Q.  1.  What  is  thy  only  comfort  in  life  and  death  f 

A.  That  I,  with  "body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and  death, 
am  not  my  own,  but  belong  unto  my  faithful  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ,  who,  with  his  precious  blood,  hath  fully 
satisfied  for  all  my  sins,  and  delivered  me  from  all  the 
power  of  the  devil ;  and  so  preserves  me,  that  without 
the  will  of  my  heavenly  Father  not  a  hair  can  fall  from 
my  head:  yea,  that  all  things  must  be  subservient  to 
my  salvation :  and  therefore,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  he  also 
assures  me  of  eternal  life,  and  makes  me  sincerely  willing 
and  ready  henceforth  to  live  unto  him. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Comfort,  source  of  consolation  and  happiness. 
h.  Faithful,  true  to  the  performance  of  his  promises  and 
engagements. 

c.  Saviour,  a  deliverer  from  sin  and  misery. 

d.  Blood,  his  sufferings  and  df>ath. 

e.  Sins,  transgressions  of  tne  *aw. 

/.  Devil,  the  spiritual  enemy  of  mankind. 

g.  Salvation,  deliverance  from  sin  and  its  consequences. 

h.  Holy  Spirit,  the  gracious  influences  and  workings  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  third  person  of  the  blessed  Trinity. 

i.  Eternal  life,  the  holiness  and  happiness  which  the  saints 
possess  for  ever  in  heaven. 

j.  To  live  unto  him,  to  aim  at  the  promotion  of  his  glory 
in  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions. 
10 


DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Christian  is  not  his  awn.  1  Cor.  vi.  19 — Ye  are  not 
your  own. 

2.  The  Christian  belongs  to  Christ.  1  Cor.  iii.  23 — And  ye 
are  Christ's. 

3.  The  Christian  belongs  to  Christ  both  in  life  and  death. 
Rom.  xiv.  7,  8 — For  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man 
dieth  to  himself.  For  whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the 
Lord;  and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord;  whether 
we  live,  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's. 

4.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  his  people.  Matt, 
i.  21 — And  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus ;  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins. 

5.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  faithful  Saviour.  2  Tim.  ii. 
13 — He  abideth  faithful ;  he  cannot  deny  himself. 

6.  The  Christian  derives  all  his  happiness  from  the  particular 
relation  he  sustains  to  God  as  his  child  in  Christ  Jesus.  Ps. 
lxxiii.  25,  26 — Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  and  there 
is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee.  My  flesh 
and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart, 
and  my  portion  for  ever. 

7.  Christ  v:ith  his  blood,  i.  e.  with  his  sufferings,  has  made  a 
full  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  his  people.  1  John  i.  7 — And 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin. 
1  Pet.  i.  18, 19 — For  as  much  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not 
redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  silver  and  gold,  from 
your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your 
fathers :  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot. 

8.  Christ  has  delivered  his  people  from  the  power  of  the  devil. 
Heb.  ii.  14,  15 — That  through  death  he  might  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil ;  and  deliver 
them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  sub- 
ject to  bondage.  1  John  iii.  8 — For  this  purpose  the  Son 
of  God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of 
the  devil. 

9.  Christ  faithfully  and  carefully  preserves  his  people.  John 
x.  28,  29 — And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand. 
My  Father,  which  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  all,  and 
none  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father's  hand.  Luke 
xxi.  18 — But  there  shall  not  a  hair  of  your  head  perish, 
John  vi.  39;  Matt.  x.  29-31. 

10.  All  things  are  subservient  to  the  salvation  of  Christians, 
Rom.  viii.  28 — And  we  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  good  to  them  that  love  God ;  to  them  who  are  the  called 
according  to  his  purpose. 

11.  God,  by  his  Spirit,  assures  the  believer  of  his  relation  to 
Him  in  Christ.  Eom.  viii.  16 — -The  Spirit  itself  beareth  wit- 
ness with  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  2 
Cor.  i.  22 — Who  hath  also  sealed  us  and  given  the  earnest 
of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts.    2  Cor.  v.  5. 

12.  God  maketh  his  people  ready  and  willing  to  fulfil  his  own 
purposes.  Ps.  ex.  3— Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the 
day  of  thy  power.  Phil.  ii.  13 — for  it  is  God  which  worketh 
in  you,  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure.  Luke 
i.  74,  75.    Rom.  viii.  14.    Heb.  xiii.  21. 

EXERCISES. 

Whose  are  you  not  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  not 
your  own?  (1.)  To  whom  do  you  belong?  How  do  you 
prove  that  you  belong  to  Christ?  (2.)  With  what  do  you 
belong  to  Christ  ?  In  what  do  you  belong  to  Christ  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  you  belong  to  Christ  both  in  life  and  death  ? 
(3.)  What  is  Jesus  Christ  to  you?  What  is  a  Saviour? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  your  Saviour?  (4.) 
What  kind  of  a  Saviour  is  Christ?  What  is  a  faithful 
Saviour?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  such  a 
Saviour?  (5.)  What  is  the  fact  of  your  not  being  your 
own,  but  belonging  unto  Christ,  to  you?  What  do  you 
mean,  when  you  say  it  is  your  comfort?  (a,)  How  do  you 
prove  that  you,  as  a  Christian,  derive  thus  all  your  happi- 
ness from  the  relation  you  sustain  to  God  in  Christ?  (6.) 
What  has  Christ,  as  your  Saviour,  done  for  you  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  sins?  (e.)  With  what  has  Christ  satisfied  for 
your  sins  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  his  blood?  (d.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  has  made  a  full  satisfaction  for  your 
sins  with  his  blood?  (7.)  What  has  Christ  done  for  you,  be- 
sides satisfying  for  your  sins  ?  Who  is  the  devil  ?  (f. )  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  has  delivered  you  from  all  the  power 
of  the  devil?  (8.)  What  does  Christ  still  do  for  you  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  Christ  thus  preserves  you  ?  (9.)  How  is 
the  extent  of  Christ's  preserving  care  further  expressed  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  salvation?  (g.)    How  do  you  prove 


12  that  all  things  must  be  subservient  to  your  salvation  ?  (10.) 
What  is  Christ  said  to  do  to  you  on  account  of  all  the  pre- 
ceding? What  is  eternal  life?  (i.)  By  what  does  he  assure 
you  of  this?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  Holy  Spirit?  (h.) 
How  do  you  prove  this  doctrine  of  assurance  ?  (11.)  What 
is  Christ  further  said  in  this  connection  to  do  to  you  ?  What 
is  it  to  live  unto  him t  (j.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ 
makes  you  sincerely  willing  and  ready  henceforth  to  live 
unto  him  ?  (12.)