Q.  4.   What  doth  the  laio  of  God  require  of  us? 

A.  Christ  teaches  us  that  briefly,  Matt.  xxii.  37-40, 
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
with  all  thy  soul,  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy 
strength.  This  is  the  first  and  great  command  ;  and  the 
second  is  like  to  this,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as 
thyself.  On  these  two  commands  hang  the  whole  law 
and  the  prophets. 39 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Briefly,  in  few  words  ;  in  a  summary. 

b.  To  love,  to  regard  with  affection. 

c.  Heart,  affections. 

d.  Soul,  the  powers  of  the  mind. 

e.  Mind,  the  inclinations  of  the  will. 

/.  Strength,  the  exertion  and  perseverance  of  which  we 
are  capable. 

g.  The  first  and  great  command,  the  first  and  principal  duty 
required  of  man. 

h.  Neighbor,  our  fellow-men. 

i.  Hang,  are  comprehended  in. 

j.  The  whole  laic  and  the  prophets,  the  duties  enjoined  by 
the  law  and  the  writings  of  the  prophets. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  There  are  summaries  of  the  moral  law.  Rom.  xiii.  9 — If 
there  be  any  other  commandment,  it  is  briefly  compre- 
h ended  in  this  saying,  namely,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh- 
bor as  thyself. 

2.  The  substance  of  the  whole  law  is  love.  Kom.  xiii.  10 — 
Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 

3.  To  love  God  supremely  is  the  first  and  principal  duty  of 
man.  Matt.  xxii.  37,  38 — Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy 
God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with 
all  thy  mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great  commandment. 
Luke  x.  27. 

4.  To  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves,  is  the  second  and  subor- 
dinate duty  of  wan.  Matt.  xxii.  39 — And  the  second  is  like 
unto  it,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself. 

5.  The  duties  required  of  man  in-  the  whole  law  of  God,  and 
in  the  writings  of  the  prophets,  are  summarily  comprehended  in 
loving  God  supremely,  and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves.  Matt, 
xxii.  40 — On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the  law  and 
the  prophets. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  fourth  question  ?  In  whose  words  is  the  an- 
swer given  ?  How  does  Christ  teach  us  the  requirements 
of  the  law?  What  is  meant  by  teaching  us  briefly?  (a.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  there  are  summaries  of  the  moral 
law?  (1.)  What  are  the  words  of  Christ?  What  is  the 
substance  of  the  whole  law  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  it  ?  (2.) 
In  what  words  are  the  requirements  of  the  law  in  reference 
to  God  expressed  ?  What  is  meant  by  the  phrase  to  love  ? 
(b.)  What  by  the  word  heart?  (c.)  What  by  soul?  (d.) 
What  by  mind ?  (e.)  Wha£  by  strength  9  (f)  What  is  the 
loving  of  God  with  all  the  heart,  &c.  said  to  be  ?  What  is 
meant  by  calling  it  the  first  and  great  command?  (g.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  to  love  God  supremely  is  the  first  and 
principal  duty  of  man?  (3.)  In  what  words  are  the  re- 
quirements of  the  law  in  reference  to  our  neighbor  ex- 
pressed ?  What  is  meant  by  our  neighbor?  (It.)  By  what 
is  the  love  to  our  neighbor  to  be  measured  ?  [By  the  love 
to  ourselves.]  What  is  the  duty  of  loving  our  neighbor  as 
ourselves  said  to  be  ?  [The  second  command.']  How  do  you 
prove  that  to  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves  is  the  second 
and  subordinate  duty  of  man?  (4.)  What  is  remarked  in 
reference  to  these  two  commandments  ?  What  is  meant 
by  the  whole  law  and  the  prophets?  (/.)  What  is  meant  when 
it  is  said  that  the  whole  law  and  the  prophets  hang  upon 
these  two  coram  an  dments  ?  (£.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
duties  required  of  man,  in  the  whole  law  of  God  and  in  the 
writings  of  the  prophets,  are  summarily  comprehended  in 
loving  God  supremely  and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves  ?  (5.)