Q.  8.  Are  we  then  so  corrupt,  that  we  are  wholly 
incapable  of  doing  any  good,  and  inclined  to  all 
wickedness  ? 

A.  Indeed  we  are,  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Incapable  of  doing  any  good,  without  the  power  of  doing 
any  thing  that  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God. 

b.  Inclined  to  all  wickedness,  prone  to  sin  of  every  de- 
scription. 

c.  Regenerated,  to  be  made  new  creatures. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  corruption  of  our  nature,  in  consequence  of  the  fall, 
is  so  great  as  to  'render  us  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any  good. 
Bom.  vii.  18 — I  know  that  in  me  (that  is  in  my  flesh)  dwell- 
eth  no  good  thing ;  for  to  will  is  present  with  me  :  but  how 
to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not.    2  Cor.  iii.  5. 

2.  In  consequence  of  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  resulting 
from  the  fall,  we  are  inclined  to  all  wickedness.  Job  xv.  16 — 
How  much  more  abominable  and  filthy  is  man,  which  drink- 
eth  iniquity  like  water.  Gen.  vi.  5 — Every  imagination  of 
the  thoughts  of  his  [man's]  heart  was  only  evil  continually. 
Gen.  viii.  21. 


Q.9.] 
3.  There  is  no  way  of  deliverance  from,  this  state  of  corrup- 
tion, except  by  regeneration.  John  iii.  3 — Verily,  verily  I  say 
unto  thee,  except  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

4.  Regeneration  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  John  iii.  5, 
6 — Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  except  a  man  be  born  of 
water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God. — That  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.  Titus 
iii.  5 — The  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

EXERCISES. 

"What  is  the  subject  inquired  about  in  this  question  ?  [The 
extent  of  the  corruption  of  human  nature."]  What  is  the  extent 
of  it  designated  in  the  question  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of 
the  phrase  incapable  of  doing  any  good?  (a.)  What  of  the 
phrase  inclined  to  all  wickedness?  (b.)  What  is  the  answer 
to  this  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  corruption 
of  our  nature  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  is  so  great  as  to 
render  us  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any  good?  (1.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  in  consequence  of  the  corruption  of  our 
nature  resulting  from  the  fall,  we  are  inclined  to  all  wicked- 
ness ?  (2.)  What  exception  does  the  answer  make  to  the 
general  affirmation  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  re- 
generated? (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  there  is  no  way  of 
deliverance  from  this  state  of  corruption,  except  by  regene- 
ration ?  (3.)  By  whom  is  it  said,  we  must  be  regenerated  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  regeneration  is  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit?  (4.) 


IV,  Lord's  Day.