Q.  9.  Doth  not  God  then  do  injustice  to  man,  by 
requiring  from  him  in  his  law  that  which  he  cannot 
perform  ? 

A.  Not  at  all :  for  God  made  man  capable  of  perform- 
ing it ;  but  man,  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,  and  his 
own  wilful  disobedience,  deprived  himself  and  all  his 
posterity  of  those  divine  gifts. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Injustice,  that  which  is  contrary  to  right. 

b.  Capable  of  performing  it,  with  the  necessary  power  to 
keep  the  law. 
c.  Divine  gifts,  the  powers  necessary  to  the  fulfilment  of 
the  requirements  of  the  law,  with  which  he  was  furnished 
by  God. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  requires  of  man  since  the  fall,  as  well  as  before  it,  the 
fulfilment  of  the  laic.  Gal.  iii.  10 — Cursed  is  every  one  that 
continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them. 

2.  Man,  since  the  fall,  is  not  able  to  fulfil  the  laiv.  Rom.  iii. 
20 — By  the  deeds  of  the  law,  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justi- 
fied in  his  sight. 

3.  God  does  no  injustice  to  man  in  requiring  of  him,  since  the 
fall,  that  which  he  cannot  perform.  Rom.  iii.  5,  6 — Is  God  un- 
righteous who  taketh  vengeance  ?  God  forbid.  Rev.  xv.  3 
— Just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints. 

4.  Jxod  made  man  with  the  ability  to  keep  the  law.  Eccl.  vii. 
29 — God  hath  made  man  upright. 

5.  Adam  deprived  himself  and  his  posterity  of  this  power  to 
keep  the  law.  Rom.  v.  12 — Wherefore,  as  by  one  man  sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin ;  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned. 

6.  Adam  committed  the  act,  ivhich  deprived  him  of  the  power 
to  keep  the  laiv,  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil.  Gen.  iii.  18 — 
The  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat.  2  Cor.  xi.  3 — The 
serpent  beguiled  Eve  through  his  subtiity. 

7.  Adam  deprived  himself  and  his  posterity  of  the  power  to 
keep  the  law,  by  his  own  wilful  disobedience.  Rom.  v.  19 — By 
one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners. 

EXERCISES. 

What  does  this  question  say  God  requires  of  man  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  requires  of  man,  since  the  fall  as 
well  as  before  it,  the  fulfilment  of  the  law?  (1.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  man,  since  the  fall,  is  not  able  to  fulfil  the 
law?  (2.)  What  does  the  question  ask  with  respect  to 
God's  requiring  of  man  in  his  law  that  which  he  cannot 
perform?  What  do  you  mean  by  injustice?  (a.)  What 
is  the  answer  given  to  this  question?  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  does  no  injustice  to  man,  in  requiring  of  him, 
since  the  fall,  that  which  he  cannot  perform  ?  (3.)  What 
is  the  reason  assigned  for  the  answer  given  to  this  ques- 
tion? What  do  you  mean  by  the  phrase  capable  of  per- 
forming it?  (b.)    How  do  you  prove  that  God  made  man 
with  power  to  keep  the  law?  (4.)  How  does  the  answer 
say  man  lost  this  power  to  keep  the  law  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  the  expression  divine  gifts  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  Adam  deprived  himself  and  his  posterity  of  the  power 
to  keep  the  law?  (5.)  Through  what  influence  is  Adam 
said  to  have  committed  the  act  which  deprived  him  of  the 
power  to  keep  the  law  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  man  com- 
mitted this  act  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil?  (6.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  man  deprived  himself  and  his  posterity 
of  the  power  to  keep  the  law,  by  his  own  wilful  disobe- 
dience ?  (7.)