Q.  12.  Since,  then,  by  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God,  ice  deserve  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  is 
there  no  way  by  which  we  may  escape  that  punishment, 
and  be  again  received  into  favor  ? 

A.  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied;  and  therefore 
we  must  make  this  full  satisfaction,  either  by  ourselves 
or  by  another. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Righteous  judgment  of  God,  the  distribution  of  his  justice 
in  strict  accordance  with  the  deserts  of  those  who  are  the 
objects  of  it. 

b.  Received  into  favor,  restored  to  the  state  in  which  man 
was  before  the  fall,  enjoying  the  approbation  of  God. 

c.  Will  have,  requires  as  a  necessary  result  of  his  nature. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  judgment  of  God  is  a  righteous  judgment.  Ps.  cxlv. 
17 — The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways. 

2.  We  deserve  the  punishments  threatened  against  us  on  ac- 
count of  our  sins.  Rom.  i.  32 — Who,  knowing  the  judgment 
of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such  things  are  worthy  of 
death. 

3.  There  is  a  wag  of  escaping  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins, 
and  of  being  again  restored  to  the  favor  of  God.  John  iii.  16 — 
God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life. 

4.  In  order  to  escape  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins,  and  to 
be  restored  to  God's  favor,  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied. 
Exod.  xx.  5 — For  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God, 
visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  unto 
the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me. 
Deut.  xxvii.  26 — Cursed  be  he  that  confirmeth  not  all  the 
words  of  this  law  to  do  them. 

5.  The  satisfaction  which  God's  justice  requires  ought  to  have 
been  rendered  by  ourselves.  Ezek.  xviii.  4 — The  soul  that  sin- 
neth  it  shall  die. 

6.  In  the  event  of  our  being  unable  of  ourselves  to  render  the 
satisfaction  which  God's  justice  requires,  it  must  be  rendered  by 
another.  2  Cor.  v.  21 — For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for 
us  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  him.  Rom.  viii.  3,  4 — For  what  the  law  could 
not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending 
his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh  ;  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fulfilled  in  us. 

EXERCISES. 

What  does  this  question  admit  to  be  true  ?    What  do  you 


28  mean  by  the  righteous  judgment  of  God?  (a.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  a  righteous  judgment ! 
(1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  deserve  the  punishment 
threatened  against  us  on  account  of  our  sins  ?  (2.)  What 
does  the  question  ask  in  view  of  what  it  admits  to  be  true  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  phrase  received  into  favor  f  (b.) 
Does  the  answer  imply  that  there  is  such  a  way  of  escape 
as  that  inquired  after?  [Pies.]  How  do  you  prove  that 
there  is  a  way  of  escaping  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins, 
and  of  being  restored  to  the  favor  of  God?  (3.)  What  does 
the  answer  say  God  requires,  in  order  to  our  escaping  the 
punishment  due  to  our  sins  and  being  restored  to  his  favor  ? 
What  is  the  force  of  the  expression  will  have?  (c.)  How  do 
you  prove,  that  in  order  to  our  escaping  the  punishment  due 
to  our  sins  and  being  restored  to  his  favor,  God  will  have 
his  justice  satisfied?  (4.)  What  does  the  answer  further 
say  with  respect  to  the  satisfaction  which  the  justice  of  God 
requires  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  ought  to  have  ren- 
dered this  satisfaction  by  ourselves  ?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  in  the  event  of  our  being  unable  of  ourselves  to  render 
this  satisfaction,  it  must  be  rendered  by  another?  (6.)