Q.  14.  Can  there  then  be  found,  anywhere,  one  who 
is  a  mere  creature,  able  to  satisfy  for  us  ? 

A.  None;  for,  first,  God  will  not  punish  any  other 
creature  for  the  sin  which  man  hath  committed  ;  and, 
further,  no  mere  creature  can  sustain  the  burden  of 
God's  eternal  wrath  against  sin,  so  as  to  deliver  others 
from  it. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Creature,  a  being  whose  existence  is  derived  from  an- 
other. 

b.  Any  other  creature,  any  one  else  besides  man,  of  all 
beings  who  have  derived  their  existence  from  another. 

c.  Sustain,  to  bear  up  under. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  JVo  mere  creature  can  be  found  able  to  satisfy  for  our  sins. 
Heb.  x.  4 — For  it  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and 
goats  should  take  away  sins. 

2.  God  ivill  not  punish  any  other  creature  than  man  for  the 
sins  which  he  hath  committed.  Ezek.  xviii.  20 — The  soul  that 
sinneth  it  shall  die.  Gen.  ii.  17 — For  in  the  day  that  thou 
eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die. 

3.  No  mere  creature  is  able  to  sustain  the  burden  of  God's 
wrath  against  sin  so  as  to  deliver  others  from  it.    Ps.  cxxx.  3 — ■ 

3* 
[Q.15. 


If  thou,  Lord,  sliouldest  mark  iniquities,  0  Lord,  who  shall 
stand  ?  Ps.  xlix.  7,  8 — None  of  them  can  by  any  means  re- 
deem his  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him :  For 
the  redemption  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  it  ceaseth  for 
ever. 

EXERCISES. 

What  kind  of  a  being  is  it  to  which  the  inquiry  in  this 
question  refers?  What  do  you  mean  by  creature?  (a.) 
What  qualification  must  the  creature  inquired  about  pos- 
sess ?  What  does  the  question  inquire  in  reference  to  a 
mere  creature  possessed  of  the  qualification  specified  ? 
What  answer  is  returned  to  this  question  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  no  mere  creature  can  be  found  able  to  satisfy  for 
our  sins  ?  (1.)  How  many  reasons  are  assigned  for  the  an- 
swer returned  ?  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  expression  any  other  creature?  (b.)  Whose  sin  is  it  for 
which  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature  than 
man  for  the  sin  which  he  hath  committed?  (2.)  What  is 
the  second  reason  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  sustain?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  no 
mere  creature  is  able  to  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  wrath 
against  sin,  so  as  to  deliver  others  from  it  ?  (3.) 


Q.15.  What  sort  of  a  mediator  and  deliverer  then 
must  ioe  seek  for  f 

A.  For  one  who  is  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous ; 
and  yet  more  powerful  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is,  one 
who  is  also  very  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Mediator,  one  who  transacts  between  parties  at  vari- 
ance, in  order  to  bring  them  to  an  agreement. 

b.  Then,  seeing  no  mere  creature  is  able  to  satisfy  for  us. 

c.  Very  man,  possessed  of  every  thing  that  essentially  be- 
longs to  human  nature. 

d.  Perfectly  righteous,  wholly  conformed  to  the  require- 
ments of  God's  law. 

e.  Very  God,  possessed  of  ail  that  is  essential  to  the  na- 
ture and  character  of  God. 
DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Our  condition  as  sinners  is  such  as  to  render  a  mediator 
and  deliverer  necessary  for  us.  John  iii.  36 — He  that  believeth 
not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  bat  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him.  Rom.  iii.  19 — That  every  mouth  may  be  stopped, 
and  all  the  world  become  guilty  before  God. 

2.  The  mediator  and  deliverer  which  our  condition  requires, 
must  be  possessed  of  all  that  essentially  belongs  to  the  nature  of 
man.  Heb.  ii.  14, 17 — For  as  much,  then,  as  the  children 
are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  [Christ  the  mediator] 
also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same ;  that  through 
death  he  might  destroy  him  that  hath  the  power  of  death, 
that  is,  the  devil. — Wherefore  in  all  things  it  behooved  him 
to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that  he  might  be  a  mer- 
ciful and  faithful  high-priest  in  things  pertaining  to  God, 
to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  his  people.  1  Cor. 
xv.  21.    Eom.  viii.  3. 

3.  Our  mediator  and  deliverer  must  also  be  a  perfectly  right- 
eous man.  Heb.  vii.  26 — For  such  a  high-priest  became  us, 
who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners. 
Isaiah  liii.  9,  11. 

4.  Our  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  more  powerful  than  all 
creatures,  that  is,  one  who  is  possessed  of  all  that  is  essential  to 
the  nature  and  character  of  God.  Jer.  xxiii.  6 — This  is  his 
name  whereby  he  shall  be  called,  The  Lord  our  right- 
eousness.   Heb.  vii.  26 — For  such  a  high-priest  became 

us,  who  is  made  higher  than  the  heavens.    Isa.  vii.  14. 

Kom.  ix.  5. 

2.  Our  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  both  God  and  man.  1 
Tim.  iii.  16 — And,  without  controversy,  great  is  the  mystery 
of  godliness :  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh. 

exercises. 

What  is  the  fifteenth  question  ?  What  does  this  question 
imply?  [That  our  condition  as  sinners  is  such  as  to  render  a 
mediator  and  deliverer  necessary  for  us.]  How  do  you  prove 
that  our  condition  is  such  as  this  question  implies?  (1.) 
What  do  you  mean  by  a  mediator?  (a.)  What  is  the  force 
of  the  word  then  in  this  question?  (6.)  How  many  things 
does  the  answer  specify  as  requisite  to  the  mediator  and  de- 
liverer which  our  condition  requires?  [Three.']  What  is 
the  first?    What  do  you  mean  by  very  man  f  (c.)    How  do 
you  prove  that  our  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  very 
man,  that  is,  possessed  of  all  that  is  essential  to  the  nature 
of  man?  (2.)  "What  is  the  second  thing  specified  as  requi- 
site to  our  mediator  and  deliverer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
perfectly  righteous?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  me- 
diator and  deliverer  must  also  be  a  perfectly  righteous 
man?  (3.)  What  is  the  third  thing  specified  as  being  re- 
quisite to  our  mediator  and  deliverer  ?  WThat  is  the  expla- 
nation which  the  answer  itself  gives  of  this  third  requi- 
site ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  very  God?  [e.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  our  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  more  power- 
ful than  all  creatures,  that  is,  very  G-od  ?  (4.)  How  many 
natures  are  claimed  in  this  answer  for  our  mediator  and  de- 
liverer? [Two.]  What  are  they?  [That  of  God  and  that 
of  man.~\  How  do  you  prove  that  our  mediator  and  deliverer 
must  be  both  God  and  man?  (5.) 


VI.  Lord's  Day. 

§.16.  Why  must  lie  he  very  man,  and  also  per- 
fectly righteous? 

A.  Because  the  justice  of  God  requires  that  the  same 
human  nature  which  hath  sinned  should  likewise  make 
satisfaction  for  sin  ;  and  one  who  is  himself  a  sinner  can- 
not satisfy  for  others. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Same  human  nature,  a  being  possessed  of  all  that  essen- 
tially belonged  to  man  in  his  original  state. 

b.  Cannot  satisfy  for  others,  is  without  the  ability  to  make 
the  amends  which  the  justice  of  God  requires,  in  order  that 
others  may  be  treated  as  though  they  had  not  sinned  ? 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  In  order  that  God  may  pardon  the  sinner,  his  justice  re- 
quires that  the  demands  of  the  violated  law  should  be  satisfied. 
Matt.  v.  17,  18 — Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the 
law  or  the  prophets  ;  I  am  come  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil. 
For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one 
jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law  till  all 
be  fulfilled. 


t>0 


2.  The  justice  of  God  requires,  that  as  human  nature  hath 
sinned,  so  should  it  also  render  the  satisfaction  which  is  necessary 
in  order  that  sin  may  be  pardoned.  Exod.  xxxii.  83 — Who- 
soever hath  sinned  against  me,  him  will  I  blot  out  of  my 
book.  1  Cor.  xv.  21 — For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man 
came  also  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.    Rom.  v.  15. 

3.  One  ivho  is  himself  a  sinner,  cannot  satisfy  the  demands  of 
the  law  so  as  to  secure  the  pardon  of  others.  Heb.  vii.  26,  27 
— For  such  a  high-priest  became  us,  who  is  holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,  and  made  higher  than  the 
heavens :  Who  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high-priests,  to 
offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the 
people's.    1  Pet.  iii.  18.    Isa.  liii.  11. 

EXERCISES. 

WThat  is  the  sixteenth  question?  Of  how  many  parts 
does  this  question  consist?  [Tivo.~]  What  is  the  first ? 
[  Why  m,ust  he  be  very  man  ?]  What  reason  does  the  answer 
assign  for  this  part  of  the  question?  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  expression  the  same  human  nature?  (#.)  How  many 
doctrines  are  taught  in  this  part  of  the  answer?  [Two,] 
What  is  the  first?  (1.)  How  is  this  doctrine  proved?  (1.) 
What  is  the  second  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  this  doctrine  ? 
(2.)  What  is  the  second  part  of  the  general  question? 
[  Why  must  he  be  perfectly  righteous  f]  WThat  reason  is 
assigned  in  the  answer  for  this  part  of  the  question?  What 
do  you  mean  by  the  expression  cannot  satisfy  for  others  ?  (6.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  one  who  is  himself  a  sinner  cannot 
satisfy  for  others  ?  (3.) 


$.17.  Why  must  he  in  one  person  be  also  very 
God? 

A.  That  he  might,  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead,  sus- 
tain, in  his  human  nature,  the  burden  of  God's  wrath ; 
and  might  obtain  for,  and  restore  to  us,  righteousness 
and  life. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  In  one  person,  as  a  distinct  individual. 

b.  Godhead,  the  divine  nature. 

c.  Burden  of  God's  wrath,  the  punishment  of  sin,  which 
God's  displeasure  toward  it  requires  him  to  inflict. 
d.  Righteousness,  freedom  from  the  condemnatory  sentence 
of  the  law. 

e.  Life,  the  bliss  of  heaven,  in  opposition  to  death,  the 
wages  of  sin. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Our  mediator  must  possess  the  natures  of  God  and  man  in 
one  person.  Col.  ii.  9 — For  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily. 

2.  Our  mediator  sustained  the  burden  of  God's  vjrath  against 
cur  sins.  Isa.  liii.  5 — But  he  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  the  chastise- 
ment of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we 
are  healed. 

3.  Christ  sustained  the  burden  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  in 
his  human  nature.  1  Pet.  iii.  18 — For  Christ  also  hath  once 
suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring 
us  to  God,  being  put  to  death  in  the  nesh,  but  quickened  by 
the  spirit. 

4.  The  human  nature  of  Christ,  in  sustaining  the  burden  of 
God's  wrath  against  sin,  was  strengthened  by  his  divine  nature. 
2  Cor.  xiii.  4 — For  though  he  was  crucified  through  weak- 
ness, yet  he  liveth  by  the  power  of  God.  1  Pet.  iii.  18 — 
Being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  spirit. 
Acts  ii.  24. 

5.  Christ  by  his  sufferings  has  obtained  righteousness  for  its. 
Jer.  xxiii.  6 — This  is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called, 
The  Lord  otjr  righteousness.    Chap,  xxxiii.  16. 

6.  Christ  by  his  sufferings  has  obtained  life  for  us.  1  John 
iv.  9 — God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that 
we  might  live  through  him. 

7.  Christ  by  his  sufferings  restores  righteousness  to  us.  2 
Cor.  v.  21 — For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew 
no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  him. 

8.  Christ  by  his  sufferings  restores  life  to  us.  2  Tim.  i.  10 — 
But  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death,  and  hath  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel. 

exercises. 

Repeat  the  seventeenth  question.  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  expression  in  one  person?  (a.)    How  do  you  prove  that 
our  mediator  must  possess  the  natures  of  God  and  man  in 
one  person?  (1.)  How  many  reasons  does  the  answer 
assign  for  what  is  inquired  about  in  the  question  ?  [Three.  ] 
What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  burden  of 
God's  wrath?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  mediator 
sustained  the  burden  of  God's  wrath  against  sin?  (2.)  In 
what  must  the  mediator  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  wrath? 
How  do  you  prove  that  our  mediator  sustained  the  burden 
of  God's  wrath  against  sin  in  his  human  nature?  (3.)  By 
what  must  our  mediator  sustain  in  his  human  nature  the 
burden  of  God's  wrath  ?  YvThat  do  you  mean  by  Godhead  ? 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  human  nature  of  Christ, 
in  sustaining  the  burden  of  God's  wrath  against  sin,  was 
strengthened  by  his  divine  nature?  (4.)  What  is  the  second 
reason  assigned  in  answer  to  the  general  inquiry  in  the 
question?  [That  he  might  obtain  for  us  righteousness  and 
life.~\  Wrhat  do  you  mean  by  righteousness  f  (d.)  What  by 
life?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  by  his  sufferings 
has  obtained  for  us  righteousness  ?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  Christ  by  his  sufferings  has  obtained  for  us  life  ?  (6.) 
What  is  the  third  reason  assigned  in  reply  to  the  general 
inquiry  in  the  question?  [That  he  might  restore  to  us  right- 
eousness and  life.~\  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  by  his  suf- 
ferings restores  to  us  righteousness?  (7.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  by  his  sufferings  restores  to  us  life?  (8.)