Q.  19.   Whence  know  est  thou  this? 

A.  From  the  holy  gospel,  which  God  himself  revealed 
first  in  Paradise,  and  afterward  published  by  the  patri- 
archs and  prophets  ;  and  was  pleased  to  represent  it  by 
the  shadows  of  sacrifices,  and  the  other  ceremonies  of 
the  law ;  and  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his  only  be- 
gotten Son. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Gospel,  good  news  of  salvation  made  known  in  the 
Bible. 

b.  Patriarchs,  the  principal  fathers  of  mankind,  particu- 
larly of  the  Jews,  as  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

c.  Prophets,  the  sacred  writers  of  the  Old  Testament,  em- 
powered by  God  to  teach  the  people  and  foretell*  future 
events. 

d.  Sacrifices,  things  offered  to  God. 

e.  Ceremonies,  rites  used  in  the  Jewish  worship. 

/.  Only  begotten  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  exclu- 
sively sustains  to  God  a  peculiar  relation  in  many  respects 
similar  to  that  which  a  son  sustains  to  his  father. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  news  of  a  Mediator  being  provided  is  glad  tidings. 
Luke  ii.  10,  11 — Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great 
joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people.  For  unto  you  is  born 
this  day  in  the  city  of  David,  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the 
Lord. 

2.  The  tidings  of  a  Saviour  being  provided  were  first  revealed 
38 


by  God  in  Paradise.  Gen.  iii.  15 — And  I  will  put  enmity 
between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed  and 
her  seed  ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head  and  thou  shall  bruise  his 
heel. 

3.  The  tidings  of  a  Saviour  were  published  by  the  patriarchs. 
Gen.  xlix.  10 — The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah, 
nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come, 
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be.  Gen. 
xxii.  18,  xxviii.  14. 

4.  The  tidings  of  a  Saviour  were  published  by  the  prophets. 
Acts  x.  43 — To  him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness,  that 
through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sins.  Heb.  i.  1 — God,  who  at  sundry  times  and 
in  divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets.    Acts  iii.  24  ;  Rom.  i.  2. 

o.  The  tidings  of  a  Saviour  ivere  represented  by  the  sacrifices 
and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law  under  the  Old  Testament  dis- 
pensation. Col.  ii.  16,  17 — Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you 
in  meat  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  an  holy  day,  or  of  the 
new  moon,  or  of  the  Sabbath  days ;  which  are  a  shadow  of 
things  to  come  ;  but  the  body  is  of  Christ.  Heb.  x.  1 — For 
the  law,  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not 
the  very  image  of  the  things,  can  never  with  those  sacrifices 
which  they  offered  year  by  year  continually,  make  the 
comers  thereunto  perfect. 

6.  The  tidings  of  a  Saviour  made  known  and  shadowed' forth 
under  the  Old  Testament,  have  been  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Acts 
xiii.  82,  33 — And  we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how  that 
the  promise  which  was  made  unto  the  fathers,  God  hath 
fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their  children,  in  that  he  hath 
raised  up  Jesus  again. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  nineteenth  question  ?  What  is  the  answer  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  gospel?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  news  of  a  mediator  being  provided  is  glad  tidings?  (1.) 
What  is  the  first  remark  added  in  the  answer  with  respect 
to  this  gospel?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  tidings  of  a 
Saviour  being  provided  were  first  revealed  by  God  in  Para- 
dise? (2.)  What  is  the  second  thing  added  with  respect  to 
the  gospel  as  the  source  of  the  information  inquired  after  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  patriarchs?  (b.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  tidings  of  a  Saviour  were  published  by  the 
patriarchs?  (3.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  prophets?  (c.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  tidings  of  a  Saviour  were  pub- 
lished by  the  prophets  ?  (4.)  What  is  the  next  thing  added 
in  the  answer,  with  respect  to  the  gospel  referred  to  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  sacrifices  f  (d. )  What  by  ceremonies  f 
(e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  tidings  of  a  Saviour  were 
represented  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  of  the 
law  ?  (5.)  What  is  the  last  thing  added  with  respect  to  the 
gospel  referred  to  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression 
only  begotten  Son?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  tidings 
of  a  Saviour,  made  known  and  shadowed  forth  under  the 
Old  Testament,  have  been  fulfilled  in  Christ?  (6.) 


VII.  Lord's  Day*