Q.  20.  Are  all  men,  then,  as  they  perished  in  Adam, 
saved  by  Christ  f 

A.  No ;  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him  and  re- 
ceive all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Perished,  lost  their  original  righteousness,  became 
alienated  from  God,  and  exposed  to  his  everlasting  wrath. 

b.  Ingrafted  into  him,,  become  united  to  him  so  as  in  a  cer- 
tain sense  to  constitute  one  with  him. 

c.  All  his  benefits,  the  advantages  and  blessings  which  re- 
sult from  the  purchase  of  his  death. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  All  men  perished,  thai  is,  fell  in  Adam.  1  Cor.  xv.  22 — 
In  Adam  all  die.  Rom.  v.  18 — By  the  offence  of  one,  judg- 
ment came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation. 

2.  Not  all  tvho  became  sinners  by  Adam  are  saved  by  Christ* 
Matt.  vii.  21 — Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord, 
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Matt.  vii.  13, 14 — • 
Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate ;  for  wide  is  the  gate  and 
broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many 
there  be  which  go  in  thereat :  because  strait  is  the  gate 
and  narrow  is  the  way,  which  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few 
there  be  that  find  it. 
3.  Somt  art  saved  by  Christ,  and  they  are  those  only  who  are 
his  own  people.  Matt.  i.  21 — Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jestjs  ; 
for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.    Isa.  liii.  11. 

4.  Those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  are  ingrafted  into  him, 
that  is,  become  united  to  him  so  as  in  a  certain  sense  to  consti- 
tute one  with  him.  1  Cor.  i.  30 — But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ 
Jesus.  2  Cor.  v.  17 — Therefore,  if  any  man  be  in  Christ, 
he  is  a  new  creature. 

5.  Those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  receive  all  his  benefits. 
1  Cor.  i.  30 — But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is 
made  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption. 1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23 — All  are  yours  :  and  ye  are 
Christ's  :  and  Christ  is  God's.    Rom.  viii.  32. 

6.  The  reception  of  Christ's  benefits  is  consequent  upon  our 
being  ingrafted  into  him.    Bom.  viii.  32 — He  that  spared  not 

»      his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he 
not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? 

7.  Those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  become  thus  united  to  him 
and  interested  in  his  benefits  through  faith.  Heb.  x.  39 — But 
of  them  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul.  Rom.  xi. 
20 — And  thou  standest  by  faith.    John  i.  12,  iii.  16,  18,  36. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  twentieth  question?  What  does  this  question 
admit  to  be  true  ?  What  is  meant  by  perished?  (a.  )  How 
do  you  prove  that  all  men  perished  in  Adam  ?  (1.)  What 
does  the  answer  say  in  reply  to  this  question  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  not  all  who  became  sinners  in  Adam  are  saved 
by  Christ?  (2.)  Who  then  does  the  answer  say  are  saved 
by  Christ  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  some  are  saved  by 
Christ,  and  they  are  those  only  who  are  his  people?  (3.) 
How  many  characteristics  of  those  who  are  saved  by  Christ 
are  mentioned  in  the  answer  ?  [Tiro.]  What  is  the  first  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  ingrafted  into  him  ?  (b.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  are 
ingrafted  into  him  ?  (4.)  What  is  the  second  characteristic 
of  those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  mentioned  in  the  answer  ? 
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression  all  his  benefits?  (c.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  those  who  are  saved  by  Christ  re- 
ceive all  his  benefits  ?  (5.)  What  is  the  relation  which  our 
being  ingrafted  into  Christ,  and  our  receiving  all  his  bene- 
fits, sustain  to  each  other,  as  set  forth  in  this  answer  ? 
\The  latter  is  consequent  upon  the  former.']     How  do  you 


Q.21.] 
prove  this?  (6.)  By  what  are  those  who  are  saved  said  to 
become  thus  ingrafted  into  Christ  and  receive  all  his  bene- 
fits? How  do  you  prove  that  those  who  are  saved  by- 
Christ  become  thus  united  to  him,  and  interested  in  his 
benefits  through  faith  ?  (7.) 


Q.21.  What  is  true  faith? 

A.  True  faith  is  not  only  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby 
I  hold  for  truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  his 
word,  but  also  an  assured  confidence,  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  works  by  the  gospel  in  my  heart ;  that  not  only  to 
others,  but  to  me  also,  remission  of  sin,  everlasting  right- 
eousness and  salvation,  are  freely  given  by  God,  merely 
of  grace  only  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  True  faith,  such  a  trust  in  God  through  Christ  as  re- 
sults m  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  in  opposition  to  any  faith 
that  is  not  saving. 

b.  Not  only,  though  essential,  yet  in  itself  not  sufficient 
to  constitute  true  faith. 

c.  Knowledge,  correct  understanding  and  perception  of 
things. 

d.  Hold  for  truth,  receive  as  being  in  exact  accordance 
with  the  reality  of  things. 

e.  Assured  confidence,  hearty  trust,  such  as  admits  of  no 
doubt. 

/.  Heart,  the  internal  man  which  constitutes  the  spring 
of  all  our  acts,  made  up  of  the  understanding,  will,  and  af- 
fections. 

g.  Grace,  unmerited  favor. 

h.  Christ's  merits,  the  virtue  or  efficacy  belonging  to  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  Christ. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  True  faith  includes  in  it  a  certain  knowledge.  John  xviL 
3 — And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee,  tho 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent. 
Heb.  xi.  3 — Through  faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God.    John  vi.  69;  Heb.  xi.  6. 

4* 
[Q.21. 


2.  The  object  of  the  knowledge  embraced  in  the  idea  of  true 
faith  is  all  that  God  hath  revealed  in  his  word.  Acts  xxiv. 
14 — Believing  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law  and 
in  the  prophets. 

3.  This  knowledge  is  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  constitute  true 
faith.  Luke  viii.  13 — They  on  the  rock  are  they  which, 
when  they  hear,  receive  the  word  with  joy ;  and  these  have 
no  root,  which  for  a  while  believe,  and  in  time  of  tempta- 
tion fall  away.    James  ii.  19  ;  Rom.  ii.  18-20. 

4.  True  faith  also  includes  in  it  confidence,  trust.  Eph.  iii. 
12 — In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access  with  confidence 
by  the  faith  of  him.    Heb.  iii.  6,  xi.  1 ;  Rom.  iv.  20,  21. 

5.  The  confidence  included  in  true  faith  is  an  assured,  that  uy 
hearty  confidence.  Acts  viii.  37 — If  thou  believest  with  all 
thine  heart,  thou  mayest. 

6.  True  faith  is  produced  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Gal.  v.  22— But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  faith.    2  Cor. 

iv.  13 ;  John  iii.  5  ;  Matt.  xvi.  17. 

7.  The  Holy  Ghost  produces  faith  in  the  heart  by  means  of 
the  gospel.  Rom.  x.  17 — So  then  faith  cometh  by  hearing, 
and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God.  Rom.  i.  16  ;  1  Cor.  i.  21 ; 
Acts  xvi.  14. 

8.  True  faith  trusts  the  promises  of  God  not  with  reference  to 
others  simply,  but  with  a  special  reference  to  ourselves.  Acts, 
xvi.  30,  31 — Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  And  they 
said,  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved.  2  Tim.  iv.  8 — Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a 
crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous 
Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day :  and  not  to  me  only,  but 
unto  ail  them  also  that  love  his  appearing. 

9.  True  faith  secures  the  remission  of  sins.  Acts  x.  43 — To 
him  gave  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins. 
Matt.  ix.  2. 

10.  True  faith  secures  everlasting  righteousness.  Rom.  x.  10 
— For  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness. 
Phil.  iii.  9 — iVnd  be  found  in  him,  not  having  my  own  righte- 
ousness, which  is  of  the  law ;  but  that  which  is  through 
the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by 
faith. 

11.  True  faith  secures  salvation.  Rom.  x.  9 — If  thou  shalt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe 


Q.2L] 
in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead, 
thou  shalt  be  saved. 

12.  God  confers  the  benefits  secured  by  faith  freely.  Rom. 
iii.  24 — Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace.  Rom.  viii.  82 — 
How  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? 

13.  The  benefits  secured  by  faith  are  conferred  merely  of 
grace.  Eph.  ii.  8 — By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith. 
Rom.  iii.  24. 

14.  The  benefits  secured  by  faith  arc  conferred  only  for  the 
sake  of  Christ's  merits.  Eph.  i.  7 — In  whom  [Christ]  we 
have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace.   Col.  i.  14 ;  Gal.  ii.  20. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  twenty-first  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  true  faith?  (a.)  What  is  the  first  thing  included  in  true 
faith  as  specified  in  the  answer?  What  do  you  mean  by 
knowledge?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  true  faith  includes 
in  it  a  certain  knowledge?  (1.)  How  is  the  object  of  this 
knowledge  expressed  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  phrase 
hold  for  truth?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  object  of 
knowledge  embraced  in  the  idea  of  true  faith  is  all  that 
God  has  revealed  in  his  word  ?  (2.)  What  is  the  force  of 
the  expression  not  only  in  the  commencement  of  this  part 
of  the  answer?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  knowledge 
referred  to  is  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  constitute  true  faith  ? 
(3.)  What,  in  addition  to  the  knowledge  already  spoken 
of,  is  included  in  true  faith  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  true 
faith  includes  in  it  confidence  also  ?  (4.)  What  kind  of  a 
confidence  is  that  included  in  true  faith  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  assured  confidence?  (e.)  How  do  prove  that  the  confi- 
dence included  in  true  faith  is  an  assured,  that  is,  a  hearty 
confidence?  (5.)  What  is  further  added  with  respect  to 
this  confidence?  Who  is  meant  by  the  expression  heart? 
(f.)  How  do  you  prove  that  true  faith  is  produced  in  the 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost?  (6.)  By  what  does  the  Holy 
Ghost  produce  this  faith  in  the  heart  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  produces  faith  in  the  heart  by  means 
of  the  gospel?  (7.)  Upon  whom  are  those  things  conferred 
with  respect  to  which  this  confidence  is  exercised  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  true  faith  trusts  the  promises  of  God, 
not  with  reference  to  others  simply,  but  with  a  special  re- 
ference to  ourselves?  (8.)    What  is  the  first  thing  with 


44  [Q,  22. 

respect  to  which  this  confidence  is  exercised?  How  do 
you  prove  that  true  faith  secures  the  remission  of  sin? 
(9.)  What  is  the  second  thing  with  respect  to  which  this 
confidence  is  exercised  ?  Eow  do  you  prove  that  true  faith 
secures  everlasting  righteousness  ?  (10.)  What  is  the  third 
thing  with  respect  to  which  this  confidence  is  exercised? 
How  do  you  prove  that  true  faith  secures  salvation?  (11.) 
In  what  manner  are  the  benefits  secured  by  true  faith  con- 
ferred upon  us  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  confers  the 
benefits  secured  by  faith  freely  ?  (12.)  What  do  you  mean 
by  grace  ?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  benefits  secured 
by  faith  are  conferred  merely  of  grace  ?  (13.)  What  do 
you  mean  by  Christ's  merits  /  (/*.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  benefits  secured  by  faith  are  conferred  only  for  the 
sake  of  Christ's  merits  ?  (1-i.j