Q.  26.  What  uelievest  thou  when  thou  sayest,  H  I 
believe  in  God  the.  Father  Almighty ,  maker  of  Heaven 
and  Earth  r 
A.  That  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
(who  of  nothing  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  all  that  is 
in  them,  who  likewise  upholds  and  governs  the  same 
by  his  eternal  counsel  and  providence,)  is  for  the  sake 
of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God  and  my  Father ;  on  whom  I 
I  rely  so  entirely,  that  I  have  no  doubt  but  he  will  pro- 
vide me  with  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body: 
and  further,  that  he  will  make  whatever  evils  he  sends 
upon  me  in  this  valley  of  tears,  turn  out  to  my  advan- 
tage ;  for  he  is  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty  fiod,  and 
willing,  being  a  faithful  Father. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sustaining  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  all  eternity,  a  peculiar  relation, 
in  many  respects  similar  to  that  of  a  father  to  a  son. 

b.  Heaven  and  earth,  this  world,  together  with  the  illimit- 
able  space  with  which  it  is  surrounded. 

e.  Upholds,  preserves  in  being. 

d.  Governs,  directs  to  certain  and  determinate  ends. 

e.  Eternal  counsel,  purpose  formed  from  all  eternity. 
/.  Providence,  care  over  created  beings. 

g.  Rely  so  entirely,  trust  in  with  such  a  degree  of  confi= 
deuce  as  to  exclude  all  doubt. 

h.  Evils,  the  trials  and  afflictions,  both  temporal  and 
spiritual,  incident  to  the  present  life. 

i.  This  valley  of  tears,  the  present  world,  so  called  be- 
cause it  is  to  the  Christian  especially  a  place  of  trouble  and 
difficulty  with  respect  to  that  in  which  his  heart  is  most 
interested. 

j.  Advantage,  interest  and  profit,  both  temporal  and  spi- 
ritual. 

k.  Almighty,  possessed  of  unlimited  power. 
I.  Faithful  Father,  true  to  his  promises  and  to  his  charac- 
ter as  a  kind  parent. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  is  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Eph.  i.  8 — 
Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  God  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  all  that  is  in  them,  that 
is,  all  things  in  existence.  Acts  iv.  24 — Lord,  thou  art  God, 
which  hast  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  all 

d  5 


50  ,  [Q.26. 

that  in  them  is.  Jer.  xxxii.  17 — Ah,  Lord  God!  behold 
thou  hast  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth  by  thy  great 
power  and  stretched  out  arm,  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard 
for  thee.    Gen.  i.  1,  2 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  6 ;  Neh.  ix.  6. 

3.  God  made  all  things  of  nothing.  Heb.  xi.  3 — Through 
faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the 
word  of  God ;  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made 
of  things  which  do  appear. 

4.  God  upholds,  that  isf  preserves  all  things.  Heb.  i.  3 — 
*  And  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power.  Neh. 

ix.  6 — Thou,  even  thou,  art  Lord  alone;  thou  hast  made 
heaven,  the  heaven  of  heavens,  with  all  their  host,  the  earth, 
and  all  things  that  are  therein,  the  seas  and  all  that  is 
therein,  and  thou  preservest  them  all. 

5.  God  governs  all  things.  Ps.  ciii.  19 — His  kingdom 
ruleth  over  all.    Matt.  x.  29. 

6.  God  upholds  and  governs  all  things  by  his  counsel  or  pur- 
pose, and  providence.  Eph.  i.  11 — According  to  the  purpose 
of  him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own 
will. 

7.  The  counsel  or  purpose  of  God  by  which  he  upholds  and 
governs  all  things,  is  eternal.  Eph.  iii.  11 — According  to  the 
eternal  purpose  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord.    Acts  ii.  23,  iv.  28. 

8.  God  is  our  God  and  Father.  John  xx.  17 — Go  to  my 
brethren  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  my  Father  and 
your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and  your  God.  1  John  iii.  1 ; 
John  i.  12 ;  Bom.  viii.  15  ;  Eph.  iv.  6. 

9.  God  is  our  God  and  Father  for  the  sake  of  Christ  his 
Son.  Gal.  iii.  26 — For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Eph.  i.  5 — Having  predestinated  us 
unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself, 
according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will.    Gal.  iv.  5-7. 

10.  We  should  exercise  an  univavering  trust  and  confidence  in 
God.  Job  xiii.  15 — Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in 
him.    1  Tim.  iv.  10 — Because  we  trust  in  the  living  God. 

11.  We  should  trust  in  God  for  all  that  is  necessary  for  soul 
and  body.  1  Pet.  v.  7 — Casting  all  your  care  upon  him ; 
.for  he  careth  for  you.  Ps.  Iv.  22 — Cast  thy  burden  upon 
the  Lord,  and  he  shall  sustain  thee ;  he  shall  never  suffer 
the  righteous  to  be  moved.    Matt.  vi.  26 ;  Luke  xii.  22. 

12.  We  are  subject  to  trials  and  afflictions  in  the  present  life. 
John  xvi.  33 — In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation. 


q.26.] 
13.  We  should  trust  in  God,  that  he  will  cause  all  our  trials 
and  afflictions  to  turn  out  to  our  advantage.  Heb.  xii.  10,  11 
— For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened  us  after  their  own 
pleasure ;  but  he  for  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers 
of  holiness.  Now,  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth 
to  be  joyous  but  grievous;  nevertheless,  afterward  it  yield- 
eth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto  them  which, 
are  exercised  thereby.    Rom.  viii.  28  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17. 

14.  God  is  Almighty,  and  therefore  able  to  effect  the  object 
of  our  trust.  Ps.  cxv.  3 — But  our  God  is  in  the  heavens ; 
he  hath  done  whatsoever  he  hath  pleased.  Ps.  cxxxv.  6 — 
Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased,  that  did  he  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,  in  the  seas  and  all  deep  places. 

15.  God  is  a  faithful  Father,  and  therefore  willing  to  effect 
the  object  of  our  trust.  Ps.  ciii.  13 — Like  as  a  father  pitieth 
his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him.  Matt, 
vii.  11 — If  ye  then  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts 
unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  Lsa. 
xlix.  15,  16 ;  Rom.  x.  12. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  twenty-sixth  question  ?  What  is  God  said  to 
be  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  expression  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  (a.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  (1.)  What  is  God  said  to  have  made?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  expression  heaven  and  earth?  (b.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  all 
that  is  in  them?  (2.)  Of  what  did  God  make  all  things  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  made  all  things  of  nothing  ? 
(3.)  What  does  the  answer  add  with  respect  to  God  in  re- 
ference to  the  things  he  has  made  ?  What  is  meant  by  up- 
holds ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  upholds  all  things  ? 
(4.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  govern s?  (d.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  governs  all  things  ?  (5.)  By  what 
does  God  uphold  and  govern  all  things  ?  What  do  you 
Sfean  by  his  eternal  counsel  ?  (e.)  What  by  providence  ?  (/.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  upholds  all  things  by  his  coun- 
sel or  purpose  ?  (6.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  counsel 
or  purpose  of  God,  by  which  he  upholds  and  governs  all 
things,  is  eternal  ?  (7.)  What  relation  does  the  answer  say 
God  sustains  to  you  ?    How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  your 
God  and  Father?  (8.)  For  whose  sake  is  God  your  God 
and  Father  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  your  God  and 
Father  for  the  sake  of  Christ?  (9.)  What  is  the  state  of 
mind  ascribed  in  the  answer  to  you  in  reference  to  God  as 
your  God  and  Father  in  Christ  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
expression  rely  so  entirely?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
you  should  exercise  such  a  trust  and  confidence  in  God  ? 
(10.)  What  is  the  first  thing  mentioned  in  the  answer  in 
reference  to  which  you  should  exercise  this  trust  in  God  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  you  should  trust  in  God  for  all  that 
is  necessary  for  soul  and  body?  (11.)  What  is  the  next 
thing  specified  in  the  answer  with  respect  to  which  you 
should  trust  in  God?  What  do  you  mean  by  emlsf  \h.) 
What  by  the  expression  this  valley  of  tears?  (•*.')  How  do 
you  prove  that  you  are  subject  to  trials  and  difficulties  in 
the  present  world  ?  (12.)  What  will  God  make  these  evils 
do?  What  do  you  mean  by  advantage?  (j.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  you  should  trust  in  God  that  he  will  cause  all 
your  trials  and  afflictions  to  turn  out  to  your  advantage? 
(13.)  What  is  the  first  ground  of  your  trust  in  God  as 
stated  in  the  answer?  What  do  you  mean  by  Almighty? 
(k.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  Almighty,  and  there- 
fore able  to  effect  the  object  of  your  trust  ?  (14.)  What  is 
the  second  ground  of  your  trust  in  God  as  stated  in  the  an- 
swer ?  YvThat  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  faithful  Father  ? 
(L)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  a  faithful  Father,  and 
therefore  willing  to  effect  the  object  of  your  trust?  (15.) 


X.  Lord's  Day. 

Q,  27.  What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  providence  of 
God? 

A.  The  Almighty  and  everywhere  present  power  of 
God;  whereby,  as  it  were  by  his  hand,  he  upholds  am} 
governs  heaven,  earth,  and  all  creatures  :  so  that  herfts 
and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  barren  years, 
meat  and  drink,  health  and  sickness,  riches  and  poverty, 
yea  all  things,  come  not  by  chance,  but  by  his  Fatherly 
hand. 


q.27.] 


5S 


EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Everywhere  present,  exerted  throughout  the  whole  uni- 
verse. 

b.  Power  of  God,  influence  or  energy  of  the  Deity. 

c.  As  it  were  by  his  hand,  with  the  same  facility  and  effect 
as  if  he  were  possessed  of  a  hand  and  exerted  his  power  by 
means  of  it. 

d.  Herbs  and  grass,  every  species  of  vegetables. 

e.  Rain,  the  moisture  that  falls  from  the  clouds. 
/.  Drought,  want  of  rain. 

g,  Fruitful  years,  seasons  of  plenty. 

h.  Barren  years,  seasons  of  scarcity  and  want. 
i  Meat  and  drink,  the  necessaries  of  life. 

j.  Health,  that  state  of  the  body  in  which  all  its  various 
organs  perform  their  proper  functions. 

Jc.  Sickness,  diseased  or  disordered  state  of  the  body. 

I,  Riches,  the  possession  of  this  world's  goods  in  great 
abundance. 

m.  Poverty,  the  want  of  the  good  things  of  this  world, 
n.  By  chance,  resulting  from  mere  accident. 

0.  Fatherly  hand,  the  parental  power  by  which  he  con- 
trols all  his  creatures. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  exerts  a  power  over  all  that  he  has  made,  by  which  he 
upholds  and  governs  them.  Acts  xvii.  25,  26,  and  28 — He 
giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things  :  and  hath 
made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the 
face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  determined  the  times  before  ap- 
pointed and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation;  For  in  him 

we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being.  Isa.  xl.  12 — Who 
hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and 
meted  out  heaven  with  a  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust 
of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains  in 
scales  and  the  hills  in  a  balance  ?    Heb.  i.  3. 

2.  The  poiver  by  which  God  upholds  and  governs  all  things 
is  almighty.  Ps.  lxxxix.  13 — Thou  hast  a  mighty  arm :  strong 
is  thy  hand  and  high  is  thy  right  hand.  Isa.  xl.  26 — Lift 
up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold  who  hath  created  these 
things,  that  bringeth  out  their  host  by  number ;  he  calleth 
them  all  by  names,  by  the  greatness  of  his  might,  for  that 
he  is  strong  in  power ;  not  one  faileth. 

5* 
[Q.27. 


3.  Tlie  power  by  which  God  upholds  and  governs  all  things 
is  everywhere  present.  Ps.  cxxxix.  7-10 — Whither  shall  I  go 
from  thy  Spirit  ?  or  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  ? 
If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  thou  art  there ;  if  I  make  my 
bed  in  hell,  behold  thou  art  there.  If  I  take  the  wings  of 
the  morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea, 
even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me  and  thy  right  hand  shall 
hold  me.  Acts  xvii.  27 — Though  he  be  not  far  from  every 
one  of  us. 

4.  Herbs  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  barren 
years,  meat  and  drink,  are  all  controlled  by  God's  Providence. 
Ps.  civ.  13-16 — He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers ; 
the  earth  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works.  He 
causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herb  for  the 
service  of  man :  that  he  may  bring  forth  food  out  of  the 
earth ;  and  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man,  and 
oil  to  make  his  face  to  shine,  and  bread  which  strengthened 
man's  heart.  The  trees  of  the  Lord  are  full  of  sap ;  the 
cedars  of  Lebanon  which  he  hath  planted.  Acts  xiv.  17 — 
Nevertheless  he  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that  he 
did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  sea- 
sons, filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.  Jer.  v.  24; 
Zech.  x.  1. 

5.  Health  and  sickness  are  controlled  by  God's  Providence. 
Ex.  xv.  26 — I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee.  Job  v.  18,  19 
— For  he  maketh  sore,  and  bindeth  up :  he  woundeth,  and 
his  hands  make  whole.  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  troubles  ; 
yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee.  Ps.  ciii.  3 ; 
Job  i.  21. 

6.  Riches  and  poverty  are  controlled  by  Gods  Providence. 
1  Sam.  ii.  7 — The  Lord  maketh  poor,  and  maketh  rich :  he 
bringeth  low  and  lifteth  up.  Prov.  xxii.  2 — The  rich  and 
poor  meet  together :  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  all. 

7.  God  so  controls  all  things  that  nothing  takes  place  by 
chance,  but  every  thing  is  ordered  by  his  controlling  power. 
Lam.  iii.  37,  38 — Who  is  he  that  saith  and  it  cometh  to  pass, 
when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not  ?  Out  of  the  mouth  of 
the  Most  High  proceedeth  not  evil  and  good  ?  Isa.  xlv.  6, 
7 — I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else.  I  form  the  light, 
and  create  darkness :  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil :  I  the 
Lord  do  all  these  things.  Matt.  x.  29,  30,  31 — Are  not  two 
sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  ?  and  one  of  them  shall  not 
fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Father.    But  the  very 


Q.28.] 
hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Fear  ye  not,  there- 
fore, ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.   Eph.  i.  11. 

EXEKCISES. 

Repeat  the  twenty-seventh  question.  How  does  the  an- 
swer designate  this  providence  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  power  of  God  ?  (b.)  What  does  the  answer  say  he  ac- 
complished by  this  power  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  ex- 
pression as  it  were  by  his  hand?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  exerts  a  power  over  all  these  things,  by  which  he 
upholds  and  governs  them?  (1.)  What  properties  are  as- 
cribed to  this  power  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer?  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  power  by  which  God  upholds  and 
governs  all  things  is  almighty?  (2.)  What  do  you  mean 
by  everywhere  present?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
power  by  which  God  upholds  and  governs  all  things  is 
everywhere  present?  (3.)  What  particular  results  are  de- 
signated in  the  answer  as  flowing  from  God's  exerting  this 
power  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  herbs  and  grass?  (d.)  What 
by  rain?  (e.)  What  by  drought?  (/.)  What  by  fruitful 
years?  (g.)  What  by  barren  years?  (h.)  What  by  meat 
and  drink?  (I)  How  do  you  prove  that  herbs  and  grass, 
rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  barren  years,  meat  and  drink, 
are  all  controlled  by  God's  providence  ?  (4.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  health  ?  (j.)  What  by  sickness  ?  (k.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  health  and  sickness  are  controlled  by  God's  pro- 
vidence? (5.)  What  do  you  mean  by  riches?  (Z.)  What 
by  poverty?  (m.)  How  do  you  prove  that  riches  and  po- 
verty are  controlled  by  God's  providence?  (6.)  What  is 
the  meaning  of  the  expression  by  chance  ?  (n. )  What  do 
you  understand  by  his  Fatherly  hand?  (o.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  so  controls  all  things  that  nothing  takes 
place  by  chance,  but  every  thing  is  ordered  by  his  con- 
trolling power?  (7.) 


Q.2S.  What  advantage  is  it  to  us  to  know  that 
God  has  created,  and  by  his  providence  doth  still  up- 
hold all  things  f 

A.  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity ;  thankful  in 
prosperity :  and  that  in  all  things,  which  may  hereafter 
befall  us,  we  place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faithful  God  and 
CATECHETICAL  EXERCISE? 


Father,  that  nothing  shall  separate  us  from  his  love  ; 
since  all  creatures  are  so  in  his  hand  that  without  his 
will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Patient,  enduring  afflictions  without  murmuring  or 
fretfulness. 

b.  Adversity,  seasons  which  are  marked  by  afflictions  or 
misfortunes. 

c.  Thankful,  impressed  with  a  sense  of  favors  received, 
and  ready  to  acknowledge  them. 

d.  Prosperity,  seasons  when  special  mercies  are  enjoyed, 
or  all  things  succeed  according  to  our  wishes. 

e.  Firm  trust,  a  reliance  or  resting  of  the  mind  on  the 
fidelity  of  God,  so  as  not  to  be  easily  shaken  or  moved. 

/.  Love,  benevolence  or  desire  for  our  welfare. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  should  be  patient  in  adversity.  Job  i.  21- — Naked 
came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return 
thither:  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away; 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Ps.  xxxix.  9 — I  was 
dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth  ;  because  thou  didst  it. 
Rom.  v.  3  ;  James  i.  3. 

2.  We  should  be  thankful  in  prosperity.  Deut.  viii.  10 — 
When  thou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  then  thou  shalt  bless 
the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  good  land  which  he  hath  given 
thee.  1  Thess.  v.  18 — In  every  thing  give  thanks  ;  for  this 
is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  you. 

3.  We  should  exercise  a  firm  trust  in  God  tuith  respect  to  all 
things  that  may  befall  us.  2  Cor.  i.  10 — In  whom  we  trust 
that  he  will  yet  deliver  us.  Ps.  lii.  8 — I  trust  in  the  mercy 
of  God  for  ever  and  ever.  2  Sam.  xxii.  3 — The  God  of  my 
rock ;  in  him  will  I  trust.    Rom.  v.  4-6. 

4.  Nothing  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God.  Rom. 
viii.  35,  38,  39 — Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ  ?  shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  fa- 
mine, or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  For  I  am  per- 
suaded that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  princi- 
palities, nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come, 
nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able 
to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord, 


Q.  29,]  ,  57 

5.  All  creatures  are  so  in  the  hands  of  God  that  without  his 
will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move.  Acts  xvii.  28 — For  in  him 
we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being.  Matt.  x.  29  and 
30 — Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  ?  and  one  of 
them  shall  not  fall  on  the  ground  without  your  Father.  But 
the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  Prov.  xxi. 
1 ;  Job  i.  12  and  ii.  6  ;  Matt.  viii.  31. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  twenty-eighth  question  ? 
What  does  the  question  inquire  in  reference  to  the  fact  that 
God  has  created  and  doth  still  uphold  all  things  ?  How 
many  advantages  are  particularized  in  the  answer  ?  [Three.  ] 
What  is  the  first?  What  do  you  mean  by  patient?  (a.) 
What  by  adversity?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  should 
be  patient  in  adversity?  (1.)  -  What  is  the  second  advan- 
tage specified  in  the  answer?  What  do  you  mean  by  thank- 
ful? (c.)  What  by  prosperity?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  should  be  thankful  in  prosperity?  (2.)  What  is 
the  third  advantage  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  the  expression  firm  trust  ?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  should  exercise  a  firm  trust  in  God  with  respect  to 
all  things  that  may  befall  us?  (8.)  With  respect  to  what 
is  this  trust  exercised  in  God  ?  Wrhat  do  you  mean  by  his 
love?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that  nothing  shall  separate 
us  from  the  love  of  God?  (4.)  What  is  the  ground  of  this 
trust  in  God,  as  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  all  creatures  are  so  in  the  hands  of  God,  that 
without  his  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move  ?  (5.) 


XI.  Lord's  Day. 

®f  fob  %  Son.