Q.  29.  Why  is  the  Son  of  God  called  Jesus,  that  isf 
a  Saviour? 

A.  Because  he  saveth  us,  and  delivereth  us  from  our 
gins ;  and  likewise,  because  we  ought  not  to  seek,  neither 
can  find  salvation  in  any  other. 
, 


[Q,  30. 


EXPLANATIONS. 

a>  Son  of  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  sustains  a  pe- 
culiar relation  to  God,  in  many  respects  resembling  that  of 
a  son  to  a  father. 

b.  Salvation,  complete  deliverance  from  sin,  and  restora- 
tion to  the  favor  and  friendship  of  God. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  saveth  us  from  sin.  Matt.  i.  21 
— -And  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  ;  for  he  shall  save  his 
people  from  their  sins.    Heb.  vii.  25. 

2.  We  ought  not  to  seek  salvation  in  any  other  than  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1  Cor.  iii.  11 — For  other  foundation  can 
no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.  Matt, 
x.  37 — He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,  is 
not  worthy  of  me. 

3.  Salvation  cannot  be  found  in  any  other  than  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Acts  iv.  12 — Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other ;  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  ? 

exercises. 

What  is  the  twenty-ninth  question  ?  Whom  you  do  mean 
by  the  Son  of  God?  (a.)  What  is  the  answer  returned  to 
this  question  ?  How  many  reasons  does  this  answer  assign 
for  the  fact  inquired  about  in  the  question  ?  [Two.~\  What 
is  the  first?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
saves  us  from  our  sins?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  reason 
assigned  for  the  fact  inquired  about  in  the  question  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  salvation?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  ought  not  to  seek  salvation  in  any  other  than  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  cannot  find 
salvation  in  any  other  than  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  (3.)