Q.  30.  Do  such,  then,  believe  in  Jesus  the  only  Sa- 
viour, who  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness  of  saints, 
of  themselves,  or  anywhere  else  ? 

A.  They  do  not;  for  though  they  boast  of  him  in 
words,  yet  in  deeds  they  deny  Jesus,  the  only  deliverer 
and  Saviour:  for  one  of  these  two  things  must  be  true, 


, 
that  either  Jesus  is  not  a  complete  Saviour,  or  that  they, 
who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Saviour,  must  find  all 
things  in  him  necessary  to  their  salvation. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Happiness,  that  state  of  mind  in  which  it  is  free  from 
every  thing  that  interferes  with  our  enjoyment. 

b.  Saints,  the  blessed  in  heaven,  especially  those  ca- 
nonized by  the  Church  of  Rome. 

c.  Complete  Saviour,  one  who  is  in  every  way  qualified  to 
effect  the  deliverance  our  condition  requires. 

d.  Receive,  to  embrace  in  the  exercise  of  an  unwavering 
confidence. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  There  are  those  who  trust  in  the  saints  ;  or  in  the  piety  of 
their  forefathers  for  salvation.  Isa.  lxii.  16 — Doubtless,  thou 
art  our  Father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and 
Israel  acknowledge  us  not.  John  viii.  38  and  39 — We  be 
Abraham's  seed.  Abraham  is  our  father. 

2.  There  are  those  who  trust  in  themselves  for  salvation. 
Luke  xviii.  11  and  12 — The  Pharisee  stood  and  prayed  thus 
with  himself :  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other 
men  are,  extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this 
publican.  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that 
I  possess. 

3.  Those  who  trust  in  their  ancestry  or  in  themselves  for  sal- 
vation do  not  believe  in  Christ,  and  have  no  interest  in  his  salva- 
tion. Matt.  iii.  9 — And  think  not  to  say  within  yourselves, 
We  have  Abraham  to  our  father.  Luke  iii.  8 ;  Gal.  v.  4 — 
Christ  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you,  whosoever  of  you 
are  justified  by  the  law ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace. 

4.  Jesus  is  a  complete  Saviour.  Col.  i.  19  and  20 — For  it 
pleased  the  Father,  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell ; 
and  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross,  by 
him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  himself ;  by  him,  I  say,  whether 
they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven.  Col.  ii.  10 — 
And  ye  are  complete  in  him. 

5.  Those  who  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  by  faith,  find  in  him  all 
things  necessary  to  salvation.  Heb.  vii.  25 — Wherefore  he  is 
able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God 
by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them. 


* 
Heb.  xii.  2  ;  John  i.  16 — And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  re- 
ceived, and  grace  for  grace. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  thirtieth  question.  What  does  this  question 
take  for  granted  ?  [That  there  are  those  who  seek  their  salva- 
tion and  happiness  of  saints,  ^*c]  What  do  you  mean  by  hap- 
piness? (a.)  What  by  saints  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
there  are  those  who  seek  their  salvation  of  saints,  or  of 
their  forefathers?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  there  are 
those  who  trust  in  themselves  for  salvation?  (2.)  What 
does  the  question  ask  in  reference  to  those  who  are  trust- 
ing in  saints,  or  in  themselves  for  salvation  ?  What  answer 
is  returned  to  this  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  those 
who  trust  in  saints,  or  in  themselves  for  salvation,  do  not 
believe  in  Christ  ?  (3.)  What  reason  is  assigned  for  the 
answer  returned  to  the  question  ?  What  consideration  does 
the  answer  present  for  asserting  that  those  who  trust  in 
saints,  or  in  themselves  for  salvation,  deny  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  What  do  you  mean  by  a  complete  Saviour  ?  (c.) 
How  you  prove  that  Jesus  is  a  complete  Saviour?  (4.) 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  receive?  (d.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  those  who  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  by  faith  find 
in  him  all  things  necessary  to  salvation?  (5.) 


XII.  Lord's  Day. 

$.81.  Why  is  he  called  Christ,  that  is,  anointed  ? 

A.  Because  he  is  ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  our  chief  prophet 
and  teacher;  who  has  fully  revealed  to  us  the  secret 
counsel  and  will  of  God  concerning  our  redemption  :  and 
to  be  our  only  High-priest,  who,  by  the  one  sacrifice  of 
his  body,  has  redeemed  us,  and  makes  continual  inter- 
cession with  the  Father  for  us  ;  and  also  to  be  our  eternal 
King,  who  governs  us  by  his  word  and  Spirit :  and  who 
defends  and  preserves  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  salva- 
tion he  has  purchased  for  us. 


Q.31.] 


CATECHETICAI,  EXEECJSES. 
EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Ordained,  solemnly  set  apart  to  the  several  offices  to 
which  he  was  appointed. 

b.  Anointed,  consecrated  by  unction  or  imparting  pecu- 
liar influences. 

c.  Prophet,  one  who  makes  known  the  will  of  God. 

d.  Teacher,  one  who  instructs  others  in  religion. 

e.  Priest,  one  who  offers  sacrifice,  presents  its  blood,  and 
makes  supplication  for  the  people. 

/.  King,  one  who  rules  and  protects  his  subjects. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  has  been  ordained  by  God,  that  is,  solemnly  set 
apart  to  the  several  offices  to  which  he  'was  appointed.  Luke  iv. 
18 — The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath 
anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ;  he  hath  sent 
me  to  heal,  the  broken  hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the 
captives,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at 
liberty  them  that  are  bruised.  Acts  ii.  36 — Therefore,  let 
all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly,  that  God  hath  made 
that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
Christ.    Isa.  lxi.  1. 

2.  Christ  has  been  anointed  by  God  the  Father.  Acts  iv.  27 
— For  of  a  truth,  against  thy  holy  child  Jesus,  whom  thou 
hast  anointed,  both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate  with  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  the  people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  together. 
Acts  x.  38 ;  Heb.  i.  9. 

3.  Christ  has  been  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Acts  x. 
38 — How  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  with  power.  Heb.  i.  9 — Thou  hast  loved  righte- 
ousness, and  hated  iniquity ;  therefore  God,  even  thy  God, 
hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  thy  fel- 
lows.   Ps.  xlv.  7. 

4.  Christ  has  been  constituted  our  chief  Prophet  and  teacher. 
Acts  iii.  22 — For  Moses  truly  said  unto  the  fathers,  a  pro- 
phet shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto  you  of  your 
brethren,  like  unto  me  ;  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things 
whatsoever  he  shall  say  unto  you.  Deut.  xviii.  15,  18; 
John  vi.  14 — This  is  of  a  truth  that  Prophet  that  should  come 
into  the  world.  Matt  xvii.  5 — Behold  a  voice  out  of  the 
cloud,  which  said,  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am 
well  pleased  ;  hear  ye  him. 
62 


5.  Christ  has  been  constituted  our  only  High-priest.  '  Ps.  ex. 
4 — Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 
Heb.  iii.  1 — Wherefore,  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the 
heavenly  calling,  consider  the  Apostle  and  High-priest  of 
our  profession,  Christ  Jesus.    Heb.  vii.  21. 

6.  Christ  has  been  constituted  our  eternal  King.  Ps.  ii.  6 — 
Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion.  Matt, 
xxi.  5 — Tell  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  thy  king 
cometh  unto  thee,  meek,  and  sitting  upon  an  ass,  and  a  colt 
the  foal  of  an  ass.    John  xviii.  37  ;  Luke  i.  33. 

7.  Christ,  as  our  chief  Prophet  and  teacher,  has  fully  re- 
vealed to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  concerning  our 
redemption.  John  i.  18 — No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ; 
the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
he  hath  declared  him.  John  xv.  15 — All  things  that  I  have 
heard  of  my  Father,  I  have  made  known  unto  you.  Matt, 
xi.  27. 

8.  Christ,  as  our  only  High-priest,  has  redeemed  us  by  the  one 
sacrifice  of  his  body.  Heb.  x.  10  and  14 — By  the  which  will 
we  are  sanctified,  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus 
Christ  once  for  all.  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  per- 
fected for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified.    Heb.  ix.  26. 

9.  Christ,  as  our  only  High-priest,  makes  continual  interces- 
sion with  the  Father  for  us.  Rom.  viii.  34 — Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is 
risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us.  Heb.  vii.  25 — He  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them. 

10.  Christ,  as  our  eternal  King,  governs  us  by  his  word. 
Ps.  lxiii.  24 — Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel,  and 
afterward  receive  me  to  glory.  Ps.  cxix.  105 — Thy  word  is 
a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path. 

11.  Christ,  as  our  eternal  King,  governs  us  by  his  Spirit. 
John  xvi.  13 — Howbeit,  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is 
come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth;  for  he  shall  not 
speak  of  himself ;  but  whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall 
he  speak,  and  he  will  show  you  things  to  come.  Ps.  cxliii. 
10 — Thy  Spirit  is  good ;  lead  me  into  the  land  of  upright- 
ness. 

12.  Christ,  as  our  eternal  King,  defends  and  preserves  us  in 
the  enjoyment  of  the  salvation  he  has  purchased  for  us.  John 
x.  27,  28 — My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and 
they  follow  me ;  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life ;  and 


q.32.] 


, 
they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them 
out  of  my  hand. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  thirty-first  question.  What  is  the  answer  re- 
turned? What  do  you  mean  by  ordained?  (a.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  has  been  ordained  by  God,  that  is, 
solemnly  set  apart  to  the  several  offices  to  which  he  was  ap- 
pointed? (1.)  What  is  said  to  have  been  done  to  Christ 
besides  being  ordained?  What  do  you  mean  by  anointed? 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  been  anointed  by 
God  the  Father  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has 
been  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost?  (3.)  To  how  many 
offices  has  Christ  been  ordained  and  anointed?  [Three.] 
What  is  the  first?  What  do  you  mean  by  prophet?  (c.) 
What  by  teacher?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has 
been  constituted  our  chief  prophet  and  teacher  ?  (4.)  What 
has  Christ  done  as  our  chief  prophet  and  teacher  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ,  as  our  chief  prophet  and  teacher,  has 
fully  revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  con- 
cerning our  redemption?  (7.)  What  is  the  second  office  to 
which  Christ  has  been  appointed  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
priest?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  been  con- 
stituted our  only  High-priest?  (5.)  What  has  Christ  done 
for  us  as  our  only  High-priest  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ,  as  our  only  Pligh-priest  has  redeemed  us  by  the 
one  sacrifice  of  his  body?  (8.)  What  does  Christ  still  do 
for  us  as  our  only  High-priest  ?  How  do  prove  that  Christ, 
as  our  High-priest,  makes  continual  intercession  with  the 
Father  for  us  ?  (9.)  What  is  the  third  office  to  which 
Christ  has  been  appointed  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  King  ? 
(/.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  been  constituted  our 
eternal  King?  (6.)  What  is  the  first  thing  which  Christ 
does  for  us  as  our  King  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ, 
as  our  King,  governs  us  by  his  word?  (10.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ,  as  our  King,  governs  us  by  his  Spirit? 
(11.)  What  is  the  second  thing  Christ  does  for  us  as  our 
eternal  King  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ,  as  our  King, 
defends  and  preserves  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  salvation 
he  has  purchased  for  us  ?  (12.)