Q.  32.  But  why  art  thou  called  a  Christian  ? 
A.  Because  I  am  a  member  of  Christ  by  faith,  and 


64  ,  [Q,  32. 

thus  am  partaker  of  his  anointing,  that  so  I  may  confess 
his  name,  and  present  myself  a  living  sacrifice  of  thank- 
fulness to  him :  and  also,  that  with  a  free  and  good  con- 
science I  may  fight  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this  life  ; 
and  afterward  reign  with  him  eternally,  over  all  crea- 
tures. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Member,  a  part  of  Christ's  mystical  body. 

b.  Partaker,  one  who  has  a  part  or  interest  in  him,  in 
common  with  others. 

c.  Anointing,  his  consecration  to  the  several  offices  to 
which  he  has  been  appointed. 

d.  Confess  his  name,  to  acknowledge  Christ  before  men, 
and  show  forth  his  praises. 

e.  Conscience,  that  peculiar  faculty  of  the  mind  which 
judges  of  right  and  wrong. 

/.  Reign,  exercise  government  or  authority  over. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

L  The  Christian  is  a  member  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  xii.  27 — 
Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular. 
Eph.  v.  80 — For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh, 
and  of  his  bones.    1  Cor.  vi.  15. 

2.  This  membership  of  the  Christian  to  Christ  is  effected  by 
faith.  Eph.  iii.  17 — That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts 
by  faith.  1  John  v.  4 — This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh 
the  world,  even  our  faith.  Col.  ii.  6 — As  ye  have  therefore 
received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him. 

3.  The? Christian  is  a  partaker  of  Christ's  anointing.  1  John 
ii.  20  and  27 — But  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One, 

and  ye  know  all  things.  But  the  anointing  which  ye 

have  received  of  him  abideth  in  you.  1  Cor.  i.  21 — Now  he 
which  establisheth  us  with  you  in  Christ  and  hath  anointed 
us,  is  God, 

4.  The  Christian  must  confess  the  name  of  Christ.  Matt.  x. 
32 — Whosoever,  therefore,  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him 
will  I  confess  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
1  Pet.  ii.  9 — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priest- 
hood, an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people;  that  ye  should 
show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of 
darkness  into  his  marvellous  light.  Rom.  x.  9 — That  if 
thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt 


q.32.] 


CATECHETICAL  EXEKCISES. 
believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved. 

5.  The  Christian  -must  present  himself  to  Christ  as  a  living 
sacrifice  of  thankfulness.  Rom.  xii.  1 — I  beseech  you  there- 
fore, brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which 
is  your  reasonable  service.  1  Pet.  ii.  5 — Ye  also,  as  lively 
stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy  priesthood* 
to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ. 

6.  The  Christian  must  fight  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this  life. 
Eph.  vi.  11,  12 — Put  on  the  whole  armor  of  God,  that  ye 
may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  For 
we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  princi- 
palities, against  powers,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in 
high  places.  1  Pet.  v.  8,  9 — Be  sober,  be  vigilant ;  because* 
your  adversary,  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour :  whom  resist  steadfast  in  the 
faith.    Rom.  vi.  12,  13  ;  1  Tim.  i.  18.  19. 

7.  The  Christian  shall  hereafter  reign  with  Christ  for  ever 
over  all  creatures.  2  Tim.  ii.  12 — If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also 
reign  with  him.  Rev.  iii.  21 — To  him  that  overcometh  will 
I  grant  to  sit  with  me  on  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  over- 
came, and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne* 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  thirty-second  question  ?  What  reason  is  as- 
signed in  the  answer  for  your  being  called  a  Christian  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  being  a  member  of  Christ  ?  (a,)  How 
do  you  prove  that  a  Christian  is  a  member  of  Christ  ?  (1.) 
By  what  are  you  a  member  of  Christ  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  your  membership  of  Christ  is  effected  by  faith?  (2.) 
What  is  said  to  follow  from  your  being  a  member  of  Christ  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  &  partaker?  (b.)  What  by  Christ's 
anointing  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  a  partaker 
of  Christ's  anointing?  (3.)  For  what  end  are  you  a  par- 
taker  of  Christ's  anointing  ?  How  many  purposes  are  spe- 
cified in  the  answer,  which  are  designed  to  be  subserved  by 
your  being  made  a  partaker  of  Christ's  anointing  ?  [Four.l 
What  is  the  first  ?  What  is  it  to  confess  his  name  ?  (d.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  you  mu.st  confess  the  name  of 
Christ  ?  (4. )  W'hat  is  the  second  purpose  to  be  subserved 
by  your  interest  in  Christ's  anointing  ?    How  do  you  prove 
CATECHETICAL  EXERCISER. 


[Q.S3. 


that  you  must  present  yourself  to  Christ  as  a  living  sacrifice  of 
thankfulness  ?  (5.)  What  is  the  third  purpose  to  be  subserved 
by  your  being  a  partaker  of  Christ's  anointing?  What  do 
you  mean  by  conscience  ?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you 
must  fight  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this  life?  (6.)  What  is 
the  fourth  purpose  to  be  subserved  by  your  being  a  partaker 
of  Christ's  anointing  ?  What  is  meant  by  reign  ?  (/.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  you  shall,  after  this  life,  reign  with  Christ 
eternally  over  all  creatures?  (7.) 


XIII.  Lord's  Day.