Q.  33.  Why  is  Christ  catted  the  only  begotten  Son 
of  God j  since  we  are  also  the  children  of  God? 

A.  Because  Christ  alone  is  the  eternal  and  natural 
Son  of  God ;  but  we  are  children  adopted  of  God,  by 
grace,  for  his  sake. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Natural,  according  to  the  course  of  things  as  they  exist 
in  reference  to  the  Deity. 

b.  Adopted,  taken  as  one's  own ;  received  as  a  son  or  heir. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christians  are  the  children  of  God.  John  i.  12 — But  as 
many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name.  Rom. 
viii.  14 — For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they 
are  the  sons  of  God. 

2.  Christ  is  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  John  i.  1 — In  the  be- 
ginning was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and 
the  Word  was  God.  Heb.  i.  8 — Unto  the  Son  he  saith,  Thy 
throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever. 

3.  Christ  is  the  natural  Son  of  God.  Heb.  i.  2,  3 — Hath  in 
in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath 
appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the 
worlds ;  who  being  the  brightness  of  his  glory  and  the 
express  image  of  his  person.  John  v.  18 — Therefore  the 
Jews  sought  the  more  to  kill  him,  because  he  not  only  had 
broken  the  Sabbath,  but  said  also  that  God  was  his  Father. 


Q.34.] 
making  himself  equal  with  God.  Rom.  viii.  32;  Uohn 
v.  20. 

4.  Christians  are  the  children  of  God  by  adoption.  Eph.  i. 
6 — Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  children. 
Rom.  viii.  15 — But  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father. 

5.  Christians  are  adopted  as  the  children  of  God  by  grace. 
Eph.  i.  6 — To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  wherein 
he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved.  1  John  iii.  1— 
Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon 
us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God. 

6.  Christians  are  adopted  as  the  children  of  God  for  the  sake, 
of  Christ.  Gal.  iii.  26 — For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God 
by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Eph.  i.  5 — Having  predestinated 
lis  unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ.  Rom. 
viii.  17. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  thirty-third  question  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christians  are  the  children  of  God  ? 
(1.)  What  does  the  question  inquire  in  view  of  the  fact 
that  we  are  the  children  of  God  ?  Y*7hat  reason  is  assigned 
in  the  answer  for  the  fact  inquired  about  in  the  question  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  the  eternal  Son  of  God? 
(2.)  What  do  you  mean  when  you  say  Christ  is  the  natural 
Son  of  God?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  the 
natural  Son  of  God?  (3.)  How  does  the  answer  say  we 
sustain  to  God  the  relation  of  children  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  adopted?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God  by  adoption  ?  (4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we 
are  adopted  as  the  children  of  God  by  grace  ?  (5.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  are  adopted  as  the  children  of  God 
for  the  sake  of  Christ?  (6.)