Q.  34.  Wherefore  callest  thou  him  our  Lord  ? 
A.  Because  he  has  redeemed  us,  both  soul  and  body, 
from  all  our  sins,  not  with  gold  or  silver,  but  with  his 
precious  blood,  and  hath  delivered  us  from  all  the  power 
of  the  devil ;  and  thus  hath  made  us  his  own  property. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Lord,  proprietor;  master;  a  person  possessed  of  su- 
preme power  and  authority. 
[Q.84. 


b.  Gold  or  silver,  the  precious  metals  usually  employed 
as  the  standard  of  value. 

c.  Property,  that  which  he  has  the  exclusive  right  of  pos- 
sessing, enjoying,  and  disposing  of. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  has  redeemed  us,  both  soul  and  body.  1  Cor.  vi. 
20 — For  ye  are  bought  with  a  price:  therefore  glorify  God 
in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's.  GaL 
iv.  4,  5. 

,  2.  Christ  has  redeemed  its  from  all  our  sms.  Col.  i.  14 — In 
whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.  1  John  i.  7 — And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin. 

3.  Christ  has  delivered  us  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil. 
Heb.  ii.  14,  15 — That  through  death  he  might  destroy  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver 
them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage.  1  John  iii.  8 — For  this  purpose  the 
Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil. 

4.  Christ  has  redeemed  and  delivered  us,  not  with  gold  and 
silver,  but  with  Ms  precious  blood.  1  Pet.  i.  18  and  19 — For- 
asmuch as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  cor- 
ruptible things,  as  silver  and  gold,  from  your  vain  conver- 
sation received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers  ;  but  with 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish 
and  without  spot. 

5.  Christ,  by  redeeming  and  delivering  us,  has  made  us  his 
own  property.  Titus  ii.  14 — Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that 
he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  him- 
self a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.  1  Pet.  ii.  9 
— But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an 
holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  thirty-fourth  question?  What  do  you  mean 
by  Lord?  (a.)  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the  ques- 
tion ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  redeemed  us  both 
soul  and  body?  (1.)  From  what  has  Christ  redeemed  us? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  all  our 
sins  ?  (2.)  What  has  Christ  done  for  us  besides  redeeming 
us  ?    How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  delivered  us  from  all 


q.35.] 
the  power  of*  the  devil  ?  (3.)  "With  what  does  the  answer 
say  Christ  has  not  redeemed  us  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
gold  and  silver?  (b.)  With  what  then  has  Christ  redeemed 
us  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  redeemed  and  de- 
livered us,  not  with  gold  and  silver,  but  with  his  precious 
blood?  (4.)  What  is  further  added  in  this  answer?  What 
is  meant  by  property  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ, 
by  redeeming  and  delivering  us,  has  made  us  his  own 
property  ?  (5.) 


XIV.  Lord's  Day. 

$.35.  What  is  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "he 
icas  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary  r 

A,  That  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is,  and  contirmeth  to 
be  true  and  eternal  Gocl,  took  upon  him  the  very  na= 
ture  of  man,  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Virgin  Maryf 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that  he  might  also 
be  the  true  seed  of  David,  like  unto  his  brethren  in  all 
things,  sin  excepted. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Very  nature  of  man,  all  that  is  required  to  constitute 
him  a  real  human  being. 

b.  True  seed,  a  real  descendant. 

c.  David,  the  son  of  Jesse,  and  one  of  the  ancient  kings 
of  Israel,  who  was  distinguished  for  his  devoted  piety. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  is,  and  continueth  to  be,  true  and  eternal  God.  I 
John  v.  20 — We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life.  Rom. 
ix.  5 — Whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of  whom  as  concerning 
the  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever. 
Amen.  Heb.  xiii.  8 — Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  and 
to-day,  and  for  ever. 

2.  Christ  took  upon  him  the  vmj  nature  of  man.  John  i.  14 
— And  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.  Gal. 
iv.  4 — But  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God 


70  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law. 
Luke  xxiv.  39  ;  Heb.  ii.  16. 

3.  Christ  derived  his  human  nature  from  the  Virgin  Mary. 
Luke  ii.  7 — And  she  [Mary]  brought  forth  her  first-born 
son,  and  wrapped  him  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  him 
in  a  manger.  Isa.  vii.  14 — Behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive, 
and  bear  a  son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel.  Matt, 
i.  18 ;  Luke  i.  26,  27,  30-32. 

4.  Christ  derived  his  human  nature  from  the  Virgin  JIarjj 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Luke  i.  35 — The  Holy 
Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest 
shall  overshadow  thee ;  therefore  also  that  holy  thiDg. 
which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  3hall  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 
Matt.  i.  18. 

5.  Christ  is  the  true  seed,  that  is,  a  real  descendant  of  David. 
Acts  ii.  30 — Therefore  being  a  prophet,  and  knowing  that 
God  had  sworn  with  an  oath  to  him,  [David,]  that  of  the 
fruit  of  his  loins  according  to  the  flesh,  he  would  raise  up 
Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne.  Acts  xiii.  23 — Of  this  man's 
[David's]  seed  hath  God  according  to  his  promise,  raised 
unto  Israel  a  Saviour,  Jesus.    Ps.  cxxxii.  11. 

6.  Christ  ivas  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that  is,  similar  to 
mankind,  in  all  things.  Heb.  ii.  17 — Wherefore  in  all  things 
it  behooved  him  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren  ;  that 
he  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High-priest  in  things 
pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the 
people.  Phil.  ii.  7 — But  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  men. 

7.  Christ  was  without  sin.  Heb.  iv.  15 — But  [Christ]  was 
in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  1  John 
iii.  5 — And  ye  know  that  he  was  manifested  to  take  away 
our  sins  ;  and  in  him  is  no  sin.  1  Pet.  ii.  22 — Who  did  no 
sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  thirty-fifth  question.  What  is  the  answer  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is 
and  continueth  to  be  true  and  eternal  God  ?  (1.)  What  did 
Christ  do?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  very  nature  of  man? 
(a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  took  upon  him  the  very 
nature  of  man  ?  (2. )  What  is  said  as  to  the  medium  through 
which  Christ  took  upou  him  the  very  nature  of  man  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  Christ  derived  his  human  nature  from 
the  Virgin  Mary?  (3.)  By  what  means  was  the  derivation 
of  the  human  nature  of  Christ  from  the  Virgin  Mary  ef- 
fected ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  derived  his  human 
nature  from  the  Virgin  Mary  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  (4.)  For  what  purpose  is  Christ  said  to  have  taken 
upon  himself  the  very  nature  of  man,  and  that  of  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  true 
seed?  (b.)  Who  was  David?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ  is  the  true  seed,  that  is,  a  real  descendant  of  David  ? 
(5.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  was  made  like  unto 
his  brethren  in  all  things?  (6.)  What  exception  is  made 
to  this  general  resemblance  of  Christ  to  his  brethren? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  was  without  sin  ?  (7.)