Q.  37.  What  dost  thou  understand  by  the  words, 

"He  suffered?" 

A.  That  he,  all  the  time  he  lived  on  earth,  but  espe- 
cially at  the  end  of  his  life,  sustained  in  body  and  soul 
the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sins  of  ail  mankind :  that 
bo  by  his  passion,  as  the  only  propitiatory  sacrifice,  he 
might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from  everlasting  damna- 
tion ;  and  obtain  for  us  the  favor  of  God,  righteousness, 
and  eternal  life. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Wrath  of  God,  the  divine  anger  developing  itself  in  the 
infliction  of  punishment. 

6.  Propitiatory,  having  the  power  to  appease  or  render 
favorable. 


0.37.] 
DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  sustained  the  ivrath  of  God  against  the  sins  of  all 
mankind,  Isa.  liii.  4,  5,  6 — Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs, 
and  carried  our  sorrows ;  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken, 
smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.  But  he  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chas- 
tisement of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stripes 
we  are  healed.  All  we,  like  sheep,  have  gone  astray  ;  we 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way;  and  the  Lord  hath 
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  1  John  ii.  2 — And  he  is 
the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but 
also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world. 

2.  Christ  sustained  the  wrath  of  God  in  his  body.  1  Pet.  ii, 
24— Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the 
tree,  that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righte- 
ousness ;  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.  Ps.  xxii.  16 — 
They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet. 

3.  Christ  sustained  the  wrath  of  God  in  his  soul.  Matt. 

xxvi.  38 — My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death, 
Ps.  xxii.  14 — My  heart  is  like  wax;  it  is  melted  in  the  midst 
of  my  bowels. 

4.  Christ  suffered  all  the  time  he  lived  on  earth.  Isa.  liii. 
2,  3 — He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness  ;  and  when  we  shall 
see  him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him.  He 
is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  :  a  man  of  sorrows  and  ac- 
quainted with  grief.    Luke  xii.  50. 

5.  Christ  suffered  especially  at  the  end  of  his  life.  Matt. 

xxvii.  46,  50 — And  about  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani  ?  that  is  to 

say,  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  

Jesus,  when  he  had  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  yielded 
up  the  ghost. 

6.  Christ,  by  his  sufferings,  offered  himself  as  a  propitiatory 
sacrifice.  Heb.  ix.  26 — In  the  end  of  the  world  hath  he  ap- 
peared, to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.  Heb. 
vii.  27 — This  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself. 

7.  Christ,  by  offering  himself  as  a  propitiatory  sacrifice,  has 
redeemed  us  from  everlasting  damnation.  Heb.  ix.  12 — Neither 
by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  he 
entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having,  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us. 

8.  Christ  has  obtained  the  favor  of  God  for  us.    Rom.  v.  2 — 
By  whom  also  we  have  access  by  faith  into  this  grace 
wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God 
John  i.  17 — For  the  law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and 
truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ.    Rom.  v.  21. 

9.  Christ  has  obtained  righteousness  for  us.  2  Cor.  v.  21 — 
For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ; 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him. 
1  Cor.  i.  30 — But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God 
is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  redemption. 

10.  Christ  has  obtained  eternal  life  for  us.  1  John  iv.  9 — 
God  sent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we 
might  live  through  him.  John  iii.  15  and  36 — Whosoever 
believeth  in  him,  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life. 

 He  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life. 

Bom.  v.  11. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  thirty-seventh  question.  What  is  the  answer 
returned?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  wrath  of  God?  (a.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  sustained  the  wrath  of  God 
against  the  sins  of  all  mankind?  (1.)  In  what  did  Christ 
sustain  the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  sustained  the  wrath  of  God 
in  his  body  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  sustained 
the  wrath  of  God  in  his  soul?  (3.)  When  did  Christ  sus- 
tain the  wrath  of  God  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  suf- 
fered all  the  time  he  lived  on  earth?  (4.)  When  was  it 
that  he  especially  suffered  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ 
suffered  especially  at  the  end  of  his  life?  (5.)  For  what 
purpose  is  Christ  said  to  have  suffered?  What  do  you 
mean  by  propitiatory  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ, 
by  his  sufferings,  offered  himself  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  ? 
(6.)  What  did  Christ  do  for  us  by  his  sufferings  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  everlasting 
damnation?  (7.)  What  further  has  Christ  done  for  us? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  obtained  the  favor  of 
God  for  us  ?  (8.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  ob- 
tained righteousness  for  us  ?  (9.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ  has  obtained  for  us  eternal  life  ?  (10.)