Q.  38.  Why  did  lie  suffer  under  Pontius  Pilate  as 
his  judge? 


Q,  38.]  75 


A.  That  he,  being  innocent,  and  yet  condemned  by  a 
temporal  judge,  might  thereby  free  us  from  the  severe 
judgment  of  God,  to  which  we  were  exposed. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Pontius  Pilate,  the  Roman  governor  of  Judea. 

b.  Temporal  judge,  one  who  presides  in  judgment  over  the 
actions  of  men  relating  to  the  present  life. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  ivas  innocent  of  the  crimes  laid  to  his  charge.  John 
xviii.  38 — He  went  out  again  unto  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto 
them,  I  find  in  him  no  fault  at  all.  Luke  xxiii.  14 — Behold, 
I,  having  examined  him  before  you,  have  found  no  fault  in 
this  man  touching  those  things  whereof  ye  accuse  him. 
Matt,  xxvii.  24 — I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  per- 
son ;  see  ye  to  it. 

2.  Though  innocent,  Christ  was  condemned  by  Pontius  Pilate, 
the  Roman  governor .  Matt,  xxvii.  2 — And  when  they  had  bound 
him,  they  led  him  away,  and  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate 
the  governor.  John  xix.  13 — When  Pilate  therefore  heard 
that  saying,  he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  down  in  the 
judgment-seat. 

3.  We  as  sinners  are  exposed  to  the  severe  judgment  of  God. 
Gal.  iii.  10 — Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all 
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them. 
John  iii.  18 — He  that  believeth  not,  is  condemned  already, 
because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  be- 
gotten Son  of  God. 

4.  Christ,  by  his  innocent  sufferings  and  death,  hath  freed  us 
from  the  severe  judgment  of  God.  Gal.  iii.  13 — Christ  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse 
for  us.  Isa.  liii.  5 — But  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgres- 
sions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  ;  the  chastisement  of 
our  peace  was  upon  him;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  thirty-eighth  question?  Who  was  Pontius 
Pilate?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate  as  his  judge?  (2.)  What  is  the  answer  re- 
turned to  the  question?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ 
suffered  innocently  ?  (1.)    What  do  you  mean  by  a  temporal 
[Q.39. 


judge?  (b.)  What  is  the  particular  reason  assigned  in  the 
answer  for  Christ's  being  condemned  innocently  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  are  exposed  to  the  severe  judgment  of 
God?  (3.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  freed  us 
from  the  severe  judgment  of  God?  (4.)