Q.  40.  Why  ivas  it  necessary  for  Christ  to  humble 
himself  even  unto  death? 

A.  Because,  with  respect  to  the  justice  and  truth  of 
God,  satisfaction  for  our  sins  could  be  made  no  otherwise 
than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Humble,  to  abase ;  to  reduce  to  a  low  state. 

b.  Justice,  that  perfection  of  God,  by  virtue  of  which  he 
cannot  but  do  right. 

c.  Truth,  fidelity  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  promises. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

%4  Christ  humbled  himself  even  unto  death.  Phil.  ii.  8 — And 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross. 
Heb.  ii.  9 — But  we  see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory 
and  honor ;  that  he  by  the  grace  of  God  should  taste  death 
for  every  man. 

7* 
2.  Christ  by  his  death  has  made  satisfaction  for  our  sins. 
Heb.  ix.  26  and  28 — But  now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world 
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  him- 
self.— So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many. 
1  Pet.  iii.  18 — For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins, 
the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,  be- 
ing put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the  Spirit. 
1  Cor.  xv.  8. 

3.  The  Justice  of  God  required  that  satisfaction  for  sin  should 
be  made  by  the  death  of  his  Son.  Rom.  i.  32 — Who,  knowing 
the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such  things 
are  worthy  of  death.  Eom.  viii.  3 — For  what  the  law  could 
not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending 
his  own  Son,  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh. 

4.  The  truth  of  God  required  that  satisfaction  for  sin  should 
be  made  by  the  death  of  his  Son.  Gen.  ii.  17 — For  in  the  day 
that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die.  Gen.  iii.  15 
— And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and 
between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head 
and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  fortieth  question  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  to  humble 9  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ  humbled  himself  even  unto  death?  (1.)  What  does 
the  question  inquire  with  respect  to  Christ's  humbling  him- 
self even  unto  death  ?  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the 
question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  by  his  death  has 
made  satisfaction  for  our  sins?  (2.)  Wrhat  is  the  language 
of  the  answer  containing  the  reason  why  the  death  of  Christ 
was  necessary  in  order  to  satisfy  for  our  sins  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  justice  of  God?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  justice  of  God  required  that  satisfaction  for  sin 
should  be  made  by  the  death  of  his  Son  ?  (3.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  the  truth  of  God?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  truth  of  God  required  that  satisfaction  for  our  sins 
should  be  made  by  the  death  of  his  Son?  (4.)