Q.  42.  Since,  then,  Christ  died  for  us,  why  must 
ice  also  die  ? 

A.  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,  but 
only  an  abolishing  of  sin,  and  a  passage  into  eternal  life. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Satisfaction,  the  recompense  for  sin  demanded  by  the 
law. 

b.  An  abolishing,  a  destroying  or  putting  an  end  to. 

c.  Passage,  that  which  introduces  into,  or  conducts  to. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  died  for  us.  Rom.  v.  6  and  8 — In  due  time  Christ 
died  for  the  ungodly.  But  God  commendeth  his  love  to- 
[Q.42. 


ward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us.  1  Cor.  xv.  3 — How  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  ac- 
cording to  the  Scriptures. 

2.  We  also  must  die.  Heb.  ix.  27 — And  as  it  is  appointed 
unto  men  once  to  die.  Gen.  iii.  19 — In  the  sweat  of  thy 
face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return  unto  the  ground ; 
for  out  of  it  wast  thou  taken;  for  dust  thou  art,  and  unto 
dust  shalt  thou  return. 

3.  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins.  Matt.  xvi. 
26 — For  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his  soul?  Luke  ix.  25 — For  what  is  a  man 
advantaged,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  himself, 
or  be  cast  away. 

4.  Our  death  is  an  abolishing  of  sin.  Rom.  vi.  7 — For  he 
that  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin.  Heb.  iv.  10 — For  he  that  is 
entered  into  his  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own 
works,  as  God  did  from  his.    1  Pet.  iv.  1. 

5.  Our  death  is  a  passage  into  eternal  life.    Phil.  i.  21  and 

23 — For  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain.  For  I 

am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart,  and 
to  be  with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better.  John  v.  24 — Yerily, 
verily  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  be= 
lieveth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall 
not  come  into  condemnation;  but  is  passed  from  death 
unto  life.    Rev.  xiv.  13. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  taken  for  granted  in  this  question  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  died  for  us?  (1.)  What  is  asked  in  the 
question  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Christ  died  for  us  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  also  must  die  ?  (2. )  What  is  the  an- 
swer returned  to  the  question  ?  How  many  particulars  are 
here  specified  in  reference  to  the  nature  of  our  death? 
[Three.']  What  is  the  first?  What  do  you  mean  by  satis- 
faction? (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  death  is  not  a 
satisfaction  for  sin  ?  (3.)  What  is  the  second  particular  spe- 
cified ?  What  do  you  mean  by  an  abolishing  f  (b.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  our  death  is  an  abolishing  of  sin?  (4.)  What  is 
the  third  particular  specified  in  the  answer  with  respect  to 
the  nature  of  our  death?  What  do  you  mean  by  passage  ? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  death  is  a  passage  into 
eternal  life?  (5.) 


Q.  43,]  , 


m 


Q.  43 .  What  further  henefit  do  vie  receive  from  the 
sacrifice  and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ? 

A.  That  by  virtue  thereof,  our  old  man  is  crucified, 
dead,  and  buried  with  him ;  that  so  the  corrupt  inclina- 
tions of  the  flesh  may  no  more  reign  in  us ;  but  that 
we  may  offer  ourselves  unto  him  a  sacrifice  of  thanks- 
giving. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Old  man,  our  corrupt  human  nature. 

b.  Inclinations,  propensities ;  disposition  of  mind. 

c.  Flesh,  the  natural  man,  or  corrupt  nature, 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  By  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ,  our  old  man  or  corrupt 
nature  is  crucified  with  him.  Rom.  vi.  6 — Knowing  this,  that 
our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him.  Gal.  v.  24 — And  they 
that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections 
and  lusts. 

2.  By  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ,  our  old  man  is  dead  with 
him.    Rom.  vi.  8  and  11 — Now  if  we  be  dead  with  Christ, 

we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him.  Likewise 

reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but 
alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

8.  By  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ,  our  old  man  u  buried 
with  him.  Rom.  vi.  4 — Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by 
baptism  into  death.   Col.  ii,  12— -Buried  with  him  in  baptism. 

4.  The  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  should  no  more  reign  in. 
us.  Rom.  vi.  6,  12  and  14 — Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man 
is  crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  de- 
stroyed, that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin. — —Let  not 
sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body,  that  ye  should  obey 

it  in  the  lusts  thereof.  -For  sin  shall  not  have  dominion 

over  you ;  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace. 
1  Thes.  v.  10. 

5.  We  should  offer  ourselves  to  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  of  thanks- 
giving. Rom.  xii.  1 — I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by 
the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  your  reason- 
able  service.  Rom.  vi.  18 — Neither  yield  ye  your  members 
as  instruments  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin ;  but  yield  your  - 
selves unto  God  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  dead,  and 
your  members  as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God, 
EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  forty-third  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  What  is  meant  by  our  old  man  ? 
(a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  by  virtue  of  the  death  of 
Christ  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him?  (1.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  by  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ  our  old  man 
is  dead  with  him  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  by  virtue 
of  the  death  of  Christ  our  old  man  is  buried  with  him  ?  (3.) 
How  many  things  are  said  to  result  from  this  destruction 
of  our  old  man  by  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ?  [Two.] 
What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  inclinations ?  (b.) 
What  by  the  flesh?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  cor- 
rupt inclinations  of  the  flesh  should  no  more  reign  in  us  ? 
(4.)  What  is  the  second  thing  resulting  from  the  destruc- 
tion of  our  old  man  by  virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  should  offer  ourselves  to  Christ  as  a 
sacrifice  of  thanksgiving?  (5.)