Q.  44.  Why  is  there  added,  "  he  descended  into 
hell?" 

A.  That,  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  as- 
sured, and  wholly  comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  by  his  inexpressible  anguish,  pains,  terrors, 
and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged  during  all 
his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath  delivered 
me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Greatest  temptations,  the  sorest  trials,  especially  of  a 
spiritual  nature,  to  which  the  Christian  is  subjected  in  this 
life. 

b.  Anguish,  extreme  suffering  of  mind. 

c.  Pains,  distressing  sensations  of  the  body. 

d.  Terrors,  those  circumstances  connected  with  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ,  which  were  calculated  to  excite  dread. 

e.  Hellish  agonies,  great  torments  partaking  of  the  nature 
of  the  sufferings  of  the  damned  in  hell. 

/.  Anguish  and  torments  of  hell,  the  sufferings  inflicted 
upon  the  wicked  in  the  infernal  world. 


,,  83 


DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  '  The  Christian  is  exposed  to  trials  and  temptations  in  this 
life.  2  Tim.  iii.  12 — Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution.  John  xvi.  33 — In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation. 

2.  The  Christian's  comfort  in  the  midst  of  his  trials  is  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  John  xvi.  33 — But  be  of  good  cheer  ;  I 
have  overcome  the  world.  John  xiv.  1  and  18 — Let  not 
your  heart  be  troubled ;  ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in 

me.  1  will  not  leave  you  comfortless:  I  will  come  to 

you. 

3.  Christ's  descension  into  hell  consisted  in  his  inexpressible 
anguish,  pains,  terrors,  and  hellish  agonies.  Ps.  lxxxvi.  13— 
Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the  lowest  hell.  Ps.  xxx. 
3 — 0  Lord,  thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  the  grave. 

4.  Christ  endured  this  anguish,  pain,  terror,  and  agony,  dur- 
ing all  his  sufferings.  Matt.  xxvi.  37  and  38 — And  he  took 
with  him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  began  to 
be  sorrowful  and  very  heavy.  Then  saith  he  unto  them, 
My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death.  Isa.  liii. 
3 — He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men;  a  man  of  sorrows, 
and  acquainted  with  grief. 

5.  Christ  endured  this  anguish,  pain,  terror,  and  agony  espe- 
cially on  the  cross.  Mark  xv.  34 — And  at  the  ninth  hour 
Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sa- 
bachthani  ?  which  is,  being  interpreted,  M}^  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  Matt,  xxvii.  46  ;  Isa.  liii.  10 
— Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  him  ;  he  hath  put  him 
to  grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin, 
he  shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the 
pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand. 

6.  Christ,  by  means  of  his  sufferings,  has  delivered  us  from 
the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell.  1  Cor.  xv.  55  and  57 — 0 
death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?    0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? 

 But  thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory 

through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Isa.  liii.  4  and  5 — Surely 
he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows ;  yet  we 
did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.  But 
he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for 
our  iniquities;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him  ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed. 


84  CATECHETICAL  EXERCISE?.  [Q.45. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  forty-fourth  question?  What  is  the  answe? 
returned  to  this  question  ?  What  does  the  answer  take  for 
granted  with  respect  to  the  Christian's  condition  in  the  pre- 
sent life?  What  is  meant  by  his  greatest  temptations  ?  (a.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  Christian  is  exposed  to  trials  and 
temptations  in  the  present  life?  (1.)  From  whom  does  the 
Christian  derive  his  comfort  in  the  midst  of  his  aiBicrions? 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  Christian  derives  this  comfort 
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  (2.)  What  is  the  ground  of 
this  comfort,  as  expressed  in  the  latter  part  of  the  answer  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell?  (/.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  delivered  us  from  the  an- 
guish and  torments  of  hell  ?  (6. )  By  what  has  Christ  ef- 
fected this  deliverance?  What  do  vou  mean  by  anguish? 
(b.)  What  by  pains?  (c.)  What  by  terrors f  {d.}  "What 
by  hellish  aaoroes?  (c.)  Row  do  you  prove  that  Christ's 
descension  into  hell  consisted  in  his  inexpressible  anguish, 
pains,  terrors,  and  hellish  agonies  ?  (3.)  What  is  said  with 
regard  to  the  time  when  he  experienced  this  anguish,  pain, 
<£c.  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  endured  these  things 
during  all  his  sufferings?  (4.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ  endured  these  things  especially  on  the  cross  ?  (5.  | 


XVII.  Lord's  Day.