Q.  45.  What  doth  the  resurrection  of  Christ  pro- 
fit us  ? 

A.  First :  by  his  resurrection  he  hath  overcome  death, 
that  he  might  make  as  partakers  of  that  righteousness 
which  he  had  purchased  for  us  by  his  death.  Secondly, 
we  are  also  by  his  power  raised  up  to  a  new  life.  And 
lastly,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our 
blessed  resurrection. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Xexr  life,  the  state  of  reconciliation  with  God,  in  which 
the  Christian  lives  to  his  glory,  and  to  which  he  is  ictro 
duced  by  repentance  and  faith. 


Q.45.] 


CATECHETJCAL  EXERCISES, 
6.  Pledge,  something  that  guarantees  the  accomplishment 
of  a  certain  event. 

c.  Blessed  resurrection,  the  happy  triumph  of  the  Christian 
over  death,  and  entrance  upon  the  joys  of  heaven. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  arose  from  the  dead.    1  Cor.  xv.  4  and  20 — He 

rose  again  the  third  day,  according  to  the  Scriptures.  - 

But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead  and  become  the  first 
fruits  of  them  that  slept.  Mark  xvi.  6 — Ye  seek  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  which  was  crucified :  he  is  risen :  he  is  not  here  ; 
behold  the  place  where  they  laid  him. 

2.  Christ  by  his  resurrection  has  overcome  death.  Rom.  vi. 
9 — Knowing  that  Christ,  being  raised  from  the  dead,  dieth 
no  more :  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him.  Col.  ii 
15 — And  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he  made 
a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it.  1  Cor. 
xv.  54-57  ;  Heb.  ii.  14 ;  2  Tim.  1.  10. 

3.  Christ  has  made  us  partakers  of  his  righteousness  by  his 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  Rom.  iv.  25 — Who  was  delivered 
for  our  offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our  justification. 

1  Cor.  xv.  17  and  18 — And  if  Christ  be  not  raised  your  faith 
is  vain  :  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins  :  then  they  also  which  are 
fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished. 

4.  Christ  has  purchased  righteousness  for  us  by  his  death. 

2  Cor.  v.  21 — For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who 
knew  no  sin;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  him.  Titus  ii.  14 — Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  him- 
belf  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works. 

5.  Christians  are  raised  up  by  the  poiver  of  Christ  to  a,  new 
life.  Rom.  vi.  4  and  8 — Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him 
by  baptism  into  death;  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up 
from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also 

should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Now  if  we  be  dead  with 

Christ,  we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him.  Col.  ii. 
12  and  13 — Buried  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye 
are  risen  with  him  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of 
God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead.  And  you,  being 
dead  in  your  sins  and  the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,  hath 
he  quickened  together  with  him,  having  forgiven  you  all 
trespasses. 
86  6.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  the  Chris- 
tian's blessed  resurrection.  1  Cor.  xv.  20  and  21 — But  now  is 
Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first  fruits  of 
them  that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man 
came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  1  Thess.  iv.  14 — 
For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him. 
Rom.  viii.  11. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  subject  of  inquiry  in  the  forty-fifth  question? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  arose  from  the  dead  ?  (1.) 
"What  is  inquired  with  respect  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  ? 
"What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the  question  ?  How  many 
benefits  of  Christ's  resurrection  are  specified  in  the  answer  ? 
What  is  the  first?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ,  by  his 
resurrection,  has  overcome  death?  (2.)  For  what  purpose 
is  Christ  said  to  have  overcome  death  by  his  resurrection  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  made  us  partakers  of  his 
righteousness  by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead  ?  (3.)  How 
has  Christ  procured  this  righteousness  for  us?  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  has  purchased  righteousness  for  us 
by  his  death?  (4.)  What  is  the  second  benefit  of  Christ's 
resurrection?  What  do  you  mean  by  new  life 9  (a.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  Christians  are  raised  up  by  the  power  of 
Christ  to  a  new  life  ?  (5.)  What  is  the  third  benefit  of 
Christ's  resurrection?  What  do  you  me&n  by  pledge?  (b.) 
What  by  our  blessed  resurrection  f  (c.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our 
blessed  resurrection  ?  (6.) 


XVIII.  Lord's  Day.