Q.  46.  How  dost  thou  understand  these  words,  "  he 
ascended  into  heaven  ?" 

A.  That  Christ,  in  sight  of  his  disciples,  was  taken 
up  from  the  earth  into  heaven ;  and  that  he  continues 
there  for  our  interest,  until  he  come  again  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead. 


q.46.] 


CATECHETICAL  EXEKC1SES. 
EXPLANATIONS, 

a.  Heaven,  that  part  of  the  universe  in  which  God  affords 
more  sensible  manifestations  of  his  presence  and  glory, 
and  which  is  the  especial  dwelling-place  provided  for  the 
blessed. 

b.  Judge,  to  decide  upon  the  moral  quality  of  actions. 

c.  Quick,  the  living. 

d.  Dead,  those  who  have  departed  this  life. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  ivas  taken  from  earth  to  heaven.  Mark  xvi.  19— 
So  then>  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  them,  he  was  re- 
ceived up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God. 
1  Pet.  iii.  22— Who  [Christ]  is  gone  into  heaven,  and  is  on 
the  right  hand  of  God. 

2.  Christ  was  taken  from  earth  to  heaven  in  the  sight  of  his 
disciples.  Acts  i.  9 — And  when  he  had  spoken  these  things, 
while  they  [his  disciples]  beheld,  he  was  taken  up ;  and  a 
cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight.  Luke  xxiv.  51 — And 
it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them,  he  was  parted  from 
them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven. 

3.  Christ  continues  in  heaven  for  our  interest.  John  xvi.  7 — 
It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away  ;  for  if  I  go  not  away, 
the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I 
will  send  him  unto  you.  Horn.  viii.  34 — Who  is  he  that  con- 
demned! ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen 
again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us.    Heb.  iv.  14. 

4.  Christ  shall  continue  in  heaven  until  he  shall  come  again 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  Acts  iii.  21 — Whom  the 
heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all 
things,  which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy 
prophets  since  the  world  began. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  forty-sixth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
heaven?  (a.)  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  this  ques- 
tion? From  whence  was  Christ  taken  up?  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  was  taken  up  from  earth  to  heaven  ? 
(1.)  In  whose  presence  was  Christ  taken  up  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  was  taken  up  from  earth  to  heaven 
in  the  sight  of  his  disciples  ?  (2.)  Is  Christ  still  in  heaven  ? 
For  what  purpose  does  Christ  continue  there  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  continues  in  heaven  for  our  interest  ? 
(3.)  How  long  will  Christ  continue  in  heaven  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  judge?  (b.)  What  by  the  quick?  (c.)  What 
by  the  dead?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  will  con- 
tinue in  heaven  until  he  shall  come  again  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead?  (4.)