Q.  47.  Is  not  Christy  then,  with  us  even  to  the  end  of 
the  world,  as  he  hath  promised  ? 

A.  Christ  is  very  man  and  very  God  ;  with  respect  to 
his  human  nature,  he  is  no  more  on  earth  ;  but  with  re- 
spect to  his  Godhead,  majesty,  grace,  and  Spirit,  he  is 
at  no  time  absent  from  us. 

EXPLANATIONS 

a.  End  of  the  world,  the  time  when  the  affairs  of  the  pre= 
sent  state  of  man  shall  be  brought  to  a  close. 

b.  Godhead,  divine  nature. 

c.  Majesty,  sovereignty;  dignity. 

d.  Grace,  unmerited  favor  and  love. 

e.  Spirit^  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  has  promised  to  be  with  his  people  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world.  Matt,  xxviii.  20 — Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world. 

2.  Christ  is  very  God  and  very  man.  John  i.  14 — And  the 
Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.  1  Tim.  iii.  16 
—And  without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery  of  godli- 
ness :  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  justified  in  the  spirit, 
seen  of  angels,  preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on  in 
the  world,  received  up  into  glory. 

3.  Christ  is  no  more  on  earth  with  respect  to  his  human  na- 
ture. John  xvi.  28 — Again,  I  leave  the  world  and  go  to  the 
Father.  Matt.  xxvi.  11 — For  ye  have  the  poor  always  with 
you;  but  me  ye  have  not  always.  Heb.  viii.  4 — For  if 
he  [Christ]  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a  priest.  Acts 
iii.  21. 

4.  Christ  is  ever  present  with  his  people,  vHth  respect  to  his 
Godhead  and  majesty.  Jer.  xxiii.  24— Can  any  hide  himself 
in  secret  places  that  I  shall  not  see  him  ?  saith  the  Lord, 
Bo  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  Lord.  Ps.  cxxxix, 
7-10 — Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  Spirit  ?  or  whither  shall 
I  flee  from  thy  presence  ?  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  thou 
art  there  j  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,  thou  art  there, 
If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning  and  dwell  in  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  sea ;  even  there  shall  thy  hand  lead  me, 
and  thy  right  hand  shall  hold  me. 

5.  Christ  is  ever  present  with  his  people  with  respect  to  his 
grace  and  Spirit.  2  Cor.  xiii.  14 — The  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all.  Amen.  Johnxiv.  16  and  17 
— And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever ;  even  the 
Spirit  of  truth.  Matt,  xviii.  20 — For  where  two  or  three 
are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst 
of  them. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  forty-seventh  question?  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  end  of  the  world?  [a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ 
has  promised  to  be  with  his  people,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
world  ?  (1.)  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  this  question  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  very  God  and  very  man  ? 
(2.)  What  is  said  of  Christ's  human  nature  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  is  no  more  on  earth  with  respect  to  his 
human  nature?  (3.)  What  is  said  with  respect  to  Christ's 
divine  nature?  What  do  you  mean  by  Godhead?  (b.) 
What  by  majesty?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is 
ever  present  with  his  people  with  respect  to  his  Godhead 
and  majesty?  (4.)  What  do  you  mean  his  grace  ?  (d.) 
What  by  his  Spirit?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is 
ever  present  with  his  people  with  respect  to  his  grace  and 
Spirit?  (5.)