Q.  48.  But  if  his  human  nature  is  not  present, 
wherever  his  Godhead  is,  are  not,  then,  these  two  na- 
tures in  Christ  separated  from  one  another  ? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  since  the  Godhead  is  incompre- 
hensible and  omnipresent,  it  must  necessarily  follow  that 

8* 
the  same  is  not  limited  with  the  human  nature  he  as- 
sumed, and  jet  remains  personally  united  to  it. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Incomprehensible,  beyond  the  reach  of  human  intellect, 

b.  Omnipresent,  in  every  place  at  the  same  time. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Godhead  of  Christ  is  incomprehensible.  Job  xi.  7-9 
— Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  Canst  thou  find 
out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  ?  It  is  as  high  as  heaven ; 
what  canst  thou  do  ?  deeper  than  hell ;  what  canst  thou 
know?  The  measure  thereof  is  longer  than  the  earth  and 
broader  than  the  sea. 

2.  The  Godhead  of  Christ  is  omnipresent.  Acts  xvii.  27 — 
That  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  af- 
ter him,  and  find  him,  though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one 
of  us.  Acts  vii.  49 — Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  earth  is  my 
footstool :  what  house  will  ye  build  me  ?  saith  the  Lord ;  or 
what  is  the  place  of  my  rest  ?    1  Kings  viii.  27. 

3.  Christ  assumed  human  nature.  Phil.  ii.  6,  7 — Who,  be- 
ing in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal 
with  God:  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men. 

4.  The  Godhead  of  Christ  remains  personally  united  with  his 
human  nature.  Col.  ii.  9 — For  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  bodily. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  forty-eighth  question.  What  is  taken  for 
granted  in  this  question  ?  What  does  the  question  ask  in 
view  of  the  fact  that  the  human  nature  of  Christ  is  not  pre- 
sent wherever  his  Godhead  is  ?  What  answer  is  returned  to 
the  question  ?  What  reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  re- 
turned ?  What  do  you  mean  by  incomprehensible  f  [a.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  Godhead  of  Christ  is  incomprehen- 
sible? (1.)  What  do  you  mean  by  omnipresent  ?  (b.)  How 
do  3Tou  prove  that  the  Godhead  of  Christ  is  omnipresent  ? 
(2.)  What  is  said  necessarily  to  follow  from  the  fact  that 
the  Godhead  of  Christ  is  incomprehensible  and  omnipre- 
sent ?    How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  assumed  human  na~ 
ture?  (3.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Godhead  of  Christ 
remains  personally  united  with  his  human  nature  ?  (4.)