Q.  49.  Of  what  advantage  to  us  is  Christ7 s  ascen- 
sion into  heaven  f 

A.  First,  that  he  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  his 
Father  in  heaven :  secondly,  that  we  have  our  flesh  in 
heaven,  as  a  sure  pledge,  that  he,  as  the  head,  will  also 
take  up  to  himself  us,  his  members:  thirdly,  that  he 
sends  us  his  Spirit  as  an  earnest,  by  whose  power  we 
"  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth. " 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Advocate,  one  who  pleads  the  cause  of  another. 

b.  Our  flesh,  the  nature  by  which  we  are  particularly  dis- 
tinguished. 

c.  Sure  pledge,  a  guarantee  which  can  be  relied  on,  that 
it  will  certainly  take  place. 

d.  Head,  chief ;  principal  of  his  spiritual  body,  the 
church. 

e.  Members,  constituent  parts  of  his  spiritual  body,  the 
church. 

/.  Earnest,  first-fruits ;  that  which  is  in  advance  and 
gives  promise  of  something  to  come. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  his  father  in 
heaven.  1  John  ii.  1 — And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  ad- 
vocate with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  Rom. 
viii.  34 — Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that 
died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us. 
Heb.  ix.  24 — For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places 
made  with  hands,  which  are  the  figures  of  the  true ;  but 
into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God 
for  us. 

2.  Christ  is  the  head  of  his  people.  Eph.  v.  28 — For  the 
husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  even  as  Christ  is  the  head 
of  the  church.  Col.  i.  18 — And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body, 
the  church.    Eph.  i.  22. 
3.  Christians  are  the  members  of  Christ's  body.  1  Cor.  xii. 
27 — Now  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  par- 
ticular. Eph.  v.  30 — For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of 
his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones. 

4.  The  presence  of  Christ's  hitman  nature  in  heaven  is  a  sure 
pledge  that  he  will  take  up  his  people  to  himself.  John  xiv.  2, 
3 — I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you.  And  if  I  go  and  pre- 
pare a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you 
unto  myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  maybe  also.  Eph. 
ii.  6 — And  hath  raised  us  up  together,  and  made  us  sit  to- 
gether in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus. 

5.  Christ  sends  his  Spirit  upon  his  people.  John  xvi.  7 — It 
is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away ;  for  if  I  go  not  away, 
the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart  I 
will  send  him  unto  you.  John  xiv.  16,  17 — And  I  will  pray 
the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  even  the  Spirit  of  truth. 

6.  Christ  gives  his  /Spirit  to  his  people  as  an  earnest.  Eph. 
i.  13,  14 — In  whom  also  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were 
sealed  with  that  holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest 
of  our  inheritance  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased 
possession,  unto  the  praise  of  his  glory.  2  Cor.  v.  5 — Nov 
he  that  hath  wrought  for  us  the  selfsame  thing  is  God, 
who  also  hath  given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit. 
2  Cor.  i.  22. 

7.  Christ  gives  us  his  Spirit  that  we  should  seek  those  things 
ivhich  are  above,  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Col.  iii.  1-3 — If 
ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Set 
your  affections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth. 
For  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God. 
Phil.  iii.  20 — For  our  conversation  is  in  heaven ;  from 
whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  forty-ninth  question?  What  is  the  answer 
returned  to  the  question  ?  How  many  advantages  of  Christ's 
ascension  are  specified  in  the  answer?  What  is  the  first  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  an  advocate  ?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  Christ  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  his  Father  in 
heaven  ?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  advantage  of  Christ's  as- 
cension specified?  What  relation  is  Christ  said  to  sustain 
to  his  people  in  this  part  of  the  answer  ?    What  do  you 
mean  by  head?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  is  the 
head  of  his  people?  (2.)  What  relation  are  his  people 
said  to  sustain  to  him  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  members? 
(e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christians  are  members  of 
Christ's  body?  (3.)  What  do  you  mean  by  our  flesh  spoken 
of  in  this  part  of  the  answer  ?  (b.)  What  by  a  sure  pledge? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  presence  of  Christ's  human 
nature  in  heaven  is  a  sure  pledge  that  he  will  take  up  his 
people  to  himself?  (4.)  What  is  the  third  advantage  of 
Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  specified  in  the  answer  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  sends  his  spirit  upon  his 
people  ?  (5.)  What  do  you  mean  by  an  earnest  ?  (/. )  How 
do  you  prove  that  Christ  gives  his  Spirit  to  his  people  as  an 
earnest?  (6.)  What  is  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this 
part  of  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  gives  us 
his  Spirit  that  we  should  seek  those  things  which  are  above 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  not  things  on  the  earth  ?  (7, ) 


XIX  Lord's  Bay.