Q.  50.  Why  is  if  added,  u  and  sitteth  at  the  right 
tend  of  God?" 

A,  Because  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  for  this  end, 
that  he  might  there  appear  as  head  of  his  church,  by 
whom  the  Father  governs  all  things 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  occupies  the  place  of 
preferment  and  power  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God. 

b,  Church,  the  collective  body  of  those  who  believe  in 
Christ. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Heb.  viii.  1 — 
We  have  such  a  high-priest,  who  is  set  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens.  Heb.  i.  3 — 
Upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  when  he  had 
by  himself  purged  oar  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high.  Eph.  i.  20 — Which  he  wrought  in 
Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at 
, 


[Q.5L 


his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  Mark  xvi.  19  ; 
1  Pet.  iii.  22  ;  Rom.  viii.  34. 

2.  Christ  ascended  into  heaven.  Eph.  iv.  8-10 — When  he 
ascended  up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave 
gifts  unto  men.  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that 
he  also  descended  first  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ? 
He  that  descended  is  the  same  also  that  ascended  up  far 
above  all  heavens,  that  he  might  fill  all  things.  1  Pet.  iii. 
22 — Who  is  gone  into  heaven,  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of 
God. 

3.  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  that  he  might  appear  there  as 
the  head  of  Jus  church.  Eph.  i.  22 — And  hath  put  all  things 
under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things 
to  the  church.  Col.  i.  18 — And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body, 
the  church. 

4.  The  Father  governs  all  things  by  Christ.  1  Cor.  xv.  25 — 
For  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his 
feet.  John  v.  22 — For  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath 
committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son.  Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 
All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  fiftieth  question ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
expression  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  (a.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  (1 . ) 
What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the  question  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  ascended  into  heaven?  (2.)  For  what 
purpose  did  Christ  ascend  into  heaven  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  his  church?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  as- 
cended into  heaven  that  he  might  appear  there  as  the  head 
of  his  church?  (3.)  What  further  is  affirmed  with  regard 
to  Christ's  presence  in  heaven?  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  Father  governs  all  things  by  Christ?  (4.)