Q.  51.  What  profit  is  this  glory  of  Christ,  ovr 
head,  unto  us  ? 

A.  First,  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  potireth  out  hea- 
venly graces  upon  us  his  members  ;  and  then,  that  by  his 
power  he  defends  and  preserves  us  against  all  enemies. 


Q.  52,]  95 


EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Glory,  distinguished  honor. 

b.  Heavenly  graces,  divine  influences. 

c.  All  enemies,  every  one  that  seeks  to  injure  or  destroy 
us,  as  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  by  his  Holy  Spirit  pour eth  out  heavenly  graces  upon 
his  people.  Acts  ii.  33 — Therefore  being  by  the  right  hand 
of  God  exalted,  and  having  received  of  the  Father  the  pro- 
mise of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed  forth  this,  -which  ye 
now  see  and  hear.  Acts  x.  45 — And  they  of  the  circumci- 
sion which  believed  were  astonished,  as  many  as  came  with 
Peter,  because  that  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    Eph.  iv.  8. 

2.  Christ  by  his  power  defends  and  preserves  his  people  against 
all  enemies.  John  x.  28 — And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ; 
and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck 
them  out  of  my  hand.  John  xvi.  33 — In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation ;  but  be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome 
the  world.  2  Cor.  xii.  9 — My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ; 
for  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  fifty -first  question.  What  do  you  mean  by 
glory?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  this  question? 
How  many  advantages  of  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  are  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  is  the  first  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  heavenly  graces  ?  {b. )  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  by  his  Spirit  poureth  out  heavenly  graces 
upon  his  people  ?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  benefit  derived 
from  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God?  What  do 
you  mean  by  all  enemies  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ, 
by  his  power,  defends  and  preserves  his  people  against  all 
enemies?  (2.1