Q.  52.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee,  "  that  Christ 
shall  come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead?" 

A.  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  up- 
lifted head  I  look  for  the  very  same  person,  who  before 
offered  himself,  for  my  sake,  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and 
hath  removed  all  curse  from  me,  to  come  as  judge  from 
heaven  ;  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  enemies  into  ever- 
lasting condemnation,  but  shall  translate  me,  with  all  his 
chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly  joys  and  glory. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Sorrows,  troubles,  or  circumstances  which  occasion 
pain  and  distress. 

b.  Persecutions,  opposition  encountered,  or  injuries  re- 
ceived, in  consequence  of  our  adherence  to  the  Christian 
religion. 

c.  Uplifted  head,  erect  countenance,  such  as  indicates  a 
rising  superior  to  every  difficulty. 

d.  Condemnation,  the  punishment  provided  by  God  for  all 
his  enemies. 

e.  Translate,  transfer  ;  remove  from  one  place  to  another. 
/.  Chosen,  elected;  selected  from  among  others. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  offered  himself  to  God  in  the  room  and  stead  of  his 
people.  Heb.  ix.  28 — So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the 
sins  of  many.  Titus  ii.  14 — Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that 
he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  him- 
self  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.  Heb.  ix.  14 
and  x.  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24  ;  Rom.  v.  8  ;  1  John  iii.  5. 

2.  Christ  has  removed  all  curse  from  his  people.  Gal.  iii.  13 
— Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  be- 
ing made  a  curse  for  us.  Rom.  viii.  1 — There  is  therefore 
now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus, 

8.  The  Christian  is  exposed  to  sorrows  and  persecutions  in  the 
present  life.  John  xvi.  33 — In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu- 
lation ;  but  be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome  the  world, 
2  Tim.  iii.  12 — Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution. 

4.  The  very  same  Lord  J esus  Christ,  7vho  offered  himself  for  the 
sins  of  his  people,  will  come  as  judge  from  heaven.  Acts  i.  11 — This 
same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall 
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven. 
Acts  x.  42 — And  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  peo- 
ple, and  to  testify  that  it  is  he  [Christ]  which  was  ordained 
of  God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  2  Cor.  v.  10; 
Acts  xvii.  31  ;  John  v.  22. 


q.  52.] 
5.  The  Christian  looks  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  judge  from  heaven.  Titus  ii.  13 — Looking  for  the 
blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God 
and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Heb.  ix.  28 — Unto  them  that 
look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second  time,  without  sin, 
unto  salvation.    2  Pet.  iii.  1£. 

(5.  This  looking  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  come  as  judge 
from  heaven,  is  a  source  of  comfort  to  the  Christian  in  the  midst 
of  his  troubles  and  sorrows.  Luke  xxi.  28 — And  when  these 
things  begin  to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your 
heads;  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  1  Thess.  iv. 
16-18 — And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first:  then  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together 
with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  and 
so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  comfort  one 
another  with  these  words. 

7.  Christ  will  cast  all  his  enemies,  and  the  enemies  of  his  peo- 
ple, into  everlasting  condemnation.  2  Thess.  i.  6-9 — Seeing  it 
is  a  glorious  thing  with  God  to  recompense  tribulation  to 
t  hem  that  trouble  you ;  and  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest 
with  us  :  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  revealed  from 
heaven  with  his  might}^  angels,  in  flaming  fire,  taking  ven- 
geance on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  who  shall  be  punished 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
and  from  the  glory  of  his  power. 

8.  Christ  tvill  translate  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself  into  hea- 
venly joys  and  glory.  John  xiv.  3 — And  if  I  go  and  prepare 
a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto 
myself;  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also.  John  xvii. 
24 — Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom  thou  hast  given 
me,  be  with  me  where  I  am ;  that  they  may  behold  my 
glory,  which  thou  hast  given  me.  Matt.  xxv.  34 ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  17. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  fifty-second  question.  What  is  the  answer 
returned  to  the  question?  What  is  Christ  said  to  have 
done  for  his  people  in  this  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  Christ  offered  himself  to  God  in  the  room  and  stead  of 
his  people  ?  (1.)  What  is  Christ  said  to  have  done  for  his 
people  besides  offering  himself  for  them?  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  has  removed  all  curse  from  his  people  ? 

G  9 


CATECHETICAL  EXERCISE? 


(2.)  "What  is  the  condition  of  the  Christian  in  the  present 
world,  as  represented  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  sorrows  f  (a.)  What  by  persecutions  f 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Christian  is  exposed  to 
sorrows  ana  persecutions  in  the  present  life  ?  (3.)  In  what 
capacity  is  the  Christian  represented  in  the  midst  of  his 
sorrows  and  persecutions,  as  expecting  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
to  appear  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  very  same  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  offered  himself  for  the  sins  of  his  people, 
will  come  as  judge  from  heaven?  (4.)  With  what  word  is 
this  expectation  of  the  Christian  with  regard  to  Christ's 
coming  as  judge  expressed  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
Christian  thus  looks  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  judge  from  heaven  ?  (5.)  In  what  particular  attitude  is 
the  Christian  represented  as  thus  looking  for  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  What  is  the  force  of  the  expres- 
sion with  uplifted  head  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  this 
looking  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  come  as  judge  from 
heaven  is  a  source  of  comfort  to  the  Christian  in  the  midst 
of  his  troubles  and  sorrows  ?  (6.)  What  shall  Christ  do 
when  he  comes  as  judge  from  heaven  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  condem nation  ?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  will 
cast  all  his  enemies  and  the  enemies  of  his  people  into  ever- 
lasting condemnation?  (7.)  What  will  Christ  do  further 
when  he  comes  as  judge  from  heaven  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  translate  ?  (e.)  What  by  chosen:-  (/.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  Christ  wiil  translate  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into 
heavenly  joys  and  glory  ?  (8.) 


XX.  Lord's  Bay. 

<S3f  (gob  %  fjob  (sijost