Q.  53.  What  dost  thou  helieve  concerning  the  Holy 
Ghost? 

A.  First,  that  he  is  true  and  co-eternal  God  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son  ;  secondly,  that  he  is  also  given  me 
to  make  me,  by  a  true  faith,  a  partaker  of  Christ  and  all 
his  benefits,  that  he  may  comfort  ine  and  abide  with  me 
for  ever. 


q.  53.] 
EXPLANATIONS. 

a,  Co-eternal,  equally  eternal  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son. 

h.  Comfort,  to  cheer  or  support  in  the  midst  of  depres- 
sion or  trouble. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Holy  Ghost,  is  true  God.    Acts  v.  3  and  4— Why 

hath  Satan  tilled  thy  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  ■ 

Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God.  1  Cor.  iii.  16 
and  vi.  19— Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and 

that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  What?  know  ye 

not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  th  e  Holy  Ghost?   Gen.  i.  2. 

2.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  co-eternal  God  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  1  John  v.  7 — For  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in 
heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost :  and 
these  three  are  one.  Heb.  ix.  14 — How  much  more  shall 
the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered 
himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Christians.  Acts  ii.  38 — 
Kepent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  re- 
ceive the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Acts  v.  32 — The  Holy 
Ghost  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey  him.  1 
Thess.  iv.  8 — He  therefore  that  despiseth,  despiseth  not 
man,  but  God,  who  hath  also  s;iven  unto  us  his  Holy  Spirit. 
1  John  iii.  24  and  iv.  13  ;  2  Cor.  i.  22. 

4.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Ch  ristians  to  make  them  par- 
takers of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits.  1  Cor.  xii.  3 — No  man 
can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Rom.  viii.  9 — Now,  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
he  is  none  of  his.  Eph.  iii.  14  and  16 — For  this  cause  I 
bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

 That  he  would  grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 

glory,  to  be  strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man. 

5.  The  Holy  Ghost  makes  Christians  partakers  of  Christ  and 
all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith.  Gal.  iii.  14 — That  the  blessing 
of  Abraham  might  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus 
Christ:  that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
through  faith.    Col.  ii.  12 — Ye  are  riven  with  him  [Christ] 


100  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God.  Eph.  iii.  17 — 
That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith. 

6.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Christians  that  ha  may  comfort 
them.  John  xiv.  26 — But  the  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my  name,  he  shall 
teach  you  all  things.  John  xv.  26 — But  when  the  Comforter 
is  come,  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father,  even 
the  Spirit  of  truth.    Acts  ix.  31 . 

7.  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  abide  with  Christians  for  ever. 
John  xiv.  16  and  17 — And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he 
shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  with 

you  for  ever;  even  the  Spirit  of  truth.  For  he  dweileth 

with  you  and  shall  be  in  you. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  fifty-third  question.  What  answer  is  returned 
to  the  question?  How  many  things  does  the  answer  say 
are  believed  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  What  is  the  first  ? 
How  do  yo\x  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  true  God?  (1.) 
What  do  you  mean  by  co-eternal?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  co-eternal  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son  ?  (2.)  What  is  the  second  thing  which  the  answer  says 
is  believed  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost?  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Christians  ?  (3.)  For  what 
purpose  is  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  Christians  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Christians  to 
make  them  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits?  (4.) 
By  what  does  the  Holy  Ghost  make  Christians  partakers  of 
Christ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  makes 
Christians  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits  by  true 
faith  ?  (5.)  What  further  does  the  Holy  Ghost  do  for  the 
Christian?  What  do  you  mean  by  comfort  ?  (b.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  Christians  that 
he  may  comfort  them?  (6.)  What  is  said  as  to  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  Holy  Ghost  with  Christians  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  abide  with  Christians  for 
ever?  (7.) 

XXI.  Lord's  Bay,