Q.  54.  What  helievrti  thou  concerning  the  "Holy 
Catholic  Church"  of  Christ? 


Q.  5-1.] 


, 
A.  That  the  Son  of  God,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  the  world,  gathers,  defends,  and  preserves  to  him- 
self, by  his  Spirit  and  word,  out  of  the  whole  human 
race,  a  church,  chosen  to  everlasting  life,  agreeing  in 
true  faith ;  and  that  I  am,  and  for  ever  shall  remain,  a 
living  member  thereof. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Catholic,  general ;  universal. 

b.  Beginning,  the  time  when  the  present  state  of  the  hu- 
man race  commenced. 

c.  End  of  the  tear  Id,  the  time  when  the  affairs  of  man's 
present  state  shall  be  brought  to  a  close. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

L  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  So?i  of  God,  rjatliers  unto  him- 
self a  ckurc k.  Eph.  iv.  11 — And  he  [Christ]  gave  some,  apos~ 
ties;  and  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evangelists  ;  and  some, 
pastors  and  teachers ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for 
the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  of 
Christ.  Eph.  i.  10 — That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness 
of  times,  he  might  gather  together  in  one,  all  things  iu 
Christ,  both  which  are  iu  heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth ; 
even  in  him. 

2.  The  Son  of  God  gathers  Ins  church  out  of  the  whole  human 
race.  llev.  v.  9 — For  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us 
to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people,  and  nation.  Ps.  ii.  7,  8 — Thou  art  my  son  ;  this 
dajr  have  I  begotten  thee.  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee 
the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  earth  for  thy  possession.    Isa.  xliii.  5-7. 

3.  The  church,  wkieh  the  son  of  God  gathers,  is  a  chosen 
church.  1  Pet.  ii.  9 — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people.  Mark  xiii. 
20 — Bat  for  the  elect's  sake  whom  he  hath  chosen,  he  hath 
shortened  the  days.  Eph.  i.  4 — According  as  lie  hath  cho- 
sen us  in  him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.. 

4.  The  church,  which  Christ  gathers,  he  hath  chosen  unto 
everlasting  life.  Acts  xiii.  48 — And  as  many  as  were  or- 
dained to  eternal  life  believed.  John  x.  28 — And  I  give 
unto  them  eternal  life. 

5.  The  church,  which  the  Son  of  God  gather.*,  agrees  in  (rue 
faith.  Eph.  iv.  4-6  and  13 — There  is  one  body,  and  one 
Spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling ; 
one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of 

all.  Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the 

knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the 
measure  of  the,  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ. 

6.  The  Son  of  God  gathers  his  church  by  his  Spirit  and  word. 
Bom.  xv.  17-19 — I  have,  therefore,  whereof  I  may  glory 
through  Jesus  Christ  in  those  things  which  pertain  to  God. 
For  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those  things  which 
Christ  hath  not  wrought  by  me,  to  make  the  Gentiles  obe- 
dient, by  word  and  deed,  through  mighty  signs  and  wonders, 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  so  that  from  Jerusalem 
and  round  about  unto  Illy ri cum,  I  have  fully  preached  the 
gospel  of  Christ.    Horn.  x.  J .4-1 7. 

7.  The  Son  of  God  gathers  his  church  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world.  Luke  xi.  49-51 — Therefore  also  said  the  wisdom 
of  God,  I  will  send  them  prophets  and  apostles,  and  some 
of  them  they  shall  slay  and  persecute  :  that  the  blood  of  all 
the  prophets,  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  may  be  required  of  this  generation  ;  from  the  blood 
of  Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zacharias,  which  perished  be- 
tween the  altar  and  the  temple.    Heb.  xi. 

8.  The  Son  of  God  will  continue  to  gather  his  church  until  the 
end  of  the  world.  Matt,  xxviii.  20 — Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  1  Cor.  xi.  26 — For  as  often 
as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the 
Lord's  death  till  he  come. 

9.  '  The  Son  of  God  also  defends  and  preserves  his  church. 
Matt.  xvi.  18 — And  I  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  art  Peter,  and 
upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church  ;  and  the  gates  of 
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  Isa.  liv.  17 — No  weapon 
that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper.  John  x.  28 — 
They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them 
out  of  my  hand. 

10.  The  Christian  is  a  living  member  of  Chris  fs  church. 
Eph.  ii.  19-22 — Now  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and 
foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the 
household  of  God  ;  and  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief 
corner  stone ;  in  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed  to- 
gether groweth  unto  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord :  in  whom 


q.  54.] 


CATECHETICAL  EXERCISE'S. 
also  ye  are  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through 
the  Spirit. 

11.  The  Christian  vAll  remain  a  member  of  Christ's  church 
for  ever.  1  Cor.  i.  8,  9 — Who  shall  also  confirm  you  unto 
the  end,  that  ye  may  be  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  God  is  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called 
unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Ps. 
xxiii.  6 — Surely  goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all 
the  days  of  my  life ;  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  ever. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  fifty-fourth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  catholic?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  ques- 
tion ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  unto 
himself  a  church?  (1.).  From  what  does  the  Son  of  God 
gather  his  church?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Son  of  God 
gathers  his  church  out  of  the  whole  human  race  ?  (2.)  How 
is  the  church,  which  the  Son  of  God  gathers,  further  repre- 
sented ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  church  which  the  Son 
of  God  gathers  is  a  chosen  church?  (3.)  To  what  is  the 
church  which  the  Son  of  God  gathers  chosen  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  church  which  the  Son  of  God  gathers  is 
chosen  to  everlasting  life  ?  (4.)  What  is  further  said,  with 
regard  to  the  church  which  the  Son  of  God  gathers  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  church  which  the  Son  of  God 
gathers  agrees  in  true  faith?  (o.)  By  what  does  the  Son 
of  God  gather  his  church?  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
Son  of  God  gathers  his  church  by  his  Spirit  and  word?  (6.) 
From  what  time  does  the  Son  of  God  gather  his  church  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  beginning  of  the  world  ?  (6.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  his  church  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world?  (7.)  To  what  time  does  the 
Son  of  God  gather  his  church  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
end  of  the  world?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Son  of 
God  will  continue  to  gather  his  church  to  the  end  of  the 
world?  (8.)  What  does  the  Son  of  God  do  for  his  church 
besides  gathering  it  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Son  of 
God  also  defends  and  preserves  his  church?  (9.)  WThat  re- 
lation do  you  sustain  to  this  church  as  stated  in  the  an- 
swer ?  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  a  living  member 
of  Christ's  church?  (10.)  What  is  said  about  your  con- 
tinuing a  member  of  this  church  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
you  will  remain  a  member  of  Christ's  church  for  ever  ?  (11.) 


104  