Q.  55.  What  do  yon  mean  by  the  "communion  of 
saints?" 

A.  First,  that  all  and  every  one  who  believes,  being 
members  of  Christ,  are  in  common  partakers  of  him.  and 
of  all  his  riches  and  gifts  :  secondly,  that  every  one  must 
know  it  to  be  his  duty,  readily  and  cheerfully  to  employ 
his  gifts  for  the  advantage  and  salvation  of  other  members. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Communion,  fellowship ;  mutual  intercourse  between 
two  or  more  persons. 

b.  Saints,  the  children  of  God;  the  members  of  Christ's 
spiritual  church. 

c.  In  common,  having  a  mutual  and  equal  part  in. 

d.  Riches,  the  spiritual  blessings  Christ  possesses. 
c.  Gifts,  the  favors  and  mercies  Christ  bestows. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AM)  PROVED. 

I«  All  that  bdieve  are  members  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  xii.  12,  IS 
and  27 — For  as  the  body  is  one.  and  hath  many  members, 
and  all  the  members  of  that  one  body,  being  many,  are  one 
body :  so  also  is  Christ.    For  by  one  Spirit,  we  are  all 

baptized  into  one  body.  Now  are  ye  the  body  of  Christ 

and  members  in  particular.  Eph.  v.  80 — For  we  are  mem- 
bers of  his  body,  of  his  Sesh,  and  of  his  bones. 

2.  All  that  bdieve  are  in  comm  on  partakers  of  Christ.  1  John 
i.  0 — And  truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  John  xvii.  21 — That  they  all  may  be 
one;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they 
also  may  be  one  in  us.  1  Cor.  vi.  17 — But  he  that  is  joined 
unto  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit. 

3.  All  that  believe  are  in  common  partakers  of  all  Chrisfs 
riches  and  gifts.  John  i.  16 — And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we 
received,  and  grace  for  grace.  Rom.  viii.  82 — He  that  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
he  not  with  him  also  freely  s;ive  us  all  thines  ?  Eom.  v. 
6-10. 

4.  All  that  believe  are  partakers  in  common  of  Christ  and  all 
his  riches  and  gifts,  in  consequence  of  their  being  members  of  him. 
1  Cor.  xii.  13  and  14 — For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  baptized 
into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles,  whether  we 
be  bond  or  free;  and  have  been  aii  niade  to  drink  into  one 


q.  55.] 
Spirit.  For  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many.  Col. 
ii.  19 — And  not  holding  the  Head,  from  which  all  the  body 
by  joints  and  bands  having  nourishment  ministered,  and 
knit,  together,  increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God.  Eph. 
v.  29  and  80 — For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh  ; 
but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the 
church :  for  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and 
of  his  bones.    Eph.  iv.  15  and  16. 

5.  It  is  the  duty  of  evary  Christian  readily  and  cheerfully 
to  employ  his  gifts  for  the  advantage  of  others.  1  Pet.  iv.  10 — 
As  every  one  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so  minister  the 
same  one  to  another,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 
of  God.  Phil.  ii.  8  and  4 — In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  es- 
teem others  better  than  themselves.  Look  not  every  mini 
on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of 
others.    1  Cor.  xiii.  5. 

6.  Christians  are  members  one  of  another.  Eph.  iv.  25 — For 
we  are  members  one  of  another.  Rom.  xii.  5— ~8o  we,  being 
many,  are  one  body  in  Christ,  and  every  one  members  one 
of  another. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  fifty-fifth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
communion?  (a.)  What  by  saints?  (b.)  What  answer  is 
returned  to  the  question?  Into  how  many  parts  is  the 
question  divided?  Of  what  does  the  first  treat?  [Of 
the  communion  of  saints  in  reference  to  Christ  their  head.~\  Of 
what  does  the  second  part  treat?  [Of  the  communion  of 
saints  in  reference  to  each  other. ]  How  is  the  first  part  ex- 
pressed ?  How  do  you  prove  that  all  that  believe  are  mem- 
bers of  Christ?  (1.)  What  further  is  affirmed  of  all  that 
believe,  in  relation  to  Christ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
expression  in  common?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  all  that 
believe  are  in  common  partakers  of  Christ?  (2.)  Of  wfeat 
further  besides  Christ  are  all  that  believe  said  to  be  par- 
takers ?  What  do  you  mean  by  riches  ?  (d. )  What  by  gifts  ? 
(e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  all  that  believe  are  in  common 
partakers  of  all  Christ's  riches  and  gifts?  (8.)  Inconse- 
quence of  what  are  all  that  believe  partakers  of  Christ  and 
ail  his  riches  and  gifts  ?  [In  consequence  of  their  being  mem- 
hers  of  Christ.']  How  do  you  prove  this  ?  (4.)  What  is  the 
second  part  of  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  it  is 
the  duty  of  every  Christian  readily  and  cheerfully  to  em- 
ploy  his  gifts  for  the  advantage  and  salvation  of  others  ? 
(5.)  What  particular  relation  do  Christians  sustain  to  each 
other,  as  set  forth  in  this  part  of  the  answer  ?  [They  are 
members  one  of another. .]    How  do  you  prove  this  ?  (6.)