Q.  56.  What  believest  thou  concerning  the  "forgive- 
ness o  f  sins  f*3 

A.  That  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  will 
no  more  remember  my  sins,  neither  my  corrupt  nature, 
against  which  I  have  to  struggle  all  my  life  long ;  but 
will  graciously  impute  to  me  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
that  I  may  never  be  condemned  before  the  tribunal  of 
God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Satisfaction,  the  atonement  made  by  his  sufferings  and 
death. 

b.  Remember,  to  keep  in  mind  with  a  view  to  punish. 

c.  Corrupt  nature,  the  depravity  with  which  we  are  born, 
in  consequence  of  which  we  are  inclined  to  evil,  usually 
called  original  sin. 

d.  Tnwute,  to  put  to  one?s  credit,  so  that  he  receives  the 
benefit  just  as  if  it  were  his  own. 

e.  Tribunal,  judgment-seat. 

"DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  mil  no  more  remember,  thai  is,  he  will  forgive  the. 
sins  of  his  people.  Jer.  xxxi.  84 — For  I  will  forgive  their 
iniquity,  and  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more.  Ps.  ciii. 
12 — As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  re- 
moved our  transgressions  from  us. 

2.  God  will  no  more  remember,  that  is,  he  will  forgive  (he 
corrupt  nature,  or  the  original  sins,  of  his  people  as  well  as  their 
actual  transgressions.  Rom.  vii.  21  and  25 — 0  wretched  man 
that  I  am !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this 
death  ?  I  thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Ps. 
ciii.  3 — Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities ;  who  healeth  all 
thy  diseases. 

3.  God's  p>eople  have  to  struggle  all  their  life  long  against 
their  corrupt  nature,  that  is,  original  sin.  Pvom.  viii.  18,  19, 
21 — For  I  know,  that  in  me,  (that  is,  in  my  flesh,)  dwelleth 
no  good  thing ;  for  to  will  is  present  with  me ;  but  how  to 


q.  56.] 
perform  that  which  is  good  I  find  not.  For  the  good  that 
I  would,  I  do  not ;  but  the  evil  which  I  would  not,  that  I 
do. — I  find  then  a  law,  that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  me.  Gal.  v.  17 — For  the  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh  ;  and  these  are 
contrary  the  one  to  the  other:  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the 
things  that  ye  would. 

4.  God  forgives  the  sins  of  Ids  people  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
satisfaction.  Eph.  i.  7 — In  whom  we  have  redemption  through 
his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  2  Cor.  v.  21 — For  he 
hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we 
might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  1  John 
ii.  2  ;  2  Cor.  v.  19. 

5.  God  imputes  to  Christians  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 
Rom.  iii.  22  and  25 — Even  the  righteousness  of  God,  which 
is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all,  and  upon  all  them  that 
believe. — To  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of 
sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of  God.  1  Cor. 
i.  80 — But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is 
made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification, 
and  redemption. 

6.  God  imputes  to  Christians  the  righteousness  of  Christ  from 
motives  of  grace.  Rom.  iii.  24 — Being  justified  freely  by  his 
grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Rom. 
iv.  16 — Therefore  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  of  grace. 
Eph.  ii.  8. 

7.  In  consequence  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  being  im- 
puted, to  Christians,  they  shall  never  be  condemned  before  the 
tribunal  of  God.  John  v.  24 — Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you, 
He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent 
me,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemna- 
tion ;  but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life.  Rom.  viii.  1 — 
There  is  therefore  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are 
in  Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit.    John  iii.  18. 

EXERCISES. 

"What  is  the  fifty-sixth  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  remember? 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  will  no  more  remember 
the  sins  of  his  people?  (1.)  What,  besides  the  sins  of  his 
people,  will  God  no  more  remember  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  corrupt  nature  $  (c.)    How  do  you  prove  that  God  will  no 
more  remember  the  corrupt  nature  of  his  people?  (2.) 
What  is  further  said  with  regard  to  this  corrupt  nature  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  God's  people  have  to  struggle  all 
their 'life  long  against  their  corrupt  nature ?  (3.)  On  ac- 
count of  what  does  God  forgive  the  sins  of  his  people  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  satisfaction  ?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  forgives  the  sins  of  his  people  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
satisfaction?  (4.)  What  is  God  said  to  do  besides  forgiving 
his  people  their  sins?  What  do  you  mean  by  impute  J  (d.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  imputes  to  Christians  the  righte- 
ousness of  Christ?  (5.)  How  does  God  impute  to  Chris- 
tians Christ's  righteousness?  Plow  do  you  prove  that  God 
imputes  to  Christians  Christ's  righteousness  graciously  ?  (0.) 
What  is  said  to  follow  from  God's  imputing  Christ's  righte- 
ousness to  his  people  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  tribunal  ?  (c.) 
How  do  you  prove  that,  in  consequence  of  Christ's  righte- 
ousness being  imputed  to  Christians,  they  shall  never  be 
condemned  before  the  tribunai  of  God  ?  (7.) 


XXII.  Lord's  Bay.