Q.  57.  WJiat  comfort  doth  the  "  resurrection  of  the 
hodif '  afford  ihec  f 

A.  That  not  only  my  soul,  after  this  life,  shall  be  im- 
mediately taken  up  to  Christ,  its  head  ;  but  also,  that 
this  my  bo3j?  being  raised  by  the  power  of  Christ,  shall 
be  re-united  with  1113'  soul,  and  be  made  like  unto  the 
glorious  body  of  Christ. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  After  this  life,  when  man's  present  state  of  existence 
has  closed. 

b.  Re-united,  brought  together  again  after  having  been 
separated. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

I.  The  soul  of  the  Christian  (-hall  be  taken  up  to  Christ  its 
head.  Eccl.  xii.  7 — Then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  earth 
as  it  was ;  and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave 
it.  Phil.  i.  2:J — For  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a 
desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ  ;  which  is  far  better. 


Q.57.] 


J  00 


2.  This  taking  up  of  the  soul  to  Christ  its  head  shall  take 
place  immediatehf  after  this  life.  Luke  xxiii.  43 — And  Jesus 
said  unto  him,  Verily  I  say  unto  thee,  to-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise.  Luke  xvi.  22 — And  it  came  to  pass 
that  the  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  angels  into 
Abraham's  bosom.  Rev.  xiv.  13 — Blessed  are  the  dead  which 
die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth. 

3.  There  will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Acts  xxiv.  15 — 
And  have  hope  toward  God,  which  they  themselves  also 
allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both 
of  the  just  and  unjust.  ?uatt.  xxii.  31  and  32 — But,  as 
touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  have  ye  not  read, 
that  which  was  spoken  unto  you  by  God,  saying ;  I  am  the 
God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of 
Jacob ;  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living. 
Acts  iv.  2 — And  preached  through  Jesus  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead. 

4.  In  the  resurrection,  the  same  body  that  died  shall  be  raised. 
1  Cor.  xv.  36  and  53 — Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  sowest  is 

not  quickened,  except  it  die.  For  this  corruptible  must 

put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immor- 
tality. Job  xix.  25  and  26 — For  I  know  that  my  E,edeemer 
liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth ;  and  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body, 
yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God. 

5.  The  body  shall  be  raised  by  the  power  of  Christ.  John  v. 
25  and  28  and  29 — Verily,  verily,  1  say  unto  you,  the  hour 
is  coming  and  now  is,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice 

of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live.  Marvel 

not  at  this ;  for  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that 
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice.  And  shall  come 
forth ;  they  that  have  done  good  unto  the  resurrection  of 
life  ;  and  they  that  have  clone  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of 
damnation. 

6.  The  body  shall  be  re-united  with  the  soul.  Ezek.  xxxvii. 
5  and  6 — Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto  these  bones,  Behold, 
I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into  you,  and  ye  shall  live; 
and  I  will  lay  sinews  upon  you,  and  will  bring  up  flesh  upon 
you,  and  cover  you  with  skin,  and  put  breath  in  you,  and 
ye  shall  live ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord. 

7.  The  bodies  of  believers  shall  be  made  like  unto  the  glorious 
body  of  Christ.  Phil.  iii.  21 — Yfho  shall  change  our  vile  body 
that  it  maybe  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  ac- 
110 


cording  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  himself.  1  Cor.  xv.  42  and  43 — So  also  is 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  It  is  sown  in  corruption  ;  it 
is  raised  in  incorruption  :  it  is  sown  in  dishonor  ;  it  is  raised 
in  glory :  it  is  sown  in  weakness  ;  it  is  raised  in  power. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  fifty-seventh  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  your  soul 
shall  be  taken  up  to  Christ  its  head  V  (1. )  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  expression  after  this  life?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  your  soul  shall  be  taken  up  to  Christ  its  head  imme- 
diately after  this  life  ?  (2.)  What  is  added  in  the  answer 
with  respect  to  the  body?  How  do  you  prove  that  there 
will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead?  (3.)  What  body  shall 
be  raised  in  the  resurrection?  \The  same  body  that  died.'] 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  same  body  that  died  shall  be 
raised  in  the  resurrection?  (4.)  By  what  shall  the  body 
be  raised  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  body  shall  be  raised 
by  the  power  of  Christ?  (5.)  What  will  be  done  to  the 
body  after  it  has  been  raised  by  the  power  of  Christ  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  re-united?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
body  shall  be  re-united  with  the  soul  ?  (6.)  What  besides 
this  re-union  with  the  soul  will  be  done  to  the  body  after 
the  resurrection?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  body  shall 
be  made  like  unto  the  glorious  body  of  Christ?  (7.)