Q.  58.  What  comfort  takest  thou  from  the  article 
of  life  u  everlasting  ?" 

A.  That  since  I  now  feel  in  my  heart  the  beginning 
of  eternal  joy,  after  this  life,  I  shall  inherit  perfect  salva- 
tion, which  "eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man"  to  conceive ;  and 
that  to  praise  God  therein  for  ever. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Eternal  joy,  happiness  or  feelings  of  pleasure  whieh 
shall  continue  for  ever. 

b.  Heart  of  man,  the  human  mind  or  understanding. 

c.  Conceive,  form  an  idea  of ;  understand;  comprehend. 

d.  Praise,  celebrate  his  excellencies. 


q.  58.] 


Ill 


DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Christian  feels  in  his  heart,  in  the  present  life,  the  be- 
ginning of  eternal  joy.  1  Pet.  i.  3  and  8 — Blessed  be  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which,  according  to  his 
abundant  mercy,  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope 
by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead. — Whom 
having  not  seen,  ye  love  ;  in  whom,  though  now  you  see  him 
not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory.    2  Cor.  v.  2  and  3  ;  Rom.  xiv.  17. 

2.  The  Christian  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation  in  the  life  to 
come.  1  Cor.  xiii.  10 — But  when  that  which  is  perfect  is 
come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away.  Ps. 
xvi.  11 — In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy  :  at  thy  right  hand 
there  are  pleasures  for  evermore.  Matt.  xxv.  34 — Then  shall 
the  king  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from 
the  foundation  of  the  world. 

3.  The  salvation,  ivhich  the  Christian  shall  inherit  in  the  life 
to  come,  is  such  as  has  not  been  seen  by  the  eye,  nor  heard  by  the 
ear,  nor  conceived  by  the  mind  of  man.  1  Cor.  ii.  0 — But  as  it  is 
written,  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  en- 
tered into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  pre- 
pared for  them  that  love  him.    Isa.  Ixiv.  4  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  4. 

4.  The  Christian  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation  in  the  life  to 
come,  in  order  that  he  may  therein  praise  God,  for  ever.  Rev. 
xxii.  3  and  4 — But  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall 
be  in  it :  and  his  servants  shall  serve  him ;  and  they  shall  see 
his  face ;  and  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads.  Rev.  xix. 
5 — And  a  voice  came  out  of  the  throne,  saying,  Praise  our 
God,  all  ye  his  servants,  and  ye  that  fear  him,  both  small 
and  great.    Rev.  vii.  15. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  fifty-eighth  question?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  eternal  joy? 
(a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you  feel  in  your  heart  in  the 
present  life  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy?  (1.)  What  fur- 
ther is  added  with  regard  to  your  happy  experience  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  you  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation  in  the 
life  to  come?  (2.)  How  is  this  perfect  salvation,  which 
you  shall  inherit,  described?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
heart  of  man?  (b.)    What  by  conceive?  {c.)     How  do  you 
C  A  TECH  ETICAL  EXERCISES. 


[u.  59. 


prove  that  the  salvation  which  you  shall  inherit  in  the  life 
to  come  is  such  as  has  not  been  seen  by  the  eye,  nor  heard 
by  the  ear,  nor  conceived  by  the  mind  of  man?  (3.)  For 
what  end  is  it  said  you  shall  inherit  this  perfect  salvation 
in  the  life  to  come?  What  do  you  mean  by  praise?  {J.  i 
How  do  you  prove  that  you  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation 
in  the  life  to  come,  in  order  that  you  may  therein  praise  God 
for  ever  ?  (4.  ) 


XXXII.  Lord's  Say.