Q.  59.  But  what  doth  It  profit  thee  now  that  thou 
belituest  all  this? 

A.  That  I  am  righteous  in  Christ  before  God,  and  an 
heir  of  eternal  life. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Alt  this,  the  several  articles  of  faith  contained  in  the 
creed,  and  which  have  been  considered. 

b.  Righteous,  regarded  or  treated  as  though  the  life  had 
been  wholly  conformed  to  the  law  of  God. 

c.  Heir,  one  who  has  a  title  or  claim  to  something,  the 
possession  of  which  is  yet  future. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Christian  is  righteous  in  Christ  before  God  in  the 
present  life.  Rom.  v.  1 — Therefore  being  justified  by  faith, 
we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Rom.  ill.  21  and  22 — But  now  the  righteousness  of  God  with- 
out the  law  is  manifested,  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and 
the  prophets  ;  even  the  righteousness  of  God,  which  is  by 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  be- 
lieve.   Rom.  i.  17. 

2.  The  Christian  is  an  heir  of  eternal  life.  John  iii.  15 — 
That  whosoever  belie veth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but 
have  eternal  life.  John  v.  24 — Verily,  verily.  I  say  unto 
y  ou,  He  that  heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him  that 
sent  me,  hath  everlasting  life.    John  iii.  86. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  fifty-ninth  question  ?  To  what  does  the  ex- 
pression all  this  refer?  (a.)    AYhat  answer  is  returned  to  the 


q.  60.] 


CATECHETICAL  "EXERCISES. 
question  ?  How  many  benefits'  are  specified  in  this  answer  ? 
Two.~]  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  righteous? 
b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  righteous  in  Christ 
before  God  in  the  present  life?  (1.)  What  is  the  second 
benefit  derived  from  believing  the  several  articles  of  faith 
as  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  an  heir? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  an  heir  of  eternal 
life?  (2.)