Q.  60.  Ilotv  art  thou  righteous  before  God  f 

A,  Only  by  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  so  that, 
though  niy  conscience  accuse  me,  that  I  have  grossly 
transgressed  all  the  commands  of  God,  and  kept  none  of 
them,  and  am  still  inclined  to  all  evil ;  notwithstanding 
Cod,  without  any  merit  of  mine,  but  only  of  mere  grace, 
grants  and  imputes  to  me  the  perfect  satisfaction,  righte- 
ousness, and  holiness  of  Christ ;  even  so,  as  if  I  never 
had  had,  nor  committed  any  sin;  yea,  as  if  I  had  fully 
accomplished  all  that  obedience  which  Christ  hath  ac- 
complished for  me ;  inasmuch  as  I  embrace  such  benefit 
with  a  believing  heart. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Conscience,  the  peculiar  faculty  in  man  which  judges 
of  right  and  wrong,  and  approves  or  condemns  according 
to  that  judgment. 

b.  Merit,  reward  deserved:  goodness  or  excellence  which 
entitles  one  to  reward. 

c.  Obedience,  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  God's 
law. 

d.  Benefit,  the  imputation  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  righte- 
ousness, and  holiness. 

e.  Believing  heart,  a  cordial  trust  in  the  merits  of  Christ. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Christian  is  righteous  before  God  only  by  a  true 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Gal.  ii.  16 — Knowing  that  a  man  is 
not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of 
Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we 
might  be  justified  by  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the 
works  of  the  law:  for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh 

K  10* 
be  justified.  Rom.  iii.  28— Therefore  we  conclude  that  a 
man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the  law.  Eph. 
ii.  8  and  9 ;  Phil.  iii.  9. 

2.  The  conscience  of  the  Christian  accuses  him  of  having 
grossly  transgressed  all  the  commands  of  God,  and  kept  none 
of  them.  Rom.  iii.  9  and  10 — What  then  ?  are  we  better 
than  they  ?  No,  in  no  wise :  for  we  have  before  proved 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  they  are  all  under  sin ;  as  it 
is  written,  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one.  Rom.  iii. 
23 — For  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God. 

3.  The  conscience  of  the  Christian  accuses  him  also  of  being 
still  inclined  to  all  evil.  Rom.  vii.  14 — For  we  know  that  the 
law  is  spiritual :  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin.  Rom. 
vii.  21-23 — I  find  then  a  law,  that,  when  I  would  do  good 
evil  is  present  with  me.  For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God 
after  the  inward  man :  but  I  see  another  law  in  my  mem- 
bers, warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me 
into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  members. 

4.  Notwithstanding  the  Christian's  conscience  accuses  him  of 
having  transgressed  God's  law,  and  of  being  inclined  to  all  evil, 
ttill  God  grants  and  imputes  to  him  the  perfect  satisfaction,  righte- 
ousness, and  holiness  of  Christ.  2  Cor.  v.  21 — For  he  hath 
made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  Rom.  v.  18  and 
19 — Therefore,  as  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came 
upon  all  men  to  condemnation ;  even  so  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justifica- 
tion of  life.  For  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were 
made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be 
made  righteous.    Rom.  iv.  4,  5. 

5.  God  grants  and  imputes  to  Christians  Chrisf  s  perfect  satis- 
faction, righteousness ,  and  holiness  without  any  merit  of  theirs, 
but  only  merely  of  grace.  Titus  iii.  5 — Not  by  works  of 
righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according  to  his 
mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Eph.  ii.  8  and  9 — For  by 
grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  your- 
selves :  it  is  the  gift  of  God :  not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast.    E,om.  iii.  24. 

6.  In  consequence  of  the  imputation  of  Christ's  perfect  sati*- 
f action,  righteousness,  and  holiness  to  Christians,  they  are  treated 
by  God  in  the  same  manner  as  if  they  never  had  sinned;  yea,  as 


, 
if  they  had  themselves  fully  accomplished  all  that  obedience  which 
Christ  has  accomplished  for  them.  Isa.  i.  18 — Though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool.  Micah  vii. 
19 — He  will  subdue  our  iniquities ;  and  thou  wilt  cast  all 
their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  2  Cor.  v.  19 — To  wit, 
that  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself, 
not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them. 

7.  God  imputes  to  Christians  the  perfect  satisfaction,  righte- 
ousness, and  holiness  of  Christ,  in  consequence  of  their  embracing 
these  benefits  with  a  believing  heart.  Horn.  x.  10 — For  with 
the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness.  Rom.  iv.  23 
and  24 — Now  it  was  not  written  for  his  sake  alone,  that  it 
was  imputed  to  him  ;  but  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be 
imputed,  if  we  believe  on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord 
from  the  dead.    John  iii.  16. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  sixtieth  question  ?  What  answer  is  returned 
to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  righteous 
before  God  only  by  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  (JL.)  How 
is  the  operation  of  this  righteousness  before  God  described  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  conscience?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  your  conscience  accuses  you  of  having  grossly  trans- 
gressed all  the  commands  of  God  and  kept  none  of  them  ? 
(2.)  What  further  does  your  conscience  accuse  you  of? 
How  do  you  prove  that  your  conscience  also  accuses  you  of 
being  inclined  to  all  evil?  (3.)  What  does  God  do  in  con- 
sequence of  your  righteousness  before  him  in  Christ,  not- 
withstanding your  conscience  accuses  you  of  the  several 
things  mentioned  ?  How  do  you  prove,  that  notwithstand- 
ing your  conscience  accuses  you  of  having  transgressed  God's 
law  and  of  being  inclined  to  all  evil,  still  God  grants  and 
imputes  to  you  the  perfect  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and 
holiness  of  Christ?  (4.)  Upon  what  terms  does  God  grant 
and  impute  these  things  to  you?  What  do  you  mean  by 
merit?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  grants  and  im- 
putes to  you  Christ's  perfect  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and 
holiness,  without  any  merit  of  yours,  but  only  merely  of 
grace?  (5.)  What  is  said  to  follow  from  this  imputation 
of  Christ's  righteousness  to  you  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
obedience?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  in  consequence  of 
the  imputation  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and 
[Q.61. 


holiness  to  Christians,  you  are  treated  by  God  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  you  never  had  sinned ;  yea,  as  if  you  had 
yourself  fully  accomplished  all  that  obedience  which  Christ 
has  accomplished  for  you  ?  (6.)  What  ground  for  God's 
imputing  Christ's  righteousness  to  you,  and  treating  you 
accordingly,  is  assigned  in  the  answer  ?  To  what  does  the 
word  benefit  here  refer?  (d.)  What  do  you  mean  by  a  be- 
lieving heart?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  imputes  to 
you  the  perfect  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and  holiness  of 
Christ,  in  consequence  of  your  embracing  these  benefits 
with  a  believing  heart  ?  (7.) 


§.61.  Why  say  est  thou,  thai  thou  art  righteous  by 
faith  only  ? 

A.  Not  that  I  am  acceptable  to  God  on  account  of  the 
worthiness  of  my  faith  ;  but  because  only  the  satisfac- 
tion, righteousness,  and  holiness  of  Christ  is  my  righte- 
ousness before  God,  and  that  I  cannot  receive  and  apply 
the  same  to  myself  in  any  other  way  than  by  faith  only. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Acceptable,  received  with  favor. 

b.  Worthiness,  merit ;  desert. 

c.  Righteousness  before  God,  that  on  account  of  which  God 
treats  the  Christian  as  though  he  had  never  sinned. 

d.  The  same,  the  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and  holiness 
of  Christ. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  Christian  is  not  acceptable  to  God  on  account  of  the 
worthiness  of  his  faith.  Ps.  xvi.  2 — 0  my  soul,  thou  hast  said 
unto  the  Lord :  Thou  art  my  Lord  :  my  goodness  extendeth 
not  to  thee.  Eph.  ii.  8  and  9 — For  by  grace  are  ye  saved 
through  faith ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves :  it  is  the  gift  of 
God:  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast. 

2.  The  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and  holiness  of  Christ,  is 
the  Christian's  only  righteousness  before  God.  Rom.  iii.  24 
and  25 — Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  re- 
demption that  is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  whom  God  hath  set  forth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past, 


CATECHETICAL  EXEaCJS.ES. 
through  the  forbearance  of  God.  Rom.  x.  4 — For  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  be- 
lie veth.    'Horn.  v.  18  and  19  ;  1  Cor.  i.  30. 

3.  The  Christian  cannot  receive  and  apply  to  himself  the  satis- 
faction, righteousness,  and  holiness  of  Christ  in  any  other  way 
than  by  faith.  Rom.  iii.  22 — Even  the  righteousness  of  God, 
which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all  them 
that  believe.  Rom.  iv.  3 — Abraham  believed  God,  and  it 
was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness.  1  John  v.  10 — He 
that  believeth  on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  him- 
self; he  that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made  him  a  liar  ;  be- 
cause he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his  Son. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  sixty-first  question  ?  Repeat  the  answer 
returned  to  the  question.  In  how  many  ways  is  the  ques- 
tion answered  in  this  answer?  [Two:  negatively  arid  posi- 
tively.] What  is  the  negative  part  of  the  answer?  What 
do  you  mean  by  acceptable?  (a.)  What  by  worthiness?  (b.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  you  are  not  acceptable  to  God  on 
account  of  the  worthiness  of  your  faith?  (1.)  What  is  the 
positive  part  of  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
expression  righteousness  before  God?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  satisfaction,  righteousness,  and  holiness  of  Christ  is 
your  only  righteousness  before  God  ?  (2.)  What  farther  is 
asserted  in  this  latter  part  of  the  answer  ?  To  what  do  the 
words  the  same  refer?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  you 
cannot  receive  and  apply  to  yourself  the  satisfaction,  righte- 
ousness, and  holiness  of  Christ  in  any  other  way  than  by 
faith?  (3.) 


XXIV.  Lord's  Day.