Q.  62.  But  why  cannot  our  good  works  he  the  whole 
or  part  of  our  righteousness  before  God? 

A.  Because  that  the  righteousness,  which  can  be  ap- 
proved of  before  the  tribunal  of  God,  must  be  absolutely 
perfect,  and  in  all  respects  conformable  to  the  divine 
law ;  and  also,  that  our  best  works  in  this  life  are  all 
imperfect  and  defiled  with  sin. 
EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Good  works,  actions  harmonizing  with  the  require- 
ments of  God. 

b.  Conformable,  agreeing  with ;  corresponding  to. 

c.  Best  works,  the  actions  most  in  accordance  with  the 
requirements  of  God. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED, 

1.  The  righteousness,  which  can  be  approved  of  before  the 
tribunal  of  God,  must  be  absolutely  perfect,  and  in  all  respects 
conformable  to  the  divine  law.  Gal.  iii.  10 — Cursed  is  every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them.  Deut.  vi.  5 — And  thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  with  all 
tlry  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might.    Deut.  xxvii.  26. 

2.  Our  best  works  in  this  life  are  all  imperfect  and  defiled  with 
sin.  Isa.  lxiv.  6 — But  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and 
all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags ;  and  we  all  do 
fade  as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities  like  the  wind,  have  taken 
us  away.  Phil.  iii.  12  and  13 — Not  as  though  I  had  already 
attained,  either  were  already  perfect;  but  I  follow  after, 
if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am  appre- 
hended of  Christ  Jesus.  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to 
have  apprehended ;  but  this  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  those 
things  which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those 
things  which  are  before. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  sixty-second  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  good  works  ?  (a. )  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  ques- 
tion? How  many  reasons  are  assigned  in  the  answer  for 
that  about  which  the  question  inquires  ?  What  is  the  first  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  conformable  ?  (b.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  righteousness  which  can  be  approved  of  be- 
fore the  tribunal  of  God  must  be  absolutely  perfect,  and  in 
all  respects  conformable  to  the  divine  law?  (1.)  What  is 
the  second  reason  assigned  in  the  answer  for  the  subject  of 
inquiry  in  the  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  our  best 
works  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  best  works  in  this 
life  are  all  imperfect  and  defiled  with  sin  ?  (2.) 


Q-  63.] 


, 


119