Q.  63.  What!  do  not  our  good  tvorks  merit  which 
yet  God  will  reward  in  this  and  a,  future  life  ? 
A.  This  reward  is  not  of  merit,  but  of  grace. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  (rod  will  reward  our  good  works  both  in  this  and  in  a 
future  life.  1  Tim.  iv.  8 — Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that 
which  is  to  come.  Mark  x.  29  and  30 — Verily  I  say  unto 
you,  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or  brethren,  or 
sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children,  or  lands 
for  my  sake,  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive  a  hun- 
dred fold  now  in  this  time,  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sis- 
ters, and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecu- 
tions :  and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life. 

2.  The  reward  of  our  good  works  is  not  of  merit.  Luke  xvii. 
10 — So  likewise  ye,  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things 
which  are  commanded  you,  say,  We  are  unprofitable  ser- 
vants :  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do.  Rom. 
xi.  35  and  36 — Or  who  hath  first  given  to  him,  and  it  shall 
be  recompensed  unto  him  again  ?  For  of  him,  and  through 
him,  and  to  him,  are  all  things :  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever. 
Amen. 

3.  The  reward  of  our  good  works  is  of  grace.  1  Cor.  xv.  10 
— By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  ;  and  his  grace  which 
was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain ;  but  I  have  labored 
more  abundantly  than  they  all ;  yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of 
God  which  was  with  me.  Eph.  i.  6 — To  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in 
the  beloved.    Ps.  ciii.  13. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  taken  for  granted  in  the  sixty-third  question? 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  will  reward  our  good  works 
both  in  this  and  in  a  future  life  ?  (1 . )  What  does  the  ques- 
tion ask  in  view  of  the  fact  that  God  will  reward  our  good 
works  both  in  this  and  in  a  future  life  ?  What  answer  is 
returned  to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  re- 
ward of  good  works  is  not  of  merit?  (2.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  reward  of  good  works  is  of  grace  ?  (3.) 
