Q.  64.  But  doth  not  this  doctrine  make  men  care- 
less and  profane? 

A.  By  no  means :  for  it  is  impossible  that  those,  who 
are  implanted  into  Christ  by  a  true  faith,  should  not 
bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Doctrine,  sentiment ;  principle  received. 

b.  Imj?lanted,  hxed  in  for  the  purpose  of  growth. 

c.  Thankfulness,  gratitude  for  favors  received. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATE3>  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  doctrine  that  Christians  are  justified  by  grace  through 
faith,  and  not  by  works,  docs  not  make  men,  careless  and  profane. 
Rom.  iii.  31— Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  ? 
God  forbid:  yea  we  establish  the  law.  Rom.  vi.  1  and  2 — - 
What  shall  we  say  then  ?  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that 
grace  may  abound  ?  God  forbid.  How  shall  we  that  are 
dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  therein  ? 

2.  Christians  are  implanted  into  Christ  by  a  true  faith.  'Rom. 
xi.  19  and  20 — Thou  wilt  say  then,  The  branches  were  broken 
off,  that  I  might  be  graffed  in.  Well;  because  of  unbelief 
they  were  brokeu  off,  and  thou  standest  by  faith. 

3.  Those  who  are  implanted  into  Christ  by  a  true  faith  cannot 
but  bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness.  Matt.  vii.  18 — A  good 
tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree 
bring  forth  good  fruit.  1  John  iii.  9 — Whosoever  h  born  of 
God  doth  not  commit  sin;  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him: 
and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God.    Johnxv.  5. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  sixty-fourth  question?  What  do  you  mean 
by  doctrine  t  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  doctrine  that  Christians  are  jus- 
tified  by  grace  through  faith  and  not  by  works,  does  not 
make  men  careless  and  profane  ?  (1.)  What  reason  is  as- 
signed for  the  answer  returned?  What  do  you  mean  by 
implanted?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christians  are  im- 
planted into  Christ  by  a  true  faith?  (2.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  thankfulness?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  those 
who  are  implanted  into  Christ  by  a  true  faith,  cannot  but 
bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness  ?  (3.) 


q.  65.] 
XXY.  Lord's  Bay.