Q.  65.  Since,  then,  we  are  made  partaJcers  of  Christ 
and  all  his  benefits  by  faith  only,  whence  doth  this  faith 
proceed  f 

A.  From  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  works  faith  in  our 
hearts  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  confirms  it  by 
the  use  of  the  sacraments. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Preaching,  proclaiming  ;  publishing  in  discourse. 
h.  Confirms,  strengthens;  ratines. 

c.  Sacraments,  solemn  religious  rites,  the  observance  of 
which  was  enjoined  by  Christ  upon  his  followers. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christians  are  made  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  bene- 
fits by  faith  only.  Keb.  x.  39 — But  of  them  that  believe  to 
the  saving  of  the  soul.  John  iii.  86 — He  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  hath  everlasting  life ;  and  he  that  believeth  not 
the  Son  shall  not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him. 

2.  The  Holy  Ghost  ivories  faith  in  the  hearts  of  Christians. 
2  Cor.  iv.  13 — We  having  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  according 
as  it  is  written,  I  believed  and  therefore  have  I  spoken ; 
we  also  believe  and  therefore  speak.  Gal.  v.  22 — But  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  faith. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  works  faith  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  flora,  x.  17 — So  then  faith  cometh 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God.  1  Cor.  i.  21 — 
For  after  that,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  world  by  wisdom 
knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preach- 
ing to  save  them  that  believe. 

4.  The  Holy  Ghost  confirms  the  faith  of  Christians  by  the  use 
of  the  sacraments.  Rom.  iv.  11— And  he  received  the  sign 
of  circumcision:  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith 
which  he  had,  yet  being  uncircumcised.  Acts  viii.  36-38 — 
And  the  eunuch  said,  See  here  is  water ;  what  doth  hinder 
me  to  be  baptised  ?    And  Philip  said,  if  thou  believest  with 
all  thine  heart,  thou  mayest.  And  he  answered  and  said, 
I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God.  And  he  com- 
manded the  chariot  to  stand  still ;  and  they  went  down  both 
into  the  water,  both  Philip  and  the  eunuch ;  and  he  bap- 
tized him. 

EXERCISES. 

What  does  the  sixty-fifth  question  take  for  granted  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  Christians  are  made  partakers  of 
Christ  and  all  his  benefits  by  faith  only  ?  (1.)  What  does 
the  question  ask  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Christians  are 
made  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits  by  faith  only  ? 
What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  works  faith  in  the  hearts  of 
Christians?  (2.)  By  what  does  the  Holy  Ghost  work  faith 
in  the  hearts  of  Christians  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  preach- 
ing? (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  works 
faith  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel?  (3.)  What  more  does  the  Holy  Ghost  do  besides 
working  faith  in  the  hearts  of  Christians  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  confirms?  (b.)  What  by  sacraments?  (c.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  the  faith  of 
Christians  by  the  use  of  the  sacraments  ?  (4.)