Q.  66.  What  are  the  sacraments? 

A.  The  sacraments  are  holy  visible  signs  and  seals, 
appointed  of  God  for  this  end,  that  by  the  use  thereof  he 
may  the  more  fully  declare  and  seal  to  us  the  promise 
of  the  gospel,  viz.  that  he  grants  us  freely  the  remission 
of  sin  and  life  eternal,  for  the  sake  of  that  one  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Signs,  things  by  which  other  things  are  represented. 

b.  Seals,  things  that  confirm,  ratify,  or  make  stable. 

c.  Promise,  the  declaration  or  assurance  given  by  God  in 
his  word  of  bestowing  blessings  en  his  people. 

d.  One  sacrifice,  the  offering  of  himself  to  God  made  once 
and  only  once  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  sacraments  are  signs  and  seals.  Gen.  xvii.  11 — And 
ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin ;  and  it  shall 
be  a  token  of  the  covenant  between  me  and  you.  Rom.  iv. 
11 — And  he  received  the  sign  of  circumcision :  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had,  yet  being  uncir- 
cumcised.  Ex.  xiii.  9 — And  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  unto  thee 
upon  thine  hand,  and  for  a  memorial  between  thine  eyes. 

2.  The  sacraments  are  holy  signs  and  seals.  Ex.  xxix.  33 — - 
But  a  stranger  shall  not  eat  thereof,  because  they  are  holy. 
Lev.  xxii.  10 — There  shall  no  stranger  eat  of  the  holy  thing ; 
a  sojourner  of  the  priest,  or  a  hired  servant,  shall  not  eat 
of  the  holy  thing. 

3.  The  sacraments  are  visible  signs  and  seals.  Rom.  ii.  28 — 
Neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh. 
Ex.  xii.  13 — And  the  blood  shall  be  a  token  to  you  upon  the 
houses  where  ye  are :  and  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass 
over  you,  and  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy 
you,  when  I  smite  the  land  of  Egypt. 

4.  The  sacraments,  as  holy  visible  signs  and  seals,  have  been 
appointed  by  God.  Ex.  xii.  27 — It  is  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Lord's  passover.  Acts  vii.  8 — And  he  [God]  gave  him  the 
covenant  of  circumcision.    John  i.  33. 

5.  God  appointed  the  sacraments  that  he  might,  by  the  use 
thereof,  more  fully  declare  the  promise  of  the  gospel.  Deut. 
xxx.  6 — And  the  Lord  thy  God  will  circumcise  thine  heart, 
and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  that  thou  mayest  live. 
Acts  xxii.  16 — And  now,  why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be 
baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  1  Cor.  xi.  26 — For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he 
come.    1  Cor.  v.  7  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  27  and  28. 

6.  God  appointed  the  sacraments  that  he  might,  by  the  use 
thereof,  seal  to  us  the  promise  of  the  gospel.  Rom.  iv.  11-— And 
he  received  the  sign  of  the  circumcision;  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had,  yet  being  uncir- 
cumcised.  John  vi.  56,  57 — He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him.  As  the 
living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the  Father ;  so  he 
that  eateth  me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me. 

7.  The  promise  of  the  gospel  fully  declared  and  sealed  unto 
us  by  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  includes  in  it  the  remission  of 
sins.  Matt.  xxvi.  28 — For  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  tes- 
tament which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins. 
Acts  ii.  38 — Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the 


124  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall 
receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  The  promise  of  the  gospel  fully  declared  and  sealed  unto 
us  by  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  includes  in  it  life  eternal.  John 
x.  28 — And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand.  1  John  v.  11 — And  this  is  the  record,  that  God  hath 
given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son. 

9.  The  remission  of  sin  and  life  eternal,  included  in  the  pro- 
mise of  the  gospel,  and  fully  declared  and  sealed  unto  us  by  the 
use  of  the  sacraments,  are  freely  granted  unto  us  for  the  sake  of 
that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  accomplished  on  the  cross.  Rom.  iii. 
24,  25 — Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  re- 
demption that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  whom  God  hath  set  forth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past, 
through  the  forbearance  of  God.  Heb.  ix.  28 — So  Christ 
was  once  offered  to  benr  the  sins  of  many ;  and  unto  them 
that  look  for  him,  shall  he  appear  the  second  time,  without 
sin,  unto  salvation. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  sixty-sixth  question.  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  signs?  [a.) 
What  by  seals  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  sacraments 
are  signs  and  seals  ?  (1.  )  What  kind  of  signs  and  seals  are 
they  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  sacraments  are  holy 
signs  and  seals?  (2.)  What  kinds  of  signs  and  seals  are 
sacraments  besides  holy  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  sacra- 
ments are  visible  signs  and  seals  ?  (3.)  What  relation  is 
God  said  to  sustain  to  these  signs  and  seals.  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  sacraments,  as  holy  visible  signs  and  seals, 
were  appointed  by  God?  (4.)  For  what  end  were  the 
sacraments  appointed  by  God  ?  How  many  purposes  is  it 
said  God  intended  the  use  of  the  sacraments  to  subserve  ? 
[Two.~\  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  promise  f 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  appointed  the  sacraments 
that  he  might,  by  the  use  thereof,  more  fully  declare  the 
promise  of  the  gospel?  (5.)  What  is  the  second  purpose 
which  it  is  said  God  intended  the  use  of  the  sacraments  to 
subserve  ?  How  do  }tou  prove  that  God  appointed  the  sacra- 
ments, that  by  the  use  thereof  he  might  seal  to  us  the  pro- 
mise of  the  gospel  ?  (6. )    What  is  ihe  promise  of  the  gospel. 
more  fully  declared  and  sealed  by  the  use  of  the  sacraments, 
said  to  be  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  promise  of  the 
gospel,  fully  declared  and  sealed  unto  us  by  the  use  of  the 
sacraments,  includes  in  it  the  remission  of  sins  ?  (7.)  What 
does  the  promise  of  the  gospel  include  besides  the  remission 
of  sins  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  promise  of  the  gospel, 
fully  declared  and  sealed  unto  us  in  the  use  of  the  sacra- 
ments, includes  in  it  life  eternal?  (8.)  Tor  the  sake  of 
what  does  God  grant  us  freely  the  remission  of  sin  and  life 
eternal?  What  do  you  mean  by  that  one  sacrifice?  [d.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  remission  of  sin  and  life  eternal, 
included  in  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  and  fully  declared 
and  sealed  unto  us  by  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  are  freely 
granted  unto  us  for  the  sake  of  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ 
accomplished  on  the  cross?  (9.)