Q.  67.  Are  both  word  and  sacraments,  then,  or- 
dained and  appointed  for  this  end,  that  they  may 
direct  our  faith  to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the 
cross  as  the  only  (/round  of  our  salvation  ? 

A.  Yes,  indeed ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us  in  the 
gospel,  and  assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  whole 
of  our  salvation  depends  upon  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
which  he  offered  for  us  on  the  cross. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Ground,  basis;  that  upon  which  the  existence  of  a 
thing  depends. 

b.  Depends,  has  such  a  connection  with  it,  that  without 
it,  it  could  not  take  place,  or  be  brought  about. 

DOCTKINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  word  of  God  was  written  that  it  might  direct  our  faith 
to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  as  the  only  ground 
of  our  salvation.  John  xx.  31 — But  these  are  written,  that 
ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God;  and  that  believing,  ye  might  have  life  through  his 
name.  Rom.  xv.  4 — For  whatsoever  things  were  written 
aforetime,  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through 
patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope. 

2.  The  sacraments  were  ordained  and  appointed  that  they 

11* 
might  direct  our  faith  to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross 
as  the  only  ground  of  our  salvation.  Col.  ii.  17 — Which  are  a 
shadow  of  things  to  come ;  hut  the  body  is  of  Christ.  1  Cor. 
xi.  26 — For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us  in  the  gospel  that  the  whole  of 
cur  salvation  depends  upon  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  offered  for 
m  on  the  cross.  1  Cor.  i.  23,  24 — But  we  preach  Christ  cru- 
cified, unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling  block,  and  unto  the  Greeks 
foolishness  ;  but  unto  them  which  are  called,  both  Jews  and 
Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 
1  Cor.  iii.  11 — For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ. 

4.  The  Holy  Ghost  assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the 
whole  of  our  salvation  depends  upon  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
offered  for  us  on  the  cross.  Kom.  vi.  3 — Know  ye  not,  that  so 
many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ,  were  bap- 
tized into  his  death  ?  Gal.  iii.  27 — For  as  many  of  you  as 
have  been  baptized  into  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ.  Matt, 
xxvi.  28. 

EXEHCISES. 

What  is  the  sixty-seventh  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  word  ground  in  this  question?  (a.)  What  answer  is 
returned  to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  word 
of  God  was  written  that  it  might  direct  our  faith  to  the 
sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  as  the  only  ground  of 
our  salvation?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  sacra- 
ments were  ordained  and  appointed  for  the  same  end?  (2.) 
Wrhat  reason  is  assigned  for  the  affirmative  answer  re- 
turned ?  What  is  the  force  of  the  word  depends  in  this  con- 
nection? (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
teaches  us  in  the  gospel  that  the  whole  of  our  salvation  de- 
pends upon  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  offered  for  us  on  the 
cross?  (3.)  What  does  the  Holy  Ghost  do  besides  teach- 
ing us  this  fact  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  whole  of  our  salva- 
tion depends  upon  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  offered  for  us 
on  the  cross  ?  (4.)