Q.  69.  How  art  thou  admonished  ana  assured  hy 
holt/  baptism,  that  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the 
cross  is  of  real  advantage  to  thee? 

A.  Thus,  that  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing 
CATECHETICAL  EXES  CIS  ES. 


with  water,  adding  thereto  this  promise,  that  I  am  as 
certainly  washed  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  from  ail  the 
pollution  of  my  soul,  that  is,  from  all  my  sins,  as  I  am 
washed  externally  with  water,  by  which  the  filthiness  of 
the  body  is  commonly  washed  away. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  External  washing  with  water,  baptism,  in  which  water 
is  outwardly  applied  to  the  body. 

b.  Blood,  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  enduring  which  his 
blood  was  shed. 

c.  Pollution  o  f  soul ',  defilement  induced  by  sin. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  In  baptism  there  is  an  external  washing  with  water.  Acts 
x.  47 — Can  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be 
baptized.  Acts  Tiii,  86 — See,  here  is  water:  what  doth 
hinder  me  to  be  baptized? 

2.  This  external  washing  with  water,  or  baptism,  has  been  ap- 
pointed by  Christ.  Matt,  xxviii.  19 — Go  ye  therefore,  and 
teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  Christ  has  annexed  a  promise  to  baptism.  Acts  ii.  39 — 
For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  yr.ur  children,  and  to 
all  that  are  afar  cfi",  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God 
shall  call. 

4.  The  promise  which  Christ  has  annexed  to  baptism  is,  that 
we  shall  be  washed  from  our  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spiri'  <<;" 
Christ,  as  certainty  as  our  bodies  are  washed  with  water.  Luke 
iii.  3 — Preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins.  Acts  xxii.  16 — And  now,  why  tarriest  thou  ? 
arise  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  Alark  xvi.  16 — He  that  believeth, 
and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved.    Mark  i.  4;  Acts  ii.  38. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  sixty-ninth  question?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  "What  do  you  mean  by  this  external 
washing  with  water  ?  (a.)  Plow  do  you  prove  that  there  is 
an  external  washing  with  water  in  baptism?  (I.)  From 
what  source  has  this  external  washing  with  water  been  de- 
rived? How  do  you  prove  that  this  external  washing  with 
water  has  been  appointed  by  Christ?  (2.)    What  did  Christ 


Q.  70,]  129 

do  in  connection  with  the  appointment  of  this  external 
washing  with  water  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has 
annexed  a  promise  to  baptism?  (3.)  What  is  the  promise 
which  Christ  has  annexed  to  baptism  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  Christ's  blood  ?  (b.)  What  by  pollution  of soul?  (c.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  promise  which  Christ  has  annexed  to 
baptism  is,  that  you  shall  be  washed  from  your  sins  by  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  certainly  as  your  body  is 
washed  with  water?  (4.)