Q.  70.  What  is  it  to  be  'washed  with  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ? 

A.  It  is  to  receive  of  God  the  remission  of  sins,  freely, 
for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood,  which  he  shed  for  us  by 
his  sacrifice  upon  the  cross  ;  and  also  to  be  renewed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to  be  members  of  Christ ; 
that  so  we  may  more  and  more  die  unto  sin,  and  lead 
holy  and  unblamable  lives. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Renewed,  made  new ;  renovated. 

b.  Sanctified,  made  holy ;  purified  from  sin. 

c.  Die  unto,  to  cease  to  be  under  the  power  of. 

d.  Unblamable,  not  chargeable  with  fault. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  To  be  washed  with  the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  receive  of  God 
the  remission  of  sins,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood.  1  John  i.  7 
— And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  sin.  Rev.  i.  5 — Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood.  Eph.  i.  7 — In  whom  we  have 
redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 

2.  The  remission  of  sins  received  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
blood  is  conferred  freely.  Rom.  iii.  24 — Being  justified  freely 
by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

3.  The  blood  of  Christ,  for  the  sake  of  which  we  receive  from 
God  the  remission  of  sins,  was  shed  for  us  in  this  sacrifice  upon 
the  cross.  1  Pet.  ii.  24 — Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in 
his  own  body  on  the  tree.  • 

4.  To  be  washed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  to  be  renewed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Titus  iii.  5 — Not  by  works  of  righteousness 
which  we  have  done,  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  saved 
us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

5.  To  be  washed  by  the  Sjririt  of  Christ  is  also  to  be  sanctified 
to  be  members  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  vi.  11 — And  such  were  some 
of  you ;  but  ye  are  washed  ;  but  ye  are  sanctified ;  but  ye 
are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God.    1  Pet.  i.  2. 

6.  We  are  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  sanctified  to  be 
members  of  Christ,  in  order  that  we  may  more  and  more  die  unto 
sin.  Rom.  vi.  4  and  6 — Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him 
by  baptism  into  death :  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up 
from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also 

should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  Knowing  this,  that  our 

old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be 
destroyed,  that  henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin. 

7.  We  are  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to  be 
members  of  Christ,  in  order  that  we  may  also  lead  holy  and  un- 
blamable lives.  1  Pet.  ii.  24 — Who  his  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  that  we,  being  dead  to 
sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness.  Rom.  vi.  11 — Like- 
wise reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin, 
but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  seventieth  question.  What  answer  is  returned 
to  this  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  to  be  washed  with 
the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  receive  of  God  the  remission  of  sins 
for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood?  (1.)  How  does  God  confer 
this  remission  of  sins  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  remission  of  sins  received  of  God  for 
the  sake  of  Christ's  blood  is  conferred  freely?  (2.)  Where 
is  Christ  said  to  have  shed  this  blood  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  blood  of  Christ,  for  the  sake  of  which  we  receive 
from  God  the  remission  of  sins,  was  shed  for  us  in  his  sacri- 
fice upon  the  cross  ?  (3.)  What  further  is  the  washing  with 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  spoken  of  said  to  be  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  renewed?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  to  be 
washed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  to  be  renewed  by  the  Holy 
Ghost?  (4.)  What  is  added  to  the  renewing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  explanatory  of  being  washed  by  the  Spirit  of 
Christ?    What  do  you  mean  by  sanctified?  (b.)    How  do 


Q.71.] 
you  prove  that  to  be  washed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  is  also 
to  be  sanctified  to  be  members  of  Christ?  (5.)  For  what 
end  are  we  said  to  be  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and 
sanctified  to  be  members  of  Christ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
die  unto?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  renewed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to  be  members  of  Christ,  in 
order  that  we  may  more  and  more  die  unto  sin  ?  (6.)  What 
do  you  mean  by  unblamable?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  thafc 
we  are  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to  be 
members  of  Christ,  in  order  that  we  may  also  lead  holy  and 
unblamable  lives  ?  (7.) 


Q.l\.  Where  has  Christ  promised  us  that  he  will 
as  certainty  wash  us  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  as  we  are 
washed  with  the  water  of  baptism  ? 

A.  In  the  institution  of  baptism,  which  is  thus  ex- 
pressed, "  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost "he  that  believeth,  and  is  bap- 
tized, shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not,  shall  be 
damned."  This  promise  is  also  repeated,  where  the 
Scripture  calls  baptism  ' '  the  washing  of  regeneration, 
and  the  washing  away  of  sins." 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Teach,  make  disciples  of;  instruct. 

b.  Nations,  people ;  communities. 

c.  Baptized^  has  had  water  applied  to  him  in  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  agree- 
ably to  the  command  of  Christ. 

d.  Washing  away  of  sins,  cleansing  from  moral  guilt  and 
defilement. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  In  the  institution  of  baptism,  Christ  has  promised  that  he 
will  as  certainly  wash  us  by  his  blood  and  Spirit,  as  we  are 
washed  with  the  water  of  baptism.  Matt,  xxvii.  19 — Go  ye 
therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

2.  The  fact  that  Christ  will  as  certainly  wash  us  by  his  blood 
and  Spirit,  as  ive  are  washed  with  the  water  of  baptism,  is  also 
, 


, 


contained  in  the  promise  annexed  to  baptism.  Mark  xvi.  16— 
He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved,  but  he 
that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned. 

8.  The  same  promise  is  repeated  where  the  Scripture  calls  bap- 
tism the  washing  of  regeneration.  Titus  iii.  5 — Not  by  works 
of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according  to  his 
mercy  he  saved  us.  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  re- 
newing of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

4.  The  same  promise  is  also  repeated  wh'ere  the  Scripture  calls 
baptism  the  washing  a  wag  of  sins.  Acts  xxii.  16 — And  now. 
why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

exercises. 

What  is  the  seventy-first  question?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  teach?  (a.) 
What  by  nations?  (6.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has 
promised,  in  the  institution  of  baptism,  that  he  will  as  cer- 
tainly wash  us  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  as  we  are  washed 
with  the  water  of  baptism?  (1.)  What  is  the  promise  an- 
nexed to  baptism?  What  do  you  mean  by  baptized?  (c.) 
How  do  you  prove  that,  in  the  promise  annexed  to  baptism, 
Christ  has  also  promised  that  he  will  as  certainly  wash  u~ 
with  his  blood  and  Spirit  as  we  are  washed  with  the  water 
of  baptism?  (2.)  What  is  further  added  with  regard  to 
this  promise  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  promise  referred 
to  is  also  repeated  where  the  Scripture  calls  baptism  the 
washing  of  regeneration  ?  (3.)  What  do  you  mean  by  wash- 
ing  away  of  sins?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  promise 
of  Christ  referred  to  is  also  repeated  where  the  Scripture 
calls  baptism  the  washing  away  of  sins  ?  (4.) 


XXVII.  Lord's  Lay,