Q.  72.  Is,  then,  the  external  heiptizm  with  water  the 
washing  aicery  of  sin  itself? 

A.  Xot  at  all :  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  cleanse  us  from  all  sin. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  External  baptism  with  water,  the  mere  application  of 


Q.73.] 
water  to  the  body  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

b.  Cleanse  from  all  sin,  purify  from  every  species  or  de- 
gree of  moral  pollution. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  external  baptism  with  water  is  not  the  washing  away 
of  sin  itself.  1  Pet.  iii.  11 — The  like  figure  whereunto,  even 
baptism,  doth  also  now  save  us  (not  the  putting  away  of 
the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience 
toward  God,)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  1 
John  i.  7 — And  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth 
us  from  all  sin.  1  John  v.  6 — This  is  he  that  came  by  water 
and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ;  not  by  water  onty,  but  by 
water  and  blood. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost,  by  whom  the  blood  of  Christ  is  applied 
to  the  souls  of  believers,  cleanseth  from  all  sin.  1  Cor.  vi.  11 — 
And  such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are 
sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Matt.  iii.  11 — He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  seventy-second  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  external  baptism  with  water?  (a.)  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  ex- 
ternal baptism  with  water  is  not  the  washing  away  of  sin 
itself?  (1.)  What  reason  is  assigned  for  the  negative  an- 
swer returned  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  phrase  cleanse 
from  all  sin  ?  (b. )  How  do  you  prove  that  the  blood  of  Christ 
only  cleanseth  from  all  sin?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whom  the  blood  of  Christ  is  applied  to 
the  souls  of  believers,  cleanseth  from  all  sin?  (3.)