Q.  73.  Why,  then,  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  coll  haptism 
i(  the  washing  of  regeneration,"  and  "  the  washing 
away  of  sins  ?" 

A.  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,  to  wit, 
not  only  thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body 
is  purged  away  by  water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by 
134 


the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ :  but  especially,  that 
by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may  assure  us  that  we 
are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really  as  we 
are  externally  washed  with  water. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Great  cause,  a  special  and  important  design. 

b.  Pledge,  something  guaranteeing  the  accomplishment 
of  a  certain  thing. 

DOCTRINES  SEPAEATEI)  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water.  Ezek. 
xvi.  4 — Neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water. 

2.  Our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  Eev.  i.  5 — 
Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his 
own  blood.  Heb.  ix.  14 — How  much  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself 
without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from  dead 
works  to  serve  the  living  God  ? 

3.  Our  sins  are  removed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  vi. 
11 — And  such  were  some  of  you;  but  ye  are  washed,  but 
ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Isa.  iv.  4 — When 
the  Lord  shall  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the  daughters 
of  Zion,  and  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  Jerusalem  from 
the  midst  thereof,  by  the  spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the 
spirit  of  burning. 

4.  By  baptism  as  a  divine  pledge  and  sign,  we  are  assured 
that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really  as  we  are, 
externally  washed  with  water.  Acts  ii.  38 — Repent,  and  be 
baptized  every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for 
the  remission  of  sin ;  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Gal.  iii.  27 — For  as  many  of  you  as  have  been 
baptized  into  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ.    Mark  xvi.  16. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  seventy- third  question.  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  phrase 
great  cause?  (a.)  WThat  is  this  great  cause  said  to  be? 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away 
by  water?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our  sins  are  re- 
moved by  the  blood  of  Christ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ?  (3.) 


0.74.] 
What  further  is  it  said  God  designed  to  teach  us  by  the 
phrase  referred  to  in  the  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
pledge  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove,  that  by  baptism  as  a  divine 
pledge,  we  are  assured  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed 
from  our  sins,  as  really  as  we  are  externally  washed  with 
water?  (4.)