Q.  74.    Are  infants  also  to  he  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  in- 
cluded in  the  covenant  and  church  of  God ;  and  since 
redemption  from  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised  to  them  no  less 
than  to  the  adult ;  they  must,  therefore,  by  baptism,  as 
a  sign  of  the  covenant,  be  also  admitted  into  the  Chris- 
tian Church  ;  and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of 
infidels,  as  was  done  in  the  old  covenant  or  testament  by 
circumcision,  instead  of  which  baptism  was  instituted  in 
the  new  covenant. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Infants,  children ;  persons  who  have  not  attained  to 
the  years  of  discretion. 

b.  Adult,  persons  who  have  attained  to  the  years  of  dis- 
cretion. 

c.  Covenant,  the  agreement  between  God  and  Christ  on 
man's  behalf. 

d.  Christian  Church,  the  collective  body  of  those  who 
believe  in  Christ. 

e.  Distinguished,  separated  from  by  some  particular 
mark. 

/.  Old  covenant  or  testament,  the  dispensation  that  pre- 
ceded the  coming  of  Christ. 

g.  Circumcision,  the  rite  of  cutting  off  the  foreskin. 

h.  New  covenant,  the  gospel  dispensation. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Infants  are  included  in  the  covenant  of  God.  Gen.  xvii. 
7 — And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  between  me  and  thee, 
and  thy  seed  after  thee,  in  their  generations,  for  an  ever- 
lasting covenant;  to  be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed 
after  thee.    Psalm  xxii.  10. 
2.  Infants  are  included  in  the  Church  of  God.  Mark  x.  14 
and  16 — Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto  me,  and  for- 
bid them  not:  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  . 

And  he  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  put  his  hands  upon  them, 
and  blessed  them.    Matt.  xix.  14;  Joel  ii.  16. 

3.  Redemption  from  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ  is  promised 
to  infants.  Acts  ii.  38  and  39 — Repent  and  be  baptized 
every  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins  ;  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  For  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children, 
and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call. 

4.  The  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised  to  in- 
fants. Luke  i.  15 — For  he  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  shall  drink  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink  ;  and 
he  shall  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  from  his  mother's 
womb.    Acts  ii.  38  and  39. 

5.  Baptism  is  the  sign  of  the  covenant.  Mark  xvi.  46 — He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  shall  be  damned. 

6.  Baptism  is  the  medium  of  admission  into  theChristian  Church. 
Matt,  xxviii.  19 — Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  [make  disciples 
or  Christians  of]  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1  Cor.  xii.  13. 

7.  Baptism  distinguishes  the  children  of  believers  from  those  of 
unbelievers.  1  Cor.  vii.  14 — For  the  unbelieving  husband  is 
sanctified  by  the  wife,  and  the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified 
by  the  husband  ;  else  were  your  children  unclean ;  but  now 
are  they  holy. 

8.  Under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  the  children  of  be- 
lievers were  distinguished,  from  those  of  unbelievers  by  circum- 
cision. Gen.  xvii.  14 — And  the  uncircumcised  man-child, 
whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin  is  not  circumcised,  that  soul 
shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people  ;  he  hath  broken  my  cove- 
nant. 

9.  Baptism  has  been  instituted  in  the  new  covenant  instead 
of  circumcision.  Col.  ii.  11  and  12 — In  which  also  ye  are 
circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  in 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh  by  the  circum- 
cision of  Christ :  Buried  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  also 
ye  are  risen  with  him  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of 
God,  who  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead. 
EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  seventy-fourth  question?  Whom  do  you 
mean  by  infants  ?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the 
question  ?  What  reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  return- 
ed? Whom  do  you  mean  by  the  adult?  (b.)  WMt  by 
covenant?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  infants  are  included 
in  the  covenant  of  God  ?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  in- 
fants are  included  in  the  Church  of  God  ?  (2.)  What  further 
reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  ?  How  do  you 
prove,  that  redemption  from  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  is 
promised  to  infants  ?  (3.)  What  further  is  promised  to  in- 
fants, besides  redemption  from  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith, 
is  promised  to  infants  ?  (4.)  What  is  inferred  from  the  facts 
stated  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  baptism  is  the  sign  of  the 
covenant  ?  (5.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  Christian  Church? 
(d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  baptism  is  the  medium  of  ad- 
mission into  the  Christian  Church  ?  (6.)  What  does  baptism 
do  for  infants  besides  admitting  them  into  the  Church? 
What  do  you  mean  by  distinguished?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  baptism  distinguishes  the  children  of  believers  from 
those  of  unbelievers  ?  (7.)  What  further  is  added  in  the 
answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  old  covenant  or  testa- 
ment? (/.)  What  by  circumcision .?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove, 
that  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  the  children  of 
believers  were  distinguished  from  those  of  unbelievers  by 
circumcision?  (8.)  What  is  further  said  with  regard  to  circum- 
cision ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  new  covenant  ?  (A.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  baptism  has  been  instituted  in  the 
new  covenant  instead  of  circumcision  ?  (9.) 


XXVIII.  Lord's  Day. 

©f  %  ftalg  %xt$px  of  mi  ITorb  $z$k$  Christ