Q.  75.  Hoiv  art  thou  admonished  and  assured  in 
the  Lord's  supper,  that  thou  art  a  partaker  of  that 
one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross,  and 
of  all  his  benefits  ? 

A,  Thus,  that  Christ  has  commanded  me,  and  all  be- 
lievers, to  eat  of  this  broken  bread,  and  to  drink  of  this 

12* 
cup,  in  remembrance  of  him  ;  adding  these  promises, 
first,  that  his  body  was  offered  and  broken  on  the  cross 
for  me,  and  his  blood  shed  for  me,  as  certainly  as  I 
see  with  my  eyes  the  bread  of  the  Lord  broken  for 
me,  and  the  cup  communicated  to  me ;  and  further, 
that  he  feeds  and  nourishes  my  soul  to  everlasting  life, 
with  his  crucified  body  and  shed  blood,  as  assuredly  as 
I  receive  from  the  hands  of  the  minister  and  taste  with 
my  mouth  the  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord,  as  certain  signs 
of  the  blood  and  body  of  Christ. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Believers,  those  who  trust  in  Christ  as  their  Saviour. 

b.  Bread,  the  element  in  the  Lord's  supper  representing 
Christ's  body. 

c.  Cup,  the  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper  representing  the 
blood  of  Christ. 

d.  Remembrance,  as  a  token  by  which  he  is  kept  in  the 
memory. 

tr  Communicated,  imparted  from  one  to  another. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  has  commanded  all  believers  to  eat  of  the  brolcen 
bread  and,  drink  of  the  cup  in  the  Lord's  supper,  in  remem- 
brance of  him.  Matt.  xxvi.  26-28 — And  as  they  were  eat- 
ing, Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  it.  and  brake  it,  and 
gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  Take,  eat  :  this  is  my 
body.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it 
to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  For  this  is  my  blood 
of  the  new  testament  which  was  shed  for  many,  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins. 

2.  Christ  has  added  to  the  command  to  observe  the  Lord's 
supper,  the  promise,  that  his  bod//  was  offered  and  brolcen  and 
his  blood  shed  on  the  cross  for  believers,  as  certainly  as  they  see 
with,  their  eyes  the  bread  of  the  Lord  broken  for  them,  and  the 
cup  communicated  to  them.  Luke  xxii.  19  and  20 — And  he 
took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake  it,  and  gave  unto 
them,  saying.  This  is  my  body  which  is  given  for  you ;  this 
do  in  remembrance  of  me.  Likewise  also  the  cup  after 
supper,  saying,  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood, 
which  is  shed  for  you. 


q.75.] 
3.  Christ  has  added  to  the  command  to  observe  the  Lord's 
supper,  the  promise  that  he  feeds  and  nourishes  the  souls  of  be- 
lievers to  everlasting  life,  with  his  crucified  body  and  shed  blood* 
as  assuredly  as  they  receive  from  the  hands  of  the  minister  and 
taste  with  their  mouth  the  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord.  1  Cor. 
xi.  23  and  24 — The  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he 
was  betrayed,  took  bread  :  And  when  he  had  given  thanks, 
he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat :  this  is  my  body  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the 
same  manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped, 
saying,  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood  :  This  do 
as  often  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  1  Cor.  x. 
16 — The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  com- 
munion of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  The  bread  which  we  break, 
is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ? 

4.  The  bread  and  ivine  in  the  Lord's  supper  are  signs  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Mark  xiv.  22-24 — And  as  they 
did  eat,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake  it,  and 
gave  to  them,  and  said,  Take,  eat :  This  is  my  body.  And 
he  took  the  cup,  and  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  gave 
it  to  them  ;  and  they  all  drank  of  it.  And  he  said  unto 
them,  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed 
for  many. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  seventy-fifth  question.  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  believers  ? 
(a.)  What  by  bread?  (b.)  What  by  the  cup?  (c.)  What 
by  remembrance?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has 
commanded  you  and  all  believers,  to  eat  of  the  broken  bread 
and  drink  of  the  cup  in  the  Lord's  supper,  in  remembrance 
of  him  ?  (1.)  What  is  Christ  said  to  have  added  ?  What 
is  the  first  promise  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  communicated?  (e.)  How  do  3^ou  prove  that  Christ 
has  added  to  the  command  to  observe  the  Lord's  supper, 
the  promise,  that  his  body  was  offered  and  broken,  and  his 
blood  shed  on  the  cross  for  believers,  as  certainly  as  they 
see  with  their  eyes  the  bread  of  the  Lord  broken  for  them, 
and  the  cup  communicated  to  them  ?  (2.)  What  is  the  se- 
cond promise  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove, 
that  Christ  has  added  to  the  command  to  observe  the  Lord's 
supper,  the  promise  that  he  feeds  and  nourishes  the  souls 
of  believers  to  everlasting  life,  as  assuredly,  as  they  receive 


140  CATECHETICAL  EXERCIfiER.  from  the  hands  of  the  minister  and  taste  with  their  mouth 
the  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord  ?  (3.)  As  what  are  the 
bread  and  eup  represented  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper  are  signs  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ?  (4.)