Q.  76.  What  is  it,  then,  to  eat  the  crucified  hody, 
and  drink  the  shed  hlood  of  Christ  ? 

A.  It  is  not  only  to  embrace  with  a  believing  heart  all 
the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ,  and  thereby  to  obtain 
the  pardon  of  sin  and  life  eternal ;  but  also,  besides  that, 
to  become  more  and  more  united  to  his  sacred  body  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells  both  in  Christ  and  in  us  ;  so 
that  we,  though  Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  we  on  earth, 
are,  notwithstanding,  '?  flesh  of  his  flesh,  and  bone  of  his 
bone  and  that  we  live  and  are  governed  for  ever  by 
one  spirit,  as  members  of  the  same  body  are  by  one 
soul. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  More  and  more  united,  gradually  brought  into  the  closest 
relation  and  most  endearing  intimacy. 

b.  Sacred  body,  the  mystical  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  which 
he  himself  is  the  head  and  those  who  have  received  him  as 
their  Saviour  are  the  members  ;  all  of  which  is  representa- 
tive of  the  intimate  union  subsisting  between  Christ  and 
believers. 

c.  Flesh  of  his  flesh  and  bone  of  his  bone,  sustain  the  most 
intimate  connection  with  him  as  members  of  his  mystical 
body,  the  Church. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  To  eat  the  crucified  body  and  drink  the  shed  blood  of 
Christ,  is  to  embrace  all  his  sufferings  and.  death  with  a  believing 
heart.  John  vi.  35,  47,  48  and  50 — And  Jesus  said  unto 
them,  I  am  the  bread  of  life :  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall 
never  hunger ;  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never 

thirst.  Yerily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth 

on  me  hath  everlasting  life.    I  am  that  bread  of  life.  


Q.76.] 


, 
This  is  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from  heaven,  that  a 
man  may  eat  thereof  and  not  die. 

2.  In  consequence  of  our  thus  embracing  all  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Christ,  as  is  done  by  eating  the  crucified  body  and 
drinking  the  shed  blood  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament  of  the  supper, 
tee  obtain  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  life  eternal.  John  vi.  51, 
54  and  58—1  am  the  living  bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven :  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever : 
and  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh,  which  I  will  give 

for  the  life  of  the  world.  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and 

drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life  ;  and  I  will  raise  him 

up  at  the  last  day.  This  is  that  bread  which  came 

down  from  heaven  ;  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  manna,  and 
are  dead :  he  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  for  ever. 

3.  To  eat  of  the  crucified  body  and  drink  of  the  shed  blood 
of  Christ,  is  also  to  become  more  and  more  united  to  the  sacred 
body  of  Christ.  John  vi.  56 — He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him. 

4.  This  union  to  the  sacred  body  of  Christ  in  eating  his  cruci- 
fied body  and  drinking  his  shed  blood  in  the  sacrament  of  the 
supper,  is  effected  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dioells  both  in  Christ 
and  in  us.  John  vi.  63 — It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth ; 
the  flesh  profiteth  nothing.  1  Cor.  xii.  13 — For  by  one  Spirit 
are  we  all  baptized  into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or 
Gentiles,  whether  we  be  bond  or  free ;  and  have  all  been 
made  to  drink  into  one  Spirit. 

5.  In  consequence  of  our  union  to  Christ,  though  he  is  in  hea- 
ven, and  vje  are  on  earth,  yet  we  are  "flesh  of  his  flesh,  and 
bone  of  his  bone."  Eph.  v.  30 — For  we  are  members  of  his 
body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.  1  Cor.  xii.  27 — Now 
ye  are  the  body  of  Christ  and  members  in  particular.  1 
Cor.  vi.  15,  17,  19. 

6.  In  consequence  of  our  union  to  Christ,  we  live  and  are 
governed  for  ever  by  one  Spirit,  as  members  of  the  same  body 
are  by  one  soul.  1  Cor.  vi.  17 — But  he  that  is  joined  unto 
the  Lord  is  one  spirit.  John  vi.  56,  57  and  58 — He  that 
eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me, 

and  I  in  him.  He  that  eateth  me,  eve/n  he  shall  live 

by  me.  He  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live  forever. 

Rom.  viii.  9  and  11 — Now,  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit 

of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his  But  if  the  Spirit  of  him 

that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that 
raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead,  shall  also  quicken  your 
mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you.  Eph.  iv. 
15,  16. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  seventy-sixth  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  to  eat  the 
crucified  body  and  drink  the  shed  blood  of  Christ,  is  to 
embrace  all  his  sufferings  and  death  with  a  believing  heart? 
(1.)  What  further  is  added  in  the  answer?  How  do  you 
prove  that  in  consequence  of  our  embracing  all  the  suffer- 
ings and  death  of  Christ  with  a  believing  heart,  we  obtain 
the  pardon  of  sin  and  life  eternal  ?  (2.)  What  is  added,  in 
the  answer,  to  what  has  already  been  considered  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  expression  more  and  more  united?  (#.) 
What  by  sacred  body  9  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  to  eat 
the  crucified  body  and  drink  the  shed  blood  of  Christ,  is 
also  to  become  more  and  more  united  to  the  sacred  body  of 
Christ?  (3.)  By  whom  is  this  union  to  Christ  effected? 
How  do  you  prove  that  this  union  to  the  sacred  body  of 
Christ  in  eating  his  crucified  body  and  drinking  his  shed 
blood,  is  effected  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  (4.)  What  is  said  to 
take  place  in  consequence  of  this  union  to  Christ  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  the  expression  flesh  of  his  flesh,  and  bone  of 
his  bone?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  in  consequence  of 
our  union  to  Christ,  though  he  is  in  heaven  and  we  are  on 
earth,  yet  we  are  "  flesh  of  his  flesh  and  bone  of  his  bone  ?" 
(5.)  What  further  consequence  of  our  union  to  Christ  is 
specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  in  conse- 
quence of  our  union  to  Christ,  we  live  and  are  governed  for 
ever  by  one  Spirit,  as  members  of  the  same  body  are  by  one 
soul?  (6.)