Q.  77.  Where  has  Christ  promised  that  he  vjill  as 
certainly  feed  and  nourish  believers  with  his  body  a  nd 
blood,  as  they  eat  of  this  broken  bread  and  drink  of 
this  cup  ? 

A.  In  the  institution  of  the  supper,  which  is  thus  ex- 
pressed :  ' 4  The  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which  he 
was  betrayed,  took  bread,  and  when  he  had  given  thanks, 
he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body  which  is 
broken  for  you  ;  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me :  After 
the  same  manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had 
supped,  saying,  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my 
blood  ;  this  do  ye  as  often  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remem- 
brance of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and 
drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  until  he 
come." 

This  promise  is  repeated  by  the  holy  apostle  Paul, 
where  he  says,  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless, 
is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ?  the 
bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the 
body  of  Christ  ?  for  we,  being  many,  are  one  bread, 
and  one  body ;  because  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one 
bread/' 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Betrayed,  treacherously  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
enemies. 

b.  New  testament  in  my  blood,  the  new  covenant  which 
God  was  about  to  establish  with  men  through  his  sufferings 
and  death. 

c.  Come,  appears  again  in  the  judgment  on  the  last  day. 

d.  Cup  of  blessing,  the  wine  solemnly  set  apart  from  a 
common  to  a  sacred  use. 

e.  Communion^  a  token  of  the  union  of  believers  with 
Christ  and  with  each  other. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  In  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  supper  Christ  has  promised 
that  he  loill  as  certainly  feed  and  nourish  believers  with  his  body 
and  blood,  as  they  eat  of  the  broken  bread  and  drink  of  the  cup. 
1  Cor.  xi.  23-26 — The  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which 
he  was  betrayed,  took  bread ;  and  when  he  had  given  thanks, 
he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body  which  is 
broken  for  you :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the 
same  manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped, 
saying,  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood :  this 
do  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew 
the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.  Matt.  xxvi.  26.  Heb.  ix. 
20.    Exod.  xxiv.  8. 
[q.  78. 


2.  The  same  promise  is  repeated  by  the  apostle  Paul.  1  Cor. 
x.  16,  17 — The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the 
communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  the  bread  which  we 
break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?  For 
we  being  many  are  one  bread,  and  one  body  ;  for  we  are 
all  partakers  of  that  one  bread. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  seventy-seventh  question  ?  What  answer  is 
returned  ?  How  is  the  institution  expressed  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  betrayed?  (a.)  What  by  the  expression 
New  Testament  in  my  blood?  (b.)  What  by  come?  (c.) 
Where  are  these  words  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  sup- 
per recorded  ?  (1.)  What  is  further  added  in  the  answer  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  cup  of  blessing?  (d.)  What  by 
communion  ?  (e.)  Where  are  these  words  of  the  apostle  re- 
corded? (2.) 


XXIX.  Lord's  Day.