Q.  78.  Do,  then,  the  bread  and  wine  become  the  very 
body  and  blood  of  Christ  f 

A.  Not  at  all ;  but  as  the  water  in  baptism  is  not 
changed  into  the  blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  the  washing 
away  of  sin  itself,  being  only  the  sign  and  confirmation 
thereof  appointed  of  God ;  so  the  bread  of  the  Lord's 
supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very  body  of  Christ, 
though  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  properties  of  sacra- 
ments, it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Very  body  and  blood,  the  same  material  substance  in 
reality,  which  belonged  to  Christ  as  man. 

b.  Confirmation,  the  act  of  ratifying. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  tcater  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into  the  blood  of 
Christ.  Acts  viii.  86 — The  eunuch  said,  See,  here  is  water, 
what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ?  Acts  x.  47 — Can  any 
man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  which 
have  received  the  Holy  Gho^t  as  well  as  we  ! 

2.  Baptism  is  not  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself.  1  Fet.  iii. 
21 — The  like  figure  whereunto.  even  baptism;  doth  also  now 
save  us  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but 
the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God,)  by  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus  Christ.    1  Cor.  x.  1-4. 

3.  Baptism  is  appointed  by  God  as  the  sign  and  confirmation 
of  the  promise  that  sin  shall  be  washed  aivay.  Matt,  xxviii. 
19 — Go  ye  therefore,  teach  [make  disciples  of]  all  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Mark  xvi.  16 — He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not, 
shall  be  damned. 

4.  The  bread  in  the  Lord's  supper  is  not  changed  into  the 
very  body  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  x.  16 — The  bread  which  we 
break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?  1 
Cor.  xi.  23  and  26 — The  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in  which 

he  was  betrayed,  took  bread.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this 

bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till 
he  come. 

5.  The  bread  in  the  Lord's  supper  is  called  the  body  of  Christ 
agreeably  to  the  nature  and  properties  of  sacraments.  Gen. 
xvii.  10* — This  is  my  covenant,  which  ye  shall  keep,  between 
me  and  you,  and  thy  seed  after  thee ;  Every  man-child 
among  you  shall  be  circumcised.  Exod.  xii.  11 — And  ye 
shall  eat  it  in  haste  ;  it  is  the  Lord's  passover.  Acts  vii. 
8 — And  he  gave  him  the  covenant  of  circumcision.  Acts 
xxii.  16.    Matt.  xxvi.  26,    Mark  xiv.  24. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  seventy-eighth  question.  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  very  body  and  blood  of  Christ  ?  {a.)  What  answer  is 
returned  to  the  question  ?  What  reason  is  assigned  for  the 
answer  returned  ?  What  is  the  first  particular  specified 
with  regard  to  baptism  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  water 
in  baptism,  is  not  changed  into  the  blood  of  Christ?  (1.) 
What  is  the  second  particular  mentioned  with  regard  to 
baptism  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  baptism  is  not  the  wash- 
ing away  of  sin?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  thing  said  with 
regard  to  baptism  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  confirmation  f 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  baptism  is  appointed  by  God 
as  the  sign  and  confirmation  of  the  promise,  that  sin  shall 
be  washed  away.  (3.)  How  is  the  comparison  instituted  in 
the  answer  between  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper  carried 
out  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  bread  in  the  Lord's  sup- 
per, is  not  changed  into  the  very  body  of  Christ?  (4.)  How 
k  13 
[q.  79. 


do  you  prove  that  the  bread  in  the  Lord's  supper,  is  called 
the  body  of  Christ,  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  properties 
of  sacraments.  (5.)