Q.  79.  Whyy  then,  doth  Christ  call  the  bread  his 
body,  and  the  cup  his  blood,  or  the  new  covenant  in 
his  blood  ;  and  Paid  u  the  communion  of  ilie  body 
and  blood  of  Christ  P 

A,  Christ  speaks  thus  not  without  great  reason,  name- 
ly, not  only  thereby  to  teach  us  that  as  bread  and  wine 
support  this  temporal  life,  so  his  crucified  body  and  shed 
blood  are  the  true  meat  and  drink  whereby  our  souls  are 
fed  to  eternal  life  ;  but  more  especially  by  these  visible 
signs  and  pledges  to  assure  us,  that  we  are  as  really  par- 
takers of  his  true  body  and  blood,  (by  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,)  as  we  receive  by  the  mouth  of  our  bodies 
these  holy  signs  in  remembrance  of  him  ;  and  that  all 
his  sufferings  and  obedience  are  as  certainly  ours,  as  if 
we  had  in  our  own  persons  suffered  and  made  satisfaction 
for  our  sins  to  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Crucified  body  and  shed  blood,  Christ  as  he  was  offered 
for  us  on  the  cross. 

b.  True  meat  and  drink,  the  real  food. 

c.  Visible  signs,  tokens  that  are  capable  of  being  seen. 

d.  Made  satisfaction,  rendered  the  recompense  which  the 
violated  law  requires. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Bread  and  wine  support  this  temporal  life.  Ps.  civ.  14 
and  15 — He  causeth  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and 
herb  for  the  service  of  man  ;  that  he  may  bring  forth  food 
out  of  the  earth :  And  wine  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of 
man,  and  oil  to  make  his  face  to  shine,  and  bread  which 
strengthened  man's  heart. 

2.  The  crucified  body  and  shed  blood  of  Christ  are  the  true 
meat  and  drink,  whereby  our  souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life.  John 
vi.  51,  55  and  56 — I  am  the  living  bread  which  came  down 
from  heaven:  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live 


q.  79.] 
for  ever ;  and  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh,  which 

I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world.  For  my  flesh  is 

meat  indeed  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed.  He  that  eat- 
eth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me  and  I 
in  him. 

3.  The  hread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper,  as  visible  signs 
and  pledges,'' assure  us  that  tve  are  as  really  partakers  of  Christ's 
true  body  and  blood  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we 
receive  by  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  remembrance 
of  him.  1  Cor.  xi.  26-28 — For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he 
come.  Wherefore,  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
this  cup  of  the  Lord,  unworthily,  shall  be  guilty  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  the  Lord.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and 
so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  1  Cor. 
x.  16 — The  cup  of  blessing,  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the 
communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  The  bread  which  we 
break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ? 

4.  The  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper,  as  visible  signs 
and  pledges,  assure  us,  that  all  Christ's  sufferings  and  obedience 
are  as  certainly  ours  as  if  we  had  in  our  own  persons  suffered 
and  made  satisfaction  for  our  si?is  to  God.  1  Cor.  xi.  26 — For 
as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do 
shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.  Rom.  v.  9,  18  and  19 
— Much  more  then,  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we 

shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him.  Therefore, 

as  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to 
condemnation ;  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the 
free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life.  For 
as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so 
by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous. 
Rom.  viii.  4. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  seventy-ninth  question?  What  answer  is 
returned  to  this  question  ?  WThat  is  the  first  thiug  men- 
tioned as  explanatory  of  this  reason  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  bread  and  wine  support  this  temporal  life  ?  (1.)  What 
do  you  mean  by  Christ's  crucified  body  and  shed  blood?  (a.) 
What  by  true  meat  and  drink?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  crucified  body  and  shed  blood  of  Christ  are  the  true 
meat  and  drink  whereby  our  souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life  ? 
(2.)    What  is  the  second  thing  mentioned  as  explanatory 
of  the  reason  before  spoken  of?    What  do  yon  mean  by 

visible  signs  9  (c.)  How  do  yon  prove  that  the  bread  and 
•wine  in  the  Lord's  supper,  as  visible  signs  and  pledges, 
assure  us  that  we  are  as  really  partakers  of  Christ's  true 
body  and  blood  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we 
receive  by  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  re- 
membrance of  him  ?  (3.)  What  further  are  we  assured  of 
by  the  visible  signs  and  pledges  in  the  Lord's  supper  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  the  expression  made  satisfaction  ?  (d.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper, 
as  visible  signs  and  pledges,  assure  us  that  all  Christ's 
sufferings  and  obedience  are  as  certainly  ours  as  if  we  had 
in  our  own  persons  suffered  and  made  satisfaction  for  our 
sins  to  God  ?  (4.) 


XXX.  Lord's  Day.