Q.  80.  What  difference  is  there  between  the  Lord's 
supper  and  the  Popish  mass  f 

A.  The  Lord's  supper  testifies  to  us  that  we  have  a 
full  pardon  of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ,  which  he  himself  has  once  accomplished  on  the 
cross  ;  and  that  we  by  the  Holy  Ghost  are  ingrafted 
into  Christ,  who,  according  to  his  human  nature,  is  now 
not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
his  Father,  and  will  there  be  worshipped  by  us  : — but  the 
mass  teacheth  that  the  living  and  the  dead  have  not  the 
pardon  of  sins  through  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  unless 
Christ  is  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests  ;  and 
further,  that  Christ  is  bodily  under  the  form  of  bread 
and  wine,  and  therefore  is  to  be  worshipped  in  them  ;  so 
that  the  mass  at  bottom  is  nothing  else  than  a  denial  of 
the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  an 
accursed  idolatry. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Popish  mass,  the  sacrament  of  the  supper  as  celebrated 
in  the  Romish  Church. 

b.  Ingrafted  into,  become  united  to,  so  as  to  constitute  one 
with  him. 


Q.80.]  149 

c.  Right  hand  of  God,  the  place  of  preferment  and  power 
in  the  immediate  presence  of  God. 

d.  Denial,  rejection  ;  disowning. 

e.  Idolatry,  the  worship  of  any  thing  which  is  not  God. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  have  a  full  pardon  of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Heb.  ix.  12,  26  and  28— Neither  by  the  blood 
of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in 
once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
tion for  us.  For  then  must  he  often  have  suffered  since 

the  foundation  of  the  world :  but  now  once  in  the  end  of 
the  world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 

of  himself.  So  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins 

of  many ;  and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear 
the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.  2  Cor.  v.  21. 
Luke  xxii.  19  and  20.    Matt.  xxvi.  28. 

2.  The  sacrifice  by  which  we  have  a  full  pardon  of  sin,  Christ 
has  himself  accomplished  once.  Heb.  vii.  27 — Who  needed  not 
daily,  as  those  high  priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifices,  first  for 
his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people  ;  for  this  he  did  once 
when  he  offered  up  himself. 

3.  This  sacrifice  Christ  has  accomplished  on  the  cross.  1  Cor, 
v.  7 — For  even  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us.  Heb. 
x.  14 — For  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them 
that  are  sanctified.  John  xix.  80 — When  Jesus  therefore 
had  received  the  vinegar,  he  said,  It  is  finished:  and  he 
bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost. 

4.  We  are  ingrafted  into  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  John  vi. 
63 — It  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth ;  the  flesh  profiteth  no- 
thing. 1  Cor.  vi.  17 — But  he  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord 
is  one  spirit.  1  Cor.  xii.  13 — For  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all 
baptized  into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or  Gentiles, 
whether  we  be  bond  or  free ;  and  have  all  been  made  to 
drink  into  one  Spirit. 

5.  Christ,  according  to  his  human  nature,  is  now  not  on  earth, 
but  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Col.  iii.  1 — If  ye 
then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are 
above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Heb. 
i.  3 — When  he  had  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  sat  down 
on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  Heb.  viii.  1 
and  4 — We  have  such  an  high  priest,  who  is  set  on  the 
right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens,— — 

13* 


150  For  if  he  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a  priest.  Acts 
iii.  21. 

6.  Christ,  who  is  now  in  heaven,  will  be  worshipped  by  us. 
Acts  vii.  56  and  59 — And  said,  Behold  I  see  the  heavens 
opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 

God.  And  they  stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  God,  and 

saying,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit.  Luke  xxiv.  51  and 
52 — And  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them,  he  was 
parted  from  them  and  carried  up  into  heaven ;  And  they 
worshipped  him,  and  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great 

joy- 

7.  The  popish  mass  is  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  suffer- 
ings of  Christ.  Gal.  v.  4 — Christ  is  become  of  no  effect  unto 
you,  whosoever  are  justified  by  the  law ;  ye  are  fallen  from 
grace.  Isaiah  i.  11 — To  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of 
your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  saith  the  Lord ;  I  am  full  of  the 
burnt  offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts  ;  and  I 
delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks,  or  of  lambs,  or  of  he 
goats.    Jer.  ii.  13.    Matt.  xv.  9. 

8.  The  popish  mass  is  an  accursed  idolatry.  Deut.  xxvii. 
15 — Cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  any  graven  or  molten 
image,  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord,  the  work  of  the 
hands  of  the  craftsman,  and  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place. 
And  all  the  people  shall  answer  and  say  Amen.  Isaiah 
i.  12  and  13 — When  ye  come  to  appear  before  me,  who 
hath  required  this  at  your  hands,  to  tread  my  courts  ? 
Bring  no  more  vain  oblations  ;  incense  is  an  abomination 
unto  me. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  eightieth  question.  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  popish  mass  f  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  this 
question  ?  What  does  the  Lord's  supper  testify  to  us  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  we  have  a  full  pardon  of  all  sin  by 
the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ?  (1.)  What  is  said  with 
regard  to  this  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  sacrifice  by  which  we  have  a  full  pardon  of  all  sin, 
Christ  has  himself  accomplished  once?  (2.)  Where  did 
Christ  accomplish  this  sacrifice  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ  has  accomplished  this  sacrifice  on  the  cross?  (3.) 
What  further  does  the  Lord's  supper  testify  ?  WThat  do  you 
mean  by  ingrafted  into  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
ingrafted  into  Christ  by  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  (4.)    What  is 


<J.  81.]  151 


said  with  regard  to  Christ's  presence  ?  What  do  3^011  mean 
by  the  right  hand  of  God?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
Christ,  according  to  his  human  nature,  is  now  not  on  earth, 
but  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  (5.)  What  does 
Christ,  who  is  now  in  heaven,  claim  from  us  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  tvorshipped?  [d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ, 
who  is  now  in  heaven,  will  be  worshipped  by  us  ?  (6.)  What 
does  the  answer  say  with  regard  to  the  mass  ?  What  con- 
clusion is  drawn  from  the  view  of  the  mass  just  given  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  a  denial?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  the  mass  is  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings 
of  Christ  ?  (7.)  What  do  you  mean  by  idolatry  ?  (/.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  popish  mass  is  an  accursed  idol- 
atry? (8.)