Q.  81.  For  whom  is  the  Lord's  supper  instituted? 

A,  For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  sins, 
and  yet  trust  that  these  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake 
of  Christ ;  and  that  their  remaining  infirmities  are  co- 
vered by  his  passion  and  death  ;  and  who  also  earnestly 
desire  to  have  their  faith  more  and  more  strengthened, 
and  their  lives  more  holy  ;  but  hypocrites,  and  such  as 
turn  not  to  God  with  sincere  hearts,  eat  and  drink  judg- 
ment to  themselves. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Instituted,  appointed  to  be  observed. 

b.  Truly  sorrowful,  manifest  sincere  grief  on  account  of. 

c.  Remaining  infirmities,  the  inclinations  to  sin  that  still 
adhere  to  them,  even  after  their  conversion. 

d.  Covered,  concealed,  so  as  to  be  no  more  remembered 
for  the  purpose  of  punishing  them. 

e.  Hypocrites,  those  who  assume  the  appearance  of  piety 
and  virtue,  while  they  know  they  are  destitute  of  true  re- 
ligion. 

/.  Sincere  hearts,  feelings  and  sentiments  corresponding 
to  the  real  nature  of  the  act  of  turning  to  God. 

g.  Eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves,  partake  of  the  ele- 
ments of  the  Lord's  supper  in  such  a  manner  as  to  incur 
the  displeasure  of  God. 


152  DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Those  for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted,  are  truly 
sorrowful  for  their  sins.  Acts  iii.  19 — Repent  ye  therefore, 
and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  maybe  blotted  out.  Psalm 
li.  17— The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit ;  a  broken 
and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise.  Matt, 
v.  4 — Blessed  are  they  that  mourn  for  they  shall  be  com- 
forted.   Luke  vii.  37  and  38 ;  and  xv.  18  and  19. 

2.  Those  for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted,  trust  that 
their  sins  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  and  that  their 
remaining  infirmities  are  covered  by  his  passion  and  death.  Acts 
■viii.  37 — If  thou  believest  with  all  thine  heart,  thou  mayest. 
2  Cor.  xiii.  o — Examine  yourselves,  whether  ye  be  in  the 
faith  ;  prove  your  own  selves.  1  Cor.  xi.  28 — But  let  a  man 
examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink 
of  that  cup.  Psalm  ciii.  3 — Who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniqui- 
ties :  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases. 

3.  Those  for  whom  the  Lord7s  supper  is  instituted,  also  ear- 
nestly desire  to  have  their  faith  more  and  more  strengthened,  and 
their  lives  more  holy.  Matt.  v.  6 — Blessed  are  they  which 
do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness ;  for  they  shall 
be  filled.  Psalm  cxvi.  12-14 — What  shall  I  render  unto 
the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me  ?  I  will  take  the 
cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  I 
will  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord  now  in  the  presence  of  all 
his  people. 

4.  Hypocrites,  and  such  as  turn  not  to  Godioith  sincere  hearts, 
in  partaking  of  the  LoroVs  supper,  eat  and  drink  judgment  to 
themselves.  1  Cor.  xi.  27  and  29 — Wherefore,  whosoever 
shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord,  unwor- 
thily, shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  

Por  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and 
drinketh  damnation  to  himself,  not  discerning  the  Lord's 
body  ?    Psalm  1.  16  and  17.    Titus  i.  16. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-first  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
instituted?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  this  question  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  truly  sorrowful?  (b,)  How  do  you 
prove  that  those  for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted, 
are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  sins  ?  (1.)  What  do  those  do  for 
whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted,  besides  being  truly 


q.82.] 
sorrowful  for  their  sins?  What  do  you  mean  by  remaining 
infirmities?  (c.)  What  by  covered?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  those  for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted,  trust 
that  their  sins  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  and 
their  remaining  infirmities  covered  by  his  passion  and  death  ? 
(2.)  What  further  exercise  of  mind  is  ascribed  to  those 
for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted?  How  do  you 
prove  that  those  for  whom  the  Lord's  supper  is  instituted, 
also  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  faith  more  and  more 
strengthened,  and  their  lives  more  holy  ?  (3.)  For  what 
kind  of  persons  does  the  answer  say  the  Lord's  supper  was 
not  instituted?  What  do  you  mean  by  hypocrites?  (<?.) 
What  by  sincere  hearts?  (/.)  What  by  the  expression  eat 
and  drink  Judgment  to  themselves?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  hypocrites,  and  such  as  turn  not  to  God,  with  sincere 
hearts,  in  partaking  of  the  Lord's  supper,  eat  and  drink 
judgment  to  themselves  ?  (4.) 


Q,  82.  Are  they  also  to  he  admitted  to  this  supper, 
who,  by  confession  and  life,  declare  themselves  in fidels 
and  ungodly  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  by  this  the  covenant  of  God  would  be  pro- 
faned, and  his  wrath  kindled  against  the  whole  congre- 
gation ;  therefore  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  Church, 
according  to  the  appointment  of  Christ  and  his  apostles, 
to  exclude  such  persons  by  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  until  they  show  amendment  of  life. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Profaned,  violated ;  treated  with  disrespect. 

b.  Whole  congregation,  the  entire  body  of  Christians  asso- 
ciated together  for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  God. 

c.  Keys,  that  by  which  men  are  admitted  to  or  excluded 
from  the  Church. 

d.  Kingdom  of  heaven,  the  Church  of  Christ  under  the 
Gospel  dispensation. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Those  who  by  confession  and  life  declare  themselves  infidels 
and  ungodly,  are  not  to  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's  supper.  Matt. 
[0.  82. 


vii.  6 — Give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither 
cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they  trample  them 
under  their  feet,  and  turn  again  and  rend  you. 

2.  By  admitting  infidels  and  ungodly  persons  to  the  LoroVs 
supper,  the  covenant  of  God  is  profaned.  Psalm  1.  18  and 
17 — But  unto  the  wicked,  God  saith,  Y\rhat  hast  thou  to  do 
to  declare  my  statutes,  or  that  thou  shouldst  take  my  cove- 
nant in  thy  mouth  ?  Seeing  thou  hatest  instruction  and 
castest  my  words  behind  thee.  1  Cor.  x.  21 — Ye  cannot 
drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  devils  ;  ye  cannot 
be  partakers  of  the  Lord's  table,  and  of  the  table  of  devils. 
Isaiah  i.  11-13. 

3.  By  admitting  infidels  and  ungodly  persons  to  the  Lord's 
supper,  the  wrath  of  God  is  kindled  against  the  whole  congre- 
gation. 1  Cor.  xi.  30,  31 — For  this  cause  many  are  weak 
and  sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep.  For  if  we  would 
judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged.  Psalm  1.  22 — 
Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in 
pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver. 

4.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  to  exclude  infidels 
and  ungodly  persons  from  the  Lord's  supper.  1  Cor.  v.  11 
and  13 — But  now  I  have  written  unto  you  not, to  keep  com- 
pany, if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  or 
covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an 

extortioner;  with  such  an  one  no  not  to  eat.  Therefore* 

put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person. 

5.  This  duty  is  required  by  the  appointment  of  Christ. 
Matt,  xviii.  15-17 — Moreover,  if  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and 
him  alone ;  if  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  bro- 
ther. But  if  he  will  not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one 
or  two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
every  word  may  be  established.  And  if  he  shall  neglect 
to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  church  ;  but  if  he  neglect  to 
hear  the  church,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man 
and  a  publican. 

6.  The  same  duty  is  also  required  by  the  appointment  of 
Christ's  apostles.  Titus  iii.  10 — A.  man  that  is  a  heretic,  after 
the  first  and  second  admonition,  reject.  2  Thess.  iii.  6,  14, 
15 — Now  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every 
brother  that  walketh  disorderly,  and  not  after  the  tradition 
which  ye  received  of  us.  And  if  any  man  obey  not  our 
word  by  this  epistle,  note  that  man,  and  have  no  company 
with  him,  that  he  may  be  ashamed.  Yet  count  him  not  as 
an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother. 

7.  The  Church  is  to  exclude  infidels  and  ungodly  persons 
from  the  Lord's  supper  by  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Matt.  xvi.  19 — And  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven:  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on 
earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  and  whatsover  thou  shalt 
loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven.  Matt,  xviii.  18 — ■ 
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth 
shall  be  bound  in  heaven ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on 
earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven. 

8.  Infidels  and  ungodly  persons  are  to  be  excluded  from  the 
Lord's  supper  until  they  show  amendment  of  life.  2  Cor.  ii. 
6,  7— Sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment,  which 
was  inflicted  of  many.  So  that  contrariwise  ye  ought 
rather  to  forgive  him,  and  comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  such 
an  one  should  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow. 
Gal.  vi.  1. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-second  question  ?  What  answer  is 
returned  to  this  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  those 
who  by  confession  and  life  declare  themselves  infidels  and 
ungodly,  are  not  to  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's  supper  ?  (1.) 
What  reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  to  the 
question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  profaned?  (a.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  by  admitting  infidels  and  ungodly  persons 
to  the  Lord's  supper,  the  covenant  of  God  is  profaned  ?  (2.) 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  whole  congregation?  (b.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  by  admitting  infidels  and  ungodly  persons  to 
the  Lord's  supper,  the  wrath  of  God  is  kindled  against  the 
whole  congregation  ?  (3.)  What  is  said  to  result  from  the 
facts  thus  far  stated  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  to  exclude  infi- 
dels and  ungodly  persons  from  the  Lord's  supper?  (4.) 
How  is  it  said  that  this  duty  must  be  done?  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  duty  of  excluding  infidels  and  ungodly  per- 
sons from  the  Lord's  supper  is  required  by  the  appointment 
of  Christ  ?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  same  duty  is 
also  required  by  the  appointment  of  Christ's  apostles?  (6.) 
By  what  is  the  Christian  Church  to  exclude  infidels  and  un- 
godly persons  from  the  Lord's  supper  ?    What  do  you  mean 


156  [Q.83. 


by  the  kingdom  of  heaven?  (d.)  Y/hat  by  the  keys  of  that 
kingdom?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Church  is  to 
exclude  infidels  and  ungodly  persons  from  the  Lord's  supper 
by  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  (7.)  How  long 
are  such  persons  to  be  excluded  from  the  Lord's  supper  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  infidels  and  ungodly  persons  are  to 
be  excluded  from  the  Lord's  supper  until  they  show  amend- 
ment of  life?  (8.) 


XXXI.  Lord's  Day.