Q.  83.  What  are  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven f 

A.  The  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  and  Christian 
discipline,  or  the  excommunication  out  of  the  Christian 
Church ;  by  these  two,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened 
to  believers,  and  shut  against  unbelievers. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  proclaiming  the  good  news 
of  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ. 

b.  Christian  discipline,  the  execution  of  the  laws  by  which 
the  Christian  Church  is  governed. 

c.  Excommunication,  the  act  of  ejecting  or  expulsion. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers  and  shut 
against  unbelievers  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Matt.  xvi. 
18 — And  I  say  also  unto  thee,  That  thou  art  Peter,  and  upon 
this  rock  I  will  build  my  church :  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against  it.  John  xx.  23 — Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit, 
they  are  remitted  unto  them ;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  re- 
tain, they  are  retained. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers,  and  shut 
against  unbelievers  by  the  exercise  of  Christian  discipline.  Matt, 
xviii.  15-18 — Moreover,  if  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 
alone  :  if  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother. 
But  if  he  will  not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or 
two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
every  word  may  be  established.  And  if  he  shall  neglect  to 
hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  church :  but  if  he  neglect  to  hear 
the  church,  let  him  be  unto  thee  as  a  heathen  man  and  a 
publican.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  bind 
on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall 
loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven.  2  Cor.  x.  4-6 ; 
1  Cor.  v.  11,  12. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  eighty-third  question.  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  preaching 
of  the  holy  gospel?  (a.)  What  by  Christian  discipline?  (b.) 
What  by  excommunication  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers  and  shut  against 
unbelievers  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel?  (1.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers 
and  shut  against  unbelievers,  by  the  exercise  of  Christian 
discipline?  (2.)