Q.  84.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  and 
shut  by  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel  ? 

A.  Thus  :  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ, 
it  is  declared  and  publicly  testified  to  all  and  every  be- 
liever, that  whenever  they  receive  the  promise  of  the 
gospel  by  a  true  faith,  all  their  sins  are  really  forgiven 
them  of  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits  ;  and  on  the 
contrary,  when  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  unbe- 
lievers, and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent,  that  they 
stand  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  eternal  condem- 
nation so  long  as  they  are  unconverted :  according  to 
which  testimony  of  the  gospel,  God  will  judge  them,  both 
in  this  and  the  life  to  come. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Promise,  the  declaration  or  assurance  which  God  has 
given  that  he  will  bestow  blessings  on  his  people. 

b.  All  their  sins,  every  violation  of  God's  law  of  which  they 
have  been  guilty. 

c.  Unbelievers,  those  who  refuse  to  trust  in  Christ  as  their 
Saviour. 

d.  Repent,  exercise  sorrow  for  and  turn  from  their  sins. 

e.  Unconverted,  not  renewed  or  changed  in  heart. 
158 


DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  To  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  is  to  declare  and  publicly  testify  to  believers  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits.  John  xx.  22.  23. 
■ — Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost :  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit, 
they  are  remitted  to  them.  Acts  xiii.  38,  39 — Be  it  known 
unto  you  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that  through  this 
man  is  preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  And  by 
him,  all  that  believe  are  justined  from  all  things,  from  which 
ye  could  not  be  justined  by  the  law  of  Moses. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  thus  opened  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  to  believers.  Mark  ii.  8  and  5 — And  they 
came  unto  him,  bringing  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  which  was 

borne  of  four.  When  Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  unto 

the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee.  John 
iii.  36 — He  that  beiieveth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life. 
Mark  xvi.  16. 

3.  The  sins  of  believers  shall  be  forgiven  them  whenever  they 
receive  the  promise  of  the  gospel  by  a  true  faith.  John  vi.  37 — 
Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out.  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11.  '12 — As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked ;  but  that  the  wicked 

turn  from  his  way  and  live.  As  for  the  wickedness  of 

the  wicked,  he  shall  not  fall  thereby  in  the  day  that  he 
turneth  from  his  wickedness.    Isaiah  lv.  7. 

4.  To  shut  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  preaching  of  the  gos- 
pel, is  to  declare  and  publicly  testify  to  unbelievers,  that  they 
stand  exposed  to  the  wrath,  of  God  and  eternal  condemnation. 
John  xx.  23 — Whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retained. 
Matt.  xvi.  19 — And  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth, 
shall  be  bound  in  heaven.    2  Thess.  i.  7-9. 

5.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  thus  shut  by  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  against  all  unbelievers  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely 
repent.  John  viii.  24 — For  if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he, 
ye  shall  die  in  your  sins.  Acts  viii.  21 — Thou  hast  neither 
part  nor  lot  in  this  matter :  for  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the 
sight  of  God. 

6.  Unbelievers  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent,  stand  ex- 
posed to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as 
they  are  unconverted.  Matt.  iii.  7,  8 — 0  generation  of  vipers, 
who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  ? 
Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  Matt, 
xviii.  3 — Verily  I  say  unto  you,  except  ye  be  converted,  and 
become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven. 

7.  This  opening  and  shutting  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  is  done  according  to  the  command  of 
Christ.  Mark  xvi.  15 — Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature.  Matt,  xxviii.  19 — Go  ye, 
therefore,  and  teach  all  nations. 

8.  According  to  the  testimony  thus  presented  in  preaching  the 
gospel,  God  will  judge  both  believers  and  unbelievers,  both  in 
this  and  the  life  to  come.  Rom.  ii.  16 — In  the  day  when  God 
shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men,  by  Jesus  Christ,  according 
to  my  gospel.  Matt,  xviii.  18 — Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven ; 
and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in 
heaven. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-fourth  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  When  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
opened  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  the  expression  all  their  sins?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  to  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  is  to  declare  and  publicly  testify  to  believers  the  for- 
giveness of  sins  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits?  (1.)  To 
whom  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  be  thus  opened  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  is  to  be  thus  opened,  by  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel,  to  believers  ?  (2.)  When  is  it  said  that  the  sins 
of  believers  shall  be  forgiven  them  of  God  for  the  sake  of 
Christ's  merits  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  promise?  (a.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  sins  of  believers  shall  be  forgiven 
them,  whenever  they  receive  the  promise  of  the  gospel  by 
a  true  faith  ?  (3.)  When  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  unbe- 
lievers ?  (c.)  What  by  repent  ?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
to  shut  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  preaching  of  the  gos- 
pel, is  to  declare  and  publicly  testify  to  unbelievers  that 
they  stand  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  eternal  con- 
demnation? (4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  to  be  thus  shut  by  the  preaching  of  ihe  gospel 
against  all  unbelievers  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent  ? 


160  (5.)  How  long  do  unbelievers  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely 
repent,  stand  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  eternal  con- 
demnation ?  What  do  you  mean  by  unconverted?  (e.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  unbelievers  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely 
repent  stand  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  eternal  con- 
demnation, so  long  as  they  are  unconverted?  (6.)  How  is 
this  opening  and  shutting  of  the  kingdom  of  God  done? 
How  do  you  prove  that  this  opening  and  shutting  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  done 
according  to  the  command  of  Christ  ?  (7.)  What  is  further 
affirmed  with  regard  to  this  preaching  of  the  gospel  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  according  to  the  testimony  thus  presented 
in  preaching  the  gospel,  God  will  judge  both  believers  and 
unbelievers,  both  in  this  and  the  life  to  come  ?  (8.) 


§.85.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and 
opened  by  CJiristian  discipliiie  ? 

A.  Thus :  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ, 
those  who,  under  the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  doc- 
trines or  practices  inconsistent  therewith,  will  not,  after 
having  been  often  brotherly  admonished,  renounce  their 
errors  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are  complained  of  to 
the  Church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  appointed  by 
the  Church  ;  and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are, 
by  them,  forbid  the  use  of  the  sacraments  ;  whereby  they 
are  excluded  from  the  Christian  Church,  and  by  God 
himself  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  when  they 
promise  and  show  real  amendment,  are  again  received 
as  members  of  Christ  and  his  Church. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Doctrines,  opinions ;  principles. 

b.  Practices,  particular  courses  of  conduct :  customs. 

c.  Brotherly  admonished,  reproved  in  an  affectionate  man- 
ner ;  kindly  counselled  against  wrong  practices. 

d.  Renounce,  forsake  ;  reject. 

e.  Wicked  course  of  life,  sinful  line  of  conduct  or  manner 
of  deporting  themselves. 


■ 


Q,  85.]  161 

/.  Churchy  a  body  of  persons  associated  together  for  pur- 
poses of  religious  worship. 

g.  Kingdom  of  Christ,  the  invisible  Church  of  Christ  on 
earth,  membership  in  which  is  essential  to  admission  into 
heaven. 

h.  Real  amendment,  genuine  reformation  of  life. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  To  shut  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  Christian  discipline,  is 
to  exclude  an  individual  from  the  Christian  Church.  1  Cor.  v. 
11  and  13 — But  now  I  have  written  unto  you  not  to  keep 
company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother,  be  a  fornica- 
tor, or  covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard, 

or  an  extortioner ;  with  such  an  one  no  not  to  eat.  

Therefore  put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  shut  against  those,  who, 
under  the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  doctrines  inconsistent 
therewith.  Titus  iii.  10. — A  man  that  is  an  heretic,  after  the 
first  and  second  admonition,  reject.  2  John  vs.  10  and  11 — 
If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and  bring  not  this  doctrine, 
receive  him  not  iuto  your  house,  neither  bid  him  God  speed : 
For  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed,  is  partaker  of  his  evil 
deeds. 

3.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  shut  against  those,  who, 
under  the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  practices  inconsistent 
therewith.  2  Thess.  iii.  14 — And  if  any  man  obey  not  our 
word  by  this  epistle,  note  that  man,  and  have  no  company 
with  him,  that  he  may  be  ashamed.    1  Cor.  v.  11  and  13. 

4.  Before  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  against  such  persons, 
they  must  be  often  brotherly  admonished.  Matt,  xviii.  15,  16 
—Moreover,  if  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against  thee,  go 
and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  alone ;  if  he 
shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he 
will  not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more, 
that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses,  every  word  may 
be  established. 

6.  Before  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  against  such  persons, 
they  are  to  be  further  complained  of  to  the  Church,  or  to  those 
who  are  thereunto  appointed  by  the  Church,  in  case  they  do  not 
renounce  their  errors  and  wicked  course  of  life,  after  having  been 
often  brotherly  admonished.  Matt,  xviii.  17 — And  if  he  shall 
neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church. 

h  14* 
6.  If  such  persons  despise  the  admonition  of  the  Church,  they 
are  by  them  to  be  forbid  the  use  of  the  sacraments  ;  by  which  act 
they  are  excluded  from  the  Christian  Church.  Matt,  xviii.  17 
— But  if  he  negiect  to  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  unto  thee 
as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican.    1  Cor.  v.  3—5. 

7.  Those,  who  are  excluded  from  the  Church  by  Christian 
discipline,  are  by  God  himself  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of 
Christ.  Matt,  xxviii.  18 — Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Whatso- 
ever ye  shall  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven. 
Matt.'xvi.  19. 

8.  To  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  tJhristian  discipline*  is 
to  receive  again  into  the  Church  an  individual  who  had  been 
excluded.  2  Cor.  ii.  6-8 — Sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this 
punishment.  Trhich  was  inflicted  of  many.  So  that  contra- 
riwise ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  him,  and  comfort  him,  lest 
perhaps  such  a  one  should  become  swallowed  up  with  over- 
much sorrow.  Wherefore  I  beseech  you  that  ye  would 
confirm  your  love  toward  him. 

9.  Persons  who  have  been  excluded  from  the  Church,  are  to 
be  received  into  it  again,  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amend- 
ment. Luke  xv.  21-24 — And  the  son  said  unto  him,  Father, 
I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  in  thy  sight,  and  am  no 
more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  But  the  father  said  to 
his  servants,  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him, 
and  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  feet :  And 
bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kill  it ;  and  let  us  eat,  and 
be  merry  ;  For  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  ajlve  again ; 
he  was  lost,  and  is  found.    2  Cor.  ii.  6-8. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-fifth  question  ?  Repeat  the  answer 
returned  to  this  question.  How  do  you  prove  that  to  shut 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  Christian  discipline,  is  to  ex- 
clude an  individual  from  the  Christian  Church  ?  (1.) 
Against  whom  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  be  shut?  "What 
do  you  mean  by  doctrines?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  shut  against  those  who,  under 
the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  doctrines  inconsistent 
therewith?  (2.)  What  do  you  mean  by  practices'?  (b.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  be  shut  against 
those,  who,  under  the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  practices 
inconsistent  therewith  ?  (3. )  When  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
to  be  shut  against  such  persons  ?   What  do  you  mean  by 


q:  86c]        catechetical  exercises.  163 


brotherly  admonished  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  before 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  against  such  persons, 
they  are  to  be  often  brotherly  admonished?  (4.)  What  do 
you  mean  by  renounce  ?  (d.)  What  by  wicked  coarse  of  life? 
(e.)  What  by  the  Church?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
before  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  against  such  persons 
they  are  to  be  further  complained  of  to  the  Church,  or  to 
those  thereunto  appointed  by  the  Church,  in  case  they  do 
not  renounce  their  errors  and  wicked  course  of  life,  after 
having  been  often  brotherly  admonished?  (5.)  What  further 
step  is  to  be  taken  with  such  persons  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  if  such  persons  despise  the  admonition  of  the  Church,  they 
are  by  them  to  be  forbid  the  use  of  the  sacraments,  by  which 
process  they  are  excluded  from  the  Christian  Church?  (6.) 
What  follows  from  such  an  exclusion  from  the  Christian 
Church,  on  the  part  of  God  himself?  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  kingdom  of  Christ?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that  those 
who  are  excluded  from  the  Christian  Church  by  Christian 
discipline,  are  excluded  by  God  himself  from  the  kingdom 
of  Christ?  (7.)  What  is  the  counter  part  of  the  process 
thus  far  considered  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  to  open  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  by  Christian  discipline,  is  to  receive  again 
into  the  Church  an  individual  who  had  been  excluded?  (8.) 
When  are  persons,  who  have  been  excluded  from  the  Church, 
to  be  received  into  it  again  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  real 
amendment  ?  (A.)  How  do  you  prove  that  persons  who  have 
been  excluded  from  the  Church,  are  to  be  received  into 
it  again,  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amendment 
(9.) 


XXXII.  Lord's  Day, 

THE  THIRD  PART.