Q.  86.  Since,  then,  we  are  delivered  from  our  misery, 
merely  of  grace  through  Christ,  without  any  merit  of 
ours,  why  must  we  still  do  good  works  f 

A,  Because  that  Christ,  having  redeemed  and  delivered 
us  by  his  blood,  also  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  after 
his  own  image  ;  that  so  we  may  testify,  by  the  whole  of 


164  -  , 


our  conduct,  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his  blessings,  and 
that  he  may  be  praised  by  us :  also,  that  every  one 
may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his  faith,  by  the  fruits 
thereof ;  and  that,  by  our  godly  conversation,  others  may 
be  gained  to  Christ* 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Good  works,  the  duties  required  by  the  law  of  God. 

b.  Testify,  declare  ;  make  known. 

c.  Conversation,  behavior  ;  deportment. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  hath  redeemed  and  delivered  us  by  his  blood.  Heb, 
ix.  12 — By  his  own  blood,  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy 
place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us.  Tit.  ii. 
14 — Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from 
all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people, 
zealous  of  good  works. 

2.  Our  redemption  and  deliverance  is  merely  of  grace  without 
any  merit  of  ours.  Acts  xv.  11 — But  we  believe  that  through 
the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  be  saved, 
Rom.  iii.  24 — Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through 
the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

3.  Christ  also  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit  after  his  own 
image.  Tit.  iii.  5 — Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we 
have  done,  but  according  to  his  mercy,  he  saved  us,  by  the 
washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
John  iii.  5 — Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  except  a  man 
be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

4.  Christ  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  testify  by 
the  whole  of  our  conduct,  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his  blessings, 
1  Cor.  vi.  20 — For  ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore 
glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's. 
Rom.  xii.  1 — I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mer- 
cies of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies,  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service. 
Rom.  vi.  13. 

5.  Christ  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  God  may  be 
praised  by  us.  1  Pet.  ii.  9 — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation, 
a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people  ;  that 
ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you 
cut  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light.    1  Pet.  ii.  5. 
6.  Christ  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  every  one  of  us 
may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his  faith,  by  the  fruits  thereof. 
James  ii.  18 — Show  me  thy  faith  without  thy  works,  and  I 
will  show  thee  my  faith  by  my  works.  1  John  ii.  3,  4 — And 
hereby  we  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  command- 
ments. He  that  saith  I  know  him,  and  keepeth  not  his 
commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him.  Matt, 
vii.  16-20  ;  2  Peter  i.  10. 

7.  Christ  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  by  our  godly  con- 
versation, others  may  be  gained  to  Christ.  Matt.  v.  16 — Let 
your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good 
works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  1  Pet. 
ii.  12 — Having  your  conversation  honest  among  the  Gentiles : 
that  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evil  doers,  they  may 
by  your  good  works,  which  they  shall  behold,  glorify  God 
in  the  day  of  visitation.    1  Pet.  iii.  1,  2 ;  Eom.  xiv.  19. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-sixth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  good  works?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  this 
question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  redeemed 
and  delivered  us  by  his  blood?  (1.)  What  does  the  ques- 
tion take  for  granted  with  respect  to  the  ground  of  this 
redemption  and  deliverance  through  Christ  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  our  redemption  and  deliverance  is  merely  of 
grace,  without  any  merit  of  ours  ?  (2.)  What  is  Christ  said 
in  the  answer  to  do  besides  having  redeemed  and  delivered 
us  by  his  blood  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  also  renews 
us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  after  his  own  image  ?  (3.)  For  how 
many  purposes  is  Christ  said  thus  to  renew  us  after  his  own 
image  by  his  Holy  Spirit  ?  [Four.']  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  testify  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  re- 
news us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  testify  by  the  whole  of 
our  conduct,  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his  blessings?  (4.)  What 
is  the  second  purpose  for  which  Christ  renews  us  by  his 
Holy  Spirit  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  renews  us  by  his 
Holy  Spirit,  that  God  may  be  praised  by  us  ?  (5.)  What  is 
the  third  purpose  for  which  Christ  renews  us  by  his  Holy 
Spirit  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  renews  us  by  his 
Holy  Spirit,  that  every  one  of  us  may  be  assured  in  him- 
self, of  his  faith  by  the  fruits  thereof?  (6.)  What  is  the 
fourth  purpose  for  which  Christ  renews  us  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  conversation  f  (c.)    How  do  you  prove  that  Christ 
renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  by  our  godly  conversa- 
tion, others  may  be  gained  to  Christ  ?  (7.)