Q.  87.  Cannot  they  he  saved,  wlio,  continuing  in  their 
wicked  and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted  to 

God  t 

A.  By  no  means  ;  for  the  Holy  Scripture  declares,  that 
no  unchaste  person,  idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous 
man,  drunkard,  slanderer,  robber,  or  any  such  like,  shall 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Unchaste  person,  one  who  is  lewd,  or  impure  in  thoughts 
and  desires. 

b.  Idolater,  one  who  worships  as  a  deity  that  which  is  not 
God. 

c.  Adulterer,  a  married  man  guilty  of  incontinency. 

d.  Thief,  one  who  takes  the  property  of  another  wrong- 
fully. 

e.  Covetous  man.  one  who  is  excessively  eager  to  obtain 
and  possess. 

f.  Drunkard,  one  given  to  the  excessive  use  of  strong 
drink. 

g.  Slanderer,  one  who  injures  another  by  maliciously  re- 
porting something  to  his  prejudice. 

h.  Robber,  one  who  forcibly  takes  away  from  another  his 
property. 

DOCTEINES  SEPARATED  AND  PEOVED. 

1.  Those,  who,  continuing  in  their  wicked  and  ungrateful 
lives,  are  not.  converted  to  God,  cannot  be  saved.  Matt,  xviii. 
3 — Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  be- 
come as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  Heb.  xii.  14 — Follow  peace  with  all  men.  and 
holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  1  Cor. 
vi.  9 — Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

2.  The  Holy  Scripture  declares  that  no  unchaste  person,  idol- 
ater, adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard,  slanderer,  robbery 
or  any  such  Uke,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.   Eph.  v.  5— 


CATECHETICAL  EXEKCISES,  167 

For  this  ye  know,  that  no  whoremonger,  nor  unclean  person, 
nor  covetous  man,  who  is  an  idolater,  hath  any  inheritance 
in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God.  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10 — 
Be  not  deceived  ;  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor 
adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  themselves  with 
mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor 
revilers,  nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Gal.  v.  19-21 ;  I  John  iii.  15. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-seventh  question  ?  What  answer  is 
returned  to  this  question  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  those, 
who,  continuing  in  their  wicked  and  ungrateful  lives,  are 
not  converted  to  God,  cannot  be  saved?  (1.)  What  reason 
is  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  an  unchaste  person?  (a.)  What  by  an  idolater?  (b.) 
What  by  an  adulterer  ?  (c.)  "What  by  a  thief  f  (d.)  What 
by  a  covetous  man?  (e.)  What  by  a  drunkard?  (/.)  What 
h  j  2b  slanderer?  (g.)  What  by  a  robber  ?  (A.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  Holy  Scripture  declares  that  no  unchaste 
person,  idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard, 
slanderer,  robber,  or  any  such  like,  shall  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God?  (2.) 


,  XXXHI.  Lord's  Bay.