Q.  89.  What  is  the  mortification  of  the  old  man  f 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  pro- 
voked God  by  our  sins  ;  and  more  and  more  to  hate  and 
flee  from  them. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  More  and  more  to  hate,  to  increase  daily  in  our  abhor- 
rence of. 

b.  More  and  more  to  flee  from,  to  increase  daily  in  our  ef- 
forts and  power  to  avoid. 
DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  A  sincere  sorroio  of  heart,  that  we  have  provoked  God  by 
our  sins,  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  mortification  of  the  old  man. 
Joel  ii.  12,  13 — Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord,  turn  ye 
even  to  me  with  all  your  heart  and  with  fasting,  and  with 
weeping,  and  with  mourning.  And  rend  your  heart  and  not 
your  garments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  your  God.  2  Cor. 
vii.  10 — For  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salvation 
not  to  be  repented  of ;  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh 
death.  Matt.  xxvi.  75 — And  he  [Peter]  went  out  and  wept 
bitterly.    Psalm  li.  4,  8,  17  ;  Luke  xv.  18. 

2.  To  hate  and  flee  from  sin  more  and  more,  is  a  constituent 
part  of  the  mortification  of  the  old  man.  Amos  v.  15 — Hate 
the  evil,  and  love  the  good.  Born.  xii.  9 — Abhor  that  which 
is  evil ;  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  2  Tim.  ii.  19 — Never- 
theless the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this 
seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his.  And  let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ,  depart  from  iniquity, 
Rom.  vii.  13. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  eighty-ninth  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  Of  how  many  things  is  the  morti- 
fication of  the  old  man  constituted?  [Two.']  What  is  the 
first  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that 
we  have  provoked  God  by  our  sins,  is  a  constituent  part  of 
the  mortification  of  the  old  man?  (1.)  What  is  the  second 
thing  of  which  the  mortification  of  the  old  man  is  consti- 
tuted ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  more  and  more 
to  hate?  (a.)  What  by  more  and  more  to  flee  from?  (6.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  to  hate  and  flee  from  sin  more  and 
more,  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  mortification  of  the  old 
man?  (2.)