Q.  90.  What  is  the  quichening  of  the  new  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God,  through  Christ, 
and  with  love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will 
of  God  in  all  good  works. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Joy,  gladness ;  rejoicing. 

b.  To  live>  to  govern  one's  conduct. 
170 


[Q.91. 


c.  Will  of  God,  the  divine  precepts  contained  in  the  Holy 
Scriptures. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED, 

1.  A  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ,  is  a  consti- 
tuent pari  of  the  quickening  of  the  new  man.  Psalm  li.  8  and 
12 — Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness  ;  that  the  hones 

which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.  Restore  unto  me 

the  joy  of  thy  salvation  ;  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free 
Spirit.  Rom.  v.  2 — By  whom  [Christ]  also  we  hare  access 
by  faith  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,  and  rejoice  in  the 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  Rom.  xiv.  17 — For  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink  ;  but  righteousness,  and  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

2.  With  love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
in  all  good  works,  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  quickening  of  the 
new  man.  Rom.  vii.  22 — For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God 
after  the  inward  man.  1  Pet.  iv.  2 — That  he  no  longer 
should  live  the  rest  of  his  time  in  the  flesh  to  the  lusts 
of  men,  but  to  the  will  of  God.  Gai.  ii.  20 — And  the  life 
which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son 
of  God.  who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me.  Rem. 
vi.  13. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  ninetieth  question.  What  answer  is  returned 
to  this  question  ?  Of  how  many  things  is  the  quickening 
of  the  new  man  said  to  consist  ?  [YVo.j  "What  is  the  first? 
"What  do  you  mean  by  joy  ?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  a 
sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ,  is  a  constituent- 
part  of  the  quickening  of  the  new  man?  (1.)  What  is  the 
second  thing  of  which  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  is 
said  to  consist  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  to 
live?  (b.)  What  by  the  vAll  of  God?  (c.j  How  do  you 
prove  that  to  live  with  love  and  delight  according  to  the 
will  of  God,  is  a  constituent  part  of  the  quickening  of  the 
new  man  ?  (2.) 


§.91.  But  what  are  good  works  ? 

A.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  are 
performed  according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to  his  glory  ; 
and  not  such  as  are  founded  on  our  Imaginations,  or  the 
institutions  of  men. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Law  of  God,  the  rule  given  to  us  in  the  Holy  Scriptures 
for  the  regulation  of  our  conduct. 

b.  Imaginations,  fanciful  opinions. 

c.  Institutions,  appointments ;  commandments. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Good  works  must  proceed  from  a  true  faith.  Heb.  xi.  6 
— But  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  him  :  for  he 
that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him.  Rom.  xiv.  23 — 
For  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin.    Heb.  xi.  4. 

2.  Good  uwrks  must  be  performed  according  to  the  law  of  God. 
Deut.  xii.  32 — What  thing  soever  I  command  you,  observe 
to  do  it:  thou  shalt  not  add  thereto,  nor  diminish  from  it. 
Ezek.  xx.  19 — I  am  the  Lord  your  God;  walk  in  my  statutes, 
and  keep  my  judgments,  and  do  them.  Lev.  xviii.  4 — Ye 
shall  do  my  judgments,  and  keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk 
therein  :  I  am  the  Lord  your  God.    Eph.  ii.  10. 

8.  Good  works  must  be  performed  to  the  glory  of  God.  1  Cor. 
x.  31 — Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye 
do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  1  Pet.  iv.  11 — That  God  in 
all  things  may  be  glorified  through  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom 
be  praise  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever. 

4.  Works  founded  on  our  imaginations  are  not  good  works. 
Deut.  xii.  8 — Ye  shall  not  do  after  ail  the  things  that  we  do 
here  this  day,  every  man  whatsoever  is  right  in  his  own 
eyes.    Deut.  xii.  32. 

5.  Works  founded  on  the  institutions  of  men  are  not  good 
works.  Matt.  xv.  9 — But  in  vain  they  do  worship  me,  teach- 
ing for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men.  Ezek.  xx.  18 
—-But  I  said  unto  their  children  in  the  wilderness,  Walk  ye 
not  in  the  statutes  of  your  fathers,  neither  observe  their 
judgments,  nor  defile  yourselves  with  their  idols. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-first  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  How  many  things  are  here  men- 
tioned as  being  essential  to  constitute  good  works  ?  [Three.] 
What  is  the  first  ?   How  do  you  prove  that  good  works  must 


172  proceed  from  a  true  faith?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  thing 
mentioned  as  essential  to  constitute  good  works  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  law  of  God  ?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
good  works  must  be  performed  according  to  the  law  of 
God?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  thing  mentioned  as  essential 
to  constitute  good  works  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  good 
works  must  be  performed  to  the  glory  of  God?  (3.)  WThat 
kind  of  works  does  the  answer  say  are  not  good  works  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  our  imaginations  ?  (b.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  works  founded  on  our  imaginations  are  not  good 
works  ?  (4.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  institutions  of  men  ? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  works  founded  on  the  institu- 
tions of  men  are  not  good  works  ?  (5.) 


XXXIV.  Lord's  Day. 

#f  tht  Km  Commmxbnutrts.