Q.  92.  What  is  the  law  of  God  t 

A.  God  spake  all  these  words,  Exod,  20  ;  Dent  5 — 
saying  :  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God.  which  hath  brought 
thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage. 

1.  Commandment. 

Thou  shalt  have  no  other  Gods  before  me. 

2.  Commandment. 

Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thyself  any  graven  image, 
nor  the  likeness  of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  above, 
or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  water  under  the  earth. 
Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  to  them,  nor  serve  them ;  for 
I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  unto  the  third 
and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me,  and  showing 
mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me  and  keep 
my  commandments. 

3.  Commandment. 

Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
vain ;  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain. 


Q,93.]  178 


4.  Commandment, 

Remember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy  ;  six  days 
shalt  thou  labor  and  do  all  thy  work,  but  the  seventh 
day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt 
do  no  manner  of  work,  thou  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daugh- 
ter, nor  thy  man  servant  nor  maid  servant,  nor  thy 
cattle,  nor  the  stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates.  For 
in  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea, 
and  all  that  in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day ; 
wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the  Sabbath  day,  and  hal- 
lowed it. 

5.  Commandment. 

Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that  thy  days  may 
be  long  in  the  land,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
thee. 

6.  Commandment, 
Thou  shalt  not  kill. 

7.  Commandment 
Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. 

8.  Commandment. 
Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

9.  Commandment. 

Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbor  0 

10.  Commandment. 

Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's  house,  thou  shalt 
not  covet  thy  neighbor's  wife,  nor  his  man  servant,  nor 
his  maid  servant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  thing 
that  is  thy  neighbor's.