Q.  94.  What  doth  God  enjoin  in  the  first  com- 
mand f 

A.  That  I,  as  sincerely  as  I  desire  the  salvation  of  my 
own  soul,  avoid  and  flee  from  all  idolatry,  sorcery,  sooth- 
saying, superstition,  invocation  of  saints,  or  any  other 
creatures,  and  learn  rightly  to  know  the  only  true  God'; 
trust  in  him  alone,  with  humility  and  patience  submit  to 
him,  expect  all  good  things  from  him  only  ;  love,  fear, 
and  glorify  him  with  my  whole  heart :  so  that  I  renounce 
and  forsake  all  creatures,  rather  than  commit  the  least 
thing  contrary  to  his  will. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Idolatry,  the  worship  of  any  thing  which  is  not  God. 

b.  Sorcery,  magic  ;  enchantment ;  divination  by  the  as- 
sistance of  evil  spirits. 

c.  Soothsaying,  the  foretelling  of  future  events  by  persons 
without  divine  aid  or  authority. 

d.  Superstition,  excess  or  extravagance  in  religion  ;  doing 
things  not  required  by  God,  and  abstaining  from  things  not 
forbidden. 

e.  Invocation  of  saints,  the  offering  of  adoration  and 
prayers  to  the  departed  spirits  of  holy  men. 

f.  Humility,  lowliness  of  mind  ;  a  deep  sense  of  one's  own 
unworthiness  in  the  sight  of  God. 

g.  Patience,  the  enduring  of  affliction  without  murmuring 
or  fretfulness. 

h.  All  good  things,  the  blessings  both  of  this  life  and  that 
which  is  to  come. 

%  Glorify,  to  be  sensible  of  his  power  and  perfections 
ourselves,  and  make  them  known  to  others. 

j.  Whole  heart,  undoubted  sincerity  and  undivided  affea- 
tion. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

%  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  idolatry. 
1  Cor.  x.  14 — Wherefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idol- 
atry. 1  Cor.  vi.  9  and  10 — Be  not  deceived,  neither  fornica- 
tors, nor  idolaters,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

1  John  v.  21 — Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols. 
Psalm  lxxxi.  9  and  10. 

2.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  sorcery. 
Deut.  xviii.  10-12 — There  shall  not  be  found  among  you  any 
one  that  maketh  his  son  or  his  daughter  to  pass  through  the 
fire,  or  that  useth  divination,  or  an  observer  of  times,  or 
an  enchanter,  or  a  witch,  or  a  charmer,  or  a  consulter  with 
familiar  spirits,  or  a  wizard,  or  a  necromancer.  For  all 
that  do  these  things  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  Lev.. 
- 


xix.  31 — Regard  not  them  that  have  familiar  spirits,  neither 
seek  after  wizards  to  be  defiled  by  them ;  I  am  the  Lord 
your  God.    Rev.  xxi.  8. 

2.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  soothsaying. 
Micah  v.  12 — And  I  will  cut  off  witchcrafts  out  of  thy  land ; 
and  thou  shait  have  no  more  soothsayers. 

4.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  superstition. 
Col.  ii.  18  and  23 — Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  reward 
in  a  voluntary  humility  and  worshipping  of  angels,  intruding 
into  those  things  which  he  hath  not  seen,  vainly  puffed  up 

by  his  fleshly  mind.  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show 

of  wisdom  in  will-worship,  and  humility,  and  neglecting 
of  the  body;  not  in  any  honor  to  the  satisfying  of  the 
flesh. 

5.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  invocation 
of  saints,  or  any  other  creatures.  Matt.  iv.  16 — Thou  shalt 
worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve. 
Rev.  xix.  10 — And  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  worship  him.  And  he 
said  unto  me,  See  thou  do  it  not :  I  am  thy  fellow-servant, 
and  of  thy  brethren,  that  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus :  wor- 
ship God.    Deut.  iv.  15  and  19 — Take  ye,  therefore,  good 

heed  unto  yourselves  ;  Lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto 

heaven,  and  when  thou  seest  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the 
stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest  be  driven  to 
worship  them,  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  divided  unto  all 
nations  under  the  whole  heaven. 

6.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  learn  rightly  to  know  him  the  only 
true  God.  John  xvii.  3 — And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they 
might  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ 
whom  thou  hast  sent.  J er.  ix.  24 — But  let  him  that  glorieth, 
glory  in  this,  that  he  understandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that 
I  am  the  Lord,  which  exercise  loving-kindness,  judgment, 
and  righteousness  in  the  earth :  for  in  these  things  I  delight, 
Baith  the  Lord. 

7.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  trust  in  him  alone.  Jer.  xvii.  5 
and  7 — Thus  saith  the  Lord:  Cursed  be  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart 

departeth  from  the  Lord.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth 

in  the  Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is.  Psalm  xxxvii. 
3  and  5. 

8.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  submit  to  him  with  humility.  1 
Pet.  v.  5  and  6 — Likewise  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves 
unto  the  elder.    Yea,  all  of  you  be  subject  one  to  another, 


Q.  94.}  177 


and  be  clothed  with  humility :  for  God  resisteth  the  proud, 
and  giv^eth  grace  to  the  humble.  Humble  yourselves  there- 
fore under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  he  may  exalt  you 
in  due  time.    James  iv.  10. 

9.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  submit  to  him  with  patience.  Heb. 
x.  36— For  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  after  ye  have 
done  the  will  of  God,  ye  might  receive  the  promise.  James 
i.  4 — But  let  patience  have  her  perfect  work,  that  ye  may 
be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing.  Luke  xxi.  19 — In 
patience  possess  ye  your  souls.  Col.  i.  11 ;  Rom.  v.  3  and 
4;  Phil.  ii.  14. 

10.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  expect  all  good  things  from  him 
only.  Psalm  xxxvii.  4— Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord ; 
and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thy  heart.  James 
i.  17 — Every  good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and 
cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 
variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning.  Psalm  civ.  27 
and  28. 

11.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  love  him  with  the  yjhole  heart. 
Deut.  vi.  5 — And  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might. 
Matt.  xxii.  37  ;  Deut.  x.  12. 

12.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  fear  him  with  the  ivhole  heart. 
Psalm  xxxiv.  9 — 0  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  saints  ;  for  there 
is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him.  Eccl.  xii.  13 — Let  us 
hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter :  Fear  God  and 
keep  his  commandments :  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man. 
Deut.  x.  12. 

13.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  glorify  him  with  the  whole  heart. 
1  Cor.  vi.  20 — For  ye  are  bought  with  a  price :  therefore, 
glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are 
God's.  1  Pet.  ii.  9 — But  ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a 
royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people ;  that 
ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called 
you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light. 

14.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures^ 
rather  than  renounce  and  forsake  him.  Matt.  x.  28  and  37— 
And  fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body,  but  are  not  able  to 
kill  the  soul :  but  rather  fear  him  which  is  able  to  destroy 

both  soul  and  body  in  hell.  -He  that  loveth  father  or 

mother  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me :  and  he  that 
loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me. 

M 
Acts  t.  29 — We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men.  Luke 
xiv.  26  :  Matt.  v.  29,  30. 

15.  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  manifest  our  adherence  to  him  to  such 
an  extent,  as  to  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures,  rather  than 
commit  even  the  least  thing  contrary  to  his  will.  Matt.  v.  19 — 
Whosoever  therefore  shall  break  one  of  these  least  com- 
mandments, and  shall  teach  men  so,  he  shall  be  called  the 
least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  James  ii.  10 — For  whoso- 
ever  shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  oifend  in  one  point, 
he  is  guilty  of  all. 

EXEECISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-fourth  question  ?  Repeat  the  first 
commandment.  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the  ques- 
tion ?  How  many  things  are  we  enjoined  to  avoid  and  flee  ? 
[Five."]  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  idolatry  ? 
(a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid 
and  fiee  from  all  idolatry  ?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  thing 
we  are  enjoined  to  avoid  and  flee?  What  do  you  mean  by 
sorcery?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  enjoined  to 
avoid  and  fiee  from  all  sorcery?  (2.)  What  is  the  third 
thing  we  are  enjoined  to  avoid  and  flee?  What  do  you 
mean  by  soothsaying  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
enjoined  to  avoid  and  fiee  from  all  soothsaying?  (3.)  What 
is  the  fourth  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  avoid  and  fiee  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  superstition  ?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  are  enjoined  to  avoid  and  fiee  all  superstition?  (4.)  What 
is  the  fifth  thing  we  are  required  to  avoid  and  flee  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  in  vocation  of  saints  ?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  avoid  and  flee  from  all  invoca- 
tion of  saints,  or  any  other  creatures?  (5.)  How  many 
things  is  it  said  in  the  answer  we  are  enjoined  to  do  ? 
[Eight. ~\  What  is  the  first  ?  How  do  you  prove  tha 
enjoins  upon  us  to  learn  rightly  to  know  him  the  only  true 
God  ?  (6.)  What  is  the  second  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  do  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  trust  in  him 
alone  ?  (7.)  What  is  the  third  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  do  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  humility?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  submit  to  him  with  humility  I 
(8.)  What  is  the  fourth  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  do  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  patience  ?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
enjoins  upon  us  to  submit  to  him  with  patience  ?  (9.)  What 
is  the  fifth  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  do  ?   What  do  you  mean 


Q.95.] 


, 
by  all  good  things  9  (A.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins 
upon  us  to  expect  all  good  things  from  him  only  ?  (10.) 
Y/hat  is  the  sixth  thing  we  are  enjoined  to  do?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  expression  whole  heart  ?  (j.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  love  him  with  the  whole 
heart?  (11.)  What  is  the  seventh  thing  we  are  enjoined  to 
do?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  fear 
him  with  the  whole  heart  ?  (12.)  What  is  the  eighth  thing 
we  are  enjoined  to  do  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  to  glorify  ?  (i.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  glorify  him 
with  the  whole  heart?  (13.)  What  duty  is  said  to  result 
from  thus  loving,  fearing,  and  glorifying  God  with  the  whole 
heart  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  enjoins  upon  us  to  re- 
nounce and  forsake  ail  creatures  rather  than  renounce  and 
forsake  him  ?  (14.)  To  what  extent  are  we  enjoined  thus 
to  manifest  our  adherence  to  God  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  enjoins  upon  us  to  manifest  our  adherence  to  him  to 
such  an  extent,  as  to  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures 
rather  than  to  commit  even  the  least  thing  contrary  to  his 
will?  (15.)