Q.  95.   Wliat  is  idolatry  ? 

A.  Idolatry  is  instead  of,  or  besides  that  one  true 
God,  who  has  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  to  con- 
trive, or  have  any  other  object  in  which  men  place  their 
trust. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Instead,  in  the  place  or  room  of. 

b.  Besides,  in  addition  to. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

E  To  contrive,  or  have  any  other  object  in  which  men  place 
their  trust  instead  of  that  one  true  God  who  has  manifested  him- 
self in  his  word,  is  idolatry.  Gal.  iv.  8 — Howbeit,  then  when 
ye  knew  not  God,  ye  did  service  unto  them  which  by  nature 
are  no  gods.  1  Thess.  i.  9— For  they  themselves  show  of 
us  what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how 
ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to  serve  the  true  and  living 
God.    Eph.  ii.  12. 

2.  To  contrive,  or  have  any  other  object  in  which  men  place 
their  trust  besides  that  one  true  God  ivho  has  manifested  himself 
in  his  word,  is  idolatry.  Mo.tt.  vi.  24 — No  man  can  serve  two 
masters  :  for  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other ; 
or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  despise  the  other.  Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon.  Phil.  iii.  19 — Whose  end 
is  destruction,  whose  god  is  their  belly,  and  whose  glory  is 
in  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  things.    Col.  iii.  5. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-fifth  question  ?  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  this  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  instead t 
(a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  to  contrive  or  have  any  other 
object  in  which  men  place  their  trust  instead  of  that  one 
true  God  who  has  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  is  idol- 
atry ?  (1.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  besides  f  (b.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  to  contrive  or  have  any  other  object 
in  which  men  place  their  trust  besides  that  one  true  God, 
who  has  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  is  idolatry  ?  (2.) 


XXXV.  Lord's  Day. 

§.96.  What  doth  God  require  in  the  second  com- 
mand ? 

A.  That  we  in  no  wise  represent  God  by  images,  nor 
worship  him  in  any  other  way  than  he  has  commanded 
in  his  word. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Represent,  make  a  resemblance. 

b.  Images,  similitudes  ;  likenesses. 

c.  Worship,  pay  divine  honors  to. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  requires  us  in  no  wise  to  represent  him  by  images, 
Deut.  iv.  23  and  24 — Take  heed  unto  yourselves,  lest  ye  for- 
get the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God,  which  he  made  with 
you,  and  make  you  a  graven  image,  or  the  likeness  of  any 
thing  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  forbidden  thee.  For 
the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous  God. 
Acts  xvii.  29 — Forasmuch  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  of 
God,  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto 
gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device* 
Rom.  i.  22  and  23 ;  Isaiah  xL  18. 


q.97.] 
2.  God  requires  us  not  to  worship  him  in  any  other  vjay  than 
he  has  commanded  in  his  word.  Bent.  xii.  32 — What  thing 
soever  T  command  you,  observe  to  do  it;  thou  shaltnot  add 
thereto,  nor  diminish  from  it.  Deut.  iv.  2 — Ye  shall  not  add 
unto  the  word  which  I  command  you,  neither  shall  ye  dimi- 
nish aught  from  it,  that  ye  may  keep  the  commandments 
of  the  Lord  your  God  which  I  command  you. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-sixth  question  ?  Repeat  the  second 
commandment.  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question? 
What  do  you  mean  by  represent?  (a.)  What  by  images?  (6.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us  in  no  wise  to  repre- 
sent him  by  images  ?  (1.)  What  do  you  mean  by  worship  f 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us  not  to  wor- 
ship him  in  any  other  way  than  he  has  commanded  in  his 
word?  (2.)