Q.  97.  Are  images,  then,  not  at  all  to  he  made  f 

A.  God  neither  can,  nor  may  be  represented  by  any 
means  ;  but  as  to  creatures,  though  they  may  be  repre- 
sented, yet  God  forbids  us  to  make  or  have  any  resem- 
blance of  them,  either  in  order  to  worship  them,  or  to 
serve  God  by  them. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Forbids,  prohibits  ;  commands  not  to  do. 

b.  Resemblance,  likeness  ;  similitude. 

c.  Serve,  render  homage  to. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  cannot  be  represented  by  any  means.  Isa.  xl.  18  and 
25 — To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  God,  or  what  likeness  will 

you  compare  unto  him  ?  To  whom  then  will  ye  liken  me, 

or  shall  T  be  equal,  saith  the  Holy  One  ?  Isa.  xlvi.  5 — To 
whom  will  ye  liken  me  and  make  me  equal,  and  compare  me 
that  we  may  be  alike  ?    Deut.  iv.  15. 

2.  God  may  not  be  represented  by  any  means.  Deut.  iv.  IS- 
IS—Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yourselves  ;  (for  ye 
saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on  the  day  that  the  Lord  spake 
unto  you  in  Horeb  out  of  the  mixlst  of  fire  ;)  lest  ye  corrupt 
p 


182'  [Q..97. 

yourselves,  and  make  you  a  graven  image,  the  similitude 
of  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female,  the  likeness 
of  any  beast  that  is  in  the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged 
fowl  that  hieth  in  the  air,  the  likeness  of  any  thing  that 
creepeth  on  the  ground,  the  likeness  of  any  fish  that  is  in 
the  waters  beneath  the  earth.    Rom.  i.  23. 

3.  Creatures  may  be  represented.  Exodus  xxxv.  30-33 — 
And  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  See,  the  Lord 
hath  called  by  name  Bezaleel,  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur, 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  :  and  he  hath  filled  him  with  the  spirit 
of  God,  in  wisdom,  in  understanding,  and  in  knowledge, 
and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship  ;  and  to  devise  curious 
works,  to  work  in  gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass,  and  in 
the  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  them,  and  in  carving  of  wood, 
to  make  any  manner  of  cunning  work. 

4.  God  forbids  us  to  worship  the  resemblance  of  creatures. 
Psalm  xcvii.  7 — Confounded  be  all  they  that  serve  graven 
images,  that  boast  themselves  of  idols  ;  worship  him,  all  ye 
gods. 

5.  God  forbids  us  to  serve  him  by  the  resemblance  of  creatures. 
Lev.  xxvi.  1 — Ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor  graven  image, 
neither  rear  you  up  a  standing  image,  neither  shall  ye  set 
up  any  image  of  stone  in  your  land,  to  bow  down  unto  it : 
For  I  am  the  Lord  your  God.    Deut.  xii.  3  and  4. 

6.  God  forbids  us  to  make  the  resemblance  of  creatures,  either 
in  order  to  worship  them,  or  serve  God  by  them.  Deut.  xxvii. 
15 — Cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  any  graven  or  molten 
image,  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord,  the  work  of.  the  hands 
of  the  craftsman,  and  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place.  And  all 
the  people  shall  answer  and  say,  Amen. 

7.  God  forbids  us  to  have  the  resemblance  of  creatures,  either 
in  order  to  worship  them,  or  serve  God  by  them.  Exod.  xxiii. 
24 — Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  to  their  gods  nor  serve  them, 
nor  do  after  their  works  :  but  thou  shalt  utterly  overthrow 
them,  and  quite  break  down  their  images.  Exod.  xxxiv. 
13  and  14 — But  ye  shall  destroy  their  altars,  break  their 
images,  and  cut  down  their  groves  :  for  thou  shalt  worship  no 
other  God :  for  the  Lord,  whose  name  is  Jealous,  is  a  jealous 
God.    Deut.  vii.  5. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety- seventh  question  ?  What  answer  is 
returned  to  the  question?    How  do  you  prove  that  God 


18S 


cannot  be  represented  by  any  means?  (1.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  may  not  be  represented  by  any  means  ?  (2.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  creatures  may  be  represented  ?  (3.) 
Though  creatures  may  be  represented,  what  does  God  still 
say  with  respect  to  them  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  forbids  f 
(a.)  What  by  resemblance  f  (b.)  What  by  serve  $  (c.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us  to  worship  the  resemblance 
of  creatures  ?  (4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us 
to  serve  him  by  them  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids 
us  to  make  the  resemblance  of  creatures,  either  in  order  to 
worship  them,  or  serve  God  by  them?  (6.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  forbids  us  to  have  the  resemblance  of  crea- 
tures, either  in  order  to  worship  them,  or  serve  God  by 
them?  (7.)