Q.  98.  But  may  not  images  be  tolerated  in  the 
churches,  as  books  to  the  laity  f 

A.  No  ;  for  we  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God, 
who  will  have  his  people  taught  not  by  dumb  images, 
but  by  the  lively  preaching  of  his  word. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Tolerated,  allowed;  permitted. 

b.  Churches,  houses  dedicated  to  the  worship  of  God. 

c.  Laity,  the  people  as  distinguished  from  the  clergy. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  will  not  have  his  people  taught  by  dumb  images.  Hab. 
ii.  18  and  19 — What  profiteth  the  graven  image,  that  the 
maker  thereof  hath  graven  it ;  the  molten  image,  and  a 
teacher  of  lies,  that  the  maker  of  his  work  trusteth  therein, 
to  make  dumb  idols  ?  Wo  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood, 
Awake ;  to  the  dumb  stone,  Arise,  it  shall  teach.  Behold, 
it  is  laid  over  with  gold  and  silver,  and  there  is  no  breath 
at  all  in  the  midst  of  it.  Zech.  x.  2 — For  the  idols  have 
spoken  vanity.    Jer.  x.  1,  etc. 

2.  Go.d  will  have  his  people  taught  by  the  lively  preaching  of 
his  word.  2  Tim.  iii.  16  and  17— All  scripture  is  given  by 
inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness :  that  the 
man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished1  unto  all 
good  works.  John  v.  39 — Search  the  scriptures  ;  for  in  them 
ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life ;  and  they  are  they  which 
testify  of  me.  Luke  xvi.  29 — They  have  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  let  them  hear  them.    2  Pet.  i.  19. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-eighth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  tolerated?  (a.)  What  by  churches?  (6.)  What  by  the 
laity?  (c.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ?  What 
reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  ?  What  is  said 
of  God  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  will  not  have  his 
people  taught  by  dumb  images?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  will  have  his  people  taught  bv  the  livelv  preaching 
of  his  word?  (2.) 


XXXVI.  Lord's  Day.