Q.  99.  What  is  required  in  the  third  command? 

A.  That  we,  not  only  by  cursing  or  perjury,  but  also 
by  rash  swearing,  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name 
of  God ;  nor  by  silence  or  connivance  be  partakers  of 
these  horrible  sins  in  others  ;  and  briefly,  that  we  use 
the  holy  name  of  God  no  otherwise  than  with  fear  and 
reverence  ;  so  that  he  may  be  rightly  confessed  and 
worshipped  by  us,  and  be  glorified  in  all  our  words  and 
works. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Cursing,  to  call  for  mischief  or  evil  to  fall  upon  one. 

b.  Perjury,  the  crime  of  wilfully  making  a  false  oath 
when  lawfully  administered. 

c.  Rash  swearing,  hastily  or  inconsiderately  affirming  unpn 
oath. 

d.  Profane,  use  with  irreverence. 

e.  Silence,  forbearing  to  express  disapprobation. 

/.  Connivance,  intentional  forbearing  to  see  a  fault  or 
other  act,  generally  implying  consent  to  it. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1 .  We  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God  by  cursing. 
Lev.  xxiv.  15 — And  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of 
Israel,  saying,  whosoever  curseth  his  God,  shall  bear  his 
sin.    Bom.  xii.  14— Bless,  and  curse  nor. 
2.  We  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God  by  perjury. 
Lev.  xix.  12 — And  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name  falsely, 
neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of  thy  God;  I  am  the 
Lord.  Zech.  viii.  17 — And  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in 
your  hearts  against  his  neighbor ;  and  love  no  false  oath  ; 
for  all  these  are  things  that  I  hate,  saith  the  Lord. 

3.  We  must  not  profane  or  abxise  the  name  of  God  by  rash 
swearing.  Matt.  v.  34-36 — But  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not 
at  all :  neither  by  heaven  ;  for  it  is  God's  throne :  nor  by 
the  earth,  for  it-is  his  footstool :  neither  by  Jerusalem;  for 
it  is  the  city  of  the  great  King.  Neither  shalt  thou  swear 
by  thy  head,  because  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or 
black.  James  v.  12 — But  above  ail  things,  my  brethren, 
swear  not,  neither  by  heaven,  neither  by  the  earth,  neither 
by  any  other  oath  :  but  let  your  yea  be  yea  ;  and  your  nay, 
nay  :  lest  ye  fall  into  condemnation. 

4.  We  must  not,  by  silence  or  connivance  at  the  curving,  per- 
jury or  rash  swearing  of  others,  be  partakers  of  these  horrible 
sins  in  them.  Lev.  v.  1 — And  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the 
voice  of  swearing,  and  is  a  witness,  whether  he  hath  seen 
or  known  of  it;  if  he  do  not  utter  it,  then  shall  he  bear 
his  iniquity.  Prov.  xxix.  24 — Whoso  is  partner  with  a 
thief  hateth  his  own  soul ;  he  heareth  curbing  and  betrayeth 
it  not. 

5.  We  must  use  the  holy  name  of  God  no  otherwise  than  with 
fear  and  reverence.  Mai.  iv.  2 — But  unto  you  that  fear  my 
name  shall  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arise  with  healing  in 
his  wings.  Rev.  xv.  3,  4 — Great  and  marvellous  are  thy 
works,  Lord  God  Almighty ;  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou 
King  of  saints.  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  glo- 
rify thy  name?    Isa.  xlv.  23,  24. 

6.  God  must  be  rightly  confessed  by  us.  Matt.  x.  32,  33 — 
Whosoever  therefore  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will 
I  confess  also  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But 
whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny 
before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.    1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

7.  God  must  be  rightly  icorshipped  by  us.  1  Chron.  xvi.  29 
— Worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  1  Tim.  ii. 
8 — I  will  therefore  that  men  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up 
holy  hands,  without  wrath  and  doubting. 

8.  God  must  be  glorified  by  us  in  all  our  words  and  works. 
1  Cor.  x.  31 — Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  what- 
soever ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.    1  Pet.  iv.  11 — If 

16* 
any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God ;  if  any 
man  minister,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability  which  God 
giveth :  that  God  in  all  things  may  be  glorified  through 
Jesus  Christ.    Col.  iii.  17. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  ninety-ninth  question  ?  Repeat  the  third 
commandment  ?  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ? 
How  many  things  does  the  answer  say  we  must  not  do  ? 
[Four.~\  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  cursing  ? 
(a.)  What  by  profane?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we 
must  not  profane  nor  abuse  the  name  of  God  by  cursing  ? 
(1.)  What  is  the  second  thing  the  answer  says  we  must 
not  do?  What  do  you  mean  by  perjury?  {b.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  must  not  profane  nor  abuse  the  name 
of  God  by  perjury?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  thing  the 
answer  says  we  must  not  do  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
rash  wearing?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  .must  not 
profane  nor  abuse  the  name  of  God  by  rash  swearing? 
(3.)  What  is  the  fourth  thing  the  answer  says  we  must 
not  do?  What  do  you  mean  by  silence?  (e.)  What  by 
connivance?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  must  not  by 
silence  or  connivance  at  the  cursing,  perjury,  or  rash 
swearing  of  others,  be  partakers  of  these  horrible  sins  in 
them  ?  (4.)  What  does  the  answer  say  we  must  do  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  must  use  the  holy  name  of  God  no 
otherwise  than  with  fear  and  reverence  ?  (5.)  What  other 
duties  are  said  to  follow  from  the  one  just  mentioned  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  must  be  rightly  confessed  by  us  ?  (6.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  must  be  rightly  worshipped  by 
us  ?  (7.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  must  be  glorified  by 
us  in  all  our  words  and  works  ?  (8.)