Q.  100.  Is,  then,  the  profaning  of  God's  name, 
by.  swearing  and  cursing,  so  heinous  a  sin,  that  his 
wrath  is  kindled  against  those  who  do  not  endeavor, 
as  much  as  in  them  lies,  to  pi^event  and  forbid  such 
cursing  and  sicearing  ? 

A.  It  undoubtedly  is ;  for  there  is  no  sin  greater,  or 
more  provoking  to  God.  than  the  profaning  of  his  name  : 


Q,  100.]  187 


and  therefore  he  has  commanded  this  sin  to  be  punished 
with  death. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Heinous,  wicked  ;  atrocious. 

b.  Provoking,  having  the  quality  of  exciting  resentment. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  There  is  no  sin  greater  or  more  provoking  to  God,  than  the 
profaning  of  his  name.  Lev.  xxiv.  15 — And  thou  sha.lt  speak 
unto  the  children  of  Israel,  saying,  Whosoever  curseth  his 
God  shall  bear  his  sin.  Lev.  v.  1 — And  if  a  soul  sin,  and 
hear  the  voice  of  swearing,  and  is  a  witness,  whether  he 
hath  seen  or  known  of  it ;  if  he  do  not  utter  it,  then  he 
shall  bear  his  iniquity.    Prov.  xxix.  24. 

2.  God  has  commanded  the  sin  of  profaning  his  name  to  be 
punished  with  death.  Lev.  xxiv.  10-14  and  16 — And  the  son 
of  an  Israeli tish  woman,  whose  father  was  an  Egyptian, 
went  out  among  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  this  son  of  the 
Israelitish  woman  and  a  man  of  Israel  strove  together  in 
the  camp.  And  the  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed  the 
name  of  the  LORD  and  cursed ;  and  they  brought  him  unto 
Moses ;  and  they  put  him  in  ward,  that  the  mind  of  the 
Lord  might  be  showed  them.  And  the  Lord  spake  unto 
Moses,  saying,  Bring  forth  him  that  hath  cursed  without 
the  camp ;  and  let  all  that  heard  him  lay  their  hands  upon 

his  head,  and  let  all  the  congregation  stone  him.  And 

he  that  blasphemeth  the  name  of  the  Lord,  he  shall  surely 
be  put  to  death,  and  all  the  congregation  shall  certainly 
stone  him ;  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  is  born  in  the 
land,  when  he  blasphemeth  the  name  of  the  LORD,  shall 
be  put  to  death. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundredth  question  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  heinous  ?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ? 
What  reason  is  assigned  for  the  answer  returned  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  provoking?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
there  is  no  sin  greater  or  more  provoking  to  God,  than  the 
profaning  of  his  name?  (1.)  What  has  God  done  in  view 
of  the  nature  of  this  sin  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  has 
commanded  the  sin  of  profaning  his  name  to  be  punished 
with  death  ?  (2.) 
XXXVII.  Lord's  Day.