Q.  101.  May  we,  then,  swear  religiously  by  the 
name  of  God  ? 

A.  Yes  ;  either  when  the  magistrates  demand  it  of  the 
subjects,  or  when  necessity  requires  us  thereby  to  confirm 
fidelity  and  truth,  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  safety  of 
our  neighbor ;  for  such  an  oath  is  founded  on  God's 
word,  and  therefore,  was  justly  used  by  the  saints,  both 
in  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Swear.,  utter  or  affirm  with  a  solemn  appeal  to  God  for 
the  truth  of  the  declaration. 

b.  Religiously j  reverently ;  in  a  manner  corresponding 
with  the  precepts  of  religion. 

c.  Magistrates,  officers  of  government,  invested  with  exe- 
cutive or  judicial  authority. 

d.  Subjects,  those  who  are  under  the  control  of  gOTernment 
and  owe  obedience  to  its  laws. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  may  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  when 
magistrates  demand  it  of  us  as  their  subjects.  Esod.  xxii.  10, 
11— If  a  man  deliver  unto  his  neighbor  an  ass,  or  an  ox,  or 
a  sheep,  or  any  beast,  to  keep  ;  and  it  die,  or  be  hurt,  or 
driven  away,  no  man  seeing  it ;  then  shall  an  oath  of  the 
Lord  be  between  them  both,  that  he  hath  not  put  his  hands 
unto  his  neighbor's  goods  ;  and  the  owner  of  it  shall  accept 
thereof,  and  he  shall  not  make  it  good.    Neh.  xiii.  25. 

2.  We  may  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  when  neces- 
sity requires  us  thereby  to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth.  Josh.  ix. 
15  and  19 — And  the  princes  of  the  congregation  sware  unto 

them.  [Gibeonites.]  But  all  the  princes  said  unto  all  the 

congregation,  we  have  sworn  unto  them  by  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel :  now  therefore  we  may  not  touch  them. 

3.  We  may  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  when  it  is 
done  to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth,  to  the  glory  of  God.  Deut. 
X.  20 — Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  him  shalt  thou 
serve,  and  to  him  shalt  thou  cleave  and  swear  by  his  name. 
Deut.  vi.  18. 
4.  We  may  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  GPod  when  it  is 
done  to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth,  to  the  safety  of  our  neighbor. 
Josh.  ii.  12 — Now  therefore,  I  pray  you,  swear  unto  me  by 
the  Lord,  since  I  have  showed  you  kindness,  that  ye  will 
also  show  kindness  unto  my  father's  house,  and  give  me  a 
true  token. 

5.  Swearing  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  in  the  manner 
described,  is  founded  upon  the  word  of  God.  Deut.  vi.  13 — 
Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  serve  him,  and  shalt 
swear  by  his  name.  Heb.  vi.  16 — For  men  verily  swear  by 
the  greater;  and  an  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them  an  end 
of  all  strife.    Isa.  xlv.  23  and  lxv.  16. 

6.  Swearing  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  in  the  manner 
described,  was  justly  used  by  the  saints  both  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament.  Gen.  xxi.  24  and  31 — And  Abraham  said,  I  will 
swear.  Wherefore  he  called  that  place  Beer-sheba  ;  be- 
cause there  they  sware  both  of  them.  Gen.  xxvi.  31 — And 
they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  morning,  and  sware  one  to 
another:  and  Isaac  sent  them  away,  and  they  departed  from 
him  in  peace.  Gen.  xxxi.  53 ;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  21  and  22.  Rom. 
i.  9 — For  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with  my  Spirit 
in  the  gospel  of  his  son,  that  without  ceasing,  I  make  men- 
tion of  you  always  in  my  prayers.  Rom.  ix.  1 — I  say  the 
truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  also  bearing  me 
witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost.    John  xvi.  23. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  first  question  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  swearing?  (a.)  What  by  religiously?  (b.) 
What  answer  is  returned  to  this  question  ?  What  are  the 
circumstances  mentioned,  in  which  we  may  swear  religiously 
by  the  name  of  God?  What  do  you  mean  by  magistrates? 
(c. )  What  by  subjects  f  (d. )  How  do  you  prove  that  we  may 
swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  when  magistrates 
demand  it  of  us  as  their  subjects?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  may  swear  religiously,  when  necessity  requires  us 
thereby  to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth  ?  (2.)  To  what  purpose 
must  swearing  religiously  be  done,  when  it  is  required  of  us 
to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we 
may  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  when  it  is  done 
to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth  to  the  glory  of  God  ?  (3.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  may  swear  religiously  by  the  name 
of  God,  when  it  is  done  to  confirm  fidelity  and  truth,  to  the 
safety  of  our  neighbor  ?  (4.)  What  reason  is  assigned  for 
the  answer  returned  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  swearing 
religiously  by  the  name  of  God  in  the  manner  described  is 
founded  on  God's  word?  (5.)  What  inference  is  drawn 
from  the  fact  just  proven  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  swearing 
religiously  by  the  name  of  God,  in  the  manner  described, 
was  justly  used  by  the  saints,  both  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament?  (6.)