Q.  103.  What  doth  God  require  in  the  fourth  com- 
mand f 

A.  First,  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  and  the  schools 
oe  maintained :  and  that  I,  especially  on  the  Sabbath, 
that  is,  on  the  day  of  rest,  diligently  frequent  the  church 
of  God,  to  hear  his  word,  to  use  the  sacraments,  publicly 
to  call  upon  the  Lord,  and  contribute  to  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  as  becomes  a  Christian.  Secondly,  that  all  the  days 
of  my  life  I  cease  from  my  evil  works,  and  yield  myself 
to  the  Lord,  to  work  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in  me,  and  thus 
begin  in  this  life  the  eternal  Sabbath. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Ministry  of  the  gospel,  the  clergymen  of  the  Christian 
Church,  whose  duty  it  is  to  preach  salvation  through  Jesus 
Christ. 

b.  Schools,  places  of  education ;  places  for  collecting  pupils 
for  purposes  of  instruction. 

c.  Sabbath,  the  day  set  apart  for  religious  worship. 

d.  Publicly,  in  company  with  the  congregated  assembly. 

e.  Contribute,  to  give  of  our  substance  in  common  with 
others. 

/.  All  the  days  of  my  life,  throughout  the  whole  of  my 
existence  in  this  world. 
g.  The  eternal  Sabbath,  the  cessation  from  sin  and  occupa- 
tion in  holy  employments,  which  shall  take  place  in  heaven 
and  continue  for  ever. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel  and  the  schools  must  be  main- 
tained. Deut.  xii.  19 — Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  forsake 
not  the  Levite  as  long  as  thou  livest  upon  the  earth.  1  Cor.  ix. 
II  and  14 — If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  things,  is  it  a 

great  thing  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal  things?  Even  so 

hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach  the  gospel 
should  live  of  the  gospel.  2  Tim.  ii.  2 — And  the  things  that 
thou  hast  heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses,  the  same 
commit  thou  to  faithful  men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach 
others  also.    Tit.  i.  5  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  14  and  15. 

2.  It  is  our  duty,  especially  on  the  Sabbath  day,  diligently  to 
frequent  the  church  of  God.  Heb.  x.  25 — Not  forsaking  the 
assembling  of  ourselves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is  ; 
but  exhorting  one  another,  and  so  much  the  more  as  ye 
see  the  day  approaching.  Isa.  lxvi.  23 — And  from  one 
Sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before 
me,  saith  the  Lord.  Acts  ii.  42  and  46  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  19, 
29,  31  :  Lev.  xxiii.  3. 

3.  We  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  to  hear  God's  word.  Acts  xiii.  42  and  44 — The 
Gentiles  besought  that  these  words  might  be  preached  to 

them  the  next  Sabbath.  -And  the  next  Sabbath  day  came 

almost  the  whole  city  together  to  hear  the  word  of  God. 
Acts  xvii.  2 — Paul,  as  his  manner  was,  went  in  unto 
them,  and  three  Sabbath  days  reasoned  with  them  out  of 
the  Scriptures. 

4.  We  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  to  use  the  sacraments.  Acts  xx.  7 — And  upon  the 
first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disciples  came  together  to 
break  bread,  Paul  preached  unto  them,  ready  to  depart  on 
the  morrow. 

5.  We  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  publicly  to  call  upon  the  Lord.  Acts  i.  14 — These 
all  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplication. 
1  Tim.  ii.  1 — I  exhort,  therefore,  that  first  of  all,  supplica- 
tions, prayers,  intercessions,  and  giving  of  thanks,  be  made 
for  all  men. 


q.  108.] 


CATECHETICAL  KXSRCISE^. 
6.  We  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  to  contribute  to  the  relief  of  the  poor,  as  becomes  a 
Christian.  1  Cor.  xvi.  2 — Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week 
let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath  pros- 
pered him,  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  come. 

7.  In  connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  we  must 
all  the  days  of  our  lives  cease  from  our  evil  ivorks.  Isa.  mil. 
13  and  14 — If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the  Sabbath, 
from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day ;  and  call  the 
Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  honorable  ;  and 
shalt  honor  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine 
own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words  ;  then  shalt 
thou  delight  thyself  in  the  Lord. 

8.  In  connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  we  must 
yield  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  to  work  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in  us. 
Excd.  xxxi.  13 — Verily  my  Sabbaths  ye  shall  keep;  for  it 
is  a  sign  between  me  and  you  throughout  your  generations  ; 
that  ye  may  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  that  doth  sanctify 
you.  Ezek.  xx.  12 — Moreover  also  I  gave  them  my  Sabbaths, 
to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they  might  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord  that  doth  sanctify  them. 

9.  We  are  thus  to  cease  from  evil  works  and  yield  ourselves  to 
the  Lord,  in  connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  in 
order  that  we  may  thus  begin  in  this  life  the  eternal  Sabbath, 
Heb.  iv.  9-11 — There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the 
people  of  God.  For  he  that  is  entered  into  his  rest,  he  also 
hath  ceased  from  his  own  works,  as  God  did  from  his.  Let 
us  labor  therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest,  lest  any  man  fall 
after  the  same  example  of  unbelief.    Isa.  lxvi.  23. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  third  question  ?  Repeat 
the  fourth  command?  What  answer  is  returned  to  this 
question?  Into  how  many  parts  is  the  answer  divided? 
How  many  particulars  are  included  in  the  first  part  ?  [&x.] 
What  is  the  first  particular  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
ministry  of  the  gospel?  (a.)  What  by  the  schools?  (b.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  and  the 
schools  must  be  maintained?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  par- 
ticular contained  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer?  What  do 
you  mean  by  the  Sabbath  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we, 
especially  on  the  Sabbath  day,  are  diligently  to  frequent 
the  church  of  God?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  particular  con« 
i  17 


194  tained  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of  God  on  the 
Sabbath,  to  hear  God's  word?  (3.)  What  is  the  fourth 
particular  contained  in  the  first  part  of  the  answer  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church 
of  God  on  the  Sabbath,  to  use  the  Sacraments?  (4.)  What 
is  the  fifth  particular  contained  in  the  first  part  of  the 
answer?  What  do  you  mean  by  publicly  7  (d.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church  of 
God  on  the  Sabbath,  publicly  to  call  upon  God?  (5.)  What 
is  the  sixth  particular  contained  in  the  first  part  of 
the  answer?  What  do  you  mean  by  contribute?  (e.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  are  diligently  to  frequent  the  church, 
of  God  on  the  Sabbath,  to  contribute  to  the  relief  of  the 
poor,  as  becomes  a  Christian  ?  (6.)  What  is  the  second 
part  of  the  answer  ?  How  many  particulars  are  contained 
in  it?  [Three. ]  What  is  the  first?  What  do  you  mean  by 
the  expression  all  the  days  of  my  life?  (/.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  in  connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath, 
we  must  all  the  days  of  our  lives  cease  from  our  evil 
works?  (7.)  What  is  the  second  particular  contained  in 
the  second  part  of  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that, 
in  connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  we  are 
to  yield  ourselves  to  the  Lord  to  work  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in 
us  ?  (8.)  What  is  the  third  particular  contained  in  the 
second  part  of  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
eternal  Sabbath?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  thus 
to  cease  from  evil  works  and  yield  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  in 
connection  with  our  observance  of  the  Sabbath,  in  order- 
that  we  may  thus  begin  in  this  life  the  eternal  Sabbath?  (9.) 


XXXIX.  Lord's  Day.