Q.  104.  What  doth  God  require  in  the  fifth  com- 
mand ? 

A.  That  I  show  all  honor,  love  and  fidelity  to  my  father 
and  mother,  and  all  in  authority  over  me,  and  submit 
myself  to  their  good  instruction  and  correction  with  due 
obedience :  and  also  patiently  bear  with  their  weaknesses 
and  infirmities,  since  it  pleases  God  to  govern  us  by  their 
hand. 
EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  All  in  authority  over  me,  our  superiors ;  such  as  teach- 
ers, elders,  magistrates,  guardians,  and  aged  persons. 

b.  Correction,  chastisement ;  that  which  is  intended  to 
rectify  faults. 

c.  Infirmities,  imperfections ;  defects. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  must  show  all  honor  to  our  father  and  mother  and  all 
in  authority  over  us.  Eph.  vi.  1-3 — Children,  obey  your  pa- 
rents in  the  Lord  ;  for  this  is  right.  Honor  thy  father  and 
mother ;  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise  :  that 
it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the 

earth.    1  Pet.  ii.  17  Fear  God,  honor  the  king.  Lev. 

xix.  82 — Thou  shait  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and 
honor  the  face  of  the  old  man,  and  fear  thy  God :  I  am  the 
Lord.    1  Tim.  v.  17 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1  ;  Mai.  i.  6. 

2.  We  must  show  all  love  to  our  father  and  mother  and  all  in 
authority  over  us.  Matt.  x.  87 — He  that  loveth  father  and 
mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me.  1  Thess.  v.  12 
and  13 — And  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  to  know  them  which 
labor  among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord,  and  ad- 
monish you,  and  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for  their 
work's  sake. 

3.  We  must  show  all  fidelity  to  our  father  and  mother  and  all 
in  authority  over  us.  Prov.  xxviii.  24 — Whoso  robbeth  his 
father  or  his  mother,  and  saith,  It  is  no  transgression  ;  the 
same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer.  Tit.  ii.  9, 10 — Exhort 
servants  to  be  obedient  to  their  own  masters,  and  to  please 
them  well  in  all  things ;  not  answering  again  ;  not  purloin* 
ing,  but  showing  all  good  fidelity. 

4.  We  must  submit  ourselves  with  due  obedience  to  the  good 
instruction  of  our  father  and  mother  and  those  in  authority  over 
us.  Prov.  i.  8 — My  son,  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father,, 
and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother.  Prov.  vi.  20-22— 
My  son,  keep  thy  father's  commandments,  and  forsake  not 
the  law  of  thy  mother  ;  bind  them  continually  upon  thy 
heart,  and  tie  them  about  thy  neck.  When  thou  goest,  it 
shall  lead  thee ;  when  thou  sleepest,  it  shall  keep  thee  ;  and 
when  thou  awakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee.  Col.  iii.  20 — » 
Children,  obey  your  parents  in  all  things  ;  for  this  is  well 
pleasing  unto  the  Lord.  Heb.  xiii.  17 — Obey  them  that 
have  the  rule  over  you,  and  submit  yourselves :  for  they 
watch,  for  your  souls,  as  they  that  must  give  an  account, 
that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and  not  with  grief.  Rom.  xiii. 
1 — Let  every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher  powers.  Prov. 
xv.  5  ;  Eph.  vi.  1  ;  Col.  iii.  22. 

5.  We  must  patiently  bear  with  the  weaknesses  and  infirmities 
of  our  father  and  mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us.  Prov. 
xxx.  17 — The  eye  that  mocketh  at  his  father,  and  despiseth 
to  obey  his  mother,  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it 
out,  and  the  young  eagles  shall  eat  it.  Prov.  xxiii.  22 — 
Hearken  unto  thy  father  that  begat  thee,  and  despise  not 
thy  mother  when  she  is  old.  1  Pet.  ii.  18 — Servants,  be 
subject  to  your  masters  with  ail  fear :  not  only  to  the  good 
and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  froward.    Gen.  ix.  24-26. 

6.  It  pleases  God  to  govern  us  by  the  hand  of  our  father  and 
mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us.  Eph.  vi.  4 — And  ye 
fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wrath ;  but  bring  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  1  Pet.  ii. 
13  and  14 — Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man 
for  the  Lord's  sake  :  whether  it  be  to  the  king  as  supreme ; 
or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that  are  sent  by  him  for 
the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  and  for  the  praise  of  them 
that  do  well.  Rom.  xiii.  1,  2 — Let  every  soul  be  subject 
unto  the  higher  powers.  For  there  is  no  power  but  of  God: 
the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God.  "Whosoever  there- 
fore resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God : 
and  they  that  resist,  shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation. 
Col.  iii.  19,  21. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  fourth  question?  Repeat 
the  fifth  commandment.  What  answer  is  returned  to  the 
question  ?  Whom  do  you  mean  by  all  in  authority  over  me  ?  (a. ) 
How  many  duties  which  we  owe  to  father  and  mother  and 
all  in  authority  over  us,  are  specified  in  this  answer?  [Five.] 
What  is  the  first?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  must  show 
all  honor  to  father  and  mother,  and  all  in  authority  over 
lis  ?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ? 
How  do  you  prove  that  we  must  show  all  love  to  father  and 
mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us?  (2.)  What  is  the 
third  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  must  show  all  fidelity  to  our  father  and  mother  and 
those  in  authority  over  us?  (3.)  What  is  the  fourth  duty 
specified  in  the  answer''    What  do  you  mean  by  correction  ? 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  must  submit  ourselves, 
with  due  obedience,  to  the  good  instruction  and  correction 
of  our  father  and  mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us  ? 
(4.)  What  is  the  fifth  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  infirmities?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  must  patiently  bear  with  the  weaknesses  and  infirmities 
of  our  father  and  mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us  ? 
(5.)  What  particular  ground  does  the  answer  assign  for 
observing  the  duties  specified  toward  our  father  and 
mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  it  pleases  God  to  govern  us  by  the  hand  of  our  father 
and  mother  and  those  in  authority  over  us?  (6.) 


XL.  Lord's  Bay.