Q.  105.  What  doth  God  require  in  the  sixth  com- 
mand f 

A.  That  neither  in  thoughts,  nor  words,  nor  gestures., 
much  less  in  deeds,  I  dishonor,  hate,  wound,  or  kill  my 
neighbor,  by  myself  or  by  another ;  but  that  I  lay  aside 
all  desire  of  revenge  :  also  that  I  hurt  not  myself,  or 
wilfully  expose  myself  to  any  danger.  Wherefore  also 
the  magistrate  is  armed  with  the  sword,  to  prevent 
murder. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Thoughts,  the  conceptions  of  the  mind. 

b.  Gestures,  motions  of  the  body  or  limbs  expressive  of 
sentiment  or  passion. 

c.  Revenge,  return  of  injury  for  injury  received. 

d.  Magistrate,  civil  ruler ;  officer  of  government. 

e.  Armed  with  a  siuord,  clothed  with  power  to  inflict  punish- 
ment for  crime. 

/.  Murder,  the  act  of  unlawfully  killing  a  human  being 
with  premeditated  malice. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  are  not  to  dishonor  our  neighbor.  Psalm  xv.  1  and  3 
— Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  ?  who  shall  dwell 

in  thy  holy  hill?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue, 

nor  doeth  evil  to  his  neighbor,  nor  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbor. 

17* 
2.  We  are  not  to  hate  our  neighbor.  Lev.  xix.  17 — Thou 
shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thy  heart. 

3.  We  are  not  to  wound  our  neighbor.  Lev.  xxiv.  19 — And 
if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbor  ;  as  he  hath  done, 
so  shall  it  be  done  to  him. 

4.  We  are  not  to  kill  our  neighbor.  Lev.  xxiv.  17 — And  he 
that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be  put  to  death. 

5.  We  are  i\Gt  to  kill  our  -neighbor  through  the  instrumentality 
of  another.  2  Sam.  xii.  9 — Wherefore  hast  thou  despised 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  to  do  evil  in  his  sight?  thou 
hast  killed  Uriah  the  Hittite  with  the  sword,  and  hast  taken 
his  wife  to  be  thy  wife,  and  hast  slain  him  with  the  sword 
of  the  children  of  Ammon. 

6.  The  several  prohibitions  thus  far  specified  extend  to  our 
thoughts.  Zech;  viii.  16  and  17 — Speak  ye  every  man  the 
truth  to  his  neighbor;  execute  the  judgment  of  truth  and 
peace  in  your  gates  :  and  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in 
your  hearts  against  his  neighbor. 

7.  The  same  prohibitions  extend  to  our  words.  Matt.  v.  22 
— And  whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall  be 
in  danger  of  the  council ;  but  whosoever  shall  say,  Thou 
fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire.  Eph.  iv.  31 — Let  all 
bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamor,  and  evil 
speaking  be  put  away  from  you  with  all  malice. 

8.  The  same  prohibitions  extend  to  our  gestures.  Gen.  iv.  6 
— And  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Why  art  thou  wroth?  and 
why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ? 

9.  The  same  prohibitions  extend  especially  to  our  deeds. 
Num.  xxxv.  16-18 — And  if  he  smite  him  with  an  instru- 
ment of  iron,  so  that  he  die.  he  is  a  murderer ;  the  murderer 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death.  And  if  he  smite  him  with 
throwing  a  stone,  wherewith  he  may  die,  and  he  die,  he  is 
a  murderer ;  the  murderer  shall  surely  be  put  to  death. 
Or  if  he  smite  him  with  a  hand-weapon  of  wood,  wherewith 
he  may  die,  and  he  die,  he  is  a  murderer ;  the  murderer 
shall  surely  be  put  to  death.    Gen.  ix.  6;  Matt.  v.  21,  22. 

10.  We  are  to  lay  aside  all  desire  of  revenge.  Lev.  xix.  18. 
—Thou  shalt  not  avenge,  nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the 
children  of  thy  people.    Rom.  xii.  17  and  19 — Recompense 

to  no  man  evil  for  evil.  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not 

yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath :  for  it  is  written, 
Vengeance  is  mine :  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.  Eph.  iv. 
26;  Matt.  v.  39,  40. 


CATECHETICAL  EXE&CISES. 
11.  We  are  not  to  hurt  ourselves.  Eph.  v.  39 — For  no  man 
ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh. 

12.  We  are  not  wilfully  to  expose  ourselves  to  any  danger. 
Matt.  iv.  5-7 — Then  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy 
city,  and  setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple ;  and  saith 
unto  him,  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down : 
for  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning 
thee ;  and  in  their  hands  shall  they  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any 
time  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a  stone.  Jesus  said  unto  him, 
It  is  written,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. 

13.  To  prevent  murder,  the  magistrates  are  armed  with  a 
sword.  Rom.  xiii.  4 — For  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee 
for  good.  But  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid; 
for  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain ;  for  he  is  the  minister 
of  God,  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth 
evil.  Exod.  xxi.  12 — He  that  smiteth  a  man,  so  that  h© 
die,  shall  be  surely  put  to  death.  Gen.  ix.  6 — Whoso  shed- 
deth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed.  Matt, 
xxvi.  62  ;  Num.  xxxv.  81-33. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  fifth  question  ?  Repeat  the 
sixth  commandment.  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the 
question  ?  How  many  things  are  prohibited  in  it  ?  [Five'] 
What  is  the  first  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  not  to 
dishonor  our  neighbor?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  thing 
prohibited  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
not  to  hate  our  neighbor?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  thing 
prohibited  in  the  answer?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
not  to  wound  our  neighbor  ?  (3.)  What  is  the  fourth  thing 
prohibited  in  the  answer?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
not  to  kill  our  neighbor?  (4.)  What  is  the  fifth  thing  pro- 
hibited in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  not 
to  kill  our  neighbor  through  the  instrumentality  of  another  ? 
(5.)  To  what  do  these  several  prohibitions  extend?  How 
many  things  are  here  enumerated?  [Four.~\  What  is  the 
first  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  thoughts  f  (a.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  prohibitions  in  the  answer  extend  to  the 
thoughts?  (6.)  What  is  the  second  thing  to  which  these 
prohibitions  extend  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  the  prohibi- 
tions in  the  answer  extend  to  our  words  ?  (7.)  What  is  the 
third  thing  to  which  the  several  prohibitions  of  the  answer 
extend  ?    What  do  you  mean  by  gestures  9  (6. )    How  do  you 
prove  that  the  prohibitions  contained  in  the  answer  extend 
to  our  gestures?  (8.)  What  is  the  fourth  thing  to  which 
the  prohibitions  contained  in  the  answer  extend  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  several  prohibitions  of  the  answer  extend 
to  our  deeds?  (9.)  What  particular  duty  with  respect  to 
our  neighbor  is  further  specified?  What  do  you  mean  by 
revenge?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  lay  aside 
all  desire  of  revenge  ?  (10.)  What  particular  prohibitions 
are  added  with  respect  to  ourselves  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  are  not  to  hurt  ourselves  ?  (11.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  are  not  wilfully  to  expose  ourselves  to  danger?  (12.) 
Wrhat  particular  inference  is  drawn  from  all  the  facts  thus 
far  presented  ?  Whom  do  you  mean  by  the  magistrate  f  (d.) 
What  by  the  expression  armed  with  a  sivord?  (e.)  What  by 
murder?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that  to  prevent  murder 
the  magistrates  are  armed  with  a  sword?  (13.)