Q.  106.  But  this  command  seems  only  to  speak  of 
murder  ? 

A.  In  forbidding  murder,  God  teaches  us  that  he 
abhors  the  causes  thereof ;  such  as  envy,  hatred,  anger, 
and  desire  of  revenge ;  and  that  he  accounts  all  these 
as  murder. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Abhors,  hates  extremely ;  detests. 

b.  Causes,  the  things  from  which  it  proceeds  and  without 
which  it  would  not  exist. 

c.  Envy,  discontent  excited  by  the  sight  of  another's  su- 
periority or  success,  accompanied  with  some  degree  of 
hatred  or  malignity. 

d.  Hatred,  great  dislike  or  aversion. 

e.  Anger,  violent  passion  of  the  mind,  excited  by  real  or 
supposed  injury. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  abhors  and  forbids  envy.  1  Pet.  ii.  1 — Wherefore, 
laying  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies,  and 
envies,  and  all  evil  speaking.  1  Cor.  iii.  8— For  whereas 
there  is  among  you  envying,  and  strife,  and  divisions,  are 
ye  not  carnal  and  walk  as  men.    Gal.  v.  19-21 ;  Horn.  i.  29. 
2.  God  abhors  and  forbids  all  hatred.  1  John  ii.  9  and  11 
—He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  light  and  hateth  his  brother, 

is  in  darkness  even  until  now.  He  that  hateth  hiss 

brother  is  in  darkness,  and  walketh  in  darkness.  1  John 
iv.  20 — If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother, 
he  is  a  liar. 

3.  God  abhors  and  forbids  anger.  Psalm  xxxii.  8 — Cease 
from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath.  Eph.  iv.  31 — Let  all  bitter- 
ness, and  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamor,  and  evil  speaking 
be  put  away  from  you  with  all  malice.  Col.  iii.  8 — But  now 
ye  also  put  off  all  these ;  anger,  wrath,  malice,  blasphemy, 
filthy  communication  out  of  your  mouth. 

4.  God  abhors  and  forbids  a  desire  of  revenge.  Prov.  xx. 
22 — Say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  evil.  Prov.  xxiv.  29 
—Say  not  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  me ;  I  will 
render  to  the  man  according  to  his  work.  Rom.  xii.  19; 
Matt.  v.  39. 

5.  Envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge  are  the  causes 
of  murder.  Gen.  xxxiv.  7  and  25 — And  the  sons  of  Jacob 
came  out  of  the  field  when  they  heard  it :  and  the  men  were 
grieved,  and  they  were  very  wroth,  because  he  had  wrought 

folly  in  Israel.  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day, 

when  they  were  sore,  that  two  of  the  sons  of  Jacob, 
Simeon  and  Levi,  Dinah's  brethren,  took  each  man  his 
sword,  and  came  upon  the  city  boldly,  and  slew  all  the 
males.  Gen.xxxvii.  4,  11  and  18 — And  when  his  brethren 
saw  that  their  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his  brethren, 
they  hated  him,  and  could  not  speak  peaceably  unto  him. 

 And  his  brethren  envied  him ;  but  his  father  observed 

the  saying.  And  when  they  saw  him  afar  off,  even  before 

he  came  near  unto  them,  they  conspired  against  him  to  slay 
him.    2  Sam.  xiii.  22,  28,  29. 

6.  God  accounts  envy,  haired,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge  as 
murder.  1  John  iii.  15 — Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a 
murderer ;  and  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life 
abiding  in  him.  Matt.  v.  22 — But  I  say  unto  you,  That 
whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother  without  a  cause,  shall 
be  in  danger  of  the  judgment. 

EXERCISES. 

Repeat  the  one  hundred  and  sixth  question  ?  What  an- 
swer is  returned  to  this  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
abhors?  («.)    What  by  causes  f  (b.)    How  many  causes  of 


202  murder  does  the  answer  specify  ?  [Four.]  What  is  the  first  * 
What  do  you  mean  by  envy?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  abhors  and  forbids  envy?  (1.)  What  is  the  second 
cause  of  murder  specified?  What  do  you  mean  by  hatred  f 
(d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  abhors  and  forbids  hatred? 
(2.)  What  is  the  third  cause  of  murder  specified  in  the 
answer?  What  do  you  mean  by  anger?  (e.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  abhors  and  forbids  anger  ?  (3.)  What 
is  the  fourth  cause  of  murder  mentioned  in  the  answer  | 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  abhors  and  forbids  a  desire  of 
revenge  ?  (4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  envy,  hatred,  anger, 
and  desire  of  revenge  are  the  causes  of  murder  ?  (6.)  Ia 
what  light  does  God  regard  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  desire 
of  revenge  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  accounts  envy, 
hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge  as  murder?  (6.)