Q.  108.  What  doth  the  seventh  command  teach  us  f 

A.  That  all  uncleanness  is  accursed  of  God.  and  that, 
therefore,  we  must  with  all  our  hearts  detest  the  same, 
and  live  chastely  and  temperately,  whether  in  holy  wed- 
lock or  in  a  single  life. 
EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Uncleanness,  incontinence  ;  personal  impurity. 
h.  With  all  our  hearts,  to  the  utmost  degree. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  All  uncleanness  is  accursed  of  God.    Deut.  xxvii.  20,  22, 

23 — Cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  his  father's  wife.  Cursed 

be  he  that  lieth  with  his  sister.  Cursed  be  he  that  lieth 

with  his  mother-in-law.  Lev.  xix.  29 — Do  not  prostitute 
thy  daughter,  to  cause  her  to  be  a  whore  :  lest  the  land 
fall  to  whoredom,  and  the  land  become  full  of  wickedness. 
Lev.  xx.  10 — And  the  man  that  committeth  adultery  with 
another  man's  wife,  even  he  that  committeth  adultery  with 
his  neighbor's  wife,  the  adulterer  and  the  adulteress  shall 
be  put  to  death. 

2.  We  must  detest  all  uncleanness  with  our  hearts.    Eph.  v. 

3 —  But  fornication,  and  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness, 
let  it  not  once  be  named  among  you,  as  becometh  saints. 
Jude  vs.  23 — And  others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out 
of  the  fire  ;  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh. 

3.  We  must  live  chastely  and  temperately.   1  Thess.  iv.  3  and 

4—  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification, 
that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication  :  that  every  one  of 
you  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sanctification 
and  honor. 

4.  We  must  live  thus  chastely  and  temperately,  whether  it  be 
in  holy  wedlock  or  in  a  single  life.  Heb.  xiii.  4 — Marriage  is 
honorable  in  all,  and  the  bed  undefiled  :  but  whoremongers 
and  adulterers  God  will  judge.  1  Cor.  vii.  9 — But  if  they 
cannot  contain,  let  them  marry :  for  it  is  better  to  marry 
than  to  burn.    1  Cor.  vii.  4. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  eighth  question  ?  Bepeat 
the  seventh  commandment.  What  answer  is  returned  to 
the  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  uncleanness?  (a,) 
How  do  you  prove  that  all  uncleanness  is  accursed  of  God? 
(1.)  What  inference  is  drawn  from  the  fact  that  all  un- 
cleanness is  accursed  of  God  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
expression  with  all  our  hearts  f  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  must  detest  all  uncleanness  with  all  our  hearts  ?  (2.)  What 
further  does  the  answer  say  we  must  do  ?  How  do  you 
is 
prove  that  we  must  live  chastely  and  temperately?  (3.)  In 
what  must  we  thus  live  chastely  and  temperately  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  must  live  chastely  and  temperately, 
whether  in  holy  wedlock  or  in  a  single  life  ?  (4.)