Q.  109.  Doth  God  forbid,  in  this  command,  only 
adidtery,  and  such  like  gross  sins? 

A.  Since  both  our  body  and  soul  are  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  he  commands  us  to  preserve  them  pure  and 
holy  ;  therefore  he  forbids  all  unchaste  actions,  gestures, 
words,  thoughts,  desires,  and  whatever  can  entice  them 
thereto. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Adultery,  violation  of  the  marriage  bed. 

b.  Temples,  dwelling  places. 

c.  Pure,  free  from  moral  defilement. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Our  bodies  and  our  souls  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1  Cor.  iii.  16 — Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God, 
and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  2  Cor.  vi.  16 
— And  what  agreement  hath  the  temple  of  God  with  idols  ? 
for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  God  hath  said, 
I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them ;  and  I  will  be  their 
God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people. 

2.  God  commands  us  to  preserve  our  bodies  and  souls,  as  the 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  pure  and  holy.  1  Cor.  iii.  17 — If 
any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy ; 
for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are.  1  Cor. 
vi.  18-20 — Flee  fornication.  Every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is 
without  the  body  ;  but  he  that  committeth  fornication  sin- 
neth  against  his  own  body.  What  ?  know  ye  not  that  your 
body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you,  which 
ye  have  of  God,  and  ye  are  not  your  own  ?  For  ye  are 
bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body 
and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's. 

3.  God  forbids  all  unchaste  actions.  Eph.  iv.  17,  19  and 
20 — This  I  say  therefore,  and  testify  in  the  Lord,  that  ye 
henceforth  walk  not  as  other  Gentiles  walk,  in  the  vanity 
of  their  mind.-  Who  being  past  feeling  have  given  them- 


a.  109.] 
selves  over  unto  lasoiviousness,  to  work  all  uncleanness  with 
greediness.    But  ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ. 

4.  God  forbids  all  unchaste  gestures.  Prov.  v.  20— And 
why  wilt  thou,  my  son,  be  ravished  with  a  strange  woman, 
and  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  stranger.  Prov.  vi.  25 — Lust 
not  after  her  beauty  in  thine  heart ;  neither  let  her  take 
thee  with  her  eyelids. 

5.  God  forbids  all  unchaste  words.  Eph.  iv.  29 — Let  no 
corrupt  communication  proceed  out  of  your  mouth,  but 
that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying,  that  it  may 
minister  grace  unto  the  hearers.  Eph.  v.  3  and  4 — But 
fornication,  and  all  uncleanness,  or  covetousness,  let  it  not 
be  once  named  among  you,  as  becometh  saints;  neither 
illthiness,  nor  foolish  talking,  nor  jesting,  which  are  not 
convenient ;  but  rather  giving  of  thanks. 

6.  God  forbids  all  unchaste  thoughts.  Matt.  v.  28— But  I 
say  unto  you,  That  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to 
lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in 
his  heart. 

7.  God  forbids  all  unchaste  desires.  2  Tim.  ii.  22 — Flee  also 
youthful  lusts.  1  Thess.  iv.  4,  5 — That  every  one  of  you 
should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sanctification  and 
honor ;  not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence,  even  as  the  Gen- 
tiles, which  know  not  God. 

8.  God  forbids  whatever  can  entice  men  to  unchaste  actions, 
gestures,  words,  thoughts,  and  desires.  1  Cor.  xv.  33 — Be  not 
deceived :  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners.  Eph. 
v.  18 — And  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess  ;  but 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  Prov.  xxiii.  31-33 — Look  not  thou 
upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red,  when  it  giveth  his  color  in 
the  cup,  when  it  moveth  itself  aright.  At  the  last  it  biteth 
like  a  serpent,  and  stingeth  like  an  adder.  Thine  eyes  shall 
behold  strange  women,  and  thy  heart  shall  utter  perverse 
things.    Deut.  xxii.  5. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  ninth  question  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  adultery?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to 
the  question  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  temples  ?  (6.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  our  bodies  and  souls  are  the  temples  of 
the  Holy  Ghost?  (1.)  What  does  God  do  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  our  bodies  and  souls  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost?    What  do  you  mean  by  pure?  (c.)    How  do  you 
prove  that  God  commands  us  to  preserve  our  bodies  and 
souls,  as  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  pure  and  holy  ?  (2.) 
What  inference  is  drawn  from  the  fact  that  God  commands 
us  to  preserve  our  bodies  and  souls  pure  and  holy  ?  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  all  unchaste  actions?  (S.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  all  unchaste  gestures  ! 
(4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  all  unchaste 
words?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  all  un- 
chaste thoughts  ?  (6.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids 
all  unchaste  desires  ?  (7.)  What  is  the  last  thing  which 
God  forbids  specified  in  the  answer?  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  forbids  whatever  can  entice  men  to  unchaste  ac- 
tions, gestures,  words,  thoughts,  and  desires  ?  (8.) 


XIII.  Lord's  Day.