Q.  110.  What  doth  God  forbid  in  the  eighth  com- 
mand f 

A.  God  forbids  not  only  those  thefts  and  robberies 
which  are  punishable  by  the  magistrate  ;  but  he  com- 
prehends under  the  name  of  theft,  all  wicked  tricks  and 
devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropriate  to  ourselves 
the  goods  which  belong  to  our  neighbor  ;  whether  it  be 
"by  force,  or  under  the  appearance  of  right  ;  as  by 
unjust  weights,  ells,  measures,  fraudulent  merchandise, 
false  coins,  usury,  or  by  any  other  way  forbidden  of 
God ;  as  also  all  covetousness,  all  waste  and  abuse  of  his 
gifts. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Thefts,  private  unlawful  taking  away  of  the  property 
of  another,  with  a  view  to  appropriate  it  to  our  own  use. 

b.  Robberies,  taking  away  from  another  his  property  by 
violence  or  force. 

c.  Tricks,  artifices  for  the  purpose  of  deception. 

d.  Devices,  stratagems ;  schemes. 

e.  Weights,  masses  of  iron,  lead,  brass  or  other  metal, 
used  for  ascertaining  the  weight  of  other  bodies. 

f.  Mis,  measures  used  chiefly  for  measuring  cloth. 

<?,  Measures,  those  things  by  which  extent  or  dimension 
is  ascertained,  either  length,  breadth,  thickness,  capacity 
or  amount. 


4  HO.]  h.  Merchandise,  the  objects  of  commerce. 

i.  False  coins,  fraudulent  pieces  of  money. 
j\  Usury,  unlawful  interest. 

k.  Covetousness,  excessive  eagerness  to  obtain  and  possess. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  forbids  those  thefts  and  robberies  ivhich  are  punishable 
by  the  magistrate.    Lev.  xix.  11  and  13 — Ye  shall  not  steal, 

neither  deal  falsely,  neither  lie  one  to  another.  Thou 

shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbor,  neither  rob  him.  1  Cor.  vL 
10— Nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers„ 
nor  extortioners  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

2.  God  forbids?  as  comprehended  under  the  name  of  theft,  all 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropriate  to 
ourselves  by  force,  the  goods  vAich  belong  to  our  neighbor.  Luke 
iii.  14 — Do  violence  to  no  man,  neither  accuse  any  falsely ; 
and  be  content  with  your  wages.    Lev.  xxv.  14. 

8.  God  forbids,  as  comprehended  under  the  name  of  theft,  all 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropriate  to 
ourselves  under  the  appearance  of  right,  the  goods  which  belong 
to  our  neighbor.  1  Thess.  iv.  6 — That  no  man  go  beyond  and 
defraud  his  brother  in  any  matter :  because  that  the  Lord 
m  the  avenger  of  all  such. 

4.  God  forbids  us  to  defraud  our  neighbor  by  means  of  unjust 
weights.  Prov.  xL  1 — A  false  balance  is  abomination  to  the 
Lord  ;  but  a  just  weight  is  his  delight  Deut.  xxv.  13 — 
Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  divers  weights,  a  great  and 
a  small.  Lev.  xix.  86 — Just  balances,  just  weights,  a  just 
ephah,  and  a  just  hin  shall  ye  have.    Ezek.  xlv.  10. 

5.  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  the  property  of 
our  neighbor  by  means  of  unjust  ells  and  measures.  Deut. 
xxv.  14 — Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thine  house  divers  mea- 
sures, a  great  and  a  small.  Lev.  xix.  35 — Ye  shall  do  no 
unrighteousness  in  judgment,  in  mete-yard,  in  weight,  or 
in  measure. 

6.  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  the  property  of 
our  neighbor  by  means  of  fraudulent  merchandise  and  false  coins, 
Amos  viii.  4-7 — Hear  this,  0  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy, 
even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail,  saying,  When  will 
the  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  ?  and  the 
Sabbath,  that  we  may  set  forth  wheat,  making  the  ephah 
small,  and  the  shekel  great,  and  falsifying  the  balances  by- 
deceit?  That  we  may  buy  the  poor  for  silver,  and  the  needy 
[Q.110. 


for  a  pair  of  shoes  ;  yea,  and  sell  the  refuse  of  the  wheat? 
The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  Surely,  I 
mil  never  forget  any  of  their  works. 

7.  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  our  neighbor's 
property  by  means  of  usury.  Exod.  xxii.  25 — If  thou  lend 
money  to  any  of  my  people  that  is  poor  by  thee,  thou  shalt 
not  be  to  him  as  an  usurer,  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon 
him  usury.  Psalm  xv.  5 — He  that  putteth  not  out  his  money 
to  usury,  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  innocent.  He  that 
doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  moved.  Ezek.  xviii.  18 ; 
Luke  vi.  35. 

8.  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  our  neighbor's 
property  by  any  other  way  forbidden  by  him.  Jer.  xxii,  13 — 
Wo  unto  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  unrighteousness, 
and  his  chambers  by  wrong ;  that  useth  his  neighbor's 
service  without  wages,  and  giveth  him  not  for  his  work. 

9.  God  forbids  all  covetousness.  Luke  xii.  15 — Take  heed 
and  beware  of  covetousness ;  for  a  man's  life  consisteth 
not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth. 
1  Tim.  vi.  9, 10. — But  they  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into  tempt- 
ation, and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  luste, 
which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition.  For  the 
love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil. 

10.  God  forbids  all  abuse  and  waste  of  our  gifts.  John  vi. 
12 — When  they  were  nlled,  he  said  unto  his  disciples. 
Gather  up  the  fragments  that  remain,  that  nothing  be  lost. 
Prov.  xxiii.  20,  21 — Be  not  amongst  wine-bibbers ;  amongst 
riotous  eaters  of  flesh :  for  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton 
shall  come  to  poverty ;  and  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man 
with.  rags.    Deut.  xxi.  18-21, 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  tenth  question  ?  Repeat 
the  eighth  commandment.  What  is  the  answer  to  the 
question?  "What  do  you  mean  by  thefts?  (a.)  What  by 
■robberies  ?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  those 
thefts  and  robberies  which  are  punishable  by  the  magis- 
trate? (1.)  Wrhat  else  is  God  said  to  do,  besides  forbidding 
the  thefts  and  robberies  referred  to  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  tricks?  (c.)  What  by  devices?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  forbids,  as  comprehended  under  the  name  of  theft, 
all  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appro- 
priate to  ourselves  by  force,  the  goods  which  belong  to  our 


Q.11L] 
neighbor?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids,  as 
comprehended  under  the  name  of  theft,  all  wicked  tricks 
and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropriate  to  ourselves 
under  the  appearance  of  right,  the  goods  which  belong  unto 
our  neighbor  ?  (3.)  What  are  some  of  these  wicked  tricks 
and  devices  referred  to  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  weights  f 
(e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate 
to  ourselves  the  property  of  another,  by  means  of  unjust 
weights  ?  (4.)  What  do  you  mean  by  ells  9  (f.)  What  by 
measures?  (g.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us  to 
appropriate  to  ourselves  the  property  of  our  neighbor,  by 
means  of  unjust  ells  and  measures  ?  (5.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  merchandise  ?  (h.)  What  by  false  coins  ?  (?'.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves 
the  property  of  our  neighbor,  by  means  of  fraudulent  mer- 
chandise and  false  coins?  (6.)  What  do  you  mean  by 
usury?  (j.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  forbids  us  to 
appropriate  to  ourselves  the  property  of  our  neighbor,  by 
means  of  usury?  (7.)  What  general  remark  is  added  to 
this  specification  of  some  of  the  wicked  tricks  and  devices 
by  means  of  which  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  our- 
selves the  property  of  our  neighbor  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  forbids  us  to  appropriate  to  ourselves  the  property 
of  our  neighbor,  by  any  other  way  forbidden  by  him?  (8.) 
What  is  still  further  added  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you 
mean  by  covetousness?  (Jc.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
forbids  all  covetousness  ?  (9.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
forbids  all  abuse  and  waste  of  our  gifts  ?  (10.)