Q.  111.  What  is  required  in  the  eighth  command? 

A.  That  I  promote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbor  in 
every  instance  I  can  or  may  ;  and  deal  with  him  as  I 
desire  to  be  dealt  with  by  others  ;  further  also,  that  I 
faithfully  labor,  so  that  I  may  be  able  to  relieve  the 
needy. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Advantage,  profit ;  interest. 

b.  Labor,  work  ;  engage  in  some  useful  employment. 

c.  Relieve,  free  wholly  or  partially  from  want, 
DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  requires  us  to  promote  the  advantage  of  our  neighbor 
in  every  instance  we  can  or  may.  Phil.  ii.  4 — Look  not  every 
man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things 
of  others.  Deut.  xxii.  1-3 — Thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother's 
ox  or  his  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself  from  them : 
thou  shalt  in  any  case  bring  them  again  unto  thy  brother. 
And  if  thy  brother  be  not  nigh  unto  thee,  or  if  thou  know  him 
not,  then  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  own  house,  and  it 
shall  be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seek  after  it,  and  thou 
shalt  restore  it  to  him  again.  In  like  manner  shalt  thou 
do  with  his  ass  ;  and  so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment : 
and  with  all  lost  things  of  thy  brother's,  which  he  hath  lost, 
and  thou  hast  found,  shalt  thou  do  likewise ;  thou  mayest 
not  hide  thyself. 

2.  God  requires  us  to  deal  ivith  our  neighbor  as  we  desire  to  be 
dealt  icith  by  others.  Matt.  vii.  12 — Therefore  all  things 
whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
so  to  them  :  for  this  i3  the  law  and  the  prophets. 

3.  God  requires  us  faithfully  to  labor,  so  that  we  may  be  able 
to  relieve  the  'needy.  Eph.  iv.  28 — Let  him  that  stole  steal  no 
more :  but  rather  let  him  labor,  working  with  his  hand?  the 
thing  which  is  good,  that  he  may  give  to  him  that  needeth, 
Keb.  xiii.  16 — But  to  do  good,  and  to  communicate,  forget 
not ;  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  eleventh  question  ?  "What 
answer  is  returned  to  this  question?  How  many  duties 
are  specified  in  this  answer  ?  [Three.]  What  is  the  first? 
What  do  you  mean  by  advantage?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  requires  us  to  promote  the  advantage  of  our 
neighbor  in  every  instance  we  can  or  may?  (1.)  What  is 
the  second  duty  specified  in  the  answer.  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  requires  us  to  deal  with  our  neighbor  as 
we  desire  to  be  dealt  with  by  others?  (2.)  What  is  the 
third  duty  specified  in  the  answer?  What  do  you  mean  by 
labor?  (b.)  What  by  to  relieve?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  requires  us'faithfully  to  labor,  so  that  we  may  be 
able  to  relieve  the  needy?  (3.) 
XLIII.  Lord's  Bay.