Q.  112.  What  is  required  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man,  nor 
falsify  any  man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slan- 
derer; that  I  do  not  judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any 
man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that  I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies 
and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  unless  I 
would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God ; 
likewise,  that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love 
the  truth,  speak  it  uprightly,  and  confess  it ;  also,  that 

1  defend  and  promote,  as  much  as  I  am  able,  the  honor 
and  good  character  of  my  neighbor. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a,  Bear  false  vjitness,  give  testimony  that  is  not  in  accord- 
ance with  truth. 

h.  Falsify,  pervert;  construe  into  a  meaning  different 
from  what  was  intended. 

c.  Backbiter,  one  who  speaks  ill  of  the  absent. 

d.  Slanderer,  one  who  injures  another  by  maliciously 
reporting  something  to  his  prejudice. 

e.  Honor,  reputation  ;  good  name. 

/.  Good  character,  honesty  and  uprightness  in  the  opinion 
of  others. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  requires  us  not  to  bear  false  witness  against  any  man. 
Prov.  xix.  5  and  9 — A  false  witness  shall  not  be  unpunished; 
and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape.  A  false  wit- 
ness shall  not  be  unpunished,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall 
perish.    Prov.  xxi.  28 — A  false  witness  shall  perish. 

2.  God  requires  us  not  to  falsify  any  man's  words.  Prov. 
iv.  24 — Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth,  and  perverse 
lips  put  far  from  thee.  Prov.  xvii,  20 — He  that  hath  a 
froward  heart  findeth  no  good ;  and  he  that  hath  a  perverse 
tongue  falleth  into  mischief. 

3.  God  requires  us  to  be  no  backbiters.  Psalm  xv.  1  and  3 
— Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  ?  who  shall  dwell 
in  thy  holy  hill?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his  tongue. 

2  Cor.  xii.  20 — For  I  fear,  lest,  when  I  come,  I  shall  not 
find  you  such  as  I  would,  and  that  I  shall  be  found  unto 
you  such  as  ye  would  not ;  lest  there  be  debates,  envyings, 
wraths,  strifes,  backbitings,  whisperings,  swellings,  tumults. 
Rom.  i.  30. 

4.  God  requires  us  to  be  no  slanderers.  Psalm  ci.  5 — - 
Whoso  privily  slandereth  his  neighbor,  him  will  I  cut  off. 
Prov.  x.  18 — He  that  utter eth  a  slander,  is  a  fool. 

5.  God  requires  us  not  to  judge  or  join  in  condemning  any 
man  rashly  or  unheard.  John  vii.  50,  51 — Xicodemus  saith 
unto  them,  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man,  before  it  hear 
him,  and  know  what  he  doeth  ?  Luke  vi.  37 — Judge  not, 
and  ye  shall  not  be  judged ;  condemn  not,  and  ye  shall  not 
be  condemned;  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven.  Matt. 

vii.  1. 

6.  God  requires  us  to  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies.  Lev.  xix.  11 — 
Ye  shall  not  steal,  neither  deal  falsely,  neither  lie  one  to 
another.  Col.  iii.  9 — Lie  not  one  to  another,  seeing  ye  have 
put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds.    Eph.  iv.  25. 

7.  God  requires  us  to  avoid  all  sorts  of  deceit.  Rom.  iii. 
13 — Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre  ;  with  their  tongues 
they  have  used  deceit ;  the  poison  of  asps  is  under  their 
lips.  Psalm  v.  b' — The  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and 
deceitful  man. 

8.  Lying  and  deceit  are  the  proper  works  of  the  devil.  John 

viii.  44 — Ye  are  of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of 
your  father  ye  will  do.  He  was  a  murderer  from  the 
beginning,  and  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no 
truth  in  him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his 
own  :  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it.  Acts  v.  3 — But 
Peter  said,  Ananias,  why  hath  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  lie 
to  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 

9.  Lying  and  deceit  bring  down  upon  us  the  heavy  wrath  of 
God,  Psalm  v.  6 — Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak 
leasing.  Prov.  xii.  22 — Lying  lips  are  abomination  to  the 
Lord.  Rev.  xxi.  8 — All  liars  shall  have  their  part  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone. 

10.  God  requires  us  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings  to  love 
the  truth.  Zech.  viii.  19 — Therefore  love  the  truth  and  peace. 
Eph.  iv.  15 — But  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  may  grow  up 
into  him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  head,  even  Christ. 
Prov.  xii.  17,  19;  1  Cor.  xiii.  6. 

11.  God  requires  us  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings  to 
speak  the  truth  uprightly.  Eph.  iv.  25 — Wherefore,  putting 
away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbor 
Psalm  xv.  1,  2 — Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill?  He  that  walketh  up- 
rightly,  and  worketh  righteousness,  and  speaketh  the  truth 
in  his  heart. 

12.  God  requires  us  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings  to 
confess  the  truth.  Rom.  ix.  I — I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I 
lie  not,  my  conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2  Cor.  i.  17,  18 — When  I  was  therefore  thus  minded, 
did  I  use  lightness  ?  or  the  things  that  I  purpose,  do  I  pur- 
pose according  to  the  flesh,  that  with  me  there  should  be 
yea,  yea,  and  nay,  nay  ?  But  as  God  is  true,  our  word 
toward  you  was  not  yea  and  nay. 

18.  God,  requires  us  to  defend,  as  much  as  we  are  able,  the 
honor  and  good  character  of  our  'neighbor.  1  Sam.  xix.  4 — 
And  Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  unto  Saul  his  father, 
and  said  unto  him,  Let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  servant,, 
against  David,  because  he  hath  not  sinned  against  thee, 
and  because  his  works  have  been  to  thee-ward  very  good. 
1  Pet.  iv.  8 — And  above  all  things  have  fervent  charity 
among  yourselves ;  for  charity  shall  cover  the  multitude 
of  sins. 

14.  God  requires  us  to  promote,  as  much  as  we  are  able,  the 
honor  and  good  character  of  our  neighbor.  1  Sam.  xvi.  18— 
And  then  answered  one  of  the  servants,  and  said,  Behold,  1 
have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  the  Beth-lehemite,  that  is  cunning 
in  playing,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war, 
and  prudent  in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  the  Lord 
is  with  him. 

EXEECISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twelfth  question  ?  Bepeat 
the  ninth  commandment.  What  is  the  answer  returned  to  the 
question  ?  How  many  negative  duties  are  specified  in  the 
answer  ?  [Seven."]  What  is  the  first  ?  What  do  you  mean 
by  to  bear  false  witness?  (a.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
requires  us  not  to  bear  false  witness  against  any  man  ?  (1.) 
What  is  the  second  negative  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  falsify?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  requires  us  not  to  falsify  any  man's  words  ?  (2.)  What 
is  the  third  negative  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  backbiter  ?  (c. )  How  do  you  prove  that  God  re- 
quires us  to  be  no  backbiters?  (3.)  What  is  the  fourth 
negative  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mtm 
, 


by  slanderer?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us 
to  be  110  slanderers?  (4.)  What  is  the  fifth  negative  duty 
specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  y ou  prove  that  God  re- 
quires us  not  to  judge  or  join  in  condemning  any  man 
rashly  or  unheard  ?  (5.)  What  is  the  sixth  negative  duty 
specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  'do  you  prove  that  God 
requires  us  to  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies?  (6.)  What  is  the 
seventh  negative  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  requires  us  to  avoid  all  sorts  of  deceit  ? 
(7.)  With  how  many  considerations  are  these  negative 
duties  enforced?  [Two.]  What  is  the  first?  How  do  you 
prove  that  lying  and  deceit  are  the  proper  works  of  the 
devil?  (8.)  What  is  the  second  consideration  with  which 
these  negative  duties  are  enforced  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  lying  and  deceit  bring  down  upon  us  the  heavy  wrath 
of  God?  (9.)  How  many  positive  duties  are  specified  in 
the  remaining  part  of  the  answer?  [Five.]  What  is  the 
first  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us  in  judgment 
and  all  other  dealings  to  love  the  truth?  (10.)  What  is  the 
second  positive  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  requires  us  in  judgment  and  all  other 
dealings  to  speak  the  truth  uprightly  ?  (11.)  What  is  the 
third  positive  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  requires  us  in  judgment  and  all  other  deal= 
ings  to  confess  the  truth  ?  (12.)  What  is  the  fourth  positive 
duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  honor? 
(e.)  What  by  good  character?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  requires  us,  as  much  as  we  are  able,  to  defend  the 
honor  and  good  character  of  our  neighbor?  (13.)  What  is 
the  fifth  positive  duty  specified  in  the  answer  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  requires  us,  as  much  as  we  are  able, 
to  promote  the  honor  and  good  character  of  our  neighbor  I 
(14.)   . 

XLIV.  Lord's  Day.