Q.  113.  What  doth  the  tenth  command  require  of 
us  f 

A*  That  even  the  smallest  inclination  or  thought, 
contrary  to  any  of  God's  commands,  never  rise  in  our 
hearts  ;  but  that  at  all  times  we  hate  all  sin  with  our 
whole  hearts,  and  delight  in  all  righteousness. 
EXPLANATIONS, 

a.  Inclination,  bias  ;  propensity. 

b.  Hearts,  the  seat  of  our  thoughts  and  affections 

c»  Righteousness,  conformity  of  heart  and  life  to  the  divine 
law. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

L  God  requires  us  never  to  permit  even  the  smallest  inclina- 
tion, contrary  to  any  of  his  commands,  to  rise  in  our  hearts, 
Rom.  vii.  7 — For  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had 
said,  Thou  shalt  not  covet.  James  i.  14,  15 — But  every  man 
is  tempted  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and  en- 
ticed. Then  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin, 
and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death. 

2.  God  requires  us  never  to  permit  even  the  smallest  thought 
contrary  to  any  of  his  commands,  to  rise  in  our  hearts.  Matt, 
sv.  19,  20 — For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts, 
murders,  adulteries,  fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  blas- 
phemies :  these  are  the  things  which  defile  a  man. 

8.  God  requires  us  to  hate  sin  at  all  times  with  our  whole 
hearts.  Gal.  v.  24 — And  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified 
the  flesh,  with  the  aifections  and  lusts.  Psalm  cxix.  104 — - 
Therefore  I  hate  every  false  way.  Prov.  viii.  18 — The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil ;  pride  and  arrogancy,  and  the 
evil  way,  and  the  froward  mouth  do  I  hate. 

4.  God  requires  us  to  delight  at  all  times  in  all  righteousness, 
Rom.  vii.  22— For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  in= 
ward  man.  Matt.  v.  48 — Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as 
your  father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  thirteenth  question  ?  Re- 
peat the  tenth  commandment.  What  answer  is  returned 
to  this  question  ?  How  many  duties  are  required  of  us  as 
specified  in  this  answer?  [Four.']  What  do  you  mean  by 
inclination  ?  (a. )  What  by  our  hearts  ?  (b. )  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  forbids  us  to  permit  even  the  smallest  inclination 
contrary  to  any  of  his  commands,  to  rise  in  our  hearts  ?  (1.) 
What  is  the  second  duty  required  of  us  as  specified  in  the  an- 
swer ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us  never  to  per- 
mit the  smallest  thought  contrary  to  any  of  his  commands 
to  rise  in  our  hearts  ?  (2.)  What  is  the  third  duty  required 
of  us  as  specified  in  the  answer  ?    How  do  you  prove  that 
218  -  [Q,  111 

God  requires  us  to  hate  all  sin  at  all  times  with  our  whole 
hearts?  (3.)  What  is  the  fourth  duty  required  of  us  as 
specified  in  the  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  righteous- 
nessf  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  requires  us  to 
delight  at  all  times  in  ail  righteousness  ?  (4.)