Q.  114.  But  can  tlwse  who  are  converted  to  God, 
perfectly  keep  these  commands  ? 

A.  No ;  but  even  the  holiest  men,  while  in  this  life, 
have  only  small  beginnings  of  this  obedience,  yet  so  that 
with  a  sincere  resolution,  they  begin  to  live,  not  only 
according  to  some,  but  all  the  commands  of  God. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Converted,  changed  from  a  state  of  sin  to  a  state  of 
holiness  and  acceptance  with  God. 

b.  These  commands,  the  precepts  contained  in  the  moral 
law,  which  has  been  considered. 

c.  Resolution,  fixed  purpose  or  determination  of  mind. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Those  who  are  converted  to  God  cannot  perfectly  keep  the 
commandments.  Eccl.  vii.  20 — For  there  is  not  a  just  man 
upon  earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not.  James  iii. 
2 — For  in  many  things  we  offend  all.  1  John  i.  8 — If  we 
say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth 
is  not  in  us. 

2.  Even  the  holiest  men,  while  in  this  life,  have  only  smatl 
beginnings  of  obedience  to  God's  commands.  Job  ix.  2,  3 — I 
know  it  is  so  of  a  truth  ;  but  how  should  man  be  just  with 
God  ?  If  he  will  contend  with  him,  he  cannot  answer  him 
one  of  a  thousand.  Psalm  xix.  12 — Who  can  understand 
his  errors  ?  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults.  Phil.  iii.  13 
— Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended. 

3.  Converted  and  holy  men,  in  this  life,  begin  to  live,  with  a 
sincere  resolution,  not  only  according  to  some,  but  all  the  com- 
mands of  God.   Psalm  cxix.  60, 106, 127, 128 — I  made  haste, 

and  delayed  not,  to  keep  thy  commandments.  1  have 

sworn,  and  I  will  perform  it,  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteous 

judgments.  -Therefore  I  love  thy  commandments  above 

gold  ;  yca3  above  fine  gold,    Therefore  .1  esteem  all  thy 
precepts  concerning  all  things  to  be  right,  and  I  hate  every 
false  way.  Rom.  vii.  22 — For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God 
after  the  inward  man.  Phil.  iii.  18,  14 — But  this  one  thing 
I  do,  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind,  and  reaching 
forth  unto  those  which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  fourteenth  question  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  converted?  (a.)  What  by  these  commands? 
(b.)  What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question?  How  do 
you  prove  that  those  who  are  converted  to  God,  cannot 
perfectly  keep  the  commandments?  (1.)  What  further  is 
affirmed  respecting  the  ability  of  converted  men  to  keep 
the  commandments  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  even  the 
holiest  men,  while  in  this  life,  have  only  small  beginnings 
of  obedience  to  God's  commands?  (2.)  What  is  further 
said  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  obedience  of  converted 
persons  to  God's  commandments  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
resolution?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  converted  and  holy 
men  in  this  life,  begin  to  live  with  a  sincere  resolution,  not 
only  according  to  some,  but  all  the  commands  of  God?  (3.)