Q.  115.  Why  will  God,  then,  have  the  ten  commands 
so  strictly  preached,  since  no  man  in  this  life  can 
keep  them  f 

A.  First,  that  all  our  lifetime,  we  may  learn  more  and 
more  to  know  our  sinful  nature,  and  thus  become  the 
more  earnest  in  seeking  the  remission  of  sin,  and  right- 
eousness in  Christ:  likewise,  that  we  constantly  endeavor, 
and  pray  to  God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that 
we  may  become  more  and  more  conformable  to  the  image 
of  God,  until  we  arrive  at  the  perfection  proposed  to  us, 
in  a  life  to  come* 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  All  our  lifetime,  throughout  the  Whole  period  of  our 
present  existence. 

b.  Sinful  nature,  the  depravity  with  which  we  were  born, 
and  in  consequence  of  which  we  are  continually  prone  to 
evil. 
, 


e.  Perfection,  complete  possession  of  all  moral  excellence, 
d.  A  life  to  come,  the  eternal  world,  or  future  state  of  ex- 
istence. 

DOCTRINES   SEPARATED  i\ND  PROVED. 

1.  God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  p reached,  even  though 
none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  all  our  lifetime  we  may  learn  more- 
and,  more  to  know  our  sinful  nature.  Kom.  iii.  20 — For  by 
the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  Rom.  iv.  15 — For  where 
no  law  is,  there  is  no  transgression.  Rom.  v.  13,  20 — For 
until  the  law,  sin  was  in  the  world  ;  but  sin  is  not  imputed 

where  there  is  no  law.  -Moreover,  the  law  entered,  that 

the  offence  might  abound. 

2.  God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though 
none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  by  learning  thereby  more  and  more 
to  know  our  sinful  nature,  we  may  become  the  more  earnest  in. 
seeking  the  remission  of  sin,  and  righteousness  in  Christ.  Rom. 
x.  o,  4 — For  they,  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness, 
and  going  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,  have 
not  submitted  themselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God. 
For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every 
one  that  believeth.  Psalm  xxxii.  5,  6 — I  acknowledged  my 
sin  unto  thee,  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid.  I  said,  1 
will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord ;  and  thou 
forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin.  For  this  shall  every  one 
that  is  godly  pray  unto  thee  in  a  time  when  thou  mayest 
be  found.  1  John  i.  9 — \f  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful 
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all 
unrighteousness.    Rom.  vii.  24,  25. 

3.  God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though, 
none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  we  may  constantly  endeavor  to  be- 
come more  and  more  conformable  to  the  image  of  God.  Deut. 
xxxi.  11-13 — When  all  Israel  is  come  to  appear  before  the 
Lord  thy  God  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose,  thou  shalt 
read  this  law  before  all  Israel  in  their  hearing.  Gather  the 
people  together,  men  and  women,  and  children,  and  thy 
stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates,  that  they  may  hear,  and 
that  they  may  learn,  and  fear  the  Lord  your  God,  and  ob- 
serve to  do  all  the  words  of  this  law:  and  that  their  children 
which  have  not  known  any  thing  may  hear,  and  learn  to 
fear  the  Lord  your  God,  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  land  whither 
ye  go  over  Jordan  to  possess  it. 

4.  God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though 


CAT ECHET I  OA  L  EXERCISES, 
none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  we  may  constantly  pray  to  God 
for  the  grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  become  more  and 
more  conformable  to  the  image  of  God.  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5,  33- 
36 — Thou  bast  commanded  us  to  keep  thy  precepts  dili- 
gently. Oh  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes ! 

 Teach  me,  0  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statutes;  and  I  shall 

keep  it  unto  the  end.  Give  me  understanding,  and  I  shall 
keep  thy  law  ;  yea,  I  shall  observe  it  with  my  whole  heart. 
Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments ;  for 
therein  do  I  delight.  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies, 
and  not  to  covetousness. 

5.  We  are  thus  constantly  to  endeavor,  and  pray  to  God  for 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  become  more  and  more 
conformable  to  the  image  of  God,  until  we  arrive  at  the  perfec- 
tion proposed  to  us,  in  «  life  to  come.  Phil.  iii.  12—14 — Not.  as 
though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect  \ 
but  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which 
also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  Brethren,  I  count 
not  myself  to  have  apprehended  ;  but  this  one  thing  I  do, 
forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind,  and  reaching; 
forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before,  I  press  toward 
the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus.  1  Cor.  xiii.  9,  10 — For  we  know  in  part,  and  we 
prophesy  in  part.  But  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come, 
then  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away.  1  John  iii. 
2 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24,  25. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  fifteenth  question?  What 
answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ?  How  many  general 
reasons  for  the  inquiry  in  the  question  are  contained  in  the 
answer?  [Two.]  What  is  the  first?  How  many  particulars 
are  contained  in  this  reason?  [Two.]  What  is  the  first? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  all  our  lifetime?  [a.) 
What  by  our  sinful  ?iature?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though 
none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  all  our  lifetime  we  may  learn 
more  and  more  to  know  our  sinful  nature?  (1.)  What  is 
the  second  particular  contained  in  the  first  general  reason 
assigned  in  the  answer?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  will 
have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though  none  are  able 
to  keep  it,  that  by  learning  thereby  more  and  more  to 
know  our  sinful  nature,  we  may  become  the  more  earnest  in 

19* 

I 
seeking  the  remission  of  sin,  and  righteousness  in  Christ  ? 
(2.)  What  is  the  second  general  reason  assigned  in  the 
answer  for  the  inquiry  contained  in  the  question  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  will  have  the  law  so  strictly  preached, 
even  though  none  are  able  to  keep  it,  that  we  may  con- 
stantly endeavor  to  "become  more  and  more  conformable  to 
the  image  of  God?  (3.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  will 
have  the  law  so  strictly  preached,  even  though  none  are 
able  to  keep  it,  that  we  may  constantly  pray  to  him  for  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  become  more  and 
more  conformable  to  the  image  of  Christ?  (4.)  flow  long 
does  the  answer  say  we  are  thus  constantly  to  endeavor  and 
pray  to  God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may 
become  more  and  more  conformable  to  the  image  of  God  ? 
What  do  you  mean  by  perfection  ?  (c.)  What  by  a  life  jo 
come  ?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  thus  constantly 
to  endeavor,  and  pray  to  God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  we  may  become  more  and  more  conformable  to 
the  image  of  God,  until  we  arrive  at  the  perfection  proposed 
10  us  in  the  life  to  come  ?  (5.) 

XLV.  Lord's  Day.