Q.  116.  Why  is  prayer  necessary  for  Christians  ? 

A.  Because  it  is  that  chief  part  of  thankfulness  which 
God  requires  of  us  ;  and  also,  because  God  will  give  his 
grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to  those  only,  who  with  sincere 
desires  continually  ask  them  of  him,  and  are  thankful  for 
them. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Prayer,  a  solemn  address  to  the  Supreme  Being. 
h.  Thankfulness,  expression  of  gratitude :  acknowledgment 
of  favors. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Prayer  is  that  chief  part  of  thankfulness  which  God  requires 
of  us.  Psalm  1.  14,  15 — Offer  unto  God  thanksgiving ;  and 
pay  thy  vows  unto  the  Most  High.  And  call  upon  me  in 
the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
glorify  me. 


Q<  117.]  CATECHETICAL  EXERCISER.  228 


2.  God  will  give  hfc  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to  those  only,  who, 
with  sincere  desires,  continually  ask  them  of  him.  Jer.  xxix. 
13 — And  ye  shall  seek  rne,  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall 
search  for  me  with  all  your  heart.  Matt.  vii.  7  and  8 — Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find :  knock, 
and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you :  for  every  one  that  asketh, 
receiveth  ;  and  he  that  seeketh,  findeth ;  and  to  him  that 
knocketh,  it  shall  be  opened.  Luke  xi.  13 — If  ye,  then, 
being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children : 
how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  Pent.  iv.  29  ;  Luke  xi.  9, 
10;  Matt.  vii.  11. 

3.  God  will  give  hw  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to  those  only  ivho 
are  continually  thankful  for  them.  Psalm  1.  23 — Whoso 
olfereth  praise,  glorifieth  me ;  and  to  him  that  ordereth  his 
conversation  aright  will  I  show  the  salvation  of  God.  Psalm 
I  15. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  sixteenth  question  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  prayer  ?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned  to 
the  question?  What  do  you  mean  by  thankfulness?  (6.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  prayer  is  that  chief  part  of  thank- 
fulness which  God  requires  of  us  ?  (1.)  What  further 
reason  is  assigned  for  the  necessity  of  prayer  ?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God  will  give  his  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to 
those  only,  who,  with  sincere  desires,  continually  ask  them 
of  him?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God  will  give  his 
grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to  those  only  who  are  continually 
thankful  for  them  ?  (3.) 


Q,  117.  What  are  the  requisites  of  that  prayer 
which  is  acceptable  to  God,  a/ad  which  he  will  hear  ? 

A?  First,  that  we  from  the  heart  pray  to  the  one  true 
God  only,  who  hath  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  for 
all  things  he  hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him :  Secondly, 
that  we  rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  sin  and  misery, 
that  so  we  may  deeply  humble  ourselves  in  the  presence 
of  his  divine  majesty :  Thirdly,  that  we  be  fully  per- 
suaded, that  he,  notwithstanding  we  are  unworthy  of  it, 
will,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  our  Lord,  certainly  hear  our 
prayer,  as  he  has  promised  us  in  his  word, 
CATECHETICAL  EXKRCXh'KS.  EXPLANATIONS, 

a.  Requisites,  indispensable  constituent  parts. 
6.  The  one  true  God,  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  such  in 
reality,  in  opposition  to  all  false  gods. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer,  we  must  pray  to  the 
one  true  God  only,  who  hath  manifested  himself  in  his  word. 
Psalm  lxxxi.  8,  9 — Hear,  0  my  people,  and  I  will  testily 
unto  thee  ;  0  Israel,  if  thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me  ;  there 
shall  no  strange  god  he  in  thee ;  neither  shalt  thou  worship 
any  strange  god.  Matt.  iv.  10 — Thou  shalt  worship  the 
Lord  thy  God,  and  him  onlv  shalt  thou  serve.    Isaiah  xlv. 

22,  23. 

2.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer,  we  must  pray  to  the 
one  true  Gocl  only,  from  the  heart.  Lam.  iii.  41 — Let  us  lift 
up  our  heart,  with  our  hands,  unto  God  in  the  heavens. 
Psalm  exlw  18 — The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  them  that  call 
upon  him,  to  all  that  call  upon  him  in  truth.    John  \s . 

23,  24. 

3.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer,  we  must  pray  to  God 
for  all  things  he  hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him.  1  John  w 
14— And  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that, 
if  we  ask  any  thing  according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us. 
James  iv.  3 — Ye  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss, 
that  ye  may  consume  it  upon  your  lusts. 

4.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God,  we  must  rightly 
and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  misery.  Luke  xviii.  13 — 
And  the  publican,  standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so 
much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast, 
saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.  Eom.  vii.  24 — 0 
wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the 
body  of  this  death  ?    2  Chron.  xx.  12  ;  Rom.  viii.  26. 

5.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God,  we  must  deeply 
humble  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  his  divine  majesty,  under  a 
sense  of  our  need  and  misery.  Ezra  ix.  6 — And  said,  0  my 
God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,  my 
God  ;  for  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  our  head,  and 
our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens.  2  Chron.  vii. 
14 — If  my  people,  which  are  called  by  my  name,  shall 
humble  themselves,  and  pray,  and  seek  my  face,  and  turn 
from  their  wicked  ways ;  then  will  I  hear  from  heaven,  and 
will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  heal  their  land.  Psalm 
xxxiv.  18;  Isa.  lxvi.  2. 

6.  In  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God,  we  must  be 
fully  persuaded,  that  he,  notwithstanding  vje  are  unworthy  of 
it,  will,  for  Christ's  sake,  certainly  hear  our  prayer.  Dan.  ix* 
18 — 0  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear ;  open  thine  eyes, 
and  behold  our  desolations,  and  the  city  which  is  called  by 
thy  name :  for  we  do  not  present  our  supplication  before 
thee  for  our  righteousness,  but  for  thy  great  mercies.  Eph. 
iii.  12 — In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access  with  confi- 
dence by  the  faith  of  him.  James  i.  6 — But  let  him  ask  in 
faith,  nothing  wavering.  Heb.  xi.  6 — But  without  faith  it 
is  impossible  to  please  him;  for  he  that  cometh  to  God  must 
believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that 
diligently  seek  him.    Heb.  iv.  16,  and  x.  22. 

7.  God  hath  promised  in  his  word  to  hear  the  prayer  of  faith. 
John  xiv.  13 — And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name, 
that  will  I  do,  that  the  father  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son. 
John  xv.  7 — If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you, 
ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  you. 
John  xvi.  23 — Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you.  Matt. 
tjL  8 ;  Rom.  x.  13. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  seventeenth  question  ?  What 
do  you  mean  by  requisites  f  {a. )  What  answer  is  returned 
to  the  question  ?  How  many  requisites  of  acceptable  prayer 
are  specified  in  the  answer  in  general?  [Three.]  What  is 
the  first  ?  To  whom  are  we  to  pray  in  order  to  offer  ac- 
ceptable prayer?  Whom  do  you  mean  by  the  one  true  God? 
(b.)  How  do  you  prove  that,  in  order  to  offer  acceptable 
prayer,  we  are  to  pray  to  the  one  true  God  only,  who  hath 
manifested  himself  in  his  word?  (1.)  How  are  we  to  pray 
to  the  one  true  God  in  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer? 
How  do  you  prove  that,  in  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer, 
we  must  pray  to  the  one  true  God  only,  from  the  heart?  (2.) 
For  what  are  we  to  pray  to  the  one  true  God  only,  in  order 
to  offer  acceptable  prayer?  How  do  you  prove  that,  in 
order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer,  we  must  pray  to  the  one 
true  God  only,  for  all  things  he  hath  commanded  us  to  ask 
of  him  ?  (3.)  What  is  the  second  general  requisite  of  ac- 
ceptable prayer  specified  in  the  answer?    How  do  you. 
prove  that,  in  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God,  we 
must  rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  misery?  (L) 
For  what  purpose  is  it  said  that  we  must  rightly  and 
thoroughly  know  our  need  and  misery,  in  order  that  we 
may  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that,  in  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to  God,  we  must 
deeply  humble  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  his  divine 
majesty,  under  a  sense  of  our  need  and  misery?  (5.)  What 
is  the  third  general  requisite  of  acceptable  prayer?  How 
do  you  prove  that,  in  order  to  offer  acceptable  prayer  to 
God,  we  must  be  fully  persuaded,  that  he,  notwithstanding 
we  are  unworthy  of  it,  will,  for  Christ's  sake,  certainly  hear 
our  prayer?  (6.)  Upon  what  is  this  full  persuasion,  that 
God  will  certainly  hear  our  prayer,  based  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  God  has  promised  in  his  word,  to  hear  the 
prayer  of  faith?  (7.)