Q.  118.  What  hath  God  commanded  its  to  ask  of 
Mm  f 

A.  All  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body ;  which 
Christ  has  comprised  in  that  prayer  he  himself  has 
taught  us. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

<z.  Comprised,  briefly  comprehended. 

b.  That  prayer,  the  specimen  of  the  manner  of  addressing 
God,  given  us  by  Christ,  commonly  known  as  the  Lord's 
prayer. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  God  hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  Mm  all  things  necessary 
for  the  soul.  Matt.  vi.  33 — But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom 
of  God  and  his  righteousness.  Matt.  xxvi.  41 — Watch  and 
pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation.    1  Thess.  v.  23. 

2.  God  hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him  all  things  necessary 
for  the  body.  Psalm  civ.  27 — These  wait  all  upon  thee; 
that  thou  mayest  give  them  their  meat  in  due  season.  Prov. 
xxx.  8,  9 — Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies :  give  me 
neither  poverty  nor  riches ;  feed  me  with  food  convenient 
for  me:  lest  I  be  full,  and  deny  thee,  and  say,  Who  is  the 
Lord  ?  or  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the  name  of 
my  God  in  vain. 

3.  AU  things  ntc&sary  for  soul  and  body,  which  God  has 
commanded  us  to  ask  of  him,  Christ  has  comprised  in  the  prayer 
he  himself  has  taught  us.  Matt.*  vi.  8,  9,  &c. — Your  Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need  of  before  ye  ask  him. 
After  this  manner,  therefore,  pray  ye :  Our  Father,  &c. 


What  is  the  one  hundred  and  eighteenth  question  ?  What 
is  the  answer  returned  to  the  question  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him  all  things 
necessary  for  the  soul  ?  (1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
hath  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him  all  things  necessary  for 
the  body?  (2.)  What  is  further  affirmed  in  the  answer? 
What  do  you  mean  by  the  word  comprised?  (a.)  What  by 
that  prayer?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  all  things  neces- 
sary for  soul  and  body,  which  God  hath  commanded  us  to 
ask  of  him,  Christ  has  comprised  in  the  prayer  he  himself 
has  taught  us  ?  (3.)