Q.  120.  Why  hath  Christ  commanded  us  to  address 
God  thus,  "  Our  Father  ?" 


EXERCISES. 


EXERCISES. 
A.  That  immediately,  in  the  very  beginning  of  our 
prayer,  he  might  excite  in  us  a  child-like  reverence  for, 
and  confidence  in  God,  which  are  the  foundation  of  our 
prayer  ;  namely,  that  God  has  become  our  father  in 
Christ,  and  will  much  less  deny  us  what  we  ask  of  him 
in  true  faith,  than  our  parents  will  refuse  us  earthly 
things. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Child-like,  resembling  that  which  a  child  exercises 
toward  a  parent. 

b.  Reverence,  fear  mingled  with  respect  nnd  esteem. 

c.  Is  become  our  father,  sustains  to  us  the  relation  of  a 
parent  in  a  special  sense. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  address  God  as  our  Father, 
that  he  might  immediately,  in  the  very  beginning  of  our  prayer, 
excite  in  us  a  child-like  reverence  for  him.  Heb.  xii.  9  and  28— 
Furthermore,  we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected 
us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  ;  shall  we  not  much  rather 
be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits  and  live?— — - 
^Wherefore  we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved, 
let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably, 
with  reverence  and  godly  fear. 

2.  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  address  God  as  our  Father, 
that  he  might  immediately,  in  the  very  beginning  of  our  prayer, 
excite  in  us  a,  child-like  confidence  in  him.  Isaiah  lxiii.  16— 
Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father,  though  Abraham  be  igno- 
rant of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not:  thou,  0  Lord,  art 
our  Father,  our  Redeemer;  thy  name  is  from  everlasting. 
Eph.  iii.  12 — In  whom  we  have  boldness  and  access  with 
confidence  by  the  faith  of  him. 

3.  A  child-like  reverence  for  and  confidence  in  God  are  the 
foundation  of  our  prayer.  James  i.  6-8 — But  let  him  ask  in 
faith,  nothing  wavering.  For  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a 
wave  of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed.  For  let 
not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  any  thing  of  the 
Lord.    A  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways. 

4.  God  has  become  our  Father  in  Christ.  John  i.  12 — But 
as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name. 
Eph.  i.  5 — Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of 


children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  will. 

5.  God,  as  our  Father,  vnll  much  less  deny  us  what  we  ask 
of  him  in  true  faith,  than  our  parents  vnll  refuse  us  earthly 
things.  Matt.  vii.  11 — If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to 
give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them 
that  ask  him  ?  Luke  xi.  13 — Isaiah  xlix.  15 — Can  a  woman 
forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compas- 
sion on  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  yea,  they  may  forget,  yet 
will  I  not  forget  thee.  Psalm  ciii.  13 — Like  as  a  father 
pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twentieth  question?  What 
answer  is  returned  to  the  question?  What  do  you  mean 
by  child-like  ?  (a.)  What  by  reverence?  (b.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  Christ  has  commanded  us  to  address  God  as  our 
Father,  that  he  might  immediately,  in  the  very  beginning 
of  our  prayer,  excite  in  us  a  child-like  reverence  for  him  ? 
(1.)  How  do  you  prove  that  Christ  has  commanded  us  to 
address  God  as  our  Father,  that  he  might  immediately,  in 
the  very  beginning  of  our  prayer,  excite  in  us  a  child-like 
confidence  in  him  ?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  a  child-like 
reverence  for  and  confidence  in  God  are  the  foundation  of 
our  prayer  ?  (3.)  How  is  the  relation  that  God  sustains  in 
Christ  to  us  expressed  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  the  expres- 
sion is  become  our  father?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God 
is  become  our  father  in  Christ?  (4.)  How  is  the  feeling 
which  God  cherishes  toward  us,  in  consequence  of  the 
relation  he  sustains  to  us  in  Christ,  expressed?  How  do 
you  prove  that  God,  as  our  Father,  will  much  less  deny  us 
what  we  ask  of  him  in  true  faith,  than  our  parents  will 
refuse  us  earthly  things?  (5.)