Q.  121.  Why  is  here  added,  u  WHICH  ART  IN 
HEAVEN  ?" 

A.  Lest  we  should  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of 
God's  heavenly  majesty,  and  that  we  may  expect  from  hm 
almighty  power  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  bod  v. 
230 


[Q.121. 


EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Heaven,  the  place  in  which  God  affords  more  sensible 
manifestations  of  his  presence  and  glory. 

b.  Earthly  conceptions,  ideas  or  opinions  suitable  only  to 
the  things  of  this  world. 

c.  Heavenly  Majesty,  greatness,  or  dignity,  sucli  as  cor- 
responds to  the  nature  of  the  Supreme  Being. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  words,  "which  art  in  heaven"  are  added  in  the  begin- 
ning  of  the  Lord?*  prayer,  lest  we  should  form  any  earthly 
conceptions  of  God's  heavenly  majesty.  I  Kings  viii.  27 — But 
will  God  indeed  dwell  on  earth  ?  Behold,  the  heaven,  and 
heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  thee  ;  how  much  less  this 
house  that  I  have  builded?  .Acts  xvii.  24 — God  that  made 
the  world  and  all  tilings  therein,  seeing  that  he  is  Lord 
of  heaven  and  earth,  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with 
hands.    Jer.  xxiii.  24. 

2.  The  words,  "which  art  in  heaven."  are  added  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Lord's  prayer,  that  ice  may  expect  from  God's 
almighty  power  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body.  Acts 
xvii.  25 — Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands,  as  though 
he  needed  any  thing:  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath, 
and  all  things.  Horn.  x.  12— The  same  Lord  over  all  is 
rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him.  Psalm  cxv.  8 — But  our 
God  is  in  the  heavens  ;  he  hath  done  whatsoever  he  hath 
pleased.  Eph.  iii.  20 — Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  do  ex- 
ceeding abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  according 
to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us.    2  Chron.  xx.  6. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-first  question? 
What  do  you  mean  by  heaven?  (a.)  What  answer  is  returned 
to  the  question?  How  many  reasons  are  assigned  for  that 
inquired  about  in  the  question?  [Tv:o.~\  What  is  the  first? 
What  do  you  mean  by  earthly  conceptions?  (b.)  What  by 
heavenly  majesty  ?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  words, 
"which  art  in  heaven,"  are  added  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Lord's  prayer,  lest  we  should  form  any  earthly  conceptions 
of  God's  heavenly  majesty?  (1.)  What  is  the  second  renson 
assigned  for  the  subject  of  inquiry  in  the  question?  How  do 
you  prove  that  the  words,  "which  art  iu  heaven,"  are 


Q,  122.]  -  281 

added  in  the  beginning  of  the  Lord's  prayer,  that  we  may 
expect  from  God's  almighty  power  all  things  necessary  for 
soul  and  body?  (2.) 


XLVI!  Lord's  Bay,