Q.  122.  Which  is  the  first  petition  f 

A.  "  Hallowed  be  thy  name  ;"  that  is,  grant  us  first 
rightly  to  know  thee,  and  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise 
thee  in  all  thy  works,  in  which  thy  power,  wisdom, 
goodness,  justice,  mercy  and  truth  are  clearly  displayed; 
and  further  also,  that  we  may  so  order  and  direct  our 
whole  lives,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  as  that  thy 
name  may  never  be  blasphemed,  but  rather  praised  and 
honored  on  our  account. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Hailoiced,  sanctified,  or  treated  as  sacred. 

b.  Name,  the  peculiar  titles,  works  or  attributes  by  whioh 
God  is  known  and  distinguished  from  every  other  being. 

c.  Wisdom,  ability  to  choose  the  best  ends  and  the  best 
means  for  their  accomplishment. 

d.  Mercy,  his  disposition  to  overlook  injuries,  or  treat 
offenders  better  than  they  deserve. 

e.  Blasphemed,  reproachfully  spoken  of,  or  irreverently 
used. 

/.  Honored,  revered ;  treated  with  due  respect. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  grant  us  rightly  to  mow  him. 
Eph.  i.  16,  17 — Cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making 
mention  of  you  in  ray  prayers ;  that  the  God  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  glory,  may  give  unto  you  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him. 
John  xvii.  3 ;  James  i.  5 ;  Jer.  ix.  23,  24. 

2.  "  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  enable  us  to  sanctify,  glorify  and 
praise  him  in  all  his  works.  Psalm  li.  15 — 0  Lord,  open 
thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  praise. 
Psalm  Ixxi.  8 — Let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  praise  and 
with  thy  honor  all  the  day. 

3.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify,  and  praise  God's  power  as 
vlearly  displayed  in  his  works.    Deut.  iii.  24— -For  what  God 
[Q..122. 


is  there  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  that  can  do  according  to  thy 
works,  and  according  to  thy  might?  Rom.  i.  19,  20 — 
Because  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in 
them  ;  for  God  hath  showed  it  unto  them.  For  the  invisible 
things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly 
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even 
his  eternal  power  and  Godhead ;  so  that  they  are  without 
excuse. 

4.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  wisdom  as 
clearly  displayed  in  his  works.  Psalm  civ.  24 — 0  Lord,  how 
manifold  are  thy  works !  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them 
all.  Prov.  iii.  19 — The  Lord  by  wisdom  hath  founded  the 
earth. 

5.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  goodness  as 
clearly  displayed  in  his  works.  Psalm  xxxiii.  5 — The  earth 
is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  Psalm  cvii.  8,  15,  21, 
31 — Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness, 
and  for  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men ! 

6.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  Justice  as 
clearly  displayed  in  his  works.  Rev.  xv.  3 — Just  and  true 
are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints.  Neh.  ix.  33 — Howbeit, 
thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  us  ;  for  thou  hast 
done  right,  but  we  have  done  wickedly. 

7.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  mercy  as 
clearly  displayed  in  his  works.  Psalm  xxxvi.  5 — Thy  mercy, 
0  Lord,  is  in  the  heavens ;  and  thy  faithfulness  reacheth 
unto  the  clouds.  Psalm  cviii.  4 — For  thy  mercy  is  great 
above  the  heavens  ;  and  thy  truth  reacheth  unto  the  clouds. 

8.  We  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  truth  as 
clearly  displayed  in  his  works.  Psalm  Ivii.  10 — For  thy  mercy 
is  great  unto  the  heavens,  and  thy  truth  unto  the  clouds, 
Psalm  c.  5 — For  the  Lord  is  good  ;  his  mercy  is  everlasting  ; 
and  his  truth  endureth  to  all  generations.  Psalm  cxv.  1. 

9.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  enable  us  so  to  order  and  direct 
our  whole  lives,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  as  that  his 
name  may  never  be  blasphemed  on  our  account.  1  Tim.  vi.  1  — 
Let  as  many  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke  count  their  own 
masters  worthy  of  all  honor,  that  the  name  of  God  and  his 
doctrine  be  not  blasphemed.  Psalm  xxxi.  3 — For  thy  name's 
sake,  lead  me  and  guide  me. 

10.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  enable  us  so  to  order  and  direct 
our  whole  Uvea,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  as  that  his 
name  may  he  honored  and  praised  on  our  account.    Matt.  v. 


Q.122.]  2&8 

16 — Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven- 
1  Pet.  ii.  12 — Having  your  conversation  honest  among  the 
Gentiles :  that  whereas  they  speak  against  you  as  evil  doers, 
they  may  by  your  good  works,  which  they  shall  behold, 
glorify  God  in  the  day  of  visitation. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-second  question? 
"What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question?  What  do  you 
mean  by  hallowed?  {a.)  What  by  the  name  of  God?  (b.) 
How  is  this  petition  explained?  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  are  to  pray  to  God  to  grant  us  rightly  to  know  him?  (1.) 
What  are  we  to  pray  to  God  for  besides  that  we  may  rightly 
know  him  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God 
to  enable  us  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  him  in  all  his 
works?  (2.)  What  is  added  with  respect  to  God's  works? 
How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and 
praise  God's  power  as  clearly  displayed  in  his  works?  (8.) 
What  do  you  mean  by  God's  wisdom?  (c.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  we  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's 
wisdom  as  clearly  displayed  in  his  works?  (4.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's 
goodness  as  clearly  displayed  in  his  works?  (5.)  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's 
justice  as  clearly  displayed  in  his  works?  (6.)  What  do 
you  mean  by  God's  mercy  ?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we 
are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  mercy  as  clearly 
displayed  in  his  works  ?  (7.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we 
are  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  God's  truth  as  clearly 
displayed  in  his  works?  (8.)  What  is  added  in  the  answer 
in  explanation  of  the  first  petition?  What  do  }'ou  mean 
by  blasphemed?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to 
pray  to  God  to  enable  us  so  to  order  and  direct  our  whole 
lives,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  as  that  his  name 
may  never  be  blasphemed  on  our  account?  (9.)  What 
do  you  mean  by  honored?  (/.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  are  to  pray  to  God  to  enable  us  so  to  order  and  di- 
rect our  whole  lives,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions, 
as  that  his  name  may  be  honored  and  praised  on  our  ac- 
count? (10.) 

20* 
XLVIII.  Lord's  Day.