Q.  123.  Which  is  the  second  petition  ? 

A.  "  Thy  Kingdom  come  that  is,  rule  us  so  by  thy 
word  and  Spirit,  that  we  may  submit  ourselves  more 
arid  more  to  thee;  preserve  and  increase  thy  Church, 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  all  violence  which 
would  exalt  itself  against  thee ;  and  also,  all  wicked 
counsels  devised  against  thy  holy  word,  until  the  full 
perfection  of  thy  kingdom  takes  place,  wherein  thou 
shalt  be  all  in  all. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Kingdom,  the  reign  of  God  in  the  hearts  of  the  children 
of  men. 

h.  Wicked  counsels,  sinful  designs  ;  evil  machinations. 
c.  All  in  all,  every  thing  thou  desirest  and  art  designed 
to  be ;  supreme. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  so  to  rule  us  by  his  word  and 
Spirit,  that  we  may  submit  ourselves  more  and  more  to  him. 
Psaim  cxliii.  10 — Teach  me  to  do  thy  will ;  for  thou  art  my 
God ;  thy  spirit  is  good ;  lead  me  into  the  land  of  upright- 
ness. Psalm  xxv.  4 — Show  me  thy  ways,  0  Lord ;  teach 
me  thy  paths.    Psalm  cxix.  5. 

2.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  preserve  and  increase  his  Church. 
Psaim  li.  18 — Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion : 
build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  Psalm  exxii.  6,  7 — 
Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem :  they  shall  prosper  that 
love  thee.  Peace  be  within  thy  walls  and  prosperity  within 
thy  palaces.    Psalm  cxviii.  25,  26. 

3.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil. 
Rom.  xvi.  20 — And  the  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  your  feet  shortly.  1  John  iii.  8 — For  this  purpose 
the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil. 

4.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  destroy  all  violence  which  would 
exalt  itself  against  him.  Psalm  v.  10 — Destroy  thou  them, 
0  God  ;  let  them  fall  by  their  own  counsels;  cast  them  out 
in  the  multitude  of  their  transgressions;  for  they  have 
rebelled  against  thee.  Psalm  exxix.  5 — Let  them  all  be 
confounded  and  turn  back  that  hate  Zion. 


q.  123.] 


2S5 


5.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  destroy  all  wicked  counsels  devised 
against  his  holy  word.  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  3-5,  16 — They  have; 
taken  crafty  counsel  against  thy  people,  and  consulted 
against  thy  hidden  ones.  They  have  said,  Come,  let  us  cut 
them  off  from  being  a  nation ;  that  the  name  of  Israel  may 
be  no  more  in  remembrance.  For  they  have  consulted  to- 
gether with  one  consent:  they  are  confederate  against  thee. 

*  Fill  their  faces  with  shame :  that  they  may  seek  thy 

name,  0  Lord.  Psalm  ix.  20 — Put  them  in  fear,  0  Lord: 
that  the  nations  may  know  themselves  to  be  but  men. 

6.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  that  the  fall  perfection  of  his  kingdom 
may  take  place.  Eev.  xxii.  17  and  20 — And  the  Spirit  and 
the  bride  say,  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth,  say,  Come. 
And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.    And  whosoever  will,  let 

him  take  the  water  of  life  freely..  He  which  testiiieth 

these  things,  saith,  Surely  I  come,  quickly ;  Amen.  Even 
so,  come,  Lord  Jesus. 

7.  When  the  kingdom  of  God  takes  place,  he  shall  therein  be 
all  in  all.  1  Cor.  xv.  28 — And  when  all  things  shall  be 
subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the  Son  also  himself  be 
subject  unto  him  that  put  all  things  under  him,  that  God 
may  be  all  in  all. 

exercises. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-third  question  ? 
What  does  the  answer  say  the  second  petition  is?  What  do 
you  mean  by  God's  kingdom?  (a.)  How  does  the  answer 
explain  this  petition  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to 
pray  to  God  so  to  rule  us  by  his  word  and  Spirit,  that  we 
may  submit  ourselves  more  and  more  unto  him  ?  (1.)  What 
further  is  included  in  this  petition  ?  How  do  you  prove 
that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  to  preserve  and  increase  his 
Church?  (2.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to 
God  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil?  (8.)  How  do  you 
prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  to  destroy  all  violence 
which  would  exalt  itself  against  him?  (4.)  What  further 
is  included  in  the  second  petition  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
wicked  counsels?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray 
to  God  to  destroy  all  wicked  counsels  devised  against  his 
holy  word  ?  (5.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to 
God  that  the  full  perfection  of  his  kingdom  may  take 
place?  (6.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the  expression  all  in  all? 
(c.)  How  do  you  prove  that,  when  the  kingdom  of  God  takee 
place,  he  shall  therein  be  all  in  all?  (7.) 
, 


XLIX.  Lord's  Day.