Q.  124.  Which  is  the  th  ird  petition  ? 

A.  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven 
that  is,  grant  that  we  and  all  men  may  renounce  our  own 
will,  and,  without  murmuring,  obey  thy  will,  which  is 
only  good  ;  that  so  every  one  may  attend  to,  and  perform 
the  duties  of  his  station  and  calling,  as  willingly  and 
faithfully  as  the  angels  do  in  heaven. 

explanations. 

a.  Will,  purposes  ;  commands. 

b.  Station,  the  particular  sphere  of  activity  assigned  us 
in  life. 

c.  Calling,  usual  occupation  or  employment. 

d.  Angels,  the  spiritual,  intelligent  beings  employed  by 
God  to  communicate  and  execute  his  will. 

doctrines  separated  and  proved. 

1.  We  are  to  pray  to  God,  that  he  would  enable  us  and  all 
men,  to  renounce  our  own  will.  Psalm  clxi.  4 — Incline  not 
my  heart  to  any  evil  thing,  to  practise  wicked  works  with 
men  that  work  iniquity  ;  and  let  me  not  eat  of  their  dainties. 
Matt.  xvi.  24 — Then  said  Jesus  unto  his  disciples,  If  any 
man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up 
his  cross  and  follow  me.    Tit.  ii.  12. 

2.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he  would  enable  us  and  all 
men,  without  murmuring,  to  obey  his  will.  Psalm  cxix.  33-36, 
133 — Teach  me,  0  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  statutes;  and  I 
shall  keep  it  unto  the  end.  Give  me  understanding,  and  I 
shall  keep  thy  law;  yea,  I  shall  observe  it  with  my  whole 
heart.  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments  ; 
for  therein  do  I  delight.  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testi- 
monies, and  not  to  covetousness.  Order  my  steps  in 

thy  word ;  and  let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over 
me.  Acts  xxi.  14 — The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.  Luke 
xxii.  42. 

3.  The  will  of  God  is  only  good.  Gen.  1.  20 — But  as  for 
you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me;  but  God  meant  it  unto 
good,  to  bring  it  to  pass,  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much 
people  alive.  Psalm  cxliii.  10 — Teach  me  to  do  thy  will; 
for  thou  art  my  God :  thy  spirit  is  good  :  lead  me  into  the 
land  of  uprightness. 
4.  The  angels  in  heaven  willingly  and  faithfully  do  the  will 
of  God.  Psalm  ciii.  20,  21 — Bless  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels, 
that  excel  in  strength,  that  do  his  commandments,  heark- 
ening unto  the  voice  of  his  word.  Bless  ye  the  Lord,  all 
ye  his  hosts ;  ye  ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure. 
Heb.  i.  14. 

5.  Every  one  of  us  should  attend  to  and  perform  the  duties  of 
his  station  and  calling,  as  willingly  and  faithfully  as  the  angels 
do  in  heaven.  1  Cor.  vii.  24 — -Brethren,  let  every  man, 
wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God.  Eph.  iv.  1  — 
I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord,  beseech  you  that  ye 
walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  called. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  question? 
"What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question?  What  does  the 
answer  say  the  third  petition  is  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
will?'  (a.)  How  does  the  answer  explain  this  petition? 
How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God,  that  he 
would  enable  us  and  all  men,  to  renounce  our  own  will  ? 
(1.)  What  further  is  included  in  this  petition?  How  do 
you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he  would  enable 
us  and  all  men,  without  murmuring,  to  obey  his  will?  (2.) 
What  is  said  with  respect  to  the  will  of  God  ?  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  will  of  God  is  only  good  ?  (3.)  What  is  said 
to  result  from  our  offering  this  petition?  What  is  the 
measure  laid  down  for  the  duty  here  prescribed  ?  Whom 
do  you  mean  by  the  angels?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
the  angels  in  heaven  willingly  and  faithfully  do  the  will  of 
God?  (4,)  What  do  you  mean  by  station?  (b.)  What  by 
calling?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  every  one  of  us  should 
attend  to  and  perform  the  duties  of  his  station  and  calling, 
as  willingly  and  faithfully  as  the  angels  do  in  heaven  ?  (5.) 


L.  Lord's  Day.