Q.  125.  Which  is  the  fourth  petition  ? 

A.  "Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread;  that  is,  be 
leased  to  provide  us  with  all  things  necessary  for  the 
ody,  that  we  may  thereby  acknowledge  thee  to  be  the 
only  fountain  of  all  good,  and  that  neither  our  care  nor 
CATECHETICAL  EXERCISER. 


industry,  nor  even  thy  gifts,  can  profit  us  without  thy 
blessing,  and  therefore,  that  we  may  withdraw  our  trust 
from  all  creatures,  and  place  it  alone  in  thee. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Bread,  the  necessaries  of  life. 

b.  Fountain  of  all  good,  source  of  every  thing  necessary 
to  make  us  comfortable  and  happy. 

c.  Industry,  steady  attention  to  business. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  are  to  pray  to  God,  that  he  way  be  pleased  to  provide 
tts  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  body.  Psalm  cxlv.  15,  16 
—The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee :  and  thou  givest  them 
their  meat  in  due  season.  Thou  openest  thine  hand,  and 
satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  thing.  Prov.  xxx.  7-9 
—Two  things  have  I  required  of  thee;  deny  me  them  not 
before  I  die :  Remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  lies ;  give  me 
neither  poverty  nor  riches :  feed  me  with  food  convenient 
for  me:  lest  I  be  full,  and  deny  thee,  and  say,  "Who  is  the 
Lord  ?  or  lest  I  be  poor,  and  steal,  and  take  the  name  of  my 
God  in  vain.    Matt.  vi.  25,  &c. ;  Psalm  civ.  27,  28. 

2.  God  is  the  only  fountain  of  all  good.  Acts  xvii.  25— 
Neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands,  as  though  he 
needed  any  thing,  seeing  he  giveth  to  all,  life,  and  breath, 
and  all  things.  Acts  xiv.  15  and  17 — The  living  God  which 
made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  all  things  that  are 

therein:  He  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that 

he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful 
seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.  James 
i.  17. 

3.  Neither  our  care  nor  industry,  nor  even  God's  gifts,  can 
profit  us  without  his  blessing.  Deut.  viii.  3 — And  he  humbled 
thee  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed  thee  with  manna, 
(which  thou  knewest  not,  neither  did  thy  fathers  know,) 
that  he  might  make  thee  know  that  man  doth  not  live  by 
bread  only,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the 
mouth  of  the  Lord  doth  man  live.  Prov.  x.  22 — The  blessing 
of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it. 
Psalm  cxxvii.  1,  2 — Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they 
labor  in  vain  that  build  it  ;  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city, 
the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain.    It  i9  vain  for  you  to 


q.  126] 
rise  up  early,  to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows ; 
for  so  he  giveth  his  beloved  sleep.    Hag.  ii.  16-19. 

4.  We  should  withdraw  our  trust  from  all  creatures,  and 
place  it  alone  in  God.  Psalm  lv.  22 — Cast  thy  burden  upon 
the  Lord,  and  he  shall  sustain  thee.  Psalm  lxii.  8  and  10 — 
Trust  in  him  at  all  times,  ye  people ;  pour  out  your  heart 
before  him  :  God  is  a  refuge  for  us.  Trust  not  in  oppres- 
sion, become  not  vain  in  robbery  ;  if  riches  increase,  set  not 
your  heart  upon  them.  Psalm  cxlvi.  3-7 — Put  not  your 
trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the  son  of  man  in  whom  there  is  no 
help.  His  breath  goeth  forth,  he  returneth  to  his  earth  : 
in  that  very  day  his  thoughts  perish.  Happy  is  he  that 
hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  the 
Lord  his  God  ;  which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and 
all  that  therein  is :  which  keepeth  truth  for  ever  :  which 
exeeuteth  judgment  for  the  oppressed:  which  giveth  food 
to  the  hungry. 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-fifth  question? 
What  is  the  answer  returned  ?  What  does  the  answer  say 
the  fourth  petition  is?  What  do  you  mean  by  bread?  (a.) 
How  does  the  answer  explain  this  petition?  How  do  ycu 
prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he  may  be  pleased 
to  provide  us  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  body?  (1.) 
For  what  purpose  are  we  thus  to  pray  to  God  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  fountain  of  all  good?  (b.)  How  do  you  prove 
that  God  is  the  only  fountain  of  all  good?  (2.)  For  what 
further  purpose  are  we  to  pray  to  God  in  the  manner  described 
in  this  answer  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  industry?  (c.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  neither  our  care  nor  industry,  nor  even 
God's  gifts,  can  profit  us  without  his  blessing?  (3.)  What  in- 
ference  does  the  answer  make  from  the  last  two  doctrines  just 
.considered?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  should  withdraw 
our  trust  from  all  creatures  and  place  it  in  God  alone?  (4.) 


II.  lord's  Day.