Q.  126.  Which  is  the  fifth  petition? 

A.  "And  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  eorgite  our 
debtors  that  is,  be  pleased  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
blood,  not  to  impute  to  us,  poor  sinners,  our  transgres- 
CATECHETICAL  EXEBCISES.  [Q,  126. 


sions,  nor  that  depravity  which  always  cleaves  to  us ; 
even  as  we  feel  this  evidence  of  thy  grace  in  us;  that 
it  is  our  firm  resolution  from  the  heart  to  forgive  our 
neighbor. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Debts,  sins ;  transgressions. 

b.  Debtors,  those  who  sin  against  us. 

c.  Impute,  place  to  our  account. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

%  We  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he  may  be  pleased  not  to  im- 
pute to  us,  poor  sinners,  our  transgressions,  nor  that  depravity 
which  always  cleaves  to  us.  Psalm  li.  1,  2,  7,  9 — Have  mercy 
upon  me,  0  God,  according  to  thy  loving  kindness :  accord- 
ing unto  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies  blot  out  my 
transgressions.    Wash  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity, 

and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me  with  hyssop, 

and  I  shall  be  clean :  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than 

snow.-  Hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  mine 

iniquities.  Psalm  xxv.  7 — Remember  not  the  sins  of  my 
youth,  nor  my  transgressions  ;  according  to  thy  mercy  re- 
member thou  me,  for  thy  goodness'  sake,  0  Lord. 

2.  We  are  to  ask  God  thus  not  to  impute  to  us  our  transgres- 
sions nor  our  depravity,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood.  Eph.  i. 
7 — In  whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  according  to  his  grace.  1  John  ii.  12— 
I  write  unto  you,  little  children,  because  your  sins  are  for- 
given you  for  his  name's  sake. 

3.  We  are  to  forgive  our  neighbor.  Col.  iii.  13 — Forbearing 
one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another,  if  any  man  have  a 
quarrel  against  any ;  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  also 
do  ye.    Matt.  vi.  14,  15. 

4.  We  are  to  forgive  our  neighbor  with  firm  resolution  from  ' 
the  heart.    Matt,  xviii.  35 — So  likewise  shall  my  heavenly 
Father  do  also  unto  you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not 
every  one  his  brother  their  trespasses. 

6.  It  is  by  the  grace  of  God  in  us  only  that  we  are  able  ivith 
firm  resolution  from  the  heart  to  forgive  our  neighbor.  Gal.  v. 
22,  23 — But  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long 
suffering,  gentleness,  goodness, faith,  meekness,  temperance: 
against  such  there  is  no  law. 
EXEKCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-sixth  question  ? 
What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question  ?  What  does  the 
answer  say  the  fifth  petition  is  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
our  debts?  (a.)  What  by  our  debtors  £  (b.)  How  does  the 
answer  explain  this  petition  ?  What  do  you  mean  by  impute  ? 
(c  )  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he 
may  be  pleased  not  to  impute  to  us,  poor  sinners,  our  trans- 
gressions, nor  that  depravity  which  always  cleaves  to  us  ?  (1.) 
Upon  what  ground  are  we  to  ask  God  not  to  impute  to  us  our 
transgressions,  nor  our  depravity  ?  How  do  you  prove  that 
we  are  to  ask  God  not  to  impute  to  us  our  transgressions 
nor  our  depravity,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood?  (2.) 
What  measure  is  laid  down  in  the  answer  in  accordance 
with  which  we  are  to  ask  God  not  to  impute  to  us  our  sins 
nor  our  depravity  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  for- 
give our  neighbor?  (3.)  How  are  we  to  forgive  our  neigh- 
bor ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  forgive  our  neighbor 
with  firm  resolution  from  the  heart  ?  (4.)  By  what  are  we 
enabled  to  forgive  our  neighbor  with  true  resolution  from 
the  heart  ?  How  is  this  expressed  in  the  answer  ?  How  d& 
you  prove  that  it  is  by  the  grace  of  God  in  us  only  that  w® 
are  able  with  firm  resolution  from  the  heart  to  forgive  #ur 
neighbor?  (6.) 


III.  Lord's  Bay,