Q.  127.  Which  is  the  sixth  petition  ? 

A.  "And  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver 
ns 'from  evil;"  that  is,  since  we  are  so  weak  in  our- 
selves,  that  we  cannot  stand  a  moment ;  and  besides  this, 
since  our  mortal  enemies,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  our 
own  flesh;  cease  not  to  assault  us  ;  do  thou,  therefore, 
preserve  and  strengthen  us  by  the  power  of  thy  Holy 
Spirit,  that  we  may  not  be  overcome  in  this  spiritual 
warfare  ;  but  constantly  and  strenuously  may  resist  our 
foes,  until  at  last  we  obtain  a  complete  victory. 

explanations. 

a.  Temptation,  a  situation  in  which  we  may  be  inclined  or 
tempted  to  sin. 

h.  Evil,  sin ;  that  which  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  God. 
c.  World,  the  corrupt  maxims  and  ungodly  influences 
with  which  we  are  surrounded  in  the  present  state  of  hu- 
man society. 

d.  Flesh,  our  corrupt  human  nature. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  We  are  so  weak  in  ourselves  that  we  cannot  stand  a  moment. 
Matt.  xxvi.  41 — Watch,  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into 
temptation ;  the  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is 
weak.  John  xv.  5 — For  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 
Psalm  ciii.  14. 

2.  The  devil,  as  our  mortal  enemy,  ceases  not  to  assault  us. 
1  Pet.  v.  8 — Be  sober,  be  vigilant ;  because  your  adversary 
the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom 
he  may  devour.  Luke  xxii.  31,  32 — And  the  Lord  said, 
Simon,  Simon,  Behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you  that 
he  may  sift  you  as  wheat:  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that 
thy  faith  fail  not.    Eph.  vi.  12. 

3.  The  world,  as  our  mortal  enemy,  ceases  not  to  assault  us. 
Prov.  i.  10- — My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou 
not.  John  xv.  19 — But  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you.    1  John  ii.  15-17. 

4.  Our  own  flesh,  as  our  mortal  enemy,  ceases  not  to  assault 
us.  Gal.  v.  17 — For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and 
the  spirit  against  the  flesh  :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one 
to  the  other:  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would. 
James  i.  14 — But  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn 
away  of  his  own  lust,  and  enticed.    Rom.  vii.  23. 

5.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he  would  preserve  and  strengthen 
us  in  our  spiritual  warfare.  2  Cor.  xii.  7  and  8 — And  lest  I 
should  be  exalted  above  measure  through  the  abundance 
of  the  revelations,  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the 
flesh,  the  messenger  of  Satan,  to  buffet  me,  lest  I  should  be 
exalted  above  measure.  For  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord 
thrice,  that  it  might  depart  from  me. 

6.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  thai  he  would  preserve  and  strengthen 
us  in  our  spiritual  warfare  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 
Eph.  iii.  14-16 — For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  unto  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  the  whole  family 
in  heaven  and  earth  is  named,  that  he  would  grant  you 
according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to  be  strengthened 
with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man. 
7.  We  are  to  'pray  to  God  to  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in 
our  spiritual  warfare,  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we 
may  not  be  overcome  therein.  Eph.  vi.  10-13 — Finally,  my 
brethren,  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his 
might.  Put  on  the  whole  armor  of  God,  that  ye  may  be 
able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  For  we  wrestle 
not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against 
powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world, 
against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.  Wherefore 
take  unto  you  the  whole  armor  of  God,  that  ye  may  be 
able  to  withstand  in  the  evii  day,  and  having  done  all,  to 
stand.    1  Thess.  v.  23  and  24. 

8.  We  are  to  pray  to  God  to  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in 
our  spiritual  warfare,  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we 
may  constantly  and  strenuously  resist  our  foes,  until  at  last  we 
obtain  a  complete  victory,  [  Thess.  iii.  18 — To  the  end  that 
he  may  establish  your  hearts  unblamable  in  holiness  before 
God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  with  all  his  saints.  1  Thess.  v.  23 — And  the  very- 
God  of  peace  sanctify  you  wholly ;  and  I  pray  God  your 
whole  spirit  and  soul  and  body  be  preserved  blameless 
ante  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Rom.  xvi.  20, 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  question  ? 
What  answer  is  returned  to  this  question  ?  What  does  the 
answer  say  the  sixth  petition  is  ?  What  do  you  mean  by 
temptation?  (a.)  What  by  evil?  (b.)  How  does  the  answer 
explain  the  sixth  petition  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
so  weak  in  ourselves  that  we  cannot  stand  a  moment?  (1.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  the  devil,  as  our  mortal  enemy, 
ceases  not  to  assault  us?  (2.)  What  do  you  mean  by  the 
'world?  (c.)  How  do  you  prove  that  the  world,  as  our 
mortal  enemy,  ceases  not  to  assault  us?  (3.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  our  own  flesh?  (d.)  How  do  you  prove  that  our 
own  flesh,  as  our  mortal  enemy,  ceases  not  to  assault  us  ? 
(4.)  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  that  he 
would  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in  our  spiritual  warfare? 
(5.)  By  what  do  we  ask  God  to  preserve  and  strengthen 
us  in  our  spiritual  warfare?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are 
to  pray  to  God  that  he  would  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in 
our  spiritual  warfare  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit?  (6.) 
CATECHETICAL  EXKECJ  SES. 


[q.  128. 


With  what  particular  object  in  view  are  we  thus  to  pray  to 
God,  that  he  would  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in  our 
spiritual  warfare  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit?  How 
do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to  God  to  preserve  and 
strengthen  us  in  our  spiritual  warfare  by  the  power  of  his 
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  not  be  overcome  therein  ?  (7.)  With 
what  further  object  in  view  are  we  to  pray  to  God  to  preserve 
and  strengthen  us  in  our  spiritual  warfare  by  the  power  of  his 
Holy  Spirit?  How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  pray  to 
God  to  preserve  and  strengthen  us  in  our  spiritual  warfare 
by  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  constantly  and  strenuously 
resist  our  foes  until  at  last  we  obtain  a  complete  victory  ?  (8.)