Q.  128.  Hove  dost  thou  conclude  thy  jjro.yer? 

A.  "  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  axd  the 
glory,  for  ever  ;M  that  is,  all  these  we  ask  of  thee, 
because  thou  being  our  King  and  Almighty,  art  willing 
and  able  to  giv^  us  all  good  :  and  all  this  we  pray  for, 
thfit  thereby,  not  we,  but  thy  holy  name,  may  be  glo- 
rified for  ever. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Conclude,  end ;  finish. 

b.  Kingdom,  goyernment :  supreme  administration, 

c.  Power,  dominion ;  rule  ;  sway. 

d.  Glory,  honor ;  praise. 

e.  All  good,  every  thing  essential  to  our  support,  and 
comfort,  and  happiness. 

/.  Holy  name,  God  himself,  as  known  by  his  titles,  attri- 
butes, and  works. 

doctrines  separated  and  proved. 

1.  God  is  our  King.  Psalm  v.  2 — Hearken  unto  the  voice 
of  my  cry,  my  King  and  my  God:  for  unto  thee  will  I  pray. 
Isaiah  xxxiii.  22 — The  Lord  is  our  King.  Psalm  x.  16, 
and  xlvii.  2. 

2.  God  is  Almighty.  Gen.  xvii.  1 — The  Lord  appeared 
to  Abraham,  and  said  unto  him,  I  am  the  Almighty  God. 
Exod.  vi.  3 — And  I  appeared  unto  Abraham,  unto  Isaac, 
and  unto  Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God  Almighty. 
8.  God,  as  our  King  and  Almighty,  is  willing  to  give  us  all 
good.  2  Pet.  ii.  9 — The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  delivel*  the 
godly  out  of  temptations.  Rom.  x.  12 — For  the  same  Lord 
over  all  is  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  him. 

4.  God  as  our  King  and  Almighty,  is  able  to  give  us  all  good. 
2  Chron.  xx.  6 — And  said,  0  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  art 
not  thou  God  in  heaven  ?  and  rulest  not  thou  over  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  heathen  ?  and  in  thine  hand  is  there  not 
power  and  might,  so  that  none  is  able  to  withstand  thee? 
1  Chron.  xxix.  11  and  12 — Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the  greatness, 
and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  and  the  victory,  and  the 
majesty:  for  all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is 
thine  ;  thine  is  the  kingdom,  0  Lord,  and  thou  art  exalted 
as  head  above  all.  Both  riches  and  honor  come  of  thee, 
and  thou  reignest  over  all :  and  in  thine  hand  is  power  and 
might ;  and  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  make  great,  and  to  give 
strength  unto  all. 

5.  We  are  to  ask  of  God  all  those  things  for  which  we  pray 
in  the  Lord's  prayer,  that  not  we,  but  his  holy  name,  may  be 
thereby  glorified  for  ever.  Psalm  cxv.  1 — Not  unto  us,  0 
Lord,  not  unto  us ;  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory,  for  thy 
mercy  and  for  thy  truth's  sake.  John  xiv.  13— And  whatsoever 
ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do,  that  the  Father 
may  be  glorified  in  the  Son.  Dan.  ix.  19  ;  Isaiah  xxxviL 
20 ;  Eph.  iv.  20. 

EXEECISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-eighth  question? 
What  do  you  mean  by  conclude?  (a.)  What  answer  is  re- 
turned to  the  question  ?  What  does  the  question  say  the 
conclusion  of  the  Lord's  prayer  is?  What  do  you  mean  by 
kingdom'!  (b.)  Wh&t  bj povjer  9  (c.)  What  by  glory  ?  (d.) 
How  does  the  answer  explain  this  conclusion  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  ?  How  do  you  prove  that  God  is  a  King?  (1.)  How 
do  you  prove  that  God  is  Almighty  ?  (2.)  What  do  you 
mean  by  all  good?  (e.)  How  do  you  prove  that  God,  as  our 
King  and  Almighty,  is  willing  to  give  us  all  good  ?  (3.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  God,  as  our  King  and  Almighty,  is 
able  to  give  us  all  good?  (4.)  For  what  purpose  are  we 
said  to  ask  all  this  1  What  is  meant  by  his  holy  name  ?  (/.) 
How  do  you  prove  that  we  are  to  ask  of  God  all  those  things 
for  which  we  pray  in  the  Lord's  prayer,  that  not  we,  but  his 
holy  name  may  be  thereby  glorified  for  ever?  (5.) 
, 


