Q.  129.  What  doth  the  word  "Amen"  signify? 

A.  **Amen"  signifies,  it  shall  truly  and  certainly  be  ; 
for  my  prayer  is  more  assuredly  heard  of  God,  than  I 
feel  in  my  heart  that  I  desire  these  things  of  him. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

a.  Heard,  answered. 

b.  Desire,  wish  for  the  possession  or  eDjoynient  of. 

DOCTRINES  SEPARATED  AND  PROVED. 

1.  The  word  "Amen"  signifies,  it  shall  truly  and  certainly  be. 
Jer.  xxviii.  6 — Even  the  prophet  Jeremiah  said,  Amen; 
the  Lord  do  so ;  the  Lord  perform  thy  words  which  thou 
hast  prophesied.  2  Cor.  i.  20 — For  all  the  promises  of  God 
in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him  Amen,  unto  the  glory  of  God  by 
us. 

2.  Our  pray  err  is  more  assuredly  heard  of  God,  than  we  feel 
in  our  hearts  that  ice  desire  the  things  we  ask  of  him.  Isaiah 
Isv.  24 — And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  before  they  call,  I 
will  answer ;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear. 
2  Tim.  ii.  13— If  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful; 
he  cannot  deny  himself.    Eph.  iii.  20 

EXERCISES. 

What  is  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-ninth  question? 
What  answer  is  returned  to  the  question?  How  do  you 
prove  that  the  word  "Amen"  signifies,  it  shall  truly  and 
certainly  be?  (1.)  What  inference  is  drawn  from  this  sig- 
nification of  the  word  "Amen  Vs  What  do  you  mean  by 
heard?  (a.)  What  by  desire  f  (b.)  How  do  you  prove  that 
our  prayer  is  more  assuredly  heard  of  God,  than  we  feel  in 
our  hearts  that  we  desire  the  things  we  ask  of  him  ?  (2.) 


APPENDIX 


A  PRAYER  BEFORE  INSTRUCTION. 


0  Lord  my  God !  I  thank  thee,  that  thou  hast  created 
me  a  rational  and  intelligent  creature,  capable  of  know- 
ing, loving,  serving  and  enjoying  thee,  the  living  and 
true  God.  Especially  would  I  praise  thee,  that  thou  hast 
placed  me  in  circumstances  so  favorable  to  the  develop- 
inent  of  the  high,  holy,  and  heavenly  principles  of  my 
nature.  I  humbly  beseech  thee,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus 
Christ,  thy  Son,  to  look  upon  me  in  mercy,  and  to  grant 
me  grace  to  appreciate  all  my  privileges  aright,  and  to 
improve  them  to  the  purposes  for  which  they  have  bee& 
given. 

As  thou  hast  especially  favored  me  abundantly  with 
the  means  of  instruction  in  things  that  concern  my  soul's 
©tenia!  peace,  may  I  profit  greatly  by  them.  To  this 
end,  I  entreat  thee  to  look  with  special  favor  upon  him 
who  is  called  to  be  my  instructor  in  spiritual  things. 
Give  him  that  wisdom  from  above  which  is  profitable  to 
direct.  May  he  have  enlarged  views  of  divine  truths 
and  be  enabled  to  communicate  them  clearly  and  forci- 
bly to  others.  Oh  that  he  may  especially  feel  deeply 
interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  youth  committed  to  his 
charge,  and  labor  diligently  for  the  salvation  of  their 

247. 


24S 


A  PRAYER  AFTER  INSTRUCTION 


souls !  Let  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost  accompany 
all  the  instruction  imparted  in  accordance  with  thy  will, 
and  make  it  productive  of  much  good. 

Help  me  to  listen  attentively  to  all  that  is  said ;  and 
may  I  carefully  treasure  it  up  in  my  heart,  and  permit 
it  to  bring  forth  fruit  in  my  life  !  May  I  be  led  by  thy 
grace  to  see  and  to  feel  my  exceeding  sinfulness  before 
thee,  and  my  consequent  helplessness  and  misery !  At 
the  same  time,  do  thou  conduct  me  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of 
the  world,  and  help  me  to  receive  and  trust  in  him  as  my 
only  Saviour.  Thus,  may  I  be  fitted  for  thy  service  on 
earth,  and  be  prepared  for  having  administered  unto 
me,  at  last,  an  abundant  entrance  into  thine  everlasting 
kingdom,  through  Jesus  Christ,  my  Lord  and  Redeemer- 
Amen. 


A  PRAYER  AFTER  INSTRUCTION. 


Father  of  mercies,  and  God  of  all  consolation  and 
grace,  to  thee  would  I  once  more  lift  up  my  heart,  in 
humble  supplication  and  prayer.  Oh  that  thou  wouldst 
look  on  me  with  favor,  and,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ, 
impart  to  me  the  blessings  I  need,  which  thou,  and  thou 
only  hast  to  bestow !  I  am  a  poor,  sinful  worm  of  the 
dust  My  heart,  by  nature,  is  exceedingly  corrupt,  so 
that  I  am  inclined  to  evil  continually.  If  left  to  myself, 
I  shall  ever  go  astray  from  thee,  the  living  and  true  God, 
and  involve  myself  in  all  the  fearful  consequences  of  sin 


A  PRAfER  BEFORE  CONFIRMATION.  24§ 

and  transgression.  Oh  that  thou  wouldst  have  mercy 
on  me,  and  lead  me,  by  repentance  and  faith,  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world ! 

To  this  end  especially,  I  pray  thee  to  bless  the  means 
of  instruction  with  which  thou  hast  favored  me.  May 
the  teachings  which  I  have  this  day  heard  from  the 
mouth  of  thy  servant,  so  far  as  they  accord  with  thy 
holy  word,  make  a  deep  and  lasting  impression  on  my 
heart,  and  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness in  my  life  !  Especially  may  thy  Holy  Spirit  take 
of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  show  them  unto  me,  that  so 
my  heart  and  affections  may  become  entirely  weaned 
from  this  world,  and  set  wholly  on  thee,  and  divine 
things.  Do  thou  not  only  incline  me  to  profess  Christ 
before  men,  but  also  enable  me  to  make  such  profession 
honestly  and  intelligently,  so  that,  by  thy  grace,  I  may 
ever  thereafter  walk  worthy  of  my  high  and  holy  voca- 
tion. I  ask  these  mercies  in  the  name  and  for  the  sake 
of  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son.  Amen. 


A  PRAYER  BEFORE  CONFIRMATION. 


In  fervent  supplication  and  prayer  would  I,  0  Lords 
humbly  draw  near  to  thee  at  this  time.  I  am  placed  in 
circumstances  of  special  interest  and  solemnity.  Thou 
hast  been  pleased  to  favor  me  with  the  means  of  instruc- 
tion in  spiritual  and  divine  things;  and  through  the 
influence  thereof,  accompanied  by  the  operations  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  I  trust  I  have  been  brought  to  see  my  lost 
and  ruined  condition  as  a  sinner  before  thee?  and  led  to 


250  A  PRAYER  AFTER  CONFIRMATION. 


embrace,  with  a  believing  and  penitent  heart,  the  rich 
provisions  of  salvation  furnished  in  and  through  the  gift 
of  thine  own  Son.  I  would  praise  thee  with  my  whole 
heart  for  all  thou  hast  done  for  me. 

And  now,  as  I  am  about  publicly  to  profess  my  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ,  and  thus  to  take  on  me  my  covenant 
vows  and  engagements  to  be  for  ever  thine,  and  to  unite 
with  thy  people  in  observing  the  Saviour's  dying  com- 
mand, may  I  be  fitted  for  the  solemn  work  before  me*  I 
feel  that  in  and  of  myself  I  am  wholly  unequal  to  what 
is  required  at  my  hands ;  but  my  hope,  as  well  as  my 
help  is  in  thee.  Do  thou,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus 
Christ  my  Lord,  impart  to  me  the  influences  I  need, 
Help  me,  humbly,  penitently,  and  believingly  to  approach 
thine  altar,  and  there  sincerely  and  devoutly  to  take  on 
me  my  solemn  vows ;  and  when  I  appear  at  the  table  of 
my  dying  Lord,  may  I  sensibly  realize  his  presence,  and 
be  enabled  to  feed  by  faith  upon  his  crucified  body  and 
shed  blood.  Oh  that  this  solemn  season  may  prove  in- 
deed a  feast  of  fat  things  to  my  soul !  And,  when  I  shall 
have  come  down  from  this  mount  of  privileges,  help  me 
ever  so  to  live  and  act,  that,  when  the  course  of  this 
present  life  shall  have  been  run,  I  may  be  privileged  to 
spend  an  eternity  of  blessedness  with  thee,  in  heaven, 
through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  Amen. 


A  PRAYER  AFTER  CONFIRMATION. 


Almighty  and  most  merciful  God,  I  once  more  pros- 
trate myself  before  thy  throne  of  grace,  and  humbly 


A  PRAYER  AFTER  CONFIRMATION, 
■supplicate  thy  favor  and  love.  I  have  been  permitted  to 
enrol  myself  among  the  followers  of  the  Lamb.  My 
vows  have  been  laid  at  thine  altar,  and  the  transaction 
has  been  sealed  over  the  emblems  of  the  Saviour's  broken 
body  and  shed  blood.  No  longer  am  I  my  own ;  but  I 
belong  to  my  faithful  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  I  thank 
thee  for  the  high  and  holy  privilege  which  thou  hast 
conferred  on  me  ;  and  would  rejoice  still  further  in  anti- 
cipation of  the  unknown  joys  which  await  thy  children 
in  the  world  to  come. 

Help  me,  0  Lord,  to  prove  faithful  to  my  covenant 
vows  and  engagements.  Many  are  the  temptations  and 
dangers  to  which  I  am  continually  exposed  ;  and  such 
is  my  weakness,  that  I  am  wholly  insufficient  of  myself 
to  pass  through  them  without  being  overwhelmed,  But 
thou  hast  promised  that  thy  grace  shall  be  sufficient  for 
me,  and  thy  strength  perfected  in  my  weakness.  Oh 
that  thou  wouldst  verify  thy  promise  in  my  happy  expe- 
rience !  Have  me  at  all  times  in  thy  holy  care  and 
keeping.  Mark  out  plainly  before  me  the  path  of  duty, 
and  help  me  to  walk  steadfastly  therein,  turning  neither 
to  the  right  nor  to  the  left.  May  it  be  my  constant  aim, 
as  well  as  the  source  of  my  highest  delight,  to  seek  the 
temporal  as  well  as  the  eternal  interests  of  my  fellow- 
men  ;  and  may  I  cheerfully  use,  for  this  purpose,  all  the 
gifts  with  which  thou  shalt  be  pleased  to  intrust  me. 
Impart  to  me  largely  of  the  influences  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  so  that  I  may  be  guided  in  the  way  of  all  truth, 
and  at  all  times  share  abundantly  the  consolations  of  thy 
grace.  Guard  me  against  every  species  of  sin  and 
transgression ;  and  help  me  to  go  up  through  this  wil- 
derness-world, leaning  on  Jesus  as  the  beloved  of  my 
80ul,  so  that,  when  the  conflicts  of  this  life  shall  end,  I 


252        A  PRAYER  FOU   SABBATH  MORNING. 


may  rejoice  in  the  victory  which  thou  givest  to  thy 
children,  through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  Amen. 


A  PRAYER  FOR  SABBATH  MORNING. 


Most  gracious  God  and  Father  1  I  bless  thee  for  the 
return  of  this  morning's  light,  and  for  all  the  mercies  it 
brings  with  it.  This  day  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  blessings 
and  privileges  for  which  it  is  distinguished  are  such  as 
are  peculiar  to  thy  Sabbaths  in  the  midst  of  a  Christian 
land.  Oh  that  I  maybe  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day,  and 
be  enabled  to  improve  its  sacred  hours  and  precious  privi- 
leges  to  the  purpose  for  which  they  have  been  conferred  I 

Be  with  me  in  my  moments  of  retirement.  Help  me 
to  commune  with  thee  and  my  own  heart.  May  I  read 
thy  word,  and  meditate  on  its  sacred  contents,  not  as  the 
word  of  man,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  word  of  the  living 
God.  If  permitted  to  go  up  to  thy  courts  and  mingle 
with  thy  people  in  the  public  services  of  the  sanctuary, 
may  thy  presence  and  blessing  attend  me  thither.  Enable 
me  to  worship  there  before  thee  in  the  beauty  of  holiness, 
and  so  to  improve  all  the  hours  and  privileges  of  thife 
day,  both  in  public  and  in  private,  that  I  shall,  in  my 
happy  experience,  make  a  sabbath-day's  journey  toward 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem. 

Grace  thine  own  assemblies  with  that  presence  which 
thou  hast  promised  where  two  or  three  have  met  together 
in  thy  name.  Build  up  thy  children  in  their  most  holy 
faith.  Strengthen  them  for  all  thy  mind  and  will  con- 
cerning them.    Convert,  sinners  from  the  error  of  their 


A  PRAYER   FOR    SABBATH  EVENING.  253 

ways  to  the  service  of  thee,  the  living  and  true  God, 
Bless  thy  ministering  servants,  and  help  them  faithfully 
to  proclaim  thy  word.  Accompany  their  efforts  with  the 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  crown  them  with  the 
most  abundant  success.  Send  abroad  the  light  of  thy 
truth  throughout  the  world ;  and  hasten  the  coming  of 
the  kingdom  of  thy  Son. 

Hear,  0  Lord,  my  prayer.  Forgive  my  sins.  Bless 
my  soul ;  and  help  me  ever  so  to  live,  that,  when  my 
Sabbaths  on  earth  shall  end,  I  may  be  permitted  to 
spend  a  Sabbath  of  eternal  blessedness  with  thee  in 
heaven,  through  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord.  Amen. 


A  PRAYER  FOR  SABBATH  EVENING. 


Thou  hast  been  pleased,  0  Lord,  to  favor  me  with  an- 
other of  thy  holy  Sabbaths.  I  thank  thee  for  all  the  mercies 
and  privileges  I  have  therein  enjoyed.  Oh  that  thou 
wouldst  now  follow  them  with  thy  blessing,  so  far  as  they 
have  been  improved  in  accordance  with  thy  will !  and  do 
thou,  for  Jesus'  sake,  forgive  whatsoever  thy  pure  and 
holy  eyes  have  seen  amiss.  In  many  things  do  I  offend, 
and  on  all  I  come  infinitely  short  of  what  thou  dost 
require. 

Bless  thy  word  unto  all  who  have  this  day  heard  it. 
May  the  labors  of  thy  servants  not  be  in  vain  !  Cause 
thine  own  people  to  be  thereby  quickened  in  the  ways 
of  holy  obedience,  while  sinners  shall  be  induced  to  turn 
from  their  sins  and  live. 
254     A  PRAYER  FOB  A   WEEK-DAY'  MORNING. 


Be  with  me  now  this  night.  Watch  over  me  through- 
out its  silent  hours.  Protect  me  from  harm  and  danger. 
Refresh  me  with  quiet  and  comfortable  repose.  Prepare 
me  for  the  labors  and  duties  of  the  week  that  is  before 
me,  and  for  all  that  awaits  me  in  life.  Help  me  so  to 
live  from  day  to  day,  that,  at  last,  when  my  days  on 
earth  shall  end,  I  may  be  able  to  render  my  account  to 
thee  with  joy,  and  not  with  grief,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
my  Lord  and  Redeemer.    Amen  . 


A  PRAYER  FOR  A  ATEEK-DAY  MORNING, 


0  Lord,  most  merciful  and  most  gracious!  thou  hast 
spared  me  to  behold  this  morning's  light,  and  to  enter  on 
the  privileges  and  duties  of  another  day.  I  thank  thee  for 
the  care  and  protection  of  the  night  that  is  past.  No 
evil  has  befallen  me,  nor  any  plague  come  nigh  my 
dwelling.  I  am  this  morning  in  the  land  of  the  living, 
the  monument  of  thy  sparing  mercy,  and  the  witness  of 
thy  boundless  goodness  and  love. 

Oh  that  thou  wouldst  take  me  into  thy  care  and  keep- 
ing this  day !  Manifest  thyself  graciously  present  with 
me  throughout  its  various  vicissitudes.  Preserve  me 
from  harm  and  danger.  Save  me  especially  from  sin, 
and  help  me  to  walk  uprightly  before  thee  in  the  land 
of  the  living.  Let  thy  fear  be  constantly  before  my 
eyes,  and  thy  glory  the  end  of  all  my  actions.  May  I 
live  this  day  and  all  my  days,  not  unto  myself,  but  unto 
Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for  me,  rose  again,  and  ever  livea 
to  make  intercession  for  me. 


A  PRAYER   FOR  A  WEEK-DAY   EVENING.  255 


Guard  me  against  every  species  of  temptation.  Make 
me  equal  to  all  my  duties.  Help  me  to  rise  superior  to 
every  difficulty  ;  and  especially  in  my  spiritual  conflicts 
may  I  come  off  conqueror,  and  more  than  conqueror, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself 
for  me.  Give  me  success  in  my  lawful  undertakings, 
and  may  all  my  pursuits  be  followed  in  subserviency  to 
thy  righteous  and  holy  will. 

Hear  my  prayer ;  forgive  my  sins  ;  and  own  me  at  last 
as  thine,  through  Jesus  Christ,  my  Redeemer.  Amen. 


A  PRAYER  FOR  A  WEEK-DAY  EVENING. 


I  thank  thee,  0  Lord,  my  God  and  Father  in  Jesus 
Christ  thy  Son,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  in  safety  to 
the  close  of  another  day.  Many  have  been  the  accidents 
and  dangers  to  which  I  was  exposed  in  the  house  and  by 
the  way ;  but  thou  hast  delivered  me  from  them  all. 
This  night  am  I  still  enjoying  the  comforts  of  thy  provi- 
dence and  the  privileges  of  thy  grace.  I  praise  thee  for  all 
the  mercies  I  am  receiving  at  thy  hands ;  but  especially 
for  the  gift  of  thy  Son,  for  the  work  of  redemption  ;  and 
for  the  various  means  of  grace.  Let  thy  goodness  ever 
lead  me  to  repentance  for  my  sins,  and  thy  long-suffering 
eventuate  in  the  salvation  of  my  soul. 

Forgive  the  sins  and  follies  of  the  past  day.  May  I 
lie  down  this  night  at  peace  with  thee,  and  my  soul 
return  to  thee,  and  repose  in  thee  as  its  rest.  Take  care 
of  me  during  the  defenceless  hours  of  sleep.  Strengthen 


£56     A   PRAYER   FOR  A  WEEK-DAY  EVENING. 


me  for  the  duties  and  events  of  to-morrow,  if  it  shall 
please  thee  to  spare  me  to  behold  its  light  and  mingle  in 
its  scenes ;  and  prepare  me  for  every  thing  thou  hast 
appointed  for  me  in  my  pilgrimage  through  this  world. 
May  I  ever  be  guided  by  thy  good  Spirit,  and  finally 
obtain  the  salvation  of  my  soul,  through  Jesu3  Christ 
my  Lord !  Amen. 


THE  EHD<