EXPO SITION.

IV. WHAT ARE THE FRUITS OF CHRIST'S SITTING AT THE RIGHT HAND OF

THE FATHER?

The fruits of his sitting at the right hand of the Father comprehend all the benefits of the kingdom and priesthood of Christ glorified. They are such as the following: 1. Intercession for us. 2. The gathering, govern ing and preservation of the church by his word and Spirit. 3. The de fence of the church against all her enemies. 4. The rejection and destruc tion of the enemies of the church. 5. The glorification of the church, and the removal of all the infirmities to which it is here subject. These fruits of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, naturally grow out of the office which he sustains. The benefits of the kingdom of Christ glorified are, that he rules us through the ministry of his word and Spirit, that he pre serves his ministry, gives his church resting places, makes his word effectual in the conversion of the elect, raises them up at length from the dead, de livers them from all their infirmities, glorifies them, wipes all tears from their eyes, places them upon his throne, and makes them kings and priests unto his Father. The fruit of the priesthood of Christ glorified is, that he appears and intercedes prevailingly for us in heaven, so that the Father does not refuse us any thing on account of the virtue and force of his inter cession. It is in view of this, that we obtain this precious comfort, that since he who is our king, our head, our flesh and brother, sits at the right hand of the Father ; therefore he will grant unto us his members every good. He will grant unto us the Holy Spirit, so that we shall be quickened and glo rified : he will bestow upon us celestial gifts, such as a true knowledge of God, faith, repentance, and every Christian virtue, and he will accomplish all this for us, as well on account of the brotherly love which he cherishes towards us, as from the office which he sustains as our head. And, because we have such a High Priest, who is set down at the right hand of the Father, there is no reason why we should doubt in regard to our salvation, for he will preserve it safely for us, and at length bestow it upon us. " Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hands." " I will that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am." (John 10: 28 ; 17 : 24.)

What now is the application which it becomes us to make of this article relating to Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father ? It is this : I believe that Christ, possessed of supreme and divine majesty, intercedes for me and all the elect, and that he applies to us his sacrifice, that the Father, by and for his sake, may bestow upon me eternal life ; and that he may also rule and defend me in this life, against the devil and all dangers, and that he will at length glorify and grant me eternal life.