The second coming of Christ, the end of the world and the last judg ment, although they diifer somewhat from each other, are, nevertheless, all coni'prehended in this Article. We shall treat of them in common, in as much as they are closely linked together ; yet in such a manner as to give special attention to the final judgment ; because it would be of little ac count for us to think and speak of the second coming of Christ, if we did not, at the same time, consider the end for which he will come.

The subjects which specially claim our attention in connection with the final judgment, are the following :

I. Whether there be a future judgment :

II. What it is :

III. Who the judge will be :

IV. Whence and ivldther lie will come : V. The manner in which he will come, :

VI. The subjects of this judgment :

VII. What the character of the sentence, and the execution of thi&

judgment will be :

VIII. The objects of this judgment :

IX. When it will take place :

X. The reasons why ive should expect it :

XI. The reasons tvhy G-od has left the time of it uncertain :

XII. Why it is deferred : and,

XIII. Whether it may be desired and looked for.

I. WlLL THERE BE A FUTURE JUDGMENT ?

This question is necessary. The Scriptures have also foretold that thereshall come, in the last days, scoffers, who will regard this article as nothing more than a fable : " Saying, Where is the promise of his coming ? For since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the be ginning of the creation," &c. (2 Pet. 3 : 4.) It is true, indeed, that phi losophy cannot fully and clearly establish the doctrine of the final judgment: nor does it, on the other hand, contain anything that would conflict with it. The whole certainty of this doctrine depends upon the teachings of the church and the oracles of God. And, although the philosopher, having a faint glimmering of light, might perhaps say, and reason might also decide in the same way, that it ought to be well with the good and ill with the wicked, and that it is not probable that man was created merely to be subjected to the evils and miseries of this life ; yet man, having lost the knowledge of the righteousness, goodness and truth of God, could not, when left to himself, con clude with any great certainty whether there will be any future judgment, or when it will be ; much less the circumstance with which it will be atten ded. Hence we are forced to rest the truth of this doctrine chiefly upon

the testimony of the Scriptures. The arguments which philosophy adduces are, indeed, forcible in themselves ; but they cannot be explained or drawn out with any clearness, unless they are taken in connection with theology, so that their force is only felt by those who enjoy the advantages of a su pernatural revelation. The proofs which theology, or the doctrine of the gospel, furnishes are such as these :

1. The declarations of Scripture, from the Old and New Testaments, touching this subject clearly and explicitly teach the doctrine of a future judgment. The testimony of Daniel is here in point : " I saw in the night vis ions, and behold, one like the .Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all peo ple, nations and languages should serve him : his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." And a few verses before he says : " The Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool : his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burn ing fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him : thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him : the judgment was set and the books were opened. The beast was slain, and the -body destroyed and given to the burning flame." (Dan. 7 • 13, 14, 9, 10.) So also the prophecy of Enoch, quoted by the Apostle Jude, bears similar testimony : " Behold the Lord cometh with ten thou sand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have un godly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." (Jude 14, 15.) The discourses of Christ are equally explicit upon this point, especially the 24th and 25th chapters of Matthew. The same may also be said of the writings of the Apostles. " He hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righte ousness by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given assu rance in that he raised him from the dead." " The Lord himself shall de scend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God ; and the dead in Christ shall rise first ; then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air." "It is appointed unto men once to die ; but after this the judgment." " I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heavens fled away : and I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God ; and the books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life ; and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Acts 17: 31. 1 Thes. 4: 16. Heb. 9: 37. Rev. 20: 11, 12.) Nor docs the certainty of a future judgment merely appear from these and similar explicit declarations of God's word ; but it is also evident from other portions of Scripture, from which we may deduce these proper, arid just conclusions :

2. From the decree of God, by which he ordained, and determined with himself, from everlasting to raise the dead. This purpose can never be altered as God is unchangeable. A copy, or transcripts of this decree, may be found in the thirty seventh chap, of Ez., whilst Enoch, Elijah and lChrist, are examples of it.

3. From the omnipotence of God, by which he is able to accomplish things which are impossible in the judgment of reason. Christ uses this argument in refuting the Sadducees. "Ye do err not knowing the Scrip tures, nor the power of God." (Matt. 22 : 29.)

4. From the justice of Grod, which demands that it be well with the good, and ill with the wicked, and that perfectly. But this does not come to pask in this life. There must, therefore, be another life in which God will render full justice to every one. It is in this way that Paul comforts himself, and all the godly under the trials to which we are exposed. " See ing it is a righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them tha trouble you ; and to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels." " Son, re member that thou, in thy life-time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented." (2 Thes. 1 : 6. Luke 16 : 25.)

5. From the end for which Grod created the human race. The purpose of God is never thwarted ; he always obtains his end. He created man for this purpose, that he might be the temple in which he would dwell, and that he might communicate joy and blessedness to man. But this does not take place here in this life, neither can it here take place ; and as God would not create so excellent a creature as man for perpetual misery, we may infer with certainty that there will be a change. God is never disap pointed in his purpose, nor will he permit the temple of the Holy Ghost to be given over to perpetual corruption. This happiness, too, is a part of the image of God in which man was created ; and as it was destroyed by the devil. God, who is greater than the devil, will restore it. Therefore it is not only probable, according to the reasoning of philosophers, but it is also most certain that man was not created to suffer these evils but for a better end, which although it is not obtained in this life on account of various Mnderances, will, nevertheless, certainly be attained in the end. The resur rection and happiness of our bodies is also confirmed by this argument ; according to what Paul says : " What ! know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you." (1 Cor. 6 : 19.)

6. From the glory of God. God created man that he might for ever praise and glorify him, which cannot take place without the resurrection and the judgment. All other arguments may be referred to these.

II. WHAT THE FINAL JUDGMENT is.

In every judgment amongst men we have the accused, the accuser, the judge, the case, the trial, the law according to which a decision is given, the sentence of acquittal or condemnation, and the execution thereof ac cording to the law. Hence a human judgment, in general, is the examina tion of a case by a regular judge according to just laws, and the passing and execution of the sentence either by acquitting or punishing the guilty.

From this it is easy to give a definition of the final judgment which God will execute through Christ. The judge, in this case, will have no need of accusers or witnesses, inasmuch as he himself will make the works of all manifest, being himself the searcher of hearts. There will then merely be the judge, the guilty, the law, the sentence and its execution. The final judgment is, therefore, that judgment which will take place at the end of

the world, when Christ the judge will descend in a visible manner from heaven in a cloud in the glory and majesty of his Father and the holy an gels, when all men who have lived from the beginning of the world will be raised, whilst those who will then be living shall be suddenly changed, and when all will stand before the judgment seat of Christ, who will pass sen tence upon all, and who will then cast the wicked with the devils into ever lasting punishment, but will receive the godly to himself, that they may, with him and the blessed angels, enjoy eternal felicity and glory in heaven. " He shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1 : 11.) Or, we may define the last judgment in a few words to be the disclosure of all hearts, and the revelation of all those things which have been done by men, and a separation between the righteous and the wicked, which God will execute through Christ, who will pronounce and execute sentence upon all according to the doctrine of the law and gospel, which will result in the perfect deliverance of the church, and the banishment of the wicked and devils into everlasting punishment.

The holy Scriptures corroborate all the different parts of this definition, as is evident from the passages which we shall here adduce. 1. There will be a disclosure and revelation of all the thoughts and actions of men ; for the books shall be opened, that the secrets of the heart may be made manifest. (Rev. 20 : 12.) 2. There will be a separation between the righteous and the wicked ; for " the judge shall separate them one from another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats ; and shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left." (Matt. 25 : 31, 83.) 3. This separation will be made by God himself; and therefore be most holy and righteous. " Is God unrighteous ? For then how shall he judge the world?" (Rom. 3 : 6.) It will be effected through Christ: because " the Father hath committed all judgment unto the Son." " God hath appointed a day in the which he will judge the world by that man," &c. (John 5 : 22. Acts 17: 31.) 4. Sentence will also be pronounced : "Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, in herit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." To those on his left he shall say, "Depart from me ye cursed, into ever lasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels." (Matt. 25 : 34, 41.) 5. The execution will be eternal. " And these shall go away into ever lasting punishment ; but the righteous into life eternal." 6. The righteous and wicked will be judged according to the law and gospel, which means, that they will be declared righteous or wicked at the tribunal of Christ. The acquittal of the righteous will be principally according to the gospel, but will be confirmed by the law. The condemnation of the wicked, on the other hand, will be chiefly by the law, and confirmed by the gospel. Sen tence will be passed upon the wicked according to their own merits ; but upon the righteous according to the merits of Christ applied to them by faith, the truth of which will then be made manifest by their works which shall be brought to light. The righteous themselves will then also confess that their reward is not of merit, but of grace in that which they shall be heard to say : " When saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee ? or thirsty and gave thee drink?" (Matt. 25: 37.) We are by nature all subject to the wrath of God. Yet we shall by him be pronounced blessed, not, in deed, in Adam, but in Christ, the blessed seed. It is for this reason that sentence shall be passed upon the righteous according to the gospel.

Obj. But every one shall receive according to his works. Therefore sentence will not be passed according to the gospel ; but only according to the law. Ans. It is true, indeed, that God will render even to the elect according to their works, not, however, because their works are meritori- . ous, but because they are the effects of faith. They shall, therefore, re ceive according to their works, which are the effects of their faith, that is, they shall be judged according to their faith, which is the same thing as to be judged according to the gospel. The judgment now which Christ will execute will be rather according to the effects of faith, than according to faith ; because he will have it manifest to all why he thus judges, in order that the wicked may not impugn his righteousness as though he bestowed eternal life unjustly upon the faithful. He will prove from the fruits of their faith, that it was a true faith which they possessed, and that they are the persons to whom eternal life is due according to the promise. He will, therefore, exhibit to the wicked the works of the righteous, and bring them forward as evidences for the purpose of convincing the ungodly that they have applied unto themselves the merits of Christ. God will also render to the faithful according to their works, that we may take comfort there from in this life, having the assurance that we shall be placed at his right hand.

III. WHO WILL BE THE JUDGE?

The judge will be Christ, the same person who is the mediator. " The Father hath committed all judgment to the Son, and hath given him authori ty to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man." (John 5 : 22, 27.) By this, however, we are not to understand that the Father and the Holy Ghost will have no part in this judgment, but it is committed to Christ because he will appear and pronounce the sentence in his human nature. But Avhen he speaks, God will speak ; when he judges, God will judge, and that not only because he is himself God, but also because the Father speaks and judges through him. " He was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead." " He will judge the world in righteous ness by that man whom he hath ordained." (Acts 10 : 42 ; 17 : 31.) This judgment, therefore, will belong to all the persons of the Trinity as it respects their consent and authority ; but to Christ as it respects the visi ble scene, the announcement and execution of the sentence ; for Christ will in a visible manner pass and execute sentence upon all. The church will also judge by giving its approbation to the decision of the judge. It is for this reason that Christ says that the apostles shall be seated upon twelve thrones, and that they shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Yea, Ave also shall approve and subscribe to the sentence which Christ Avill then pass.

The following reasons may be assigned for the appointment of the man Christ as the judge. 1. Because the judgment of men will require a visi ble judge ; but God is invisible. 2. Because it is the good pleasure of God that the same mediator, who justified and saved the church, should also glorify it. " God will judge the world by that man whom he hath or dained." "Thev shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with great power and glory." " The Father hath given him authority to execute judgment also because he is the Son of mar " f Acts 17: 81 Matt.

24 : 30. John 5 : 27.) 3. That we may have this comfort, that this judge, being our redeemer, our brother and our head, will be gracious to us, and will not condemn those whom he has purchased with his own blood, and whom he has deigned to constitute his brethren and members. This comfort may be said to consist, first, in the person of the judge, who is our brother and our flesh. Then in the promise of the judge, who has declared for our consolation : " He that belie veth on the Son hath everlasting life ;" " and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.'* (John 3 : 36 ; 5 : 24.) And lastly, in the end for which he will come, which is to deliver his Church, and to cast all his and our enemies into everlasting condemnation. 4. It is proper that the man Christ should be the judge on account of the justice of God, which demands that those who have reproached Christ, and rejected his benefits, should see him whom they have pierced, and be the more confounded by being compelled to con front him whom they have so strongly opposed.

Obj. But Christ says that he came not to condemn the world. How then shall he be the judge ? Ans. This he says of his first coming, which was not to judge, but to save the world. But in his second coming, of which we here speak, he will be the judge of the quick and dead.

IV. WHENCE, AND WHITHER WILL HE COME?

We expect Christ, our judge, to come from heaven in a cloud. He will come from the same place to which the disciples saw him ascend. " The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels." " Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." "Our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus." (2 Thes. 1 : 7. Matt. 26 : 64. Phil. 3 : 20.) Christ, according to these declara tions of Scripture, will descend in a cloud from heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God, and not from the air, the sea, or the earth. He will descend from heaven in a visible manner to this region of the air, as he ascended into heaven. " He shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1 : 11.) It is necessary that these things should be explained that the church may know whence to look for her judge and redeemer ; for as Christ will have it known whither he as cended, so he will also have it known whence he will return, that we may be assured that he has not laid aside the human nature which he assumed.

V. IN WHAT MANNER WILL HE COME ?

He will come, first, truly, visibly and locally, and not imaginarily, or apparently. He will descend in the same manner in which he went up into heaven, which, as we have shown, was visible and local. " They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven." (Matt. 24 : 80.) They shall recognize him to be God from his visible majesty. " They shall look upon him whom they have pierced." (Zech. 12 : 10.) Secondly, he will come arrayed in the glory of his Father, and with divine majesty, with all the holy angels,^ with the voice and trump of the archangel, with divine power to raise the dead, to separate the righteous from the wicked, to de liver the godly, arid to cast the ungodly into everlasting punishment. "The

Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his holy angels." (Matt. 16 : 27.) which means that he will come with such glory as belongs to the true God alone ; and glorious in view of the retinue of angels with which he will be attended. Thirdly, he will come suddenly, when the wick ed will not be looking for him : "for when they shall say, Peace, and safety then sudden destruction cometh upon them as a thief in the night." (1 Thes. 5 : 3, 4.) •

VI. WHOM WILL HE JUDGE ?

He shall judge all men, the living as well as the dead, the righteous as well as the wicked. He shall also judge the bad angels. Men are called the living or dead in respect to the state which precedes the judgment. Those who remain and will be alive at the time of the judgment, are the living r, whilst all the rest are included in the dead. At the time of the judgment the dead shall be raised, whilst the living shall be changed, which change shall, as far as they are concerned, take the place of death ; and so we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.

Obj. But it is said, he that belie veth on the Son shall not come in judg ment. Therefore all will not be judged. Ans. He that believes on the Son of God shall not come under the judgment of condemnation ; but he shall come under that of acquittal. Hence all shall be judged, understan ding the word judgment in its larger sense, as including the whole seen of the judgment, or the judgment of condemnation and acquittal at th same time. The judgment of the fallen angels will consist in the public declaration and aggravation of the decision already passed upon them.

VII. WHAT THE PROCESS, THE SENTENCE, AND EXECUTION OF THE FINAL

JUDGMENT WILL BE.

1. The dead shall be raised by the divine power and virtue of Christ, and by his human voice calling them forth. " All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth." (John 5 : 28.) The living shall be changed; their mortal bodies shall be made immortal. 2. Christ will gather all, both the righteous and the wicked, from the four corners of the earth, and cause them to stand before his judgment seat, through the ministry of the angels. This he will do, however, not from any necessity, but with authority ; not because he will need their ministry, but that he may declare himself Lord of angels and of all creatures, and because it will contribute to his majesty and glory. 3. The world, the heavens and earth shall be dissolved by fire : there will be a change in the present state of things, but no annihilation. 4. There will be a separation between the righteous and the wicked, and a sentence passed upon each. The sentence which will be passed upon the wicked will be principally, as we have before shown, according to the law, yet in such a way as to be approved of by the gospel ; whilst that which will be passed upon the righteous will be chiefly according to the gospel, yet so as to be sanctioned by the law. The righteous will, therefore, hear their sentence out of the Gospel, according as they have apprehended the merits of Christ by faith, of which faith their works will testify. " Come, ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared for," &c. (Matt. 25 : 34.) The wicked, on the other hand, will hear the ter rible sentence of the law : " Depart, ye accursed, into everlasting fire."

(Matt. 25 : 41.) 5. There will then follow the perfect glorification of the righteous, and the casting of the wicked into everlasting torments. Christ will then take the faithful to himself; for said he, "I will come again, and receive you unto myself." " We shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord." (John 14 : 3. 1 Thes. 4 : 17.) But the ungodly shall be cast away with devils, and sentenced to everlasting punishment.

Obj. But it it said that the unbelieving are condemned already ; and that the prince of this world is judged. Therefore they are already under sentence of condemnation and will not again be judged in the final judg ment. Ans. The devils and unbelieving are already condemned, and judged in the following respects : in the decree of God — in the word of God in as far as it contains a revelation of his decree — in their own consciences, and as it respects the commencement of their own condemnation. But in the final judgment their condemnation will be made public, for then there shall be, 1. A manifestation of the judgment of God, that those who per ish are justly punished. 2. The ungodly shall also suffer punishment and torments in the body which now lies in the grave. 3. Their punishment will be greatly aggravated, and they will be put under such restraints that they shall no longer be able to injure the righteous, or to despise God and cast reproach upon his church. The great gulf fixed between them and us will effectually prevent them from ever doing us any harm.

VIII. WHY WILL THERE BE A JUDGMENT ?

The chief cause of this judgment lies in the decree of God. God has decreed and declared that it shall be. Hence there is a necessity in view of this decree, that it should take place. It is also necessary that God may obtain the end for which he created man, and be eternally praised by his people — that he may declare his great goodness and mercy towards the faithful, who in this life suffer various trials and afflictions ; and that he may manifest his justice and truth in the punishment of the wicked, who here flourish and prosper ; for there is a necessity that it should at length be well with the righteous, and ill with the wicked both in body and soul. In a word, the end of the final judgment is, that God may cast away the wicked and deliver the church, that he may dwell in us and be all in all.

IX. WHEN WILL THIS JUDGMENT TAKE PLACE ?

The future judgment will take place at the end of time, or at the end of the world. The duration of the world consists of three periods ; that be fore the law ; that under the law ; and that under Christ. The period which is under Christ is called the end of the world, the end of days, the last time, and the last hour, and comprehends that portion of the world's history included between the first and second coming of Christ. This pe riod will not be as long as that from the beginning of the world to the first coming of Christ ; for we are in the last times, and daily see the signs which were foretold in relation to the judgment. " Little children, it is the last time ; and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time." (1 John 2 : 18.) But the year, the month, the day, the hour, in which the

final judgment will take is known by no one, not even the angels. Christ himself is ignorant of it as it respects his humanity, and his office as medi ator, which does not require that he should declare unto us the time of the judgment. " Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no not the an gels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father." (Mark 13: 32.)

X. THE REASONS WHY WE SHOULD CERTAINLY LOOK FOR THE JUDG

MENT.

Although we are ignorant of the precise time of the judgment, yet God will have us assured of the certainty of it, first, on account of his glory , that we may be able to refute all those who regard the doctrine of a future judgment as a mere fable, and who infer from the apparent confusion which there is in the world, that God has no concern for it, or if he has, that he is unjust ; for, say they, it ought to be well with the righteous, but it is not ; therefore God is either not able to effect this, or he is not as good as his promise ; or there is no providence. We reply to this cavil, that in the life to come a different state of things will succeed that which we now see in this life ; for since it is not here well with the righteous it shall be well with them hereafter. Secondly, God will have us know the certainty of a future judgment for our comfort, that we may be assured that hereafter AVC shall obtain a deliverance from the miseries of this life. Thirdly, that we may keep ourselves in the fear of God, and in the proper discharge of our duties, so that we may be able to stand in the judgment. " Watch ye, therefore, and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man." u Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation." (Luke 21 : 36. 2 Pet. 3 : 11.) Fourthly, that the wicked may be stripped of every excuse, in that they have been so frequently admonished of the importance of being constantly prepared for the coming of the Son of man, so that they cannot say that they have been taken on surprise.

XI. THE REASONS WHY GOD WILL HAVE us IGNORANT OF THE PRE

CISE TIME OF THE JUDGMENT.

Certain as it is that there will be a future judgment, the precise time of it is altogether unknown. " Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.'* (Mark 13 : 32.) The reasons why God will have the time of the judgment unknown to us are: 1. That he may exercise our faith, hope an patience, and that we may believe in him, and persevere in the expectation o* the fulfillment of his promise, although we are ignorant of the time when our deliverance shall take place. 2. That he might restrain our curiosity.

3. That he might keep us in his fear, and in the observance of our Chris tian duties, that so we may not fall into a state of carnal security, but al ways be ready inasmuch as we know not when the Lord will come.

4. That the ungodly may not defer repentence, seeing they are ignorant of the hour, that so this day may not come upon them unprepared. " But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch

the thief would come, he would have watched." " Watch, therefore., for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh." « Occupy till I come." (Matt. 24 : 43 ; 25 : 13. Luke 19 : 13.)

XII. WHY THIS JUDGMENT IS DEFERRED.

The Lord defers his coming : 1. That he may exercise the godly in faith, hope, patience, and prayer. 2. That all the elect may be gathered into the church ; for it is on their account, and not on account of the wicked, that the world is permitted to stand. The lower orders of crea tion were made for the children of God. The wicked use them as thieves and robbers. But when the whole number of God's people shall once have been gathered into the church, then will the end be. God, too, will have his people brought in by ordinary means ; he will have them hear his word, and through this be converted and born again, the accomplish ment of which will require time. 3. That he may afford all time for repentence, as in the days of Noah, and that this his delay may render the wicked and disobedient without excuse. " God endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction." "Not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance." (Rom. 9 : 22 ; 2: 4.)

XIII. WHETHER THE LAST JUDGMENT MAY BE DESIRED.

The final judgment should be anxiously looked for, because there will then be a separation between the righteous and the wicked, which the godly earnestly desire : for they continually exclaim with Paul, " Who shall deliver me from the body of this death." " I desire to depart and to be with Christ." (Rom. 7: 24. Phil. 1 : 23.) The Holy Spirit works this desire in their hearts, so that they say with the Spirit and the bride, come Lord Jesus ; and let him that heareth say come. The wicked, on the other hand, fear and tremble at the mention of this judgment. £enn e£ fcienet ibnen ntd;t in ifyrer Diuhe, This is a certain sign of un godliness ; for how can any one say, Come, if he is not a member of the church and has not the Spirit of Christ, who inspires this language in the godly.

What then does this article mean ; / believe in Christ who shall come to judge the quick and the dead? It means, I believe, 1. That Christ shall certainly come, and that at his second coming there will be a renewing of heaven and earth. 2. That the very same Christ shall come who suffered, died, and rose again for us. 3. That he shall come visibly and gloriously to deliver his church, of which I am a member. 4. That he shall come to cast the wicked into everlasting punishment. From these considerations we obtain strong and solid comfort ; for seeing that heaven and earth shall be made new, we have this confidence that our condition will hereafter be different and better than it now is : seeing that Christ shall come, we have the assurance that our judge will be gracious ; for it will be the very same person who has merited for us righteousness, and who is our brother, redeemer and defender : seeing that he shall come gloriously we believe that he will pass a righteous sentence, and will have sufficient power to deliver us : seeing that he shall come to liberate his church we look for him with joy : seeing that he shall come to cast the wicked into everlasting

punishment, we patiently bear with their opposition and tyranny ; and finally, seeing that he will deliver the righteous and reject the wicked, he will also either deliver or reject us ; and hence there is a necessity that we should repent, be thankful, and avoid carnal security, that we may be in cluded in the number of those whom he will deliver.

TWENTIETH LORD'S DAY. OF GOD, THE HOLY GHOST.