EXPO SITION.

The doctrine concerning good works belongs properly to this Question of the Catechism, concerning which we must enquire particularly :

I. What are good works?

II. How may they be performed?

III. Are the works of the saints pure and perfectly good?

IV. How can our works please God since they are only imperfectly goodf V. Why must we perform good works?

VI. Do your good works merit any thing in the sight of G-od?

I. WHAT ARE GOOD WORKS?

Good works are such as are performed according to the law of God, such as proceed from a true faith, and are directed to the glory of God.

Three things, therefore, claim our attention in the exposition of this ques tion : 1. The conditions necessary to constitute a work good in the sight of God. 2. The difference between the works of the regenerate and the unregenerate. 3. In what respect, or how far the moral works of the ungodly are sins.

Mrsty that a work may be good and pleasing in the sight of God these three conditions are necessary :

1. It must be commanded by God. No creature has the right, or power to institute the worship of God. But good works (we speak of moral good) and the worship of God are the same. Moral good differs widely from natural good, inasmuch as all actions, in as far as they are actions, including even those of the wicked, are naturally good ; but all actions are not morally good, or in accordance with the justice of God. This condition excludes all will-worship, as well as the figment of good in tentions, as when men do evil that good may come, or when they perform works founded upon their own imaginations, which they endeavor to thrust upon God in the place of worship, which, indeed, are not evil in themselves, but yet are not commanded by God. It is not sufficient for the worship of God, that a work be not evil, or not prohibited : it must also be commanded by God, according to what the Scriptures declare, " To obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." " Walk in my statutes." " In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (1 Sam. 15 : 22. Ez. 20 : 19. Matt. 15 : 9.)

But some one may object and say, that works of indifference, such as may be done, or left undone, are not commanded by God, and yet many of them are pleasing to him ; to which we reply that they are not pleasing to God in themselves, but by an accident, in as far as they partake of the general nature of love, and in as far as they are performed for the purpose of avoiding offence, and for the sake of contributing to the salvation of our fellow men. In this respect they are commanded by God in general, although not specially.

2. That a work may be good it must proceed from a true faith, which rests upon the merit and intercession of Christ, and from which we may know that we, together with our works, are acceptable to God for the sake of the mediator. To do any thing from a true faith is, 1. To believe that we are acceptable to God for the sake of the satisfaction of Christ. 2. That our obedience itself is pleasing to God, both because it is commanded by him, and because the imperfection which attaches itself to it is made accep table to God for the sake of the same satisfaction of Christ on account of which God is well pleased with us. Without faith it is impossible for any one to please God. Nor is the faith, by which any one may assure him self, that God wills and commands any particular work sufficient ; for if this were all that is necessary, then the wicked, who know and do what God wills, would also act from faith. To act from a true faith, however, includes much more than this, because it includes in itself historical faith, and what is the most important of all, it applies unto itself the promise of .the gospel. The Scriptures speak of this true faith in the following refer ences: " Whatsoever is not of faith is sin." " Without faith it is impos sible to please God." (Rom. 14: 23. Heb. 11 : 6.) Nor is it difficult to perceive the reason and force of what is here affirmed ; because without faith there is no love to God, and consequently no love to our neighbor.

Every work now that does not proceed from love to God is hypocrisy, yea a reproach and contempt of God ; for he who has the presumption to do any thing, whether it be pleasing to God or not, despises God, and casts a reproach upon him. Nor is it possible for us to have a good conscience without faith ; and what is not done with a good conscience cannot please God.

3. That a work may be good, it must be referred principally to the honor and glory of God. Honor embraces love, reverence, obedience and gratitude. Hence, to do any thing to the honor of God, is to do it, that we may testify our love, reverence and obedience to God, and that for the sake of showing our thankfulness for the benefits which we have re ceived. There is a necessity that our works, in order that they may be good and acceptable to God, should be referred to the divine glory, and not to our own praise or advantage ; otherwise they will not proceed from the love of God, but from a desire to advance our own selfish interests, and will thus be mere hypocrisy. God must, therefore, be respected first whenever we do any thing : nor must we care what men may say, whether they praise or reproach us, if we have the assurance that we please God in what we do, according to what the Apostle says, " Do all to the glory of God." (1 Cor. 10 : 31.) Yet we may at the same time lawfully and profitably desire and seek true glory, according as it is written, " Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5: 16.)

Briefly, faith is required in good works, because if we are not firmly persuaded that our works are pleasing to God, they proceed from contempt of God. The divine command is necessary, because faith has respect to the word of God. Inasmuch, therefore, as there cannot be any faith apart from the word, there can likewise be no good works independent of it. Finally, it is necessary that whatever we do, be referred to the glory of Grod, because, if we seek our own praise, or advantage in what we do, our works cannot please God.

By these conditions we exclude from the category of good works all those works, 1. Which are sins in themselves, being contrary to the di vine law, and the will of God as revealed in his word. 2. Also those which are not opposed to the divine law, which in themselves are neither good nor evil, being actions of indifference, but which may, nevertheless, become evil by an accident. For works which are not opposed to the divine law, and which are not commanded by God, but by men, become evil and sinful when they are done with the conceit and expectation of wor shipping God, or with offence and injury to our neighbor. Works of this character are deficient as it respects the first two conditions which we have specified as being indispensably necessary to constitute an action good in the sight of God. 3. Those works which are good in themselves, and which are commanded by God ; but which, nevertheless, become sins by accident, in that they are not performed lawfully, not being done in the manner, nor with the design which God requires ; that is, they do not pro ceed from a true faith, and are not done with the end that God may be glorified thereby. Works of this character are deficient in the last two con ditions specified as necessary in order that our action may be pleasing to God.

Secondly , the works of the regenerate and the unregenerate differ, in this, that the good works of the regenerate are done according to the con ditions which we have here specified ; whilst those of the unregenerate,

GOOD WORKS.

although God may have commanded them, do, nevertheless, not proceed from faith, and are not joined with internal obedience ; but are done with out sincerity, and are, therefore, works of hypocrisy : and, as they do not spring from a right cause, which is faith, so they are nor directed to the glory of God which is the chief end to which all our actions ought to be referred. The actions of the unregenerate do not, therefore, deserve to be called good works.

Thirdly, the difference which exists between the works of the righteous and the wicked, goes to prove that the moral works of the wicked are sins, but yet not such sins as those which are in their own nature op posed to the law of God : for these are sins in themselves, and according to their very nature, whilst the moral works of the wicked are sins merely by an accident; viz., on account of some defect, either because they do not proceed from a true faith, or are not done to the glory of God. This consequence, therefore, is of no force: The good works of the heathen and such as are unregenerate, are sins. Therefore they are all to be avoided and condemned: this consequence, we say, is not legitimate, be cause it is only the defects which attach themselves to these works, that are to be avoided and guarded against, as we have shown, in the former part of this work, when treating the subject of sin.

A Table of Good Works.

r

1. According to"

Perfect, as the

the command of

works of angels,

1. Truly good,

God.

of man before

which, according

the fall, and in

to the definition «

2. Of faith.

These are <

the life to come.

of good works,

' either

are done.

Imperfect, as

Of good works

3. To the glory . of God.

the works of the regenerate in

some are,

this life.

1. Commanded by God, and are in their own

nature good, but become evil by an accident, not

2. Apparently

being done in the manner, nor with the end with

good, which in- <

which they ought to be performed.

elude such as are,

2. Commanded by men, for the sake of reli

gion, such as the traditions, the counsels, and pre

cepts of the Pharisees and Papists. (Matt. 15 :

„

9.) "In vain do they worship me," &c.

II. HOW MAY GOOD WORKS BE PERFORMED?

The explanation of this question is necessary on account of the Pela gians, who affirm that the unregenerate may also, as well as the regene rate, perform good works ; and also on account of the Papists and semiPelagians who imagine certain preparatory works of free-will. Good works are possible only by the grace and assistance of the Holy Spirit, and that by the regenerate alone, whose hearts have been truly regenerated by the Spirit of God, through the preaching of the gospel, and that not only in their first conversion and regeneration, but also by the perpetual and constant influence and direction of the same Spirit, who works in them a knowledge of sin, faith and a desire of new obedience, and also daily increases and confirms more and more the same gifts in them. St.

Jerome endorses this doctrine when he says, " Let him be accursed, who says that it is possible to render obedience to the law, without the grace of the Holy Spirit" Without the grace and continual direction of the Holy Spirit, even the most holy persons on earth can do nothing but sin, as is evident from the examples of David, Peter, and others. Yea, without re generation, no part of any work that is good in the sight of God, can ever be begun, inasmuch as we are all by nature evil and dead in sin. (Matt. 7 : 11. Eph. 2 : 1.) " All our righteousnesses," says the prophet Isaiah, in which declaration he comprehends both himself and the most holy amongst men, " are as filthy rags." (Is. 64 : 6.) Now if nothing but sin is found before God in the saints, what will that be which is found in those who are unregenerated ? What good these are able to perform, the apos tle Paul describes in a most graphic manner, in the first and second chap ters of his Epistle to the Romans. That the unregenerate are unable to perform such works as are acceptable to God, is also taught in the follow ing passages of Scripture: "A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit." " Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots ? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil." " Without me ye can do nothing." "It is God, which worketh in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure." (Matt. 7 : 18. Jer. 13 : 23. John, 15: 5. Phil. 2: 13.) Without the righteousness of CKrist imputed unto us, we are altogether unclean and abominable in the sight of God, and all our works are as dung. But the righteousness of Christ is not imput ed unto us before our conversion. It is impossible, therefore, either that we, or our works should be pleasing to God before our conversion. Faith is the cause of good works. Faith comes from God : Therefore good works which are the fruits of faith, are from God ; neither can they be before faith and conversion, or else the effect would be before its cause.

It is asked by some, in connection with this subject, are there not works that are preparatory to conversion? To which we reply, that if by pre paratory works are meant such as are the occasion of repentance, or which God uses for the purpose of effecting repentance in us, which may be said to be true of the outward deportment and discipline of the life, in as far as it is in accordance with the divine law ; hearing, reading and medita ting upon the word of God; also the cross, and adverse circumstances ; — if such works as these are meant, we may admit that there are such works as are preparatory. But if by preparatory works are meant works which are performed according to the law before conversion, by which, as by men's good efforts, God is enticed and moved to grant true conversion, as well as his other gifts, to those who do these things, we deny that there are any such works ; because, according to the declaration of the Apostle Paul, " Whatsoever is not of faith is sin." (Rom. 14 : 23.) The Papists call such works merits of congruity, as if they would say that they are indeed such as are imperfect in themselves and deserve nothing, but on ac count of which it may seem proper for the mercy of God to grant unto men conversion and eternal life. But God hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, and not upon those who deserve mercy. (Rom. 9 : 18.) No one deserves anything of God, but punishment, and banishment from his pres ence. " When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants ; for we have done that which was our duty to do." (Luke 17 : 10.)

HI. ARE THE WORKS OF THE REGENERATE PERFECTLY GOOD?

The works of the saints are not perfectly good or pure in this life : 1. Because even those who are regenerated do many things which are evil, which are sins in themselves, on account of which they are guilty in the sight of God, and deserve to be cast into everlasting punishment. Thus, Peter denied Christ thrice ; David committed adultery, slew Uriah, at tempted to conceal his wickedness, numbered the children of Israel, &c. The law now declares, " Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them." (Deut. 27 : 26.). 2. Because they omit doing many good things which they ought to do according to the law. 3. Because the good works which they perform are not so perfectly good and pure as the law requires ; for they are always marred with defects, and polluted with sins. The perfect righteousness which the law requires is wanting, even in the best works of the saints. The reason of this is easily understood, inasmuch as faith, regeneration, and the love of God and our neighbor, from which good works proceed, continue imperfect in us in this life. As the cause is, therefore, imperfect, it is impossible that the effects which flow from this cause should be perfect. " I see another law in my mem bers, warring against the law of my mind." (Rom. 7: 23.) This is the reason why the works of the godly cannot stand in the judgment of God. " Enter not into judgment with thy servant ; for in thy sight shall no man living be justified." " Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them." (Ps. 143: 2. Deut. 27: 26.) Inasmuch, there fore, as all our works are imperfect, it becomes us to acknowledge and lament our sinfulness and infirmity, and press forward so much the more towards perfection.

From what has now been said, it is evident that the figment, or conceit of the Monks in reference to works of supererogation — by which they understand such works as are done over and above what God and the law require from them, is full of impiety; for it makes God a debtor to man. Yea, it is a blasphemous doctrine ; for Christ himself has said : " When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants ; for we have done that which was our duty to do." (Luke 17: 10.)

Obj. 1. But it is said, Luke 10 : 35 : " Whatsoever thou spendest more, when I came again I will repay thee.'1' Therefore there are at least some works of supererogation. Ans. It is a sufficient reply to this objection to remark, that in the interpretation of parables we must be careful not to press every minute circumstance too closely : for that which is similar is not altogether the same. The Samaritan says, Whatsoever thou, spendest more, not in reference to God, but to the man that was bruised and. wounded.

Obj. 2. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7 : 25 : " Concerning virgins I have no com mandment of the Lord, yet I give my judgment" Therefore judgment or advice may be given concerning things not commanded or required. Ans. But Paul's meaning is, I give my advice, that it is suitable and pro fitable for this life, but not that it merits eternal life.

Obj. 3. But Christ said, Matt. 19: 21: "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell what thou hast," &c. Therefore there are certain directions, which, being followed, make those who comply therewith perfect. Ana.

This is a special command, by which Christ designed to call this proud joung man to humility, to the love of his neighbor, and to the office of an apostle in Judea. We may also remark, that Christ did not require from him supererogation, but perfection ; which requirement he made in order that he might bring him to see his great deficiency.

IV. How CAN OUR GOOD WORKS PLEASE GOD, SINCE THEY ARE ONLY

IMPERFECTLY GOOD ?

If our works were not pleassing to God, they would be performed to no purpose. We must, therefore, know in what way it is that they please God. As they are imperfect in. themselves, and defiled in many respects, they cannot of themselves please God, on account of his extreme justice and rectitude. Yet they are, nevertheless, acceptable to God in Christ the Mediator, through faith, or on account of the merit and satisfac tion of Christ imputed unto us by faith, and on account of his intercession with the Father in our behalf. For just as we ourselves do not please God in ourselves, but in his Son, so our works being imperfect and unholy in themselves, are acceptable to God on account of the righteousness of Christ, which covers all their imperfection or impurity, so that it does not appearbefore God. It is necessary that the person who performs good works should be acceptable to God ; then the works of the person are also accepted ; otherwise, when the person is without faith, the best works are but an abomination before God, inasmuch as they are altogether hypocritical. As now the person is acceptable to God, so are the works. But the person is acceptable to God on account of the Mediator ; that is, by the imputation of the merit and righteousness of Christ, with which the person is covered as with a garment in the presence of God. Hence the works of the per son are also pleasing to God, for the sake of the Mediator. God does not look upon and examine our righteousness and imperfect works as they are in themselves, according to the rigor of his law in respect to which he would rather condemn them ; but he beholds and considers them in his Son. It is for this reason that God is said to have had respect to Abel and his offering, viz : in his Son, in whom Abel believed ; for it was by faith that he presented his sacrifice. (Gen. 4:4. Heb. 11 : 4.) So Christ is also called our High Priest, by whom our works are offered unto God. He is also called tlw altar, on which our prayers and works being placed, they are acceptable unto God, which otherwise would be detestable in his sight. It follows, therefore, that every defect and every imperfec tion respecting ourselves and our works is covered, and, as it were, repaired in the judgment of God, by the perfect satisfaction of Christ. It is in view .of this that Paul says, " That I may be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith." (Phil. 3 : 9.)

V. WHY GOOD WORKS ARE TO BE DONE, OR WHY ARE THEY

NECESSARY ?

We have already, under the 86th Question, enumerated certain moving causes of good works which properly belong here ; such as the connection which holds necessarily between regeneration and justification, the glory

of God, the proof of our faith and election, and a good example by which others are won to Christ. These causes may be very appropriately dwrelt upon to a much greater extent, if, having reduced them to three principal heads, we say that good works are to be performed by us for the sake of God, ourselves and our neighbor.

1. Good works are to be done in respect to God, 1. That the glory of God our heavenly Father, may be manifested. The manifestation of the glory of God is the chief end why God commands and wills that good works should be performed by us, that we may honor him by our good works, and that others seeing them may glorify our Father which is in heaven, as it is said, " Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5: 16.)

2. That we may render unto God the obedience which he requires, or on account of the command of God. God requires the commencement of obedience in this life, and the perfection of it in the life to come. " This is my commandment, That ye love one another." " This is the will of God even your sanctification." " Being then made free from sin, ye be came the servants of righteousness." " Yield your members as instruments of righteousness unto God." (John 15: 12" 1 Thes. 4: 3. Rom. 6: 18, 13.)

3. That we may thus render unto God the gratitude which we owe unto him. It is just and proper that we should love, worship and reverence him by whom we have been redeemed, and from whom we have received the greatest benefits, and that we should declare our love and gratitude by our obedience and good works. God deserves our obedience and worship on account of the benefits which he confers upon us. We do not merit his benefits by anything that we do. Hence our gratitude, which shows itself by our obedience and good works, is due unto God for his great benefits. " I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasona ble service." " Ye are an holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. (Rom. 12 : 1. Pet. 2:5,9, 20.)

II. Good works are to be done on our own account, 1. That we may thereby testify our faith, and be assured of its existence in us by the fruits which we produce in our lives. " Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit." " Being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, unto the praise and glory of God." " Faith without works is dead." (Matt. 7 : 17. Phil. 1 : 11. James 2 : 17.) It is by our good works, therefore, that we know that we possess true faith, because the effect is not without its own proper cause, which is always known by its effect ; so that if we are destitute of good works and new obedience, we are hypocrites, and have an evil conscience instead of true faith ; for true faith (which is never wanting in all the fruits which are peculiar to it,) as a fruitful tree produces good works, obedience and repentance ; which fruits distinguish true faith from that faith which is merely historical and temporary, as well as from hypocrisy itself.

2. That we may be assured of the fact that we have obtained the for giveness of sins through Christ, and that we are justified for his sake. Justification and regeneration are benefits which are connected and knit together in such a way as never to be separated from each other. Christ

obtained both for us at the same time, viz : the forgiveness of sins and the Holy Spirit, who through faith excites in us the desire of good works and new obedience.

3. That we may be assured of our election and salvation. " Give dili gence to make your calling and election sure." (2 Pet. 1 : 10.) This cause naturally grows out of the preceding one ; for God out of his mercy chose from everlasting only those who are justified on account of the merit of his Son. " Whom he did predestinate, them he also called ; and whom he called, them he also justified." (Horn. 8 : 30.) We are, therefore, assured of our election by our justification ; and that we are justified in Christ, (which benefit is never granted unto the elect without sanctification,) we know from faith ; of which we are, again, assured by the fruits of faith, which are good works, new obedience and true repentance.

4. That our faith may be exercised, nourished, strengthened and in creased by good works. Those who indulge in unclean lusts and desires against their consciences cannot have faith, and so are destitute of a good conscience and of confidence in God as reconciled and gracious ; for it is only by faith that we obtain a sense of the divine favor towards us and a good conscience. " If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die." " I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee." (Bom. 8 : 13. 2 Tim. 1 : 6.)

5. That we may adorn and commend our profession, life and calling by our good works. " I beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called." (Eph. 4:1.)

6. That we may escape temporal and eternal punishment. " Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire." " If ye live after the flesh ye shall die." " Thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity." (Matt. 7 : 19. Rom. 8 : 13. Ps. 39 : 11.)

7. That we may obtain from God those temporal and spiritual rewards, which, according to the divine promise, accompany good works both in this and in a future life. " Godliness is profitable unto all things, having pro mise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come." (1 Tim. 4 : 8.) And if God did not desire that the hope of reward, and the fear of punishment should be moving causes of good works, he would not use them as arguments in the promises and threatenings which he addresses unto us in his word.

Ill Good works are to be done for the sake of our neighbor ', 1. That we may be profitable unto our neighbor, and edify him by our example and godly conversation. " All things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God," &c. " Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you." (2 Cor. 4: 15. Phil. 1: 24.)

2. That we may not be the occasion of offences and scandal to the cause of Christ. " Woe to that man by whom the offence cometh." " The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you." (Matt. 18 : 7. Rom. 2 : 24.)

3. That we may win the unbelieving to Christ. " And when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22 : 32.)

The question, whether good works are necessary to salvation, belongs properly to this place. There have been some who have maintained simply and positively, that good works are necessary to salvation, whilst others,

* GOOD WORKS. 485

again, have held that they are pernicious and injurious to salvation. Both forms of speech are ambiguous and inappropriate, especially the latter ; because it seems not only to condemn confidence, but also the desire of performing good works. It is, therefore, to be rejected. The former ex pression must be explained in this way ; that good works are necessary to salvation, not as a cause to an effect, or as if they merited a reward, but as a part of salvation itself, or as an antecedent to a consequent, or as a means without which we cannot obtain the end. In the same way we may also say, that good works are necessary to righteousness or justification, or in them that are to be justified, viz : as a consequence of justification, with which regeneration is inseparably connected. But yet we would prefer not to use these forms of speech, 1. Because they are ambiguous. 2. Because they breed contentions, and give our enemies room for caviling. 3. Because these expressions are not used in the Scriptures with which our forms of speech should conform as nearly as possible. We may more safely and correctly say, That good works are necessary in them that are justified, and that are to be saved. To say that good works are necessary in them that are to be justified, is to speak ambiguously, because it may be so un derstood as if they were required before justification, and so become a cause of our justification. Augustin has correctly said: "Good works do not precede them that are to be justified , but follow them that are justified" We may, therefore, easily return an answer to the following objection : That is necessary to salvation without which no one can be saved. But no one who is destitute of good works can be saved, as it is said in the 87th