The Lord's Prayer consists of three parts ; a preface — petitions, and a conclusion.

The preface is contained in the words, Oar Father which art in heaven. This again consists of two parts : a calling upon the true God contained in the words, Our Father, and a description of the true God expressed by the words, Who art in heaven. Christ will have us to pray in this way, because God desires to be called upon with due honor, which consists, 1. In true knowledge. 2. In confidence. 3. In obedience. Obedience comprehends true love, fear, hope, humility and patience.

Oar Father. God is our Father, 1. In respect to our creation. " Which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God." 2. In respect to our redemption, and reception into divine favor through Christ our me diator. Christ is the only begotten and natural Son of God — we are by

nature the children of wrath, and are adopted as children by God for Christ sake. 3. In respect to our sanctification or regeneration by the Holy Spirit.

Christ will have us call God, Father, and so to address him, 1. That we may direct true prayer to G-od, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. On account of true knowledge, that we may know and acknowl edge him to be our Father, who for the sake of the Son of God our media tor, adopted us as his children, when we were his enemies. " I ascend unto my Father, and your Father." (John 20 : 17.) This same God also regenerates us by the Holy Spirit, and confers upon us all necessary good. 3. On account of reverence, or that we may be led to cherish true reverence towards God ; for since he is our Father, we, therefore, conduct ourselves as it is proper for children to do, and cherish such reverence for him as children should have for a father, especially those who have been adopted, and are undeserving of the benefits of God. 4. On account of confidence, or that we may have such a confidence wrought in us as that by which we may be assured of being heard, and that God will grant us all things which pertain to our salvation. For since God, whom we call upon, is our Father, and loved us so greatly as to give his only begotten Son to die for us, how shall he not with him give us all things necessary to our salvation. (Rom. 8; 32.) 5. For a remembrance of creation. God now will hear none but those who thus pray unto him, because it is in them only that he obtains the end of his blessings.

Obj. 1. We call upon the Father according to the command of Christ. Therefore we are not to call upon the Son and Holy Ghost. Ans. We deny the consequence which is here drawn ; for it is no just conclusion which infers that certain attributes are withdrawn from the other persons of the Godhead, when they are attributed to one of the persons. Again: the name of the Father, as the name of God, when it is opposed to crea tures, must be understood essentially ; and where it is used in connection with the other persons of the Godhead, it must be understood personally. The name Father must, therefore, here be understood essentially, the rea sons of which are evident : 1. Because the name of Father is not here put in opposition to the other persons of the Godhead, but in opposition to creatures by whom he is called upon. It is in this way that Christ is called by the prophet Isaiah the everlasting Father. (Is. 9 : 6.) 2. Because when one of the persons of the Godhead is named, the others are not ex cluded, when mention is made of their external operations or works. 3. We cannot think of God the Father, and draw near to him, except in his Son, our mediator. The Son has also made us the sons of God by the Holy Spirit, who is for this reason called the Spirit of adoption. 4. Christ commands us to call upon him likewise, saying, " Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you." (John 16 : 23.) 5. Christ gives the Holy Ghost. It is, therefore, he himself from whom we are to ask the Holy Spirit.

Obj. 2. Christ is called, and is our brother. Therefore he is not our Father. Ans. He is our brother in as far as he is man ; and our Father in as far as he is God, our Creator and Redeemer. • He is the everlasting Father. (Is. 9 : 6.)

Obj. 3. He who receives us into favor for Christ's sake, is not Christ himself. But the Father, whom we here so call, receives us into favor for

Christ's sake. Therefore he is not Christ. Ans. He who receives us hit* favor for Christ's sake, is not Christ himself, viz., in the same respect. Christ, as mediator, is he on account of whom we are received into divine favor ; but as God he is the person who receives us.

Our Father. Why does Christ direct us to say our Father, and not my Father ? He does this :

1. That he may excite in us a confidence of being heard : for since we do not pray alone, but seeing that the whole church unites its voice with ours, God will not reject the prayers of the whole church, but hears them, according as it is said : " Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." But some one may perhaps be ready to say, it is often the case that Christians pray at home when the church is ignorant of it ; but then Christians, and the whole church, al ways pray for themselves, and for all the members, with desire and affec tion. Love is an habitual quality, abiding even when we are asleep, and is not an affection or passion quickly passing away. Hence, when any one prays alone in his closet, the whole church prays with him in affection and desire.

2. That he might admonish us to mutual love. Christians possessing mutual love should pray one for another. It is for this reason that Christ, by placing the word our in the very commencement of this prayer, would admonish us of the duty of cherishing mutual love : 1 . Because where there is no true love to our neighbor, there is no true prayer ; neither can we have any assurance that God will hear us. For if we come into the presence of God, having no regard for our brethren, the sons of God, he will not regard us as his sons. 2. Because where there is no love to our neighbor, there is no faith ; and without faith there is no prayer ; " for whatsoever is not of faith is sin." (Rom. 14 : 23.)

Obj. It belongs to a father to withhold nothing from his children. But God withholds many things from us. Therefore he is not our Father. Ans. It belongs to a father to grant his children everything necessary and pro per for them ; and to withhold from them whatever is unnecessary, useless and hurtful. It is in this way that God deals with us, giving us all good things, temporal and spiritual, which are necessary and profitable, and contribute to our salvation.