LECTTTRE   I. 

THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 


INTEODUCTOEY    EEMAEKS. 

TT  is  a  peculiarity  of  our  Church,  that  she  not  only 
directs  her  children  to  be  taught  by  a  Catechism  the 
Christian  doctrine,  as  every  Church  of  the  Reforma- 
tion has  done,  but  also  orders  her  ministers  to  explain 
the  Catechism  which  she  has  adopted,  systematically 
and  regularly  before  her  congregations  on  the  Sabbath 
day ;  thus  securing  the  intelligent  acquaintance  of  her 
people  with  the  articles  of  our  holy  faith,  and  the  fidel- 
ity of  her  preachers  as  expounders  of  all  evangelical 
truth.  Originally  it  was  made  the  pastor's  duty  to  go 
through  the  exposition  once  a  year,  each  of  the  fifty- 
two  Sabbaths  having  its  assigned  part ;  but  the  Church 
in  this  country,  that  the  minister  might  have  a  more 
free  choice  of  topics,  sometime  since,  modified  the  rule, 
by  extending  the  time  over  four  years  ;  and  one  lecture 
or  more  in  each  month  will  meet  the  requirement  of 
that  authority  to  which  we  happily  owe  submission. 
I  undertake  the  difiicult  work  the  more  cheerfully,  be- 
cause many  of  my  hearers  have  but  recently  associated 
themselves  with  our  denomination  ;  because  the  method 
and  the  language  of  the  Catechism  is  well  chosen  for 
such  as  desire  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  they 
may  live  by  it ;  because  many  hurtful  errors  are  lament- 
ably prevalent ;  and  because  Christ's  true  disciples  will 
always  gratefully  listen  to  plain,  scriptural  statements 


4  INTRODUCTORY    REMARKS. 

of  sanctifying  truth.  At  the  same  time,  we  protest 
against  being  thought  "  to  hold  the  Catechism  in  equal 
estimation  with  the  Word  of  God "  (^Marck ) ;  or 
"  that  orthodoxy  should  be  decided  by  any  other  stand- 
ard than  the  combined  writings  of  the  divinely  inspired 
Prophets  and  Apostles,  —  the  only  rule  of  faith  and 
practice  "  (^Zeic/Iand,  U Enfant^  ;  —  but  we  do  hold  it  as 
the  symbol  of  our  belief,  and  the  test  of  adherence  to 
our  Reformed  Church,  into  which  no  one  has  a  right 
of  entrance  who  does  not  acknowledge  its  published 
confessions.  "  If,"  as  Van  der  Kemp  says,  "  we  believe 
the  doctrines  of  the  Catechism,  it  is  not  on  account  of 
the  Catechism,  but  of  God's  own  Word,  out  of  which 
and  according  to  which  the  Catechism  was  composed. 
If  we  prize  this  little  book,  we  love  the  Word  of  God 
more.  We  commend  it,  because  it  recommends  and 
explains  clearly  the  Word  of  God  to  us." 

Before,  however,  we  begin  its  exposition,  it  may 
not  be  out  of  place  to  give  a  very  brief  sketcb  of  its 
origin  and  history.  It  received  its  name  from  the  city 
of  Heidelberg,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Neckar,  now  in 
the  Grand  Duchy  of  Baden,  but  formerly  of  the  Lower 
Palatinate,  or  Palatinate  of  the  Rhine  ;  the  fertile  terri- 
tory of  which  is  now  divided  into  Prussia,  Bavaria, 
Baden,  Hesse  Darmstadt,  and  other  German  States. 
Heidelberg  became  famous  by  the  establishment  of  a 
University  there,  in  1386  (the  oldest  of  the  German 
seats  of  learning  .after  those  of  Prague  and  Vienna), 
which  contributed  greatly  to  the  enlightening  of  the 
Palatinate  and  the  circumjacent  countries.  Early  in 
the  fifteenth  century,  Jerome  of  Prague  came  to  Hei- 
delberg, advocating  the  new  opinions  ;  and  the  Univer- 
sity took  an  active  part  among  the  controversialists  of 


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS.  6 

that  eventful  time.  In  April,  1518,  under  the  reign 
of  the  Elector  Luclwig,  Luther  came  from  Wittenbero; 
to  his  brethren,  the  Augustines,  at  Heidelberg,  and  set 
up  public  disputations  in  their  monastery,  gaining  ap- 
plause and  followers  among  the  members  of  the  Uni- 
versity and  the  nobility  of  the  Palatinate.  These 
eminent  men,  but  especially  (Ecolampadius,  Martin 
Tucco,  and  Brentz,  pushed  the  cause  of  the  Refor- 
mation with  such  vigor  as  to  alarm  the  champions  of 
Rome,  who  prohibited  the  disputations  of  Luther  and 
his  friends,  citing  Brentz  and  his  associate,  Theobald 
Bilikan,  before  the  Chancellor  of  the  Electorate 
(Von  Banningen),  to  answer  the  charge  of  heresv, 
and  for  a  time  prevented  their  preaching ;  but  Frederic 
II.,  who  succeeded  his  brother,  the  Elector  Philip, 
bein.j;  Avell  versed  in  the  disputes,  and  zealously  devoted 
to  tlie  new  opinions,  began  at  once  the  Reformation  of 
the  Church;  and  was  accomplishing  much  good,  when 
the  disastrous  battle  of  Miihlberg  (24th  of  April,  1547, 
in  which  the  Elector  of  Saxony,  the  leader  of  the  Ref- 
ormation, and  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  were  made 
prisoners)  gave  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  the  power  to 
dictate  the  so-called  Interim,  by  which  the  main  tenets 
of  Popery  were  enforced.  The  Emperor's  triumph 
over  the  steadfast  friends  of  truth  did  not  last  long, 
however ;  and  by  the  memorable  treaty  of  Passau, 
Aug.  2,  1552,  the  Germans  obtained  full  religious 
freedom.  The  Elector,  Otto  Heinrich,  following  the 
example  of  Frederic  II.,  whom  he  succeeded,  1556, 
abolished  the  mass,  with  other  idolatries  of  Rome, 
ordered  all  images  to  be  removed  from  the  churches, 
and  commissioned  Heinrich  Stole,  Michael  Diller,  and 
Dr.  Marbach,  from  Strasburgli,  to  make  a  new  Church 


6  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 

order,  or  ritual,  which  he  caused  to  be  published 
and  adopted  by  all  the  churches  of  the  Palatinate. 
He  also  established  at  Heidelberg  an  "  Ecclesiastical 
Council,"  the  first  members  of  which  were  Diller,  the 
court  chaplain,  the  electoral  Chancellors  Ehren  and 
Eraft,  and  afterwards,  on  the  recommendation  of  Me- 
lancthon,  Tielman  Hesshus.  Already,  however,  the 
opinions  of  Zuinglius,  who  held  the  true  doctrine,  con- 
trary to  the  consubstantiation  of  Luther,  had  many 
adherents  at  Heidelberg ;  and  disputes  ran  high  be- 
tween the  two  schools.  The  pious  Frederic  HI., 
succeeding  Otto  Heinrich,  1559,  at  once  declared  him- 
self on  the  side  of  the  Zuinglians.  He  took  and  pursued 
his  measures  with  great  prudence,  but  no  less  zeal ;  and, 
after  a  sharp  controversy,  he  remodelled  the  churches 
of  the  Palatinate  after  the  form  of  the  Zuinglian-Hel- 
vetic  pattern.  He  converted  a  college,  which  Fred- 
eric the  Second  had  established  at  Heidelberg,  into  a 
theological  seminary,  and  gave  it  professors  of  the  Re- 
formed (not  Lutheran)  opinions.  After  accomplishing 
this,  he  turned  all  his  attention  to  the  preparing  of  a 
catechism  for  the  churches  and  schools  of  the  Palati- 
nate, There  were  already  several  catechisms,  besides 
that  of  Brenhius  and  that  of  Luther,  used  among  the 
Palatinate  churches,  causing  many  disputes  from  their 
discrepancies ;  and  they  needed  a  symbolical  book  of 
their  own,  clearly  setting  forth  the  true  Christian  doc- 
trine. The  Elector  himself  says,  in  the  Preface  which 
he  wrote  to  the  first  edition  of  the  Heidelberg  Cate- 
chism, 1563,  that  it  was  written  in  order  to  remove  all 
error,  false  doctrine,  and  differences  of  opinion  from 
the  Church,  and  establish  the  Reformation  firmly.  The 
Elector  proposed  the  composition  of  the  Catechism,  in 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS.  7 

1562,  to  Zachary  Ursinus,  a  learned  professor  at  Hei- 
delberg, and  Casparus  Olevianus,  the  court  preacher, 
a  favorite  of  Frederic.  Each  took  part  in  the  com- 
position of  the  book.  Olevianus  arranged  his  as  a 
simple  illustration  of  the  covenant  of  grace  ;  Ursinus 
prepared  two  forms  of  a  catechism,  —  one  for  children 
in  the  schools,  another  suited  to  the  more  advanced. 
From  the  labors  of  both,  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  was 
produced,  —  the  system  of  which  must  be  attributed  to 
Ursinus.  It  is,  however,  certain  that  Frederic  himself 
took  part  in  the  work,  especially  in  the  answer  to  the 
Seventy-eighth  Question,  which  the  Elector  says  he 
altered  from  the  words  of  Theodoret,  for  reasons  as- 
signed. 

The  Catechism  having  been  completed  in  the  same 
year  that  it  was  begun,  Frederic  assembled  in  a  synod 
at  Heidelberg  all  the  superintendents  and  preachers  of 
the  Palatinate,  whom  he  expected  to  examine  the  book 
carefully,  and  see  that  it  was  every  way  according  to 
the  Word  of  God.  Part  of  the  church  in  which  the 
synod  met  is  still  standing.  They  zealously  performed 
the  part  assigned  them,  and,  expressing  their  wonder  at 
the  learning  and  the  precision  shown  in  it,  heartily  ap- 
proved it,  particularly  and  as  a  whole,  recommending 
its  adoption  and  publication.  It  was  immediately  trans- 
lated into  Latin  by  two  learned  professors,  Lago  and 
Pithozao,  and  published  in  both  languages  at  Heidel- 
berg, 1563,  by  John  Mayer,  under  the  title  of  "  Cate- 
chism, or  Christian  Instruction,  according  to  the  usages 
of  the  Palatinate  Churches  and  Schools." 

Though  the  Latin  version  was  published  at  the  same 
time  with  the  German,  the  German,  or  original,  is  the 
authentic  copy ;  "  in  which,"  says  Alting,  "  everything 


8  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 

is  not  only  more  elegantly,  but  also  more  impressively 
set  forth." 

The  first  edition  is  now  extremely  rare.  It  differs 
not  a  little  from  our  present  copies  in  form,  words,  and 
style,  some  things  being  wanting  which  were  afterwards 
added,  and  some  things  supplied  which  were  afterwards 
left  out.  It  is  not  divided  into  the  sections  for  the  suc- 
cessive Lord's  days.  The  paragraphs  are  not  distinctly 
separated,  questions  and  answers  being  thrown  togeth- 
er. The  scriptural  proofs  are  few,  and  not  always  well 
chosen.  The  Eightieth  Question,  for  some  unknown 
reason,  is  wholly  omitted. 

The  first  edition  was  followed  in  the  same  year  by 
another,  having  the  same  title  and  editor,  so  that  it 
could  not  be  recognized  as  distinct  but  for  the  insertion 
of  the  Eightieth  Question,  and  a  note  at  the  end,  stating 
that  it  was  added  upon  the  order  of  the  Elector.  The 
language  of  the  Eightieth  Question  is  not,  however, 
the  same  with  that  which  we  now  have,  (probably  from 
some  desire  not  unnecessarily  to  offend  the  Papists,)  but 
is  in  these  words  :  "And  is  not  the  mass,  in  truth,  noth- 
ing else  but  an  idolatrous  denial  of  the  sole  accepted 
sacrifice,  the  sufferings  of  Christ?"  There  was,  prob- 
ably, yet  a  third  edition  in  1563 ;  as  a  copy,  in  other 
respects  like  tlie  second,  gives  the  conclusion  of  the 
Eightieth  Question  somewhat  differently  ;  possibly,  how- 
ever, a  new  page  was  substituted  in  later  impressions 
of  the  second.  The  inconvenience  of  the  early  arrange- 
ment was  so  much  felt,  that  the  fourth  edition  (with 
same  title)  was  issued  by  Mayer,  1,573  (duodecimo), 
in  which  the  questions  and  answers  are  divided  and 
numbered,  and  marked  for  the  fifty-two  Lord's  days. 

The  most  valuable  edition  of  these  times  is  yet  pub- 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS.  9 

lished  at  Neustadt  on  the  Hardt,  1595  (octavo),  with 
the  title:  "  Catechism,  or  Brief  System  of  Christian  Doc- 
trine ;  together  with  the  Church  Ritual,  Prayers,  and 
appropriate  Proofs  from  Holy  Writ.  Also,  the  Defence 
of  the  Heidelbei'g  Theologians  against  the  unfounded 
charo-es  and  attacks  with  which  this  Catechism  and  its 
excellent  Proofs  out  of  Scripture  have  been  unfairly 
pursued.  Also,  the  Opinion  of  Martin  Luther  on  the 
Bread-breaking  in  the  Holy  Supper.  Also,  Answers 
and  Counter-questions  on  the  Six  Questions  on  the 
Holy  Supper,  and  in  which  particulars  the  Evangeli- 
cal Churches  agree  or  differ  respecting  the  Holy  Sup- 
per;- arranged  by  Zacharias  Ursinus."  The  Defence 
given  in  this  previous  edition  is  masterly. 

The  division  of  the  Catechism  into  its  three  principal 
parts,  as  set  forth  in  the  Second  Question  and  Answer, 
was  imitated  from  the  order  of  Scripture  in  the  Old  and 
New  Testament,  as  we  learn  from  the  Prolegomena, 
(preface)  of  Ursinus  himself.  It  is  also  stated  by  sev- 
eral learned  divines  (Theo.  Marck  in  his  Catechetical 
Defence,  Dontrein  in  his  Golden  Treasure,  and  Von 
Alpen  in  his  Prolegomena),  that  the  arrangement  fol- 
lowed is  that  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans. 

The  Catechism  was  the  object  of  many  and  long- 
continued  attacks  from  various  quarters,  but  was  man- 
fully and  successfully  defended  until  it  gained  the  con- 
fidence and  praise  of  all  the  Reformed  Churches ;  editions 
of  both  the  German  and  Latin  versions  were  numerous, 
and  many  commentaries  and  expositions  by  way  of  ser- 
mons were  written  upon  it,  —  the  best  of  which  is  that 
of  Ursinus  himself,  published  from  notes  taken  from  his 
lectures  on  the  work  at  Heidelberg,  1569-77,  coi-rected 
and  edited  by  David  Pareus,  1591-98. 


10  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 

The  Catechism  has  been  translated  into  nearly  all 
the  civilized  languages.  A  Greek  translation,  intended 
for  the  churches  of  that  name,  was  made  by  Frederic 
Sylburg,  and  sent  at  the  expense  of  the  States-Gen- 
eral to  the  Patriarch  of  Constantinople.  The  Belgian 
government  had  it  translated  into  Spanish,  that  it  might 
be  used  in  the  West  Indies.  The  Swiss  churches  re- 
constructed the  Catechism  of  Zurich  after  its  clearer 
expositions.  The  Reformed  churches  of  Hungary  or- 
dered it  to  be  taught  and  explained  in  their  churches, 
schools,  and  universities.  It  received  high  commenda- 
tions from  the  pious  and  learned  in  England ;  while 
almost  miiversally  on  the  continent  it  was  acknowl- 
edged as  a  symbolical  book  of  the  Reformed  churches. 
It  was  rendered  into  Hebrew,  Greek,  Dutch,  Spanish, 
French,  English,  Italian,  Bohemian,  Polish,  Hungarian, 
Arabic,  and  Malay,  as  well  as  in  Gemian  and  Latin. 
It  has  passed  through  not  less  than  five  hundred  thou- 
sand editions,  through  the  press  of  Germany  alone. 

But  in  no  country  was  it  more  highly  honored  than 
in  Holland.  It  was  early  made  the  symbolical  book  of 
the  Dutch  Church,  ordered  to  be  taught  in  their  schools 
and  universities,  and  expounded  regularly  from  their 
pulpits.  All  their  pi-eachers,  and  teachers,  and  profes- 
sors were  sworn  to  hold  and  promulgate  its  doctrines  ; 
nor  was  any  one  admitted  to  church-membership  who 
did  not  profess  its  faith.  In  the  most  mournful  times 
of  persecution,  Peter  Gabriel  encouraged  the  constancy 
of  his  suffering  brethren  by  preaching  from  it  at  Am- 
sterdam. It  was  first  approved  by  the  Dutch  divines  who 
were  exiles  for  their  creed,  in  an  assembly  at  Wessel, 
1568  ;  the  lesser  national  synod  of  Dordrecht,  1574, 
required  that  all  their  teachei's  of  religion  should  sign 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS.  H 

the  Catechism  at  the  same  time  with  their  Confession 
of  Faitli ;  and  the  great  synod  of  Dordrecht  directed 
their  formularies  to  be  prepared,  —  the  first  to  be  signed 
by  professors  of  theology,  the  second  by  preachers, 
and  the  third  by  school-masters,  —  declaring  and  prom- 
ising the  strictest  adherence  to  the  Heidelberg  Cate- 
chism. The  first  and  second  formularies  are  preserved 
in  use  among  our  churches  here  to  this  day.  Many 
most  learned  theologians  from  all  parts  of  Europe  being 
present,  by  invitation,  at  that  synod,  united  with  their 
Dutch  brethren  in  thoroughly  examining  it,  and  gave 
it  the  most  unreserved  and  highest  commendation. 
From  the  mother  churches  of  Germany  and  Holland, 
it  was  brought  by  their  children  to  this  country,  and  is 
now  the  symbolical  book  of  the  Reformed  German  and 
Dutch  churches  of  North  America  ;  where  may  God 
long  maintain  its  holy  teachings. 

Thus  you  may  see,  dear  fellow-Christians,  through 
Avhat  care  and  unanimous  devotion  of  pious,  learned 
men  the  Lord  of  the  Church  has  prepared  and  pre- 
served this  admirable  compend  of  his  pure  truth  for  us. 
The  little  book  which  your  children  study,  has  stood 
the  shock  of  Popery  and  heresy  through  bloody  centu- 
ries,—  strengthening  the  weak,  and  making  heroic  the 
strong.  Well  may  we  study,  with  devout  and  thankful 
hearts,  a  manual  so  sacred  in  its  doctrines  and  associa- 
tions. 

You  will  remark,  however,  that,  unlike  most  books 
of  the  kind,  our  Catechism  takes  the  order  of  Christian 
experience  ;  was  prepared  for  those  professing  to  be 
Christians,  and  should  be  expounded  accordingly.  May 
God  aid  me  in  the  exposition,  and  bless  you  in  the  hear- 
ing, for  the  honor  of  his  holv  name.     Amen. 


FIRST  LORD'S   DAY. 
THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

Quest.  I.     What  is  thine  only  comfort  in  life  and  death  f 

Ans.  That  I,  with  body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and  death,  am  not  my 
own,  but  belong  unto  mj-  faithful  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ,  who,  with  his 
precious  blood,  hath  fully  satisfied  for  all  my  sins,  and  delivered  me  from 
all  power  of  the  devil ;  and  so  preserves  me,  that  Avithout  the  will  of 
my  heavenly  Father,  not  a  hair  can  fall  from  my  head;  yea,  that  all 
things  must  be  subservient  to  my  salvation;  and,  therefore,  by  his 
Holy  Spirit  he  also  assures  me  of  eternal  life,  and  makes  me  sincerely 
willing  and  ready  henceforth  to  live  unto  him. 

Quest.  II.  How  many  things  are  necessary  for  thee  to  hnoiv,  that  thou, 
enjoying  this  comfort,  mayest  live  and  die  happily  f 

Ans.'  Three:  the  first,  how  great  my  sins  and  miseries  are ;  the  second, 
how  I  may  be  delivered  from  all  my  sins  and  miseries;  the  third,  how 
I  shall  express  my  gratitude  to  God  for  such  deliverance. 

T^HE  answer  to  tlie  First  Question  tells  us  in  a  few 
-^  words,  what  those  great  doctrines  of  the  Scriptures 
are,  from  which  the  Christian  derives  his  sure  and  only 
comfort. 

The  answer  to  the  Second  Question  states  the  or- 
der which  will  be  followed  throughout  the  Catechism, 
by  a  division  of  all  Christian  knowledge  necessary  for 
our  salvation  into  three  parts. 

The  several  truths  contained  in  both  these  answers 
will  be  discussed  at  length  as  Ave  proceed,  step  b}'  step, 
with  our  study  of  the  book.  At  present,  therefore,  we 
shall  only  ask  you  to  mark  — 

First:  The  comfort  ivhicli  a  Christimi  has  in  his 
religious  belief. 

Secondly  :  The  method  by  ivhich  he  attains  a  knowl- 
edge of  this  comfort. 


THE  ONLY   COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.  13 

First:  The  comfort  ivJiieh  a  Christian  has  in  his 
religious  belief. 

My  beloved  friends,  —  the  Catechism  does  not  err, 
but  follows  the  high,  infallible,  binding  example  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  throughout  the  Scriptures.  When  the 
evangelical  prophet,  moved  by  divine  influence,  pro- 
claimed, as  the  voice  of  God,  the  blessings  of  Christ's 
approaching  kingdom,  he  commanded  the  messengers 
of  grace,  saying  :  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people, 
saith  your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem, 
and  cry  unto  her  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that 
her  iniquity  is  pardoned  ;  for  she  hath  received  of  the 
Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  When  the  ano-el 
came  to  the  shepherds  with  the  annunciation  of  Christ's 
advent,  what  were  his  words?  "  Fear  not ;  for  behold, 
I  bring  you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  which  shall  be  to 
all  people."  When  Jesus  himself  preached,  what  was 
his  argument  to  gain  the  ears  of  the  people  ?  "  If  any 
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink."  "  Come 
unto  me  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  give  you  rest."  What  is  the  name  given  by  the 
blessed  Master  to  his  truth  but  the  Gosjjel,  or  good 
news,  which  he  has  ordained  shall  be  preached  to  every 
creature  ?  Nay,  does  not  the  term  salvation  imply  that 
there  is  a  danger  of  misery  from  which  we  are  to  be 
rescued,  and  is  not  the  hope  of  safety  a  comfort  ?  The 
Catechism  is  right  in  bringing  religion  to  us  under  the 
name  of  comfort ;  nor  is  the  promise  of  comfort  discord- 
ant with  the  inculcation  of  duty,  as  the  subsequent 
teachings  of  the  book  -will  show. 

The  chief  end  of  man,  in  his  salvation,  as  in  his 
creation,  is  the  glory  of  God ;  but  the  glory  of  our 
divine  Maker  and  Redeemer  is  closely  connected  with 


14  THE  ONLY  COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.        [Lect.  1. 

the  happiness  of  all  who  faithfully  obey  him.  It  was 
that  he  mioht  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeino;  a  fam- 
ily  of  creatures  reflecting  in  their  happiness  his  own 
blessedness,  that  he  made  our  race  ;  it  is  that  he  may 
behold  a  familj^  of  penitent  sinners  happy  again  and 
forever,  that  he  has  established  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion. The  holy  angels,  who  advance  by  their  glad 
service  the  glory  of  their  Lord,  are  happy  in  their 
ministry  ;  and  man,  while  he  continued  sinless,  was 
happy  in  his  heavenly  Father's  approbation.  The  re- 
lation of  the  creature  to  the  Creator  makes  it  necessary 
that  the  happiness  and  obedience  of  the  subject  should 
be  inseparable,  and  also  —  his  disobedience  and  misery. 
It  is  only  when  his  intelligent  creatures  break  the  right- 
eous laws  which  God  has  given  for  tlieir  guidance,  and 
thus  dash  themselves  against  the  immutable  principles 
of  his  government,  that,  to  manifest  the  glory  of  his 
justice,  he  makes  them  miserable  in  their  sins,  as  the 
fallen  angels  are,  and  as  fallen  men  are,  except  they  be 
saved  through  faith  in  Christ  and  repentance  toward 
God.  The  process  of  the  Gospel  is  the  conversion  of 
the  sinner  from  sin  to  holiness ;  that  through  holiness 
he  may  be  restored  to  happiness.  It  is  our  duty  to  be 
happy,  because  happiness  lies  in  contentment  with  all 
the  divine  will  concerning  us.  Therefore,  the  Chris- 
tian is  not  selfish  or  blameworthy  in  seeking  his  own 
liappiness  from  that  religion,  by  the  avowal  and  prac- 
tice of  which  he  endeavors  to  glorify  God  on  earth 
and  prepare  for  glorifying  him  more  perfectly  beyond 
the  grave.  Indeed,  it  is  our  enjoyment  of  the  Chris- 
tian religion,  which  proves  our  sincerity,  for  when  we 
truly  love  God  we  must  find  his  service  a  great  delight. 
Jesus,  our  divine  Master  and  holy  example,  served  God 


THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS.  15 

for  the  "joy  that  was  set  before  him,"  counting  it  his 
meat  and  his  drink  to  do  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Fa- 
ther, and  we  follow  in  his  steps  when  we  fight  the 
Christian  fight,  run  the  Christian  race,  and  keep  the 
Christian  faith,  cheered  by  the  hope  of  winning  through 
grace  the  crown  of  life,  which  God  for  Christ's  sake 
has  prepared  for  all  who  love  him.  It  is  because  God 
would  animate  our  zeal  by  such  motives  that  he  has 
given  us  so  many  exceeding  great  and  precious  prom- 
ises, causing  the  holy  Scriptures  to  be  "  written  for  our 
learning,  that  we  through  faith  and  comfort  in  the 
Scriptures  might  have  hope." 

There  is  much  meaning  in  the  use  of  the  word  com- 
fort, to  express  the  Christian's  enjoyment  of  religion,  as 
it  supposes  that  the  person  who  is  comforted  would 
otherwise  be  oppressed  by  trouble.  The  angels  are 
happy  in  heaven,  but  they  need  no  comfort,  for  they 
have  no  sorrow.  Our  first  parents  needed  no  comfort 
until  sin  brought  trouble  upon  them ;  but  Lamech 
called  the  name  of  his  son  Noali  (or  Rest),  because, 
said  he  :  "  This  same  shall  comfort  us  concerning  our 
work  and  toil  of  our  hands,  because  of  the  ground 
which  the  Lord  hath  cursed."  Religion  does  not  at 
once  deliver  us  out  of  trouble  ;  on  the  contrary,  "  it 
is  good  for  us  to  be  aftlicted  ;  "  but  it  comforts  us  in 
tribulations,  through  which  we  enter  the  kingdom  of 
God,  enabling  las  to  bear  with  patience  our  many  sor- 
rows, and  to  resist  with  courage  our  many  temptations, 
by  the  assurance  that  God  loves  us  now,  and  has  pro- 
vided for  us  an  eternal  rest  hereafter.  When  we  reach 
heaven  we  shall  need  no  comfort,  because  our  troubles 
will  be  over  forever. 

Hence  the  Catechism  speaks  of  our  "  comfort  in  life 


16  THE  ONLY   COMFOKT   OF  BELIEVERS.        and  death."  While  lite  lasts  our  troubles  will  last,  and 
death  is  a  fearful  trial  to  the  stoutest  heart ;  but  when 
we  have  passed  through  and  survived  that  final  agony, 
our  joy  will  be  perfect  and  secure.  Until  then  we  have 
great  need  of  comfort,  and  find  it  in  our  Christian  re- 
ligion, which,  though  it  does  not  make  our  present  life 
perfectly  happy  (for  this  is  not  our  rest),  is  rich  in 
comfort  to  all  that  believe.  Hence  the  Holy  Ghost, 
through  whose  gracious  influences  we  receiv6  the  truths 
of  the  Gospel,  is  called  the  Comforter,  and  those  who 
enjoy  his  grace  are  said  to  "  walk  in  the  comfort  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Of  this  the  Apostle  Paul,  our  best 
example  of  a  Christian,  and  of  a  Christian  preacher 
after  Christ,  had'  sweet  experience,  as  we  know  from 
many  texts  in  his  writings,  but  especially  fi*om  the 
preface  of  his  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  : 
"  Blessed  be  God,  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God 
of  all  comfort,  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribula- 
tion, that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them  which  are 
in  any  trouble,  by  the  comfort  wherewith  we  ourselves 
are  comforted  of  God." 

This  is  the  believer's  "  onli/  comfort."  They,  who 
have  never  acquainted  themselves  with  the  God  of 
salvation,  may  find  some  passing  comfort  in  things  of 
the  present  world,  but  at  the  end  will  reap  shame  and 
eternal  disappointment,  since  things  gross  and  perish- 
able can  never  satisfy  the  spiritual  and  immortal  soul ; 
but  the  Christian  looks  up  to  God,  saying  :  "  Whom 
have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee.  My  flesh  and  my 
heart  ftiileth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart, 
and    my   portion    forever."      He    is    conscious   of   his 


THE  ONLY   COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.  17 

spiritual  immortality,  and  knows  that  God  alone  can  fill 
his  immortality  with  blessedness.  He  draws  many  com- 
forts through  the  creatures  of  God,  but  only  through 
them  as  the  channels  in  which  they  flow  down  to  him 
from  God,  the  overflowing  Fountain.  Witiiout  God,  he 
has  nothing ;  with  God,  he  has  all  things.  It  is  the  truths 
of  religion  which  assure  him  of  the  Divine  favor  to  his 
soul ;  and,  therefore,  in  religion  he  finds  his  only  comfort. 
The  Catechism  is  right  in  its  first  question,  lor  it  puts 
our  religion  to  the  closest  proof,  when  it  demands  : 
"  \Yh^t  is  our  only  comfort  in  life  and  in  death  ?  " 

The  believer's  answer  to  this  question,  states,  firsts 
a  main  fact ;  then,  the  particulars  contained  in  the 
fact. 

I.  A  main  fact. 

"  That  I  with  my  body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and 
death,  am  not  my  own,  but  belong  unto  my  faithful 
Saviour,  Jesus  Christ." 

The  natural  pride  of  man's  heart  resists  the  thought 
of  subjection  to  God,  and  of  dependence  upon  him. 
This  was  the  essence  of  man's  first  sin,  when,  tempted 
by  the  devil,  he  sought  to  be  a  god  unto  himself.  So, 
every  man,  unconverted  from  the  iniquity  of  the  fall, 
loves  not  to  retain  the  thought  of  God,  but  walks  after 
the  choice  of  his  own  heart.  He  would,  perhaps,  shrink 
from  denying  the  existence  or  sovereign  providence  of 
God  ;  but,  practically,  every  man  who  does  not  live  in 
the  fear  of  God,  depending  gratefully  upon  divine  care 
and  conscious  of  his  responsibility  to  the  Great  Judge, 
is  an  atheist  at  heart.  The  Christian  has  been  changed 
from  this  proud  temper  by  faith  in  the  Gospel ;  and 
he  considers  it  his  happiness  that  he  is  not  his  own 
but  belongs  to  God  in  Christ ;  that  he  is  the  Lord's, 


18  THE  ONLY   COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.        not  only  by  creation,  for  surely  what  is  made  out  of 
nothing  belongs  to  the  Maker,  but  also  by  redemption, 
because  having  been  rescued  from  eternal  ruin,  he  is 
the  rightful  property  of  his  Saviour  ;  that  his  body  is 
the  Lord's,  from  whom  its  life  with  all  its  faculties  is 
derived,  and  by  whom,  when  death  returns  it  to  the 
dust,  it  will  be  kept  for  a  glorious  immortality  ;  that 
his  soul  is  the  Lord's,  with  all  its  capacities  and  affec- 
tions, to  be  taught,  ruled,  sanctified,  and  employed  by 
him  for  his  glory ;  that  his  life  is  the  Lord's,  to  be  spent 
in  his  holy,  pleasant  service  ;  and  that  his  death  is  the 
Lord's,  because  his  closing  triumph  here,  and  his  eter- 
nal being  after,  will  praise  the  mercy  of  his  Redeemer, 
through  whose  gracious  power  he  is  raised  from  the 
depths  of  sin  to  the  heights  of  heaven. 

He  belongs  to  Christ  by  a  threefold  obligation. 
Christ  has  bought  him.  His  life  and  happiness  were 
forfeit  to  divine  justice  ;  but  Christ  has  redeemed 
him  from  eternal  death  by  the  substitution  of  himself 
to  bear  the  wrath  of  God,  and  so  Christ  has  acquired 
a  full  right  over  him,  as  the  purchase  of  his  atonement. 
First,  he  belonged  to  God  his  Creator,  then  he  was  in 
the  rio-hteous  hands  of  God  his  Judo-e,  but  now  he  be- 
longs  to  God  the  Saviour.  "  Thine  they  were,"  said 
the  blessed  Mediator,  speaking  of  his  disciples  to  the 
Father,  "  and  thou  gavest  them  me."  The  Father,  as 
the  representative  of  the  Godhead  against  whom  they 
had  sinned,  gives  them  to  the  incarnate  Son  as  the 
representative  of  both  the  Godhead  and  the  Church  in 
the  plan  of  salvation  ;  but  gives  them  not  without  a 
pi'ice.  They  are  delivered,  transferred,  set  over  to  the 
Saviour  by  virtue  of  the  eternal  covenant.  Christ  has 
fulfilled  his  part  in  satisfying  the  honor  of  the  divine 


,.ECT.  I.]         THE  ONLY  COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.  19 

law  which  they  had  broken,  and  now  the  Father  fulfils 
his  part  in  giving  them  to  Christ  as  his  own  peculiar 
property.  Wherefore  the  apostle  says  :  "  Ye  are  not  your 
own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price :  therefore,  glorify 
God  in  your  body  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's." 
Again,  we  are  exhorted  to  look  for  the  "  appearing 
of  the  great  God  and'  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who 
gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all 
iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  (or 
a  people  of  his  own)  zealous  of  good  works."  Yet 
again :  "  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not 
redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold 
.  .  .  .  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of 
a  lamb  (a  lamb  sacrificed  for  sin)  without  blemish 
and  without  spot."  All  the  property  which  God,  as 
Creator  and  Judge,  had  in  the  believer  is  now  trans- 
ferred to  God  the  Saviour. 

This  the  believer  acknowledges  when  he  accepts  the 
atoning  work  of  Christ.  He  is,  therefore,  Christ's  by 
Ilia  own  vow.  He  gives,  surrenders  himself  to  Christ, 
making  a  covenant  with  him,  promising  on  his  part  to 
serve  the  Saviour  by  divine  help  all  the  days  of  his 
life,  and  Christ  on  his  part  engaging  to  sa;ve  him  until 
the  uttermost. 

Then,  as  a  gracious  consequence,  the  believer  belongs 
to  Christ. because  he  is  a  member  of  that  spiritual  bodt/, 
whose  Head  is  Christ.  There  is  much  meant  by  the 
mystery  of  the  believer's  union  with  the  body  of  Christ, 
which  he  cannot  at  present  understand  ;  but  this  we  do 
know,  that  through  faith  he  lives,  because  Christ's  life 
is  in  him,  that  he  is  corporated  with  Christ  in  the  en- 
joyment of  all  those  blessings  which  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  has  obtained  from  the  Father  ;  and  that  he  is 


20  THE   ONLY    COMFORT   OF   BELIEVERS.         one  with  Christ  in  all  the  future  glory  of  his  Head. 
It  is  thus  a  vital  union  ;  the  believer  is  a  member  of 
Christ's  "  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones  ;  "  it  is 
a  fruitful  union,  Christ  animating  him  to  all  good 
works  ;  for,  by  another  figure,  he  is  said  to  be  grafted 
in  Christ  as  a  branch  in  a  vine,  which  bears  fruit  from 
the  energy  diffused  through  it  by  the  vigorous  stem  ; 
it  is  an  indissoluble  union,  for  the  body  cannot  be  separ- 
ated from  its  immortal  Head  ;  "  because  I  live,"  says 
the  Saviour,  "  ye  shall  live  also." 

Therefore  does  the  Christian  rejoice  that  he  is  "  not 
his  own,  but  belongs  unto  his  faithful  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  Were  he  his  own,  he  would  be  left  to  the 
care  of  himself;  but  now  because  he  is  Christ's,  Christ 
will  take  care  of  him  as  his  own,  as  the  purchase  of  his 
blood,  as  a  member  of  his  body,  as  the  instrument  of 
his  glory,  and  as  a  trophy  of  his  triumphant  grace. 
This  leads  us  to  consider  — 

n.   The  particulars  included  by  the  main  fact. 

1.  Pardon. —  Christ  "  hath  fully  satisfied  by  his  own 
blood  for  all  his  sins."  Did  he  belong  to  himself,  he 
would  be  obliged  to  meet  in  his  own  person  all  the 
guilty  consequences  of  his  many  offences  against  God, 
and  be  unavoidably  overvvhehned  by  eternal  wrath ; 
but  now  Christ  claims  him  at  the  hands  of  divine  jus- 
tice as  his ;  interposing  his  atonement  between  the  ven- 
geance of  God  and  his  ransomed  one,  covering  the 
unworthy  with  his  merits,  representing  the  penitent  in 
his  ever-prevalent  prayers,  claiming  for  him  acceptance 
with  himself,  in  whom  the  Father  is  well  pleased.  Oh, 
how  precious,  in  this  light,  is  the  fact  that  we  belong 
not  to  ourselves,  but  to  our  faithful  Saviovu'  Jesus 
Christ ! 


THE   ONLY   COMFORT  OF   BELIEVERS.  21 

2.  Deliverance  from  danger.  —  "•  And  hath  deUvered 
me  from  all  power  of  the  devil.",  Tiiis  deliverance  is 
twofold.  The  devil,  full  of  malice  against  men,  is 
employed  by  God  as  an  executioner  of  divine  ven- 
geance ;  and  in  this  permitted  capacity  he  claims  the 
imuenitent  for  his  victims ;  but  our  faithful  Saviour, 
stronger  than  our  arch-enemy,  and  in  his  right  as  the 
Redeemer,  rescues  the  captive  out  of  his  cruel  hands. 
So  far  as  sin  had  given  Satan  a  right  over  the  body 
and  soul  of  the  sinner  that  calls  to  Christ  for  help,  he 
destroys  death  and  him  that  has  the  power  of  death ; 
placing  the  penitent,  now  his  own,  eternally  beyond 
his  baffled  rage.  This  deliverance,  however,  is  a  part 
of  pardon,  which  we  have  already  treated  of. 

But  sinners  are  said  by  the  Scripture  to  put  them- 
selves wilfully  under  the  control  of  the  devil,  when 
they  comply  with  his  temptations.  They  admit  his 
sophisms,  by  which  he  leads  the  godless  astray,  into 
their  minds,  and  so  their  conscience  is  deadened  or 
perverted ;  their  crimes  against  God,  often  repeated, 
acquire  the  fettering  force  of  habit ;  nay,  they  get  a 
fearful  proclivity  to  evil,  accelerating  in  impulse  as 
they  go  downward,  until,  if  divine  gmce  do  not  arrest 
them,  they  plunge  from  the  wickedness  of  this  world 
to  the  yet  more  awful  wickedness  of  hell.  Hence 
they  are  said  to  be  "  sold  (like  slaves)  under  sin  ;  "  to 
be  "  led  captive  of  the  devil ;  "  to  be  "  in  bondage  to 
Satan."  Oh,  how  shall  the  sinner,  if  left  to  himself, 
break  these  more  than  iron  chains  ?  How  shall  he  de- 
liver himself  from  this  fatal  bondage  ?  How  shall  he 
escape  from  his  cunning,  cruel  master?  "Blessed  be 
God !  "  exclaims  the  penitent  believer,  "  I  belong  to 
my  faithful  Saviour  Jesus   Christ ;    he    is  my  master 


22  THE  ONLY   COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS.         now ;  he  has  bought  me  for  his  own  with  his  most 
precious  blood  ;  he  will  not  leave  me  in  my  helpless- 
ness;  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  will  break  the  fetters  from 
my  soul  ;  he  will  give  me  liberty  ;  his  love  will  be  a 
refuge  where  my  old  master  cannot  reach  me.  Stronger 
is  he  that  is  for  me,  than  all  that  be  acrainst  me."  The 
deliverance  may  not  be  complete  at  once,  for  sancti- 
Hcation,  in  the  wise  process  of  grace,  is  a  gradual 
work ;  the  devil  yields  not  his  possession  of  our  hearts 
easily,  and  the  conflict  there  of  sin  with  godliness  may 
be  sharp  ;  but  the  deliverance  is  begun  in  regeneration  ; 
it  is  can'ied  on  by  an  Almighty  Power  ;  its  certainty  is 
assured  by  divine  promise.  The  charm  of  Satan  over 
the  believer  is  met  by  a  master  charm  in  the  name  of 
Jesus,  "  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins." 
The  Seed  of  the  womai>  has  so  bruised  the  old  ser- 
{)ent's  head,  that  the  weakest  saint  shall  break  him 
down  under  foot,  and  trample  over  him  into  life,  free- 
dom, and  joy  eternal.  Oh,  thanks  again  to  God,  that 
Christ  owns  us,  and  we  are  not  our  own  ! 

3.  Preservation.  —  "  And  so  pi-eserves  me,  that  with- 
out the  will  of  my  heavenly  Father,  not  a  hair  can  fall 
from  my  head  ;  yea,  that  all  things  shall  be  subservient 
to  my  salvation."  If,  instead  of  belonging  to  his  Saviour, 
the  Christian  owned  himself,  his  condition  were  most 
miserable,  for  he  would  own  nothing  but  himself,  while 
all  around  him  —  all  that  is  necessary  to  his  happiness, 
all  present  and  future  events  affecting  his  welfare,  are 
the  Lord's,  and  oi'dered  by  the  Lord,  on  whose  good- 
ness he  has  no  claim  ;  he  would  be  alone,  helpless, 
utterly  destitute  and  needy.  Now,  Chi'ist  owns  him  ; 
and  as  a  faithful  master  cares  for  his  own  servant, 
whom  he  has  bought  so  dearly ;    and  all   things   are 


THE   ONLY   COMFORT   OF   BELIEVERS.  23 

Christ's,  and  he  turns  all  things  for  the  good  of  his 
own.  The  God  of  salvation  is  the  God  of  adoption. 
The  behever  is  united  to  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God 
incarnate,  therefore  God  adopts  him  as  his  child ;  and 
the  heavenly  Father  will  never  suffer  any  real  evil  to 
come  upon  his  regenerate  children.  When  the  Father 
gave  to  Christ  the  sinners  whom  he  redeems,  he  gave 
all  things  into  Christ's  hands,  that  he  might  be  Head 
over  all  things  to  his  Church.  All  power  is  given  unto 
Christ,  and  all  his  sovereign  prerogative  he  employs  for 
the  benefit  of  his  own  peculiar  people.  He  has  made 
their  eternal  salvation  his  glory,  and  none  can  pluck 
those  whom  he  preserves  out  of  his  affectionate  em- 
brace. Life  is  the  time  of  the  Christian's  prepai'ation 
for  eternity  ;  every  thing  that  concerns  him  here  has  a 
bearing  upon  his  state  hereafter,  therefore  does  his 
faithful  Saviour  take  the  tenderest  care  of  him  now 
and  until  he  is  brought  home.  He  is  "  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be 
revealed  in  the  last  time."  So  nice  and  intense  is  this 
care  that  the  very  hairs  of  his  head  are  numbered. 
Not  one  of  them  falls  to  the  ground  without  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  Nay,  all  things  work  together  for  his  good. 
The  process  is  begun,  is  now  carried  on,  and  will  be 
steadily  furthered  until  the  design  is  consummated  in 
the  believer's  full  redemption.  Cheerfully,  then,  does 
the  believer  commit  his  all  to  Him  to  whom  he  has 
committed  himself;  his  time,  to  him  who  takes  charge 
of  his  eternity,  the  regulation  of  his  circumstances  on 
earth,  to  him  who  has  prepared  for  him  a  blissful  heaven. 
If  he  had  the  care  of  himself,  he  might  well  despair ; 
but  now  that  Christ  has  the  care  of  him,  he  knows  heis 
safe,  —  his  bodv  safe,  his  soul  safe,  safe  in  life,  safe  in 


24  THE  ONLY  COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.         death,  safe  forever.  His  griefs  may  be  many,  his 
temptations  strong,  his  infirmity  extreme,  and  therefore 
he  cannot  help  being  troubled ;  but  he  has  comfort 
amidst  all,  because  he  belongs  to  his  faithful  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  whose  grace  is  sufficient  for  him. 

4.  Assurance.  —  "  By  his  Holy  Spirit  he  also  assures 
me  of  eternal  life,  and  makes  me  sincerely  willing  and 
ready  henceforth  to  live  unto  "him."  Man,  left  to  his 
own  unassisted  reason,  could  never  have  ascertained 
the  character  or  will  of  God,  much  less  discovered  the 
plan  of  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ ;  but  the  faith- 
ful* Saviour  having  undertaken  to  rescue  his  own  from 
all  the  consequences  of  their  sins,  makes  their  instruc- 
tion sure  by  the  grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  Holy  men 
of  old  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  write  the 
books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  which  together 
constitiate  the  Word  of  God,  our  only  rule  of  faith  and 
})ractice ;  and  thei'efore  all  we  know  of  religion  we 
have  been  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Scriptures 
are,  however,  by  themselves  addressed  to  men  or  Chris- 
tians (as  the  case  may  be)  generally  ;  and  experience, 
nay,  the  Word  itself,  shows  that  no  man  applies  the 
testimony  of  the  revelation  to  his  own  case,  until  the 
same  divine  Agent  who  inspired  the  testimony  moves 
the  sinner's  heart  to  perceive  himself  addressed  by  it ; 
but  then  discovering  his  guilt  and  danger,  he  also  sees 
the  sufficiency  of  atonement  offered  on  his  behalf,  and 
trusts  in  Christ  as  his  Saviour.  Such  personal  faith  — 
the  appropriating  of  the  Gospel  to  our  own  souls  —  is 
the  effect  of  the  Spirit's  testimony  in  our  hearts  corre- 
sponding to  his  testimony  in  the  Scriptures,  and  consti- 
tutes our  assurance  of  salvation,  —  by  which  salvation 
we  mean,  according  to  Scripture,  the  full  accomplish- 


THE  ONLY   COMFORT   OF  BELIEVERS.  25 

ment  of  the  Saviour's  purpose  of  eternal  love  toward 
the  sinner  that  beheves  on  his  name.  Tlius  we  read : 
"  No  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord  but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  "  and  again  :  "  He  that  believeth  on  the 
Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself;  "  and  yet 
again  :  "As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
they  are  the  sons  of  God.  For  ye  have  not  received 
the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear;  but  ye  have  re- 
ceived the  spirit  of  adoption  whereby  ye  cry,  Abba, 
Father.  The  Spirit  also  beareth  witness  with  our 
spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  God;  and  if  children, 
then  heirs  ;  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ." 
The  promise  assures  complete  salvation  to  all  who  be- 
lieve ;  when,  therefore,  we  believe,  God  by  his  own 
testimony  assures  complete  salvation  unto  us. 

But  it  will  be  asked.  May  not  a  sinner  deceive  him- 
self in  thinking  that  he  believes  wlien  he  does  not  ? 
Is  there  not  a  counterfeit  of  true  faith  ?  and  if  so,  how- 
may  we  attain  the  assurance  of  our  salvation  ?  The 
Catechism  meets  the  inquiry.  Tiiere  is  indeed  a  coun- 
terfeit faith,  but  it  may  be  detected  by  its  fruitlessness, 
while  on  the  other  hand  a  true  faith  shows  itself  in  its 
sanctifying  effect  on  the  life  and  character.  The  pur- 
pose of  the  Saviour  is  to  save  his  people  from  their 
sins ;  perfect  salvation,  wdiich  is  perfect  holiness,  is 
achieved  only  in  heaven,  but  it  is  begun  on  earth. 
Repentance  is  the  beginning  of  salvation,  the  pulsa- 
tions of  a  new  life  which  is  eternal.  The  believer  is 
conscious  of  this  great  change.  He  is  yet  a  sinner,  he 
sees  his  sinfulness  more  plainly  than  ever,  lie  feels  his 
weakness  and  utter  inability  to  contend  with  the  temp- 
tations that  beset  him  ;  but  he  no  longer  delights  in 
sin  ;  his  desire  is  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and,  by  divine 


26  THE  ONLY   COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS.        [Leot.  I. 

help,  to  resist  all  evil.  Amidst  all  his  failures  and 
imperfections- he  discovers  a  new  principle  at  work  in 
his  soul  which  can  have  been  engendered  there  only 
by  divine  power.  This  is  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit. 
The  same  Holy  One  Avho  testifies  in  the  Scriptures  and 
in  tlie  hearts  of  sinners,  testifies  in  the  believer's  life, 
making  him  who  was  once  a  rebel  now  "  sincerely 
willing  and  ready  henceforth  to  live  unto  Christ."  Oh 
what  a  happiness,  what  a  comfort  it  is,  that  we  belong 
unto  Christ,  who  not  only  has  died  for  us,  but  by  his 
Spirit  lives  in  us,  working  through  us  his  holy  pur- 
pose !  When  we  can  claim  this  comfort,  "  Christ  is 
formed  in  us  the  hope  of  glory." 

Secondly  :  The  method  hy  which  the  Cliristian 
attains  a  knowledge  of  this  comfort. 

This  is  not  the  time  to  dwell  upon  the  answer  to  the 
Second  Question,  as  it  only  sets  forth  in  brief  what  will 
be  shown  more  fully  hereafter.  The  order  given  is, 
howevA',  most  natural,  and  according  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  Scriptures. 

I.  He  must  know  how  great  his  sins  and  miseries 
are.  Unless  he  knows  himself  to  be  a  sinner,  he  will 
not  feel  his  need  of  pardon  ;  unless  he  sees  his  miseries, 
he  will  not  see  his  need  of  a  Saviour ;  unless  he  feels 
that  his  sins  and  miseries  are  great,  he  will  not  be 
zealous  in  escaping  from  them  to  the  gi'eat  salvation 
provided  for  him.  None  but  those  who  are  conscious 
of  being  lost  can  discover  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour 
they  need.  This  is  set  forth  in  the  second,  third,  and 
fourth  Ivprd's  days. 

II.  He  must  know  how  he  may  be  delivered  from 
all  his  sins  and  miseries.  This  includes  a  knowledge 
of  the  whole  Gospel,  —  the  purpose  of  God,  the  media 


THE  ONLY   COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS.  27 

tion  of  Christ,  and  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
is  taught  from  the  fifth  to  the  thirty-second  Lord's 
days. 

III.  He  must  know  how  to  express  his  gratitude  for 
such  dehverance  to  God  his  Saviour.  This  includes 
all  his  duty,  to  which  the  Catechism  gives  the  yet 
highej-  name  of  gratitude ;  the  true  Christian  being 
moved  to  render  it  with  a  cheerful  zeal,  not  only  be- 
cause God  has  a  right  in  him,  but  also  because  he  de- 
lights in  recognizing  and  meeting  the  claims  of  a  Bene- 
factor so  gracious,  upon  all  his  heart  and  mind  and  life. 
This  is  treated  of  from  the  thirty-second  to  the  last 
Lord's  day. 

May  God  assist  our  farther  studies  by  his  Holy 
Spirit,  that  we,  being  convinced  of  sin  and  made  to 
know  the  preciousness  of  Christ,  may  find  our  only 
comfort  in  his  choice  of  us,  and  our  choice  of  him  as 
our  Saviour,  Master,  and  eternal  Friend.     Amen.