LECTURE  II. 

THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR   MISERY. 


SECOND  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE   KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY. 

Qdest.  III.     mience  knoivest  thou  thy  misery  ? 

Ans.    Out  of  the  law  of  God. 

Quest.  IV.     What  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  f 

Ans.  Christ  teaches  us  that  briefly,  Matt.  xxii.  37-40:  "Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with 
all  thy  mind,"  and  with  all  thy  strength.  "  This  is  the  first  and  great 
commandment;  and  the  second  is  like  unto  it:  Thou  shalt  love  thj' 
neighbor  as  thyself.  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the  law 
and  the  prophets." 

Quest.  V.     Canst  thou  keep  all  these  things  perfectly  ? 

Ans.     In  no  wise ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  my  neighbor. 

T^HE  blessed  Master  himself  declares  the  reason  and 
-*-  purpose  of  his  mediatorial  work,  when  he  says  : 
"  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was  lost."  Had  not  God  been  angry  with  us  we  should 
not  have  been  miserable ;  had  we  not  sinned  against 
God,  he  would  not  have  been  angry  with  us ;  had  we 
the  power  of  reconciling  ourselves  to  God,  we  should 
not  ha^■e  needed  a  Saviour ;  had  not  our  condemnation 
been  very  great,  we  should  not  have  needed  so  great  a 
Saviour  ;  and  had  not  God,  our  righteous  Judge,  been 
infinitely  merciful,  he  would  not  have  "  sent  his  Only 
Begotten  Son,  that  whoso  believeth  in  him  might  not 
perish  but  have  everlasting  life."  It  was  our  ruin  that 
moved  the  pity  of  God,  our  helplessness  that  brought 
his  Son  to  be  our  Saviour,  our  guiltiness  that  made  the 
Saviour  a  sinless  suft'erer  in  our  nature,  obedient  until 
death  on  our  behalf.  To  understand  and  appreciate 
the  salvation  by  Christ,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should 
know  our  misery,  its  source,  its  extent,  and  our  utter 


32  THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR   MISERY.        dependence  upon  divine  grace  through  Christ  for  par- 
don, favor,  a  new  life,  and  immortal  happiness.  To 
teach  us  this  is  the  design  of  the  Church,  as  opened 
in  the  section  of  her  Catechism  for  the  second  Lord's 
day  ;  from  which  we  learn, 

First  :   The  Test  of  our  condition : 
The  Law  of  God. 

Secondly  :    The  Requirements  of  the  Law  : 
Supreme  love  to  God  our  Lord,  and  love  to  our  neigh- 
bor as  ourselves. 

Thirdly  :    Our  Inability  to  fulfil  those  Hequirements : 
Being  prone  "  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  my  neigh- 
bor." 

First  :  Tlie  Law  of  God  is  the  test  of  our  condition : 
According  to  the  Second  Question  and  Answer,  the 
first  branch  of  Christian  inquiry  is :  "  How  great  our  sins 
and  miseries  are."  The  Third  Question  is:  "Whence 
knowest  thou  thy  misery  ?  "  the  term  sin  not  being  re- 
peated ;  yet  the  answer  is  :  "  Out  of  the  Law  of  God  ; " 
which  is  an  implied  assertion  that  our  misery  is  penal 
or  the  effect  of  sin,  being  our  punishment  as  sinners, 
and,  therefore,  in  proportion  to  our  sins.  The  word 
and  character  of  God  allow  of  no  other  conclusion, 
since  we  cannot  believe  that  he  who  delights  in  good- 
ness and  mercy  would  willingly,  or  without  reason,  af- 
flict his  creatures.  Our  misery  can  come  only  from  his 
anger,  and  he  is  angry  only  with  the  wicked.  His 
favor,  which  includes  all  blessings,  is  promised  to  the 
obedient ;  his  curse,  which  includes  all  miseries,  is 
threatened  against  the  disobedient.  The  degree  of 
our  sin  is,  therefore,  the  measure  of  our  misery,  and 
that  we  may  ascertain  this  we  must  look  into  the  Law 
of  God  ;  for  if  we  have  not  kept  its  precepts,  the  pen- 


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OUR  MISERY.  33 

alties  annexed  show  the  guilt,  or  obnoxiousness,  liability 
to  punishment,  which  we  have  brought  upon  ourselves. 
Hence  the  Law  of  God  is  the  only  true  test  of  our  con- 
dition. This  is  the  argument  in  brief,  which  we  may, 
not  without  profit,  examine  more  particularly. 

1st.  God  is  Sovereign  ;  by  which  we  understand, 
that  he  has  the  right  to  rule,  that  he  has  the  power  to 
rule,  and  that  he  does  rule  over  all.  To  deny  this  were 
atheism  ;  for  the  fundamental  idea  of  God  is :  The  First 
Cause  of  all  things.  The  First  Cause  must  be  self-ex- 
istent and  independent  of  all.  The  same  Mil  which 
alone  could  create,  alone  can  preserve ;  and,  therefore, 
God  must  rule  over  all.  The  creation  includes  moral 
beings,  or  beings  who  have  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong, 
with  powers  to  act  accordingly;  therefore,  the  admis- 
istration  of  the  Supreme  Will  must  be  a  moral  govern- 
ment. Thus  the  fact  of  our  existence  proves  that  we 
belong  to  God ;  the  fact  of  our  preservation,  that  we 
are  under  the  control  of  God  ;  and  the  fact  of  our  mor- 
al consciousness,  that  we  are  subject  to  the  moral  gov- 
ernment of  God.  If  our  lives  be  in  harmony  with  the 
principles  of  the  divine  government,  no  evil  can  reach 
us,  because  our  Preserver  is  Sovereign  over  all  ;  but  if 
we  are  at  variance  with  his  will,  no  good  can  reach  us 
for  the  same  reason. 

But  how  may  we  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  divine 
will  which  should  be  the  rule  of  our  lives,  and  in  our 
conformity  or  opposition  to  which  we  are  to  find  happi- 
ness or  misery  ?  The  Catechism  answers  :  "  Out  of 
the  Law  of  God ;  "  that  is,  out  of  the  Law  which  God 
has  revealed  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  For  it  is  clear 
that  none  but  God,  whose  infinite  wisdom  arranged  and 
ordained  the  principles  on  which  he  administers  his  will. 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OUR  MISERY.        can  discover  what  those  principles  are.  These  may  be 
dimly  perceived  in  the  processes  of  Providence  around 
us,  or  what  is  sometimes  called  the  fitness  of  things ; 
but  not  sufficiently,  for  besides  that  we  cannot,  from  the 
weakness  of  our  reason,  accurately  trace  the  visible  ef- 
fects back  to  their  unseen  causes,  the  development  of 
those  effects  is  as  yet  very  partial.  If  we  were  left  to 
learn  the  will  of  God  concerning  our  duty  from  the 
manifestations  of  his  providence,  we  should  have  to 
wait  until  eternity  before  we  could  begin  our  obedience, 
for  only  in  eternity  those  manifestations  are  complete. 
There  are  a  thousand  seeming  discrepancies  in  the 
providential  administration  of  human  afltairs,  which 
God  will  not  vindicate  until  he  consummates  his  migh- 
ty  scheme  at  the  catastrophe  of  the  Judgment.  So 
oppressively  embarrassing  are  these  difficulties,  that  the 
very  advocates  of  Natural  Religion,  who  bid  us  learn 
the  character  of  God  and  our  duty  from  the  fitness  of 
things,  make  them  their  strongest,  but  far  from  satis- 
factory, argument  for  a  future  state  of  reward  and  pun- 
ishment. 

Neither  can  conscience  be  a  trustworthy  oracle.  For 
conscience  does  not  itself  determine  right  or  wrong,  but 
is  only  our  faculty  of  recognizing  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  right  and  the  wrong,  when  they  are  present- 
ed to  us.  Recognition  is  very  different  from  discovery. 
It  is  one  thing  to  perceive  a  path  when  it  is  marked  out 
for  us,  and  another  to  find  out  a  path  for  ourselves , 
so  it  is  one  thing  to  see  the  right  when  God  makes  it 
known,  and  another  to  decide  upon  what  is  right  with- 
out his  aid.  This  last  is  utterly  beyond  the  prerogative 
or  the  power  of  conscience.  Indeed,  conscience  needs 
education  like  any  other  human  faculty,  and  education 


THE  KNOWLEDGE   OF  OUR  MISERY.  35 

supposes  some  fixed  fundamental  rules  to  which  it  must 
be  conformed.  No  faithful  parent  leaves  his  child  to 
learn  morals  from  its  conscience,  but  presses  rules  of 
right  upon  its  conscience.  The  variety  of  moral  opin- 
ions among  men  is  so  great,  that  were  it  possible  to  hold 
an  oecumenical  council  of  consciences,  there  is  scarcely  a 
point  of  morals  on  which  their  decree  would  be  unani- 
mous. Nay,  the  revolutions  of  moi'al  sentiment  in  the 
same  man  at  different  stages  of  his  experience  and 
knowledge,  show  how  uncertain  and  even  capricious 
the  judgments  of  conscience  are  when  left  to  itself. 

Besides,  obedience  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,  with- 
out a  distinct  reference  to  the  will  of  God,  is  not  right, 
since  that  were  making  conscience  and  not  God  our 
Judge  and  Lord.  For  a  man  to  think  that  he  can  do 
no  wrong  while  he  follows  his  conscience,  unless  his 
conscience  be  regulated  by  the  will  of  God,  is  a  self- 
idolatry  and  an  atheistical  pride.  A  human  govern- 
ment does  not  try  its  subjects  by  their  consciences, 
but  by  its  own  laws ;  and  excuses  a  violation  of  its 
laws  only  in  those  who  are  not  capable  of  perceiving 
what  those  laws  require.  So  will  God  try  us  by  the 
laws  of  his  kingdom,  not  by  our  own  imaginations. 

The  judgments  of  individuals  being  so  imperfect,  the 
general  opinions  of  mankind  must  be  also  unworthy  of 
confidence.  A  long  and  traditional  experience  of  the 
good  or  ill  effects  consequent  upon  certain  courses  of 
action,  may  have  led  the  world  to  agree  respecting  some 
matters  immediately  afti?cting  our  interests  ;  but  history 
proves  the  failure  of  all  attempts  to  frame  a  system  of 
morals  without  wisdom  from  above.  The  best  and 
wisest  of  the  classical  philosophers  differed  widely 
among  themselves  as  to  the  very  definition  of  virtue ; 


36  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OUR  MISERY.        while  some,  especially  Socrates,  the  most  exalted  of 
them  all,  humbly  confessed  that  the  line  dividing  right 
from  wrong  could  be  drawn  only  by  the  linger  of 
him  who  presides  over  the  universe. 

God  has  himself  excluded  all  question  on  the  subject, 
by  giving,  in  his  own  revealed  word,  the  law  to  which 
he  commands  our  conformity  on  pain  of  his  curse. 

The  Christian,  therefore,  goes  directly  to  God  for 
instruction,  trusting  neither  to  the  discoveries  of  his 
reason,  the  dictates  of  his  conscience,  the  opinions  of 
men,  nor  the  practices  of  the  world.  God  has  the 
sole  right  to  his  service,  and  he  asks  from  God  only 
how  that  service  should  be  rendered.  Thus  he  makes 
the  law  of  God  the  sole  test  of  liis  condition,  sees  his 
crimes  in  his  transgressions  of  it,  and  his  misery  in  the 
punishment  which  it  threatens.  Until  he  looks  at  him- 
self in  that  mirror  of  infallible  truth,  he  can  never  judge 
of  his  moral  cliaracter  ;  until  he  gets  a  response  from 
that  unerring  oracle,  he  can  never  know  what  awaits 
him  at  the  hands  of  his  God.  He  learns'  his  "  misery 
out  of  the  law  of  God." 

Secondly  :   The  requirements  of  that  Imv. 

These  the  Catecliism  shows  by  citing  the  words  of 
our  blessed  Lord,  Matt.  xxii.  37-40  ;  though  it  must 
be  noted  that,  in  giving  the  first  great  commancbiient, 
the  last  clause,  "  and  with  all  thy  strength,"  is  added 
from  the  parallel  passage,  Luke  x.  27  ;  and  that  our 
translator  of  the  Catechism,  by  carelessly  neglecting  to 
copy  the  Scripture  immediately  out  of  his  Bible,  has 
allowed  a  slight  but  displeasing  variation  from  the 
English  text,  which  difference  we  shall  correct. 

"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind  ; " 


Leot.  II.]       THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY.  37 

and,  from  Luke,  "  with  all  tliy  strength."  "  This  is 
the  first  and  great  commandment.  And  the  second  is 
like  unto  it :  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself. 
On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the  law  and  the 
prophets." 

Our  divine  Saviour  did  not  give  these  comprehensive 
precepts  as  of  himself,  but  brought  them  together  from 
separate  parts  of  the  Pentateuch  ;  the  first  from  Dent, 
vi.  5  :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
miffht:"  the  second  from  Lev.  xix.  18:  "Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself"  All  that  the  older  scrip- 
tures contain  of  divine  morals,  of  our  duty  to  God  and 
our  service  to  man  for  God's  sake,  are  summed  up  in 
these  two  commandments.  As  the  Apostle  Paul  says, 
Rom.  xiii.  10  :  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  ; " 
and  again,  1  Tim.  i.  5  :  "  Now  the  end  of  the  com- 
mandment is  charity  (love^,  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and 
of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned ;  "  and 
the  Apostle  John  in  his  first  epistle,  iv.  16  :  "  He  that 
dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him  ; " 
iv.  21 :  "  This  commandment  have  we  from  him  :  That 
he  who  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also." 

Here  is  the  legislation  infinitely  perfect.  The  stat- 
utes of  human  governments  fill  many  volumes,  and  are 
then  proverbially  indefinite,  while  every  attempt  to  con- 
dense them  has  only  made  the  uncertainty  worse  ;  but 
the  whole  law  of  God  is  written  in  two  sentences,  the 
whole  duty  of  man  in  one  word  :  Love.  This  clear,  con- 
cise rule  covers  all  the  specifications  of  service  which 
God  requires  of  us  in  all  the  various  circumstances  in 
svhich  we  can  possibly  be  placed.  Love  is  the  bond  of 
perfectness,  the  golden  chain,  which,  depending  from  the 


38  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OUR  MISERY.        throne  of  our  Father  God,  and  retiu'ning  to  it  again, 
is  cast  around  the  brotherhood  of  his  human  children, 
binding  us  in  sweet  liarmony  with  him  and  with  each 
other. 

Love  has  never  been  accurately  defined,  nor  can  it 
be  :  but  we  know  its  meanino;  from  our  consciousness 
and  from  its  effects.  We  love  that  being  whose  char- 
acter we  approve,  of  whom  we  delight  to  think,  whose 
excellences  we  endeavor  to  imitate,  whose  wishes  we 
desire  to  fulfil  and  in  whose  favor  we  find  happiness. 
Such  affection  we  may,  without  inconsistency,  have  at 
the  same  time  towards  several,  even  many  of  our  hu- 
mankind, according  as  they  have,  through  Providence, 
claims  upon  us  ;  but  our  supreme  love,  comprehending 
all  exercises  of  love  towards  his  creatures,  is  demanded 
by  God  for  himself  alone  :  "'■  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord 
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and 
with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength." 

These  several  terms  :  "  heart,"  "  soul,"  "  mind," 
"  strength,"  do  not,  it  should  be  stated,  convey  to  us 
the  precise  meaning  of  the  Greek  or  Hebrew  originals 
which  they  translate,  but  collectively  in  the  entire  verse 
they  give  the  full  meaning  of  the  Scripture.  To  define 
each  of  them  particularly  would  not  be  easy,  and,  if 
practicable,  would  require  a  nice  criticism  too  prolix 
for  the  aim  of  our  present  discourse.  Let  us,  there- 
fore, devoutly  consider  the  scope  of  this  first  and  great 
conuiiandment,  which  is,  that  We  must  render  the  Lord 
our  Grod  a  suj^reme,  intelligent,  zealous  love,  freely  conse- 
crating all  our  faculties  to  his  praise,  and  all  our  energies 
to  his  service. 

We  are  to  love  God  supremely.  "  Tliou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart."     Every  motive 


THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR   MISERY.  39 

which  prompts  love,  should  urge  us  to  love  God  above 
all.  If  intellectual  excellence  attracts  our  admirino- 
regard,  God  is  omniscient,  the  author  of  all  light,  the 
source  of  all  truth  ;  if  moral  beauty  wins  our  affection- 
ate esteem,  his  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  mercv  are 
infinite  ;  if  favors  received  and  favors  expected,  claim 
our  gratitude,  from  him  alone  is  our  being,  wnth  all  its 
capacities  of  enjoj'ment,  and  all  we  do  or  can  enjoy  ; 
if  rightful  authority,  administered  in  faithfulness  and 
considerate  kindness,  be  entitled  to  a  prompt,  unswerv- 
ing, devoted  loyalty,  he  is  our  Owner  because  our 
Creator,  our  Ruler  because  our  Preserver,  our  Law- 
giver because  Supreme  Lord  of  the  universe,  whose 
precepts  are  our  sure  only  guides  to  happiness,  because 
obedience  is  accordance  with  his  will;  and  his  chosen 
glory,  the  design  of  his  government,  is  the  best  good 
of  his  intelligent  subjects,  comprehending  all,  yet  over- 
looking none.  No  creature,  therefore,  should  be  al- 
lowed to  rival  him  in  our  affections  ;  he  must  have  all 
our  hearts,  and  none  be  admitted  there  except  in  har- 
mony with  our  highest  reverence,  esteem,  and  love  for 
him  who  is  the  Lord  our  God. 

We  are  to  love  God  intelligently.  "  Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  mind."  God  has  en- 
dowed us  with  understanding  and  reason,  that  we  may 
know  him  and  perceive  the  arguments  which  he  ad- 
dresses through  our  minds  to  our  affections.  The 
faculty  of  will  or  choice  which  he  grants  us,  cannot 
be  exercised  rightly  unless  intelligently.  We  are  not 
to  love  even  the  Lord  our  God  without  motive,  or  an 
appreciation  of  his  claims  upon  our  love.  We  are, 
therefore,  to  employ  our  minds,  above  all  else,  irt  the 
study  and  contemplation  of  those  claims  that  we  may 


40  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY.        by  the  very  force  of  logic,  cheerfully,  yet,  as  it  were, 
of  a  moral  necessity,  fix  our  hearts  supi'emely  iipon 
him  to  whom  of  right  they  belong.  We  must  dili- 
gently read  his  Word,  in  which  he  reveals  himself  for 
our  learning ;  we  must  observe  his  works,  in  which  he 
demonstrates  himself  to  our  senses  ;  we  must  investi- 
gate his  doctrines,  meditate  on  his  attrilmtes,  apply  his 
laws  to  our  consciences,  trust  in  his  promises,  set  his 
threatenino;s  between  us  and  what  he  has  forbidden, 
while  we  practice  his  commands,  that  through  experi- 
ence we  may  be  continually  acquiring  greater  proof 
of  their  wise  goodness  ;  and  especially  must  we  seek 
by  earnest,  humble  prayer  the  sanctifying  grace  of  his 
illuminating  Spirit,  that  in  close,  personal,  habitual  com- 
munion with  God,  we  may  grow  more  like  him  as  we 
know  more  of  him.  Thus  consecrating  all  our  facul- 
ties to  his  praise,  we  shall  love  the  Lord  our  God  with 
all  our  hearts  and  with  all  our  minds. 

We  are  to  love  God  zealously. 

"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
soul,  and  with  all  thy  strength." 

Soul^  here,  according  to  both  the  originals,  signifies 
the  will,  or  rather  the  determined  purj)ose  of  a  man  ; 
and  strength,  his  powers  of  external  action.  The  two, 
therefore,  may  be  expressed  by  zeal,  which,  as  we  ordi- 
narily understand  it,  is  ardor  of  pursuit,  or  earnest  pur- 
pose carried  out  in  correspondent  action.  A  supreme, 
intelligent  love  for  God  our  Creator,  Sovereign,  and 
Judge,  cannot  be  inoperative.  The  reasons  for  which 
we  love  God,  his  authority  and  character,  show  how 
our  love  is  to  be  proved.  If  we  love  him  as  our  Cre- 
ator, all  our  faculties  should  be  consecrated  to  his  glory; 
if  we  love  him  as  our  Ruler,  we  should  delight  to  obey 


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY.  41 

all  his  commandments ;  if  we  love  him  as  our  Bene- 
factor, gratitude  should  make  us  continually  intent  upon 
rendering  him  returns  for  his  kindness.  Thus  we  truly 
love  him  with  all  our  hearts  and  with  all  our  minds, 
only  when  we  endeavor  to  serve  him  with  all  our  pow- 
ers in  their  utmost  energy.  Hence,  love  comprehends 
our  fidelity  to  God  as  his  subjects,  and  our  dutifulness 
as  his  children.  If  we  love  him  with  all  our  hearts, 
and  know  what  he  requires  of  us,  the  entire  conformity 
of  our  lives  to  his  will  is  certainly  secured. 

This  is  the  only  service  which  God  can  accept  or  a 
rational  creature  render.  The  laws  of  man  refer  only 
to  the  external  conduct,  because  the  human  eye  can 
look  no  further;  yet  is  an  unwilling  obedience  admitted 
to  have  no  merit,  and  we  always  consider  the  good  or 
evil  of  an  act  to  lie  in  the  motive.  But  God  looks  in 
upon  the  heart,  and  according  as  he  sees  that  love  to 
him  is  or  is  not  the  ruling  principle  of  our  actions,  will 
he  accept  or  disown  us,  whatever  our  overt  acts  may 
be.  He,  who  refuses  his  love  to  God,  the  perfection 
of  moral  beauty  and  the  centre  of  all  obligation,  does 
not  love  goodness  or  justice  or  holiness,  evinces  a  spirit 
at  war  with  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  and  is  justly 
punished  for  so  monstrous  a  depravity.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  who  renders  such  love  to  God  is  justly  re- 
warded for  an  obedience  which  on  every  opportunity 
will  be  overtly  shown. 

Such  service  is  necessary  to  the  happiness  of  the 
creature.  Our  happiness  can  come  only  from  God  who 
has  so  fenced  us  in  by  his  laws,  that  our  welfare  de- 
pends on  our  conformity  to  them ;  but  to  obey  one 
whom  we  do  not  love,  is  to  do  what  we  hate,  thus  turn- 
ing our  seeming  compliance  with  right  into  a  source  of 


42  THE  KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR  MISERY.        misery.  The  highest  reward  of  obedience  is  love,  and 
love  alone  can  earn  it.  Love  is  the  strong  charm  by 
which  God  jn'ompts  the  discharge  of  every  duty  springing 
from  the  relations  of  life,  —  as  the  duty  of  the  husband, 
the  wife,  the  parent,  the  child,  the  friend,  or  the  patriot. 
How  much  more  is  love  necessary  for  our  duties  to 
God !  If  Ave  love  him,  we  can  never  do  enough  for 
him,  all  our  inclinations  will  be  absorbed  by  a  desire  to 
please  him,  and  his  honor  will  engross  all  our  energies. 

The  Second  Commandment  is  like  to  the  first ;  like 
in  authority,  because  emanating  from  the  same  divine 
source ;  and  like  in  the  character  of  the  duty  which  it 
enjoins.  Love.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thy- 
self." It  is  included  in  the  first,  because  he,  who  has 
a  right  to  all  our  heart  and  all  our  service,  has  the 
right  of  commanding  our  love  and  service  for  those 
whom  he  commends  to  our  regard. 

Our  blessed  Master,  in  his  parable  of  The  Good 
Samaritan,  has  clearly  defined  "  our  neighbor  "  to  be 
every  human  being  brought  by  the  providence  of  God 
within  the  reach  of  our  kindness.  The  duty  is  to  God 
the  Father  of  all  men,  and  required  for  our  fellow-man 
as  his  child.  Selfishness  may  restrict  itself  within  nar- 
row boundaries,  but  a  soul  elevated  to  the  love  of  God 
looks  over  all  such  littlenesses  and  comprehends  the 
whole  brotherhood  of  mankind. 

The  degree  of  loving  service  which  we  are  to  ren- 
der our  neighbor  is  to  regard  his  welfare  as  we  do  our 
own.  The  precept  clearly  allows  a  certain  degree  of 
self-love,  and  insists  upon  no  fanciful,  impracticable 
disinterestedness.  I  am  to  love  my  neighbor,  because 
God  is  his  Father ;  but  for  the  same  reason  I  am  to  love 
myself,  since  he  is  my  Father  also,  and  he  has  in  a 


THE' KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY.  43 

peculiar  degree  committed  my  happiness  to  my  own 
keeping.  Our  love  for  ourselves  is  taken  for  granted, 
being  the  standard  by  which  our  love  for  our  neighbor 
must  be  adjusted,  and  therefore,  not  inconsistent  with 
it ;  so  that  we  should  err  if  we  regarded  another's  wel- 
fare to  the  neglect  of  our  own.  Nor  can  we  love  all 
men  alike,  since  we  are  commanded  by  Sci'ipture  and 
Providence  to  love  some  especially,  as  those  of  our  own 
household  and  those  of  the  household  of  faith.  We 
are  to  love  ourselves  consistently  with  the  law  of  God, 
and  according  to  its  directions ;  so  we  are  to  love  our 
neighbor,  rendering  them  all  that  affectionate  service 
which  God  enjoins  with  the  sgme  readiness  that  we 
would  benefit  ourselves. 

The  Master  himself  has  given  us  the  best  commen- 
tary on  the  law  of  love  to  our  neighbor,  in  Matthew 
vii.  12,  where  he  says :  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do-  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to 
them."  That  is,  Whatever  we  could  properly,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  God,  expect  from  others  in  certain 
circumstances,  we  are  in  similar  circumstances  to  do 
readily  for  them,  though  they  be  never  so  unworthy 
of  such  kindness,  since  it  is  a  duty  which  we  owe  not 
to  them  personally,  but  to  God,  and  to  them  for  his 
sake.  At  the  same  time,  the  promise  is  distinctly  con- 
veyed that  such  service  of  our  neighbor  has  sure  ten- 
dency to  advance  our  own  welfare. 

How  clear  is  this  rule,  and  how  universally  applica- 
ble, when  we  carry  the  measure  due  to  others  within 
our  own  bosoms !  How  happy  would  the  world  be,  if 
all  men  acted  towards  each  other  on  this  principle  ! 
But  how  vain  must  be  all  attempts  to  secure  the  com- 
mon welfare  of  the  race,  upon  any  system  of  ethics 


44  THE  KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR  MISERY.         short  of  tliat  which  first  lifts  man  out  of  all  sinful  self- 
ishness to  the  love  of  God,  and  then  enables  him  from 
that  generous  fountain  to  mingle  his  love  Avith  the  love 
of  the  universal  Father  as  it  descends  in  blessing  upon 
all  his  children  ! 

Farther  discussion  of  these  two  commandments  is 
reserved  for  the  time  when  we  must  consider  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  Two  Tables,  given  on  Mount  Sinai. 

Thirdly  :    Our  inability  to  fulfil  these  requirements. 

"  Canst  thou  keep  all  these  things  perfectly  ?  " 

"  In  no  wise  ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God 
and  my  neighbor."  This  melancholy  truth  the  Christian 
learns  from  the  Word  of  God  and  from  experience. 

1.  The  terras,  ability,  power,  and  the  like,  originally 
referring  to  physical  matters,  become  very  vague  when 
applied  to  our  moral  being,  the  exercise  of  our  will, 
judgment,  and  affections  ;  nor,  though  some  have  in- 
geniously but  unsatisfactorily  dogmatized  on  the  ques- 
tion, could  we  readily  show  where  man's  moral  impo- 
tence lies,  except  we  be  content  with  acknowledging, 
what  is  the  fact,  that  it  is  a  disorganizing  corruption  of 
the  entire  soul.  But,  putting  such  lame  metaphysics 
aside,  and  going  to  the  unerring  Word,  we  find  there  un- 
equivocally stated  the  fact  of  our  own  utter  insufficiency 
to  keep  the  law  of  God.  The  testimonies  to  it  jjervade 
the  whole  Scripture,  and  the  Divine  Spirit  labors  to 
express,  in  our  imperfect  language  and  by  such  figures 
as  we  can  understand,  our  complete  ruin  as  moral  crea- 
tures. It  is  declared  that  "  there  is  none  that  doeth 
good,  no,  not  one  ;  "  that  "  the  heart  of  man  is  evil,  and 
only  evil,  and  that  continually ;  "  that  "  all  are  concluded 
under  sin,"  conceived  in  sin,  and  brought  forth  in  ini- 
quity ;  that  we  are  not  only  weak,  but,  so  far  as  godly 


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF   OUR  MISERY.  45 

virtue  is  concerned,  without  any  strength,  nay,  "  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins."  The  plan  of  salvation  proceeds 
on  this  fact.  When  we  were  impotent,  "  without 
strength,  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  "  If  righteous- 
ness "  could  have  "  come  by  the  law  (i.  e.  through  our 
keeping  of  the  law),  then  is  Christ  dead  in  vain." 
That  this  is  true  only  of  some  is  disproved  by  the  offer 
of  the  Gospel  to  all  men :  "  God  so  loved  the  ivorld, 
that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life.  For  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  con- 
demn the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him  might 
be  saved.  .  .  .  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son 
shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on 
him." 

So  the  sanctifying  or  illuminating  and  strengthening 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  radical  in  every  one  that  is 
saved.  He  renews  us  by  a  fresh  begetting,  a  re-crea- 
tion, a  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  and  no  man,  "  ex- 
cept he  be  born  again  "  "  of  the  Spirit,"  "  can  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God."  So  we  see  that  "  there  is  no 
difference,  for  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God."  "  The  carnal  mind  (^.  e.  the  mind  of 
man  in  his  natural  state)  is  enmity  against  God  ;  "  and 
since,  as  we  have  seen,  love  to  our  neighbor  proceeds 
from  our  love  to  God,  man  is  by  nature  at  enmity  with 
his  neighbor. 

This  enmity  against  God  and  our  neighbor  may  not 
at  once  be  utter  and  extreme,  for  living,  as  we  do, 
under  a  remedial  system,  the  restraining  grace  of  God 
is  round  even  the  unregenerate ;  but  we  are  prone  to 
it,  and  were  the  grace  of  God  entirely  taken  from  us, 


46  THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF  OUR  MISERY.         as  it  will  be  from  the  lost  in  hell,  there  is  no  depth  of 
depravity  to  which  we  should  not  sink.  Our  enmity 
against  God  may  not  appear  against  his  goodness,  or 
his  mercy,  or  his  love ;  but  it  is  naturally  strong  against 
what  is  equally  his  character  —  his  holiness  and  justice; 
for  whenever  his  law  or  his  providence  clashes  with  our 
inclination,  it  is  rampant,  bitter,  and  obstinate.  So  are 
we  enemies  of  our  neighbor,  when  he  crosses  our  sup- 
posed interest.  Whence  also  could  come  such  malicious 
crimes,  such  bloody  wars,  such  envious  calumnies,  as 
those  which  fill  the  earth  with  clamor  and  rapine  and 
cruelty !  Thus,  the  Apostle  describes  the  heathen 
who  had  departed  from  God  as  filled  with  evil, 
stained  by  the  most  hideous  pollutions,  "  covenant- 
breakers,  without  natural  affection,  implacable,  unmer- 
ciful." It  is  the  proneness,  not  of  the  individual,  here 
and  there,  but  of  human  nature,  of  the  race ;  for  every- 
where we  see  symptoms  of  this  depravity  ;  everywhere 
men  make  laws  to  guard  against  it;  every  penal  stat- 
ute, every  gibbet,  every  prison,  every  lock  on  our 
doors,  testify  to  man's  belief  that  his  fellow-man  is 
prone  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbor.  Christianity,  or 
other  restraining  influences  of  God's  government,  may 
modify,  and  to  some  extent  hold  back  the  tendency,  but 
in  what  man  has  been  and  what  man  now  is,  when 
srace  is  not  exercising  some  control,  we  see  what  he 
would  be  were  he  left  alone. 

The  Christian's  experience  confirms  the  divine  dec- 
laration. Who  that  looks  upon  these  two  precepts  of 
God's  law  can  say  he  has  kept  them,  or  that  he  could 
keep  them  perfectly  ?  Who  of  us  can  love  God,  with 
all  his  heart,  and  his  neighbor  as  himself?  The  be- 
liever knows  he  cannot ;  he  knows  that  there  is  within 


THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OUR   MISERY.  47 

him  a  tendency  downward,  which  none  but  God  can 
change ;  that  there  is  a  lack  in  him,  call  it  what  you 
will,  and  place  it  where  you  will,  which  nothing  but 
God's  grace  can  supply,  but  without  which  he  is  lost, 
—  powerless  to  do  good,  and  prone  to  all  evil.  It  is 
this  that  he  expects  through  Christ ;  this  he  asks  of  God 
by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  this  he  relies  upon  alone  for  eternal 
life.  . 

O  blessed  Gospel,  that  thus  meets  us  in  our  last  ex- 
tremity, turning  our  despair  into  joy !  O  blessed  Law 
of  God,  whose  very  terrors  drive  us  to  welcome  Christ ! 
O  blessed  Bible,  which  thunders  on  the  one  page  from 
Sinai  the  curse  of  eternal  death,  and  on  the  next  shows 
us  Christ  on  the  cross  dying  in  our  stead ;  then  beyond 
it,  Christ  on  his  throne  beckoning  the  penitent  to  eternal 
life !  Glory  to  God  the  Lawgiver  !  Glory  to  God  the 
Redeemer !  Glory  to  God  the  Sanctifier  !  Glory  to 
God,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  our  Covenant  God, 
throughout  all  ages  !     Amen.