LECTURE  III. 

THE   FALL  OF  IAN. 


.  THIRD   LORD'S   DAY. 
THE   FALL    OP'   MAN. 

Quest.  VI.     Did  God,  then,  create  man  so  wicked  and  ^Jerverse  ? 

Ans.  Br  no  means;  but  God  created  man  good,  and  after  his  own  image, 
in  rigliteousness  and  true  holiness,  that  he  might  rightlj'  know  God  his 
Creator,  heartily  love  him,  and  live  with  him  in  eternal  happiness  to 
glorify  and  [jraise  him. 

Quest.  VII.      Whence,  then, proceeds  this  depravity  of  human  nature? 

Ans.  From  the  fall  and  disobedience  of  our  first  parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  in 
Paradise;  hence  our  nature  is  become  so  corrupt  that  we  are  all  con- 
ceived and  born  in  sin. 

Quest.  VIII.  Are  toe,  then,  so  corrupt  that  we  are  zchoUy  incapable  of  doing 
any  good,  and  inclining  u)  uU  ckI? 

Ass.  Indeed  we  are;  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

npHE  lesson  of  to-day  sets  forth  a  doctrine  of  Chris- 
-^  tianity  at  which,  more  than  any  other,  infidels  and 
heretics  have  aimed  their  assaults ;  and  no  wonder, 
since,  if  it  be  not  true,  our  whole  creed  is  without  con- 
sistency and  must  fall  to  the  ground ;  but  the  purpose 
of  this  discourse  is  not  to  establish  or  defend  it  by  any 
argument  of  our  own.  The  Catechism  undertakes  no 
more  than  to  teach,  systematically  and  very  briefly,  what 
doctrines  God  himself  has  declared  throughout  the  Holy 
Scriptures ;  and  the  Church,  when  commanding  her 
ministers  to  preach  upon  the  Catechism,  intends  no 
more  than  that  they  should  teach  only  what  the  Cat- 
echism teaches,  assisting  her  people  to  understand  it 
by  farther  explanations  conformable  with  the  Scriptures 
and  the  other  articles  of  evangelical  faith.  Our  duty, 
therefore,  is  to  bring  before  you  what  God  asserts  to  be 
true  ;  if  after  that  there  be  any  questioning  as  to  how 


62  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  these  things  can  be,  the  dispute  is  not  with  us  but  God, 
and  we  leave  the  objector  in  his  hands  who  needs  no 
help  from  our  logic. 

You  will  also  remember  that  on  the  point  before  us, 
has  turned  a  long,  extensive  controversy,  filling  many 
volumes  by  the  most  acute  pens  ;  and  that  it  is  not  pos- 
sible in  a  single  hour  even  to  touch  many  things,  Avhich 
the  most  candid  hearer  might  wish  made  clear. 

The  section  for  the  Second  Lord's  Day  having  taught, 
that  we  are  "  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  our 
neighbor,"  inquiry  is  supposed  to  arise  respecting  the 
origin  of  such  an  evil  tendency  : 

6th.  "  Did  God  create  man  so  wicked  and  per- 
verse f "  which  being  denied,  and  contrary  facts  stat- 
ed, it  is  asked : 

7th.  "  Whence,  then,  proceeds  this  depravity  of  human 
nature?'''' 

And  the  answer  gives  the  true  history  of  our  most 
mournful  ruin  ;  whereupon  another  question  is  put  as 
to  the  degree  of  our  moral  decay : 

8th.  ^'Are  loe,  then,  so  corrupt  that  ive  are  wholly  in- 
capable of  doing  any  yood,  and  inclined  to  all  ivicked- 
ness  ? 

The  reply  confirms  the  doctrine  already  asserted, 
pronouncing  our  condition,  if  left  to  ourselves,  utter- 
ly desperate  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  points  out  a  sure 
way  of  escape  through  the  gracious  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  the  Author  of  all  life. 

Thus  we  have  our  subject  and  the  order  of  handling  it : 

The  subject: 

The  origin  of  human  depravity. 

The  order : 

First  :  It  is  not  from  our  Creator. 


LiccT.  III.]  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  53 

Secondly:  It  is  from  the  sin  of  our  first  parents. 

We  need  not  treat  of  the  answer  to  the  last  question 
separately,  as  the  first  part  is  properly  included  by  our 
second  head,  and  the  latter  will  be  fully  discussed  un- 
der a  subsequent  division  of  the  Catechism. 

Before,  however,  we  enter  upon  the  explanation  sup- 
plied us  by  our  Church,  it  should  be  remarked,  that  the 
origin  of  evil  is  a  difficulty  not  peculiar  to  the  Christian 
creed.  The  actual  existence  of  evil,  physical  and  mor- 
al, is  a  fact  not  to  be  denied.  Death,  with  all  its  pain- 
ful precedents,  is  upon  all  men.  Crime  or  wrong-doing, 
by  which  we  mean  violation  of  laws  regulating  our  own 
and  the  common  happiness,  is  seen  every  where,  among 
all  nations,  in  all  circumstances.  There  are  degrees  of 
wrong-doing,  and  there  may  be  exceptions  as  to  partic- 
ular kinds  of  wrong-doing,  still  a  tendency  to  do  wrong 
is  as  much,  or  as  reall}',  a  characteristic  of  human  na- 
ture as  liability  to  death.  Every  civilized  community, 
and,  though  less  formally,  savage  tribe  ordain  statutes 
for  the  punishment  of  murder,  theft,  adultery,  not  be- 
cause this  or  the  other  individual  is  particularly  suspect- 
ed of  a  purpose  to  commit  any  of  those  crimes  (which, 
at  the  moment,  may  or  may  not  be  the  case),  but  be- 
cause the  nature  common  to  all  men  makes  the  com- 
mission of  such  grievous  wrong  so  probable  that  severe 
restrictions,  with  penalties,  are  necessary  to  prevent 
what  all  agree  would  be  evil ;  nor  are  any  of  us  affront- 
ed at  being  put  under  a  government  of  the  kind.  Nay, 
from  our  own  consciousness  of  human  weakness,  we 
consent  to  laws  for  the  control  of  all.  Thus,  those  who 
reject  the  Bible  are  as  much  bound  as  we  are  to  ac- 
count for  this  fact  of  human  corruption,  which,  because 
it  is  universal,  cannot  have  been  fortuitous,  but  must 


54  THE   FALL   OF   MAN.  [Lkct.  IT  I. 

come  from  a  source  involving  all  men.  Philosophers 
of  all  age=,  people,  and  sects,  have  sorely  felt  this 
difficulty  at  the  very  gutset  of  their  ethical  observa- 
tions ;  and  a  Christian  does  not  create,  but  obeys  the 
necessity,  when  he  seeks  in  the  Word  of  God  for  an 
answer  to  the  sad  question,  —  whence  originated  the 
depraved  tendency  of  our  world-wide  race  ?  Our  pres- 
ent duty,  therefore,  is  to  consider  that  answer  as  it  is 
I  trough  t  before  us  by  the  Catechism.. 

First  :    Human  depravity  is  not  from  God. 

As  the  depravity  is  in  human  nature,  and  human 
nature  sprang  from  the  creating  will  of  God,  our  first 
thouoht  is :  Can  it  be  that  man  came  into  beino-  with 
such  an  evil  disposition  ?  or,  as  the  Catechism  has  it : 

"  Did  God,  then,  create  man,  ho  tvicked  and  per- 
verse?" 

But  at  once  we  shrink  from  such  an  impious  sugges- 
tion with  horror,  which  re\'ulsion  is  strengthened  by 
the  scriptural  account : 

"  By  no  means ;  but  God  created  man  good  and  after 
his  own  image  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  that 
he  might  rightly  know  God  his  Creator,  heartily  love 
him,  and  live  with  him  in  eternal  happiness  to  glorify 
and  praise  him." 

1.   A  positive  denial  :   "  By  no  means." 

There  can  be  no  thought  so  shockino;  as  that  God  is 
in  any  way  the  author  of  evil,  which  he  would  be  if  he 
had  created  man  wicked  and  perverse  ;  since,  then,  the 
inference  would  be  irresistible  that  the  will  of  God  is 
evil,  and  the  sovereign  rule  of  the  universe  held  by  the 
hands  of  One  who  can  be  neither  wise,  nor  just,  nor  good. 
Where,  then,  could  his  moral  creatures  look  for  a  stand- 
ard of  right,  for  the  reward  of  virtue  or  the  ])unish- 


THE  FALL  OF  MAN.  55 

ment  of  vice?  Better  the  blankest  atheism  than  such 
a  belief,  —  better  the  wildest  chance  than  such  a  gov- 
ernment, —  by  whose  capricious  cruelty  all  the  elements 
of  happiness  and  misery  are  thrown  into  dark,  waning, 
destrnctive  confusion.  No!  It  cannot  be!  "By  no 
means  "  can  it  be !  Let  man's  wickedness  and  conse- 
quent misery  come  whence  they  may,  tliey  cannot  have 
come  from  the  creating  will  of  God.  "  Yea,  let  God 
be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar."  Some  may  ask  here, 
if  it  be  not  asserted  in  Scripture  that  God  made  men 
wicked,  where  the  Wisdom  says  (Prov.  xvi.  4),  "  The 
Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  himself;  yea,  even  the 
wicked  for  the  day  of  evil."  But  that  text  bears  no 
such  interpretation.  God,  who  made  all  things  for 
himself,  certainly  made  wicked  men,  yet  that  is  very 
different  from  making  men  wicked.  He  made  them, 
and  they  became  wicked ;  and  what  the  Wisdom  means, 
is  that  the  wickedness  of  men  does  not  put  them  beyond 
the  control  of  God,  neither  will  it  defraud  him  of  his 
glory ;  for  they  are  still  his  creatures,  therefore  in  his 
power ;  and  on  the  great  day  of  retribution  (a  most 
evil  day  to  them),  he  will  abundantly  display  the  glory 
of  his  justice  by  their  signal  punishment.  So  says  the 
Psalmist  (Ixxvi.  10),  "  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall 
praise  thee ;  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain  ; " 
i.  e.  God  in  the  wisdom  of  his  providence  "will  overrnle 
the  malignant  passions  of  men  to  the  praise  of  his  gov- 
ernment, and  suffer  them  to  go  no  farther.  The  same 
principle  is  woven  through  our  whole  subject. 

II.   The  contrary  account  in  Scripture. 

(1)  "  God  created  man  good  ;  (2)  and  after  his 
own  image  in  righteousness  and  t?'ue  holiness  ;  (3)  that 
he  might  rightly  know  God  hi  ■   Creator,  heartily  love 


56  THE   FALL   OF   MAN.  liim,  and  live  witli  liim  in  eternal  happiness,  to  glorify 
and  praise  him." 

Here  we  have  1.  The  creation  of  man  good.  2.  The 
form  of  his  goodness  ;  after  the  image  of  God  in  right- 
eousness  and  true  holiness.  3.  The  design  of  his  crea- 
tion after  the  divine  image ;  that  he  might  be  capable 
of  glorifying  God  by  an  eternal,  spiritual,  and  happy 
obedience. 

The  logical  order  of  the  thoughts  is  the  reverse  of 
the  words. 

1.  The  design  of  God  in  creating  man  was,  that  he 
might  be  capable  of  glorifying  his  Creator  by  an  eter- 
nal, spiritual,  and  happy  obedience. 

The  English  translation  of  our  Catechism  is  not  well 
done,  and  there  is  an  obscurity  in  the  last  phrase  of  the 
answer  now  before  us,  which  is  made  worse  by  defec- 
tive punctuation.  As  it  now  reads,  it  would  seem  that 
the  words,  "  to  glorify  and  praise  him,"  had  reference 
only  to  man's  "  living  with  God  in  eternal  happiness," 
while,  really,  they  relate  to  all  that  has  gone  before. 
A  comma  put  after  happiness,  will  greatly  help  to  clear 
the  sense  ;  but  there  should  have  been  inserted  some 
such  phrase  as, —  "And  this  as  the  method"  "  to  glorify 
and  praise,"  or  "for  the  purpose  of  glorifying  and  prais- 
ing him." 

By  the  glory  of  God  is  to  be  understood  the  mani- 
festation of  his  infinite  attributes  ;  and  he  is  glorified 
by  his  works,  when  they  show  proofs  of  his  attributes 
exerted  upon  them.  The  radiant  sun,  the  fruitful 
earth,  the  cunning  anatomy  of  plants  and  animals,  all 
that  is  discoverable  in  unconscious  nature,  glorify  God. 

Yet  it  is  necessary  to  such  glorification  of  God  that 
there   should   be   creatures  capable  of  perceiving   and 


THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  57 

recognizing  the  glory  so  manifested.  Being  created  with 
these  spiritual  faculties,  they  exhibit  in  their  own  nature 
proofs  of  tlie  divine  glory  as  much  more  wonderful  than 
those  of  unconscious  nature,  as  conscious  spirit  is  more 
wonderful  than  mere  matter.  But  they  render  a  higher 
tribute  of  glorification,  when  they  give  their  adoring 
praise  before  kindred  intelligences  to  the  Author  of  all. 
The  glory .  of  God  in  the  revelation  of  truth  to  his 
creatures,  whom  he  has  gifted  with  capacity  to  receive, 
is  unspeakably  more  noble  than  his  glory  in  his  works ; 
and  those  creatures  return  him  a  correspondent  glory 
when-  they  acknowledge  his  truth  with  homage  for  his 
divine  wisdom  ;  but  the  highest  degree  of  glorification 
which  intelligent  creatures  can  yield,  or  God  can  re- 
ceive, is  their  perfect  happiness  derived  from  conform- 
itv  to  his  will,  for  then  are  the  power,  wisdom,  good- 
ness, and  holiness  of  God  most  fully  manifested. 

It  was  to  give  man  a  fitness  for  thus  glorifying  his 
Creator  that  God  made  him,  as  Scripture  everywhere 
testifies.  God  had  already,  according  to  many  scrip- 
tural intimations,  created  various  orders  of  intelligences  ; 
but,  so  far  as  we  know,  they  are  all  pure  spirits,  liv- 
ing, acting,  serving,  and  adoring,  only  in  spheres  of 
thoucrht.  Man  alone  was  a  union  of  the  material  and 
spiritual.  Man  alone  was  intrusted  with  lordship  over 
material  things,  was  capable  of  deriving  happiness  from 
God  in  a  legitimate  use  of  them,  and  charged  with  the 
office  of  glorifying  God  by  such  a  happy  obedience,  on 
a  theatre  where  mind  and  matter  are  united  and  coop- 
erative. In  him  the  things  of  heaven  and  earth  are 
brought  together.  In  him,  as  the  connecting  link,  the 
two  grand  divisions  of  the  Almighty's  works  are  met. 
It  is  true  that  this  is  seen  very  dimly  in  the  first  Adam  ; 


58  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  yet  when  we  know  of  the  woman  conceiving  from  the 
Holy  Ghost  the  Second  Adam,  and  see  Jesus,  our 
Brother,  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  the  demonstration 
is  complete. 

The  design  of  God  was  to  give  man  a  fitttess  for  thus 
glorifying  him  ;  but  the  divine  purpose  was  not  abso- 
lute that  man  should  so  glorify  him,  as  the  immediate 
sequel  shows,  though  the  ultimate  issues  of  redemption 
will  triumph  gloriously  over  the  ruins  of  the  fall.  The 
design  was  carried  out.  Man  did  receive  from  his 
Creator  entire  fitness  to  glorify  and  enjoy  him  ;  though, 
as  we  shall  see,  there  was  necessarily  in  that  very  fitness 
an  element  which  made  his  defection  possible.  "  God 
made  man  upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many 
inventions." 

2.  The  form  of  man's  moral  creation  was  "  after  the 
image  of  God  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness." 
"And  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our 
likeness.  ...  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image  ; 
in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him  ;  male  and  female 
created  he  them."  What  is  meant  by  the  image  of 
God  in  which  man  was  created  ?  The  parallel  and 
nearly  synonymous  term  "likeness,"  used  by  God  him- 
self, gives  us  the  key  to  the  explanation. 

Man  being  designed  to  reflect,  spiritually,  the  spirit- 
ual glory  of  God,  by  his  enjoyment  of  God  through  an 
intelligent  conformity  to  the  divine  will,  it  was  neces- 
sary that  he  should  have  a  correspondent  capacity,  and 
be,  so  far  as  a  finite  creature  may,  a  counterpart  of  his 
infinite  Creator.  This  could  not  be  properly  true  of 
his  body,  for  organized  matter  cannot  resemble  the 
spiritual  One,  "  whom  no  one  hath  seen  or  can  see  ;  " 
and  the  lano-uao-e  of  the  text  cited  guards  us  against 


Lect.  hi.]  the  fall  of  MAN.  59 

such  a  mistake  :  "  In  the  image  of  God  created  he 
him,"  i.  e.  man  irrespective  of  bodily  distinctions,  as 
"  in  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  female ; "  but 
when  those  corporeal  differences  are  spoken  of,  it  i^j 
simply  said,  ''  Male  and  female  created  he  them  ; " 
no  mention  being  made  of  the  divine  image.  It 
must,  therefore,  relate  to  the  soul,  and  in  fact  proves 
that  man  has,  besides  his  body,  a  spirit,  because  he  is 
like  God  who  is  a  spirit,  and  he  "  must  worship  "  the 
spiritual  God  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

Man  is  a  creature  :  therefore,  all  that  he  is,  and  has, 
must  be  derived,  and,  for  the  same  reason,  finite  ;  God, 
the  origin  and  source  of  all,  must,  on  the  other  hand, 
be  infinite.  Still  there  will  be  a  correspondence  be- 
tween the  finite  receiver  and  the  infinite  imparter. 
The  happiness  of  the  spiritual  creature  must  come 
from  the  same  causes  as  the  spiritual  creature  ;  and 
hence  there  must  be  a  spiritual  resemblance. 

Thus  this  image,  likeness,  or  counterpart  of  God  in 
man  may  be  seen  threefold. 

1.  In  understanding  :  all  knowledge  is  original  with 
God,  but  he  imparts  truth  to  man,  and  man  must 
have  understanding  as  the  capacity  to  receive  it. 
Hence  the  Catechism  gives  as  one  reason  why  man 
was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  —  "  that  he  might 
rightly  know  God  his  Creator." 

2.  In  affection  :  by  which  we  mean  what  is  among 
us  commonly  understood  by  heart  ;  that  is,  a  capacity 
of  being  so  aftected  by  the  character  and  disposition  of 
those,  to  whom  we  have  relations  that  we  return  them 
love,  or  the  reverse.  But  God  manifests  his  love  tow- 
ards us,  and  requires  om-  love  in  return.  Hence, 
man  must  have  aifections  correspondent  to  the  relations 


GO  THE   FALL  OF  MAN.  which  lie  has  with  God,  and  in  the  economy  of  God 
with  his  fellow-creatures.  So  the  Catechism  gives  as 
another  reason  why  man  was  made  in  the  image  of 
God,  "  that  he  might  .  .  .  love  his  Creator ;  "  and  the 
Apostle  John :  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in 
God,  and  God  in  him." 

3.  In  will :  by  which  we  mean  a  power  of  choice,  or 
of  determining  our  actions,  within  our  sphere.  The 
will  of  God  is  supreme  over  all  tilings,  for  it  is  the  only 
source  whence  they  exist.  He  rules  over  unintelligent 
things  by  mere  force,  and  they,  being  unconscious, 
cannot  resist  or  obey.  But,  having  given  man  under- 
standing and  affections,  he  jDresented  to  his  understand- 
ing, —  and  through  his  vniderstanding  to  his  affections, 
—  arguments  or  motives  for  the  determination  of  his 
choice,  that  man  might  act  freely  according  to  his  own 
will ;  and  an  intelligent,  hearty  choice  of  that  which 
God  approves  is  the  service  which  the  Creator  required 
at  man's  hands.  Here,  then,  you  see  the  triple  like- 
ness of  the  creature,  man,  to  the  Creator,  God.  God 
understands,  man  understands  ;  God  loves,  man  loves  ; 
God  chooses,  man  chooses. 

But  there  must  have  been  something  more  to  com- 
plete the  correspondence  of  the  creature  to  his  Creator  ', 
and  what  this  was  we  learn  from  the  descnption  which 
the  Apostle  gives  of  regenerated  man,  or  sinful  man  in 
whom  the  original  likeness  is  reimplanted  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  We  find  it  in  two  nearly  parallel  texts  :  one, 
Ephes.  iv.  23,  24  :  "  And  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of 
your  mind  ;  and  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holi- 
ness ;  "  the  other  in  Coloss.  iii.  9,  10  :  "  Ye  have  put 
off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds  ;  and  have  put  on  the 


Lect.  III.  I  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  61 

new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  him  that  created  him."  Here  we  see  that 
the  image  of  God  consists  in  knowledo-e,  riohteousness, 
and  true  holiness.  In  knowledge,  that  is,  a  right  use  of 
the  understanding  ;  in  righteousness,  that  is,  a  proper 
discharge  of  relative  duties,  to  which  love,  as  the  two 
great  commandments  teach,  is  necessary,  for  "  love  is 
the  fulfilling  of  the  law  "  ;  and  holiness,  which  is  con- 
formity of  will  to  the  will  of  God,  or  choosing  as  God 
chooses.  God,  being  unchangeably,  because  essentially, 
perfect,  never  makes  an  error  in  understanding ;  never 
fails  in  righteousnesss  toward  his  creatures ;  never  is 
inconsistent  with  himself,  which  is  his  holiness.  Man, 
therefore,  when  he  had  the  divine  image,  was  sound  in 
understanding,  disposed  to  a  loving  discharge  of  all  his 
relative  duties,  and  conformed  willingly  to  the  will  of 
God.  But,  being  a  creature,  he  was  unlike  God,  neither 
infallible  nor  unchangeable  ;  and,  having  the  power  of 
choice,  he  might  choose  evil  or  good.  This  was  neces- 
sary to  his  original  constitution  as  a  moral  creature  ;  for 
else  his  conduct,  however  in  accordance  with  the  divine 
rule,  would  not  have  been  the  result  of  his  'knowledge, 
his  love,  or  his  will.  You  could  not  predicate  of  him 
either  right  or  wrong  any  more  than  you  could  of  a 
brute,  a  plant,  or  a  stone.  Still,  though  he  had  this 
faculty  of  choice,  he  was  under  no  bias  to  wrong,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  received  from  his  Creator  with  his 
being  a  disposition  to  do  well.  Hence,  the  Catechism 
gives  a  third  reason  why  man  was  made  in  the  image 
of  God,  "  that  he  might  live  with  God  in  eternal  happi- 
ness," which  he  could  not  do  unless  he  chose  as  God 
chooses,  partaking  of  the  divine  blessedness  as  he  agreed 
with  the  divine  character,  which  is  the  reason  of  the 


62  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  [Lkct.  IIL 

divine  blessedness.  The  blessedness  so  acquired  would 
have  been  for  ever,  because  death  came  in  only  as 
"  the  wages  of  sin ;  "  and  the  soul  of  man  being  im- 
mortal would  have  lived  perpetually  with  God.  Nay, 
his  body  also  would  have  been  incorruptible,  and  the 
whole  man  happy  through  conformity  to  the  divine 
will.  But  of  this  we  need  not  now  speak  further,  as  it 
M'ill  come  under  consideration  in  another  place. 

Thus,  God  created  man  good,  with  no  evil  in  him, 
or  disorder  tending  to  evil,  but  fitted  for  the  duties 
and  circumstances  which  should  be  assigned  him  ;  so 
that  in  no  sense  has  the  evil,  moral  and  physical,  which 
subsequently  came  upon  man  and  is  now  upon  all  his 
descendants,  been  the  fault  of  his  Creator. 

Secondly  :  Human  depravity  is  from  man  himself. 

The  7th  Question  asks :  "  Whence,  then,  p'oceeds 
this  deframty  of  human  nature?"  If  man  was  not 
created  wicked  and  perverse,  how  became  he  so  ? 

The  Catechisin  answers : 

"  From  the  fall  and  disobedience  of  our  first  pai'ents, 
Adam  and  Eve,  in  Paradise  ;  hence  our  nature  is  become 
so  corrupt  that  we  are  conceived  and  born  in  sin." 

This  asserts :  the  cause  of  the  corruption  to  be  the 
sin  of  our  first  parents  ;  and :  the  manner  of  its  trans- 
mission to  be  our  conception  and  birth  in  sin  ;  which 
together  give  us  the  doctrine  held  by  the  Reformed 
Churches,  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  that  all  men 
are  involved  in  the  fatal  consequences  of  Adam's  sin. 

Or,  as  the  clear  language  of  the  Westminster  divines 
expresses  it :  "  They  sinned  with  him  and  fell  with  him 
in  his  first  transgression." 

The  word /a//,  though  nowhere  it  has  such  reference 
in  Scripture,  is  commonly  used  by  believers  of  Christian 


THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  63 

doctrine  to  signify  man's  loss  of  the  high  place  which  he 
had  when  originally  created.  This  was  brought  about 
by  the  disobedience  of  our  first  parents,  Adam  and 
Eve,  in  Paradise.  The  particular  act  of  disobedience 
on  which  such  fatal  consequences  ensued,  must,  there- 
fore, have  been  the  first  of  which  man  was  guilty,  be- 
cause before  that  he  was  blameless,  and  immediately 
after  it,  he  was  cast  out  of  Paradise.  It  is,  then,  for 
us  to  inquire  how  our  race  were  so  deplorably  con- 
cerned in  that  one  sin  of  our  first  parents  ?  This  we 
may  learn  from  a  collation  of  Scripture :  Gen.  ii.  15  : 
"And  the  Lord  God  took  the  man,  and  put  him  into 
the  garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and  to  keep  it.  And  the 
Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  saying:  Of  every 
tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat ;  "  (mark, 
the  tree  of  life  was  among  those  not  forbidden  to  him ;) 
"  but  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou 
shalt  not  eat  of  it ;  for  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof 
thou  shalt  surely  die."  Mark  here,  that  from  the 
nature  of  this  command  with  the  threatening,  there  is 
implied  a  covenant  by  which  God  promises  life  on  con- 
dition of  his  obedience,  since  death  could  come  only 
through  his  disobedience.  Chap.  iii.  1  .  .  .  "  Now  the 
serpent  was  more  subtile  than  any  beast  of  the  field 
which  the  Lord  God  had  made."  (Other  Scriptures 
warrant  us  in  believing  that  the  devil  was  here  under 
the  form  of  the  subtle  reptile  :  "  That  old  serpent  called 
the  devil,"  Rev.  xii.  9.)  "  And  he  said  unto  the  woman  : 
Yea,  hath  God  said.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  of  the 
garden  ?  And  the  woman  said  imto  the  serpent :  We 
may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden  ;  but  of  the 
tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath  said. 
Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye 


64  THE  FALL  OF  MAN.  ll 

die."  (The  covenant  had  been  made  witli  the  man 
before  the  woman  was  formed ;  but  she  rightly  judged 
herself  involved  by  it,  as  making  with  man  the  human 
nature.)  "  And  the  serpent  said  unto  the  woman,  Ye 
shall  not  surely  die ;  for  God  doth  know  that  in  the 
day  ye  eat  thereof,  then  your  eyes  shall  be  opened, 
and  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil.  And 
when  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food, 
and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be 
desired  to  make  one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit  thereof, 
and  did  eat,  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband,  and  he 
did  eat.  And  the  eyes  of  them  both  were  opened, 
and  they  knew  that  they  were  naked  ;  and  they  sewed 
fig-leaves  together  and  made  themselves  aprons.  And 
they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  walking  in  the 
garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day  ;  and  Adam  and  his  wife 
hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  God 
amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden.  And  the  Lord  God 
called  unto  Adam,  and  said  unto  him,  Adam,  Where 
art  thou  ?  And  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  gar- 
den, and  I  was  afraid  because  I  was  naked,  and  I  hid 
myself.  And  He  said.  Who  told  thee  that  thou  M'ast 
naked  ?  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree,  whereof  I  com- 
manded thee  that  thou  shouldest  not  eat?  And  the 
man  said  :  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be  with 
me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat.  And  the 
Lord  God  said  unto  the  woman,  What  is  this  that 
thou  hast  done  ?  And  the  woman  said.  The  serpent 
beguiled  me  and  I  did  eat.  And  the  Lord  God  said 
unto  the  serpent,  Because  thou  hast  done  this,  thou  art 
cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast  of  the 
field  ;  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou 
eat  all   the  days   of  thy   life :    and  I  will  put  enmity 


THE   FALL   OF  MAN.  65 

between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed 
and  her  seed  ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt 
bruise  his  heel.  Unto  the  woman  he  said,  I  will  great- 
ly multiply  thy  sorrow  and  thy  conception ;  in  sorrow 
thou  shalt  bring  forth  children  ;  and  thy  desire  shall 
be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee.  And 
unto  Adam  he  said.  Because  thou  hast  hearkened  unto 
the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and  hast  eaten  of  the  tree,  of 
which  I  commanded  thee,  saying.  Thou  shalt  not  eat 
of  it,  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake :  in  sorrow 
shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;  thorns  and 
thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  eat 
the  herb  of  the  field ;  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt 
thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return  unto  the  ground ;  for 
out  of  it  wast  thou  taken  ;  for  dust  thou  art,  and  unto 

dust  shalt  thou  return And    the   Lord  God 

said.  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us  to  know 
good  and  evil ;  and  now  lest  he  put  forth  his  hand,  and 
take  also  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat  and  live  for  ever ; 
therefore  the  Lord  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  gar- 
den of  Eden,  to  till  the  ground  from  whence  he  was 
taken.  So  he  drove  out  the  man.  And  he  placed  at 
the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims  and  a  flam- 
ing  sword,  which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the  way 
of  the  tree  of  life."  Gen.  v.  3.  "  And  Adam  .... 
begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image." 

Now  compare  with  this  the  doctrine  of  the  Apostle, 
when  opening  the  way  of  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ ; 
Rom.  V.  12 :  "  Wherefore  as  by  one  man  sin  entered 
nito  the  world  and  death  by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed 
upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned.  .  v.  18.  Therefore 
as  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  men 
to  condemnation  ;  even  so  by  the  x'ighteousness  of  one, 

VOL.   I.  5 


66  THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification 
of  life."  So,  also,  1  Cor.  xv.  21.  ..."  For  since  by- 
man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive."  45.  "  The  first  Adam  was 
made  a  living  soul ;  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quick- 
ening spirit." 

There  are  many  things  in  the  original  story  and  the 
apostolical  comments,  upon  which  it  might  not  be  un- 
profitable to  remark,  if  we  had  time  ;  but  since  we 
have  not,  we  shall  be  confined  to  the  inferences  im- 
mediately touching  our  subject.  Let  us,  however,  be 
on  our  guard  against  the  sceptical  notion  that  the  Mo- 
saic account  is  an  allegory  ;  for  it  is  in  no  way  so  dis- 
tinguished from  what  follows  or  from  what  goes  before. 
If  part  be  allegory,  the  whole  is  allegory  ;  the  account 
of  creation  is  allegory,  man  is  but  an  allegorical  being, 
and  all  human  beings,  you  and  I  and  the  rest  of  our 
race,  are  mere  figments  of  a  poetical  description.  The 
facts  of  the  curse  are  present  with  us  now,  —  the  creep- 
ing serpent,  the  ungenerous  earth  with  its  thorns  and 
thistles,  the  pains  of  childbirth,  the  necessity  of  toil, 
the  death  which  returns  us  all  to  the  dust.  The  whole 
reasoning  of  the  apostles  respecting  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion assumes  the  facts  given  by  Moses  to  be  actual  and 
not  figurative.  Nay,  if  the  first  Adam  fell  not,  there 
is  no  redemption  by  the  second,  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 
The  simple  means  by  which  the  obedience  of  our  first 
parents  was  tried,  so  far  from  being  puerile,  as  some 
profanely  think,  were  in  perfect  accordance  with  the 
general  economy  of  God,  and  show  more  plainly  than 
more  complex  or  imposing  arrangements  could  have 
done  the  importance  of  the  principle  that  a  holy  safe- 


Lect.  in.]  THE   FALL   OF   MAN.  67 

ty  lies  in  obedience  to  God.  Innocent  man  was  yet 
dependent  on  his  Maker  for  daily  food,  and  God  put 
the  test  there  that  it  mio;ht  be  most  obvious. 

From  the  whole,  then,  we  learn,  — 

a.  That  Adam  forfeited  by  sin  the  favor  of  God,  lost 
the  upright  likeness,  which  he  originally  had,  to  his  Cre- 
ator, and  came  under  condemnation  to  death,  being  driv- 
en out  of  tlie  garden  where  God  held  communion  with 
him,  and  shut  out  from  all  access  to  the  tree  of  life, 
the  fruit  of  which  was  the  means  of  immortality.  How 
a  pure  being  could  fall  into  sin,  we  have  not  philosophy 
enough  to  explain,  nor  has  tlie  Holy  Ghost  answered 
such  curiosity.  He  had  the  faculty  of  choice,  from  the 
exercise  of  which  God  could  not  dii'ectly  restrain  him 
without  destroying  the  essence  of  his  moral  being. 
But  that  he  did  sin,  we  know  from  the  testimony  of 
God  ;  and  that  the  punishment  of  sin  came  upon  him, 
we  know  by  experience. 

h.  When  he  fell,  he  fell  not  alone,  but  all  his  descend- 
ants fell  with  him,  as  the  Apostle  expressly  asserts:  "  In 
Adam  all  died."  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the 
world,  and  death  by  sin."  When  the  covenant  was 
made  with  Adam,  it  was  made  with  human  nature,  for 
he  was  then  the  whole  of  human  nature,  and,  by  his 
progenitive  cliaracter,  the  head  and  representative  of  all 
the  human  nature  that  should  proceed  from  him.  Had 
he  remained  sinless,  no  doubt  his  posterity  would  have 
been  sinless  ;  but  he  fell,  and  his  posterity  fell  with  him. 
Had  he  retained  the  holiness  which  constituted  the  im- 
acfe  of  God,  he  would  have  beo;otten  his  chiklren  in  the 
image  of  God  ;  but  having  lost  that  image,  his  children 
were  begotten  and  conceived  in  his  own  image.  The 
natural  faculties  of  understanding,  affection,  and  choice, 


68  THE    FALL   OF   MAN.  his  nature  retained,  but  greatly  shattered  and  under  a 
fatal  bias  to  sin  ;  for,  though  one  may  be  free  to  tali 
from  a  precipitous  height,  he  is  not  free  to  regain  his 
lost  place.  His  moral  likeness  to  God  was  gone  from 
him  and  he  could  not  give  it  to  his  offspring.  Death 
moral,  death  natural,  death  as  the  result  of  sin,  death 
as  the  punishment  of  sin,  Avas  upon  him,  upon  his  very 
nature  ;  and,  therefore,  upon  all  who  derived  their  na- 
ture from  h'un.  Death  was  distinctly  threatened  as  the 
punishment  which  would  follow  Adam's  breach  of  the 
covenant,  and  that  death  involved  the  moral  being  of 
his  soul  as  well  as  the  decay  of  his  body.  "  The  wages 
of  sin  is  death  ;  "  and  the  consent  of  Evangelical  Scrip- 
ture declares  that  the  death  now  visible  is  but  the  faint 
yet  sure  foreshadowing  of  death  eternal,  which,  as  the 
favor  of  God  is  life,  must  be  the  wrath  of  God  on  body 
and  sovd  forever.  Death  is  upon  us  all.  We  have  the 
evidences  of  it  in  our  frames.  We  are  of  a  mortal  race. 
Our  forefathers  are  dead.  We  too  must  die,  for  we 
have  derived  death  from  them  with  our  life.  As  we 
all  die  with  Adam,  we  must  all  be  condemned  with 
him,  and  are  corrupt  with  him.  The  evidences  of  our 
moral  depravity  are  as  plain  as  those  of  our  bodily 
death ;  and  so  as  we  fell  in  Adam,  are  we  depraved 
with  him.  "  We  are,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  by  nature 
the  children  of  wrath  ;  "  and  again  :  "  The  Scripture 
hath  concluded  all  under  sin."  God  deliver  us  from 
the  death  eternal ! 

c.  Our  corruption  is  derived  from  Adam  through  our 
conception  and  birth  :  "  Behold,"  says  the  Psalmist, 
when  accounting  for  his  foul  transgressions,  "  I  was 
shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  ray  mother  conceive 
me."     In  the   same  maimer  that  we  have  our  descent 


THE  FALL   OF  MAN.  69 

from  Adam,  we  have  our  fallen  evil  nature.  Whatever 
be  the  difficulties  which  lie  about  this  fact,  it  is  true. 
The  parental  relation  of  Adam  to  us  involves  us  with 
him.  Our  whole  nature,  in  some  proper  sense,  is  from 
him.  Our  sins  are  imitations  of  his  ;  we  commit  wil- 
fully personal  sins,  but  behind  all  these  there  is  sin  in 
us  and  guilt  upon  us  ;  we  "  are  by  nature  the  children 
of  wrath,"  begotten  in  the  likeness  of  man  after  he  had 
lost  the  image  of  God.  So  certainly  as  we  are  his 
children,  are  we  sinners  prone  to  all  evil,  except  we  be 
regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Such,  my  dear  hearers,  is  our  sad  state  by  nature. 
Our  cavils  cannot  change  the  fact ;  but  the  grace  of 
God  can  change  our  condition  by  changino-  our  nature. 
Let  us  cease  to  challenge  the  justice  of  God  in  con- 
demning us,  and  invoke  his  ever  ready  mercy  to  create 
in  us  clean  hearts  and  renew  right  spirits  within  us. 

Let  us  seek  the  same  blessing  for  our  feliow-sinners, 
our  brothers  in  human  fallen  nature  ;  and  strive  by  all 
the  means  which  the  Gospel  offers  to  bring  them  under 
the  headship  of  Christ,  the  second  Adam  ;  that,  as  in 
the  first  they  died,  so  in  him  they  may  all  be  made 
alive  by  his  quickening  Spirit  unto  eternal  holiness. 

Especially  do  you,  who  are  parents,  look  upon  those 
who  are,  through  you,  children  of  sin  because  your 
children  ;  and  leave  no  method  untried  that  you  may 
be,  by  divine  help,  their  fathers  and  mothers  in  Christ, 
to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost  be  Glory. 
Amen.