LECTURE  IV. 


PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN. 


FOURTH    LORD'S    DAY. 
PUNISHMENT    OF    SIN. 

Quest.  IX.  Doth  not  God,  then, do  injustice  to  man  by  requiring  from  him  in 

his  law  that  tohich  he  cannot  per/brm  f 
Ans.  Not  at  all;  for  God  made  man  capable  of  performing  it;  but  man,  by 

the  instigation  of  the  devil  and  his  own  wilful  disobedience,  deprived 

himself  and  all  his  posterity  of  those  divine  gifts. 
Quest.  X.    Will  Gud  suffer  such  disobedience  and  rebellion  to  go  unpunished? 
Ajjs.  By  no  means;  but  is  terribly  displeased  with  pur  original  as  well  as 

actual  sins;    and  will  punish  them  in  his  just  judgment,  temporally 

and  eternally,  as  he  hath  declared:  "Cursed  is  every  one  that  cou- 

tinueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 

them." 
Quest.  XI.  7s  not  God,  then,  also  merciful? 
Ans.  God  is  indeed  merciful,  but  also  just;  therefore  his  justice  requires 

that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God, 

be  also  punished  with  exti'eme,  that  is,  everlasting  punishment,  both 

of  bod\'  and  soul. 

T^HE  section  of  the  Catechism  for  the  Second  Lord's 
^  Day  taught  us  the  utter  inabihty  of  man  to  keep 
the  law  of  God  ;  that  for  the  Third,  how  our  nature, 
which  God  created  good,  became  so  corrupt ;  and  the 
lesson  of  to-day,  declares  the  certain,  most  terrible  pun- 
ishment of  sin  by  the  wrath  of  God. 

An  inquiry  is  supposed,  whether  or  not  the  obliga- 
tion of  man  to  obey  the  commands  of  God  is  removed 
by  his  inability  : 

9th.  "  Doth  not  Grod,  then,  do  injustice  to  man  hy  re- 
quiring from  him  in  his  law  that  which  he  is  imable  to 
perform  ?  " 

This  being  denied  for  reasons  given,  farther  inquiry 


74  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  is  made  respecting  the  consequences  of  man's  wicked- 
ness : 

10th.  "  Will  Grod  suffer  such  disobedience  and  rebel- 
lion to  go  unjjunished  ?  " 

The  answer  to  which  is,  that  God  has  not  only  made 
known  his  holy  anger  with  us  because  of  our  innate 
depravity  and  overt  crimes,  but  has  pronounced  an 
awful  curse  upon  every  transgressor  of  his  law.  Nor 
will  the  compassion  of  God  mitigate  the  severity  of 
his  vengeance,  for  the  answer  to  question  the 

11th.  "  Is  not  Crod,  then,  also  merciful  ?  "  reminds 
us  that  executive  justice  is  essential  to  divine  sover- 
eignty, and  that  no  one  attribute  of  God  can  oppose 
another. 

Thus  we  have  our  subject  and  its  order  :  — 

The  subject : 

Tlie  Punishment  of  Sin. 

The  order  : 

First  :   The  accountability  of  fallen  7nan. 

Secondly  :    The  sentence  passed  upon  him. 

Thirdly  :    The  certainty  of  its  execution. 

First  :    The  accountability  of  fallen  man. 

Tiie  original  obligation  of  man  to  obey  God,  with  his 
consequent  responsibility  for  his  actions,  Avas  shown  on 
the  Second  Lord's  Day,  and  springs  necessarily  from 
the  relation  of  the  moral  creature  to  his  Creator.  The 
difficulty  before  us  is,  how,  since  man  has  lost  his  ability 
to  keep  the  law,  he  can  be  held  liable  to  punishment  for 
not  keeping  it ;  and  whether  it  is  or  is  not  charging  God 
with  injustice  to  assert  that  he  so  holds  him.  The 
Catechism  answers  : 

"  Not  at  all,  for  God  made  man  capable  of  perform- 
ing it  ;  but  man,  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,  and 


PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  '  75 

liis  own  wilful  disobedience,  deprived  himself  and  his 
posterity  of  those  divine  gifts." 

The  truth  of  the  principle  that  ability  must  precede 
obligation  is  admitted,  but  its  applicableness  to  the  case 
of  fallen  man  is  denied  ;  and  the  argument  takes  the 
form  of  a  syllogism,  thus :  God  made  man  able  to  keep 
the  law  given  him  ;  But  man  by  his  own  wilful  act  de- 
prived himself  and  his  race  of  that  ability  ;  Therefore, 
the  law  with  its  penalties  is  justly  binding  upon  us. 
The  first  was  shown  in  answer  to  the  fifth  question  ; 
the  second  in  answer  to  the  sixth  ;  the  third,  though 
following  irresistibly,  we  may  briefly  discuss. 

The  law  with  its  penalties  is  justly  binding  upon 
us,  notwithstanding  our  inability  to  perform  its  re- 
quisitions. 

1.  God  has  declared  it  to  be  so  in  both  his  word  and 
providence.  In  his  word,  he  makes  the  law  the  rule 
of  our  duty,  as  :  in  the  promulgation  of  its  two  tables 
on  Sinai,  and  the  confirmation  of  it  by  our  Lord  in  the 
two  requirements  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neigh- 
bor;  while  he  pronounces  us  utterly  unable  to  keep  it, 
and  describes  us  as  "  without  strength,"  "  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins,"  needing  a  new  life,  a  new  nature,  and 
the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ  before  we  can  be 
saved,  because  "  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  flesh  shall 
be  justified ; "  at  the  same  time  forewarning  us  of  the 
judgment  when  he  will  render  iinto  every  man  accord- 
ing to  his  deeds,  and  denouncing  the  fearful  curse,  which 
is  no  less  than  the  wrath  of  God  forever,  against  "every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  If  God  condemns 
us  for  not  keeping  the  law,  which  he  himself  says  we 
are  unable  to   keep,  who  will   dare  deny  his  justice  ? 


76  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN.  Shall  we  set  up  our  opinion  against  his,  who,  while  he 
pronounces  us  guilty,  "  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  ?  "  Surely, 
one  so  merciful  cannot  be  unjust. 

His  providence  agrees  with  his  word,  for  death  is  the 
penalty  of  the  law,  and  "  death  hath  passed  upon  all 
men,"  which  is  clear  proof  "  that  all  have  sinned." 
The  full  infliction  of  the  penalty  is  reserved  for  the 
next  world,  yet  here  we  see  that  mainly  the  happiness 
or  unhappiness  of  men  springs  from  their  conformity 
to  the  law  of  God  or  their  transgression  of  it ;  so  much 
so,  that  those  governments  which  copy  most  nearly  their 
laws  from  the  divine,  offer  the  best  security  for  the  com- 
mon good  ;  and,  that  those  nations  which  violate  the 
rules  of  righteousness  and  purity  divinely  laid  down 
are  sure,  if  not  at  once,  in  succeeding  generations  to 
bring  disaster  and  ruin  on  themselves  ;  showing,  beyond 
a  doubt,  that  the  law  with  its  penalties  originally  im- 
posed on  man  is  still  the  law  of  his  nature  under  Mdiich 
his  Creator  holds  him.  Nor,  as  has  been  intimated  by 
these  examples,  are  those  penalties  of  sin  always  sent 
only  upon  the  actual  transgressor :  posterity  suffers 
from  the  crimes  of  their  ancestors ;  children  through 
many  generations,  often  until  families  become  extinct, 
inherit  disease  and  weaknesses  of  both  mind  and  body 
through  the  vices  of  their  forefathers  ;  while  a  very 
large  majority  of  deaths,  with  the  ordinary  accompa- 
niments of  pain  and  distress,  is  of  children  too  young 
to  have  contracted  guilt  by  their  own  voluntary  sin. 
How  can  we  account  for  these  facts  (which  no  one 
can  deny)  otherwise  than  by  the  theory  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, that  the  primeval  law  is  still  dominant  over  us  ; 


PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  77 

that  the  corruption  of  man  is  derived  with  his  nature  ; 
and  that  all  his  race,  in  consequence  of  Adam's  sin,  are 
held  guilty  (that  is,  obnoxious  to  the  penalties  of  the 
divine  law)  before  God. 

2.  The  law  under  which  man  was  created,  with  its 
penalties,  is  unchangeable.  God  adapted  it  to  his  na 
ture  and  his  nature  to  it.  It  is  the  result,  as  has 
before  been  said,  of  his  relations,  moral  and  physical, 
to  his  Creator,  and  to  the  system  of  things  in  which 
the  Creator  has  placed  him.  Unless  all  the  laws  of 
this  world,  as  created  by  God  (which  we  must  believe 
are  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of  the  universe,  because 
the  Legislator  is  one  and  the  same),  be  changed,  the 
particular  law,  under  which  man  was  at  the  first  sub- 
ject, must  remain  unaltered.  We  distinguish  some- 
times, for  the  sake  of  argument,  between  the  natural  and 
the  penal  consequences  of  sin  ;  between  the  mischief 
which  sin  brings  about  in  the  condition  of  the  sinner, 
and  the  miseries  which  the  wrath  of  God  inflicts  on 
him  because  he  is  a  sinner ;  but  the  distinction  is 
nominal,  and  has  no  \varrant  from  fact.  The  Creator 
is  the  Lawgiver,  and  he,  who  is  both  Creator  and 
Lawgiver,  is  the  only  Judge.  He  would  allow  no  hurt 
to  reach  the  innocent,  and  has  arranged  all  things  for 
the  happiness  of  the  obedient ;  consequently,  whatever 
evil  comes  upon  any  moral  creature  must  come  from 
the  wrath  of  God  and  is  a  punishment  of  guilt.  The 
skeptic,  making  out  of  his  own  purblind  fancy  a  law 
according  to  which  he  would  ftishion  the  righteousness 
of  the  infinite  Creator,  may  presumptuously  deny  that 
•  our  good  God  can  be  so  severe  as  to  send  misery  on 
the  whole  race  of  man  through  Adam  ;  but  the  denial 
is  in   the  teeth   of  fact.      Misery  has  come  upon    the 


78  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN.  whole  race  ;  depravity,  physical  and  moral,  has  been 
and  is  characteristic  of  every  individual  who  lias  a 
human  nature.  Whence  came  that  misery,  if  not 
from  the  Creator?  and  why  from  the  Creator,  if  it 
be  not  the  punisliment  of  sin  ?  If  the  fact  of  hu- 
man misery  Avere  not  obvious,  we  might  tolerate  for 
a  moment  the  hypothesis  of  the  objector  ;  but,  when 
we  see  and  feel  a  fate  so  universal,  we  cannot  doubt 
that  it  is  from  God,  and  when  we  know  that  it  is  from 
God,  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  is  just. 

Besides,  when  the  law  was  ordered  and  given  as  both 
the  rule  of  man's  duty  and  the  method  of  his  happi- 
ness, he  was  able  to  keep  it ;  since  he  has  so  lost  his 
ability  that  (in  the  language  of  Scripture)  he  "  cannot 
please  God  ;  "  must  then  God  lower  the  demands  of 
his  law  and  accommodate  it  to  our  fallen  nature  ?  No 
one  can  soberly  contend  for  that.  Should  a  law  pun- 
ishing murder  restrain  its  operation  against  the  wretch 
who  has  become  so  malignant  and  brutal  that  he  can- 
not keep  from  shedding  blood  for  revenge  or  rapine  ? 
Or  should  the  poisonous  effects  of  strong  drink  cease 
in  the  constitution!  of  the  drunkard,  because  he  cannot 
resist  the  terrible  thirst  which  he  has  wickedly  ac- 
quired ?  Upon  such  a  principle,  the  worse  a  man  is, 
the  less  pure  and  exacting  the  law  over  him  shoiild 
be.  It  is  not  the  fault  of  the  law,  but  of  the  sinner, 
that  he  comes  under  its  penalties,  \\hich  are  intended, 
not  to  make  man  miserable,  but  to  deter  him  from  sin, 
which  will  (;ertainly  make  him  miserable. 

3.  The  inability  of  man  to  keep  the  law  of  God, 
which  we  derive  through  our  descent  from  Adam,  is 
not  of  such  a  natiu'e  as  to  free  us  from  blameworthi- 
ness.    There  niay  have  been,  there  probably  has  been, 


Lect.  IV.J  punishment  OF  SIN.  79 

all  along  with  our  reasoning,  an  objection  in  the  minds 
of  some,  tliat  the  absence  of  power  to  obey  renders 
obedience  on  our  part  impossible,  which  seems  to  go  far 
towards  relieving  us  from  guilt.  But  let  us  consider 
more  closely  the  nature  of  this  inability,  and  where  it 
lies.  It  is,  doubtless,  a  moral  inability,  for  it  respects 
moral  acts ;  and  as  morality  (or  right  and  wrong) 
belongs  to  the  will,  the  inability  must  lie  in  the  will. 
Mark,- — in  asserting  that  our  inability  is  of  the  will, 
we  are  far  from  asserting,  as  some  with  moj-e  art 
than  correctness  have  done,  that  we  have  a  natural 
ability  to  keep  the  law  of  God.  To  speak  of  a  natural 
ability  to  do  a  moral  act,  is  a  confusion  of  terms  utterly 
unjustitiable,  and  can  lead  to  no  sound  result.  The 
exercise  of  what  are  termed  our  natural  faculties,  (not 
those  of  our  bodies  but  of  our  souls,)  such  as  the  fac- 
ulty of  understanding  or  loving,  have  a  moral  char- 
acter only,  because  of  the  exercise  of  the  will  through 
them.  Morality  is,  we  know,  inseparable  from  the  ex- 
ercise of  those,  so  called,  natural  facu.lties,  because  the 
exercise  of  them  is  always  by  the  will ;  but,  for  the 
same  reason,  their  moral  character  is  derived  from  the 
will.  To  know  God  is  our  duty,  yet  could  not  be  our 
duty  if  we  were  without  the  faculty  of  knowing  ;  to 
love  God  is  our  duty,  yet  could  not  be  if  we  had  not 
the  faculty  of  loving  ;  but  as  both  our  understanding 
and  our  heart  are  exercised  by  our  will,  there  can  prop- 
erly be  no  ability  to  do  what  is  moral  where  the  will 
is  not  concerned  and  engaged.  To  deny  the  moral 
ability  to  do  right  (by  which  is  understood  ability  of 
will)  is  to  deny  all  ability  to  do  right.  At  the  same 
time,  it  must  be  seen  that  there  is  a  reflex  action  of  the 
understanding  and  affections  upon  the  will,  biasing  it. 


80  PUNISHMENT  OF   SIN.  and,  where  it  is  weak,  controlling  it,  because  the  will 
itself  is  determined  (so  far  as  we  can  discover  the  laws 
of  its  mystery)  by  the  motives  presented  to  it.  This, 
however,  strengthens  the  objection  to  the  claim  of  nat- 
ural ability  to  serve  God,  because  both  Scripture  and 
experience  teach  us  that  the  understanding  is  darkened 
and  weakened  by  sin,  while  our  affections  have  from 
the  same  fatal  cause  acquired  a  proneness  to  evil,  thus 
influencing;  the  will  to  wrono-  as  well  as  being;  directed 
by  it.  In  fact,  our  whole  spiritual  being  is  disorganized 
from  its  j^roper  balance  and  adjustment,  needing  an  en- 
tire renovation  as  a  whole,  and  in  each  part.  So  the 
Apostle  declares  that  God  worketh  in  the  believer  "  both 
to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure  ;  "  his  vmder- 
standing  must  be  enlightened  and  his  heart  changed. 
This  corruption  of  his  so-called  natural  powers  does 
not  free  the  sinner  from  guilt,  because  he  has  himself 
corrupted  them  wilfully.  Had  God  created  man  with- 
out eyes,  he  surely  would  not  have  required  from  him 
an  admiring  study  of  visible  creation  ;  but  if  man, 
after  having  received  sight,  had  wilfully  deprived  him- 
self of  his  eyes,  he  would  not  by  so  criminal  an  act 
have  escaped  from  his  duty,  because  his  accjuired  ina- 
bility would  have  been  a  sin  involving  all  the  conse- 
quent omissions  ;  just  as  human  law  holds  a  drunken 
man  responsible  for  all  the  wrong  he  does  while  in  a 
state  of  self-assumed  craziness.  God  gave  man  a  sound 
reason  and  unpolluted  affections  ;  but  he  depraved  those 
faculties  wilfully,  and  is  justly  responsible  for  the  conse- 
quences of  that  depravity. 

It  is  cle^r,  however,  that  much  of  the  difficulty  thrown 
around  this  subject  arises  from  the  insufficiency  of  our 
human  language  to  state  clearly  what  concerns  spiritual 


PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  81 

or  moral  things.  Power,  strength,  ability,  are  terms 
primarily  expressive  of  physical  faculty  ;  and  cannot 
apply  with  parallel  force,  or  corresponding  sense,  to 
the  will  of  the  spiritual  soul.  When  the  will  is  ex- 
ercised, there  is  choice  ;  and  when  we  say  that  man 
cannot,  before  he  is  regenerate,  choose  the  service  of 
God,  we  do  not  mean  that  he  is  compelled  to  evil 
by  a  force  without  himself,  as  a  stream  runs  down- 
ward or  a  flame  points  upward  ;  but  that  he  is  so 
wicked  by  nature  that  his  choice  is  inevitably  fixed  on 
what  is  wrong.  He  cannot  do  right,  because  he  is  so 
bent  on  doing  wrong.  Can  any  of  us  say  that  he  is 
forced  to  sin  whether  he  will  or  not  ?  Can  he  say  that 
his  bondage  to  sin  does  not  include  his  will,  or  that, 
when  he  sins,  he  is  not  a  voluntary  agent  ?  There  is 
no  reasoning  on  this  ;  we  know  it,  in  the  same  way  that 
we  know  we  exist,  from  our  consciousness.  If,  then, 
we  sin  of  our  own  accord,  can  we  be  innocent  ?  Nay, 
if  we  are  without  a  disposition  to  obey  God,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  of  our  guilt.  It  is  the  want  of  a  heart  to 
serve  him  for  which  God  condemns  us.  The  inability 
spoken  of  by  the  word  of  God  and  the  Catechism,  is 
nothing  else  than  that  depravity  of  our  nature  through 
sin  by  which  our  heart  is  alienated  from  God,  our  un- 
derstanding blinded,  and  our  very  conscience  perverted. 
Therefore,  (in  the  language  of  the  Episcopal  Church,) 
"  the  condition  of  man  after  the  fall,  is  such,  that  he 
cannot  turn  and  prepare  himself,  by  his  own  natural 
strength  and  good  works,  unto  faith  and  calling  of 
God." 

It  may  be  objected  that  the  Apostle  speaks  of  "  doing 
the  thing  he  would  not,"  and  our  Church  in  the  Com- 
munion service,  of  "  sin  remaining  against  our  will  in 

VOL.   I.  G 


82  PUNISHMENT  OF   SIN.  US  ; "  but  in  those  passages  we  must  understand 
"  would  "  and  "  will  "  to  mean  the  general  purpose 
and  desire  of  a  believer,  which  is  for  the  consecration 
of  his  whole  being  to  God. 

4.  The  method  of  God  in  salvation  justifies  his  con- 
demnation of  us  under  Adam  ;  for  Christ  takes  the 
place  of  a  second  Adam,  and  holds  the  same  federal 
relation  to  the  elect,  whom  he  represents,  as  the  first 
Adam  did  to  his  natural  posterity.  In  him  the  be- 
liever is  justified,  as  in  the  first  man  he  was  condemn- 
ed ;  by  the  righteousness  and  expiation  of  Christ  in 
his  stead,  he  is  pardoned,  accepted,  and  rewarded  ; 
the  blessing  comes  on  Christ  the  Head  first,  then  on 
every  member  of  the  Church  which  is  his  body  ;  and 
the  strength  enabling  him  to  do  right  is  not  his  own, 
but  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
dwelling  in  him.  It  is  only  through  such  representa- 
tion or  suretyship  of  Christ  that  he  can  be  saved  from 
either  the  guilt  or  the  power  of  sin,  as  the  Apostle  says : 
"  For,  if  by  one  man's  oifence  death  reigned  by  one, 
much  more  they,  which  receive  abundance  of  grace 
and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness,  shall  reign  in  life  by 
one,  Jesus  Christ." 

To  deny  the  justice  of  representation  as  a  principle 
on  which  God  may  deal  with  us,  is  to  take  away-  all 
hope  of  our  salvation.  Indeed,  when  handling  the 
subject  of  the  fall,  we  should  have  constant  refer- 
ence to  the  condition  of  sinners  under  the  Gospel, 
as  a  remedial  system,  for  such  is  our  condition ;  and, 
therefore,  every  other  method  of  considering  it  would 
be  more  curious  than  practical  ;  since  God  leaves'  us 
who  hear  the  Gospel  not  irrecoverably  lost  through 
Adam,  but  with  the  gracious  opportunity  of  restora- 
tion through  Christ. 


PUNISHMENT   OF  SIN.  83 

In  conclusion,  let  every  believer  ask  himself  if  he 
does  not  feel  that  of  his  own  nature  he  is  utterly  un- 
able to  obey  God,  yet  that  he  is  guilty  for  not  obeyinor 
him  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  "  it  is  God  who  work- 
eth  in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure?  " 
Such  conviction  of  Christian  experience  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  Catechism. 

Secoistdly  :  The  sentence  passed  upon  fallen^  sinful 
man. 

Our  guilt,  because  of  our  sins,  having  been  demon- 
strated, the  question  recurs:  SJiall  ive  be' suffe^'ed  to 
go  unpunished  by  the  good  God.,  ivhom  we  have  re- 
belled against?  And  the  Catechism  answers:  "By 
no  means  ;  but  (he)  is  terribly  displeased  with  our 
original  as  well  as  actual  sins  ;  and  will  punish  them 
in  his  just  judgment,  temporally  and  eternally,  as  he 
hath  declared  :  '  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them.'  " 

From  the  line  of  argument  which  we  have  chosen, 
much,  which  otherwise  sliould  come  under  this  head, 
has  been  anticipated,  yet  several  important  things  are 
yet  to  be  noted  :  The  terms  of  the  condemnation  ;  the 
reason  of  it ;  and  its  extent. 

1.  The  terms  of  the  condemnation  :  "  Cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which 
are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them." 
This  is  the  language  of  God  himself  as  given  by  the 
Apostle  Paul  out  of  the  older  Scripture.  Curse  is  the 
opposite  of  blessing  ;  both  imply  the  action  of  God, 
for  he  alone  can  curse,  and  he  alone  can  bless  ;  bless- 
ing is  the  happy  consequence  of  his  favor,  cursing  is 
the  miserable  consequence  of  his  anger.      Sometimes 


84  PUNISHMENT  OF   SIX.  these  opposite  terms  are  applied  to  unconscious  objects, 
as  :  "a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed,  which  for 
that  reason  is  fruitful ;  or  "cursed  is  the  gi'ound,"  which 
for  that  reason  brought  forth  thorns  and  thistles  ;  yet 
such  merely  material  things  are  not  themselves  prop- 
erly objects  of  divine  blessing  or  cursing,  but  only  the 
means  through  which  God  blesses  or  curses  man. 
Blessing  or  cursing  are  often  restricted  to  particular 
concerns  or  parts  of  men's  interests,  but  when  used 
generally,  or  without  specification,  they  comprehend 
the  whole  of  man's  being  and  experience ;  and  are 
then  synonymous  with  life  and  death  in  their  full 
sense,  —  for  the  favor  of  God  is  life,  and  the  anger  of 
God  is  death.  Thus  Moses,  having  declared  the  law 
with  its  sanctions  of  reward  and  punishment,  says : 
"  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  this  day  against 
you,  that  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,  blessing 
and  cursing  ;  therefore  choose  life,  that  both  thou  and 
thy  seed  may  live."  So  in  the  sentence  before  us, 
"  Every  one  that  continueth  not  in  ail  things,  which 
are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to  do  them,"  is 
denovmced  as  "  cursed,"  that  is,  condemned  to  death, 
or  to  all  the  awful  effects  of  divine  wrath  ;  God  not 
only  withdrawing  from  him  his  favor,  but  also  pursuing 
him  with  his  vengeance.  How  extreme  must  be  the 
misery  of  one  whose  enemy  is  God  omnipotent  ! 

The  sentence  is  ])assed :  "  Cursed  is  every  one  who 
'  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them."  God  has,  it  is  true,  "  appointed 
a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world,"  but  his  wrath 
does  not  linger  until  then  ;  for  the  day  of  judgment  is 
rather  the  time  of  the  public  final  award  to  the  right- 
eous of  life  eternal,  and  to  the  wicked  of  deatli  eternal, 


PUNISHMENT  OF   SIN.  85 

at  the  close  of  the  mediatorial  scheme.  Doubtless, 
there  will  then  be  a  great  increase  of  happiness  on  the 
one  hand,  and  of  misery  on  the  other,  because  the 
sentence  either  way  will  be  fully  carried  out,  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ  beino;  ended  ;  but  the  sentence  against 
the  sinner  is  already  passed,  and  partly  put  in  force  the 
moment  he  is  a  sinner  ;  nay,  the  only  reason  why  it  is 
not  executed  at  once  is  the  stay  of  divine  venc^eance  to 
give  opportunity  of  salvation  through  the  Atoner.  So 
the  language  is  not  "  cursed  will  be  "  the  sinner,  but 
'•'•  cursed  is  he."  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou 
shalt  surely  die,"  and  in  the  day  he  ate  he  did  die  ;  he 
lost  the  favor  of  God  which  is  life,  he  came  under  the 
anger  of  God  which  is  death  ;  death  in  his  body  which 
then  began  to  die ;  death  in  his  soul  which  then  became 
corrupt;  death  in  his  entire  humanity,  because  under 
condemnation  ;  death  upon  all  the  race  which  he  rep- 
resented :  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world, 
and  death  by  sin,  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men  for 
that  all  have  sinned  ;  "  and  again  :  "  By  the  offence 
of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation." 
How  dreadful  is  this  thought !  We  are  already  con- 
demned ;  and  unless  we  have  escaped  to  the  shelter  of 
Christ's  mediation,  the  unspeakable  weight  of  the  curse 
of  God  may  at  any  moment  crush  us  into  hell  forever  ; 
all  the  woes  we  suffer  now,  unless  they  have  been 
changed  to  fatherly  discipline  by  the  adopting  grace 
of  God  in  Christ,  are  but  faint  presaging  shadows  of 
our  eternal  doom. 

The  sentence  is  passed  upon  all  sinners  :  "  Cursed  is 
evei-y  one,"  &c.  "  The  Scripture  hath  concluded  all 
under  sin,"  for  "  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no  not 
one."     "Death  hath  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all 


[■6  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  have  sinned."  In  our  mortality  and  moral  corruption 
we  have  the  proof  of  both  our  sin  and  our  condemna- 
tion. We  cannot  escape  on  the  plea  that  we  have 
broken  only  one  or  a  few  of  the  divine  precepts  and 
kept  the  rest;  even  if  this  were  possible,  the  sentence 
is  against  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;  " 
so  that  to  escape  the  curse  we  must  not  only  keep  all 
the  commandments,  but  keep  them  continually,  with- 
out exception  and  without  internu'ssion.  But  it  is 
not  possible  ;  "  for,"  says  the  Apostle  James,  "  who- 
soever shall  keep  the  whole  law,  and  yet  offend  in 
one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all.  For  he  that  said  do 
not  commit  adultery,  said  also,  do  not  kill.  Now  if 
thou  commit  no  adultery,  yet  if  thou  kill,  thou  art 
become  a  transgressor  of  the  law."  The  sin  lies  not 
merely  in  a  particular  offence,  or  in  the  breach  of 
one  particular  commandment ;  but  in  rebelling  against 
the  authority  of  him  wdio  ordained  the  whole  law, 
showing  plainly  that  the  sinner  is  not  restrained 
from  breaking  the  rest  by  the  reverence  he  has  for 
God,  but  only  through  temperament,  or  absence  of 
trial,  or  lack  of  opportunity.  He,  who  would  for 
sound  religious  reasons  keep  one  precept,  would  from 
the  same  conscientious  motive  abstain  from  breaking 
all  the  rest.  Therefore  is  the  sinner  condemned  for 
having  rebelled  against  the  majesty  of  the  Lawgiver. 
Who,  then,  my  hearers,  can  stand  ?  Who  among  us 
has  always  and  at  all  times  made  the  law  of  God,  be- 
cause it  is  God's  law,  the  rule  of  his  conduct  ?  Who 
'  of  us  can  abide  the  scrutiny,  when  God  searches  our 
inmost  hearts  ? 

2.    The  reason  of  the  condemnation. 


PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  87 

God  is  terribly  displeased  with  our  original  as  well 
as  actual  sins. 

The  word  God  is  not  only  the  distinguishing  name 
of  the  infinite  Being,  but  also  a  title  of  his  supreme 
office.  We  cannot  use  it  rightly  without  understand- 
ing by  it  the  Moral  Governor,  as  well  as  the  Creator 
of  the  Universe.  As  belief  in  an  all-wise  First  Cause 
throws  chance  entirely  out  of  the  physical  system, 
bringing  all  things  under  law ;  so  it  is  impossible  that 
the  Sovereign  can  be  indifferent  to  the  character  and 
acts  of  his  moral  subjects.  The  freedom  of  their 
agency  does  not  put  them  beyond  his  authority,  else 
they  would  become  more  than  creatures  and  he  less 
than  supreme.  They,  therefore,  must  be  under  law, 
and  their  happiness  or  misery  be  in  proportion  to  their 
conformity  or  lack  of  conformity  with  the  divine  law  ; 
so  that,  giving  to  their  freedom  its  widest  definition,  it 
can  be  nothing  more  than  freedom  to  work  out  their 
happiness  or  misery  under  the  law  of  the  Creator. 
But  the  law,  under  which  they  act,  must  spring  from 
the  very  nature  of  God,  and,  as  he  is  essentially  holy, 
whatever  in  the  moral  creature  is  contrary  to  the 
divine  holiness,  must  bring  upon  him  the  hostility  of 
the  divine  power. 

Again :  whatever  definition  may  be  given  to  right, 
the  rule  of  right  for  the  moral  creature  can  be  no  other 
than  the  expressed  will  of  his  divine  Lord  ;  he  has,  as 
a  subject,  reason  to  look  for  such  a  declaration  of  the 
divine  will  respecting  his  acts,  (since  "  sin  is  not  im- 
puted where  there  is  no  law,")  and  God  has  revealed 
that  law  clearly  to  us  ;  a  transgression  of  the  revealed 
law  is,  therefore,  a  rebellion  against  our  rightful  Sov- 
ereign, and   tlie   transgressor   must  be  dealt  with  as  a 


88  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  [Lkct.  IV. 

traitor.  Yet  again  :  no  man  is  alone  in  tlie  world,  nor 
do  his  actions  affect  only  his  own  well  being,  but  he 
belongs  to  a  vast  community  of  human  beings,  moral 
creatures  like  himself,  so  interlinked  that  their  actions 
necessarily  bear  upon  each  other  and  upon  their  pos- 
terity ;  God  is  the  Governor  and  Defender  of  the  whole 
as  he  is  of  each,  and  therefore  any  breach  of  the  law- 
given  to  conserve  the  happiness  of  all,  must  be  regarded 
by  him  as  a  grievous  offence  against  him,  because 
against  the  peace  of  those  under  his  care. 

Once  more  :  all  his  intelligent  creatures  have  a 
right  to  ask  from  God  his  estimate  of  right  or  wrong, 
the  degree  in  which  the  one  is  meritorious,  the  other 
damnable ;  nor  can  they  learn  this  except  from  the 
reward  he  attaches  to  obedience  and  the  penalties  he 
denounces  against  disobedience.  Were  he  to  overlook 
his  creatures'  good  or  evil,  were  he  to  reward  lightlj''  or 
punish  lightly,  even  in  a  single  case,  the  consistency  of 
his  administration  would  be  shaken,  and  doubt  as  to 
the  very  principles  of  truth  or  happiness  would  darken 
over  the  universe.  The  dreadfulness  of  the  curse 
against  sin  is  the  expression  of  the  sense  he  has  of  its 
enormity,  and  meant  to  deter  his  siibjects  from  it ;  but 
when  any  will,  notwithstanding,  transgress,  the  penalty 
they  defy  must  take  its  course.  Thus  we  see  that  God 
is  terribly  displeased  with  sin  from'  the  holiness  of  his 
nature,  from  jealous  vindication  of  his  authority,  from 
his  regard  for  the  happiness  of  his  subjects,  and  from 
his  design  to  teach  his  moral  tmiverse  the  only  way  of 
life. 

Sin,  therefore,  in  any  form  that  may  be  chargeable 
on  us,  must  excite  his  severe  displeasure  ;  our  actual 
sins  not  only,  but,  also,  our  sin  in  which  we  are  boi'n  ; 


PUNISHMENT   OF  SIN.  89 

for,  if  the  overt  act  be  a  trangression  of  his  law,  tlie 
disposition  or  tendency  to  transgression  which  is  in  our 
nature  must  be  offensive  to  him  as  the  root  or  fountain 
of  all  sin. 

As  to  our  actual  sins,  the  testimony  of  the  word  of 
God  is  so  clear,  that  none  of  them  will  escape  his  right- 
eous anger,  as  to  need  nothing  from  us,  especially  after 
our  previous  reasoning.  But  the  Catechism,  by  our 
innate  or  born  sins,  ("  original ''  as  the  English  trans- 
lator has  it,)  evidently  means  not  only  our  native  cor- 
ruption, but  also  the  sin  of  our  first  parent  in  whom 
we  fell.  This  we  shall  now  argue  no  farther  than  to 
say,  upon  the  testimony  of  afore-cited  Scripture,  and 
upon  the  proof  everywhere  seen  of  tlie  whole  race 
being  as  a  race  under  the  curse  pronounced  upon 
Adam,  that  God  holds  us  guilty  because  we  are  chil- 
dren of  Adam,  the  progenitor  of  us  all.  How  else,  Ave 
ask  aoain,  can  we  account  for  the  suffering;  and  mor- 
tality  of  babes  before  they  are  capable  of  actual  sin  ? 
Not  that  we  can  believe  in  the  damnation  of  inflmts,  as 
has  been  falsely  charged  on  those  who  hold  our  creed  ; 
on  the  contrary,  only  we  can  consistently  hold  the  doc- 
trine of  their  salvation,  because  we  believe  that  they 
are  saved  through  the  merit  of  Him  who  has  said : 
"  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Are  we  asked : 
What  would  have  been  their  fate,  if  the  redemption 
had  not  been  provided  ?  We  answer  that  of  such 
contingencies  we  have  no  knowledge,  and,  therefore, 
no  right  or  room  for  conjecture,  except  that  in  no  cir- 
cumstances God  would  do  unjustly.  Sufficient  is  it  for 
us  to  know  that  we  are  all  condemned,  all  under  the 
curse,  all  born  in  sin  ;  and  (thanks  be  unto  God  for  his 
unspeakable  gift !)  that  there  is  full  redemption  through 
Jesus  Christ  for  all  who  believe  on  his  name. 


90  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  [Lkct.  IV. 

O  my  friends,  liow  terrible  must  be  the  displeasure 
of  God,  and  how  base  that  sin  which  clouds  with 
frowns  against  his  creatures  the  face  of  him,  whose 
names  are  Life  and  Light  and  Love ! 

3.  The  extent  of  the  condemnation. 

God  "will  punish  them  (our  sins)  in  his  just  judg- 
ment, temporally  and  eternally." 

The  penal  consequences  of  sin,  included  by  the  curse 
are  temporal  and  eternal,  on  (as  the  answer  to  the 
next  question  states)  both  body  and  soul." 

Man,  as  God  created  him,  consists  of  both  body  and 
souL  His  soul,  having  a  life"  peculiar  to  itself,  may 
exist  without  his  body,  and  will  so  exist  from  the  time 
of  his  so  called  death  until  the  Last  Day  ;  but  then 
it  is  not  the  entire  man  ;  neither  is  it  the  design  of  God 
that  the  soul  should  be  disembodied,  except  for  a  pass- 
ing purpose  ;  nor  can  the  soul  have  its  full  sensibility 
or  put  forth  its  full  energy  when  apart  from  the  body. 
God  contrived  the  body  with  its  faculties  to  be  the 
dwelling  and  instrument  of  the  soul  ;  he  created  and 
fitted  the  soul  (unlike  angelic  spirit)  to  live  in  the 
body  and  act  through  it.  The  relations  of  body  and 
soul  are,  therefore,  most  intimate.  As  w^e  see  it  in  this 
life,  the  sympathy  of  each  with  the  other  is  close  and 
necessary.  Through  the  bodily  ap})etites,  the  soul 
maintains  or  im])airs  its  natural  vigor ;  through  the 
bodily  senses,  it  perceives  and  derives  ideas  from  ex- 
ternal things  ;  through  the  bodily  faculties,  it  acts  out- 
wardly its  will  ;  through  the  passions,  which  belong 
both  to  it  and  the  body  in  combination,  it  enjoys  or 
suffers.  The  soul,  it  is  true,  has  faculties  and  affections 
peculiar  to  itself,  and  alone  has  will,  but  it  has  not  the 
complete  powers   intended  for  its   action   without   the 


PUNISHMENT    OF   SIN.  91 

means  and  implements  supplied  by  the  body  ;  for  which 
reason  a  "  spiritual  body  "  (as  the  apostle  characterizes 
it)  as  well  as  a  sanctified  soul  is  necessary  to  the  entire 
felicity  of  man  in  heaA^en,  not  less  than  in  paradise  on 
eai'th  ;  which  makes  the  clear-sighted  Paul,  even  while 
lamenting  the  impediments  of  a  corrupt  body,  desire 
not  to  "  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon,  that  mortality 
might  be  swallowed  up  of  life."  It  follows,  therefore, 
Avithout  dwelling  now  longer  on  this  most  interesting 
topic,  that  the  punishment  of  sin,  and  the  reward  of 
righteousness  as  well,  must  be  both  on  body  and  soul, 
or  on  the  entire  man.  The  body  is  the  instrument  of 
the  soul's  vnigodly  acts  and  unholy  pleasures  and  con- 
taminating influences,  so  through  and  in  the  body  must 
the  sinful  soul  suffer  punishment ;  yet,  as  the  soul  has 
its  peculiar  properties  which  it  prostitutes  to  sin,  the 
punishment  must  also  be  heavy  on  the  soul  itself  imme- 
diately. 

This,  we  have  seen,  is  the  case  temporally,  because 
the  curse  has  passed  upon  all  men,  and  many  specific 
punishments  occur  on  every  hand.  Yet  it  should  be 
remarked  that  these  inflictions  of  divine  wrath  are  for 
the  most  part  warnings  against  the  wrath  to  come,  that 
men  may  repent  ;  and  that  what  remains  of  them  on 
the  believer  have  the  curse  so  taken  out  of  them  as  to 
make  them  parts  of  the  divine  discipline,  educating  his 
vet  sinful  though  penitent  child  for  the  glory  above. 

The  punishment  will  be  eternal,  upon  the  impenitent 
sinner,  body  and  soul  in  this  life,  upon  his  soul  after 
death  until  the  Last  Day,  and  ever  after  upon  him 
body  and  soul,  for  his  body  will  then  be  raised  to  the 
resurrection  of  damnation.  The  eternity  or  perpetuity 
of  the   sinner's  punishment  is   plainly  declared  in  the 


92  PUNISHMENT   OF  SIN.  [I.kct.  IV. 

word  of  God.  Let  one  text  out  of  many  suffice  : 
"  These  (tlie  wicked)  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
punishment."  This  proof  is,  however,  objected  to  by 
some  on  the  plea  that  the  original  word,  rendered 
"  everlasting,"  seldom  or  never  in  Scripture  means 
everlasting,  but  only  a  long  period.  Our  answer  is 
easy  and  promi)t,  that  the  same  word  is  applied  in  the 
other  part  of  the  verse  to  the  blessedness  of  the  right- 
eous, "  into  life  eternal."  If  the  criticism  were  sound, 
the  happiness  of  the  righteous  as  well  as  the  misery  of 
the  wicked  will  be  for  only  a  limited  period.  But  men 
are  immortal.  Where,  then,  will  the  wicked  immortal 
be  after  having  passed  through  the  age  of  hell?  Where 
the  immortal  righteous,  after  the  age  of  heaven  ? 
Where  the  immortal  soul,  when  heaven  and  hell  are 
both  past  ?     The  objection  is  absurd. 

Besides,  if,  as  has  been  shown,  the  natural  effects  of 
sin  are  misery,  and  the  justice  of  God  requires  the 
punishment  of  the  sinner,  those  consequences,  natural 
and  penal,  nmst  remain  upon  the  sinner  so  long  as  he 
continues  to  be  a  sinner,  every  moment  of  his  sinful- 
ness working  out  fresh  misery  and  provoking  anew  the" 
wrath  of  the  Judge.  But  the  Scriptures  teach  us  that 
there  is  no  repentance  after  death,  and  that  with  death 
all  opportunities  of  God's  converting  grace  ai*e  closed  ; 
wherefore  it  must  be  that  the  impenitent  soul  will  grow- 
worse  from  the  downward  tendency  of  sin,  and  so  his 
misery  increase  constantly  forever.  Let  us,  then,  dear 
friends,  hasten  while  we  may  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  for  there  is  no  escape  across  the  gulf  which  God 
has  fixed  between  hell  and  heaven  !  "  To-day,  if 
'  we'  will  hear  his  voice,  let  us  not  harden  our  hearts," 
lest  he  "swear"  unto  us  in  his  "wrath:  Ye  shall  not 
see  my  rest." 


Lect,  IV.J  punishment   OF   SIN.  93 

Thirdly  :  The  certainty  that  the  se7itence  ivill  he 
executed. 

After  the  previous  reasoning,  but  one  objection  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  sinner's  punishment  remains  for  us  to 
answer,  wliich  is,  that  God  is  merciful,  and,  therefore, 
will  not  be  so  severe  against  his  human  creatvires,  even 
though  they  have  broken  his  law\  The  reply  of  the 
Catechism  is  ours  :  "  God,  is,  indeed  merciful,  but  also 
just:  therefore  his  justice  requires  that  sin,  which  is 
committed  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God,  be 
also  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  everlasting  punish- 
ment both  of  body  and  soul." 

That  God  is  merciful,  we  rejoice  in  knowing  from 
countless  passages  of  Scripture,  but  those  which  assert 
his  justice  are  scarcely  less  numerous.  His  justice 
demands  that  sin,  every  sin,  against  his  law  should  be 
followed  with  appropriate  punishment.  His  law  has 
been  proclaimed  with  its  penalty  of  curse,  and  so  the 
punishment  is  now  demanded  by  the  truth  of  God. 
Sin  is  an  offence  not  only  against  God  himself  as  our 
Creator  and  owner,  but  also  against  him  as  the  most 
high  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  whose,  office  is  to  teach 
all  his  intelligent  subjects  what  is  the  way  of  right  and 
the  consequences  of  keeping  or  departing  from  it ;  but 
also  to  defend  and  vindicate  them  from  the  evil'  of  sin 
by  which  the  disobedient  may  assail  the  welfare  of  the 
faithful.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  his  mercy,  when 
exercised,  must  be  consistent  with  his  justice,  and  in  no 
case  can  remit  the  punishment  of  sin.  If  by  mercy  is 
meant  mere  pity  for  the  transgi'essor,  which  allows  him 
to  escape  the  righteous  sentence  against  him,  it  would 
be  a  weakness  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  perfection  of 
God ;  for  where,  then,  would  be  the  force  of  his  law, 


94  I'UNISIIMEXT  OF  SIN.  where  the  consistency  ot"  his  administration,  where  the 
knowledge  ot"  liis  wrath  against  sin  ?  What  should  we 
think  of  a  human  sovereign,  presiding  over  a  consider- 
able community,  if  he  should  cease  to  execute,  or  irreg- 
ularly execute,  the  laws  out  of  pity  for  the  offenders  ? 
Should  we  not  say  that  he  was  unfit  to  govern,  that 
his  miscalled  mercy  to  the  criminal  was  cruelty  to  the 
many,  because  encouraging  crime  by  the  prospect  of 
impunity  ;  and  that  if  such  a  course  were  continued,  it 
would  end  in  anarchy  and  utter  ruin  ?  Would  this  be 
less  true  on  the  enlarged  scale  of  the  divine  dominion  ? 
So  long  as  we  attribute  to  God  the  moral  government 
of  the  universe,  we  must  believe  that  so  principal  a 
part  of  executive  sovereignty  as  the  punishment  of 
offences  against  organic  law  will  be  faithfully  adminis- 
tered. If  God  punish  not  wi'ong,  where  shall  we  look 
for  the  vindication  of  right  ? 

God  is  merciful,  but  his  mercy  cannot  contradict  his 
justice.  There  must,  therefore,  be  a  method  by  which 
the  divine  mercy  is  justified,  and  the  divine  justice 
administered  through  mercy.  This  is  the  purpose  and 
end  of  the  redemption  through  Christ,  the  delightful 
doctrines  of  which  it  will  he  our  privilege  to  consider 
on  the  subsequent  Lord's  Days.  There  Ave  may  see 
that,  though  "  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God,"  all  who  believe  are  "justified  freely  by 
his  grace,  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus;  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation, 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  for- 
bearance of  God  ;  to  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time  his 
righteousness  ;  that  he  might  be  just,  and  the  justifier 
of  him  which  bdieveth  in  Jesus,"     Yes,  beloved  breth- 


Lkct.  IV.]  PUNISHMENT   OF   SIN.  95 

ren,  here  is  our  hope  :  "•  Cursed,"  indeed,  "•  is  every  one 
that  continuetli  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;  but  Christ  hath  re- 
deemed us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us."  Death  by  Adam,  life  by  Christ ;  lost 
ourselves,  redeemed  by  Jesus ;  guilty  through  our  own 
sin,  justified  by  the  righteousness  of  Him  in  whom  we 
have  believed.  God  grant  its  all  this  faith,  that  we 
may  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  !     Amen.