LECTURE  V. 

NECESSITY  OF   A   MEDIATOR. 


FIFTH   LORD'S   DAY. 
NECESSITY   OF    A   MEDIATOR. 

Quest.  XII.  Since,  then,  by  the  righteous  Judgment  of  God,  we  deserve 
temporid  and  eternal  imnishment,  is  there  no  way  by  ichich  we  may 
escape  that  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favor  f 

Ans.  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied;  and,  therefore,  we  must  make 
this  full  satisfaction,  either  by  ourselves,  or  by  another. 

Quest.  XIII.     Can  we  ourselves,  then,  make  this  satisfaction? 

Ans.     By  no  means;  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  daily  increase  our  debt. 

Quest.  XIV.  Can  there  be  found  anywhere  one  who  is  a  mere  creature 
able  to  satisfy  for  us  ? 

Ans.  None;  for,  first,  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature  for  the  sin 
which  man  has  committed;  and,  further,  no  mere  creature  can  sustain 
the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath  against  sin,  so  as  to  deliver  others 
from  it 

(JUEST.  XV.  What  sort  of  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  then,  must  we  seek 
for  f 

Ans.  For  one  who  is  very  man  and  perfectly  righteous ;  and  yet  more 
powerful  than  all  creatures,  that  is,  one  who  is  also  very  God. 

TTITHERTO  our  meditations  on  the  Catechism  have 
-*--'-  been  sad  and  bitter,  though,  I  trust,  not  unprofit- 
able or  witliout  glimpses  of  comfort.  The  shadows  of 
,  the  cnrse  have  been  heavy,  yet  the  morning  light  of 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  gilded  the  horizon.  It  is 
the  method  of  Christ's  Spirit  thus  to  humble  that  he 
may  exalt  us,  and,  by  convincing  us  of  our  guilt,  to 
prepare  us  for  hearing  with  great  joy  the  glad  tidings 
of  salvation  ;  nor  could  we  understand  how  we  may  be 
saved  through  the  representative  righteousness  of  Christ, 
did  we  not  first  see  our  ruin  through  the  fall  of  our 
first  father.  "  The  law  "  is  "  our  schoolmaster  to  bring 
us  unto  Christ,  that  we  "  may  "  be  justified  by  faith." 
Blessed  be  God,  that  when  our  sense  of  eternal  danger 


100  NECESSITY   OF  A  MEDIATOR.  makes  us  cry  out :  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ? 
He  has  himself  given  us  the  answer  by  his  only  begot- 
ten Son,  our  Elder  Brother  !  Yea,  blessed  be  his  holy 
name,  that  he  honors  sinful  men  Avith  the  happy  office 
of  proclaiming  the  full  and  free  salvation  to  their  fel- 
low-sinners !  O  that  his  grace  would  strengthen  me, 
his  most  unworthy  servant,  this  da}''  and  at  all  times  of 
my  ministry,  to  make  known  the  methods  of  his  mercy 
so  clearly  that  all  of  you,  my  dear  hearers,  may  by  the 
same  Spirit  be  comforted  and  built  up  in  the  faith  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  only  "  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved  !  " 

Hereto  assist  us,  the  Almighty  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Amen  ! 

Having  shown  us  our  condemnation  under  the  curse 
denounced  against  sinners,  the  Catechism  leads  us  to 
ask  if  there  be  any  way  of  deliverance  from  the  irre- 
sistible wrath  of  God,  and  gives  a  gleam  of  hope  in  the 
answer  to  Question  the  12th.  "  God  will  have  his  jus- 
tice satisfied  ;  and,  therefore,  we  must  make  this  full 
satisfaction,  either  by  ourselves  or  by  another." 

If,  then,  we  may  escape  through  a  full  satisfaction, 
for  the  dishonor  we  have  done  to  the  holy  law  of  God, 
can  we  ourselves  make  such  a  satisfaction  ?  This  is 
declared  to  be  impossible,  in  the  answer  to  Question  the 
13th.  "  By  no  means  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  daily 
increase  our  debt." 

But  if  Ave  look  for  help  to  the  creatures  of  God,  is 
there  any  one  of  them  all  who  could  make  such  satis- 
faction for  us  ?  The  Catechism  replies,  in  the  answer 
to  Question  the  14th,  "  None  ;  for,  first  :  God  Avill  not 
punish  any  other  creature  for  the  sin  which  man  hath 
committed  ;  and,  further  :  no  mere  creature  can  sustain 

y 


Lect.  v.]  necessity   OF   A   MEDIATOR.  101 

the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath,  so  as  to  deliver 
others  from  it." 

Thus  denied  all  hope  from  mere  creatures,  what 
kind  of  a  surety  must  we  look  for  ?  Ans.  15th.  "  For 
one  who  is  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous ;  and  yet 
more  powerful  than  all  creatures,  that  is,  one  who  is 
also  very  God." 

This  is  our  lesson  proper  for  to-day ;  but  if  you 
glance  over  that  of  the  Sixth  Lord's  Day,  you  will  see 
the  doctrines  of  the  14th  and  15th  Questions  and  an- 
swers there  more  thoroughly  opened,  for  which  reason 
we  shall  now  touch  them  but  lightly,  giving  our  atten- 
tion chiefly  to  the  12th  and  13th,  comprising,  however, 
the  treatment  of  the  whole  doctrine  in  both  Lord's 
Days  under  the  following  heads  : 

First  :  The  impossibility  of  our  salvation  hy  our  own 
ivorks. 

Secondly  :  The  possibility  of  our  salvation  through 
the  righteousness  of  a  sufficient  substitute. 

Thirdly  :  The  qualities  necessary  to  a  sufficient  sub- 
stitute, or  mediator,  for  us  with  God. 

Fourthly  :  The  jyrovision  of  such  a  substitute,  or 
7nediator,  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we  learn  from 
the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

First  :  The  imijossibility  of  our  salvation  by  our  oion 
good  works. 

This  is  taught  us,  according  to  Scripture,  in  the  12th 
and  13th  Questions  and  answers :  1.  "  God  will  have 
his  justice  satisfied."  2.  "  We  cannot,"  of  ourselves, 
make  such  satisfaction,  "  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  daily 
increase  our  debt." 

1.  "  God.  will  have  his  justice  satisfied."  This,  you 
will  remember,  we  argued  at  length  in  our  lecture  on 


102  NKCESSITY   OF   A   MEDIATOU.  [Lkct.  V. 

the  Fourth  Lord's  Day,  when  treating  of  the  10th  and 
11th  Questions  and  answers  ;  but  we  may,  not  unprofit- 
ably,  repeat  the  main  points. 

a.  The  truth  of  God  demands  it ;  for  he  lias  expressly 
and  repeatedly  declared  that  "  the  soul  which  sinneth, 
it  shall  die  ;  "  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them  ";  and  that  he  "  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty."  It  cannot,  for  a  moment,  be  supposed 
that  God  will  deny  himself.  What  he  has  said,  he  will 
execute.  Whatever  sophisms  the  carnal  heart  may 
invent,  "  let  God  be  true  and  every  man  a  liar." 

b.  The  holiness  of  God  demands  it ;  for  there  is  such 
a  contrariety  in  sin  to  his  own  purity  that  he  cannot 
look  upon  the  sinner  without  abhorrence ;  and,  as  his 
infinite  blessedness  results  from  his  infinite  holiness,  it 
must  be  that  the  result  of  sin  will  be  misery. 

c.  The  authority  of  God  demands  it ;  for  if,  as  the 
Supreme  Ruler,  he  has  promulgated  his  law,  and  one 
of  his  subjects  break  that  law,  he  is  defied  to  his  face, 
and,  shoiald  he  not  execute  the  penalty  incurred,  the 
transgressor  will  seem  to  triumph,  and  the  divine  rule 
cease  to  be  infallible,  giving  encouragement  and  immu- 
nity to  sin. 

d.  The  cai'e  of  God  for  the  ivelfare  of  his  subject- 
creatures  demands  it ;  since  his  law  was  given  to  guard 
the  happiness  of  each  from  the  injurious  enci'oachment 
or  remissness  of  any,  and  sin  is  a  positive  and  wide- 
spreading  injury,  any  tolerance  of  sin  on  his  part  would 
he  to  allow  of  wrong  being  done  by  the  sinner  against 
his  fellow-subjects,  who  should  have  the  divine  protec- 
tion. 

e.  The  moral  instruction  of  God^s  rational  subjects 


Lect.  Y]  necessity   OF  A  MEDIATOR.  103 

demands  it ;  for,  only  from  his  revelation  of  his  will  in 
his  word  and  works  can  we  know  what  he  requires  of 
us,  the  distinction  in  his  sight  between  right  and  wrong, 
and  the  estimate  he  sets  upon  righteousness  and  upon 
wi'ong-doing.  If,  therefore,  he  allow  sin  to  pass  with- 
out punishing  the  sinner,  how  can  we  or  any  observer 
of  his  doings  know  the  way  of  right  and  reward  from 
the  way  of  wrong  and  punishment  ? 

Thus  we  see  that  the  escape  of  a  single  sinner  from 
punishment,  though  he  may  have  committed  but  a 
single  sin,  would  cause  a  fatal  doubt  of  the  divine 
truth,  of  the  divine  holiness,  of  the  divine  authority, 
of  the  divine  goodness,  and  of  the  divine  will.  Truly, 
therefore,  asserts  the  Catechism :  "  God  will  have  his 
justice  satisfied,"  and  until  that  satisfaction  be  ren- 
dered, we  cannot  escape  punishment.  As  certainly  as 
God  is  michangeable,  the  unjustified  sirwier  must  die. 

2.  "  We  cannot,  of  ourselves,  make  satisfaction  to  the 
divine  justice  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  daily  increase 
our  debt." 

Debt,  though  now  commonly  used  for  pecuniary 
obligation,  really  signifies  that  which  is  due,  whatever 
it  be.  Our  debt  to  God  is  twofold  :  The  penalty  we 
have  incurred,  and  the  constant  obedience  required  ; 
both  the  discharge  of  that  penalty,  and  the  rendering 
of  that  obedience,  are  necessary  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  law  to  which  we  are  subject ;  but  in  neither  part 
can  we  render  satisfaction  to  divine  justice. 

a.  Not  by  discharging  the  penalty.  For,  as  has  been 
shown,  the  guilt  of  man,  that  is,  his  desert  of  punish- 
ment, God  considers  so  great  that  no  suifering  of  man 
oan  ever  expiate  it,  and  hence  his  punishment  will  be 
so  long   as   any  guilt  of  his   remains  ;    which,   conse- 


104  NECESSITY  OF  A   MEDIATOR.  quently,  if  man  be  left  to  himself,  will  be  ])erpetual  or 
eternal.  We  should  be  continually  enduring  ])unisli- 
ment,  but  never  finishing  the  payment  of  the  penalty  ; 
and  our  expiation,  being  ever  imperfect,  would  be  pro- 
longed forever. 

But  some  may  ask :  Will  not  God  allow  us  to  atone 
for  our  past  offences  by  future  obedience,  or,  in  other 
words,  make  uj)  for  past  transgressions  by  our  repent- 
ance and  faithful  service  after  this  ?  The  answer  must 
be  in  the  negative.  When  a  penalty  has  been  deserved 
it  must  be  suffered.  No  remorse  can  destroy  the  sinful 
act  done  or  its  consequences.  The  law  has  been 
broken,  the  authority  of  God  has  been  insulted,  the 
evil  against  our  fellow-creatures  has  been  wrought,  the 
sentence  has  been  pronounced  ;  no  regrets  can  annihi- 
late the  past.  Is  it  not  so  under  human  law  ?  Is 
remorse  ever  considered  an  expiation  of  crime,  or 
accepted  in  lieu  of  the  penalty  ?  The  thief  goes  to 
prison,  the  murderer  to  the  gallows,  though  they  weep 
never  so  bitterly  or  promise  never  so  well.  Sometimes, 
indeed,  the  penalty  may  be  mitigated,  but  it  would  be 
only  because  the  moral  sensibility  displayed  by  the  cul- 
prit shows  that  his  guilt  was  less,  not  that  his  tears  had 
washed  it  away.  Is  it  not  so  under  God's  natural 
laws  ?  Can  the  remorse  of  the  sensualist  repair  the 
peace  he  has  destroyed  ?  or  the  tears  of  the  drunkard 
restore  to  him  the  health  and  vigor  he  has  wasted  ? 
And  shall  a  few  pangs  of  the  sinner's  soul,  caused 
rather  by  dread  of  suffering  than  honest  sorrow  for 
crime,  suffice  to  hide  from  the  holy  God  all  trace  of  his 
offences  against  wise,  good,  and  just  law  ?  Let  it  once 
be  admitted  as  a  principle,  that  sorrow  for  sin  atones  for 
it,  and  the  value  of  law  is  at  an  end.     Ag-^i"  •  The 


Lect.  v.]  necessity   OF  A   MEDIATOR.  105 

Jaw  of  God  is  so  broad  that  it  requires  all  oiu  service 
at  all  times.  Every  thought,  every  word,  every  act, 
every  moment  of  our  lives  belong  to  God.  All  our 
mind,  all  our  heart,  all  our  soul,  all  our  might,  belong 
to  God.  We  cannot,  without  sin,  alienate  our  strength 
for  a  single  moment  from  the  duty  which  belongs  to 
that  moment.  If,  therefore,  we  have  at  any  time  failed 
to  render  an  entii'e  obedience,  we  can  never  compensate 
for  it ;  because,  even  though  we  should  afterward  ren- 
der an  entire  obedience,  it  is  no  more  than  what  we 
owe  to  God  at  the  time,  and  there  can  be  no  excess  or 
surplus  of  service  which  may  be  put  to  the  supply  of 
the  former  deficiency.  This  principle  is  acknowledged 
in  the  administration  of  human  laws  ;  for  they,  requir- 
ing good  conduct  at  all  times,  admit  no  previous  or  sub-  ' 
sequent  virtue  as  an  expiation  of  crime.  Though  a 
man  be  honest  all  the  rest  of  his  life,  if  he,  in  any  one 
moment,  steal,  he  is  punished  as  a  thief;  if  he  commit 
but  one  murder,  he  is  executed.  The  penalty  may 
sometimes,  through  a  merciful  policy,  be  mitigated,  but 
can  never,  in  strict  justice,  be  remitted. 

h.  Neither  can  we  satisfy  divine  justice  by  a  constant 
obedience ;  which  is  the  other  part  of  the  debt  we  owe 
to  God.  Granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  all  the 
penal  consequences  of  our  past  sins  Avere  removed  from 
us,  and  we  were  allowed  to  begin  anew  our  probation, 
we  could  not,  if  left  to  ourselves  and  our  present 
nature,  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  divine  law,  but, 
"  on  the  contrary,"  should  "  daily  inci*ease  our  debt ;  " 
for,  as  has  been  shown  in  our  previous  lessons  (par- 
ticular! 3^  on  the  Second  and  Third  Lord's  Days),  the 
natural  consequence  of  sin  is  the  depravity  of  our 
moral  disposition    and   faculties,  so  that  we   are  from 


106  NECESSITY   OF  A  MEDIATOU.  our  very  birth  "  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any  good, 
and  inclined  to  all  wickedness,"  "  excejit  we  be  regen- 
erated by  the  Spirit  of  God."  Upon  this  depravity  of 
our  nature  we  have  already  argued  so  fully  that  no 
farther  proof  need  be  adduced.  It  is  clearly  a  doctrine 
of  all  Scripture,  especially  that  which  declares,  on  the 
one  hand,  that  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  no  flesh  can  be 
justified,  and,  on  the  other,  that  sincere  repentance  and 
its  fruits  of  a  Christian  life  ai"e  wrought  in  the  believer 
by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  converting  and  sancti- 
fying his  soul.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
and  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  is  bestowed  only  upon  those 
who  by  faith  receive  Christ  as  their  Saviour  because 
the  Saviour  of  sinners.  If  reformation  does  occur,  it 
is  only  through  the  operation  of  faith  in  the  Gospel 
which  reveals  the  atonement,  and  is,  therefore,  conse- 
quent on  the  atonement.  Even  then  the  reformation 
is  never  complete  in  this  life,  and  the  more  a  ])enitent 
receives  of  divine  grace,  the  more  is  he  convinced  that 
"  it  is  God  who  worketh  in  "  him  "  both  to  will  and  to 
do  of  his  good  pleasure."  Without  the  Spirit  uf  Christ 
we  are  utterly  unable  to  render  any  of  that  service 
which  the  law  requires  for  our  justification  ;  and  if  we 
be  regenerated  so  that  we  lead  good  lives,  the  credit  is 
due,  not  to  us  for  our  justification,  but  to  him,  whose 
IS  the  only  righteousness  which  God  will  accept  as 
sufficient  to  honor  the  law  under  which  we  live  and 
by  which  we  shall  be  tried. 

.  Thus  we  see  that  in  no  sense  are  we  able  to  satisfy 
for  ourselves  the  justice  of  God,  but  are  daily  increas- 
ing our  dfcbt,  and  heaping  up  for  ourselves  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath.  Such  would  be  our  miserable 
condition  in  this  world,  and  such  our  terrible  fate  in  the 


Lect.  v.]  necessity  OF  A   MEDIATOR.  107 

world  to  come,  were  there  no  method  provided  for  ou.- 
salvation,  other  than  tliat  originally  proposed  to  man  : 
our  personal  innocence  and  obedience.  But,  blessed 
be  God,  we  are  not  so  cut  off  from  hope  ;  for  we 
learn  : 

Secondly  :  The  possibility  of  our  salvation  tkrough 
the  rigltteousness  of  a  sufficient  substitute. 

"  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied,  and,  therefore, 
we  must  make  this  full  satisfaction  either  by  ourselves 
or  by  another."   (Ans.  12th.) 

The  necessity  of  satisfaction  having  been  shown,  and, 
also  that  we  cannot  make  it  of  onrselves,  a  new  ques- 
tion arises  :  Will  God  accept  of  satisfaction  rendered 
for  us  by  another? 

The  whole  evangelical  Scriptures,  and  our  Church 
in  all  her  confessions  accoixling  to  Scripture,  answer  : 
Yes.  We  freely  admit  that  no  such  method  of  salva- 
tion could  have  been  discovered  by  the  reason  of  men  ; 
but  contend  that,  having  been  revealed  to  us  by  God 
himself,  the  infinitely  wise  and  holy  Sovereign,  it  is 
perfectly  consonant  with  the  highest  reason. 

1.  God  has  declared  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
when  accepted  by  the  faith  of  the  sinner  as  offered  on 
his  behalf,  is  accepted  as  a  sufficient  ground  of  his  jus- 
tification ;  as  says  the  apostle  :  "  All  have  sinned,  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  ;  being  justified  freely 
by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  ;  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  through  the  for- 
bearance of  God  ;  to  declare,  I  say,  his  righteousness ; 
that  he  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him  which 
believeth  in  Jesus."     This  puts  beyond  doubt  the  fact, 


108  NECESSITY   OF  A  MEDIATOR.  [Lkct.  V. 

that  God  does  justify  tlie  believing  sinner  on  tlie 
ground  that  a  sufficient  righteousness  has  been  offered 
on  his  behalf  by  another.  We  may  not,  therefore, 
deny  the  propriety  of  such  an  arrangement  without 
impeaching  the  justice  of  God.     But, 

2.  It  is  also  perfectly  consonant  with  sound  reason. 
The  design  of  God  in  the  denunciation  of  penalties  on 
the  breaking  of  his  law,  certainly  was  not  the  destruc- 
tion of  his  subjects,  but  to  maintain  the  divine  authority 
of  his  law  and  to  deter  man  from  transgression.  Now, 
if  by  the  provision  of  a  sufficient  substitute  for  the  sin- 
ner, three  things  can  be  secured,  God  is  just  in  receiv- 
ing the  sinner  again  into  favor.  Those  three  things 
are :  a.  The  honor  of  the  divine  law.  h.  The  main- 
tenance of  the  divine  authority,  so  that  no  encourage- 
ment is  givfen  that  sin  will  go  un})unished.  c.  The 
reformation  of  the  transgressor,  so  that  he  returns  to 
obedience. 

a.  For  the  first :  The  honor  of  the  divine  law  ;  it  is 
necessary  that  God  should  show  his  infinite  estimation 
of  its  excellence.  "  This  is  done  by  the  perfect  submis- 
sion and  obedience  to  the  law  of  the  sufficient  Surety, 
that  in  the  greatness  of  his  service,  the  dishonor 
which  we  have  done  the  law  may  be  covered  by  a 
transcendent  glory.  And  what  greater  honor  could 
God  have  given  to  his  law  than  by  sending  forth  his 
only  begotten  and  coequal  Son  to  become  in  our  nature 
its  faithful  servant,  and  obey  all  its  requisitions,  actual 
and  penal,  on  our  behalf?  Must  not  the  spectacle  of 
the  divine  Lawgiver  himself  condescending  to  fulfil  all 
its  demands  as  a  voluntary  servant,  yield  in  the  sight 
of  all  holy  creatures  a  testimony  to  its  excellence  and 
invest  it  with  a  glory  infinitely  higher  and  more  con- 


Lect.  v.]  necessity   OF  A   MEDIATOR.  109 

vincino;   than  the  obedience  of  our  whole   race,  or  of 
myriads  of  worlds  like  ours  ? 

h.  For  the  second  :  The  maintenance  of  the  divine 
authority ;  it  is  necessary  that  God  sternly  require  the 
penalties  which  we  have  incurred  to  be  fully  endured 
by  a  sufficient  Surety,  in  such  a  manner  as  will  show 
beyond  a  doubt  the  displeasure  of  God  against  sin  and 
his  determination  not  to  allow  it  to  go  unpunished. 
And  how  could  God  more  plainly  indicate  his  just  wdl 
that  no  sin  shall  be  tolerated  with  impunity,  and  display 
his  deep  abhorrence  of  transgression,  than  by  requiring 
the  penalties  which  we  have  incurred  to  the  uttermost 
from  his  own  beloved  Son,  when  incarnate  as  our  rep- 
resentative ?  Could  the  eternal  suffering  of  all  our  race, 
of  myriads  of  worlds  like  ours,  exhibit  the  divine  wrath 
against  the  sinner,  in  any  degree  approaching  the 
terrible  anguish  of  body  and  soul  which  the  innocent 
holy  Jesus  endured  under  the  displeasure  of  the 
Father  ? 

c.  For  the  third :  The  reformation  of  the  sinner  who 
'  is  pardoned  on  account  of  the  substituted  righteousness, 
so  that  he  returns  to  obedience  ;  it  is  necessary  that  the 
same 'grace  which  pardons  should  inspire  him  with  a 
new  life,  with  desire,  and  strength  to  keep  the  law  he 
before  has  broken  ;  else  the  pardon  would  be  to  let 
loose  a  rebel  unsubdued,  and  an  evil-doer  unreclaimed. 
And  how  wisely  and  certaiidy  has  God  secured  the 
repentance  and  sanctification  of  the  ransomed  transgre>- 
sor,  by  making  the  same  faith  which  admits  him  to  a 
discharge  from  condemnation  effectual,  by  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  to  purify  his  heart,  to  work  in  him  love, 
and  to  strengthen  him  for  overcoming  the  world.  For 
Christ  saves  none  from  wrath  whom  he  does  not  save 


110  NECESSITY   OF  A   JNIEUIATOK.  [Litt.  V. 

from  the  power  of  sin  ;  none  have  the  grace  of  faith 
without  the  grace  of  repentance  ;  none  have  a  part  in 
Christ  who  do  not  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in 
their  sonls  ;  and  none  are  admitted  to  heaven  without 
being  first  made  holy  and  pure.  Where  can  be  found 
such  generous  and  persuasive  arguments  to  cease  from 
siiming  and  do  the  will  of  God,  as  are  forced  upon  the 
soul  by  the  mercy  of  God  through  the  devoted  love  of 
Christ  ?  Who,  that  has  a  heart  at  all  sensitive  to 
grateful  emotion,  would  wilfully  insult  his  deliverer  that 
died  for  him  ?  How  are  we  encoui-aged,  notwithstand- 
ing our  weakness,  and  the  pressure  of  temptation  from 
within  and  without,  to  attempt  the  difficult  patli  of 
duty,  when  we  are  assured  that  God,  for  Christ's  sake, 
will  work  in  ixs  "  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good 
pleasure  ;  "  that  all  power  is  in  the  hand  of  Christ  to 
overrule  all  circumstances  for  the  safety  of  his  people  ; 
and  that  heaven,  with  all  its  benedictions  and  felicities, 
is  before  us  as  an  eternal  recompense  for  our  brief 
trials,  an  exceedingly  glorious  reward  of  our  persever- 
ance in  the  footsteps  of  Christ  ? 

While  presenting  to  you  this  condensed  argument 
for  the  vindication  of  divine  justice  in  redeeming  the 
j)enitent  sinner,  we  should  be  far  from  the  thought  that 
we  have  all  the  divine  reasons  for  such  an  arrangement. 
There  are  depths  in  the  divine  purposes  which  no 
created  mind  can  fathom,  as  tliere  is  a  range  of  the 
divine  operations  which  no  created  mind  can  compre- 
hend. Divine  truth,  so  far  as  it  is  revealed  to  us  here 
in  our  present  state,  must  be  communicated  through 
the  medium  of  human  language,  which  has  been  framed 
(a  very  few  words  excepted)  with  reference  only  to 
things  of  this  world,  and  all  illustrations  of  the  divine 


Lect.  v.]  necessity   OF  A  MEDIATOR.  Ill 

working  must  be  taken  from  facts  of  which  we  are 
conversant.  Thus,  the  Scriptures  (and  our  Church 
according  to  the  Scriptures)  exemplifj^  the  juridical 
proceedings  of  our  divine  Sovereign  by  the  methods  of 
human  jurisdiction  ;  borrowing  from  them  its  terms,  as 
debt,  penalty,  guilt,  pardon,  justification,  atonement, 
and  the  like ;  or,  at  the  farthest,  we  look  for  explana- 
tions to  what  we  can  discover  of  the  divine  administra- 
tion in  providence  over  this  present  economy.  But 
what  is  the  narrow  sphere  of  this  little  world,  so  petty 
a  province  considered  by  itself,  to  the  vast  empire  over 
which  our  God  sways  his  sovereignty  ?  What  is  the 
brief  time  of  the  earth's  few  ages  to  the  eternity  past 
and  future,  through  which  the  omniscient  purposes  of 
God  are  carried  on  by  the  mighty  working  of  his 
omnipresent  will  ?  What  is  the  aggregated  fortune  of 
all  our  race,  if  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  spiritual 
creation,  to  the  moral  well-being  of  the  countless 
families,  who  depend  on  our  God  for  all  that  consti- 
tutes the  life  of  life  ?  Of  what  we  can  discover 
respecting  God's  dealings  here  and  among  men,  though 
we  push  our  inquiries  to  the  utmost  limit,  we  must  say 
with  the  adoring  patriarch  :  "  Lo  !  these  are  parts  of 
his  ways;  but  how  small  a  portion  is  heard  of  him?" 
The  full  doctrine,  or,  if  the  expression  be  allowed,  the 
complete  theory  of  the  atonement ;  the  reasons  for  its 
methods  ;  the  extent  of  its  purposes  ;  the  variety  of  its 
results  ;  the  number  and  character  and  condition  of 
the  moral  beings  that  are  and  are  to  be  affected  by  its 
consequences,  can  be  understood  only  by  the  Infinite 
Author  of  the  scheme.  There  must,  after  all  our 
study  and  reasoning  out  of  the  Scripture  and  the  analo- 
gies  of  providence,  remain   mysteries    in   the  plan  oi' 


112  NECESSITY  OF   A  MEDIATOR.  salvation  utterly  above  our  reach  ;  and  our  best  illus- 
trations fall  infinitely  short  of  the  vast  idea. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  Allwise  Father  v^^ere 
himself  teaching  his  heavenly  servants  the  doctrine  of 
the  redemption  provided  for  man,  would  he  employ  the 
terms  and  the  analogies  with  which  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  Scriptures  condescends  to  teach  us  ?  Must  we  not 
believe  that  he  would  uplift  the  attention  of  those  apt, 
long-disciplined  intelligences  to  great  principles  of  the 
divine  government,  but  partially  revealed  to  us  because 
we  are  capable  only  of  partially  understanding  them  ? 

We  cheerfully  and  with  devout  reverence  admit, 
nay,  would  earnestly  contend,  that  the  principles  of  the 
divine  government  on  which  the  atonement  is  based,  as 
it  is  revealed  to  us,  must  be  the  same  throughout  all  its 
extent  —  and,  especially,  that  main  principle  of  justifi- 
cation for  the  believing  penitents  of  our  human  race 
through  the  substituted  obedience  and  suffering  of  the 
Son  of  God  in  our  nature  as  our  representative  ;  but 
what  we  mean  to  assert  is,  that  that  very  principle  is 
and  can  be  only  partially,  very  partially  understood  by 
us  even  through  the  revelation  God  has  given  of  it  to 
us,  because  from  the  condition  we  are  in,  the  revelation 
must  be  confined  within  comparatively  narrow  limits. 
Thus  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  "  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ,"  and  of  "  the  love  of  Christ  which 
passeth  knowledge  ;  "  and  again  with  the  same  reference 
he  exclaims  :  "  O,  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the 
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  how  unsearchable  are 
his  judgments  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !  " 

This  is  certain,  the  testimony  of  Scripture  being  so 
clear  as  to  allow  no  doubt,  that  the  influence  of  the 
plan  of   redemption  extends    far  beyond    the    Church 


Lect.  v.]  necessity   OF   A  MEDIATOR.  113 

which  it  translates  from  the  depth  of  condemnation  to 
the  height  of  heavenly  glory  ;  nay,  we  may  believe  that 
the  radiance  of  the  Snn  of  Righteousness  sheds  fresh 
magnificence  over  all  the  spiritual  universe  of  God's 
creation.  The  Apostle  Peter  declares  that  "  the  angels 
desire  to  look  into  the  things  of  redemption  ;  "  and  Paul 
that  "  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places " 
will  be  taught  and  are  now  taught  "  by  the  church 
(that  is,  by  God's  dealings  M'ith  the  church)  the  mani- 
fold wisdom  of  God."  Jesus  is  declared  to  be  the 
observed  "  (seen)  of  angels ; "  and  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain  will  be  eternally  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  ; 
the  eternal  object  of  admiration,  adoration,  and  praise 
to  all  the  angelic  hosts,  who  will  alternate  their  respon- 
sive hallelujahs  with  glorified  believers,  and  join  with 
them  in  the  unanimous,  unending  choruses  of  acclaim- 
ino-  homage  before  the  throne  of  God  and  his  Christ. 
What  the  effects  of  the  evangelical  scheme  on  other 
Avorlds  may  be,  we  know  not  and  dare  not  conjecture  ; 
but  this  we  are  certain  of,  that  it  reveals  to  all  his  holy 
creatures  who  contemplate  the  divine  character,  its 
very  highest  glory,  his  most  manifold  wisdom  and  love 
and  power.  It  is  "  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his 
grace  that  he  has  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved." 
God  has  manifested  the  glory  of  his  majestic  attri- 
butes in  many  ways,  some  of  which  we  know,  but  more 
of  which  we  cannot  understand  ;  yet  it  may  without 
irreverence  be  asserted,  that  were  it  not  for  the  shining 
of  his  glory  in  the  face  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  the 
full  beauty  and  the  most  attractive  charm  of  his 
infinite  love  would  not  be  known.  His  holy  servants 
would  forever  have  adored  his  several  excellences,  but 
could  not  have  perceived  their  admirable  harmony  as 


114  NECESSITY   OF  A   MEDIATOR.  now  they  behold  his  wisdom  devisinjr  and  his  power 
executinn;  the  wonderful  plan  of  salvation  for  the  sin- 
ner, in  which  justice  and  goodness  combine  to  reveal 
mercy.  The  justice  of  God,  had  it  taken  its  unquali- 
fied course  in  punishing  the  siinier,  —  the  goodness  of 
God,  had  its  bounties  been  confined  only  to  the  deserv- 
ing and  guiltless,  —  would  indeed,  have  received  and 
been  worthy  of  all  praise  from  all  holv  creatures.  Still 
those  most  glorious  attributes  are  naturally  essential  to 
the  divine  Sovereign  ;  we  coi;ld  not  imagine  the  Holy 
Father  of  intelligent  creatures  otherwise  than  just  and 
good.  The  exercise  of  those  divine  qualities  is  neces- 
sary to  the  idea  of  God  ;  but  that  they  could  meet  in 
blessing  on  the  souls  of  guilty  sinners,  no  created  mind 
could  ever  have  conjectured  or  believed  to  be  possible 
had  not  God  made  it  manifest.  His  mercy  surprises 
and  startles  the  moral  universe  with  a  mild  and 
exquisite  glory,  transcending  all  other  emanations  from 
the  light  unapproachable  in  which  the  mystery  of  his 
being  dwells.  It  is  brighter  than  justice,  softer  than 
goodness  ;  for  it  is  justice  and  goodness  blending  their 
beams  in  mercy,  —  his  choice,  his  delight,  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  sovereign  will. 

Now,  dear  hearers,  let  us  learn  and  carry  away  Avith 
us  the  practical  inferences,  from  the  doctrine  thus  far 
developed. 

First  :  Our  utter  helplessness  under  our  deserved 
condemnation. 

God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied.  Who  of  us  can 
escape  from  his  hands,  or  bear  the  fiery  vengeance  of 
his  curse  ?  O,  vain  and  impious  is  the  expectation  of 
the  sinner  from  the  goodness  or  pity  of  God,  while  his 


Lect.   v.]  necessity   OF   A  MEDIATOK.  115 

justice  with  flaming  sword  stands  between  to  execute 
the  sentence  of  the  law. 

Secondly  :  Our  certain  salvation,  if,  with  penitent 
hearts,  we  accept  of  the  suretyship  of  Christ. 

It  is  the  method  God  has  provided,  because  he 
delights  to  save.  It  is  the  method  which  magnifies  his 
justice  infinitely  more  than  our  eternal  death.  It  is 
the  method  by  which  we  may  be  transformed  from  deep 
corruption  into  holy  servants  of  his  will  forever. 

Thirdly  :  Our  gracious  obligation  to  spread  the 
knowledge  of  this  mercy  among  our  fellow-sinners,  for 
their  immortal  good  ;  the  joy  of  angels  ;  our  own  re- 
ward, and  the  glory  of  God  our  Saviour.