LECTURE  VI. 
QUALITIES  OF  THE   MEDIATOR. 


SIXTH  LORD'S   DAY. 
QUALITIES    OF   THE   MEDIATOR. 

Quest.  XVI.     Why  must  he  he  very  man,  and  yet  perfectly  righteous  f 

Ans.  Because  the  justice  of  God  requires  that  the  same  nature  which  hath 
sinned,  should  likewise  make  satisfaction  for  sin;  and  one  who  is  him- 
self a  sinner  cannot  satisfy  for  others. 

Quest.  XVII.      Why  must  he  in  one  person  be  also  very  Godf 

Ans-  That  he  might  bj'  the  power  of  his  Godhead,  sustain  in  his  human 
nature,  the  burden  of  God's  wrath;  und  miglit  obtain  for,  and  restore 
to  us  righteousness  and  life. 

Quest.  XVIII.  Who  is,  then,  that  Mediator,  who  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God  and  real  righteous  man  f 

Ans.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom  and 
righteousness,  and  sanctification  and  redemption. 

Quest.  XIX.     Whence  knowest  thou  this  ? 

Ans.  From  the  holy  Gkispel  which  God  himself  revealed  first  in  Paradise, 
and  afterwards  published  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  and  was 
pleased  to  represent  it  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  the  other 
shadows  of  the  law  ;  and,  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his  only 
begotten  Son. 

T^HE  lesson  for  the  Fifth  Lord's  Day  set  forth  in  the 
-*-  12th  Question  and  answer  :  The  necessity  of  a 
satisfaction  being;  made  for  our  sins  in  order  to  our  sal- 
vation  ;  in  the  13th  :  Our  utter  inability  to  make  svich 
satisfaction  for  ourselves  ;  and  in  the  14th  :  The  in- 
sufficiency of  any  mere  creature  to  make  satisfaction 
for  us  ;  which  led  to  the  15th  Question  :  What  sort  of 
Mediator  and  Deliverer  must  we  then  seek  for  ?  The 
answer  given  to  which,  is :  "  For  one  who  is  very  man, 
and  perfectly  righteous  ;  and  yet  more  powerful  than 
all  creatures,  that  is,  one  who  is  also  very  God." 

But  those  who  were  attentive  to  our  lecture  on  the 
Fifth  Lord's  Day  will  remember  the  statement,  —  that 


120  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  the  doctrine  of  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man, 
which  is  opened  in  the  14th  and  15th  questions  and 
answers,  is  more  thorouglily  discussed  throughout  those 
for  the  Sixth  Lord's  Day  ;  and  that,  therefore,  for 
greater  convenience,  it  was  proposed  to  consider  the 
whole  subject  under  four  heads  :  — 

First  :  The  impossibility  of  our  salvation  hy  our  own 
works. 

Secondly  :  The  possibility  of  our  salvation  by  or 
through  the  righteousness  of  a  sufficient  substitute. 

Thirdly  :  The  qualities  necessary  to  a  sufficient  sub- 
stitute or  mediator  for  us  zvith  God. 

Fourthly  :  The  provision  of  such  a  substitute  or 
mediator  hi  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  we  learn  from  the 
Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testametits. 

The  first  two  of  these  heads  were  then  discussed  at 
considerable  length,  leaving  the  third  and  fourth  for 
discussion  to-day  ;  which,  imploring  divine  help,  we 
shall  now  pursue. 

Thirdly  :  The  qualities  necessary  to  a  sufficient  sub- 
stitute or  mediator  for  us  with  God. 

The  answer  to  the  14th  Question  denies  that  he  may- 
be "  a  mere  creature,"  because,  "  first :  God  will  not 
punish  any  other  creature  for  the  sin  which  man  has 
committed  ;  and,  further,  no  mere  creature  can  sustain 
the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath  against  sin,  so  as  to 
deliver  others  from  it."  The  answer  to  the  15th  Ques- 
tion asserts  that  "  our  Mediator  and  Deliverer"  must 
be  :  '•'  One  who  is  very  man,  and  yet  perfectly  righteous, 
and  yet  more  powerful  than  all  creatures,  that  is,  one 
who  is,  also,  very  God." 

He  must  be  "  very  man,  and  yet  perfectly  right- 
eous," says  the  answer  to  the  16th  Question  :  "  Because 


QUALITIES   OF   THE   MEDIATOR.  121 

the  justice  of  God  requires,  that  the  same  nature  which 
hath  sinned  should  hkewise  {i.  e.  also)  make  satisfac- 
tion for  sin  ;  and  one  who  is  himself  a  sinner  cannot 
satisfy  for  others."  He  "  must  also  in  one  person  be 
very  God,"  says  the  answer  to  the  17th  Question : 
"  That  he  might,  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead,  sus- 
tain in  his  human  nature  the  burden  of  God's  wrath  ; 
and  might  obtain  for  and  restore  to  us  righteousness 
and  life." 

This  instruction  of  the  Catechism  is  so  full  and  clear 
as  to  render  any  prolonged  commentary  of  ours  need- 
less ;  yet  some  more  specific  explanations  may  not  be 
without  use  ;  and  they  will  be  given  under  two  propo- 
sitions :  — 

I,  The  Substitute  and  Mediator  must  be  "  very  (or 
truly)  man,  and  perfectly  righteous." 

II.  He  must  "  also  be  very  God  in  one  person  "  with 
his  human  nature. 

I.  He  must  be  "  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous." 

1.  No  other  mere  creatui'e  can  be  accepted  as  a  sub- 
stitute for  man. 

A.  "  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature  for  the 
sin  which  man  has  committed." 

a.  God  would  not  compel  any  other  creature  to  suf- 
fer for  man's  sin.  If  that  creature  be  himself  a  sinner, 
he  must  suffer  the  punishment  of  his  own  sin,  which  he 
can  never  sufficiently  expiate  ;  and,  therefore,  no  suf- 
ferings of  his  can  be  put  to  the  credit  of  the  sinner  of 
another  nature.  There  are  various  ranks  of  spiritual 
creatures,  and  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  among 
the  angels  who  have  fallen  there  are  some  of  very  high 
rank  originally  ;  but  according  to  their  original  height 
has  been  the  depth  of  their  fall ;  according  to  the  emi- 


122  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.         nence  of  their  duties  has  been  the  guilt  of  their  rebellion. 
They  suffer  for  themselves  ;  they  cannot  be  made  to 
suffer  more  than  they  deserve ;  nor,  if  that  were  possi- 
ble, would  the  infliction  of  any  additional  sufferings  on 
them  for  man's  sake  be  just  to  them,  or  give  any  honor 
to  the  law  which  man  has  broken.  Neither,  if  the 
other  creature  be  innocent,  would  it  be  just  to  impose 
upon  him  sufferings  which  he  does  not  deserve,  that 
man  might  be  relieved  from  sufferings  which  he  does 
deserve.  The  authority  of  God  could  never  be  vindi- 
cated by  such  treatment  of  a  creature  who  is  entitled  to 
reward  for  his  obedience. 

b.  Nor,  again,  may  such  a  creature,  however  highly 
exalted,  voluntarily  assume  the  place  of  man,  either  to 
endure  man's  punishment  for  the  sins  he  has  committed, 
or  to  perform  the  duties  which  he  has  omitted,  both 
beino;  necessary  to  the  satisfaction  demanded.  For 
every  creature,  from  the  fact  of  his  creation,  is  a  ser- 
vant of  God,  bound  to  use  all  his  faculties  with  the 
utmost  energy  of  which  he  is  capable  in  the  sphere 
where  God  has  placed  him,  and  can  never  do  more 
than  his  duty.  To  take  man's  place,  therefore,  he 
must  desert  his  own  ;  to  endure  man's  punishment,  to 
perform  man's  duties,  he  must  use  faculties  and  time 
which  already  belong  to  God.  The  just  authority  of 
God  would  be  aggrieved,  not  honored,  by  the  disobe- 
dience of  an  angel  to  the  law  under  which  he  is  placed, 
that  he  might  obey  the  law  under  which  man  is  placed. 
A  creature  of  God  cannot  change  his  sphere  of  duty 
any  more  than  he  can  change  his  nature,  for  they  are 
by  the  divine  appointment  necessarily  relative  to  each 
other,  not  matters  of  the  creature's  choice,  but  abso- 
lutely of  the  divine  will. 


QUALITIES   OF   THE  MEDIATOR.  123 

B.  "  Further :  no  mere  creature  can  sustain  the 
burden  of  God's  wrath  against  sin  so  as  to  deliver  oth' 
ers  from  it." 

Even  if  it  were  possible  that  another  mere  creature, 
however  holy  and  exalted,  could  take  our  place,  no 
amount  of  suffering  on  his  part  would  be  sufficient  to 
make  up  for  the  sufferings  we  need  to  be  released  from. 

a.  The  punishment  appointed  to  the  sinner  is  ever- 
lasting, because  he  can  never,  by  any  suffei'ings  he  is 
capable  of,  exhaust  the  penalty.  Yet  the  distance  in 
dignity  between  any  other  creature  and  man  is,  of 
necessity,  limited ;  how,  then,  can  our  punishment, 
which  is  unlimited,  be  substituted  by  any  sufferings  of 
his  short  of  eternal  ?  The  substitution,  if  undertaken, 
can  never  be  accomplished. 

6.  Besides  :  the  sinners  to  be  redeemed  are  a  great 
multitude,  whom  no  man  can  number,  and  the  substi- 
tute would  have  to  bear  in  his  single  person  the  aggre- 
gate responsibility  of  them  all ;  if,  then,  the  punishment 
of  one  sinner  be  so  heavy  that  he  cannot  exhaust  it,  but 
must  suffer  on  forever,  what  mere  creature  could 
endure  the  imputed  sufferings  of  the  whole  Church  ? 
A  proper  idea  of  the  atonement  will  not  tolerate  for  an 
instant  the  substitution  of  a  mere  creature  to  satisfy  the 
wrath  of  God  which  we  deserve. 

2.  The  character  of  our  responsibility  is  such  that  it 
cannot  be  assumed  except  by  one  in  human  nature,  yet 
himself  guiltless. 

A.  "The  justice  of  God  requires  that  the  same  hu- 
man nature  which  hath  sinned,  should  likewise  make 
satisfaction  for  sin."  (16th  Ans.) 

Even  were  another  creature  found  capable  of  endur- 
ing the  weight  of  our  punishment,  the  circumstances  of 


124  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  our  sin  are  such  that  he  could  not  assume  its  guilt  or 
render  a  satisfactory  obedience  on  our  behalf;  for  — 

a.  The  law  which  has  been  outraged  was  given  to 
man,  Avas  adapted  to  his  nature,  and  ordei'ed  for  his 
sphere  of  service.  Righteousness,  it  is  true,  must  be 
ever  and  everywhere  the  same  in  its  essential  qualities. 
The  same  great  principles  of  right  must  rule  over  all 
the  subjects  of  God  ;  yet,  as  the  natures  of  those  subjects 
are  various,  and  different  theatres  of  action  are  assigned 
to  their  different  natures,  it  follows,  that  the  manner  in 
which  the  obedience  is  to  be  rendered  must  be  peculiar 
to  each  class.  The  service  demanded  of  a  pure  spirit, 
which  has  been  created  to  live  without  a  body,  must  be 
different  from  that  demanded  of  a  spirit  created  to  live 
in  a  body ;  for  example,  the  service  of  angelic  spirit 
from  that  of  a  human  being.  Take  the  ten  precepts 
of  the  law  given  to  man,  and  you  see  that  there  are 
human  duties  which  a  holy  angel  cannot  perform,  as 
there  are  offences  which  a  wicked  angel  cannot  commit. 
Even  one  class  of  angels  or  unembodied  spirits  may 
have  duties  assigned  them  for  which  they  are  fitted, 
differing  from  those  for  Avhicli  other  classes  of  angels 
are  fitted,  each  class  being  under  its  peculiar  law,  v/ith- 
in  its  peculiar  sphere,  beyond  which  it  cannot  go.  How 
much  less  can  an  angel,  or  unembodied  spirit,  come 
under  the  peculiar  obligations  of  man  ?  The  law, 
given  to  man  for  his  obedience  on  earth,  can  be  obeyed 
or  satisfied  only  by  human  nature  on  earth,  or  in 
man's  proper  sphere.  That  law,  imposed  by  the  Cre- 
ator on  human  nature,  to  be  obeyed  in  his  body  on 
earth,  man  has  broken  ;  and  the  earth  is  full  of  his  re- 
bellion. Whatever  laws,  therefore,  are  obeyed,  if  the 
law  given  to  man  remain  dishonored,  the  government 


QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  125 

of  God  Is  shaken.  Whatever  classes  of  his  moral  creat- 
ures are  faithful,  if  man  be  a  successful,  unpunished 
sinner,  the  justice  of  God  is  uncertain.  Whatever  prov- 
inces of  his  empire  are  loyal  and  tributary,  if  in  this 
world  his  authority  be  not  vindicated,  it  ceases  to  be 
sovereign.  Whatever  decrees  of  his  will  are  fulfilled, 
if  the  sentence  against  sinful  man  be  not  executed,  his 
truth  has  failed.  The  satisfaction  necessary  for  our 
safety  must,  therefore,  we  repeat,  be  made  to  the  law 
appointed  for  us,  in  our  nature  and  upon  our  earth. 
So  we  read  that :  "  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a 
woman,  made-  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that 
were  under  the  law." 

h.  The  penalties  denounced  against  sin  are  of  such  a 
nature  that  none  but  man  can  endure  them  so  as  to  free 
us  from  guilt.  The  sentence  pronounced  on  man  is 
death,  —  death  of  body,  and  death  of  soul,  —  which  we 
know  includes  all  the  sicknesses,  pains,  and  corruption 
of  the  body,  with  all  the  sorrow,  anguish,  and  degrada- 
tion of  spirit  which  is  occasioned  by  the  withdrawal  of 
God's  favor  and  the  weight  of  his  wrath.  This  death 
of  our  entire  human  nature,  temporal  and  eternal,  is 
the  punishment  we  deserve  and  must  suffer,  except  we 
be  delivered  from  it  by  a  sufficient  satisfaction  rendered 
for  us.  None  but  man  can  know  and  feel  the  sorrows 
and  agony  of  man  in  body  and  sotil ;  none  but  man  can 
suffer  the  pains  and  distresses  of  our  mortal  life,  or 
our  eternal  death,  the  death  "  passed  upon  all  men 
because  that  all  have  sinned."  So  we  read  of  our 
Redeemer:  "  Forasmuch,  then,  as  the  children  are  par- 
takers of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  took  part  of 
the  same,  that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that 
had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;  and  deliver 


126  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  them,  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage.  For,  verily,  he  took  not  on  him  the 
nature  of  angels,  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham. Wherefore  in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be 
made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that  he  might  be  a  mer- 
ciful and  faithful  high-priest  in  things  pertaining  to 
God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  his  people." 
There  are  other  and  most  important  reasons  why  the 
Mediator  should  be  very  man,  which  we  may  not  now 
enter  upon,  but  hope  to  consider  fully  when  they  are 
brought  before  us  by  subsequent  sections  of  the  Cate- 
chism. Yet  we  may  ask :  How  may  sinful  man  dare 
approach  unto  God;  how  may  he  know  that  God  will 
again  dwell  with  men  ;  that  his  fallen  nature  may  again 
enjoy  the  felicity  of  his  presence  and  the  light  of  his 
love,  unless  he  saw  one  made  in  the  likeness  of  his  own 
sinful  flesh  holding  intimate  communion  with  God, 
olorious  himself  from  communications  of  the  divine 
crlorv,  and  standing  before  us  as  the  medium  through 
whom  we  may  look  upon  God  and  not  die,  —  unless 
God  be  again  with  man  on  earth,  as  he  was  once  in 
Paradise,  speaking  to  man  as  to  his  dear  child  ? 

B.  The  Mediator  in  our  human  nature  must  be  "  per- 
fectly righteous,"  because  "  one  who  is  himself  a  sinner 
cannot  satisfy  for  others."  This  point  is  so  clearly  stated, 
that  no  argument  of  ours  is  needed  to  make  it  clearer ; 
but  it  is  stated  so  distinctly  to  prepare  us  for  faith  in 
him  who  has  been  constituted  by  God  as  our  Mediator 
and  Substitute.  The  perfect  righteousness  of  the  man 
who  is  our  surety  must  be  twofold ;  innocence  and  ac- 
tive obedience. 

a.  Innocence. —  He  must  bo  without  sin.  If  he  had 
committed  sin,  his  own  guilt  would  be  upon  him  ;  and 


QUALITIES    OF    THE   MEDIATOR.  127 

he  would  be  rejected  by  God  in  his  own  person,  much 
more  as  a  mediator  for  his  fellow-sinners.  So  we  read 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  that  "  he  did  no  sin,  neither 
was  guile  found  in  his  mouth." 

b.  Active  Obedience.  —  The  satisfaction  for  us  required 
by  God,  is  not  merely  a  sufficient  suffering  in  room  of 
that  which  we  deserve  on  account  of  our  transgression, 
but  an  honoring  of  the  law  by  an  active  obedience  suf- 
ficient to  be  substituted  in  room  of  that  which  we  are 
bound  to  render,  and  Avhich  is  necessary,  according  to 
the  chvine  justice,  for  our  re-admission  within  the  divine 
favor,  vouchsafed  only  to  those  who  are  righteous  in 
his  sight.  Such  positive,  energetic  righteousness,  no 
sinner,  whose  faculties  have  been  depraved  by  the  cor- 
ruption of  human  nature  consequent  upon  the  fall,  can 
render.  "  He  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew 
no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  him." 

The  inference  from  this  is,  that  the  mediator  or  sub- 
stitute we  need  must  be  man,  partaker  of  all  other 
human  characteristics,  but  not  of  sin  ;  and,  therefore, 
as  all  our  race  are  fallen  in  Adam,  guilty  of  overt,  per- 
sonal sins,  and  utterly  without  moral  strength  to  honor 
God  by  keeping  his  law,  the  mediator  or  substitute  for 
us  in  human  nature,  must  be  man  after  some  extraor- 
dinary method  which  excepts  him  from  the  otherwise 
universal  entailment  of  guilt  and  corruption,  while  he 
inherits  all  our  weaknesses  which  are  not  sinful.  Our 
guilt  and  corruption  are  derived  from  Adam  in  the  same 
manner  that  our  being  is  derived  from  him  ;  "  Adam 
begat  his  '  children  '  in  his  own  likeness  ;  "  we  are  "  con- 
ceived in  sin  and  brought  forth  in  iniquity  ;  "  that  can-' 
not  be  human  nature,  which  is  not  born  of  woman  ; 


128  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  that  cannot  be  sinless  human  nature  M'liicli  is  begotten 
by  man  ;  hence,  our  surety  in  liuman  nature  must  be 
conceived  from  some  "  extraordinary  generation,"  con- 
ceived without  sin,  brouolit  forth  without  iniquity,  yet, 
because  liis  flesli  and  blood  are  derived  from  woman, 
having  the  physical  weaknesses  of  humanity,  being 
subject  to  all  those  infirmities,  but  witliout  sin.  So 
we  read  of  our  Lord's  miraculous  conception,  in 
the  words  of  the  angel  to  the  Virgin  Mary  (Let 
"  all  generations  call  her  blessed  !  ")  "  The  Holy 
Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the 
Highest  shall  overshadow  thee  ;  therefore  also  that  holy 
thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the 
Son  of  God."  The  germ  of  the  body  was  in  the  woman, 
and  in  her  womb  it  grew  till  its  birth,  and  from  her 
bosom  was  it  nourished  after  its  birth,  but  the  impreg- 
nating power  was  of  God,  and,  therefore,  was  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  the  "child  wonderful  "  lioly  ;  of  the  seed 
of  Adam,  Abraham,  Judah,  and  David,  through  his 
mother,  but  sanctified  in  the  first  beginning  of  his  hu- 
man nature  by  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

II.  Oiu-  Mediator  and  Substitute  "  must  also  be  very 
God  in  one  person  "  with  his  human  nature. 

For  this  two  reasons  are  given  by  the  Catechism 
(17th  Ans.) 

"  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead  sus- 
tain in  his  human  nature  the  burden  of  God's  wrath  ;  " 
and 

"  Might  obtain  for  and  restore  us  to  righteousness 
and  life." 

1.  "  That  he  might,  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead, 
sustain  in  his  human  nature  the  burden  of  God's 
wrath." 


QUALITIES    OF   THE  MEDIATOR.  129 

A,  Because  the  burden  of  God's  wratli  is  too  great 
for  human  nature,  unsupported,  to  endure. 

It  is  the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sinner.  The 
sentence  denounced  against  the  sinner ^is  death,  which 
we  have  seen  to  be  the  utter  withdrawal  of  the  divine 
favor  and  tlie  actual  infliction  of  his  vengeance.  The 
moment  that  this  sentence  comes  upon  the  sinner  in  its 
full  execution,  he  must  be  crushed  —  he  must  die. 
There  can  be  in  him  no  vital  energy  left,  no  recupera- 
tive force  —  the  weight  presses  him  down  forever. 
The  substitute  must  be  man,  because  it  is  the  penalty 
of  the  law  given  to  man.  But  if  he  were  mere  man, 
though  himself  righteous,  the  weight  of  the  imputed 
guilt  of  a  single  sinner  would  crush  him  in  death  for- 
ever. He  could  never  react  from  under  it ;  his  power 
would  be  lost ;  he  would  be  dead.  Nor  could  the 
strength  of  any  creature  avail  for  his  help  in  so  extreme 
an  emergency.  How,  then,  shall  the  one  mediator  be 
enabled  to  sustain  the  otherwise  intolerable  burden  ? 
All  the  wit  of  men  and  angels  could  never  resolve  the 
difficulty ;  we  must  go  for  our  answer  to  the  revelation 
of  the  Gospel.  "  God  "  is  there  "  manifest  in  the 
flesh."  Man  still  stands  forth  the  substitute  of  man, 
to  receive  upon  his  head  the  terrible  curse ;  one  person 
is  still  to  meet  it  alone  ;  but  that  Person  is  not  merely 
man  ;  by  an  ineffable  mystery,  the  coequal  Son  of  God 
assumes  that  humanity  to  himself,  so  that  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  son  of  the  woman,  very  God  and  very 
man,  their  natures  still  distinct,  yet  in  their  distinctness 
united,  constitute  one  Person,  the  Substitute  of  the  sin- 
ner. The  Son  of  God  thus  makes  the  human  nature 
of  the  Son  of  man  his  own.  The  wrath  divine  comes 
not  on  the  Son  of  God,  for  divinity, can  in  no  sense  suf- 

VOL.   1.  9 


130  QUALITIES  OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  fer  or  be  put  to  shame  ;  it  falls  on  the  human  nature 
alone,  because  the  jvistice  of  God  requires  that  the 
nature,  which  has  sinned,  should  bear  the  penalty  of 
the  sin  ;  but  the  divinity  in  the  person  of  the  mediator 
sustains  by  its  almightiness  the  hvunanity  in  the  person 
of  the  mediator  to  bear  up  under  the  curse,  and,  while 
folly  satisfying  the  wrath  of  God,  yet  to  retain  a  vital 
energy  sufficient  for  its  recovery  from  the  imputed 
death.  The  human  nature  alone  endures,  but  endures 
by  the  strength  of  the  divine,  to  which  it  is  personally 
associated.  Thus,  the  apostle  speaks  of  the  "  Church 
of  God  which  he  hath  redeemed  by  his  own  blood ;  " 
i.  e.  by  the  blood  of  the  human  nature  which  through 
his  incarnation  he  made  "  his  own."  "  God  sent  forth 
his  Son"  (elsewhere  called  his  only  begotten  Son, 
therefore  Divine,  as  the  begotten  is  of  the  nature  of 
the  begetter)  —  his  Son  must  have  existed  before  he 
sent  him  forth  —  sent  forth  his  preexistent  Son  "made 
of  a  woman,"  that  is,  united  to  the  Son  of  man  as  the 
Saviour  of  sinners.  So  again,  we  read,  that  Christ 
Jesus,  "  being  in  the  form  of  God  (i.  e.  existing  as 
Grod)  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  ;  but 
made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men; 
and,  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  him- 
self and  became  obedient  to  (until)  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross."  Great  as  must  have  been  the 
wrath  of  God  which  came  on  the  human  nature  of  our 
Substitute,  the  strength  of  God  could  enable  that  hu- 
man nature  to  bear  it. 

B.  Because  the  merit  of  no  sufFering  endured  by  a 
mere  man  would  be  sufficient  for  the  redemption  of  the 
Church,  saved  through  the  Mediator. 


QUALITIES   OF   THE  MEDIATOR.  131 

If  the  wrath  of  God  against  a  single  sinner  be  so 
intolerable,  how  could  a  single  man,  as  their  substitute, 
sustain  the  wrath  due  to  such  a  -multitude  ? 

A  ready  answer  is,  that  the  divine  strength  of  the 
Immanuel  could  uphold  his  human  nature  under  any 
degree  of  penal  suffering  ;  but  the  reply  goes  not  far 
enough,  for  it  will  be  asked  again.  Upon  what  principle 
of  justice  can  one  man  be  accepted  in   the   room    of 
many?     If  he  be  a  mere  man,  how  can  the  divine  law 
be  magnified  by  his  suffering,  let  him  suffer  never  so 
much,  so  that  many  sinners  may  escape  by  his  substitu- 
tion ?     It  is  obvious  that  where  one  stands  forth  as  a 
substitute  for  very  many,  he  cannot  be  accepted  unless 
he  has   in   his   single  person  a  dignity,  or    worth,  far 
excelling  that  of  a  private  individual  man,  and  com- 
mensurate  to    the   vast    representativeness    which    he 
would  assume.     It  is  true,  that  by  one  man,  Adam, 
condemnation  to  death  came  on  our  whole  race  ;  but 
Adam  acted  not  merely  as  a  private  individual ;  nor 
became  he  man  by  ordinary  generation  ;  he  was  created 
immediately  by  God,  so    that  the   sacred   genealogist 
hesitates  not  to  call  him  "  the  Son  of  God "  ("Enos, 
which   was    the   son   of  Seth,   which  was   the  son  of 
Adam,  which  was  the    son   of   God,"  Luke  iii.  38)  ; 
and,  deriving  his  nature  in  this  extraordinary  way,  he 
was  constituted  in  the  dignity  of  head  of  his  race.     He 
could  justly  represent  all  human    nature,  because  all 
human  nature  was  in  him.     All  his  descendants    fell 
with  him  ;  all  are  under  the  condemnation  which  he 
brought  upon  them :   where,  then,  among  those  guilty 
descendants  can  one  be  found  of  competent  worth  to 
take  the  place  of  a  second  Adam,  the  headship  of  a 
new  race,  the  Redeemer  of  sinful  men  who  are  repre- 


132  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.         sented  by  his  sufterings  expiatory  of  their  offences  ?  It 
is  obvious,  again,  that  tlie  Second  Adam,  like  the  first, 
must  be  the  Son  of  God,  of  sufhcient  dignity  to  be 
constituted,  and  actually  constituted  by  God,  Head  or 
Representative  of  all  who  are  to  be  redeemed  through 
him.  There  must  also  be  such  a  worth,  or  legal  value, 
in  his  sufferings,  as  fully  to  vindicate  the  justice  of 
God  in  accepting  them  on  behalf  of  the  sinners  saved. 
But  we  have  seen  from  our  previous  reasoning  that  no 
mere  creature  could  be  accepted  to  bear,  or  could  bear, 
if  accepted,  the  sufferings  due  to  us.  How,  then,  shall 
this  difficulty  in  the  way  of  a  just  mercy  be  met  ?  (O 
the  matchless  wisdom  of  divine  love !)  The  Only 
Begotten,  eternal  Son  of  God  himself,  becomes  incar- 
nate as  our  Elder  Brother  ;  he  assumes  to  himself,  out 
of  a  woman's  flesh  and  blood,  a  perfect  human  nature, 
begotten  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  thus  uniting  it 
with  his  own  divinity  in  one  person,  not  only  sustains 
the  humanity  under  all  the  suffering  of  imputed  guilt, 
but  presents  a  surety  of  infinitely  sufficient  worth  to 
represent  all  the  redeemed.  Therefore,  was  "  laid  upon 
him  the  iniquity  of  us  all  ;  "  therefore,  did  it  please 
the  Father  to  bruise  him,  and  put  him  to  grief ;  there- 
fore, did  he  forever  "  put  away  sin  by  the  one  sacrifice 
of  himself,"  and  by  that  "  one  offering  perfect  forever 
them  that  are  sanctified."  Our  sufferings  on  account 
of  sin  would  have  been  everlasting,  because  no  suffer- 
ings of  ours  could  ever  have  satisfied  the  penalty  due 
to  the  sinner  ;  but  such  is  the  incalculable  merit  of 
our  Surety's  sufferings  for  us,  that  in  a  portion  of  three 
days,  the  law  was  fully  vindicated,  and  the  whole 
Church  absolved.  Adam  was  made  in  the  likeness  of 
God,  so  far  as  a  creature  could  reflect  the  likeness  of 


Lect.   \'I.]  qualities    OF   THE   MEDIATOR.  133 

the  Creator,  yet  was  he  sustained  only  by  a  creature's 
strenoth,  and  he  fell  ;  but  in  our  Second  Adam  dwelt 
"  the  Lord  from  heaven,"  the  Son  of  God  himself;  the 
first  Adam  was  made  "  a  living  soul ;  "  the  Second 
Adam  is  a  quickening  Spirit,  for  in  him  is  not  only  a 
hfe  derived,  but  he  is  the  Life-giver.  Therefore  did  he, 
"  through  death,  destroy  him -that  hath  the  power  of 
death,"  and  become  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation 
unto  all  them  that  obey  him." 

2.  Our  Mediator  must  also  be  "  very  God  in  one  per- 
son with  his  human  nature,"  that  "  he  might  obtain  for 
and  restore  to  us  righteousness  and  life." 

Here  are  two  offices  of  the  Mediator  for  which  his 
Divinity  is  necessary  :  — 

The  obtaining  for  us  righteousness  and  life  ;  and  the 
restoring  of  righteousness  and  life  to  us. 

A.  The  obtaining  for  us  righteousness  and  life. 

It  is  the  part  of  the  Mediator  to  act  for  us  with  God, 
and,  therefore,  is  it  requisite  not  only  that  a  sufficient 
satisfaction  be  made  to  the  law  under  which  we  are 
condemned,  but  that  such  satisfaction  be  duly  presented 
and  pleaded  before  God  ;  and  our  justification,  with  its 
consequence,  our  readmission  to  the  divine  favor,  ac- 
knowledged and  secured.  This  justification  and  divine 
favor  are  meant  by  the  terms  "  righteousness  and  life," 
used  by  the  Catechism  ;  for,  according  to  the  method 
of  grace,  the  sinner  who  believes  is  not  personally,  that 
is,  through  his  own  merit,  righteous,  but  considered 
and  treated  as  righteous  or  justified  solely  on  account 
of  the  satisfaction  rendered  to  the  law  for  him  by  his 
substitute  ;  and  the  favor  of  God,  which  is  life,  goes 
out  to  him  again  only  through  his  substitute,  with 
whom,  as  the  atoning  representative  of  the  sinner,  God 


134  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  is  well  pleased.  Is  it  not,  then,  clear  that  only  he, 
who  could  make  the  satisfaction,  can  plead  its  merit 
before  God  and  claim  its  reward  ?  Who  less  than 
divine  can  thus  speak  with  God  ?  Who  less  than 
divine  can  take  into  his  grasp  such  great  blessing  as 
life  for  all  the  host  of  the  redeemed  ?  If  nothino;  less 
than  divine  strength  coi>ld  sustain  the  humanity  of  our 
surety  under  the  wrath  due  to  his  people,  an  equal 
capacity  is  needed  to  contain  the  immensity  of  favor 
vouchsafed  by  the  love  of  the  reconciled  Father  to  all 
his  ransomed  family.  So  reasons  the  Apostle  of  our 
glorious  Mediator :  "  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in 
him  should  all  fulness  dwell ;  and  having  made  peace 
through  the  blood  of  his  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all 
things  unto  himself;  "  and  again  :  "  For  in  him  dwell- 
eth  all  the  fiilness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  And  ye  (all 
believers)  are  complete  in  him,  which  is  the  head  of  all 
principality  and  power."  And  in  the  same  strain,  John 
the  Baptist  testified  of  our  Lord  :  "  Of  his  fulness 
have  all  we  received  and  grace  for  grace."  All  the 
grace  we  need  we  receive  of  Christ ;  therefore  all  ful* 
ness  dwells  in  Christ,  and  that  he  might  contain  all 
this  fulness,  in  him  dwells  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead, 
It  was  necessary  that  the  divine  nature  should  sustain 
the  humanity  of  the  substitute,  in  the  work  of  atone- 
ment ;  so  it  is  necessary  that  after  the  merit  of  the 
work  is  provided,  the  divine  nature  should  qualify  the 
Mediator  to  obtain  and  receive  by  his  intercession  eter^ 
nal  redemption  for  us. 

B.  The  restoring  of  righteousness  and  life  to  us. 

It  is  the  part  of  the  Mediator  to  act  for  God  with  us  ; 
therefore  is  it  requisite  that  not  only  the  justification 
of  the  sinner,  and  the  consequent  life  be  obtained  for 


QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  135 

US,  but,  also,  that  those  benefits  be  actually  conferred, 
and  we  restored  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  we  have  lost 
through  sin.  Who  less  than  God  can  accom})lish  this 
in  us  ?  Who  can  justify  where  God  has  condemned, 
but  God  himself?  Who  can  give  life  back,  but  the 
Lord  of  life  ?  Who  less  than  God  can  visit  the  hearts 
of  all  the  Church,  and. by  the  Holy  Spirit  incline  them 
all  to  receive  by  faith  the  pardon  God  extends,  and 
strengthen  them  all  for  the  new  obedience  which  God 
requires  ?  If  our  Mediator  be  not  divine,  how  can  he 
be  omnipresent  to  hear  every  prayer  of  each  one  of  all 
his  people  ;  omniscient,  to  know  their  every  thought 
and  every  need ;  omnipotent,  to  sustain  them  all  against 
every  temptation,  under  every  duty,  amidst  sorrows 
innumerable,  and  throughout  time  to  a  glorious  eter- 
nity ?  God  adopts  the  penitents,  but  it  is  Christ  who 
"  gives  power  to  as  many  as  believe,"  to  become  the 
sons  of  God  ;  "  God  strengthens  them  with  all  might, 
but  it  is  through  Christ  strengthening  him  that  the 
believer  can  do  all  things  ;  God  assures  comfort,  but 
the  comfort  reaches  us  only  through  him,  who,  having 
been  the  man  of  sorrows,  is  now  the  Lord  of  joy  ;  God 
has  prepared  unspeakable  glories  for  them  that  love 
him,  and  they  are  kept  by  his  power  unto  salvation  ; 
but  Christ  who  is  the  Author,  is  also  the  Finisher  of 
their  faith,  and  when  they  enter  the  full  blessedness  of 
heaven,  it  is  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord.  Christ  is  the 
beginning,  Christ  the  continuance,  Christ  the  end  ; 
Christ  first,  Christ  always,  Christ  last,  Christ  all  in  all. 
He  is  the  Way,  and  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  ;  no  man 
cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  him.  Who  but  the 
Son  of  God,  can  lie  in  the  bosom  of  God  ?  From  that 
bosom  he  came  to  be  our  Surety  in  human  flesh ;  to 


136  QUALITIES   OF  THE  MEDIATOR.  that  bosom  he  has  returned,  but  with  our  flesh  about 
him,  to  be  our  ever  prevalent  Advocate,  and  the  accom- 
plisher  of  our  redemption  ;  for  where  he  is  glorified, 
our  humanity  is  glorified  ;  and  where  the  Son  of  God 
dwells,  there  dwells  his  body  the  Church,  the  fulness 
of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all.