LECTURE    VII. 

THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR. 


SIXTH  LORD'S  DAY. 

THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR. 

TTAVING  ascertained  the  qualities  necessary  to  a 
-'--'-  sufficient  substitute  or  mediator  for  us  with  God, 
viz :  That  he  be  very  man  and  very  God  in  one  per- 
son ;  we  come  to  consider  :  — 

Fourthly  :  The  provision  of  such  a  substitute  or 
mediator  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christy  as  we  learn  from  the 
Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

"  Who,  then^''  asks  the  18th  Question,  "  is  thai 
mediator,  that  in  one  person  is  both  very  God  ayid  real 
righteous  man  ?  " 

Ans.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "  who  of  God  is  made 
unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification, 
and  redemption." 

"  Wlience  knoivest  thou  this  ? "  demands  the  Cate- 
chism, (Quest.  19th.) 

Ans.  "  From  the  Holy  Gospel,  which  God  himself 
revealed  first  in  Paradise,  and  afterwards  published  by 
the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  and  was  pleased  to  repre- 
sent it  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices,  and  the  other  cere- 
monies of  the  law  ;  and,  lastly,  has  accomplished  it 
by  his  only  begotten  Son." 

The  order  in  which  these  questions  and  answers 
occur  is  the  most  natural  for  the  purpose  of  the  Cate- 
chism ;  but  for  convenience  of  exposition  we  shall 
invert  it,*  and  mark  :  — 

*  This  Ursinus  himself  is  forced  to  do.    p.  128,  Lond.  fol.  1633. 


140  THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.       I.  The  Fact  of  divine  testimony  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  our  Mediator  (Quest,  and  Ans.  19th)  ;  and, 
II.  The  Substance  of  that  testimony  concerning  him, 
(18th.) 

I.  The  Fact  of  divine  testimony  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  as  our  Mediator. 

"  Whence  knov^^est  thou  thy  misery  ?  "  asked  the 
Catechism,  when  opening  to  us  our  ruin  through  sin  ; 
and  the  answ^er  given  to  us  was  :  "  Out  of  the  hiw  of 
God."  From  God  only  do  we  know  our  duty,  our  wick- 
edness, and  our  condemnation  ;  so,  from  God  only,  can 
we  learn  the  way  of  escape  from  guilt,  and  return  to 
life.  The  revelation  of  such  a  merciful  deliverance  is, 
indeed,  as  it  was  called  by  the  heavenly  Messenger  to 
the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  "  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  ;  "  which  is  more  briefly  expressed  by  our  one 
Saxon  word,  Gospel,  a  contraction  of  goodspell,  corre- 
sponding to  the  Greek,  Evangel.  This  "  glorious  "  and 
delightful  term  "  Gospel,"  our  Catechism  applies  to  the 
whole  doctrine  of  salvation  as  taught  throughout  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  ;  for  which 
there  is  the  highest  authority.  The  word  Gospel,  it  is 
true,  does  not  occur  in  our  English  translation  of  the 
Old  Testament,  but  its  synonyms  are  frequent  there, 
and,  in  citations  from  the  former  Scriptures  by  the  New 
Testament  writers,  it  is  freely  employed  :  "  Search  the 
Scriptures,"  that  is,  of  the  Old  Testament  which  only 
then  were  written,  said  our  Lord  to  the  skeptical  Jews, 
"  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life ;  and  they  are 
they  which  testify  of  me."  So,  also,  in  his  memo- 
rable walk  with  the  two  disciples  to  Emmaus,  he  said : 
"  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the 
prophets  have  spoken  !     Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suf- 


THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.  141 

fered  these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his  gloiy  ?  And, 
beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  he  expounded 
unto  them  in  all  the  Scriptures,  the  things  concerning 
himself."  From  these  and  many  other  texts,  we  learn, 
that  the  main  purpose  of  all  Scripture  is  to  teach  the 
doctrine  of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  Avhatever  we 
find  in  them  is  contributive  to  the  great  theme. 

A.  "  God  himself  revealed  it  first  in  Paradise." 
There,  after  their  fall  and  before  their  expulsion  from 
Eden,  God  himself,  in  the  hearing  of  our  first  parents, 
said  to  the  serpent-tempter  :  "  I  will  put  enmity 
between  thee  and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed 
and  her  seed  ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head  and  thou  shalt 
bruise  his  heel."  Christ,  the  son  of  a  virgin,  came 
emphatically  as  the  seed  of  the  woman  ;  between  him 

*  and  "  the  old  serpent  the  devil,"  there  was  battle  to 
extremity  ;  and  though  in  the  desperate  struggle  our 
Champion  was  sorely  wounded,  he  crushed  the  head 
of  our  foe,  "  destroying  death  and  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death."  Hence  this  prophecy,  that  the  seed 
of  the  w^oman  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent, 
is  properly  regarded  as  the  first  promise  and  proclama- 
tion of  the  Gospel. 

B.  The  sacrifice  by  Abel  of  the  firstlings  of  his 
flock,  the  life  of  lambs  substituted  in  typical  expiation 
of  sin,  shows  that  he  apprehended  the  future  sacrifice 
of  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world,"  for  us,  and  told  that  in  so  doing  he  acted 
"  by  faith,"  and  faith  supposes  a  revelation  of  promise. 
The  offering  of  the  sacrifice  was  itself  a  publication  of 
the  Gospel  by  Abel,  and  so  we  find  our  Lord  naming 
him  as  the  first  of  the  prophets,  when,  speaking  of  the 
prophets  slain  by  wicked  men  he  says  :  "  The  blood  of 


142  THE  PROVISION  Olf  A  MEDIATOR.       all  the  prophets  ....  from  the  blood  of  Abel  to  the 
blood  of  Zacharias  which  perished  between  the  altar 
and  the  temple," 

The  publication  of  the  Gospel  thus  begun  was, 
doubtless,  continued  by  the  patriarchs  until  the  flood, 
though  the  record  of  their  preaching  and  the  range  of 
it  is  but  indistinct ;  for  Jude  speaks  of  Enoch  proph- 
esying concerning  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  and  Peter 
expressly  calls  Noah  "  a  preacher  of  righteousness," 
and  that  Christ  preached  by  him  "  while  the  ark  was 
a  preparing,"  (2  Peter  ii.  5  ;  1  Peter  iii.  19,  20.) 
So  Paul,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  asserts  plainly 
that  God  preached  the  Gospel  unto  Abraham,  saying : 
'■'  In  tliee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed  ;"  which  revelation 
was  repeated  unto  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  by  them  all,  and 
many  of  their  distinguished  descendants,  "  published  " 
to  the  house  of  Israel. 

The  strain  was  taken  up,  and  the  publication  con- 
tinued, by  prophet  after  prophet ;  their  intimations 
becoming  clearer  and  clearer,  like  the  brightening 
dawn,  until  Jesus,  of  whom  Moses  and  all  of  them  did 
write,  himself  appeared,  the  Sun  of  righteousness, 
"  with  healing  in  his  wings."  Respecting  this  succes- 
sive and  unanimously  concurrent  testimony,  tlie  Apostle 
Peter  has  this  remarkable  language :  "  Of  which  sal- 
vation the  prophets  have  inquired  and  searched  dili- 
gently, who  prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come 
unto  you ;  searching  what,  or  wliat  manner  of  time  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it 
testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the 
glory  that  should  follow.  Unto  whom  it  was  revealed, 
that  not  vmto  themselves,  but  unto  us  they  did  minis- 
ter the  things,  which  are  now  reported  unto  you  by 


THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.  143 

them  that  have  preached  the  Gospel  unto  you  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven." 

C.  Nay,  such  was  the  condescending  goodness  of 
God,  that,  not  content  with  "revealing  it"  himself, 
"first  in  Paradise,"  and  "afterwards  publishing  it 
by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,"  he  "  was  pleased  to 
represent  it  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  other 
ceremonies  of  the  law."  Under  the  former  dispensa- 
tion, the  enlightening  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
were  not  granted  so  abundantly  as '  they  are  to  us 
under  this  which  is  emphatically  "  the  ministration  of 
the  Spirit ; "  and  our  heavenly  Father  assisted  the 
faith  of  his  people  by  sensible  signs  and  emblems. 
Such  were  the  sacrifices  of  living  victims  taught  to  the 
worshipper,  as  we  have  seen,  near  the  gates  of  Para- 
dise ;  tiie  translation  of  Enoch,  a  testimony  of  God  to 
the  righteousness  of  faith  ;  the  ark  of  Noah,  an  elo- 
quent emblem  of  the  covenant  within  which  the  Church 
is  safe  amidst  the  ruin  of  ungodly  men  ;  the  rescue  of 
Isaac,  the  son  of  promise,  from  the  death  for  which,  at 
the  command  of  God,  the  father  of  the  faithful  had 
prepared  him  ;  the  wrestling  of  Jacob  with  tlie  Angel 
of  the  Covenant,  until  he  obtained  from  the  present  Son 
of  God  the  blessing  he  desired ;  the  deliverance  of 
Israel  from  the  destruction  of  Egypt  by  the  blood 
of  the  Paschal  lamb.  But,  after  the  formal  constitu- 
tion of  the  pilgrim  tribes  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  as  a 
church  or  congregation  of  worshippers,  God  appointed 
the  law  of  ordinances,  that  by  a  regular  and  complete 
system  of  types  or  shadows  (so  called  because  pre- 
cursing  the  substance  that  was  to  come)  all  the  great 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel  might  be  presented  distinctly  to 
the  eyes  of  the  people.     All  these  representative  cere- 


144  THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.       monies  typified  Christ.  Every  service  and  every  officer 
of  tliat  law  pointed  forward  to  Christ  and  his  offices 
for  us.  The  shedding  of  blood,  the  burning  of  tlie 
victims,  the  sending  of  the  scape-goat  with  the  sins  of 
the  people  into  the  wilderness ;  the  purification  of  the 
sinner  by  the  hyssop  branch  sprinkling  the  sacrificial 
blood  upon  him  ;  the  shew-bread,  the  lights  of  the 
sanctuary,  the-  offering  of  incense,  the  Visible  Glory 
resting  on  the  ark  of  the  testimony  ;  the  ark  itself 
with  its  propitiatory  and  the  memorials  which  the  pro- 
pitiatory covered ;  the  officiating  priesthood,  especially 
the  high-priest,  with  the  sanctifying  mitre  on  his  head, 
the  mystical  Urim  and  Thummim  on  his  breast  and  his 
robes  of  ceremony ;  the  intercession  of  the  high-priest 
once  a  year  within  the  veil  and  the  blessing  which 
followed  it ;  all  represented  and  preached  Christ  and 
his  Gospel,  the  provision  made  for  our  need,  and  the 
glory  consequent  upon  the  grace.  All  declared  the 
necessity  and  appointment  of  a  Mediator  for  us,  the 
substitution  of  his  person  to  bear  the  wrath  of  God  on 
our  behalf,  his  acceptableness  with  God  and  his  inter- 
cession, which  the  Father  heareth  always,  and  the  gift 
of  the  Hol}^  Ghost  through  him.  The  ceremonial  law 
was,  in  fact,  the  Gospel  of  the  Old  Testament. 

D.  All  these  promises,  publications,  prophecies,  cere- 
monies, and  officers  had  their  anti-type  or  reality  in 
Christ.  By  his  incarnation,  his  anointing  from  the 
Holy  Ghost,  by  his  life  of  obedience,  his  bitter  sorrows, 
his  unspeakable  agony,  his  death  in  darkness  on  the 
cross  accursed  of  God,  his  burial,  his  uprising  from  the 
dead,  his  ascension  to  heaven,  his  session  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father,  his  pleading  for  us  there  as  our 
Advocate,  and  the  outpouring   of  the   Holy  Spirit  in 


THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.  145 

answer  to  his  prayers,  he  has  accomphshed  the  truth  of 
his  Gospel  and  made  clear  as  the  light  of  day  the  doc- 
trines dimly  perceptible  amidst  the  shadows  of  the  law. 
"  The  law  was  given  by  Moses," — the  moral  law  which 
brings  condemnation,  and  the  ceremonial  law,  which 
shadowed  forth  the  promises  of  life  ;  "  "  but  grace  and 
truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ  " —  grace,  deliverance  from 
the  condemnation  of  the  moral  law,  truth,  the  reality 
or  actual  fulfilment  of  the  things  before  shadowed  by 
the  types  of  the  ceremonial  law. 

It  is,  therefore,  to  this  Gospel,  the  revelation  of  God 
concerning  Jesus  Christ,  the  foretellings  and  prefigur- 
ations  of  the  Old  Testament,  with  the  histories  and 
doctrinal  expositions  of  the  New,  that  we  go  for  knowl- 
edge of  the  Mediator  ;  our  faith  is  built  on  the  founda- 
tion of  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself 
being  the  chief  corner-stone."  The  truth  on  which 
we  of  the  Reformed  Churches  rely  is  the  word  of  God, 
the  whole  word  of  God,  and  the  word  of  God  alone. 
Nothing  short  of  divine  testimony  do  we  credit ;  all 
that  is  supported  by  divine  testimony  do  we  believe  ; 
whatever  has  not  the  divine  testimony  we  reject. 
From  God  alone  we  can  derive  our  religious  creed,  for 
he  is  the  object  of  all  worship  ;  from  him  alone  our 
rules  of  moral  practice,  for  he  is  the  object  of  all 
duty. 

11.  The  substance  of  the  divine  testimony  concerning 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Mediator.  This  is  given 
in  the  answer  to  the  18th  Question,  which  has  two 
parts  —  the  first :  a  recital  of  the  three  principal  names 
designating  our  Mediator ;  the  second  :  a  comprehen- 
sive catalogue  of  the  blessings  which  we  have  in  him. 

A.  Our  Mediator  is  "  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     Of 

VOL.   I.  10 


146  THE  PROVISION   OF  A  MEDIATOR.       these  names  we  shall  be  required  to  treat  fully  in  expound- 
ing the  lessons  of  the  Eleventh,  Twelfth,  and  Thirteenth 
Lord's  Days,  and  need  now  note  only  a  few  things. 

a.  He  is  our  Lord.  This  is  an  epithet  of  authority 
and  power,  whicli  belongs  to  him  by  delegated  right  as 
appointed  by  the  Father,  in  the  plan  of  redemption,  to 
rale  over  the  Church  and  over  all  things  for.  the  sake 
of  the  Church  ;  and  tlirougliout  the  New  Testament 
(with  but  two  or  three  not  contradictory  exceptions) 
it  is  applied  exclusively  to  him  as  the  Son  of  God 
incarnate,  the  Saviour.  "  Unto  you,'*  said  the  angel 
to  the  shepherds,  "is  born  this  day  in.tlie  city  of 
David  a  Saviour  which  is  Christ  the  Lord ;  "  and  the 
Apostle  to  the  Romans  :  "  For  to  this  end  Christ  both 
died  and  rose  and  revived,  that  he  might  be  Lord  both 
of  the  dead  and  the  living."  From  which,  and  many 
other  passages,  we  see  that  he  is  called  Lord,  not 
merely  in  virtue  of  his  original  divinity  as  the  Second 
Person  of  the  Godhead,  (Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and 
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost !)  but  Avith  special 
reference  to  his  mediatorial  character  :  nay,  that  it 
was  bestowed  upon  him  in  reward  of  his  mediatorial 
obe4ience.  "  All  power,"  said  he  himself  after  his 
resurrection,  "  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth  ;  "  and  the  Apostle  to  the  Philippians  testifies  of 
the  Immanuel :  "  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he 
humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  God  also  hath 
liighly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  (or  office) 
which  is  above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things 
in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confi^ss  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the 


THE   PROVISION   OF  A  MEDIATOR.  147 

glory  of  God  tlie  Father."  Yet  does  the  delegation 
of  such  authority  to  him  as  the  Saviour  prove  his 
divinity.  To  what  mere  creature  could  God  the 
Father  commit  a  viceroyship  so  great?  Who,  less 
than  divine,  could  comprehend  the  divine  counsels  for 
tlie  government  of  the  Church  ?  Who,  less  than  divine, 
could  sustain  the  wqight  of  all  power  over  all  things  ni 
heaven,  earth,  and  hell  ?  Who,  less  than  divine,  could 
receive  the  homage  of  "  every  knee  "  and  the  ascrip- 
tions of  "every  tongue,"  as  the  "  Lord,"  "  whose  right 
it  is  to  reign  ?  " 

h.  "  Our  Lord  Jesus.'"  This  is  the  name  which  was 
given  to  him  by  the  angel  "  before  he  was  conceived  in 
the  womb,"  and  when  tli*  announcement  was  made  to 
the  virgin  that  she  should  bring  forth  a  son.  It  may 
be,  therefore,  considered  as  more  peculiarly  his  human 
name,  the  name  by  which  he  was  called  by  his  mother 
and  kindred  and  acquaintances.  So  Peter,  preaching 
to  the  mixed  multitude,  says :  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a 
man  approved  of  God  among  you  ;"  and  Paul  to  Tim- 
othy :  "  There  is  one  mediator  between  God  and  men, 
the  man  Christ  Jesus."  But  the  name  was  given  to 
him  because  of  its  peculiar  significance :  "  Thou  shalt 
call  his  name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from 
their  sins."  The  word  is  an  imitation  of  the  Hebre^v 
name  Joshua,  which  means  a  saviour,  or  one  who  makes 
safe.  As  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  having  succeeded 
Moses  by  the  command  of  God,  led  the  tribes  in  safety 
to  a  triumphant  possession  of  the  promised  land;  so 
does  our  Jesus  deliver  his  brethren  of  the  true  Israel, 
from  the  power  of  their  sins,  their  worst  enemies,  and 
bring  them  through  all  difficulties  to  the  secure  enjoy- 
ment of  their  heavenly  rest.     For  this  he  unites  to  his 


148  THE  PKOVrSION   OF  A  MEDIATOR.        infinitely  divine  attributes,  the  experience  and  full  sense 
of  our  humanity,  assuring  us  of  his  sympathy,  and  en- 
couraging us  by  liis  j)ower. 

c.  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ.^^  This  is  a  verbal  noun 
from  a  word  signifying  to  anoint^  —  anointing  with  oil  in 
solemn  ceremony  .being  the  method  by  wliicli  prophets, 
priests,  and  kings  were  consecrated  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. It  is  properly  neither  a  personal  name,  nor  a  title 
descriptive  of  office,  but  being  added  to  Lord  Jesus,  de- 
clares that  he  has  been  appointed  and  confirmed  by  God 
as  the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  of  his  ChurcJi.  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,  for  he  hath  anointed 
me,"  is  the  language  which  was  prophetically  put  into 
the  mouth  of  our  Lord  ;  and,  accordingly,  we  read  in 
the  Gospel  that  "  Jesus,  being  baptized  (by  John),  and 
praying,  the  heaven  was  opened,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
descended  in  a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove  upon  him,  and 
a  voice  came  from  heaven,  which  said  :  '  Thou  art  my 
beloved  Son  ;  in  thee  I  am  well  pleased.'  "  This  unction 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  inauguration  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  to  his  mediatorial  office,  by  God  the  Father. 
Hence,  because  of  his  infinite  preeminence  as  an  office- 
bearer by  divine  appointment,  he  is  called  emphatically 
"  the  Christ,"  or  "  the  Messiah,"  which  is  the  Hebrew 
synonym.  The  doctrine  which  we  should  derive  from 
the  word  Christ,  as  applied  to  our  Lord  Jesus,  is,  that 
the  efficiency  of  our  Saviour's  atonement  depended  not 
merely  upon  the  dignity  of  his  person,  or  the  infinite 
merit  of  his  work,  but  also  on  the  fact  of  his  having 
been  called  and  set  apart  to  his  mediatorial  office  by 
God  himself  In  the  appointment  of  God  the  Son,  by 
God  the  Father,  and  his  anointment  by  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  we  see  the  three  Persons  of  the  Godhead  united 
as  the  God  of  our  redemption. 


THE  PROVISION  OF  A  MEDIATOR.  149 

B.  The  Catechism  adds  a  comprehensive  catalogue 
of  the  blessings  which  we  have  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
taken  from  1  Cor.  i.  30  :  "  Of  him  (that  is,  by  the 
gracious  will  of  God),  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  who  of 
God  (that  is,  by  appointment  of  God)  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption ;"  to  which  the  Apostle  adds:  "  that,  accord- 
ing as  it  is  written,  he  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in 
the  Lord  ;  "  the  term  "  Lord,"  in  this  latter  verse,  with 
"  Christ  Jesus  "  in  the  former,  making  the  triple  appel- 
lation by  which  we  acknowledge  and  adore  the  Imman- 
uel  as  our  Saviour,  "  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our 
faith." 

a.  He  is  "  made  unto  us  wisdom."  He  is  the  wis- 
dom of  God  unto  our  salvation,  because  it  was  infinite 
wisdom  which  provided  the  method  of  our  justification  ; 
and  the  doctrine  of  Christ  is  the  sum  of  all  divine  truth, 
through  which  God  makes  himself  known  as  our  God. 
He  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  because  by  his  Holy  Spirit 
the  writers  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  were  moved 
to  prepare  that  only  and  sufficient  treasury  of  divine 
truth  for  our  learning,  comfort,  patience,  and  hope ; 
and  because,  by  the  power  of  that  same  spirit  within 
us,  we  are  enlightened  to  understand  the  truth,  convert- 
ed to  love  the  truth,  and  strengthened  to  obey  the  truth. 

All  the  knowledge  which  the  Christian  needs  must 
come  to  him  through  Christ  the  Mediator,  as  the  Apos- 
tle says  :  "  God,  who  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
manners,  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets,  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his 
Son  ;  "  and  again  :  "  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to 
shine  out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts  to  give 
the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the 


150  THE  PROVISION   OF  A  MEDIATOR.        face   of  Jesus   Christ."     By  Christ  the   Mediator,  we 
have  infinite  wisdom  speaking  to  us  with  human  lips. 

b.  "And  righteousness."  We  liave  nothing  of  our  own 
that  is  fit  to  appear  before  him,  but,  co^•ered  with  sin, 
we  could  not  stand  in  his  presence  ;  and  all  the  merit 
of  his  expiatory  death  and  obedient  life  is  freely  im- 
puted to  the  believer  as  tlie  perfectly  sufKcient  ground 
of  his  justification  ;  and,  clothed  in  Christ's  righteous- 
ness, he  is  accepted  as  a  penitent  and  adopted  as  a  child 
by  the  reconciled  Father. 

c.  "  And  sanctification."  The  blessing  of  sanctifi- 
cation  is  inseparable  from  the  grace  of  justification. 
•'  Jesus  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  It  is  the 
power  of  his  Holy  Spirit  applying  to  our  hearts  the  doc- 
trine of  his  atoning  and  interceding  love,  which  trans- 
forms our  dispositions  from  enmity  to  the  love  of  God, 
purifies  our  affections  from  the  contaminating  grossness 
of  the  flesh,  and  supplies  to  our  faith  those  superior 
motives  which  successfully  oppose  the  temptations  of 
the  world.  This  renovating  change  is  gradual,  and 
never  complete  in  this  world,  but  it  is  begun  with  faith, 
as  the  Evangelist  says  :  "  To  as  many  as  received  him 
....  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even 
to  them  that  believe  on  his  name."  But  the  full  per- 
fection of  his  people  is  secured,  for  — 

d.  "  He  is  made  unto  us  ...  .  redemption."  Re- 
demption most  often,  and  certainly  when  following 
sanctification,  signifies  the  full  and  accom])lished  salva- 
tion of  the  believer,  both  body  and  soul  ;  his  entire 
deliverance  from  sin  and  guilt  and  death  ;  and  his  res- 
toration complete  to  the  favor,  and  presence,  and  enjoy- 
ment of  God  forever.  This  Christ  undertakes,  and  this 
ne    will    perform.     "  He  is  able  to   save  even   to  the 


THE  PROVISION   OF   A  MEDIATOR.  151 

uttermost  "  extremity  of  this  life,  all  that  come  unto 
God  by  him.  He  is  the  Forerunner,  who  for  lis  has 
entered  and  taken  possession  of  heaven,  the  second  Par- 
adise; he  is  the  Resurrection  and  Life,  and  all  who 
believe  in  him,  though  they  die,  shall  live ;  he  is  our 
life  himself,  and  wherever  he  is  formed  in  the  heart, 
there  he  is  the  hope,  the  earnest,  and  the  beginning  of 
heavenly,  immortal  glory.  He  is  all  our  Avisdom,  all 
our  righteousness,  all  our  sanctification  ;  our  all  in  all. 
Who  then  can  pluck  his  people  out  of  those  pierced 
hands  by  which  he  holds  them  with  an  almighty  love  ! 
They  are  his  own,  purchased  by  his  blood  ;  his  own, 
the  travail  of  his  soul  ;  his  own,  the  trophies  of  his 
grace  ;  and  will  he  suffer  himself  to  be  robbed  of  his 
own  ?  Beloved  Master,  our  Elder  Brother,  Jehovah- 
Jesus,  Lord  our  Righteousness,  —  thou  art  "  the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  life  !  " 

Lessons. 

First :  Let  us  trust  in  Christ  alone,  fully,  to  the 
end ;  for  pardon,  for  strength,  for  glory. 

Secondly  :  Let  us  rely  upon  his  word  ;  for  guidance, 
for  instruction,  for  encouragement. 

Thirdly :  Let  us  live  near  to  him,  by  prayer,  by  com- 
munion, by  close  following  of  his  example.

LECTURE  VIII. 


SAVING   FAITH 


SEVENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 

SAVING    FAITH. 

Quest.  XX.  Are  all  men,  then,  as  they  perished  in  Adam,  saved  by  Christ? 

Ans.  No;  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive  all  his 
benefits  by  a  true  faith. 

Quest.  XXI.    What  is  true  faith  ? 

Ans.  True  faith  is  not  only  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby  I  hold  for 
truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,  but  also  an  assured 
confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  by  the  Gospel  in  my  heart, 
that,  not  only  unto  others,  but  to  me  also,  remission  of  sin,  everlasting 
righteousness  and  salvation,  are  freely  given  b}'  God,  merely  of  grace, 
onl}'  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits. 

Quest.  XXII.     What  is,  then,  necessary  for  a  Christian  to  believe  i 

Ans.  All  things  promised  us  in  the  Gospel;  which  the  Articles  of  our 
Catholic,  undoubted  Christian  faith  briefly  teach  us. 

Quest.  XXIII.     What  are  those  Articles^. 

1.  I  believe  in  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth; 

2.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  only  begotten  Son  our  Lord; 

3.  Who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary; 

4.  Suffered   under   Pontius   Pilate,    was   crucified,  dead   and   buried;  He 

descended  into  hell; 

5.  The  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead ; 

6.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the 

Father  Almighty, 

7.  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

8.  I  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost; 

9.  I  believe  in  a  holy  Catholic  Church;  the  communion  of  saints; 

10.  The  forgiveness  of  sins; 

11.  The  resurrection  of  the  body; 

12.  And  the  life  everlasting.     Amen. 

TT  is  the  unspeakably  precious  privilege  of  the  Chris- 
tian preacher  to  declare  that  God  hath  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  the  wicked  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  hath 
himself  provided  by  Jesus  Christ,  his  only-begotten  Son, 
our  Lord  incarnate  as  the  seed  of  the  woman,  an  aton- 


15G  SAVING  FAITH.  ing  righteousness  infinitely  sufficient  to  save  all  who  go 
unto  him  for  pardon  and  life.  This  we  have  endeav- 
ored to  do,  briefly,  in  discoursing  on  the  lessons  of  the 
Fifth  and  Sixth  Lord's  Days,  hoping  for  permission 
from  a  good  Providence  to  open  the  doctrines  of  re- 
demption more  fully  in  our  comments  on  several  arti- 
cles of  the  creed.  To-day,  the  Catechism  teaches  us 
how  we  must  go  unto  God  that  we  may  be  received  of 
him  in  mercy ;  and  the  lesson  before  us  shows :  — 

First  :   The  necessity  of  Faith  in  Christ. 

(20th  Question  and  Answer.) 

Secondly  :   The  nature  of  true  Faith. 

(21st  Question  and  Answer.) 

Thirdly  :    The  Articles  of  true  Christian  Faith. 

(22d  and  23d  Questions  and  Answers.) 

First  :   The  7iecessity  of  Faith  in  Christ. 

The  Catechism  having  taught  us  that  all  men,  being 
represented  in  Adam,  came  with  him  under  condemna- 
tion ;  and  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  liis  perfect 
satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  represented,  as  the 
second  Adam,  all  who  are  saved,  an  inquiry  natu- 
rally arises :  Is  the  representation  of  the  Mediator  com- 
mensurate with  that  of  our  first  parent  ?  i.  e.  "  Are  all 
men,  as  they  perished  in  Adam,  saved  by  Christ  ? " 
The  answer  given  is,  "  No  ;  "  Christ's  representation  is 
on  another  principle,  and  he  saves  "  only  those  who 
are  incrafted  into  him  and  receive  all  his  benefits  bv  a 
true  faith." 

I.   All  men  are  not  saved  by  Christ. 

The  Scriptures,  while  they  conclude  all  under  sin, 
and  set  forth  the  infinite  merits  of  the  atonement  pro- 
vided for  sinners,  declare  that  there  are  those  to  whom 
the  benefits   of  the  atonement  are  not  applied. 

The  unregenerate  are  not  saved  : 


SAVING   FAITH.  157 

"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kincrdom  of  God  ;  "  said  our  Lord  to  Nicodemus. 

The  impenitent  are  not  saved  : 

"  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish ;  " 
said  he  to  the  Jews. 

The  unbelievino;  are  not  saved  : 

"  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned  ;  "  said  he 
to  his  apostles,  when  sending  them  forth  to  preach  the 
Gospel. 

The  wilfully  vicious  are  not  saved.  Throughout  the 
Scriptures,  liars,  adulterers,  drunkards,  thieves, .mur- 
derers, and  other  gross  criminals  are  denied  the  hope 
of  heaven. 

And,  that  there  will  be  found  such  unreclaimed 
transgressors  when  Christ  completes  his  mediatorial 
administration,  we  know  from  his  own  foreshowing  of 
the  final  judgment :  "  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
come  in  his  glory  ....  before  him  shall  be  gathered 
all  nations:  and  he  shall  separate  them  one  from  another, 
as  a  shepherd  divideth  his  sheep  from  the  goats ;  and 
he  shall  set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand  and  the  goats 
on  the  left.  Then  shall  the  King  say  unto  them  on 
his  right  hand  :  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation   of 

the  world Then  shall  he  say  also  unto  them 

on  the  left  hand  :  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels. 
. . .  And  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment, 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."     Matt.  xxv.  31-46. 

All  men,  therefore,  are  not  represented  in  Christ  the 
Saviour. 

II.  Those,  and  those  only,  are  saved,  "  who  are 
ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive  all  his  benefits  by  a 
true  faith." 


l.J8  SAVING   FAITH.  [Lkct.  VIII. 

1.  Tlie  representation  of  all  men  in  Adam  is  on  the 
j-rinciple  of  their  natui'al  descent  from  him,  as  the 
orioinal  man,  and  progenitor  of  the  race.  Between  us 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  is  no  such  natural  or 
necessary  connection.  By  his  humanity  he  is  our 
kinsman  or  brother,  but  not  our  parent,  or,  of  birth- 
ri;j;ht,  our  sponsor.  He  represents  liis  people  of  his 
free  choice,  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  redemp- 
tion ;  his  people  accept  him  as  their  representative,  of 
their  free  choice,  according  to  the  same  divine  will. 
The  relation  is,  therefore,  not  original,  but  appointed  ; 
not  necessary,  but  gracious  ;  not  natural,  but  spiritual ; 
ordained  to  deliver  those  whom  Christ  represents,  from 
their  condemnation  with  Adam ;  yet  in  no  sense  violat- 
ing the  justice  which  demanded  the  condemnation,  but 
on  the  contrary,  rendering  a  full  satisfaction  to  the  law 
of  God  for  those  who  are  delivered.  In  a  word,  Christ 
takes  the  place  of  Adam,  to  supply  the  righteousness 
which  Adam  failed  to  render,  yet  not  on  behalf  of  all 
whom  Adam  represented,  but  on  behalf  of  those  whom 
he  represents  as  Redeemer.  If  this  difference  in  the 
representation  be  not  admitted,  it  must  follow  that  as 
all  men  fell  in  Adam,  all  men  are  saved  in  Christ,  which 
the  Scriptures  show  is  not  the  case  ;  wherefore,  when 
the  Scripture  says,  that  as  in  Adam  all  died,  so  in 
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive  ;  and  "  as  by  the  offence 
of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  jnen  to  condemnation  ; 
even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the  free  gift  came 
upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life,"  we  must  under- 
stand tlie  Ai)ostle  as  speaking  of  "  all  "  represented  in 
either  ;  in  Adam,  the  head  of  his  race,  in  Christ  the 
Head  of  his  Church,  which  is  his  body  and  "  his  ful- 
ness." 


Lect.  VIII. J  SAVING   FAITH.  159 

The  same  rule  of  interpretation  applies  to  many 
Scriptiires,  which  the  superficial  or  heterodox  reader 
might  quote,  as  proving  that  most  inconsistent  doctrine 
of  universal  redemption.  It  should  also  be  remem- 
bered, that,  under  the  former  dispensation,  salvation 
seemed  confined  to  the  Jews,  whereas  now  it  is 
preached  to  all  people  ;  and  when  it  is  said  that  Christ 
is  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  it 
means  for  the  sins  of  all  (not  of  the  Jews  only  but  of 
all)  nations, —  or  of  all  those  in  every  nation  who 
believe.  Faith  must  always  be  supposed,  for  "  he  that 
believeth  not  (Jew  or  Gentile)  shall  be  damned." 

2.  Such,  then,  being  the  character  of  the  relation, 
there  must  be  some  method  by  which  those  who  are 
saved  are  brought  into  a  vital  uniou  with  their  repre- 
sentative, that  they  may  receive  the  advantage  of  his 
mediation  for  them.  This  link,  or  bond,  or  method  of 
the  sinner's  connection  with  Christ,  the  Catechism, 
according  to  the  testimony  of  all  Scripture,  declares  to 
he  faith.  It  cannot  be  any  merit,  or  anything  that  has 
merit,  of  our  own  ;  because  the  representation  of  Christ 
presupposes  that  we  are  utterly  guilty,  and  is  intended 
to  provide  for  us  righteousness  of  which  we  are  ourselves 
utterly  incapable  ;  and,  therefore,  it  must  be  some  purely 
gracious  process  by  which  we  are  made  Christ's,  and 
Christ  is  made  ours.  Life,  under  the  first  covenant, 
was  promised  on  a  condition :  "  Do  this  and  thou  shalt 
live."  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  assumed  the  condition 
in  the  room  of  his  church,  and  by  his  perfect  righteous- 
ness purchased,  or  merited  for  them,  life.  Our  enjoy- 
ment of  that  life  can,  therefore,  depend  upon  no  condi- 
tion, but  is  simply  bestowment  on  Christ's  part,  and 
acceptance  on  ours.     All  this  the  answer  of  the  Cate- 


160  SAVING   FAITH.  chism  teaches  :  "  Only  those  (are  saved)  who  are  in- 
grafted into  Christ,  and  receive  all  his  benefits  by  a  true 
faith." 

Here  is  an  act  of  God  :  They  are  grafted  into  Christ 
by  faith  ;  and  an  act  of  those  who  are  saved  :  "  They 
receive  all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith."  God  brings 
them  into  this  union  ;  they  receive  (embrace  or  lay  hold 
of,  is  a  better  translation)  all  the  benefits  flowing  from 
the  union.  The  act  of  God  is  first,  for  he  is  the  giver ; 
the  act  of  the  sinner  follows,  for  he  is  the  receiver. 

The  figure  of  ingrafting  is  taken  from  our  Lord's 
own  parable  of  The  Living  Vine  (John  xv.  1-8),  and 
the  Apostle  Paul's  of  The  Olive  Trees  (Rom.  xi.  17-24) ; 
but  it  is  familiar  to  our  own  observation,  and  delight- 
fully illustrative.  By  nature,  we  are  branches  of  a  con- 
demned and  pernicious  vine,  bearing  only  evil  fruit, 
and  soon  to  be  cast  into  the  fire.  Of  ourselves,  we 
cannot  separate  ourselves  from  the  accursed  stem,  much 
less  make  ourselves  part  of  the  living  vine,  Christ  Jesus. 
God,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  takes  us,  cuts  us  off  from  the 
ruined  vine,  and  grafts  us  into  the  stem  of  Christ ;  the 
vital  union  is  then  formed,  a  new  life  flows  into  the 
grafted  branch,  and  it  blossoms,  buds,  puts  forth  leaves, 
and  yields  good  fruit,  not  from  itself,  but  by  virtue  of  the 
life  it  derives  out  of  the  stem.  Christ  is  still  the  vine ; 
the  fruit  is  also  all  his,  but  he  makes  the  once  wild 
branch  a  part  of  himself,  and  so  makes  it  fruitful,  and 
himself  fruitful.  Or,  to  lay  aside  the  figure :  The  sin- 
ner is  joined  to  Christ  by  the  free  grace  of  God,  and 
derives  spiritual  life  from  Christ,  and  Christ  works  good 
works  through  him.  The  glory  is  Christ's,  the  bene- 
fits are  the  believer's. 

God,  we  have  said,  is  the  agent  in  the  grafting,  but 


Lect.  A^IL]  SAVING  FAITH.  161 

the  method  of  engraftment  which  he  uses  is  faith.  Do 
you  ask  how  this  may  be,  since  faith  is  the  act  of  tlie 
Christian  ?  We  answer :  Faith,  though  our  personal 
act,  is  not  of  our  own  strength,  but  is  tlie  effect  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  regenerating  grace,  and  this  grace  comes 
to  us  from  God,  through  Christ.  Thus,  the  Heavenly 
Father  provides  in  the  Mediator  the  proper  object  of 
faith,  and  fills  him  with  the  Spirit  of  all  grace  ;  he  then 
brino's  the  sinner  niwh  to  the  Saviour  whom  he  has 
pierced,  and,  as  he  applies  the  sinner  to  the  bleeding 
side,  grace  flows  out  to  the  soul,  and  the  sinner,  feeling 
within  him  the  vivifying  power,  believes  and  clings  to 
his  embracing;  Saviour.  Grace  from  the  Saviour's  side, 
and  grace  in  the  believer's  apprehending  soul,  unite  to 
bind  in  union  close  and  sweet  and  vital,  the  sinner 
saved,  to  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  From  that  moment 
he  becomes  one  Avith  Christ ;  all  the  benefits  which 
Christ,  as  his  representative,  has  obtained  for  him,  be- 
come his.  Clu'ist  is,  "  of  God  made  unto  him,  wisdom 
and  righteousness  and  sanctification  and  redemption." 

3.  Do  you  ask  again  :  Why  faith  is  made  the  neces- 
sary method  of  union  ?  We  answer  briefly  now,  as  we 
shall  more  at  large  hereafter.  It  is  necessary  that  we 
return  to  our  obedience  ;  and  the  great  command  of 
God  in  Christ  is  :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
It  is  necessary  that  the  sinner  acknowledge  Christ  as 
his  representative,  and  faith  is  such  acknowledgment. 
It  is  n^essary  that  the  sinner  should  apply  to  Christ 
for  his  acceptance,  and  faith  is  such  an  application.  It 
is  necessary  that  the  sinner  receive  the  benefits  of  sal- 
vation, and  faith  is  such  an  apprehending  or  laying  hold 
of  them.  It  is  necessary  that  there  be  a  channel  of 
communication  between  Christ,  the  fountain,  and  the 

VOL.    I.  11 


162  SAVING    FAITH.  sinner's  soul,  and  faith  is  tlie  golden  conduit.  As  sal- 
vation is  all  of  grace,  so  it  is  all  thi'ough  Christ ;  and  as 
it  is  all  through  Christ,  so  it  is  all  by  faith. 

How  impoitant,  therefore,  that  our  faith  be  true  ! 
Let  us,  then,  learn  : 

Secondly  :    The  Nature  of  True  Faith. 

We  derive  whatever  knowledge  we  have  of  things 
beyond  our  immediate  consciousness,  either  through 
our  own  perceptions  or  from  the  testimony  of  others ; 
but,  as  both  our  range  and  j^ower  of  personal  observa- 
tion are  very  limited,  by  far  the  greatest  part  of  our 
knowledge  is  communicated  to  us  by  others.  When 
such  testinjony  is  brought  before  us,  we  exercise  our 
judgment  respecting  the  witnesses,  determining  whether 
they  can  be  relied  on  for  veracity  and  intelligence ; 
since  a  man  may  wish  to  state  the  truth,  yet  lack  suffi- 
cient good  sense  or  opportunity,  or  both,  to  know  what 
is  the  truth  ;  or  he  may  have  the  sense  and  the  infor- 
mation, yet  lack  honesty  of  purpose  ;  but,  when  we 
consider  him  entitled  to  credit,  we  believe  him,  and 
add  the  facts  which  he  states  to  our  knowledge.  Thus, 
I  am  certain  that  there  is  such  a  country  as  Japan, 
though  I  have  iiever  been  there  ;  and  that  Alexander 
was  once  king  of  Macedon,  though  he  died  two  thou- 
sand years  ago.  This  belief,  or  holding  of  testimony 
to  be  true,  is  the  same  as  faith ;  faith  being  derived 
from  a  Latin  word  corresponding  to  our  Saxon  belief . 

When,  however,  the  testimony  respects  things  in 
which  we  are  personally  concerned,  and  our  belief  of 
it  is  full,  we  rely  upon  it  and  act  accordingly.  Thus, 
a  merchant  has  advices  from  a  correspondent  at  a  for- 
eign port,  that,  by  sending  there  a  cargo  of  certain 
commodities,  he  will  not  fail  to  realize  a  larger  profit 


Xect.  Vni.]  SAVING    FAITH.  .  168 

than  he  can  by  any  other  transaction  ;  and,  if  he  relies 
upon  the  testimony,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  make  the 
venture.  Without  such  reliance  upon  others,  how  nar- 
row would  be  the  sphere  of  commerce  !  Such  a  prac- 
tical reliance  is  the  same  as  confidence  in  testimony. 

Now,  the  Scriptures  contain  the  declarations  of  God 
respecting  all  things  which  concern  our  everlasting 
welfare  ;  and  belief  of  God  as  the  infallible  witness, 
and  of  the  truths  revealed  in  his  testimony,  is  the  faith 
by  which  we  are  grafted  into  Christ  and  receive  all  his 
benefits  as  our  Saviour.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  through  the  depraving  effect  of  sin 
upon  our  minds  and  hearts,  we  are  unable,  without 
divine  grace,  either  rightly  to  understand,  or  duly  to 
appreciate,  spiritual  (that  is,  religious)  truths.  Hence 
the  Catechism,  in  tlie  21st  Question  and  Answer,  teaches 
us :  I.  The  several  essential  parts  of  genuine  faith ; 
and,  II.  The  divine  source  from  which  such  faith  is 
derived. 

I.   The  several  essential  parts  of  genuine  faith. 

These  may  be  brought  under  three  heads :  Faith  in 
the  witness ;  faith  in  the  testimony;  faith  z'n  the  appli- 
cation of  the  testimony  to  ourselves. 

a.  Faith  in  the  witness.  The  witness  is  none 
other  than  God  himself.  The  first  act  of  religion  is  to 
believe  that  God  exists ;  and  to  believe  in  the  existence 
of  the  true  God,  is  to  believe  that  he  is  the  eternal, 
self-subsisting  Author  and  Sovereign  of  all  things, 
infinite  as  to  his  being,  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice, 
goodness,  and  truth.*  From  him  alone  can  come  a 
certain  knowledge  of  whatever  is  requisite  for  us  to 
know,  because  only  he  who  made  and  administers  all 

*  See  Westminster  Assembly's  Catechism. 


164  SAVING    FAITH.  things  can  know  them  aright ;  but  especially  is  it  nec- 
essary that  ho  should  make  known  -to  us  the  things  of 
religion,  because  he  is  the  only  and  supreme  Object  of 
all  religion,  and,  therefore,  has  alone  the  right  as  well 
as  the  knowledge  to  declare  what  is  essential  to  true 
religious  belief,  affection,  and  practice.  It  is  utterly 
absurd  to  suppose  for  a  moment,  or  on  any  plea,  that 
any  man,  or  any  creature,  or  any  combination  of  crea- 
tures, can  be  authority  to  us  on  any  matter  between  us 
and  God  ;  for  were  we  to  receive  their  testimony,  it 
would  be  faith  in  creatures,  not  faith  in  God ;  and  any 
practice  founded  on  such  testimony  would  be  obedience 
to  creatures,  not  obedience  to  God ;  and,  consequently, 
such  faith  and  obedience  would  not  be  any  part  of  true 
religion.  Whatever  faith  it  be  that  stops  short  of  God, 
is  false,  deceiving,  and  destructive.  Even  our  blessed 
Lord,  when  incarnate  as  the  servant-mediator,  claimed 
to  be  trusted  only  on  the  testimony  of  God  the  Father : 
"  If  I  bear  witness  of  myself,  my  testimony  is  not  true. 

There  is  another  that  beareth   witness  of  me 

But  I   receive  not  testimony   from  man And 

the  Father  himself,  which  hath  sent  me,  hath  borne 
witness  of  me."  And,  again,  of  God's  people,  "  It  is 
written  in  the  prophets  :  They  shall  be  all  taught  of 
God." 

While,  therefore,  we  utterly  reject  all  dictates  of 
human  reason  or  of  any  other  creature,  we  should  bow 
imhesitatingly  before  God  as  the  infinitely  true  and  suf- 
ficient Teacher  of  all  religion,  receiving  whatever  he 
declares  to  be  truth,  not  because  it  coincides  with  our 
reason,  or  because  it  has  the  stamp  of  ecclesiastical 
authority,  but  simply  because  it  is  tlie  declaration  of 
God.      Lay   this  at   the   foundation  of  your  religious 


SAVING  FAITH.  165 

princi})le,  and  you  are  safe  from  all  the  subtleties  of 
men  or  devils.  "  He  that  believeth  in  him  shall  not  be 
confounded."  Attempt  religion  without  this,  and  "  the 
multitude  of  thoughts  within  "  you  will  be  dark  and 
confused  as  chaos,  before  God  said  "  Let  there  be 
light !  " 

h.  Faith  in  the  testimony  of  God.  This  follows  as  a 
logical  and  moral  necessity  from  faith  in  God  as  the 
witness.  We  are  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  God  has 
made  a  revelation  to  us,  and,  if  so,  where  that  revela- 
tion is  to  be  found  ;  after  which  there  is  no  alternative 
but  to  believe  w^hatever  he  has  been  pleased  to  reveal, 
all  that  he  has  revealed,  and  nothing  beyond  that  he 
has  revealed.  It  Avere  preposterous  for  us,  who  have 
confessed  that  we  can  know  nothing  of  religion  except 
as  God  makes  it  known  to  us,  to  sit  in  judgment  upon 
the  matter  of  his  teaching,  receiving  this  and  rejecting 
that  portion  of  it,  according  as  it  seems  consistent  or  not 
with  our  reason.  In  acknowledging  God  to  be  the  only- 
true  and  sufficient  witness,  we  have  bound  ourselves 
to  believe  his  testimony  implicitly  and  unhesitatingly. 
Upon  the  same  princi[)le,  we  may  not  extend  our  re- 
ligious opinions  beyond  what  he  has  taught,  for,  besides 
our  incompetence  to  make  farther  discoveries,  we  can- 
not allow  ourselves,  without  gross  irreverence,  to  sup- 
pose that  God  would  teach  us  imperfectly,  or  keep  back 
anything  which  is  profitable  or  comforting. 

God  has  given  us  a  revelation,  and  tliat  revelation  is 
found  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Tes- 
taments. We  may  and  should  exercise  our  reason  in 
judging  of  the  evidences  on  which  the  claim  of  those 
Scriptures  to  be  the  Word  of  God  is  founded  ;  but,  the 
moment  that  we  admit  their  divine  inspiration,  right 


166  SAVING  FAITH.  [Lect.VIII. 

reason  becomes  faith  in  all  tliey  declare,  and  in  their 
full  declarations  as  utterly  sufficient  for  our  religious 
science  and  practice.  Of  the  proofs  that  the  Scriptures 
are  the  Word  of  God,  this  is  not  the  place,  nor  have 
we  the  time,  now  to  si)eak.  It  is  enough,  at  present, 
to  say,  that  we  have  historical  testimony  which  puts 
beyond  doubt  the  fact  of  their  having  been  written  by 
holy  men  of  God,  "  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  "  that  such  is  the  incomparable  majesty  of  their 
style,  the  supernatural  elevation  of  their  truths,  the 
admirable  harmony  of  their  parts,  though  publislied  at 
intervals  by  different  (secondary)  authors,  during  a 
period  of  more  than  fifteen  hundred  years ;  the  purity 
and  uncompromising  sternness  of  their  moral  sentiments 
and  precepts ;  the  vast  and  salutary  control  which 
they  have  had  upon  the  lives  of  those  who  have  be- 
lieved them,  and  the  nations  through  which  they  have 
been  disseminated,  as  to  render  their  ascription  to  any 
source  less  than  divine  a  contradiction  and  absurdity. 
The  Catechism  does  not  argue,  or  even  admit  the 
question ;  it  is  (as  was  shown  in  our  remarks  prefa- 
tory to  the  lesson  of  the  First  Lord's  Day)  addressed  to 
Christians ;  and  every  sincere  Christian  has  in  his  own 
conscious  experience  a  proof,  divinely  given  him  by  the 
testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  his  soul,  stronger  than 
all  other  proofs  beside,  and  one  which  no  arguments  of 
infidelity  can  shake.  "  He  that  believeth  hath  the  wit- 
ness in  himself,"  for  none  but  he  who  made  the  heart 
could  have  promulged  a  scheme  so  adapted  to  its  wants, 
its  weaknesses,  its  temptations,  and  its  immortality. 
The  true  Christian,  therefore,  has,  in  the  language  of 
the  Catechism,  "  a  certain  knowledge,  Avhereby  he 
holds  for  truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  his 


Lect.VIII.]  saving   FAITH.  167 

Word."  Not  that  a  thorough  knowledge  of  all  that  is 
taught  in  the  Word  is  absolutely  necessary  to  saving 
faith,  for  the  Christian  is  born  unto  eternal  life  as  a 
little  child,  and  many  are  unfitted,  for  various  reasons, 
to  pursue  the  study  necessary  for  a  thorough  science  of 
divine  religion ;  and  such  are  the  infinities  of  truth 
opened  by  the  sacred  writings,  that  no  finite  mind  can 
fathom  them  in  time,  or  even  in  eternity ;  but  every 
true  Christian,  however  simple  or  learned,  believes  the 
main  fundamental  principles  on  which  the  entire  system 
is  built  up,  and  is  ready,  from  his  faith  in  God  the  wit- 
ness, to  receive  with  humble  and  glad  faith  all  that  he 
progressively  ascertains  "  to  be  written  in  the  Scriptures 
for  our  learnino;."  He  "  grows  in  grace  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ." 

c.  Faith  in  the  application  of  the  testimony  to  ourselves. 
"True  faith,"  says  the  Catechism,  "is  not  only  a  cer- 
tain knowledge,  whereby  I  hold  for  truth  all  that  God 
has  revealed  to  us  in  his  Word,  but  also  an  assured 
confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  by  the  Gospel 
in  my  heart,  that  not  only  to  others  but  to  me  also,  re- 
mission of  sin,  everlasting  righteousness,  and  salvation 
are  freely  given  of  God,  merely  of  grace  only,  for  the 
sake  of  Christ's  merits." 

The  Catechism  does  not  assert,  as  I  understand  it, 
that  such  "  a  certain  knowledge  whereby  we  hold  for 
truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,"  can 
exist  in  our  souls  without  an  apprehension  of  that  truth 
for  ourselves,  or  that  a  sinner  can  believe  in  the  grant 
of  Christ's  saving;  benefits  to  other  sinners,  while  he 
does  not  believe  in  their  grant  to  him  ;  but,  that  a  per- 
sonal reliance  on  the  Gospel  with  its  promises  is  essen- 
tially necessary  to  a  true  faith,  and  that  without  such 


1G8  SAVING   FAITH.  [Lkct.  YIII. 

an  application  of  tlie  Gospel  to  his  particular  case, 
whatever  semblance  of  belief  in  the  Scrii)tures  a  man 
may  have,  it  is  but  a  semblance  and  not  a  genuine 
faith.  This  will  appear  at  once,  if  we  consider  the 
vast  importance  of  the  truths  contained  in  the  Scrip- 
tures to  each  sinner  who  knows  the  Gospel.  We  are 
the  sinners  of  whom  the  Scriptures  speak;  vipon  us  rests 
the  wrathful  curse  of  divine  condemnation  for  time  and 
eternity  ;  to  us  the  only  way  of  escape  from  death,  the 
only  way  of  life,  is  declared ;  and  salvation,  though 
provided  for  many,  is  promised  only  to  those  who  be- 
lieve, and  to  them  certainly.  "  God  so  loved  the  world 
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 
believeth  in  him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting 
life."  Mark  the  change  from  the  noun  of  multitude  to 
the  singular  person,  "  whosoever."  Again  :  "  If  any 
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink."  The 
church  is  not  saved  in  a  mass,  but  individually.  Faith 
and  repentance  are  personal  acts  ;  pardon  and  life  are 
given  to  persons  ;  and,  therefore,  except  a  man  believe, 
and  repent,  and  accept  t^^e  grace  for  himself,  he  does 
not  truly  believe  in  the  Gospel  at  all.  For  a  true  be- 
lief in  such  momentoixs  declai'ations  must  be  something 
more  than  a  mere  acknowledgment  that  they  are  truths. 
Except  we  act  upon  them,  except  we  are  convinced  of 
our  own  guilt,  except  we  put  our  trust  in  Christ  as  our 
Saviour,  except  we  forsake  our  sins  and  endeavor  after 
new  obedience,  is  it  not  clear  that  we  have  no  genuine 
belief  of  the  divine  testimony  ?  For  who  can  believe 
in  eternit}  and  not  make  preparation  for  it  ?  Who 
can  believe  in  eternal  punishment,  and  not  strive  to 
escape  it?  Who  can  believe  in  eternal  blessedness,  and 
not  strive  to  attain  it  ?     Who  can  believe  that  Christ 


SAVING  FAITH.  169 

is  able,  willing,  and  ready  to  save  every  one  that  comes 
to  him,  and  not  go  to  him  to  be  saved  ?  I  may  be  told 
that  Julius  Ca3sar  was  murdered  in  the  Roman  capitol 
nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  ago,  but  whether  I  be- 
lieve it  or  not,  it  will  make  no  difference  in  my  conduct, 
for  his  death  has  no  perceptible  bearing  on  my  welfare ; 
but,  when  God  declares  to  me  that  a  few  years  after 
CtEsar's  death,  his  only  begotten  Son  became  incar- 
nate, passed  through  a  life  of  trial  and  righteousness, 
and  died  upon  a  cross,  that  by  the  merits  of  liis  substi- 
tuted merits  all  who  put  their  trust  in  him  shall  be 
saved,  but  all  who  reject  him  shall  be  damned  ;  if  I 
truly  beheve  the  testimony,  I  will  trust  and  follow  him 
as  my  Saviour  ;  but  if  I  profess  to  believe  that  he  is  the 
Saviour  of  other  sinners,  yet  do  not  rely  upon  him  as 
mine,  my  belief  that  he  is  willing  to  save  all  who  be- 
lieve must  come  fatally  short  of  true  faith  in  the  divine 
Word.  This  personal  application  and  apprehension  of 
Christ's  Gospel  is  the  faith  which  unites  us  to  Christ, 
grafts  us  in  him,  and  makes  the  channel  of  his  saving 
benefits  to  our  souls.  Thus  the  Apostle  exultingly 
says :  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  nevertheless  I  live  ; 
yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  ;  and  the  life  which 
I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of 
God  who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Not 
that  Christ  died  for  him  only,  or  in  any  exclusive  sense, 
but  that,  because  he  believed  in  Christ,  he  knew  the 
promise  of  salvation  by  Christ  was  applicable  to  him. 
A  thousand  other  scriptural  proofs  might  be  added,  for 
it  is  a  doctrine  running  through  the  whole  Gospel.  So 
sino-s  the  sweetest  singer  of  modern  Israel :  — 
•'  O  love  divine,  how  sweet  thou  art ! 
When  shall  I  find  this  longing  heart 


170  SAVING  FAITH.  All  taken  up  by  thee  ? 
For  tliue  I  thirst,  I  die  to  prove 
The  sweetness  of  redeeming  love, 

The  love  of  Christ  for  n»e." 

II.  The  divine  source  from  which  this  faith  is 
derived. 

"  True  faith,"  says  the  Catechism,  is  "  an  assured 
confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  by  the  Gospel 
in  my  heart." 

1.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  efficient  agent,  and  works 
faith  in  the  heart.  P'aith,  as  has  been  said,  is  a  per- 
sonal act,  an  exercise  of  a  man's  own  judgment  and 
will ;  but  sin  has  so  disordered  and  impaired  our  moral 
faculties  as  to  render  us  incapable  of  understanding  or 
relishing  the  truths  of  the  divine  Word  ;  and  as  our 
hearts  are  by  nature  "  enmity  against  God,"  so  they 
are  averse  to  all  that  he  reveals.  Ordinary  observa- 
tion shows  that  a  criminal  temper  and  conduct  disin- 
chnes  a  man  to  hear  whatever  rebukes,  condemns,  or 
threatens  him  ;  renders  him  insensible  to  argument  or 
motive ;  distorts  his  perceptions  ;  preoccupies  his  con- 
victions ;  stupefies  his  conscience  ;  and  even  enrages 
him  against  the  reasoning  and  the  reasoner  on  the 
opposite  side  ;  so  that  we,  without  exaggeration,  pro- 
nounce him  to  be  incompetent  to  think  truly,  or  decide 
justly  ;  but  much  more  is  this  the  case  with  our  fi\llen 
nature  in  respect  to  the  principles  of  religion,  which 
ai'e  opposed  to  our  innate  dispositions,  and  the  habits 
of  an  ungodly  life.  Man  lost  by  the  fall  that  spiritual 
likeness  to  God,  which  answered  with  echoing  assent 
every  declaration  of  the  divine  will.  Hence  there 
must  be,  in  order  to  faith,  a  regeneration  or  re-creation 
of  our  natures ;  an   "  enlightening  of  the  eyes  of  our 


SAVING  FAITH.  171 

understanding"  that  we  "may  know,"  a  transforma- 
tion by  the  renewing  of  our  minds  "  that  we  may 
prove  (learn  by  investigation)  what  is  that  (the)  good, 
and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God."  This  repa- 
ration of  our  moral  faculties  making  us  capable  of 
faith,  is  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and,  so, 
faith  is  said  to  be  "  wrought  in  us,"  though  Ave  exert 
the  faith,  or  believe.  Thus  :  the  "  Lord  opened  the 
heart  "  of  Lydia,  that  she  "  attended  unto  the  things 
which  were  spoken  of  Paul :  "  and  again :  "  No  man 
can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost;" 
which  corresponds  to  our  Lord's  promise,  that  when 
the  Spirit  of  truth  (before  called  by  him  the  Holy 
Ghost)  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth  ; "  and 
the  fact,  that  after  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
at  the  Pentecost,  the  triumphs  of  the  Gospel  over  the 
carnal  prejudices  of  men  began.  The  Apostle  Paul 
sums  up  the  doctrine :  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through 
faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  " 
which  means  that  the  whole  method  of  salvation  through 
faith  is  the  gracious  gift  of  God,  by  the  operations  of 
the  official  agent  in  the  communication  of  grace,  —  the 
Holy  Ghost.  In  fact,  we  can  neither  do  or  be  what  is 
acceptable  to  God,  but  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

2.  The  instrument  which  the  Holy  Ghost  employs  to 
work  faith  in -our  hearts  is  "the  Gospel,"  by  which 
the  Catechism  means  the  Avhole  Word  of  God.  The 
truth  of  the  Gospel  is  the  testimony  which  we  are  to 
believe  ;  and,  therefore,  faith  cannot  be  wrought  until 
the  word  is  brought  nigh  to  the  soul  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  God  might,  certainly,  fill  the  soul  of  a  man  at 
once,  and   without   any  instrumentality,  with   all    the 


172  SAVING   rAITH.  truths  of  religion,  as  lie  did  the  minds  of  prophets  and 
apostles  ;  but  that  would  be  inspiration  by  an  act  of 
divine  sovereignty,  not  faith,  which  is  an  act  of  our 
our  own.  It  is  true,  also,  that  there  is  a  work  of  the 
Holy  S})irit  in  the  soul  of  man,  ])revious  to  his  recep- 
tion of  the  truth  ;  but  that  is  rather  a  preparation  of 
the  soul,  a  giving  to  it  of  a  disposition  to  believe,  than 
faith  itself.  But  we  can  hardly  doubt  that  there  is  a 
divine  fitness  in  the  Gospel  to  work  this  faith,  when  it 
is  wielded  by  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Giiost.  The  truths 
of  the  Gospel  are  precisely  those  which  would,  were 
there  no  fatal  defect  in  the  reasoning  of  men,  convince 
them,  and  constrain  their  belief.  Every  Christian 
knows,  also,  by  experience,  that  the  growth  of  his  soul 
in  spiritual  life  is  nourished  by  the  Holy  Ghost  through 
the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  they  are  admi- 
rably calculated  for  that  end  ;  so  that  we  may  without 
rashness  believe  the  fitness  of  the  same  Gospel  for  the 
conviction  and  conversion  of  the  impenitent.  The 
manner,  the  arguments,  the  illustrations,  the  very  lan- 
guage of  the  Scripture,  have  been  arranged  and  adapted 
by  the  only  all-wise  Metaphysician  for  the  purpose  of 
working  faith  in  the  heart.  Hence  the  main  doctrine 
of  Scripture,  "  Jesus  Christ  and  him  Crucified,"  is 
called,  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  -wisdom  of  God,  and  the 
power  of  God  "  unto  salvation  ;  and,  again,  "the  Word 
of  God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any 
two-edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder 
of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  the  marrow, 
and  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart ;  "  that  is,  it  dissects  and  probes  the  heart  to  the 
quick.  The  Apostle  Peter,  also,  makes  the  Word  to  be 
the  living  seed  by  whici/  God  begets  his   spiritual  chil- 


SAVING  FAITH.  173 

dren  to  eternal  life :  "  Being  born  again  not  of  corrupt- 
ible seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God, 
which  liveth  and  abideth  forever."     This  ascription  of 
divine  adaptedness  to  the  Word  as  the  chosen  instru- 
ment,  is   not   opposed    to   the   efficiency   of  the   Holy 
Ghost  as  the  agent.     An  instrument  can  produce  effect 
only  when  it  is  employed  by  an  intelligent  agent ;  and 
oftentimes  an  instrument  is  of  such  a  character  that  a 
mighty  and  most  skilful  agent  is  required  to  wield  it, 
wldch  is  preeminently  the  case  with  the  Word  of  God. 
Because  it  is  the  Word  of  God,  none  but  God  can  em- 
ploy it  effectually.     It  is  a  sword  of  exquisite  keenness, 
but  it  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit ;  impotent  of  itself,  yet 
powerful  in  his  omnipotent  hand. 

The  source  of  our  faith  is,  therefore,  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ ;  and  the 
method  of  his  operation  is  by  the  Gospel,  which  is  the 
doctrine  of  Christ.     Hence  we  learn   the  wisdom   of 
looking  to  Christ  for  the  Spirit  of  faith,  its  Author  and 
Finisher.     "  Lord,  increase  our  faith  !  "  was  the  prayer 
of  the  disciples  ;  let  it   be  continually  ours  ;   until  we 
shall  no  more  have  need  even  of  God's  testimony,  but 
shall  "  see  him  as  he  is,"  "  face  to  face  !  "     And,  also, 
we  learn  to  recognize  as  true  faith,  only  that  which  is 
wrought  in  our  hearts  by  the  Gospel.     All  dreams,  or 
visions,   or  supernatural  intimations   of  any  kind  ;   all 
impressions,  sentiments,  or  impulses  of  our  own  ;  all 
dictates  of  public  opinion,  ecclesiastical  decrees,  or  tra- 
ditions of  men  are  unworthy  of  trust.     These  are  not 
instruments  by  which  the  Spirit  works.     The  sword  of 
the  Spirit  is  the  Word  of  God  alone.     We  believe  God 
and  his  testimony.     We  need  no  more  ;  we  will  take 
no  less. 


174  SAVING  FAITH.  [Lkct.  VIII. 

Thirdly  :   The  articles  of  a  true  Christian  faith. 

We  learn  from  the  22d  and  2od  Questions  and  An- 
swers, tliat  these  are  stated  in  the  admirable  summary 
commonly  called  The  Apostles'  Creed  ;  the  study 
of  which  is,  by  divine  permission,  to  occupy  us  for  the 
next  fifteen  Lord's  Days.  We  shall,  therefore,  reserve 
the  opening  of  it  until  our  next  lesson,  where  it  more 
properly  belongs. 

Practical  Inferences.  —  First :  The  importance 
of  ascertaining  our  union  with  Christ. 

Secondly :   The  necessity  of  a  personal  faith  in  Christ. 

TJdrdly :  The  vital  dependence  of  our  souls  for  faith 
on  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Fourthly  :  The  duty  and  privilege  of  studying  the 
Word  with  prayer. 


w  ■