LECTURE  IX. 


THE  BEING  AND  UNITY  OF  GOD. 


EIGHTH   LORD'S   DAY. 
THE   BEING   AND   UNITY   OF   GOD. 

Quest.  XXIV.     noro  are  these  articles  divided  f 

Ans.     Into  three  parts:  The  first  is  of  God  the  Father,  and  our  creation; 

the  second  is  of  God  the  Son,  and  our  redemption  ;  the  third  is  of  God 

the  Hoi}'  Ghost,  and  our  sanctification. 
Quest.  XXV.      Since  there  is  only  one  divine  essence,  ivhy  speakest  thou 

of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  ? 
Ans.      Because  God  hath  so  revealed  himself  in  his  Word,  that  these  three 

distinct  persons  are  the  one  only  true  and  eternal  God. 

npHE  lesson  of  the  last  Lord's  Day  brought  before  us 
-*-  that  compend  of  religious  truth,  commonly  known 
as  "  The  Apostles'  Creed  ;  "  which,  for  at  least  thirteen 
centuries,  has  been  acknowledged,  formally  or  infor- 
mally, by  all  bodies  of  men,  not  heretical,  calling  them- 
selves Christians,  as  "  a  good  confession."  The  lesson 
of  to-day  begins  the  commentary  of  our  Church,  in 
its  Catechism,  on  its  several  articles  ;  but,  before  enter- 
ing upon  the  exposition,  it  is  proper  that  some  brief 
notice  should  be  taken  of  the  Creed  itself,  as  a  symbol 
or  declaration  of  belief. 

Here,  and  in  the  "  Form  for  the  administration  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,"  it  is  denominated  "  our  Catholic, 
undoubted  Christian  Faith,"  or  summary  confession  of 
faith.  Christian,  because  it  distinguishes  our  only  true 
relio-ion  from  everv  false  religion,  the  doctrine  of  salva- 
tion  by  Christ  being  its  grand,  peculiar  characteristic  ; 
undoubted,  because  as  a  whole,  and  in  its  several  par- 
ticulars, it  is  derived  from  the  sure  and  complete  testi- 
mony of  God's  most  holy  word  ;  Catholic,  because  it  is 

VOL.  I.  "^12 


178  THE  BEING  AND  UNITY   OF  GOD.        the  faith  of  all  true  Christians  of  all  ages,  and  through- 
out the  world. 

It  takes  its  name  of  Creed  or  Belief  from  the  Latin 
verb  Credo,  at  the  beginning,  the  translation  of  which 
is  "  I  believe  ;  "  and  we  do  not  refuse  to  call  it  "  The 
Apostles'  Creed,"  because  it  sets  foi'th  the  doctrine 
which  is  authoritatively  recorded  for  the  faith  of  the 
Church  in  the  books  of  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

The  Church  of  Rome,  however,  misinterpreting 
and  misquoting  the  language  of  some  eminent  and 
ancient  doctors  or  fathers,  and  adding  gross  inventions 
of  its  own,  has  claimed  for  the  Creed  that  its  very 
form  was  actually  the  joint  work  of  the  apostles  them- 
selves ;  and  that,  before  separating  on  their  different 
missions,  they  determined  to  frame  a  common  symbol 
by  which  the  disciples  of  each  might  be  recognized  by 
the  disciples  of  the  others,  and  the  unity  of  faith  be 
preserved,  each  apostle  contributing  an  article,  thus 
making  up  the  twelve  as  we  find  them  ;  or,  if  Paul 
and  Barnabas  were  among  the  compositors,  fourteen, 
as  the  division  is  sometimes  made.  This  fable  has 
been  incautiously  received  and  reasserted  by  some 
Protestants,  but  ought  to  be  utterly  repudiated  as 
unfounded  and  mischievous.  For  it  is  incredible  that 
so  important  a  transaction  as  the  provision  of  a  Creed 
for  the  whole  Church,  combining  the  inspiration  of 
the  apostolical  college,  should  receive  no  notice  from 
the  historian  Luke,  or  any  other  sacred  writer  ;  yet  no 
mention  of  it  is  made  anywhere  in  the  New  Testament, 
nor  does  the  document  itself  anywhere  appear,  there 
being  not  the  slightest  allusion  to  it.  All  along  down 
to  Augustine,  himself  included,  the  early  doctors  set 


THE   BEING  AND   UNITY    OF   GOD.  179 

forth  nothing  else  than  the  canonical  books  of  Scrip- 
ture as  the  rule  of  faith ;  nor  can  we  find  the  Apostles' 
Creed,  as  we  have  it,  earlier,  at  the  earliest,  than  toward 
the  end  of  the  fourth  century.  Parts  of  it,  indeed,  did 
appear,  and  it  was  gradually  increasing  to  its  complete 
form ;  but  its  full  consistency  cannot  be  discovered 
until  about  the  time  just  stated.  Therefore  do  we 
believe  the  doctrines  of  the  Creed,  not  because  they  are 
contained  in  the  Creed,  which,  as  to  its  form,  is  an  un- 
inspired and  human  document,  but  because  they  are 
the  doctrines  of  the  Word  of  God.  At  the  same  time 
that  we  deny  divine  inspiration  to  the  Creed,  we  rejoice 
in  receiving  it  as  the  most  condensed,  comprehensive, 
and  scriptural  digest,  or  abridgment,  of  Christian 
truth  framed  by  human  hands  ;  and  fully  adopt  the 
encomium  pronounced  on  it  by  St.  Augustine  :  "  It  is 
a  perfect  compend  of  our  faith,  simple,  brief,  full ;  its 
simplicity  adapted  to  ordinary  minds ;  its  brevity  to 
our  memories  ;  its  fulness  to  the  entire  doctrine."  May 
God  make  our  belief  of  it  clear,  strong,  and  entire  ! 

Let  us  now  consider  the  lesson  proper  to  this  Lord's 
Day,  which  consists  of:  — 

First  :  A  Division  of  the  Creed  into  three  parts. 

Twenty-fourth  Question  and  Answer. 

Secondly:  The  fundamental  doctrine  of  One  God  in 
Three  Persons^  which  is  the  substance  of  the  whole. 

Twenty-fifth  Question  and  Answer. 

First.     A  Division  of  the  Creed  into  three  parts  :  — 

The  First,  of  God  the  Father,  and  our  Creation  ; 

The  Second,  of  God  the  Son,  and  our  Redemption  ; 

The  Third,  of  God  the  Holy  Grhost,  and  our  Sancti- 
fication. 

The  mission  of  the  Church  of  God   to  preach  th 


180  THE  BEING   AND   UNITY   OF   GOD.        [Lkct.  IX 

Gospel  throughout  the  world  required  that  it  should 
be  presented  before  tlie  world  in  an  outward,  visible 
organization,  for  which  was  necessary  some  pviblic  cere- 
mony of  separation,  and  a  distinct  avowal  of  faith  to 
distiniruish  its  members  from  unbelieving  men.  It, 
therefore,  might  have  been  expected  that  the  Head  of 
the  Church  would  himself  prescribe  both  the  ceremony 
and  the  form  of  the  confession,  which  he  did  when, 
giving  the  apostles  his  parting  injunction,  he  said  :  "  Go 
ye,  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  Baptism,  or  the  application  of  water  to 
the  person  of  the  candidate,  was  the  ceremony  by 
which  the  Church  acknowledged  him  as  a  believer,  and 
admitted  him  to  her  fellowship.  The  doctrine  which 
he  professed,  and  which  was  set  forth  as  the  common 
belief  of  the  Avliole  Church,  is  stated  in  the  formula 
accompanying  the  administration  of  the  ordinance.  It 
matters  little  whether  the  person  to  be  baptized  himself 
uttered  the  words:  "  I  believe  in  the  Father,  and  in 
the  Son,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  or  the  administra- 
tor, when  pronouncing  the  formula,  thereby  openly  sig- 
nified that  the  confession  had  been  given  in  to  him 
more  privately  ;  though  it  seems  from  sevei'al  Scrip- 
tures probable  that  "  confession  "  was  made  "  with  the 
mouth,"  publicly,  at  the  time.  The  fact  of  his  submit- 
ting to  baptism  administered  to  him  with  the  formula, 
was  a  confession  of  his  faith  symbolized  by  those  words. 
This,  then,  was  the  first  form  of  the  Christian  Creed, 
and  its  three  parts,  the  triple,  yet  united,  foundation  of 
all  Christian  belief.  The  instruction  which  he  was  to 
receive  was  not  to  be  confined  within  the  few  words 
of   the    formula ;    our  Lord  enjoined   that  all   nations 


Lkct.  IX.]         THE  BEING  AND  UNITY  OF  GOD.  181 

should  be  taught  to  "  observe  all  things  whatsoever  he 
had  commanded "  the  apostolical  teachers  ;  but  the 
formula  gives  the  three  heads  under  which  the  more 
particular  developments  of  the  inspired  scriptural  doc- 
trine should  be  arranged.  Hence,  the  early  churches, 
finding  it  necessary  to  o;uard  against  heretical  miscon- 
ceptions  and  unauthorized  novelties,  rendered  their 
creeds  more  specific  and  nice,  by  parenthetical  inser- 
tions, but  preserved  the  order  of  the  original  symbol  ; 
and  gradually  the  creed  grew  into  the  shape  which  it 
now  has,  and  was  adopted  really,  if  not  by  express 
declaration,  as  the  creed  of  the  Church  universal.  Our 
Catechism,  therefore,  follows  the  organic  division. 

The  supplementary  titles  of  the  three  several  parts, 
viz:  Of  our  Creation,  Of  our  Redemption,  Of  our 
Sanctification,  are  added,  partly  because  that  is  the 
order  of  the  Divine  works  concerning  us,  and  espe- 
cially because  the  Scriptures  represent  Creation  as  the 
official  work  of  the  Father,  the  First  Person  of  the 
Godhead ;  Redemption  as  the  official  work  of  the  Son, 
the  Second  Person  ;  Sanctification  as  the  official  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Third  Person  ;  but  it  must  not 
be  inferred  that  these  divine  adorable  Persons  operated 
each  alone  when  performing  their  official  works,  since 
Creation  is  ascribed  also  to  the  Son  as  the  eternal 
Word,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  efficient  Agent ; 
Redemption  also  to  the  Father,  v/ho  sent  the  Son,  and 
to  the  Holy  Ghost  who  prepared  and  sealed  the  Im- 
manuel  for  his  raediatorship  ;  and  Sanctification  also  to 
the  Father,  who  grants  grace  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
to  the  Son,  at  whose  intercession  the  grace  is  given  ; 
all  which  will  be  fully  shown  hereafter. 

Secondly.   The  fundamental  doctrine  underlying  the 


182  THE  BEING  AND  UNITY   OF   GOD.         lohole  Greedy  which  is  :  The  existence  of  one  Grod  in  three 
Persons. 

An  inquirer  after  truth  might  well  put  the  question 
here  suggested  : 

"  Since  there  is  but  one  only  divine  essence,  why 
speakest  thou  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  But 
the  answer  is  readily  given  on  the  best  authority  : 

"  Because  God  hath  so  revealed  himself  in  his  word 
that  these  three  distinct  Persons  are  the  one  only  true 
and  eternal  God." 

Here  are  three  things  stated :  I.  There  is  a  God. 
II.  There  is  only  one  God.  III.  There  are  three  dis- 
tinct Persons  in  the  one  only  and  true  God. 

I.  There  is  a  God.  The  word  God  is  a  radical 
found  in  several  languages,  (Persic,  Goda ;  Hindu, 
Choda  ;  Icelandic,  Godi ;  German,  Gott ;)  signifying 
One  above  all,  or  The  Supreme.  Many  fxlse  or  imag- 
inary beings  have  been  called  and  worshipped  as  gods 
by  men  ;  but  that  is  not  a  true  belief  in  God,  which  is 
not  belief  in  the  true  God.  Hence  the  Apostle  denom- 
inated the  Gentiles  of  his  day  Atheists,  or,  as  our  trans- 
lation has  it,  "  without  God  "  ;  because,  though  they 
cultivated  very  many  false  gods,  tliey  had  no  knowl- 
edge of  him  who  alone  is  God.  It  is  requisite,  there- 
fore, that  we  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  word 
God  ;  and  the  best  definition  we  can  give  of  God  is  : 
The  self-existent,  intelligent  First  Cause  of  all  things. 
Our  Church,  in  commanding  us  to  lecture  on  this  sec- 
tion, did  not  require  an  elaborate  proof  of  its  several 
propositions,  as  that  would  be  far  beyond  the  compass 
of  a  single  Lord's  Day ;  but  only  that  we  should  fairly 
j)resent  them  preparatory  to  subsequent  discussion.  We 
must,  then,  be  as  succinct  as  possible.     Tliat  there  is  a 


THE   BEING  AND   UNITY   OF   GOD.  183 

God  we  know  from  his  own  declaration  of  himself; 
and  from  the  existence  of  things  constituting  what  is 
called  nature. 

A.  From  his  own  declaration  of  himself.  The  fact 
that  we  have  the  idea  of  God  demonstrates  in  the 
highest  degree  both  that  he  is  and  that  our  knowledge 
of  him  is  derived  from  himself.  The  idea  of  God, 
according  to  the  definition  we  have  given,  or,  as  set 
forth  by  the  Scriptures,  is  infinitely  above  human  im- 
agination, and  utterly  beyond  the  scope  of  any  argu- 
ment human  reason  could  frame.  It  has  never  had 
place  in  men's  minds,  except  where  divine  revelation 
has  communicated  it ;  while  the  tendency  of  mankind, 
always  and  everywhere,  except  when  restrained  and 
enlightened  by  divine  grace,  has  been  to  ignore  and 
degrade  it.  Men  without  I'evelation  have  worshipped 
false  gods,  and  attempted  to  demonstrate  their  exist- 
ence, but  they  have  never  reached  the  idea  of  the 
true  God.  Therefore,  since  man  could  neither  invent 
nor  discover  the  grand  idea,  it  must  have  been  made 
known  to  us,  and  that  by  God  himself  "  The  world 
by  wisdom,"  i.  e.,  by  its  unassisted  reason,  "  knew  not 
God,"  asserts  the  Apostle.  He  cannot  "  by  searching 
find  out  God,"  i,  e.,  "  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  per- 
fection." That  men  in  all  ages  and  countries  have  had 
some  notion  of  a  superior  being  or  beings  whom  they 
called  God  or  gods,  does  not  impugn  our  position, 
because  their  vague  belief  may  very  well  be,  and  we 
learn  from  Scripture  is,  a  corrupted  tradition  from  the 
fathers  of  the  race  to  whom  God  made  himself  known. 
(Romans  i.  19 .) 

To  this  revelation  of  himself,  God  has  added  the 
irresistible  evidence  of  his  works  ;  for 


184  THE  BEING  AND   UNITY   OF   GOD.         B.  The  existence  of  things  can  be  accounted  for 
only  by  the  existence  of  God.  We  know  that  things 
do  exist  in  that  order  and  consistency  which  we  call 
nature  ;  therefore,  they  must  have  always  existed,  or 
they  must  have  come  into  existence  by  chance,  or  they 
must  have  been  caused  to  exist  by  the  great,  self-exist- 
ent, intelligent  Being,  whom  it  becomes  us  to  acknowl- 
edge and  worship  as  God. 

That  the  pi'esent  frame  of  things  has  existed  always 
is  disproved  by  all  analogy.  In  all  the  processes  of 
natui'e  we  see  none  occur  but  what  follows  some  prece- 
dent which  we  call  cause,  but  the  effective  power  is  not 
in  that  proximate  cause,  for  that  cause  is  itself  an  effect 
of  a  cause  which  is  again  an  effect,  and  so  link  by  link 
we  trace  the  chain  backward.  There  must  be  an  orig- 
inal, uncaused  energy  working  through  all  these  causes 
all  these  effects  ;  for  the  first  cause  must  be  antecedent 
to  nature,  above  nature,  and  independent  of  nature. 
Again  :  There  is  motion  producing  change  in  things  as 
they  exist.  But  matter  of  itself  is  inert ;  it  does  not 
move  except  from  some  force  a})plied  to  it  fi*om  without 
itself.  There  must,  therefore,  be  a  cause  of  motion,  a 
source  of  impulse,  a  power  determining  change,  above 
and  antecedent  to  all  things  that  suffer  change.  Yet 
again :  This  motion  and  change  are  regulated  by  cer- 
tain laws,  many  of  which  are  discovered,  and  these 
laws  cooperate  in  the  nicest  adjustment  to  each  other; 
this  system  of  laws  indicates  design,  there  must,  there- 
fore, be  a  designer,  or  an  intelligent  cause,  whose  will  is 
the  supreme  law  antecedent  to  all  these  laws. 

The  supposition  that  things  as  they  exist  came  into 
existence  by  chance,  is  as  irrational  as  that  they  never 
had  a  beginning,  and  for  the  same  reasons.     We  have 


THE  BEING  AND  UNITY   OF   GOD.  185 

no  knowledge  of  s\ich  a  thing  as  chance.  Law  is  pres- 
ent always  and  everywhere,  and  he  is  a  most  ignorant 
fool  who  ascribes  any  change  to  chance.  How  then 
could  the  entire  system  originate  by  chance  ?  There 
is  evident  design  in  all  things  ;  but  design  indicates 
purpose,  and  purpose  supposes  intelligence;  and  an 
intelligent  directing  Will  can  tolerate  no  chance. 

If  a  printer  were  to  enter  his  office  in  the  morning, 
and  find  that  the  types  which  he  had  left  in  confusion 
the  night  before  were  so  arranged  that  an  impression 
taken  from  them  presented  to  the  reader  a  clear,  pro- 
found, metaphysical  argument,  he  would  laugh  to  scorn 
the  supposition  that  it  was  the  result  of  mere  chance. 
How  much  less  than  folly  is  the  notion  that  the  won- 
derful system  of  nature,  and  above  all  of  man  able  to  set 
types  and  write  metaphysics,  have  come  into  existence 
by  chance  ? 

We  are  thus  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  cardinal 
truth  on  which  the  whole  system  set  forth  by  the  Scrip- 
tures is  based,  that  in  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth. 

Let  us,  however,  press  the  argument  a  little  farther. 
Every  one  who  reflects  at  all,  must  be  conscious,  that 
although  in  some  sense,  and  to  some  extent,  he  is  free, 
he  is  at  the  same  time  under  a  control  from  without 
himself  which  he  cannot  resist  or  escape.  This  con- 
sciousness, strongest  in  strongest  minds,  is  so  universal 
that  those  so-called  philosophers  who  have  denied  the 
being  or  government  of  God,  substitute  necessity  or 
fate  in  his  place  ;  or,  if  they  call  it  chance,  it  amounts 
to  the  same  thing,  for  a  blind  chance  over  which  we 
had  no  power,  would  be  fate  or  necessity  to  us  ;  but 
this  necessity  clearly  works  through  laws ;  there  must. 


186  THE   BEING   AND   UNITY   OF   GOD.         therefore,  be  a  supreme  intelligent  will  presiding  over 
our  intelliirent  wills,  reo-ulatino;  the  issues  of  all  human 
agencies.  Besides,  we  cannot  deny  that  there  are 
moral  truths  distinguishable  from  those  which  are  nat- 
ural, that  is,  which  concern  physical  facts.  As  beings 
possessed  of  affections  and  reason,  we  are  bound  to  each 
other  by  certain  relations ;  these  relations  are  under 
laws,  conformity  to  which  we  denominate  right ;  vio- 
lation of  which,  wrong.  We  have  notions  of  right 
and  wrong,  by  which  we  approve  ourselves  when 
we  do  right,  and  condemn  ourselves  wlien  we  do 
wrong.  We  also  see  a  connection  between  right  and 
happiness,  wrong  and  unhappiness.  There  may  be 
differences  of  opinion  on  minor  points,  but  in  the  essen- 
tial, the  sense  of  mankind  is  so  general  that  there  is  no 
community  without  laws  to  punish  wrong  in  order  that 
the  common  welfare  may  be  defended  from  the  criminal 
selfishness  of  individuals.  Whence,  then,  comes  this 
moral  system,  the  fact  of  which  we  confess,  and  the 
operation  of  which  we  imitate,  if  not  from  a  moral 
source  original,  independent,  and  sovereign  ?  The  idea 
of  God  is  absolutely  necessary  to  our  satisfaction.  If 
there  be  no  God,  the  universe  is  without  superintend- 
ence, order,  or  government.  There  is  no  guide  for  our 
actions,  no  certainty,  no  right,  no  wrong,  no  truth,  no 
hope.  The  soul  of  man  is  without  security  or  satisfic- 
tion.  Matter  reverts  to  chaos,  humanity  is  fatherless, 
and  virtue  with  all  her  attendant  train  of  blessings,  a 
vision  fair  but  unsubstantial  as  a  poet's  dream.  God 
has  pervaded  the  universe  with  the  divinity  of  its  origin, 
and  planted  in  our  very  being  the  necessity  of  his  own. 

II.   There  is  only  one  God. 

"  We  know,"  writes  the  Apostle  to  his  Corinthian 


Lkct.  IX.]         THE  BEING  AND  UNITY   OF  GOD.  187 

brethren,  "that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world,  and  that 
there  is  none  other  God  but  one."  Evident  as  this 
appears  to  us,  it  was  then  a  new  doctrine  at  Corinth 
and  throughout  the  inhabited  earth  except  in  Judea. 
There  is  not  in  all  Christian  lands  a  single  sceptic  who 
would  assert  a  plurality  of  gods,  or  regard  such  an 
hypothesis  as  less  than  absurd.  Yet  the  overwhelming 
fact  is  indisputable  that  the  very  large  majority  of  man- 
kind, from  the  farthest  times  down  to  the  present  day, 
have  been  polytheists,  worshippers  of  more  gods  than 
one.  The  gods  of  the  classical  nations  were  innumer- 
able, as  are  now  the  gods  of  Asia  and  Africa.  The  unity 
of  God  has  never  been  taught  but  by  revelation,  and  is 
the  belief  which  distinguishes  Jews,  Christians,  and 
Mohammedans,  from  the  heathen  who  fill  the  rest  of 
the  world.  It  should  not,  therefore,  be  considered  use- 
less for  us  to  examine  and  declare  the  groinids  of  our 
belief,  especially  as  we  who  hold  the  adorable  mystery 
of  the  Trinity  to  be  an  essential  part  of  the  Christian 
system,  (Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and 
to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen  !)  have  been  accused  of 
denying  the  unity  of  God  by  some  who  arrogate  to 
themselves  the  name  of  Unitarian,  which  belongs  as 
truly  to  us  as  does  that  of  Trinitarian.  Our  exposition 
shall,  however,  be  as  brief  as  is  consistent  with  clear- 
ness. 

By  the  unity  of  God,  we  mean  that  there  is  one  and 
one  only  Being,  to  whom  the  name  of  God  should  be 
criven,  the  works  of  God  ascribed,  the  perfections  of 
God  attributed,  and  the  worship  of  God  rendered. 
This  we  assert. 

I.  From  the  Scriptures,  which,  because  they  teach 
the  original  and  only  clear  notion  of  the  divine  exist- 


188  THE  BEING  ANTJ  UNITY   OF   GOD.         ence,  are  worthy  of  the  highest  credence  in  all  that 
relates  to  the  nature  of  God. 

a.  God  asserts  it  of  himself.  His  first  command- 
ment is  :  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me." 
The  name  by  which  he  declared  himself  to  Israel  is 
sublimely  significant  of  both  unity  and  eternal  exist- 
ence :  "  I  am  that  I  am^  He  identifies  himself  as  the 
one  God  with  the  Creator  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that 
created  the  heavens,  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth 
and  made  it ;  he  hath  established  it,  he  created  it  not 
in  vain,  he  formed  it  to  be  inhabited  :  I  am  the  Lord, 
and  there  is  none  else  ;  "  also  with  the  Judge  and 
Saviour  of  all  men  :  "  There  is  no  God  else  beside  me  ; 
a  just  God  and  a  Saviour ;  there  is  none  beside  me  ; 
Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  for  I  am  God  and  there  is  none  else  ; "  as 
the  Lord  of  providence  :  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou 
hast  not  known  me  ;  that  they  may  know  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun,  and  from  the  west,  that  there  is  none 
beside  me.  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else  ; " 
and  so  with  regard  to  every  distinct  attribute  and 
operation  of  God. 

h.  His  inspired  worshippers  throughout  the  Book, 
adore  him  as  the  one  only  God.  Moses  says  :  "  Hear, 
O  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord  ;  "  David  : 
"  Thou  art  God  alone ;  "  all  the  prophets  of  the  Old, 
and  all  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  combine  in 
declaring  the  oneness  of  God  as  the  characteristic  be- 
lief of  Jews  and  Christians  ;  but  why  should  we  mul- 
tiply quotations  when  our  divine  Master  sums  up  the 
scriptural  testimony,  saying :  "  This  is  life  eternal, 
that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." 


,-ECT.  IX.]         THE  BEING  AND  UNITY   OF  GOD.  189 

II.   We  assert  it  from  reason. 

a.  It  is  a  rule  of  sound  philosophy  to  rest  satisfied 
with  one  sufficient  cause  for  an  effect ;  if,  therefore,  the 
God  of  the  Bible  with  his  boundless  attributes  be,  as  he 
is,  infinitely  sufficient  for  the  causation  of  all  things,  it 
were  absurd  to  inquire  further.  The  only  objection  to 
this  having  the  shadow  of  plausibility  is  taken  from  the 
actual  existence  of  evil  within  the  dominion  of  the  Su- 
preme Good,  which  difficulty,  felt  by  all  reflecting 
minds,  gave  rise  to  the  most  ancient  extra-scriptural 
philosophy,  that  which  recognized  two  contending  prin- 
ciples, the  good  and  the  evil.  The  answer  to  this  is, 
that  although  the  good  cannot  be  supposed  to  have 
produced  evil  immediately,  yet  it  sprung  from  the  free- 
dom necessarily  given  to  his  moral  creatures.  Besides, 
evil  is  so  intermingled  with  the  good,  that  it  could  not 
have  existed  but  through  the  permission  of  the  Divine 
good ;  since  none  can  doubt  that  he  who  has  ordained 
with  such  wisdom  the  economv  of  thing-s  mio-ht,  had 
he  chosen,  have  excluded  evil ;  and,  in  fact,  no  advo- 
cate of  the  dualistic  system  (that  of  The  Two  Princi- 
ples) from  the  early  followers  of  the  Persic  Zoroaster, 
down  to  the  Manichean  heretics,  ever  doubted  the  ulti- 
mate triumph  of  good  over  the  evil,  or  the  real  suprem- 
acy of  the  good. 

h.  The  infinity  of  the  perfections  attributed  to  God, 
excludes  the  possibility  of  more  than  one  God,  since 
there  cannot  be  more  than  one  infinity.  For  instance, 
omnipotence  excludes  all  other  power  not  derived 
from  and  controlled  by  itself;  omnipresence,  all  ex- 
istence not  within  itself;  omniscience,  all  knowledge 
without  itself.  To  suppose  anything  external  to  nthe 
divine    causation    or  comprehension,    is   to    deny   that 


190  THE  BEING  AND  UNITY  OF  GOD.        [Lkct.  IX 

infinity  to  God  which  is  essential  to  the  very  idea  of 
God. 

c.  The  unity  of  the 'system  of  things,  called  for  that 
reason  the  universe,  demands  our  fliith  in  one  supreme 
will.  Law  is  present  everywhere,  holding  all  the 
smallest  and  the  greatest,  the  nearest  and  the  farthest, 
in  a  grand  harmonious  whole.  There  is  a  countless 
variety  of  operations,  the  invariable  order  of  which  we 
call  laws  ;  but  when  we  observe  closely,  we  see  these 
laws  coalescing  into,  or  combined  under,  fewer  laws, 
those  under  still  fewer,  until  we  reach  the  necessity  of 
one  highest  law  combining  all,  the  will  of  that  One 
whom  we  adore  as  God. 

d.  Analogy  confirms  this  reasoning  ;  for  in  every 
arrangement  of  things  there  must  be  some  presiding 
head  ;  ultimate  power  must  exist  somewhere  ;  govern- 
ment must  be  supreme.  It  is  so  in  all  human  systems ; 
it  must  be  in  that  system  which  comprehends  all  sys- 
tems. 

e.  Moral  duty  (without  which  there  is  neither  right 
nor  wrong,  virtue  nor  vice)  must  have  a  supreme 
object.  No  man  can  serve  two  masters ;  yet  from  the 
multitude  and  variety  of  human  relations,  if  we  have 
not  one  master  in  God,  we  cannot  know  what  duty  is. 
Duties  may  clash  with  duties,  and  so  cease  to  be  duties  ; 
there  must  be  one  highest  duty  comprehending  all 
duties,  ovir  duty  to  him  who  is  the  one  Lord  of  all. 

/.  The  wisest  part  of  mankind,  those  who  feel  the 
logical  necessity  of  following  premises  to  conclusion, 
have  been  compelled,  in  effect,  to  acknowledge  one  Su- 
preme. Even  while  dividing  their  worship  among  a 
multitude  of  deities,  there  has  been  traceable  in  their 
systems,  popular  or  ])liilos()phical,  a  dependence  from  a 


THE   BEING  ANIJ    UNITY   OF   GOD,  191 

supreme  original.  The  leading  theological  problem 
(of  Proclus),  "  There  is  unity  in  all  multiplicity,"  was 
admitted  by  all  the  theistical  sects.  Hence,  though 
shrinking  from  what  they  deemed  the  impiety  of  giving 
a  name  or  even  a  mode  of  being  to  the  Head  of  all, 
they  called  Him  To  'Ev,  or  The  One  ;  and  he  was  the 
ultimate  truth  of  all  their  speculations  and  mysteries. 
Even  amono-  the  multitudinous  idolatries  of  Hinduism, 
the  Brahminical  books  dimly  but  really  acknowledge 
an  original  source  of  all  things,  though  they  worship 
him  not,  and  his  existence  is  rather  an  unavoidable 
physical  fact  than  a  religious  truth.  In  fact,  idolatry 
has  never  been  so  much  a  denial  of  the  One  God,  as 
a  perversion  of  his  worship,  and  a  profane  subdivision 
of  his  authoritative  power  under  many  names.  They 
could  not  escape  from  the  idea  of  the  One  God  altogeth- 
er ;  but  they  put  as  many  false  shadows  between  them 
and  his  all-seeing  eye,  as  their  sensual  imaginations 
could  invent.  "  They  changed  the  truth  of  God  into 
a  lie." 

Let  us,  then,  ever  devoutly  remember  the  great 
goodness  of  God  in  mvino-  us  a  clear  revelation  of 
himself  in  his  holy  Scriptures,  without  which,  left  to 
the  imperfections  of  our  own  minds  and  the  worse 
seductions  of  our  sensual  hearts,  we  could  never  have 
known  him  aright  or  offered  him  the  worship  that  is  his 
due.  It  is  to  the  Bible  that  we  owe  that  which  distin- 
guishes us  from  the  heathen,  who  bow  down  to  images 
their  own  hands  have  made ;  and  only  in  the  study  of 
those  Scriptures  can  we  approach  that  Light  which  is 
the  life  of  the  soul. 

Let  us  remember  that  the  essence  of  idolatry  is  an 
unwillingness  to  retain   God  in  our  imaginations  ;  and 


192  THE  BEING  AND  UNITY  OF  GOD.         that  when  we  forget  God,  to  place  our  trust,  or  to 
make  the  object  of  our  conduct,  other  than  in  God 
alone,  we  are  as  really  idolaters  as  the  heathen  who 
worship  false  gods,  though  far  more  guilty,  because 
without  their  excuse. 

And  above  all,  let  us  remember  that  Ave  cannot  ap- 
>proach  God  or  know  him  aright,  but  by  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  the  only  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  "  I 
am  the  Way,  and,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life,"  saith  the 
Lord ;  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." 
"  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  shall  we  go  but  unto 
thee?"

LECTURE   X. 


THE   DOCTRINE  OF  THE  TRINITY  STATED. 
EIGHTH   LORD'S   DAY. 

THE   DOCTRINE    OF   THE   TRINITY 
STATED. 

TTAVING  in  our  last  discourse  enforced  the  funda- 
-*-'-  mental  truths,  I.  That  there  is  a  God  ;  II.  Tliat 
there  is  only  one  God  ;  we  now  come  to  the  third 
division  of  our  subject,  which  embraces  the  all-impor- 
tant doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 

III.  There  are  three  distinct  Persons,  Fatlier,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  one  true  and  only  God. 

In  the  proper  places,  as  we  proceed  with  our  expo- 
sition of  the  Catechism,  we  shall  show  out  of  Scrip- 
ture, that  the  Father  is  God  (Ninth  Lord's  Day)  ; 
that  the  Son  is  God  (Thirteenth  Lord's  Day)  ;  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  God  (Twentieth  Lord's  Day)  ;  from 
which,  since  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  there  is 
only  one  God,  it  must  follow  irresistibly  that  th«se 
three.  Father,  Sou,  and  Holy  Ghost,  coexist  or  svibsist 
in  the  one  God  and  as  one  God.  Now,  however,  our 
aim,  as  required  by  the  part  of  the  Catechism  under 
consideration,  is  to  show  what  we  mean  by  this  subsist- 
ence of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  in  One  God  ; 
and  this,  not  only  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith,  but 
also  for  the  vindication  of  the  doctrine  from  the  false 
charges  which  ignorance  or  malice  ha^'e  brought 
against    it. 

Let  no  one  turn  away  from  this  discussion,  as  though 
the  doctrine  were  a  mere  technical  mysticism,  having 
no  important  bearing  upon  Christian  belief,  sentiment. 


196  DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TRINITY    STATED.       [Liicr.  X. 

or  practice.  Our  Lord  commands  his  disciples  first  to 
"  teach  all  nations,"  and  then  to  baptize  the  converts 
to  his  Gosj)eI ;  and  the  formula  to  be  used  in  Baptism 
("  In  the  name  oi'  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  ")  shows  that  the  (jospel  consists  of 
the  true  doctrine  concernino-  the  Father,  and  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  not  of  the  Father  only,  but  also 
of  the  Son,  and  also  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  not  of  the 
Three  only  as  One,  but  also  of  each  of  the  Three  as 
distinguished  from  the  other  two  ;  so  that  any  error 
respecting  the  doctrine  of  any  one  of  the  Three  is  fatal 
to  a  Christian  belief.  For  example :  If  the  Father 
only  be  God,  and  we  ascribe  divine  honors  to  the  Son 
or  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  are  guilty  of  giving  to  others 
the  homage  due  to  God  only  ;  but,  if  the  Son  be  God 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  be  God,  and  we  worship  not  the 
Son  as  God,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  as  God,  we  deny  to 
the  Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  the  divine  homage 
which  is  their  separate  due.  On  each  side  we  run  into 
sin  mortally  offensive  to  God.  Again  :  If  these  three 
names  be  only  different  titles  of  the  same  object,  as 
that  the  Father  is  the  same  as  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Son  the  same  as  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Father  and  the  Son,  each 
of  the  Three  not  distinct  from  each  of  the  other  two, 
and  we  worship  each  of  the  Three  as  God,  we  are  verily 
guilty  of  worshipping  three  gods,  which  is  a  blasphe- 
mous folly  ;  but,  if  God  has  revealed  himself  as  distinct  in 
Three,  —  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  —  and  demands 
that  homage  be  rendered  to  Father,  to  Son,  and  to 
Holy  Ghost,  as  distinct  in  some  real  not  nominal  sense, 
then,  by  refusing  this  distinct  homage  to  each  or  any 
one  of  the  divine  Three,  we  refuse  to  worship  him  in 


DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TRINITY    STATED.  197 

the  manner  he  requires,  confounding  wliat  he  declare? 
is  distinct  in  his  divine  nature. 

Besides,  the  Scriptures  clearly  show  that  this  distinc- 
tion of  Three,  —  Father,  Son,  and   Holy   Ghost,  —  in 
One  God,  is  not  a  mere  technical  mysticism,  but  that  it 
underlies  all  the  doctrines  of  salvation,  pervading  them 
with  a  divine  energy,  which,  if  they  lacked,  they  would 
lose  all  warrant  for  our  trust ;    since  not  only  would 
many  scriptural  statements  respecting  the  processes  of 
redemption  be  utterly  inexplicable,  but  also  without  the 
divinity  of  the  Son  there  can  be  no  sufficient  ground 
for  a  vicarious  atonement,  and  without  the  divinity  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  there  would  be  no  efficient,agent  for  our 
new  birth  and  internal  sanctification  ;  and  we  should  re- 
vert to  a  feith,  if  fidth  it  could  be  called,  in  a  God  with- 
out a  Mediator,  through  whom  the  sinner  may  approach 
him  and  a  quickening  Power  by  whose  help  we  may  as- 
cend the  livino-  way  to  life  eternal.     Experience  confirms 
this  in  a  most  melancholy  manner;  for  those  who  are  so 
unhappy  as  to  deny  the  proper  divinity  of  the  Son  and 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  have   with   scarcely   an   exception 
rejected  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  of  a  spiritual  regeneration  by  the  divine  inworking. 
They  may  use  the  terms,  but,  if  so,  in  a  sense  utterly 
apart  from  that  of  the  evangelical  Scriptures  ;  nor  will 
they  deny  that  an  error  here  on  either  side  must  go 
through  all  the  Christian  system. 

Let  it  also  be  kept  in  mind  from  tlie  outset  that  this 
distinction  of  Three,— Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,— 
one  God,  is  purely  a  doctrine  of  Scripture,  and  espec- 
ially of  the  New  Testament,  as  only  from  the  interpret- 
ing light  of  the  later  books  are  we  able  to  see  any 
traces  of  it  under  the  older  covenant.       We  make  no 


198  DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TRINITY    STATED.       [Li:ct.   X. 

arguiiient  in  favor  of  it  from  reason  or  the  liglit  of 
nature  ;  what  some  students,  more  enthusiastic  than 
wise,  liave  thought  to  be  corroborations  of  it  in  the 
trinities  of  Phitonism  and  eastern  mythologies,  though 
startling  at  first  sight,  we  are  com])eIled  to  reject  as 
unworthy  of  parallelism  with  this  article  of  our  Chris- 
tian faith.  If  we  cannot  find  it  in  Scripture  it  is  to  be 
found  nowhere.  It  is  above  the  discovery  of  reason, 
tliongh  not  contrary  to  reason  when  discovered,  and 
could  have  been  taught  only  by  God  himself,  even  by 
the  Spirit  which  searcheth  the  deep  things  of  God. 
He,  therefore,  avIio  rejects  the  Scriptures  as  the  only 
infallible  rule  of  faith,  need  go  no  farther  with  us,  as 
we  shall  not  leave  their  sacred  platform  to  contend  on 
meaner  ground. 

Nor  will  it  do  for  any  to  object  in  advance,  that  God 
would  reveal  nothing  which  is  beyond  the  comprehen- 
sion of  human  reason,  and,  therefore,  that  anything 
in  the  Scriptures  which  seems  to  teach  this  doctrine 
should  be  either  torn  out  of  the  Book  as  spurious,  or 
so  interpreted  as  to  be  deprived  of  such  meaning. 
That  would  be  to  make  finite  man  the  judge  of  divine 
truth  ;  a  monstrous  assinnption  which  limits  the  wis- 
,  dom  of  the  infinite  God  by  oiu'  little  capacity.  Yet 
we  freely  admit  that  God  would  reveal  nothing  contra- 
dictory to  human  reason,  for  then  he  would  be  so  incon- 
sistent with  himself  as  to  demand  from  us  a  faith  he 
had  unfitted  us  to  exercise  ;  but  at  the  same  time  we 
know  that  human  reason  is  finite,  cannot  go  beyond  its 
sphere,  and  is  very  weak  even  within  its  proper  limils  ; 
so  that  it  is  one  thing  for  a  doctrine  to  be  above  our 
comprehension,  and  another  to  be  contrary  to  our  ini- 
derstanding.      A   doctrine    contrary   to   our   I'eason   is 


DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TRINITY    STATED.  199 

false  ;  as  that  a  thing  may  be  and  not  be  at  the  same 
moment ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  a  doctrine  above 
our  reason  is  false,  as  any  mystery  of  the  divine  nature. 
As  well  might  I  deny  that  nothing  exists  beyond  what 
I  can  hold  in  the  hollow  of  my  hand,  as  that  nothing 
is  true  beyond  what  I  am  able  to  comprehend  by  my 
mind  ;    else    ignorance   would   be   the   annihilation   of 
truth,  and  the  stupidity  of  the  dunce  who  cannot  un- 
derstand the  Principia  of  Newton  would  put  aside  the 
planetary  system.      There   are   many  scientific   truths 
certainly  demonstrated  that  are  utterly  beyond  the  per- 
ception of  uneducated  men,  nay,  which  seem  to  what 
they  call  common  sense  necessai-ily  absurd  ;    yet  are 
they  not  the  less  true  or  the  less  conformable  to  right 
reason  ;  and  if  this  be  the  difference  between  the  phi- 
losopher and  a  savage  with  regard  to   material  things, 
what  must  be  the  difference  between  the  best  cultivated 
human  mind  and  the  mind  of  God  respecting  the  mode 
of  his  infinite  adorable  existence  ?      If  he  condescend 
to  give  us  the  highest  proof  of  a  doctrine,  which  is  his 
own  direct  testimony,  it  is,  then,  the  part  of  reason  to 
receive  it  implicitly,  however  mysterious  it  may  be. 

Besides;  it  is  one  thing  to  know  a  fact,  and  another 
to  know  the  mode  of  a  fact.  We  know  the  fact  of  the 
needle's  tendency  to  the  pole  ;  but  who,  as  yet,  has 
fully  explained  the  reason  of  that  phenomenon  ?  There 
is  no  fact  of  which  all  men  are  more  fully  convinced 
than  that  we  can  control  our  muscles  by  a  mere  eflFort 
of  will ;  yet  what  physiologist  can  explain  how  this 
control  is  put  within  the  power  of  our  will  ?  A  man 
who  should  deny  either  fact  is  a  fool,  and  not  a  philos- 
opher ;  but  what  is  he  who  denies  a  fact  in  the  divine 
nature,   because  he  cannot  measure  God  by  his  foot- 


200  DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TlilNITY    STATED,      [Lkct.  X 

rule?  It"  reason  is  at  fault  in  its  searches  of  our  own 
mode  of  being,  how  may  it  judge  absolutely  of  the 
divine  ?  Let  those  follow  the  dim  lamp  of  reason 
which  they  have  lighted  from  the  siln,  —  we  will  pursue 
no  such  dim  glimmer  ;  it  goes  out  amidst  the  damps 
of  death  ;  it  has  never  shone  a  foot  beyond  the  grave  ; 
be  it  ours,  my  brethren,  to  uplift  our  souls  to  the  Sun 
of  Righteousness  whose  viniversal  splendor  so  illustrates 
heaven  and  earth,  that  the  believer,  from  the  promises 
of  time,  gazes  with  realizing  sense  on  the  certain  glories 
of  his  immortality.' 

Let  us,  then,  who  are  convinced  that  the  Scriptures 
are  the  testimony  of  God,  study  the  doctrine  of  God 
by  them  revealed  ;  and  receive  it  as  true  because  God 
teaches  it.  Li  other  discussions  we  have  premises  from 
which  to  argue,  and  analogies  with  which  to  compare  ; 
but  in  this  we  have  neither,  for  God  is  himself  first  of 
all,  and  infinitely  above  all  parallel.  The  doctrine  be- 
fore us  is  one  purely  of  faith  in  the  testimony  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures. 

After  this  preface,  we  go  on  to  state  in  as  precise 
language  as  we  can  the  belief  of  the  Reformed  Churches 
respecting  the  subsistence  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  in  one  God  ;  termed  by  Theologians  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Trinity  in  Unity,  —  Latin  terms  signifying 
Threeness  in  Oneness  ;  or,  more  shortly,  since  all  are 
agreed  as  to  the  unity  of  God,  the  Trinity,  —  by  which 
is  meant  the  coexistence  of  Three  distinct  Persons  in 
one  God. 

The  term  Trinity  is  not  found  in  the  Scriptures,  yet 
should  not  on  that  account  be  objected  to,  as  it  is  used 
not  to  convey  any  new  or  extra-scriptural  doctrine, 
but  only  to  express  in  one  word  what  would  otherwise 


DOCTRINE   OF    THE   TRINITY    STATED.  201 

require   many.     The   advocates   of  the   doctrine   have 
been  compelled  to  adopt  this  and  some  other  terms  by 
the  subtle  cavils  and  mischievous  sophistries  of  its  op- 
ponents ;   as  Dr.  Waterland  says  :  "  The  early  Chris- 
tians easily  believed  that  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  whose  name  they  were   baptized,  and 
whom  they  worshipped,  were  equally  divine,  without 
troubling   themselves   about   the   manner   of  it,  or  of 
reconciling:  it  with  their   belief  in  one  God  ;    as  men 
generally  believe  that  God  foreknows  everything,  and 
that  man,  notwithstanding,  is  a  free  agent,  scarcely  one, 
perhaps,   in    a    thousand,   concerning    himself  how   to 
reconcile  these  two  positions,  or  being  at  all  apprehen- 
sive of  any  difficulty  ;  so,  probably,  these  plain  honest 
Christians  believed  each  of  the  Three  to  be  God,  and 
yet  but  one  God,  and  troubled  not  their  heads  with  any 
nice  speculation  about  the  mode  of  it.     This  seems  to 
have  been  the  artless  simplicity  of  the  primitive  Chris- 
tians till  prying  and  pretending  men  came  to  start  diffi- 
culties and  to  raise  scruples  and  to  make  disturbances, 
and  then  it  was   necessary  to  guard   the  faith  of  the 
Church  against  such  cavils  and  impertinences  as  began 
to  threaten  it.     Philosophy  and  metaphysics  were  called 
in  to  its  assistance,  but  not  till  'heretics  had  shown  the 
way,  and  made  it,  in  a  manner,  necessary  for  the  Cath- 
olics   (orthodox)   to  encounter   them  with   their  own 
weapons.     Some  new  terms  and  particular  applications 
came  in  by  this  means,  that  such  as  had  a  mind  to  cor- 
rupt or  destroy  the   faith   might   be  defeated  in  their 
purposes."     For  the  same  reason,  the  language  of  some 
early  writers  who  were  firm  believers  in  the  true  doc- 
trine, diffijrs  from,  and  at  first  sight  seems  to  contradict 
that  of  the  later  Church,  but  the  discrepancy  lies  in  the 


202  DOCTRINE   OF  THE   TRINITY   STATED,       meaning  attached  to  these  added  terms  in  subsequent 
centuries. 

1.  We  do  not  differ  except  from  those  who  deny- 
that  God  is  one,  or  tliat  the  Father  is  God,  that  the 
Son  is  God,  or  that  the  Holj  Ghost  is  God  ;  and  if 
we  are  not  able  to  prove  each  of  these  propositions 
from   Scripture  we   yield  the  controversy. 

2.  When  we  say  that  there  is  this  distinction  of 
Three  in  the  Godhead,  we  mean  that  this  distinction  is 
real  and  not  merely  nominal ;  that  is,  these  names  are 
not  several  names  of  the  Godhead,  as  Caius  Julius 
Csesar,  are  names  of  one  man  ;  nor  are  they  used  sep- 
arately of  the  Godhead  in  reference  to  the  several 
operations  of  the  Divine  will,  as  that  God  is  called  the 
Father,  in  reference  to  the  Creation  ;  the  Son,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  Redemption  ;  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  reference 
to  the  Sanctification  of  man  ;  but  that,  as  the  Scriptures 
teach,  these  three  are  so  distinct  from  each  other  as  to 
have  relations  to  each  other.  It  is  absurd  to  speak  of 
a  being  having  relations  to  himself,  because  relativeness 
implies  distinctiveness  between  those  spoken  of  as  re- 
lated. Thus  God  cannot  be  said  to  send  himself,  or  to 
be  sent  by  himself,  or  to  go  forth  from  himself;  yet  the 
Father,  in  Scripture,  is  declared  to  send  the  Son,  the 
Son  to  be  sent  of  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be 
sent  from  both.  The  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  said 
by  the  Scriptures  to  have  coexisted  with  the  Father  at 
the  time  of  the  creation  ;  for  if  it  be  said  that  the  Father 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  it  is  also  said  that 
he  created  the  world  by  his  Son,  and  that  the  S})irit  of 
God  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters  ;  whence  also 
God  speaks  as  if  there  were  more  than  one  in  council, 
when   he  said :    "  Let  us  make  man  ; "   i.  e..  Let  us, 


Li£CT.  X.]      DOCTRIM-:   OF   THE   TRINITY    STATED.  203 

Father  and  Son  and  Spirit,  unite  in  making  man.  Us 
is  plural  though  God  is  one ;  yet  God  said  :  "  Let  us," 
which  indicates  more  than  the  Father.  Hence  it  can- 
not be  that  Father  means  only  God  as  Creator,  since 
the  Son  and  tlie  Holy  Spirit  were  also  engaged  in  the 
work  of  creation.  So  also  the  Father  is  said  to  have 
coexisted  and  cooperated  with  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  work  of  Redemption  :  "  God  so  loved  the 
world  as  to  send  his  only  begotten  Son  ;  "  the  Son  him- 
self took  part  of  flesh  and  blood  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  over- 
shadowed the  Virgin  Mary,  and  she  conceived  that  holy 
Thing  which  she  brought  forth  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Here  are  three  separate  acts  imputed  to  three  separate 
ao-ents.  Hence  it  cannot  be  that  iSon  only  means  God 
as  Saviour,  since  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost  were 
also  engaged  in  the  work  of  salvation.  So  also  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are  said  to  coexist  and  cooperate 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  work  of  Sanctification  : 
"  When  the  Comforter  (whom  he  declares  in  another 
[)]ace  to  be  the  Holy  Ghost)  is  come,"  saith  our 
Lord,  "  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father, 
even  the  Spirit  of  truth  which  proceedetii  from  the 
Father,  he  shall  testify  of  me."  The  Apostle  Jude 
speaks  of  those  that  are  sanctified  of  God  the  Father  ; 
the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  attributes  sanctification  to 
the  Son,  when  he  says :  "  Both  he  that  sanctifieth  and 
they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one  ;  for  which  cause 
he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren  ; "  the  Apostle 
Panl  declares  the  converted  Gentiles  to  be  "  sanctified 
by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Here  are  then  several  agents  in 
tlie  one  work  ;  and  in  the  first-cited  text  three  separate 
acts  in  this  one  work  ;  the  Son  praying  the  Father  to 
send   the  Holy  Spirit,   the  Father  sending    the   Holy 


204  DOCTRIXK   UF    THE   TRINITY    STATED.      Spirit,  the  Holy  Spirit  proceeding  from  the  Father  ami 
testifying  of  tlie  Son.  Hence  it  cannot  be  that  Holy 
Ghost  is  only  the  title  of  God  as  Sanctifier,  sin(;e  the 
Father  and  the  Son  are  also  eno-aoed  in  the  work  of 
sanctification.  The  same  council  of  Three  which  said  : 
"  Let  VIS  make  man,"  said  also,  "  Let  us  redeem  man," 
and,  "  Let  us  sanctify  him."  To  mark  the  error  we 
are  contending  against,  let  us  put  the  simple  name  of 
God  in  the  place  of  the  three  personal  names  which  it 
is  asserted  mean  only  God  acting  in  each  of  his  three 
great  works,  and  it  will  strike  you  at  once  as  absurd : 
God  prays  to  God  that  lie  would  send  forth  God;  or 
again  :  God  sanctifies  through  God  by  God  ;  or  again  : 
through  God  we  have  access  by  one  God  to  God.  But 
how  clear,  and  in  accordance  with  Scripture,  it  is  when 
we  say :  God  the  Father  sanctifies  through  God  the 
Son,  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

3.  When  we  assert  that  the  Father  then  is  God,  the 
Son  is  God,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  God,  we  do  not  mean 
that  there  are  three  Gods,  but  that  each  is  divine.  For 
when  we  speak  of  one  God,  we  mean  by  God  one 
divine  Being  ;  but  wlien  we  speak  of  each  of  the  three 
as  God,  Ave-  do  not  mean  the  divine  substance,  but  that 
each  is  divine  or  subsisting  in,  or  partaking  of,  this 
cUvine  Being  or  Essence,  which  is  but  the  Latin  syn- 
onym for  Being.  Thi^  the  syllogism  by  which  the 
Unitarian  would  drive  lis  to  absurdity,  fails  :  "  There 
is  one  God  ;  but  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  are  each  God  ;  therefore  there  are  three  Gods ; " 
for  God  in  the  minor  is  not  of  the  same  sense  as  God 
in  the  major.  The  true  form  of  the  syllogism  is : 
There  is  one  divine  essence  ;  but  there  are  three  that 
are  divine  ;  therefore  there  are  Three  in  the  one  divine 


i.Ecr.  A.J      DOCTRINE   OF   THE   TRINITY   STATED.  205 

essence  ;  or,  as  the  Catechism  states  it,  "  There  are  three 
distinct  Persons  in  the  one  only  true  and  eternal  God  ;  " 
by  which  is  meant  that  each  Person  is  divine,  —  God, 
but  not  the  Godhead,  —  and  that  the  Godhead  is  one 
but  three  Persons.  Do  any  start  from  this  as  though  it 
were  impossible  that  three  should  be  as  one,  and  one 
as  three  ;  we  bid  them  remember  that  God  is  infinite, 
and,  therefore,  as  we  cannot  comprehend  infinite,  we 
cannot  comprehend  the  mode  in  which  the  infinite  God 
exists.  Each  man  has  in  him  a  trinity  :  his  body,  his 
soul,  and  his  animal  life  ;  yet  is  he  one  person.  Even 
material  substances  may  be  composed  of  two,  three,  or 
many  constituent  elements,  yet  each  substance  so  com- 
posed is,  as  respects  its  aggregation,  one  thing.  Shall 
we  then  dare  to  deny  that  there  may  be  three  in  the 
divine  being  of  one  substance  ? 

4.  But  as  we  have  employed  the  term  Person,  we 
must  define  what  we  understand  by  it,  when  the  truth 
of  the  doctrine  will  be  yet  more  apparent. 

The  term  person  is  employed  somewhat  in  an  arbi- 
trary sense,  as  it  is  not  possible  for  the  human  mind  to 
understand,  or  for  any  language  to  declare  the  distin- 
guishing properties  of  the  Three  in  the  adorable  God- 
head.    It  assists,  however,  better  than  any  other. 

a.  By  person,  we  mean  one  possessed  of  a  distinct 
understanding  and  will.  Thus  the  Scriptures  distin- 
guish between  the  understanding  of  the  Father,  and 
that  of  the  Son,  and  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  No 
man  knoweth  the  Son,"  saith  our  Lord,  "  but  the  Father, 
neither  knoweth  aiiv  man  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and 
he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him."  Again  : 
"  He  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knoweth  what  is  the  mind 
of  the  Spirit ;  "  again :  "  God  hath  revealed  them  (the 


206  DOCTRINE   OF    THE   TlilNITY    STATED.        [Lkct.  X. 

things  of  the  Gospel)  unto  us  by  liis  Spirit ;  for  tlie 
Spirit  searciieth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God." 
Again,  the  Saviour  saith  :  "  He  (the  Holy  Ghost)  shall 
glorify  me  ;  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine  and  shall  show 
it  unto  you.  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine, 
therefore  said  I,  he  shall  take  of  mine  and  shall  show 
it  unto  you."  It  is  clear  that  in  these  texts,  not  one 
but  three  are  spoken  of.  So,  also,  is  the  will  of  the 
Father  distinguished  from  the  will  of  the  Son,  and  that 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  either.  "  I  came  down  from 
heaven,"  saith  the  Saviour,  "  not  to  do  mine  own  will, 
but  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me."  Again  :  "  Father, 
not  as  I  will,  Jbut  as  thou  wilt ; "  and  in  some  afore- 
cited text,  we  read  of  God  "  knowing  the  will  of  the 
Spirit,"  and  of  the  Spirit  acting  from  his  own  will  sep- 
arately from  the  Father  and  from  the  Son.  The  will 
of  each  is  ever  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  other 
two,  so  that  the  will  of  God  is  one  ;  but  as  they  each 
exercise  will,  they  are  distinct  Persons. 

h.  We  use  person,  to  signify  relative  distinction. 
Hence  we  call  I,  thou,  he,  we,  you,  they,  personal  pro- 
nouns. Such  personal  relations  the  Scriptures  declare 
exist  in  the  Godhead.  Thus,  the  Saviour  saith  ;  "  I 
will  pray  the  Father  and  he  Avill  send  yon  another 
Comforter."  Here  the  Son  speaks,  the  Father  is  spoken 
to,  and  the  Spirit  is  spoken  of.  We  need  not  multiply 
passages  though  we  might. 

c.  So,  also,  we  use  the  word  person,  because  we  find 
distinct  personal  acts  and  offices  attributed  to  each  of 
the  adorable  Three.  Thus  the  Father  accepts,  the  Son 
redeems,  the  Spirit  quickens. 

d.  But  let  it  be  carefully  remembered  that  when  we 
speak  of  Three   Persons   in   the  Godhead,  we  do  not 


DOCTRINE  OF   THE  TRINITY   STATED.  207 

mean  that  they  are  separate  as  three  Imman  or  created 
persons  are  separate.     This  we  deny ;  for  they  are   of 
one  essence  or  nature,  not  of  the  same  common  nature 
as  three  men  are  of  a  common  humanity,  but  actually 
of  one  being,  not  three  beings.     Such  a  distinction  is, 
we  admit,  incompatible  with  oneness  in  any  finite  being ; 
but  it  is  not  incompatible  with  the  Oneness  of  the  infi- 
nite, because  finiteness  has  parts,  infinity  must  be  ever 
one.     We  are  not  ashamed  to  confess  that  we  cannot 
explain,  for  we  do  not  know  how  these  three  Persons 
coexist  as  one  Being,  but  we  believe  that  they  do,  be- 
cause the  Scripture^  says  that  they  do.     If  God  could 
be  understood   by  us,  he  would  cease  to  be  God  ;  as 
an  eminent  thinker  (Daniel  Webster)   is  reported  to 
have  said  :  "  The  arithmetic  of  infinity  is  not  for  us  to 

cipher." 

Nor  shall  wc  attempt  as  some  have  done  to  illustrate 
these  truths  by  other  examples,  because  there  can  be 
no  analoo-y  ;  yet  we  might  show  the  inconsistency  of 
men  who  consider  the  Trinity  of  the  Godhead  contrary 
to  reason,  yet  believe  greater  difficulties  every  day  of 
their  lives.     Thus  :  A,  B,  and  C,  may  be  distinct  from 
each  other  in  a  property,  D,  yet  be  one  in  a  relation 
to  E.     The  three  sides  of  a  triangle  are  distinct  from 
each  other  and  may  be  equal,  yet  they  constitute  one 
triangle.      We    do    not  contend   that  these   cases   are 
analogous  to  the  Divine  Trinity,  yet,  if  there  may  be 
tri-unity  in   an   algebraic  formula,  or  a   mathematical 
figure,  who  dare  deny  that  it  may  in  the  Godhead? 
Again:    The    sovereign    authority   of  an    Italian   city 
was   once  vested  in  a  council,  known  by  one  name  ; 
that  council  was  composed  of  three  equal  members  ;  as 
respects  the  action  ad  extra  (externally)  of  the  council, 


208  DOCTRINE  OF   THE  TRINITY   STATED.       it  was  one ;  as  respects  the  action  of  the  three  ad  infra 
(or  in  their  relation  to  eacli  other)  they  were  distinct. 
The  illustration,  we  admit,  is  not  complete,  because  the 
Supreme  God  is  infinitely  above  any  human  authority  ; 
but  does  it  not  fully  meet  the  objection  that  a  tri-unity 
is  impossible  ? 

5.  The  Three  Persons  in  the  Godhead  are  equal 
each  to  each.  On  this  we  need  not  enlarge,  for  if  our 
previous  reasoning  be  received,  the  co-equality  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  must 
follow. 

a.  If  each  of  the  Three  Persons  be  divine,  each 
must  be  possessed  of  divine  attributes  ;  but  the  divine 
attributes  are  infinite,  and  infinity  is  not  separable  into 
parts ;  therefore  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  must  be  equal,  else  one  infinity  would  be  greater 
than  another  infinity,  which  is  impossible. 

b.  Divine  worship  is  homage  to  the  Supreme  author- 
ity ;  and  such  worship  is  demanded  for  each  of  the 
Three  divine  Persons  ;  therefore  they  must  be  equal, 
else  they  could  not  receive  each  the  homage  due  to  the 
Supreme. 

c.  If  it  be  objected  that  the  Scriptures  of  the  New 
Testament  often  re];)resent  the  Father  as  superior  to  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  subordinate  to  both  ;  we 
answer  that  all  such  passages  will  be,  on  examination, 
found  to  refer  to  the  working  out  of  the  redemption, 
and  describe  not  the  original  or  natural  relations  of  the 
Three  to  each  other,  but  the  official  distinctions  they 
have  voluntarily  assumed  to  each  other  in  the  remedial 
scheme  :  The  Father,  as  the  Representative  of  the 
Godhead  ;  The  Son,  as  the  incarnate  representation  of 
man  ;  and,  therefore,   in  the  form   of  servant  to   the 


DOCTRINE  OF   THE  TRINITY   STATED.  209 

Father;    the    Holy   Ghost   as   the    efficient   agent   of 
both.      In  the  essential  constitution  of  the  Godhead, 
they  are,   and   have  been  from  all  eternity,   and  will 
be    to    all    eternity,    equal.      Is    it    rejoined    that    the 
relation    of   a    son    to    a    ftither    necessarily    implies 
inferiority  ?      We   answer  :    Those    names   cannot   be 
applied  to  the  first  two  persons  of  the  Godhead  in  the 
same   sense  as  in  the  human   relation,  since   the  Son 
is  eternally  existent  with  the  Father ;  but  are  used  to 
indicate  that  the  Son  is  of  the  same  nature  with  the 
Father,  as  the  begotten  is  of  the  same  nature  with  the 
begetter.     Neither  is  it  true,  that  a  son  is  necessarily 
inferior   to   the  father,  but  only  while  under  age;  in 
adult  years,  a  son  takes   his   place  by  the  side  of  his 
father,  nay,  comes  to  be,  from  the  decrepitude  of  the 
aged  parent,  in  every  way  besides  that  of  afiectionate 
reverence,  superior  to  his  father.     The  divine  Father 
and  the  divine  Son  have  no  such  changes,  and  there- 
fore  there   is  nothing   in   the  terms  Father   and   Son 
which  supposes  the  one  to  be  greater  in  authority  than 
the  other. 

Here,  for  the  present,  we  rest  our  exposition,  the 
nice  technicalities  of  which  have  been  required  to 
o-uard  our  faith  from  the  uncandid  attacks  of  its  oppo- 
nents. 

PRACTICAL    INFERENCES. 

First :  In  all  our  studies  of  God,  we  should  humble 
our  reason  at  the  feet  of  Divine  Wisdom.  What 
know  we  of  God  beyond  what  he  has  revealed  of 
himself  ? 

Secondly:  We  should  confidently  trust  the  great 
Three  in  One  for  our  whole  salvation  ;  the  Spirit  for 
his  sanctifying  grace  ;  the  Son  for  his  prevalent  media- 

VOL.    I.  14 
DOCTRINE   OF   THK   TRINITY   STATED.       tion  ;  the  Father  for  his  adopting  love  ;  God  the  Spirit 
within  us  ;  God  the  Father  above  us  ;  God  the  Son 
between  us  and  God  the  Father. 

Thirdly:  We  should  ever  thankfully  adore  with 
equal  praises,  The  Father,  The  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  —  the  One  God,  the  God  of  our  salvation.