LECTURE  XI. 
FAITH   IN   GOD   THE   FATHEE. 


NINTH  LOED'S  DAY. 
FAITH   IN   GOD    THE   FATHER. 

Quest.  XXVI.  What  believest  thou,  when  thou  sayest:  "  /  believe  in  God, 
the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  "  ? 

.^NS.  That  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (who  of  nothing 
made  heaven  and  earth  and  all  that  is  in  them;  who  likewise  uphold.i 
and  governs  the  same  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  providence)  is  for  the 
sake  of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God  and  Father,  on  whom  I  rely  so  entirely 
that  I  have  no  doubt  but  he  will  provide  me  with  all  things  neces- 
sary for  soul  and  body ;  and  that  he  will  make  whatever  evils  he 
sends  upon  me  in  this  valley  of  tears  turn  out  for  my  advantage;  for  he 
is  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty  God,  and  willing,  being  a  faithful  Father. 

TT  is  necessary  here,  and,  indeed,  throughout  our 
-^  study  of  the  Catechism,  to  be  mindful  of  what  was 
stated  at  the  beginning  of  our  exposition,  that  the 
answers  given  are  supposed  to  come  from  the  mouth  of 
a  true  Christian ;  and,  therefore,  not  only  is  very 
strong  hmguage  used,  but,  also,  the  order  is  rather  that 
of  Christian  experience  than  of  systematic  theology. 
We  shall  not,  however,  err,  if,  in  opening  the  truths 
taught  by  the  section  for  this  (Ninth)  Lord's  Day,  and 
the  one  following,  we  do  not  confine  ourselves  to  the 
course  suggested  by  the  words  ;  but  unite,  as  far  as  we 
can,  the  theoretical  with  the  experimental,  the  doctrinal 
with  the  practical.  You  will  also  please  to  note,  that 
the  lesson  for  the  Tenth  Lord's  Day  is  an  expansion  of 
this  for  the  Ninth,  and  that  the  edifying  inferences  are 
from  the  whole,  allowing  us  to  reserve  until  our  next 
Lecture  several  important  things,  wliich  ought,  other- 
wise, to  be  treated  of  to-day. 

We    are   now  to  inqviire   (Quest,  and  Ans.  26th)  : 


214  FAITH    IN    GOD   THE   FATHER.  What  a  Christian  professes  when  he  says  :  '•^  I  believe  in 
God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  "  ? 

If  we  ascertain, 

First  :  What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  divine  title  : 
God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,"" 
we  shall  know, 

Secondly  :  What  is  the  doctrine  held  by  us  ivhen  ive 
assert  this  first  article  of  the  Creed. 

First  :  What  is  to  be  understood  by  the  divine  title  : 
God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth? 

In  our  last  Lecture  we  took  pains  to  show  from  the 
Scriptures,  that  there  is  One  Divine  Essence,  and  in  the 
One  Divine  Essence  three  distinct  Persons,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost.  Uj)on  this  distinction  and  order  of 
Three  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  as  set  forth  in  the  for- 
mula for  Christian  baptism,  our  Christian  Creed  is 
founded.  Hence  the  holy  and  reverend  name  of  God 
is  used  to  signify  the  one  divine  Being  in  Three  Persons, 
and  also  each  of  the  Three  Persons  as  divine.  There- 
fore, this  first  article  of  the  Creed  relates  to  God  the 
Father,  the  First  Person  in  the  ever-adorable  Godhead. 

It  was  also  shown  that,  while  the  distinction  of 
Three  in  the  one  God  is  eternal,  the  mode  of  their  co- 
existence is  utterly  beyond  our  comprehension  ;  but 
when  the  names.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  are 
used  with  reference  to  the  plan  of  redemption,  they 
have  a  significance  which  we  can  better  understand  ; 
and,  as  the  Christian  Creed  is  meant  to  set  forth  spe- 
cially God  in  our  redemption,  it  is  of  the  First  Person 
that  we  here  speak  of  as  God,  the  Father,  and  of  him 
as  engaged  with  God  the  Son  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  the  economy  of  saving  grace.  In  that  economy,  ac- 
cording to  the  eternal  counsel  and  covenant  of  the  Three 


Lect.  XI.J  FAITH   IN   GOD   THE   FATHER.  215 

Divine  Persons,  each  assumes  his  pecuhar  office  ;  and 
while  the  Son  executes  the  work  necessary  for  our 
redemption,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  applies  the  benefits  of 
that  work  to  the  believer,  the  Father  is  constituted  the 
representative  of  the  Godhead  and  vindicator  of  its 
honors  ;  and,  therefore,  officiallij  the  source  and  end  of 
the  scheme,  to  whom  we  must  go  for  acceptance  through 
the  Son  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  as  the  Apostle  says : 
"  Through  him  (i.  e.  Christ)  we  have  access  by  one 
Spirit  to  the  Father." 

You  will  observe,  however,  that,  by  a  difference  in 
punctuation,  this  article  may  read :  I  believe  in  God  ; 
the  Father  Almighty,  etc.,  i.  e.  I  believe  in  God,  viz: 
in  "  the  Father,  ....  and  in  .  .  his  only  begotten 
Son,  .  .  .  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  According  to  this 
reading,  tlie  Creed  asserts  first  the  unity  of  God,  in  op- 
position to  those  heretics  who  contended  for  more  gods 
than  one,  and  in  refutation  of  those  who  reproach 
believers  in  the  Trinity  with  believing  in  three  Gods. 
There  is  in  the  history  and  comparison  of  the  Creed,  as 
adopted  by  different  portions  of  the  earlier  church,* 
some  little  ground  for  this  view  ;  but  as  the  difference 
is  not  essential,  and  as  we  have  already  proved  the 
unity  of  the  true  God,  we  shall  adopt  the  ordinary 
acceptation. 

With  this  preface  we  proceed.  Giod,  the  Father  Al- 
mighty^ Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Here  are  several  titles  of  the  First  Person  in  the 
Godhead  combined  :  The  I.  absolute,  God ;  the  II. 
relative.  The  Father  ;  the  III.  characteristic.  Al- 
mighty ;  the  IV.  executive.  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth. 

*  See  King  and  others  on  The  Creed. 


216  FAITFI    IN   GOD   THE   FATHER.  I.  Grod.  —  This  is  an  absolute  term  for  tliat  ineffable 
mode  of  beinjj;  in  -wliich  God  exists  alone,  indej)endently 
of  all  liis  creatures,  oifices,  and  acts.  For  although, 
because  of  his  authority  over  us,  and  of  our  dei'ivation 
of  all  we  are  and  have  from  him,  we  are  accustomed 
to  .consider  God  in  connection  with  his  infinite  sover- 
eignty, and  the  effects  of  his  will ;  he  would  be  not 
the  less  God  if  there  were  no  being  animate  or  inanimate 
in  tlie  universe  but  he.  We  can,  therefoi-e,  attempt 
no  definition  of  the  word  God,  used  thus  absolutely. 
He  himself  has  given  us  none.  "  I  am  that  I  am,"  said 
he  to  Moses  ;  and  again  by  the  prophet :  "  I  am  Je- 
hovah (the  Lord),  and  besides  me  there  is  none  else." 
The  composition  of  the  name  Jehovah  has  the  same 
meaning,  —  being  of  two  words  signifying  existence, — 
existing  ;  which  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  imply- 
ing his  eternity,  but  the  mode  of  being  in  which  he  is 
eternal.  Josephus  calls  Jehovah  "  the  shudder-causing 
name  of  God  ;  "  and  the  Jews  never  pronounced  it,  such 
was  their  awful  reverence  for  its  inscrutable  meaning. 

We  need  not  stay  to  prove  this  essential  Divinity  or 
Godship  of  the  Father,  seeing  that  it  is  disjDuted  by  none, 
—  Jew,  Mohammedan,  Arian,  Socinian,  or  Sabellian,  — 
who  contend  against  us  only  because  we  impute  per- 
sonal divinity  also  to  the  Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  all  are  united  with  us  in  calling  the  Father  God. 

II.  God,  the  Father.  —  Father  is  a  relative  term,  im- 
plying that  there  is  one  or  more  of  whom,  or  to  whom, 
a  father  is  father.  We  use  it  to  signify  the  author  of 
life  in  a  conscious  being,  as  a  man  is  of  the  child  lie 
has  begotten,  or  the  Greater  of  men  and  angels.  This 
is  its  first  and  radical  sense. 

From  this  it  comes  to  signify  one  who  extends  over 


,         FAITH  IN   GOD   THE  FATHER.  217 

another  or  others  such  care  as  a  father  lias  for  his  off- 
spring. So  Job  was  "  a  father  to  the  poor,"-  because 
he  felt  for  their  wants  and  supplied  them.  Often  it 
implies  instruction,  as  followers  of  an  eminent  teacher 
(Socrate*s,  for  example)  address  him  as  their  father  ; 
and  as  the  apostles  Paul  and  John  call  those  whom 
they  instruct  their  children.  It  also  may  include  gov- 
ernment and  protection,  as  kings  are  spoken  to  by  their 
subjects  by  the  name  of  Sire  ;  and  as  our  Indian  tribes 
call  our  President  their  Great  Father. 

It  may,  therefore,  designate  a  natural  relation,  an 
affectionate  relation,  or  an  authoritative  relation  ;  and 
these  three  senses  may  be  combined  by  the  word. 

When  we  speak  of  God  the  Father,  we  may  use  the 
phrase  with  one  of  two  references.  1.  We  may  speak 
of  the  First  Person  of  the  Trinity  in  his  relation  to  the 
other  two  Persons,  but  particularly  in  his  peculiar  re- 
lation to  the  Second  ;  as  when  it  is  said :  "  God  sent 
forth  his  Son  ;  "  and  Christ  says :  "  I  go  unto  my 
Father."  Or,  2.  We  may  speak  of  God  the  Father 
in  the  relation  which  he,  with  merciful  condescension, 
sustains  to  his  intelligent  creatures,  and  especially 
through  Christ  to  the  new  creatures  of  his  grace.  Thus 
the  Catechism  here:  "I  believe  that  the  eternal  Father 

of  our  Lord   Jesus   Christ, is,  for  the  sake  of 

Christ  his  Son,  my  God  and  Father." 

1.  We  speak  of  the  First  Person  in  the  Trinity  in 
his  relation  to  the  other  two,  but  particularly  his  pecul- 
iar relation  to  the  Second,  who  is  called  the  Sou. 

The  Three  Persons  in  the  Godhead  are,  as  we  took 
pains  in  a  former  discourse  to  show,  originally  and 
essentially  equal.  They  are  divine  ;  and,  as  Deity  is 
essentially  supreme,  there  can  be  no  natural  superiority 


218  FAITH  IN  GOD   THE  FATHER.  of  one  over  another.  They  are  divine  ;  and,  as  Deity 
is  essentially  self-existent,  therefore  eternal,  no  one 
could  be  before  another  ;  they  must  have  coexisted 
from  all  eternity.  As  the  Father  is  eternal,  so  is  the 
Son  eternal,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  eternal.  But  in  the 
Scriptures  the  First  Person  is  called  the  Father  ;  the 
Second,  the  Son  ;  the  Third,  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  spoken 
of  as  sent  from  both. 

Yet,  as  we  have  seen,  these  relations  cannot,  from 
the  essential  properties  of  the  Holy  and  Divine  Per- 
sons, imply  any  difference  in  rank  or  order  of  being. 
They  are  relations  we  cannot  understand,  the  mystery 
arising  from  the  incomprehensibility  of  God  by  our 
finite  minds.  The  terms  employed  by  theologians,  as 
"  eternal  generation  "  and  "  procession,"  and  the  like, 
though  useful  as  technicalities  of  science,  really  throw  no 
light  on  the  subject;  nor  can  they  themselves  be  farther 
explained,  although  the  offices  which  the  several  Per- 
sons hold  in  the  redemption  are  clearly  distinguishable. 

It  is,  however,  to  tlie  Second  Person  that  the  First 
bears,  peculiarly,  the  relation  of  Father.  As  Jehovah 
said  unto  David,  the  royal  type  of  Christ,  and,  there- 
fore, according  to  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  prophetically  of  Christ  himself:  "  I  will  be 
his  Father,  and  he  shall  be  my  Son  ;  "  and  again  in  the 
Second  Psalm,  which  we  know  on  the  same  authority 
(and  from  the  strain  of  the  Psalm  itself)  refers  also  to 
Christ,  God  says  by  solemn  decree  :  "  Thou  art  my 
Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."  "  This  day  "  — 
that  is  in  eternity  ;  —  from  all  eternity  he  is  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  God  the  Father. 

a.  He  is  his  Father,  because  of  that  inefftible  rela- 
tion subsistinir  between  them  in  the  Godhead. 


FAITH  IN   GOD  THE   FATHER.  219 

b.  He  is  his  Father,  because  the  Begotten  is  of  the 
same  nature  witli  the  Begetter. 

c.  He  is  his  Father,  because  the  Son  is  appointed  to 
appear  acknowledged  as  the  representative  to  receive 
honor  in  his  Father's  name. 

d.  He  is  his  Father,  because,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
begat  his  human  nature  in  a  miraculous  manner. 

e.  He  is  his  Father,  because  he  raised  him  up  from 
the  dead,  so  giving  him  a  renewed  life. 

/.  He  is  his  Father,  because  he  constitutes  him  the 
head  of  that  spiritual  family  which  he  has  adopted  for 
the  sake  of  the  Son,  from  among  the  fallen  race  of  men. 

For  all  these  reasons,  the  Catechism  speaks  of  God 
the  Father  as  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  eternal,  because  himself  eternal ;  eternal,  be- 
cause from  all  eternity  the  Father  of  the  Second  Per- 
son, who,  at  the  fulness  of  time,  became  incarnate 
for  us. 

2.  In  using  the  title  God  the  Father,  we  may  speak 
of  the  First  Person  in  the  relation  he  sustains  to  his 
intelligent  creatures. 

a.  God  the  Father  is  oiu'  Father,  because  he  is  the 
author  of  our  being.  He  created  us  as  he  created  all 
things.  We  came  into  existence  only  through  the 
efficient  ^^a^  of  his  will.  The  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
coopeiated  with  him  in  the  divine  work  ;  for  the  Son 
is  the  Eternal  Word  by  whom  the  worlds  were  made, 
and  "  without  whom  there  was  not  anything  made  that 
was  made  ;  "  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  Spirit  that 
moved  on  the  face  of  the  chaotic  deep,  and  that  breathed 
into  man's  nostrils  the  breath  of  life  ;  yet,  as  we  are 
taught  to  recognize  in  the  First  Person  the  rej)resenta- 
tive  of  the  combined  honors  of  the  Godhead,  we  ascribe 


220  FAITH   IN   GOD  THE  FATHER.  [Lkct.  XI. 

to  him  tlie  official  work  of  creation  tlirougli  the  Word 
by  tlie  Holy  Spirit. 

h.  He  is  our  Father,  because  lie  is  our  Teacher, 
having  given  us  intelligent  souls,  and  instructing  us  by 
his  works,  his  Word,  and  his  Spirit. 

c.  He  is  our  Father,  because,  knowing  the  wants  of 
our  nature,  physical  and  moral,  he  feels  for  us,  watches 
over  us,  and  supplies  us  with  that  which  we  need. 

d.  He  is  our  Father,  because  he  is,  in  the  same  man- 
ner, our  Protector,  so  that  nothing  can  affect  us  but  by 
his  order  or  permission  ;  wdiile,  as  our  Sovereign  Ruler, 
lie  insists  upon  our  entire  obedience,  chastening  us  when 
we  stray,  and  punishing  us  if  we  be  obstinately  ini- 
])enitent. 

In  these  senses  God  is  a  Father  to  all  his  intellio;ent 
creatures,  though  his  chastening  of  those  who  err  be- 
longs more  properly  to  the  dispensation  of  gi'ace. 

But,  as  the  First  Person  is  peculiarly  the  Father  of 
the  Second  Person,  who  became  incarnate  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  so  is  he  in  a  peculiar  manner  the  Father 
of  penitent  sinners  among  men,  who,  believing  on  Christ, 
the  appointed  Saviour,  are  represented  by  Christ  the 
Son  of  God.  We  have  by  our  sins  forfeited  our  origi- 
nal right  and  natural  claim  to  our  Maker's  regard,  and, 
having  lost  the  image  of  God,  there  is  in  us  nothing 
correspondent  to  the  divine  holiness.  Before  we  can 
be  restored  to  our  primeval  estate  of  favor,  our  sins 
must  be  expiated  ;  we  must  have  a  new  righteousness 
which  may  recommend  us  to  his  approval  ;  we  must 
have  a  new  nature  in  wlii(!h  we  can  hold  communion 
with  him.  That  expiation  he  has  provided  for  us  by 
the  death  of  Christ ;  that  righteousness  has  been 
wrought  out  for  us  by  the  active  obedience  of  Christ ; 


Lect.  XI.J  faith    in   GOD   THE   FATHER,  221 

that  new  nature  is  created  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
the  divine  image  being  renewed  in  our  souls.  These 
benefits  become  ours  the  moment  that  we  receive  them 
and  apply  them  to  ourselves  by  faith  in  Christ,  which 
is  an  acceptance  of  him  as  our  atoning  Mediator  with 
the  Father,  and  a  reliance  on  his  merits  alone  for  our 
justification  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  faith  unites  us 
to  Christ ;  he  becomes  our  Head,  we  become  members 
of  his  body.  We  are  then  found  in  him  ;  we  in  him 
look  to  God  ;  God  looks  upon  us  in  him  ;  and,  as  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  God,  we  become  by  him  children  of  God. 

We  are  his  children,  because  we  are  begotten  again 
by  his  power ;  because  we  have  the  right  (a  right 
through  grace,  but  still  a  right)  of  children  ;  and  be- 
cause God  formally,  absolutely  adopts  us  as  his  children, 
making  us  objects  of  his  affectionate  care,  instruction, 
and  discipline,  reflections  of  his  image,  and  heirs  of  his 
kingdom  above.  "  To  as  many  as  received  him  (i.  e. 
Christ),  to  them  gave  he  power  (prerogative)  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name." 

III.  God,  the  Father  Almighty.  —  This  title,  charac- 
teristic of  his  power,  is  in  some  versions  of  the  Creed 
joined  to  "  Father,"  in  others  to  "  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth  ;  "  but  the  difference  is  little  whether  we 
speak  of  God  as  the  Father  Almighty  or  as  the  Al- 
mighty Creator,  since  our  Father  and  the  Creator  are 
one  and  the  same,  —  our  gracious  and  faithful  Lord 
God.  He  could  not  be  the  Creator  were  he  not 
almighty  ;  nor  could  he  be  our  Father  were  he  not 
the  Creator.  It  is  his  boundless  power  which  warrants 
and  demands  our  sole  and  entire  trust  in  him,  accord- 
ing to  his  promises  of  merciful  love  through  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son  and  Lord. 


222  FAITH   IN    GOD   THE    FATHER.  [Lkct.  XI. 

When  we  say  that  He  is  almighty^  we  mean  that  he 
can  do  what  it  pleases  liim  to  do,  and  prevent  what  it 
pleases  him  to  prevent,  and  overrule  what  any  of  his 
creatures  may  do  in  disregard  of  his  authority,  for  his 
own  ends  and  his  own  glory.  It  is  worse  than  idle  and 
impertinent  to  ask  if  God  can  do  anything  inconsistent 
with  his  holiness,  or  anything  not  conformed  to  the 
nature  of  things  which  he  has  ordained.  It  pleases 
him  to  do  nothing  of  the  sort ;  it  is  morally  impossible 
that  anything  inconsistent  can  occur  in  his  acts ;  but 
his  power  is  limited  only  by  his  will.  How  great  his 
power  is  we  cannot  know,  for  it  is  infinitely  above  our 
thoughts ;  yet,  that  it  is  unbounded,  we  easily  discover 
in  his  acts.  He  who  can  make  the  least  thing  out  of 
nothing,  must  be  able  to  make  what  he  pleases  out  of 
nothing ;  and  he  who  has  thus  made  all  things  must 
be  able  to  control  all  things.  Think  what  power  there 
is  in  that  will  which  at  once  brought  all  things  into 
existence  ;  which  since  maintains  them  in  existence,  and 
repeats  or  multiplies  many  of  them  by  such  nice,  grad- 
ual, wonderfully  adapted  laws  and  instrumentalities. 
What  power  there  is  in  the  wind,  the  fluxes  of  the 
waters,  the  expansion  of  heat,  the  contraction  of  cold, 
the  electric  fire,  and  the  magnetic  attraction  !  What 
power  there  is  in  the  motion  of  all  the  radiant  worlds 
throughout  all  space,  and  their  restraint  to  their  har 
monious  orbits  by  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal  forces  ! 
What  power  there  is  in  the  uj)heaving  from  the  soil  of 
the  vesetating  seeds  that  cover  the  earth  with  verdure, 
and  the  vital  sap  that  nourishes  and  perfects  plant  and 
shrub  and  vine  and  tree  !  What  power  there  is  in  the 
strength  put  forth  by  all  animated  beings !  Think, 
also,  that  this  power  is  irresistibly  exerted  and  felt  at 


FAITH   IN   GOD   THE   FATHER.  223 

once,  constantly,  everywhere  !  Yet  is  all  this  power 
his.  Nay,  these  are  parts  of  his  works ;  and  we  know 
but  a  small  portion  of  the  vast  effects  which  resnlt  from 
his  will  ;  nor  can  we  deny  that  he  who  has  done,  or 
is  doing,  what  we  now  must  ascribe  to  God,  may,  if  it 
pleases  him,  accomplish  infinitely  more.  In  a  word, 
his  power  has  no  bounds  ;  he  is  almighty. 

IV.  Maker  of  heaven  a^id  earth.  —  This  we  have 
called  an  executive  title,  because  it  represents  God  the 
Father  not  merely  possessed  of  infinite  power,  but  as 
exerting  it  in  the  first  great  work  of  his  will,  which  is 
the  basis  or  beginning  of  all  his  system  of  operations, 
at  least  of  all  that  concern  our  race. 

The  making  of  heaven  and  earth  by  God  the  Father 
Almighty,  is  so  vast  a  subject  that  to  discuss  or  even 
speak  of  all  the  things  which  closely  relate  to  it,  would 
exhaust  the  longest  lifetime;  and,  if  the  pen  were  em- 
ployed, "  I  suppose  that  even  the  world  itself  Could  not 
contain  the  books  that  should  be  written."  We  must, 
therefore,  confine  ourselves  to  a  statement  of  a  few  gen- 
eral heads,  under  which  all  may  be  arranged,  with  such 
brief  comments  as  are  required  for  our  practical  use  of 
the  matter,  and  shall  treat  1st,  Of  the  making ;  2d, 
Of  what  was  made  ;  3d,  Of  the  time  of  the  making. 

1st.  Of  the  making.  The  translators  of  the  Creed 
into  our  vernacular  have  evidently  endeavored  to  use, 
as  far  as  possible,  purely  English  words,  for  the  better 
understanding  of  the  common  people  ;  and,  here,  have 
chosen  the  verb  to  make  as  the  only  Saxon  one  by 
which  the  idea  can  be  at  all  expi'essed.  Yet  making 
does  not  give  the  whole  sense  implied  ;  for  a  man  may 
make  various  things  out  of  material  supplied  to  his 
hand,  while  here  is  intended  an  act  of  sovereign  om- 


224  FAITH   IN   GOD   THE   FATHER.  lupotence.  Nor  is  it  true  that  eitlrer  tlio  Latin,  Greek, 
or  even  the  Hebrew  words  rendered  here  by  "  made," 
signify,  radically,  any  more.  Still,  our  Avord  "  create," 
formed  from  the  Latin,  is  univei'sally  used  by  us,  espe- 
cially by  theolofrians,  to  convey  the  sense  of  entire 
origination,  or,  when  applied  to  the  great  fact  before 
us,  of  makbig  out  of  nothing  ;  and  so  we  shall  use  it. 
The  insufficiency  of  the  terms  of  the  other  languages 
should  not,  however,  prejudice  us  against  the  idea  of 
the  origination  by  God,  because  the  Romans  and 
Greeks,  being  heathen,  had  no  notion  of  what  we  mean 
by  creation,  and  thought  that  matter  was  eternal ; 
while  the  Hebrew  has  few  radicals,  and  Moses  took 
the  one  nearest  to  the  full  sense.  The  Jews,  however, 
universally  understood  the  making  to  be  out  of  nothing ; 
indeed,  such  belief  in  the  divine  origination  of  all  things, 
distinguishes  those  who  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  written 
revelation  from  all  others.  The  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
puts  beyond  doubt  the  belief  of  both  Jews  and  Chris- 
tians on  the  subject,  when  he  says  :  "  Through  faith 
{i.  c.  reliance  on  divine  testimony),  we  understand  that 
the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  (or  speech 
of  God,  pyjfxaTi,  not  Xoyco,)  so  that  things  which  are  seen 
(visible)  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear 
(i.  e.  are  distinguishable)  ; "  meaning,  as  Chrysostom 
observes,  things  that  are  were  made  of  things  which 
are  not  (see  1  Cor.  i.  28  ;  ra/xr/  ovto.  .  .  .  Tuorra),  that 
is,  of  nothing.  Besides  the  notion  that  matter  itself  has 
not  originated  from  God's  supreme  will,  would  impeach 
the  divine  almightiness,  since  that  which  had  existence 
without  his  will  must  continue  to  be,  in  some  degree, 
beyond  his  power.  When,  therefore,  we  read  that  "  in 
the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth," 
we  understand  that  he  made  tliem  out  of  nothino;. 


FAITH  IN  GOD   THE  FATHER.  225 

2d.  What  was  made.  Tlie  verse  just  cited  tells  us, 
"  The  heaveu  and  earth."  The  only  question  arising 
here  is  I'especting  what  is  meant  by  "  heaven  ;"  *  whether 
it  signifies  the  heaven  of  the  divine  Presence,  with  the 
various  orders  of  angelic  spirits  whose  abode  is  there,  — 
or  what  we  call  heaven,  intending  the  sky  and  the 
starry  worlds  which  we  call  the  heavenly  bodies.  The 
Rabbinical  opinion  is  that  it  means  the  former,  and  this 
is  followed  by  most  divines  ;  but  the  latter  idea,  confin- 
ing it  to  the  visible  heaven,  has,  at  least,  a  strong  prob- 
ability for  several  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  the 
scriptural  history  throughout  relates  to  this  woi-ld,  or 
rather  to  the  Church  in  this  world ;  and  what  concerns 
other  worlds,  which  are  the  abodes  of  happy  or  lost 
spirits,  is  spoken  of  with  great  reserve,  and  only  when 
necessary  to  the  development  of  facts  bearing  on  the 
Church  and  the  future  state  of  men.  Then,  again,  the 
account  is  everyvidiere  else  of  the  physical  creation, 
except  where  the  spiritual  nature  of  man  and  his  moral 
condition  (in  the  image  of  God)  are  stated.  So  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews,  speaking  of  what  we  know  by 
taith  respecting  the  creation,  says:  "  tlie  things  that  are 
seen."  Besides  which,  the  Jews  (and  the  sacred  lan^ 
guage  is  conformable)  believed  that  there  were  three 
heavens  :  the  earth's  atmosphere  (as  we  say  the  fowls 
of  heaven)  ;  the  supernal  atmosphere,  or  Avhat  we 
should  call  the  space  beyond  ;  and  the  third  heavens, 
or  heaven  of  heavens,  which  last  is  rarely,  if  ever, 
without  some  distinguishing  epithet,  alluded  to  by  the 
sacred  writers.  Certainly,  this  view  of  the  subject  re- 
lieves us  from  many  embarrassments  ;  as  we  believe 
firmly  that  all  creatures  in  heaven  as  well  as  on  eartli, 

*  Or  heavens;  the  word  is  plural. 

VOL.    T.  15 


226  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER.  [Lkct.  XI. 

came  ibrth  from  the  almighty  will  ;  and  only  conline 
the  sense  of  the  word  heaven  or  heavens  in  the  text 
before  us. 

3d.  Tiie  time  of  the  making.  The  present  the- 
ories of  geologists  and  others  have  introduced  large 
discussions  on  this  point ;  and  Christian  inquirers 
have  sometimes  ventured  dangerously  far  through 
anxiety  to  recojicile  the  inspired  account  with  scien- 
tific opinion.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  if  our 
knowledge  of  facts  were  sufficient,  revelation  and  sci- 
ence would  be,  in  every  respect,  agreed  ;  but,  as  firm 
believers  in  the  Divine  testimony,  we  should  never 
consent  to  try  the  truth  of  Moses  by  the  deductions  of 
philosophers.  Science  is  progressive,  and,  therefore, 
imperfect,  and,  therefore,  fallible.  The  present  iiypoth- 
esis  of  geologists  is  scarcely  half  a  century  old,  being 
based  on  facts  until  then  undiscovered  ;  it  is  itself  con- 
tradictory to  the  hypothesis  of  the  same  science  in  the 
centuries  before  ;  so  that  they  who  insist  upon  modern 
views  would  themselves  laugh  at  us  were  we  to  attempt 
the  trial  of  the  sacred  story  by  what  was  once  science, 
but  now  is  exploded.  Yet,  since  such  changes  haA'e 
been  made  in  science  by  facts  discovered  lately,  who 
can  assert  that  no  new  facts  shall  be  discovered  to-mor- 
row, or  fifty  or  a  hundred  years  hence,  which  will 
change  as  entirely  the  scientific  opinion  as  it  has  been 
before  ?  We  do  not  doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  facts 
which  the  geoloo-ists  state  ;  but  we  doubt  their  theoret- 
ical  deductions,  because  we  doubt  the  sufficiency  of 
their  facts  to  wai'rant  an  absolute  conclusion,  as  one 
new  fact  may  change  the  whole  combination.  We 
shall,  therefore,  adhere  to  the  Word  of  God,  let  other 
men  argue  as  they  please.     Still,  as  the  Mosaic  account 


Lect.  Xr.]  FAITH  IN   GOD   THE  FATHER.  227 

does  not  enter  into  questions  of  science,  but  is  meant 
for  the  general  mind  of  men,  our  interpretation  of  its 
language  should  be  correspondently  liberal,  though  not 
licentious  to  a  degree  that  would  impeach  its  fundamen- 
tal accuracy. 

Thus  we  read  that  "  in  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth."  When  "the  beoinnincr" 
was,  is  not  stated  ;  and  it  may  very  well  be  a  general 
comprehensive  statement  of  an  original  fact,  viz  :  the 
creation  of  the  substance  out  of  which  the  present 
order  of  things  was  framed  ;  and  not  necessarily  in- 
cluded by  the  first  day.  Nay,  this  might  seem  to  be 
intimated  by  the  statement  that  the  earth  was  without 
form  and  void  until  the  subsequent  mandates  of  Jeho- 
vah were  issued.  If  this  interpretation  be  received, 
we  can  consistently  allow  the  possibility  of  the  sub- 
stance of  things  having  existed  long  before  ;  and  that, 
antecedent  to  the  present  constitution,  other  forms  had 
been  given  to  such  substance  ;  a  supposition,  not  forbid- 
den, which  would  go  far  to  meet  the  main  objections 
derived  from  facts  discovered  in  the  deeper  parts  of  the 
earth  ;  while  the  fluxes  and  changes  of  the  waters  of 
which  Moses  speaks  are  confirmed  by  the  facts  of 
science. 

Again  ;  some,  from  motives  stated  a  little  while 
ago,  have  contended  that  "  the  day  "  in  six  of  Avhich 
"  all  things  were  made,"  does  not  mean  a  day  of  twenty- 
four  hours,  but  a  period  of  time  including,  it  may  be, 
centuries  or  thousands  of  years  ;  but,  when  we  read 
closely,  such  an  assumption  is  unwarranted  ;  for  Moses 
expressly  limits  by  night  and  day,  as  we  do  our  day  — 
"  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day,"  and 
so  with   the  other  five  ;  and,  besides,   on  the  seventh 


228  FAITH   IN  GOD   THE  FATHER.  day  lie  rested,  and  from  tliat  fact  he  ordained  then, 
and  on  jNIount  Sinai,  the  sacredness  of  the  Sabbath  to 
his  honor.  It  will  not,  therefore,  do  to  make  "  the 
day  "  indefinite  when  reading  one  verse,  and  confine  it 
to  twenty-four  hours  when  reading  another.  The  same 
rule  must  measure  each  and  all  of  the  seven. 

In  few  words,  then,  we  understand  by  the  account 
given  in  Genesis,  just  so  much,  no  more,  no  less,  as  an 
ordinary  yet  cautious  and  reverent  reader  would  under- 
stand by  it ;  that  God  in  the  beginning  made  all  things 
out  of  nothing,  and  that  in  six  days  he  gave  to  matter 
the  form  which  it  now  has,  and  created  man  body  and 
soul  to  be  the  inhabitant  of  the  world,  and  the  vice- 
gerent of  God  over  all  things  that  are  in  the  earth. 

We  now  know. 

Secondly  :  The  doctrine  held  hy  us  when  we  assert 
this  first  article  of  the  creed :  I  believe  in  Gfod,  the  Father 
Almighty^  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth. 

The  catechumen  is  made  to  speak  in  the  first  person 
(I  believe),  because  he  is  addressed  personally  and 
required  to  state  his  own  personal  faith  and  convictions  ; 
yet  in  adopting  the  creed  of  the  true  Catholic  Church, 
he  declares  his  adherence  to  the  principles  of  faith  held 
by  the  whole  Churcli,  and,  tlierefore,  that  Avhat  the 
creed  teaches  concerning  himself  is  equally  applicable 
to  all  genuine  Christians. 

Some  commentators  are  unnecessarily  anxious  to 
insist  upon  the  difference  between  "  believing"  and 
"believing  in,"  as  if  "believing"  were  simply  recog- 
nizing a  truth  to  be  true,  and  "  believing  in  "  implied 
trusting  in  or  relying  upon  that  truth.  Sucli  a  distinc- 
tion is,  however,  by  no  means  universal  when  these 
terms  are   employed  ;  yet,  as  was   shown   in   our   dis- 


FAITH    IN   GOD   THE   FATHER.  229 

course  on  Saving  Faith  (21st  Question  and  Answer), 
sincere  belief  in  the  blessed  truths  here  set  forth,  must 
be  accompanied  by  a  cordial  reliance  upon  them. 

The  answer  of  the  catechist  (to  the  26th  Quest.) 
declares  the  main  Christian  doctrine  here  professed  : 
"  I  believe  "  "  that  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  .  .  .  ^'s,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God 
and  my  Father.''"'  This  is  the  doctrine  of  Adoption; 
which  includes  two  thino;s  :  — 

I.  The  relation  which  God,  represented  by  the  First 
Person  of  the  Godhead,  the  Father,  graciously  bears  to 
all,  Avho  through  faith  are  represented  by  the  Second 
Person,  the  Son,  incarnate  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners ; 
and, 

II.  The  spirit  or  disposition,  which  all  those  thus 
adopted  bear  to  God  as  his  children. 

I.  The  relation  which  God,  represented  by  the  Father, 
the  First  Person  of  the  Godhead,  graciously  bears  to 
all,  who  through  faith  are  represented  by  the  Second 
Person,  the  Son,  incarnate  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners. 

All  that  God  was  to  man  before  he  fell,  he  is  now 
graciously,  and  in  a  more  eminent  degree,  toward  sin- 
ners through  Christ  his  Son.  The  reconciliation,  by 
the  infinite  merits  of  the  Saviour  is  complete  ;  and  in 
honor  of  his  Son,  he  advances  the  believer  to  far  higher 
honors  than  man,  though  he  had  continued  holy,  could 
ever  have  won  by  his  own  righteousness.  God  renews 
the  sinner  whom  he  calls  to  a  new  life,  by  begetting  in 
him  a  new  nature  through  the  word  of  his  Gospel 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  applies.  But  this  life,  though, 
like  the  life  given  in  his  first  creation,  it  bears  the  image 
of  God,  yet,  unlike  that,  is  not  liable  to  be  lost,  but  is 
derived  from  God  throuo-h  the  divine  Son  to  whom  he 


230  FAITH  IN   GOD   THE  FATHER.  [I.kct.  XI. 

is  vitally  joined  by  faith,  as  a  member  of  tlie  body  of 
whicli  Christ  is  the  Head  ;  and  is  maintained  in  him 
by  the  constant  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Hence  the 
Master  says  :  "  I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life,  and 
that  ye  might  have  it  more  abundantly  ;  "  again  :  "  My 
sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  fol- 
low me  ;  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they 
shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  (2.  e.  any 
one)  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand ;  "  and  again,  ad- 
dressing his  Father  :  "  Glorify  thy  Son  that  thy  Son 
also  may  glorify  thee  ;  as  thou  hast  given  him  power 
over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  eternal  life  to  as 
many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  The  new  life  is  as 
infallible  and  incorruptible,  therefore  eternal,  as  is  the 
union  of  the  believer  to  the  Son,  and  as  is  the  favor  of 
the  Son  with  the  Father.  As  the  Son  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  partakes  of  our  human  nature,  so  the 
believer,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  him,  is  (using 
the  strong  language  of  the  Apostle  Peter)  "  partaker 
of  the  divine  nature." 

For  the  same  reasons,  and  in  the  same  manner,  is 
the  fellowship  between  God  and  the  believer  more  inti- 
mate and  full.  The  Son  is  near  to  the  Father ;  the 
believer  to  the  Son.  The  word  of  truth  is  enlarged 
for  his  benefit ;  the  communications  of  divine  knowl- 
edge far  greater,  things  hidden  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  and  things  of  the  world  to  come,  are  re- 
vealed ;  and,  especially,  does  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Illu- 
minator, dwell  in  him,  enabling  him  to  hear  and  under- 
stand the  language  of  the  Father's  love  to  his  soul  ; 
while  the  privilege  of  prayer  based  on  the  merits  of 
Christ,  and  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  is  equally 
enlarged,  so  that  he  has  access  Avith  the  affectionate 
boldness  of  a  dear  child  to  the  throne  of  grace. 


FAITH   IN    GOD   THE   FATHER.  231 

So,  also,  with  his  inheritance.  It  is  as  superior  to 
God's  original  bestowal  on  innocent  man,  as  Christ's 
mediatorial  righteousness  is  to  any  possible  righteous- 
ness of  man.  The  eternal  life  which  Christ  gives,  and 
the  communion  which  God  allows,  demand  for  their 
full  consummation,  a  higher,  purer,  more  glorious  and 
enduring  sphere  than  this  world  will  permit.  God  first 
gave  man  the  earth  ;  now  he  gives  him  heaven.  Christ 
came  from  heaven  to  dwell  with  the  believer,  and  he 
returns  to  heaven  that  the  believer  may  dwell  with  him 
there.  Christ's  home  as  the  Son  of  God  is  in  heaven  ; 
there  is  the  place  of  his  highest  dignity  and  honor ; 
and  there  is  the  believer's  home  as  the  child  of  God  in 
Christ,  and  there  will  he  share  in  all  the  dignity  and 
honor  of  his  Elder  Brother  forever. 

But  as  sin  yet  lingers  in  the  believer's  soul,  and  the 
effects  of  sin  are  in  his  body,  there  is  a  necessity  of  a 
purifying  process  before  he  is  fit  to  enter  upon  the  per- 
fection of  his  bliss.  Hence,  the  salutary  discipline 
which  God  by  affliction,  exerts  upon  the  believer's 
soul.  Even  Christ,  though  sinless,  yet  as  the  Head  of 
a  sinful  Church,  and  pai'taker  of  all  our  infirmities  ex- 
cept sin,  yet  "  as  a  Son,  learned  obedience  by  the  things 
which  he  suffered  ; "  and  as  the  Apostle  says  :  "  If 
children,  then  heirs  ;  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs  with 
Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him  that  we  may 
be  glorified  together."  Tims,  even  trial  is  a  most 
blessed  proof  of  God  our  Father's  love,  "  that  the 
trial  of  our  faith  being  much  more  precious  than  of 
gold  which  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  might 
be  found  unto  praise  and  honor  and  glory  at  the  appear- 
ing of  Jesus  Christ." 

II.   The  spirit  or  disposition  of  the  adopted  ones  to 


232  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER.  God  as  their  Father,  is  correspondent  to  the  privileges 
of  the  adoption.  It  is  stated  in  the  answer  before  ns. 
He  behoves  and  asserts,  "  that  the  eternal  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (who  of  nothing  made  heaven 
and  earth,  with  all  that  in  them  is)  who  likewise  up- 
holds and  governs  the  same  by  his  eternal  counsel  and 
providence,  is,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God 
and  my  Fatlier;  on  whom  I  rely  so  entirely  that  I  have 
no  doubt  but  that  he  will  make  whatever  evils  he  sends 
upon  me  in  this  valley  of  tears,  turn  out  for  my  advan- 
tage ;  for  he  is  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty  God ;  and 
willing,  being  a  faithful  Father." 

1.  Here  is  a  spirit  of  reverence,  for  who  can  so  ap- 
proach the  holy  and  infinitely  majestic  God  without  deep 
awe  !  An  affectionate,  yet  humble  fear,  is  a  necessary 
characteristic  of  a  child  of  God.  It  includes,  also, 
a  spirit  of  obedience,  for  now  there  is  a  double  claim 
upon  his  service ;  the  claim  of  God  as  his  Creator,  and 
the  claim  of  God  as  his  loving  Father  in  Christ.  He 
belongs  wholly  to  God  his  owner,  and  now  his  Redeemer 
in  Christ,  the  author  of  his  natural  life,  and  the  author  of 
his  spiritual  eternal  life.  How  can  he  hesitate  to  believe 
the  commands  of  such  a  Father  to  be  wise  and  kind  ? 
How  can  he  hesitate  to  obey  that  divine  Father  Avho  is 
so  merciful  to  him  in  this  life,  and  has  provided  for  him 
such  a  glorious  bliss  in  the  life  to  come  ?  For  the  same 
reason  it  includes  submission  and  resignation  to  all 
God's  dispensations,  since  God  has  a  right  to  do  what 
he  will  with  his  own,  and  the  heavenly  Father  will  do 
nothing  hurtful  to  his  child. 

2.  But  here  is,  also,  the  spirit  of  confidence.  God, 
the  Almighty  Maker  of  all  things,  must  be  the  Disposer 
of  all  things  ;  therefore,  all  things  *are  his  to  order  as 


Lkct.  XI.]  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER.  233 

he  pleases.  Thus  assured  of  his  power,  the  behever  is, 
also,  sure  of  the  willingness  of  God  to  do  all  things 
necessary  and  profitable  for  his  best  good,  because  God 
is  his  faithful  Father.  Therefore,  he  is  "  not  afraid  of 
evil  tidings,  his  heai't  is  fixed  trusting  in  God."  He 
dreads  no  want,  for  all  things  are  in  his  Father's  hand. 
He  quails  before  no  enemy  ;  his  Father  is  stronger  than 
all  that  can  be  against  him.  He  shrinks  from  no  trial 
in  the  path  of  his  duty,  for  he  knows  that  the  angel  of 
the  covenant  is  in  the  midst  .of  the  flame ;  and,  when 
called  to  die  he  is  triumphant,  for  he  can  say :  "  Now, 
O  Father,  I  come  to  thee."  "  All  things  are  yours," 
says  the  holy  Paul,  ..."  the  world,  or  life,  or  death, 
or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  ;  all  are  yours  ; 
and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's." 

Thanks  to  thee,  O  blessed  Father,  for  such  an  adop- 
tion !  Thanks  to  thee,  O  blessed  Son,  for  thy  merits, 
which  commend  us  to  God  I  Thanks  to  thee,  O  blessed 
Holy  Spirit,  by  whose  grace  we  draw  nigh  to  God's 
embrace  !  Thanks  !  Thanks  !  Thanks  eternal,  O 
blessed  Trinity,  God  of  our  life,  God  of  our  mercies, 
God  of  our  hope  ! 

And  O,  grant  when  all  thy  children  are  brought 
home  safely  to  thy  heavenly  house,  there  may  be 
wanting  not  one  of  all  these  before  thee  this  day  ! 

Amen.