LECTURE   XII. 


THE   PEOVIDENGE   OF   GOD. 


TENTH   LORD'S   DAY. 
THE   PROVIDENCE    OF   GOD. 

Quest.  XXVII.     What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  Provulence  of  God? 

Ans."*  The  almighty  and  everywhere  present  power  of  God,  whereby  as  it 
were  by  his  hand,  he  upholds  and  governs  heaven,  earth,  and  all 
creatures ;  so  that  herbs  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  bar- 
ren years,  meat  and  drink,  health  and  sickness,  riches  and  poverty, 
yea,  and  all  things  come,  not  by  chance,  but  by  his  fatherly  hand. 

Quest.  XXVIII.  What  advantage  is  it  for  us  to  know  that  God  has  created, 
and  by  his  Providence  doth  still  uphold  all  things  ? 

Ans.  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity,  thankful  in  prosperity;  and 
that  in  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we  place  our  firm 
trust  in  our  faithful  God  and  P'ather,  that  nothing  shall  separate  us 
from  his  love ;  since  all  creatures  are  so  in  his  hand,  that  without  his 
will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move. 

THE  lesson  of  the  Ninth  Lord's  Day  sets  forth  two 
principal  things  which  must  be  kept  in  mind  for  a 
better  understanding  of  the  lesson  before  ns  :  1.  That 
God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  is  the  eternal  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  2.  That  he  is,  for  the 
sake  of  his  Son,  the  God  and  Father  of  all  who  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Saviour  ;  from  which 
truths  we  were  taught  to  infer  the  duty  and  privilege 
of  relying  confidently  and  entirely  on  his  almighty  and 
gracious  will,  as  the  certain  source  of  all  things  requisite 
for  body  and  soul,  for  time  and  eternity.  But  that  this 
eminent  comfort  of  the  believer  might  be  fully  assured, 
thei-e  must  be  added  to  the  fact  of  creation  by  God 
alone,  the  consequential  fact  of  his  all-wise,  supreme, 
and  unceasing  government  over  all  he  has  made.  This 
constant    and    universal    crovernment,    the   Catechism, 


238  THE  riiOVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  agreeably  to  general  usage,  has  in  the  26th  Question 
and  Answer  called  Providence,  and 

The  doctrine  of  Divine  Providence,  with  the  Practical 
Lessons  which  it  suggests,  is  the  subject  for  our  study 
to-day. 

The  doctrine  is  stated  in  the  answer  to  the  27th 
Question  ;    the  lessons  are  given  in  that  to  the  28th. 

First  :   The  doctrine  of  Divine  Providence. 

We  unhesitatingly  and  thankfully  adopt  the  state- 
ment of  it  supplied  by  our  Church  : 

"  What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  Providence  of  God  ?  " 

"■  The  almighty  and  everywhere  present  power  of 
God,  whereby  as  it  were  by  his  hand,  he  upholds 
and  governs  heaven,  earth,  and  all  creatures  ;  so  that 
herbs  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  barren 
years,  meat  and  drink,  health  and  sickness,  riches  and 
poverty,  yea,  and  all  things  come,  not  by  chance,  but 
by  his  fatherly  hand." 

Following  this  our  guide,  we  are  to  consider  :  I.  The 
signification  of  the  phrase  ;  Providence  of  God.  II. 
The  fact  of  such  Providence.  III.  The  extent  of 
Divine  Providence.  IV.  The  particularity  of  Divine 
Providence. 
.   I.  The  signification  of  the  phrase :  Providence  of  God. 

1.  The  word  providence  occurs  only  once  in  the 
Scriptures,  where  Tertullus,  opening  his  action  against 
Paul,  and  addressing  Felix,  says  :  "  Very  worthy  deeds 
are  done  imto  this  nation  by  thy  providence,"  that  is, 
by  the  vigor  and  skill  of  his  administration  ;  but  Chris- 
tians have  universally  adopted  it,  or  its  equivalent,  in 
their  several  languages,  as  aptl}'  descriptive  of  the  great 
work  here  ascribed  to  God. 

It  is  taken   from   the  Latin,  and   by  its  etymology 


Lect.  Xir.]  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  239 

means  foresight,  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  seeing  be- 
fore (as  then  it  would  he  jjr evidence  or  ^jrescience)  but 
in  the  sense  of  taking  care  *  for  the  future,  or  rather 
an  ordering  of  things  and  events  after  a  predetermined 
intelligent  plan  ;  Avhich  supposes  wisdom  to  devise  and 
pov^^er  to  execute. 

2.  In  the  divine  mind  there  is,  properly  speaking, 
neither  past  nor  future,  hence  by  the  Providence  of 
God  we  understand  his  supreme  disposition  of  his  creat- 
ures according  to  the  infinitely  wise  counsel  of  his  own 
will.  Thus  it  is  not  only  an  opei'ation  but  an  economy  ; 
and  when  the  Catechism  here  speaks  of  "  the  almighty 
and  everywhere  present  power  of  God,"  it  means  the 
sovereignty  of  God  systematically,  constantly,  and  uni- 
versally active,  "  whereby  (as  it  were  by  his  hand)  he 
upholds  and  governs  heaven,  earth,  and  all  creatures  ; '' 
or  as  the  Westminster  Assembly's  Catechism  has  it : 
"  His  most  holy,  wise,  and  powerful  preserving  and 
governing  all  his  creatures,  and  all  tlieir  actions." 

11.   The  fact  of  such  a  Providence. 

1.  The  testimony  of  Scripture  to  Providence  is  so 
general,  explicit,  and  strong,  that  the  citation  of  partic- 
ular texts  is  hardly  necessary.  It  is  the  joy  of  all  be- 
lievers to  know  that  the  Lord  reigneth,  and  that  "  he 
doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven  and 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;  "  that  his  doings 
are  neither  capricious  nor  uncertain,  but  that  "  known 
unto  the  Lord  are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning," 
because  he  "  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his 
own  will,"  "according  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  he 
purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

But  for  his  Providence,  where  would  be  the  govern- 

*  Such  is  the  classical  force  oi'  pro  in  composition. 


240  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  ment  everywhere  ascribed  to  him  ?  Where  the  truth 
of  the  propliecies  he  inspired  holy  men  to  utter?  Where 
the  faithfuhiess  of  his  promises  on  which  he  encourages 
us  to  rely  ?  Where  the  certainty  of  his  rewards  pro- 
posed to  the  obedient,  or  of  his  penahies  threatened 
anainst  the  trano;ressor  ?  All  his  declarations  are  based 
upon  his  efficiency  to  carry  out  his  determinations  ;  so 
that  without  Providence  there  can  be  no  order,  no  con- 
fidence, no  justice,  no  hope. 

2.  Reason  abundantly  confirms  the  testimony  of 
Scripture  ;  from 

A.  (a  priori.')  The  being,  perfections,  and  creation 
of  God. 

a.  When  we  admit  the  existence  of  God,  we  admit 
his  sovereignty.  It  enters  into  our  definition  of  God. 
Take  away  the  idea  of  supreme  rule  from  him,  and  you 
have  denied  what  is  meant,  what  all  understand,  by 
God. 

h.  It  is  necessary  to  his  power ;  for  latent  power  in  a 
being,  whom  we  can  know  only  by  his  manifestations 
of  himself,  is,  for  us,  all  the  same  as  inertness.  It  is 
necessary  to  his  wisdom ;  for  without  application  in  the 
exercise  of  his  power,  it  is  equally  undiscoverable.  It 
is  necessary  to  his  moral  attributes  of  holiness  and 
goodness  ;  for  how  can  we  conceive  of  a  being  worthy 
of  adoration,  service,  and  trust,  who  gives  no  evidence 
of  regard  for  justice,  or  affection  for  his  subjects  ? 

c.  And  this  the  more  since  we  know  the  fact  of  his 
creation.  Was  the  construction  from  nothing  of  this 
vast,  complicated,  harmonious  system  of  things,  a  mere 
passing  amusement  for  its  Maker,  a  mere  caprice,  an 
idle,  purposeless  stroke  of  his  hand,  that  he  should  cast 
it  aside  when   done,  as  unwortliy  of  his  fartlier  care  ? 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  241 

Has  he  called  into  consciovis  being  so  many  intelligent 
creatures,  dependent  for  knowledge  and  happiness  upon 
circumstances  utterly  above  their  management,  to  leave 
them  in  their  w^eakness,  bhndness,  and  yearning  anxie- 
ties, the  sport  of  chance,  the  prey  of  necessity,  the  vic- 
tims of  ignorance?  Will  the  divine  Father  abandon 
his  children  ?  Will  the  Author  of  all  things  despise 
the  works  of  his  own  hands  ? 

B.  (a  posteriori.^  The  frame  and  order  of  the  uni- 
verse, physical  and  moral. 

a.  When  we  observe,  though  superficially,  the  nature 
of  things  around  us,  and  with  which  we  have  neces- 
sai-ily  more  or  less  to  do,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  that  there 
is  a  systematic  arrangement  by  which  veiy  many  things, 
each  having  its  peculiar  characteristics,  are  combined  as 
a  harmonious  whole ;  and  that,  though  there  are  con- 
tinual chano;es  and  successions,  the  orioinal  orcranization 
is  maintained  by  an  all-pervading  energy,  operating  uni- 
formly through  what  are  popularly  denominated  causes, 
or  as  we  prefer  to  say,  according  to  certain  laws.  These 
great  facts,  though  at  once  obvious,  are  more  fully  ap- 
parent, the  farther  and  more  closely  we  investigate.  It 
is,  in  fact,  the  whole  object  and  business  of  science, 
through  all  its  departments,  to  discover  these  laws  and 
bring  them  within  the  reach  of  our  uses  ;  for  it  is  upon 
our  conformity  to  these  laws  that  our  welfare  depends. 
These  laws,  being  applied  by  special  adaptations  to  the 
many  various  things  in  tlieir  various  purposes,  seem,  at 
first  sight,  to  be  almost  innumerable  ;  each  (so  called) 
kingdom  of  nature,  animal,  mineral,  and  vegetable,  nay, 
each  thing  in  each  of  those  kingdoms,  being  under  a 
peculiar  regulation,  yet  when  followed  out,  coalesce 
into  fewer,  as  we  see  them  pervading  all,  until  we  reach 

VOL.    I.  16 


242  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  [Lkot.  XII. 

a  point  where  tliej  converge,  compelling  the  logical 
conviction,  that  there  is  one  law  siii)reme  over  all,  one 
grand  centre  from  wliich  they  all  radiate.  AVhat  is 
that  grand  source,  that  sovereign  law,  but  the  will  of 
the  Creator  ?  For  nothing  is  more  clear  than  that  no 
one  of  those  phenomena  (or  appearances)  which  are 
styled  causes,  has  in  itself  the  force  to  produce  what  is 
called  its  effect,  since  it  is  itselfan  effect  of  a  cause  pre- 
ceding it,  and  so  backward  as  far  as  we  can  trace  the 
succession.  There  must  be,  therefore,  an  original  sin- 
gle force  operating  through  all  these  cooperating,  never 
conflicting  cau.ses.  But  is  it  not  equally  clear  that  these 
laws  of  operation  proceed  from  an  intelligent  will  ?  — 
And  as  these  laws  are  operative  throughout  all  things, 
combining  them  as  a  consistent  whole,  that  that  intelli- 
gent will  is  imperial,  supreme,  and  one?  If  no  one 
thing,  or  change  of  a  thing,  occurs  by  chance,  or  pro- 
duces itself,  or  is  independent  of  the  rest,  or  can  be 
separated  from  the  whole,  but  all  are  subject  as  parts  or 
as  combination,  to  law,  how  could  the  entire  system 
have  come  by  chance,  or  produced  itself,  or  in  any  way 
exist,  but  from  the  energy  of  an  almighty,  all-v/ise 
Will  ?  If  so,  is  not  the  same  almighty,  all-wise  Will 
which  was  necessary  to  create,  yet  more  necessary  to 
maintain  the  organization,  since  the  act  of  creation  was 
an  instant  exercise  of  omnipotence,  while  in  the  contin- 
uance of  the  moving  system  the  impelling  force  is  con- 
stant? And,  if  so,  are  there  not  stronger  I'easons  for 
the  Divine  will  to  maintain  it  than  there  were  for  its 
creation  ;  since  not  to  maintain  would  be  to  destroy  the 
wonderful  structure  which  has  been  called  into  exist- 
ence out  of  nothing  ?  The  skilful  arrangements,  every- 
where seen,  for  the  continuance  of  the  economy,  prove 


Lect.  XII.l  THE  PROVIDENCE   OF   GOD.  243 

the  desio-n  of  the  Creator  that  it  shall  be  continued 
until  the  purpose  of  the  creation  is  reached  ;  and  the. 
equally  certain  fact  that  these  arrangements  are  not 
themselves  causes,  or  of  themselves  efficient,  but  simply 
methods  through  which  the  almighty  will  operates, 
proves  that  the  Divine  power  is  and  shall  be  constantly 
put  forth  in  its  continuance.  To  sum  up  our  brief 
argument :  The  order  of  natural  things  demonstrates 
their  having  been  created  by  the  almighty  all-wise  God  ; 
therefore,  the  active  continuance  of  that  order  must  be 
maintained  and  governed  by  God  alone. 

h.  A  similar  course  of  reasoning  proves  the  provi- 
dence of  God  over  moral  beings  and  events.  That 
there  is  a  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  that 
God  has  created  conscious  intelligent  beings,  whose 
conduct  must  be  either  right  or  wrong,  and  that  their 
welfare  individually  and  collectively  is  inseparably  con- 
nected with  such,  their  moral  conduct,  no  one  will 
soberly  pretend  to  deny.  The  inference,  however,  is 
irresistible  that  there  is  a  system  of  moral  things  as 
there  is  a  system  of  things  physical ;  and  that,  as  there 
can  be  no  such  thing  as  chance,  the  order  of  moral 
events  is  presided  over  by  the  same  almighty,  all-wise 
will  which  has  ordained  the  connection  between  moral 
actions  and  their  retributory  consequences.  God,  by 
his  creation  of  moral  beings,  has  put  himself  at  the 
head  of  the  moral  economy ;  and  no  moral  event  can 
occur  outside  of  his  will,  that  is  without  his  determina- 
tion, except  through  his  indifference  or  impotence. 
That  he  is  indifferent  to  what  so  intimately  concerns 
the  welfai-e  of  his  creatures,  it  were  impious  denial  of 
his  character  to  assert ;  that  he  is  unable  to  exercise 
such  control,  is  as  inconsistent  with  his  essential  almigh- 


244  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  H. 

tiness ;  but,  as  the  moral  events  which  concern  his 
moral  creatures  are  intimately  and  systematically  con- 
nected with  their  moral  conduct,  so  their  moral  actions 
must  as  certainly  be  within  the  control  of  his  sover- 
eignty. This  we  argue  farther  from  the  fact  that  men, 
for  the  most  part,  if  not  always,  immediately  or  more 
remotely,  make  use  of  physical  things  in  carrying  out 
their  moral  purposes  ;  and,  therefore,  if  uncontrolled, 
would  interfere  with  the  physical  order  which  God  has 
established ;  yet  farther,  from  the  fact  that  the  moral 
acts  of  an  individual  affect  necessarily  more  or  less  the 
welfare  of  other  moral  creatures  with  whom  he  is  sys- 
tematically connected.  The  denial  of  moral  providence 
would  be,  therefore,  to  put  the  order  of  physical  things, 
and  the  welfare  of  other  moral  beings,  at  the  disposal 
of  any  individual  moral  agent.  Where  then  would  be 
the  Creator's  right  to  his  own  ?  Where  the  paternal 
government  of  God  over  his  moral  children  ?  Where 
his  power  to  punish  or  reward  ?  Where  the  knowledge 
of  distinction  between  ri^ht  and  wrong  ?  There  would 
be  an  end  of  truth,  of  certainty,  and  of  hope ;  and  the 
universe  would  be  abandoned  to  a  self-destructive  an- 
archy, until  it  became  worse  than  hell,  over  which  the 
power  of  God  is  dominant,  —  a  chaos  of  desires  and  pas- 
sions and  furious  actions,  where  the  vile  would  rage  and 
torment  without  check,  and  the  good  suffer  without  a 
possibility  of  escape.  There  is  no  avoiding  one  or  the 
other  of  these  conclusions  ;  the  divine  government  must 
be  supreme,  or  there  is  no  divine  government ;  every 
moral  being  except  God  must  be  in  all  respects  his 
subject,  or  there  is  no  God  ;  and  an}^  even  the  least, 
limitation  of  the  divine  control,  is  a  denial  of  divine 
control   altogether.       God,  I  speak   with    deep    rever- 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  245 

ence,  must  be  over  all,  through  all,  all  in  all,  or  noth- 
ing- 

If  It  be  asked :  How  this  can  be  consistent  with  that 

moral  freedom  of  the  creature  which  makes  him  a 
responsible  agent  ?  we  answer,  That  the  free  agency 
of  the  moral  being,  the  fact  of  which  every  one  knows 
by  his  own  consciousness  (and  there  can  be  no  higher 
proof),  must  be  the  freedom  of  a  creature^  and,  there- 
fore, limited  by  his  nature  and  the  circumstances  of  the 
economy  under  which  he  has  his  being.  His  being  a 
creature,  supposes  his  being  to  have  been  derived  and 
to  be  maintained  ;  so  that  he  must  act  only  within  the 
limits  the  creative  will  has  set  to  his  agency.  A  bird  is 
not  without  freedom  as  a  bird,  because  he  cannot  live 
the  life  of  a  fish  ;  or  a  fish  because  he  cannot  live  the 
life  of  a  bird.  An  angel  is  not  without  freedom  as  an 
angel,  because  he  cannot  perform  the  corporeal  actions 
of  a  man :  or  a  man  because  his  spirit  here  is  incorpo- 
rated. Neither  are  without  freedom,  because  the  organ- 
ization of  our  natures  makes  us  dependent  for  physical 
life  and  comforts  on  the  economy  of  physical  things 
around  us ;  because  we  must  have  food  and  shelter  and 
healthful  air,  or  we  die.  God  never  intended  that  we 
should  be  independent  of  him  ;  though  lie  did  intend 
for  us  the  opportunity  of  that  happiness  which  springs 
from  personal  choice  and  correspondent  action  ;  and, 
therefore,  with  our  freedom  he  ordained  the  system  of 
things  in  which  we  may  choose  and  act  for  our  own 
good  by  a  conformity  with  the  laws  which  he  has  estab- 
lished ;  yet  is  our  freedom  within  law ;  and  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  laws  of  the  economy  in  which  he  has  placed 
us,  and  to  which  he  has  adapted  our  natures,  he  holds 
us,  notwithstanding  our  freedom,  under  perfect  control. 


246  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  He  never  forces  us  to  liarm  ourselves  bj  doing  wrong, 
but  provides  methods  in  using  which  we  may  advan- 
tage ourselves  by  doing  right ;  yet  we  may  harm  our- 
selves by  doing  contrary  to  the  very  laws  which  he  has 
appointed  for  our  good.  Tliat  which  he  prevents  us 
from,  he  reserves  within  his  own  action  ;  that  only  in 
•which  he  allows  us  to  act  is  within  our  freedom,  and 
consequently  within  our  moral  responsibility.  He  may 
slacken  the  reins,  but  never  lets  them  drop  from  his 
hands. 

Now,  we  do  not  say  that  the  methods  of  his  moral 
providence  can  be  always  as  distinctly  traced  as  those 
of  his  physical  rule  ;  natural  things  are  merely  passive, 
and  their  changes  being  from  his  power  alone  are  more 
obvious  ;  yet  it  cannot  be  that  his  moral  administration 
is  less  systematic,  and  could  we  trace  it  out  as  distinctly, 
we  should  perceive  it  to  be  equally  uniform.  As  it  is, 
the  history  of  individual  men  and  of  nations  clearly 
proves  that  wrong  is  punished  and  right  rewarded ;  or, 
if  present  inequalities  occur,  they  are  yet  to  be  com- 
pensated beyond  this  sphere.  This  last  fact  could  not, 
it  is  true,  be  discovered  by  our  unassisted  reason,  but 
divine  revelation  relieves  us  of  all  doubt.  If  you  ask 
again,  how  it  is  that  evil  exists  and  that  men  do  wrong 
when  God  could  have  prevented  it  ?  We  answer, 
that  it  is  not  for  us  to  accuse  or  defend  the  sovereign 
will  of  God  ;  he  has  permitted  and  does  permit  evil, 
therefore,  he  must  have  the  best  reasons  for  such  per- 
mission, and  in  the  end  his  glory  will  be  manifest 
through  all ;  but  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  there 
is  a  wide  difference  between  permitting  evil  to  occur 
through  the  unforced  action  of  his  moral  creatures, 
and  causing  it  to  occur  by  his  own  immediate  power; 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  247 

nor  can  we  see  how  a  creature  could  be  free  to  choose 
virtue  or  the  right,  and  not  be  free  to  choose  sin  or  the 
wrong  ;  as  in  such  case,  all  morality  would  be  lost  in  a 
necessity.  As  it  is,  no  man,  let  him  dispute  as  he  will, 
can  put  himself  outside  of  the  moral  system  in  which 
God  has  placed  him  ;  while  he  is  as  certainly  conscious 
that,  thougji  the  issues  of  his  actions  are  beyond  his 
control,  his  actions  themselves  spring  from  his  own 
choice.  Depraved  habit  may  superinduce  a  force  of 
tendency,  which  we  have  not  force  enough  of  will  to 
resist ;  but  the  tendency  is  acquired,  not  original,  and 
has  come  from  the  will  of  God  only  so  far  as  the  de- 
praving nature  of  sin  is  part  of  its  inevitable  punish- 
ment. The  common  sense  of  mankind  will  not  allow 
the  force  of  such  habit  to  avail  a  transgressor  of  human 
laws  ;  nor  will  it  be  tolerated  in  the  judgment  of  God. 
Philosophy,  falsely  so  called,  has  sometimes  argued  for 
such  a  necessity  in  men  ;  and  a  mawkish  sensibility 
over  criminal  suicides  of  their  own  well-being,  has 
pleaded  it  in  their  excuse  ;  but  the  doctrine  in  either 
case  is  as  contrary  to  the  practical  reasoning  of  the 
world  as  it  is  to  tlie  declai'ations  of  inspired  Scripture  ; 
for  according  to  both  it  is  subversive  of  all  morality, 
of  human  responsibility,  and  of  divine  government,  re- 
ducing men  below  the  brute. 

III.   The  extent  of  Divine  Providence. 

It  is,  says  the  Catechism,  "  The  almighty  and  every- 
where present  power  of  God,  whereby,  as  it  were  by 
his  hand,  he  upholds  and  governs  heaven,  earth, 
and  all  creatures."  This  is  in  accordance  with  our 
argument,  for  if  there  be  any  force  in  our  previous 
reasoning.  Providence  must  be  commensurate  with 
creation,  and  continuous  as  its  continuance.     The  up- 


248  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOU.  [T.ect.  XII. 

holding  or  maintenance  of  things  as  tliey  exist  is  as 
necessarily  an  act  of  divine  power,  as  the  calling  of 
them  into  existence  out  of  nothing  ;  and,  as  the  entire 
universe  is  the  creation  of  one  almighty,  all-wise  will, 
so  it  must  all  be  comprehended  by  the  purpose  of  that 
divine  will,  and,  therefore,  constitute  one  grand  system 
of  active  laws  ;  for  the  preservation  of  which  economy 
a  constant  government  by  its  Divine  Author  is  both 
morally  and  physically  essential. 

Such  is  the  extent  assigned  to  the  government  of 
God  in  innumerable  passages  of  Holy  Scripture  ;  and 
many  corroboratory  evidences  of  the  fact  are  discover- 
able by  an  observant  reason.  Science  has  demonstrated 
that  the  various  parts  of  the  universe,  within  its  ken, 
are  held  together  in  harmonious  motioix  by  the  two 
grand  laws  of  attraction  and  repulsion  ;  that  there 
is  nothing  so  minute  as  to  be  beneath  them,  nothing 
so  vast  as  to  be  beyond  them  ;  nay,  that  there  could 
not  be  a  suspension  or  violation  of  either  law  in 
any  part  without  producing  confusion  and  destruction 
thi'oughout  all,  such  is  the  exactness  of  the  balance 
with  which  the  apparently  opposing  forces  are  harmo- 
nized by  the  divine  rule.  The  doctrine  of  the  New- 
Testament  is,  that  all  providence  is  committed  to  the 
hands  of  Christ,  the  Mediator,  for  the  accomi)lishment 
of  his  covenant  purpose  toward  the  Church  ;  and, 
therefore,  in  their  nearer  or  more  remote  relations, 
"  all  things  "  work  together  under  his  kingly  directions, 
that  God  "  according  to  his  good  pleasure  which  he 
hath  purposed  in  himself  .  .  .  in  the  dispensation  of  the 
fulness  of  times  .  .  .  might  gather  together  in  one  all 
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which 
are  in  earth  ;  even  in  him."  Hence  the  doxology  of  the 


THE  PEOVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  249 

four  and  twenty  elders  before  the  throne  :  "  Thou  art 
worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory  and  honor  and  power ; 
for  thou  hast  created  all  things  and  for  thy  pleasure 
they  are  and  were  created ;  "  hence  also  John  the  rev- 
elator  heard  "  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and 
on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in 
the  sea  and  all  that  are  in  them  .  .  .  saying  :  Blessing 
and  honor  and  glory  and  power  be  unto  him  that  sit- 
teth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  forever  and 
ever."  From  this,  and  many  other  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture, it  would  appear  that  a  universal  providence  is 
necessary  to  the  carrying  on,  and  completion  of  the 
plan  ordained  for  the  redemption  by  Christ  of  the 
Church,  '  which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that 
filleth  all  in  all." 

IV.  The  particularity  of  Divine  Providence. 

Our  Church,  ever  mindful  of  its  design  to  put  the 
answers  of  the  Catechism  into  the  mouth  of  each  pious 
believer,  specifies  some  of  those  things  which  more  im- 
mediately affect  his  experience  here  :  "  Herbs  and  grass 
(or  all  vegetation,)  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and  bar- 
ren 3'ears,  meat  (food)  and  drink,  health  and  sickness, 
riches  and  poverty,  yea,  and  all  things,  come  not  by 
chance,  but  by  his  fatherly  hand."  But  for  the  same 
reason  that  some  events  are  particularly  ordered  by 
God  all  must  be  ;  and  the  whole  of  oui-  ])revious  argu- 
ment goes  to  show  the  fact  and  the  necessity  of  such 
particular  action  on  the  part  of  God  in  his  providence. 

The  order  and  arrangement  of  laws  under  which  all 
things  are  placed  by  the  almighty  will,  because  it  proves 
an  all-wise  design,  proves  a  universal  providence  ;  but, 
also,  as  the  economy-  is  a  combination  of  parts,  each 
under  its  own  laws  consistent  with  the  general  laws,  it 


250  THE  PROVIDENCE   OF    GOD.  proves  a  particular  attention  of  Providence  to  each 
part  or  process,  and  to  the  operation  of  the  laws  which 
concern  it.  In  fact,  it  is  upon  the  divine  regulation  of 
each  and  every  part,  that  the  continuance  of  the  whole 
system  depends.  As  in  a  vast  complication  of  machin- 
ery, if  you  take  away  a  single  wheel,  or  connection 
between  the  wheels,  the  whole  is  checked,  or  made  to 
work  wrongly,  or  even  to  destroy  itself  by  its  own  dis- 
arrano-ed  forces  ;  so  it  would  be  with  the  movements 
of  the  providential  economy.  They  mutually  depend 
on  each  other.  If  you  balance  a  pair  of  scales  on 
either  side  by  portions  of  sand,  it  is,  indeed,  the  aggre- 
gate weight  on  each  scale  that  maintains  the  equilib- 
rium, yet,  were  the  beam  adjusted  with  sufficient  deli- 
cacy, the  taking  away  of  a  single  grain  from  either 
would  give  the  preponderance  ;  so  it  is  with  the  system 
of  worlds,  .which  worlds  are  made  up  of  atoms.  Each 
atom  has  its  weight,  as  well  as  the  vastest  orb  that  rolls 
along  its  circuit  singing  of  its  Maker's  power.  Again  : 
we  see  that  though  there  are  processes  common  to  dif- 
ferent departments  of  nature  animate  and  inanimate, 
yet  that  each  individual  of  the  class  has  its  own  pecul- 
iar place  and  history.  You  look  over  a  meadow^  field ; 
it  is  all  waving  in  green  except  where  it  is  sprinkled 
with  wild  flowers  ;  but  examine  more  closely  and  you 
see  that  the  mass  of  verdure  is  not  one  and  single  ; 
but  that  it  is  made  up  of  separate  individual  plants, 
each  of  which  has  sprung  from  its  own  seed,  and  has 
its  own  life  subject  to  accidents  peculiar  to  itself.  So 
it  is  with  the  animal  creation.  Each  conscious  being 
has  his  own  experience,  differing  from  that  of  all  others 
in  some  discoverable  particulars,  while  it  is  with  all  the 
others  subject  to  the  laws  which  preside  over  the  family 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  251 

to  wliich  it  belongs.  So  it  is  with  intelligent  commu- 
nities. Take  our  own  nation  under  its  admirable  sys- 
tem of  government.  One  grand  law  of  the  constitu- 
tion presides  over  it  as  a  whole  ;  yet  each  State  of  the 
confederacy  has  its  distinctly  recognized  individuality, 
each  county  in  the  State,  each  town  in  the  county,  each 
subdivision  of  the  town,  nay,  each  individual  citizen 
has  peculiar  rights  and  a  peculiar  action.  The  Execu- 
tive President  at  the  head  of  all  is  one  ;  but  he  repre- 
sents the  constitutional  will  of  the  nation,  yet  the 
nation  not  as  a  single  mass,  but  everv  individual  citizen 
who  contributes  his  individuality  to  make  up  the  aggre- 
gate people.  So,  though  with  infinitely  greater  right 
and  power  and  wisdom,  doth  the  Supreme  Lord,  the 
Creator,  rule,  through  the  operation  of  his  own  divinely 
appointed  laws,  the  universe  he  has  made,  by  ruling 
over  each  individual  creature,  event,  and  process.  The 
tallest  angel  before  his  throne,  and  the  least  insect  that 
lives  its  little  life  and  dies  in  an  hour,  are  equally  de- 
pendent upon  his  constant  care..  The  history  of  man- 
kind under  his  controlling  will,  is  the  aggregate  of  the 
history  of  each  individual  of  the  race.  We  may  not 
be  able  to  trace  the  connection,  but  could  we  see  as  he 
sees,  it  would  be  all  manifest ;  and  as  the  weaver  forms 
the  long,  wide  web  by  adding  thread  to  thread  in  the 
woof  and  warp,  so  does  he  by  his  constant,  unerring 
control  of  each  and  all,  accomplish  the  result  of  his 
infinite  design. 

Is  it  objected  to  this,  that  it  deprives  men's  actions 
of  their  freedom  ?  We  answered  the  cavil  in  a  former 
[)art  of  our  argument.  He  does  not  force  our  actions. 
We  are  free  to  act  within  the  limits  of  the  constitution 
of  law  he  has  ordained,  —  but  he  does  control  the  con- 


252  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  sequences  of  our  actions,  else  would  he  cease  to  be  God, 
and  each  man  cease  to  be  his  subject.  Wise  and  good 
laws,  so  far  from  endangering  freedom,  are  essentially 
necessary  to  its  preservation  ;  and  all  the  laws  of  G.od  are 
infinitely  wise,  infinitely  good  ;  if  we  conform  to  them, 
we  live  ;  if  we  dash  ourselves  against  them,  we  perish. 

Is  it  objected  again,  that  such  particularity  is  beneath 
the  infinite  God  ?  We  answer,  that  as  it  was  not  be- 
neath him  to  create  particular  things,  it  cannot  be  to 
take  care  of  particular  things  ;  as  it  was  not  beneath 
him  to  ordain  particular  laws,  it  is  not  beneath  him  to 
execute  them  ;  it  is  not  beneath  him  to  know  each 
thing,  for  he  is  omniscient ;  it  is  not  beneath  him  to  do 
or  control  each  thing,  for  he  is  omnipotent ;  it  is  not 
beneath  him  to  be  everywhere,  and,  therefore,  it  is  not 
beneath  him  to  be  everywhere  the  all-wise,  almighty 
Ruler  of  each  and  of  all  thino;s  which  he  has  made. 

Is  it  further  objected,  that,  as  God  has  been  pleased 
to  create  things  in  a  perfect  system,  a  sufiicient  impulse 
may  have  been  given  to  the  universe  as  a  whole  as  well 
as  in  its  parts,  and  it  is  not  necessary  that  he  should 
continue  to  exercise  his  power,  but  might  leave  the  sys- 
tem to  evolve  itself  from  the  force  originally  given. 
We  answer,  (as  once  before,)  that  that  would  be  to 
make  the  organized  universe  a  machine,  such  as  men 
construct  to  assist  their  weakness.  God  sends  no  such 
contrivance,  and  it  is  far  more  in  accordance  with  his 
infinite  excellence  to  believe  that  his  power  is  every- 
where, and  continually,  directly  active.  The  almighty 
God  has  neither  difficulty  nor  weai'iness  in  his  works. 

Is  it  asked,  why,  then,  are  we  commanded  to  pray, 
since  God  acts  in  everything,  even  the  least,  according 
to  a  plan  which  he  will  not  alter  to  suit  our  wish  ?    We 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  253 

answer,  certainly  prayer  will  not  so  control  the  divine 
plan  as  to  make  it  vary  from  his  purpose,  for  then  the 
events  would  be  as  contradictory  as  are  the  wishes  of 
men  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  carries  on  his  plan  by 
operating  through  laws  he  has  seen  fit  to  impose  ;  and 
it  is  one  of  those  laws,  that  prayer  founded  upon  the 
promises  he  has  revealed  shall  be  answered,  a  law  as 
certain  in  its  operation  as  any  other,  though  we  cannot 
see  as  distinctly  the  connection  between  the  prayer  and 
its  fulfilment ;  and,  therefore,  prayer  must  be  used  to 
obtain  our  desires  from  God  as  much  as  any  physical 
law  reoulatincr  what  is  called  cause  and  eflFect.  Thus 
the  grand  law  of  his  evangelical  system,  prescribed  to 
Christ  himself  its  mediatorial  head,  is  :  "  Ask  and  I 
will  o-ive  thee."  For  observe,  that  God  does  not  en- 
gage to  answer  all  prayer,  but  prayers  offered  in  faith, 
or  prayer  based  upon  the  promises  he  has  revealed,  and, 
therefore,  prayer  for  things  agreeably  to  his  will. 
"  This,"  says  the  Apostle  John,  "  is  the  confidence 
that  we  have  in  him,  that  if  we  ask  anything  accord- 
ing to  his  will  he  heareth  us  ;  it  must  be  according  to 
his  directioiis  as  to  what  we  should  pray  for,  and  our 
prayer  is  the  method  through  which  his  will  is  accom- 
plished. By  prayer  we  put  ourselves  in  harmony  of 
purpose  with  himself,  and  in  his  answer  to  our  prayer, 
he  performs  his  own  will  ;  still  the  prayer  is  the  method 
of  our  obtaining  what  we  desire,  without  which  the 
blessing  would  not  occur.  Various  good  reasons  might 
be  given,  if  we  had  the  time,  for  this  ordained  connec- 
tion between  prayer  and  the  event  sought  for  ;  but  the 
principal  are,  the  spiritual  benefit  it  is  of  to  the  peti- 
tioner, and  the  stimulus  it  gives  him  to  personal  exer- 
tion, according  to  the  divine  direction,  to  secure  the 


254  THE  PROVIDENCE  OF   GOD.  things  we  pray  for  ;  because  the  blessing  is  not  vouch- 
safed to  those  who  only  pray,  but  to  those  who  work  as 
well  as  pray.  It  might  as  well  be  asked  why,  since 
the  will  of  God  must  be'  done,  we  must  work,  as  why 
should  we  pray?  The  will  of  God  must  be  done,  but 
it  is  done  by  answering  our  prayer,  and  blessing  our 
zeal  ;  or,  equally,  in  withholding  from  us  what  we  de- 
sire because  we  do  not  pray  and  work.  The  law  is  not 
for  any  necessity  on  the  part  of  God,  since  he  is  su- 
premely independent  of  second  causes  ;  but  it  is  for  our 
benefit  that  we  may  be  brought  in  will  and  effort  to  a 
cordial  concurrence  with  God.  In  a  word,  praj^er  with 
correspondent  action,  is  a  right  use  of  that  free  agency 
which  God  allows  us  under  the  laws  of  his  kingdom  ; 
and  not  the  least  evidence  of  his  fatherly  care  for  his 
human  children. 

Secondly  :  The  Practical  Lessons  which  the  doc- 
trine of  divine  Providence  suggests. 

WJiat  advantage  is  it  for  us  to  know  that  God  has 
created,  and  hy  his  providence  doth  still  uphold  all 
things  ? 

"  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity,  thankful  in 
prosperity,  and  that  in  all  things  which  may  hereafter 
befall  us,  we  place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faithful  God 
and  Father,  that  nothing  shall  separate  us  from  his  love  ; 
since  all  creatures  are  so  in  his  hand,  that  without  his 
will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move." 

I.  To  adore  God,  the  Creator  and  Lord  of  Providence, 
as  our  Father, in  Christ. 

The  fliith  which  unites  us  to  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
makes  us  the  children  of  God.  Represented  by  Christ, 
we  are  made  partakers  of  all  the  blessings  which  he 
enjoys  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  all  the  rewards  which 


lect.  xii.j  the  providence  of  god.  255 

he  has  earned  by  his  mediatorial  righteousness.  With 
hiin  the  Father  is  well  pleased,  and  for  his  sake  he  is 
well  pleased  with  us,  unworthy  and  guilty  as  we  are  by 
nature,  because  washed  from  our  guilt  by  Christ's  blood 
and  covered  by  his  merits.  It  is,  therefore,  not  with 
slavish  fear,  but  a  reverent,  filial  boldness  that  we  are 
to  approach  God  through  Christ,  rejoicing  in  his  love, 
and  making  our  refuge  under  the  very  shadow  of  his 
throne. 

All  providence  has  been  committed  by  the  Father  to 
the  hands  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ ;  and  he  administers 
it  for  the  advantage  of  the  adopted  family,  whose  Elder 
Brother  he  is,  as  a  Son  over  his  Leather's  house.  All 
things  belong  to  God,  and  the  Father  hath  given  them 
all  to  the  Son,  and  the  Son  shares  them  all  with  us.  It 
is,  therefore,  as  heirs  of  God,  because  joint  heirs  with 
Christ,  that  we  are  to  worship  him  Avhose  all  things 
are,  assured  of  his  faithfulness  because  of  the  covenant 
which  God  has  made  with  us  in  Christ  our  Lord. 

This  spirit  of  adoption,  springs  from  no  imagination 
or  pretension  of  our  own,  but  from  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  sent  of  the  Father  through  the  Inter- 
cessor to  dwell  in  us  ;  and  is,  therefore,  the  voice  of 
God  in  our  hearts  calling  us  to  him  as  children  to  a 
Father.  It  is  the  Spirit  witnessing  with  our  spirits  that 
we  are  children  of  God  ;  nor  will  he  refuse  to  answer 
the  filial  reliance  which  he  has  himself  inspired.  Such 
in  general,  is  the  affectionate  sentiment  of  adoring  hom- 
age which  we  should  offer  to  God. 

II.  This  filial  adoration  will  cultivate  in  us  an  entire 
confidence  that  all  things  will  work,  and  are  working, 
for  our  good,  if  we  love  God.  Nothing  can  harm  us, 
for  all  things  are  under  his  control  ;  everything  is  for 


256  THE  PROVIDENCE  OV   GOD.  [Lkct.  XII. 

US,  because  all  things  are  directed  by  his  hand.  The 
end  of  providence  is  "  for  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his 
grace  "  in  Christ  Jesus,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved.  He  has  ordained  that  his 
glory  shall  be  in  the  full  salvation  of  his  Church,  and 
he  has  so  linked  our  blessedness  with  his  own,  that  his 
power  and  wisdom  and  truth  in  all  his  ojierations  are 
as  certainly  for  his  people  as  they  are  for  himself. 

How  patient  then  should  we  be  in  adversity  !  We 
call  many  trials  which  come  upon  us  here  adversity, 
for  such  is  the  common  phraseology  of  the  world  ;  but 
they  are  only  adversity  in  seeming ;  they  cannot  be 
really  so  since  they  are  dispensed  by  our  Father's  hand. 
The  ways  of  providence  may  be  to  us  mysterious,  for 
how  can  we  enter  into  the  wisdom  of  God  ?  They 
may  seem  dilatory ;  for  we  cannot  see,  as  God  sees,  the 
end  with  the  beginning.  The  ways  of  providence  may 
seem  hard  ;  but  their  hardness  is  only  the  merciful 
severity  of  a  wise  Father's  faithful  love,  disciplining 
us  to  a  fitness  for  a  higher  bliss. 

How  thankful  should  we  be  in  prosperity  !  When 
we  consider  how  tenderly  mindful  he  is  of  our  wants, 
how  rich  in  bounty  to  our  desires,  when,  as  a  Father 
rejoicing  among  his  children,  he  crowns  us  with  bless- 
ing. What  wisdom,  what  power,  what  riches  are 
exerted  for  our  good  !  Surrounded  by  God,  upheld  by 
his  hand,  watched  by  his  eye,  cherished  by  his  love, 
defended  by  his  sovereignty,  how  precious  should  be 
all  the  proof  of  his  kindness,  —  kindness  purchased  for 
us  by  the  infinite  price  of  Christ's  atonement,  obtained 
for  us  by  Christ's  intercession,  and  ordered  for  us  by 
Christ's  authority  as  head  over  all  things. 

How  trustful  should  we  be  for  all  time  to  come !    He, 


THE  PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD.  257 

who  has  been  at  such  cost  to"  redeem  us  to  himself,  — 
who  has  taken  us  out  of  our  guilt  and  misery  and  rebel- 
lion, to  make  us  children,  —  who  has  predestined  all 
things  for  our  eternal  happiness,  —  will  never  desert  us, 
never  leave  us  to  our  own  folly,  never  suffer  any  to  pluck 
us  out  of  his  hand !  His  word  is  passed,  and  he  will 
keep  his  covenant  as  long  as^is  power  shall  last. 

III.  But  how  sad  is  their  condition,  who,  because 
they  believe  not  in  Christ,  have  no  part  in  the  love  of 
God  !  If  all  things  work  together  for  the  good  of  those 
who  love  God,  all  things  must  work  against  those  who 
love  him  not.  Now  they  are  under  his  displeasure ;  but 
what  will  be  their  terrible  fate,  when  God,  long-suffer- 
ing no  longer,  arms  his  omnipotence  for  their  defeat, 
and  eternity  shall  cumulate  upon  them  the  fierceness 
of  his  wrath  !  O  my  people,  let  us  escape  while  we 
may,  and  cling  to  the  cross  of  him  who  sitteth  upon 
the  throne  ! 
I