LECTURE  XIII. 

THE  NAME  OF  JESUS. 


ELEVENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE  NAME  OF  JESUS. 

Quest.  XXIX.     Why  is  the  So7i  of  God  called  Jesus,  thai  is,  a  Saviour  ? 

Ans.  Because  he  saveth  us,  aiul  delivereth  us  from  our  sins;  and  like- 
wise because  we  ought  not  to  seek,  neither  can  find  salvation  in  any 
other. 

Quest.  XXX.  Do  such  then  believe  in  Jesus,  the  only  Saviour,  who  seek 
salvation  and  hajipiness  of  saints,  of  themselves,  or  anywhere  else  f 

AjfS.  They  do  not;  for,  though  they  boast  of  him  in  words,  yet  in  deeds 
they  deny  Jesus,  the  only  deliverer  and  Saviour;  for  one  of  these  two 
things  must  be  true :  that  either  Jesus  is  not  a  complete  Saviour,  or 
that  they,  who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Saviour  must  find  all  things 
in  him  necessary  to  salvation. 

TTAVING  exhibited  the  doctrine  of  "  God  the 
•*-*-  Father,"  as  professed  by  us  in  the  first  article  of 
the  creed,  we  are  now  to  enter  upon  the  doctrine 
we  hold  concerning  God  the  Son,  as  set  forth  in  the 
next  six  articles,  which  it  will  be  our  duty  to  discuss  in 
the  order  of  their  occurrence.  Following  this  arrange- 
ment, our  first  inquiry  is  respecting  the  meaning  of  the 
several  names,  or  rather  appellations  by  which  he  is 
revealed  to  our  faith,  as  our  Mediator  with  God  : 

Jesus  Christ,  His  only  begotten  Son,  our  Lord. 

The  first  only  of  these  is  properly  a  name,  designat- 
ing personal  individuality,  though  significant  of  the 
great  work  which  he  undertook  for  our  salvation  : 
"  Thou  shalt,"  said  the  annunciating  angel  to  Joseph 
and  Mary  the  blessed  Virgin,  speaking  of  the  child  she 
should  bear  from  her  conception  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 


262  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  "  call  his  name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from 
their  sins." 

The  other  appellations  are  descriptive  epithets : 
"  Christ,"  of  his  anointment,  or  divine  consecration 
to  his  office  ;  "  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,"  of  his 
essentially  divine  nature  ;  and  "  Lord,"  of  his  media- 
torial authoritj'  over  his  Church,  and  over  all  things 
for  his  Church. 

Our  lesson,  to-day,  is  on  the  name  Jesus. 

Jesus  !  How  does  the  very  word  overflow  with  ex- 
ceeding sweetness,  and  light,  and  joy,  and  lo\e,  and 
life  !  Filling  the  air  with  odors,  like  precious  ointment 
poured  forth,  irradiating  the  mind  with  a  glory  of 
truth  in  which  no  fear  can  live,  soothing  the  wounds  of 
the  heart  with  a  balm  that  turns  its  sharpest  anguish 
into  delicious  peace  ;  shedding  through  the  soul  a  cor- 
dial of  immortal  strength  !  Jesus  !  the  answer  to  all 
our  doubts,  the  spring  of  all  our  courage,  the  earnest 
of  all  our  hopes,  the  charm  omnipotent  against  all  our 
foes,  the  remedy  for  all  our  sicknesses,  the  supply  of 
all  our  wants,  the  fulness  of  all  our  desires  !  Jesus, 
melody  to  our  ears,  altogether  lovely  to  our  sight, 
manna  to  our  taste,  living  water  to  our  thirst !  Jesus, 
our  shadow  from  the  heat,  our  refuge  from  the  storm, 
our  cloud  by  night,  our  morning  star,  our  sun  of  right- 
eousness !  Jesus,  at  the  mention  of  whose  name 
"  every  knee  shall  bow  and  every  tongue  confess  !  " 
Jesus  our  power,  Jesus  our  righteousness,  Jesus  our 
sanctification,  Jesus  our  redemption  !  Jesus  our  Elder 
Brother,  Jesus  our  Jehovah,  Jesus  our  Immanuel  ! 
Thy  name  is  the  most  transporting  theme  of  the  Church, 
as  they  sing  going  up  from  the  valley  of  tears  to  their 
home  on  the  mount  of  God  —  thy  name  shall  ever  be 


Lect.  Xlir.]  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  263 

the  richest  chord  in  the  harmony  of  heaven,  where  the 
anp-els  and  tlie  redeemed  unite  their  exultino;,  adorins; 
songs  around  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  Jesus, 
thou  only  canst  interpret  thy  own  name,  and  thou  hast 
done  it  by  thy  work  on  earth,  and  thy  glory  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father  ;  Jesus,  Saviour  ! 

In  pursuing  our  meditations  on  this  most  delightful 
subject,  and  for  our  edification  through  a  better  knowl- 
edge of  the  truth  it  contains,  let  us  consider  :  — 

First  :   The  name  Jesus, 

Secondly  :   The  reason  of  it. 

Thirdly  :   The  practical  inferences. 

First  :    The  name  Jesus. 

I.  It  is  a  name.  Every  person  has  a  name  which 
distinguishes,  or  is  intended  to  distinguish  him  from 
every  other  person,  and  stands  as  the  sign  or  verbal 
representative  of  his  individual  self.  Thus  Jesus  was 
the  personal,  and,  eminently,  the  peculiar  name  of  the 
Son  of  God  incarnate,  the  name  to  which  all  his  other 
appellations  are  added  and  attributive ;  not  assumed  by 
him  after  he  had  reached  manhood,  but  given  to  him 
when  a  babe  ;  not  imposed  on  him  accidentally  or  by 
the  will  of  man,  but  appointed  for  him  by  God,  through 
a  special  revelation  which  an  angel  communicated,  be- 
fore he  was  born,  to  those  who  were  to  have  the  legal 
charge  of  his  tender  years  ;  and  so  appointed,  as  we 
are  divinely  taught,  because  in  its  etymology  significant 
of  the  gracious  design  of  God  which  he  should  accom- 
plish. 

II.  It  becomes  us,  therefore,  as  devout  and  deeply 
interested  students  of  unerring  Scripture,  to  search  out 
the  remarkable  significance  of  this  name  Jesus. 

The  revelation  by  the  angel  to  Joseph,  and,  because 


2G4  •        THE  NAME   OF  JESUS.  [Lkct.  XIII. 

recorded,  to  us,  was :  "  Fear  not  to  take  unto  thee 
Mary  thy  wife,  for  that  which  is  conceived  in  her,  is  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  she  sliall  bring  forth  a  son  ;  and 
thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  peo- 
ple from  their  sins."  Here  the  appropriateness  of  the 
name  is  asserted  from  its  radical  meaning. 

1.  The  word  Jesus,  though  exactly  transferred  to 
our  language  from  the  Greek  original  of  the  text, 
where  it  is  written  in  Greek  letters,  is  not  Greek  either 
in  form  or  derivation.  Some  have  erroneously  sup- 
posed that  it  is  a  verbal  noun  from  a  Greek  verb  signi- 
fying to  heal  or  to  cure  ;  and,  certainly,  he,  in  whom 
we  trust,  had  been  prophetically  called,  "  the  Lord  that 
healeth,"  "  who  healeth  all  our  diseases,"  and  his  blood 
described  as  a  balm  of  sovereign  efficacy  ;  and  we  are 
warranted  in  honoring  as  the  Great  Physician  ;  still 
the  rule  of  the  Greek  language  will  not  allow  us  to 
admit  that  such  is  the  etymology  of  Jesus. 

2.  It  is  the  Hebrew  name  Joshua,  imitated,  as  nearly 
as  difference  of  language  would  permit,  in  Greek. 

Joshua,  from  its  remarkable  meaning  and  historical 
associations,  was  a  rather  common  name  among  the 
Jews,  who,  like  other  orientals,  were  fond  of  such  pre- 
tentious ostentation  ;  though  first  given  by  Moses 
under  divine  inspiration  to  the  son  of  Nun,  his  pious, 
heroic  successor'  in  command  of  Israel ;  and  wherever 
there  was  occasion  to  record  it  in  Greek,  it  is  written 
Jesus,  as  when  Stephen  the  Martyr,  speaking  of  the 
tabernacle,  says :  "  which  our  fathers  that  came  after 
(Moses)  brought  in  with  Jesus  into  the  possession  of 
the  Gentiles,  whom  God  drave  out  before  the  face  of 
our  fathers  ; "  and  as  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,   speaking  of   that   Canaan   as   only  a  type, 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  265 

says  :  "  If  Jesus  had  given  them  rest,  then  would  not 
he  (the  Psahnist  from  whom  he  had  been  quoting)  not 
afterwards  have  spoken  of  another  day."  It  is,  there- 
fore, to  the  original  bestowal  of  the  name  on  the  vic- 
torious leader  of  the  Tribes  that  we  must  turn  for  its 
proper  etymology.  This  we  find  in  Numbers  xiii.  16 : 
"  Moses  called  Oshea,  the  son  of  Nun,  Jehoshua,"  or, 
as  it  is  afterwards  written  in  our  Eng-lish  Vulcjate, 
Joshua.  Now,  as  in  Hebrew  the  consonants  only  are 
the  radical  letters  of  a  word,  this  was  easily  turned  to 
Jeshua,  which  by  substituting  the  Greek  termination  s 
for  the  Hebrew  a,  and  by  throwing  out  the  aspirate  7i, 
which  the  Greeks  never  used  except  in  the  beginning 
of  a  word,  we  have :  Jesus. 

It  is  at  once  seen  that  this  change  from  Oshea  to 
Joshua,  was  significant  of  some  great  prophetic  truth. 
Oshea  and  Jehoshua  are  derivatives  from  the  same 
verb ;  but  Oshea  is  from  the  present,  probably  the  im- 
perative, and  signifies  simply  Save,  or  Saviour  :  the 
prefix  of  the  letter  we  represent  by  J,  shows  Jehoshua 
to  be  from  the  future,  and  it  signifies :  He  shall  save. 
This  is  not,  however,  all.  The  letter  prefixed  is  the 
initial  letter  of  the  peculiar  name  of  God,  Jehovah,  or 
Jah ;  and,  according  to  the  constant  symbolical  habit 
of  revealed  language,  conveys  a  certain  divine  empha- 
sis and  dignified  sense ;  so  that  Jehoshua  may  be  inter- 
preted The  Lord  (Jah)  shall  save,  or  more  freely  :  The 
Lord  shall  save  through  or  in  or  by  Oshea. 

Let  us  compare  with  this  what  the  Lord  says  in 
Exodus  xxiii.  20  -  23  :  "  Behold,  I  send  an  Angel 
before  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  the  way,  and  to  bring  thee 
into  the  place  which  I  have  prepared.  Beware  of  him, 
and  obey  his  voice  ;   provoke  him  not,  for  he  will  not 


266  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  [Lect.XIII. 

pardon  your  transgressions ;  for  my  name  is  in  him. 
But  if  thou  slialt  indeed  obey  his  voice,  and  do  all  that 
I  speak  ;  then  I  will  be  an  enemy  unto  thine  enemies, 
and  an  adversary  unto  thine  adversaries.  For  mine 
Anojel  shall  oo  before  thee,  and  brino;  thee  in  unto  the 
Amorites,  and  the  Hittites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the 
Canaanites,  the  Hivites,  and  the  Jebusites ;  and  I  will 
cut  them  off."  Now,  doubtless,  the  angel  here  spoken 
of  is  the  great  Angel  of  the  covenant,  or  of  the  pres- 
ence, who  dwelling  in  the  Shekinah,  the  pillar  of  cloud 
and  fire,  led  the  tribes  to  their  conquest  of  the  prom- 
ised land  ;  and  by  the  name  of  God  in  him  we  are  to 
understand  the  authority  or  power  which  the  divine  name 
represents.  But  it  is  as  certain  that  Joshua  was  the  hu- 
man, visible  instrument  through  whose  personal  agency 
the  work  of  the  divine  Angel  was  done.  Hence  the 
sacred  ])ropriety  of  changing  his  name  to  one  which 
should  have  the  Divine  name  in  it :  Oshea  into  Jehoshua. 
Yet  further :  The  Angql  of  the  covenant,  we  have 
strong  reason  to  believe,  was  none  other  than  the  Sec- 
ond Person  of  the  ever-adorable  Godhead,  and  the 
Saviour  of  the  typical  Israel ;  he  who  in  the  fulness  of 
time  would  come,  —  blessed  be  his  name  !  has  come  —  to 
be  in  human  form  the  Saviour  of  the  true  Israel,  the 
church.  Hence  Joshua  was  a  double  type,  of  the  then 
present,  though  unseen.  Saviour,  the  Angel  of  the 
covenant,  and  of  the  Saviour,  who,  according  to  cove- 
nant and  promise,  was  to  bring  his  people  into  their 
heavenly  rest.  The  divine  name  was  in  the  name  of 
the  human  Saviour  by  whom  God  gave  the  triumph  to 
Israel  of  old,  as  a  typical  prophecy  that  Jehovah,  the 
Angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  would  be  incarnate 
as  the  Saviour  of  his  people.      This  is  established  by 


Lect.  Xril.]  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  267 

the  testimony  of  the  Evangehst  Matthew,  following  his 
record  of  the  annunciation  to  Joseph  :  "  Now  all  this 
was  done  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  of 
the  Lord  by  the  prophet,  saying :  Behold  a  virgin  shall 
be  with  child  and  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  they  shall 
call  his  name  Emmattuel,  which  being  interpreted  is, 
God  with  us."  The  prophecy  was  fulfilled  not  only  in 
the  birth  of  Christ  as  the  son  of  a  virgin,  but  also  in 
the  import  of  his  name,  the  interpretation  of  which  cor- 
responds with,  that  which  we  have  given  of  the  word 
Jesus,  Such,  we  believe,  is  the  majestic  import  of 
the  most  precious  name  Jesus  —  Jehovah-Jesus  ;  foi- 
in  him  who  received  it  at  his  circumcision,  and  now 
bears  it  on  his  throne  of  highest  glory,  our  Elder 
Brother,  the  born  of  woman,  we  recognize,  adore,  and 
trust  the  Emmanuel,  God  with  us. 

We  are  now,  in  answer  to  the  29th  Question  of  the 
Catechism :  "  Wliy  is  the  Son  of  God  called  Jesus, 
that  is,  Saviour  ?  "  to  declare. 

Secondly  :  The  reason  on  account  of  which  the  name 
of  Jesus  belongs  hy  divine  appointment  to  the  Son  of  God 
incarnate. 

This  is  stated  by  the  Catechism  :  — 

"  Because  he  saveth  us  and  delivereth  us  from  our 
sins ;  and,  likewise,  because  we  ought  not  to  seek 
neither  can  find  salvation  in  any  other." 

If  the  first  part  of  the  answer  be  proved,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  second  follows  necessarily ;  and,  therefore, 
will  come  appropriately  under  our  third  head.  For  the 
present,  we  occupy  ou.rselves  with  the  first  clause : 
"  Because  he  saveth  us  and  delivereth  us  from  all  our 
sins  ;  "  the  thought  in  which  is  taken  from  the  annun- 
ciation of  the  angel  to  Joseph,  Matthew  i.  21 :    "  Thou 


268  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  ;  for  he  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins."  This  brings  before  us  three  questions : 
I.  From  what  doth  Jesus  save  ?  II.  How  doth  he 
save  ?  III.  Whom  doth  he  save  ?  Or,  the  Nature, 
the  Manner,  and  the  Objects  of  his  salvation. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  salvation  "by  Jesus.  "  He  shall 
save  his  people /rom  their  sinsy 

All  men  are  sinners  ;  the  people  of  Christ  are  sin- 
ners, for  he  "  came  into  the  Avorld  to  save  "  —  not  the 
righteous,  but  "  sinners."  Now,  because  sin  is  a 
violation  of  the  law  of  God,  who  denounces  the  most 
terrible  consequences  upon  all  who  shall  be  guilty  of  so 
offending  his  holy  majesty,  all  sinners  are  in  a  state  of 
ruin,  or,  as  the  Scripture  strongly  expresses  it,  "  lost," 
except  they  be  saved  from  their  sins  ;  which,  the  Gospel 
everywhere  asserts,  can  be  accomplished  only  by  the 
mediatorial  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  Thus,  "Cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to  do  them."  "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made 
a  curse  for  us."  Again  :  "  By  one  man  sin  entered  into 
the  world,  and  death  by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed  upon  all 
men  for  that  all  have  sinned."  "  Where  sin  abounded, 
grace  did  much  more  abound  ;  that  as  sin  hath  reigned 
unto  death,  even  so  might  grace  reign  unto  eternal  life, 
by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  From  these,  and  many 
other  synonymous  passages,  we  see,  that  the  salvation 
which  sinners  need,  and  which  Christ  accomplishes  for 
his  people,  is  twofold  :  From  the  wrath  of  God,  and 
from  our  sins  themselves ;  or  from  the  penalty  of  sin, 
and  the  power  of  sin. 

1.  From  the  wrath  of  God,  the  penalty  of  sin.  Sin 
is  the  very  opposite  of  the  divine  holiness,  and  a  direct 


the  name  OF  JESUS.  269 

violation  of  that  moral  order,  which,  after  the  pattern 
of  his  own  blessed  character,  he  has  ordained  for  the 
happiness  of  his  human  creatures,  in  conformity  with 
the  general  laws  of  his  moral  universe.  It  must, 
therefore,  be  that  sin  is  ever  to  God  an  object  of  his 
infinite  disgust  and  hate  ;  but,  as  he  is  the  moral  Gov- 
ernor of  the  world,  it  becomes  necessary  to  his  truth, 
his  justice,  and  even  to  his  sovereignty,  that  he  should 
punish  sin  by  whomsoever  and  howsoever  committed. 
The  laws  which  he  has  established  are  the  rules  of  his 
administration  as  well  as  of  our  conduct,  and  extend  in 
their  exceeding  breadth  over  every  possible  particular 
of  our  moral  action.  His  sovereignty  is  so  complete 
that  at  no  moment  we  can  in  thought,  word,  or  deed, 
put  ourselves  beyond  our  responsibility.  But  the  pen- 
alty he  denounces  is  equally  explicit:  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Every  soul  that  sins,  by  the 
very  fact  of  his  sin,  comes  under  the  divine  displeasure 
not  only,  but  under  the  penalty  of  the  divine  law,  and 
a  penalty  which  is  extreme  ;  for  it  is  death,  which  from 
its  very  nature  is  perpetual,  there  being  no  escape  out 
of  death  or  any  return  from  it.  A  sentence  to  impris- 
onment or  any  other  form  of  punishment  for  a  term  of 
yeai-s,  short  of  the  natural  life,  may  be  served  out  and 
the  convict  recover  his  freedom  ;  even  should  it  be  for 
the  whole  of  his  natural  life,  he  may  have  the  sentence 
reversed  after  he  has  suffered  some  time  ;  but  an  inflic- 
tion of  death  as  a  penalty  is  final,  and  once  that  it  has 
been  executed,  nothing  but  the  power  of  God  in  giving 
a  new  life  can  restore  from  it.  The  ruin  of  the  sinner 
is,  therefore,  utter,  perpetual,  irremediable,  except  by 
the  intervention  of  some  divine  method  which  shall 
justify  God  who  ordained  and  has  inflicted  the  penalty, 


270  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  in  pardoning  tlie  sinner,  and  in  recovering  hini  from 
under  its  power  by  quickening  liim  with  a  new  life. 

Farther  :  The  penahy  of  death,  though  perpetual 
like  death,  is  not  annihilation  or  insensibility.  The 
soul,  though  it  dies,  ceases  not  to  be,  nor  loses  its  con- 
sciousness or  sensitiveness.  It  is  a  moral  death.  As 
the  favor  of  God  is  life,  and  he,  who  has  that  favor  is 
conscious  of  the  divine  love,  enjoying  with  keen  delight 
the  holy  pleasures  which  flow  from  that  love  ;  so  death 
is  the  divine  wrath  on  the  soul,  and  he,  who  is  under 
its  power,  is  conscious  of  the  terrible  doom,  suffering 
with  keenest  anguish  the  infamous  tortui'es  which  pour 
forth  from  that  wrath.  We  can  measure  the  ruin  of 
the  sinner  only  by  the  eternity,  the  inexorableness,  the 
fierceness  of  the  divine  anger  against  sin.  "  Even 
according  to  thy  fear,  so  is  thy  wrath."  "  Tell  me," 
said  one  whom  faith,  not  genius,  made  eloquent,  "  tell 
me  what  the  wrath  of  God  is,  and  I  can  tell  you  the 
sweetness  of  the  name  he  bears  who  delivers  me  from 
it ;  Jesus,  my  Saviour." 

2.  From  our  sins  themselves,  or  their  power  over  us. 
It  is  clear  that  our  salvation  must  be  more  radical  than 
from  the  penalty.  The  penalty  is  consequent  upon  the 
evil  in  us  that  is  behind  it.  God  is  angry  with  us  be- 
cause of  our  sins,  so  that  our  sins  are  the  procuring 
cause  of  our  death  —  they  would  bring  death  on  our 
souls,  even  if  there  were  (what  it  is  impossible  to  sup- 
pose) no  judicial  infliction  of  death  as  a  legal  penalty. 
The  whole  nature  of  things,  the  very  character  of  the 
ever-blessed  God  must  be  changed,  before  a  soul  can 
sin  and  not  die.  The  first  act  of  sin  puts  us  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  law  of  life.  It  is  like  a  taint  of  leprosy,  a 
fatal,  infectious  plague  which  mortifies  all  our  moral 


Lkct.  XIII.]  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  271 

spiritual  being,  corrupting  our  powers,  depraving  our 
perceptions,  and,  not  only  incapacitating  us  to  i-ecover 
ourselves,  but  tending  surely,  constantly,  rapidly  to 
o-reater  disease,  loathsome  decay,  deformity,  and  an- 
guish. Its  povs^er  over  us  is  not  the  less,  but  greater, 
because  a  marked  symptom  of  it  is  an  insane  love  of 
the  mortal  cause,  a  wilful  determination  to  persevere  in 
courting  the  contagion.  Our  death  is  not  less  certain, 
because  our  moral  practice  is  a  continued  suicide. 

Nay,  even  were  it  possible  that,  our  moral  nature 
continuing  as  it  is,  God  should  remit  the  penalty  of  our 
past  transgressions,  the  suspension  of  his  wrath  would 
be  but  for  a  moment ;  because,  instantly  sinnmg  again, 
we  should  incur  fresh  guilt ;  and,  again,  yet  more 
guilt ;  so  that  the  pardon  would  need  to  be  repeated 
as  often  as  sin  would  be  committed  ;  a  course  utterly 
irreconcihxble  with  the  faintest  sense  of  justice. 
What  mockery  would  it  be,  if  human  laws  were  so 
neutralized,  if  immediately  on  sentence  being  passed 
upon  him  for  one  crime,  a  pardon  would  set  the 
criminal  fi'ee  to  commit  new  offences,  the  penalty  of 
each  successively  remitted  as  often  as  he  was  sentenced  ? 
What  authority  would  there  be  in  such  a  government  ? 
What  security  would  there  be  for  the  subjects  it  claimed 
to  protect  ?  What  hope  even  for  the  reform  of  the 
transgressor,  thus  encouraged  by  impunity  to  laugh  at 
the  cobweb  restraint,  and  to  harden  himself  by  habitual 
crime  ?  .  Can  such  weak,  false  lenity  be  tolferated  in 
the  government  of  God  ? 

Salvation  must,  therefore,  be  radical  as  the  cause  of 
the  ruin.  The  sinfulness  of  the  sinner  which  is  the 
occasion  of  the  divine  wrath,  the  very  cause  of  hell, 
nay,  in  its  own  workings,  itself  hell,  must  be  eradicated. 


272  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  A  new  virtue  of  life  must  be  infused,  to  meet  in  our 
corrupted  system  the  fatal  virus,  to  counteract  its 
corruption,  to  overcome  and  to  drive  it  out  by  a  x'eturn- 
ing  vigor  and  health,  from  a  divine  power.  In  a  word 
and  without  a  figure,  we  need  to  be  set  free  from  sin, 
to  be  delivered  from  the  power  it  has  over  us,  to  have 
the  bent  of  our  inclinations  changed  upward  toward 
God  and  holiness,  to  receive  strength  for  the  conquest 
of  evil  habits  and  the  resistance  of  temptations  ;  nay, 
in  the  strong  language  of  Scripture,  to  be  "  born  again," 
that  we  may  come  out  into  the  world  as  thoroughly 
changed  in  our  principles,  purposes,  desires,  and  motives, 
as  if  we  had  been  created  anew  with  a  nature  morally 
the  opposite  of  that  which  we  have  had  and  manifested 
from  our  first  birth. 

All !  my  brethren,  now  we  see  the  reason  of  the  di- 
vine name  being  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Who  but  God 
can  deliver  from  the  wrath  of  God  ?  Who  but  he  who 
created  man  at  first  in  the  image  of  God,  can  create 
us  anew  and  re-stamp  the  divine  likeness  on  our  souls  ! 

II.  The  method  of  salvation. 

How  doth  Jesus  save  his  people  from  their  sins  ? 
Like  the  nature  of  salvation,  the  method  of  it  must  be 
twofold  :  By  his  atoning  merits,  and  by  his  sanctifying 
grace  ;  the  first  of  which  delivers  his  people  from  the 
wrath  of  God,  the  penalty  of  sin  ;  the  second,  from  the 
power  of  their  sins  over  them. 

1.  His  atoning  merits. 

The  word  lost,  or  ruined,  supposes  not  only  present 
calamity,  but  a  loss  of  former  prosperity,  the  ruin  of  a 
former  happiness.  Hence,  also,  we  speak  of  man  as 
fallen,  and  of  the  act,  which  occasioned  our  present 
misery,  as  the  fall.     The  Scripture  teaches  us  that  our 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  273 

race,  as  represented  by  our  first  parent,  was  created 
with  a  likeness  to  God  and  originally  enjoyed  the 
divine  favor,  which  the  Scripture,  as  has  been  stated, 
denominates  life.  The  condition  on  which  this  favor 
was  to  be  continued  could  be  no  other  than  his  con- 
formity to  his  divine  pattern  by  obedience  to  the  divine 
commandments  ;  the  penalty  of  his  disobedience  was, 
necessarily,  death,  the  entire  withdrawal  of  divine  like- 
ness, the  infliction  of  divine  wrath,  and  consequent 
misery.  In  order,  therefore,  to  our  full  restoration, 
there  must  be  a  reconcilement  to  God.  This  is  what 
is  meant,  properly,  by  atonement.  God  and  sinful 
man  have  been  divided  ;  it  is  necessary  for  our  salva- 
tion that  we  be  at-one  again  with  God.  Atonement 
is  often  used  to  signify  the  basis  of  the  reconciliation, 
as  the  procuring  cause  of  the  effect ;  but  radically,  it 
is  the  reconciliation,  the  atowement  itself. 

Now  to  this  reconciliation,  the  full  restoration  from 
the  misery  into  which  we  are  fallen  because  of  the 
divine  wrath,  it  is  necessary  that  the  law  which  we 
have  broken  should  be  so  satisfied  as  to  justify  our  holy, 
divine  Sovereion  in  removing  from  our  souls  the  curse 
of  his  wrath  and  taking  us  again  into  his  approving 
favor.  This  justification  of  his  mercy  it  pleased  God, 
out  of  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  to  provide 
in  the  vicarious  merits  of  Christ,  who  took  our  place 
under  the  law,  that  all  who  believe  in  him  might  be 
admitted  to  his  place  in  the  divine  regard  ;  and,  hence, 
we  call  them  his  atoning  merits.  The  infinite  pro- 
priety, wisdom,  and  mercy  of  the  sinner's  salvation 
through  the  righteousness  of  a  sufficient  substitute,  the 
necessity  of  both  a  divine  and  human  nature  for  the 
personal    constitution    of  such    a   substitute,    and   the 

VOL.    I.  18 


274  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  [Lect.XIII. 

divine  appointment  of  Jesus,  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
God,  and  the  miraculously  conceived  Son  of  the  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  the  Emmanuel,  to  be  that  substitute, — 
were  all  demonstrated  at  length  in  our  lectures  on  the 
lessons  for  the  Fifth  and  Sixth  Lord's  Days.  It  is  now 
requisite  only  that  we  refresh  our  memories  and  our 
hearts  with  a  mention  of  what  Christ,  as  our  atoning 
substitute,  did  on  behalf  of  his  people.  His  work  was 
twofold :  Expiation  of  our  sins,  and  obedience  to  the 
divine  law. 

For  the  law  of  God,  unlike  most  human  laws,  not 
only  threatened  the  transgressor  of  it  with  punishment, 
but  also  proposed  reward  for  our  obedience.  We  are, 
therefore,  because  of  our  sin,  not  only  exposed  to  the 
wrath  of  God,  but  without  any  possible  claims  to  his 
favor.  Even  were  the  penalty  remitted,  no  blessing 
could  be  justly  bestowed  upon  us,  because  we  are  not 
entitled  to  the  reward  of  obedience.  Before  God  can, 
consistently  with  his  own  word,  receive  us  back  to  his 
love,  not  only  must  the  guilt  of  our  sins  (by  which  we 
mean  our  liability  to  punishment)  be  taken  from  us, 
but  there  must  also  be  provided  a  perfect  obedience,  the 
reward  of  which  may  be  bestowed  upon  us.  Thus 
Jesus  took  upon  him  the  guilt  of  his  people's  sins,  and 
satisfied  the  penalty  which  they  had  incurred,  by  his 
death  on  the  cross  ;  but  he  also,  by  his  previous  active 
obedience,  purchased,  or  earned,  or  became  entitled  to 
the  reward  of  divine  favor,  which,  according  to  his 
covenant  with  the  Father,  is  transferred  to  those  who 
accept  his  substitution  for  them  by  believing  on  his 
name.  This  is  what  theologians  technically  call  impu- 
tation —  the  imputation  of  our  sins  to  Christ,  and  the 
imputation  of  his  righteous  obedience  to  us ;  by  which 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  275 

we  are  to  understand,  not  that  our  sins  become  his 
sins,  for  that  is  impossible  as  personal  acts  are  not 
transferable,  or  that  his  righteousness  becomes  our  per- 
sonal obedience,  which  is  alike  impossible,  but  that  the 
legal  consequence  of  our  sins,  which  is  death,  is  inflicted 
on  him,  and  the  legal  consequences  of  his  obedience, 
which  is  life,  is  conferred  on  us.  Even  as  the  apostle 
says  :  "All  things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reconciled  us 
to  himself  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  hath  given  to  us  the 
ministry  of  reconciliation  :  to  wit,  that  God  was  in 
Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imput- 
ing their  trespasses  unto  them  ;  and  hath  committed 
unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation.  Now,  then,  we  are 
ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  you 
by  us  ;  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled 
to  God.  For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who 
knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him."  Jesus  is  our  Saviour  in  both  ways : 
his  expiatory  death,  and  his  active  obedience,  constitut- 
ing the  ground  on  which  the  sinner  that  believes  in 
him  is  reconciled  to  God  ;  and  not  only  relieved  from 
the  penalty  of  death,  but  also  restored  to  the  full  enjo.y- 
ment  of  divine  favor.  His  death  saves  us  from  hell  ; 
his  obedience  entitles  us  to  heaven  ;  but  in  both  the 
merit  is  all  his,  and  to  him  be  the  glory  ! 

2.  His  sanctifying  grace,  by  which  he  delivers  us 
from  the  power  of  our  sins.  We  have  seen  under  our 
former  head,  what,  alas !  we  know  by  sad  experience, 
that  sin  corrupts  our  whole  nature,  giving  us  such  an 
inclination  to  sin  more  and  more  that  even  pardon  itself 
cannot  deliver  us  from  the  misery  which  is  its  inevita- 
ble consequence.  The  Scripture  represents  this  deprav- 
ity as  a  bondage  to  sin.     Such  is  its  power  over  us  that 


276  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  though  its  chains  are  willingly  worn,  we  have  not  moral 
strength  to  break  them  ;  and  the  bondage  is  aggravated 
by  bringing  us  under  the  power  of  the  devil,  the  great 
tempter,  and  of  his  two  principal  instruments  of  temp- 
tation, —  the  world  and  the  flesh.  Thus,  our  sins  are 
denominated  our  enemies,  who  oppose  our  entrance  to 
heavenly  rest,  as  the  Canaanites  did  the  entrance  of 
Israel  to  the  promised  land  ;  and  from  them  our  Joshua 
must  deliver  us  by  a  victory  which  we  cannot  accom- 
plish of  ourselves.  So  the  father  of  the  Baptist  speaks 
of  Jesus  as  "  a  horn  (or  strength)  of  salvation  "  sent  to 
fulfil  the  promise  which  God  "  sware  unto  Abraham, 
tliat  he  would  grant  unto  us  that  we,  being  delivered 
out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies,  might  serve  in  holi- 
ness and  righteousness  before  him  all  the  days  of  our 
life."  For,  if  we  be  free  from  the  power  of  our  sins, 
we  are  safe  from  all  enemies,  because  none  "  can  harm 
us  if  we  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good."  This 
deliverance  from  sin  is  called,  theologically,  sanctifica- 
tion,  is  begun  in  the  conversion  of  the  sinner,  and  car- 
ried on  until  he  is  made  perfect  in  glory.  It  is  gradual 
for  wise  reasons ;  and  among  them,  obviously,  because 
the  divine  process  is  conducted  through  the  operation 
of  the  sinner's  own  faculties.  The  immediate  agent  in 
this  sanctification  to  whose  power  the  several  steps  in 
the  process  is  attributed  by  the  Scriptures,  is  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  it  is  that  begets  us  again  in  regeneration, 
dwells  as  a  new  life  in  our  hearts,  enlightens  our  under- 
standing, turns  our  affections  upward  to  God,  invigor- 
ates our  faltering  will  to  determine  good,  and  by  faith  in 
the  gospel  transforms  us  from  rebels  to  children  of  God. 
But,  as  we  shall  consider  at  large  this  sanctifying  worl 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  we  come  to  the  lesson  for  the 


Lect.XIII.]  the  name  OF  JESUS.  2T7 

Twentieth  Lord's  Day,  we  shall  now  briefly  note  the 
sense  in  which  our  deliverance  from  the  power  of  sin  is 
ascribed  to  Jesus. 

a.  He  obtains  for  us  by  the  prayers  of  his  interces- 
sion,  based   on   the  merits   of  his   life  and  death,  the 
influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost.      When  he  had  accom- 
plished a  righteousness  of  infinite  value,  and  the  Father, 
well  pleased   with  his   work,  said  :  "  Ask,  and   I  will 
give  thee,"  the  Mediator  asked  that  the  various  graces 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  might  be  given  him  for  his  people. 
Accordingly,  we  find  that  immediately  on  the  Saviour's 
beginning  his  intercession  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  the 
Spirit  was  sent  down  on  the  multitudes  of  the  Pente- 
cost, and  has  never  ceased  to  dwell  with  his  true  church 
or  in  the  heart  of  every  true  believer.      So  says  the 
prophetic  Psalmist :    "  Thou  hast    ascended  on  high ; 
thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  ;  thou  hast  received  gifts 
for  men  ;    yea,  for  the   rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord 
God  might  dwell  among  them.      Blessed  be  the  Lord, 
who  daily  loadeth  us  with  benefits,  even  the  God   of 
our  salvation  ;  "  and  our  Lord  at  the  Last  Supper  :  "  I 
will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you   another 
Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  with  you  forever,  even 
the   Spirit  of   truth."      All   the    effects    of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  without  whose  grace  we  can  do  nothing,  —  faith, 
repentance,  love,  hope,  peace,  holy  desires,  and  all  good 
works,  —  thus  come  from  Jesus,  because  of  his  merits. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  emphatically  His  Spirit  ;  the  Spirit 
of  the  Son  of  God,  our  Saviour.     We  have  nothing  of 
our  own  ;    all  that  is  good    in    us,  all    the    good    we 
ever    shall    or   can   have    in    us,   is  the  result  of   his 
work  and    the   answer  of    his  prayers.      "  It  pleased 
the  Father   that    in    him    should    all   fulness   dwell;" 


278  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  "  and  of  liis  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace 
for  grace." 

h.  The  instrument  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  accom- 
plishes the  work  of  sanctification  is  the  Word  of  God, 
which,  from  its  beginning  to  its  end,  testifies  of  Christ. 
The  legitimate  effect  of  the  Gospel  when  applied  to  the 
soul  of  the  sinner  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  to  "  work  by 
love,"  to  "  purify  the  heart,  and  to  give  victory  over 
the  world."  The  love  of  Jesus  is  the  great  convert- 
ing, animating,  sanctifying  argument  and  motive  over 
all  that  is  evil  in  our  natures,  and  cornipting  in  the 
world  around  us.  It  is  the  divine  story  of  his  conde- 
scension which  brought  him  to  earth,  his  incarnation  as 
the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  that  he  might  be  very  man ; 
his  sorrowful  e^cperience  of  human  griefs  and  human 
temptations,  that  he  might  assure  his  people  of  his 
sympathy ;  his  pure  example  of  human  virtue  that  he 
might  mark  the  way  to  heaven  ;  his  bitter  death  on  the 
cross  that  he  might  pluck  the  sting  from  the  last  enemy ; 
his  resurrection  in  his  crucified  body,  and  his  ascension 
with  that  human  body  scarred  by  the  thorns,  and  nails, 
and  spear,  to  the  i-ight  hand  of  the  Father,  that  as  the 
second  Adam  he  might  be  head  over  all  things  to  his 
Church ;  and  the  blessed  conviction,  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  bears  home  on  the  penitent  soul  that'all  this  love, 
and  humiliation,  and  suffering,  and  righteousness  and 
death,  and  power  and  glory,  were  for  every  one  who 
believes,  which  melts  the  obdurate,  encourages  the  fear- 
ful, strengthens  the  weak,  and  keeps  the  unstable. 
No  one  can  have  a  heartfelt  conviction  of  a  love  so  great 
without  an  answering  affection  ;  and  the  sentiment  of 
every  Christian  soul  must  be  that  of  the  glowing  Apos- 
tle when  he  says :  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us, 


I.ECT.  XIII.]  THE  NAME   OF  JESUS.  279 

because  we  thus  judge  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then 
were  all  dead,  and  that  he  died  for  all,  that  they  which 
live  should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but 
unto  him  which  died  for  them  and  rose  again."  The 
transformation  is  not  immediate,  but,  for  wise  reasons, 
gradual ;  yet  it  is  certain,  because  every  one  "  that  hath 
this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself  even  as  he  is  pure ;  " 
and  because  it  is  written,  "  He  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins."  The  sanctifying  process  which  is 
beo-un  in  the  regeneration  of  the  penitent  will  be  car- 
ried on  until  it  is  complete  in  his  celestial  life  ;  and  the 
sinner  whom  Jesus  saves,  is  lifted  from  the  depths  of 
corruption  to  the  height  of  holiness. 

III.  The  objects  of  the  salvation  by  Jesus. 
Here  we  need  but  little  argument.     The  text  decides 
at  once  who  they  are  whom  Jesus  saves,  and  the  na- 
ture of  the  salvation  confirms  the  text. 
1.  "  He  shall  save  his  peopled 

It  is  our  high  privilege  to  believe  that  the  merits  of 
Christ,  substantially  considered,  are  infinite.  His  hu- 
man nature,  however  pure,  his  human  righteousness, 
however  perfect,  his  human  suff'erings,  however  great, 
must,  like  all  that  pertains  to  the  human  creature,  be 
finite.  Had  our  Jesus  been  only  man,  he  could,  at 
best,  have  saved  only  himself,  because  he  could  not 
have  transcended  the  obligations  which  every  man  is 
personally  under  to  God.  But  our  Jesus  was  not,  is 
not,  a  mere  man.  Even  his  humanity  was  miraculously 
engendered  and  sanctified,  though  real.  He  was  Jesus, 
the  Emmanuel,  God  with  us  ;  the  only  begotten  Son 
of  God  in  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  He,  existing 
from  all  eternity  in  the  form  of  God,  took  to  his  divin- 
ity the  nature  of  humanity  ;  and  it  is  from  this  union 


280 .  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  of  his  infinite  divinity  with  our  finite  humanity,  that 
the  obedience  and  expiation  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus 
derive  their  value,  and,  therefore,  their  value  must  be 
infinite. 

It  is  not,  however,  of  their  absolute  value  that  we 
now  speak,  but  of  their  application.  Had  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  been  pleased  so  to  apply  the  sav- 
ing merits  of  Jesus,  they  would  be  sufficient  for  the 
salvation  of  all  men,  though  the  race  were  millions  of 
times  more  numerous  than  it  is  ;  but  we  know  that  all 
men  are  not  saved,  because  those  who  do  not  believe 
are  lost.  '  The  salvation  of  Jesus  cannot,  therefore,  be 
ap])lied  to  all  men.  Yet  it  is  equally  clear  that  Jesus 
cannot  have  failed  in  his  purpose  or  any  part  of  it ; 
and,  therefore,  that  his  people  whom  he  came  to  save 
are  not  all  men,  but  those  among  men  who  are  his  in 
some  peculiar  sense. 

It  is,  also,  undoubtedly  true  that  the  provisions  for 
the  pardon  of  sin  in  the  merits  of  Christ  are  so  great, 
so  infinitely  great,  as  to  assure  every  sinner  who  will 
believe  on  his  name  of  acceptance  and  everlasting  life  ; 
but  it  is  as  true  that  no  sinner  will  believe  except  under 
the  constraining  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  then 
the  salvation  of  Christ's  people  depended  on  the  con- 
tingency of  their  unassisted  faith,  or  faitli  not  wrought 
in  them  by  divine  grace,  none  would  be  saved,  and  the 
purpose  of  Jesus  has  failed.  The  language  of  the 
text,  however,  is  not  that  Jesus  will  offer  salvation  to 
all  men,  which,  blessed  be  his  name !  he  does  ;  but  that 
he  sliall^  positively,  certainly  "  shall  save  his  people ;  " 
and  as  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  which  faith  is 
wrought  in  the  soul,  has  been  purchased  by  his  merit 
and  is  given  by  him,  the  inference  is  irresistible  that 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  281 

Jesus  not  only  offers  his  salvation  to  all  men,  but  actu- 
ally and  infallibly  secures  and  will  accomplish  the  sal- 
vation of  his  people.  Therefore,  the  Master  himself 
says  :  "  I  am  the  good  shepherd,  and  know  my  sheep, 
^nd  am  known  of  mine  ;  .  .  .  and  I  lay  doAvn  my  life 
for  the  sheep."  Again  :  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth 
me  shall  come  to  me  ;  and  him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out."  This  is  no  discouragement  to 
the  seeking  soul,  for  all  who  come  are  sure  of  being 
received  ;  but  it  is  the  highest  encouragement  for  us  to 
be  assured  that  our  salvation  is  in  no  sense  dependent 
on  our  own  .strength,  because  all  who  are  willing  to  be 
his  people,  he  will  certainly  save. 

2.  The  nature  of  the  salvation  confirms  this  :  '•'  He 
shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.'''  Not  only  did 
Christ  by  his  death  pay  the  penalty  due  to  them  on 
account  of  their  sins  for  all  who  believe  ;  and  by  his 
righteousness  purchase  for  them  an  eternal  happiness 
of  which  they  are  personally  utterly  undeserving  ;  but 
it  was  a  principal  object  of  his  purpose,  and  is  the 
main  benefit  which  they  receive  through  him,  that  his 
people  shall  be  saved  by  the  grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit 
from  their  sins  themselves,  that  is,  from  the  power  of 
their  sins,  their  sinfulness  of  nature,  tendency,  and 
habit.  Deliverance  from  punishment  is  tlie  least  part 
of  salvation  ;  for  salvation  is  complete  only  in  sanctifi- 
cation.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  hell,  and  our  sinfulness 
constitutes  our  danger  of  eternal  death  ;  until  our  sins 
are  taken  from  us,  or  we  are  assured  that  they  will  be, 
we  are  in  danger.  But  this  is  the  work  of  Christ's 
spirit  through  Chinst's  gospel.  Hence,  only  those  are 
saved  who  are  Christ's  people,  his  "  peculiar  people, 
zealous  of  good  works  ;  "  and  all  those  whom  he  came 


282  THE  NAME  OF   JESUS.  certainly  to  save,  he  sanctifies  that  they  may  be  saved. 
It  is  all  of  grace.  "We  love  him,"  says  the  Apostle, 
"  because  he  first  loved  us."  It  is  grace  to  the  end,  as 
it  is  grace  from  the  beginning.  He  ordained  his  peo- 
ple, not  because  he  foresaw  that  they  would  be  holj'-  of 
themselves  ;  but  because  he  purposed  that  they  should 
be  holy  by  his  power.  "  For  whom  he  did  foreknow, 
he  also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image 
of  his  Son.  .  .  .  Moreover,  whom  he  did  predestinate, 
them  he  also  called  ;  and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also 
justified ;  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glori- 
fied," which  is  the  height  of  sanctification.  It  is  all  of 
grace,  therefore,  all  of  Christ.  This  is  the  truth  of 
the  Gospel.  Our  Church  teaches  no  other.  They 
who  think  that  they  can  save  themselves  will  reject  it 
as  a  hard  saying  ;  but  to  all  who  cling  to  Christ  as 
their  only  Saviour,  it  is  their  only  comfort  in  life  and 
death. 

Thirdly  :    The  Practical  Inferences. 

These  flow  so  easily  from  our  previous  exposition, 
and  are  so  clearly  stated  in  the  Questions  and  An- 
swers for  this  Lord's  Day,  that  they  need  only  to  be 
set  forth,  and  may  then  be  left  to  our  personal  medita- 
tions. 

I.  "  We  ouo-ht  not  to  seek,  neither  can  we  find  sal- 
vation  in  any  other,"  but  Jesus. 

1.  We  ouffht  not  to  seek  salvation  in  anv  other. 

a.  For  it  is  God  whom  we  have  offended,  God  whose 
wrath  we  deserve,  God  who  alone  can  saA^e  us.  It 
is  not  for  us  to  ^dictate  how  he  shall  s^ve  us  ;  but 
since  he  has  revealed  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  as  the 
only  way  in  which  he  is  willing  to  save  us,  and  freely 
offers  salvation  to  alt  who  believe,   we  should   grate- 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  283 

fully,  gladly  and  at    once   believe    on  Christ  for    our 
salvation. 

h.  He  has  also  declared  that  his  highest  glory,  the 
glory  of  his  justice  and  mercy,  of  his  wisdom  and  his 
power,  is  in  saving  all  who  come  to  him  through  Jesus; 
and,  therefore,  should  we  most  reverently  and  devoutly 
turn  from  our  sins,  by  which  we  so  greatly  dishonor 
him,  and  offer  ourselves  to  him  through  faith  in  Christ, 
that  he  may  have  his  glory  yet  more  mailifest  in  our 
salvation. 

c.  And,  when  we  contemplate  all  he  has  done  for  us 
in  the  humiliation,  obedience,  and  death  of  Christ,  with 
all  he  is  willing  to  do  for  us  on  earth  and  in  heaven  by 
the  power  and  grace  of  Christ,  how  should  his  love  con- 
strain us  to  become  the  followers  of  the  Good  Shep- 
herd, who  laid  down  his  life  for  us  that  he  might  lead 
us,  through  green  pastures  and  beside  still  waters,  to 
his  heavenly  fold. 

2.  But  we  cannot  find  salvation  in  any  other. 

a.  "  There  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved,"  but  the 
name  of  Jesus.  God  has  said  it ;  and  since  our  salva- 
tion can  come  only  from  God,  there  can  be  no  other. 
What  folly  for  us  to  think  of  finding  another  way  than 
that  which  the  wisdom  of  God  devised  ;  or  of  trusting 
another  way  than  that  which  his  power  has  executed ! 

h.  If  there  could  have  been  any  other  way,  God 
would  never  have  put  his  only  begotten  Son  to  such 
humiliation,  or  that  Son  incarnate  to  such  shame  and 
suffering.  That  no  method  less  would  have  sufficed,  is 
shown  in  the  sorrow  and  death  of  Jesus  ;  that  there 
could  be  none  greater  is  shown  in  the  divine  merit  of 
the  vicarious  sufferer. 


284  THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  [Lkct.  XIII. 

c.  So  far  from  there  being  any  other  way,  God  in 
many  Scriptures  denounces  a  fearful  aggravation  of 
punishment  upon  all  those  who  reject  Christ.  "  He  that 
believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath 
not  believed  on  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
God."  "  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without 
mercy  under  two  or  three  witnesses.  Of  how  much 
sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought 
worthy  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God, 
and  liath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith 
he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done 
despite  unto  the  spirit  of  grace  ?  "  O  my  hearers, 
"  how  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great  salva- 
tion ?  " 

II.  Those  do  not  believe  in  Jesus  "  who  seek  salva- 
tion and  happiness  of  saints,  of  themselves,  or  any- 
where else." 

"They  may  boast  of  him  in  words," — call  them- 
selves Christians,  —  "  but  in  deeds  deny  him  to  be  the 
only  deliverer  and  Saviour.  For  one  of  these  two 
things  must  be  true  :  either  Jesus  is  not  a  complete 
Saviour,  or  they  who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Sa- 
viour, must  find  in  him  all  things  necessary  to  salva- 
tion." 

We  can  add  nothing  to  this  reasonins;.  Jesus  saves 
his  people  from  their  sins.  If  he  cannot  do  it,  none 
can  help  him,  for  his  poAver  is  infinite.  If  he  under- 
takes to  do  it,  he  will  accomplish  it.  To  look  else- 
where is  to  doubt  his  power  to  save,  or  to  refuse  his 
grace.  There  is  not  a  saint  in  glory  who  docs  not 
ascribe  all  his  salvation  to  Jesus  ;  and  how  can  they 
save  others  who  themselves  were  saved  ? 

If  we  be  not  lost,  utterly  lost,  we  have  no  part  in 


THE  NAME  OF  JESUS.  285 

Christ,  for  he  came  to  save  only  the  lost ;  and  how  can 
a  lost  sinner  help  to  save  himself? 

No,  blessed  Jesus  !  Thou  art  the  Way,  and  the 
Truth,  and  the  Life  !  $io  man  can  go  unto  the  Father 
but  by  thee.  Save  us  for  thy  name's  sake,  O  blessed 
Jesus !