LECTURE  XIV. 


THE  TITLE,  CHRIST. 


TWELFTH    LORD'S   DAY. 
THE   TITLE,  CHRIST. 

Quest.  XXXI.      Why  is  he  called  Cin-isI,  that  is,  anointed? 

Ans.  Because  he  is  ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and  anointed  with  the 
Hol_v  Ghost  to  be  our  Chief  Prophet  and  Teacher,  who  has  fully 
revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  conceruinrj  our 
redemption;  and  to  be  our  only  High  Priest,  who,  by  the  one  sacrifice 
of  his  bod}',  has  redeemed  us  and  makes  continual  intercession  with 
the  Father  for  us;  and  also  to  be  our  eternal  King,  who  governs  us  by 
his  word  and  Spirit,  and  also  defends  and  preserves  us  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  that  salvation  he  hath  purchased  for  us. 

Quest.  XXXII.      Bui  why  art  thou  called  a  Christian'? 

Ans.  Because  I  am  a  member  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  thus  am  partaker  of 
his  anointing,  that  so  I  may  confess  his  name,  and  present  mvself  a 
living  sacrifice  of  thankfulness  to  him;  and,  also,  that,  with  a  free  and 
good  conscience,  I  may  fight  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this  life,  and 
afterwards  reign  with  him  eternally  over  all  creatures. 

TN  our  last  lesson  we  were  taught  the  meaning  of  that 
■*■  most  precious  word  Jesus,  the  personal  name  of  our 
divine  Redeemer,  given  him  because  he  is  the  Joshua 
of  the  new  covenant,  who  "  saves  his  people  from  their 
sins."  But  there  is  another  word  habitually  associated 
in  our  faith  and  praise  with  the  name  Jesus  ;  which,  if 
understood,  greatly  confirms  our  trust  and  excites  our 
thankfulness.  Dear  brethren,  you  anticipate  my  utter- 
ance, and  your  hearts,  burning  within  you,  know  that 
it  is  Christ. 

"  I  believe,"  says  every  true  confessor  of  our  holy 
religion,  "  in  Jesus  Christ."  The  name  Jesus,  being 
as  has  been  shown  sacredly  personal,  and  from  its  sig- 
nification, applicable  only  to  him  who  alone  can  save, 
ought  never  to  be  used  with  any  other  reference,  nor 

VOL.    I.  19 


290  THE   TITLE,   CHHIST.  JV. 

should  any  e])ithet  be  derived  from  it;  though  somi?, 
under  the  sliadow  of  a  deplorable  superstition,  have  so 
abused  it,  especially  that  infamous  band  of  conspirators 
against  the  peace  of  the  world,  who  cloak  a  systematic 
falsehood,  opposed  to  every  rule  of  the  gospel,  by  de- 
nominating themselves  The  Society  of  Jesus  Christ, 
is  not  a  personal  name,  however,  but  a  descriptive  ap- 
pellation ;  and  all  who,  by  their  union  to  Jesus  as  their 
Head,  share  in  the  honorable  blessings  which  it  repre- 
sents, may,  whatever  was  the  first  occasion  of  the  title, 
pi'ofess  and  call  themselves  Christians. 

We  are,  therefore,  now  following  the  order  of  the 
Creed  under  the  guidance  of  the  Catechism,  to  learn, 

First  :    Why  Jesus  is  called  Christ  ? 
And 

Secondly  :  Why  those  who  acknowledge  Hun  as  their 
Saviour  are  called  CJivistians  ? 

The  former  inquiry  is  met  by  the  31st  Question  and 
Answer ;  the  latter  by  the  32d. 

First  :    Why  is  Jesus  called  Christ  ? 

1.  The  word  itself  is  Greek,  and  an  adjective  derived 
from  a  verb  signifying  to  apply  oil  ;  it  translates  exactly 
the  Hebrew  word  which  we  pronounce  Messiah^  and  is 
ti'anslated  by  the  Latin  unctus^  participle  of  unguo,  from 
which  we  make  unguent,  unction,  and,  through  the 
French,  ointment,  anoint;  so  you  percei\e  that  both 
Messiah  and  Christ  mean,  as  the  Catechism  says, 
anointed. 

2.  Yet,  although,  radically,  anointment  signified  the 
application  of  oil  in  any  way,  it  came  to  have,  among 
the  Hebrews,  a  particular  and  dignified  sense  ;  because 
God  had  ordained  that  persons  designated  to  the  high 
functions  of  pi-oj)het,  priest,  or  king,  should  be  conse 


THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  291 

crated  or  ceremoniously  confirmed  in  their  several  offi- 
ces by  the  pouring  of  oil  on  their  heads. 

a.  Thus  the  word  of  Jehovah  was  :  "  Touch  not 
mine  anointed ;  and  do  my  i^ropliets  no  harm  ;  "  using 
the  two  terms,  in  poetical  parallelism,  as  synonymous, 
and  expounding  each  other.  It  does  not  appear  from 
express  Scripture  that  prophets  generally  received  such 
external  unction,  but,  from  the  fact  of  Elijah  being 
commanded  to  anoint  Elisha  as  his  successor  in  the 
prophetical  authority,  we  may  suppose  that  in  more 
eminent  cases  the  rite  was  performed.  Certainly  it  i? 
to  his  office  as  prophet,  that  the  language  of  Messiah  in 
Isaiah  Ixi.  1,  refers,  where  he  says :  "  The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,  because  the  Lord  hath 
anointed  me  to  preach  glad  tidings." 

h.  As  to  priests^  the  testimony  is  explicit.  Thus,  the 
Lord,  having  directed  Moses  how  to  compound  of  olive 
oil  and  many  precious  spices  "an  holy  anointing  oil," 
said,  "  Thou  shalt  anoint  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  con- 
secrate them,  that  they  may  minister  unto  me  in  the 
priest's  office.  (Ex.  xxx.  30.)  By  comparing  this  with 
correspondent  passages  in  Ex.  xxxix.  and  Lev.  viii.,  we 
learn  that  the  anointing  oil,  mingled  with  the  blood  of 
sacrifice,  was  sprinkled  upon  the  sacerdotal  garments 
of  both  Aaron  and  his  sons,  their  right  ear,  right 
thumb,  and  right  great  toe  being  also  touched  with  it ; 
but  the  fragrant  oil,  unmingled  with  the  blood,  was 
poured  upon  the  head  of  Aaron  alone.  Hence  the 
Psalmist :  "  Behold,  how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is 
for  brethi'en  to  dwell  together  in  unity  !  It  is  like  the 
precious  ointment  upon  the  head,  that  ran  down  upon 
the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard  ;  that  (the  beard)  went 
down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments."     It  has  been  sup- 


292  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  [Leot.  XIV. 

})osed  bv  some,  though  perhaps  not  correctly,  tlmt,  after 
tliis  first  recognition  of  an  inferior  priesthood,  they 
were  not  pubhcly  anointed  ;  but  to  the  consecration  of 
a  high  priest  the  unction  was  essential. 

c.  Samuel  anointed,  by  divine  command,  first  Saul, 
afterwards  David,  to  be  king  over  Israel ;  Zadok  the 
priest  and  Nathan  the  prophet,  anointed  Solomon  ; 
Elijah  anointed  Hazael  to  be  king  over  Syria,  and  Jehu 
to  be  king  over  Israel.  So  we  may  believe  the  custom 
was  perpetuated,  at  least  until  the  confusion  which  en- 
sued on  the  degeneracy  of  the  circumcised  people.  In 
Psalm  ii.  6,  Jehovah  declares :  "  Yet  have  I  set  (liter- 
ally, anointed)  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion  ;  " 
in  Isaiah  xlv.  he  calls  Cyrus  "  his  anointed,"  and  many 
other  Scriptures  show  that  the  term  was  applied  to 
those  gifted  by  the  special  revelation  or  providence  of 
God,  with  kingly  power. 

3.  The  Jews,  from  the  covenant  of  God  with  their 
father  Abraham,  and  some  older  promises,  expected 
that  at  a  divinely  appointed  time  a  great  personage 
would  appear,  under  whose  administration  their  people 
were  to  attain  the  summit  of  heavenly  favor  and  an 
unparalleled  prosperity.  That  he  would  be  a  mighty 
king  was  more  than  intimated  by  the  declaration  of  the 
dying  Jacob  concerning  Judah  :  "  The  sceptre  shall  not 
depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his 
feet  {%.  e.  from  among  his  descendants),  until  Shiloh  (or 
The  Pacificator)  come,  and  unto  him  shall  the  gather- 
ing of  the  people  (or  the  Gentiles)  be.  That,  while  a 
priest  and  a  king,  he  was  to  be  a  prophet,  they  knew 
from  the  inspired  testimony  of  Moses  :  "  The  Lord  thy 
God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  prophet  from  the  midst 
of  thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me  ;   unto  him  shalt 


THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  293 

thou  hearken."  That  he  was  to  be  a  Priest,  they  natu- 
rally inferred  from  the  eminently  sacerdotal  character 
of  their  national  constitution,  and  the  unchangeable  rule 
by  which  all  approaches  to  God  and  blessings  from  him 
were  through  the  mediation  of  the  high  priest ;  which 
inference  was  fully  justified  by  David.  The  Lord  hath 
sworn  and  will  not  repent.  "  Thou  art  a  priest  forever 
after  the  order  of  Melchisedek ;  '\  and  Zechariah : 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  Behold  the  man  whose 
name  is  The  Branch,  ...  he  shall  build  the  temple 
of  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit 
and  rule  upon  his  throne ;  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon 
his  throne,  and  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between 
them  both  "  (^'.  e.  God  and  Israel).  These  passages, 
and  at  least  seventy  more,  were  interpreted  by  their 
most  able  doctors  (as  seen  in  Chaldee  Paraphrase)  as 
referring  to  Him  who  was  "  the  expectation  of  Israel." 
Hence,  though  we  find  the  word  retained  by  our  trans- 
lators only  in  one  chapter  of  the  Old  Testament  (9th 
of  Daniel),  they  habitually  called  this  promised  person- 
age, who  was  to  unite  in  himself  their  three  greatest 
offices,  —  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  —  the  Messiah,  or 
the  anointed.  Thus,  Andrew,  after  his  first  meeting 
with  Jesus,  told  Simon :  "  We  have  found  the  Messias, 
which  is,"  adds  the  Evangelist,  "being  interpreted,  the 
Christ."  So,  also,  the  woman  of  Samaria  said  to 
Jesus :  "  I  know  that  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called 
Christ  (again  interpolates  the  Evangelist)  ;  when  he  is 
come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things  ;  "  and  Simon,  when  he 
answered  his  Lord's  question  by  the  clear  acknowledg- 
ment, "  Thou  art  the  Christ,"  must,  in  his  native 
speech,  have  said,  "  Thou  art  the  Messiah.''' 

11.    Our  Lord  Jesus  is  called,  throughout  the  New 


294  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  Testament,  Christ,  for  two  reasons :  first,  because  He 
was  the  true  Messiah  of"  whom  Moses  in  the  hiw  and 
all  the  prophets  did  write  ;  secondly  :  "  Because  he  is 
ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and  anointed  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  to  be  our  Chief  Prophet,  ....  our  only 
High  Priest,  ....  and  our  Eternal  King." 

1.  That  our  Lord  Jesus  is  the  true  Messiah,  need 
not  now  to  be  further  demonstrated  than  it  is  in  the 
New  Testament ;  for  we  are  not  Jews  but  Christians, 
and  believe  the  testimony  of  the  evangelists  and  apos- 
tles who  have  shown  us  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  all  the 
signs  and  characteristics  which  the  prophets  had  fore- 
told of  Christ.  Whatever  discussion  on  this  point  may 
yet  be  necessary,  will  be  found  as  we  follow  the  Cate- 
chism in  the  answer  to  the  31st  Question. 

2.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  Christ,  because  he  is  ordained 
of  God  the  Father  and  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  be  our  Prophet,  and  Priest,  and  King. 

A.  Ordained  of  the  Father,  anointed  with  the  Spirit, 
Himself  the  Son  of  God  incarnate.  Thus  are  the 
three  persons  of  the  ever-adorable  Godhead  united  in 
the  provision  of  a  Saviour  for  us  guilty  sinners  ;  the 
Father  ordaining,  the  Son  accepting,  the  Holy  Ghost 
anointing.  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen. 

a.  According  to  the  plan  of  redemption  in  which  the 
Son,  as  the  representative  of  servants,  takes  officially 
the  place  of  a  sei'vant,  he  could  not  assume  the  media- 
torship  without  the  appointment,  or,  as  the  word  in  the 
Catechism  is,  ordination  of  the  Father,  who  represents 
the  majesty  of  the  Godhead.  As  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  argues  :  "  No  man  taketh  this  honor  (the 
high  priesthood)  mito  himself,  but  he  that  is  called  of 


I.ECT.  XIV.]  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  295 

God,  as  Avas  Aaron.  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself 
to  be  made  an  high  priest,  but  he  that  said  unto  him, 
Thou  art  my  Son,  to-day  have  I  begotten  thee.  As  he 
saith'  also  in  another  place.  Thou  art  a  priest  forever 
after  the  order  of  Melchisedek,"  —  Melchisedek,  the 
Priest  of  the  most  high  God,  and  also  king  of  Salem 
or  peace,  and  also,  we  may  add,  a  Prophet,  for  he 
blessed  Abram.  From  this  appointment  or  ordination 
of  God,  the  Saviour's  office  derived  its  validity,  and  on 
its  validity  depended  its  efficacy.  The  Emmanuel  is 
mighty  to  save,  not  merely  because  of  his  righteous- 
ness, but  because  the  Father  sent  him  to  save,  and 
covenanted  to  accept  him  as  the  surety  of  his  peo- 
ple. His  works  were  not  his  own  exclusively,  but 
the  works  which  his  Father  had  given  him  to  do  ; 
and  hence  when  he  had  accomplished  them  his  right  to 
save. 

h.  His  ordination  ft'om  all  eternity  was  known  to  the 
Godhead,  but  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  con- 
firmed and  assured  to  us,  since  we  could  not  rely  upon 
him  until  we  knew  his  appointment  by  the  Father. 
Hence,  the  necessity  of  his  public  inauguration  with 
the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  sacred  per- 
fumed oil  typified.  Accoi'dingly,  we  find  that  after  he 
had  reached  the  proper  age,  and  by  accepting  baptism 
from  his  forerunner  he  had  fulfilled  all  preliminary 
righteousness,  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  went  up  from  the 
water,  praying  or  asking  for  the  consecration,  in  the 
sight  of  a  vast  multitude,  the  heaven  was  opened,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  in  a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove,  de- 
scended upon  him,  and  a  A'oice  came  from  heaven 
which  said,  "  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son  ;  in  thee  I  am 
well  pleased."      It  should  not  be  overlooked  that  the 


296  THE   TITLE,  CHRIST.  [Lkct.  XIV. 

dove-like  glory  did  not  reascend,  but  (John  i.  33) 
remained  upon  him,  as  the  oil  on  the  prophet,  priest, 
and  king.  This  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  his 
anointing,  and,  with  the  proclamation  from  heaven, 
constituted  his  inauguration  to  the  Messiahship.  Here 
we  liave  a  direct  fulfilment  of  that  afore-cited  prophecy 
which  the  ancient  Jewish  doctors  unanimously  referred 
to  the  Messiah  :  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon 
me ;  because  the  Lord  hath  anointed  me  to  preach 
good  tidings  unto  the  meek  ;  he  hath  sent  me  to  bind 
up  the  broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  tlie  cap- 
tives, and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are 
bound ;  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God  ;  to  comfort  all 
that  mourn,"  etc.  (Is.  Ixi.  1  —  3.)  As  the  sacred 
anointing  oil  was  ever  accompanied  with  the  promise 
of  divine  qualifications,  and  as  its  spices  diffused  around 
the  consecrated  one  a  ravishing  perfume,  so  did  the 
Holy  S])irit  remaining  on  him  strengthen  his  human 
nature,  body  and  soul,  for  his  woi'k,  and  render  all  his 
righteousness  a  sweet-smelling  savor  to  God,  accepta- 
ble because  the  perfect  merits  of  the  Saviour,  ordained 
of  God  the  Father. 

B.  The  office  of  the  Saviour  was  threefold,  uniting 
those  of  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  to  each  of  which 
he  was  consecrated  by  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  Catechism  directs  us  to  examine  them  severally, 
that  we  may  learn  their  gracious  meaning. 

a.  He  is  "  our  Chief  Pkophet  and  Teacher,  who 
has  fully  revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of 
God  concerning  our  redemption." 

The  Catechism  adds  "  Teacher  "  by  way  of  defini- 
tion, for,  though  people  now  understand  a  prophet  to 


Lkct.  XIV.]  THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  297 

be  one  who  foretells,  such  was  not  the  full  sense  of  the 
term  among  the  ancients,  Hebrew  or  Greek  ;  but  they 
meant  by  it  one  who  declares  the  truth  of  God  to  aiien. 
Our  Lord  did,  indeed,  foretell  many  things,  but  he  was 
and  is  the  great  Teacher  of  his  people,  from  whom  we 
learn  all  that  God  would  reveal  to  us.  So  he  declares 
of  himself,  "  I  am  .  .  .  the  Truth  ;  "  and  Peter  at 
the  Beautiful  Gate  says :  "  Moses  truly  said  unto  the 
fathers,  a  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up 
unto  you  of  your  brethren,  like  unto  me  ;  him  shall  ye 
hear  in  all  things  whatsoever  he  shall  say  unto  you  ;  " 
and  when  the  Catechism  asserts  that  he  has  fully  re- 
vealed to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God,  by 
"  secret"  is  meant  the  "  counsel  and  will  "  which,  but 
for  his  teaching,  would  be  unknown. 

The  learned  Jews  found  it  necessary  for  the  under- 
standing of  the  Scriptures,  to  believe  that  God  revealed 
himself  and  uttered  his  will  by  a  personal  word  or 
voice,  and  never  immediately,  or  without  such  inter- 
vention, communicated  to  men  ;  but  their  doctrine  on 
this  point  was  painfully  obscui'e.  John,  in  the  first 
chapter  of  his  Gospel,  makes  the  fact  clear,  by  showing 
that  the  Word  which  was  in  the  beginning  with  God, 
was  also  himself  God,  even  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
the  Father,  who,  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  Jesus, 
"  became  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  "  No  man 
(rather  no  one)  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only 
begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he 
hath  declared  him  ;  "  that  is,  has  made  his  being  and 
will  known  to  us.  Thus  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  our 
Prophet  or  Teacher,  is  none  else  than  God  the  Son, 
the  second  Person  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  incarnate 
as  the  Son  of  man.     The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sets 


298  THE  TITLK,   CIIUIST.  forth  tlie  same  truth  :  "  God,  who  at  sundry  times  and 
ill  divers  manners  spake  unto  the  fothers  by  the  proph- 
ets, hath  in  these  last  days,  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son, 
whom  lie  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom 
also  he  made  the  worlds ;  who,  being  the  brightness," 
tliat  is,  the  shining  forth,  "of  his  glory,  and  the  express 
image  (or  manifest  counterpart,  as  the  impression  is  of 
a  seal),  and  upholding  all  things  by  the  word  (utter- 
ance) of  his  power,  when  he  had  by  himself  purged 
our  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on 
high."  Here  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  is  identified 
with  the  Son  of  God,  Avho  alone  reveals  the  glory  of 
God  and  his  excellent  nature ;  and  the  Father  now  in 
the  Gospel  speaks  to  us  by  the  same  Word  by  whom 
"•  the  worlds  were  made."  The  Son,  whose  divine  office 
it  ever  has  been  to  declare  the  truth  of  his  Father's 
will,  now  becomes  incarnate,  that  he  may  by  his  Gospel 
make  a  nearer  and  fuller  revelation  of  his  grace. 

The  Scriptures  of  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testa- 
ments were  written  by  men  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  in- 
spired for  the  work  ;  but  as,  according  to  the  plan  of 
redemption,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  our 
Lord  Jesus  teaches  us  by  the  whole  Book  of  God.  He 
is  the  great  Prophet  who  speaks  through  all  the  proph- 
ets ;  he  is  the  great  Apostle  who  speaks  through  all 
the  apostles  ;  the  Projihet  of  prophets,  the  Apostle  of 
apostles.  And  as  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose  illumi- 
nating and  transforming  influences,  accompanying  the 
various  means  of  instruction  ordained  for  us  of  God, 
make  them  effectual,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  spirit 
of  Christ ;  so  all  the  knowledge  we  gain  from  the  bless- 
ing of  the  Spirit  of  God  without,  and  the  blessing  of 
that  divine  Spirit  within  us,  is  derived  from  the  Lord 


..kcT.  XIV.]  THE   TITLE,   CHRIST.  299 

Jesus,  our  Prophet  and  Teacher.  To  him  alone  are 
we  to  look,  from  him  alone  we  are  to  learn.  The  eter- 
nal Word  made  flesh,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  "  the 
True  Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into 
the  world." 

h.  He,  who  is  "  the  Apostle,"  is  also  the  "  High 
Priest  of  our  profession."  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  "  our 
only  High  Priest,  who,  by  the  one  sacrifice  of  his 
body,  has  redeemed  us,  and  makes  continual  interces- 
sion with  the  Father  for  us."  That  our  Lord  Jesus 
has  been  ordained  and  anointed  to  be  our  High  Priest, 
is  sufficiently  established  by  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews, 
and  other  Scriptures.  "  For  such  a  High  Priest  be- 
came us,  who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners,  and  made  higher  than  the  heavens." 

Like  the  typical  high  priests,  his  office  is  twofold : 
To  make  an  atonement  by  sacrifice  for  those  whom 
he  represents  ;  and  to  make  intercession  with  God  for 
them. 

a.  a.  In  our  study  of  several  previous  sections  of  the 
Catechism,  and  particularly  the  last,  we  learned  how 
the  Lord  Jesus  has  redeemed  his  people  from  the  curse 
of  death,  due  to  them  for  their  sins,  by  taking  their 
place  and  sufi^ering  the  penalty  of  the  law  in  their  stead. 
This  vicarious  suffering  is  represented  as  a  sacrifice. 
The  victim  was  himself,  his  divinely  begotten  and  sin- 
less humanity,  body  and  soul  ;  the  altar  was  his  own 
indwelling  divinity  which  sanctified  the  offering,  mak- 
ing its  merits,  of  itself  finite,  infinitely  meritorious  ; 
and  as  he  was  both  Sacrifice  and  Altar,  so  he  is  also 
the  Priest ;  and,  as  none  bvit  the  High  Priest  could 
make  an  atoning  sacrifice,  he  is  our  only  High  Priest. 
The  typical  sacrifices   being  mere  figures,  utterly  in- 


300  THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  [Leot.  XIV. 

sufficient,  needed  to  be  repeated ;  but  our  great  High 
Priest,  "  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for- 
ever," a  sacrifice  infinitely  sufficient,  and  therefore  of 
eternal  efficacy,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
from  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  his 
footstool  ;  his  offering  accepted,  his  work  as  a  Sacrificer 
was  done,  and  he  now  waits  for  his  promised  reward ; 
"  for  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  forever  them 
that  are  sanctified."  "  There  remaineth  no  more  sac- 
rifice for  sins ;  "  none  other  is  needed,  none  other  can 
be  offered ;  nor  can  that  one  sacrifice  be  repeated,  as 
the  Papists  in  their  deplorable  superstition  pi-etend  by 
the  Mass,  nor  need  we  nor  can  we  have  any  High 
Priest  but  he,  as  the  Papists  blasphemously  pretend  by 
calling  the  liead  of  their  superstition  the  Chief  Pontiff. 
The  work  of  atonement  is  finished,  finished  for  us, 
finished  for  all  who  believe :  whereof  God  has  given 
assurance  in  raising  our  Lord  Jesus  from  the  dead,  and 
setting  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly 
places.  O  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  hope  of 
pardon  is  alone  in  thee,  and  in  thy  death  upon  the 
cross  ! 

h.  h.  When  the  typical  high  priest  had  offered  the 
sacrifice  of  atonement  without,  he  entered  within  the 
vail,  and  there,  having  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  vic- 
tim over  the  cover  of  the  ark  that  contained  the  broken 
law,  he  made  intercession  by  fervent  prayer  for  the 
people.  So  our  true  High  Priest,  after  finishing  his 
work  of  satisfaction,  passed  into  the  heavens  ;  and 
there,  not  for  a  little  while  but  constantly,  he  abides, 
making  intercession  for  us  ;  not  as  a  suppliant,  at  the 
foot  of  the  throne,  but  as  the  Son  of  God  seated  on 
the  throne  itself,  and  asking  of  his  willing  Father  the 


THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  301 

fulfilment  of  the  covenant,  whose  condition  on  his  part 
he  had  fulfilled :  even  eternal  life  for  all  who  believe  in 
his  name.  Through  him,  therefore,  unworthy  as  we 
are  in  ourselves,  we  may  have  access  with  boldness 
"  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  All  our  pray- 
ers must  go  up  to  the  Father  through  him,  and,  as  he 
has  been  accepted  for  a  sacrifice,  his  advocacy  of  our 
cause  Avill  be  prevalent ;  and  the  Father  through  him 
will  grant  us  pardon  and  life  eternal.  All  our  services, 
with  our  hearts,  must  be  presented  through  him,  and, 
having  washed  them  from  their  sinfulness,  he,  with  the 
perfume  of  his  anointment,  will  make  them  acceptable ; 
and  he,  receiving  the  reward  of  his  own  righteousness, 
will  bestow  in  return  for  our  poor  services  blessings 
far  more  abundant  "  than  we  can  ask  or  think."  Unto 
him  be  glory  in  the  Church  throughout  all  ages,  world 
without  end.  Amen. 

c.  He  is  "  our  eternal  King,  who  governs  us  by 
his  word  and  spirit ;  and  who  defends  and  preserves 
us  in  (the  enjoyment  of)  that  salvation  he  has  pur- 
chased." 

God,  because  he  is  the  only  Creator,  is  the  only  Sov- 
ereign of  all  creatures  intelligent  or  material,  and  any 
authority  or  control  over  them  exerted  by  any  other 
than  himself  immediately,  must  be  derived  from  his 
ordination  or  providence.  Our  blessed  Saviour,  when 
he  condescended  to  be  our  repi'esentative,  and  associated 
our  humanity  with  his  divinity,  took  a 'position  necessa- 
rily inferior  to  the  Sovereign,  though,  as  to  his  original 
nature,  the  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead ;  and 
accordingly,  that  he  might  be  fully  qualified  to  accom- 
plish all  the  divine  purposes  of  his  mission,  he  received 


"302  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  from  tlie  Fatlier,  repre.senting  the  Godliead,  all  author- 
ity and  power.  This  kinoship  or  lordship  is  delegated  ; 
and  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  infinite  right  to 
reign  which  is  his,  coequally  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  as  the  Second  Person  of  the  ever-blessed 
Godhead.  "  All  power  is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,"  said  he  to  his  apostles  just  before  his  ascension  ; 
and  it  was  granted  to  him  in  acknowledgment  of  his 
perfect  righteousness,  passive  and  active,  during  his 
humiliation  on  earth.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  who,  being  in  the  form  of 
God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  :  but 
made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of 
men :  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled 
himself  and  became  obedient  unto  (untW)  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore,  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  (^author it i/')  which 
is  above  every  name  :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father."  Here  you  see  that  this  uni- 
versal dominion  is  given  to  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  in- 
carnate, as  a  servant,  —  to  Jesus  Christy  or  the  anointed 
Jesus,  after  he  had  been  obedient  until  death,  and 
because  of  his  obedience,  and  the  result  will  be  "  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father."  Hence,  as  this  authority 
was  delegated  to  Jesus  as  the  Mediator,  we  are  accus- 
tomed to  distinguish  it  from  his  original  authority  as 
the  Son  of  God  by  calling  it  his  mediatorial  kingdom  ; 
by  which  we  mean  all  the  power  necessary  for  the  full 
salvation  of  those  he  has  redeemed  bv  his  rio-hteous- 


Lkct.  XIV.]  THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  303 

ness,  and  for  tlie  vindication  of  the  divine  honor  in  the 
redemption  of  his  people. 

This  kingdom  has  two  parts,  as  the  Catechism 
teaches.  One,  a  kingdom  over  his  people  ;  the  other, 
a  kingdom  over  all  things  for  the  benefit  of  his  people ; 
"  He  saves  us  ;  "  "  He  defends  and  preserves  us  in 
that  salvation  he  has  purchased  for  us." 

a.  a.   His  kingdom  over  his  church. 

Thus  the  annunciatino;  angel  to  the  blessed  virgin  : 
"  The  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
father  David,  and  he  shall  reign  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  forever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no 
end."  So  also,  the  Psalmist  as  cited  in  the  Hebrews  : 
"  Thou  art  a  priest  forever  after  the  order  of  Melchis- 
edek,  which  united  the  kingship  over  those  for  whom 
the  priestship  was  exercised,  —  Melchisedek,  which  is  by 
interpretation  king  of  righteousness,  and  king  of  Salem, 
which  signifies  king  of  peace.  Our  Jesus  rules  in 
righteousness  and  peace  over  all  for  whom  his  atone- 
ment and  intercession  are  accepted.  The  same  thing- 
is  declared  by  the  apostle :  "  Who  gave  himself  for  us, 
that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  (a  peoj)le  who  are  his 
own),  zealous  of  good  works."  Redemption,  purifica- 
tion, sanctification,  are  united  in  his  care  of  his  own 
people.  "  Thine  they  were  and  thou  gavest  them  me," 
said  he  unto  his  Father  in  his  mediatorial  prayer. 

The  method  of  his  governing  his  church  is  t.wofold  : 
"  He  governs  us,"  says  the  Catechism,  "  by  his  Word 
and  Spirit." 

His  people  are  a  willing  people.  The  Saviour  rules 
over  them,  not  by  force  of  mere  authority,  but  with  the 
consent  of  their  hearts  and  minds.      Hence  he  reveals 


304  THE   TITLE,   CHRIST.  his  word,  the  Holy  Scriptures,  as  the  law  and  constitu- 
tion of  his  kingdom,  the  rule  by  which  his  people  shall 
serve  him,  and  the  source  of  the  motives  from  which 
they  shall  serve  him. 

But  our  dispositions  are  naturally  opposed  to  the 
divine  will.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God, 
and  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed 
can  be  ; "  consequently,  the  more  that  the  truth  is 
pressed  upon  the  unrenewed  soul,  the  greater  will  be  its 
enmity  and  its  o}>position.  There  is,  therefore,  a  neces- 
sity of  a  divine  energy  to  convert  the  soul  to  the  love 
of  God,  and  to  a  choice  of  the  service  he  requires. 
"  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power." 
This  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who,  because  his 
influences  are  obtained  through  the  merits  and  inter- 
cession  of  Christ,  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  He, 
by  his  sovereign,  mysterious  agency  on  the  soul  and 
through  the  word,  converts  the  heart  to  love,  enlight- 
ens the  mind  to  approve,  and  inclines  the  will  to  choose 
the  Avord  of  God  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 
Nor  shall  this  divine  influence  ever  cease  ;  for  hot  only 
will  it  bring  the  believer  gradually  to  a  perfect  sanctifi- 
cation  in  heaven,  but  there  perpetually  maintain  the 
glorified  saint  in  a  holy  happiness.  This  kingdom  of 
Christ  is  eternal.  "  He  shall  rule  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  forever." 

h.  b.  His  kingdom  over  all  things  for  the  benefit  of 
his  people. 

Inasmuch  as  the  church  is  exposed  to  great  enmity 
from  wicked  men  and  wicked  spirits,  besides  finding 
many  obstacles  to  its  progress  and  final  triumph  from 
the  state  of  things  occasioned  by  sin,  there  is  necessity 
for    the    divine    defence    and    preservation    of    every 


THE  TITLE,   CHRIST.  305 

believer,  and  of  the  whole  body,  that  the  salvation  pur- 
chased be  secured.  Therefore,  all  power  is  given  to 
him  and  exerted  by  him  for  his  people.  He  is  "  Head 
over  all  things  to  his  Church."  All  power  over  earth 
is  his.  The  forces  of  nature,  the  discoveries  of  science, 
the  commercial  intercourse  of  nations,  the  wars  between 
them,  their  revolutions  and  politics,  all  are  controlled 
and  combined  in  his  hand  for  the  ftirtherance  of  his 
cause.  All  power  is  his  over  heaven.  As  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  he  brings  all  his  angelic  armies  to  serve  him  in 
his  mediatorship.  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits, 
sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation  ?  All  power  is  his  over  hell.  For  he  has 
conquered  death,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
that  is,  the  devil.  He  does  not,  indeed,  make  the  ma- 
lignant spirits  who  contend  against  us  his  willing  sub- 
jects, neither  does  he,  for  wise  reasons,  wholly  prevent 
their  wicked  activity ;  but,  as  he  showed  when  on 
earth,  even  the  devils  are  subject  to  him.  They  can  do 
nothing  without  his  permission,  and,  as  will  be  seen  in 
the  end,  he  will  overrule  all  their  machinations  for  his 
glory  and  the  prosperity  of  the  Church,  and  of  every 
member  of  his  church.  It  is  in  this  that  the  apostle 
exults :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 
He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up 
for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us 
all  things  ?  .  .  .  .  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ  ?  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution, 
or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  .  .  .  . 
Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors, 
through  him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am  persuaded  that 
neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,   nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come, 

VOL.  I.  20 


806  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be 
able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  This  kingdom  over  all  thincrs 
having  been  bestowed  upon  him  for  the  specific  purpose 
of  bringing  all  his  people  triumphantly  to  glory,  is  not 
eternal ;  but,  when  that  purpose  is  accomplished,  and 
when  at  the  final  judgment  he  will  have  vindicated  the 
justice  of  God  in  tlie  condemnation  of  tliose  who  reject 
the  offers  of  mercy,  it  will  revert  to  God, — Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost.  As  we  learn  from  the  apostle  :  "  Then 
Cometh  the  end,  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the 
kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father  (as  the  representative 
of  the  Godhead)  ;  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule 
and  all  authority  and  power.  For  he  must  reign  till 
he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy 
that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death.  For  he  hath  put  all 
things  under  his  feet.  But  when  he  saith,  all  things 
are  put  under  him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is  excepted 
which  did  put  all  things  under  him.  And  when  all 
things  shall  be  subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the  Son 
also  himself  be  subject  inito  him  that  put  all  things 
under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all ;  "  that  is,  prov- 
idence, which  for  the  church  has  been  entrusted  to  the 
Son  as  the  Mediator,  will  revert  to  the  hands  of  God, 
and  the  Son  as  Mediator  *  with  the  Church,  whose 
head  he  is  eternally,  will  be  subject  to  God,  who, 
thenceforward,  will  reign  immediately. 

Thus  is  it  our  privilege,  beloved  Christians,  to  see  in 
Chi'ist  all  that  is  necessary  for  his  office  as  our  Saviour. 

*  Some  think  that  by  the  Son  here  is  intended  tlie  human  nature  of 
Christ  (Thomas  Aquinas  in  Epistohis)  for  which  compare  lleb.  i.  1,  Ps.  viii. 
6,  6,  Heb.  ii.  5-9.  I  prefer  the  interpretation  given.  T)ie  church,  ever 
existing?,  will  exiSt  in  its  head;  the  humanity  will  ever  l)c  conjoined  to  the 
divinity,  llanca  the  person  of  Christ  is  '"subject  unto  him  that  put  all 
things  under  him." 


Lect.  XIV.I  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  307 

What  he  promises  he  obtains ;  what  he  obtains  he 
secures  for  all  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him.  The 
covenant  of  our  redemption  is  made,  not  between  us 
and  the  Father  ;  but  between  the  Father  and  Son  in- 
carnate as  our  Mediator  with  the  Father.  The  hope 
of  the  true  believer,  therefore,  cannot  fail ;  for  it  is 
established  on  the  truth,  the  merits  and  the  power  of 
him  whom  the  Father  has,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  anointed 
to  be  our  Prophet,  our  Priest,  and  our  King. 

Secondly  :  Why  are  those  who  acknowledge  Jesus  as 
their  Saviour  called  Christians  ? 

We  have  no  mention  of  the  word  Christian  until  we 
come  to  Acts  xi.  26,  where  the  historian  says  that  about 
the  time  when  Paul  and  Barnabas  spent  a  whole  year 
with  the  Church  and  taught  much  people  at  Antioch, 
the  disciples  were  there  first  called  Christians.  Many 
contend  that  this  name  was  given  them  by  divine  reve- 
lation or  apostolic  authority  ;  but  if  that  had  been  the 
case  it  would  in  all  probability  have  been  so  recorded  ; 
and  the  more  reasonable  opinion  seems  to  be  that,  owing 
to  the  remarkable  success  attending  the  labors  of  Paul 
and  Silas,  the  disciples  increased  to  such  a  considerable 
sect  as  to  require  a  particular  designation.  Christian 
may  have  been  the  name  pitched  upon  by  the  unbeliev- 
ing out  of  derision,  and,  no  doubt,  it  was  used  in  con- 
tempt ;  but  it  is  certain  that  it  was  a  very  natural 
appellation,  as  all  people  are  used  to  call  the  followers 
of  an  eminent  teacher  by  his  name,  as  Socratics,  Cal- 
vinists,  Wesleyans.  The  name,  however,  soon  came 
to  be  applied  and  understood  generally,  as  "  Agi'ippa 
said  unto  Paul,  almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a 
Christian  ;  "  and  it  received  apostolical  sanction,  as  it  is 
used  by  Peter  in  his  first  epistle,  iv.  16. 


308  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  The  Catechism  takes  occasion  from  its  etymology, 
and  very  properly,  to  describe  under  it  the  privileges 
and  distinguishing  characteristics  of  all  who  are  truly 
called  after  Christ. 

The  doctrine  of  the  whole  New  Testament  is,  that 
believers  are  represented  or  covered  by  Christ ;  that 
the  history  of  Christ's  personal  body  is  a  parable  of  the 
Church,  which  is  his  spiritual  body ;  and  that  all  our 
blessings  having  been  primarily  conferred  on  our  Head 
reach  us  through  him,  as  all  our  services  must  be  ren- 
dered unto  God  through  his  mediation. 

I.  Hence  our  Catechism  makes  the  believer  say  :  "  I 
am  a  member  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  thus  am  partaker 
of  his  anointing."  Belief  in  Christ  is  evidence  of 
union  to  him  and  of  participation  with  him  ;  for,  as  the 
oil  upon  the  head  of  Aaron  ran  down  to  the  skirts  of 
his  garments,  so  does  the  anointing  of  Christ  flow  over 
his  whole  body,  even  to  the  most  humble  believer.  We 
have  seen  that  the  anointing  oil  represented  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which,  for  the  assistance  of  our  faith,  came  down 
visibly  upon  the  head  of  Christ  after  he  had  passed 
through  baptism  to  Jolm  and  abode  upon  him  ;  so  not 
less  truly,  though  invisibly,  is  every  believer  sanctified 
unto  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  Christ's  Spirit, 
and  reaches  his  people  through  his  infinitely  meritori- 
ous mediation.  Not  only  are  they  regenerated,  or  born 
again  of  the  Spirit,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  them 
as  an  animating,  enlightening,  strengthening,  elevating 
principle,  maintaining  their  union  to  Christ,  even  as 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  consecrated,  moved,  in- 
st^'ucted,  iipheld  and  maintained  his  humanity,  until  his 
work  would  be  accomplished. 

H.   But  as  Christ  Jesus  was  anointed  to  the  several 


THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  '  309 

offices  necessary  for  his  work  of  redemption,  so  the 
effects  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  each  anointed  believer 
must  in  some  proper  measure  correspond  to  those 
offices. 

1.  Christ  is  our  anointed  Prophet,  the  great  Pub- 
lisher of  truth:  so  "  all  the  Lord's  people  are  prophets," 
for  "  the  Lord  hath  put  his  spirit  upon  them."  (See 
Numbers  xi.  29.)  This  imitation  of  Christ  in  his  pro- 
phetical office  is  condensed  here  into  confession  of  his 
name.  Every  believer  who  openly  professes  to  be  a 
Christian,  gives  his  testimony  from  conviction  and  ex- 
perience that  the  Gospel  of  Christ  is,  indeed,  the  truth 
of  God  unto  salvation  ;  then  he  adds  to  it  the  confirma- 
tion of  a  godly  example,  and  according  to  the  measure 
he  has  of  Christ's  spirit,  will  he  strive  to  send  the 
Gospel  as  Christ  sends  to  all  men  in  all  the  world. 
This  last  prophetical  duty  of  the  believer  is  eminently 
characteristic  of  a  Christian  life,  and  those  who  regard 
the  missions  of  Christianity  with  indifference,  or  assist 
them  reluctantly,  may  well  doubt  if  they  have  Christ's 
spirit,  for  they  neither  obey  his  commands,  nor  follow 
his  example.  In  a  word,  the  life  of  a  Christian  is,  by 
the  same  Spirit  which  saves  him,  consecrated  to  the 
spread  of  the  Gospel  throughout  the  world. 

2.  Christ  is  our  Priest,  through  whose  atonement 
and  mediation  all  the  services  of  the  Church  are  to  be 
acceptably  offered  ;  for,  many  as  were  the  religious  ser- 
vices of  both  inferior  priests  and  people  under  the  Jew- 
ish dispensation,  they  all  derived  their  value  from  the 
expiatory  sacrifice  and  intercessory  prayers  of  the  High 
Priest.  So,  as  Christ  by  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  him- 
self unto  God,  the  believer  by  the  same  Spirit  offers  his 
whole  life.     The  work  of  atonement  and  mediation  is 


810  THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  peculiar  to  Christ,  but,  through  his  purifying  and  pre- 
vailing merits,  the  believer  presents  himself  a  living 
sacrifice  of  thankfulness  to  God.  His  whole  life,  all 
his  faculties,  all  his  influence,  all  he  has  and  all  he  is, 
are  a  thank  offering  for  the  blessings  of  salvation. 
Hence  the  true  Israel  are  called  by  the  prophet  "  a 
nation  of  priests  ; "  and  the  Apostle  Peter  unites  with 
the  Apostle  Paul  in  designating  the  Church  as  an  holy 
priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  (sacrifices  dic- 
tated by  heart  and  mind),  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ.  Thus,  as  priests  as  well  as  prophets,  our  whole 
strength  belongs  to  God  bv  the  consecration  of  the 
same  spirit  which  makes  us  members  of  Christ. 

3.  Christ  is  our  King  ;  therefore,  as  his  subjects,  his 
willing  people,  are  we  to  obey  him  wholly,  making  his 
word  our  rule  of  Christian  conduct,  and  following  the 
monitions  of  his  Spirit  in  all  things.  But  as  we  are 
subject  to  sinful  temptations  from  within,  and  from  the 
world,  and  from  the  devil,  who  makes  use  of  both  our 
evil  nature  and  the  world  to  seduce  and  intimidate  us,  we 
are  animated  by  the  consciousness  of  our  acceptance  with 
God  in  Christ,  resolutely,  heartily  and  courageously  to 
contend  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this  life,  trusting  in  the 
power  of  Christ  to  conquer  our  enemies,  and  in  the  grace 
of  his  Spirit  to  conquer  ourselves.  Nay,  we  are  to  regard 
ourselves,  each  one  of  us,  as  soldiers  of  that  sacramen- 
tal army,  the  Church  militant,  which,  by  the  blessing 
of  God  upon  his  word,  is  to  subdue  this  revolted,  angry 
world,  in  spite  of  its  oppositions  and  persecutions,  its 
wrath,  its  power,  and  its  ostentations.  We  follow  a 
conquering  King  through  battle  and  fatigue  and  suffer- 
ing, but  if  we  be  faithful  unto  death,  we  shall  shai-e 
his  certain,  inevitable,  and  glorious  triumph.     "  Unto 


THE  TITLE,  CHRIST.  311 

him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to  sit  down  with  me 
upon  my  throne,  even  as  I  have  overcome  and  am  sat 
down  with  my  Father  on  his  throne."  Whatever 
honors  preeminent  he  enjoys  eternally,  whatever*  king- 
dom he  shall  rule  forever,  his  faithful  ones  shall  share 
with  him  immortally  ;  for  he  who  hath  made  them 
priests,  has  by  the  same  word  and  spirit  made  them 
kings  unto  God  and  his  Christ.  His  prophetical  office 
shall  cease,  and  theirs  with  his,  for  all  prophecies  shall 
fail  when  divine  knowledge  is  perfect ;  but  his  priestly 
office,  and  theirs  in  rendering  worship  and  praise,  his 
kingly  office,  and  theirs  in  the  power  of  the  Father,  are 
eternal.  He  the  Melchisedek,  king  of  Salem,  king  of 
righteousness.  Priest  of  the  most  high  God  ;  and  they 
a  royal  priesthood.  O  Christ  our  prophet,  O  Christ 
our  priest,  O  Christ  our  King,  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our 
only  Saviour,  behold  us  at  thy  feet,  that  we  may  catch 
the  drops  descending  from  thine  anointment,  and  so  walk 
worthy  of  the  holy  name  of  Christian,  wherewith  we 
are  called  !     Amen.