LECTURE  XV. 


THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST. 


THIRTEENTH    LORD'S    DAY. 

THE   SONSHIP   AND   GOVERNMENT   OF 
CHRIST. 

Quest.    XXXIII.       Why  is  Christ  called  the  only  begotten  Son  of   God, 

since  we  are  also  the  children  of  God? 
Ans.     Because  Christ  alone  is  the  eternal  aud  natural  Son  of  God;  bnt  we 

are  children  adopted  of  God,  by  grace,  for  his  sake. 
Quest.  XXXIV.     Wherefore  callest  thou  him  our  Lord? 
Ans.     Because  he  hath  redeemed  us,  both  soul  and  body,  from  all  our  sins, 

not  with  gold  or  silver,  but  with  his  precious  blood,  aud  hath  delivered 

us  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  thus  hath  made  us  his  own 

property. 

TN  our  study  of  the  section  for  the  Eleventh  L.ord's 
-*-  Day,  it  was  our  dehghtful  privilege  to  meditate  on 
the  fragrant  name  of  Jesus,  and  in  that  for  the  Twelfth 
we  learned  the  meaning  of  Christ,  his  title  of  consecra- 
tion as  our  Mediator  with  God,  the  Prophet,  Priest, 
and  King  of  his  people.  There  yet  remain  two  other 
appellations  by  which  the  Catholic  Church  recognizes 
him  as  worthy  of  our  divine  homage  and  entire  obedi- 
ence ;  the  first  descriptive  of  his  essential  divinity,  the 
other  of  his  supreme  authority :  "  The  only  begotten 
Son  of  God,"  "  our  Lord."  ''  I  believe  in  God  the 
Father  Almighty,  and  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  only  begotten 
Son,  our  Lord.'" 

There  is,  therefore,  no  need  of  further  preface  to  our 
use  of  the  lesson  before  us,  which,  as  we  see  at  once, 
teaches  us, 

First  :  The  reason  why  Christ  is  called^  The  only 
begotten  Son  of  God. 

Thirty-third  Question  and  Answer. 


316        SONSHIP   AND   GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.    Secondly  :   The  reason  ivhy  we  call  him  our  Lord. 

Thirty-fourth  Question  and  Answer. 

First  :  The  reason  why  Christ  is  called  the  only  he- 
gotten  Son  of  God. 

"  Why,"  asks  the  Catechism,  "  is  Christ  called  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  since  Ave  are  also  the  chil- 
dren of  God  ?  "  "  Because,"  we  are  instructed  to 
answer,  "  Christ  alone  is  the  eternal  and  natural  Son 
of  God,  but  we  are  children  adopted  of  God  by  grace 
for  Christ's  sake." 

I.  Sonship  to  God  is,  by  the  Scriptures,  ascribed  to 
other  persons  besides  Jesus  Christ,  viz:  The  holy  an- 
gels, of  whom  we  read,  "  All  the  sons  of  God  shouted 
for  joy ;  "  men  generally,  for  the  Evangelist  Luke,  in 
his  genealogy  of  the  Saviour,  traces  it  back  to  "  Adam, 
which  was  the  Son  of  God  ;  "  we  are  all  of  us  com- 
manded to  pray,  saying,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in 
heaven,"  and  the  Apostle  Paul  strongly  ai)proves  the 
declaration  of  a  Greek  poet,  that  men  are  the  offspring 
of  God  ;  worship2Jers  of  Grod,  when  distinguished  from 
those  who  do  not  worship  him,  as  the  sacred  historian 
tells  us  that  "  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughtei's  of 
men  ;  "  tlie  children  of  Israel,  after  they  had  been  sol- 
emnly covenanted  with  God  :  "  Ye  are,"  said  Moses  to 
them  by  divine  command,  "  tlie  children  of  the  Lord 
your  God ;  "  magistrates,  who  are  the  ministei's  of 
God,  in  a  certain  sense,  before  the  people,  as  the 
Psalmist  to  the  judges  :  "  I  have  said.  Ye  are  gods 
(i.  e.  high  persons),  and  all  of  you  are  chihh-en  of  the 
Most  High  ;"  and,  especially,  believers  ill  Christ,  who, 
for  Christ's  sake,  and  being  renewed  by  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  are  owned  as  the  "  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Lord  Almighty,"  having  "  received  the  spirit  of 


SONSHIP  AND   GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.      317 

adoption."  Our  Lord  is  distinguished  infinitely  above 
these  by  the  character  of  his  fihation,  or  sonship.  An- 
gels and  men  are  called  sons  of  God,  simply  because 
he  has  given  them  their  being  ;  worshippers  of  God, 
because  they  acknowledge  his  paternal  rule  and  care  ; 
the  covenanted  Israelites,  because  he  took  them  under 
his  special  guardianship  ;  magistrates,  because  they  rep- 
resent his  authority  ;  and  Christians,  because  he  adopts 
them  into  his  family  through  their  imion  to  Christ :  the 
term  in  all  these  cases  being  used  figuratively  and  im- 
plying no  essential  relationship  to  God.  But  our  Lord 
is  styled  :  the  Son  of  God  ;  his  oiV7i  Son  ;  his  only  he- 
gotten  Son ;  which  expressions  imply  that  he  is  the  Son 
of  God  in  an  excellent,  peculiar,  natural,  and  there- 
fore an  eternal  relation. 

1.  The  Son  of  God.  No  one  can  read  the  New 
Testament,  the  epistles  as  well  as  the  historical  books, 
without  seeing  that  this  title  as  applied  to  our  Saviour 
has  a  very  eminent  signification,  and  can  by  no  means 
be  confounded  with  the  figurative  sonship  of  angels  or 
men.  Belief  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  is  compre- 
hensive of  all  Christian  faith.  Thus  the  Evangelist 
John  gives  the  testimony  of  John  the  Forerunner : 
"  I  saw  and  bare  record  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God." 
"  He  saith  unto  them :  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ? 
And  Simon  Peter  answered  and  said.  Thou  art  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  And  Jesus  an- 
swered and  said  unto  him  :  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon 
Bar-Jona,  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto 
thee,  but  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  "  Whatso- 
ever is  born  of  God  ovei'cometh  the  world,  and  this  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 
Who  is  he  that  overcometh    the   world,  but  he  that 


318      SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.     believeth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  ? " 
Now,  surely,  these  expressions  cannot  mean  that  Christ 
was  tlie  Son  of  God  in  any  such  sense  as  Adam  was  or 
any  Christian  is.  What  need  of  the  Baptist's  solemn 
assurance  for  this  ?  Did  such  a  conviction  require  a 
special  revelation  ?  or  could  a  faith  that  went  no  farther 
overcome  the  world  by  its  inspiring  virtue  ?  It  is  true 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  a  scriptural  title  of  Messiah 
recognized  by  the  Jews  themselves  :  yet  that  it  was  not 
a  mere  synonym  for  Messiah,  but  meant  more,  is  clear 
from  the  fact  that  the  two  terms  are  used  together.  No 
one  could  be  the  Messiah  but  the  Son  of  God ;  and 
because  he  was  the  Son  of  God  he  Avas  the  Messiah. 
The  Jews  condemned  him  as  a  blasphemer,  not  because 
he  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah,  which,  if  the  claim  were 
false,  would  not  have  been  blasphemy,  but  because  as 
the  Messiah  he  avowed  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God. 
"  Jesus  answered  them  and  said :  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work.  Therefore  the  Jews  sought  the 
more  to  kill  him,  because  he  not  only  had  broken  the 
Sabbath,  but  said,  also,  that  God  was  his  Father,  mak- 
ing himself  equal  with  God."  So,  at  his  trial  before  the 
Sanhedrim,  "  the  high  priest  said  unto  him  :  I  adjure 
thee  by  the  living  God  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou 
art  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ?  Jesus  saith 
to  him,  Thou  hast  said  (or,  I  am,  see  Mark  xiv.  62.) 
....  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying, 
He  hath  spoken  blasphemy  !  What  further  need  have 
we  of  witnesses  ?  "  For  this  reason  the  Jews,  after 
Pilate  had  acquitted  him,  insisted  on  his  crucifixion,  for 
said  they  :  "  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought 
to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God." 
They  were  right  in  their  understanding  of  our  Lord's 


Lect.XV.]   SONSHIP  and  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.       319 

assertion  of  his  sonsliip  to  God,  for,  if  he  were  not 
actually  the  Son  of  God,  he  had  blasphemed. 

2.  But  that  all  cavil  might  be  rebuked,  the  Scripture 
is  if  possible  more  explicit.  Thus  the  Apostle  twice  in 
one  chapter,  (eighth  of  Romans,)  calls  our  Lord,  God's 
own  Son :  "  God,  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin,  condemned  fein  in  the  flesh  ; " 
aitd  again  :  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son  but  de- 
livered him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him 
also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  Here,  tlie  force  of 
the  reasoning  depends  wholly  upon  the  peculiar  son- 
ship  of  Christ  to  God.  For  no  such  inference  could  be 
made  if  Christ  who  had  been  given  were  the  Son  of  God 
only  in  a  figurative  or  official  manner.  It  is  the  love 
of  the  Father  for  his  own  Son  which  proves  his  great, 
his  unspeakable  love  to  us,  in  sending  that  Son  under 
the  likeness  of  our  sinful  humanity  for  our  redemption  ; 
nor  can  we,  without  great  violence  against  the  obvious 
meaning  of  words,  understand  by  the  phrase  "  his  own," 
otherwise  than  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  in  the 
fullest  sense  in  which  one  can  be  the  son  of  his 
father. 

3.  Does  any  objector  yet  hesitate,  and  suggest  that 
"  his  own  "  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  term  of  en- 
dearment or  approbation  ?  There  is  yet  another  ex- 
pression repeatedly  employed  for  the  very  purpose  of 
declaring  that  the  sonship  is  natural,  by  which  we 
mean  that  he  is  essentially  of  the  same  nature  of  his 
Father :  "  God  .  .  .  sent  his  onli/  begotten  Son."  As, 
in  all  cases,  the  son  is  of  the  same  nature  with  his 
begetter,  so  is  the  begotten  of  God  of  the  same  essence 
as  his  divine  Father.  God  calls  his  intelligent  crea- 
tures, who,  as  to  some  qualities,  resemble  him  finitely, 


?)20      SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.    his  children,  but  Christ  he  calls  his  only  begotten,  his 
only  Son  in  his  own  nature.  It  is  impossible  that  the 
force  of  lan<iua2:e  can  20  farther.  This  is  the  reason- 
ing  in  the  first  chapter  of  Hebrews.  The  writer  is 
establishing  the  infinite  superiority  of  Christ  to  all 
those  by  whom  God  had  made  any  previous  revelation 
of  his  word  ;  and,  beginning  with  the  angels,  he  asserts 
that  Christ  hatli  by  inheritance,  or  by  his  sonship,  ob- 
tained a  more  excellent  name  or  dignity  than  they.  As 
a  son  derives  his  nobility  from  his  descent,  so  Christ  is 
divine  in  virtue  of  his  sonship  to  God.  "  For,"  asks 
he  "  unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time  : 
'  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day,  have  I  begotten  thee  ? '  " 
"  this  day,"  meaning  after  the  Hebrew  idiom,  "  in  eter- 
nity." Again,  "  unto  the  Son  he  saith,  Thy  throne,  O 
God,  is  forever  and  ever."  God  himself  interprets 
the  meaning  of  his  own  language,  and  styles  his  begot- 
ten Son,  God,  as  truly  God  as  himself.  How  could 
God  himself  be  more  explicit  in  asserting  the  divinity 
of  Christ  ?  Yet  even  against  this  direct  testimony  from 
the  highest  of  all  witnesses,  the  sceptic  struggles,  and 
would  have  us  believe  that  the  begetting  refers  to 
Christ's  miraculous  conception  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It 
is  true  that  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was,  as  it  were, 
begotten  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  he  only  has  been 
so  begotten  ;  but  was  it  to  a  man,  though  divinely  con- 
ceived, that  the  Father  Almighty  said  :  ^  Thy  throne, 
O  God,  is  forever  and  ever  ?  "  Nay,  is  it  not  clear 
that  Christ  was  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  before 
his  incarnation  ?  For  the  Father  sent  his  only  begot- 
ten Son  into  the  world.  Christ  must,  therefore,  have 
existed  before  he  was  sent ;  and  existed  as  the  only 
begotten  Son  of  God.     Again,  in  the  first  chapter  of 


SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT   OF   CHRIST.      321 

the  Hebrews,  it  is  asserted,  that  God  made  the  worlds 
by  the  Son  whom  he,  a  httle  farther  on,  declares  to  be 
his  begottfen  ;  and  the  Evangelist  John,  in  tJie  preface 
to  his  Gospel,  clearly  identifies  the  Word  which  was  "  in 
the  beginning  with  God,"  and  which  "  was  God,"  and 
by  whom  "  all  things  were  made,"  with  him  who  "  was 
made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us ;  "  whose  glory  his  dis- 
ciples beheld,  "  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father."  So,  also,  the  Saviour  in  his  prayer  before 
his  passion,  says  :  "  Now,  O  Father,  glorify  thou  me 
with  thine  own  self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with 
thee  before  the  world  was."  Proofs  of  Christ's  preex- 
istence  might  be  multiplied  ;  but  these  are  enough  to 
show  that  the  title,  "  only  begotten,"  was  his,  indepen- 
dently of  his  incarnation,  and  antecedently  to  it.  But 
in  what  state  did  he  preexist  ?  Certainly  not  as  man, 
for  he  became  man  by  his  birth  of  the  Virgin  Mary 
("  blessed  was  she  among  women  !  "}  :  not  as  an  angel, 
for  it  is  proved  that  "  he  had  by  inheritance  a  more 
excellent  name  than  they."  What  else  could  the  only 
begotten  of  God  be  but  God  ?  Not  merely  divine,  but 
truly,  essentially  God  :  as  truly  and  essentially  of  the 
same  nature  as  God  the  Father,  as  the  son  of  a  man  is 
as  truly  and  essentially  a  man.  Not  God  in  some  lower 
sense  than  the  Father,  for  it  is  only  in  his  minority  that 
a  son  is  less  than  his  father;  and  as  Deity  is  infinite, 
the  Son  of  God  must,  like  God  the  Father,  be  infinite ; 
and,  therefore,  they  are  equal.  Is  this  reasoning  too 
bold  ?  It  is  exactly  what  the  Apostle  asserts  in  so 
many  words  :  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which 
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,  who,  being  in  the  form 
(the  mode  of  existence)  of  God,  thought  it  not  rob- 
bery to  be  equal  with  God,  but  made  himself  of  no 

VOL.  I.  21 


322     SONSIIIP  AND   GOVERNMENT   OF  CHRIST.     reputation,  mid  took  on  him  tlie  tbnn  of  a  servant." 
How  could  lie  be  God,  and  not  equal  with  God ;  if 
equal  with  God,  infinite ;  if  infinite,  equal  with  the 
Father  ?  The  besotten  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the 
begetter,  the  Son  of  God  as  God  tlie  Father  ;  therefore 
does  the  Cliurch  adore  with  equal  praises  the  divine 
Father,  and  the  divine  Son  ;  the  First,  and  Second 
Persons  of  the  holy  Trinity  ;  wdio,  with  the  third  Per- 
son, the  Holy  Ghost,  constitute  the  one  God  in  wdiom 
we  believe. 

We  must,  however,  be  careful  to  remember  that  tlie 
Scripture,  in  speaking  of  God  and  of  the  relations 
between  the  Persons  of  the  Godhead,  uses  language 
framed  for  men,  and  to  express  their  relations  ;  nor  is 
it  possible  in  such  language  to  make  known  the  infinite 
truths  of  God's  own  being.  Hence,  the  terms  Father, 
Son,  begetting,  or  generation  (which  is  the  Latin 
synonym),  are  to  be  understood  in  a  sense  as  distinct 
from  that  wliich  they  bear  when  applied  to  men,  as  the 
divine  nature  is  infinitely  above  the  human,  and  it  may 
be  true  that  theologians  have  speculated  by  inferences 
from  these  terms  to  an  unwarranted  degree  :  but  we 
are  certain  from  correlative  Scripture  that  they  imply 
a  real,  natural,  essential,  though,  from  the  nature  of 
the  case,  by  us  incomprehensible,  relation  between  the 
first  and  second  Persons  of  the  Godhead  ;  which  im- 
plies their  equal  divinity.  Hence,  also,  we  must  believe 
that,  as  the  nature  of  God  is  unchangeable,  the  relation 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  though  clearly  re- 
vealed (as  to  its  fact)  only  in  connection  with  the 
Gospel,  must  have  existed  from  all  eternity.  The 
Father  did  not  cause  the  Son  to  be  ;  the  Son  did  not 
in   his  being  follow  the  Father,  but,   whatever  is  the 


SONSHIP  AND   GOVERNMENT   OF  CHRIST.     323 

ineffable  relation  which  those  words  imply,  it  has  been 
and  will  be  coeternal  with  the  existence  of  God. 

The  scope  of  the  lesson  for  to-day  is  so  great,  that 
we  have  no  opportunity  to  enter  upon  other  corrobora- 
tory arguments  for  our  Lord's  divinity,  nor  even  to  draw 
out  the  many  practical  deductions  from  the  matter  to 
which  we  have  confined  ourselves  ;  but  we  trust  in  the 
Christian  judgment  of  those  who  have  followed  us  as 
we  reasoned  out  of  the  Scriptures,  so  far  as  to  believe 
that  they  Avill  agree  with  the  orthodox  of  all  ages  in 
the  truth  of  Christ's  natural  and  eternal  soriship  to 
God :  to  deny  which  is  to  deny  his  divinity,  and  to  take 
all  value  from  his  atoning  mediation. 

Secondi,y  :  The  reason  tvhy  we  call  Jesus  Clirist  tJiA 
only  begotten  Son  of  Grod,  our  Lord. 

"  Because,"  says  the  Catechism,  "  he  hath  redeemed 
us,  Kotli  soul  and  body,  from  all  our  sins,  not  with  gold 
or  silver,  but  with  his  precious  blood,  and  hath  deliv- 
ered us  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  thus  hath 
made  us  his  own  property." 

Tlie  true  and  essential  divinity  of  Christ  being  estab- 
lished by  his  sonship  to  God  the  Father,  his  divine 
authority  over  us  follows  as  a  necessary  consequence  ; 
for  he  hath  himself  said  :  "  that  all  men  should  honor 
the  Son,  even  as  they  honor  the  Father.  He  that  hon- 
oreth  not  the  Son,  honoreth  not  the  Father  which  hath 
sent  him."  God  is  our  Almighty,  all-wise,  infinitely 
holy  Creator.  Our  being,  with  all  its  faculties,  physical 
and  spiritual,  has  come  from  him,  from  whom  have 
come  all  things.  We,  thei-efore,  belong  to  him,  body, 
soul,  and  spirit,  —  all  that  we  are,  all  that  we  have,  all 
that  we  can  do  ;  and  he  has  the  sole  right,  as  he  alone 
has  the  competent  knowledge,  to  command  and  direct 


324      SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.     US  in  the  way  in  which  we  may  ftilfil  the  end  of  our 
creation,  which  is  his  own  glory.  It  is  both  wicked- 
ness and  folly  not  to  acknowledge  and  obey  God  as  our 
rightful  owner  and  master.  Hence  the  uncommuni- 
cable  name  of  the  true  God,  which  distinguished  him 
throughout  the  Old  Testament  from  all  the  false  gods 
of  the  heathen,  was  Jehovah,  used  in  the  sense  of  Su- 
preme, which  our  translators  render  by  LORD,  printed 
in  capital  letters.  Thus  the  Psalmist :  "  For  the  Lord 
(or  Jehovah)  is  great  and  greatly  to  be  praised  ;  he  is 
to  be  feared  above  all  gods.  For  all  the  gods  of  the 
nations  are  idols ;  but  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  made  the 
heavens."  The  term  lord,  signifying  one  having  right 
and  power  to  rule,  is,  however,  applied  to  human  sov- 
ereicrns,  dio;nitaries,  and  masters,  who  exercise  dominion 
over  their  fellow-men.  Hence,  God  the  Creator  re- 
ceives homage  and  glory  from  the  Scriptures,  as  infin- 
itely supreme  over  all  such  forms  of  authority  as  may 
be  claimed  for,  or  by  him  delegated  to  any  of  his  intel- 
ligent creatures  ;  and  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God,  the 
second  person  of  the  adorable  Godhead,  is  by  virtue 
of  his  original,  essential  divinity,  entitled  to  our  hom- 
age and  obedience  as  our  Lord,  and  Lord  of  all. 

But  there  is  a  peculiar  and  evangelical  sense  in  which 
the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  incarnate  as  Christ  Je- 
sus, the  anointed  Saviour,  has  become  our  Lord,  —  the 
Lord  of  all  Christians,  —  to  which  the  apostle  refers 
when  he  says  :  "  We  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in 
the  world,  and  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  one. 
For  though  there  be  that  are  called  gods,  whether  in 
heaven  or  in  earth  (as  there  be  gods  many  and  lords 
many),  but  to  us  there  is  but  one  God  the  Father,  of 
-•vhora  are  all   things  and  we  in  him  ;   and  one  Lord 


SONSHIP   AND    GOVERNMENT   OF   CHRIST.      825 

Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  him." 
This  is  the  Lordship  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  which  the  Cate- 
chism here  speaks,  and  concerning  which  it  is  now  our 
duty  especially  to  inquire  ;  although  it  is  included  in 
Christ's  office  of  king,  already  considered  by  us  when 
expounding  his  name,  Christ. 

I.   The  source  of  Christ's  Lordship. 

It  is  not  original  but  derived.  As  the  only  begotten 
Son  of  God,  he  had  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  the  supreme  authority  as  creator,  preserver, 
and  administrator  of  all  things  ;  but  when,  in  execut- 
ing the  plan  of  redemption,  he  became  the  representa- 
tive and  took  the  place  of  his  people,  he  "  was  made  in 
the  likeness  of  men,"  and  so  "  took  upon  him  the  form  " 
and  condition  "  of  a  servant."  In  so  doing,  therefore, 
he,  so  far  as  he  was  incarnate,  laid  aside  his  glory :  he 
appeared  as  man,  as  a  servant ;  and  as  a  man,  and  by 
assumption  of  human  nature,  he  was  voluntarily  but 
truly  a  servant.  Now  the  stress  of  all  evangelical,  as 
well  as  antecedent,  scripture  shows  that  upon  him  as 
the  Son  of  God  incarnate,  as  the  representative  of  men, 
the  Father,  representing  the  Godhead,  conferred  a  dele- 
gated lordship,  equal  in  all  respects  to  that  which  God 
exercises,  within  the  limits  and  for  the  purpose  desig- 
nated by  the  plan  of  redemption.  Thus  says  the 
Psalmist,  speaking  for  God  :  "  I  have  set  my  King  on 
my  holy  hill  of  Zion  ;  "  that  is,  in  the  church.  Again, 
the  angel  in  the  annunciation  :  "  Behold,  thou  shalt 
conceive  in  thy  womb  and  bring  forth  a  son,  and  shalt 
call  his  name  Jesus.  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be 
called  the  Son  of  the  Highest ;  and  the  Lord  God  shall 
give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his  father  David.  And  he 
shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever;  and  of  his 


o26      SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF   CHRIST.    kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  Again,  in  commission- 
ing his  disciples,  Jesus  came  and  si)ake  unto  them,  say- 
ing, "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  Again,  in  PhiHppians  :  "  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above 
every  name ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee 
siiould  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and 
things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that  every  tongue  should 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God 
the  Father."  These  are,  as  you  know,  but  a  few  of 
the  passages  in  which  Lordship  supreme  is  conferred 
upon  Jesus  the  Emmanuel  who  was  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  crucified  under  Pontius  Pilate,  raised  from  the 
dead,  and  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  of  God. 

II.  The  object  of  this  Lordship. 

It  is  twofold  :  1,  His  people,  or  church,  comprising 
all  who  believe  on  his  name  ;  2,  All  things  for  the  sake 
of  his  people. 

1.  His  people.  The  right  of  God  in  them  and  over 
them  is  delegated  to  Jesus  Christ.  "•  He  shall  reign 
over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever."  Again,  saith  he  in 
his  mediatorial  prayer :  "  I  have  manifested  thy  name 
unto  the  men  which  thou  gavest  me  out  of  tlie  world  ; 
thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me ;  and  they 
have  kept  thy  word  :  "  and  many  other  passages  of  the 
same  import. 

2.  We  have  already  cited  proofs  that  his  power  is 
over  all  things  ;  and  the  apostle  in  Ephesians  tells  us 
for  what  use  this  illimitable  power  is  given  :  "  That  ye 
may  know  .  .  .  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of 
his  power  to  usward  who  believe,  according  to  the 
working  of  his  mighty  power  which  he  wrought  in 
Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set  him 


SONSHIP  AND   GOVERNMENT   OF   CHRIST.     327 

at  his  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far 
above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  do- 
minion, and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this 
world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come  ;  and  hath  put 
all  things  under  his  feet,  and  gave  hini  to  be  the  head 
over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  the 
fuhiess  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  In  a  word,  his 
kingdom  is  over  his  people,  and  over  all  things,  that  he 
may  secure  their  present  and  everlasting  salvation, 
which  includes  a  spiritual  rule  over  their  hearts  and 
the  administration  of  providence.  Hence,  liis  king- 
dom in  this  double  sense  is  called  his  mediatorial  king- 
dom ;  and  the  apostle  speaks  of  it,  when  he  says : 
"  Giving  thanks  unto  the  Father,  which  hath  made  us 
meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light ;  who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  ])ower  of  dark- 
ness, and  hath  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his 
dear  Son  ;  "  i.  e.  translated  us  into  Christ's  kingdom, 
that  we  by  his  gracious  power  be  delivered  from  the 
power  of  darkness  and  be  brought  to  a  participation  of 
the  heavenly  inheritance. 

III.   The  right  of  this  Lordship. 

As  it  is  not  original  but  conferred,  and  conferred  on 
Christ  incarnate  as  the  representative  of  servants,  he 
can  receive  favor  or  privilege  from  God  only  as  other 
creatures,  who  are  servants  of  God  ;  that  is,  as  a  reward 
of  righteousness.  The  justice  of  God  can  allow  it  on  no 
other  principle.  Indeed,  it  is  on  this  moral  necessity 
that  the  whole  scheme  of  salvation  by  Christ  proceeds 
— "  to  declare,"  as  the  apostle  says,  "  his  (God's) 
righteousness,  that  he  might  be  just,  i\nd  the  justifier 
of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus."  The  righteousness 
required,  therefore,  is  such  a  righteousness  as  is  needed 


328      SONSHIP  AND   GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST.     by  those  whom  Christ  represents,  which  is  twofold :  ex- 
piation of  sin,  and  a  meritorious  obedience,  both  of 
which  Christ  offered  unto  God  :  the  expiation  in  his 
death,  tlie  meritorious  obedience  in  his  honoring  of  the 
law  by  his  whole  life.  Because  of  this  perfect  right- 
eousness which,  through  the  iniion  of  the  divine  na- 
ture with  the  human  in  which  it  was  offered,  is  of  in- 
finite merit,  the  Father  bestows  the  mediatorial  king- 
dom or  Lordship  on  Christ.  "  Being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself  and  became  obedient 
unto  (until)  death  ;  wherefore  God  also  hath  highly 
exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is  above 
every  name,"  &c.  Again :  "  Who  (Jesus  Christ) 
gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all 
iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people 
(i.  e.  a  people  belonging  unto  himself),  zealous  of  good 
works."  Again  :  "  The  righteousness  of  God  which  is 
by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all  them 
that  believe,  .  .  .  being  justified  freely  by  his  grace, 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  Christ 
has  thus  purchased  for  his  own  all  that  believe,  and 
they  bear  his  name  stamped,  as  it  were,  upon  them  in 
token  of  their  being  secure  in  him  of  everlasting  life. 
"  In  whom  also,"  says  the  apostle,  "  after  that  ye  be- 
lieved, ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy  Sj)ii-it  of  promise, 
which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  until  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  purchased  possession,  that  we  should  be  to 
the  praise  of  his  glory."  Hence,  throughout  the  New 
Testament,  the  title  Lord  is  given  only  and  emphati- 
cally to  Jesus  Christ ;  the  Holy  Ghost  thus  showing  us, 
that  now  all  the  divine  aovernment  in  all  things  re- 
specting  the  church  is  committed  to  him  alone,  as  the 
only  mediator  between  God  and  man. 


SONSHIP  AND   GOVERNMENT   OF   CHRIST.        329 

Thus  you  have  confirmed  out  of  Scripture  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Catechism,  as  to  the  reason  why  all  true 
Christians  call  Jesus  Christ  "  our  Lord  " :  "  Because 
he  hath  redeemed  us,  both  soul  and,  body,  from  all  our 
sins,  not  with  gold  or  silver,  but  with  his  precious 
blood,  and  hath  delivered  us  from  all  the  power  of  the 
devil,  and  thus  hath  made  us  his  own  property." 

INFERENCES. 

First :  The  safety  of  all  who  believe  in  Christ. 

The  Son  of  God  is  their  king.  Incarnate  as  our 
elder  brother,  we  know  that  he  has  a  sympathy  for 
us ;  appointed  and  accepted  as  our  Redeemer,  we  know 
that  he  has  a  right  to  save  us  ;  bi'inging  to  his  office  all 
the  power  and  authority  of  his  divine  nature,  we  know 
that  he  is  able  to  save  us.  Were  he  not  man,  M-e  mio-ht 
doubt  his  willingness  ;  were  he  not  God,  we  mio-ht 
doubt  his  ability  ;  but  w^ien  we  see  in  him  God  and 
man,  we  may  trust  him  while  we  adore. 

Secondly  ;  The  duty  of  all  who  believe  in  Chi'ist. 

To  serve  him  as  we  would  serve  God,  who  has  given 
us  to  him  ;  to  avow  openly  our  allegiance  to  him  before 
the  world,  and  to  build  up  his  kingdom  as  the  divinely 
ordained  method  of  glorifying  God  in  the  redemption 
of  the  world.