LECTURE  XVI. 
THE   INCAENATION. 


FOURTEENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE    INCARNATION. 

Quest.  XXXV.    What  is  the  meaning  of  these  words:  '•'  He  was  conceived 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin  Alary  f" 
Ans.  That  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is  and  continueth  true  and  eternal  God, 

took  upon  him  the  very  nature  of  man,  out  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of 

the  Virgin  Mary  by  the  operation  of  th6  Holy  Ghost :  that  he  might 

also  be  the  true  seed  of  David,  like  unto  his  brethren  in  all  things,  sin 

excepted. 
Quest.  XXXVI.    WJiat  profit  dost  thou  receive  by  Christ's  holy  conception 

and  nativity  ? 
Aks.  That  he  is  our  Mediator;  and  with  his  innocence  and  perfect  holiness 

covers  in  the  sight  of  God  my  sins,  wherein  1  was  conceived  and 

brought  forth. 

TTAVING  demonstrated  the  true  and  essential  divin- 
^^  ity  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  the  express  declaration 
of  Scripture  that  he  is  "  the  only  begotten  Son  "  of 
God  ;  and,  also,  his  right  to  be  honored  by  us  as  our 
Lord,  in  consequence  of  the  delegated  authority  he  has 
received  from  the  Father  to  be  Lord  or  head  of  the 
Church,  and  Lord  or  head  over  all  things  for  the  sake 
of  the  Church  ;  we  now  come  to  inquire  how  it  is  that 
we  offer  this  divine  homage  and  render  this  entire  obe- 
dience to  one  who  is  presented  before  our  faith  in  the 
form  and  substance  of  a  man  like  ourselves :  which 
leads  us  to  consider  the  great  mystery  of 

The  Incarnation, 

or  the  taking  of  human  nature  upon  himself  by  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God,  or,  as  the  Evangelist  John 


334  THE  INCARNATION..  expresses  it,  his  "  being  made  flesh,"  or,  as  the  apostle 
Paul  states  it,  his  being  "  sent  forth,  made  of  a  woman." 
This  incarnation  was  necessary  for  thd  fulfilment  of 
all  prophecy,  from  the  first  promise  that  "  the  seed  of 
the  woman  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent,"  to 
the  declaration  of  the  last  of  the  Old  Testament  writ- 
ers, that  "  the  Lord,''''  the  object  of  all  godly  faith  and 
desire,  as  "  the  messenger  of  the  covenant,"  would  per- 
sonally "  come  into  his  temple."  It  is  necessary  to  the 
truth  of  all  the  evangelical  Scriptures,  which  set  forth 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  the  Saviour  in  whom  we  are  to 
trust,  and  describe  him  with  the  perfections  of  eternal 
God.     Hence  the  Church  Catholic  requires  each  of  her 

members  to  say :  "  I  believe in  Jesus  Christ, 

his  (God's)  only  begotten  Son,  our  Lord,  who  was  con- 
ceived by  the  Holy  Ghost,  horn  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ;  "  — 
which  is  a  declaration  of  our  faith  respecting  the  con- 
stitution of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  person  after  such  a 
manner  that  he  was  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Our 
lesson  to-day  expounds  the  meaning  of  these  words,  and 
has  two  parts  :  The  first  asserting  the  fact  of  the  in- 
carnation (35th  Question  and  Answer) ;  the  second 
showing  the  reasons  for  the  incarnation  (36th  Ques- 
tion and  Answer)  ;  both  of  which  we  shall  handle 
as  succinctly  as  the  importance  of  the  subject  will 
allow. 

First  :   The  fact  of  the  Incarnation. 

"  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is  and  continueth  true  and 
eternal  God,  took  upon  him  the  very  nature  of  man,  out 
of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  by  the  ope- 
ration of  the  Holy  Ghost :  that  he  miglit  also  be  the 
true  seed  of  David  like  unto  his  brethren  in  all  things, 
sin  excepted." 


'.ECT.  XVI.J  THE   INCARNATION.  335 

We  derive  our  knowledge  of  the  incarnation  only 
from  the  word  of  God,  who  alone  could  reveal  it ;  and 
we  believe  the  great  truth  which  it  contains  solely  on 
divine  testimony.  The  Scriptures  which  recite  the 
glorious  mystery,  are  so  familiar  to  us,  and  so  very 
many,  that  we  need  not  quote  them  at  full  length  ;  but 
may  take  out  of  them  the  principal  particulars  referred 
to  by  the  Catechism  in  the  place  before  us  :  and  these 
we  shall  arrange  under  three  propositions  concerning 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  I.  He  is  truly  man.  II.  He 
is  truly  God.  III.  He  is  both  God  and  man  in  one. 
We  say  is,  not  tvas ;  for  what  our  Lord  became  at  his 
incarnation,  he  is  now  on  the  throne  of  his  glory,  and 
will  continue  to  be  forever. 

I.  He  is  truly  man. 

A  man  is  compounded  of  a  substantial  body  having 
certain  physical  qualities  and  faculties,  and  of  a  spiritual 
soul  having  will,  understanding,  and  affections.  So 
did  our  Lord  become  man. 

1.  As  to  his  body.  It  was  substantial — not  a  mere 
phantom  or  appearance  of  a  body,  but  having  all  the 
qualities  which  distinguish  substance  from  spirit.  "Han- 
dle me  and  see,"  said  he  to  his  disciples  after  his  resur- 
rection ;  "  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  ye  see 
me  (or  perceive  me  to)  have." 

It  was  a  human  body.  Flesh  is  a  term  used  generally 
for  the  substantial  part  of  man.  "  The  word  becam 
flesh,''''  says  the  Evangelist ;  "  Forasmuch  as  the  chil- 
dren were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself 
took  part  of  the  same."  His  glorified  body  has  iinder- 
gone  that  change  which  the  apostle  describes,  when, 
in  the  xv.  of  1  Corinthians,  he  speaks  of  the  body 
which  the  believer  will  have  after  the  resurrection  :  but 


336  THE  INCARNATION.  his  body,  while  he  was  on  earth,  was  as  truly  human  as 
ours  are,  and,  if  we  be  his  people,  ours  will  be  glorified 
as  his  is  now.  "  He,"  says  the  apostle  in  Philippians, 
"  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned 
like  unto  his  glorious  body  ;''  which  could  not  be,  if  his 
body  had  not  been  first  like  ours.  There  was  purity 
in  our  Saviour's  body  from  the  holy  manner  of  its  ori- 
gin and  his  constitutional  sinlessness,  but,  whether  on 
earth  or  in  heaven,  it  had  and  has  all  necessary  human 
characteristics. 

He  was  "  born  of  a  woman  ;  "  "  the  seed  of  the 
woman,"  according  to  the  first  promise ;  "  made  of  a 
woman,"  as  the  apostle  has  it;  "conceived  in  her," 
as  the  angel  told  Joseph  ;  carried  in  her  womb  until 
"  the  days  were  accomplished  that  she  should  be  deliv- 
ered." The  generative  cause  of  the  conception  was 
miraculous  from  a  divine  energy  :  "  conceived  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  says  the  Creed,  or,  more  properly  ren- 
dered,/?'om  the  Holy  Ghost ;  '•  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  "  our  Catechism  explains  it.  "  The  Holy 
Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the 
Highest  shall  overshadow  thee:  therefore,  also,  that  holy 
thing  (creature)  which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be 
called  the  Son  of  God,"  is  the  declaration  of  the  angel. 
The  blessed  Mary  was  a  virgin  ;  but  all  that  a  woman 
is  to  a  child  of  which  she  is  the  mother,  she  was  to  our 
Lord's  humanity  ;  —  not  to  his  divine  nature,  for  the 
Papists  talk  blasi)hemously  when  they  call  her  the 
mother  of  God.  '  The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was 
threefold  :  in  sanctifying  the  body  of  the  Virgin  for 
the  purpose  of  our  Lord's  becoming  flesh  through  her ; 
in  causing  the  conception,  and  in  sanctifying  the  child  : 
hence,  the  purity  and  sinlessness  of  our  Lord's  human- 


THE  INCARNATION.  337 

itj,  for  he  was  not  conceived  in  sin  and  brought  forth 
in  iniquity,  as  we  are  ;  hence,  also,  his  freedom  from 
the  moral  connection  which  all  others  born  of  woman 
have  with  the  first  Adam's  apostasy.  But  in  all  other 
respects,  Christ  derived  his  body  as  we  have  derived 
ours. 

The  papists  have  many  idle  and  preposterous  fables 
about  the  incarnation  ;  and  a  little  while  ago  a  council 
of  their  bishops  met  to  determine  that  the  Virgin  Mary 
herself  was  conceived  without  sin,  which  would  seem 
also  to  require  that  her  mother  was  as  immaculately 
born,  and  so  backward  to  the  first  mother  :  but  the 
scriptural  doctrine  is,  that  the  sanctification  of  Mary  for 
her  maternal  office  was  at  the  time  of  her  conception 
from  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  reject  with  horror  all  the 
profane  inventions  of  a  miserable  idolatry,  but  we 
should  receive  with  adoring  faith  all  that  'the  divine 
word  teaches  of  the  manner  in  which  Jesus  Christ  is 
truly  human  ;  and  how  nobly  does  the  sacred  narrative 
exalt  the  character  of  maternity  above  the  disgraces  of 
the  fall  !  How  absurd  are  the  honors  which  the  papists, 
imitating  Gnostic  follies,  would  throw  around  a  celibate 
state  !  If  God  chose  a  virgin  to  exalt  her,  the  exalta- 
tion he  conferred  was  making  her  a  mother  I  It  could 
be  the  privilege  of  but  one  woman  to  bear  our  Elder 
Brother  ;  yet  blessed  are  all  those  women  whose  mater- 
nal faith  consecrates  their  offspring  to  be  the  sons  and 
daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty,  immortal  heirs  of  his 
heavenly  kingdom  ! 

2.  Our  Lord  derived  his  human  soul  in  the  same 
manner  (mysterious  beyond  all  guess  at  explanation) 
that  every  man  derives  his  soul  with  his  body.  All 
further  question  is  idle,   for  it  would   be  pryino-  into 

VOL.  I.  22  * 


338  THE  INCARNATION.  what  God  has  not  revealed.  But  it  were  grave  heresy 
to  suppose  that  our  Lord  had  not  a  human  soul  as  truly 
as  he  had  a  human  body ;  for  without  either  he  would 
not  have  been  man.  He  needed  to  be  made  like  unto 
his  brethren  in  all  things,  "  that  he  might  be  a  merciful 
and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining  to  God." 

3.  The  history  of  our  Lord  after  his  birth  confirms 
the  truth  of  his  full  humanity.  He  was  nourished  as  a 
babe  at  the  breast.  He  increased  in  stature,  from  the 
weakness  that  needed  the  swaddling  bands,  and  the 
support  of  his  mother's  arms.  He  went  up  as  a  Jewish 
lad  when  twelve  years  old  to  keep  the  Passover  at  Je- 
rusalem, and  afterwards  passed  through  youth  to  the 
adult  stature  of  man.  He  saw,  he  heard,  he  felt,  he 
spake,  he  walked.  He  hungered,  and  eat ;  he  was 
thirsty,  and  drank.  He  was  weary,  and  he  rested. 
When  night  came,  he  slept ;  and  (oh,  blessed  proof 
of  human  sympatliy  !)  he  wept.  He  suffered  extreme 
agony,  sweating  "great  drops  of  blood,"  and,  wrung 
with  mortal  anguish  upon  the  cross  to  which  his  blessed 
hands  were  nailed  and  his  feet  bound,  his  meek  brow 
bleeding  under  the  thorns,  his  dear  side  pierced  to  his 
heart  by  the  cursed  spear,  he  died,  breathing  out  his 
soul,  was  laid  in  a  tomb,  and  the  spices  were  prepared 
for  his  embalmment. 

He  thought  as  a  man.  He  was  taught  and  grew 
"  in  wisdom  "  and  "  in  favor  Avith  God  and  man."  He 
performed  the  moral  duties  of  a  man  ;  witness,  his  obe- 
dience to  his  mother  and  to  Joseph  her  husband,  to  the 
Jewish  authorities,  to  Cffisar,  and  to  God,  He  loved 
as  a  son,  and  as  a  friend,  and  as  a  patriot.  He  was 
full  of  human  sympathies ;  pitying  the  poor,  the  dis- 
eased, and  the  sorrowful.     He  took  little  children  up  in 


THE  INCARNATION.  339 

his  arms  ;  he  was  grateful  for  friendly  kindness,  and  at 
the  grave  of  his  friend  he' groaned  in  spirit,  being 
troubled.  He  prayed  "  with  strong  crying  and  tears." 
He  devoted  himself  with  most  intelligent  and  hearty 
zeal  to  do  the  will  of  his  Father.  He  "  learned  obedi- 
ence by  the  things  which  he  suffered."  "  For  we  have 
not  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with  the 
feeling  of  our  infirmities  ;  but  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin." 

Yes  !  he  was  pure.  The  seed  of  the  woman,  con- 
ceived of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  fell  not  in  Adam.  Born 
of  a  woman,  yet  begotten  of  God,  he  was  our  fellow- 
man  but  not  our  fellow-sinner.  Sanctified  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  from  the  womb,  "  he  did  no  sin,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  his  mouth,"  but  he  was  "  holy,  harmless, 
undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  His  holy  soul 
ruled  the  infirmities  of  his  body,  and  he  was  "  as  a 
lamb  without  blemish,  and  without  spot." 

Thus  was  he  truly  man :  "  the  son  of  man,"  "  the  seed 
of  David  ;  "  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus  ;  "  "  the  man  ap- 
proved of  God  ;  "  "  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained," 
"the  second  Adam."  The  perfect  humanity  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  an  essential  article  of  the  Christian  creed ;  for 
our  Lord  himself  hath  said  :  "  Except  ye  eat  my  flesh 
and  drink  my  blood  "  (i.  e.  receive  the  doctrines  of  my 
incarnation  and  atonement),  "  ye  have  no  life  in  you." 
II.  He  is  truly  God. 

This  .we  have  already  suificiently  proved  in  our  ex- 
position of  several  sections,  but  especially  the  last,'when 
we  showed  that  the  Son  whom  God  the  Father  sent 
into  the  world  to  be  made  of  a  woman,  is  the  only  begot- 
ten Son  of  God ;  by  which  phrase  we  can  understand 
nothing  else  than  that  he  is  truly  and  essentially  of  the 


340  THE  INCARNATION.  same  nature  as  his  Father.  The  same  "  Word  "  which 
was  God  in  the  beoinning;,  "  became  flesh  and  dwelt 
among  us,"  says  the  Evangelist ;  "  and  we  beheld  his 
glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father, 
full  of  grace  and  truth."  If,  therefore,  he  was  God 
before  his  incarnation,  he  must  continue  to  be  God  after 
his  incarnation  ;  that  is,  God  is  essentially  eternal,  and 
the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  must  be  God  from  ever- 
lasting to  everlasting.  Thus  the  Evangelist  applies  to 
the  incarnation  the  very  distinct  prophecy  of  Isaiah  : 
"  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and  shall  bring 
forth  a  son,  and  they  shall  call  his  name  Emmanuel, 
which,  being  interpreted,  is,  God  with  us."  So  St. 
Paul  also  :  "  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  .  .  .  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant  and  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  men."  So  the  apostle  again  :  "  Great  is 
the  mystery  of  godliness  :  God  manifest  in  the  flesh." 
So  also  the  Catechism  :  "  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is 
and  continueth  true  and  eternal  God,  took  upon  him 
the  very  nature  of  ma-n."  We  may  then  pass  on  to 
our  remaining  proposition :  — 

III.     He  is  God  and  man  in  one  person. 

God  the  Son  dwelt  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  The 
Word  became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us  ;  or,  more  lit- 
erally, tabernacled  among  us.  He  took  the  humanity, 
so  miraculously  prepared,  for  a  tent,  a  habitation,  a 
covering  under  which  he  humbled  himself,  radiating 
his  divine  glory  through  it  as  the  mediator  between 
God  and  man.  The  writer  to  the  Hebrews  calls  it  the 
vail  of  his  divinity :  "  The  rent  vail,  that  is  to  say,  his 
flesh."  "  For  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily."  He  entered  the  flesh  within  the 
Virgin  Mary,  for  the  "  holy  thing  which  was  born  of 


THE  INCARNATION.  341 

her  is  called  the  Son  of  God."  Nor  was  this  dwelling 
only  in  his  body,  but  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  soul  and 
body ;  in  the  raind,  the  aiFections,  and  the  will  of  the 
holy  man,  using  the  spiritual  as  well  as  the  physical 
fliculties  of  the  humanity  :  for  the  human  obedience, 
active  and  passive,  which  he  came  in  the  flesh  to  ren- 
der acceptable,  because  infinitely  meritorious,  was  of 
the  soul  as  well  as  of  the  body. 

But  it  was  more  than  a  mere  indwelling,  such  as  that 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  every  believer.  "  The  Word  was 
made  flesh."  The  passive  verb  is  there  used  to  indi- 
cate the  concurrent  action  of  the  Father,  who  sent  his 
only  begotten,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  overshad- 
owed the  Virgin  with  the  third  person  of  the  ever- 
blessed  Trinity  (Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost !),  and  of  the  Son,  who.  of  his  own 
personal  will  and  by  his  own  personal  act,  came  into  the 
world  as  the  seed  of  the  woman.  "  He  took  upon  him 
the  form  of  a  servant."  "  Forasmuch  as  the  children 
are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  like- 
wise took  part  of  the  same,"  i.  e.  participated  in  our 
human  nature.  Here,  in  the  word  took,  we  have  the 
nearest  approach  we  can  have  to  an  explanation  of  the 
manner  after  which  the  divine  and  human  natures  of 
our  Lord  were  united.  He  took  the  human  nature  to 
his  own  divine  nature.  The  human  nature  —  body  and 
soul  —  in  all  its  parts,  quaUties,  faculties,  and  functions, 
physical  and  spiritual,  became  his,  his  own  ;  not  in  es- 
sence but  in  relation,  by  assumption  and  adjunction. 
Hence,  the  pains  of  the  man,  his  sorrows,  his  very 
death,  became,  as  the  language  of  many  scriptures  as- 
serts, the  pains,  the  sorrows  and  death  of  our  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ.     He  is  truly  man  as  he  is  truly  God.      His 


342  THE  INCARNATION.  divinity  was  not  transformed  into  liumanity ;  he  is  still 
God.  The  humanity  was  not  transformed  into  divinity : 
he  is  still  man.  The  divinity  was  not  commixt  with 
the  humanity,  nor  the  humanity  with  the  divinity,  else 
he  would  be  neither  God  nor  man.  He  is  both  God 
and  man.  The  divinity  was  not  made  less,  for  infinite- 
ness  is  essential  to  it ;  the  humanity  is  not  made  more, 
for  finiteness  is  essential  to  it.  He  is  entitled  to  all  the 
divine  attributes  while  he  disowns  nothino;  that  is  hu- 
man  except  sin.  He  is  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God, 
yet  our  brother.  The  human  nature  is  adjoined  to  the 
divine.  He  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  incarnate 
God,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  Emmanuel,  God  with 
us.  God,  yet  man  ;  man,  yet  God :  the  God  distinct 
from  the  man ;  the  man  distinct  from  the  God  :  else 
God  would  have  been  a  sufferer,  or  the  works  of  the 
man  been  finite  in  merit.  Yet,  we  repeat,  the  human- 
ity is  so  united  to  the  divinity  that  he  is  one  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  This  perfect  union  is  described  by  theologians, 
for  want  of  a  better  term,  as  in  one  person ;  that  is, 
one  individual.  The  divinity  so  pervades,  sanctifies, 
and  renders  meritorious  the  nature,  obedience,  and  suf- 
ferings of  the  man,  that  the  Father  accepts  them  and 
we  rely  upon  them  as  the  one  infinitely  worthy  atone- 
ment of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Objections  have  been 
made  by  those  who  deny  our  Lord's  personal  divinity, 
to  this  use  of  the  word  person,  and,  did  we  use  it  in  its 
ordinary  sense,  the  objection  would  be  plausible ;  but  the 
singular,  anomalous  nature  of  the  case  warrants  us  in 
using  a  term,  when  we  have  no  other,  according  to  our 
definition  of  it :  which  is  that  oneness  that  constitutes 
the  two  natures  of  Christ,  as  one  agent  or  representa- 
tive for  us  with  the  Father. 


THE  INCARNATION.  343 

Other  questions  which  may  be  here  suggested  have 
been  treated,  or  will  be  elsewhere,  in  our  expositions  of 
the  Catechism  ;  and  we  wish  to  add  only  that  it  is  im- 
portant for  our  undei'standing  of  the  true  catholic 
doctrine  to  remember  the  precise  conditions  which  have 
been  specified.  Thus  Hooker,  whom  theologians  wor- 
thily call  the  judicious,  says  that  "  in  four  words  we 
may  fully,  by  way  of  abridgment,  comprise  whatsoever 
antiquity  hath  at  large  handled  "  respecting  the  person 
of  our  Lord,  "  either  in  declaration  of  Christian  belief, 
or  in  refutation  of  heresies,  viz :  truly,  perfectly,  in- 
divisibly,  distinctly.  Truly,  as  to  his  being  God  ;  per- 
fectly, as  to  his  being  man  ;  indivisibly,  as  to  his  being  of 
both  one  ;  distinctly,  as  to  his  continuing  both  in  that 
one."  Indeed,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  first  four 
and  greatest  councils  of  tlie  church  were  called  to  de- 
fine and  establish  the  catholic  doctrine  on  these  several 
points  :  the  Council  of  Nice,  to  condemn  the  Arians, 
who  denied  the  proper  divinity  of  Christ ;  the  (first) 
Council  of  Constantinople,  to  condemn  the  Apolinari- 
ans,  who  attacked  the  proper  humanity  of  Christ ;  the 
Council  of  Epliesus,  to  condemn  the  Nestorians,  whose 
leader,  Nestorius,  was  w^rongfully  charged  with  assert- 
ing that  there  were  two  persons  in  Christ ;  and  the 
Council  of  Chalcedon,  to  condemn  the  Eutychians,  who 
confounded  the  two  natures  of  Christ.  All  these  here- 
sies are  fidl  of  mischiefs,  and,  therefore,  our  pastors 
should  imitate  the  ancient  church  in  guardino;  the 
people  against  them. 

Secondly  :   The  reasons  for  the  Inca7'nation. 

Quest.  36.  Wliat  profit  dost  tJiou  receive  hy  CJirisf  8 
lioly  conception  and  nativity  ? 

Ans.    That  he  Is  our  Mediator,  and  with  his  inno- 


344  THE  INCARNATION.  cence  and  perfect  holiness  covers  in  the  sight  of  God 
my  sins,  in  which  I  was  conceived  and  brought  forth. 

These  heads  of  doctrine  have  been  ah-eady  treated  of 
in  our  lectvu-e  on  the  lesson  for  the  Sixth  Lord's  Day, 
but  a  brief  review  of  them  may  not  be  unprofitable. 

The  incarnation  w^as  necessary, 

I.  To  establish  an  intercourse  between  God  and  man. 

The  sinner  convinced  of  his  guilt  would  not  dare  to 
approach  God,  whom  he  had  offended,  and  whose 
wrath  he  knows  himself  to  have  incurred.  Whence 
we  find  those  of  God's  servants  to  whom  he  had  mani- 
fested himself,  trembling  with  fear,  and  becoming  as 
dead  men.  It  is  the  difficulty  which  Job  felt  when  he 
exclaimed  :  "  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow-water,  and 
make  my  hands  never  so  clean,  yet  shalt  thou  plunge 
me  in  the  ditch,  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor  me  ; 
for  he  is  not  a  man  as  I  am,  that  I  should  answer  him, 
and  we  should  come  together  in  judgment.  Neither 
is  there  any  daysman  betwixt  us,  that  might  lay  his 
hand  upon  us  both.  Let  him  take  away  his  rod  from 
me,  and  let  not  his  fear  terrify  me  :  then  would  I  speak 
and  not  fear  him ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  me."  The 
proposition  of  a  reconcilement  must,  therefore,  come 
from  God  to  man.  On  the  other  hand,  God  in  his 
holiness  cannot  approach  the  sinner  and  not  destroy 
him.  "  Thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil, 
and  canst  not  look  upon  iniquity,"  says  Habakkuk. 
There  must,  therefore,  be  an  intervention  of  some  pure 
medium  between  holy  God  and  sinful  man  ;  one  equal 
with  God,  yet  equal  with  man,  who  may  put  his  hand 
upon  both  ;  and  that  Mediator  is  found  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  Christ  as  Emmanuel,  God-man.  In  him  we 
behold  God  united  to  humanity,  but  a  humanity  sinless : 


THE  INCARNATION.  345 

humanity  united  to  God,  but  to  God  in  loving-kindness 
and  tender  mercy.  God  looks  well  pleased  on  man 
represented  by  his  incarnate  only  begotten ;  man  looks 
with  penitent  confidence  on  God  represented  to  him  by 
his  elder  brother.  As  God,  the  blessed  Christ  enters 
into  the  wisdom  of  God  and  is  his  Counsellor  ;  as  man, 
he  assures  the  believer  of  his  kindred  and  is  his  Re- 
deemer. Christ  for  us  hath  by  his  atoning  merit  taken 
away  the  rod  of  his  Father's  wrath ;  and  now,  having 
passed  into  the  heavens  for  us,  his  flesh  once  torn  on 
the  cross  becomes  a  new  and  living  way  which  he  has 
consecrated  for  us,  by  which  we  have  access  with  bold- 
ness unto  God,  even  on  his  throne.  Christ  is  the  real- 
ity of  that  ladder  which  Jacob  saw,  whose  top  rested 
on  heaven  while  it  was  set  on  earth,  by  which  our 
prayers  ascend  to  God,  and  the  blessings  of  God  de- 
scend to  us. 

II.  To  make  a  sufficient  ground  of  our  reconciliation 
with  God. 

Whatever  be  the  merciful  purpose  of  God  towards 
the  sinner,  he  must  be  just ;  and  God,  not  laying  aside 
his  justice,  yet  bent  upon  mercy,  provides  a  method  by 
which  his  violated  law  is  magnified,  yet  his  grace  vin- 
dicated from  reproach  ;  and  that  method  is  the  substi- 
tution of  the  Emmanuel  to  expiate  our  guilt  and  pro- 
vide a  righteousness  on  the  credit  of  which  we  may  be 
rewarded.  "  He  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew 
no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  him."  It  was  necessary  that  this  substitute  should  be 
divine,  for  every  creature  is  himself  subject  to  God, 
and  requires  all  his  powers  to  discharge  his  own  duty. 
It  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  in  the  forai  of  a  ser- 
vant, for   God  himself  cannot  be  under  his  own  law. 


346  THE  INCARNATION.  fLECx.  XVI. 

It  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  a  man,  because  man 
was  the  sinner  to  be  redeemed ;  that  he  should  magnify 
the  law  given  to  man,  because  that  Avas  the  law  which 
had  been  dishonored  ;  that  the  law  should  be  magnified 
on  earth,  because  it  was  given  to  rule  man  in  this  life. 
It  was  necessary  that  the  penalty  of  the  law  should  be 
endured  in  the  nature  of  man,  and  in  the  sphere  of  his 
rebellion,  because  here  the  curse  had  passed  upon  hu- 
man nature.  But  it  was  necessary  that  an  infinite 
merit  should  be  communicated  to  the  obedience  and 
sufferino-s  of  the  substitute  in  human  nature  ;  and  so 
the  divinity  in  the  humanity  pervaded  the  actions  of 
Christ,  honoring  the  law  infinitely  more  than  the  obe- 
dience or  eternal  punishment  of  a  whole  world. 

III.   To  sustain  man  in  his  weakness. 

With  the  wrath  of  God  have  come  on  man  a  thou- 
sand woes.  The  natural,  as  well  as  the  penal,  conse- 
quence of  sin,  is  death,  with  all  its  precursive  evils  and 
all  its  following  torment.  Bitter  is  the  cup  which  time 
presses  on  every  human  life.  Without  some  strong 
sustaining  power  man  would  sink  under  his  calamities. 
The  child  of  God,  even  while  he  looks  forward  to 
heaven,  is  not  relieved  from  his  pains  and  sorrows. 
Still  the  body  of  sin  and  death  is  around  his  spirit. 
Still  he  lives  in  a  fallen,  faded,  polluted,  and  hostile 
world.  Still  he  must  meet  the  malice  of  the  Satanic 
tempter  and  the  contradiction  of  sinners.  Grace  has, 
indeed,  made  a  blessed  change.  Afflictions  are  to  him 
no  longer  evidence  of  divine  wrath,  but  proofs  of  a 
father's  care  to  chasten  him  for  heaven.  Yet  he  must 
be  assured  of  this  blessing  and  be  upheld,  for  his  flesh 
is  weak,  though  his  spii'it  be  willing.  And  this  is  given 
in  the  pei'son  and  sorrows  of  Christ,  who  was  tried 


THE  INCARNATION.  347 

with  all  our  temptations,  whose  heart  bled  in  all  our 
griefs,  who  shuddered  under  the  deep  shadows  of  his 
Father's  wrath,  and  poured  out  his  soul  amidst  the  an- 
guish of  a  cruel  death.  He  himself  learned  obedience 
by  the  things  that  he  suffered  ;  and  now  on  the  throne 
of  his  glory,  he  knows  how  to  succor  them  that  are 
tempted  ;  and,  while  he  assures  the  believer  of  his  hu- 
man sympathy,  he  assures  him  also  of  the  same  divine 
strength  that  sustained  him  under  the  griefs  and  diffi- 
culties that  we  are  passing  through.  With  what  strong 
consolation  is  the  Christian  met  as  he  flies  for  refuge  to 
the  hope  set  before  him,  and  sees  the  great  sufferer  on 
the  right  hand  of  God  ;  the  crown  of  luiiversal  glory 
on  the  brow  yet  scarred  with  thorns,  and  the  hand 
pierced  by  the  nail  holding  forth  to  him  the  sceptre,  that 
he  may  touch  it  and  live  forever.  Looking  unto  Jesus, 
the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith,  who,  for  the  joy 
that  was  set  before  him,  endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame,  he  lays  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin  that  so 
easily  besets  him,  and  runs  with  patience  the  race  set 
before  him.  Nothing  short  of  this  can  sustain  and 
cheer  and  make  us  victorious.  Oh,  the  hfe  of  my  life 
Avill  go  out  unless  I  can  see  my  nature  in  him  sustained 
by  the  divine  strength  I  need ;  unless  I  can  see  the  same 
hand  that  wipes  away  ray  tears  wiping  away  his  own  ; 
unless  I  can  trace  his  footsteps  down  into  the  dark  val- 
ley and  know,  .however  painful  my  path  may  be,  that 
he  has  trodden  it  before  me,  and  now  waits  to  wel- 
come me  to  his  joy  when  I  have  drunk  the  cup  which 
he  drank  for  me. 

IV.  To  elevate  our  fallen  nature. 

"  We  are  all  hy  nature  the  children  of  wrath."  Cavil 
at  it,  modify  it  as  men  will,  there  is  no  getting  over  the 


348  THE  INCARNATION.  fact  that  in  Adam  our  nature  was  cast  down  from  its 
pristine  dignity  to  shame  and  dust.  "  By  man  sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."  By  man 
must  that  nature  be  raised  from  the  dust,  and  its  dignity- 
restored.  The  second  Adam  must  repair  the  ruins 
of  the  first,  and,  in  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Lord  from 
Iieaven,  we  see  all  that  we  have  lost  more  than  restored 
and  secured  to  us  by  a  covenant  never  to  be  broken  be- 
cause its  surety  cannot  fail  ;  nay,  which  has  already  ful- 
filled all  its  conditions.  By  man  we  lost  the  image  of 
God,  his  pi'esence  and  communion.  In  Christ  we  behold 
God  again  dwellino;  in  man,  and  ofFerincr  to  us  fellow- 
ship  with  the  Father  and  with  himself.  By  man  we 
lost  the  empire  God  gave  him  over  all  things  here  ;  in 
Christ  we  behold  man  head  over  all  things  to  liis 
church.  In  man,  we  fell  under  the  tyranny  of  death 
and  lu'm  that  hath  the  power  of  death  ;  in  Christ,  we 
behold  the  seed  of  the  woman  bruising  the  head  of  the 
serpent,  and,  having  conquered  death  and  hell  in  the 
enemy's  own  dominions,  dragging  them  bound  to  his 
chai'iot-wheels,  and  making  ostentation  of  his  spoils, 
openly  triumphing.  O  Death,  where  is  thy  sting,  when 
thou  comest  as  a  radiant  angel  to  call  us  home  ;  when 
every  cord  of  flesh  thou  dost  rend  is  but  the  parting  of 
another  stay  that  binds  the  aspiring  soul  to  earth  ;  when 
thy  severest  agonies  are  but  the  wrenching  of  fetters 
from  our  wings !  O  Grave,  where  is  thy  victory, 
when,  through  the  tomb  which  Jesus  has  broken  for 
us,  we  pass  to  the  holy,  glorious  heavens !  There,  the 
second  Adam  has  entered  the  second  paradise ;  and 
there,  when  the  resurrection  shall  change  our  vile  body 
to  be  like  his  glorious  body,  shall  our  entire  humanity 
be  pure,   sinless,   innocent,   and  blessed    forevermore  ; 


THE  INCARNATION.  349 

but  oh,  with  what  greater  bhss  when  we  walk  amidst 
the  garden  of  dehghts,  not  alone,  as  Adam  walked  at 
first,  or  as  afterwards  with  but  one  to  second  his  praise  ; 
but  in  fellowship  with  an  innumerable  company  of 
saints  and  angels  plucking  freely  of  the  tree  of  life, 
and  drinking  of  the  river  of  God's  pleasures  that  flows 
from  out  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  !  And  the 
bliss  shall  be  eternal :  for  sin  can  never  enter  there, 
because  the  second  Adam  is  the  Son  of  God  who  can- 
not die ;  because  he  has  died  on  the  cross  and  now  liv- 
eth  forevermore. 

Great  is  our  confidence,  because  we  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  who 
was  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  born  of  the  Vir- 
gin Mary. 


LECTURE   XA^II. 
CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND   CROSS. 


FIFTEENTH   LORD'S   DAY. 
CHRIST'S   SUFFERING   AND   CROSS. 

Quest.  XXXVII.      What  dost  thou  understmul  by  the  words :    He   suf- 

FEKED  V 

A  MS.  That  he  all  the  time  that  he  lived  on  earth,  but  especially  at  the 
end  of  his  life,  sustained  in  body  and  soul  the  wrath  of  God  against 
the  sins  of  all  mankind;  that  so,  by  his  passion,  as  the  only  propitia- 
tory sacrifice,  he  might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from  everlasting 
damnation,  and  obtain  for  us  the  favor  of  God,  righteousness,  and 
eternal  life. 

Quest.  XXXVIII.     Whij  did  he  suffer  under  Pontius  Pilate  as  his  judge  f 

Ans.  That  he,  being  innocent  and  yet  condemned  by  a  temporal  judge, 
might  thereby  free  us  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God  to  which  we 
were  exposed. 

Quest.  XXXIX.  Is  there  anything  more  in  his  being  crucified  than  if  he 
had  died  some  other  death  f 

Ans.  Yes,  there  is ;  for  thereby  I  am  assured  that  he  took  on  him  the 
curse  which  lay  upon  me;  for  the  death  of  the  cross  was  accursed  of 
God. 

THE  doctrine  Iteld  by  the  reformed  churches,  accord- 
ing to  the  word  of  God,  respecting  the  propitiatory 
and  vicarious  nature  of  our  Lord's  sufferings,  has  nec- 
essarily been  handled  at  large  in  our  comments  on  sev- 
eral previous  lessons,  especially  on  those  for  the  Fourth, 
Fifth,  and  Sixth  Lord's  days ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  not 
requisite,  that,  in  studying  the  article  of  the  creed  be- 
fore us,  we  should  do  more  than  consider  such  particu- 
lars in  it  as  have  not  been  already  treated  of. 

"I  believe  .  .  .  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  .  .  who  .  . 
suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead  and 
buried." 

The  death  and  hurial  of  our  Lord  are   reserved  for 

^  OL.  I.  23 


354  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.       [I-ect.  XVII. 

the  )iL'xt  k'sson  ;  and  we  are  now  to  learn  :  What  is 
meant  by  his  suffering ;  Why  it  is  stated  that  he  suf- 
ered  under  Pontius  Pilate ;  and  the  reason  for  his 
suft'ering  on  the  cross. 

First  :  What  do  we  understand  by  tlie  words :  He 
suffered  ? 

The  Catechism  tells  us  in  the  Thirty-seventh  Answer, 
which  has  just  been  read  in  our  hearing. 

Here  are  several  things  to  be  noted :  the  purpose  of 
his  sufferings  ;  the  cause  of  his  sufferings  ;  and  the 
duration  of  his  sufferings. 

I.  The  purpose  of  our  Lord's  suffering. 

"  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death 
by  sin,  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all 
have  sinned."  That  is  the  history  of  our  ruin.  The 
sentence  which  fell  upon  our  first  parent  has  fallen 
u[)on  us  all,  for  like  him  we  all  have  sinned.  That 
sentence  is  death  :  "  In  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof, 
tliou  slialt  surely  die."  Death  is  the  mode  and  execu- 
tion of  divine  wrath  against  the  sinner  ;  but  it  means 
more  than  the  separation  of  soul  from  body,  which  we 
ordinarily  call  death.  It  is  such  an  infliction  of  divine 
punishment  as  turns  the  life  of  man,  which  God  origi- 
nally meant  for  liappiness  in  the  enjoyment  of  divine 
favor,  to  utter  misery  ;  and,  as  man  ^ins  in  bodily  acts 
consequent  upon  the  will  of  his  spiritual  nature,  and  as 
the  sentence  is  upon  the  whole  man,  both  his  soul  and 
liis  body  are  under  tlie  curse.  The  misery  of  man  is 
not  at  once  extreme,  because,  instantly  with  his  ruin, 
began  the  working  of  the  remedial  scheme  by  which 
the  full  execution  of  the  sentence  was  delayed,  that  the 
sinner  might  have  opportunity  of  repentance  through 
faith  in  the  redemption.     Our  first  parents  did  not  die, 


CHRIST'S   SUFFERING   AND  CROSS.  355 

that  is,  their  mortal  life  did  not  end,  the  moment  that 
the  sentence  was  incurred ;  but  they  at  once  began  to 
die  :  their  life  was  thenceforward  a  fatal  disease  until  it 
terminated  in  the  mortal  agony,  and  then,  had  not  the 
curse  been  averted  by  the  redemption,  they  would  have 
gone  into  everlasting,  utter  misery.  So  with  us.  We 
are  born  to  die.  Death  meets  us  at  the  beginning  of 
life,  and  we  are  dying  all  through  our  days  on  earth  till 
we  go  to  our  graves  ;  and  then,  if  not  saved  by  Christ, 
we  must  go  to  endure  the  never-ceasing  agonies  of 
eternal  death. 

But  the  purpose  of  God  in  Christ  is  to  redeem  us 
from  death  through  the  consecration  of  Christ  to  die  in 
our  stead,  that  so  the  penalty,  being  transferred  to  him, 
might  no  longer  rest  upon  us  who  accept  the  grace. 
As  the  apostle  says :  "  The  righteousness  of  God  [is 
manifested]  which  is  by  faith  unto  all  and  upon  all 
them  that  believe,  being  justified  freely  by  his  grace 
through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  :  whom 
God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation,  through  faith  in 
his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remis- 
sion of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of 
God ;  to  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time  his  righteousness  : 
that  he  might  be  just  and  the  justifier  of  him  which  be- 
lieveth  in  Jesus."  On  no  other  ground  but  the  substi- 
tution of  Christ  to  endure  the  penalty  for  us  could  the 
mercy  of  God  to  us  be  justified,  and  only  through  his 
suffering  can  we  escape  eternal  death.  So,  also,  on  no 
other  ground  can  be  justified  the  suffering  of  the  inno- 
cent Jesus  when  he  was  abandoned  by  God  the  Father, 
whose  word  is  pledged  for  the  reward  of  righteousness, 
to  the  malice  of  wicked  men,  the  ignominy  of  crucifix- 
ion, and  the  curse  of  the  violated  law. 


356  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.       II.  The  cause  of  our  Lord's  sufferings. 

The  substitution  of  Chi'ist  for  sinners  exposed  him 
to  the  Avrath  of  God  against  sinners,  and,  as  tliat  divine 
wrath  is  manifested  in  the  sufferings  whicli  are  the  pun- 
ishment of  sin,  so,  as  the  Catechism  teaches  us,  the 
cause  of  Christ's  sufferings  could  be  nothing  else  than 
the  wrath  of  God  laying  upon  him  the  pi;nishment 
which  we  deserve.  There  can  be  no  suffering  but  that 
Avhich  proceeds  from  the  wrath  of  God  against  sin. 
Yet  the  wrath  of  God  was  not  against  our  Lord  pei'- 
sonally,  because  he  was  without  sin  ;  but  against  the 
sinners  whom  he  represented.  It  was  as  if,  when  the 
bolts  of  divine  vengeance  were  launched  against  sin- 
ners,  our  Lord  put  himself  before  them,  sheltering 
them  with  his  own  person  and  receiving  them  on  his 
own  body  and  soul.  He  himself  was,  and  continued  to 
be,  throughout  the  whole  of  his  sufferings,  the  beloved 
of  the  Father  ;  and  it  was  because  he  was  the  beloved 
of  the  Father  that  his  sufferings  had  their  great  merit 
of  propitiation.  Thus  the  prophet :  "  We  did  esteem 
him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted  ;  but  he  was 
wounded  for  our  transgressions  ;  he  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities  ;  ...  he  had  done  no  violence,  neither  was 
any  deceit  to  be  found  in  his  mouth  ;  yet  it  pleased  the 
Lord  to  bruise  him  ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief"  .  .  . 
"  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied  ; 
by  his  knowledge  (t.  e.  knowledge  of  him  or  faith  in 
him)  shall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many,  for  he 
shall  bear  their  iniquities.  Therefore  will  I  divide  him 
a  ])ortion  with  the  great,  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil 
with  the  strong ;  because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul 
unto  death,  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgress- 
ors, and  he  bare  the  sin  of  manv,  and  made  interces- 


CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  357 

sion  for  the  transgressors."  Or  as  the  apostle  expresses 
it :  "  For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who 
knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  him."  And  again  :  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us  ; 
for  it  is  written,  '  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on 
a  tree  : '  "  which  is  equivalent  to  saying  that,  by  his  cru- 
cifixion, he  bore  the  curse  which  we  deserved,  in  our 
stead. 

It  follows,  also,  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  of 
his  whole  human  nature,  or  "  both  of  his  body  and 
soul,"  as  the  Catechism  has  it.  The  sentence  upon 
man  because  of  his  sin,  is  upon  both  his  body  and  soul. 
Nay,  as  the  body,  not  being  itself  of  a  moral  nature, 
cannot  sin  except  as  it  is  the  instrument  of  the  soul, 
the  suffering  of  the  body  has  no  other  end  or  reason 
but  the  affliction  of  the  soul  ;  and,  as  we  see  in  human 
suffering  on  earth,  but  as  will  be  fearfully  more  appar- 
ent in  the  place  of  torment,  the  soul  is  and  must  be  the 
great  sufferer,  not  only  from  its  sympathy  with  the 
body,  but  in  the  anguish  of  its  own  spiritual  remorse 
and  bitter  grief.  It  is  possible,  as  many  a  martyrdom 
or  natural  death-bed  has  shown,  for  a  Christian  to  for- 
get the  keenest  anguish  of  body  in  the  joyful  elevation 
of  his  spirit ;  but  there  is  no  escape  from  the  internal 
anguish  of  the  soul  itself.  So,  during  the  interval  be- 
tween death  and  the  resurrection,  while  the  bodies  of 
the  wicked  are  senseless  dust,  their  spirits  are  in  tor- 
ment ;  —  though  their  torments  will  be  fearfully  aggra- 
vated when,  their  bodies  being  raised,  their  spirits  are 
tormented  through  corporeal  sufferings.  Hence,  as  is 
manifest  from  many  passages,  our  Lord  suffered  not 
only  in  the  pains  of  his  ilesh,  but  far  more  in  the  ago- 


358  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.      [Lkct.  XVII. 

nies  of  his  spirit.  "  He  Avas  a  man  of  sorrows  and  ac- 
quainted with  grief.''  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  is  my  soul 
troubled  ;  "  and  again  :  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sor- 
rowful, even  unto  death."  The  Saviour  was  sinless ; 
but  all  the  distress  that  sin  could  bring  upon  the  soul 
of  one,  who,  not  conscious  of  personal  guilt,  stood  in 
the  room  of  the  guilty,  he  felt ;  the  sense  of  horror 
from  the  contact  of  sins  laid  upon  him,  the  anguish 
consequent  upon  the  withdrawal  of  his  Father's  coun- 
tenance, tlie  humiliating  weight  of  the  curse,  the  shrink- 
ins:  which  the  livino;  feel  from  an  io;nominious,  cruel 
death,  —  all  were  his.  These  were  the  causes  of  that 
fearful,  indescribable  agony  in  the  garden  ;  these  filled 
to  the  brim  that  cup  which  he  shuddered  over  before  he 
could  drink  it,  when,  as  yet,  not  a  hand  had  been  laid 
upon  him,  and  the  physical  torture  of  the  cross  was  in 
anticipation  ;  and  these  wrung  out  of  his  meek  heart 
that  exceedingly  bitter  cry,  "  My  God  !  My  God  ! 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  " 

But  our  Lord  stood  not  in  the  room  of  a  single  sin- 
ner ;  he  bare  the  sins  of  many  ;  and  heaven,  opened  to 
us  by  the  vision  of  John,  shows  a  mighty  host  redeemed 
unto  God  by  his  blood.  Hence  his  sufferings  were  in- 
calculably more  than  the  sufferings  of  any  one  mere 
man  could  have  been.  For,  though  we,  unhesitatingly, 
and  not  without  horror,  reject  the  idea  that  his  suffer- 
ings were  weighed  out  to  him  in  exact  projiortion  to 
the  sufferings  which  every  individual  of  all  lie  re- 
deemed would  otherwise  have  actually  suffered,  we 
must  see  that  they  needed  to  be  so  great  as  to  justify 
God  in  taking  away  his  wrath  from  all  the  Saviour's 
people.  It  was,  among  other  reasons,  for  the  purpose 
of  streno-thening  o"i'  Lord's  humanity  to  endure  this 


CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND   CROSS.  359 

accumulated  aggrecration  of  sufFering,  that  it  was  con- 
stituted  in  union  with  the  divine  nature,  which  also 
gave  to  his  suiFerings  their  infinite  value.  So  the 
Catechism  says,  that  "  he  sustained  the  wrath  of  God 
against  the  sins  of  all  mankind." 

This  last  sentence  requires  some  little  explanation 
lest  its  meaning  should  be  misunderstood ;  and  we  shall 
give  it  conformably  to  the  comments  of  the  learned  and 
pious  Ursinus,  the  author  of  the  Catechism,  and,  there- 
fore, the  best  expositor  of  its  sense.  The  idea  of  the 
sentence  is  that  of  several  scriptures :  as  where  our 
Lord  declares  that  "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  as  to 
give  his  only  begotten  Son  ;  and  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews,  that  Christ  "  tasted  death  for  every  man  ;  " 
and  Paul,  that  "  he  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all ; "  and 
John,  "  that  he  is  a  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for 
ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 
Yet  Scripture  must  be  read  in  harmony  with  itself; 
and,  as  we  know  that  all  men  are  not  actually  saved, 
but  only  those  who,  through  grace,  being  ordained  to 
eternal  life,  do  believe  and  repent ;  it  cannot  be  that 
our  Lord  bore  the  wrath  of  God  against  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world  in  the  same  sense  or  degree  that  he  bore 
it  in  the  room  of  his  people.  They  were  actually  re- 
deemed by  his  blood,  he  having  taken  the  penalty  they 
deserved  on  himself,  so  that  their  salvation  was  cer- 
tainly secured  by  his  vicarious  satisfactioy  ;  but  the  rest 
of  mankind,  though  they  have,  so  far  as  the  gospel  is 
preached  to  them,  opportunities  of  salvation,  are  con- 
demned to  death  eternal,  without  violence  being  done 
to  the  covenant  of  the  Son  with  the  Father,  in  the 
plan  of  salvation. 

Thus  Christ  died  for  all  mankind,  because  in  him 


360  CHRIST'S  SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.      [Lkct.  XVII. 

the  blessings  of  salvation  are  not  confined  as  were  those 
of  the  Abrahamic  dispensation,  to  one  particular  peo- 
ple. The  Go9})el  is  sent  throughout  all  the  world  to 
be  preached  to  every  creature ;  and  whosoever  will,  be 
he  a  Jew  or  Gentile,  may  take  of  the  water  of  life 
freely.  And  again  :  The  merit  of  our  Lord's  suffer- 
ings, through  the  union  of  his  human  to  his  divine 
nature,  is  infinite  ;  displaying  the  wrath  of  God  against 
the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  and  so  justifying  the  offer 
of  divine  mercy  to  every  sinner  that  believes  on  his 
name.  As  several  of  the  later  fathers,  following  Ter- 
tullian,  phrase  it :  "  His  merits  are  sufficient  for  all ;  but 
efficient  for  the  elect ;  "  and  Aquinas,  whom  the  Papists 
call  "  the  Angelical  Doctor,"  teaches  :  "  The  merit  of 
Christ  as  concerns  its  sufficiency  equally  belongeth  to 
all  men  ;  but  as  to  its  efficacy,  .  .  .  the  effects  and 
fruits  of  it  are  mercifully  bestowed  on  some,  and,  by  the 
just  judgment  of  God,  withheld  from  others."  Nor 
can  this  be  otherwise,  since  it  were  preposterous  to 
make  Christ  the  substitute  of  those  that  refuse  his  rep- 
resentation. But  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  positively  true 
that  the  benefits  of  Christ's  merit  do  actually,  though 
not  in  a  saving  degree,  extend  to  all  men :  because,  for 
the  sake  of  Christ,  all  temporal  mercies  come  to  all, 
and  the  world  is  kept  by  his  intercession  from  becoming 
a  hell  of  extreme  torture  and  despair ;  and  very  pre- 
cious blessings,  though  not  the  most  precious,  are  be- 
stowed on  mankind  through  the  restrainino-  influence 
of  Christianity  and  the  light  which  it  sheds  on  every 
mind  wherever  the  healing  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness  shine.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that,  if  we 
believe  in  Christ  with  our  whole  heart,  his  merit  will 
certainly  save  us  ;  but,  if  we  refuse  the  grace  he  offers, 


Lect.XVII.]        CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  36 1 

not  ail  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  warrants  the  slight- 
est  hope  of  escape  from  everlasting  death. 

III.  The  duration  of  our  Lord's  sufferings. 

On  this  particular  we  need  not  greatly  enlarge ;  for, 
as  we  have  already  shown  that  the  penalty  of  death 
which  was  inflicted  on  men  was  not  merely  the  mortal 
agony  of  the  dissolution  of  soul  and  body,  but  all  the 
evil  consequent  upon  our  mortality,  which  is,  in  the  hin- 
guage  of  our  Church,  "  a  continual  death,"  or,  as  we 
expressed  it,  a  long  mortal  disease  of  which  what  we 
ordinarily  call  death  is  the  critical  symptom,  it  was 
necessary  that  the  imputed  death  should  come  upon  our 
Lord  at  the  very  moment  of  his  life's  beginning.  All 
his  life  on  earth,  he  was  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and 
afflicted.  His  spirit  was  under  the  shadows  which  pre- 
ceded the  utter  darkness  of  the  cross,  and,  learning 
obedience  through  the  things  which  he  siiffered,  he 
became  our  sympathizing  Saviour,  and  knows  how  to 
succor  us  who  are  tempted,  that  we  may  overcome  the 
world,  and,  notwithstanding  our  manifold  tribulation, 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  All  his  precursive 
suffering  would  not  have  been  enough  (as  we  shall 
hereafter  learn)  without  the  consummation  of  his  death 
on  the  cross  ;  but,  had  he  not  suffered  from  his  manger 
to  his  giving  up  his  spirit  on  the  cross,  he  would  not 
have  suffered  the  death  we  deserve  to  die,  nor  have 
secured  for  us  the  grace  by  which  alone  we  may  "  live 
unto  God  "  while  "  we  die  daily."  , 

Secondly  :  Wh^  is  it  stated  that  he  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate  ? 

The  main  reason,  doubtless,  for  the  insertion  of  this 
man's  name  here,  was  that  the  date  of  our  Lord's  suf- 
fering on  the  cross  might  be  precisely  fixed.     The  sev- 


362  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.      [Lixx.  XVII. 

eral  gospels  repeatedly  speak  of  Pontius  Pilate  as  the 
Roman  officer,  or  procurator,  charged  by  the  emperor 
with  the  government  of  Judoa  at  the  time  of  which 
they  write.  Luke,  the  evangelist,  had  before  said 
that  Pontius  Pilate  was  governor  of  Judea  when 
the  Baptist  began  to  preach.  Now  we  know  from 
other  histories  that  Pilate  was  removed  from  his  procu- 
I'atorship  just  before  the  death  of  Tiberius,  and  after  he 
had  exercised  his  government  ten  years.  This  fixes 
the  period  of  his  administration  between  A.  D.  25  and 
35,  which  corresponds  with  all  reasonable  accuracy  to 
the  sacred  chronology,*  and  proves  that  our  Lord  was 
crucified  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius. 
Justin  Martyr,  in  his  Apology  (or  defence)  for  Chris- 
tianity, about  the  beginning  of  the  second  century, 
boldly  appeals  to  the  record  of  the  acts  of  Pontius  Pi- 
late, then,  like  the  reports  of  all  governors,  on  file  at 
Rome,  for  the  truth  of  the  facts  respecting  the  passion 
of  our  Lord.  There  is  also  a  remarkable  passage 
found  in  some  editions  of  the  Jewish  History  by  Jose- 
phus,  which  speaks  of  an  extraordinary  person,  well 
known  by  the  name  of  Christ,  who  taught  new  and 
extraordinary  doctrines,  and  wrought  miracles,  and 
persuaded  many  people  to  follow  his  opinions,  who  were 
called  after  him  Christians  ;  but,  being  brought  before 
Pilate  by  impeachment  of  the  principal  Jews,  he  was 
crucified.  Yet  his  followers  did  not  desist,  but  claimed 
through  their  preachers  to  have  seen  him  alive  three 
days  after  his  death.  The  passage  has,  however,  been 
thought  by  many,  though  not  all,  learned  men  to  have 
been  a  forged  interpolation  of  the  text  of  Josephus, 
and,  therefore,  we  need  not  insist  upon  citing  it  as  cor- 

*  See  Lardner,  Cred.  Gos.  His.,  vol.  i.  b.  ii.  c.  2.     - 


Lkct.  XVII.]      CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  363 

roboratoiy  proof.  My  own  opinion  is  that  the  passage 
is  genuine  ;  but  modesty  may  well  prevent  me  from 
uro-ino;  it  when  Larclner  is  aoainst  it.  But  there  is  a 
passage  in  the  Annals  of  Tacitus  which  cannot  be  im- 
peached, and  states  that  "  Nero  persecuted  with  ex- 
quisite torments  a  sect  of  men  commonly  called  Chris- 
tians,—  called  so  from  Christus,  who  in  the  reign  of 
Tiberius  was  executed  under  Pontius  Pilate,  the  pro- 
curator of  Judea."  There  are  other  highly  convincing 
testimonies,  of  writers  not  Christian  ;  but  these  may 
suffice  to  show  the  reason  for  this  sentence  in  the 
Creed. 

It  is  proper,  however,  from  deference  to  the  teaching 
of  the  Catechism,  and  for  our  greater  edification,  that 
we  note  here  several  important  truths  connected  with 
our  Lord's  suffering  under  Pontius  Pilate. 

1.  It  coincides  with  prophecy.     For,  — 

a.  Shiloh  could  not  come  until  the  sceptre  had  de- 
parted from  Judah ;  which  was  not  the  case  until  after 
the  death  of  Herod  the  Great,  and  the  appointment  of 
a  Roman  governor  over  Judea  as  a  conquered  province. 
Hence  the  Jews,  by  appealing  to  Pilate,  acknowledged 
their  lack  of  authority. 

h.  The  Jews,  and  the  Romans,  now  the  masters  of 
the  world,  may  be  said  to  have  comprehended  all  man- 
kind ;  and  our  Lord  was  "  to  be  despised  and  rejected 
of  men  :  "  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  of  men  gencrallv. 
So  the  Psalmist :  "  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the 
people  imagine  a  vain  tiling  ?  The  kings  of  the  earth 
set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together 
against  the  Lord  and  his  anointed  ;  "  and  the  company 
of  believers  after  the  Pentecost  interpret  "  the  people  " 
as  the  people  of  Israel  (Acts  iv.  27),  and,  following  the 


364  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.     [Lkct.  XVII. 

same  view,  \vc  may  suppose  that  by  "  the  rulers"  are 
meant  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  who  united  with  the 
Roman  authorities  in  the  execution  of  Christ,  or  the 
Lord's  anointed  ;  as  Jesus  himself  had  told  his  disciples : 
"  The  Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  unto  the  chief 
priests  and  unto  the  scribes,  and  they  shall  condemn 
him  to  death  ;  and  shall  deliver  him  to  the  Gentiles  to 
mock,  and  to  scourge,  and  to  crucify  him." 

c.  It  was  necessary  also  that  he  should  "  be  taken 
from  prison  and  from  judgment."  So  was  he  impris- 
oned and  put  to  death  under  the  double  sentence  of  the 
Jewish  Sanhedrim  and  the  Roman  governor. 

d.  It  was  distinctly  foretold'  that  the  Messiah  should 
bear  the  curse  by  hanging  on  a  tree ;  but,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  crucifixion  was  a  mode  of  punishment 
never  used  by  the  Jews,  who,  if  they  had  executed  the 
Saviour,  would  have  stoned  him  to  death,  —  the  punish- 
ment of  blasphemy  by  their  law. 

2.  There  was  a  most  fitting  significance,  as  the  Cat- 
echism says,  in  his  being,  "  though  innocent,  condemned 
by  a  temporal  judge  that  he  might  free  us  from  the 
severe  judgment  of  God  to  which  we  were  exposed." 
We  see  him,  the  just,  crucified  as  the  unjust.  His 
innocence  is  acknowledged.  Pilate's  wife  from  her 
miraculous  dream,  the  penitent  thief  by  his  side,  the 
centurion  who  glorified  God  after  his  death,  and  all  the 
people  that  stood  beholding  and  smote  their  breasts, 
but  especially  Pilate  himself,  in  explicit  and  repeated 
declarations,  testified  his  innocence  ;  yet  was  he  never- 
theless condemned  and  crucified  under  the  will  of  God, 
actine:  through  the  hands  of  ostensible  authoritv.  So 
may  we,  as  we  look  upon  the  sufferer,  see  him  taking 
our  place,  bearing  our  condemnation,  and  dying,  not 


Lect.  XVIl.j       CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  365 

himself  guilty,  the  death  which  we  deserved.  Nor 
should  we  overlook  the  strong  consolation  that,  though 
the  world  may  unjustly  I'eproach,  condemn,  and  perse- 
cute his  people  for  his  sake,  all  its  malice  is  of  lit- 
tle account,  so  that  we  are  able,  through  faith  in  his 
guiltless  sufferings,  to  have  the  pardon  and  favor  of 
God  his  Father.  God  may  chasten  the  Christian  even 
by  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  but  will  not  forsake  him 
or  suffer  him  to  be  overwhelmed.  Nay,  though  he 
slay  us  we  may  yet  trust  in  him. 

Thirdly  :  The  reason  for  our  Lord's  suffering  on  the 
cross. 

"  Thereby,"  says  the  Catechism,  "  I  am  assured  that 
he  took  on  him  the  curse  which  lay  upon  me,  for  the 
death  of  the  cross  was  accursed  of  God." 

This  is  in  agreement  with  the  apostle  (Galatians  iii. 
13)  :  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us  ;  for  it  is  written, 
Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree."  Let  us, 
however,  for  greater  explicitness,  consider  first  the 
nature  of  crucifixion,  and  then  the  reasons  why  our 
Lord  was  put  to  death  in  that  manner. 
1.  The  nature  of  crucifixion. 

It  was  probably  a  most  ancient  mode  of  punishment : 
for  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  men,  deter- 
mined to  execute  a  criminal  or  an  enemy,  should,  if 
they  refused  him  the  mercy  of  the  sword,  hang  him  on 
the  nearest  tree ;  and  this  especially  when  they  meant 
to  make  him  a  spectacle  of  ignominy,  vengeance,  or 
warning.  Examples  of  this  are  frequent  among  all 
people.  When,  h'owever,  they  desired  to  protract  the 
agonies  of  the  victim,  they  would  fasten  him  upon  the 
tree  to  perish  with  pain  and  hunger.      The  tree  would 


366  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND   CROSS.        afford  an  opportunity  for  this  by  its  forked  or  trans- 
verse branches  :  hence,  one  of  tlie  Latin  terms  for  such 
an  instrument  of  tortui*e  was  furca,  or  fork,  Hke  the 
letter  Y  ;  and  another,  patibidum,  (from  patere,  quasi  to 
stretch  apart,)  whicli  would  seem  to  intend  the  cross- 
piece  to  the  perpendicular,  forming  the  letter  T.  In 
process  of  time  the  cross  came  to  be  artificially  con- 
structed of  two  beams  in  this  last  form,  or,  sometimes, 
though  at  a  much  later  period,  like  the  letter  X.  The 
Jews,  as  we  learn  from  several  passages,  used  to  hang 
persons  convicted  of  certain  crimes  on  a  tree,  as  crim- 
inals among  us  are  hung  by  the  neck  on  a  gallows  ;  but 
their  law  did  not  allow  them  to  protract  their  suffer- 
ings, nor  to  leave  the  bodies  hanging  after  sunset. 
Among  the  Greeks,  and,  especially,  tiie  Romans,  cruci- 
fixion was  common,  but  was  ever  considered  'the  most 
disgraceful  and  extreme  mode  of  punishment,  —  being 
awarded  only  to  slaves  and  the  worst  malefactors, 
though  sometimes  to  their  barbarian  captives,  whom 
they  considered  as  slaves. 

When  a  person  was  condemned  to  the  cross,  the 
command  of  the  magistrate  to  the  executioner  was : 
"  Go  ;  bind  his  hands,  scourge  him,  cover  his  head, 
hang  him  on  the  unhappy  tree."  Scourging  in  every 
case  preceded  the  crucifixion.  It  would  seem,  also,  that 
the  convict  was  made  to  bear  his  cross  to  the  place  of 
punishment.  When  there,  in  some  cases  the  cross  was 
first  laid  along  on  the  ground,  and  the  man  so  bound 
to  it  that  it  might  be  lifted  with  him  and  fixed  uprightly  ; 
or  the  cross  was  first  erected,  and  he,  being  seated  on  a 
bar  projecting  at  a  proper  height,*  was  then  fastened 
upon    it :    which   was   done   by  driving  strong   spikes 

*  Sedilis  excessu.  Tertull.  adv.  natioiies,  LII. 


Lect.XVII.]        CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  367 

through  the  pahns  of  the  hands,  the  arms  being 
stretched  out  on  the  transverse  beam,  and  by  a  spike 
driven  through  both  feet,  or  one  through  eacli  foot. 
Some  have  doubted  whether  or  not  our  Lord's  feet 
were  nailed  to  the  cross ;  but  the  prophecy  is  explicit  : 
"  They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet."  (Ps.  xxii.  16.) 
The  limbs  were,  however,  most  probably,  bound  with 
cords,  as  else  the  weight  of  the  body  Avould  have  torn 
it  off  at  the  nails.  No  vital  part  being  touched,  the 
wretched  sufferer  would  hang  often  for  days,*  until  he 
expired  from  the  mingled  agonies  of  shame,  hunger, 
thirst,  and  pain.  The  anguish  of  crucifixion  (from 
which  we  derive  our  term,  excruciating')  must  have 
been,  physiologists  tell  us,  very  great.  Cicero,  in  his 
impeachment  of  Vei-i-es,  who  had  crucified  a  Roman 
citizen,  calls  it  "  the  most  cruel  and  terrible  "  of  all 
punishments,  which  "  no  man  should  see,  or  hear,  or 
even  think  of."  The  great  nails  were  driven  through 
the  parts  of  the  hands  and  feet  abounding  in  nerves 
and  tendons  ;  the  arms  being  stretched  back  and  apart 
made  the  slightest  motion  aggravate  the  pain  ;  the  ac- 
tion of  the  air  on  the  open  wounds,  increased  it,  by 
inflammation,  yet  more  ;  and,  besides,  the  blood  was 
necessarily  forced  in  unnatural  quantity  on  the  brain 
and  the  stomach,  which  itself  would  cause  intolerable 
torment.  To  this  physical  torture  must  be  added, 
what  to  a  pure,  noble  spirit  would  be  far  more  poignant, 
a  consciousness  of  disgrace,  and  an  exposure  to  the 
jeers  and  taunts  of  an  idle,  brutal  mob,  always  gathered 
around  an  execution.  Plato,  in  a  passage  which  has 
ever  excited  great  astonishment  fi-om  its  striking  re- 
semblance to   prophecy,  makes  crucifixion   to   be   the 

*  Often  till  the  third,  sometimes  even  the  seventh  day. 


368  CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND   CROSS.      utmost  possible  extreme  of  dishonor  and  sufFex'ing  to 
which  a  man  can  be  brouglit  by  the  malignant  persecu- 
tion of  men.  He  is  describing  a  just  person,  such  as 
philosopliical  imagination  portrayed,  maintaining  his 
integrity  against  ever}^  jiossible  disadvantage,  and  says  : 
"  This  man,  though  he  has  done  notliino-  but  irood, 
sliall  be  accused  of  all  manner  of  wrong,  and,  thougli 
innocent,  pass  through  life  under  censiu'e  as  the 
most  wicked  of  men,  yet  maintain  tln-qugh  all  a  most 
unshaken  virtue,  until  he  shall  be  seized,  scourged,  tor- 
tured, bound,  have  his  eyes  put  out,  and  finally,  after 
having  endnred  the  extreme  of  all  other  cruelties,  shall 
be  crucified."* 

Our  Lord's  head  was  not  covered,  neither  were  his 
eyes  put  out,  and  the  mercy  of  the  Jewish  law, 
(strangely  remembered  by  that  bigot  people  in  their 
savage  fury,)  which  commanded  that  "  strong  drink 
should  be  given  to  him  that  is  ready  to  perish,"  doubt- 
less, prompted  (perhaps  at  the  suggestion  of  some 
pitying  bystander,  though  the  soldiers  may  have  done 
it  insultingly,)  the  offering  of  a  sponge,  but  with  sour 
wine  and  bitter  infusions,  to  his  painful  lips  ;  for  there 
was  no  such  custom  among  either  Greeks  or  Romans. 
But,  in  all  other  respects,  he  suffered  crucifixion  as  it 
has  now  been  described  :  he  was  bound,  was  scourged, 
was  tormented  by  the  soldiers  ;  they  laid  the  heavy 
wood  on  his  blessed  shoulders,  and  then  nailed  him  on 
the  cross. 

In  the  addition  of  the  crown  of  thorns,  as  of  the 
purple  robe,  the  reed  placed  between  his  bound  hands', 
and  the  superscription  on  the  cross-piece  (^jyatihulurti) ^ 
where  the  Romans  usually  put  the  crime  of  the  sufferer, 

*  Plato,  Report,  II.  §  5. 


Lect.XVII.]      CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  369 

we  see  the  mockery  of  his  claim  to  be  King  of  the 
Jews,  —  the  only  thing  in  our  Lord's  conduct  which  the 
callous-hearted  Pilate  appears  to  have  cared  about,  it 
being  rebellion  against  the  Roman  authority.  We  are 
now  prepared  to  learn 

II.  The  reason  why  our  Lord  was  put  to  death  on 
the  cross. 

1.  It  was  death  on  a  tree.  The  sin  fatal  to  our  race 
was  committed  by  an  offence  against  a  tree  which  God 
had  commanded  should  not  be  touched.  It  was  also  a 
tree,  which,  in  the  arrangements  of  Paradise  resem- 
bling the  apocalyptical  description  of  heaven,  bore  the 
fruit  of  which  if  a  man  ate  he  should  live  forever. 
There  is  an  exquisite  fitness  in  our  Lord's  atoning 
for  sin  on  a  tree,  thus  turning  the  occasion  of  a  de- 
served death  into  the  ever-verdant,  fruit-laden  source 
of  life  eternal.  As  we  look  back  to  that  disastrous 
scene  where  the  tempter  triumphed  in  the  sin  of  the 
first  Adam  that  brought  the  curse  on  us  all,  we  see  the 
second  Adam,  by  his  infinite  righteousness,  triumphing 
for  us  over  all  the  force  of  our  enemy,  achieving  our 
immortal  blessing. 

2.  It  being  requisite  that  our  Lord  should  die  under 
Jewish  as  well  as  Gentile  law,  there  was  yet  no  mode 
of  mortal  punishment  in  the  Mosaic  law  by  which  his 
suffering  would  have  been  consistent  with  prophecy  ; 
for,  of  the  four  methods  known  to  them,  slaying  by  the 
sword  would  not  have  answered,  because  it  involved 
no  disgrace  ;  nor  stoning,  because  then  his  bones  would 
have  been  broken,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  had  foretold 
should  not  be  ;  nor  burning,  because  then  the  flesh  of 
the  great  Paschal  Lamb  would  not  have  remained  to 
be  the  food  of  his  people,  for  strangulation  would  have 

VOL.  I.  24 


370  CHRIST'S  SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.     [Lkct.  XVII. 

rendered  his  flesh  unclean.  It  was,  however,  necessary 
that  his  bh)od  sliould  be  shed,  because,  without  the  shed- 
ding of  blood,  there  is  no  remission  ;  that  he  should  be 
lifted  up  to  the  eyes  of  faith  as  the  serpent  was  lifted 
up  in  the  wilderness  ;  that  he  should  suffer  extreme 
agony,  because  his  pains  were  to  be  expressive  of  divine 
wrath  against  sin  ;  and,  above  all,  that  he  should  die  on 
a  tree,  because  that  was  the  only  mode  of  death  which 
God  had  specially  pronounced  accursed.  These  requi- 
sites could  be  found  only  in  crucifixion. 

3.  It,  more  than  any  other  imaginable  method,  is 
calculated  to  impress  us  with  the  religious  lessons  which 
the  death  of  the  Lamb  of  God  for  us  should  teach 
every  believer  on  his  name. 

a.  With  what  horror  should  we  regard  those  sins 
which  brought  such  shame,  and  anguish,  and  curse  on 
him,  our  devoted  Friend  and  patient  Surety ! 

h.  With  what  confidence  may  we  rely  upon  the 
acceptance  of  his  atonement  for  his  people  when  it 
pleased  the  Father  so  to  bruise  him,  and  put  him  to 
grief ! 

c.  With  what  readiness  should  we  give  up  the  world 
when  duty  requires  it,  as  we  see  it  rejecting,  persecut- 
ing, and  maligning  our  divine  Master,  Example,  and 
Saviour !  There,  as  we  behold  him  crucified,  should 
we  see  "  the  world  crucified  unto  us,"  and  so  "  crucify 
ourselves  unto  the  world." 

d.  With  what  patience  and  long-suffering  should  we 
bear  the  certain,  inevitable  trials  of  a  Christian  life,  so 
fully  and  painfully  set  forth  in  the  crucifixion  of  our 
elder  brother,  while  we  arm  ourselves  with  his  pa- 
tience, and  assure  ourselves  of  his  sympathizing  grace ! 
The  cross  is  the  badge  of  our  profession  ;  we  all  must 


CHRIST'S   SUFFERING  AND  CROSS.  37] 

bear  it ;  but  it  is  the  sign  of  our  victory,  because  Christ 
in  the  midst  of  its  agonies,  overcame  for  us. 

e.  With  what  instant  earnestness  should  we  flee  to 
take  shelter  iji  the  Saviour's  atonement,  while,  on  the 
one  hand,  we  see  that  God  will  by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty,  and  the  fearfulness  of  the  punishment  which  is 
sure  to  follow  unrepented  sin ;  on  the  other,  see  how 
greatly  Christ  desired  the  salvation  of  our  souls  when 
he  opened  for  us  the  entrance  to  life  by  devoting  him- 
self to  the  cross,  with  all  its  shame,  and  curse,  and 
anguish ! 

O  Lord  Jesus,  fain  would  we  bear  the  cross  for  thee, 
as  thou  didst  bear  it  for  us  !  But  we  are  weak  and  sin- 
ful ;  how  shall  we  bear  what  thou  didst  faint  under  ? 
O  Saviour,  stamp  its  image  on  our  hearts  !  Crucify 
us  to  thyself!  Then  shall  the  sorrow  be  easy,  and  the 
burden  be  li^ht ! 


LECTURE  XVI IL 
CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BUEIAL. 


SIXTEENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
CHRIST'S   DEATH   AND   BURIAL. 

Quest.  XL.     Wlnj  was  it  necessary  foi'  Christ  to  humble  himself,  even  unto 

death  ? 
Ans.    Because,  with  respect  to  the  justice  and  truth  of  God,  satisfaction  for 

our  sins  could  not  be  made  otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of 

God. 
Quest.  XLI.     Why  was  he  also  buried'? 
Ans.     Therebj^  to  prove  that  he  was  reall}'  dead. 
Quest.  XLII.     Since,  then,  Clirist  died  Jar  us,  why  must  we  also  die  ? 
Ans.     Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins;  but  only  an  abolishing 

of  sin  and  a  passage  to  eternal  life. 
Quest.  XLIII.      What  further  benejii  do  loe  receive  from  the  sacrifice  of 

Clirisl  on  the  cross  f 
Ans.     That,  by  virtue  thereof,  our  old  man  is  crucified,  dead,  and  buried 

with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  may  no  more 

reign  in  us;  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves  unto  him  a  sacrifice  of 

thanksgiving. 
Quest.  XLIV.      Why  is  there  added:  Be  descended  into  hell? 
Ans.     That,  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I    may  be    as.sured   and  wholly 

comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  bj'  his  inexpressible 

anguish,  pains,  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged  during 

all  his  sufl'erings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath  delivered  me  from 

the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

/^UR  lesson  for  the  last  Lord's  Day  led  us  to  consider 
^^  carefully,  and,  as  we  trust,  not  without  profit,  the 
sufferings  of  our  Lord,  especially  his  condemnation 
under  Pontius  Pilate,  and  his  bitter  anguish  on  the 
cross.  To-day  we  are  called  to  behold  the  great  Suf- 
ferer dead,  and  not  only  dead,  but  buried. 

The  doctrine  of  his  death  could  not  be  separated 
from  an  understanding  of  his  crucifixion,  which  was  the 


376  CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAL.      [Lkct.  XVIH. 

mode  of  it,  and,  indeed,  has  been  fundamental  to  all 
that  we  have  hitherto*  been  taught  respecting  the  way 
of  salvation  ;  therefore,  the  Catechism  simply  reiterates 
the  main  truth  under  the  40th  Question.  With  like 
brevity,  the  purpose  of  his  burial  is  stated  to  be  proof 
that  his  death  was  really  accomplished  (41st)  ;  and  an 
inquiry  as  to  the  reason  why  we  must  die,  notwith- 
standing his  dying  for  us,  is  met  by  showing  what  the 
death  of  the  Christian  has  become,  through  the  pro- 
pitiation of  Christ  (42d).  Then  follows  a  recital  of 
some  further  benefits,  or,  rather,  of  some  not  as  particu- 
larly dwelt  upon  before,  derived  from  the  cross  (3d)  ; 
after  which  is  set  forth  the  fulness  of  comfort  to  be 
found  in  the  fact  asserted  of  our  Lord  by  the  Creed, 
that  he  descended  into  hell. 

There  are  so  many  interesting  questions  connected 
with  the  last  point,  that  it  requires  a  separate  discourse  ; 
and  we  shall  postpone  its  formal  treatment,  using  it, 
however,  as  far  as  needed  in  our  present  study.  The 
other  matter  of  the  lesson  may  be  conveniently  arranged 
under  three  heads  :  — 

First  :  The  7iecessity  for  our  Lord^s  humiliation  even 
unto  death. 

Secondly  :  Sis  burial.,  and  the  reasons  for  it. 

Thirdly  :  The  benefits  which  we  receive  from  his 
death  and  burial. 

First  :  The  necessity  for  our  Lord^s  humiliation  even 
unto  death. 

The  infinite  merit  of  our  Lord's  vicarious  sufferings 
having  been  already  shown,  the  question  now  is  :  Why 
was  it  requisite  that  he  should  actually  die  ?  Were  not 
those  sorrows  of  his  that  wrung  his  heart  all  his  life 
long,  his  terrible  agony  in  the  garden,  his  anguish  of 


Lect.  XVIir.]      CHRIST'S   DEATH  AND  BURIAL.  377 

both  body  and  soul  on  the  cross,  enough  to  testify  the 
divine  wrath  against  us  without  this  extreme  huniiha- 
tion  ?  If  Enoch  and  Ehjah  were  taken  into  heaven 
without  having  passed  through  the  mortal  agony,  why 
might  not  the  Father  have  assumed  his  well-beloved 
Son  to  his  glory  from  the  cross,  in  the  sight  of  his  ene- 
mies, as  he  did  afterward  from  Bethany,  from  the  midst 
of  his  adoring  disciples  ?  Would  not  the  arrest  of  his 
passion  by  such  majesty  have  vindicated  the  excellence 
of  his  atonement  more  than  even  his  resurrection  after 
the  disgraces  of  the  tomb  ?  My  brethren,  if  such 
thoughts  arise  in  our  minds,  it  is  because  we  forget 
the  penalty  which  the  Mediator  undertook  to  pay 
on  behalf  of  his  people.  The  sentence  was  explicit : 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die ; "  "  Without  the 
shedding  of  blood,  there  is  no  remission."  The  life  of 
the  sinner  was  forfeited  ;  and,  therefore,  the  life  of  the 
substitute  was  required.  He  had  covenanted  to  die 
that  they  might  live.  We  must  believe  that  nothing 
less,  nothing  short  of  this,  could  have  answered  the 
broken,  dishonored  law.  All  the  sacrifices  in  which 
the  victims  were  slain  outright,  all  the  prophecies 
which  declared  that  he  should  pour  out  his  soul  unto 
death,  all  his  own  testimonies  respecting  the  decease 
which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem,  all  the  sub- 
sequent teachings  of  his  apostles,  show  that  his  obe- 
dience was  not  complete  until  death,'  nor  his  expiation 
but  in  death.  All  his  antecedent  sorrows  and  pains  and 
tortures  were  but  precursors  of  his  death :  death  was 
in  them  all,  but  not  complete  until,  as  in  our  death,  his 
spirit  was  separated  from  his  body,  leaving  the  clay  life- 
less, and  prone  to  mingle  with  the  dust  out  of  which  it 
was  taken.     It  was  no  seeming  death,  no  deep  trance 


3Y8  CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAL.      HI. 

nor  syncope  simulating  death,  from  which  he  recovered 
on  the  third  day ;  but  an  entire  dissolution,  so  that  he 
ceased  to  live  until  at  his  resurrection  he  began  to  live 
again.  "  Father,"  said  he,  in  the  midst  of  the  great 
darkness,  as  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain, 
"  into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit !  and,  having 
said  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost,"  or,  as  it  is  in  the 
Greek,  lie  expired .'  the  breath  went  utterly  out  of  his 
torn,  exhausted  frame ;  his  body  yet  hung  on  the  cruel 
nails,  but  his  anguish  was  over ;  his  blessed  heart  was 
still,  liis  holy  head  di'ooped,  his  gentle  eyes  were  closed ; 
he  had  lived  our  life  to  its  last  pang ;  his  soul  had  gone 
up  to  his  Father ;  and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  dead. 

The  death-sentence  passed  upon  man  included  far 
more  than  the  mere  mortality  of  the  body  :  death  was 
a  name  for  tlie  wrath  of  God  upon  body  and  soul ; 
wrath  eternal,  because  never  could  man  have  suffered 
sufficiently  to  expiate  his  sin,  and,  without  the  renewing 
grace  of  God,  he  would  be  continually  incurring  fresh 
condemnation  by  fresh  offence :  so  that  death  implies 
all  the  torfnents  of  hell,  as  well  as  the  penal  effects  of 
sin  in  this  worM ;  but  the  death  which  is  the  end  of 
our  course  here,  was  a  component,  essential  part  of  the 
death-punishment,  besides  being  a  most  striking  emblem 
and  foreshadowing  of  the  wrath  which  follows  it.  '  Our 
blessed  Lord  did  suffer  the  wrath  of  God  in  his  spirit, 
as  well  as  his  body :  the  very  wrath  which  makes  the 
hell  of  the  wicked.  "  The  sorrows  of  death  com- 
passed "  him  ;  "  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  upon  "  him  ; 
or,  as  the  Catechism  says  (44th),  he  was  in  inexpressi- 
ble anguish,  pains,  and  hellish  agonies,  daring  all  his 
sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross  :  as  far  as  a  pure, 
sinless  spirit  can  suffer  hell,  he  suffered  it ;  but,  so  com- 


CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAI,.  379 , 

pletely  did  he  expiate  our  guilt,  so  fully  satisfy  divine 
justice,  so  utterly  exhaust  death  by  his  sufferings,  that 
he  needed  not  to  pass,  after  the  article  of  dissolution, 
into  the  torments  which  await  the  wicked  beyond  this 
life.  As  he  bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  he 
said  :  "  It  is  finished  !  "  because,  in  that  last  submission, 
he  bore  the  last  pang  of  the  curse,  he  drank  the  last 
drop  in  the  cup  of  wrath,  he  felt  the  last  stroke  of  the 
avenger,  and  the  Father,  in  receiving  his  soul,  accepted 
his  atonement.  Then  was  it  apparent  to  the  universe 
of  observing  intelligence  that  he  died  for  us,  as  at  his 
resurrection  it  was  apparent  that  his  death  was  infinite- 
ly sufficient  for  our  eternal  life.  Hence  we,  after  the 
example  of  Scripture,  testify  our  belief  in  the  redemp- 
tion, by  our  confession  of  Christ's  death,  and,  obeying 
his  own  command,  celebrate  his  death  by  a  sacrament 
which  symbolizes  the  breaking  of  his  body  and  the 
sheddino;  of  his  blood. 

O  beloved  Christians,  what  strength  and  sweetness 
there  is  in  this  article  of  our  faith  !  If  Christ  walked 
never  so  closely  with  us  during  all  our  previous  temp- 
tations and  sorrows,  but  turned  away  when  the  last 
enemy  approached,  shaking  his  fearful  dart,  how  should 
we  shrink  back  in  terror,  and  cry,  in  his  own  "  exceed- 
ing bitter  cry,"  "  My  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me?  "  But  now  that  we  have  seen  him  dead,  we  know 
that  he  will  not  leave  nor  forsake  us,  but  will  be  our 
guide  even  unto  death ;  we  mark  the  prints  of  his 
bleeding  feet  down  every  step  into  the  valley  dark  as 
darkness  itself,  and  know  that  he  will  go  with  us 
through  the  mystery.  Then  we  fear  no  evil,  because 
his  rod  and  his  staff  shall  comfort  us. 

Secondly  :  His  burial^  and  the  reasons  for  it. 


380  CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND   BURIAL.      41st.    Why  was  he  also  buried? 

Ans.     Thereby  to  prove  that  he  was  really  dead. 

1.  This  is  a  very  important  reason  ;  for,  on  the  reali- 
ty of  his  death  depends  the  perfection  of  his  sacrifice, 
and  the  fact  of  his  resurrection  ;  and,  consequently,  the 
truth  of  all  Christianity.  It  was  at  the  third  hour 
(nine  o'clock  in  the  morning)  that  our  Lord  was  fixed 
on  the  cross,  and  about  the  ninth  hour  (three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon)  that  he  expired.  Many  lived  on  the 
cross  for  days  before  they  died ;  and  it  would  seem  that 
both  the  malefactors  executed  with  him  were  alive 
toward  the  close  of  the  day,  for  the  soldiers  brake  their 
legs  to  kill  them  outright ;  but  in  six  houi's  his  suffer- 
ings were  over,  his  spiritual  agonies  hastening  the  catas- 
trophe. The  next  day  was  a  Sabbath,  a  high  solemni- 
ty, —  one  of  the  three  Sabbaths  of  holy  convocation,  and 
immediately  previous  to  the  wave-offering  (Lev.  xxiii. 
10,  11)  ;  so  that  the  Jews,  whose  law  forbade  them  to 
let  any  one  remain  on  a  tree  over  any  sunset,  were 
specially  anxieus  that  this  notable  Sabbath  should  not 
be  defiled,  and  besought  Pilate  that  an  immediate  end 
should  be  put  to  the  sufferers.  Strange  bigotry,  that 
could  tolerate  such  malignant  injustice  as  the  crucifix- 
ion of  an  innocent  one  like  Jesus,  yet  stickle  at  a  form ! 
Yet  such  is  formality  in  religion  :  its  scrupulosity  in 
outward  rules  survives  the  spirit  of  piety.  Pilate,  easy 
to  comply  when  it  cost  him  nothing,  commands  the  sol- 
diers, not  without  witnesses  from  among  the  Jews,  to 
fulfil  their  wish :  but  Jesus  is  so  manifestly  dead,  that 
neither  soldiers  nor  Jews  doubt  it ;  yet,  to  make  ^\\ 
sure  for  us  as  well  as  for  them,  one  of  the  Romans 
thrusts  a  spear  into  his  side.  The  spear  reaches  his 
heart,  or,  at  the  least,  gives  a  mortal  wound  ;  for  out  of 


CHRIST'S   DEATH  AND  BURIAL.  381 

the  fissure  flows  not  only  "  blood,"  but  what  the  evan- 
gelist calls  "  water,"  or  the  serous  fluid  found  within 
the  sac  encasing  the  heart  (^pericardium);  though  it  is 
possible  that  it  was  from  the  eff'usion  which  great  agony 
often  sends  into  the  pleura  :  but,  in  either  case,  the  proof 
is  clear  that  death  had  actually  occurred.  If  there  had 
been  the  slightest  chance  for  denial,  the  Jews,  after  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord,  would  not  have  spared  it ; 
but,  though  they  bribed  the  soldiers  to  say  that  his  dis- 
ciples had  stolen  his  body  in  the  night,  they  did  not 
pretend  to  say  he  had  not  been  really  dead. 

Had  not  divine  Providence  prevented  it,  the  sacred 
body  would  have  been  roughly  buried  in  the  place  ap- 
pointed for  executed  malefactors,  near  the  scene  of  the 
crucifixion ;  but,  now  that  he  had  "  poured  out  his  soul 
unto  death,"  he  is  spared  from  farther  indignities.  Jo- 
seph of  Arimathea,  of  whom  we  know  little  more  than 
that  he  was  "  a  rich  man,"  a  Pharisee,  "  an  honorable 
counsellor,  which  also  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God," 
"  a  good  man  and  a  just,"  who  "  had  not  consented  "  to 
the  decree  against  Christ,  but  was  "  his  disciple,  though 
secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews,"  —  remorseful  at  having 
forsaken  his  Master,  and  impressed  by  the  awful  mira- 
cles attending  his  death,  now  goes  "  boldly  "  to  Pilate 
and  asks  "  that  he  might  take  away  the  body  of  Jesus ;  " 
and  Pilate,  willing  to  please  a  man  of  his  rank,  and  all 
the  while  persuaded  that  our  Lord  had  suffered  unjust- 
ly, gives  him  leave.  Joseph  had  a  new  tomb  prepared 
for  himself,  hewn,  as  was  the  custom  of  the  rich  Jews, 
out  of  a  rock  in  the  midst  of  a  garden  ;  and  there  he 
determined  to  lay  the  precious  remains.  But  Nicode- 
mus,  his  brother  counsellor,  and  like  him  in  concealed 
discipleship  (for  it  was  the  same  that  came  to  Jesus  by 


382  CHRIST'S  DEATH   AND  BURIAL.      [Lect.XVIII. 

night),  now  claims  a  part  in  the  sad  offices.  The  Jews, 
who  abhorred  burnin";,  and  the  disembowellinti  neces- 
sary  for  the  embahnment  common  among  Eastern  peo- 
ple, or  any  other  mode  of  treating  the  bodies  of  their 
dead  than  burial,  —  yet  craved  the  solace  of  fragrant 
obsequies,  and  were  accustomed  to  wrap  them  with 
fine  linen  in  spices,  whidi  were  sometimes  burned  in 
great  quantities.  So,  as  Joseph  had  the  honor  of  giv- 
ing the  tomb,  Nicodemus  brings  the  perfumes,  not 
less  than  a  hundred-pound  weight  of  myrrh  and  aloes, 
—  a  costly,  even  magnificent  provision,  —  such  as 
would  have  been  made  for  a  person  of  highest  rank  ; 
and  together,  the  true-hearted  Marys  standing  by 
if  not  assisting  them,  they  wind  the  body  in  linen 
cloths  with  the  sj^ices,  hoping  to  do  it  farther  honor 
when  the  Sabbath  had  passed  by.  So  they  laid  him  in 
the  rocky  tomb,  causing  its  door  to  be  closed  by  a  great 
stone  rolled  into  its  mouth  ;  and  there  in  a  garden  the 
second  Adam  rested  in  death,  as  in  a  garden  death  had 
come  upon  the  first.  But  the  wretched,  persecuting 
Sanhedrim,  though  they  could  not  oppose  Pilate  in  his 
grant  of  Joseph's  request,  are  not  satisfied  ;  and  the  next 
day  demand  of  the  Procurator  that  the  sepulchre  should 
be  made  sure  until  the  third  day,  lest  his  disciples  might 
come  and  steal  the  body,  and  so  claim  that  Christ's  own 
])rophecy  of  rising  on  the  third  day  was  fulfilled.  Pi- 
late, out  of  patience  with  their  wicked  pertinacity,  tells 
them  to  use  their  own  watch-guard,  which  was  a  body 
of  sixty  soldiers  assigned  to  guard  the  temple,  and 
make  as  sure  as  they  can.  They,  therefore,  seal  the 
stone,  so  that  any  movement  of  it  might  be  detected, 
and  set  sentinels  to  prevent  any  entrance.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  believe  as  some  do  (Theophylact  and  oth- 


CHRIST'S   DEATH  AND  BURIAL.  383 

ers)  tliat  tlie  whole  of  the  temple  guard  were  put  to 
the  service ;  but  the  Jews  had  it  in  their  power  to  em- 
ploy all  that  was  sufficient,  and  doubtless  did.  How 
did  God,  through  their  own  act  and  intention  to  frus- 
trate the  truth  of  Jesus,  thus  provide  for  their  discom- 
fiture and  our  assurance  ! 

The  death  of  the  Saviour  is  even  yet  more  certain. 
How  could  he,  even  if  his  wounds  were  not  mortal, 
have  survived  the  enrolment  of  his  head  and  person  so 
closely  ?  —  or  his  confinement  within  the  rock-bound  cell 
whose  entrance  was  so  entirely  sealed  ?  Or  how  could 
his  terror-stricken  friends,  against  all  these  precautions, 
have  abstracted  the  mangled  body,  and  restored  him  to 
the  full,  vigorous  life  in  which  he  appeared  on  the  day 
of  his  resurrection  ? 

2.  Neither,  without  his  burial,  would  all  the  prophe- 
cies respecting  his  work  for  us  have  been  fulfilled. 
Until  then,  though  he  had  had  his  place  with  the 
wicked,  he  had  rest  with  the  rich  in  his  death ;  * 
neither  was  there  opportunity  for  the  Father  to  ransom 
his  chosen  from  the  power  of  the  grave,  and  over  the 
grave  give  him  the  victory.  These  prophecies  are, 
however,  so  connected  with  what  has  been  already 
said,  and  will  be  said  hereafter,  that  we  may  refrain 
from  farther  reference  to  them  now. 

3.  But  what  comfort  and  hope  is  offered  to  our 
hearts  as  we  linger  with  the  weeping  women  before  the 
door  of  the  Saviour's  tomb  !  We  need  not  be  pilgrims 
to  the  Holy  Land  for  this  ;  our  faith  in  the  blessed 
Evangelists  brings  us  to  the  scene.  How  calmly,  how 
quietly,  he  rests  within  !     They  have  done  unto  him 

*  A  grave  was  appointed  for  him  with  the  wicked,  but  with  the  rich  man 
was  his  tomb  (high  place).  —  Is.  liii.  9. 


384  CHRIST'S   DEATH  AND   BURIAL.     H. 

whatsoever  they  listed,  but  they  canirot  reach  him  now 
with  their  savage  cries,  and  brutal  insults,  and  merci- 
less tortures.  They  have  driven  him  out  of  the  world 
which  he  made  for  them,  so  fair  and  beautiful ;  out  of 
his  own  Jerusalem,  which  he  had  loved  so  well,  and 
wept  over  with  so  fond  a  pity ;  out  of  the  mortal  life 
which  he  had  made  so  lovely  by  his  innocence,  and  so 
beneficent  by  his  miracles,  and  so  eloquent  of  truth  by 
his  teachings,  and  so  full  of  promise  to  the  sorrowful 
by  his  tears,  and  to  the  penitent  by  his  prayers.  Oh, 
what  a  dal'kness  was  that  when  the  sun  hid  his  face 
from  the  murder  of  the  Holy  One,  and  the  convulsed 
earth  quaked  in  sympathy  with  her  Maker  !  What  a 
night  was  that  when  the  stars  looked  down  on  the 
world,  whose  Saviour  and  Lord  lay  dead  and  buried. 
Think  of  the  poor  disciples,  shrunk  into  hiding-places 
like  timorous  sheep  whose  shepherd  is  slain,  and  of  the 
broken-hearted  women,  loving  without  hope,  but  faithful 
in  their  despair  !  Yet  the  sufferer  is  at  rest.  He 
sleeps.  His  labors  are  done,  his  pains  are  past,  his 
enemies  have  accomplished  their  worst ;  his  last  cry 
was  the  escape  of  his  spirit,  and  his  dear,  holy,  mangled 
flesh  awaits  in  peace  a  speedy  awakening  far  beyond 
sorrow  and  ignominy,  within  the  glory  of  his  better 
world,  where  all  the  heavenly  host  will  acclaim  him  an 
infinite  homage,  because  the  signatures  of  the  cross 
attest  him  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.  Odors,  fragrant 
and  rich,  fill  the  air,  as  the  spices  breathe  their  honors 
around  him,  and  the  flowers  of  the  garden  are  redolent 
through  the  dews.  All  is  as  sweet  as  it  is  calm.  O 
faithful  Master,  thanks  be  to  thee,  that  thou  didst  not 
refuse  to  lie  down  in  the  grave  !  The  grave  is  gloomy 
and  cold  and  sad,  —  the  disgrace  of  our  humanity,  the 


Lect.XVIII.]      CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAL.  385 

hiding-place  of  our  shame.  Disguise  it  as  we  may, 
with  marbles  and  epitaphs,  and  graceful  trees,  and  sum- 
mer-blooms, and  evergreens,  till  it  looks  like  a  palace- 
garden,  it  is  yet  the  place  of  silence,  darkness,  and 
corruption ;  nature  revolts  from  the  thought,  nor  can 
philosophy  cure  us  of  the  shudder,  for  reason  justi- 
fies it:  — 

"  To  lie  in  cold  obstruction  and  to  rot, 
This  sensible,  warm  motion  to  become 

A  kneaded  clod  — 

't  is  too  horrible  !  " 

But  oh,  how  sad  it  is  when  we  are  forced  to  carry 
there  and  put  deep  within  its  shades,  away  from  our 
touch,  and  sight,  and  care,  the  dear  forms  in  which  the 
beloved  of  our  hearts,  —  the  good,  the  kind,  the  true, 
have  lived  but  live  no  longer  ;  the  pleasant  faces 
through  which  their  souls  shone  on  us,  the  bosoms  that 
yearned  for  us,  the  hands  that  ministered  to  our  com- 
fort, the  limbs  active  in  serving  our  faintest  wish,  —  to 
lie  out  amidst  loathsome  damps,  under  the  beatings  of 
the  storm,  and  the  winter's  snows,  because  they  are 
dust  and  to  dust  they  must  return  !  Yet,  how  changed 
is  the  sepulchre  since  we  have  followed  in  his  funeral, 
and  seen  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay !  He  is  not 
there  now,  —  he  is  risen ;  but  he  has  been  there;  the 
fragrance  yet  fills  the  tomb  ;  the  garden  still  blossoms 
around  it :  as,  in  the  beginning,  he,  by  his  own  rest, 
made  the  Sabbath  a  rest  for  our  souls,  so  has  he,  by  his 
own  burial,  made  the  grave  a  rest  for  the  bodies  of  his 
people.  There  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  them ; 
there  they  have  a  refuge  from  temptation,  from  tears 
and  sin ;  there  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  has 
set  a  company  of  the  guard  from  the  heavenly  temple 

VOL.  I.  25 


386  CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAL.        to  watch  their  sleeping  dust  —  his  own  seal  is  on  the 
door  —  and  in  his  own  time,  when  all  the  mortality, 
and  dishonor,  and  corruption,  and  weakness,  have 
crumbled  away,  will  he  roll  back  the  stone  from  its 
mouth,  and  they  shall  come  forth  immortal,  glorious, 
incorruptible,  and  full  of  power,  to  enter  upon  the  king- 
dom where  he  is  now  gone  to  prepare  places  for  them. 
Oh  !  noAV  we  know  what  our  church  means  when  it 
bids  us  say  that,  though  Christ  has  died  for  our  sins,  we 
must  also  die.  Death  and  tlie  grave  are  no  longer  the 
penalty  and  the  disgrace  of  our  nature.  Christ  hath 
taken  out  the  sting  from  death,  the  victory  he  has 
wrested  from  the  grave  ;  and  now  death  to  all  who 
believe  is  the  abolishing  of  sin,  the  grave  a  passage  to 
eternal  life.  The  pious  dead  are  not  lost:  they  only 
sleep  in  Jesus,  — a  blessed  sleep  from  which  he  is  coming 
to  awake  them.  He  has  taken  up  their  spirits  now  to  the 
Father  who  took  up  his  ;  and  he  will  once  more  descend 
in  the  latter  day  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  restore  their 
full  humanity  to  paradise,  —  far  more  lovely  than  that 
the  tempter  entered,  where  no  enemy  nor  ill  can  reach 
them  forever.  O  spirit  of  the  Holy  One,  Avho  didst 
anoint  Christ  with  grace  for  his  death  and  burial,  pre- 
pare us  for  ours,  that  we  may  follow  him  with  the 
countless  train  of  those  who,  through  faith  and  pa- 
tience, inherit  the  promises !  Then  shall  death  be  to  us 
a  gain  unspeakable,  and  thfe  grave  a  welcome  rest. 
We  need  rest,  O  Lord,  for  we  are  often  weary ;  and,  if 
it  please  thee,  we  would  not  bear  our  burden  long. 

"  We  would  not  live  alvvay,  thus  fettered  by  sin, 
Temptation  without,  and  corruption  within  ; 
Where  the  rapture  of  pardon  is  mingled  with  fears, 
And  the  cup  of  thanksgiving  with  penitent  tears. 


Lect.  XVIIl.l        CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BUEIAL.  387 

We  would  not  live  alway  — no,  welcome  the  tomb; 
Since  Jesus  hath  lain  there  we  dread  not  its  gloom"; 
There  sweet  be  our  rest,  till  he  bid  us  arise,  ^^ 
To  hail  him  in  triumph  descending  the  skies." 

But  we  had  wellnigh  anticipated  what  we  proposed 

to  treat  of —  •   5    ^      z 

Thirdly  :   The  benefits  we  receive  from  Christ  s  death 

and  burial. 

The  Catechism  says  "further  benefits,"  because  it 
has  ah-eady  made  us  dwell  largely  on  the  benefits  of 
Christ's  sacrifice  ;  but  we  shall  briefly  recapitulate,  and 
add  to  these  stated  in  the  present  answer  (43d),  those 
given  in  the  44th,  as  taught  in  our  Lord's  descent  to 

hell.  ^  . 

1.  Christ  as  our  infinite  surety  has  borne  the  wrath 
of  God  for  all  who  believe  on  his  name.     When  the 
Father  accepted  the  substitute,  he  did  it  under  covenant 
to  release  those  whom  Jesus  represented.     He  took  the 
guilt  of  their  sins  from  them  in'  the  very  act  by  which 
he  laid  it  on  the  sinless  elder  brother.     So,  when  he 
paid  the  penalty,  they  paid  it ;  when  he  was  stricken  of 
God  it  was  with  their  stripes  ;  when  he  was  crucified 
they  were  crucified  with  him  ;  when  he  died  they  died 
in  him  ;  when  he  was  buried  he  sanctified  the  grave  for 
them  ;    and  so,   also,   when   the  Father   received   his 
spirit,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead,  in  sure  token  that 
justice  was  satisfied  and  heaven  opened  for  the  atoner, 
the  Father  accepted  them,  adopted  them  as  his  sons 
and  daughters,  assured  them  of  deliverance  from  eternal 
death,  set  open  wide  the  gate  of  heaven  for  their  spirits 
when  they  leave  the  bodv,  and  for  their  bodies  after  the 
purification  of  the  grave  which  Christ  has  made  fra- 
grant with  holy  peace.     How  certain,  then,  is  the  salva- 


388  CHRIST'S   DEATH  AND  BURIAL.        tion  of  the  Christian,  since  justice  and  mercy  with 
interlinking  arms  stand  pleading  for  him  before  the 
throne  on  which  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  sits  at  the 
riiiht  hand  of  God  ! 

2.  The  sympathy  of  onr  Lord  with  his  people  is 
entire.  "  In  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being 
tempted,  he  is  able  to  succor  them  that  are  tempted." 
He  has  not  only  the  power  but  the  knowledge  from 
experience  to  apply  the  power  ;  and  as,  in  the  language 
of  the  New  Testament,  temptation  and  trial  are 
synonymous,  one  word  in  the  original  representing 
both,  his  sympathizing  grace  covers  all  the  experience 
of  the  Christian  ;  for  there  is  no  form  of  trial  through 
which  the  Christian  can  be  made  to  pass  that  he  did 
not  pass  through  on  his  way  to  victory  and  rest. 

All  that  we  ordinarily  call  temptations,  —  the  motives, 
arguments,  and  provocations  to  sin,  to  which  we  are 
exposed  during  our  mortal  life  in  this  world,  he  knew ; 
we  have  a  notable  example  of  this  in  the  conflict  he 
had  with  the  devil  immediately  after  his  unction  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.  All  that  we  ordinarily  call  trials,  —  our 
sicknesses,  our  pains,  our  persecutions,  our  wrongs  from 
the  false  judgments,  and  slanders,  and  oppositions  of 
men,  our  sorrows  for  those  we  love  in  their  sicknesses, 
ind  deaths  and  burials,  —  we  know  that  he  knew  from 
the  record  of  the  evangelical  witnesses. 

So  far  as  his  innocent  spirit  could  feel  the  anguish 
and  self-abhorrence  and  shame  of  sin,  he  knew  what 
the  penitent  suffers  when,  under  the  thunderings  of  the 
law,  he  trembles  and  avows  his  guilt ;  for  all  his  Israel's 
sins  were  gathered  around  his  soul,  compassing  his 
spirit  about,  hiding  his  Father's  face  from  him,  causing 
him  to  shrink  with  horror  from  the  vile  contact,  and 


CHRIST'S  DEATH  AND  BURIAL.  389 

pressing  on  his  mediatorial  conscience  the  fact  that  the 
punishment  he  bore  was  just.  Nay,  those  very  doubts 
which  oftentimes  assail  the  believer's  mind,  causing  him 
to  shrink  from  duty,  to  fear  the  future  set  before  him, 
and  even  to  think  that  God  has  forsaken  him,  assaulted 
the  humanity  of  Jesus.  "  Now,"  saith  he,  at  one  time, 
"  is  my  soul  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say  ?  Father, 
save  me  from  this  hour."  What  else  was  that  agony 
in  the  garden,  when  he  prayed :  "  Father,  if  it  be  pos- 
sible let  this  cup  pass  from  me  !  "  and  "  there  appeared 
an  anoel  unto  him  from  heaven  streno-thening  him  ?  " 
And  how  else  can  we  understand  that  bitter  cry  out 
of  the  thick  darkness,  "  My  God  !  my  God  !  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  There  could  not  be  a  single  form 
of  pain,  or  anguish  of  body  or  soul,  that  follows  sin,  of 
which  the  Redeemer,  who  took  the  cup  filled  with  our 
deserts,  did  not  taste  ;  and  this  is  what  the  Catechism 
declares  when  it  says  (44th),  that  "  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the 
cross,  was  plunged  in  inexpressible  anguish,  pains,  tei'- 
rors  and  hellish  agonies,"  that  he  might  deliver  us  from 
the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

Here  then,  believer,  —  tempted,  afflicted,  weak  and 
trembling,  is  there  full  comfort  for  you.  The  Master 
knows  your  trials  and  your  infirmity.  Only  imitate 
his  steadfastness,  —  be  faithful  to  him  as  he  was  to  you  ; 
and  he  who  received  a  gift  of  strength  from  on  high  to 
go  through  his  passion,  will  send  you  strength  accord- 
ing as  your  day. 

3.  For  there  is  here  a  promise  of  sanctification.  He 
crucified  our  old  nature  when  the  body  he  took  on  him, 
out  of  the  flesh  and   blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  was 


390  CHRIST'S  DEATH   AND  BURIAL.        crucified.  There  in  his  death,  the  tyrannous  power  of 
sin,  by  which  the  devil  holds  captive  the  impenitent, 
was  broken  from  his  people  ;  and  in  his  grave  he  finally 
buried  the  mortal  flesli  that  he  might  raise  it  in  new- 
ness of  life,  holy  and  eternal.  Thus  has  he  promised 
to  quicken  from  their  death  in  trespasses  and  sins,  all 
who  by  faith  are  crucified  with  him,  with  him  die,  and 
with  him  are  buried.  As  he  was  raised  up  to  heaven, 
so  shall  they,  ev(jn  in  this  life,  be  raised  up  to  sit  with 
him  in  heavenly  places  :  privileges  so  like  heaven,  that 
the  apostle  can  give  them  no  less  an  epithet  than 
''  heavenly."  Yet,  this  grace  is  only  vouchsafed  to 
those  who,  relying  on  the  working  of  God  in  them, 
work  out  with  fear  and  trembling  their  own  salvation. 
But,  believer,  what  a  motive  as  well  as  encouragement 
is  here  ?  What  so  separates  a  man  from  the  world  as 
death  and  burial  ?  Yet  so,  by  our  profession  of  repre- 
sentation in  Christ,  do  we  profess  to  have  died  with  the 
world  of  sin,  and  to  have  put  off  our  old  man  with  its 
affections  and  lusts.  We  are  not  dead  with  him,  if  we 
be  not  buried  Vv-itli  him.  We  have  not  been  buried 
with  him,  if  we  be  not  risen  with  him.  Our  true  life, 
our  Christian  life,  now  lies  on  the  other  side  of  the 
grave  as  to  its  affections  and  aims  and  delights.  "  If 
ye,  then,  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which 
are  above."  All  our  motives  and  rules  must  be  brought 
by  us  from  heaven,  "  into  which  the  Forerunner  has 
for  us  entered."  "  Truly,"  says  an  apostle,  "  our  con- 
versation is  in  heaven."  Yes,  beloved  brethren,  this  is 
the  grace  into  which  we  profess  to  stand,  who  profess 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  to  have  received  the  atonement. 
We  cannot  go  back  to  tiie  world   except  we  trample 


CHRIST'S  DEATH   AND  BURIAL.  391 

over  the  grace  of  Jesus,  and  reject  the  arguments  of 
his  cross. 

O  Son  of  the  Highest,  remember  us  on  thy  throne ! 
Thou  hast  vanquished  sin  for  us  in  the  atonement  of 
thy  death  ;  now  vanquish  sin  in  us  by  the  intercession 
ofthyHfe!