LECTURE  XIX. 

THE  DESCENT  INTO  HELI 


SIXTEENTH   LORD'S   DAY. 
THE   DESCENT   INTO   HELL. 

"  He  descended  into  hell." 

THIS  article  of  our  creed,  which,  because  of  its  pecul- 
iar interest,  requires  a  closer  study  than  we  could 
give  it  when  considering,  on  a  late  occasion,  the  lesson 
for   the  Sixteenth   Lord's  Day,  should  be  approached 
with  cautious  modesty,  as  it  has  been  so  disputed  over 
by  theologians  of  the  highest  rank,  that  an  attempt  to 
determine  the  truth  among  their  widely  different  views 
would  be  presumptuous,  if  we  had  not  a  "  more  sure 
word  of  prophecy."      Rejecting,  as  we  do,  the  prepos- 
terous notion  wliich  the  papists  have  adopted  from  the 
good  but  fanciful  Bishop  of  Milan  (St.  Ambrose),  — 
all  the  fathers  before  him  saying  nothing  of  the  kind,  — 
that  the  creed  was  composed  by  the  inspired  apostles,  we 
cannot  receive  any  dogma  it  contains  on  less  authority 
than  divine  Scripture  ;  yet,  since  we  have  adopted  it  as 
the  symbol  of  our  catholic,  evangelical  belief,  we  must 
understand  its  articles  "  according  to  the  proportion  (or 
rather  analogy)  *  of   faith,"   as  the  apostle  calls  the 
consistency  of  Christian  doctrine. 

But,  First  :  it  should  be  noted  that  the  descent  into 
hell  is  not  found  as  a  separate,  distinct  article  of  the  ear- 
lier creeds.  In  the  Nicene  (A.  D.  325)  we  read: 
"  He  suffered,  and  was  buried,  and  the  third  day  he  rose 
again,"  —the  descent  into  hell  not  being  inserted ;  in  that 
*  uvaT^oylav  ttjq  mareug.  —  Kom.  xii.  6. 


396  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  vulgarly  attributed  to  Athanasius  (A.  D.  333)  we  read  : 
"  Who  suffered  for  our  salvation,  descended  into  hell, 
rose  again  the  third  day  from  the  dead,"  —  the  burial 
being  omitted ;  from  which  comparison  it  would  seem 
that  the  two  phrases  wei'e  then  thought  to  be  synony- 
mous. '  But  nearly  all  the  learned,  outside  the  papal 
ranks,  deny  that  Athanasius  wrote  the  formula  called 
by  his  name.  Waterland,  on  strong  grounds,  ascribes 
,'::  to  Hilary  (Bishop)  of  Aries,  which  would  bring  it  a 
century  later ;  and  certainly  it  was  not  known  through 
the  church  until  the  close  of  the  sixth.  Rufinus, 
Bishop  of  Aquileia  *  (a  great  city  in  the  Venetian  ter- 
ritory), says  that  his  church  had  both  articles  in  its 
creed,  but  that  the  Roman  and  Eastern  churches  had 
only  the  burial  ;  and  he  thought  that  the  two  meant 
the  same  thing,f  one,  perhaps,  t»eing  explanatory  of  the 
other,  if  not  a  mere  expletive.  It  is  not  known  at 
what  time  they  came  to  be  interpreted  distinctly, 
though  Erasmus  thought  that  it  beoan  with  Thomas 
Aquinas  (^circa  1305)  ;  but,  undoubtedly,  some  opinions 
now  held  respecting  our  Lord's  descent  into  hell  were 
promulged  at  an  early  period.  Witsius  (the  noble  doc- 
tor of  our  mother-church)  cites  the  historian  Socrates, 
to  show  that  a  company  of  about  fifty  Arians  at  Con- 
stantinople (A.  D.  359)  published  a  creed  which  says : 
"  He  was  crucified,  and  died,  and  was  buried  and  pene- 
trated (^SieX-qX-vOoTo)  into  parts  beneath  the  earth  (Kara- 
xOovLo)^  at  whom  hell  (a8*/s)  itself  was  struck  with  ter- 
ror." But  Witsius  might  have  found  in  the  same  his- 
torian a  creed  rejected  by  the  council  of  Ariminum 
(Rimini),  who  deposed   the  Arian   bishops  |  that  had 

*  Nona  inter  claras,  Aquileia,  urbes.  —  Ausoniiis. 

t  Vis  tamen  verbi  eadem  videtur  esse  in  eo  quod  sepultus  dicitur. 

X  Ursatius  and  Valens. 


THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  397 

presented  it  (A.  D.  356),  which  has  these  expressions: 
"  Was  crucified  and  died,  and  descended  into  parts 
infernal,  and  set  in  order  what  was  to  be  done  there, 
at  (the  sight  of)  whom  the  doorkeepers  of  hell  trem- 
bled." *  Such  language  intends  considerably  more 
than   mere  burial. 

We  are  careful  to  observe  these  historical  facts, 
because  they  prove  that  the  insertion  of  the  article, 
"  He  descended  into  hell,"  as  meaning  more  than  his 
burial,  was  made  by  heretics  ;  f  and  that,  though  now  the 
papists  connect  with  it  their  doctrine  of  purgatory,  and 
kindred  follies,  the  creed  of  the  early  church  had  noth- 
ing between  the  burial  and  the  resurrection.  The  de- 
scent into  hell  is  in  the  creed  of  the  church  of  Rome 
now.  How  it  got  there  nobody  knows,  but  it  certainly 
was  not  before  the  fifth  century,  probably  not  until  long 

after. 

Secondly  :  It  is,  nevertheless,  a  scriptural  fact  that 
our  Lord  descended  into  hell,  as  we  learn  from  a  colla- 
tion of  Psalm  xvi.  9,  10,  11,  with  Acts  ii.  23-32.  In 
the  psalm  Ave  read  :  "  My  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope  ; 
for  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt 
thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  Thou 
wilt  show  me  the  path  of  life."  In  the  other  scripture, 
the  apostle  Peter  at  the  Pentecost  says  :  "  Him  (Jesus 
of  Nazareth)  by  wicked  hands  ye  have  crucified  and 
slain  ;  whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the 
pains  of  death,  because  it  was  not  possible  that  he 
should  be  holden  of  it.  For  David  speaketh  concern- 
ing him :   I  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  my  face  ; 

*  Not  having  the  Greek  at  hand,  I  quote  the  English  translation,  fol. 
Cambridge,  1683.  p.  272. 

t  At  Seleiieia,  Acacius  withdrew  the  passages,  but  no  doubt  from  craft, 
as  he  restored  them  at  Constantinople. 


398  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  that  I  should  not  be  moved. 
Therefore  did  my  heart  rejoice,  and  my  tongue  was 
glad  ;  moreover,  also,  my  Hesh  shall  rest  in  hope : 
because  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither 
wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption. 
Thou  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways  of  life ;  thou 
shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy  countenance.  Men 
and  brethren,  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of  the  pa- 
triarch David,  that  he  is  both  dead  and  buried,  and  his 
sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  day.  Therefore,  being  a 
prophet,  and  knowing  that  God  had  sworn  with  an 
oath  to  him,  that  of  the  fruit  of  his  loins  he  would 
raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne  ;  he,  seeing  this 
before,  spake  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that  his 
soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither  his  flesh  did  see  cor- 
ruption. This  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we 
all  are  witnesses."  Thus  the  apostle,  as  well  as  the 
psalmist,  in  saying  that  our  Lord  was  not  left  in  hell, 
implies  that  he  had  been  there  ;  and  since  Ave  must 
believe  the  words  of  Scripture,  we  should  rightly  un- 
derstand what  those  words  mean. 

1.  The  Hebrew  and  the  Greek  originals  have  each 
two  words  of  different  signification,  to  render  which 
our  translators  had  but  the  one  word,  hell.  The  He- 
brew has  gehenna  (DSn'^s)  and  sheol  (biWl)')  :  gchenna 
signifying  the  place  where  the  wicked  after  death  are 
in  fiery  torment,  or  hell  in  the  present  sense  of  that 
word  among  us ;  sheol  signifying  the  regicni  beneath 
the  surface  of  the  ground,  but  most  frequently  the 
place  of  the  dead,  or  the  grave  —  though  in  a  few  texts, 
by  a  natural  figure,  destruction.  Sheol,  not  gehenna, 
is  the  word  in  the  psalm :  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  sheol"  i.  e.  in  the  place  or  state  of  the  dead,  or 


lect.  xix.j         the  descp:nt  into  hell.  399 

the  grave.  The  writers  of  the  New  Testament  adopted 
gelienna  from  the  Hebrew,  and  use  it  to  signify  the  place 
of  future  punishment  (yUwa^  rendei'ed  throughout  our 
translation  by  hell;^  but  whenever  they  speak  of  the 
state  or  place  of  the  dead,  they  use  the  word  hades 
(aSj^s)  as  equivalent  to  sheol.  Thus  Luke  in  the  para- 
ble has :  "  The  rich  man  also  died  and  was  buried ; 
and  in  (liades)  hell,  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  tor- 
ments, and  seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his 
bosom."  Both  were  in  hades,  or  the  state,  —  place,  if 
you  will,  —  of  the  dead  ;  but  one  in  torments,  the 
other  a  great  way  off,  in  Abraham's  bosom.  Through- 
out our  English  Vulgate,  hades  is  rendered  by  hell,* 
except  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  55,  where  we  have  grave : 
"0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  O  grave  (hades^, 
where  is  thy  victory?"  Hades  is  the  word  in  Peter's 
citation  of  the  psalm. 

Thus  neither  the  psalmist  nor  the  apostle  says  that 
pur  Lord  went  into  the  place  of  punishment,  but  the 
contrary  ;  as  otherwise  the  reasoning  of  Peter  would 
be  that  David  had  gone  to  torment,  and  is  there  still,  — 
a  conclusion  from  which  every  one  would  shrink. 

2.  Then,  again,  the  Hebrew  word  rendered  soul, 
nepJiesh  (p-iO^,  does  not  necessarily,  nor  even  radically, 
signify  what  we  understand  by  soul,  —  the  spiritual, 
moral  part  of  man.  Its  primary  sense  is  breath,  or  the 
life,  whether  of  man  or  beast.  Nay,  there  are  passages 
where  it  signifies  a  corpse  or  exanimate  body,  as  Hag- 
gai  ii.  13 :  "  If  one  that  is  unclean  by  a  dead  body  " 
Qiephesh')  ;  and  Lev.  xix.  28  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  make 

*  There  is  no  doubt  that  hell  has  both  the  senses:  the  place  of  punish- 
ment, and  the  place  of  the  dead,  —  the  last  the  primary  one.  Holle  (G.), 
hell;  hohle  (G.),  hole.  Hence  the  common  people  associate  hell  with 
gloomy  caverns,  —hell-gate,  hell's-mouth,  devil's  chimney,  etc.,  etc. 


400  THE  DESCENT   INTO  HELL.  SX. 

any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  the  dead "  Qnephesh'). 
So,  also,  xxi. ;  but  especially  Numbers  vi,  G  :  "  All  the 
days  that  he  separateth  himself  to  the  Lord,  he  shall 
come  at  no  dead  body"  QiepheBli).  Thus  we  might 
consistently  translate  it  in  the  psalm  :  "  My  flesh  also 
shall  rest  in  hope  ;  for  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  body  in 
the  grave,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see 
corruption."  For  the  most  part,  however,  nephesh  is 
used  as  the  word  person  by  us :  that  which  presents  the 
idea  of  the  man  to  us  ;  as  we  say,  "  there  were  so  many 
persons  present,"  or,  so  many  souls  were  there  ;  and, 
"  not  a  soul,"  or,  "  not  a  person  was  present."  It  is, 
in  fact,  a  frequent  orientalism  for  the  personal  pro- 
nouns ;  so  that  it  would  be  also  consistent  to  read : 
"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  me  in  the  state  of  the  dead." 
Either  of  these  renderings  would  be  justified  by  that 
peculiarity  of  Hebrew  poetry  called  parallelism,  which 
repeats  in  the  second,  with  some  difference  of  phrase, 
the  idea  of  the  first  line :  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  me,  or 
my  person,  or  my  body,  in  the  grave ;  nor  wilt  thou 
suffer  thy  Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  Certainly  ^o?^ 
One  can  scarcely  apply  to  an  exanimate  body  merely, 
but  must  refer  to  the  person  Avhose  body  is  in  the 
grave  ;  for  the  term  rendered  Holy  One  in  both  the  lan- 
guages is  not  holy  in  the  sense  of  dedicated,  but  in  the 
absolutely  moral  sense  of  pious,  or  godly ;  and  the 
psalmist  would  not  speak  of  a  pious  or  godly  corpse. 

The  apostle's  term  for  soul  (^nephesJi)  is  i/'^x'? :  a  term 
corresponding  to  the  Hebrew  word  in  many  particulars, 
though  not  in  all,  but  certainly,  as  many  passages  from 
the    classics    show,  *   to   the  sense  of  person  ;  and  we 

*  Euripides,  Helena,  v.  52.      Her.  Furens.  v.  452.      Tlieocritus,    Id.  xvi. 
24.     C.  Mukw. 


Lect.  XIX.  THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  401 

should  interpret  it  accordingly.  This  is  in  accordance 
with  the  common  habit  of  language.  Martha  said  of 
her  brother  Lazarus :  "  Lord,  by  this  time  lie  stinketh, 
for  he  hath  been  dead  four  days."  So  our  Lord  said  : 
"  Where  have  ye  laid  him  ?  "  and  the  apostle  Paul 
(Acts  xiii.  35,  37)  "  Wherefore  he  (David)  saith  also 
in  another  Psalm  :  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  thine  Holy 
(pious)  One  to  see  corruption  ;  but  7ie,  whom  God  raised 
up  again,  saw  no  corruption."  We  see,  therefore,  that 
somZ,  here,  does  not  necessarily,  nor  even  probabh',  mean 
our  Lord's  spiritual  soul  in  the  first  parallel,  any  more 
than  Holy  One  does  in  the  second. 

This  is  a  fair  critical  interpretation  of  the  passages 
on  which  the  descent  into  hell  is  mainly  founded,  and 
the  one  admitted  by  the  great  part  of  the  learned,  es- 
pecially by  all  the  eminent  doctors  of  the  reformed 
churches  from  Calvin  down  ;  yet,  since  it  has  obtained 
a  place  in  the  creed  of  the  catholic  church,  a  great 
variety  of  opinions  have  been  given  concerning  it  by 
theologians,  both  Papist  and  Protestant. 

We  shall,  therefore,  state  some  of  these:  first,  those 
of  the  Papists,  and  of  such  as  agree  with  them  partly, 
among  the  Protestants ;  then,  those  of  the  reformed 
churches,  to  Avhose  communion  by  the  blessing  of  God 
we  belono;. 

1.  The  ancient  Jews,  to  whom  "  life  and  immortal- 
ity "  were  not  revealed  as  they  have  since  been  by  the 
gospel,  had  an  indistinct  notion  of  a  great  region 
beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground,  whither  not  only 
the  bodies  of  men  went  (in  burial),  but  their  spirits 
lived  after  death,  —  the  good  in  bliss,  the  wicked  in  mis- 
ery. This  corres])onded  with  the  Egyptian  and  classi- 
cal notions  :  Ave  might  say  with  the  universal  idea   of 

VOL.  I.  26 


402  THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  cultivated  nations.  Men  at  death  were  said  to  descend, 
—  go  down  somewhere,  ("  Facilis  descensus  "  "  ad  infe- 
ros.")  The  neo-platonic  philosopliers,  who  were  in 
full  force  at  Alexandria  during  the  earlier  Christian 
centuries,  and  mingled  Greek  with  Egyptian  doctrines, 
had,  also,  according  to  their  wont,  adopted  many  myths 
from  the  popular  superstitions,  as  all  the  Orphic  writ- 
ings show.  Some  of  the  fathers,  learned  in  both  Chris- 
tian and  neo-platonic  systems,  but  converted  at  a  time 
of  life  when  few  men  can  wholly  change  their  inveter- 
ate sentiments,  still  less  their  phraseology,  transferred, 
without  any  scriptural  authority,  not  a  few  figments  of 
superstition  to  their  new  faith ;  especially  mingling 
these  about  the  state  of  the  dead  with  the  Christian 
doctrine.  The  Arians,  sympathizing  with  the  Alexan- 
drian notion  of  the  Logos,  would  be  likely  to  carry 
their  bias  farther.  Hence,  we  are  not  sui'prised  to 
find  them  (as  has  been  shown)  interpolating  the  creed 
with  their  fancy  respecting  our  Lord's  descent  into 
hades.  The  opinion  obtained  some  favor  even  with  the 
more  orthodox,  as  it  tallied  to  a  certain  extent  with  the 
rabbinical  teachings  that  had  obtained  popular  credence 
among  the  Jews,  and  given  a  tinge  of  language  to  some 
scriptural  passages.  We  have  no  more  respect  for  the 
Rabbins  than  for  the  Hermaic  teachers ;  but  we  are 
disposed  to  consider  what  they  quote  who  have  adopted 
their  general  idea.  The  principal  texts  are  these  three : 
Eph.  iv.  9,  wher,e  it  is  said  that  our  Lord  "  descended 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ; "  1  Peter  iii.  18,  19, 
20,  where  it  is  said  that  our  Lord  by  the  spirit  went 
and  "  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison  ; "  Luke  xxiii. 
43,  where  our  Lord  said  to  the  penitent  thief,  "  This 
day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."      Misinterpret- 


THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  403 

ing  these  texts,  they  divided  tlie  abode  of  the  dead  — 
sheol^  hades,  hell,  —  into  two  main  parts  :  one  the  place 
of  the  pious  ancients  wlio  believed  in  Messiah,  but 
died  before  his  "  manifestation  to  Israel ;  "  the  other, 
the  prison  (^gehenna)  of  the  wicked  ;  with  some  minor 
partitions  we  need  not  stay  to  describe.  Christ,  said 
they,  descended  to  this  lower  region  first,  to  make 
know^n  to  the  pious  spirits  his  full  gospel,  that,  through 
faith  in  his  finished  work,  they  might  obtain  full  salva- 
tion, which  they  did  by  rising  with  him  when  he  rose  ; 
but,  also,  to  confound  with  his  power  and  glory  the 
devils  and  wicked  souls.  Afterwards,  by  degrees, 
these  notions  were  somewhat  modified  and  enlarged, 
until  they  composed  out  of  them  the  doctrine  of  purga- 
tory, Avith  its  kindred  follies  ;  which  is,  that  the  spirits 
of  even  Christians  (except  martyrs  and  some  few  oth- 
ers) after  death  need  a  purgatmi,  or  cleansing  by  fire ; 
and  are,  for  that  purpose,  shut  up  in  suffering  until 
either  sins  are  burned  away,  or  they  are  freed  from  the 
necessity  by  the  prayers  of  the  church,  accompanying 
the  repeated  sacrifices  of  Christ's  body  in  the  mass. 
This  is  what  the  papists  mean  hy  saying  masses  for  the 
repose  of  souls.  The  doctrine  of  purgatory  has  been, 
as  is  well  known,  a  most  fruitful  source  of  simoniacal 
gain  and  profit  to  that  artful  mistress  of  abominations, 
who  leaves  no  means  untried  to  subject  mankind  by 
terror  of  her  pretended  authority,  here  and  in  the  next 
world ;  but  time  would  fail  to  give  even  the  briefest 
account  of  the  many  follies  uttered  by  them  in  connec- 
tion with  the  main  dogma.  It  is  remarkable,  however, 
that  it  (the  doctrine  of  purgatory)  was  never  formally 
affirmed  by  the  church  of  Rome  until  the  council 
of  Florence,  1439,  and  has  been   steadily  rejected  by 


404  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  the  Eastern  churches  of  all  ages.  Strange  that  it 
should  have  taken  thirteen  centuries  for  an  infallible 
church  to  find  out  a  doctrine  of  religion  !  The  immac- 
ulate conception,  however,  lagged  far  behind.  God 
deliver  us  from  such  developments  of  church-life  ! 

There  is,  also,  out  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  prin- 
cipally (if  not  altogether,  nowadays)  among  high- 
church  Episcopalians,  a  party  more  considerable  for 
learning  than  numbers,  who,  adopting  the  ancient  no- 
tion oi  shcol,  or  hades,  contends  that  at  death  neither  the 
righteous  go  to  heaven,  nor  the  wicked  to  hell  (prepared 
for  the  devil  and  his  angels)  ;  but  that,  until  the  resur- 
rection, the  good  are  in  bliss,  the  wicked  in  torments, 
though  far  apart,  and  that  neither  the  bliss  of  the  one 
nor  the  misery  of  the  other,  will  be  complete  until  the 
soul  is  again  united  to  the  body.  This  region,  or  con- 
dition, intervening  between  the  death  of  the  body  and 
the  resurrection,  they  call,  for  want  of  a  better  term, 
the  separate  state;  because  there  disembodied  souls 
exist  apart  from  living  men  on  earth,  and  from  the 
angels  in  heaven. 

It  is  not  easy  to  see  why  this  notion  is  so  much  in- 
sisted upon  ;  as  while,  at  the  best,  its  advocates  are  able 
to  give  but  a  vague,  shadowy  idea  of  what  they  mean 
by  it,  they  gain  no  practical  benefit  over  the  vast  ma- 
jority of  the  orthodox  who  hold  another  opinion,  but, 
as  we  think,  lose  much  comfort ;  for  all  well-taught 
Christians  believe  that,  though  the  disembodied  soul  of 
the  wicked  man  goes  to  the  hell  of  fire,  and  the  soul  of 
the  pious  man  goes  to  heaven,  at  once,  the  one  will 
receive  a  great  accession  of  misery,  the  other  of  bliss, 
when  souls  are  united  again  to  their  proper  bodies ; 
because  then  tlie  entire  man  will  suffer  or  enjoy  with 


Lect.  XIX  ]  THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  405 

greater  intensity.  But  as  was  said  before,  the  number 
even  of  Episcopalians  holding  this  doctrine  is  compara- 
tively small,  many  of  the  same  creed  opposing  it  stren- 
uously, others  speaking  of  it  very  doubtingly  ;  nor  has 
it  any  place  in  their  articles  or  liturgy  ;  *  and,  as  it  is 
based  on  the  same  texts  as  the  Romish  doctrine  of 
purgatory,  a  due  examination  of  those  texts  will  suffice 
to  refute  both. 

a.  When  the  apostle  in  Ephesians  (iv.  9)  asserts 
that  our  Lord  "  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth,"  he  simply,  according  to  his  Hebraistic  habit  of 
language,  means  to  describe  the  Saviour's  extreme 
humiliation  for  us,  in  submitting  to  poverty  of  life,  the 
shame  of  the  cross,  and  even  to  the  disgraces  of  the 
grave  in  his  burial  under  ground.  He  could  not  as.  a 
man  descend  lower.  It  was  from  the  uttermost  depths 
of  human  ignominy  that  he  ascended  to  the  sublimest 
height  of  glory  in  heaven,  bearing  up  with  him  his 
cross-scarred,  once  dead  and  buried  body,  to  the  right 
hand  of  his  Father's  throne. 

h.  The  text  in  1  Peter  (iii.  18,  19),  quoted  to  prove 
that  our  Lord  went  after  his  death,  and  preached  to  the 
spirits  in  prison,  teaches  no  such  thing.  For,  if  we 
read  from  the  14th  verse,  we  see  that  the  apostle  is 
exhorting  Christians  to  steadfastness  and  patience  under 

*  The  XLth  article  adopted  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.  condemns  the 
doctrine  of  the  soul  sleeping  between  death  and  the  resurrection,  but  says 
nothing  about  a  separate  state.  The  expressions  in  the  prayer  of  the 
Burial-Service:  "Almighty  God,  with  whom  do  live  the  spirits  of  them  that 
depart  hence  in  the  Lord,  and  with  whom  the  souls  of  the  faithful,  after 
they  are  delivered  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh  are  in  joy  and  felicity;" 
....  and  that  God  would  hasten  his  kingdom  "  that  all  the  elect  might 
have  their  perfect  consummation  and  bliss  both  in  body  and  soul,"  are 
quite  as  much  in  conformity  with  our  opinions,  if  not  more  so,  and  were. 
no  doubt,  like  many  other  things  in  the  book,  adopted,  at  the  farthest,  as  a 
compromise  of  sentiments  on  things  not  essential. 


406  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  calumny  and  persecution  :  "  If  ye  suffer  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  liappy  are  ye,  and  be  not  afraid  of  their  ter- 
ror, neither  be  troubled  ;  but  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in 
your  hearts  ;  and  be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to 
every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that 
is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear ;  having  a  good  con- 
science ;  .  .  .  .  for  it  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be 
so,  that  ye  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing." 
Then,  to  encourage  them  in  this  patient  steadfastness, 
he  gives  two  examples  of  fidelity  and  deliverance : 
"  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just 
for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God  ;  being 
put  to  death  in  the  flesh,"  —  persecuted  to  that  last  ex- 
tremity, —  "  but,"  not  abandoned  by  God,  "  quickened 
by  the  Spirit,  even  by  the  Holy  Ghost  who  raised  him 
gloriously  ;  "  then  again  :  "  by  which,"  the  same  Spirit 
which  moved  him  to  his  mission  of  suffering  and  mercy, 
and  delivered  him  triumphantly,  "  also  he  went  and 
preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison,  which  sometime 
were  disobedient,  when  once  the  long-suffering  of  God 
waited  in  the  days  of  Noah  while  the  ark  was  a  prepar- 
ing, wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  souls,  were  saved  by 
water."  He  did  preach  to  the  spirits  in  prison,  but 
not  when  they  w^ere  in  prison,  neither  did  he  go  per- 
sonally after  his  death  to  preach  to  them  :  he  preached 
to  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Noah,  when  they  were 
living  on  earth  at  the  time  the  ark  was  a  preparing  ; 
for  the  neglect  of  whose  warnings  they  were  drowned, 
and  cast  into  the  prison  of  hell  where  they  have  been 
ever  since,  as  they  were  at  the  time  Peter  wrote. 
Christ,  in  Noah,  by  his  Spirit,  preached  to  them  before 
the  flood,  just  as  in  his  ministers  he  preaches  to  us  by 
his  Spirit  now. 


Lect.  XIX.J  THE  DESCENT  INTO  HELL.  407 

Noah,  acting  under  the  mfluence  of  this  Si)irit  of 
Christ  as  a  preacher  of  truth,  suffered  many  trials,  but 
was  dehvered  out  of  them  all  in  the  ark  which  bore 
him  safely  over  the  waters  that  submerged  the  wicked 
to  hell.  Now,  reasons  the  apostle,  "the  like  figure 
(that  is,  the  ark  on  the  water)  whereunto,  even  baptism, 
doth  also  now  save  us"  who  are  suffering  persecutions 
by  making  us  one  with  Christ — "baptism  (not  [like 
circumcision  which  was]  the  putting  away  of  the  filth 
of  the  flesh  but  [see  verses  15,  16]  the  answer  of  a  good 
conscience  toward  God,)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ,"  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  eternal,  complete 
redemption.  This  is  the  only  view  of  the  passage  that 
will  connect  its  several  parts  from  the  14th  verse  to  the 
end  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  fitness  be- 
tween Christian  steadfastness,  which  is  the  apostle's 
'theme,  and  Christ's  preaching  to  souls  in  purgatory. 
There  are  other  good  reasons  against  the  papistical  in- 
terpretation, but  what  has  been  said  is  sufficient. 

c.  It  has  also  been  contended  that  the  Paradise 
into  which  (Luke  xxiii.  43)  our  Lord  promised  the 
penitent  thief  admission  with  himself,  the  very  day  they 
died,  must  be  some  other  place  than  iieaven,  and,  there- 
fore, the  separate  place  of  faithful  souls.  We  cannot 
allow  either  supposition  ;  but  see  the  contrary.  By  sin 
man  lost  paradise,  where  he  had  enjoyed  the  favor  of 
God,  and  was  driven  out  of  it ;  and,  now  that  our  Lord 
had  expiated  sin  for  the  restoration  of  his  people  to 
divine  favoi-,  what  more  natural  or  appropriate  than  to 
call  the  state  of  his  people's  recovered  blessedness, 
paradise?  What  more  in  harmony  with  the  great 
truth  than  that  he,  as  the  second  Adam,  should,  his 
work  of  salvation  being  finished,  reenter  paradise  as 


408  THE  DESCENT  INTO  HELL.  [Lkct.  XIX. 

the  liead  of  his  new  race,  taking,  as  a  trophy  of  his 
merits  and  as  an  earnest  of  his  churcli,  the  converted 
malefactor  into  its  holy,  blissfnl  beauty  ?  We  cannot 
imagine  a  better  name  for  the  heaven  of  the  recovered 
humanity,  than  ])aradise.  Why  should  there  not  be 
a  second  paradise  when  there  is  a  second  %^dam  ? 

Besides,  the  first  paradise  was  not  the  abode  of  un- 
embodied  spirits,  butof  man  integrally,  body  and  soul: 
with  what  proj)riety  or  intelligibleness  can  its  name  be 
given  to  a  sphere  where  man  never  is,  bodily  ?  Is  not 
heaven,  which  has  always  been  the  abode  of  pure,  holy 
spirits,  the  more  fitting  place  for  the  spirit  of  a  just 
man  when  disembodied  ? 

There  is,  moreover,  no  warrant  in  Scripture  for  such 
a  definition  of  paradise.  The  word,  which  literally 
means  a  garden,  is  used  by  the  Seventy  for  the  Garden 
of  Eden,  and  in  the  New  Testament  occurs  in  only 
two  places  besides  our  text :  once  in  2  Corinthians 
xii.  4,  and  in  Revelation  ii.  7. 

In  the  first,  the  whole  passage  taken  together  inter- 
prets itself.  "  I  knew,"  says  he,  speaking  of  himself,  "  a 
man  in  Christ  above  fourteen  years  ago,  (whether  in 
the  body  I  cannot  tell,  or  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  tell  : 
God  knoweth)  —  such  a  man  caught  up  to  the  third 
heaven  ;  and  I  knew  such  a  man  (whether  in  the  body 
or  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell :  God  knoweth)  —  how 
that  he  was  caught  up  into  paradise,  where  he  heard 
imspeakable  words."  Now,  here,  before  we  go  farther, 
we  must  note  two  things  that  make  it  most  unHkely  for 
Paul  to  have  had  the  views  of  paradise  which  they 
have,  against  whom  we  argue.  They  declare  loundly 
that  it  is  the  separate  place  of  faithful  spirits  only  ;  but 
Paul,  who  must  have  known  this  if  it  were  so,  cannot 


THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  409 

tell  whether  he  went  there  in  his  body  or  out  of  it. 
Had  he  gone  to  such  a  place,  it  must  have  been  in 
spirit,  as  they  say  Christ  did.  Then  they  situate  para- 
dise in  sheol,  or  hades  ;  and  throughout  in  Scripture, 
men  are  said  to  go  down  into  sheol^  as  here  in  the  creed  : 
"  He  descended  into  hell ;  "  but  Paul  was  "  caught  up 
into  paradise :  "  went  there  in  the  same  direction  — 
upward  —  that  he  went  to  the  third  heaven.  The 
utter  discrepancy  is   manifest. 

But,  on  taking  the  whole  passage,  the  two  state- 
ments only  describe,  to  any  unbiased  judgment,  one 
rapture,  —  not  two,  as  our  opponents  think  ;  for  it  is  only 
after  the  second  statement  that  he  states  what  occurred 
in  his  vision,  i.  e.  he  "  heard  unspeakable  words." 
After  his  manner,  writing  as  he  did  for  Gentiles  and 
Jews,  he  repeats  his  first  statement,  using  for  the  state 
of  the  blest  the  word  to  which  his  Hebrew  readers 
were  accustomed.  Not  improbably  (as  we  think),  he 
meant  to  teach  them  that,  contrary  to  the  popular  opin- 
ion derived  from  the  rabbins,  paradise  was  not  in  sheol, 
or  "  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,"  but  in  the  third 
heaven,  which  all  admit  is  the  immediate  presence  of 
God.*  If  there  was  only  one  rapture,  therefore,  our 
point  is  proved  ;  but  if  there  were  two,  it  by  no  means 
proves  that  paradise  is  a  state  separate  from  heaven. 

For,  in  Rev.  ii.  7,  we  read  :  "  To  him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  paradise  of  God."  Now,  where  the 
tree  of  life  is,  there  is  paradise ;  but  in  the  22d  chapter 
(1,  2)  we  read  again  :  "  He  showed  me  a  pure   river 

*  Paul  certainly  had  two  raptures  or  visions,  at  least,  before  this:  one 
at  his  conversion,  near  Damascus;  another  shortly  after,  at  Jerusalem. 
Acts  xxii.  17.  Hut  both  were  more  than  fourteen  years  before  the  date  of 
the  epistle,  that,  at  the  earliest,  was  written  a.  d.  56  —  probably  later. 


410  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  [Lf.ct.  XIX. 

of  the  water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of 
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb;  in  the  midst  of  the 
street  of  it,  and  on  either  side  of  the  river,  was  there 
the  tree  of  life."  Where  the  throne  of  God  and  the 
Lamb  is,  there  is  the  highest  heavens,  the  place  of  final 
blessedness  (see  Rev.  vii.  9)  ;  but  the  tree  of  life  is 
])lanted  near  the  throne  ;  therefore,  there  is  paradise. 
Compare,  also,  with  the  text,  Rev.  iii.  21,  where,  to 
him  that  overcometh,  Christ  promises  a  seat  on  his 
tlu'one.  The  promises  are  parallel.  In  a  word,  what 
more  natural  than  that,  when  the  Spirit  describes  the 
restoration  of  man  to  blessedness,  he  should  describe  it 
by  the  images  of  the  first  paradise,  and  the  tree  of  life, 
of  which  man  was  not  there  permitted  to  eat. 

Before  we  entirely  dismiss  these  controverted  texts, 
let  us  put  alongside  of  them  several  which  are  not  con- 
troverted.     The  apostle  in  Philippians   i.  21—23,  savs, 

"  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain 

For  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  de- 
part and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better."  Now 
Christ  is,  all  admit,  in  heaven,  —  body  and  soul.  When, 
therefore,  Christ  in  life,  that  is,  the  living  to  Christ 
here,  is  exchanged  for  departing  to  be  with  Christ,  it 
must  be  because  the  soul  will  then  go  to  heaven,  where 
Christ  is  ;  which  is,  indeed,  "  far  bettor."  The  reply 
offered  to  this  is  that  Christ  by  his  divinity  is  omnipres- 
ent, and,  also,  by  his  Spirit  present  with  his  saints  in 
their  separate  state  ;  but  this  is  rather  a  quibble  than 
an  argument,  since  it  was  not  necessary  for  tlie  apostle 
to  depart  to  be  with  Christ  in  that  sense ;  as  he  is  here 
in  his  omnipresence  and  by  his  Spirit  until  the  end  of 
tlie  world.  The  apostle  evidently  means  a  jyersonal 
nearness  to  his  Lord.       So  he  says,  2    Cor.   v.    5-8, 


Lfct.  XIX.]  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  411 

even  Avhen  anticipating  the  fulness  of  the  resurrection  : 
"  Now  he  that  hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same  thing 
is  God,  who  also  hath  given  unto  us  the  earnest  of  the 
Spirit.  Therefore,  we  are  always  confident,  knowing 
that,  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body,  we  are  absent 
(not  at  home)  from  the  Lord  :  for  we  walk  by  faith,  not 
by  sight  (that  is,  in  this  life)  :  we  are  confident,  I  say, 
and  willing  rather  to  be  absent  *  from  the  body  (not  at 
home  in  the  body),  and  to  be  present  (at  home)  with 
the  Lord."  Certainly,  this  means  personal  nearness 
and  actual  vision  ;  for  the  contrast  is  of  sight  to  faith. 
And  where  is  the  Christian's  home  —  his  dwelling,  not 
in  a  foreign  land,  but  with  his  people  ?  In  sJieol^  or 
heaven  ?  In  corroboration  of  this,  see  what  Stephen 
the  martyr  saw  and  said  at  his  death,  Acts  vii.  55  : 
"  He,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  looked  up  stead- 
fastly into  heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Je- 
sus standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  .  .  .  And  they 
stoned  Stephen,  calling  upon  God,  and  saying.  Lord  Je- 
sus, receive  my  spirit !  "  Where  would  the  Lord  Jesus 
receive  the  soul  of  his  saint,  but  where  he  himself  is  ? 

Other  corroboratory  passages  might  be  added,  but 
these  will  answer  our  purpose. 

II.  The  doctors  of  the  reformed  churches,  findino- 
the  article  in  the  creed,  and  not  wishing  to  reject  it, 
though  having  no  respect  for  the  dogmas  of  the  papists, 
expounded  it  in  a  sense  conformable  to  the  word  of 
God.  Thus  Calvin  (Ins.  ii.  16,  10)  :  "  Nothing  had 
been  done  if  Christ  had  endured  only  corporeal  death. 
To  interpose  between  us  and  the  anger  of  God,  and 
satisfy  his  righteous  judgment,  it  was  necessary  that  he 

*  'EKSTjfiEug  —  EK  and  d;;^of — exiled,  expatriated,  awaj'  from  one's 
people. 


412  THE  DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  [Lkct.  XIX. 

should  feel  the  weijiht  of  divine  venoeance.  Whence, 
also,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  engage  at  close 
quarters,  as  it  were,  with  the  powers  of  hell,  and  the 
horrors  of  eternal  di'ath.  He  undertook  and  paid  all 
the  penalties  which  must  have  been  exacted  from  them 
(for  whom  he  was  Surety),  the  only  exception  being 
that  the  pains  of  hell  could  not  hold  him.  Hence,  there 
is  nothing  strange  in  its  being  said  that  "  he  descended 
into  hell,"  as  he  endured  the  death  which  is  inflicted 
on  the  wicked  by  an  angry  God.  It  is  but  a  frivolous 
and  ridiculous  objection  to  say  that  this  perverts  the 
order  of  the  creed,  putting  after  the  burial  what  pre- 
ceded it.  For,  after  explaining  what  Christ  endured 
in  the  sight  of  man,  the  creed  appropriately  adds  the 
invisible  and  incomprehensible  judgment  which  he  en- 
dured before  (in  the  sight  of)  God,  to  teach  us  that 
not  only  was  the  body  of  Christ  given  up  for  our  re- 
demption, but  that  there  was  a  greater  and  more  excel- 
lent price  :  "  That  he  bore  in  his  soul  the  tortures  of 
condemned  and  ruined  men." 

The  same  view  is  given  bv  the  authors  of  the  "  Hei- 
delberg  Catechism,"  in  the  44th  Question  and  Answer  : 
"  Why  is  there  added  :  '  He  descended  into  hell  ?  ' 
That,  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  assured, 
and  wholly  comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  by  his  inexpressible  anguish,  pains,  terrors,  and 
hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged  during  all  his 
sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath  delivered 
me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell."  With 
this  the  reformed  theologians  universally  agree. 

That  our  Lord  did  so  suffer  the  wrath  of  God,  and 
the  curse  due  to  us  in  his  spirit,  there  can  be  no  doubt ; 
but  that  such  was   the  meaning  of  the  article   when 


THE   DESCENT   INTO   HELL.  413 

added  to  the  creed  after  the  burial,  is  not  so  clear.  Yet 
the  edification  and  comfort  so  derived  is  not  less  ;  nor 
are  we  forbidden  to  think,  if  we  choose,  that  it  was  in- 
serted to  comply  with  the  scripture  of  the  IGtli  Psalm, 
as  quoted  by  the  apostle  at  the  Pentecost. 

It  may,  however,  be  properly  asked,  how,  if  we  re- 
ject, as  we  do,  the  notion  of  an  intermediate  state,  was 
the  time  between  his  death  on  the  cross  and  his  burial 
spent  by  our  Lord  ? 

To  this  our  answer  is,  that,  as  he  commended  his 
departing  spirit  into  the  hands  of  his  Father,  and 
promised  to  take  the  penitent  thief  the  same  day  into 
paradise,  we  believe  that  the  soul  of  our  Lord  did  go 
immediately  to  God  in  heaven.  The  next  day  being 
the  Sabbath,  the  second  Adam  rested  with  God,  after 
accomplishing  the  new  creation,  as  the  first  Adam 
rested  with  Him  after  the  former  creation,  in  para- 
dise. 

The  rest  of  the  Sabbath  being  over,  the  soul  of  our 
Lord  descended  on  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  the 
week,  from  heaven  into  sheol,  or  the  grave,  or  the  state 
of  the  dead  ;  not  to  be  under  the  power  of  death,  but 
as  a  conqueror,  to  take  up  again  his  body  from  under 
the  earth.  In  the  metaphorical  language  of  Scripture, 
we  may  suppose  that  there  was  a  conflict  between  our 
Lord,  now  the  Lord  of  life,  and  "  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ;  "  for  he  is  said  to 
have  vanquished  the  last  enemy,  —  his  spoils  being  his 
own  ransomed  body,  which  he  displayed  openly.  Thus 
we  read :  "  Whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed 
the  pains  of  death,  becaiise  it  was  not  possible  that  he 
should  be  holden  of  it"  (Acts  ii.  24).  So,  also,  in  the 
68th  Psalm  (18th  v.)  :  "  Thou  hast  ascended  up  on 


414  THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  liigli ;  thou  hast  led  captivity  captive  ;  "  upon  wliicli 
the  apostle  (Ephes.  iv.  8-10)  comments  :  "  Where- 
fore he  saith,  When  he  ascended  up  on  high,  he  led 
captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men.  Now  that 
he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he  also  descended  first 
into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  ?  He  tliat  descended 
is  the  same,  also,  that  ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens, 
that  he  might  fill  all  things."  And  again  in  Col.  ii. 
15 :  ''  Having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he 
made  a  show  of  them  opeidy,  triumphing  over  them  in 
it,"  or  by  it,  —  his  resurrection  and  ascension.  As  a 
conqueror  in  an  ancient  triumph  showed  not  only  the 
spoils  of  his  conquest,  but  exhibited  his  vanquished  foes 
in  chains  about  his  car,  so  did  Christ,  bearing  aloft  his 
own  body,  the  earnest  of  all  the  bodies  of  his  people, 
manifest  his  power.  Thus  Hosea  (xiii.  14)  :  "  I  will 
ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  grave  ;  I  will 
redeem  them  from  deatli.  O  death,  I  will  be  thy 
plagues  !  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction  !  "  On 
which  the  apostle  (1  Cor.  xv.  54-56)  :  "  Then  shall 
be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  written,  Death  is 
swallowed  up  in  victory.  O  death !  where  is  thy 
sting  ?  O  grave  !  where  is  thy  victory  ?  The  sting 
of  death  is  sin,  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  ;  but, 
thanks  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  "  Or,  as  Heber  sings  in  his 
magnificent  hymn  for  Easter  :  — 

'*  Now  empty  are  the  courts  of  death, 
And  crushed  thy  sting,  Despair; 
And  roses  bloom  in  the  desert  tomb, 
For  Jesus  hath  been  there. 

"  And  he  hath  tamed  the  strength  of  hell 
And  dragged  him  through  the  sky  ; 


THE  DESCENT  INTO   HELL.  415 

And  captive  behind  his  chariot  wheel 
He  hath  bound  captivity. 

"  God  hath  gone  up  with  a  merry  shout 
Of  his  saints  that  sing  on  high ; 
Witli  his  own  right  hand  and  his  holy  arm 
He  hath  won  the  victory  ! " 

Is  it  presumptuous  to  say  that  this  view  of  the  sub- 
ject meets  the  questions,  and  corresponds  with  the  tes- 
timony of  Scripture  ? 

PRACTICAL    INFERENCES. 

First:   The  completeness  of  Chrisfs  work  for  us. 

He  exhausted-  the  curse  in  his  sufferings,  and  there 
remains  no  hell  for  the  believer. 

He  follows  us  even  into  the  regions  of  the  dead,  and 
bursting  the  bars  of  death,  opens  the  way  for  our 
resurrection. 

He  hath  made  death  our  servant  and  friend. 

Secondly  :   The  blessedness  of  the  believer'' s  death. 

It  is  following  Christ  out  of  this  life  to  heaven. 

It  is  the  departure  of  the  soul,  not  into  prison,  or 
sleep,  but  into  the  presence  of  God. 

It  is  leaving  the  body  of  sin  and  death  in  the  grave, 
to  be  kept  and  purified  by  Christ  until  a  glorious  resur- 
rection.