LECTURE  XX. 

THE  RESUERECTION  OF  CHRIST. 

VOL.  I.  27 


SEVENTEENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 

THE   RESURRECTION   OF   CHRIST. 

Quest.  XLV.    What  doth  the  resurrection  of  Christ projit  ns  f 

Ans.    First,  by  his  resurrection  he  hath  overcome  death   that  he  might 

make  us  of  that  rigliteousness  which  he  had  purchased  for  us  b_y  his 

death;   secondly,  we  are  also  by  his  power  raised  up  to  a  new  life; 

and,  lastly,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our  blessed 

resun-ection. 

"  THE  THIRD  DAY  HE  ROSE  AGAIN  FROM  THE  DEAD." 

TF  you  take  this  article  away  from  our  creed,  the 
"*-  whole  system  of  evangelical  doctrine  is  dissolved  and 
crumbles  to  the  ground  like  a  building  from  under 
which  the  corner-stone  has  been  dragged  out.  The 
prophets  before  him,  our  Lord  himself,  and  the  apostles 
after  him,  stake  the  credibility  of  the  gospel  in  all  its 
parts  and  as  a  whole,  on  tlie  one  fact  of  his  resurrection 
from  the  dead  (a).  Without  it  the  divinity  of  his  per- 
son (S),  the  genuineness  of  his  mission  (e),  the  efficacy 
of  his  atonement  ((^),  and  the  eternal  life  of  his  jjeo- 
ple  (e)  would  be,  not  only  without  proof,  but  proved  to 
be  falsehoods.  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen,"  says  the 
apostle,  "  then  is  our  (a)  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith 
is  also  vain."  Again,  he  speaks  of  himself  as  "sepa- 
rated unto  the  gospel  of  God  .  .  .  concerning  his  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  which  was  made  of  the  seed  of 
David  according  to  the  flesh,  and  (6)  declared  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of 
holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the   dead."     Again, 


420  TIIK  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.         preacliing  to  the  Athenians  on  Mars-liill,  lie  opens  the 
doctrine  of  the  mediatorship  :  "  Now  commandeth  " 
God  "all  men  everywhere  to  repent:  because  he  hath 
appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness  (r)  by  that  man  u>hom  he  hath  or- 
dained: wjiereof  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men, 
in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  deadJ'"'  Again  : 
"  If  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain  ;  ye  are 
yet  in  your  sins  :  "  which  corresponds  with  the  testi- 
mony in  Romans  —  "  To  us  also  it  "  (that  is  the  right- 
eousness of  faith  which  Abraham  had)  "  shall  be  im- 
puted, if  we  believe  on  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our 
Lord  from  the  dead  ;  who  was  delivered  for  our  offences, 
and  was  raised  again  (^)  for  our  justification."  So, 
also,  the  apostle  Peter :  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which,  according  to 
his  abundant  mercy,  hath  (e)  begotten  us  again  unto  a 
lively  hope  (a  hope  of  life)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible, 
and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in 
heaven  for  you,  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the 
last  time."  Lideed,  the  testimony  of  the  Old  Testament 
throughout  foretold  the  humiliation  and  consequent 
exaltation  of  the  Messiah,  as  our  Lord  showed  when, 
walking  with  the  two  disciples  to  Emmaus,  he  said  : 
"  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the 
prophets  have  spoken.  Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suf- 
fered these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his  glory  ?  And, 
beginning  at  Moses  and  all  the  prophets,  he  expounded 
unto  them  in  qll  the  Scriptures  the  things  concerning 
himself."  Hence  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  has  been 
justly   denominated  the  cardinal  fact  of  Christianity  3 


THE   RESURKECTIOX   OF   CHRIST.  421 

and  we  cannot  over-estimate  the  im])ortance  of  rightly 
understanclino;  its  vital  relation  to  all  the  principles  of 
onr  most  holy  faith.  This  is  tanght  us  in  tlie  45th 
Question  and  Answer  of  the  Catechism,  under  three 
comprehensive  heads,  which  suggest  the  proper  order 
for  our  thought,  after  some  preliminary  observations 
on  matter  brought  before  us  by  the  phraseology  of  tlie 
creed. 

By  the  resurrection  of  Clirist  we  mean  what  the 
words  of  the  article  literally  signify:  "He  rose  again 
from  the  dead."  As  he  actually  died  and  not  merely 
swooned  away  (of  which  his  murderers  certified  them- 
selves before  he  was  taken  down  from  the  cross),  so 
he  actually  rose  up  from  death,  leaving  the  tomb  in 
which  he  had  lain  a  living  man.  The  same  body  which 
he  took  on  him  out  of  the  flesh  and  blojpd  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,  (blessed  was  she  above  women,  and  blessed  the 
fruit  of  her  womb  !)  was  crucified  ;  the  same  body  in 
which  he  was  crucified,  was  buried,  and  so  the  same 
body  rose  U])  from  the  grave.  It  was  not  a  phantasm, 
or  mere  semblance  of  a  body,  but  a  real,  substantial 
bod)-,  identical  with  that  which  he  had  before  his  death  ; 
and  in  it  the  Avounds  he  received  on  the  cross  were 
clearly  visible.  Thus,  when  he  appeared  to  his  disci- 
ples in  the  evening,  they  were  "terrified  and  affrighted, 
and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit,  and  he  said 
unto  them  :  Why  are  ye  troubled  ?  and  why  do  thoughts 
(disputes)  arise  in  your  hearts  ?  Behold  my  hands 
and  my  feet  "  (those  dear  hands  and  feet  which  had  been 
pierced  by  the  nails),  "that  it  is  I  myself:  handle  me  and 
see  ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  ye  see  me 
have.  And,  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  showed 
them  his  hands  and  his  feet.      And  while  they  yet  be- 


422  THE   RESURRECTION    OF   CHRIST.         lievecl  not  for  joy,  and  wondered,  he  said  unto  them, 
Have  ye  here  any  meat  ?  And  they  gave  liim  a  ]Mece  of 
a  broiled  fisli  and  of  a  hone^-comb  ;  and  he  took  it  and 
did  eat  before  them  .  .  .  Then  opened  he  tlieir  un- 
derstanding,  that  tliey  might  understand  the  Scriptures; 
and  said  unto  them,  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  be- 
hooved Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  tlie  dead  the 
third  day."  The  evangehst  John  farther  informs  us 
that  Thomas,  the  apostle,  was  not  present  on  this  occa- 
sion, and  when  told  of  it  by  the  rest,  he  doubted  the 
story  and  said  :  "  Except  I  shall  see  in  his  hands  the 
print  of  the  nails,  and  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of 
the  nails,  and  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not 
believe.  And  after  eight  days  again  his  disciples  were 
within,  and  Thomas  with  them.  Then  came  Jesus, 
the  doors  being  shut,  and  stood  in  the  midst  and  said, 
Peace  be  unto  you  !  Then  saitli  he  to  Thomas,  Reach 
hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  (perceive)  my  hands;  and 
reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side  ;  and 
be  not  faithless,  but  believing.  And  Thomas  answered 
and  said  unto  him.  My  Lord  and  my  God."  So  also 
the  apostle  Peter,  when  pi'eaching  to  Cornelius  and  his 
friends  in  Cesarea,  says :  "  Him  God  raised  up  the  third 
day,  and  showed  him  openly  ;  not  to  all  the  people,  but 
unto  witnesses  chosen  before  of  God,  even  te  us,  who  did 
eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the  dead." 
These  were  palpable,  unmistakable  proofs  that  the  vis- 
ible form  of  Jesus  was  a  real,  substantial,  living  body, 
—  the  same  that  was  crucified. 

At  the  same  time,  the  manner  and  character  of  the 
corporeal  life  which  our  Lord  had  when  visible  to  his 
disciples  on  earth  after  his  resurrection  must  have  dif- 
fered in  some  important  particulars  from  those  of  the 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF   CHRIST.  423 

life  he  had  had  l^efore  his  death ;  and,  for  the  same  rea- 
sons, his  body  must  have  been  changed,  not  as  to  iden- 
tity or  essential  quality,  but  as  to  its  mode  of  being. 
It  becoijies  us  to  speak  here  with  a  reverent  modesty, 
yet  we  cannot  and  ought  not  to  blink  the  questions 
which  necessarily  arise. 

The  life  which  he  received  and  exercised  then  was 
not  derived,  as  his  former  life  or  our  ordinary  life,  from 
physical  generation  and  growth,  but  from  the  immedi- 
ate will  of  God.  His  former  life  was  necessarily,  be- 
cause of  his  body's  natural  tendency  to  decay,  mortal. 
The  death  of  Christ  in  his  human  nature  was  as  much 
the  inevitable  consequence  of  his  being  born  of  a 
woman  as  ours  is.  Nay,  one  of  the  main  reasons  why 
he  became  a  partaker  of  our  flesh  and  blood  was,  that 
he  might  die  and,  as  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  says, 
"through  death  .  .  .  destroy  him  that  had  the  power 
of  death  ;  "  which  he  could  not  have  done  in  any  other' 
nature  than  human.  But  the  life  of  Christ  after  his 
resurrection  was  in  its  nature  immortal,  and  his  blessed 
body  incapable  of  decay  or  any  of  those  weaknesses 
which  arise  from  a  tendency  to  corruption.  It  was 
the  same  life  that  he  has  now  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father ;  and,  therefore,  his  body  had  all  those  prop- 
erties that  his  body  has,  and  the  bodies  of  his  saints  will 
have  after  their  resurrection,  in  heaven.  This  body 
and  the  change  through  which  it  passes,  is  described  by 
the  apostle  in  the  15th  of  1  Corinthians  :  "  It  is  sown 
in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incorruption  ;  it  is  sown  in 
dishonor,  it  is  raised  in  glory  ;  it  is  sown  in  weakness, 
it  is  raised  in  power  ;  it  is  sown  a  natural  (animal) 
body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body  ;  and  so  it  is  written, 
The  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul  (that  is, 


424  THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.         [I.ect.  XX. 

made  for  an  animal  life)  ;  the  last  Adam  was  made 
a  qnickening  spirit."  Now  no  one  may  pretend  to  un- 
derstand the  full  meaning  of  these  remarkable  antitheti- 
cal phrases  (we  must  wait  till  the  light  of  heaven  for 
that)  ;  but  this  much  we  can,  with  the  aid  of  other 
scriptures,  discover  :  The  heavenly  life  of  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  and  of  his  people  after  their  resurrection, 
having  a  spiritual,  not  an  animal  source,  will  be  so  far 
spiritual  as  to  be  set  free  from  all  animal  necessities  and 
infirmities  ;  such  as  dependence  on  food  and  breath,  and 
liability  to  passion,  appetite,  weariness,  sickness,  and 
decay.  So,  by  consequence,  their  bodies  will  be  ethere- 
alized,  purged  from  all  grossness,  no  longer  a  hindrance 
to  their  souls,  but  sympathizing  with,  and  partaking  of, 
spiritual  activity  and  indefatigable  self-supporting  en- 
ergy. In  a  word,  though  we  have  not  now  time  to 
enter  upon  the  edifying  comparison,  the  glorified  body 
of  Christ,  as  it  was  seen  by  the  three  disciples,  transfig- 
ured on  the  to})  of  Tabor,  was  the  pre-manifestation  of 
his  heavenly  body,  and  the  pattern  after  which  the 
bodies  of  tlie  redeemed  will  be  transfio-ured  at  the  res- 
urrection.  "  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven,"  says  the 
apostle,  "  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  who  shall  cliange  our  vile  body, 
that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body, 
according  to  the  working"  (energy,  which  is  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,)  "  whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  himself;"  or  again  in  the  aforecited 
chapter  of  1  Corinthians  :  "  As  we  have  borne  the 
image  of  the  earthy  "  (that  is,  of  the  first  Adam  who  was 
formed  from  the  earth),  "  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of 
the  heavenly  "  (that  is,  of  the  second  x\dam,  the  Lord 
from  heaven).     Let  it  not  be  objected  to  this  view  of 


THE   RESURRECTION    OF   CHRIST.  425 

our  Lord's  body  after  his  resurrection,  that  he  did  actu- 
ally partake  of  food.  So  did  the  angels  who  appeared 
in  bodily  shape  to  Abraham  and  Lot.  It  was  but  a 
gracious  condescension  of  Christ  to  the  weak  minds  of 
his  disci])les,  the  more  readily  to  convince  them  that  he 
was  the  same  Lord  who  had  so  often  broken  bread  with 
them  before  ;  not  because  he  needed  the  sustenance 
requisite  for  a  mortal  life.  Our  own  Witsius  on  this 
quotes  with  high  approbation  a  passage  of  St.  Augus- 
tine :  "  To  be  incapable  of  taking  food,  or  to  stand  in 
need  of  food,  would  be  equally  an  evidence  of  imper- 
fection in  the  revived  body.  The  jiarched  earth  swal- 
lows up  water  in  a  very  different  manner  from  that  in 
which  it  is  taken  up  by  the  burning  sun.  The  one 
does  it  from  need,  the  other  b}^  power."  For  a  like 
reason,  our  Lord  did  not,  during  the  forty  days,  appear 
to  the  disciples  in  his  glory.  Tliey  could  not  have 
identified  him  in  such  radiance  with  the  man  of  sor- 
rows, ueitlier  could  they  with  their  sensual  eyes  have 
looked  upon  him  and  lived,  as  w^e  know  from  the  ex- 
perience of  the  three  witnesses  who,  on  the  holy  mount, 
became  as  "  dead  men." 

While,  however,  w^e  believe  that  the  body  of  our 
Lord  was  gloriously  changed,  we  must  reject  the  vain 
notions  of  pajnsts  and  others,  that  it  became  infinitely 
divisible  and  omnipresent,  as  they  contend  that  it  is  in 
the  mass.  It  continued  to  be  a  human  body,  and, 
therefore,  limited  to  such  space  as  a  human  body  natu- 
rally occupies  ;  nor  is  it  possible,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  even  for  a  miracle  to  transubstantiate  the  sacra- 
mental bread  in  the  priest's  hands,  so  as  to  make  it 
part  of  Christ's  body,  which  is  in  heaven. 

We  should  note,  also,  the  language  of  the  article  : 


426  THE  RESURRECTION   OF   CHRIST.        "  He  rose.''  He  rose  from  the  dead  by  his  own  media- 
torial power.  He  had  purchased  the  right  of  uprising, 
by  his  blood  shed  in  expiation  of  sin.  Yet,  in  niany 
passages  we  read  that  God,  even  God  the  Father, 
raised  him  up;  and,  in  several,  the  quickening  is  as- 
cribed to  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  same  is 
said  of  his  incarnation  :  "  God  sent  his  Son,  made  of  a 
woinan  ;  "  "  tlie  Holy  Ghost  came  upon  the  virgin,  and 
the  ])ower  of  the  Highest  overshadowed  her;  yet  he 
"  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant ;  "  he  took  part 
of  flesh  and  blood.  So  with  his  death  :  "  It  pleased  the 
Father  to  bruise  him,"  and  to  "  make  his  soul  (life) 
an  offeriiio;  for  sin  ;  and  though  he  of  his  own  will  laid 
down  his  life  for  his  friends,  it  was  through  the  eternal 
Spirit  that  "  he  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God." 
There  is  no  contradiction  in  these  several  statements, 
but  a  declaration  of  the  consent  and  coefficiency  of  the 
three  persons  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity  m  the  several 
processes  of  the  redemption.  Glory  be  to  the  Father, 
and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen  ! 

The  article  farther  particularizes  that  it  was  the 
third  day  on  which  our  Lord  rose  again  from  the  dead. 
This  is  according  to  several  scriptures,  particularly 
Christ's  own  words  shortly  after  his  transfiguration 
(Mark  ix.  31),  and  was  literally  true  ;  for  he  expired 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  day  before  the  Jewish  Sabbath 
(our  Friday),  and  rose  on  the  morning  of  the  first  day 
of  the  week.  But  other  scriptures  seem  to  have  fore- 
told that  the  interval  would  be  three  days,  or  three 
days  and  three  nights.  He  himself  said  to  the  Jews, 
speaking  of  his  body,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  ;  '"'  and  again  :  "  As  Jonas 
was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  427 

shall  the  Son  of  Man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in 
the  heart  of  the  earth."  But  there  is  proper!)''  neither 
discrepance  nor  difficulty  in  this,  the  two  expressions 
in  the  Hebrew  manner  of  speech  meaning  the  same 
thing.  They  began  the  day  of  twenty-four  hours  in 
the  evening,  and  called  it  the  evening  and  the  morn- 
ing, like  the  Greek  night-day  ;  and  also  reckoned  a 
part  of  a  day  as  the  Avhole.  So,  as  our  Lord  remained 
dead  part  of  three  days,  they  would  express  it  by  three 
days  and  three  nights.  Any  objection  to  the  truth  of 
our  Lord  is  frivolous,  and  any  attempt  to  explain  it 
otherwise  than  we  have  done  would  be  incorrect.  Our 
Lord  and  his  disciples  would  not  make  so  manifest  a 
contradiction  of  themselves  as  the  use  of  three  days 
and  three  nights  in  any  other  sense  would  have  been. 
He  continued  dead  long  enough  to  disprove  the  suspi- 
cion that  he  had  only  swooned,  but  not  long  enough, 
especially  as  his  dear  body  was  wrapt  around  with 
spices,  to  "  see  corruption." 

He  rose  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  thus  ushering 
in  a  new  world  ;  whence  the  early  Christians  under 
apostolical  authority,  which  was  equivalent  to  revela- 
tion, for  they  acted  under  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  transferred  the  weekly  rest,  or  Sabbath,  from  the 
seventh  day  to  that  of  the  resu.rrection.  After  this  Ave 
have  no  trace  of  their  keeping  the  seventh  day,  but 
many  instances  of  their  meeting  together  for  Christian 
worship,  instruction,  and  communion,  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  the 
Lord's  day  (Rev.  i.  10).  The  doctrine  of  the  Sabbatli 
will  be  handled  at  large  in  its  proper  place  ;  but,  while 
we  devoutly  acknowledge  the  obligation  of  the  Sabbath 
to  be  perpetual,  we  cannot  err  in  following  apostolical 


428  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.       [Lkct   XX. 

example  in  connecting  the  Sabbath  rest  with  the  resur- 
rection of  him  who  is  Lord  of  the  Sabbath.  The 
change  is  but  another  honor  done  to  the  mediatorial 
kingship  of  Christ,  \Yho  appointed  Ills  Sabbath  as  tiie 
Creator  in  the  bc-'ginning  had  apj)ointed  his.  Tlie 
transference  of  divine  authority  to  the  Mediator  was 
aptly  signah'zed  by  a  change  of  the  day  symbolical  of 
worship.  It  meets  the  instincts  of  the  Ciu'istian  heart. 
Man  yet  guiltless,  the  representative  of  God  over  the 
works  of  his  hands,  might  enjoy,  as  he  needed,  com- 
munion with  the  Creator  to  prepare  him  for  his  holy 
duty  ;  but  man  the  sinner,  whose  only  hope  is  in  the 
merits  of  him  whom  the  Father  honors,  and  whose 
evangelical  duty  is  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Son,  needs 
and  can  enjoy  divine  communion  with  his  Saviour,  and 
only  through  him  can  he  reacli  communion  with  the 
Father,  our  God  in  Christ. 

The  last  day  of  the  week  has  for  us  no  associations 
or  warrant  of  hope.  It  leads  us  only  to  the  tomb, 
where  he,  who  had  promised  to  redeem  Israel,  lies  dead 
and  cold,  and,  to  all  human  sight,  \anquished  by  our 
great  enemy  ;  but,  on  the  morning  of  the  first  day,  we 
meet  a  risen  Saviour,  triuni})liant  over  death,  and  victo- 
rious for  us.  Then,  throughout  the  day,  more  than  on 
any  other,  does  he  delight  to  mingle  with  us  by  his 
spirit,  whether  in  our  solitary  searchings  for  him  as 
man,  or  in  our  social  converse,  like  the  two  disciples 
talking  together  as  they  walked,  or  in  the  full  assembly, 
as  the  ten  with  the  devout  women.  Oh,  who  that  has 
enjoyed  such  communion  with  the  Lord,  can  doubt  that 
God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  has  Ijlessed  our 
Sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it  ? 

Now,  on   what  authority  does   the   article   before  us 


Lect.XX.]         the  RESUKKECTION  of  CHRIST.  429 

require  our  faith  in  the  fact  that  our  Lord  rose  again 
from  the  dead  on  the  third  day  ?  We  answer  solely  on 
the  authority  of  the  apostles.  There  are,  it  is  true, 
corroboratory  proofs  from  external  history,  but  as  Chris- 
tians we  can  base  our  belief  only  on  inspired  records. 
The  story,  as  told  by  the  evangelists  with  such  wonder- 
ful agreement,  is,  indeed,  a  testimony  to  its  own  truth- 
fulness ;  but  two  of  the  four  were  themselves  apostles, 
and  the  other  two  companions  of  apostles,  —  Mark  of 
Peter,  and  Luke  of  Paul.  So  it  is  on  the  apostolical 
testimony  alone  that  we  depend.  This  was  the  divine 
arrangement.  In  all  the  dis2:)ensation  of  the  gospel,  it 
is  the  order  of  God  that  they  who  are  saved  should  be 
saved  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.  The  pride  of  human 
scepticism*  must  be  broken  down  by  the  truth,  mighty 
through  the  accompanying  power  of  God.  It  had  been 
easy  for  the  risen  Saviour  to  have  showed  himself  alive 
to  the  Sanbedrim  and  all  the  people  of  Jerusalem  ;  but 
such  is  not  the  divine  method.  Our  Lord  during  his 
life  did  exhibit  before  them  every  sufficient  and  pro- 
phetical proof  of  his  Messiahship  ;  yet  they  wickedly 
rejected  and  crucified  him.  After  his  death  and  resur- 
rection, he  demonstrates  the  truth  of  his  gospel,  not  by 
mere  human  suffrages,  but  by  its  own  divinity  and  his 
confirming  spirit.  It  was  graciously  due  to  those  who 
had  believed  on  him  during  his  life  of  humiliation,  that 
they  should  behold  him  risen  ;  and  it  is  most  probable, 
we  might  say  certain,  that  he  did  show  himself  alive 
after  his  passion,  to  all  such  believers ;  but  for  others, 
the  testimony  of  the  appointed  witnesses  was  to  be 
enough.  So  the  apostle  Peter,  in  the  first  sermon  to 
tbe  Gentiles,  says  :  "  Him  God  raised  up  the  third  day, 
and  showed  him  openly,  not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto 


430  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.        [Lkct.  XX. 

witnesses  chosen  before  of  God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat 
and  drink  Avitli  him  after  lie  rose  from  the  dead ;  and 
he  commanded  ns  to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to  tes- 
tify that  it  is  he  which  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the 
judge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  him  give  all  the  proph- 
ets witness,  that,  through  his  name,  whosoever  believeth 
in  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins."  In  conformity 
to  this  we  are  told,  that  all  true  believers,  who  consti- 
tute by  aggregation  the  church  of  God,  are  built  on 
the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus 
Christ  himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone,  —  the  testi- 
mony of  the  prophets  before  Christ,  and  the  testimony 
of  the  apostles  after  him,  being  united  in  his,  person, 
history,  and  works,  as  the  Saviour.  Nay,  one  of  the 
chief  purposes  for  which  the  apostleship  was  ordained 
was  to  testify  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  ;  and  a  main, 
indispensable  qualification  for  the  office  was  that  the 
one  chosen  should  have  seen  the  Lord  after  his  resur- 
rection. Thus,  in  the  aforecited  passage  (Luke  xxiv. 
46-8),  our  Lord,  in  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which 
he  arose,  after  having  showed  them  his  woiuids  and 
illuminated  them  with  a  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures, 
added:  "Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behooved  Christ 
to  suffer,  and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day : 
and  that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be 
preached  in  his  name  among  all  nations,  beginning  at 
Jerusalem.  And  ye  are  witnesses  of  these  things.  And 
behold,  I  send  the  promise  of  ray  Father  upon  you  : 
but  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  until  ye  be  en- 
dued with  power  from  on  high."  So,  when  the  eleven 
before  the  Pentecost  thought  it  necessary  to  put  one  in 
the  ])lace  of  Iscariot,  Peter  said  that  one  must  be  or- 
dained to  be  a  witness  of  his  (the  Loid's)   resurrection. 


THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.  431 

Paul,  called  afterwards  to  be  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles, 
received  this  qualification  by  special  vision  of  Christ, 
and  vindicates  his  claim  to  the  apostleship,  which  it 
would  seem  some  had  challenged  by  demanding  :  "  Am 
I  not  an  apostle  ?  Am  I  not  free  ?  Have  I  not  seen 
Jesus  the  Lord?  "  And  in  another  place,  he  says,  after 
speaking  of  the  other  witnesses  to  the  resurrection : 
"  Last  of  all,  he  was  seen  of  me  also,  as  of  one  born 
out  of  due  time.  For  I  am  the  least  o£.the  apostles,  that 
am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle,  because  I  perse- 
cuted the  church  of  God." 

For  this  reason  among  others,  we  of  the  reformed 
churches  consider  that  the  apostolical  office  ceased  with 
the  first  college,  and  that  it  is  wholly  unscriptural  to 
hold  of  any  minister  in  the  church  since,  that  he  is  a 
successor  of  the  apostles  as  such.  The  apostles  were 
also  preachers,  and  we  should  be  sorry  to  deny  the 
right  of  any  ordained  minister  of  any  evangelical 
church,  to  follow  the  apostles  as  a  preacher  of  the  word  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  we  confidently  and  flatly  deny 
that  any  preacher  or  minister  of  any  rank,  of  any 
church,  can  be  a  successor  of  the  apostles  in  any  other 
sense,  and  consider  such  pretensions  preposterous,  arro- 
gant, contrary  to  the  truth  of  God.  For,  besides  its 
being  necessary  to  an  apostle  that  he  should  be  appointed 
immediately  by  Christ,  should  have  the  gift  of  inspira- 
tion, should  be  able  to  work  miracles  and  to  confer  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  —  none  of  which  marks  are 
discernible  in  those  who  claim  the  office  nowadays  —  it 
were  enough  to  vitiate  their  assumption  that  they  have 
not  seen  the  Lord  Jesus. 

While,  however,  we  receive  the  fact  on  the  authority 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  apostles,  the  same  Spirit  bear- 


432  THE  EESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  FLect.  XX. 

ing  witness  in  our  hearts  that  their  word  is  true,  we 
should  be  irrational  not  to  inquire  on  what  grounds 
their  testimony  is  put  beyond  impeachment. 

If  Christ  be  not  risen,  as  they  state,  Christianity  is 
the  most  consummate  imposture,  and  the  result  of  the 
basest  conspiracy  that  the  world  has  ever  seen.  But 
this  is  impossible  ;  for  let  us  consider,  first :  The  char- 
acter of  the  witnesses.  They  were,  —  with  the  doubtful 
exceptions  of  Matthew,  the  publican,  among  the  eleven 
who  were  with  Christ  from  the  beginning,  and  of  Paul, 
who  was  added  four  years  after  the  crucifixion, — simple, 
unlearned,  inexperienced,  born  in  a  rude  country  and 
bred  to  humble  callings,  —  men  most  unlikely  to  origi- 
nate such  a  scheme  or  to  dare  the  risk  of  carrying  it  on. 
They  were,  also,  ordinarily  shrewd  and  not  easily  de- 
ceived as  to  facts  that  came  under  their  immediate 
observation.  But,  if  they  had  been  deceived  by  the 
pretensions  of  him  they  followed,  his  death  of  weakness 
and  shame,  had  it  not  been  succeeded  as  he  had  fore- 
told by  his  resurrection  on  the  third  day,  would  have 
undeceived  them.  The  resurrection  was  the  hinge  on 
which  their  opinion  of  Jesus  turned ;  and,  had  it  not 
occurred,  there  was  no  motive  for  them  to  continue 
their  adherence  to  his  cause,  but  every  reason  for  their 
abandonment  of  it.  Yet,  though  their  faith  was  weak 
and  often  vacillating  before  his  death,  shortly  after  it 
they  appear  among  the  people  cognizant  of  the  cruci- 
fixion, courageous,  unhesitating  and  explicit  in  declar- 
ing their  full  reliance  on  the  truth  and  power  of  the 
doctrine  he  had  preached.  And  what  was  that  doc- 
trine but  a  system  of  the  purest  morals,  the  most  relig- 
ious obligations,  the  utmost  self-denial  and  steadfast- 
ness under  persecution  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  from  a 


Lect.XX.]  the  EESUERECTION  of  CHRIST.  433 

just  God  a  recompense  of  mercy,  not  in  this  world  but 
in  eternity  ?  There  have  been  many  false  religions,  and 
each  has  had  many  devoted  followers,  but  no  instance 
has  been  seen  where  men  lied  for  the  sake  of  virtue  ; 
conspired  to  cheat  that  they  might  make  others  upright ; 
and  braved  the  vengeance  of  God,  to  teach  the  world 
his  worship  in  the  purest  and  most  spiritual  form  :  cer- 
tainly none  in  which  the  devotees  based  their  delusion 
on  a  palpable  fact  of  which  their  senses  were  judges,  yet 
which  had  never  occurred. 

Consider  also  tlie  number  of  the  witnesses.  The 
prophets,  from  the  foil  downward  until  the  baptism  of 
Christ,  had  all  of  them  foretold  the  humiliation  and 
glory  of  Christ,  some  of  them  with  great  particularity 
as  to  time,  place,  and  circumstances ;  John  the  Baptist, 
at  the  height  of  an  unparalleled  influence  over  the  peo- 
ple, jeoparded  it  all  by  declaring  that  he  was  only  the 
forerunner  of  Christ,  in  whose  rising  light  his  should 
wane  like  a  star  before  the  morning  sun  ;  our  Lord  him- 
self, while  presaging  his  own  ignominy  and  death,  prom- 
ised his  followers  nothing  for  this  life  but  tribulation, 
shame,  and  persecutions.  All  occurred  as  it  had  been 
foretold  :  then,  after  his  death  he  was  seen  alive  (for,  if 
we  admit  the  testimony  at  all,  the  particularity  with 
which  it  is  given  precludes  deception  or  mistake  respect- 
ing his  identity  and  life)  by  the  eleven  apostles,  with 
Matthias,  all  of  whose  statements  fully  and  minutely 
harmonize  ;  by  the  piovis  women  ;  and,  at  one  time,  by 
more  than  five  hundred  brethren  assembled,  the  greater 
part  of  whom  were  alive,  as  Paul  says,  twenty-eight 
years  after,  and  not  one  of  whom  ever  denied  the  as- 
sertions of  the  apostles  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  all  of 
them  continued  steadfast  in  their  faith,  despite  of  perse- 

VOL.  I.  28 


434  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.        oution  and  obloquy.  Now  how  can  we  believe  that  a 
conspiracy  could  be  formed  of  so  many  persons  of  all 
ranks,  stretching  over  twenty  centuries,  at  least,  for  the 
purpose  of  deluding  the  world,  contrary  to  its  prejudices 
and  habits,  into  the  adoption  of  the  ])urest,  most  benefi- 
cent system  with  which  mankind  has  ever  been  blessed  ! 
Consider,  again,  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
apostolical  testimony  was  given  :  not  in  some  remote, 
obscure  place,  but  at  Jerusalem,  before  the  \ery  multi- 
tude and  within  hearing  of  the  very  Sanhedrim,  who 
had  been  promoters  of  the  trial  and  crucifixion  of 
Jesus,  as  well  as  personal  observers  of  the  natural 
prodigies  said  to  have  accompanied  his  death  and  up- 
rising ;  nor  this  long  afterward,  but  at  the  close  of  fifty 
days.  The  apostle  Peter  at  the  Pentecost  boldly  ap- 
pealed to  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  mixed 
multitudes  of  Jews  and  proselytes  from  Judea  and 
other  countries,  who  had  been  present  all  the  time,  for 
the  truth  of  his  assertions  respecting  the  life  and  works 
of  Jesus,  his  crucifixion,  and  the  supernatural  events 
■iccompanying  it ;  and  then  plainly  declared  his  resur- 
rection and  ascension.  Surely,  then,  the  more  intelli- 
gent and  influential  Jews  had  the  oj)portunity  (and 
they  did  not  lack  the  will),  if  it  were  possible,  to  dis- 
prove the  story  ;  yet  so  far  from  this,  the  very  people 
who  had  clamored  against  Jesus  and  followed  him 
with  execrations,  listen  astounded,  and  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  them  embrace  the  gospel.  The  new 
church  is  founded  close  to  the  cross  and  tomb  of  its 
Master.  There  it  lingered  for  several  years,  challeng- 
ino;  investigation  ;  and  thence  its  adherents  scattered 
themselves  over  the  greater  part  of  the  then  known 
world,  disputing  with  erudite  philosophers,  attacking 


I-ECT.  XX.]  THE  RESURRECTION   OF   CHRIST.  435 

hoary  prejudices,  denouncing  popular  idolatries  adorned 
with  magnificence  and  attractive  through  their  sensu- 
alism, daring  the  anger  of  infuriated  priests  and  abso- 
lute tyrannies  :  while  they  required,  as  the  only  method 
of  reconciliation  to  God,  that  men  learned  and  unlearned, 
freemen  and  slaves,  kings  and  people  of  all  nations  and 
lands,  should  bow  at  the  cross  of  an  excommunicated 
Jew  ;  yet  with  such  success,  that  though,  in  the  course 
of  three  centui'ies,  three  millions  of  them  had  been 
martyred  and  many  more  treated  as  infamous  and  de- 
serving of  all  outrage,  the  little  church,  at  first  not  six 
lumdred  strong,  had  become,  even  in  what  the  world 
estimates  as  strength,  mightier  than  the  Roman  empire 
itself,  —  absorbing  within  its  bosom  sects  of  philosophy, 
religious  armies,  aristocracies  and  populace,  though 
never  a  sword  had  been  unsheathed  for  its  defence  or 
progress,  and  its  only  weapon  was  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  confirmed  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus. 

And  what  motives  could  there  have  been  for  such  a 
conspiracy  ?  Why  should  the  apostles  with  their  attest- 
ing brethren,  after  having  had  proof  of  the  imposture, 
if  imposture  it  was,  have  united,  contrary  to  all  their 
avowed  love  of  divine  truth,  to  propagate  the  name  of 
the  deceiver  ?  That  priestcraft  in  all  ages  has  been 
cunning,  and  bold  with  schemes  to  attain  power  and 
wealth  and  luxurious  gratifications,  history  abundantly 
shows  ;  that  even  Christianity,  when  in  favor,  has  been 
prostituted  and  defiled  for  such  purposes  by  its  priests 
and  hierarchs,  that  astute  but  unscrupulous  rulers  have 
used  its  forced  alliance  to  strengthen  thrones  or  erect 
dynasties,  is  most  lamentably  true  ;  but  where  had  the 
ajtostles  such  inducements  ?  Forewarned  by  their  mas- 
ter that  they  should  suffer  trial  in  every  foi-m,  openly 


436  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.  [Lkct.  XX. 

foretelling  their  own  persecutions  and  martyrdom, 
promising  their  disciples  a  no  better  lot  than  their  own, 
they  Jived  as  they  pi'ofessed  to  live,  for  reward  after 
death,  in  an  eternity  where,  if  they  were  conspirators, 
and  blasphemers,  and  liars,  as  they  must  have  been  if 
Christ  had  not  risen,  they  could  have  expected  nothing 
short  of  utter  damnation. 

Now,  to  say  nothing  of  other  proofs,  many  of  which 
might  and  should  be  adduced  in  a  longer  treatise,  we 
may  safely  conclude,  as  sturdy  Barron  expresses  it, 
"  that  this  testimony  is  beyond  exception  ;  that  no  mat- 
ter of  fact  ever  had,  or  could  well  have,  a  more  valid 
and  certain  proof:  .  .  .  .  so  that  to  refuse  it,  is  in  effect 
to  decline  all  proof  by  testimony,  to  renounce  all  cer- 
tainty in  human  affairs,  to  remove  all  grounds  of  pro- 
ceeding securely  in  any  business  or  administration  of 
justice,  to  impeach  all  history  of  fabuloiisness,  to  charge 
all  mankind  with  insufficiency  or  extreme  infidelity, 
and  to  thrust  God  away  from  bearing  credible  attesta- 
tion in  any  case."  Nay,  my  brethren,  may  it  not  be 
truly  said  that,  to  be  sceptical  of  the  great  fact  which 
we  this  day  celebrate,  requires  a  greater  credulity  than 
the  most  absurd  superstition  ?  At  this  very  hour,  all 
Christendom  is  exulting  in  honor  of  our  risen  Lord  ; 
earth  ascends  toward  heaven,  and  heaven  is  stooping 
toward  earth,  that  the  church  below  and  the  church 
above  may  blend  their  anthems  in  one  grand  harmony 
of  praise,  to  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  for  our  offences 
and  raised  again  for  our  justification. 

Let  us  now  follow  the  Catechism  in  ascertaining  how 
we  are  profited  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 
The  answer  supplied  us  is  :  — 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  437 

"  First,  by  his  resurrection,  he  hath  overcome  death, 
that  he  might  make  us  partakers  of  that  righteousness 
which  he  had  purchased  for  us  by  his  death  ;  secondly, 
we  are  also  by  his  power  raised  up  to  a  new  life ;  and, 
lastly,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our 
blessed  resurrection." 

We  have  here,  to  reduce  the  doctrine  under  brief 
heads,  the  assurance  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 

First  :    Of  our  justification. 

"  He  hath  overcome  death,  that  he  might  make  us 
partakers  of  that  righteousness  which  he  had  purchased 
for  us  by  his  death." 

Secondly  :    Of  our  sanctification. 

"  We  are  also  by  his  power  raised  up  to  a  new  life." 

Thirdly  :    Of  our  final  and  full  glorification. 

"  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our 
blessed  I'esurrection." 

First  :  The  resurrection  of  Christ  assures  us  of  our 
justification. 

The  divine  method  of  justifying  the  sinner  who  be- 
lieves in  Jesus,  through  the  imputation  of  the  infinitely 
meritorious  righteousness  wrought  for  us  by  our 
divine  Surety,  incarnate  as  our  elder  brother,  has  been 
handled  at  large  under  several  previous  sections  of  the 
Catechism,  and  need  not  now  be  formally  discussed. 
Let  us,  however,  remember  that,  in  his  atoning  work, 
Christ  acted  under  a  covenant  which  he  had  made  as 
our  representative  head  with  the  Father,  as  representing 
the  godhead  ;  and  the  conditions  of  the  gracious  cove- 
nant were,  that,  on  his  rendering  a  sufficient  honor  to 
the  law  which  they  had  broken,  the  salvation  of  his 
people  should  be  intrusted,  with  all  power  in  heaven 
and  earth,  to  his  mediatorial  hands.     It  was  necessary, 


438  THE   RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.         therefore,  not  only  that  he  should  be  divinely  acknowl- 
edged as  the  appointed  Mediator,  which  was  done  by 
the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  him  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  ministry,  but  that,  when  his  atoning  work 
Avas  finished,  its  sufficiency  and  acceptance  should  be  as 
divinely  certified ;  and  this  was  done  by  his  being 
raised  from  the  dead  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 
Thus  the  apostle,  in  that  wonderful  verse  which  is  an 
epitome  of  the  whole  gospel :  "  Let  this  mind  be  in 
you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ;  who,  being  in  the 
form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
God,  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon 
him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men  ;  and,  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he 
humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  (until) 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  ;  wherefore,  God 
also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name 
which  is  above  every  name."  This  exaltation  was  the 
exaltation,  not  of  the  Son  of  God  merely,  for  he  needed 
none,  but  of  the  Son  of  God  incmfiate,  as  a  servant,  in 
our  room ;  and  was  the  reward  of  his  obedience 
wrought  out  all  his  life,  even  to  his  death  on  the  cross. 
In  other  words,  he  had  fulfilled  his  part  of  the  cove- 
nant by  rendering  an  infinitely  sufficient  righteousness  ; 
and  the  Father  fulfilled  his  part  by  exalting  the  cruci- 
fied Redeemer  to  infinite  power,  with  "  a  name  which 
is  above  every  name,  that,  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  every 
knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the 
{.dory  of  God  the  Father." 

The  fitness  of  such  a  recognition  is  apparent.     The 
death  passed  upon  the  sinner  by  sentence  of  the  law  is 


Lkct.  XX.]        THE   RESURRECTION  OF   CHRIST.  489 

eternal  death,  because  no  amount  of  punishment  that 
the  sinner  can  endure  can  satisfy  tlie  law's  offended 
honor  :  he  can  never  pay  the  penal  debt,  and,  therefore, 
must  suffer  on  forever,  because  never  relieved  from 
condemnation.  So,  had  Christ  not  risen  after  he  died, 
there  was  no  proof  that  the  honor  he  had  vicariously 
done  the  law  was  sufficient.  To  all  seeming,  his  death, 
like  ours,  would  have  been  eternal,  and  our  representa- 
tive, like  ourselves,  remained  under  the  curse.  But 
when  he,  from  the  infinite  dignity  which  his  divine  na- 
ture gave  to  his  human  sacrifice,  had  honored  the  law 
by  the  obedience  of  his  active  life,  and  the  expiation  of 
his  submissive  death  had  rendered  the  law  an  infinite 
honor,  he  had  utterly  paid  the  penalty,  disarmed  the 
curse,  and  exhausted  death.  The  avenger  had  no 
power  over  him  ;  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be 
longer  holden  of  the  pains  of  death  ;  and,  therefore,  of 
his  own  right,  purchased  under  the  terms  of  the  cove- 
nant, the  Mediator  arose,  in  manifestation  that  his  sav- 
ing work  was  accomplished  and  accepted.  Thus  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews  declares  that  "  the  God  of  peace 
brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  great 
Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  ever- 
lasting covenant ;  "  that  is,  through  the  virtue  of  his 
own  blood  shed  as  the  head  of  the  church,  under  the 
agreement  of  the  gracious  covenant  ;  and,  in  another 
place,  the  same  writer  declares  that  the  Son  of  God  was 
sanctified  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant  (Heb.  x.  29). 
The  whole  argument  of  the  evangelical  scriptures  pro- 
ceeds upon  this.  The  victims,  —  goats,  or  sheep,  or 
calves,  slain  upon  the  Levitical  altar,  were  proved  to  be 
mere  types,  pointing  to  the  true  sacrifice,  but  in  them- 
selves insufficient  to  take  away  sin,  not  merely  becausn 


440  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.        of  their  unworthy  nature,  but  because,  when  slain,  they 
never  revived.  Hence  the  necessity  of  fresh  blood  ; 
the  craving  law  was  never  satisfied,  the  penalty  was  not 
paid,  the  death  substituted  was  not  enough.  Nothing 
short  of  his  resui  rection  could  show  that  the  sacrifice 
of  the  substitute  was  accepted  as  svifficient.  Thus  the 
writer  to  the  Hebrews :  "  For  the  law,  having  a  shadow 
of  good  things  to  come,  .  .  can  never,  with  those  sac- 
rifices which  they  offered  year  by  year  continually, 
make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect.  For  then  would 
they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered  ?  because  that  the 
worshippers  once  purged  should  have  had  no  more  con- 
science of  sins.  .  .  .  And  every  priest  standeth  daily 
ministering  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices, 
which  can  never  take  away  sins  ;  but  this  man,  after 
he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  forever,  sat  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  God  ;  from  henceforth  expecting  till 
his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool.  For,  by  one  offering, 
he  hath  perfected  forever  them  that  are  sanctified." 
From  the  moment  that  he  said  on  the  cross  :  "  It  is  fin- 
ished !  "  the  justification  of  his  people  was  secured ; 
even  the  lifeless  body  of  the  Surety  passed  from  the 
hands  of  his  enemies  into  those  of  his  friends,  having 
suffered  no  farther  insult  except  the  rude  opening  of 
that  blessed  fountain  of  blood  and  water  which  has 
filled  for  us  the  pool  of  healing ;  and  he  lay  in  the  tomb 
only  long  enough  to  sweeten  it  for  our  rest :  but  the 
assurance,  the  divine  acknowledgment,  of  the  justifying 
merit,  was  not  given  till  his  resurrection.  Then  we 
see,  by  his  victory  of  the  grave,  that  the  sting  of  death 
was  plucked  out,  and  that  the  law  has  no  more  strength 
to  hold  us,  and  bless  with  triumphant  voices  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     So  the  apostle  in  Roiuans :  "  Who  shall 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  Ml 

lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God 
that  justifieth.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is 
Christ  that  died ;  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again." 
And  in  full  sympathy  with  the  divine  word,  we  may 
exclaim,  in  the  words  of  the  seraphic  Hall :  "  Oh,  my 
dear  Saviour,  I  bless  thee  for  thy  death,  but  I  bless  thee 
more  for  thy  resurrection.  That  was  a  work  of  won- 
derful humility,  of  infinite  mercy  ;  this,  a  work  of  infi- 
nite power.  In  tliat,  was  human  weakness ;  in  this, 
divine  omnipotence.  In  that,  thou  '  wast  delivered  for 
our  offences ; '  in  this,  thou  '  wast  raised  again  for  our 
justification.'  " 

But  there  was  something  more  needed  than  the  dis- 
play of  his  acceptance  with  the  Father  ;  the  salvation  of 
his  people,  now  purchased  by  his  blood,  was  to  be 
accomplished  by  his  power.  He  was  to  ask  and  receive 
for  tliem  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  that 
Spirit  make  them  actually  partakers  of  his  righteous- 
ness. The  smitten,  feeble  flock  needed  the  care  and 
guidance  and  championsliip  of  its  great  and  good  Shep- 
herd ;  the  powers  of  hell  were  to  be  crippled,  and  the 
powers  of  heaven  and  earth  employed  for  the  ti-iumph 
of  his  church  ;  the  gates  of  hell  were  to  be  borne  away, 
and  the  everlasting  doors  of  heaven  flung  open  for  their 
exodus  from  the  grave  to  immortality ;  the  angelic 
armies  were  waiting  for  the  Lord  of  their  hosts,  the 
Captain  of  our  salvation,  to  lead  and  direct  them  in  the 
service  of  his  redeemed,  and  the  Father  expecting  him 
on  his  throne,  that,  to  his  coequal  divinity,  the  infinite 
rule  of  providence  might  be  given.  He  could  not  be 
Lord  of  the  livino-  while  he  remained  amonor  the  dead. 
None  but  the  risen  Lord  could  say  to  the  sorrowful  be- 
liever, Why  weepest  thou?  and  chase  away  his  tears 


442  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.        by  a  word  of  love.  None  but  the  risen  Lord  could  say 
to  the  doubting  one,  "  Be  not  faithless,  but  believing," 
while  he  opens  the  scriptures  concerning  himself  to  the 
illuminated  understanding.  None  but  the  risen  Lord 
could  say  to  his  messengers,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature ;  and  lo  !  I  am 
with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  "  No  ! 
if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain  ;  " 
"  if  Christ  be  not  raised,  then  is  our  faith  vain  ;  we  are 
yet  in  our  sins ;  "  "  if  for  this  life  only  we  have  hope 
in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable." 

Secondly  :  The  resurrection  of  Christ  assures  us  of 
our  sanctification. 

The  union  of  the  believer  with  Christ,  his  represen- 
tative head,  is  vital  and  perpetual.  "  I  am  ci'ucified 
with  Christ,"  says  the  apostle,  "  nevertheless,  I  live  ; 
yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  ;  and  the  life  that  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of 
God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  As 
by  faith  he  dies  in  Christ's  death  on  the  cross,  so  by 
faith  he  lives  a  new  life  in  Christ's  life  after  death.  As 
Christ's  life  after  his  resurrection  was  a  heavenly  life, 
so  the  life  of  the  believer,  who  knows  the  power  of 
Christ's  resurrection,  as  well  as  the  fellowship  of  his 
sufferings,  is  made  conformable  to  Christ's  death  by 
dying  unto  sin,  and  aspiring  to  Christ's  life  in  heaven. 
This  is  the  generous  and  elevating  argument,  as  the 
apostle  gives  it :  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did 
much  more  abound ;  that,  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto 
death,  even  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness 
unto  eternal  life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  What 
shall  we  say  then  ?  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that 
grace  may  abound  ?     God  forbid.     How  shall  we,  who 


} 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  443 

are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ?  Know  ye  not 
that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ 
were  baptized  into  his  death.  Therefore  we  are  buried 
with  him  by  baptism  into  death ;  that,  like  as  Christ 
was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  For, 
if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his 
death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrec- 
tion ;  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with 
him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,,  that 
henceforth  we  should  not  serve  sin.  For  he  that  is 
dead  is  freed  from  sin.  Now,  if  we  be  dead  with 
Christ,  we  believe  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him  ; 
knowing  that  Christ,  being  raised  from  the  dead,  dieth 
no  more  ;  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him.  For 
in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  once  ;  but  in  that  he 
liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God.  Likewise  reckon  ye  also 
yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Nothing  can 
be  clearer  than  this  expository  logic.  Sanctification  fol- 
lows necessai'ily  upon  justification  through  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ,  as  his  resurrection  followed  his  death. 
We  have  no  part  in  the  one,  if  we  do  not  feel  the 
power  of  the  other.* 

Besides,  as  we  learn  from  several  scriptures,  the 
same  Holy  Spirit  by  whose  power  Christ  was  raised, 
quickens  his  people  by  grace.  The  gift  of  that  Spii'it 
without  measure  to  Christ  was  promised  him  in  the 
covenant :  "  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him 
should  all  fulness  dwell."      All  grace  comes  from  the 


*  See  Ephesians  i.  19-23;  ii.  6,  7.  The  parallel  is  drawn  between  the  rais- 
ing up  of  Christ  and  the  converr^ion  of  the  sinner.  Throughout  the  epistle, 
the  power  of  God  signifies  the  Hoi}-  Ghost. 


444  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.        Father,  but  only  through  Christ,  and  through  Christ 
only  by  the  operating  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Christ  needs  not  the  grace  for  liimself,  but  receives  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit,  that  of  his  fulness  we  all  might 
receive,  and  grace  for  grace.  Hence  the  apostle  Peter, 
at  the  Pentecost,  proves  the  ascension  of  Christ,  and 
accounts  for  the  miraculous  effusion  of  spiritual  influ- 
ences by  the  same  word.  "  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised 
up,  whereof  we  all  are  Avitnesses.  Therefore,  being  by 
the  rio'ht  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  havino;  received  of 
the  Father  the  promise*  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath 
shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  That 
Holy  Spirit  purchased  for  us  by  his  merits,  and  ob- 
tained for  us  by  his  prayers,  he  continues  to  send  down 
upon  Christians  as  individuals,  and  as  a  church,  and 
will  until  the  consummation  in  glory.  The  grace  of 
the  Spii'it  is  the  sanctifying  life  of  the  church,  sent  from 
the  head  of  the  body  through  all  his  members  ;  and 
"  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  It  is  of 
this  inner  grace,  as  well  as  Christ's  power  over  provi- 
dence, that  the  apostle  was  thinking  when  he  says  : 
"  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that,  while 
we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us.  Much  more, 
then,  being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be 
saved  from  wrath  through  him.  For  if,  when  we  were 
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  unto  God  by  the  death  of 
his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved 
by  his  life ; "  that  is,  his  life  after  his  resurrection. 
Salvation  is  completed  only  through  sanctification  ; 
sanctification  only  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
and  that  grace  is  obtained  for  us  only  by  him  who  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  So  the  apostle 
Peter,  speaking  of  our  lively  hope  from  the  resurrec- 


Lect.  XX.}         the  resurrection  of  CHRIST.  445 

tion  of  Jesus,  says  that  the  heavenly  inheritance  is 
"  reserved  "  for  those  "  wlio  are  kept  by  the  power  of 
God,  through  faith  unto  salvation."  Not\vithstandini»; 
all  Christ's  sufferings,  we  should  despair  of  reaching 
heaven,  were  it  not  that  he  who  died  for  us  now  lives 
for  us,  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors  over  tempta- 
tion without  and  corruption  within.  Thus  it  is  that  we 
are  by  his  power  raised  up  to  a  new  life  ;  and  now,  be- 
cause Christ  that  died  is  risen  again,  and  is  now  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  also  maketh  intercession  for  us, 
we  know  that  the  author  will  be  the  finisher  of  our  faith, 
and  may  well  be  persuaded  that  nothing  will  be  able 
to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.     "  Because  he  lives,  we  shall  live  also." 

Thirdly  :  The  resurrection  of  Christ  assures  us  of 
our  final  and  full  glorification. 

The  answer  in  the  Catechism  is  confined  to  our  res- 
urrection, and  the  ascension  of  Christ  is  the  subject  of 
the  next  article,  the  discussion  of  which  will  involve 
our  assurance  of  an  entrance  with  him  into  glory.  But, 
though  theologians  distinguish,  and  very  properly,  the 
several  degrees  of  our  Lord's  exaltation,  the  Scriptures 
often  speak  of  his  resurrection  and  ascension  together, 
as  though  his  ascension  began  in  his  rising  from  the 
grave,  and  finished  in  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father.  So  in  Philippians  :  "  He  was  obedient 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross :  wherefore  God 
hath  highly  exalted  him."  "  This  Jesus  hath  God 
raised  up,"  says  the  apostle  at  the  Pentecost,  "  whereof 
we  all  are  witnesses.  Therefore,  being  by  the  right 
hand  of  God  exalted,  ....  he  hath  shed  forth  this," 
manifestly  from  his  throne  ;  and  in  his  first  epistle  he 
says  that,  by  the  resurrection   of  Jesus  Christ,  we  are 


446  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST.       begotten  to  a  lively  hope  of  our  heavenly  inheritance. 
If  a  view  we  took  of  the  matter  in  oiir  study  of  the  last 
Lord's  Day  be  correct,  our  Lord  ascended  to  liis  Father 
immediately  after  he  arose,  though  for  obvious  reasons 
he  returned  at  intervals  to  show  himself  to  his  disciples, 
and  to  make  a  formal,  visible  ascension  at  the  end  of 
forty  days.  Certainly,  the  apostle  Paul  teaches  that 
there  will  be  no  such  interval  (as,  indeed,  there  is  no 
reason  for  it)  between  the  rising  of  tlie  saints,  and  their 
reception  into  glory  :  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we 
shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye,  at  the  last  trump."  The  change  spoken  of  is 
into  glory.  So  again  :  "  The  Lord  himself  shall  de- 
scend from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God  ;  and  the  dead 
in  Christ  shall  rise  first :  then  we  which  are  alive  and 
remain  (that  is,  those  Christians  who  shall  be  living  at 
the  time)  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  in  the 
clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air :  so  shall  we  be  ever 
with  the  Lord."  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  for  us  not 
to  connect  closely  our  glorification  with  our  resurrec- 
tion. The  resurrection  promised  us  is  not  a  renewal 
of  our  animal  life,  nor  a  life  to  be  spent  upon  earth, 
even  in  part,  but  an  instant  and  full  entrance  to 
heaven,  of  which  our  Lord's  ascension  was  both  type 
and  assurance. 

He  died  and  vvas  bui'ied,  not  as  an  individual  man, 
but  as  the  recognized  head  of  his  church  ;  and,  there- 
fore, he  arose  not  as  an  individual,  but  as  the  head 
of  his  church,  in  which  caj)acity  he  also  ascended  to 
heaven  and  now  reigns  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father. 
But  if  the  head  ascends,  the  body  ascends  with  it. 
Thus  I  find  that  the  Latin  translators  of  the  Catechism 


Lt-or.  XX.]  THE  KESURRECTION   OF   CHRIST.  447 

insert  tlie  wr.vd  "  Head  "  here  :  "  The  resurrection  of 
Christ  our  Head  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our  blessed  resur- 
rection." All  who  by  faith  die  with  him,  shall,  through 
the  indissolubleness  of  their  vital  union  to  him,  rise 
with  him,  that,  as  they  have  partaken  of  his  shame,  they 
may  partake  of  his  glory.  The  consummation  of  this 
privilege  is  for  wise  reasons  delayed,  but  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  is  the  assurance  of  its  certainty.  For  as 
without  the  resurrection  of  Christ  we  should  have  no 
proof  that  he  is  the  Saviour,  so  except  we  shall  be 
raised  we  can  have  no  salvation. 

.The  soul  of  the  believer  could  not  at  death  enter 
heaven  unless  it  was  made  certain  that  in  due  time  his 
body  should  be  raised  also.  For  the  soul  of  the  man 
is  not  the  man ;  neither  is  the  body  of  a  man,  the  man  : 
the  man  is  not  perfect,  the  whole  man  is  not  saved, 
except  he  be  saved  soul  and  body.  The  curse  of  death 
fell  upon  man,  both  soul  and  body  ;  the  grace  of  eter- 
nal life  through  the  second  Adam  is  given  to  the  be- 
liever, both  soul  and  body.  The  Son  of  God,  wdien  he 
came  to  be  incarnate  as  our  Surety,  took  to  himself  a 
human  body  and  soul,  else  would  he  not  have  been  a 
man  :  so  he  suffered  for  us  the  pains  of  the  curse  in 
both  his  body  and  his  soul  ;  and  so  he  rose  as  our 
Surety,  having  accomplished  the  atonement,  both  body 
and  soul.  So,  also,  because  of  his  acknowledged  satis- 
faction, shall  we  who-  believe  in  him  be  redeemed,  body 
and  soul,  and  raised  to  the  blessedness  where  he  is. 
Thus  the  apostle  :  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept.  For  since 
by  man  came  death,  by  man  came  also  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ 
shall  all  be  made  alive.      But  every  man  (eacli)  in  his 


448  THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.         [Lkct.  XX. 

ovvn  order :  Christ  the  first-fruits  ;  afterward  they  that 
are  Christ's  at  his  coining."  Tlie  argument  is  brief,  but 
conclusive.  Other  questions  on  this  doctrine  will  be 
discussed,  when  we  come  to  the  article  on  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body. 

For  the  present  let  us  rejoice  that  "  tliis  mortal  shall 
put  on  immortality,  and  this  corruption,  incorruption." 
Our  life  is  brief,  so  was  our  Lord's  ;  it  is  full  of  sorrows, 
but  his  incomparably  fuller  ;  it  is  racked  with  pain,  but 
never  so  exquisite  and  manifold  as  his ;  it  is  worse  than 
grief  and  torture,  it  is  polluted  with  sin,  and  there  we 
are  unlike  him,  the  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  ;  it 
ends  with  agony  and  death  and  the  grave,  and  to  the 
close  we  may  track  his  blood-stained  footsteps.  But  this 
is  not  all  of  life  :  Christ  has  risen  to  a  life  eternal,  heav- 
enly, holy,  and  blest.  So  shall  all  his  people  live,  Avhere 
sin  or  sorrow  or  pain  or  death  can  reach  them  no  more 
forever. 

O  beloved  friends,  shall  all  of  us  have  part  in  that 
blessed  resurrection  ?  Have  we  all  been  crucified  with 
Christ  ?  Have  we  all  been  converted,  are  we  all  sanc- 
tified to  newness  of  life  ?  Have  we  all  set  our  affec- 
tions beyond  and  far  above  this  world,  where  Christ 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  O  let  us  see  to  it 
that  we  are  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  ; 
for  a  new  heart,  and  a  Christian  life  here,  is  the  only 
earnest  of  a  glorious  life  hereafter. 

O  remember  (God,  for  his  Son's  sake,  make  us  all 
remember !)  that  there  is  also  a  resurrection  unto  dam- 
nation, and  that  all  who  are  not  Christ's  in  faith,  certi- 
fied by  practice,  pass  through  death  and  the  grave  into 
the  second  death,  and  hell,  from  which  there  is  no  re- 
turn forever  !     It  is  a  terrible  alternative  !     Save  us, 


I 


THE  RESURRECTION   OF  CHRIST.  449 

O  heavenly  Fatlier !  Save  us,  O  Holy  Spirit !     Save 

us,  O  Jesus  Christ !  Standing  beside  the  broken  tomb 

of  the  crucified,  and  looking  up  through  the  rent  vail 

to  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb,  we  pray,  Save  us 
from  eternal  death  ! 


29