LECTURE  XXII. 

CHRIST  ON  THE  THEONE  AS  RULER  AND  JUDGE. 


NINETEENTH   LORD'S   DAY. 

CHRIST   ON   THE   THRONE  AS  RULER 
AND   JUDGE. 

Quest.  L.      Why  is  it  added  "  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  Godf" 

Ans.  Because  Christ  is  ascended  into  lieaven  for  this,  and  that  he  might 
there  appear  as  head  of  his  church  by  whom  the  Father  governs  all 
things. 

Quest.  LI.     What  profit  is  this  glory  of  Christ,  our  head,  unto  us? 

Ans.  First,  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  poureth  out  heavenly  graces  upon 
us  as  his  members;  and  then  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and  pre- 
serves us  against  all  enemies. 

Quest.  Lll.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee  that  Christ  "■shall  come  again  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead?" 

Ans.  That  in  allmy  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  uplifted  head,  I  look 
for  the  very  same  person  who  before  offered  himself  for  my  sake  to  the 
tribunal  of  God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse  from  me,  to  come  as  judge 
from  heaven;  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  enemies  into  everlasting 
condemnation,  but  shall  translate  me  with  all  his  chosen  ones  to  him- 
self, into  heavenly  joys  and  glory. 


THE  assumption  of  Christ  Jesus  into  heaven  testified 
the  divine  approval  of  his  work  on  earth,  as  his 
uprising  from  the  dead  demonstrated  the  sufficiency  of 
his  expiation.  The  only  begotten  Son  of  God  had  been 
sent  from  heaven  into  the  world  to  provide  a  righteous- 
ness for  our  justification  through  faith  ;  and  when  that 
end  was  fulfilled,  he  returned  whence  he  came.  Bu 
not  as  he  came  forth  did  he  return  to  heaven.  In  order 
to  accomplish  his  vicarious  righteousness,  he  had  as- 
sumed a  human  nature  like  our  own,  and  made  it  one 
person  with  his  adorable  divinity.  In  that  human 
nature  he  had  humbled  himself  as  a  servant  obedient 
until  death,  "despised  and  rejected  of  men,"  "stricken, 


472  CHRIST  ON  THE  THRONE  r 

smitten  of  God  and  attticted,"  oppressed  to  the  lowest 
ignominy  of  torture  by  the  mahee  of  the  world,  to  the 
deepest  reproach  and  pains  of  hell  both  in  body  and 
soul  on  the  tree  of  the  cross  by  the  justice  of  his  Father ; 
and  all  this  that  he  might  bear  away  our  shame,  mag- 
nify and  honor  the  law  which  we  had  broken,  expiate 
the  guilt  we  had  incurred,  and  lift  up  from  the  ruin  sin 
had  brought  upon  them,  those  whom  he  accei)ted  as 
brethren  when  he  became  "  the  seed  of  the  woman." 
Therefore,  when  his  vicarious  merit  was  complete,  and 
the  crucified  had  by  a  divine  life  "  conquered  death  and 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,"  "  having  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us,"  he  did  not  forsake  the  nature 
he  had  loved  so  well,  but  bore  aloft  through  the  rent 
skies  the  body  and  soul  he  had  made  his  own  by  a 
union  personal  and  indissoluble.  He  entered  heaven 
as  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  but  also  as  the  Son 
of  man  ;  coequal  with  the  Father,  yet  our  elder 
brother,  the  Emmanuel  claiming  his  divine  right,  the 
mediator  claiming  his  covenanted  rewaixl,  the  forerun-' 
ner  claiming  the  inheritance  which  as  a  Son  was  his 
own,  and  in  which  he  had  associated  his  people  through 
the  adoptioTi  they  receive  by  his  representation. 

But  the  Scriptures  declare  that  his  being  received 
into  heaven  was  not  enough  ;  and  when  our  faith  looks 
up  through  the  parted  vail,  we  see  that  he 

"  Sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  The  Catechism, 
also,  in  the  lesson  for  to-day  very  properly  unites  to  this 
article  of  our  creed  that  which  asserts 

"  From  thence  he  will  come  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead." 

Both  will,  with  divine  permission,  make  the  subject 
of  our  present  study. 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  473 

The  Answer  to  the  50th  Question  gives  the  reason 
why  it  is  added  th^t  Christ  "  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God." 

The  51st  states  the  "  profit  which  this  glory  of 
Christ,  our  head,  is   unto   us." 

The  52d  declares  the  comfort  we  derive  from  the  fact 
that  Christ  "  shall  come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead." 

We  shall  be  able  to  cover  all  this  ground,  and  with 
greater  convenience,  by  considering  the  several  topics 
under  three  heads  : 

First  :  Tlie  meaning  of  the  'phrase^  "  He  .  .  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.''' 

Secondly  :  The  reason  for  this  preeminent  glory  of 
CJirist. 

Thirdly:  The  comfort  which  the  believer  derives  from 
this  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  exaltation. 

First  :  TJie  meaning  of  the  phrase,  "  He  .  .  sitteth 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.'' 

1.  The  assignment  of  a  place  on  the  right  hand  of  a 
king  denotes  his  confidence  and  satisfaction  in  the  per- 
son so  honored.  Christ  "  sitteth  on  the  riglit  hand  of 
God."  The  Sciipture  represents  that  it  is  God  in  his 
supreme  dignity  who  thus  honoi^s  Christ.  The  Son, 
"  when  he  had  pui'ged  our  sins,  sat  down  on  the  right 
hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,"  says  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  ;  and  again  :  "  Looking  unto  Jesus  .  .  who 
...  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of 
G'od  ; "  which  fulfils  the  prophecy  :  "  The  Lord  said 
unto  my  Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make 
thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  This  implies  a  conferring 
of  authority  with  the  honor,  as  when  a  king  elevates 
one    as   chief    minister    in    the   administration    of    his 


474  CHRIST   ox    THE   THKOXE  empire.  But  other  scriptures  show  that  more  is  in- 
tended than  a  place  beside  the  throne  on  its  riglit  hand. 
The  Son  sitteth  on  the  throne  itself  with  the  Father : 
"  Unto  liim  tliat  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with 
me  on  mj  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame  and  am  set 
down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne."  So,  also,  we 
behold  "  the  Lamb  in  the  midst "  "  of  the  great  white  " 
"  throne  ; "  and  the  river  of  life  issuing  from  "  the 
throne  of  the  Lord  God  almighty  and  the  Lamb." 
This  clearly  signifies  the  association  of  Christ  with  the 
Father  in  the  full  exercise  of  all  power  over  all  things, 
as  the  Master  says  :  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in 
heaven  and  in  earth." 

2.  The  vastness  of  the  power  thus  exercised  by  the 
Son  proves  liim  to  be  truly  and  infinitely  God,  and 
therefore  coequal  to  the  Father  ;  for  what  less  than 
omnipresence,  omniscience,  and  omnipotence  were  equal 
to  the  administration  of  universal  empire?  So  we  read : 
"  Unto  the  Son,  he  saith.  Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for 
ever  and  ever." 

3.  Yet,  while  such  dominion  belongs  unto  the  Son  by 
right  of  his  original  divinity,  the  phrase  "  on  the  right 
hand  "  indicates  that  this  eminent  authority  has  been 
delegated.  It  is  the  Emmanuel,  the  Son  of  God  incar- 
nate, that  sits  on  the  throne,  and  we  know  that  the 
human  nature  neither  has  by  right,  nor  can  of  itself 
exercise  such  dominion.  Hence  we  are  told  that,  be- 
cause Christ  Jesus  "being  in  the  form  of  God  took  upon 
him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  like- 
ness of  men  ;  and,  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man, 
humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  until  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross,  .  .  God  also  hath  highly  ex- 
alted him  (the  God-man)  and  given  him  a  name  that 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  475 

is  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should,  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the 
glory  of  God  the  Father." 

The  phrase  "  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the 
Father  almighty,"  signifies  the  elevation  by  God  the 
Father,  representing  the  Godhead,  of  Jesus  Christ  the 
Mediator,  representing  the  church,  to  the  glory  and 
power  of  a  universal  kingdom,  as  we  read  :  "  That  ye 
may  know  .  .  .  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his 
power  to  usward  who  believe,  according  to  the  work- 
ing of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ 
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead  and  set  him  at  his 
own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all 
principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and 
every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world,  but 
also  in  that  which  is  to  come :  and  hath  put  all  things 
under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be  head  over  all  things 
to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all." 

Secondly  :  The  7'eason  for  this  preeminent  glory  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

1.  That  the  Father  might  manifest  to  all  intelligent 
creatures  his  infinite  appreciation  of  our  Lord's  media- 
torial work. 

The  redemption  of  sinners  was,  as  the  Scriptures 
assure  us,  purposed  and  planned  in  a  council  of  the 
ever-blessed  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
each  adorable  pei'son  taking  his  peculiar  part :  The 
Father  representing  and  vindicating  the  honor  of  the 
Godhead  which  had  been  treasonably  provoked  by  our 
sins  ;  the  Son  undertaking  to  magnify  the  broken  law 


476  CHRIST   ON  THE  THRONE  H. 

and  satisfy  the  justice  of  the  law,  whose  sanctions  were 
eternal  life  as  the  reward  of  righteousness  alone,  and 
eternal  death  as  the  sure  penalty  of  disobedience  ;  the 
Holy  Ghost  promising  his  efficient  energies  to  make 
successful  all  the  means  employed  in  the  economy  of 
grace. 

This  redemption  is  the  highest  work  of  God,  infinitely 
transcending  all  his  other  works  of  creation  and  provi- 
dence, which  for  the  same  reason  are  made  subservient 
and  contributive  to  it.  There  God  has  his  highest  de- 
light, and  from  its  issues  he  looks  for  his  chiefest  praise. 
Hence  it  is  styled  emphatically/'  the  good  pleasure  of 
his  will ;  "  and  it  is  "  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his 
grace."  But  while  we  adore  with  equal  thanks  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  for  their  most 
merciful  offices  in  our  redemption,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
office  of  the  Father  and  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
necessarily  demand  a  perfect  discharge  of  the  office 
committed  to  the  Son.  His  vicarious  righteousness  is 
the  basis  of  the  Father's  choice  and  the  Spirit's  effi- 
ciency ;  for  the  Father  sends  the  Son  to  work  out  the 
atonement,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  applies  the  atonement 
to  the  salvation  of  the  church.  The  Father  "  predes- 
tinates us  to  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ," 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  makes  us  "  accepted  in  the  be- 
loved." Now,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Son  having  become 
incarnate  had  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  made  an  infi- 
nitely sufficient  basis  for  our  atonement  (or  reconcilia- 
tion) with  God,  and  so  justified  the  mercy  of  God  in 
the  salvation  of  the  sinner  who  believes  on  Jesus,  when 
he  finished  his  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  Therefore  was 
Jesus  Christ  his  only  begotten  Son,  in  whom  he  was 
well  pleased,  —  not  simply  as  his  only  begottdn  Son,  — 


Lect.XXIL]  as   EULER  AND  JUDGE.  477 

there  needed  no  work  of  righteousness  to  recommend 
his  coequal  Son,  —  but  his  onlj  begotten  Son,  the  in- 
carnate mediator  who  had  perfected  the  work  of  propi- 
tiation. The  only  begotten  had  taken  on  him  the  form 
of  a  servant,  in  our  nature  representing  us  ;  and  in  him, 
as  a  servant  representing  us,  is  he  well  pleased.  The 
Father  rejoices  over  him  as  the  magnifier  of  the 
divine  law,  the  satisfier  of  the  divine  justice,  the  justi- 
fier  of  the  divine  mercy  ;  and  receives  him  back  to 
heaven  as  the  head  of  a  once  prodjgal  race  that  was 
dead  but  is  alive  again,  that  was  lost  and  is  found. 
With  what  glory  shall  he  invest  this  well-beloved  Son 
less  than  the  robe  of  his  best  majesty  !  What  place 
shall  he  assign  him  in  whom  he  is  so  well  pleased,  less 
than  a  seat  on  his  own  throne  !  What  reward  shall  he 
bestow  on  the  Propitiator  for  such  perfect  righteous- 
ness, less  than  the  administration  of  all  power  in  heaven 
and  in  earth  ! 

The  incarnate  Son,  in  the  execution  of  this  work,  had 
stooped  to  extreme  shame.  He  had  been  degraded  by 
poverty,  persecution,  and  contempt,  even  to  the  once 
infamous  cross  ;  his  enemies  had  exulted  over  him  as 
he  lay  in  the  guarded  tomb  to  all  semblance  under  the 
grasp  of  "him  that  had  the  power  of  death ;  "  men 
and  angels  had  seen  that  it  even  pleased  the  Father  to 
bruise  him  and  put  him  to  grief;  nay,  had  heard  his 
cry  of  anguish  and  desolation  come  from  the  thick 
darkness,  "  My  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  !  " 
And  now  must  tlie  Father  show  by  a  glory  infinitely 
greater  than  the  ignominy,  how  much  he  delights  in  his 
faithful  servant ;  so  he  raises  him  from  the  lowest  parts 
of  the  earth,  where  he  was  stript  of  all  things,  to  the 
highest   seat  in   heaven,  that  he   may  fill    all   things. 


478  CHRIST  ON  THE   THRONE  H. 

Therefore  the  glory  of  Christ  is  to  be  measured  only  by 
the  infinite  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  grace ;  and  such 
the  manifestation  of  the  Father  to  the  man  whom  he 
delighteth  to  honor,  that  not  only  the  church  shall 
ascribe  unto  him  glory  and  dominion  forever  and  ever, 
"  but  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  earth 
and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all 
that  are  in  them,"  shall  say,  "  Blessing  and  honor  and 
glory  and  power  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  forever  and  ever." 

2.  "  That  he  might,"  says  the  Catecliism,  "  there 
appear  as  the  head  of  his  church,  by  whom  the  Father 
governs  all  things." 

Let  us,  for  greater  convenience,  divide  this  sen- 
tence. 

a.  "  That  he  might  there  appear  as  the  head  of  his 
church." 

The  first  Adam  was  driven,  because  of  his  sin,  by 
avenging  angels,  from  the  presence  of  God  in  the  first 
paradise,  and  all  his  descendants  fallen  with  him  are  by 
nature  and  personal  guilt  in  tlie  same  state  of  condem- 
nation and  consequent  exclusion  from  the  divine  favor. 
Christ,  as  the  second  Adam,  had  undertaken  to  restore, 
by  his  representative  righteousness,  all  sinners  who  be- 
lieve on  his  name  to  the  privilege  and  blessedness  they 
had  lost.  As  Adam  was  the  head  of  his  race,  so  does 
Ciirist  act  as  the  head  of  his  church,  which  Isaiah  calls 
"  his  seed,"  "  the  travail  of  his  soul."  But  as  the 
vicarious  merit  of  the  mediator  is  infinitely  greater  than 
the  most  perfect  obedience  of  man  could  have  been, 
the  privilege  and  blessedness  purchased  by  him  must 
incomparably  transcend  what  had  been  lost.  Hence, 
the  state  of  the  church  in  the  divine  favor  cannot  now 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  479 

be  adequately  shown  on  earth  ;  and  the  second  paradise 
is  opened  amidst  the  glories  of  the  divine  presence  in 
heaven.  Christ,  therefore,  having  risen  from  the  dead 
after  the  consummation  of  his  atonement,  remains  oji 
earth  no  longer  than  was  required  to  confirm  the  fact 
of  his  resurrection,  but  ascends  with  his  human  body 
and  soul  to  take  possession  of  heaven  as  his  by  media- 
torial right.  He  enters  heaven  not  for  himself  alone, 
but  for  us  as  the  forerunner  of  his  church.  When  his 
pierced  feet  crossed  the  threshold  of  that  holy  place,  he 
demonstrated  that  all  who  believe  on  his  name  shall 
follow  in  his  majestic  steps,  and  that  the  whole  nature, 
body  and  soul  of  every  Christian,  shall  partake  of  the 
same  glory  with  which  his  humanity  is  now  invested. 
There  in  the  second  paradise,  where  the  tree  of  life 
offers  its  perpetual  fruits,  beside  the  river  of  the 
waters  of  life,  which  flows  from  out  the  throne  of 
the  Lord  God  almighty  and  the  Lamb,  shall  Jesus, 
our  surety,  forever  enjoy  the  reward  for  which  he 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  as  he  beholds 
all  his  ransomed  people  safe,  sinless,  and  happy 'like 
himself. 

Nor  was  it  enough  for  this  that  he  should  merely 
enter  heaven.  The  angels  enjoy  heaven  as  the  con- 
comitant reward  of  their  unswerving  fidelity  ;  —  the 
divinely  incarnate  Son  who  had  not  only  accomplished 
an  infinite  merit  for  his  people,  but  also,  in  so  doing, 
fulfilled  the  highest  good  pleasure  of  the  Father,  must 
have  a  recompense  far  above  the  angel's  honor.  The 
only  begotten  Son  must  have  his  divine  place  on  his 
Father's  throne,  and  he  takes  his  seat  with  his  insepara- 
ble humanity  about  him,  the  Immanuel  in  whom  the 
Father  is  well  pleased.     The  ransomed  sinners,  in  all 


•180  CHRIST   ON   THE  THRONE  [Lkct.  XXH 

their  multitudinous  numbers,  will  enjoy  lieaven  as  the 
reward  of  his  imputed  righteousness,  but  he  is  the  head 
of  the  body  of  which  they  all  are  members,  and  it  is  his 
right  byjtvhich  they  are  there-;  therefore  must  it  ap- 
])ear  that  his  dignity  is  infinitely  preeminent ;  nay,  that 
he  is  Lord  of  heaven,  to  open  its  gates  and  its  treasures 
as  his  own  for  all  his  people.  He  reigns  for  us,  because 
he  reigns  in  our  flesh.  There  to  Christ  on  his  throne 
do  our  affections  follow  him,  for  there  "  all  the  articles 
of  our  faith  lead  us." 

h.  "  That  he  might  there  appear  as  the  head  of  his 
church,  hy  whom  the  Father  governs  all  things.'''' 

Though  the  merit  on  which  the  salvation  of  the 
church  was  finished  by  Jesus  Christ  when  he  died  upon 
the  cross,  his  work  as  our  Redeemer  will  not  be  accora- 
))lished  lantil  his  whole  church  —  every  one  of  his  ran- 
somed people  —  is  brought  home  to  the  glorious  house 
of  his  Father.  For  wise  reasons,  (elsewhere  treated 
of,)  this  process  is  gradual ;  gradual  in  each  believer, 
and  gradual  in  the  church.  There  is  a  severe  discipline 
through  which  the  grace  of  God  is  manifested  by  the 
experience  of  Christians  and  the  church  on  earth,  and 
by  which  they  are  to  be  prepared  for  the  holy  consum- 
mation of  heaven.  They  are  to  labor  in  services  like 
his,  for  which  their  strength  is  utterly  insufficient ;  they 
are  to  meet  difficulties  and  oppositions  and  delusions 
far  greater  than  their  own  power  and  skill  to  overcome. 
All  the  malice  of  the  world  and  hell  is  against  them. 
Yet  must  they  overcome.  Humanity  must  achieve  its 
own  triumphs.  All  things  were  put  under  man  at  the 
beginning,  and  all  things  must  be  again  put  under  him 
in  the  end.  The  restoration  else  were  not  complete. 
Now  we  see  not  all  things  put  under  the  church.     Her 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  481 

battle  is  fierce  and  obstinate.  "  But  we  see  Jestjs,  our 
second  Adam,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father," 
crowned  with  glory  and  honor.  God  has  put  all  things 
into  his  hands,  the  hands  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  All 
power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  earth,  not  as 
the  Son  of  God,  —  that  power  has  been  eternally  his  by 
right  of  his  original  divinity,  —  but  to  the  Son  of  God 
incarnate,  Jesus  Christ  as  the  head  of  his  church,  and 
for  the  benefit  of  his  church.  Nothing  less  than  his 
infinite  divinity  were  sufficient  to  exert  this  universal 
power,  but  he  exerts  it  through  his  humanity  as  the 
grand  type  of  regenerated,  glorified  man.  He  reigns 
as  the  second  Adam  by  the  power  of  his  godhead. 
All  providence,  therefore,  is  his  ;  all  things,  all  beings 
created,  all  events,  all  the  laws  of  nature,  all  the  affairs 
of  nations,  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  inventions  and  en- 
terprises of  men  are  so  ruled,  directed,  and  overruled 
by  him  as  to  assist  his  people  individually,  and  as  a 
church  in  their  struggles  onward  and  open  the  way  for 
their  final  triumph.  "  The  angels  "  who  constitute 
the  hosts  of  which  he  is  Lord,  are  "  all  ministering 
spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs 
of  salvation ;  "  even  the  devils,  also,  are  subject  unto 
him,  their  malice  being  restrained  and  their  ultimate 
defeat  made  certain,  for  "  he  must  reign  till  he  hath  put 
all  enemies  under  his  feet."  So  that  the  apostle  made 
no  vain  boast  when  he  said,  "  We  know  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,"  and 
that  all  things  are  theirs,  because  they  are  "  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  God's."  The  fulness  of  the  church 
which  is  his  body,  is  the  fulness  of  Christ's  glory,  so 
hath  the  Father  put  all  things  under  his  feet  and  given 
him  to  be  head  over  all   things  to  his  church  that  he 

VOL.   I.  31 


482  CHRIST  ON   THE  THRONE  |  Lkct.  XXII. 

may  see  of  tlie  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  fully  sat- 
isfied. 

3.  That  he  "  may  by  his  Holy  Spirit  pour  out  heav- 
enly graces  on  us  his  members." 

In  the  plan  of  redemption  the  Holy  Ghost  assumes 
the  office  of  rendering  effectual  the  work  of  Christ,  and 
hence  is  said  to  proceed  from  the  Father  and  tlie  Son, 
as  the  Son  from  the  Father.  When,  therefore,  the 
mediator  had  finished  his  meritorious  work,  he  took  his 
seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  asked  and 
received  the  promised  agency  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for 
the  carrying  out  of  his  redemption  to  its  entire  com- 
pletion. Hence  the  Holy  Ghost  is  said  to  be  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  and  he  is  said  to  send  the  Spirit  from  the 
Father  (John  xv.  26).  So  at  the  Pentecost  the  descent 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  proved  the  session  of  Christ  on  his 
throne  :  "  Therefore,"  said  the  apostle  Peter,  "  being 
by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  having  re- 
ceived of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
(i.  e.  the  promised  Holy  Ghost),  he  hath  shed  forth 
this  Which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  All  the  gifts  of 
God  through  Christ  to  men,  all  the  graces  which 
characterize  believers,  —  knowledge,  strength,  holiness, 
faith,  hope,  love,  —  with  all  their  attendant  train  of 
blessed  dispositions,  are  the  effects  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwelling  and  working  in  them.  To  obtain  this 
spirit  in  his  various  energies  is  the  object  of  Christ's 
pi-iestly  intercessions.  Whatever  we  need  for  our 
Christian  comfort,  guidance,  and  courage,  can  come 
to  us  only  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  as  all  that  was  neces- 
sary to  consecrate  and  sustain  the  humanity  of  Christ 
himself,  came  from  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  by 
the  Father  npon   him.     The   Spirit  was  the   holy  oil 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  483 

of  his  unction  when  he  was  crowned  as  the  royal  high 
])riest  and  prophet  of  the  church,  and  its  precious  per- 
fumes flow  down  to  the  humblest  member  of  his  mys- 
tical body.  Christ,  therefore,  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father  on  his  throne,  that  as  he  administers  all 
providence  for  the  external  benefit  of  his  church,  he 
may  also  send  each  member  of  it  all  g-vace  for  the 
internal  Christian  life  ;  or,  as  the  51st  Question  and 
Answer  has  it,  the  profit  which  this  glory  of  Christ, 
our  head,  is  unto  us,  may  be  stated  in  two  parts. 
"  First :  That  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  poureth  out  heav- 
enly graces  upon  us  his  members  ;  and  then  that  by 
his  power  he  defends  and  preserves  us  against  all 
enemies." 

4.  There  is  yet  another  form  of  Christ's  glory  con- 
nected with  his  elevation  as  Lord  of  all,  which,  though 
stated  in  a  separate  article  of  the  creed,  the  Catechism 
most  properly  unites  with  the  consideration  of  his  sit- 
ting at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  :  his  coming  "  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead." 

Throughout  the  Scriptures,  the  final  and  general 
judgment  of  the  world  is  ascribed  to  Christ,  "  be- 
cause," says  the  apostle  on  the  Areopagus,  God  "  hath 
appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained, 
whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men  in  that 
he  raised  him  from  the  dead."  Here  not  only  is  the 
judge  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  incarnate,  by  the 
emphatic  term  man,  but  his  judgeship  is  intimately 
connected  with  his  office  as  mediator  by  the  assurance 
of  his  appointment  being  given  in  his  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  We  see,  also,  according  to  the  creed,  that 
he    proceeds   from    his    throne  to  execute    the   office : 


484  CHRIST   ON    THE   THRONK  H. 

"  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead  ; "  not  that  he  leaves  his  sovereign  au- 
thority beliind  him,  but  that  he  derives  his  authority 
to  judge  from  his  royal  dignity.  In  a  word,  it  is  a 
prerogative  of  his  mediatorial  headship  over  all.  The 
reason  of  this  is  twofold  :  first,  from  the  relation  of 
the  mediator  to  God  ;  secondly,  from  his  relation  to 
the   church. 

a.  In  committing  to  Jesus  Christ  the  administration 
of  mercy,  the  Father  necessarily  committed  to  him  the 
administration  of  justice.  It  became  him  to  reconcile 
mercy  to  the  believer  with  justice  to  the  impenitent ; 
and,  while  he  effected  through  his  righteousness  the 
redemption  of  his  people,  though  sinners,  to  carry 
out  the  condemnation  of  all  who  rejected  his  surety- 
ship. He  could  not,  therefore,  fulfil  the  trust  of 
all  authorit}-  from  the  Father  until  he  had  not  only 
opened  heaven  for  the  penitent,  but  also  sent  away 
the  obstinately  impenitent  to  their  merited  doom.  The 
gospel  did  not  annul  the  law,  but  placed  the  law  with 
the  gospel  in  the  hands  of  the  mediator.  Hence,  as  the 
final  judgment  is  intended  for  the  manifestation  of  the 
di\  ine  holiness  in  the  consummation  of  the  present  sys- 
tem, so  it  should  be  presided  over  by  the  mediatorial 
Lord. 

It  is  also  for  the  benefit  of  the  church,  that  its  me- 
diatoi-ial  head  should  be  the  judge  to  dissipate  their 
fear,  fulfil  his  gracious  promises  to  them,  and  forever 
deliver  them  from  all  danger  and  dread  of  their  ene- 
mies, by  a  complete  and  everlasting  overthrow  of  all 
wickedness. 

Thus  the  disciple,  in  the  answer  to  the  52d  Question, 
declares  his  unspeakable  comfort  from  the  judgeship  of 


AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  485 

Christ :  "  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions, 
with  uplifted  head,  I  look  for  the  very  same  person,  who 
before  offered  himself  for  my  sake  to  the  tribunal  of 
God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse  from  me  to  come  as 
judge  from  heaven  ;  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  ene- 
mies into  everlasting  condemnation,  but  shall  translate 
me  with  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself  into  heavenly 
joys  and  glory."  Even  in  this  majestic  splendor  of 
the  mediator,  the  believer  is  associated  with  the  glory 
of  his  elder  brother.  It  is  in  his  kindreH  flesh  that  the 
Son  of  God  shall  sit  on  the  judgment-seat ;  it  is  his 
head  that  shall  display  consummate  power  over  the 
destinies  of  all  men. 

There  are  many  verj'  interesting  questions  and  edify- 
ing truths  beyond  what  we  have  touched  upon  con- 
nected with  this  subject ;  but  as  the  Catechism  does 
not  bring  them  under  the  present  lesson,  and  much 
larger  space  were  necessary  for  their  discussion  than 
we  have  now  at  our  disposal,  we  must  leave  them  for 
other  occasions,  and  proceed  to  consider 

Thirdly  :  Tlte  comfort  ivldch  the  believer  derives 
from  this  doctrine  of  our  Lord's  exaltation. 

This  has  been  made  to  appear  as  we  went  through 
the  previous  discussion,  but  the  several  points  may  be 
profitably  recapitulated. 

1.   Our  right  through  grace  to  heaven  is  secured. 

"  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,"  said  Peter  on 
the  mount  of  transfiguration,  when  he  beheld  the  glory 
of  Jesus,  and  in  his  bewildered  ignorance  he  would 
have  continued  on  the  top  of  Tabor  ;  but  just  before 
his  passion,  when  the  master  had  gathered  the  twelve 
around  him  for  the  last  time,  he  declared,  "  It  is  expe- 
dient for  you  that  I  go  away."     From  the  scene  of  his 


486  CHRIST  ON   THE  THRONE  [Lect.XXH 

transfiguration  he  descended  to  pass  through  sorrow, 
shame,  and  death  to  his  Father's  presence  ;  and  after 
he  had  ascended  out  of  sight  of  his  exuhing  disciples 
at  Bethany,  they  had  to  pass  through  trials  like  his  to 
reach  their  crown.  But  it  was  "■  the  joy  set  before, 
him,"  which  animated  him  to  "endure  the  cross,  de- 
spising the  shame  ;  "  it  was  the  leward  he  had  promised 
them  which  nerved  their  spirits  to  be  faithful  until 
death.  He  was  no  ^longer  with  them  on  earth;  but 
they  knew  that  he  was  in  glory  at  the  right  liand  of 
the  Father.  They  no  longer  heard  his  gentle  voice  or 
saw  his  affectionate  smile,  but  they  knew  that  he  had 
not  forgotten  them,  for  he  had  carried  up  with  him  his 
liuman  body,  and  was  still  their  elder  brother  and 
high  priest,  who  could  be  touched  with  tiie  feeling  of 
their  infirmities,  having  been  tempted  like  as  they  were, 
though  without  sin  ;  they  had  seen  him  condemned, 
fn'ucified,  dead,  and  buried  ;  and  now  they  were  ex- 
posed, a  scattered  feeble  flock,  to  the  malice  of  the 
same  enemies  and  a  cruel  death ;  but  they  knew  that  he 
whom  they  trusted  was  Lord  of  heaven,  triumphant 
over  all,  and  had  taken  his  royal  seat  as  their  forerun- 
ner. There  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  body  and  soul,  was 
in  glory,  —  a  glory  of  which  he  had  promised  them  that 
they  should  be  partakers.  Therefore,  sinners  though 
they  were,  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  unworthy  in 
themselves,  and  weak  as  they  were  unworthy,  they 
knew  that  heaven  was  theirs  ;  that  they  should  enter 
heaven  body  and  soul  ;  that  none  could  debar  them 
entrance,  because  he,  who  had  washed  them  from  theii 
sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  imputed  to  them  his  right 
eousness,  and  acknowledged  them  as  members  of  his 
body,  was  now  the   king  who  had  control  over  all  the 


Lect.  XXII.J  AS   RULER  AND  JUDGE.  487 

mansions  of  his  Father's  house,  and  had  promised  to 
come  again  and  receive  them  unto  himself,  that  where 
he  is  tliey  should  be  also.  They  could  have  no  doubt 
of  his  faithfulness,  they  could  have  no  doubt  of  his 
pow^er  ;  for  he  had  been  faithful  unto  death,  and  was 
now  head  over  all  things  to  his  church.  Thus  we  find 
that  an  assured  hope  of  heaven  was  the  great  stay  and 
comfort  of  the  apostles  and  of  the  primitive  Christians. 
They  set  their  hearts  on  heaven,  and  nothing  short  of 
heaven  could  at  all  satisfy  their  longing  expectations. 
Doubt  of  their  ultimate  blessedness  there,  the  possibility 
of  their  being  disappointed,  would  have  been  to  them 
the  power  of  keenest  torture  :  "  If  for  this  life  only  we 
have  hope  in  Christ,"  said  the  apostle  Paul,  "  we  are 
of  all  men  most  miserable."  Their  hope  was  in  tChrist 
for  the  life  to  come.  The  same  comfort  is  ours,  beloved 
brethren.  Our  Saviour  is  in  heaven  ;  he  is  Lord  of 
heaven  —  Lord  of  heaven  in  our  nature  ;  and  in  receiv- 
ing him  and  crowning  him,  the  Father  has  given  an 
earnest  of  receiving  us  and  crowning  us,  if  we  be  in- 
deed Christians.  It  was  to  gain  heaven  for  us  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  suffered  and  endured  ;  to  reach  heaven  and 
be  with  him  there,  should  be,  as  it  is,  the  great  aim  of 
all  his  true  followers,  and  our  only  comfort ;  but  our 
unspeakable  comfort  is,  that,  whatever  meets  us  here, 
lieaven  will  be  ours  at  last,  because  Christ  has  made  it 
ours  now.  Let,  then,  our  conversation  be  in  heaven, 
our  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  his  Son  Jesus 
Ohrist,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and 
the  holy  angels.  We  are  pilgrims  now,  but  we  are 
going  home,  and  that  home  is  heaven. 

2*  Our  strength  for  the  Christian  life  is  secured. 

Though   the   end   of   his   pilgrimage   be   secured   in 


488  CHRIST   ON   THE  THRONE  H. 

heaven,  tlie  Christian  knows  that  great  trials  may,  it' 
liis  time  on  earth  be  prokinged,  lie  between  his  ])resent 
state  and  heaven  ;  nor  can  he  lielp  but  fear,  lest  a 
promise  being  left  him  of  entering  into  rest,  he  might 
seem  to  come  short  of  it.  He  would  not  deliberately 
wander  from  his  master's  footsteps,  nor  yield  to  temp- 
tation ;  but  he  is  feeble,  his  heart  most  wicked  and 
deceitful,  his  knowledge  little,  and  his  judgment  weak. 
How  shall  he  restrain  that  wicked  heart  of  his  ?  How 
undeceive  himself  from  its  sophisms  ?  How  resist  its 
lono'-induloed  tendencies  to  draw  back  from  the  livins; 
God?  Were  he  left  to  himself  he  would  despair; 
but  he  is  not.  His  master  is  not  beyond  his  reach  ; 
there  is  a  door  open  by  which  his  faith  can  reach  him 
still  ;  and  in  faith  he  goes  thi'ough  the  rent  vail  even  to 
the  throne  of  grace,  and  on  that  throne  he  sees  Jesus, 
his  intercessor,  beside  God  the  Father  almighty,  having 
received  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  all  the  members 
of  his  blessed  body.  As  the  Father  honors  the  Son 
by  receiving  him  as  head  of  the  church,  so  the  Holy 
Ghost  honors  him  by  putting  all  his  energies  at  his  dis- 
posal for  the  church.  The  Holy  Ghost  enters  the  soul 
of  eacli  believer  as  the  earnest  of  eternal  life,  shedding 
the  light  of  truth  through  his  understanding,  the  love 
of  God  through  his  heart,  power  from  on  high  through 
his  will.  In  a  word,  all  that  the  believer  needs  within 
for  his  Christian  life  is  assured  to  him,  because  he 
knows  that  Christ  sits  on  his  throne  to  "  pour  out  by 
his  Holy  Spirit  heavenly  graces  upon  us  his  members."' 
We  may  not,  therefore,  whatever  be  our  conviction 
of  our  own  sin  and  insufficiency,  doubt  of  strength 
from  Christ,  so-  long  as  we  have  continual  access  to 
the   throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.     We  have  but  to 


Lect.  XXII.J  as   ruler   AND  JUDGE.  489 

ask,  and  we  receive,  and  receive  in  no  small  measure, 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,  grace  to  cover  all  our 
infirmities,  to  supply  all  our  wants,  to  transform  us 
from  all  that  we  are  by  nature  to  the  likeness  of  the 
second  Adam,  the  perfection  of  humanity  and  the 
heavenly  type  of  his  ransomed  seed. 

3.  As  our  strength  within  is  secured,  so  is  our  de- 
fence from  without. 

Our  Head,  by  his  victory  over  death  and  him  that 
had  power  of  death,  triumphed   over  all  his  and  our 
enemies;   nay,  by  right   of  the  covenant,  has   power 
over  all  created  instrumentalities  as  head  of  the  church 
for  the  church.     It  is,  therefore,  no  more  a  question 
whether  or  not  we  are  able  individually,  or  as  a  church, 
to  contend  against  the  forces  adverse  to  our  cause,  oi- 
to  advance  towards  an  ultimate   success  the  kingdom 
of  which  we  have  been  made  partakers ;  that  has  long 
since  been  settled.     We  are  nothing,  the  whole  church 
apart  from  its  head  is  nothing,  in  comparison  with  the 
world  and  the  devil.     Now  we  ask  with  uplifted  heads, 
is  not  Christ   able  ?     Has  he  not,  whose  is  all  power 
in  heaven  and  in  earth,  who  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  the  Father  almighty,  the  force  as  h^  has  the 
prerogative  to  overcome  for  us,  and  by  us,  that  we  mav 
overcome  with  him  ?     O  believer,  when  by  reason  of 
difficulties   around   you   and   threatenings    before  you, 
your  heart  fails,  look  up!     Look  up  to  Jesus,  wher' 
he  sitteth  at   the  right  hand  of  God,  whither  all  the 
articles  of  your  faith  lead  you.     Only  set  your  affec- 
tions  on   him  ;    only  cast  your  care   on   liis   almighty 
arm,  and  you   shall  be  certain  of  deliverance  and  of 
success. 


490  CHKIST   ON   THE  THRONE  H. 

4.   Onr  vindication  is  secure. 

Our  Lord  left  his  disciples  on  earth  to  take  his  seat 
on  his  throne.  Personally  absent  he  is  now,  though 
present  by  his  Spirit.  Rut  the  separation  will  not  be 
perpetual.  We  show  forth  in  the  holy  sacrament  of 
the  supper  his  death  ;  but  we  show  it  till  he  come. 
When  the  disciples  stood  gazing  up  at  the  heavens 
through  which  their  Lord  disappeared  in  glory,  angels 
were  sent  to  stand  by  them,  and  say,  "  This  same 
Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall 
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into 
heaven ; "  and  he  himself  had  said  before,  "  If  I  go 
away,  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you  unto  myself, 
that  where  I  am  ye  may  be  also."  So  says  the  article 
of  our  creed  :  "  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge 
the  quick. and  the  dead."  For  wise  reasons  he  will 
permit  his  church  to  be  tried,  assisting  them  by  his 
Spirit  and  his  power,  but  withholding  from  them  a  full 
success.  They  will  be  accused,  mocked,  baffled,  and 
persecuted.  Yet  only  for  a  time.  He  sits  on  his 
throne  expecting  till  his  "  enemies  be  made  his  foot- 
stool ; "  and  we,  though  on  earth,  have  a  gracious 
privilege  of  sharing  in  the  expectation  ;  for  Avhen 
he  comes  again,  it  shall  be  to  judge  the  quick  and 
the  dead.  The  Lamb  that  was  slain  shall  sit  on  the 
judgment-seat,  to  justify  the  believer  from  the  curse 
by  his  own  righteousness  ;  to  condemn  the  unbe- 
liever because  his  mercy  has  been  rejected  ;  to  open 
with  his  nail-pierced  hands  the  kingdom  of  glory  for 
his  friends  ;  to '  banish,  by  the  fierceness  of  his  own 
wrath,  his  enemies  to  an  everlasting  doom.  Before 
assembled   angels   and    an  observant    universe  will  he 


I.ECT.  XXII.]  AS    RULER   AND   JUDGE.  491 

acknowledge  and  glorify  the  most  despised  of  his  little 
ones,  while  he  pours  eternal  contempt  upon  the  proud 
who  resisted  his  love. 

O  Christian,  O  unbeliever,  consider  who  can  stand 
before  him  in  the  judgment  !  If  we  trust  in  our- 
selves, our  condemnation  is  sure ;  if  we  trust  in  him, 
our  vindication  shall  be   complete. 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


I 


.;* 


^  m^ 


'v  r< 


^^' 
>'.^ 


c^> 


<''fi 


%i 


f^ 


m 


.>■:  r 


S    ,1 


w;  ail' 4TM|s>  '^  ■ 


1    1012  01034  7344 


>a.'» 


imm 


^*^!'!:  I  ^  ^  ? : : :  ^ : : ; :  ::- 


t  i'  'kki 




NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  06825886  6 


•r-^*,< 


*•  1, 


i:.^m^Mi 


EXPOSITORY    LECTURES 


HEIDELBERG   CATECHISM. 


BY 

GEORGE  W.   BETHUNE,  D.  D. 


IN   TWO   VOLUMES 
VOL.   II. 


NEW    YORK: 

SHELDON  &  CO^rPANY,  PUBLISHERS, 
498  &  500  BROADWAY. 

1866. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1864,  by 

Sheldon  and  Company, 

in  the  Clerk's  OfiSce  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  New  York. 


CONTENTS   OF  VOLUME   II. 


-♦-

LECTURE  XXIII. 

FAOB 

THE   JUDGMENT   BY   CHRIST         ...  .  .  5