LECTURE    XXXVI. 

THE  LORD'S  SUPPER. 

SECOND   LECTURE. 
TWENTY-EIGHTH  AND  TWENTY-NINTH  LORD'S 
DAYS. 

THE  LORD'S   SUPPER. 

(CONTINUED.) 

Quest.  LXXVIII.  Do,  then,  the  bread  and  mne  become  the  very  body  and 
blood  of  Chiisl  f 

Ans.  Not  at  all ;  but  as  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into  the  blood 
of  Christ,  neither  is  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself,  being  only  the  sign 
and  confirmation  thereof  appointed  of  God,  so  the  bread  in  the  Lord's 
supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very  body  of  Christ,  though,  agreeable 
to  the  nature  and  properties  of  sacraments,  it  is  called  the  body  of 
Christ  Jesus. 

Quest.  LXXIX.  Wliy,  then,  doth  Christ  call  ike  bread  his  body,  and  the  cup 
his  blooil,  or,  the  New  Testament  in  his  blood;  and  Paul,  the  "  communion 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  ChiiU  "  ? 

Ans.  Christ  speaks  thus  not  without  great  reason,  namely,  not  only  to 
teach  us,  that,  as  bread  and  wine  support  this  temporal  life,  so  his  cru- 
cified body  and  shed  blood  are  the  true  meat  and  drink  whereby  our 
souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life;  but,  more  especially,  by  these  visible  signs 
and  pledges,  to  assure  us,  that  we  are  as  really  partakers  of  his  true 
body  and  blood  (by  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost),  as  we  receive 
by  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  remembrance  of  him; 
and  that  all  his  suflTerings  and  obedience  are  as  certainly  ours,  as  if  we 
had  in  our  own  persons  suffered  and  made  satisfaction  to  God. 

T^HIRDLY  :    The  purpose  of  the  sacrament  of  the 
-*-    supper. 

The  solemn  and  affecting  circumstances  of  its  insti- 
tution  by  our  blessed  Lord,  the  peculiar  stress  laid  upon 
its  observance  by  the  apostolical  command,  the  great 
prominence  it  has,  and  has  always  had,  in  the  religious 
services  of  the  church,  the  comfort  derived  from  par- 
taking of  it  by  believers  of  all  ages,  and  the  regard  in 
which  it  is  universally  held  as  the  most  awful  ceremony 


292  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  and  august  spectacle  Christianity  offers  to  the  contem- 
plation of  both  Christians  and  the  world,  all  teach  us 
the  high  importance  of  rightly  understanding  its  de- 
sign and  purport,  to  both  of  which,  as  comprehended 
by  one  word,  our  thoughts  must  now  be  directed. 

From  the  several  considerations  we  have  already 
had  on  the  subject,  we  learn  that,  while  the  sacrament 
of  the  supper  is  an  ordinance  by  which  God  in  salva- 
tion addresses  us,  it  is  also  an  ordinance  in  the  comple- 
tion of  which  we  are  to  take  an  active  part.  Hence, 
the  purpose  of  the  sacrament  is  to  be  looked  for  in 
two  directions  :  first,  as  to  what  God  intends  by  this 
sacrament  to  do  for  us  ;  and,  secondly,  as  to  what  he, 
by  this  sacrament,  requires  us  to  do  for  ourselves  and 
for  him. 

1.  What  God  purposes  by  this  sacrament  to  do  for 
his  people.     (75th  Question  and  Answer.) 

a.  To  put  us  and  keep  us  in  remembrance  of  Christ's 
love  towards  us,  especially  as  it  is  manifested  by  his 
death  on  the  cross  for  our  redemption. 

When  our  blessed  Lord,  at  the  institution  of  the 
supper,  uttered  the  gracious,  mandatory  words,  "  This 
do  in  remembrance  of  me  "  (Luke  xxii.  19),  it  was  in 
close  connection  with  his  other  declarations,  "  This  is 
my  body  which  is  given  [broken  the  apostle  has  it] 
for  you,"  and,  "  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my 
blood,  whicli  is.  shed  for  you."  So  the  apostle:  "As 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  dc 
show  the  Lord's  deatli  till  he  come."  It  is  essential  to 
om'  Christian  faith  that  we  rccofrnize  the  doctrines  of 
Christ's  person,  as  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God  incar- 
nate, as  our  brotbcr-man,  and,  also,  that  we  consider 
that  the  vicarious  work  of  Christ,  through  the  merits 


r.KCT.  XXXVI.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  293 

of  wliich  we  are  saved,  covered  liis  whole  life  on  earth  : 
yet  our  redemption  was  not  accomplished  until  he 
actually  died  on  the  cross.  The  shedding  of  his  blood, 
the  going  out  of  his  precious  life  there,  was  the  act 
which  gave  value  and  consecration  and  acceptance  to 
all  that  he  had  done  and  suffered  before.  That,  as  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us,  was  "  the 
blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified  " 
(x.  29),  and  by  virtue  of  which  satisfying  the  law  in 
room  of  our  death,  he  rose  from  the  dead  (xiii.  20). 
Hence,  "  the  death  of  Christ,"  "  the  blood  of  Christ," 
"  the  cross  of  Christ,"  each  is  used  in  Scripture  as 
synonymous  with  the  whole  work  of  Christ  on  earth 
for  our  salvation  ;  and,  therefore,  as  our  church  says  in 
her  form  for  this  sacrament,  "  we  see  that "  our  Lord 
"  directs  our  faith  and  trust  to  his  perfect  sacrifice,  once 
offered  on  the  cross,  as  to  the  only  ground  and  founda- 
tion of  our  salvation."  The  whole  action  and  admin 
istration  of  the  sacrament,  the  exhibition  of  the  ele- 
ments, the  breaking  of  the  bread  and  the  extension  of 
the  wine,  prove  the  same  thing.  Whatever  other 
thoughts,  edifying  and  comforting  and  hortatory  to  a 
Christian  life,  we  may  have  in  our  minds,  the  main 
thought,  and  that  which  gives  validity  and  meaning  to 
all,  is  a  faithful  remembrance  of  Christ's  death  on  the 
cross  ;  and  the  sacrament  is  perverted  and  abused  from 
its  purpose  w^lien  the  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  is 
not  made  the  special  theme  of  our  meditations  and 
object  of  our  faith.  Not  to  use  the  sacrament  for  this 
its  ordained  end,  is  a  crime  against  its  authority,  which 
cannot  be  too  heavily  censured. 

Our  blessed  Lord,  mercifully  mindful  of  our  infirmi- 
ties, our  temptations  within  and  without,  our  liableness 


294  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  to  err,  especially  in  self-righteousness  and  the  pride  of 
a  carnal  ingenuity,  which  substitute  other  grounds  for 
our  salvation,  appointed  this  sacrament  to  remind  us 
continually  of  his  death  on  the  cross  as  our  only  hope. 
However  at  other  times  we  may  forget  his  love  and 
gracious  authority  in  the  cares  or  pleasures  of  the  world 
and  the  flesh,  the  sacrament,  which  exhibits  Christ's 
devoted  love  by  lifting  him  up  on  his  cross,  as  it  were, 
before  our  very  eyes,  rebukes  our  ingratitude,  and  gen- 
erously persuades  us  to  live  only  for  him.  However  at 
other  times  we  may  have  listened  to  the  voice  of  the 
tempter,  teaching  any  other  way  of  salvation,  in  whole 
or  in  part,  than  the  expiation  of  Christ's  blood,  the  sac- 
rament, by  its  simple  and  direct  preaching,  brings  us 
sack,  humbled  and  thankful,  to  the  foot  of  the  cross. 
However  we  may  have  suffered  from  the  sophisms  of  a 
base  expediency,  the  doctrines  of  the  cross  to  be  for  a 
time  ignored  and  thrust  on  one  side  to  give  place  to 
some  man-invented  scheme  for  carrying  on  the  work  of 
the  Lord  in  the  conquest  of  the  evil  that  is  in  the 
world,  the  sacrament,  by  making  the  gospel  of  Christ's 
death  "  the  wisdom  of  God,"  and  "  the  power  of  God  " 
"  unto  salvation,"  rebukes  our  miserable  policy  as  sin 
against  the  very  essence  of  Christianity,  and  refutes  it 
as  folly  in  the  light  of  God's  omniscience.  In  a  word, 
the  sacrament,  rightly  administered  and  received,  is  a 
full  though  brief  compend  of  all  the  religion  which 
Christianity  teaches  and  enjoins  ;  the  most  eloquent 
enunciation  which  God  has  given  of  what  we  are  to 
believe  and  trust  in  and  do,  as  his  servants  and  children, 
through  Christ ;  and  the  most  clear,  palpable  refutation 
of  all  error  in  doctrine  and  practice,  which  the  subtlety 
of  the  devil  and  tlie  pride  of  human  reason  have  en- 


THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  295 

deavored  to  foist  upon  the  gospel  of  God,  and  the 
church  of  his  anointed. 

To  this  end,  the  pecuhar  action,  or,  if  I  may  be 
allowed  tlic  expression,  the  scenic  arrangement  of  the 
saciament,  were  devised  by  the  holy,  merciful  wisdom 
of  God.  The  divine  Creator,  in  none  of  his  dealings 
with  the  church,  overlooks  the  fact  of  man's  double 
nature,  corporeal  as  well  as  spiritual.  The  very  incar- 
nation of  our  Lord  has  a  reference  to  this  ;  and  our 
adoption  into  the  family  of  God,  as  human  sinners  saved 
bv  gi'ace,  is  not  complete  until  we  shall  at  the  last  day 
be  received,  body  and  soul,  into  the  kingdom  on  high, 
where  Jesus,  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  has  for  us 
entered,  as  the  assurance  that  his  people  shall  all  be 
received  there  and  be  made  like  to  him,  —  not  only  their 
minds  and  hearts  like  him  in  holy  wisdom  and  love,  but 
their  bodies  also  transfigured  into  a  likeness  of  his  most 
glorious  body.  There  we  shall  see  him,  hear  him,  sing 
to  him,  serve  him,  not  only  as  we  now  perceive  him  by 
spiritual  apprehension,  but  really  with  the  senses  and 
faculties  of  our  bodies ;  yes,  as  really  as  the  disciples, 
enjoying  his  presence  on  earth,  heard  his  articulate 
voice,  saw  and  looked  upon  his  mortal  person,  and 
handled  his  palpable  form  ;  though  with  incomparably 
greater  recognition  of  his  gracious,  adorable  beauty  and 
majesty  and  love,  as  he  sits  upon  the  throne  of  his 
Father,  equal  with  God,  beaming  forth  a  brother's 
sympathy  with  our  joy  in  him,  even  as  when,  in  our 
sorrows,  he  revealed  his  sympathy  with  our  needs. 

The  weakness  of  our  minds,  and  the  disorder  of  our 
bodies,  in  consequence  of  sin,  expose  us  to  much  temp- 
tation from  our  lower  nature,  so  that  Paul  comj^lained 
of  his  incorporated  state  as  a  bondage  and  captivity, 


296  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  [Li  ex.  XXXVI. 

crying  out  in  his  distress :  "  O  wretched  man  that  I 
am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  " 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  our  corporeal  faculties  are  of 
great  use  to  us  here  in  exciting,  assisting,  and  obeying 
the  Christian  purposes  of  our  souls.  God,  therefore, 
even  wliile  stripping  from  the  simple  truth  the  various 
visible,  or,  as  the  apostle  calls  them,  "  carnal  ordi- 
nances "  of  the  Levitical  ritual,  did  not  overlook  the 
relation  of  the  soul  to  the  bodily  senses,  but  ordained 
the  visible  sacraments,  in  each  of  Avhich  the  spiritual 
thought  is  represented  by  a  lively  figure :  in  baptism, 
the  cleansing  of  Christ's  blood  by  the  application  of 
water  ;  in  the  Lord's  supper,  the  death  of  Christ  in 
broken  bread  and  poured-out  Avine  ;  and  his  doctrine, 
the  spiritual  food  of  the  Christian,  by  the  eating  of  the 
bread  and  the  drinking  of  the  wine. 

As  was  said  before  (twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day),  these 
palpable  ordinances  are  very  simple  and  few,  to  prevent 
our  being  led  into  formality  and  superstition ;  but,  at 
the  same  time,  they  are  most  eloquently  expressed. 
Thus,  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  supper  in  a  right 
manner  and  in  a  right  spirit,  that  is,  when  we  "  discern 
the  Lord's  body  "  as  represented  by  the  elements,  has 
alwavs  been  found  to  be  a  m'eat  streno-fhener  of  our 
faith  and  incitement  of  our  zeal.  It  brings  us  into  tlie 
very  presence  of  Christ,  around  his  table,  and  among 
his  brethren,  to  receive  the  grace  he  has  promised  to- 
bestow.  We  behold  him  crucified  before  our  eyes,  and 
know  that  we  derive  our  life  and  the  joy  of  life  from 
the  offering  of  his  body  and  tlie  shedding  of  his  blood. 
We  feel  that  we  are  one  with  liini  and  one  with  each 
member  of  "  his  church,  Avhich  is  his  body,  the  fulness 
of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all  "  ;  and,  looking  forward  to 


Lect.  XXX^T]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.  297 

tlie  bless.'d  day  when  lie,  wlio  was  crucified  and  rose 
from  the  dead,  shall  come  again  to  receive  his  people 
where  he  is  in  glory,  we  anticipate  the  blessed,  consum- 
mate iov  of  sittino;  down  with  the  church  of  all  ao;es  at 
the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  in  the  upper  sanctu- 
aiy,  amidst  the  holy  perfections  of  the  eternal  Sabbath. 
Any  attempt  to  add  anything  to  the  simplicity  of  the 
rite  as  Christ  ordained  it,  is  not  only  to  impair  its  valid- 
ity, and  dishonor  the  wisdom  of  its  institutor,  but  also 
to  degrade  and  pervert  it.  If  we  are  not  edified  by  the 
rite  as  our  Loixl  ordained  it,  no  invention  of  man  can: 
improve  it  for  us. 

h.  Again ;  it  was  the  wise  purpose  of  Christ  to. estab- 
lish on  earth  a  visible  church  which  should  be  the  out- 
ward form  of  his  spiritual  church.  As  he  exhibited  his 
power,  his  wisdom,  his  holy  virtue,  and  compassionate 
grace  before  the  world  in  his  mortal  life,  so  it  is  his  wiL 
that  his  people  should  openly  follow  his  blessed  exam- 
ple, declaring  his  truth  as  their  trust,  and  vindicating 
the  divine  energy  of  his  saving  grace  by  their  Christ- 
like lives.  For  this  end  it  was  necessary  that  those 
who  profess  his  religion  should  be  visibly  separated  from 
the  world,  and,  by  appropriate,  significant,  public  ser- 
vices, declare  the  doctrines  and  obligations  of  their 
faith.  Hence  baptism,  or  the  washing  away  of  sin,  is 
the  entrance  of  the  sinner  to  the  church ;  and  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  Lord's  supper,  by  the  assembled  church, 
is  their  avowal  of  themselves  as  his  family,  and  their 
exhibition  to  the  world  of  the  gospel  of  the  cross  as  the 
only  hope  of  their  salvation,  and  the  only  nutriment  of 
their  spiritual  life.  It  is  a  frequent  repetition,  and  with 
greater  fulness,  of  the  confession  they  made  in  baptism 
bnfore  the  church  and  the  world.     Hence  the  use  of  the 


298  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  Lord's  supper  is  not  for  the  communicant's  own  per- 
sonal benefit  only,  though  that  is  largely  found  in  the 
service,  but  for  the  benefit  of  the  church,  in  the  assur- 
ance of  his  fellowship  with  all  her  members,  and  for  the 
benefit  of  the  world,  in  his  testimony  from  experience 
of  the  grace  of  Christ  and  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
God,  therefore,  by  the  sacrament  means  to  give  us  the 
great  advantage  of  Christian  fellowship,  the  honor  of 
being  witnesses  for  him  before  the  Korld,  the  dignity 
and  reward  of  being  fellow-workers  with  Christ  in  the 
accomplishment  of  his  merciful  dominion  over  the 
whole  earth. 

e.  God  purposes,  by  this  sacrament,  to  remind  us  of 
his  gracious  willingness  to  maintain  and  support  our 
Christian  life  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  tlu'ough 
the  truths  therein  signified.  As  the  disciple  says  in  the 
Catechism  :  "  He  feeds  and  nourishes  my  soul  to  ever- 
lasting life  with  his  crucified  body  and  shed  blood,  as 
assuredly  as  I  receive  from  the  hands  of  the  minister, 
and  taste  with  my  mouth,  the  bread  and  cup  of  the 
Lord  as  certain  signs  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ." 

So  in  the  19th  Question  and  Answer :  "  Christ 
speaks  thus  [^.  e.  calls  the  bread  his  body  and  the  cup 
his  blood]  not  Avithout  great  reason,  namely  ....  to 
teach  us,  that,  as  broad  and  wine  support  this  temporal 
life,  so  his  crucified  body  and  shed  blood  are  the  true 
meat  and  drink  whereby  our  souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life." 

Our  blessed  Lord,  after  his  miracle  of  feeding  the 
multitude  with  five  barley  loaves  and  two  small  fishes, 
as  a  parable  of  his  power  and  willingness  to  meet  the 
wants  of  all  those  who  trust  in  him,  was  followed  by 
many  people  anxious  to  share  the  benefits,  not  of  his 
teaching,  but  of  his  temporal  bounty ;  to  whom  he  said : 


1.KCT.  XXXVI.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  299 

"  Labor  not  for  the  meat  which  perishetli,  but  for  that 
meat  wliich  endureth  unto  everlasting  life,  which  the 
Son  of  man  shall  give  unto  you."  A  little  afterwards 
he  says :  "  I  am  the  bread  of  life  ;  he  that  cometh  unto 
me  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  belie veth  on  me 
shall  never  thirst."  From  this  it  is  plain  that  he  speaks 
of  his  truth,  or  his  doctrine,  as  the  true  bread  of  the 
Christian  life,  wliich  endureth  forever  ;  and,  also,  that 
the  manner  of  partaking  of  that  spiritual  food  is  by 
going  unto  him  and  believing  on  him,  for  personal  faith 
in  Christ  is  the  only  way  by  which  we  can  receive 
sanctifying  grace  unto  our  souls.  He  is,  however,  yet 
more  particular,  for  he  again  adds  :  "  I  am  the  living 
[spiritual  or  eternal]  bread,  which  came  down  from 
heaven  ;  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live 
forever ;  and  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh, 
which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world."  The 
Jews  were  astonished  at  this,  and,  supposing  that  his 
language  Avas  to  be  taken  literally,  asked  wonderingly, 
"  How  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ?  "  To 
which  he  answered  (as  he  did  to  Nicodemus  when  he 
asked,  "  How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old  ?  Can 
he  enter  the  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb  and 
be  born  ?  ")  by  repeating  the  assertion  more  strongly : 
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  except  ye  eat  the  flesh 
of  the  Son  of  man  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life 
in  you.  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood, 
hath  eternal  life,  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last 
day.  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is 
drink  indeed.  He  that  eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh 
my  blood,  dwelleth  in  mo,  and  I  in  him.  As  the  liv- 
ing Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the  Father,  so 
he  that  eateth  me  shall  live  by  me."     The  disciples 


300  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  themselves  secretly  murmured  at  this,  and  said,  "  This 
is  a  hard  saying ;  who  can  hear  [or  receive]  it  ?  "  To 
which  the  Master  rephed  :  "  Doth  this  otf'end  you  ? 
What  and  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  ascend  up 
where  he  was  before  ?  It  is  the  Spirit  that  quicken- 
eth ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing ;  the  words  that  I 
speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life." 
From  all  which  it  is  evident,  that  it  is  especially  the 
doctrine  of  his  passion  and  death  for  us  which  is  the 
food  and  drink  of  the  Christian  soul,  assuring  him  of 
his  oneness  with  Christ  and  of  the  resurrection  of  his 
body  at  the  last  day  to  enjoy  the  life  and  immortality 
"vv'hich  are  brought  to  light  by  the  gospel ;  and,  also, 
that  this  benefit  is  confirmed  unto  us  by  no  carnal  par- 
ticipation of  mere  material  elements  signifying  Christ's 
body  and  blood,  for  "  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing,"  and 
"  it  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  "  ;  but  that  "  the 
words,"  or  the  truths  which  he  speaks  concerning  his 
incarnation  and  death  for  us,  when  received  into  our 
souls  by  an  intelligent,  appropriating  faith,  become  our 
true  meat  and  drink  of  life  eternal. 

The  parallel  between  these  passages  in  the  sixth  chap- 
ter of  John  and  those  giving  the  institution  of  the  sup- 
per, is  so  obvious  that  we  believe  none  deny  it ;  and,  if 
so,  our  Lord's  commentary  on  his  own  words  in  the 
one  case  serves  equally  well  for  the  other.  Our  church, 
from  this,  rightly  infers,  that  the  sacrament  signifies, 
by  the  elements  and  our  participation  of  them,  our 
spiritual  nourishment,  or  the  religious  life  of  our  souls 
received  by  faith  in  the  spiritual  doctrines,  which  are 
thereby  set  forth  and  illustrated.  We,  therefore,  deny 
and  reject  the  abominable  heresy  of  the  Papists,  whc 
insist  that  our  Lord's  words   must   be  taken  literally 


Lkct.  XXXVI.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  301 

and  that  the  bread  actually  becomes  the  body  of  our 
Lord  and  the  wine  his  blood  ;  for,  says  the  Catechism 
(78th  Question  and  Answer)  :  "As  the  water  in  bap- 
tism is  not  changed  into  the  blood  of  Christ,  neither  is 
the  washing  away  of  sin  itself,  being  only  the  sign  and 
confirmation  thereof  appointed  of  God  ;  so  the  bread 
in  the  Lord's  supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very  body 
of  Christ,  though,  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  proper- 
ties of  sacraments,  it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus." 
Even  if  the  abhorrent  idea  were  true  and  the  bread  and 
wine  were  so  changed,  our  eating  and  drinking  of  them 
could  not,  our  Lord  being  witness,  profit  us  anything. 
"  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing,"  he  himself  says  in  ref- 
erence to  his  own  assertion  of  the  bread  and  the  wine 
being  his  body  and  blood  ;  "  the  words  that  I  speak  unto 
you,  they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life  "  ;  which  is  equiv- 
alent to  what  he  said  before  :  "  I  am  the  bread  of  life  ; 
he  that  cometh  unto  me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he 
that  belie veth  on  me  shall  never  thirst." 

But  on  this  point  we  shall  be  required  to  dwell  with 
greater  particularity,  when  we  come  to  consider  what 
our  church  teaches  in  the  80th  Question  and  Answer 
of  the  Catechism. 

Now  let  us  learn  of  God  by  this  sacrament,  that  not 
only  at  the  beginning  of  our  Christian  life  we  are 
Drought  into  his  kingdom  by  faith  in  the  blood  of 
Christ  for  the  remission  of  our  sins  (which  is  shown  in 
baptism),  but  that  avc  continually  need  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  through  the  truth  to  maintain  in  our  hearts 
the  principles,  and  in  our  lives  the  practice,  of  the  holy 
religion  which  we  profess.  As  the  Israelites  were  fed 
in  the  wilderness  by  manna  from  heaven,  and  drank  the 
water  from   the  rock,  and  only  in   the  strength  they 


302  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  derived  from  that  bread  and  -water  they  were  able  to 
continue  their  pilgrimage  to  the  promised  land,  so  the 
Christian  draws  all  his  ability  to  follow  Christ,  "  walk- 
ing as  he  also  walked,"  to  heaven,  from  the  doctrines 
of  Christ's  incarnation  and  death. 

So,  also,  is  this  sacrament  often  repeated  to  remind 
ns  at  once  of  our  continual  need  and  his  continual  will- 
ingness to  supply  our  wants.  We  are  to  go  in  the 
strength  of  one  Lord's  supper  unto  another,  and  so 
"  from  strength  unto  strength,"  until  we  "  appear  be- 
fore God  in  Zion,"  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  This  is 
the  meaning  of  the  apostle  when  he  says,  "  Ye  do 
show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come  ;  "  for  until  he 
comes  and  takes  them  unto  himself  in  glory,  his  follow- 
ers will  need  the  nourishment  of  soul,  which  can  be 
drawn  only  from  faith  in  his  body  broken  and  his 
blood  shed  for  us,  the  warrant  and  assurance  of  our 
eternal  redemption. 

Nor  is  it  only  while  we  are  at  the  Lord's  table  that 
such  blessing  is  extended  and  received.  We  are  to 
keep  the  feast  "  in  remembrance  of  him."  The  cele- 
bration is  to  prevent  our  forgetting  him,  to  quicken  our 
thoughts  of  him,  and  so  to  pervade  our  minds  at  all 
times  with  those  blessed  doctrines  in  whose  strength 
we  go  forward.  It  were  strange  perversion  of  the 
sacrament  to  allow  ourselves  in  the  ungodly  thought, 
that,  because  we  are  to  remember  Christ's  death  in  the 
celebration,  we  may  cease  to  remember  it  during  the 
intervals  of  its  occurrence.  No,  believers,  the  Chris- 
tian should  be  conscious  of  a  continual  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  a  continual  feeding  on  his  precious  body  and 
blood,  a  continual  strength  derived  by  faith  from  his 
gracious  work  and  promises.     We  should  "  desire  to 


Lect.  XXXVI. J  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  308 

know  nothing  else  save  Jesus  Christ  and  hiia  cru- 
cified." 

d.  There  is  anotlier  doctrine  wliich  God  in  the 
Lord's  supper  proposes  for  the  confirmation  of  our 
trust  in  liim  :  The  incorporation  of  the  behever  with 
the  body  of  Christ. 

This  the  Catechism  asserts  and  explains  in  the  76th 
Question  and  Answer :  where  we  learn  that  "  to  eat 
the  crucified  body  and  drink  the  shed  blood  of  Christ " 
is  .  .  .  "to  become  more  and  more  united  to  his  sacred 
body  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Avho  dwells  both  in  Christ 
and  in  us ;  so  that  we,  though  Christ  is  in  heaven  and 
we  on  earth,  are,  notwithstanding,  "  flesh  of  his  flesh 
and  bone  of  his  bone  " ;  and  that  "  we  live  and  are  gov- 
erned forever  by  one  Spirit,  as  members  of  the  same 
body  are  by  one  soul."  Again,  in  the  79th  Question 
and  Answer :  "  Christ  speaks  thus,  [^.  e.  calls  the  bread 
his  body  and  the  cup  his  blood,]  .  .  .  more  especially 
by  these  visible  signs  and  pledges,  to  assure  us  that  Ave 
are  as  really  partakers  of  his  true  body  and  blood  (by 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost)  as  we  receive  by  the 
mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  remembrance 
of  him,  and  that  all  his  sufferings  and  obedience  are 
as  certainly  ours  as  if  we  had  in  our  own  persons  suf- 
fered and  made  satisfaction  for  our  sins  to  God." 

When  our  blessed  Lord  assumed  our  human  nature, 
ne  condescended  to  represent  in  his  sacred  person  all 
true  believers,  even  his  church  which  he  redeemed  by 
nis  most  precious  blood.  As  the  great  sacrifice  of 
atonement,  under  the  Levitical  law,  was  substituted  for 
the  people,  whose  sins  were  laid  on  its  head,  so,  bear- 
ing our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  he  repre- 
sented us  in  the  expiation.     The  typical  victim  perished 


304  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  l 

wholly,  because  it  could  not  take  away  sin  ;  but  our 
Redeemer  rose  again  from  the  dead,  because  his  death 
was  a  complete  satisfaction  of  the  law  for  his  people, 
and  liis  mediatorial  person,  with  its  entire  humanity, 
body  and  soul,  entered  heaven,  as  our  forerunner,  and 
sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  In  the  Lord's 
supper  we  show  forth  his  death,  and  the  elements  sym- 
bolize to  us  his  crucified  body  and  shed  blood.  But 
we  "  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."  While, 
therefore,  we  remember  a  crucified  Saviour,  we  declare 
our  trust  in  a  living  Saviour,  who  rose  from  the  grave 
to  complete  our  redemption  by  his  intercession,  author- 
ity, and  grace  ;  as  the  aj)ostle  says :  "If,  when  we  were 
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his 
Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by 
his  life."  The  representation  of  his  people  is  as  true 
and  perfect  in  his  resurrection  and  glory  as  it  was  in 
his  death  and  shame.  The  sacrament  shows  him  to  us 
m  both  aspects,  that  is  to  say,  in  his  sacrifice  for  our 
■sins,  and  in  his  glory  as  our  head. 

The  feast  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  commemoratfed  the 
complete  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  therefore 
all  Israel  Avere  permitted  and  enjoined  to  partake  of 
the  flesh,  which  was  forbidden  to  them  in  the  case  of 
the  sacrifices  of  imperfect  expiation.  They  were  com- 
manded to  eat  of  the  Paschal  Lamb,  because  they  shared 
in  the  salvation  it  commemorated ;  they  were  forbidden 
to  eat  of  the  other  victims,  because  their  sins  were  yet 
in  the  flesh  of  them.  The  true  passover  having  been 
sacrificed  for  us,  no  victim  of  blood  could  afterward  be 
offered,  so  our  Lord  substituted  bread  as  the  emblem  of 
his  body  ;  and  as  we  live  by  his  doctrine,  through  the 
grace  of  our  reigning  Intercessor,  so  the  bread,  which 


Lkct.  XXXVI.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  305 

broken  represents  his  expiation  for  us  on  the  cross,  also, 
as  tlie  emblem  of  nourishment,  represents  our  nourish- 
ment and  strength  unto  eternal  life. 

When,  tlierefore,  we  partake  of  the  sacramental  em- 
blems, we  make  a  double  profession,  of  union  to  him  in 
his  death,  and  union  to  him  in  his  glorified  life.  Our 
church,  in  lier  communion  service,  declares  this  :  "  For 
by  his  death  he  liath  taken  away  the  cause  of  our  eter- 
nal death  and  misery,  namely,  sin,  and  obtained  for  us 
the  quickening  Spirit,  that  we,  by  the  same  (which 
dwelleth  in  Christ  as  in  the  head,  and  in  us  as  his 
members),  might  have  true  communion  with  him,  and 
be  made  partakers  of  life  eternal,  righteousness,  and 
glory."  This  intimate  union  with  Christ  is  described 
by  veiy  strong  language  in  the  New  Testament  Scrip- 
tures. Every  believer  is  a  member  of  Christ's  body, 
and  the  aggregate  church  is  the  body  of  Christ,  he  being 
its  divine  head.  "  Now,"  says  the  apostle,  "  ye  are 
the  body  of  Christ  and  members  in  particular  "  ;  and 
again,  he  is  "  head  over  all  things  to  his  church,  which 
is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all." 
We  become  thus  united  to  him  by  faith  ;  and  every 
one  who  believes  in  him,  that  is,  accepts  and  relies 
upon  his  mediatorial  suretyship,  is  a  member  of  "  his 
body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones." 

Our  eating  and  drinking;  of  the  sacramental  emblems 
strikingly  and  naturally  illustrate  this  participation  of 
Christ's  body  and  union  with  it.  We  receive  (as  the 
Catechism  says)  with  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these 
holy  signs.  They  are  thus  incorporated  with  us , 
Christ  (symbolically)  enters  into  us,  and  makes  us  one 
with  him  :  one  with  him  in  his  sufferings ;  one  with 
him  in   the  glory  which  has  followed   the  sufferings. 

VOL.  n.  20 


306  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  We  partake  of  his  true  body  and  blood,  not  in  a  gross 
or  carnal  sense,  for  it  is  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and,  therefore,  spiritually  through  faith  ;  yet  we 
are  by  the  sacrament  assured  that  we  were  actually 
represented  by  his  true  personal  body  on  the  cross,  and 
are  now  represented  by  his  glorified  body  in  heaven. 
As  he,  by  his  vicarious  expiation,  took  away  the  cause 
of  death,  which  was  sin,  and  we  throuo-h  him  receive 
pardon,  so  he,  having  been  accepted  for  us  by  the 
Father,  derives  from  the  Father  life  for  his  people, 
even  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  we  live  by 
that  life  Avhich  is  in  him  as  our  head.  So  the  apostle 
Paul :  "  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law  that 
I  might  live  unto  God.  I  am  crucified  with  Christ, 
nevertheless  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  ; 
and  the  life  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the  faith 
of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for 
me."  Thus  each  believer  becomino;  a  member  of 
Christ,  the  whole  church  is  his  body,  animated  in  all 
its  members  by  the  same  life  which  is  in  him,  the  divine 
head,  even  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 
We  are,  therefore,  made  certain  that  Christ's  love  and 
care  of  his  church,  and  of  each  particular  member  of  it, 
is  constant,  close,  and  personal.  He  loves  his  church 
as  his  own  body ;  its  safety  and  its  glory  is  identical 
with  his  own.  So  the  apostle  :  "  No  man  ever  yet 
hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it 
even  as  our  Lord  the  church,  for  we  are  members  of 
his  bod}',  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones."  The  gracious 
wisdom  of  God  could  go  no  farther  in  asserting  the  full 
salvation  of  all  who,  by  a  true  faith,  are  united  unto 
Christ. 

It  follows  immediately  from  this,  that,  being  united  to 


Lf.ct.  XXXVI.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  307 

Christ,  we  are,  by  the  same  act  of  faith,  united  to  his 
true  church,  which  is  his  body,  and  to  each  of  all  the 
members  of  his  church.  We  have  one  life,  one  hope, 
one  strength,  one  nourishment,  with  them.  Their 
interest  is  our  interest,  their  growth  our  growth  ;  our 
interest  their  interest,  our  growth  their  growth.  So 
our  Church,  in  her  communion  service  :  "  We  by  the 
same  spirit  may  also  be  united  as  members  of  one  body 
in  true  brotherly  love,  as  the  holy  apostle  saith  :  '  For 
we  being  many  are  one  bread  and  one  body  ;  for  we 
are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread.'  For  as  out  of 
many  grains  one  meal  is  ground  and  one  bread  baked, 
and  out  of  many  berries,  being  pressed  together,  one 
wine  floweth  and  mixeth  itself  together,  so  shall  we  all, 
who  by  a  true  faith  are  engrafted  into  Christ,  be  alto- 
gether [all  together]  one  body,  through  brotherly  love, 
for  Christ's  sake,  our  beloved  Saviour,  who  hath  so  ex- 
ceedingly loved  us  ;  and  not  only  show  this  in  word, 
but  in  very  deed  towards  one  another."  So  again  the 
apostle  :  "  Holding  the  Head, from  which  all  the  body 
by  joints  and  bands  having  nourishment  ministered,  and 
knit  together,  increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God  " 
(Coloss.  ii.  19)  ;  and  in  the  parallel  passage  of  the  twin 
epistle :  "  Speaking  the  truth  in  love,  [we  may]  grow 
up  into  him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  head,  even 
Christ:  from  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined  together 
and  compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth,  ac- 
cording to  the  effectual  working  in  the  measure  of  every 
part,  maketh  increase  of  the  body  unto  the  edifying  of 
itself  in  love"  (Ephes.  iv.  15,  16).

LECTURE   XXXVII. 
THE    LORD'S    SUPPER. 

SECOND  LECTURE. 

(COMPLETED.) 


TWENTY-EIGHTH   AND   TWENTY-NINTH  LORD'S 
DAYS. 

THE  LORD'S   SUPPER. 

SECOND  LECTURE.     (Completed.) 

TTAVING  considered  what  God  proposes  to  do  for 
liis  people  in  the  Lord's  supper,  we  now  should 
learn 

2.  What  he  requires  us  to  do  for  ourselves  and  for 
nim  in  our  use  of  the  sacrament. 

The  highest  o-lory  of  God  in  Christ  is  the  full  salva- 
tion  of  his  people  from  death  and  from  sin.  All  the 
economy  of  grace  is  arranged  and  maintained  for  that 
divine  end.  Hence,  whatever  we  are  enabled  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  do  for  our  own  souls,  or 
those  of  our  fellow-sinners,  in  our  use  of  the  sacrament, 
is  done  for  God,  and,  for  the  same  reason,  the  duties 
required  must  correspond  to  the  benefits  intended. 
Thus,  (a,)  we  have  seen  that  the  main  purpose  of  God 
in  the  sacrament  is  to  put  us  and  keep  us  in  remem- 
brance of  Christ's  love  towards  us,  especially  as  it  is 
manifested  by  his  death  on  the  cross  for  our  redemp- 
tion. It  follows,  therefore,  from  the  analogy  of  faith, 
that  a  cordial  apprehension  of  the  love  of  Christ  cru- 
cified will  have  the  strongest  effect  in  awakening  and 
in  increasing  our  love  to  Christ ;  and  as  his  love 
towards  us  moved  him  to  die  for  our  salvation,  so  our 
love  towards  him  will  constrain  us  to  live  for  his  glory. 
No  obedience  that  we  may  attempt  to  render  him  will 


312  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  be  sincere  or  acceptable,  except  as  it  flows  from  our 
love  to  him,  and,  therefore,  by  the  most  generous  of  all 
arguments,  his  undeserved,  devoted,  self-sacrificing  love 
for  us,  he  would  in  the  sacrament  persuade  us  to  follow 
in  his  steps.  Such  being  the  purpose  of  God,  we  should 
conform  ourselves  to  it,  by  fixing  our  contemplations 
on  Christ  and  his  cross :  on  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  on 
his  cross  as  the  cardinal  means  of  our  redemption.  We 
are  to  contemplate  his  person  as  the  infinite,  only- 
begotten  Son  of  God,  incarnate,  that,  by  the  sacrifice 
of  his  flesh  and  blood,  he  might  be  our  Redeemer.  We 
are  to  contemplate  him  as  the  Lamb  of  God  bearing 
our  sins,  and  put  to  a  sorrowful,  painful,  shameful 
death,  because  he  undertook  to  answer  and  atone  for 
our  sins.  We  are  to  contemplate  him  rising  again  from 
the  dead  by  the  will  of  the  Father,  whom  it  pleased 
"  to  bruise  him  and  put  him  to  grief,"  because  the  infi- 
nite merits  of  his  expiation  fully  satisfied  the  law  fc. 
us,  and  entitled  him,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant,  to  his 
stipulated  reward,  even  the  consummate  salvation  of 
all  who  trust  in  his  suretyship.  We  are  to  contemplate 
him  on  the  throne  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  ih. 
his  once  crucified  but  now  glorified  person,  administer- 
ing the  providence  of  nature  and  of  grace,  for  the  full 
accomplishment  of  all  his  merciful  designs  toward  his 
church  which  is  his  body.  We  are  to  contemplate  his 
coming  to  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day,  to  vindicate 
his  people,  and  to  receive  them  to  himself  in  his  ever- 
lasting glory,  where  our  eternity  shall  be  filled  with  the 
grateful  memory  and  thankful  enjoyment  of  his  im- 
speakable  love.  All  this  is  in  the  sacrament  in  which 
we  "  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."  Thus,  as 
we  see  the  great  love  of  him  affiiinst  whom  we  have 


Lect.  XXXVn.]  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  313 

sinned,  our  hearts  will  be  moved  to  the  source  of  a  true 
repentance ;  and  as  we  see  the  greatness  of  the  sacri- 
fice which  alone  could  redeem  us,  we  shall  be  humbled 
from  a  sense  of  our  utter  un worthiness,  while  we  rely 
with  assured  confidence  on  his  mightiness  to  save ;  and 
as  we  see  the  infinite  power  and  wisdom  he  gives  to 
the  care  of  his  church  and  of  his  glory  on  earth,  we 
shall  be  stirred  up  and  strengthened  to  devote  all  our 
faculties  of  mind  and  heart  and  life  to  the  same  glori- 
ous purpose ;  and  as  we  gaze  in  faith  and  hope  on  the 
future  revelations  of  eternity,  the  misery  of  the  eter- 
nal hell  from  which  he  redeems  us,  the  holy  raptures 
of  the  eternal  heaven  to  which  he  will  exalt  us,  the 
motives  of  the  world  to  come  will  lift  us  above  the 
attractive  temptations  and  malignant  oppositions  of  the 
present  time,  until,  having  our  conversation  in  heaven, 
our  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  our  companionship  with  the  innumerable  an- 
gels and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  we  shall 
be  "  more  than  conquerors  "  over  "  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil,"  "  through  him  that  loved  us." 

Whether,  therefore,  we  consider  our  own  salvation, 
or  our  calling  to  advance  the  glory  of  God  in  our  sal- 
vation, it  is  our  main  and  highest  duty,  in  the  use  of  the 
sacrament,  to  remind  ourselves  of  Christ's  love  for  us, 
especially  in  his  death  on  the  cross.  To  this  should  all 
our  thoughts  be  directed,  not  only  as  we  actually  par- 
take of  the  elements,  but  when  we  prepare  for  the 
sacred  festival,  or  go  from  the  blessed  table  to  the  ac- 
tive service  of  a  Christian  life  ;  for  only  as  our  minds 
are  full  of  thoughts  of  Christ,  will  our  hearts  be  full  of 
the  love  of  Christ ;  and  only  as  our  hearts  are  full  of 
his  love,  will  our  lives  be  to  his  praise. 


314  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  h.  God,  by  the  sacraments,  intends  to  mark  the  sep- 
aration of  his  church  from  the  world ;  tlierefore  is  it 
our  duty,  in  the  sacrament  of  the  supper,  openly  before 
the  world  and  the  church  to  profess  our  faith  in  his 
gospel,  and  to  declare  ourselves  his  disciples,  his  ser- 
vants, and  his  children,  as  we  were  set  apart  to  be  by 
our  holy  baptism.  Such  an  open  confession  of  his 
authority  and  profession  of  his  service  is  due  to  God. 
The  testimony  and  obedience  of  his  people  is  the 
method  by  which  he  receives  glory  on  earth.  As, 
when  our  Lord  was  proclaiming  his  gospel,  he  proved 
his  divine  mission  by  miracles,  healing  the  effects  of 
sin  on  tlie  bodies  of  men,  so,  now  that  he  is  in  heaven, 
he  demonstrates  the  grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit  through 
the  gospel,  by  its  transforming  influence  on  character 
and  life.  If,  from  our  personal  experience,  we  know 
that  there  is  a  vital  power  in  Christianity  to  supply  the 
motives  and  strength  of  a  better  virtue  than  we  could 
learn  or  maintain  from  any  other  source,  the  credit 
should  be  given  where  it  belongs  ;  and,  even  tliough 
from  our  sinful  weakness  we  come  far  short  of  a  proper 
Christian  example,  we  should  give  our'  devout  approva- 
of  the  principles  which  the  gospel  asserts  and  the  pra" 
tice  it  enjoins.  The  world  is  full  of  God's  enemies, 
who  deny  the  reality  of  religion,  and  revile  its  doctrines 
with  its  morals ;  his  friends,  therefore,  should  not  con- 
ceal themselves,  but  come  out  honestly  and  resolutely 
on  his  side.  Hence  he  declares  such  a  confession  of 
faith  to  be  necessary  on  our  part :  "  If  thou  shalt  con- 
fess with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  believe  in  thy 
heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou 
shalt  be  saved  ;  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto 
righteousness,  and  witii  the  mouth  confession  is  made 


Lkct.  XXXVII.]  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  315 

unto  salvation."  The  confession  is  vain  and  hypocriti- 
cal, if  there  be  not  faith  in  the  heart ;  but  if  the  faith 
be  in  the  heart,  there  will  be  an  open  confession  that 
God  may  be  glorified.  "  For  it  is  written,  whosoever 
believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  ashamed,"  or  "put  to 
flight."  True  faith  will  never  be  deterred  by  fear  of  the 
world  from  avowing  itself.  So  our  Lord  :  "  Whosoever 
shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  words  [doctrines], 
of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he  shall 
come  in  his  own  glory,  and  in  the  glory  of  his  Father 
and  of  the  holy  angels;"  and  again:  "Whosoever 
shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  shall  the  Son  of  man 
confess  before  the  angels  of  God ;  and  he  that  denieth 
me  before  men,  shall  be  denied  before  the  angels  of 
God."  How  can  they  who  will  not  avow  Christ  be- 
fore his  enemies  hope  to  be  honored  by  him  before  his 
friends  ? 

It  is,  also,  the  uniform  method  of  God  in  Christ  to 
employ  the  agency  of  believers,  individually  and  collec- 
tively, for  the  advancement  of  his  religion.  Hence  they 
are  called,  as  we  have  seen,  his  "  witnesses,"  his  "  fel- 
low-workers," his  "  soldiers  " ;  and  the  church  is  a  dis- 
ciplined "  host,"  or  an  "  army  with  banners,"  of  which 
he  is  "  the  captain."  It  is,  then,  necessary  that  they 
should  be  known,  not  only  to  him  who  reads  the  heart, 
but  to  their  fellow-Christians  and  to  the  world.  There 
is  a  great  work  to  be  done,  and  a  great  fight  to  be 
maintained  ;  therefore  should  they  avow  their  mutual 
sympathy,  be  ready  to  unite  in  their  efforts,  and  to- 
gether present  themselves  to  the  eyes  of  men.  Besides, 
a  man  who  conceals  his  sentiments  and  purposes  is 
never  true  to  them.  The  secret  man  must  disguise 
himself,    but   the    honest    man    is    frank   and   candid. 


316  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.  When  we  hide  our  rehgion  from  others,  -we  cannot  act 
it  out,  but  will  waver  and  deny  it,  as  did  Peter  in  the 
high  priest's  house,  When  we  fairly  take  our  stand, 
our  very  self-respect  and  consistency  will  go  far,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  to  make  us  firm  and  zealous.  Hence 
our  Lord  says :  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let 
him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me." 
We  should  be  as  plainly  known  to  be  Christ's  disciples, 
as  though  the  cross  were  on  our  shoulders  and  we 
were  following  the  Master's  living  person.  The  early 
church  disowned  as  recusants  all  who  did  not  avow 
themselves  to  be  Christians,  though  in  the  face  of  per- 
secutions, tortures,  and  death.  Then  the  confessor  of 
Christ  was  second  in  rank  to  the  martyr ;  and  there 
is  the  same  reason  for  our  open  confession  now.  He 
must  be  conscious  of  cowardice  w'ho  is,  notwithstand- 
ing his  convictions,  hidden  among  the  crowd  of  Christ's 
enemies  :  he  will  prove  himself  faithless  when  he  is 
tried. 

Therefore  should  we  regard  the  sacrament  as  an 
ordained  means,  the  principal  ordained  opportunity,  of 
avowing  ourselves  Christians,  to  our  fellow-Christians 
and  to  the  world.  In  taking  our  places  among  the  com- 
municants, we  should  take  our  places  among  Christ's 
friends,  followers,  servants,  witnesses,  and  soldiers,  ready 
to  join  his  people  in  eveiy  good  work  for  his  glory,  the 
advancement  of  his  church,  and  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
We  there  put  our  hand  to  the  plough  not  to  look  back. 
We  assume  our  stand  to  be  "  steadfast,  unmovable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord." 

e.  Tlie  work  before  us  is  arduous,  our  weakness  i& 
extreme,  our  temptations  are  great,  and  we  are  to  grow 
from  the  littleness  of  "  new-born  babes  "  to  the  *•  full 


,Rcr.  XXXVII.]  THE  LOKD'S   SUPPER.  317 

stature  "  of  adults  in  Christ  Jesus.  Hence,  God  in  the 
sacrament  assures  us  of  his  divine  strength,  by  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  the  doctrines  of  the  cross. 
This  is  the  significance  of  the  bread  and  the  wine. 
Christ  is  the  life  of  the  believer,  not  only  in  giving  him 
life  by  his  vicarious  death,  but  in  maintaining  his  Chris- 
tian life  by  the  truth.  It  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  cross  which  is  the  main  support  of  our 
faith  and  zeal.  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son 
of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you. 
"Whoso  eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath 
eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. 
For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drinV 
indeed."  So  our  Lord  compares  himself,  or  the  doc 
trine  of  his  person  and  his  passion,  to  the  manna  of  the 
wilderness.  As  the  Israelites  drank  of  the  water  from 
the  rock,  and  ate  of  the  bread  from  heaven,  living  in 
the  strength  derived  from  them  until  they  reached  the 
promised  land,  so  only  from  his  doctrines  can  we  de- 
rive by  faith  the  vigor  and  growth  of  our  piety  until 
the  end,  in  heaven. 

We  should,  therefore,  go  to  the  holy  table,  as  to  a 
supply  of  spiritual  food  and  drink,  to  restore  our  faint- 
ing powers,  to  cheer  our  trembling  hearts,  and  to  ac- 
quire courage  and  vigor,  that  we  may  go  on  toward 
the  consummation  of  our  rest  in  the  fulness  of  Christ's 
glory.  It  should  be  to  us,  not  merely  the  comfort  of 
the  moment,  but  as  a  healthful  meal,  partaken  of  Avitli 
the  keenness  of  huno-er  and  thirst,  to  animate  us  for 
future  and  more  determined  labors.  Except  we  pro- 
pose to  ourselves  the  subsequent  labor,  we  have  no  right 
to  the  heavenly  food.  "  The  workman  "  only  "  is 
worthy  of  his  meat."     They  who  have  been  most  dil- 


318  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  [Lect.XXXVU 

igent  in  working  for  Christ,  have  the  best  relish  of  the 
sacrament,  because  their  work  has  stimulated  their 
appetite  ;  they  who  most  ardently  aspire  to  increasing 
service,  will  have  the  best  blessing  on  their  share  of 
the  feast,  because  God  will  strengthen  his  willing 
servant. 

d.  The  sacrament  is  a  vivid  representation  of  Christ's 
body,  to  which  all  believers  are  vitally  and  indissolubly 
united  ;  therefore  is  it  our  duty,  as  well  as  our  privilege, 
to  lay  hold  for  ourselves  of  the  blessed  truth.  It  is  no 
presumption,  but  an  obedient  trust  in  God's  grace,  for 
the  penitent  sinner  to  believe  himself  actually  united 
to  Christ,  —  so  intimately  united  as  to  be  crucified  with 
him,  quickened  with  him,  assured  of  glory  with  him. 
It  is  only  from  this  close  appropriation  of  Christ's 
suretyship,  that  wc  can  be  made  certain  of  pardon,  of 
grace,  and  of  heaven.  Such  acts  of  faith  must  accom- 
pany our  receiving  into  our  mouths  our  portion  of  the 
elements,  or  we  do  not  receive  their  spiritual  benefits 
which  God  offers. 

The  blessed  effects  of  such  faith  on  the  soul  cannot 
sufficiently  be  estimated.  It  answers  all  our  doubts  of 
mercy ;  for  whatever  be  our  guilt,  Christ  has  taken  it 
all  away,  when,  uniting  us  to  his  person  on  the  cross, 
he  for  us  and  we  in  him  satisfied  the  law  and  died  un- 
der its  penalty.  It  answers  all  our  fears  from  our  own 
weakness,  because  we,  by  the  same  spirit  which  quick- 
ened him  from  the  dead,  rise  with  him  into  a  new  life, 
given  by  God  and  maintained  in  us,  as  Christ  lived, 
accepted,  justified,  and  sanctified.  It  answers  all  our 
hesitations  in  drawing;  near  to  God  and  asking  a  full 
supply  of  all  wc  need,  because  Christ  our  head  sits  on 
the  throne  of  grace,  and  has  received  without  measure 


«ECT.  XXXVII.]  THE  LORD'S  SUPPliK.  319 

the  Holy  Ghost  for  his  body,  even  as  the  abundant  oil, 
poured  on  the  head  of  the  high  priest,  descended  over 
his  wliole  person,  "  even  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments.'' 
It  answers  all  our  questions  for  the  future,  because., 
certainly  as  Christ's  glory  followed  his  sufferings,  they 
who  were  united  wath  him  on  his  cross  shall  be  united 
to  him  on  his  throne.  It  will  make  us  reverent  and 
devout,  for  how  holy  should  they  be  who  are  members 
of  Christ's  body  !  How  shameful  a  thing  to  pollute  his 
sacred  person  !  It  will  make  us  zealous  in  good  works, 
because,  when  on  our  earth,  he  was  zealous,  and  they 
who  say  they  "  abide  in  him  "  ought  themselves  to  Avalk 
even  as  he  also  walked.  How  can  we  represent  our 
Head,  or  how  feel  that  the  life  which  is  in  him  is  in  us, 
except  "we  do  as  he  did,  and  obey  his  will  as  the  body 
obeys  the  spirit.  It  will  inspire  us  with  long-suffering 
charity  for  our  fellow-sinners,  whom  he  pities  so  much, 
and  boars  with  so  patientl}^,  and  invites  so  tenderly,  a'ld 
is  ready  to  receive  so  graciously.  It  will  unite  us  in 
closest  sympathy  with  our  fellow-Christians  dear  to 
Christ,  and  enjoying  his  sympathy  as  members  of  the 
body  he  has  redeemed,  banishing  from  our  hearts  all 
quarrel  and  schism  and  envy  and  jealousy,  making  us 
ardently  desirous  of  their  growth  in  grace,  because  as 
they  prosper  we  prosper,  and  as  we  prosper  they  pros- 
per. And  it  will  fill  our  souls  with  fervent  aspiring 
expectations  of  our  final  victory  and  consummate  bliss, 
drawing  our  affections  from  things  on  earth  to  things 
above,  where  Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  pre- 
paring places  of  honor  and  bliss  and  light,  and  safe 
eternal  rest ;  where  hope,  often  wearied  here,  shall  fold 
her  wings  to  gaze  on  the  rainbow  about  the  throne  ; 
and   faith  put  off  her   sword    and   buckler   to   strike 


320  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  the  golden  harp  of  triumph  ;  and  love,  satisfied  with 
love,  the  love  of  the  saints,  the  love  of  the  angels,  the 
love  of  Christ,  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  love  of 
the  Father,  transfigure  the  happy,  holy,  exulting, 
thankful  church  from  glory  to  glory.

LECTURE   XXXVIII. 
AGAINST   TRANSUBSTANTIATION. 
THIRTIETH  LORD'S  DAY. 
AGAINST   TRANSUBSTANTIATION. 

Quest.  LXXX.  What  difference  is  (here  between  the  Lord's  supper  ana 
tlie  Popish  mass. 

Ans.  The  Lord's  supper  testifies  to  us  that  we  have  a  full  pardon  of  all 
sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  himself  has  once  ac- 
complished on  the  cross ;  and  that  we  by  the  Holy  Ghost  are  ingi-afted 
into  Christ,  who  according  to  his  human  nature  is  now  not  on  earth, 
but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  his  Father,  and  will  there  be 
worshipped  bvus: — but  the  mass  teacheth,  that  the  living  and  tiie 
dead  have  not  the  pardon  of  their  sins  through  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
unless  Christ  is  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests;  and,  further, 
that  Christ  is  bodily  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine,  and,  therefore, 
is  to  be  worshipped  in  them ;  so  that  the  mass,  at  bottom,  is  nothing 
else  than  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  suffering  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  an  accursed  idolatry. 

TTAVING,  in  our  expositions  of  the  twenty-eighth 
-^  and  twenty-ninth  Lord's  days,  discussed  at  length 
the  nature  and  purpose  of  the  Lord's  supper,  we  need 
not  now  to  dwell  upon  what  is  stated  in  the  first  part 
of  the  80th  Answer,  but  may  give  our  whole  atten- 
tion to  the  extraordinary  absurdity  and  idolatrous  wick- 
edness of  the  doctrine  taught  by  the  Papists,  respecting 
the  conversion  of  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  eucharist 
into  the  actual  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  which  they 
term  transubstantiation,  and  also  the  offering  of  that 
bread  and  wine  as  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  in  the  mass. 

Let  not  any  object  to  our  proposed  discourse  as  un- 
necessary, because  the  Papist  belief  is  not  worthy  of 
serious  vefutation   befo'e  a  P  '  ^*.estant  ass^myjy  :   for, 


324  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      , 

let  it  be  remembered,  that,  a  short  time  before  the  com- 
position of  our  Catechism,  the  views  we  would  con- 
demn were  held  by  nearly  the  whole  of  Christendom, 
and  that  they  prevail  over  the  larger  part  of  it  at  the 
present  time.  The  glorious  Reformation,  which,  by 
making  the  simple  Scriptures  of  God  our  only  rule  of 
faith  and  practice,  greatly  impaired  the  influence  of 
opinions  derived  from  decrees  of  councils  and  asserted 
through  doubtful  tradition,  has  not  accomplished  a  com- 
plete victory  ;  as  we  see  in  the  dominance  of  the  Papal 
syste/m  at  this  day  ;  nor  are  we  without  painful  proof 
that,  while  many  are  coming  out  from  that  region  of 
the  shadow  of  death  into  the  purer  light,  there  are 
those  so  weak  in  their  religious  judgment  and  con- 
science as  to  leave  the  open  Bible,  wdth  its  spiritual 
teachings,  for  the  cunningly  devised  fables  of  a  gross, 
carnal  superstition.  Therefore  our  church  commands 
her  ministers  publicly  to  refute,  from  Scripture  and  the 
analogy  of  faith,  these  mischievous  errors,  which  she 
will  continue  to  protest  against  until  the  head  of  the 
old  serpent  is  fatally  crushed  beneath  the  foot  of  our 
triumphant  Lord. 

The  controversy  on  the  points  before  us  has  been 
waged,  as  you  doubtless  know,  for  many  centuries, 
having  enlisted  the  logic  and  learning  of  the  keenest, 
most  disciplined  minds,  Papist  and  Protestant ;  so  that 
it  would  be  utterly  impossible  to  handle,  in  a  brief  dis- 
course, matter  about  which  thousands  of  volumes  have 
been  written.  Nor  will  it  be  necessary.  Whatever 
difficulty  they  who  have  beeia  sophisticated  and  crip- 
pled by  false  education  and  inveterate  bigotry,  may 
find  when  required  to  decide  upon  questions  which 
have  been  tangled  by  Jesuitical  art,  we,  who  rely  only 


Lect.  XXXViri]     AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  325 

upon  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  can  easily  cut  tlie  knot. 
God's  holy  word  will  make  all  plain  to  his  "  little  chil- 
dren," who  would  "  keep  themselves  from  idols." 

The  word  mass  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures, 
original  or  translated  ;  nor  was  it  known  in  the  church 
for  the  first  four  centuries.  Its  etymology  is  doubtful, 
but,  among  the  many  attempts  to  trace  its  derivation, 
the  one  generally  received  as  the  most  probable  is 
that  given  by  the  Romish  doctors.  May  it  not  be  a 
corruption  from  edere^  to  eat ;  comesa,  comapa^  an  eat- 
ing together  ?  They  say  it  is  a  coiTuption  of  the  Latin 
word  missa^  and  came  into  use  from  the  sacrament 
being;  administered  after  the  non-communicants  were 
sent  out  of  the  church  by  the  customary  phrase,  Ite^ 
missa  est,  —  ^.  e.  Go,  the  congi*egation  is  dismissed. 
Strictly  speaking,  the  mass  signifies  the  prayers  and 
ceremonies  with  which  the  Popish  priests  precede  and 
accompany  the  eucharist.  In  process  of  time,  as  the 
corruption  of  the  church  increased,  the  mass  came 
rather  to  mean  the  supposed  transubstantiation  of  the 
elements  and  the  offering  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
Lord  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  living  or  dead, 
on  whose  behalf  the  service  was  performed.  It  would, 
however,  be  a  wearisome  folly  for  us  to  recite  all  the 
mummery  and  multifarious  formalities  prescribed  by 
the  highest  ecclesiastical  authority  in  the  missal  or 
mass-book.  We  shall  take  up  only  what  is  brought 
before  us  in  the  80th  Question  and  Answer. 

The  statement  here  made  of  the  Popish  doctrine  has 
two  parts  :  the  first  concerning  the  pretended  offering 
of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  under  the  appearance  of 
bread  and  wine,  as  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  sins  unto 
God  the  Father ;  the  second  concei'ning  the  pretended 


326  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.     conversion  of  the  bread  'and  wine  of  the  sacrament  into 
the  real  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  But  as  the  first 
error  of  the  sacrifice  properly  follows  or  is  dependent 
upon  the  second,  of  transubstantiation,  we  shall  for 
that  reason  reverse  the  order. 

I.  That  the  Catechism  does  not  represent  the  Popish 
doctrine  unfairly,  will  be  seen  by  reading  the  confession 
of  the  ITtli  article  of  the  creed,  which  was  established 
by  the  council  of  Trent :  "  I  do  likewise  profess  that  in 
the  mass  is  offered  a  true,  proper,  and  propitiator}^  sac- 
rifice for  the  living  and  the  dead  ;  and  that  the  body 
and  blood,  together  with  the  soul  and  divinity  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  are  truly,  really,  and  substantially 
in  the  most  holy  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper  ;  and 
that  the  whole  substance  of  the  bread  is  turned  into 
the  body,  and  the  whole  substance  of  the  wine  is  turned 
into  the  blood  ;  which  change  the  Catholic  church  calls 
transubstantiation."  The  council  of  Trent  farther 
stated  and  established  the  doctrine  of  their  church  in 
the  following  articles  :  1.  If  any  one  denies  that  there 
is  contained  in  the  most  holy  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
truly,  really,  and  substantially  the  body  and  the  blood, 
together  with  the  soul  and  divinit}^  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and,  consequently,  the  entire  Christ,  —  if  any 
one  say,  that  he  is  contained  therein  only  in  a  symbol 
or  figure  or  virtue  (grace),  let  him  be  accursed.  2.  If 
any  one  says  that  there  remains  in  the  most  holy  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar  the  substance  of  the  bread  and  wine 
together  with  the  life  and  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  it'  lie  denies  that  wonderful  and  miraculous 
transformation  of  the  whole  substance  of  the  bread  into 
the  body,  and  the  whole  substance  of  the  wine  into  the 
bloo'l,  while  there  remains  only  the  form  (^species,  ap- 


AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  G27 

pearance)  of  the  bread  and  wine,  wliicli  transforma- 
tion is  termed  by  the  Catholic  churcli  transubstantia- 
tion,  let  him  be  accursed.  3.  If  there  be  any  one  Avho 
denies  that  there  is  contained  in  the  venerable  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar  under  both  sorts,  and,  after  division 
has  been  performed,  under  the  single  parts  of  both 
sorts  [bread  and  wine],  the  whole  Christ,  let  him  be 
accursed.  4.  If  any  one  says,  that,  after  consecration 
has  been  performed,  the  body  and  the  blood  of  Christ 
is  not  in  the  miraculous  sacrament  of  the  altar,  but 
that  it  is  only  during  the  tasting  and  not  before  or 
afterwards,  and  that  there  is  not  in  the  consecrated 
host  [hostia^  properly  victim],  or  the  particles,  pre- 
served or  remaining  after  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's 
supper,  the  true  body  of  the  Lord,  let  him  be  accursed. 

5.  If  any  one  says,  either  that  remission  of  sins  be  the 
principal  effect  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  or  that 
no  other  results  spring  from  it,  let  him  be  accursed. 

6.  If  any  one  says  that  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God 
is  not  to  be  adored  by  external  worship  in  the  holy 
sacrament  of  the  altar,  and  not  to  be  revered  with  par- 
ticular solemnity  ;  nor  to  be  carried  about  in  proces- 
sions, after  the  praiseworthy  and  universal  usage  of  the 
church  ;  nor  to  be  presented  publicly  to  the  people  : 
and  that  those  who  adore  liim  [that  is  in  the  host] 
are  idolaters,  let  him  be  accursed.  7.  If  any  one  says 
that  it  is  not  permitted  to  keep  the  holy  eucharist  in 
the  pyx,  but  that  it  must  be  distributed  immediately 
after  the  consecration  to  the  by-standers,  or  that  it  is 
not  permitted  to  bear  it  reverentially  to  the  sick,  let 
him  be  accursed.  8.  If  any  one  says  that  the  Christ 
offered  in  the  eucharist  is  tasted  only  spiritually,  and 
not   sacramentally  and    really,   let   him    be    accursed. 


828  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.       9.  If  any  one  denies  that  all  Christian  believers  of 
either  sex,  as  soon  as  they  are  arrived  at  years  of  dis- 
cretion, are  bound,  after  the  command  of  the  holy 
Catholic  church,  to  communicate,  at  least  on  Easter  in 
each  year,  let  him  be  accursed.  10.  If  any  one  denies 
that  it  is  not  permitted  to  the  officiating  priest  to  ad- 
minister the  sacrament  to  himself,  let  him  be  accursed. 
11.  If  any  one  says  that  faith  alone  is  a  sufficient  prep- 
aration for  the  enjoyment  of  the  holy  sacrament,  let 
him  be  accursed.* 

Were  these  not  a  close  translation  of  the  decrees 
solemnly  adopted  and  issued  by  the  council  of  Trent, 
you  might  well  suspect  that  the  statement  made  by  our 
church  was  an  exaggerated  slander  on  the  church  of 
Rome  ;  as  it  is,  your  Protestant  reason  can  hardly 
believe  that  so  large  a  body  of  people,  professing  to 
acknowledge  the  Scriptures  of  divine  revelation,  really 
consent  to  the  most  remarkable  imposition  on  human 
credulity  that  has  ever  been  attempted  by  designing 
or  fanatical  men.  But  the  painstaking  particularity 
with  which  the  council  puts  forth  the  preposterous 
dogma  allows  no  room  for  charity  to  plead  that  they 
mean   otherwise  than  as  they  say. 

Their  doctrine  is  :  1.  That  at  the  moment  the  priest 
utters  the  consecrating  words,  the  whole  substance  of 
the  bread  and  wine  is  changed  into  the  true,  real,  and 
substantial  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  containing  his 
spiritual  soul  and  adorable  divinity. 

2.  That,  notwithstanding  the  elements,  as  presented 
to  our  senses,  remain  to  all  perception  the  same  as  be- 

*  This  translation  is  cepied  from  tho  article  Masit  in  the  "  Kncyclopaedia 
Americana,"  to  which  it  was  fiirnishod  by  a  Konian  Catholic.  It  is  inele« 
gant,  but  correct. 


lect.  xxxviil]    against  transubstantiation.        329 

fore  their  consecration,  only  their  perceptible  accidents 
remain,  but  none  of  their  substance,  the  substance  being 
the  body  and  blood  of  Christ. 

3.  That  the  whole  Christ  Is  contained  In  eacli  part 
of  the  sacrament,  in  that  which  was  the  bread  and  in 
that  which  was  the  wine ;  and  this,  also,  in  each  sub- 
division or  particle,  however  minute,  of  each  of  them. 

4.  That  the  body  and  blood,  soul  and  divinity  of 
Christ  Is  contained  in  both  parts  of  the  sacrament  from 
the  moment  of  the  priest  pronouncing  the  transubstan- 
tiating words  (^Hoc  est  corpus  meu77i),  and  so  long  as  the 
elements  retain  their  species,  or  appearance  of  bread 
and  wine. 

5.  That  the  fact  of  the  transubstantiation  is  in  no 
way  dependent  on  the  faith  either  of  the  officiating 
priest  or  of  the  participator,  but  is  accomplished  solely 
by  the  virtue  of  the  words  JToc  est  corpus  meum,  pro- 
nounced by  the  ordained  priest,  as  prescribed  by  the 
rituah 

This  whole  doctrine  the  Reformed  churches  deny 
and  protest  against : 

1.  Because  it  has  no  foundation  in  Holy  Scripture. 

The  Papist  asserts  that,  when  our  Lord,  at  the  insti- 
tution of  the  supper,  took  bread,  and,  having  broken  it, 
said,  "  This  is  my  body  broken  for  you,"  and  after- 
wards took  thfe  cup  and  said,  "  This  cup  Is  the  new 
testament  in  my  blood,"  he  meant  that  the  bread  was 
actually  transubstantiated  into  his  body,  and  the  wine 
into  his  blood.  The  whole  controversy,  so  far  as  we, 
who  give  no  heed  to  mere  church  authority,  are  con- 
cerned, hinges  on  this  point. 

We  deny  that  our  Lord  intended  by  the  words  in 
question  anything  more  than  that  the  bread  and  Avine 


830  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      were   significant  representations  of  his  true  body  and 
blood  offered  on  the  cross. 

Our  Lord,  adopting  the  usages  of  human  speech, 
was  accustomed  to  illustrate  spiritual  truths  by  figures ; 
and  to  insist  upon  our  taking  such  blessed  words  of  his 
literally,  would  be  to  make  his  teachings  utterly  ridicu- 
lous and  incomprehensible.  Thus,  when  he  told  Nico- 
demus  that  he  must  be  born  again,  and  Nicodemus, 
with  a  Papist-Kkc  stupidity,  asked,  "  How  can  a  man 
be  born  when  he  is  old  ?"  he  explained  it  by  giving  the 
spiritual  meaning  of  the  new  birth.  So  when  he  said 
at  another  time,  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let 
him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me," 
it  is  admitted  on  all  hands  that  the  follower  of  Christ  is 
not  required  actually  to  carry  a  cross  on  his  shoulders, 
but  to  bear  faithfully  the  reproach  of  Christ  before  the 
world.  He  said  to  Peter :  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and  on 
this  rock  I  will  build  my  church  ;  "  by  which  the  Papists 
understand  that  the  church  is  established  on  the  su- 
premacy of  Peter,  but  by  no  means  suppose  that  Peter's 
person  was  transubstantiated  into  a  rock,  or  that  the 
churcli  rests  actually  on  him.  For  elsewhere  he  said 
unto  Peter  :  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  ;  "  which,  if 
the  words  be  taken  literally,  would  be  to  assert  that 
Peter  was  changed  into  Satan,  and,  therefore,  that  their 
church  was  built  on  the  devil,  — a  fact,  probable  enough, 
but  one  they  would  be  far  from  admitting.  At  the 
well  of  Sychar  he  offered  unto  the  woman  ''  living 
water,"  and  added,  in  reply  to  her  wondering  question, 
"  Whosoever  shall  drink  of  the  water  that  I  sliall  give 
him  shall  never  thirst,  and  the  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into 
everlasting  life."     "  Living  water  "  is  running  water ; 


Lect.  XXXVIir.]      AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  831 

yet  will  the  Papist  assert  that  our  Lord  gave  the  woman 
running  water,  or  that  the  Christian's  heart  is  actually 
an  eternal  fountain  of  running  water?  The  Baptist 
pointed  him  out  to  his  disciples  as  the  Lamb  of  God  ; 
but  was  he  actually  a  lamb  ?  or  was  that  word  used  to 
declare  him  the  sacrifice  appointed  for  sin  ?  He  calls 
Christians  his  sheep  ;  are  they  actually  sheep,  or  only 
like  him  in  his  meekness,  and  the  objects  of  his  peculiar 
care?  He  calls  himself  "the  door  of  the  sheep,"  and 
"  the  true  vine  "  ;  was  he  transubstantiated  into  a  door 
or  a  vine  ?  Each  of  these  assertions  are  as  positive  as 
liis  saying,  "  This  is  my  body ; "  and  if  this  last  must 
be  taken  literally,  so  must  they  all. 

In  the  sixth  chapter  of  John,  which  is  especially  relied 
on  by  the  Papists  to  prove  their  dogma,  he  said,  "  I  am 
the  bread  of  life ; "  was  he  at  that  moment  transub- 
stantiated into  bread  ?  Again,  he  says  of  himself  that 
he  was  "  the  bread  that  came  down  from  heaven  "  ; 
did  he  come  down  from  heaven  in  the  substance  of 
bread  ?  If  then,  because  he  said  "  This  is  my  body," 
the  bread  Avas  transubstantiated  into  his  body,  it  follows 
that,  because  he  declared  himself  to  be  bread,  his  body 
was  transubstantiated  into  bread  ;  yet  the  Papist  anath- 
ematizes those  who  do  not  deny  that  any  substance  of 
bread  remains  in  the  host.  So  again  our  Lord  said, 
"  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood  ;  "  not 
the  Clip,  the  ivine  in  the  cup  ;  and  if  we  must  take  his 
words  literally,  the  cup  was  transubstantiated  into  his 
blood,  or  rather  into  the  new  covenant,  of  which  the 
blood  of  Christ  was  the  meritorious  cause.  Into  such 
absurdities  does  the  Papistical  rule  of  understanding 
our  Lord's  words  literally  betray  us. 

But  the  apostle  Paul,  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh  chap- 


832  AGAINST   TEANSUBSTANTIATION.      U. 

ters  of  1  Corintliians,  in  effect  denies  the  transubstan- 
tiation  of  the  elements ;  for  lie  says  :  "  The  cup  of 
blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the 
blood  of  Christ  ?  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not 
the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?  "  Again  :  "As 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show 
the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.  Wherefore,  wdiosoever 
shall  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  un- 
worthily, shall  be  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
Lord."  Here  the  first  element  is  called  bread,  and  the 
second  the  cup,  or  wine,  after  wdiat  the  Papist  considers 
the  moment  of  transubstantiation,  that  is,  the  utterance 
of  the  formula  Hoc  est  corpus  meum  ;  because  he  speaks 
of  the  bread  broken  and  both  elements  partaken  of  by 
the  communicant.  Now,  says  the  council  of  Trent : 
"  If  any  one  says  that  there  remains  in  the  most  holy 
sacrament  of  the  altar  (<.  e.  in  the  elements)  the  sub- 
stance of  the  bread  and  wine  together  with  the  life  and 
blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  "  and  "  if  anyone  says 
that,  after  consecration  has  been  performed,  the  body 
and  the  blood  of  Christ  is  not  in  the  miraculous  sacra- 
ment of  the  altar,  but  that  this  is  only  during  the  tast- 
ing, neither  before  nor  afterwards,  ...  let  him  be 
accursed."  But  the  apestle  Paul  calls  the  elements 
bread  and  wine  after  the  consecration  and  during  the 
tasting,  therefore  the  apostle  is  anathematized.  Our 
Lord  himself,  after  distributing  the  cup,  said,  "  I  wmII 
drink  no  more  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  until  that  day 
that  I  drink  it  new  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  This  is 
contrary  to  tlic  council  of  Trent.  Will  they  anathe- 
matize our  Lord  ?  The  Papists  lay  great  stress  upon 
our  Lord's  words  in  John  vi.  53-57  :  "  Except  ye  eat 
the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye 


LEC-r.  XXXVIII.]      AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  333 

have  no  life  in  you,"  &c.  But  what  does  our  Lord  add 
to  these  declarations  :  "  This  is  that  bread  which  came 
down  from  heaven ;  not  as  your  fatliers  did  eat  manna, 
and  are  dead  ;  he  that  eateth  of  this  bread  shall  live 
forever."  Here  our  Lord  himself  contradicts  the  coun- 
cil of  Trent  by  calling  his  body,  of  which  the  commu- 
nicant is  to  eat,  bread.  He  adds  still  further:  "  It  is 
the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing ; 
the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit  and 
they  are  life."  What,  then,  can  be  clearer  than  that, 
when  our  Lord  calls  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  sacra- 
ment his  body  and  blood,  he  means  that,  in  receiving 
these  elements,  we  receive  spiritually  by  faith  the  bless- 
ings purchased  by  his  atonement,  and  that  through  such 
faith  we  derive  life  ? 

2.  The  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  is  thus  op- 
posed to  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture,  which  declares 
that  we  are  saved  through  faith  in  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  and  that  all  external  acts  are  valueless,  except 
so  far  as  they  are  manifestations  of  such  inward  faith. 
Even  were  the  abhorrent  thing  possible  that  we  should 
eat  the  actual  flesh  of  Christ,  and  drink  his  actual 
blood,  it  could  not  benefit  or  in  any  way  reach  our 
souls,  which  can  be  affected  only  by  truths  received 
and  held  in  a  spiritual  faith.  We  are  not  to  look  for 
Christ  in  any  corporeal  presence  on  earth,  but  to  "  lift 
up  our  hearts,"  or  "  set  our  affections  on  things  above, 
where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father." 

3.  The  asserted  transubstantiation  is  contrary  to  rea- 
son and  the  evidence  of  our  senses.  This  the  Papists 
admit,  but  assert  that  it  is  to  be  received  as  a  matter  of 
faith  ;  for  with  God  all  things  are  possible ;  and,  there- 
fore, when  our  Lord  declares  the  bread  and  the  wine 


834  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      to  be  his  body  and  blood,  we  are  bound  to  believe  him, 
the  testimony  of  our  senses  and  tlie  judgment  of  our 
reason  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding.  To  this  we 
answer,  that  there  are  certain  things  which  are  impos- 
sible with  God,  because  they  would  be  inconsistent 
with  himself.  Thus,  "it  is  impossible  that  God  should 
lie,"  or  that  he  should  deceive,  which  he  must  be  sup- 
posed to  do  in  the  case  of  transubstantiation  ;  for  it 
demands  that  we  should  believe  a  thing  whicli  has 
everv  accident,  quality,  or  property  of  bread  or  wine, 
to  be  another  thing,  the  flesh  or  blood  of  Christ,  when 
it  has  no  accident,  quality,  or  property  of  flesh  or  blood. 
How  do  we  know  any  one  to  be  that  particular  thing, 
and  not  any  other  thing,  but  by  its  accidents  or  quali- 
ties or  properties  ?  Thus  we  know  bread  and  wine 
to  be  bread  and  wine  by  their  form,  color,  taste,  and 
effects.  Take  these  all  away  from  them,  and  they 
cease  to  be  bread  and  wine  ;  nor  can  that  be  flesh  and 
blood  whicli  has  not  the  particular  qualities  of  flesh 
and  blood,  but  aj^pears  with  the  particular  qualities  of 
bread  and  wine.  In  other  words,  it  is  no  blasphemy  to 
deny  that  God  can  make  one  thing,  while  its  distinctive 
properties  are  retained,  to  be  another  thing.  The  Pa- 
pists' reply  to  this  is,  that  the  substance  of  the  bread 
and  wine  is  changed,  but  their  properties  or  perceptible 
qualities  are  not  changed  ;  and  that  it  is  not  bread  and 
wine,  but  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  not  under  tlie 
form  (jgpecies)  of  flesh  and  blood,  but  under  the  form 
Qipecies^  and  with  the  perceptible  qualities  of  bread 
and  wine.  What  do  we  know  of  substance,  except  as 
that  undiscernible  essence  in  which  the  qualities  of  a 
thino-  subsist?  Hence  we  can  know  of  the  substance 
of  a  thing  only  by  the   discernible   qualities   of  that 


AGAINST  TKANSUBSTANTIATION.  335 

thinn-.  If  we  perceive  the  peculiar  qualities  of  bread 
and  wine,  we  are  compelled  by  the  nature  God  has 
given  us  to  believe  that  they  subsist  in  the  substance  of 
bread  and  wine.  If  we  do  not  perceive  the  peculiar 
qualities  of  flesh  and  blood,  we  cannot  believe  that  the 
substance  of  flesh  or  blood  is  there  ;  because  the  per- 
ceptible qualities  are  the  peculiarities  by  which  God 
orders  that  we  should  distino-uish  things  from  other 
things. 

But,  say  they,  it  is  a  miracle  and  a  mystery,  and 
must  be  received  by  faith,  not  by  corporeal  sense  or 
reason.  We  answer,  it  is  not  a  miracle,  but  a  contra- 
diction. A  miracle  is  a  divine  work  submitted  to  the 
evidence  of  our  senses,  as  when  the  water  was  turned 
into  wine.  There  was  then  an  actual  change  of  the 
qualities  of  the  water  into  the  qualities  of  the  wine. 
Had  there  been  no  such  change  of  qualities,  there 
would  have  been  no  miracle,  because  there  was  no 
submitting  of  the  work  to  the  senses.  So  it  is  not  a 
mystery.  A  mystery  is  a  fact,  the  reality  of  which  we 
know,  but  the  mode  of  which  is  above  our  understand- 
ing. The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  a  mystery,  because 
it  concerns  the  mode  of  God's  infinite  being.  The  fact 
of  the  subsistence  of  three  divine  persons  in  one  God, 
we  know  from  divine  testimony  ;  but  the  mode  of  such 
subsistence  is  infinitely  above  our  reason.  In  transub- 
stantiation,  the  object  is  perfectly  within  our  capacity 
of  observation,  wdiile  the  asserted  fact  is  contrary  to 
every  rule  of  evidence  by  which  God  requires  us  to  try 
such  facts.  Can  God  contradict  himself,  by  requiring 
us  to  believe  that  which  is  contrary  to  what  he  has 
taught  us  to  believe  ? 

There  are  other  absurdities.     The  flesh  and  blood, 


336  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      or  body  of  Christ,  is  a  human  body.  A  human  body 
is,  as  to  its  essence  and  quaUties,  finite,  and  limited  to 
a  certain  portion  of  space,  that  is,  it  cannot  be  in  two 
separate  places  at  the  same  time.  Is  it,  then,  possible 
that  one  and  the  same  human  body  can  be,  at  the  same 
moment,  in  heaven  and  in  earth  ?  nay,  in  ten  thou- 
sand different  places  on  earth  widely  apart?  —  and  that 
it  is  infinitely  multiplicable,  so  that  each  minute  parti- 
cle of  what  was  once  bread  and  wine  is  its  whole  self, 
the  actual,  perfect  body  of  Christ?  Can  they  avoid 
the  absurdity  that  there  are  as  many  bodies  of  Christ 
as  there  are  particles  of  broken  bread,  or  portions  of 
distributed  wine  ?  That  the  divinity  of  Christ  is  every- 
where present,  we  know  from  its  infiniteness  ;  that  the 
humanity  ©f  Christ  cannot  be  in  more  than  one  place 
at  the  same  time,  we  know  fi'om  its  finiteness.  The 
more  astute  Papists  have  attempted  to  meet  this  by 
asserting  of  his  body  a  miraculous  or  "  supernatural  " 
manner  of  existence,  by  which,  being  without  exten- 
sion of  parts  rendered  independent  of  space,  it  may  be 
one  and  the  same  in  many  places  at  once,  and  whole  in 
every  part  of  the  symbols,  and  not  obnoxious  to  any 
corporeal  contingencies.*  What  ridiculous  self-con- 
tradiction !  Independent  of  space,  yet  occupying  space 
in  many  places  ;  separate  as  particles,  yet  whole  in 
each  particle  ;  continuing  as  a  corporeal  substance,  yet 
subject  to  no  corporeal  contingency  !  A  human  body, 
without  any  properties  of  a  human  body  !  The  fact  of 
our  Lord's  human  body,  or  body  in  all  points  like  our 
own,  having  been  raised  from  the  dead  and  translated 
into  glory,  is  full  of  comfort  to  us,  because  it  assures 
us  of  his  sympathy ;  but  that  comfort  is  all  taken  away 

*  Gother,  as  cited  by  Fletcher. 


Lkct.  XXXVm.]     AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  387 

when  his  body  ceases  to  be  like  a  human  body,  jy 
being  freed  from  corporeal  contingencies. 

4.  The  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  is  most  abhor- 
rent to  our  moral  sensibilities. 

There  is  scarcely  anything  more  shocking  than  the 
oatincf  of  human  flesh  or  the  drinking  of  human  blood. 
Cannibalism  is  the  most  degrading  vice  of  the  most 
brutal  savages,  and  is  scarcely  resorted  to  by  educated 
people  even  in  the  last  extremity  of  famine.  Yet  the 
Papist,  when  partaking  of  the  sacrament,  is  required 
under  pain  of  anathema  to  believe  that  he  actually 
breaks  with  his  teeth  and  swallows  the  most  holy  body 
of  our  divine  Lord,  which,  under  the  mumbling  of  a 
priest,  has  been  made  out  of  the  bread  and  the  wine. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  worst  rites  of  heathenism  so 
horrible  as  this.  Nay,  the  council  of  Trent  teaches 
that  the  spiritual  soul  and  proper  divinity  of  our  Lord 
is  contained  in  the  sacrament  so  that  we  take,  with  the 
sacrament,  the  spiritual  soul  and  divinity  of  our  Lord 
into  our  mouths  and  thence  into  our  bodies. 

They  contend,  also,  that  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
Lord  remain  in  the  elements  so  long,  and  only  so  long, 
as  they  retain  the  species  or  form  of  bread  and  wine. 
Portions  of  the  host  may  remain  in  the  pyx  after  the 
communion,  yet  continue  the  body  of  Christ.  But  the 
wafer  retaining  the  properties  of  the  bread,  though 
not  its  substance,  is  therefore  liable  to  corruption,  by 
which  it  is  dissolved  ;  so  that  corruption  is  the  method 
by  which  the  miracle  (so  called)  is  limited  and  the 
body  of  the  Lord  destroyed  ;  even  that  sacred  body  of 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  twice  said,  it  shall  not  see 
corruption.  The  portions  that  are  eaten,  each  contain- 
ing the  whole  Christ,  pass  into  the  bodies  of  the  partici- 

VOL.  11.  22 


338  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      l. 

pants,  and  then  are  subject  to  the  process  by  which  all 
food  and  drink  lose  their  species  and  are  changed  into 
diiFerent  substances  ;  and  this  process  destroys  or  dis- 
solves the  most  sacred  and  glorified  body  of  our  divine 
Lord.  These  are  the  disgusting  consequences  which 
inevitably  result  from  the  desperate  perversions  of  Pop- 
ery. We  adore  that  one  day,  which  to-morrow  is 
changed  into  corruption.  We  adore  that  at  one  mo- 
ment, which  in  another  we  eat  and  swallow.* 

Dear  brethren,  how  sad  is  the  superstition,  hi  the 
honest  exposure  of  which  we  are  compelled  to  mingle 
with  our  most  precious  thoughts  such  painfully  offen- 
sive associations ! 

This  argument  will  suffice  to  establish  our  denial  of 
transubstantiation,  and  we  may  be  glad  that  the  disa- 
greeable, though  necessary,  duty  is  over.  We  now 
pass  to  treat,  as  proposed  in  our  order,  of 

II.  The  oblation  of  the  sacrament  as  a  sacrifice  for 
sin. 

The  Papist  holds  that  the  priest,  having  instru  men- 
tally, by  using  the  words  Hoc  est  corpus  meum,  transub- 
stantiated the  elements  into  the  body  and  blood  con- 
taining the  soul  and  divinity  of  our  Lord,  offers  that 
body  and  blood,  or  the  Avhole  Christ,  as  a  sacrifice  of 
adoration,  thanksgiving,  merit,  and  expiation  to  God  on 
behalf  of  both  the  dead  and  the  living.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  if,  as  we  have  shown,  there  be  no  tran- 
substantiation, there  can  be  no  offering  of  Christ,  as 
pretended,  in  the  mass.     Yet  we  add  a  few  other  sug- 

*  That  we  have  not  misstated  the  Romish  views  on  this  subject,  may  be 
seen  from  the  fact,  that  the  priest  about  to  officiate  and  the  communicant 
intending  to  participate  in  the  sacrament  are  required  to  fast  from  twelve 
o'clock  of  the  night  before,  lest  any  other  substance  might  mingle  in  their 
digestion  with  the  host. 


AGAINST  TEANSDBSTANTIATION.  339 

gestions  in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  our  Cate- 
chism. 

1.  The  sacrament  cannot,  in  any  proper  sense,  be  a 
sacrifice,  because,  according  to  our  Lord's  institution  of 
it,  it  is  an  ordinance  commemorative  of  his  death  for 
our  sins,  on  the  cross.  "  This  do,"  said  he,  "  in  remem- 
brance of  me."  "  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink 
this  cup,"  says  the  apostle,  "  ye  do  show  the  Lord's 
death  till  he  come."  But  the  mass  pretends  to  be  a 
repetition,  not  a  memorial.  Our  Lord  said  not  a  word 
of  its  being  a  sacrifice  to  God,  but  treats  it  altogether 
as  a  service  of  faith,  profitable  to  our  own  souls,  because 
it  carries  back  our  thoughts  to  his  atonement,  made  and 
finished  on  the  cross.  So  throughout  the  apostolical 
writings  there  is  not  a  word  of  trust  in  anything  else 
but  the  cross  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ; 
whereas  the  Papist  would  have  us  put  our  reliance  on 
another  sacrifice  of  Christ,  as  they  pretend,  in  the  ob- 
lation by  the  priest.  What  Christian  can  allow  such  a 
denial  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  great  atonement  ? 

2.  If  Christ  enter  the  sacrament  to  be  offered,  it  is 
necessary  that  he  should  come  from  heaven  to  earth  ; 
which  is  contrary  to  his  own  and  the  apostolical  decla- 
rations. For  our  Lord  told  his  disciples  that  his  going 
away  was  expedient  for  them,  because,  if  he  went  not 
away,  the  Comforter  would  not  come  ;  but  that  he 
would  come  again  to  receive  them  unto  himself  in 
the  places  he  had  prepared  for  them  ;  whence  it  is 
clear  that  his  coming  is  to  be  at  the  time  he  would  so 
take  them  with  him  into  heaven.  He  cannot,  there- 
fore, come  to  us  personally  in  the  sacrament,  and  will  not 
until  he  comes  to  his  final  triumph  ;  which  the  apostle 
means  when  he  says  we  "  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he 


340         AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATIOX.      YIII. 

come."  During  the  interval  between  liis  going  away 
in  his  ascension,  and  his  return  in  his  great  glory,  we 
receive  his  blessino-  from  the  grace  of  "  the  Comforter 
which  is  the  Holy  Ghost."  So,  also,  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  makes  our  "  sure  and  steadfast"  hope  to  enter 
"  within  the  veil,  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  en- 
tered, even  Jesus,  made  an  high  priest  forever  after  the 
order  of  Melchisedek." 

3.  The  asserted  repetition  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  mass 
is  a  denial  of  perfectness  or  sufficiency  in  our  Lord's 
sacrifice  of  himself  on  the  cross,  which  is  a  direct  con- 
tradiction of  apostolical  testimony.  For  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  the  writer  deduces  his  strono;est  argu- 
ment  to  prove  the  superiority  of  Christ's  priesthood 
over  the  Levitical  from  the  fact,  that,  while  the}'' 
needed  often  to  repeat  their  sacrifices,  our  Lord  offered 
but  one,  which  was  himself.  These  are  his  words  on 
this  point :  "  Such  an  high  priest  became  us,  who  is 
holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,  and 
made  higher  than  the  heavens  ;  who  needeth  not  daily, 
as  those  high  priests,  [or,  we  may  add,  as  the  Romish 
priests,]  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and 
then  for  the  people's :  for  this  he  did  once  when  he 
offered  up  himself."  Again :  "  For  Christ  is  not  en- 
tered into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  which  are 
the  figures  of  the  true  ;  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  Nor  yet  that 
he  should  offer  himself  often,  as  the  high  priest  enter- 
eth  into  the  holy  place  every  year  witli  the  blood  of 
others  ;  for  then  must  he  often  have  suffered  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world  ;  but  now,  once  in  the  end  of 
the  world  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sac- 
rifice of  himself;  and,  as  it  is  appointed  unto  all  men 


AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  341 

once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judgment,  so  Christ  was 
once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  ;  and  unto  tliem, 
that  look  for  liim,  will  he  appear  the  second  time  with- 
out sin  unto  salvation."  Again  :  "  By  the  which  will 
[the  will  of  God  in  Christ]  we  are  sanctified  through 
the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all. 
And  every  priest  standeth  daily  ministering  and  offering 
oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices,  which  can  never  take 
away  sins  :  but  this  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sac- 
rifice for  sins  forever,  sat  down  on  the  riirht  hand  of 
God  ;  from  henceforth  expecting  till  his  enemies  be 
made  his  footstool.  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  per- 
fected forever  them  that  are  sanctified."  It  was  in 
anticipation  of  this  one  perfect  and  perfecting  atoning 
offering  of  Clmst  on  the  cross  that  Daniel  prophesied  : 
"  After  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut 
off,  but  not  for  himself;  ....  and  he  shall  confirm  the 
covenant  Avith  many  for  one  week,  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  week  he  shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation 
to  cease."  And  this  also  is  the  meaning  of  our  Lord 
on  the  cross,  when  he  said,  "  It  is  finished." 

4.  The  Papists,  however,  contend  that  the  oblation 
of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  the  whole  Christ,  in  the 
sacrament,  is  most  pleasing  to  God.  This  again  is 
contrary  to  Scripture,  which,  in  a  thousand  places, 
declares  that  it  is  faith  in  Christ's  cross  which  is  well 
pleasing  to  God  ;  for,  says  the  Psalmist  in  his  most 
penitential  psalra  :  "  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else 
would  I  give  it ;  thou  delightest  not  in  burnt  offering. 
The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit ;  a  broken 
and  a  contrite  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise." 

They,  also,  attempt  to  justify  their  dogma  by  assert- 
ing that,  as  our  Lord  was  High  Priest  after  the  order 


342  AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.      of  Melchisedek,  and  Melchisedek  "  brought  forth  bread 
and  wine  "  when  he  blessed  Abram,  so  Christ  must 
offer  a  similar  bloodless  sacrifice  of  bread  and  wine, 
which  he  did  not  offer  on  the  cross,  and  can  be  said 
to  offer  only  in  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  sacrament. 
The  citation  itself  defeats  them  ;  for,  setting  aside  the 
obvious  probability  that  the  bread  and  wine  brought 
forth  by  Melchisedek  were  nothing  more  than  refresh- 
ments offered  by  him  to  Abram,  there  is  eitlier  blood 
in  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  or  there  is  not.  If  there 
be  blood,  it  is  not  a  sacrifice  of  bread  and  Avine ;  if 
there  be  not  blood,  it  is  not  an  expiatory  sacrifice,  be- 
cause "  without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  re- 
mission." But  if  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  be 
true,  there  is  both  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  the 
mass,  and  it  is,  therefore,  wholly  changed  from  the 
bread  and  wine  of  Melchisedek's  example  ;  and  they 
incur  the  anathema  of  their  chiefest  council  when  they 
assert  it  to  be  a  bloodless  sacrifice  or  a  sacrifice  of  bread 
and  wine.  They  try  to  evade  this  by  saying  that  it 
is  in  appearance  bread  and  wine.  What  avail  is 
the  mere  appearance,  when  the  substance  is  flesh  and 
blood  ? 

No,  my  brethren,  we  do  indeed  present  an  accept- 
able offering  to  God,  sufficient  to  cover  all  our  sins, 
when  in  our  faith  we  plead  the  perfect  sacrifice  of 
Christ,  once  offered  for  us  on  his  cross  ;  and  Jesus  is 
our  Melchisedek  w^hen  he  sets  before  us  the  holy  bread 
and  Avine  as  emblems  of  his  atoning  passion. 

No  reference  has  been  made  in  our  fore^oino;  discus- 
sion  to  the  opinions  of  the  church,  ancient  or  modern, 
because,  as  protestants,  we  reject  every  other  rule  of 
faith  beside  the  Scriptures ;  but  it  is  fair  to  add  that, 


AGAINST  TRANSUBSTANTIATION.  343 

antecedently  to  the  council  of  Trent,  very  many  Pa- 
pists, and  not  the  least  learned  among  them,  denied  the 
transubstantiation  of  the  mass.  Dun  Scotus,  the  great 
opponent  of  Aquinas,  hesitated  not  to  oppose  it  with  all 
the  vijTor  of  his  eminent  abilities,  in  which  he  was  sus- 
tained  by  others  less  able  only  than  he.  Some,  who 
held  the  doctrine,  denied  that  it  was  taught  in  Scripture, 
contendino;  that  it  should  be  received  as  a  dogma  of 
their  infallible  church. 

We  learn  from  the  whole  subject  the  danger  of  de- 
parting from  the  simple  word  of  God,  and  the  simple 
doctrine  of  the  cross.  There  is  no  pitch  of  absurdity 
and  heresy,  even  idolatry,  that  we  may  not  reach  if  we 
give  ourselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  men,  even  of  a 
church. 

Very  thankful  should  we  be  that  God  by  his  unmer- 
ited goodness  has  not  permitted  us  to  be  educated  in 
such  superstition. 

And  earnestly  should  we  pray  that  those,  who  are 
now  in  that  region  of  the  shadow  of  death,  the  so-called 
church  of  Rome,  may,  by  the  same  grace,  be  brought 
to  the  true  light. 


LECTURE  XXXIX. 
THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS 


THIRTY-FIRST  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE   POWER   OF   THE   KEYS. 

QOEST.  LXXXIII.      Wliat  are  the  keys  of  (he  kingdom  of  heaven  f 

Ajss.  The  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel  and  Christian  discipline,  or  ex- 
communication out  of  the  Christian  church ;  by  these  two  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers  and  shut  against  unbelievers. 

Qdest.  LXXXIV.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  and  shut  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  ? 

Ans.  Thus:  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  it  is  declared  and 
publicly  testified  to  all  and  every  believer,  that  whenever  they  receive 
the  promise  of  the  gospel  by  a  true  faith,  all  their  sins  are  really  for- 
given them  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits;  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, when  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  unbelievers,  and  such  as 
do  not  sincerely  repent,  that  they  stand  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God 
and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as  they  are  unconverted ;  —  accord- 
ing to  which  testimony  of  the  gospel,  God  will  judge  them  both  in  this 
and  the  life  to  come. 

Quest.  LXXX  V.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and  opened  by  Chris- 
tian discipline  f 

Ans.  Thus:  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  those  who,  under 
the  name  of  Christians,  maintain  doctrines  or  practices  inconsistent 
therewith,  and  will  not,  after  having  been  brotherly  admonished, 
renounce  their  errors  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are  complained  of 
to  the  church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  appointed  by  the  church, 
and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are  by  them  forbid  the  use  of  the 
sacraments,  whereby  they  are  excluded  from  the  Christian  church  and 
by  God  himself  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ;  and  when  they  promise 
and  show  real  amendments,  are  again  received  as  members  of  Christ 
and  his  church. 

A  SUSPICION  has  arisen,  it  is  likely,  in  the  minds 
■^^  of  some  of  you  who  have  pursued  with  us  the 
study  of  our  Catechism,  that  there  are  at  least  a  few 
things  treated  of  with  too  great  particularity,  since  they 
are  now  fairly  understood,  and  the  true  doctrine  con- 
cerning them  believed  by  the  great  body  of  evangelical 


348  THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.      Christians.  It  should,  however,  be  remembered  that 
the  Catechism  was  written  but  a  short  time  after  our 
Reformed  churches  had  come  out  from  the  idolatrous 
church  (so  called)  of  Rome,  and  that  many  of  the 
anti-scriptural  dogmas  and  pretensions  of  Popery  and  its 
ministers  retained  not  a  little  power  over  the  common 
mind,  accustomed  to  an  entire  and  unquestioning  sub- 
jection for  many  centuries ;  and  this  especially,  as 
they  were  proclaimed  and  insisted  on  by  the  advocates 
of  Rome  with  all  the  art  and  ardor  and  strength  of 
men  skilled  in  argument  and  fond  of  rule,  who  felt 
that  they  were  in  great  danger  of  losing  their  author- 
ity and  its  emoluments  forever.  Doctrines  and  prac- 
tices, upon  which  a  well-taught  child  in  a  pious  family 
or  Sunday-school  can  now  pronounce  correctly,  were 
then  subjects  of  angry  and  protracted  dispute  between 
learned  and  eminent  men  in  halls  of  universities,  and 
in  councils  summoned  by  princely  and  imperial  com- 
mand ;  and  how  partially  truth  prevailed  over  error,  is 
shown  by  the  fact  that  the  greater  part  of  Europe  fell 
back  from  the  alarm  of  controversy  to  a  more  servile 
awe  of  the  monstrous  superstition  than  before.  At 
this  hour  the  adherents  to  these  destructive  errors  con- 
siderably outnumber  all  others  who  profess  themselves 
Christians ;  and  as  some  think  sacred  prophecy  warns 
us  of  a  desperate  attempt  again  to  subjugate  the  world 
by  the  iron  yoke  of  their  intolerant  supremacy,  it  is, 
therefore,  not  wise  for  us  so  to  overlook  the  falsity  of 
such  pretensions  as  to  remain  ignorant  of  the  scriptural 
arguments  by  which  they  may  be  refuted,  and  our 
Protestant  faith  intelligently  confirmed.  These  re- 
marks are  particulax'ly  applicable  to  the  subject  of  our 
lesson  for  to-day. 


THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.  349 

A  key  being  the  instrument  by  which  a  door  is 
opened  or  shut,  he  who  has  the  key  has  the  power  of 
admitting  or  excluding.  Hence,  it  is  very  naturally 
used  as  a  figure  to  signify  the  prerogative  of  conferring 
or  withholding  privileges,  as  in  a  state  or  society.  Of 
this  we  have  a  notable,  though  not  solitary,  example  in 
Scripture,  where  our  Lord  says  to  the  apostle  Peter, 
after  his  memorable  confession,  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and 
upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church  ;  and  the  gates 
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  And  I  M'ill  give 
unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  and 
whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in 
heaven ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall 
be  loosed  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18,  19).  It  is  upon 
this  text,  as  you  knoAv,  that  the  Papists  ground  their 
claim  for  the  supreme  and  infallible  dominion  of  the 
Pope,  as  the  alleged  successor  of  St.  Peter  in  things 
spiritual,  and,  in  truth,  things  temporal  so  far  as  they 
can  be  made  contingent  upon  the  interest  of  the  church 
over  which  he  presides.  Peter,  say  they,  was  the  rock 
on  which  Christ  founded  the  true  church.  Peter  was 
bishop  of  Rome ;  therefore  each  successive  bishop  of 
Rome  derives  the  same  fundamental  relation  -  to  the 
church,  and  no  one  who  does  not  so  rest  his  faith  on 
the  authority  of  Christ  so  delegated  to  the  Pope  is  a 
member  of  the  true  church.  In  like  manner  they 
argue,  that,  as  our  Lord  gave  to  Peter  the  authority  to 
admit  into  his  kingdom,  which  is  his  church,  and  to 
exclude  or  expel  from  it,  promising  to  ratify  in  heaven 
what  the  apostle  did  on  earth,  binding  what  he  bound, 
and  loosening  what  he  loosed  (that  is,  condemning  for 
sin  or  absolving  from  sin),  so  the  bishop  of  Rome,  or 
Pope,  being  the  successor  of  Peter,  is  the  vicegerent 


350  THE  POWEE  OF  THE  IvEYS.       of  Christ  on  earth,  whose  sentences  of  absolution  or 
condemnation,  finally  pronounced,  have  infallible  au- 
thority in  heaven.  Now,  if  we  allow  their  view  of  the 
text  cited,  their  inference  must  be  allowed,  and  we  can- 
not, without  fatal  disloyalty  to  Christ,  refuse  entire 
subjection  to  the  Pope. 

But  let  us  sift  this  interpretation  and  argument  of 
theirs.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  far  from  certain,  nay, 
very  improbable,  that  the  apostle  Peter  was  ever  bishop 
of  Rome.  It  is  even  doubted  by  many  learned  inves- 
tigators that  he  ever  was  at  Rome  at  all.  The  traces 
of  his  special  presidency  over  the  particular  church 
of  Rome,  if  there  be  any,  are  exceedingly  obscure ; 
whereas,  if  such  stupendous  interests  depend  on  the 
alleged  fact,  it  is  fair  to  believe  that  God  would  have 
put  it  beyond  doubt.  Certainly,  there  is  no  allusion  to 
anything  of  the  kind  in  the  Scriptures ;  on  the  contrary, 
the  care  of  the  church  of  Rome  was  presidentially 
assigned  rather  to  the  apostle  Paul,  as  appears  from  his 
epistle  to  that  church  and  his  residence  there  after  his 
appeal  to  Coesar.  Paul,  also,  declares  that  the  gospel 
of  circumcision  was  unto  Peter,  which  implies  that  his 
mission  was  especially  to  the  Jews,  while  the  apostle- 
ship  of  the  uncircumcision  was  committed  to  himself, 
that  he  should  go  unto  the  Gentiles  (Gal.  ii.  7-10), 
for  which  reason  Paul,  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  his 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  says  :  "  I  speak  unto  you,  Gen- 
tiles, inasmuch  as  I  am  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  I 
magnify  mine  office  ; "  from  Avhich  it  Mould  appear 
that  any  pretension  of  Peter  to  special  authority  over 
the  Gentile  church  of  Rome  was  an  intrusion  within 
the  sphere  appointed  to  the  apostle  Paul. 

But  we  go  farther,    and  assert,  on  a  cohation  of 


THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.  351 

scriptural  passages,  that,  so  far  from  any  primacy  in 
the  apostleship  having  been  assigned  to  Peter,  what- 
ever prerogatives  were  given  him  were   given    to  all 
the  apostles  in  common.     Thus,  was  Peter  a  rock  on 
which  Christ  built  his  church  ?     So  were  all,  for  Paul 
says  (Ephes.  ii.  20),  that  the  church  was  built  on  "  the 
foundation  of  the  prophets  and  apostles,"  "  Jesus  Christ 
himself"  alone   having  a  far  excelling   distinction  as 
"  the  chief  corner-stone  ";    and  the  apostle  John,  in 
the  Revelation,  describing  the  church  as  a  city,  says 
that  the  wall  of  it  "had  twelve  foundations,  and  in 
them  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  were  written  " 
(xxi.  14).     Besides,  the  office  of  the  apostles  as  the 
foundation,  with  the  prophets,  lay  in  their  inspired  tes- 
timony of  the   truth  concerning  Christ,  and  therefore 
ceased  when  their  testimony  ceased,  so  that  in  this  re- 
spect the  apostles  had  not,  and  could  not  have  had,  any 
successor  at  Rome,  or  anywhere.     If  Peter  was  sent 
of  Christ  with  power  of  the  keys,  that  is,  to  retain  or 
remit  sins,  so  were  they  all,  for  our  Lord  after  his  res- 
urrection said  to  them :  "  As  my  Father  hath  sent  me, 
even  so  send  I  you.     And  when  he  had  said  this,  he 
breathed  on  them,  and  saith  unto  them,  Receive  ye  the 
Holy  Ghost :  whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re- 
mitted unto  them  ;    and  whosesoever   sins  ye  retain, 
they  are  retained  "  (John  xx.  21-23).      Thomas,  it 
may  be  observed,  was  not  then  present  ;    but  as  he 
was  afterwards  with  the  other  ten  when  they  received 
the  final  and  general   commission  of  apostleship,  we 
need  not  doubt  of  his  having  had  the  same  authority 
as  the  rest.     Nay,  Paul  was  himself  the  first  protes- 
tant  against  the  primacy  of  Peter,  when,  asserting  his 
prerogative  to  rule  the  Corinthian  church,  he  says  :  "  I 


352  THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.       suppose  [or,  I  reason]  I  was  not  a  whit  behind  the  very 
chiefest  apostles  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  5)  ;  and  on  one  critical 
occasion  he  "  withstood  Peter  to  the  face,  because  he 
Avas  to  be  blamed"  (Gal.  ii.  11).  So  shall  we  with- 
stand any  pretended  successor  of  Peter,  if  he  teach 
any  other  gospel  than  that  which  Paul,  our  apostle, 
taught.  Peter  had  this  precedency,  and  no  more,  that 
his  preaching  at  the  Pentecost  was  instrumental  in 
adding  the  first  converts  from  Jvidaism,  and  afterwards 
completing  the  organization  of  the  Christian  church 
by  the  addition  of  the  Gentile  elements,  necessary  to 
"  the  one  new  man  "  in  Christ  (Gal.  ii.  11—16),  when 
he  baptized  Cornelius  (Acts  x.  xi.  18). 

But,  as  we  have  hinted  before,  the  apostles  had  no 
successors  in  the  full  degree  of  apostleship,  nor  can  the 
words  of  the  text  under  consideration  be  applied  in 
anything  like  their  full  sense  to  any  one  after  them  in 
the  church.  Our  Lord  sent  his  apostles  forth  as  he 
had  been  sent  by  his  Father,  which  was  with  power  on 
earth  to  forgive  sins,  and  with  extraordinary  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  including  power  to  confer  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  upon  others.  This  commission  to  them 
was  indicated  and  attested,  as  his  commission  from  the 
Father,  by  the  power  of  working  miracles.  Where 
this  seal  and  evidence  is  wanting,  it  is  clear  that  the 
full  commission  has  not  been  transmitted  by  any  suc- 
cession. But  as  no  pope  or  bishop  or  priest  has  this 
miraculous  energy,  none  of  them  are  fully  successors 
of  the  apostles.  It  follows  that  our  Lord's  address  to 
Peter,  or  his  subsequent  connnission  to  them  all,  em- 
braced some  powers  not  transmissible,  for  the  exercise 
of  which  they  were  peculiarly  fitted.  Now,  as  they 
were  appointed  to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  church  on 


THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.  353 

the  chief  corner-stone,  Christ  Jesus,  and  they  were 
governed  from  Avithin  by  a  peculiar  degi'ee  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  they  may  very  well  be  supposed  to  judge  infal- 
libly, when  necessary,  of  what  was  in  men,  so  as  to 
make  no  error  in  admitting  them  to  the  church  or  ex- 
cluding them  from  it,  and  in  pronouncing,  as  our  Lord 
did  infallibly,  the  remission  or  retention  of  sins.  There- 
fore it  was  literally  true  that  whatever  they,  when 
exercising  their  apostolical  authority,  bound  on  earth, 
or  loosed  on  earth,  would  be  bound  or  loosed  in  heaven. 
Christ  on  his  throne  would  certainly  ratify  what  his 
Spirit  in  the  apostles  did  on  earth.  But  the  same  con- 
firmation cannot  be  presumed  of  any  uninspired  men, 
claiming  to  be  their  successors.  Any  such  claim  for 
them  is  a  blasphemous  assumption  of  Christ's  discern- 
ment and  authority.  Hence  the  assumptions  of  the 
Pope  to  open  and  shut  heaven,  and  to  forgive  or  retain 
the  guilt  of  sin,  is  worse  than  vanity  and  arroganr.e. 

But  a  very  urgent  question  here  arises,  which  our 
church,  professing  to  declare  by  the  Catechism  the  full 
doctrine  of  Christ,  is  not  at  liberty  to  shun.  Was 
Christian  government  and,  especially,  discipline,  so  re- 
strained in  the  hands  of  the  apostles,  that,  after  their 
divinely  directed  office  ceased  on  earth,  it  ceased  to  ex- 
ist ;  or,  if  it  continued,  to  whom  was  it  committed  ?  Vol- 
umes of  dispute  have  been  written  in  all  ages  of  tlie 
church  on  these  points,  and  with  every  variety  of  opin- 
ion ;  but  all  the  inquiries  properly  refer  for  considera- 
tion in  the  premises  to  that  striking  passage  in  Matthew, 
(xviii.  15-20,)  where  our  Lord,  speaking  of  quarrels 
between  brethren,  and  having  enjoined  first  private  and 
gentle  methods  of  attempting  reconciliation,  adds :  "  Tell 
it  unto  the  church,  and  if  he  (the  other  party  in  the  case) 
VOL.  n.  23 


354  THE  POWER  OF   THE  KEYS.        nefflect  to  hear  the  church,  let  liim  be  unto  thee  a 
heathen  man  and  a  pubhcan.  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in 
heaven,  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall 
be  loosed  in  heaven  [the  identical  words,  with  the  ex- 
ception that  the  singular  pronoun  is  changed  to  the 
plural,  showing  that  the  promise  to  Peter  was  not  ex- 
clusive]. Agam  I  say  unto  you,  that  if  any  two  of 
you  shall  agree  on  earth  as  touching  anything  that  they 
shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which 
is  in  heaven.  For  where  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 
These  two  verses  (19,  20)  are  evidently  parts  of  the 
paragraph  relating  to  discipline,  and  are  to  be  consid- 
ered in  its  exposition.  We  have  here,  then,  three 
things  to  settle  :  First,  To  whom  were  these  words 
addressed  ?  Secondly,  What  is  meant  by  the  church  ? 
Thirdly,  To  what  extent  and  in  what  manner  (if  any) 
are  these  promises  applicable  beyond  the  apostles  ? 

As  to  the  address,  it  will  be  seen  on  reference  to  the 
chapter  that  our  Lord  was  speaking  to  his  disciples,  or 
his  future  apostles  (compare  Mark  ix.  33;  Luke  ix. 
46  ;  xxii.  24-30  ;  John  xiii.  12-17),  who  were  under 
the  prejudice  of  Jewish  notions  concerning  Messiah's 
kingdom.  The  commands  and  the  promises,  therefore, 
were  primarily  to  the  inspired  apostles  ;  and  upon  this 
Paul  acted  in  a  case  of  discij)line  at  Corinth  (1  Cor.  v. 
1-5),  where,  though  evidently  claiming  his  apostolical 
authority,  he  yet  directs  the  church  to  proceed  to  con- 
demnation in  his  absence,  he  confirming  their  decision 
beforehand  :  "  For  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body,  but 
present  in  spirit,  have  judged  already,  as  though  I  were 
present,  concerning  him  that  hath  so  done  this  deed  ; 


THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.  355 

In  tlie  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  ye  are 
gathered  togetlier,  and  mij  spirit^  with  the  power  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,*  to  deliver  such  a  one  unto 
Satan  for  tlie  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit 
may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  But 
though  the  address  was  primarily  to  the  inspired  apos- 
tles, we  may  believe,  and  in  this  all  parties  are  agreed, 
that  our  Lord,  in  giving  these  directions  to  them  as  the 
founders  of  his  church,  intended  to  mark  out  the  prin- 
ciples of  action  for  the  church  in  all  ages  ;  which  view 
is  strengtliened  by  the  fact  of  the  apostle  Paul's  asso- 
ciation with  himself  of  the  church  of  Corinth  in  the 
case  cited,  as  also  by  the  address  of  the  same  apostle 
to  the  ciders  of  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  28),  and  of  the 
apostle  Peter  to  the  elders  generally,  in  both  of  which 
they  are  expected  to  take  faithful  care  of  the  church, 
the  oversight  (undoubtedly  including  discipline)  of 
which  Avas  committed  unto  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
What  then  is  meant  by  "  the  church  "  ?  Church  is 
a  Greek  term,  and  therefore  had  not  been  used  by  the 
Jews  in  their  polity ;  and  though  under  the  inspiration 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  it  was  afterwards  given  to  the  flock 
of  Christ,  the  Christian  church  was  not  formally  estab- 
lished until  after  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
Jewish  economy  being  still  in  force.  Under  that  sys- 
tem we  know  that  ultimate  discipline  of  offenders  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  assembly  of  elders,  or  Sanhedrim,  as 
they  called  it.  Did  our  Lord  refer  his  immediate  dis- 
ciples to  that  tribunal  ?  The  supposition  is  not  mon- 
strous, since  he  himself  submitted  to  trial  by  the  San- 
hedrim, and  protested  only  against  the  flagrant  illegality 

*  It  may  be  questioned  whether  the  phrase  "  with  the  power  of  our  Lore' 
Jesus  Christ "  refers  to  the  whole  assemblj',  or  to  the  spirit  of  the  apostle 
I  incline  to  the  latter  opinion. 


356  THE  POWER  OF   THE  KEYS.       of  their  proceedings.  Or  did  lie  refer  in  advance  to 
the  future  church,  in  language  not  understood  by  the 
disciples  at  the  time,  but  which  would  be  understood 
by  that  church  for  whose  benefit  in  all  ages  his  sacred 
words  are  recorded  ?  This  opinion  seems  not  unrea- 
sonable, as  our  Lord  shows  a  similar  anticipation  of 
phraseology  when  he  exhorts  his  disciples,  before  they 
knew  that  he  was  to  be  crucified,  to  "  take  up  their 
cross  and  follow  him  " ;  for  although  that  expression 
probably  was  in  proverbial  use  among  the  Jews,  it  had 
undoubtedly  in  our  Lord's  mind  a  force  which  the 
whole  church  has  subsequently  given  it,  as  sympathy 
with  his  death  on  the  cross.  We,  therefore,  hold  that 
the  counsel  given  to  tell  matters  of  dispute  between 
Christian  brethren,  or  of  offence  against  the  morals  of 
our  holy  profession,  should,  when  more  gentle  methods 
of  composition  fail,  be  told  to  the  church,  and  submit- 
ted to  them  for  decision  ;  —  not  necessarily  the  whole 
church,  or  the  whole  of  a  particular  church,  (for  we 
know  that  some,  and,  ordinarily,  the  larger  portion  of 
a  church,  are  forbidden  to  speak  in  the  church,  and  so 
have  no  voice  in  the  church  court,)  but,  as  the  Jewish 
church  was  represented  by  the  court  of  elders,  and  as 
elders  to  "  rule  over  "  were  appointed  in  the  apostolical 
churches,  this  function  of  oversight,  or  government, 
may  be  very  well  committed  to  their  hands,  by  which 
much  confusion  and  unnecessary  scandal  are  avoided  ; 
and,  therefore,  such  a  system  of  government  and  disci- 
pline, by  a  body  of  elders  elected  by  the  members  of 
each  church,  has  been  adopted,  and  prevails  in  all  our 
Reformed  churches. 

These  points  being  settled,  our  third  question  recurs: 
To  what  extent  and  in  what  manner  are  the  promises, 


THE  POWER  OF   THE   KEYS.  357 

primarily  directed  to  the  inspired  apostles,  applicable 
to  the  church,  since  their  day,  in  its  exercise  of  disci- 
pline ?  It  is  obvious  that  there  must  be  some  restraint 
of  them,  if  not  modification.  For  the  apostles,  when 
under  plenary  inspiration  as  the  appointed  and  miracu- 
lously accredited  ministers  of  Christ  in  the  absolute 
government  of  the  church,  had  such  divine  discern- 
ment and  impartiality  that  their  judgment  was  infal- 
lible ;  and,  therefore,  Christ  certainly  confirmed  in 
heaven  what  they,  by  his  authority  and  under  his 
guidance,  ordered  on  earth.  But,  though  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  promised,  and  has  been,  as 
it  will  be,  given  to  all  Christians,  and  Christ  has  prom- 
ised to  be  "in  the  midst  of  them,"  especially  when  met 
together  in  his  name,  such  inspiration  is  not  plenary,  or 
such  guidance  thorough,  as  in  the  case  of  the  apostles. 
On  the  contrary,  every  Christian  knows  that,  from  the 
weakness  of  his  understanding  and  heart,  and  the 
temptations  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  he  is 
constantly  prone  to  error,  misjudgment,  and  uncharita- 
bleness  ;  nay,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  preserve 
him  from  such  ignorance  and  sin,  except  so  far  as  he 
purifies  his  heart  and,  using  all  the  means  of  grace,  acts 
in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  according  to  the  word  of  Christ, 
and  singly  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  This  must  also  be 
true  of  the  church  or  eldership  of  the  church  when 
administering  Christian  discipline.  Christ  will  confirm 
in  heaven  whatever  they  do  in  accordance  with  his 
word  and  Spirit ;  but  it  is  preposterous  to  say  that 
he  will  confirm  the  erroneous  or  illegal  acts  of  his  ser- 
vants,  though  they  profess  to  act  in  his  name.  There 
must  be,  if  I  may  be  allQwed  the  technicality,  appeal 
from  the  fallible   court  below  to  the   infalhble  judge 


358  THE  POWER  OF   THE  KEYS.      on  the  throne  of  heaven.  Yet,  until  that  appeal  be 
tried  and  pronounced  upon,  it  becomes  all  good  Chris- 
tians to  bow  before  the  tribunal  constituted  by  Christ 
on  earth.  So  far,  then,  as  Christian  discipline  is 
administered  according  to  the  law  of  Christ,  by  the 
church  on  earth,  it  will  be  confirmed  by  Christ,  the 
only  head  of  the  church,  in  heaven. 

We  should  here  add,  by  way  of  cautionary  infer- 
ence, that  such  prerogative  of  ministerial  judgment, 
having  been  committed  to  the  church,  as  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  which  is  not  of  this  world,  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  church  is  positively  restricted  to  matters  purely 
spiritual,  all  others  being  left  to  extra-ecclesiastical  au- 
thorities, or  what  the  apostle  terms  "the  poAvers  that 
be."  Our  Lord,  it  will  be  remembered,  refused  to 
settle  a  matter  of  inheritance,  saying,  "  Who  made  me 
a  judge  or  divider  over  you  ?  "  And  Avhen  asked  to 
decide  a  political  question,  refused  to  answer  farther 
than  to  say,  "  Render  unto  Csesar  the  things  which  are 
Cffisar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  ai'e  God's  "  ; 
while  on  another  occasion,  though  privately  protesting 
the  right  of  "  the  children  "  to  be  "  free,"  he  wrought 
a  miracle  to  procure  means  for  the  payment  of  tribute 
to  the  foreign  oppressor  Avho,  in  divine  providence,  held 
rule  over  his  countiy.  It  is,  therefore,  clearly  against 
the  example  of  our  divine  head  to  bring  questions  of 
property  or  temporal  politics  into  church  courts.  They 
have  no  right  to  adjudicate  them. 

So,  also.  Christians,  in  their  private  capacity,  or  oth- 
erwise than  for  the  administration  of  Christian  disci- 
pline, are  debarred  from  the  exercise  of  open  censure 
or  ]iersonal  condemnation  of  their  brethren,  and  are 
liable  in  attempting  such  annoyance  to  condcmnat'on 


THE  POWER  OF  THE   KEYS.  859 

themselves  by  him  who  has  said,  "  Judge  not,  that  ye 
be  not  judged." 

But  it  equally  follows  that  the  prerogative  of  judg- 
ment in  religious  matters  belongs  to  the  church  alone, 
and  that  neither  the  civil  power  nor  any  body  of  men 
(not  a  church)  have  anything  to  do  with  such  matters ; 
and  if  any  such  presume  to  take  them  into  their  hands, 
they  are  guilty  of  profanely  obtruding  themselves  on 
the  kingdom  of  Christ.  No  greater  mischiefs  have 
happened  to  church  and  to  state  than  have  arisen  from 
such  unchristian  and  wicked  confusion  of  things  spirit- 
ual with  things  temporal,  —  things  ecclesiastical  with 
things  political.  In  this  country,  for  the  first  time  since 
history  began  its  records,  the  providence  of  God  has 
ordered  that  constitutional  law  should  unite  with  the 
word  of  God  in  severing;  the  relimon  of  Christ  fi'om 
the  civil  government ;  and  it  behooves  all  true  disciples 
of  Christ  to  be  very  careful  how,  on  their  part,  they  do 
not  transcend  their  sphere,  lest,  as  will  inevitably  be 
the  case,  they  provoke  the  world  to  interfere  with  the 
rights  of  the  church. 

We  can  now  see  how  and  why  the  section  for  the 
present  Lord's  Day  was  introduced  by  the  authors  of 
the  Catechism,  especially  as  they  wei*e  so  rudely  pressed 
at  the  time  by  the  advocates  of  Poper}*.  The  Pope,  as 
the  successor  of  St.  Peter,  claimed  supreme  and  sole 
dominion  over  the  church,  and  bore  embroidered  on 
his  vestments  two  keys,  as  the  badge  of  his  power. 
Where,  asked  the  Papists  of  the  Protestants,  is  the 
right  of  ecclesiastical  government  ?  Who  has  the 
mystical  keys  which  open  and  shut  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  ?     To   this  the   Reformers   replied,   as   in   the 


360  THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.       answers  before  us  :  That  the  right  of  government  was 
in  the  church,  constituted  and  governed  according  to 
the  word  of  Christ ;  and  tliat  tlie  two  keys  were  also 
in  tlie  hands  of  the  church  :  the  one,  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel,  by  which  those  who  believe  are  made 
heirs  of  heaven,  and  those  who  refuse  to  believe  are 
forever  excluded  from  its  glorious  blessedness ;  the 
other,  Christian  discipline,  which,  in  excommunicating 
the  gross  sinner  from  the  church  on  earth  and  in  restor- 
ing the  penitent,  if  administered  according  to  the  word 
and  spirit  of  Christ,  must  be  according  to  the  will  of 
Christ  in  heaven.  The  language  and  reasoning  of  the 
whole  section  are  so  very  plain  that  we  may  leave  them 
without  farther  comment. 

1.  How  infinitely  important  it  is  that  the  gospel  be 
preached  faithfully,  purely,  and  fully  !  It  is  the  voice 
of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  declar- 
ing unto  sinful  men  the  principles  on  which  the  Judge 
of  all  will  determine  our  eternal  state.  Those  who 
come  within  the  sound  of  the  preacher,  have  a  right  to 
hear  the  gospel  as  God  has  sent  it ;  because  their  eter- 
nal salvation  or  damnation  depends  on  the  manner  in 
which  they  regard  the  revelation  of  mercy.  If  the 
preacher  be  faithful  in  delivering  the  message,  as  an 
ambassador  for  Christ,  he  is  free  from  the  blood  of  all 
men  ;  if  he  be  faithless,  the  blood  of  his  hearers'  souls, 
dying  impenitent,  God  will  require  at  his  hands.  This 
thought,  but  for  the  assurance  of  God's  grace,  would 
have  overwhelmed  the  apostle  Paul ;  how  should  it 
make  his  uninspired  successors  humble,  reverent,  and 
zealous  !  Hear  what  he  says  :  "  For  we  are  unto  God 
a  sweet  savor  of  Christ,  in  them  that  are  saved,  and  in 
them  that  perish  ;  to  the  one  we  are  the  savor  of  death 


Lf.ct.  XXXIX.]      THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.  361 

unto  death,  and  to  the  other  the  savor  of  life  unto 
life.  And  who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  For  we 
are  not  as  many,  which  corrupt  the  word  of  God  ;  but 
as  of  sincerity,  but  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God  speak 
we  in  Christ." 

How  vast  is  tlie  responsibility  of  those  who  hear  the 
gospel  so  proclaimed  !  Upon  their  treatment  of  the 
word  hangs  their  everlasting  condition.  Every  time 
the  gospel  is  preached,  the  gate  of  heaven  is  flung  open 
and  they  are  invited  to  enter ;  every  time  they  turn 
away  unbelieving,  the  gate  of  heaven  is  shut  against 
them.     Dear  friends,  "  take  heed  how  you  hear." 

2.  How  important  that  Christian  discipline  be  faith- 
fully and  religiously  maintained  !  The  officers  of  the 
church  are  charged  to  vindicate  the  character  of  the 
Christian  name  before  the  world.  They  are,  therefore, 
bound  to  disown  those  whose  lives  are  in  open  contra- 
diction to  the  law  of  God.  The  duty  is  difficult,  much 
more  so  than  people  are  apt  to  think.  The  rule  of 
Christ  requires  at  least  two  witnesses ;  and  as  church 
courts  have  not  the  power  to  compel  the  attendance 
of  witnesses,  trial  is  often  impossible  even  where  the 
scandal  is  more  than  suspected.  But  so  far  as  in  them 
lies,  they  are  bound  in  fidelity  to  Christ,  to  the  offender, 
and  to  the  world,  for  an  unshrinking,  impartial,  and 
merciful  discharge  of  their  sacred  function. 

And  all  of  us  should  regard  such  an  oversight  by 
the  church  authority  as  a  blessing,  cheerfully  yielding 
ourselves  to  faithful  admonition,  and  submitting  our- 
selves to  the  decision  of  those  who  are  set  over  us  in 
the  Lord,  by  the  paternal  love  of  God  and  the  grace 
of  Christ.     Amen. 


LECTURE   XL. 

OF  THANKFULNESS. 

KECESSITY    OF    GOOD    WORKS. 


THIRTY-SECOND  LORD'S   DAY. 
OF    THANKFULNESS. 

Quest.  LXXXVI.  Since,  then,  we  are  delivered  from  our  misery,  merely 
of  grace,  through  Christ,  without  any  merit  of  onr  oion,  why  must  we  still 
do  good  works  ? 

Ans.  Because  Christ,  having  redeemed  and  delivered  us  by  his  blood, 
also  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit  after  his  own  image,  that  so  we  may 
testify,  by  the  whole  of  our  conduct,  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his  bless- 
ings, and  that  he  may  be  praised  b}'  us;  also,  that  every  man  may  be 
assured  in  himself  of  his  faith  by  the  fruits  thereof  ;  and  that  by  our 
godly  conversation  others  may  be  gained  to  Christ. 

Quest.  LXXXVII.  Cannot  they  then  be  saved,  who,  continuing  in  their 
moled  and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted  unto  God? 

Ans.  By  no  means;  for  the  Holy  Scripture  declares  that  no  unchaste  per- 
son, idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard,  slanderer,  rob- 
ber, or  any  such  like  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

rpiIE  purpose  of  religion  being  to  cultivate  our  sense 
-^  of  obligation  to  God,  and  thereby  to  make  us  more 
like  our  divine  Father  in  the  practice  of  those  duties  he 
has  enjoined,  it  follows  that  no  scheme  of  religious  doc- 
trine or  worship  can  be  true  which  has  not  such  effect 
upon  the  hearts  and  lives  of  all  who  sincerely  receive 
it.  Such  evidence  of  its  authenticity,  or  divine  origin, 
is  especially  demanded  of  the  Christian  religion,  which, 
on  the  one  hand,  declares  our  native  inability  to  serve 
God  aright,  and,  on  the  other,  offers  us  the  blessedness 
of  his  favor  for  time  and  eternity  only  through  the 
merits  of  Christ  in  gracious  answer  to  our  faith.  The 
original  constitution  under  which  man  was  placed,  un- 
doubtedly ordered  that  he  should  be  rewarded  for  his 
own  righteousness  or  punished  for  his  own  unrighteous- 


366  OF  THANKFULNESS.  ness,  —  righteousness  and  unrighteousness  being  synon- 
ymous Avith  obedience  and  disobedience  to  God.  This 
is  clearly  set  forth  by  the  apostle  Paul  (Romans  ii.  6— 
11)  :  "  Who  \_{.  e.  God  the  Judge]  "will  render  to  every 
man  according  to  his  deeds :  to  them  who  by  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for  glory,  honor,  and 
immortality,  eternal  life ;  but  unto  them  that  are  con- 
tentious, and  do  not  obey  the  truth,  but  obey  unright- 
eousness, indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  an- 
guish upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  —  of  the 
Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile ;  but  glory,  honor,  and 
peace  to  every  man  that  worketh  good,  —  to  the  Jew 
first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile  ;  for  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons  with  God."  Such  a  system  at  once  commends 
itself  to  our  reason.  It  is  right  that  a  man  should  be 
treated  as  he  deserves.  We  can,  also,  see  that  the  legit- 
imate effect  of  such  a  system  should  be  to  restrain  men 
from  evil  and  move  them  to  do  rioht.  It  must,  more- 
over,  be  unchangeable,  because  eternal  justice,  the  per- 
fect consistency  of  God  with  himself,  requires  that  his 
favor  should  be  the  reward  of  righteousness  only,  his 
wrath  the  punishment  of  unrighteousness  only.  The 
gospel,  so  far  from  abrogating  this  constitution,  vindi- 
cates it  in  every  particular.  Nay,  the  sole  end  of 
Christ's  mediation  was  to  justify  God  in  taking  to  him- 
self preeminent  glory  by  the  salvation  of  sinners  Avho 
believe  in  Christ.  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  tal*es  the 
place  of  the  first,  on  behalf  of  all  the  seed  of  faith, 
suffers  for  them  the  penalty  due  their  disobedience, 
renders  for  them  a  perfect  obedience,  —  so  obtaining  for 
them  by  the  infinite  merit  of  his  substitution  entire 
absolution  from  guilt,  and  a  gracious  title  to  full  divine 
favor. 


OF   THANKFULNESS.  367 

This  is  not  the  place  to  argue  the  propriety  of  vi- 
carious atonement,    or  the    imputation  of  our  sins  to 
Christ  and  the   imputation   of  Christ's   righteousness. 
God  sufficiently  demonstrates  it  in  his  holy  word,  and 
we  have  rehearsed  his  demonstration  in  several  lectures 
already.     But  it  does  behoove  us  to  answer  the  ques- 
tion, how  by  such  an  arrangement  the  repentance  of 
the  sinner  so  saved,  his  reformation  from  disobedience  to 
obedience,  is  brought  about  ?  for  unless  such  a  change 
in  the  sinner,  pardoned  and  blest,  be  secured,  the  end 
of  religion  is  lost,  and  Christ  made,  as  our  apostle  ex- 
presses it,  "a  minister  of  sin."     The  opponents  of  the 
doctrine  of  free  grace,  of  justification  by  faith  alone, 
(they  are  identical,  being  two  forms  of  expressing  the 
same  thing,)  press  upon  us  as  they  think  a  serious  diffi- 
culty, as  if  we  took  away  from  before  the  sinner  all 
motive  to  do  right  and  abstain  from  wrong.     We  and 
our  Reformed  church  here,  out  of  the  word  of  God, 
contend  in  reply,  that,  so  far  from  taking  away  our 
motives  to  do  right,  the  doctrine  of  grace  not  only  pre- 
serves those  which  spring  from  the  law,  but,  also,  adds 
those  of  a  fiir  more  influential  and  more  generous  char- 
acter ;  nay,  that,  instead  of  encouraging  or  even  tolerat- 
ing a  wilful  practice  of  sin,  the  gospel  expressly  with- 
holds from  all  wilful  transgressors  any  part  in  the  sal- 
vation by  Christ.    We  deny,  it  is  true,  that  good  works 
have  any  share  in  procuring  our  justification  with  God 
but  we  assert  as  confidently,  that  they  certainly,  be- 
cause  necessarily,  follow  the   justification   of  the  sin- 
ner through  faith  in  Christ,   or,  in  other  words,  that 
his  good  works  are  not  offered  to  merit  favor  with  God, 
but  as  evidences  of  gratitude  for  his  favor  already  con- 
ferred in  iionor  of  Christ's  merits. 


3G8  OF  THANKFULNESS.  Our  Catechism,  in  its  lesson  for  the  first  Lord's  Day, 
taught  us  that  there  are  tln-ee  things  which  we  must 
know  in  order  to  our  enjoyment  of  the  comfort  in  life 
and  death  which  the  Christian  religion  alone  can  give : 
first,  how  great  our  sins  and  miseries  are  ;  secondly, 
how  we  may  be  delivered  from  all  our  sins  avid  miseries  ; 
and  thirdly,  how  we  shall  express  our  gratitude  to  God 
for  such  deliverance.  The  first  and  the  second  we 
have  already  treated  of  at  large.  We  are  now  to  treat 
of  the  third,  which  will  embrace  all  our  remaining 
expositions  of  the  Catechism.  For,  as  Van  der  Kemp 
and  other  commentators  on  our  book  have  pointed  out, 
this  third  part  of  the  Catechism  has  five  particulars. 
I.  The  necessity  of  good  works  (86th  and  87th  Ques- 
tions and  Answers).  II.  The  principle  from  which 
they  proceed,  conversion  (88,  89,  90).  III.  Their 
nature  (91).  IV.  Their  rule,  the  laiv  of  God  (92- 
115).  V.  The  means  of  performing  them,  irrayer 
(116-129).     Our  subject  to-day  is  — 

The  Necessity  of  Good  Works  in  a  Christian. 

This  the  Catechism  argues,  in  the  first  place,  from 
the  effects  of  that  renewing;  grace  of  Christ  which  al- 
ways  accompanies  his  pardoning  grace ;  and,  secondly, 
from  the  testimony  of  Scripture  that  none,  who  con- 
tinue in  wicked  lives,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

First  :  The  effects  of  that  reneiving  grace  of  Christ 
which  always  accompanies  his  pardoning  grace. 

1.  What  is  this  renewinjT  m-ace  ? 

"  Christ,  having  redeemed  and  delivei*ed  us  by  his 
blood,  also  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in  his  own 
image." 

The  purpose  of  God  in  Christ  is,  umloubtedly,  to 
deliver  his  people,  or  all  who  believe  on  his  name,  from 


Leci   XL.]  OF  THANKFULNESS.  369 

eternal  death,  which  is  the  just  punishment  of  their 
sins,  and  to  bring  them  again  into  favor  witli  God. 
But,  as  has  been  repeatedly  shown,  deliverance  from 
punishment  is  a  small  part  of  that  salvation.  If  it 
went  no  flu-thcr,  the  mercy  shown  would  be  a  weak- 
ness, which  Ave  cannot  without  great  impiety  charge 
upon  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  —  a  mere  pity  for  the  sin- 
ner's sufferings  without  regard  to  his  character.  Where, 
then,  were  the  use,  the  authority,  or  holiness  of  his  law  ? 
To  show  that  such  is  not  the  case,  he  not  only  insists 
on  the  repentance  of  every  one  who  would  enter  into 
Christ's  kingdom,  but,  as  an  article  of  the  covenant 
with  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  he  has  required 
that  Christ  should  also  be  the  judge  of  men  at  the  last 
day,  and  then  vindicate  the  justice  of  mercy  by  con- 
demning all  the  impenitent,  or  all  who  wilfully  lead 
wicked  lives,  thereby  showing  that  they  have  no  part 
in  the  kingdom  of  grace. 

The  Father  has  given  to  Christ  his  people  as  the 
reward  of  his  mediatorial  righteousness,  but  on  the 
express  condition  that  they  might  be  "  redeemed  from 
all  iniquity,"  and  purified  as  "  a  peculiar  people,  zeal- 
ous of  good  works  "  ;  and  so  agreeable  to  the  holy 
Saviour  is  this  condition,  that  such  a  change  in  the  sin- 
ner was  his  main  purpose  in  giving  himself  for  us. 
"  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  says  the  apostle,  "  for  ye  are 
bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body 
and  spirit  which  are  God's."  Nay,  this  is  the  covenant 
which  the  Saviour  himself  makes  with  the  true  Israel : 
"  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write  them 
in  their  hearts  ;  and  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they 
shall  be  to  me  a  people."  We  also  know  that  his  name 
was  called  "  Jesus  "  (Deliverer),  "  for  he  shall  save  his 

VOL.  II.  24 


370  OF  THANKFULNESS.  people  from  their  sins."  The  texts  to  the  same  import 
are,  as  you  know,  very  numerous.  It  was  to  accom- 
phsh  this  purpose  that,  after  finishing  the  atonement, 
he  ascended  up  on  high  and  took  his  seat  at  tlie  right 
hand  of  God  as  a  "  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  "  to  give 
repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sins."  For 
this,  also,  he  asks  and  receives  of  the  Father,  and  sends 
down  iipon  his  people,  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Avho  by  his  divine  power  regenerates,  converts,  enlight- 
ens, strengthens,  and  sanctifies  them  to  the  service  of 
God,  gradually,  but  in  the  end,  surely  and  completely. 
Thus  is  Christ  made  unto  us  "  wisdom,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  The  grace 
of  pardon  and  the  grace  of  sanctification  always  go  to- 
gether. The  sanctification  is  the  sealing  of  the  pardon, 
and  the  earnest  of  the  perfect  redemption. 

Nay,  it  is  impossible  in  the  nature  of  things  that  it 
should  be  otherwise,  for  not  only  from  the  penal  enact- 
ments of  God,  but  also  from  the  connection  of  moral 
c^use  and  effect,  misery  must  follow  wilful,  unrepented 
sin.  Christ  could  not,  (we  speak  it  with  reverence,) 
so  long  as  the  holy  God  is  the  blessed  God,  save  from 
misery  those  who  choose  to  go  on  in  the  ways  of  wick- 
edness, because  they  will  not  use  the  only  means  of 
happiness.  In  or  out  of  Christ,  there  is  no  peace,  there 
can  be  no  peace,  for  the  wicked. 

Besides,  the  believer  by  the  very  terms  of  the  re- 
demption is  united  to  Christ ;  he  is  made  one  with  him 
as  his  representative  ;  and  the  union  with  Christ  is  so 
vital  and  personal,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  in 
Christ  the  head,  lives  and  reigns  in  all  his  members. 
Therefore,  as  the  Catechism  asserts,  he  is  renewed  after 
Christ's  own  image.     That  image,  or  likeness  of  Christ, 


OF  THANKFULNESS.  371 

is  the  seal  of  the  Spirit  by  wliicli  lie  stamps  the  believ- 
er's soul  as  belonging  to  Christ.  So,  for  the  believer, 
to  live,  is  Christ;  he  lives  in  Christ,  with  Christ,  to 
Christ,  for  Christ.  Christ  is  formed  in  him,  —  "  Christ 
in  you,  the  hope  of  glory."  So  invariably  is  this  the 
case,  that  "  if  any  man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ," 
which  is  tlie  spirit  of  holy  obedience  and  filial  love, 
"he  is  none  of  his." 

2.  a.  This  grace  of  the  Spirit  does  not  operate  in  us 
as  a  mere  force  or  impulse,  but  morally,  that  is,  accord- 
ing to  the  laws  by  which  moral  creatures  are  governed. 
Hence,  the  most  lively  gratitude  is  awakened  in  the 
soul  towards  God  for  our  redemption  from  eternal  death 
and  the  restoration  of  the  divine  favor  by  the  work  of 
Christ.  The  believer,  conscious  of  these  infinite  and 
inestimable  blessings,  asks,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto 
the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me  ?  "  The  salva- 
tion has  been  all  of  grace,  —  for  Christ's  sake,  without 
any  merit  of  ours  ;  and,  for  the  same  reason,  nothing 
that  we  can  do  for  God  can  in  any  degree  be  a  repay- 
ment of  his  kindness.  God,  who  has  given  us  all,  needs 
not  anything  at  our  hands.  Still,  and  so  much  the 
more,  the  believer  is  ardently  desirous  of  testifying  his 
thankfulness  by  more  than  feeling  or  words.  What 
then  will  be  most  acceptable  to  God  ?  What  is  it  he 
most  delights  to  see  in  his  children  ?  With  what  is  he 
most  pleased  in  his  Son  as  our  Surety,  and  for  the  sake 
of  which  he  has  ffiven  us  all  these  blessings  ?  It  is 
obedience,  the  honor  done  to  his  holy  law,  the  reflec- 
tion of  his  holiness  in  the  life  of  his  servants.  This, 
then,  is  the  thank-offerino-  we  are  to  render  him.  Our 
whole  conduct  is  to  testify  by  its  submission  to  his  will 
and  the  doing  of  his  commands  how  strong,  stronger 


372  OF  THANKFULNESS.  than  any  other  motive,  is  our  sense  of  his  loving-kind- 
ness. Thus  the  apostle,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
after  having  demonstrated  the  freeness  and  the  fulness 
of  salvation  by  Christ,  opens  the  practical  application 
of  the  doctrine  in  these  words  :  "  I  beseech  you,  thei'c- 
fore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present 
your  bodies  [that  is,  our  whole  conduct  while  in  the 
body]  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God, 
which  is  your  reasonable  service."  So,  also,  we  read 
that  true  "  faith  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  v.  6)  ;  that 
he  purifieth  the  hearts  of  his  people  by  faith  (Acts  xv. 
9)  ;  and  that  faith  is  the  victory  [or  the  victorious 
principle]  "  which  overcometh  the  world  "  (1  John  v. 
5).  It  works  by  love,  because  it  excites  this  gratitude 
in  the  heart ;  as  we  read :  "  The  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  us ;  because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died 
for  all,  then  were  all  dead ;  and  that  he  died  for  all, 
that  they  which  live  should  not  henceforth  live  unto 
themselves,  but  unto  him  which  died  for  them,  and  rose 
again  ; "  it  purifies  the  heart,  because  in  proportion  as 
love  for  Christ  occupies  our  affections,  eveiy  impure 
desire  will  be  expelled  from  it ;  and  it  overcomes  the 
world,  because  all  that  the  world  has  to  tempt  us  will 
be  overcome  by  the  strength  of  this  love  for  Christ, 
who  calls  us  out  of  the  world  to  his  service. 

This  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  whole 
scheme  of  our  redemption  is  for  the  greater  glory  of 
God,  and  that  his  glory  is  to  be  seen  in  the  marvellous 
change  of  sinners,  vile  and  lost,  to  holy,  faithful  chil- 
dren. There  is  the  purpose  of  God  the  Father,  the 
reward  of  God  the  Son,  the  work  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  it  is  for  this  that  God  has  made  a  church 
for  himself  in  the  world.    So  the  apostle  Peter  reasons  ; 


OF  THANKFULNESS.  373 

"  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an 
holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,  that  3^0  should  show 
forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of 
darkness  into  his  marvellous  light."  A  godly  life  is 
the  homage  of  the  believer  to  the  God  of  salvation.  It 
is,  therefore,  impossible  that  any  one  who  truly  be- 
lieves in  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  should  not  be  desirous 
and  endeavor  to  do  good  works  for  the  praise  of  God. 
b.  From  this  it  follows  that  we  are  to  judge  of  our 
faith  by  the  effects  it  has  on  our  hearts  and  lives.  We 
are  saved  by  faith,  —  that  is,  by  faith  and  through  faith 
we  become  partakers  of  Christ's  blessings  in  the  redemp- 
tion. This  faith  assures  us  of  salvation  ;  but  the  Scrip- 
ture teaches  us  in  many  places  that  we  are  greatly  lia- 
ble to  be  deceived  in  this  most  important  matter.  The 
promises  of  God  cannot  deceive  us  :  it  must  be  certain 
that  he  who  believes  is  safe  ;  but  we  may  be  deceived 
as  to  the  reality  or  genuineness  of  our  faith  itself. 
There  is  a  spurious  faith,  or  a  persuasion  of  the  mind 
that  we  are  safe  in  Christ,  when  we  are  not,  but  are 
still  in  our  guilt.  The  New  Testament,  therefore,  and 
many  parts  of  the  Old,  insist  upon  our  taking  especial 
pains  to  certify  or  assure  ourselves  of  our  being  Chris- 
tians. So  the  apostle  exhorts  us  to  examine  ourselves 
whether  we  be  m  the  faith.  That  is  the  thing  to  be 
ascertained :  for,  if  we  be  in  the  faith,  all  is  well ;  if  we 
be  not  in  the  faith,  all  is  wrong.  But  with  what  test 
shall  we  prove  or  try  ourselves  ?  Plow  may  we  know 
true  faith  from  false  faith  ?     The  Scripture  leaves  us  in 

no  doubt  here.     "  Faith  without  works  is  dead 

For  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  with- 
out works  is  dead  also."  Unless  our  belief  be  a  living 
principle,  moving  us  to  good  works,  it  is  spurious  ;  for 


374  OF  THANKFULNESS.  our  Saviour  tells  us  that  "  not  every  one  that  saitli  unto 
me  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in 
heaven."  So,  not  to  multiply  texts,  the  Psalmist, 
when  asking  divine  help  in  his  self-examination,  prays  : 
"  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and 
know  my  thoughts  ;  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked 
way  in  me  ;  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  If 
our  faith  does  not  work  by  love,  if  it  does  not  purify 
our  hearts,  if  it  does  not  lead  us  to  overcome  the  world, 
it  is  spurious  ;  for  the  assurance  of  faith,  as  our  Cate- 
chism teaches,  consists  not  in  the  simple  persuasion  of 
the  mind  that  we  are  in  Christ,  but  in  the  evidences  of 
its  sanctifying  power.  So  the  believer  is  faithfi.il  to 
maintain  good  works  that  he  may  be  assured  in  himself 
of  the  fruits  thereof. 

c.  For  the  same  reason  that  the  believer  desires  to 
glorify  God  by  his  own  godly  life,  he  desires  that  other 
sinners  may  be  brought  to  glorify  him  also  ;  and  the 
method  by  which  he  is  to  seek  the  satisfaction  of  his 
desire  is  very  obvious  :  "  Let  your  light  [that  is,  your 
faith  in  the  gospel]  so  shine  before  men  that  they  may 
see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is 
in  heaven."  So  the  apostle  Peter  :  "  Having  a  good 
conscience,  that  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you,  as  of 
evil-doers,  they  may  be  ashamed  tluit  falsely  accuse 
your  good  conversation  in  Christ."  Again,  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  :  "  Let  us  hold  fiist  the  profes- 
sion of  our  faith  without  wavering  (for  he  is  faithful 
that  promised)  ;  and  let  us  consider  one  another  to 
provoke  unto  love  and  to  good  works."  Our  blessed 
Lord  did  not  only  proclaim  his  mission  to  be  divine, 
but  proved  it  to  be  so  by  his  miraculous  works  of  heal 


OF  THANKFULNESS.  375 

ino-  and  life-giving  power.  All  those  works  were  sym- 
bolical of  his  gracious  works  in  the  salvation  of  souls 
from  death  and  sin.  His  miracles  of  healing  the  body 
ceased  when  their  purpose  was  accomplished  ;  but  the 
greater  miracles  of  renewing  and  sanctifying  the  hearts 
and  lives  of  sinners  will  continue  until  the  end  of  time 
to  prove  the  gospel  divine.  This  is  his  own  appointed 
method,  which  Christians  are  to  pursue  when  their 
sratitudc  for  the  love  which  Christ  has  shown  their  own 
souls  moves  them  to  win  the  impenitent  from  the  ways 
of  sin,  and  to  animate  the  flagging  zeal  of  their  fellow- 
Christians  in  their  Master's  honor.  This  is  a  most  sol- 
emn consideration  for  us,  who  profess  the  religion  of 
Christ.  We  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  practice  of 
others,  and  be  innocent.  Our  lives  should  be  constant 
testimonies  before  the  world  that  the  gospel  teaches  us 
to  do  justice,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with 
God.  Nay,  we  should  give  this  testimony  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  winning  others  to  glorify  our  God  in  a 
religious  life. 

Thus  have  we  learnt  that  true  faith  is  the  means  by 
which  the  grace  of  Christ  brings  sinners  to  repentance, 
and  fits  believers  through  a  godly  practice  on  earth  for 
the  holy  blessedness  of  heaven  ;  and  that  the  method 
by  which  faith  works  is  the  inclining  our  hearts  through 
a  grateful  love,  to  do  the  will,  and  seek  the  glory  of 
our  God  and  Saviour.  Therefore,  though  we  are  saved 
by  grace  alone,  wholly  on  account  of  Christ's  merits, 
and  though  our  own  works  have  no  merit  in  the  sight 
of  God,  we  must  still  do  good  works  to  prove  our 
thankfulness,  to  advance  our  Saviour's  praise,  to  assure 
ourselves  that  our  faith  is  genuine,  and  to  persuade  our 
fellow-men  to  seek  the  same  salvation,  and  glorify  God 
by  a  Christian  life. 


376  OF  THANKFULNESS.  Secondly  :  The  testimony  of  Scripture  that  none  who 
continue  in  wicked  lives  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

This,  though  very  properly  repeated  for  tlie  enforce- 
ment of  the  truth,  is  but  a  repetition  of  the  previous 
argument,  and  needs  no  demonstration  other  than  the 
direct  testimonies  of  Holy  Scripture.  No  religious 
opinion  can  be  sound  which  tolerates  a  wilful  persever- 
ance in  known  sin.  The  gospel  was  sent  to  turn  men 
from  wickedness  to  the  service  of  God,  and  the  heaven 
which  it  promises  is  holy  and  pure,  receiving  into  its 
blessedness  none  who  love  sin.  It  is  as  true  now  as  be- 
fore Christ  came,  that  "  the  wicked  shall  be  cast  into 
hell  with  all  the  nations  who  forget  God."  God  will 
have  mercy  upon  all  who  truly  rely  on  Christ  for  salva- 
tion, but  the  main  part  of  that  salvation  is  deliverance 
from  the  power  of  sin.  Therefore,  none  truly  rely 
upon  Christ,  or  trust  in  his  merc}^,  who  are  not  sin- 
cerely penitent,  and  who  do  not  earnestly  endeavor  by 
his  grace  to  follow  his  example. 

Beloved,  let  us  examine  ourselves  by  these  tests 
whether  we  be  in  Christ  or  not.  It  will  be  a  fearful 
thing  if,  after  professing  ourselves  Christians,  we  should 
fall  at  last,  because  of  our  neglects  or  our  vices,  into 
the  bitter  pains  of  eternal  death  ! 


LECTURE    XLI. 
THE  NATUEE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION. 

FIRST  LECTURE. 


THIRTY-THIRD  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE   NATURE   OF   TRUE   CONVERSION. 

(first   lecture.) 

Quest.  LXXXVIII.  Of  how  many  parts  doth  the  tru&  conversion  of  man 
consist  ? 

Axs.  Of  two  parts.  Of  the  mortification  of  the  old,  and  of  the  quiclien- 
ing  of  the  new  man. 

Quest.  LXXXIX.     What  is  the  mortification  of  tlie  old  man  ? 

Ans.  It  is  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart  that  we  have  provoked  God  by  our 
sins;  and  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from  them. 

Quest.  XC.     What  is  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  ? 

Axs.  It  is  a  sincere  joj'  of  heart  in  God,  through  Christ,  and  with  love 
and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  good  works. 

Quest.  XCI.     What  are  good  works  ? 

Ans.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  and  are  performed  ac- 
cording to  the  law  of  God  and  to  his  glory  ;  and  not  such  as  are 
founded  on  our  imaginations,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 

TN  our  lesson  for  the  last  Lord's  day  we  were  taught 
-*-  that  the  consequence  of  our  deliverance  from  misery 
by  the  grace  of  Christ  through  faith  is  our  doing  of  good 
works  as  the  fruits  of  a  lively  and  constraining  grati- 
tude, and,  therefore,  that  they  who  by  their  wilful 
continuance  in  wicked  lives  prove  their  not  having 
been  converted  unto  God,  can  have  from  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  no  true  hope  of  salvation.  It  follows, 
properly,  that  we  should  ascertain  what  time  conversion 
of  a  sinner  to  God  is,  or,  as  the  Catechism  has  it,  in 
what  true  conversion  consists, — the  knowledge  of  which 
will  discover  plainly  what  a  Christian  means  by  good 
works.  These  two  points  are  handled  in  the  lesson 
which  we  are  now  to  study. 


380         THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.      First  :  The  nature  of  true  conversion.  (88th,  89th, 
90th  Questions  and  Answers.) 

Secondly  :  The  nature  of  good  works.  (91st  Ques- 
tion and  Answer.) 

First  :   The  nature  of  true  conversion. 

I.  The  purpose  of  God  in  the  gospel  being  to  deliver 
"  his  people  from  the  power  "  as  well  as  the  guilt  "  of 
their  sins,"  there  must  be  wrought  in  all  those  who  are 
partakers  of  that  salvation,  a  radical  change  from  a  sin- 
ful to  a  holy  life.  This  transformation  will  be  complete 
in  the  fulness  of  the  redemption,  that  is,  when  the  be- 
liever is  taken  up  to  be  with  Christ,  his  Head  and  Fore- 
runner ;  but  on  earth  it  is  gradual,  though  surely  pro- 
gressive. This  process  we  commonly  call  sanctifica- 
tion.  There  must,  therefore,  be  a  beginning  of  this 
transformation  or  sanctification,  a  time  when  the  tide 
of  the  soul's  moral  life  is  turned  from  its  natural  ebb 
towards  eternal  death  and  flows  toward  heaven.  This 
act  of  change  we  call  conversion. 

Salvation  being  all  of  grace,  the  conversion  of  a  sin- 
ner from  sin  to  God's  service  must  be  from  a  sovereign, 
divine  power,  exerted  in  the  sinner's  soul,  changing  its 
principles  and  motives  of  conduct ;  but  as  the  operation 
of  grace  is  through  the  moral  faculties  of  free  agents, 
and  not  a  mere  force  impelling  us  against  our  will  and 
understanding,  the  sinner,  called  effectually  by  divine 
grace,  turns  himself  by  the  divine  strength  so  imparted 
to  him.  Conversion,  therefore,  is  indeed  accomplished 
by  the  grace  of  God,  but  it  is  also  the  act  of  the  sinner 
himself.  In  the  former  part  of  the  Catechism,  on  oiu' 
Deliverance,  we  found  conversion,  or  the  change  from 
the  old  to  the  new  man,  among  the  "  benefits"  which 
we  "  receive  from  the  death  and  sacrifice  of  Christ  on 


Lect.  XLI.J     THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.  381 

the  cross  ''  (Question  43d),  and  there  we  treated  of  it 
as  the  act  of  God.  This  conversion  of  the  sinner  by 
God  is  also  called  by  Scripture  regeneration,  or  the 
begetting  again  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with 
the  seed  of  the  word  (1  Peter  i.  23),  because  it  is  an 
imparting  of  a  new  moral  life  to  the  soul,  from  which 
holy  actings  will  proceed.  Sere  we  find  conversion 
among  the  evidences  of  our  thankfulness  to  God  for 
having  "  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness  and 
translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son." 
Hence,  we  are  now  to  consider  it  as  the  act  of  the 
sinner  under  the  influence  of  divine  grace. 

II.  The  Catechism  declares  this  true  conversion  to 
consist  in  two  parts.  1.  The  mortification  of  the  old 
man.     2.   The  quickening  of  the  new  man. 

Let  us,  before  proceeding  farther,  ascertain  the  mean- 
ing of  these  terms.  The  contrasted  expressions  "  old 
man  "  and  "  new  man  "  are  taken  from  Scripture.  The 
apostle  (Eph.  iv.  22-24)  says  :  "  That  ye  put  off  con- 
cerning the  former  conversation  [conduct]  the  old  man, 
which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,  and 
be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind ;  and  that  ye 
put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness"  [holiness  of  truth]. 
Man,  here,  is  put  for  our  moral  nature :  "  the  old  man," 
for  the  nature  we  are  born  with,  —  whence  it  is  also 
called  "  the  natural  man  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  14)  ;  "  the  new 
man,"  for  the  holy  nature,  which  we  derive  from  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  regeneration,  —  whence  it  is  also  called 
"  spiritual."  We  inherit  the  first  from  the  first  Adam  ; 
we  receive  the  second  by  faith  from  the  second  Adam, 
who  is  Christ.  "  Mortification  "  and  "  quickening  " 
are  also  scriptural  words.     Mortification  signifies,  liter- 


382  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.     ally,  slaying  or  putting  to  death,  and  hence,  metaphori- 
cally, deadening.  "  If  ye  through  the  spirit  do  mortify 
[^avttTovre]  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live"  (Rom. 
vii.  13).  "Mortify  [j/cK/jwo-arc],  therefore,  your  mem- 
bers Avhich  are  upon  the  earth  "  (Col.  iii.  5).  Quicken- 
ing is,  literally,  reviving,  or  making  alive  [^woTrotew],  and 
hence  may  have  the  metaphorical  sense  of  strengthen- 
ing, or  increasing,  life.  Strictly  speaking,  only  God  can 
kill  the  old  man,  or  revive  —  make  to  life  —  the  new 
man ;  yet  here,  and  in  close  accordance  with  Scripture, 
the  believer  has  a  personal  agency  in  mortifying  the 
one  and  quickening  the  other.  We  are  taught,  also, 
tliat  the  mortification  of  our  old  nature  and  the  quick- 
ening of  our  new  nature  are  carried  on  by  the  believer 
simultaneously  in  the  continuous  process  of  conversion, 
or  transformation  ;  which  shows,  that,  though  the  new 
life  is  implanted,  it  is  not  immediately,  or  without  resist- 
ance, perfectly  paramount  in  the  soul,  but  is  opposed 
and  hindered  by  our  old  nature,  not  yet  utterly  killed, 
though  it  has  had  its  death-blow.  Conversion,  there- 
fore, on  our  part,  is  a  struggle  or  conflict  which  the 
believer,  animated  by  the  grace  of  God  in  the  new  life, 
maintains  against  the  power  of  sin  "  which  still  remain- 
eth,  against  our  will,  in  us  ";  and  this  conflict,  though 
the  new  life  must  be  ultimately  victorious,  is  sharp  and 
often  with  various  alternations  or  vacillations  to  either 
side.  It  is  the  new  life  within  our  carnal  nature,  and, 
therefore,  opposed  and  impeded  by  the  lusts  and  infirm- 
ities of  our  fallen,  or  old  nature.  This  the  apostle 
describes  (Rom.  vii.  19-25)  :  "  The  good  that  I  would 
I  do  not ;  but  the  evil  which  I  Avould  not,  that  I  do. 
Now,  if  I  do  that  I  would  not,  it  is  no  more  I  that  do 
it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.     I  find  then  a  law  [a 


the  nature  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.  383 

principle]  that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present 
with  me.  For  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the 
inward  man  ;  but  I  see  anotlier  law  in  my  members, 
warrin<T  acainst  the  law  of  my  mind  and  brinmnn;  me 
into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  mem- 
bers. O  wretched  man  that  I  am !  Who  shall  deliver 
me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  I  thank  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  So,  then,  with  the  mind  I  my- 
self serve  the  law  of  God,  but  with  the  flesh  the  law  of 
sin."     We  are  now  prepared  to  inquire, 

1.  What  is  the  mortification  of  the  old  man  ?  "  It 
is  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  provoked 
God  by  our  sins  ;  and  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee 
from  them." 

a.  "  A  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  pro- 
voked God  by  our  sins."  It  is  the  believer  who  has 
this  sorrow.  Though  he  is  now  forgiven,  and  is  enjoy- 
ing the  favor  of  God  here,  and  the  hope  of  eternal 
blessedness  hereafter,  he  is  for  that  very  reason  more 
sorrowful  on  account  of  his  offences  against  God.  He 
mourns  his  past  sins  and  his  present  failures,  not  be- 
cause he  dreads,  like  a  slave,  the  punishment  he  de- 
serves and  cannot  escape  from,  but  because  he  has  done 
such  grievous  wrong  against  the  holy  God,  who  is  so 
kind  and  merciful  to  his  soul  in  Christ  Jesus.  He 
acknowledges  his  desert  of  hell,  and  shudders  at  the 
terrible  danger  he  hopes  to  escape,  but  he  rather  sees 
in  the  agonies  of  the  eternal  death  the  infinite  proof  of 
God's  condemnation  of  such  sins  as  he  has  committed, 
—  the  estimate  God  has  of  its  abominable  evil.  He 
trusts  for  mercy  through  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
the  ground  of  his  atonement  (or  reconciliation)  to  God ; 
but  the  infinite  means  provided,  because  necessary  for 


384  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.     his  redemption  in  the  humihation,  painful  obedience, 
and  more  painful  sufferings  of  Christ  the  Son  of  God 
incarnate,  convinces  him  yet  more  of  the  guilt  of  all 
sin,  while  they  increase  immeasurably  his  love  for  the 
God  he  has  offended,  and,  therefore,  his  sorrow  of  heart 
for  his  great  sins  against  his  heavenly  Father  and  best 
friend.  The  holiness  of  God  condemns  him,  the  right- 
eousness of  God's  law  condemns  him,  as  very  wicked 
and  degraded  ;  but  the  love  of  God  and  his  unspeak- 
able mercy  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  deep  humiliation  and 
bitter  sufferings  of  his  Saviour,  the  long-suffering,  pa- 
tience, and  successful  perseverance  of  the  Holy  Gliost 
in  bringing  him,  notwithstanding  his  obstinate,  rebel- 
lious resistance,  into  salvation,  —  the  consideration  of 
these,  I  say,  show  him,  in  yet  darker  colors,  his  ex- 
treme baseness  and  utter  inexcusableness.  He  sees 
that  it  was  his  sin,  with  that  of  others  like  himself, 
which  brought  the  dreadful  Avrath  of  God  upon  Christ, 
his  surety  ;  that  all  his  healing  comes  from  the  stripes 
which  Christ  bore  in  his  stead,  and  all  his  hope  of  life 
from  the  exquisite  agonies  of  his  incarnate  Lord  dying 
the  death  man  deserved  to  die.  Therefore,  when  with 
true  faith  he  looks  upon  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  and  sees 
in  his  Lord's  glorified  body  the  scars  of  the  crucifixion, 
he  remembers  all  that  Jesus  suffered  because  of  his 
guilt,  and  he  mourns  and  reproaches  himself  for  all  his 
sins.  He  sees,  also,  the  great  pains  the  blessed  Spirit 
has  taken  for  his  conversion,  in  giving  him  the  Holy 
Scripture,  and  all  the  other  means  of  grace,  with  oppor- 
tunities of  repentance ;  in  pursuing  him  by  arguments 
and  warnings  and  invitations  and  promises  ;  in  pressing 
the  truth  closely  home  upon  his  understanding  and 
heart  and  conscience  ;  in  forcing,  as  it  were,  liis  wav 


lect.xll]    the  nature  of  true  conveksiox.        385 

into  ]iis  soul,  enlightening  his  mind,  turning  his  affec- 
tions, and  graciously  overpowering  his  will,  and  now 
bringing  him  to  repentance  and  dwelling  within  him,  to 
move  and  strengthen  him  unto  those  good  works  which 
are  the  grateful  evidences  of  his  faith  in  Christ ;  and, 
therefore,  he  sees  the  enormous  wickedness  of  those  sins 
of  his  which  insulted  and  grieved  and  wounded  the  Holy 
Spirit  at  the  very  time  the  Holy  Comforter  was  striv- 
ing to  save  him ;  the  opportunities  he  despitefully  mis- 
improved  ;  the  obstinate  resistances  he  made  ;  the  wilful 
breaking;  through  of  restraints  which  he  was  so  often 
guilty  of;  and,  even  now,  the  feeble  zeal  of  his  renewed 
mind  in  seconding  and  carrying  out  to  practice  the  re- 
ligious purposes  that  grace  has  inspired  him  with.  There 
is,  thus,  not  a  doctrine  or  fact  or  incident  of  the  salvation 
he  believes  to  be  his,  which  does  not  enhance  his  sorrow 
for  sin.  This  is  the  sorrow  which  is  the  sign  of  true  con- 
version, —  the  sorrow  for  sins  which  springs  from  an 
apprehension  (or  trustful  belief)  of  the  mercy  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Such 
sorrow  as  springs  only  from  a  fear  of  God's  Avrath  on 
account  of  our  sins,  though  it  may  mingle  with  more 
gracious  motives  to  hate  sin,  is  no  proof  of  genuine 
repentance,  because  it  is  wholly  selfish,  and  does  not 
bring  us  back  to  the  love  of  God.  It  is  not  necessarily 
sinful,  nay,  as  we  have  said,  it  may  aid  in  moving  the 
sinner  to  repentance,  but  in  itself  it  is  no  proof  of  our 
conversion,  and  in  the  absence  of  reliance  upon  Christ 
it  is  the  reverse,  —  a  sorrow  that  worketh  death,  be- 
cause there  is  no  submission  of  the  heart  to  God.  But 
the  sorrow  which  comes  from  faith  in  Christ's  love 
kills  in  the  heart  our  enmity  to  God,  and  bows  us  at  the 
feet  of  God,  weeping  yet  loving  children. 
VOL.  n.  25 


386  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.    h.  We  learn  tliat  this  sorrow  is  not  a  mere  senti- 
ment or  emotion,  a  thing  of  sighs  and  tears  and  regrets, 
but  that  it  operates  as  an  energetic  principle,  making  us 
"  hate  "  all  sin,  and  resolutely  "  to  flee  from  it."  How- 
can  they  who  have  seen  how  odious  sin  is  in  God's 
sight,  continue  to  offend  him  by  wilfully  committing  it? 
How  can  they  who  have  seen  what  their  sins  brought 
upon  Christ,  inflict  fresh  wounds  on  his  love,  and  before 
the  world  "  crucify,  as  it  were,  the  Son  of  God  afresh 
and  put  him  to  an  open  shame  "  ?  How  can  they  who 
have  seen  that  sin  is  a  direct  insult  and  resistance  and 
grievance  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  gracious  work  upon 
our  hearts,  throw  fresh  injuries  and  obstacles  in  his 
merciful  and  sanctifying  way  ?  The  believer,  there- 
fore, will  turn  from  sins  with  abhorrence,  he  will  hate 
them,  he  will  resist  temptation  to  them,  he  will  fly 
from  them  as  from  disgusting,  guilty,  perilous  enemies 
to  God  and  his  soul.  The  more  he  learns  of  God  in 
Christ,  the  more  he  enjoys  the  comforts  of  his  religion, 
the  more  will  he  hate  sin  and  fly  from  it.  Day  by  day, 
as  his  faith  strengthens,  will  he  "  mortifv  "  "'  the  old 
man,"  and  show  his  gratitude  to  God  in  Christ  by 
hating  all  that  God  hates,  and  avoiding  all  that  God 
has  forbidden. 

2.  The  quickening  of  the  new  man. 

"  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ, 
and  with  love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will 
of  God  in  all  rrood  works." 

a.  A  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ. 

If  any,  hearing  us  discourse  of  the  sorrow  and  self- 
condemnations  and  painful  strugglings,  temptations 
within  and  without  us,  which  accompany  repentance, 
suppose  that  conversion  to  God  is  only  a  melancholy 


the  nature  OF  TRUE   CONVERSION.  387 

and  grievous  temper,  clouding  oiu'  life  in  gloom,  and 
making  our  religious  practice  an  afflictive  penance, 
they  need  farther  teaching  in  the  blessed  experience  of 
a  believing  soul.  As  the  "old  man  "  and  the  "new 
man  "  are,  so  long  as  our  Christian  hfe  is  in  the  mortal 
body  of  sin,  struggling  for  the  mastery,  and  the  old 
man,  our  worse  self,  must  be  resolutely  "  mortified," 
we  must  feel  the  anguish  and  ao;onies  of  a  death,  an 
execution,  or,  as  the  Scripture  more  emphatically  calls 
it,  a  crucifixion  of  our  natural  tendencies  and  desires. 
Therefore  hate,  a  very  strong  passion,  is  sent  to  our  aid, 
that  we  may  set  ourselves  on  our  wickedness  with  the 
ardor  of  a  combatant,  who  minds  not  his  own  sufferings 
in  his  determination  to  inflict  death  on  his  foe.  But 
hate  is  not  enough  to  bear  us  victoriously  through. 
There  is  a  stronger  passion  yet,  —  the  power  most  preva- 
lent and  impelling  in  God  or  man,  —  love,  which  sheds 
through  the  faculties  and  affections  of  the  human  soul 
a  delicious  ardor,  absorbing  the  whole  nature  to  one 
purpose,  and  concentrating  all  its  forces  on  one  enter- 
prise. Faith  is  strong,  hope  is  stronger,  but  love  is 
strongest  in  all  the  operations  of  the  Christian  life.  It 
is  the  superlative  of  the  three  degrees  of  heavenly 
grace,  the  acme  of  the  climax  by  which  we  ascend  to 
God.  Hence,  in  this  most  difficult  work  of  our  con- 
version, love  alone  is  equal  by  divine  grace  to  its  ac- 
complislnnent,  and  has  the  largest  share  in  the  process. 
God,  from  whom  comes  the  divine  life  which  assimi- 
lates us  to  himself,  is  love ;  and  love  to  God  is  so  iden- 
tified with  the  new  life,  that  we  cannot  distinguish  it 
from  the  life  itself.  It  can  be  engendered,  quickened, 
nurtured,  perfected  only  by  love.  It  is  the  love  of  God 
in  Christ  which  awakens   love  in  our  hearts.     "  Wo 


388  THE  NATUKE  OF   TRUE  CONVERSION.     love  him  because  lie  first  loved  us."'  "  The  love  of 
Christ  constrainetli  us  .  .  .  to  live  not  unto  ourselves 
but  unto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again."  It  is 
the  perception,  the  persuasion,  the  apprehension,  the 
bringing  home  to  himself  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ, 
which  transforms  the  believer  by  an  all-pervading  en- 
ergy, thrilling,  subduing,  exciting  all  his  senses  into  a 
willing,  happy,  obedient  creature  of  Christ's  will.  As 
in  his  life-giving  miracle  the  prophet  stretched  himself 
on  the  body  of  the  child,  so  does  Christ  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  in  regenerating  love,  closely  embrace  the  soul  of 
his  choice,  warming  it  with  his  own  divine  warmth, 
breathing  into  it  his  own  divine  breath,  until  it  returns 
the  glow,  the  breath,  the  clinging  embrace,  and  rises 
with  him  a  new  creature,  conscious  of  eternal  life. 

The  first  effect  of  this  love  of  God,  through  fiuth  in 
Christ,  is  joy  :  joy,  that  we  possess  Christ  as  our  own ; 
joy  in  the  great  love  he  shows  to  us ;  joy  in  the  delight- 
ful love  wo  bear  towards  him  ;  joy  in  the  beauty  of  his 
holiness ;  joy  that  we  may  partake  of  that  highest 
beauty  ;  joy  in  our  deliverance  from  the  displeasure  of 
him  whose  love  is  our  greatest  happiness  ;  joy  in  the 
assured  hope  of  a  perfect,  eternal  consummation  of 
such  transcendent  bliss  ;  joy,  that  he  will  accept  any 
returns  of  our  gratitude  ;  joy,  that  he  enables  us  to 
make  those  returns  by  our  own  powers,  poor  in  them- 
selves, but  vigorous  from  his  im})arted  grace  ;  joy,  that 
we  may  give  up  our  whole  lives,  all  we  are,  all  we 
have,  now  and  forever,  to  "  him  whom  "  our  "  soul 
loveth." 

Christian  joy,  joy  springing  from  such  a  source,  must 
be  more  than  a  lively  passion  or  a  rapturous  sentiment. 
It  inspires  the  soul  with  a  divine  energy,  and  gives  a 


the  nature  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.     389 

tone  of  vigorous  health  to  all  its  faculties.  "  The  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength,"  saith  the  Holy  Ghost  by 
the  prophet  to  Israel.  Therefore  the  Catechism,  in  its 
definition  of  conversion  :  "  With  love  and  delight  to 
live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  G;ood  works." 
The  believer,  rejoicing  over  his  deliverance,  is  filled  with 
gratitude  to  his  deliverer,  and  ardently  gives  himself 
up  to  God's  service.  His  inquiry  is,  What  can  I  do  to 
please  him,  my  Father,  my  Saviour,  my  Sanctifier  ?  It 
is  now  his  delight  to  obey  the  divine  will.  His  heart 
is  turned  from  sin  because  it  provokes  God  ;  he  hates 
it  and  would  fly  from  it.  So  when  he  discovers  what 
God's  law  requires,  he  not  only  assents  to  its  require- 
ments, but  rejoices  in  them,  and  delights  to  do  what  he 
loves  for  the  sake  of  him  whom  he  loves.  Far  from 
considering  those  commandments  grievous,  they  are  to 
him  a  perfect  law  of  liberty,  for  he  delights  in  the  law 
of  God  after  the  inward  man  ;  and  as  he  feels  the  new 
life  and  love  and  joy  in  God  through  Christ  filling  and 
animating  his  soul,  he  gladly  gives  all  his  strength  to 
every  good  work  which  Providence  lays  to  his  hand. 
It  is  no  longer  a  spirit  of  bondage,  making  him  a  reluc- 
tant servant  through  fear  of  wrath,  but  the  cheerful, 
earnest  obedience  of  a  child  loving  his  Father,  God, 
and  loving  the  work  his  Father  gives  him,  that  he  may 
become  more  and  more  like  Christ,  with  whom  the 
Father  is  well  pleased,  and  through  whom  the  Father 
is  well  pleased  with  all  who  endeavor  to  follow  in  his 
steps. 

Such  is  the  nature  of  true  conversion. 

1.  It  is  accompanied  by  strong  emotions,  —  sorrow. 
and  joy,  and  hate,  and  love,  anguish  and  delight.  Yet 
it  is  a  fatal  mistake  that  mere  excitement  of  feeling, 


390  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.     [Lecf.  XLI. 

even  though  it  be  about  religious  things,  is  a  proof  of 
conversion.  Rehgion  does  not  lie  in  heats  of  devotion 
or  exaggerated  passion.  The  heathen  are  so  excited  in 
their  idolatries,  as  were  the  Israelites  before  the  golden 
calf.  We  must  carefully  examine  whence  these  feelings 
come  :  whether  they  spring  from  our  having  offended 
God  or  not ;  whether  from  joy  in  God  or  not ;  whether 
our  hearts  are  converted  from  sin  to  the  service  of  God 
or  not. 

2.  We  have  described  the  converted  heart  under 
strong  terms,  setting  it  forth  in  the  manner  which, 
were  grace  perfect  in  us,  it  would  manifest  itself.  Still 
we  must  not  despair  of  God's  mercy,  or  doubt  his  re- 
newino;  grace,  if  we  come  far  short  of  these  high  sensi- 
bilities  and  of  the  holy  practice  which  the  law  of  God 
requires.  Conversion  is  a  change  begun,  it  is  true,  in 
regeneration,  but  not  consummated  until  the  believer 
enters  into  heaven.  He  hates  sin  and  flees  from  it  more 
and  more  ;  he  loves  God  and  delights  to  do  the  will  of 
God  in  good  works.  Yet  the  corruption  is  still  within 
him,  though  against  his  will ;  and  grace  is  still  in  conflict 
with  the  corruption.  Nay,  the  conflict  rouses  the  cor- 
ruption to  a  desperate  resistance.  Before,  his  eyes  were 
blinded,  his  conscience  inert ;  he  did  not  see  or  feel  the 
vileness  and  misery  of  sin,  and  knew  not  how  great  a 
sinner  he  was.  Now,  his  sense  of  sin  is  keen.  He 
compares  himself  with  the  law  of  God,  the  claims  of 
God's  love  on  his  heart ;  and  in  proportion  as  he  desires 
and  endeavors  to  obey,  he  discovers,  to  his  shame  and 
grief,  his  evilness  of  heart,  his  shortcomings,  his  fail- 
ures, his  lapses.  He  mourns  that  he  hates  sin  so  little ; 
that  he  loves  God  in  Christ  so  little  ;  tliat  he  sins  so 
often ;  that  he  does  so  few  good  works,  and  those  so 


TPIE  nature  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.  391 

feebly.  But  the  very  sharpness  of  the  conflict  proves 
the  activity  of  grace  ;  and  while  he  suffers  that  his  spir- 
itual life  is  so  weak,  he  should  thank  God  Avith  joy  that 
he  is  no  longer  dead.  It  is  a  great  change  which  only 
the  grace  of  God  could  work,  that  the  current  of  his 
life  has  been  turned  from  love  of  sin  to  love  of  holiness, 
from  enmity  against  God  to  delight  in  the  way  of  God's 
commandments. 

3.  Hence  the  main  and  only  sufficient  evidence  of 
our  conversion  lies  in  our  principles.  If  the  old  man 
reigns  over  us,  and  we  yield  our  desires  and  our  affec- 
tions and  our  acts  to  its  corrupt  will,  we  are  yet  dead 
in  our  sins  ;  but  if  the  new  man  be  established  in  our 
hearts,  and  we  yield  to  its  godly  will  our  desires  and 
affections  and  acts,  sincerely  endeavoring  after  new 
obedience,  we  are  children  of  grace.  This  is  what  our 
church  says  in  her  office  for  the  holy  communion,  which 
is  the  profession  and  covenant  of  our  faith  in  Christ : 
"  We  do  not  come  to  the  supper  to  testify  thereby  that 
we  are  perfect  and  righteous  in  ourselves  ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  considering  that  we  seek  our  life  out  of  our- 
selves in  Christ,  we  acknowledge  that  we  lie  in  the 
midst  of  death.  Therefore,  notwithstanding  we  feel 
many  infirmities  and  miseries  in  ourselves,  as  namely, 
that  we  have  not  perfect  faith,  and  do  not  give  ourselves 
to  serve  God  with  that  zeal  as  we  are  bound,  and  have 
daily  to  strive  with  the  weakness  of  our  faith  and  the 
evil  lusts  of  our  flesh,  yet,  since  we  are,  by  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  sorry  for  these  weaknesses,  and 
earnestly  desirous  to  fight  against  our  unbelief,  and  to 
live  according  to  all  the  commandments  of  God,  there- 
fore we  rest  assured  that  no  sin  or  infirmity,  which  still 
remaineth  against  our  will  in  us,  can  hinder  us  from 


392  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUE  CONVERSION.     being  received  of  God  in  mercy,  and  from  being  made 
worthy  partakers  of  the  heavenly  meat  and  drink." 

Lastly :  We  see  how  vain  are  all  endeavors  after 
repentance  before  faith  in  Christ.  It  is  only  the  love 
of  God  in  Christ  that  can  change  the  enmity  of  our 
hearts  to  love.  It  is  only  our  love  to  God  in  Christ 
that  can  constrain  us  to  live  not  unto  ourselves  but  unto 
him.  Therefore,  the  contemplation  of  God's  love  to 
us  in  Christ  is  the  grand  means  of  cultivating  our  re- 
pentance and  accomplisliing  our  conversion.  It  is  as 
we  look  up  to  our  crucified  Forerunner  on  his  throne, 
that  the  lio-ht  of  heaven  streams  down  on  our  souls, 
and  the  attraction  of  God's  holy  love  overcomes  the 
attraction  of  earth  and  sin.  Look  to  Jesus,  your 
Saviour ;  believe  in  him  and  hope  in  his  promise ;  then 
shall  you  run  with  patience  the  race  set  before  you, 
and  at  last  come  to  perfect  rest,  in  the  perfect  enjoy- 
ment of  his  love.