LECTURE  XLI. 
THE   NATURE    OF    TRUE   CONVERSION  ....      377

LECTURE     XLII. 
THE   NATUEE   OF   GOOD   WOEKS. 

SECOND  LECTURE. 


THIRTY-THIRD  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

(second  lecture.) 

Qdest.  XCI.    But  what  are  good  worTcs  ^ 

Ans.    Only  those  which  proceed  from  true  faith,  are  performed  according 

to  the  law  of  God  and  to  his  glory;  and  not  such  as  are  founded  on 

our  imaginations,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 

CLEAR  and  sufficient  as  this  definition  must  be  to 
the  evangelical  believer,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that 
the  subject  involves  radical  questions  of  moral  philoso- 
phy which  have  engaged  the  greatest  and  keenest  minds 
from  the  beginning  of  inquiry  to  the  present  day.  The 
results  of  these  long,  large,  and  able  discussions  have 
not  been  satisfactory,  for  the  war  of  opinions  is  as  vigor- 
ous as  ever.  It  does  not  consist  with  our  purpose  to 
occupy  ourselves  at  any  length  with  controversies  which 
have  lasted  for  more  than  two  thousand  years,  while  it 
Avould  be  the  extreme  of  presumption  to  attempt  a 
settlement  of  them  except  from  the  plain  teaching  of 
Holy  Scripture  ;  yet  a  slight  notice  of  the  more  impor- 
tant points  in  dispute  is  desirable  for  our  future  exposi- 
tions of  the  matter  before  us,  and  also  to  show  how 
impossible  it  is,  without  the  wisdom  from  on  high,  to 
find  the  path  of  truth  and  virtue. 

What  is  right  ?  This  question  meets  us  at  the  very 
outset  of  moral  investigation.  All  are  practically 
agreed,  however  they  may  differ  in  terms  or  modes  of 


396  THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.      statement,  that  the  doing  of  right  is  our  highest  duty 
and  best  wisdom.  But  what  is  right  ?  or  (for  it 
amounts  to  the  same  thing),  how  shall  we  know 
what  is  right  ?  From  this  point  the  leaders  of  opin- 
ion, with  their  several  schools,  Avidely  diverge. 

Right  is  a  figurative  term,  synonymous  with  straight. 
But  to  ascertain  whether  or  not  our  conduct  is  right  or 
straight,  we  must  have  an  undoubted,  infallible,  attain- 
able rule  by  which  to  try  it.  Now,  by  what  rule  shall 
we  try  our  moral  acts  ?  Some  say,  the  rule  is  in  our 
own  souls.  We  are  so  constituted  that  the  soul  distin- 
guishes right  from  wrong  as  necessarily  and  naturally 
as  the  eye  perceives  proportion  or  the  ear  harmony. 
Hence  they  give  to  what  Ave  ordinarily  call  conscience 
the  name  of  moral  sense.  But,  passing  over  some 
grave  difficulties  in  this  scheme,  (as  the  imperfection 
of  our  moral  nature  which  renders  the  judgment  of 
our  consciences  untrustworthy,  and  the  manifest  fact 
of  a  diversity  in  the  moral  decisions  of  men,)  we  ask, 
if  we  be  so  constituted  as  to  discern  right  and  wrong, 
Who  gave  us  this  most  eminent  of  all  faculties  ?  and, 
as  the  answer  must  be,  God,  we  ask  again.  By  what 
standard  has  he  reojulated  all  the  consciences  of  men  ? 
Should  we  be  answered.  The  fitness  of  things,  (or  the 
order  of  that  constitution  of  things  of  which  we  form 
a  part,)  the  difficulty  is  only  moA^ed  a  step  farther  back  ; 
for  besides  the  impossibility  of  so  comparing  the  innu- 
merable parts  of  such  a  vast  and  complicated  system 
as  to  ascertain  what  the  fitness  of  things  requires  of  us, 
we  are  forced  to  ask  ao;ain,  According  to  what  rule  did 
the  Creator  organize  this  constitution  in  which  he  has 
placed  us  ?  We,  therefore,  come  inevitably  to  the 
question    which   has  long   been  agitated  by  profound 


Lkct.  XLII.]      the  nature  OF  GOOD   WORKS.  397 

thinkers  :  whether  right  and  wrong  are  determined  by 
the  simple  will  of  God,  or  by  an  eternal  rule  antece- 
dent to  and  independent  of  the  will  of  God  ? 

It  would  be  more  curious  than  profitable  to  relate 
the  many  extravagant  and  even  ridiculous  arguments 
and  suppositions  advanced  by  the  disputants  on  both 
sides,  especially  during  the  three  centuries  after  the 
middle  of  the  loth,  when  the  two  schools  of  Thomas 
Aquinas  and  Dun  Scotus  (Erlgena)  convulsed  the  re- 
ligious world  of  Europe  with  their  subtle  polemics.  The 
Thomists  held  with  Aquinas,  who,  though  a  champion 
of  the  Augustinian  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Sovereignty, 
taught  that  God  always  wills  right,  but  that  he  wills  it 
because  it  is  right,  and  that  it  is  not  right  solely  because 
he  wills  it.  Hence  they  assumed  the  name  of  Realists : 
intimating  that  they  held  to  a  real,  not  an  arbitrary 
distinction  between  right  and  wrong.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Scotists  held  that  what  God  wills  is  right, 
simply  because  he  wills  it,  and  that  had  he  commanded 
the  opposite,  wdiich  is  now  wrong,  it  would  have  been 
right,  and  that  which  is  now  right  would  have  been 
wrong.  Hence  they  were  called  Nominalists^  because 
they  held  that  right  was  right,  and  wrong  wrong  only 
because  God  declared  them  so  to  be,  and  not  from  any 
original  quality  in  either  of  them. 

A  modest  searcher  after  divine  truth,  not  intoxicated 
by  metaphysical  subtleties,  shrinks  from  adopting  either 
extreme.  In  the  first  place,  though  the  terms  antece- 
dent and  independent  are  used  only  in  a  logical  sense, 
we  are  shocked  by  the  doctrine  that  anything  in  mor- 
als is  before  God,  or  independent  of  him  in  any  sense : 
which  would  be,  in  effect,  reviving  the  heathen  doc- 
trine of  fate    controlling  the    divinity.     Then,  again, 


398  THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.       H. 

Ave  are  as  much  sliocketl  by  the  bare  supposition  that 
God's  determination  of  right  and  wrong  is  merely 
arbitrary,  so  arbitrary  that  he  might  have  ordained  the 
reverse.  Let  us  see  if  there  be  not  a  wa,y  of  satisfying 
ourselves  more  in  accordance  with  our  reverence  for 
the  God  of  the  Bible. 

The  will  of  God  flows  from  his  divine  nature,  which 
is  self-existent,  eternal,  and  infinitely  perfect.  This 
infinite  perfection  implies  perfect  consistency  in  all  the 
divine  thoughts,  purposes,  and  acts.  For  if  any  one  of 
these  were  contrary  to,  or  discordant  Avith,  any  one 
other,  he  would  not  be  perfect,  because  one  or  the  other 
of  the  differings  would  be  an  imperfection.  Thus  we 
should  place  the  eternal  rule  of  right  not  in  any  mere 
arbitrary  will  of  God,  because  his  nature  being  infi- 
nitely, therefore  unchangeably  perfect,  his  will  must 
be  in  accordance  with  his  nature.  Therefore  the  eter- 
nal law  of  right  can  be  found  only  in  the  self-caused 
nature  of  God,  or,  in  other  words,  the  entire  consist- 
ency of  God  with  himself  Thus,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  will  of  God  in  determining  right  is  not  arbitrary 
because  it  is  consistent  with  his  infinite  nature  ;  and  on 
the  other  hand,  right  is  not  antecedent  to  or  indepen- 
dent on  God,  because  he  is  self-existent  and  eternal. 
The  holiness  of  a  moral  creature  is  his  conformity  to 
the  divine  character  so  far  as  a  finite  being  can  resem- 
ble the  infinite  ;  the  holiness  of  God  is  his  infinitely 
perfect  consistency  with  himself.  If  this  view  cannot 
resolve  the  difficulty  of  the  schoolmen,  it  will,  at  least, 
relieve  the  mind  of  the  child-like  Christian  who  can 
submit  himself  only  to  God.  To  repeat  what  we  said 
in  the  beginning,  we  must  have  a  rule  by  which  to  tiy 
our  moral  conduct ;  and  that  rule  must  be  ascertained, 


THE  NATURE  OF   GOOD   WORKS.  399 

simple,  and  infallible.  We  cannot  delay  our  acts  until 
we  satisfy  ourselves  respecting  the  conclusions  of  general 
conscience,  or  the  fitness  of  things  ;  nor  from  what  we 
have  seen  of  men's  differences  in  sentiment  and  opinion, 
could  we  ever  come  to  an  undoubted  conclusion.  When 
the  most  learned  and  ingenious  disagree  so  widely,  the 
great  mass  of  mankind  cannot  be  expected  to  distin- 
guish between  right  and  wrong.  But  when  we  take 
the  law  of  God  for  our  standard,  Ave  conform  ourselves 
to  the  infinitely  wise  Avill  of  him  who  has  made  us  and 
all  things,  thereby  placing  us  in  relations  to  a  system 
so  harmonious  and  settled  that  any  violation  of  his  law 
would  be  a  violation  of  fitness,  and  any  violation  of  fit- 
ness a  violation  of  his  law.  We  must  go  farther.  It 
is  not  enough  that  we  conform  ourselves  to  the  law  of 
God,  but  we  must  take  it  as  our  rule,  because  it  is  the 
law  of  God.  In  other  words,  we  must  obey,  not  the 
law,  but  God  from  whom  the  law  proceeds.  Our  duty 
is  to  God  ;  his  law  is  the  rule  which  he  has  prescribed 
for  the  rendering  of  our  duty.  It  is  incorrect  to  speak 
of  our  obligation  to  right,  or  of  duty  to  law.  Right 
and  law  respect  the  I'elations  of  moral  beings,  but  are 
not  themselves  moral  beings,  and,  therefore,  cannot 
themselves  be  objects  of  duty.  That  goes  beyond  or 
through  the  law  to  the  being  or  beings  with  whom  we 
are  in  relation.  This  is  clearly  shown  by  the  scriptural 
fact  that  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  by  the 
summary  of  the  law  in  supreme  love  to  God  and  love 
to  our  neighbor  as  ourselves.  Such  an  affection  cannot 
be  rendered  to  a  law,  or  a  principle,  but  can  be  given 
only  to  another  conscious  moral  being.  We  cannot 
keep  the  law  of  God  without  supreme  love  to  him,  and 


400  THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.     therefore  our  obedience  is  due  to  God  wlio  ordained  the 
law,  not  to  the  law  itself.  It  is,  therefore,  most  unphil- 
osophical  to  attempt  a  transference  of  our  obedience 
from  the  will  of  God  to  a  mere  principle  or  rule,  —  an 
error  they  commit  who  would  place  our  rule  of  right 
elsewhere  than  in  the  divine  will.  To  tell  me  that  I 
must  do  right  simply  because  it  is  right,  and  not  be- 
cause it  is  the  will  of  God,  is  to  say  that  God  should 
have  no  place  in  morals.  It  is  true  that  God  rewards 
those  who  do  right,  and  punishes  those  who  do  wrong  ; 
but  to  put  my  obligation  on  that  principle  is  to  make 
God  only  a  judge  and  an  executioner.  No  ;  I  must  do 
right  and  avoid  wrong,  because  I  love  him  and  it  is  his 
will  that  I  should  so  order  my  conduct.  Hence  the 
Christian  considers  God  to  be  the  only  object  of  all 
duty,  our  so-called  duties  to  ourselves  or  our  fellow- 
creatures  being  covered  by  our  duty  to  him,  because  he 
has  enjoined  them  upon  us. 

The  ground  of  our  duty  to  God  is  the  fact  that  he  is 
our  Creator  and  the  Creator  of  all  things.  All  our 
faculties  of  soul  and  body  were  by  him  brought  into 
existence  out  of  nothing,  and  are  by  him  maintained  in 
existence.  He,  therefore,  owns  us  and  has  a  right  to 
our  entire  service.  As  the  Creator  he  is  the  Governor, 
Legislator,  and  Judge  ;  every  attribute  of  sovereignty 
is  included  by  his  creatorship.  Our  sense  of  obligation 
should  be  vastly  enhanced  by  his  infinite  wisdom  and 
goodness  and  holy  excellence,  and,  above  all,  by  the  re- 
demption in  Christ  Jesus  ;  nay,  it  is  by  the  exercise  of 
these  adorable  attributes  that  our  love  to  him  is  drawn 
out ;  but,  nevertheless,  the  original  basis  of  our  moral 
obligation  is  our  being  his  creatures.     Does  any  one 


the  nature  OF  GOOD  WORKS.  401 

ask  nie  liere,  If  God  -were  other  than  good  or  holy, 
should  I  be  bound  to  love  him  ?  or,  if  he  commanded 
me  to  do  anything  contrary  to  right,  should  I  feel  my- 
self bound  to  obey  him  ?  I  reply  that  such  questions 
are  profane  absurdities.  I  cannot  conceive  of  God 
without  infinitely  perfect  attributes.  They  are  essen- 
tial to  my  idea  of  God.  Without  them  the  imaginary 
being  you  talk  of  would  not  be  God.  I  cannot  consent, 
even  in  supposition,  to  put  my  God  out  of  existence. 
I  can  have  no  knowledge,  no  thought,  no  being,  except 
from  my  Creator.  To  him  I  belong  ;  therefore  is  his 
law  the  rule  of  my  life.  He  is  infinitely  excellent ;  I 
only  know  of  excellence  but  from  him.  He  is  my 
Father,  my  Saviour,  my  Sanctifier,  my  all ;  therefore 
do  I  love  him,  and  am  conscious  that  it  is  my  duty  to 
make  his  will  my  own. 

These  considerations,  though  perhaps  more  abstruse, 
and  apparently  more  abstract  than  those  which  are  or- 
dinarily brought  before  you,  are  far  from  unprofitable. 
On  a  correct  understandino;  of  the  ffreat  truth  of  our 
obligation  to  God  alone  depend  our  correctness  of  be- 
lief in  many  consequent  doctrines ;  and  if  we  have 
grace  to  hold  it  fast,  it  will  be  a  clue  to  guide  us  out  of 
many  a  labyrinth  where  we  should  otherwise  wander 
"  in  '  wildering  mazes  lost.'  '•  If  God  be  wrong,  who 
shall  tell  us  what  is  right  ?  If  God  be  right,  what 
need  of  conjecture  ?  We  believe  in  God,  and  are  not 
at  liberty  to  make  any  question  as  to  what  is  right 
or  what  is  wrong  from  our  own  reason,  but  only  to 
ascertain  what  he  determines,  and  has  declared  by  his 
law  to  be  right  or  wrong.     There  alone  can  we  rest. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  exposition  of  the  Catechism 
itself.    The  answer  to  the  91st  Question  defines  "  good 

VOL.  II.  26 


402  THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.     works  "  to  be  "  only  those  wliicli  proceed  from  true 
faith  [and]  are  performed  according  to  the  h\w  of  God 
and  to  his  glory,  and  not  such  as  are  founded  on  our 
imaginations  or  the  institutions  of  men." 

1.  It  must  be  remembered  that  tliis  definition  occurs 
in  an  account  of  the  new  or  converted  man  ;  and, 
therefore,  that  the  phrase  "  good  works  "  is  used  not 
in  an  absolute,  but  in  the  evangelical  sense.  To  us  sin- 
ners, who  are  acceptable  to  God  only  through  the  infi- 
nitely meritorious  mediation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"that  which  is  without  fiiith  is  sin,"  and  our  best  deeds 
are  offensive  to  God  except  as  they  are  cleansed  by  the 
blood,  covered  by  the  righteousness,  and  presented  by 
the  intercession  of  our  great  Surety.  It  is  also  obvi- 
ous that  the  Christian,  who  makes  (as  the  Catechism 
goes  on  to  say  every  converted  man  does)  the  word  of 
God  his  only  rule  of  right  practice,  must  exercise  faith 
in  the  truth  of  the  Scriptures,  which  faith  respects  the 
justice  of  the  divine  commandments  as  well  as  the 
mercy  of  the  divine  promises,  so  that  in  proportion  to 
the  strength  of  our  faith  in  the  word  of  God  w\\\  be 
our  aim  to  comply  with  the  divine  will.  Faith  in 
Christ  is  necessary,  therefore,  not  to  the  oi'iginal  or 
absolute  goodness  of  a  moral  act,  but  to  our  recovery 
from  the  rebellion  of  sin,  and  the  acceptableness  of  our 
imperfect  obedience  in  the  sight  of  God.  Besides, 
every  motion,  desire,  and  endeavor  to  do  right,  which 
we  have,  is  the  effect  of  divine  o-race,  "  workino-  in  us 
both  to  Avill  and  to  do  of  God's  good  pleasure,"  and 
this  grace  is  ever  given,  and  given  only  in  answer  to 
faith.  Hence  our  Christian  life  can  be  maintained 
only  by  the  exercise  of  a  true  fixith,  without  which  any 
good  works  on  our  part  are  imjiossible. 


Lect.  XLTI.]     the  nature  OF  GOOD  WORKS.  403 

2.  Tliose  only  are  good  works  wliich  "  are  performed 
according  to  the  law  of  God." 

a.  We  ai'e  the  creatures  of  God,  and  therefore 
belong  to  him ;  so  that  his  will,  as  declaimed  to  us  in 
his  law,  is  absolutely  sovereign  over  us ;  and  tlie  only 
question  Ave  have  a  right  to  make  respecting  our  con- 
duct is  :  "  What  doth  the  Lord  our  God  require  of 
lis?" 

I).  We  are  bought  with  a  price  ransomed  from  the 
power  of  Satan  and  from  everlasting  death  by  the 
most  precious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  he  has  bought  us  to 
himself,  as  a  peculiar  (his  own)  people,  zealous  of  good 
works  ;  for  which  reason  we  are,  by  the  power  of  his 
Holy  Spirit,  "  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus 
unto  good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that 
we  should  walk  in  them."  If,  therefore,  we  accept  the 
redemption  of  Christ  for  our  souls,  we  must,  by  divine 
help,  assume  the  obligations  which  the  purpose  of  the 
redemption  implies,  and  walk  (or  order  our  practice) 
according  to  the  rules  ordained  for  us  in  the  law  of 
God.  This  should  not  be  by  any  constraint  of  servile 
fear,  but  with  the  willingness  which  the  most  lively 
and  paramount  gratitude  inspires.  "  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us  ;  because  we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died 
for  all,  then  were  all  dead  ;  and  that  he  died  for  all, 
that  they  which  live  should  not  henceforth  live  imto 
themselves,  but  unto  him  which  died  for  them  and  rose 
again."  Our  whole  life,  in  all  its  thoughts,  affections, 
words,  actions,  and  energies,  is  the  thank-offering  which 
we  should  render  unto  Christ  for  his  unspeakable  love 
in  offering  himself  as  a  sacrifice  to  redeem  us  unto 
God. 

€.  Nay,  more  ;  God,  accepting  us  in  Christ  his  Son, 


404  THE  NATURE  OF   GOOD   WORKS.      H. 

accepts  us  as  his  cliildren  ;  and,  as  tlie  proof  and  earnest 
of  his  Fatherly  love,  he  sends  into  our  hearts  the  spirit 
of  his  Son,  which  is  the  spirit  of  adoption  whereby  we 
cry  "  Abba,  Father."  We,  therefore,  should  be  "  fol- 
lowers of  God  as  dear  children."  As  an  affectionate 
child  confides  in  his  father's  wisdom  and  love,  desiring 
nothing  so  much  as  to  obey  his  father's  will,  so  the 
Christian,  committing  all  that  concerns  him  for  life  and 
death,  time  and  eternity,  to  his  heavenly  Father's  dis- 
position, asks  only  what  that  Father  Avould  have  him  to 
do,  and  does  it  with  his  whole  heart. 

3.  They  must  also  be  performed  to  the  glory  of  God. 
This  has  been  made  evident  by  our  previous  considera- 
tions. The  orioinal  and  ultimate  end  of  all  thino;s  can 
be  none  other  than  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of 
their  great  Author  ;  and  as  the  moral  creature  is  the 
greatest  of  God's  creatures,  the  oblioation  of  all  intel- 
ligent  beings  to  manifest,  by  the  beauty  of  obedient 
lives,  the  wisdom  and  holiness  of  the  Creator's  moral 
law  is  proportionately  great.  But  the  highest  glory  of 
God  is  placed  by  himself  in  the  redemption  of  sinful 
men  by  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  their  elevation  by 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the  depths  of  guilty 
depravity  to  the  perfect  eternal  holiness  of  heaven. 
Therefore  are  we  doubly  bound  by  our  creation  and 
redemption,  nay,  trebly,  since  we  add  the  dedication  of 
ourselves  to  glorify  God  by  our  bodies  and  spirits  which 
are  his.  This  can  be  done  only  by  an  entire  conformity 
to  the  will  of  God,  as  made  known  by  his  work.  What 
virtue  of  our  own  invention  we  may  pretend  to,  if  it 
have  any  praise,  would  be  to  our  glory ;  what  duty  w^e 
perform  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  I'eflects  glory 
on   him.      The    light  of  the   truth   is  our  light   only 


THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.        405 

because  it  shines  upon  us  from  God  ;  therefore  does 
our  Lord  say,  Avhat  is  repeated  in  a  tliousand  Scrip- 
tures :  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  tliey 
may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."  The  motive  of  the  divine  glory 
is,  therefore,  essential  to  any  good  work  of  the  Chris- 
tian. 

It  may,  however,  be  asked  here,  whether  or  not  this 
motive  of  the  divine  glory  should  exclude  from  our 
hearts  all  motive  of  our  own  good,  so  that  our  obedi- 
ence to  God  shall  be  perfectly  disinterested.  We  an- 
swer that,  so  far  from  this  being  the  case,  such  disinter- 
estedness is  not  only  not  required,  but  from  the  nature 
of  the  case,  impossible.  God  has  from  the  beginning 
implanted  in  the  moral  creature  a  love  of  happiness 
and  relio;ion,  instead  of  eradicatino;  this  strong  motive- 
principle,  addresses  it  by  the  strongest  arguments,  and 
directs  it  by  the  divine  commandments.  When  God 
says,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,"  he, 
by  making  it  the  measure  of  our  love  to  our  neighbor, 
recognizes  our  love  of  ourselves  as  just,  and  shows  that 
without  it  we  cannot  know  how  to  obey  God  in  loving 
our  neio-hbor.  The  sanctions  of  the  divine  law  —  life  in 
reward  of  obedience,  death  in  penalty  of  disobedience  — 
can  have  no  force  except  as  self-love  has  power  in  our 
hearts.  So  we  find  our  blessed  Lord  opposing  the  mo- 
tives which  worldly  men  have  to  sin,  and  hypocrites  to 
an  external  form  of  piety,  by  saying  that  they  have  their 
reward,  but  that  our  heavenly  Father  himself  will  reward 
openly  all  those  who  serve  him  out  of  a  sincere  heart. 
According  to  which  principle  Moses  acted  when  "  he 
had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  reward  "  ;  nay, 
our  Lord  himself,  the   "  great  pattern  of  a  Christian 


406  THE  NATURE  OF   GOOD  WORKS.      life,"  when  "  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him  he 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  We  do  not  lose 
our  will  when  we  make  the  will  of  God  our  own  ;  nor 
do  we  lose  our  happiness  when  we  seek  the  glory  of 
God  which  lies  in  the  best  happiness  of  his  children. 
If  I  am  bound  to  serve  the  welfare  of  my  fellow-man 
because  he  is  God's  creature,  I  am  bound  for  the  same 
reason  to  seek  my  own  welfare,  since  I  am  equally 
God's  creature.  Besides,  the  Christian  cannot  isolate 
himself.  He  belongs  to  a  system,  each  part  of  which 
receives,  as  well  as  gives,  influences  for  good  or  evil. 
God  in  Christ,  and,  before  the  necessity  of  redemption^ 
God  the  Creator,  is  the  head  of  the  system  from  whom 
all  the  vital  influences  for  good  proceed,  as  to  him  the 
issues  of  praise  return.  We  cannot,  therefore,  obey 
God  without  receiving  our  share  of  the  benefit  Avhich 
our  obedience  works  in  the  system.  We  cannot, 
therefore,  and  ought  not  to  ignore  our  interest  in 
doing  the  will  of  God,  any  more  than  we  should  seek 
to  isolate  ourselves  from  the  constitution  of  things  in 
which  God  has  placed  us.  The  glory  of  our  heavenly 
Father  is  the  blessedness  of  his  children ;  therefore 
should  we  seek  our  own  good  in  the  way  of  his  com- 
mandments, from  the  very  desire  we  have  for  his 
glory. 

If  our  foregoing  demonstrations  have  been  sound, 
the  remaining  part  of  the  answer  before  us  needs 
none. 

1.  The  law  of  God  being  our  only  and  sovereign 
rule,  we  have  no  right  to  mingle  with  it,  or  oppose  it 
by,  any  imagination  or  thought  of  our  own.  It  is  not 
permitted  us  to  do  what  we  suppose  or  what  seems  to 
us  right ;  we  must  do  only  that  which  God  declares  in 


the  nature  OF  GOOD  WORKS.  407 

his  blessed  word  to  be  right.  The  settlement  of  what 
is  right  or  wrong  is  infinitely  above  our  faculty.  We 
must  take  the  rule  only  from  him  who  alone  knows. 
Therefore  we  ought  most  religiously  to  guard  our- 
selves from  the  temptation  of  acting  from  our  im- 
pulses, our  feelings,  or  opinions  ;  for  all  these  come 
out  of  a  sinful  heart,  which  is  deceitful  above  all 
things.  Our  duty  is  to  obey  God,  not  ourselves ;  and 
this  we  do  only  when  we  rule  our  hearts  and  lives  by 
the  commandments  he  has  given  us  in  his  holy  word. 
2.  If  we  are  not  to  obey  our  own  imaginations, 
neither  are  we  to  obey  the  imaginations  of  other  men, 
whether  they  come  to  us  in  traditions  or  decrees  of 
churches,  or  dogmas  of  associations,  or  public  opinion. 
Nothing  is  our  duty  but  what  God  has  commanded  ; 
and  we,  in  effect,  transfer  our  allegiance  from  him 
to  the  authority  of  sinners  like  ourselves,  when  we 
adopt  any  article  into  our  creed,  any  ceremony  into 
our  worship,  or  any  rule  into  our  morality,  which  God 
has  not  expressly  given.  There  is  a  strong  tendency 
even  in  conscientious  people  to  go  astray  here.  They 
cannot  resist  the  influence  of  those  whom  they  think 
good  or  wise,  nor  refuse  that  which  is  plausibly  expe- 
dient. So  we  find  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  follow- 
ing the  traditions  of  the  elders.  Afterwards  the  Papal 
church  tyrannized  in  the  same  manner  over  the  con- 
sciences of  the  people  ;  and  among  Protestants  of  our 
own  day,  methods  of  worship  and  reform,  wholly  from 
the  inventions  of  men,  are  made  paramount  to  the 
plainest  dictates  of  Holy  Scripture.  Dearly  beloved 
brethren,  be  not  so  deceived.  You  can  render  the 
God  of  the  Bible  no  divided  allegiance.  If  the  opin- 
ion  of  men  be  your  god,  serve  it ;  but  if  God  who 


408  THE  NATURE  OF  GOOD  WORKS.     gave  us  the  Bible  be  your  God,  serve  him  alone.  The 
Scripture  was  given  that  the  man  of  God  might  be 
thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works  ;  and  noth- 
ing is  a  good  work  which  is  not  founded  on  "  thus 
saith  the  Lord." 


LECTURE  XLin. 


THE  OKDER,  THE  OBLIGATION,  AND  DIVISION  OF  THE 
DUTIES  ENJOINED  BY 

THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS. 


THIRTY-FOURTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE   TEN   COMMANDMENTS. 

Quest.  XCIl.      Wlutt  is  the  law  of  God  ? 

Ans.  God  spake  all  these  -words:  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have 
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage. 
Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto 
thee  any  graven  image,  or  anj-  likeness  of  anj'thing  that  is  in  heaven 
above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the 
earth:  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them:  for 
I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them 
that  hate  me;  And  showing  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love 
me,  and  keep  my  commandments.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of 
the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain:  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless 
that  taketh  his  name  in  vain.  Remember  the  Sabbath-day,  to  keep  it 
holy.  Six  days  shalt  thou  labor,  and  do  all  thy  work;  But  the  seventh 
day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God:  in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any 
work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy  man-servant,  nor  thy 
maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that  is  within  thy  gates: 
For  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea  and  all  that 
in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day;  wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the 
Sabbath-day,  and  hallowed  it.  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother; 
that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God 
giveth  thee.  Thou  shalt  not  kill.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. 
Thou  shalt  not  steal.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thj' 
neighbor.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's  house,  thou  shalt  not 
covet  thy  neighbor's  wife,  nor  his  man-servant,  nor  his  maid-servant, 
nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  anything  that  is  thy  neighbor's.  —  Exodus 
XX.  1-17.     (Compare  Deuteronomy  v.  6-21,  &c.) 

Quest.  XCIII.     How  are  these  Ten  Commandments  dicided  1 

Ans.  Into  two  tables:  The  first  of  which  teaches  us  how  we  must  behave 
toward  God;  the  second,  what  duties  we  owe  to  our  neighbor. 

TT  having  been  settled  by  the  previous  teachings  of 

the  Catechism,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  that  the 

behever  called  to  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ  is  by  the 

same  gospel  called  to  do  good  works,  (86th,  87th,  88th, 


412  THE  TEN   COMMANDMENTS.  89th  Questions  and  Answers,)  and  also  that  "  good 
works  are  only  those  which  proceed  from  true  faith 
[and]  are  performed  according  to  the  law  of  God  and 
to  his  glory  ;  not  such  as  are  founded  on  our  imagi- 
nations, or  the  institutions  of  men  "  ;  it  becomes  us 
to  inquire  what  is  the  law  of  God,  according  to  wdiich  all 
the  conduct  of  men  should  be  regulated  ;  and  we  are 
taught  to  answer  this  question  by  a  recital  of  the  Deca- 
logue, or  ten  commandments,  as  they  are  recorded  in 
the  twentieth  chapter  of  Exodus,  1—17,  collated  with 
Deuteronomy  v.  6—21 ;  and  the  next  eleven  Lord's 
days  are  occupied  with  an  exposition  of  the  command- 
ments in  their  order.  They  are  divided  into  two  tables, 
because  Jehovah  wrote  them  twice,  once  on  two  stone 
tablets  prepared  by  himself  (Deut.  v.  22),  which  Moses 
let  fall  from  his  hands,  and  brake  in  his  indignation  at 
the  people's  idolatry  of  the  golden  calf  (Ex.  xxxii.  19)  ; 
and  a  second  time  on  two  tables  like  the  first,  prepared, 
according  to  his  order,  by  Moses  (Ex.  xxxiv.  1 ;  Deut. 
X.  1).  Which  commandments  were  written  on  the  first 
table,  and  which  on  the  second,  Ave  are  not  expressly 
told,  though  it  is  certain  that  there  Avere  ten  in  all 
(Deut.  iv.  13  ;  x.  4).  All  are  agreed  that  the  first 
table  included  those  duties  Avhich  we  owe  immediately 
to  God  ;  the  second,  those  he  has  commanded  us  to 
render  him  through  duties  to  our  fellow-men  ;  which  is 
in  am*eement  with  our  Lord's  condensation  of  the  whole 
law  into  two  great  commandments  :  the  first,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all 
thy  strength ; "  the  second,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbor  as  thyself"  (Matt.  xxii.  37-40)  ;  the  fii-st  of 
which  we  find  in  Deuteronomy  vi.  5,  and  elsewhere ; 


Lect.  XLIII.j  THE  TEX  COMMANDMENTS.  413 

the  second,  in  Lev.  xix.  18,  34.  But  here  the  Re- 
formed with  all  the  evangelical  churches  are  at  dif- 
ference with  the  Jews,  the  Roman  Catholics,  and  a 
large  majority  of  the  Lutherans.  Our  churches  reckon 
four  commandments  to  the  first  table,  and  six  to  the 
second.  What  division  was  established  amono;  the  an- 
cient  Jews  is  not  very  clear.  Josephus  says  (Ant.  c. 
V.  8}  that  God  showed  them  two  tables  with  the  ten 
commandments  written  upon  them,  five  on  each  table, 
which  according  to  the  order  of  his  enumeration  would, 
against  propriety,  throw  the  fifth  commandment  into 
the  first  table  instead  of  the  second,  which  includes  our 
ofiices  to  men  (Ant.  c.  v.  5).  Philo,  however,  appears 
to  have  considered  the  preface,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy 
God,"  &c.,  to  have  been  the  first  commandment;  but  as 
he  omits,  in  his  recital,  the  words  of  what  we  consider 
the  first,  passing  over  them  to  those,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
make  any  graven  gods,"  &c.,  it  would  seem  most  prob- 
able that  he  conjoined  the  sense  of  the  preface  with  the 
first  commandment  (in  our  order).  Athanasius  follows 
him  in  this.* 

The  Roman  Catholics  combine  the  first  and  sec- 
ond commandments,  giving  them  in  their  catechisms 
abridged,  so  as  to  avoid  the  strength  of  the  prohibition 
against  employing  images  in  their  devotions.  Thus, 
reducing  the  number  of  commandments  in  the  first 
table  to  three,  they  are  obliged,  that  they  may  keep  the 
number  ten,  to  divide  the  tenth  into  two,  which  is  done 
by  making  the  first  clause  of  the  tenth  (as  given  Deut. 
V.  21,  "  Thou  shalt  not  desire  thy  neighbor's  wife,")  the 
ninth,  and  the  rest  of  it,  the  tenth ;  to  which  the  Re- 
formed churches  object,  as  that  would  be  merely  a  repe- 

*  See  Jer.  Taylor;  Due.  Dub.  B.  II.  Ch.  2,  Kule  6. 


414  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.  HI. 

tition  of  the  seventh,  whereas  tlie  closing  precept  is  in- 
tended to  forbid  all  envious  craving  of  whatever  is  our 
neighbor's.  Many  of  the  Lutherans,  being  partial  to 
pictures  in  churches  for  the  illustration  of  divine  truths 
to  the  laity,  have  followed  the  course  of  the  Papists 
with  regard  to  the  disposition  of  the  ten  precepts  ;  but 
it  is  fair  to  add  that  their  best  divines  lay  little  stress 
on  the  matter,  as  Walchius,  very  famous  among  them, 
says :  "  Concerning  the  division  of  the  Decalogue,  there 
is  much  dispute.  The  doctors  of  the  Reformed  church 
give  four  precepts  to  the  first  table  and  six  to  the  sec- 
ond, in  doing  which  they  separate  from  the  first  com- 
mandment what  relates  to  the  making  of  images,  and 
rank  it  as  the  second  commandment ;  but  join  the 
ninth  and  tenth  as  one.  They  contend  fiercely  for  this 
division,  and  many  of  them  [^Anhaltijii,  Mmjmrgenses 
atque  aZuJ  accuse  Luther  of  omitting  the  precept  on 
image-making.  We,  however,  give  three  precepts  to 
the  first  table,  and  seven  to  the  second,  referring  what 
God  says  against  image-making  to  the  first  precept,  and 
separating  the  ninth  from  the  tenth.  This  discussion 
is  of  little  account.  The  thing  is  that  it  may  be  ar- 
ranged so  as  to  give  each  the  liberty  of  opinion  on  the 
division,  for  it  is  enough  that  the  commandments  be 
reckoned  as  ten."  (Intro,  in  Lib.  Ecc.  Luth.  Symbol, 
L.  1,  vi.  sec.  xl.  p.  657.)  In  this  liberal  sentiment  the 
eminent  Turrctin  agrees.* 

A  more  important  question  arises  :  — 

WJiat  proof  have  we  that  these  ten  commandments  are 
binding  upon  tis  ? 

The  delivery  of  this  law  of  the  two  tables  on  Sinai 
by  Jehovah  to  the  hands  of  Moses  for  the  people  of 
*  See  Kenrick  (Bisliop),  Theol.  Mor.  dc  Decalogue,  c.  iv. 


the  ten  COMMANDMENTS.  415 

Israel  was  not  its  first  promulgation.  It  had  been  the 
rule  of  God  for  man  from  the  creation,  though  unwrit- 
ten till  the  finger  of  God  eno-raved  it  amidst  the  terri- 
blc  glories  of  his  presence.  From  the  beginning  he 
had  claimed  an  entire  sovereignty.  The  apostle  tells 
us,  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans,  that  men  knew  God 
from  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  that  idolatry  in  all 
its  forms  originated  in  their  departure  from  the  worship 
of  the  true,  incorruptible  God.  Reverence  for  the 
name  of  God  is  a  duty  clearly  consequent  upon  our 
allegiance  and  worship.  The  Sabbath  was  ordained  in 
Eden  on  the  day  after  the  creation  of  man,  while  he 
yet  was  sinless.  Honor  to  parents,  respect  of  human 
life,  purity  as  opposed  to  licentiousness,  the  right  of 
property,  veracity  or  truthfulness,  are  all  virtues  essen- 
tial to  a  social  constitution  in  which  men  were  placed 
by  their  divine  author,  and  were  required  by  him  al- 
ways, as  many  facts  in  the  early  sacred  history  show. 
The  final  precept,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet,"  enforces  the 
keeping  of  the  heart  before  him  who  reads  our  thoughts, 
and  is  a  resumption  of  the  previous  five,  while  the  ne- 
cessity of  such  inward  restraint  to  a  secure  morality 
was  fully  shown  by  the  manner  of  the  original  sin,  for 
had  not  the  man  and  -woman  first  lusted  after  the  for- 
bidden fruit,  they  had  not  seized  it. 

We  learn  also  from  Holy  Scripture,  that  the  solemn, 
written  enunciation  of  this  law  was  an  act  of  God's 
merciful  care  over  his  people.  He  had,  as  the  apostle 
tells  us  (Gal.  ii.  8,  17),  preached  the  gospel  to  Abra- 
ham four  hundred  and  thirty  years  before,  when  he 
made  a  covenant  with  the  father  of  all  the  faithful,  say- 
ing, "In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed."  His  nat- 
ural posterity,  though  increased  to  a  very  considerable 


416  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.  people,  had  never  been  raised  to  the  style  of  a  distinct, 
free,  independent  nation,  until  Jehovah,  taking  his  place 
as  their  king,  led  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  with 
a  promise  of  bringing  them  into  the  land  promised  by 
him  to  their  fathers.  It  was  requisite,  therefore,  that 
there  should  be  a  glorious  inauguration  of  his  authority, 
with  a  publication  of  the  laws,  or  constitution,  accord- 
ing to  which  he  would  reign  ;  and  on  the  other  hand, 
that  the  people  should  declare  their  fealty  to  their  The- 
ocrat  by  pledging  themselves  to  obey  his  laws  or  accept- 
ine:  the  constitution  Avhich  he  gave  them.  Hence  the 
transaction  at  Sinai  was  in  fact  a  covenant,  God  man- 
ifesting himself  on  the  mount,  Israel  protesting,  with 
united  voice,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  said,  will  we 
do,  and  be  obedient ;  "  in  token  of  which  "  Moses  took 
the  blood  "  of  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings,  "  and 
sprinkled  it  on  the  people,  and  said,  "  Behold  the  blood 
of  the  covenant  which  the  Lord  hath  made  with  you 
concerning  all  these  words  "  (Ex.  xxiv.  3-8).  You 
will  observe  that,  according  to  the  analogy  of  all  Scrip- 
ture, Israel  stood  before  the  Lord  in  a  double  capacity, 
as  a  political  nation,  and  as  a  church,  —  as  the  natural 
offspring  of  Abraham,  and  as  the  type  (the  truly  faith- 
ful among  them  included  by  the  reality)  of  the  spiritual 
descendants  of  the  father  of  all  the  faithful,  the  seed 
of  the  promised  seed,*  the  church  of  Christ  which  he 
hath  redeemed  out  of  all  ages  and  all  kindreds  of  the 
Avorld.  The  inference  plainly  is,  that  the  law  is  bind- 
ing on  us,  who  profess  allegiance  to  God  through  the 
covenant  in  the  blood  of  Christ;  not  the  political  law, 
which  concerned  Israel  as  a  nation,  or  the  ceremonial, 
•which  was  done  away  by  Christ,  the  substance  of  its 

*  Compare  Gal.  iii.  IG,  and  Isaiah  liii.  10,  11. 


the  ten  COMMANDMENTS.  417 

shadows  and  the  realit}'  of  its  types,  but  the  moral 
law,  the  law  of  the  ten  precepts  on  tlie  two  tables, 
which,  as  they  had  been  binding  on  men  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world  nntil  Sinai,  are  binding,  since 
then,  nntil  the  end  of  the  world. 

This  is  the  more  obvious  from  the  indisputable  con- 
sideration, that,  as  the  effect  of  faith,  according  to  the 
evangelical  scheme,  is  to  produce  repentance  in  the  con- 
verted sinner  by  working  love  in  his  heart,  and  so  ena- 
bling him  to  overcome  the  temptations  of  the  world,  it 
must  follow  that  the  genuine  effects  of  saving  faith  are 
in  all  ages  the  same ;  and,  therefore,  the  fundamental 
rules  or  principles  of  a  godly  life  are  in  all  ages  the 
same.  Precepts  which  only  affect  men  in  the  regula- 
tion of  their  conduct  under  a  temporary  and  changea- 
ble system,  such  as  the  national  polity,  or  typical  pre- 
paratory ritual  of  the  Jews,  may,  for  that  reason,  be 
chano;ed  or  abroo-ated  :  but  those  which  are  essential  to 
our  relations  as  human  creatures  with  God,  and  with 
our  fellow-creatures  under  the  social  system  God  has 
ordained  for  us  on  earth,  must  be  perpetual.  Such  are 
the  ten  commandments. 

Thus  we  find  this,  the  moral  law,  confirmed  by  our 
Lord  and  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  as  the  rule 
of  life  for  all  believers.  Every  precept  of  the  two 
tables  is  reinforced,  often  in  the  very  same  language 
and  with  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  source  from 
which  they  are  taken,  as  the  ground  of  the  authority. 

Exception  has,  it  is  true,  been  by  some  taken  with 
respect  to  the  fourth  commandment,  ordaining  the  rest 
of  the  Sabbath  in  order  to  its  sanctification.  That 
commandment,  they  say,  is  ceremonial^  therefore  be- 
longing to  the  law  of  ordinances  which  has  been  abol- 

VOL.  II.  27 


418  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.         l. 

ished  ;  and  typical^  relating  to  the  "  spiritual  rest,"  or 
freedom  from  the  necessity  of  our  own  works,  as  ground 
of  justification,  that  God  may  perform  his  works  in  us 
for  his  OAvn  glory.  We  shall  examine  this  matter  far- 
ther when  we  come  to  the  particular  study  of  the  fourth 
commandment ;  but  at  present  it  is  enough  to  say  that 
on  the  same  principles  which  require  us  to  take  the  law 
of  the  two  tables,  we  must  take  it  as  a  whole.  God 
himself  divided  the  moi'al,  the  political,  and  the  ceremo- 
nial laws  from  each  other,  so  that  we  have  no  right  to 
wrench  any  part  out  of  one  to  put  it  in  one  of  the 
others.*  Besides,  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  given  to 
our  first  parents  while  yet  sinless  in  Eden,  and  there- 
fore to  the  whole  race,  irrespective  of  national  or  cer- 
emonial or  accidental  distinctions  of  any  kind  ;  nor  had 
it,  whatever  typical  character  it  acquired  afterwards, 
any  such  character  at  the  time  of  its  original  promul- 
gation. The  Saviour  himself,  when  he  asserted  that 
"  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  and  not  man  for  the 
Sabbath,"  not  only  points  out  the  spirit  of  the  precept 
in  which  it  is  to  be  obeyed,  but  establishes  the  univer- 
sality and  perpetuity  of  the  precept. 

There  is  another  remark  preliminary  to  our  exposi- 
tion of  the  commandments,  which,  in  consistency  with 
our  past  and  future  reasoning,  should  here  be  made. 

The  answer  to  the  93d  Question  states  that  "  the 
first  "  table  "  teaches  us  how  we  are  to  behave  towards 
God  ;  the  second,  what  duties  we  owe  to  our  neigh- 
bor." This  lann;uao;e,  thouffli  conformable  enough  to 
the  common  uses  of  the  terms,  is  not  strictly,  that  is  to 
say,  ethically,  accurate.  Properly,  we  owe  duty  only 
to  God.     He  only  is  our  Lord.     What  are  popularly 

*  Calvin's  Cat.  on  the  Fourth  Commaiulment. 


the  ten   COMMANDMENTS.  419 

termed  duties  to  our  neighbor  are  not,  therefore,  in  a 
strict  sense,  duties  to  him,  but  duties  to  God,  who  has 
commanded  us  so  to  deport  ourselves  toward  our  neigh- 
bor as  his  precepts  prescribe.  That  tliis  is  the  mean- 
ing of  the  Catecliism  here,  we  know  from  what  Ursi- 
nus  (its  chief  author)  says  in  his  commentary  on  the 
place  :  "  The  Decalogue  is  divided,  according  to  the 
things  themselves  which  are  commanded  or  forbidden, 
into  the  immediate  and  mediate  tvorshij)  of  God.  Gen- 
erally, is  commanded  in  the  Decalogue  the  worship  of 
God ;  that  which  is  contrary  to  God's  worship  is  for- 
bidden. The  worship  of  God  is  either  immediate,  when 
moral  works  are  performed  immediately  unto  God,  or 
mediate,  when   moral  works  are  performed  unto  our 

neighbor  in  respect  of  God The  obedience  of 

the  second  table  of  the  law  is  not  the  immediate  woi'- 
ship  of  God,  as  the  obedience  of  the  first  is  ;  yet  is  it 
the  mediate  worship  of  God,  that  is,  such  as  is  per- 
formed to  God  in  our  neighbor  mediating,  or  coming 
between  God  and  us.  For  the  duties  [offices]  of  love 
toward  our  neighbor  ought  to  flow,  or  proceed,  out  of 
the  love  of  God  \_qii.  love  to  God]  ;  and  being  so  per- 
formed, they  are  acceptable  to  God,  and  are  no  less 
done  to  God  himself  than  the  obedience  of  the  first 

table The  worship  required  in  the  two  tables 

differeth  in  [character  of]  its  objects  :  for  the  first  table 
has  an  immediate  object  only,  which  is  God  ;  the  sec- 
ond has  both  an  immediate  object,  our  neighbor,  and 
farther  also  a  mediate  object,  God."  Hence  Ursinus, 
in  his  sermon  on  the  Decalogue,  comprises  it  generally 
in  God's  worship,  divided  into  two  parts  :  1.  Immedi- 
ate, towards  God  alone  ;  2.  Mediate,  or  towards  our 
neighbor  for  God's  sake. 


420  THE  TEN  COMMANDSIENTS.         l. 

The  value  and  even  necessity  of  this  careful  applica- 
tion of  terms  over  the  looser  language  of  the  text  will 
be  seen  when  we  consider  the  proneness  of  men  to  sep- 
arate the  two  tables  in  such  a  way  as  though  they  might 
observe  the  first  table  without  observing  the  second,  or 
the  second  without  observing  the  first.  The  former  is 
the  fatal  error  of  those  pharisaical  devotees  who  are 
zealous  in  prayers  or  other  forms  of  worship,  in  ortho- 
doxy of  opinion  or  ceremonial,  while  they  neglect  char- 
ity of  heart  and  speech  and  act  towards  their  fellow- 
creatures.  The  unity  of  the  law  of  God  utterly  con- 
demns such  inconsistency,  and  shuts  the  gate  of  heaven 
in  the  faces  of  all  who  practise  it.  There  is  no  love 
to  God  which  is  not  followed  by,  or  rather  does  not 
include,  love  to  our  neighbor  ;  which  is  farther  shown 
by  the  fact  that  we  cannot,  as  in  tlie  address  Christ  has 
taught  us,  claim  God  as  our  Father  in  heaven,  without 
acknowledging  as  our  brethren  all  his  children  on 
earth.  The  other  is  the  equally  fatal  error  of  those  avIio, 
proud  of  their  personal  and  social  morality,  think  that 
they  can  keep  the  second  table  of  the  law  without 
observing  the  first,  or  love  their  neighbor  without  first 
loving  God  with  all  their  hearts,  and  rendering  him  the 
personal  and  public  homage  which  he  requires.  The 
very  source  of  the  law  condemns  this,  because  being 
the  law  of  God,  no  part  of  it  can  be  kept  without 
hearty  and  supreme  reverence  to  the  will  of  him  who 
enjoins  the  whole.  The  very  order  of  the  law  con- 
demns it,  because  we  cannot  reach  the  second  table 
Avithout  going  through  the  first.  The  very  terms  of 
the  law  condenni  it,  because,  if  we  are  to  love  God 
with  all  our  heart,  how  can  we  love  our  neighbor 
except  love  to  him   Ije  iiichuled  by  our  love  to  God? 


THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.  421 

Again :  If  we  do  not  make  this  distinction,  that  is,  of 
duties  immediate  and  duties  mediate  to  God,  all  moral- 
ity is  thrown  into  uncertainty  and  confusion.  If  God 
be  the  central  source  and  central  object  of  all  duty,  no 
laws  emanating  from  him,  no  services  rendered  to  him, 
can  ever  clash,  as  no  number  of  straight  lines,  drawn 
from  a  given  point,  can  ever  cross  each  other,  or,  con- 
verging to  one  point,  can  ever  meet  except  in  that  ppint. 
While,  therefore,  we  consider  our  duty  referrible  to  God 
only,  tliere  can  be  no  confusion.  All  we  have  to  ascer- 
tain, is,  what  God  requires  of  us,  and  all  our  relative 
services  toward  our  fellow-men  fall  into  their  appropri- 
ate places  within  the  harmonious  whole.  But  when 
we  attempt  to  apportion  or  distribute  our  services 
among  our  fellow-men,  as  though  our  duty  were  to 
each  of  them,  we  find  the  number  of  relations  so  great, 
yet  so  intermingled,  that  we  cannot  see  how,  amidst 
the  variety  and  seeming  conflict  of  interests,  to  combine 
them  in  harmonious  proportions.  How  shall  a  man 
proportion  the  duty  he  owes  to  his  father  with  the  duty 
he  owes  to  his  mother,  when  their  commands  or  seem- 
ing interests  are  adverse  ?  —  the  duties  he  owes  to  con- 
flicting  brothers  ?  —  the  duties  to  his  family  with  those 
he  owes  to  his  country,  or  those  to  his  country  with 
those  due  to  the  world  ?  No  human  intellect  has  grasp 
or  continuity  enough  to  reason  through  all  the  possi- 
bilities of  results,  to  determine  one  of  a  thousand  among 
the  difliculties  which  may,  and  every  day  do,  arise.  In- 
variable, supreme  love  to  God  is  the  only  clue  we  can 
have  to  guide  us  through  what  is  plain  to  him,  but  an 
inextricable  labyrinth  to  us. 

Take,  for  example,  the  question  which  Arch-Deacon 
Paley  moots  in  his  Moral  Philosophy  (a  system  which 


422  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.  should  never  be  tolerated  for  a  moment  under  any  pre- 
text in  a  Christian  school)  :  Is  it  ever  right  to  tell  a  lie  ? 
If  we  proceed  on  the  principle  that  all  our  duty  is  to 
God,  the  thing  is  settled  at  once,  for  God  requires  truth 
in  the  heart,  speech,  and  act;  nor  can  we  imagine  it 
possible  that  in  any  circumstances  a  lie  can  be  accept- 
able to  him  ;  but  if,  adopting  the  division  which  Paley 
follows,  of  duty  to  God  and  duty  to  man,  the  latter 
separates  itself  from  the  first,  and  we  attempt  to  decide 
it  on  the  comparative  benefit  or  injury  of  the  results  to 
ourselves  or  others.  Thus  the  Arch-Deacon  asserts  that 
a  lie  is  justifiable  in  certain  cases,  as,  "  compliments  in 
the  subscription  of  a  letter;  a  servant's  denying  his 
master  [to  be  at  home]  ;  a  prisoner's  pleading  not 
guilty ;  an  advocate  asserting  the  justice,  or  his  belief 
in  the  justice,  of  his  client's  cause.  In  such  instances, 
no  confidence  is  destroyed,  because  none  was  reposed  ; 
no  promise  to  speak  the  truth  is  violated,  because  none 
was  given  or  imderstood  to  be  given."  Or  "  where 
the  person  you  speak  to  has  no  right  to  know  tne  truth, 
or,  more  properly,  where  little  or  no  inconvenience 
results  from  the  want  of  confidence  in  such  cases  :  as 
where  you  tell  a  falsehood  to  a  madman  for  his  own 
advantage  ;  to  a  robber,  to  conceal  your  property  ;  to 
an  assassin,  to  defeat  or  divert  him  from  his  purpose. 
The  particular  consequence  is,  by  the  supposition,  ben- 
eficial ;  and  as  to  the  general  consequence,  the  worst 
that  can  hai)i)en  is,  that  the  madman,  the  robber,  the 
assassin  will  not  trust  you  again  :  which  (beside  that 
the  first  is  incapable  of  deducing  regular  conclusions 
from  having  been  once  deceived,  and  the  last  two  not 
likely  to  come  in  your  way  a  second  time)  is  snfii- 
ciently  compensated  by  the  immediate  benefit  which 


Lect.  XLIU.J         THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS.  423 

you  proposed  by  the  falsehood."  What  miserable  pal- 
tering is  tliis  !  If  a  lie  is  to  be  justified  by  mere  expe- 
diency, or  by  any  man's  judgment  of  expediency,  how 
shall  we  know  when  we  meet  falsehood  or  when  we 
meet  truth  ?  How  can  it  be,  that,  under  the  universal, 
perpetual,  and  particular  providence  of  God,  who  is 
infinitely  true,  a  falsehood  can  ever  issue  except  in  dis- 
order and  mischief  ?  Even  if  the  immediate  issue  be 
slight  or  even  apparently  beneficial,  is  not  the  general 
importance  of  truth  incomparably  above  such  petty, 
doubtful  considerations  ?  Yet  we  cannot  see,  how,  un 
der  such  a  system,  any  better  reasoning  could  be  pur- 
sued. There  are  cases,  undoubtedly,  in  which  we  are 
not  under  obligation  to  speak  at  all,  or  even  when 
silence  is  duty  ;  but  if  Ave  speak,  and  speak  not  truth, 
we  serve  the  devil,  who  is  the  father  of  lies,  and  we 
shall,  if  we  repent  not  in  Christ,  have  our  portion  with 
him  under  the  wrath  of  a  just  God,  who  has  made 
truth  a  duty  to  himself,  and  a  lie  a  sin  against  himself. 
The  question  cited  is  but  one  of  innumerable  that  will 
arise  under  a  system  of  ethics  other  than  that  which 
makes  God  the  only  object  of  duty. 

For  this  reason  we  shall  adopt,  in  all  our  subsequent 
study  of  the  moral  law,  the  division  of  duty  into  duties 
to  God  immediate  and  mediate,  —  those  we  should  ren- 
der to  God  directly,  and  those  we  should  render  to  him 
through  his  creatures  in  serving  them  for  his  sake,  ac- 
cordino;  to  his  command.* 

*  Tliis  is  the  division  adopted  and  pursued  by  Ursinus.  See  his  Com- 
mentary on  the  Catechism  here. 


LECTURE  XLIV. 
THE  FIEST  COMMANDMENT. 

SECOND    PART. 


THIRTY-FOURTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
THE   FIRST   COMMANDMENT. 

Quest.  XCIV.     What  doth  God  enjoin  in  the ^rst  command  f 

Ans.  That  I,  as  sincerely  as  I  desire  the  salvation  of  my  own  soul,  avoid 
and  flee  from  all  idolatry,  sorcery,  soothsaying,  superstition,  invocation 
of  saints  or  any  other  creatures;  and  learn  rightly  to  know  the  only 
true  God;  trust  in  him  alone;  with  humility  and  patience  submit  to 
him;  expect  all  good  things  from  hini  only;  love,  fear,  and  glorify  him 
with  my  whole  heart;  so  that  I  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures 
rather  than  commit  even  the  least  thing  contrary  to  his  will. 

Quest.  XCV.     What  is  idolatry? 

Ans.  Idolatrj'  is,  instead  of,  or  besides  that  one  true  God,  who  has  mani- 
fested himself  in  his  word,  to  contrive  or  have  any  other  object  in 
which  men  place  their  trust. 

"170LL0WING  the  division  of  duties  enjoined  hy  the 
-^  ten  commandments,  as  set  forth  in  our  last  lecture, 
viz :  those  we  owe  to  God  immediately,  that  is,  di- 
rectly to  himself,  and  those  we  owe  to  him  mediately, 
that  is,  through  his  creatures,  we  now  proceed  to  the 
study  of  the  first  table  of  the  law,  comprising  the  first 
four  commandments,  each  of  which  has  immediate  ref 
erence  to  God  himself. 

The  first  of  these  is  fundamental  and  comprehensive, 
including,  with  a  force  peculiar  to  itself,  the  spirit  of 
the  other  three,  each  of  which  has  a  specific,  particu- 
lar direction.  Thus,  the  first  forbids  our  giving  to  any 
creature  the  place,  homage,  trust,  love,  or  obedience 
which  belongs  to  the  one  only  God.  The  second  for- 
bids oiir  having  low,  material,  or  sensuous  notions  of 


428  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.         God,  and  all  practices  that  tend  to  impair  our  belief 
and  recognition  of  his  pure,  spiritual  nature.  The 
third  forbids  all  profane  or  undevout  use  of  the  names, 
titles,  and  authoritative  sentences  of  God,  and  all  prac- 
tices that  tend  to  impair  the  awful  supreme  respect  in 
which  those  divine  terms,  with  their  significations,  should 
be  held.  The  fourth  enjoins  our  worship  and  pious 
remembrance  of  God  our  only  Creator  and  Lord,  espe- 
cially on  the  Sabbath-day,  which  he  has  consecrated  for 
that  holy  purpose ;  and  all  practices  that  tend  to  impair 
our  devotion  generally,  but,  particularly,  our  proper 
observance  of  the  day  he  has  set  apart  for  himself. 

These  commandments  are  given  in  a  negative  form, 
but  they  enjoin  positively :  1.  Supreme  acknowledg- 
ment of  God.  2.  Practical  belief  in  his  essential  spir- 
ituality, that  is,  spirituality  of  essence  or  mode  of  being. 
3.  Reverence,  internal  and  external,  for  the  authority 
of  God,  and  all  that  relates  to  the  exercise  of  his  au- 
thority. 4.  Worship  of  God,  internal  and  external, 
and  cultivation  of  whatever  means  he  has  ordained  for 
our  worship  of  him.  The  order  of  these  precepts  and 
of  the  duties  they  enjoin  is  natural  and  necessary, 
showing  us  that  the  Decalogue  is  not  merely  a  collec- 
tion of  commandments,  but  a  system  of  morals  in  which 
each  has  its  appropriately  relative  place. 

The  First  of  these  is  the  subject  of  our  lesson  for 
to-day.     "  TJbou  shall  have  no  other  gods  before  me.''' 

The  idea  of  God  is  fundamental  to  all  religion  and 
morals  ;  for  religion  is  the  honoring  of  God,  and  morals 
the  obeying  of  God.  Proof  of  the  existence  and  char- 
acter of  God  is  not  in  place  liere,  that  having  been 
given  in  another  part  of  our  exposition,  and  now  by 
the  Catechism   is    considered    established.      But   it  is 


Lect.XLIV.]  the  first  COMMANDMENT.  429 

required  that  we  know  what  is  meant  by  the  term 
aod. 

First  :  Tlie  use  of  the  word  in  the  plural  and  the 
phrase  "  other  gods  "  show  that  God  is  not  a  personal 
name,  but  a  title,  or  official  appellation,  which  truly 
belongs  to  the  One  Supreme  only,  but  has  been  and 
may  be  usurped  by  others,  or  falsely  applied  to  others  ; 
as  the  apostle  says  (1  Cor.  viii.  5,  6)  :  "  For  though 
there  be  that  are  called  gods,  whether  in  heaven  or  in 
earth  as  there  be  gods  many  and  lords  many ;  but  to 
us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all 
things,  and  we  in  him,  —  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whom  are  ail  things,  and  we  by  him."  The  word  ren- 
dered god,  or  gods,  in  the  Old  Testament,  literally  signi- 
fies high  ones,  and  thus  comparatively  is  applied  to 
angels,  and  even  to  princes  or  exalted  personages 
among  men,  as  David  says :  "  I  will  praise  thee  with 
my  whole  heart ;  before  the  gods  will  I  sing  praise 
unto  thee."  But  it  is  more  frequently  given  to  the 
imaginary  beings,  or  their  visible  representatives,  whom 
men,  departing  from  true  religion,  worshipped  and 
iuA'^oked  in  the  place  of  the  Creator,  who  is  God  over 
all,  blessed  forever.  These  false  gods  were  numerous, 
each  nation  and  often  each  family  having  their  tutelary 
divinities  ;  nay,  there  was  not  a  kingdom  or  process  of 
nature,  not  a  wind  or  stream  or  mountain  or  tree,  that 
had  not,  according  to  the  popular  creed.  Its  particular 
divinity.  Such  an  ascription  of  divine  power  to  more 
than  one  supposed  being,  or  division  of  it  among  many, 
was  a  gross  insult  to  him  whose  will  is  the  sole  efficient 
energy  pervading  all  things,  as  he  created  all  things, 
and  is,  therefore,  forbidden  by  the  commandment.  The 
Sovereign  Giver  of  the  law  in  his  preface  distinguishes 


430  THE  FIRST  COIiIlMANDMENT.  himself  from  the  gods  of  the  nations,  saying  to  Israel : 
"  I  am  the  Lord  [Jehovah]  thy  God,  which  have 
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egy])t,  out  of  the 
house  of  bondage.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 
before  me."  By  which  he  does  not  allow  the  gods  of 
the  nations  to  be  real,  but,  asserting  his  own  as  the  sole 
divinity,  declares  that  he  has  taken  Israel  under  his  al- 
mighty care,  revealing  himself  by  his  name,  Jehovah. 
This  was  the  title  by  Avhich  he  required  his  people  to 
worship  him  ;  yet  it  is  no  more  than  God  a  personal 
name,  but  one  descriptive  of  his  nature.  Attempts 
have  been  made  to  define  its  meaning,  but  without  sat- 
isfactory result ;  that  which  approaches  nearest  is  par- 
allel to  the  description  of  himself  when  he  revealed  his 
presence  to  Moses,  saying,  "I  am  that  I  am,"  —  an 
expression  declaring  at  once  the  eternity,  the  self-exist- 
ence and  incomprehensibleness  of  his  being.  It  is  well 
here  to  note  that  the  most  ancient  of  the  Theistic  })hilos- 
ophers,  whom  we  find  far  back  in  the  primitive  sects  of 
mankind  after  the  flood,  as  the  Chaldean,  from  whom  the 
Platonists  and  Gnostics  learned  their  uses  of  language, 
held  it  impious  to  give  a  name  to  the  Highest,  or  to 
attempt  in  any  way  a  description  of  his  essence,  but 
called  him  The  One.  It  is  also  remarkable,  that, 
among  cultivated  nations  at  least,  though  they  wor- 
shipped many  inferior  deities,  whose  favor  they  invoked 
and  whose  anger  they  deprecated,  there  was,  as  there  is 
now  among  the  idolatrous  peoples  of  the  East,  a  belief 
in  one  original  divinity,  whom  they  did  not  worship 
because  they  thought  him  too  sublimely  absorbed  in 
his  own  perfections  to  care  for  them  or  their  service. 
Nav,  there  is  soiuid  reasoning  for  believing  tliat  idola- 
try, at  the  begiiming  of  its  deplorable  evils,  was  not  an 


Lkct.XLIV.]        the  first  COMI1LA.NDMENT.  431 

invention  of  false  deities  by  the  mind  seeking  after 
divinity,  bnt  a  departure  from  the  worship  of  the  true 
God  who  had  revealed  himself  to  the  fathers  of  our 
race.  Nor  was  it  so  much  a  denial  of  the  true  God 
as  the  putting  between  themselves  and  him  inferior 
beings,  or  powers,  who  exercised  over  them  immedi- 
ately an  authority  and  control  derived  from  the  original 
one.  This  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  Aaron,  when  he,  at  the 
impious  demand  of  the  Israelites  for  gods  to  go  before 
them,  copied,  in  what  our  translators  call  a  golden  calf, 
the  Egyptian  emblem  of  the  productive  or  agricultural 
power,  and  then  proclaimed  a  feast  in  honor  of  the 
idol  as  a  feast  to  Jehovah  (Exodus  xxxii.  4,  5),  he 
meant,  and  the  people  understood  him  to  mean,  not 
that  they  denied  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah,  but  that 
they  worshipped  him  as  represented  by  the  idol.  So 
the  apostle  (Romans  i.  20-23)  says  of  the  heathen : 
"  When  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as  God, 
[that  is,  they  did  not  give  him  the  spiritual  homage  due 
to  an  infinite  spirit,]  neither  were  thankful ;  but  became 
vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was 
darkened  ;  professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became 
fools,  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God 
[that  is,  the  eternal,  immaterial  God]  into  an  image 
made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four- 
footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things."  Whatever  was 
afterwards  the  utterly  brutish  reliance  on  such  dumb 
idols  and  gross  fictions  of  their  depraved  fancy,  they  did 
not  intend  at  the  beginning  anything  more  than  to  rep- 
resent by  such  emblems  the  power  of  the  true  God, 
whose  spiritual  perfections  they  were  too  gross  to  ap- 
prehend. Hence  we  see  that  the  real  nature  of  idolatry 
is  nothing  else  than  a  depraved  tendency  of  sensualized 
man  to  give  to  things  which  are  seen  the  trust  and  regard 


432  THE  FIRST  COjVIMANDJIENT.         which  should  go  through  them  and  above  them  to  the 
invisible  God,  to  rest  in  the  creature  ratlier  than  in  the 
Creator,  and  rely  on  the  palpable  means  instead  of  the 
spiritual  directing  cause.  This  is  in  exact  accordance 
with  the  definition  of  idolatry  as  given  by  the  answer 
to  the  95th  Question. 

"  Idolatry  is,  instead  of,  or  beside,  the  one  true  God, 
who  has  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  to  contrive 
[invent,  imagine]  or  to  have  any  other  object  in  which 
men  place  their  trust."  Whatever  be  the  object  to 
which  wc  give  the  trust  or  any  part  of  the  trust  due  to 
the  Infinite  Supreme,  thus  putting  it  between  us  and 
him,  is  in  the  commandment  called  a  god.  "  Thou 
shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me." 

We  are  now  prepared  to  learn, 

Secondly  :  What  G-od  doth  enjoin  in  the  first  com- 
mand. 

The  answer  in  the  Catechism  is  very  instructive  and 
particular,  showing  that  by  the  word  trust,  in  the  defi- 
nition of  idolatry,  are  included  all  those  dispositions  and 
acts  of  the  soul  comprehended  by  the  wo",onip  and  ser- 
vice of  the  one  true  and  only  God.  It  (the  answer) 
has  two  parts, — the  one  teaching  us  Avhat  the  command 
forbids,  the  other  what  it  requires.  If  we  ascertain 
the  truths  in  the  latter,  we  shall  clearly  imderstand 
those  in  the  former. 

I.  We,  or,  as  our  church  bids  us  each  answer  for 
himself,  "I,"  must  "  learn  rightly  to  know  the  only 
true  God  ;  trust  in  him  alone ;  with  humility  and  pa- 
tience submit  to  him ;  expect  all  good  things  from  him 
only  ;  love,  fear,  and  glorify  him  with  my  whole  heart, 
so  that  I  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures  rather 
than  commit  [do]  even  the  least  thing  contrary  to  his 
will." 


Leot.  XLIV.]         the  first  COJmANDMENT.  433 

Here  are  several  divisions  of  the  great  duty  we  owe 
to  God. 

1.  Right  knowledge  of  God.  The  command  ex- 
pressly forbids  any  other  gods  but  the  one  Jehovali  or 
Lord.  To  imagine  him,  either  from  ignorance  or  way- 
wardness, to  be  in  any  respect  other  than  he  is,  is  not 
to  acknowledge  the  true  God,  but  to  set  up  in  his  place 
a  creature  of  our  own  fancy ;  and  as  we  cannot  know 
God  otherwise  than  from  himself,  it  is  our  primary  duty 
to  know  what  he  is  from  his  own  revelation  of  himself 
in  the  Scriptures ;  therefore  our  ideas  of  God  are  true 
only  so  far  as  they  are  conformable  in  character  and 
degree  to  those  given  of  him  in  his  own  word.  There 
are  mysteries  in  the  divine  nature  as  far  above  our 
comprehension  as  the  infinite  is  above  the  finite  ;  but 
the  Spirit,  which  "  searcheth  even  the  deep  things  of 
God,"  has  declared  all  that  it  is  profitable  for  us  to 
know  this  side  of  heaven,  and  no  more.  There  is  no 
reasoning  beyond  this,  because  we  have  no  facts  from 
which  to  draw  inferences,  no  data  on  which  to  found 
our  conclusions.  We  have  no  more  right  to  go  beyond 
what  is  written  than  we  have  to  withhold  our  belief 
from  what  is  written.  The  God  of  the  Bible  is  the  one 
only  true  God. 

2.  Trust  in  him.  The  Scripture  reveals  him  as 
infinitely  perfect  in  all  his  attributes  ;  and,  therefore, 
his  absolute  government  must  be  infinitely  wise  and 
just,  and,  in  Christ,  full  of  goodness  and  mercy  toward 
all  who  acknowledge  him  to  be  their  God.  Hence,  if 
we  rightly  know  God,  our  confidence  will  be  complete, 
unhesitating,  unfaltering,  and  full  of  peace.  "  The 
Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoice."  Such  trust  will 
make  us  humbly  and  patiently  submissive  to  all  his 

TOL.  II.  28 


434  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.        dispensations,  however  tiying  or  unintelligible,  towards 
us  ;  for  are  we  not  wholly  dependent  on  him,  and  is  it 
not  his  omnipotent,  unchangeable  will  to  provide  for 
his  children's  best  good  in  the  future  as  at  the  present, 
in  time  and  in  eternity  ?  When  there  is  perfect  confi- 
dence in  God,  there  can  be  neither  discontent,  impa- 
tience, or  despondency.  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  forever";  therefore  the  past,  the  present,  the 
future  in  his  almighty  hands  are  right.  Therefore  our 
Lord  taught  us  to  pray  to  him  as  our  Father  in  heav- 
en, "  Thy  kingdom  come,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as 
it  is  in  heaven  ;  "  and  himself,  our  divine  example  of 
human  piety,  when  passing  through  his  unutterable 
grief  for  our  atonement,  took  the  cup  into  his  trem- 
bhng  hand,  saying,  "  Father,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou 
wilt." 

3.  The  love  of  our  whole  hearts.  Love  is  the 
grand  attraction  by  which  God  unites  all  holy,  intel- 
ligent creatures  to  himself,  and  in  him  to  each  other. 
It  is  the  union  which  seciu'es  the  harmony  of  the  godly 
in  Christ.  We  love  that  which  we  admire  and  delight 
to  contemplate  ;  and  God  is  the  original  and  infinite 
perfection  of  all  that  is  worthy  of  our  admiration  and 
delight ;  therefore  should  he  have  our  aff'ectionate,  glad 
adoration :  we  love  those  from  whom  we  receive  the 
elements  and  means  of  our  happiness  ;  and  God  is  the 
author  and  giver  of  all  good  :  we  love  those  who  love 
us,  and  have  fellowship  with  us  ;  and  God  loves  us 
with  an  everlasting,  boundless,  tender  love,  as  his  crea- 
tures, his  servants,  and  children  ;  therefore  should  we 
give  him  our  first,  best,  highest  love ;  nay,  our  hearts 
should  be  so  filled  with  love  to  him  that  no  love  to  any 
creature  can  find  room  within  it,  except  as  it  is  com- 


the  first  COMMANDMENT.  435 

prehended  and  sanctified  by  supreme  affection,  esteem, 
gratitude,  and  desire  for  the  one  only  true  God. 

4.  Fear.  Not  the  terror  which  the  power  of  an 
enemy  inspires,  nor  the  servile  dread  which  forces  sub- 
mission to  a  hard,  irresistible  master  ;  but  a  reverence 
filling  the  heart  that  is  filled  with  love,  an  awful  hom- 
age to  his  sovereign  majesty,  humble  veneration  of  his 
infinite  attributes,  jealous  caution  lest  we  offend  against 
his  will,  and  a  constant  sense  of  his  holy  presence 
searching  our  thoughts  and  taking  account  of  all  our 
doings.  The  devils  tremble  while  they  believe  in  the 
vindictive  authority  of  the  one  only  true  God  ;  but  the 
angels  veil  their  faces  and  worship  close  to  the  glory  of 
his  throne  :  so  his  true  children  never  love  him  more 
or  obey  him  more  gladly  than  when,  bowing  lowest  at 
his  feet,  they  adore  him  Lord  over  all,  and  acknowledge 
that  in  him  alone  they  "  live  and  move  and  have  their 
being." 

5.  The  result  of  this  knowledge,  trust,  love,  and  fear 
of  God,  the  only  God,  is  an  entire  consecration  to  his 
service ;  or,  as  the  Catechism  has  it,  we  "  glorify  him 
with  our  whole  heart,  so  that  we  x'enounce  and  forsake 
all  creatures  rather  than  commit  the  least  thing  con- 
trary to  his  will."  God  is  our  creator,  therefore  he  is 
our  owner  ;  he  is  our  only  king,  therefore  Ave  are  his 
subjects  alone  ;  he  is  our  only  teacher,  therefore  we 
should  learn  from  him  alone  ;  he  is  our  only  benefac- 
tor, therefore  our  whole  lives  should  be  thank-offerings 
to  his  love  ;  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all 
things  consist,  therefore  is  he  alone  "  worthy  to  re- 
ceive honor  and  glory  and  blessing."  So  the  true  be- 
liever in  the  one  only  God  makes  it  the  purpose  of  his 
heart,  as  it  is  the  purpose  of  his  creation,  to  glorify  God 


436  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.        in  all  his  thoughts  and  words  and  wavs,  that  his  Maker 
may  delight  in  him,  and  men,  "  seeing  his  good  works, 
may  glorify  his  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

II.  The  sin  forbidden  by  the  command  is  the  oppo- 
site of  all  this.  It  "  enjoins,"  as  the  Catechism  says, 
"  That  I,  as  sincerely  as  I  desire  the  salvation  of  my 
soul,  avoid  and  flee  from  all  idolatry;''''  and  idolatry, 
as  defined  in  answer  to  the  next  question,  is  the  hav- 
ing any  other  object  of  trust  than  the  one  true  God. 
Whenever,  therefore,  we  give  to  any  creature  that 
which  belongs  to  God  only,  we  are  idolaters,  and  the 
object  of  such  impious  trust  is  an  idol.  It  matters  not 
what  it  is :  an  image  cut  out  of  wood  or  stone,  an  imag- 
ination of  our  own  as  to  what  God  is  or  should  be,  the 
laws  or  processes  of  nature,  worldly  possessions,  honor 
or  opinions,  relatives  or  friends,  human  skill,  wisdom, 
or  power,  —  whatever  it  be,  if  we  so  set  our  hearts 
upon  it  as  to  bring  it  between  us  and  God,  it  is  an  idol. 
In  these  days  Christianity  has  so  far  enlightened  us 
Protestants  that  none  of  you,  my  hearers,  would  do 
such  an  absurd  thing  as  to  set  u})  an  altar,  offer  sacri- 
fices, and  make  prayers  to  any  created  thing.  Yet  wc 
are  scarcely  less  idolaters  if,  for  any  reason,  we  turn 
away  from  God  and  put  our  trust  elsewhere,  instead  of 
depending  on  him  alone,  and  on  him  as  he  has  made 
himself  known  by  his  divine  word.  Idolatry  is  a  great 
sin,  but  atheism  is,  if  possible,  a  greater.  It  is  a  gross, 
profane  absurdity  to  worship  a  false  god  ;  but  what 
shall  be  said  of  those  who  worship  no  God  ?  Yet  such 
is  their  atheism,  who  do  not  by  a  hearty  homage,  trust, 
and  affection  glorify  him  in  whom  their  "  breath  is 
and  in  whose  hands  are  all  their  ways."  There  are 
few  irreligious  persons  among  the   heathen  ;    such  as 


THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.  437 

their  religion  is,  they  practise  it ;  but  among  us  tlie 
irreligious  are  many  :  they  know  too  much  to  worship 
images  ;  they  are  not  willing  to  worship  the  God  of  the 
Bible ;  and,  therefore,  they  worship  no  God  at  all. 
God  is  not  in  their  thoughts  ;  they  do  not  seek  him,  or 
trust  in  him,  or  obey  him,  or  give  him  glory.  They 
"  love  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world,"  but 
"  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  them."  Will  not 
God  be  avenged  of  such  sinners  as  these  ? 

There  has  always  been  a  disposition  in  mankind 
to  pry  into  the  future,  or  things  hidden  from  mere 
human  knowledge  ;  hence  the  practice  in  all  ages  and 
countries  of  what  is  comprehended  under  the  general 
name  of  divination.  The  term  itself  shows  that  it  is 
an  attempt,  from  extraordinary  signs  in  nature  which  is 
under  divine  control,  from  some  spiritual  being  superior 
in  knowledge  to  ourselves,  or  mortal  supposed  to  be  su- 
pernaturally  endowed  or  inspired,  to  learn  that  which 
the  true  God  has  not  revealed.  It  is  most  probable,  that, 
as  idolatry  was  originally  a  departure  from  the  true  God, 
so  divination  began  with  profane  attempts  to  counterfeit 
the  miraculous  signs  and  portents  by  which  God,  in 
early  ages,  made  known  his  presence  and  his  will,  as 
also  the  prophecies  which  he  caused  to  be  uttered  by 
men  immediately  under  his  impulse.  The  origin  of 
magic  in  Chaldea,  near  the  cradle  of  our  postdiluvian 
race,  whence  it  passed  into  India  (where  it  received 
that  name),  Egypt,  and  other  parts  of  the  world,  is  a 
strong  indication  of  this.  The  arts  of  such  divination 
have  been  so  various  and  many,  that  volumes  could  not 
enumerate  them  ;  and  the  Catechism  makes  mention 
of  only  four  or  five. 

1.    Sorcery^    which   is  a   resort   to    the    evil    spirit, 


i38  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.  who,  according  to  a  very  early  belief,  was  a  being  of 
great  malignity  in  power  and  wisdom,  rivalling  the 
spirit  of  good.  A  modern  name  for  it  is  diabolism, 
devilism,  or  the  black  art.  To  ask  counsel  or  aid  of 
the  devil  is  flat  insult  to  the  true  God. 

2.  Soothsaying^  as  it  is  in  the  Dutch  (tvaer  seg- 
ginge),  o;*,  as  it  is  in  the  German,*  superstitious  resort 
to  charms  or  incantations  (aherglduhische  Sagen),  com- 
prehends all  use  of  enchantments  and  consultation  of 
persons  pretending  skill  in  such  deceits. 

3.  Superstition,  which  is  an  over-credulity,  attrib- 
uting, without  reason  or  scriptural  faith,  meanings  and 
effects  to  things  and  occurrences  with  which  they  have 
no  connection,  —  as,  thinking  Friday  an  unlucky  day, 
or  a  comet  ominous  of  disaster,  or  that  chances  at 
cards,  or  fortune-telling  tables,  show  any  facts  beyond 
ordinary  providence  and  the  revealed  Scriptures.  (It 
is  noteworthy  here,  that  superstition  is  distinguished 
from  veneration  of  the  true  God  by  always  producing 
gloom  and  dread.  It  is  "  the  spirit  of  fear,"  as  opposed 
to  "  the  spirit  of  love  and  of  power  and  of  a  sound 
mind.")  In  a  word,  Avhatever  notion  or  act,  especially 
in  attempting  to  get  a  knowledge  of,  or  control  over, 
things  not  shown  us  by  God  in  nature  or  the  Bible, 
which  is  not  consistent  with  a  simple  trust  iu  his  over- 
ruling providence  and  grace.  We  must  not  delude  our 
pride  by  thinking  such  profane  follies  peculiar  to  hea- 
then nations  and  darker  ages.  Superstition,  in  various 
forms,  is  rife  among  us  at  this  very  time,  and  will  continue 
to  prevail  until  Christian  faitli,  enlightening  reason,  has 
cast  out  all  power  of  the  devil  from  our  hearts.     In- 

*  There  is  a  variation  here  from  the  German  in  the  Dutch  version. 


THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.  439 

deed,  it  Avould  seem  to  have  received  a  neAV  impulse, 
and  to  meet  with  ready  dupes,  since  so-called  spiritual- 
ism, (which  is  nothing  else  than  necromancy,  or  super- 
natural communication  with  departed  spirits,)  the  silli- 
est of  all  divining  contrivances,  has  obtained  so  wide  a 
credence,  and  that  even  among  cultivated  minds.  No 
true  Christian,  worshipping  the  true  God,  should  give 
the  slightest  heed  to  such  miserable  impiety,  nor  will 
he  be  ensnared  by  it  so  long  as  he  maintains  a  lively 
faith  in  the  promises  of  his  heavenly  Father ;  for  then 
he  will  believe  none  but  the  God  of  the  Bible,  and 
desire  to  know  no  more  than  what  God  teaches  him. 
Hence  our  church,  at  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's 
supper,  solemnly  and  peremptorily  bars  from  its  pre- 
cious privileges  "  all  enchanters,  diviners,  charmers, 
and  those  who  confide  [or  put  faith]  in  such  enchant- 
ments." Let  us,  beloved,  seeing  how  weak  our  human 
nature  is,  beware,  lest  we  also,  being  led  away  with 
the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  our  own  steadfast- 
ness. "  Let  us  walk  in  the  light  as  children  of  the 
light,  because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light 
now  shineth." 

4.  Invocation  of  saints  or  other  creatures.  This 
sin  is  pronounced  by  our  church,  in  her  form  for  the 
Lord's  supper,  as  not  at  all  compatible  with  genuine 
faith.  In  both  places,  worship  of  deceased  saints  and 
even  angels,  by  invoking  their  aid  or  asking  them  to 
intercede  for  us  with  God,  as  practised  and  approved 
by  the  Papal  church,  is  particularly  aimed  at  and  de- 
nounced. It  is  nothing  else  than  a  practice  of  ancient 
heathenism,  which  made  gods  of  dead  heroes,  or  kings, 
or  wise  men,  and  therefore  should  have  no  place 
among  Christians.     It  is  the  extreme  of  irrationalism 


440  THE  FIRST  COaiMANDSIENT.         , 

to  dream  that  a  human  spirit  can  have  the  omnipresent 
heart-searching  faculty  of  God,  so  as  to  hear  our  pray- 
ers and  know  our  thoughts  ;  nor  is  there  a  word  of 
Scripture  to  encourage  a  thought  that  God  has  ever 
committed,  or  will  commit,  such  power  upon  any  crea- 
ture. There  is  one,  "  and  but  one  Mediator  between 
God  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  also  Im- 
manuel  God  with  us."  It  is  a  fiction  of  antichrist,  to 
give  to  any  other  the  prerogative  which  is  Christ's 
alone,  and  therefore  violates  the  first  and  greatest  of 
all  the  commandments. 

You  see,  then,  brethren,  how  great  a  blessing  we 
enjoy  in  the  Scriptures  of  our  Christian  faith.  "  The 
world  by  wisdom  [of  its  own]  knew  not  God ; "  and 
when  unwilling  to  have  his  holy  image  in  their  thoughts, 
they  ceased  to  worship  him,  who  is  a  spirit,  in  spirit 
and  in  truth ;  they  sank  into  all  the  irrational,  degrad- 
ing, cruel,  lascivious  vices  of  heathenism.  We  pity  their 
stupidity ;  we  abhor  their  practices.  Yet  such  were  our 
own  ancestors,  and  such  should  we  ourselves  be,  but 
for  the  light  of  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed 
God."  Jehovah,  who  led  his  ancient  Israel  out  of  the 
house  of  bondage,  has  led  us  and  our  fathers  out  of 
worse  slavery.  Let  us  bless  his  holy  name,  and,  offer- 
ing him  the  undivided  homage  of  our  hearts,  entreat 
him,  while  we  rely  only  on  his  grace,  to  keep  us  from 
falling. 

Remember,  also,  dearly  beloved,  that  it  needs  not  a 
sculptured  image,  or  invocation  of  a  demon,  or  charm, 
or  incantation,  to  constitute  idolatry.  Whatever  comes 
between  us  and  God,  receiving  the  tnist  which  should 
be  put  in  him  alone,  or  shutting  out  from  us  the  blessed 


the  first  COMMAITOMENT.  441 

light  which  shines  in  his  gracious  countenance,  is  an 
idol. 

Nay,  if  we  do  not  know  him  and  Jesus  Christ,  wor- 
shipping him,  through  our  only  Mediator,  with  all  the 
love  of  our  hearts,  all  the  adoration  of  our  minds,  all 
the  strength  of  our  souls,  we  are  idolaters,  because  we 
may  be  sure  that  some  creature  has  come  between  us 
and  him.  Let  these  awful  words,  O  Holy  Spirit,  be 
written  deep  in  our  hearts  :  — 
"  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me." 


LECTURE   XLV. 

ON  THE  OEIGIN  AND  HISTOEY  OF  IDOLATRY. 


THIRTY -FIFTH    LORD'S    DAY. 

ON   THE 

ORIGIN   AND   HISTORY   OF   IDOLATRY. 

T^HE  religious  worship  of  any  object  other  than  the 
-*-  Infinite  Supreme  is  so  contrary  to  pure  reason,  and 
the  prevalence  of  the  monstrous  error,  where  an  immedi- 
ate or  a  written  revelation  has  not  shed  its  divine  light, 
so  nearly  universal,  that  the  origin  and  history  of  idola- 
try should  excite  a  grave  curiosity  in  the  mind  of  every 
thoughtful  Christian.  The  evident  pi'oneness  of  our 
race  to  the  deadly  sin,  and  the  deep  moral  degradation 
by  which  it  is  infallibly  accompanied  and  followed,  ren- 
der the  inquiry  one  of  the  utmost  practical  importance. 
There  is  the  more  need  of  thoroughly  investigating  the 
subject,  from  the  fact,  too  little  known,  that  the  specious 
but  deadly  sophistries  of  infidel  speculators,  especially 
those  of  the  French  School  during  the  last  century,  have 
been  suffered  to  pervade  the  treatises  of  Christian  stu- 
dents, and  thence  the  opinions  of  Christians  generally. 
We  must  refute  and  utterly  repudiate  their  falsities  be- 
fore we  can  take  the  first  step  in  the  right  direction ; 
nor  will  the  refutation  be  difficult  if  we  meet  them  at 
their  starting-point,  and  compare  their  imaginary  data 
with  the  statements  of  Scripture,  and  the  corroboration 
of  those  statements  by  reason  and  history. 

The  grand  falsity  of  these  philosophers,  and  the  basis 
on  which  they  have  built  all  their  scheme,  is  the  as- 
sumption that  barbarism  and  ignorance  was  the  original 


446  ON  IDOLATKT.  state  of  man ;  and  that,  by  the  force  of  natural  reason 
actine;  on  the  inconveniences  and  o;rowino;  necessities  of 
such  a  state,  they  have  evolved  the  cultivation  of  the 
soil,  the  laws  of  property,  general  virtue,  the  combina- 
tions of  government,  in  a  word,  tlie  whole  social  svs- 
tem ;  nay,  ignorant  in  a  great  degree  of  natural  causes, 
and  stimulated  by  a  desire  of  happiness,  which  the  least 
experience  taught  them  was  beyond  their  ability  to 
secure,  they  sought  the  aid  and  deprecated  the  wrath 
of  a  higher  power,  and  so  constructed  a  religion  in  the 
worship,  first,  of  perceptible  forces,  as,  light,  wnnd,  the 
flow  of  waters,  vegetation,  —  then,  of  imaginary  beings, 
invisible  but  ever  active,  controlHng  those  forces.  These 
they  represented  to  the  eye  by  various  forms,  princi- 
pally an  exaggeration  of  the  human,  grotesque,  or  beau- 
tiful, according  to  their  taste,  clothing  them  with  ap- 
propriate attributes  and  symbols.  When  knowledge 
increased,  and  cultivated  reflection  showed  them  the 
need  of  a  yet  higher  authority  to  which  men  should 
feel  themselves  responsible,  they  attained  the  ideas  of  a 
Supreme  Being  and  a  future  state  of  reward  and  pun- 
ishment. The  more  atheistical  of  the  anti-scriptural 
theorists  ridicule  all  such  efforts  after  religion  as  slav- 
ishly superstitious,  and  denounce  religion  itself  as  an 
imposture  of  priests  and  tyrants  combining  to  hold  the 
vulgar  in  subjection  by  visionary  terrors ;  hence  the 
atheism  of  revolutionary  France  ;  but  those  wdio  are 
not  wilhng  to  deny  God  a  place  in  the  universe,  con- 
tend that  all  religion  has  been  a  legitimate,  gradual 
discovery  by  the  human  soul  seeking  after  truth,  as  the 
poet  expresses  it :  — 

"  Through  nature  up  to  nature's  God." 

This  scheme,  as  you  see,  finds  man  living  apart  in  a 


ON  roOLATRY.  447 

wilderness,  scarcely  raised  above  the  wild  brutes,  sub- 
sisting by  the  chase  or  fishing,  and  on  vegetables  of 
spontaneous  growth, — then,  as  families  increased,  and 
these  resources  became  inadequate,  contriving  the  arts 
of  life  and  the  morals  requisite  for  communities,  of 
which  religion  is  the  highest.  Two  facts  are  thus  ad- 
mitted,  which  we  note,  because  useful  to  our  future 
argument  and  fatal  to  that  of  our  opponents :  first, 
that  man  had  a  beginning ;  secondly,  that  he  has  a 
natural  tendency  towards  religion,  as  necessary  to  the 
development  of  his  better  condition.  The  human  sav- 
age could  not  have  sprung  into  being  uncaused,  and 
with  filial  instinct  must  have  sought  his  author. 

The  scheme  is,  however,  contradicted  by  all  history 
and  the  traditions  of  our  race.  We  have  no  accredited 
instance  of  a  people  elevating  themselves  out  of  barba- 
rism to  civilization  without  foreign  aid.  Some  plausi- 
ble attempts  have  been  made  to  adduce  instances  of 
the  kind,  as  the  ancient  Mexicans  and  the  Greeks,  the 
civilization  of  both  of  whom  have  been  claimed  to  be 
indigenous ;  but,  putting  aside  other  facts  which  our 
time  will  not  allow  us  to  cite,  the  great  fact  cannot  be 
questioned,  that  there  was  civilization  in  the  world 
antecedent  to  their  rise.  The  source  from  which  the 
Mexican  sprang,  and  their  early  condition,  are  too 
deeply  obscure  to  permit  any  theory  of  their  growth, 
though  the  character  of  their  monuments  strongly 
savors  of  an  eastern  transoceanic  kindred.  But  Avith 
regard  to  European,  or,  indeed,  the  whole  of  the  old- 
world  civilization,  we  can  —  unless  we  ignore  the  uni- 
versal  voice  of  classical  antiquity,  backed  by  proof  in 
the  names  of  places,  rivers,  mountains,  and  cities,  fixing 
unalterably  the  main  truth  of  their  traditions  —  trace 


448  ON  IDOLATRY.  the  transfer  of  grafts  of  civilization  from  the  farthest 
east  to  the  ultimate  north.  Greece  avowed  her  deri- 
vation of  culture  from  Asia  and  Egypt.  The  very 
names  about  the  Athenian  Acropolis  perpetuate  those  of 
the  Egyptian  immigrants  who  introduced  laws  and  arts 
among  her  aboriginal  Pelasgi.  From  the  beginning  of 
her  annals,  down  to  the  northern  invasion,  her  people, 
philosophers  as  well  as  the  illiterate,  regarded  the  east- 
ern lands  much  as  we  Americans  regard  Europe.  Their 
religious  system  and  ceremonies  were  to  a  great  extent 
the  same  as  the  Egyptian.  The  most  trusted  oracle  of 
all  was  that  of  Jupiter  Amnion  in  the  Libyan  desert, 
and  he  was  clearly  the  Osiris  of  Egypt  and  probably 
the  Ham  of  the  Ethiopians  ;  while  the  Egyptians  them- 
selves frankly  owned  that  they  had  derived  their  sys- 
tem, religious  and  philosophical,  from  a  far  more  remote 
period.  We  all  know  the  influence  of  Greece  over 
Italy,  and  of  Italy  over  northern  Europe  ;  nay,  that 
maritime  part  of  Italy  about  the  modern  Naples  and 
eastward  to  the  sites  of  Crotona  and  Lybaris,  are  full 
of  evidences  that  Egyptian  influences  were  there  long 
before  those  of  Greece.  Similar,  though  not  so  distinct, 
traces  of  Phoenician  emigration  may  be  found  in  more 
northern  Europe  as  in  Southern  France  and  in  Ireland, 
or,  if  we  credit  acute  ethnologists,  in  various  other  re- 
gions. From  Europe  civilization  has  come  here  to  the 
western  continent,  and  is  now  rolling  back  the  tide 
over  the  decayed  nations  from  which  it  originally 
flowed.  All  this,  and  in  many  ways  wo  have  no  time 
to  particularize,  points  backward  and  backward  until 
we  reach  the  acknowledged  seat  of  the  first  human 
philosophy  in  Chaldea,  close  to  the  region  which  Scrip- 
ture makes  the  second  cradle  of  the  race,  where  the 


Lect.  XLV.j  ON  roOLATRY.  449 

great  temple  of  Babel,  or  Baal,  or  Bel,  or  Belus,  was 
built,  and  whence  was  the  dispersion  of  the  nations. 
We  find  the  notion  of  man's  original  barbarism  no- 
where in  antiquity,  but  always  the  reverse,  —  a  chief 
proof  of  which  was  the  general  traditionary  belief  in  a 
golden  age  when  man  was  fresh  from  the  creating 
power,  of  which  Hesiod,  as  old  as  Homer,  or,  as  many 
think,  older,  gives  a  glowing  description,  accompanied 
with  many  other  asserted  facts  corroboratory  of  our 
position.  Allow  us  but  the  one  fact,  that  man  had  a 
beginning,  and  his  origin  must  be  attributed  to  a  crea- 
tor, —  then  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  intelli- 
gent cause  who  gave  him  such  a  wonderful  being,  phys- 
ically, intellectually,  and  morally,  would  have  intro- 
duced his  creature  into  the  world  a  mere  savage  and 
without  knowledge  of  Him  "  in  whom  his  breath  was 
and  in  whose  hands  were  all  his  ways,"  or,  as  the 
heathen  poet,  quoted  by  Paul  on  Areopagus,  says, 
whose  **  offspring  "  he  was. 

It  is  remarkable  also,  and  as  susceptible  of  clear 
proof  as  it  is  remarkable,  that  men,  so  far  from  becom- 
ing more  moral  and  religious  as  they  descended  from 
antiquity,  actually  grew  worse  and  worse.  This  was 
seen  in  the  history  of  their  philosophy,  as  well  as  in 
that  of  the  people  ;  nor  were  they  ever  weary  —  philos- 
ophers, poets,  historians,  and  moralists  —  of  praising  the 
ancient  manners  and  regretting  their  decay.  In  the 
same  manner  we  hear  them  always  ascribing  their  re- 
ligious habits  to  the  example  of  the  past,  never  claim- 
ing them  as  inventions  of  their  own.  One  of  the  finest 
passages  of  Plato,  respecting  the  existence  of  divine 
power  and  the  duty  of  worship,  is  an  indignant  burst 
of  astonishment  that  any  could  doubt  the  gods,  when 

VOL.   II.  29 


450  ON  IDOLATRY.  they  all  had  been  taught  the  elements  of  religion  on 
their  nurses'  laps  and  at  their  mother's  knee,  and  by 
the  unanimous  example  of  all  people,  civilized  and  bar- 
barian, who  worship  in  temples  and  bow  down  at  the 
rising  and  setting  of  the  sun.  A  clear  acknowledg- 
ment that  such  faith  was  traditionary.  Indeed,  so  uni- 
versal was  this  reference  to  divinity,  that  all  the  older, 
more  eminent  legislators  and  teachers  claimed  the  re- 
spect of  tlie  multitude  on  account  of  a  divine  inspira- 
tion. The  founders  of  states  boasted  a  divine  lineage. 
Lycurgus  in  Greece,  as  Numa  in  Rome,  asserted  them- 
selves to  be  the  mediums  of  divine  instruction.  Pythag- 
oras, at  once  the  head  of  a  sect  and  the  founder  of  a 
philosophical  republic,  who  drew  his  mystical  doctrines 
from  Egypt,  was  called  by  his  disciples  the  Son  of  God, 
and  assumed  miraculous  gifts.  Plato,  on  whose  infant 
lips  a  swarm  of  bees  lovingly  clustered,  was  on  similar 
testimony  virgin-'born ;  and  even  the  grave,  good  Soc- 
rates had,  as  he  asserted,  his  guardian  demon.  The 
old  poets,  who  were  also  the  historians  and  the  proph- 
ets of  early  times,  readily  received  the  epithet  "  divine" 
from  their  supposed  inspiration.  It  were  easy  to  cite 
a  multitude  of  like  instances,  showing  that  the  human 
mind  has  never  been  satisfied  with  mere  human  author- 
ity, but  has  always  demanded  divine  testimonies  to 
moral  doctrines. 

If,  as  we  have  shown,  the  common  belief  of  man- 
kind has  been  always  against  the  idea  that  barbarism 
was  man's  original  condition,  and  that  his  progi'ess  has 
been  toward  refinement  and  religion,  the  books  of  the 
Scriptures  contradict  it  even  more  positively.  We  see 
the  two  brothers  near  the  gate  of  Eden,  —  one  a  tiller 
of  the  ground,  the  other  a  shepherd.    The  earliest  work 


Lect.  XL  v.]  on  idolatry.  451 

recorded  of  Noah  after  tlie  deluge  was  tlie  planting  of 
a  vineyard.  The  circumcised  patriarchs,  because  pil- 
grims without  a  country,  were  migratory  herdsmen, 
while  the  farthest  records  show  us  Egypt  eminent  for 
its  agricultural  wealth,  and  ruled  by  shej)herd-kings. 
In  vain  do  we  search  for  a  barbarous  people  in  those 
remote  ages.  Barbarism  was  of  a  later  date.  Adam, 
who  conversed  with  God,  his  Creator,  as  a  child  with 
his  father,  must  have  learned  from  his  infinite  Teacher 
the  great  truths  of  religion,  and  cannot  be  supposed  to 
have  forgotten  them  in  his  fall,  but  must  have  taught 
them  to  his  multiplying  descendants  till  the  close  of 
his  lono;  term.  Between  him  and  the  callino;  of  Abra- 
ham,  we  see  that  there  were  needed  only  three  —  Me- 
thuselah, Noah,  and  Shem  —  to  hand  down  the  pri- 
meval doctrines. 

Religion,  therefore,  was  no  discovery  of  reason,  no 
gradual  development.  True  religion  was  the  original 
faith  of  men  in  the  divine  testimony.  This  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  account  given  by  the  apostle  Paul  in  the 
first  chapter  of  the  Romans,  where  he  tells  us :  "  The 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  uncod- 
liness  and  unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  the  truth 
in  unrighteousness  ;  because  that  which  may  be  known 
of  God  is  manifest  in  them  ;  for  God  hath  shown  it  unto 
them ;  for  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation 
of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the 
things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  God- 
head :  so  that  they  are  without  excuse :  because  that 
when  the}'  knew  God,  they  worshipped  him  not  as  God, 
neither  were  thankful,  but  became  vain  in  their  imagina- 
tions, and  their  foolisli  heart  was  darkened.  Professing 
themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools,  and  changed 


452  Om  IDOLATRY.  tlie  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  made 
like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  four-footed 
beasts,  and  creeping  things.  Wherefore  God  also  gave 
them  up  to  uncleanness,  through  the  lusts  of  their  own 
hearts,  to  dishonor  their  own  bodies  between  them- 
selves :  who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and 
worshipped  and  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Cre- 
ator, who  is  blessed  forever.  Amen."  Here  the  apostle, 
of  his  inspired  wisdom,  declares  that  the  nations  had 
originallj  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God  ;  but  unwilling 
to  retain  a  sense  of  his  holy  spiritual  majesty,  yet 
unable  to  banish  all  thought  of  divinity,  they  turned 
their  worship  to  senseless  images  of  man  and  brutes, 
and  even  reptiles  ;  and,  therefore,  God  suffered  them 
to  lose  his  true  idea,  and  in  consequence  the  most 
deplorable  immoralities  took  the  place  of  that  virtue 
which  the  worship  of  a  spiritual  God  enforces.  Idol- 
atry was  not  the  attempt  of  a  barbarous  mind  to  seek 
divinity,  but  the  departui'e  of  civilized,  instructed  mind 
from  God,  and  barbarism  itself  the  fall  of  mankind 
from  original  civilization. 

The  theory  of  the  Bible  is  corroborated  by  the  facts 
of  history. 

We  mark,  however,  more  particularly  that  it  was 
the  spirituality  of  the  divine  nature  which  offended  the 
corrupted  heart  of  man.  A  spiritual  Creator,  infinitely 
above  the  passions  and  appetites  of  corporeal  life,  and 
the  pure  ruler  over  the  creatures  he  had  made,  held 
them  in  fear  and  restraint  from  the  sensualities  they 
desired  to  enjoy  ;  and,  therefore,  they  exerted  their 
wicked  ingenuity  to  darken  their  hearts  against  spirit- 
ual holy  light.  They  could  not  do  without  religion 
altogether ;    the  evidences  of  divine  power  were   too 


Lect.  xlv.]  on  idolatry.  453 

strong,  their  dependence  on  power  higher  than  their 
own,  too  manifest ;  the  habit,  grown  almost  instinctive, 
to  pray  and  worship  when  calamities  threatened  or 
successes  M'ere  doubtful,  could  not  be  repressed  ;  and  so 
they  set  up  before  their  eyes  symbolical  images  which 
they  worshipped,  not  as  they  would  have  said  had  they 
been  questioned,  because  they  considered  those  sense- 
less shapes  to  possess  divine  attributes,  but  because  they 
sugeested  the  ideas  of  God  to  their  mind.  It  was  the 
same  error  as  that  into  which  the  Papist  has  fallen,  who 
will  tell  you  that  he  does  not  worship  the  crucifix  he 
holds  before  him,  but  the  Saviour  whom  the  image 
brings  eloquently  to  his  remembrance.  We  have  a 
striking  illustration  of  this  in  the  Israelites  at  the  foot 
of  Sinai ;  who,  impatient  of  delay  when  the  glorious 
sign  of  the  divine  presence,  which  had  led  them  out  of 
Egypt,  rested  long  on  the  top  of  the  mount,  demanded 
of  Aaron  that  he  should  make  them  gods  which  should 
go  before  them  ;  and  Aaron  copied  the  Egyptian  sym- 
bol of  productive  force,  the  agricultural  ox,  or,  as  our 
translators  render  it,  a  calf.  That  neither  they  nor 
Aaron  considered  the  golden  calf  to  be  a  conscious 
god,  but  only  a  symbol  of  divine  power,  is  seen  in  the 
fact  that  Moses  proclaimed  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  (Je- 
hovah), the  name  of  Israel's  covenant  God. 

The  purpose  of  idolatry  being  to  get  rid  of  a  spirit- 
ual divinity,  from  which  moral  attributes,  condemning 
their  sensual  vices,  were  inseparable,  but  to  retain  the 
physical  power  of  divinity  for  their  selfish  purposes, 
they  set  up  images  symbolical  of  the  forces  visible  in 
nature.  In  other  respects  than  superhuman  power, 
they  made  their  gods  animal  and  subject  to  animal 
passions  like  themselves,  —  nay,  like  the  brutes.     The 


454  ON  IDOLATRY.  least  acquaintance  with  heathen  mythology  proves  the 
truth  of  Aristotle's  saying,  that  "  such  as  men  wish  the 
gods  to  be,  so  they  make  them."  For  the  same  reason 
not  only  did  the  imputed  sensualities  of  the  gods  en- 
courage similar  impurities  among  their  worshippers, 
but  sensuality  of  the  grossest  character  became  pre- 
scribed parts  of  idolatrous  worship ;  and  not  a  few  of 
their  most  observed  festivals  and  ceremonies  were  most 
abominable  imitations  and  representations  of  acts  on 
the  part  of  their  gods  of  which,  as  the  apostle  Paul 
says  in  particular  reference  to  them,  it  is  a  shame  even 
to  speak.  The  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ro- 
mans is  a  history  true  to  the  letter  of  the  Gentile  idol- 
atry. 

They  retained,  as  we  have  said,  the  idea  of  divine 
force  —  the  motive  power,  if  I  may  so  speak  —  in  their 
gods  ;  and  this  is  the  key  to  the  philosophy  of  idolatry ; 
though  in  more  ignorant  nations,  or  where  the  corrup- 
tion became  most  brutal,  the  traces  of  it  are  less  dis- 
tinct. Thus  the  first  object  of  idolatrous  worship  was 
fire,  or  the  great  central  fire,  the  sun.  They  were  led 
first  to  this,  no  doubt,  by  the  fact  that  God  himself  had 
made  supernatural  fire  or  flame  or  brightness,  "  glory," 
as  it  is  termed  by  the  sacred  writers,  the  symbol  of  his 
presence.  But  they  soon  went  farther;  and  as  they 
saw  the  sun,  by  his  active  heat,  calling  forth  the  fertility 
of  the  earth,  they  learned  to  worship  productive  force 
in  that  glorious  sign  and  medium  of  divine  power. 
The  earth,  for  the  reason  that  she  bears  the  fruit  of 
the  sun's  genial  influences,  received  the  name  of 
mother;  and  out  of  this  marriage  grew  the  widely 
extended  worship  of  productive  energy  under  mascu- 
line and  feminine  symbols,  known  as  the  Bacchic  or 


lect.  XL  v.]  on  idolatry.  455 

Phallic  system,  the  main  elements  of  which  exist  to 
this  day  in  the  idolatries  of  India,  and  spread  them- 
selves from  Egypt  over  the  ancient  historical  world. 
Of  this  most  popular,  because  most  sensual  of  all  idola- 
tries, it  is  not  becoming  for  us  to  say  more  ;  but  could 
we  detail  its  nature  and  its  mystic  ceremonies  as  they 
were  practised  by  the  classical  nations,  as  well  as  many 
less  cultivated,  down  to  as  late  a  period  as  the  sixth 
centuiy  after  Christ,  all  would  bear  out  the  statement 
we  have  made. 

In  process  of  time  this  productive  energy  came  to  be 
divided  among  many  new  inferior  gods  who  were,  to 
the  minds  of  the  common  people  at  least,  the  control- 
lers of  various  departments  in  nature  and  art  and  intel- 
lectual exercise.  The  sea,  the  winds,  the  farm,  poetry, 
wisdom,  peace,  war,  all  had  tlieir  tutelary  or  peculiar 
deities,  while  each  mountain,  stream,  and  tree  had  its 
guardian  nymphs. 

The  primeval  faith  had  left  traces  on  the  traditionary 
conscience  of  mankind  too  deep  to  be  eradicated,  and 
accordingly  we  find  a  general  acknowledgment  that 
vice  provoked  the  anger,  and  virtue  had  the  approba- 
tion of  the  powers  that  rule  human  destinies.  There 
are  passages  in  the  philosophical  writings  and  the  tragic 
poems  containing  sentiments  and  truths  which  approach 
in  purity  and  sublimity  the  inspired  Scriptures  ;  but 
the  philosopher  painfully  felt  the  lack  of  evidence  on 
which  to  base  a  confident  trust,  and  the  strain  of  the 
highest  poetry  places  retributive  justice  above  the 
gods  themselves,  and  even  ruling  them  as  by  eternal 
fates.  Every  scholar  is  familiar  with  the  mysterious 
destiny  which,  through  all  the  tragic  and  heroic  poems, 
is  made  to  pursue  with  calamitous  vengeance,  yet  as  a 


456  OIT  IDOLATRY.  Y. 

blind  necessity,  the  perpetrators  of  greater  crimes  and 
their  descendants.  This  does  not,  however,  deny  the 
fact  that  the  aim  of  idolatry  in  transferring  worship 
from  a  spiritual  supreme  to  sensible,  material  objects, 
was  to  deprive  divinity  of  moral  attributes.  They 
dreaded  divine  justice,  and  when  conscious  of  guilt, 
sought  to  avert  its  wrath  by  sacrifices  and  purifications, 
but  they  never  adored  it  as  a  venerable  claim  on  their 
homage  and  trust.  The  prayer  of  the  people  never 
was  for  purity  of  heart  and  strength  of  virtue  ;  in  a 
word,  there  was  no  love  of  holiness  in  all  their  worship, 
no  practical  recognition  of  it  in  all  their  religion  ;  and 
this,  we  repeat,  was  the  reason  why  the  morals  of  hea- 
thenism were  so  abominably  depraved,  their  very  gods, 
because  of  their  own  vices,  becoming  so  low  and  con- 
temptible as  to  be  made  the  butt  of  satirists  and  farce- 
writers.  Even  while  they  persecuted  to  death  teachers 
who,  like  Socrates,  endeavored  to  restore  the  moral 
authority  of  heaven  over  the  popular  theogony,  and 
while  the  altars  of  magnificent  temples  were  deluged 
with  the  blood  of  hecatombs,  amidst  the  smoke  of  the 
costliest  perfumes,  the  audience  in  the  theatre  roared 
in  laughter  at  the  scurrilous  jokes  of  Aristophanes  or 
Plautus,  who  were  never  so  witty  or  recklessly  bold  as 
when  ridiculing  the  inhabitants  of  Olympus,  from  the 
father  of  gods  and  men  down  to  sooty  Vulcan. 

The  object  of  this  discourse  will  have  been  gained, 
if  its  argument,  for  obvious  reasons  more  brief  than 
another  occasion  might  allow,  has  served  to  show  the 
immense  practical  importance  of  our  Lord's  divine  doc- 
trine :  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  liim 
must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  There  is  in 
our  natures,  even  when  renewed,  but  as  yet  imperfectly 


ON  IDOLATRY.  457 

sanctified,  a  constant  struggle  between  the  spirit  and 
the  flesh,  which  prompts  men  to  substitute  external, 
visible  forms  for  a  spiritual  religion.  The  tendency  to 
such  a  corruption  of  worship  is  not  peculiar  to  heathen- 
ism, so  called,  but  has  exerted  its  baneful  sway  under 
the  name  of  Christianity,  as  the  rites  of  the  Papists,  and 
those  who  imitate  them,  too  plainly  show  ;  nor  is  it  alto- 
gether absent  from  the  straitest  sects  of  Protestantism. 
It  is  the  vice  of  our  fallen  nature  ag-ainst  which  we 
have  all  constantly  to  struggle,  and  shows  itself  in 
every  attempt  to  have  the  form  of  godliness  while  we 
deny  the  power  thereof  Religion,  to  be  true,  must  be 
a  spiritual  worship  of  the  infinite  Spirit.  His  authority 
searching  our  inmost  thoughts,  his  love  ruling  our 
moral  aifections,  alone  can  control  the  practice  of  our 
lives.  Hence  a  godly  life  is  throughout  the  Scripture 
a  spiritual  life,  and  is  begun,  continued,  consummated 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  and  bearing  witness 
with  our  spirits,  thereby  enabling  us  by  a  divine 
strength  to  resist  and  overcome  the  degrading  ten- 
dencies  of  our  carnal  natures.  Hence  faith,  the  main 
instrument  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  our  sanctification,  is 
a  belief  of  God's  moral  truth,  discerning  things  invisi- 
ble and  eternal.  Such  belief  alone  can  make  us  closely 
acquainted  with  God,  purge  our  souls  from  the  gross- 
ness  of  sensualism,  and  overcome  the  world  by  the 
infinitely  transcendent  attractions  of  eternal  fellow- 
ship with  God.  Hence  the  first  commandment  of  the 
law  demands  of  us  faith  in  the  absolute  supremacy  of 
the  one  only  God  ;  the  second  insists  on  an  equal  rec- 
ognition of  his  spiritual  essence,  and  forbids  all  prac- 
tices springing  from  a 'desire  to  rid  ourselves  of  the 


458  ON  IDOLATRY.  moral  restraints  wliicli  his  spiritual  nature  imposes 
upon  all  who  fear  and  adore  him.  It  is  only  in  this 
broad  light  that  we  can  see  the  full  meanino;  of  the 
second  commandment  and  its  true  object  in  forbidding 
all  idolatry. 


LECTURE   XLVI. 

ON  PEOFANE  SWEARING. 


THIRTY-SIXTH  LORD'S  DAY. 
ON    PROFANE    SWEARING. 

"  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  ;  for  the  Lord 
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain."  —  Exodus xx.  7. 

TT  were  very  painful  to  think  that,  among  this  vast 
■*-  crowd  of  intelhgent  and  educated  young  men,*  there 
could  be  found  one  who  denied  or  even  doubted  the 
being  of  God.  So  deeply  is  the  great  Idea  impressed 
upon  human  reason,  so  clearly  is  it  announced  to  us  by 
revelation,  so  fully  is  it  demonstrated  by  the  admirable 
economy  of  nature,  so  necessary  is  it  to  philosophical 
argument  as  the  source  of  all  law,  so  essential  to  social 
morals  as  the  universal,  supreme,  only  sufficient  motive 
of  virtue,  that  we  regard  an  atheist  as  a  monster,  our 
pity  for  whose  wretchedness  is  wellnigh  swallowed  up 
in  disgust  at  his  deformity.  Yet,  my  friends,  when  we 
acknowledge,  as  we  do,  the  existence  of  God,  we  con- 
fess that  he  is  our  God,  our  Creator ;  therefore,  our 
Owner,  our  Ruler  ;  therefore,  our  Judge.  Let  us  sus- 
pend our  officious  denunciation  of  the  atheist,  and  ask, 
What  are  we,  if,  believing  in  God,  we  live  as  though 
there  were  no  God  ?  if,  while  he  speaks  in  his  word, 
we  deafen  our  ears  to  his  voice,  forget  him  amidst  the 
countless  miracles  of  his  works,  and,  stifling  his  witness 
in  our  consciences,  do  as  we  list,  careless  of  our  duty 
and  allegiance,  disregardful  alike  of  his  smile  or  his 
frown,  his  eternal  rewards  or  everlasting  damnation. 

*  This  lecture  was  one  of  a  course  of  sermons,  preached  by  the  clergy- 
men of  New  York  and  other  cities,  before  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Asso- 
ciation of  New  York. 


462  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  VI. 

But  criminal  as  such  neglect  of  God  is,  there  is  a 
sin  yet  more  aggravated,  an  offence  against  his  majesty 
far  more  heinous,  more  than  contempt,  a  defiance  of 
his  almighty  wrath,  so  common  that  the  atmosphere 
of  our  land  is  loaded  with  its  enormity ;  nor  can  we 
easily  believe  that  there  are  none  even  in  this  most 
respectable  audience  stained  by  its  guilt.  It  is  a  pro- 
fane use  of  the  divine  names  and  sentences  in  ordi- 
nary conversation.  No  apology  need  be  made  for 
bringing  a  subject  of  such  importance  to  your  atten- 
tion, since  God  himself  has  given  it  a  place  among  the 
four  great  commandments  which  immediately  respect 
his  own  honor.  That  commandment  shall  be  our 
text :  — 

"  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God  in  vain  ;  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless 
that  taketh  his  name  in  vain."  —  Exodus  xx.  7. 

We  have  here  two  things  for  our  solemn  consid- 
eration :  — 

First  :  JVJiat  is  meant  hy  taking  the  name  of  the 
Lord  our   God  in  vain. 

Secondly  :  The  extreme  wickedness  of  such  lyrofan- 
ity.  "  TJie  Lord  ivill  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain.''^ 

First  :  Wliat  is  meant  hy  "  taking  the  name  of  the 
Lord  our  Grod  in  vain  "  ? 

By  the  na^ne  of  the  Lord  God,  according  to  the 
idiom  of  Scripture,  is  intended  not  merely  the  a})pella- 
tion  of  the  Divine  Being,  but  also  his  supreme  author- 
ity and  power.  Thus  :  "  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a 
strong  tower,  the  righteous  ruinictli  into  it  and  is  safe." 
The  Saviour  did  his  works  in  his  "  Father's  name  "  ; 


on  profane  SWEARING.  463 

and  by  his  direction  we  pray,  "  Hallowed  be  thy 
name."  The  simple  mention  of  the  Deity  should  re- 
mind us  of  his  claim  upon  our  worship  and  obedience  ; 
yet  the  text  goes  farther,  and  enjoins  a  reverence  not 
only  for  the  supreme  himself,  but  for  all  that  bears 
the  impress  of  his  majesty  :  "  Thou  slialt  not  treat 
lightly  the  authority  of  the  Lord  thy  God."  The 
prohibition  is,  therefore,  very  extensive,  forbidding  not 
only  perjury,  which  is  an  appealing  to  the  Great 
Searcher  of  hearts  while  uttering  a  lie,  but  also  all 
irreverence  whatsoever  toward  his  names,  titles,  attrib- 
utive epithets,  sentences,  words,  and  institutions. 

As,  however,  it  would  be  impossible  at  present  to 
treat  of  the  whole  subject,  our  consideration  will  be  of 
prqfaneness  in  common  conversation. 

By  such  profaneness  is  meant, 

1.  Light  and  impious  protestations  by  any  of  the 
Divine  names  on  trivial  occasions.  These  are  correctly 
termed  oaths  in  every  sense  of  that  momentous  word. 
The  profane  swearer  may  not  reflect  upon  what  he  is 
saying ;  but,  in  fact,  he  is  taking  God  to  witness  of 
what  he  utters.  It  is  not  the  place  or  the  occasion 
which  makes  an  oath,  but  the  assertion  by  the  name  of 
God.  How  awful  the  blasphemy  of  invoking  the  Most 
High  on  slight  pretences,  or  of  using  his  venerable  titles 
without  a  solemn  sense  of  their  tremendous  meaning  ! 

2.  The  thoughtless  mention  of  the  divine  name  in 
idle  or  hasty  exclamations,  such  as,  "  My  God  !  "  "  O 
Lord  !  "  "  God  bless  me  !  "  and  the  like.  If  there 
be  any  nieaning  in  the  use  of  such  phrases,  it  is  an  in- 
vocation of  the  divine  presence  and  favor,  which  cannot 
be  our  feeling  unless  we  have  some  proper  idea  of  his 
infinite  character;  and  if  we  utter  them  without  any 


464  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  - 

consideration   of  their  import,  we  grossly  insult  him 
who  is  very  jealous  of  his  name. 

3.  An  irreverent  use  of  those  words  which  are  em- 
ployed by  God  to  denote  his  wrathful  sentences,  as 
damn,  damnation,  curse,  hell.  These  and  like  words 
are  so  appropriated  to  the  divine  dispensations  of  his 
justice  against  transgressors  of  his  law,  that  they  are 
always,  with  a  few  inconsiderable  exceptions,  so  under- 
stood. What  a  contempt  does  it  argue  of  his  avenging 
anger,  when  we  invoke  it  petulantly  or  flippantly  on 
our  own  heads ;  or  cruelly  and  maliciously  desire  to 
make  God  the  minister  of  our  excited  passions  by 
invoking  it  on  the  heads  of  others  ! 

4.  A  wanton  use  of  scriptural  texts  or  expressions 
by  way  of  witticism  or  facetiousness.  The  language 
of  Scripture  is  peculiar,  and,  at  the  same  time,  familiar 
to  us,  so  that  we  readily  recognize  an  imitation  of  it ; 
and  all  the  point  of  the  miserable  jest  lies  in  the  resem- 
blance to  the  words  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  closer 
the  resemblance,  the  droller  it  is  thought  to  be.  This 
form  of  profaneness  has  too  much  prevalence,  even 
among  those  who  profess  better  and  should  know 
better  ;  nor  can  it  bo  sufficiently  condemned,  for  how 
shocking  should  be  a  travesty  of  those  sacred  words  in 
which  we  are  accustomed  to  hear  God  speaking  of 
mercy  and  judgment,  or  a  parody  of  his  most  gracious 
teachings  !  No  one  can  thus  sport  with  holy  words 
who  has  a  respect  for  the  authority  of  Scripture  ;  nor 
are  we  able  entirely  to  divest  a  text,  which  we  have 
heard  so  abused,  of  the  unworthy  association.  It  may 
be  said  that  no  profanity  is  intended ;  but  how  can 
it  be  otherwise  than  profane  to  use  the  language  of 
eternity  in  speaking  of  trifles,  or  to  raise  an  idle  laugh 


on  profane  SWEARING.  465 

at  the  expense  of  respect  for  tlie  word  of  God  ?  The 
Mohammedan,  who  will  not  tread  upon  written  or 
printed  letters  lest  he  might  trample  on  a  saying  of  his 
prophet,  may  teach  professed  Christians  a  lesson  ;  and, 
surely,  he,  who  commanded  Moses  to  put  off  his  shoes 
from  his  feet  as  he  stood  before  the  burning  bush,  be- 
cause the  very  ground  was  holy  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  will  avenge  such  an  insulting  approach  to 
that  holy  word  by  which  he  reveals  himself  as  a  jealous 
God. 

Having  thus  briefly  defined  profanity  in  common 
conversation,  let  us  now  consider. 

Secondly  :  Its  extreme  tvicJcedness.  "  The  Lord 
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketli  his  name  in 
vain." 

1.  It  is  an  evidence  of  a  heart  deplorably  insensible 
to  the  character  of  the  Most  Hio-h.  It  is  the  name 
of  the  Lord  our  God  which  is  so  profaned.  It  is  a 
rule  of  human  as  well  as  divine  wisdom,  to  give  honor 
where  honor  is  due.  Respect  to  our  superiors  in  law- 
ful authority  has  ever  been  held  necessary  for  the  order 
of  society.  Filial  reverence  is  the  first  lesson  of  filial 
duty.  Our  judges  on  the  bench  and  our  legislators  in 
their  halls  are  protected  by  privileges  and  addressed  by 
titles,  to  which,  as  private  persons,  they  have  no  claim. 
This  deference  is  extended  to  all  who  are  distincpuished 
by  age  or  wisdom  or  worth.  A  hoary  head  is  a  crown 
of  honor  in  the  eyes  of  all  but  the  utterly  abandoned. 
To  treat  with  disrespect  the  counsels  of  the  wise  is  to 
argue  ourselves  fools,  and  to  speak  lightly  of  the  good 
is  to  prove  ourselves  depraved.  How  much  more  is  the 
King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God, 
our  Saviour,  entitled  to  our  reverential  and  awful  re- 

VOL.  II.  30 


466  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  [Lect.XLVI. 

spect !  He  is  our  Creator,  avIio  formed  us  out  of  dust, 
animated  us  with  intelligent  and  immortal  spirits,  up- 
holds and  preserves  us  by  his  constant  hand ;  our 
Ruler,  whose  authority  is  over  all,  and  from  whose 
dominion,  there  is  no  escape  ;  our  Judge,  by  whose 
laws  and  sentences  our  eternal  state  is  to  be  fixed,  and 
from  whose  decision  there  is  no  appeal ;  the  infinitely 
glorious  Being,  to  the  majesty  of  whose  holy  perfec- 
tions there  is  no  bound,  —  at  the  thought  of  whom  the 
very  devils  tremble,  —  before  whose  brightness  seraphim 
and  cherubim  veil  their  faces  as  they  adore ;  whose 
throne  is  ever  surrounded  by  innumerable  hosts  of 
prostrate  worshippers,  and  to  whom  universal  crea- 
tion, except  the  blasphemer,  is  ever  sending  up  hymns 
of  praise,  —  yet  it  is  his  name  that  man,  the  worm  of 
the  dust,  the  creature  of  his  hand,  dependent  upon  him 
even  for  the  air  he  breathes,  profanes  in  the  burst  of 
anger,  in  peevish  impatience,  in  wanton  thoughtless- 
ness, in  the  ribald  jest.  O  Avhat  must  be  the  depravity 
of  his  heart  who  can  stand  upon  earth,  from  which 
God  took  him,  and  beneath  the  heavens  which  arc  tell- 
ing God's  glory,  and  in  the  midst  of  God's  bountiful, 
beautiful  works,  yet  use  that  tongue,  which  God  taught 
speech,  to  blaspheme  the  holy,  the  just,  and  the  good 
Author  and  Sovereign  of  all ! 

2.  It  is  a  direct  insult  to  God.  In  other  sins  we 
rebel  against  the  divine  government ;  but  in  profane- 
ness  we  defy  God  to  his  face,  we  rush  before  his  terri- 
ble presence,  we  stand  fronting  his  burning  eye,  and 
fling  our  challenge  at  the  foot  of  his  throne ;  we  mock 
at  his  curse,  we  scorn  his  threatcnings,  we  dare  his 
fierce  damnation,  and  deride  his  fiery  vengeance.  O 
when  we  hear  him  thus  insulted,  assailed,  and  defied, 


on  profane  SWEARING.  467 

we  ■wonder  that  his  hghtning  sleeps,  that  his  red  right 
hand,  which  flung  the  revolting  angels  down  to  hell, 
crushes  not  in  sudden  destruction  the  puny  rebel, — 
that  the  shuddering  earth  does  not  swallow  him  up  as 
it  did  the  company  of  Korah,  —  that  the  caverns  of  the 
lost  open  not  to  receive  so  congenial  a  spirit  among  the 
blaspheming  fiends  ;  for  who  is  more  worthy  of  the 
tortures  which  the  damned  suffer  than  he  who  pollutes 
the  name  of  God  with  his  foul  lips  ? 

3.  It  is  a  sin  ao-ainst  knowledo;e.  In  most  other  sins 
men  may,  at  times,  have  doubts  of  their  criminality. 
The  profane  swearer,  if  he  knows  the  meaning  of  his 
words,  cannot  attempt  such  excuse.  No  one  contends 
for  the  propriety  of  profaneness.  No  one  defends  it  as 
necessary  or  pleasant.  No  one,  who  believes  in  God, 
can  doubt  its  guilt.  There  is  no  need  of  study  to  de- 
tect, or  of  reasoning  to  prove  its  shamefulness.  The 
command  is  too  plain  to  be  misunderstood :  "  Thou 
shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  ;  " 
and  conscience,  however  hardened,  acknowledges  that 
"  the  Lord  "  should  "  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain." 

In  other  sins  we  may  forget  that  God  is  nigh  ;  but 
the  profane  swearer,  by  the  very  terms  of  his  oath,  con- 
fesses that  he  is  in  God's  presence,  acknowledges  his 
power  and  the  reality  of  his  fearful  ciu'ses  on  the 
guilty ;  yet,  in  this  spirit,  he  blasphemes.  He  sins 
wilfully,  therefore  foully ;  intelligently,  therefore  inex- 
cusably ;  impudently,  therefore  desperately ;  and  when 
the  wrath  of  God  kindles  unquenchable  fires  around  his 
lost  spirit,  in  the  agonies  of  his  despair  and  remorse, 
his  wailing  cry  will  be,  "  I  have  got  that  for  Avhich  I 
prayed.       I  taunted  God  to  do  his  worst.      I  called 


468  ON  PKOFANE  SWEARING.  for  damnation  and  hell,  and  they  are  here.  With  my 
own  hand  I  have  plucked  ruin  down  on  my  head  and 
murdered  my  soul !  " 

4.  It  is  a  sin  without  temptation.     Every  other  sin 
has  some  lure,  some  promised  pleasure,  some  momen- 
tary gratification,  some  hoped-for  worldly  profit.     The 
sensualist  indulges  luxuriously  strong-impelling  appe- 
tites ;   avarice,  fraud,  and  robbery  aim  at  that  wealth 
which  purchases  the  things  of  this  life  ;    revenge  has 
a  malicious    satisfaction   in   paying  back  wrong  with 
wrong  ;  falsehood  seeks  some  end  in  deceiving,  and  the 
sophistry  of  the  sceptic  is  an  affected  display  of  subtile 
acuteness,  or  of  daring  contrariety  to  established  opin- 
ion.    But  profanity,  especially  common  swearing  and 
cursing,  has  no  temptation  to  it  except  it  be  unmixed 
Avickedness ;  it  is  a  luxury  to  no  sense,  it  brings  a  man 
no  gain,  it  acquires  for  him  no  credit,  nor  is  there  any- 
thing in  our  natural  constitution  impelling  us  to  it.     A 
profane  swearer  displays  no  talent,  but  rather  proves 
his  lack  of  power  to  express  himself  in  decent  words. 
A  half-witted  fool,  a  drunken  vagabond,  a  brazen  har- 
lot, a  vagrant   child,  can  swear  as  well  as  he.      He 
talks  the  most  arrant  nonsense  ;  he  uses  the  most  ab- 
surd phrases  ;  he  fills  his  mouth  with  words  that  mean 
only  vileness.     Profanity  is  the  forlorn  expedient  of  an 
empty  head  and  a  depraved  heart,  the  last  resort  of 
blundering  silliness,  the  incoherence  of  frenzied  rage. 
Does  a  jest  want  point  ?     It  is  sharpened  by  an  oath. 
Is  a  story  insipid  ?     A  ciirse  is  the  ever-ready  season- 
ing.    Is  an  argument  defective,  or  an  opponent's  con- 
tradiction strong  ?     Blasphemy  is  an  easy  logic.     Is  an 
epithet  wanting  ?     The  swearer  needs  no  rhetoric  to 
supply  it;  he  has  one  ready  for  all  occasions,  — for  hot 


Lkct.  XLVI.]  on   profane  SWEARING.  469 

or  cold,  black  or  white,  right  or  wrong,  fair  or  ugly. 
Certainly,  there  is  no  intellectual  temptation  to  this 
hateful,  degrading  habit.  The  swearer  must  acknowl- 
edge, that,  were  his  words  summed  up,  no  one  talks 
more  aggregate  absurdity ;  and  that,  however  wise  in 
other  respects,  for  the  time  he  is  a  parrot-like  babbler, 
or  a  vociferous  dunce.  What  should  we  think  of  a 
judge  swearing  on  the  bench,  an  advocate  in  his  plea, 
a  senator  in  his  place  ?  How  should  we  regard  an 
oath  in  a  written  treatise,  or  a  formal  speech  ?  Is 
there  any  wit,  reasoning,  fancy,  or  beauty  in  it  ?  Can 
it  answer  any  purpose  of  instruction  or  delight  ?  What 
motive  can  there  be  for  profanity  ?  It  has  nothing  in 
it  but  a  gross,  stupid,  devil-like  contempt  of  all  that 
good  men  love  or  deprecate.  I  have  never  heard  any 
one  defend  it  upon  any  piinciple  ;  and  the  only  excuse 
ever  offered  is,  that  it  has  become  an  unthinking  habit ; 
though  some  have  owned  themselves  so  lost  to  proper 
feeling  that  (to  use  their  own  expression)  it  did  them 
good  to  swear  Avhen  excited  or  irntated.  "  An  un- 
thinking habit !  "  The  rapid  growth  and  strength  of 
such  a  habit  is  another  proof  of  the  enormous  sin. 
"  No  one,"  says  the  Roman  satirist,  "  ever  became 
very  wicked  at  once."  So  no  one  was  ever  naturally 
or  without  intentional  practice  a  profane  swearer. 
When  he  first  attempted  his  awkward  oath,  he  started 
and  trembled  lest  the  lightnino;  of  God  would  consume 
him  on  the  spot,  —  his  lips  grew  pale  as  he  faltered  out 
the  fearful  phrase  ;  but  soon,  emboldened  by  the  divine 
forbearance,  callous  from  custom,  and  shameless  through 
practised  effrontery,  he  tosses  from  his  leprous  tongue 
oath  after  oath  still  more  and  more  daring,  until  he 
scarcely  knows  when  he  swears,  and  his  conversation 


470  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  , 

teems  "with  insulting  defiances  of  liis  Maker.  "  Un- 
thinking habit !  "  "  Unthinking  !  "  Is  it  not  the 
privilege  and  dignity  of  a  man  to  think  ?  Wretched 
swearer,  is  there  naught  that  can  serve  to  supply  your 
dearth  of  words  but  the  titles  of  your  good  and  mighty 
God  ?  Naught  to  swell  your  impoverished  speech  but 
the  judgments  that  will  ere  long,  except  you  repent, 
crush  your  soul  in  eternal  anguish  ?  "  Habit !  "  Does 
habit  excuse  a  thief,  a  liar,  a  debauchee  ?  Has  habit 
so  corrupted  your  heart  and  your  lips,  rendered  you  so 
familiar  with  the  dialect  of  the  blackguard,  the  drunk- 
ard, and  the  damned,  that  you  cannot  choose  but  blas- 
pheme like  a  lost  spirit  before  your  time  ?  O  surely, 
of  all  fools  that  mock  at  sin  and  at  God  who  avenges 
himself  on  the  sinner,  the  profane  swearer  is  the  silliest, 
cheapest,  maddest,  nearest  to  hell !  So  far  from  getting 
the  world  in  exchange  for  his  soul,  the  swearer  asks  for 
his  sratuitous  condemnation.  Well  has  old  Herbert 
said  :  — 

"  Lust  and  Avine  plead  pleasure;  avarice,  gain; 
But  the  cheap  swearer,  tlirough  his  open  sluice, 
Lets  his  soul  run  for  nought." 

5.  It  is  a  very  corrupting  sin.  There  is,  perhaps,  no 
vice  that  corrupts  the  heart  more  than  profanity.  Fear 
of  God,  or  a  belief  in  his  retributive  justice,  tends  more 
than  anything  else  to  preserve  men  in  a  course  of  vir- 
tue. "  The  denunciations  of  divine  vengeance,"  says 
the  eloquent  Roscoc,  as  quoted  by  the  great  penal  jurist 
of  Louisiana,  "  when  duly  impressed  on  the  mind,  pos- 
sess a  sanction  at  which  mere  human  authority  can 
never  arrive,  and  bring  with  it  that  certainty  which 
alone  and  in  all  circumstances  can  prevent  the  perpe- 
tration of  crime."      Tliis   o})iniou   is   corroborated  by 


Lkct.  XLVL]  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  471 

universal  experience.  Those  wlio  bow  with  the  most 
sincere  reverence  before  God,  are  uniformly  most 
strictly  true  in  their  dealings  with  men.  But  how  is 
this  restraint  lost  by  the  profane  swearer  !  That  very 
name,  which  should  excite  his  awe,  is  prostituted  to  a 
base  familiarity.  He  cannot  fear  God  who  does  not 
hesitate  to  sport  with  His  most  solemn  titles,  nor  can 
he  have  any  just  apprehension  of  a  future  punishment 
who  makes  it  a  jest  and  a  by-word.  The  floodgate  of 
all  iniquity  is  thus  raised.  I  firmly  believe  that  a  pro- 
fane man  is  not  to  be  trusted,  and  that  no  reliance  can 
rightly  be  placed  on  his  integrity,  except  so  far  as  a 
regard  for  human  laws  and  social  opinion  may  restrain 
him.  He  can  have  no  abiding;  sense  of  virtue.  There 
is  many  a  bad  man  who  does  not  swear,  there  are 
many  hypocrites  in  religion  ;  but  the  profane  swearer 
avows  himself  to  be  wicked,  and  we  know  that  he  is 
without  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes ;  and,  without 
the  fear  of  God,  he  can  have  no  conscience. 

This  eftect  must  be  peculiarly  great  upon  formal 
oaths  in  courts  of  justice,  or  in  the  assumption  of  office. 
"  Rash  swearing,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  leads  to  false 
swearing."  It  is  impossible  that  one  who  trifles  with 
the  name  of  God  upon  all  occasions  should  feel  the 
solemnity  of  an  appeal  to  him  when  the  legal  oath  is 
tendered.  Penal  statutes  against  perjury  may  restrain 
him,  but  the  sanctity  of  the  oath  will  not.  The  best 
decisions  set  aside  as  unworthy  of  belief  the  testimony 
of  those  who  do  not  understand  the  nature  of  an  oath, 
or  who  deny  a  future  state  of  rewards  and  punishments. 
But  how  much  more  credit  does  a  profane  swearer  de- 
serve ?  He  may  understand  what  an  oath  is,  but  does 
he  reverence  it  ?     He  may  believe  in  God  and  the 


472  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  7I. 

judgment,  but  his  conversation  proves  that  he  -worships 
him  not,  for  his  anger  is  with  him  a  matter  of  ordinary- 
ridicule.  Is  the  oath  of  such  a  man  any  better  or  as 
good  as  his  -word  ? 

6.  This  is  farther  seen  in  the  fact  that  profaneness  is 
the  ordinary  accompaniment  of  great  depravity.  Hell 
is  full  of  curses  ;  and  they  who  are  fitting  themselves  by- 
other  crimes  for  the  companionship  of  devils,  prepare 
themselves  by  practice  to  join  in  the  profanity  of  their 
destined  prison-house.  The  gambler  swears  over  his 
cards  and  sweating-cloth.  The  brothel  echoes  with 
obscenity  and  profanity  in  turn  or  commingled.  The 
bar-room  rings  with  maudlin  or  frenzied  blasphemy. 
It  is  the  last  incoherent  mutter  of  the  bloated,  house- 
less drunkard,  as  he  rolls  into  the  kennel.  Tlie  cells  of 
a  prison  are  filled  with  the  curses  of  felons.  It  is  rare 
to  find  a  notorious  villain,  from  the  sneaking  pickpocket 
to  the  murderer  on  the  highway,  that  is  not  notoriously 
profane.  If  he  be  not,  it  is  because  he  is  such  an  adept 
in  crime  that  he  artfiilly  lays  aside  what  his  cunning 
tells  him  is  a  sign  of  guilt.  So  no  man  is  ever  profane 
without  losing,  in  some  degree,  the  respect  of  others, 
even  of  the  profane  themselves.  Although  we  may 
have  before  admired  his  demeanor,  giving  him  credit 
for  dignity  and  propriety,  the  moment  an  oath  drops 
from  his  lips,  he  sinks  in  our  regard,  —  he  loses  the  air 
of  a  Christian,  the  high  polish  of  a  gentleman,  the 
calm  truthfulness  of  a  wise  man.  This  sentiment  is 
general.  If  any  of  my  hearers  doubt  it,  let  him  ask 
himself  whether  there  is  any  profane  person  of  his 
acquaintance  whom  he  truly  esteems  as  a  thoroughly 
good  man,  or  whom  he  would  not  respect  more  if  he 
were  not  profane  ?     If  he  looks  not  on  a  profane  child 


on  profane  SWEARING.  473 

as  precociously  depraved,  or  shudders  not  as  an  old  man, 
tottering  on  the  brink  of  the  grave,  perseveres  in  curs- 
ins  and  swearino;  ? 

7.  It  corrupts  others  besides  the  profane  person  him- 
self. President  Dwight  well  remarks  that  profanity  is 
a  social  vice.  "  A  man  seldom  swears  when  alone." 
The  swearer  corrupts  his  companions,  familiarizes  them 
with  that  which  at  first  shocked  and  disgusted  them. 
He  swears  in  his  family,  his  children  imitate  his  baleful 
example,  —  the  little  one,  whom  perhaps  the  mother 
would  teach  to  pray,  has  the  paternal  sanction  for  its 
lisping  oath,  and  grows  up  nurtured  in  sin,  consigned 
by  a  parent's  murderous  tongue  to  depravity  and  ruin. 
These  in  their  turn  spread  the  contagion,  until  distant 
generations  and  far-off  lands  feel  the  corrupting  leaven, 
and  stain  with  the  blood  of  countless  souls  the  skirts 
of  the  blasphemer.  The  profane  swearer  is  thus  a 
moral  blight,  a  walking  pestilence,  a  reckless  madman, 
scattering,  even  among  those  he  loves  best,  arrows,  fire- 
brands, and  eternal  death.  O  swearer,  if  you  will  in- 
voke the  curse  of  the  Almighty,  step  aside  from  the 
crowd,  that  it  may  consume  you  alone  ! 

Lastly.  It  is  a  sin  against  which  God  has  declared 
his  especial  vengeance.  You  may  count  it  a  trifling 
fault ;  but  is  that  trifling  which  is  followed  by  such 
mischief?  God  is  the  Judge  by  whom  our  sins  are  to 
be  w^eighed  ;  and  throughout  the  Scriptures  he  declares 
himself  to  be  a  jealous  God,  especially  jealous  for  the 
honor  of  his  name.  As  the  moral  Governor  of  the 
universe,  he  is  particularly  incensed  against  a  sin  so 
corrujjting,  so  calculated  to  shake  all  sense  of  his  au- 
thority, and  evincing  such  ungrateful  impiety  in  return 
for  his  goodness  and  patience  and  readiness  to  forgive. 


474  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  You  may  think  his  punishment  of  a  few  idle  words  will 
not  be  severe.  But  he  sets  the  enormity  of  the  siu 
and  the  penalty  of  the  sinner  beyond  all  doubt  when 
he  utters  the  commandment :  "  Thou  shalt  not  take 
the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain ;  for  the  Lord 
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in 
vain."  God  will  keep  his  word.  Awful,  therefore, 
must  be  the  punishment  of  the  profane  swearer  in  the 
eternal  world,  except  he  repent.  Hell  is  certainly  his 
portion.  It  is  the  ruin  he  has  invoked,  ridiculed,  and 
defied.  He  is  fitted  by  his  character  and  habits  for  no 
other.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  holy,  reverent,  and  ador- 
ing praise ;  hell,  the  abode  of  rebellion,  despair,  and 
blasphemy.  Even  there,  his  punishment  will  be  fear- 
fully great.  "  I  will  pour  out  my  fury,"  saith  the 
Lord,  "  upon  them  that  despise  my  statutes."  How 
terrible  the  thought !  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  turned 
to  fury!  The  fury  of  the  Lord!  —  and,  then,  the 
bitter  reflection,  more  tormenting  than  the  fire  that  is 
not  quenched,  more  envenomed  than  the  worm  that 
never  dies,  that  it  is  the  swearer's  own  wickedness 
turned  in  fierce  retribution  upon  him  ! 

Let  me  entreat  you,  my  friend,  to  avoid  profaneness. 
It  is  easily  avoided,  yet,  easily  acquired ;  and  Avhen 
acquired,  with  difficulty  laid  aside.  It  is  a  virulent 
vice,  spreading  like  a  leprosy  through  the  whole  moral 
constitution  of  a  man  ;  for  you  cannot  learn  to  swear 
without  ceasing  to  pray,  without  despising  the  check  of 
conscience,  without  becoming  Avorse  in  every  respect ; 
since  profaneness  concentrates,  in  a  few  brief  phrases, 
unholy  rancor,  determined  rebellion,  and  reckless  aban- 
donment of  your  soul.  It  Avill  bring  you  neither  gain, 
credit,  nor  honor.     It  introduces  you  to  the  vilest  com 


on  profane  SWEARING.  475 

panionsliip,  and  expels  you  from  the  society  of  the 
good  as  a  self-branded  Cain,  the  horror  of  all  who  fear 
God  and  practise  virtue.  It  excludes  you  from  the 
redemption  of  Christ,  drives  away  the  merciful  Holy 
Ghost,  and  is  the  fore-doom  of  eternal  perdition.  Oh, 
swear  not !  For  your  mother's  sake,  swear  not ;  for 
your  friend's  sake,  swear  not  ;  for  society's  sake,  swear 
not ;  for  your  own  soul's  sake,  swear  not ;  for  the  sake 
of  God  who  made  you,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  who  died 
for  you,  swear  not.  It  is  easy  to  forbear,  but  oh,  how 
desperately  wicked  to  commit  such  a  sin  ! 

Have  you  been,  are  you  now,  in  the  habit  of  pro- 
faneness  ?  Oh,  lay  it  aside.  You  would  be  a  gentle- 
man, yet  even  the  loose  Chesterfield  says  a  gentleman 
never  swears  ;  consider  how  you  wound  and  shock  the 
ears  and  hearts  of  all  religious  people,  though  they  but 
catch  the  offensive  sound  as  they  pass  you  in  the  street. 
I  ask,  as  a  favor  which  courtesy  can  readily  grant,  that 
they  may  not  hear  you  speak  lightly  of  their  best 
Friend,  their  beloved  Father,  their  venerated  Sovereign. 
But  I  plead  more  for  your  own  sake  and  the  sake  of 
those  whom  your  example  may  influence.  How  good 
and  how  patient  has  God  thus  far  been  to  you  in  not 
cutting  you  off  at  your  word  !  If  he  had  done  so, 
where  were  you  now  ?  He  may  do  it  yet.  Have  you 
not  insulted  his  forbearance  long;  enough  ?  What  has 
He  done  to  provoke  such  insult,  so  gratuitous,  so  impu- 
dent ?  Oh,  my  friend,  it  is  mean,  it  is  dishonorable  thus 
to  treat  your  Benefactor  because  he  is  so  long-suffer- 
ing !  Are  you  bent  upon  destroying  your  soul  for  the 
sake  of  uttering  a  vile  word  ? 

Do  not  say  that  you  cannot  break  the  habit.  Your 
occasional  restraint  belies  vour  assertion.     You  would 


476  ON  PROFANE  SWEARING.  not  swear  before  a  lady,  or  a  clergyman.  A  slight 
respect  for  another  human  being's  feelings  checks  the 
oath  upon  your  lips.  Have  you  less  respect  for  God  ? 
You  would  not  swear  if  you  knew  that  God  would 
strike  you  dead ;  why  defy  him  who  maintains  you  in 
life  ?  Resolve  now  that  not  one  more  oath  shall  pass 
your  lips,  and  you  will  leave  this  sacred  place  a  truer 
gentleman,  a  better  man,  and,  I  trust,  to  become  a 
happy  Christian.