I. IN WHAT TRUE COMFORT CONSISTS.

1. Man, ever since sin came into the world, and because of sin, is subject to the miseries of life (Gen. 3 : 16-19; pain — grief — thorn and thistles — sweat of the brow), and to the terrors of death (Job 18 : 14, the king of terrors ; Heb. 2 : 15, fear of death ; Heb. 10 : 27, a fearful looking for of judgment). So both body and soul suffer because they are bound together. The greatest misery is the misery of sin.

2. Over against all this, we need comfort, both in life and death. Gen. 5 : 29, Isa. 38: 17, Ps. 25 : 17, Ps. 11(3: 3.

3. Comfort is a calming, a stirring to life, a setting upright of soul, in which, however, we are sensible of the pains and needs of the body. Matt. 11 : 28-30.

4. False comfort is sought :

a) In riches and luxury, Job 31 : 24, the rich citizen, Luke 16, and the rich peasant, Luke 12.

2 THE HEIDELBEIUI rATECITlSM.

b) In health of body. The common saying is, " Health is the most im])ortant thing." Bnt " to-day re{l,to-moiTow dead." Ps. 90: (>, they are like grass.

c) In obstinacy, Ps. 2 : :>, Jonah 4 : 1). An example is Agag, 1 Sam. IT) : ;>l2.

6?) In dissipation, by worldly pleasures, amusements and drunkenness, 1 John 2: 17, Luke (> : 25, Isa. 22: 13, 14, Isa. 5 : 22, 24, or in frivolity.

" I live, how long I know not ; I die, and when I know not ; I go, and wliere I know not ; And I wonder that yet I am happy."

e) In other men, as if they could dissipate anxiety and sorrow in any one. Job 16 : 2 (miserable comforters), 2 Pet. 2: 17 (wells without water and clouds without rain).

5. But all these comforts fail to be permanent, or they only make the evil worse than before. True comfort must be suitable to all cases and durable for all time. There is only one true comfort, and it consists in this, "that I am not my own, but belong to my faithful Savior.'' Luke 10 : 42 (the good part), Acts 4 : 12, Haggai 2 : 8, Christ is promised as the heathens' comfort. In Luke 2 : 25 He is awaited as the comfort of Israel. " I am my own master" means the same as " I am my own slave." From this arises the slavery of sin. Rom. (\ : 20 (servants of sin), 2 Pet. 2 : 19 (servants of corruption). Cain was his own master, Gen. 4 : 7, 8, 18. Esau also, Heb. 12 : 17, and Haul, 1 Sam. 15 : 19, 23 ; 31 : 4. As long as I am my own and must rely on myself alone, I must provide for myself. Cares bring and increase trouble, but give no comfort. But if Christ is my Lord and I am His property. He therefore cares for me, and this stills all care and unrest, and gives the true comfort. 1 Pet. 2 : 9,

Rom. 14 : 8. See Mark 8, on the feeding of the four thousand. Luke 22 : 35, John 10 : 15.

II. UPON WHAT THE ONLY COMFORT RESTS.

Our only true comfort in Christ is grounded in this, that we rest unconditionally on His love and power, and expect from Him every good.

1. Cake. — For He has cared for me before I was born, in that He

a) With His precious blood hath fully satisfied for all my sins.

His " blood" is His whole life and death.

" Precious" means the same, because Christ is the most innocent and highest sacrifice. 1 Pet. 1 : 18, 19.

" Perfectly" means that we can not or must not add anything to it, not even the very least. Heb. 9 : 12.

" For all my sins" declare that no sin and no number of them is so great that the sacrifice of Christ is not sufiicient for them.

" Satisfied" means that He has paid the ransom for me, and so blotted out the guilt of my sin. Col. 2 : 14, 1 Pet. 2 : 24.

b) Our only comfort rests on this, that He has delivered me from the power of the devil. Man through sin has become the servant of the devil. Through the deliverance from sin we became free from the power of the devil. 1 John 3 : 8, 10, Eph. 2 : 3, Eom. 6 : 23, Heb. 2 : 14, 15. {JS/ote. — The word " devil" is repugnant to the world when it is confronted by the name in the Word of God or in the preaching of the same ; while it often uses his name, and even curses and swears by it. There are three reasons for this. 1. Either they first of all hope to deny the existence of the devil. If so, they are like the ostrich which buries its head in the sand or in the bushes when the hunters are upon its heels and it cannot escape any more. And

then it thinks that the liunter cannot see him, because it cannot see the hunter ; and tlius thestuj)id bird more easily becomes a prey of the hunter. 2. For they do not perceive and feel that through sin they are under the power of the devil. Of this the world is informed by one of her greatest prophets (Tit. 1: 12), the poet Goethe, who says : " The people never feel the devil even when he has caught them by the collar." o. Or the anger of the world (because Christians speak of the devil in holy earnestness and according to the Word of God) proves that they cannot endure it where their Lord (the Prince of this world, John 12 : 31, 16 : 11) is attacked. The Heidelberg Catechism, on the contrary, has from its beginning the Word of God in mind (Rev. 22: 19), namely, that the whole Bible undeniably affirms the existence of the devil.)

" Redeemed," that is, ransomed, and therefore freed from the slavery of sin. In ancient times servants and slaves were ransomed, and so made free.

c) The comfort rests on this, that Christ satisfied for the guilt of my sins and ransomed me from the slavery of sin. Christ has acquired me as His own personal property. And no one or nothing can tear me. His rightful possession, away from Him.

2. Preservation.— He also preserves me, in that

a) Without the will of my Heavenly Father not a hair can fall from my head. God is my Father through Jesus Christ, and the will of the Father is also the will of the Son. John (J: 89, John 10: 30.

" I{ai7' of my Head.'' — The hair is the very smallest thing in the human body. We do not pay any attention if one falls out. Nevertheless it is said, " The very hairs of your head are numbered." Matt. 10 : 29-31. The preservation of the l)ody is assured to us. Isa. 43 : 1-3, Mark 1() : 19. Examples, Daniel in the Lion's den, Dan. 6 ; the men in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3 (the hair of their heads was not singed) ; Paul and the viper, Acts 28 ; out of the mouth of the lion, 2 Tim. 4 : 17. If Christ cares for the preservation of our bodies with tlie greatest exactness, how mucn more does He care for my soul. John 10 • 28 1 Cor. 1 : 8. ■ '

b) If nothing can happen to me without my Heavenly Father's will, then if at any time affliction of body and soul befalls me, it occurs in accordance with His will. Preservation then shows itself in this, that nothing can harm me, but rather all must be subservient to my salvation. Acts 14 : 22, James 1 : 12, Rom. 8 : 28. As examples, the guiding of Jacob, Gen. 32 : 10 ; of Joseph, Gen. oO : 20; of David, Ps. 118: 18, 21.

This gives a mighty comfort and a joyful courage.

3. Assurance.— In order that I with firm confidence as a chosen child of God can make this only comfort my own, Christ gives the double assurance :

a) The in\yard witness of the Spirit. Self-made sentiments and imaginations cannot help me, the Holy Ghost alone can assure me of my salvation and of eternal life. If one has no certainty of his salvation in Christ, then he has no comfort. Rom. 8 : 9, 14, 16.

b) The strength for a new life, which we cannot have of ourselves, Christ Himself makes me "through His Holy Spirit willing and ready henceforth to live unto Him." To live according to the commandment of God and His honor, is then not a burden, but a delight. Matt. 7 : 21, Is. 40 : 29, Matt. 11, 30, Ps. 110 : 3. Therefore I am certain, through the only comfort, that I am not my own, but belong to Christ. In order to obtain this precious comfort, we can give up everything else, like the man with the hid treasure and the merchant with the pearl of great price. Matt. 13, Ps. 73: 25, 26, Rom. 8: 38, 39.

ftuestion 2

Hotr mnii;/ ihiiuis are ueceio^itrif for thee to kiioiv, f/iaf fhoit, nijoii'niij thh comfort, iii(ii/f-<t five and die happy f

Three ; the first, how great my sins and miseries are ; the second, how I may be delivered from all my sins and miseries ; the third, how I shall express my gratitude to God for such deliverance.

The first answer is, as it were, an open gateway, through which we behold the glorious benefits, salvation and eternal life in Christ; which, as a treasure-liouse of God, the Catechism offers to us in a beautiful arrangement. The second question shows us the three steps by which we enter and share these gifts. The only comfort must become and remain your comfort, else it will profit you nothing if you merely know of it.

I. The Fikst Part.

He that desires to be delivered from the misery of sin, must know, above all things, that he is held fast in miserv, and that this is so o-reat that neither he nor any ot;ier can help him out of it. A sick man that will not own that he is sick, will not ask for a physician nor take medicine. But sin is the most grievous disease, which ruins body and soul, temporally and eternally. Tlie first part aims to awaken in us a desire for deliverance Matt. 9 : 12, Jer. 3 : 18. The prodigal son, Luke 15, when far from home and his father, sees most of all his misery. And he came to himself, but found fault not with others, but with himself.

II. The Second Part. Were w^e.only to see how great our misery is, but not how we can be delivered, we would despair and be disheartened. Illustration — Cain, Gen. 4 : l.S. It is therefore necessary to know " that I have a Savior, who from tlie manger to the grave, yes, to the throne, where man gives Him honor, belongs to me a sinner." This the second part teaches. A sick man who sees he is

sick, will not go to the very best physician, but to the one who is skilled in his profession, in whom he can place his confidence. John 17 : 3, Matt. 11 : 28, Luke 5: 17, Acts 4: 12. The woman who was a great sinner, Luke 7, permitted nothing to detain her from going to Christ, and then she found the forgiveness of her sins, although they had been very great.

III. The Third Part.

Every kindness we have received deserves gratitude ; and this makes us more attached to the benefactor. A physician we pay when we have become well, l)ut it is impossible for us to pay God for the deliverance which is given us in Christ. However we can show ourselves grateful to Him by a new life. But this we know not of ourselves. Therefore it is necessary for us to learn how this is to be attained according to the commandments and prayer. Ps. 50 : 14. "The proper thankoffering. Rom. 12 : 1, Col. 2 : 7. The healed Samaritan, Luke 17, is to us an example of gratitude ; the behavior of the nine lepers warns us against ingratitude. The one who was thankful was especially assured of his comfort. When we say that it is necessary to know, i. e., to understand these three parts, we do not mean that this is to be done only with the head, but it must become a matter of the heart. John 13: 17, Ps. 50: 15.

IV. Division of the Catechism.

^' The three parts we find together in Rom. 7 : 24, 25, ^" O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the l)ody of this death ? I thank God through our Lord Jesus Christ." The headings of the three parts of the Catechism are taken from this, while the division is based on the Epistle of the Romans in which the Apostle Paul treats of these three divisions. First he convinces the Jews and Gentiles that they are miserable

8 THE heidelbi:rg catechism.

and condemned sinners. Chap. 1 : 18 — 3 : 21. Secondly he teaches redemption tlirongh Christ. Chap. 3 : 21 — 11 : 3(). Thirdly he exhorts them to gratitude through a Christian life. Chap. 12: 1 — 16: 27.

Questions 1 and 2 are the introduction to the Catechism just. Chap. 1 : 1 — 17 are to the E2)istle to the Romans.

PART FIRST.

OF THE MISERY OF MAN.

THE LAW AND SIX.