I. THE IMPORT OF THE WORD "MISERY."

The word " Elend" here translated misery originally carried with it the idea of " out of one country," " in a foreign land," and was formerly applied to what was considered the extremity of civil punishment, viz., banishment. " Misery" therefore indicated the unhappy condition of punitive separation from home and friends. In the time of the Reformation the original meaning of the woi'd still prevailed. Luther translated Isa. 58 : 7, They who are in " Elend" bring to thy house. The literal rendering would be : " The poor who are wandering," and thus poor- travelers or wanderers. The Septuagint translates the ex])ression, " Shelterless poor," i. e., homeless.

2. That wliich is s[)oken of in the second (juestion as " sin and misery" is treated in the third question under one head. Sin and its power (sinfulness) and their consequences, viz., guilt and i)unishment, are set forth. Sin is not merely human weakness ; it is rather transgression,^ evil-doing, an offence against God. Therefore sin is the greatest of all miseries, because it separates man from God and banishes him from His presence, and thereby makes him wretched in body and soul, in time and eternity. Isa. 59 : 2. The first sin at once plunged man into misery, and banished him from Paradise (the dwelling place of God among men) — out to accursed ground. Sin developed with the first murder, and drove the first murderer, Cain, full of despair, into the land of Nod, i. e., into banishment. And when a son was born to Seth, he named him, with a feeling of the deepest misery, Enos, i. e., incurably sick. (The word Enos thus also signifies " man.")

II. The Import of the Law of God.

1. A law is something established, a certain fixed order, to which one must conform. It demands obedience. All human law has its authority only through the divine economy. Where it contradicts that, the word of the apostle holds true, " We must obey God rather than men." Acts 5 : 29. The divine law on the contrary demands unconditional obedience, because God is the highest and the only infallible lawgiver.

2. God's law is His revealed will, and directs us what to do and what to leave undone. It is, therefore, in the form of a command and prohibition. We must distinguish between the natural law of God or the conscience, and the revealed or written law of God found in the Scriptures.

a) Conscience is the innate consciousness in man of good and evil, right and wrong — a remnant from the school of Pai-adise, from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. It is also called " God's voice in the heart of man." Rom. 2 : 4-15. But as all the powers and capacities of the soul have become corrujjt through sin, so in like manner the conscience is involved. Man

can, tlierefore, never attain to a knowledge of sin tlirongli conscience alone, since his conscience even often approves many things that God conden^ns {e. g., to lie, when it does not work injury to another, or when it is of advantage to the person himself or to some one else ; to purloin or to retain something — i. e., to steal — when it is only of little value, or when the one to whom it belongs has an abundance of it). The conscience of the natural man is, therefore, unreliable. Rom. 2 : 1/). It needs to be regulated and quickened by the written law of God, just as a clock must constantly be regulated and set by the sun. There is an erring conscience, which is like the clock that runs and strikes the hour, but not correctly. There is a slumbering conscience, wdiich is like the running clock that does not strike. By the "^ooc^" and ^^ evil conscience" we understand the testimony of conscience that one has done well or ill. But the " good" conscience may also be an erratic one.

b) The written law of God, which is revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, is God's revealed will, according to which we are to regulate our conduct, both in our actions and in avoiding things improper.

1. First of all in the Old Testament: John 1: 17, Micah 6 : 8. The law in the old covenant is of a threefold character — the moral or ethical, the ceremonial or ecclesiastical, and the state or civil law. The ceremonial law is comprehended in the directions about worship and the religious observances of the people of Israel ; the civil law determines the political institutions and governs the judicial relations of the people. Botii laws applied only to the people of Israel, and were intended also to bring them to a knowledge of sin. The former, through their sacrifices and ceremonial washings, testified to their uncleanness. Heb. 10 :

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. n

3. ^ The latter convicted them of disobedience and resistance to hiw in daily life. Both laws have been abolished in Christ ; the ceremonial law throu^»-h His sacrificial death and His high i:.riestly office (Cof 2 • 17 which are a shadow of things to come ; bnt the body is ot Christ Heb. 10: 12, 2(>). The civil law has been abolished through His kingly office and through His heavenly reign, Matt. 28: 18-20, after the severest punishment of this law, the penalty of death, had been inflicted on the Son of God (John 19 : 7, Deut. 21 : 23), and after the Jewish state had been destroyed by the judgment of God. Of the ceremonial and civil law of Israel it may be said to be true that Christ is the end of the law. Rom. 10 : 4.

The moral or ethical law, which is comprehended in the Ten Commandments, was the first law which God gave to Israel at Sinai as soon as they had come out of Egypt, and had become an organized community. Ex. 20, Deut. T). It is still in force and is for all people, and for all times the foundation given of God of the moral order of the world. Matt. 5 : 17, " Think not that I came to destroy the law and the prophets, but to fulfil ;" i, e., not only to fulfil its demands in His active, and its punishments in His passive obedience, but He had also fulfilled the law in the sense that He made it more complete, and demands that in His kingdom there should be a more exact fulfilment than that to which the Jews were accustomed, and which was only directed to the letter.

2. The New Testament contains not only the gospel, but also the law of the new covenant. John 14 • 15 John 13 : 34, Gal. 6 : 2, 1 Thess. 4:3.

III. How to Attain to the Knowledge of Sin Through the Law of God.

God gave the law for a two-fold purpose. It is to lead, first of all, to the knowledge of our sin, and then to serve us as a guide to the new life which is wellpleasing to God. For the latter purpose the law, i. e., the Ten Cbmmandnients, is set forth exjdained in the third part of tlie C-atechism (of " tliankfulness"). Here, in the first ]>art, we have to do with tli(3 law in the former sense. It is by bitter experience that we become acquainted with misery as evil, the consequence of sin ; l)ut we learn sin itself as misery only from the law of God. Rom. o: 20. Here we are concerned not so much with the coarse outbreaks of sin and with single sins, but with the essence of sin and our sinfulness. Rom. 7:7. By sin we understand all that is opposed to the holy will and law of God, whether it be in thought, word or deed. 1 John o : 4. Sin is accordingly rebellion against the will of God and apostasy from God. We come to the knowledge of sin when we compare our whole life, in deeds and things avoided, in thought, word and deed with the demands of the divine law, and when we do not turn our eyes away from the odious picture, which confronts us as our own in this pure mirror ; or when we are not like the man who beholdeth his natural flxce in a glass, and forthwith goeth his way and forgetteth what manner of man he was. James 1 : 23, 24. Christ pointed the rich young man who asked him the way of salvation (Matt. 19), as well as the scribe who tempted him (Luke 10), to the law. But both of these had read the law only superficially, or else they could not have said : " All this have I kept." We must know tiie far-reaching significance of the law if we would know the greatness of our sin.