Unlike Luther's Catechism, which had already been published when the Heidelberg Catechism was composed, this does not set forth the Ten Commandments, but the summary of them given by Christ Himself as the means to bring about a knowledge of sin. The reason for this arrangement is not that the writers wished to change the order of the five principal points treated in both Catechisms, or because it was undesirable to introduce the Ten Commandments twice, in the first part as a mirror in which to discover the knowledge of sin, and then again in the third part as the rule of Christian life. The reasons manifestly lie deeper, and are to be found in the nature of the subject itself and in the purpose of the book.

1. The subject does not treat of the knowledge of individual sins in the sense of transgressions of particular commandments, but of the knowledge of sin, of the sinfulness and the lost condition of the natural man. This knowledge is far more easily attained by holding the Ten Commandments before us in the concentrated form of a summary like a mirror with intense reflection in a narrow compass. The source from which all true keeping of the law must j)roceed, and the goal which it strives to reach, is love. Do you love God perfectly and your neighbor as yourself? Tliis question penetrates the inmost recesses of the soul, and over against it there is no escape as might perchance be attempted from one or another of the commandments. " Ye are to be perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect." To this there is but one confession : I am not perfect, and I cannot become such of myself.

2. The other reason is found in the purpose of the Catechism, which is intended for youth, and is, therefore, a pedagogical one. One might not succeed in bringing a catechumen to a consciousness of utter sinfulness in regard to the seventh commandment (thou

shalt not commit adultery), or the tenth (thou sluilt not covet thy neiglihor's wife). On the contrary, love to parents, to kindred and to benefactors, with wliich the yonth is familiar, ])resents a point of de[)artu)-e from which to bring him to recognize that he does not love (xod and his neighbor as he ouglit, and conso(][uently does not keep the commandments of God as a whole.

Althongh Calvin in his Catechism treats the Apostles' Creed as his first point, yet the application which the Heidelberg Catechism makes of the law in the first part, is fully Calvinistic. Calvin says : "The purpose of the law is easily recognized. It teaches love — love to God and to the brethren. Love to one's self it does not teach. There is nothing in it that says what to do or what to avoid for the sake of ourselves. For even without a command we think first of ourselves, and in everything we care best for ourselves, if we become absorbed in love toward others. The commaudments do not aim at particulars, but at the righteousness of our whole being. Let no one think that he can fulfil them by external acts. Wlioever is not pervaded by love, and does not do everything out of love, breaks the law in every thought and act. But since no one has such love in himself, we all come short and are guilty before God. We stand in need of forgiveness, of a re-adoption through grace, of a love which is shed abroad in our hearts and which teaches us how to love. Thus the law points us to Christ."

Again, the summary of the divine law is divided into two commands. The fii'st corresponds to the first table of the law (commandments 1-4), the second to the second table (commandments 5-10). Compare question 93. This summary we find already in the Pentateuch, and evidently in vicAV of it the scril)e who wished to tempt the Lord with his question (Matt. 22), made no reply (Dent. (3: 5, Lev. 19: 18).

I. The First and Greatest Commandmeiit.

Loving God with all our lieart, with all our soul, with all our miud, and with all our strength is to love Him above all else with full determination of purpose and with complete self-surrender, — with all the powers of heart, soul and mind. Love is not a mere sentimental feeling, but it embraces all the powers and faculties of man, — the understanding (knowledge), feeling (sensation) and willing (determination), and gives proof of itself in all the energies of body and soul. Therefore loving God means also : (a) That I recognize and honor Him as the highest good (for true love rests upon reverence), Ps. 73: 25; {b) that I long after Him continually (for this is the disposition of love), Ps. 27 : 8 ; and rejoice in His presence (this is the happiness of love),'Ps. 84: o; (c) that I gladly and freely do His will (this is the proof of love), 1 John 5 : 3, Acts 5 : 29.

U. The Second Commandment, which is like unto the First.

1. To love your neighbor as yourself, i. e., as if you were he, or as if you were in his place. The impure and sinful self-love (selfishness and egotism) of the natural man is hereby not recognized as good and justifiable. Against this is directed the demand of self-denial, withoutwhich love to one's neighbor is impossible. True self-love consists in this, that we seek our true well-being and eternal salvation. Eph. 5 : 29. This feeling we should also have toward our neighbor, and we should be concerned for his eternal salvation and temporal well-being to the same degree as we are for our own, just as sincerely, constantly and actively as we are bound and inclined, according to the will of God, to love ourselves. We are not to say with Cain : " Am I my brother's keeper ?" Gen. 4 : 9. On the contrary, we are bound by what Paul writes in Philippians 2 : 4 — " Look not every man on his own things, but every

man also on the tilings of others ;" and by what Christ says in Matt. 7: 12 — "Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them ;" and by the royal law as expressed in James

2 : 8 — " Thou shalt love thy neiglibor as thyself."

2. According to Scripture we distinguish in our love toward our fellow-men between (a) love of brother, {b) love of neighbor and (c) love of enemy.

a) Every Christian who through faith has become a living member of the body of Christ, is my brother. 1 Cor. 12: 27, 1 Pet. 2: 17. In 1 Cor. 13: 4-7 the apostle depicts the essence of brotherly love. In Matt. 18 : 21, 22 we see how often we are to forgive our brother. Acts 2 : 44, 45 : They (the brethren, the first Christians) held all things in common. Also 1 John

3 : 16. Abraham gives an example of brotherly love in his conduct toward Lot. Gen. 13 : 8, 9.

b) Every person without reference to race or religion, is my neighbor ; and especially the one who stands in need of my hel]^. In Luke 10, in the parable of the Good Samaritan, which sets forth an example of love of neighbor, Christ changes the question " Who is my neighbor ?" into " To whom art thou neiohbor?" Acts 17: 2(i, Isa. 58: 7, 2 Pet. 1:7.

c) Among our fellow-men an enemy stands farthest from us, but the same love is to be extended to him. An enemy is one who wishes me ill, who desires or does me evil. Matt. 5 : 44. Love toward one's enemy does not manifest itself merely in not returning evil for evil, but in return in"' o-ood for evil. Rom. 12 : 19-21. We have examples of love toward our enemies in our crucified Savior, and in Stephen. Luke 23 : 34, Acts 7 : 59.

in. The Sum of the Law is the Two Commandments.

1. The demand of the divine hiw is love. 1 Tim. 1 : 5. The fulfiUment of the divine law, therefore, roots itself in love. Rom. 13 : 10.

2. God asks us to love Him, for His own sake ; because He is our Lord and God, our Creator and Benefactor with respect to body and soul. 1 John 4 : 19.

3. For God's sake we are to love our fellow-men. Levit. 19 : 18.

4. The two commandments are like each other : a) With reference to their contents, for both demand love ; b) with reference to their importance, for God demands the fulfillment of the one as of the other with equal emphasis; c) because one cannot be fulfilled without the other.

5. The two commandments are unlike in their rank (the " first and the greatest," and the " other," i. e., the second) : a) In respect to the object of love (God and man) ; b) in respect to the measure of love (above all things and as thyself) ; c) in respect to their relation to each other (because love towards one's neighbor springs only from love toward God),

6. Love toward God is the source of all true love toward one's neighbor, and love to one's neighbor is the test of love toward God. 1 John 4 : 19-21.

7. Upon these two commandments hangs the whole law which God gave through Moses and the prophets, through whom He preaches, interprets and inculcates the law. The demands of the law and the prophets are summarized in the two commandments. Upon these they hang, and their fulfillment moves in them like a door on its hinges.

ftuestion 5.

Canst thou keep all these things perfectly f

In no wise ; for [ am prone by nature to hate (rod and my neighbor.

I. That I Cannot Keep the Law of God Perfectly.

How then do I come to the knowledge of sin ?

The law of God stands before me as a mirror. The

purpose is not to view the mirror, but myself in the mirror; not merely to become acquainted with tlie law, but to learn to know myself through it. In a mirror we see how we appear, clean or unclean. Speaking without a figure, it is our dnty to compare with open eyes and with all earnestness, the entire man — his disposition and conduct, his thoughts, words, and deeds — with the whole law. Canst thou keep it all, — not single commands, but all the demands of the law, — perfectly ; not merely here and there, but always and everywhere, and according to the measure in which God demands its fulfillment ? And not merely, " Hast thou kept it ?" but also, " Canst thou keep it ?" Conscience, Scripture and experience answer : No! Rom. 2: 17, James 2: 10, 1 John 1 : 8, Rom. 7 : 18, 21. The image which, according to the comparison mentioned above, confronts us in the mirror, is not lovely and beautiful, but repulsive and wholly deformed through sin. Isa. 1 : 5, 6. What great wretchedness, what depth of misery !

II. Why I Cannot Keep the Law of God Perfectly.

1. This comes from my being prone by nature to evil.

a) Evil did not first enter my heart in the progress of time, but it was already there when I was born ; therefore, because we have not acquired it by practice, we cannot rid ourselves of it in the same way. And because the inclination to evil dwells in the heart by nature, it therefore exerts so great a power over it, and cannot be overcome and removed from it through one's own strength, which is already weakened by it.

b) If the inclination to evil resides by nature in the human heart, then no man is free from it, but this sinfulness extends to all men. Gen. 8 : 21, Eph. 2 : o. Gen. 6 : 5, Jer. 13 : 23, Job 14 : 4, Rom. 3 : 10-12.

2. " I am prone l)y nature to hate God and my neighbor." From this natural inclination arises our sinful

and corrupt condition, not from the outbreaks of sin, which are its natural effects and consequences. And the corruption is not to be measured by the coarseness or refinement of these outbreaks. The natural inclination of man is directed to the very opposite of what God demands of us in His law — love to God and man. And this antithesis the Catechism expresses in all its severity, " prone to hate God and neighbor."

a) I am prone by nature to hate God. Love and hate are like two poles between which there is no mediation. According to man's way of looking at it, indifference is indeed regarded as standing between them. But this is a deception. God as the highest good desires to be loved perfectly ; this demand is His right, its fulfillment our duty. "^ Indifference and lack of love toward Him are only lesser grades of hatred. With God only a decision for or against (ein entweder — oder) is recognized as valid according to the word of the Son of God. Matt. 12: 30. Further, he who does that which is against me, and which he knows is against me, will not indeed be able to say that he loves me. Accordingly he who loves sin, which is hateful to God, and loves the world, which hates Him, is allied to that which stands in hateful opposition to God, and of such an one it can be said that he hates God. 1 John 2 : 15. The natural man bears within his heart a hatred against all that comes from God and belongs to (^od, — against the Son of God, in whom dwelleth the fullness of the Godhead bodily and in whom the greatest love of the Father is revealed, John 15 : 28 ;—against God's Word, and that not merely against the threatening of the law, but also against the proclamation of the saving Gospel, 1 Cor. 1 : 23 ; — against God's ways in His providence and government of the world, Ps. 78 : 41 ; 14 : 1 ; — against God's children and servants, John 15 : 18, 19 ; Luke 21 : 17.

Thft reference, therefore, is not so much to the coarse outbreaks of open liatred against God, as they occur among those who liave reached the extremity of in fa ni}^ in blaspheming and cursing the name of God, as to the inner disinclination toward God's Being and Will. Thus it is antagonism and enmity against God. The essence of enmity can be characterized as nothing else but hatred. Even if the world and the flesh claim that they love God, it is only empty talk. For the God whom they pretend to love, is not the true and living God, who created man after His own image in true righteousness and holiness, but an idol which they create in their own thoughts, according to their own imaginations, and in which they love their own infirmities. It is not different with the idols of the heathen ; theirs are coarse, but these are refined. But just in this their hatred against the true God manifests itself. Bom. 8 : 7, Ps. 45 : 8, Matt. 6 : 24, James 4 : 4, Isa. 5U : 2, Horn. 5: 2, Col. 1 : 21.

b) I am prone by nature to hate my neighbor. From the same root of sinfulness from which springs outspoken hatred, arises also that relation toward our neighbor in which we love ourselves more than we love him, instead of loving him as we love ourselves. How universal this is, we learn from daily experiences with men and their principles. " Das Hemd ist mir nadier als der Bock." {" Each one is neighbor to himself") Where a so-called natural love is found, it is always very imperfect and lacks the only ])roper motive. One loves either for the sake of one's own ])leasure, or on account of one's own advantage ; thus ultimately one's self, or on account of one's self; whereas God wishes that we should love our neighbor for God's sake, i. e., from obedience toward Him and according to the manner that is well-jdeasing to Him. How little value is to be set on such natural love, we may conclude from

the ease and persistence with which it passes over into deadly hatred, as daily experience teaches us. He who knows his own heart, and whose eyes are open to penetrate the restless life of men, must coincide with the words : " I am prone by nature to hate my neighbor." Titus 3 : o. (The apostle Paul says this of himself and of the other Christians after their former conversation, although he could testify with reference to himself: "After the righteousness in the law I w^as blameless." Phil. 3 : 6.) Kom. 1 : 29— full of malice, hate, murder, dispute, says Paul of all the heathen. Also Gal. 5 : 19, 20. Cain, the first son of the first parents, is an example of hatred against one's neighbor. Gen. 4 : 5-8. And Abel had not given him the least cause for hatred. Lamech had great natural love — he had two wives— and yet he was a nmrderer. Gen. 4: 23. The sons of Jacob were envious of their brother Joseph ; they hated and envied him who walked in love and obedience toward his father. Gen. 37 : 14-28. 3. Thus I know how great my sins and miseries are.

OF MAN'S GUILT.