By no means, but God created man good, and after his own image, in righteousness and true holiness, that he might rightly know God his creator, heartily love him, and live with him in eternal happiness, to glorify him and praise him.

I. How God Created Man.

1. If therefore man has not in the progress of his life learned to sin, but is sinful by nature, how then did evil originate in man's nature ? Where shall we seek for the origin of sin ? Man was not brought forth through any process of nature, nor was he developed

from a lower animal {e. (/., the ape), but God created him. Did God then plant evil in man ? Would He consequently be the cause of sin and bear the guilt of our misery ? Already the first sinners, Adam and Eve, sought to fasten the guilt of their sin upon others. Eve says, " the serpent deceived me," and Adam even wishes to throw the blame upon God, when he excuses himself, " the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat." And thus the words of the preacher continue to be verified that " God hath made man upright ; but they have sought out many inventions" {i. e., subterfuges). Eccles. 7 : 29.

2. The cause of evil cannot be in God, because He is the highest good ; and God could not have created man evil, because He Himself is pure and holv. John 4 : 24, Habbakkuk 1 : 13, 1 Peter 1 : 16, Ps. 92 : 16, 1 John 1 : 5, James 1 : 16.

3. As God, according to the testimony of Scripture, created all things good. He also created man, not evil, but good, i. e., endowed in body and soul with everything necessary to enable him to fulfil his destiny, the glorifying of God. Gen. 1: 31, Eccles. 7: 29. Man was created good and perfect in the sense that there was nothing faulty in him, but he was suscepti})le of development.

4. God exalted man above all other beings already through the manner of his creation.

a) God made man at the close of His creative work, in order to indicate thereby that he was the crown of the whole creation ; b) while God in the creation of other things merely said, " let there be," or in the creation of living creatures " let the earth bring forth," He now says to Himself, " Let us make man," and formed, out of the dust of the ground itself, man's body ; which, although like that of the animal, surpasses it by far in structure, and breathed into him the breath of life. Gen. 2 : 7.

5. God created man not evil, but good ; He created him not perverse, but after His own image. By image we are to understand not a perfect identity, but an exact resemblance to the original. Gen. 1 : 2(5, 27.

6. By this creating man after His own likeness, God has raised him above all other created beings, and made him His child. 1 Cor. 15: 49, Rom. S: 29, 2 Cor. 3: 18.

7. The essential image of God in man consists in the immortal personal spirit which he has from God, and by which the nobly created body is also governed. Thus man was good in regard to his being, and like unto God in his moral nature, in the gifts which he had received, viz., true (real, complete) righteousness and holiness ; in addition to which (also aftei- the image of God) dominion over the earth was confei-red upon him.

8. Man was created in true righteousness and holiness, i. e., with the inclination and power for good in disposition and conduct. He was, therefore, without sin and guilt, and in a state of innocence ; he loved, desired and did nothing except what was good, righteous, holy, acceptable and pleasing to God.

9. On this account all the spiritual powers of man, his understanding, feeling and will, were as the image of God, good and perfect. He could rightly know God, his Creator (understanding — knowledge) ; he could heartily love Him (feeling — love) ; he could live with Him in eternal happiness (will — life). This we may also learn from passages in the New Testament which refer to the renewal of the original image of God in man. Col. 3 : 10, Eph. 4 : 23, 24, Eom. ^: Cj. ^

10. According to Ursinus the image of God in man consisted : a) In the understanding, which could rightly know the being, will and works of God ; b) in the will, which obeyed God freely, in that all his inclinations,

desires and acts were in harmony witli the will of God ; c) in the spiritual and immortal nature of the soul, in the purity and s])otlessness of the entire man, in complete happiness, in joy in (lod, in the dignity and sovereignty of man, by which he surpassed and governed the rest of creation.

11. With reference to his body, man was created in conditional immortality. He would be immortal as long as he remained in a state of innocence. He did not have to die. To show this we have the testimony of a) the translation of Enoch (Gen. 5 : 24 : While he walked with God, God took him and he was no more) ; and of Elijah {2 Kings 2 : 11, Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven) ; as well as the future translation of all believers who will be alive at the second coming of Christ. 1 Cor. 15: 51, 1 Tliess. 4: 17.

b) The tree of life in Eden. Gen. 3 : 22.

c) The threatening of God. Gen. 2 : 17.

d) That mortality would be the first consequence of sin. Rom. 5 : 12, Rom. 6 : 23.

n. Why God Created Man After His Own Image.

The purpose and end for which God created man after His own image is likewise good ; to praise and glorify God, in all His manifestations, in word and deed, as the noblest creature, God's masterpiece — if one may so say. The honoring and glorifying of God is the purpose for which He created the whole world, and especially man. Prov. 16: 4, Rom. 11 : 30. In praising and gloi'ifying God, men should be like the angels, whose blissful occupation is such. Isa. 6 : 3, Ps. 148 : 2, Luke 2: 13.