From the fall and disobedience of our first parents, Adam and

Eve, in Pai-adise ; hence our nature is become so corrupt, that we

are all conceived and born in sin.

I. Whence Originates Man's Misery.

1. The sixth qaestion has yielded tlie result that the evil and perverse inclination in the nature of man, i. e., his corrupt nature, his misery, does not come from God, his Creator. The seventh question sets forth whence misery originates and who is chargeable with it.

2. Man created good, living in a state of innocence, capable of development, was endowed with freedom to choose good or evil. His development would have to take the one or the other direction. Because he was created good, he had at first by nature only an inclination toward the good, which in advance gave the weight of its influence against evil in the temptation in which he was to choose for himself. Obedience to the commandment, and the temptation which followed, therefore, did not exceed his powers as long as he lived in communion with God. According to his innate state of righteousness and holiness, we may say : " He was able not to sin ;" and if he had continued in this state by overcoming the temptation, then it would have been said of him in his state of perseverance : " He was not able to sin."

3. This determination was brought about through the temptation. This was necessary, in order that man might declare himself through an act of free-will, either for good (for God) or for evil (against God). In the temptation we distinguish between the occasion of temptation and the tempter.

a) The occasion of the temptation was the tree of knowledge of good and evil ; not that the tree or its

fruit could have had a peculiar quality to make man wise, but God, on account of the child-like state of our first parents, attached a command to it. He could not issue His command abstractly, on the basis of man's relation to God, and say, " Ye dare not hate me," for of such hatred they could not as yet have had any definite idea ; or, " Ye dare not be disobedient to me ;" they knew not, indeed, what disobedience was, and could not know it. God could only associate the command with the closest and simplest relations of man to nature, which impressed him externally and served him for his bodily sustenance. He forbade them to taste of the fruit of a tree which, to distinguish it from others, He named the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The tree was, because of the purpose for which it was used, a tree of knowledge, just in so far as it served as an instrument of that test ; through which man, if he endured it, was to be brought to conscious good, — to the consciousness and knowledge of good, in the original doing of which he felt happy and stood in clear opposition to evil, the doing of whicli would lead him into the contrary condition, into misfortune and misery. It was not necessary, therefore, that man should first fall, in order to come to a knowledge of good and evil. c) The tempter was the Devil (slanderer) or Satan (adversary), who used the serpent as his instrument. He was originally created a good angel by God, a spiritual being, but he fell away from God, and with him many angels, who also became evil spirits and subject to him. Matt. 4 : 1, 3. (The first Adam was tempted in Paradise — the second Adam in the wilderness ; both were tempted of the devil ; the first succumbed— the second endured the temptation that he might overcome the devil for us.) Luke 22 : 31, Eph. 6 : 11,1 Peter 5 : 8, Kev. 12 : 9, and 20 : 2, John 8 : 44, 2 Peter 2 : 4, Eph. 6 : 12.

4. Let us consider the Fall more closely as it is described in Gen. 3, not as an allegory (a figurative representation of a thought or of a mere internal process), but as a historical fact and an actual occurrence.

A— Tlie Sin.

a) The Temptation. Gen. 3 : 1-5.

Vei'se 1. — The tempter, as a spiritual being and unknown by our first parents, chooses as his instrument the serpent, well known to men for its shrewdness, fie first tries to confuse them with reference to God's word and command, to create doubt and uncertainty, by lyingly putting a false construction upon it. He first turns to the woman, not because she was created less good than man, but probably because she had not received the command directly from the mouth of God (Gen. 2 : 16, 17), and, therefore, might be more accessible to temptation after the manner devised by him.

Verses 2, 3. — God had not merely warned them against the actual sin ("do not eat thereof"), but also against the desire ("ye shall not touch it"). Eve shows by her answer that she well knows God's word and commandment, and what consequences would follow the transgression (" that ye may not die"), and thereby she at first resists the temptation, God's word sustaining her.

Verses 4, 5. — (" Ye shall not surely die," i. e., in no way, certainly not.) She should have turned away immediately from the tempter. By remaining, she enters already into relation with him, and he comes forth with the open, insolent lie: "Ye shall not die;" in direct contradiction to God's unmistakable statement : " Ye shall die." He, the liar, seeks thereby to represent God as a liar and to awaken at the same time mistrust, as if God were jealous and were keeping back

from mail that which is highest and best. Man was like God in the sense that he was created in His image (Gen. 1 : 2(3), and he might have been satisfied with it. The tempter dazzled the eye of Eve with his flattering falsehood, and further assured her, as if in derision, that her eyes would be opened. At all events, he mixes with his lie a grain of truth, but which God had already told them, viz., that they should learn from the tree what was good and evil. But to this knowledge they would have come through their obedience to God's command, and, in that event, without injury to themselves.

b) The Fall. Verses 6-8.

Verse 6. — As soon as Eve lost sight of God's word and opened her ear to the tempter, she was lost ; she had no longer any support, and became the prey of the tempter. She fell away from God to the tempter, the devil, whom she believed rather than God. The entire development of sin comes forth instantly : 1) The evil desire which is excited in her by the sight of the forbidden fruit ; 2) the sinful act of taking and eating which grew out of it ; 3) the seduction to sin by which she involved also Adam in destruction.

Verse 7. — That they were naked, was neither injury, nor sin, nor shame to them ; for God had thus created them. But they transferred to the external the inner perception and feeling, viz., that they had lost their holiness and righteousness through sin. Shame was the first indication of the agitation of conscience on account of sin. They sought an outward covering of leaves for their nakedness (their shame), since they were not able to cover the inner nakedness which had arisen. Thus after the first sin, there is revealed the consciousness of sin and the need of deliverance. Their eyes were opened, and now they were sorry for the deed.

Verse 8. — When Adam and Eve in the evening of the same day heard the voice of God in the garden, they hid themselves frOm the face of the Lord amongst the trees of the garden. This corresponds entirely with their child-like condition. The voice which at other times sounded so graciously in their ears, now fills them with fear. The cause for this lay not in the voice of God, but in the ears of man. Conscience accused them of their sin. Therefore they were ashamed and afraid of the appearance of their approaching God and Lord. Here also, as in the preceding covering with leaves, the hiding amongst the trees is the consequence and expression of an inner emotion. Dread of God takes the place of former fear of God,. i. e., the child-like obedience in which they were happy ; instead of approaching God, they flee from God. Sin makes itself felt in them as misery,

B — The Judgment.

a) The Trial. Verses 9-13.

Verses 9, 10. — Sin began with the temptation, judgment begins with the trial ; not that God stood in need of such a process as does an earthly judge. Because of His righteousness He would not condemn man without a trial and without giving him an opi)ortunity to defend himself, and for man's sake, that by the examination He might explicitly convict him of his sin. God summoned Adam first (not Eve) to judgment, because He had first given him the commandment, and he was the head of the woman (in a different sense from that in verse 16, when he becomes her lord). Adam was conscious of his inner and outer nakedness, but referred to the latter only as the ground or excuse foihiding himself, since this condition in which God created him could not be held in his opinion as culpable. But in reality the terror of the law, " thou shalt surely die," filled his body and soul.

Verse \\. — The omniscient God at once brings the sinner's refuge to naught : Tliou didst eat of the tree and tliereby hast transgressed my command. Tlie Lord puts it in the form of a question, so that Adam in his answer would have to acknowledge and confess his sin.

Verse 12. — Before Adam confesses, " I ate," he seeks to excuse himself and to cast the blame on his wife, who had led him astray. Impliedly he would make God, who had given the woman to be with him, responsible for his eating. But the penalty had been announced to him with the command ; therefore his excuse is vain.

Verse 13. — Also the ^voman, before she confesses, " I ate," seeks to excuse herself on the ground of temptation, even as the man did on the ground of having been misled. She acknow^ledges now that the serpent deceived her. She became wise through the misfortune.

b) The Sentence. Verses 14-19.

Verses 14, le5 (" above all the cattle of the field," i. e., more than the other animals, which, Rom. 8 : 20-22, are also involved in the ruin of their lord, Adam). — God began in His sentence with the author of the sin, the tempter. He does not challenge the serpent, the animal, the instrument, with a question, the means by which He had brought Adam and Eve to the knowledge and acknowledo-nient of their sin. At the same time He recognizes the accusation of the woman against the serpent as well founded, although without excuse for Eve, and pronounces the curse upon the reptile ; in a wider sense, also upon him whose instrument it was. The serpent, in being made to crawl in the dust of the earth, became the lowest and most despised of all creatures. Not only man, but also animals, have a natural abhorrence of this reptile. Enmity is [)ut between the serpent and the woman, and between their seed. The

serpent can only be destroyed by bruising its head, and it bruises the heel of him who so treads upon it. But as that curse upon the serpent has less significance for the animal than for our first parents (who are to be reminded continually of their Fall by the creeping serpent), far more does the second part of tlie sentence apply to them. It is to awaken in them a comforting hope of deliverance. (The protevangelium, i. e., the first proclamation of the future Redeemer.) The Seed of the woman will come, who will destroy (bruise the head) the power of him who tempts and occasions sin, i. e., the devil (the " old serpent," Rev. 12 : 9), who in return will cause His death (will bruise His heel). (This has been fulfilled through Christ's suffering and death on the cross.)

From the tempter God turns to the woman, who led the man astray. Eve receives bodily and spiritual j)unishment : a) pain of body (and in the most sacred sphere of the woman. In dirist the curse has been transformed into a blessing, 1 Tim. 2 : 14, lo) ; and b) entire dependence upon the man (desire for him and subjection to his will. In Christ this relation has been sanctified, Eph. 5 : 28).

Verses 17-19.— God turns now to him who had been led astray, but to whom, however, belongs the greatest accountability. God reminds him of this by recalling the command which had been directly given to him. Instead of obeying the holy will of God, Adam had yielded to the will of the woman, which had become sinful. With this calling to mind of the commandment, the revelation of the divine will, God replies at the same time to the excuse of Adam, which by implication had been directed against God Himself (verse 12). The punishment for Adam is also a bodily one (he being appointed to the laborious tilling of the ground cursed for his sake, whose fruit he had to eat instead

of the fruit of Paradise), and a spiritual one (affliction and vexation of soul, every misery of life). Upon him who had received the threatening of the law in behalf of himself and of his wife, is now pronounced the heaviest part of the sentence for him and his wife — death. Man, who had become sinful, now becomes mortal. Death is implanted as a germ in his flesh, and has descended upon all his posterity ; the consequence is the final disintegration of body, which we call death in a narrower sense. Tiie word of God, " The day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die," is not fulfilled in the sense, on that day thou wilt become dust, but thou wilt be subject to death. This does not reduce the poignancy of the threat which had been pronounced, as man did not know, but could only anticipate, what death is. How God meant it in the beginning, we learn from His own interpretation of this sentence (misery, toil and distress until his turning to dust). The whole life of man, corrupt .through sin with all its misery, is to be called death. From the day of our birth and with each new day's increased growth in life, we are ripening for death. And the end is, we turn to earth. Rom. 5 : 12, Rom. 6 : 3.

5. Through sin the devil obtained power over the sinner. He thereby becomes subject to the authority of the devil, to which the first question of the Catechism already referred. In his pride man wished to become like God ; in reality he became the servant of the devil, since he subjected himself to his will. John 8: 44, Heb. 2 : 14, 15.

6. The Fall, which involved apostasy from God, and subjection to the dominion of sin and the devil, and disobedience, which expressed itself in resistance to divine authority, out of which the Fall originated and in which it was actually accomplished, — both had their own consequences for Adam and Eve.

a) Loss of the Image of God. — This was true thus far, that in the fall they lost their original holiness and righteousness (tlie divine gifts of grace), and their dominion over the earthly creation came to an end (enmity between the serpent and other animals, thorns and thistles). The essential image of God, i. e., the immortal personal spirit, was left to man, but it was clouded by sin. Man became neither wood nor stone (Stock und Stein), nor animal, nor devil (the substance or essence of whose being is evil, or sin) ; but he remained man in his being, even if entirely permeated by sin.

b) Sinfulness. — Sin was not a solitary act ; but it clung to man with its fascination, and left its traces upon all his work ; so that he, who before was only inclined to good, was henceforth prone to all evil.

c) Mortality. — Only with God (Question 6) could man live in eternal happiness. Since he was now separated from God through sin, he was driven out of Paradise, that he might not eat of the tree of life, and live forever. Mortality refers primarily to bodily, temporal death. With this, however, is most closely connected spiritual and eternal death. The punishment of temporal death was at the same time tempered by God's mercy, else the reign of sin would be eternal.

II. How the Misery of Sin Has Come Upon Us.

1. But what have we to do with the fall of Adam and Eve? Very much. For the consequences of it extended beyond Adam and Eve to all their posterity without exception. Sin did not, it is true, become the essential nature of man, i. e., his real being; but his nature was most deeply corrupted thereby. Human nature became tainted ; as the poison, when it enters the body, passes into the blood and poisons it, without being assimilated by the blood, or the blood ceasing to

be blood, and finally produces death ; in the same way the first sin operated upon the being, the nature of our first parents. And because the generation (birth) of a man is not an original creative act on the part of God, but the propagation and communication of man's own being, and because this being is sinful, we have all (since we are descended from Adam) been conceived and born in sin ; and thus the sinful nature is our own from the first moment of our existence. In Gen. 5 : 8 the same expressions that were used by God at the creation of man, are aj^plied to the first father, Adam, at the birth of a son. As the image of God consisted in man's original holiness and righteousness, so the image of Adam was reflected in implanted and inborn sinfulness.

2. The first sin is the mother of all the sins of the whole world, and its origin is typical of the genesis of all other sins. James 1 : 13-15. The first sin embraces already the three cardinal sins (1 John 2 : 16) : the lust of the eyes — the tree, " pleasant to the eyes" ; the lust of the flesh — " good for food" ; the pride of life— " to be like God" (Gen. 3: 5, 6). In a threefold temptation, corresponding to this one, the second Adam, Christ, gained the victory ; lust of the flesh — " bread" ; lust of the eyes — " pinnacle of the temple" ; pride of life — " all the kingdoms of the world" (Matt. 4).

o. We distinguish original, or inherited, sin and actual sins, or sins of commission.

A) Original sin is the natural inclination inherited by all men. Rom. 5:12, Ps. 51 : 5.

B) AcTUAT SINS are the several sins which arise from original sin (inherited sinfulness). Actual does not here stand in antithesis to " apparent," but it refers to what has been done, to what is set in motion, and is practised. James 1 : 15.

a) Knoivn Sins and Sins of Ignorance. — The former are those which we know to be sins ; the latter are such as we either do not know to be sins, or do not acknowledge as such. Ps. 32 : 5, Ps. 40 : 12, Ps. 19 : 18, 1 Cor. 4 : 4.

b) Sins in thought, word and deed are such as are committed in thinking, in speech, or in conduct. Matt. 15 : 19, 20, 12 : 36. " But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment" (idle not in the sense of vain and superfluous, but, as the literal expression is, "evil," causing offence). Eph. 4: 29, 5 : 4, Ga,l. 5 : 19-21.

g) Sins of Commission ( Transgressions) and of Omission.— The former are such as we incur when we disregard a prohibition ; the latter, when we neglect a command. Hosea 6 : 7, James 4 : 17, Luke 10.

d) Intentional Sins and Si7is of Weakness. — The former are such as are recognized beforehand as sins, and are committed with deliberation ; the latter are those which are committed thoughtlessly, with rashness, or when the struggle against temptation is relaxed in the heart. The former are not excusable, on the ground that one has had perchance a good purpose in view (Rom. 3:8), or was compelled by necessity (lie of necessity) ; nor the latter, on the ground that the necessary strength to resist was not at hand. The contrary is proved by Ps. 141 : 1, 34 : 7, Isa. 40 : 29-31, 65 : 24, Luke 18 : 7, 8. An example of the so-called " Nothluege," lie of necessity, is found in the life of Abraham when he passed off his wife Sarah in Egypt and Gerar for his sister, but was delivered by God, and put to shame by the heathen princes. Gen. 12 and 20. Intentional sins were committed by the brothers of Joseph when they sold him and deceived their father, Gen. 37 ; and by Judas, when he betrayed the Lord,

Matt. 26 : 15. Noah, when he drank to excess through ignorance of the effect of wuie, Gen. 9 : 21 ; and Peter, when he denied the Lord, Mark 14 : ()()-72, sinned through weakness.

e) Ones Own and Others' Sins. — The former are those which a man commits himself; the hitter are the sins of others, of which one becomes a gnilty participant by taking pleasure in them, or by assisting to perpetrate them, or by acquiescing in them, either expressly or by silence. Heb. 7: 27, Levit. 5:1, 1 Tim. 5 : 22.

/) The sin against the Holy Ghost, or blaspheming the Holy Ghost, which alone of all sins will neither in this world, nor in the future, be forgiven ; or the sin unto death, upon which eternal damnation irrevocably rests, is the willful and wicked forsaking, as well as the malicious persecution, of apprehended and ex23erienced divine truth. Matt. 12 : 81, Mark 8 : 29, 1 John 5 : 16, Heb. 6 : 4-6.