Indeed we are, except we are regenerated by the Spirit of God. I. How Deeply Corrupt Human Nature is.

1. The seventh Question taught us the origin of sin, and the extension of sinfulness to the whole human race. The eighth Question points us to the greatness and depth of our misery. Is there then no power of any sort left in man that he might do good and resist evil ? To this holy Scripture answers with an emphatic no. John 3 : 6, Rom. 8 : 7, Eph. 2 : 5, Rom. 7 : 14, Matt. 7 : 16, Gen. 8 : 21.

a) The natural man cannot know the good. What he finds agreeable and calls good is capricious. He makes his own moral law for himself, which is not in harmony with the law of God. 2 Cor. 3 : 5.

b) He is not able to will the good, because sin dominates him, and he is alienated from God. Eph. 2 : 3, Rom. 6:16.

c) He yields his members servants to sin. Rom 6 • 19, Ps. 10: 7, Isa. 59: 3, 7, 8.

2. But is it not the case that the natural man does some good and abstains from evil ; e. g., in helping the poor and in the practise of temperance and moderation, etc. ? Such externally good works lack the true motive^ love to God, and the proper aim, the glory of God. They may have as their basis a sort of natural benevolence, or tenderness of feeling. One may do good and abstain from evil out of ambition, or for the sake of material advantage, or through fear of punishment, shame or injury. Of such the word of the apostle is true, Rom. 14 : 23, " Whatsoever is not of faith is sin"; Heb. 11: 6, " Without faith it is impossible to please God."

Evidence of the depth and greatness of man's corruption is found in the history of paganism (Rom. 1), and of Judaism, and of the entire strata of degenerate Christianity.

4. The knowledge of the greatness of our corruption [that weare, a) incapable, ^. e., powerless, unadapted to any (i. e., any whatsoever) good ; and b) inclined, i. e., capable, adapted, and willing, to all evil] tends to bring us, 1, to humility and distrust of ourselves ; and 2, to the desire for deliverance from this great misery. Rom. 7 : 24. For man, before he comes to a knowledge of his totally corrupt state, has no desire for deliverance.

n. How Long Man Remains in this Corrupt Condition.

Man abides in his native state of total depravity until the end of his life, if a change does not take place in his life. Such a change does not ensue from a

so-called reformation, emanating from the man liimself. For the outward putting off of single sins and misdeeds does not help toward a thorough renewal of one's own heart. For this the natural man lacks the power. Such pretended reformation is in reality only a deception, and furnishes food for self-righteousness and self-complacency. Jer. 18 : 2o, Isa. 57 : 10, 12, Eev. 3 : 17.

2. Just as little is education, or culture and the refinement of man's spirit, able to deliver him from the misery of sin. The Duke of Wellington justly said that there is a possibility of a mere education of the head making refined devils. Matt. 7 : 17. One may fasten good fruit to the branches of a tree, but this is not the fruit of the tree, nor the outgrowth of its life. One might lop off its branches and trim it, and dig about it and dung it ; but the wild apple tree still bears only fruit after its kind. The defect is in the sap. A noble scion must be engrafted upon the wild tree, in order that a new and an entirely different sap, and a noble nature, may be brought to it. The principle of this new life cannot be another human spirit, just as degenerate ; but it can only be the Holy Spirit of God. Man cannot be helped psychically (a word of quality having reference to the spirit of man), but only spiritually (by the Spirit of God). It is the Spirit of God that quickeneth ; the flesb (even that which is refined, developed, informed) profiteth nothing. Therefore man remains, with all his intellectual culture, without the Spirit of God, spiritually dead. He remains incapable of any good and inclined to all evil so long as he has not been regenerated by the Spirit of God. John 3 : 5. L?t us take another example for our contemplation. If a coin were lost upon the street and trodden under foot, not only would it become soiled ; but the image of the king, which is stamped upon it, would in many cases

be defaced beyond recognition. This cannot be restored by merely cleansino- the coin. But it must again be sraeked in furnace heat, and the image of the king must be stamped upon it anew. This takes ])Uice in man, in whom the image of God is defaced through sin, in regeneration. Matt, o: 11, MaL o : 2, 8.

3. Eegeneration is God's work of grace. Just as little as man can conceive and bring forth himself, so little can he regenerate and bring himself into the kingdom of God. Regeneration* is a work of God, wrought by the Holy Ghost. Ezek. 11 : 19, 2 Cor. o : 17. Regeneration, i. e., the birth of the new man in the image of the Son of God, is a work of divine grace. Phil. 2 : 13, John 3 : 8, Rom. 8 : 29.