Not at all; for God made man capable of performing it ; but man, by the instigation of the devil, and his own wilful disobedience, deprived himself and all his posterity of those divine gifts.

I. Grod Has a Right to Demand of Man the Fulfillment of the Law.

Some one (in reply to Question 8) might say : How can I help that it is impossible for me to keep the law of God ? Why did not God create me better ? But God did originally create man in righteousness and holiness (see Question (3), capable of keeping the law, and therefore the creature always remains under the obligation to obey the Creator, who rightfullv exacts such obedience. Deut. 32 : 4, Job 34 : 10, Rom. 1 : 32. If it is just that God should punish disobedience to the law, it is also just that He should exact obedience, whether man is able to render it or not. The parable of the unjust steward serves as an illustration of this. His Lord justly demands of him His goods, although He knows that he has squandered them.

n. That Man Cannot Keep the Law of God Perfectly is His Own

Fault.

1. (Question 7 proves that it is man's fault.

a) Although the fall took place through the instigation of the devil, man was not compelled to yield to tlie temptation and to obey the devil. He is, therefore, without excuse. 2 Cor. 11:3.

b) The disobedience of our first parents was wilful. For the command which God had given them was not difficult to fulfill. They were not driven to transgression either through necessity or want. They were allowed to eat of all the trees in the garden (Gen. 2 : 16). The devil had no power over them. God had rendered them many favors.

c) Through this disobedience man deprived himself of these divine gifts, i. e., he lost the powers by which he might have rendered complete obedience, and through which all his posterity would have been able to render the same.

2. All his posterity must bear the consequences. When a man becomes bankrupt, his whole family passes into poverty and want. At the same time the claims of the creditor stand in law and equity against the debtor and his heirs. With sin we have also inherited the guilt. Rom. 5 : 19, Matt. 18 : 25.

in. The Demand of God is Intended to Bring Man to the Knowledge

of His Misery.

God well knows that man in his present condition is incapable of keeping the law perfectly; but He insists on it because of His holiness and unchangeableness, and to bring man to the recognition of sin, and of his consequent disability. 1 Cor. 15: h(% Ilom. 3: 20. Not only is there no injustice done to man through God's demands, although man is incapable of fulfilling them ; but on the contrary, a great advantage accrues to man

through these dernaads ; for they are the means which God uses to bring him to a knowledge of his inability and boundless misery.

OF THE PUNISHMENT OF SIN.