God is indeed merciful, but alsojust ; therefore hisjustice recjuires that siu, which is committed against the most high majesty of God, be also punished with extreme, that is, with everlasting punishment, both of body and soul.

I. God's Mercy.

1. God will punish sin temporarily and eternally. "Who knoweth the power of thine anger? Even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath." (Ps. 90: 11.) Objection is brought to this penal law of God on the ground that He is merciful, and, therefore, could not and would not reckon so exactly with the sin of man.

2. God is indeed merciful. Ps. 8() : 15. But the natural man has a false notion of this mercy. God's mercy is not negative, i. e., weakness. It does not consist in this, that He overlooks the sin of man and allows it to go unpunished, as Eli did (1 Sam. o : 13), or as any other weak father might overlook the bad conduct and sins of his children. But it consists in this, that He prepares ways and means whereby He might forgive siu without violating His justice.

3. If God should allow sin to go unpunished, who would fear Him ? Man would trifle with Him. Ps. 50 : 21, Isa. 57 : 11, Ezek. 33 : 28-33, Gal. (i: 7.

II. God's Justice.

1. Justice, as well as mercy, is an essential attribute of God, i. e., it belongs in like manner to His being. As God is one in Himself, the one attribute cannot exclude the other, and God cannot on account of His mercy act contrary to His justice. Ps. 11: 7, 2 Tim. 2: 13.

Augustine says : "Neither vvheu God threatens, nor when He promises, does He disappoint any one." God's justice inchides also His veracity. Ps. 33: 4. "For the word of the Lord is right ; and all his works are done in truth," and He has pronounced in His penal law : " Cursed is every one that coutinueth not," etc.

2. One might object that it is too severe and hai-d that sin, which is only tem[)oral, is requited by God, not merely with temporal, but also with eternal punisliment. To this it might be replied that a punishment must correspond not only to the transgression, but also to the relations of the persons involved. 8in has been committed by man destined for eternity, against the most high majesty of the eternal God. Therefore it is rebellion against God, high treason against the Kinii; of kings. Ex. 5 : 2, Ps. 2 : 3, 4, Luke 19 : 14.

p]ven in temporal affairs the punishment corresponds to the station of the injured person ; liigh treason is more severely punislied than an ordinary offence and breach of faith.

3. 8in is not a small matter. Every sin is high treason, and before God there is no difference between " great" or " small" sins ; since every sin is an act of opposition to the will of the most high majesty. Through the severe punishment which God has set upon sin, and which He executes according to His righteousness, sin is to be known and felt in all its depth. Whoever will not obey, nuist suffer.

III. Mercy and -lustice Do Not Exclude Each Other.

1. Both are united in God in such a manner that they can well go togethei", and each manifests itself in its own time and way. Ex. 34 : (>, 7, 2 Thess. 1 : 510, Rom. 11: 22.

2. Examjdes from S(;ripture.

a) The Hood and Noah. Gen. 0-8. While judgmeut and destruction- overtook the entire human race, Noah obtained favor witli God.

b) Sodom and Lot. Gen. It). Sodom with all its inhabitants is condemned on account of its atrocious sins (Gen. 18: 'JO), and is utterly destroyed ; but God's mercy is manifested to Lot, and to his family. Gen. 19: 19.

c) The parable of the barren fig tree, Luke 13 : ()-9. God's mercy ; " let it alone this year also," if pei-chance it might bear fruit ; God's justice, " after that thou shalt cut it down."

3. God shows also mercy in His justice in punishing sin eternally with death, that the reign of sin might not be eternal, and that after the day of wrath there might not be an accumulation of wrath as of guilt. God also shows justice in His mercy, in that (as we shall see) He punishes with death the innocent surety for the guilty sinners.

IV. Conclusion.

We observe that the law, which reveals the holy will of God, and the transgression of which is followed by tlie severest punishment, cannot deliver man out of his misery. Its mission is only this, to awaken and enlighten conscience, that man might thoroughly know his misery, and thereby awaken in him the desire for 'deliverance. Rom. 3: 19, 20. The Catechism in its first part is intended to awaken a consciousness of the misery of sin with its guilt and punishment, and of the necessity of redemption from sin, and thereby to awaken in man a longing for deliverance. For this purpose it appeals to God's word, and to experience. But the reason of the natural man, which does not so readily submit to a conviction of sin, offers various objections. These the Catechism considers, in order to refute them. They are as follows : 1) Whether God

48 Till': in-:iI)KT.BER(i CATECHISM.

Himselt' is not the cause of sin, Question (> ; "2) whether there is not some C:ij)ability for the good in man, (Question 8 ; 3) whetlier God in His demands does not do man injustice, (Question 9 ; 4) whether (Jod's mercy is not in contradiction to punishment, Question 11. The j)ur])Ose aimed at in their consideration is to l)ring about conviction, i. e., the ])ei-suasion of tlic truth of God's word, Ps. «51 : 6 ; and to lead to the confession, Rom. 7 : 24 ; " O wretched man tliat I am ! who shall deliver me from the l)odv of this death ?"

PART SECOND.

OF MAN'S DELIVEKANCE.

Tlie second part of the Catecliism, in continuation of Question 11, shows how a reconciliation between God's justice and His mercy, after the counsel of His wisdom, is established, namely through the obedience and sacrifice of His only Son, Jesus Christ, for our sins. Deliverance means liberation, redemption, and reinstatement into the former condition ; or, according to (Question 12, escape from tempoi-al and eternal punishment, so as to regain God's favor, i. e., become again acceptable to God, and be received into His communion.

The Heidelberg Catechism is charged by some with having forsaken, in Questions 12-17, the Biblical standj)oint peculiarly its own, and with having developed a scholastic theory. The Catechism could indeed simply say that no man could deliver himself from His misery, nor be delivered by another man ; and that God, according to His mercy in giving up His Son, as He has determined from all eternity, has accomplished an eternal redemption for all who believe in Jesus.

But, indeed, no other thought than this is carried out in Questions 12-17, since the object is to explain more exhaustively how and why it has been accomplished in the way indicated, and how the justice and mercy of God are in harmony with each other. Our attention is directed, in the first place, to the conception of a Mediator who makes ransom for another ; secondly, to the nature of the Mediator sought for in this case ; and, lastly, Question 18 names the Mediator in whom these requirements are found. The conception of satisfaction and redemption is, however, thoroughly Biblical. And it is equally a Biblical thought to- indicate the characteristics of the Mediator. In Heb. 7 : 22-28 a similar method of proof is used. The conception of a Mediato'' is directly misconstrued, if Christ is looked upon as the security of the truth and love of God. Of this, the Scripture knows nothing. It recognizes and names Christ as a security only in so far as He appears for us before God.

OF SATISFACTION AND THE MEDIATOR.

Ctuestion 12.

Since, then, by the righteous judgment of God, we deserve temporal and eternal punishment, is there no way by which we may escape that punishment and be again received into favour f

God will have his justice satisfied ; and therefore we must make this full satisfaction, either by ourselves or by another.

L Full Satisfaction Must Be Made.

1. By " God's Justice" we are not to understand here His attribute according to which He j^unishes sin, nor the righteous judgment which He has pronounced against it ; but His righteous demand as Creator and Lord of man that be should fulfil the law completely, or suffer punishment for its transgression. The justice of God is satisfied through complete fulfillment of the law

or through perfect atonement, i. e., through perfect obedience in tlie keeping of the law or in suffering punishment. Luke 10 : 28, Ezek. 18 : 4. The satisfaction that is demanded is this, that the debt by which the sinner is obligated to the justice of God be paid. But this jterfect obedience to the law of God is due from man, as God originally created him, and the suffering of a sufficient penalty is due from man, as he has become through sin.

2. " Satisfaction" is the payment on the part of man, whereby God's violated justice is atoned for and man's lost righteousness is restored. It is paying in the sense of atoning for, restoring. Job 20: 11, Ps. 69: 4, Matt. 18 : 34, Philemon 18, 19, Mark 10 : 45.

3. The requirement of such satisfaction is a fundamental law of God. Isa. 1 : 27 ; 5 : 16, Josh. 24 : 19, Ex. 23 : 7.

IL By Whom Full Satisfaction Must Be Made.

1. The one who is guilty must render the satisfaction, and the one wdio has sinned must suffer the punishment. Deut. 27 : 26, Ezek. 18 : 4.

2. But in ordinary life it is also permitted that another, a surety, may take the ^^lace of the debtor and assume his obligations, in case of his inability to pay the debt or to suffer the punishment. Gen. 44 : 32, 33, Philemon 19.

3. Over against God's justice, L e., His just demand upon the sinner, a security is admissible. This is proved by the fulfillment of redemption through Christ, who is called in Heb. 7 : 22 the surety (not " executor") of the new covenant. Col. 2 : 14, " Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which w^as contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross." He has paid the debt for us as our surety, and thereby discharged the obligation. According to Rom. 5 : 6-8, Christ died as surety for the ungodly.

4. The institution of sacrifices in the old covenant points also to this, that through another satisfaction may be made ; through the sacrifice there is made, even if not a complete, yet a symbolical satisfaction for the sinner by whom or for whom it is offered unto God. Lev. 9 : 7. In the fulfillment of redemption Christ is made the sin-offering for us, 1 Peter 2 : 24, " Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree" (literally: Who His own self carried our sins in His own body upon the wood— upon the cross as the altar, according to Lev. 9:7). Rom. 8 : 3, 2 Cor. 5 : 21.

5. References to the redemption from slavery mav also be cited. He who was sold as a slave through inability to pay (Matt. 18: 25), could either redeem himself, if he earned enough money, or could be redeemed through the payment of the debt by another. Mark 10 : 4o. " For even the Son of man came .... to give his life a ransom (literally : As redemption money to buy freedom) for many."