By no means ; but on the contrary we daily increase our debt.

After establishing (Ques. 12) the fact and nature of man's guilt and how satisfaction for it is to be made, we must further inquire who can render this satisfaction ; whether we ourselves (Ques. 13), or any mere creature (Ques. 14) , and if neither, what sort of a Mediator we must seek for (Ques. 15).

1. There is a two-fold way (see Ques. 12, 1., 1) to satisfy the justice of God, viz., by the fulfillment of the law and the suffering of its penalty. In neither respect can the payment, the satisfaction, be made by ourselves. Man cannot render the satisfaction.

2. By fulfilling the law.

a) Man has lost all power in the direction of the sjood. Job \) : 2, 3, Ps. 143 : 4, Rom. 8 : 7, Matt. 16 : 2(3.

b) An externally honorable conduct, so-called civil righteousness, is excluded in relation to God, who demands perfect obedience. Isa. 64 : 6.

c) A restoring or making good again is also out of the question ; for whatever good we could do, we are indebted to God for doing it. And if we cannot in our own strength in the present do any good, much less can we perform an excess of goodness that is to atone for the })ast.

d) On the contrary we daily increase our guilt through new sin. That we daily sin anew is proved by our consciences and by Christ Himself when He teaches us daily to pray : Forgive us our debts. 1 Kings 8 : 46, Jas. 3 : 2, Rom. 2 : 5.

One who presumes to be his own deliverer resembles a man who is sunk in the mire, and with his own hand attempts to draw himself out of it by the hair. Not only does he fail to draw himself out, but he works himself into it deeper and deeper.

3. It is not possible for us to make satisfaction by enduring the punishment ; for it will be not only temporal, i. e., finite, but also eternal, and we shall not come forth from it throughout eternity. Isa. 33 : 14.

4. If, therefore, the justice of God cannot be satisfied by us, it is necessary that satisfaction should be made for us by another, if we are to escape the punishment and be again received into favor, i. e., if we are to be delivered.