No, only those who are ingrafted into him, and receive all his benefits by a true faith.

1. All men, as descendants of Adam, conceived and born in sin and living in sin, are lost, i. e., have become subject to judgment and condemnation. Rom. 5 : 12, 18. The point of comparison is not found in the unlimited extension of condemnation and justification upon all men, but in this, that both proceed from one person, the former from the first and the latter from the second Adam, and that in the nature itself of men there is no difference. Verse 18 is supplemented by v. 19. Calvin says on v. 18 : "As it has come to pass through the judgment of God that the sin of one abides to the condemnation of many, so grace becomes effective to the righteousness of many." Lampe says : " It indicates no less than that Christ is the head of all those who are saved, just as Adam was the head of all those who have fallen under condemnation. Not all will be saved." Matt. 7 : 13, 14 ; 22 : 14.

2. In order that we may be rescued from destruction and be saved, i. e., delivered, which according to Scripture can only be accomplished through Christ, we must come into communion with Him, which again is only possible through faith in Him, as the means ordained by God for this end. John 3 : 16, Mark 16 : 16.

3. Faith is the means ordained by God, but it is not demanded as a condition whicli man in his own strength has to fulfil. For this he is not at all capable of doing in his sinful condition (compare Ques. 8). It also does not say, therefore, in Question 20 that man through faith incorporates himself, i. e., engrafts himself into Christ, but that he is engrafted into Him by faith. Neither is it first mentioned that he appropriates the benefits of Christ according to his own pleasure, but that he is engrafted into Christ. Faith has reference to both being engrafted into Christ and to the appropriation of His benefits, but each in its order,

4. Faith does not ground itself in the will of man, and is not a work or an act of the same, but it is a work of the Spirit of God in the soul of man, whereby the will of the called sinner is constrained to receive Christ alone and entirely as the ground of righteousness and the source of life.'' 2 Thess. 3 : 2, Luke 13 : 24, John 3 : 27, John 3 : 8, Eph. 2 : 8, John 6 : 29.

5. Through faith we are incorporated into Christ, i. e., engrafted into His body. We are to understand by this in the first place that we are brought inwardly, spiritually into most intimate fellowship with His person, and the consequence of this is that we are then also true members of His spiritual body, which is the communion of those who are redeemed and sanctified through Him. " Engrafted into Him" also points toward this, that the union with Christ is not mechanical, external, but organic, living. As the living sap flows from the stem into the branches which grow upon the tree and into those which are grafted upon it, and as the blood is conveyed from the heart, the centre of the human organism, through the veins into the members of the body as a living power, and as all the members are held together by the sinews and joints, so life proceeds from Christ only to those who are incorporated into Him. John 15 : 5, Eph. 5 : 30, Eph. 4 : 15, 16

In explanation of the idea of engrafting, the picture in Rom. 11 : 17 may also be adduced, according to which wild branches are engrafted upon the noble olive tree, and through the impartation of its sap they also then bear noble fruit. This kind of ennobling, or rather regeneration, renewing of the olive tree is to-day yet customary in the East.

6. In like manner we receive through faith only, wrought by the Holy Ghost, the benefits of Christ, viz., forgiveness of sin, righteousness and eternal life ; for the natural man has neither understanding of nor pleasure in these. 1 Cor. 2 : 14, John 1:12, Acts 26: 18.

7. Not all is gold that glitters and not all is faith that is so called or accepted as such. A four-fold false faith is to be distinguished :

a) An imaginary or self-constituted faith. Matt. 7 : 21-23, 2 Tim. 3 : 5 ; 4 : 3, 4.

b^ An historical or intellectual faith i. e., the mere formal appropriation of the proclamation of salvation and the mere knowledge of it. Acts 26 : 27, James 2: 19.

c) A temporal faith, i. e., the assent to the truth, but without remaining constant in it. Luke 8 : 13, John 6 : 66, Heb. 6 : 4-6.

d) A faith in miracles, i. e., a faith that works miracles without being alive in love. 1 Cor. 13 : 2, Matt. 7 : 22, 23.

8. By true faith alone we are engrafted into Christ and receive all His benefits. As examples, we have the believing thief on the cross, Luke 23 : 42, 43 ; the refusal and the acceptance of the invitation in the parable of the Great Supper, Luke 14 : 16-24 ; the lack of the wedding garment in the parable of the wedding of the king's son. Matt. 22 : 1-14. After establishing in Question 20 that we are saved by faith only. Question

21 treats of liow faith must be constituted, or of its nature ; and Questions 22 and 2o of what is to be believed, or of the contents of faitli.