All things promised us in the gospel, which the articles of our Catholic, undoubted Christian faith briefly teach us.

1. True faith is based u|)on the promises of the gospel, and these are also its object and contents. Acts 24 : 14, John 3 : 33.

2. The gospel, or the Word of God, is on this account the only rule of faith. Isa. 30 : 21, Deut. 28 : 14. All the statutes and institutions of men are excluded, even the so-called oral traditions of the apostles. Hence also the Apostles' Creed cannot be placed on the same level with the Holy Scriptures. " It is merely a summary of the most important facts and doctrines of salvation contained in the Scriptures.

3. A creed is also called a "symbol," which signifies a watchword, by which soldiers recognize each other, or a standard around which they rally.

4. It is called catholic, because, as the oldest confession of faith, it is accepted by all Christian Churches, and forms a bond of union between them.

5. Undoubted, i. e., beyond all doubt, because its articles are based upon the Holy Scriptures.

6. It is called Christian, because it embraces the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith, without the recognition of which no one can lay claim to the name of Christian.

7. It is finally called the Apostles' Creed. It received this name because the Church prior to the Reformation, believed, and the Church of to-day, outside of the Protestant (Roman aud Greek), believes that it was composed by the Apostles before they departed from Jerusalem to so into all the world. This is an unfounded tradition. The catechism very wisely has not taken up with this designation, in order that it might not create misapprehension. The creed might be called apostolic, inasmuch as its articles, although not composed by the Apostles themselves, are grounded upon their writings. It originated in the first centuries after Christ, by a gradual expansion of the baptismal formula (Matt. 28: 19), or of the answers to the questions in baptism, the so-called baptismal confession. The article " He descended into hell," was added at the latest in the sixth or seventh century. The baptismal confession, as it was used by our forefathers, reads as follows : Q. Dost thou believe in God the Father Almighty? A. I believe in God the Father Almighty. Q. Dost thou believe in Christ, the Son of God ? A. I believe in Christ, the Son of God. Q. Dost thou believe in the Holy Ghost? A. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

8. The creed of the Reformed Church in Germany and in the United States, is besides this the Palatinate or Heidelbero; Catechism. The Reformed Churches in otlier countries have their own confessions, which, however, fully agree with our catechism. The latter was also recognized at the Synod of Dort (1618) by all the representatives of the different Reformed Churches.

THE HOLY TRINITY.