I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth : And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord : Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost : Born of the Virgin Mary : Suffered under Pontius Pilate : Was crucified, dead and buried : He descended in Hell : The third day he rose from the dead : He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the P^ather Almighty : From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost : I believe in the Holy Catholic Church]: The Communion of saints : The Forgiveness of Sins : The Resurrection of the Body : And the life everlasting. Amen.

duestion 24.

How are thexe articles divided f

Into three parts : the first is of God the Father, and our creation ; the second of God the Son, and our redemption ; the third of God the Holy Ghost, and our sanctifi cation.

1. The creed is divided into twelve articles, and these, according to their inner connection, are grouped into three parts.

2. The division is in accord with the three persons of the one Divine Being therein confessed, (Matt. 28 : 19). Such acts are mentioned as are especially ascribed and attributed to each individual person. This does not mean that each of the three persons of the one Divine Being acted independently. The acts of the Holy Trinity are as indissoluble as the Trinity itself, and the distinction is made only to facilitate the clear exposition and explanation of the different acts, in the revelation of each of which one person appears prominently.

3. God the Father has created us — and the whole world (Gen. 1 : 1), by the Son (Gen. 1 : 3, John 1 : 1-3, 14, Col. 1 : 1(3), in union with the Holy Ghost (Gen. 1:2).

God the Son has redeemed us (1 Tim. 2 : 6), He being sent by the Father (John 3 : 16, Gal. 4:4), throuoh the Holy Ghost (John 1 : 32).

God the Holy Ghost sanctifies us (effects our sanctification, i. e., our renewal. 2 Thess. 2 : 13), sent by the Father, (John 14 : 10, 17), and by the Son (John 16 : 7).