That the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (who of nothing made heaven and earth, with all that is in them, who likewise upholds and governs the same by his eternal counsel and providence,) is for the sake of Christ his Son, my God and my Father ; on whom I rely so entirely, that I have no doubt but he will provide me with all things necesary for body and soul ; and further,

that he will make whatever evils he sends upon me in this valley of tears turn out to ray advantage; for he is able to do it, being Almighty God, and willing, being a faithful Father.

Wliat are we to understand by this, that God is called " Father," ''Almighty" and " Creator ?" In the exposition of true faith " certain knowledge" is first.

A— God the Father.

1. God is called Father, because he is the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the only true God who has revealed Himself as Father in Christ Jesus through the Holy Ghost. Eph. 1 : 3, John 17 : 3. ^ 2. God is the Father of Jesus Christ, not from the time of His incarnation and temporal birth, but He is His eternal Father, i. e., from eternity before all creatures, and the Son of God is of like' eternal beino- as the Father. Col. 1 : 15, John 17: 5. ^

B— The Almighty.

1. In the Apostles' Creed the first article ought to be translated : I believe in God the Father, the Almighty, creator of heaven and earth, the way in whicli it is given in the first and oldest editions of the Heidelberg Catechism. In the middle ages, e. g., in the baptismal confession, which the Franks and Saxons used, the word "Almighty" was joined to Father to qualify it, and later to " Creator," which is now the general usage.

2. Omnipotence is the power of God which He manifests in His works. Jer. 32 : 17.

C— The Creator of Heaven and Earth.

1. God created the heavens and the earth, with all that is in them, out of nothing. To create means to bring forth something out of nothing, ^. e., without the presence of matter, and without the use of implements by a mere act of the will. To make, on the contrary,

means to fUsliion something out of matter and with implements. When "create" is used of men, it rehites either to the spiritual sphere or to the construction of a great work; and wh-^n "make" is used of God, it is in the sense of create. Heb. 11 : o, Kom. 4: 17.

2. By " the heavens and the earth and all that is in them" we understand the whole world, the visible and the invisible.

3. Heaven (in the Hebrew, Gen. 1:1, the heavens) signifies in the Scriptures not only the visible firmament, or the space in which innumerable heavenly bodies move, but also the place (1 Kings 8: 27) in which the unveiled glory of God manifests itself, and in which the created, unfallen spirits, the angels, are present in countless multitudes. Therefore God is called the Lord of Sabaoth, that is, the Lord of Hosts. Gen. 32 : 1, 2, Dan. 7 : 10, Luke 2 : 13.

The creation of the invisible heavens preceded the creation of the earth, atmosphere, and the starry firmament. The angels who inhabit it were ci^eated by God pure and holy spirits ; but some fell away from God, and therefore holy angels are spoken of and fallen angels, or devils, who did not continue in the truth.

a) The good or holy angels (the word angel signifies messenger, ambassador) are pure spirits, who are constantly in the presence and service of God. Matt. 18 : 10, Ps. 103 : 20. As such their activity extends throughout the entire creation, and the Scriptures know nothing of the reign of blind, natural forces. Ps. 104 : 4, Heb. 1 : 7, John 5 : 4. (Healing power was exerted each time by the angel in the pool.)

Especially are angels active, in accordance with the divine will and command, in behalf of the kingdom of God on earth.

1. In its preparatory state — in the lives of the patriarchs, the judges and the prophets ; at the giving of the law. Acts 7 : 53.

2. At its appearance — in the life of Christ. Luke 1 : 26 ; 2 : 8, 13, Matt. 4 : 11, John 1 : 51, Luke 22 : 48, Matt. 28 : 2, Acts 1 : 10. In the lives of the Apostles. Acts 5 : 19 ; 8 : 26 (Philip) ; 12 : 7 (Peter) ; 27 : 28 (Paul).

3. For the service and protection of its members. Heb. 1 : 14, Ps. 91 : 11, 12, Matt. 18 : 10.

4. At its completion — in Christ's second coming. Matt. 24: 31 ; 13 : 41.

b) The evil or fallen angels. Their head is the devil. (The word is derived from the Greek and means the same as slanderer.) He is also called satan (Job 2 : 7, Matt. 4 : 10), i. e., enemy, adversary ; tempter (Matt. 4:3); Prince of this world (John 14 : 30) ; liar, father of lies and murderers (John 8 : 44) ; Belial, i. e., the destroyer (2 Cor. 6 : 15) ; accuser (Kev. 12 : 10) ; the old serpent (Rev. 20: 2). The evil spirits are also called devils after him. Their power was especially manifest during the time of the activity of the Son of God upon earth ; compare the demoniacs.

The devil opposes the kingdom of God unto the end (Rev. 20 : 10), in that he provokes the members to apostasy and the enemies to malice. Luke 22 : 31,

1 Peter 5 : 8, 9, Eph. 6 : 11 ; 2 : 2, 2 Tim. 2 : 26,

2 Cor. 4: 4. The judgment against the devil and his angels is eternal damnation. 2 Peter 2 : 4.

4. The creation of the heavens and the earth or of the visible world. The origination of the world of itself is impossible. Here the proverb is true, " out of nothing, nothing comes," i. e., of itself. The world was created by the almighty will of God, and by the word (John 1 : 1, 2, 14) in which He reveals Himself. The biblical account of the creation, (Gen. 1 : 1, 2) gives us over against all the conjectures of modern Natural Science, the most simple and certain information as to the origin of the world. We shall scarcely err if we

refer this account to a revelation of God made to Adam, since we find echoes of the same among the oklest nations, the Babylonians and Assyrians.

a) In the beginning does not mean when God had a beginning, but when the world began. In the creation time had its beginning, and with the creation, finite space had its beginning in the universe.

b) The earth was void and without form. God first called into being matter, the material out of which worlds are made, out of which He formed in His six days' work the worlds, and among them the earth, with all that is in it, even the most minute created forms. In our planetary system the earth is the smallest body, but its creation is so minutely described because this revelation was made for its inhabitants. For this reason it appears in the account as the centre of creation. But in that which is least God would glorify himself most, and this has been accomplished by the incarnation of the Son of God upon this small wo]'lTh"*N

c) The creation of the world has its ground, not in a necessity lying outside of God, but in His free counsel and will. The end for which He created it is His honor and glory.

d) God created the world in six days. That a day of creation was a period of twenty-four hours is not explicitly stated, and if we understand by day a period of creation, we do not in the least detract from the omnipotence of the Creator. God could have called forth, had He so desired, in the twinkling of an eye the whole world complete in every detail. Ps. 00 : 4. Modern geological science assumes periods of evolution of thousands of years in the formation of the earth's surface. With the present results of geological researches, agrees also the biblical account of the order of creation. The Bible says : The earth was void and without form and darkness covered the deep. Geology says : In the beginning there were neither mountains nor continents. The earth was everywhere covered by the ocean, and a thick, impenetrable atmosphere enveloped it. The Bible says : Then the dry land ap}3eared. Geology says : Gradually there emerged from the ocean slight elevations and marshy stretches of land. The Bible says : Then God created vegetation. Geology says : There followed an enormous develojDraent of large-sized plants, which are yet preserved to us in the form of coal. The Bible says : Only then did God cause the sun and moon to appear. Geology says: The uniform distribution of vegetation over the entire earth proves that at that time warmth and light were distributed differently from now, and that probably no change of seasons occurred. The Bible says : After vegetation God created fishes and birds. Geology says : After the carboniferous era followed immense numbers of creeping saurians, or animals, that swim in the water. At the same time there appeared also the first denizens of the air. The Bible says : Then were created fourfooted animals. Geology says : With the cretaceous period there appeared fcur-footed animals and mammals. The Bible says : Lastly man was created. Geology says: It is firmly established that during the carboniferous age, and at the time of the saurians, and the cretaceous formation, man did not yet exist upon the earth. Geology draws its conclusions from the examination of the earth's crust, and from the discoveries thus made, without finding in the lifeless fossils the living God, as the Creator. As such, however, the Holy Scriptures, God's revelation in the living Word, teaches us to know Him.

e) There is a correspondence- between the first three

and the last three days. On the first day God created

the light, and on the fourth the heavenly luminaries,

the starry firmament ; on the second He divided the

waters above (the clouds) and the waters below (the sea) by the atmosphere, and on the fifth He created fishes and birds, the animals that live in the water and those that live in the air ; on the third day the dry land and the vegetable world, and on the sixth the land animals and man.

/) The order of creation is from the lower to the higher: first the mineral kingdom (lifeless bodies), then the vegetable kingdom (life without free movement), and lastly the animal kingdom (animated bodies). But where does man belong? King Frederick William IV. of Prussia was once visiting a school. He sho\7ed his gold ring with a precious stone on his finger and asked : " To whicn of the three natural kingdoms does this belong ?" " To the mineral kingdom," was the answei-. Then he drew an orange from his pocket and asked : " Where does this belong?" "To the vegetable kingdom," they replied. And pointing to a bird, " Where this ?" " To the animal kingdom," the children exclaimed. " But," added the king, " Where do I belong ?" Then a little girl raised her finger, and with a clear voice said : " To the heavenly kingdom." The eyes of the pious king filled with tears, and he took the child in his arms ynd kissed it. It is true, man does not belong to the animal kingdom, although his body has much in common with the animal. He has not been developed from the animal by a process of evolution. On the contrary, God formed his body in a special manner, different from that of the animal creation, and breathed into him the breath of life, thus constituting him a living soul. And because he is created in the image of Him who dwells in heaven, he also belongs to the heavenly kingdom. The soul of man is distinguished from that of the animal, in that it is s[)irit, i. e., ])0ssesses the spiritual powers of thought and will. The reason (Vernunft), which distinguishes man essentially from the animal, is a psychical power, and when enlightened by the Holy Ghost, has power to discern spiritual things. Therefore the name (Vernunft from Vernehmen), i, e., to know.

5. The omnipotence of God is not limited to the creation, but is also manifested in the preservation and government of the world, which is comprehended by the word Providence. The creation of the world is not like the mechanism of a watch, w^hich is wound up and then allowed to run its appointed time. But God works uninterruptedly in its preservation and government, by the same living power with which He created it. " Through His eternal counsel and Providence." The counsel of God is the plan, according to which He made the world. (Acts 15 : 18.) His Providence is His continued influence upon the same. Providence is, accordingly, an activity of God, but not God Himself; therefore we should not use the word Providence, when to His honor God's name ought to be employed.

a) God upholds the world, i. e., God maintains the whole creation as long as He wills that it shall continue, or He works by His almighty and everywhere present power, so that the world continues to exist. Ps. 148 : 6, Heb. 1:3.

b) God governs the world, i. e., God directs all events and changes in the world, so that all things at last fulfil their divine purpose, or He works through His almighty and everywhere present power, so that all things in the world continue according to His will. Ps. 148 : 6, Isa. 46 : 10, 11, Lara. 3 : 37.

c) As little as the forces which God constituted the elements in creation work of themselves, so little do the laws (the so-called natural laws), according to which the ordinary course of nature proceeds, depend upon themselves. As lawgiver God stands above the laws which He has instituted, and no natural law can limit

His omnipotence or prevent Him from interru})ting, according to His will, the ordinary conrse of nature, if at any time He wills to work otherwise. Such interference on the part of God we call miracles, and does not j^roceed contrary to nature, but above nature. Ps. 147: 5. How are we to understand that God is "my God and my Father ?" In true faith there must be united with knowledge that is certain, i. e., exact, an assured confidence. It is not enough to believe God, i. e., to believe that He is and that He created the world. The lan.2;uage is : I believe in or on God, i. e., I have a firm confidence in Him. Therefore the creed also does not say, we believe, but I believe in God, because every one who would be saved, must exercise for himself this assured confidence : I believe that God is my God and my Father.

1. God is in a certain sense the God and Fatliei- of all men, since in the beginning He created man after His own image, and continues to uphold all men. At the same time the world, which has fallen away from God, is lost, and only those are saved who are ingrafted into Christ by true faith, and who, by means of renewal after His image, again attain divine Sonship. " I believe that the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ — for the sake of His Son Jesus Christ — is my God and my Father." Eph. I: 5, G, John 20: 17, Rom. 8 : 14, 2 Cor. 6 : 1(3, 18. Our heathen ancestors named their chief Deity (Wodan) "All-Father;" and there is just as much heathen folly to-day in representing the living God as only such an all-world Father; in the real sense of the word. He is not a World-Fatlier, but in and through Christ only " our and my Father."

2. Only the immeasureable love which God manifested toward us in Christ (John 3 : 16), can awaken such confidence, " that I have no doubt." The childlike confidence of faith excludes all doubt and uncertainty. Ps. 118 : 8, Rom. 4 : 20, 21.

3. The divine Providence and care which are specially manifested toward the children of God, consist in their preservation and government.

a) God preserves me, in that He provides for me all things necessary for body and soul. The needs of the body, especially food and clothing, we call our daily bread ; the need of the soul is the Word of God, the bread of life, and heavenly gifts. Out of proper confidence in God there arises freedom from anxiety (Phil. 4: 6, 1 Peter 5 : 7) and contentment (1 Tim. 6 : 6-8). God not only in times past wrought miracles necessary for the preservation of His own people (for individuals, as in the case of Noah and Elijah, and for His people, as in the case of Israel in the desert), but His arm is not shortened, that He cannot help marvellously.

b) God rules over me, in that " He will make whatever evils He sends upon me in this valley of tears, turn out to my advantage." God orders our ways and directs our steps in good and evil days, to the end that we may achieve our soul's salvation. Prosperity is not to make us presumptuous, and adversity is not to cause us to despair, but we are so to trust as not to doubt. Although the children of God have obtained forgiveness of sins, the world does not become a Paradise, but remains for them also a vale of tears, from which they look wistfully toward the heavenly Canaan, neither do they escape the evil that is in it. Evil, i. e., all distress and suffering in their case is not a punishment foi- sin, but a discipline, i. e., a means of correction in the hand of God ; therefore evil redounds to theii- good. The life of Joseph is an example. Gen. 50: 20, Heb. 12: 11, Acts 14: 22, Rom. 8: 28.

4. Our confidence is based upon the omnipotence of God, for He can do all things, and upon His faithful love as a Father, for He will do it. Human help is unreliable ; many could help, but are not willing ;

iiiauy would help, but are not able. God is both able aud willing. Luke 1 : 37, Ps. 103 : 13, Isa. 41) : 15, Jer. 31 : 20.