The almighty and everywhere present power of God ; whereby, as it were by his hand, he upholds aud governs heaven, earth, aud all creatures; so that herbs aud grass, rain and drought, fruitful aud barren years, meat and drink, health and sickness, riches aud poverty, yea all things come uot by chance, but by his fatherly baud.

I. What is to be Understood by the Providence of God.

1. The name has its origin in Gen. 22 : 14 (according to the original), The Lord will provide, i. e., will care for it. The Providence of God is, therefore, the divine provision for the present and the future. The Providence of God rests upon His omnipotence and omnipresence. Ps. 89 : 13, Isa. 40 : 2(3; 4() : 10, Acts 17 : 27, 28. Therefore the Providence of God, because it is the same power by which He created the world, may be looked upon as a continuous creation.

2. " As it were, by His hand," means that God not only works from beyond the visible world through laws and forces of nature, but personally and independently, so that He is not bound to the forces and laws, but at all times preserves His freedom. Job 12 : 10. The Scriptures often sjieak of the arm and the hand, the eyes and the ears of God. Not that God, who is a spirit, is like unto man, or that the men of God looked upon Him as human, but these are the figurative designations of the omnipotence (arm and hand) and the omnipresence (eyes and ears) of God.

II. T« What the Providence of God Extends.

1. The Providence of God, according to which He preserves and governs the world, extends to all creatures, i. e., to all that God has created, and whatever is

THE HEIDELBERCx CATECHISM. 103

found ill heuven and earth and hell. Ps. 139 : 8-10. It embraces the greatest as well as the smallest; the weal and the woe of all creatures. Evil also lies within the Providence of God. Amos o : 6, Isa. 45 : 7. In everything- the aim is God's honor and glory, His kingdom and the salvation of His chosen ones.

2. We distinguish, a) a general Providence of God, which extends to external creation ; b) special Providence, which extends to men : and c) a very special and minute Providence, which extends to the kingdom and children of God.

a) The general Providence of God. " Herbs and grass." The heavens — clouds — wind — sea — seasons — mountains — springs — grass and seedtime — wine and bread — sun and moon — day and night. Ps. 104 : 29, 30. " Rain and drought."" Jer. 5 : 24. " Fruitful and barren years." Hos. 2 : 21, 22.

b) The special Providence of God concerns :

1. The bodily relations of men. " Food and drink." Ps. 145: 15, 16, Acts 14: 17, Ps. 104; 15. " Health and sickness." Job 5 : 18, Ex. 15 : 26. As the sickness of individuals, so also war and pestilence and national calamities are in the hand of God. Jer. 14 : 12, Ps. 91 : 6. " Riches and poverty." 1 Sam. 2 : 7. (Example : Job 1:11; Solomon, 1 Kings 3 : 13.) Prov. 22 : 2.

2. The thoughts and devices of men. Prov. 21 : 1, Ps. 33 : 10, Prov. 16 : 9.

3. The external destiny of the human race. The history of the world is not the judgment of the world, but God's judgments appear in its history. Daniel 2: 37-45 sets forth the grand outlines of God's ruling in the history of the world, and shows how God has provided for (not merely foreseen, but predetermined) the government of the kingdoms of the world : 1. The Assy ro-Baby Ionian (Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar),

2. The Medo-Persian (Darius, Aliasiierus and Cyrus), 8. The Greco-Macedonian (Alexander), 4. The Roman Empire (Augustus), with its division into Eastern and Western. Upon the Roman Empire rest also the laws and culture of the kingdoms ot' the present day. Dan. 2: 43, Acts 17: 26.

c) The very special Providence of God relates to the kingdom of God, and to His children.

1. In the history of the kingdom. From the call of Abraham, the progenitor, until the leading out of the people from Egypt; the develo])ment of the public life of the people in the desert and the direction of the political life in Canaan ; the Egyptians, Babylonians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Romans as scourges of Israel in the hand of the Lord ; then the appearance from heaven of the kingdom, for which Israel was the preparation. Dan. 2: 44, Hag. 2: 7. For the fulfilment of the prophecies, God made use of the Roman Empire and of its mightiest ruler, Augustus, and in accordance with H^s eternal counsel and Providence, the extension of His kingdom is carried forward through the work of missions. First, it spread from Jerusalem throughout Palestine ; then into the Roman world, i. e., the region around the Mediterranean Sea, and then throughout the whole world. The extension of God's kingdom follows the plan of campaign projected by King Immanuel. Acts 1 : 8. The Providence of God in the preservation and government of His kingdom relates to its inner development (Reformation), and its protection against enemies (Jews, heathen and nominal Christians — the persecutions of the first centuries and of the time of the Reformation), as well as to its final consummation, as this is depicted in the revelation of St. John. Rev. 11 : 15 ; 19 : 6.

2. In the personal guidance of the children of God. In all their guidance we trace : Ye are blessed of the

Lord which made heaven and earth (Ps. 115: 15); but there shall not a hair of your head perish (Luke 21 : 18) ; for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon Him (Rom. 10: 12).

The doctrine of the Providence of God does not exclude prayer or render it superfluous. It rather encourages prayer. He who said : Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things (Matt. 6 : 32), admonishes us in the sermon on the Mount : Ask, and ye shall receive. Matt. 7 : 7. God extends His protecting care over His own. Zech. 2 : 8, Ps. 34 : 7. When they are of)pressed He provides for their deliverance. Luke 18 : 7, Job 5 : 19. Examples of divine guidance and Providence are Abi-aham, Joseph, Moses, David, Daniel.

3. The relation of the Providence of God to evil and to sin. God is not the author of evil, but He also controls the wicked ; the evil purpose belongs to man, but whether he shall be allowed to execute it rests in the hand of God. In the government of the world divine Providence takes into account evil as a factor, without the wicked thereby becoming guiltless. Matt. 18: 7. Examples : Pharaoh, Ex. 7 : 3 ; 9 : 35 ; Shimei, 2 Sam. 16: 10; Judas, John 17: 12; the crucifixion of Christ, Luke 24 : 46, Acts 4 : 27, 28.

We may say : 1. God is not the cause of evil (of sin), neither does He prevent it [e. g., Cain) ; 2. He controls it, in that He limits it {e. g., the flood, the tower of Babel, Sennacherib, Jer. 36: 29), and punishes it by its own consequences (Rom. 1: 24, 26), and overrules the evil designs of the wicked to the good of His children (Joseph, Gen. 50: 19, 20).

4. We are also not to stumble at God's Providence by the fact that the wicked are often outwardly prosperous, and the righteous in distress. The question is, what is really good and what evil, i. e., injurious. This

can only be determined by the results, the final outcome. The ])ros])erity of the wicked renders them more secure and firm only in their wickedness, but their end is eternal destruction. The sufferings of the righteous purify them, drive them nearer to their God, and their end is eternal glory. The apparent contradiction in the above observation is specifically considered and solved in Psalm 7o and Mai. 3 : 14 ; 4 : 2. " Yea, all things come not by chance, but by his fatherly hand." There is neither a " law of necessity" nor " chance," neither " fate" nor " destiny," not even an " accident." Such expressions and conceptions are not found in the Scriptures, but have their origin in paganism. The Lord's hand is everywhere present ; even where the event seems to come " by chance," i. e., seems not to be directed. " The lot is cast into the lap ; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord." Prov. 16 : 33. To the children of God everything comes from the hand of a faithful Father, who intends it for their good, oven when it appears to be evil. Therefore the children of God, however untoward their outward circumstances may be, always respond to the question : "How are you?" with the answer : "I am well."

ftu'^slion 28.

What advantage w it to us to know that God has created, a)i,d by his providence does still uphold all things f

That we may be patient in adversity, thankful in prosperity ; and that in all thin^js which may hereafter befall us, we place our firm trust in our faithful God and Father, that nothing shall separate us from his love ; since all creatures are so in his hand, that without his will they cannot so much as move.

The advantage accruing from the certain knowledge attained by the study of creation and Providence is, that we are thereby confirmed and strengthened in faith, in assured confidence in God the Father, A\-

mighty Creator. It may be remarked once for all that in the treatment of the catechism it is neither essentially nor catechetically correct to substitute the word " blessing" for " advantage," whenever it occurs. Essentially it is not correct, because " advantage" and *' blessing," although related conceptions, yet differ. " Advantage" or gain expresses the wholesome effect of knowledge when appropriated, while " blessing"expresses the gracious activity and guidance of God, in virtue of which we are enabled to find advantage in the different relations in which He places us. Here, as well as in later corresjDOuding answers of the Catechism, it is not said that God does this or that for us, but " that we are to be thus and so," that we are ourselves to draw this or that gain out of particular knowledge. Neither is such a substitution justifiable on catechetical grounds. Even if it were admissible to introduce a related conception for the sake of explanation and a better understanding, here it is not the case, since to the child the expression " advantage," which occurs in its daily life and in outward relations, is more familiar and better understood than that of " blessing." But it is altogether intolerable that the catechist should tell the children ; " We use the word blessing for what the catechism here calls advantage."

I. Patient In Adversity.

1. The knowledge that in every adversity God's hand has a directing influence, is to be of this advantage to us, that we are to learn from it to be patient. Heb. 10 : 36, James 1 : 2, 3.

2. Patience, the proper demeanor in adversity {i. e., in every sorrow and need), in view of the knowledge of the Providence of God, consists :

a) In humble submission to the will of God. Dan. 4: 35, 2 Sam. 15: 25, 20 ; 16: 10, 1 Tim. 6: 7.

b) The calm resignation to the will of God. Psalm 39 : 9 ; 73 : 24, 2 Cor. 12 : 8, 9.

3. The earthly life is for every child of God a school of suffering. In it there are three classes. Tlie first say : This I must suffer ; " but the right hand of the Most High can change it all." Ps. 77 : 10. The second say : I will gladly suffer ; for " I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." Rom. 8 : 18. The third say : I rejoice in suffering ; for I have in it a seal of my sonship in Christ. Heb. 12: 5-9, Rom. 5 : 3, 2 Cor. 4 : 10. Compare Heb. 12: 8.

11. Thankful in Prosperity.

1. The knowledge that we cannot of ourselves secure for ourselves pleasant relations in life, but receive them from God's hand, is to be of this advantage to us that we thank God for them. Gen. 32 : 10, 1 Thess. 5: 18.

2. Thankfulness, the proper disposition in prosperity {i. e., in the pleasant circumstances of life) in view of the knowledge of the Providence of God, consists in this, that we do not exalt ourselves, but acknowledge the undeserved fiivor of God, and it manifests itself in the praise and sei'vice of God :

a) With the heart. Ps. 138: 1.

b) With the mouth. Eph. "> : 20.

c) With the hands. Josh. 24 : 15, 24. Example : the grateful Samaritan. Luke 17 : 11-19.

III. Of Firm Trust for the Future.

1. The knowledge that the eternal and unchangeable God not only cares for us in the present, but by His Providence has already determined and ordered all that is yet to meet us in the future, is to be of this

advantage to us that with believing certainty we expect from Him all future good, and are thereby relieved of care for the future. Hence joyfuluess. Ps. 91 : 9-12.

2. To the eye of man the future is enveloped in darkness and uncertainty. On this account we are not to despair or be indifferent, but rather place our entire confidence in the Providence of God. This consists:

a) In confiding trust. Ps. 27 : 1 ; 91 : 1, 2 ; 31 : 15, Jer. 17 : 7.

b) In cheerful hope. Ps. 37 : 5, 7, Isa. 30 : 15. Example : Jacob's ladder. Gen. 28 : 10-15.

3. The certainty of this confidence involves that whatever may befall us in the future, nothing shall separate us from tiie love of God. Rom. 8 : 35-39, Josh. 1 : 7.

4. The ground of such certainty lies in this, that " all creatures are so in His hand, that without His will they cannot so much as move." Even the worst enemy of the children of God, satan himself, is with reference to them like a dog held by a chain ; he can go no further than the chain reaches ; he may bark and rage, but he cannot hurt. John 10 : 28, Rom. 8 : 31 ; 16 : 20. Examples : Daniel in the lions' den, Dan. 6, and the three men in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.

6. Faith in the Providence of God is the best " Life Insurance." It has nothing to do with the superstition of a blind destiny which one cannot escape, but on the contrary it is a joyful resignation to a " faithful God and Father." Such, however, the Almighty God is only to His children in Christ Jesus ; to the wicked He is and remains a consuming fire, from which they do not escape. 2 Tliess. 1 : 3-10.

OF GOD THP] SON.

A. THE PERSON OF CHRIST (Ques. 29-36.)