Because he saveth us, and delivereth us from our sins ; and likewise, because we ought not to seek, neither can find salvation in anyother.

The second part of the Apostle's Creed treats of God the Son and our redemption, or of the person and work of the Redeemer. The following articles refer to the Person of the Redeemer : And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. The following refer to the Work of the Redeemer : Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. He descended into hell, the third day He rose from the dead, He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, from thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Including the article " Born of the Virgin Mary," the first five (suffered — descended into hell) define the state of humiliation ; the other four (rose — to judge the quick and the dead) the state of exaltation.

I. The Name Jesus.

1: "I believe" is to be supplied before "in Jesus Christ." Even as we believe in God the Father, so we are to believe in God the Son, because he is of the same essence and of like glory with the Father, and because it is the Father's will and command. John 14 : 1, 11 ; 10: 30; 6: 39; 5: 23.

2. Jesus (from the Hebrew) was a name that was frequently used [e. g., the two Jesus Sirach), and signifies helper, Savior, literally : " Jehovah is our helper."

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. Ill

But it lias its full siguificance only as the name of the Son of God. Jesus is the Greek form for Joshua. The son of Nun was a type of Jesus. Joshua led God's people out of the desert into Canaan. Jesus leads God's people out of misery into His kingdom and into heaven. He is the " captain (leader) of their salvation." Heb. 2: 10. Later we find the name Jesus (Col. 4: 11) as. that of one of the assistants of the Apostle Paul. But the addition " which is called Justus" leads us to suppose that he received the former as a Jew and the latter after his conversion, since no one could any longer be called Jesus, except the Son of God, who alone is the real Jesus.

3. Jesus is the personal name of the Savior, and at the same time points in the direction of His work. It was given Him by God the Father before His birth, through the angel (Matt. 1 : 21), and then at His circumcision (Luke 2: 21) by Joseph. As "Jesus of Nazareth" the Savior was spoken of among the people (Matt. 21: 11; 26 ; 71, Luke 18: 37; 24: 19, John 19: 19). Under this name He was known to angels (Mark 1(3 : 6) and devils (Mark 1 : 24). Even after His ascension He thus speaks of Himself. Acts 22 : 8.

II. Jesus is the True Savior.

1. " He saveth us and delivereth us from our sins." Matt. 1 : 21. Sin deprived our first parents of the happiness of Paradise, and is still the cause of the un happiness of man. Jesus is the true Savior, because He was created such not by man, but by God. Ps. 130 : 8, Luke 19 : 10, 1 Tim. 1 : 15, 1 John 4: 14.

2. To save (the Greek word signifies " to deliver"; means to free the sinner in body and soul from the guilt, punishment and power of sin, and to bring him into communion with God. Gal. 3 : 13.

3. Jesus saves us through His obedience by which

112 THP: HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

He j)urcliased our salvation, and thi-ougli His Spii-it by whicli lie imparts it to us. T\\e beginning is made in this lite, and tlie consummation follows in the life to come. Heb. ~j : II.

4. Those whom He saves are His people, Ursinus (Ques. 20) : "The people whom Jesus saves are the chosen or believing ones, all of them and those alone. He is the Savior of these only, because in them alone is His purpose attained. For he has determined to gather in this life a peo|)le and to save them, but on the condition that they i-eceive His benefits and are thankful unto Him."

in. Jesus is the Only and Complete Savior.

1. " We ought not to seek, neither can find salvation in any other" (not even the least).

a) Jesus is our only Savior. For according to the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures there is only one Mediator, therefore also only one Savior, and that is Jesus. 1 Tim. 2 : 5, 6, John 3 : 18, Acts 4 : 12.

b) Also according to the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Old Testament, in which salvation and redemption are ascribed to God alone, Jesus only as the Son of God can be the Savior of men. Isa. 43 : 11, 25, Hos. 13: 9.

2. Jesus is a complete Savior, so that another need not be sought outside of or beyond Him.

This is true in view of

a) His nature. Heb. 7 : 24, 25.

b) The number of the redeemed. 1 John 2: 2, Acts 13: 48.

c) The multitude of sins. 1 John 1 : 7.

d) The completeness of the satisfaction. Kom. 1: 8.

e) The time. Heb. 10 : 14.

Q,u*>8tion 30

Do such then believe in Jesm the only Savior, who seek their salvation, and happinesK of saints, of themselves, or anywhere else?

They do not ; for though they boast of him in words, yet in deeds they deny Jesus, the only dpliverer and Savior ; for one of these two things must be true, that either Jesus is not a complete Savior, or that they, who by a true faith receive this Savior, must find all things in him necessary to their salvation.

1. The reference here is not to heathen, Jews or Turks, who do not believe in Jesus, neither to such nominal Christians as in general do not wish to know anything of Jesus, but to Christians who recognize Him as a Savior, but not as the only, i, e., exclusive Savior.

2. This is first of all and in general the case in the Roman Catholic Church. They believe in Jesus as the Savior, but they also seek salvation outside of Him.

a) From the saints, especially the virgin Mary, the mother of the Lord, and from the angels, namely through their intercession. All believers who have been sanctified in Christ Jesus are called " saints" in the Scriptures, although they remain, as long as they abide in the flesh, poor sinners who are in need of the grace of God and the daily forgiveness of their sins. " Saints" in the Romish Church are deceased christians whom the Pope has declared to be saints. From the register of these " saints" the names in the almanac have been taken. They are invoked and adored for their intercessions with God, in that prayers are directed to them and their favor is sought by vows which are made to them. It is believed that acceptance with God is obtained more readily through them and their intercessions than by turning to Him direct.

The holy apostles, as well as the angels, refused such adoration, and the virgin Mary did not stand above her Son (John 2: 4, Matt. 12: 46-50), but like every other sinful person was in need of redemption through

lu THE heidelbp:rg catechism.

Him. When the ceiitiirion Cornelius in Cesarea (Acts 10: 2d, 26) fell down before Peter and would thus adore him, he said : " Stand up ; I myself also am a man." When the men in Lystra would have done sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas, they rent their clothes aud cried among the people : " We also are men of like passions with you." Acts 14 : 15. And when John (Rev. 22 : 8) fell down before the feet of an angel to worship him, he said : " See thou do it not : for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book : worship God." We read on the contrary in the gospels that when any one fell down at the feet of Jesus to worship Him, even in the days of His humiliation, He did not forbid it, because such adoration was befitting Him as the Son of God. There is only one mediator between God and man (1 Tim. 2:5), and one intercessor with the Father (1 John 2 : 1) — Jesus alone, who is God's only begotten Son and our brother.

That the intercession of believers upon earth is of some help, the Scriptures declare (the Canaanitish woman for her daughter, Matt. 15 : 22 ; the centurion at Capernaum for his servant, Luke 7 : 3, 2 Cor. 1 : 10, 11, James 5 : 15), but to invoke the dead for their intercession with God we have neither command nor example in the Scriptures. We are indeed exhorted by the Apostle (Eph. 6 : 18) that we are to make supplication " for all saints," i. e., believing Christians, but it is nowhere said that " deceased" saints pray for us. When in the time of the Peformation an attempt was made in Bohemia to bring back again by persuasion and by force the Protestants into the Romish Church, there came a Protestant tenant to the manor-house of his Catholic proprietor to ask for an abatement of his rent, because his crops had failed. He turned to the manager and chamberlain of the lord, but was turned

away by both of them. When he was about to go away, the nobleman appeared and asked him what he was seeking. The man tokl him his need and desire, and the kind lord at once exempted him from his rent for the year. At the same time the lord wished to make use of the opportunity to draw the man over to his church. He showed him the pictures of the saints which hung on the wall in the vestibule and declared to him that these were his intercessors with God, and that if the tenant would turn to these, he could be saved. But the man shook his head and said : " I have just had an experience which does not encourage me so to do. When I sought for the intercession of your servants, I was turned away ; but when I applied directly to my proprietor, you were kind enough to grant my request immediately. But of the saints I do not even know that they would hear me, should I call upon them."

b) " Of themselves." This refers to their own good works, such as fasting, almsgiving, pilgrimages and every mortification of the body, by which, according to the doctrine of the Romish Church, we merit heaven or a higher place in heaven. On the contrary, God's word declares (Bom. 3: 28), "Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law." One's " rank in heaven" depends solely upon God's will and pleasure. Matt. 20 : 20-23.

c) " Or anywhere else." The means of grace of the Romish Church include also the mass and indulgences. The offering of the mass by the priest is not only to benefit those who participate in its celebration or pay for an offering, but also others for whom masses may be read, even the dead (the so-called masses for departed souls), enabling them the sooner to pass from purgatory into heaven. According to the doctrine of the Romish Church the " saints" are said to have done

ll(i THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

more good woi'ks than tliey need for tliemselves. From this is said to liave arisen a treasure of merits of the saints which the pope is to administer, and out of which he may distribute among his own, sufficient merit to cover their deficiencies and for the forgiveness of their sins. This comes to pass in the so-called indulgences, the remission of sins for the sake of the superabundant merits of the " saints." (Originally indulgences were only the remission of Church penalties.) Christ is not represented to us by God as a "sacrifice of the mass," the so-called bloodless sacrifice, but (Rom. 3 : 25) as a propitiation (means of redemption) througn faith in His blood ; and we (Rom. o : 24) receive the forgiveness of sins without any merits of our own or of anyone else, through God's grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

3. But even among the Protestants there are many who stumble at the doctrine that Jesus is the only Savior.

a) He who believes in Jesus and refers this faith only to the free will of man, must also ground his salvation through Christ in its ultimate basis upon himself. Over against this idea the Apostle Paul ll Cor. 1 : 2(5-31) represents it as the goal of God's election : that no flesh should glory in his presence, i. e., that no one should attribute anything of his salvation to himself.

b) Whoever believes in Jesus and through God's grace is furnished unto good works (2 Tim. 3 : 17), but makes a merit of the same, does not give Jesus the honor as the only Savior. 2 Cor. 3 : 5, G.

c) Whoever believes in Jesus, but regards Him only as a wise teacher, through whose moral doctrine one may be refined into a pious person, and thinks that upon the ground of his honorable conduct he may merit heaven, holds in reality himself as his savior and Jesus only as his guide, but not as the only Savior, through

whose merit alone one becomes righteous and is saved. Eom. 8 : 20.

4. All such — in the Romish as well as in the Protestant Church — deny indeed Jesus the only deliverer and Savior, " though they boast of him in words." For to believe in Jesus means : to trust in him wholly and alone as the Savior. Jer. 2 : 18, 1 Cor. 1 : 13, Gal. 5 : 4.

5. There are only two possibilities : " either Jesus is not a complete Savior," which the Scriptures deny (Col. 1 : 19, 20), "or that they who by a true faith receive this Savior, must find all things in him necessary to their salvation." John 10: 10, Heb. 7: 25.