Because I am a member of Christ by faith, and thus am partaker of His anointicg, that so I may coufess His name, and present myself a living sacrifice of thankfulness to Him, and also, that with a free and good conscience I may fight against sin and satan in this life, and afterwards reign with Him eternally, over all creatures.

I. Of the Name and State of Christians.

1. Christ called His own, " disciples," " friends" and ''brethren." John 13: 35; 15: 14; 20: 17.

2. The first Ciiristians called themselves " disciples,"

i. e., learners, viz., Christ's learners, or " brothers" (and ** sisters"), or " saints," i. e., sanctified, sejjarated from the world and appointed to salvation. Acts 6 : 7 ; 9 • 30, Jas. 2 : 15, Eph. 6 : 18.

3. At Antioch in Asia Minor the name Christians, i. e., adherents of Christ, was first used as a term of reproach, as the Reformed are sometimes called Zwino-- lians or Calvinists. The Christians themselves, in view of their glorified head, Cnrist Jesus, the Lord of lords, and Kino- of kings, were pleased to accept this name as a name of'honor. Acts 11 : 26. The name '• Christian" occurs in the apostolic letters only in 1 Peter 4 : 16.

4. " Christian," the same as the word Christ, means an anointed one, filled, as it were, by the Holy Ghost, who is also the spirit of Christ. Gal. 4 : 6, 2 Cor 1 • 21 22, 1 John 2 : 20.

5. Baptism alone does not yet constitute living attachment to Christ, but one becomes a partaker of His anointing when one is " a member of Christ by faith." Holy baptism is a seal of the covenant for those only who are engrafted into Christ by faith, and belong to the covenant of grace. Mark 16: 16: "He that belie veth and is baptized shall be saved ; but he that believeth not shall be damned" (although he is baptized). As the living branches (John 15) upon the vine have the same sap coursing through them, and all the living members of a body the same blood, so all living Christians are filled by one Spirit, i. e., the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Christ. Eph. 3 : 17, 1 Cor. 12 : 27, Eph. 5: 30.

6. Our anointing is the same as that of Christ, i. e., by one and the same Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6 : 17. We differ from Christ in the measure of the anointing by the Holy Ghost, in that He received the Spirit without measure (John 3 : 34), but we receive the same from Him (John 15: 26), and each one in such measure as it pleases the Lord. (I Cor. 12 : 11, Eph. 4:7).

7. Ajiparent Christians ami true Christians are to be distinguished :

a) Those who are only apparently Christians are such as have (2 Tim. )] : 5) the form of a godly life, but deny the power thereof.

b) True Christians must be in Christ, and must be conformed to His image in word and deed. 2 Tim. 2 : 19.

II. Of the Threefold Office of Christians.

Through the anointing of Christ which we receive, we are not merely united with His person, but are also called to a corresponding threefold office, for the fulfilling of which the Holy Ghost furnishes us by His gifts. This kingly, priestly and prophetic calling is expressed in 1 Peter 2 : 9 : *' But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people ; that ye (as prophets) should show forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous

light."

A. The Office of Teacher.

" That so I may confess His name."

1. To confess the name of Christ means (in the narrower sense) to acknowledge before every one that I believe in Jesus Christ as my only Savior, and that I am His own in body and soul, both in life and in death. But this coufession presupposes a correct knowledge, and authenticates itself in a holy walk and an effort to spread and defend divine truth. In the wider sense confession of the name of Christ includes also walking in the spirit of Christ. Matt. 10: 32, Bom. 10: 10, 1 Peter 2: 12, 2 Tim. 2:2.

2. The opposite of confession is denial, through the fear and favor of man, i. e., to deny that one knows Jesus Christ, and believes in Him, for the purpose of escaping an external disadvantage, or of securing an external advantage. The name of Christ is also denied

when one confesses Him in vvords, but dishonors Him by an unholy life. Matt. 10: oo. Peter in the palace of the High Priest is an example. Matt. 26: GU-75. Hearty repentance before God and man is the only way for one who has denied Christ to recover again from his fall.

B. The Office of Priest.

"And present myself a living sacrifice of thankfulness."

1. Christ as Higli Priest gave His life unto death as an atoning sacrifice for me ; in return for this I am to mortify my flesh and dedicate my whole life as a thankoffering to His honor. 1 Peter 2 : 5. Rom. 12 : 1 : " I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God (for the sake of the mercy of God experienced in the sacrifice of Christ), that ye present (offer up) your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service."

2. Of the nature of such a thank-offering are:

a) The entire surrender of the heart with all its desires and inclinations. Gen. 22 : 2. Under a picture of Calvin in which he holds a heart in his hand, are written these words of his : " I offer my bleeding heart as an offering to God."

b) Prayer. Ps. 119 : 108, Heb. 13 : 15.

c) Gifts of love and charity. In Phil. 4 : 18, the apostle Paul calls those gifts of love that were sent to him from Philippi " a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God." Heb. 13 : 16.

3. Ursinus. " Our priesthood consists in this, that we offer unto God acceptable sacrifices of thanksgiving, sanctified by the offering of Christ," which includes, a) Ourselves, in that we mortify our old man and offer our members unto God as instruments of righteousness ; b) Our prayers ; c) Our alms ; d) The confession of the Gospel (Rom. 15 : 16 : " ministering the

128 THE HEIDELBERG CATECHrSM".

gosj3el of God, i e., proclMiiiiiiii;- it to the Gentiles); e) Bearinjj; our cross and the sufferings which God sends upon us (Phil. 2 : 17 : " Yea, and if' I be offered upon tlie saei'ifiee antl service of your faith, I joy and rejoice witli you all" ; 2 Tim. 4 : G : " For I am now ready to be offered and the time of my departure is at hand").

4. The doctrine of the general priesthood of true Christians is based specially upon the passage in 1 Peter 2 : 1), 10 : " Ye are a royal priesthood .... which are now the people of God." By this we are to understand that we need no human priest as mediator between us and God, as in the old covenant, but have free access to God in Christ. Tiiis teaching is contrar\^, on the one hand, to the arrangement of a priesthood (hierarchy) in the papacy, after the pattern of the Old Testament and Levitical priesthood ; and, on the other hand, it does not justify the practice of modern Protestantism, which allows all members of the church without distinction, even the unbelieving and unchurclily, the same right of co-operation in the appointment of church officers and the direction of church affairs.

C. Tlie Office of King.

" That with a free and good conscience I may fight against sin and satan in this life, and afterwards reign with Him eternally over all creatures."

1. The exercise of our kingly office is distinguished as to time and manner : a) in this life — fight, and b) afterwards eternally — reign.

2. A king is one who conducts righteous wars against his enemies. In accordance with our kingly Christian calling, we fight against our bitterest enemies :

a) Sin, which would again bring us into bondage, Rom. 6 : 12, 13, 1 Tim. 1 : 18, 1 Cor. 9 : 27.

b) The world, which on account of our confession of Christ, bears ill-will toward us, or would draw us over to itself 2 Tim. 2 : 3, 2 Cor. 6: 7, Rom. 12: 2.

-THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 129

rd) 'Thedevil, who presses us hard with temptations of all kinds to cause us to fall ; at one time he allures and entices, in connection with which he puts on the appearance of an angel of light (2 Cor. 11: 14), at another he threatens and terrifies. Eph. 6: 11, 12, James 4 : 7, 1 Peter, 5 : 8, 9.

^3. A warrior who would fight with fettered hands and feet could not accomplish anything ; therefore we must also fight " with a free and good conscience," if we would conquer, free from the fetters of sin and guilt, i. e., we must have forgiveness of sin, that we may have strength and courage for the conflict.

4. The conflict must be carried forward with the right weapons and in the right manner.

a) The armor of a soldier of Jesus Christ is described in Eph. 6: 10-18. The weapons of protection or defense are truth, righteousness, peace, faith and assurance of salvation. The weapon of offense or attack is the word of God. Believing prayer serves for protection and attack.

b) We are appointed to a spiritual conflict, and it must therefore be carried forward in a spiritual manner. 2 Cor. 10: 3, 4, 2 Tim. 2 : 5, 1 Cor. 9: 26.

5. The numerous victories which by the grace of God are granted to true Christians in these conflicts, notwithstanding their own helplessness, are followed by final triumph : " Reign with him eternally over all creatures." Only he who has fought here in Christ, will reign with Him there, i. e., become a partaker of His glory. 2 Tim. 2 : 12, Rev. 3 : 21 : "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne " To this dominion belongs also the participation on the j)art of true Christians in the final judgment of the world of ungodly men and of fallen

. angels. 1 Cor. 6 : 2, 3.

6. The reign with Christ will be a much higher and

more comprehensive one than tlie doniinion over the earth which God granted originally to Adam. Gen. 1: 28.