ity of Christ appears from 1 John 4 : l-o, according to which they are " false prophets," who deny that Jesus Christ " is come in the flesh," i, e., that the eternal Son of God took upon Himself the very nature of man. This is the spirit of antichrist. 1 Tim. 2 : 5.

II. Why the Son of God Became Man.

A) " That He might also be the true seed of David."

1. God had promised that the Redeemer should be a descendant of Abraham (Gen. 22 : 18), of the tribe of Judah (Gen. 49 : 10) and of the family of David. 2 Sam. 7: 12, Isa. 9 : 6, 7 ; 11 : 1, 10, Jer. 23: 5, 6; 33 : 15, 16. Of the two genealogies of Christ, that of Luke (3 : 23-38) reaches back to Adam, to establish His claim as the " Son of man." On the other hand, that of Matthew begins with David, to present Him as David's Son. Matt. 1:1. The Apostles lay great stress upon Christ's descent from David. Peter, Acts 2 : 30, Paul, 13 : 23, Rom. 1 : 3. Referring to Isa. 11 : 1, 10, Christ is designated (Rev. 5 : 5) by one of the elders before the throne and by Himself (Rev. 22 : 16) the Root of David.

2. When Christ was born, the people were animated by an expectation of the promised Messiah (Luke 2 : 38), which at the time of His appearance was intensified through the preaching of the Baptist who went before Him. To the people the promise and designation of the Redeemer as the " Sou of David" was the most familiar. Matt. 12 : 23 ; 21 : 9.

3. Both Joseph and Mary belonged by direct descent to the family of David. Therefore they must go to Bethlehem, their native city, for enrollment. Luke 2 : 3-5. It would not have been necessary for Mary, the betrothed of Joseph, to be enrolled, if she had not been a descendant of David, and therefore a representative of one branch of his familv.

B) "Like unto his brethren [i. e., like unto men) in all things." Heb. 2: 17, 18, Phil. 2: 7.

1. He was born like any other child. Luke 2 : 7.

2. As a child He grew in body and soul after the manner of men. Luke 2: 40, 4l), '"32. The man Jesus had to " learn the Scriptures," and He taught what was given Him of the Father. Heb. o : 8 : Tliough he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. Menken (4, 261) : " He walked by faith, and not by sight. His faith began wnth the first instruction which He received from His mother Mary. He held it firmly, even in the most distressing, distracting circumstances of life, and perfected it under deepest darkness, when exposed to all the subtle assaults of the devil, being forsaken by God and man."

3. It was possible for Him to be tempted, and it was necessary for Him to struggle against the assaults of evil. Matt. 4: 1, Heb. 2:' 18.

4. He had human wants. He ate and drank and slept. Matt. 11: 19 ; 8 : 24. Even after His resurrection He ate and drank. Acts 10 : 41.

5. }le felt human weakness. He hungered and thirsted and was weary. Matt. 4 : 2 ; 21 : 18, John 19 : 28; 4: 6.

6. He had human sensibilities. He rejoiced, was troubled and sorrowful, groaned and wept. Luke 10 : 21 ; 12 : 50, Matt. 26 : 37, 38, John 11 : 33, 35, Luke 19 : 41, Heb. 5 : 7. We read jn the Scriptures of three occasions when Christ wept, but nowhere that He laughed. He was, however, cheerful.

7. He was mortal. Matt. 27 : 50, John 19 : 33, 34.

C) " Sin excepted."

1. It was necessary for the Son of God to become man that He might bear the punishment of sin for the redemption of sinners, and by His sufferings and death make satisfaction for the sins of the world. He, therefore, took upon Himself our flesh and blood, with all its weaknesses through sin. Rom. 8 : 3, 2 Cor. 5: 21.

2. Even though the Hon of God took upon Himself human nature in a condition of infirmity through sin, He did not thereby become a partaker of sin itself. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and, therefore, was born without hereditary taint or guilt. And though, as true man, it was possible for Him to be tempted, He triumphed over tem^Dtation and is. therefore, truly without sin. Heb. 7 : 26 ; 4 : 15, 1 John 3: 5.

8. But upon Him, as our Surety and Mediator, though in Him there dwelt neither sin nor guilt, God laid all our debt of sin ; to Him He imputed it. And Jesus bore the same, feeling in body and soul the weight of the heavy burden, from the time of His conception until His death upon the cross. Isa. 53, John 1, Mark 14: 34, Luke 22 : 44, Matt. 27: 46, Heb. 5: 7.

III. The Two Natures in Christ.

1. In Christ, the incarnate Son of God, we distinguish, in accordance with His deity and His humanity, a divine and a human nature, which in Him however united in one person. They are distinct and yet not divided, unmixed and yet not separated.

2. Zwingli : " The Son of God, very God, so assumed human nature that the divine was not lost or transformed into the human, but both are in Him truly, really and essentially, and in such a way that His human nature lost nothing, and He is no less truly, really and essentially God. But the human nature has not so com^^letely passed over into the divine nature, that He is not truly, really and essentially man, with the exception of the tendency to sin. And in so far as He is God, His union with the Father and the Holy Ghost is such that He nevertheless possesses everything that is essential to and characteristic of human nature, and has lost nothing through His union with the divine nature, except that He is without sin. Therefore the characteristics of both natures are easily traceable in all His words and acts, so that a pious mind readily recognizes what is to be attributed to the one or to the other nature, even though it is true that everything pertains to the one Christ."

3. The Belgic Confession of Faith, Article 19, says : " But these two natures are so united and bound together in one person, that they were not separated even by His death. That which Christ, when dying, commended into the hands of His Father, was in reality His human spirit, which departed from His body. Luke 28 : 46, Matt. 27 : 50. Meanwhile the divine nature remained united with the human, even in the grave. So that the Godhead did not cease to be in Him any more than it did when He was an infant, though for a short time it did not so clearly manifest itself Wherefore we confess that He is very God and very man. Very God that He might by His power conquer death, and very man that He might according to the infirmity of His flesh suffer death for us."

4. Olevianus : "A personal union is such a connection of two unlike natures, that the two constitute one person. Thus body and soul in man are unlike ; for the body can be seen and laid hold of, but not the soul ; the body may be dismembered and will die, but not the soul, and yet they are united in such a manner that both body and soul belong to the being of a man. As body and soul constitute one man, so God and man unite in one Christ, as the Christian Church has always rightly confessed. From this comparison it will be more readily understood what the Word of God teaches concerning the personal union of the two natures in Christ, viz., that it is such a connection of two unlike

natures, of the divine and the human in Christ, that although the one, the divine, created heaven and earth, and is without beginning, the other, the human, is and remains created, and had a beginning. The one is almighty, for it is true God ; the other is not. For the creature, the humanity of Christ, is not the Creator, and there are not two that are almighty, but one, although there are two natures. The one, the divine, is infinite ; it can not be limited or circumscribed in sj^ace. The other is finite, and is composed of definite members, of head, arms, chest, limbs, feet, all of which in their several places differ from each other. Although I say that both these natures have their special sphere and characteristics, yet are they so united that both the one as well as the other belong to the being and substance of the one person, Christ.

" With Paul and Peter, however, God is not personally united ; for although the divine dwells in them, it is not so united with them that it belongs to the being of Peter and of Paul, that one could say : God and Peter constitute one person, or this man Peter is God, as is true of Christ. This description of the personal union is based upon the facts involved in the conception of Christ, For then the personal union was consummated, and after that no other personal union of the two natures in Christ was developed."

5. Ursinus, who drew up the Confession of the Theological Professors and Pastors of Heidelberg, treats the doctrine in that paper as follows : " The word man signifies a person in whom dwells human nature, whether he have in addition to this another nature, as is the case with the man Christ Jesus, who was also divine, or this alone, as is the case with other men. The word humanity or human nature, however, does not embrace two or more natures, but only this one, consisting of a human body and soul. So also the word

God signifies a person who is God, i. e., in whom the divine nature resides, whether He be at the same time different, as is the case with the second person of the Godhead, the eternal Son, who is also man, or be God alone, as are the Father and the Holy Ghost. The word Deity (Gottheit), however, signifies and embraces only the divine nature and being. We can, therefore, rightly and truthfully say : God is man, God suffered and died for us, arose from the dead and ascended into heaven. But it would not be true to say : the Deity (Gottheit) is human, suffered, died, rose again and ascended into heaven. It is also true that the man Christ Jesus is God, but it is not true that the humanity of Christ is deified. And so likewise it is true that the man Christ is almighty, omniscient, ever^^where present and worketh all things that the Deity worketh. But that the humanity of Christ is almighty, omniscient, and everywhere present and worketh all things that the Deity worketh, is as far from the truth as it is to say that the humanity is divine."