That he is our mediator, and with his innocence and perfect holiness covers, in the sight of God, my sins, wherein I was conceived and brought forth.

1. Olevianus mentions a threefold benefit of the " holy conception and birth of Christ."

" First, that He is our only Mediator in every thing that devolves upon us in relation to God, the one who partakes not only of one, but of both natures, viz., the human and the divine. Gal. 3 : 20, 1 Tim. 2 : 5.

" Secondly, that He is a Mediator in whom the divine love, which surpasses heaven and earth, first exists, and in whose heart it abides personally, a heart which cherishes true brotherly love and fidelity toward us.

" Thirdly, that He is also a Mediator, whose body and soul were com})letely sanctified in their conception. First, that He might become a pure and holy offering, in which the penalty of our sinful conception, with all the fruits thereof, is forever paid, and we, therefore, are declared free from its guilt ; not that there is in us no longer any original sin, but that it is no longer imputed to us. Secondly, that by the power of His perfect holiness He gradually sanctifies our sinful body and soul, until at last we are entirely delivered from the inborn malady ; that He will graciously renew our nature after the image of God, with the same Holy Ghost by which the eternal Word, viz., the Son, sanctified His body and soul in the womb. Heb. 2 : 11 ; 7: 26."

2. Ursinus : " The benefit of the holy conception and birth of Christ is two-fold :

" First, the confirmation of the faith that He is the Mediator ; secondly, the comfort that through this Mediator we become righteous before God. This conclusion follows from the fact that there can be no Mediator between God and man who is not himself man, who is not righteous, who is not one with the Eternal Word (John 1), i. e., one who is truly and really God and man and able to preserve for us the purchased redemption. Heb. 7 : 26."

B. THE WORK OF CHRIST (Ques. 37-52.)