That he, being innocent, and yet condemned by a temporal judge, might thereby free us from the severe judgment of God, to which we were exposed.

I. The Innocence of Christ.

1. Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor, was the highest imperial officer and judge in Judea, and he only could authorize the death penalty, a j^ower that was taken away from the highest court of the Jewish people, the Sanhedrim, when their land passed under the Roman yoke.

2. That Christ was condemned under Pontius Pilate, is historical testimony to the fulfillment of prophecy. Gen. 49 : 10, as well as proof of the fulfillment of Christ's own prediction, recorded in Luke 18 : 32, 33, " For he shall be delivered unto the gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on, and they shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise again."

3. Christ was not to suffer death at the hands of his enemies privately or in a public tumult, but was to be openly sentenced by a regular judge, and that by a gentile, after the rulers of the Jews had condemned Him to death. Acts 4 : 27.

4. The trial of Christ before a temporal, i. e., a legal tribunal, served the purpose of bringing out His innocence, in accordance with which He suffered death, although without personal sin and guilt. Pilate examined Him twice, first in his own palace, and afterwards before the rulers of the people. At three different times he declared His innocence before the people, besides appealing to a like judgment of Herod, and, in addition, performing the symbolical act of washing his hands, making a total of five attestations. The warning of his wife Claudia Procula carried with it the same testimony. Matt. 27, Luke 23, John 18, VJ.

5. The Apostles lay stress upon the fact that Christ stood before Pilate as historical testimony (Acts 3 : 13, 14; 13: 28), and that He was innocentlv condemned. 1 Tim. 6:13.

II. His Condemnation for Us.

1. Although the innocence of Christ was acknowledged and declared before the temporal judge, yet was He condemned. Humanly speaking, the reason is to be found in the clamorous demonstrations of His enemies and the vacillation of Pilate, who feared his own deposition (John 19 : 12), besides being influenced by an uneasy conscience on account of his many deeds of violence (Luke 13 : 1) and extortion. But the ultimate ground (hidden also from the Jews, Acts 3 : 17 : I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers) lay in the counsel and will of God, according to which the cruel sentence of death which He must suffer on our account was to pass upon the innocent surety. Therefore the sentence of death must also be pronounced by divinely constituted authority, John 19: 11: "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above." Nevertheless the guilt of the condemnation rests upon

15G THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

Pilate, whose hands might be cleansed with water, but not his conscience (Matt. 27 : 24), and upon the people who cried : " His blood be on us, and on our children." Verse 25.

2. The condemnation of Christ by a temporal judge, who attested His innocence, doubly assures us that He did not suffer for His own sins, but for ours, and " thereby freed us from the severe judgment of God, to which we were exposed." 2 Cor. 5 : 21, Rom. 13: 1; 8: 1, John 5 : 24.