Yes, there is ; for thereby I am assured that he took on him the curse which lay upon me ; for the death of the cross was accursed of God.

I. Christ a Curse for Us.

1. It would be inconceivable, and was not according to the counsel and law of God, that Christ should suffer "some other death," i. e., in consequence of illness or the infiru'ities of age. Since He was to be the offering for our sins, and in accordance with the divine order and law there could be no forgiveness of sins w^ithout the shedding of blood. Christ must die a violent death. Heb. 9: 22.

2. Of all the modes of death and of bodily punishment, crucifixion was the bitterest.

a) It was the most painful and agonizing death, because the one crucified was slowly consumed by terrible pains in his limbs and vital organs, and by fever heat, while his soul suffered the most excruciating tortures. Ps. 22 : 14.

b) It was the most disgraceful death. Only slaves, seditious persons, highway robbers (such as the two who were crucified with Christ) were crucified. Isaiah 53: 3.

c) It was accursed of God. A special curse lay upon it, since this mode of execution re^:) resented the extreme penalty for an offence punishable by death. Deut. 21 : 23, Isa. 53 : 4.

3. Through the death of Christ upon the cross prophecy was fulfilled.

a) The prophecy in the type of the brazen serpent. Num. 21 : 6-9. The brazen serpent erected upon a pole that all who looked upon it in faith might be healed, was made in the form of the fiery serpents by which the children of Israel had been bitten. So also Christ, "in the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rom. 8: 3), was elevated upon the cross, that whosoever should look upon Him in faith, might not perish because of the bite of the old serpent (Gen. 3), and because of the consequences of sin in the flesh. Christ Himself declared that the brazen serpent was a type of Himself. John 3 : 14, 15.

b) The prophecy of Christ Himself. Matt. 20 : 19, John 18: 31,32. John evidently had in mind the words of Jesus (John 3: 14, 15), in which He intimated this death.

4. The Providence of God in the condemnation of Jesus to die upon the cross is worthy of notice.

Before the ecclesiastical court of the people of Israel He was accused of blasphemy, the greatest crime against the law of God, and, although the testimony of the false witnesses did not agree and no proof of His guilt was offered, yet He was condemned to death. The Jews said to Pilate : We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. John 19 : 7. According to the law of Moses, stoning was the punishment for blasphemy. Lev. 24 : 16. This punishment could be further intensified by hanging the body of the person stoned to death upon a tree or pole as a special indignity. Since the Jews were not allowed

to execute this sentence, and blasphemy of the God of Israel did not constitute a ground of condemnation before the temporal court, the rulers of the people accused Jesus before Pilate of sedition, the most heinous civil offence. Mark 15 : 12, John 18 : 33. (Compare also the superscription on the cross, which indicated the nature of the accusation, Matt. 27 : 37). Although in the trial the innocence of Jesus was established, yet }{e was condemned to death by the temporal court as the King of Israel, as He had been condemned by the ecclesiastical court as the Son of God. The punishment for sedition among the Romans was crucifixion. With the nature of this death, elevation upon the cross, corresponds the penalty provided by the law of Moses for blasphemy, viz., that one who had been stoned was also hanged.

5. In accordance with the counsel and will of God, Jesus was to die upon the cross, yet the men who were responsible for His crucifixion, carried theguilt of their own sins. Pilate ended his life by suicide while in banishment, to which the Emperor sentenced him, upon the accusation of the Jews, on account of his numerous acts of injustice. The Jews cried out against Jesus: Away, away with Him, crucify Him! (John 19 : 15.) At the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans (in the year 70 A. D.), the Jews, impelled by hunger, escaped in large numbers from the city into the camp of the Romans. Titus commanded all to be crucified in sight of the city, and oftentimes no less than 500 were hanging before the walls. Jerusalem itself was entirely destroyed after it had been conquered, and the people were scattered in all lands. It was the day of wrath and the revelation of the righteous "judgment of God." Rom. 2 : 5.

n. The Removal of the Curse From us Through the Death of Christ Upon the Cross.

1. Death upon the cross was " accursed of God," correspouding to death by hanging among the Jews. Deut. 21 : 22, 23.

2. Christ Avas guiltless, yet voluntarily took upon Himself the accursed death of the cross, and thereby " took on Him the curse [i. e., the heaviest penalty for sin) which lay upon me," and removed it from me. Of this I am assured by the death of Christ upon the cross. Gal. 3 : 13, Deut. 21 : 33, Col. 2 : 14, Heb. 12 : 2; 13: 12, 13.

3. The cross was the symbol of the deepest ignominy. In Christ it has become the symbol of. highest honor, so that the announcement of redemption by Jesus Christ is called the preaching of the cross. 1 Cor. 1 : 18 ; 2 : 2. The cross has become the symbol of Christianity, and it has also been perverted into a superstitious sign.