L The Burial of Christ as Evidence of His Death.

Persons that were crucified often hung upon the cross more than a day before death took place. The Jews were required by their law to take down persons crucified on the day of their execution (Deut. 21 : 23), and therefore it was their custom to break the limbs of those crucified who were still living in order to hasten their death. Jesus had expired at three o'clock in the afternoon (Matt. 27 : 46), and when toward evening, at the request of the Jews, Pilate gave the command that their legs be broken and they be taken down, the soldiers broke the legs of the two thieves, but not those of Jesus when they saw that He was already dead. When the soldier thrust his spear into Jesus' side, blood and water flowed forth, proving that death had taken place. John 19 : 31-35. The soldiers were convinced by what they saw and by the test they had made that Jesus was really

dead. After the announcement was made to Pilate by the captain of the guard (Mark 15: 44, 45), permission was given to Joseph of Arimathea and to Nicodemus to bury Him. His burial and what preceded it constitute a four-fold evidence of His actual death. The firm establishment of the fact of his death is important because it precludes the possibility of a mere swoon or au apparent death. Christ must really, actually die if redemption was to be accomplished, and if the resurrection was to be a progression from death unto life. 1 Cor. 15 : 4, Isa. 58 : 9. Jesus had cited his burial as witnessing for Him. Matt. 12 : 40. So also in the parable, John 12 : 24 : Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone ; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.

II. The Benefit of Christ's Burial to Us.

1. From the burial of Christ we receive a two-fold benefit.

a) The admonition that we be buried with Him spiritually, i. e., in His redemption, and that we be separated from sin and the world, Rom. 6:4.

b) The comfort that His burial takes away the fear of the grave and sanctifies our rest in the tomb. Jesus was laid into a " new" tomb " wherein never man before was laid." (Matt. 27 : 60, Luke 23 : 53.) Job 17 : 13, Ps. 6 : 5. Whoever came in contact with a grave, according to the law of Moses, (Num. 19: 16, 18) was unclean for seven days. Rev. 14 : 13.

2. Olevianus. " The first benefit that we receive from His burial is the confirmation of our faith. We are not to doubt, since Christ died for us and was buried, that He humbled Himself for us in such measure, that neither death nor the grave can hurt us, because the Father's wrath has been appeased. For just as the vehemence of the sea ceased and it became calm when Jonah

(wlio was a type of Christ) was cast out of the ship and swallowed by the whale, so Christ also declared in advance that He should be cut off out of the land of the living and be laid into the bosom of the earth in order that He might reconcile the Father and calm His wrath.

"As in the first place the burial of Christ serves to strengthen our faith and confidence in God, enabliuf; us to see more clearly the reconciled, fatherly heart of God, so also it is to promote our sanctification. For as Christ, having died for sin, rested in the grave, so also we, by the power of our communion with Christ, are to see to it that our old man be buried with Christ, by faith in Him and by the testimony of holy baptism ; that after our consciences have found peace in Christ, we rest from our former evil works and allow God to accomplish His work in us, and that we begin in our consciences here on earth the eternal Sabbath (Jesus remained in the grave over the Sabbath), until it be perfected, when we enter into eternal rest with Christ."

3. The mode of interment among the ancients was by burial in the ground or by depositing the bodies of the dead in vaults. The first burial of which there is a record in the Scriptures is that in the family-vault of Abraham in the cave of Machpelah. Gen. 23. Not only Israel, but also the oldest civilized nations, the Babylonians, Assyrians and Egyptians, buried their dead. That burial in the ground is in accordance with God's order may, to a certain extent, be inferred from His words to Adam, For dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return ; and from His promise to Abraham, Gen. 15 : 15, And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace ; thou shalt be buried in a good old age. Dent. 34 : 6, And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab. Cremation was introduced later only among the heathen. The effort to introduce this custom among

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 16a

Christian people is made on the one hand by those who not only have departed from the Christian faitli, but who are consciously or unconsciously antagonistic to it. The movement is in reality directed against the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. In itself it is the same to Almighty God whether he raises the new body out of the dust of decomposition or the aslies of incineration. Otherwise, what of the countless martyrs who died upon the funeral pile? On account of this enmity, and because Christ hallowed the grave, the believing Christian will not consent to the cremation of his body, but will insist upon its burial.

4. Because the grave has been hallowed for the believing Christian, by Christ's rest therein, the dedication of Christian cemeteries is a superfluous ceremony. The only act of dedication that can properly take place is the ceremony connected with the first interment.

A " consecration" (Einsegnung) of the body is, according to Reformed principles, wholly improper, since for the reception of a blessing man must necessarily use his soul as the organ, but which is no longer present in the body. The " consecration" of the dead was not practiced in the Evangelical Church until it arose in the present century in the Lutheran Church, and here and there has also crept into Reformed circles. So alsothe formula, "the peace of God rest upon this grave,"" has no sense, because God's peace is a spiritual possession which cannot be imparted to a lump of clay. So alsothere is no propriety in commending the departed spirit to the grace of God, since after death that grace benefits neither the believer nor the unbeliever. There i& an old saying, "As you believe so you live, and as you live so you die. And as you die so you go, and where you go there you remain." The early Reformed church knew nothing of the present-day style of funeral discourses which are, to a great extent, imitations of the

ancient heathen eulogies of the dead, and which, according to the classification of Heinrich Mueller (in his "Hours of Refreshment"), fall under the head of ■** Leichenrede — Luegenrede" (funeral discourse — lying discourse) ; neither did it approve of pompous display at funerals. So also the ancient Christian church knew nothing of fiovvers and wreaths upon burial caskets, which formed part of the funeral observances of the heathen of those days.

The constitution of the Church of the Palatinate of 15<)3 contained this paragraph : "At burials all popish and superstitious ceremonies are to be avoided. We are, however, to commit our dead to the earth with honor, as it is becoming, with such services as may be of profit to the living. In funeral discourses and addresses at the grave the minister shall abstain from excessive praise. The sermons or exhortations shall be chiefly directed to the instruction of those who attend the burial, that they may learn how to live a Christian life and how to die happy.