That by virtue thereof our old man is crucified, dead, and buried with him ; that so the corrupt inclinations of the flesh may no more reign in us, but that we may offer ourselves unto him a sacrifice of thanksgiving.

I. The Mortification of the Old Man.

1. The first benefit which we receive from the sacrifice and death of Christ on the cross is the forgiveness of our sins and full deliverance from sin in death. This rests upon the justification which He has secured for us. His sacrifice and death upon the cross have a further significance for our life upon earth, since that death also accomplishes our sanctification, the first part of which is the mortification of the old man.

2. As in Christ our relation to death has become changed, so our life itself becomes different. As through Christ's death our death has been transformed into life, so our natural, sinful life shall be given over unto death. The " old man" is not the body, and to give the old man over to death, does not mean that we are to oppress the body by fasting and chastisement. " Our old man" is our inborn, sinful nature, the tendency to sin and its indulgence. And above all the exjiression refers to the so-called favorite or besetting sins, ^. e., particular inclinations to various forms of

«in, e. g., to lying, to anger and hatred, to covetousuess, to unchastity, etc.

3. Our old man neither can nor ought to be laid aside merely outwardly, as is a coat. On the contrary, since it is a part of our inward life, we can only be freed from it by its mortification, which, on our part, can be accomplished only by its gradual destruction. The way in which this is to be brought about is indicated by the reference to the death of Christ in the words, " crucified, dead and buried." In these words the Scriptures speak of the dying of the old man in believers.

a) Crucified. Rom. 6 : 6, Gal. 5 : 24. Crucifixion is the bitterest death. Such it is also spiritually in the mortification of the old man. Matt. 18 : 8, John 12 : 25, Luke 14 : 26. Crucifixion was also the most ignominious death, and so every one who would live in Christ Jesus, must be prepared to take upon himself the ignominy of the cross of Christ, for it will become his rich portion at the hands of the world and the children thereof. Luke 21 : 17, Gal. 6 : 14, 1 Cor. 4 : 13, Acts 5: 41.

b) Dead. Col. 3 : 5, 8, 9, Rom. 6 : 11.

c) Buried. Rom. 6 : 4, Col. 2 : 12.

4. Die (as to the old man) before thou diest (the temporal death), that thou diest not (the eternal death) when thou diest (the temporal death).

II. How the Mortification of the Old Man Takes Place.

1. Our old man died in Christ as the Scriptures teach. Therefore it is also to die in us. The mortification takes place through the destruction of the old man. But this we can accomplish only by " virtue of the sacrifice and death of Christ." As in our natural birth sin is transmitted to us, so also in our spiritual birth (regeneration) we become partakers of the power of Christ's death, for the vanquishing of sin in our flesh.

2. The evil desires of the flesh are indeed also active in the regenerate, but they are not allowed to reign over them, i. e., to obtain the supremacy. Rom. 6 : 12, 14.

3. We are to make an offering of ourselves to Christ, i. e., out of thankfulness to Him for offering Himself unto death as a sacrifice for us, we are to mortify the old man, to subdue and destroy more and more the corrupt nature that is in us. Ps. 51 : 17, Rom. 6: 13.

4. " What does it mean to be dead to the world and to sin ?" With this question a youth once came to an old experienced Christian. The elder said : " Go forth into the cemetery and call the dead that they come forth to you out of their graves." The youth was astonished at his words, but went and did as he was requested. He returned to the elder, saying : " The dead will not come." " Then go again," said the elder, "call them, praise them, and make promises to them." This also the youth did, and returning, said: "The dead will not come." The elder said : " Go for the third time and call them, chide and threaten them." The youth did so, and came back with the same answer: " It is of no avail, the dead will not come." " Learn then from the dead," said the elder, " what it means to be dead and buried in Christ to sin and the world, — strenuously to resist the voice of sin and of the world, and not to allow oneself to be moved by its flatteries and allurements, by its reproaches and threatenings."