That in my greatest temptations, I may be assured, and wholly comfort myself in this, that my Lord Jesus Chri>t, by his inexpressible anguish, pains, terrors, and hellish agonies, in which he was plunged during all his sufferings, but especially on the cross, hath delivered me from the anguish and torments of hell.

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 16^

Why Christ Suffered in His Soul the Torments of Hell.

1. The word hell (in Hebrew " Sheol," in the Greek " Hades," in the German " Hoelle," is derived from Hel or Helle, the goddess of the infernal world in German mythology,) has various significations.

Ursinus accepts the three following :

a) The grave. Gen. 42 : 38, 1 Kings 2 : 9.

b) The place of the damned. Matt. 11 : 23, Luke 16: 23.

c) The anguish and torments of hell. Ps. 116: 3, Ps. 30 : 3 ; 86 : 13, 1 Sam. 2 : 6.

2. As Christ was not only to redeem us in body, but also in soul from eternal condemnation, so He must not merely die, but also suffer in his soul the torments of hell, the punishment for our sins. This did not occur in the place of the damned, but at His death ; " my Lord Jesus Christ, by his inexpressible anguish, pains and terrors, which he suffered in his soul upon the cross, and before, hath delivered me from the anguish and torments of hell."

a) " Before," in Gethsemane, when He was '* sorrowful and very heavy," and His soul was " exceeding sorrowful, even unto death" (Matt. 26: 37, 38), when He was " in an agony," and " his sweat was as it were great drops of blood." Luke 22 : 44.

b) "Upon the cross," when He cried out: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me !" Matt. 27 : 46 ; when the father withdrew from him the feeling of Jlis presence and communion, and He suffered the anguish and terror of those who are rejected of God.

3. By Christ's suffering upon the cross, and before,. the torments of hell :

a) Prophecy, Hosea 13 : 14, was fulfilled.

b) There is secured for me a certain comfort in the midst of my greatest temptations, as in times of doubt

of my redemption and salvation through Christ. Ps. 42 : 7, 8, Isa. 41), 1 Thes. 1 : 10, 1 Cor. 15 : 55, 57.

4. The conception, that Christ felt the torments of hell in His soul, not after His death in the abode of the damned, but in His sufferings in Gethsemane and upon the cross, is undoubtedly the correct one ; for His redemptive work was completed by His death. John 19 : 30. But this belongs properly to question 37, which treats of the sufferings of Christ. " Especially at the end of his life, he sustained in body and soul the wrath of God against the sins of all mankind." The fact that the expression, " He descended into hell," follows the articles, " was crucified, dead and buried," gives us a hint as to where the soul of Christ remained after His death, while His body lay in the grave. Neither is it said anywhere, that Christ arose from death, but " from the dead."

5. That which in the German translation of the Bible has been rendered " Hoelle" — Sheol, Hades — has in the original in one place the signification grave, in another the place or torment of the damned, then again it signified the realm of the dead, i. e., all who have departed from the earthly life, who are divided into two classes, the saved and the unsaved. Christ remained in death, i. e., in the state of death, as long as body and soul were separated.

6. How we are to conceive of the realm of the dead, appears from the parable of the rich man and Lazarus (Luke 16: 19-31). In connection with which it is to be remembered that not fancies, but veritable relations always lie at the basis of that which is figurative in the parables of the Lord. Those who have departed from this life, are found in two entirely sepai-ate ]:)laces. Verse 26. From the expression " pass from hence," and from verse 23, where the rich man " lift up his eyes and seeth Abraham afar off," it follows, that the

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHLS.AI. 171

abode of the saved is on high (in '* heaven," where the holy angels carried Lazarus), and the abode of the damned is in the deep (in " hell," where also the fallen angels are). Matt. 25 : 41. The Scriptures speak not only of heaven in general, but also of" heavens." Paul was " caught up to the third heaven." 2 Cor. 12 : 2. Christ says : " In my Father's house are many mansions." John 14 : 2. The abode of the blessed, where the faithful of the Old Covenant enjoy the rest and refreshment of eternal life, is called Abraham's bosom, because unto him, the father of the faithful, are gathered those of his posterity (he was gathered to his people), who are appointed unto eternal life. Thither also the soul of Christ, as a son of Abraham according to the flesh, went at death, where it was in the hands of His heavenly Father, into which He had commended it (His human "spirit," Luke 23: 46), when He died upon the cross. To this points His answer to the thief upon the cross : " To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise." Luke 23 : 43. To the highest heaven of glory, upon the throne of majesty, Christ was exalted only by His ascension.

Of a " limbo" or a " purgatory," as the Romish Church teaches, the Scriptures do not know anything, neither of what is taught by the Lutheran Church that Christ, before His appearance as risen, went immediately with body and soul, to the place of the damned, there to celebrate His triumph over hell and the devil.