Christ is very man and very God ; with respect to his human nature, he is no more on earth ; but with respect to his Godhead, majesty, grace and Spirit, he is at no time absent from us.

duestion 48.

But if his human nature is not present wherever his Godhead is^ are then these two natures in Christ separated from one another f

Not at all ; for since the Godhead is incomprehensible and omnipresent it must necessarily follow that the same is not limited with the human nature he assumed, and yet remains personally united to it.

Both the 47th and the 48th Questions treat of the relation of the two natures in Christ, the divine and the human, after His exaltation to heaven, and relate to

the difference between the Lutheran and tlie Eeformed Church with respect to this doctrine. The Lutheran Church teaches, that with the exaltation of Christ to the right liand of God, all the attributes of the divine, including also omnipresence, were communicated to His human nature. Thus it is intended to prove, that in the Lord's Supper the body and the blood of Christ are substantially present in the bread and wine after their consecration. The inference is thus drawn : The right hand of God is everywdiere present. Christ sitteth, with respect to His humanity, at God's right hand. Therefore His humanity is every w^here present. Ursinus very pertinently proves this conclusion to be incorrect : " Because the humanity of Christ is not itself the right hand of God's power, but is seated at the right hand of God, and because not everything that is seated at the right hand of God is on that account everywhere present. For Christ is seated at the right hand of God and conducts His kingly office, in accordance wdth the attributes of both His natures. With respect to His divinity He is everywhere present : with respect to His humanity He is not present in more than one place at one time, and yet remains Lord over all creatures, wdio upholds and governs all things by His divine power." In the consideration of these questions we must always be mindful of the fact that our thought and language are limited, and we must hold ourselves within what God has revealed to us in His word and the extent to which He has revealed it.

1. Christ is true God and true man. This is revealed throughout the Scrijitures, and we accept this truth in good faith, a truth with which also agrees the promise of the Lord : " Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." Matt. 28 : 20. He is true God, and as such, viz., with respect to His divine essence. He is not limited either before, during or after His life u23on

earth. As true man He assumed in His incarnation a body that was limited (limited in space), and as He remains also after His exaltation to the right hand of God in heaven true man, so He also retains the characteristic of limitation in space belonging to a real human body. With respect to His human nature, He is, therefore, no more on earth. Matt. 26 : 11, John 10 : 28, Heb. 8 : 4, John 17 : 24. If Christ were omnipresent with respect to His human nature, they who are to enter into His glory after death, would not need to change their abode, but might be glorified here upon earth.

3. But with respect to His Godhead, Majesty, Grace and Spirit, He is at no time absent from us.

a) His majesty, i. e., His power and glory. He reveals in us that we may know Him, love Him above all things, and that we may not esteem the world and its glory, but overcome the world and the devil, and do all things throuirh Him alone, who strengtheneth us. 1 John 5: 4; 2": 14, Phil 4 : 13.

b) By His grace He bears us up continually, and assures our hearts of His love, although we vet sin daily. John 14 : 23.

c) With His spirit He works powerfully in us, preserves us in living communion with Himself, and comforts us at all times. John 14 : 18, Matt. 18 : 20, Gal. 4 : 6, 2 Cor. 3 : 18.

4. Thus the two natures in Christ are not separated, even as they were not separated during His earthly life, since by His ascension He only changed the abode of His human nature, exchanged earth for heaven. Of His divine nature what God said (1 Kings 8 : 27) is true, and of His human nature what is recorded in Acts 3 : 21.

5. In this doctrine the Reformed Church is in entire accord with the Church of the first centuries, while the

doctrine of the ubiquity of Christ's human nature is new and has no foundation in Scripture. We shall here cite the testimonies of the Church father Augustine (Bishop of Hippo, died 430).

a) With respect to His Majesty, Providence, inexpressible grace, what is said of Him is fulfilled : " Lo, I am ^vith you alway, even unto the end of the world." AVith respect to the flesh which the Word, the Son of God, assumed, i. e., with respect to that which was born of the Virgin Mary, w^as arrested by the Jews, nailed to the cross, taken down from the cross, wrapped in linen, laid into the grave, appeared in the resurrection, ye will not always have Him with you. Why ? Because with respect to His bodily presence, after communing with the narrower and wider circle of disciples for forty days. He ascended into heaven, whither they followed Him with their eyes, but not bodily, and is not here. He is yonder, because He is seated at the right hand of God ; and He is here, because with respect to His Majesty, He is at no time absent from us. Or, with respect to the presence of His Majesty (i. e., His Godhead), Christ will always be present with us ; of the presence of the human nature {i. e., His humanity), what He said to His disciples holds true: " But me ye have not always." For with respect to His bodily presence, He remained with the Church but few days, but now He is present to faith, but not to sight. (Augustinus, Tract 50 in Job.).

b) Do not doubt that the man Christ Jesus is now in the place whence He will come ; and remember and hold fast the confession, that He is risen from the dead, ascended into heaven and sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and will come from none other place to judge the quick and the dead, and in accordance with the word of the angel. Acts 1 : 11, shall so come in like manner, as He was seen going into heaven, i. e., in the

substance and form of the flesli, to which indeed He gave immortality, but the nature of which he did not thereby take away. With respect to His human form, it must not be imagined that He has been effused everywhere. For we must be on our guard, that we do not conceive of the Divinity of His person in such a manner as to destroy the reality of His humanity. For it does not follow that that which is in God is like Him, everywhere present. For the Scriptures also say of us, that in Him we live, move and have our being, and yet we are not like God everywhere present. But the man Christ Jesus is in God differently, since God (the Godhead) is in the man (Christ) in an especial and peculiar manner. For both God and man constitute one person, and both one Christ Jesus, who is everwhere present with respect to His divinity, but in heaven with respect to His humanity. This is"'the confession of the Christian Church, according to the simple understanding of the article of the Christian faith '(Augustiiius ad Dardanum, Epist. 57).

Question 41).

Of What advantage to us is Chrisfs ascension into heaven ?

First, that he is our advocate in the presence of his Father in heaven ; secondly, that we have our flesh in heaven, as a sure pledge that he, as the head, will also take up to himself, us, his members; thirdly, that he sends us his Spirit, as an earnest, by whose power we " seek the things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God, and not things on earth."

I. Christ our Intercessor in Heaven.

1. Christ represents us in the presence of the Father, for He presents in behalf of those who believe, who are ingrafted into Him and constitute with Him one body, the righteousness which He has wrought out for them, and with which their sins are covered in the sight of God. Heb. 9 : 24, Rom. 8 : 34, 1 John 2:1.

184 T[II-: HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

2. Because of His intercession, which is foiuuled upon His sacrifice, our prayers offered in His name are heard by the Father. Heb. 7 : 25, John 14 : 13.

3. Olevianus. " Because Christ through His own blood entered the sanctuary, which is not made witli hands, into heaven itself, it is a certain assurance, or thereby the world is powerfully convinced, that through Christ has been accomplished eternal righteousness, as Daniel (9 : 24) prophesied. So that it is not only evidence of our righteousness that Christ once entered into the holy of holies, but also the fact that He abides there and appears before the Father continually in our name, is a continuous accomplishment or advancement of our righteouMiess ; because by virtue of His only sacrifice, with which He blotted out our sins in His body through eternity. He appears righteous continually before the face of God. Heb. 9 : 24."

II. Christ's Flesh our Pledge In Heaven.

1. Christ is exalted to heaven in our flesh, i. e., with His human nature, which He received from us, and wdiich He still shares with us in His glorification. As our surety, who had offered Himself to the Father for His chosen ones already before the foundation of the world, He entered into heaven and glory, as He had entered into suffering and death. Jer. 30: 21. In this we have the assurance that not only our soul, but also our glorified body will hereafter participate in eternal salvation. This assurance is further strengthened in that we stand in indissoluble life communion (head and members) with Him. " Does a head leave its member, does it not draw it after itself?" John 12: 32; 14: 3, Eph. 2: 6, Thii. 3: 20.

2. Olevianus. *' By His ascension Christ took possession of the heavenly inheritance in l)ehalf of all His brethren (in the name of all His brethren, i. e., His

believing ones), so that we now have Christ's flesh, which is our flesh, as a sure pledge that He, as the Head, will also take up to Himself us. His members, as He promised. John 14 : 2, 3 ; 17 : 24."

III. Christ's Spirit as an Earnest Upon Earth.

1. As Christ's flesh, our human nature, in heaven is an assurance of our eternal salvation in Christ, so is also Christ's spirit upon earth, the Holy Ghost in our hearts, the pledge of our salvation. Through the testimony of the Holy Ghost (Rom. 8: 16, 17) we become conscious that we are children of God and heirs of eternal life, joint heirs with Jesus Christ, who has already received the inheritance for us and has entered upon it. Acts 2 : 33, 2 Cor. 1 : 21, 22, Eph. 1 : 13. Through the Holy Ghost our life is hid with Christ in God ; but when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with Him in glory. Col. 3 : 3, 4. Of this the Holy Ghost assures us as an earnest. " They are pilgrims upon earth and live in heaven." Ps. 39 : 12 : " For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all ray fathers were."

2. The gift of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of the exalted Christ is not only an earnest of assurance, but is also to admonish and incite us that by His power we may become heavenly minded. Col. 3 : 1, 2, Matt. 6 : 21. " Fit your heart for the place where you would be eternally."

3. Olevianus. " On the other hand Christ sent down another earnest (over against the earnest of our flesh in heaven) which He received not from us (as His flesh), but from the Father, viz., the Holy Ghost, that He should dwell in our body and soul, and should be an indissoluble bond between the head which is in heaven, and us His members who are upon earth, and should assure us of the eternal inheritance in heaven."