there appear as head of his church, by whom the Father governs

all things.

I. The Slgniflcatlon of His Sitting at The Right Hand of God.

1. Ursinus. " The sitting at the right liand of God is to be distinguished from His ascension into heaven. The one cannot take place without the other, they are, therefore, not the same. The article of the sitting at the right hand of God is distinguished from the preceding one in a threefold manner : 1. In it is set forth the object of the ascension ; for Christ ascended into heaven that He might be seated at the right hand of God. 2. Christ sitteth continually at the right hand of God ; but only once did He ascend into heaven. 8. The angels also ascend into heaven, and we shall also ascend into heaven ; but neither they nor we shall sit at the right hand of the Father. Heb. 1: 13, ' But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?' How much less did He say this to any man, except to Christ."

2. The sitting at the right hand of another has from ancient times been a mark of honor. Even to-day one whom we would honor is seated at our right hand.

a) It is the highest mark of honor if a king should invite any one to sit on his right hand. When Bathsheba came to Solomon after his ascension to the throne, he advanced toward her, and when he seated himself upon the throne, his mother was seated at his right hand. 1 Kings 2 : 19. The mother of Zebedee's children made the request of the Lord : " Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in thy kingdom." Matt. 20 : 21.

b) The prophets of the Old and the New Testament

beheld in their visions God sitting upon a throne in heaven. 1 Kings 22 : 19, Isa. 6:1, Rev. 7 : 10.

c) The right, i. e., the right hand, is in ordinary life preferred to the left, because we accomplish the most with it, and it is, therefore, stronger than the left. It is the rio;ht hand of the kino* in which he holds the sceptre.

Ursinus. " When we speak of the right hand of God, we derive the conception from human relations, as the Scriptures also speak of other bodily members with reference to God. The expression includes a twofold significance : 1. The highest power and strength, or the omnipotence of God. Ps. 118: 16, Ex. 15: 6. 2. The highest dignity and honor, or the majesty of God. The latter is here intended."

d) The sitting at the right hand of God was promised to Christ. Ps. 110: 1. Christ Himself foretold it. Matt. 26 : 64. The apostles attest it. Mark 16 : 19. Acts 2 : 34-36, " For David is not ascended into the heavens : but he saith himself. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my riglit hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." Ps. 110 : 1, " The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool."

Stephen beheld Christ at the right hand of God. Acts 7 : 55.

3. Sitting at the right hand also signifies rest after labor. The sitting of Christ at the right hand of God after the work of redemption, corresponds to the rest of God the Father after the work of creation.

4. The ascension of Christ was His accession to the throne, the sitting at the right hand of God indicates His reign.

5. Oleviauus. " We believe thus that Christ not

only ascended into heaven in His human nature, in order that He might live there, as the angels, in eternal happiness, but that He might sit down in heaven at the right hand of God, i. e., manifest Himself at the throne of God as the King of the holy angels and of saints, and as the head of the Christian Church, through whom the Father governs all things, which dignity surj^asses by far the dignity of all angels and other creatures. Heb. 1: 13, Ps.'llO: 1."

II. What is Embraced in Christ's Reign.

A. Christ manifests Himself in the first place as the Head of His Church.

1. He governs the Church which is His body, as by the head the human members are governed through the understanding and the will. Col. 1 : 18, Eph. 1 : 22, 23.

2. Olevianus. " On this account the exaltation of Christ in His kingdom is His induction to the highest honor, so that the Christ who before was crowned with thorns now appears openly in heaven before the angels and the saints in the most glorious light as King of the Christian Church, and as the Head of all angels and of the redeemed, that He might from thence work more powerfully in all His members than He did when He was bodily on earth ; and that He might prepare them for salvation and further them daily by the service of the Church, according to the order which He had prescribed in His Word and by the power of His spirit, with which He rules in His Church and dwells in it."

3. The Pope of Rome maintains that he is the " visible head of the Church," the " representative of God" and the " vicar of Jesus Christ upon earth. He makes his appeal to the words of Christ to Peter : " And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church ; and the gates of hell shall

not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven : and whatsoever tliou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven." Matt. 16 : 18, 19. Since it is claimed that Peter w^as afterward bishop of Rome, they also claim that this promise passed over to his successors, the Popes of Pome.

To this we reply : 1. The personal promise given to Peter for his good confession was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, when the communion of Jesus Christ, the Christian Church, was first established upon the sermon of the man of rock, and there were added to it about three thousand souls. Acts 2 : 41. 2. The power of the keys was given by the Lord after His resurrection to the other disciples, as well as to Peter, so that he was in this respect in no way superior to them. John 20 : 22, 23. 3. That Peter was bishop of Rome, cannot at all be proved, but it is a tradition that arose subsequently. 4. Even if Peter had been actually invested with the bishop's ofiice in Rome (an ofiice which did not belong to the Apostolate), the bishops at Rome would have only been successors of Peter as bishop, but not of his apostolic dignity, and the personal distinction connected with it. 5. The Church is not in need either of a visible head, because the invisible Head (Matt. 28 : 20) promised to her His continual presence, neither can a sinful man administer the highest authority of God as His representative upon earth. Christ Himself, before His departure to the Father, indicated His representative upon earth, which does not exclude His immediate operation, but includes it. The Holy Ghost is alone the " representative of God" and vicar of Christ upon earth. John 14 : 16 ; 16: 14.

B. Through Christ as the head of the Christian Church the Father governs all things.

1. At the right hand of God Christ also superintends the government and judgment of the world. Matt. 28 : 18, Heb. 1 : 3 ; 2 : 7, 8, Eph. 1 : 20, 21, John 5 : 22.

2. The talk that is heard from unbelievers is very silly : " If Christ governs the world, then God the Father is superannuated (put on a stipend)." John 10 : 80 : " I and my Father are one." This word of Christ holds true in His humiliation, as well as in His exaltation. He had subjected Himself to the Father, and yet they were and remained one. God was in Christ and reconciled the world unto Himself 2 Cor. 5 : 19. The Father has now exalted Him at His right hand and hath given Him all power in heaven and upon earth, and they remain one ; since the Son of God governs all things, God the Father also governs the world through Him.

QueBtion 51.

What profit is this glory of Christ, our head, unto usf

First, that by his Holy Spirit he poureth out heavenly graces

upon us, his members ; and then, that by his power he defends and

preserves us against all his enemies.

I. Heavenly Gifts.

1. Although Christ is invisible to our eyes, there exists between Him and believers, who are His members, the most intimate communion which is mediated by the Holy Ghost, who dwells in Christ and in us. The Holy Ghost is the royal gift of grace, which He had promised to send after His departure to the Father in glory, that by His gifts and powers here already the glorification of the members of His kingdom might be begun. Acts 2 : 33, Eph. 4 : 8.

2. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are of two kinds :

a) Extraordinary, — for extraordinary purposes and times, such as prophesying, speaking with tongues (in foreign languages not previously learned), and working miracles. These gifts were largely bestowed in the times of the Apostles, and will doubtless be restored again at the end of the world. In the intervening years they are not entirely withdrawn, but are only seldom manifest. Mark 16: 17, 18. The fulfillment of the promise of working miracles, we may find recorded in Acts 16 : 18 ; 2 : 4, 11 ; 10 : 46 ; 28: 5, 8, 1 Cor. 12: 4-11.

b) Ordinary, — which are necessary to the salvation of every believer, e. g., knowledge, faith, love, hope, etc.. Gal. 5 : 22.

3. Olevianus. " The first benefit is that for the sake of Christ, and for His sake only, the Father bestows the Holy Spirit upon the elect, governs and quickens them by the preaching of the gospel through the power of the Holy Ghost, and not only adorns the entire Church with diverse gifts, but also bestows upon each member as many gifts as may be necessary to the honor and glory of the Head, to the edification of the whole body and to the happiness and salvation of its members, and to the extent to which the King Himself desires to work in each member, for His own honor and for the edification of the other members, as He says, John 15 : 16, ' Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit.' Therefore each member bringeth forth as much fruit as is desired by Him who has ordained the same. But no member is left without the gifts necessary to his salvation, and none remain so fruitless as not to serve to some extent the honor of God and the welfare of the body of Christ."

II. Heavenly Protection.

1. Enemies on every hand, within and without, is the lot of every one upon earth who believes heartily on the Lord Jesus and confesses Him in word and deed. Luke 21 : 17.

2. But we have a powerful Head iu heaveu who protects and preserves His members upon earth :

a) Against our own flesh. Kom. 6 : 14.

b) Against the world. John 10 : 33.

c) Ag-ainst satan. Eom. 16 : 20.

d) Against death. 1 Cor. 15 : 26.

3. As powerless as are these enemies against the Head who is in heaven, so little they prevail against His members on earth. 1 Peter 1 : 5, John 10 : 28.

4. Olevianus. " The second benefit is the protection of the Church against all enemies, against sin, the flesh, the world, tyrants, unclean spirits, the secret and open instruments of these, all of whom the heavenly Father calls enemies of Christ, and with reference to whom He manifests by daily examples His power to overthrow them. In a word, we are members of the King, members, I say, of His own body, with far more certainty than the hand is a member of the body. All the hindrances which meet us in the whole world are brought into subjection to this King, that they cannot injure us ; yea, that even the thoughts and counsels of all kings, princes and lords have their begiuning, their fulfillment or failure in His will, and He so controls them that they must be subservient to His own glory and to the salvation of those who believe on Him. Eph. 1 : 21-23. Therefore nothing from man or devil can befall believers without the will of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is seated in heaven at the right hand of the Father."

5. This truth is illustrated in the life of Frederick the Pious of the Palatinate, the father of the Heidelberg Catechism. Scarcely had the catechism been introduced into the Palatinate, when enmity arose on all sides against the Elector, especially on the part of his Lutheran co-electors and their theologians. He was accused before Emperor and Empire, and it was

their intention, with the help of the Catholic princes, to declare his sovereignty forfeited. They even spoke of it that it might cost him his head. To his brother Richard, who gave him the information, Frederick wrote at that time : " I rely upon my dear and faithful Father in heaven in confident hope that His omnipotence will use me as an instrument to confess His name openly in the holy Empire of the German nation in these last times, not only with my mouth, but also by my acts. I also know that He has sufficient power to preserve me, a poor, simple (unlearned) man, and that He will preserve me through the power of the Holy Ghost, even should it come to this, that it would cost my life ; for which, should it please my God and Father in heaven to use me for such honor, I should never be able to thank Him sufficiently, neither here on earth nor in eternity." When he was called upon by the Catholic Emperor at the Diet, which convened soon after this declaration was made, in 1566, again to rid his land of his catechism and of other Reformed institutions, he declared before the entire assembly : " with reference to matters of religion, which I am called upon to change and to set aside, I announce that in the sphere of faith and conscience I know but one Lord, who is the Lord of lords and King of kings ; and therefore I say that this question does not pertain to 'a cap full of flesh' {i. e., his head), but to the soul and its salvation, which has been committed to me by my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and which I am in duty bound and prepared to preserve for Him. Therefore I cannot concede to your Imperial Majesty the right of authority over it, a right which belongs to God alone, who is its Creator. As far as my catechism is concerned, I am committed to it. It is fortified in the margin by proof-texts from the Holy Scriptures to such an extent that it may stand immoveable, and it is

my hope that by the help of God it may continue so ta stand. As for the rest, I comfort myself with the thought that my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has given me, together with all who believe on Him, the assured promise that everything which I shall lose for the sake of His honor or name, shall be restored to me in the world beyond a hundred-fold. With this I most humbly commend myself to the grace of your Imperial Majesty." Rightly did Boquinus say later in his funeral sermon for the Elector : " If martyrdom consists in the righteousness of the cause, the temper of soul and joyous resignation to suffering, then we may count this splendid Elector among the martyrs of Christ." Although the Emperor, after the Elector had departed from the Diet, declared that " the pest must be destroyed," yet no one dared to lift a hand against the courageous confessor. The Lord at the right hand of the Father in heaven, who had given to him the heavenly gifts of faith and of courage to bear testimony, extended also His hand over him, " to protect and preserve him by His power against all enemies."