That in all my sorrows and persecutions, with uplifted head, 1 look for the very same person who before offered himself, for my sake, to the tribunal of God, and hath removed all curse from me, to come as judge from heaven ; who shall cast all his and my enemies into everlasting condemnation, but shall translate me, with all his chosen ones, to himself into heavenly joys and glory.

I. The Final Judgment and the Judge.

1. By His ascension Christ manifested Himself in heaven as the Head of the Church and Lord over all. As such He will manifest Himself on earth in His second coming, visibly before the eyes of the whole world,

of those who are yet alive, and of those who have died and will be raised again.

2. Christ will come again as judge of the living and the dead. Acts 10 : 42.

a) He will come from heaven. Matt. 26 : 64, Acts 1: 11.

b) He will come in His glorified body, visibly and in glory. Matt. 25 : 31, 1 Thess. 4 : 16, John 19 : 37.

3. Christ will sit in judgment ;

a) Over all men, the quick and the dead. John 5 : 22, Acts 17 : 31, Matt. 25: 32, Rev. 20: 12, 13.

b) He will judge: 1. Their thoughts. 1 Cor. 4: 5.

2. Their words. Matt. 12: 36. 3. Their works. 2 Cor. 5 : 16.

c) The principle of the judgment. 1. The heathen will be judged according to the law in their hearts, i. e., their conscience. Rom. 2 : 12, 15. 2. The Jews according to the law of Moses. Luke 16 : 29, Rom. 2 : 12.

3. Nominal Christians will be judged by the gospel, which they heard, but did not accept. John 3 : 36 ; 12: 48.

d) The judgment will be strict, and no secret sin will remain hidden from the Judore. Rev. 20 : 12. Even the sins of youth will be remembered, if not followed by repentance and forgiveness. Eccles. 12 : 1. Therefore David prays, Ps. 25 : 7 : " Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions."

e) The judgment will be entirely just and impartial. 1 Peter 1: 17, Rev. 6: 15-17, Luke 23: 30, Acts 17: 31.

4. Types of the judgment of the world are: 1. The Flood, Gen. 6 — 7 ; 2. The drowning of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, Ex. 14 ; 3. The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen. 19 ; 4. The destruction of Jerusalem in the year 70 A. D., Matt. 24, Luke 21.

II. The Expectation of tlie Judgment on the Part of Believers.

1. Tlie day of the final judgment awakens feelings of terror, and so also the expectation of the same, so much the more because no one knows when it will come. Joel 2: 11, Heb. 10: 27, Matt. 24: 36.

2. The unbelieving world, however, does not experience these terrors. Gen. 19 : 14, Matt. 24 : 38, 39.

3. For believers the expectation of the judgment is associated not with dread, but witli comfort,

a) For the judge is the very same Christ who before offered Himself, for their sakes, to the tribunal of God, who bore their sins and thereby freed them from the curse and the punishment of sin, so that they have the forgiveness of all their sins, and are no more judged and condemned. John o : 24 ; 3 : 18.

b) In this world they suffer many sorrows and persecutions. Acts 14 : 22, 2 Tim. 3 : 12. In such sorrow and persecution the prospect of Christ's return to judgment affords them comfort. For it will bring to an end all their adversities. Therefore they await this day with uplifted head, i. e., with joyful confidence. Luke 21 : 28.

4. From the children of God the day of judgment and of complete redemption is hidden, even as it was hidden from the Son of God in the days of His flesh, Mark 13 : 32 ; and with the flight of the centuries it seems as if God were delaying the fulfillment of the promise. 2 Peter 3 : 9.

Therefore the Lord admonishes His own. Matt. 25 : 13, " Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh." The waiting must at the same time be a watching. " To look for" implies more than to wait. It implies preparation, so to live in faith as to be ready at any hour to meet the coming of the Judge with joy, though He

should appear suddenly. Matt. 24 : 44, 1 John 2 : 28 ; 4 : 17. See the warning and admonition recorded, Matt. 24 : 40-51.

0. Even though the day and the hour of the second coming of Christ be hidden from us, there are signs of its approach to which we are to give heed. Matt. 16 : 3; 24: 3.

a) Matt. 24 : 14, ''And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations (though it may not secure the conversion of all nations and of all their individual members), and then shall the end come."

b) 2 Thess. 2 : 3, " For that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of j^erdition" (the antichrist). 2 Peter 3:3, " Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers walking after their own lusts . . ."

c) Matt. 24 : 21, 22, " For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. And except those days should be shortened, there should no fiesh be saved : but for the elect's sake those days shall be shortened."

d) Matt. 24 : 29, 30, " Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken : and then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man (His visible manifestation) in heaven {i. e., in the clouds of heaven or in the sky)."

III. The Redemption of Believers in the Judgment.

1. The sorrows and tribulations which befall the children of God upon earth, proceed from the enmity of the world against Christ. For Christ's sake they are198 THE HE1DELBP]RG CATECHISM.

subjected to hatred and hostility, while they themselves seek to obey the iuj unction of the apostle, Rora. 12 : 18, "If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men."

2. The enemies of Christ are not merely those who openly by word and deed reject and blaspheme Him, but also those who, notwithstanding their knowledge of the gospel, persist in their carnal-mindedness, which, acco]"ding to Rom. 8 : 7, is enmity against God ; and likewise those who have tasted the good word of God, but fall away, and crucifv to themselves anew the Son of God. Heb. 6 : 6. These " His enemies," Christ at His return will cast into eternal condemnation. Matt. 25 : 41, 2 Thess. 1 : 8-10, John 19 : 37, Rev. 20 : 10.

3. All these enemies of Christ are also the enemies of the Christian, who in truth bears the name of Christ, confesses Him, and for the sake of whose name He is hated. John 15 : 18-21, 1 Peter 4: 4-5.

" All his and my enemies" are thus one and the same persons. Other enemies a child of God cannot have if he lives according to the word and spirit of his heavenly Father. Matt. 5: 38-48, Rom. 12: 17-21, Matt. 5 : ^2—24.

4. The comfort which is found in the judgment of Christ over " all his and my enemies," does not indeed consist in a carnal, malignant joy over their condemnation, but in the sure prospect that believers are thereby delivered, i. e., set free forever from their oppressors and persecutors. Luke 21 : 28, 2 Thes. 1 : 6.

rv. The Glorification After the Judgment.

Not only shall the children of God be glorified, but also the whole creation.

A. THE BODILY GLORIFICATION OF THE CHILDREN OF GOD.

1. The redemption of the elect is brought to its completion with the return of Christ, because then also the body will be restored and united with the soul, so that

the whole man in body and soul will participate in the joy of eternity. The elect are those whom God, in accordance with His eternal counsel and will, endowed with true faith, and whom He preserves unto eternal life. The lost receive in the judgment what they deserved, on account of their sins, but the elect receive, as a gracious gift, eternal life. Rom. G : 23, John 14 : 3.

2. At the return of Christ, His own, wdio have died, will arise first, and afterward those yet alive will be glorified together with them. 1 Thess. 4: 16-18, 1 Cor. 15: 53.

3. True believers, according to the promise, w^ill not come into judgment, i. e., will not be judged and condemned. But yet they will appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, in order that the works which they have wrought in God, even as the works of the wricked, may be made manifest, not for their own, but for the glorification of Christ, their Head, and that the gracious reward, which the righteous judge will give them, may be openly awarded, as will be done with the punishment merited by the wicked. 2 Cor. o : 10, Matt. 2d : 34, 2 Tim. 4 : 8.

4. The three parables. Matt. 25, do not treat of the judgment of the whole world, but of the separation between true and nominal believers. Christ will judge, i. e., will separate those who bear His name only outwardly from those who are truly ingrafted into Him and are anointed by His spirit, i. e., His elect.

a) In the parable of the ten virgins. Matt. 25 : 1-13, the difference brought out is between dead and living faith. They all had lamps, outer vessels, but only the five wise had oil, the Holy Ghost. While tarrying for the bridegroom, '' they all slept." But when the bridegroom came, only the wise who had received the oil, the anointing of the Holy Ghost, and had a livingfaith, were able to meet him and go in with him to the

marriage ; the foolish had only lamps without oil, faith without j)Ower.

b) In the parable of the talents, Matt. 25 : 14-30, the ground of separation is fidelity and unfaithfulness in life. Accordiuir to the measure of the gift of o^race and fidelity in \vork the gracious reward is bestowed ; those who despised grace, although they are counted among the " servants" of the Lord upon earth, are rejected.

c) In the parable of the sheep and the goats, Matt. 25 : 31-4(3, the separation is made on the basis of the sincerity of loving service, which receives even the humblest member of Christ into favor without reckoning upon reward. The selfish, who have no regard for the Lord in the person of His humble members, are rejected.

5. The elect or true believers also experience, if not in their person, yet in their work for the kingdom of God, something of judgment. They stand and build upon the one foundation, which is Christ Jesus ; but the day of Christ's return will manifest what will stand the test and what will not. 1 Cor. 3 : 10-15.

6. Olevianus. " The article of the second coming of Christ serves as a further confirmation of our faith. Since Christ is seated at the right hand of the Father in heaven, and exercises J lis royal prerogative and judgment, — first, to protect His own, while at the same time He keeps them under the cross and under manifold oppressions of the enemy, in order that the sin remaining in them may be subdued; secondly, to overcome and to punish the wicked, while at the same time He allows much to go unpunished in this life, to prove to them His patience and long-suffering. That we may not become weary under the sorrows and crosses under which Christ keeps us in this life for our own highest good, in order that sin may be destroyed within

us, and that we may not fear too much the forwardness and insolence of the wicked, it is His will that we should lift up our hearts and our heads, and await the blessed advent of Him who will not always suffer the wicked to do violence to His faithful children, but when they least expect it will take vengeance upon them and completely deliver His own and wipe away all tears from their eyes. Isa. 35 : 10, 1 Peter 3 : 13-15."

B. THE RENEWAL OF THE CREATION.

1. Through sin there has come not only over man, but over the entire material creation, curse and ruin. Gen. 3: 17.

2. As man, so also the creation, groans under the curse and longs for redemption. Rom. 8 : 19-22.

3. With the second coming of Christ the entire creation will also be renewed. 2 Peter 3 : 10, 13.

After all this we can see that the second coming of Christ is not a source of terror, but of comfort, to the elect. " He which testifieth these things saith, surelv I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come. Lord Jesus." Rev. 22 : 20.

OF GOD THE HOLY GHOST. Quesiion 53

What dost thou believe concerning the Holy Ghod ?

First, that he is true and co-eternal God with the Father and the Son ; secondly, that he is also given me to make me, by a true faith, a partaker of Christ and all his benefits, that he may comfort me, and abide with me forever.

I. The Being and the Person of the Holy Ghost.

1. Ursinus. " The Holy Ghost is the third person of the true and only God, proceeding from the Father and the Son, co-eternal in Being and attributes with

the Father and the Son, who is sent forth by both of them into the hearts of the elect, to sanctify them unto eternal life. 1 Cor. 2: 11, 12; 12: 11, John 3: 8.

2. The Holy Ghost is not a mere energy or attribute of God, still less a disposition in the individual man or the apprehension of divine things as it prevails at one time or another among Christians (the so-called " Spirit of the Church") ; but He is in the one and only divine Being a Person like the Father and the Son, and is called holy, because being of the divine essence and different from the human spirit, he is holy and maketh holy.===

3. The Holy Spirit is called the " Comforter," Paraclete, of the same import as Advocatus, ^^ e., the one summoned to help, the Helper. Christ speaks for us in heaven as our intercessor (intercession), the Holy Ghost speaks to us in our hearts as the comforter (consolation, i. e., comfort). The personality of the Holy Ghost appears clearly from the following :

a) He is spoken of in the Scriptures with the Father and the Son, and after the same manner. Matt. 28 : 19, 2 Cor. 13 : 14.

b) In the creation He is distinguished from the Father (who speaks) and from the vSou (the Word). Gen. 1:2. So also at the baptism of Christ, when the Holy Ghost appeared in visible form. Matt. 3 : 16.

c) The Holy Ghost is self-active ; He comes, Luke 1 : 35 ; He abides, John 14: 17; He testifies, John 15: 26 ; He reproves, John 16 : 8 ; He teaches and brings to remembrance, John 14 : 26 ; He prays for us, Rom. 8: 26, 1 Cor. 12 : 11, "But all these work-

■^' The two adjectives derived from the word " Geist" (Spirit), "geistig" psychical) and "gf'istlich" (spiritual) are frequently interchanged. " Geistig" has reference to everything that pertains to the human spirit, and "geistlich" to that which pertains to the Spirit of God and the divine sphere.

eth that one and the self-same spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will."

d) The Holy Ghost is the only true representative of Jesus Christ upon earth since His ascension. Christ promised Him as the " other" Comforter, i. e., the Helper in the place of Him who has been exalted to heaven and is to His people an invisible Savior. John 14 : 16 ; 16 : 13, 14. The Holy Ghost spake to the disciples and gave them commands. Acts 8 : 29 ; 10 : 19; 11: 12; 13: 2; 16: 7.

4. When the Holy Ghost is spoken of as the third Person in the one divine essence, there is no distinction of rank implied, but He is so called because He proceeds from the Father and the Son. He is of the same rank as the Father and the Son. John 16 : 13-15. The coming of the Father and the Son into the hearts of believers and abiding there (John 14 : 23) takes place through the Holy Ghost. The Divinity of the Holy Ghost, equal with the Father and the Son, is indicated by :

a) The divine names which are given Him. Acts 5 : 3, 4, 2 Peter 1 : 21, 2 Tim. 3 : 16.

h) The divine attributes which He possesses. 1 Cor. 2 : 10 ; 3 : 16, Isa. 40 : 13, Pom. 11 : 33, 34.

c) The divine works which He performs. Ps. 33 : 6, Job 33 : 4, Acts 20 : 28, 1 Cor. 12 : 11.

d) The divine honors which are ascribed to Him. Matt. 12 : 32, 1 Peter 4 : 14.

5. The Holy Ghost is co-eternal with the Father and the Son, but His relation to the world is different in both the economies of God, the old and the new, through which He prepares and brings salvation to His own. In the old covenant He was active chiefly as the Spirit of the revelation of the Will of God (in the law), and of the future redemption (in the prophecies and promises). By the law He wrought repentanee unto lite, and by tlie promises He sealed the Sonship of the believing covenant people. But the free manifestation of His power is announced as in the future. Isa. 32 : 15 ; 44 : 3, Ezek. 36 : 27, Joel 3 : 1. In this sense are to be understood the words recorded in John 7 : 39, " For the Holy Ghost was not given ; because that Jesus was not yet glorified." After the resurrection and ascension of Jesus, the Holy Ghost was " poured out" (manifested His full power) as the Spirit of sanctification in the new covenant. Acts 2 : 10, Joel 1 : 1, Acts 1 : 4, 5 ; 2 : 33.

0. The Holy Ghost is designated differently, according to His activities. He is called :

a) The Spirit of Sonship. Rom. 8:15.

b) A pledge and seal. Eph. 1 : 13, 14.

c) The Comforter, i. e., the Helper. John 14; 26.

d) The Spirit of Truth. John 14 : 17.

e) The Spirit of anointing. 1 John 2 : 20.

/) The Spirit of grace and of prayer. Zech. 12 : 10, Rom. 8 : 15, 26.

g) The Spirit of glory. 1 Peter 4 : 14.

Olevianus. " In the first part (of the articles of the creed) we are taught of God the Father and the Creation ; how out of pure love toward us, whom He adopted as His children. He created all things and upholds them. In the second part we are taught how the Son was sent into the world by the Father, how He became man, how He accomplished upon earth what was necessary for our salvation, and now appears for us in heaven until He shall return to judgment. But in order that the love of God the Father and the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ may be impressed upon our hearts, the Father gives us, through the Son, the Holy Ghost, who makes us partakers of the mercy of the Father and of the grace of Jesus Christ."

II. The Office and the Activities of the Holy Ghost.

1. After the Son of God had purcliased and prepared for us redemption through His blood, the Holy Ghost imparts the same to us and makes us jiartakers thereof, makes us whole and holy. His activity is the work of sanctification. 1 Cor. (3 : 11.

The Reformed Church prefers to speak of the impartation rather than of the appropriation of salvation, because sanctification is in reality not the work of man, but of God the Holy Ghost. Phil. 2 : 13. The exhortation of the Apostle (Heb. 12: 14) has reference to our exercise in sanctification, i. e., in godliness. 1 Tim. 4 : 7.

2. Just as Christ (Question 31), so also the Holy Ghost exercises a three-fold office: 1. Of reproof 2. Of instruction. 3. Of comfort. John 16 : 7-13.

a) The Holy Ghost reproves,- i. e., (literally) convinces the world, the natural man, of sin (" because they believe not on me," which since the revelation of God in Christ is the greatest sin), of righteousness (viz., that before God no other righteousness avails except that which Christ has purchased by His death and ascension to the glory of the Father), and of judgment (by which He judges the world, and from which only he will be freed who believes on Him who has overcome the prince of this world). By His reproofs the Holy Ghost works repentance and conversion.

^j He teaches believers, in that He opens to them the knowledge and understanding of divine truth, and furthers them therein from one stage to another. John 16: 12, 13.

c) He comforts them, in that He is sensibly near to them in place of the invisible Savior, who is exalted in heaven and supports them in all things. John 16 : 6, 7.

3. Ursinus. " The office of the Holv Ghost is that

of sanctificatiou, which is directly effected through Him by the Father and the Son, on account of which He is called the spirit of sanctificatiou. The most important parts of this office are : instruction, regeneration, union with Christ and God, guidance, comfort and perseverance."

4. The Holy Ghost works in part directly, — He can awaken the longing for redemption in the heart of a man {e. g., a heathen) who is far from the covenants of promise and without the knowledge of revelation {e.g., the jailer at Philippi with his question, " What must I do to be saved ?" ) ; in part mediately, — through the appointed means of grace, the Word and the sacraments. Rom. 10 : 17.

It is our privilege and duty to pray for the Holy Ghost. Luke 11 : 13. This also we cannot do of ourselves. It must be incited in the heart and sustained before the Father in heaven by Him. Rom. 8 : 26.

5. The relation of the Holy Ghost to the soul of man is an entirely personal one. It is necessary that He be " also given me." Only there where He has entered the heart can He fulfill His office. Gal. 4 : 6.

6. The Holy Ghost works in the heart " True Faith," whereby He makes us partakers of Christ, so that Christ becomes our own. Rom. 8 : 9.

7. By the Holy Ghost we are also made partakers in Christ of all His benefits, i. e., the forgiveness of sins, righteousness and eternal life. The steps by which this is ordinarily accomplished, and which we call the "order of salvation," are the following:

a) The call. We distinguish : 1. A general call, i. e., in so far as the Word is proclaimed to all men. Acts 17 : 30, Matt. 24 : 14 ; and 2. An energetic or effectual call, which proves itself in the case of the elect. Matt. 20 : 16, John 6 : 37, 44, 2 Thess. 2 : 13, 14, 2 Tim. 1 : 9, 10.

b) Illumination, by which the Holy Ghost works in the hearts of sinners the proper self-knowledge (of sin) and the proper knowledge of God (of salvation). Eph. 1: 17, 18.

c) Faith, ^. e., the power wrought by the Holy Ghost in the heart of the sinner, by which he lays hold of and appropriates the benefits of Christ offered him. 1 Cor. 12 : 3, 2 Thess. 3 : 2, Eph. 2 : 8.

d) Justification and sanctification. By the faith wrought by the Holy Ghost in accordance with God's grace, the sinner becomes a partaker of the forgiveness of sins, of righteousness and holiness before God, in which the beginning of the new life, regeneration, consists. Rom. 5:1; 1 : 17, 1 Peter 1 : 1, 2, Gal. 5 : 22, 24.

e) The sealing. The Holy Ghost comforts me and abides with me forever, i. e., He assures me of divine sonship, defends me against all the power of satan, and preserves me unto eternal salvation and glory, so that I am enabled to persevere in faith. Rom. 8 : 14, 16 ; 8 : 28, 30, Eph. 4 : 30.

8. The elect child of God is assured of his salvation by the Holy Ghost. When Olevianus was about to die, his colleague advanced toward him and said : " Dear Brother ! You are without doubt certain of your salvation in Christ, just as you have taught others?" The dying man laid his hand upon his heart and said : " Certissimus !" i. e., " most certain !" This was Olevianus' last word.

9. Olevianus. " To sum up all, the Holy Ghost is the only bond by which Christ dwells in us and we in Him, and as the branch is ingrafted into the vine and receives strength and life from the vine, so we are ingrafted into Christ through the Holy Ghost, that we may have true fellowship with Him and receive from Him eternal life."

How do we know that we have the Holy Ghost ?

From its effects. For as the wind is not seen by us, but its effects are felt, so also the Holy Ghost is known through the effects He produces, of which the most important are : First, believing prayer and childlike trust in our heavenly Father, Rom. 8 : 15, 2G ; secondly, hatred of sin and love for righteousness. The struggle against sin is a certain indication that the Holy Ghost dwells in man. For flesh and blood has not revealed to us that we ought to resist sin, because it is the nature of flesh and blood to continue in all sin. God works this disposition in us b7 the Holy Ghost, as St. Paul teaches. Rom. 7 : 5. Therefore the strua;- gle against the remaining sins still clinging to us, and which distress us, should not discourage us. It should rather serve as a source of comfort, and give us courage against the sins which bring sorrow after sorrow upon us, since this struggle in us is a certain indication that we have the Holy Ghost. If we have the Holy Ghost, we are members of Christ, whose perfect righteousness, which He purchased for us by His death, clothes and covers in the sight of God the remaining temptations and sins with which we struggle, so that God will not regard nor remember them forever. If it be that we continue in this spiritual contest in true faith, the victory will not fail us, as the Apostle teaches in Rom. 7 : 19, 20, 24, 25, etc., a comfort which he concludes with these words, " There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit," i. e., those who in their lives resist the sins of the flesh through the Spirit of God. Thirdly, further effects wrought by the Holy Ghost are confession of Christ and of His truth, that He may be honored ; also thanksgiving and hope of the help of the Lord. These are certain indications that the Spirit of God dwells in a man's heart. Rom, 10 : 9, 10, 1 Cor. 12 : 3, Eph. 5 : 18-21. Finally that

hope is a work of tlie Holy Ghost, from which each one may conclude that he is a child of God and of eternal salvation, and has also the child-like spirit and the pledge of salvation, may be inferred from the beautiful promises found in Ps. 2:12 and Rom. o : 1-5.