That the Son of God, from the beginning to the end of the world, gathers, defends, and preserves to himself, by his Spirit and word, out of the whole human race, a church chosen to everlasting life, agreeing in true faith ; and that I am, and for ever shall remain, a living member thereof.

It is to be observed that in the Creed it is not said "I believe on (or in) a holy universal Christian Church," as it is said I believe on (or in) God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost. " I believe one holy universal Christian Church," which means, I believe that there is a Christian Church, and of it I believe that it is holy and universal. The same meaning underlies the statement of the remaining articles in the third part of the Creed. "I believe in" involves the personal revelation of man to God, of person to person ; " I believe one," etc.=:" I believe that," etc., indicates that one is persuaded of a matter, i. e,, has confidence in the same. The Holy Ghost is the Person. In the Church is the special sphere of His activity. The communion of saints, forgiveness of sins, resurrection of the body and eternal life are the blessings which He communicates in the Church. I believe in the Holy Ghost, and in Him I am certain of the blessings which I expect.

I. Of the Name and Nature of the Christian Churcli.

1. " Church" signified originally the " House of the Lord," and refers to the place where a Christian congregation assembles ; in a wider sense it stands for the congregation itself and for a number of churches collectively. In the widest sense it stands for the whole body of Christian churches or the congregation of the Lord. (" Gemeine" is the earlier, " Gemeinde" the present form in the German language ; the former is still used for the body of churches, the latter for single congregations.)

2. The Christian Church derives its name from Christ, and is the " Church chosen to everlasting life." The election of God is the ground upon which membership rests, and eternal life is its end. A note in the official edition of the Heidelberg Catechism of 1619 says : " The word * chosen' indicates the difference between the outer, visible Church, in which the pious and the wicked are mingled together, and the invisible Church of Christ, to which belong, properly speaking, only those who are chosen, who truly believe and are godly in their lives." To such only the answer of the Catechism is applicable. Eph. 1 : 4, 10, John 10 : 27, 28.

3. The Christian Church is spoken of as " one," because its members, " agreeing in true faith" and in spirit, are so closely bound together that they constitute one body. Eph. 4 : 3-6. The unity of true faith in Christendom finds its expression in the Catholic or so-called Apostles' Creed, which is common to all Christian Churches.

4. The Church is called " holy," because it is sanctified by the blood and spirit of Christ, i. e., for the sake of Christ's merits it is looked upon by God as perfectly holy and righteous, and is so renewed by the Holy Ghost that its members strive diligently after a holv life and character, and thus God separates it from the\vorld for Himself. 1 Cor. 3 : 17, Ps. 93: 5.

5. The Church is called " Catholic," because it is gathered " out of the whole human race," and is not

limited by any people or country, neither by time, place nor condition, race nor age. Mark 16 : 15, Kev. 5 : 9, 1 Cor. 1 : 2, Gal. 3 : 28.

a) The discord which arose in the human family after the flood, through new and common sins (Gen. 11 : 1-9), the dispersion of the nations and the enmity which followed it, have been removed for all true children of God upon earth by the outpouring of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost. Acts 2 : 1-11, 17, 21.

3. The name " Catholic" is not to be understood as if the Christian religion was to be the so-called " world religion," and as if all individuals were to be embraced by it. Compare Luke 12 : 32, Matt. 7 : 14, Luke 18 : 8, Matt. 24: 14 (a witness unto all nations).

6. Other names of the Church than that of a " Church chosen," etc., are : The kingdom of God or of Christ,, the kingdom of heaven (compare the parables in Matt. 13), the body of Christ (Eph. 4 : 11, 12), God's house (1 Tim. 3: 15, 1 Pet. 2:5), Temple (1 Cor. 3: 17, 2Thess. 2: 4), city and Zion (Heb. 12: 22), fellow citizens and of the household of God (Eph. 2: 19, 22), the flock (Acts 20: 28, 1 Peter 5: 2, 3), the bride (John 3: 29, Eev. 21 : 9).

7. The Augsburg Confession, Art. 7. "The holy Christian Church is the congregation of saints (the assembly of all believers), in which the Gospel is purely preached, and the sacraments rightly administered according to the Gospel."

8. Calvin. The Church is the " assembly of saints and the mother of believers. Wherever the Word of God is purely preached and the sacraments are administered according to the institution of Christ, there is without any doubt a Church of God. The Catholic Church consists of a multitude of people, gathered out of all nations who are scattered abroad, and yet agree in their doctrinal views and are united by the bond of

a common worship. It embraces all separate Churches organized in city and village, according to man's need, so that each one rightly claims the name and character of a Church."

II. Christ Is the Only Head of the Church.

1. Christ is the only foundation upon which the Church stands. 1 Cor. 3:11. He is the only Lord to whom the Church belongs. Acts 20: 28. (Compare Rev. 5:9.) He is the only Head that governs the Church. Eph. 1 : 22, 23 ; 4 : 15, 1 Peter 2 : 9, Tit. 2: 13.

2. The activity of Christ in the Church and for it is two-fold :

a) He " gathers" and unites the chosen members of the Church in His communion. Jer. 31 : 3, Eph. 4 : 11, 12. To the gathering activity of Christ belongs especially the work of missions ; and even if the command of the Lord recorded in Matt. 28 : 19 referred primarily to the Apostles, yet the Church has entered upon its heritage, both by the preaching of the Gospel in the congregation and by its proclamation among Jews and Gentiles. Isa. 49 : 6. The Apostles were sent forth directly by the Lord (Matt. 28 and Acts 9) ; but the work which we call " missions" was undertaken under the influence of the Holy Ghost by the congregation, and from Antioch, where the Christian name first arose, were sent forth the first messengers to proclaim the Gospel among Jews and Gentiles. Acts 13.

b) He " defends and preserves" the Church against all the enmity of the Avorld and all the powers of darkness. Ps. 110: 2, Matt. 16: 18 (compare Acts 2: 14, 41), Matt. 28: 20.

3. The means by which Christ effects this work are ^' His Spirit and Word." The Spirit stands first, for by Him the Word is given, and without Him the Word

cannot accomplish anything. At Pentecost the outpouring of the Spirit preceded the proclamation of the Word.

a) By His Spirit. John G : 63, Acts 10 : 14.

b) By His Word. 2 Thess. 2 : 14, Rom. 15 : 18-20, Ps. 68 : 11.

4. This work is carried forward by Christ " from the beginning to the end of the world." The building and the gathering of the kingdom of Christ in the world began immediately after the entrance of sin into the world, with the first promise in Paradise, Gen. 3 : 15 ; is continued in the Old Covenant, 1 Peter 1 : 10, 11,. Heb. 11, especially verses 39 and 40 ; and is completed in the New Covenant, Acts 2 : 42. What is recorded in Isa. 59 : 21, is true of the kingdom of Christ, both in the old and in the new covenant. *'As for me, thisis my covenant with them, saitli the Lord ; my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and forever."

m. Of the Members of the Church.

1. The Church is one body (organism) ; Christ i& the Head, Christians are the members. Eph. 4 : 15, 16,

1 Cor. 12: 27.

2. There are different classes of members of the Church : dead, hypocritical, and true or " living."

a) Dead members are those who are indifferent to revealed truth, or who believe only intellectually, Jas.

2 : 17, Rev. 3 : 1.

b) Hypocritical members are those who carry the name of Christ in their mouths and know how to speak of " knowledge" and " experience," but have not broken earnestly with sin. Matt. 7 : 21, 2 Tim. 3 : 5. Calvin i

^'Among the members of the visible Church there are many hypocrites who have nothing of Christ, except the name and appearance. There are some who are ambitious, covetous, envious, slanderous, some of impure walk, who are endured for a time, either because they cannot yet be convicted by an ordinary judicial process, or because Church discipline has not always been administered with the necessary firmness."

c) The true or " living" members are the chosen ones, holy and beloved of God, who have true and living faith in their hearts and bring forth fruit in their lives. Gal. 5 : 6, Col. 3 : 12-14.

3. The visible Church is to be distinguished from the invisible.

A. The visible Church. To it belong all who have been baptized into the name of the Triune God, and who have not publicly renounced the Church or have not been excommunicated by it. The visible Church or " Christendom" is divided into various larger or smaller communions. The larger are known as " Churches," the smaller as " sects."

1. The following are Churches : The Roman Catholic, which has as its head the Pope, whose seat is in Rome. The Greek-Catholic, whose head is in part the patriarch of Constantinople and in part the Emperor of Russia. The Lutheran, which is named after Luther. The Reformed, which retained the name that was originally borne by all the Churches of the Reformation, and which in its fuller title is known as " The Reformed Church according to the Word of God." We neither call ourselves Zwinglians nor Calvinists. 1 Cor. 1 : 12, 13. " Reformed" means restored, renewed, viz., according to the Word of God ; and he only is truly Reformed who not only accepts the doctrines of the Reformed Church as the knowledge of the truth which is after godliness (Tit. 1:1), but who is also

renewed in the spirit of his mind, Eph. 4 : 23. The Lutheran and the Reformed Church stand upon the ground of the Gospel, and, therefore, bear also the common name " Evangelical," in the Union (in Germany) as well as outside of it. They are to maintain peace with each other after the manner of Abraham's word to Lot, " Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen ; for we be brethren." Gen. 13 : 8. In common they are to defend the honor of their King Jesus. " We as those of one race stand also for one man" (Zinsendorf). In common they are to oppose the enemies of the Gospel. " Divided on the march, united in attack" (Moltke), but not upon each other. They are also called " Protestants," which name they received at the Diet of Speyer in the year 1529, when they, the Lutheran and the Reformed states of the German kingdom, in common protested, i. e., entered a protest against the violence done to the Gospel by the worldly power. True Protestants, are, therefore, those who protest in behalf of, but not a^rainst, the Gospel. The Protestants justly claim for themselves that they restored the Apostolic Church, and the question of the Catholic opponent, " Where, then, was your Church before the Reformation ?" may be dispatched with comfort by a counter question, " Where was your face this morning before yon had washed yourself?" The Reformed Church numbers about sixty million members.

2. The above named Churches also stand for confessions, differentiated by their doctrines and institutions. 1 Cor. 3 : 12. The marks of the true Church are: 1. That the pure and unadulterated Word of God be preached. 2. That the Sacraments be rightly administered according to the institution of the Lord, and 3. That Christian discipline (Church discipline) be rightly

exercised. Matt. 28 : 19, " Go ye therefore, and teach (1) all nations, baptizing (2) them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ; teaching them to observe (3) all things whatsoever I have commanded you."

3. The chief confessions of the Reformed Church are: The Heidelberg Catechism (1563), the Catechism of Geneva (Calvin's, lo41). The Scotch (1560), The Galilean (1561), The Belgic (1562), The ^Inglican (1562), the Second Helvetic (1566), and the Canons of Dort (1619).

4. Besides the " Churches" there are a number of so-called sects (communions which have separated from the Churches), of which the Methodists and Baptists are the most numerous, both of which sprung from the Reformed Church.

B. The invisible Church is included in the visible. To it belong all true and living members (see above 2, c), those who are still sojourning on earth, as well as those who are already at home with the Lord. Gal. 4 : 26, Rev. 21 : 2.

4. There is a distinction made between the Church militant and the Church triumphant. The Church militant is the one which in this world fights against the flesh, the world and the devil under the banner of Christ. Eph. 6: 10-12. The Church triumphant is the one which already rejoices in heaven with the holy angels, and which will celebrate a complete triumph after the resurrection. Rev. 7 : 9-17.

5. A three-fold distinction may also be made after the type of the temple in the Old Testament : a) In the outer court are those who are still unconverted, b) in the holy place, the regenerate, who still walk by

'=■ The Anglican or Episcopal Church of England belongs to the Reformed Churches so far as its confession is concerned.

faith, and c) in the holy of holies, the perfect, who in heaven do behold the face of God.

6. The principal question is : " What is your relation to the church and what comfort do you derive from the fact that there is a church chosen unto everlasting life ?" I believe " that I am, and forever shall remain, a living member thereof." That I am and forever shall remain a living member thereof, does not rest upon my will and strength, but upon the free grace, and the faitht'uhiess of God in Christ Jesus. Eph. 2 : 8-10, 20-22, 1 Cor. 1 : 8, 9, John 10 : 28, Ps. 23, G.

7. That one is of the elect of God and a living member of the church is evidenced : By his faith (Mark 16 ; 16) ; by a holy life (2 Tim. 2 : 19) ; and by the inward testimony of the Holy Ghost (Rom. 8 : 16). Living members of the church also must struggle all their life-time upon earth against sin, and may fall into grievous errors (as did David and Peter) ; but the Lord always awakens them again to repentance and strengthens their faith that they may persevere. Luke 22 : 32, Matt. 24 : 24.

8. Of the perseverance of the saints, i. e., of believers. Question 53 closes with the statement in reference to the Holy Ghost that He is given me that He " may abide with me forever." Question 54 closes with this statement with reference to the church : " that I am, and forever shall remain a living member thereof." In the former statement is expressed the one side of the doctrine of the perseverance of believers, viz., the preservation by the Holy Ghost, who never forsakes entirely or forever the elect, and in the second statement the other side is brought out, viz., the consequent confirmation and assurance of salvation. The doctrine of the Reformed Church with reference to election (thb term Election is found in Rom. 11 : 5) is not

218 THE HEIDELBERG CATECHIHiM.

treated in a separate question either in the Jleidelberg Catechism or in the Catechism of Geneva (Calvin's), since both Catecliisms were prepared primarily as hand-books of instruction for youths, and their authors accommodated themselves to this end through a wise consideration of the Apostle's distinction of milk for children and strong meat for them that are of full age. Heb. 5 : 13, 14. But that election is a fundamental doctrine of the Heidelberg Catechism cannot be doubted, as a large number of questions (1, 8, 20, 26, 28, 52, 53, 54 and 65) could otherwise not be understood at all in the sense of the authors, as given in their own writings. Ursinus, in his commentary on the catechism, treats this doctrine very thoroughly in connection with Question 54, which defines the " chosen" Church, and in this the expounders of the catechism have followed him for three hundred years. Olevianus with his last word, " certissimus," avowed the same doctrine in the face of death.

With reference to the doctrine of election [i. e., God's free choice in the election and the sovereignty of grace) the Reformers were agreed with the exception, of Lasco and of Melancthon in his later years. Their brotherly relation to Calvin, however, was not disturbed thereby, and this should serve as an example to us. God hath called us to peace. 1 Cor. 7 : 15.