That God, for the sake of Christ's satisfaction, will no more remember my sins, neither my corrupt nature, against which I have to struggle all my life long, but will graciously impute to me the righteousness of Christ, that I may never be condemned before the tribunal of God.

The following three articles (concerning the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life

everlasting) treat of the benefits of Christ which we receive as living members of the Church.

I. The Ground of Forgiveness.

1. No person can forgive his own or another person's sins. Neither can the Church and its servants. They can only announce to those who believe, and assure them of the forgiveness of their sins. God alone can forgive sins. In this the scribes (Mark 2:7) were correct; but the Son of man, as the Son of God, has also power to forgive sins. Mark 2 : 10, Isa. 43 : 25.

2. All sins, even those against men, are committed against God, because they are transgressions of His law. Ps. 51 : 4.

3. The ground upon which God forgives sins is the " satisfaction of Christ." To believers under the old covenant it was the approaching, to believers under the new covenant it is the accomplished sacrifice of Christ upon the cross that atones for their sins. Rom. 3 : 25, 1 Peter 2 : 24, Eph. 1 : 7.

II. The Measure of Forgiveness.

1. " All sins," great and small, without exception, are remitted to believers. The sin against the Holy Ghost (Matt. 12 : 31) can not be committed by true believers, the elect, because the Holy Ghost lives and governs in them. 1 John 1 : 7, Rom. 8 : 1, Ps. 103.

2. God forgives believers not merely all actual sins, but also " the corrupt nature, against which I have to struggle all my life long." The " corrupt nature" is the evil desire which still clings even to believers, as long as they live in this mortal body, and disinclines them (Heb. 12: 1) to fulfill the will of God in all respects. This is also sinful. Paul does not speak of his former condition, but of his then present regenerated state, when he laments, Rom. 7 : 23-25 : " But I see another law in my members, warring against the

law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O, wretched man that I am ! Who shall deliver me from the body of this death ? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord." Gal. 5: 17, Ps. 103: 3.

III. The Nature of Forgiveness.

1. To forgive sins does not mean to undo a sinful deed, which is not possible. God forgives sins in the sense that He "no more (in time and eternity) remembers" them, i. e., He will not visit or punish them. Jer. 31 : 34, Isa. 38 : 17, Micha 7 : 19.

2. God not only forgives my sins, but " He will graciously impute to me the righteousness of Christ." When by His act of forgiveness He removes from us the filthy garments of siu, we would stand before Him in nakedness and shame. He, therefore, graciously covers our nakedness with the garment of Christ's righteousness. R.ora. 3 : 24, Isa. 61 : 10.

3. When God forgives sins they are forever " forgiven and forgotten." The temporal and bodily consequences of sin God either removes or allows to remain. In the latter case they are not to be looked upon as punishments for sin, but as evils which are intended to humble and to warn us.

IV. The Benefits of Forgiveness.

1. Because God will not only not remember my sins anymore, but will impute to me the righteousness of Christ, it follows that the forgiveness is complete and secures this benefit " that I may never be condemned before the tribunal of God." The reference here is to the final judgment which will bring condemnation upon the sinner on account of his sins. But sin having been fully forgiven, there is no more sin at hand to be condemned in the believer at the day of judgment. John 5 : 24, Rom. 8 : 33, 34.

2. To " believe " the forgiveness of sins means not merely to have a knowledge of all that is involved therein, but also to seek earnestly for forgiveness and to accept it with a repentant and believing heart. Ps.

01 : 1 ; 82 : 5.