I. The Condition After Death.

1. Man consists of body and soul which in life are most intimately united with each other. Death is the separation of soul and bodv. Gen. 35 : 18, 1 Kings 19: 4.

2. The soul, the divine breath oF life, is immortal. It continues, therefore, to exist even after the separation from the body. But the body, when with the departure of the soul it becomes lifeless, decays and again returns to dust, from which it was taken at creation. Gen. 2 : 7, Eccles. 12 : 7, Matt. 10 : 28.

3. That the soul remains alive after death appears from the fact that the body only is spoken of as jjarticipating in the resurrection.

4. The separation of body and soul after death is really an incomplete state, because the two belong together. 2 Cor. 5 : 4. But the disembodied state of the soul of the child of God after death is rendered complete by its being " taken up to Christ, its head," and thereby becoming free from all the weakness, want and suffering which are connected with life in " the body of this deatli," and participating in the salvation of Christ. Of His glory it will partake only at the resurrection of tiie body. Rev. 14 : 13, Phil. 1 : 23,

2 Cor. 5:8.

5. " Immediately," i. e., as soon as death takes place. There is no intermediate state, as is taught by the Greek Church, or purgatory, as the Roman Church teaches. According to' the" latter, the souls eyen of belieyers are to be purified in some such j)lace from many sins, and are to do penance for many things which they neglected to do. By indulgences, which the Hying also can secure for the\lead, the time in purgatory for the latter is to be shortened. Of such a purgatory scripture knows nothing. Luke 23 : 48. Neither do belieyers stand in need of such a purification after death, since they ai-e in the enjoyment of complete forgiyeness. 1 John 1 : 7.

6. A first separation between those who are justified by the blood of Christ, and the wicked, takes place at death. Luke 10 : 22, 23, Acts 1 : 25, Heb. 9 : 27.

For the dying prayers may be offered, but not for the dead.

II. The Resurrection of the Body at the End of the World.

1. An " immortality of the soul" is accepted eyen by most heathen of all ages. But the resurrection of the body is a truth reyealed by God to His people, which was already believed by the patriarchs under the old coyenant, and was clearly set forth by Christ. Ps. 16 : 9, John 11 : 25. That the resurrection of the dead was accepted under the old covenant, according to the stage of revelation which they enjoyed, Christ declared when He said to the Sadducees, Matt. 22 : 29, '' Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the ])ower of God," and, verses 31-33, " have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God?"

2. "This my body," i. e., this body in which I now dwell and which will return to dust ; not another, foreign to me. Job 19 : 25, 27, 1 Cor. 15 : 54.

3. All objections of the natural reason against the

22fi THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

resurrection of the tlesli, i. e., of the body, ai-e answered by tlie words of Christ to the Saddueees, who denied the resurrection of the dead. Matt. l32 : 29. The resurrection is no more a natural process, than was the creation of man, but like it, one of the miracles of divine omnipotence. Besides, this death does not affect a complete annihilation of the body, but only a dissolution of its parts, which may be mingled with other matter, but do not escape God's hand, i. e., do not |)ass beyond the sphere of His almighty and omnipresent power. The same almighty power which created the first man out of the dust of the earth, is also able to restore the decomposed human body. Luke 1 : 37.

4. Examples from nature: 1. The butterfly, whose body is the same as that which the caterpillar bore, from which it sprung, and yet is different ; 2. The seed of corn, which perishes in the earth, and yet from whose material springs up the stalk, which, in contrast with the unsightly grain, is both beautiful and noble. From this is drawn the illustration recorded in 1 Cor. 15 : 42-44. (Verses 3G, 37 of the grain of wheat.)

5. The body is " raised." This biblical expression also points to the fact that the body in its material particles is yet at hand, and that no foreign body is substituted in the resurrection, just as a man awakes from sleep with the same body with which he went to sleep. The Scriptures also speak of those who have died in Christ as asleep. 1 Thess. 4 : 13, 14. To be " raised " means to arise, not to begin anew.

6. The resurrection is the work of the Triune God. Of the Father and of the Holy Ghost. Rom. 8: 11. In a special sense, however, it is the work of the Son, because the resurrection of the body constitutes the completion of His redemptive work. John 6 : 39. My body is therefore raised " by the power of Christ."

7. The resurrection by the power of Christ is actually

pledged to us : a) By Christ's own resurrection from the dead ; b) By His raising the dead — the daughter of Jairus (Matt. 9), the youth at Nain (Luke 7), Lazarus at Bethany (John 11).

8. My restored body " shall be reunited with my soul," and thereby the complete man is restored for the enjoyment of salvation and glory. Ezek. 37 : 5, 6. This prophecy is primarily a picture of the restoration of captive and dispersed Israel. It may also be regarded as a picture of the human body held captive in death and dissolved as to its elements. In reality the latter is the presupposition of the vision of the prophet.

9. The resurrection body will be " made like unto the glorious body of Christ," i. e., the body with which Christ arose and ascended into heaven. It was the same body which was laid into the grave and which the disciples again recognized, but it was transfigured, glorified. Phil. 3 : 21, 1 Cor. 15 : 42-44, 49.

10. The glorified body will be a spiritual body (1 Cor, 15 : 44-46), and therefore : a) Without desires, Matt. 22 : 30; b) Without wants, such as food, drink and sleep, 1 Cor. 6: 13; c) Without limitations, as Jesus appeared with His resurrection body through closed doors among the disciples, John 20 : 19, 26; d) White and glistering. Matt. 17 : 2, the glorified form of Jesus ; e) fitted to behold the presence of God, 1 Cor, 13 : 12, 1 John 3 : 2 ; /) incorruptible, i. e., never aging and wasting away, immortal, 1 Cor. 15 : 53, Luke 20 : 36.

11. The order in which the resurrection will take place is (1 Cor, 15: 23-26) as follows : 1. The children of God which are asleep are raised, and they who are yet alive are changed, 2. After that the end, when Christ will also raise the wicked, whose bodily resurrection is only a transition to eternal death, i. e., to condemnation and to anguish of body and soul, John 5 :

28, 29, 1 Cor. 15: ol, 1 Thess. 4: 10, 17, Kev. 20: 4-6, 12.

12. Tlie ground upon which we believe in the resurrection of the just and of the unjust is:

1. The omnipotence of God, Kev. 21 : o ; 2. The righteousness of God, Acts 17 : ol ; 3. The trutlifuluess of God, Dan. 12 : 2.

13. The aim and purpose of tlie resurrection of the body is the honor and glory of God. Prov. 16:4, 1 Cor. 15 : 28.

14. What comfort dost thou then derive from the resurrection of the body? That in this life I endure all things patiently both in body and soul and long for the redemption of my body. Rom. 8 : 18, 23.

15. When the pious queen consort of the great Elector Frederick William of Brandenburg, Louisa Henrietta (both ornaments of the Reformed Church) was placed in deejDest sorrow through the death of her firstborn son, the hereditary prince (1649), she composed the noblest resurrection hymn contained in the treasury of song of the entire Evangelical church :

Jesus, my Redeemer, lives, And His life I soon shall see ; Bright the hope this promise gives ; Where He is, 1 too shall be. Shall I fear Him ? Can the head Rise and leave the members dead ?

Close to Him my soul is bound, In the bonds of hope enclasped ; Faith's strong hand this hold hath found, And the Rock hath firmly grasped. Death shall ne'er my soul remove From her refuge in Thy love.

I shall see Him with these eyes, Him whom I shall surely know, Not another shall I rise ; With His love my heart shall glow ; Only there shall disappear Weakness in and round me here.

Ye who suffer, sigh and moan, Fresh and glorious there shall reign ; Earthly here the seed is sown, Heavenly it shall rise again ; Natural here the death we die, Spiritual our life on high.

Body, be thou of good cheer, In thy Saviour's care rejoice ; Give not place to gloom and fear, Dead, thou yet shalt know His voice. When the final trump is heard, And the deaf, cold grave is stirred.

Laugh to scorn then death and hell, Fear no more the gloomy grave ; Caught into the air to dwell With the Lord who comes to save, AVe shall trample on our foes, Mortal weakness, fear and woes.

Only see ye that your heart Rise betimes from earthly lust ; Would ye there with Him have part, Here obey your Lord and trust. Fix your hearts above the skies, Whither ye yourselves would rise.