Having explained the articles of the creed, with Question 59, the thought of Question 22 is again taken up. Question 21 explains the nature of true faith. Question 22 sets forth the contents or object of that faith, of which we have a full exposition in Questions 25-58. And now Questions 59 and 60 treat of the benefit, of the fruit or effect of true faith.

I. Justification Before God.

1. " Before God," not before one's self; for no one can be his own judge. Neither before men who liave no power to pass judgment either unto salvation or condemnation. God alone is the true judge since He alone is righteous, holy and omniscient. James 4 : 12.

2. " In Christ " only then would we be righteous in and of ourselves if we had fulfilled the law of God perfectly in our entire life. 1 John 3 : 7, " He that doeth righteousness, i. e., fulfills all the demands of the law, is righteous." Such is not our condition. But if we are ingrafted into Christ by faith and have appropriated His benefits, especially redemption through His blood, by faith, then His righteousness is also our righteousness. Phil. 3 : 9.

3. To be "righteous" before God or to be justified does not mean that my sinful life and nature have been entirely taken away from me, and that I am now wholly pure and sinless in all my thoughts, words and acts, but that I who am a sinner, am fully freed and absolved by God the judge from all sin and its consequences. Rom. 4: 8; 8: 37.

XL The Inheritance of Eternal Life.

1. When a criminal who has been sentenced to death is pardoned, his right to life is restored to him. Thus there flows from the first benefit of faith, which is justification, a second, that I, a pardoned sinner, am reinstated into the right to life which was lost through sin and am become " an heir of eternal life."

2. "In Christ." This relation holds with reference to the second benefit of faith as well as the first. Being ingrafted into Christ by faith, I become a partaker of His life as well as of His righteousness. John 6 : 40, Rom. 8 : 17, Tit. 3 : 7.