Only by a true faith in Jesus Christ ; so that, though my conscience accuse me that I have grossly transgressed all the commands of God, and kept none of them, and am still inclined to all evil; notwithstanding God, without any merit of mine, but only of mere grace, grants and imputes to me the perfect satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ ; even so, as if I never had had, nor committed any sin ; yea, as if I had fully accomplished all that obedience which Christ hath accomplished for me ; inasmuch as I embrace such benefit with a believing heart.

I. The Manner of Justification.

Justification is a judicial act of God in relation to the believing and repentant sinner. (" Only by a true faith.") It may be illustrated by the method of procedure in an action at court.

1. The judge is God the Father. Ps. 50: 6, Isa. 1 : 18.

2. The accused is the sinner. " Thou art the man !" 2 Sam. 12 : 7.

3. The accuser is our own " conscience" (Rom. 2 : 15, " their thoughts the meanwhile accusing") when it is awakened by the law. John 5 : 45.

4. The accusation is this : *' that I have grossly transgressed all the commands of God, and kept none of them, and am still inclined to all evil." Rom. 3 : 23, James 2 : 10.

" Still inclined to all evil " has reference to the old man, i. e., the corrupt, sinful kind and nature which clings to all men, even the regenerate, from Adam. Rom. 7 : 14, 21-23.

(In this passage " law " is equivalent to impulse,

incitement ; the one tends toward the good, in virtue of

the inward, i. e., the new, regenerate man or the renewed

mind ; the other tends toward evil, by reason of sin, i. e.,

the sinful nature of the old man, which is still active even in the regenerate in this life.)

5. The witnesses which rise up against sin are the broken commandments of God and our own thoughts, words and deeds.

6. At the trial the accused sinner can neither justify nor excuse himself Job 9 : 3. He can only say with the publican : " God be merciful to me a sinner." Luke 18: 13.

7. According to the righteous judgment of God it would be necessary to condemn the sinner to eternal death ; for " the soul that sinneth, it shall die." Ezek. 18 : 20. But the surety appears, Christ the Son of God, with His " perfect satisfaction, righteousness and holiness."

(A " surety " is one who goes security for the debt of another, so that when the other cannot pay the debt he pays it.)

" The satisfaction of Christ " is His entire redemptive work by which He has paid as our surety the debt we owe and has satisfied the demands of God the Father, in that He has kept the law of God perfectly and has borne the punishment for our transgressions, and thereby made full satisfaction. Rom. 5 : 19, 2 Cor. 5: 14.

His " righteousness and holiness " were manifested in that, having entered into our sinful flesh, He yet preserved Himself unspotted from sin and fulfilled all righteousness. John 8 : 46, 1 Peter 2 : 22-24, Phil. 2 : 8, John 17 : 19.

The satisfaction of Christ is " perfect " because it is sufficient for the sins of the whole world and it is shared alike by all chosen believers. Heb. 10 : 14.

8. The sentence. Our sinfulness and the vastnessof our debt excludes all merit on our part and at the same time also every ground why God should receive us and declare us innocent in the judgment. Such a declaration can only be secured " without any merit of mine, but only of mere grace," and in consideration of our surety who takes our place, points to His merit and appeals to the mercy of the Father. Rom. 3 : 24. Thus the satisfaction of Christ is granted and imputed to me by God (my bond is cancelled and its payment put to my account and placed to my credit), and indeed so perfectly that God now looks upon me " as if I never had had, nor committed any sin ; yea, as if I had fully accomplished all that obedience which Christ hath accomplished for me." 2 Cor. 5: 19, 21, Rom. 5: 20, Isa. 1 : 18.

9. The one who announces the sentence and makes it effectual is God the Holy Ghost, who by the word assures the heart of the pardoned sinner of his justification and seals it by His testimony that God has become our Father instead of being our Judge, and that we condemned sinners have become the children of God. Rom. 8 : 15, 16.

11. To Whom Justification is Granted.

1. God grants the satisfaction of Christ to us of mere grace. We receive it and appro]3riate it by faith. Justification is not general, passing upon all sinners, but only upon those who believe and repent. Justification is accomplished in me only when " I embrace such benefit with a believing heart." Rom. 10 : 10 ; 3 : 26, 28.

2. Faith appropriates the justification granted to it in the following manner :

a) It acknowledges the necessity and completeness of the satisfaction of Christ. Acts 4 : 12, Heb. 7 : 25.

b) It hungers and thirsts after righteousness which avails before God. Matt. 5 : 6.

c) It takes refuge in the satisfaction of Christ. Isa. 53 : 4, 5.

d) It rejoices and glories in justification. Rom. 8: 81-34.