The Scriptures uowhere teach that we are justified on account of our faitli, but by or through faith, and justification by faith excludes all ground for boasting and all idea of merit. If the " worthiness " of our faith were the cause of our justification, we would have ground for boasting, at least of the dignity or excellence of our faith. Faith itself, however, is a free gift of God's grace, and, therefore, can merit nothing for us. Eph. 2 : 8, 9. Therefore it is not of faith in the sense of a good work on the part of believers, but in the sense of an instrument whereby they lay hold of Christ's merits and appropriate them.

2. A gold ring in which is set a precious stone derives its value not from the gold, but from the jewel which it contains. In the same way our faith and confidence in Christ's merits do not make us righteous on account of their worthiness as a good work, but on account of the merits of Christ which it embraces as the most precious gem.

3. The satisfaction of Christ is complete. It therefore needs nothing to supplement it and excludes such an idea. Therefore it " only " is our righteousness. 1 Cor. 1 : 30, 31.

4. Faith is necessary as a means in order that we may appropriate the righteousness of Christ, since it acknowledges and agrees that only the satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ is our righteousness before God. In so far it is necessary, because it is

the only means ordained by God. But in this respect it is only like the hand with which a beggar receives apiece of bread that is offered to him. "The beggar's hunger is not satisfied by the hand, but by the bread which he takes and puts into his mouth. Rom. 3 : 22, Heb. 11: 7. It is not to be understood that Abraham's faith was looked upon as something meritorious, for the sake of which he was accounted righteous. Such a conception is excluded by the preceding verse (2) and the following (4). Rom. 3 : 28.

5. Examples. The wedding garment. Matt. 22 : 1113. The beggars who are invited accept the garment that is given to them and put it on. The guest who rejects it is cast out, because without this garment no one is permitted to take part in the feast. The lost son. Luke 15 : 11-32. That the sou in his misery longs for his father's house and returns home as he is, is not credited to him by his father as a merit, but he receives him out of mere grace.