From the Holy Ghost, who works faith in our hearts by the preaching of the Gospel, and confirms it by the use of the sacraments.

The Holy Ghost is the author of ftiith in the heart and uses as its means for this purpose, 1. The Word of God, and 2. The Holy Sacraments. The doctrine of the Sacraments is, therefore, closely joined to the third part of the Apostles' Creed. Since faith is produced by the Word and confirmed by the Sacraments, and these are also the means through which the Holy Ghost assures and seals His grace to us, they are called the means of grace. In them we have both the communication (the Holy Scriptures) and the seal (the Holy Sacraments) of the grace of God in Christ Jesus.

I. The Operation of the Holy Ghost Through the Word.

1. By the Gospel is to be understood the main contents of the entire Word of God (the canonical Scriptures). Compare Question 19.

2. God can also, when it is His desire, produce faith in an extraordinary manner without the Word, as, e. g., in the case of the wise men from the East. Matt. 2 : 2. But according to the divine order the ordinary means of awakening faith is the preaching of the Word. 1 Cor. 1: 21, Bom. 10: 17.

3. The trustworthiness of the Holy Scriptures as the Word of God rests upon the following grounds :

a) It contains the revelation of the greatest mysteries (the Being of God, the Incarnation of the Son of God and our Bedemption, Eternal Salvation, etc.), and its

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 24^

authors were for the most part unlearned men. Ps. 87 : 3, Acts 4 : 13.

b) The harmony of its contents, although the several books were composed by different men and at different times.

c) The fulfillment of its prophecies.

d) The miracles performed by the holy men who were its authors.

e) The effects of the Holy Scriptures upon individual souls, as well as in the general extension of the kingdom of God.

/) But above all, the testimony of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of believers. Rom. 1 : 16.

4. The Word of God is used wdien it is heard and read. To its right use belong both tlie hearing and the reading of it.

a) Not out of curiositv, but from a desire for salvation. 1 Peter 2:2.

b) With prayer for the illumination of the Holy Ghost. Ps. 119: 18.

c) With reverence for Almighty God, who speaks ta us through it. Ex. 3 : 5.

d) By attentive search into the meaning of the Word. Acts 17 : 11.

e) Diligently and perseveringly. Col. 3 : 16.

/) That it be kept and pondered also after the hearing and reading of it. Luke 2 : 19 ; 11 : 28.

g) By applying it to one's own heart and life. Ps. 119: 105, James 1: 22-24.

5. As by the rays of the same sun wax is softened and clay is hardened, so the Word of God has a different effect upon the elect and the lost. Acts 2 : 37 ; 7 : 54, 1 Cor. 1 : 18, Acts 13 : 48, Mark 4 : 11, 12.

6. The Holy Ghost works faith in the elect, not in a magical or forcible manner, but a) by illuminating our minds and convincing us of the divine truth concerning

our misery and our salvation in Christ only, and b) by inclining our wills and prevailing upon us to put confidence in it. Heb. 4: 12, Jer. 23: 29, John 6: 37, 44, Acts 16 : 14.

II. The Operation of the Holy Ghost Through the Sacraments.

1. Sacrament is not a Scriptural expression. The word is derived from the Latin, and among the Romans it meant the military oath which the soldiers took in allegiance to the Emperor. In the old Latin translations of the Bible it was used to render the Greek word " mysterium," i. e., a mystery, or something that is consecrated. Mysterium signified among the Greeks also, either something secret or the mysterious sign of a secret, or something that had a mysterious signification which was known only to the initiated.

2. The Holy Ghost makes use of both Word and Sacraments, the former to work faith in our hearts, the latter to confirm faith in our hearts, i. e., to strengthen and to establish it ; the former by hearing, the latter by seeing and feeling. The Church father Augustine calls the Sacrament " the visible Word." Calvin says : " It is certain that the Sacraments have no other purpose than to offer and to represent Christ to us and in Him the treasures of heavenly grace."

Rom. 4 : 11, " He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being nncircumcised. . ." Circumcision was a confirmation of his faith by which he had already become a partaker of righteousness. Acts 8 : 36-38, " and the eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized ? And Philip said, if thou believest with all thine heart, thou may est. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they Avent down both into the water, both Philip and the

eunuch ; and he baptized him." Philip did nat, therefore, baptize the eunuch that he might be saved through baptism, but that this should be to him a confirmation of the faith by which he had already embraced and appropriated the salvation which had been promised for Christ's sake.