The sacraments are holy visible si^ns aud seals, appointed of God for this end, that by the use thereof he may the more fully declare and seal to us the promise of the gospel, viz., that he grants us freely the remission of sin, and life eternal, for the sake nf that one sacrifice of Christ, accomplished on the cross.

I. What Belongs to tlie Sacrament.

1. In this connection we are not only to consider the sacraments of the new, but also those of the old covenant, since in the New Testament reference is made to them. Kom. 4: 11, 1 Cor. 5: 7.

2. To a sacrament belong, a) the visible, material sign and seal, h) the institution by God, or by Christ, c) the invisible heavenly grace which the signs and seals signify and assure to us.

3. The visible sign must be related to the invisible grace to the extent that there be a similarity between the two. Circumcision related to the destiny of the race descended from Abraham as a covenant people dedicated unto the Lord (Gen. 17 : 1-11) ; the passover indicated God's forbearance which the blood of the lamb upon the doorposts at their departure from Egypt made manifest (Ex. 12 : 13), and the social community which had arisen through God's leadership and which found expression in the common meal. Ex. 12 : 4, 6. Water as the ordinary means of purification points in baptism to the purification from sin (Acts 22 : 16) ; the breaking of the bread and the pouring out of the wine intothe cup, to the violent death of. Christ upon tiie cross and to the shedding of His blood. 1 Cor. 11 : 24, Matt. 20 : 28. The Church fathers call the sacrament " the visible sign of invisible grace."

4. *' Visible signs and seals." They represent and confirm to the eye in a sensible and perceptible way what we perceive by the ear, through the word, the promise of the Gospel.

5. They are called " holy," a) because they are given to us by the holy God and represent the most holy mysteries of faith ; b) because they are destined for holy purposes and must be used with holy reverence. That is holy which is set apart from its ordinary use and is devoted to the service of God. Ex. 29 : 33.

6. "Appointed of God." For no one has power to appoint signs and seals for the promises of God but He Himself (God or Christ), who has given these promises. Ps. Ill : 4, Acts 7 : 8, Ex. 12 : 27, Matt. 28 : 18, 19, 1 Cor. 11 : 23.

7. The invisible, heavenly grace of the sacraments is " remission of sin and life eternal " which God " grants us freely, for the sake of that one sacrifice of Christ, accomplished on the cross."

II. The Purpose of the Sacraments.

1. The purpose of the sacraments is the confirmation (establishing) of faith through the memorial of Christ's sacrifice accomplished on the cross and the assurance of the fruit of this sacrifice, the forgiveness of sins and eternal life, through faith. The Holy Ghost works, therefore, through the sacraments only in those who believe. Faith does not constitute the sacrament, but belongs to it, and it is strengthened by the same. Mark 16 : 16, Ex. 12: 43.

2. The sacraments as signs are to make more comprehensible to us and as seals are to confirm, i. e.,

strengthen the promise of the Gospel, viz., that God, for the sake of the one sacrifice of Christ accomplished on the cross, freely grants to us forgiveness of sins and eternal life. They are therefore not mere signs, but at the same time seals and pledges. Gen. 17 : 11, Rom 4 : 11, Ex. 13 : 9, 1 Cor. 11 : 24, 25. As Christ connected the institution of the Lord's Supper with the last Passover, He manifestly had in mind when He used the words " memorial," " remembrance," the word of the unleavened bread.

3. Sacraments are signs of the covenant and there is attached to them a reciprocal obligation. God obligates Himself in them to forgive us our sins and to grant us eternal life ; we in return obligate ourselves to believe in Christ and to walk in the new life. 1 John 1 : 7, 2 Tim. 2 : 19.

4. The sacraments are not offerings.

In like manner they are not "ecclesiastical acts," but " divine acts," for the one who acts is alone the Holy Ghost, in comparison with which the outer service in the use of the sacraments recedes as something of secondary importance.

5. The sacraments fulfill their purpose only " by the use thereof" (in that they are used) ; they have accordingly as signs and seals significance only for and during their use.

The administration of the sacraments belongs only to the ordai^ied ministers of the Word, upon whose personal worthiness or unworthiness the efficacy of the sacraments is not dependent. 1 Cor. 4 : 1, 4. A case of necessity which might demand a departure from this order does not occur. For, as Augustine says, not the privation, but contempt for the sacraments condemns. Luke 7 : 30. The Reformed Church, therefore, rejects also so-called private or hasty baptism through midwives or other pei'sons ; also in principle private communioii and grants such only when with the sick others also partake of the supper, thereby making it a real " communion " (mutual participation).

Que-tion 67.

Are both word and sacraments then ordained and appointed for this end, that they may direct our faith to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, on the cross, as the only ground for our salvation f

Yes, indeed ; for the Holy Ghost teaches us, in the Gospel, and assures us by the sacraments, that the whole of our salvation depends upon that one sacrifice of Christ, which he offered for us on the cross.

1. As little as the mere hearing of the Word of God, so little does the mere use of the sacraments effect salvation. This rests alone upon the sacrifice of Christ, accomplished for us on the cross, to which both word and sacrament point, and which we must lay hold of by faith. Kom. 2 : 25, " For circumcision vei'ily profiteth, if thou keep the law : but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision." So baptism also does not benefit without faith. Mark 16 : 16, " He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias and Sapphira, Demas and others were also baptized and yet were lost. 1 Cor. 11 : 20, 30.

2. Both Word and Sacrament point to one and the same thing, to the sacrifice of Christ accomplished for us which is the only ground of our salvation. 1 Cor. 3 : 11.

a) The star and the kernel of the entire Word of God, the gospel in the old and new covenant, is the announcement of redemption through the sacrifice of Christ, as it is promised and typified in the old covenant and fulfilled in the new. 1 Cor. 1 : 23.

h) The idea of the sacraments in the old and the new covenant is nothing other than to represent the sacrifice of Christ before the eyes and to imjDress it upon the heart. Rom. 6 : 3, 1 Cor. 11: 26.

3. The difference between Word and Sacrament consists only in the manner in which they point to the sacrifice of Christ and the way in which the Holy Ghost operates through them (to awaken and to confirm faith).

4. With reference to the meaning of the sacraments two errors are to be avoided : one must not see in them too much nor too little. The signs must not be confused with the things signified ; on the other hand, the sacraments must not be taken as mere empty signs and ceremonies.