Two : Holy Baptism, and the Holy Supper.

1. In the Old Testament there are various types which are applied to the sacraments of the New Testament, e. g., the pillar of cloud and the passage through the Red Sea, the manna and the water out of the rock. 1 Cor. 10 : 1-4. Christ in this passage is called the "rock," but as the "spiritual" in distinction from the natural rock from which the water flowed.

2. Tlie old covenant, like the new, had only two sacraments : circumcision and the passover, for only these two were permanent institutions for the ancient covenant people. The so-called Old Testament sacraments, named above, were of a temporary character.

a) Circumcision not only constituted reception into the covenant of God, but it also pointed to the purification of the heart, regeneration ; it took place, therefore, only once. Gen. 17 : 7-14, Deut. 30 : 6.

b) The passover, which was killed and eaten, was the sacrament of redemption through the blood of the lanib of God and the continued renewal of the covenant. Therefore it was repeated every year. Ex, 12 : 13, 2.5-27.

3. To the two sacraments of the old covenant correspond the two of the new : to circumcision, holy baptism ; to the passover, the holy communion.

a) Baptism is the seal (sacrament) of our regeneration and the reception into the covenant of God ; therefore it is performed only once. Col. 2 : 11-13.

b) The Lord's Supper is the seal (sacrament) of the nourishing of the new man, his growth in faith and the continued renewal of the covenant. Wherefore it is often repeated. 1 Cor. 5:7.

4. In the new covenant Christ instituted only two sacraments, holy baptism and the holy communion, as the ancient Church also knew and used only these two. They alone fulfill the conception of a sacrament. Being instituted by Christ, the institution receives its validity from God. As is His word, so also are His acts, the Father's. John 12 : 49.

5. Christ instituted the sacraments at the close of His redemptive work : the holy supper when He was about to enter upon death and to offer Himself as a sacrifice (" this is my body, which is broken ; my blood, which is shed"), and holy baptism when he was about to enter heaven and assume the rule of His kingdom ("disciple all nations").

6. The Boman Catholic Church accepts seven sacraments. Besides baptism and the Lord's Supper, they accept confirmation, penance, marriage, priestly consecration and extreme unction. These five ecclesiastical acts, which in early Christianity were not considered sacraments, do not fulfill the conception of a sacrament in all respects, as this is set forth in the Scriptures.

Confirmation, priestly consecration and extreme unction lack institution by Christ. Marriage and penance are indeed divine ordinances, but the visible sign

is lacking. Besides, marriage and jn-iestly consecration fall short of the trne idea of a sacrament, because priests are not allowed to marry, and yet saci'aments are to be for the benefit of all believers. Extreme unction is administered only in anticipation of death, while the passages, Mark 6: 13 and James 5: 14, which are quoted in support of it, promise the restoration (v. 15) of the sick.

OF HOLY BAPTISM.