Thus, that Christ appointed this external washing with water, adding thereunto this promise that I am as certainly washed, by his blood and Spirit, from all the pollution of my soul, that is, from all my sins, as I am washed externally with water, by which the filthiness of the body is commonly washed away.

1. Washings, as well as sprinkling with water or blood, were appointed in the law under the old covenant as symbolical acts of purification and consecration ; e. g., with water, Ex. 29 : 4 ; the water of sprinkling in connection with the sacrifice noted in Num. 19 ; witli blood, Ex. 29 : 21 ; Lev. 14 : 7, for the cleansing of the lepers ; with blood and water, Heb. 9 : 1922. Under the figure of sprinkling, the prophets announced that God Himself in the time to come would spiritually renew and cleanse both Jews (Ezek. 36 ; 2527) ; and Gentiles (Isa. 52 : 15). Compare Heb. 12 : 24.

2. The baptism of John the Baptist preceded Christian baptism. Jesus Himself was baptized by John, in accordance with the order established by God. Matt. 3 : 15. Jesus submitted to the baptism of repentance, not because He had any sins of His own to confess, but

because upon Him as the Son of man and the Lamb of God were laid the sins of the world. After His public appearance the disciples of Jesus also baptized ; Jesus Himself did not baptize. John 3 : 22, 23 ; 4 : 1, 2. Baptism was the sign of admission to discipleship. The bajDtism of John and of the disciples of Jesus, both as to its outward sign and seal, and as to its contents, was like our baptism, with this exception, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the ground of which forgiveness took place, was yet in the future. Matt. 3 : 11. The " disciples" at Ephesus who had believed on Christ, but had only received the baptism of John, after having been instructed by Paul, were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Acts 19 : 1-7.

3. Christ instituted holy baptism as the sacrament of the new covenant. Matt. 28 : 19.

4. " This external washing with water." Originally baptism was more generally performed by immersing the candidate three times in water, which was to signify that the old man had been given over to death and that a new man was to come forth. Kom. 6 : 3, 4, Col. 2 : 12, Eph. 5 : 26. The words " taufen" (baptize) from tauchen and " taufe" (baptism) point to the practice of immersion. Without a doubt baptism was administered already in the times of the apostles by pouring or sprinkling water upon the head, in cases of sickness, and in times and places of persecution, where baptism had to be performed in the houses. This may also be taken for granted in the baptism of the centurion, Cornelius, and his house (Acts 10 : 47, 48), and of the jailer at Philippi and his household in his home in the prison (Acts 16 : 33). The Greek Church still holds to immersion as essential in baptism, while in the western Churches, since the close of the thirteenth century, the sprinkling of the person to be baptized with water has generally taken the place of

immersion. The sprinkling of the head with water is suggestive of the complete immersion of the head. The apostles speak of a sprinkling with the blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Peter 1 : 2, Heb. 10 : 22 ; 12 : 24. Among us baptism is performed by thrice sprinkling with water the forehead of the one to be baptized while pronouncing the words : " I baptize thee in the (upon the) name of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen."

Calvin. " AVhether one be entirely immersed in baptism, whether it be three times or once, or be only sprinkled with water, is not of importance, but must be left to the option of the Churches, to be decided by climatic conditions, although according to common acceptance the word " taufen" (to baptize) signifies to immerse, and the ancient Church practiced this mode of baptism."

5. By holy baptism as a sign I am " reminded" and as a seal " assured" that I am as certainly washed, by His blood and spirit, from all the pollution of my soul, that is, from all my sins, as I am washed externally with water ; that, therefore, the one sacrifice of Christ is of advantage to me.

A distinction is made between the outward transaction, the purification of the body and the inner purification of the soul ; the visible is intended to assure us of the invisible. The language is not simply : " as

. . .^. . so," but "as certainly as so certainly

also." By the water the filthiness of the body is washed away. This cannot be denied. Just as little can it be denied that for the believer the soul is purified from sin through the blood and Spirit of Christ Isa. 64 : 6, Tit. 3:5.

QuestioD 70.

What is it to be washed icith the blood and Spirit of Christ f

It is to receive of God remission of sins, freely, for the sake of Christ's blood, which he shed for us in his sacrifice upon the cross ; and also, to be renewed by the Holy Ghost, and sanctified to be members of Christ, that so we may more and more die unto sin and lead holy and unblamable lives.

I. The Washing With the Blood of Christ.

1. We are washed with the blood of Christ, and are thereby assured that the blood of Christ is of real advantage to us. It secures to us

a) " Kemission of sins." Acts 2 : 38. h) "Of God freely." Tit. &: 5-7. c) " For the sake of Christ's blood, which He shed for us in His sacrifice upon the cross." Rev. 1 : 5.

2. We are thereby assured of all that Christ has accomplished for us by His sacrifice.

11. The Washing by the Spirit of Christ.

1. We are washed by the Spirit of Christ, and are thereby assured that the Holy Ghost is operative in us. We are thus

a) " Renewed by the Holy Ghost." John 3 : 5, 2 Cor. 5 : 17.

h) " Sanctified to be members of Christ," and consequently baptism seals our reception into the Church, which is the body of Christ. Eph. 1 : 23, 1 Cor. 12 : 13.

c) *' That so we may more and more die unto sin and lead holy and unblamable lives." This is the obligation which holy baptism lavs upon us. Gal. 3 : 27, Col. 2 : 6, Rom. 6:4.

" More and more." Baptism does not give us the assurance that we are already complete Christians, but obligates and incites us to growth in sanctification. Eph. 4 : 15.

2. Thus we are assured that Christ works in us by

His Spirit.

ni. Two Benefits of Christ.

There are two benefits of Christ, the possession of which is sealed to us in holy baptism : Kegeneration and sanctification, which consist in the dying off of the old and the resurrection of the new man. 1 Cor. 6 : 11. Paul explains here what it means to be " washed," viz., first, to be justified for the sake of the Lord Jesus, i. e., for the sake of His merit and the shedding of His blood, and secondly, to be sanctified by the Spirit of God.

1. The blood of Christ justifies and the Spirit of Christ sanctifies, i. e.,

a) The blood takes away the guilt and punishment of sin, the Spirit the power of sin.

b) The blood secures the righteousness which avails before God, the Spirit produces the image of God in us.