In the institution of baptism, which is tlius expressed : Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved ; but he that believeth not, shall be damned.

This promise is also repeated, where the Scripture calls baptism the washing of regeneration and the washing away of sins.

I. The Baptismal Command.

1. The institution of baptism lies in the command which Jesus gave at the time of His ascension for the extension of His kingdom. This command, exactly translated, is as follows : " Go ye and make disciples of all nations, in that ye baptize them upon the name of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and

teach them to observe all things that I have commanded you." Matt. 28 : 19, 20.

2. While the sacrament of circumcision set forth and sealed reception into God's covenant with Israel, for the new covenant in Christ this limitation falls away and the citizens of the kingdom of God as disciples of Jesus are gathered out of all nations. Acts 10 : 34, 35.

3. As a matter of course in the case of unbaptized adults, instruction as tc the nature of the ordinance must precede baptism ; but according to the exact translation the words of instiiution cannot be used by the Baptists against infant baptism. They generally appeal to the words thus expressed (in Luther's translation) : Go ye, therefore, and (first) teach all nations, and (then) baptize them. Baptism is performed " in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," i. e., of the Triune God. The sacrament is not merely administered " in the name" or by the command of God, but also upon or " into His name." We are, as it were, inwardly immersed into the name of God, i. e., ingrafted into His communion, as we are outwardly immersed in water. Num. 6 : 27, Jer. 15 : 16.

5. Baptism is then properly administered when it is performed by means of sprinkling with pure water, and by the use of the words of institution : " I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost," and by the ordained minister of the Church.

II. The Promise of Baptism.

1. The promise reads : " He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth not, shall be damned." Mark 16 : 16. The promise of salvation, which is joined to the sacrament, avails only for believers. For he that believeth not, shall be damned — although he is baptized.

2. The Triune God gives to the one who believes, the assurance that He is His covenant God. God the Pather gives him the promise that He has accepted him as His child ; God the Son, that He has imparted to him His merit ; God the Holy Ghost, that He sanctifies him and preserves him unto eternal life.

3. The promise made by Christ at the institution of baptism is " repeated" where Christ calls baptism " the washing of regeneration, and the washing away of sins." These expressions are, however, to be interpreted in harmony with Christ's words of institution. Tit. 3 : 5 (compare John 3 : 5, 6), Acts 22 : 16.

Qaestion 72.

Is then the external hajitism ivith water the washing away of sin itself?

Not at all : for the blood of Jesus Christ only, and the Holy Ghost, cleanse us from all sin.

1. The Scriptures nowhere say that the power and efficacy of baptism reside in the water, and in 1 Peter 3 : 21, where the water of baptism is directly spoken -of, it is characterized as a " covenant of a good conscience with God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ."

2. A material substance cannot effect anything spiritual and heavenly.

3. The Ethiopian eunuch, the centurion Cornelius, Lydia and the jailer at Phillippi had saving faith before they were baptized with water. If the water were the efficient agent, then all baptized persons, even the wicked, would be saved.

5. The Scriptures expressly declare that only the blood of Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost cleanse us from all sin. 1 John 1 : 7, 1 Cor. 6 : 11, Eph. 5 : 26, John 19 : 34. Under the old covenant the deliverance from sin was accomplished by blood and purification

by water. Both, however, were a type of the real deliverance from sin by the blood of Christ, and of the real purification by His Spirit, who was promised under the figure of pure water. Ezek. 36 : 25, John 7 : 38, 39, 1 John 5 : 6.