c) In the time when Rationalism prevailed, confirmation was elevated to the importance of a sacrament, even above it, and to-day there is yet a great deal of this sentimental over-estimation. So also it is utterly contrary to the spirit of the Reformed Church, which everywhere and always insists upon truth and sobriety, and is averse to all manufactured impressiveness, when confirmation is made an occasion of sentimental excitation, or a spectacle, which feeds the vanity of parents and of children. The act should be earnest, real and simple.

d) Gisbert Voetius (Vuzius,) the most important authority of the Netherlands in Church polity (died 1676, when professor at Utrecht), "most decidedly approves of this method of procedure in the Church." "After the officiating minister has offered a prayer and has read the names of the different catechumens, an examination is to follow, which is to cover the whole catechism, and in which questions are to be directed to individuals, either in regular order or promiscuously, and, when necessary, the answers are to be repeated and explained more fully by the minister for the sake of the catechumens and the hearers. At the completion of the examination the following questions are to be put to them, to which they are all to give hearty responses : " Do you declare the doctrine of our Church, in as far as you have learned, heard and confessed the same, to be the true and wholesome doctrine, which is in conformity with the Holy Scriptures ?" Answer : "Yes." " Do you promise by God's grace to remain constant in the confession of this wholesome doctrine, and to live and die in it ?" Answer : " Yes." " Do you promise in conformity with this holy doctrine to lead at all times a pious, honorable and unblamable life, and to adorn your profession with good works ?" Answer: "Yes." " Do you promise to submit vourselves continually to the admonition, correction and discipline of the Church, if you should happen (which God forbid) to lapse in doctrine or in life?" Answer: ■"Yes."

To this solemn vow and promise the minister adds a benediction that God, who has commenced this o;ood work and has furthered it, hitherto, by His grace, might confirm them in it, and accomplish it more and more ■until the day of Jesus Christ. " These are essentially the questions, which, along with others or more extensive ones, may be put by the minister."

" Lastly the entire act is concluded with thanksgiving and prayer, and the congregation is dismissed."

e) The form of benediction during the laying on of hands reads as follows in the Electoral Palatinate Directory of Worship of 1724 : " God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost grant unto you His grace, shelter and protection from all evil, strength and help unto all good, for the sake of the merits of our only Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen."

In the Directory of Worship of Lippe of 1686 : *' After giving the answers (to the questions of confession) the children kneel, and the minister, who either lays his hands upon each of them, or extends them over them in a body, says : ' God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the only true and living God, confirm and strengthen you according to the riches of His mercy, that ye may be His children and His heirs, and prove yourselves such through your whole lives, to the glory of His great name and your present and eternal salvation, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.' "

OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.