Thus, that Christ has commanded me, and all believers, to eat of this broken bread, and to drink of this cup, in remembrance of him ; adding these promises, first, that his body was offered and broken on the cross for me, and his blood shed for me, as certainly as I see with my eyes the bread of the Lord broken for me, and the cup communicated to me ; and further, that he feeds and nourishes my soul to everlasting life, with his crucified body and shed blood, as assuredly as I receive from the hands of the minister and taste with my mouth the bread and cup of the Lord, as certain signs of the body and blood of Christ.

I. The Supper and Its Guests.

1. The name of the Supper.

a) The Holy Supper takes its name from the time when the Lord Jesus Christ instituted it, viz., on the evening or in the night when He was betrayed. On this account also it is called a supper.

b) It is called the Table or Supper of the Lord, because the Lord Himself has provided it for us, and is Himself present as host, and offers Himself as the heavenly food and drink.

c) It is called breaking of bread, Acts 2 : 42, because the breaking of the bread is the most significant, symbolical act connected with it, pointing to the broken, i. e., slain body of Christ, as His only sacrifice, accomplished on the cross. Compare 1 Cor. 10 : 16, " The bread which we break."

d) Eucharist, which means thanksgiving, was its name in the ancient Church, suggested by the other prominent feature, the cup of thanksgiving, and because in connection with it we give thanks unto the Lord for the benefits, which He purchased for us by His sacrifice on the cross, and which He confirms to us in tlie Supper. Compare 1 Cor. 10 : 16, " The cup of blessing which we bless."

e) It is called communion, which means fellowship, because thereby our communion or union with Christ, and the communion of believers with one another, is set forth and sealed.

The designation " sacrament of the altar" comes from the Romish Church, from the sacrifice of the mass performed on the " altar." We, as Reformed, therefore lustly reject this designation.

2. The essential character of this sacrament is that of a meal, as the name already indicates. It points to the inward assimilation of that which we receive by eating and drinking. Valuables, which we receive, may be locked in a chest or carried upon the person, but food and drink enter our bodies, and are completely assimilated by the body. The former is an outward possession, this an inward, inseparable from our own life. The body can only receive and assimilate material food and drink through its organs. Spiritual food can only be received by the soul, the organ of the inner man. In the Holy Supper we, therefore, receive by the mouth into our bodies the earthly gifts of bread and wine, while the heavenly gifts, the body and blood of Christ, are united with our souls by faith. Where only earthly gifts are received, it is an ordinary eating and drinking; where only spiritual gifts, the Word and Spirit of God and the merits of Christ, are received and enjoyed, it is a spiritual eating. Where both spiritual gifts and material gifts, related to the spiritual, are received, it is called a sacramental eating and drinking.

3. The gifts.

a) The material gifts in the Holy Supper, as outer signs and seals, the so-called elements, are bread and

wine. They are the choicest products of the earth for food and drink, given by God Himself for the preservation and strengthening of the bodily life. Ps. 104: 14, 15.

b) The heavenly gifts in the Holy Supper, which are signified and visibly represented by bread and wine and which are given us for our inward quickening, are the body and blood of Christ, sacrificed on the cross. Christ Himself says in the words of institution : " This is my body, which is broken for you (on the cross) ; take and drink ye all of it ; this is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you" (on the cross). Of the reception of a " glorified" body and blood the Scriptures give no intimation.

c) As little as in the nature of things in general the material and the spiritual can be transformed into each other, or can be mixed up with each other, so little can also here in the Holy Supper the material gifts be transformed into the spiritual, or the spiritual gifts be mixed up with the material.

The transformation of the body and blood of Christ into bread and wine, so that the latter are said to lose their nature and only retain the outward form and taste, is taught by the Komish Church. The other, that the body and blood of Christ, after the consecration during the Holy Supper, are present in bread and wine as substance, and are received by the mouth, is taught by the Lutheran Church. The Reformed Church teaches that we receive at the same time with the bread and wine, but unchanged and unmixed, the body and blood of Christ, the former after a bodily manner with our mouth, and the latter after a spiritual manner with the soul by faith. A wider difference between the Lutheran and the Reformed doctrine is this, that according to the former the unbelieving also receive the body present in the bread, and the blood of

Christ present in the wine, while the Reformed hiy stress upon the fact that believers only receive the heavenly gifts, since the mouth is the instrument of the body for the reception of food and drink, while for the reception of spiritual gifts, faith, the organ, as it were, of the soul is required.

4. That Christ instituted the holy supper in conjunction with the passover, is neither accidental nor arbitrary, but points to the passover as the corresponding sacrament of the old covenant, from which the significance of the New Testament sacrament is to be learned. The holy supper points to the only sacrifice of Christ on the cross, accomplished for the redemption of sin, as the passover pointed to the slain lamb, on account of whose blood the destroying angel passed by the houses of the children of Israel at the time of their deliverance from Egyptian bondage (passover means to pass by or to spare). Christ joined the holy supper to the passover of the old covenant, in that He took for its institution of the bread and wine which were used in the celebration of the passover. He did not take of the lamb, but of the bread, because in that act He abolished the sacrament of the old covenant as a rite, and substituted for it a new rite, yet corresponding to the type and suggestive of His discourse (John 6) concerning the bread which came down from heaven to give life to the world, in which He also speaks of the eating of His flesh and the drinking of His blood.

As was the passover under the old covenant, so the holy supper as the sacrament of the new covenant is :

a) A memorial supper. As the passover was the commemoration of the deliverance from Egypt and the exemption of God's people from the judgment upon Egypt, so the holy supper commemorates the deliverance from sin through the only sacrifice of Christ on the cross and the forgiveness of sins through the blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 11 : 24, 25.

h) A covenant meal. By the common eating of the passover the communion of all the chiklren of Israel as the people of God was to be set forth and confirmed. 1 Cor. 10 : 16-18. The apostle explains here what he calls communion by referring to the sacrificial communion of the old covenant, which was set forth by the common participation in the sacrificial meal. Therefore the expression, the communion of the body and blood of Christ, does not indicate a union of the body and blood of Christ with bread and wine, but (compare " partakers of the altar") on the one hand, the participation of the communicants in the only sacrifice of Christ on the cross and all His benefits, and, on the' other hand, the communion which believers have with one another by partaking of the same food and drink.

c) A confession. The passover was a thankful confession on the part of the believing community of their gracious covenant keeping God and distinguished Israel as the people of God from the Gentiles in the same manner as did circumcision. Ex. 12 : 43-45, 1 Cor.

11: 26.

n. Signs and Seals.

1. The sacrament of the holy supper is based upon the command given at the time of the institution by Christ " to eat of this broken bread and to drink of this cup in remembrance of Him." 1 Cor. 11 : 24, 25.

2. The promise of Christ consists in this, that His sacrifice on the cross is accomplished for us, and that He feeds our souls with His crucified body and offers His shed blood for drink unto eternal life. The confirmation of this promise we are to receive by eating the elements of bread and wine, after these have been consecrated for the celebration, i. e., separated from their ordinary use. They are, therefore, the visible signs and seals or pledges of the invisible heavenly blessings which we receive in the supper.

a) Signs and seals of redemption through Christ, " That His body was offered and broken on the cross for me, and His blood shed for me, as certainly as I see with my eyes the bread of the Lord broken for me, and the cup communicated to me."

b) Signs and seals of our union with Christ. " That He feeds and nourishes my soul to everlasting life, with His crucified body and shed blood, as assuredly as I receive from the hands of the minister, and taste with my mouth the bread and cup of the Lord, as certain signs of the body and blood of Christ."