It is not only to embrace with a believing^ heart all the sufferings and death of Christ, and thereby to obtain the pardon of sin and life eternal ; but also, besides that, to become more and more united to his sacred body, by the Holy Ghost, who dwells both in Christ and in us ; so that we, although Christ is in heaven, and we on earth, are notwithstanding, "flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone ;" and that we live and are governed forever by one Spirit, as members of the same body are by one soul.

Questions 76-80 are introduced in j)aTt to elucidate and establish Question 75, and in part to guard against error.

I. What the Guests Do at the Holy Supper.

1. As everything in the kingdom of God is arranged to serve spiritual ends, so also in the holy supper neither the earthly gift nor the outward eating and drinking are the main factors, but the heavenly gift and the spiritual participation. That which the Lord says in His discourse in John 6 : 27-58 of His flesh as the true meat and of His blood as the true drink, which give and maintain eternal life, and of the eating and drinking of the same, does not have express reference

to the Lord's Supper, but it is helpful to the proper understanding of the same. The men of Capernaum, who had only a mind for the visible, the Lord sent away, and those of His disciples who were not rooted in faith, departed from Him on account of this " hard saying." (" Not in the discourse, but rather in their hearts lay the hardness." — Calvin.)

2. True guests at the table of the Lord are, therefore, those who do not look upon the visible, but upon the invisible (2 Cor. 4: 18), and who have living faith. For to eat the crucified body of Christ and to drink His shed blood, consists on our part in this, that we receive with believing hearts and have therein the forgiveness of sins and eternal life, the entire sufferings and death of Christ, which in the broken bread and poured out wine are set forth and sealed to us, that the same may be of real advantage to us. John 6 : 50, 35,

54, 47.

II. What the Lord Does in the Holy Supper.

1. We do not unite ourselves with Him, but we are united with His body by the Holy Ghost, who dwells in Christ and in us. The union is thus effected^ although Christ with His body is in heaven and we are upon the earth. John 6 : 63, Col. 3 : 1. On this account the deacon in the early Church, before the beginning of the celebration of the Lord's Supper, addressed the congregation : Sursum cor da ! i. e., lift up your hearts. 1 Cor. 11 : 25. In a bodily manner Christ will come to His own only at the end of the world, and it is not to be overlooked that in connection with the words of institution of the Lord's Supper Paul makes reference to it !

2. The union with the body of Christ in the Holy Supper is so close and intimate that we are " of His flesh and of His bones." Eph. 5 : 30. Paul manifestly had in view here the words of Adam, Gen. 2 : 23, and

set forth the most intimate spiritual communion between Christ and His believers, the members of His spiritual body.

Although the eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ in the supper are spiritual, and in the first jDlace are of advantage to the spiritual man, in virtue of the connection of the soul with the body, our mortal body thereby partakes of the power of the eternal life to the extent to which the body and blood of Christ become in us the seed of immortalitv. John 6 : 54.