In the institution of the supper, which is thus expressed : " The Lord Jesus, in the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat ; this is my body which is broken for you ; this do in remembrance of me : After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, this cup is the new testament in my blood : this do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death •until he come."

This promise is repeated by the holy Apostle Paul, where he says, " the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ ? for we, being many, are one bread and one body ; because we are all partakers of that one bread."

I. The Institution of the Holy Supper.

1. " TAe Lord Jesus : He is the author of this Supper. It is for this reason called the Lord's Supper. We must, therefore, inquire what the Lord did, said, and commanded, as Cyprian appropriately admonishes us, when he says : ' If Christ alone is to be heard, we must not regard what any one before us has thought proper to be done; but what Christ, who is before all, has first done.'

"The same night in which he was betrayed : This circumstance is added to teach us that Christ instituted His Supper at the last celebration of the Passover that He might show, 1. That there was now an end to all the ancient sacrifices, and that He substituted a new sacrament, which should henceforth be observed, the Passover being now abolished ; and that it signified the same thing which that did in the place of which it was substituted, with the exception of the difference of time. The Paschal Lamb signified that Christ would come, and offer Himself a sacrifice. The Lord's Supper teaches that this is already accomplished. 2. That He might excite His disciples and us to a more attentive consideration of the cause on account of which He instituted this Supper, and that He might also show how solemnly He would commend it to our regard, in as much as He would not do any thing just before His death, except that which was of the greatest importance. Christ instituted it then at the time of His death that it might be, as it were, the testament, or last will of our Testator. In a word : Paul adds this circumstance that we may know, that Christ instituted this Supper as a memorial of Himself now ready to die.

'' He took bread : The bread which Christ took was unleavened bread, such as they ate at the feast of the Passover. This circumstance, however, does not properly belong to the supper, any more than the evening at which time it was instituted ; for the use of unleavened bread at the institution was accidental. Hence we must not infer from this that there is any necessity for the use of such bread in the celebration of the Supper, or that Christ would lay down any particular way of baking or using it. Yet still the bread which is used in the celebration of the Lord's Supper differs from common bread, for whilst the latter is eaten for the nourishment of the body, the former is received for

the nourishment of the soul, or for the confirmation of our faith, and union with Christ. It is here to be observed too that Christ is said to have taken bread from the table, that is, with His hand. Hence He did not take His body ; nor did He take His body with, in or under the bread, except in a sacramental sense : for His body did not lie upon, but sat at the table.

" When he had given thanks : Matthew and Mark say o^ i\\Q hve?k.^, when he had blessed it; and of the cup, when he had given thanks. Luke and Paul say of the bread, when he had given thanks. Hence to bless and give thanks signify in this place the same thing, so that the mystery of the magical consecration of the Papists cannot be found in the difference of the language here used. Christ blessed, that is, gave thanks to His Father, and not to the bread, for spiritual blessings ; because His work on earth was now finished, with the exception of the last act, which was just at hand, and because it pleased the Father to redeem the world by the death of His Son : or He gave thanks because the typical Passover was abolished, and that which was true and signified was now exhibited, and that the Church had a memorial of Him ; or He may have given thanks for the wonderful gathering and preservation of the Church.

'^ He brake it: He broke the bread which He took from the table, and distributed the one bread among many, and not some invisible thing which was concealed in the bread. He did not break His body, but the bread. Hence Paul says, ' The bread which we break.' (1 Cor. 10 : 16.) He distributed the one bread among many : because we being many are one body. Christ then broke the bread not merely for the purpose of distributing it, but also to signify thereby, 1. The greatness of His sufferings, and the separation of His soul from His body. 2. The communion of

many with His own body, and the bond of their union,, and mutual love. ' The bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of Christ ; for we being many are one bread, and one body ; for we are all partakers of that one bread.' (I Cor. 10: 16.) The breaking of the bread is, therefore, a necessary ceremony both on account of its signification, and for the confirmation of our faith, and is to be retained in the celebration of the Supper : 1. Because of the command of Christ, Do this. 2. Because of the authority and example of the Church in the times of the Apostles, which in view of this circumstance termed the whole ivdus-Rction the bi'eakinff of bread. 3. For our comfort, that we may know that the body of Christ was broken for us, as certainly as we see the bread broken. 4. That the doctrine of transubstantiation and consubstantiation may be rejected and abandoned.

^^2ake, eat: This command was addressed to the disciples and the whole Church of the New Testament, from which it appears, 1. That the Popish mass, in which the priest gives nothing to be received and eaten by the church, is not the Lord's Supper, but a private supper to him that sacrifices, and a mere theatrical performance. 2, That we ought not to be idle spectators of the Sapper, but ought to receive and eat it. 3. That the Lord's Snpper ought not to be celebrated, except where there are those to receive and partake of it. 4. That it is a sign of grace on the part of God, who exhibits unto us certain benefits which we are to receive by faith, as we take the signs with our hand and mouth,

" This is my body which is broken for you : If we wisli to take tnis expression in its literal sense, its purport can only be : This, i. e., this bread is my body which is broken and given unto death for you, which can mean nothing else but : The substance of this bread isthe substance of my body. But to understand the words in this sense would be absurd ; for bread is something destitute of life, which is baked of grain, and not l^ersonally united with the Word ; but the body of Christ is a living substance, born of the virgin Mary, and personally united with the Word. Christ, then, calls the bread His body, meaning thereby, that it is the sign of His body, attributing by a figure of speech the name of the thing signified to the sign ; because He appoints this bread as the sign and sacrament of His body, as Augustine interprets it when he says : ^The Lord did not hesitate to say, This is my body, when He gave the sign of His body.'' Be it far from us, therefore, that we should say that Christ took bread visibly, and His body invisibly in the bread ; for He did not say, In this bread is my body ; or. This bread is my body invisibly ; but, This bread is my body, true and visible, which is offered for you.

" These, moreover, are the words of the promise added to this sacrament, for the purpose of teaching us that the bread in this use is the body of Christ, which is exhibited and given to those who partake of it and believe in this promise ; or, it is the flesh of Christ which He promised that He would give for the life of the world. For this is the same promise which Christ had made before in the sixth chapter of John, where He says that His flesh shall quicken us, and that it shall contribute to the salvation of those who eat of it. Here He merely adds the sacramental rite, which clothes and seals the promise, as if He would say : I have promised in the gospel eternal life to all that eat my flesh and drink my blood ; now I confirm and seal with this external rite the promise which I have made, that henceforth all that believe this promise and eat this bread, may be fully persuaded and assured that they do truly eat my flesh, which is given for the life of the world, and that they have eternal life.

" By this promise the bread is made the sacrament of Christ's body, and His body is made the thing signified by this sacrament ; and these two, the sign and thing signified, are joined in the sacrament, not by any physical union, nor by any corporal or local existence of the one in the other, much less by a transubstantiation or change of the one into the other ; but by a sacramental union, whose bond is this promise, which is added to the bread, requiring faith of those who use it, which union declares, seals and exhibits the things signified by the signs. From this it appears that these things in their lawful use are always exhibited and received conjointly, but not without faith, viewing and apprehending the thing promised and now present in the sacrament ; yet not j^resent or included in the sign, as in a vessel, but present in the promise, which is the better part, being the soul of the sacrament. For they want judgment who say that the body of Christ cannot be present in the sacrament, unless it be in or under the bread, as if the bread alone, without the promise, were the sacrament, or the principal part of it.

" Which for you : For my disciples ; that is, for your salvation and that of the whole Church.

"is broken : But the body of Christ, some one may say, was not broken, nor is it now broken. To this we reply, that the Apostle in this passage has respect to the signification cf the breaking of the bread, which denotes the rending of Christ's body. For, as the bread is broken in pieces, so the body and soul of Christ were torn from each other upon the cross. The property of the sign is, therefore, by a sacramental metonymy, attributed to the thing signified.

^^This do: This is a command for the observance of this sacrament. 2his which you see me do, do ye also hereafter in my Church ; when congregated take bread, give thanks, break, distribute, eat, etc. He compreLends and gives command in reference to the whole transaction ; and that to us who believe ; not to the Jews who were about to crucify Him.

"i/i remembrance of me : That is, meditating upon my benefits which I have bestowed upon you, and which this sacrament calls to your remembrance ; feeling also in your hearts that I give you these my gifts, and celebrating them by public confession in the sight of God, angels and men, and so giving thanks for them. TJie design of the Lord's Supper is, therefore, a remembrance of Christ, which does not consist merely in meditating upon His history, but is a remembrance of His death and benefits, including faith, by which we appropriate to ourselves Christ and His merits, and gratitude or a public confession of the benefits of Christ. The parts of this remembrance, which is, as it were, the whole supper, are faith and gratitude, from which it appears that it was instituted to be a memorial of Christ, calling to our recollection what and how great benefits He hath purchased for us, and with what and how great sufferings He has obtained them, confirming in us at the same time the faith by which we receive these gifts. It does not, therefore, follow that because Christ has instituted the supper to His remembrance, that it is not for the confirmation of our faith any more than if I were to say the supper does not confirm our faith, because the Holy Ghost does. It is no proper consequence to infer the denial of an instrumental cause from the fact that we give prominence to the chief cause, no more' than the denial of a part follows from a statement of the whole of which it is a part. Remembrance of Christ comprehends the remembrance of His benefits, together with faith and the giving of thanks ; for Christ, by the use of these signs, admonishes us of Himself and of His benefits, and stirs up and establishes our confidence in Him, from which it naturally

follows that we also publicly express our gratitude to him. Hence this supper ought not only to admonish us of our duty, as some will have it, but it should first remind us of Christ's benefit, and then of our duty ; for where there is no benefit, there cannot be any gratitude.

''Drink ye all of this: This command condemns the conduct of the Pope, who refused the laity the cup, and is likewise opposed to the sophistical figment of the concomitance of the blood with the body of Christ under the form of bread. Christ commanded all to eat and to drink. The Pope, however, will not allow the wine to any but the priests, giving nothing more than the bread to the laity, affirming that they drink in eating the bread. This shameful conduct is condemned by this command of Christ: "Drink ye all of this." That the argument of the Pope in justification of his course is a mere sophism, when he affirms that this command had i-eference merely to the disciples who were present at the time, who were not laymen, but priests, is evident, 1. Because by this argument they foolishly make the disciples mass-mumming priests. 2. Because the Scriptures do not recognize the distinction which they make between the priests and laity. All the faithful are called priests in the Scriptures. "And hath made us kings and priests unto God, and his Father." " Ye are a royal priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." (Rev. 1 : 6, 1 Pet. 2 : 9, 5.) 3. Because by the same pretext the whole supper might be taken away from the laity, especially from females, if it were true that none are to be admitted to this sacrament but that class of persons present at its institution. The figment of concomitarice is a wicked pretext, which Christ refutes when He calls the bread by itself. His body, and the cup by itself. His blood, and gave both

sejDarately to the disciples, to be eaten and drunk, and commanded them henceforth to administer them in the same way.

"Ihis cup is the J^ew Testament: Or, the covenant according to the Greek word Diatheke, which corresponds with the Hebrew Berith. It is called the new covenant, which means the renewed, or fulfilled covenant. The new covenant consists in our reconciliation with God, and communion with Christ and all His benefits by faith in His sacrifice already offered, without the observance of the ceremonies of the old Passover. The sujjper is called the new covenant with reference to its signification, because it is the sign and seal of this covenant, sealing unto us our reconciliation with God, and our union with Christ by faith. Christ, in calling the supper the new covenant, comprehends both the promise and the condition expressed in the promise, which is repentance and faith on our part ; from which it follows that it was also instituted to bind us to a Christian life. The new covenant is here also opposed to the old, which was the Passover with its rites. The supper signifies Christ already offered ; the Passover signified Christ, who should be offered. Both, however, signify our union with Christ. From what has now been said, we may infer that the drinking of the blood of Christ is not corporal ; for the New Testament is only one, and includes also all the people of God who lived before the coming of Christ into the world.

"//i my blood, ivhich is shed for you for the i^emission of sins : The blcod of Christ is His death. Hence in His blood, is the same thing as in, or on account of His death. The shedding of the blood of Christ is His merit, in view of which we receive the forgiveness of sin, when it is apprehended by faith.

'^As often as ye eat this bread : The supper is, therefore, to be frequently celebrated, wliieh we may also

establish from its design, which is to celebrate the Lord's death.

" Ye do shew the Lord's death : Believe that Christ died, and that for you ; then profess His death publicly before all.

" Until He come : This supper is, therefore, to be perpetuated unto the end of the world, nor is any other external form of worship to be expected.

" The words of the institution, which we have now explained, may be more fully illustrated by the words of the apostle : "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" (1 Cor. 10: 16.)

^'The cup of blessing: It is called the cup of blessing, or thanksgiving, because it is received for this end, that we may call to mind the benefits of Christ, and so render thanks to Him for His sufferings and death.

"J7ie communion of the blood of Christ: Communion is a participation in the thing which is common. The communion of the body and blood of Christ is, therefore, to be made through faitli partakers of Christ and all His benefits, by the same Spirit dwelling both in Christ and in us, and effecting the same things in us which He does in Christ : or, it is the spiritual fellowship which the fliithful have with Christ, as members with the head, and as branches with the vine. The bread and vine are the communion, that is, they are the sign and testimony of our communion with Christ. This communion, as the apostle briefly expresses it, consists in this, that we, being many, are one body ; from which it is easy to see that this our communion with Christ is no corporal eating ; for it is effected only by faith and the Holy Ghost. Christ is the head, and we are the members ; all who are members have communion in all the benefits of Christ. The head and

benefits are both common : hence we are all members in common and so have mutual love one to another."

2. Olevianus. " Let us see how the holy supper directs our hearts and confidence to the Savior.

" First, that Christ, by means of the holy supper, would direct our hearts to His bitter sufferings, may easily be inferred from the fact that He instituted the holy sacrament immediately before that suffering, viz., in the night when He was betrayed, and instead of the passover, which pointed to the sufferings of Christ yet to come, as the holy supper points to the same now accomplished. It may also be proved by the outward signs of the sacrament which Christ instituted, and by the words of the supper.

" In the first place, the breaking of the bread is a certain and holy sign that the body of Jesus Christ was broken for us, i. e., was tortured with great pain and separated from His soul.

" Secondly, the institution of the holy wine as a special memorial of His blood, beside the bread, also visibly represents His death, viz., that upon the cross His blood was as truly separated from the body and shed for the forgiveness of sins, as Christ instituted the holy wine beside the breaking of bread.

"Thirdly, if you view rightly the words of institution, you will see that the Lord Jesus wishes to direct your heart and confidence to His bitter suffering. For Christ does not say simply : ' This is my body,' as some claim, but adds, ' which is offered for you.' Neither does He simply say : ' This is my blood,' but adds, ' which is shed for you for the remission of sins.'

"Christ might well have said: this is my body which is born of the Virgin Mary, or this is my body which is to be glorified. But He would not thus speak, but as follows : this is my body which is given unto you, viz., unto death ; in order that He might direct

our hearts and confidenoe lo His suffering and death as the only ground and foundation of our salvation, so that it becomes to our hungering and thirsting souls the true food and drink unto eternal life, as Christ elsewhere teaches (John 6) when He says, the bread which I give is my flesh, which I give for the life of the world.

" Finally, the apostle proves it clearly in the words in which He cites the chief reasons why we should keep the holy supper. For, He says, as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord, ye do show the Lord's death until He come. 1 Cor. 11. To proclaim the death of the Lord means to trust in your heart, and outwardly by the reception of the holy supper to testify and to confess before God, His holy angels and men, that by no other means than through the bitter death of Jesus Christ all your sins are already forgiven, and that God will not remember them forever, that you have been accepted as a member of the Lord Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost, and that you are preserved as such and are an heir of eternal life, all of which Christ has secured for you by His death, and has promised to you through the Holy Ghost, and by this outward memorial repeats and confirms it. But you, on the other hand, publicly acknowledge that you received this gift and are still receiving it by true faith, and will never think of surrendering it, and with heartfelt joy you will offer to Christ for His bitter death, w^hence all these benefits flow, praise, honor and thanksgiving."

II. The Celebration of the Supper.

1. Since by the one sacrifice of Christ upon the cross all sacrifices have been fulfilled and the sacrificial service has been abolished, so also the altar as the place of offering has been superseded in the Christian Church,

even as the oldest church knew no altars. The Reformed Church, therefore, celebrates the holy supper at the table of the Lord, even as Christ Himself instituted and observed it at a table.

2. In the Reformed Church two forms are common, sitting and standing. The former, at which the communicants alternately, commonly twelve at a time, sit down at tables or remain in their seats, and pass bread and wine to each other, while the minister speaks a few words, corresponds most nearly to the first communion. Yet the other form is not to be rejected, according to which the communicants in numbers of two or more go to the table or surround the same, in order to receive the gifts of the Lord. On the other hand, the Reformed Church unanimously rejects kneeling at the reception, which would be in place in the Romish sacrificial service, but not in an Evangelical celebration of the communion. At the first communion the disciples did not kneel down, but sat (reclined, according to the custom of that time) arcund the table.

3. We use at the supper ordinary wheat bread, and not consecrated wafers, just as Christ at the institution took of the bread at hand upon the table, which, however, in the case of the Lord's Supper, need not be unleavened, since this provision was in force only for the passover and came to an end with the same. Even the oldest churches made use of the ordinary leavened bread in the communion. Consecrated wafers signify " offerings," and in the Romish and the Lutheran Churches are not broken, but are offered entire to the communicants.

4. We, on the contrary, break the bread, because the Scriptures themselves lay stress upon this as a significant act. The Lord Himself brake it. The Apostle Paul speaks of the bread " which we break ;" from this the Lord's Supper received its name " breaking of

bread" (Acts 2 : 42), and the oldest churches celebrated it ill this way.

5. In like manner we set great value upon this, that the bread and the cup are given into the hands of the communicants, as also the Lord did when He said expressly : " Take." We reject the practice of placing the bread into the mouth and of holding the cup to the lips of the communicants as a sign of priestly assumption, from which this custom arose.

6. The consecration of the elements does not consist for us in a special act or prayer of consecration, but io the reading of the words of institution, whereby bread and wine are withdrawn from ordinary use and are set. apart for holy use iu the supper.

7. In the different Reformed churches, after reading the words of institution, no special form of distribution is used. The words adopted, upon the advice of Melancthon, by the Elector Frederick II. of the Palatinate and by the Palatinate Directory of Worship of 1563, formerly extensively used in the Reformed German churches, are the words of promise at the close of Question 77 : " The bread, which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ." " The cup of blessing, which we bless, is the communion of the blood of Christ."

8. How often shall the communion be celebrated ? This is a question which concerns the Church on the one hand and the individual believer on the other.

a) From Geneva the custom of celebrating the Lord's Supper four times during the year has spread in the Reformed Church. Calvin was not in accord with the practice, but preferred a monthly celebration. In several of the Reformed churches of Germany (as in Lippe) it is celebrated every month during the winter and less frequently during the summer.

b) As to how often we slioiild partake of tlie Lord's Supper, Calvin expresses himself in his "Treatise on the Lord's Supper" as follows : " With reference to the number of times that the Lord's Supper is to be partaken of, no fixed regulation can be adopted. For in the case of every one there are frequent special hindrances, which excuse him if he absents himself. Besides, we have no express command which obligates all Christians to partake of it every time when it is offered to them. In all cases, if we keep its object rightly in view, we will recognize that its nse ought to be more frequent than is commonly the practice. For the more our weakness makes itself felt in us, the more frequently must we practice that which may and will serve for the confirmation of our faith and our furtherance in a holy life. Therefore in all well regulated churches the custom is to be insisted on that the supper should be celebrated as frequently as the circumstances of the congregation may allow. And every individual member, as far as he is able, should be ready to partake of it as often as it is celebrated in the conofregation, and only very weighty reasons should keep him from the same. Although we have no definite command, fixing a time or designating a day, it must be sufficient for us to know that it is within the purjDOse of the Lord that we should partake of it often, otherwise we lose the benefit which arises from it.

The excuses which some, on the other hand, advance, are entirely untenable. Some say that they are unworthy, and under this pretext abstain from the communion throughout the entire year. Others do not concentrate their attention upon their own worthiness, but pretend that they cannot commune with many whom they see coming to the table without the proper preparation. Still others consider frequent communion superfluous on the ground that having once accepted

-sua lL(m

Christ, communion with Him does not require repeated renewal. The first who excuse themselves on the ground of their unworthiness, I would ask how their consciences can endure to continue an entire year or more in so miserable a state, without vtnturing to call earnestly upon God ? For they must grant that it is presumption to call upon God as our Father, when we are not members of Jesus Christ, and the latter relation does not exist as long as that which is offered to us in the communion has not really and truly taken possession of us. But when we have the substance (Christ Himself), are we not worthy to receive the sign ? We, therefore, see that he who would absent himself from the enjoyment of the holy supper, is also unworthy of the privilege of praying unto God. Besides, I do not wish to do violence to the consciences of those who are disquieted by any scruples whatsoever, though they may not be clear to themselves. Rather do I advise them in such cases to wait until the Lord Himself frees them from such scruples. So also I would not condemn a postponement of communing where any other valid hindrance arises. I only desire to show that no one can rest easy for any length of time by absenting himself from the Lord's Supper on account of his unworthiness. For thereby he deprives himself of the communion of the Church, in which rests all our happiness. Rather let him struggle determinately against all the obstacles which the devil puts in his pathway, that he may not exclude himself from so great a blessing and all that it brings with itself. The others have a certain show of excuse for themselves when they reason as follows : If it is not proper tojoininan ordinary meal with those who, though called our brethren, yet live a disorderly and scandalous life, how much more ought we to hesitate to eat in common with them the bread of the Lord, which has

been sanctified to this end that it mav represent and convey to us the body of Christ ? But it is not difficult to answer this objection. It is indeed not within the province of every single member to judge or decide who should be admitted or excluded. This is rather a prerogative of the entire Church, or of the pastors with the elders, who are his co-adjutors in the government of the congregation. The Apostle Paul does not ask that one should examine others, but that each one should examine himself. It is indeed our duty to admonish those whom we see leading disorderly lives ; and if they do not wish to hear us, to notify the pastor, in order that he may interpose with his ecclesiastical authority. But it is not the right way for us to withdraw from the society of the vicious by giving up the communion of the Church. Besides, it will often happen that the offences are not so public as to justify exclusion from the Lord's Supper. For however much even a pastor might consider in his heart one unworthy, in no case can he point him out as such publicly and send him back from the communion, when he cannot appeal to a decision of the Church authorities (presbyterium). In such a case we have no other recourse than to pray to God that He might deliver His Church more and more from all offences, and to await the last day, when the chaff will be fully separated from the wheat. In behalf of the third objection not even the shadow of a reason can be given. For it is not possible to be surfeited by this spiritual bread, which was given us in order that after having tasted its sweetness, we might desire it more and more, and enjoy it as often as it is offered to us. For as long as we tarry in this mortal life, Christ is never imparted to us in such a manner that our souls are satisfied once for all by Him, but He will be our constant support."