Not at all ; but as the water in baptism is not changed [into the blood of Christ, neither is the washing away of sin itself, being only the sign and confirmation thereof appointed of God ; so the bread of the Lord's supper is not changed into the very body of Christ, though, agreeably to the nature and properties of sacraments, it is called the body of Christ Jesus,

1. As Ursinus remarks, this question is not only directed against transubstantiation, i. e., against the doctrine, according to which bread and wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ, but also against consubstantiation, i. e., the doctrine that the " true," i. e., the essential body of Christ is present " in and under the form of bread," and that the " true," i. e., the essential blood of Christ is present " in and under the form of wine" after consecration. Both these teachings (the Romish and the Lutheran) have this in common, that a change takes place in relation to the bread and wine, while the Reformed Church teaches that the bread and wine are distinguished from other bread and wine only by their holy use, 9nd remain bread and wine unchanged.

2. The Romish and the Lutheran Church make an unfair appeal in this matter to the words : " This is." Christ did not say : " This bread is my body ; this wine is my blood ;" also not : " In and under this bread is my body ; in and under this wine is my blood." The words mean much more : " This is my body ; — which is offered (or broken) for you ; this cup is the New Testament (the new covenant) in my blood ; — which is shed for you." He points not merely to bread and wine, but at the same time also to that which He intended thereby. His body was seated before His disciples and His blood coursed

through the veins of His body. Therefore neither could the bread which He brake, nor the wine which He ]wured into the cup, have been changed into His body and blood (into the material or substance of His body and blood), nor could both have been present, in and under bread and wine. He says rather that His body is offered for them unto death and His blood shed for them in His death ; and the Apostle Paul says, that as often as we eat " this bread" and drink " this cup," we proclaim the death of the Lord. This cannot be interpreted in any other way than that the Lord wished to give His disciples in the breaking of the bread and the pouring out of the wine into the cup chiefly a symbolization of His violent death, which was still impending over Him, in connection with which, however, no change took place in bread and wine, nor needed to take place. But then the Lord emphasizes at the same time the words " for you," that His death was for their benefit, in that He would thereby secure for them the " forgiveness of sins." This could, however, be imparted to them only if they stood by their fellowship with Him through faith and continued therein. He calls that eating His body and drinking His blood, which can take place only spiritually, and not that which takes place bodily in the eating of the natural bread and wine.

3. Both sacraments point to " that one sacrifice of Christ which He offered for us on the cross," and by them the Holy Ghost confirms in believers the communion of the death and of the life of Christ. As the water in baptism is not transformed into the blood of Christ, nor includes the blood of Christ, so bread and wine in the supper are not transformed into the body and blood of Christ, nor do they include them. And as baptism is called the washing awa}' of sins, in the same sense also in the supper the bread is called

the body of Christ and the cup tlie testament in His blood.

4. This takes place after the manner and usage of sacraments, inasmuch as the name of the thing is therein attributed to the sign, without any change taking place in the sign, either by transformation or inclusion, but because the thing itself is to be represented by the sign in accordance with the similarity existing between the two, and its reception to be sealed thereby. That the bread remains bread and the wine wine without change, appears also from the fact that St. Paul calls bread " bread," even in its sacred use. 1 Cor. 10: 16.

5. The following review may make this clear : Circumcision is called the covenant of God, because

it was a sign of this covenant. Baptism is called regeneration and the washing away of sins, because it reminds and assures us of the same. The paschal lamb is called the passover, because it was to be a sign that the Lord was to pass by the houses marked whh the blood of the lamb. Bread and vine are called the body and blood of Christ, because they are received in remembrance of the body and blood of Christ.

6. The words of the Apostle Paul, " that he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, because he does not discern the body of the Lord," are quoted in support of the interpretation that the " real" body of Christ is present in the supper, and is received and eaten also by unbelievers. But if, as has been proved, in the holy supper only a spiritual eating of the body and blood of Christ is referred to, this can take place only in the case of those who possess the organ for the reception of spiritual gifts, and that is faith only. The unbeliever brings a guilt, a condemnation upon himself, because he does not discern the body of the Lord, i. e., does not

distinguish the holy supper from an ordinary meal, and thereby slights or abuses that which is holyl