The Lord's Supper testifies to us that we have a full pardon of all sin by the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which he himself has once accomplished on the cross ; and that we by the Holy Ghost are ingrafted into Christ, who, according to his human nature, is now not on earth, hut in heaven, at the right hand of God his father, and will there be worshipped by us : — but the mass teaches that the living and the dead have not the pardon of sins, through the sufferings of Christ, unless Christ is also daily offered for them by the priests; and further, that Christ is bodily under the form of bread and wine, and therefore is to be worshipped in them ; so that the mass, at bottom, is nothing else than a denial of the oue sacrifice and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and an accursed idolatry.

The word mass comes from the Latin missa, a word' which was used in the ancient Church, when the service, at which the un baptized were also permitted to be present, was ended, and the celebration of the holy su]3per was to begin, and at the pronunciation of which the former departed. It means the same as : The congregation is dismissed.

1. The Komish mass is a mutilation of the Lord's Supper, as it is celebrated by the priest only, without the participation of others.

2. It is a denial of the only sacrifice of Christ on the cross, because it is to be a continual, ^. e., a daily offered bloodless sacrifice of Christ, and thereby a repetition of the bloody sacrifice of Christ.

3. Simple attendance upon the mass is said to be sufficient for the forgiveness of sins, while Christ demands repentance and conversion of the heart.

4. The mass is said to bring this benefit not only to the living, but also to the dead, for whom one is to have performed the so-called masses for departed souls, for which the priest is paid a fixed fee.

5. But tlie most sliocking part is, that as soon as the wafer has been consecrated by the priest, the congregation ftills upon its knees, offering to it the divine honor of adoration, on the ground that the same has now been transformed into die body of Christ, and that Christ is bodily present in the receptacle in which the host is preserved. Especially on this account is the mass called an " idolatry." And with what fanaticism the worship of the mass and its errors fills the hearts and heads of those who believe in it, may be seen in connection with the chief festival of the mass, that of Corpus Christi, when those of a different faith are compelled to uncover their heads before the consecrated wafer, and that often in the most violent manner. An evangelical Christian who does this, becomes thereby a participant of the sins of others. 1 John 5 : 21, 1 Cor. 10: 14.

6. The Word of God opposes in the clearest manner such a misrepresentation of the sacrifice of Christ and of the holy supper as takes place in the teaching concerning the mass. Heb. 10: 10, 12, 14; 8: 1.

7. In support of the concluding sentence of the 80th Question, the two. following verses are cited in the oldest editions of the Catechism. Dan. 11 : 38, 39, " But in his estate shall he honour the God of forces; and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory ; and he shall caube them to rule over many, and shall divide tiie land for gain." Dent. 27 : 15, " Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen."

8. Objection has been brought against the catechism, that in the last sentence of the 80th Question too severe expressions are used. In the Smalkald Articles (Part

2, Article 2) Luther speaks of the " mass of the papacy" as " the greatest and most monstrous abomination" and " the extreme of all papal idolatries." "Above all these has this dragon's tail, the mass, produced a horde of pests and manifold idolatries." (For the understanding of " dragon's tail," refer to Rev. 12 :

3, 4, and 20 : 2.) " Therefore we are and shall forever remain separate and opposed to each other. They know well that where the mass is dropped, the papacy falls ; and before they will allow that, they will kill us all wherever it is possible." (This was apropos not only to those 'times.) What Luther says here in the Smalkald Articles, a confession of the Lutheran Church, in reference to the mass, is in substance the same as the statements in the Heidelberg Catechism, but the expressions are unquestionably much stronger than they are in the latter.

duestion 81.

For ivhom is the Lord's Siqjper instituted ?

For those who are truly sorrowful for their sins, and yet trust that these are forgiven them for the sake of Christ ; and that their remaining infirmities are covered by his passion and death ; and who also earnestly desire to have their faith more and more strengthened, and their lives more holy ; but hypocrites, and such as turn not to God with sincere hearts, eat and drink judgment to themselves.

Questions 81 and 82 belong together to the extent to which the first requires self-examination and the second Church discipline as a preparation for the celebration of the Lord's Supper.

I. Worthy Communicants. 1. Because the Lord's Supper is no mere external eating and drinking, there belongs to a worthy participation of the same an inner preparation.

2. The worthiness of the communicants does not consist in their own merits, but in the right condition of the inward man. 1 Cor. 11 : 28, " But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup." This means : Let him search his own heart and conscience, whether he is sorry for his sins, whether he believes on Christ, and whether he earnestly purposes to reform his life. 1 Cor. 11 : 26, " For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he come." This means : You are thereby to be reminded that Christ, on account of your sins, suffered death, and, therefore, ye are to hate sin ; and that by His death He has paid for your sins, and that by the power of His death your old man is to be mortified.

3. The first thing necessary is that they be " truly sorrowful for their sins." This takes place when in childlike fear they learn to recognize not only their sins, while meditating upon the sum of the divine law (compare Question 4), but also their condemnation while reflecting upon the curse of the law (compare Questions 10 and 11). Ps. 51 : 17.

4. The second thing necessary is that in connection with this acknowledgment of their sins they " yet trust that these are forgiven them for the sake of Christ ; and that their remaining infirmities are covered by His passion and death." Their sins consist in the transgressions and neglects of the divine commandments. The remaining infirmity is our inability to do the good, which fills us with pain. 1 John 1 : 7, 2 Cor. 13 : 5.

5. The third thing necessary is that they " also earnestly desire to have a) their faith more and more strengthened and b) their lives more holy."

a) Upon a sincere and strict self-examination, our faith, i. e., our trust in the merits of Christ, is always found to be weak. It is strengthened by diligent

prayer to God for the Holy Ghost, and by the use of the means through which God produces and confirms faith, viz., by hearing, reading and meditating upon the divine word and by the use of the holy supper (compare Question 65). Luke 17: 5.

b) The forgiveness of sins assured to us in the holy supper is to incite us more and more to renounce and resist sin, by making our lives, i. e., our conduct, holy. 2 Tim. 2:19.

II. Unworthy Communicants.

1. The impenitent are those who do not heartily wish to repent and be converted. Rom. 2 : 5.

2. Hypocrites are those who have only the appearance of being converted, and thereby deceive themselves and others, as well as those who sometimes wish to side with Christ and at other times with the world. 1 Cor. 10: 21.

3. The Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 11, rebukes especially uncharitableness, by which the Church makes itself guilty of an unworthy communion of the holy supper, and which manifests itself in discord, in selfishness and in the despising of others. 1 Cor. 11 : 16-22.

4. The unworthy eating of the Lord's Supper is followed by a judgment of God. 1 Cor. 11 : 29 : "He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself (a judgment or sentence of God), because he does not discern the Lord's body (because he treats slightingly, like ordinary bread, the consecrated bread which is offered to him as a divine token and seal of the crucified body of Christ, and, therefore, called by Paul the body of Christ). But by judgment is, however, not to be understood eternal damnation, as is to be seen from the following : v. 30-32, " For this cause (on account of the unworthy eating occurring in the congregation) many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. For if we would

judge ourselves (in self-examination), we should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, but might yet be brought to sincere repentance ' of heart.

5. As a guide to self-examination, preparatory services are held in the Reformed Church, a divine service preceding the communion, generally on the day before. Yet it is well to take into consideration preparation several days before, and also after the communion especially to thankfully remember the same.* The preparatory service as a Church regulation appears already in the first edition of the Palatinate Directory of Worship (1563).

6. In the celebration of the holy supper we are to appear

a) With outward propriety, in that, as is becoming in divine service, we avoid negligence as well as extravagance in dress, and during the celebration do not allow ourselves to be distracted ;

b) With inner devoutness, in that we fix our hearts wholly upon the Lord Jesus and reflect upon the exalted blessings which are secured by Him, and which are confirmed and sealed unto us at His table. Let it be insisted on that, according to the old custom of our E-eformed Church, the communicants appear in simple black, or at least in dark clothing, and that bright garments be avoided. It was always touching and edifying to me when in the early Reformed country congregations of my Palatinate home the women came to the Lord's table dressed in black and wearing a plain white hood, and the men in dark clothing, wearing a long, single-breasted coat, with a staff under the left arm and

* Bee the meditations and prayers in my hand-book for communicants, " The Communion Table. A Hand-Book for the Children of God." Bielefeld and Leipzig, Belhagen and Klasing, 1868.

the hymn book in the hand. It reminded me of the first Passover which Israel ate, Ex. 12 : 11, prepared to be eaten as " in haste."