No ; for by this the covenant of God would be profaned, and his wrath kindted against the whole congregation ; therefore it is the duty of the Christian Church, according to the appointment of Christ and his apostles, to exclude such persons by the keys of the kingdom of heaven, until they show amendment of life.

1. In view of the idea of self-discipline being associated with self-examination, hypocrites and unbelievers, whose true character cannot be discerned, are to be warned to absent themselves from the holy supper. On the contrary, by the discipline of the Church those members of the congregation who show themselves to be skeptical in their faith and ungodly in their lives, are to be excluded from the communion in a regular way by Church discipline.

2. These are excluded, in that they are forbidden to participate in the Lord's Supper ; and if they still j)ersist, they are not allowed to do so. 1 Cor. 5 : 11. Matt. 7 : 6, " Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you." " That which is holy" and " the pearls" are God's holy word of grace and the holy sacraments entrusted to the Church ; the impure and malicious are compared to dogs and swine, which, according to the law, were impure animals.

3. By the exclusion of unbelievers and the wicked, two evils are to be averted.

a) That the covenant of God may not be profaned. The covenant of God relates not only to the individual,

but also to the congregation as a whole, and the Lord's Supper is the covenant meal. Ps. 50 : 16.

b) That His wrath may not be kindled against the whole congregation, when it tolerates laxity of discipline in faith and practice. 1 Cor. 11 : 30, "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep." Weak and sickly may be understood either bodily or spiritually, or in both senses. " To sleep" in the former sense is equivalent to being dead, in the latter without living faith. Compare 1 Cor. 10 : 1-5.

4. Exclusion is based upon the " regulation of Christ and His Apostles."

a) The regulation of Christ. Matt. 18 : 15-17.

b) The regulation of the Apostles. Tit. 8 : 10, 2 Thess. 3 : 6, 14, 15.

5. Exclusion from the supper is only for a time, i. e., until the excluded one gives evidence of a better life. 2 Cor. 2:6.

6. Exclusion takes place only through the appointed officers of the Church. Matt. 16 : 19.

OF THE POWER OF THE KEYS.