Thus : when, according to the command of Christ, those who, under the name of Christians, maintain doctrines or practices inconsistent therewith, will not, after having been often brotherly admonished, renounce their errors and wicked course of life, are complained of to the Church, or to those who are thereunto appointed by the Church ; and if they despise their admonition, are, by them, forbid the use of the sacraments ; whereby they are excluded from the Christian Church, and by God himself from the kingdom of Christ ; and when they promise and show real amendment, are again received as members of Christ and his Church.

1. " Christian discipline" is elsewhere spoken of also as Church discipline. The name already indicates that it was not intended as an opportunity for the exhibition of the authority of the Church, but is intended as a last resort to bring to repentance by means of exclusion erring members of the Church who are no longer benefited by the Word, and thus it serves the purpose of spiritual discipline.

2. The Reformed Church lays great stress upon the administration of Church discipline, and the prosperous condition of her congregations in earlier times is largely to be attributed to this fact. She reckons among the marks of the true Church not only that God's Word is purely preached and that the sacraments are administered in accordance with their institution, but also that a godly life is insisted upon, to the preservation and furtherance of which Christian discipline contributes. (Catechumens ought to be reminded that with their admission to the holy supper they take upon themselves the obligation to submit to Christian discipline.)

3. Those " appointed by the Church" for the administration of discipline are the minister and elders of the congregation.

4. Where, after a long neglect, Church discipline is again to be restored, it is necessary to act prudently, and what the condition of each particular congregation will warrant is to be considered no less than that everything is to tend to the edification and improvement of the same," as the Church Directory of Lippe of 1684 advises, notwithstanding its provision for the strictest Reformed Church discipline, ever, to the point of public repentance before the congregation. In this connection the directions of Christ recorded in Luke 14 : 28-30 should be earnestly considered.

5. Calvin. " If no society, not even a house with ever so small a family, can be kept in good order without discipline, so much the more is discipline necessary in the Church, whose condition is to be regulated in the best possible way. As the saving doctrine of Christ is the soul of the Church, so Church discipline represents the nerves and sinews of the same. By these the members of the body, each in its place, are connected and brought into accord with each other. Whoever, therefore, desires that Church discipline be abolished, or hinders its restoration, whether he do it consciously or unwittingly, follows the surest path to bring about the complete dissolution of the Church. For what will be the result, if every one does as he pleases ? This would certainly be the outcome if the preaching of the Gospel were not supplemented by personal admonition and punishment, and by the use of other means which aid the preaching and render it effective. Church discipline is, therefore, as it were, a check to curb and restrain those who would oppose the doctrine of Christ, or a goad to urge on those who lack earnestness of purpose ; in other instances a fatherly rod, by which, after the manner of the Spirit of Christ, those who have grossly sinned are kindly chastised. When we see in the Church the beginnings of threatened insubordination, the very exigency of the situation demands a remedy, because in the face of this evil no progress can be made in the Church. And the only remedy is that which was ordained by Christ Himself, and which has been continually practiced by His people, viz., Church discipline.

6. According to Calvin there are three grades or degrees of Church discipline indicated in Question 85, which are to be applied in their order, but in serious cases the higher without delay : 1. Brotherly admonition ; 2. Admonition by those who are ordained for this purpose, the presbytery ; 3. Exclusion from the Lord's Supper.

7. The purpose of Church disci^^line is, according to Calvin, three-fold : 1. That the name of God and His Church may not be disgraced by the toleration of disorderly and scandalous conduct ; 2. To deter others, since a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump ; 3. For the improvement of the sinner in accordance with 1 Cor. 5 : 3-5, where the Aj^ostle delivers the fornicator unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the sjDirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

8. To this discipline of the Church, says Calvin^ there are no exceptions, so that even princes, as well as their humblest subjects, must submit themselves to it. For it is exercised at the command of Christ, to whom the sceptres and crowns of kings must bow.

Examples of Church discij^line of those in high station :

1. When the Roman Emperor Theodosius the Great, who had ordered that 7,000 of the inhabitants of Thessalonica, most of them innocent, be massacred in punishment for revolt, wished soon thereafter to attend a religious service in Milan, Bishop Ambrose forbade him to enter the Church, upbraiding him at the same time with his sins. Theodosius thereupon laid aside all tokens of his regal dignity, confessed in the Church before the congregation his sin and begged with tears for forgiveness.

2. One of the most prominent men in Geneva and leader of the libertines, Berthelier, had been excluded from the communion by the consistory on account of his impious addresses and scandalous life. Upon his complaint the magistrate, the highest authority in the 'State, declared this judgment void. Relying upon this decision, Berthelier and his confederates again presented themselves at the autumn communion (1553). But Calvin remained firm and closed the sermon preceding the communion with the words : "As far as I am concerned, ye know well that God has given me firm courage, after having implored the help of His grace ; and as long as I am here I shall stand firm, however matters may turn out. There is no other rule for my conduct but that of my Master, and what He has prescribed to me is clear and certain to my mind. Chrysostom already taught that we should rather die than offer the holy emblems to those who have been declared unworthy of communion with the body of

Christ. Therefore if any should presume to approach this table who have been forbidden so to do by the consistory, I hereby declare in advance, though it be at the risk of my life, that I will do what I must and what I have been commanded to do." Thereupon none of those excluded attemj^ted to commune, but they all left the Church.

Calvin's positive stand with reference to excommunication, which was the chief occasion of conflict in Geneva, and for a long time stirred the city to its depths, is indicated by his private and public utterances at the time. He writes to a friend : " It is true, there is considerable grumbling and dissatisfaction, especially among the youth, and here and there the poison which gathers in their hearts breaks out openly against us. But it all ends only in smoke. They have found more courage and determination in us (his colleagues and fellow presbyters) than they expected, and all their threatenings amount to no more than the vaporings of the proud Moabites, of which no one is afraid. Should matters even become worse, I shall not be astonished. Vastly worse rebellions were raised against Moses and the prophets, although they were the appointed rulers over God's people, and such trials are wholesome for us. Only pray to the Lord for us, that His grace may not depart from us, and that through His strength we may esteem obedience to Him better than life itself. O how much more must we be afraid to offend Him than to excite the rage of the wicked, and even though I at times fear that the courage of the weak and unfortified might fail by reason of their continual attacks, yet, on the other hand, I have the cheerful confidence that the Lord will calm the storms before that comes to pass. Hitherto, at least. He has given us the disposition to resist the evil, and has granted to those who stand by us steadfastness of purpose to

endure with us. Only one thing is needful, that the good Lord continue to protect and direct His work." In a sermon he exclaims, in the presence of his congregated enemies : " If I followed my inclination, I would pray to God to take me away from this world. I should not wish to live three days in the confusion which reigns here. And yet we would boast that we have established a Reformation ! Not servants of God, but the blind might be our judges ; for with their hands they could grasp our (those of Geneva) worthlessness. And why should I give way to considerations of self? I and all of us will not cease to do our duty in cleansing the home and the Church of everything that hinders the progress of the grace of God among us."

3. During a campaign of the Huguenot war of 1586-1589, King Henry of Navarre (later Henry IV. of France) betrayed a daughter of honorable Reformed parents of the city of Rochelle. Soon thereafter (Oct. 20, 1587) a battle was fought at Coutras. When the battle was to begin, and the king, as it was customary in the Huguenot army, was about to kneel down with his people for prayer, the chaplain, pastor Chandieu, who accompanied the troops, approached him and demanded that the king first publicly acknowledge his sin in the presence of his army, to whom his offence was known. Henry obeyed in tears. To escape the strict discipline of the Reformed Church and to rid himself of the censors, who had become so disagreeable to his carnal mind — it was these which no doubt contributed their share to make it easy for him afterwards to apostatize from the cause of the Gospel.

ON THE DOCTRINE OF TJIE SACRAMENTS.

Before the two tendencies in the Church of the Reformation, formally separated into a Lutheran and a Reformed Church by the adoption of the Formula of Concord on the part of the Lutherans, the Reformed made repeated efforts to come to an agreement with the other party. These attempts had reference mainly to the doctrine of the Lord's Supper, in regard to which there was the greatest difference ; for as to the doctrine of predestination they agreed up to that time. The Elector Frederick the Pious labored unremittingly to bring about an agreement among his co-electors, and the authors of the Heidelberg Catechism followed the same course among theologians, governments and congregations in the German empire, even while they were compelled to defend themselves against attacks from the other side. Such an attempt at agreement we have in Olevianus's " Proposal how Doctor Luther's doctrine of the holy sacraments, as contained in his smaller catechism, may be brought, agreeably to God's Word, into harmony with that of the Reformed Church."

In the short preface which he addressed " to the Christian governments and congregations of the German nation," he directs attention to the ftict that the persecutions, arising on every hand against the Gospel, appealed to them to come to an agreement, and he concludes by saying : "As for the rest, I acknowledge hereby boldly that I do not think of Doctor Luther otherwise than as a great servant of God, whom I also heartily love, and of whom I shall speak only with respect. Neither do I doubt that if the good, honest man were still living and were to see this meditation, he would be satisfied with it as in agreement with the Scriptures. He would also not take it amiss that we •do that which in the preface to iiis books he himself

asked in the following words : 'Above all I pray the Christian reader, and pray for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he read these my books with consideration and with jugdment, yea even with much compassion and sympathy, and remembering that I formerly was a monk,' etc. These are Dr. Luther's blessed words. And now since God has graciously granted that in the school of suffering the persecuted Christians should be favored with further light, who would wantonly quench such light and force them not to acknowledge the same, since all gifts indeed are imparted to us for this very purpose, that without injury to anybody they may produce fruit to the honor of God and the edification of the Church. Faithfully recommending you all hereby to the same omnipotent God and Father."

PART THIRD.

OF THANKFULNESS.

The 86th Question, and with it the third part of the catechism, which treats of " thankfulness," points back to the first part, which treats of our misery, and to the second part, which treats of our deliverance (" freely given by God, merely of grace, only for the sake of Christ's merits"), and in the next place is connected with the section on justification by faith alone (Ques. 59-64), in order to show (in the third part) how must be constituted the life of fiiith as the fruit of justification and sanctification, as well as the manifestation of thankfulness. With justification sanctification is associated, for he that is justified is also sanctified, and it would not be in accord \7ith the conception of our catechism to say that the third part treats only of our sanctification ; although indeed it treats of our walk in

holiness, i. e., of the holy life of believers, of the life and growth of those sanctified in Christ. Good works are the effects, consequences and marks of justification and sanctification, and to do good works means nothing else than to live according to the holy will of God and in His communion. Therefore only the regenerate can do really good works, and such are not difficult for them to do, because they have the power of the Holy Ghost. 1 John 5 : 3, Matt. 11 : 30. They are to do good works, not to merit anything by them, nor to effect thereby for themselves their sanctification, but out of thankfulness.

Ursinus. " True Christian thankfulness, therefore, which is here taught, is an acknowledgment and profession of our gracious deliverance, through Christ, from sin and death, and a sincere desire to avoid sin, and everyihing that might offend God, and to conform the life according to His will ; to desire, expect and receive all good things from God alone, by a true faith, and to render thanks for the benefits received."

Thankfulness is shown : 1. In true repentance and a godly life according to the commands of God, and 2. In true supplication to God and believing prayer after the j^attern of the Lord's Prayer. Therefore the third part of the Catechism is divided into two parts : 1. The Law, and 2. Prayer.