Because that Christ having redeemed and delivered us by his blood, also renews us by his Holy Spirit, after his own image ; that so we may testify, by the whole of our conduct, our gratitude to God for his blessings, and that he may be praised by us ; also, that every one may be assured in himself of his faith, by the fruits thereof; and that by our godly conversation others may be gained to Christ.

Why we Ought to do Good Works.

1. It is reasonable on account of the benefits we have received.

a) For Clirist, by means of our justification and renewal (sanctification), has bestowed upon us the greatest benefits. He has not only redeemed us from our sins by His blood, thereby taking away from us our misery, but by the Holy Ghost has also renewed us after His own image, and has thus granted us in reality the power of a new life. 1 Cor. 1 : 30, 2 Cor. o : 17.

b) The purpose of our justification and sanctification in Christ is a life of good works. Eph. 2 : 10, Tit. 2: 14.

c) Ursinus. "The benefits of justification are not given to us without the benefits of renewal (regeneration) : 1. Because Christ purchased for us both the forgiveness of sins and the indwelling of God in us through the Holy Ghost. But the Holy Ghost is never inactive. He is always at work, transforming the persons in whom He dwells into the likeness of God. 2. Because by faith our hearts are cleansed. For those who by faith have received the merit of Christ, find awakened in them love toward God and a desire to show their gratitude toward Him. 3. Because ■ God does not grant the benefits of justification to those who do not show themselves thankful. But no one shows himself thankful who has not received the favor of renewal (regeneration). Neither of the two can be separated from the other."

2. We owe it to God. For by His benefits He has brought us under obligation to thank Him.

a) We prove ourselves thankful to God when /' the whole of our conduct" is made tributary to the service of God, i. e., all that we are and have, what we think, do and speak, and that at all times. Heb. 12 : 28, Col. 3: 17.

b) Everything in our conduct must have for its end the glory of God, and thus He will be " praised by us" through our good works, in that by them the grace and power of God bestowed upon us will be made manifest to others. 1 Cor. 6 : 20, Matt. 5 : 16.

3. It is necessary on our own account. For by our good works we are assured in ourselves of our faith by the fruits thereof. We are assured that we have true faith, for that is not a mere fancy, a faith of the head and lips, which manifests itself as the power of God in good works. Good works must proceed from true faith, as necessarily as good fruit must come from a good, healthy tree. As such a tree cannot do otherwise than bring forth good fruit, so true faith necessarily produces good works. (This does not imply that those who are born again do not still commit sin, but it. does teach that what does not proceed from faith is sin. Rom. 14 : 33.) Matt. 7 : 17, 18, '' Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit. ... A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit ; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit." Whence then arise the sins of the reo-enerate man ? He is in this life like a grafted tree ; the fruit which grows upon the branches of the graft is good fruit. If, however, sprouts shoot forth from the old stock and are allowed to develop, they will bring forth bad fruit, wild apples or wild pears. James 2 : 17, 1 John 2 : 3, 4, 2 Peter 1 : 10.

4. It is helpful to the salvation of our fellow-man, "That by our godly conversation others may be gained to Christ" {i. e., encouraged to believe on Christ and thus to become children of God). This is the demand of love toward our neighbor and of duty in respect to the extension of the kingdom of God. Our godly conversation is to have a beneficial influence,

a) Upon those who are united with us in the faith. Rom. 14 : 19.

b) Upon those who stand in any relation to us, but are still unbelieving. 1 Peter 3 : 1, 2.

c) Upon those who are yet hostile to the faith. 1 Peter 2 : 12. The proverb : verba docent, exempla trahunt, mio;ht in this connection be rendered : Words instruct, example converts.

5. Olevianus. " Good works do not make us either wholly or in part righteous before God. But this end they serve that, after we are justified, freely of grace, through the imputation of Christ's righteousness, we may show ourselves thankful to God the Lord by good works, so that God may be praised by us, whereunto we were created in the beginning and are again redeemed. Luke 1 : 74, " That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life." They also serve this good end that we are assured by works, as the fruit of faith, that we do not have a false but a true faith. In the third place, that through the influence of our good works others may be won to Christ, and that those who have already been won to Him may be kept from falling away, and be preserved and built up more and more in Christ.

6. The first confession of Basle (1535), Article 9, says : " We receive the forgiveness of sins through faith in Jesus Christ, the crucified one, and although such faith exercises and manifests itself unremittingly through works of love and is confirmed by them, yet we do not ascribe the righteousness and the satisfaction for our sins to the works which are the fruits of our faith, but only to true trust and faith in the shed blood of the Lamb of God. For we freely confess that in Christ, who is our righteousness, holiness, redemption, way, truth, wisdom and life, all things are a free gift. Therefore the works of believers are not performed as a satisfaction for their sins, but only that by them believers may in some degree show themselves thankful to God the Lord for the great benefit which is conferred on them in Christ."