By no means ; for the holy scripture declares that no unchaste person, idolater, adulterer, thief, covetous man, drunkard, slanderer, robber, or any such like, shall i'herit the kingdom of God.

1. As good works, i. e,, a godly life, are fruits of regeneration, proofs of thankfulness, and marks of true faith, so wicked works, i. e., an ungodly life, are fruits of the flesh, proofs of unthankfulness and marks of unbelief. Matt. 7:16.

2. Of open sins and infamous conduct only a few kinds are mentioned. Unchaste persons are such as violate the law of modesty by unclean words or deeds. Idolatrous persons are those who love anything else more than God, e. g., money and possessions, or eating and drinking (" whose belly is their God, whose end is condemnation," Phil. 3: 19). Adulterers are those who are not true to their marriage vows. Thieves are such as secretly gain possession of the property of others. Covetous persons are those whose thoughts and efforts are entirely bent, upon the accumulation and retention of earthly possessions. (In Col. 3 : 5, covetousness is called idolatry, for the covetous man makes mammon his God.) Drunkards are those who are addicted to the excessive use of spirituous liquors, of which the most dangerous and ruinous is whiskey ! Slanderers are those who dishonor God by the blasphemous use of His name, and men by abuse and calumny. Robbers are those who violently appropriate the property of others. " Or any such like," as for example murderers, to which class not only belong those who

seriously wound other persons or kill them, but alsosuch as live in hatred and slay with the tongue. 1 John

3 : 15, 1 Cor. 6 : 9, 10.

3. We are not saved by good works, nor on their account, nor are we saved without them ; for where there are no good works, i. e., a godly conversation, true faith and life from God are also lacking. 1 Thess.

4 : 7, " For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness." And wicked works deserve condemnation. Rev. 20: 13, Gal. 6: 8.

4. Those will be visited by an especially heavy judgment who pretend to have faith and yet dishonor the name of Christ by wicked works. 2 Peter 2:2, 3, Matt. 18 : 7.

5. Those who do not repent, cannot be saved ; but those who live in sin and shame, may be saved if they are regenerated by the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6 : 11.

6. On this account, however, no one who is still living in sin is justified in postponing his repentance. To-day thou livest, to-day do thou repent ! To-day thou art in the ruddiness of health, to-morrow in the embrace of death ! Luke 12 : 20, Heb. 3 : 7, 8.

OF REPENTANCE OR THE CONVERSION OF MAN.