(Compare with this Question also the explanation of Question 43.) I. The Signiflcance of the Words Repentance and Conversion. 1. Repentance.

a) The German word " Busze" (translated repentance) carried with it originally the idea of restitution or of a fee for wrong inflicted upon another. The word

was, therefore, also applied to the punishment imposed by the court. The word " bueszen" in the next place means to close up a breach. Amos 9 : 11, " Close up the breaches." It further means to amend a wrong by taking upon oneself the punishment of it. In this sense the Romish Church still conceives of " Busze," in that it teaches that sins are atoned for and, thereby, forgiveness obtained by the bearing of ecclesiastical penalties, or the fulfillment of specially imposed works, like fasting, the performance of stated prayers (our Father and Ave Maria, the so-called rosary), alms, mortifications, pilgrimages.

b) The word " Busze" in the biblical sense has a different signification. It means properly " change of mind." Mark 1 : 4, Acts 2 : 38.

2. The word repentance is derived from " to repent," which means to turn about from a perverted way to the right way. To repent, therefore, means to turn from the way of sin in which we walk by nature, and to turn to God and walk in His ways. Zech. 1 : 4, Isa. 5b : 7.

3. The word " Busze" is used in various senses, at one time to indicate sorrow or pain on account of sin, then again it includes the idea of faith. In the latter sense, repentance and conversion mean one and the same thing, viz., inward and outward turning away from sin to the living God. Isa. 1 : 16, 17, Acts 3 : 19, Eph. 4 : 22-24.

4. Ursinus. " True repentance, or change of mind, or conversion is the change or renewal of man effected by the Holy Ghost, by which man, in consequence of the true knowledge of God and of His holy will, as the same has been revealed in the law and the gospel, and of his own corruption and guilt, is made terribly afraid on account of the wrath and judgment of God against sin, and regrets that by his sins he has offended and still offends God ; and yet in the obedience of faith in

Christ and with an improved life, rests upon the mercy of God and the promise of grace through trust in Christ as the Mediator. And because he is certain of being reconciled with God through Him, he surrenders and subjects himself to Him, as a son to a gracious father, and for such acceptance in grace proves himself thankful to God through eternity."

II. What is to be Understood by the Mortification of the Old and the Quickening of the New Man.

1. The old and the new man. This is a figure of speech.

a) By the old man is meant the sinful nature of man or the inclination to sin which clings to him by nature. It is called " man," because it fills and controls the entire man in body and soul. It is called " old," because it is inherited from Adam (therefore also " the old Adam") and is born in us.

b) The new man is the disposition and inclination of man toward the good, effected by the Holy Ghost. It is called " man," because it likewise embraces the whole man, and must control him in body and soul. It is called new, because it stands in opposition to the former natural and sinful being. 1 Thess. 5 : 23.

2. Mortification and quickening.

a) Mortification is not used in the sense in which it is used when anything decays and dies on account of sickness or old age. It rather carries with it the idea of continuous destruction, of handing over to death, and of being subject to it more and more.

b) In the same way quickening is also properly making alive, with which is connected the idea of increase, of growth in life.

c) The figure is taken from Rom. 6 : 4-6.

III. Wherein " True" Conversion is Distinguished from False.

1. As there is faith that deceives, so there is also hypocritical repentance. This kind of conversion either

does not last or affects the outward life only, for the sake of advantage, or which has its motive only in the fear of punishment for sin and not in the love of God, or which is contented with a mere outward fulfillment of the law, while the heart remains the same. Hos. 7 : 16, Ex. 8 : 8, 15, Matt. 15 : 8. Examples of false repentance : Judas, Matt. 27 : 3-5 ; Simon Magus, Acts 8 : 13, 18-21.

2. True repentance consists in sincere and heart-felt sorrow for sin, on account of which we have offended God and have requited His goodness with contempt, and affects the whole life. 2 Cor. 7 ; 10, Matt. 26 : 75. The prodigal son is an example of true repentance and conversion. Luke 15.

8. For the manner and mode of true conversion there is no fixed form (as with the Methodists with their anxious bench and penitent seat), but it takes place in accordance with the will and guidance of God, either gradually, as in the case of the patriarch Jacob, or instantaneously, as in the case of Saul, but it must always reach the point of actual decision. 1 Kings 18 : 21, Gen. 32 : 26.

IV, For Whom True Repentance and Conversion are Necessary.

1. Repentance as a renunciation of sin and the beginning of a new life is necessary for those who are yet under the power and dominion of sin. Isa. 55 : 7.

2. But because believers still daily commit sin, they stand in continued need of repentance, by the mortification of the old man (in struggling against the sin which is still clinging to them and makes them weary, Heb. 12 : 1), as well as by the quickening of the new man, and the recovering from their constant falls. Kev. 2 : 4, 5.

Examples : David, the man after God's heart, Ps. 51 ; and Peter, the disciple of the Lord, Luke 22 : 32, 62.

3. Children, too, must be converted, not although, but because they are baptized. They are baptized into Christ's death and, thereby, obligated to lay aside the old man and to live a new life (Rom. 6 : 4-6, Eccles. 12 : 1, Prov. 8 : 17).

Examples of converted youths are Joseph (Gen. 39 : 9), Samuel (1 Sara. 2 : 26 ; 3 : 10), and Timothy (Acts 16 : 1, 2, 2 Tim. 1 : 5 ; 3 : 15).

4. Ursinus. " Our conversion to God is not perfect in this life, but is here continually advancing, until it reaches the perfection which is proposed in the life to come. 'We know in part.' (1 Cor. 13: 9.) All the complaints and prayers of the saints are confirmations of this truth. ' Cleanse thou me from secret faults.' ' O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death.' (Ps. 19: 13, Rom. 7: 24.) The conflict which is continually going on in those who are converted, bears testimony to the same truth. ' The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,' etc. (Gal. 5, Rom. 7.) The same thing may be said of the exhortations of the prophets and apostles, in which they exhort those who are converted to turn more fully unto God. ' He that is righteous, let him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still' (Rev. 22 : 11.) We may also establish the same thing in the following manner : Neither the mortification of the flesh, nor the quickening of the Spirit, is absolute or perfect in the saints in this life. Therefore, neither is conversion, which consists of these two parts, perfect. As it respects the mortification of the old man, the case is clear, and does not admit of doubt that it is not perfect in this life ; because the saints do not only continually strive against the lust of the flesh, but they also often for a time yield, and give over in this conflict — often do they sin, fall and offend God, although they do not defend their sins, but detest,.

deplore, and endeavor to avoid them. As it regards the imperfection of the quickening of the new man, the same conflict is a sufficient testimony ; and surely as our knowledge is now only in part, the renovation of the will and heart must also be imperfect : for the will follows the knowledge which we have.

" There are two plain reasons why the will, in the case of those who are converted, tends imperfectly to the good in this life :

" 1. Because the renovation of our nature is never made perfect in this life, neither as it respects our knowledge of God, nor the inclination which we have to obey Him. The single complaint and acknowledgment which the Apostle Paul made is a sufficient proof of what we have just said. * I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwelleth no good thing,' etc. (Rom. 7 : 18, 19.) 2. Because those who are converted are not always governed by the Holy Spirit, but are sometimes for a season deserted by God, either for the purpose of trying, or chastising, or humbling them ; yet they are nevertheless brought to repentance, so as not to perish. ' Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief.' (Mark 9 : 24, Ezek. 16 : 61.)

" But why does God not perfect conversion in case of the people in this life, seeing that He is able to effect it ? The reasons are :

" 1. That the saints may be humbled and exercised in faith, patience, prayer and wrestling against the flesh, and that they may not boast of their perfection, thinking more highly of themselves than they ought, but daily pray: 'Enter not into judgment with thy servant.' ' Forgive us our sins.' (Ps. 143 : 2, Matt. 6: 12.)

" 2. That they may press forward more and more unto perfection, and desire it more earnestly. That, trampling the world under their feet, they may run

with greater alacrity in the Christian course, and aspire after those joys that are laid up in heaven, knowing that it will not be until then that they shall fully enjoy their promised inheritance. 'Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth, for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.' ' Mortify, therefore, your members which are upon the earth.' ' It doth not yet appear what we shall be ; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him.' " (Col. 3 : 2, 3, 5, 1 John 3:2.)

5. Calvin. " This restoration is not accomplished in a single moment, or day, or year ; but by continual, and sometimes even slow advances, the Lord destroys the carnal corruptions of His chosen, purifies them from all pollution, and consecrates them as temples to Himself ; renewing all their senses to real purity, that they may employ their whole life in the exercise of repentance and know that this warfare will be terminated only in death."

6. Luther's first word in the Reformation reads as follows : "As our Lord and Master Jesus Christ says : Repent, etc., it is His will that the entire life on earth of those who believe on Him should be a steady and continual repentance."

V. Whose Work Repentance or Conversion is.

1. No man can convert himself, as in his totally corrupt nature he has neither the knowledge nor the power. Jer. 13 : 23.

2. Conversion in its beginning, as well as in its progress, until its completion in the future life, is the work of God, particularly of the Holy Ghost. Ezek. 36: 26, 27.

3. When the prophets (Joel 2 : 12, " Turn ye even to me with all your heart") and the apostles (Peter, Acts 3 : 19, " Repent ye therefore, and be converted")

summoned to repentance, their demands were always addressed to the people of God, who had the law of God to give them the knowledge of sin, and in which their sins were held before them by God's Word and Spirit. Among the Gentiles Paul always preached the gospel before summoning them to repentance, as Jesus Himself commanded him. Acts 26 : 17, 18.

The summons is addressed, according to God's command, to all men alike, but conversion follows only in the case of those in whom God Himself accomplishes it.

John 6 : 44, " No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him. . . ." Rom. 9: 18, " Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth." Phil. 2 : 13, " For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." The demand of the apostle, " work out your own salvation with fear and trembling," is based upon the fact that he is addressing converted persons, in whom the power of God is at work, so that they are active in good works. Compare Heb. 13 : 20, 21.

4. All in whom God by His word and by the influence of the Holy Ghost has awakened a desire for salvation, know that they cannot convert themselves. Jer. 31 : 18, 19, Song of Solomon 1 : 4.

5. Augsburg Confession (1530), Article 5: "The Holy Ghost worketh faith where and when it pleaseth God, in those that hear the gospel."

6. Ursinus. "All the elect are truly converted in this life, and the final victory in the struggle of the spirit with the flesh is not doubtful. For in those in whom true repentance has once begun, it never entirely ceases, even if they occasionally sin grievously through human weakness and through that which in this life still clings to them of the old man or of sin, so that they are enabled to recover from their fall and will

finally be saved. Matt. 7 : 24, Phil. 1 : 6, 1 John 2 : 19, 3, 9. Nevertheless the will of God in this respect does not warrant any one's taking license in sinning, nor in postponing his repentance from sin to some future time. For to those who do not live in carnal security, but in true penitence and piety, the promise of the present and the eternal grace of God avails. Not only on account of the uncertainty of human life, but chiefly on account of the wrath of God against those who in self-security and against their conscience abuse God's mercy, are they in danger, according to the righteous judgment of God, of being forsaken and hardened, and of eternal damnation through being snatched out of this life without repentance. Matt. 24 : 28, 24, Rom. 2 : 4."