It is a sincere joy of heart in God, through Christ, and with love and delight to live according to the will of God in all good works.

I. THE MORTIFICATION OF THE OLD MAN.

A. The Significance of the Word Mortification.

1. Mortification means to destroy or crucify. Rom. 8 : 3, Gal. 5 : 24.

It is thus spoken of, 1. Because it is a painful work ; 2. Because the death of the old man is not brought about at once, but gradually ; 3. Because it takes place in virtue of the death of Christ.

2. Die (unto sin), before thou diest (in death), in order that thou mayest not die (the eternal death), when thou diest (the temporal death).

B. The Two Parts of Mortification. 1. "A sincere sorrow of heart that we have provoked God by our sins." The Holy Ghost brings about in the sinner,

a) The knowledge of sin, in that He reveals to him sin as sin, and shows him how great it is and how heinous. Ps. 51 : 3.

b) In that He convinces him of the guilt of sin as an offence against the highest Majesty of God. Jer. 3 : 13.

c) So that the sinner becomes ashamed of sin and is filled with sorrow on account of it. Dan. 9 : 7, James 4 : 9, Joel 2 : 13, 2 Cor. 7 : 10.

d) And is driven to the acknowledgment of his sin before God. Ps. 32 : 3, 5, 1 John 1 :' 9.

Since all our sins as violations of God's holy law are committed against God alone and He only has power to forgive sin in Christ, we owe it to Him only to confess our sins. The confession of such sins as we have committed against men, and before men, is necessary, in order to obtain forgiveness for them. The confession of sins in general, even to men, is advisable, when in human weakness the support and prayers of others are needed. To this the counsel of the apostle refers. James 5 : 16, " Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much." For such confession one is directed not merely to the minister, but also to every earnest and experienced Christian ("one to another"), and so-called private confession cannot be required ; least of all has the auricular confession of the Pomish Church, which serves only to bring the conscience into subjection, any ground in the Scriptures.

2. "And more and more to hate and flee from them."

a) The hating of sin is the abhorrence of it, not on

account of temporal shame and injury or punishment,.

but because God is offended by sin and God Himself hates sin. Rom. 12 : 9, Ps. 45 : 7. That in which man formerly found his pleasure according to the flesh, he now hates. Ps. 119 : 104.

b) He who is really earnest in abhorring and hating sin, also avoids it. He not only avoids trifling with sin, as children play with fire, but he also carefully shuns every opportunity which might lead him into temptation. That which he formerly sought, the pleasures of sin, he now flees. 2 Tim. 2 : 19, Eph. 5 : 4.

c) " More and more." The knowledge of sin is the beginning of repentance, but the knowledge of our sins is not at once complete ; just as we recognize with increasing daylight the individual objects about us more and more clearly than when the day begins to dawn. With growth in knowledge and exercise in godliness, the power to avoid and flee from sin grows also more and more. Eph. 3 : 16.

11. THE QUICKENING OF THE NEW MAN.

A. The Significance of the Word " Quickening."

1. Quickening signifies to be made alive in the inner man by the power of the Holy Ghost, and rests upon the power of Christ's resurrection. Col. 3 : 1.

2. The Holy Ghost quickens the penitent sinner and lifts him up, or he would perish in his sorrow. Ps. 38 : 4.

3. Without contrition of heart there is no joy of the new life in conversion, and when this state is not reached, repentance is onlv partial or not of the right kind. Ps. 51 : 3, 12.

B. The Two Parts of Quickening.

1. " Sincere joy of heart in God, through Christ." a) This is the inward joy of those who have been converted, on account of the fact that God's grace, forgiveness of sins and eternal life, have been granted to them through Christ. Rom. 5 : 1, Isa. 61 : 10.

b) That which formerly was foolishness to him, God's grace and truth, has now become his greatest

joy.

c) Joy in God, joy fulness, is not experienced by all who are converted, nor to the same extent at all times by the same person. There will be hours of temptation and times of refreshing, Ps. 42 : (3, 7 ; 138 : 7.

2. " Love and delight to live according to the will of God in all good works."

a) Joyfulness is more a state of the heart ; desire and love for the good and zeal in good works constitute the activity of the new man, the actual proof of the sincerity and genuineness of repentance. Rom. 7 : 22, Gal. 2 : 19, 20.

b) That which man formerly disdained, viz., to do God's will and to keep His commandments, he now regards his highest honor. For to be God's servant is to be the Lord's free man. Rom. 6 : 20-22.

c) A truly converted Christian is in the world, but not of the world. John 17: 11, 16, James 1 : 27.

Examples of true repentance and conversion : the publican, Luke 18 ; the prodigal son, Luke 15 ; Peter, Matt. 26 and John 21.

Examples of false repentance : Cain, Gen. 4 ; Judas, Matt. 27.

See also the penitential psalms : 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143.

OF GOOD WORKS. (Question 91.

But what are good ivorks f

Oflly those which proceed from a true faith, are performed according to the law of God, and to his glory, and not such as are founded on our imaginations, or the institutions of men.

In accordance with Question '^^^ thankfulness for redemption through Christ, and in accordance with Question 90, the new life of the one who has been converted and regenerated, manifest themselves in good works.

By good works we understand the entire new life from God, as well as its manifestations in single words and acts. And hereby again not merely religious and other acts are to be understood, which are accepted as special manifestations of piety, but all manifestations of our personal as well as of our professional life are included.

It is necessary at this point to set forth the real nature of good works, not only for these reasons, but also to confute the self-constituted and so-called " good works" which the Romish Church regards as meritorious. The word " only" at the beginning of the question, let it be noted, has reference to the three parts of the same.

I. The True Ground from which Good Works Proceed.

1. Good works proceed " only from a true faith," which consists in a certain knowledge of God and of His word, and in hearty confidence in His grace in Christ Jesus. Heb. 11 : 4, 6, Rom. 14 : 23.

a) From the right understanding of the truth that God requires good works from us. Micah 6:8.

h) From true confidence in the promise (1) that God will give to His own, strength to perform good works,

Isa. 40 : 29 ; and (2) that our good works, notwithstanding their imperfections, are acceptable to Him. Heb. 13 : 16.

II. The Law According to which Good Works are Performed.

Good works are to be performed " only according to the law of God." The law of God has a double purpose. First, it is to bring us to a knowledge of our sins ; for by the law is the knowledge of sin. Rom. 3 : 20. When, however, we have received the forgiveness of sins and have entered upon the new life, it becomes to us the rule and guide, in accordance with which, by the help of God, we are to lead a life well-pleasing to Him. Lev. 18 : 4, Ezek. 20 : 19, Gal. 6 : 16.

in. The Purpose for which they are Performed.

Good works are performed " only to His glory," for to honor and glorify God is the highest aim of the new life. 1 Cor. 10 : 31, Matt. 6 : 2.

IV. Errors to be Avoided.

1. The above three parts in their entirety are the necessary attributes of good works ; when one of them is lacking, the whole act is of no value.

2. But especially are we to guard against the error that good works are " founded in our imaginations, or the institutions of men."

3. We are not to presume to be wiser than God, and to change His order according to our pleasure. Deut. 12 : 8, 32. God rejected Saul on account of such selfwilled conduct, and took away from him his throne an J crown. 1 Sam. 15 : 7-23. V. 22, "And Samuel said. Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord ? Behold,, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams."

4. Commandments of men are such as men substitute for God's commandments, or for which the claim

is made that they are in force alongside of God's commandments, or that they are even more binding. These are to be rejected, and works which are founded upon them cannot be regarded as truly good and acceptable to God.

a) Such commandments and works God rejected already in Israel under the old covenant. Isa. 29 : 13, 14.

b) Because the Pharisees practiced such " traditions of the elders" and sought honor in good works, the Lord rejected them as hypocrites. Matt. 6 : 1-7, 16, 17; 15: 1-14.

c) When this old system sought again to fasten itself upon the early Christians, the Apostle Paul (Col. 2 : 20-23) warned them against such doctrines and ordinances of men, which have the appearance of wisdom on account of self-appointed sanctity and humility, and by their not sparing the body from all sorts of castigations, and by not honoring it enough to satisfy its wants. (" Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship and humility, and severity to the body ; but are not of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.")

d) In the Romish Church this system is practiced through almsgiving, fasting (abstinfence from meats), the rosary (praying a number of " Our Fathers" and "Ave Marias" in succession), and pilgrimages. Still in advance of this system is that of the monasteries with their so-called " evangelical resolutions," voluntary poverty, chastity, and voluntary, unconditional obedience under a spiritual superior.

e) In the evangelical Church it is also necessary to guard against an unlawful system of works by reason of the manifold activities of the kingdom of God (in home and foreign missions), and in the adornment of churches, etc.

OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.