God spake all these words, Exod. 20, Deut. 5, saying : I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

FIRST COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

SECOND COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not make unto thyself any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them ; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments. THIRD COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain : for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. FOURTH COMMANDMENT.

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy : six days shalt thou labour and do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God : in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day ; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

FIFTH COMMANDMENT. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

SIXTH COMMANDMENT. Thou shalt not kill.

SEVENTH COMMANDMENT. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

EIGHTH COMMANDMENT. Thou shalt not steal.

NINTH COMMANDMENT. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. TENTH COMMANDMENT.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour's.

I. THE GIVING OF THE LAW.

1. God Himself gave the law^ to the Israelites upon Mount Sinai, through Moses, the Mediator of the Old Covenant, after He had led them as His chosen people out of Egypt on the way to the laud which He had promised them. The giving of the law was the solemn ratification of the covenant between God and the people. " God spake all these words" (Ex. 20 : 1) ; it is, therefore, the law of God. It is called the law of Moses, because God gave it through Moses. God did not reveal it to Moses, as He did many other things merely by revelation to the understanding, but gave it to him by writing it Himself upon tables of stone. The importance of the giving of the law was made manifest by the requirement that the people should specially prepare themselves for it, should purify themselves by washing, and should not approach the mountain, as well as by the impressive manifestations which they saw and heard.

2. The form of the several requirements of the law is either a command or a prohibition, mostly the latter, because the law opposes sin. In respect to its contents every requirement comprehends both a command and a prohibition. In the next place, by the use of the words " thou" the people as a whole are addressed, and at the same time also every individual member.

3. The law of the ten commandments which God gave to the people of the old covenant is also binding under the new covenant. Christ says, Matt. 5 : 17, 18, " Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or

the prophets : I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled." (The law is not to be fulfilled merely outwardly according to the letter, but in its deeper meaning and also inwardly. Rom. 3: 31.)

II. THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

The law given on Sinai is also called " the ten commandments" (decalogue). Ex. 34: 28, Deut. 4 : 13 ; 10 : 4. The division of the several commandments is not indicated in the Scriptures, but that the Reformed emuneration is the correct one, appears from the following :

1. The conclusion of the commandments reads, Ex. 20 : 17, *' Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his manservant," etc., and in the repetition of the law, Deut. 5 : 21, " Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbor's wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbors house, his field or his man-servant," etc. If these were two separate commandments, the ninth and the tenth, Moses must have erred in the order of the commandments when he stated them the second time, which, however, is impossible. But if they are one commandment, the tenth, it makes no difference whether in the one instance " the neighbor's wife" and in the other " the neighbor's house" be mentioned first. The Apostle Paul, as well as all the Jews of his time, recognized it only as one commandment, when he refers to it, Rom. 7:7," For I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet."

2. From the first commandment, which demands worship of the only true God, the second is distinguished, which forbids worshipping the true God falsely. It is also specially set off by the threat

attached to it. If it had been God's purpose to make the threatening and the promise refer to all the commandments, He would have placed both of them at the end of the commandments. Besides, the second commandment, Deut. 4 : 15-26, was impressed upon the people by Moses as especially important.

3. As the Reformed Church divides the commandments, so they have been divided at all times, even to the present day, by the Jews, unto whom, according to Rom. 3 : 2, " were entrusted the oracles of God ;" also by the Christians of the first centuries, as is proved by the Church Fathers.

A. The Preamble.

1. As at the be,sjinning of all laws issued by an earthly king, there stand the words : " By God's grace we, N. N.," in order to give by means of his name the power of law to his statements, so God has also placed at the beginning of His laws a preamble, which relates to all the commandments : " I am the Lord thy God, which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage."

2. Three things are here expressed : The lawgiver is

a) "The Lord;" in the Hebrew, Jehovah, i. e., the Eternal One, who hath all power of and in Himself;

b) " Thy God," who covenants with His people, that they should be His people and He their God ;

c) The benefactor of His people, who by the deliverance of the people from Egypt manifested His power, as well as His mercy, toward them.

Accordingly Israel is to serve God obediently and thankfully on account of His omnipotence, truth and mercy.

3. The same holds true under the new covenant, in which deliverance from the bondage of sin and satan by redemption through Christ has taken the place of deliverance from the house of bondage in Egypt.

B. The Commandments in Particular.

1. Tlie first commandment has reference to the being of God. Because He alone is truly God, therefore we are to have no other Gods beside or above Him. Deut. 6 : 4. This only true God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, has revealed Himself to us in His word as the Triune God. This is the significance of the first commandment for us.

2. The second commandment has reference to the service and worship of God.

a) The heathen nations worshipped their gods, and still do it by means of statues of gold, silver, iron, stone or wood, whichever might serve as an appropriate image, or in other objects in which they found a resemblance, a " likeness" to one of their gods. These images were taken from the " heavens," as sun, moon and stars, also birds ; from the •' earth," as men, animals or plants ; from the " water," as fish or other aquatic animals.

The children of Israel were not to do thus with their God, or the worship of God would become a worship of idols. Against this commandment Israel sinned when Moses was upon Mount Sinai and Aaron in his weakness allowed himself to make an image of God, the golden calf. The form was copied, it is true, from the highest god of the Egyptians, a bull ; but Aaron and the people wished, however, to worship the only true God thereby. The people said, Ex. 32 : 4, " These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt." And Aaron made a proclamation (v. 5), " To-morrow shall be a feast to the Lord."

The prohibition : not to bow down to them nor to serve them, relates to the worship of particular gods and to worship in general, or to personal and religious worship.

b) " Jealous," i. e., envious, a God who jealously protects His honor and will not share it with an idol. Isa. 42 : 8, Heb. 12 : 29. Because He is " almighty God," He is able, and because He is a "jealous God," He will and does punish the transgression of this commandment as sin. " To visit" means to go in quest of one in his home. God visits a man, either to show him favors or to punish and chastise him. (" Visitation.")

c) From the very threatening of God it appears most certainly that the second commandment is a special one, and that this threatening relates only to the transgression of this one. Otherwise the word of God would stand in irreconcilable contradiction with itself when it states, as in Ezek. 18 : 20, " The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father." The Lord will visit and punish idolatry among His people, unto the third and fourth generation, and will then perchance not rest, but will uproot the family in the third or fourth generation. The history of the kings in the kingdom of Israel furnishes examples. The " sin of Jeroboam" consisted in this, that in two places (Bethel and Dan) he set up golden calves, that his people might not attend the service at Jerusalem, but might there worship Jehovah. (1 Kings 12 : 28, the same words are used here as in Aaron's time !) The family of Jeroboam was exterminated on this account (1 Kings 14 : 9, 10 ; 15 : 29, 30), so also the house of Baasha (16 : 1-3), Ahab (21 : 21, 22, 2 Kings 10 : 17), and Jehu (2 Kings 10 : 30, 31 ; 13 : 2, 3, 10, 11 ; 14 : 23, 24 ; 15 : 8-10), the fourth generation.

3. The third commandment relates to the name of God. His name is the designation of His Being, therefore no empty word, and sin against His name is directed against Himself. " To take in vain" (to make unlawful or bad use of anything) translated literally means : using the name of God as a lie, i. e., as a cloak for a lie, and thereby making God Himself a liar.

4. The fourth commandment has reference to the Lord's day.

a) This commandment does not begin : " Thou shalt/^ but : " Remember the Sabbath day." The Sabbath was ah'eady instituted by God in Paradise, and this fact is brought forward at the close of the commandment as the basis for it. By being here renewed, it is called to the remembrance of the people.

b) Sabbath day means day of rest ("Feiertag" (holy day), from " feiern," i. e., to keep holy, compare '' Feierabend"). It is hallowed, in that it is separated from the ordinary purposes to which days are devoted in secular work and business, and dedicated to God, i. e., consecrated to the service of God.

c) The week has seven days, of which God gives six to man and desires only one for Himself. And this one day God has especially " blessed" as a day of rest. For experience in all ages has proved the wisdom of God, in that the seventh day (one day of the week) has been found indispensable to man's nature for relaxation from labor and for the recuperation of his powers, and not peradventure the tenth (one day of a " decade"), as was attempted in the French Revolution by the men who rebelled against all God's ordinances. They themselves discontinued the innovation, because they found that men could not hold out under it.

d) " The stranger that is within thy gates" was the one who belonged to another people and tarried among the people of Israel. Not only he, but also the servants (man-servant and maid-servant) and the cattle were to have part in the blessing of the Sabbath, i. e.y rest.

e) God rested, i. e., He ceased to create anything new. He " hallowed" the seventh day, i. e., He separated it for His service.

5. The fifth commandment relates to family life, and in its wider application also to public life, inasmuch as

a people are to be considered an extended family. The parents are God's representatives in the family, and rulers or government in the state. As there is added to the second commandment a special threat, so there is attached to the fifth a special promise : long life in the promised land. Eph. 6 : 2. With Canaan, the land of promise, Christians have nothing to do. It was only the type of the heavenly Canaan, which is our land of promise. And because the promise carried with it an earthly blessing, the Apostle applies the word " land" to the entire earth.

6. The sixth commandment relates to human life.

7. The seventh to the matrimonial state.

8. The eighth to our neighbor's property.

9. The ninth to our neighbor's reputation.

10. The tenth intensifies not only the seventh and the eighth, but also points out how the whole law is to be understood, that it forbids not only the evil deed, but also the evil desire in the heart. Rom. 7 : 7.