Into two tables ; the first of which teaches us how we must behave towards God ; the second, what duties we owe to our neighbor.

1. The division into two tables or sections was made by God Himself at the giving of the law, when He commanded Moses to make not one, but two stone tables, and wrote upon them the " ten commandments." Deut. 4 : 13.

2. Moses already distinguished the two tables according to their contents, viz., love to God and to one's neighbor. Deut. 6 : 5, Lev. 19 : 18.

3. So also Christ gathered up the law in two commandments. Matt. 22 : 37-40.

4. To the Israelite his neighbor was his countryman, an Israelite, not only a friendly Israelite, but also

a personal enemy (an Israelite), toward whom lie was to ^manifest love. Lev. 19 : 17, 18 (compare Matt. 18: 15), Ex. 23: 4.

But Christ says in the sermon on the mount, Matt. 5 : 43, " Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy." This contradicts, rightly understood, the former in no way. For here we find contrasted with their countrymen, their " neighbors," the enemies of the people, the heathen, the Canaanites and other nations, whom Israel was to shun and hate on account of their abominations, in order that they might not be led astray by them. Lev. 26 : 7.

On the other hand, the Israelite was commanded to love the same as his countryman, his " neighbor," the "stranger," who was not his countryman, but who dwelt in the land and was obedient to the laws and ordinances of God. Lev. 19 : 33, 34.

Under the new covenant, which is not limited like the old by national boundaries, every man who is in need of his help stands in the relation of neighbor to the Christian, in accordance with the answer which Christ gave in the parable of the good Samaritan to the question : " Who is my neighbor ?" Luke 10 : 29-37.

5. The question whether the fifth commandment belongs to the first or to the second table, must be answered according as we see in parents, the representatives of God, or as we regard them in the light of standing nearest to us among " our neighbors." It stands as a connecting link in the centre, but must belong to the one table or to the other. The catechism classes it after the manner of Calvin in the Geneva Catechism with the second table, and this is in so far also suitable, since only the commandments which relate directly to God stand upon the first table, and

on the second those which regulate the conduct of men in th^r relation with one another.