Idolatry is, instead of, or besides, that one true God, who has manifested himself in his word, to contrive or have any other object in which men place their trust.

I. The ProMbition.

A, The four forbidden sins which we are to " avoid and flee ;" i. e., we are not to be guilty of them ourselves, nor are we in any manner whatever to participate in them. 1 Cor. 10: 21,

1. Idolatry. We distinguish :

a) Gross idolatry, which consists in the substitution of anything else, either in thought or in act, for the only true God who has revealed Himself in His Word, as an object of divine worship in which confidence is reposed.

a) Among the heathen idolatry in all its forms. Rom. 1 : 23, Ps. 81 : 8, 9, 1 Cor. 6 : 9.

b) Among Christians the deification of nature, when the personal living God is rejected and the universe is regarded as having originated of itself and as subsisting in itself, and the denial of Ood, when the existence of God, who has revealed Himself in His Word, is denied and a god after one's own notions is invented. Ps. 14: 1.

b) Refined idolatry, which exists among Christians when they place their confidence in anything else, either in thought or in act, alongside of the only true God, who has revealed Himself in His Word. 1 John 5: 21.

a) Worldliness. 1 John 2 : 15-17, " Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof : but he that doeth the will of God abideth forever." To this class belong :

(1) Money and goods, capital or fields, i. e., all mammon worship. Examples : the rich young man. Matt. 19 : 22 ; the rich man, Luke 12 : 19, Matt. 6 : 24, " Ye cannot serve God and mammon" (the riches of this world). Col. 3 : 5, Covetousness is idolatry. 1 Tim. 6: 9.

(2) Honor among men. John 12 : 43.

(3) Fine clothing. In Isaiah 3 : 16-23 we have the earliest record of the fashions of the day ; but in the next verse a statement of God's disapproval.

(4) Food and drink. Phil. 3 : 19, 1 Peter 4 : 7. To the three gods of this world, the lust of the flesh,

the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, the following admonition is applicable :

"Courageously cast thy idol down, Whether it be gold, lust or renown."

(il/. Claudius.')

b) Hero worship :

(1) An excessive reverence of great men, such as scholars, statesmen and warriors. (Compare the foolish conduct of the people at Lystra and the apostles' remonstrance. Acts 14 : 11-15.)

(2) The over-estimation of distinguished and powerful patrons ( Jer. 17 : 5, " Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord").

(3) Deification of princes and kings on the impious principle that the service of princes takes precedence of God's service. Ps. 146 : 3.

(4) Excessive love to our nearest relatives, man, wife or children (blind partiality). Matt. 10 : 37, Luke 14 : 26.

c) Self-deification.

(1) Confidence in health and strength. Ps. 103 : 15, 16.

(2) Beauty. Isa. 14: 11.

(3) Understanding, art and knowledge. Pro v. 3 : 5.

(4) The so-called " good heart" and its virtues. Prov. 28: 26.

d) The Peformers classified with these idolatries (1) the mass (compare Question 80), to which Luther also applied the words in Daniel 11 : 38, 39, and (2) the (infallible) Pope, who is honored by men prostrating themselves before him and kissing his red slipper (as is honored no prince in Christendom), to whom 2 Thess. 2 : 4 has been applied.

2. Sorcery. By sorcery is to be understood an effort to ascertain, by ways or means which have not been ordained by God, what He has hidden, or to attain what He has denied us. The former is done by means of fortune telling (from the lines of the hand, from coffee grounds, by cards, casting bullets on New Year's eve, etc.) ; the latter is done by means of so-called sympathetic cures, or pow-vowing, in which all manner of objects are made use of in connection with special ceremonies. These are remnants of ancient paganism, which have survived among Christians to the present day. Much of it is deception, but it is not to be denied

that there is also a kingdom of darkness, with its prince and its powers of darkness, whose operations are not only spiritual, but extend into the region of the physical life. So much must be accepted, even though through a heated imagination and foolish delusions much mischief has been done in times past, on account of so-called "compacts with the devil," and through " persecutions of witches," and though many who give themselves to these things do not realize what a wicked work they thereby carry on. In modern times sorcery has assumed new forms in addition to those prevalent in ancient times, such as the moving of tables, spiritrapping, the calling up of spirits, and the whole proceeding of " spiritualism" with its media. Deut. 18 : 9-12, " When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to da after tiie abominations of those nations. There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire (this refers to human sacrifices offered to Moloch), one that useth divination (one who boasts of special understanding with a spirit. Acts 16 : 16), or an observer of times (one who chooses for his affairs in a superstitious manner certain days and times as specially fortunate, and avoids so-called " days of misfortune"), one that practiseth augury (one who pretends to read in the cry or flight of birds fortune or misfortune), or an enchanter, or a sorcerer (who employ magic formulas), or a consuiter with a familiar spirit (one who superstitiously foretells the destiny of others), or a wizard (one who interprets as signs all sorts of intimations, such as the meeting of animals, etc.), or a necromancer (one who calls up the spirits of the dead, as did the witch of Endor at the request of Saul, 1 Sam. 28, and as do the modern spiritualists, whether they be deceivers or deceived).

3. Superstitious blessings ; the use of mysterious formulas, objects consecrated, or in the Romish Church sprinkled with holy water, as sprinkling sticks, etc., to which is attributed the power of preserving man and animals from sickness or from being " bewitched." To this class also belongs that kind of formal consecration, which is believed to impart to lifeless objects, such as altars, crucifixes, candles, organs, bells and other church utensils, a special sanctity, by ^pronouncing the name of the Triune God, and by making the sign of the cross over them. The Church of the Gospel must keep itself free from such practices, even in their more moderate form. For there can be no consecration of church property, such as church buildings and their accessories, cemeteries, etc., other than that of publicly setting them apart, in the presence of the whole congregation, to their appointed uses. A church is " dedicated" by the first service that is held in it, and a cemetery by the word of God which is proclaimed at the first burial in it. 1 Tim. 4 : 5, " For it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer" (but not by holy water and by making the sign of the cross).

4. Invocation of saints and of other creatures. In the Romish Church the dead who have been canonized by the Pope, at whose head stands the Virgin Mary as the "Mother of God" and "queen of heaven," as well as certain angels, especially the " guardian angels," are not only " invoked" for the sake of their help and intercession with God, but are also worshipped, in that altars are erected and divine services are addressed to them. Their " invocation" is already a violation of the first commandment ; still more their " adoration," which, although theoretically rejected by the Church, is actually tolerated among the Catholic people. In the Romish Church the worship of God is passing more and more into Mariolatry, which was especially

brought into favor Ijy the Jesuits, and by which sentimental souls in the Evangelical Church are very frequently taken captive. Jer. 44 : 17, " But we will certainly perform every word that is gone forth out of our mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem : for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil." So spake to the prophets the idolatrous men of Judah, who had been led astray by their wives to the worship of the " queen of heaven." Matt. 4 : 10, Acts 10 : 25, 26, Rev. 19 : 10.

B. "As sincerely as I desire the salvation of my own soul." God will not suffer to go unpunished such transgressions of His commandments, which affect His majesty and honor. They involve the loss of happiness and salvation. Jer. 17 : 5, Rev. 22 : 15.

II. What Is Commanded.

A. The eight virtues that are enjoined.

1. The right knowledge of God : "And learn rightly to know the only true God." The source of this knowledge is the Holy Scriptures alone, in which the only true God has revealed Himself. The knowledge is of the right kind, if it is a living knowledge, i. e., if it is not merely apprehended by the understanding, but is also practiced in life., Jer. 9 : 23, 24, John 17 : 3.

2. Confidence in God — " Trust in him alone" — is based on the knowledge that He alone is mighty, faithful and true, and is the firm assui'ance that w4iat He has promised to us. He also can and will fulfill. Ps. 62: 11, Isa. 26: 4, Ps. 118: 8.

3. " With humility." Only he can trust in God who is conscious of his weakness to help himself, and, therefore, does not at all rely on himself, and at the same

time recognizes his unworthiness, on account of which he can not lay claim to anything. 1 Peter 5 : 5.

4. "And patience." Patience is the continuance in confidence in God, even at times and in circumstances when it appears as if God had forgotten us, or was giving us rather the opposite of that which we have asked and expect from Him. Ps. 27 : 14 ; 62 : 1, Heb. 10 : 36.

o. Hope, in which we " expect all good things from him only" (i. e., confidently await them). Hope is directed to that which lies in the future, and is, therefore, for the time being not yet apparent, although seen and laid hold of as present. James 1 : 17, Rom. 5 : 5.

6. The love of God : " Love Him with all my heart." Love is the surrender of the heart to another. God alone claims " our whole heart," i. e., undivided love. Prov. 23 : 26, " My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways" (the real surrender of the heart to God is shown in this, that we walk in God's ways, i. e., His commandments). Ps. 18 : 1, 2.

7. The fear of God : " Fear him with my whole heart." This is no servile fear of punishment, but the recognition of the endless Majesty of God, by which He stands over us, in order that we may humble ourselves before Him, even when He mercifully condescends to us. Ps. 34 : 9, Gen. 18 : 27.

8. The honor or glorification of God : " Glorify him with my whole heart." Knowing that God alone gives us all good, and works all good in us, we are to glorify Him for the same by acknowledging His mercy, and by testifying thereto in word and deed. Jer. 13 : 16, Ps. 29: 2.

B. As the prohibition is introduced witli the threat : "As sincerely as I desire the salvation of my own soul," so the conclusion of the commandment points us to the greatness of the love, fear and honor which we owe to

the only true God, "so that I renounce and forsake all creatures, rather than commit even the least thing contrary to his will."

1. There can be nothino- in the world that we may love, fear or honor, so as, thereby, to elevate it above God and His commandments ; in our love, fear and honor God must have the preference in all things — Love, Luke 14 : 26 ; Fear, Matt. 10 : 28 ; Honor, Acts 5: 29; "Renounce all creatures," Ps. 73: 28-26. The proverb is : " God satisfies."

2. Examples. Abraham at the sacrifice of Isaac. Gen. 22 ; Moses in Egypt, Heb. 11 : 25 ; Daniel and his three friends, Dan. 3 and 6 ; Jesus in the temptation. Matt. 4 ; Paul, Phil. 3 : 4-8 ; the martyrs of the first church and the martyrs of the Reformed Church in the persecutions of the 16th and 17th centuries.

Ursinus says in the treatment of the ten commandments : " The easiest method for the explanation of the particular commandments is to separate that which is commanded in each one into parts as virtues, with the addition of the corresponding vices," as that which is forbidden. For the purposes of instruction in schools, however, it is better to adhere to the method of following word for word the answers of the Catechism. The method of treatment which Ursinus follows is more adapted to catechetical instruction and to catechetical sermons, wherefore we add in condensed form a sample of his method in connection with the first and the third commandment.

Ursinus. 1. " The knowledge of God includes such a conception of the being and character of God as agrees with the revelation He has been pleased to make of Himself in His works and word, and to be moved and stirred by this knowledge to trust, love, fear and worship this one true God. Rom. 10: 14, John 17 : 3.

The vices opposed to this virtue are :

a) Ignorance of God and of His will, which is not to know concerning God, or to doubt in reference to those things which we ought to know from the works of creation, and the divine revelation which has been made unto us. Ps. 14: 2, Kom. 3: 11, 1 Cor. 2: 14.

b) Errors or false notions of God, as when some imagine that there is no God, or that there are many gods, as do heathen nations ; or if they do not profess this in word, they nevertheless, in fact, make many gods, by ascribing to creatures those properties which are peculiar to God alone, as the Papists do, who make angels and the spirits of men, who have departed this life, gods ; inasmuch as to address any one in prayer, is to attribute infinite wisdom and power to the person thus invoked. Hence Paul declares (Rom. 1 : 23, 25), that those who pray to creatures " change the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds and four-footed beasts and creeping things." " They also change the truth of God into a lie ; whilst they worship and serve the creature more than the Creator." The same thing may be said of those who profess that they know the true God ; but yet depart from Him, and worship, instead of Him, an idol which they make for themselves : because they imagine the true God other than He has made Himself known in His Word. John 5 : 23, 1 John 2 : 23.

c) Enchantments belong to magic, and consist in the use of certain words and ceremonies, according to an agreement entered into with the devil, according to which he effects what the enchanters ask at his hands, when the words and signs have been gone through with. There is no efficacy or power in the words and ceremonies which are used ; but the devil himself accomplishes what he has promised, with the design, that these persons may fall from God to himself, and

that they may worship him instead of God. The Scriptures now do not only condemn magicians and enchanters themselves, but all those who countenance them by seeking their direction and assistance. Lev. 20 : 6, Deut. 18: 11, 12.

d) Superstition. This is to attribute effects to certain, or to particular signs and words, which do not depend upon any physical or political causes, nor upon the word of God.

e) All confidence reposed in creatures, which is evidently opposed to a correct knowledge of God, since he who places his trust in creatures makes for himself many gods. Hence God expressly condemns in His Word all those who repose their confidence either in men, or in power and riches, or in any created object. Avarice, or covetousness, is included in this vice and condemned.

/) Idolatry, which is defined in the 95th Question of the catechism. There are two forms or species of idolatry. One is, when another beside the true God is professedly worshipped, or, when that is worshipped for God which is no god. The first is the more apparent and gross form of idolatry, and belongs properly to the first commandment. The other form of idolatry is when we do not professedly worship another god, but err in the kind of worship we render unto Him, or when the true God is worshipped in a manner different from that which He has prescribed in the second commandment and in various other portions of His Word. This species of idolatry is more subtle and refined, and is condemned in the second commandment. Those who worship God in statues and images are idolaters, notwithstanding they deny that they worship any other being beside the true God.

g) Contempt of God, which is to have a correct knowledge of God without being moved and excited thereby to love and worship Him. Rom. 1 : 20, 21.

2. Faith is a firm persuasion, by which we assent to everything which God has revealed to us in His Word, and by which we rest fully assured that the promise of the free mercy of God extends to us for Christ's sake ; and is also an assured confidence by which we receive this benefit of God and rest upon it — which confidence the Holy Ghost works by the Gospel in the minds and hearts of the elect, producing in them delight in God, prayer and obedience, according to all the commandments of God. 2 Chron. 20: 20.

a) There is opposed to faith on the side of want, 1.. Unbelief, which includes a rejection of what is heard and known respecting God. 2. Doubt, which is, neither firmly to assent to the doctrine concerning God, nor yet wholly to reject it. 3. Diffidence,, or distrust. This does not apply to itself the knowledge which it has of God and His promises. 1 John 5 : 10. 4. Hypocritical and temporary faith. This endureth only for a while. Matt. 13 : 20, Acts 8 : 13.

b) Those things, on the other hand, which are^ opposed to faith on the side of excess, include, 1. Tempting God, which consists in departing from the word and order of God, and so to presume upon, or to make a trial of His truth and power and to provoke Him to anger. Deut. 6 : 16, Matt. 4:7,1 Cor. 10 : 9, 22. 2. Carnal security, which is to live without any thought of God and His will, or of our own infirmity and danger, without acknowledging and deploring our sinfulness and without the fear of God, and yet to expect and hope at the same time for deliverance from: punishment and the wrath of God. Matt. 24 : 37-39.

3. Hope. This is a sure and certain expectation of eternal life, to be given freely for the sake of Christ,, with the expectation of a mitigation of present evil& with a deliverance from them, according to the counsel and will of God. 1 Peter 1 : 13, Rom. 5 : 5 ; 8 : 24 ; 12 : 12, Heb. 11 : 1.

a) That which is opposed to hope, as it respects the want thereof, is, 1. Despair, Geu. 4 : 13 ; 2. Doubt in reference to future benefits.

b) As it regards the opposite side of hope, or that which is opposed thereto by reason of excess, we may make mention of carnal security.

4. The love of God consists in acknowledging Him to be good and merciful in the highest degree, and that not only in Himself, but also towards us, and therefore to love Him supremely — to desire more earnestly to be united and conformed to Him, and to have His will accomplished in us, than to enjoy all things beside, and to be willing to suffer the loss of all things, which we have, sooner than be deprived of His favor. There is opposed to the love of God, on the side of want, 1. A rejection of the love of God, or a contempt and hatred to God. Rom. 8 : 7 ; 2. An inordinate love of self, and of other creatures. Matt. 10: 37.

5. The fear of God is to acknowledge His infinite wrath against sin. His power to punish it, and to be willing to suffer all other things sooner than offend God in the smallest matter.

6. Humility is to acknowledge that all the good which is in us and done by us, does not proceed from any worthiness or excellency which we possess, but from the free goodness of God, and so by an acknowledgment of the divine majesty and our own weakness and unworthiness, to submit ourselves to God, to ascribe the glory of all the good which is in us to Him alone. 1 Cor. 4 : 7, 1 Peter 5 : 5, Matt. 19 : 4, Phil. 2 : 3.

The opposite of humility, as it respects the want of this virtue, is,

a) Pride, or arrogance. Prov. 16 : 5.

b) A feigned modesty or humility is the opposite of this virtue, as it respects the other extreme. Matt. 6 :

7. Patience consists in obeying God and submitting to Him under the various evils and adversities which He sends upon us and desires us to endure, arising from a knowledge of the wisdom, providence, justness and goodness of God — does not murmur against God on account of the sufferings to which these evils expose us, and does nothing contrarv to His command. Ps. 37 : 7, 34.

The opposite of patience, on the side of want, is impatience. Thoughtlessness or rashness is the opposite of patience on the side of excess.

We may here remark, " that often in this and other commandments the same vices are opposed- to many and different virtues. So in this commandment carnal security stands opposed to faith, hope and the fear of God ; tempting God is opposed to hope, the love of God, humility and patience ; whilst idolatry is utterly at variance with a true knowledge of God and faith. The same thing may be seen, and should be observed in the virtues and vices of other commandments."