In the first commandment God enjoins that we should acknowledge and worship Him alone, and that we should have no other gods beside Him ; in the second commandment, that we should not worship Him by means of pictures or images.

I. What is Forbidden.

Every form of idolatry is forbidden.

1* Especially image-worship, " that we in no wise represent God by images." Under which are to be distinguished

a) A grosser and b) a more refined form.

a) Gross image-worship consists in making an image of God and worshij^ping it as the heathen worship their gods in pictures and statues. Deut. 4 : 23, 24, Heb. 12 : 29, Rom. 1 : 22, 23, Ps. 97 : 7.

b) A more refined image-worship consists in forming false conceptions or mental pictures of God. Col. 1 : 15, John 14 : 9, 2 Cor. 15 : 16.

c) The Church Father St. Augustine says : " We believe that Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father, But no one is to suppose that God the Father has a human form, or has a right and a left side, or that when one speaks of His sitting, that reference is made to a bodily position, that we may not fall into the same blasphemy, on account of which Paul declares that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against those who have " changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, etc. For it would be an inexpressible dishonor to set up such an image of God in a church among Christians ; and it would be still more dishonorable to cherish such thoughts of God in the heart."

Bishop Hilary of Poitiers (died 368) says : " It is as wicked to make an image of God as it is to deny Him."

The following forms of idolatry are also to be condemned :

2. The worship of objects, which are represented to have been in contact with the body of Christ, as the so-called " holy coat" of Treves, nails of the cross of Christ, etc.

3. Ceremonialism, in which the thought is that God is to be worshipped in outward acts, such as burning incense, removing the hat before pictures, by means of processions, etc. Acts 17 : 24, 25.

4. Meritorious works, when one devotes himself to works of the law, as meritorious in the sight of God, and minimizes the merits of Christ, or when one wishesto merit salvation without Christ by one's own virtues or good works. Gal. 3 : 10 (Deut. 27 : 26).

5. Lip-service, when one prays and sings and speaks piously without living faith in the heart. Matt. 15 : 7,8.

11. What is Commanded.

The worship which is required of us is " that we in no wise represent God by images, nor worship Him in any other way than He has commanded in His word^ i. e., worshipping Him a) publicly, in the family and in the closet, by prayer and by meditation upon His word ; and b) in our public and private life. Deut. 12 : 32. The command in His word is, that we should worship Him in spirit and in truth. John 4 : 24, 1 Tim. 2 : 8.

We may also cite the brazen serpent, which God Himself had commanded to be set up, for the confirmation of faith in His promises (Num. 21), but which was destroyed by the pious king Hezekiah (2 Kings 18 : 4)^ as it had been misused for idolatry.