God neither can nor may be represented by any means ; but as to creatures, though they may be represented, yet God forbids us to make, or have any resemblance of them, either in order to worship them, or to serve God by them.

1. God must not, because He cannot, be represented.

a) He is spirit and invisible, and nothing in the world can serve the purpose, even in a slight degree only of symbolically presenting or representing Him. John 4 : 24, Rom. 1 : 20, John 1 : 18, Isa. 46 : 5.

b) Man does not need the help of an image to realize God's presence, as He is Himself everywhere present. Acts 17 : 27, 28.

c) Objection is made that in the Old Testament God appeared, e. g., to Abraham, in human form, and, therefore, might also be represented in human form, especially since man also is created in the image of God. The reply to this is: 1. That we are no longer under the old covenant, where God revealed Himself by visible manifestations ; 2. That we have no picture of such 3i manifestation of God ; 3. That the creation of man in the image of God is not to be understood of the outward form of man (Eph. 4 : 24). Acts 17 : 29, " Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." This is true not only of the idols of the heathen, but also of the representations which we make in our thoughts of the only true God.

d) It is further said : Christ at least we may and can represent by means of pictures, since He appeared in the flesh and became in form like other men. To this the reply is that we have even no picture of Christ ; for the tradition that the Evangelist Luke, who, it must be remembered, was not a painter, but a physician (Col. 4 : 14), made a picture of Christ from the impression of His face upon the handkerchief of Veronica (which, besides, is not known to exist), is a Romish fable. When a painter or a sculptor makes a picture of Christ, he does not follow any particular model, but rather his own fancy. It may be then " like another man," but it is not a picture of Christ as He appeared in the flesh.

2. Not in any sense, however, are the plastic arts, painting and sculpture, forbidden to Christians. " Creatures (all created things) may (can) be represented by pictures."

For God Himself, already under the old covenant, filled men with His spirit and with wisdom to do all manner of work and to devise curious works. Ex. 35 : 30-35. But no abuse is to be made of such pictures, " to worship them, or to serve God by them." As everything human, so also the plastic arts, which are not indebted to Christianity for their origin, are to be brought within its sphere and are to be permeated by its spirit. We may honor true artists, may find joy in their works and adorn our walls with good pictures. But in this connection it is also to be remembered how much harm is done to the souls of the young and old by poor, and at the same time unchaste pictures, which excite sensual desires. The young ought to be warned sincerely and earnestly against such pictures, in order that their imagination may not poison the entire life, at an age when the impressions are the most lasting, and other temptations may, thereby, become so much the more dangerous.

Zwingli. " Pictures which are not used for purposes of worship, or in connection with which it is not to be feared that they will be used for this purpose, I do not reject ; on the contrary, I recognize painting and sculpture as gifts of God."

Calvin (in the Geneva Catechism) : " It is not to be understood that these words reject all painting and sculpture ; we are only forbidden to make pictures for the purpose of seeking or worshipping God by them, or, which amounts to the same thing, to worship them to the honor of God, or misuse them, in any manner whatsoever, superstitiously for idolatrous purposes."