No ; for we must not pretend to be wiser than God, who will have his people taught, not by dumb images, but by the lively preaching of his word.

1. The use of pictures in churches is defended even by the Lutherans, on the ground (to use an expression of Gregory) that they are " lay-books," i. e., that the common people are instructed and edified by them. The Romish Church makes a distinction between the " laity" and " the clergy," i. e., between the people and the clergy or priesthood, a distinction which does not hold under the new covenant. 1 Peter 2 : 9. Under the new covenant the knowledge of God is to be imparted to all believers in the same way, by means of God's word and spirit. John 6 : 45, *' It is written in the prophets. And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, Cometh unto me." Jer. 31: 34, "And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord : for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord : for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more."

2. In school, pictures may be used to fix the attention for purposes of instruction, but in churches, devotion is disturbed, rather than furthered, by pictures. There are " dumb idols," with which to-day yet the worst abuses are practiced in large parts of Christendom. Think of the many " pictures of saints" and of the " pictures of the Virgin Mary," which are represented as working miracles in all lands, from which the laity in large numbers seek help year after year. Hab. 2 : 18-20.

3. " We must not pretend to be wiser than God," and, therefore, must, not seek any other means of knowledge than He Himself has ordained. He *' will have his people taught by the lively preaching of his word." Where this is vigorously prosecuted, no other means of instruction or edification are needed in the churches ; but the more this is neglected, or the people turn against it, the more is satisfaction sought in outward things, such as pictures, crucifixes, etc. The Church father Hieronymus already complained (died 420) : " AVhen the Church still used wooden cups (at the communion), it had golden bishops ; now it uses golden cups and has wooden bishops." Let us not be disturbed by the reproach that our Reformed churches are '* bare" and our worship " barren." The most beautiful ornament of a Christian church is the "lively preaching of the word of God" and a living congregation. Ps. 93 : 5, " Thy testimonies are very sure : holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, forever."

4. With the secularization of the Church at the beginning of the Middle Ages, pictures were given a place in the houses of worship, notwithstanding the opposition of many earnest-minded men. Of this we still have evidence in the Church father Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamis (died 403).

In a letter to Bishop John of Jerusalem, which Hieronymus recommends to the attention of the churches, he writes : " When we went together to the sacred place of Bethlehem, in order, according to Christian custom, to gather alms there (a collecting tour), and I came into a village named Anablatha, and, in passing through, saw a light burning, I asked what kind of a place that was. When I heard that it was a church, I entered to pray. I found at the church door a colored curtain with a picture of Christ or of some saint painted on it. I cannot recall definitely whom it was to represent. When I saw hanging in a Christian church, contrary to the command of the Scriptures, the picture of a man, I tore it down, and gave those present the advice that they should rather wrap and bury in it the body of some poor person. I pray you to inform the ministers of that place to accept from the bearers of this letter another curtain, which we hereby send, and command, that in the future such curtains, as are contrary to the Christian religion, be not used in the Christian churches. For it belongs to the responsibilities of your office that you should guard against the commission of such offences, which are unbecoming to the Christian Church and the people entrusted to you."