It undoubtedly is ; for there is no sin greater or more provoking to God than the profaning of his name, and therefore he has commanded this sin to be punished with death.

I. What is Forbidden.

1. A name is a word used to characterize a person,, or an object, visible or invisible. The names of God represent

a) The Person of God ("God," ''the Lord,"' " Father," " Son," " Holy Ghost").

b) His Being (" the Eternal," " the Almighty"), and

c) His revelation in Creation (in the words "heaven," the " elements," " thunder," " lightning"), and in grace ("cross," "sacrament").

2. The name of God is " holy," i. e., it is given to us only for the use for which God intended it, and, therefore, when it is blasphemed, i. e., when anything unseemly or offensive is spoken concerning God, or when it is taken in vain, i. e., used falsely, God will not look with allowance upon such wickedness, but will punish it according to His holiness and justice. " The Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." Ex. 5 : 2.

3. The name of God is blasphemed and taken in vain :

a) By swearing. By this we mean to wish ill to oneself or to others by the use of the name of God or of His creatures. likewise it is swearing when the name of God or of His creatures is used to express anger or astonishment. Swearing is not weakened, as is imagined, by changing the oaths so that the words have a different sound.

In explaining this subject to children, one needs to guard himself against being the means of bringing oaths to their knowledge. It is better to limit oneself to such oaths as have already been noticed among them, or are known to be in common use among the people. Lev. 24: 15, Prov. 21: 10, James 3: 8-10, Eom. 12 : 14.

But has not God Himself made use of the oath, and have not the prophets done the same in His name ? e. ^., " cursed is the ground" (Gen. 3: 17), "cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them" (Deut. 27: 26), "cursed be the man that trusteth in man" (Jer. 17: 5), etc. Such " cursing" is the threatening or the suspending over human sin

of God's righteous piuiishraent, which punisliment itself is, on this account, also called a curse. This is something entirely different from man's cursing.

Again, how are we to explain the so-called " imprecatory Psalms," which invoke evil upon enemies, e. g., Ps. 35, 69, 109, etc. ? In these there is no reference to personal enemies, but to the enemies of God and of His kingdom, who hate and threaten to destroy the righteous on account of their acknowledgment of God. They, therefore, pray to God for help and for His judgment upon the ^yicked.

Example of a swearer : Shimei, 2 Sam. 16 : 5-8.

b) By perjury. The oath is an affirmation by the invocation of God's name. Whoever makes an affirmation that is not in accordance with fact, either by not telling the truth or by breaking a promise, has sworn fasely or committed perjury. Lev. 19 : 12.

c) By unnecessary swearing, i. e., through frivolous affirmations, either in statements or promises, by invoking the name of God in daily life or habitually. Lev. 5 : 4, Matt. 5 : 34-37. It is evident that Jesus forbids in these passages unnecessary swearing in daily life, and not the oath in general. This is indicated by the language in which He refers to the daily life, and in which He does not include an oath in the name of God. His followers are to be so established in the truth that a simple yea or nay, without an affirmation, suffices ; " yea, yea, nay, nay," i. e., a yea that is really yea, and a nay that is really nay. Misleading expressions are also forbidden.

d) Of this character is also the misuse of God's name, which occurs 1) When it is spoken thoughtlessly. 2) When it is used hypocritically in order to appear pious, or in the mumbling of prayers by rote. Matt. 6:7. 3) When Scripture is used in jest.

e) By silence and connivance, whereby " we are partakers of these horrible sins in others," because he who listens to and connives at these sins, to say the least, awakens the suspicion that he does not disapprove of them. Lev. 5 : 1, Prov. 29 : 24, Eph. 5 : 11.

II. What Is Commanded.

Over against the prohibition stands the command, viz., that we are to use the name of God properly, as is becoming toward a holy God, and for the purpose for which He has revealed His name. Ex. 3 : 15.

a) We are to use it with " fear and reverence," for it is the name of the almighty and holy God. The expressions, " our dear God" or " the good Lord," are more childish than childlike, and tend to produce enfeebling conceptions of God ; they ought not to be used. Isa. 8 : 13, Matt. 10 : 28, Mai. 4 : 2.

b) The name of God is " rightly confessed by us" if by the use of it, in the presence of friend and foe, we openly show that He is our God, and that we are His children in Christ Jesus. We are not through the fear of man to hesitate to name the name of God, and, instead, speak in a general way about " heaven ;" which amounts to denying God and to be ashamed of Him. Matt. 10 : 32, 33, 1 Peter 3 : 15, Rom. 10 : 10.

c) The name of God is " rightly worshipped by us," if we speak with Him in prayer, or call to Him for help in need. Rom. 10: 13, Ps. 50: 15.

• d) The name of God " is glorified in all our words and works," when all our words and deeds conform to His will and pleasure, and we, who are called by His name, show, thereby, that His power dwells in us. Col. 3 : 17, 1 Peter 2 : 9.

III. The Heinousness of Blasphemy.

1. There is no greater sin than to blaspheme the name of God in any of the above-mentioned ways ; for a) It is a personal insult to Almighty God.

b) He has ])ronounced against it in His law the heaviest penalties. Lev. 24 : 16.

c) He has Himself added to the third commandment the special threat : " the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in vain."

2. Therefore all — every individual, but especiallyChristian governments, — are bound, as much as possible, to assist in preventing this terrible sin and to forbid it. (In earlier times it was punished with death in Christian countries.)