I. What Kind of Oaths are to be Allowed.

The name of God is taken in vain by false oaths or frivolous swearing, but neither the third commandment nor the sermon on the mount (Matt, o : 34-37) forbids the general use of the name of God in oaths. A proper oath is rather a religious matter, a divine act. The question with reference to such an oath is, how it has been occasioned and what is its object?

1. The occasion. Oaths are allowed under two circumstances :

a) " When the magistrates demand it of their subjects." Ex. 22: 10, 11, Ezra 10: 5, Rom. 13: 1, 4.

b) " When necessity requires it of us," but only for the purpose of maintaining and furthering fidelity and truth. The necessity for the oath rests chiefly upon the corruption which prevails among men. Ps. 116 : 11. But a necessity for swearing without a summons of the government in individual cases can be justified only when specially important matters are involved, in which " truth and fidelity to the glory of God are thereby confirmed." Heb. 6 : 16.

2. The oath must be to the glory of God and tor the

safety of our neighbor. -.^ ^ r^,

a) " To the glory of God." Deut. 10: 20, 2 Chron.

15 • 14.

b) To the safety of our neighbor." Josh 2 : 12 ; 9 :

15.

3. " Such an oath is founded on God's word" and the example of " the saints, both in the Old and the New Testament." .r oo

a) " On God's Word." Deut. 6 : 13, Isa. 45 : 23. God Himself made use of the oath. Gen. 22 : 16, Ps. 110 : 4, Heb. 6 : 17 (v. 16 : " For men verily swear by the ' greater : and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife." Therefore God swears by Himself, because there is no one greater than He is).

b) " Such an oath was justly used by the saints, both in the Old and the New Testament." In the Old Testament: Abraham, Gen. 14: 22; 24: 3; Isaac, Gen. 26 : 31 ; Jacob, Gen. 31 : 53 ; David, 1 Sam. 24 : 22. In the New Testameni : Paul, Rom. 9:1. Christ made use of the oath when the government, the highpriest and necessity required it to confirm the truth that He was the Son of God. Matt. 26 : 63, 64. The form of the oath among the Jews differed from that in use among us, since the judge pronounced the form of the oath,—" I adjure thee by the living God"— and in the same way the one sworn, responded to what was to

be confirmed : " Thou sayest it, it is so, i. e., I confirm it."

11. What a Lawful Oath Is.

" Lawful," i. e., allowed, and to be recognized as legal and valid is only an oath that is sworn in the name of God.

1. The lawful oath is

a) Calling upon God. Isa. 65 : 10, 2 Cor. 1 : 23.

b) "As the only one who knows the heart" (the allknowing One), who alone knows the secrets of the heart, that He will bear witness to the truth, i. e., as a witness vouch for the truth of a declaration or of a promise. 1 Kings 8 : 39.

c) As the highest judge (the Almighty), '* who will punish me if I swear falsely." Deut. 32 : 35.

2. The oath is therefore (briefly) : the calling upon God as a witness to the truth, and as the avenger of untruth.

3. An oath can be taken only before God as the allknowing One (searcher of hearts) and the Almighty (judge), and, therefore, not before "saints or any other creatures," because to them does not belong such honor as is involved in an invocation, which implies that the one invoked is almighty and omniscient. Jer. 5:7.

4. When truth and fidelity, to which God is summoned as witness, are broken through untruth and unfaithfulness, under the first circumstances there is sworn a false oath or perjury is committed, and in the second the oath taken is broken. When in testifying, something is definitely affirmed of which one is not quite certain, and which subsequently p>i*oves untrue, one has committed heedless perjury. It is also to be considered a false oath when one makes silent reservations, by which violence is done to the truth as a whole, or when one uses misleading expressions. By

such a course Almighty God is mocked. " Rather lose money and possessions than to swear falsely." (Proverb.) Lev. 19: 12, Prov. 6: 19, Gal. 6 : 7.

5. A lawful oath must be kept inviolable, even when one suffers danger or loss thereby. Num. 30 : 2. But a wicked oath, i. e., one in which a man has committed himself to do what is sinful, dare not be kept, because it involves a two-fold sin, both in the promise and in the act. An example of what one is not to do under such circumstances, is found in Herod, Matt. 14 : 7-10. On the contrary, an example of the opposite kind, which teaches us what to do, is found in David, who in excitement had sworn death against Nabal and against all his household, but did not execute his oath. 1 Sam. 25 : 22, 32-34.

6. The different kinds of oaths. Either a declaration or a promise is confirmed by an oath ; the former, which concerns the " truth," is called an oath of testimony, and the latter, which relates to fidelity, is called an oath of obligation. This again is manifold : the oath of submission and allegiance, the oath to one's colors, and the ofiicial oath ; the oath which is taken by the members of an assembly, of the Diet and the Synods. A ruler of a country, when he enters upon his ofiice, takes the oath of fidelity to the constitution of the country.

7. The outward form in taking the oath. The one swearing holds up the right hand, the palm of the hand being turned toward the face, to indicate thereby that he invokes God in heaven upon his soul. In the other cases, when the right hand is raised, the first three fingers (the thumb, index and middle finger) are extended, and the other two are bent inward, to indicate that the Triune God is invoked, and that both body and soul are pledged. Formerly the left hand was at the same time laid upon the Bible.

8. At the side of the oath stands the vow, which is a promise not bound to any distinct form. Of the highest character is the vow by the joining of hands, and the pledge "instead of an oath" ; then the vow in general, whether it be to God or man. A vow to God is made, e. g., in confirmation, a vow before God unto men in the wedding ceremony, the promise of marital love and fidelity even unto death. Ps. 50 : 14, Eccles. 5 : 2, 4.

Examples : Jacob at Bethel, Gen. 28 : 20-22 ; Hannah, 1 Sam. 1 : 11, 27, 28.