First, that the ministry of the gospel and the schools be maintained ; and that I, especially on the fSabbath, that is, on the day of rest, diligently frequent the church of God, to hear his word, to use the sacraments, publicly to call upon the Lord, and cootribute to the relief of the poor, as becomes a Christian. Secondly, that all the days of my life I cease from my evil works, and yield myself to the Lord, to work by his Holy Spirit in me, and thus begin in this life the eternal Sabbath.

I. Sabbath and Sunday.

1. To hallow the Sabbath means to separate the day appointed for rest (Hebrew, Sabbath) from the remaining days of the week, so that ordinary business avocations may be omitted on the one day, and the congregation may assemble for public worship.

2. For Israel the Sabbath had a three-fold significance— ceremonial, social and moral.

a) Ceremonial. 1. It was a sign under the old covenant. Ex. 31 : 17, *' It is a siorn between me and the children of Israel forever." Therefore, verse 15, ^' whosoever doeth any work on the Sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death."

2. It served as a reminder of the creation, of the departure of Israel out of Egypt, and of the giving of the hivv at Sinai.

3. It was intended for religious gatherings.

b) Social. 1. The rest, beginning regularly on the -seventh day, was to afford to the body and the soul necessary relaxation and refreshing, in order that man might not succumb under his labors. 2. For those who served (son and daughter, man-servant and maid-servant, also the stranger, the non-Israelite, and the cattle) the command was to afford protection against the exhaustion of their physical powers and against -exaction. The Sabbath, was to be a blessing from God to the laborer. Mark 2 : 27.

c) Moral. It was to prevent man's being submerged by the earthly life, and to incite him to seek the higher gifts of life in communion with God.

3. Neither were the Israelites forbidden by this -command to perform works of necessity and charity. Compare the plucking of the ears of corn by the disciples, in order to satisfy their hunger, Mark 2 : 23, and the healings on the Sabbath day wrought by Christ, Mark 3 : 1, Luke 14 : 1.

4. All the ceremonies of the old covenant were only shadows, types of Christ, and of the blessings of the new covenant. Col. 2 : 16, 17, " Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days : which are a shadow of the things to come ; but the body is of Christ." In this sense is Christ's word to be understood, Mark 2 : 28, " The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath." And by His rest in the grave on the seventh day, the Sabbath, so far as its ceremonial significance is concerned, has been fulfilled and abolished, as well as circumcision, the passover, etc.

5. On this account the Christian Church was free to appoint, instead of the last day (the seventh), the first day of the week as a day of rest and freedom, as well as the day on which the congregation was to serve the Lord, thus making it the Lord's day. Here also is to

be found the ground on which ceremonial days and times were set aside with the ceremonial institutions, because in many instances the people still clung too readily to these externals, and sought help in them. Gal. 4 : 9, 10.

6. The New Testament furnishes the clearest evidence that Christians already in the times of the apostles observed the first day of the week, Sunday, as a day of assembly. Acts 20 : 7. (compare Acts 2 : 42, 46), 1 Cor. 16: 2, Rev. 1: 10.

7. As was the Old Testament Sabbath, so also is our Sabbath a memorial day (remember the Sabbath day) of creation, and of redemption — the former from EgyjDt, the latter by Christ from sin.

a) On the first day of the week and of the world God created light. Gen. 1 : 3, 5.

b) On the first day of the week Christ arose. Mark 16: 2.

8. The social significance of the Sabbath as a protection of the working classes against the exhaustion of their physical powers has passed over to Sunday.

II. Religious Worship.

1. The holyday {i. e., Sunday and other religious holidays) finds its chief significance in the observance of public worship ; participation in which is a duty for the individual, and in turn becomes to him a blessing.

2. Therefore, it is according to the will of God " that the ministry of the gospel and the schools be maintained."

a) The ministry of the gospel and schools serve for the instruction of adults and youths in true doctrine unto holiness.

1) The ministry of the gospel was instituted by Christ, individual ministers are called by men. Eph^ 4: 11, Tit. 1: 5.

2) Schools are the nurseries of the Church. Their most important function is to give religious instruction by means of biblical history and the catechism. This is supplemented by Christian training. Schools are not independent institutions of the same rank with the State and the Church. They are entrusted with the training of the members, for a certain length of time, of both Church and State, and, in reality, stand in the relation of helps to the parent, upon whom, first of all, rests the obligation to instruct and train his children. Deut. 6 : 7, Gen. 18 : 19, Ex. 13 : 8, 14.

Three factors have a right in the schools : The State, the Church, and the parents. The school is an institution of the State, and its duty is to see that the school educates good citizens. It is the duty and the privilege of the Church, which first established schools, to see to it that the children are not taught infidel and false doctrine, but that they are instructed and trained according to the doctrines of the Church to which they belong. Parents also have a right in the matter, because to them has been given by God the nearest right to their children, which no civil law can take away from them. "

b) Schools are to be maintained.

1) The authorities in State and Church must take their maintenance to heart, because the ministry of the gospel and schools are of the greatest importance to the true culture and civilization of the people. Isa. 49 : 23.

2) Provision must be made for the education of ministers and teachers. 2 Tim. 2 : 2.

3) The churches must furnish the means for the support of ministers and teachers, and for the needs of churches and schools. 1 Cor. 9 : 14, Gal. 6 : 6.

3. The most important function of the ministry of the gospel is to conduct religious services, and it is the duty of the members of the congregation to take part

in the same, " diligently frequent the church of God." Heb. 10 : 25. The several parts of public religious services are, as in the early Church, so also in the Keformed Church :

a) To preach and to learn (not merely hear) the Word of God. Luke U : 28, Rom. 10 : 17, Eccles 5 : 1. Only passages from the canonical scriptures are to be used as texts for sermons ; in the same way sermons on the catechism (the Heidelberg) must be based upon passages of Scripture.

b) " To use the sacraments." By this is meant not merely participation in the holy supper, but also that baptism be performed, as is the order of the Reformed Church, in the church before the congregation, so that it also may have a part in the service, and that adults may be reminded anew of their baptismal covenant. Acts 20 : 7, "And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread (to celebrate the Lord's Supper, compare Acts 2 : 42), Paul preached unto them."

c) " Publicly to call upon the Lord" (in distinction from family worship). This is done by prayer, which the minister offers or reads, and which every one is to offer in common with him ; and by the singing of the congregation. Acts 1 : 14, Ps. 68 : 26, Eph. 5 : 19, Amos 5 : 23. As the first Christians sang only psalms, so the Reformed Church has especially fostered the singing of psalms.

d) " Contribute to the relief of the poor." In this are included also other collections which are taken for Church purposes or for other needy objects. In Church collections it is proper to contribute more than the so-called " Church dollar," i. e., one penny. The poor widow (Mark 12 : 41-44) put indeed only a mite into the treasury, but it was, as the Lord said, all her substance, i. e., all the money she had, and which she

needed for her subsistence, she gave. 1 Cor. 16 : 2, 2 Cor. 9 : 7, Gal. 6 : 10. " Christian almsgiving" is proper not only at the ordinary Sunday and festival services, but also at the services of missionary and Gustavus Adolphus Societies. (The word *' alms" is derived from the Greek word, meaning " mercy.")

4. But public religious services do not constitute the entire holyday ; to these must be added edification at home, by reading, singing, praying and godly conversation in the family circle or with friends. Col. 3 : 16.

5. The rest of the body from earthly labor and the rest of the soul in God, as well as the work of God in the hearts of His children, constitute the holyday and the real Sabbath joy. Ps. 84 : 1,2.

6. It is the duty of Christian governments to provide for Sabbath rest, and to secure immunity from hindrances and offences against such rest. For Sabbath observance Christians themselves must provide. This must be done, not by police authority, but by custom ; and where this has lost its power, it must again be restored. Above all, believing Christians are not to make the day of the Lord a day of pleasure and of feasting, nor are they to participate in worldly entertainments. Eph. 5 : 15, Rom. 12 : 2.

7. Already in the first century the churches commenced to celebrate special festivals on particular Sabbaths or on other days, to commemorate the mighty acts of God : The Christmas festival, which is preceded by Advent ; the Easter festival, preceded by passion week and Good Friday ; the Feast of Pentecost, and between this and the Easter festival, Ascension Day» To this have been added in the Protestant Church, the fast-days and days of prayer, and the Reformation festival. A large part of the Reformed Church celebrates only the Sabbath, others (in Switzerland and Germany) have also retained the traditional festival

days. But in no wise must the proclamation of the mighty deeds of God be limited to the special festivals, which are celebrated in their remembrance. Ps. 96 : 2.

8. Christian worship in the times of the apostles was not associated with the temple worship of the wliole congregation of Israel, but as the arrangement of elders was derived from the synagogue, the individual congregation, so also was the order of service, in which the word of God formed the centre. When the hierarchy of the Middle Ages found their types in the highpriests and priests of the old covenant, and a new " sacrifice" in the mass was invented, a new temple service with altars and consecrations was established in the Christian Church.

The Reformed Church establishes its order of worship upon the Scriptures and upon the usage of the first Christian congregations. There is especially one passage of Scripture which contains the different parts of the apostolic church service. Acts 2 : 42 : "And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles' doctrine (preaching), and fellowship (participation in alms-giving), and in breaking of bread (the use of the sacraments), and in prayers (to which also belonged singFrom the beginning there has prevailed in the Reformed Church a certain freedom with reference to the several parts of church worship, which, however, has been ruled throughout by the law of simplicity ; thus, e. g., in the Swiss and the French Directory of Worship the confession of sin stood first, in the Palatinate, at the end. The true order of the different parts which have found a place in the services of the Reformed Church, is as follows: 1. Singing. 2. Confession of sin and gracious consolation (announcement of forgiveness). 3. Prayer. 4. Reading of Scripture. (5. Apostles' Creed.) 6. Singing. 7. Sermon. 8. Prayer and

the Lord's Prayer. 9. Singing. 10. Celebration of the sacraments. 11. Benediction.

III. The Eternal Sabbath.

1. It would be a gross perversion to think that when due respect has been shown to the Sabbath or Sunday, it is not necessary on the other days of the week to give such close attention to a godly life. The Chris^ tian is to be the same in his working clothes as in his Sunday garments. As in this life already we have in our hearts the beginning of that eternal joy, which after this life will be perfect, so here already we begin with the new life in God, the eternal Sabbath.

2. The beginning of the eternal Sabbath in this life consists in this :

a) ** That all the days of my life I cease from my evil works." Isa. 58: 13, Rom. 12: 1, 1 Peter 2 : 11, James 1 : 22, 27.

b) " That I yield myself to the Lord to work by His Holy Spirit in me." For otherwise we cannot cease from our evil works, which alone is not sufficient, for we are also to do good works, to which the Spirit of God impels and strengthens us. A means to this €nd is daily family worship, morning and evening, or at least at one of these periods of the day, in connection with the reading of the divine Word and prayer, and, if possible, also with singing. Gal. 5 : 16, 18.

3. The perfection of the eternal Sabbath will be found in the life beyond, when we shall be free from all sin, and from all the troubles and miseries of the present life, and shall praise God and serve Him in perfect righteousness and holiness forever. But no one will attain this perfect state who has not made the beginning here. Heb. 4: 9, 11.