No ; for when God forbids envy, hatred, and anger, he commands us to love our neighbor as oui selves ; to show patience, peace, meekDtss, meicy, and all kindness towards him, and prevent his hurt as much as in us lies ; and that we do good even unto our enemies.

The purpose of commandments 6 — 0 is the protection of our neighbor and of ills propeity. The sixth commandment pertains to our neighbor's life, the seventh to his i'amily, the eighth to his property, and the ninth to his honor.

I. What is Forbidden in the Sixth Commandment.

A. Murder is forbidden. To kill means to take a man's life. There is one kind of murder which destroys the body, and another which destroys the soul. The commandment refers chiefly to the former, to the slaying of the body. There is a distinction to be made between a coarser and a more refined form of murder. The former is accomplished by outward violence or direct means, and the latter by so undermining and injuring the health and life of our neighbor that his death follows as a result.

1. What is embraced in murder.

a) Reviling, i. e., speaking evil of or against our neighbor. Ps. 15 : 1, 3.

b) Hatred, i. e., cherishing evil thoughts in the heart against our neighbor. Lev. 19 : 17.

c) Insult, i. e., slanderous expressions or acts intended to grieve or to hurt. Lev. 24 : 19.

d) Taking life, i. e., the violent destruction of life. Lev. 24 : 17.

e) Revengefulness. Lev. 19 : 18.

/) Self-inflicted injury. Prov. 24 : 8. Injury is inflicted upon oneself, e. g., by withholding from the body, through covetousness, whatever is needful to it, or by a lack of cleanliness and rest, Rom. 13 : 14 ; or by undermining one's health through intemperance in eating and drinking, or sensuality, 1 Cor. 3 : 17 ; or by mutilating one of the members of the body to escape military service. Suicide is especially forbidden. When this is caused by the clouding of the mind iu delirium, or fever heat, a man is to be pitied. It may also be caused by despair over external circumstances or inward unrest ; also by fear of punishment (as iu the case of the jailer at Philippi, who would have killed himself, Acts 16 : 27). No man has power

over his own life. It belongs to God, who gave it. Examples of suicide are Saul, 1 Sam. 31 : 4, and Judas, Matt. 27 : o.

g) Wanton or unnecessary exposure to danger or overtaxing one's strength. This is presumption. Matt. 4 : 7. In this is included duelling, which is indefensible on moral grounds : 1. Because it is inspired either by revenge or by a false sense of honor ; 2. Because thereby one exposes his life wantonly, i. e., unnecessarily to danger ; and 3. Because the aim is to injure or even to destroy the life of the opponent, or at all events to bring it into danger. There is more moral courage required, if one is the offender, to ask for forgiveness ; and if one is the offended party, to forgive an enemy than to face a pistol. The meeting of David and Goliath cannot be quoted as an example, since it was an act of war and the two decided the conflict for their respective armies. When the Apostle Paul demanded as a matter of honor of the magistrates of the city of Philippi, who had punished him innocently and uncondemned, that they should themselves bring them forth out of the prison, he was not anxious about his personal honor, but that no reproach should be brought upon the gospel he was preaching in Greece, which he had just entered. Under other circumstances he was willing to bear all manner of contumely in his person. 2 Cor. 11 : 23-25.

2. How murder is committed.

a) In thought. Zech. 8 : 17.

b) In words, invective, words of abuse, and of railing and the like. Jer. 9 : 8, Matt. 5 : 22.

c) By angry, threatening, and mocking gestures, etc. Gen. 4 : 6, Ps. 22 : 7.

d) In act, as when a man himself takes the life of another violently or treacherously. Num. 35 : 16-21. Under the Mosaic law there was also a provision that

when any one killed another accidentally, unintentionally and without enmity, he could flee into one of the cities of refuge in the land, and after the death of the highpriest could return home unpunished ; he was thus not punished by death, but only with banishment or imprisonment. Cain was a murderer. Gen. 4 : 8.

He also is guilty of the act of murder who kills anyone " by another when he incites and instigates or authorizes another to commit the act ; as David had put to death Uriah (2 Sam. 12 : 9), Ahab, Naboth (1 Kings 21), Herod, John (Matt. 14 : 10).

Those become guilty of destroying the soul, who become to others a stumbling-block or give offence tO' them in words, gestures or deeds, by which they are led into sin or to a denial of their faith. Matt. 18 : 6, 7.

B. The root of murder, i. e., the thought out of which the deed springs is also forbidden.

1. Of such a nature are :

a) Envy, hati^ed, anger, which excite the heart to enmity against one's neighbor. Gal. 5: 19-21.

b) Kevenge, i. e., the desire to avenge upon another a real or supposed wrong which one has suffered, i. e., to return evil for evil. The world says : " Revenge is sweet." It is indeed so for the flesh, but it has a bitter root, hatred, and bears a deadly fruit, enmity unto death. 1 Thess. o : 15, Kom. 12 : 19. Christian revenge is described in Rom. 12 : 20, " Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him ; if he thirst, give him drink : for in so doing thou shait heaj:* coals of fire on his head."

2. Such roots of evil must be eradicated from the heart :

a) Because from them finally springs murder, and whoever wishes to destroy a weed, must pull it up by the roots. Matt. 15 : 19.

b) Because God hates these evil desires of the hearty

looks upon them as secret murder, and judges them the same as the deed itself. 1 Sam. 16 : 7, Matt, o : 22, 1 John 8: 15. 3. Examples.

a) The brothers of Joseph wei-e hostile to him and envied him, and when they saw him in the distance before he came near to them, they formed plans to kill him. Gen. 37 : 4, 11, 18. Envy was, therefore, the root of their murderous thoughts.

b) Absalom hated Amnon, and commanded his servants and said : Smite Amnon and slay him. And the servants of Absalom did so. 2 Sam. 13 : 22, 28, 29. Absalom's hatred was the root of the murder wdiich he committed " by another."

c) The sons of Jacob became very wroth, and Simeon and Levi each took his sword and went into the city (Shechem) (as two against many) boldly and slew the males, in order to avenge the disgrace brought upon their sister Dinah. Gen. 34 : 7, 25. Anger and reveno-e were in this case the root of murder.

II. What is Allowed.

1. The State is allowed to execute the death penalty, but only when the sentence is just; otherwise when it is inflicted in passion or unjustly, it is also murder. The magistrate bears the sword, i. e., he is to prevent rnurder, in that he punishes the same with the death of the murderer, whereby he not only punishes him and renders him harmless, but also deters others from <;ommitting the same wicked act. The execution of the death penalty is not commanded under all circumstances. The pardon of the criminal is also allowed, and the death penalty may be entirely remitted or another punishment substituted for it. Rom. 13 : 4, Gen. 9 : 6, Matt. 20 : 52.

2. Self-defense. AVhen in an attack or a surprise, by which our life is threatened, it is not possible for us

to obtain the protection of the State, we are allowed to act in self-defense. And if the assailant should thereby lose his life, it is not murder or homicide.

3. Lawful war, which is to be looked upon as the self-defense of a people when they are attacked or as the exercise of the power of the State to prevent injustice when occasion demands it. A war occasioned by ambition, greed of conquest, revenge and other passions is unjustifiable. Whether a war is lawful, is not to be decided by the individual subject or soldier, but bv the government, which also carries the responsibility."^

4. In this connection may also be considered the killing of animals, although the command has reference only to the taking of human life. Since the flood, God has allowed men to kill animals in self-protection and for food. Gen. 9 : 2, 3, Prov. 12 : 10. Children are to be warned against torturing insects, such as bugs, and flies, and robbing birds' nests. Many a murderer, who ended his life upon the gallows, has confessed that he commenced in his youth by being cruel to small animals, especially to young birds.

III. "What is Commanded in the Sixth Commandment.

It is not enough that we do not kill our neighbor or otherwise injure him in any manner (Ques. 105 and 106), which God has forbidden, but He also commands us to act according to His will toward our neighbor. Such uprightness of conduct expresses itself (Ques! 107) in at least eight virtues. Every man is my neighbor without reference to his nationality or relio-ion, and especially he who is in need of my help"? Christ teaches this truth in the parable of the good Samaritan, Luke 10 : 29-37, when He changed the question : " Who is my neighbor ?" to " To whom are you neighbor ?" Acts 17 : 26, 2 Peter 1:7.

1. " To love our neighbor as ourselves." Love is a cordial attachment to another. Lev. 19 : 18. How we

are to imderstand the expression " as ourselves" Christ teaches us in the golden rule. Matt. 7 : 12.

2-6. "To show patience, peace, meekness, mercy, and all kindness," through which love expresses itself. Col. 3 : 12, 13.

a) Patience consists in this, that we endure the insults of our neighbor with unruffled temper. Its strength lies in self-control. Matt. 5 : 39.

b) By peace is here to be understood peaceableness, the disposition according to which one is willing to sacrifice a part of one's own right and advantage in order to live in unity with one's neighbor, and the endeavor to create and further peace among others. Rom. 12 : 18, Matt. 5 : 40 ; 5 : 9. Peaceableness is also manifested by approaching a neighbor, who has cause for complaint, to seek reconciliation with him. Matt. 5 : 23, 24, 25.

c) Meekness is to show itself in our efforts to convince our fellow-men of their wrong and to correct them, in that it is done not in bitterness, but with gentle words. Matt. 5: 5, Gal. 6: 1, 2.

d) Mercy consists in deep sympathy with our neighbor's bodily and mental distress and in active effort to help him out of his need. Luke 6 : 36, Matt. 5 : 7.

e) Kindness is sincere cordiality in word, gesture and act in our intercourse with our neighbor, and the readiness to serve him in all good things, without seeking anything for oneself in return. Matt. 5 : 47. Children should show kindliness toward their companions, as well as to adults, by their readiness to serve them.

7. " To prevent his hurt as much as in us lies," i. e., as much as is possible for us we should prevent any hurt from coming upon our neighbor, or relieve him of any that may have befallen him. Prov. 24 : 11, Isa. b^ : 7. In order to save the life of our neighbor, we

should risk even our own life, if necessity demands it. John 15: 13.

8. " That we do good even unto our enemies." An enemy is one who wishes me ill, or from an evil purpose does me harm. Love of an enemy is shown not merely in refraining from returning evil for evil, but also in recompensing his evil for good. Ex. 23 : 4 5 Matt. 5 : 44, 45, Eom. 12 : 20.

The suffering Savior (Luke 22 : 49-51 ; 23 : 24) and dying Stephen (Acts 7 : 59) are examples of love of enemies.