Since both our body and soul are temples of the Holy Ghost, he commands us to preserve them pure aud holy ; therefore he forbids all unchaste actions, gestures, words, thoughts, desires, and whatever can entice men thereto.

In treating this commandment before children, the greatest care needs to be exercised, as the sphere of marital life is known to them only as it manifests itself in the family, and since it behooves us to warn children against sins which for the most part are yet unknown to them. But the subject must not be evaded, especially since in our time sins of the flesh are so appallingly common, and our youth, through increasing effeminacy, are brought more and more under the fascination of secret sins. One should speak of it with earnestness and reserve, but yet in plainness and candor. With my catechumens I have sought to reach

this end in an interview, which, as pastor, I was in the habit of holding with each one privately in my study before confirmation.

I. Of Holy Matrimony.

1. Holy matrimony is a union as to body and soul for life between one man and one woman, ordained by God Himself and sanctified in Christ. Gen. 1 : 27, 28, Matt. 19 : 4-6, Gen. 2 : 24. Polygamy belongs to the abominations of the heathen, and, as found under the old covenant, is to be judged in the light of God's forbearance.

By His presence at the marriage of Cana, Christ ^ave His sanction to holy matrimony, and by His first miracle pledged His blessing upon it. John 2 : 1-11.

2. In entering into a conjugal union one is not to proceed thoughtlessly, and outward circumstances, such ^s money or physical beauty and so on, are not to be the basis of decision. It must be a matter of the heart and be consummated with parental approval. Prov. 31 : 10, 30.

The proverb says : " Marriages are made in heaven." This holds true only when honor and piety control both parties, and when the will of God is inquired after. Example : Isaac and Rebecca, Gen. 24 : 3-4, 12-14.

3. The civil ceremony precedes the religious. The latter only constitutes true marriage, since in it alone the marriage covenant is sealed in the name of God, and the betrothed are united in marriage, i. e., they pledge marital fidelity to each other before God. " Trauen" (to unite in marriage) is derived from " Treue" (fidelity), and matrimony is spoken of beautifully among the people as pledged troth, ^. e., as the firmest and most inviolable pledge. The religious ceremony is not to be neglected, because by it matrimony is sanctified, and it is only then that we can

speak of it as " holy matrimony." Those who are engaged are not to regard themselves, as is often the case, as man and wife before they are joined in marriage. Otherwise they sin grievously.

4. The basis of the right relation in holy matrimony is : " to show to one another love, honor and fidelity." Eph. 5: 28, 33, 1 Peter 3: 7.

The husband is the head of the family, also of the wife. Eph. 5 : 22, 23.

The wife is the helpmeet of the husband in labor, in joy and in sorrow, but not his slave. Gen. 2 : 18. Their relation to God in Christ and to salvation is expressed in Gal. 3 : 28, i. e., there is no difference between them, for they are all one in Christ Jesus. Since the loss of Paradise through sin, it may be said in many respects, " Ehestand — Wehestand" (state of matrimony — state of woe). Gen, 3 : 16-19. Under all circumstances the counsel of the apostle (Gal. G : 2) is to be observed, "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ." Matrimony is also a state of joy, especially when God blesses it with a family of healthy and well-favored children. Ps. 128 : 2-6.

5. Mixed marriages, i. e., marriages between Protestants and Catholics, are to be avoided, as inward and marital peace are too much endangered when both hold firmly to their Churches. Marriages between Christians and Jews or heathen are entirely indefensible, as in these cases there is not only a difference in confessions, but also in religion. A believing Christian should also guard against forming a matrimonial alliance with an unbeliever, since his religious life would be easily affected thereby.

6. The marriage bond is indissoluble, and divorce is under no circumstances to be granted, except when marital infidelity of the one or of the other has been proved ; further also in cases of willful desertion.

These are the only admissible grounds of divorce, according to the old Reformed marriage regulation (Calvin). All others are without support in God's Word and Spirit. Matt. 19 : 9, 1 Cor. 7 : 10, 15.

II. What God has Forbidden in the Seventh Commandment.

All uncleanness in holy wedlock or in single life.

1. Outward.

a) " Unchaste actions." Gal. 5 : 19.

Adultery is committed by a husband when he stands in unlawful relations with another woman ; by a wife, when she stands in such relations with another man. Examples : For our warning, Herod, to whom John the Baptist said : " It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife" (Mark 6 : 17, 18) ; for our imitation, Joseph, when Potiphar's wife wished to betray him, who said : " How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God ?" Gen. 39 : 9.

Such unlawful relations among those in single life are called unchastity. The holy scriptures characterize bodily impurity, the so-called secret sins, which cry to heaven, onanism and sodomy, as the most abominable of all sins. Gen. 18 : 20, 21, Rom. 1 : 26, 27.

b) " Unchaste gestures and words." Eph. 4 : 29 ; 5 : 3, 4.

With, unchaste gestures must also be classed all kinds of indecent exposure of the body. Decollete dress among women also does not accord with a Christian sense of modesty.

2. Inward.

a) " Unchaste thoughts and desires." The source of all impurity is the fleshly lust of the heart. Matt. 15: 19 ; 5 : 28, James 1 : 15.

b) " Whatever can entice thereto." In this is included first of all intemperance in eating and drinking (compare. Lot, Gen. 19 : 33) and idleness (David, 2 Sam.

11 : 2), Rom. 13 : 13, 14, Prov. 23 : 31-33, Eph. 5 : 18. These well-known sayings are true : " Idleness is the beginning of all evil ;" or " Idleness is the devil's couch." Then evil companions and their loose speech. 1 Cor. 15 : 33. Further, unchaste or tempting songs, books (romances) and pictures. Lastly, the theatre and all sorts of amusements, e. g., drinking-bouts and frivolous dances, whereby the sensual desires are excited. Matt. 14 : 6.

Ill- What Grod lias Commanded in the Seventh Commandment. Chastity in holy wedlock and in single life.

1. Aversion to and hatred of all unchastity, both outward and inward, " that we must, with all our hearts, detest the same." Jude, v. 23, 2 Tim. 2 : 22.

2. The preservation of a chaste mind and heart. 1 Peter 2: 11, Phil. 4: 8.

3. The observance of modesty and chastity in life. Heb. 13 : 4, Gal. 5 : 16.

IV. Why Unchastity is to be Detested.

1. Unchastity in itself dishonors, and in its eftects injures both body and soul.

2. Unchastity is accursed of God. Heb. 13 : 4.

3. The body and soul of the Christian are a temple of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 6 : 18, 20.

4. Marriage is a symbol of the holy communion between Christ and the Church. Eph. 5 : 22-32.

V. What Helps in Preserving Chastity.

1. Prayer and a chaste heart. Ps. 51 : 10.

2. The avoidance of all that would excite impurity (compare II., 2, b).

3. Watchfulness over oneself. Prov. 4 : 23, Job 31 : 1.

4. Constant thought of the nearness of God, who looks into the heart and sees what is hidden. Ps. 139 : 1-4.

(jaestion 110,

What doth God forbid in the eighth command ."

God forbids not only those thefts and robberies which are punishable by the magistrate, but he comprehends uuder the name of theft, all wicked tricks and devices, whereby we design to appropriate to ourselves the goods which belong to our neighbor: whether it be by f >rce, or under the appearance of RKiirr, as l)y unjust weights, ells, measures, fraudulent merchandise, false coins usury, or by any (ither way f >rbidden by God ; as also all covetousness, all waste and abuse of his gifts.