That I promotf^ the advantasre of ray neighbor in every instance I can or may, and deal with him as I desire to be dealt with by others; further also, that I faithfully labor, so that I may be able to relieve the needy.

I. God Forbids Us to Encroach In Any Way on our Neighbor's

Property.

1. To steal means to appropriate unlawfully another's property, or in any way whatever to bring into our possession what belongs to our neighbor. Hab. 2 : 6. Property that belongs to another may be lawfully acquired by sale, exchange or gift, etc.

2. Many persons would justify their dishonesty by excuses that are inadequate, claiming that the one whom they rob has an abundance or more than he needs; that what they take is small in quantity or of insignificant value ; that necessity has driven them to it, and that necessity knows no law. Children do not regard it as a serious wrong to take money or other things belonging to their parents. The sin does not depend on whether the person robbed has much, nor on the quantity stolen, but it depends upon the deed itself. It is stealing in every case. Poverty and necessity do not license stealing. The way of deliverance for such is indicated bv God Himself Ps. 91 :

15, " He shall call upon me, and I will answer him ; I will be with him in trouble ; I will deliver him, and honour him." To children God says, Prov. 28 : 24, " Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no transgression ; the same is the companion of a destroyer" (in league with robbers).

3. Stealing is a grave sin, because it is an infringement of the order of God, who has allotted to each one his portion, and by this commandment He has sanctified property. Prov. 30 : 9, 1 Cor. 6: 10, "Nor thieves,

nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God."

Achan (Josh. 7) and Judas (John 12 : 6) were thieves.

4. A distinction is to be made between coarser and more refined theft.

(A) 5. To the coarser form of theft belong :

a) The secret appropriation of another's property, such as stealing from churches, houses, orchards, fields or woods.

b) Kobbery, the taking away of another's property by force or by threatening the safety and life of the owner. Highway robbery. Lev. 19 : 13.

(^) 6. Under the head of refined theft fall "all wicked tricks and devices, whereby we design to appropriate to ourselves the goods which belong to our neighbor, whether it be by force, or under the appearance of right." To this class belong cunning and deception of every sort in conduct and in trade, by which men take advantage of their fellows and injure their property. In these days the state punishes not only " thefts and robberies," but also every form of fraud. A deceitful transaction has the appearance of being right, i. e., outwardly it appears as if everything were right and proper, and yet it is not honest. Amos 8: 4-7.

7. By way of example the following wicked tricks may be cited as frauds :

a) " Unjust weights, ells, measures." Lev. 19 : 35, Prov. 11 : 1.

b) The sale of bad merchandize, and the adulteration of food for profit. To this category belongs inferior workmanship. 1 Thess. 4 : 6.

c) Counterfeit coin and usury. Not only to make, but also to circulate counterfeit money when one is aware of it, is fraud. Usury in the sense of interest on money lent is not forbidden in itself (see Christ's teaching in the parable. Matt. 25 : 27, Luke 19 : 23), but certainly in the sense of excessive interest, or when the need of one's neighbor is taken advantage of, and when interest is taken from the poor. Lev. 25 : 35, 36.

d) "Any other way forbidden by God," even if it is not directly condemned in the Word of God, but yet is contrary to its spirit. To this category belong :

1. Keceiving stolen goods. " To conceal is as bad as to steal" (proverb).

This sin is committed a) when one knows of a theft and fails to give information of it ; b) when one conceals what has been stolen ; e) when one accepts as a ^ift or purchases what he knows to have been stolen. Prov. 29 : 24.

2. Changing boundaries, either by secretly removing landmarks or effacing such lines. Deut. 27 : 17.

3. Embezzlement by purloining or permitting to go to ruin that which has been entrusted to one's charge {e. g., by servants and workmen). Lev. 6 : 2.

4. To borrow and not to pay back, as well as all forms of reckless contracting of debts. Ps. 37 : 21.

5. Keeping back or curtailing wages that have been •earned. Lev. 19 : 13, Jer. 22 : 13, James 5 : 4.

6. Not to give back to a known owner anything that has been found. Lev. 6 : 2, 3.

7. Gambling (cards, dice, lotteries, etc.). 2 Thess. 5: 11, 12.

8. Unjust lawsuits. Jer. 5 : 28, James 2 : 6. Example : Ahab against Naboth. 1 Kings 21.

(C) 9. The unlawful use of one's own property is likewise theft. All property is an individual trust from God, for whose use an account must be rendered. 1 Cor. 4 : 7, Luke 16 : 2.

Both covetousness and extravagance are sinful. a) Covetousness is the inordinate desire for possessions and retaining them without making use of them for the benefit of oneself or others. Luke 12-15 1 Tim. 6 : 10.

Covetousness is : 1. Theft, because we do not honor God with our possessions, but on the contrary we appropriate them to ourselves and alienate them from God. Prov. 3:9. 2. Idolatry, because we withhold from our own families and from those in need what we owe them ; yea, the covetous man robs himself, in that he begrudges himself everything. The avaricious person also readily resorts to unlawful means to enrich himself or to increase his goods. Col. 3 : 9, 1 Tim. 6 : 9.

b) Unnecessary extravagance consists in excessive expenditure for eating and drinking, clothing, pleasures, etc., as well as in expenditures for things which we do not need. Beside this wastefulness in money and possessions there is a wastefulness of time. Such a squanderer of time is called a " sluggard." Prov. 23 : 20-21; 6: 6-11. Example: The prodigal son. Luke 15 : 13, 14. ^

Waste of time and money is theft : for time is stolen from God, who has given the command, "Six days shalt thou labor;" and the man's family is dei3rived of the money wasted, and he brings himself and them, as well as his needy fellow-men, into distress and want. 1 Tim. 5 : 8.

Not every expenditure is "useless extravagance;" but men of wealth and rank, as well as kings and princes, have the right to spend more for their table, for clothing, upon their houses, etc., than a poor man, or one of lower rank. At the same time one is not to live beyond his means. Such expenditure is again to the advantage of trade and labor by which other people live. But such a mode of life also becomes sinful when one's affections are set upon it, or when thereby one's duties to his fellow-men are neglected, and very little is left for the kingdom of God. Hag. 1 : 2-4. The rich man, Luke 16 : 19-21.

II. God Commands Us to be Concbrned for our Neighbor's Welfare.

(A) 1. Our relation to our neighbor in general. " That I promote the advantage {i. e., welfare and prosperity) of my neighbor in every instance I can or may" {i. e., where I myself am in a position to do it and as far as my circumstances allow it). Phil. 2 : 4, 1 Pet. 4 : 10.

2. When our neighbor has been injured by robbery of any kind, the thief, when he comes to the knowledge of his sin, must restore what he has taken or make compensation for the injury he has done. Ex. 22 : 3, Ezek. 33 : 15.

When one is afraid or ashamed to approach the injured party himself, the intervention of the pastor or of some other trustworthy member of the congregation may be sought. If the injured party is dead, compensation should be made to the heirs or to the poor. Example : Zaccheus, Luke 19 : 8.

3. The golden rule is particularly applicable to my relation to my neighbor's possessions, viz., " that I do to him as I would that he should do to me." Matt. 7: 12.

{B) 4. To provide for our fellow-men who are* in want is particularly commanded. Isa. 58 : 7, Eph. 4: 28.

The support of the needy, ahusgiving, may be practiced in many ways, but in all cases heartily and cheerfully. 2 Cor. 9:7. It is not to be done for personal aggrandizement (as did the Pharisees, Matt. 6-12) but secretly, Matt. 6 : 3, 4.

{C) 5. In sharp contrast with robbery, labor is set forth as the lawful God-ordained means of acquirinomaintenance, and increasing one's possessions, especially labor in a proper vocation. " That I faithfully labor." This embraces three parts :

a) Industry. Gen. 3 : 19, 1 Thess. 4 : 11. Examples : Jacob, Gen. 31 : 38-41 ; Paul, Acts 20 : 34, 35

b) Economy. Prov. 13: 11. The Lord also said unto His disciples, John 6 : 12, " Gather up the frao-- ments that remain, that nothing be lost." *

Economy is essentially distinguished from covetousness m this, that it proceeds from a feeling of duty not to allow any one of God's gifts to perish, while covetousness proceeds from avarice and has its eye fixed solely upon increased possessions.

c) Contentment. 1 Tim. 6 : 6-8, Heb. 13 : 5. Labor faithfully, live within your means, and as for the rest remember what the Lord hath said : " I will never leave thee nor forsake thee."

6. In conclusion : From covetousness and envy arises the transgression, from self-denial and love of one's neighbors the fulfillment of the eighth commandment.