That I bear false witness against no man, nor falsify anv man's words; that I be no backbiter, or slanderer; that I do not jud^e or join in condemning any man rashly or unheard ; but that"' I avoid all sorts of lies and deceit, as the proper works of the devil unless I would bring down upon me the heavy wrath of God • likewise, that in judgment and all other dealings I love the truth,'speak it uprightly, and confess it ; also, that I defend and promote as much as I am able the honour and good character of my neighbour

I. Sins Forbidden by God.

1. The ninth commandment treats of our conduct in relation to our neighbor's honor and reputation in daily intercourse.

2. Everything is forbidden that might injure our neighbor's honor and reputation.

a) False witness. Testimony is a statement concerning any man or thing, whether attested by an oath or not. One is guilty of bearing false witness, not merely when one himself invents and makes a false statement, but also when one receives and spreads such a statement from others. Ex. 23 : 1, Prov. 19 : 5. Example : The witnesses against Naboth, 1 Kings 21.

b) Slander, i. e., to injure a man's reputation by making a false statement based upon a misrepresentation of his language. His language is misrepresented (perverted) either by omission or addition, or false construction. Lev. 19 : 16, Prov. 4 : 24, Ps. 15 : 3. Example : The false witnesses against Christ, Matt. 26 : 61. Compare John 2: 19, 21. Jesus had said : "Destroy this temple" — His body. But they declared that He said, I can destroy the temple of God at Jerusalem.

c) Calumny, to which also belongs all meddling and tale-bearing, by which people are set against each other. James 4 : 11.

d) Defamation, i. e., to attribute to our neighbor crimes which bring him into disrepute. Jer. 18 : 18, Eph. 4 : 31, Tit. 3 : 1, 2.

e) To condemn without a hearing, or to judge thoughtlessly. John 7 : 51, Luke 6 : 37, 41.

/) Lying, i. e., to state an untruth knowingly or intentionally. Lev. 19 : 11. Example : Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. It is an inexcusable evasion to say that a lie is allowable which does not injure another or which may even be to his advantage. The following also are sinful :

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. S99

1. A lie s}3oken in jest ; we are not to play with sin,, with a lie. Eph. 5:4.

2. Lies of necessity. For the Christian no necessity can arise which justifies sin, a lie. Rom. 3 : 8. Compare the " lies of necessity" of Abraham and Isaac, spoken in weakness of faith, Gen. 12 : 10-19 ; 26 : 6-11 ; of Peter, Matt. 26 : 69-73. While the Lord in a really trying exigency, v. 63-66, was confessing the truth, Peter from fear of man and imaginary necessity was lying. Bitter sorrow (v. 75) followed the " lie of necessity."

g) Deceitfulness, i. e., all forms of deception in, speech.

1. Hypocrisy and flattery. Ps. 12 : 2 ; 55 : 21.

2. Deceit. Pro v. 12 : 22.

3. " Business lies," which are employed to dupe oner's neighbor by a false representation concerning goods offered him.

4. " Lies of courtesy," so-called compliments, employed to say agreeable things at the expense of the truth. Flippancy of speech, gossip and boastfulness lead to lying and deception. Sins of the tongue are of all sins the most common. Prov. 10 : 19. To boast of one's sins is outrageous. Isa. 3 : 9, Jas. 3 : 5.

3. Why lying and deception are to be avoided.

a) Because they are the devil's own works, i. e., they really originate from him. Truth is divine, lying is devilish. John 8 : 44.

b) Because God's wrath, i. e., His judgment is threatened against these. Ps. 5:6.

11. The Virtues Which God Enjoins.

1. Love of truth. If the lips are to speak the truth, the heart must first be inclined thereto.

2. Speaking the truth in sincerity. One is not bound in all cases (except before a magistrate) to tell

all that he knows or all tliat is true, whether inquiry is made in relation thereto or not ; for there is also a virtue in secrecy with reference to what has been entrusted to us. When one is solicited to speak freely, the answers must be openly evasive, and one must not seek to help himself by the use of ambiguous language. While, therefore, we are not obliged to tell all that is true, what we do say must be true. Prov. 12 : 17, Eph. 4 : 25. Examples : Nathan, 2 Sam. 12 (concerning David) ; John the Baptist, John 1 : 19 (concerning himself).

3. Perseverance in the confession of the truth, even wdien it involves danger to body and life. 2 Cor.l : 17. Example : Peter and John before the Sanhedrim, Acts 4.

4. To establish and to maintain the honor and the good name of our neighbor. Honor and a good name are precious possessions, which we are to preserve not only for ourselves, but also for our neighbor. From this, however, it is not inferred that we are to defend or palliate manifest wrong done by our neighbor. Isa. 5 : 20. We are to preserve the good name of our neighbor. 1 Sam. 19 : 4. We are to promote our neighbor's honor. 1 Sam. 16 : 18.

0. The means by which the sins forbidden may be avoided, and the virtues enjoined, practiced.

a) Watchfulness, Ps. 39 : 1.

b) Prayer, Ps. 141 : 3.