No ; but even the holiest men, while in this life, have only small beginnings of this obedience, yet so, that with a sincere resolution, they begin to live, not only according to some, but all the commands of God.

1. The natural man may indeed strive outwardly after a life that is honorable according to human conceptions of morality, but the commandments of God he cannot keep, because he lacks the impetus and power of the Spirit of God. The converted or regenerated man is able to keep God's commandments, because he has the Spirit of God, but he cannot do this perfectly, because here he has still to struggle with the flesh, which lusts against the Spirit. Gal. 5 : 17, 1 John 1 : 8, James 3 : 2.

2. The converted man's obedience of the commandments of God can be spoken of as " only small beginnings" in comparison with the perfection required by the law of God, or in comparison with legal perfection. James 2 : 10.

Even " the holiest men," i. e., the children of God who by grace have reached the highest degree of obedience, themselves confess that they have only attained a slight beginning. Job, Job 9 : 2, 3 ; David, Ps. 19 : 12; Paul, Rom. 7 : 18, 19, Phil. 3 : 12.

3. This, however, must not deter us from following after holiness, i. e., growth in the inner life, for there is such a thing as an evangelical perfection possible in this life {i. e., a jierfection offered by the gospel in contrast with that of the law) ; " yet so," which consists in this, that " with a sincere resolution we begin to live, not only according to some, but all the commands of God," according to the workings of the Holy Ghost, who dwells in us. Ps. 119 : 106, Rom. 7 : 22.

Regenei'ated persons, when they have lapsed into sin, recover again from their fall by the power of God's grace in virtue of their forgiveness through the blood of Christ. Phil. 3 : 13.

4. That in this life we are able to make only a small beginning in perfect obedience, indicates to us also that our sanctification does not rest upon good works, but only upon justification through grace. This also is our comfort in all the weakness and imperfection of our inward life and of our conduct. 1 John 2 : 1, 2.

Question 115,

Why will God then have the ten commands so strictly preached, since no man in this life can keep them f

First, that all our lifetime, we may learn more and more to know our sinful nature, and thus become the more earnest in seeking the remission of sin, and righteousness in Christ ; likewise, that we constantly endeavour and pray to God for the grace of the Holy Spirit, that we may become more and more conformable to the image of God, until we arrive at the perfection proposed to us, in a life to come.

1. The law is also of service to the converted.

a) It serves as a mirror to bring them to a knowledge of their sins, and that all their lifetime. This knowledge is also progressive, for at first it takes cognizance of grosser sins, and then " more and more" of the more refined sins, in that through the influence of the Holy Ghost the spiritual eye becomes more and more discerning. E-om. 3 : 20 ; 5 : 13.

b) Through our increasing knowledge of sin we " become the more earnest in seeking the remission of sin and righteousness in Christ." Matt. 5 : 6, Rom. 10 : 4.

Calvin says with reference to the above passage : " The Apostle shows that he (as the Jews, v. 3) is a false interpreter of the law who strives to become righteous through its works, since the law is given for the purpose of leading us to another righteousness; yea, all that the law teaches, all its demands and promises have Christ as their end, on account of which all its parts are to be referred to Him. But this can take place only when we lay aside all self-righteousness, are permeated by the knowledge of sin, and supplicate Him only for righteousness by grace. Matt. 5 : 17, ' Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets : I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.' Therefore Rom. 10 : 4 cannot be interpreted as implying that Christ abolished the law of God. He fulfilled it in His perfect obedience and atoned for our transgressions of it by His sufferings and death, and, thereby, has secured for us who believe on Him the righteousness which avails before God."

2. The preaching of the law admonishes us to live earnest lives before God.

a) We should constantly endeavor that we may become more and more conformable to the image of God. Deut. 31 : 11-13, 2 Cor. 7 : 1.

b) At the same time, because the regenerate cannot do this through their own strength, we are to " pray to God for the grace of the Holy'Spirit," who gives us power. Eph. 3 : 16, Ps. 143 : 10.

3. '* Until we arrive at the perfection proposed to us, in a life to come." The goal of perfection is attained only with the renewal of the body in the resurrection, when the whole man is again fully restored to the image of God. 1 Cor. 13 : 9, 10, 1 John 3 : 2. The elect of God have, therefore,

a) A heartfelt desire for the goal of perfection. Rom. 8 : 23, 24.

b) An unshaken certainty that they will reach this goal. 2 Tim. 1:12.

The law of God serves a threefold purpose for those who have been regenerated :

1. It furthers them in the knowledge of sin.

2. It serves as a rule of life for them.

3. It keeps alive in them the desire for perfection.

OF PRAYER.