That even the smallest inclination, or thought, contrary to any of God's commands, never rise in our hearts ; but that at all times we hate all sins with our whole hearts, and delight in all righteousness.

The tenth commandment relates chiefly to the unlawful desire for our neighbor's property, and is a part of

the second table of the law, but as the concludino- commandment it also has reference to all of them. In this atter sense Paul uses it, Eom. 7:7," For I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet. So also Christ in the sermon on the mount (Matt. 5) in the words " but I say unto you" extends the tenth commandment to the whole law ; even as in Matt. 15: 19-20, He traces back the origin of all sins against the second table to the evil inclination which is forbidden in the tenth commandment.

I. The Desire for Evil is Forbidden.

1. Evil inclination is the incitation and desire for anything evil in the heart.

2. Although the evil inclination often arises involuntarily in the heart, yet in its origin even the smallest inclination is sin, because it proceeds from a sinful neart. James 1 : 14.

3. The second stage is, that one takes pleasure in the «vil desire and yields to it in thought. James 1 : 15, Matt, lo : 19, 20.

4. The command not only forbids the evil desire but also enjoins upon us not to allow ourselves to be enticed by evil. A man cannot stop birds from flying about him, but he can prevent them from buildinS nests upon his head. Gen. 4:7. *

5. As the evil desire is incited from without, everything that brings one into danger is to be avoided. 1 John 2 : lo 16. 1 John 5 : 19, " The whole world

leth in wickedness." On this account all inclination to evil, as well as all sin, has its ultimate ori^n in the €vil one, ^. e., the devil.

II. The Desire for Good is Enjoined. 1. " Hate all sin." We must not only condemn sinful deeds, but must also hate the sin within us and struggle against it. This is done through self-denial

To deny oneself means not to do anything to please oneself and one's own flesh, but in all acts and deeds to have regard only for God ; or to act as if one did not know himself and as if his own flesh did not belongto him, i. e., to recognize and subdue his flesh as an enemy, which must be overcome in the conflict. Ps. 119 : 104, Gal. 5 : 24.

2. " Delight in all righteousness" {i. e., delight in all that is just and that is enjoined by God). Rom. 7 : 22, Matt. 5 : 48.

3. To this end the continued renewal of the heart and the sanctification of the life is necessary. Eph. 4 : 22, 23, Gal. 5 : 16.

4. "At all times with our whole heart." We can neither love the good without hating the evil, nor hate the evil without loving the good. Jer. 4 : 3, Matt. 6 : 24.