Because it is that chief part of thankfulness which God requires of us; and also, because God will give his peace and Holy Spirit to those only, who with sincere desires continually ask them of him and are thankful for them. '

I. The Nature and Character of Prayer.

A. The nature of prayer. Prayer is not merely meditating upon God, but is the intercourse of the heart (the believing soul) with God. Ps. 19 : 14 ; 5 : 2.

Prayer is the native breath of the renewed man.* The first indication of life in the case of Paul after he was converted was that he prayed. Acts 9:11.

Prayer is the thermometer of the inner life, by which the Christian may himself gauge his communion with the living God. James 5 : 16.

1. When are we to pray ?

a) From of old the children of God observed three stated times for j^rayer : morning, noon and night. Ps. 63 : 6, Deut. 8 : 10. Prayer was offered by Christ at the table in the circle of His disciples. Matt. 14 : 19, Mark 14 : 22, Luke 24 : 30, 35. Isaac at eventide went into the field to pray. Gen. 24: 63. Daniel prayed three times a day. Daniel 6 : 10. Peter and John observed the customary hours of prayer for the children of Israel. Acts 3 : 1.

b) Other times are suitable for prayer, even as often as we have desires to bring unto God. Ps. 62 : 8, Eph. 6: 18.

c) Pray without ceasing. 1 Thess. 5: 17. This does not mean that we are to pray without intermission, but that we are not to omit praying. 1 Peter 3 : 7, Pom. 12 : 12. See the parable of the unjust judge. Luke 18 : 1.

2. Where shall we pray ?

a) Alone, in secret. Matt. 6 : 6. Whoever does not have a place to which he can retire by himself in the house, let him follow the example of Isaac (Gen. 24 : 63), or of Jesus (Matt. 14 : 23), and seek one outdoors.

b) In the jDublic service of the congregation. In the service of song we pray aloud. The prayer offered by the minister we follow silently in the heart. Ps. Ill : 1, Acts 1 : 14.

c) In home worship, with the family, with the household.

3. How are we to pray ?

a) Aloud or silently ? No directions with I'eference to this are given. It depends upon circumstances and regulates itself. Luke 6 : 45, " . . . for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh." Hannah, on the contrary, 1 Sam. 1 : 13, " spake in her heart ; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard." Moses is not heard to pray, Ex. 14 ; he sighed only in his heart, and yet the Lord said (v. lo), ''Wherefore criest thou unto me?" The catechism speaks of asking " with sincere desires continually."

h) In what posture ? Upon this the efficacy and the hearing of the praver do not depend. But it has its significance. The" children of Israel prayed standing or kneeling with outstretched arms ; on fast-days they fell upon the face to the earth. 1 Kings 8 : 54, Daniel 6 : 10. According to Luke 18 : 11, 13, both the Pharisee and publican stood at prayer. Num. 16 : -.--. Christians pray sitting, standing or kneeling; with bowed heads and folded hands, the former as an expression of humiliation before God, and the latter as that of inward composure.

Examples of kneeling in prayer: The Lord Jesus Himself, Luke 22 : 41 ; Stephen, Acts 7: 60; Peter, Acts 9: 40; Paul, Acts 20: 36, Epii. 3; 14; the early Christians, Acts 21 : 5 ; the saints in heaven, Key. 4 : 10 ; 11 : 16.

In accordance with the custom of the early Church, the Peformed at first knelt in prayer at public service, following the example of Zurich and Geneva. The Directory of Worship of the Reformed Church of France (la discipline des eglises reformees de France) directs in chapter 10, Art. 1, that in public, as well as in family worship, the head be uncovered and the knee be bent in prayer. " The pastors, as well as the elders and the heads of families, are instructed to have great care that during prayer everyone without exception and without respect of person give evidence of these outward signs of the humility of his heart and his reverence before God; except when by sickness or other causes, the judgment of which must be left to his own conscience, he be prevented from so doing."

At the religious conference of Poissy (1561) there appeared before King Charles IX. and his mother, Queen Catharine, as the representative of the Reformed Church, Theodore of Beza, the friend and successor of Calvin, besides thirty-three pastors and elders. When at the beginning of the proceedings he was called upon to speak, he stepped before the bar, and with a clear, firm voice said : " Since the issue of every undertaking depends upon God's grace and help, it will not displease your Majesty, nor will you find it strange, if we open the services by calling upon His name." He then kneeled with his Reformed brethren, while the Catholic prelates stood and offered the prayer with which every divine service in Geneva was opened. (It was the prayer of Oecolampadius, entitled " public confession," and is found also in the Electoral Palatinate Directory of Worship : " Heavenly Father, eternal and merciful God ! we acknowledge and confess before thy divine Majesty that we are poor, miserable sinners," etc.) Then they arose, and Beza delivered his address in defence of the Reformed doctrine.

4. The entire life of the Christian is to be a prayer, in that he is to strive earnestly that he may at all times be found in the proper frame of mind for prayer. Zech. 12 : 10.

"A time and place in which to pray In solitude I sought alway ; Now in my heart unceasingly I pray, alone where'er I be."

— G. Tersteegen,

B. Different kinds of prayer mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Tim. 2 : 1, are : Supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks. Regardless of special occasions for the one or the other, these four parts are found united in every prayer as the four spices in the sacrifice of incense under the old covenant. Ex. 30 : 34.

1. Supplications for the forgiveness of sins, for help and deliverance and for God's gifts. Ps. 20: 5, John 16: 24.

2. Prayers, in the special sense of praise, adoration. Ps. 147 : 1 ; 95 : 6.

3. Intercessions, supplications for others. Col. 1:3; 4 : 3, James 5 : 16, Matt. 5 : 44. Abraham prayed for Sodom, Gen. 18; Moses for his people, Ex. 32: 11, Num. 14 : 13 ; the centurion of Capernaum for his sick servant. Matt. 8: 5; Jesus prayed for Peter, Luke 22: 32, for His disciples and for all believers, John 17 : 20, for His enemies, Luke 23 : 34.

4. Giving of thanks for benefits received and deliverances experienced. Col. 1 : 12, Ps. 107.

II. The Necessity of Prayer.

Prayer is necessary for us :

1. Because God requires it of us as the chief part of thankfulness.

a) God requires prayer of us. Ps. 50 : 15 ; 27 : 8. Although God knows what we need and His purpose in relation to our salvation stands firm, yet He desires us to come before Him in prayer and supplication, in order that we may praise Him, and that our faith may be strengthened. Matt. 6 : 32, "... your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things ;" and yet. Matt. 7 : 7, "Ask and it shall be given you." Luke 18 : 7.

b) Prayer is the "chief part of thankfulness," 1) because it is the most direct expression of our gratitude ; 2) because adoration is the highest honor we can pay to God ; 3) because it is necessary for us as an expression of the thanks we would bring to God in our good works. Ps. 50 : 14.

2. Because w^e are in need of prayer. For " God will give his grace and Holy Spirit to those only,

a) " who with sincere desires continually ask them of him." Deut. 4: 29. Luke 11: 13, "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him ?" This does not refer to the effect of grace and of the Holy Ghost in conversion ; for the Holy Ghost Himself is necessary to prayer. Rom. 8 : 2(3. When thankfulness in prayer is spoken of, the reference is to the children of God, asking for the increase of His gifts of grace and of the Spirit.

b) " Who are thankful for them." Ps. 50: 23. Example : The Samaritan who returned to give

thanks, Luke 17 : 11-19 ; while the nine had merely received the healing of the body, the one who returned to give thanks experienced in addition a strengthening of his faith.