First, that we from the heart pray to the one true God only, who hath manifested himself in his word, for all things he hath commanded us to ask of hira : secondly, that we rightly and thoroughly know our need and misery, that so we may deeply humble ourselves in the presence of his divine majesty ; thirdly, that we be fully persuaded that he, notwithstanding we are unworthy of it, will, for the sake of Christ our Lord, certainly hear our prayer, as he has promised us in his word.

Not every prayer is acceptable to God and will be lieard by Him. Isa. 1 : 15, James 4 : 3. Example : The prayer of the Pharisee in the temj^le. Luke 18 : 11, 14.

Therefore, if our prayer is to be heard of God, it must be of the right sort. We are to consider, 1) to whom, 2) for what, and 3) how to pray.

I. To Whom we are to Pray.

1. We are to pray *' to the one true God only."

a) This God is He " who hath manifested himself to us in his word," the Triune God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. (Compare Ques. 25) Ps. 81 : 8, Matt. 4 : 10.

b) To this God we are to pray, because He alone is everywhere present and almighty, and, therefore. He alone can hear and answer prayer. Ps. 94 : 9 • 115-6 Eph. 3 : 20. ' • .

c) We may also pray to the Lord Jesus, indeed it is our special duty to do so, because He is true God, and to Him belongs the honor of worship. John 5 : 23, Phil. 2 : 10. The disciples of Jesus worshipped Hini at His ascension, Luke 24 : 52; Stephen prayed to Him, Acts 7 : 58.

2. We are to pray to the one true God " only," but not forsooth to the angels, or the Virgin Mary, or the so-called ^saints. We are not to distinguish, as the Romish Church pretends to do, between " invocation" and " worship," for invocation in praver is really worship. Isa. 42 : 8. We do not at all need the saints as *' intercessors," since Christ is our intercessor in heaven (1 John 2:1), and the Holy Ghost teaches us to say • Abba, Father. Rom. 8 : 15.

II. For What we are to Pray.

" For all things he hath commanded us to ask of Him." 1 John 5 : 14. Everything of a carnal nature, for which we might perchance pray, is excluded. 1 Kings 3 : 9-13. It pleased the Lord that Solomon prayed for an understanding heart. "And God said unto him. Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life ; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine ene- "^^^* :....; Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, . . . That for which thou hast not prayed, I have also given thee, viz., riches and honor." Matt. 6 : 33, James 4 : 3.

TIL How we are to Pray.

To pray acceptably to God, one must pray from the heart in humility and in faith.

1. " Pray from the heart."

a) Devoutly (Andacht, from Andenken, to think upon), i. e., to direct all our thoughts, the whole heart, exclusively upon God, and to check all distracting thoughts. Lam. 3: 41, Ps. 145: 18, Heb. 10: 22.

b) In this way alone can we prevent prayer from becoming a mere lip-service, or from becoming a repetition of beautiful phrases. Matt. ]5 : 8 ; 6 : 7.

c) Prayer should be devout, whether one prays in one's own words, or in the woi"ds of another. To pray " from the heart" means something more than to pray heartily. By it free prayer is meant, or that one pray in one's own words, in distinction from prayer in the words of another, as by means of prayer books, hymn books or forms prescribed by the Church for religious service and worship. The necessity for these forms is found in the demand for order and uniformity, but fi'ee prayer should follow the sermon. The use of prayer books in family worship may be compared to crutches, but if they are in accordance with the Word of God and breathe the spirit of prayer, they are not to be rejected, since it is always better to use crutches than not to walk at all. For prayer from the heart no rules can be prescribed ; for this the only teacher is the Holy Ghost (Pom. 8 : 26) and the proper models are the Psalms, the prayer book, as well as the hymn book of the children of God from of old. As a guide in prayer from the heart the explanation of the several petitions of the Lord's Prayer is put in the catechism in the form of prayer.

2. "That we rightly and thoroughly know our need and misery, that so we may deeply humble ourselves in the presence of His divine majesty."

a) The natural man can not pray in the true sense of the word, because he is encompassed with pride. Rev. 3:17.

" Necessity teaches one to pray," ^. e., it drives to prayer when one " rightly and thoroughly" knows his bodily and spiritual needs and miseries, and at the same time his own helplessness and unworthiness. Isa. 26 : 16.

b)^ This knowledge, as well as the infinite exaltation (majesty) of God, before whom we appear in prayer, prompts us to humility. Ezra 9: 6, Isa. 6: 2-5. Abraham was an example of an humble intercessor. Gen. 18 : 27.

An humble prayer is acceptable to the Lord. Ps. 34 •

18.

3. Such humility does not lead to discouragement, when the third part of prayer acceptable to God, the confidence of faith, is not wanting. " That we be fully persuaded, that he, notwithstanding we are unworthy of it, will, for the sake of Christ our Lord, certainly hear our prayer." God does not look upon the unworthiness of the believing petitioner, but upon the merits of His dear Son, who represents the one who prays before the Father ; to this we must firmly hold by faith. Dan. 9 : 18, James 1 : 6. Jacob is an example of one who prayed in confidence and who took fast hold of the Lord in faith. Gen. 32 : 26.

4. Prayer in the name of Jesus includes all that belongs to a prayer acceptable to God. It means to pray

a) At His bidding. John 16 : 24.

b) In accordance with His will. Luke 22 : 42.

cj Upon the ground of His merit, for the sake of which the Father looks upon us graciously, and without which we could not appear before Him in i:>raver Eph. 3:12. 1 J •

d) In accordance with His promise. John 14 : 13.

IV. Why our Prayer is Heard by God.

1. God's answer to the prayer of the believing soul is the hearing, i. e., the granting of that which is asked. The basis of the same with God is not the person of the petitioner, or the character of the prayer, but His promise. Ps. 91 : 15, Isa. 65 : 24, John 16 : 23.

2. Examples of prayers that were heard : Elijah, James 5:17; Peter at the raising of Tabitha, Acts 9 : 40 ; the Church at Jerusalem when Peter was in prison. Acts 12 : 5.

3. God gives to the believing soul, by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, the assurance that his prayer will be heard. 1 John 5: 15. In an extraordinary manner God gave assurance of the hearing of their prayer to the first Church at Jerusalem, Acts 4: 31, and to the Apostle Paul and Silas, Acts 16 : 26.

4. The answer to prayer does not always come immediately. God reserves His own time for all things. Eccles. 3: 11, John 2: 4. God wishes to try our faith. Hab. 2 : 3. Example : The Canaanitish woman, Matt. 15 : 22. Or God wishes to exercise us in perseverance in prayer. Ps. 22 : 2. Examj^le : The parable of the unjust judge and the widow. Luke 18.

5. At times what is prayed for is not granted at all, just as a father refuses the unreasonable or even injurious requests of his child for the child's own good. Example : The prayer of Salome and her sons. Matt. 20 : 20-22. Or our prayers are not in accord with God's gracious counsel concerning us, according to which He allows all things to work together for the good of those who love Him, who are the elect according to His purpose (Rom. 8: 28), so that He may not grant our prayer for protection against a germing evil. Example: Paul (2 Cor. 12: 6-9), who had prayed thrice that the thorn in the flesh might depart

from him, received, instead of having it granted, an answer, which at the same time was full of comfort : " My grace is sufficient for thee : for my strength is made perfect in weakness." Under such circumstances we are not to persist in our prayers, just as Paul acquiesced in the answer when he had besought the Lord " thrice."

6. Examples of prayer : Abraham, Gen. 18 : 2332 ; Jacob, Gen. 32 : 9-12, 26 ; Moses, Ex. 32, 33, 34 ; Hannah, 1 Sam, 1 : 2 ; David, 2 Sam. 7 and the Psalms ; Solomon, 1 Kings 3 ; Hezekiah, Isa. 38 ; Jesus, Matt. 26 : 39-44. Compare Paul (2 Cor. 12 : 7-9, also " thrice").