1. We are to pray for " all things necessary," i. e., for everything needful to the well-being of body and soul. On this account prayer to God is not only a privilege, but is also commanded. Phil. 4 : 6, James 1: 17.

a) Under spiritual need is included all that is necessary for us in relation to God's honor and our own salvation, such as forgiveness of sins, renewal by the Holy Ghost, living according to the will of God and eternal life. Ps. 51: 10, 11; 143: 10, James 1: 5. Spiritual need takes the precedence over bodily need, because the immortal soul stands higher than the mortal body, and eternal happiness higher than temporal. Matt. 6 : 33 ; 16 : 26.

b) Under bodily need is included everything necessary for our support in an honorable life, such as health, food and clothing, possessions, a peaceful life, etc. Prov. 30 : 8, James 5 : 15.

(?) Prayers for the supply of our spiritual needs we

may address to God without reservation ; in relation to our bodily needs we are to pray with the condition that God would give us when and what He pleases.

2. Prayer for the supply of spiritual and bodily needs is to conform to the pattern of the prayer Christ Himself has taught us. Matt. 6: 9-13, Luke 11: 2-4.

a) When His disciples asked Him : Lord, teach us to pray, as also John (the Baptist) taught his disciples, Jesus gave them this prayer. (John had also taught his disciples a form of prayer.) That they were to use the same literally, is proved by the words of the Lord : " When ye pray, say,'' etc. Accordingly it is entirely proper that this prayer be used in the public congregation. Jesus did not lead His disciples in this prayer, so as to include Himself in it (compare, " forgive us our debts"), but He taught them the prayer that they might use it.

b) The Lord did not wish to teach His disciples one prayer only, but He would also teach them to pray ; it is, therefore, to serve not merely as a form of prayer, but also as a model prayer according to contents and form, in order that we may learn from it what and how we are to pray. That the Apostles themselves understood it in this way, is already to be inferred from the fact that this prayer is expressed in different forms by Matthew and Luke. At the same time it will remain for all time the prayer of ])rayers, and embraces everything needful for body and soul, for time and eternity.