Lest we should form any earthly conceptions of God's heavenly majesty, and that we may expect from his almighty power all things necessary for soul and body.

I. Our Father.

1. We are to address God as Father ; for in this name is expressed His infinite love. The name does not merely include God the Father, the Father of Jesus Christ, but the Triune God is invoked thereby as " our Father." Gal. 4 : 6.

2. The Triune God is our Father :

a) By creation and redemption. Mai. 2 : 10 is spoken primarily not of all men, but of Israel, the peo23le of God. Isa. 63 : 16, John 1 : 12.

b) By election. Eph. 1 : 5, 6.

c) By regeneration. 1 Peter 1 : 3.

Therefore only the regenerated, believing Christian, the child of God, can in the true sense of the word pray " Our Father." To the natural man God stands in the relation of judge, not that of Father.

3. The paternal love of God, which is expressed in the name Father, is to awaken in us childlike fear and confidence in God.

a) Childlike fear carries with it the feeling of awe, i. e., reverence, but not that of dread of God. Rom. 8 : 15, " For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear (and in fear and dread to flee from God, as

for example Israel, Ex. 20 : 18, 19) ; but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father." b) Childlike confidence is a firm trust in the paternal love of God. Ps. 89 : 26 ; 103 : 13.

4. This confidence rests upon the fact " that God is become our Father in Christ, and will much less deny us what we ask of Him in true faith, than our parents will refuse us earthly things."

a) God has become our Father in Christ (compare Ques. 26 and 33), and in Him gives us all things. Eom. 8 : 32.

b) Divine paternal love far exceeds human love. Matt. 7:11, Isa. 49 : 15.

5. The address " Our Father" stands " in the very beginning," in order that our entire prayer may be pervaded by that childlike confidence, which is " the foundation of our prayer." It is tlie key-note of the prayer. Heb. 4 : 16.

II. Which art In Heaven.

1. Literally, " in the heavens," while the third petition says " in heaven." We distinguish 1) the atmospheric heaven (the atmosphere, e. g., the birds of heaven, Ps. 104 : 12) ; 2) the starry heaven {e. g., the heavens and all their host, Ps. 33: 6), and 3) the place of the glory of God. Ps. 103 : 19. The last is to be understood here and in the third petition. Although God is everywhere, and is nigh unto us in all places, yet we are to address Him in " heaven," in order that we may continue mindful of His majesty, i. e., His exaltation and dominion over all creatures. Ps. 113 : 5, 6, 7.

2 We derive a two-fold benefit from keeping " God's heavenly majesty" in view.

a) " That we do not form any earthly conceptions of Him," i. e., do not form any earthly notions concernling Him. 1 Kings 8 : 27. We are to pray in confidence, but we are to guard against unseemly intimacy with God in prayer ; our Father is also our God. We are to pray in a childlike manner, but not childishly (with effeminate feelings and expressions). A child, in his intercourse with his father, will never neglect the reverence which is due to him, just as we do not forget that the ruler of a country is also its lord.

Example : Abraham, although the Lord spake to him in great condescension, "Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do ?" (Gen. 18 : 17) and he was called the Friend of God (James 2 : 23), yet he says (v. 27) : " Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes."

b) That we may not think lightly of God's heavenly majesty, nor doubt the same, but " expect from his -almighty power all things necessary for soul and body," and trust in Him that He can do and give all things. Ps. 115: 3, Luke 1 : 37, Eom. 10: 12*.

Gluestion 122.

Which is the first petition ?

•' Hallowed be thy name ;" that is, grant us first rightly to know thee, and to sanctify, glorify and praise thee in all thy works, in which thy power, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy and truth, are clearly displayed ; and further also, that we may so order and direct our whole lives, our thoughts, words and actions, as that thy name may never be blasphemed, but rather honored and praised on our account.

That the Name of God be Hallowed.

This is the first petition :

1. Because the glorification of God is the first and highest end of all creatures. Rom. 11 : 36.

2. Because all who would approach God in prayer, must be impressed with His excellence and holiness. Lev. 10: 3.

The name of God is to be hallowed, 1) by us, and 2) through us.

I. By Us.

1. God revealed Himself by His name, which we learn to know in His Word and in His works The name of God sets forth His being, and, therefore, Himselt; m the works of God "are displayed," ^. e., are visible His attributes.

To hallow God's name means, to give God the honor which belongs to Him. Ps. 115: 1.

2. Above all we pray that God Himself would let us rightly know His name. Such knowledge, however is not merely a matter of the understanding, but also ot the heart, as at the same time it includes faith also. John 17: 3, Ps. 119: 18.

3. The knowledge of the name of God is derived Irom the knowledge of His works.

a) The work of creation, whereby God has created and still preserves all things. Ps. 19 : 1.

b) The work of redemption, whereby God has redeemed us through Christ and renews us by the lloly Ghost, and will make us eternally happy. John o : lb.

4. In these works are displayed, i. e., appear the essential attributes of God.

a) In the works of creation :

1. God's power. Eom. 1 : 19, 20.

2. His wisdom. Ps. 104 : 24.

3. His goodness. Ps. 36 : 5.

b) In the work of redemption :

1. God's justice. 2 Cor. 5 : 21.

2. His mercy. Tit. 3 : 5.

3. His truth. John 17 : 19.

4. We give expression to the knowledge of the excellence and holiness of God, which we have derived from His vvorks, by glorifying and praising His name. Ps. lOo : 3, Ex. 15 : 2.

II. Through Us.

1. Not merely in our prayers are we to glorify and praise the name of God, but our whole life, all our thoughts, words, and works are to be an act of praise to God, that through us His name may be hallowed, i. e., that it may be made manifest what a glorious God is ours, who makes saints of sinners ! Ps. 31 : 3, 2 Thess. 1 : 11, 12.

2. We must, therefore, *' so order and direct our whole lives :"

a) That the name of God may never be blasphemed Qu our account, which would happen if we confess the name of the Lord and do not live according to His Word. He w4io confesses the name of Jesus with his mouth, but not in his life, either deceives himself, which is sad, or he would deceive others by acting the hvpocrite, which is still worse. 2 Tim. 2 : 19, Rom. 14: 16.

b) That through our conversation and life others also may be incited to turn to God, and thereby to honor and to praise him. Ps. 51 : 13, Matt. 5 : 16.