"' Thy kingdom come ;" that is, rule us so by thy word and Sprit, that we may submit ourselves more and m >re to thee ; preserve and increase thy Church ; destroy the works of the devil, and all violence which would exalt itself against thee, and also all wicked counsels devised against thy holy wnrd, until the full perfection of thy kingdom takes place, wherein thou shalt be all in all.

1. The kingdom of God is distinguished from creation or nature, in which God manifests His sovereignty over all created things (Ps. 135 : ^), and also from the world, which through sin is under the dominion of the prince of darkness. 1 John 5 : 10.

2. The kingdom of God is in the world, but not of

the world (John 18 : 36), i. e., it is not after the fashion of a world-kingdom ; it extends beyond the world into heaven, from which it arose (Dan. "2 : 44), wherefore it is also called the kingdom of heaven ; in the same way it also extends beyond time into eternity (Dan. 4: 34).

3. The kingdom of God is the realm of the revelation of divine grace, power and glory, in heaven and upon earth. In the world it is- found wherever the Triune God rules men's hearts in righteousness and grace. The outward, visible Church, which is composed of all who are baptized, is not the kingdom of God. It is the institution for the gathering and perfecting of the elect of God. The kingdom of God upon earth is, therefore, included in the Church, and in this sense it is true that " out of the Church there is no salvation." (Extra ecclesiam nulla salus.)

4. " Kingdom of God" is a figurative expression, derived from earthly, human relations. An earthly kingdom is an orderly community governed by a ruler. God's kingdom is called in Scripture literally " the kingdom of God," and the heavenly kingdom " the kingdom of heaven." 1. The King is the Triune God, and since the completion of redemption, especially the Son of God, Jesus Christ, to whom the Father has given all power in heaven and upon earth (Ps. 110: 1,2, Matt. 28: 18), and who sits at His right hand (Mark 16 : 19), until all shall have been accomplished. 1 Cor. 15 : 27, 28. 2. The real subjects upon earth are Christian believers. John 18: 37, Ps. 110: 3. In heaven they are the angels and the saints made perfect. 3. The members of the kingdom are not confined to any land or people upon the earth. Acts 10 : 35. No one is excluded on account of his belonging to any one people. Col. 3 : 11. 4. Therefore there are no limitations to this kingdom. Acts 1:8. 5. The law

of the kiugdoni is the Holy Scripture. Isa. 2 : 3. 6. The fuudamental law of the kingdom is love. Matt. 22 : 37-40, Col. 3 : 14. 7. The blessing of the kingdom is redemption through the blood of Jesus Christ, together with all its possessions and benefits. Rom. 14 : 17. 8. The ordinances of the kingdom are the preaching of the Word of God and the administration of the holy sacraments, and everything incidental thereto. Eph. 4 : 11, 12. 9. The arch-enemy of the kingdom is satan, with all his hosts. 10. The wars of the kingdom are directed against the power of sin and the kingdom of darkness. 11. The weapons of the warriors are the Word of God and prayer. Eph. 6:12, 17, Matt. 17 : 21. 12. The purpose and end of the kingdom is the honor of God,

5. The kingdom of God is already in the world, and yet we are to pray. Thy kingdom come ; for it is still coming, so that it may become more powerful in us, outside of us, that it may be more widely extended.

I. The Kingdom of Grace.

1. We pray God to govern us, the members of His kingdom and His subjects, i. e., that He direct all our thoughts, purposes and desires, words and deeds according to His grace. Col. 3 : 15, Isa. 48 : 17.

2. God governs us by His Word and Spirit (compare Ques. 31) ; by His Word, Ps. 25 : 4, 5 ; by His Spirit, Ps. 143 : 10. The Word and Spirit of God do not work separately, but conjointly.

3. Its end is that we may subject ourselves more and more to God, i. e., become obedient. The regenerate also have not yet attained perfect obedience, but they must learn the same and increase in it more and more. Net in words, but in obedience to the commandments of God do we recognize how fai- the kingdom of God has advanced in us. For the kingdom of God is not in

word, bat in power. 1 Cor. 4: 20, Ex. 24- 7 Heb 12: 28.

II. Tlie Kingdom of Power. 1. The work of the kingdom of God upon earth is committed to weak human hands. 1 Cor. 3 : 7, 8, 9. Therefore we are to pray that God by the power of His Spirit may maintain and increase His Church.

a) God preserves His Church in that He maintains His Word in it, and when through the indolence of men it has come into disrepute, or has been neglected, He awakens a hunger after the bread of life, or places the word again upon the candlestick. This took place most manifestly in the Reformation, after the Church had entirely neglected His Word and had been sunk for centuries in superstition and the works of men. Ps. 51 : 18 ; 68 : 28.

b) Everything living must increase, if it is not to retrograde ; in life nothing is stationary. So it is also with the kingdom of the living God upon earth.

Therefore we pray that He should not onlv inwardly strengthen His Church, but outwardly increase the same. Acts 2 : 47.

The spread of the kingdom of God is accomplished among the heathen, the Jews and Mohammedans through missionary activity. We should never pray the Lord's Prayer without remembering especially in connection with the second petition the work of evangelical missions, in which God manifests Himself as the "Augmenter of the kingdom." In the foreign missionary field 6250 missionaries from Christian knds are at present at work, of whom 3000 are ordained and 750 unordained missionaries, and 2500 are women ; of heathen Christians 27,000 are missionary laborers, and among them 2506 are ordained pastors. In a hundred years about 3,000,000 heathen have been converted to Christ by the grace of God through the work of evangelical missions of all lands. The blessing of the Lord is manifest in this work. But the number of heathen who are yet sti-angers to the kingdom is still great, numbering about 800,000,000. Matt. 9 : 37, 38.

Parables relating to the extension of the kingdom of God: The grain of mustard seed, Matt. 13: 31, 32; the leaven (v. 33).

2. The kingdom of God stands in opposition to ihe world and to sin ; therefore it is opposed by the world and its prince. To overcome these powers, God must come to our aid, by manifesting the power of His arm and His judgment.

a) We, therefore, pray God to destroy the works of the devil. Everything that is done to injure and oppose the kingdom of God is the devil's work. He opposes the truth of God with his lies which are agreeable to the carnal heart. All the arts designed to seduce men by means of false doctrine into error, superstition and unbelief, into sin and vice, are his works ; he also often causes bitterness and strife among those who are of the same household of faith. 1 John 3 : 8, Rom. 16 : 20, Eph. 4 : 27. Compare the parable of the tares among the wheat. Matt. 13 : 24, 25, 28.

b) The world which is obedient to him, and those whom he deceives, he uses as his instruments against the kingdom of God. They are the enemies of mankind, who rise up against God in their might, or devise evil counsels against God's holy Word. We pray God to bring to naught both their power and counsel.

(1) The enemies outside of the kingdom of God seek to suppress and destroy it by external means. Pharaoh, Herod. Similar testimony is found in the entire history of the Christian Church, from the time of Julian, the apostate, to Louis XIV., and the tyrants of the French Revolution. The first Christian congregation prayed against the tyrants who persecuted the kingdom of God. Acts 4: 24-30, Ps. 129: 5, Num. 10: 35.

(2) Enemies within the kingdom of God are those who dilute the Word of God within the Church, or adulterate sound doctrine and undermine the foundations of the Church hy evil counsels. Therefore we pray God to thwart such efforts. Ps. 83 : 3, Phil. 3 : 18, Ps. 5 : 10.

(3) Prayer for the kingdom strengthens the courage of faith and enjoys the assured promise that the kingdom of God will be maintained even in its direst extremities, and will at length come forth triumphant from all its persecutions. The entire 46th Psalm (from which Luther's battle hymn for the imperial host of God, "A Safe Stronghold is our God," was composed). Matt. 18 : 20, Luke 12 : 32.

lU. The Kingdom of Glory.

The kingdom of God will be made manifest in glory at its consummation at the end of the world. The glory will principally consist in this, that the members of the kingdom will be freed from all weakness which may still cleave to them, as well as from all their temptations and struggles, because God will then be all in all (not in all men, but in all His elect). 1 Cor. 15 : 28.

1. To the individual members of the kingdom the glory thereof is revealed at the end of their days. 2 Tim. 4 : 18.

2. To the Church, the community of believers, it comes at the end of all days, when Jesus, their Lord and Head, will come again in glorv. Rev. 21 : 2 ; 22 : 17, 20.