"Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven ;" that is, grant that we and all men may renounce our own will, and without murmuring obey thy will, which is only good ; that so every one may attend to, and perform the duties of his station and calling, as willingly and faithfully as the angels do in heaven.

I. Renouncing One's Own Will.

1. By nature the will of man is evil, corrupt, and turned against God's will. Therefore it is necessary for us to renounce our own self-asserting will, i. e., renounce our evil lusts, desires and inclinations, suppress the same, and subdue the will. Matt. 16 : 24.

2. We often experience great difficulty in doing this, and it involves a struggle, in which, without God's gracious help, we cannot prevail; wherefore we are to pray : Grant unto us, O God, strength to overcome. 2 Cor. 3 : 5.

3. We are to make this prayer also for all men, because they all by nature have this corrupt will, and our love is to embrace all men. Eccles. 12 : 13.

II. Obedience to the Will of God.

1. As our own will is by nature totally corrupt, so God's will is only good. As little as we can of ourselves renounce our own will, so little can we subject our hearts to the will of God. Therefore we are to pray : Grant unto us, give us strength that we may obey thy will. Jer. 7 : 23.

2. There is a distinction to be made between the secret and the revealed will of God.

a) The secret will of God we can discern only in the way in which He leads us, which we often do not understand. We are, therefore, to pray for strength that we may submit to His will without gainsaying, and to yield ourselves to the same without murmuring. His will is to be done in us. 1 Peter 4 : 19. Acts 21 : 14, " The will of the Lord be done." Thus spake the Christians in Cesarea, when Paul was journeying to Jerusalem, where he was to be arrested, and when he would not allow himself to be turned back.

b) The revealed will of God we learn from His Word, the Law and the Gospel. In particular cases

we must be careful not to deceive ourselves and regard as God's will what we would like to have and to^'do Rom. 12:2.

3. There are circumstances and relations in life, when God's will is to be done by us, and other relations when it is to be done in us, viz., when we suffer according to God's will for the same reason for which we do His will. Heb. 10 : 36.

4 Christ has given to us the most exalted example in His life and in His sufferings of how God's will is to be done, both by us and in us. John 4: 34, Luke 22: 42.

III. The Fulflllmeiit of our Calling.

1. We are not to think that we are to do God's will only m particular acts. The truth is, rather, that daily and hourly we have opportunity to do the same in our station and calling, i. e.,'m the duties and responsibilities which the special positions of life place upon each one ; and we often find the small and simple duties of life, which recur daily, more difficult than the performance of something great. ^ Every one is to be contented in his station, and calling, I. e., in the position in life appointed him by God and whatever it brings with it, he is to perform willingly, cheerfully, faithfully and carefully. 1 Cor 7 • 20, Luke 16 : 10.

. .^; ^^? ^h^ ^"gels in heaven, viz., as willingly and faithfully, the children of God are to fulfill their calling upon earth. Ps. 103 : 20, 21.

The example of the angels is to have an effeci upon us, because we are their com^Danions in the kingdom of God. Heb. 12 : 22, 23.