" Give us this day our daily bread ;" that is, be pleased to provide us with all things necessary for the body, that we may thereby acknowledge thee to be the only fountain of all good, and that neither our care nor industry nor even thy gifts, can profit us without thy blessing, and that we may withdraw our trust from all creatures, and place it alone in thee.

1. By " our daily bread" we are to understand all the physical necessaries of life. They are called bread, because it is the most indispensable for the support of the bodily life.

2. That is our bread which we do not procure by unlawful means, as by theft, covetousness, cheating or begging, but such as we pray for and labor for in our ordinary calling. Gen. 3 : 19, 2 Thess. 3 : 12.

" Work and pray." (Proverb.)

3. By daily bread we understand everything that we need for the day in order to live. Heb. 13 : 5.

All believers have a filial right to daily bread. Matt. 7 : 8, 9, 11.

4. Give unto us. In this connection we are not only to think of ourselves and of our own needs, but also of those who are in want. Isa. 58 : 7.

5. This day. We are not to pray for provisions for days and years to come, which fosters covetousness and parsimony, and which prayer God will not hear. The expression also teaches us that we are to come to God with our prayer every day. Matt. 6 : 34.

Neither do we know whether we will be alive yet and in need of bread on the morrow. Prov. 27 : 1.

6. We also pray that God would provide us with all the physical necessaries of life. Ps. 145 : 15, 16.

7. From this prayer we are to learn : 1) to recognize that God is the fountain of all good ; 2) that without His blessing nothing can prosper ; 3) to place our

trust in Him alone. Thus 1) our faith is strengthened, 2) our humility is promoted, 3) our confidence is increased.

I. That God is the Fountain of All Good.

1. Although our daily bread is a natural product, it does not come from nature, not from the creature, but from the Creator. Ps. 104 : 13, 14, Acts 14 : 15, 17.

2. Therefore we are to pray to Him, the Giver of all good, for our daily bread. Ps. 85 : 12 ; 65: 2.

XL That Without God's Blessing Nothing Can Profit Us.

1. The blessing of God crowns our labor with success, which He alone can give, and constitutes the strength of our food. 1 Cor. 3 : 7, Prov. 10 : 22, Deut. 8 : 3, Matt. 4 : 4.

2. The credit is not to be given to our anxieties and labor, although these are our portion. For by cares are not to be understood worldly cares, to which God does not give His blessing, for they are an offense to Him, but the careful and thoughtful attention to our labors, how we are to begin them at the right time and in the right wav, and carry them to completion. Ps. 127: 1, 2.

3. Even the smallest of God's gifts may by His blessing be increased so as to supply our wants. Compare the widow's cruse of oil at Zarephath. 1 Kings 17 : 14-16 ; and the feeding of the thousands, Mark 6 : 41, 42 ; 8 : 6-8.

On the contrary, without God's blessing His gifts cannot profit, i. e., fulfil their purpose. Lev. 26 : 5, 14, 26, Hag. 2 : 17, 19.

" Everything depends upon God's blessing." (Proverb.)

m. That We Place Our Trust Alone in God.

1. The human heart is too much inclined to seek refuge with the creature, i. e., with other men, and to

rely upon the ordinary natural course of things. But all creatures, as well as the entire creation, are in God's hands. We are not to place our trust in the creature, but in the Creator, and in Him alone.

a) Confidence in weak, mortal men is vain ; for either they are not able or not willing to help us. On the contrary, God can and will give His own all the necessaries of life.

b) God is thereby displeased, for such a reliance in man is at the same time distrust of God. But He is honored by us as is becoming when we put all our confidence in Him alone, since He is the fountain of all good.

2. He who prays to God needs not beg of men. Ps. 146: 3,5; 62: 10; 55: 22.

8. In one of the persecutions which in the 17th century came upon the Reformed ministers of Scotland, Andrew Duncan was driven into banishment, and with his wife and six children was reduced to direst need. One evening, when the children cried for bread, and none was to be had, the poor exile sought refuge in God by prayer, to whom he committed his hungry children and his wife, who was approaching confinement, deprived of every necessity. Thereupon he admonished his family to wait patiently upon God, who was now chastening them, but who would surely care for them, even if He must rain bread from heaven. There was no one in the place nor in the region who knew them or was aware of their need. The next morning very early a man came into the house, who brought them a sack of provisions and went away again without telling them whence he came, although they begged him to do so. When not long thereafter in the night Duncan's wife approached her hour and no human help was nigh, there came a lady of rank and offered her services, and after sending away her servant with

her carriage, asked permission to be allowed to remain with the lonely woman. This she did throughout a number of days and nights until her services were no longer needed, and at her departure left what their most pressing needs required. Notwithstanding all their entreaties, she would neither say who she was nor whence she came.