"And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors ;" that is, be pleased for the sake of Christ's blood not to impute to us, poor sinuer-5, our transgressions, nor that depravity which always cleaves to us ; even as we feel this evidence of thy grace in us, that it is our firm resolution from the heart to forgive our neighbor.

In the law God tells us what He demands of us and what we owe, ^. e., are in duty bound to do. We owe what according to the law of God is our duty to do, but have not done (whether it be through transgression or omission). Every transgression against God to the extent to which it demands atonement, i. e., recompense, is sin. Atonement for sin and guilt is made either by restitution or by punishment, and as we cannot render the former, the latter only remains. Punishment can be remitted to us only by the forgiveness of the debt. We pray therefore : forgive us our debts, i. e., we acknowledge that we are in debt ; but we can render no satisfaction, and yet would become free from guilt and punishment. Therefore we take refuge in His grace.

I. Our Debts.

1. Confession must be preceded by knowledge.

a) In the first place sin is recognized in its outward manifestations as transgression {i. e., as consisting of perverted, evil deeds, acts which are contrary to the law). Ps. 90: 8, 1 John 3: 4.

b) Not only the transgression, but also its root, the evil in the heart which always cleaves to ns, the evil desire and inclination, is sin before God. Heb. 12 : 1, Gen. 6 : 5 ; 8 : 21.

2. According to His holiness and justice God must account us guilty, i. e., hold us responsible and punish us. Job 9: 2, 3, Isa. Qb : 6, 7. They are called " debts," on account of the multitude of individual sins. Ps. 19 : 12. " Our debts," because we are also to pray for the forgiveness of the sins of all the people of God, in whose communion we stand. Neh. 1:6. In this are to be included the sins of our enemies which they have committed against us. Matt. 5 : 44, Luke 23 : 34.

n. God's Forgiveness.

1. In the prayer " forgive us our debts" we take refuge in the grace of God, in that we acknowledge ourselves guilty, indeed as " poor sinners" who have not within themselves the power to pay the debt, to put away sin. Ps. 38 : 4.

2. Therefore we pray God not to impute to us our debt, not to demand any payment from us, neither as restitution which we cannot render, nor as punishment which we cannot bear. Ps. 51 : 1, Rom. 4 : 8. Example : The publican in the temple. Luke 18 : 13, 14.

3. For this we appeal to our surety, Jesus Christ, who has paid the debt for us. " For the sake of Christ's blood." Eph. 1 : 7.

4. We need to pray daily for the forgiveness of our debts, because we sin daily. This was also the significance of the morning and evening sacrifice of the children of Israel, at each of which a lamb was slain. Num. 28 : 3, 4.

III. Forgiveness by God Demands a Forgiving Heart.

1. As God forgives us, so also we are to forgive our debtors, ^. e., forgive the debts of all those who have

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 435sinned against us. This is to be done from the heart, i. e., freely and fully. Matt. 18 : 21, 22.

2. That we cherish this " firm resolution," i. e., are earnestly and at all times ready to forgive, testifies to the grace of God in us, which alone can soften the hard heart and bring about a forgiving spirit, and is at the same time an evidence of our thankfulness to God for the forgiveness of our debts. 1 John 3 : 14, Col. 3 : 13,

3. On the other hand, a forgiving heart is also a condition of God's forgiving our debts, but in no way a reason. The two are entirely distinct. Christ says immediately after the Lord's Prayer, Matt. 6 : 14, 15, " For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you : But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." The explanation is found in ^^the parable of the wicked servant. Matt. 18 : 23-35. The Lord remitted the debt of the servant unconditionally over and above his request, but when he treated his fellow-servants with severity, the Lord withdrew from him His grace and delivered him to his deserved punishment. Verse 35.

Cyprian (Bishop of Carthage, died 258) : " The prayer for food is followed by the prayer for forgiveness of debts, that he who is fed by God, may live in God and may think not only of the present, temporal life, but also of the eternal life, to which he can attain only when his sins are forgiven. This petition is an excellent confession of the Church, acknowledging and bewailing her sins, and at the same time a comfort, because in response to it she receives the forgiveness of sins in accordance with the promise of Christ. Finally it is also an obligation to mutual forgiveness. Christ has in view, therefore, in this petition: 1) that we should acknowledge our sins ; 2) that we should thirst after the forgiveness of sins, because only those become

partakers of it who earnestly desire the same, and who do not trample under foot the blood of the Son of God ; 3) that our faith may be exercised, because this petition proceeds from faith and at the same time again sti-engthens faith ; for faith is the source of this petition, and this petition again is the occasion of faith, because it has reference to its growth."