" And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from EVIL ;" that is, since we are so weak in ourselves that we cannot stand a moment ; and besides this, since our mortal enemies, the devil, the world, and our own flesh, cease not to assault us, do thou, therefore, preserve and strengthen us by the power of thy Holy Spirit, that we may not be overcome in this spiritual warfare, but constantly and strenuously may resist our foes, until at last we obtain a complete victory.

1. To tempt means, 1) to put one on trial as God tried Abraham at the offering of his son Isaac, Gen. 22 : 1, Deut. 13 : 3, or as Jesus tried Philip at the feeding of the multitude, John 6 : 5, 6; 2) To incite one to evil. Here it has the second meaning in the sense that God has given us to the devil, the world or our own flesh to tempt us. For no temptation can come upon us without the will of God. Matt. 4:1. Thus God leads into temptation. In the same manner the tempter can only exercise his art upon the children of God when he is permitted to do so by God, as we see in the case of Job. Job 1 : 12 ; 2 : 6. Only the testing proceeds from God, but not the incitement to evil. James 1 : 13.

We pray therefore: 1) That God would not deliver us to our enemies to tempt us ; 2) That if it should be His will so to do according to His counsel, we be not tempted beyond what we are able to bear, but that God would keep and strengthen us in the temptation.

Calvin, in reference to the passage, James 1 : 13, says : " It is clearly apparent that the outward temptations of

which the apostle made mention in vv. 2-12, are sent ta us by God. In this sense God tempted Abraham (Gen. 22), and tempts us daily, i. e.. He puts us on trial in that opportunity is given us to reveal our disposition. But it is something entirely different to bring to the surface what is hidden in the heart, from inwardly inciting the heart to evil passions. In this connection the reference is to inward temptations, which are nothing else but the inordinate desires tempting us to sin. The apostle rightly denies that God is their author, because they come forth from our corrupt nature. This reminder is necessary because nothing is more common among men than to ascribe the cause of the evil they do to another, and they feel most free of all when they can shift the responsibility upon God Himself. This artful device to cover one's tracks was resorted to by our first parents, and we eagerly imitate them in this respect. Therefore James leads us to the acknowledgment of our own guilt that we may not misrepresent God as if He Himself had incited us to sin. To this seems to be opposed the tenor of that Scripture which teaches that man has been blinded by God, has been given over to a reprobate mind and to shameful and forbidden lusts. To this I reply that perhaps on this very account James was led to deny that we are tempted of God, because the wicked are fond of furnishing Scripture proof in extenuation of their conduct. But two things are to be noticed in this connection : When the Scriptures attribute the blinding and hardening of the heart to God (Ex. 9 : 12), it does not set Him forth either as the beginner or as the author thereof, so that the responsibility would fall upon Him. James is here concerned with these two points only. Do the Scriptures maintain that those rejected by the Lord are given over to abominable lusts- (Kom. 1 : 26), because perchance the Lord leads astray and corrupts their heart? In no wise ; for it is subjected to evil lusts because it is already sinful and corrupt. Or when God blinds or hardens, is He then the author or servant of sin ? Much rather does He in this way punish sin and gives the wicked who will not be controlled by His spirit, their just deserts. It, therefore, follows that neither the origin of sin lies in God nor can the cause of it be ascribed to Him as if He found pleasure in evil. Lastly it is a vain subterfuge when a man seeks to lay the burden of his sins upon God because all evil of every sort comes from nowhere except from the corrupt inclination of man. And the fact is that we are urged on in no other way, but each one is led and impelled by his own corrupt desires. That God tempts no one is confirmed by this fact, that He Himself is not tempted by evil. Therefore it is only the devil who incites us to sin, because he is utterly consumed by a burning desire to sin. God has no pleasure in evil and is not the author thereof when we do evil." 2. " Deliver us from the evil one" is altogether to be preferred to the rendering " from evil," as the former expression embraces both the evil one and evil, and " evil" also embraces sin as well as evil. The Greek expression for the " evil one," i. e., the devil, occurs in Matt, o : 37 (where it cannot mean *' evil") ; Matt. 13 : 19, 38, Eph. 6 : 16, 2 Thess. 3 : 3, John 17 : 15, 1 John 2 : 13, 14 ; 3: 12; 5: 18, 19.

I. The Combatants.

1. On the one side " in this spiritual warfare" are the •children of God, who, however, are so weak in themselves that they cannot for one moment stand in their own strength. Matt. 26: 41, John 15 : 5.

Peter in his presumption is an example of warning to us. Matt. 26 : 33. He fell more deeply when he was tempted than almost any other Christian, v. 74.

2. On the other side, are the " enemies which we have renounced, the devil, the world and our own flesh," all

of them strong confederates to whom all means are lawful.

a) *' Enemies which we have renounced" are those from whose good will nnd friendship we have withdrawn ourselves. The so-called " renunciation" formerly preceded every feud ; it was the same as that which to-day yet in general is the declaration of war. But these enemies are so embittered against us because they have lost their control over us by our renunciation.

b) Their weapons are lying and deception, by which they force their way in upon us through temptations and assaults. At one time we are brought to despair by sorrow and want, or to unbelief by our doubts, at another time we are led astray into presumption by riches and prosperity.

1. The chief enemy is the devil, " the ancient Prince of Hell," "strong mail of Craft and Power he weareth in this hour." The world and the flesh are his soldiers. 1 Peter 5 : 8, Luke 22 : 31.

He does not always come as a roaring lion, but oftentimes also as an angel of light, just as he did when he used Scripture in the temptation of the Savior. 2 Cor. 11 : 14. With all sorts of flattering insinuations he wishes to betray the children of God into false security or pride, and thereby bring about their ruin. " Dear pastor, what a beautiful sermon you preached to-day," was remarked to a minister at the church door. " So I was informed by the devil when I left the pulpit," was the further comment of the minister.

When John Knox (d. Nov. 24, 1572), the Reformer of Scotland, lay upon his death bed, a friend found him the evening before the day of his death in a restless slumber broken by heavy sighs. After he awoke he asked him why he had sighed so deeply. Knox answered : " I have in my life endured many assaults of Satan through his holding up before me my sins to bring

me to despair; but God gave me strength to overcome his temptations. Now the crafty serpent which never ceases its tempting has taken another course, seeking to persuade me that my many labors in my spiritual calling and my faithfulness in the service of God have secured for me heaven and eternal life. But praised be the Lord who has given me strength to quench these fiery darts by bringing to my mind such passages of Scripture as these: What hast thou that thou didst not receive? and by the grace of God I am what lam. In the face of these passages Satan has gone away ashamed and will not return again, for I have been assured that the end of my struggle is near, and that I shall soon exchange without pain and anxiety this mortal and miserable life for that happy and eternal one.'^

2. The world, i. e., wicked men and every opportunity to enter into temptation in daily life, seeks at one time through its allurements, at another time by threats, to draw us again under its corrupting influence, after we have escaped the same by followins; after Christ. Prov. 1: 10, John 15: 19.

3. Our own flesh, i. e., the inclination to sin which still cleaves to the children of God, as the inclination to intemperance, unchastity, to pride, etc. Gal. 5 : 17, James 1 : 14.

II. Our Help.

These enemies which abound on every hand, without and within, no less than the knowledge of our own weakness, impel us to pray that God would keep us and strengthen us by the power of the Holy Ghost. Matt. 26 : 41. Paul besought the Lord thrice that Satan's angel might depart from him. 2 Cor. 12 : 7, 8.

2. The Lord sends help to His own through the Holy Ghost. Eph. 3 : 16.

3. The effect of this help is shown in this, that we are not weakened by these assaults, but become stronger under them. 2 Thess. 3 : 3.

This effect we see plainly in the disciples of the Lord after they had received the Holy Ghost. The men who a few weeks before were deserting the Lord and were fearful, became heroes, enduring ignominy and persecution, imprisonment and stripes, and it was afterwards said of them. Acts 5 : 41, ''And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name."

III. Conflict and Victory.

1. The attacks of our enemies in this conflict and warfare are incessant, and, therefore, the manner of warfare appointed for us is that of resistance, i. e., we are not to allow ourselves to be led or driven by temptation and assault whither the evil one would lead us. Eph. 6: 10, 11, 13. "Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand."

a) Against the devil. James 4 : 7.

b) Against the world. 1 John 2 : 15.

c) Against our own flesh. Col. 3 : 5,

2. Notwithstanding the promised and proffered help of God, there is many a discomfiture in this conflict if we do not use the help aright or are not sufficiently watchful. We must, therefore, always pray that " we may not be overcome in this spiritual warfare," and if we should at any time fall, that the Lord would graciously lift us up again. The look of Jesus raised again fallen Peter when he had yielded to temptation and assault. Luke 22 : 61, 62. On the other hand, Judas after his fall went and hanged himself after the Lord's hand had been withdrawn from him. Matt. 27: 5.

3. The last conflict, which yet awaits not merely the individual Christian, but the entire Church of the Lord, is the great temptation, which through antiChrist is to come upon all the world. Rev. 3 : 10, 2Thess. 2: 3, Matt. 24: 21, 22.

4. " Until at last we obtain a complete victory." For this we pray, for this we struggle, and the Lord, the Prince of our salvation, will certainly grant it, because He has promised it.

a) Over the evil one and over evil. Rom. 16 : 20, 1 Thess. 5 : 23.

b) Over death. Ps. 31 : 5. Compare Luke 23: 46.

c) Over all evil. 2 Tim. 4 : 18.

duestion 128.

Soiv dost thou conclude thy prayer f

" For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, FOREVER ;" that is, all these we ask of thee, because thou art our King, and Almighty, art willing and able to give us all good ; and all this we pray for, that thereby not we, but thy holy name, may be glorified forever.

1. Praise to God (a doxology) in this threefold form (kingdom, power, glory) we first find in 1 Chron. 29 : 9-13, ''and David, the king, also rejoiced with great joy. Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation, and David said : " BleSSed be thou. Lord God of Israel, our Father, for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty ; for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine ; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all ; and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now, therefore, our God, we thank thee, -and praise Thy gloriouS name."

2. The conclusion of the Lord's Prayer (" for . . . .") is the foundation upon which the entire prayer rests. For it embraces the grounds which encourage us to pray and prompt God to hear our prayer.

I. God Will Hear Us.

1. For He is our King and we are the subjects of His kingdom, for whom He will provide according to His grace all things necessary for body and soul. Ps. 74: 12.

2. Thine is the kingdom, that is : " Heavenly Father, we acknowledge Thee as the only Lord and King of heaven and earth ; Thou hast created all things, and governest all, for Thine honor, as well as for the furtherance of our salvation. Thou hast counted us worthy to be subjects here of Thy kingdom of grace, and yonder of eternal glory. Therefore we have childlike confidence in Thee, that Thou wilt provide, govern, sanctify, protect and preserve us. Thy subjects, in body and soul, until Thou wilt transplant us from Thy kingdom of grace to the Kingdom of Thy glory."

11. God Can Hear Us.

1. For He has power over all things. Therefore nothing is impossible to Him, and He can do all things that conduce to our welfare in body and soul, and no one can prevent Him from helping us when He has determined so to do. 2 Chron. 20 : 6, Rom. 10 : 12.

2. Thine is the power, that is : " Heavenly Father, we acknowledge, honor and implore Thine endless power and might ; thou canst do beyond all that we pray and understand ; Thou canst control all things, and canst give us all good, and Thou only needst to speak a word, for when Thou speakest, it is done, when Thou commandest, it stands fast. Therefore we trust Thee that Thou wilt not deny us what serves Thine honor and our salvation."

III. God Will Hear Us.

1. For it redounds to His honor and glory that He manifest His grace and power in His kingdom and

among His members by answering prayer. He will hear that not we, but His holy name may be praised. For He is true and has promised His own that He will answer prayer. Ps. 115 : 1 ; 79 : 9, Isa. 37 : 20, John 14: 13.

2. Thine is the glory, that is : " Heavenly Father, thou art the endlessly glorious, majestic and praiseworthy God, and, therefore, alone worthy and deserving to be worshipped, praised and adored by us with deepest reverence. All that we pray for and desire, we desire alone to the praise of Thy glory. When Thou givest us grace to hallow Thy name, to further Thy kingdom, to do Thy will, when Thou givest us daily bread and forgivest us our debts and deliverest us from evil, it is all for Thine honor and glory. Therefore, because it is to the honor of Thy name that our requests be granted, hear us. And because our hearts testify that in all our prayers we look to Thine honor and glory, we have the confidence that Thou wilt certainly hear us."

IV. God Always Hears Us.

1. For He is God for ever and ever.

a) The eternal God changes not, but in His faithfulness He is immutable. Ps. 146 : 10.

b) He is not limited as to time, and is ready with the answer before we ask. Isa. 65 : 24.

c) Hereafter, when that which is perfect is come, we shall no longer pray to God. But prayer will not cease in eternity. Then it will be thanksgiving and praise and adoration. E,ev. 5 : 13 ; 7 : 12.

2. For ever, that is : " Heavenly Father, because Thy kingdom, power and glory will endure through unending eternity, and Thou art, therefore, also worshipped, adored and praised by us, grant what we

ask of Thee here in time, and we shall praise and adore Thee in eternity."