1. In answer to our prayer God indeed often gives us the assurance through the testimony of the Holy Spirit that He will immediately hear us. We are not, however, to base our prayer upon our feelings and emotions, but it must always be and remain a matter of faith, which rests upon God's promise. And, therefore, "Amen" at the close of the prayer signifies that I rest my assurance of being heard upon God, rather than upon the feelings of my heart. Isa. Qb : 24, 1 John 5 : 14, 15, 2 Cor. 1 : 20.

Eph. 3 : 20, 21 : " Now uDto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us, unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen."

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 44T

^FFE:N^r>ix:.

I.

THE HISTORY OF THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

" Books also have their reverses and their history" {Habent sua fata libelli). Apart from the Bible there is no book whose history has been so checkered and yet so influential as that of the Heidelberg Catechism. Having been prepared under the direction and with the assistance of the foremost prince of the time of the' Reformation, it attained the distinction of a general symbol for the whole Beformed Church. Its experience, however, was akin to that of ancient Israel (Psalm 129) : " Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me." From its very beginning it encountered opposition. It was seized by bailiffs and suppressed. It was burnt. Even in its home it was supplanted through political federation and Church union. But against all this it stood as invincible as the confessors and martyrs of our Church, with whom it is justly compared. And it is continuing to maintain itself firm and invincible, its power undiminished and its glory undimmed, our fathers' shield and our defence. Its power is the power of the Word of God, for it is born of the Word. Its glory is derived from the light of the Spirit of God, which permeates it. Often stricken, but not destroyed ; reviled, and yet esteemed. So may it hold on and continue in its way.

Tlie name " Palatinate or Heidelberg Catechism" indicates its original home. The principal territory of the ancient Electoral Palatinate, with its capital cityHeidelberg on the Neckar, lay on both sides of the Middle Rhine. It also included the Upper Palatinate with its capital city Amberg and numerous enclaves. To-day these provinces belong to Bavaria (the Rhine and the Upper Palatinate), to Baden, Hesse, Alsace and Prussia. It was not one of the German provinces in which the Reformation found a welcome in its very beginning. Only in the year 1545 did the Elector Frederick II. yield to the urgent demands of his subjects, but the work of the Reformation was carried forward indifferently. The situation improved when in 1556 the Count-Palatine Otto Henry became Elector. At first he favored the Lutheran confession, but later he inclined toward the Reformed, so that he appointed Reformed theologians as professors in the University of Heidelberg and as pastors in Palatinate congregations. At his death the majority of the preachers and j^eople were more Reformed or " Zwinglian" than Lutheran, so that, as the sequel showed, the course followed by his successor, Frederick III., did not involve a violent change, but only gave expression to what had previously been developed, and by extending it completed the Reformation of the Palatinate.

Frederick was born February 14, 1515, in the little town of Simmern on the Hunsrueck. His father was the Count-Palatine John II. of the Palatinate-Simmern, an intelligent and learned man, but a strict Catholic, who was very anxious to rear his twelve children, especially his oldest son Frederick, in his own faith. For this purpose he sent him to Bishop Eberhard of Liege, a zealous enemy of the Reformation, and afterwards to the court of the Emperor C^harles V. But man proposes and God disposes. That time already

Frederick had discovered that the Bible is the only source of truth and Christ our only Savior ; and after having married in 1537 Margravine Mary of Brandenburg-Bayreuth, who with all her heart believed in the •Gospel, he soon identified himself openly and freely with the evangelical faith, prepared to risk everything for it. When he was to attach his signature to the Regensburg Interim (1541), with which it was proposed to suppress the Reformation, Frederick said to the Emperor : " Rather than do this, I will by God's help suffer anything ; and if I am not safe in this country on account of my faith, I may be able to live at some other place with God." The care and support of a large family made him familiar with the way of the cross, but also with its blessings. His father, whom he with filial devotion had steadfastly sought to lead to the knowledge of the truth, died (1557) with the confession that his hope was fixed upon the merit of Christ alone and with fervent prayers to God, which Frederick in later years frequently recalled with a grateful heart. He now became Duke of Simmern, and at once introduced the Reformation in his province. But his work in Simmern, both as a ruler and a reformer, was only a training school for a greater work to which God had chosen him.

In the year 1559 the Elector Otto Henry of the Palatinate died at Heidelberg, and the CountPalatine of Simmern became his successor. At that time the Palatinate of the Rhine, the so-called Lower Palatinate, was in a state of excitement and confusion ; at Heidelberg in particular the two tendencies in the Church were arrayed against each other over the doctrine of the Lord's Supper. Thus the new Elector had to adjust and settle disputes in the very beginning. He did so with great wisdom and firmness. On the advice of Melanchthon, a native of the Palatinate, he directed that thereafter in the administration of the Lord's Supper, St. Paul's words should be used : " The bread which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ; the cup of blessing which we bless, is the communion of the blood of Christ" (1 Cor. 10 : 16). He also instituted the Reformed order of worship, removed crucifixes, images, candles, altars and baptismal fonts from the churches, where this had not been done under Otto Henry. To take the place of these he introduced communion tables and baptismal bowls, and instead of the Latin Church hymns, which had previously been in use, he introduced the singing of the Psalms in German. It must be understood that a man like Frederick would not allow himself to be dictated to in his work of reformation by his theologians. He himself was a theologian and of ripe Christian experience. At the same time he was ready to receive advice, and the men who stood nearest to him and influenced him most were the theologians Olevianus and Ursinus, both young in years, but rich in gifts, in faith, and in learning,

Casper Olevianus {i. e., of Olewig, the ancestral seat of the family). Doctor of Theology, was born at Treves on the 10th of August in the year 1536. His father was a baker, a trades official, and a city councillor, a respected and wealthy citizen. In his fourteenth year young Olevianus went to France to study jurisprudence in the celebrated law-schools of Paris, Orleans and Bourges. There he attached himself to the persecuted Keformed congregations, having been already awakened at home. It was at this time that a most thrilling event occurred, which led him to give himself fully to God and to consecrate himself to His service. At Bourges a son of Frederick, who subsequently became his sovereign, was drowned before his very eyes in the Auron river. Olevianus rushed to his assistance in vain and brought his own life into imminent periL

Out of the depth he cried unto the Lord and promised that if the Lord would preserve his life, he would devote it entirely to the service of the Divine Word. In a marvellous manner he was rescued from a watery grave. He now began to study the Bible and Calvin's works most earnestly. Then he went to Geneva, Lausanne and Zurich. In his twenty-third year he returned to his native town, full of enthusiasm"^ for his work, and there accepted the position of Professor of the Latin language. But he did not forget his vow, and soon began to preach in his school-room to many hearers. When forbidden to preach there, he obtained the consent of the council and citizens to use the pulpit of St. James' church, and there continued his preaching. Most of the citizens were won for the Keformation, and a large evangelical church was organized, so that the Elector Frederick and Duke Wolfgang of Palatinate-Zweibruecken sent Superintendent Flinsbach to Olevianus' assistance. But his joy was of brief duration. In 1560 the archbishop of"^ Treves invaded his city with an army of mercenaries, and cast Olevianus into prison and expelled the citizens who refused to give up their evangelical faith. While still in prison, Olevianus was called to Heidelberg by the Elector as court-preacher, and at the Elector's request he was released at the end of ten weeks. In his new position he enjoyed the fullest confidence of his sovereign.

Zacharias Ursinus (originally „^-t^di", i. e., Bear), Doctor of Theology, was born July 18, 1534, at Breslau, where his father was a clergyman. From his youth he was distinguished for excellent intellectual talents, a spiritual temper and great industry. In his sixteenth year he entered the University of Wittenberg, where he formed a special attachment for Melanchthon, who in return opened his heart to his pupiL

Ill order to complete his classical education, Ursinus frequented (1557) the celebrated universities of Switzerland and France, where he became more fully acquainted with Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, and Peter Martyr, whose teaching he accepted most ardently, without separating himself from Melanchthon, the friend of Calvin. Ursinus prosecuted his studies most profoundly. In order to reach a settled conviction concerning the Reformed doctrine of predestination, he read the Bible from beginning to end, and finding this doctrine clearly and positively revealed in the Word of God, he, as well as Olevianus, adhered to it firmly as long as he lived. On his return to his home he was appointed Professor of Theology in his native town. But, as there was opposition to him on account of his Calvinism, he voluntarily resigned. When asked by his uncle whither he would now go, he cheerfully and confidently wrote: "I am content to leave my native land when it will not allow one to confess the truth, which I cannot with a good conscience renounce. Since my beloved teacher Philip (Melanchthon) is dead, I shall turn to the theologians of Zurich, whose reputation, however small it may be here, is so great in other churches that it cannot be obscured by our preachers. They are pious, learned, and distinguished men, in whose society I have resolved to spend my life. As for the rest, God will provide," In this way Ursinus was led to go to Zurich (1560), whence, upon the recommendation of Peter Martyr, he was called by Frederick III, to Heidelberg as Professor (1562). Of the certainty of his faith and of his personal salvation he speaks as follows in a private letter :

" If you mean that we cannot say with certainty that one will be saved, you are right when speaking of others ; but with regard to oneself, or one's own conscience and convictions concerning oneself, such a conception is both shocking and biasphemous, and subverts the very foundation of faith. Whoever has taught you such an idea, has instructed you as would a devil, even though he came from heaven. I will say even more ; if you are not certain in this world that you are an heir of eternal life, you will not be one after death. From such a fate the Lord deliver you. For faith itself is that certainty which is the beginning of eternal life, which beginning every one must possess in this life who Avould have it hereafter. If you would remember the meaning of the word hope, that it is a certain expectation of eternal life, you would not write to me what causes my hair to stand on end. I would not accept a hundred thousand worlds and be so far away from my Lord as not to know certainly whether I am His or not."

These were Frederick's co-laborers in completing the Reformation in the Palatinate countries. The three were thoroughly grounded in Christ Jesus and labored together in rare unanimity of spirit. The greatest service they rendered not only to the Palatinate, but also to the entire Reformed Church, was the production of their catechism. The Elector found different manuals of instruction in his schools, and to unify the instruction he wanted a book whose creed was decidedly Reformed, suitable both for the common and the higher schools. This labor he committed to Olevianus and Ursinus, but he himself took an active part in it, and nothing was incorporated in it, even as to expression, of which he did not approve,* so that he

* See passage in a memorial of the elector by Koecher, Catechetical History of the Reformed Church, Jena 1756, p 242.

la a defence written by himself (dated Amberg, Dec. 1, 1566), the elector declared in answer to the false report that Buliioger of Zurich had prepared the catechism for him : " The report that I have had my catechism and Directory of Worship prepared in Zurich by BuUinger and his associates, is an open and barefaced lie, and it can be demonstrated by my own handwriting that after I had received the catechism from my theologians and had examined it, I improved it in difiereat places." See Kluckhohn, Letters of Frederick the Pious of the Palatinate, Munich, 1868, vol. I, p. 726.

could say of the book, " my catechism." After the two divines had prepared outlines, the catechism soon assumed the form in which we have it to this day, and when we consider the shortness of the time and the excellence of the work, it is evident that God's blessing was resting in an extraordinary manner upon the authors. In Janfiary, 1563, the Elector submitted for approval, at his own residence, the completed work to an assembly composed of all the superintendents, professors and preachers of Heidelberg, by whom the book was unanimously accepted and approved, as well as the Directory of Worship submitted to them.*

* The institution of superintendents originated in the time of Otto Henry. According to a letter of Frederick to his son-in-law, John Frederick of Saxony (dated Amberg, March 30, 1563), this gathering was not of the nature of a " special Synod," but a regular assembly. " It is not without good reason that I have called together all my superintendents, foremost Church officers (ministers) and theologians (since it is in accordance with established order that they meet once or twice a year to report tj me whatever irregularities may exist anywhere in churches and schools, that the same may be corrected), who agreed upon a uniform catechism, which is adapted to the youth, as well as to the Church officers (ministers) themselves, since I have found in my electorate a great lack of uniformity and many irregularities in the catechetical work, and in many places no catechism at all." See Kluckhohn, Letters, vol. I, p. 390.

In the library at Weimar there is a pamphlet, printed in tiie year 1563, in which is found the following notice from a Lutheran source: "Palatinate Directory of Worship, adopted in January. Points discussed at Heidelberg eight days in succession. All superintendents summoned, and special lodgings provided for them. A new catechism is submitted to their inspection, in which are found a new enumeration of the Ten Commandments and the chief doctrines, arranged in a new order, as well as new explanations .... All the superintendents of the electorate and all the ministers at the court aud in the city of Heidelberg have received, adopted and subscribed to this catechism. Aud to further confirm the same, they partook of the Lord's Supper Sunday, January 17, with the lord consessors (members of the consistory?). On January 18 the elector summoned them to the court, and addressed them thus : 'I

The catechism was speedily printed and published under the title : " Catechism, or Instruction in Christian Doctrine, as it is conducted by the churches and schools of the Electoral Palatinate. (Then followed the Electoral coat of arms in three fields: the Palatinate lion, the Bavarian quadrangles, and the Imperial globe— because in case of necessity the Elector of the Palatinate was regent of the empire) . Printed in the Electoral city of Heidelberg, by John Mayer, 1563." The edict of the Elector, prefixed to the catechism, which was evidently written by himself in the official style of that time, is as follows :

" I, Frederick, by the grace of God Count-palatine of the Rhine, Lord-high-steward and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, Duke of Bavaria, etc., extend grace and greeting to all superintendents, ministers, preachers, church and school officers of the electorate of the Rhine Palatinate, and hereby would have you know, to wit :

" Being mindful of God's Word, and feeling bound by natural duty and kinship, I have at last undertaken to carry on my divinely entrusted office, calling and government not only for

have learned from the lord concessors that you have come to a uaauimous conclusion which is highly gratifying. I desire that you should now io all faithfulness act accordiugly. Bat I observefrom the minutes submitted to me that the superiutendeat of Ingelheitn was the only one who was not willing to attach his signature. I shall consult with him, and he will no d )ubt see what U reasonable.' " See Niedner's Journal of Historical Theology, 1846, p. 494, and my Evangelical-R-fjrmed church paper, 1868, p. 150.

According to this record, the discussions of the assembly on the catechism and the Directory of Worship coutiuued eight days, and oa the last day, January 16, 1563, all the members, with but one exceptioQ, subscribed to it. On Sunday, January 17, they all partook of the communion with the congregation, at which perhaps for the first time the bread was broken; and on January 18 the elector solemnly dismissed them, after expressing to them his satisfaction with the result of their deliberations, and exhorting them to devote themselves zealously to the introduction of the cntechism. The elector's order for the iutr.)ductii>n of the catechism is, therefore, dated " Tuesday, January 19th."

presei'viuo^ peace and quiet, and maintaiuing a pure, sincere and virtuous Hie and conduct among my subjects, but also and particularly for instructing them in and briny;in<i- them to the true knowledge and fear of the Almighty and His saying Word as the only foundation of all virtue and obedience, and for advancing with all diligence from a pure heart their eternal and temporal interests, and as far as it is in my power to help maintain them in the same.

"And as I learned in the very beginning of my administration, although my dear cousins and forefathers, the Countpalatines, Electors, etc.,* of noble and blessed rhemory, had instituted and undertaken different Christian and useful ordinances and regulations for the furtherance of God's honour and the maintenance of civil discipline and order ;

" That they were not carried out as earnestly as they ought to have been, and that they did not yield the fruit that was hoped for and desired, this induced me not only to renew the same, but also, wherever necessity required it, to improve them and exemplify them, and to make further provisions. I also found no little deficiency in this respect, that the promising young people everywhere, both in the schools and the churches of my electorate, were carelessly instructed in Christian doctrine, and in places not at all, everywhere unequally and nowhere in a binding, authoritative and uniform catechism, but according to each one's own ideas and plans. From this state of things, besides other grave and numerous evils, it came to pass that they were often brought up without the fear of God and the knowledge of His Word, and without being uniformly instructed, or else they were burdened with irrelevant and unnecessary questions, sometimes even with false doctrine.

" Now if both Christian and secular offices, power and households cannot be maintained, and order, respectability and all estimable virtues cannot be developed and promoted in subjects without first and foremost instructing and training the youth in the pure and uniform doctrine of the holy Gospel and the true knowledge of God and continually exercising them therein ;

" I have deemed it of the highest necessity and as the chief duty of my administration to institute proper regulations, to

* Fredt-rick II. and Otto Henrv.

correct the lack of uniformity and other abuses, and to bring about necessary reforms.

"To this end, with the advice and consent of my whole theological faculty, and all tlie superintendents and most prominent ministers, I have ordered a summary of instruction, or Catechism of our Christian Religion, to be compiled from the Word of God, both in the German and Latin languages. In this way hereafter not only the youth in the churches and the schools will be piously instructed in these Christian doctrines, but also preachers and teachers themselves will have a certain and authoritative form and rule according to which they may instruct the youth, without continually making changes according to their own fancy or introducing new doctrines.

" I, herewith, earnestly and graciously admonish and command each and all of you thankfully to accept this catechism or book of instruction to the honour of God, and to the profit and advantage of my subjects and your own souls, and to use it diligently according to its true sense for the instruction of the youth in the schools and churches, and of the people from the pulpit, — to teach, to act and to live according to the same. And I firmly hope and trust that when tlie youth are thus earnestly instructed and trained in the Word of God, God may grant reformation in life, temporal and eternal prosperity. That this be done as suggested, we look with confidence to you.

" Issued at Heidelberg, Tuesday, January 19, in the year fifteen hundred and sixty-three after the birth of Christ, our dear Lord and Savior."

The Palatinate Directory of Worship, also issued in 1563, contains the following statement :

" In our Christian religion the term ' Catechism' means brief and simple oral instruction concerning the chief points of Christian doctrine, in which the young and unlearned are required to repeat what they have learned. It has been the custom of pious parents since the beginning of the Christian Church to have their children instructed in the fear of the Lord at home, in the school, and at church, doubtless for the following reasons, which certainly ought to induce us to do the same. In the first place they wisely concluded that the natural depravity of man would gain the ascendency, and would

corrupt both Church and state, unless counteracted in time by Avholesome instruction. In the second place they were prompted by God's express command, Exod. 12 : 13, Deuteronomy, chapters 4, 6 and 11, in which God says (Deut. 6:6, 7) :' These words (the Ten Commandments), which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart : And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and ■when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.' In the next place, as the children of the Israelites, who had been circumcised, were instructed when they came to years of discretion concerning the significance of the rite and in the covenant of God, so our children who have been baptized are to be instructed in true Christian faith and repentance, that they may confess their faith in the presence of the entire Christian congregation before they are admitted to the table of the Lord."

In the first editions of the catechism the questions were not numbered and divided into Lord's Days, and the Scripture proofs in the margin were cited only by chapter. In subsequent editions an appendix was added containing the following : 1) A " Table of Family Duties," with the heading, "Scripture passages, from which every one may learn the duties appropriate to his station in life;" 2) Morning, evening and table prayers; 3) Prayers for the Lord's Day and forms for baptism, the Lord's Supper and marriage, taken from the Directory of Worship ; 4) The " Questions which were to be asked the youth when for the first time they presented themselves at the Lord's Table," viz.,- questions 60, 21, 65-69, 71, 75-79, 81, 82. Concerning the Scripture passages, which were afterwards printed underneath the text of the questions, it was said in a prefatory note : " The Scripture proofs by which the faith of the children is confirmed, are such only as have been selected with great pains from the divinely inspired Scriptures (usually called canonical books) and have been added to each question and answer." In the first editions one of the proofs from the Apocrjpha had crept ill (Sir. 3 : 27, under Question 105), , which soon disappeared."

Question 80, concerning the Roman mass, has a history of its own. It can be proved that three editions of the catechism appeared in the first year of its publication* (1563). In the first the question did not appear. In the second, which soon followed, the question occupies its present place, closing with the following statement : " So the mass at bottom is nothing else than an idolatrous denial of the one sacrifice and sufferings of Jesus Christ." The statement immediately follows the words, "offered by the priests." The following note appears on the last page of the book : " To the Christian reader. Omissions in the first editionsee especially folio 55 (the place where the new question appears)— are now supplied at the command of his grace, the elector.f 1563." In the third edition the closing statement of the question received its present form (after the words, " offered by the priests"), " and further, that Christ is bodily under the form of bread and wine, and, therefore, is to be worshiped in them ; so that the mass at bottom is nothing else than a denial of the one sacrifice and sufferings of Jesus

1 ^ai ^^"''^^^' ^^^ Heidelberg Catechism ia its original form, Bonn, 1864, contains an exact reprint of the first edition, of which only a single copy is extant.

t In a letter to Calvin, Olevianus says, " I send you, most worthy father, a copy of the Latin edition of the catechism. Iq the first German edition, a copy of which was sent to Schrimger (no doubt a native of the Palatinate, who- was sojourning in Geneva) the question concerning the difference between the Lord's Supper' and the Popish mass was omitted. At my suggestion the Prince directed that in the second German and the first Latin editions it should be inserted {Admojiitus a me jyrinceps voluit . . . addl). I trust it may be ot service to our German people."

The letter is dated April 3, 1563, and appears in Baum's edition ot Calvin s works, Cunitz and Reusz, Brunswick, 1878, vol. 19 p

Christ, and an accursed idolatry.'' In this form Question 80 was incorporated in the Palatinate Directory of Worsliip, and is a part of the catechism as a confession of faith. The elector was no doubt incited to such sharp polemics by tlie decisions and anathemas of the Romish Council of Trent, which in the meantime had been published and brought to his notice.

At the same time that the second German edition was published, a Latin translation of the catechism appeared, prepared by the minister Joshua Lagus and the schoolmaster Lambert Pithopoeus for the use of the higher schools and gymnasia. It was used also for a long time as a compendium in connection with the lectures on dogmatics in the Reformed universities. Ursinus himself gave a series of lectures on it in the Latin language, out of which grew his larger catechetical work, " Explicationes catecheticae," explanations of the catechism.*

In the Lower Palatinate (of the Rhine) the new book of instruction was everywhere received with joy. In the Upper Palatinate, however, notwithstanding the fact that the book was printed several times at Amberg, its introduction was stubbornly resisted at the instigation of the Lutheran ministers, who were supported in this matter by the governor, the crownprince Louis. The elector was not willing to coerce them, and in person, as well as through his best ministers, sought repeatedly, though in vain, to win over the people of Amberg. It was the same Upper Palatinate, which only a generation later allowed itself to be turned by the Jesuits to Catholicism.

No sooner was the Heidelberg Catechism published, than it was fiercely assailed by Frederick's Lutheran

* This work appeared for the first time in the collected writings of Ursinus in 1584, which were published by Quirinus Reuter. In 1598 a special edition was issued by Pareus, which was enlarged from manuscripts left by Ursinus.

fellow-princes, who were his neighbors and in other respects his closest friends, Duke Wolfgang of Zweibruecken, Duke Christopher of Wurtemberg and Margrave Charles of Baden. His own son-in-law, Duke John Frederick, the intermediate, of Saxony, often attacked it in a most unbecoming manner ; so also the most celebrated Lutheran theologians in the empire Against the former the elector himself led the defence' the latter he handed over to Ursinus, after he had had Bui linger, of Zurich, to prepare for him a written defence against them. This suggested to his adversaries the suspicion that the latter was also the author of the catechism.

Frederick sent the following reply, dated Sept. 14 lobd, to the princes who opposed him : '

"My beloved, believe me in all kindness that I do not doubt that your remonstrance against the catechism >yas prompted by good and friendly motives and the best of intentions In this sense it is understood and received. And vou may be assured, my beloved, that I am heartily thankful to everyone even the least, from whom I learn anything out of Grods Word that would improve my sinful life and increase my knowledge of God's Word, and that might at the same time promote my own salvation and that of my subjects which I have more at heart than even their temporal prosperitv I clearly recognize that all of us, as long as we live, are not lords, but only disciples in the school of Christ ; also that we are human and liable to err, and, therefore, stand in constant need of instruction and edification. On the other hand I have at the same time learned so much, both from the divine Word and through long experience (God Almighty having awakened me since my entra ce upon my electoral reign b? numerous adversities, as well as by restless spirits, seliish and ambitious theologians, all of which nevertheless have proved to be fatherlv visitations, and have been for my good), not to allow myself to be carried away by every wind of heretical doctrine, nor to be diverted from the truth which I have accepted and confessed but my immovable foundation and firm ground has always been, and still remams upon this : ' This is my beloved Son'

hear Him.' To this as a pure and infallible standard I would cheerfully conform my whole lite and the government entrusted to me by the grace of God ; in this I would persevere, at the same time avoiding and removing everything possible that is contrary to it, and yet fulfilling my duties as they meet me .... And likewise it has frequently happened since the beginning of the world, and even to the present time, that those who have been Christlike in character and earnest in the discharge of the duties of religion, and have openly confessed the same, have been slandered and persecuted more than others. And I am not the first one that has fallen into such evil rep te, for many others have suifered, more recent examples of which may readily be recalled, and yet the truth has always stood firm ... . And my catechism is not based upon the doctrines of men, but only and alone npon the Word of God, as is clearh' proved by the marginal references to Scripture. And since the Scriptural foundations upon which my catechism is built remain firm and unshaken, I cannot see that such a catechism contains false or pernicious doctrine, on account of which it should be condemned, unless one is prepared at the same time to reject and condemn the Word of God itself."*

Frederick was visited at Heidelbers" by different friendly princes, who sought to induce him to withdraw bis catechism, and to recede from the changes which he had introduced into the churches. Against all these influences he stood immovable. The dukes Wolfgang and Christopher sent an embassy to him proposing a conference, a colloquy, with their theologians. They reported the following answer of the elector to their sovereigns :

" In answer to the proposal of a colloquy I would say that it is known and manifest to all what such colloquies have accomplished among our own people, as well as among our 0 aponents. Your grace, the elector, would not be averse to discussing these matters familiarly and fraternally with his dear friends and cousins (the princes), but he will have nothing to do with the restless theologians."t

* Kluckhohu, Letters, vol. I., p. 439. f The same, vol. I., p. 466.

His son-in-law, Duke John Frederick of Saxony, opposed the elector most vehemently. To him he wrote, March 30, 1563 :

"You have been unnecessarily anxious, as if I were in danger of being deceived by the devil's iustraments ; but thank God, I have attained to such an age, and to such knowledge and understanding of the divine Word that I am not moved about by every wind of doctrine. I would also most heartily wish that all others, setting aside their own feelings and the views of men, might be governed and led by God's Word alone. In other respects I acknowledge before God, as is proper, that I am a poor sinner, and I pray daily for the forgiveness of my sins, and that by the power of the Holy Ghost I may grow more and more in the knowledge of His dear Son, my faithful Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen."*

In a letter dated August 21, 1563, Frederick thanks his son-in-law for different writings he had received, saying that he accepted them as having been sent in a christian, friendly spirit and with good intentions.

" I would, therefore, thank my beloved, and I hope to God that I have not given you any occasion for assaulting me, nor would I willingly do it now. But I know better than that I am in the grasp of the devil, and that you need to devote yourself to my rescue. For I belong in body and soul, both in life and death, to my dear and faithful Savior, Jesus Christ, and it has cost Him too much to make me His own, to deliver me to the power of the devil, seeing that I have been purchased by His own precious blood. I also assuredly know and believe that the devil, with all his arts and cunning, cannot injure me nor rob me of a single hair on my head without the will of my heavenly Father.f But I hope to God that my beloved understands the truth better than appears from his conduct toward me. Should, however, my hope be vain, I shall the more diligently pray to my dear and faithful God, and shall not doubt that by the aid of His good and Holy Spirit His omnipotence may yet open the eyes of your understanding, so that you may come to a right knowledge of the truth. "ff

* Kluckhohn, Letters, vol. I., p. 391.

t See Question 1 of the catechism.

ft Kluckhohn, Letters, vol. I., p. 440.

Frederick endured the invectives of the young man, his son-in-law, with the greatest patience and meekness. When he, however, became so base, after having alienated the affections of his wife from her father, that he sought by correspondence to incite the Electress Mary against her husband on account of the catechism, bringing upon her an attack of sickness, Frederick addressed him in a different tone. In a letter written July 7, 1563, he said :

" I desire that you, my beloved, cease from troubling and grieving and seeking to reform my aifectionate and dearly beloved wife. I have given you my daughter for your wife. With her you have the right and power to undertake a work of reformation. I have given her to you and instructed her when she took her departure from me that she should render to you the Christian obedience due you. If she does not do it, you must speak to her about it. But you, my beloved, must not interfere with my wife nor my children (with the exception of your wife)."*

The severest opposition to the elector and his catechism was yet to come. The emperor, Maximilian II., issued a call for a Diet at Augsburg in 1566, at which war against the Turks was to be discussed. Thereupon several Lutheran princes, incited by their theologians, agreed, on account of his " innovation," to bring charges against the elector before the emperor and the Diet, accusing him of departure from the Augsburg Confession, and that he should, therefore, be excluded from the Religious Peace. It was rumored that it might even cost him his electorate, if not his life. With brotherly anxiety he was warned in two letters by his brother, Count-palatine Richard of Simmern, not to go to Augsburg. Among other things he said to his dearly-beloved brother :

" I find consolation in the hope that the Almighty power of my dear and faithful Heavenly Father will use me as an instru-

^Kluckhohn, Letters, vol. L, p. 416.

meiit for the confession of His name in these latter days in the holy empire of the German nation,* not only by word of mouth, but also by act, as was done some time ago by my dear brother-in-law, Duke John Frederick of Saxony, elector of blessed memory.t And although I do not have the presumption to compare myself with the said elector of blessed memory, I know on the other hand that the same God who kept him in the true knowledge of the holy Gospel is still living, and is well able to preserve me, a poor, simple man, and, by the power of the Holy Ghost, will certainly do it, even if it should come to this that blood must be spilt. And should it please my God and Father in heaven thus to honor me, I should never be able to thank Him sufficiently for it, either in time or in eternity."

In this heroic faith Frederick went to Augsburg. There his princely opponents were stirred up by their theologians, while the Bishops of Worms and Speyer and the papal nuncio sought to influence the em peror. Frederick stood alone, but the Lord was with him. Upon the accusation of Duke Wolfgang of Zweibruecken and Christopher of Wurtemburg, his " good friends and true neighbors," the emperor ordered him to appear before the'assembly, May 14, demanding of him that he set aside all the changes he had introduced into the churches, as well as the catechism, in order to prevent his being proceeded against with the utmost severity. Frederick retired from the assembly in order to prepare a defence, but soon appeared again followed by his son, John Casimir, who as his " spiritual armour-bearer" carried after him the Bible. Not long after the Diet he wrote out the entire proceedings and his own defence, in which, among other things, he said :

* It is worthy of note that here Frederick does not designate the empire by the official title of the Holy Roman Empire of the German nation.

t The elector having been conquered and taken prisoner in the Smalcald war at the battle of Miihlberg, 1547, by the emperor Charles V., was declared to have forfeited his land, and was held as a prisoner for five yeard after he had first been sentenced to death.

" With reference to matters of" religion which I am called upon to change and to set aside, I announce that in tiie sj)here of faith and conscience I kn w but one Lord, who is the Lord of lords and King of kings; and, therefore, I say that this question does not pertain to 'a cap full ot flesh' {/. e., his head), but to the soul and its salvation, which has been committed to me by my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and which I am in duty bound and prepared to preserve for Him. Therefore I cannot concede to your Imperial Majesty the right of authority over it, a right which belongs to God alone, who is its creator. As far as ' y catechism is concerned, I am committed to it. It is fortified in the margin by proof-texts from the holy Scriptures to such an extent that it must stand immovable, and it is my hope that by the help of God it may continue so to stand. As for the rest, I comfort myself with the thought that my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has given me, together with all who believe on Him, the assured promise that everything ^vhich I shall lose for the sake of His honor or name, shall be restored to me in the world beyond a hundred-fold. With this I most humbly commend myself to the grace of your Imperial Majesty."

During his address all eyes were turned upon the elector. According to an old tradition, when he had finished his speech, the Elector Augustus of Saxony approached him, and putting his hand upon his shoulder, said to him : " Frederick, thou art more pious than all of us." So also at the close of the session the Margrave Charles of Baden said to those standing around him, " Why do you persecute this prince? He has more piety than the whole of us!" And history has given Frederick the surname of " the Pious." The emperor, however, was not at all satisfied with Frederick's defence. He afterwards stated in the presence of the princes, " this pest must be destroyed." Boquinus rightly said of the elector at a later date in his Latin funeral oration : " If martyrdom consists in the righteousness of the cause, the temper of soul with which it is endured, and joyous resignation to suffering, then we may count this splendid elector among the martyrs of Christ."

Frederick left the Diet before it closed. He arrived at Heidelberg on Friday before Whitsunday, and the people received him with the greater joy, because it had been rumored that he had been deposed at Augsburg, yea even beheaded. On the following day he attended preparatory service in the church of^he Holy Ghost, and in the presence of all the people extended his right hand to his court-preacher, Olevianus, exhorting him to remain steadfast. On Sunday he and his f\imily publicly partook of the Lord's Supper with the congregation.

^ Frederick III. was a prince by the grace of God, like whom there were but few, of eminent good sense, firm faith, dispassionate judgment, sincere piety, beloved by his people, and of blessed memory to this day. After God had preserved him many years to be a blessing to men, the hour approached for which he had been preparing himself all his lifetime. Earlier in life he suffered from gout, in his later years he was afflicted with dropsy and suffered much pain. But the "only comfort," which sustained him earlier in conflict, now also supported him in suffering — " in life and death." On his deathbed he said to those standing around him :

" I have lived long enough, both for you and the Church. Now I shall be called to a better life. 'l have done for the Church the best I possibly could, but have not accomplished a great deal. God who can do all things and who cared for His servants before my day, still lives and reigns in heaven. He will not leave you orphans, nor will He leave without fruit the prayers and tears which I have brought to Him on my knees in this room for my successors and for the Church."

Then he said to his court-preacher, Olevianus : " The Lord may call me whenever it pleases Him. I have a clear conscience in Christ Jesus my Lord, whom I have served with all my heart, and I have lived to see that in my churches and schools the people are directed

away from men to Him alone." He also said : " I have been detained long enough by the prayers of pious Christians. It is time that my earthly life should close, and that I should go to my Savior into heavenly rest." After he had directed that Psalm 31 and John 17 should be read to him, and he himself had prayed aloud, he gently fell asleep, assured of iiis salvation, at the age of 61 years, on October 26, 1576. Upon his tombstone was inscribed his motto : " Lord, as Thou wilt." In his will also, which was published''' by John Casimir in 1577, Frederick made express mention of his catechism in the following words :

" I especially acknowledge allegiance to my published catechism and Directory of Worship, in which all the chief points of the Christian faith are explicitly and clearly set forth in order, and many of them explained in detail."

As decisively as Frederick HI. was devoted to the Reformed confession, his eldest son and successor, Louis VI., held to Lutheranism. But he lacked very much of having his father's spirit. As soon as he had come to Heidelberg from Amberg, where he had resided as governor of the Upper Palatinate, while his father's body yet remained unburied, he asserted himself most harshly by not allowing his father's faithful ministers to speak a word at the funeral, insisting that the Lutheran court-preachers, whom he had brought with him, should officiate. Anxious apprehension seized the people of the Palatinate, of whose very flesh and Wood Keforraed doctrine and practice had become a part. Petitions and representations of every kind, even those of his brother, John Casimir, as well as the entreaties and admonitions which his father had given to his successor in his last will were of no avail with the new elector. He suppressed the Heidelberg Catechism,

* Struve, Palatiuaie Church History, Fraukfurt on the Main, 1721, p. 275, etc.

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 46^

drove out six hundred Reformed ministers and schoolmasters, whom the Swiss received most kindly, and introduced Lutheranism into the entire Palatinate, Under such circumstances Count-Palatine John Casimir could no longer remain in Heidelberg. He removed to Neustadt on the Haardt, having received Neustadt, Kaiserslautern and Boeckelheim (with Frankenthal) as an inheritance from his father. In this territory, through his influence, the Heidelberg Catechism was retained. The title under which the book was now printed was, "Catechism, or Instruction in Christian Doctrine, as Conducted in the Churches and Schools of the Former Electoral, now Princely Palatinate."

Louis was especially bitter against both of his father's spiritual advisers, Olevianus and Ursinus, and they were made to suffer his utmost displeasure.

After his dismissal Ursinus was appointed a professor in the new Reformed university which had been established at Neustadt on the Haardt as a substitute for the University of Heidelberg. Just as he had stood by the father in the defence of the catechism, so now he served the son. Several of his admirable defences were published with the catechism after 1592. These were : 1) '' Reply to the criticisms of several theologians in reference to the marginal Scripture proofs of the Heidelberg Catechism. 1564." 2) "Answer and ' counter-questions' to six questions concerning the Lord's Supper. 1564." 3) "Articles in which the evangelical churches agree or differ in relation to the Lord's Supper. 1566." 4) "Vindication of the catechism of Christian doctrine, published at Heidelberg in the year 1563, against the unfounded charges and misrepresentations with which it has been assailed by different persons. In addition, Dr. Martin Luther's interpretation of the breaking of the bread in the

Lord's Supper. 1564," In this treatise there are printed on the face and on the back of the title-page two passages from Tertullian as a motto : " None but a wicked heart is offended at the good ;" and, " Neither time, nor human authority, nor custom, nor anything else can deprive truth of its right." The conclusion of the preface is as follows :

" For ourselves we find sufficient comfort first and foremost in our own consciences which appeal with joy and confidence from the accusations of our opponents to the just tribunal of Christ; in the next place, in the words of our Lord Jesus Himself when He says to His disciples, and to the entire Church, both to warn and to comfort them : " Blessed are ye, when men shall hate, revile, and reproach you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and persecute you, cast out your names as evil, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad : for great is your reward in heaven : for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. (Matt. 5 : II; Luke 6 : 22) . . . . Since we find that such unjust and grievous complaining on the part of these troublesome people works great injury to the divine Word and to the churches of this section which we are called upon to serve by God's help and assistance, and grieves many pious and God-fearing christians, and disturbs many weak consciences, for these just and sufficient reasons we have felt constrained to prepare a Scriptural vindication of the catechism

and Christian doctrine of these churches Finally,

we ask the Christian reader that each one, in the light of his own duty and for his own advantage, seek the truth with an impartial mind and avoid falsehood. And since we desire and wish nothing more than that our writings and thoseof our opponents be thoroughly examined in comparison with each other and with the Word of God with all diligence, and with a sole design to know the truth ; although our opponents make use of every effijrt and means with the authorities and with the people to have our writings torn from the hands of the people, to have them removed out of sight, and to prohibit their sale in city and country ; every sensible man, therefore, may readily see which party is less afraid and anxious about its cause and whose fault it is that Christian unity cannot be brought about through

THE FIEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 471

a knowledge of the truth. For if our opponents were as willing and ready as we are to search for and accept the truth by means of an amicable and impartial colloquy, we do not doubt' that all dispute and dissension would soon be silenced and the Church would attain to blessed rest and peace. And we earnestly pray the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that by His'Spirit of truth and peace He would moye and incline all Christian hearts in this direction, for tlie sake of His dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen."

To the vindication of the doctrine of the catechism, which had been assailed, there is added a " conclusion in the form of an apology to Christian and peaceful people, who might think "that in parts the vindication was perhaps unnecessary or too vehement." Following this the words of the Church father Augustine are quoted (Epist. 7): "That love for oneself is wicked which desires that others might be in error, in order that one's own error might be concealed."

These treatises, written with much ingenuity and ability, are rather of an apologetical than of a polemical character. Their chief aim is to prepare the people for the attacks of opponents and to establish them in the truth they had accepted.

Ursinus was not permitted to labor long in Neustadt. His vigor was exhausted by his excessive labors at Heidelberg, where he was not only professor, and the preparation of many writings fell to his lot, but also president of the " Sapienz-College," a theological seminary, whose only professor he was for a time, and whose economic management also depended upon him, on account of which he sometimes spoke of it in letters as his " tread-mill. "=•= He was not of a

* Over the door of his study he had placed the following inscription :

"Amice, quisquis hue venis, Aut agito paucis, aut abi, Aut me laborantem juva." (" Friend, whoever thou art that enterest here, be brief, or go, -or help me in my work.")

contentious disposition, but sincerely loved and sought peace ; at the same time he would not evade a conflict for the truth when forced upon him, however deeply it might wound his heart. He wrote to Bulliuger : " From this conflict I carry a wound which I do not expect ta be healed of in this life." He died May 6, 1583, only 48 years of age, and was buried in the choir of the parish church at Neustadt. His epitaph speaks of him as- " a great theologian, victorious over heresies concerning the person of Christ and the Lord's Supper, endowed with great power as a speaker and a writer, a keen philosopher, a wise man, and an earnest teacher of youth." Olevianus, after his dismissal from oflice at Heidelberg, was called by Count Louis of Wittgenstein, lordhigh-steward and friend of Frederick IIL, to Berleburg, and here again he took an active part in the development of the Church. In the year 1584 he went to Herborn, where a Reformed university soon flourished under his direction. The General Synod, over which he presided (1586), adopted the presbyterial and synodical form of government for the districtsof Nassau, Wittgenstein, Solms and Wied. The following year he was overtaken by a critical illness, and calmly looked forward to his end. In his last will and testament he says after the introductory words :

" In the first place, I thank my dear God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that He created me a rational creature in this world ; then in particular, that He efficaciously called me and bestowed upon me the gift of faith, that He quickened me in our only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ, when I was dead in sin, and bestowed upon me in Him the righteousness of God through the holy sacrifice of my Savior Jesus Christ, as well a& the hope of glory, and that He has revealed unto me the riches of His grace, viz., that He predestinated me by grace to sonship in Christ, whence all these blessings flow, and that He has made me a partaker of the same through the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry " Abba, Father."

The subscriptioa, written in his own hand, is as follows : " I, Caspar Olevianus, declare by my own signature and openly testify before the Holy Trinity that, by the help of God's Spirit and grace, I have taught, both in word and writing, the pure Christian faith, and that I, being sealed by the Holy Ghost, persevere in the same faith and doctrine by God's grace unto eternal salvation, relying upon the grace which He has revealed unto me in His Word. Amen, through Jesus Christ." On his deathbed he said: "I have only learned to know in this sickness what sin is, and how great is the majesty of God, and that it is not sufficient for men only to desire companionship with God." Then he spoke of a vision he had : " Yesterday I was filled for more than an hour with unspeakable joy. It appeared to me that I was walking in a meadow resplendent with light, and while I was moving about, heavenly dew fell upon me, not in drops but in streams. Both m}^ body and soul were filled with exceeding great joy." His friend, John Piscator, said to him : " So the good Shepherd has led you into His green pastures?" " Yes," he answered, " he has led me to the fountain of living water." He asked that Psalm 42 and Isaiah 53 and other chapters of the Word of God be read to him, and then exclaimed : " I would no longer postpone my journey to the Lord, I desire to depart and be with Christ." He asked his friends, who were standing at his bedside, to sing the hymn, *' Nun bitten wir den Heiligen Geist" (" Now pray we the Holy Ghost"), he himself joining in the singing with a weak voice. Then he bade farewell to his aged mother and his friends, shakino; hands with them and blessing them. When at the point of death, his colleague, Alsted, approached him and said : *' Dear brother, you are undoubtedly certain of your salvation in Christ, even as you have taught others?" the dying

man laid his hand upon his heart and said : " CeHissimus !" i. e., " most certain !" This was Olevianiis' last word. He died March 15, 1587.

Thus the three authors of the Heidelberg Catechism lived and labored, thus they died, and both in their life and in their death they verified what they had professed.

The reign of Elector Louis VI. was of short duration. He died in 1583. The work of reformation which he had carried on by force experienced the truth expressed by one of his mottoes: "Everything passes away." John Casimir, who adininistered the government for his nephew, still under age, subsequently Elector Frederick IV., restored not only the old Directory of Worship, but also the Heidelberg Catechism in the entire Lower Palatinate, where under the reigu>^ of Frederick IV. and Frederick V. it was again earnestly taught and brought with it a rich blessing. Scarcely had the catechism been adopted by the Synod of Dort (1619) as a confession of the entire Reformed Church* when it encountered a period full of vicissitudes through the Thirty Years' War. When Frederick V., after the unfortunate battle at the White Mountain near Prague, had lost his dominions and had fled to Holland, the Palatinate was invaded by Spanish and Bavarian troops. With them came monks of every order, who undertook

* The resolution was as follows: "It is unanimously declared with the heartiest approval of the foreign as well as of the Netherland theologians that the doctrine embraced in the Palatinate Catechism is in accordance with the Word of God, and that it contains nothing which on the ground of dissonance with the Word of God needs to be altered or amended, and that it is also an exceedingly correct hand book of sound Christian doctrine adapted with special skill, not ouly to the capacity of youth, but also to adults, that, therefore, it may hereafter be taught with much profit in the Netherland churches, and it must, by all means, be retained (adopted at the 147th and 148th sessions, May 1, 1619).

the work of proselyting. First of all, the Heidelberg Catechism was forced out and as many copies as possible were destroyed. There are still some copies of that day extant, which bear the title, " Catechism, or Instruction in Christian Doctrine, as it is conducted in the churches and schools of the Electoral Palatinate." As a result of the victories of Gustavus Adolphus it was again brought into general use for a time; but after the battle of Nordliugen (1634) it lost its place in the Palatinate throughout the continuance of the war. Not until the Peaceof Westphalia (1648), when Charles Louis, the son of Frederick V. returned to his paternal inheritance, was the Heidelberg Catechism brought back from its banishment and used again to lead the generation demoralized by war in the way of salvation and of piety. With the year 1685 a new period of conflict began, when, after the death of Charles, the last of the electors of the Reformed line of Simmern, the Neuburger family began to reign, with the late proselyte to Catholicism, Phihp William, at its head. The Jesuits whom he brought with him attacked the catechism fiercely, especially on account of the eightieth question. The catechism found an able defender in Lenfant, the courtpreacher of the Elector's widow. ("The innocence of the Heidelberg Catechism." 1688.j His life being in danger on account of the Jesuits, he was compelled to flee to Berlin, where he again received an appointment to preach. The opposition was carried to the point of suppressing the catechism under the next Elector, John William, and during the French War of Reunion. It was taken away from the children of mixed marriages, and the children themselves were compelled to attend Catholic schools. Oppression and abuse were invoked to cause adults to apostatize from their faith. The " only comfort" was the support of many from whom had been taken both house and home, of many

who were cast into prison and allowed to suffer there from cold. They were either to make a declaration that they had become Catholics of their own accord, or be left to perish in prison. When it was discovered that the prisoners strengthened themselves for resistance through the books they had brought with them (the Psalms and the catechism), these were taken away from them. But they were not dependent upon the outward letter. They remained true to their feith ; and although one and another had become weak, such recovered themselves with deep penitence. What the bailiff of Germersheim said, in anger on account of this fact, was true: "These Reformed are just like the willows by the brooks : though cut and stunted, they sprout again." True, indeed ! So said the prophet Jeremiah (17 : 7, 8) : '* Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. For lie shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green ; and shall not be cai^eful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit."

The opposition which had hitherto been waged against the catechism reached its climax under the reign of the Elector Charles Philip, when an attempt was made to suppress it altogether. In a proclamation " issued at Heidelberg, April 24, 1719," he commanded the catechism to be " suppressed" in the following manner. The officers were to " seize without exception within the space of three months all the copies containing the eightieth question and some other objectionable points." The reason given for this command was that this question was offensive to the- Catholics, and that besides, the title-page of the book bore the electoral escutcheon, with the words, " by order of his serene Electoral Highness," and " with the permission

of his Electoral Highness." This was ''audacious, offensive and criminal." The catechism was not only removed from the schools, but was also taken away from the families. Therefore the bailiff of the place went from house to house to collect the copies. Another proclamation directed that the citizens in whose possession such books would thereafter be found must " pay to his gracious majesty a fine of ten florins for each copy." The collected copies were to be delivered to the magistrates. The officers everywhere complied, with the exception of the burgomaster and council of the city of Odernheim, who had to be compelled to carry out the order. That the Elector's purpose was not only to prohibit its use in his own country, but, if possible, to destroy the catechism itself, is shoAvn further by the circumstance that even the bookbinders were ordered under the threat of punishment to secure again and to hand over such copies as they had already sent to other countries. The copies that had been collected were burnt. The Catholic pulpits found pleasure in whipping the catechism with rods in the presence of the devout worshipers. The Keformed Church Council at }{eidelberg, which had also been commanded to withdraw the catechism, remonstrated against this. They cited the fact that the objectionable words had always been on the title-page, and that they had hitherto been printed on it in every new edition. Besides, the last edition had been issued by a Catholic printer without consultation with the consistory. In relation to the introduction and use of the catechism, they showed that it had been issued by the Elector Frederick III. himself in 1563 and triumphantly defended at Augsburg in 1566, acknowledged at Dort in 1619 by all the Reformed churches as a confession of faith, and had been in use ever since for more than 150 years without being prohibited. Assurances were also given that Question 80 referred only to the doctrine, without in the least condemning the persons themselves. In conclusion the Consistory referred to its obligations, in virtue of which it was bound to maintain the confessional position of the Church.

In answer to this memorial, the members of the Consistory were verbally informed that the command would have to stand, and that unconditional obedience to it would be expected. Besides this violent action, the elector committed another offence by taking away from the Reformed the Church of the Holy Ghost and giving it to the Catholics. The Consistory discharged its duty in remonstrating again and again, but were always put off. As the Reformed did not wish to leave any lawful means untried, they sent a complaint to the Protestant States of the empire (Corpus Evangelicorum). The Reformed States especially espoused with energy the cause of the Palatinate brethren, and foremost among them was the Landgrave of HesseCassel, who in a letter sought to persuade the elector to revoke his order, by calling especial attention to the fact that the confession adopted at Trent on the part of the Catholics condemned not only the doctrines of the Lutherans and the Reformed, but their persons as well. So also the Reformed king, Frederick William I. of Prussia, sent an ambassador to urge the release of the catechism, on the ground that it was the confession of the Reformed Church in Germany, and, as such, security was given to it with all its contents. The ambassador, Lord von Hecht, was unremitting in his efforts, and with him stood the ambassadors (who had meanwhile arrived) of the Landgrave of Hesse and of the Reformed European potentates, viz., of the king of Great Britain and of the states of Holland. These now demanded most explicitly that the elector must again

allow the free use of the Reformed Heidelberg Catechism ia the countries of the Palatinate, and must restore it to the subjects themselves. To meet the emergency of continual refusal, the powers threatened, since all their remonstrances and entreaties were in vain, to curtail the liberty of worship of their Catholic subjects. In spite of this intervention, the suppression of the catechism was continued amid the persistent resistance of the people and their ministers. At Odernheim one of the Reformed was cast into prison and was given only bread and water, because he would not comply with the order of the bailiff to search for copies of the catechism that w^ere still concealed in the houses. Only the most earnest intervention of the ambassador of Great Britain succeeded in securing liberty for him. Even the pope interfered in the matter, and encouraged the elector to continue in his " praiseworthy" zeal. On the other hand, the Reformed Consistory was also encouraged and strengthened by comforting messages from abroad. The Archbishop of Canterbury wrote in the name of the Anglican Church to the Palatinate Consistory, his " greatly beloved brethren in Christ.'* The letter begins thus :

" We, the archbishops and bishops of the Anglican Churchy greet you and the congregations entrusted to you with due friendship and love. We, as members of the same body with you, heartily lament and are as deeply touched by the hard and cruel persecutions which you suffer for righteousness' sake, as if we were called upon to suffer them in our own persons. This you must not regard as a kindness flowing from pity, but rather as the expression of a duty which we owe to you and our Savior Jesus Christ."

The assurance is then given that the king and parliament are firmly resolved to assist the Reformed people of the Palatinate. On this account England also was compelled to become a party to the guarantee of the Peace of Westphalia. The letter ends thus :

" ]\[ay the chief Shepherd of our souls and the bishop of our Church grant tliat this righteous work which we have begun may reach a happy issue, and that through the ])resent persecutions, which are directed not only against you, but against all Evangelical-Reformed churches, the Evaugelical-Roforraed princes may once be aroused and stirred up to take rightly to heart the welfare of our Chureli, and to agree upon measures for its protection ; for our deadly enemies, the Jesuits, need nothing more at the present time than sufficient power to suppress, and, if possible, to devour us, and the sooner they can do it, the better they will like it. In this connection, what else does it behoove us Protestants to consider, than how to organize ourselves in good time for defense, and not to allow when some of us are attacked, our whole Church to be overthrown and destroyed. God Almighty grant that we may bring about among ourselves an alliance for the permanent protection of the Protestant Church, and as our Savior Jesus Christ has established it upon the eternal rock, so may He continue to strengthen and maintain it upon this immovable foundation and not permit the gates of hell to prevail against it. This ought to be the desire of us all. In this direction we must labor with united strength. To this end we will encourage one another with the words which the valiant general Joab addressed to his brother Abishai and his fellow-combatants, when they were attacked at one and the same time by the Syrians and the Ammonites (2 Sam. 10 : 12) : ' Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seemeth Him good.' "

The complaints against the prohibition of the catechism and the taking away of the Church of the Holy Ghost were finally also brought before the Emperor and the Imperial Diet. The violation of the law on the part of the Elector was so apparent that even tiie Emperor had to decide against him, however unwilling he was to do so on account of confessional interest. Although ordered to permit the free use of the book, he endeavored in the course of the negotiation to secure from the Palatinate Consistory an alteration or modifination of the language of Question 80. But the Consistory now also stood firm, and declared that it was not authorized to make changes in a symbolical book of the Church. Thus the Heidelberg Catechism emerged from this siege of persecution unaltered, and its use was continued to the blessing of young and old.

The electoral Palatinate was blotted out in the first French revolution, never to arise again. After Germany's deliverance from the French yoke, it was divided among the neighboring states. In different provinces the Palatinate Catechism remained in use, until it was displaced, like Luther's catechism, in those provinces into which the union was introduced, in 1817, a century after the abortive attempt to suppress it by force. In the Bavarian Palatinate a catechism was substituted, in which one of the first questions was this : " What is man's chief end ?" " Man's chief end is to know the truth and to do good, in order that he may thereby become virtuous and happy." About the year 1850 this book was superseded by another catechism, prepared by Ebrard, and, like that prepared by Ullmann for Baden, which followed the arrangement of the Heidelberg Catechism, it was a blending of the same with the Lutheran Catechism. Both books (the Palatinate in 1869, the Bavarian in 1882) yielded to the advance of Liberalism in Church and state.

In this way the blessed old Heidelberg Catechism has been shut out from its native home for more than fifty years, but it left its impress for decades upon the hearts of the departing generation. To this I can testify.

In 1851 I was pastor, in my native Palatinate home, of the congregation at Billingheim, an old electoral Palatinate town and the birthplace of Billicanus, wellknown in the history of the Reformation. How could I instruct my catechumens in the above named cate482 THE HEIDELBERG CATECHIS^r.

chism ? I resorted to the expedient of dictating my own manual for catechumens, which the law allowed us to do, besides using the above named book. The congreojation was originally Reformed, and according to the charter of the union the symbolical books " were to be held in proper esteem," and so with a good conscience I began with the first catechetical lesson to dictate to the children out of my own manual for catechumens the " only comfort," the first question of the Heidelberg Catechism. After a few lessons, I noticed that several children discontinued writing out the questions and answers, and when I questioned them with reference to the matter, they answered : " Herr Parre, mer hawe's gedruckt; misse mer's dann noch schreiwe?" (" Dear pastor, we have it in print ; must we also write it out?") As the children committed at home the dictated exercises, the old people's memory was awakened, and everything appeared familiar to them. It had scarcely become known that these lessons could be found in the "Heidelberg Catechism," when the children explored every garret and lumber-room, with the result that they brought to church old copies of the Heidelberg Catechism of all sizes and styles of binding. In the same congregation I met the long-since suppressed catechism with a poor widow on her dyingbed ; not in the lumber-room, but in the chamber of her heart. The woman indicated in her conversation that she had a knowledge of the Word of God, and when I finally pointed her to her only comfort in the language of the Heidelberg Catechism, she took the words out of my mouth, and repeated in prayer almost word for word the answer to the first question.*

* Professor Plitt (later of Bonn) had similar experiences at that time in Heidelberg, " In the congregation which had been served by one of the authors of the Heidelberg Catechism, Olevianus, the Church of the Holy Ghost at Heidelberg, I learned to know many

When in 1854 this new catechism was introduced, I had another experience of how the Heidelberg Catechism maintained itself, in an old Reformed congregation on the Rhine, at Iggelheim, where the Elector Frederick the Pious had a hunting castle, at which he frequently sojourned. There it was the custom for the children to sleep with their grandparents in a rear room reserved for the old people. I soon discovered in my pastoral visits that in the evening after retiring, the old people, before going to sleep, would recite and discuss with their grandchildren who were attending catechetical instruction questions taken from the Heidelberg Catechism. I could tell in my instruction where such evening catechization had taken place. Yes, if our old Heidelberg Catechism could relate the whole story of its life and sufferings, what great things we should hear !

old men and women whose eyes brightened wnen upon their sickbefis and deathbeds their attention was directed to the first question of the catechism. Most of them remembered the question from the days of their childhood. Mauy of them said that as children thej were not able fully to understand the question, and that it was a burden to them to learn it by heart ; now, however, they thanked God that they knew it, and could use it in prayer to their comfort and strengthening. The later generation which had not been brought up on the Heidelberg Catechism had no such anchorage. The older people, to whom had been entrusted in their youth the riches of the Heidelberg Catechism, passed through all the changeful scenes of life without being disturbed in their souls. They stood upon an immovable foundation. How the attention was quickened when occasionally the outline of a sermon was taken from the Heidelberg Catechism. How the lips of the older people would move, silently joining in repeating the question, when one of the pithy questions of the catechism was cited in the sermon. The days of their youth would be revived. To hear the old familiar tones did them good. They

sounded through their souls like a message from home The

Heidelberg Catechism still lives. In three hundred years it has not

died ; it lives in the hearts of Christians It will not die as

long as the Protestant Church stands." Theol. Studien und Kritiken, 1863, p. 24, etc.

From the beginning the Reformed Church did not want in good catecliisiiis. One needs only to be reminded of those of Calvin, Bullinger and a'Lasco. But none breathed so thoroughly the right spirit and met all the requirements of such a book as the Heidelberg Catechism, and for this reason it was everywhere joyfully welcomed, and reached a wide circulation. This accounts for the fact that, apart from the Bible, this book has been translated into more languao-es than any other, and more copies of it have been circulated than of any other book. At the same time that the second German edition appeared, a Latin edition was published (1563). Subsequently it was translated into Dutch (1566 by Dathen, and 1580 by C. van der Heyden) ; into Greek (1597 by Sylburg), a copy of which was sent to the patriarch of Constantinople ; by order of the states of Holland into modern Greek and Spanish (1648) ; into Polish by Prasmovius ; into Hungarian (1577) by Huszdr, later by Skarasi, and then revised by Molnar) ; into Arabic by Chelius ; into Siugalese by Konijn (1741), besides into Hebrew, Low Saxon, English, Scotch, French, Italian, Bohemian and Malay (1621).

Outside of the Palatinate, the Heidelberg Catechism was first adopted as a book of instruction in Germany ^by the congregations of refugees from the Netherlands, the " congregations of the cross," by the Synod of Wesel, 1568, and of Emden, 1571, and thus it found its way into East-Friesland, where a'Lasco's catechism had been used. Then it was adopted by the Reformed congregations on the Lower Rhine (Julich- -Cleve-Berg, Mark, etc.'*'), in which in accordance with

'■^ The first Synod of Berg was held in the parsonage at Neviges. The first paragraph of the minutes is as follows : " After having invoked the name of God, it was unanimously resolved and ordained by this Synod that, as there is among the present ministers perfect

the synoclical resolutions adopted in 1576, sermons were preached on it, and after 1586 it was made binding by oath upon pastors and teachers. Nassau and the neighboring dominions adopted it in 1581, Anhalt in 1596. Soon after the year 1600 the catechism was more extensively introduced. In 1613 it found its way into Brandenburg after the elector John Sigismund had embraced the Reformed faith, and thence into the Reformed congregations of the eastern provinces of Prussia. When in 1695 the parochial church of Berlin was built, which was the first Reformed church of the city, there were placed in the corner-stone, besides other documents, a Herborn Bible (translated by the Reformed pastor Piscator) and a Heidelberg Catechism, both bound in black and fastened with large gilded clasps. At the dedication of the Jerusalem church of the city (on Easter Monday, 1708), at which both Reformed and Lutheran ministers officiated, the Heidelberg and the Lutheran Catechisms lay side by side during the service on the communion table, which occupied the place from which the altar had been removed. The cathedral church was originally Reformed, and until the middle of the present century the youth were instructed in the Heidelberg Catechism, and the princes of the house of Hohenzollern were confirmed upon the basis of the same catechism. According to the royal Prussian " Evangelical Reformed Regulations" instituted for the guidance of inspectors, presbyteries, classes, gymnasia and schools, October 24, 1713, which were issued as a " permanent pragmatic law," no Reformed " pastor or teacher" was

accord as to the doctrine of the Word of God, since they have separated themselves from the papal abominations, and hold to the pure doctrine of the Gospel, and in particular to the Heidelberg Catechism, as the doctrine which they find to be absolutely based upon the Word of God."

to be permitted to use any other catechism but this one. In a mandate issued November 9, 1717, by Kino; Frederick William I. he commands :

" That in all Evangelical cburcbes and schools of all my dominions there shall be used and taught no other catechism but the Heidelberg Catechism, to which I myself hold allegiance."

These mandates were not affected by the union introduced into Prussia, since King Frederick William III. expressly declared that the confessional status of the two Churches was not to be changed by the union. The Heidelberg Catechism was adopted in the duchy of Zweibruecken after 1600. In Bremen it had been introduced earlier, for in 1621 it was ordered that it should be made binding upon the ministers by oath. Beginning with 1575, it gradually made its way into Lower Hesse, and was formally adopted there in 1655.

In what was formerly the earldom, but is now the principality of Lippe, in which a change from the Lutheran to the Reformed faith was consummated at the close of the century under the reign of the Reformed count Simon VI., there was adopted in the year 1612 the " Catechism us Angerii," printed at Cassel and made up of selections from the Heidelberg Catechism. As early as 1623 it began to be superseded by the Heidelberg Catechism itself. In the Directory of Worship of 1684, which is still binding, it is stated (chap. 8) :

" No minister is to be allowed to introduce any other or special catechism, but each one must be faithful to the Heidelberg Catechism, and must present and explain its questions and answers with sufficient clearness to enable all to understand them."

The same is required of the teachers (chap. 13). For this purpose the Commentary on the Heidelberg Catechism prepared by Frederick Adolph Lampe (a native of Detmold) and published under the title, '' The Milk of the Truth," was diligently used in the last century by ministers and teachers. When in 1781

a normal school was founded at Detmold and an attempt was made by the one party to set aside the Heidelberg Catechism, the sovereign, Count Simon Augustus, to whom all papers pertaining to the matter had to be submitted, published his decision in an autograph manuscript as follows :

" That the Heidelberg Catechism, which has been adopted iu this earldom, and upon which all the regulations pertaining to candidates and ministers are based, must be retained, since it especially has become of the highest importance in the midst of the present conflicting world-systems."

In this century an attempt, which in effect succeeded,* was made to set aside the catechism indirectly as a book of instruction in the schools and for catechetical classes, by introducing a " Guide for Religious Instruction in Schools" (Lemgo 1811). When in 1843 the Consistory directly introduced the *' Guide" as a book of instruction in the place of the Heidelberg Catechism, and the regulations pertaining to candidates and ministers were altered accordingly, a struggle began, in which at first only five ministers joined, and which some of the congregations approved and others opposed. It was at that time that a large number of the members of the congregation of Langenholzhausen sold their houses and farms and emigrated to America, rather than give up their Heidelberg Catechism. They still constitute the mainstay of the flourishing Keformed congregation at Franklin, Wisconsin, in whose midst is located a Reformed theological seminary.

* The book was not arranged in catechetical form, but in the form of parai^raphs, the first of which is as follows: "When man begins to reflect earnestly upon the world and upon himself, he desires to know who has created all things, for what purple they were created, how he is to conduct himself, an(f to what he may look forward if he conducts himself" properly." This was to take the place of "thy only comf)rt !"

In the year 1856 was reached a crisis that proved favorable to the Heidelberg Catechism. In the regulations for administering the oath of office to candidates and ministers, the old ordinance was restored : " that I will teach nothing but what is in accordance with the writings of the Old and the New Testament and in accordance with the confession of faith based upon them, which is held by the Church reformed according to God's Word, viz., the Heidelberg Catechism." Next the catechism became one of the subjects of agitation on the part of the liberal party in the state, who desired to have it abolished. Here again it was a ministerial order of the sovereign. Prince Leopold III., which diverted the storm and secured for the Heidelberg Catechism the right which belongs to it according to the decrees of the Church. '='

The three hundredth anniversary of the Heidelberg Catechism was celebrated by the Keformed people of Germany, July 7-9, 1863, at Detmold, in a conference of Reformed ministers, elders and candidates.'!*

A few years later the political situation of the country gave rise to another assault upon and defence of the Heidelberg Catechism in the Reichstag, 301 years after the memorable day at Augsburg. The attack was led by a very active democratic agitator, who was a deputy in the Reichstag, and the defence was conducted by Lord von Oheimb, a good Lutheran, at that time minister of Lippe. It was in the session of the North German Reichstag in Berlin, on the 23d day of October, 1867, and the subject under consideration was a complaint from the country concerning certain

'•-The order of April 30, 1863, which is worthy of special attention, may be found in my Evangelical Reformed Church Paper, 1863, p. 167, etc.

fSee Acts and Proceedings of the Conference in my Evangelical Reformed Church Paper, 1863, page 273, etc.

points of administration. The address of the minister, which at the same time gives us a clear understanding of the progress of the conflict, was, according to the stenographic report, as follows :

" There is a third point, embracing special complaints, against my administration. They pertain to a most serious sphere, and on the other hand a sphere with which, no doubt, in my judgment neither the Federal Council nor the Reichstag can in any way interfere according to the constitution. They pertain to the religious sphere, and in the name of my administration I must protest most earnestly against the Reichstag resolving to refer this matter to the Imperial Chancellor in any form whatever, although I have no reason to fear an investigation of the transactions that have taken place in relation thereto since my administration began. It would take me very far if I were to enter upon the discussion of this complaint, the language of which is as follows :

" ' That the authorities have arbitrarily interfered with our constitutionally established confessional status, in that they have prohibited even under the threat of ecclesiastical punishment those religious books which promote a rational Christianity, and have been in use for more than fifty years, and have forcibly substituted for them against the express will of the schools and t e churches, the highly antiquated Heidelberg Catechism of the year 1563, and likewise a hymn book of the same tendency.^

" I say it would take me entirely too far to enter in detail upon a discussion of this point. When I entered upon my office, I found a most violent religious controversy that had lasted for a number of years, and had assumed widespread proportions, requiring immediate adjustment. For my part, I did not seek the controversy, but when I was compelled to take cognizance of it, I entered upon it with all the earnestness and decision the situation demanded, which at that time had assumed such dimensions that in different congregations a state of rebellion existed, and on this account a considerable portion of the ministry and of the membership claimed — basini^ their claims upon the opinions of eminent authorities in canon law and in theolooy — that the confessional standing of the Church was suffering. Upon this point I will cite names well known to most of the gentlemen and highly esteemed by them, among others that of

oo

the still living: Provost Xitzsch himself, and that of the late Privy Councillor Richter, the eminent professor of canon law. These gentlemen considered the matter of so much importance that they addressed themselves even to the sovereign of the land, and requested that he should extend relief to the distressed condition of the Reformed Church ; and just as I entered into office there was before me a very voluminous complaint based upon such opinions, which I as a layman desired to treat with the greatest care, and as the complaint was directed against the Consistory, I submitted it for a formal opinion to a foreign Church judicatory, the Prussian Consistory at Coblenz. After they had rendered their opinion, I proceeded in the matter according to the obligations which the Church government enjoins, and which according to the Church law in force at my entrance into office, is laid as a duty upon the sovereign of the land, viz., to protect the confessional standing of the Reformed churches of the land in so far as it is in accordance with the Word of God and the Church's special symbol, the Heidelberg Catechism, and not as was done at that time, to withhold the Heidelberg Catechism from the schools."

A recent attempt to modernize the language of the Heidelberg Catechism and, thereby, to alter it materially, may be regarded as abandoned.

Since 1887 there has been prescribed for candidates a six weeks' course in the normal school, and according to direction they are obliged before entering, among other things, " to work out for themselves an outline of the Heidelberg Catechism in detail."

Outside of Germany the catechism was adopted as follows: In 1574 in the Netherlands (at the Synod of Dort), after it had been in use there since 1568; in 1577 it found entrance into Hungary, and was adopted by synodical authority in 164(3. At an early period it was "introduced into Switzerland, first in the canton of Bern, then in St. Gall and Schaffiiausen, and soon in almost all the Reformed cantons. In Poland it soon became the general book of instruction, and was held in high esteem. It is used in the Reformed congregations of Austria, in Bohemia and Moravia, as well as in Russia. In England, Scotland and France it was not adopted as a book of instruction, but is recognized as a confession of faith.

In the United States of America it was first brought from the Palatinate by German immigrants, who, on account of the persecutions of the catechism by the Catholic electors, escaped with it across the ocean and settled for the most part in Pennsylvania, where to-day yet one meets with many things reminding one of the Palatinate, both in speech and customs. In the Reformed Church of North America it has been adopted both as a confession and as a book of instruction. An Article of the " Constitution of the Reformed Church in the United States" says : " The Heidelberg Catechism is the only book that is accepted as an authoritative expression of the truths taught in the Holy Scriptures, and is acknowledged as the standard of doctrine in the Reformed Church in the United States." " Licentiates" (candidates) obligate themselves when they are licensed as follows (Art. 4) : "I hereby testify that I honestly and truly hold the doctrines of the Heidelberg Catechism to be the doctrines revealed to us in the Bible, and promise, moreover, faithfully to preach and defend the same," etc. Likewise " teachers of theology" (professors in the theological seminaries) are required, " at their inauguration, solemnly to affirm the following declaration, as by an oath in the presence

of God, in a public assembly" (Art. 19) : " You, N

N , professor elect of the theological seminary of

the Reformed Church in the United States at N ,

acknowledge . . . further that the doctrine contained in the Heidelberg Catechism, is the doctrine of the Holy Scriptures. You declare sincerely that in the office you are about to assume, you will make the inviolable divine authority of the Holy Scriptures, and

the truth of the doctrine contained in the Heidelberg Catechism, the basis of all your instructions, and faithfully maintain and defend the same in your preaching and writing, as well as in your instructions," etc. The Tercentenary of the catechism was brilliantly celebrated in the United States in 1863.

In the Reformed Church of South Africa, in Cape Colony and the Transvaal Republic, the Heidelberg Catechism is held in high esteem as a confession of faith and as a book of instruction.

The latest page in the history of the catechism has reached me while I am writing this history. It is the information that in Japan two Reformed denominations, the missionary Churches of the Congregationalists and the Presbyterians, at a synod in Tokio, May, 1887, united upon the basis of the infallible Word of God as contained in the Old and the New Testament and adopted as their symbols the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed, as well as the Westminster and Heidelberg Catechisms.*

We have learned to know the Heidelberg Catechism in its life history of more than 300 years, as teacher, confessor and martyr in behalf of Christianity. We also see it as a missionary among the heathen, even as the old translations into Singalese and Malay were prepared for missionary service in the Dutch Indies, and that into Spanish for similar service in the West Indies. About the middle of this century nearly 30,000 Christians, who had been entirely lost sight of, were discovered on the Sanguir Islands in the Indian Archipelago. There was a vague rumor that on some islands north of the Celebes, which belong to the Dutch, there were three Bibles and a few people that gathered about them. The Netherland Missionary Society sent missionaries

^' Quarterly Register of the Alliance of Reformed Churches holding the j)i(shyteri8n SYSltni. No. 8. Oct. 1887.

thither and found the number of Christians that had been reported. The school children wrote on the bark of trees the most beautiful verses of Scripture. Twenty schools and churches were found, but without sacraments. In a short time 3000 adults and children were baptized, as they were found to possess sufficient knowledge of Christian doctrine. And whence had they obtained this knowledge ? They were acquainted with the Heidelberg Catechism, probably one of the older translations. It is possible that the earlier missionaries to these islands had lost their lives or had given up the field long ago for different reasons. But one missionary remained and continued his labors under the blessing of God. He was the missionary from Heidelberg. Now others joined him again.

The great enmity of the world to the catechism has often manifested itself, but the rich blessing with which the Lord has attended it in the hearts of believers will not be fully known until the day of the revelation of Jesus Christ from heaven. Then, according to the promise (Matt. 10: 32), He will confess the Heidelberg Catechism, which confessed Him before friend and foe. And the catechism can truly say with St. Paul : ** Having, therefore, obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come : that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles."

II.

THE EEFORMED METHOD OF CATECHIZING.

It is often said that the Heidelberg Catechism is not adapted as a book of instruction to the wants of either teachers or pupils ; that it is too difficult to learn and to teach. But when the objection is thoroughly sifted, there remains nothing for it to rest upon except the length of the answers to some of the questions in the Catechism, and to silence it altogether, let us look back three hundred years and consider the low grade of intelligence among the people, the length of the school term, limited to the winter months, the lack of compulsory education, the few branches taught, and the meagre knowledge of the best teachers of the common schools, who lacked utterly in professional training. In the country the teaching was done by the sextons and bell-ringers, who at the same time followed their trades, while schoolmistresses were provided for the girls. Yet these simple but earnest-minded j^eople, under the guidance of their pastors and with the help of God, advanced the people's knowledge of the Scriptures to such an extent that after the Catechism had been in use fifty years, the Electoral Palatinate delegates to the Synocl of Dort joyfully declared that among them the words of the prophet Joel had been fulfilled of late years : "And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions" (Joel 1 : 28). To-day, when systematic instruction is more general and of a higher order, and teachers are trained professionally, it should certainly be possible to attain the same success in the use of the Catechism. The multiplication of subjects in the public schools and the wider distribution of interest on the part of the pupils

which it entails, is counterbalanced by the more regular attendance and the greater length of the school term. The religious instruction of the people by the use of the Heidelberg Catechism is greatly facilitated by the clearness and simplicity of the book, so that the contents of the answers need only to be unfolded and illustrated to the pupils. As early as 1585 an attempt was made to remove the difficulty occasioned by the length of some of the answers of the Catechism by the official publication at Heidelberg of a so-called " Smaller Heidelberg Catechism." The preface says : " The purpose of this summary of the larger Heidelberg Catechism is not to introduce a new catechism, or to supersede the larger one, which explains in detail the chief articles of Christian doctrine . . . But as some questions of the larger catechism may be too long and others too difficult for plain and simple people and growing youth, we have prepared this summary or smaller catechism. Especially has the doctrine" of the holy sacraments been so set forth from the Word of God in a few questions that it is hoped the unfounded accusations which have been brought, against it may be silenced and all fair-minded persons satisfied, while the plain people and the youth will find in it a helpful guide in Christian doctrine until they are prepared to take up the larger catechism."

This summary was to serve also only as a preparation for the larger catechism. AVhile on the one hand it was a simplification, yet it served to make the later instruction more difficult, because the abridgment of the summary made different forms of expression necessary, which "confused the children when they came to learn the unabridged questions of the larger catechism. And after all the two books were different, which was found to be a drawback in committing the answers, since the memory of children is local rather thaa logical.

49fi THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM.

The same end was sought to be gained by the Synod ■of Dort, in a resohition adopted at its 17th session (Nov. 30, 1618). The teachers were directed not only to drill their classes at least twice a week in memorizing, but were also to explain the fundamental doctrines •of the catechism, dividing the pupils into three sections according to their age and capacity. In the first the chief articles (the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Institution of the Sacraments and the requirements of Church Discipline), together with a few short prayers, were to be learned and explained by the use of very brief questions relating to the three parts of the catechism ; in the second the smaller catechism was to be used, and in the third section, composed of those advanced in years and in understanding, the larger Heidelberg Catechism was to be used. This resolution, however, was not carried out in the Netherlands.* The " Kort Begrip," a brief summary of the catechism, was prepared later.

In the present century also a summary was attempted, in which thirty-six of the most important questions are given a place, without abridgment or division, covering the entire ground of the catechism, for use in the schools and in the instruction of catechumens. This plan would certainly be preferable to the other two, were it not for one serious consideration. The Reformed Church, unlike the Lutheran Church, has but one brief and simple confession of faith, viz., the Heidelberg Catechism, which can be placed into the hands of every church member, while the Lutheran Church has at least six, some of which are quite voluminous, and this plan would soon drive the catechism from the homes of the people and leave only the abridged form.

* Gisb. Voetius Tract, sel de polit. ecclesiast. Ser. II., p. 309. Amsterdam, 1887.

The simplest way is indicated already in the earlier editions of the catechism, in which eighty-one questions are marked with a '''. In accordance with this arrangement the entire catechism was to be taught only in the four electoral colleges ; in the ordinary schools only these eighty-one questions were to be used, while in the primary schools the explanation of twenty-two questions was considered sufficient. With this number and with this selection of questions agree in general the regulations for the common schools of Lippe, issued October 18, 1873, according to which eighty-two questions are to be taught and explained in the schools, while the doctrine of the sacraments and the other unmarked questions are reserved for the catechetical instruction preparatory to confirmation. Instruction in the catechism is begun in the middle grades of the schools, for which thirty-two questions are designated with '^"'', and the remaining fifty, marked with a single '^, are added in the upper grades. These designations are retained in this commentary. The instruction in the catechism assis'ued to the schools is completed in the upper grades, from which children at the age of thirteen years enter upon instruction preparatory to confirmation, so that the schools work hand in hand with the Church.

Soon after the selection of these eighty-one questions, there appeared an admirable book of instruction""' upon the same, in which both the theoretical and the practical sides received proper treatment. The old Reformed method of catechization, with its gratifying results, was based upon this guide. According to it, " the words of the text of the catechism, as well as some other subjects which might be obscure to the minds of the children, are to be first explained." Then *' the contents of each question are to be vividly set

* A copy of which, published in 1619, is lying before me.

forth in very few words, rendering the understanding of the entire question quite easy." Then the answers are to be analyzed, their Scripture proofs cited, and both are to be explained. Finally " the children are to be drilled in the catechism" by the answers which they can frame out of the words of the catechism. "When," says the conclusion, "teachers and schoolmistresses diligently instruct the youth in the catechism, according to this method and under the guidance of their pastors, we may confidently expect that these will obtain a fair knowledge of the fundamental principles of the Christian religion to the joy of their own and of their parents' hearts. This method of catechizing has been tried in several schools of this kind, and it was found to be easy, even after it had been in use only a short time. And they will discover further that by instructing their children in this way^ they themselves will increase more and more in their knowledge of the Christian religion and in true piety. . . . May our faithful God pour out His holy Spirit, in accordance with His promise, in rich measure upon our children that they may truly know and honor Him, be able to overcome the evil one, and thus become heirs of eternal life, through Jesus Christ, in whom all God's promises are yea and amen. Amen. Amen."

The introductory directions cover fourteen pages ; then follows the catechism ; after which, in an appendix of fifty-two pages, illustrations of the method of procedure are given with individual questions.

According to this guide catechetical training is divided into two parts : " Instruction" and " Exercises." " Instruction" is provided for three grades. It is not to be denied that the method is somewhat

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. 499'

mechanical ; but it was the only guide accessible to the untrained catechists, and it was not onlv found necessary to repeat what was to be impressed upon the understanding, but a second part, called " Exercises," was found serviceable. By changing the form of the questions, the children were to be " drilled" to answer intelligently by using the words of the answers in the catechism. In this way it was hoped to prevent merely mechanical work on the part of both teachers and pupils.

A guide to the " Exercises" is furnished in the practical examples which are given.

By these " Exercises" on the one hand the children are to be brought to reflection, and their knowledge of the truth is to be made more clear and firm, while on the other hand the teachers will have the opportunity to gather from the answers what has been apprehended and what may need further explanation.

In these times there is a disposition to speak disparagingly of this method, which in its essentials has held its place as the mode of catechetical instruction in the schools to this day, as scholastic. But it must be acknowledged in the main as the correct system, not only because its success has proved it to be so, but also because it is adapted to the relation of the schools ta catechetical instruction. The chief ends of the latter are to be secured by the minister when he prepares his catechumens for confirmation, and the work of the school is to be looked upon as preparatory to this work. The Heidelberg Catechism makes this work very easy, and, besides its systematic structure, it ha& a great advantage over Luther's Smaller Catechism in that the material of the instruction need not first be supplied by the teacher, but is furnishei in rich measure and in systematic form by the answers of the catechism itself; and to give the children a clear understanding of it, that which they have already committed to memory needs only to be analyzed and explained.'^' On the other hand the child, after having committed so much to memory, has this advantage that it will not forget the explanations of the several doctrines so readily as when these are given orally, which must be done when the Lutheran Catechism is used. And lastly, this method not only makes the work easier for the schools, but affords a certain guarantee to the Church that nothing can easily be introduced into catechetical instruction that is contrary to the doctrines which are based upon the Word of God, and which are supported by proof texts of the same.f

In the light of my experience, during forty-one years of service (1891) in church work and in schools, and as the result of my own catechetical efforts, and of my observations in visiting schools in which the teachers have adhered to the traditional system, I would recommend the following methods of procedure. This commentary furnishes the requisite material for this purpose.

* Nitzsch (Practical Theology, vol. II.) says that the Heidelberg Catechism is an admirably organized structure, since it is more than a collection of material for a catechism, while Luther's Smaller Catechism is more of a collection of " building material" than a structure.

fGisbert Voetius, 1. c. p. 309, decidedly commits himself to this method, which has maintained itself, although in his day also other methods were tried which served rather to darken and confuse the understanding than to enlighten it. When any one says that a number of the questions of our catechism, such as 1, 26, 60, and others, are too long and not adapted to pupils that are not advanced, I answer that it is the part of the work of catechization to separate these questions into their proper parts and to direct the children to frame the corresponding answers out of the text of the catechism, and that this method must be continued until the children have thoroughly mastered them.

1) Let the teacher himself read clearly and correctly the questions to be committed to memory at the time he assigns them, then let one or two of the children read them in the same way; and for the sake of malting the memorizing easier, let the teacher explain special expressions or constructions which are unfamiliar to tiie children. This will require but little time if the teacher confines himself to the purpose for which he makes explanation.

2) When the questions are to be explained, let them first be recited, together with the proof texts, by a number of children. Let the teachers see to it that what has been committed to memory be neither drawled out nor declaimed, but that in a simple way only the principal words be emphasized. "Aufbeten" (to speak as one would a prayer) is the expression that was used by our forefathers and that is still in use in some localities. Then let the explanation take the following course :

a) When it is necessary, as is frequently the case, the answer is only the completion of the question of the catechist framed in such a way that the gist of the question of the catechism may be brought out in a brief answer.

b) The answer of the catechism is then separated into its parts, so that the children may be led to frame their answers to the questions addressed to them out of the text of the catechism.

c) Next the parts of the answer of the catechism are to be explained in such a way that the teacher himself will introduce the new matter and will at the same time bring to the recollection of the children, by means of questions, what they have already learned. The teacher, however, needs to guard against falling into the habit of using merely dry definitions, as was the case in the time of Dinter. The catechism was not prepared as a mere manual of memory exercises.

d) In connection with each part Scripture proofs pertaining to it are to be cited, and, if necessary, briefly explained (which has been kept in view throughout this commentary). These, however, are not intended to explain but to prove the different statements. According to the fundamental principle of our Church, reformed according to the Word of God, the purpose of these Scripture passages is to show how fully the doctrines of the catechism are in accord with the Scriptures. When a familiar example from Biblical history, or from life, or a proverb can be introduced naturally to illustrate a point, it is to be done to make the instruction more animated. It is not well, however, to expand illustrations in all their fulness and detail, as this would take too much time and would interrupt the continuity of the instruction itself. They ought to be restricted to the point in hand. It is a very undesirable method to have the text of the catechism rehearsed without analysis and to have it followed by a bare recital of the proof texts. Such a course indicates that the teacher lacks both in industry and skill.

3) In the last place, what has been explained is to be briefly reviewed. The same is to be done at the opening of the next lesson, in order to keep up the connection with what follows. For instruction in the catechism must not be, at least in the upper grades, disconnected, but systematic.

Catechetical instruction is to be given in the middle and upper grades of the school, while Bible history begins in the lower grade, and is continued in the other two grades together with the catechism. In the middle grade, when one teacher gives the instruction in the three grades by himself, he may attach the explanation of particular questions of the catechism to the study of different events in Bible history without

assigning a separate hour to instruct in the catechism.* In the upper grade most of the time set apart for religious instruction is devoted to the catechism. How far the work is to be carried and what particular principles of catechetical instruction are to be applied at different times, must be decided by the teacher himself in the light of his normal training, and must be learned in part by experience.

In the light of my own experience I can assure any one who 1) prepares himself thoroughly for catechetical instruction, 2) follows the above method, 3) keeps within proper bounds, that he will be able, by the help of God, to advance the children entrusted to him in the knowledge of the catechism, according to their several gifts and capacities, as far as it is necessary and possible. One thing more. Religious instruction in the schools is not only to open the understanding to an apprehension of the truth revealed in God's saving Word, as this is apprehended in the questions of the catechism, but also to secure its experience in the heart. Only what proceeds from the heart reaches the heart, and such believing Christian experience is presupposed in all the questions of the Heidelberg Catechism. One is properly prepared, therefore, only when that preparation is prayerfully made, and then the exercises of the catechism will also be edifying. The apostle James also gives good advice which is applicable to catechists (James 1 : 5) : "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that givetii to all men liberally, and upbraideth not ; and it shall be given him."

*Iq the course of instruction assigned for the schools of Lippe, Nov. 18, 1873, part 2, twenty one historical incidents from the Old Testament and twenty-eight from the New are indicated, tos/ether with appropriate questions from the catechism for instruction in the middle jirade.

As it is within the province of the schools to teach the catecliism in preparation for the cluirch, so in turn it is the duty of the church and the home to co-operate with the schools. Only where these three factors work in hearty unanimity can the true end of religious instruction be attained. This was kept prominently in view when the Heidelberg Catechism was introduced, and accounts for the early reputation of the adherents of the Reformed faith, that both old and young were firmly established in the knowledgeofsaving truth, and though much persecuted, were willing and able to defend their faith. They provided for the furtherance and confirmation of their people in the knowledge of Christian truth by means of catechetical instruction in the schools, catechetical instruction and sermons on the catechism in the church, and by home training.

In the beginning neither a certain age nor a particular day of the year was fixed for the admission or confirmation of the youth. According to the Palatinate Directory of Worship of 1563 (in the chapter on " Preparation for the Holy Communion"'^') after the celebration of the Lord's Supper has been announced to the congregation from the pulpit eight days in advance,

" The minister shall admonish parents and heads of families to instrnct during the week children and other youths (their servants) whom they wished to bring to the table of the Lord for the first time, and on the following Saturday (at the preparatory service) or at an earlier day of the week (at the mid-week service),

* The Lord's Supper shall be celebrated iu the cities at least every month, in the towns every two mouths, and at Easter, Whitsunday aud Christmas. When it seems to be necessary for the edification of the congregation, or the custom of the church requires it, it is right and proper that it should be observed more frequently. But whenever the communion is to be celebrated, it shall invariably be announced to the congregation by the minister eight days in advance, with the admonition that the entire congregation shall prepare itself fur it.

THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM. r,05

fls the needs of the church required, thev were to be brought to the mini-ter after tlie sermon for further advice."

After the preparatory service

" The minister shall take his place before the communion table, and first of all shall admonish the young people present who had never communed before, to present themselves in order to make confession of their faith. Then the minister shall require those who have presented themselves to recite first the articles of the Creed, the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Supj>er. But as some, on account of their timidity, may not be able to repeat these articles word for word, who are in other respects blameless in their lives, the minister shall remind them of the chief articles of the Christian faith, and after this confession has been made, they shall be admitted with the congregation to the Lord's table."

The Palatinate Directory of Worship gives the following directions concerning catechetical instruction and sermons on the catechism.*

" Every Lord's Day afternoon at the hour most convenient a sermon shall be preached on the catechism. Where two sermons are preached in the afternoon, as is the case in the cities, after the singing of the hymn, God's blessing shall be invoked that His Word may be rightly understood, after which the summary of the catechism, together with the proof texts of the five principal parts shall be distinctly read to the congregation at the beginning of the sermon in the order in which they are arranged. And several questions of the twenty following these parts shall be explained for half an hour. After the sermon the youth shall be examined and shall be dismissed with a prayer and benediction and sent home. In the second sermon, preached later in the day, the catechism and the chief points of Christian doctrine which it embraces shall be explained more fully and exhaustively to the adult portion of the congregation. The service shall be opened as usual with an invocation, singing and prayer, after which a Scripture passage relating to the subject to be presented, together with the questions of the catechism which are to be expounded, shall be read and intelligently explained. The service shall be closed with the prayer following the lesson, which is specially provided for use with the catechism (" The

* Richter's edition, the Evangeiical Church directories of the sixteenth century, Weimar, II., 260, not reprinted in full.

prayer after the sermon on theeateeliism"). In the eountry and in towns where but one sermon is preached in the afternoon, the minister, after the bell lias been rung a second time for service, shall examine and catechize the youth before the sermon, and when he is through, the bell shall be rung a third time, that the whole congregation may be gathered. Then, after the singing and prayer, the summary of the catechism shall l)e read, after which several (questions shall be explained for half an hour; then those called forward shall be kindly and considerately examined and instructed in the fundamental truths of salvation, and finally the service shall be closed with the usual prayer," — "■ In the cities the Sunday afternoon sermons shall cover the entire catechism once a year,"

Regulations with reference to catechetical instruction and sermons on the catechism similar to those prescribed by the Palatinate Directory of Worship were instituted in all the Reformed churches of Germany.

At the Synod of Dort (15th session) the delegates of East Friesland (the pastors Eilshemius and Grimershemius of Emden) describe the catechetical arrangements that prevailed among them in the following manner : The schoolmasters are required to subscribe their names to a solemn agreement, that along with the other duties of their office they will devote themselves earnestly to catechetical instruction, and will diligently prosecute it with their scholars. The pastors, elders and school inspectors, therefore, make quarterly visits to the schools of their congregations, to assure themselves of the industry of the teachers and of the progress of the scholars in the knowledge of the catechism. On Sunday afternoon the schoolmasters bring their scholars regularly to the church service. The boys five and six years of age repeat the principal parts and questions of the catechism. Other scholars to the number of thirty or forty recite from memory the questions which are to be explained in the sermon. When the children are dismissed from school, pious parents are in

the habit of going over the catechism with them, especially on the evening of festival clays, and in order that they may not forget it, they make them recite it. When youths and maidens, as well as adults, are admitted to the Lord's Supper, they are publicly examined in the catechism in the presence of the entire congregation, and they recite the same from memory, except the timid ones, who are examined privately. The minister who conducts the catechetical instruction, after prayer, himself quotes the five principal parts, after which the boys and girls recite the questions that are to be explained. The explanation, which is brief and comprehensive, is followed by an edifying application.. The catechism is gone over every six months, and in their annual pastoral visits the ministers admonish all their members, both young and old, to persevere faithfully in their study of the catechism.

The Directory of Worship of Lippe of 1684, chapter VIIL, gives detailed directions " concerning catechization and how the same is to be conducted,"

" As catechizatioa which is founded upon the Word of God, and confirmed by the practice of the Church, is, according to the experience of all ages, a very important part of the office of the Christian ministry, so that without the same very little fruit can be expected from the preaching of the pulpit, because the hearers who have not been instructed and have no knowledge of the fundamental doctrines of Christianity, understand very little of what is preached to them, but continue in gross ignorance and unbelief; not only in the schools, but also in the churches of these dominions, catechization shall be prosecuted with the greatest earnestness by the ministers, and where it is not yet introduced, it shall be introduced without delay, and shall be cultivated no less assiduously than the preaching of the Word, in order that by this blessed means they may diligently and faithfully instruct not only tlie youth, but also adults who are without a knowledge of the chief doctrines of the Christian faith, and bring them to a true knowledge ol God in Christ, and to Christian, God-fearing life and conduct.

" To this end parents, fathers and mothers, shall not only admonish and urii'e their ehildren and servants with all earnestness, but are also to go before them in the way of example, so that young and old will attend as often and as faithfully as possible eateehetieal instruction in the church.

" Catechization shall be conducted in the following manner : the minister in his place after having preached on the Lord's Day a sermon on the catechism, shall politely invite the youth into the choir or some other suitable ])lace in the church, that he may examine them and thus ascertain what they have learned of Christian doctrine from the sermon, or in school or from their parents.*

" In congregations in the country, where during the winter on account of the shortness of the days no afternoon sermon is preached, the minister shall nevertheless catechize in the afternoon the older youths, especially those who desire to be admitted to the Lord's Supper in the near future.f

" In large and extensive parishes the children shall be divided into classes for catechetical instruction on Sunday. These classes shall recite the catechism in turn, but all shall be required to be present and to listen. A roll shall be kept and in cases of absence the parents shall be earnestly admoni-hed.

* This regulation is in accord with the resolulion adopted by the Synod of Dort at the conclusioa of its deliberations upon catechetical instruction (sessions 114-117, Nov. 27-30.1618): " la order that the Christian youths from their earliest years may be instructed with the utmost care in the fundamental doctrines of religion, threefold catechetical instruction shall be observed : in the home by the parents, in the schools by the teacher.-", in the churches by the ministers and elders. Accordingly patents are to instruct their children and servants at home in the primary truths of Christian doctrine, shall frequently urge them to prayer and the fear of God, shall take them with them to church, especially to the sermons on the catechism, shall review these sermons with them at home, and

shall require them t > commit to memory important Scriptural

„„„„„„ )>

t In the Directory of Worship, ch^ip. X., p. 7, it is stated : " Such confirmation ot' catechumens shall take place twice a year on the Sunday precading the semi annual fast-days (Good Friday and the fast-day in September), as miy be m )3t agreeable or suitable."

" In their catechetical iustructiou the ministers shall proceed carefully, and as spiritual fathers shall not only deal kindly and gently, yet earnestly when necessary, with the catechumens, but also in all their questions and instruction shall have regard for the capacity, age and understanding of their catechumens.

" The catechization shall proceed according to the order and divisions of the Heidelberg Catechism, so that the questions and answers, which are to be treated in the sermon, shall be used afterward in the catechization, and whenever possible the entire catechism shall be covered every year.

" No minister shall be allowed to introduce a new or special catechism, but each one must retain the Heidelberg Catechism, and must explain its questions and answers with sufficient simplicity to enable all to understand them.

" The catechization shall aim not only to impart a knowledge of the truth to the catechumens, but also to exhibit with the utmost clearness the power and beauty of true godliness which is embraced in every fundamental article of the Christian faith.

" Besides, every preacher shall, after having preached a sermon, hold catechetical instruction on other days of the Aveek, or at other suitable hours, either in the church or in his own house, which shall be attended by all children who can conveniently do so."

If the Heidelberg Catechism is ever to bring its richest blessings again into our Reformed congregations, and the ancient loyalty to Scripture is to regain its supremacy, the schools, the Church and the family must co-operate in every way possible and with the greatest earnestness to re-establish faithful catechetical instruction, and the Reformed method of catechizing must be revived.

DOCTRINAL INDEX.

Altar, 268, 285.

Augels, 53, 94.

Atonement, 150, 49, 134, 33.

Baptism, 251.

Bible (see Word of God and Gospel).

Christ, 110.

Cnrist's Ascension, 177, 234.

" Incarnation, 138.

" Intercession, 183.

" Offices, 119.

Person, 54, 56, 179.

" Second Coming, 194.

" kSession, 186. Christian, 124, 133. Church, 209. Church Discipline, 302. Communion of Saints, 218. Confirmation, 261. Conscience, 9. Covetousness, 400. Creation, 93. Creation of Man, 21. Creed, Apostles', 81.

Death, 164. Depravity, 36. Devil, 3, 95.

Election, 217, 218. Eternal Eite, 229.

Faith, 74, 1, 10, 231. Fall, 25.

False Witness, 397. Forgiveness, 221, 433.

God, 83.

Good Works, 313.

Gospel, 59, 81.

Heaven, 229.

Hell, 169.

Holy Ghost, 75, 141, 201,

242. Home, 376.

Idolatry, 341, 353. Images, Use of, 355. Inability, Human, 17, 51. Intercession of Saints, 113, 345.

Judgment Day, 194, 225. Justice of God, 41, 49, 159. Justification by Faith, 116, 221,

232. Justification by Works, 115,

237.

Law of God, 9, 44, 60. Liceutioiisness, 387. Lord's Prayer, 416. Lord's Supper, 267.

Mau, the Image of God, 23. Man, Old and New, 166, 317. Mediator, 53. Murder, 380.

Oaths, 364.

DOCTRINAL INDEX.

Parents and Children, 376. Perseverance of Saints, 217. Praver, 405. Profanity, 360. Providence, 102, 157, 430.

Redemption (see Atonement). Resurrection, 172, 224.

Sabbatb, 368. Sacraments, 242. Satisfaction of Christ(see Atonement).

Scripture (see Word of God). Sin, 8, 33, 105. Sins, Classes of, 34.

Temptation, 27, 436. Ten Commandments, 302. Theft, 392. Trinity, 83.

Ubiquity, 182.

Union With Christ, 74.

Word of God, 242, 59, 81, 248.

DATE DUE

'wMi^mmtv^

w

GAYLORD #3523PI Printed in USA