Question  1.     Wliat  is  thy  only  comfort  in  life  and  death? 

Answer.  That  I,  with  body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and  death,  am 
not  my  own,  but  belong  unto  my  faithful  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who 
with  His  precious  blood,  hath  fully  satisfied  for  all  my  sins,  and 
delivered  me  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil ;  and  so  preserves  me 
that,  without  the  will  of  my  heavenly  Father,  not  a  hair  can  fall 
from  my  head ;  yea,  that  all  things  must  be  subservient  to  my  sal- 
vation :  and  therefore,  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  He  also  assures  me  of 
eternal  life,  and  makes  me  sincerely  willing  and  ready  henceforth 
to  live  unto  Him. 

The  first  Lord's  Day  is  introductory  to  the  whole  Cate- 
chism. The  first  question  teaches  the  baptized  child  his 
Christian  position.  The  second  gives  the  divisions  of  the 
Catechism.  Often,  indeed,  as  here,  the  question  has  quite 
as  much  force  and  meaning  as  the  answer,  and  so  needs  as 
much  study  and  explanation. 

The  first  answer  is  the  sum  of  the  whole  Catechism,  yea, 
the  sum  of  the  Gospel,  embracing  the  three  great  facts  of 
sin  ("all  my  sins"),  redemption  ("  satisfied       .    .  and  de- 
14  XOTES  OX  THE 

liTcred**),  and  thankiulnes  ("willing  ...  to  live  unto 
Him  ").  Indeed  every  leading  word  has  its  full  explanar 
tion  in  ite  own  propor  place  fiuther  on:  "Belong  to  .  .  . 
Christ,"  in  Question  74;  "aitisfied,"  in  Qu^don  37;  ''de- 
livered," in  Question  45;  "preserves"  in  Questions  26, 
27;  "assures,"*  in  Questions  21,  53,  69-79;  "live  unto 
Him,"  in  Questions  86-129. 

Ccnicr^  This  impli^  misery.  Back  of  this  word  lies 
the  c.  :  :  :  f"  =in,  the  source  of  all  misery.  Amid  the 
soTTowi  ials  of  life,  we  sadly  need  divine  comfort  to 

sustain  a_  ^  .  ^eer  us.  Thy.  It  niust  be  personal,  as  sin 
and  misery  arr  '"-^r^^nal.  The  child  does  not  understand 
sin  and  its  c :  i-s  ^  zees,  but  must  be  taught  the  5ict ;  so 
in  regard  to  this  comfort.  It  is  his.  1=,  z:~  :,Lready. 
"Your  redemption  is  b^un,"  says  the  Church  to  her 
child-  ^ilVTiat  i-*  thy  comfort?  !!sc~  ~lat  will  be  when 
you  are  full  gro^^^^  :  - ::  ~_:-i  may  ;?  :z  ItIt.iz.  _  :■ 
tions ;  but,  what  is  y :  :  :  :  i.  dw  already,  as  a  child  in 
grace?  Here  the  Caie^iiiiriii  iL^ea^itifully  shows  its  practical 
character,  tc::Li:ir  the  child  first  his  r  '  :'  i.  to  Christ, 
and  afterwr.ri  —zrn  the  way  is  prej:::  _  :—  all  this 
came  about,  CiIt.  Compared  with  whi:li,  w—  :ihers  ?.re 
as  nothing.  TTealth,  feme,  Snead?,  T>:-^?r.  T:>':»siii;:i, — 
" miserable  comforters  CLr ?  ~r  ;— 1.    £:  :ji_    iii  msatisf^-- 


■  S    4  *  ■ 


lag. 

deep  as  our  misery. 


W    I  I    .. I 


:   :  :  z .  by  pr^ervarion,  by  redemp- 
Tuis  is  I.  _: ::  ^  _:  is  not  a  centre  of  staiezigfJi, 

-  -k'  -      I       -    v  :ie    outciy  of  Ps.  61:    2. 

':  •  'il'Ll  Ciiri".".,     Xotmy   -rrn,   much  less 

rL  5.  cu:  His.     T_  s  is  comfbrtin::-"  iisitive.     His. 


HEIDELBERG  CxVTECHISM.  15 

not  as  grass  and  beasts  are  His,  a  mere  creature,  but  also 
by  blessed  purchase ;  His,  not  as  a  mere  possession,  but  as 
living  branches  ingrafted  on  the  true  Vine ;  yea  more. 
His,  as  God's  dear  children,  adopted  of  grace.  I  belong 
to  Him,  not  because  I  have  laid  hold  of  Pllm,  but  for  the 
more  sure  reason  that  He  has  laid  hold  of  me.  We  become 
personally  His  in  Holy  Baptism,  thus  entering  His 
covenant  and  Kingdom  of  Grace.  Question  74  says  that 
by  baptism  we  are  admitted  (incorporated)  into  the  Chris- 
tian Church.  Question  70  says  we,  in  baptism,  are  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  made  members  of  Christ.  As  the  gospel  was 
before  the  law,  the  promise  before  the  curse  (Gen.  3  :  15), 
so  the  Catechism  here  gives  the  child  a  taste  of  the  sweet- 
ness of  grace  before  pointing  him  to  the  bitterness  of  sin. 
It  starts  out,  not  with  the  fact  of  sin,  but  with  the  fact  of 
redemption.  It  tells  first  not  what  you  must  do,  but 
what  God  has  done  for  you ;  not  what  you  must  believe, 
but  what  is  your  highest  joy ;  not  what  you  were  or  will 
be,  but  what  you  now  are.  "^ith  body  and  SOUl.  The 
whole  man  is  under  sin,  and  must  be  redeemed.  With 
all  our  parts  and  powers,  therefore,  time  and  talents,  pos- 
sessions and  influence,  we  are  His.  All  these  shall  be 
sanctified  by  His  grace,  and  used  in  His  service.  (See 
Lev.  8  :  24.)  In  life  and  death..  We  are  His  not  only 
wholly,  but  always.  His  redeeming  grace  must  cover  the 
whole  extent  of  sin.     Hence  the  resurrection. 

This  now  is  my  sweet  comfort.  "  I  am  Christ's."  I,  a 
little  child,  am  His.  Every  Christian  is  Christ's.  Not 
only  ministers  and  grown  people,  but  little  children  also. 

How  now  is  all  this  a  comfort  ?  Just  as  deliverance 
from  Egypt  was.  Just  as  the  adoption  of  a  homeless 
child  is.  We  now  stand  in  right  relation  at  every  point. 
God  is  our  Father.      We  have  a  heavenly  home,  and 


1$  angel's  food,  and  robes  divine.  The  catechumen  mav  not 
understand  and  appreciate  all  that  lies  in  this  gracious 
fact,  but  the  fact  stands.  A  three  year  old  child  cannot 
rightly  know  the  meaning  and  value  of  his  family  rela- 
tion ;  but  yet  he  is  really  a  child,  an  heir,  and  needs  to 
be  told  this. 

The  rest  of  the  answer  tells  what  Christ  has  done,  and 
is  doing.  HlS  blood,  His  atoning  death  on  the  cross, 
offering  His  life  (which  was  in  the  blood;  Lev.  17  :  11). 
Precious.  ^>ot  typical,  like  the  blood  sprinkled  on  the 
Jewish  altar,  blood  that  could  not  take  away  sin  (Heb. 
10 :  1-4),  but  only  point  men  forward  (Heb.  9 :  8-14)  to 
the  true  Lamb,  whose  blood  should  have  perfect  atoning 
power  (John  1 :  29).  !N'ot  typical  but  "  precious,"  meri- 
torious, efficacious,  availing  blood  (1  Peter  1 :  18,  19). 
Fully  satisfied.  He  is  a  perfect  Saviour.  This  recon- 
ciliation to  God  is  explained  at  length  in  Questions  37-45, 
but  is  here  mentioned  as  the  ground  of  hope.  Delivered. 
The  devil  is  the  great  enemy  of  Christ  and  of  souls,  the 
prince  of  this  world  (John  12 :  51 ;  Eph.  2 :  2 ;  6 :  12). 
His  kingdom  and  power  are  real.  To  him  we  belong  by 
nature ;  and  from  his  power  Christ,  by  His  resurrection 
victory,  has  delivered  us.  Me.  Our  personal  deliverance 
begins  when  we  come  under  the  power  of  His  grace,  and 
will  be  completed  in  our  resurrection.  FrOHl  all  the 
power.  His  power  is  broken  (Col.  2:  15).  He  can 
tempt  but  not  control  us.  He  can  vex,  but  does  not  own 
us.  Christ  is  our  Lord.  Preserves  lae.  Only  He 
could  make  me  His  own,  and  only  He  can  keep  me  (Jolin 
10:  28).  As  true  of  soul  as  of  body.  All  things  •  •  • 
subservient.  Sickness,  trial,  temptation  and  danger 
may  come;  but  they  must  all  work  together  m  God's  plan 
for  our  spiritual  good   (Rom.  8:   28.)     Therefore,  ?*.  e., 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  17 

because  i  am  Christ's.  Holy  Spirit.  In  this  answer 
the  three  Persons  of  the  Trinity  are  distinctly  named. 
ASSUIGS  me.  Of  eternal  life,  of  perfect  salvation, 
which  is  now  only  begun  (Ques.  58),  not  only  by  comforting 
promises,  but  especially  by  His  quickening  inworking 
(Rom.  8 :  15-17).  Of  course  this  assurance  is  not  at  five,  ten 
or  twenty ;  but  from  a  weak  beginning,  it  becomes  stronger 
and  stronger  as  we  yield  ourselves  to  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  This  Christian  self-consciousness,  or  rather 
Christ-consciousness,  has  its  parallel  and  illustration  in 
our  natural  self-consciousness.  Makes  me  Willing.  By 
nature  we  are  both  unwilling  and  unable  to  serve 
Christ.  The  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  a  difierent  spirit 
and  power  (Luke  1 :  74;  75).  To  live  unto  Him.  Not 
just  after  confirmation,  but  now  already,  as  a  Christian 
child,  shall  I  live  in  His  holy  service,  and  work  for  His 
kingdom,  by  doing  the  duties  of  my  childhood  in  His 
name,  by  His  grace,  and  to  His  praise. 

Thus  while  the  Church  teaches  her  baptized  children 
their  high  and  gracious  position  in  Christ,  she  also  teaches 
them  not  to  live  in  sin  (Rom.  6:  1-11),  but  to  bring  forth 
fruit  unto  holiness,  and  this  not  merely  after  confirmation, 
nor  yet  first  during  catechization,  but  from  their  infancy 
on  through  all  their  years.  As  the  Spirit  bears  witness  to 
them,  so  their  godly  life  shall  bear  witness  to  others,  of 
their  standing  in  grace. 


THE   GREAT  DIVISIONS   OF   THE   CATECHISM.