Question  2.     How  many  things  are  necessary  for  thee  to  know, 
that  thou,  enjoying  this  comfort,  mayest  live  and  die  happy? 

Answer.     Three ;  the  first,  how  great  my  sins  and  miseries  are ; 
the  second,  how  I  may  be  delivered  from  all  my  sins  and  miseries ; 
18  NOTES  OX  TnE 

the  tldrd,  how  I  shall  express  my  gratitude  to  God  for  such  delive- 
rance. 

The  Triglott  translates :  "  That  thou  in  this  comfort 
maye^t  live  and  die  happily."  "  The  greatness  of  my  sin 
and  misery."  "  How  I  am  redeemed."  "  How  I  am  to  be 
thankful." 

Now  how  many  things  are  necessary?  Three,  ^'-  €-, 
three  great  leading  and  essential  things ;  and  these  are 
not  independent  of  each  other,  but  inwardly  related,  so 
that  each  can  be  rightly  understood  only  in  the  light  of 
the  others. 

The  Catechism  is  not  a  bundle  of  doctrines  and  duties, 
but  a  beautiful  system — ^very  logical  and  plain.  The 
catechumen  passing  from  point  to  point,  finds  that  one 
prepares  the  way  for  another,  and  that  the  last  always 
grows  out  of  the  preceding  one. 

The  divisions  of  the  Catechism  are  based  on  the  Epis- 
tle to  the  Komans,  which  has  three  parts : — The  first  three 
chapters  teach  us  the  universal  sinfulness  of  the  race ;  the 
fourth  to  the  eleventh  inclusive  teach  us  the  way  of  salva- 
tion ;  the  twelfth  to  the  end  show  us  how  the  Chi-istian 
should  live. 

Great  and  constant  use  was  made  of  this  Epistle  by  all 
the  Eeformers.  Iso  other  exerted  a  more  powerful  influ- 
ence on  the  teaching  and  preaching  of  that  time.  Owing 
to  this  fact,  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  came  to  be  based 
upon  Romans  ;  and  the  authors,  following  Paul's  order  of 
thought,  divided  the  Catechism  into  three  parts.  This 
division,  then,  is  both  Scriptural  and  logical :  Sin,  Delive- 
rance, Thankfulness.   These  three  things*  we  need  to  know. 

*  Indeed  these  three  things  lie  already  in  Ques.  1.  Misery  is, 
implied  in  "  comfort."  Deliverance  is  expressed  in  "  I  belong  to 
Christ."     Gratitude  lies  in  "live  unto  Him." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  19 

1.)  We  must  know  our  misery,  both  the  fact  and  the 
fruit  of  sin,  not  as  a  comfort,  but  in  order  to  comfort;  as 
a  man  needs  to  know  his  bodily  disease,  in  order  to  re- 
covery. Only  as  we  know  our  condition  are  we  concerned 
about  it.  The  knowledge  itself  is  painful,  but  it  makes 
us  willing  to  lay  strong  hold  of  help.  Part  First  is  short, 
emphatic,  and  solemn,  and  well  calculated  to  touch  the 
heart  and  conscience  of  the  catechumen,  and  to  awake  in 
him  earnest  desire  for  deliverance. 

2.)  Knowing  our  sinful  condition,  we  must  also  know 
th©  way  of  deliverance,  else  our  misery  would  only 
be  increased.  Deliverance  is  not  through  sinful  self, 
nor  yet  through  any  mere  creature,  but  only  tjirough 
Jesus  Christ  (1  Tim.  2:  5).  The  love  of  the  Father,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Son  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
at  once  give  us  the  outline  of  the  Creed,  which  the  Cate^ 
chism  places  in  Part  Second. 

3.)  Those  redeemed  must  be  thankful,  but  they  must 
be  taught  how  to  return  thanks,  namely,  in  good  works 
as  the  fruits  of  grace.  Hence  the  Ten  Commandments 
and  the  Lord's  Prayer  are  given  in  Part  Third. 

See  illustrations  of  this  order  in  Ps.  40:  1-4  (pit, 
brought  out,  song  of  praise);  Ps.  50:  15  (trouble,  deliver, 
glorify) ;  Rom.  7 :  24,  25  (wretched,  deliver,  thank) ;  Eph. 
5:  8  (darkness,  light,  walk). 

The  First  Part  shows  us  our  relation  to  the  Father,  as 
condemned  under  His  law  and  needing  repentance. 

The  Second  Part  shows  us  our  relation  to  the  Son,  in 
whom  we  must  believe  as  our  only  Saviour  from  sin  and 
misery. 

The  Third  Part  shows  us  our  relation  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  by  whose  sanctifying  power  and  gracious  guid- 
NOTES  OX  THE 


ance  alone  we  are  able  to  live  holv,  obedient  and  thank- 
ful lives. 

All  may  be  summed  up  as  follows : 


Sin. 

Eepentance. 

Father. 

Deliverance. 

Faith. 

Son. 

Thankfulness. 

Obedience. 

Holy  Ghost. 

HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  21 


THE  FIEST  PART. 


OF  THE  MISERY  OF  MAN. 


SECOI^D  LORD'S  DAY. 


OUR   MISERY.