Question  3.     Whence  knowest  thou  thy  misery  ? 
Answer.     Out  of  the  law  of  God. 

Here  begins  Part  First,  the  shortest  of  the  three,  but 
the  hardest  to  appreciate.  Let  this  fact  be  early  known, 
that  catechumens  may  all  the  more  earnestly  study  it. 

Whence  knowest  thou  thy  misery?     The  question 

does  not  ask  what  it  is,  but  whence  we  know  it.  Nor 
does  it  mention  our  sins,  but  only  "  misery,"  the  conse- 
quence of  sin,  because  we  more  easily  see  and  are  more 
concerned  about  these  consequences  than  their  cause. 

Men  do  not  and  cannot,  of  themselves,  rightly  know 
their  misery.  They  know  neither  its  nature,  cause,  nor 
extent. 

They  know  the  fact  of  misery,  from  its  manifold  conse- 
quences, in  body  and  soul,  and  in  all  the  relations  of  life, 
— sickness,  pain,  sorrow,  death,  an  aching  heart,  pangs  of 
conscience,  unrest  of  soul,  vain  strivings  after  happiness, 
and  fruitless  longings  after  God.  The  earnest  outcry  of 
men  in  all  ages  has  been, 

"  Oh  where  shall  rest  be  found, 
Eest  for  the  weary  soul." 


22  But  the  meaning  of  all  this  they  do  not  know.  They 
trace  these  evils  only  to  secondary  causes,  to  enemies,  to 
ignorance,  to  misfortune,  to  natural  laws,  and  to  the  hiding 
of  God's  face ;  whereas  sin  is  the  first  and  only  cause  of 
all  our  misery  and  death  (Rom.  5:  12).  By  it  we  are 
brought  into  wrong  relation  to  God,  to  self  and  to  the 
world ;  and  so  long  as  we  are  in  this  wrong  relation,  we  can- 
not rest  (Is.  57 :  20,  21).  Good  old  St.  Augustine  richly 
says,  "  Thou,  God;  hast  made  us  for  Thyself,  and  our 
hearts  are  without  rest  until  they  rest  in  Thee."  Man  is 
a  star  out  of  its  appointed  course.  He  is  the  prodigal 
son,  gone  from  a  good  home,  and  so  in  misery. 

But  whence  do  we  know  this  ?  God  tells  us,  "  By  the 
law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  "  (Eom.  3 :  19,  20).  How 
the  law  shows  us  our  misery  will  be  shown  under  Ques.  5. 


THE   LAW    OF    GOD.