Question  4.     What  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us? 

Answer.  Christ  teach eth  us  that  briefly  (Matt.  22:  37-40), 
*'  Thou  Shalt  love  tlie  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  with  all 
thy  soul,  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength.  This  is  the 
first  and  the  great  command ;  and  the  second  is  like  to  this :  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  On  these  two  commands  hang 
the  whole  law  and  the  prophets." 

Law  of  God.  "What  is  here  meant?  Not  the  Ten 
Commandments,  but  rather  their  sum ;  the  law,  not  in 
detail,  but  in  concentrated  form ;  not  as  a  rule  of  life,  but 
as  a  condemning  power ;  not  to  point  out  acts  of  trans- 
gression, but  to  show  the  absence  of  all  proper  disposition 
to  do  good  acts.  The  full  force  of  the  law  is  felt  only  in 
this  short  form  in  Matt.  22 :  37-40,  which,  like  a  sun- 
glass, gathering  up  the  scattered  forces  of  the  divine  law 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  23 

into  the  focus  of  the  little  word  Love,  burns  into  the  con- 
science of  man. 

Christ  teacheth  lis.  While  other  Catechisms  place  the 
Ten  Commandments  in  the  beginning,  and  so  make  the 
child  hear  the  thunder  of  Sinai,  this  makes  Christ  his  first 
teacher.  Indeed,  grace  and  love  were  at  Sinai  already 
(Ex.  20:  2).  Briefly.  That  is,  not  merely  in  few  words, 
condensed  as  in  Luke  18 ;  20,  but  in  substance,  essence, 
principle.  And  this  sum  of  the  law  he  found  ready  to 
hand  in  Deut.  6 :  5,  and  Lev.  19 :  18.  What  wonderful 
brevity  and  fullness,  compared  with  human  legislation ! 

Thou  shalt.  This  sum  of  the  law  is  not  negative  like 
the  decalogue,  but  positive ;  implying  that  the  Christian 
child  has  grace  to  keep  it  in  this  positive  form. 

Love.  Christ  reduces  the  whole  law  to  this  one  word. 
So  Paul  does  (Rom.  13:  10).  Love  is  not  action,  but  a 
state  of  will  toward  God.  It  is  the  essence  of  all  right 
action,  the  principle  and  substance  of  all  true  obedience 
(1  Cor.  13:  1-13).  God  Himself  is  love,  and  He  requires 
in  man  a  like  spirit  and  will. 

1)-  God.  This  love  is  twofold,  to  God  and  to  man. 
Hence  the  law  was  written  on  two  tables  (Ex.  34:  1). 
The  first  table  relates  to  God,  because  He  is  the  highest 
object  of  our  love.  Thy  God.  So  He  said  to  His  people 
at  Sinai  (Ex.  20:  2).  ''Thy  God,'*  as  revealed  in  Christ. 
Eph.  2:  13-18.  We  are  His,  not  by  creation,  but  by 
gracious  adoption.  We  are  in  His  covenant,  signed  and 
sealed  in  holy  Baptism ;  and  as  His  people  we  shall  love 
Him.  With  all.  Supremely,  that  is,  in  the  highest  pos- 
sible degree,  because  He  is  infinitely  worthy.  Heart :  the 
emotional  nature,  the  affections.  Soul :  the  will  or  moral  na- 
ture. Mind :  the  mental  powers,  reason,  judgment,  memory. 
Strength :  this  is  added  from  Luke  10 :  27,  and  means  not 


24  only  the  bodily  powers,  but  also  that  the  whole  man  shall 
love  God  (Lev.  8 :  24)  to  the  full  extent  of  all  his  powers. 

This  is  the  first  command  because  it  is  the  sum  of  the 
first  table  of  the  law ;  and  great*  because  it  relates  to 
God,  is  above  all  ceremonial  laws,  and  is  the  ground  of  all 
other  laws. 

But  why  must  we,  who  are  so  dependent  on  God  and 
owe  Him  unspeakable  love  for  His  great  love  to  us,  be 
commanded  to  love  Him  ?  Because  sin  has  given  us  the 
spirit  of  hate.     See  under  Ques.  5. 

2).  Neighbor.  Our  relation  to  God  is  central,  and 
therefore  love  to  Him  demands  love  to  all  His  intelligent 
creatures.  All  men,  because  God  loves  all.  Created  and 
redeemed,  they  are  our  equals  (Luke  10:  29-37).  As 
thyself  I  not  more,  but  also  not  less.  But  why  must  those 
so  closely  related  by  creation,  preservation,  redemption, 
social  life  and  business  ties,  be  commanded  to  love  one 
another?  Because  sin  has  separated  them,  and  intro- 
duced the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  hate. 

This  royal  law  (Jas.  2 :  8)  is  called  the  secOnd  com- 
mand, because  it  is  the  sum  of  the  second  table.  Like 
unto  the  first,  having  the  same  author,  God,  and  the 
same  essence,  love.  On  these  twO.  They  are  insepara- 
ble. You  cannot  keep  one  and  ignore  the  other.  Some 
make  great  account  of  the  first,  and  others  of  the  second ; 
but  they  cannot  be  thus  made  twain,  for  in  essence  they 
are  one.  Love  is  their  life-bond  (1  John  4 :  20 ;  5 :  2). 
Hang  all.  These  two  tables  include  all  our  duties,  in  all 
the  relations  of  life.     The  laW  and  the  Prophets:  every- 

■^  How  men  reverse  this !  Many  who  scorn  to  lie,  kill  or  grossly 
covet,  and  make  great  merit  of  loving  their  neighbor,  think  it  a 
small  matter  to  ignore  God.  His  Day,  Church  and  worship  are 
nothing  to  them. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  25 

thing  required  and  forbidden  by  God ;  explained  and  de- 
clared by  His  ministers. 


THE   LAW    SHOWS   US   OUR   MISERY.