Question  5.     Canst  thou  keep  all  these  things  perfectly? 

Answer.  In  no  wise ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and 
my  neighbor. 

The  Triglott  says :  Keep  all  this,  i.  e.,  this  law  of  love. 
The  answer  states  a  fact  which  men  confess,  we  cannot 
keep  the  law ;  and  the  reason,  we  hate  God  and  man, 
which  men  deny. 

Perfectly.  If  the  question  were  simply,  "  Canst  thou 
keep  the  law  of  God  ?"^the  Christian  child  might  rightly 
answer,  "Yes,  because  I  am  Christ's,  and  have  His  Spirit;" 
but  the  Catechism  adds  "  perfectly,"  and  he  must  answer, 
"  In  no  wise." 

God  requires  love,  but  we  are  prone  to  hate ;  and  this 
hate,  like  the  love  which  God  requires,  is  two-fold,  toward 
God  and  toward  man. 

1.)  We  are  prone  to  hate  God.     This  sounds  harsh, 

but  it  is  true.  We  show  it  not  merely  by  gross  sins,  but 
indeed  most  by  indifference  to  God,  ignoring  His  claim 
upon  us.  How  can  you  show  greater  contempt  for  a  man 
than  by  slighting  him  ?  Silence  betrays  as  much  bitter- 
ness as  a  blow.  Love  cannot  be  indifferent.  The  lack  of 
right  acts  plainly  shows  the  presence  of  a  wrong  spirit. 
The  easy  test  of  love  is,  keeping  the  Commandments 
(John  14:  15,  21,  24;  15:  10-14). 

The  natural  man  thinks. he  does  not  hate  God ;  but  the 
god  whom  he  loves  lives  only  in  his  imagination,  and  is 
very  different  from  the  God  of  the  Bible ;   more  merciful 


26  KOTES  OX  THE 

i^sm  just,  VcTT  indulgent,  overlooking  many  things,  and 
even  ignoring  his  own  ordinances  and  statutes.  This 
god  the  natnral  man  loves.  But  the  living  and  trae 
Crod,  the  gracioos  Jehovah,  men  do  hate,  and  show  their 
hate  bv  indifl^vence  and  disobedience. 

2.)  We  oTS  "r:~5  ::  ':.y.^  :zi  z^Wizz?,  This  neces- 
sarily foL  -  -I  ~r  L  :  >  r  cannot  love 
man.  liove  to  _  -kes  love  to  man  possible. 
He  who  does  not  keep  tiie  zist  table,  c-i^  :  keep  the 
second. 

This  hate  expre^e?  iiseli  in  r>ride.  ambidon,  envy,  jeal- 
ousy, anger,  cmelty,  murder,  adiiltcry.  tlieft,  mise  wiaiess, 
covetoosaess,  and  all  other  lomis  of  selnihriess  GraL  5: 
1^21),  largely  indeed  in  not  caring  for  taose  in  di^iTeis 
(liokelO:  31,  32.) 

Of  course  man  is  not  a  devH,  with  all  good  gone,  and 
absohifedy  full  of  hate  and  sin.  He  has  pity,  compossiui, 
beneYolence,  natoial  kindness ;  bat  all  this  is  held  in  check 
by  a  stronger  pow»  in  his  nature,  by  a  spirit  Uiai  rules 
him,  the  spirit  of  hate. 

Indeed,  much  that  men  call  love  is  only  a  form  of  sel- 
fishness. To  help  him  who  in  sindlar  circnmstanees  is 
bound  to  help  you  (as  in  Scci^Tir^  -  irely  is  not  the  holy 
love  of  Christ  Tlie  very  ne :  5 ;  :  : :  r  such  outward  obli- 
gation to  help  the  needy,  is  i:iclf  a  srrong  proof  of  the 
epirit  of  selSshness  and  hate  in  our  nature. 

PrC-O ;  predisposed,  inclinel  TLis  is  just  the  tzooble. 
It  L5  n : :  a  sn  i ien  impulse,  a  single  and  occasional  ^ling, 
bit  a  nir  -  ifiri:,  an  evil  principle  in  our  nature,  a  spir- 
itual disease.  Our  hate  is  not  first  outward  act,  1 1:  in- 
ivard  disposition  (as  is  also  /bee).  Tliis  is  denied  by  Soci- 
niai^  Pelagians,  Unitarians,  and  others.  Bj  ^attTLT^. 
This  hate  is  not  just  a  bad  spirit  in  the  individual ;  nor  dc-es 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  27 

it  come  from  without  by  education.  It  lies  in  the  fallen 
life  of  the  race,  and  comes  to  us  by  birth  (Ps.  51 :  5).  The 
origin  and  extent  of  this  proneness  are  given  in  Ques.  7, 8. 

The  First  Part  of  the  Catechism  deals  not  with  the 
greatness  of  single  sins,  but  with  sin.  Not  just  our  acts 
condemn  us,  but  rather  our  sinful  nature.  Our  misery 
comes  not  first  from  what  we  do,  but  rather  from  what  we 
are.     The  law  of  God,  then,  shows  us  these  two  things: — 

1.)  Sow  great  our  sins  are.  As  a  mirror,  it  shows  us 
our  spiritual  deformity.  As  a  copy,  it  shows  how  far  short 
we  come  of  its  divine  perfection.  As  a  perfect  rule  of 
right,  it  shows  how  crooked  our  life  is.  This  is  true  even 
of  those  in  grace.  Back  of  all  our  effort  at  obedience, 
lies  our  sad  proneness  to  disobedience.  Comparing  our 
inner  spirit  with  the  deep  demand  of  the  law,  namely, 
love,  we  can  see  in  ourselves  not  merely  a  neglect  of  the 
law,  but  a  deep  opposition  to  it.  The  greatness  of  our 
sins  lies  not  just  in  their  number,  nor  yet  in  our  proneness 
to  sin,  but  especially  in  this,  that  all  our  sins  of  heart  and 
life  are  against  God  (Ps.  51 :  4). 

2.)  How  great  our  miseries  are.  We  must  either  love 
or  hate  both  God  and  man.  We  cannot  be  neutral.  The 
law  of  God  requires  perfect  love  and  obedience.  Our  will 
is  directly  contrary  to  God's  will.  Therefore  the  law 
stands  over  the  sinner  and  pronounces  the  terrible  sen- 
tence of  divine  condemnation,  "  Cursed "  (Gal.  3 :  10), 
which  Paul  in  a  free  way  quotes  from  (Deut.  27  :  26).  The 
trembling  soul  knows  that  the  sentence  is  righteous,  and 
cries  out  "  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am  "  (Rom.  7 :  24). 
Thus  the  law  shuts  every  mouth,  while  it  sets  the  world 
guilty  before  God.  If  men  do  not  feel  its  condemning 
power,  it  is  because  they  refuse  to  look  at  it  and  at  self. 
Unbelievers  are  not  in   danger   of  being  lost,  but  are 


28  KOTES  ON  THE 

already  lost,  "condemned  already"  (John  3 :  18).  Standing 
under  the  curse  of  the  law  their  danger  is  that  they  may 
not  be  saved. 


THIRD  liOPtD'S  DAT. 


SIX    IS    XOT    FROM    GOD.