Question  6.     Did  God  then  create  man  so  wicked  and  perverse? 

Answer.  Bv  no  means,  but  God  created  man  good,  and  after  His 
own  image,  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  that  he  might 
rightly  know  God  his  Creator,  heariilv  love  Him,  and  live  with 
Him  in  eternal  happiness,  to  gloritV  Him  and  praLse  Him. 

Lid  God  create.  The  Catechism,  having  given  the 
fact  of  our  sinfulness,  now  asks  whence  it  comes.  So 
.wicked,  ?*•  e.,  with  this  broad,  deep  spirit  and  habit  of 
hate  towards  God  and  man.  If  sin  were  from  God  it 
would  not  be  our  fault,  but  only  our  misfortune.  "  Did 
God  create  man  so,'*  the  better  to' glorify  Himself  in 
the  redemption  of  some  and  in  the  damnation  of  others  ? 

By  no  means.  This  emphatic  answer  sets  God  free 
from  all  blame  of  our  sinfulness.  Bllt  •  •  •  gOOd,  com- 
plete, without  any  defect  in  any  part,  yea  "  very  good  " 
(Gen.  1 :  31).  But  more  than  this.  He  created  man  after 
His  own  image.  Of  course  not  like  God  in  all  things, 
but  relatively  like  Him.  Our  nature  is  a  reflection  of 
His,  "the  totality  of  God's  nature  in  finite  form"  (know- 
ledge, holiness,  power).  In  what,  then,  was  man  like 
God? 

1.)  Personality.  Man  has  reason,  will,  judgment,  me- 
mory and   affections.      He  is   not   like  beasts,  but   like 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  29 

angels.*  Therefore  lie  is  able  rightly  to  "know"  God, 
His  nature,  works,  law. 

2.)  Holiness.  All  His  powers  were  good,  right,  pure. 
God  could  not  have  created  man  wicked.  Sin  is  not  an 
original  part  of  our  nature,  as  the  Manicheans  teach ;  for 
then  there  could  have  been  no  fall.  Nor  did  God  create 
man  neutral,  without  moral  inclination,  equally  balanced 
between  good  and  evil ;  but  God  created  man  positively 
good  "  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,"  with  a  nature 
in  sympathy  with  God.  Therefore,  as  holy,  man  could 
"  heartily  love  "  God. 

3.)  Immortality.  Man  has  endless  existence.  God  alone 
is  eternal,  having  "  life  in  Himself"  (John  5:  26),  "  with- 
out beginning  and  without  end  "  (Ps.  90:  2) ;  but  He  cre- 
ated man  like  Himself,  in  everlasting  continuance,  that 
"  he  might  live  with  Him  in  eternal  happiness,"  that  the 
happiness  of  Eden  might  continue  forever. 

We  see,  then,  that  man  was  made,  not  to  fall,  but  to 
live  with  God ;  and  sin  is  not  from  God. 

To  the  image  of  God,  some  add  also  man's  "  dominion," 
his  headship  of  the  whole  creation,  a  reflection  of  God's 
absolute  sovereignty.  "  Have  dominion,"  said  God  (Gen. 
1 ;  28).  So  in  Ps.  8 :  5-7 :  *'  crowded,"  "  to  have  domin- 
ion." He  is  the  great  link  between  God  and  the  whole 
lower  creation,  which  thus  finds  in  him  its  meaning  and 
its  mouth-piece.  Through  man  it  praises  God  (Ps. 
148:  8-14.) 


SIN   IS   FROM   MAN.