Question  7.     Whence,  then,  proceeds  this  depravity  of  human 
nature  ? 

*  Angels  also  are  in  the  image  of  God,  having  personality,  holi- 
ness and  immortality,  but  yet  differ  from  man  (Ps.  8:5). 


30  NOTES  ox  THE 

Ansic<iT.  From  the  fall  and  disobedience  of  oar  first  parents, 
Adam  and  Eve,  in  Paradise;  hence  oar  nature  is  become  so  cor- 
mpt,  that  we  are  all  conceived  and  bom  in  sin. 

DSwTaTity.  The  TrigiotE  says:  *"Tliis  depraved  na- 
ture."    So  ihe  quesnon  and  the  answer  correspond. 

Man  was  perfect,  ^ot  that  all  his  powers  were  fiilly 
developed,  bat  that  they  were  in  right  relation  to  God 
and  each  other.  They  were  perfect  as  the  young  plant  is 
perfect,  all  its  parts  being  right,  and  free  to  realize  their 
end,  though  as  yet  undeveloped. 

7r-ei:^  :hen  .  .  .  .  ?    From  the  felL    The  tree  of 

knowledge  was  not  a  temptation,  but  a  test,  that  his  fi-ee- 
irill  might  have  exercise,  and  so  be  developed.  God  put 
nothing  in  his  way.  How  terrible  to  think  of  God  en- 
snaring the  creatures  He  has  just  made !  (Gen.  6 :  5.  6.) 
niC'C3il0!lC5,  Sin  came  not  from  any  weakness  in  Lis 
r  :  r.  not  rrom  any  secret  decree  of  God,  but  from  man's 
0  viL  free-will  act  of  disobedience.  Of  At^atn  acd  StS. 
God  made  but  one  pair,  and  all  sin  comes  from  them. 
But  how  can  the  sin  of  Adam  affect  us?  Because  the  race 
is  organic.  One  generation  proceeds  from  another  before  it. 
Adam  was  not  merely  a  representative  of  the  race,  but  its 
generic  head.  He  was  himself  the  race.  Ii  lay  in  his 
loins,  and  proceeded  from  him,  "  He  was  the  actual  com- 
plex of  the  entire  human  race." 

Ee-:5  ::ir  iivzr-^  is  l:e::r:i3  ccrrupL     This  at  once 

contradicts  the  Pelagian  view,  that  sin  is  only  from  bad 
education,   from  the  outsid^  superficial,  and  so  to  be 

cured  by  external  remedies.  Sin  is  broader  and  deeper 
than  the  itidividuaL  It  lies  in  the  \eij  life  of  the  race. 
From  the  fountain  comes  the  stream;  and  hence  every 
drop  is  poisoned. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  31 

So  corrupt  that  .  .  .  torn  in  sin.  Children  are  not 
born  pure  but  depraved.  They  are  not  a  blank  sheet  on 
■which  just  anything  may  be  written,  but  already  blotted 
and  blurred,  and  so  need  the  cleansing  blood  of  Christ. 
Sin  is  not  a  mere  outward  imputation  but  a  real  possession. 

Proofs  of  universal  depravity  : — 

1.)  The  sickness  and  death  of  children.  This  shows 
that  something  is  wrong  already  with  their  physical  frame. 
Death  comes  from  sin  (Rom.  5:  12). 

2.)  All  children,  long  before  they  know  right  from 
wrong,  show  a  sinful  disposition  (anger,  revenge,  self-will, 
deception,  selfishness,  unforgiveness) ;  and  this  early 
estrangement  (Psalm  58  :  3),  this  bias  toward  sin,  is  made 
only  worse  by  years.     Hence 

3.)  Every  adult,  without  exception,  shows  this  same 
sinful  disposition,  this  proneness  to  hate  God  and  his 
neighbor,  only  developed  and  strengthened  by  years.  The 
Holy  Ghost  makes  a  sad  record  in  Rom.  3:  9-23. 

4.)  The  universal  sense  of  sin,  in  all  ages  and  nations 
of  the  world,  and  the  efibrts  of  heathen  to  find  a  remedy 
in  sacrifices,  and  in  worship  of  their  own  invention. 

5.)  All  this  is  confirmed  by  the  Scriptures.  Gen.  6 :  5 ; 
8:  21;  Ps.  14:  1-3;  51:  5;  58:  3;  Prov.  22:  15;  Jer. 
17:  9;  Mark  7:  21,  22;  John  3:  6;  Rom.  3:  9-23; 
Eph.  2:  3. 

Sin  then  is  from  man.  Notice,  too,  that  God  has  given 
us  this  knowledge  of  sin.  No  amount  of  reflection  or  ob- 
servation could  reveal  it.  The  fact  of  sin  is  painfully  evi- 
dent, but  not  its  origin. 

Sin  is  thus  a  fearful  death-power  in  our  nature,  whose 
remedy  is  not  knowledge,  good  example,  and  strict  laws, 
but  a  gracious  life-power  implanted  in  the  soul. 


32  THE  EXTENT  OF  OUR  DEPRAVITY.