Question  8.  Are  we  then  so  corrupt  that  we  are  wholly  incapa- 
ble of  doing  any  good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness  ? 

Ansicer.  Indeed  we  are,  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit 
of  God. 

So  corrupt.  Ques.  5  gives  the  fact  of  our  depravity ; 
Ques.  7,  its  cause ;  and  this,  its  extent.  The  question  is  as 
rich  as  the  answer,  and  aims  a  fatal  blow  at  Pelagianism. 
It  lays  the  human  heart  quite  open. 

How  corrupt  are  we  ?  What  is  the  degree  of  our  de- 
pravity ?  What  is  our  natural  state  ?  The  race  is  so  cor- 
rupt that  every  one  is  born  in  sin ;  and  the  individual  is 
so  corrupt  that  in  all  his  parts  and  powers  he  is  not  only 
indisposed  toward  good  but  even  prone  to  evil. 

1.)  "We  are  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any  good." 

This  astonishes  the  natural  man.  "  A  cup  of  cold  water, 
feeding  the  hungry,  protecting  the  helpless,  educating  the 
poor,  &c., — are  not  these  good  works?"  They  are  not 
wicked,  but  (as  shown  under  Question  fifth)  they  proceed 
fi'om  the  wrong  source,  and  so  lack  the  proper  spirit. 
Their  form  is  good,  but  not  their  substance.  "^ 

It  is  expressly  declared,  "  They  that  are  in  the  flesh 
cannot  please  God  "  (Rom.  8:8).  Why  not  ?  Because 
they  are  in  wrong  relation  to  God  (rebels,  aliens,  prodi- 
gals, &c.) ;  have  the  wrong  spirit  (Rom.  8 :  5,  7 ;  Eph. 
4:  17-19);  and  so,  as  corrupt  trees,  cannot  bring  forth 
good  fruit.     (See  Matt.  7:  17-20.)      Before  men  can  do 

■^  The  hand  on  a  clock,  says  Charnock,  will  twice  a  day  point  to 
the  right  figure,  even  if  the  pendulum  swings  not ;  so  the  natural 
man  may  do  single  and  occasional  worthy  works  which  seem  to 
point  toward  goodness,  though  they  come  not  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  33 

right,  they  must  be  right.  Good  works  are  not  from 
nature,  but  from  the  Holy  Ghost  (Gal.  5 :  22,  23).  How 
can  men  please  God,  so  long  as  their  whole  nature  is 
averse  to  God  and  good  (Rom.  7:  18-23)?  How  can  a 
father  accept  the  obedience  of  a  rebel  or  prodigal  son  ? 
How  can  the  son  in  this  wrong  relation  be  true  to  the 
father  ? 

But  the  stress  lies  not  so  much  on  "  doing  "*  as  on  ''  in- 
capable." This  word  in  the  German  is  imtuchtig,  and 
means  indisposed,  disinclined,  not  in  sympathy  with  the 
good,  unapt  toward  it.  And  this  is  '^  wholly,"  true  of  the 
whole  man, — reason,  will  and  affections.  Indifference  to 
the  good,  however,  is  not  the  worst  of  our  case,  for — 

2.)  "We  are  inclined  to  all  wickedness,"  not  abso- 
lutely depraved  (as  are  devils),  utterly  lacking  moral 
capacity,  but  powerfully  biased  toward  evil,  because  our 
nature  is  in  sympathy  with  it.  The  history  of  heathen- 
ism, of  the  Hebrews,  of  any  individual  life,  is  plain  proof. 
How  readily  children  learn  sinful  ways,  take  bad  advice, 
and  follow  bad  examples !  ' 

All  wickedness.  Not  that  every  man  is  prone  to  every 
form  of  sin ;  but  human  nature  is  thus  prone,  and  every 
man  is  prone  to  evil  iu  some  form.  Therefore  he  may  feel 
himself  to  be  a  great  sinner,  not  because  he  has  done  great 
wickedness,  but  because  he  has  the  disposition  to  do  it.  "f 
Nor  are  men  all  equally  wicked.  They  have  different  de- 
grees both  of  proneness  to  sin  and  of  actual  sins. 

*  "  Doing  "  is  not  in  the  German.  The  Triglott  says :  "  We  'vre 
wholly  unapt  to  any  good." 

t  Calvin  says:    "By  the  fall  man  lost  all  ability  to  do  good,  and 

he  became  corrupt  in  mind,  will,  body,  and  all  his  powers."     The 

Scotch  Confession  says :    *'  We  are  utterly  indisposed,  disabled  and 

made  opposite  to  all  good,  and  wholly  inclined  to  all  evil." 
34  TVe  have  lost  that  true  holiness  in  which  God  created 
man ;  and  now,  not  just  any  particular  siu  condemns  us, 
and  brings  us  into  misery,  but  this  depravitT  of  our  whole 
fallen  life.  The  difference  between  sin  and  sins  is  like 
that  of  root  and  branches. 

This  is  what  we  mean  by  total  depravity.  It  lies  not 
simply  in  the  corrupt  afiections;  nor  iu  the  perverse 
will ;  nor  in  the  darkened  understan<iing  ;  but  in  all  our 
parts.  The  sin-disease  affects  the  whole  nature ;  and  as  a 
sick  man  turns  in  disgust  from  both  food  and  work,  so 
turns  the  natural  man  from  the  word  and  work  of  God. 
Nor  is  this  a  siugle,  sudden  impulse,  but  a  fixed  disposi- 
tion. Hence  our  natural  state  is  called  darkness  (Col. 
1:  13;  alienation  (Eph.  2:  12);  rebellion  (Rom.  8:  7); 
death  'Eph.  2:1;  and  by  other  sadly  significant  names. 

Except  VTS  are  regenerate!  Here  is  man's  only  hope. 
Grace  must  touch  his  dead  nature  and  quicken  it  to  action. 
He  must  be  bom  again,  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  Bap- 
tism is  not  here  named,  but  presupposed  in  the  catechu- 
men. 

This  new  birth  is  not  a  superficial  work,  the  result  of 
example,  education,  refinement,  or  outward  reformation. 
Sin  came  from  no  such  outward  cause,  and  its  remedy 
must  be  equally  deep,  radical  and  far-reaching. 

Eegeneration  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  imparting 
to  the  sinner  a  new  life  and  spirit,  so  that  henceforth  he  is 
able  and  willing  to  live  unto  Christ  in  the  sanctified  use  of 
all  his  powers. 

Morality  is  not  regeneration.  ^Morality  is  the  best  side 
which  our  fallen  nature  can  show ;  but  is  it  not  a  whited 
sepulchre  ?  '*'  It  removes  the  stench  and  putrefaction,  but 
not  the  death,"  says  Chamock.  The  corruption,  poison 
and  rebellion  are  only  hid  away.     '*'  The  new  man  "  (Eph. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  35 

4 :  24)  is  something  much  broader,  deeper  and  higher  than 
morality. 

It  is  not  easy  to  make  men  see  and  appreciate  their 
spiritual  condition — how  great  their  sins  and  miseries  are ; 
but  Part  First  of  the  Catechism,  though  short,  if  faith- 
fully studied  with  a  heart  and  mind  fully  open  to  the  truth, 
will  deeply  touch  the  conscience.  Its  logic,  so  far,  may  be 
summed  up  as  follows  : — 

\Ve  know  our  misery  from  the  law  of  God.  The  law 
requires  love.  We  have  only  hate.  We  have  this  nature 
not  from  God,  but  from  our  First  Parents.  This  is  our 
condition  until  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Our  misery,  therefore,  is,  that  we  are  under  the  condemna- 
tion of  God's  law.  "  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am !  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? " 


FOUBTH    liORD'S    DAY. 


DOES   GOD   WRONG   MAN   IN  THIS?