Question  9.  Does  not  God  then  do  injustice  to  man  by  requiring 
from  him,  in  His  law,  that  which  he  cannot  perform  ? 

Answer.  Not  at  all ;  for  God  made  man  capable  of  performing 
it ;  but  man,  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,  and  his  own  wilful 
disobedience,  deprived  himself  and  all  his  posterity  of  those  divine 
gifts. 

Injustice  to  man.  Here  the  carnal  mind,  the  natural 
reason,  raises  the  objection:  If  man  is  thus  incapable  of 
good,  and  prone  to  sin,  how  can  God  justly  hold  him  to 
a  law  which  he  cannot  possibly  keep  ? 

.   God  made  man  capable.    The  Triglott  says :  "  God  so 


36  made  man  that  he  could  perform  it."  His  demand  is  not 
arbitrary.  He  requires  man  to  do  simply  that  which  be- 
longs to  his  true  nature.  God  made  man  (not  each 
individual  now  born,  but  the  race^  as  it  lay  in  Adam)  able 
to  keep  the  law.  Our  first  parents  fully  had  the  spirit  of 
loving  obedience,  and  before  the  fall  kept  the  law  per- 
fectly. Now  that  man  is  in  sin,  God  cannot  lower  the  law 
to  suit  his  fallen  state.  Therefore  God  is  just  in  holding 
man  to  the  unchano-eable  divine  law. 

Man  deprived  himself.  "  Capable "  lies  in  Ques.  6  ; 
"  deprived,^'  in  Ques.  7.  Loss  came  by  his  own  act.  Sin 
did  not  originate  with  him,  however.  He  was  tempted  by 
Satan  f  but  he  might  have  resisted  him.  Therefore  his 
disobedience  is  called  willful.  It  was  utterly  against 
God's  desire  and  purpose  (Gen.  6 :  6).  Nor  did  it  lie  in. 
any  defect  in  man.     God  made  him  "  very  good." 

Of  those  divine  gifts.  The  Triglott  says :  "  Of  this 
power,"  the  ability  to  keep  the  law  of  God.  Man  lost 
his  true  holiness,  and  so  the  power  rightly  to  know  and 
love  and  glorify  God  (Ques.  6).  He  became  not  absolutely 
depraved  (irredeemable),  but  yet  totally  so.  Sin  has 
afiected  his  whole  nature.  His  reason  is  darkened ;  his 
will  is  turned  against  God ;  and  his  affections  are  corrupt. 
And  all  his  posterity.  Those  coming  after  him.  How 
so  ?  Because  the  race  was  bound  up  in  him,  in  his  organic 
headship.  In  him  the  race  was  made  able  to  obey  the  law ; 
and  hence  the  race  is  held  accountable  for  breaking  and 
now  not  keeping  the  law. 

*  In  Ques.  7  sin  is  traced  to  man.  Here,  a  step  further  back, 
namely,  to  the  devil ;  but  the  Catechism,  resting  satisfied  with  this 
revealed  fact  (John  8 :  44),  enters  upon  no  speculations.  It  cares 
rather  to  show  the  curse  of  sin  than  the  origin  of  sin. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  37 

See,  also,  the  goodness  of  God.  He  makes  this  severe 
demand,  in  order  to  show  man  his  inability,  and  thus  to 
lead  him  to  deske  and  accept  the  needful  grace  which  God 
offers  for  the  keeping  of  the  law. 


THE   PUNISHMENT   OF   SIX.