Question  17.    Why  must  he  in  one  person  be  also  very  God  ? 

Answer.  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  His  Godhead,  sustain 
in  his  human  nature,  the  burden  of  God's  wrath ;  and  might  obtain 
for  and  restore  to  us,  righteousness  and  life. 

What  sort  •  •  •  then  ?  Even  among  men,  a  mediator 
must  have  a  certain  fitness.  So  here.  Our  Mediator  can- 
not be  God,  the  oflTended  party ;  nor  yet  man,  the  offend- 
ing party.     Hence  the  mystery  of  our  redemption. 

The  Catechism  now  proceeds  to  state  the  qualifications 
of  the  Redeemer : — 

1)  "  Very  (i-  e.,  truly)  man."  Human  nature  sinned, 
and  the  same  nature  must  make  satisfaction  (Ques.  12). 
This  shuts  out  the  notion  of  imputation.     Our  redemption 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  43 

must  be  in  the  bosom  of  tbe  race,  and  by  one  of  the  race. 
This  shows  the  necessity  of  the  incarnation.  "  The  Word 
was  made  flesh."  He  took  on  Him  the  very  nature  of 
man  (Queo.  35).  God  could  not  accept  any  mere  repre- 
sentative satisfaction, for  example  an  angel,  even  waiving 
all  other  disability  *. 

Also  perfectly  righteous.  The  Triglott  says:  "Sinless." 
Not  under  condemnation,  but  in  right  relation  to  God.  He 
must  have  both  a  perfectly-  holy  nature  and  a  perfectly 
holy  life.  A  sinner  cannot  satisfy  for  himself,  much  less 
for  others  (Ps.  49  :  7). 

2)  Very  God,  truly  divine,  that  He  may  have 
power  to  do  His  work  for  man.  He  must  not  be  partly 
God  and  partly  man,  but  true  and  perfect  God  and 
true  and  perfect  man.  (See  Athanasian  Creed.)  A 
sinless  humanity  and  a  real  divinity  are  the  two  essential 
qualifications  in  the  Redeemer.  He  must  stand  in  the  race 
as  one  of  it,  and  yet  have  in  Himself  that  which  is  above 
the  race,  in  order  that  by  the  power  of  this  higher  nature 
He  may  lift  the  race  out  of  its  misery  and  death  into  a 
new  and  everlasting  life.  Here  again,  "  sustain  the  burden 
of  God's  wrath."  means,  exhausting  the  penalty  of  sin,  de- 
stroying its  power,  coming  forth  conqueror  of  death,  and 
so  restoring  to  us  righteousness  and  life :  "  righteousness," 
over  against  our  natural  sinfulness ;  and  "  life,"  over 
against  our  death  through  Adam.  This  an  angel  could 
not  do.  Hence  the  great  stress  laid  on  the  resurrection  of 
Christ  (1  Cor.  15  :  13-20).  An  infinite  penalty  requires 
an  infinite  power. 


*  An  angel  could  not  keep  the  law  which  was  made  only  for  man ; 
nor  could  he  satisfy  its  penalty,  death.  Hence,  even  for  this  the 
Eedeemer  must  be  human  (Heb.  2 :  14-17). 


44  3)  In  one  person.  These  two  qualifications  must  be  in 
unity.  He  must  be  truly  human,  since  only  the  human 
can  die  (Heb.  2:9);  He  must  be  truly  divine,  since  only 
as  such,  has  He  right  to  give  His  life  for  another  (John 
10 :  18).  But  the  Redeemer  must  be  one ;  not  a  dualism, 
but  divine-human ;  not  God  and  man,  but  the  God-man. 
*'  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh !  "  The  incarnation  is  the  mystery  and  miracle  of 
all  mysteries  and  miracles. 

He  took  on  Him  not  merely  human  form  (as  angels  did, 
Gen.  18 :  2,  Acts  1 :  10),  but  human  nature  ;  and  this,  in- 
deed, not  for  a  time  but  forever.  He  brought  Himself 
into  such  relation  and  position  toward  both  God  and  man, 
that  in  His  human  nature  He  could  satisfy  the  justice  of 
God,  and  in  His  divine  nature  He  could  overcome  all  the 
consequences  of  sin,  and  deliver  man  from  the  curse.  His 
divine-human  constitution  was  neither  accidental  nor  arbi- 
trary, but  essentially  necessary  to  His  redeeming  work. 
Hence  the  emphasis  laid  on  His  supernatural  conception 
and  human  birth  (Ques.  35). 

These  qualifications  are  stated  in  Gal.  4 :  4  (Son,  made 
of  a  woman)  ;  Phil.  2 :  5-8  (God,  man) ;  John  1:14 
(Word,  made  flesh) ;  1  Tim.  2 :  5  (man,  Christ).  So  in 
the  Creed  :  "  Conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of 
the  Virgin  Mary." 


THE   EEDEEMEE.