Question  20.  Are  all  men,  then,  as  they  perished  in  Adam,  saved 
by  Christ? 

Answer.  No ;  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  Him,  and  re- 
ceive all  His  benefits  by  a  true  faith. 

All  men  perished  in  Adam  (Ques.  7-11).  Hence  all 
need  redemption.  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men  (1  Tim. 
2:4;  Heb.  2 :  9).     Will  all  be  saved? 

Uo,  The  Catechism  here  speaks  not  of  what  Christ  has 
done,  but  of  man's  relation  to  His  redemption.  Some  re- 
fuse it,  as  they  refuse  water,  light  and  air.     Only  thoSG 

who  are  ingrafted  into  Him.    As  we  through  the  first 

Adam  have  death,  so  through  Christ,  the  Second  Adam, 
we  must  have  a  new  and  eternal  life  (1  John  5 :  12).  The 
farmer  cuts  a  branch  from  a  choice  tree  and  sets  it  into 
another  tree.  If  left  out,  it  must  die,  because  separated 
from  its  true  life ;  but  set  into  another  it  lives,  because 
new  life  flows  into  it. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECniSM.  47 

So  with  man:  Sin  has  cut  him  off  from  God,  his  true 
life,  and  he  stands  in  the  process  of  death.  Only  as  re- 
united to  Christ,  "  ingrafted  into  Him,"  can  he  live. 

How  man  is  ingrafted  into  Christ,  is  explained  only- 
later  (Ques.  69-74),  when  the  catechumen  is  prepared  to 
know  it.  God's  act  of  Holy  Ba^^tism  is  his  ingrafting 
(1  Cor.  xii.  13).     Ques.  74  calls  it  this  {einverleiht^). 

By  a  trilQ  faith.  In  the  Triglott  these  words  stand  be- 
fore "ingrafted."  But  surely  man  cannot  ingraft  him- 
self. The  Holy  Ghost  makes  us  partakers  of  Christ  and 
all  His  benefits  (Ques.  53).  "We  by  the  Holy  Ghost  are 
ingrafted  into  Christ "  (Ques.  80).  What,  then,  does  faith 
do?  It  is  not  the  producing  but  the  procuring  cause 
(Mark  5  :  34).  It  cannot  heal  the  soul,  but  is  the  condi- 
tion on  which  this  benefit  is  possible  (Mark  xvi.  16).  Our 
redemption  is  thus  made  to  hinge,  not  on  the  decrees  of 
God  (Predestination),  but  on  our  own  personal  will-act  of 
acceptance  (John  5  :  40 ;  Rev.  22  :  17). 

Receive  all  His  benefits.  Ingrafting  is  not  enough.  It 
is  only  the  beginning,  not  the  end.  The  graft  must  grow, 
bud,  bloom,  and  bear  fruit;  and  through  this  whole  pro- 
cess, faith  is  the  appropriating  organ.  Many  a  graft  dies 
because  no  life  flows  into  it.  Many  baptized  children  will 
grow  up  unsaved  because  faith  is  wanting. 


TRUE   FAITH. 
Questional.     "What  is  true  faith  ? 

Answer.  True  faith  is  not  only  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby  I 
hold  for  truth  ail  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  His  word,  but  also 
an  assured  confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  by  the  gospel 

*  This  word,  which  in  Ques.  74  is  translated  "admitted,"  is  in 
Ques.  20  better  translated  "  ingrafted." 


48  NOTES  OX  THE 

in  mv  heart ;  that  not  onlv  to  others,  but  to  me  .also,  remission  of 
sin,  everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation,  are  freelv  given  hj 
Grod,  merely  of  grace,  onlv  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits. 

Tnie  faith.  The  word  faith  means :  the  power  of  faith, 
that  with  which  we  believe  i^Rom.  4  :  20 ;  Heb.  11 :  3) ; 
also  the  object  of  faith,  what  we  believe  (Acts  24:  24; 
Jude  3);  and  the  act  of  believing  (Mark  16:  16;  Eph. 
2:8).  In  "  true  faith  "  these  three  things,  organ,  object 
and  act,  are  united. 

Faith  is  an  organ  or  power  of  the  soul,  the  organ  for 
the  supernatural.  It  is  to  the  soul  just  what  the  eye  is  to 
the  body,  the  organ  of  sight.  The  eye  lays  hold  of  things 
temporal  and  seen ;  faith,  of  things  eternal  and  unseen — 
the  whole  supernatural  world. 

A  certain  knowledge.  Faith  must  have  an  object. 
This  object  is  given  in  full  in  Ques.  23,  namely,  the  Apos- 
tles' Creed,  an  outline  of  the  great  facts  of  redemption, 
including  all  that  Grod  has  revealed  to  us,  and  therefore 
certain,  undoubted.  But  "  true  faith "  is  much  more 
than  any  mere  mental  assent  to  historical  and  doctrinal 
statements,  any  mere  intellectual  apprehension  of  credible 
facts. 

Manv  believe  the  Bible  as  thev  believe  anv  authentic 
historical  record ;  and  for  them  it  is  only  a  good  book. 
This  is  sometimes  called  historical  faith,  but  hardly  de- 
serves the  name,  for  it  ignores  the  very  substance  of  what 
it  pretends  to  believe. 

An  assnred  confidence.  Faith  is  a  real,  personal  appro- 
priation of  this  supernatural  revelation.  Seeing  an  object 
with  the  bodily  eye,  we  know  that  we  see  it.  So  the  ob- 
jects of  faith  are  truly  seen,  giving  us  "an  assured  confi- 
dence," a  personal  certainty  in  regard  to  them.  Soul- 
sight  must  be  as  real  and  convincinsr  as  bodilv  seeino:,  bo- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  49 

cause  the  objects  of  faith  are  as  real  as  those  of  the  natural 
world. 

Remission  of  sin  •  •  .  and  salvation.    Faith  not  only 

sees  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  but  also  sees  them  in 
their  gracious  covenant  relation  to  the  individual.  Ee- 
demption  is  not  only  for  "men  but  for  "me."  Christ  and 
His  benefits  are  mine.  "  I  belong  to  my  faithful  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ.  I  am  forgiven,  made  righteous,  and  saved," 
delivered  from  the  misery  and  death  of  the  first  Adam, 
through  the  grace  and  merits  of  the  Second  Adam.  "  Re- 
mission of  sin "  is  negative.  "  Salvation "  is  positive. 
Of  course  what  was  taught  in  Part  First  will  trouble  the 
soul,  until  the  soul  is  assured  of  redemption.  Freely 
given  «...  Christ's  merits.  Here  already,  the  Cate- 
chism, over  against  the  Roman  Catholic  doctrine,  empha- 
sizes the  fact  that  grace  is  "  given,"  not  earned;  "of 
God,"  not  by  man  ;  "  freely,"  out  of  infinite  love ;  "  for 
the  sake  of  Christ's  merits,"  not  out  of  God's  love  apart 
from  Christ. 

In  the  words  "assured  confidence,"  the  Catechism  ex- 
presses the  calm  and  joyful  state  of  the  soul  that  lays  hold 
of  Christ  and  all  His  benefits, — just  as  Ques.  89  and  Ques. 
90  describe  not  so  much  the  act  of  repentance  as  the 
spiritual  state  of  the  true  penitent.  This  joyful  trust  is 
beautifully  described  in  Ques.  26  :  "  My  Father,  on  whom 
I  rely  so  entirely,"  &c.  Indeed  this  whole  definition  of 
faith  fully  corresponds  with  that  in  Heb.  11 :  1. 

Which  the  Holy  Ghost  works.    "The  Holy  Ghost 

works  faith  in  our  hearts"  (Ques.  65).  "By  His  Holy 
Spirit  He  also  assures  me  of  eternal  life"  (Ques.  1).  This 
assurance  of  faith,  then,  is  not  from  man,  not  from  any 
earthly  power,  but  from  God  (Eph.  2:8;  Gal.  5 :  22). 
Faith,  in  one  view,  is  a  natural  power  in  every  man,  ex- 


50  ercised  first  towards  men ;  but  this  must  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  be  quickened,  and  so  enabled  to  lay  hold  of  Christ 
and  all  His  benefits.  Only  then  is  there  saving  faith. 
This  work  the  Spirit  does  by  the  Gospel  (Rom.  10 :  17), 
not  creating  in  man  a  new  faculty,  but  giving  faith  a  new 
object — the  whole  supernatural  world. 

Of  course  in  all  this  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  there  are 
degrees,  depending  not  on  Him  but  on  the  spiritual  capa- 
city and  activity  of  the  individual.  This  fact  is  true  even 
of  natural  faith.  Of  ten  men,  five  will  believe  the  same 
historical  fact  much  more  deeply  and  vigorously  than  the 
other  five,  and  just  for  this  reason  rest  in  it  much  more 
calmly  and  fully,  whether  it  concern  time  or  eternity, 
business  or  soul.  The  Christian  child  must  come  to  a 
personal  faith,  and  assume  his  baptismal  vows.  The 
parental  faith  avails  only  until  the  child's  faith-power  can 
accept  Christ. 

The  relation  of  faith  to  repentance  and  good  works,  is 
explained  only  later  (Ques.  64,  86-91). 

Ques.  21  grows  out  of  Ques.  20.  All  are  lost.  "Will  all 
be  saved  ?  Xo,  because  they  believe  not.  They  lack  the 
will-act  of  faith. 


THE   OBJECTS    OF   FAITH.