Question  23.    "WTiat  are  these  articles  ? 

Ansicer.   I.  I  believe  in  God,  tlie  Father  Almighty,  maker  of 

heaven  and  earth : 

II-    And  in  Jesus  Christ,  His  onlv  begotten  Son,  our  Lord : 
III.    "Who  was  conceived  bv  the  Holv  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin 

Mary: 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  51 

IV.  Suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate:  was  crucified,  dead  and 
buried  :  He  descended  into  hell : 

V.  The  third  day  He  rose  from  the  dead : 

VI.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  the  Father  Almighty  : 

VII.  From  thence  He  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead. 

VIII.  I  believe  in  the  H0I7  ahost: 

IX.  I  believe  in  ^  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  the  communion  of 
saints : 

X.  The  forgiveness  of  sins  : 

XI.  The  resurrection  of  the  body: 
Xn.    And  the  life  everlasting.     Amen. 

Faith  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  for  seeing  spiritual,  eternal, 
supernatural  things.  What,  now,  are  these  objects  of  faith? 
The  question  in  the  Catechism  is  peculiar : — 

Necessary.  Not  what  may  a  man  believe,  at  his  plea- 
sure ;  but  what  is  essential  to  a  proper  Christian  faith, 
less  than  which  he  dare  not  believe,  and  more  than  which 
he  need  not  believe.  The  answer,  which  points  to  the 
common  faith  of  the  Christian  Church,  shields  us  from 
the  unscriptural  and  dangerous  traditions  of  men,  whether 
Popes  or  Synods. 

For  a  Christian.  Not  a  Jew,  Mohammedan,  Romanist, 
Protestant,  Lutheran,  Reformed  or  sectarian,  but  for  any 
one  in  Christ.  Only  a  Christian  can  truly  say  "  I  believe 
in  .  .  Father  .  .  .  Son  .  .  .  Holy  Ghost."  Only  by 
true  faith  could  Peter  say,  "  Thou  art  that  Christ"  (John  6 : 
69).  So  to-day  yet  (1  Cor.  12:  3).  Color  is  not  for  the 
blind.     Sound  is  not  for  the  deaf.     So  the  objects  of  faith 

*  This  phrase  "  I  believe  in  "  is  here  unfortunate.  It  comes  not 
from  the  German,  but  from  the  Latin  copy,  and  does  not  belong  to 
any  subordinate  article,  but  only  to  the  three  great  objects  of  faith. 
Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost. 


52  are  for  those  'who  have  faith.  Therefore  the  Church  puts 
the  Creed  into  the  mouth  of  her  children,  and  teaches 
them  to  frame  to  pronounce  it  aright. 

To  belisve,  ^ot  find  out.  "  The  -world  by  wisdom 
knew  not  God "  (1  Cor.  1 :  21).  The  gospel  is  a  divine 
revelation,  and  even  foolishness  to  the  natural  man  (1  Cor. 
2 :  14).  He  cannot  even  see  it,  until  born  again  (John 
3:  3). 

Nor  yet  understand.  Much  of  the  natural  world  is 
beyond  our  ken ;  how  much  more  these  heavenly  myste- 
ries !  "We  do  not  believe  these  articles  because  we  under- 
stand them,  but  we  try  to  understand  them  because  we  be- 
lieve them.  Faith  is  before  knowledge,  but  always  seeks 
to  become  intelligent.  Hard  questions  may  be  raised,  but 
they  do  not  weaken  our  faith ;  for  the  very  nature  of  faith 
is  to  lay  hold  of  that  which  is  beyond  the  reach  of  reason. 
'Not  is  the  Christian  called  upon  even  to  systematize  and 
formulate  his  faith,  as  the  Church  has  done  it,  or  as  a 
theologian  might  do  it,  but  only  to  believe  it. 

"  I  believe  "  does  not  mean  simply  that  we  hold  these 
facts  to  be  historically  true ;  but  much  more,  it  is  a  hum- 
ble confession  and  declaration  that  we  stand  in  the  bosom 
and  under  the  saving  power  of  this  di^nne  revelation. 

All  things  in  the  gospel.  Not  merely  a  few  plain 
Scriptural  facts,  or  favorite  doctrines,  or  denominational 
hobbies,  but  the  whole  great  outline  of  the  gospel.  But 
how  shall  a  man  know  what  the  gospel  does  contain? 
Shall  every  one  frame  his  own  faith  ?  No.  The  gospel 
is  summed  up  for  us  in  the  Apostles'  Ceeed. 

The  articles.  The  parts  or  members  of  this  faith,  which 
in  itself  is  a  unit.  The  Creed  commonly  is  di^nded  into 
twelve  articles,  or  subdivisions ;  but  more  or  less  may  be 
made,  according  to  the  punctuation.     And  every  article 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  53 

is  for  faith.  It  may  have  a  natural  side,  but  of  necessity 
it  has  also  a  supernatural,  something  beyond  reason,  and 
so  for  faith. 

Olir  faith,  that  which  we  believe  (Eph.  4 :  5).  Not  in 
the  Catechism,  but  in  common  speech  it  is  called  "  the 
Apostles'  Creed."  Creed  from  its  first  word  in  the  Latin 
(Credo,  I  believe).  The  Apostles':  not  Peter's  or  Paul's, 
but  the  faith  of  all.  It  was  not  framed  by  them ;  but  is 
so  called,  partly  because  it  embodies  the  sum  and  substance 
of  Apostolic  doctrine,  and  also  to  distinguish  it  from  the 
Nicene  "^^  and  Athanasian  Creeds. 

1.)  Its  history.  Whence  comes  it?  Not  from  the  Re- 
formers. They  made  no  new  Creed  for  the  Protestant 
Church,  but  fell  back  upon  the  old  and  sure  foundation  of 
the  early  Church.  The  Roman  Church  had  in  her  much 
truth,  of  course,  as  well  as  error;  and  this  truth  the  Re- 
formers retained.  The  value  of  the  Apostles'  Creed  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  they  embodied  it  in  almost  all  their 
Confessional  books. 

The  Creed  is  much  older,  then,  than  the  Reformation. 
It  comes  from  Apostolic  times.  It  was  not  made  by  the 
Apostles,  at  least  in  its  present  form.f  It  was  not  written 
by  an  individual  (as  a  book  is  written)  ;  nor  yet  framed 
by  a  Synod  (as  the  Nicene  was)  ;  but  rather  (like  pro- 
verbs, customs  and  laws  which  arise,  no  man  knows  where 
or  how)  it  grew  out  of  the  general  life,  spirit  and  wants  of 
the  Apostolic  Church. 

*  Used  in  the  Greek  Church.  Called  Nicene,  because  it  was 
adopted  by  the  oecumenical  (general,  catholic)  Council  of  Nice,  A. 
D.  325,  to  condemn  Arianism,  which  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ. 

f  This  was  a  fanciful  notion  of  Ambrose,  Bishop  of  Milan,  from 
whom  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  got  the  tradition. 


54  ISOTFS  OS  TSE 

It  was  not  made;  it  grew.  Its  r  : :  -:.5  ihe  hnsf  aan- 
{essoa  of  Teie^  (Matt.  16 :  16,.  ;    _  td,  aO  the 

odier  aitkles  grew,  not  by  meze  oatw:.  _  ^     .  ji  new 

trutii, but  beeanae indnded in  it   Tbissh-         :    Ljrmexe 
medumieal  addition  of  artiele  to  article. 

Doabtless  tlie  Apo^es  tao^bt  tbe  early  Cimsuans  some 
form  of  feitii  (see  2  Tim.  1 :  13),  but  not  ps^edsely  the 
same  fbrm, — diS^zeot  in  diSbroit  secdons,  sa;^  Churcli 
bisloEj.  xH  Qw  it  is  easy  to  see  how  tbe^  Tanoos  Qreeda^ 
entire^  agre^ng  in  snbstance  and  ditlmiig  asitf  in  &nny 
would  giadnallj  be  redneed  in  number,  nnlil  at  laigih 
one  of  tbese  would  ^in^edbl  pframineiie^  become  OHn- 
mcm  psapsrljy  and  all  the  rest  be  left  bdhind. 

2.)  ^posHkm  in  the  Catediigm.  It  is  in  Part  Seeood, 
to  ^ow  OS  tKe  wa J  of  aadratios,  and  there  of  nece^ty. 
Where  else  could  it  hare  a  lM»ne?  And  if  omitted,  what 
dae  could  take  its  place?  Its  po^tioii  is  e^cn  a  leading 
peculiarity  of  the  HeidelbQg  Catechism  (see  page  10). 
The  "Rpfhrtmara  regarded  ^le  Oeed  as  so  in^oitant,  diafc 
alin':?-  cue- third  of  tiie  whole Oitec^ism  was  devoted  to  iL 

11-5  ::.::_  i5  :all©d  Quistl^  -frnm  CSirfet,  the  centi^I 
PersoiL  Also  in di^indioii  zr:::i  —z.::Z  is  mTir.-  ",t_:_:- 
natioiiaL  It  contains  no  ~  —  : :  ::;  thilt:-  j.T_i  :_1^  7 
aooie,  but  ^le  great  £icls  of  'liii  ::_::-  1^  1  :r  z  r  :  - 
ocdi»,  and  digii^ire  can&  :^      It  :  : 

©i::li:iT  ;:  -'..."Lt  all  Chi^iizis  ii:::l  in  crmman.    Its  ard- 
^s&  :-:---.    i:  ^Tited  but  :l:   T   :!     z  :  iiii-Dj-but  :         - 

It  is  called  also  nadfl^iDted  hecanse  its  short,  simple 

str^rezrirTi^  are  hdid  Sh*  eoiain  trind^  nxed  and  unehange- 

-:   is  not  our  own  notion,  opinion,  or  ^atcsnent, 

-_„—_  i^zresh  Snom  tiie  Bible;  butwiard^  which  we  hare 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  55 

heard  (2  Tim.  1 :  13  ;  2:2).  The  Church  does  not  allow 
catechumens  to  frame  their  own  Confession,  but  puts  into 
their  mouth  words  of  faith,  which  they  shall  receive  even 
as  the  early  Christians  received  the  Apostles'  doctrine 
(Acts  2  :  42).  The  Creed  of  Christianity  does  not  need 
new  settlement  or  formulation  every  generation  or  century. 
Men  may  deny  certain  doctrines  or  facts,  but  they  only 
repeat  old  heresies,  and  the  faith  stands  sure  because  un- 
doubted. 

This  undoubted  Christian  faith  is  called  also  catholic* 
universal,  because  it  is  the  faith  of  the  Church  of  all 
ages,  finished  and  full.  Of  course  the  Holy  Ghost  is  daily 
leading  the  Church  into  new,  deeper  and  broader  views  of 
the  truth  (John  14  :  26  ;  16  :  13)  ;  but  God's  revelation  it- 
self is  complete.  The  Jews  knew  only  the  Father,  and 
awaited  the  Son ;  and  the  disciples,  after  the  Ascension, 
awaited  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  the  Trinity  is  the  end  of  re- 
velation, and  nothing  new  will  or  can  be  revealed.  As 
Christianity  itself  is  catholic,  for  all  ages  and  nations,  so 
its  faith  must  be.  Adam,  Noah,  Moses  and  Isaiah  could 
now  repeat  it,  though  not  when  they  were  on  earth ;  and 
to  the  end  of -time  this  will  be  the  faith  of  men. 

Briefly  teach  lis.  It  is  a  summary  of  Christian  faith. 
We  have  the  Bible  ;  but  that  is  a  book  of  detailed  histori- 
cal facts,  not  of  brief  doctrinal  statements.  The  need  of  a 
summary  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  God  Himself  gave  the 

*  Both  here  and  especially  in  the  Creed  itself,  this  word  is  often 
misunderstood,  as  if  it  referred  to  the  Eomish  faith.  Unfortunately, 
too,  it  here  is  honored  with  a  capital  "  C."  It  is  a  strong  word, 
and  must  never  yield  to  a  mere  prejudice.  The  Epistles  of  Peter, 
James,  John  and  Jude  are  addressed  not  to  a  particular  person  or 
congregation,  but  to  all  Christians.  Hence  they  are  called  ''  The 
Epistle  general  of  Peter,"  &c. ;  but  some  Bibles  say  "catholic"  in- 
stead of  "  general."     The  Greek  word  is  katholika. 


56  Ten  Commandments  and  the  Lord's  Prayer  (the  sum  of 
duty  and  worship),  and  the  Apostles  gave  believers  a  "form 
of  sound  words  "  (2  Tim.  1 :  13).  The  Creed  teaches  men 
in  sum  what  to  believe. 

Its  brevity  makes  it  suitable  for  teaching  others.  If  a 
Chinaman  should  ask :  "  What  do  you  believe  ?"  you  could 
not  answer,  "  The  Bible."  Even  if  he  could  read  it  all, 
how  could  he  draw  from  it  the  sum  of  your  faith  ?  And 
how  can  you  better  teach  a  child  the  sum  of  Christianity, 
than  in  the  Creed  ?  Doubtless  it,  or  a  similar  formula, 
was  used  for  this  purpose  by  the  Apostles  and  early  teach- 
ers. So  you  teach  a  child  geography  or  botany  by  giving 
him  a  general  view  of  the  whole,  and  then  its  particulars. 
The  Creed,  in  its  brevity  and  fullness,  is  thus  well  suited 
to  children  and  the  ignorant. 

So  also  in  confirmation.  The  candidate  must  confess 
his  faith.  This  all  Churches  require,*  even  by  Apostolic 
example.  The  catechumen  cannot  repeat  the  Bible;  nor 
yet  from  it  frame  his  own  confession,  even  if  allowed. 
Hence  the  Church  teaches  him  a  fixed  form  of  faith,  that 
all  may  have  the  same.  The  catechumens  of  the  early 
Church,  and  for  ages  afterwards,  were  taught  the  Creed 
and  confessed  it. 

Nothing  could  be  more  suitable,  too,  for  public  worship. 
Such  penitent,  grateful,  adoring  confession  of  itself  con- 
firms our  faith.  This  is  communing  with  the  heavenly 
world.  We  rest  our  souls  on  the  great  facts  of  the  Creed, 
and  then  embody  the  coDfession  again  in  a  godly  life. 
Hence  only  a  Christian  can  rightly  confess  the  Creed. 

*  Not  even  excepting  those  that  reject  -what  they  call  ''  human 
Creeds,"  and  mock  at  Catechisms,  yet  all  the  while  teach  a  creed  of 
their  own,  and  demand  the  confession  of  it  in  some  form  by  the 
candidate ! 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  57 

Therefore  hold  fast  this  "  form  of  sound  words."  Study 
it.  Our  faith  should  be  intelligent.  Hence  the  Catechism 
explains  the  Creed.  Hold  fast  this  faith,  against  the 
errors  which  many  teach.  Grow  strong  in  it,  in  view  of 
coming  weakness  ;  so  that  when  flesh  and  heart  shall  fail, 
this  may  be  the  strength  of  your  heart. 


EIGHTH  liORD'S  DAY. 


THE   HOLY   TRINITY.