Question  26.  What  believest  thou  when  thou  sayest,  *'  I  believe 
in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ?" 

Answer.  That  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (who 
of  nothing  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  all  that  is  in  them,  wh<3 
likewise  upholds  and  governs  the  same  by  His  eternal  counsel  and 
providence),  is  for  the  sake  of  Christ  His  Son,  my  God  and  my 


62  Father:  on  ■whom  I  rely  so  entirely,  that  I  have  no  doubt  but  He 
"will  provide  me  with  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body  :  and 
further,  that  He  will  make  whatever  evils  He  sends  upon  me  in 
this  valley  of  tears  turn  out  to  my  advantage ;  for  He  is  able  to  do 
it,  being  Almighty  God,  and  willing,  being  a  faithful  Father. 

Haviiig  given  the  divisions  of  the  Creed,  the  Catechism 
now  takes  up  each  one  for  explanation.  Part  First  treats 
of  God  the  Father  and  His  providence. 

VThat  believest  thou  ?  TThat  is  included  in  this  article? 
What  does  it  mean,  when  rightly  confessed  ?  I,  Not  the 
Church,  but  a  Christian  child,  confessing  his  personal  faith. 
Believe.  Having  faith  not  merely  in  His  existence,  but 
in  His  covenant  relation  to  His  children.  G"Od  the  Father, 
Kot  simply  "God."  The  Creed,  like  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
teaches  us  to  call  Him  Father.  This  is  the  Christian  idea 
of  God.  The  heathen,  and  even  the  wicked  of  our  own 
land,  judging  Him  by  themselves,  think  of  God  as  either 
caring  nothing  about  man,  or  as  cruel  and  revengeful. 
The  word  Father,  expresses  love,  interest,  care,  protection, 
guidance,  yea,  forgiveness,  i.  e.,  both  the  character  of  God, 
and  His  relation  to  us.  God  is  our  Creator,  Ruler,  King, 
Judge ;  but  we  here  call  Him  Father,  a  powerful  word  in 
the  Christian  mouth,  bringing  us  very  near  to  God  (Rom. 
8  :  15).  The  child  of  an  earthly  ruler  may  with  joy  and 
freedom  stand  before  his  father ;  while  others  must  stand 
at  a  distance,  or  at  most  approach  his  majesty  with  fear 
and  reserve.  Almighty.  So  He  calls  Himself  (Gen.  17: 
1) ;  and  this  He  shows  Himself  to  be,  in  His  work  of  crea- 
tion and  providence. 

Eternal  Father.  This  raises  our  thoughts  above  the 
earthly  relation  of  father,  and  will  be  more  fully  explained 
under  Ques.  33.  Natural  theology,  so  called,  or  deism, 
cannot  say  "  Father,"  because  it  ignores  Christ  through 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  63 

whom  alone  He  is  our  Father  (Eph.  3 :  14,  15).  Who  of 
nothing.  This  phrase,  ex  nihilo  in  the  Latin  Bible,  comes 
from  2  Mac.  7 :  28,  "  Of  things  that  were  not."     The  same 

thought  is  in  Heb.  11:3.  Made  heaven  and  earth.  (Acts 

4:  24;  Ps.  146:  6).  Matter  is  not  eternal.  God  made 
all  things,  "in  the  beginning"  (Gen.  1:1;  John  1 :  3). 
Hence  we  call  Him  "Almighty"  (Jer.  10  :  12),  able  to  do 
all  things.  Thus  from  the  Bible  alone  do  we  learn  the 
origin  of  all  things.  Upholds  and  governs.  Explained  in 
Ques.  27.  "  Thou  preservest  them  all"  (Neh.  9:  6).  See 
Matt.  6 :  25-34.  Providence.  God's  wise,  powerful, 
loving,  unceasing  care  over  the  works  of  His  hands,  fully 
explained  in  the  next  question. 

Here  the  parenthesis  ends.  It  declares  that  God  crea- 
ted and  now  upholds  all  things.  The  great  thought  in  the 
answer  is,  that  this  Eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  Is  ...  my  God  and  my  ^Father.  Very  signifi- 
cantly the  Christian  faith  teaches  us,  not  only  that  God  is 
a  Father,  but  our  Father.  Our  sonship  is  just  as  real  as 
that  of  the  Eternal  Son ;  and  therefore  the  Spirit  of 
adoption  in  us  is  so  sure  and  comforting  (Eom.  8 :  15). 
Notice,  too,  that  the  Catechism,  in  explaining  this  arti- 
cle, lays  stress,  not  on  God's  attributes  (omnipotence,  om- 
niscience, omnipresence,  eternity,  holiness,  justice  and 
mercy),  nor  yet  upon  His  great  work  of  creation  and 
providence,  but  upon  the  warm  and  touching  fact :  "  He 

*  The  catechumens  are  taught  to  say  this,  because  as  baptized 
children  of  the  Church  they  stand  in  real  covenant  relationship 
with  Him  ;  but  how  about  such  catechumens  as  are  out  of  the 
Church  ?  How  can  they  use  the  Creed  ?  Evidently  only  by  accom- 
modation, yet  not  without  reason ;  for  though  not  in  the  Church, 
they  are  standing  at  its  door ;  "  though  not  in  the  body  of  grace, 
yet  they  stand  in  the  draught  of  grace." 


64  Iis  my  Father."  Por  the  sake  of  Christ  His  Son.  In  a  very 
broad,  general  sense,  God  is  called  the  Father  of  all  men, 
having  created  all ;  but  these  children  have  all  become 
aliens  through  sin  (Eph.  2 :  12),  and  therefore  cannot  call 
Him  their  Father  (John  8 :  42-44).  The  covenant  rela- 
tion is  not  by  nature  but  by  grace.  As  we  can  know  the 
Father  only  through  the  Son  (Mat.  11 :  27 ;  Eph.  2 :  18), 
60  only  through  the  Son  can  we  become  His  children  (John 
14 :  6  ;  Gal.  3 :  26).  On  whom  I  rely.  In  these  words 
of  faith  the  Catechism  expresses  our  sense  of  this  gracious 
relation.  Because  He  is  our  Father,  we  fully  and  trust- 
ingly look  to  Him  for  all  things  (Ps.  23 :  1).  Whence 
come  they,  but  from  Him  ?  Trace  them  back  step  by  step, 
through  the  skill  and  strength  of  man,  and  you  soon  get 
beyond  man's  doing  and  power  into  the  sphere  of  God's 
activity. 

He  will  provide.  Man  cannot  supply  the  wants  of  his 
body,  much  less  those  of  his  soul ;  but  God  can,  and  this 
He  will  also  do.  This  He  promised  to  Jacob  (Gen.  28 : 
15).  Moses  repeated  the  promise  to  the  Hebrews  (Deut. 
31 :  6,  8).  God  said  the  same  thing  to  Joshua  (Josh.  1 : 
5),  and  David  to  Solomon  (1  Chron.  28  :  20),  and  the 
Apostle  to  the  Christians  (Heb.  13 :  5,  6).  Therefore 
I  have  no  doubtr  He  that  hath  given  the  greater  will 
not  mthhold  the  less  (Rom.  8  :  32).  He  cares  for  birds, 
and  surely  also  then  for  His  children  (Matt.  6 :  26). 
Make  e^ls  •    •  Such  as  sickness,  pain,  loss,  disappointment 

trials  in  all  their  manifold  forms.     He  sends-     All 

things  are  from  His  hand  (see  further  under  Ques.  27), 
either  willed  or  permitted  (Job  1 :  12).  Under  the  power 
of  sin,  we  feel  its  consequences  in  all  the  relations  of  life. 
Troubles  come,  therefore,  in  body,  soul,  family,  society  and 
business,  and  life  is  truly  a  "  valley  of  tears."     Turn  OUt 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  65 

to  my  advantage.  We  know  not  how,  but  He  will  do  it 
(Koiii.  8:  28;  2  Cor.  4:  17).  This  we  know,  for  He  is 
both  iible,  being  Almighty  God  (Ps.  135:  5,  6),  and  will- 
ing also,  being  a  faithful  Father  (Ps.  103  :  13). 


TENTH  LORD'S  DAY. 


THE   PROVIDENCE   OF    GOD. 

Question  27-     What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  providence  of  God? 

Answer.  The  Almighty  and  everywhere  present  power  of  God  ; 
whereby,  as  it  were  by  His  hand,  He  upholds  and  governs  heaven, 
earth,  and  all  creatures ;  so  that  herbs  and  grass,  rain  and  drought, 
fruitful  and  barren  years,  meat  and  drink,  health  and  sickness, 
riches  and  poverty,  yea  all  things  come  not  by  chance,  but  by  His 
fatherly  hand. 

This  question  comes  from  the  parenthesis  in  the  last  an- 
swer. How  does  God  uphold  and  preserve  all  things  ? 
How  does  He  provide  for  all  our  wants,  and  make  all 
things  work  together  for  our  good  ?  By  His  providence. 
"  What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  providence  of  God." 

The  power  of  G-od  (Dan.  4  :  35),  which  is  "  Almighty, 
and  ever}-where-present,"  infinite  both  in  degree  and 
presence,  involving  God's  omnipotence  (Matt.  19  :  26), 
omniscience  (Acts  15  :  18),  and  omnipresence  (Ps.  139 : 
1-13),  and  equally  active  at  the  same  time  in  Europe  and 
in  America,  in  heaven  and  in  hell.  By  His  hand,  as  the 
symbol  of  strength  and  action  (Ex.  13  :  3  ;  Ezra  7  :  9). 
He  upholds  and  governs.  He  that  created  all  things  must 
also  preserve  them.  No  creature  is  self-dependent.  In 
Creation  God  brought  things  into  original  existence  (Gen. 


66  1  :  1 ;  Ps.  33  :  6)  ;  in  providence  He  holds  and  controls 
these  in  their  appointed  order  and  course  (Heb.  1 :  13). 

Heaven,  earth  and  all  creatures.    In  the  nature  of  things 

His  divine  power  and  rule,  His  providence,  must  be  as 
broad  as  creation.  This  view  shuts  out  several  errors  : — 
1 )  Atheism,  which  denies  the  existence  of  God.  2)  Pan- 
theism, which  denies  the  personality  of  God,  and  makes 
Him  the  soul  of  the  world.  3)  Materialism,  Naturalism, 
and  other  similar  forms  of  error,  which  deny  the  govern- 
ment of  God,  and  set  Him  quite  outside  the  world  as  hav- 
ing nothing  to  do  with  it :  like  a  ship-builder,  who  leaves 
a  finished  ship  to  sailors ;  or  a  watch-maker  whose  care  is 
not  now  needed.  4)  The  idea  of  Fate,  an  inexorable  ne- 
cessity ruling  all  things,  even  God  Himself,  thus  placing 
Him  and  the  world  on  a  level,  equally  under  this  blind, 
merciless,  irrational  power,  whence  comes  much  of  the 
common  superstition  about  our  lucky  days  and  acts  ! 

God  be  praised,  none  of  these  things  are  so.  He  is  in 
the  world,  but  is  not  part  of  it.  He  is  above  the  world, 
but  not  indijQPerent  to  it.  Over  man  there  is  an  unseen 
power  that  marks  the  course  and  shapes  the  destiny  of 
thin2:s ;  but  instead  of  beino;  blind  and  merciless,  it  is  wise 
and  good,  even  His  loving,  fatherly,  almighty  and  every- 
where present  power. 

So  that  herbs  and  grass*  ....  yea  all  things  come. 

Providence  is  only  the  great  plan  of  God,  in  regard  to  in- 
dividuals, families,  nations,  His  Church,  the  world,  yea  the 
universe,  for  the  preservation  and  government  of  all  His 
creatures.     How   could  God  be   without  a  plan?      All 


*  These  six  couplets  deserve  study.  The  first  three  mainly  re- 
late to  the  products  of  the  earth.  The  rest  describe  the  state  of 
man  as  affected  bv  the  first  class. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  67 

tilings,  then,  come  not  by  chance.  How  can  anything 
come  either  of  itself  or  by  hap-hazard  ?  The  very  idea 
of  "  chance  "  is  too  absurd  and  unreasonable  to  be  at  all 
seriously  discussed.  Everything  has  its  own  law  of  being 
and  action,  but  yet  is  under  God's  control.  It  is  impossi- 
ble to  think  of  a  weak  spot  or  dangerous  place  in  His 
providence.  Fire,  flood,  wind  and  lightning  are  all  His 
servants.  But  by  His  Fatherly  hand.  Much  He  direct- 
ly wills,  and  much  He  only  permits ;  but  all  things  are 
within  the  sphere  of  His  providence,  even  the  bow  drawn 
at  a  venture  (1  Kings  22 :  34).  His  rule  is  not  arbitrary 
and  merciless  but  fatherly  (Ps.  103  :  11-18). 

His  providence  is  not  only  general  but  also  special. 
That  is.  He  not  only  keeps  things  running  in  their  own 
natural  and  appointed  order,  but  also  so  orders  and  guides 
their  course  as  to  produce  special  results.  Rain,  frost  and 
heat  are  the  result  of  general  laws ;  but  God's  hand  may, 
by  increase  or  decrease,  give  very  different  results.  Thus 
God  can  bless  or  curse,  give  or  withhold  (Deut.  28 :  1-68 ; 
Mai.  3 :  11) ;  and  here  is  room  for  the  idea  of  prayer.