Question  28.  "What  advantage  is  it  to  us  to  know  that  God  has 
created,  and  by  His  providence  doth  still  uphold  all  things  ? 

Answer.  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity ;  thankful  in  pros- 
perity ;  and  that  in  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we 
place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faithful  God  and  Father,  that  nothing 
shall  separate  us  from  His  love ;  since  all  creatures  are  so  in  His 
hand,  that  without  His  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move. 

Adversity.  When  things  go  ill  (sickness,  pain,  death, 
loss,  temptation,  trial  of  any  kind).  Patient.  Bear  it 
calmly  and  quietly,  because  it  comes  from  God,  for  our 
good.     We  shall  not,  like  the  ancient  Stoics,  by  a  stub- 


68  born  will  ignore  the  pain,  and  bear  it  without  making  out- 
cry ;  nor  yet  like  the  Epicurean,  drown  our  sorrow  in 
pleasure ;  but  with  unmurmuring,  trustful  spirit,  receive 
it  as  from  God's  fatherly  hand.  How  shamefully  people 
grumble,  doubt  and  despair  in  regard  to  drought,  sickness, 
famine,  fire,  accidents  and  poverty,  as  though  God  had 
left  things  go  awry !  Great  also  is  the  sin  of  melancholy, 
which  is  simply  distrust  of  God,  the   infinitely  kind  and 

wise  Father.  Prosperity.  When  things  go  well.  Thank- 
fill.  Because  they  all  came  from  Him.  The  thoughtful 
Christian  will  gratefully  trace  all  blessings  back  to  the 
good  hand  of  God  (Ps.  107  :  1-43).     And  for  what  is  yet 

future God  only  knows  what  it  may  be "  we 

place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faithful  God  and  Father."    AH 

creatures  are  so  in  His  hand.    It  is  wonderful  that  any 

one  should  for  a  moment  doubt  this.  As  in  science,  art 
and  mechanics,  man  acts  upon  matter  and  its  laws,  pro- 
ducing such  results  as  these  elements  of  themselves  could 
never  have  produced,  and  all  this  in  harmony  with  the 
law  of  their  being ;  so  God  acts  upon  all  His  creatures, 
upon  matter  and  spirit,  and  works  out  His  wise  and  glori- 
ous ends. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  69 


or  GOD  THE  SON. 


EliETENTH    IjORD'S    DAT. 


JESUS.