Question  30.  Do  such  then  believe  in  Jesus  the  only  Saviour, 
who  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness  of  saints,  of  themselves,  or 
anywhere  else? 

An^oer.  They  do  not ;  for  though  they  boast  of  Him  in  words, 
yet  in  deeds  they  deny  Jesus,  the  only  deliverer  and  Saviour :  for 
one  of  these  two  things  must  be  true,  that  either  Jesus  is  not  a  com- 
plete Saviour,  or  that  they,  who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Saviour, 
must  find  all  things  in  Him  necessary  to  their  salvation. 

The  Catechism  now  takes  up  Part  Second  of  the  Creed, 
"  Of  God  the  Son  and  our  Redemption :"  His  names,  birth, 
suffering,  death,  burial,  descent,  resurrection,  ascension, 
session,  and  second  coming. 

And,  shows  the  close  relation  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  JesuS.  His  human  name  (in  distinction  from 
Christ,  His  official  title),  so  called  by  the  angel,  before  He 
was  born  (Matt.  1 :  21) ;  so  named  at  His  circumcision 
(Luke  2 :  21)  (as  we  now  name  children  at  baptism)  ;   so 


70  known  as  a  boy  at  Xazareth,  and  afterward  as  a  man 
(John  19 :  19).  SaviOTlT.  Jesus  means  the  same  as 
Joshua,  "  one  that  saves  "  i^Heb.  4 :  8).  He  SavStL  ^ot 
our  works,  not  His  words,  not  any  one  part  of  His  work, 
but  Himself  saves  us,  Xotice,  too,  He  "  saveth,"  is  now 
doing  it,  in  the  process  of  grace  in  His  Church.  He  is 
not,  like  Moses,  Joshua  and  others,  a  partial  and  relative 
Saviour,  but  "complete,"  absolute,  for  body  and  soul,  de- 
livering us  from  the  power  as  well  as  the  consequences  of 
sin.  The  only  SaTioiir,  The  only,  because  the  perfect. 
Saviour  (1  Cor.  3 :  11).  Therefore  men  must  not  seek 
salvation  and  happiness  (the  Triglott  says :  "  welfare ")  of 
saints  as  do  Roman  CathoKcs,  who  think  that  in  the  saints 
they  have  more  truly  human  mediators  or  more  likelihood 
of  sympathy,  than  in  Jesus  ;  of  themselveS,  as  do  Arians, 
Pelagians  and  others  who  denying  the  deep  original  depra- 
vity of  man,  regard  sin  as  only  an  imitation  of  others,  and 
therefore  to  be  cured  by  following  good  examples.  Hence 
denvincr  His  divine-human  nature  and  His  infinite  satis- 
faction  for  sin,  they  find  their  salvation,  in  part,  in  them- 
selves. Anywhere  else.  So  with  all  in  the  Church  and 
out  of  it,  who  depend  upon  humanitarian  schemes,  morality 
or  their  good  works  for  salvation  (Eph.  2:  8.  9\  If  men 
do  seek  salvation  elsewhere  than  in  Christ,  they  cannot 
find  it.  Indeed  in  all  such  seeking  they  deny  Jesus,  be- 
cause all  this  implies  that  man  is  not  wholly  helpless  in 
sin,  and  that  the  work  of  Christ  is  not  in  itself  complete 
and  sufficient. 

But  Christian  faith,  seeing  "  how  great  our  sins  and 
miseries  are,"  finds  in  Him  all  things  needful  for  salva- 
tion, and  so  confesses  Him  as  "  Jesus,  the  only  Saviour." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  71 


TWELFTH    IjORD'S    DAY. 


CHRIST.