Question  31.    Why  is  He  called  Christ,  that  is,  anointed  ? 

Answer.  Because  He  is  ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and  anointed 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  our  chief  Prophet  and  teacher ;  who  has 
fully  revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  concerning 
our  redemption,  and  to  be  our  only  High  Priest,  who,  by  the  one 
sacrifice  of  His  body,  has  redeemed  us,  anc^  makes  continual  inter- 
cession with  the  Father  for  us;  and  also  to  be  our  eternal  King, 
who  governs  us  by  His  word  and  Spirit,  and  who  defends  and  pre- 
serves us  in  the  enjoyment  of  that  salvation  He  has  purchased 
for  us. 

Christ  is  His  official  title,  and  corresponds  with  the 
Hebrew  word  Messiah  (John  1 :  41 ;  4 :  25).  It  means 
anointed,  set  apart  to  a  divine  office.  The  Old  Tes- 
tament dispensation  had  three  offices.  The  prophet  re- 
vealed the  will  of  God,  whether  in  regard  to  the  present  or 
the  ftiture.  The  priest  offered  sacrifice  and  made  interces- 
sion for  the  people.  The  kiog  ruled,  executing  God's  laws 
and  protecting  the  people.  These  officers  were  commonly- 
set  apart  by  being  anointed  with  holy  oil  ;*  for  example, 
the  prophet  Elisha  (1  Kg.  19 :  16),  the  high-priest  Aaron 
(Ex.  30 :  30),  and  the  kings  Saul,  David  and  Solomon 
(1  Sam.  10 :  1 ;  16  :  43  :  1  Kg,  1 :  39). 

*  This  oil  was  a  peculiar,  and  divinely-appointed  preparation 
(Ex.  30:  23-38),  of  certain  materials,  in  certain  proportions,  to  be 
made  only  by  the  priest,  and  to  be  used  only  for  its  own  holy  pur- 
poses. 


72  Now  He  is  called  Christ,  i.  e.  anointed,  because  He  was 
anointed,  not  with  holy  oil  but  with  the  H0I7  Ghost,  at 
His  Baptism'^  (Matt.  3:  13-17;  Acts  10:  38).  His  bap- 
tism was  His  ordination  to  office,  His  entrance  upon  His 
public  ministry  (Luke  4 :  18,  quoted  from  Is.  61 :  1). 
From  that  time  Jesus  bega7i  to  preach  (Matt.  4:17)  and 
to  work  mii-acles  (John  2  :  11).  To  be.  In  Him  these 
three  offices  were  necessarily  and  inseparably  united.  In 
the  Jewish  Church  no  one  man  held  all  three  offices  ;  gen- 
erally only  one,  but  sometimes  two.  Melchizedek  was 
priest  and  king  (Heb.  7 :  1).  David  was  prophet  and 
king  (Acts  2 :  30 ;  13 :  22).  Ezekiel  was  prophet  and 
priest  (Ezk.  1:3).    . 

Our  chief  Prophet  and  Teacher.     Different  from  all 

others,  speaking  as  never  man  spake,  being  Himself  "the 
Truth"  (John  14:  6),  and  therefore  called  the  Word  of 
God  (John  1 : 1),  "  fully  revealing  the  secret  f  will  of  God," 
especially  concerning  our  redemption,  not  merely  by  word 
of  mouth,  but  also  in  His  divine-human  person  and  redeem- 
ing work  (Col.  2  :  3,  9).  So  He  fulfilled  Deut.  18  :  15-19. 
Our  Cnly  High  Priest  (Heb.  3 :  1),  above  all  others,  of- 
fering Himself,  a  sacrifice  of  infinite  efficacy  (Heb.  9 :  11- 
14),  not  needing  repetition  (Heb.  10 :  14),  and  followed  by 
high-priestly  intercession  (Heb.  7  :  25).  So  He  as  a  sin- 
less High  Priest^  entering  once  for  aU  into  the  true  holy 

*  His  baptism  was  not  unto  personal  repentance,  as  in  the  case 
of  other  Jews  (Matt.  3:  11),  for  He  was  sinless;  yet  in  another 
view  it  was  much  more  so,  for  He  bore  the  sins  of  all.  As  He  was 
circumcised,  not  from  personal  need,  but  to  bring  our  nature  into 
the  covenant  of  God,  so  He  was  baptized  by  John  to  fulfill  all 
righteousness  for  us  whose  nature  He  truly  bore. 

f  This  is  death  to  the  notion  that  the  Catechism  teaches  the  Cal- 

vinistic  doctrine  of  predestination. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  73 

place  (Heb.  9 :  24),  with  "precious"  blood  (1  Pet.  1 :  19), 
fulfilled  Lev.  16  :  3-19.  The  phrase,  "  by  the  one  sacri- 
fice "  of  His  body,  is  technical  in  the  Catechism,  and  is 
very  often  used  (Ques.  37,  56,  66,  67,  69,  70,  75,  80),  and 
always  in  the  same  sense,  namely,  to  denote  His  great 
high-priestly  act  upon  the  cross. 

Our  eternal  King.  He  rules  us  by  His  word  or  law,  not 
by  force,  but  by  inclining  us  to  obedience  by  His  Spirit. 
He  is  King  not  in  name,  not  in  rhetorical  figure,  but  in 
fact,  in  a  real  kingdom,  with  real  power,  through  real 
means,  and  to  real  results."*"  He  defends  us  against  our 
enemies,  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil,  and  preserves 
us  in  (the  Triglott  omits :  "the  enjoyment  of ")  our  state 
of  redemption  (John  10  :  27,  28).  So  He  fulfills  Ps.  2  :  6  ; 
45  :  1-7  ;  Zech.  9  :  9. 

How  rich  in  meaning  this  name  "  Christ "  is !  In  our 
day  many  Christians,  largely  from  habit  (or  possibly  from 
a  needless  intoning  of  His  humanity) ,  use  only  His  human, 
individual  name,  "  Jesus ;"  but  so  do  Strauss,  Renan,  and 
other  rationalists,  who  deny  His  divinity  and  who,  there- 
fore, refuse  to  give  Him  His  official  title,  "  Christ."  Not 
so  Paul.  Two  hundred  and  twenty-five  times  he  calls  Him 
"Jesus,"  but  always  adds  either  "Lord"  or  "Christ"  (ex- 
cept in  ten  or  twelve  cases,  where  with  special  fitness  he 
says  "Jesus"  only). 

*  For  example,  see  His  victory  over  hades  in  His  resurrection, 
and  over  the  early  persecutions  of  the  Church ;  the  spread  of  Chris- 
tianity; the  victory  of  the  Church  in  conquering  the  Northern  na- 
tions during  the  middle  ages ;  the.  purification  and  reorganization 
of  the  Church  in  the  Reformation ;  the  present  missionary  activity 
of  the  Church,  and  her  sure  glorious  triumph  over  the  kingdoms 
of  this  world  (Eev.  11:  15).  Writing  dates  with  A.  D.,  anno  Do- 
mini, is  a  confession  of  His  Kingship. 


74  See  how  fully  He  meets  our  wants  !  We  are  ignorant, 
and  He  becomes  our  Prophet;  we  are  sinful,  and  He 
makes  atonement  for  us ;  we  are  weak  in  will,  and  He 
rules  us.  These  three  offices  are  continued  in  the  Church, 
not  only  in  the  individual  Christian  (Ques.  32),  for  private 
and  personal  ends,  but  in  a  special  form,  for  general  and 
official  purposes,  namely  in  the  Christian  ministry : — 1) 
The  prophetical,  teaching  the  will  of  God  (Matt.  28  :  19, 20). 

2)  The  priestly,  not  only  offering  pardon  by  the  word,  but 
also  sealing  it  by  the  sacraments  (Rom.  4:11;  Gal.  3  :  27). 

3)  The  kingly,  wielding  real  authority  (Rom.  13:1). 
Church  discipline,  the  royal  side  of  Church  life,  has  bind- 
ing force. 


CHEISTIAN.