Question  32.    But  why  art  thou  called  a  Christian  ? 

Amwei'.  Because  I  am  a  member  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  thus  am 
a  partaker  of  His  anointing,  that  so  I  may  confess  His  name,  and 
present  myself  a  living  sacrifice  of  thankfulness  to  Him :  and  also, 
that  with  a  free  and  good  conscience  I  may  fight  against  sin  and 
Satan  in  this  life,  and  afterwards  reign  with  Him  eternally,  over  all 
creatures. 

Notice  how  closely  this  question  and  answer  correspond 
with  the  last,  both  in  form  and  matter. 

Thou,  is  the  baptized  child,  who  is  personally  ad- 
dressed throughout  the  Catechism,  and  to  whom  alone  both 
questions  and  answers  properly  apply. 

Christia^n.  Having  explained  the  official  name  of  the 
Saviour,  the  Catechism  now  explains  the  name  of  His  peo- 
ple. Christian  is  our  family  name  (Eph.  3  :  15)  for  large 
and  small.  Men  often  pride  themselves  on  their  name 
(family,  order,  party  or  national)  ;  but  none  can  compare 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  75 

with  this.  The  Christian  can  point  to  nobler  ancestral 
deeds,  to  greater  endurance,  to  holier  heroism,  and  to  a 
more  glorious  history  than  any  other  in  the  world.  There- 
fore we  should  know  the  meaning  of  our  family  name. 
How  sad,  that  many  know  neither  its  origin  nor  its  mean- 
ing ! 

1)  Its  origin.  It  was  given  soon  after  the  founding  of 
the  Church  (about  the  year  42),  at  Antioch.*  Here  was 
organized  the  first  Christian  congregation  among  the  Gen- 
tiles (Acts  11 :  19-26),  and  here  the  disciples  were  first 
called  Christians. 

Who  gave  them  this  name  ?  Evidently  not  the  Jews. 
They  would  not  call  a  "  sect "  after  the  sacred  name  of 
their  Messiah.  Hence  they  called  them  Nazarenes  (Acts 
24:  5). 

Perhaps  it  came  from  the  Gentiles.  The  people  of  An- 
tioch were  noted  for  their  low  wit  and  for  the  invention 
of  nick-names  ;  and  possibly  they  named  them  Christians 
in  derision. 

Or  the  name  may  have  been  given  by  either  Jewish  or 
Gentile  Christians,  forming  it  most  naturally  from  "  Christ," 
a  word  which  was  very  prominent  in  Apostolic  preaching. 

At  all  events  it  at  length  became  their  common  and  ac- 
cepted name  (see  Acts  26  :  28  ;  1  Pet.  4  :  16),  and  by  it 
they  have  ever  since  been  called. 

2)  Its  meaning  is  very  rich  and  significant.  It  means 
far  more   than   believer,    disciple,   saint,   brethren,   &c. 

*  Not  Antioch  in  Asia  Minor,  but  the  Capital  of  Syria,  the  seat 
of  the  proconsul,  and  hence  a  noted  centre,  situated  near  the  Medi- 
terranean Sea,  three  hundred  miles  north  of  Jerusalem.  From  here 
Paul  made  his  missionary  journeys  westward.  Hence  this  Antioch 
was  to  the  Gentile  churches  what  Jerusalem  was  to  the  Jewish 
Christian  churches. 


76  NOTES  OX  THE 

Cbristian  of  course  means  "  anointed,"  and  sets  forth  our 
official  character. 

Whv  called.  The  question  is  not,  "  Are  you  a  Chris- 
tian T'  This  is  taken  for  granted  ;  and  the  child  of  the 
Church  is  here  asked,  "  Why  are  you  called  a  Christian  ?" 
The  answer  is  very  full  and  clear. 

Because  I  am  a  member  of  Christ.    Not  just  of  the 

Church,  but  of  Christ  Himself,  having  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
been  ingrafted  into  Him  (Ques.  20).  B7  faith,  first, 
the  faith  of  his  parents  as  confessed  in  his  baptism,  and 
afterward  his  own  faith,  duly  growing  into  full  conscious- 
ness. "  By  faith  "  expresses  man's  act  in  the  matter  of 
salvation.  God's  sacramental  act  is  not  here  named.  As 
the  catechumen  is  a  baptized  child,  it  was  necessary  to 
lay  stress   rather  on  his   act  of  making  Christ  his  own. 

Thus  am  partaker,  of  His  anointing,  namely,  the  Holy 

Ghost  (Acts  2  :  38  ;  1  John  2 :  20,  27).  Our  mgrafbing 
is  thus  at  the  same  time  our  anointing.  The  Holy  Ghost 
sets  us  in  the  three-fold  office  of  Christ,  to  which  also  all 
His  people  are  called.  The  words  prophet,  priest  and 
king  are  not  given,  in  Ques.  32,  but  only  their  sense  and 
substance.  We  are  made  like  Him,  not  only  in  character 
but  also  in  office.  We  are  called  to  do  in  part,  what  He 
did  in  fulness  (Rev.  1 :  6). 

1)  As  prophet,  I  may  confess  His  name,  in  confirma- 
tion, the  Lord's  Supper,  public  worship,  godly  living,  and 
revealing  the  will  of  God  to  others  also  by  teaching  and 
missionary  activity. 

2)  As  priest,  present  myself  a  living  sacrifice,  not  of 

atonement  but  of  joyful  thanksgiving  (Ps.  107 :  22). 
"  Living,"  not  a  dead  Judaism,  nor  a  dead  formalism,  but 
the  warm  devotion  of  the  heart.  As  Christ  gave  Himself 
for  us,  so  must  the  Christian  present  himself  (Rom.  12 :  1, 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  77 

in  body,  soul,  time,  talents,  possessions)  before  the  Lord, 
as  wholly  devoted  to  His  most  blessed  service  and  praise, 
acceptable  to  God  through  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice. 
"  With  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased  "  (Heb.  13  :  16). 

3)  As  king,  fight  •  •  •  and  .  •  •  reign.  We  have  enemies 
within  and  without.  We  dare  not  stand  indiflferent  to 
them,  in  a  false  peace,  but  must  oppose  and  destroy  them. 
On  this  depends  our  reigning  with  Christ.  But  even  be- 
fore we  can  at  all  fight  against  sin  and  Satan,  we  must  be 
delivered  from  the  power  of  darkness  (Col.  1 :  13),  and 
have  a  "  free  conscience."  The  power  of  sin  within  us 
must  first  be  broken  by  grace  divine.  Then,  ruling  our 
spirits  and  fighting  our  spiritual  enemies,  we  will  finally  in 
full  victory  reign  with  Christ.  The  heart  is  a  kingdom 
of  which  He  is  the  rightful  king ;  and  self-rule  is  a  royal 
act  (Prov.  16  :  32  ;  25  :  28). 

In  these  three  offices,  indeed,  man  stood  before  the  fall ; 
but  through  sin  he  lost  the  blessed  position.  He  was  the 
head  and  crown  of  creation ;  the  priest  of  the  world,  through 
whom  alone  it  had  voice  (Ps.  148  :  1-10) ;  having  domi- 
nion also  (Gen.  1 :  26),  To  all  this  Christ  restores  him, 
by  virtue  of  his  anointing  with  the  Holy  Ghost.* 

Hence  he  is  called  a  Christian,  an  anointed  one. 
This  is  just  what  that  beautiful  word  "  christen  "  means, 
as  used  by  many  persons  instead  of  the  word  baptize,  bC' 
cause  in  our  baptism  we  receive  our  anointing  (Acts  2  : 
38).  This  very  word  " christen"  or  anoint  (in  the  Gx-eek 
Chriso)  is   used  in  regard  to  both  Christ  (Luke  4 :  18 ; 

'^  Here  is  declared  the  "  universal  priesthood  "  of  believers,  but 
yet  without  at  all  ignoring,  yea  rather  implying  and  even  demand- 
ing, the  special  priesthood  of  the  holy  ministry  appointed  and  or- 
dained by  Christ  for  the  orderly  service  of  His  .Church. 


78  NOTES  OX  THE 

Acts  4:  27;  10:  38)  and  Christians  (2  Cor.  1 :  21 ;  IJohn 
2:  20). 

Study  the  meaning  of  your  Christian  name,  received  at 
Yonr  baptism,  my  child.  Let  it  always  remind  you  of 
your  anointing  and  holy  calling.  You  haye  a  gracious 
position.  You  stand  in  God's  family.  Believe  this. 
Honor  it.  Be  thankful  to  God  for  it.  And  show  all  this 
faith,  love  and  gratitude,  by  faithfulness  in  your  holy 
three-fold  office.  Because  you  are  a  Christian  in  name, 
position  and  fact,  live  like  one,  even  from  your  very 
childhood. 

But  what  about  bad  boys  and  orirls  in  the  Church? 
They  are  baptized,  but  are  they  Christians  ?  Answer : 
They  are  members  of  the  Church,  standing  in  God's 
family,  but  are  very  unworthy  members,  and  dishonor 
their  heavenly  Father.  A  boy  may  be  very  disobedient, 
but  this  does  not  change  the  fact  that  he  is  a  child. 


THIHTEEXTH    LORD'S   DAY. 


HIS    ONI.Y-BEGOTTEN'    SON.