Question  33.    "Why  is  Christ  called  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God, 
since  we  are  also  the  children  of  God  ? 

Answer.     Because  Christ  alone  is  the  eternal  and  natural  Son  of 
Gt)d;  but  we  are  children  adopted  of  Grod,  by  grace,  for  His  sake. 

The  Creed  calls  Christ  God's  only-begotten  Son,  because 
the  Scriptures  call  Him  this  (John  1 :  14;  3  :  16\     But 

why  ? sLQce  both  angels  (Job  38  :  7)  and  we  (1  John 

3  :  1.2)  are  called  sons  of  God. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  79 

He  is  the  natural  Son  of  God,  absolutely  of  the 
same  nature  and  essence  as  the  Father  (Heb.  1:3;  John 
5 :  26).  See  also  the  Nicene  and  Athanasian  Creeds, 
which  define  this  article  against  the  ancient  heretics. 
"  Of  one  substance  with  the  Father."  Therefore  of  neces- 
sity He  is  also  the  eternal  Son  of  God  (1  John  1:2). 
His  Sonship  lies  in  the  very  essence  of  the  divine  nature. 
But  the  eternal  Sonship  of  Christ  is  a  profound  mystery. 
We  cannot  know  the  full  meaning  of  this  relation,  because 
the  nature  of  the  Godhead  is  utterly  beyond  our  compre- 
hension. Here,  however,  is  taught  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
divinity,  which  is  denied  by  Unitarians  and  others.     But 

we  are  children  adopted  of  God.    Brought  like  orphans 

from  without  into  His  family,  and  so  by  grace  made  to 
bear  the  family  name  and  to  have  the  joys  of  sonship. 
For  His  sake.  We  are  sons,  not  by  merit  or  claim,  not 
even  by  God's  abstract  mercy,  but  because  we  stand  in 
Him  the  Son ;  sons  of  God,  not  through  the  first  Adam, 
but  through  the  Second  (Gal.  4 :  3-7).  Therefore  the  fig- 
ure of  adoption  does  not  fully  explain  our  sonship,  since 
it  implies  no  oneness  of  life.  And  yet  in  the  word  adop- 
tion is  expressed  the  great  difierence  between  Christians 
as  sons  and  Christ  as  the  Son.  He  is  the  Son,  uncreated, 
only-begotten,  and  of  the  same  essence  as  the  Father ;  we 
are  sons,  because  created  anew  in  Christ,  regenerated,  and 
so  stand  in  His  image  (Col.  3  :  10). 


OUR   LORD.