Question  35.  What  is  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "  He  was  con- 
ceived by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary  ?  " 

Answer.  That  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is,  and  continueth  true  and 
eternal  God,  took  upon  Him  the  very  nature  of  man,  of  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  He  might  also  be  the  true  seed  of  David,  like  unto  His  breth- 
ren in  all  things,  sin  excepted. 

Having  explained  the  names  of  the  Holy  Saviour,  the 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  81 

Catecliism  now  takes  up  His  divine-human  person.  This 
order  in  the  Creed  is  very  significant.  What  He  does  for 
us  must  depend  altogether  upon  what  He  is  Himsel£  His 
divine-human  nature  is  the  ground  of  His  redeeming  work. 

Conceived.  Here,  not  on  the  cross,  not  in  the  wilder- 
ness, but  here  begins  His  state  of  humiliation,  in  taking 
human  nature  under  the  consequences  of  sin  (Rom.  8 :  3). 
It  was  a  process :  conceived,  born,  suffered,  crucified,  dead, 
buried  and  descended. 

God's  Eternal  Son,  the  Second  Person  of  the  Godhead. 
This  expresses  His  divinity,  the  highest  possible  form  and 

means  of  redemption.    Took  upon  Him  the  very  nature  of 

man,  the  true  nature  of  man,  not  a  sham  or  make- 
believe,  not  a  mere  Gnostic  appearance,  not  the  form  of 
man  as  the  angels  often  did,  only  to  be  laid  aside  again ; 
but  He  entered  the  race  in  a  real  way,  and  took  on  Him 
our  nature  forever.  Of  the  flesh  and  blood.  This  tells 
how  He  took  our  nature.  The  incarnation  (infleshment) 
of  Christ  was  not  a  mere  theophany,  not  God  coming  down 
to  man,  nor  yet  the  mere  deification  of  man,  but  a  real 
union  of  the  divine  with  the  human. 

Of  the  Virgin  Mary.  Stress  lies  on  the  word  '^  Virgin," 
says  Matthew  (1  :  22,  23,  quoting  Is.  7 :  14),  i.  e.  a  pure 
unmarried  woman,  shall  bring  forth  a  son.  By  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  delicately  stated  to  the  Virgin 
by  the  angel  (Luke  1  :  35).  The  Holy  Ghost,  active  in 
the  first  creation  (Gen.  1:2),  was  of  necessity  active  also 
in  this  greater  second  creation  ;  and  only  so  could  a  sin- 
less one  be  born  *  (John  3  :  6).     "  A  body  hast  thou  pre- 

*  Hence  the  Eomish  doctrine  of  ''  the  immaculate  conception," 

i.  e.  the  sinlessness  of  Mary  as  the  ground  of  the  sinlessness  of  Jesus, 

is  both  unscriptural  and  needless.     It  only  pushes  the  miracle  a 

step  further  back. 
82  pared  me"  (Heb.  10:  5).  The  true  Seed  of  Lavid,  a 
real,  historical  descendant  of  David,*  according  to  plain 
prophecy  (Acts  2  :  30),  and  so  the  seed  of  Abraham,  yea, 
even  of  Adam,f  and  thus  was  at  the  same  time  the  Son  of 
man  and  the  Son  of  God.  As  the  race  was  in  the  first 
Adam,  and  in  him  fell,  so  truly  was  the  race  (our  human 
nature)  in  the  Second  Adam,  unto  newness  of  life. 

Like  unto  His  brethren.  He  was  a  real  man,  hav- 
ing all  the  physical,  mental  and  moral  powers  of  a  true 
manhood,  sending  truly  under  the  curse  of  sin,  in  sufier- 
ing,  conflict  and  death.     He  was  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile, 

but  more a  man.     He  was  of  Jewish  descent,  and 

had  Jewish  training ;  but  He  rose  far  above  the  narrow 
notions,  traditions  and  prejudices  of  His  nation.  Sin  ex- 
cepted. He  was  not  under  original  sin  as  we  are.  His 
manhood  was  pure  and  perfect  as  well  as  real.  Only  as 
holy  could  He  be  the  Redeemer.  Otherwise,  taking  our 
nature  would  have  availed  nothing.  And  then,  too,  His 
sinlessness  must  be  maintained,  through  His  whole  earthly 
life,  amid  real  temptations  and  conflicts  with  the  powers 
of  darkness  (John  8  :  46  ;  Heb.  7 :  25). 

In  Him,  then,  we  find  the  two  essential  qualifications 
for  the  Redeemer  (Ques.  15),  a  sinless  humanity  and  a 
real  divinity  in  one  person.     "  Conceived  by  the  Holy 

*  Very  significant  and  interesting  is  the  fact  that  the  Saviour  of 
the  world  really  had  in  His  veins,  by  direct  descent  and  marriage 
relation,  the  blood  of  both  Gentile  and  Jew.  David  was  of  Jewish- 
Moabite  descent  (Ruth  4 :  9-17). 

f  Hence  the  careful  genealogical  records  of  Christ,  given  by 
Matthew  and  Luke  ;  Matthew  tracing  Him  back  to  Abraham,  be- 
cause he  wrote  mainly  for  the  Jews,  and  Luke  back  to  Adam,  be- 
cause he  wrote  for  the  Gentiles  who  were  not  interested  in  Abra- 
ham. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  83 

Ghost,"  expresses  His  divine  nature  (Luke  1 :  35*).  "  Born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary"  expresses  His  human  nature. 

"Thou  art  the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father. 
When  Thou  tookest  upon  Thee  to  deliver  man, 
Thou  didst  humble  Thyself  to  be  born  of  a  Virgin." 

If  He  had  not  been  human,  He  could  not  have  suffered 
in  our  stead  ;  and  if  He  had  not  been  divine,  He  could 
not  have  atoned  for  sin  and  triumphed  over  death. 

"Oontimietll  .  •  .  eternal  Qod."  His  incarnation 
does  not  change  His  relation  to  the  Father. 


THE   HOLY   CHILD.