Question  36.  What  profit  dost  thou  receive  by  Christ's  holy  con- 
ception and  nativity  ? 

Anstver.  That  He  is  our  Mediator,  and  with  His  innocence  and 
perfect  holiness  covers,  in  the  sight  of  God,  my  sins,  wherein  I  was 
conceived  and  brought  forth. 

What  profit  ?  Ques.  35  speaks  of  the  nature  of  the  in- 
carnation ;  this,  of  its  benefit.  "  Sin  excepted  "  there, 
leads  to  the  word  "  holy  "  here.  So  much  is  commonly 
made  of  the  manhood  and  public  ministry  of  our  Saviour, 
that  this  question  has  great  force.  Holy  Conception  and 
nativity.  For  nativity,  the  Triglott  has  "  birth."  Why 
did  He  become  a  babe  ?  Why  not  enter  the  race  as  a  full- 
grown  man  ?  The  miracle  and  the  mystery  would  not  have 
been  any  greater.  He  is  OTir  Mediator,  not  by  a  sinless 
life,  not  by  an  atoning  death,  not  by  a  triumphant  resur- 
rection, but  now  already  as  a  child,  thirty  years  before  He 

*  "  Shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God,''  not  because  He  is  the  Eter- 
nal Son,  but  because  He  was  born  of  a  Virgin  by  God's  direct  crea- 
tive power.    So  Adam  is  called  the  son  of  God  (Luke  3  :  38). 


84  had  spoken  a  public  word.  His  redeeming  work  began, 
not  at  His  baptism,*  but  at  His  conception,  "  wherein  He 
lifted  our  nature  out  of  sinfulness  to  a  holy  state,  and  so 
became  able  to  give  us  a  new  and  holy  life."  It  began 
where  our  sinfulness  begins,  and  the  remedy  is  thus  as 
deep  as  the  disease.  In  this  view  it  was  just  as  needful  for 
Him  to  be  in  the  womb  of  Mary  as  to  be  in  hades.     His 

innocence  and  perfect  holiness  covers ...  my  sins.    We 

are  saved,  not  by  His  words,  nor  works,  nor  spotless  ex- 
ample, but  by  His  divine-human  person  (1  John  5  :  11, 
12).  Therefore  He  entered  the  race  as  an  infant,  covering 
our  whole  sinful  life  with  His  redeeming  work.  Sin  does 
not  enter  our  nature  at  ten  or  five,  but  with  the  beginning 
of  life.  There  His  redemption  must  begin.  This  is  the 
meaning  of  His  holy  infancy.  Then,  too.  His  truly  human 
infancy  assures  us  of  his  true  humanity.  He  came  not  as 
a  full-grown  man,  but  in  the  course  of  common  birth,  link- 
ing Himself  livingly  with  the  race,  and  subject  to  all  the 
conditions  of  our  earthly  life  through  thirty-three  years. 

And  to  this  same  blessed  Saviour,  who  thus  became  a 
little  child,  who  made  so  much  of  children,  and  who  now 
takes  them  into  His  kingdom  (more  blessed  than  in  His 
arms),  you  should  give  yourselves,  ye  anointed  ones,  with 
earnest  love  in  Christian  living. 


FIFTEEIS^TH    LORB'S    DAY. 


HE   SUFFEEED.