Question  37.  What  dost  thou  understand  by  the  words,  "He 
suffered  ? 

*  How  could  these  thirty  years  of  His  life  be  a  blank?  Or  at 
most  only  a  physical  and  mental  preparation  for  His  life-work  ? 
God  wastes  nothing. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  85 

Answer.  That  He,  all  the  time  He  lived  on  earth,  but  especially 
at  the  end  of  His  life,  sustained  in  body  and  soul,  the  wrath  of  God 
against  the  sins  of  all  mankind ;  that  so  by  His  passion,  as  the  only 
propitiatory  sacrifice,  He  might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from 
everlasting  damnation ;  and  obtain  for  us  the  favor  of  God,  right- 
eousness, and  eternal  life. 

He  STlffered'  Very  significantly  the  Catechism  treats 
His  innocence  just  before  His  sufferings.  Very  signifi- 
cantly, too,  "  suffered  "  comes  right  after  "  born."  Of 
course,  between  His  birth  and  final  suffering  lie  His  boy- 
hood, manhood,  baptism,  fasting,  temptation,  miracles  and 
teaching.  His  redeeming  work  was  not  one  act  but  many ; 
and  beautifully  does  the  Church  in  her  solemn  Litany 
plead  before  the  Father  the  rich  merit  of  all  these  acts. 

All  the  time  He  lived  on  earth.  "Suffered"  comes  im- 
mediately after  "born,"  because  He  took  upon  Him  our 
nature  under  the  curse  and  consequences  of  sin,  and  these 
pressed  upon  Him  from  first  to  last.  Prophecy  represents 
Him  as  a  suffering  Saviour  (Gen.  3  :  15  ;  Ps.  22:  1-31 ; 
Is.  53 :  1-12).  In  fulfillment  of  all  this  we  find  Him  suffer- 
ing in  childhood,  in  youth  and  in  manhood.  Exile,  pov- 
erty, toil,  and  the  "  contradiction  of  sinners,"  with  sor- 
rows and  griefs  untold,  filled  His  thirty  years  at  Nazareth. 
These  sufferings  of  His  private  life  were  neither  acci- 
dental, nor  without  efficacy,  but  part  of  His  redeeming 
work. 

Especially  at  the  end  of  His  life.    Ilis  entrance  upon 

His  public  ministry,  at  His  baptism,  was,  as  compared 
with  what  went  before,  only  the  beginning  of  sorrows. 
The  devil  tempted  Him.  The  Jews  hated  Him.  His 
friends  misunderstood  Him.  He  was  reviled,  mocked, 
doubted,  threatened  and  despised,  and  all  this  was  long 
before  His  Crucifixion. 


86  The  Crucifixion  was  only  the  fearful  intensification  of 
all  that  went  before.  The  powers  of  darkness  then  became 
more  malignant  and  fierce.  How  deeply  the  soul  of  the 
dear  Redeemer  must  have  suffered  during  the  last  week 
of  His  life !  The  story  is  so  familiar  that  we  fail  to  ap- 
preciate it  as  we  should. 

In  body.  Every  part  was  wronged.  On  His  head  was 
a  crown  of  thorns.  In  His  hand  was  a  mock  sceptre. 
His  mouth  tasted  the  vinegar  and  gall.  His  ear  heard  the 
mocking,  "Hail,  King."  The  eye  saw  the  hypocritical 
bowing.  His  cheek  received  their  shameful  blows.  His 
side  was  pierced  with  a  spear,  and  His  holy  feet  were 
nailed  to  the  cross.  And  SOUl.  His  holy  soul  was  filled 
with  deepest  anguish  (Matt.  27:  46).  Sustained  the 
wrath  of  G"Od-  He  bore  the  inexpressible  punishment  of 
sin.  Only  by  the  power  of  His  Godhead  could  He  do 
this  (Ques.  17).  The  darkness  which  covered  the  earth 
for  three  hours  (Matt.  27 :  45)  was  the  shadow  of  God's 
wrath,  not  upon  those  around  the  cross,  but  upon  His 
only-begotten  Son  who  was  then  bearing  the  whole  burden 

of  the  curse.    Against  the  sins  of  all  mankind-   No  room 

here  for  the  thought  of  a  limited  atonement.  Redemption 
must  be  as  broad  as  the  ruin  (Rom.  5  :  18,  19 ;  2  Cor.  5  : 
14;  Heb.  2:  9).  Of  course  this  objective  redemption 
must  not  be  confounded  (as  Universalists  do)  with  its 
actualization  (see  Ques.  20).  The  Catechism  here  speaks 
of  what  God  has  done,  not  of  what  man  must  do.  That 
so.  Here  begins  the  second  part  of  this  answer,  namely, 
stating  the  object  of  His  sufferings.  By  His  paSSion,  or 
suffering,  even  unto  death.  Propitiatory  means  atoning, 
reconciling  the  Father  (1  John  2:2).  The  only  sacrifice. 
The  only  one,  because  of  infinite  efiicacy,  giving  value  to 
all  typical  sacrifices  before  it,  and  forbidding  any  repeti- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  87 

tion  afterward  (Ques.  80).  Hence  He  is  called  "  our  only 
High  Priest"  (Ques.  31).    Now  to  what  end  was  all  this? 

Negatively,  that  He  might  redeem  ....  from  everlast- 
ing damnation-  His  sufferings  were  not  just  so  much 
price  paid  to  satisfy  divine  justice  [because  if  His  work 
had  stopped  with  His  death,  redemption  would  not  have 
been  secured  (1  Cor.  15  :  17)] ;  but  rather  the  result  of^ 
terrible  conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness.  Having 
taken  our  place,  He  must  bear  our  curse  (Gal.  3:  10, 13). 
Obtain  the  favor  of  God.  This  is  the  positive  side  of  re- 
demption, the  result  of  a  full  victory  over  death  and  hell. 
"  Righteousness  and  eternal  life "  are  in  Him,  and  they 
become  ours  only  as  we  stand  in  Christ,  ingrafted  into 
Him  and  so  made  partakers  of  His  benefits  (2  Cor.  5 : 
21). 


UNDER    PONTIUS   PILATE.