Question  38.    Why  did  He  suffer  under  Pontius  Pilate,  as  His 


judge 


? 


Answer.  That  He,  being  innocent,  and  yet  condemned  by  a  tem- 
poral judge,  might  thereby  free  us  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God, 
to  which  we  were  exposed. 

Pontius  Pilate,  the  Roman  Governor  of  Judea  *  from 
A.  D.  26  to  A.  D.  36.  His  exact  title  is  Procurator, 
an  officer  sent  by  a  Roman  Emperor  to  a  subject  province, 
to  have  charge  of  the  imperial  revenues,  and  to  judge  the 
causes  connected  with  it.     Within  his  reign  fell  Christ's 

*  Palestine  was  divided  into  three  districts.  Pilate  ruled  over 
Judea,  and  Herod  over  Galilee.  Both  were  under  the  Roman  Em- 
peror Tiberius.  This  helps  us  to  understand  their  jealousy,  quar- 
rel and  enmity  (Luke  23:  12).  The  words  ''Pontius  Pilate,"  may 
possibly  also  point  back  to  Gen.  49 :  10,  as  its  fulfilment. 


88  •whole  public  ministry.  In  these  words  the  Creed  gives 
the  time  of  this  event.  This  was  the  common  way  of 
fixing  dates  in  ancient  writings  (Ez.  1:1;  Esth.  1:1; 
Jer.  32:  1;  Luke  3:  1).  Condemned.  The  name  of 
Pilate  is  far  more,  however,  than  a  mere  date.  Christ 
might  have  been  slain  by  an  irresponsible  mob,  or  by  the 
Jews,  but  with  far  less  meaning  than  by  the  act  of  Pilate. 
The  Jewish  Sanhedrim  first  condemned  Him ;  and  then 
Pilate,  taking  up  their  sentence  in  his  own,  condemned 
Him.  Thus  not  only  Jews  but  also  Gentiles  consented 
unto  His  death.  The  sentence  of  Pilate  was  thus  the  offi- 
cial sentence  of  the  whole  world  upon  the  world's  Re- 
deemer. And  He  was  the  officer  of  God  as  well  as  the 
mouthpiece  of  man.  Being  innocent.  See  Matt.  27 : 
4,  24 ;  John  18  :  38.  Bearing  this  condemnation  of  the 
world,  and  the  wrath  of  God,  He  as  our  innocent  and 
victorious  substitute  frees  us  from  the  severe  judgment  of 
God  (Is.  53:  5). 


THE    MEAXENG   OF   HIS   CRUCIFIXION.