Question  39.  Is  there  anything  more  in  His  being  crucified,  than 
if  He  had  died  some  other  death  ? 

Answer.  Yes  [there  is]  ;  for  thereby  I  am  assured  that  He  took 
on  Him  the  curse  which  lay  upon  me ;  for  the  death  of  the  cross 
was  accursed  of  God. 

Some  other  death,  For  example  (besides  poisoning, 
drowning,  starving,  &c.)  there  were  several  common  forms 
of  public  death.  He  might  have  been  beheaded,  as  was 
the  apostle  James  (Acts  12 :  2),  or  stoned  to  death,  as 
was  Stephen  (Acts  7 :  58) ;  but  this  would  have  broken 
His  bones,  and  both  the  law  and  the  prophet  said  that 
not  a  bone  of  the  paschal  lamb  dare  be  broken  (Ex.  12 : 
46 ;  Ps.  34 :  20).    Or  burned  (Gen.  38  :  24  ;  Lev.  21 :  9)  ; 


HEIDELBERG  CxVTECHISM.  89 

but  here  there  would  have  been  no  shedding  of  blood ;  and 
as  the  flesh  of  the  paschal  Iamb  had  to  be  eaten  (Ex.  12  : 
8),  burning  would  have  been  a  very  unbecoming  death  for 
the  true  paschal  Lamb. 

A  fourth  form  of  public  death  at  that  time  was  cruci- 
fixion, namely,  hanging  up  alive  to  die  in  slow  agony. 

This  was  not  a  Jewish  punishment.  Sometimes,  when 
one  had  been  put  to  death  in  some  other  way,  his  body 
was  then  hung  up  before  the  eyes  of  the  world  as  a  dis- 
grace and  warning  (Joshua  10 :  26) ;  but  even  then  his 
body  dared  hang  only  till  evening  (Deut.  21 :  23).  As 
this  hanging  was  commonly  on  a  tree,  and  as  Jesus  hung 
on  the  cross,  the  Apostles  use  both  words  in  regard  to  Him 
(Acts  5:  30;  Phil.  2:  8).  Crucifixion  was  a  heathen  or 
Gentile  punishment.  So  the  Jews  brought  Jesus  to  His 
death,  but  the  Gentiles  gave  the  mode  of  death. 

Crucifixion  was  common  among  the  Egyptians  (Gen. 
40:  19)  and  Persians  (Ezra  6 :  11 ;  Esther  7 :  9),  and  at 
a  later  day  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  Among  the 
Romans  it  was  only  for  slaves,  robbers,  rebels  and  prison- 
ers, for  men  of  the  worst  class. 

Why  now,  was  Jesus  crucified  ?  Why  was  this  a  spe- 
cially fit  death  for  the  Saviour  of  the  world  ? 

1.)  It  met  all  the  demands  of  the  ceremonial  law,  in  re- 
gard to  the  ofiering  of  the  paschal  Lamb.  Blood  was 
shed,  no  bone  was  broken,  and  the  flesh  was  not  mangled. 

2.)  It  met  all  the  demands  of  the  moral  law.  "  The 
soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die"  (Ezek.  18:  20).  As  on 
Him  was  laid  the  iniquity  of  all  (Is.  53 :  6),  He  being 
made  a  curse  or  sin-ofiering  for  us  (Gal.  3 :  13 ;  2  Cor.  5  : 
21),  His  own-  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the 
tree  (1  Pet.  2 :  24),  and  so  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of 
the  law. 


90  3)  Then,  too,  this  most  ignominious  and  dreadful  death 
best  expressed  the  extreme  wrath  of  God  against  sin ;  and 
gave  the  devil  all  possible  opportunity  to  tempt  and  try 
the  Redeemer,  because  its  inexpressible  agony  was  so 
lengthened  out ;  while  at  the  same  time  the  deepest  hate 
in  the  natural  heart  against  God  and  His  holiness,  could 
express  itself  in  the  cruelty,  pain  and  shame  of  the  cross. 

There  was,  therefore,  much  more  in  being  crucified  than 
if  He  had  died  some  other  death,  because  no  other  death 
could  so  fully  have  met  all  the  demands  of  the  case ;  and 
He,  bearing  the  cross  bore  also  my  curse,  and  thus  made 
me  free.  His  work  on  the  cross,  then,  needs  no  repetition, 
as  Rome  teaches. 


SIXTEEIS^TH    liORD'S    DAY. 


HIS   DEATH  AND   BURIAL.