Question  43.  What  further  benefit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacri- 
fice and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ? 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  91 

Ansicer.  That  by  virtue  thereof  our  old  man  is  crucified,  dead, 
and  buried  with  him;  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh 
may  no  more  reign  in  us,  but  that  we  may  otier  ourselves  unto  Him 
a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving. 

1)  Lead,  says  the  Creed.  "Why?"  asks  the  Catechism. 
His  death  was  necessary,  as  the  penalty  of  sin.  It  was 
only  the  end  of  what  was  in  Him  and  upon  Him  from  the 
beginning.  Having  taken  our  place,  death  ran  through 
His  whole  suffering  life.  The  cross  was  only  its  fulness. 
The  justice  and  truth  of  God,  God's  holy  hatred  of 
sin,  and  His  law  against  sin  (Gen.  2 :  17),  required  the 
death  of  the  Eedeemer.  Then,  too,  how  else  could  He 
enter  truly  into  the  kingdom  of  death,  to  break  its  power 
and  become  victorious  ?  Here,  too,  His  death  has  rich 
meaning. 

2)  Why  was  He  also  buried?  To  prove,  or  to  show, 
that  He  was  really  dead — not  in  a  swoon.  His  death  must 
be  as  real  as  His  birth.  The  proof  lies  in  this,  that  His 
enemies  declared  Him  dead.     When  Joseph  of  Arimathea 

.asked  for  the  body,  Pilate  was  astonished  to  hear  He  was 
already  dead  (Mark  15:  42-45).  Those  crucified  lingered 
sometimes  two,  three,  or  even  five  days ;  whereas  Jesus  had 
been  on  the  cross  only  nine  hours  at  most.  Hence,  the 
surprise  of  Pilate.  His  certain  death  also  makes  His  re- 
surrection credible.  Hence,  too,  we  bury  our  dead,  not 
burn  them.  Cremation  is  of  heathen  origin  and  repulsive. 
The  Jews  always  buried.     So  have  Christians  done. 

3)  Why  must  we  also  die  ?  The  force  of  this  question 
lies  in  the  fact  that  He  died  in  our  stead ;  and  if 'He  freed 
us  from  the  wrath  of  God  why  not  also  from  death  ?  Why 
must  we  die?  Not  to  satisfy  for  our  sins, — He  did  that 
(Ques.  40), — but,  negatively,  to  abolish  sin,  and,  positively, 
to  pass  into  the  Church  triumphant.     His  victory  over 


92  death  is  repeated  in  us,  but  by  a  gracious  process,  which 
will  be  complete  only  at  the  resurrection ;  but  the  death  of 
the  Christian  is  a  great  epoch  in  this  victorious  process, 
"a  dying  to  sins,"  says  the  Triglott,  laying  aside  the  old 
fallen  order  of  life,  and  ceasing  to  be  subject  to  the  bond- 
age of  corruption ;  yea,  more,  it  is  also,  positively,  a  pass- 
age into  eternal  life,  a  rising  to  a  higher  state  of  being. 
Hence  death  is  even  to  be  desired  (Phil.  1 :  23). 

4)  What  further  benefit  ?  Besides  those  mentioned  in 
Ques.  37-42.  Our  old  man,  the  flesh,  our  depraved 
human  nature  which  He  had.  Is  crucified,  dead  and 
buried  with  Him.  Christ  standing  in  our  fallen  nature, 
and  bearing  the  curse,  broke  the  power  of  sin,  gained  an 
eternal  victory  over  it,  and  so  made  a  like  process  possible 
in  us  (Gal.  5 :  24).  This  process  is  "  by  His  power"  (says 
the  Triglott  for,  "  by  virtue  thereof").  What  came  to 
pass  in  Him,  must  come  to  pass  in  ev-ery  Christian  (Rom. 

8 :  2).    Corrupt  inclinations .  •  -  no  more  reign  in  us, 

as  they  once  did.  The  flesh,  the  old  evil  nature,  will 
still  trouble  us,  but  does  not  control  us.  Grace,  not  sin, 
is  now  the  controlling  power,  and  so  we  are  made  able  to 

offer  unto  Him  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving.    This  whole 

subject — ^the  crucifixion  of  the  old  nature,  the  life  of  grace, 
and  the  thankful  sacrifice  of  the  new  man — is  beautifully 
set  forth  in  Rom.  6  :  6-14  and  2  Cor.  5  :  14,  15.  (In  the 
latter  passage,  "  then  were  all  dead  "  should  read,  "  then 
all  died ;"  i.  e.,  when  Christ  died  the  race  died,  because  He 
was  in  our  stead.) 


THE   DESCENT   INTO   HADES.