Question  44.     "Why  is  there  added,  "  He  descended  into  hell  ?" 

Answer.     That  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  assured,  and 
wholly  comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  His 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  93 

inexpressible  anguish,  pains,  terrors,  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which 
He  was  plunged  during  all  His  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the 
cross,  hath  delivered  me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

Into  hell.  Why  say  "  hades  "  rather  than  "  hell  "?  Be- 
cause, it  is  not  so  liable  to  be  misunderstood.  The  word 
"  hell  "  now  has  its  own  fixed  well-known  sense,  namely 
the  place  of  the  lost,  which,  however,  is  not  the  meaning 
of  "  hades."  Then,  too,  "  hades  "  is  nearer  the  original, 
being  an  Anglicized  Greek  word,  like  baptize,  pentecost, 
Christ  and  angel. 

This  article  was  inserted  in  the  Creed  in  the  fourth  Cen- 
tury, against  the  heresy  of  the  Apollinarians.  They  de- 
nied that  Christ  had  a  human  soul.  If  so,  then  He  died 
not,  and  what  becomes  of  the  atonement  ?  Now  to  lay 
stress  on  His  death,  this  article  was  added,  expressing  a 
real  separation  of  soul  and  body.  To  some  ears  it  sounds 
harsh,  and  is  very  offensive ;  but  surely  such  forget  that 
Peter  uses  this  very  word  in  Acts  2  :  31,  where  he  quotes 
and  explains  Ps.  16  :  10. 

The  doctrine  of  Christ's  descent  is,  therefore,  not  a  mere 
matter  of  curiosity  or  speculation,  but  of  Christian  faith ; 
and  though  difficult,*  we  should  yet  try  to  gain  some  de- 
finite idea  of  its  meaning. 

Hades  cannot  mean  the  grave,  for  this  is  spoken  of  in 
"  buried " ;  nor  can  it  mean  His  sufferings,  for  they  are 
expressed  in  the  words  "  He  suffered."  Hades  must  mean 
something  quite  different  from  both,  because  the  Creed, 
being  a  very  brief  confession  of  faith,  cannot  have  in  it 
any  repetition. 

Hades,  in  the  New  Testament,  like  the  Hebrew  word 

*  Though  not  more  difficult  than  other  articles  of  the  Creed. 
The  whole  Creed  is  for  faith,  because  every  part  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  reason. 


94  Sheol,  so  much  used  in  the  Old  Testament,  means  the 
realm  of  death,  the  kingdom*  of  the  dead,  the  whole 
world  of  departed  spirits,  good  and  bad,  held  under  the 
power  of  death. 

Of  course,  it  includes  the  idea  of  place,  for  the  souls  of 
the  dead  must  be  somewhere ;  but,  we  cannot  locate  it. 
Indeed  much  of  the  difficulty  in  understanding  this  article 
of  the  Creed  comes  from  laying  too  much  stress  on  the  idea 
of  place,  thinking  of  it  as  somewhere  between  what  we  call 
heaven  and  hell,  and  associating  with  it  the  repulsive  error 
of  purgatory. 

Into  this  place  and  state  of  the  dead  the  soul  of  Christ 
went.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell  "  (hades).  It 
was  there,  but  could  not  be  held  there,  says  Peter  (Acts 
2:  24-31). 

He  descended.  What  for  ?  The  Creed  does  not  tell  us. 
Of  course  not.  Nor  does  it  tell  us  why  He  was  born.  It 
is  a  confession,  not  a  teacher. 

And  the  Catechism  does  not  say  that  He  did  anything 
there,  but  only  that  this  article  expresses  His  dreadful 
sufferings  before  and  during  the  crucifixion,  which  secured 
our  deliverance  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell ;  so 
that  in  our  greatest  temptations,  for  example  when  led  to 
doubt  our  salvation,  we  may  find  comfort  in  this  assur- 
ance that  Christ  suffered  in  full  in  our  stead,  and  therefore 
God  will  not  demand  a  second  endurance  from  us  His 
children.  This  is  a  most  blessed  truth,  but  one  hardly  to 
be  expected  again  at  this  point,  having  been  fully  given  in 
Ques.  37-39. 

The  fact  is,  many  theologians  of  the  Reformation  feared 
to  give  this  article  its  natural  interpretation,  lest  they 

*  The  modern  German,  in  the  Triglott,  says :  *'  Hinahgejahren  in 
das  Todtenreich." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  ^5 

might  seem  to  encourage  the  Romish  error  of  purgatory  ; 
and  so  they  called  it  figurative,  a  spiritual  descent.  So 
Calvin's  Catechism  does  ;  and  Ursiuus  was  a  disciple  of 
Calvin.  But  Ebrard  (Dogmatics  II.,  §  419j  says  that  the 
Heidelberg  Catechism  is  the  only  Reformed  Confession 
that  gives  this  view.  Of  course  He  thus  suflfered  on  the 
cross ;  but  while  His  body  was  in  the  grave,  His  soul  was 
in  "  hades  "  (Acts  2 :  31).     Now  why  ? 

1)  It  was  the  end  of  His  humiliation.  His  humiliation 
was  a  process  (conceived,  born,  suffered,  dead,  buried,  de- 
scended), reaching  down  to  the  lowest  possible  consequences 
of  sin.  Where  death  carries  us,  it  must  carry  Him,  and 
there  in  the  depths  must  He  exhaust  its  power.  His  de- 
scent was  a  down-going,  not  in  the  sense  of  local  direction, 
but  as  part  of  the  process  of  humiliation.  His  redeeming 
work  began  where  our  want  begins,  and  of  course  must 
cover  our  whole  want.  Just  as  His  body  went  into  the 
grave,  where  the  bodies  of  all  the  dead  go,  so  His  soul 
went  into  the  place  and  state  of  the  dead.  Having  taken 
upon  Him  our  nature,  to  redeem  us  from  the  power  of  sin, 
He  bore  the  curse  which  lay  upon  us,  and  of  necessity  was 
carried  by  it  into  hades. 

2)  It  was  the  beginning  of  His  exaltation.  There  was 
the  crisis,  the  meeting  point  of  His  two  states.  In  that 
kingdom  of  death  He  conquered.  There  the  conflict  came  to 
an  end.  He  gained  victory  after  victory,  while  in  the  flesh ; 
but  this  last  and  absolutely  necessary  one  could  be  gained 
only  by  going  into  the  enemy's  country,*  and  hence  He  en- 
tered hades  as  a  conqueror  enters  a  Capital.  There  "hav- 
ing spoiled!  principalities  and  powers,"  having  broken 

*  As  the  devil  entered  man's  kingdom,  for  the  overthrow  of  the 
race,  so  Christ  entered  his  kingdom  for  its  overthrow. 

t  A  military  term,  meaning  to  take  the  armor  of  a  defeated  enemy. 


96  the  power  of  Satan  and  his  hosts  in  a  complete  victory 
over  them,  "He  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing 
over  them  in  it,"  first  of  all  in  that  world  of  spirits,  and 
afterwards  on  the  earth  (Col.  2 :  15).  At  His  death,  no 
doubt,  the  whole  kingdom  of  Satan  rejoiced  in  what  seemed 
yictory ;  but  not  so  when  with  divine  majesty  He  "  preached 
unto  the  spirits  in  prison"  (1  Pet.  3 :  19},  that  is,  announced 
— the  Greek  word  here  translated  "  preached  "  signifies  to 
herald,  to  grive  tidings — to  the  whole  kinofdom  of  the  dead 
the  joyful  fact  that  His  redeeming  work  was  now  about  to 
be  completed  in  His  resui-rectiou. 

Thus  the  descent  of  Christ  into  hades  must  evidently 
mean  more  than  any  thing  that  goes  before  it  in  the  Creed. 
His  resurrection  was  not  a  mere  risinof  of  bodv,  but  a  real 
union  of  soul  and  body  sundered  in  death  ;  and  this  union 
was  possible  only  through  a  real  victory  of  His  soul  over 
the  death-power — not  on  the  cross  by  sufferings,  not  in  the 
grave  by  bui'ial,  but  in  the  world  of  spirits  by  "spoiling" 
principalities.  Xor  was  this  victory  for  Himself  as  an  in- 
dividual, but  for  the  race.     We  triumphed  in  Him. 


sett:xteexth  eord's  dat. 


THE    RESITREECTIOX    OF    CHRIST.