Question  45.    THiat  doth  the  resurrection  of  Christ  profit  us  ? 

Ansicer.  First :  by  His  resurrection  He  hath  overcome  death, 
that  He  might  make  us  partakers  of  that  righteousness  which  He 
had  purchased  for  us  by  His  death.  Secondly,  we  are  also  by  His 
power  raised  up  to  a  new  life.  And  lastly,  the  resurrection  of 
Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of  our  blessed  resurrection. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  97 

The  first  Christians  called  Easter  "the  day  of  joy." 
The  night  of  weeping  is  past ;  the  morning  of  gladness  has 
come.  Thanks  be  to  God  which  giveth  us  the  victory 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  third  day  He  rose  from  the  dead.    No  one  saw 

Him  rise,  but  "He  showed  Himself  alive  after  His  passion 
by  many  infallible  proofs"  (Acts  1 :  3).  He  several  times 
appeared  to  the  disciples  (1  Cor.  15  :  5-7).  He  ate  before 
them  (Acts  10 :  41),  and  His  marked  hands  and  side  as- 
sured them  of  His  identity.  His  enemies  having  declared 
Him  dead  (Mark  15:  44,  45),  He  was  buried  in  a  new 
tomb,  "  wherein  never  man  before  was  laid  "  (Luke  23 : 
53),  lest  it  be  said  that  another  had  risen,  or  that  He  had 
risen  by  touching  the  bones  of  a  prophet  (2  Kg.  13 :  21). 
This  tomb  was  hewn  out  of  a  rock.  It  had  only  one  en- 
trance, and  this  was  sealed  and  guarded  by  His  enemies ; 
so  that  the  body  could  not  be  stolen. 

The  certainty  of  His  resurrection,  however,  for  Christian 
faith,  lies  not  so  much  in  these  outward  circumstances,  as 
in  His  own  divine -human  person.  "  It  was  not  possible 
that  He  should  be  holden  of  it,"  says  Peter  (Acts  2 :  24), 
i.  e.,  in  the  bonds  of  death,  because  He,  the  eternal  Son  of 
God,  had  broken  the  power  of  death. 

Profit  US.  "What  are  the  benefits  of  His  resurrection  ? 
Three :  victory  over  death,  new  life  for  the  race,  and  as- 
surance of  our  resurrection. 

1)  He  hath  overcome  death,  the  death-power,  the  sin- 
disease,  which  is  lodged  in  our  fallen  nature,  and  to 
which  He  was  in  a  real  way  subject;  yea,  more,  the  realm 
of  death  and  the  state  of  the  dead  into  which  sin  carried 
Him.  He  not  only  died  for  our  sins,  but  also  rose  for  our 
justification  (Kom.  4 :  25).  If  He  had  been  held  under 
the  power  of  death,  He  could  not  have  been  our  Redeemer 


98  (1  Cor.  15 :  1-20).  He  must  not  only  bear  the  "wratli  of 
God,  but  also  rise  above  it.  He  must  destroy  the  power 
of  sin,  and  so  coming  forth  conqueror  of  death,  restore  to 
us  righteousness  and  life  (Rev.  1  :  18).  Without  the  re- 
surrection, His  death  would  have  availed  us  nothincr. 
Hence  His  resurrection  confirmed  every  thing  that  went 
before.  And  just  because  of  the  central  and  fundamental 
character  of  His  resurrection,  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon 
it  in  the  preaching  and  writing  of  the  Apostles. 

2)  We  are  also . . .  raised  up  to  a  new  life.  His  resur- 
rection was  not  simply  a  restoration  to  His  former  state, 
like  that  of  Lazarus  (John  11 :  44),  but  a  real  glorification 
of  our  nature.  This  we  see  in  His  resurrection  body,  which 
was  very  difierent  from  His  crucifixion  body.  He  could 
not  again  have  been  crucified,  nor  could  He  in  any  way 
have  suffered  (Rom.  6:9).  He  was  not  subject  to  matter, 
as  before  (John  20  :  19).  His  glorified  body  became  for 
us  a  fountain  of  life  and  immortality  (2  Tim.  1:10;  1  John 
5:11, 12),  which  He  makes  flow  over  to  us  in  His  Church. 
Thus  "  we  (not  as  individuals,  but  our  human  nature  in 
Him)  are  also  by  His  power  (in  the  resurrection)  raised  up 
to  a  new  life." 

3)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  STlie  pledge  of  OUT 
Tblessed  resinrection.  These  three  benefits  are  so  closely 
related  that  they  cannot  be  separated.  FuU  victory  over 
death  secures  righteousness,  life  and  a  blessed  resurrection 
for  us.  His  triumphant  resurrection  became  thus  the  sure 
pledge  of  our  final  triumph  in  Him.  He  is  the  first-fruits 
(1  Cor.  15 :  20).  We  also  shall  rise,  being  partakers  of 
His  blessed  life. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  99 


EIGHTEENTH  liORD'S  DAY. 


THE   ASCENSION   OF   CHRIST.