Question  46.      How  dost  thou  understand  these  words,  "He  as- 
cended into  heaven?" 

Answer.  That  Christ,  in  sight  of  His  disciples,  was  taken  up 
from  the  earth  into  heaven ;  and  that  He  continues  there  for  our 
interest,  until  He  come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

His  ascension  was  forty  days  after  His  resurrection. 
Why  this  delay  ?     For  three  reasons : — 

1)  To  convince  the  disciples  of  the  reality  of  His  resur- 
rection. Surprises  (sudden  wealth,  poverty,  sickness  or 
death)  are  hard  to  realize.  His  disciples  did  not  at  first 
believe  His  resurrection  (Mark  16 :  11-14)  ;  and  even 
after  believing  it,  they  needed  time  clearly  to  realize  it. 
Their  difficulty,  however,  was  not  a  mere  surprise,  an  un- 
expected fact,  but  rather  this,  that  He  in  His  glorified 
state  was  so  difierent  from  His  previous  state.  They  did 
not  now  know  Him  (John  20:  14;  Luke  24:  16).  In- 
deed He  was  not  now  as  before  an  object  of  bodily  sense, 
not  for  sight,  but  for  faith.  Therefore,  in  mercy,  "  He 
showed  Himself  alive  after  His  passion  by  many  infallible 
proofs  "  (Acts  1  :  3).  What  proofs  ?  They  saw  Him  (1 
Cor.  15 :  5-8).  He  spake  and  ate  with  them  (Luke  24 : 
43;  Acts  10:  41).  He  showed  them  His  wounds  (John 
20:  27).   He  did  miracles  before  them  (John  21 :  10-12). 

2)  To  prepare  them  still  further  for  their  ministry.  He 
had  taught  them  three  years,  but  had  to  withhold  many 
things  until  they  could  receive  them  (John  16  :  12) — in 


100  regard  to  Himself,  (Luke  24  :  27,  44 — 47),  and  in  regard 
to  themselves  and  their  work  (Acts  1 ;  4,  5  ;  Matt.  28  :  l^^- 
20).     These  things  they  could  now  receive. 

3)  Also  for  His  own  sake  did  He  thus  delay  forty  days 
after  His  resurrection.  This  is  plain  from  the  fact,  that 
He  was  so  little  with  the  disciples,  and  so  much  alone.  In 
His  life  there  was  nothing  sudden  or  abrupt.  His  birth, 
growth,  teaching,  suffering,  death  and  victory  were  each 
and  all  gradual  in  their  happening.  So  must  it  be  ^ith 
His  ascension.  We  know  not  just  what  change  took  place 
in  Him,  but  we  can  see  the  fitness  of  the  delay.  As  there 
were  forty  days  between  His  birth  and  His  presentation  in 
the  temple  (Luke  2  :  22),  so  on  the  fortieth  day  after  His 
resurrection  (His  second  nativity)  He  entered  the  temple 
not  made  ^ith  hands  (Heb.  9-24). 

Hs  ascended-  Sis  ascension  was  foretold  (Ps.  24 :  7- 
10,  68  :  18  ;  compare  Eph.  4 :  8-10).  The  account  is 
given  in  Luke  24  :  50,  51,  and  Acts  1  :  1-12.  St.  Luke 
wrote  both  these  books,  the  Life  of  Christ  and  the  History 
of  the  Church,  beginning  Acts  where  he  closed  his  Gospel, 
namely  with  an  account  of  the  Ascension. 

It  was  "in  sight  of  His  disciples,"  showing  them  their 
great  mistake  in  expecting  Him  to  re-establish  the  ancient 
earthly  kingdom  of  David  (Acts  1 :  6).  Into  heaven, 
beyond  this  visible  order  of  being  (Eph.  4 :  10),  into 
a  higher,  the  third  heaven  (2  Cor.  12 :  2).  Wliile  we 
may  correctly  say  that  His  ascension  was  a  real,  bodily, 
local  change,  a  going  from  one  place  to  another  (John  16: 
28  ;  Acts  1 :  9),  we  must  yet  add  that  Heaven  here  means 
more  than  a  mere  place  ;  it  is  also  a  state  or  order  of 
being.  As  there  are  orders  of  life  and  corresponding 
modes  of  being  below  us,  and  very  different  from  our  own, 
so  also  above  us.  The  heavenly  is  so  far  above  the  earthly 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  IQI 

that  we  cannot  conceive  what  it  is.  Out  of  this  Christ 
came,  at  His  incarnation,  and  back  to  it  He  returned  at 
His  ascension.  "  Up  "  into  heaven,  therefore,  means  more 
than  local  direction.  It  indicates  also  His  exaltation 
through  His  glorification,  whereby  He  was  prepared  for 
entering  again  the  heavenly  order  of  being. 

Was  taken  up.  The  question  says,  "  He  ascended," 
He  was  active  (John  20:  17).  The  answer  says,  "was 
taken  up,"  i.  e.,  He  was  passive  (Acts  1  :  9).  So  it  is 
said  that  He  rose  from  the  dead,  and  also  that  He  was 
raised. 

Of  necessity  He  ascended  into  Heaven.  He  was  now 
in  His  glorified  state,  and  fitted  for  the  heavenly  world  ; 
hence,  unfitted  for  the  sin-cursed  earth,  He  must  go  where 
the  whole  order  corresponded  with  His  present  state. 

His  ascension  as  part  of  His  exaltation,  with  its  glory 
and  honor,  belonged  therefore  to  this  very  period  of  His 
life.  He  could  not  have  ascended  from  the  cross,  for  ex- 
ample, or  from  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  because  it 
depended  on  His  victory  over  death,  and  the  glorification 
which  followed.* 

His  resurrection  and  ascension,  accordingly,  are  not  es- 
sentially diflTerent  acts,  but  two  stages  of  one  and  the  same 
act.  Hence  the  early  Church  had  only  one  festival  for 
both  resurrection  and  ascension,  regarding  the  latter  as 
the  completion  of  the  former. 

He  continues  there.  How  long?  Until  His  second 
coming.     He  went  there  the  better  to  carry  forward  our 

*  This  makes  it  easy  to  see  the  great  difference  between  the  tranS' 
lation  of  Enoch  and  the  ascension  of  Christ.  The  going  up  of 
Enoch  was  not  through  his  victory  over  death  but  by  the  mira- 
culous power  of  God,  and  stands  related  to  the  ascension  of  Christ 
much  as  the  raising  of  Lazarus  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 


102  redemption,  and  will  not  return  until  this  work  be  finished, 
until  the  whole  world  of  living  and  dead  be  ready  for 
judgment.  FoP  OUT  inisrest-  Though  gone,  He  yet  is 
closely  related  to  His  people.  He  is  even  Head  over  all 
things  to  the  Church  (Eph.  1  :  22). 


rBIQUITT.