Question  49.  Of  what  advantage  to  us  is  Christ's  ascension  into 
heaven  ? 

Ans^oer.  First,  that  He  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  His 
Father  in  heaven :  secondly,  that  we  have  our  flesh  in  heaven,  as  a 
sure  pledge  that  He,  as  the  head,  will  also  take  up  to  Himself,  us 
His  members :  thirdly,  that  He  sends  us  His  Spirit,  as  an  earnest, 
by  whose  power  we  "  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ 
sitleth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth." 

Of  what  advantage.  The  disciples  thought  of  His  as- 
cension as  a  loss  (John  16:  6)  ;  but  the  Catechism,  in  the 


104  spii'it  of  the  Creed,  seeing  that  it  is  part  of  His  redeeming 
work,  asks,  Of  what  advantage  is  it  to  us  ? 

1)  He  is  our  Advocate  (Rom.  8:  34).  His  eternal 
high-priestly  intercession  is  a  most  precious  and  comforting 
fact.  Hence  we  close  every  prayer  saying,  "  for  Jesus' 
sake,"  because  He  alone  secures  all  our  blessings.  Sinful 
presumption,  then,  is  it  to  pray  otherwise  than  in  the  name 
of  Christ,  which  some  dare  to  do ;  those  who  ignore  Him 
altogether  (deists,  infidels,  moralists),  and  also  those  who 
though  they  acknowledge  Him,  yet  beg  the  kindly  aid  of 
saints  and  angels  (Roman  and  Greek  Catholics).  He  is 
the  one  and  only  Mediator  (1  Tim.  2 :  5).  "  We  must  not 
think  of  His  intercession,  however,  as  a  merely  local  and 
external  act  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  but  as  reach- 
ing down  in  a  real  way,  through  the  constitution  of  His 
body,  the  Chm-ch,  and  the  gracious  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  to  our  earthly  life.  This  gives  it  a  historical  char- 
acter." 

2)  'W'e  have  our  flesh  in  heaven.    He  took  upon  Him 

our  nature,  and  by  His  victory  over  death  glorified  it. 
This  glorified  Human  nature  He  took  with  Him  in  His 
ascension.  His  ascension  was  not  the  end  of  His  fleshly 
existence,  that  is,  He  did  not  lay  aside  His  human  nature 
when  He  left  the  earth  (as  angels  laid  aside  their  human 
form  when  their  work  was  done) ;  but  His  divine-human 
nature  in  heaven  is  for  us  the  sure  pledge  that  His  people 
also  shall  triumph  over  death  as  He  did,  be  glorified  as  He 
was,  and  ascend  to  the  Father ;  for  He  is  their  Head,  and 
that  must  happen  to  them  which  happened  to  Him,  both 
humiliation  and  exaltation  (Rom.  8  :  17). 

3)  He  sends  us  His  Spirit.  Without  His  ascension  the 
Holy  Ghost  would  not  have  come  (John  16 :  7).  We  can- 
not fiilly  understand  why,  but   the   fact  is  plain.     The 


HEIDELBEKG  CATECHISM.  105 

adorable  Trinity  was  gradually  revealed  to  man,  and  the 
coming  of  the  Spirit  depended  on  the  going  of  the  Son, 
who  now  retires  from  His  work,  not  as  though  it  were 
complete,  but  in  order  that  it  may  be  carried  forward  in  a 
higher  form.* 

But  why  was  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  better  for 
the  Church  than  the  continued  bodily  presence  of  Christ 
(John  16:7)? 

Christ,  even  as  glorified,  was  bodily  present  at  only  one 
place  at  the  same  time,  and  so  could  reach  only  this  and 
that  man  or  assembly ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  His  infi- 
nite presence,  omnipresence,  can  reach  all  men  at  the  same 
time.  Then,  too,  the  Holy  Ghost  will  abide  with  us  for- 
ever, to  the  end  of  the  world  (John  14:  16),  as  "an 
earnest,"  a  real  divine  presence  in  us,  carrying  forward 
our  personal  redemption,  and  causing  us  to  "seek  the 
things  which  are  above,"  in  living  communioQ  with  our 
adorable  Head. 

Thus  the  ascension  of  Christ  was  necessary  not  only  for 
His  own  sake,  but  also  for  ours,  and  the  ascension  festival 
is  therefore  very  joyful  (see  the  Canticle). 

*  In  the  work  of  redemption  are  three  great  periods :— 1)  That 
of  the  Father,  four  thousand  years,  law  and  prophecy,  teaching 
men  the  need  and  the  fact  of  a  Eedeemer.  2)  That  of  the  Son, 
thirty-three  years.  He  keeps  the  law,  fulfils  prophecy,  makes 
atonement,  triumphs  over  death,  and  glorifies  our  nature.  3)  That 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  from  Pentecost  to  the  Second  Advent.  He 
carries  forward  what  Christ  began  (Acts  1 :  1),  regenerating,  sanc- 
tifying, and  glorifying  the  race. 


106  NIKETEEXTH    liORD'S    DAT. 


THE   SESSION   OF   CHRIST.