Question  51.  What  profit  is  this  glory  of  Christ,  our  head,  unto 
us? 

Atiswer.  First,  that  by  His  Holy  Spirit  He  poureth  out  heaven- 
ly graces  upon  us,  His  members  ;  and  then,  that  by  His  power  He 
defends  and  preserves  us  against  all  His  enemies. 

At  the  right  hand  of  God,  the  place  of  honor,  power 
and  glory  (Ps.  45 :  9  ;  Matt.  25  :  33).  But  we  must  be 
careful  not  to  think  of  Christ's  session  as  literal  and  local. 
It  is  a  figure,  taken  from  an  earthly  custom,  and  suited  to 
our  present  power  of  apprehending  divine  things. 

Was  He  not  there  before  His  incarnation  ?*  Yes,  the 
Eternal  Son  was  there,  but  not  Jesus  the  Saviour  of  sin-< 
ners ;  the  Word,  but  not  the  Word  made  flesh.  The  ses- 
sion of  Christ  relates  to  the  divine-human*  Eedeemer,  and 
so  dates  from  His  ascension.  His  session  is  the  highest 
point  in  His  exaltation.  Sitteth,  is  the  position  of  Kings 
(1  Kings  1  :  46  ;  22 :  19).     Servants  and  inferiors  stand 

*  What  became  of  the  Trinity  during  His  earthly  life  ?  Was 
not  the  Second  Person  lacking  ?  No.  We,  of  course,  can  think  of 
acts  and  states  only  under  the  form  of  time  and  space  ;  but  God  is 
above  all  such  earthly  limitation  (Ps.  139  :  8-10  ;  2  Pet.  3:  8). 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  107 

(1  Kg.  10:  8;  Kev.  7:  11).  Therefore  this  sitting  of 
Christ  at  God's  right  hand  is  always  mentioned  in  connec- 
tion with  His  kingly  glory  (Matt.  25 :  31  ;  Heb.  1  :  3). 
As  a  Prophet  He  revealed  the  will  of  God.  As  a  Priest 
He  offered  an  infinite  sacrifice.   As  King  He  is  now  Head 

of  an  everlasting  Kingdom.  By  whom  the  Father  gov- 
erns all  things  (Eph.  1 :  20-23).  His  kingly  rule  ex- 
tends not  only  to  His  Church,  but  to  the  whole  world,  using 
all  creatures  for  His  glory,  and  turning  all  the  currents 
of  history  toward  the  establishment  and  spread  of  His 
Church  (Rev.  11  :  15). 

What  profit  ?  Ques.  50  gives  the  meaning  of  His  session. 
This,  its  benefits.  He  poureth  OUt.  This  He  could  not 
have  done  before  His  resurrection,  but  now  He  is  in  a  po- 
sition of  power  and  glory  enabling  Him  to  do  it  (Eph.  4 : 
7-13).  Heavenly  graces,  both  the  means  of  grace  and 
the  fruits  of  grace, — Church,  Ministry,  Sacraments,  and  all 
the  benefits  of  His  redeeming  work  (1  Cor.  12 :  4-12).  All 
this  He  does  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
medium  through  which  they  come ;  and  they  cannot  be 

had  apart  from  Him.     Upon  US  His  members.    These 

benefits  are  only  for  those  ingrafted  into  Christ  (Ques. 
20).  He  defends  us.  So  every  good  king  does.  We 
have  powerful  enemies,  the  devil  and  his  hosts,  and  could 
not  stand  without  His  gracious  help.  This  He  freely, 
fully  and  always  grants  (Eph.  6 :  10-17).  This  also  it 
would  have  been  impossible  for  Him  to  do  in  the  days  of 
His  humiliation,  because  then  He  was  waging  his  own  per- 
sonal warfare  with  the  kingdom  of  evil ;  but  now,  a  victo- 
rious King,  He  defends  all  His  people.  Preserves. 
He  not  only  defends  us  when  attacked,  but  also  shields  us 
against  danger.    His.     But  His  enemies  are  also  ours. 


108  THE   SECOXD   COMING   OF   CHRIST.