Question  52.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee,  that  "  Christ  shall  come 
again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead?" 

Amv:er.  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  uplifted 
head,  I  look  for  the  very  same  person  who  before  offered  Himself, 
for  my  sake,  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse 
from  me,  to  come  as  judge  from  heaven ;  who  shall  cast  all  His 
and  my  enemies  into  everlasting  condemnation,  but  shall  translate 
me,  with  all  His  chosen  ones,  to  Himself  into  heavenly  joys  and 
glory. 

From  thenCS,  ^-  e.  from  heaven.  Out  of  it  He  came  at 
first,  and  entered  into  the  state  of  humiliation ;  back  to 
it,  after  triumphing  over  death  and  hades.  He  returned 
at  His  ascension,  and  entered  upon  His  kingly  glory ;  and 
from  thence  He  shall  COm©  agailL  Once  before  the  peo- 
ple of  God  waited  for  His  coming,  through  four  thousand 
years,  in  sure  faith  and  joyful  hope.  At  length  He  came, 
suffered,  died,  rose  from  the  dead,  ascended  into  heaven, 
promising  to  come  again.  For  the  fulfillment  of  this  pro- 
mise, the  Christian  Church  has  long  waited,  through 
eighteen  hundred  years,  is  waiting  now,  and  may  yet  wait 
long. 

AVhen  will  He  come  ?  !N"o  man  knows  or  can  know 
(Matt.  24:  36).  He  will  come  only  at  the  end  of  this 
earthly  period,  when  His  victory  over  evil  is  complete, 
when  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  become  His  (Rev. 
11 :  15),  when  the  Holy  Ghost  has  finished  His  work  of 
sanctification  and  the  whole  Church  is  ready  for  full  glo- 
rification (Rom.  8  :  18-23 ;  1  Cor.  15 :  24-28)'.  This  date 
is  absolutely  beyond  our  knowing. 

Yet  strange  to  say,  in  almost  every  age  of  the  world 
men  called  "Adventists  "  have  professed  to  know  it.     "Well 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  109 

kno^yIl  is  tlie  Millerite  scare  of  1843,  and  a  similar  folly  in 
Chicago  in  April,  1875.*  What  blindness !  the  time  of 
His  coming  is  not  a  certain  arbitrary  date,  fixed  by  divine 
decree,  and  which  may  be  calculated,  but  depends  on  the 
progress  of  His  kingdom.  As  His  first  coming  could  hap- 
pen only  in  "  the  fullness  of  the  time,"  in  the  ripeness 
of  events,  so  His  second  coming  (1  Cor.  15 :  25). 

To  judge.  He  will  come,  not  as  at  first,  in  weakness 
and  humility,  but  in  great  power  and  glory  (Matt.  25  :  31 ; 
1  Thess.  4 :  16),  not  to  redeem  but  to  judge  the  world. 
The  quick,  i-  e.,  the  living,  those  yet  living  on  the  earth  at 
His  coming  (2  Tim.  4:  1).  The  dead.  Those  who  died 
before  His  second  coming. 

I  look  for  the  very  same  person.  This  is  the  fact  em- 
phasized, that  He  who  offered  Himself  to  God  for  my  sake, 
who  passed  through  humiliation  to  exaltation,  who  thus 
fiilly  triumphed  over  sin  and  Satan  and  so  delivered  His 
people, — this  victorious,  glorified  Redeemer  shall  also 
judge  the  world  (Acts  10 :  38-42),  and  make  sure  that  His 
people  receive  what  He  secured  for  them.  Judging  here 
implies  not  merely  a  sentence,  but  a  separation,  setting  the 
saints  absolutely  free  from  all  the  powers  of  evil  (Matt.  25 : 
32).  This  is  the  fiill  end  of  His  kingly  office,  and  forms 
thus  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  the  race  as  really  as  His 
first  coming.  The  Christian  economy,  in  its  present  form, 
will  close  with  the  general  judgment,  and  the  Church  will 
enter  upon  her  full  and  eternal  glory. 

"Wliat  comfort  is  it  to  thee  ?  His  coming  is  not  to  be 
dreaded  but  longed  for  (2  Pet.  3  :  12),  because  it  will  be 
our  full  deliverance.     We  now  have  sorrows  and  persecu- 

*  At  the  end  of  the  tenth  century,  His  coming  was  fiilly  ex- 
pected, in  fulfillment  of  Eev.  20 :  2-4,  and  led  to  great  follies. 


110  tions,  because  the  powers  of  evil  are  doing  their  utmost 
to  vex  and  harm  the  saints ;  but  we  stand  on  the  winning 
side,  and  know  that  Christ  and  His  Church  will  triumph. 
The  victory  is  a  process,  slow  and  painful,  through  tears, 
agony  and  blood  (even  as  His  was  in  the  flesh),  but  sure. 
Here  already  these  evils  are  turned  to  our  advantage ; 
but  then  they  shall  have  an  end,  and  this  is  our  comfort 
(Jas.  5:  7,  8).  Therefore  with  uplifted  head*  in 
sure  faith  and  joyful  hope,  as  the  Hebrews  looked  for  the 
Messiah,  and  as  a  bride  awaits  the  bridegroom  (Matt.  25 : 
1),  we  with  earnest  longing  look  for  Him  who  shall  cast 
all  His  and  our  enemies  into  everlasting  condemnation 
(2  Thess.  1 :  6-10),  and  take  us  into  the  full  joy  and 
glory,  of  everlasting  life. 


OE  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 


TWENTIETH  I^ORD'S  DAT. 


THE   HOLY   GHOST.