Question  54.  What  believest  thou  concerning  the  ''Holy  Catho- 
lic Church"  of  Christ? 

Answer.  That  the  Son  of  God,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 
the  world,  gathers,  defends,  and  preserves  to  Himself,  by  His  Spirit 
and  word,  out  of  the  whole  human  race,  a  church  chosen  to  ever- 
lasting life,  agreeing  in  true  faith ;  and  that  I  am,  and  forever 
shall  remain,  a  living  member  thereof. 

What  believest  thou  ?  Article  IX.  of  the  Creed  in 
our  English  translation  begins  with,  ''  I  believe  in."  This 
unfortunate  addition  comes  not  from  the  original  German, 
but  from  the  Latin  copy  from  which  the  present  English 
translation  was  made.  "  I  believe  in  "  belongs,  properly, 
only  to  the  three  great  objects  of  faith.  Father,  Son  and 
Holy  Ghost, — not  to  any  subordinate  article. 

Concerning  the  churoh.  God  has  always  had  a  people, 
— "  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  under  two  great 
eras  or  dispensations.  First  they  were  called  Hebrews,* 
now  they  are  called  Christians.  His  covenant  people  are 
called  a  "  church"  (1  Tim.  3  :  15),  and  "  kingdom  "  (Col. 
1:  13),  the  "family"  of  God  (Eph.  3:  15),  the  "body" 
of  Christ. 

*)  Also  Israelites,  after  Jacob  whose  name  God  changed  to  Israel 
(Gen.  32:  28),  and  Jews,  which  name  they  received  during  the 
Babylonian  captivity,  because  the  captives  were  mainly  from  Judea 
and  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  (Esth.  3:4). 


116  Of  Christ  This  Church  Christ*  "gathers,"  it  is 
not  propagated  like  the  race  ;  "  defends,"  in  conflict  with 
the  kingdom  of  the  devil ;  and  **  preserves,"  from  attack 
and  danger.  This  is  done  "  by  His  Spirit  and  word," 
not  immediately,  but  through  divinely  appointed  means, 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  gospel  through  which  He  works. 
The  Catechism  explains  these  means  fiirther  on  (Ques. 
65-82).  A  fine  illustration,  however,  is  found  in  Acts  2  : 
14-42,  where  ministry,  word  and  Sacraments  are  promi- 
nent. 

The  Christian  Church  was  organized  at  Jerusalem,  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
That  it  does  not  date  from  the  birth,  death,  resurrection 
or  even  the  ascension  of  Christ,  is  evident  from  the  fact 
that  the  Apostles  neither  preached  nor  administered  sacra- 
ments durinof  the  ten  davs  between  the  Ascension  and 
Pentecost,  but  waited  at  Jerusalem  for  the  Holy  Ghost 
(Luke  24  :  49  ;  Acts  2  :  41). 

The  work  of  Christ  relates  to  the  race,  that  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  the  individual ;  and  He  must  have  a  place  in 
which,  and  means  through  which,  the  grace  of  Christ  be- 
comes available  for  man,  namely  the  Christian  Church 
with  her  word  and  Sacraments  (Acts  2:  38-47). 

Therefore  this  article  of  the  Church  naturally  follows 
that  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  cannot  transpose  the  arti- 
cles of  the  Creed,  any  more  than  you  can  the  parts  of 
vour  bodv.  The  Creed  is  an  orsanic  whole.  It  is  an 
order  of  faith,  not  a  bundle.  This  is  true  not  only  of  the 
three  great  divisions,  but  of  each  sub-division  or  article. 

*The  Catechism,  in  explaining  this  artide,  evidently  inclndea 
the  people  of  God  before  the  founding  of  the  Christian  Church ; 
though  the  article  itself  refers  primarilv  to  the  Christian  Church 
as  instituted  hj  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  117 

We  must  think  of  the  Christian  Church  as  very  differ- 
ent from  the  Old  Testament  Church.  The  new  is  higher 
than  the  old  (2  Cor.  3:  11).  Judaism  was  for  a  time,  for 
one  nation,  prophetical  and  preparatory ;  but  Christianity 
is  the  broad,  everlasting  fulfillment  of  it,  and  so  required 
new  and  higher  ministry.  Sacraments  and  worship. 

The  Church  is  a  divine  institution.  It  has  a  human  side, 
of  course,  as  the  blessed  Saviour  Himself  had, — ministry, 
Sacraments,  worship  and  government,  visible  and  change- 
able, but  even  these  are  of  divine  appointment  and  author- 
ity; and  the  divine  and  supernatural  character  of  the 
Church,  the  real  presence  and  gracious  activity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  the  Church,  make  it  an  object  of  Christian  faith. 
It  is  the  body  of  Christ,  not  as  the  sum  total  of  believers, 
but  literally  and  truly ;  and  this,  not  just  because  all  His 
people  are  livingly  united  to  Him,  but  because  His  body 
was  the  fountain  of  life  before  there  were  members. 

The  Church  is  for  the  salvation  of  men.  It  is  God's 
wise  and  gracious  means  to  this  end.  The  Church  is  like 
a  spiritual  mother,  who  feeds  and  leads  us  from  babes  in 
Christ  to  manhood  (Gal.  4:  26;  1  Pet.  2:  2;  Eph.  4:  13). 
Hence  the  early  Christians  used  to  say:  "He  that  hath 
not  the  Church  for  his  mother  hath  not  God  for  his  Fa- 
ther;" and  Calvin  says,  "beyond  her  bosom  ...  no  sal- 
vation." 

Therefore  the  necessity  of  membership  in  the  Church, 
— not  because  membership  is  common,  right,  respect- 
able, a  duty,  an  impressive  and  wholesome  restraint  upon 
our  evil  nature,  affording  us  good  society,  and  giving  a 
claim  to  baptism  for  our  children  and  pastoral  care  in 
general, — ^but  because  we  must  staud  in  this  kingdom  of 
grace  as  really  as  we  before  stood  in  sin.  What  wrong 
notions  about  membership,  just  because  men  have  wrong 


118  notions  about  tlie  Cliurcli  itself!  Notice  the  solemn  stress 
laid  upon  membersliip,  in  the  use  of  the  Sacraments  (Mark 
16:  16;  Matt.  28:  19;  John  3:  5;  6:  53;  Acts  2:  38;  1 
Cor.  12:  13),  illustrated  by  miraculous  efforts  to  bring 
men  mthin  reach  of  the  Church  (Acts  8:  26-38;  9:  1-18; 
10:  1—48).  To  say  Tve  do  not  need  membership  in  the 
Church  is  to  make  light  of  divine  appointments,  appoint- 
ments which  are  not  arbitrary  but  needful  for  us.  God  is 
not  bound  by  them,  but  we  are. 

What  is  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  the  various  Orders 
in  the  land  ?  It  is  far  above  them,  both  in  its  nature  and 
object.  They  are  not  divine  but  human;  not  for  the  re- 
demption of  men  from  sin,  but  only  for  temporal  purposes. 
Loving  our  neighbor,  to  say  the  least,  is  only  half,  and  in- 
deed the  less  important  half,  of  Matt.  22 :  37-40. 

"What  is  the  relation  of  the  various  Christian  Associa- 
tions and  Societies  to  the  Church?  Thev  are  children  of 
the  Church,  that  should  honor  their  spiritual  mother,  with 
loving  obedience,  faithful  activity,  and  due  modesty. 

The  Church  is  one,  not  in  outward  form  but  in  inner 
life.  We  speak  of  the  Jewish  Church  and  the  Christian 
Church ;  but  they  are  only  different  forms  and  stages  of  the 
one  covenant  of  grace.  So  part  of  the  Church  is  in  hea- 
ven, and  part  on  the  earth;  yet  (Heb.  12:  22,  23),  truly, 

"The  saints  on  earth  and  all  the  dead 
But  one  communion  make." 

Then,  too,  the  Church  on  earth  is  separated  not  only  by 
space  and  nationality,  but  also  by  many  denominational 
differences.  Divisions  in  the  Church  date  back  to  the  days 
of  Paul  (1  Cor.  1:  10-13). 

Nevertheless,  the  Church  is  one  in  its  inner  life  (Eph. 
4 :  3-16),  as  truly  as  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  are  one. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  119 

The  body  of  Christ  must  be  a  true  unity  (1  Cor.  12:  12- 
27) ;  and  a  deep  sense  of  this  makes  the  Church  strive  to 
express  it  in  some  form,* 

The  Church  is  holy.  This  cannot  be  said  of  any  Order 
or  Association;  not  even  of  the  State.  The  Church  must 
be  holy,  because  it  is  the  body  of  Christ  (Eph.  5j  27),  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  3:  17),  and  to  this  end 
called  (1  Thess.  4:   7;  1  Peter  1:  15). 

It  is  not  perfectly  holy,  as  is  seen  in  its  government, 
worship,  discipline  and  daily  life,  but  under  the  power  of 
holiness.  In  the  process  of  sanctification,  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  gradually  changing  our  vile  nature,  and  fashioning  us 
like  unto  Christ.  The  Church  bewails  its  imperfections, 
and  earnestly  reaches  out  toward  perfect  holiness  (Phil.  3 : 
12-15;  1  John  3:  2,  3),  which  will  be  fully  realized,  how- 
ever only  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ. 

From  the  holiness  of  the  Church  comes  the  necessity  for 
discipline,  for  casting  out,  so  far  as  possible,  all  that  is 
unholy  (1  Cor.  5:   7,  13). 

The  Church  is  catholic,  **•  <5.  universal,  for  two  reasons : — ■ 
1)  It  is  for  all  time,  not  preparatory  to  something  higher 
and  better,  as  the  Jewish  Church  was,  but  itself  the  high- 
est and  last  form  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  2)  It  is  for 
the  whole  world.  Not  confined  to  one  country  or  race,  as 
was  the  Jewish  Church.  It  knows  no  nation,  race  nor 
class  (Col.  3 :  11).     Christ  gathers  His  people  "  out  of  the 

*  Christians  feel  that  even  without  visible  union  there  is  yet  a 
real  unity,  which  finds  expression  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  At  the 
Evangelical  Alliance  in  ISTew  York  in  1873,  even  the  Dean  of  Can- 
terbury communed  in  a  Presbyterian  church ;  and  in  the  same  year, 
at  Carthie,  in  Scotland,  Queen  Victoria,  who  is  ex-offieio  Head  of  the 
Church  of  England,  did  the  same  thing. 


120  NOTES  OX  THE 

whole  human  race."  The  Church  must  be  catholic,  because 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  all. 

The  catholicity  of  the  Church  is  seen  already  in  the  Old 
Testament  prophecies  (,Gen.  12:  3  ;  49  :  10  ;  Is.  60  :  1-22 ; 
Ps.  72 :  8-17  ;  Is.  -49 :  6,  quoted  by  Simeon  in  Luke  2 :  32 ; 
Micah  4:  1-7),  and  is  expressly  taught  also  in  the  New 
Testament  (John  10:  16:  Matt.  24^  14;  28:  19;  Luke 
24 :  47;  Eph.  2  :  14  ;  Rev.  5  :  9  ;  7  :  9). 

Therefore  Christianity  is  missionary  in  spirit  and  life, 
and  from  the  day  of  Pentecost  onward  showed  this  by 
sending  ministers  out  into  all  the  world.  The  whole  world 
needs  redemption,  and  Chiistianity  alone  can  meet  this 
want. 

To  many  the  word  catholic  is  offensive,  because  it  is 
part  of  the  title  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church ;  but  it  is 
older  than  that  Church,  and  does  not  belong  to  it  exclu- 
sively. It  is  simply  an  anglicized  Greek  word  (like  Christ, 
angel,  baptize),  and  must  not  be  given  up  through  prejudice 
against  mere  sound,  lest  we  also  rob  ourselves  of  its  rich 
sense.*  To  substitute  "  Christian,"  as  Luther  did,  and  as 
Lutherans  now  do,  is  to  change  the  very  sense  of  the 
Creed.  ''  Catholic  "  is  an  essential  attribute  of  the  Church, 
declaring  it  a  religion  for  all  men  of  all  ages  ;  but  "  Chris- 
tian "  is  simply  a  derivative  word,  and  adds  nothing  to 
the  sense.t  for  it  is  of  this  verv  Chi'istian  religion  that 
the  whole  Creed  speaks.  Then,  too,  the  word  '•  catholic  " 
includes  in  it  the  whole  Church  of  God  of  all  ages  and 
nations ;  but  '''  Christian  "  is  narrow,  limiting,  and  shuts 
out  the  whole  body  of  Jewish  saints  who  died  in  the  faith 
of  the  Messiah  before  His  incarnation. 

*  See  foot-note  on  page  55. 

t  *' Ckristian"   is  added  to  catholic,  in  the  old  German,  both,  in 
Ques,  23  and  Ques.  54.     See  also  Ques.  22,  Grerman  and  English. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  121 

Of  course  all  these  attributes  of  the  Church,  unity, 
holiness  and  catholicity,  will  be  fully  realized  only  at 
the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  The  Church  is  historical. 
The  body  of  Christ  must  unfold,  develop  and  grow,  even 
to  fullness.  We  confess  faith  in  the  Church,  not  just  in 
W'hat  it  now  is,  but  rather  in  what  it  will  become. 

Of  this  Church,  this  real  kingdom  of  grace,  I  aill  Si 
member,  says  the  catechumen,  expressing  faith  in  his  own 
living  union  with  this  body  of  Christ.  How  he  became  a 
member  is  told  us  only  in  Ques.  74.  "  By  baptism  .  .  , 
be  admitted  into  the  Christian  Church."  Living,  having 
been  quickened  (Eph.  2:  5),  and  now  striving  to  realize 

this  life  (John  15:  4-6).    For  ever  shall  remain.    This 

does  not  mean  that  he  will  never  fall,  but  expresses  a  sense 
of  what  His  union  with  Christ  involves,  and  also  an  earn- 
est desire  forever  to  stand  in  this  *'  everlasting  life  "  of  the 
Church. 

How  real  the  Church  is !  Kot  something  vague,  indefi- 
nite and  shadowy,  but  as  real  as  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  having,  like  the  family,  and  the  State, 
real  law,  authority  and  blessings,  a  real  presence  and 
poAver  (Heb.  12:  22-24). 


THE   COMMUNION   OF   SAINTS.