Question  55.  "What  do  you  understand  by  "  the  communion  of 
saints?" 

Answer.  First,  that  all  and  every  one  who  believes  being  mem- 
bers of  Christ,  are  in  common  partakers  of  Him,  and  of  all  His 
riches  and  gifts ;  secondly,  that  every  one  must  know  it  to  be  his 
duty,  readily  and  cheerfully  to  employ  his  gifts  for  the  advantage 
and  salvation  of  other  members. 

This  article  was  inserted  about  A.  D.  430,  owing  to  the 


122  schism  of  the  Donatists.  This  historical  fact  throws  light 
on  its  meaning,  for  any  one  who  will  study  that  period  of 
Church  history. 

Saints,  i-  &.,  holy  ones.  Many  think  saints  are  those  in 
heaven  ;  but  Paul  pyrites  his  Epistles  to  living  saints.  The 
same  word  which  in  1  Cor.  1  :  2  and  Col.  1  :  2  is  trans- 
lated "  saints/'  is  in  Col.  3 :  12  and  Heb.  3  :  1  translated 
"holy." 

Christians  are  called  saints,  or  holy  ones,  because  -they 
are  in  Christ,  and  so  made  partakers  of  His  anointing 
(Ques.  32 j,  namely  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  are  not  mere- 
ly figuratively  and  ceremonially  holy,  like  the  vessels 
of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  22 :  19),  but  also  purified,  renewed, 
changed  by  the  Holy  Spii-it,  sanctified,  "  made  holy." 

Saint,  therefore,  is  the  common  name  for  all  who  belong 
to  the  family  of  God;  baptized  children,  full  members, 
and  those  who  have  died  in  the  Lord. 

The  COmniUllion  of  saints  means  two  things,  says  the 
Catechism. 

1)  It  is  a  common  union  in  Christ.  Not  just  an  act  of 
mutual  fellowship  in  worship,  but  fii'st  of  all  the  historical 
fact  of  partaking  in  common  of  His  redeeming  life. 

The  Church  and  the  communion  of  saints  are  not  iden- 
tical, but  yet  very  closely  related.  The  one  is  the  body  of 
Christ ;  the  other  is  its  inner  life.  The  one  is  the  Head 
and  members ;  the  other  is  the  members  alone,  in  their  re- 
lation to  their  Head  and  to  each  other.  Hence,  too,  this 
article  of  the  Creed  comes  just  after  that  of  the  Church, 
and  indeed  defines  it. 

Illustrations :  all  parts  of  a  tree  stand  in  one  common 
life.  So  of  the  human  body.  As  we  by  birth  stand  re- 
lated to  the  first  Adam,  and  thus  are  in  common  partakers 
of  his  fallen  life,  so  by  our  spiritual  birth  into  the  king- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  123 

dom  of  grace  are  we  made  partakers  in  common  of  the  re- 
deeming life  of  Christ. 

All  Christians,  then,  are  heirs  of  the  same  inheritance, 
and  partakers  of  the  same  blessings.  They  may  live  in 
different  ages  and  in  different  nations,  and  may  realize 
and  enjoy  them  in  different  degrees,  according  to  age  and 
circumstances  ;  but  to  them  belong  "  all  His  riches  and 
gifts,"  namely,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Church,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  the  life-ever- 
lasting (Eph.  4 :  4-7),  with  all  that  is  involved  in  them. 

2)  The  common  enjoyment  and  sharing  of  these  gifts. 
This  is  the  practical  side  of  this  communion,  and  for  every- 
day life.  The  life  and  love  of  Christ  must  beam  out  from 
our  life  to  cheer  others.  The  Father's  forgiveness  must 
make  us  forgiving.  And  God's  temporal  gifts  to  us  must 
be  freely  given  joy  us  to  those  in  need. 

Thus  this  common  union  in  Christ  and  participation  in 
all  His  gifts,  not  only  forbids  all  selfishness,  but  also  enforces 
the  law  of  Christian  love  (Phil.  2  :  4),  so  that  readily  and 
cheerfully  the  Christian  will  employ  his  gifts — the  gifts 
of  grace,  and  also  those  of  nature  sanctified  by  grace,  as 
time,  money,  influence,  business  and  talent — for  the  tem- 
poral and  spiritual  good  of  others,  in  all  forms  of  private 
and  public  Christian  activity  (Matt.  25 :  35-40).  "  Eeadi- 
]y  and  cheerfully."  How  this  shames  the  narrow,  grudg- 
ing, heartless  alms  and  Church- work  of  some !  "  Must  feel 
himself  bound,"  says  the  Triglott,  driven  by  the  law  of 
love,  obedience  to  which  is  holy  joy. 

The  communion  of  saints  extends  thus  to  social  and 
business  life.  What  a  world  of  meaning  lies  in  Rom.  16 : 
1,  2 !     "  Assist  her  " — because  she  is  a  saint.*     This  is  the 

*  Some  Christians  grossly  violate  the  plain  law  of  Christian  love. 
They  will  do  far  more  for  one  related  to  them  by  the  ties  of  party, 


124  NOTES  OX  THE 

liand-shaking,  sympatliizmg,  helping  spirit  (Rom.  15  :  1- 
6),  Tvhicli  needs  to  be  more  cultivated  among  God's  child- 
ren. Christianity  is  eminently  social.  Indeed  if  this 
practical  communion  of  saints  "were  more  fully  actualized, 
men  would  not  so  much  seek  the  same  general  benefits  in 
Orders  and  Associations,  but  would  find  their  wants  met  in 
the  Church. 

The  highest  expression  of  this  communion  of  saints  is 
of  course  in  worship.  We  pray  for  each  other,  though 
far  apart,  because  we  are  one  in  Christ.  The  sense  of  this 
is  seen  in  letters,  in  farewells,  in  greetings  to  the  absent, 
yea  also  at  the  grave. 

"  TTe  shall  ?till  be  joined  in  heart, 
And  hope  to  meet  again." 

Especially  in,  public  worship  :  "  Our  Father  who  art  in 
heaven."  Both  prayers  and  hymns  are  "common" 
prayers,  the  united  voice  of  every  heart. 

This  communion  in  worship,  however,  is  not  merely 
with  the  saints  on  earth,  but  also  with  those  in  heaven. 
The  Church  includes  both  worlds  (Heb.  12  :  22-24). 

''The  Church  on  earth  and  all  the  dead 

But  one  communion  make ; 
All  join  in  Christ  their  living  head. 

And  of  His  grace  partake." 

See  how  heaven  and  earth  join  in  the  Te  Deum.  "  "We 
.  .  all  the  earth  .  .  all  angels  .  .  apostles  .  .  prophets 
.    .  martyrs  .    .    .  the   holv  Chui'ch  throuo^hout  all  the 

business,  social  life  or  Order,  than  for  a  Christian.  The  strongest 
bond  on  earth  is  Christian  hfe.  The  deepest,  yea,  the  only  true 
love,  is  Christian  love.  The  highest  obliganon  among  men  is 
Christian  brotherhood.  To  ignore  this  is  a  great  sin.  "While  doing 
good  to  all  men,  we  should  especially  do  good  to  Christians  (Gal. 
6:  10). 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  125 

"World  " — praise  Thee.  So  in  the  doxologies  we  reverently 
challenge  the  heavenly  host  to  join  us  in  adoring  the  holy 
Trinity. 

The  highest  and  sweetest  expression  of  this  life-union 
with  Christ  and  ^Yith  each  other  is  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 
This  is  our  nearest  approach  to  the  heavenly  world.  It  is 
not  an  act  of  worship,  but  is  the  centre  of  our  worship, 
namely,  God's  act  to  us.  It  is  emphatically  called  the 
communion,  in  which  we  have  fellowship  not  only  with 
God,  but  with  each  other,  and  with  the  whole  body  of 
Christ.  See  this  in  the  Communion  hymns  and  prayers. 
To  the  holy  Eucharist  we  come  by  families ;  wish  our  ab- 
sent friends  there  ;  invite  all  Christians  present  to  unite 
with  us ;  and  tenderly  pray  for  the  whole  family  of  God. 

The  communion  of  saints  in  this  form  is  real  and  com- 
forting, but  falls  far  short  of  what  it  will  be  after  this  life, 
especially  after  the  resurrection,  when  the  full  glory  of 
Christ  shall  be  revealed  in  and  unto  us.  To  this  end  the 
Lord's  Supper  looks  (John  6  :  51,  54),  and  of  this  its 
comforting  benediction  assures  us. 


THE   FORGIVENESS   OF   SINS.