Question  57.  "What  comfort  doth  the  ''resurrection  of  the  body  " 
afford  thee? 

Answer.  That  not  only  my  soul,  after  this  life,  shall  be  immedi- 
ately taken  up  to  Clirist,  its  head,  but  also  that  this  my  body,  being 
raised  by  the  power  of  Christ,  shall  be  re-united  with  my  soul,  and 
made  like  unto  the  glorious  body  of  Christ. 

What  comfort  ?  This,  that  my  body  shall  be  raised, 
reunited  with  my  soul,  and  glorified.  Not  Only  my  SOTll. 
Why  must  the  body  be  raised  ?  Because  it  is  an  essen- 
tial part  of  man.  He  is  not  spirit,  nor  matter,  but  the 
mysterious  union  of  both.  The  whole  man  fell,  and  the 
whole  man  is  under  redemption.  Sin  has  separated  body 
and  soul  (Rom.  5 :  12),  and  grace  unites  them  (1  Thess.  5 : 

23).    Immediately  taken  up  to  Christ  expresses  the  fact 

that  the  Christian  at  death  goes  to  heaven  (Phil.  1  :  23). 
This  condemns  the  doctrine  of  purgatory,  soul  sleeping, 
and  kindred  errors ;  but  it  must  not  be  so  held  as  to  ignore 
the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  the  full  glory  which  shall 
then  be  revealed  in  and  to  us  (1  John  3:2).  To  man, 
without  dispute,  belong  three  states :  in  this  life,  body  and 
soul  are  together;  at  death  they  are  separated;  at  the 
resurrection  they  are  again  united.  The  second  is,  there- 
fore, literally  an  "  intermediate  state,"  abnormal,  a  disem- 
bodied, transition  state,  in  which  the  good  are  in  great  joy, 
and  the  bad  in  great  misery ;  and  so  lacking  the  body,  an 
essential  part  of  self,  and  thus  being  imperfect,  they  await 
the  resurrection. 


132  But  also  •  •  •  nvy  body.  What  body  will  be  raised  ? 
Kot  this  n:\tur:il  body  which  we  lay  iu  tlie  grave  (,1  Cor. 
15 :  50\  This  view  is  gross.  Surely  there  is  a  close  cou- 
nectiou  between  our  present  body  aud  tlie  resurrection 
body  ;  but  Paul  calls  tlie  latter  a  *•  spiritual "  body.  The 
whole  subject  is  for  iaitli  and  not  for  reiison.  The  best  ex- 
planation we  have,  indeed  almost  all  we  can  know  of  it,  is 
Paul's  illustration  (1  Cor.  15 :  37,  38,  42-44),  namely,  as 
the  hidden  life-power  of  the  seed  takes  to  itself  a  new 
body,  so  the  new  life  of  Christ  in  us,  by  the  working  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  forms  for  itself  a  glorious  resurrection  body. 

Raised  by  the  power  of  Christ.  This  expresses  the  ne- 
cessity of  a  living  union  with  Christ  (Eph.  5 :  30),  in  order 
to  be  partakers  of  His  grace.  We  must  be  in  His  cove- 
nant in  order  to  be  under  the  sanctifying  power  of  tlie 
Holy  Ghost  (Rom.  8  :  9-11).  In  other  words,  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body  is  not  an  isolated  fact  or  event,  away 
out  at  the  end  of  time,  an  arbitrary,  sudden,  creative  act 
of  God  eaUmg  the  body  to  life,  but  a  process  of  redemp- 
tion (as  the  Creed  shows),  beginning  in  our  regeneration, 
going  forward  in  our  sanctification,  and  completing  itself 
at  last  in  the  full  victory  of  grace  over  sin,  by  tlie  reunion 
of  soul  and  body.  Sanctification  ends  in  jrlorifi cation. 
Hence  Paul  speaks  of  us  as  having  already  risen  (Col. 
3  :  l-o),  having  in  us  the  resurrection  life  of  Clirist ;  and 
the  blessed  Saviour  Himself  connects  the  resurrection  at 
the  last  day  with  our  present  relation  to  Him  and  to  the 
Lord's  Supper  ^Johu  6  :  54-58). 

ReTinited  with  my  soul.  Tlie  glorious  end,  involved  in 
the  beginning,  here  comes  fully  to  pass.  What  seems  to 
be  the  victory  of  death  and  the  grave  shall  issue  in  the 
triumph  of  the  resurrection.  Life  shall  overcome  death. 
Grace  shall  ripen  into  glory. 


HEIDELBEKG  CATECHISM.  133 

This  shows  why  the  resurrection  is  not  possible  until  the 
second  coming  of  Christ,  namely,  at  the  end  of  this  pro- 
cess of  redemption,  when  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
complete,  not  only  in  the  individual  Christian,  but  also  in 
the  whole  "  body  of  Christ,"  the  Church  (1  Thess.  4:13- 
17).  The  dead  shall  rise  and  the  living  ("the  quick") 
shall  be  changed  (1  Cor.  15 :  51).  Nor  will  our  waiting 
seem  long  and  weary ;  because  in  another  life  we  shall  not 
be  under  the  limitations  of  time  and  space  as  now  in  the 
flesh. 

Like  unto*  the  glorious  body  of  Christ.  Our  resurrec- 
tion, therefore,  will  not  be  like  that  of  Lazarus  (John  11 : 
44),  a  mere  reviving,  the  reunion  of  a  corruptible  body 
with  a  departed  spirit  unto  a  second  dying ;  but  like  that 
of  Christ  Himself,  quite  free  from  the  power  and  conse- 
quences of  sin  (Rom.  6  :  9  ;  Phil.  3:21).  Therefore  the 
joyful  outcry  of  Paul  in  1  Cor.  15  :  55-57.  The  lovely 
form  turns  to  dust  and  ashes ;  but  the  saints  shall  rise  in 
glory  and  honor. 

Of  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked  we  know  only  the 
fearful  fact  (John  5:28,  29;  Acts  24:15).  This  shuts 
out  all  thought  of  annihilation.  As  their  body  is  a  par- 
taker in  sin,  so  is  it  involved  also  in  eternal  death.  But 
one  may  well  ask.  With  what  body  will  they  come  forth  ? 
Will  not  its  hideousness  correspond  with  the  glory  of  ours  ? 


THE    LIFE    EVERLASTING.