Question  64.  But  doth  not  this  doctrine  make  men  careless  and 
profane  ? 

Aasu-er.  By  no  means;  for  it  is  impossible  that  those  who  are 
implanted  into  Christ  by  a  true  faith,  should  not  bring  forth  fruits 
of  thankfulness. 

Question  21  gives  the  natui'e  of  faith ;  23  gives  the  ob- 
jects of  faith,  in  the  Creed ;  24-58  explain  the  Creed ;  and 
59  gives  the  benefit  of  faith,  namely,  justification. 

Belisvest  all  tMs, — vrhat  ?  The  great  facts  of  the  Creed, 
namely,  that  God  the  Father  has  created  me,  the  Son  has  re- 
deemed me,  and  the  Holv  Ghost  is  sanctifving-  me. 

"  I  believe,"  is  not  merely  an  assent  of  the  mind  to  a 
sure  Hstorical  fact,  else  the  impenitent  also  could  confess 
the  Creed ;  but  it  is  the  act  of  the  soul  truly  laying  hold 
of  these  divine  realities  and  making  them  its  own.  "WTiat 
profit?  The  Triglott  says,  "What  does  it  help  thee?" 
This :  "  I  am  rightsOllS  before  God,  standing  in  right 
relation  to  God,  free  from  condemnation,  and  in  the  divine 
favor,  because  I  am  in  Clirist  (Rom.  8 : 1).  Christ  has 
redeemed  me,  and  I  have  accepted  Tvhat  He  has  done. 
These  great  facts  of  redemption,  which  I  confess,  are  the 
ground  of  my  salvation,  and  upon  these  my  soul  rests  in 
faith.     So  I  am  an  lislr  of  eternal  life,  not  in  the  full  pos- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  137 

session,*  as  yet,  but  in  the  sure  prospect  of  it.  "  Righteous" 
is  negative,  reUiting  to  sin  and  guilt.  "  Heir  "  is  positive, 
relating  to  His  benefits. 

How  art  thou  righteous  ?  You  are  a  sinner.  Your  own 
conscience  accuses  you  of  daily  past  sins  (Rom.  7  :  21-23), 
and,  what  is  yet  worse,  of  present  proneness  to  sin. 
How,  then,  can  such  a  person  be  called  righteous  ?  By  a 
trU8  faith-  This  refers  back  to  "  believest "  in  Ques.  59.  By 
this  act  of  the  soul  the  penitent  sinner  embraces  Christ  and 
all  His  benefits  (John  3  :  36).  Indeed  we  are  justified  by 
faith  only  (Rom.  3 :  28).  This  word  "  only"  does  not 
mean  that  salvation  is  a  matter  directly  between  God  and 
the  individual,  apart  from  God's  sacramental  acts ;  but 
that  faith  is  all  that  man  can  or  need  do  in  order  to  right- 
eousness before  God.  Faith  is  here  emphasized,  over 
against  the  Romish  doctrine  of  justification  by  works. 
The  office  of  faith  was  the  great  question  of  that  age.  In 
Jesus  Christ,  not  in  doctrines  or  customs ;  nor  yet  in  self, 
as  though  repentance,  faith  and  godly  living  were  the 
ground  of  our  hope  ; — but  in  Him.  And  just  this  laying 
hold  of  Christ,  as  its  only  satisfying  object,  makes  our 
faith  "  true."  To  such  true  believer,  confessing  himself  ut- 
terly without  merit,  God  of  mere  grace  (Rom.  3 :  24), 
grants  and  imputes — not  merely  imputes  but  imparts ;  and 
the  grant  is  the  ground  of  the  imputation — the  perfect  Sat- 
isfaction, righteousness  and  holiness  of  Christ-t     In  other 

*  All  Christians,  but  especially  the  children  of  the  Church,  must 
be  warned  against  selling  their  gracious  birthright  (Heb.  12  :  16). 
Many  a  son,  to-day  an  heir  to  a  large  estate,  fails  to  enter  upon  it, 
because  he  is  an  unfaithful  son.  Only  as  we  honor  our  sonship 
toward  God,  do  we  make  our  inheritance  sure  (2  Pet.  1 :  5-11). 

t  Justification  is  not  gradual  like  sanctification,  but  at  once  com- 
plete. The  work  of  Christ  was  full,  and  this  fulness  becomes  ours. 
See  Question  18. 


138  "^vords,  the  holiness  of  Christ  must  be  made  as  really  and  per- 
sonally ours  as  was  the  sinfulness  of  the  first  Adam.  Sin  was 
not  imputed,  but  really  at  hand  in  us ;  so  must  the  redeem- 
ing grace  of  Christ  be  at  hand  in  us.  Our  justification,  like 
our  forgiveness,  depends  on  the  grace  of  God  in  us:  not  just 
on  what  Christ  did  on  the  cross  for  every  man,  but  on  His 
relation  to  the  individual.  Regeneration  is  the  ground  of 
our  justification.  God  makes  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
through  faith,  partakers  of  Christ  (Ques.  53), — and  so  looks 
upon  us  as  holy  in  Christ.  God  calls  us  righteous,  or  holy, 
because  we  are  so ;  and  we  are  so  because  by  grace  He  has 
made  us  so  (2  Cor.  5  :  21).  Evsn  SO  aS  if.  This  answer 
is  very  strong.  I  am  a  sinner  ;  but  what  Christ  has  done 
on  the  cross  and  in  my  heart,  so  really  and  fully  avails 
for  me,  that  God  now  looks  upon  me  even  so  as  if  I  never 
had  had  any  original  sin,  nor  committed  any  actual  sin, 
yea,  as  if  I  had  been  as  perfect  in  obedience  as  Christ  Him- 
self.     By  faith  I  make  Him  and  all  His  benefits  my  own. 

T^y  ....  by  faith  only?  Not  because  faith  has 
any  merit,  some  value  as  a  good  work,  or  through  other 
good  works,  but  because  only  by  faith  can  I  lay  hold  of  the 
righteousness  of  Christ.  The  beggar  reaches  out  his 
hand,  and  the  sick  man  opens  his  mouth  for  the  physi- 
cian, because  only  so  can  the  benefit  come  to  them.  Faith 
in  Christ  is  not  meritorious ;  but  the  gift  of  grace,  and  the 
healing  of  the  soul  come  only  by  it.  As  only  the  eye  can 
see  natural  objects,  so  only  faith  can  see,  hear  and  grasp 
Christ. 

Why  cannot  our  good  works?  Here  the  Catechism 
shows  the  relation  of  good  works  to  faith  and  justification. 
The  Komanist  asks,  "  Why  cannot  our  good  works  be  the 
whole  or  part  of  our  righteousness  before  God  ?" 

Because  that  righteousness  must  be  perfect.    Nothing 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  139 

less  than  perfect  holiness  can  satisfy  God.  The  ground 
of  our  acceptance  must  be  absolutely  without  defect.  But 
our  best  works,  in  the  light  of  the  divine  law,  are  all  im- 
perfsct,  both  in  quality  and  quantity,  and  so  cannot  be 
even  a  part  of  our  salvation.  Besides  if  they  could  in 
any  wise  be  a  part,  then  in  so  far  we  would  not  need  Christ, 
and  He  would  not  be  a  complete  Saviour  (Ques.30).  But 
even  if  our  good  works  were  perfect,  they  are  due  from 
us  (Luke  17 :  10),  and  could  never  buy  forgiveness  for 
past  sins.     Supererogation  is  impossible. 

Do  not  OTir  good  works  merit  ? asks  the  Papist.  God 

does  reward  them  (Matt.  10 :  41,  42),  but  even  this  re- 
ward is  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  through  whose  grace  alone 
good  works  are  possible  (Phil.  2 :  13).  Therefore  thlS 
reward  is  •  •  -of  grace,  and  not  from  any  merit  on  the 
human  side.  Just  as  you  reward  a  child  for  studying, 
for  obedience  and  good  behaviour,  and  as  the  loser  rewards 
the  finder  for  restoring  a  purse — all  of  grace,  and  nothing 
of  merit, — so  God  rewards  our  good  works.  They  are 
truly  pleasing  to  God,  and  so  He  rewards  them,  but  yet 
only  because  they  are  the  fruit  of  grace.  Of  self-righteous 
goodness  and  personal  merit  apart  from  Christ,  Protestant- 
ism knows  nothing. 

Make  men  careless  ?  "  Is  not  this  a  dangerous  doc- 
trine?" asks  the  Papist.  If  our  salvation  in  no  wise  de- 
pends upon  good  works,  men  will  cease  to  do  them,  hav- 
ing no  sufScient  motive  for  doing  them.  Bv  no  means,  is 
the  emphatic  answer,  based  on  the  clear  logic  of  nature 
and  grace  (Kom.  6  :  22)..  It  is  impossible.  A  tree  must 
bear  fruit,  as  part  of  its  very  nature.  So  must  those  in- 
grafted into  Christ  (John  15:  5).  We  are  righteous  only 
by  faith  (Ques.  60) ;  but  this  faith  must  prove  itself  with 
fruits  (James  2 :  18).      The  Reformers  never  separated 


140  NOTES  OX  THE 

justification  by  faith  fi^m  good  works,  as  though  the  two 
things  could  stand  apart.  Our  good  works,  then,  are  not 
our  righteousness,  but  the  fruit  of  it.  The  Eomanist  savs : 
'"  Mv  crood  works  make  mv  salvation ;"  but  the  Protestant 
says,  "  Mv  salvation  makes  my  good  works."  TilSZkril- 
ZIS^  Here  the  doctrine  of  good  works  is  dropped,  until 
it  is  again  taken  up  in  detail  at  Ques,  86,  under  the  head 
of  Th  a  >rKPrx>~i:ss. 


T^X^TTY-FITTH   I.OEDV5   DAT. 


THE    SACRAMENTS, 

QuesHoA  65.  Since  thai  we  are  made  partakezs  of  Chrisi,  and 
all  TT^-a  benefits,  by  ^th.  only,  wienee  doth  tliis  faith  proceed  ? 

AAseer.  from,  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  wofks  fiiith  in  our  hearts 
by  the  pteadifng  of  the  gospel,  and  confirrss  it  by  the  use  of  the 
saczamexits. 

Very  significant  is  the  feet  that  the  Sacraments  are 
treated  in  the  Second  Part  of  the  Catechism,  namely,  as 
part  of  our  deKverance  from  sin. 

Bj  faith  OZlly.  The  redemption  of  Christ  becomes  per- 
sonally ours  only  by  fiiith  (Ques.  20,  53,  60,  61  and  64). 
Of  course  this  does  not  mean  that  our  salvation  is  a  mat- 
ter directly  between  the  individual  and  Giod,  apart  from 
Chtirch  and  ^craments  (which  is  the  Quaker  doctrine). 
This  would  make  the  Catechism  stultiiy  itself  in  much 
that  goes  before  and  much  that  follows  after  this  question. 
"  By  faith  only "  expresses  the  personal  condition,  over 
against  the  Romish  doctrine  of  meritorious  works. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  141 

.    Whence  doth  this  faith  proceed  ?    ^^ot  from  the  word, 

not  from  the  Sacraments,  but  from  thc  Holy  Ghost.  This  is 
the  answer  given  in  Ques.  21.  He  does  two  things.  He 
works  faith.  He  awakens  the  natural  faith-power,  and 
makes  it  able  to  grasp  the  objects  of  faith.  By  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel.  Faith  comes  from  Him,  not  directly 
but  only  through  divinely-appointed  means.  One  of  these 
is  preaching  (Rom.  10 :  17).  The  truth  has  power  over 
the  soul  because  it  is  divine  (John  6  :  63).  Therefore  the 
great  necessity  of  hearing  the  word  (in  the  pulpit,  in  cate- 
chization,  and  in  the  family).  In  OUr  hearts.  True  faith 
is  not  just  a  mental  process,  but  an  act  of  the  inner  life. 
He  also  confirms  faith,  strengthens  and  enlarges  it,  makes 
it  more  firm.  The  SacramentS.  So  called  from  saeramen- 
tum,  the  Roman  military  oath,  because  God's  covenant  is 
His  oath  (Deut.  29 :  12),  and  the  Sacraments  are  His 
seals.  By  the  use  of.  This  phrase  is  very  important,  and 
is  repeated  in  Ques.  66.  It  condemns  the  Romish  doc- 
trine that  the  Sacraments  have  inherent  power,  and  pro- 
duce their  results  without  regard  to  the  fitness  or  activity 
of  the  individual  (for  example,  the  daily  mass  when  the 
people  are  absent,  and  masses  for  the  dead).  "Use"  im- 
plies the  faith  and  activity  of  the  believer  (Num.  21 :  8 ; 
John  9:7).  "Word  and  Sacraments,  then,  are  both  neces- 
sary to  our  salvation.  We  are  not  saved  by  preaching 
alone,  by  the  mere  knowledge  of  the  great  facts  of  re- 
demption given  in  the  Creed.  Hence  when  Peter  had 
preached,  the  believing  Jews  were  at  once  baptized  (Acts 
2:  41).