Question  66.     ^Vh at  are  the  sacraments? 

Answer.     The  sacraments  are  holy  visible  signs  and  seals   ap- 
pointed of  God  for  this  end,  that  by  the  use  thereof  He  may  the 


142  more  fully  declare  and  seal  to  us  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  viz., 
that  He  grants  us  fully  the  remission  of  sin,  and  life  eternal,  for  the 
sake  of  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross. 

The  Catecliism  first  gives  a  general  view  of  the  nature 
and  meaning  of  the  Sacraments,  and  then  takes  up  each 
Sacrament  in  detail.  The  importance  of  the  subject  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  the  Catechism  devotes  eighteen  ques- 
tions to  it.  Four  define  the  Sacraments;  six  explain 
Holy  Baptism ;  six  explain  the  Lord's  Supper ;  and  two 
relate  to  the  fitness  of  the  communicant.  The  Sacraments 
are  signs.  They  explain  these  gracious  acts  of  God.  The 
German  expressively  calls  them  "  truth-signs,"  over  against 
the  rationalistic  error  that  they  are  empty  signs.  The 
sacramental  elements  were  not  arbitrarily  but  wisely 
chosen.  As  Baptism  is  the  sign  of  cleansing,  not  milk  or 
wine  but  water  was  used ;  and  as  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the 
sign  of  nourishment,  bread  and  wine  were  used.  And 
seals.  The  definition  does  not  stop  with  signs,  as  though 
the  Sacraments  were  only  representatives  of  something 
outside  of  themselves,  like  the  rainbow  (Gen.  9  :  13),  the 
paschal  blood  (Ex.  12:  22)  and  the  brazen  serpent  (Num. 
21:8);  but  they  are  called  seals,  assurances  of  the  presence 
of  that  which  is  signified.  A  seal  on  an  official  document 
(deed,  writ,  pardon,  charter),  is  not  an  empty  form,  but  gives 
value  to  that  to  which  it  belongs.  Men  must  not  say  they 
have  the  inward  assurance  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  do 
not  need  these  visible  sacramental  assurances ;  for  these  are 
divinely  appointed  and  given  just  because  we  need  them, 
and  it  is  very  presumptuous  in  men  to  ignore  them.  Hence 
the  Sacraments  are  called  "  sealing  ordinances."  Christ 
oflTers  us  grace ;  faith  accepts  it ;  the  Sacraments  seal  it. 
Visible.  This  relates  to  their  natural  elements.  But 
they  have  also  an  invisible  side.     This  is  true   even  of 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  143 

water  or  bread.  You  can  see  it  with  the  bodily  eye,  and 
yet  its  refreshing,  nourishing  power  you  cannot  see.  Hence 
the  Sacraments  are  sometimes  defined  as  visible  sio^ns  of 
an  invisible  grace.  *  God  has  suited  them  to  our  nature. 
Man  is  neither  matter  nor  spirit,  but  the  mysterious  union 
of  both.  He  is  two-sided.  The  soul  is  reached  through 
the  body.  Not  my  mouth  speaks,  but  my  soul  through 
my  mouth ;  not  to  your  ears,  but  to  your  soul  through 
them.  The  Holy  Ghost  reaches  the  soul  of  man  through 
his  body,  in  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel ;  and  in  like 
manner  confirms  his  faith  by  the  use  of  visible  signs  and 
seals,  t  called  Sacraments,  which  have  thus  not  only  outer 
material  form  but  also  inner  spiritual  power.  Holv.  This 
relates  to  their  spiritual  substance.  Holy,  not  only  be^ 
cause  appointed  by  the  Holy  Saviour,  found  only  in  His 
holy  Church,  and  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  sancti- 
fication  of  men,  but  also  because  to  natural  elements  is 
now  joined  sacramental  grace.  Appointed  of  God,  namely, 
Christ  (Matt.  28:  19;  1  Cor.  11 :  23-26),  therefore  found 
only  in  the  Christian  Church,  to  be  administered  only  by 
a  minister  of  Christ,  and  this  to  the  end  of  the  world.  The 
Church  cannot  change  them,  much  less  set  them  aside, 
because  they  are  not  of  its  appointing.  J 

*  The  Larger  Catechism  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  says :  "  The 
parts  of  a  sacrament  are  two :  the  one,  an  outward  and  sensible 
sign,  used  according  to  Christ's  own  appointment ;  the  other,  an 
inward  and  spiritual  grace  thereby  signified." 

f  A  fine  illustration  of  the  need  and  meaning  of  sealing  ordi- 
nances is  given  in  Gen.  15  :  7-18.  God  said,  ''  I  will  give  thee." 
Abraham  said,  "  How  shall  I  know  this  ?"  Then  came  the  visible 
seal  to  the  covenant  promise. 

X  Various  institutions  and  customs  of  the  Church  may  be  either 
changed  or  altogether  set  aside,  because  men  have  made  them,  and 
so  may  unmake  them  ;  but  not  so  in  regard  to  the  Sacraments. 


144  The  Old  Testament  Cliurcli  had  its  rites  (circumcision 
and  the  passover,  Ex.  12 :  48, — we  do  not  call  them  Sac- 
raments "^ — which  also  were  of  divine  appointment,  but  of 
different  meaning,  and  only  for  that  dispensation.  They 
passed  away,  because  the  Church  itself  did  so  ;  but  the 
Christian  Sacraments  will  never  change,  because  the 
Church  will  abide  in  its  present  form  tiU  the  end  of  the 
world.  B7  the  US9  iherecf-  This  important  phrase  was 
explained  under  Ques.  60.  He  may.  The  "use"  is 
man's  activity,  but  the  Sacrament  itself  is  God's  act. 
The  Sacraments  are  not  human  acts  of  worship,  in  which 
we  express  penitence,  faith  and  love,  but  divine  acts  of 
grace.  Ke  does  something.  They  should  never  be  put 
on  a  level  with  singing,  praying  and  alms-giving,  because 
they  have  their  own  peculiar  nature  and  purposes.  Their 
efficacy  is  real,  present,  and  thus  assured  to  us.  If  this  is 
true  of  the  preached  word — and  no  one  doubts  it — ^why  is 
it  not  true  also  of  the  Sacraments  ?  What  now,  do^  God 
do  in  them  ?  Declare,  explain  the  nature  and  meaning  of 
something.  The  German  says:  zu  verstehen  gehe.  A!ld 
seal.  Through  them  God  also  assures  us  of  that  which  is 
signi&ed  bv  them.  Indeed  the  sism  and  the  thinsr  sismified 
must  not  be  separated.  As  signs,  the  Sacraments  are  visible 
acts  ;  but  thej  also  have  divine  contents.  The  promise  cf 
the  G-OSpel,  namely,  the  fact  of  redemption,  the  benefits  of 
Christ,  negatively,-  "  the  remission  of  sin,"  and  positively, 
"life  eternal"  These  benefits  He  grants,  not  imputes, 
but  gives,  not  at  some  tune  but  now.  Freelv.  The  Tri- 
glott  says,  "  out  of  free  grace,"  over  against  the  Eomish 

^The  great  dicTerence  between  Jewish  rires  and  dnisdan  Sacra- 
ments is  this,  that  the  first  were  types  and  shadows  of  good  things 
to  come,  whereas  the  latter  are  divine  pledges  of  grace  at  hand  for 
men,  the  real  fulfilment  of  what  before  was  only  promised. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  145 

error  of  grace  merited  through  good  works.  This  promise 
of  the  Gospel,  God  in  the  Sacraments  more  fully  declares 
and  seals.  He  had  done  so  in  part  by  the  preaching  of 
the  word,  explaining  the  promise,  and  also  sealmg  it  by 
working  faith  in  the  heart ;  but  here  the  Sacraments  are 
raised  above  the  word.  What  the  word  declares,  they 
"more  fully" — the  German  says,  "  better" — declare. 
What  the  word  offers,  they  give.  This  shows  why  they 
come  right  after  the  Creed ;  not  by  accident,  but  to  con- 
firm the  faith  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  wrought.     These 

benefits  He  grants  for  the  sake  of  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ 

on  the  cross.  This  expression  is  very  often  used  in  the  Cate- 
chism (Ques.  31, 37, 56, 66, 67,  69, 70, 75, 80),  and  always  in 
the  same  sense,  namely,  to  denote  the  great  high-priestly 
act  of  Christ  upon  the  Cross,  as  the  only  ground  of  our 
salvation,  over  against  two  errors  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church :  the  saving  merit  of  good  works,  and  the  unbloody 
sacrifice  of  the  altar  (Ques.  80).  The  grace  of  God  comes 
not  by  His  abstract  mercy,  nor  yet  by  our  works,  but  only 
by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  this  not  repeated,  but "  one  " 
sacrifice,  not  on  the  altar,  but  "  on  the  cross." 

But  how  can  the  Sacraments  be  the  bearers  of  such 
great  grace  ?  Because  Christ  has  thereto  appointed  them. 
If  God  can  create  the  wonders  of  heaven  and  earth,  why 
not  also  this  sacramental  mystery  ?  We  should  expect  in 
them  just  what  He  offers.  In  mercy  to  human  weakness, 
He  here  repeats  in  significant  symbols,  what  He,  in  the 
preached  word,  declares,  namely,  that  He  will  pardon  and 
save  us.  And  if  we  have  faith  in  the  word  as  a  divine 
power,  "  bearing  supernatural  force  under  the  form  of  the 
natural,"  why  not  also  here  ?  Indeed  if  they  are  not  mys- 
teries of  grace  but  only  impressive  ceremonies,  then  there 

is  no  room  for  faith. 
146  *'  But  you  must  have  faith  in  Christ,  not  in  the  Sacra- 
ments," says  one. 

How  can  you  have  faith  in  Christ,  and  doubt  His  sacra- 
mental acts  ?  If  you  have  confidence  in  a  man,  must  you 
not  also  believe  his  word  ?     So  here. 

Just  to  the  extent  that  men  call  the  Sacraments  "forms," 
"  impressive  ceremonies,"  "  solemn  rites,"  and  think  of 
them  as  commanded  by  Christ  merely  to  affect  the  mind 
of  the  individual,  and  to  be  observed  simply  as  an  evidence 
of  obedience,  will  they  neglect  the  Sacraments.  For  this 
reason  infant  baptism  is  almost  a  dead  letter  in  some 
churches ;  for  men  cannot  see  the  necessity  of  an  empty 
ceremony.  Thus  Christ  becomes  a  formalist,  and  the 
Sacraments  have  but  little  force.  To  think  of  them  as 
having  meaning  only  on  the  human  side,  as  acts  of  con- 
fession and  obedience,  is  to  rob  them  of  their  true  charac- 
ter and  purpose,  as  acts  of  God  sealing  His  word.  Only 
when  the  Sacraments  are  taken  at  par,  instead  of  having 
their  gracious  force  ignored,  can  you  understand  the 
solemn  stress  laid  in  the  New  Testament  upon  their  use. 

Some  imagine  they  exalt  Christ  and  the  preached  word 
by  lowering  the  Sacraments ;  but  they  fail  to  see  that 
He  appointed  these,  as  well  as  the  word  (Matt.  28:  19, 
20),  and  promised  great  things  in  them.  How  much  bet- 
ter to  have  child-like  faith  in  these  divine  acts,  than  to 
explain  away  their  meaning !