Question  68.  How  many  Sacraments  has  Christ  instituted  in  the 
New  Covenant  or  Testament  ? 

Answer.     Two,  namely,  holy  Baptism,  and  the  holy  Supper. 

How  many?  Romanism  teaches  that  the  Church  may 
appoint  Sacraments ;  but  Protestantism  says  they  are  ap- 
pointed of  God  (Ques.  66).  Now,  according  to  this  defi- 
nition, how  many  has  Christ  instituted?  In  the  nCW 
Covenant  or  Testament*  in  the  Christian  Church,  which  is 
the  new  dispensation,  as  distinguished  from  the  Jewish 
Church.  Sometimes  the  expressed  will  of  God  is  called  a 
covenant,  and  sometimes  a  testament  (Heb.  8:6;  9 :  15). 
The  word  testament  is  now  used  to  denote  the  record  of 
God's  covenant ;  but  the  Catechism  refers  not  to  the  Bible, 


148  yoTEs  oy  the 

but  to  the  Church  itself.  Ttt:,  answers  all  Protestantism  ; 
Holy  Baptism  and  the  Holy  Supper.  The  Roman  Catho- 
lic Church  holds  seven  sacraments  : — Baptism,  the  Lord's 
Supper,  confirmation,  ordination,  marriage,  penance  and 
extreme  unction. 

The  number  of  Sacraments  has  varied  in  different  ages 
of  the  Church,  but  Protestantism  can  accept  only  two, 
because: — 

(1)  There  were  only  two  in  the  Jewish  Church,  circum- 
cision and  the  passoyer ;  and  these  have  their  antitypes  or 
correspondents  in  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  (2) 
Only  these  two  were  positively  commanded  by  Christ,  for 
perpetual  and  universal  observance.  (3)  Only  these  two 
"were  ield  as  Sacraments  by  the  early  Christian  Church. 
(4)  Some  of  the  seven  are  not  needful  for  all.  Marriage 
is  optional,  and  ordination  exceptional ;  and  neither  one 
is  for  personal  salvation. 

TTe  altogether  reject  penance  and  extreme  unction  (the 
latter  is  adjninistered  by  a  sect  here  and  there)  ;  but  con- 
firmation, marriage  and  ordination  are  held,  not  as  sac- 
raments, but  as  sacramental  acts,  acts  of  Grod,  done  by 
His  minister,  carrying  with  them  force  and  authority,  each 
according  to  its  own  divine  purpose. 

Certain  sects  hold  to  ''  feet-washing,''  as  a  divinely  ap- 
pointed rite  (John  13  :  14,  15) ;  to  be  observed  in  connec- 
tion with  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  apart  from  the  fact  that 
it  lacks  the  very  nature  of  a  Sacrament,  being  the  act  of 
man  to  man,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  while  the  Xew  Testa- 
ment gives  examples  of  Baptism,  the  Lord's  Supper,  ordi- 
nation, confirmation  and  marriage,  it  gives  none  of  "  feet 
washing."  It  is  mentioned  only  once  by  the  Apostles,  and 
then  not  as  an  act  of  religion,  but  of  hospitality,  not  as  a 
Sacrament  but  as  a  good  work  (1  Tim.  5 :  10).    In  1  Cor. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  149 

11 :  23-39,  Paul  gives  a  minute  account  of  the  Lord's 

Supper,  but  without  even  a  reference  to  this  rite.  Signi- 
ficant ! 


TWENTY-SIXTH  AISTD  TWEXTT-SEYEISTH 

LORD'S  BAYS. 


HOLY    BAPTISM.