Question  69.  How  art  thou  admonished  and  assured,  by  holy 
baptism,  that  the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  is  of  real 
advantage  to  thee? 

Answer.  Thus,  that  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing  with 
water,  adding  thereunto  this  promise,  that  I  am  as  certainly  washed 
by  His  blood  and  Spirit  from  all  the  pollution  of  my  soul,  that  is, 
from  all  my  sins,  as  I  am  washed  externally  with  water,  by  which 
the  filthiness  of  the  body  is  commonly  washed  away. 

Having  given  a  general  view  of  the  Sacraments,  as 
necessary  to  a  correct  view  of  the  particular  Sacrament, 
the  Catechism  now  takes  up  each  in  detail.  Of  course 
Holy  Baptism  is  first. 

The  question  itself  is  significant.  Holy  Baptism,  though 
administered  only  once,  must  never  be  forgotten.  Children 
especially  should  often  be  reminded  of  what  was  therein 
done  for  them,  and  of  what  is  now  due  from  them. 

Admonished  and  assured.  The  Triglott  says  :  "  Sig- 
nified and  sealed."  These  words  point  back  to  the  defini- 
tion of  a  Sacrament,  "signs  and  seals  "  (Ques.  66).  ThoU 
means  the  baptized  child.  The  Church  says  to  him, "  The 
one  sacrifice  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  is  of  real  advantage 
to  thee ;  and  this  advantage  is  signified  and  sealed  to  thee 
in  Holy  Baptism ;  tell  me  now  hoW." 


150  Tims  •  •  •  proniise,  namely,  because  Ckrist  joined  His 
promise  to  the  external  ^vvashing.  This  makes  it  what 
it  is,  His  own  significant  assurance  that  we  are  par- 
takers of  Him  and  all  His  benefits.  Clllist  appointed- 
Holy  Baptism  is  a  two-fold  washing, — an  external  and 
visible  washing  with  water,*  as  the  sign  and  pledge  of  an 
invisible  but  real  washing  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of 
Christ. 

And  these  two  belong  together,  as  the  present  tense  in 
both  question  and  answer  shows.  To  separate  them  as 
though  the  internal  washing  had  gone  before,  or  might 
come  after,  robs  Holy  Baptism  of  the  very  comfort  and  as- 
surance which  the  question  implies.  As  certainly  shows 
the  close  relation  of  the  two.  The  invisible  benefit  is  as 
real  and  certain  for  faith  as  the  visible  act.  Washed  •  •  • 
from  all  my  sins,  original  and  actual,  past  and — rightly 
understood — fature,"r  from  their  guilt  and  power.  By  H!^ 
blood  and  Spirit,  ^ot  water,  but  these  are  the  producing 
cause.  "  Blood  "  refers  to  His  atonement,  through  which 
forgiveness  comes  (Lev.  17:  11  ;  Heb.  9:  22).  "Spirit" 
refers  to  the  positive  activity  of  the  Holy  Ghost.