Question  73.  AVhy  thai  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  the 
*'  washing  of  regeneration,"  and  the  '*  washing  away  of  sins  ?" 


Gt)d  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that,  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  awav  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesos 
Christ ;  but  especially  that,  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign.  He  may 
a^ure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really  a3 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

^Thy  ......  call  3ap:isn?      Having  allowed  the 

two  things  to  be  for  a  moment  separated,  in  Ques.  72,  the 
Catechism  here  again  carefully  joins  them  together.  It 
lays  aside  the  words  "  external  baptism  with  water,"  and 
speaks  of  Baptism.     It  acknowledges  no  such  thing  a3 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  155 

• 

"  water-baptism."  Now,  if  the  efficacy  is  not  in  the  visi- 
ble element  and  transaction,  but  in  the  internal  part, 
"  Why,  then,  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  Baptism  tlie  wash- 
ing of  regeneration  /"* 

Not  without  groat  cause,  namely,  it  is  just  such  an  ex- 
ternal and  internal  washing.  Christ  appointed  a  baptism 
of  water  and  of  the  Spirit  (John  3:5),  a  visible  sign  and 
seal  of  an  invisible  grace,  an  external  washing  of  the  body 
as  the  divinely  appointed  pledge  of  a  corresponding  in- 
ternal washing  of  the  soul;  and  this  true  Baptism  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  Titus  3 :  5  calls,  "  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion," for  two  reasons  : — 

1)  To  teach  us.  The  visible  washing  is  a  sign  or  sym- 
bol of  the  invisible.  As  water  cleanses  the  body,  so  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  cleanse  the  soul.  Hence  Bap- 
tism is  called  a  "  washing." 

2)  To  assure  us.  It  is  much  more  than  a  mere  sign,  to 
represent  a  spiritual  effect ;  it  is  also  a  divine  seal  to  as- 
sure us  of  this  gracious  effect,  namely,  that  we  are  cleansed 
and  renewed.  Spiritually,  not  with  water,  but  by  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ ;  really,  not  just  in  appear- 
ance or  figure  but  in  fact ;  and  Baptism  is  called  a  diviue 
pledge,  because  it  is  from  Christ,  and  includes  the  activity 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Therefore,  the  Holy  Ghost  calls  Bap- 
tism the  washing  of  regeneration,  even  because  it  is  this.f 

*  See  how  carefully  the  Catechism,  again  critically  applying 
these  words  of  Paul  to  Baptism,  holds  the  two  sides  of  the  Sacra- 
ment as  joined  together  in  one  divine  act. 

f  The  standards  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  are  even  stronger 
than  the  Heidelberg  Catechism  in  defining  the  meaning  and  bene- 
fits of  Baptism :  **  Baptism  is  ...  .  not  only  for admis- 
sion into  the  visible  Church,  but  also  ....  a  sign  and  seal 

of  his  ingrafting  into  Christ,  of  regeneration,  of  remission  of  sins, 
....  of  adoption  and  resurrection  unto  everlasting  life." 


1-56 


yOTES  ON  THE 


Qj^sdu-^  74-    Are  m&ntsalao  tobebapdaed? 

A^s^'i^-  Yes,  fiir  aance  they  as  wdl  as  ffae  adnh  are  indoded 
in  the  covenant  and  duircii  of  God;  and  sinee  zeden^don  from 
an  by  tlie  Wood  of  Oiiiat,  and  die  Holy  Gbost,  the  aath«  of  fciA, 
is  psomked  to  Afim  no  less  than  to  the  adult :  they  mnat,  tfie«e- 
fiKe,byb^tism,as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  be  also  admitted  into 
theChnslian  al]IIdl^  and  be  di^ingaidicd  fitom  the  cfaildTen  of 
in&dds,  as  was  done  in  the  old  covenant  or  testemenfc  by  eircam- 
eisioD,  iratead  of  ^Heii  h^v^sm  was  institoted  in  the  new  cove- 
nant 

r«.-.«i5  •■!-*?  Yes  eni--^  ."  c-Ht ;  whv not?  " Because 
thev  ::z"  ::  repent;  and  believe,"  savs  the  B^4ist 

fn-  -  iptism  was  never  opposed,  on  scriptural  groonds, 
till  1:-'..  inring  ike  Befonnation,  by  the  Anabaptfets.* 
And  — li-^  -.0  thdbr  oppoeilaoii  this  questioa  ^as  intro- 
duced. 

r-..„  ,.  ^^"   ^  .Vj  -j«^-^    For  adult  the  Tri^lott 

^V3 :     "  T^irir  parents.''     Tbe  Catediisni  speaks  i. : :   ; : 
all  cbildren,  but  of  tl:  Sr  ::  Cliristian  par^zTi. 

Ars  Lid-i^d  —  ~s  •  ■  •  CT-irci  ::  ^*i.    THs  is  the 

first  of  rvvo  rr:-5:.i^,  ■■C:-tZ^:i:"  neazis  zzr  will  and 
plan  and  promke  of  G :i  in  rrr'ri  ::  lur  redemption. 
"Cliiirch"  here  r2e-?.:i5  :Lr  .Tzei^^  G^:^iT  of  God's  people^ 
in  wMcb  he  ^ ::i- "-  -  l  :  i._l  birth  firom  Christian  par 
i^its.  "In-l-iiri  ::ii_-:  ii^-zi^z,  diat  cMdren  by  their 
nataral  birth  are  members  of  the  Church  ;  for  Ais  fe  con- 
tiadicted  not  only  by  J<din  3:  6,  but  al^  by  the  subae- 
quen:  sT..:eiiez.:  that  they  must  "be  admitted  into  the 
Chris  r  -  Chnrck."  It  iie.^i.5  :l:3.t  they  stand  in  God's 
purj :  T     :  ojace ;   and  being  bom  of  believing  parents 


-D--^ 


m^siaiB,  a  sect  thai  arose  A.  D.  1100^  igected  in- 
:  -:     ^       _  a  the groond fliafc diildren eoold  not  stall  be 

sayed,  and  (heieiaie  ahoold  not  be  baptiaed! 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  157 

they  now  have  a  right  to  enter  the  covenant  in  the  way  of 
membership.  Children  have  always  been  included  in  the 
covenant.  This  was  so  in  the  sad  case  of  Adam.  So  with 
Noah  (Gen.  9:  9);  so  with  Abraham  (Gen.  17:  7);  re- 
peated by  the  mouth  of  Moses  (Deut.  29;  10-15)  ;  and  so 
continued  down  to  the  days  of  Christ,  who  Himself  was 
circumcised  (Luke  2  :  21). 

Redemption  ....  is  promised  to  them.    This  is  the 

second  ground  of  infant  baptism.  "  Redemption :"  the 
full  benefits  of  Christ  as  their  Saviour.  This  is,  nega- 
tively, deliverance  from  sin  by  His  blood  (Eph.  1 :  7), 
and,  positively,  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  also 
in  due  time  works  faith  in  the  child's  heart.  Now  this 
full  redemption  is  "  promised  to  them  no  less  than  to  their 
parents  "  (so  the  German  reads).  See  Acts  2 :  39.  They 
need  it,  because  partakers  of  the  fall  (Rom.  5:  12,18, 
19).  Redemption  is  as  broad  as  the  fall,  and  therefore 
the  covenant  of  grace  is  for  them  as  well  as  for  the  adult. 
Question  35  says  that  Christ  became  a  little  child  that 
His  redeeming  work  might  reach  back  as  far  as  our  sin- 
disease  (Ps.  51 :  5).  Therefore,  when  the  work  was  done, 
its  benefit  was  ofiered  to  all  of  every  age.  Infant  bap- 
tism rests  not  so  much  on  separate  texts,  as  on  this  great 
fact  of  a  world's  Redeemer  for  all  who  need  Him. 

They  must be  admitted  into  the  Christian 

Church.  This  is  the  conclusion  drawn  from  the  two  rea- 
sons. Admitted.  The  German  is  much  stronger  :  einver- 
leibt,  ingrafted  fas  this  word  is  translated  in  Ques. 
20),  lifted  out  of  a  relation  of  death  and  brought  into  a 
relation  of  life,  taken  out  of  the  old  Adam  and  inserted 
into  the  New.  Surely  those  included  in  the  covenant 
should  be  received  into  it.  To  refuse  a  child  that  has  the 
covenant  claim,  is  as  wrong  as  to  refuse  an  adult.     By 


158  BaptiS22L  By  tkis  act  of  God  the  spiritual  relation  of  the 
child  is  really  changed  ^1  Cor.  12:  13;  GaL  3:  27). 
Hence  infant  baptism  was  practised  from  the  dav  of  Pen- 
tecost onward  How  could  ChristianitT  be  narrower  than 
Judaism  ?  How  shut  out  those  who  for  ages  were  admit- 
ted? If  their  children  had  ";  rri.  shut  out,  the  Jews  would 
have  made  binex  complaint ;  but  not  a  word  of  this  is  re- 
corded. Indeed  if  Baptism  had  not  been  for  children, 
then  the  Apostles  should  have  explained  to  the  Jews  this 
great  change  in  the  covenant  of  God ;  but  on  the  contrary 
they  receive  also  their  children.  Of  course  in  this  mission- 
ary age  of  the  Church,  mainly  adults  were  baptized ;  but 
we  read  of  the  baptism  of  whole  families.,  in  which  evi- 
dently children  were  found,  namely,  Lydia's.  the  PhUip- 
pian  jailers,  and  Stephanas"  Acts  16:  15:  Acts  16:  33; 
1  Cor.  1:  16). 

ListingTlished.  Baptism  is  not  an  empty  sign,  but  a 
real  divine  act,  making  the  child  different  from  what  he 
was  before,  and  so  making  him  to  differ  from  all  the  un- 
baptized.  If  not,  what  would  it  be  but  a  formality  ? 
Infidels-  The  word  infidel  commonly  means  one  who  de- 
nies the  truth  of  the  Bible  and  of  Christianity ;  but  here 
it  is  used  in  a  broader  sense,  and  simply  means  one  who  is 
not  a  Christian,  as  in  2  Cor.  6  :  15,  and  1  Tim.  5  :  8.  *'  Dis- 
tinsruished,''  i.  e.,  marked,  as  beloncrinsr  to  Christ,  thougrh 
the  mark  is  seen  by  G?d  al-ne.  The  children  of  unbe- 
lievers are  outside  of  the  e:  tenant,  and  without  snch  a 
claim  to  it,  though  equally  needing  its  benefits.  Of  what 
benefit  is  Baptism  ?  3Iuch  every  way  (Eom.  3  :  2;.  It 
is  for  the  child  just  what  it  is  for  the  adult.  It  signifies 
and  seals  the  forgiyeness  of  his  sins,  the  renewing  of  his 
nature,  and  his  admission  into  the  Christian  Church.  Bap- 
tism, thus,  is  not  a  prospective  blessing,  namely^  in  order 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  159 

that  the  child  may  some  day  become  a  Christian ;  but  it 
is  a  present  blessing,  bringing  the  child  into  the  Christian 
Church,  uniting  him  to  Christ,  and  making  him  an  heir  of 
eternal  life. 

This  is  what  we  mean  by  "baptismal  grace."  Baptism 
is  a  benefit  to  the  child — call  the  benefit  by  whatever  name 
you  will ;  ingrafting,  adoption,  regeneration,  a  spiritual 
blessing,  cleansing,  or  grace, — only  hold'  fast  to  the  fact 
that  there  is  something  at  hand  for  the  child.  Surely 
Christ  did  not  appoint  an  empty  ceremony. 

As  was  done  ....    by  circiiincision.     Here  the 

Catechism  supports  infant  baptism  by  an  argument  drawn 
from  the  Jewish  rite  of  circumcision :  would  God  by  a 
sacramental  seal  admit  children  into  the  typical  and  pre- 
paratory old  covenant,   and   then-  shut  them  out  of  the 

new  ?  Instead  of  which  Baptism  was  instituted.  Cir- 
cumcision, in  the  Jewish  Church,  was  the  sign  and  seal  of 
God's  covenant  (Gen.  17  :  7-12),  by  which  the  child  was 
admitted  into  the  Church,  and  to  a  position  of  holiness  be- 
fore God  (Lev.  20 :  26).  He  then  received  his  name 
(Gen.  17 :  5 ;  Luke  1 :  59  ;  2:  21),  and  was  pledged  to  a 
life  of  holiness. 

We  know  that  Baptism  has  taken  the  place  of  circum- 
cision, because : —  (1)  The  Apostolic  Commission  (Matt. 
28 ;  19)  makes  it  the  initiatory  sacrament.  (2)  In  Col.  2 : 
11  Baptism  is  called  the  circumcision  of  Christ.  (3)  This 
question  was  settled  forever  by  the  first  Synod  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church  (Acts  15  :),  which  said  that  circumcision  is 
not  a  Christian  ordinance.  (4)  Therefore  circumcision  is 
nowhere  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  as  needful,  but 
great  stress  is  laid  upon  Baptism. 

The  baptized  child  needs  Christian  training.  Baptisni 
is  not  the  end,  but  only  the  beginning  of  his  Christian  life. 


160  ISOTES  OS  THE 

Wliat  God  lias  done  ftr  liim  nmst  now  be  met  hf  lAat  Ins 

parents  can  do  £»*  liim.  In&nt  bapti^n  demands  Cluri^- 
tian  nnrtnre  (Eph-  6 :  4).*  If  cMldren  have  not  a  poei- 
tivelj  Chrisrian  home,  their  eatechizatum  will  likelj  &D. 
dioit  of  its  proper  end.  Hie  "  nurinie  of  the  Ijord  "  is 
before  **  admonTfiogt"  not  odIv  in  time  l>at  also  as  a  di- 
Tindy  appcnnted  ordrr. 

So  the  ehUd  has  a  w: rz  :  Z  :  rz.  in:    :li  ziz _     ii. 

he  miKt  now  gro^  i:  yi  ::  TZr  :  :ii  !„  :  :  m:  :  — 
come  a  zi^n  in  CiirisT.  T-ir  ':;  ;::;i_:i  _;:i::  m":!.  ins 
sooL':  :;  ^Tni:  ii.:n  sii:- iTs^ij  :n  :i -:  ;ii7  im.  Z  ;::-_: 
baa  T —  r:r_-  [  i:  li-  m:::.  i.A:.::r  ;.  _:.:m  :nis.  wim  re- 
long,  TiT-i:z_  Zi~  ii:  :    :Zr  Holv    -im: 


GBXEcnasa  to  evfant  za^ti?:^: 
iHayiog  Iffld  a  good  feon  i  ~  n  :  r  :iir  i     riiir   i:  ni^j 

be  nefl  bii^y  to  ansm^  &  z-^        :  :    ns  ir^    -  ..in:  it. 

Only  r^oanbcT  that  it  is  a  very  rusy  ^iiizr  ::  r.i-T  :  :  r> 

tioi^  and  ask  hard  qaesAc—s,  in  rrr ..r    :        _     :  n^-  -     - 

:r:nr  ; :  tKe  BiMe. 

{I'j  Ji  UnrA  expre^hj  commanded.     TMs  is  ir-if,     ^  zir 

*JnafcfiirflnsrejL^:i  -T  r-i^f  ::    :i;:nT    nrii^.iijr::    ::    :i-:^f 
^daDazenolintheC      :/^  i    i  ianion,  art.  119),  faeeao^  ^r 

hxveno  asEiinmoec:  -iir_^  ._:_::- n  rr-iirii^  This  is  in  fiill  aigre^ 
n—T —ith  the  leadi^;  i  :::-:-=  :  :iiT  EeSraiatian  on  the  sob- 
-tI        r^iSTsavAai;  .—7  '.'~-  :i— i-^::  ;:        ^<gri«n  pirpnfa  m^  lie 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  161 

doctrines  rest  not  on  a  distinct  passage,  but  rather  on  the 
very  nature  of  things.  For  example,  female  communion ; 
keeping  the  first  day  of  the  week  holy  ;  besides  many  of 
our  Church  customs.  So  infant  baptism  is  not  expressly 
commanded  ;  but  none  the  less  scriptural  is  it  on  this  ac- 
count. It  rests  in  the  broad,  catholic  spirit  of  Christianity  ; 
and  many  passages  plainly  teach  the  doctrine,  though  none 
mentions  the  baptism  of  children  in  just  so  many  words. 

(2)  Tlie  child  does  not  understand  it,  and  how  can  he 
receive  any  benefit  from  it  ?  Did  the  Jewish  child  under- 
stand circumcision  ?  Did  those  in  Mark  10 :  14  ?  Does 
a  child  understand  the  will  which  makes  him  heir  ?  Yet 
in  every  case  there  is  benefit.  As  the  child  without  either 
will  or  understanding  came  under  the  power  of  sin  through 
the  first  Adam,  so  may  he  likewise  unconsciously  come 
under  the  grace  of  Christ. 

(3)  The  child  cannot  meet  the  conditions  of  baptism, 
namely,  repentance  and  faith. 

This  is  the  great  objection  of  Baptists.  But  if  the  child 
has  not  active  repentance  and  faith,  he  also  is  not  impeni- 
tent and  unbelieving.  There  is  no  opposition,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  can  work.  But  faith  is  at  hand,  in  the  parents,  who 
act  for  the  child  until  he  can  act  for  himself.  The  condi- 
tions of  circumcision  were  just  the  same ;  yet  not  the  child, 
but  the  parents,  met  them.  So  in  Matt.  8 :  5-13  ;  Mark  7  : 
25-30 ; 9  :  17-27. 

(4)  You  should  not  hind  the  child  with  vows.  Why  not  let 
him  grow  up  and  choose  for  himself? 

As  the  parent  acts  for  the  child  in  all  temporal  things, 

not  wronging  him  but  meeting  his  wants,  so  must  he  care 

for  the  child's  soul.     This  he  does  by  a  divine  right  (Gen. 

18  :  19  :  Deut.  6:7;  Prov.  22  :  6  ;  John  21 :  15;  Eph.  6  : 

.4),  based  upon  the  common-sense  principle  that  the  parent 
162  understands  better  than  tlie  child  possibly  can  what  is 
needful  for  him  ;  and  the  child  is  bound  by  what  the 
parent  has  done.  What  has  he  done  ?  Brought  the  child 
into  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  pledged  him  to  keep  God's 
law.  How  was  this  a  wrong  ?  This  the  Jew  was  com- 
manded to  do  (Deut.  29:  10-13),  and  this  he  did,  not  only 
in  circumcision  but  also  in  many  special  vows  (Ex.  24 :  7  ;  1 
Sam.  1 :  28).  So  the  Christian  parent,  in  the  name  of  the 
child,  takes  the  baptismal  vows,  pledging  the  child  to 
these  things  ;  and  now  God  holds  the  child  accountable  for 
these  vows.  To  say  that  he  is  not  bound  by  them  because 
they  are  not  his  own  act,  is  like  saying  that  he  is  not 
bound  by  the  common  laws  of  life  because  he  had  no  voice 
in  his  birth  into  the  world. 

(5)  So  many  baptized  children  grow  up  wicked.  But  this 
is  not  God's  fault.  If  it  were  an  argument  against  infant 
baptism,  it  would  hold  also  against  adult  baptism,  indeed 
against  the  Lord's  Supper  too,  because  many  adults  fall 
from  steadfastness. 

Notice,  that  all  these  objections,  except  the  first,  would 
have  held  equally  against  circumcision  1 


THE    MODE  OF   BAPTISM. 

The  Catechism  says  nothing  about  the  mode,  in  regard 
to  either  Sacrament.  Judaism  had  a  detailed  ceremonial 
law,  fixing  the  time,  place  and  manner  of  every  service  ; 
but  Christianity  is  not  thus  rigid  and  formal  but  free. 
Christ  appointed  Sacraments,  not  legal  ceremonies  ;  and  we 
need  careless  about  the  form  than  its  gracious  contents. 
And  yet  it  is  a  notorious  fact  that  those  who  make  so 
much  account  of  the  mode,  make  little  account  of  the  sub- 
stance of  the  Sacirament. 


HEIDELBEBG  CATECHISM.  163 

The  two  most  common  modes  are  sprinkling  and  im- 
mersing. It  is  not  needful  here  to  discuss  their  merits  at 
length.  As  water  does  not  touch  the  soul,  it  matters  little 
about  its  quantity.  Without  a  doubt  both  are  valid  bap- 
tism, and  both  were  practised  in  the  early  age  of  the 
Church.  The  free  spirit  of  Christianity  abhors  the  nar- 
rowness which  lays  all  stress  on  ceremonials. 

Sprinkling,  however,  is  more  significant  than  immersion, 
because  it  corresponds  with  the  "  blood  of  sprinkling,"  so 
common  in  the  Jewish  Church.  Ex.  29  :  21 ;  Lev.  14:  7  ; 
16:18,19;  Num.  19  :  18,  19  ;  Heb.  9  :  13  ;  10:  22;  12: 
24 ;  1  Pet.  1 :  2. 

Sprinkling  is  also  much  more  suitable  and  convenient 
than  immersion ;  for  example,  in  eastern  deserts,  in  the  icy 
north,  in  prisons,  in  the  sick  room,  and  in  the  case  of  deli- 
cate persons. 


TWENTY-EIGHTH    LORD'S   DAY. 


OF  THE  HOLY  SUPPER  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST.