Question  75.  How  art  thou  admonished  and  assured  in  the 
Lord's  Supper,  that  thou  art  a  partaker  of  that  one  f^crifice  of 
Christ  accomplished  on  the  cross-,  and  of  all  His  benefits  ? 

Ansiver.  Thus,  that  Christ  has  commanded  me,  and  all  believers, 
to  eat  of  this  broken  bread,  and  to  drink  of  this  cup,  in  remem- 
brance of  Him ;  adding  these  promises,  first,  that  His  body  was  of- 
fered and  broken  on  the  cross  for  me,  and  His  blood  ghed  for  me, 
as  certainly  as  I  see  with  my  eyes  the  bread  of  the  Lord  broken  for 
me,  and  the  cup  communicated  to  me:  and  further,  that  He  feeds 
and  nourishes  my  soul  to  everlasting  life,  with  His  crucified  body 
and  shed  blood,  as  assuredly  as  I  receive  from  the  hands  of  the 
minister  and  taste  with  my  mouth  the  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord, 
as  certain  signs  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ, 


1^  ^■OTES  Oif  THE 

Having  a  correct  view  of  the  natore  of  a  Sacrament,  as 
a  divinely  appointed  sign  and  seal  of  an  invidble  grace ; 
and  having  a  clear  understanding  of  what  Holv  Baptism 
is,  as  an  admission  into  the  Christian  Church  ; — is  much 
toward  understanding  the  Lord's  Supper. 

During  the  Beformadon  four  theories  were  held  in  re- 
gard to  the  Lord's  Supper  : — liie  E:  .:..  idy  or  transub- 
stantiation  theorv,  that  the  bread  and  wine  bv  consecra- 
tion  cease  to  be  bread  and  wine,  and  are  changed  into  the 
real  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  the  Lutheran,  or  consub- 
stantiation  theory,  that  the  elonents  are  not  changed,  but 
that  "  in,  wil^  and  under "  these  are  the  real  flesh  and 
blood  of  Christ  locally  pres^it,  and  that  both  the  natural 
and  the  spiritual  are  received  by  every  communicant,  but 
with  bene&t  only  where  there  is  &ith ;  the  rationalidic,  or 
symbolical  theory,  that  in  liie  Lord's  Supper  are  pressit 
only  bread  and  wine,  as  the  bare  sigus  of  something  out- 
ade  of  Ihe  Sacramoit :  ::ie  F:-r:  :ed  or  Calvinisdc  theory, 
tLai  the  elemaits  r^nain  imchanged,  and  vet  that  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  really  present,  n::  .:  ::-lly 
and  camallv  but  spiritually,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
therefore  are  received  only  by  tiie  worthy  communicant. 

Iz  tll0  Lcr£'s  SirT'Sr,  By  this  name  Paul  calls  it  (1 
Cor.  11  :  -  .  It.:.  :ss?  instinited  by  our  Lord,  and  first 
obserred  a.:  z:r:i:.  It  is  called  also  the  Lord's  table  (1 
Cor.  10:  21  .  :i.c  Communion  (1  Cor.  10:  16),  and  the 
Eucharist,  fr:>m  a  Greek  word  which  means  to  give 
thanks.  AiziCIliS-S^d  2^£  lS;'.:.r^£,  signified  and  sealed. 
Question  To  is  a.ii :-:  iirii:::  with  69.  and  both  of 
them  :;'-':^  t'lir  Irzzi:::^  iz  t  :'.  H">  Baptism  signi- 
fies and  seals  our  birth  ii.:;  :  ir  Laurch ;  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per, our  f:  1  3  ::  i  ation  in  all  the  benefits  of  Christ. 
Partaker.     Li  H  .r  Baptism  the  child  is  passive,  and  so 


HEIDELBEEG  CATECHISM.  165 

Question  69  asks  how  its  real  advantage  is  assured  to 
him ;  but  in  the  Lord's  Supper  the  child  is  active, "  a  par- 
taker," and  the  Question  corresponds  with  this  fact.  QxiQ 
Sacriiics,  over  against  the  many  Jewish  sacrifices,  and  es- 
pecially as  opposed  to  the  repeated  "  unbloody  "  sacrifice 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  All  HlS  benefits.  The 
baptized  child  has  real  and  great  benefit  in  his  baptism, 
but  when  he  with  faith  comes  in  full  membership  to  the 
Lord's  Supper  he  is  assured  of  all  the  benefits  of  Christ. 

Christ  has  commanded.  So  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  a 
matter  of  choice  with  the  believer.  Believers.  Not  in- 
fants, as  the  Greek  Catholics  teach,  contrary  to  1  Cor.  1 1 : 
28.  True  faith  must  be  at  hand.  To  eat  •  •  •  to  drink. 
So  the  Hebrews  did  in  the  Passover  (Ex.  12:8;  Matt.  26  : 
27).  This  eating  and  drinking  show  that  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per is  more  than  a  mere  memorial  of  a  historical  fact  (as 
Christmas  commemorates  His  birth).  "  AVe  have  to  do 
here,  not  with  outward  signs  only,  but  with  the  heavenly 
realities  themselves  which  these  signs  represent."  Bread 
.  .  .  cup.  Melchizedek  gave  Abraham  bread  and  wine 
(Gen.  14 :  18).  These  were  used  in  the  Passover.  There- 
fore we  now  use,  not  the  wafer,  not  unleavened  bread  (a 
ceremonial  representation  of  hasting  out  of  Egypt),  not 
the  flesh  of  an  animal,  for  the  sacrifice  cannot  be  repeated, 
— but  common  bread  as  the  symbol  of  life  and  strength ; 
and  wine,  not  some  cheap  drug,  that  looks  like  wine,  not 
wine  and  water  mixed,  as  the  early  Church  did  in  com- 
memoration of  John  19 :  34,  but  the  pure  juice  of  the 
grape.  AH  believers  shall  thus  eat  and  drink.  By 
what  right,  then  does  the  Koman  Catholic  Church  with- 
hold the  cup  from  the  people  ?    In  remembrance  of  Him. 

Not  a  repetition  of  His  sacrifice,  but  a  blessed  memorial 

of  it.    Adding  these  promises.    Without  these  two  pro- 


166  mises,  the  bread  and  wine  would  be  bare  natural  ele- 
ments. Christ  has  thus  joined  the  gracious  benefit  with 
the  sacramental  transaction,  corresponding  with  the  de- 
finition, "  by  the  use  thereof"  (Ques.  66). 

1)  His  body  was .  •  .  "broken ...  and  His  blood 

shed.  The  breaking  of  the  bread  represents  the  breaking 
of  His  body,  not  in  the  sense  of  mangled,  torn  to  pieces, 
but  by  pain  and  anguish,  and  especially  by  the  separation 
of  body  and  soul  on  the  cross.  The  pouring  out  of  the 
wine  represents  the  shedding  of  His  blood,  and  consequent 
painful  death.  Wine  having  the  color  of  blood,  and  being 
pressed  from  the  grape  by  violence,  indeed  being  called 
"  the  blood  of  grapes"  (Gen.  49  :  11),  beautifully  symbol- 
izes the  blood  of  Christ.  As  the  Old  Testament  covenant 
was  confirmed  by  the  typical  blood  of  bulls  and  goats 
(Heb.  9  :  13  ;  Ex.  24 :  8),  so  the  New  Testament  covenant 
was  confirmed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  the  true 
Lamb  of  God ;  and  His  atoning  blood  is  forcibly  symbol- 
ized in  the  "  blood  of  grapes."  As  certainly.  This  visi- 
ble, memorial  transaction,  is  not  more  certain  than  the 
fact  that  He  suffered  and  died  for  me.  Bread  of  the  Lord. 
Not  common  bread  and  wine,  but  these  lifted  out  of  natural 
relations  and  uses  for  the  body,  and  now  in  the  sacra- 
mental transaction  standing  in  new  and  spiritual  relations 
to  the  soul. 

2)  He  feeds  and  nourishes  my  soul.    The  benefit  of 

His  atonement  is  not  merely  signified,  but  given ;  not  to 
all  men  in  general,  but  to  the  believer.  Further.  The 
Lord's  Supper  is  more  than  a  mere  commemoration  of 
His  death.  It  is  also  a  nourishing  ordinance.  It  is  not 
enough  to  see  the  bread  broken,  and  the  wine  poured  out ; 
these  must  be  also  received  and  tasted.  "  Take,  eat  .  .  . 
drink"  (1  Cor.  11 :  24).     Why?    Because  He  has  some- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  167 

thing  for  us,  for  faith,  and  this  eating  and  drinking  thus 
are  not  mere  bodily  acts,  but  the  expression  of  faith.  He. 
The  Sacraments  are  God's  act  to  man.  Man  only  receives 
what  God  gives.  Feeds.  The  transaction  is  not  an  empty 
sign,  but  has  a  gracious  benefit.  Nourishes.  Feeding  is 
the  act  of  the  moment,  but  nourishing  is  the  power  of  this 
heavenly  food  in  after  time.  M7  SOUl,  renewed  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  thus  capable  of  such  nourishment.  If 
angels  and  the  risen  Saviour  ate  natural  food  (Gen.  18:8; 
Luke  24 :  43),  why  may  not  we  eat  supernatural  bread  ? 
Man  has  a  twofold  nature,  physical  and  spiritual,  and  so 
stands  related  to  earth  and  heaven.  Hunger  of  soul  is 
just  as  real  as  that  of  body,  and  must  be  met  with 
real  food  (John  6 :  33,  51).  The  Catechism  does  not  at- 
tempt to  explain — what  is  beyond  all  explanation  ! — the 
manner  of  Christ's  presence  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  He  is 
present  in  His  Church  (Matt.  28 :  20),  though  we  know 
not  how.  We  are  nourished  by  daily  bread,  though  we 
understand  not  the  mystery  of  vegetable  growth.  So  with 
the  manna  of  old  (Ex.  16  :  15).  As  in  a  hundred  things, 
relating  to  body  and  soul,  so  here,  we  have  faith  in  the 
fact,  though  we  understand  not  its  mystery.  "  We  walk 
by  faith,  not  by  sight."  Terrible  indeed  is  the  attempt  of 
some,  to  bring  these  high  things  down  within  the  grasp  of 
reason,  refusing  to  see  in  them  what  the  reason  cannot 
grasp.  To  everlasting  life.  The  new  life  in  the  believer 
must  grow  from  weakness  to  maturity  (Ques.  58),  and  to 
this  growth  the  Lord's  Supper  ministers  (John  6 :  54). 

With  His  cnicified  body  and  shed  blood.     Not  with 

visible,  earthly  bread,  but  with  that  which  it  signifies 
(John  6:  33).  As  assuredly.  These  two  things  must 
never  be  separated,*  the  memorial  and  the  nourishing,  the 

*  These  two,  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified,  are  joined  in  the 


168  NOTES  OX  THE 

visible  and  the  iuTisible  side  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  The 
sacramental  transaction  sets  before  us  the  infinite  love  and 
awful  sufferings  of  the  holy  Saviour,  and  so  excites  peni- 
tence, faith  and  love  in  us ;  but  it  does  also  much  more, 
namely,  it  "admonishes  and  assures"  us,  signifies  and 
seals  the  fact,  that  we  are  partakers  of  Christ  and  of  all 
BQ.3  benefits. 

Some  see  in  the  Lord's  Supper  only  a  memorial  of  the 
death  of  Christ ;  and  think  of  it  as  our  act  to  God,  com- 
memorating His  great  love.  A  Sacrament,  however,  is  not 
our  act  of  worship,  but  God's  act  of  grace  to  us.  Besides, 
strictly  taken,  even  the  memorial  side  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per, the  breaking  of  the  bread  and  the  pouring  out  of  the 
wine,  is  not  our  act  but  His,  done  not  by  each  believer  for 
himself,  but  done  by  Christ's  minister,  symbolically  re- 
peating before  our  eyes  His  atoniag  death,  and  thus  pre- 
paring us  penitently  to  receive  His  grace. 

That  the  Lord's  Supper  is  more  than  a  memorial,  that 
it  is  also  a  nourishing  ordinance,  is  plain,  says  Sadler, 
because :  1)  Christianity  is  not  a  dispensation  of  types 
and  shadows,  but  of  substance  and  fulfilment.  2)  If  He 
had  intended  simply  to  typify  His  sufferings  and  death, 
then  the  old  paschal  lamb  retained  and  slain  before  the 
congregation,  a  real  shedding  of  blood,  with  suffering  and 
death,  would  have  been  far  more  significant  than  the 
breaking  of  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of  wine.  3)  Paul 
says  there  is  a  body  to  be  discerned  (1  Cor.  11 :  29),  and 
something  to  be  communicated  (1  Cor.  10  :  16).  4)  Hence 
also  it  is  called  a  "  Supper,"  not  a  common  meal  for  the 

Sacrament  .  .  .  b v  a  sacramental  union.  .  .  .  From  this  it  appears 
that  these  things  in  their  lawful  use  are  always  exhibited  and  re- 
ceived conjointlj,  but  not  without  fsdth..^Ur sinus  on  the  Lord's 
Supper. 


HEIDELBEEG  CATECHISM.  169 

body,  not  a  social  feast  (1  Cor.  11 :  22),  but  a  meal  for  the 
soul,  wliicli  needs  and  receives  nourishment  as  really  as 
the  body  (John  6  :  48-58).  Common  bread,  consecrated, 
is  lifted  out  of  common  use,  having  now  a  relation  to  the 
soul,  being  the  symbol  and  vehicle,  so  to  speak,  of  true 
spiritual  bread,  which  is  to  nourish  the  new  man  in  us. 
This  is  the  force  of  "  assuredly."  As  I  rsceiVS  •  •  •  and 
taste.  The  breaking  and  the  pouring,  by  God's  minister, 
are  signs  for  our  eyes  ;  but  the  touch  and  taste  are  seals, 
nearer  assurances  for  our  souls.  Csitaill.  Not  empty  but 
real,  not  doubtful  but  sure.  Signs.  Not  the  real  body 
and  blood  of  Christ,  as  the  Romanist  says,  but  only  signs 
of  this  gracious  fact.