Question  76.  What  is  it  then  to  eat  the  crucified  body,  and  drink 
the  shed  blood  of  Christ  ? 

Anstver.  It  is  not  only  to  embrace  with  a  believing  heart,  all  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  Christ,  and  thereby  to  obtain  the  pardon  of 
sin  and  life  eternal ;  but  also,  besides  that,  to  become  more  and 
more  united  to  His  sacred  body,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells 
both  in  Christ  and  in  us ;  so  that  we,  although  Christ  is  in  heaven, 
and  we  on  earth,  are,  notwithstanding,  ''  flesh  of  His  flesh  and  bone 
of  His  bone ;"  and  that  we  live  and  are  governed  for  ever  by  one 
Spirit,  as  members  of  the  same  body  are  by  one  soul. 

To  eat  •  •  •  and  drink.  This  is  Christ's  own  expres- 
sion (John  6  :  54-56).     It  means  two  things : — 

1)  To   embrace  .  .  -the   sufferings   and   death   of 

Christ.  The  Lord's  Supper,  as  a  sign,  sets  before  our 
eyes  the  one  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ.  This  we  by  faith 
make  our  own,  and  thereby  obtain,  negatively,  the  pardon 
of  sin,  and,  positively,  life  eternal. 

2)  To  become  more  and  more  united  to  His  sacred 

tody.     The  words  "  not  only  .   .    .  but  also  besides  that" 


170  have  great  force.  We  by  faith  do  somethmg,  but  also  the 
Holy  Ghost  does  somethiDg.  "  To  eat  .  .  .  and  drink," 
not  merely  represents  our  active  faith  in  Christ,  and 
through  this  the  enjoyment  of  His  grace ;  but  also  it  in- 
cludes the  activity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  carrying  forward 
our  sanctification.  BajDtism  is  the  sacrament  of  the  new 
bii'th,  and  so  administered  only  once  ;  the  Lord's  Supper 
is  for  the  nourishing  of  our  new  spii'itual  life,  and  ad- 
ministered often.  "  More  and  more  united"  expresses  our 
gradual  growth  in  grace  from  babes  in  Christ  to  full 
stature.  "His  sacred  body"  means  the  true  glorified 
body  of  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  This 
eucharistic  benefit  is  not  magical,  not  even  natural,  but 
truly  supernatural,  namely  "  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Our 
union  with  Christ,  then,  through  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  so 
close  (Eph.  5  :  30)  and  real,  that  though  separated  we  are 
yet  livingly  one.  "  Christ  is  in  heaven"  refers  to  the  old 
"Ubiquity"  controversy  (Ques.  47,  48),  and  declares  that 
in  the  Lord's  Supper  we  receive  Him  and  His  benefits  not 
by  a  local  presence,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Ques.  53). 
By  Him  we  live  in  CTirist,  and  by  Him  are  governed. 
Thus  the  Lord's  Supper  stands  closely  related  to  our  blessed 
resurrection  (John  6 :  54),  which  has  its  beginning  in  our 
baptism,  is  carried  forward  by  the  Holy  Ghost  through 
our  whole  earthly  life,  the  Lord's  Supper  being  the  spe- 
cial means  to  this  end,  and  is  complete  only  when  the 
whole  mystical  body  of  Christ,  the  Church,  is  ready  for 
full  glorification. 

This  is  the  meaning  of  the  beautiful  benediction,  which 
dismisses  the  communicants  :  "  May  the  holy  Communion 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  keep  and  presei-ve  you  each  one,  in  body,  soul  and 
spirit,  unto  everlasting  life.     Amen." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  171 

Hence  the  Lord's  Supper  is  so  rich  in  comfort,  and  de- 
sired especially  in  sickness  and  death.  It  is  not  our  act  to 
God,  but  His  to  us,  assuring  us  of  His  grace. 

"  I  would  like  to  be  sure  that  my  sins  are  pardoned," 
said  a  dying  girl  to  her  pastor. 

*'  You  have  had  that  assurance,"  said  he,  "  in  the  Lord's 
Supper.  It  '  testifies  to  us  that  we  have  a  full  pardon  of 
all  sin.'  "—(See  Ques.  80). 

Therefore,  also,  the  neglect*  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is 
not  a  mere  omission  of  duty,  but  the  loss  of  all  that  Christ 
signifies  and  seals  in  it.  To  refuse  daily  bread  is  not  only 
disobedience  but  a  weakening. 

Only  as  we  see  in  the  Lord's  Supper  not  merely  a  visi- 
ble memorial  of  Christ,  but  also  by  faith  invisible  nour- 
ishment for  our  souls — and  here,  as  in  the  case  of  baptism, 
it  matters  little  by  what  name  we  call  this  benefit ;  whe- 
ther grace,  blessing,  heavenly  bread,  true  body  and  blood, 
or  pardon  of  sin  and  life  eternal ;  but  holding  fast  to  the 
fact  that  something  is  at  hand  for  the  believer — only  so 
can  we  understand  the  solemn  stress  laid  upon  the  use  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  (John  6  :  53),  and  upon  the  special  fit- 
ness required  for  such  use  (1  Cor.  11 :  28).