Question  77.  Where  has  Christ  promised,  that  He  will  as  cer- 
tainly feed  and  nourish  believers  with  His  body  and  blood,  as  they 
eat  of  this  broken  bread,  and  drink  of  this  cup  ? 

*  What  a  sad  record  some  Christians  make  for  themselves  by 
absence  from  the  Lord's  table !  An  old  elder,  who  died  a  few 
years  ago,  did  not  miss  one  Communion  in  forty-five  years ;  and 
another,  still  living  in  Western  Pennsylvania,  who  was  confirmed 
in  1817,  has  not  in  all  these  sixty  years  missed  one  Communion. 
What  a  comfort  to  themselves,  and  what  an  example  to  others  I 


172  Answer.  In  the  institution  of  the  Supper,  which  is  thus  ex- 
pressed :  ''  The  Lord  Jesus,  in  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  be- 
trayed, took  bread,  and  when  He  had  given  thanks,  He  brake  it, 
and  said,  take,  eat ;  this  is  My  body  which  is  broken  for  you  ;  this 
do  in  remembrance  of  Me :  After  the  same  manner,  also,  he  took 
the  cup,  when  He  had  supped,  saying,  this  cup  is  the  new  testa- 
ment in  My  blood :  this-  do  ye  as  often  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remem- 
brance of  Me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  until  He  come." 

This  promise  is  repeated  by  the  holy  Apostle  Paul,  where  he 
says :  **  The  cup  of  blessing,  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  commu- 
nion of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not 
the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?  For  we,  being  many,  are 
one,  bread  and  one  body,  because  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one 
bread"  (1  Cor.  10:  16,  17). 

The  Question  itself  gives  the  substance  of  Answer  75. 
Compare  the  two. 

In  the  institlltion.  Four  accounts  of  this  are  given, 
namely,  Matt.  26  :  26-29  ;  Mark  14 :  22-25  ;  Luke  22  :  19, 
20;  1  Cor.  11 :  23-26.  Compare  and  study  their  likeness 
and  difference.  The  Catechism  quotes  Paul's  account, 
which  is  very  full  and  sets  forth  the  Lord's  Supper  both 
as  a  memorial  and  as  a  nourishing  ordinance.     In  the 

same  night  ......  "betrayed.    He  and  His  disciples 

had  just  celebrated  the  Jewish  Passover,  in  which  bread 
and  wine  were  used,  which  now,  however,  were  to  be  used 
in  a  new  and  better  feast.  The  bread  should  be  the  sign 
and  seal  of  His  true  body,  as  the  bread  of  our  souls ;  the 
wine  should  be  the  sign  and  seal  of  His  precious  blood, 
shed  for  our  redemption ;  and  both  these  should  be  re- 
ceived by  the  believer  as  the  sign  and  seal  of  the  commu- 
nion or  communication  of  His  true  body  and  blood  (1  Cor. 

10:  16).     Given  thanks cup  of  blessing. 

These  words  express  the  act  of  consecration,  setting  apart 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  173 

the  natural  elements  to  a  supernatural  use.  Brake  it. 
The  Komau  Catholic  Church  and  a  few  Protestants  use 
the  wafer,  and  so  the  bread  is  not  broken.  The  Clip,  was 
wine  that  remained  after  the  paschal  feast.  Supped.  Not 
in  the  sense  of  "  sipped,"  but  as  we  say  breakfasted,  dined, 

so  here,  supped.    The  new  testament  in  my  blood.     The 

fulfilment  of  what  was  only  typified  by  the  blood  of  the 
old  covenant  (Ex.  24 :  8 ;  Heb.  9  :  14). 


TWENTY-NINTH  liORD'S  BAY.