Question  78.  Do  then  the  bread  and  wine  become  the  very  body 
and  blood  of  Christ  ? 

Answer.  Not  at  all ;  but  as  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed 
into  the  blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself, 
being  only  the  sign  and  confirmation  thereof  appointed  of  God  :  so 
the  bread  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very  body 
of  Christ,  though,  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  properties  of  sacra- 
ments, it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus. 

Bread  and  wine  become,  etc.  Who  says  they  do  ?    The 

Eoman  Catholic,  who  makes  the  sign  and  the  thing  signi- 
fied identical.  This  error  is  met  with  the  emphatic  denial : 
Not  at  all.  An  illustration  is  taken  from  Holy  Baptism. 
Baptismal  water  is  not  the  blood  of  Christ,  but  only  the 
sign  and  seal  of  a  real  cleansing  by  His  blood.  So  eucha- 
ristic  bread  remains  bread,  and  thus  continues  to  be  a  true 
sign.  Three  times  after  consecration,  Paul  calls  it  bread 
(1  Cor.  11 :  26-28).  Jesus  blessed  the  bread,  set  it  apart 
to  a  sacred  use,  but  without  changing  its  nature ;  as  God 
blessed  the  Sabbath^  not  changing  its  light  and  length,  but 


174  merely  its  use.  Men  are  prone  to  ixm  to  extremes.  The 
rationalist  says  the  Lord's  Supper  is  all  sign  and  no  grace ; 
the  Komanist  says  it  is  all  grace  and  no  ^gn.  See  also 
how  extreme  meet:  the  Komanist  ignoares  the  sign  and 
magnifi^  the  grace  of  the  Sacramait;  and  the  Quaker 
does  the  same  thing,  though  from  an  oppDsite  stand-point ! 
TlB  1^:1:5  .....  of  S*crazian:s,  as  given  in  their  def- 
inition v^Ques,  60  , — ^namelj,  invisible  grace  joined  to  visi- 
hle  elements,  "'the  snpematiiral  under  the  ^htdi  of  the 
naturaL"  For  "propertira"  the  Triglott  has  "usage.'* 
Accordinglv  the  bread  is  called  the  "  body "  of  Christ."* 


Qn^ioik  79.  Wav  kfieQ  doch  Ckrisi;  call  the  bread  His  hody, 
and  die  cap  Hi^  blood,  or  the  new  covaiant  in  His  blood ;  zjid 
PanI  the  "'  comnLnnioa  of  the  body  and  Uood  of  Quist?' 

AMsmer.  Christ  speaks  thos  not  without  great  reason,  nam^j, 
not  odIj  thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  bread  and  wine  axppoit  this 
tonpoial  li^  so  His  omcified  bodj  and  died  Uood  axe  the  trae 
meat  and  dnnk  whezdbjr  our  soida  are  &d  to  eteinal  life;  but  mare 
&ppeasHj  hy  these  Yisahie  signs  and  pledges  to  assure  n^  that  we 
are  is  r  riJIv  pailakeis  of  His  troebodj  and  blood  (bj  the  opezatioa 
of  the  Holv  Gliost) ,  as  we  receive  by  die  moiidis  of  onr  bodies  these 
hioijr  signs  in  zemembnmee  of  Him;  and  that  all  His  atflJeTTPig^ 
and  obedienoe  are  as  oatainfy  ours,  as  if  we  had  in  oar  own  per- 
sons soused  and  made  satisSiGtian  £>r  our  sins  to  God. 

Wby  &S&  ?  That  is,  if  the  elements  remain  unchanged, 
why  do  both  Christ  and  Paul  call  them  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ?  IS^otice  how  fidly  this  qn^tion  and 
answer  cafrespond  both  in  form  and  matter,  with  Ques- 
tion 73. 

*  The  £.;i_  -:^:  ^-.-s  that  thoogiLit  becomes  the  true  bodf  of 
Christ,  it  vet  1;  :zi  .:ii  :cii:es  like  ^uthly  bread,  lest  men  idioiild 
recoil  from  this  heavenfy  food  if  it  were  not  in  earthl  v  form. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  175 

Hot  without  great  cause.  Here  as  in  Question  73  the 
Catechism  takes  a  clear  stand  against  rationalism  as  in 
Question  78  it  did  against  Romanism.  If  the  bread  and 
wine  do  not  become  the  true  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  yet 
are  they  rightly  called  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  for 
two  reasons : — 

1)  To  teach  us.  They  are  visible  signs.  As  common 
bread  and  wine  are  food  for  the  body,  so  Christ's  true 
body  and  blood  are  food  for  the  soul.  Thus  they  point  us 
from  the  natural  and  visible  to  the  supernatural  and  in- 
visible. 

2)  To  assure  us.  They  are  also  seals.  They  go  far  be- 
yond a  sign.     This  is  expressed  in  the  words  "  not  only 

....  but  more  especially."  The  Triglott  says :  "  but 
much  more."  They  assure  us  that  we  are  partakers  of 
what  they  signify.  This  benefit,  however,  is  not  by  His 
local  presence,  as  the  Lutherans  teach,  nor  in  any  magical 
way,*  but  by  the  wonderful  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

As  reallj  •  •  •  •  as  we  receive.    The  force  of  this  was 

explained  under  Question  75.  The  invisible  is  as  real 
and  as  certainly  at  hand  as  the  visible.  If  the  unworthy 
have  condemnation  (1  Cor.  11 ;  27,  29),  then  surely  the 
worthy  may  expect  a  corresponding  benefit.  Thus,  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  what  it  is  called  in  Question  75,  the  sign 
and  seal   of  our  continued  receiving  Christ  and  all  His 

benefits.    All  His  sufferings  ...  are  as  certainly  ours. 

This  is  a  strong  answer.  What  Christ  did  becomes  fully 
ours,  by  our  partaking  of  Him,  as  truly  and  fully  so  as  if 
we  ourselves  had  done  what  He  did  for  us,  and  of  this  He 
assures  us  in  the  Lord's  Supper. 

*  The  Roman  theory  of  the  Sacraments  is  sometimes  called  the 
opus  operatum  theory,  i.  e.  they  have  power  within  themselves  to 
work,  without  regard  to  the  fitness  or  willingness  of  the  subject. 


176  Bemark.  As  in  regard  to  Holy  Eapdsm,  so  ako  tere, 
tiie  Catechism  says  i:  ::!ii:ir  aboat  the  maimer  *  of  receiv- 
ing  the  Sacranirii:.  We  rtceiTe  it  not  as  it  was  first  ad- 
ministered: at  ixig^i;  on  Thursdaj-;  in  a  priTate  house; 
in  an  npper  room  :  witL  iml  eavened  bread ;  reclining ;  and 
only  males  presri.:.  llT:_:>dists,  Episcopalians  and  Ro- 
man Catholics  receive  it  kneeling ;  Presbytaiaiis,  sittiiig  ^ 
(^so  does  tiiie  P  li  ::  R(Hne),  and  the  Befonned  Etanim^. 
Posture  of  body  is  less  important  Itbsn.  a  humble  and 
adoring  £iith  in  the  grac:   i?  zivstery. 

If  or  does  the  C  i:^:hism  say,  because  fte  Scziptures  do 
not  say,!:—  f:rz  :-1t  Lord's  Sapper  shaU  be  received- 
In  the  Apostolic  Church  it  was  daily  (Acts  2 :  48} ;  for 
three  hundred  jeaos  af^fr~7r^  T~rry  Ijord's  Day,  and 
flierefore  Chrysostom  eslls  ^ii^  ;  rl:e  day  of  bread." 
CalTin  calls  the  cnstom  :  St_  "  rj.  ^iziiiniog,  an  inven- 
tion of  ^ederil  for  il_r  i.:  ::  s;  1-.  uzi  insists  on  the 
cdehraticm  of  the  Lord's  >ui:r:  -t--.~  L:r^  s  I'i". 


tseetiztb:  hoed's  dat. 


hi:  z^f'   i:  i^-  i:  ^.-5  zr-:   Zt  ::    i.   ._ir:z  13— 26\.  cz:  :    f  =atiiie 

is  true  of  Christ  izi  Hii  i.  ;:  r-  7  _-  -t  i:  z::  f  ."i^zg 
(Ei.12:  U)hatr  :-—  -  i  :  I  iz-  1  ki  :i  l"  zi 
Bacred  soi^  (Matl.  2 : 

fit  is  said  flia:  sir  izr  -^  -  :  :  -^  7  zr  Ari  i-  ~'~i  ni^ie 
80  little  <^  Ghrisfs  ::_-::-  ...  :_  j  -;ili.  z::  iZ-Z-  TroreHim 
hot  ait  in  oompanv  -i  1  I£:_i. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  177 

Answer.  The  Lord's  Supper  testifies  to  us,  that  we  have  a  full 
pardon  of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  which  He 
Himself  has  once  accomplished  on  the  cross ;  and  that  we  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  ingrafted  into  Christ,  who,  according  to  His  hu- 
man nature,  is  now  not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  His  Father,  and  will  there  be  worshiped  by  us : — but  the 
mass  teacheth  that  the  living  and  the  dead  have  not  the  pardon  of 
sins,  through  the  sufierings  of  Christ,  unless  Christ  is  also  daily 
ofiered  for  them  by  the  priests  ;  and  further,  that  Christ  is  bodily 
under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine,  and  therefore  is  to  be  worshiped 
in  them  ;  so  that  the  mass,  at  bottom,  is  nothing  less  than  a  denial 
of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufierings  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  an  ac- 
cursed idolatry. 

What  Protestants  call  the  Lord's  Supper,  Eoman  Ca- 
tholics call  "the  Mass."  What  is  the  difference?  The 
answer  gives  first  the  Protestant  doctrine^  and  then  the 
Roman  view. 

1.  The  Protestant  Doctrine.  The  Lord's  Supper  assures 
us,  negatively,  of  the  full  pardon  of  all  sin,  and  positively, 
of  our  ingrafting  into  Christ, — a  beautiful  summing  up  of 
the  doctrine  as  detailed  in  Questions  75-79. 

The  two  great  points  are  these:  (1.)  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ  on  the  cross,  as  the  ground  of  our  pardon,  was  of 
infinite  and  therefore  of  everlasting  value  needing  no  re- 
petition (Heb.  9:  12,26,  28;  10:  10-14).  Indeed,  as 
Christ  was  born  but  once,  so  He  could  die  but  once.  This 
one  sacrifice  is  made  very  prominent  throughout  the  Cate- 
chism (Question  1,  81,  34,  37,  40,  44,  56,  60,  ^Q,  67,  69, 
70,  75,  77, 80).  (2.)  Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  there  receives 
our  worship  (Heb.  10  :  12).  The  Triglott  says,  "  Who 
with  His  true  body  is  now  in  heaven."  "  True  body " 
stands  opposed  to  His  sacramental  body  in  the  Lord's 
Supper. 

2.  The  Roman  view.    The  Mass  teaches  (1)  that  the 
178  sacrifice  of  Christ  needs  to  be  daily  repeated  on  the  altar  ; 
(2)  that  as  by  consecration*  the  bread  and  wine  become 
the  true  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  He  is  thus  personally 
and  bodily  present  on  the  altar,  and  is  to  be  there  wor- 
shiped. 

Thus  the  mass  virtually  denies  Christ's  atonement ;  and 
since  adoration  of  the  host  is  worship  addressed  to  mere 
bread  and  wine,  the  mass  is  an  idolatry,  the  worship  of  a 
creature. 

Othar  differences  are  these :  the  mass  avails  for  the 
dead  as  well  as  the  living ;  it  is  often  celebrated  only  by 
the  priest,  that  is,  without  other  communicants  ;  not  bread 
but  the  wafer  is  used ;  and  the  cup  is  withheld  from  the 
people.f 

Remarks.  Question  80  is  peculiar,  and  has  an  interest- 
ing- history.  Its  great  severity,  calling  the  mass  "  an  ac- 
cursed idolatry,"  is  very  different  from  the  mild  tone  of 
the  whole  Catechism  besides.  This  noble  Catechism  was 
written  in  the  interest  of  peace  and  union,  and  throughout 
breathes  a  loving  spirit,  opposing  error  only  by  plain 
statements  of  truth.  Question  80  is  the  only  exception  ; 
and  this  was  not  in  the  first  edition,  as  it  came  from  the 

*)  This  consecration  is  called  "  the  unbloodj  sacrifice,  "  to  dis- 
tinguish it  from  the  bloody  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  The  bread  and 
wine,  says  the  Catholic,  ceasing  to  be  bread  and  wine,  are  changed 
into  the  very  substance  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  '*'  together 
with  His  soul  and  divinity."  Eeferring  to  this,  a  devoted  Catholic 
said  to  a  Protestant,  ''The  priest  can  carry  God  in  his  pocket!" 
From  this  the  doctrine  is  called  "  transubstantiation." 

t  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  difiers  widely  from  Protestantism 
also  in  many  other  things.  It  holds  to  seven  Sacraments,  purga- 
tory, saint-worship,  relic  and  image  worship,  papal  government;, 
celibacy  of  the  clergy,  auricular  confession,  worship  in  Latin,  and 
scores  of  holy  days. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  179 

pen  of  Ursinus  and  Olevianus.  Indeed  only  a  part  was 
in  the  second   edition.     The  hard   saying,  *'  So  that  the 

mass  is an  accursed  idolatry,"  Avas  added  only 

in  the  third  edition,  by  Elector  Frederick  III.  himself. 
The  Roman  Catholic  Council  of  Trent  had  just  closed  its 
long  and  noted  sessions,  with  bitter  anathemas  upon  the 
whole  Protestant  movement ;  and  Frederick,  with  angry 
haste,  added,  first  the  doctrinal  part  of  the  answer,  and 
afterward,  as  the  full  news  reached  him  from  Trent,  the 
closing  clause.  Ouly  this  closing  clause  is  objectionable, 
and  this  only  because  it  betrays  too  much  feeling  for  an 
official  and  confessional  document. 


FITNESS   FOR    RECEIVING   THE    LORD's   SUPPER. 

Qmstion  81.    For  whom  is  the  Lord's  Supper  instituted  ? 

Answer.  For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  sins,  and  yet 
trust  that  these  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  and  that 
their  remaining  infirmities  are  covered  by  His  passion  and  death ; 
and  who  also  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  faith  more  and  more 
strengthened,  and  their  lives  more  holy ;  but  hypocrites,  and  such 
as  turn  not  to  God  with  sincere  hearts,  eat  and  drink  judgment  to 
themselves.