Question  82.  Are  they  also  to  be  admitted  to  this  supper,  who,  by 
confession  and  life,  declare  themselves  infidels  and  ungodly  ? 

Ansicer.  No ;  for  by  this  the  covenant  of  God  would  be  profaned, 
and  His  wrath  kindled  against  the  whole  congregation  ;  therefore  it 
is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  according  to  the  appointment 
of  Christ  and  His  apostles,  to  exclude  such  persons  by  the  keys  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  until  they  show  amendment  of  life. 

Tor  whom  ?  This  Question  is  peculiarly  interesting, 
and  of  the  most  serious  importance,  especially  to  catechu- 
mens, not  only  that  the  unworthy  may  be  warned,  but  also 


180  '  XOTES  OX  THE 

that  the  humble  worthy  may  not  fail,  through  too  c-evere 
judgment  of  themselves,  to  come. 

"What  fitness  is  required  ?  The  Triglott  asks :  "  Who  are  to 
come  unto  the  table  of  the  Lord  ?' 

1)  Those  wllO  are  tnsly  5Crn}wM.  The  Catechism 
does  not  mention  baptism  as  a  qualideation,'*'  but  implies 
it,  for  it  speaks  to  baptized  childi"en.  Indeed  it  is  very 
significant  that  no  such  question  about  fitness  is  asked  in 
regard  to  Holy  Baptism,  since  baptism  is  lor  chiidreiL 
The  Catechism  says  nothing  about  the  baptism  of  adults. 

To  administer  the  Lords  Supper  to  those  who  are  un- 
baprized — as  is  so  often  done  by  men  of  loose  thec»logieal 
notions,  though  perhaps  known  to  fame — is  unscriptural 
and  unreasonable,  like  much  else  in  their  whole  theory  and 
practice.  To  ignore  a  Sacrament,  to  set  aside  a  divine  ap- 
p ::i:ment,  is  terrible. 

P:r  •■truly  sorrowful"  the  Triglott  says, '"  displeased 
with  themselves."  The  Lord's  Supper  is  nc-t  for  the  sinless, 
else  none  could  come.  Xor  is  it  for  those  who  are  indif- 
ferent about  their  sins,  and  who  so  eat  and  drink  unworthi- 
ly (1  Cor.  11 :  27-29) ;  but  for  those  who  are  truly  peni- 
tent, and  who  show  this  penitence  by  turning  &om  sin  to 
holiness.  TlTlSt  that  '.':13^9  3.79  ::rrl"S2.  Forgiveness  is 
one  of  the  benefits  of  ir.r  L:rd's  Supper  'Ques.  80),  and 
this  the  believer  has  a  right  to  expect :  but  all  for  ths 
Saks  of  Chllst-  His  atoning  merits  are  the  ground  of 
hope  ;  and  faith  is  sore  that  His  merits  cover  not  only  our 
actual  sins,  but  also  the  root  from  which  they  spring, 
namely,   otir   rszisl^ill-    lnSinitiss,  the  old    man,   the 

*  Justin  Martyr  savs,  ^  This  food  is  called  by  us  the  Eudiaiist ;  of 
which  it  is  not  lawfdl  for  any  to  partake   but  such  as  belieye  .  .   . 
.  .  and  have  been  baptized." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  181 

flesh  (Ques.  7),  and  so  are  able  to  meet  our  wants  in  all 
time  to  come. 

2)  Who  also  earnestly  desire  ....  holy.    This  is 

the  beautiful,  positive  side,  a  desire  for  stronger  faith  and 
holier  life.  Realizing  this  is  the  work  of  years,  and  to 
this  end  the  holy  Eucharist  was  instituted  (Ques.  76)  ;  but 
this  earnest  desire  is  an  essential  part  of  our  fitness  for  the 
Lord's  Supper.  Indeed  our  best  fitness  is  not  a  single, 
sudden,  occasional  and  special  repentance  and  resolution, 
but  daily  faithfulness  (Micah  6:  8).* 

Hypocrites,  those  who  pretend  to  be  what  they  are  not. 
For  them  the  Lord's  Supper  will  be  a  curse  instead  of  a 
blessing  (1  Cor.  11 :  29),  a  savor  of  death  unto  death. 
Hypocrisy  is  hateful  even  to  man  ;  much  more  so  to  the 
infinitely  holy  God.f 

Infidels  and  ungodly.  Hypocrites  are  secretly  ungodly. 
Question  82  speaks  of  those  openl}'-  so,  either  in  doctrine 
or  life.  Uo.  These  also  are  not  to  be  admitted  to  the 
Lord's  Supper  (Matt.  7  :  6  ;  1  Cor.  10  :  21),  but  sTiut  out. 
Covenant  is  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  the  embodi- 
ment of  God's  will  and  plan  of  grace.  The  Lord's  Sup- 
per itself  is  a  covenant  (Luke  22  :  20),  or  at  least  the  seal 
of  the  great  covenant.  Hence  this  must  not  be  profaned. 
It  is  one  of  the  holy  things  of  God,  and  must  not  be 
treated  as  a  low,  common,  empty  and  natural  transaction. 

*  This  shows  the  fally  and  unscriptiiralness  of  "  infant "  com- 
munion, practiced  in  some  ages  of  the  Church  (and  by  the  Greek 
Church  now).  How  can  the  child  either  examine  himself  or  dis- 
cern the  Lord's  body  (1  Cor.  11 :  28)  ?  The  child  needed  circum- 
cision early,  but  the  passover  only  at  thirteen. 

t  Two  errors  are  committed  by  two  opposite  classes :  one  receives 
the  Lord's  Supper,  but  lives  an  ungodly  life ;  the  ether  professes  to 
live  a  godly  life,  but  rejects  the  Lord's  Supper. 


182  NOTES  Oy  THE 

Hence  our  Constitution  requires  ministers  and  elders  care- 
fully to  guard  the  Lord's  Supper  against  the  approach  of 
those  openly  unworthy  t^Art.  40,  49  >.  Against  the  whole 
COn^egatlcn,  for  allowing  such  sacrilege.  The  duty  •  •  . 
to  ezCJade.  "Duty"  lea  yes  no  room  for  choice,  Christ 
appointed,  and  His  Apostles  used  the  keys  of  the  Eing- 
d0221i  What  these  are  is  explained  in  the  next  Lord's 
Day.  Thus  the  Catechism  by  easy  and  natural  steps, 
passes  from  the  prophetical  and  priestly  to  the  kingly 
office  of  the  Church. 


THTRTT-FLRST    LOED'S    DAT. 


THZ   KEYS   OF   THZ   KTS'GDOir. 
Question  S3,     Whar  are  the  key?  of  ihe  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 

An.?u:er.  The  preaching  of  the  holv  gospel,  and  Christian  disci- 
pline, or  the  excommunicarion  out  of  the  Christian  Church ;  by 
these  two,  the  kingdom  of  hearen  is  open  to  believers,  and  sliut 
against  tmbelievers. 

Q'.i'^stion  84.  Hovr  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  and  shut  by 
the  preaching  of  the  holv  gospel  ? 

Anstcer.  Thus  :  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  it  is 
declared  and  publicly  testified  to  all  and  every  believer,  that  when- 
ever they  receive  the  promise  of  the  Gospel  by  a  true  faith,  all 
their  sins  are  really  forgiven  them  of  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
merits :  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all 
unbelievers,  and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent,  that  they  stand 
exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as 
thev  are  unconverted ;  according  to  which  testimony  of  the  gospel 
God  will  jndge  them,  both  in  this  and  the  life  to  come. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  183