Question  85.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and  opened  by 
Christian  discipline  ? 

Answer.  Thus :  when,  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  those 
who,  under  ihe  name  of  Christians,  maintain  doctrines  or  practices 
inconsistent  therewith,  will  not,  after  having  been  often  brotherly- 
admonished,  renounce  their  errors  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are 
complained  of  to  the  Church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  ap- 
pointed by  the  Church ;  and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are, 
by  them,  forbid  the  use  of  the  sacraments ;  whereby  they  are  ex- 
cluded from  the  Christian  Church,  and  by  God  Himself  from  the 
kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amend- 
ment, are  again  received  as  members  of  Christ  and  His  Church. 

No  man  stands  alone ;  but  in  tlie  family  and  in  the 
State  he  is  under  authority,  to  which  he  must  yield  either 
an  active  or  a  passive  obedience.     So  here. 

The  Christian  Church  is  a  Kingdom,  spiritual  but  real. 
Christ  is  King.  Christians  are  citizens.  Its  laws  are 
from  God.  Its  rules  and  customs  grow  out  of  Scripture 
teaching  and  the  wants  of  men  at  particular  times.  The 
most  solemn  acts  of  the  Church  are  these  two  :  receiving 
men  into  this  divine  Kingdom ;  and  casting  men  out. 
This  is  done  by  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom. 

What  are  the  keys  ?  The  Triglott  asks,  "  What  is  the 
office  of  the  keys  ?"  The  Preaching  of  the  Holy  Gospel, 
and  Christian  Discipline.  These  two  acts  are  called,  the 
one,  opening  and  shutting,  the  other,  shutting  and  opening, 
the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

How  .  •  .  opened  and  shut  ?  Question  84  relates  in 
part  to  those  out  of  the  Church  under  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel.  They  stand  outside,  unclean,  diseased  and  hungry. 
The  Gospel  calls  them  in,  saying,  "  Here  is  water,  balm 
and  bread  "  for  the  penitent  and  believing, — thus  opening 
the  door  of  mercy  and  grace ;  but  it  adds  the  warning  that 
without  repentance  and  faith  they  must  stand  outside,  ex- 


184  posed  to  tlie  wrath  of  God, — thus  shutting  the  door.  To 
reject  the  Gospel  is  to  dishonor  the  Holy  Trinity.  Ques- 
tion 84  relates  also  to  those  in  the  Church,  children  and 
parents.  To  them  this  challenge  of  the  Gospel  comes,  not 
only  in  the  preached  Word,  but  also  in  the  sacramental  acts 
of  the  Church.  According  to  this  testimony  God  ^vill  judge 
men,  both  in  this  life  and  the  life  to  come ;  and  many 
people  at  death  will  be  astonished  when  made  to  see  how 
many  calls  they  have  refused,  and  what  grace  they  have 
resisted. 

How  .  .  .  shut  and  opened  ?  Question  85  relates  to 
those  in  the  Church,  and  speaks  of  Christian  Discipline,"^ 
which  is  the  reverse  process,  namely,  shutting  and  open- 
ing the  door  of  the  Church.  This,  like  the  other  key, 
rests  upon  the  command  of  Christ  (Matt.  18  :  15-18). 

What  is  Christian  Discipline?  The  Constitution  de- 
fines it  (Art.  85)  :  "  The  exercise  of  the  authority,  and  the 
application  of  that  system  of  laws,  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  has  established  in  His  Church,  with  a  view  of  pre- 
serving its  purity  and  honor,  either  through  the  amend- 
ment or  exclusion  of  unworthy  members  and  ministers." 

In  other  words,  when  members  of  the  Church  are  guilty 
of  gross  sins  (profanity,  drunkenness,  adultery,  falsehood, 
theft),  or  grossly  neglect  their  duties,  or  hold  false  doc- 
trines, they  must  be  admonished  ;  and  if  not  made  better, 
they  must  then  be  "  forbid  the  use  of  the  Sacraments, 
whereby  they  are  excluded  from  the  Christian  Church, 
and  by  God  Himself,  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ."  So 
the  door  is  shut  against  them. 

The  degrees  of  discipline  are  three :  admonition,  suspen- 
sion and  excommunication,  according  to  the  nature,  fre- 

■^  Here  lies  the  fact  of  backsliding,  its  nature,  causes,  consequence 
and  cure. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  185 

quency  and  circumstances  of  the  offence.  They  are  not 
given  in  detail  in  the  Catechism,  but  in  the  Constitution. 

(1)  Admonition.  Here  the  person  is  privately  called  to 
account  for  his  sin,  earnestly  warned,  and  if  possible 
brought  to  a  better  mind.  Perhaps  he  did  not  know  he 
did  wrong.  This  any  Christian  may  do,  but  it  is  the  spe- 
cial duty  of  Pastors  and  Elders.  Great  effort  should  be 
made  at  this  point,  instead  of  waiting  till  the  individual  is 
almost  ruined. 

(2)  Suspension.  This  is  a  more  public  act.  It  com- 
monly involves  a  formal  trial  (Constitution,  Art.  97-100). 
The  time  of  suspension  is  a  probation,  during  which  the 
person  is  still  a  member  of  the  Church,  but  not  in  good 
standing.  He  is  not  allowed  the  Sacraments.  Nor  can  he 
vote. 

(3)  Excommunication.  If  he  does  not  rightly  use  his 
probation  ;  if  he  does  not  show  penitence  and  amendment ; 
if  admonitions  and  suspension  be  lost  upon  him ; — then  he 
shall  be  excommunicated*  (Const.  Art.  110). 

These  three  are  our  only  forms  of  discipline.  The  Pro- 
testant Church  knows  nothing  of  fine  or  imprisonment 
(Const.  Art.  24)  ;  but  civil  penalties  are  as  nothing  when 
compared  with  these  higher  and  more  dreadful  spiritual 
penalties, — exclusion  from  the  privileges  of  the  Church. 

They  are  excluded  .  •  .  from  the  Kingdom  of  Christ. 

What  is  the  force  of  discipline  ?  Does  it  really  affect  the 
indi\ddual  before  God  ?  Does  it  change  his  relation  ?  Or 
is  it  an  empty  form — a  religious  scarecrow  ?  May  men 
snap  their  finger  in  the  face  of  the  Church  and  defy  its 
authority,  without  hurt  to  their  souls  ?  .  In  other  words,  if 

*  The  erasure  of  his  name  from  the  Church  roll,  for  long  con- 
tinued gross  neglect  of  duty,  is  informal  excommunication  (Const. 
Art.  115). 


186  receiving  men  into  the  Church  is  a  real  and  valid  trans- 
action, is  not  also  this  casting  them  out  equally  real  and 
valid  ?   The  Catechism  answers,  "  They  are  excluded  .    .    . 
from  the  Kingdom  of  Christ." 

The  expression,  "  Keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  "  is 
a  figure,  and  scriptural  too  (Matt.  16:  19),  but  the 
figure  of  a  corresponding  truth,  and  denotes  the  real 
authority  in  the  Church  for  receiving  and  for  shutt-| 
ing  out  men.  Discipline  is  a  reality,  because  the  Church 
is  a  reality. 

Its  solemn  force  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  Church  oflicers 
act  for  Christ,  in  His  name,  and  by  His  authority  (Matt. 
18:  18;  Rom.  13:  1-7;  1  Cor.  5:  1-13;  2  Thess.  3:  6, 
11-15 ;  see  also  5th  Commandment).  In  other  words, 
Christian  discipline  must  be  far  more  than  similar  acts  in 
human  associations,  because  the  Church  is  far  more  than 
these.  It  is  simply  the  kingly  ofiice  of  Christ  in  His 
Church  (Luke  10  :  16).  Therefore,  though  painful  to  both 
officers  and  people  (often  more  so  than  to  the  individual), 
it  dare  not  be  neglected.  The  public  good  demands  it, 
and  the  good  of  the  offender  demands  it. 

Are  again  received.  This  brings  us  to  consider  the 
object  of  discipline.     This  is  two-fold : — 

1.)  To  preserve  the  purity  and  honor  of  the  Church. 
The  health  as  well  as  the  beauty  of  a  tree,  requires  the 
pruning  of  dead  and  unfruitful  branches.  The  health  and 
good  of  the  State  require  that  evil  doers  be  punished. 
So  here.  The  Holy  Church  cannot  wink  at  unholi- 
ness.  As  we  dare  not  receive  the  wicked  into  it,  so  we 
dare  not  allow  those  that  have  become  wicked  to  remain. 
The  Church  must  show  the  world  that  she  is  not  a  par- 
taker in  the  sins  of  men.  Of  course  the  Church  must  bear 
with  a  degree  of  unholiness  in  her  members ;  but  when 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  187 

men  live  in  wilful  sin,  the  Church  must  cast  off  the  re- 
proach, and  maintain  her  honor  and  purity. 

2.)  For  the  good  of  the  individual.  Discipline  is  not 
revenge,  but  wholesome  correction,  like  the  family  rod  and 
sword  of  the  magistrate,  leading  to  spiritual  care  and 
health.  Cut  off  from  the  Father's  table,  men  often  come 
to  true  hunger.  The  individual  is  made  to  stand  apart 
from  God's  people,  that  he  may  rightly  see  his  sin,  and 
truly  repent.  To  him  it  is  a  means  of  grace  (and  there- 
fore the  subject  is  treated  in  Part  Second  of  the  Catechism, 
which  relates  to  the  way  of  salvation),  and  will  do  him 
great  good  if  he  uses  it  aright.*  And  the  Church  expects 
this  result.  Then,  "  when  they  promise  and  show  real 
amendment  and  are  again  received  as  members  of  Christ 
and  His  Church," — the  door  is  opened  unto  them. 

The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  discipline  are  many,  and 
often  great.  1)  It  is  a  very  painful  and  delicate  duty  in 
all  its  degrees.  2)  A  lack  of  moral  courage  in  those  who 
should  report  charges,  and  otherwise  aid  the  cause  of 
justice  and  righteousness.  3)  The  influence  of  relatives  ! 
4)  Proving  charges  is  often  difficult,  because  sins  are 
covered ;  done  where  good  people  do  not  go ;  it  is  hard  to 
get  witnesses  (many  will  circulate  a  rumor  but  not  testify) ; 
the  main  witnesses  often  are  not  members.  5)  The  dan- 
ger of  wronging  men.  The  Church  is  the  most  merciful 
of  all  institutions,  bearing  much  and  long  with  men,  ad- 
monishing often,  slow  to  be  severe,  and  hoping  for  abetter 
life  until  actually  forced  to  exercise  the  power  of  the  keys. 
6)  It  is  hard  to  make  men  feel  the  force  of  discipline.     In 

*  But  what  if  he  should  die  during  his  discipline  ?  This  question 
is  for  him  to  answer,  and  the  Church  has  no  responsibility  in  the 
case  !  If  he  should  die  before  it,  or  without  it,  would  he  be  any 
better  off? 


188  the  divided  state  of  the  Cliurcli  it  is  easy  to  go  from  one 
branch  to  another;  and  some  denominations  do  not  re- 
spect the  discipline  of  others.     In  this  way  the  true  idea 
of  authority  in  the  Church  is  lost 
Closing  remarks  : 

1)  See  what  necessity  there  is  for  understanding  this 
subject,  as  given  in  die  Catechism  and  Constitution  of  the 
Church.  How  significant  tiiat  these  two  are  bound  to- 
gether I  Every  member  needs  to  study  the  sroverimient  as 
well  as  the  doctrine  of  his  Church. 

2)  The  sacred  duty  of  member?  and  officers  to  uphold 
the  good  name  and  holy  character  of  the  Church, — ^by  a 
godly  Hfe,  by  helping  others  (weak,  wandering,  endan- 
gered) so  to  live,  and  by  early  reporting  those  who  wil- 
folly  and  grossly  dishonor  their  vows  (but  the  sad  truth 
should  always  be  spoken  in  love). 

3)  How  pain  fill  it  is  to  explain  this  subject  to  catechu- 
mens! Tender,  penitent,  loving,  sincere  and  zealous, — 
how  can  they  appreciate  it !  Is  it  not  cruel  to  suggest 
even  the  possibility  of  their  coming  imder  discipliue  ? 

While  we  hope  better  things  of  you,  you  yet  will  always 
need  just  this  knowledge,  Xever  allow  yourself  to  come 
into  danger  of  discipline ;  but  the  human  heart  is  very 
deceitful  (1  Cor.  10 :  12),  and  you  may  faJL  K  so  at 
once  confess  your  sim 

4)  The  necessity  of  htimbly,  penitently,  sincerely  and 
promptly  yielding  to  discipline  as  from  Grod-  Why  be 
angry,  stubborn,  indifferent,  and  so  please  Satan  and  lose 
your  soul  ?  The  Church  can  always  do  without  the  indi- 
vidual, but  he  cannot  do  without  the  Church. 

5)  While  the  Church,  in  its  mercy,  gladly  takes  back 
the  penitent,  catechumens  should  well  know  that  it  is 
harder  to  sret  into  the  Church  a  second  time  than  the  first. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  189 

Not  only  "will  the  Church  demand  more  evidence  of  re- 
pentance and  sincerity,  and  at  best  perhaps  be  in  doubt ; 
but  especially  the  natural  heart  rebels  at  this  humiliation 
and  confession;  and  the  devil  takes  advantage  of  all  this 
to  hold  you  back. 

How  much  better  to  stand  fast  in  the  liberty  of  Christ ; 
to  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering ; 
to  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the 
end! 


190  THE  THIED   PAET. 


OF    THAXKPULXESS. 


THTRTY-SECO^^D    I^ORD'S    DAY. 


THE   NECESSITY   OF   GOOD   WORKS.