Question  87.  Cannot  they  then  be  saved,  who,  continuing  in  their 
wicked  and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted  to  God  ? 

^Ti^rer.  By  no  means ;  for  the  Holy  Scripture  declares  that  no 
unchaste  person,  idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard, 
slanderer,  robber,  or  any  such  like,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

Van  der  Kemp  and  other  commentators  on  the  Cate- 
chism make  five  subdivisions  of  Part  Third :  1)  The  ne- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  191 

cessity  of  good  works  (Ques.  86,  87)  ;  2)  their  ground  or 
principle,  namely  conversion  (Ques.  88-90)  ;  3)  their 
nature  (Ques.  91) ;  4)  their  rule,  the  law  of  God  (Ques. 
92-115) ;  5)  the  means  of  doing  them,  namely,  prayer 
(Ques.  116-129). 

Delivered  ....  through  Christ .  .  .  good  works  ? 

In  this  question  lie  the  three  great  divisions  of  the  Cate- 
chism,— Misery,  Deliverance,  Thankfulness.  Our  misery 
is  sin.  Our  deliverance  is  Jesus  Christ.  What,  now,  is 
our  thankfulness  ? 

As  man  could  not  know  his  misery,  except  taught  of 
God ;  and  as  man  could  not  know  the  way  of  deliverance 
unless  God  revealed  it ;  so  no  man  could  of  himself  know 
how  to  please  God  in  the  way  of  gratitude.  Therefore 
God  reveals  even  this  ;  and  great  care  is  taken  in  Part 
Third  of  the  Catechism  to  explain  the  doctrine  of  thank- 
fulness. 

Why  .....  still  do  good  works  ?  Not  for  our  sal- 
vation, as  the  Romanist  teaches.  This  is  altogether  of 
grace,  and  absolutely  without  merit  in  us  (Rom.  3 :  24). 
In  other  words,  our  good  works  cannot  secure  our  salva- 
tion (Ques.  62).  Why,  then,  must  we  still  do  good 
works?     For  three  reasons. 

The  first  part  of  the  answer,  summing  up  Part  Second 
of  the  Catechism,  states,  negatively  ("  redeemed  and  de- 
livered us")  and  positively  ("  renews  us")  the  ground  and 
possibility  of  good  works,  namely  the  life  and  grace  of 
Jesus  Christ  in  us.  The  second  part  then  gives  the  three 
reasons  for  doing  good  works,  which  reasons  relate  to  God, 
to  self,  and  to  our  fellow-men  : — 

1)  That  by  our  whole  conduct— the  Triglott  says  "with 
our  whole  life  "—through  all  our  days,  and  in  all  our 
relations  and  actions,  we  may  show  our  thankfulness  to 


192  God.  The  Christian  does  good  works,  not  for  reward,  and 
not  merely  because  commanded,  but  from  thankful  love. 
See  the  force  of  Ex.  20  : 1-3  ;  Rom.  12:1;  Psa.  116  :  12- 
14  ;  1  Cor.  6  :  20. 

2)  That  every  one  may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his 
faith  by  the  fruits  thereof  (James  2 :  18).  His  good 
works  are  possible  only  because  he  has  been  renewed  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  now  he  must  bring  forth  fruit  unto 
holiness.  See  the  forcible  logic  of  the  Catechism  in  Ques. 
64,  and  also  of  Paul  in  Rom.  6 :  22.  Good  works  do  not 
merit  salvation,  but  are  the  fruit  of  it.  This  is  the  Pro- 
testant doctrine.  Our  good  works  do  not  make  our  reli- 
gion, but  our  religion  makes  our  good  works.  We  are 
not  Christians  because  we  do  good  works ;  but  just  the 
reverse,  we  do  good  works  because  we  are  Christians.  As 
fruit  tells  the  character  of  a  tree,  so  the  fruit  of  God's 
grace  in  us  is  the  comforting  assurance  that  we  have  His 
grace.  Thus  good  works  are,  in  part,  the  witness  of  the 
Spirit  that  we  are  sons  of  God,  because  they  are  the  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  5  :  22). 

Good  works  thus  become  a  test  for  self-examination  (1 
John  2:3),  as  the  quality,  quantity  and  regularity  of  fruit 
on  a  tree  are  the  measure  of  its  life-power. 

As  our  good  works  are  the  evidence  of  grace  within, 
so  our  evil  works  (pride,  selfishness,  hate,  anger,  quarrel- 
ing, dishonesty,  unfairness  and  unkindness  in  word  and 
deed)  show  our  remaining  depravity,  against  which  we 
should  earnestly  and  daily  strive. 

And  so  even  Christian  children,  and  especially  those 
old  enough  to  be  catechumens,  must  more  and  more  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  holiness  for  their  comfort. 

Alas  for  those  who  instead  of  much  fruit  (John  15:8), 
bring  forth  as  little  as  possible,  and  so  show  little  thankful- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  I93 

ness,  and  have  little  assurance  of  faith !     A  barren  tree  is 
a  reproach  to  the  husbandman  and  liable  to  the  axe  (Matt 
7:19;  John  15:2). 

3)  That  we  may  gain  others  to  Christ.     (Matt.  5:16: 

1  Pet.  2:  12).  "Conversation"  simply  means  our  man- 
ner of  life.  The  Triglott  says,  "walk."  See  this  word 
in  Ps.  50:  23;  Gal.  1:  13;  Eph.  2:  3  ;4:  22  ;  Phil.  1:27; 

2  Pet.  3 :  11.  We  greatly  influence  men  by  our  living 
before  them.  This  is  as  true  of  Christian  boys  and  girls 
as  of  grown  people.  You  may  gain  others  to  Christ,  or 
drive  them  from  Him. 

Question  87  speaks  of  the  wicked.  Can  they  be  saved? 
By  no  means.  They  are  not  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Their  evil  works  are  sure  evidence  of  this ;  and  the  Scrip- 
tures declare  that  such  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God  (1  Cor.  6 :  9,  10 ;  Eph.  5 :  5). 


THIRTY-THIRD  I^ORD'S  DAY. 


CONVERSION.