Question    90.     What  is  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  ? 

Answer.  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God,  through  Christ,  and 
with  love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all 
good  works. 
194  For  true  conTersion,  the  Triglott  lias^  "  true  repentaoce 
and  conversion ;  "  tor  '"'  mortification,''  •*  dying.'*  The  "old 
man  "  means  our  fiillen  nanire,  our  old  Adamic  life  which 
13  corrupt  ( Eph.  4 :  22  .  This  must  die  ;  and  its  death  is 
hei^  called,  in  the  G^^rman,  '*  a  heartfelt  sorrow  fiw  sin," 
vrl:/:i  mi:  express  itself  in  hatred  of  sin  and  taming' 
n  ii:. ::.     All  iliis  is  onlv  negadre. 

"  ^^  :::^rzlzig,''  the  waking  up  to  cc>nscious  actiTity,  is 
:_r  -id.~e  side  of  the  proces.  'The  G-erman  is  auferdeh- 
rlslii^'  ::  r^^ess  of  life,  and  thus  cloeely  corre- 
spjmis  with  the  dyliir.  "*  The  new  man''  means  the  life 
of  Christ  iz.  :lir  irliTver,  and  this  fe  a  state  of  joy  and 
love  in  G^  1   -L:  1  expresees  itself  in  godly  liring. 

TheS'  :^  lif  dying  of  tlie  old  and  the  qnickening  of 
the  neiv,  :.i.z  :  5T?-ii:i  //^firr.  Th"  ?^??ond  makes  the  Si^ 
pjssible.  r.r.zi-r:::.::;!-  i;  :lf  ^i.  .,i.l  and  starting  p:»int 
of  conversirz. 

It  is  a  peouIis.riry  cf  -'^^  Keilrllrrg  Caieoliiszi.  :l:at 
this  sobject  is  rreritcii  last,  in  the  Third  Part,  n::  Iz  :1t 
First:  under  the  head  of  ThanfcriziT-s  i.;:  ;:  ^lisery. 
But,  thougl:  :zt  1  fzidcm  and  explanauon  of  conTersion 
are  &and  here,  the  : :  conversion  is  taken  for  granted 

all  through.  It  is  implied  iu  the  very  first  answer :  "  wil- 
ling and  ready  henceforth  to  live  unto  Him,"  So  in 
Ques.  32  (confess,  presait,  fight),  and  in  Ques,  70  ^^die 
nnto  sm  and  lead  a  holy  lifo}. 

AH  this  simply  means  tiiat  the  child^s  conrersion  is  a 
feet  sroingr  forward  fit)m  diildhood ;  and  dierefore  for  this 
blessed  t-  1  -^e  work  and  pray,  in  the  femily,  catechetical 
clas  V  1  "  :1 : ::.  Indeed  what  our  childrett  so  do  throog^ 
£f:Tf  z  -rirs,  is  well  done,  solid,  healthy  and  reliable. 

The  Oafieefaism  regards  conversion  not  only  as  a  painfol 
sense  of  sin,  bat  also  and  especially  as  a  jnyfui  experi- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  195 

ence,  a  daily  growing,  holy  desire  and  purpose  to  show 
our  thankfulness  by  living  for  Christ  (Kom.  6 :  19-22). 

Conversion,  in  this  view,  is  possible,  of  course,  only  in 
Christians,  namely,  those  who  stand  in  the  Church  and 
under  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  and 
hence,  too,  it  naturally  belongs  to  the  Third  Part  of  the 
Catechism,  as  the  form  and  evidence  of  our  thankfulness- 

The  necessity  for  conversion  lies,  of  course,  in  our  sinful 
nature.  "  The  carnal  mind "  (Rom.  8 :  7)  shows  itself 
not  only  incapable  of  good,  but  even  inclined  to  all  wick- 
edness. The  natural  heart,  man  under  sin,  is  called  in  the 
Bible  by  some  hard  names  :  corrupt,  diseased,  dead,  envi- 
ous, jealous  covetous,  disobedient,  alienated,  unclean,  blind, 
deaf,  selfish,  cruel,  hypocritical,  condemned,  etc. ;  and  the 
terrible  catalogue  of  its  fruits  in  Rom.  1  :  29-31,  makes 
one  shudder.  Jeremiah  calls  it  desperately  wicked  (Jer. 
17  :  9),  and  Christ  calls  it  a  fountain  of  sin  (Mark  7 :  21- 
23).  What  was  true  in  the  days  of  Solomon  (Eccles.  9  : 
3),  and  true  a  thousand  years  afterward  in  the  days  of 
Paul  (Rom.  3:  10-18),  is  true  to-day.  "The  carnal 
mind  is  enmity  against  God,"  an  incarnation  of  hate ;  and 
hence  the  absolute  necessity  of  "  a  change  of  heart "  in 
order  to  be  acceptable  or  righteous  before  God,  and  fitted 
for  the  company  of  saints  and  angels.  This  change,  in  its 
progress  and  fullness  we  call  conversion. 

Conversion  is  a  turning,  as  the  word  itself  indicates,* 
an  inward  and  an  outward  change,  and  also  two-sided, 
negative  and  positive,  a  putting  off  of  the  old  man  and  a 
puttmg  on  of  the  new  (Eph.  4 :  22-24;  Titus  2  :  12). 

*  He  is  called  a  "  convert "  who  turns  from  one  religion  or  party 
to  another.  In  Ques.  87  for  converted,  the  Triglott  has,  ''turn  to 
God." 


196  The  negative  side  we  call  repentance,  a  sincere  sorrow 
of  heart  for  sin ;  not  for  the  consequences  of  sin  (2 
Cor.  7:  10),  not  just  for  particular  sins,  but  first  for 
sin  in  us,  our  sinful  nature,*  so  contrary  to  God's  holiness, 
— and  then  of  course  also  for  its  fruits.  True  repentance 
must  express  itself  both  in  words  and  acts,  in  confessing 
and  forsaking  sin  (Luke  15  :  18),  not  only  in  hating  it  but 
also  in  fleeing  from  it. 

The  positive  side  of  conversion  is  faith.  There  can  be 
no  true  turning  from  sin  and  Satan,  without  a  real  turning 
to  Christ  and  holiness,  because  there  is  absolutely  no  neu- 
tral ground. 

The  mortification,  or  killing  ofi*,  of  the  old  man,  the  sin- 
ful dispositions,  desires,  appetites  and  habits,  neces- 
sarily implies  the  putting  on  of  the  new  man,  namely,, 
cherishing  and  cultivating  the  grace  of  God  in  the  heart 
and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  5  :  22-25). 

How,  now,  is  such  true  conversion  possible  ?  Man  by 
nature  is  dead  in  sin,  and  thus  helpless.     How  can  he  turn? 

Only  by  divine  grace.  He  is  inclined  to  all  wickedness 
until  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God  (Ques,  8).  Hence 
his  regeneration  makes  conversion  possible  (Rom.  6:4). 
There  can  be  this  conflict  between  the  old  and  the  new, 
between  flesh  and  spirit,  only  by  the  real  presence  of  the 
new.  The  old  is  destroyed  by  the  power  of  the  new,  as 
the  seed  dies  by  the  developing  life  in  it.  The  first  Adam 
can  be  overcome  in  us  only  by  the  presence  and  power  of 
the  Second  Adam. 

*  Many  think  of  repentance  as  if  it  related  only  to  sins  done, 
and  then  comfort  or  reproach  themselves  with  a  calculation  of  the 
number  of  their  sins, — not  considering  that  within  is  something  yet 
worse,  the  source  of  all  evil  thoughts,  words  and  deeds,  and  so  a 
special  ground  of  repentance. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  197 

Conversion  is  possible,  therefore,  only  through  the  use 
of  the  divinely  appointed  means,  the  preached  word,  the 
Holy  Sacraments  and  Christian  worship. 

Conversion  is  a  life-long  process,  not  a  single,  sudden, 
great,  extraordinary,  magical  change,  full  and  final,  by  a 
single  inflash  of  divine  light  and  power,  at  once  making 
all  things  new,  and  so  the  work  of  an  hour  or  a  week :  but 
like  all  physical  and  mental  change,  so  must  the  moral  be 

gradual.     You  can  as  little  step  from  great  badness 

into  great  goodness  as  from  childhood  right  into  manhood. 

The  heart  changes  more  and  more  year  by  year,  reach- 
ing higher  degrees  of  goodness. 

The  difficulty  is,  the  word  is  used  in  two  senses. 

Some  call  the  resolution  (the  decision  or  will-act)  of  the 
individual,  to  come  out  from  the  world  and  follow  Christ, 
— his  conversion. 

AYe  use  the  word  in  a  broader  sense,  including  in  it  not 
only  the  process  by  which  he  was  brought  to  this  personal 
will-act,  but  also  the  fulfillment  of  this  resolution  all 
through  his  after  life. 

The  narrow  is  a  very  unfair  sense.  It  puts  a  part  for 
the  whole.  What  some  thus  call  conversion,  is  at  most 
only  the  beginning  of  it.  Conversion  is  not  one  act  of 
will,  but  thousands,  a  process  running  through  the  whole 
Christian  life. 


THE   CONVERSION   OF   OUR   CHILDREN. 

When  does  this  gracious  process  begin?  Not  at  confir- 
mation, not  in  catechization,  but  in  childhood.  At  least 
it  should,  and  indeed,  generally  does. 

It  is  a  terrible  doctrine,  that  our  baptized  children  must 
run  the  course  of  the  prodigal  son,  down  into  the  depth 


198  of  moral  degradation  and  misery,  before  coming  to  the 
Father  in  their  own  name  and  act. 

The  baptismal  vows  breathe  a  very  different  spirit.  They 
do  not  say,  "  Let  this  child  run  after  the  world,  the  flesh 
and  the  devil  fifteen  years,  and  then  bring  him  to  good- 
ness," but  "  bring  uj)  this  child  in  the  nurture  and  admo- 
nition of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  doctrines  and  duties  of  our 
holy  relio-ion." 

The  real  and  blessed  saintshij)  of  our  baptized  children 
must  never  be  overlooked  when  considering  their  con- 
version. Lideed,  without  this  you  can  neither  understand 
nor  appreciate  the  Reformed  view  of  this  doctrine. 

Baptized  into  Christ,  members  of  His  body,  the  par- 
takers of  His  anointing,  and  thus  really  children  of  the 
heavenly  Father,  these  Chi'istian  children,  under  Ckristian 
nurture  and  teaching,  in  the  family  and  congregation  from 
infancy  onward, — grow  up  with  a  knowledge  of  sin,  a  sor- 
row for  it,  a  hatred  of  it,  love  for  truth  and  goodness,  ten- 
derness of  conscience,  and  after  a  while,  a  sweet  sense  of 
sonship  toward  God. 

Their  conversion — like  that  of  Jewish  childi-en,  from 
Abraham  to  John — is  not  the  spasmodic  excitement  of  an 
hour,  but  a  quiet,  steady,  healthy  growth  in  the  grace  and 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  powerful  working  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  through  a  number  of  years. 

This  process  of  grace  must  duly  come  to  a  head  or  ripe- 
ness. The  child  must  come  to  Christian  self-conscious- 
ness, to  a  personal  sense  of  sinfulness,  to  a  personal  will- 
act,  turning  to  Christ,  to  a  personal  sense  of  sonship  to- 
ward God,  and  so  to  a  desire  for  full  membership  in  the 
Church. 

Sometimes  this  happy  point  is  reached  only  through  a 
painful  conflict.     The  child's  physical  and  mental  life  de- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  199 

velop  to  maturity  easily,  because  there  is  no  serious  oppo- 
sing power ;  but  not  so  with  the  Christian  life  of  the  child. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  power  of  evil,  without  and  within, 
and  this  conflict  must  come  to  a  crisis,  in  which  the  Chris- 
tian child  must  answer  yes  or  no  to  the  solemn  challenge 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "Will  you  live  a  Christian  life?" 

And  yet  many  of  our  children  pass  from  darkness  to 
light  in  the  most  easy  and  gradual  way,  not  knowing  when 
they  came  to  Christian  self-consciousness,  any  more  than 
they  know  when  they  came  to  natural  self-consciousness. 
What  child  can  tell  the  day  when  he  first  learned  to  know 
and  love  his  father? 

Some  denominations  debate  the  question  of  early  con- 
versions, and  at  times  make  special  efibrt  for  the  conver- 
sion of  their  children ;  but  such  a  question  never  arises  in 
the  Reformed  Church.  From  the  Reformation  till  now 
constant  effort  has  been  made,  with  the  best  success,  for 
the  conversion  of  our  children,  namely  through  the  divinely 
appointed  means,  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord 
in  the  Christian  family  and  congregation,  during  the  first 
fifteen  years  of  the  child's  life. 

We  do  not — as  we  be  slanderously  reported — confirm 
our  young  people  without  conversion.  We  demand  of 
them  a  Christian  experience,  and  generally  have  the  great 
advantage  of  ten  or  twelve  years  of  such  experience  as  a 
ground  of  hope  and  judgment  in  regard  to  their  fitness  for 
full  membership. 

They  must  not  be  judged  too  severely.  They  may  at 
times  show  a  bad  side  (temper,  peevishness,  and  disobedi- 
ence, and  so  do  we — God  help  us)  ;  but  if  they  show  also 
a  good  side,  lamenting  their  sins,  making  earnest  effort  to 
do  better,  loving  God's  day  and  service,  and  desiring  to 
honor  their  baptismal  vows — is  not   this  evidence  of  a 


200  ctange  of  heart,  and  can  you  refuse  them  full  member- 
ship? 


THE   COXTEESION   OF   ADULTS. 

How  about  those  who  grow  up  unconverted  ?  How  about 
those  baptized  childi-en,  who  at  fifteen,  thirty  or  seventy, 
show  not  these  godly  dispositions,  who,  if  not  grossly 
wicked,  are  only  moral,  and  religiously  indifferent,  not 
concerned  about  their  salvation,  caring  nothing  about 
God's  house  and  service,  having  no  penitence  for  sin,  and 
so  no  desire  for  confirmation — and  all  this  because,  either 
they  have  not  been  nurtured,  or  if  so,  they  have  resisted 
the  grace  and  Spirit  of  God  ? 

And  how  about  those  unbaptized,  who  grow  up  not  in 
Christian  families,  with  but  little  knowledge  and  less 
Christian  nurtui'e,  who  are  either  grossly  wicked  or  sim- 
ply moral,  but  in  either  case  more  or  less  hardened  ? 

1)  Evidently  their  conversion  must  differ  from  those 
who  earlv  vield  their  hearts  to  the  Holv  Ghost.  You 
may  demand  from  them  what  you  may  not  from  the 
others. 

2)  It  is  possible  only  through  the  use  of  the  divinely- 
appointed  means.  There  is  no  royal  way,  no  short  cut,  to 
holiness. 

3)  Likely  they  will  come  to  a  decision  for  Christ  only 
through  a  painful  struggle.  Their  past  history  is  against 
them.  The  powerful  force  of  religious  habit,  whether  of 
sin  or  indifference,  holds  them  back  ;  and  their  coming  to 
Christ  is  a  hard  and  sore  battle  with  self-will,  doubts  and 
fears. 

4)  In  their  case  a  very  great  change,  within  and  with- 
out, is  demanded,  a  change  of  mind,  will,  desires,  aims 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  201 

and  views,  plainly  showing  itself  in  the  words,  acts  and 
habits  of  daily  life. 

5)  They  may  come  to  this  turning  point,  to  a  true  peni- 
tence for  sin  and  faith  in  Christ,  either  gradually,  through 
months,  after  much  thought,  ending  in  a  calm  and  intelli- 
gent resolution  to  live  a  new  life ;  or  suddenly,  in  which 
case  the  act  will  not  be  so  safe  and  trustworthy.  Resolu- 
tions made  in  haste,  amid  religious  excitement,  or  in  danger, 
may  be  sincere  enough  but  are  not  reliable.  They  seldom 
have  deepness  of  earth. 

6)  Even  this  mere  beginning  in  their  conversion,  is  a 
difficult  matter.  They  are  not  tender,  as  when  young,  but 
hardened.  It  is  hard  to  move  them,  to  interest  them  in 
their  salvation,  to  bring  them  to  reflection,  to  open  their 
blinded  eyes,  and  to  awaken  thera  out  of  their  deadly 
sleep.     What  a  lesson  for  the  young  ! 

7)  Their  whole  past  life  is  worse  than  wasted.  They 
have  spent  their  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  (Is. 
55  :  2).  At  thirty,  fifty  or  eighty,  they  are  only  babes  in 
Christ,  at  a  serious  disadvantage  in  every  way.  Many  a 
Christian  child,  whose  conversion  has  gone  quietly  forward 
through  fifteen  years,  is  stronger  in  the  Christian  life  than 
they,  with  far  fewer  doubts,  fears  and  struggles,  and  with- 
out the  painfiil  shame  of  having  so  long  walked  in  wilful 
sin.     And  this  past  loss  they  can  never  make  up. 


Special  attention  has  thus  been  called  to  the  conversion 
of  those  who  grow  up  outside  the  Church,  or  unworthily 
in  it,  in  order  to  show  the  necessity  of  treating  our  faithful 
Christian  children  as  they  deserve. 

Hundreds  of  these  grow  up  piously,  from  childhood 
walking  in  right  ways,  yielding  their  hearts  to  the  Holy 


202  Ghost,  loving  truth  and  goodness,  daily  giving  plain  evi- 
dence of  growth  in  grace,  and  at  twelve  to  fifteen,  having 
come  to  Christian  seli-consciousness,  thej  humbly  desire 
confirmation, — without  any  sore  convictions,  without  any 
painful  struggle,  without  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  in  regard 
to  their  forgiveness,  acceptance  and  sonship. 

In  other  words  :  The  experience  of  the  prodigal  son 
cannot  be  repeated  in  them,  becatise  they  have  never 
grossly  gone  Irom  their  Father's  house,  but  like  loving 
children  they  have  grown  to  Christian  manhood  in  the 
sweet  peace  of  daily  faithfulness. 

Therefore  to  treat  them  like  prodigals  who  have  gone 
into  the  fej*  country  of  a  sinfiil  life,  or  like  Gentiles  who 
have  never  been  in  the  Father's  house,  and  to  demand  of 
them  a  religious  experience  like  theirs,  with  all  the  pains 
of  sore  conviction,  and  with  all  the  struggles  of  a  guilty 
conscience,  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  unscriptural. 

The  Heidelbercr  Catechism  does  not  teach  our  children 
how  to  become  Christians,  but  the  fact  that  they  are 
Christians  (Ques.  1,  32,  53,  TO,  74) ; — and  only  as  we 
hold  to  this  old,  Keformed,  yea  scriptural  doctrine,  that 
our  baptized  children  are  lambs,  members,  Christians,  can 
we  understand  and  appreciate  the  old,  scriptural,  Kefor- 
mation  view  of  conversion  as  given  in  our  Catechism. 


CLOSrS'G   EIBIAEXS   OX   COXTERSION. 

1)  The  relation  of  conviction  to  conversion.  Conviction 
is  a  painful  sense  of  sinfulness.  Being  a  sinner  and  feel- 
ing it  are  not  the  same.  Comparing  sinful  self  with  a 
holv  Grod,  we  srraduallv  awaken  to  a  sense  of  our  own  un- 
holiness,  and  to  a  desire  for  deliverance  from  it  (Acts  2 :  37 ; 
Eom.  7 :  24}.     Cherish  conviction,  and  it  leads  to  conver- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  203 

sion.  Check  it  or  trifle  with  it,  and  it  leads  to  hardness 
of  heart. 

Persons  often  rest  under  conviction  through  years,  with- 
out peace  of  conscience  and  joy,  simply  because  they  re- 
fuse to  yield  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Instead  of  walking  in 
the  sweet  sunshine  of  divine  love,  they  walk  under  the 
cloud  of  divine  wrath  which  conviction  reveals. 

The  secret  of  their  trouble  lies  in  this :  They  want  to 
reach  a  high  standard  of  holiness  before  confessing  Christ, 
not  knowing  that  this  is  self-righteousness.  How  much 
better  say : 

**  Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea, 
But  that  Thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
And  that  Thou  bid'st  me  come  to  Thee, 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come." 

2)  The  relation  of  conversion  and  sanctification.  Sanc- 
tify means  to  make  holy.  From  this  comes  the  word 
saint,  which  means  a  "  holy  one,"  one  in  the  process  of 
being  made  holy.  Sanctification  is  the  peculiar  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  renews  us,  and  changes  our  whole 
nature  into  the  image  of  Christ,  a  process  running  from 
regeneration  to  glorification  (Phil.  1 : 6),  in  those  who, 
standing  in  the  Church  of  God,  worthily  use  the  means  of 
grace. 

But  this  process  of  redemption  from  sin  and  growth  in 
divine  life  is  possible  only  by  consent  of  the  human  will. 
The  Holy  Ghost  can  do  His  gracious  work,  only  as  we 
yield  ourselves  to  Him.  In  other  words,  sanctification 
depends  on  constant  repentance  and  faith.  Conversion 
and  sanctification,  then,  are  only  two  sides  of  one  and  the 
same  process,  namely,  the  human  will  yielding  to  the 
divine  activity ;  therefore  sanctification,  as  God's  act,  is 


204  treated  in  Part  Second  of  the  Cateeliism ;  while  conver- 
sion, as  man's  act,  is  treated  in  Part  Third.  • 

3)  These  elements  of  our  redemption  must  not  be  sepa- 
rated. You  cannot  divide  them  off  into  periods  and  assign 
each  its  place  with  so  much  time  for  conviction,  so  much 
for  conversion,  and  the  rest  of  life  for  sanctification. 
They  overlap  and  inter-penetrate  each  other  all  the  while. 
Conviction,  or  a  sense  of  sinfulness,  is  essential  to  true  re- 
pentance ;  and  faith  is  the  positive  side  of  conversion, 
making  our  sanctification  possible;  while  each  higher 
degree  of  sanctification  enables  us  to  yield  ourselves  yet 
more  fully  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  way  of  peniteuce  and 
faith. 

4)  The  whole  process  is  carried  forward  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  not  through  natural  forces,  as  education  and  social 
cultivation,  but  through  supernatural  means, — the  Holy 
Gospel,  the  Holy  Sacraments  and  Christian  worship.  These 
means  are  not  like  physical  or  electrical  powers  which 
carry  their  consequences  with  them  perforce,  but  like  all 
moral  forces  may  be  resisted,  and  hence  the  great  difier- 
ence  in  the  effect  is  due  to  the  individual  himself. 

Especially  men  must  not  think  that  their  conversion 
depends  on  the  will  of  God — sometimes  He  is  willing,  and 
sometimes  not,  and  therefore  poor  anxious  man  must 
struggle  with  God,  and  through  prayers  and  tears  gain 
His  blessing.  This  turns  all  the  gracious  promises  and 
sweet  calls  of  the  Gospel  into  nonsense.  Jacob  did  not 
wrestle  with  the  angel  but  just  the  reverse  (Gen.  32 :  24)  ; 
so  man  does  not  strive  with  God,  but  the  Spirit  strives 
with  man. 

5)  This  process  of  redemption,  especially  viewed  on  the 
human  side  as  conversion,  differs  very  much  in  different 
persons,  owing  to  difference  in  age,  temperament,  past  his- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  205 

tory,  social  life,  religious  training,  and  similar  modifying 
cii'cumstances.  Religious  experiences  must  differ  just  as 
faces,  minds  and  hearts  differ. 

Hence  the  folly  and  wrong  of  one  person  judging  or 
testing  his  Christian  experience  by  that  of  another,  and 
doubting  his  own  because  it  differs.  Equally  unreasona- 
ble is  it  to  demand  the  same  religious  experience  from 
each  and  all. 

Sometimes  persons  join  another  church,  and  with  new 
customs  and  surroundings  they  have  new  religious  experi- 
ences. They  then  are  likely  to  think  they  never  before 
had  any  religion,  and  only  now  know  what  experimental 
religion  is.  This  may  be  so,  but  if  so,  the  fault  was  their 
own.  More  likely,  however,  they  in  their  zeal  ignore  or 
forget  much  of  the  deep  conviction,  true  penitence  and 
hearty  faith  of  the  past,  and  fail  to  trace  their  new  experi- 
ences to  their  new  relations. 

6)  When  does  conversion  end?  Regeneration  is  the 
beginning  of  the  Christian  life.  Conversion  and  sanctifi- 
cation  are  respectively  the  human  and  the  divine  sides  of 
the  process.  Conversion,  therefore,  is  the  work  of  a  life- 
time. We  mourn  over  sin,  not  an  hour  or  a  week,  but  all 
our  days. 

7)  Backsliding  is  just  the  reverse  process,  a  going  back- 
ward and  downward  in  the  Christian  life ;  but  of  its  na- 
ture, causes,  consequences  and  cure  more  cannot  now  be 
said. 


GOOD  WOEKS.