Question  91.  But  what  are  good  works  ? 

Ansioer.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  are  per- 
formed according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to  His  glory,  and  not  such 
as  are  founded  on  our  imaginations,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 


206  One  mark  of  conversion,  in  both  child  and  mao,  is  "  to 
live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  good  works." 
Hence  at  once  the  question  arises, "  What  are  good  works?" 
Their  definition  includes  three  points : 

1)  They  must  proceed  from  a  true  faith.  Not  from  his- 
torical, natural  faith,  but  from  Christian  faith,  which  is 
our  first  good  work  (John  6 :  29),  and  the  condition  of  all 
others.  This  is  the  force  of  Question  64.  Therefore  only 
a  Christian  can  do  good  works.  "  Whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin"  (Eom.  14:23). 

Good  works  are  not  from  the  natural  heart,  because  the 
carnal  mind,  the  unregenerate  man,  is  enmity  against 
God  (Rom.  8:  7,  8).  The  works  of  the  flesh,  of  the  old 
nature,  are  evil  (Gal.  5  :  19-21.)  Until  regenerated  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  we  hate  God  and  are  inclined  to  all  wick- 
edness (Ques.  5,  8). 

Therefore  good  works,  moral  actions,  acceptable  to  God, 
are  possible,  not  in  nature,  but  only  in  grace. 

As  true  faith  is  from  the  Holy  Ghost  (Ques.  21,  65), 
good  works  are  called  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit "  (Gal.  5 : 
22).     They  proceed  from  grace  in  us  (Phil.  1 :  11). 

Those  who  are  not  Christians  often  do  much  that  has 
the  outward  form  of  good  works,  but  not  the  inward  sub- 
stance, because  it  does  not  proceed  from  true  faith.  Wil- 
fully standing  outside  the  covenant  of  faith  and  grace,  the 
man  evidently  is  not  a  partaker  of  that  faith  and  grace 
from  which  alone  good  works  can  come. 

If  this  definition,  shutting  out  so  much  worldly-wise 
goodness  (kindness  to  the  poor,  support  of  the  Church, 
etc.),  seems  to  be  severe,  remember  it  is  God's  own  defini- 
tion, and  the  severity  of  His  holiness.  How  can  goodness 
come  out  of  badness? 

2)  They  must  be  performed  according  to  the  law  of 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  207 

God.  Grace  is  their  source,  and  the  will  of  God  is  their 
rule  or  measure.  Man  of  himself  does  not  know  what 
things  please  God,  and  therefore  God  has  taught  him 
how  to  live  ;  but  the  error,  pride  and  folly  of  men  run  into 
all  kinds  of  extravagance  and  superstition.  You  see  this 
illustrated,  not  only  in  the  religious  superstitious  of  the 
heathen  world,  but  also  in  the  religious  acts  of  men  in  the 
Christian  Church  in  all  ages. 

For  example :  St.  Anthony  lived  to  extreme  old  age 
without  washing  his  feet.  St.  Abraham  for  fifty  years 
washed  neither  face  nor  feet.  A  certain  Egyptian  hermit 
never  combed  his  hair  except  on  Easter  Sunday,  and 
never  washed  his  clothes,  but  let  them  fall  to  pieces  from 
very  rottenness.  St.  John,  of  Lycopolis,  for  forty-eight 
years  would  not  see  a  woman — not  even  his  mother.  The 
monk  Eusebius,  of  Syria,  wore  an  iron  girdle  around  his 
waist,  and  an  iron  collar  around  his  neck,  the  two  being 
united  by  a  short  iron  chain  which  bent  his  body.  Simon, 
the  Stylite,  stood  on  the  top  of  a  pillar  sixty  feet  high, 
never  once  coming  down  for  forty  years,  and  died  there. 
Another  monk,  of  noble  birth,  Boniface,  often  rolled  him- 
self among  stinging  nettles  and  thorns.  Pope  Coelestine  V> 
when  a  monk,  lived  on  dry  bread  and  cabbage  leaves, 
wore  a  hair  shirt  full  of  knots,  and  slept  on  the  ground 
with  a  log  for  his  pillow.  In  1260  arose  the  Whippers, 
who  in  public  processions  whipped  their  bare  shoulders 
(both  sexes  and  ages)  till  blood  ran  down. 

These  things  were  done  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  no 
doubt  very  sincerely,  to  glorify  God.  But  in  it  all  one 
sees  very  much  "  bodily  exercise  "  which  Paul  says  profit- 
eth  nothing,  as  well  as  a  show  of  self-righteousness  which 
cannot  be  pleasing  to  the  all-sufficient  Saviour.  It  is  very 
hard  for  us  to  conceive  how  men  could  expect  to  please 


208  God  by  such  shamelessly  filthy  living,  by  dishonoring  a 
mother  whom  God  commanded  to  be  honored,  and  by  such 
self-torture  as  many  practiced. 

Yea,  how  many  to-day  yet  climb  Pilate's  staircase  in 
Rome  upon  their  knees !  How  many  fast  nigh  unto 
death,  and  walk  many  miles  in  great  bodily  distress,  and 
devoutly  practice  endless  arbitrary  self-denial,  to  please 
God! 

Some  of  these  unscriptural  self-denials,  such  as  poverty, 
(Matt.  19  :  21),  celibacy  (1  Cor.  7  :  8),  solitude,  pilgrim- 
ages, self-tortures,  and  the  like,  are  called  "works  of 
supererogation,"  i.  e.,  more  than  God  requires  of  man,  and 
thus  meritorious  before  God. 

But  apart  from  the  imperfection  of  all  our  works,  and 
the  words  of  Christ  in  Luke  17  :  10,  evidently  life  is  so 
full  of  duty  that  no  man  can  find  room  for  anything  not 
duty.  Supererogation  is  impossible.  He  that  does  what 
is  not  required,  must  neglect  something  that  is  required. 

Good  works  then  are  not  these  imaginations  of  men, 
and  these  inventions  of  self-righteousness,  but  such  as  God 
has  commanded  (Deut.  12:8,32).  Compare  (Matt.  15  : 
1-9  ;  Mark  7  :  2-13).  "What  God  has  commanded,  judg- 
ment, mercy  and  faith  (Mich.  6  :  8),  is  fully  set  do^ii  in 
the  Ten  Commandments.  This  law  of  God  is  the  rule 
and  measure  of  good  works. 

3)  Good  works  must  be  done  from  a  proper  motive, 
namely,  to  Hls  glory.  While  we  do  what  God  has  com- 
manded, we  must  also  do  it  as  He  has  commanded.  Good 
works  have  not  only  form  but  also  substance.  ^Tiile  men 
can  see  only  the  outside,  God  looks  upon  the  inner  life  and 
spirit  of  an  action.  He  demands  not  only  quantity  but 
also  quality  (Luke  18  :  10-13).  Much  is  done  from  pride, 
self-respect,  self-interest,  imitation,  self-righteousness,  and 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  209 

very  mucli  from  mere  professed  love  of  man,  a  humanita- 
rian effort  to  keep  the  Second  Table  of  the  Law  while 
ignormg  the  First  Table. 

Good  works,  as  the  fruit  of  grace  in  us,  and  as  the  ex- 
pression of  thankful  love,  are  at  once  directed  to  God, 
and  are  done  truly  for  His  glory  (1  Cor.  10  :  31). 

"  Good "  works  cannot  mean  absolutely  good,  as  are 
those  of  God  and  the  holy  angels,  but  such  efforts  at  obe- 
dience as  God's  people  are  able,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to 
make.  "  Our  best  works  in  this  life  are  all  imperfect,  and 
defiled  with  sin"  (Ques.  62).  Therefore  God  can  accept 
them  only  for  Christ's  sake,  and  as  they  are  washed  in 
His  cleansing  blood.  Like  our  prayers,  they  can  come  up 
acceptably  before  God  only  through  the  name  and  merits 
of  Jesus  Christ  (Col.  3  :  17). 

This  shows  the  wide  difference  between  Matt.  22 :  37-40 , 
and  the  Ten  Commandments  as  used  in  the  Catechism. 
The  first  is  a  condemning  power,  and  hence  in  the  First 
Part,  to  teach  us  our  misery.  The  Commandments  are  a  rule 
of  life,  and  thus  not  in  Part  First  to  teach  us  how,  by  plea- 
sing God,  we  may  satisfy  His  justice ;  nor  yet  in  Part 
Second,  to  teach  us  that  works  of  righteousness  may  be 
part  of  our  redemption  ;  but  in  Part  Third,  to  show  us  how 
to  express  our  gratitude  to  God  for  our  great  deliverance. 


THIRTY-FOURTH  LORD'S  DAY. 


THE   LAW   OF   GOD.