Question  93.  How  are  these  ten  commands  divided? 

Answer.  Into  two  tables ;  the  first  of  which  teaches  us  how  we 
must  behave  towards  God ;  the  second,  what  duties  we  owe  to  our 
neighbor. 

1)  Ths  Law  of  God-  As  good  -works  are  to  be  done 
according  to  the  law  of  God,  the  Catechism  tells  us  what 
this  law  is,  namely,  the  Ten  Commandments. 

The  Commandments  are  called  the  moral  law,  the  rule 
of  duty  for  man,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  ceremonial  law 
of  the  Hebrews,  which  was  an  order  of  worship,  showing 
them  when,  where,  and  how  to  woKhip  God  in  sacrifices, 
ofierings  and  purifications.  The  expression  "  law  of  God" 
often  includes  both  these,  as  in  Ps.  1 :  2,  and  Matt.  5 :  17 ; 
but  here  it  means  only  the  moral  law. 

The  moral  law  is  simply  the  will  of  God,  giving  us  a 
true  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong.  Ten  is  the  number 
of  perfection.  Here  we  have  a  perfect  rule  of  life,  a 
perfect  system  of  morals.  To  see  this,  compare  it  with 
any  heathen  code.  All  men  have  conscience,  a  moral 
sense  (Rom.  2 :  15),  and  also  some  knowledge  of  right  and 
wrong ;  but  only  in  Christianity  is  a  perfect  moral  law 
found,  namely,  God's  own  revealed  will. 

Many  people  think  they  know  all  about  the  Command- 
ments— which  is  not  likely.  "  Thy  command  is  exceeding 
broad,"  says  David  (Psa.  119  :  96).  These  "ten  words" 
have  a  wonderful  fullness,  not  of  detail  but  of  substance. 
They  meet  and  touch  us  at  every  turn  of  life,  and  in  all 
possible  relations. 

2)  God  spake  all  these  words.  This  was  at  Mount 
Sinai,  fifteen  hundred  years  before  Christ,  seven  weeks 
after  the  deliverance  of  the  Hebrews  from  Egypt,  only 
after  due  preparation  by  the  people  (Ex.  19  :  10-13),  and 


HEIDELBEEG  CATECHISM.  211 

amid  the  most  solemn  and  dreadful  evidences  of  the  Di- 
vine presence  (Ex.  19 ;  16-19:  Heb.  12:  18-21).  "Sinai 
itself  was  moved  at  the  presence  of  God "  (Ps.  68 :  8). 
The  object  of  this  wonderful  manifestation  was  two- 
fold :— 

(1)  To  honor  a  great  event  in  the  history  of  redemp- 
tion, namely,  raising  the  seed  of  Abraham  to  the  high  glory 
and  privilege  of  a  nation.  Hence  God  renewed  the  cove- 
nant (Ex.  24:  3-8). 

(2)  To  make  a  lasting  impression  upon  the  heart  and 
mind  of  the  Hebrews,  teaching  them  to  reverence  His  law, 
because  He  would  not  honor  a  light  matter  with  so  great 
solemnity. 

This  moral  law  God  with  His  own  mouth  spake  in  the 
hearing  of  all  the  people  (Deut.  5 :  22),  He  did  not  so 
honor  the  ceremonial  law,  which  He  gave  them  by  the 
mouth  of  Moses,  during  the  eleven  months  spent  at  Sinai. 
Then,  too,  God  put  special  honor  upon  this  moral  law  also 
in  another  way.  After  speaking  it.  He  wrote  it  upon  two 
tables  of  stone  (Ex.  32 :  15,  16),  to  signify  its  eternal 
character,  as  compared  with  the  ceremonial  and  civil  law 
of  the  Hebrews.  These  should  change  and  pass  away, 
but  the  will  of  the  Lord  endureth  forever.  The  ceremo- 
nial law  lost  its  force,  when  its  end  was  accomplished, 
when  Christ  fulfilled  it  (Heb.  9  :  and  10  :).  So  the  civil 
law  of  the  Hebrews  is  not  now  binding*  on  any  nation, 
for  both  their  national  and  ecclesiastical  existence  ceased 
with  the  founding  of  the  Christian  Church  at  Pentecost. 
But  the  moral  law  must  forever  remain  the  same  and 
equally  binding,  because  the  will  of  God  cannot  change. 

*  Yet  its  general  principles  are  still  binding,  and  indeed  are  em- 
bodied in  the  laws  of  all  nations  that  know  of  them.  The  will  of 
Grod  must  always  be  law  for  man. 


212  Therefore  Christ  and  the  Apostles  repeated  and  con- 
firmed the  Commandments  (Matt.  5:  17— iS;  19:  17-19; 
Eom.  13:  9> 

(3)  How  are  these  ten  commands  divided  ?  God  Him- 
self divided  them  into  two  parts  or  tables  (Ex.  32 :  15 : 
Matt.  22 :  40),  duties  to  God  and  duties  to  man.  Self  is 
.included  in  the  second  table ;  and  toward  angels  we  have 
no  duties  (though  thev  have  toward  us). 

Christ  reduces  the  whole  law  to  one  word,  namely,  love 
(Matt.  22 :  37-40 ;  Rom.  13  :  8-10).  Love  is  the  root  of 
all  true  obedience,  and  obedience  is  the  fruit  of  love. 

Therefore,  having  the  same  Author  and  essence,  the  two 
tables  of  the  law  cannot  be  separated.  No  man  can  keep 
one  without  keeping  both.  Some  men  seem  devout  toward 
God,  but  are  uncharitable  toward  men  (1  John  4 :  20)  ; 
others  pride  themselves  on  keeping  the  second  table,  but 
they  ignore  the  fii'st.  The  first  is  the  root  of  the  second, 
and  hence  no  man  can  love  his  neighbor  who  does  not  first 
love  God.  Better,  as  Ursinns  says,  not  think  of  two 
tables,  but  of  all  duty  as  to  God,  that  of  the  first  table  as 
immediate,  and  that  of  the  second  as  to  God  through  our 
neighbor.     So  David  felt  (Ps.  51 :  4). 

The  difficulty  at  this  point  is  to  say  how  many  and  which 
Commandments  belong  to  each  table.  Here  men  differ. 
There  are  two  leadino;  wavs  of  di^^dino;  the  Commandments. 

The  Augustinian  division,  now  held  by  the  Roman 
Catholics  and  Lutherans,  calls  Ex.  20  :  2-6  the  first  Com- 
mandment;  and  then  to  make  ten,  it  divides  Ex.  20:  17 
into  two,  thus  changing  the  whole  numbering. 

The    Origenistic*  division,   now   held    by   the    Greek 

*  So  called  from  Origen,  a  learned  Church  father  of  the  third 
century  who  defended  this  divLiion,  as  did  also  Athanasius  and 
Ambrose. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  213 

Catholics  and  by  almost  all  Protestants  except  Luther- 
ans, made  Ex.  20 :  4-G  the  second  Commandment  and 
leave  Ex.  20 :  17  undivided  as  the  tenth.  This  is  the 
division  given  by  the  learned  Jew,  Josephus. 

The  reasons  for  each  view  cannot  here  be  given  ;  *  but 
many  words  in  dilFerent  ages  of  the  Church  have  been 
spent  upon  the  unfortunate  difference. 

Apart  from  this,  another  question  arises,  namely,  what 
Commandments  belong  to  the  first  table,  and  what  to  the 
second? 

Roman  Catholics  and  Lutherans,  by  their  unfortunate 
count,  throw  three  into  the  first  and  seven  into  the  second 
table.  Many  others  who  adopt  the  Origenistic  division, 
give  the  tables  four  and  six.  f  A  better  division  is  five 
and  five,  throwing  the  fifth  Commandment  into  the  first 
table,  for  several  reasons  : — (1)  Josephus  tells  us  this  was 
the  Jewish  division.  He  says  that  God  wrote  five  Com- 
mandments on  each  table  of  stone.  (2)  It  is  not  reasona- 
ble that  we  owe  more  duties  to  man  than  to  God.  (3)  Pa- 
rents are  not  our  equals,  and  therefore  our  duties  to  them 
must  not  be  classed  with  duties  to  our  neighbor.  (4)  Paul, 
giving  the  second  table,  does  not  include  the  fifth  Com- 
mandment (Rom.  13 :  9). 

(4)  Thou  shalt  not.  The  negative  form  of  the  Com- 
mandments is  very  significant  of  our  universal  predisposi- 

*  Suffice  it  to  say  that  "  house  "  and  "  wife  "  are  used  interchange- 
ably in  Ex.  20  :  17  and  Deut.  5  :  21.  Which,  then,  really  is  the 
tenth  ? 

t  So  our  Catechism  does.  The  Triglott  gives  Question  93  as  fol- 
lows :  How  are  these  Commandments  divided  ?  Into  two  tables, 
the  first  of  which  teaches  us,  in  four  commandments,  what  duties 
we  owe  to  God ;  the  second,  in  six,  what  duties  we  owe  to  our  neigh- 
bor. 


214  tion  to  sin.  But  it  also  shows  the  relation  of  God's  cove- 
nant people  to  Him.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God.  Ye  are 
mine.  Therefore  go  not  aAvay.  Sin  not."  Of  course, 
too,  the  negative  "  shalt  not "  implies  the  positive  duty,  as 
in  Eph.  4 :  22-32.  And  the  Catechism  lays  great  stress 
on  the  positive  side  of  the  Commandment,  by  asking,  in 
almost  every  case,  not  what  it  forbids,  but  "  What  doth 
God  required'  This  expresses  the  difference  between 
morality  and  Christianity.  The  one  is  negative,  an  ab- 
staining from  evil ;  the  other  is  positive,  an  obedience  unto 
holiness. 


THE  FIKST  COMMANDMENT. 


GOD. 

Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me.