Question  95.     What  is  idolatry? 

Answer.  Idolatry  is  instead  of,  or  besides  that  one  true  God,  who 
has  manifested  Himself  in  His  word,  to  contrive,  or  have  any  other 
object  in  which  men  place  their  trust. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  215 

I  am brougllt  thee  out.     In  the  preface  to 

the  Ten  Commandmeuts,  God  tells  us  what  He  is  (Ex.  20  : 
2)  :  "  The  Lord  thy  God."  He  is  God  over  all  men,  but 
the  covenant  God,  Father,  only  of  those  that  believe.  He 
was  to  the  Hebrews  what  He  was  not  to  the  Egyptians ; 
and  he  is  now  to  Christians  what  He  is  not  to  unbelievers 
(Ex.  19  :  5,  6  ;  Eph.  3  :  14, 15).  He  is  more  than  Creator, 
King  and  Judge, — He  is  "  Our  Father ;"  and  in  His  cove- 
nant of  grace  He  makes  us  able  to  do  His  wilL 

God  tells  us  also  what  He  has  done  for  us : — "  Brought 
thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bond- 
age." This  also  is  true  of  us  now.  The  kingdom  of  Satan 
is  our  Egypt,  and  sin  is  our  bondage.  From  these  He  has 
delivered  us,  and  reminds  us  of  this  to  make  us  thought- 
fully and  thankfully  obedient  to  His  will  (1  Sam.  12 :  24). 

ThOTl  shalt.  Grod  says  this,  and  He  says  it  to  all  men. 
He  has  a  right  to  say  it  to  us,  because  He  is  the  true  and 
only  living  God. 

This  Commandment,  as  indeed  all,  has  a  negative  side, 

forbidding  certain  things — "  That  I creatures," 

and  a  positive  side,  requiring  certain  things,  "  and  learn 
to  His  will." 


I.    WHAT   IT   FORBIDS. 

1)  Idolatry.  This  is  defined  in  Question  95,  namely, 
having,  either  instead  of  or  besides  the  one  true  God,  any 
other  object  in  which  men  place  their  trust. 

Man  is  a  religious  being.  He  is  of  such  a  nature  that 
he  must  have  some  god,  something  which  he  regards  as 
higher  than  himself,  and  which  receives  his  devotion. 
Absolute  atheism  is  impossible.     You  see  this  in  the  his- 


216  tory  of  all  lieatlien  nations.  Tliey  have  tlieir  gods  and  a 
corresponding  worship.  This  is  not  accidental,  but  a 
necessity  of  our  moral  nature.  It  is  the  expression  of  re- 
ligious want,  the  outreaching  of  our  better  nature. 

AMiv,  then,  does  not  man  worship  the  true  God?  Be- 
cause thousands  do  not  know  Him.  Man,  through  sin 
hates  God  and  turns  from  Him  (Eom.  1 :  21,  28),  bemg 
prone  to  idolatry.  So  in  the  course  of  time  a  large  part 
of  the  human  family  has  lost  all  proper  knowledge  of  God ; 
and  God  must  reyeal  Himself  to  them,  and  challenge  their 
foith  and  obedience,  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  haye  no  other 
gods  before  Me." 

Idolatry  is  of  two  kinds,  gross  and  refined  (Ques.  95). 
Gross  idolatry*  sets  God  altoa-ether  aside.  It  is  found 
among  the  heathen  of  Asia,  Africa,  China,  Japan  and 
other  countries.  They  worship  sun,  moon  and  animals, 
and  idols  of  theii'  own  make  (Ps.  115  : 4-8  ;  Jer.  10 : 2-5) ; 
but  they  know  no  better,  neyer  haying  heard  of  the  true 
God.  To  them  we  send  our  missionaries.  Eyen  the  Jews 
were  guilty  of  this  at  times  (2  Kings  17  :  10,  11 ;  Is.  2  :  8 ; 
Jer.  7 :  18). 

Eefined  idolatry  is  found  in  our  own  land.  It  acknow- 
ledsies  God,  but  does  not  honor  Him  as  God.  Many  who 
know  of  the  true  God,  and  profess  to  belieye  in  Him, 
dishonor  Him  by  unbelief  and  ungodliness.  God  is  not  in 
all  their  thoughts  (Ps.  10 :  4).  They  liye  only  for  self  and 
for  this  life. 

Much  the  same  is  true  of  those  Christians  who  are  tiy- 

*  Gross  idolatry — wor=liiping  serpents,  rusty  metal,  painted 
wood — seems  disgusting  and  trifling;  but  among  the  ancients,  as  at 
Athens  and  Some,  and  to-day  in  China  and  Japan,  the  worship  was 
made  grand,  beautiful  and  impressive  by  magnificent  temples,  sol- 
emn services,  great  processions  and  all  the  adornments  of  art. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  217 

ing  to  serve  two  masters,  Christ  and  the  devil,  God  and 
self,  the  Church  and  the  world.  Whatever  stands  between 
God  and  us,  anything  on  w^hich  we  too  much  set  our 
hearts  and  minds,  hindering  our  full  consecration  and  de- 
votion to  Him,  is  an  idol.  Thus  business,  pleasure  and 
other  forms  of  worldliness  become  idols.  They  keep  us 
from  loving  God  with  our  whole  heart,  mind,  soul  and 
strength  (Matt.  22:  37).  Covetousness  is  idolatry  (Col.  3 : 5). 

2)  Sorcery  (Deut.  18  :  9-12),  mtchcraft,  conjuration, 
or  the  black  art,  i.  e.,  resorting  to  spirits  good  or  bad, 
human  or  superhuman  (1  Sam.  28 :  7-20),  for  knowledge 
or  aid  which  should  come  alone  from  God.  Doubtless 
now  as  well  as  in  ancient  times  (Ex.  7:11;  Acts  8:9), 
men  may  come  into  league  with  the  devil  and  receive  from 
him  strange  powers.  In  our  own  day.  Spiritualism,  hold- 
ing, or  pretending  to  hold,  communication  with  the  dead, 
comes  under  this  name. 

3)  Soothsaying  (Micah  5 :  12  ;  Acts  16  :  16),  is  the  un- 
inspired foretelling  of  future  events.  Astrologers  and  for- 
tune-tellers pretend  to  reveal  what  God  has  wisely  kept 
hid.  If  they  know  more  than  others,  their  knowledge  is 
not  from  God.     Therefore  have  nothing  to  do  with  them. 

4)  SlipGrstition  is  believing  too  much,  believing  things 
which  are  not  true,  especially  in  regard  to  signs,  omens, 
tokens,  lucky  days,  dreams,"*"  charms,  cures,  and  the  like, 
which  promise  more  than  God  tells  us  in  His  word,  and 
which  sadly  mislead  and  disappoint  those  who  trust  in 
them.     To  spill  salt,  break  a  looking-glass,  or  move  on 

*  God  gave  dreams  (Gen.  37:  5-10;  41:  1-7;  Dan.  2:  1- 
19),  and  the  power  of  interpretation  (Gen.  40  :  8  ;  Dan.  2  :  19) ; 
but  all  this  is  very  different  from  the  nonsense  which  we  nightly 
dream,  and  from  the  superstitious  nonsense  which  fills  dream 
books. 


218  Saturday,  -will  no  more  brinsr  harm  ttan  hoeing  cabba<ye 
in  the  dog  days  will  make  it  lousy.  All  such  foolish  no- 
tions are  a  distrust  of  God's  proyidence  and  loye. 

o)  Invocation  of  saints, — whether  to  worship  them  or 
to  beg  their  help.  This  at  once  is  a  dishonor  to  God,  as 
well  as  a  false  honor  to  man.  If  angels  are  not  to  be 
worshiped  (Col.  2  :  18},  much  less  the  saints  (Key.  19  :  10). 
From  all  these  things  we  must  flee,  because  they  endan- 
ger our  salyation,  leading  us  from  God  to  the  creature. 


n.   WHAT  THE    COAr\IAXDME>'T  EEQORES. 

1)  That  we  rightly  know  &od.  The  Triglott  says: 
"  rightly  acknowledge  .  .  .  God."  Eyen  the  wicked 
acknowledge  God,  but  wrongly.  "  Rightly ''  means  that 
we  accept  Him  as  God  the  Father  Almighty,  and  haye 
right  yiews  of  His  nature,  works  and  coyenant. 

Our  nature  demands  that  we  worship  some  God.  The 
ti*ue  God  tells  us  to  haye  Him.  "  Xo  other  gods  before 
me,"  implies  this.  ^N'o  other  can  help  us.  We  must  haye 
Him  alone,  because  there  is  no  room  for  any  other.  The 
heathen  haye  many  gods :  we  haye  but  one  (1  Cor.  8  :  5, 
6}.  This  Commandment  requires  that  we  stand  in  God's 
coyenant  of  grace ;  for  we  cannot  rightly  know  God  apart 
from  Christ  and  outside  of  His  Church  (Matt.  11  :  27  ; 
Eph.  2  :  13-19\ 

2)  Trust  in  Him  alone,  as  the  object  of  supreme  and 
final  trust.  The  child  trusts  the  parent,  and  friend  trusts 
friend ;  but  our  trust  must  neyer  stop  with  the  creature. 
Nor  may  we  trust  God  in  the  sense  that  He  will  do  eyery- 
thinsr  for  us  without  our  use  of  means  and  efforts.  He 
will  not  clothe  us  -vvithout  work,  nor  heal  us  without  medi- 
cine.    Here  is  implied  the  comforting  doctrine  of  God's 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  219 

fatherly,  powerful  providence  (Ques.  26  and  27).  What 
God  does  is  well  done,  though  often  His  doings  are  strange 
and  sad.  His  providence  seems  full  of  contradictions,  but 
in  due  time  we  shall  see  that  all  is  harmony.  This  trust, 
or  faith  in  God's  power  and  love,  is  demanded  by  this 
Commandment.  Yet,  alas,  how  often  men  are  unbelieving, 
distrustful,  yea  even  irreverent,  in  regard  to  the  changes, 
trials  and  disappointments  of  life !  How  common  to  hear 
people  say,  "  what  dreadful  weather  !" — and  make  doleful 
prophecies  about  crops !  It  is  simply  a  thoughtless  re- 
flection upon  God,  distrusting  His  management.  God's 
acts  and  works  are  above  criticism. 

3)  With  humility  and  patience  submit  to  Him.    The 

Triglott  omits  "submit  to  Him."  The  powerful  logic  of 
John  14:  21,  24  shows  that  unbelief  is  not  only  idola- 
trous but  also  of  necessity  disobedient.  Humble,  patient 
obedience  is  the  fruit  of  Christian  faith.  We  must  not 
only  be  God's  children,  but  also  do  His  will  and  bear 
His  will. 

4)  Expect  all  gccd  things  from  Him  only,  because  He 

is  the  source  of  all  good,  and  "  all  things  come  ...  by 
His  fatherly  hand"  (Ques.  27).  See  also  Ps.  104:  13- 
16,  27,  28  ;  Jas.  1 :  17. 

5)  Love,  fear  and  glorify  Him.    His  love  to  us  should 

make  us  love  Him.  His  infinite  greatness  demands  a 
childlike,  reverential  fear.*  For  His  own  glory  He  made 
us  (1  Cor.  6  :  20). 

Those  who  thus  rightly  know,  trust,  love  and  fear  God 

*  *'  A  reverence  filling  the  heart  that  is  filled  with  love ;  an  aw- 
ful homage  to  His  sovereign  majesty ;  a  humble  veneration  of  His 
infinite  attributes ;  a  jealous  caution  lest  we  oflfend  against  His  will ; 
and  a  constant  sense  of  His  holy  presence,  searching  our  thoughts 
and  taking  account  of  all  our  doings." — Bev.Dr.  G.  W.  Bethune. 


220  will  renounce  and  forsake  all  creatures  as  unworthy  of 
love  and  trust  when  compared  with  Him ;  but  of  course 
we  need  thus  to  turn  away  from  the  creature,  only  as  it 
hinders  us  from  rightly  haying  and  honoring  Him  as 
our  God. 

The  negative  form  of  the  first  Commandment  not  only 
shows  man's  natural  predisposition  to  idolatry,  but  also 
reminds  us  of  the  fact  that  the  Hebrews  had  just  come  out 
of  heathen  Eg-ypt,  where  during:  two  hundred  and  fifteen 
years  they  doubtless  had  become  grossly  idolatrous.  But 
as  all  mcQ,  through  sin,  are  prone  to  hate  God,  the  Com- 
mandment is  of  universal  application. 

This  Commandment  is  the  foundation  of  all  true  ren- 
gion,  and  indeed  of  all  the  following  Commandments,  and 
thus  is  first,  not  by  accident  but  of  necessity.  Keeping 
this  Commandment  makes  it  possible  to  keep  the  rest ;  and 
he  that  keeps  it  not,  cannot  keep  any  other. 


THIRTY-FIFTH    liORD'S    DAT. 


THE  SECOXD  C0:^DL1XDMENT. 


THE   WOESHIP   OF   GOD. 

Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any 
likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the 
earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the  earth :  Tliou 
shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them:  for  ItJie 
Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  221 

fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 
tion of  them  that  hate  me;  and  showing  mercy  unto  thou- 
sands of  them  that  love  me  and  keep  my  commandments.