Question  98.  But  may  not  images  be  tolerated  m  the  churches, 
as  books  to  the  laity  ? 

Answer.  No ;  for  we  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God,  who 
will  have  His  people  taught  not  by  dumb  images,  but  by  the  lively 
preaching  of  His  word. 

The  first  Commandment  is  about  God.  The  second 
Commandment  is  about  the  worship*  of  God,  because 
worship  is  our  first  duty  to  God. 


I.   IT  FORBIDS  ALL  FALSE  WORSHIP. 

Man  has  always  wanted  to  introduce  visible  helps  in  the 
worship  of  the  invisible  God,  especially  in  the  form  of 
images  of  God.     This  the  Commandment  forbids. 

1)  God  can  not  he  represented  by  images.  "  No  man 
hath  seen  God  at  any  time  "  (1  John  4 :  12),  and  how  can 
we  form  any  right  conception  of  Him  ?    Being  pure  spirit, 

*  Evidently  not  against  idolatry,  for  this  is  the  main  point  in  the 
first  Commandment. 


222  He  cannot  be  represented.  How  would  yon  make  an 
image  of  your  soul  f  Jesus  Christ  is  the  image  *  of  God 
for  us  (John  14:9;  Heb.  1 :  3).  Then,  too,  God  forbids 
it,  because  it  dishonors  Him  (Is.  46  :  5,  9  ;  Acts  17  :  29), 
and  leads  to  idolatry. 

2}  We  must  not  use  the  image  of  any  creature  in  worship. 
We  may  have  pictures  and  statues  of  the  Saviour,  of  saints 
and  angels,  and  of  friends, — as  works  of  art,  curiosity,  in- 
struction, historical  interest,  and  as  memorials,  but  never 
as  helps  in  worship.  "  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself 
to  them  nor  serve  them."  Question  98  f  has  a  radical 
sound,  without  dispute ;  but  it  was  a  solemn  protest  against 
the  dangerous  and  idolatrous  Roman  Catholic  doctrines 
and  practices  of  the  Reformation  time,  and  of  necessity 
was  emphatic. 

God  Himself  made  images,  the  golden  cherubim  over 
the  mercy-seat,  and  the  brazen  serpent  |  (Ex.  25 :  18 ; 
Num.  21 :  8) ;  and  Solomon  also  (2  Chron.  3 :  7,  10),  to 
beautify  the  house  of  God,  but  not  for  worship  (as  we  now 
have  Apostles,  doves,  lambs,  crosses,  crowns,  cups  and 
other  symbols  on  our  stained  windows). 

God  will  have  His  people  taught,  not  by  dumb  images, 
but  by  the  lively,  the  living,  preaching  of  the  word 
(Matt.  28 :  19,  20). 

*  Christ  is  God,  and  yet  we  see  Him  represented  in  painting  and 
sculpture,  even  among  Protestants.  Yes,  because  He  was  truly- 
human,  made  in  the  likeness  of  men  (Phil.  2:7);  but  these  fig- 
ures of  Him  are  not  used  as  helps  in  worship. 

f  The  Triglott  says,  "  May  not  pictures  be  tolerated  ?" 

X  Many  years  afterward,  when  the  Hebrews  had  become  idola- 
trous, and  worshiped  this  very  brazen  serpent,  Nehemiah  brake  it  to 
pieces,  and  in  contempt  called  it  "  nehushtan,"  i.  e.  a  piece  of  brass 
like  any  other,  and  without  sacreduess  (2  Kings  18  :  4). 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  223 

The  first  violation  of  this  Commandment  was  by  Aaron 
himself,  wheo  Moses  was  on  the  Mount  with  God  (Ex.  32:4; 
Ps.  106  :  19-21).  This,  however,  was  hardly  meant  by  the . 
Hebrews  as  a  denial  or  rejection  of  Jehovah,  but  rather  as 
a  visible  representation  of  Him.  Hence  they  chose  the 
Egyptian  symbol  of  productive  force,  the  agricultural  ox, 
with  which  they  were  familiar  in  Egypt.  But  long  after- 
ward Moses  reminded  them  that  God  gave  them  no  such 
figure  of  Himself  at  Sinai  (Deut.  4  :  15-19). 


II.   IT   REQUIRES    TRUE    WORSHIP. 

We  must  worship  God  in  His  own  way  and  order. 
What  this  is,  God  from  time  to  time  reveals  to  His  people. 
In  the  days  of  the  Patriarchs,  it  was  very  simple.  From 
the  time  of  Moses  it  was  much  more  grand  and  beautiful, 
in  the  glory  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple  service.  Very 
difierent  from  this  again,  is  the  worship  of  the  Christian 
Church. 

As  God  appointed  a  time,  place  and  order  of  worship 
for  the  Hebrews,  so  also  for  us.  Our  worship,  like  theirs, 
must  take  outward  form ;  and  though  much  more  simple 
and  free,  nothing  important  is  left  to  individual  notion 
or  caprice. 

We  have  a  divinely  appointed  time,  the  Lord's  day  ;  and 
place,  the  Lord's  house ;  and  order,  learned  from  Christ 
and  the  Apostles,  namely,  singing,  prayer,  preaching, 
almsgiving,  the  administration  of  the  Sacraments,  and  the 
benediction. 

It  is  just  as  true  under  Christianity  as  under  Judaism, 
that  if  God  did  not  tell  us,  we  would  not  know  how  to 
worship  Him :  and  if  our  worship  were  left  to  the  judg- 
ment and  whim  of  each  one,  instead  of  fitness  and  har- 
mony, there  would  be  folly  and  confusion. 


224  NOTES  OX  THE 

How  tiiis  Commandment  strikes  at  the  root  of  infidel- 
ity I  Men  talk  about  worshiping  God  at  any  time,  in 
anv  place,  and  in  any  way  I  Yes,  but  those  who  do  not 
worship  Him  in  His  own  time,  place  and  way,  seldom 
worship  Him  in  any  other ;  and  only  those  can  accepta- 
bly worship  God  in  any  place  and  at  any  time,  who  first 
of  all  have  acceptably  worshiped  Him  in  His  own  place 
and  time  (Heb.  10 :  25). 

Of  course  we  must  not  only  observe  God's  time,  place 
and  order  of  worship,  but  also  do  it  sincerely,  from  the 
heart. 

Those,  then,  break  this  Commandment,  who  stay  away 
from  Church,  or  take  no  part  in  worship,  or  worship  only 
with  their  Hps,  or  sleep  in  God's  house,  or  misbehave  in 
any  other  way  ^Lev.  19  :  30). 


m.   THE    EEASO:^'. 

Gx>d  even  condescends  to  give  man  the  reason  for  the 
commandment :  "I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  Gx^d." 

TVe  have  only  human  language  for  expressing  divine 
feelings  and  acts.  So  we  say  God  loves,  hates,  is  angry 
and  iealous. 

ft' 

He  is  jealous  of  His  infinite  majesty  and  glory  as  the 
only  true  God  (Is.  48  ;  11).  He  can  admit  no  rival,  nor 
aUow  trifling  with  His  worship  'Is.  40  :  18-28).  His 
jealousy  is  not  like  that  of  selfish  man,  but  the  holy 
anxiety  of  Jehovah  that  men  shall  not  wrong  His  nature 
and  their  own  souls  by  improper  worship.  Xo  wonder, 
then,  that  He  forbids  men  following  their  own  vain  ima- 
oinanons  as  to  how  thev  shall  come  before  Him.  and  also 
punishes  their  disobedence,  "  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children."    This  sounds  harsh,  but  is  ncu. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  225 

1)  Wliat  does  this  "  visiting  "  mean  f  Not  tliat  children 
must  bear  the  punishment  due  the  fathers,  for  every  man 
must  bear  his  own  burden  (Deut.  24 :  16 ;  Gal.  6:5),  and 
in  judgment  give  account  of  himself  to  God  ;  but  that 
children,  to  a  great  extent,  must  bear  the  temporal  conse- 
quences of  the  sins  of  their  fathers. 

2)  Examples:  In  the  fall  (Rom.  5  :  12,  18,  19)  ;  in  the 
flood  (Gen.  7  :  21-23)  ;  at  Sodom  (Gen.  19 :  25)  ;  in  the 
wilderness  (Num.  16:  27,  32);  in  the  case  of  Achan 
(Josh.  7 :  24,  25).  See  also  1  Kg.  11 :  12,  13  ;  Lam.  5  : 
7.  The  Jews  in  the  time  of  Christ  so  understood  and 
acknowledged  this  doctrine  (John  9:2;  Matt.  27 :  25). 

You  can  see  the  same  thing  all  around  you.  Children 
are  so  bound  up  with  the  parents  in  family  life,  as  of  ne- 
cessity to  share  their  poverty  or  riches,  disgrace  or  honor, 
disease  or  health. 

This  is  true  not  only  of  outward  circumstances,  but  also 
of  inward  dispositions.  As  a  rule,  children  inherit  not 
only  physical  and  mental  but  also  moral  qualities  and  pre- 
dispositions. 

The  mother  of  Benedict  Arnold  was  a  rough,  ignorant 
woman  ;  and  his  father  was  a  thief  and  a  sot.  Is  it  any 
wonder  the  son  was  worse  ? 

About  seventy-five  years  ago,  a  poor  girl,  Margarei,  in 
a  northern  County  of  New  York,  growing  up  ignorant  and 
wicked,  became  the  mother  of  a  long  line  of  descendants, 
about  nine  hundred,  running  through  six  generations.  Of 
these  very  many  were  idiots,  imbeciles,  lunatics,  drunk- 
ards, paupers  and  prostitutes  ;  but  the  County  records 
show  that  two  hundred  of  them  were  also  criminals.  Of 
seventeen  children  of  one  generation,  nine  spent  in  all  fifty 
years  in  prison  for  high  crimes,  while  the  rest  were  often 
in  alms-houses,  jails  and  penitentiaries. 


226  A  gentleman  in  1837  gives  tlie  following  facts  in  regard 
to  ninety-eight  families  of  one  neighborhood  : — 

In  twenty-seven,  both  parents  were  Christians.  Of  their 
one-hundred  and  twenty-five  children,  about  two-thirds 
were  godly. 

In  nineteen  families,  only  one  parent  was  a  Christian. 
Of  their  ninety-five  children,  only  one-third  were  godly 

In  fifty-two  families,  neither  parent  was  a  Christian. 
Of  their  one  hundred  and  thirty-nine  children,  only  one- 
tenth  were  Christians,  and  not  one  of  these  became  so 
while  at  home ! 

This  "visiting"'  is  not  arbitrary,  but  according  to  God's 
eternal  law  of  cause  and  effect.  The  Jewish  proverb  (Ezek. 
18  :  2),  "the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge,"  will  always 
be  true.  The  race  is  not  a  sand-heap  but  an  organism, 
and  like  begets  like. 

But  God  also  shows  mercy  to  the  children  of  them  that 
love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments,  not  only  to  the 
third  and  fourth  generation,  but  also  to  thousands  of  gen- 
erations (Gen.  22:  16-18;  Deut.  7 :  9 ;  12 :  28  ;  Ps.  103: 
17,  18). 

This  reason  which  God  gives  for  the  Commandment, 
appeals  to  parental  love.  Worship  and  serve  God  aright, 
even  for  your  children's  sake  (Deut.  4  :  40). 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  227 


THIRTY-SIXTH  &  SEYENTH  XiORD'S  DAY. 
THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT. 


THE   NAME   OF   GOD. 

Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain ; 
for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taJceth  his 
name  in  vain.