Question  102.  May  we  also  swear  by  saints,  or  any  other  crea- 
ture? 


228  An^er.  No  ;  for  a  lawful  oath  is  a  calling  upon  God,  as  the  one 
who  knows  the  heart,  that  He  will  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and 
punish  me  if  I  swear  falsely  ;  which  honor  is  due  to  no  creature. 


THE   NAME   OF   GOD. 

The  name  of  a  person  is,  in  one  sense,  the  person  him- 
self, including  all  that  belongs  to  him.  It  calls  up  the 
whole  life,  character  and  personality  of  the  individual, 
showing  how  closely  related  name  and  person  are.  So  his 
name  to  a  note  or  other  agreement  binds  him.  The  I  and 
written  name  are  identical. 

So  in  regard  to  the  name  of  God.  It  includes  His 
whole  nature  and  personality,  His  titles  and  attributes, 
His  wonderful  works  and  gracious  ordinances. 

The  words  God,  Creator,  Jehovah,  Lord,  King,  Eternal, 
Almighty,  &c.,  call  up  all  that  we  know  of  Him  as  great 
and  holy,  powerful  and  just.  They  stand  for  God  Him- 
self and  often  are  so  used  (Pro v.  28  :  10 ;  Ps.  115 :  1). 
In  John  3  :  18,  Christ  and  His  name  are  identical. 

Therefore  the  Lord  God  is  jealous  for  His  holy  name, 
and  warns  men  not  to  take  it  in  vain. 

Question  99  tells  first,  negatively,  how  we  must  not  use 

the  name  of  God,  "  That  we in  others ;"  and 

then  states,  positively,  how  we  must  use  it,  "  and  briefly 

words  and  works."     Question  100  speaks  first 

of  the  greatness  of  the  sin,  and  then  of  its  punishment. 
Question  101  treats  of  the  oath,  and  102  of  false  forms  of 
the  oath. 


HOW  IS   THE   NAME   OF   GOD   TAKEN   IN   VAIN? 

1)  By  cursing,  that  is,  by  pronouncing  sentence  upon 
any  one,  calling  down  the  judgment  of  God  upon  men 


HEIDELBEEG  CATECHISM.  229 

(Xum.  22 :  6  ;  Luke  9:54).  This  only  God  or  an  officer 
of  God  may  do  (Deut.  27  :  14-26  ;  Eom.  12  :  19  ;  13 : 4)  ; 
and  therefore  it  is  a  presumptuous  sin  in  men  to  assume 
divine  authority. 

2)  Perjury.  This  is  the  highest  form  of  taking  God's 
name  in  vain.  Perjury  is  taking  a  false  oath.  As  this 
subject  is  of  special  importance,  it  needs  a  full  explanation. 

(1)  The  civil  oath  is  a  calling  upon  God,  as  the  one  who 
knows  the  heart  of  man  (1  Kings  8 :  39),  and  who  alone 
can  punish  the  guilty,  to  witness  the  truth  and  sincerity 
of  a  word  or  act,  and  to  punish  any  untruth  or  insincerity 
in  the  swearer. 

The  oath  is  taken  before  an  officer  of  God,  and  right- 
fully of  course  only  in  weighty  matters  (evidence  before  a 
Court,  inauguration  into  office,  etc.).  The  Catechism  calls 
this  swearing  "  religiously,"  that  is,  with  reverence,  and  as 
an  act  of  worship. 

As  the  oath  is  an  appeal  to  God,  this  subject  falls  not 
under  the  ninth  Commandment,  but  under  the  third.  The 
ninth  speaks  of  false  witness,  but  in  relation  to  man; 
whereas  the  third  relates  to  God. 

Fitness  for  taking  the  oath  is  not  only  reasonable  age 
and  understanding,  but  also,  and  indeed  primarily,  belief 
in  God.  Therefore  the  atheist,  denying  the  commonly 
received  doctrine  of  a  personal  God,  cannot  take  the  oath  ; 
because,  if  there  be  no  God,  as  he  says,  the  oath  has  for 
him  no  meaning. 

(2).  Tlie  civil  oath  is  of  divine  appointment.  God  Himself 
swore.  "  As  I  live,"  is  the  common  form  of  His  oath  (ISTum. 
14:21;  Ezek.  20:33).  "When  God  made  promise  to 
Abraham,  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  He  sware 
by  Himself,''  and  confirmed  His  counsel  by  an  oath  (Heb. 
6 :  13-17). 


230  God  taught  man  how  to  take  the  oath.  "  Thou  shalt 
swear  bj  His  name  "  (Deut.  6  :  13).  "  Ye  shall  not  swear 
by  my  name  falsely  "  (Lev.  19  :  12).  "  Thou  shalt  swear, 
*the  Lord  liveth,'  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteous- 
ness" (Jer.  4:2). 

The  Pati'iarchs  used  the  oath.  Abraham  sware  to  Abi- 
melech  (Gem  21:24-31);  Isaac  also  (Gen.  26:31); 
Jacob  to  Laban  (Gen.  31 :  53) ;  the  Hebrews  to  Samuel 
(1  Sam.  12  :  5)  ;  Da\^d  to  Saul  (1  Sam.  24:  22) ;  Jesus 
to  the  high  priest  (Matt.  26  :  63,  64)  ;  and  Paul  used 
words  equivalent  to  an  oath  (2  Cor.  1 :  23). 

(3)  The  civil  oath  is.proper  now,  because  the  necessity 
for  it  is  just  the  same  as  when  God  first  appointed  it, 
namely,  "  to  serve  as  a  bond  of  truth  between  men,  and  to 
be  a  testimony  that  God  is  the  author  and  defender  of 
truth"  (Ursinus).  *'The  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them 
an  end  of  all  strife  "  (Heb.  6 :  16),  the  assurance  of  truth 
and  sincerity. 

Why  then,  did  Jesus  say,  "Swear  not  at  all"  (Matt.  5: 
33-37),  and  rebuke  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  (Matt. 
23  :  16-22)  ?  Why  did  James  (5  :  12)  repeat  His  very 
words  ? 

Because  the  Jews  of  that  day — and  the  same  is  true  even 
now* — were  very  much  given  to  the  use  of  oaths  in  com- 
mon conversation, — not  the  full  and  real  oath,  not  swear- 

*  Eev.  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson,  in  "  The  Land  and  the  Book," 
speaking  of  the  present  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  says:  "These 
people  are  fearfully  profane.  Everybody  curses  and  swears  when 
in  a  passion.  Xo  people  that  I  have  ever  known  can  compare  with 
these  Orientals  for  profaneness  in  the  use  of  the  names  and  attri- 
butes of  God,  The  evil  habit  seems  inveterate  and  universal  .  .  . 
.  .  .  The  people  now  use  the  very  same  sort  of  oaths  that  are  men- 
tioned and  condemned  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  5 :  34-36)." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  231 

ing  by  the  name  of  God  but  by  sacred  and  common  things 
(heaven,  earth,  temple,  Jerusalem,  the  head)  ;  and  as  these 
oaths  omitted  the  name  of  God  they  were  not  thought  very 
binding.  The  early  Christians  who  had  been  Jews  would 
naturally  have  this  same  bad  habit. 

Now  this  bad  habit  both  Jesus  and  James  condemn — 
not  the  civil  oath  in  its  proper  form  and  place,  but  only 
this  reckless,  needless  and  irreverent  use  of  sacred  words. 
This  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  they  both  give  examples 
of  such  swearing. 

So  the  Christian  Church  now  condemns  the  very  same 
habit  and  manner  of  speech.  When  men  say  "  By  hea- 
vens," "By  Jerusalem,"  "By  Jupiter,"  "By  thunder," 
&c.,  you  have  the  form  of  an  oath  without  its  substance, 
an  extraordinary  declaration  without  any  sanctity,  swear- 
ing by  a  creature  which  the  Scriptures  condemn,  yea  the 
caricature  of  an  oath,  and  therefore  a  dangerous  form  of 
speech,  evidently  tending  to  strip  the  proper  oath  of  its 
sacred  meaning  and  solemn  force.  To  such  persons  we  also 
say :  "  Swear  not  at  all." 

It  may  sometimes  be  necessary,  even  in  private  conver- 
sation, to  make  our  word  emphatic,  and  to  add  force  to  a 
declaration,  as  Jesus  did  when  He  said  "  verily,"  and  as 
Paul  did  when  he  said  "  God  is  my  record"  (Phil.  1 :  8). 
So  men  sometimes — sparingly  it  should  be — give  assu- 
rance by  saying  "  indeed,"  "  upon  my  honor;"  but  this  is 
a  very  different  thing  from  the  habitual  and  needless  use 
of  sacred  words  and  empty  oaths.  Where  everything  is 
emphatic,  emphasis  is  lost. 

Therefore  the  civil  oath,  in  its  proper  form  and  place,  is 
both  right  and  needful. 

In  the  ideal  State — the  final  form  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  in  which  the  life  and  spirit  of  Christ  in  us  have 


232  reached  their  full  development — the  oath  will  not  be 
needed,  because  there  every  one  will  speak  from  the  per- 
fect spirit  of  truth  within  him,  and  his  word  will  abso- 
lutely be  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay. 

Here,  however,  the  oath  is  needed,  "  to  confirm  fidelity 
and  truth,  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  safety  of  our  neigh- 
bor "  (Ques.  101). 

But  in  its  use  men  should  be  careful.  Too  often  it  is 
administered  by  the  officer  and  taken  by  the  individual,  in 
such  careless,  rapid,  rattling,  irreverent  way  as  greatly 
to  lessen  both  its  force  and  solemnity. 

(4)  The  form  of  the  civil  oath  is  very  difierent  in  diflfer- 
ent  countries.  The  heathen  who  know  not  the  true  God, 
swear  by  their  own  gods,  and  in  their  own  rude  way,  ac- 
cording to  their  notions  of  reward  and  punishment* 

The  Jews  swore  by  the  name  of  Jehovah  (Deut.  6 :  13), 
lifting  up  the  hand  (Gen.  14 :  22),  laying  the  hand  on  the 
head  of  the  accused  (Lev.  24 :  14),  and  facing  the  altar 
(1  Kgs.  8 :  31). 

In  Christian  countries,  the  oath  is  based  upon  belief  in 

*  The  ancient  Eoman,  swearing  by  Jnpiter,  holding  in  his  hand 
a  stone,  said :  "  May  I  be  cast  out  from  country  and  kindred,  as  T 
now  cast  away  this  stone,  if  I  speak  not  the  truth  " — and  cast  away 
the  stone.  The  Brazilian  raises  his  hand  to  heaven,  and  calls  down 
upon  himself  the  thunderbolts  of  heaven.  Natives  of  New  Guinea 
swear  by  sun,  mountain  or  weapon  :  ''May  the  sun  burn  me — may 
the  mountain  crush  me— may  the  weapon  wound  me — if  I  lie." 
In  Siberia  where  the  bear  is  worshiped,  men  take  their  oath  on  a 
bear's  head,  praying  that  the  beast  may  devour  them  if  not  true  to 
their  word.  The  hill  tribes  of  India,  in  like  manner  and  sense, 
swear  by  the  skin  of  a  tiger.  The  Hindoo  swears  by  the  sacred 
Ganges.  The  Bedouin  Arab  swears  by  a  broken  straw,  and  the 
Chinaman  by  a  cock's  head,  aa  if  to  say,  '*  So  be  done  unto  me  if  I 
lie." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  233 

the  true  God,  who  will  surely  punish  perjury.  As  the 
atheist  cannot  take  the  oath,  so  to  allow  heathen  to 
swear  in  our  Courts  by  their  own  gods  and  in  their  own 
rude  way — as  where  a  Chinaman  swears  by  a  cock's  head, 
and  a  Japanese  over  two  bits  of  burning  paper — is  both 
dangerous  and  wrong  as  well  as  needless  (Ex.  23 :  13). 

Two  forms  of  oath  are  used  among  us,  called  swearing 
and  affirming.  The  difference  is  important,  and  should 
be  explained  to  the  young. 

Swearing. 

a).  The  individual  assents  to  the  oath,  either  by  kissing 
the  Bible  or  Gospels,  or  by  laying  his  hand  upon  the  book, 
which  is  a  very  early  English  custom  of  expressing  an  ado- 
ration for  God's  name,  word,  law  and  authority.  As  early 
as  the  sixth  century,  the  Latin  form  of  oath  in  use  in 
Europe  was :  "  So  may  God  help  me,  and  these  holy  Gos- 
pels." 

b).  Instead  of  kissing  or  touching  the  Bible,  he  may 
swear  with  the  uplifted  hand,  as  an  appeal  to  God  to  wit- 
ness truth  and  sincerity.  This  indeed  is  scriptural.  See 
Gen.  14 :  22.  In  Ex.  6  :  8,  "  I  do  swear,"  literally  means 
"  lift  up  my  hand  "  (Deut.  32  :  40).  In  Ezek.  20 :  5,  6, 
thrice  lifting  up  the  hand  is  the  sign  of  God's  oath  of  the 
covenant.  So  the  Apocalyptical  angel  swore  (Rev.  10  :  5, 
6).  Indeed  in  Ex.  20:  7,  "Take"  literally  means  "lift 
up,"  implying  the  lifting  up  of  the  hand  in  using  God's 
name.    ■ 

Affirming. 

This  also  is  an  oath,  but  it  omits  the  name  of  God. 
The  form  is,  "  Do  you  solemnly,  sincerely,  and  truly  de- 
clare and  affirm  ?"     It  is  used  by  those  who  have  conscien- 


234  tious  scruples  in  regard  to  using  God's  name  in  tlie  oath, 
interpreting  Matt.  5 :  34-37  literally.  Others  refuse  to 
swear,  but  will  affirm,  because  they  think  the  common 
oath  is  greatly  abused, — taken  for  every  trifle,  taken  so 
carelessly,  esteemed  so  lightly, — and  they  will  discourage 
its  use  by  simply  affijToing. 

(5).  Perjury  is  taking  a  false  oath,  calling  upon  God, 
the  absolute  Truth  to  witness  a  lie,  and  so  putting  Him 
on  a  level  with  the  devil  (John  8  :  44).  Of  course  every 
lie  is  a  kind  of  perjury,  because  God  always  is  witness ; 
but  in  the  oath  we  formally  and  specially  call  Him  to  wit- 
ness ;  and  perjury  is  a  most  heinous  sin  against  the  Lord 
God  (Zech.  8  :  17). 

The  oath  of  evidence  is  very  comprehensive :  '''  That 
you  will  speak  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but 
the  truth,"  shutting  out  untruth,  omissions  and  additions. 

The  most  common  form  of  perjury  in  giving  evidence 
is  by  withholding  the  truth,  evading  questions,  and  slip- 
ping through  the  cross-examination.  The  object  of  these 
questions  is,  not  to  force  truth  from  the  individual,  but  to 
assist  him  in  giving  it.  And  many  a  witness  goes  down 
from  the  stand,  smiling  over  his  shrewd  success  in  with- 
holding truth,  perhaps  not  knowing  that  that  is  as  truly 
perj.ury  as  if  he  had  not  spoken  a  word  of  truth.  In- 
deed he  is  perjured  even  if  he  fails  in  withholding  truth. 

Of  course  the  deepest  perjury  is  the  violation  of  the 
Church  vow,  because  this  is  the  highest  possible  form  of 
oath,  a  three-fold  oath,  in  the  name  of  the  holy  Trinity. 
It  is  taken  in  Baptism,  confirmation,  the  Lord's  Supper, 
ordination  and  installation.  Hence  wilful  unfaithfulness 
in  office  or  in  Christian  living  is  a  real  perjury. 

The  sanctity  of  the  oath  must  be  fully  maintained,  or 
we  as  a  nation  will  fall.      If  the  time  should  ever  come 


HEIDELBEKG  CATECHISM.  235 

"when  the  oath  is  generally  regarded  simply  as  an  ancient 
formality,  so  that  the  individual  may  take  it,  and  then, 
like  the  Abyssinian  chief,  scrape  it  off  his  tongue  and  spit 
it  out — woe  unto  us,  because  this  divinely  appointed  bond 
of  truth  between  men  has  been  broken. 

3)  Not  onl7  ...  but  also  by  rash  swearing.    This 

refers  mainly  to  our  sadly  common  profanity.  While 
cursing  and  perjury  are  to  be  regarded  as  high  violations 
of  the  third  Commandment,  rash  swearing  must  not  be 
regarded  as  a  light  offence.    This  is  the  force  of  "  not 

only but  also."     For  rash  swearing,  the  Tri- 

glott  has  "  unnecessary  oaths." 

Here  we  may  first  mention  rash  vows.  A  vow  is  a  pro- 
mise made  to  God,  to  do  or  not  to  do  something.  It  dif- 
fers from  the  oath  in  this,  that  it  is  a  personal  matter  be- 
tween the  individual  and  God,  and  relates  not  to  truth, 
but  to  sincerity  of  purpose.     Hence  Eccles.  5 :  2-5. 

A  rash  vow  is  promising  to  do  what  we  cannot  do, 
what  we  perhaps  cannot  do,  or  what  we  should  not  do — as 
that  of  Jephthah  (Judges  11  :  30);  Herod  (Matt.  14:  7)  ; 
forty  Jews  (Acts  23  :  12).  Such  a  vow  must  be  broken. 
The  sin  lies  not  in  breaking  it,  but  in  making  it.  Keep- 
ing it  only  adds  sin  to  sin. 

Profanity  is  not  only  a  wicked  but  also  a  vile  use  of 
God's  holy  name.  Many  are  profane  from  habit,  and 
many  are  so  only  in  anger  or  other  excitement.  Pro- 
fanity is  the  opposite  of  prayer.  As  Christians  pray  from 
a  sense  of  weakness,  so  the  wicked  swear,  appealing  to  God 
and  to  creatures,  to  strengthen  their  word. 

It  makes  one  shudder  to  hear  poor,  short-lived,  helpless 
man,  recklessly  and  irreverently  using  the  titles  of  Father, 
Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  in  all  their  variety  and  sacredness, 
whether  in  the  way  of  idle  mention,  or  w^hether  in  the 


236  form  of  excited  cursing,  making  no  difference  between  the 
holy  and  the  profane  (Ezek.  22  :  26),  seeming  not  to 
know,  or  not  to  care,  that  His  name  is  "  glorious  and 
fearful  "  (I^eut.  28  :  58). 

Profanity  is  not  only  the  wicked  use  of  God's  name,  but 
also  the  trifling  use  of  other  words  of  sacred  meaning 
(heaven,  hell,  damn,  curse,  thunder,  Jerusalem),  besides 
the  senseless  halfway  oaths  which  are  so  common  ("by 
George,"  "  by  Jupiter").  Indeed  many  use  words  without 
knowing  their  meaning.  "  Zounds,"  an  expression  of  ancrer 
or  wonder,  is  a  contraction  of  "  His  wounds  "  (John  19  :  34). 
"  Dickens  "  is  only  the  shortened  form  of  de'il-kin,  which 
means  a  little  devil.  "  Laws-a-mercy,"  a  corruption  of 
La  or  Lauk,  "  Lord,  have  mercy."  "  Egad  "  means  by 
God. 

Profanity  in  all  its  degrees  is  foolish,  degrading,  undig- 
nified and  unworthy  of  a  gentleman — not  to  say  Christian. 

The  great  and  good  Washington,  in  his  military  orders 
calls  profanity  "  a  foolish  and  wicked  practice,"  .... 
"  a  vice  so   mean  and  low,  without  any  temptation,  that 
every  man  of  sense  and  character  detests  and  despises  it " 

"an   unmeanino;   and   abominable    custom " 

.    .    .    .  "as  unprofitable  as  it  is  wicked  and  shamefal." 

Some  men  say  they  cannot  help  swearing,  but  they  can. 
They  swear  not  before  their  mother;  nor  before  their 
minister ;  not  in  the  parlor  before  ladies  ;  not  at  a  funeral. 
They  swear  elsewhere  because  they  are  ^nlling  to  do  it. 

No  sin  is  more  sillv,  none  so  inexcusable,  What  does  it 
bring  you  ?     Old  Herbert  says : 

**  Lust  and  wine  plead  pleasure ;  avarice,  gain ; 
But  the  cheap  swearer,  through  his  open  sluice, 
Lets  his  soul  run  for  nought." 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  237 

Lie,  steal,  kill,  drink,  gamble,  and  jou  have  something ; 
but  in  swearing  you  do  the  devil's  bidding  utterly  without 
reward. 

Especially  is  profanity  painfully  unbecoming  in  a  pro- 
fessing Christian.  To  him  the  sacred  names  and  attri- 
butes of  the  Holy  Trinity  should  be  above  all  such  vain 
use,  which  harms  not  only  himself  but  also  others,  who  of 
necessity  lose  confidence  in  both  him  and  the  Church. 

Under  the  Old  Testament,  profaning  the  name  of  God 
was  punished  with  death  (Lev.  24:  10-16),  showing  how 
hateful  this  sin  is  before  God. 

Even  our  State  laws  punish  not  only  gross  blasphemy 
but  also  common  profanity ;  because,  how  can  he  rever- 
ence the  civil  oath  who  habitually  profanes  the  name  of 
the  only  true  God  by  whom  he  swears  ?  And  swearing 
before  the  young  is  just  so  much  towards  dragging  the 
civil  oath  down  to  a  formality. 

4)  Nor  by  silence  or  connivance.  We  must  not  our- 
selves profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God,  nor  allow  it  to 
be  done  by  others,  so  far  as  we  have  power  to  prevent  it. 
"  By  silence."  When  men  do  it  in  our  presence,  we  must 
not  let  the  sin  go  unrebuked.  If  we  dare  not  rebuke  it  in 
words,  we  yet  should  show  our  detestation  of  it  by  looks 
and  actions.  "  By  connivance."  When  children  or  schol- 
ars do  it,  parents  and  teachers  are  partakers  of  the  horri- 
ble sin,  if  they  wink  at  it,  for  they  are  bound  to  rebuke  it. 


HOW   IVIUST   WE   USE   THE   NAME   OF   GOD  ? 

^th  fear  and  reverence.     This  is  the  positive  side  of