Question  103.  "Wliat  doth  God  require  in  the  fourth  command? 

Answer.  First,  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  and  the  schools  be 
maintained ;  and  that  I,  especially  on  the  Sabbath,  that  is,  on  the 
day  of  rest,  diligently  frequent  the  Church  of  God,  to  hear  His 
word,  to  use  the  sacraments,  publicly  to  call  upon  the  Lord,  and 
contribute  to  the  relief  of  the  poor,  as  becomes  a  Christian.  Secondly, 
that  all  the  days  of  my  life  I  cease  from  my  evil  works,  and  yield 
myself  to  the  Lord,  to  work  by  his  Holy  Spirit  in  me,  and  thus 
begin  in  this  life  the  eternal  Sabbath. 


24*)  ^'OTES  ox  THE 

^fATTBi:   A2rD   itZAXCS-G   OF   THE   LOED's   DAT. 

1)  Crod  appointed  it  It  rests  not  npon  custom,  nor  jet 
upon  Cliurcli  law,  but  on  the  divine  command,  "  Keep  it 
holv,  for  the  Iiord  ble^ed  the  vSabbath-day  and  hallowed 
it."*     Onlr  on  this  divine  basis  can  it  stand  forever. 

2    (t  ited  U  for  the  whole  hwanan  family.     This 

is  evident  irom  its  early  institution,  namelj,  not  first  at 
Mount  Sinai,  but  in  Eden  (Gen.  2 :  3).  The  Sabbath  is 
older  than  sin-  Therefore  Xoah  observed  a  septenary  divi- 
sion of  time  (&en.  8  :  10,  12)  ;  and  Jacob  also  (G^en.  29 : 
27}  ;  and  the  Hebrews,  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after- 
ward (Ex.  16  :  22-30  (  :  so  that  at  Sinai  God  simply  said, 
"  Semember  the  Sabbath  dav,"  as  a  dutv  alreadv  well 
known  to  Tfi?;  people.  Likely  it  was  the  only  Command- 
ment of  flie  tea  which  was  not  new  to  them. 

Hence  the  Sabbath  was  not  a  Jewish  ceremonial  like 
their  feasts  and  tithes)  nor  a  national  institution  iike 
their  cities  of  refuge  and  boundaries)  but  appointed  for 
the  whole  human  race. 

Therefore  Christianity  did  not  set  it  aside.      Certain 

*  "Hie  fonrth  CommandmeDt  does  not  forbid  keeping  odier  days 
holy.  God  Him?rl;  ;r:  iTzer  iij;  :o  be  kept  holj  nnto  Him,  toch 
&ste  and  fesUTai-    Lr-    Li;    i-ii> : 

The  Pas&:-Tr  :Ii  ;  :-S  :  iiiy  days  later,  Pentecost  f2o:  15-21) ; 
Feast  of  T?i  rri: :  .f  ^  ir.  A  .:.:nin  .23 :  31-43  ;  six  days  before  this 
theGrec:  if  ::  A:  i-r  _rr.:  23:  27-32).  The  three  nrst  were  the 
great  yearlr  feasts  wMdi  all  male  Hebrews  had  to  attend  (Ex-  23 : 
lJr-17;  D«it  16:  16). 

So  Christianitr  has  always  had  its  holy  day^  cdgnxoecaaraiiDg  the 
great  historic^  :&cis  oi  redemption :  Christmas,  Good  Friday, 
Easter,  Aseeoaon  Thursday,  and  TVhitsontide  or  Pentecost.  And 
now  as  thai,  wily  he  can  acceptably  and  profitably  keep  these  festi- 
val days,  who  Mthfollj  keeps  the  Lord's  Day  holy. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  241 

ceremonial  penalties  and  restrictions  were  set  aside :  the 
death  penalty  (Ex.  35  :  2),  and  the  forbiddance  of  certain 
work  (Ex.  35  :  3,  Num.  15  :  32-36)  ;*  but  these  were  no 
part  of  the  Commandment,  and  so  only  the  Commandment, 
in  its  moral  substance  and  force,  binds  us  (Col.  2  :  14). 

So  the  change  of  day,  from  the  seventh  to  the  first,  set 
aside  not  the  Commandment,  but  only  an  accidental  ele- 
ment of  it.  The  seventh  day  commemorated  God's  work 
of  creation  and  His  blessed  rest,  as  well  as  the  deliver- 
ance from  Egypt  (Deut.  5  :  15).  Christ  and  the  Apostles 
changed  itf  to  the  first,  to  commemorate  the  greater 
new  creation  in  Christ  and  His  blessed  resurrection  rest, 
and  our  eternal  redemption  from  sin.  But  the  unchange- 
able, moral  substance  of  the  Commandment  remained,  J 

*  Other  restrictions  were  afterward  added ;  but  Christ  wiped 
them  out  by  a  single  wave  of  His  holy  hand  (Mat.  12 :  1-8  ;  Luke 
13:  14-17). 

f  Nothing  is  directly  said  in  the  New  Testament  about  this 
change ;  but  that  it  was  made,  is  plain  from  the  following  facts  : 

(1)  Christ,  after  His  resurrection,  twice  appeared  to  the  disciples 
on  the  first  day  of  the  week  (John  20 :  19,  26).  (2)  The  Christian 
Church  was  founded,  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  on  the  first 
day  of  the  week,  (Acts  2 :  1).  (3)  The  Christians  held  their  public 
worship  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  (Acts  20:  7;  1  Cor.  16  :  1,  2). 
(4)  The  witness  of  the  Church  Fathers:  Justin  Martyr,  A.  D.,  166, 
says :  "  On  the  Lord's  Day  all  Christians  in  the  city  or  country 
meet  together,  because  that  is  the  day  of  our  Lord's  resurrection." 
Athanasius,  A.  D.  326,  says:  "The  Lord  transferred  the  Sabbath  to 
the  Lord's  Day,  being  the  first  day  of  the  week."  Augustine,  A.  d. 
360,  says :  "  The  Lord's  Day  was  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
declared  to  Christians,  and  from  that  time  it  began  to  be  celebrated 
as  the  Christian  festival."  Ambrose,  A.  d.  380,  says :  "  The  Lord's 
Day  was  sacred  or  consecrated  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ." 

J)  Just  as  we  change  the  hour  of  its  beginning  from  evening  to 
midnight. 
242  namely,  the  seven tli  part  of  time  shall  he  kept  holy  unto 
the  Lord. 

As  Christianity  gave  us  a  new  day,  so  also  a  new  name 
for  it,—"  the  Lord's  Day  "  (Rev.  1  :  10). 

3)  God  appointed  it  to  he  kept  holy,  to  be  used  for  its 
own  sacred  purposes,  rest  of  body  and  activity  of  soul,  in 
commemoration  of  the  finished  works  of  creation  and  re- 
demption, and  to  minister  to  our  own  holiness.  So  it  be- 
comes a  type  of,  and  a  preparation  for,  the  eternal  Sab- 
bath rest  (Heb.  4 :  9). 

It  will  not  do  to  say,  as  the  Plymouth  Brethren  of  Eng- 
land held,  that  all  days  are  alike  ;  for  God  Himself  made 
this  to  difier  (Gen.  2:3;  Ex.  20  :  11),  not  in  light  or 
length,  but  like  the  garments  of  Aaron  (Lev.  16  :  4),  and 
the  vessels  of  the  tabernacle  (Lev.  8  :  11),  set  apart  from 
a  common  to  a  sacred  use. 

Therefore  whatever  hinders  a  proper  keeping  of  the 
Lord's  Day  is  forbidden — to  self,  children,  servants,  cattle 
and  strangers,  because  all  need  it. 

(1)  We  must  lay  aside  from  hand  and  heart,  our  daily 
work,  that  the  Lord's  work  may  be  taken  up.  Six  days 
are  for  man,  and  one  is  for  God. 

"  Hallow  the  day  which  God  has  blessed, 
That  thou  and  all  thy  house  may  rest ; 
Keep  hand  and  heart  from  labor  free, 
That  God  may  have  His  work  in  thee." 

Nor  is  this  an  arbitrary  command.  A  deep  law  of  our 
nature  ^  requires  man  to  use  the  seventh  part  of  his  time 
in  resting  and  refreshing  his  body. 

■^  France  found  her  tenth  day  of  rest  a  great  blunder.  Statistics 
prove  that  railroad  men  who  have  no  Sunday  rest,  grow  prema- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  243 

Truly  tlie  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  (Mark  2 :  27). 
God  made  both  it  and  him,  and  therefore  made  it  to  meet 
his  physical  and  moral  wants.  As  He  suited  air  and  food 
to  man,  so  He  appointed  certain  unchangeable  proportions 
of  labor  and  rest.  '•  Six  days  shalt  thou  labor."  The 
Sabbath  is  a  physical  necessity  (Ex.  23  :  12).* 

(2)  The  Commandment  forbids  all  worldly  amusements, 
games,  plays  and  w^eek-day  reading  (school  books,  profane 
history,  the  common  newspaper,  &c.),  because  these  things 
hinder  us  from  keeping  the  day  holy  unto  the  Lord. 

(3)  For  the  same  reason,  it  forbids  travel  and  visitation, 
by  car,  boat,  or  private  conveyance.  This  neither  rests 
the  body  nor  refreshes  the  soul,  but  necessarily  interferes 
■with  the  holy  duties  of  the  day.  It  is  as  inexcusable  as  it 
is  common. 

turely  old,  and  are  unusually  liable  to  certain  forms  of  disease. 
The  average  life  of  European  Jews,  who  strictly  keep  their  Sabbath, 
is  ten  years  longer  than  that  of  European  Christians,  who  so  largely 
have  no  Lord's  Day  rest.  The  same  thing  is  true  even  of  beasts. 
Teamsters  and  drovers  say  that  those  resting  on  Sunday  will  be  as 
far  on  by  Saturday  as  those  who  drive  seven  days.  The  statistics 
of  New  York  and  Philadelphia  Street  Car  Companies  show  that 
horses  that  run  without  a  seventh  day  rest,  take  more  feed  than 
others,  and  wear  out  ranch  sooner.  The  Lord's  Day  is  a  physical 
necessity. 

^  For  this  reason,  in  part,  the  civil  law  protects  the  Lord's  Day, 
by  declaring  what  shall  not  be  done,  and  leaving  the  divine  law 
and  the  individual  conscience  to  say  what  shall  be  done.  The  State 
does  this  by  divine  right.  This  land  is  neither  infidel,  Mohamme- 
dan, Jewish  nor  sectarian,  but  Christian ;  and  the  Lord's  Day  is 
the  ancient,  commonly  accepted  day  of  rest.  Therefore,  the  State 
protects  the  Lord's  Day  as  a  public  good,  necessary  to  the  physical 
and  moral  health  of  society.  (Florida  and  Louisiana  are  the  only 
States  that  have  no  laws  recognizing  and  protecting  the  Lord's  Day.) 


244  XOTES  ox  THE 

4)  Xow,  while  tlie  Commandment  forbids  these  things, 
it  yet  is  not  a  law  without  mercy,  hut  allows  works  of  mercy, 
necessity  and  piety.  Christ  Himself  taught  that  certain 
work  might  be  done.  An  ox  or  an  ass  fallen  into  a 
pit  maybe  lifted  out  (Luke  14:  5  .  Beasts  may  be  fed 
and  watered.  A  wreck  of  cattle  cars  may  be  taken  up, 
in  mercy  to  the  animals.  A  physician  must  care  for  the 
sick  and  the  wounded,  and  good  people  must  visit  them 
(Matt.  12:  10-13;  Luke  13:  11-17  .  Fire  and  flood 
must  be  fouo-ht  then  as  on  anv  other  dav.  Sometimes 
death  or  burial  makes  both  work  and  travel  necessary. 
[Ministers  must  both  travel  and  preach ;  and  sextons  must 
make  fires,  ring  bells,  and  dust  churches  (Matt.  12:  5). 
But  many  people  abuse  this  mercy  of  God.  They  risk 
life  waiting:  till  Sarurdav  evening:  to  take  medicine  :  and  it 
is  shamefully  true  that  physicians  have  more  patients  on 
Sunday  than  on  any  other  day.  Much  too  that  is  done  in 
the  name  of  the  dead  (funerals  and  great  feasts  on  Sun- 
day), is  simply  Sabbath-breaking.  Yea,  much  visitation 
of  the  sick  on  Sunday  is  no  better,  especially  when  it  in- 
terferes with  public  and  private  religious  duties. 

5)  Sow,  then,  shall  the  Lord's  Day  be  spent/  Surely 
not  in  sleep  and  idleness.  These  no  more  honor  God  than 
work.     He  appointed  not  only  the  day,  but  also  its  duties. 

(1)  In  public  icor-ship. — Man  has  not  only  a  body  need- 
ing rest,  but  also  a  soul  needing  refreshment.'*"  Then,  too, 
the  dav  is  not  onlv  for  the  srood  of  man,  but  also  for  the 
glory  of  God.  It  is  the  Lord's  Day.  "  The  Lord  blessed 
the  Sabbath  Dav  and  hallowed  it."     Hence  man,  laving: 

*  Tkat  the  Lord's  Dav  is  not  merelv  for  bodilv  rtst  is  seen  in  the 
simificant  fact  that  man's  first  Sabbath  was  the  first  whole  dav  of 
Adam's  life,  before  bodilv  weariness  was  possible.  This  was  to 
honor  God  and  prepare  Adam  for  his  work. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  245 

aside  work  and  care,  from  liand  and  heart,  shall  keep  the 
day  holy  by  taking  up  the  Lord's  work,  joining  heartily 
and  sincerely  in  public  worship  (Ps.  122 :  1,  2).  As  the 
soul  is  higher  than  the  body,  the  true  way  to  rest  the  body 
is  to  refresh  the  soul.     To  this  end  the  Catechism  says, 

the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Sohools  must  be  main- 
tained :  the  ministry,  because  they  devote  their  whole 
time  to  their  sacred  work  (1  Cor.  9 :  14 ;  Constitution, 
Art.  14)  ;  and  the  Schools  for  the  education  of  the  young, 
and  of  young  men  for  the  ministry.  This  refers  espe- 
cially to  the  system  of  parochial  schools.  For  this  very 
purpose  the  Catechism  was  divided  into  fifty-two  Lord's 
Days. 

Frequent  the  Church  of  God.    The  Catechism  says 

nothing  about  what  we  must  not  do  on  the  Lord's  Day,  but 
positively  insists  on  public  worship.  Diligently,  with 
earnestness  and  regularity.  To  hear  .  .  .  to  USO  •  •  •  tO 
call  .  .  •  to  contribute,  expresses  the  different  parts  of 
public  worship. 

(2)  In  private  worship,  reading  and  meditation.  The 
Bible,  Church  books.  Church  papers,  and  similar  edifying 
matter,  have  a  peculiarly  soothing  and  strengthening  effect 
upon  the  soul. 

The  Lord's  Day  should  not  be  kept  with  gloom,  silence, 
fasting  and  close  confinement,  making  it  cheerless,  griev- 
ous and  distasteful  to  the  young ;  but  it  should  be  the 
most  pleasant,  gladsome  and  enjoyable  day  of  the  seven— 
as  the  memorial  of  Christ's  resurrection  deserves  to  be. 

Such  faithful  and  devout  use  of  the  Lord's  Day  makes 
it  a  joy  and  a  blessing  to  the  Christian,  a  real  and  com- 
forting preparation  for  the  eternal  Sabbath-rest  of  the 
saints  on  high. 

All  this  is  possible,  only  as  J  cease  from  my  evil  works. 


246  NOTES  OX  THE 

Keeping  the  Lord's  Day  holy  cannot  he  separated  from 
godly  liying  tiixough  the  six  days  that  follow  it.  Ceasing 
firom  an  is  negatiye.  Therefore  I  must  also  yisjld  Dysslf 
to  thfi  Lord,  ^ho  can  work  in  me  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  not 
perforce,  but  only  as  I  yield  to  His  gracious  activity. 


GESTP.AT. 

1)  We  need  a  beUer  ie^mg  of  ft«  Lord's  Day.  Grod 
lias  set  it  for  a  sign  between  Him  and  His  people  (Ex. 
31 :  12-17),  always  to  remind  them  of  His  covenant  of 
grace  and  works  of  mercy ;  bat  many  Christians  destroy 
it,  by  makbig  it  much  like  other  days,  by  work,  bu^e^, 
planning,  visiting,  idl^oess^  n^ert  of  God's  house,  street 
parading,  -writing  letters,  improper  reading,  ever  longiug 
fcff  its  close  (Amos  8 :  5).  It  is  not  a  nose  of  wax  to  be 
shaped  by  each  for  himselt  We  need  a  deeper  sense  of 
the  sacredness  of  the  day  as  a  divine  institution: — the 
liord's  Day.  "We  should  have  a  zeal  for  it  like  ^^ehemiah's 
CS"eh.ia:' 15-22). 

We  need  a  strong,  healthy  Ckrislian  aenfiniQii  and 
habit,  also,  because  great  efforts  are  making  to  break  down 
the  Lord's  Day ;  and  if  this  pillar  fall,  with  it  will  &Jk. 
also  much  ^^  which  we  highly  prize. 

A  better  obssrance  of  the  day  is  one  of  the  great 
questions  of  American  morals,  on  which  largely  depends 
the  safety  and  pioeperity  not  only  of  the  iu'lividual  bat 
also  of  the  nation  (Jer.  17 :  21-27). 

Sabbath-breaking  is  a  root  sin.  firom  which  srrow  many 
oUieis.  Directly  and  indirectly  it  leads  to  worse  things — 
if  worse  can  be — to  lower  views  of  duty  and  to  lower  hab- 
its  of  life.  This  drauoralizing  process  repeated  ia  ten 
tboasand  ^milies,  will  soon  drag  our  American  Sunday 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.        *  247 

down  to  the  level  of  the  European* — which  may  God  in 
mercy  forbid ! 

2).  Our  danger.  Our  own  quiet  Sunday  is  losing  its 
quietness.  Many  places  of  public  and  private  business 
are  open ;  railroads,  ferries,  steamboats  and  liveries  often 
do  their  largest  business  on  the  Lord's  Day.  Even  our 
statesmen  and  government-officers  do  much  to  encourage 
Sunday  desecration.  Our  great  rail-road  and  manufactur- 
ing corporations  have,  in  the  twenty-five  years  past,  done 
much  to  hurt  the  Lord's  Lay,  lowering  both  public  senti- 

*  The  European  Sunday  is  very  different  from  ours.  In  cities 
and  large  towns,  places  of  business  are  open,  the  whole  or  part  of 
the  day ;  concerts,  theatres  and  other  amusements  do  their  largest 
business ;  halls,  parks,  public  gardens  and  drinking  places  are  full 
of  people.  While  this  is  true  of  Germany  and  Prussia,  France 
also  has  no  proper  Sunday.  Her  Sunday  is  a  great  public  holiday, 
for  elections,  parades,  military  reviews,  and  other  such  demonstra- 
tions, besides  general  private  desecration  in  all  possible  forms  of 
both  amusement  and  crime. 

The  inevitable  consequence  of  all  this  for  Europe  has  been  the 
decay  of  religion  and  the  demoralization  of  the  people.  Prison 
and  criminal  statistics  prove  that  a  large  proportion  of  crime — 
quarrels,  fights,  murders,  unchastity,  and  general  immorality — is 
plainly  traceable  to  widespread  Sunday  desecration,  by  dancing, 
drinking  and  all  forms  of  frolicking. 

Hence  many  leading  men  of  Europe,  statesmen,  theologians, 
scientists  and  philanthropists,  are  now  making  special  effort  to  se- 
cure a  better  observance  of  the  Lord's  Day — urging  it  even  upon 
the  ground  of  bodily  health  and  public  morals. 

At  the  great  World's  Fair  at  London,  in  1851  and  1862,  the  question 
of  opening  was  not  raised ;  and  at  Paris  in  1867,  and  at  Vienna  in 
1873,  the  question  of  dosing  was  not  raised — so  different  is  the 
national  conscience,  and  the  moral  spirit  of  the  several  countries. 
At  Paris  and  Vienna  the  English  and  American  exhibitors,  at  least 
the  Protestants,  kept  their  exhibits  covered,  teaching  Europeans 
a  lesson  on  the  American  Sabbath. 


248  '  ment  and  public  habits ;  and  our  Sunday  mails  and  post- 
office  deliveries  have  become  so  familiar,  that  few  people 
think  of  their  flat  denial  of  the  divine  saying,  "  The 
seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God." 

A  certain  class  of  men,  many  of  them  educated  and  in- 
fluential, calling  themselves  "  Liberals  "  (as  though  Chris- 
tians were  narrow  or  bound),  misquote  Christ's  deep  say- 
ing, "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man ;"  as  though  He  had 
lowered  the  standard  of  morality  and  lessened  the  strict- 
ness of  the  old  divine  law. 

Why  did  He  say  that  ?  The  Jews,  overstraining  the 
Sabbath  law  by  their  vain  traditions,  would  not  allow 
even  works  of  necessity  and  mercy  (Matt.  12:1,  2  [see 
Deut.  23  :  25]  ;  Matt.  12  :  10).  Stripping  it  of  their  per- 
versions. He  shows  that  the  Sabbath,  as  means  to  an  end, 
must  yield  to  his  occasional  necessities. 

But  men  now  take  advantage  of  this  teaching,  and 
overstrain  the  divine  law  as  much  as  did  the  Jews,  only 
in  the  opposite  direction  of  looseness. 

They  count  the  Lord's  Day  a  time  simply  for  man's 
bodily  rest  and  recreation ;  and  then,  with  a  show  of  supe- 
rior mercy  and  love  for  the  poor,  insist  on  running  street 
cars,  opening  public  libraries,*  having  popular  lectures, 

*  What  folly !  In  1872,  public  libraries  in  Boston,  New  York 
and  Baltimore  were  opened  on  the  Lord's  Day  for  young  men,  that 
they  might  be  kept  from  dangerous  places  and  associations ;  but 
after  two  years'  trial  they  were  closed  as  a  failure.  Only  one-tenth 
of  the  visitors  were  young  men. 

So  in  regard  to  Parks  and  other  places  of  recreation.  One  Sun- 
day in  October,  1875,  five  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-six 
pleasure  carriages  entered  Fairmount  Park,  Philadelphia.  Not  the 
poor,  but  the  rich  and  the  middle  classes  want  these  things  ! 

In  June,  1877,  an  effort  was  made  in  the  British  Parliament  to 
allow  the  opening  of  the  National  Museum  and  Galleries  on  Sun- 
day, but  failed  by  a  vote  of  229  to  87. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  249 

holding  sacred  concerts,  and  throwing  wide  open  the  pub- 
lic Parks,  Zoological  Gardens,  Museums,  and  Art  Exhibi- 
tions— as  if  these  things  could  meet  the  physical  and  reli- 
gious wants  of  man,  and  as  if  so  men  could  honor  God  and 
hallow  His  day  ! 

The  effects  of  this  upon  the  public  health  and  morals, 
will,  of  course,  be  the  same  here  as  in  Europe ;  and  good 
people  know  that  God  will  avenge  Himself  and  rebuke 
such  dishonor  of  His  day  and  authority. 

What  now  is  our  duty !  All  good  people  must  carefully 
study  this  question ;  set  themselves  right  before  God  and 
men  upon  it ;  protest  by  voice  and  vote  against  all  Sab- 
bath desecration  ;  and  in  all  possible  ways  help  to  elevate 
public  sentiment  on  this  subject. 


THIRTY-NINTH  LORD'S  DAT. 


THE  FIFTH  COMMAJSTDMENT. 


THE   RULERS   OF   GOD. 

JSonor  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that  thy  days  may  he  long 
upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.