Question  104.  What  doth  God  require  in  the  fifth  command? 

Answer.  That  I  show  all  honor,  love,  and  fidelity,  to  my  father 
and  mother,  and  all  in  authority  over  me,  and  submit  myself  to 
their  good  instruction  and  correction  with  due  obedience ;  and  also 
patiently  bear  with  their  weakness  and  infirmities,  since  it  pleases 
God  to  govern  us  by  their  hand. 


250  The  Commandments  follow  a  beautiful  order :  God,  the 
worship  of  God,  the  name  of  God,  the  day  of  God,  the  rulers 
of  God.  This  makes  it  easy  to  say  to  which  table  the  fifth 
belongs.  The  words  "father  and  mother,"  make  one  think 
of  the  second  table,  and  so  it  often  is  thrown ;  but  reason- 
ably it  belongs  to  the  first,  because :  1)  So  the  Jews  placed 
it.  2)  Parents  are  not  our  equals,  but  rulers  of  God,  and 
therefore  our  duties  to  them  are  not  to  be  classed  with 
duties  to  our  neighbor.  3)  Paul  giving  the  second  table 
does  not  include  this  Commandment  (Pom.  13:9). 


I.   WTIAT   THE   COMMANDMENT   REQUIRES. 

1)  That  I  show  all  honor  or  reverence,  because  they 
are  over  us  as  the  rulers  of  God.  Lovo,  because  they  are 
our  parents,  and  in  God's  stead,  with  inexpressible  love 
towards  us  (Gen.  46 :  29).  Fidelity  or  faithfulness,  a 
prompt,  cheerful  and  trusty  obedience  in  the  daily  duties 
of  life,  due  from  us  not  only  as  inferiors  but  especially  in 
return  for  their  daily  devotion  to  us. 

2^  Submit  myself .  .  .  with  due  obedience.  "  To  their 

good  instruction :"  the  child  knows  not  what  is  right, 
needful  and  best ;  and  so  he  must  be  taught.  "  To  theii 
good  correction  :"  he  is  not  only  ignorant,  but  prone  tc; 
go  astray,  and  so  must  be  "  corrected,"  set  right.  Often 
this  involves  punishment ;  but,  though  painful,  the  child's 
temporal  and  eternal  good  requires  it.  The  parent  must 
be  as  faithful  in  this  the  kingly  office,  as  in  the  prophetical 
and  priestly. 

Now,  to  all  this  good  instruction  and  correction,  God 
commands  us  to  submit,  not  with  frowns,  anger,  and  con- 
tempt, but  ''  with  due  obedience,"  having  faith  in  their 
love  and  wisdom,  as  well  as  reverence  for  their  age  and 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  251 

position.  Children  often  think  parents  are  exacting,  se- 
vere, arbitrary,  unreasonable, — and  learn  their  mistake 
only  too  late.     Safety  lies  in  meek  submission. 

3)  Patiently  bear  with  their  weakness  and  infirmi- 
ties.    These  belong  to  all  men ;  and  with  these,  in  the 

parent,  the  child  must  patiently  bear. 

A  weak  mind,  a  bad  temper,  a  peculiar  disposition,  odd 
habits,  weak  nerves,  besetting  sins,  bodily  deformity,  and 
especially  second  childhood  with  its  many  wants — yea  all 
faults  and  failings  of  body  and  mind — all  this  the  child 
must  not  rebuke,  expose,  mock  at,  or  trifle  with,  but 
kindly  and  patiently  bear,  remembering  several  things  : — 
much  of  this  the  parent  cannot  help ;  how  much  the 
parent  has  done  for  him  ;  how  much  and  long  the  parent 
both  bore  with  the  child's  weaknesses  and  infirmities  ;  the 
child's  filial  love  should  blind  him  to  these  failings ;  and 
God  commands  this  patient  bearing. 

4)  All  this  must  be  done  from  the  right  motive,  namely, 

Since  it  pleases  God  to  govern  us  by  their  hand.     They 

are  His  rulers,  speaking  and  acting  in  His  name  and  by 
His  authority  (Rom.  13  :  1-7).  Therefore  to  them  we  must 
give  reverence,  love  and  obedience. 

A  child  may  have  more  wealth,  talent,  fame,  education, 
cultivation,  social  position  or  other  superiority  than  the 
parent ;  but  yet  he  must  honor  father  and  mother.  The 
holy  Saviour  was  subject  to  His  parents  at  twelve  (Luke 
2 ;  51),  and  cared  for  Mary  with  His  dying  lips  (John  19  : 
26).  Solomon  was  the  King  of  Israel,  but  as  a  son  he 
must  bow  to  his  mother  (1  Kgs.  2  :  19).  Washington  also 
gives  us  a  beautiful  example  of  this. 

The  fifth  Commandment  is  not  negative,  but  as  the 
negative  Commandments  require  just  the  opposite  of  what 
they  forbid,  so  this  of  course  forbids  the  opposite  of  what 


252  NOTES  ox  THE 

it  requires — irreverence,  disrespect,  hate,  contempt,  stub- 
bornness, disobedience,  rebellion,  rudeness,  impudence,  un- 
kind words  or  acts,  murmuring,  ingratitude,  bad  manners, 
toward  all  these  rulers  of  God. 


n.    THE    PEO:viiSE. 

"That  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which 
the  Lord  thv  God'  sriveth  thee."  Paul  calls  this  "  the  first 
commandment  with  promise,"  that  is,  with  promise  ex- 
pressed (Eph.  6:  2). 

The  meaning  is  plain.  Dishonoring  the  rulers  of  God 
will  surely  shorten  days.  Contempt,  hate  and  disobe- 
dience will  bring  early  death.  The  wicked  sons  of  Eli 
(1  Sam.  2  :  25)  and  the  rebel  Absalom  (2  Sam.  18 :  W) 
are  examples.  Others  and  very  sad  ones,  are  found  in 
every  community. 

The  reason  also  is  plain.  Violation  of  this  com- 
mandment leads  to  manifold  other  sins,  to  bad  company, 
late  hours,  fatal  risks,  and  dangerous  habits,  to  disgrace, 
ruin,  accidents,  disease  and  death.  How  often  life  is  lost 
through  disobedience !  Even  to-day,  yet,  death  is  the 
penalty. 

Length  of  days,  then,  is  not  an  arbitrary  promise,  but 
lies  in  the  verv  nature  of  Gt)d's  croyemment. 


ft 


m.    GESEEAL   EEMAEK3. 

Pather  and  mother  are  mentioned  *  first  because  they 

are  the  first  rulers  of  God  with  whom  the  child  has  to  do. 

*  Yes,  and  mentioned  together,  as  equally  over  the  child,  and  so 
equally  to  receive  his  reverence,  love  and  obedience  ;  though  manv 
children  are  allowed  to  make  a  great  difference  between  father  and 
mother. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  253 

"The  family  is  a  little  kingdom  patterned  after  God's 
greater  kingdom.  In  a  civil  view,  the  father  is  legislator, 
judge  and  executive ;  in  a  religious  view,  he  is  prophet, 
priest  and  king." 

The  family  is  not  only  of  divine  appointment,  but  also 
the  foundation  of  society,  moulding  all  above  and  beyond 
it,  and  making  both  Church  and  State  what  they  are,  so- 
cially and  morally. 

The  tender,  pliable  child,  taught  and  trained  in  the 
family,  carries  the  family  life,  spirit,  habit  and  culture 
into  the  school,  the  Church  and  the  State.  He  will,  more- 
over, love  and  obey  in  later  life  and  in  other  relations,  only 
as  he  has  learned  the  holy  habit  at  home  ;  and  all  this  is 
truly  only  a  single  step  toward  that  supreme  honor  which 
is  due  to  God  the  Heavenly  Father. 

On  this  account,  without  doubt,  so  much  stress  is  laid  on 
this  commandment.  SeeDeut.  27  :  16  ;  Prov.  6  :  20-23  ; 
20:  20;  23:  22. 

Yea,  so  important  is  this  duty,  that  God  directed  the 
stubborn  son  to  be  put  to  death  (Ex.  21 :  15  ;  Deut.  21 : 
18-21).  Of  course,  this  was  a  ceremonial  penalty.  It 
was  not  in  the  Commandment,  but  only  in  the  Jewish  law, 
and  so  is  not  binding  on  us ;  yet  is  not  death  to-day  yet 
truly  the  penalty,  as  implied  in  the  promise,  "  that  thy 
days  may  be  long  "  ? 

The  New  Testament  lays  equal  stress  on  filial  obedience. 
See  Eph.  6  :  1-3  ;  1  Tim.  5  :  4.  And  one  element  of  the 
''  perilous  times  in  the  last  days,"  will  be  disobedience  to 
parents  (2  Tim.  3:2). 

From  all  this  it  is  easy  to  see  why,  in  the  Commandment, 
father  and  mother  are  first  mentioned. 

2)  All  in  authority  are  included  in  the  general  term 
father  and  mother,  both  in  Church  and  State,  such  as 


25-4  NOTES  OX  THE 

teachers,  pastors,  elders,  deacoas.  all  civil  officers,  guar- 
dians, masters  and  the  aged. 

Grod  says :  '*  Thou  shalt  uot  revile  the  gods  (judges, 
magistrates),  nor  curse  the  ruler  of  thy  people  "  i^Ex.  22  : 
28\ 

David  called  King  Saul "  master,"  "the  Lord's  anointed"' 
and  ••  father"  {I  Sam.  24  :  6,  11). 

Peter  exhorts  Christians  to  honor  civil  rulers  i^l  Pet 
2  :  13,  14,  17)  ;  and  Paul,  rulers  in  the  Church  <,1  Thess. 
5  :  12.  13\     So  Heb.  13 :  7,  17. 

This  commandment  includes  also  the  duties  of  servants 
to  nir^:  v^  ^Eph.  6  :  5-7;  Col.  3  :  22^  ;  of  wives  to  hus- 
bands ^Eph.  5 :  22-24^  :  and  of  the  young  to  the  aged 
(Lev.  19  :  32). 

The  torce  of  aU  this  lies  in  the  feet,  that  all  these  rulers, 
in  feniily,  Church  and  State,  have  their  authority  from 
G^od,  and  as  BU.s  ministers  and  servants  they  are  to  receive 
such  due  reverence,  love  and  obedience. 


FORTIETH   LORD'S    DAT. 


THE    SEKTH    C03DLi2s"DAlEyT. 


LIFE. 

Thou  shalt  not  hill, 
105>     Wiiat  doth  God  require  in  the  sixth  command  ? 

That  neither  in  thoughts,  nor  words,  nor  gestores,  much 
les  in  deeds,  I  dishonor,  hate,  wound  or  kill  my  neighbor,  by  my- 
self or  by  another  :  but  that  I  lay  aside  all  desire  of  revenge :  also, 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  255 

that  I  hurt  not  myself,  or  wilfully  expose  myself  to  any  danger. 
Wherefore  also  the  magistrate  is  armed  with  the  sword,  to  prevent 
murder. 

Question  lOG.    But  this  command  seems  only  to  speak  of  murder. 

Answer.  In  forbidding  murder,  God  teaches  us,  that  He  abhors 
the  causes  thereof ;  such  as  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  re- 
venge ;  and  that  He  accounts  all  these  as  murder.