Question  107.  But  is  it  enough  that  we  do  not  kill  any  man  in 
the  manner  mentioned  above  ? 

Answer.  No ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred  and  anger, 
He  commands  us  to  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves ;  to  show 
patience,  peace,  meekness,  mercy,  and  all  kindness  toward  him, 
and  prevent  his  hart  as  much  as  in  us  lies ;  and  that  we  do  good 
even  unto  our  enemies. 

This  Commandment  is  the  first  of  the  second  table.  It 
stands  first,  because  life  is  the  highest  earthly  gift  of  God. 
Human  life  must  not  be  taken,  because  that  is  doing  vio- 
lence to  the  image  of  God  in  man  (Gen.  9 :  6).  Life  is 
not  ours,  but  from  God,  and  therefore  to  be  used  for  His 
glory. 


I.   WHAT   THE   COMMANDMENT   FORBIDS. 

1)  Murder  in  all  its  degrees.  These  degrees  the  Cate- 
chism specifies. 

It  may  be  only  an  inward  motion  of  the  soul,  '^  in 
thought ; "  or  this  may  express  itself  in  harsh  and  threat- 
ening "  words ; "  or  the  countenance  (Gen.  4 :  6)  may 
show  murderous  "  gestures  ;"  or  this  inward  temper  may 
end  in  "  deeds,"  bodily  acts. 

So  there  are  degrees  in  the  gross  act.  "We  "  dishonor  " 
man,  when  we  treat  him  in  thought,  word  or  deed  not 
as  made  in  the  image  of  God,  but  as  of  a  lower  order. 


256  "  Hate  "  is  murder  in  embryo.  "  Wound  "  is  by  word  or 
act  to  insult  and  hurt  a  man,  whether  in  his  feelings  or  in 
his  body.  "  Kill "  of  course  is  the  highest  degree,  the 
actual  taking  of  life.  The  forms  of  this  killing  are 
manifold : — 

(1)  War  is  the  most  fearful.  However  necessary  it 
may  seem  to  men,  such  wholesale  human  slaughter  must 
be  hateful  to  God. 

(2)  Wholesale  murder.  As  the  wrecking  of  railroad 
trains,  whether  wilfully  by  a  villain,  or  carelessly  by  an 
employee ;  defective  work  or  material  in  the  building  of 
bridges,  houses,  churches,  halls,  &c.  ;  the  adulteration  of 
wines  and  other  drinks ;  *  the  use  of  poisonous  matter  in 
making  candy,  vinegar,  sugar,  soap,  hair-washes,  &c. 
"  Infernal  machines,"  as  they  are  called,  come  under  this 

head.f 

(3)  Common  murder  of  an  individual.  Shooting, 
stabbing  and  poisoning,  are  frequent  methods. 

(4)  Trying  to  take  life,  even  if  not  successful.  As  did 
Saul  upon  David  (1  Sam.  18  :  11,  17).  So  the  Jews  did 
to  Paul  (Acts  14 :  19).  So  of  train-wreckers,  duellists 
and  others.  So  God  holds  the  drunkard-maker  accounta- 
ble. "  Woe  unto  him  that  giveth  his  neighbor  drink " 
(Hab.  2 :  15).  It  is  well-known  that  almost  all  the 
brandy,  whisky,  wine  and  other  strong  drinks  sold  at 
hotels  and  in  saloons  are  drugged  or  adulterated  with 

*  The  steward  of  a  ship  once  tried  to  starve  the  crew  by  saturat- 
ing their  provisions  with  coal  oil. 

f  The  most  noted  of  these,  in  late  years,  was  that  of  Thomasen, 
in  1875,  an  inhuman  American  adventurer,  who,  to  secure  heavy 
insurance,  tried  to  destroy  a  ship  at  mid-sea,  by  exploding  a  case 
of  dynamite  powder.  But  it  exploded  at  the  port  of  Bremen, 
killing  sixty-eight  and  wounding  half  as  many  more. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  257 

poisons.  Indeed  the  whole  traffic  is  simply  murderous ; 
and  they  who  make  as  well  as  those  who  sell  such  drink, 
are  as  truly  murderers  as  he  who  takes  life  with  bullet  or 
knife. 

(5j  Helping  to  hill.  Saul  of  Tarsus  threw  not  one 
stone,  but  held  the  clothes  of  those  who  did  (Acts  7 :  58 ; 
8:1). 

(6)  Cruelty  in  all  its  manifold  forms,  to  man  and  beast. 
Sharp  goads,  heavy  whips,  the  bloody  spur,  the  severe  bit, 
shameful  abuse  and  heartless  overwork, — are  the  common 
lot  of  the  horse.*  The  dog  must  have  ears  and  tail 
cropped.  The  French  put  out  the  eyes  of  bull-finches  to 
make  them  sing.  Children  and  servants  are  whipped, 
beaten  frozen,  and  starved,  from  wrath  and  greed.  One 
father  (?)  holds  his  child's  hands  on  a  hot  stove.  An- 
other ties  his  boy  up  by  thumbs  or  heels  till  almost  dead 
and  then  throws  him  into  a  foul  cellar  among  rats  and 
vermin.  '"  Flogging,"  and  other  punishments,  in  some 
schools,  are  simply  brutal.  Government  penalties  are 
often  inhuman.  Whipping-post,  stocks  and  starvation 
are  no  part  of  Christian  civilization.  The  national  amuse- 
ment of  Spain  is  the  shameful  bull-fight,  but  no  better  are 
our  dog-fights,  cock-pits,  prize-rings,  fox  chases  and  horse- 
races. Even  professional  "  base-ball  "  is  a  murderous 
amusement,  apart  from  other  serious  objections. 

(7)  Killing,  by  another.  God  calls  David  the  mur- 
derer of  Uriah  (2  Sam.  12  :  9)  ;  and  Peter  calls  the  Jews 

*  The  "  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals,"  or- 
ganized in  New  York  in  1866,  and  now  found  in  about  thirty 
States  acting  under  their  laws,  is  doing  a  noble  work. 

Out  of  this,  in  1875,  grew  the  '*  Society  for  the  Prevention  of 
Cruelty  to  Children."  Both  these  have  as  their  friends  the  leading 
ministers  and  business  men  of  New  York  and  Brooklyn. 
258  the  murderers  of  Jesus  (Acts  2:  23).  God  held  the 
owner  accountable  for  even  a  savage  ox  (Ex.  21  :  29). 
Judge  Allison  of  Philadelphia,  fi'om  observation  covering 
twenty-five  years  of  official  life,  says  the  cause  of  ninety- 
five  of  every  hundi'ed  murders,  is  the  use  of  strong  di'ink. 
Now,  plainly,  the  drunkard-makers  are  largely  accounta- 
ble for  these  very  murders ;  and  he  who  helps  these  bad 
men  in  their  bad  work  by  aiding  or  encouraging  them  in 
any  way,  is  really  killing  his  neighbor  by  the  hand  of 
another. 

2)  Suicide  or  self-murder.  This  is  a  sin  against  both 
God  and  society.  We  not  only  destroy  God's  highest 
earthly  gift,  but  also  cut  short  our  whole  usefulness  on  earth. 

Question  105  speaks  first  of  murder,  "  That  I . . .  kill  not 
my  neighbor  ;"  and  then  of  suicide,  "  Also  that  I  hurt  not 
myself,  or  wilfully  expose  myself  to  danger."  This  may 
be  done  in  many  ways  : — 

(1)  The  actual,  deliberate  and  immediate  taking  of  life, 
by  shooting,  hanging,  drowning.  As  Saul  (1  Sam.  31 :  4), 
Ahithophel  (2  Sam.  17  :  23),  and  Judas  (Matt.  27 :  5).  Of 
course,  the  insane  are  not  accountable  for  that  act,  unless, 
as  is  often  the  case,  their  insanity  has  been  brought  on  by 
their  own  fault.  It  is  amazing  how  many  business  men 
commit  suicide !  Perhaps  unfortunate,  perhaps  criminals, 
they  fear  disgrace,  and  so  in  the  most  cowardly  way  rush 
into  the  eternal  world  to  get  rid  of  the  troubles  of  this. 
They  are  guilty  of  a  double  wrong :  they  not  only  take 
their  own  life,  but  also  forsake  their  helpless  families. 
Public  sentiment  should  in  every  way  condemn  the  deed. 

(2)  Reckless  risks,  whether  they  end  in  death  or  not.  To 
risk  life  when  in  the  line  of  duty  (soldier,  fireman,  physi- 
cian, nurse,  pastor),  is  noble  (1  Jno.  3 :  16);  but  the  reck- 
less risk  of  life  is  contemptible  as  well  as  very  sinful  (Matt. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  259 

4  :  6,  7).  Getting  on  or  off  moving  trains ;  trifling  with 
fire-arms;  carelessness  with  poison;  lighting  fires  with 
coal-oil ;  eating,  drinking  or  working  to  excess  ;*  the  im- 
moderate use  of  tobacco ;  f  gluttony,  want  of  exercise, 
filthy  living,  tight  lacing,  bare  arms,  exposed  shoulders, 
thin  shoes,  and  all  similar  violation  of  the  laws  of  health, — 
are  only  so  many  reckless  risks  of  life,  forbidden  by  the 
sixth  Commandment.  J 

(3)  By  drink.  How  many  men  are  killed  when  drunk ! 
Truly  suicides,  for  they  were  unfit  to  take  care  of  them- 
selves. The  death-end  is  often  reached  only  in  the  course 
of  years,  but  it  is  suicide. 

Slow  suicide  by  the  use  of  opium  is  alarmingly  on  the 

*  A  man  in  Somerset  Co.,  Pa.,  some  years  ago,  on  a  bet  ate 
twenty-four  cold,  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  died  next  day.  A  Connec- 
ticut baker  smoked  one  hundred  cigars  in  thirteen  hours,  and  lived, 
but  was  a  suicide.  A  Lancaster,  Pa.,  cigar-maker  worked  ninety- 
six  consecutive  hours  without  rest  or  sleep. 

t  All  tobacco  contains  poison,  just  a  little  of  course,  but  enough 
to  hurt  you  in  the  course  of  time.  Many  nice  people  laugh  at  this 
idea,  but  physicians  well  know  it  is  true.  Not  all  men  are  equally 
affected  by  using  even  the  same  amount  and  quality  of  tobacco ;  and 
indeed  generally  the  effect  of  tobacco-poison  upon  the  body  is  very 
slow,  quiet  and  secret,  so  that  men  may  use  it  a  long  time  without 
seeing  or  feeling  any  hurt.  But  the  best  medical  authority  tells  us 
that  tobacco  very  seriously  hurts  the  blood,  stomach,  heart  and 
brain,  producing  nervousness,  dyspepsia,  heart-disease,  vertigo, 
apoplexy,  disease  of  the  eye,  etc.  Without  a  doubt,  as  your  physi- 
cian will  tell  you,  many  of  the  ailments  of  men  come  from  the  long 
use  of  tobacco. 

X  The  Jewish  law  provided  for  accidental  killins:  (Dent.  19  :  4,  5). 
But  much  that  is  called  accidental  is  sheer  carelessness,  and  even 
recklessness,  which  then  is  truly  murder  before  God,  whether  it  be 
the  taking  of  our  own  life  or  that  of  another.  He  requires  care 
(Deut.  22:  8). 


260  increase.  This  ponirarfiil  drug  is  more  dimgerous  than 
drink,  because  more  secret  in  its  dufects  and  ct^mnionly 
thooght  less  disgraceful ;  but  bevrare !  (The  Chinese  go- 
Tornment  forbids  its  use  as  a  sdmoUmfc.) 

(4r)  Dueling,  rioting  and  pfrize-fightxng  are  both  murder 
and  snidde  in  one  act.     Two  lives  are  in  danger. 

(5)  Deutgerows  feais  are  snicdde,  as  llie  trapeze-bar,  rope- 
walking  and  dreos-iiding.  Evai  racing,  lifting  and  rope- 
jomping  are  c&esL  so  eKceasiYe  as  to  end  in  death. 

3)  The  Commandment  fiirinds  ^ao  ike  catiaes  tfrnardex. 
It  seons  to  speak  only  of  tiie  Yiable,  gross  act  of  kiTKng ; 
and  jet  Questicm  105  goes  berond  this,  and  speaks  of  re- 
venge as  &rKndden.  Wbj  is  this  ?  Becan%  Giod  in  the 
Comni^n'^ment  indades  ^  the  eanses  thereof" — literally : 
"  the  .  :f  murder  " — ^"  such  as  aiw,  hatred,  anger, 
and  desire  ::  levenge;  and  accoimts  all  these  as  murder" 
— ^fhidiez  mirder,"  says  the  Grerman,hiddoi  in  Ihe  heart. 
Indeed  tc  ._  .e  may  be  added  also  jealoDsj,  coveloiisnesB 
and  the  like. 

€rod  abhors  these  heart-causes,  and  counts  them  as  mur- 
der, be  15  r  :r :  m  them  the  gro^  act  always  cmoes  (Mark 
7:  21,  22).  Cain  killed  Abel  hi  anger  (Gct.  4:  8).  Jeal- 
ousy and  hate  sold  Joseph  (Gen.  3T :  4,  20, 28),  and  threw 
the  jaTelin  at  Ae  boy  David  (1  Sam.  18 :  8-17).  Covet- 
ousne^  killed  Uriah  (2  Sam.  12 :  9),  betrayed  Jesos  (MatL 
26:  15),  and  hanged  Judas  (Matt.  27:  5).  "  WhoKjevor 
hat^  his  broai«  is  a  murderer  "  (1  John  3 :  15).  There- 
fore this  Conmiandnient  forbids  also  all  these  roots  of 
murder. 

These  particolars  are  forbidden  by  the  sixth  Command- 
messt    "  Wh^^ffe  als      ir  7"  .istrate is  armed  with  the 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  261 

sword  to  prevent  murder."  He  used  to  wear  a  sword 
(Rom.  13:  4)  as  the  symbol  of  his  office  and  authority; 
and  he  prevents,  or  restrains  murder,  by  punishing  the 
guilty. 

Hence  hiding  the  murderer,  helping  his  escape,  or  other- 
wise hindering  the  cause  of  justice,  is  putting  a  premium 
upon  guilt,  and  partaking  in  his  sin.  The  murderer  must 
be  punished  (Num.  35  :  31-34).  The  officer  must  act,  and 
the  witness  must  speak.     God  demands  it. 

Nothing  is  more  hurtful  to  justice  and  the  public  safety 
in  our  day,  than  the  sinful,  sentimental  sympathy  often 
shown  to  criminals  of  high  and  low  degree.  This  is  seen 
not  only  in  the  long,  slow  trials  before  our  courts,  but  es- 
pecially in  the  dangerous  practice  of  encouraging  and 
granting  pardon  to  those  who  have  served  but  part  of  their 
time  in  confinement.  It  only  encourages  others  to  hope 
for  the  same  favor,  and  so  weakens  the  hand  of  the  law. 
Without  a  doubt,  the  pardoning  power  was  at  first  in- 
tended simply  to  reach  cases  of  error,  and  to  give  relief  if 
the  prisoner  should  at  any  time  be  found  either  innocent 
or  only  in  part  guilty.  This  great  power  surely  was  not 
intended  for  common  cases  of  plain  justice,  as  though  one 
officer  of  God  could  righteously  take  away  the  just  penalty 
laid  by  another.  A  crying  evil  is  upon  us.  Sparing  the 
rod  upon  child  or  criminal  must  work  harm. 

So  in  regard  to  Capital  Punishment.  The  death  penalty 
is  of  divine  appointment,  grounded  in  the  justice  of  God 
and  the  safety  of  man. 

"  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood 
be  shed  "  (Gen.  9 :  6).     This  *  was  said  in  the  days  of 

*  If  it  be  said  that  God  Himself  did  not  so  punish  Cain,  it  need 
only  be  answered,  this  law  of  death  had  not  then  yet  been  pub- 
lished. 


262  XOTIS  ox  THE 

Koah,  eight  and  a  half  centuries  before  tlie  giving  of  the 
law  at  Mount  Sinai  God  at  Sinai  simply  reaffirmed  tlie 
old  law. 

Thus  the  death  penalty  was  of  universal  force  for  the 
race  at  its  new  outstart  after  the  flood,  and  became  the 
law  of  all  ages  and  nations.  For  this  reason  it  was  not 
&et  aside  nor  changed  by  the  Saviour;  and  men  to-day 
have  no  right  to  trifle  with  this  plain  divine  law. 

Strong  efibrts  are  being  made  to  array  public  sentiment 
against  the  death  penalty ;  but  even  the  statistics  of  crime 
are  against  them. 

To  call  the  sheriff  a  murderer  is  shameful,  because  not 
he  but  the  government  is  taking  life,  and  this  by  God's 
own  law, — a  life  that  has  been  fullv  forfeited  bv  crime. 


n.   WHAT   THX   C0M3IA>'DMEirr   BEQUTBES. 

Questions  105  and  106  tell  us  what  the  Commandment 
forbids  ;  now  107  tells  what  it  requires.  Each  Command- 
ment of  negative  form  also  includes  a  positive  demand. 
It  is  not  enough  onlv  to  abstain  from  hatino:  and  killins  a 
man,  even  if  such  a  neutral  position  were  possible :  we 
must  also  do  him  good,  both  in  heart  and  in  act.  God 
commands  us : — 

1)-  To  love  OUT  neighbor  as  o^LTselves   Matt.  22:  39), 

a  true  and  hearty  interest  in  his  welfare. 

2).  To  sho^  patlsiOS,  cheerfully  to  bear  with  his  igno- 
rance, wilfulness,  and  other  weaknesses. 

3).  Psa08,  ?uch  a  spirit  of  concord  and  quiet  as  ^Yill 
make  and  keep  peace  and  harmony  among  men. 

4).  MoskneSS,  the  spirit  and  habit  of  lowliness,  gentle- 
ness, mildness  of  temper,  and  forbearance  under  injuries. 

5).  IfferCJ,  to  treat  him  better  than  he  deserves,  orat 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  263 

least  better  than  our  bad  natural  feelings  prompt  us  to  do. 
It  is  the  spirit  and  habit  of  pity  and  forgiveness  toward 
one  who  has  done  us  a  wrong  (Eph.  4 :  31,  32). 

6).  And  all  kindness,  all  other  forms,  not  here  men- 
tioned. Indeed  all  these  are  only  different  expressions  of 
that  love  divine  which  is  the  sum  of  the  second  table 
of  the  law. 

7).  Prevent  his  hurt  as  much  as  in  us  lies.    The  stress 

lies  on  "prevent."  It  is  not  enough  that  I  hurt  him  not, 
but  I  must,  if  possible,  save  him  from  the  hurt  of  others, 
who  may  not  have  these  good  dispositions  of  love  and 
mercy.  I  am  my  brother's  keeper  (Gen.  4:9).  As  Reu- 
ben spoke  for  Joseph  (Gen.  37 :  21-24),  and  Jonathan 
for  David  (1  Sam.  19  :  1-7)  ;  as  Obadiah  saved  the  proph- 
ets (1  Kg.  18  :  4),  and  Queen  Esther  risked  her  life  in  be- 
half of  her  nation  (Esth.  4  :  16)  ;  so  must  we  do. 

One  of  the  noblest  traits  of  man  is  risking  or  giving 
life  for  another.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,'* 
says  Jesus ;  and  Paul  says  the  act  is  very  rare  (Rom.  5 : 
7).     Yet  some  do  it.     Let  me  tell  you  of  them. 

Ida  Lewis  keeps  the  light-house  on  Lime  Rocks,  at 
Newport,  Rhode  Island.  Used  to  the  sea  from  childhood, 
she  can  skillfully  handle  a  boat,  and  is  a  real  heroine. 
She  has  saved  ten  or  fifteen  lives,  by  dashing  into  the  sea 
in  her  life-boat  and  lifting  the  perishing  out  of  danger. 

John  Horn,  Jr.,  of  Detroit,  Michigan,  has  in  ten  years 
saved  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty  persons  from 
drowning.  Young,  strong  and  brave,  he  has  often  risked 
his  own  life  to  save  others.* 

How  often  we  might  take  away  some  danger,  signal  a 

*  So  the  Government  establishes  light-houses,  snrf-boats,  signals 
and  other  helps  toward  saving  life  and  property  in  case  of  coast- 
wrecks. 


264  train,  expose  a  plot,  yea,  like  President  Lincoln,  even  lift 
a  little  bird  back  into  its  nest ! 

This  divine  law  requires  us  to  prevent  medical  quackery, 
cruelty  to  children  (yea  beasts  also),  and  the  manifold 
evils  which  the  wrath  and  greed  of  man  may  lay  upon 
man. 

8).  And  that  we  do  good  even  unto  our  enemies.    This 

is  the  law  of  Christian  love.  Heathenism  knows  nothing 
of  it.  Even  Judaism  fell  short  of  it  (Matt.  5 :  43-45  ; 
Kom.  12 :  20). 

9).  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  as  we  must  take 
care  of  our  neighbor's  life,  so  also  of  our  own,  by  holy 
living,  with  sobriety  and  moderation. 


FORTY-FIRST     LORD'S  DAY, 


THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDLIENT. 


PUEITY. 

Thou  shall  not  commit  adultery.