Question  109.  Doth  God  forbid,  in  this  command,  only  adultery, 
and  such  like  gross  sins  ? 

Answer.  Since  both  our  body  and  soul  are  temples  of  the  Holy 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  265 

Ghost,  He  commands  us  to  preserve  them  pure  and  holy ;  therefore 
He  forbids  all  unchaste  actions,  gestures,  words,  thoughts,  desires, 
and  whatever  can  entice  men  thereto. 

"Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  ;  but  unto  them  that 
are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure "  (Titus  1 : 
15).  Seeing  through  unclean  eyes,  everything  has  an  un- 
clean look. 

The  seventh  Commandment  is  delicate,  and  needs  deli- 
cate handling ;  but  this  is  no  time  for  silence,  especially 
on  the  score  of  delicacy,  when  the  land  is  full  of  deeds  of 
shame,  and  when  such  low  and  false  notions  are  held  in 
regard  to  marriage,  betrothal,  divorce,  and  social  crime 
in  all  its  degrees.  This  Commandment  should  be  all  the 
more  carefully  explained  to  adults,  because  you  cannot  do 
so  to  children ;  and  we  need  not  blush  at  hearing  what  we 
so  much  need  to  know. 


I.   "WHAT  THE   COMMANDMENT   FOEBIDS. 

1)  Tlie  gross  acts  of  adultery,  fornication,  sodomy  and 
all  such  uncleanness  both  in  single  and  married  life  (Eph. 
5 :  3).  Examples :  the  sons  of  Eli  (1  Sam.  2 :  22) ; 
king  David  (2  Sam.  11 :  4). 

2)  All  unlawful  and  improper  marriages  : — 

(1)  Folijgamy,  plurality  of  husbands  or  wives,  common 
in  Turkey,  China  and  the  Mormon  territory  in  our  own 
land.  God  made  but  one  pair  in  the  beginning  (Gen.  2 : 
22-24)  ;  He  saved  four  pairs  at  the  new  outstart  of  the 
race  under  Noah  (Gen.  7  :  13) ;  and  He  ever  since  has  so 
ordered  the  law  of  our  nature  that  males  and  females  have 
been  about  equal  in  number.  In  every  way  God  rebukes 
polygamy  as  unnatural. 


266  (2)  The  marriage  of  blood  relations.  This  is  forbidden 
not  only  by  the  law  of  God  (Lev.  18 :  6-18,  so  detailed, 
because  the  Egyptians  and  Cauaanites  did  these  things), 
but  equally  also  by  the  sure  law  of  nature.  Reliable 
statistics  of  England,  France  and  America  show  that  the 
marriage  of  cousins  (^nearer  than  this  few  come)  is  the 
fertile  source  of  deaf-mutism,  besides  many  other  physical 
and  mental  defects.  At  any  rate,  how  foolish  to  marry 
relations  when  the  world  is  full  of  people ! 

(3)  Marrying  strangers,  that  is,  on  too  short  acquaint- 
ance. What  life-long  sorrow  comes  from  what  is  called 
"  romance  I"  Love  at  first  sight  is  foolish  enough  ;  but 
marriasre  is  worse. 

(4)  Marrying  too  young.  Xo  precise  age  can  be  set,  of 
course ;  but  evidentlv  there  should  be  maturity  of  body 
and  mind,  and  general  fitness  for  the  grave  duties  and 
sacred  csres  of  family  life.  Otherwise  sorrows  will  be 
multiplied. 

(5)  Marrying  icithout  the  consent  of  parents.  From  ro- 
mantic notions  or  a  bad  spirit,  young  people  sometimes  do 
not  even  so  much  as  ask  their  consent.  This  is  shameful, 
as  well  as  a  srreat  risk.  Why  not  ask  advice  in  so  orreat  a 
matter?  What  less  is  due  to  parents?  But  marrying 
against  their  will  is  especially  dangerous.  Great  sorrows 
generally  come  from  it. 

(6)  Oiristiajis  marrying  nnbelievers.  This  great  law 
runs  through  the  whole  Old  Testament,  and  is  repeated  in 
2  Cor.  6:  1-4-17.  Yet  how  little  is  it  resrarded  !  But  the 
terrible  consequences  of  disobedience  show  how  wise  and 
good  it  is.  Xot  only  is  intimate  association  with  the  un- 
believing dangerous,  but  also  frequent  embarrassment  and 
difficulties  will  arise  where  only  one  parent  is  a  Christian. 
So  marriages  are  not  desirable  between  those  of  denomina- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  267 

tions  widely  differing  in  doctrines  and  customs,  because 
agreement  is  impossible,  and  trouble  will  come.* 

(7)  Secret  marriages  are  very  objectionable.  Often  the 
fact  of  marriage  is  withheld  from  the  public  for  a  long 
time.  Marriage  is  a  public  relation,  and  people  have  a 
right  to  know  of  it.  Neither  sport,  romance,  nor  "  neces- 
sity," can  justify  secrecy. 

(8)  Those  marriages  not  based  on  true,  mutual  love  but 
on  social  relations,  financial  considerations,  or  State  policy, 
— so  common  not  only  among  the  royal  families  of  Europe 
but  also  among  the  plebeian  nobility  of  America. 

3)  The  Commandment  forbids  also  all  unlaivful  divorces. 
and  the  re-marriage  of  those  unlawfully  divorced.  Di- 
vorce is  not  merely  separation  of  husband  and  wife  (this  is 
their  own  act),  but  the  official  dissolution  of  the  marriage 
bond,  making  subsequent  marriage  allowable.  As  mar- 
riage is  not  a  civil  but  a  divine  institution,  so  the  divine 
law  is  the  only  true  rule  and  authority  in  divorce. 

What  is  the  divine  law  in  the  case  ?  "  Is  it  lawful  for  a 
man  to  put  away  his  wifo  for  every  cause  ?  " — asked  the 
Pharisees  (Matt.  19  :  3).  "  No,"  said  Christ,  "  but  only 
for  adultery "  (Matt.  19  :  9).  Moses,  owing  to  a  low 
state  of  morals,  allowed,  but  did  not  approve,  divorce  for 
other  reasons  (Deut.  24  :  1-4;  Matt.  19:  8).  Adultery 
— one  heart  by  gross  unfaithfulness  tearing  itself  from  the 

*"  It  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to  marry  only  in  the  Lord  (1  Cor 
7 :  39)  ;  and  therefore  such  as  profess  the  true  Reformed  religion 
should  not  marry  with  infidels,  Papists,  or  other  idolaters.  Nor 
should  such  as  are  godly  be  unequally  yoked,  by  marrying  such  as 
are  notoriously  wicked  in  their  life,  or  maintain  damnable  here- 
sies."    Confession  of  Faith,  Chap.  24,  ^  3. 

The  Roman  Catholic  Church  forbids  "  mixed  marriages,"  i.  e, 
marriages  with  Protestants. 


268  NOTES  OX  THE 

marriage  unity — is  the  only  ground  for  severing  the  mar- 
riage bond.     This  is  the  divine  law  of  divorce. 

TTith  this  the  law  and  custom  of  the  Christian  Church 
generally  agree ;  but,  sad  to  say,  our  State  laws  are  very 
different.  Some  of  our  States  grant  divorces  for  many 
other  causes  than  adultery,  and  the  consequences  are  very 
serious.  The  sacredness  of  marriage  is  thus  destroyed, 
and  the  number  of  divorces  dangerously  increased.* 

But  why  do  our  State  laws  contradict  the  divine  law  ? 
(1)  Because  the  State  looks  upon  marriage  as  a  civil  con- 
tract, much  like  any  other,  and  so  to  be  regulated  by  the 
will  of  a  community.  (2)  Because  the  laws,  in  the  main, 
are  made  by  those  who  care  but  little  for  the  divine  law. 
(3)  Because  the  whole  system  of  divorce  is  made  to  hinge  on 
the  false  principle  of  individual  happiness,  as  viewed  from 
the  standpoint  of  sinful  human  nature.  So  law-makers 
profess  to  be  more  liberal  than  Christ,  and  their  laws  bet- 
ter calculated  to  produce  peace  and  happiness  than  the  di- 
vine law. 

4)  The  Commandment  speaks  only  of  adultery ;  but  in 
this  general  word  it  includes  also  the  lesser  sins  of  un- 
cleanness, — all  vulgar  and  impure  gestures,  words,  slang,"j" 

*In  1872,  almost  five  hundred  divorces  were  granted  in  Connec- 
ticut. The  same  number  in  Maine,  in  1874.  Indiana  has  shame- 
ful notorietj  in  this  adulterous  work. 

Whv  not  at  once  adopt  the  custom  of  Burmah  ?  "WTien  husband 
and  wife  wish  to  separate,  each  lights  a  candle.  If  his  burns  out 
first,  he  goes;  if  her's,  she  goes.  This  is  just  as  scriptural  as  many 
of  our  State  laws,  and  much  less  costly  and  troublesome. 

t  Slang  is  next  door  neighbor  to  vulgarity.  Indeed  often  it  is 
only  vulgarity  boiled  down,  concentrated  in  a  word  or  two.  It  is 
the  sign  of  a  vulgar  mind,  of  coarse  feelings,  of  rude  habits,  and 
so  to  be  carefully  avoided.  Slang,  Like  smut,  sticks  wherever  it 
falls. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  269 

stories  and  songs,  yea  also  thoughts  and  desires.  Like  all 
the  rest  it  forbids  heart  sins  (Matt.  5  :  28),  as  the  root  of 
all  the  rest. 

5)  The  Commandment  forbids  also  whatever  can  entice 
men  thereto.     For  example  :— 

(1)  Bad  company  (1  Cor.  15  :  33  ;  Prov.  6  :  27,  28). 
Not  only  living  company,  but  also  bad  books,  low  songs 
and  vulgar  pictures,  the  corrupting  source  of  secret  sins. 

(2)  Going  into  society  too  young.  Many,  only  fairly  out 
of  the  cradle,  at  once  take  the  ways,  dress  and  privileges 
of  grown  people.  Hardly  in  their  "  teens,"  they  "  keep 
company,"  turn  lovers,  think  of  engagements,  and  know 
quite  too  much  for  their  good. 

(3)  Dancing.  The  delicate  position,  bodily  contact  and 
surroundings,  suggest  and  excite  lust.  Therefore  all  Pro- 
testants, and  indeed  Poman  Catholics,  condemn  promiscu- 
ous dancing.  A  council  of  Poman  Catholic  Bishops,  held 
in  Baltimore  in  1870,  officially  declared  that  public  pro- 
miscijous  dancing  is  hurtful  to  the  highest  and  purest  in- 
terests of  society, — an  opinion  based  on  a  thorough  know- 
ledge of  the  facts  gained  through  the  confessional  all  over 
the  land.  Hence  it  ill  becomes  Protestants  to  excuse  and 
even  practice  dancing,  especially  the  "  round  dance"  which 
the  Poman  Catholic  Church  utterly  forbids!  Horace 
Greeley  said  that  he  knew  of  one  thousand  divorces  which 
grew  out  of  the  dance.  The  process  was :  lust,  jealousy, 
crime,  separation. 

Let  me  beg  you,  be  a  person  of  clean  lips.  *'  Keep  tliyself 
pure  "  (1  Tim.  5:  22),  in  word  and  act,  in  talk  and  thought.  "  Let 
your  speech  be  seasoned  with  salt "  (Col.  4 :  6), — not  with  the  pep- 
per of  bitterness  and  anger,  not  with  the  poison  of  falsehood  and 
sin,  and  just  as  little  with  the  dirt  of  rudeness  and  vulgarity,  but 
■with  the  salt  of  pure  words  and  good  thoughts  and  kind  feelings. 
Refinement  will  always  win. 


270  (4)  Indecent  dress — shortness,  tightness,  fullness  (1 
Thess.  5:  22).  Clothing  in  Eden  already  was  given  to 
hide  nakedness  (Gen.  3  :  21).  How  shameful  then  to  ex- 
pose the  body  like  harlots  who  ply  their  trade  ? 


n.    WHAT   THE   C0M3IAJfDME>"T   EEQUIEES. 

1)  Negatively :  We  must  With  all  OUT  hearts  detest  all 

lincleanness.  The  Triglott  says:  "loathe  it  from  the 
heart."  The  key-note  to  the  Commandment  is  purity; 
and  having  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  must  both  in  heart  and 
life  turn  away  from  what  is  so  hateful  and  accursed  before 
God. 

In  the  Old  Testament,  adultery  is  one  of  the  highest 
sins,  and  was  punished  with  death  (Deut.  22 :  22)  :  and  in 
the  New  Testament  it  is  in  the  worst  company  (1  Cor.  6  : 
9  ;  Kev.  21 :  8). 

Uncleanness  is  not  only  very  sinful,  but  also  very  dan- 
gerous, because  it  is  a  central  sin.  "  The  violation  of  this 
Commandment  destroys  love,  peace,  home,  filial  respect, 
parental  duty,  honor,  property,  health  and  life."  It  wastes 
the  body,  saps  the  strength,  weakens  the  mind,  ruins  the 
soul.  It  wars  against  all  right  feeling,  and  is  death  to 
every  religious  emotion.  "  He  that  doeth  it  destroy eth 
his  own  soul"  CProv.  6  :  32 ;  7  :  22,  23,  27  ;  5:  4,  5).  It 
is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to  destruction  (Job.  31 :  12). 
Therefore  it  must  be  loathed  from  the  heart. 

2)  Positively :  "We  must  live  chastety  and  temperately, 

whether  in  holy  wedlock  or  in  a  single  life. 

(1)  We  must  have  right  views  of  the  marriage  relation. 
"  Holy"  wedlock,  over  against  the  low  and  false  views  of 
marriage  as  a  mere  civil  contract,  a  partnership  or  bar- 
gain between  two   for  mutual  benefit.    Marriage  is  of 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  271 

divine  appointment  (Gen.  2:18-24).  Its  sacredness  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  the  relation  of  Christ  and  His  Church 
is  a  marriage  relation  (Eph.  5  :  23-32 ;  Rev.  19 :  7,8; 
21 :  2,  9).  Therefore  marriage  must  be  guarded  on  every 
side,  and  the  young  must  be  taught  their  duty  in  regard 
to  a  relation  so  sacred  and  binding. 

(2)  Closely  connected  with  it  is  engagement,  or  be- 
trothal. This  also  needs  to  be  lifted  above  the  low  views 
that  are  held  in  regard  to  it.  As  the  door  of  marriage,  it 
has  a  very  sacred  and  binding  character.  Among  the 
Jews  it  was  almost  marriage  itself,  and  was  confirmed 
with  oaths  and  gifts  (Gen.  34  :  12).  Indeed  the  two  were 
called  husband  and  wife  (Matt.  1  :  20,  24),  and  the  law 
of  divorce  applied  to  them  as  well  as  to  those  fully  mar- 
ried (Matt.  1:  19).  Therefore  "  breach  of  promise"  is  a 
very  serious  wrong. 

3)  Preserve  body  and  soul  pure  and  holy,  because  they 

are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Both  are  mentioned,  be- 
cause both  are  partakers  in  sins  of  uncleanness,  and  both 
are  called  His  temples.  We  must  cultivate  the  spirit  and 
habit  of  purity,  watch  our  hearts,  and  resist  the  first  motion 
of  sin.  What  a  difference  between  Joseph  (Gen.  39 :  9) 
and  David  (2  Sam.  11:4)! 

"  God  has  given  to  all,  especially  to  young  women,  in- 
stincts of  modesty  and  chastity  so  keen  and  acute,  that  if 
these  were  followed  and  never  slighted,  these  alone  with 
God's  grace  would  be  sufficient  to  protect  their  virtue  by 
timely  notice  of  coming  danger." 


272  KOTES  ox  THE 


FOETT-SECOXD    HOBD'S     DAY. 


THE   EIGHTH  COABIAXD^IE^'T. 


PEOPEETY. 

Thou  shah  not  steal. 

QuegHtm  110.  What  doth  God&)rbid  in  the  eighih  command? 

Amgmer.  God  forbids  not  onlj  those  thefts  and  robberies  which 
are  punishable  bv  the  magistrate,  bat  He  comprehends  mider  the 
name  of  the^  all  wicked  cricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to 
appropriate  to  onrselTes  the  goods  which  belong  to  onr  neighbor ; 
whether  it  be  bv  force,  or  under  the  appesrsince  cf  ri^HT.  as  by 
mijost  weights,  ells,  measures,  FRArDruExr  n^r: i:\iiiise,  &]9e 
eoins,  nsmy,  or  bv  any  other  way  fishidden  by  God,  as  also  all 
Govetoosneas,  all  waste  and  abnae  of  His  gifts. 

Qmegtum  111.  But  what  doth  God  require  in  this  command? 

Answer.  Tha:  I  r  r :  2: ;  :e  the  advantage  of  my  neighbor  in  every 
instance  I  can  or  may,  and  deal  with  him  as  I  desire  to  be  dealt 
with  by  others;  fiirth^  axso,  that  I  MthfoUy  labor,  so  that  I 
maybe  able  to  relieve  the  needy. 

God  is  the  absolute  owner  of  all  things,  and  men  are 
stewards.  In  this  view  man  owns  nothing.  Yet  over 
against  men,  each  man  owns  what  G^>i  has  entrusted  to 
Ms  care. 

This  Commandment  relates  to  our  neighbor's  property. 
Stealing  is  a  general  word  including  many  particulars. 
Qaestion  110  is  negative,  and  teHs  what  is  forbidden. 
Qaeslion  111  is  positive,  and  tells  what  is  required. 


HEIDELBEEG  CATECHISM.  273 

I.   WHAT   THE   COMMANDMENT   FOEBIDS. 

1)  Thefts  and  robberies  punishable  by  the  magistrate. 

Theft  here  means  common  stealing,  secretly  taking  the 
goods  of  another.  Robbery  implies  violence.  Receiving 
stolen  goods,  by  gift  or  purchase,  we  become  a  partner 
with  the  thief  (Prov.  29  :  24). 

Under  this  head  falls  also  gambling  in  all  its  forms, 
both  in  secret  dens  and  in  open  churches,  with  spotted 
cards  and  by  sacred  lot.  The  gambler  takes  your  money 
without  giving  any  proper  value.  This  sin  breeds  idle- 
ness, greed,  and  dishonesty.  Prize  packages  (candy, 
paper,  tobacco),  are  a  bad  schooling  for  the  young. 

Lotteries  in  all  their  forms  are  very  wrong  and  danger- 
ous— and  just  as  wrong  in  the  Church  as  in  a  gambling 
saloon.  Gift  concerts  and  charity -raffles,  the  unblushing 
chancing  at  fairs  and  festivals,  ought  to  be  despised  and 
punished  as  they  deserve. 

Betting,  so  common  at  elections,  races  and  elsewhere, 
is  also  forbidden,  even  by  the  civil  law,  as  a  form  of 
gambling,  very  enticing,  and  leading  to  other  sins. 

Bribery  is  stealing.  It  is  giving  or  taking  reward  of 
some  kind  for  doing  Avhat  is  wrong.  This  sin  is  common 
in  our  Courts  and  Legislatures,  at  elections  and  wherever 
great  interests  are  at  stake.  Bribery  cannot  be  used  in 
righteous  works  (Ex.  23:  8).  Benedict  Arnold  was 
bribed.*  So  was  Judas.  So  were  the  Roman  soldiers 
(Matt.  28 :  12-15). 

■^  During  the  American  Revolution,  when  the  agents  of  King 
George  III.  offered  Joseph  Reed  of  Pennsylvania  $50,000  and  high 
positions,  if  he  would  turn  to  the  British  cause,  he  answered  :  "  I 
am  not  worth  buying ;  but  such  as  I  am,  the  king  of  Great  Britain 
is  not  rich  enough  to  buy  me." 
274  NOTES  OX  THE 

2)  All  wicked  tricks  and  deTlCOS  for  wronging  man  in 
Ids  property.     In  two  ways  : — 

(1)  By  forco,  ^ot  in  the  sense  of  violence,  but  tlie  un- 
fair use  of  power  and  circumstances. 

Withholding  dues,  wilfully  and  greedily,  without  con- 
cern for  the  necessity  of  others.  Especially  is  this  wrong 
in  the  case  of  small  bills,  which  are  so  easily  paid,  so 
easily  forgotten,  and  which  commonly  are  due  the  helpless 
(servants,  widows,  errand  boys,  and  other  poor).  This  is 
sorely  condemned  in  the  Scriptures  (Lev.  19 :  13  ;  Pro  v. 
3:  28;  Deut.  24:  14,  15;  Jas.  5:  4). 

Extortion  in  all  forms,  namelv,  takinsr  advantasre  of  the 
necessity  of  our  neighbor,  grinding  the  face  of  the  poor 
(Is.  3 :  15),  also  is  sorely  condemned  (Lev.  25 :  17  ;  Prov, 
22 :  22).  Men  often  control  the  market  and  then  make 
overcharges.  Especially  do  men  extort  by  heavy  interest 
on  monev.  This  is  now  called  usurv.  The  Jews  were  not 
allowed  to  charge  interest  at  all  (Lev.  25 :  36,  37) ;  but 
Christianitv  has  no  law  acrainst  it.  Interest  is  ris^ht,  but  it 
must  be  lawful  interest.  Cruelty  and  greed  take  all  they 
can  ffet.  This  is  usurv.  Blackmailing:  is  another  form 
of  extortion,  namely,  demanding  money  or  other  reward 
under  threat  of  vengeance  (exposure,  serious  charges  or 
other  danger).* 

(2)  Under  ths  appearanc-e  of  right.   The  dealing  seems 

fair,  but  is  not. 

UnJTISt  TreiglltS,  ells.t  measures,  lacking  quantity.  The 
wrong  L5  small  and  hard  to  detect,  but  none  the  less  thefL 

*  'Wlien  ^0,000  were  asked  of  .John  Quincr  Adams,  for  suppress- 
ing an  abnsiye  pamphlet  against  him,  he  said :  "  I  would  not 
give  one  dollar  to  suppress  anything  that  anv  human  being  can 
publish  of  me,  true  or  false." 

t  The  ell  is  a  cloth  measure. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  275 

The  Scriptures  call  it  an  abomination  to  God  (Lev.  19 : 
35,36;  Deut.  25:  13-16;  Prov.  20:  10;  Amos  8:  5; 
Micah6:  10,  11). 

Fraudulent  merchandize,  lacking  quality,  as  when  men 
hiding  the  defect  sell  bad  for  good,  taking  advantage  of 
the  ignorance  or  confidence  of  another.  Many  articles  of 
clothing  and  food  are  adulterated,  mixed  with  a  cheaper 
material  to  the  gain  of  the  seller  (water  in  milk  ;  cotton  in 
wool).  So  mechanics  use  bad  material  in  their  work  and 
slight  it  in  various  ways.  Counterfeiting  is  done  in  many 
ways  outside  of  money.  Men  cannot  see  the  fraud,  but 
God  calls  it  stealing.  "What  a  miserable  lie  is  the  saying, 
"All  things  are  fair  in  trade !"  Also  that  other,  "A  man's 
eyes  are  his  market  I"  Much  that  goes  under  the  name 
of  keenness,  shrewdness,  sharpness,  is  simj)ly  theft.  No- 
thing dare  rule  but  the  law  of  love. 

By  any  other  way  forbidden  by  God,  namely,  all  other 

forms  of  swindling :  contracting  debts  without  intending 
or  knowing  how  to  pay  them ;  finding,  and  not  restoring 
to  the  owner ;  taking  advantage  of  mistakes  in  sales  and 
exchanges ;  using  a  postage  stamp  or  a  railroad  ticket  a 
second  time ;  borrowing  and  not  returning ;  fraudulently 
failing  in  business ;  assigning  property  to  others  in  order 
to  avoid  paying  creditors ;  settling  with  creditors  for  so 
much  on  the  dollar,  and  never  afterward  trying  to  pay  the 
balance ;  *    taking   advantage   of  limitations,   defects   or 

*  "  It  is  very  remarkable  that  a  large  number  of  those  who  '  break 
up'  never  seem  to  want  for  anything,  and  stalk  about  through  the 
streets  with  as  much  self-importance  as  if  they  had  never  defrauded 
anybody.  They  dress  well,  keep  good  tables  and  indulge  in  luxu- 
ries generally  to  satiety,  while  many  of  those  whose  money  they 
dishonestly  appropriated  to  their  own  use  are  scarcely  able,  through 
their  dishonesty,  to  procure  the  necessaries  of  life.     Their  families,! 


276  teclmicalities  of  the  law  *  for  gain  ;  "  confidence  "  games ; 
lying  advertisements  ;|  avoiding  paying  duty  on  imported 
goods.J 

The  forms  of  this  sin  are  legion.  The  law  and  common 
speech  call  them  forgery,  breach  of  trust,  embezzlement, 
defalcation,  insolvency,  mistakes,  blunders,  misfortunes, 
irregularities ;  but  God  calls  all  these,  and  all  of  their 
kind,  stealing.  You  may  call  a  fire  a  "  conflagration," 
but  it  is  only  fire  hid  under  a  large  word. 

3).  All  COVOtOUSnesS,  unholy  and  dangerous  greed  for 
gain.  This  will  be  more  fully  explained  under  the  tenth 
Commandment.  It  is  mentioned  here  because  it  is  the 
hidden  root  and  cause  of  all  theft,  and  of  course  forbid- 
den by  the  eighth  Commandment. 

4).  All  waste  and  abuse  of  His  gifts.     They  are  ours 

only  to  use  for  His  glory  and  for  the  true  good  of  men. 
This  waste  is  in  three  ways  : — 

(1).  By  idleness,  the  waste  of  time  and  opportunities. 

too,  are  generally  the  most  haughty,  impudent  and  overbearing  in 
the  neighborhood  where  they  live." 

*  The  heaviest  and  meanest  stealing  is  often  done  by  legal  pro- 
cess ;  and  many  think  that  what  the  civil  law  allows  them  is  just. 
But,  mark  well,  human  law  is  not  the  measure  of  divine  justice,  nor 
is  it  a  standard  for  Christian  conscience. 

t  Many  people  are  to  blame  for  encouraging  such  frauds.  When 
a  man  offers  six  dollars  worth  of  jewelry  for  half  a  dollar ;  or  a 
five  dollar  steel-plate  engraving  for  thirty-five  cents ;  or  silver-plated 
spoons  for  seventy-five  cents,  "just  to  pay  for  packing  and  send- 
ing ;"  or  a  small  farm  in  Texas  for  a  dollar ; you  should  know 

at  once  that  he  is  a  cheat.  To  deal  with  him  is  only  to  encourage 
stealing. 

%  In  1873  a  Jew  smuggled  eighteen  diamonds,  worth  about  $12,- 
OOOj,  into  the  United  States,  carrying  them  under  a  plaster  on  his 
back. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  277 

How  many  precious  hours,  yea  years,  are  spent  on  street- 
corners  and  in  stores,  over  innocent  games  and  worthless 
reading !  Such  waste  wrongs  not  only  self  and  family  but 
also  the  community.  God  made  every  man  to  be  useful 
among  men  (1  Tim.  5 :  8  ;  1  Thess.  4 :  11,  12). 

Another  form  of  waste  is  hoarding  and  hiding  money, 
instead  of  making  it  work  (Luke  19 :  23).  A  lady  in 
Potter  Co.,  Pa.,  buried  $1000  m  her  cellar,  where  it  lay 
unused  for  nine  years,  during  which  time  by  compound 
interest  it  would  have  been  almost  doubled.  A  farmer  in 
Somerset  Co.,  Pa.,  digging  a  post  hole,  found  in  an  earth- 
en vessel  $2700  dollars  in  old  coin,  which  had  been  there 
no  doubt  for  many  years.  Many  such  cases  could  be  cited. 
All  this  is  wrong. 

(2).  By  extravagance"^  in  dress,  food,  luxuries  or  any 
other  form  of  outlay.  No  rule  can  be  laid  down,  how 
much  a  man  may  spend,  but  every  one  should  make  the 
subject  a  matter  of  conscience.f  Extravagance  is  a  rela- 
tive word,  and  depends  much  on  income. 

Much  outlay,  however,  is  only  foolish  waste.  A  man 
in  Connecticut  ornamented  fifty  acres  of  ground,  and 
built  a  house  costing  two  millions  of  dollars,      A  lady  in 

*  On  the  other  hand  the  Commandment  certainly  forbids  also 
that  niggardly  hoarding  of  money,  which  makes  beasts  of  men. 
How  some  starve  their  bodies,  live  in  rags,  and  shame  humanity  ! 
Some  years  ago  a  man  in  Baltimore,  who  made  his  wife  earn  her 
living,  bought  a  cheap  coffin,  and  insisted  that  his  funeral  expenses 
must  not  exceed  ten  dollars.  To  save  cost,  he  was  shaved  before 
he  died,  and  an  exprass  wagon  carried  him  to  his  grave.  He  left 
$30,000. 

t  Queen  Elizabeth  had  three  thousand  dresses,  and  the  Em- 
press of  Russia  wears  a  crimson  velvet,  fur-lined  cloak  worth  ^20,- 
000 ;  but  this  is  no  measure  for  those  outside  of  the  royal  family. 


278  Chicago  owns  seven  thousand  dollars  worth  of  dogs  ;  and 
men  sometimes  pay  many  thousand  dollars  for  a  horse. 

!N'o  matter  how  much  money  a  man  has,  he  has  no  right 
to  waste  it.  *' Johnny  Steele,"  of  Venango  Co.,  Pa.,  oil 
fame,  who  from  poverty  became  fabulously  rich,  once  took 
a  dozen  friends  to  Xew  York,  gave  each  one  a  §1000  dia- 
mond ringj  lived  high,  spent  money  freely,  often  lighted  a 
cigar  with  a  fifty  dollar  bill,  bought  a  coach  and  four,  and 
when  done  with  it  gave  it  to  his  driver.  In  a  few  years 
he  became  sadly  poor.  "  A  fool  and  his  money  are  soon 
parted." 

(3)  Destroying  property  of  any  kind.  Ko  man  dare 
throw  his  money  into  the  fire.  Much  less  dare  servants, 
apprentices  and  others  waste,  break,  destroy,"^  burn  and 
deface  the  property  of  another.  Public  buildings  and 
public  conveyances  are  often  abused,  as  though  it  were  a 
privilege.  Men  often  lose  much  simply  by  bad  manage- 
ment, doing  business  loosely,  ignorantly,  recklessly.  The 
plainest  law  of  common  honesty  binds  men  to  conduct 
their  business  with  care. 


n.    WHAT   THE   COMMA>'DiIEXT   EEQUIKES. 

1)  Pjonote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbor.    The  great 

law  of  Christian  love  is  not  negative,  "  Thou  shalt  not," 
but  positive.     Kot  to  take  his  goods  is  only  halfway  ;  we 

*  A  farmer  in  Lancaster  Ck).,  Pa.,  revengefallr  sprinkled  poi- 
soned salt  in  the  pasture  of  another,  and  killed  the  cattle.  In 
Brooklyn  a  man  having  lighted  a  cigar,  carelessly  threw  the  match 
into  some  fireworks,  which  exploded,  killing  one  man,  burning  an- 
other, and  shattering  the  building. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  279 

mast  also  help  him  to  care  for  them  (Deut.  22 : 1-4 ;  Phil. 
2 :  4).  The  golden  rule  applies  here  (Matt.  7  :  12).  We 
must  even  try  to  find  the  owner  of  that  which  is  lost.  We 
must  be  kind  to  a  man  in  his  need  (Eph.  4 :  28),  and  deal 
justly  with  him  in  all  things.  A  man  is  bound  to  fulfil 
a  losing  contract  (Ps.  15 :  4).  Short  settlements  are  a 
great  help  in  keeping  the  peace  between  men.  Where 
men  deal  long  without  settling,  misunderstandings,  mis- 
takes, loss  of  confidence,  separation,  and  even  lawsuits*  are 
likely  to  follow. 

This  Commandment  requires  also  that  restitution,  be 
made,  in  other  words,  that  anything  wrongfully  taken  be 
restored  if  possible.  If  men  fail  in  business,  and  after- 
ward become  able  f  to  pay  their  creditors,  they  are  bound 
to  do  so.  The  civil  law,  in  certain  cases,  excuses  them, 
but  God's  law  binds  them  to  this.  Especially  where  men 
become  believers,  as  did  Zaccheus  (Luke  19 :  8),  they  must 
make  all  possible  restitution.  No  genuine  repentance  will 
come  short  of  this.  Nor  dare  a  man  in  any  way  steal, 
with  the  intention  of  making  restitution  when  able.  The 
United  States  government  has  a  "  conscience  fund,"  for 
such  money  as  is  restored  by  those  who  wish  to  restore 
anything  taken  from  the  Government. 

2)  That  I  faithfully  labor-     God  made  man  to  work 

*  Not  only  the  law  of  love,  but  even  the  law  of  common  sense 
would  and  should  save  men  from  many  a  lawsuit,  involving  both 
loss  and  shame  and  pain.  A  suit  in  Kentucky  has  been  pending 
for  sixty  years.  A  suit  in  Logansport,  Ind.,  about  two  hogs,  cost 
$1000. 

t  In  1875,  a  member  of  a  Baltimore,  Md.,  firm,  which  settled  with 
its  creditors  at  forty  cents  on  a  dollar,  thirteen  years  before,  went 
to  Boston,  and  paid  up  his  share  of  the  sixty  per  cent,  due  his 
creditors. 


280  (Gen.  2  :  15),  and  work  is  honorable  in  all.  Our  Lord 
"was  a  carpenter.  A  man  must  have  a  regular  and  proper 
business,"^  which  he  shall  manage  with  industry,  working 
"  faithfully,"  with  cheerfulness  and  earnestness.  And  all 
this  not  only  for  his  own  living,  but  also  for  the  good  of 
others,  especially  that  he  may  relieve  the  needy  (Eph. 
4:  28). 


EEMAEKS. 

1)  Some  persons  think  that  stealing  from  a  corporation 
(the  Government,  a  rail-road  company,  a  firm  or  a  bank) 
is  a  small  matter.  If  any  difierence  is  to  be  made,  this  is 
far  worse  than  stealing  from  an  individual,  because  you 
steal  from  ten  or  perhaps  a  hundred  at  once. 

2)  Know  well  that  unjust  gain  will  sooner  or  later 
curse  the  getter.  Cases  in  every  community  explain  the 
Scriptures  on  this  point.  Gehazi  got  the  raiment  of 
Kaaman,  but  also  his  leprosy  (2  Kings  5  :  23,  27).  See 
also  Jer.  17  :  11  ;  Prov.  21 :  7. 

*  "Without  a  doubt  too  few  of  our  young  people  learn  trades. 
Indeed  too  many  think  this  is  not  honorable.  Eighty  per  cent, 
of  the  criminals  in  the  Eastern  Penitentiary  have  no  trade.  Every 
Jewish  boy  had  to  learn  a  trade.  Their  proverb  was:  "He  that 
brings  his  son  up  without  a  trade  brings  him  up  to  steal." 
Stephen  Girard  sent  young  Ben.  Lippincott,  at  twenty-one,  to 
learn  the  cooper  trade ;  and  at  its  close  gave  him  $20,000  for 
two  barrels,  saying,  "  If  you  lose  your  money,  you  have  some^ 
thing  now  to  depend  on." 


REIDELBElia  CATECUISM,  281 


FORTT-THIRD    ILORD'S    DAT. 


THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT. 


CHARACTER. 

Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbor.