Question  113.  What  doth  the  tenth  command  require  of  us? 

Answer.  That  even  the  smallest  inclination,  or  thought,  contrary 
to  any  of  God's  commands,  never  rise  in  our  hearts ;  but  that  at  all 
times  we  hate  all  sin  with  our  whole  hearts,  and  delight  in  all 
righteousness, 

TllS  Tenth.  What  is  here  given  as  the  tenth,  is  by 
Koman  Catholics  and  Lutherans  divided  into  two,  and 
made  the  ninth  and  tenth.  This  matter  is  explained  at 
length,  on  page  213,  which  see.  Covet.  This  Command- 
ment is  much^^ore  searching  than  men  commonly  think. 
It  mentions  no  outward  act,  as  the  rest  do,  but  treats  of  a 
heart  sin.  Just  this  gives  it  such  great  importance.  In- 
deed all  the  other  Commandments,  in  their  deepest  mean- 
ing, touch  the  inner  life  of  man.  Hate  is  murder,  lust  is 
adultery,  and  jealousy  is  false  witness  ;  but  this  treats  only 
of  the  inner  life.  No  wonder  that  it  comes  last,  as  the 
greatest,  because  its  violation  leads  to  the  violation  of  all 
the  rest. 

Hate  all  sin  .  .  .  delight  in  all  righteousness.    This 

explanation  of  the  Catechism  is  very  general,  but  it  goes 
to  the  very  core  and  depth  of  the  Commandment.  It  does 
not  directly  explain  the  Commandment  (as  in  case  of  the 
nine  preceding),  but  rather  sets  forth  the  great,  underlying 
principle  of  all,  namely,  Christian  love.  "  Hate  "  is  nega- 
tive.    "  Delight  "  is  positive. 


I.   WHAT   THE   COMMANDMENT   FORBIDS. 

Covetousness  is  the  spirit  of  discontent,  a  strong  desire 
for  what  is  not  ours.  It  is  not  the  wish  of  a  moment,  as 
when  one  sees  and  desires  a  pleasing  object,  but  a  cher- 
ished, envious  longing,  which  makes  us  unhappy.  It 
comes  largely  from  comparing  ourselves  with  those  whom 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  287 

"we  think  more  fortunate  (but  whose  true  life  and  rela- 
tions we  perhaps  do  not  know). 

The  word  covetousness  generally  expresses  greed  of 
money  or  property  ;  but  it  covers  the  whole  range  of  earth- 
ly things, — health,  fame,  power  and  position.  "  House  " 
in  Ex.  20  :  17,  is  a  general  word,  including  all  his  goods. 
Wife,  servant,  ox  and  ass  are  the  particulars. 

Covetousness  makes  a  man  mean  to  himself,  niggardly 
toward  his  own  body,  so  that  he  will  deny  himself  of 
necessary  food,  clothing  and  common  comforts.* 

Covetousness  makes  a  man  more  and  more  selfish,  un- 
merciful, cruel,  extortionate  and  hard  toward  his  neigh- 
bor. It  is  the  parent  of  dishonesty,  trickery  and  crime. 
It  made  a  liar  of  Gehazi,  a  thief  of  Achan,  and  a  mur- 
derer of  Ahab.  The  deception,  bribery  and  rebellion  of 
Absalom,  all  were  the  fruit  of  covetousness.  This  was 
the  sin  of  Judas.  Why  did  Ananias  lie  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  Demas  forsake  Paul  ?  And  what,  but  this,  is 
the  mad  spirit  of  speculation  and  corruption  to-day,  in 
high  places  and  low  ? 

Covetousness  makes  a  man  forgetful  of  God,  shuts  out 
all  thought  of  God  (Luke  12  :  19).  Therefore  it  is 
called  "  idolatry."  The  heart  is  set  on  the  world  in  some 
form  (money,  fame,  social  standing,  or  political  distinc- 
tion), and  every  thing  else  is  sacrificed  to  this  god.  Je- 
hovah is  set  aside  !  Man  loves  the  creature  more  than  the 
Creator. 

*  About  two  years  ago,  in  a  western  town  of  Pennsylvania,  died 
a  bachelor  Irishman  worth  |10,000,  who  lived  in  a  miserable  hut, 
wore  rags,  froze  himself  in  winter,  starved  himself  all  the  year, 
slept  not  on  a  bed  but  on  a  filthy  straw  cushion,  and  boarded  him- 
self yet  without  pan,  kettle  or  dish  of  any  kind  on  the  premises. 
When  washed,  after  death,  he  was  scarcely  recognized  by  his  friends. 
Covetousness  had  almost  dehumanized  him. 


288  So  covetousness  wrongs  man  in  all  tis  relations, — to  God, 
to  his  fellow-man  and  to  himself.  Hence  the  force  of  the 
warning,  "  Beware  of  covetousness "  (Luke  12 :  15). 
Quiet,  steady  and  stealthy  in  its  growth,  it  is  very  danger- 
ous. Many  a  man  who  at  first  never  thought  of  becom- 
ing an  idolater,  at  last  finds  himself  mean  to  himself,  hard 
to  men,  and  forgetful  of  God  (1  Tim.  6 :  9,  10).  Such  a 
man  cannot  be  happy.  Happiness  lies  not  in  getting  and 
having  this  or  that.  An  old  proverb  says :  "  The  round 
world  can  never  fill  our  cornered  hearts."  A  child  wants 
a  book,  a  ball,  a  hammer,  skates,  marbles,  and  a  score  of 
other  things  ;  and  having  them  is  yet  not  happy,  but  now 
wants  just  something  else.  And  the  adult,  who  is  greedi- 
ly grasping  after  money,  fame  and  social  position,  must 
learn  the  same  lesson,  namely,  happiness  lies  not  in  this, 
that  or  all  earthly  good,  but  in  a  contented  spirit. 

Of  course  the  Commandment,  then,  forbids  not  only 
covetousness,  but  also  whatever  leads  to  it,  for  example, 
discontent,  envy  and  jealousy. 


II.   WHAT   THE   COMaiANDMENT   EEQUIEES. 

We  must  cultivate  the  spirit  of  contentment.  This,  like 
the  keeping  of  any  other  Commandment,  is  possible,  of 
course,  only  in  him  who  stands  in  the  life,  light  and  lib- 
erty of  Christ,  under  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

What  is  Contentment  ?  Is  it  a  stoical  bearing  of  bad 
fortune  ?  When  trouble  comes,  must  a  man  take  it  as  if  it 
were  a  pleasure,  or  at  most  only  an  unpleasant  joke?  Is 
it  an  idle  folding  of  the  hands,  waiting  for  something  to 
come  ?  Does  it  mean  indifference  and  inactivity  in  busi- 
ness ?     No,  but  the  cheerful,  meek  acceptance  of  what  God 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  289 

gives  us,  in  answer  to  humble  prayer  and  earnest  effort. 
If  you  want  anything,  pray  for  it,  work  toward  it,  and 
then  be  satisfied  with  God's  disposal  of  the  case.  This  is 
contentment. 

Contentment  does  not  require  you  to  stay  where  you 
are.  If  you,  by  talent,  industry,  energy  and  the  blessing 
of  God  can  rise ;  if  you,  by  the  fair  use  of  the  various 
powers  of  body  and  mind  which  God  has  given  you,  can 
become  rich,  learned  or  famous,  in  Church  or  State ; — it  is 
your  duty  to  rise  above  what  you  now  are.  Many  men 
cannot  be  kept  down,  simply  because  God  has  made  them 
stronger  than  other  men.  But  if  a  man  cannot  rise  after 
all  right  efforts,  then  he  must  humbly  and  cheerfully  keep 
his  lower  place,  and  glorify  God  where  His  wise  provi- 
dence has  placed  him.     Just  this  is  contentment. 

This  contentment  must  be  learned  (Phil.  4  :  11).  Some 
learn  it  from  the  Scriptures  (1  Tim.  6:8;  Heb.  13  :  5), 
and  others  only  from  sad  experience  (Eccles.  2  :   11). 

Truly  happy  is  the  man  who  in  the  spirit  of  content- 
ment can  say : 

"  The  Lord  my  Shepherd  is, 
I  shall  be  well  supplied  ; 
Since  He  is  mine,  and  I  am  His, 
What  can  I  want  beside?" 


THE   KEEPING   OF   THE   COMMANDMENTS.