Question  114.  But  can  those  who  are  converted  to  God,  perfectly 
keep  these  commands  ? 

Answer.  No ;  but  even  the  holiest  men,  while  in  this  life,  have 
only  small  beginnings  of  this  obedience,  yet  so,  that  with  a  sincere 
resolution,  they  begin  to  live,  not  only  according  to  some,  but  all 
the  commands  of  God. 
290  The  Catechism  having  now  fully  told  us  what  the  Com- 
mandments forbid  and  require,  especially  as  summed  up 
in  Ques.  113,  it  here  asks,  "  Can  we  do  all  this  ?" 

Can  those  who  are  converted,  namely,  Christians,  those 
who  have  been  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Ques.  SQ). 
Only  by  the  grace  of  Christ  can  we  at  all  do  any  good 
(Ques.  8).  The  carnal  mind  cannot  do  the  will  of  God 
(Kom.  8 :  7,  8).  Those  not  in  grace  may  keep  the  Com- 
mandments in  a  negative  and  external  way,  but  not  in  the 
sense  of  the  Saviour  (John  14 :  21).  Regeneration  and 
sanctification  are  necessary,  in  order  to  any  true  obedi- 
ence :  "  Renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost that  so  we 

may lead  holy  and  unblameable  lives  "  (Ques. 

70).  "  I  will  run  the  way  of  thy  Commandments,  when 
thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart"  (Ps.  119:32).  Perfectly 
keep  ?  Without  defect,  in  all  their  length,  breadth  and 
depth. 

Ho.  Much  the  same  question  and  answer  are  found  in 
Question  5,  which  see.  If  the  Question  were,  "  Can  those 
in  grace  keep  the  Commandments?"  then  the  answer 
would  be  Yes;  but  add  "perfectly,"  and  the  answer  is  an 
emphatic  No,  because  we  by  nature  are  prone  to  sin  (Ques. 
5).  Holiest-  The  Catechism  takes  up  not  a  low  or  middle 
class,  but  the  best  Christians,  and   says  that  even  they 

have  only  small  beginnings  of  this  obedience.    This  is 

not  strange.  It  simply  follows  the  law  of  growth  and 
development,  in  both  bodily  and  mental  activities,  in 
musical  or  mechanical  skill,  in  reading  and  in  reasoning. 
The  holiest  men  have  but  the  small  beginnings  of  obedi- 
ence, as  compared  with  the  fullness  of  what  the  law  de- 
mands, or  as  compared  with  the  obedience  of  angels, 
and  especially  as  compared  with  the  perfect  because  unhin- 
dered obedience  of  the  life  to  come.     Yet  SO  •    •    •    •  TOSO- 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  291 

lution.  The  Christian  cannot  be  satisfied  with  any  pres- 
ent degree  of  moral  skill  (Phil.  3 :  12-14).  "  Resolu- 
tion "  means  an  earnest  decision,  a  strong  will-act,  in 
the  effort  of  obedience.  LivS  •  •  •  according  tO  •  •  •  • 
all  the  commands  of  God.  Some  make  great  account  of 
one  and  neglect  another.  Some  lay  stress  on  the  second 
table,  but  ignore  the  first  table;  or  possibly  just  there- 
verse.  The  Commandments  are  a  unit  and  inseparable ; 
a  body,  not  a  bundle.  The  spirit  of  each  is  in  all,  namely, 
love.  Therefore  all  must  be  kept  (James  2 :  10).  Obe- 
dience may  lack  much,  but  yet  it  must  cover  the  whole 
law.  We  cannot  keep  any  Commandment  perfectly,  but 
we  must  try  to  keep  all. 


PREACHING  THE  COMMANDMENTS.