Question  115.  Why  will  God  then  have  the  ten  commands  so 
strictly  preached,  since  no  man  in  this  life  can  keep  them  ? 

Answer.  First,  that  all  our  lifetime,  we  may  learn  more  and  more 
to  know  our  sinful  nature,  and  thus  become  the  more  earnest  in 
seeking  the  remission  of  sin,  and  righteousness  in  Christ ;  likewise, 
that  we  constantly  endeavor  and  pray  to  God  for  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  become  more  and  more  conformable 
to  the  image  of  God,  until  we  arrive  at  the  perfection  proposed  to 
us,  in  a  life  to  come. 

Why SO  strictly  preached?    Why  demand 

so  much  more  than  we  can  possibly  do  ?  Why  was  the 
giving  of  the  law  so  fearfully  grand  (Ex.  19  :  16)  ?  Why 
is  it  to  be  so  constantly  kept  before  the  eyes  and  hearts  of 
men  (Deut.  6  :  6-9)  ?  Why  has  God  always  pressed  it  so 
closely  home  upon  His  people, — through  prophets.  Apos- 
tles, Pastors  and  parents  ?     For  two  reasons  : — 

1)  Learn  ....  to  know  our  sinfal  nature.  The  first 


292  NOTES  OX  THE 

great  fact  we  need  to  know  is  our  misery  through  sin  (Ques. 
2,  3),  and  this  necessity  continues  through  all  our  lifetime. 
Indeed  the  true  knowledge  of  self  comes  only  through 
years,  "  more  and  more."  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge 
of  sin."  Like  a  copy  or  a  rule,  it  shows  us  how  poorly 
we  follow  it,  eyen  with  all  our  trying,  in  eyidence  of  our 
sinful  nature.  This  makes  us,  under  a  deep  sense  of  spii'i- 
tual  need,  more  earnest  in  seeking :  (1)  "  the  remission  of 
sin,"  and  through  it  peace  of  conscience;  (2)  positiyely, 
"righteousness  in  Christ,"  and  through  it  ability  to  keep 
the  law.  Pardon  is  not  enough.  We  need  also  the  grace 
of  Christ,  both  as  the  ground  of  pardon  and  as  the  source 
of  right  liyino^. 

2)  Endeavor  and  pray  to  God  for  .  .  .  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Only  by  His  help  can  we  keep  God's  law.  He  daily 
makes  oyer  to  us  the  benefits  of  Ckrist,  but  only  as 
we  through  prayerful  effort  yield  to  His  gracious  in- 
working,  whereby  we  gradually  become  transformed  into 
the  image  of  God.  As  the  child  daily  grows  more  like 
the  parent,  in  feature  and  spirit,  so  must  we  be  conformed 
to  the  image  of  His  Son  (Rom.  8 :  29 ;  2  Cor.  3 :  18). 
Hence  we  keep  the  law,  not  from  self-interest  or  self- 
respect,  but  because  it  is  the  will  of  God  in  us.  For  these 
two  reasons,  God  will  haye  the  Commandments  so  strictly 
preached,  and  therefore  also  are  they  in  Part  Third  of  the 
Catechism,  as  a  perfect  rule  of  life,  a  diyine  guide  for  our 
Christian  walk. 

This  keeping  of  the  Commandments  must  continue  until 
we  arrive  at  perfection,  We  must  neyer  be  satisfied  with 
any  present  degree  of  godliness,  but  must  reach  out  toward 
the  highest  degree.  We  keep  the  law,  not  as  a  letter  outside 
of  us,  but  as  the  will  of  God  in  us.  Such  keeping  it,  is 
the  outreaching  of  our  inner  life  toward  God.     Our  moral 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  293 

sense  must  become  more  and  more  acute,  through  cultiva- 
tion (as  the  ear  for  sound,  or  the  eye  for  colors).  We 
must  so  fully  take  up  the  law  of  God  into  our  hearts  and 
minds  that  we  gradually  become  a  law  unto  ourselves,  so 
filled  with  the  spirit  of  truth  and  right  that  we  speak  and 
act  it  spontaneously  (as  a  grammarian  or  musician,  who 
thinks  not  of  laws  or  rules,  for  they  are  part  of  himself^. 
This  perfection  is  a  process  under  the  Holy  Ghost,  through 
the  use  of  the  means  of  grace,  completed  only  in  the  life 
to  come  (Phil.  1  :  16).  Christian  perfection  is  not  an 
end  to  be  reached  in  this  life,  but  yet  to  be  aimed  at. 
With  an  earnest  desire  and  sincere  resolution,  we  will  daily 
reach  higher  degrees  of  skill  in  keeping  the  law  of  God ; 
and  as  a  child  writes  best  near  the  copy,  so  God  by  strict 
preaching  keeps  the  Commandments  before  us. 


FORTY-FIFTH    liORD'S    DAY. 


PRAYER.