Question     118.     "What  hath  God  commanded  us  to  ask  of  Him  ? 

Ansicer.  All  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body,  which  Christ 
our  Lord  has  comprised  in  that  prayer  He  Himself  has  taught  us. 

Prayer,  in  some  form  is  common  to  all  men,  in  every 
form  of  religion.  It  is  the  outcry  of  helpless  man  to  a 
higher  power,  the  expression  of  reverence,  faith,  want  and 
gratitude. 

Necessary  for   Ohristians.     Why  must  those  pray, 

whose  God  is  a  Father,  as  wise  as  He  is  loving,  and  who 
knows  our  hearts  before  we  speak  ?  For  two  reasons : — 

1)  Because  it  is  the  cMef  part  of  thankfulness.  This  lov- 
ing communion  with  God  in  adoration,  confession,  thanks- 
giving, petition  and  intercession,*  is  what  He  expects  from 
those  for  whom  He  has  done  all  that  is  told  us  in  Part 
Second  of  the  Catechism.  Very  significantly,  too,  prayer 
falls  in  Part  Third,  as  one  expression  of  our  Christian  life, 
and  even  last,  "  as  the  rich  bloom  and  crowning  beauty 
of  the  Christian  life."  "  Prayer  is  the  Christian's  vital 
breath,"  the  highest  act  of  a  renewed  soul. 

2)  &od  will  give  ...  to  those  only  who  .  •  .  ask. 

Prayer  is  the  condition  of  our  receiving  His  grace.  In- 
deed the  relation  between  our  imperfect  obedience  and 
earnest  prayer  is  very  close.     The  prayer  not  only  honors 

*  These  are  the  parts  of  Christian  prayer  :  adoration,  standing  in 
awe  of  God's  majesty;  confession^  a  looking  upon  unworthy  self; 
thanksgiving,  acknowledging  God's  goodness;  petition,  begging 
mercies  for  ourselves  j  intercession,  asking  in  behalf  of  others. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  295 

God,  but  also  is  good  for  us,  increasing  our  sense  of  de- 
pendence and  strengthening  our  faith  in  Him. 

What  are  the  requisites  of— the  Triglott  asks,  "  What 

belongs  to  " — ^true  prayer  ?  God  will  not  hear  and  answer 
just  any  kind  of  asking.  The  Catechism  refers  to  Chris- 
tian prayer.  As  Christianity  is  the  only  true  religion,  so 
Christian  prayer  is  the  only  true  prayer,  and  has  its  own 
essential  elements,  without  which  it  could  not  be  true 
prayer.  What  makes  it  differ  from  Jewish  or  Gentile 
prayer  ?  What  things  are  necessary  in  it  ? 

1)  We  must  pray  to  the  one  tnie  God  only.    This  true 

God  has  manifested  Himself  in  His  word,  the  living  Word 
(John  1 :  14)  and  the  written  word.  To  Him,  we  shall 
pray,  not  to  heathen  gods ;  to  Him  alone,  not  also  to 
saints  (as  do  Roman  Catholics)  ;  to  Him  as  the  Father, 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  to  Him  because  He 
alone  is  able  to  hear  and  help  us.  From  the  heart.  Not 
mere  words  (Matt.  15  :  8),  but  with  sincerity  (Jas.  4:3; 
John  4 :  24 ;  Jer.  29 :  13).  Our  danger  is  formality, 
not  the  use  of  forms,  but  their  empty  use.     We  must  mean 

what  we  say  to  God.    For  all  things oom- 

manded.     What  these  things  are  is  told  us  in  Ques.  118. 

2)  Rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  misery. 

Only  as  we  feel  this  can  we  earnestly  ask  for  what  we 
need.  A  hungry  child  will  at  once  ask  for  bread.  A 
sense  of  misery,  too,  will  make  us  ask  humbly.  Not  only 
are  we  dependent,  but  also  unworthy  (Ezra  9:6;  Luke 
18:  13). 

3)  We  must  pray  in  faith.  He  •  •  •  will  •  •  •  cer- 
tainly hear.  We  must  never  doubt  this,  for  He  is  both 
able  and  willing,  and  has  promised  it  in  His  word  (Ps. 
60:  15;  102:  17;  Matt.  7:  7-11;  1  John  5:  14,  15). 
Faith  is  one  condition  of  God's  answer  (Mark  11:    24; 


296  NOTES  ox  THE 

Jas,  1 :  5-7).  Alas,  vre  too  often  ask  without  really  ex- 
pecting anything.  In  answer  to  the  scientific  infidelity  of 
the  age,  whicli  asks,  "  How  can  the  unchangeable  God  be 
affected  by  our  prayers  ?  ",  the  Christian  need  only  say, 
"  I  know  not ;  but  He  has  told  us  to  ask  for  what  we  want  ;* 
yea,  more,  He  has  often  answered  the  prayers  of  His  peo- 
ple "  (James  5 :  13-18).    for  tli3  sake ::  Cbris:  zzr  L:ri 

"We  are  unworthy,  but  He  is  our  righteousness.  Hence  an 
esential  element  of  Christian  prayer  is  to  pray  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  as  a  formality  but  as  a  neces- 
sity (John  14:  13  ;  CoL  3:  17).  Hence  all  our  prayers 
end  with  the  words,  "  for  Jesus'  sake."  Without  this  the 
prayer  rises  but  to  the  roof  By  Him  we  have  access  to 
the  Father  i^Eph.  2 :  IS  >.  Therefore  to  pray,  as  is  often 
done,  in  Orders  and  Associations,  not  iu  the  name  of 
Christ  but  simply  to  Grod,  is  an  iosult  to  the  Father  and  to 
the  Son  (John  5  :  23).  He  is  our  true  High-priest  (Heb. 
9  :  24  :  10  :  19-22).  How,  then,  dare  men  pass  Him  by, 
in  drawino:  ni^h  to  the  Father  ? 

^lat  li2.±   God  commanded  us  to  ask  of  Elm? 

This  quesTion  comes  &om  the  last.  All  things  necessary 
for  soul  and  body.  We  need  all,  Grod  has  all,  and  there- 
fore we  ask  all  things.  But  what  are  these  ?  Those  inclu- 
ded in  the  Lord's  Prayer.  Almsgiving,  prayer  and  fast- 
ing were  the  three  great  common  forms  of  piety  among 
the  Jews.  As  all  these  were  much  abused  by  the  Pharisees, 
Christ  taught  them  how  to  perform  these  acts  of  worship 
(Matt.  6 :  1-18).  Prayer  was  abused  iu  two  ways  :  1)  by 
making  a  show  of  piety  before  men  Matt.  6  :  5),  and  2), 
by  trying  to  affect  God  by  much  speaking  (Matt.  6 :  7). 
So  Christ  gave  His  disciples  a  model  prayer  (Alatt  6: 
9-13).  Thus  the  Catechism  is  very  rich  and  foil  iu  meet- 
ing the  wants  of  Christian  children.    It  teaches  them  what 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  297 

to  believe,  namely,  the  Apostles'  Creed;  how  to  live, 
namely,  according  to  the  ten  Commandments;  and  how 
to  pray,  in  the  words  of  our  Lord. 


THE   LORD  S   PRAYER.