Question  119.  What  are  the  words  of  that  prayer? 

Answer.  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy 
name.  Thy  kingdom  come.  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in 
heaven.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,  and  forgive  us  our  debts, 
as  we  forgive  our  debtors ;  and  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  de- 
liver us  from  evil.  For  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  ihe 
glory,  for  ever.     Amen. 

This  form  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  from  St.  Matthew. 
That  given  by  St.  Luke  differs  in  the  omission  of  the 
doxology,  "  For  Thine  .  .  .for  ever."  Protestants  use 
this  form ;  Roman  Catholics  use  that  of  Luke.  Was  this 
an  altogether  new  and  original  prayer,  or  did  Christ  gather 
it  from  the  old  Jewish  liturgical  forms?  Much  has  been 
said  on  both  sides  of  this  question. 

The  songs  of  Mary  and  Zacharias  (Luke  1 :  46-55 ; 
1 :  68-79),  are  free  utterances  of  the  soul,  and  yet  in  the 
use  of  old  forms.  So  Christ  found  Matt.  22 :  37-40  in 
Deut.  6  :  5  and  Lev.  19  :  18.  If  He  did  take  parts  of  this 
prayer  from  the  Hebrew  ritual.  He  lifted  these  above  their 
old  plane,  and  gave  them  a  new  and  higher  meaning. 

"  After  this  manner,  therefore,  pray  ye,"  namely,  in  the 
spirit  of  reverence,  faith  and  sonship,  even  in  these  words 
as  a  model  formula,  short,  full  and  simple, — in  contrast 
with  the  long  prayers  of  men,  with  their  empty  repetitions  * 

*  Of  what  folly  men  are  guilty !  Christ,  in  condemning  long 
prayers  and  vain  repetitions,  gave  this  short  prayer ;  and  now  men 
make  a  merit  of  repeating  it  many  times !  Prayer  is  not  an  arith- 
metical force. 


298  and  swelling  words.  Though  short  it  embodies  all  our 
wants. 

Its  plural  form  shows  that  it  was  intended  for  public, 
congregational  use ;  and  so  it  has  been  used  in  all  ages  of 
the  Church.  This  use  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  (also  of  the 
Apostles'  Creed)  is  not  a  disputed  question  in  the  Re- 
formed Church. 

This  prayer  is  beautifully  illustrated  in  the  life  of  the 
blessed  Saviour :  He  hallowed  God's  name ;  He  brought 
the  kingdom  nigh  unto  men;  He  revealed,  obeyed  and 
suffered  the  Father's  will;  He  was  the  true  bread  of  life ; 
He,  the  source  of  our  forgiveness,  was  a  beautiful  example 
of  forgiving  love ;  and  He  who  delivered  us  from  evil  was 
vainly  tempted  by  the  evil  one. 

The  Lord's  Prayer  is  trinitarian : — 

1)  Tx  FORM. 

(1)  Address :  Father,  our,  heaven. 

(2)  Six  petitions  : 

a)  Three  relate  to  God  (name,  kingdom,  will). 

b)  Three  relate  to  man  (bread,  debts,  temptations). 

(3)  Doxology :  Kingdom,  power,  glory. 

2)  In  contents. 


FATHER  AS  CREATOR. 

HALLOWED. 

GIVE  BREAD. 


SON  A3  REDEEMER. 
KINGDOM  COME. 
FORGIVE  US. 


HOLY  GHOST  AS  SANCTIFIER. 
THY  WILL  BE  DONE. 
DELIVER  US. 


The  logical  order  of  this  prayer  is  not  accidental  but 


HEIDELBEKG  CATECHISM.  299 

necessary  (as  is  that  of  the  Creed  and  the  Commandments), 
and  so  not  to  be  changed  by  us. 


FORTY-SIXTH  I^OKD'S  DAY. 


THE  ADDRESS. 

Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven.