Question  121.  Why  is  here  added,  "  which  art  in  heaven  ?" 

Answer.  Lest  we  should  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of  God's 
heavenly  majesty,  and  that  we  may  expect  from  His  almighty  power 
all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body. 

These  words  we  call  the  address,  because  we  here  call 
God  by  name,  as  if  to  gain  His  ear,  as  among  men.  Why 
say  Father  ?  We  cannot  think  of  God  as  absolute  spirit, 
but  only  under  some  earthly,  human  form.  So  we  speak 
of  His  throne,  His  hand,  eye,  ear,  and  His  names.  To 
give  us  some  idea  of  His  nature,  Christ  has  taught  us  to 
call  Him  "  our  Father." 

!)•  God  is  become  our  Father  in  Christ,  not  by  creation, 

but  by  redemption.  Infidels  may  talk  of  the  "  great 
brotherhood  "  of  men  under  one  common  Father  ;  but  the 
New  Testament  says  that  those  in  Christ  are  His  children 


300  (Jolin  1:12;  Gal.  3  :  26).  The  word  Father  is  ex- 
plained in  Questions  26,  33.  We  are  His  by  adoption  in 
Christ.  Therefore  only  a  Christian  can  pray  this  prayer. 
Paul  says  that  only  a  child  can  say,  "  Father  "  (Gal.  4  : 
6).  How  grossly,  then,  those  wrong  God,  who  use  the 
Lord's  Prayer,  but  yet  without  any  reference  to  the  Son, 
indeed  by  a  Avilful  rejection  of  Christ !  Then,  too,  we  say, 
Our.  Not  selfishly  "  my,"  forgetting  that  others  also  are 
heirs;  not  self-righteously  "my,"  shutting  out  all  other 
children  ;  but  "  our,"  acknowledging  them  as  brethren, 
and  remembering  them  before  God  in  our  common  wants. 
In  "  our  "  lies  the  idea  of  God's  family,  the  communion 
of  saints,  a  true  and  everlasting  brotherhood  in  grace. 
2).  To  excite  (the  Triglott  says,  "  awaken  ")  in  us  a 

childlike  reverence  for  and  confidence  in  &od.    The  use  of 

words  makes  us  familiar  with  their  ideas.  The  word 
Father  brings  us  very  near  to  God,  much  more  so  than  if 
we  should  say  Creator,  King  or  Judge,  and  at  once  fills 
us  with  a  sense  of  His  greatness  as  well  as  goodness,  as- 
suring us  that  He  will  grant  us  what  we  ask  in  faith  (Ps. 
103  :  13).  Our  sonship  gives  a  claim  upon  Him.  Great 
indeed  is  the  difference  between  a  son  and  a  stranger 
knocking  at  your  door  for  food  or  shelter.  This  filial  rev- 
erence and  confidence  are  the  foundation  of  our  prayer, 

the  very  substance  of  our  petitions.  Mere  words  are  not 
prayer.  The  words  must  have  a  right  spirit  as  well  as 
meaning.  As  only  a  child  can  have  the  spirit  of  reverence 
and  confidence,  so  only  a  Christian  can  say  and  pray, 
"  Our  Father." 

Why  do  we  add,  "  in  heaven  ?"     For  two  reasons : 

1).  To  express  Q-od's  heavenly  majesty.     The  word 

Father  brings  God  very  near  to  us ;  but  "  in  heaven  "  sets 
Him  above  us  (Eccles.  5:  2),  raising  our  thoughts  far 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  301 

above  the  earthly  parental  relation.  We  dare  not  think 
of  God  as  weak,  erring  and  changeable,  like  a  human 
father,  but  almighty,  true  and  unchangeable.  "  In  heaven," 
here,  does  not  express  mere  locality,  but  rather  the  majesty 
and  glory  of  God. 

2).  To  express  Hls  almighty  power,  and  assure  us  of 
His  full  ability  to  give  us  "  all  things  necessary  for  soul 
and  body,"  even  as  He  has  commanded  us  to  ask  (Ques. 
118). 


rORTY-SEYENTH   I^ORD'S   DAY* 


THE     FIRST     PETITION. 

Hallowed  he  Thy  Name.