Question  122.    WMch  is  the  first  petition  ? 

Answer.  ''  Hallowed  be  thy  name  ;"  that  is,  grant  us  first 
rightly  to  know  Thee,  and  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  Thee 
in  all  Thy  works,  in  which  Thy  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  jus- 
tice, mercy,  and  truth,  are  clearly  displayed ;  and  further,  also, 
that  we  may  so  order  and  direct  our  whole  lives,  our  thoughts, 
words  and  actions,  as  that  Thy  name  may  never  be  blasphemed, 
but  rather  honored  and  praised  on  our  account. 

Petition,  a  begging,  an  earnest  asking.  First.  The  pe- 
titions, like  the  Commandments,  are  divided  into  two 
classes.     Three  relate  to  God  (Thy)  and  three  to  man  (us). 

Thy  Name.  See  Notes  on  Question  99.  The  Name  of 
God  means  God  Himself  (Prov.  18  :  10  ;  Ps.  20  :  1),  all 
His  attributes  and  all  His  holy  things  (word,  day,  rulers, 
Church  and  worship). 

Hallowed  means  two  things : — 

1)  In  us.    Rightly  to  know  ....  and  praise  Thee. 


302  To  this  end  God  made  man  in  His  own  image  (Ques.  6). 
We  must  have  right  views  of  God,  which  is  possible  only 
through  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  indeed 
only  as  we  are  in  Christ,  and  thus  know  God  not  as  a  fact 
of  doctrine  but  as  a  living  power  in  us.  He  is  to  be  loved, 
honored  and  worshiped,  and  all  His  sacred  things  are  to 
be  held  in  due  reverence.  We  shall  hallow  His  iS^ame  in 
our  hearts  (1  Pet.  3  :  15),  by  meditation  and  holy  long- 
ings (Ps.  84 :  2)  ;  with  our  lips,  in  earnest  prayer  and 
praise  (Eph.  5 :  19,  20) ;  but  also  by  godly  living, 
namely, 

2)  By  us.    So  order  otir  lives ....  Thy  Name  iDe 

honored.  The  hallowing  must  go  from  heart  and  lip  into 
daily  living  (Matt.  5:  16;  1  Pet.  2:  12).  All  unfaith- 
fulness, inconsistency,  walking  contrary  to  the  Gospel  of 
Christ,  profanes  the  IS'ame  of  God,  makes  it  low  and  com- 
mon before  men.  See  Ezek.  36  :  20,  compared  with  22  : 
26-31.  The  Christian  hallows  God's  Kame,  not  by  shut- 
ting himself  out  from  men,  in  cave  or  cloister,  but  by  ear- 
nest activity  among  men,  showing  the  life  of  Christ  in  him. 
Grant  us.  We  here  pray  for  grace  and  wisdom  that  we 
may  glorify  Him.  Evidently,  then,  only  a  Christian  can 
pray  this  prayer,  for  he  alone  has  divine  grace  and  power 
inclining  and  enabling  him  to  such  holy  thoughts,  words 
and  deeds  as  honor  God. 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  303 


FORTY-EIGHTH     LORD'S     BAT. 


THE     SECOND     PETITION. 

Thy  Kingdom  come.