Question  123.    Which  is  the  second  petition? 

Answer.  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  that  is,  rule  us  so  by  Thy 
word  and  Spirit,  that  we  may  submit  ourselves  more  and  more  to 
Thee ;  preserve  and  increase  Thy  Church ;  destroy  the  works  of 
the  devil,  and  all  violence  which  would  exalt  itself  against  Thee, 
and  also  all  wicked  counsels  devised  against  Thy  holy  word,  until 
the  full  perfection  of  Thy  kingdom  takes  place,  wherein  Thou 
shalt  be  all  in  all. 

Thy  Kingdom,  namely  the  Christian  Church,  which, 
unlike  earthly  kingdoms,  is  not  of  a  day,  but  everlasting 
(Ps.  145  :  13).  In  regard  to  its  organization,  see  Notes 
on  Question  54. 

Come.  This  is  a  missionary  petition.  It  was  also  in 
the  Jewish  liturgies,  a  prayer  for  the  speedy  coming  of 
the  Messiah  and  the  founding  of  His  glorious  Kingdom  ; 
but  for  the  Christian  it  has  a  very  different  meaning. 
Christ  has  come,  Hi^  Kingdom  has  been  founded  (Acts  2  : 
4),  and  we  here  pray  for  its  extension  and  establishment 
in  the  world,  until  the  whole  earth  shall  be  filled  with 
His  glory.  The  answer  of  the  Catechism  has  two  parts,  a 
positive  :  "  Kule  us  .  .  .  Thy  Church,"  and  a  negative  : 
"  Destroy  .    .    .all  in  all." 

1)  Rule  US,  the  individual  members.     By  Thy  WOrd 


304  and  Spirit,  teachmg  us  by  the  Gospel  (written  and 
preached),  and  enabling  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  our 
eternal  King  governs  us  i^Ques.  31).  For  this  light  and 
grace  we  here  pray. 

Incrsass  Thy  dmrch,  namely  the  whole  body  of  Christ, 
Here  we  pray  for  the  spread  of  the  Gospel,  and  for  the 
increa;5e  of  Christian  territory,  in  fulfillment  of  prophecy 
(Rev.  11  :  15).  But  to  this  end  we  must  pay  as  well  as 
pray,  and  work  as  well  as  wish.  The  kingdom  will  not 
come  of  itself.  God  works  through  means,  even 
through  us. 

Here,  too,  we  pray  for  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom 
within  us,  for  the  increase  of  godliness  in  our  own  hearts 
and  lives.  Every  Christian  is  a  linle  kingdom  in  which 
Christ  reigns  as  truly  as  if  there  were  no  other  saint  on 
earth. 

PrgseiTS  Thy  CllUrch,  amid  her  enemies  and  dangers, 
without  and  within,  persecutors  and  heretics.  TThat,  ex- 
cept the  Bible,  can  be  more  interesting  than  Church  his- 
tory ?  TVonderfully,  indeed,  has  God  kept  His  people,  and 
brought  them  in  safety  through  many  a  wilderness  and 
many  a  Red  Sea. 

2)  Der^roy  the  works  of  the  devil,  his  power  and  his 

plans,  his  agencies  and  efibrts,  because  these  hinder  the 

coming  of  God's  kingdom.    Until  the  full  perfection  of 

Thy  kingdom  is  reached.  Thus,  in  this  petition,  while 
we  pray  for  the  spread  of  the  Church  in  the  world,  /.  e., 
for  the  o-reater  coming  of  the  kino;dom  of  srace,  we  here 
prav  also  for  the  full  cominsr  of  the  kingdom  of  elorv,  for 
the  perfection  and  complete  victory  of  the  Church,  which 
is  possible  only  at  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  From 
Pentecost  to  that  ''  day  of  the  Lord,"  is  for  the  Church  one 
great  and  joyful  Advent  (2  Pet.  3  :  12). 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  305 

Evidently,  therefore,  only  a  Christian  can  pray  this  pe- 
tition, because  he  alone  stands  in  this  kingdom,  only  in 
him  can  it  come,  only  he  can  truly  desire  its  coming,  and 
only  he  can  rightly  work  for  its  coming. 


FORTY-NINTH  JLORD'S  DAY. 


THE   THIRD   PETITION. 

Thy  icill  he  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven.