Question  124.  Which  is  the  third  petition  ? 

Ansiver.  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  ; " 
that  is,  grant  that  we  and  all  men  may  renounce  our  own  will,  and 
without  murmuring  obey  Thy  will,  which  is  only  good ;  that  so 
every  one  may  attend  to,  and  perform  the  duties  of  his  station  and 
calling,  as  willingly  and  faithfully  as  the  angels  do  in  heaven. 

1)  Thy  will.  The  will  of  God  is  made  known  to  us  in 
His  law,  which  is  a  perfect  rule  of  right  and  duty.  "  Thy  " 
will  here  stands  opposed  to  our  will,  which  through  sin 
has  been  brought  into  sad  rebellion  against  God.  The 
deepest  element  of  our  sinfulness  is  self-will ;  and  so  the 
very  first  element  of  Christian  discipleship  is  to  deny  self 
and  yield  self  to  God  (Matt.  16  :  2).  Nor  is  this  demand 
arbitrary,  because  His  will  is  the  best  (Isa.  55 :  9),  only 
good,  says  the  Catechism.  Only  as  we  renounce,  give  up, 
our  own  will,  can  we  pray  this  prayer. 

2)  Bs  don3.  This  is  the  positive  act  of  obedience. 
Therefore  we  need  to  study  and  learn  what  the  will  of 
God  is  (Ps.  119 ;  33  ;  Eph.  5  :  17),  and  then  will  in  har- 
mony with  it.     Here  we  beg  light  and  grace  needful  for  a 

true  obedience  in  all  the  relations  of  life.     Hence  only  a 
tDdoGofsidaL 


V»'. 


I     * 


V 


'?  BAT. 


3g  wmr  ^\ 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  307 

pleased  to  provide  us  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  body,  that 
we  may  thereby  acknowledge  Thee  to  be  the  only  fountain  of  all 
good,  and  that  neither  our  care  nor  industry,  nor  even  Thy  gifts, 
can  profit  us  without  Thy  blessing,  and  therefore  that  we  may 
withdraw  our  trust  from  all  creatures,  and  place  it  alone  in  Thee. 

We  now  pass  from  the  first  division  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  to  the  second,  from  the  fullness  of  God  to  the  help- 
lessness of  man.  Before  praying  this  petition,  we  should 
consider  well  whether  we  have  rightly  prayed  the  first 
three ;  because  only  as  we  stand  in  right  relation  to  God, 
to  His  Name,  kingdom  and  will,  can  we  expect  Him  to 
give  us  what  we  ask  for  ourselves. 

Us.  We  pray,  not  each  for  himself,  but  each  for  all, 
not  only  because  all  have  the  same  wants,  but  because  we 
are  brethren  and  love  is  unselfish  (Phil.  2  :  4). 

Bread.  We  here  ask,  in  one  general  word,  for  *^all 
things  necessary  for  the  body."  God  Himself  used  it  to 
express  all  temporal  blessings  (Gen.  3  :  19).  We  ask  not 
greedily  for  riches  or  luxuries,  but  for  bread,  without 
which  we  must  die. 

In  this  word  we  ask  not  only  for  natural  but  also  for 
supernatural  bread.  The  soul  has  hunger  as  well  as  the 
body  ;  and  God  has  food  for  the  higher  as  well  as  the  lower 
nature  (John  6 :  32,  33),  namely  in  the  Christian  Church 
(Ques.  75-79).  As  we  depend  on  God  for  earthly  bread, 
much  more  for  the  heavenly. 

Daily,  according  to  our  daily  need,  with  trust  for  the 
future.  So  God  fed  Elijah  (I  Kg.  17:  6).  So  Agur 
prayed  (Prov.  30 :  8).  This  word  teaches  a  lesson  of 
trust  and  contentment,  but  not  in  the  sense  that  we  must 
not  lay  by  for  the  future,  for  God  Himself  has  taught  us 
difierently  (Gen.  41 :  48  ;  2  Cor.  12:  14). 

Give.     God  does  not  now  feed  us  as  He  fed  the  He- 


308  brews  and  Elijah  (Ex.  16  :  15  ;  1  Kg.  17  :  6),  namelv, 
■svithout  efibrt  oii  our  part,  but  through  the  work  of  our 
hands.  Here  we  ask  God  so  to  bless  our  labor  and  sub- 
stance that  our  bread  may  come.  He  is  "the  only  foun- 
tain of  all  good."  Literally  our  bread  is  from  Him  (Ps. 
l-to:  15,  16;  104:  10-15).  Our  plowing,  sowing  and 
watching  will  ayail  nothing  without  His  rain,  sun  and 
blessing  (^Ps.  127  :  1,  2).  This  prayer,  then,  implies  that 
we  are  working  for  our  bread,  and  also  that  our  work  is 
righteous  and  thus  worthy  of  His  blessino^.  God  will 
bless  neither  idleness  nor  wrong-doing.  This  petition  de- 
mands industry,  honesty  and  economy. 

Only  a  Christian  can  pray  also  this  petition.  How  can 
another  ask  God  eyen  for  earthly  bread,  and  spend  his 
strength  in  sin  ?  How  can  he  ask  God  for  daily  gifts,  who 
does  not  thank  Him  in  daily  godliness  ? 


FTPTT-riHST  liORD'S  DAT. 


THE    FIPTH   PETITION. 

And  forgive  us  our  debts  as  we  forgive  our  debtors.