Question  126.     Which  is  the  fifth  petition? 

Answer.  "And  fokgite  rs  ottr  debts,  as  vte  FORGiyE 
CUE  DKBTOES ; "  tiiat  is,  be  pleased,  for  the  sake  of  Clirist's 
blood,  not  to  impute  to  us,  poor  sinners,  our  transgressions,  nor 
that  depravity  whicli  always  cleaves  to  us ;  even  as  we  feel  this 
evidence  of  thv  grace  in  us,  that  it  is  our  firm  resolution  from  the 
heart  to  forgive  our  neighbor. 

IDelots,  namely,  our  sins.      We  owe  full   obedience  to 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  309 

God's  law.  Every  sin  is  charged  against  us  as  something 
due  to  His  justice.  This  petition,  then,  is  a  confession  of 
sin,  and  implies  a  wi'ong  relation  to  both  God  and  man. 
Before  praying  it  we  should  well  consider  what  these  debts 
are,  how  many  and  how  great.  The  Catechism  in  Ques- 
tion 10,  speaks  of  original  and  actual  sins.  Here  it  gives 
them  a  different  name,  "  depravity  "  and  "  transgressions," 
the  root  and  its  branches. 

Forgive.  Cancel  the  debt,  for  we  are  absolutely  unable 
to  pay  it  by  satisfying  Thy  justice.  "  Our  "  debts  :  our 
own,  and  those  of  others.  We  ask  this,  not  only  in  the 
sweet  spirit  of  Christian  intercession,  but  also  in  justice  to 
them,  since  many  of  their  sins  are  traceable  to~bur  own. 
For  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood.  Indeed  again  and  again  • 
the  Catechism, — over  against  the  Roman  Catholic  doc- 
trine of  justification  by  works,  and  the  rationalistic  notion 
of  pardon  through  God's  abstract  mercy  apart  from 
Christ, — declares  that  our  whole  salvation  depends  upon 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  God  can  forgive  us 
only  in  Him.  The  doctrine  of  forgiveness  was  explained 
at  length  under  Question  56,  which  see.  We  here  pray 
for  grace  to  see,  hate  and  forsake  all  sin,  and  to  walk  in 
newness  of  life.  Who,  then,  but  a  Christian,  can  pray 
tliis  petition? 

As  we  forgive  our  debtors.  What  does  this  mean? 
1)  Not  because  we  forgive  others.  Our  act  cannot  merit 
anything  before  God.  2)  "  As  "  cannot  be  the  measure 
of  our  forgiveness,  for  in  our  weakness  we  forgive  but 
poorly  and  partly,  whereas  God's  forgiveness  is  full  and 
complete.  3)  But  we  make  our  forgiving  others  a  condi- 
tion of  receiving  His  forgiveness.  Not  because,  nor  as, 
but  if.  Forgiveness  is  a  kingly  act ;  and  every  Christian 
shall  exercise  it  toward  men.   We  must  forgive,  because  we 


310  are  forgiven  (Matt.  18  :  23-33).  The  grace  of  Christ  in 
us  is  the  ground  of  our  own  forgiveness ;  and  this  very- 
grace  must  make  us  forgive  others.  So  then  we  can  ex- 
pect God  to  forgive  us,  only  in  case  we  forgive  others,  for 
the  same  grace  is  at  hand  for  both  ends.  Or,  to  put  the 
matter  in  another  light:  God  cannot  forgive  those  who 
hate  Him ;  but  if  we  love  Him,  we  will  love  also  our 
brother  (1  John  4 :  20),  and  love  makes  forgiveness.  "  Thy 
grace  in  us  "  makes  us  able  to  forgive ;  but  even  with  this 
we  need  a  "  firm  resolution,"  showing  how  hard  it  is  for 
frail  man  to  forgive  others.  Notice,  too,  that  our  Saviour 
made  no  comment  in  regard  to  any  of  the  six  petitions 
but  this  one ;  and  in  regard  to  this  He  gave  a  very  solemn 
warning.  See  Matt.  6 :  14,  15. 


FIFTY-SECON^D     LORD'S  DAY. 


THE   SIXTH   PETITION. 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil.