Question  127.   Which  is  the  sixth  petition  ? 

Answer.  "And  IjEAD  us  not  into  temptation,  but  delivee,  us 
FKOM  EVIL  ;"  that  is,  since  we  are  so  weak  in  ourselves  that  we  can- 
not stand  a  moment ;  and  besides  this,  since  our  mortal  enemies,  the 
devil,  the  world,  and  our  own  flesh,  cease  not  to  assault  us,  do  Thou, 
therefore,  preserve  and  strengthen  us  by  the  power  of  Thy  Holy 
Spirit,  that  we  may  not  be  overcome  in  this  spiritual  warfare,  but 
constantly  and  strenuously  may  resist  our  foes,  until  at  last  we  ob- 
tain a  complete  victory. 

Lutheran  Catechisms  divide  this  question,  and  make  a 
seventh ;  but  the  Eeformed  treat  it  as  one,  because,  like 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  311 

the  tenth  Commandment,  its  parts  are  a  unit,  and  do  not 
allow  separation. 

This  petition  is  very  closely  related  to  the  last.  There 
we  beg  God  to  forgive  sin;  here  we  beg  deliverance 
from  it. 

The  answer  of  the  Catechism  has  two  parts :  the  reason 
for  this  petition,  "  since  we  .  .  .to  assault  us ;"  and  the 
meaning  of  the  petition,  "  do  thou  preserve  .  .  .  complete 
victory." 

1)  We  are  so  weak,  namely,  through  indwelling  sin. 
We  are  under  the  power  of  evil.     We  lost   all  spiritual 

strength  in  the  fall.    Besides  this .  •  .  enemies.    Our 

weakness  makes  them  all  the  more  a  terror  to  us.  The 
devil.  He  is  the  head  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  and 
our  chief  enemy.  The  WOrld  is  evil  of  every  kind  outside 
of  us.  The  flesh  is  evil  within  us,  our  bad  nature  (Ques. 
7,  8).  These  enemies  are  mortal? — the  Triglott  says, 
"  deadly."  While  we  are  weak  they  are  strong,  and  their 
whole  work  is  unto  death.  In  baptism  and  in  confirma- 
tion we  renounced  them,  but  yet  we  are  not  rid  of  them. 
They  assault,  or  assail  us,  and  like  wise  warriors,  always 
on  the  weak  side.  This  they  cease  not  to  do.  They  at- 
tack us  not  only  every  hour  of  the  day,  but  also  through 
all  the  days  of  our  life.  Thus  we  stand  in  a  real  conflict 
with  sin  and  Satan,  and  to  fight  is  the  Christian's  kingly 
office  (Ques.  32).  In  this  confession  of  weakness,  we  again 
express  the  fact  and  sense  of  our  sin  and  misery  (Ques. 
3-11). 

2)  Do  thou,  therefore.  This  is  our  outcry  to  God,  who 
alone  can  help  us.  Our  sense  of  need  drives  us  to  Him  ; 
but  also  His  love  draws  us.  By  •  •  •  thy  Holy  Spirit. 
His  office  is  to  make  us  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  His 
benefits.     He  carries  forward  the  work  of  our  salvation. 


312  negatively,  by  deKyering  lis  from  eyil,  and  positiyely  by 
sanctifying  U5. 

Praserve,  This  is  rather  negative,  and  refers  to  the  as- 
saults of  our  three-fold  enemy.  It  meaas  keep  me  from 
their  attacks  and  shield  me  from  their  power.  Strengthen 
is  more  positive,  and  refers  to  the  grace  of  God  in  us, 
whereby  we  are  able  to  resist  their  attacks.  Not  be  over- 
come. This  expresses  our  sense  of  danger.  "  We  wrestle 
not  against  flesh  and  blood "  (Eph.  6  :  12),  not  against 
men,  our  equals,  but  against  a  superhuman  enemv.  B'llt 
resist.  This  we  must  do.  God  cannot  do  everything  for 
us.  The  battle  is  real,  and  it  is  our  own.  In  one  sense,  it 
is  between  Christ  and  Satan ;  in  another  sense,  it  is  be- 
tween Satan  and  every  single  soul.  God  must  give  U3 
grace  or  spiritual  strength,  but  we  must  use  it  in  a  real 
resistance.  CoZlStailtlj,  because  the  enemy  ceases  not  to 
war ;  and  stremiOTlsly,  i-  e. ,  very  earnestly,  because  only 
so  can  we  obtain  a  complete  victory.  But  when  will  this 
be  ?  Not  at  confirmation,  not  at  fifty,  nor  yet  in  old  age. 
The  Catechism  is  careml  to  teach  us  that  the  struggle  be- 
tween grace  and  sin  lasts  our  whole  life  long  (Ques.  32, 
66,  115). 

*'  Ne'er  think  the  victory  won, 
Nor  once  at  ease  sit  down  ; 
Thv  arduou?  work  will  not  be  done, 
Till  thou  hast  got  thv  crown." 

Lead  ns  not  into  temptation,     All  temptation  comes 

from  the  evil  in  which  we  stand,  and  is  only  the  attack  of 
the  enemy  "upon  us.  God  tempts  no  man  (Jas.  1 :  13). 
That  is  the  work  of  the  devil  (Gen.  3:1;  Matt.  4 :  1). 
Every  Christian,  like  Christ,  is  in  the  wilderness,  from  his 
baptism  to  his  death,  and  thus  liable  to  temptations  on 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  313 

every  hand.  In  one  view  temptation  is  a  blessing,  testing 
our  sincerity  and  strengthening  our  Christian  graces  ;  and 
this  is  needful,  not  that  God  may  know  what  is  in  us,  but 
that  we  ourselves  may  see  our  weakness  and  learn  to  lean 
upon  God,  the  source  of  strength.  So  God  makes  even 
the  plans  of  our  enemies  turn  out  to  our  advantage  (Jas. 
1 :  12).  But  as  all  such  conflict  is  painful,  we  here  pray 
God  to  preserve  us  from  these  trials  of  faith  and  patience, 
and  to  give  us  needful  grace  to  stand  firm  against  all 
spiritual  danger.  But  he  that  so  prays  must  also  be 
careful  to  keep  out  of  danger.  God  cannot  keep  him  from 
falling  into  sin  who  willingly  walks  therein. 

But  deliver  us  from  evil.*  Evil  is  a  general  word,  which 
includes  all  that  God  hates  and  that  is  hurtful  to  man, — 
evil  within  us  and  around  us,  and  especially  Satan  as  the 
source  of  all  evil.  In  our  great  helplessness  we  here  pray 
for  deliverance  : 

1)  From  bodily  harm.  "  From  lightning,  tempest  and 
earthquake,  from  plague,  pestilence  and  famine,  from  all 
disasters  by  land  and  by  water,  from  battle  and  murder, 
and  from  sudden  death ;  from  tumult  and  riot,  from  sedi- 
tion and  rebellion, — good  Lord  deliver  us." 

2)  From  soul  harm.  "  From  all  evil  and  harm,  from  the 
power  of  sin  and  the  snares  of  the  devil,  from  Thy  wrath 
and  from  everlasting  damnation,  from  all  blindness  of 
heart,  from  pride,  vain-glory  and  hypocrisy,  fror^  envy, 
hatred  and  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness,  from  all  im- 
pure lusts  and  desires,  from  all  deceits  of  the  world,  the 
flesh  and  the  devil,  from  hardness  of  heart  and  contempt 
of  Thy  word  and  authority, — good  Lord  deliver  us." 

*  Never  try  to  improve  the  Lord's  Prayer  by  saying  "from  all 
evil" — nor  by  making  any  other  changes,  as  is  often  done. 


314  KOrKS  ON  THE 

Wo  hero  pniy  for  do.livoj*:vnco  not  from  this  or  that  ovil, 
but  tVoni  ovil  in  gonoral :  and  this  dolivojunoo  is  not  one 
singlo,  abrupt,  niiraonlous  act  of  Gcxi,  liko  iho  healing  of 
tho  h^poi-^  (,Luko  17  :  14),  but  a  piwoss  of  graoo,  running 
through  our  whole  earthly  lite,  yea  extending  out  oven  to 
tlio  ro^urreetion.  a^  expressed  in  Part  Third  ot'  the  Apos- 
tles' Criwl. 

Aeoordingly  this  petition  is  partly  answered  in  our 
daily  ivcoiviug  tho  craee  ot'  Je^us  Christ,  and  fully  an- 
sworoii  in  tJio  orlory  of  His  Si.XH>nd  Oonuuir. 

Who,  then,  but  a  Christian  oan  pray  this  petition? 
How  can  he  resist  temptation  who  refuses  the  graee  of 
God  ?  How  Oiui  he  be  delivoivd  from  evil  who  willfully 
stands  in  its  deadly  jx>wor  ? 


THE  I^OXOLOOY. 
Sow  12S.  How  dost  thou  conclude  thy  prayer? 
-l>k<?«w.  "  For  TurxE  is  the  ktngi>om,  tiik  power,  A]!n>  the 
G1X)RY,  FOR  EVER ;"  tliat  is,  all  thciie  we  ask  of  Thee,  hci^ui^e  Thou 
art  our  King,  and  Almightv,  art  willing  and  able  to  give  us  all 
good;  and  all  this  wo  pray  for.  that  thorohy  not  wo,  but  Thy  holy 
name,  may  be  gloritied  tor  ever. 

This  is  the  third  diyisioti  of  tho  Lord's  Prayer.  It  is  a 
beautiful  appeal  to  God.  It  is  tho  logio  of  Christian  iaith, 
whieh  doe^  not  stumble  at  any  ratiotialistio  or  metaphy- 
sical ditheultie^  about  how  our  prayers  oan  aifoot  God,  or 
how  Gaxi  can  answer  prayer.  The  doxology  is  tho  tondor 
pleading  of  a  Christian  child  with  tho  good  Father  in 
heayon,  saying,  "  Thou  art  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty 
Grod,  and  willing,  being  a  t^vithful  Father"  (^Quos. 
26\  Thine  is  tiio  kingdom,  of  nature,  gnico  and  glory, 
in  which  to  answer  this  pniyor  ;    aJld  the  pcwsr,  creative 


HEIDELBERG  CATECHISM.  315 

providential  and  redemptive,  with  which  to  do  it;  and 
th©  glory  of  doing  it,  from  me  and  all  Thy  saints.  And 
this  forever,  an  everlasting  kingdom,  power  and  glory. 
This  is  the  voice  of  adoration  and  thanksgiving,  our 
prayer  being  now  turned  to  praise. 

Thus  even  this  doxology  shows  that  he  who  prays  it 
must  be  a  Christian,  because  only  a  son  can  so  plead 
with  the  Father.  How  can  he  who  stands  outside  the 
kingdom,  who  resists  redeeming  power,  and  refuses  to 
glorify  God  in  heart  and  life, — thus  plead  the  kingdom, 
power  and  glory  of  the  Father,  as  the  ground  of  his 
prayer  ? 

AMEN.