Q.  2.  Hovj  many  things  are  necessary  for  thee  to  knoiVy  that  thou, 
enjoying  this  comfort^  ?nayest  live  and  die  hapfiily  ? 

A.  Three  ;  the  first,  how  great  my  sin&  and  miseries  are  :  the 
second,  how  I  mav  be  delivered  from  all  my  sins  and  miseiies :  the 
thiid,  ho>V  I  shall  express  my  gratitude  to  God  for  such  deliverance. 

No  man  will  pursue  any  work  freely,  unless  he  propose  to  him- 
self some  honourable,  pleasant,  or  profitable  end.  The  end  renders 
the  worker  active.  If  this  were  not  so,  the  most  useful  occupations 
would  be  relinquished,  and  a  man  would  become  more  sluggish  than 
the  most  ^tupid  animal.  Who  would  have  any  inclination  to  exer^ 
cise  himself  in  a  fatiguing  employment,  or  to  expose  his  life  to  the 

E 


i  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

inclemency  of  a  boisterous  sea,  or  to  unders^o  the  dangers  of  a  haz- 
ardous war,  or  to  practise  any  art  or  science,  or  to  employ  himself 
in  any  mercantile  business,  if  the  hope  of  honour,  pleasure,  or  profit 
did   not    urge    him  on  ?  Reward   certainly  sweetens  and   excites   to 
labour :  Cod  himself,  willing  that  man  should  work  out  his  salva- 
tion with  fear  and  trembling,  encourageth  him  by  rewards.  "  Your 
work  shall  be  rewarded,"  said  the  prophet  to  Asa,  that  he  might  in- 
cite him  to  proceed   with  the  reformation   which  he  had  begun,  2 
Chron.  xv.  7.  Therefore  salvation  is  likened  to  a  crown,  which  was 
wont  to  be  hung  up  at  the   end  of  the  race,  that  the  runners,  fixing 
their  eyes  upon  it,  might  be  encouraged  to  press  on  for  it  with  the 
greater  eagerness.     Paul  hath  an  eye  to  this  custom,  1  Cor   xi.  24, 
2.:>.  Philip,  iii.  12,  IS,  14.  "Moses  had  respect  unto  the  recompence 
of  the  reward."     And  this  caused  him  to  despise  every  other  con- 
sideration, that  he  might  obtain  it,  Heb.  ix.  24,  25,  2f>     What  is  the 
end  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  of  the  Christian  doctrine  ?  Is  it  not 
to  make  the   sinner  everlastingly   happy  ?  "  The  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  which  is  according  to  godliness,  is  also  in  and  unto  the  hope 
of  eternal  life."  Titus  i.  1,  2.  A  man  must  indeed  prcpose  the  glory 
of  God  to  himself  for  his  chief  end  :  but  the  glory  of  God  dot',  not 
oppose  the  happiness  of  man,  but  is  promoted  by  it :  yea,  the  glory  of 
of  God  is  the  salvation  of  man,  and  the  salvation  of  man  is  God's  glory. 
Therefore  the  apostle  saith  that  "  God  will  recompence  rest  to  those 
who  are  troubled,  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,"  2 
Thess  i   6,  10,  But  in  order  to  succour  the  weakness  of  man,  who  can 
not  form  such  a  perfect  idea  of  the  divine  glory ,*as  of  his  own  welfare, 
and  is  therefore  more  influenced  by  his  own  welfare,  the  Lord  will 
encourage  him  more  by  salvation,  than  by  his  own  glory. 

It  is  therefore  commendable  in  the  teacher  of  the  Christian  doc- 
trine, that  he  sets  before  his  pupil,  first  ot  all,  his  chief  good  and  his 
only  comfort  in  the  first  question,  that  he  may  incite  him  to  a  more 
earnest  inquiry  and  pursuit  after  the  means  to  obtain  that  comfort, 
in  the  second  question  ;  which  are  afterwards  more  fully  explained 
and  enforced  throughout  the  whole  catechism. 
Two  particulars  are  therefore  here  inquired  into  and  explained. 

I.  What  is  the  only  comfort  of  a  Christian  ? 

II.  The  means  by  which  that  comfort  is  to  be  obtained. 

I.  The  instructor  speaks  of  "comfort,"  of  comfort  "in  life  and 
in  death."  of  an  "only"  comfort,  and  particularly  of  "thy"  comfort. 
Comfort  denotes  sometimes  that  cheerful  frame  of  mind,  whereby  a 
person  is  M'ell  disposed  under  any  pressing,  or  apprehended  evil,  ami 
■when  the  evil  is  removed,  is  greatly  rejoiced,  as  we  see  in  Paul,  who 


 

was  "  filled  with  comfort,  and  was  exceedingly  joyful  in  all  his  tribu- 
lation," 2  Cor.  vii.  4.  But  sometimes  the  word  comfort  signifies  any 
good  word  or  work,  whereby  such  an  agreeable  frame  is  produced. 
Ill  this  sense  is  the  word  used,  Zech.  i.  13.  "  And  the  Lord  answer- 
ed tlie  angel  that  talked  with  me,  with  good  words,  and  with  com- 
fortable words."  In  this  last  sense  must  the  word  comfort  be  under- 
stood here,  as  the  instructor  shows  in  the  answer. 

Although  life  is  precious  to  a  man,  ("  skin  for  skin,  and  all  that  a 
man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life :"  this  the  devil  himself  knew, 
Job  i.  4.)  nevertheless  it  is  better  to  die  than  to  live  without  comfort. 
God  hath  created  mm  so,  that  he  c  \n  not  hve  without  refreshment. 
But  he  hath  nothing  in  himself  that  can  comfort  him  ;  he  must  seek 
all,  even  the  least,  out  of  himself;  and  therefore  as  he  is  empty  and 
void  in  himself,  he  pants  and  longs  for  that  which  can  afford  him 
satisfaction,  and  cries  out,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  P"  Psalm 
iv.  7. 

If  WQ  contem-plate  man  as  a  sinner,  we  see  that  innumerable  evils 
compass  him  about.  "  He  is  of  few  days,  and  full  ot  trouble,"  Job 
xiv.  1.  He  hath  forfeited  all  that  would  be  good  for  him,  and  he 
hath  deserved  all  that  is  destructive  to  him.  He  is  too  impotent  and 
too  wicked  to  be  able  or  willing  to  seek  his  restoration.  He  hath 
reason  to  fear  every  moment,  that  the  anger  of  God  will  take  him 
away  by  a  dreadful  death,  and  summ  n  him  betare  his  inexorable 
triounal.  As  a  sinner,  he  is  "  Magormissabib,  a  terrour  round  about, 
a  terrour  to  hims-lf,  and  to  all  his  friends,"  Jer.  xx.  3,  4.  Let  him 
strive  ever  so  much  to  be  cheerful,  and  labour  to  banish  all  fear  out 
of  his  heart,  he  hath  notwithstanding  many  severe  twinges  in  his 
soul,  and  '*  even  in  laughter  his  heart  is  sorrowful,"  Prov.  xiv.  13. 

Is  he  a  believer,  and  therefore  beloved  by  the  Lord,  he  hath  still 
need  of  comfort;  for  "  his  afflictions  are  many,"  Psalm,  xxxi-.  19. 
They  are  brought  to  him  in  "  full  cups,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  10.  All  that 
is  without  him  sets  itself  against  him  :  the  world  is  against  him, 
even  those  of  his  own  household  will  be  his  foes  :  the  devil  is  enrag- 
ed at  him,  and  •'  like  a  roaring  lion,  seeketh  to  devour  him,"  1  Pet. 
V.  8.  The  power  of  his  corruptions  is  a  body  of  death  to  him  :  the 
Lord  his  God  '*  hides  his  countenance,"  sometimes  "  from  him,  deals 
with  him  as  an  enemy,  and  writes  sometimes  bitter  things  against 
him,"  Job  xiii.  24,  26.  And  he  is  often  afraid,  that  his  expectation 
which  he  hath  of  the  life  to  come,  will  forsake  him  in  his  death. 
May  not  the  instructor  then  ask,  v/hat  can  comfort  him  in  his  life  ? 

Ahhough  a  person  could  subsist  without  comfort,  in  his  life,  yet 
he  can  not  be  without  it  in  his  death.  For  that  which  gtill  refresheth^ 


4  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS, 

Z  man  during  his  life,  becomes  a  burthen  to  him  in  his  death  :  pain 
and  anguish  will  then  cause  him  to  lament  bitterly ;  he  beholds  death 
as  a  king  of  terrours  ;  his  long  smothered  sins  and  hushed  conscience 
begin  to  bestir  themselves,  and  fill  the  soul  with  terrour,  and  the 
fear  of  eternal  destruction  causeth  him  to  cry  out  for  ant^uish  of 
heart.  And  how  many  fears  possess  even  believers  on  their  death 
beds  is  known  to  those,  whose  office  it  is  to  visit  the  sick.*  And 
therefore  the  instructor  hath  weighty  reasons  to  inquire  concerning; 
our  comfort  in  death, 

What  shall  quiet  a  person  amidst  sq  many  distresses  ?  It  must  be 
an  only  comfort.  The  heart  of  man  hath  many  and  insatiable  de- 
sires, and  his  evils  are  manifold :  and  therefore  he  hath  need  of 
many  consolations.  There  is  nothing  in  the  v.'orld  that  can  fully 
satisiy  him  :  though  he  should  have  ever  so  much,  there  will  always 
be  something  besides  what  he  hath  already,  after  which  he  will  pant. 
The  round  world  can  not  fill  the  triangular  heart :  there  is  surely 
nothing  of  all  that  he  seeth,  that  can  support  and  quiet  him  against 
the  fear  of  death  and  God's  insupportable  wrath.  Therefore  he  must' 
endeavour  to  obtain  an  only  comfort,  which  alone  is  sufficient  for  the 
mind  under  every  affliction,  and  at  all  times,  and  which  Avill  thus  be 
*'  a  strong  consolation,"  Heb.  vi.  18.  This  is  called  but  "  one  thing" 
by  David  and  (Christ,  Psalm  xxvii.  4.  Luke  x.  41,  42. 

The  instructor  doth  not  choose  to  fight  at  random^  and  merely 
to  beat  the  air,  but  he  asks  with  application  to  the  man  himself,  what 
is  ''  tny  "  only  comfort  ?  and  he  asks  the  believer  in  particular  this 
question,  that  he  may  learn  of  him,  for  the  information  of  others, 
what  is  the  true  comfort ;  the  believer  knows  it  best :  "  Evil  men 
understand  not  judgment  ;  but  they  that  seek  the  Lord  understand 
all  things,"  Prov.  xxviii.  5.  We  must  nottherefoie  ask  simply  with 
the  captious  Papists  and  Remonstrants,  what  is  the  only  comfort, 
or  what  is  the  only  comfort  of  a  believer  ;  for  every  man  must  be- 
lieve for  himself:  ''the  righteous  must  live  by  his  faith,"  Hab.  ii. 
4.  Lvery  man  must  be  examined  with  respect  to  what  he  himself 
believes,  and  whether  "  he  is  faithful  to  the  Lord,"  Acts  xvi.  15.  Of 
what  profit  is  it  to  know  what  the  comfort  of  others  is,  if  we  our- 
selves do  not  partake  of  it  ? 

What  account  doth  the  believer  now  give  of  this  comfort  of  his  ? 
doth  he  say  with  the  men  of  this  world,   and  with  the  old  philoso- 

*  The  author  hath  respect  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  Church  in  Holland,  of 
appointing  a  certain  person  in  the  congregation  a  stated  visitor  of  the  sick, 
whose  business  it  is  to  instruct,  admonish  and  comfort  the  sick,  as  their  ca£S 
TVay  require- 


I.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q   l,  2.  5 

phers,  "  who  becam  evain  in  their  imaginations,  and  whose  foolish 
hearts  were  darkened,  and  who,  professing  themselves  to  be  wise, 
became  fools,"  Rom.  i.  21,22.  that  I  possess  great  riches,  that  I 
take  my  fill  of  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  that  I  am  laden  with  hon» 
ours,  that  I  harden  myself  against  adverse  occurrences,  or  that  I  de- 
light myself  with  contemplating  the  mysteries  of  nature  ?  No ;  all 
this  is  loo  low  for  such  an  elevated  mind  :  he  knows  that  the  least 
blast  of  adversity  can  dissipate  such  idle  consolations.  He  hath  a 
higher  revelation,  accompanied  with  a  heart  ravishing  experience, 
which  teacheth  him  that  his  "  only  comfort  in  life  and  deaih  is,  that 
he  is  with  body  and  soul,  not  his  own,  but  belongs  to  his  faithful 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 

"  To  be  ones  own  with  body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and  death,"  is 
the  condition  of  one,  who  is  not  subject  to,  nor  a  slave  of  another  ; 
but  who  is  his  owa  lord  and  master,  as  the  Jews  pretended  that  they 
were,  when  they  said  to  our  Saviour,  John  viii.  33.  "  We  are  Abra- 
ham's seed,  and  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man :  how  say  est 
thou  then,  Ye  shall  be  made  free  \"  Man  was,  in  consequence  of  his 
creation,  the  property  of  God,  and  was  his  servant ;  but  by  means 
of  sin  he  hath  broken  the  yoke  and  bui*sten  the  bonds ;  he  hath  apos- 
tatized from  God  to  himself,  and  hath  tlius  set  himself  free  from  his 
Maker,  and  is  become  a  servant  to  himself ;  he  is  a  man  of  Belial, 
without  yoke,  "sliding  back,  as  a  backsliding  heifer,"  Hosea  iv.  16. 
Therefore  his  heart  and  actions  proclaim,  if  he  do  not  say  it  with 
his  mouth,  "  Our  lips  are  our  own  ;  who  is  lord  over  us  ?"  Psalm 
xii.  4.  "  He  strengthens  himself  against  the  Almighty,"  and  speaks 
proudly  with  the  Jews,  Jer.  ii.  31.  "  We  are  lords,  we  will  not  come 
unto  thee."  He  aims  at  and  pursues  also  solely  that  which  is  his 
own,  and  not  that  which  is  the  Lord's,  Philip,  ii.  21..  "  His  belly  is 
his  God,"  Philip,  iii.  19.  Yea,  he  is  so  proud,  and  so  pufTed  up  with 
a  conceit  of  himself,  that  he  admires  none  so  much  as  himself,  and 
with  the  prince  of  Tyre,  "  he  sets  his  heart  as  God's  heart."  Ezek. 
xxviii.  1,  6. 

But  though  this  freedom,  that  a  person  is  his  own,  may  appear 
exceedingly  pleasant  and  agreeable  to  the  sinner,  it  doth  not  ne^  er- 
theless  contain  a  sufficient  consolation.  For  he  hath  nothing  in  and 
.of  himself,  that  can  afford  him  satisfaction.  He  cannot  expect  it 
neither  of  God,  against  whom  he  hath  rebelled.  He  is  obnoxious 
also  to  the  most  grievous  judgment  of  God,  of  being  abandoned  to 
himself,  to  every  abomination,  and  to  every  distress,  with  the  Israe.- 
ites  and  with  the  Gentiles,  Psalm  Ixxxi.  11,  12.  Rom  i.  26,  27,  28. 
There  is  not  a  more  arrant  slave  than  he,  who  belongs  to  himsef. 


6  THi:  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

for  he  13  "a  servant  of  sin."  John  viii.  3,  4,  Rom.  vi*  20,  "a  child 
of  the  devil,"  John  viii,  44,  and  "a  captive  in  his  snare  at  his  will,'* 
2  Tim.  li.  26.  Filled  with  self  love,  he  doth  not  perceive  this,  but 
slights  and  disregards  it ;  yet  in  the  hour  of  his  death,  he  will  expe- 
rience it  to  his  terrour,  and  with  the  rich  man  he  will  not  obtain 
even  •'  a  drop  of   water  to  cool  his  scorching  tongue,"  Luke  xvi.  24. 

The  true  Christian  conducts  therefore  more  prudently^  inasmuch 
as  he  seeks  his  comfmt  "  in  belonghig  to  Chri*t  Jesus,  his  faithful 
Saviour,  with  body  and  soul,  both  in  life  and  death,"  like  an  entire 
servant  and  bondman,  who  is  not  his  own,  but  belongs  wholly  to  his 
master.  "  He  that  is  called,  being  free,  is  Chrir.t's  ser\^nt,"  saith 
Paul,  1  Cor.  vii.  22.  Jesus  claims  him  for  **  his  inheritance  aiKl 
passession,"  Psalm  ii.  8.  He  is  "the  peculiar  treasure"  of  the  Lord 
above  other  men,  Exod.  xix.  5,  his  segullah^  "  property,"  which  word, 
is  also  translated  "  the  peculiar  treasure  of  kings,'^  Eccl-  ii.  8.  Bond- 
servants were  in  ancient  times  deemed  a  person's  riches,  see  Gen» 
xxiv.  35.  Thus  also  the  Christian  is  the  riches,  "the  portion  and- 
the  lot  of  the  inheritance"  of  Christ.  Deut.  xxxii.  9.  and  that  net  in. 
part,  but  entirely  "  Vv'ith  body  and  soul,  with  which  he  must  glorify 
God,"  because  "  he  is  not  his  own,  but  bought  with  a  price,"  1  Cor* 
vi  19,  20.  Yea,  he  belongs  to  Christ  forever,  both  in  life  and  death, 
as  the  apostle  also  teacheth  in  the  text.  His  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
his  faithful  Saviour, ''  a  God  of  perfect  salvation,  and  to  whom  be- 
long the  issues  from  death,"  Psalm  Ixviii,  20. 

As  this  is  truly  an  excellent  condition,  of  which  glorious  things 
are  spoken,  therefore  our  catechism  explains  it  at  large  in  lour  par- 
ticulars, showing,  first,  how  a  believer  is  made  the  property  of  Christ, 
secondly,  how  he  is  preserved  as  his  property,  thirdly,  how  assured, 
and  fourthly,  sanctified, 

1.  The  believing  Christian  was  God's  property  formerly,  but  by 
sin  he  v.'ithdrew  himself  in  a  treacherous  manner  from  God  ;  and 
rendered  himself  his  own  property  ;  but  by  grace  he  is  become  the 
property  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  faithful  Saviour :  for  the  Father,  who 
had  chosen  him  for  himself,  gave  him  to  his  Son  in  the  eternal  cove- 
nant of  redemption  :  '*  They  were  thine,  and  thou  gavest  them  me,"^ 
saith  the  Saviour  to  his  Eatber,  John  xvii.  6.  The  Son  also  owns 
and  claims  the  elect  sinner  as  his  by  a  marriage  covenant,  Ezek.  xvi. 
8.  Hosea  ii.  18,  1 9.  Whereby,  being  "brought  under  the  bond 
of  the  covenant,  he  joins  himself  to  him  to  be  his  servant,"  Isaiah 
Ivi.  6,  and  "  says  and  subscribes  with  his  hand,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
Isaiah  xliv.  5.  But  to  abide  with  the  instructor  by  the  expression 
of  belonging  to  a  p^Tbon,  we  must  say  that  the  believer  belongs  to 


I.  LORD'S  DAY,Q.  1,2.  f 

Christ  by  virtue  of  a  purchase.  Ainoni^  Abranam's  servants,  who 
belonged  to  him,  tiiere  were  those  aho,  whom  he  had  ''  bought  with 
money,"  Gen.  xvii.  12.  Therefore  the  believer  sahh,  that  '^  his  faith- 
ful Saviour  hatli  perfectly  satisfied  with  his  precious  blood  for  all  his 
sins."  He  had  rendered  himself  guilty  before  God  by  his  sins,  and 
was  therefore,  as  God's  prisoner,  kept  and  shut  up  under  the  law, 
that  he  mi;^ht,  when  the  Jud^e  saw  fit,  be  led  forth  to  punishment, 
and  satisfy  for  his  guilt ;  but  the  Saviour  his  surety  took  his  guilt 
upon  him,  and  satistied  for  it  by  his  suffering  and  obedience,  that  he 
might  claim  the  elect  sinner  for  himself,  according  to  the  prophecy, 
Isaiah  lid.  iO*  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin, 
he  shall  see  his  seed."  Therefore  his  satisfaction  is  also  considered 
as  ••'  the  ransom  "  and  price  of  redemption,  Matt.  xx.  28.  1  Tim.  ii. 
6.  Whereby  the  elect  sinner  is  also  delivered  from  his  guilt :  "  In 
"Whom  we  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of 
sins,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  i.  7.  For  he  paid,  not  the  half,  or  a  part,  but 
the  whole  price  for  all  the  sins  of  his  people  :  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  bon  of  God,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sins,"  1  John  i.  7.  "  For 
by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified," 
Heb.  X.  14.  Which  blood,  or  bloody  suffering  is  "precious,"  accor- 
ding  to  the  declaration  of  the  catechism  from  1  Peter  i.  18,  19. 
For  the  Person,  his  suffering,  the  deliverance  from  evil,  and  the  pur- 
chase of  good  by  his  blood,  manifest  that  it  is  exceedingly  precious. 
Therefore  he,  for  whom  the  Son  of  God  paid  the  price  of  redemp- 
tion, doth  properly  belong  to  his  Redeemer.  «  He  hath  purchased 
his  church  with  his  own  blood,"  Acts  xx  28.  and  he  hath  "  bought 
her  with  a  price,"  1  Cor   vi.  19,  20, 

Moreover,  the  believer  is  Christ's  property  by  conquest.  It  was 
a  custom  in  ancient  times,  as  it  is  still  among^  many  nations,  to  re- 
duce conquered  enemies  to  servitude.  The  faithful  Saviour  delivers 
the  elect  sinner  from  the  power  of  the  devil,  who  held  him  "  a  cap- 
tive in  his  snare  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  20.  The  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  subjects  the  sinner,  as  a  capital  offender,  to  the  power 
of  the  devil :  *^  The  devil  had  the  power  of  death,"  Heb.  ii.  14.  And 
therefore  the  devil,  according  to  the  opinion  of  some  expositors,  is 
called  "  a  lawful  possessor,  whose  captives  should  be  taken  away 
from  him  and  escape,"  Isaiah  xlix.  24,  25.  Inasmuch  now  as  the 
faithful  Saviour  hath  paid  the  full  price  of  redemption,  the  devil 
ought  to  release  and  discharge  the  sinner ;  but  the  tyrant  refuseth : 
therefore  the  Saviour  employs  strength  and  power,  in  order  to  wrest 
his  purchased  property  by  his  Spirit  from  him  through  an  effectual 
calling  and  conversion :  "  He  binds  tiie  strong  man.   and  spoils  his 


«  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

goods,"  Mark  iii.  27.  The  sinner  himstlf  resists,  he  delights  in  his 
cruel  bondage  :  "  he  will  not  come  to  Jesus,  that  he  may  have  life 
everlasting,"  John  V.  40.  But  this  great  and  mighty  Hero  "  girds 
his  sword  on  his  thigh,  and  he  makes  his  arrows  sharp,  so  that  peo^ 
pie  fall  under  him,"  Psalm  xliv.  3,  4,  5.  For  this  "  he  ascended  on 
high,  and  led  captivity  captive  :  he  received  gifts  for  men  ;  yea,  for 
the  rebeilious  also  that  he  might  dwell  among  them,"  Psalm  Ixvili. 
A8.  And  thus  he  appropriates  to  himself  those  whom  he  hath  de- 
livered :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  he 
that  formed  thee,  O  Israel,  fear  not :  for  I  have  redeemed  thee,  I 
have  called  thee  by  thy  name,  thou  art  mine,"  Isaiah  xliii.  1. 

2.  If  the  person  who  is  delivered  were  left  to  his  own  care,  he 
would  soon,  (yea,  sooner  than  Aidam  before  the  fall)  be  over-master- 
ed by  the  devil,  who  seeks  continually  to  wrest  him  from  his  Lord  : 
but  his  '^  faithful  Lord  establishes  and  keeps  him  from  the  evil  one," 
2  Thess.  iii.  3.  "  He  is  kept  by  the  po^Yer  of  God  through  faith 
unto  salvation,"  I  Peter  1,5.  "Having  loved  his  ov/n,  he  loveth 
them  unto  the  end,"  John  xiii.  1."  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his 
people,  neither  will  he  forsake  his  inheritance,"  Psalm  xliv.  14.  He 
could  not  shed  his  precious  blood  in  vain.  Yea,  "  he  preserves  him 
so,  that  without  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father,  not  a  hair  can  fall 
from  his  head,"  according  to  his  promise.  Matt.  x.  30.  Luke  xxi.  18. 
How  then  should  he  suffer  the  body  and  soul  of  him  whom  he  hath 
purchased,  delivered  and  owns,  to  be  subject  to  the  power  of  his 
principal  enemy,  the  devil  ? 

The  believer^  oppressed  by  many  afflictions,  vt-ith  mdeed  some- 
times with  Gideon,  "  If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  then  hath  all  this 
evil  befallen  us?"  Judges  vi-  13.  But  he  considers  not  that «' all 
things  must  work  together  for  good  to  him,"  according  to  the  apostle, 
Rom.  viii.  28.  For  his  adversities  are  only  "  chastisements  for  his 
profit,  that  he  may  be  a  partaker  of  God's  holiness,"  Heb.  xii.  lOo 
ITea,  God  preserves  him  by  this  discipHne,  "  that  his  soul  may  not 
depart  from  him,  and  that  he  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  world,'* 
Jer.  vi.  8.  I  Cor.  xi.  32  It  is  true,  sin  is  the  most  grievous  of  all 
evils,  to  the  people  of  God,  and  causeth  them  to  fear  that  they  will 
one  day  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  infernal  Saul :  but  their  wise  and 
faithful  Saviour  knows  how  to  direct  sin  contrary  to  its  nature,  for 
the  good  of  the  believer,  in  order  that  he  may  humble  his  soul  by 
it,  render  him  more  earnest,  watchful  and  dependent  upon  him  ; 
that  his  v/onderful  wisdom,  faithfulness,  unchangeable  love  and  pow^ 
er  may  be  glorified  the  more,  in  the  admirable  way,  in  which  he 


^ 

leads  those  who  belong  to  him  to  glory.     See  this  in  Peter,  Matt. 
kxvi.  31,  S5,  Jolmxxi.  IS.  2  Cor.  xii   7,  8,  9,  lOi 

3.  But  this  doth  not  afford  him  a  sufficient  consolation,  nor  quiet 
him  fully,  unless  he  be  also  assured  of  it.     "  Therefore  his  laithful 
Saviour  assures  him  by  his  Holy  Spirit  of  eternal  life."     Since  he 
is  become  the  property  of  Jesus,  who  delivers  and  preserves  him, 
he  may  also  expect  an  everlasting  and  happy  life :  and  that  not,  as 
an  uncertainty  ;  for  he  is  assured  of  it  by  the   Holy  Ghost,  whom 
Jesus  gives  him  to  be  a  "  comforter  "  to  him,  John  xiv,  16,  26.  xv. 
26.  and  an  "  earnest   and  seal  of  his  inheritance,"  2  Cor.  i.  20,  21, 
22,  33.  Eph.  i.  13,  14.  iv.   30.     And  thus,  like  the  servants  of  old, 
he  is  marked  with  his  Lord's  seal,  to  assure  him  that  he  is  his  pro- 
perty, and  that  he  will  be  "  kept  to  everlasting  life."     See  Rev.  viii^ 
3,  8.     And  how  doth  he  attain  to  this  assurance  ?  Is  he  permitted 
to  look  into  the  book  of  life  ?  or  doth  he  hear  a  voice  from  heaven  ? 
or  doth  he  obtain  it  by  an  imagination  of  his  own  spirit  ?  No,  but 
by  a  secret  persuasion  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  according  to  his  word, 
(a)  Sometimes  the  Holy  Spirit  enables  him  to  form  a  believing  syl- 
logysm,  by  which  he  sets  before  him  from  the  word,  the  true  marks 
of  those  who  belong  to  Christ.     For  ''  we  know  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren,"  1  John  iii.  4.    He 
convinceth  him  of  this  truth  :  "  For  the  Spirit  bears  witness,  that  the 
Spirit"  (who  speaks  in  the  word)  "  is  the  truth,"  1  John  v.  6.  He 
enlightens  the  soul,  '*  that  she  may  know  the  things  that  are  freely- 
given  her  of  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.    12.     And  he  teaches  the  believer  to 
conclude,  and  "  bears  vritness   with   his   spirit  that  he  is  a  child  of 
God."  (b)  Sometimes  the  Spirit  gives  him,  upon  the  outgoings  of 
his  soul  to  the  Lord  for  reconciliation  and   ^race,  an  undisturbed 
peace  and  tranquility  of  mind,  by  which  the  former  fear  and  pertur- 
bation of  the  soul  is  hushed.  "  He  speaks  peace  to  his  people  and  to 
his  saints."  Psalm  Ixxxv.  8.  (c)  Sometimes  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks 
comfortably  to  his  people,   and  saith,  "  I  am  thy  salvation,"  Psalm 
XXXV.  5.  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  Mark  ii.  5.  "I  know  thee  by 
name,  and  thou  hast  also  found  grace  in  my  sight."     Exod.  xxxiii« 
13.     This  ravishes  the  soul  with  a  wonderful  joy,  and  is  accompani- 
ed with   so  much  secret  light  and  power,  that  she  doubts  not  that  it 
is  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  suggests  it  to  her,  and  so  the 
Spirit  causcth  the  believer  to  feel  the  beginnings  of  eternal  joy  in 
his  heart,  "  embracing  his  soul  in  love,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17,  and  "  shed- 
ding the  love  of  God  abroad  in  his  h«art,"  by  which  he  is  then  most 
powerfully  assured,  that  his  '*  hope  will  not  make  him  ashamed;^" 
Rom.  V.  5. 

F 


10  THE  ONLY' COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS, 

•  4.  May  a  believer  live  them  as  he  lists  ?  We  say,  he  may,  for  he 
will  live  holy.  Jesus  his  faithful  Saviour  "makes  him  "  by  his  Spirit 
"  sincerelywilhng  and  ready  to  live  henceforth"  not  to  himself,  but 
*'  unto  him."  To  live  unto  Jesus  is  to  surrender  oneself  to  him,  as 
his  property,  and  to  deny  oneself,  in  order  to  live  only  to  the  service 
of  Jesus,  and  according;  to  his  will.  See  this  in  the  text,  and  Titus 
ii.  14  The  believer  is  willing  and  ready  to  live  such  a  life  ;  for  he 
is  one  of  that  '•  most  willing  people,"  Psalm  ex.  3,  He  hath  "  a  will- 
ing mind,"  1  Cor.  viii.  12.  "  He  makes  haste,  and  doth  not  delay 
to  keep  God's  commandments,"  Psalm  cxix.  60.  And  he  "follows 
after  perfection,"  Philip,  iii.  12,  13,  14.  For  "the  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  him,"  2  Cor.  v#  14,  15.  But  he  attains  not  to  this  by  his 
own  spirit  but  by  the  "  Spirit  of  his  Lord,  whom  he  puts  into  the 
midst  of  nim,  and  who  causes  him  to  walk  in  his  statutes,  and  keep 
his  judgments,  and  do  them,"  Ezek.  xxxvi,  27. 

Who  can  doubt  now  that  the  only  comfort  of  a  sinner  in  life  and 
death  is,  that  he  belongs  with  body  and  soul  both  in  life  and  death 
to  Christ,  For 

1.  Is  he  the  Lord's,  the  Lord  is  then  also  his,  and  that  entirely, 
and  in  whatsoever  he  is,  hath  and  doth.  "Blessed  is  the  nation, 
whose  God  is  the  Lord ;  and  the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen  for 
his  own  inheritance,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiii  12.  "  The  portioia 
of  Jacob  is  not  like  them  :  for  he  is  the  former  of  all  things,  and 
Israel  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance  ;  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name," 
Ter.  X.  1 6.  Esau  may  say,  "  I  have  much  ;"  but  Jacob  can  say,  "  I 
have  all,"  Gen.  xxxiii.  9,  11.  Inasmuch  as  the  believer  belongs  to 
Cnrist,  therefore  whatever  exists,  belongs  to  the  believer,  I  Cor.  iii. 
21,  23,   23. 

2.  There  is  nothing  that  deprives  bf'lievers  of  their  comfort  so 
much  as  their  guilt,  and  the  power  of  the  devil.  But  Jesus  Christ 
hath  fully  satisfied  for  all  their  sins,  and  "  hath  delivered  them  from 
all  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  from  the  fear  of  death  by  his  death," 
Heb  ii.  M,  15.  Thus  "  Joshua  the  high-priest  was  comforted,  when 
he  stood  with  filthy  garments  and  Satan  at  his  right  hand  to  resist 
him,  before  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  For  the  Lord  said  unto  Satan, 
the  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  Satan  even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen 
Jerusalem  rebuke  thee :  and  to  Joshua  he  said.  Behold  I  have  caus- 
ed thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe  thee  with 
change  of  raiment,"  Zech.  iii.  1,  5. 

3.  The  fear  of  evil  to  come  cannot  deprive  a  Christian  of  his  com- 
fort, since  his  faithful  Saviour  watches  over  him,  and  preserves  him 
so  carefully,  tiiat  without  the  will  of  his  Heavenly  Father  not  a  hair 


U 

can  fall  from  his  head.  "  He  keeps  him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye,  and 
hides  him  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings,"  Psalm  xvii.  8.  "  He  is  a 
wall  of  fire  round  about  him,  and  he  that  toucheth  him  toucheth  the 
apple  of  his  eye,"  Zech.  ii.  5.  8.  Doth  any  evil  befall  him,  through  the 
wise  ordination  of  his  Saviour,  it  may  afford  him  consolation,  that  it 
will  work  together  for  his  good,  and  he  may,  "  glory  in  tribulations, 
knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience  ;  and  patience  experience; 
and  experience  hope."  Rom.  v   S,  4. 

4.  "  If  in  this  life  only  he  had  hope  in  Christ,  he  would  of  all  men 
be  the  most  miserable,"  as  Paul  speaks,  I  Cor.  xv.  19.  But  it  can 
afford  him  a  full  consolation,  that  he  hath  an  expectation  of  an  ever- 
lasting life,  founded  not  upon  an  uncertainty,  but  upon  the  plainest 
and  most  certifying  grounds  ;  for  God  gives  him  his  word,  his  Spirit, 
his  covenant  seals,  yea,  his'*  oath,  to  show  the  inimutabihty  of  his 
counsel,  that  he  may  by  these  immutable  things,  in  which  it  is  im- 
possible that  God  should  he,    have  strong  consolation,"   Heb.    xi. 

ir,  IB. 

5.  There  is  nothing  that  disturbs  his  comfort  more  than  the  natu- 
ral sluggishness  and  backwardness  of  his  heart  to  live  entirely  to 
him  only :  but  his  Lord  undertakes  to  render  him  willing  and  ready 
to  this,  "  to  run  without  being  weary  and  faint ;  for  he  giveth  power 
to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  strength,"  Isaiah  xl.  29,  30. 
"  He  enlargeth  his  heart,  that  he  may  run  the  way  of  his  command- 
ments," Psalm  cxix.  32,  and  "rejoice  in  the  way  of  God's  testimo- 
nies, as  much  as  in  all  riches,"  vs    14. 

We  may  not  doubt  that  believers  under  the  old  testament  did  also 
belong  to  their  faithful  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  both  in  life  and  death. 
They  were  also  on  this  account  "  comforted  on  every  side,  and  glori- 
ed therein,"  Psalm  Ixxi.  21.  cvi.  4,  5.  cxix.  i7^  94.  Jer.  x.  16, 
They  were  confident  that  he  had,  as  their  surety,  taken  their  sins 
upon  him,  and  would  certainly  satisfy  for  them,  and  that  they  were 
therefore  already  delivered  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil,  carefully 
preserved,  and  assured,  and  sanctified  by  his  Spirit.  And  therefore 
we  cannot  believe  that  God  did  still  demand  satisfaction  of  them 
for  their  guih,  and  that  they  were  still  under  the  law,  under  wrath, 
the  curse,  under  bondage  to  fear,  and  under  the  fear  of  death.  The 
surety  had  not  indeed  paid  fully  for  their  sins,  but  they  were,  notwith- 
standing fully  forgiven,  on  account  of  the  future  satisfaction  of  the 
surety,  of  whom  alone  the  Father  demanded  it.  The  Spirit  of  conso- 
lation was  not  indeed  poured  out  in  such  an  abundant  measure  as 
under  the  New  Testament  j  but  more  and  less  alters  not  the  nature  of 
thin^-s. 


12  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

II.  But  how  shall  a  sinner,  who  is  still  his  own,  obtain  this  comfort, 
and  how  shall  he  preserve  it,  after  he  hath  obtained  it  ?  "  It  is  neces- 
sary that  he  should  know  three  things,  First,  how  great  his  sins  and 
misery  are."  This  he  is  taught  in  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  Lord's  ^ 

day.     He  knows  this,  not   by  a  bare  literal  understanding  of  it,  and  V 

by  being  able  to  give  a  proper  account  of  it  to  others,  but  by  seeing 
and  feeling  the  g^reatness  of  his  sins  and  misery  in  himself  with  pain 
and  concern,  and  having  an  earnest  desire  to  be  delivered  from  his 
sins  and  misery,  like  Kphraim,  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.,  and  David,  Psalm 
li.  3,  4,  5.  and  like  the  Corinthians,  2  Cor.  vii.  9,  10,  II. 

*'  Secondly,  He  must  know  how  he  may  be  delivered  from  all  his 
bins  and  mise-'y."  The  instructor  showeth  the  manner  in  which  the 
sinnei  is  delivered,  from  the  fifth  to  the  thirty-second  Lord's  day. 
We  know  this  deliverance  by  faith,  whereby,  understanding  the  suf- 
ficiency and  willingness  of  the  Deliverer,  through  the  Spirit,  with 
persuasion  of  mind,  we  flee  to  him,  choose  him,  embrace  him,*and  own 
him  upon  his  invitation  and  call.  And  so  this  knowledge  is  faith. 
*'  By  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous  servmt  justify  many,"  saith 
the  Fither,  Isaiah  lii,   2 

Finally,  "  he  must  know  how  he  shall  express  his  gratitude  to  God 
for  such  deliverance,"  whereby,  from  a  view  of  his  unworthiness, 
and  the  greatness  of  this  benefit,  he  doth  with  joy,  and  surrendering 
himself  to  the  Lord,  to  serve  him,  glorify,  and  praise  him  with  his 
heart,  his  mouth,  and  whole  conversation.  See  this  in  David,  Psalm 
ciii,  civ.  Of  this  doctrine  of  c;ratitude  the  catechism  treats  from  the 
thirty-second  to  the  last  Lord's  day. 

That  these  three  things  are  necessary,  in  order  to  live  and  die 
happily  in  this  comfort,  appears  (a)  Because  no  man  is  capable  of  this 
comfort,  unless  he  be  heartily  sorry  for  his  sins  and  misery.  For 
*' blessed  are  they  that  mourn  :  for  they  shall  be  comforted,"  Matt.  v. 
4,  (b)  But  though  a  person  be  ever  so  sorry  for  his  sins  and  misery, 
he  cannot  and  will  not  obtain  deliverance,  but  will  with  Cain  and  Ju- 
das fall  into  despair,  unless  he  have  a  knowledge  of  the  deliverance, 
(c)  Doth  he  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  deliverance,  and  is  he  not 
thankful  for  it,  his  soul  will  still  not  enjoy,  or  be  refreshed  with  com- 
fort. It  is  in  proportion  to  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  the  comfort 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  multiplied,"  Acts  ix.  31. 

The  Christian  doctrine  is  therefore  very  properly  comprehended 
in  these  three  particulars,  as  especially  calculated  to  obtain  the  only 
comfort.  The  compilers  of  the  catechism  were  induced  to  adopt  this 
iiiethod  by  the  example  of  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans.  For 
that  highly  enlightened  man  speaks  there  first  of  the  misery  of  the 


 

sinner,  from  chapter  i.  18,  to  chap.  iii.  21.  At  which  place  he  begins 
the  doctrine  of  the  deliverance,  which  he  concludes  with  chap.  xi.  36. 
And  to  this  he  annexes  the  doctrine  of  gratitude,  in  the  five  last 
chapters.  In  this  excellent  way  doth  the  Lord  God  also  conduct  the 
sinner  to  the  only  comfort;  We  see  it  in  the  Jailer,  Acts  xvi.  19, 
34.  And  believers  will  improve  these  three  particulars  every  day 
after  their  repeated  discomforting  backslidings,  as  we  see  in  the  ex- 
amples of  David  and  Paul,  Psalm  xxxii,  and  li.  Rom.  vii.  24,  25. 

APPLICATION. 

See  nov/,  hearers,  the  truth  of  the  doctrme  of  our  Reformed  Church* 
Surely  that  doctrine  is  true,  and  according  to  the  word  of  God,  which 
proposes  a  perfect  and  steadfast  consolation  to  the  sinner  in  all  his 
afflictions  by  proper  means.  For  to  this  end  was  the  whole  word  of 
God  written,  as  Paul  testifieth,  Rom.  xv.  4.  "  Whatsoever  things 
were  written  afore  time  were  v/ritten  for  our  learning  ;  that  we, 
through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures,  might  have  hope." 
Who  can  now  suspect  our  doctrine  of  falsehood,  and  who  may  be 
compared  to  us,  when  we  discover  the  most  proper  method  to  obtain 
a  sufficient  comfort,  to  the  glory  of  God's  free  grace."  Verily  neither 
the  Papists,  nor  the  Socinians,  nor  the  Remonstrants,  nor  any  who 
favour  them.  The  vain-glorious,  free,  and  indifferent  will  of  the  sin- 
ner is  their  only  aim,  and  only  comfort,  to  which  they  accommodate 
every  doctrine  of  the  Christian  religion.  For  on  account  of  this  indif- 
ferent v/ill,  they  will  deny  either  the  reality  or  the  perfection  of  the 
Saviour's  satisfaction.  They  do  not  know  how  to  reconcile  an  effec" 
tual  deliverance  from  the  power  of  the  devil  to  the  freedom  of  the 
will,  nor  yet  the  particular  care  and  regard  of  the  Lord,  to  his  peo- 
ple, nor  his  wonderful  direction  of  evil  to  the  good  of  those  whom 
he  owns  for  his.  That  believers  should  have  an  assurance  of  eternal 
life,  and  should  be  made  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  an  effectual  manner 
willing  and  ready  to  live  to  their  Lord,  these  men  will  not  believe, 
because  this  would  be  a  forcing  of  the  will.  Rather  than  this  idol 
should  be  cast  down  from  its  throne,  they  will  reject  all  these  com* 
fortable  doctrines,  and  seek  their  comfort  in  being  their  own  by  this 
free  will.  The  true  Christian  is  therefore  more  considerate,  since  he 
places  his  supreme  good  and  comfort  in  being  deUvered  from  him* 
self,  and  in  belonging  entirely  and  for  ever  to  his  Lord. 

But,  hearers,  is  this  also  your  only  comfort  ?  I  ask  not  what  ought 
to  be  your  comfort,  or  wherein  it  consists,  but  what  is  your  comfort, 
and  what  is  your  chief  and  only  solace  and  satisfaction?  Truly  the 
most  of  you  neither  have  nor  seek  comfort  in  belonging  to  Christ.  For 


U  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

1.  Ye  seek  your  satisfaction  in  being  esteemed  and  beloved  by 
men,  in  getting  and  handling  many  goods,  elegant  houses,  delightful 
gardens,  beautiful  clothes,  precious  jewels,  and  delicious  meats  and 
drinks  captivate  you  so,  that  ye  indulge  yourselves  in  them  without 
restraint,  and  do,  as  it  were,  lose  yourselves  in  them. 

2.  Ye  certainly  aim  at  being  entirely  your  own  in  all  that  ye  do. 
What  is  it  that  influences  you  in  all  that  ye  do  and  forbear  ?  is  it  not 
merely  your  own  honuur,  profit  and  pleasure  ?  do  ye  not  live  entirely 
according  to  your  own  fancy  ?  Is  not  your  will  your  law  ?  can  ye 
endure  to  serve  God  so  strictly,  as  not  to  will,  do,  or  forbear  aught, 
but  what  he  will  ?  Ye  will  not  suffer  any  one  to  reprove  you  ;  that 
he  may  not  interrupt  you  in  your  dissolute  career  :  and  doth  your 
conscience  convince  and  check  you,  ye  siiHe  ity  and  will  not  indeed 
suffer  yourselves  to  be  disquieted. 

3.  It  is  surely  iniquity  in  which  ye  rejoice.  Through  the  vanity 
of  your  minds  ye  amuse  yourselves  with  idle  speculations:  ye  can 
ponder  with  delight  on  abominable  and  malicious  sins,  which  your 
corrupt  hearts  continually  suggest :  musing  on  wine,  revenge,  las- 
civiousness,  iniquity,  jesting  and  foolish  talking  is  as  agreeable  to 
you,  as  if  it  were  your  salvation  :  "  Ye  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  deiight 
in  the  frowarduess  of  the  wicked,"  Prov.  ii.  14. 

Alas  friends  I  is  this  your  comfort,  ye  are  then  yet  your  own,  and 
are  therefore,  "  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope  and 
without  God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  What  evidence  have  ye 
then  that  your  sins  do  not  stand  uncancelled  in  God's  book  of  ac- 
counts ?  ye  are  surely  yet  under  the  power  of  the  devil :  and  what 
will  preserve  you  from  destruction  ?  God  will  not,  for  he  is  not  your 
God,  since  ye  are  rebellioufi  against  him :  Satan  will  not,  for  he  seeks 
your  eternal  misery  :  neither  will  those  things  in  which  ye  delight : 
for  "even  in  your  laughter  your  hearts  will  be  sorrowful,"  Prov  xiv. 
13,  Though  your  hearts  rejoice,  and  ye  ai'e  not  afraid,  these  things 
v/ill  forsake  you  in  death  :  and  how  will  your  conscience,  which  ye 
have  soothed  so  long,  and  all  your  evil  iniquities  then  fly  in  your  face, 
and  summon  you  before  the  dreadful  tribunal  of  God,  to  which  death 
will  hurry  you,  that  ye  may  receive  tiie  reward  of  your  works  in  the 
comfortless  lake  of  fire,  where,  with  the  rich  man,  ye  will  not  obtain 
a  d/op  of  water  from  a  poor  L.izai  as  to  cool  your  tongues. 

%et  this  uifect  you  ^viih  concern,  that  ye  may  "  recover  out  of  the 
snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  ye  are  taken  captive  at  his  will,"  2  Tim. 
ii.  26.  Cor.ne  with  the  prodigal  son  to  yourselves,  that  ye  may  learn 
the  greatness  of  your  shis   and  misery,  and   may  "  repent  of  your 


 

wickedness,  saying,  what  have  I  done  ?"  Jer.  viii.  6.  for  this  would 
drive  you  out  of  yourselves,  to  seek  and  to  find  deliverance  in  the 
Son  of  God. 

Doth  any  one  say.  it  is  my  comfort,  that  I  belong  tp  Jesus  Christ  ? 
But  hast  thou  sufficient  evidences  of  this  ?  for  a  person  may  think 
that  he  is  in  this  happy  condition,  and  deceive  himself  with  vain  im- 
aginations. A  man  may  also  suppose  that  he  is  his  own,  when  he 
truly  belongs  to  Christ :  "  There  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet 
hath  nothing  :  and  there  is  that  maketh  himself  poor,  and  yet  hath 
great  riches,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings,  Prov.  xiii.  7.  It  is  therefore 
necessary,  that  every  one  should  examine  himself,  with  respect  to  this 
important  matter,  seriously  and  strictly.  "  Examine  yourselves 
whether  ye  be  in  the  faith,  prove  yourselves,"  as  Paul  admonisheth, 
2  Cor.  xiii.  6.  and  attend  to  these  true  evidences,  that  a  person  be- 
longs to  Christ. 

1.  He  who  is  not  his  own,  but  belongs  to  Christ  Jesus,  hath  sur- 
rendered himself  entirely  to  him  and  that  for  ever,  and  willingly,  in 
order  that  he  may  be  his :  ''  He  saith  and  subscribes  with  his  hand, 
I  am  the  Lord's,"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  and  that  not  only  to  be  saved  by  him, 

but  also  to  serve  him.  For  "  he  joins  himself  to  the  Lord  to  serve 
him,  and  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  be  his  servant,"  Isaiah 
Ivi   6. 

2.  Such  a  person  will  not  rest,  nor  receive  comfort,  until  he  bath 
manifest  evidences  that  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  accepted  of  him  as  his 
property,  satisfied  for  all  his  sins,  and  delivered  him  from  all  the 
power  of  the  devil.  He  must  be  clearly  and  effectually  assured  by 
the  Spirit  of  eternal  life  from  his  own  experience,  before  he  will  re- 
joice in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,  Rom.  v.  5.  A  single  mark,  a 
single  gleam  of  hope  is  not  sufficient  for  him,  he  wishes  that,  "  God 
would  say  to  his  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation,"  Psalm  xxxv.  3.  He  knows 
how  many  deceive  themselves  in  this  weighty  matter,  he  knows  the 
deceitfulness  of  his  own  heart,  and  how  dangerous  deceit  is  here: 
and  therefore  he  seeks  for  palpable,  and  as  it  were  sensible  evidences. 

3.  This  person  hath  as  great  a  delight  in  living  willingly  to  the 
Lord,  as  in  sensible  comfort :  «  It  is  joy  to  the  just  to  do  judg- 
ment," saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxi.  15.  Therefore  he  sighs  and  cries 
to  the  Lord,  "  O  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes! 
Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments,  for  therein  do  I 
deUght,"  Psalm  cxix.  5,  25,  Doth  he  perceive  that  he  is  sluggish 
and  heartless,  and  that  iniquities  prevail  over  him,  it  is  to  him,  as  it 
was  to  the  apostle,  Rom.  vii.  24.  "  a  body  of  death." 

4.  Such  an  one  hath  not  attained  to  this  comfort  like  others  by  a 


16         thpl  only  comfort  of  believers. 

strong  imagination,  or  by  his  birth  among  Christians,  or  by  a  civil 
and  externally  religious  behaviour,  or  by  enjoying  the  church  privi- 
leges of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  M^ith  which  those  who  are 
Christians  only  for  fashion  sake  content  themselves  ;  but  by  an  af- 
fecting discovery  of  the  greatness  of  his  sins  and  misery  ;  by  an 
earnest  seeking  and  wrestling  to  obtain  Christ,  and  his  righteousness, 
and  by  striving  to  lead  a  thankful  lite.  This  is  his  manner  at  the  be- 
ginning of  his  conversion,  and  this  is  also  his  daily  work  ;  and  he  ob- 
tains hereupon  comfort  of  God  repeatedly. 

Are  these  things  to  be  found  in  you,  be  assured  then  of  your  great 
salvation,  and  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  it. 

1.  By  heartily  praising  and  exalting  the  Lord  on  account  of  it  in 
all  your  conversation  :  For  "  ye  are  not  your  own,  but  are  bought 
with  a  price  :  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit, 
which  are  God's,"  1  Cor.  vi.  18,  19.  ''  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord, 
for  he  i^  good  :  for  his  mercy  cndureth  for  ever.  Let  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  say  so,  whom  he  hath  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  the 
vnemy-"  Psalm  cvii,  1,  2.  Contemplate  a  while  your  salvation,  en- 
deavour to  understand  the  excellence  of  it,  until  you  are  filled  with 
comfort,  and  transported  to  praise  the  Lord.  When  the  soul  is  satis- 
fied with  marrow  and  fatness,  the  mouth  will  utter  praises  with  joy- 
ful lips.  Psalm  Ixiii-  5. 

2.  Are  ye  not  your  owh,  but  Christ's,  deny  then  also  yourselves. 
Ye  must  be  nothing,  and  he  must  be  your  all,  ye  must  be  servants^ 
and  he  your  Lord.  Ye  must  empty  yourselves  of  your  own  wisdom, 
wdl,  honour,  profit  and  pleasure,  that  his  wisdom  will,  honour,  profit 
and  pleasure  may  possess  and  govern  your  souls  :  yea,  ye  must 
esteem  shame,  loss  and  pain,  if  he  should  inflict  them  upon  you,  for 
his  sake,  your  honour,  profit  and  pleasure.  He  saith,  "  If  any  man 
will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  take  up  his  cross,  and 
follow  me,"  Matt.  xvi.  24.  He  even  requires,  Luke  xiv.  26,  that  the 
person  who  will  be  his  disciple,  should  h?.te  father,  mother,  wife, 
v.hildrcn,  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea  his  own  life  also,"  to  wit,  when 
any  of  these  beloved  objects  comes  in  competition  with  him. 

3.  "  Moreover,  brethren,  be  joyful,  be  of  good  comfort,"  as  Paul 
aJmonisheth,  2  Cor.  xiii.  11.  This  will  be  the  life  of  your  life  :" 
lie  not  sorry,  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength,"  Neh.  vjiio 
i  1.  Ye  have  abundant  reason  :  see  only  what  your  faithful  Saviour 
hath  done  for  you,  and  will  yet  do.  Will  ye  suffer  your  heads  to 
hang  down  as  a  bulrush  ?  it  doth  not  become  you  :  ye  will  bring 
up  an  evil  repoit  upon  your  faithful  Saviour.  Let  those  who  are  still 
under  the  power  of  t!^e  devil,  sorrow,  naonni  ?nd  weep  ;    but  as  for 


l,  2.  17 

you,  lift  up  your  heads,  and  let  not  "  the  consolations  of  God  be 
small  with  you,"  Job  xv,  11.  But  take  good  heed  also  that  your 
consolation  do  not  issue  in  vain  dissoluteness,  that  it  may  not  be  im- 
bittered  to  you,  but  "rejoice  with  trembling,"  Psalm  ii.  11. 

4.  Are  your  adversities  many,  are  there  fightings  without,  and 
fears  within,  are  ye  afraid  that  ye  will  one  time  or  other  be  destroyed 
by  the  power  of  your  indwelling  corruption,  by  the  mighty  pressure 
of  the  wicked  world,  and  by  the  powerful  temptations  of  the  devil, 
know  that  your  faithful  Saviour  will  deliver  you  out  of  all  these  dan- 
gers. Psalm  xxxiv,  19.  His  tender  care  over  you  is  so  great,  and 
he  preser^'cs  so,  that  not  a  hair  can  fall  from  your  heads,  without 
the  will  of  your  Heavenly  Father :  "  He  gives  his  sheep  eteraal  life, 
they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand : 
his  Father,  who  gave  them  him,  is  greater  than  all,  and  none  is  able 
to  pluck  them  out  of  his  Father's  hand,"  John  x.  28,  29.  It  is  true, 
your  difficulties  beset  you  a  long  time ;  yet  be  not  discouraged  on 
this  account,  as  though  the  l^ord  did  not  regard  you,  nor  your  sor- 
rows, like  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  10,  14.  and  the  church,  Isaiah  xl. 
27.  For  adversities  are  not  evidences  that  the  Lord  hates  you ; 
«  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,"  and  he  will  cause  all 
this  evil  to  work  for  your  good,  therefore  be  patient  and  submit  to 
him,  as  Paul  speaks,  Heb.  xii.  6,  12.  and  resign  yourselves  to  his 
care  with  a  holy  carelessness  :  "  Commit  your  way  unto  the  Lord  : 
trust  also  m  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass,"  Psalm  xxxvii.  5.  1 
Peter  iv.  19.  v.  7, 

5.  EstabUsh  your  assurance  upon  the  witnessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  his  word,  and  in  your  hearts  ;  for  ye  will  otherwise,  with  all  your 
advantages,  labour  in  vain  for  comfort :  "  Give  all  diligence  to  make 
your  calling  and  election  sure,"  2  Peter  i.  10.  Are  ye  shaken,  ex- 
amine yourselves,  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Can  ye  deny  the  marks  that  have 
been  exhibited  ?  hath  not  God  at  sundry  times  assured  you  in  the 
clearest  and  most  powerful  manner  by  his  Spirit,  yea  so,  that  ye 
thought  ye  could  never  doubt  again,  that  ye  were  the  Lord's  ?  \K  ell 
then,  judge  that  it  is  even  so,  Rom.  vi.  11.2  Cor.  v.  15. 

6.  Shew  yourselves  also  willing  and  ready  to  live  henceforth  to 
him.  Ye  are  not  your  own  lords,  but  he  is  your  Lord,  and  ye  belong 
to  him,  that  ye  may  be  only  for  his  service.  Let  none  of  you  then 
live  to  himself,  but  to  him,  to  whom  he  belongs.  ^>ee  the  text,  and 
2  Cor.  V.  15.  But  shew  yourselves  to  be  his  by  an  earnest  and  fer- 
vent zeal  to  do  his  will,  and  to  serve  him.  "  For  he  gave  himself 
for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto 
himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  U,  Are 

G 


18  THE  ONLY  COMFORT  OF  BELIEVERS. 

ye  in  the  mean  time  overtaken  in  a  fault,  and  thereby  subjected  tor 
darkness,  know  then  also  this  part  of  your  misery,  huml3le  your- 
selves on  account  of  it,  embrace  your  Deliverer  for  reconciliation 
and  sanctification  :  for  '»  he  is  made  this  to  you,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  and 
arise  with  Hezekiah  again,  Isaiah  xxxviii.  15.  "  to  go  softly  all  your 
days,  on  account  of  the  bitterness  of  your  soul." 

7.  Doth  it  please  the  Lo»'d  to  lead  you  a  long  time  in  an  uncom- 
fortable way,  do  not  dispute  the  propriety  of  his  conduct ;  "  God  is 
greater  than  man.  Wherefore  shouldst  thou  then  strive  with  him  ? 
foi  he  giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters,"  Job  xxxiii.  12,  13. 
Let  it  suffice  you,  that  the  Son  of  God  hath  done  so  much,  and  will 
do  so  much  to  make  you  his  own.  Remember  that  he  hath  his  eye 
upon  you  to  comfort  you  as  much  as  is  needful  for  you,  in  his  own 
time.  Hear  how  he  himself  speaks,  Isaiah  Ivii.  18.  "  I  have  seen  his 
ways,  and  will  heal  him  ;  I  will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforts 
to  him,  and  to  his  mourners."  When  others  shall  have  no  more  com- 
fort, then  shall  ye  enjoy  your  full  share  of  it ;  for  as  Paul  foretells, 
I  Thess.  iv.  17,  18.  "  We  shall  be  taken  up  in  the  clouds  to  meet 
the  Lord  in  the  air  ;  and  so  we  shall  ever  be  with  the  Lord.  Where- 
fore comfort  one  another  with  these  words."  Amen. 


(   19  ) 
THE 

KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

OUT  OF  THE  LAW. 
II  LORD'S  DAY. 

Rom.  iii.  20.     By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin*