Q.  3.    Whence  knoweH  thou  thy  misery  ? 

A.  Out  of  the  law  of  God. 

Q,  4.    fVhat  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  ? 

A.  Christ  teaches  us  that  briefly,  Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40.  «  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul, 
with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength.  This  is  the  first  and 
the  great  command,  and  the  second  is  like  to  this.  Thou  sValt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  On  these  two  commands  hang  the  whole 
law  and  the  prophets." 

Q.  5.  Canst  thou  keefi  all  these  things  perfectly  ? 

A.  In  no  wise ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  my 
neighbour. 


B 


LESSED  are  they  that  moum :  for  they  shall  be  comforted,"  saith 
the  Consolation  of  Israel,  Matt.  v.  4.  Altliough  the  sinner  is  so  ex- 
ceedingly miserable,  he  will  not  mourn :  mourning  would  indeed 
disturb  his  sinful  joy.  Doth  his  conscience  reprove  him  at  times,  he 
stifles  it,  and  blesses  himself  in  his  heart,  saying  that  he  shall  have 
peace,  although  he  walks  in  the  imagination  of  his  heart.  But  hi& 
comfort  is  vain,  and  will  forsake  him,  when  death  seizeth  on  him- 
True  and  godl>  comfort  belongs  to  none  but  those  who  mourn  for 
their  misi^ry  :  for  they  only  are  capable  of  comfort :  "  The  Messiah 
was  sent  to  comfort  those  only  who  mourn,"  Isaiah  Ixi.  2.  There- 
fore the  Lord  requires  first  and  chiefly  of  his  people,  that  they  should 
acknowledge  their  iniquity,  in  order  that  he  may  restrain  his  anger 
which  is  kindled  against  them,  and  favour  them  with  his  loving  kind- 
ness, Jer.  iii.  11,13.    It  is  the  first  work  of  the  Comforter,  the  Hdy 


20  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

Ghost,  when  he  is  about  to  dispose  the  sinner  for  comfort,  to  "  con- 
vince him  of  his  sins."  The  men  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  the  jailer, 
and  Paul,  did  not  obtain  comfort,  before  they  knew  their  misery,  and 
cried  out  with  concern,  "  What  shall  we  do?"  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 
xvi.  30. 

Our  instructor  proceeds  also  in  this  manner,  in  order  to  comfort 
the  sinner.  He  had  set  before  his  pupil  the  only  comfort  in  all  its 
lustre,  in  the  first  question.  The  pupil,  eager  to  obtain  this  comfort, 
asks  his  teacher,  what  he  must  know,  and  therefore  do,  that  he  may 
live  and  die  happily  in  this  comfort.  Hereupon  he  is  taught  that 
he  must  know,  first,  how  great  his  sins  and  miseries  are,  in  the  second 
question.  But  inasmuch  as  the  sinner  cannot  learn  his  sins  and 
misery  of  himself,  therefore  he  inquires,  1.  Whence  he  shall  learn 
his  misery  in  the  third  and  fourth  question,  2.  Wherein  it  consists, 
from  the  fifth  to  the  eleventh  question. 
In  this  Lord's  day  we  are  taught, 

I.  In  general  that  we  know  our  misery  out  of  the  law,  in  the  third 
question. 

II.  And  it  is  then  explained  in  particular,  how  we  are  convinced 
out  of  the  law  of  our  misery,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  questions. 

I.  Truly  the  angels,  who  apostatized  from  God,  are  also  exceed- 
ingly miserable  :  their  sins  have  made  them  devils,  and  subjected 
them  to  eternal  damnation.  For  "  God  spared  not  tl  e  angels  who 
sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains 
of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Jude  vs. 
6.  "  Everlasting  fire  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt. 
XXV.  41.  "  The  whole  creation  also  is  become  subject  to  vanity,  and 
to  the  bondage  of  corruption  :  it  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  until 
now,"  Rom.  viii.  20,  21,  22.  But  the  instructor  speaks  not  of  the 
misery  of  the  angels,  nor  of  the  misery  of  the  whole  creation,  but 
only  of  man's  misery  :  because  we  have  the  greatest  concern  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  own  misery,  and  we  are  thereby  led  to  seek  for 
deliverance :  but  there  is  no  hope  of  deliverance  for  the  angels : 
"  For  verily  the  Saviour  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but 
he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Heb.  ii.  16.  Is  the  whole 
creation  miserable,  it  is  on  account  of,  and  to  aggravate  the  misery 
of  man,  which  he  ought  to  know. 

That  man  is  miserable,  and  that  his  misery  consists  in  sin,  in 
punishment,  and  in  an  inability  lo  deliver  himself,  this  the  instructor 
will  show  in  the  sequel,  out  of  the  law.  He  teaches  us  now  only 
how  we  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  our  misery  by  the  law.  There  is 
none  so  near  to  a  man,  as  the  man  himself :  "  The  spirit  of  man 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.      21 

which  is  in  him,  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,"  saith  the  apostle,  1 
Cor.  ii.  11.     And  yet  we  must  shew  him  his  misery,  which  cleaveth 
to  him,  and  the  means,  whereby  he  may  attain  to  the  knowledge  of 
it-     This  appears  strange  ;  but  his  misery  is  natural  to  him,  and  he 
is  so  accustomed  to  it,  that  he  doth  not  consider  it  as  misery  :  he 
thinks  that  it  ought  to  be  with  him  as  it  is.     But  sin  hath  so  bewil- 
dered him  :  he  is,  as  it  were,  through  the  bewitching  power  of  ini- 
quity, beside  himself,  and  bereaved  of  his  reason,  and  he  busies  him- 
self only  with  things,  which  do  not  concern  him.  If  he  shall  be  healed, 
he  must,  with  "  the  prodigal  son,  come  to  himself,"  Luke   xv.  17, 
and  like  "  Ephraim,  become  acquainted  v/ith  himself,"  Jer.  xxxi.  19. 
But  what  shall  discover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him  ?  The  law  of 
God  is  the  best  mean  ;  *'  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  saith 
the  text.     We  read  of  a  ceremonial  Jaw,  by  which  God  prescribed 
to  Israel  the  manner  of  the  external   worship.     Paul  calls  it,  "  the 
law  of  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,"  Eph.  ii.  15.     God 
gave  also  a  civil  law,  by  which  the  civil   state  of  Israel  was  to  be 
regulated.     Of  this  law  Nichodemus  spoke,  when  he  said,  John  vii. 
51.     "  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  know 
•what  he  doth  ?"  The  word  of  God   speaks  also  of  a  moral  law,  ex- 
pressed in  ten  commandments.     Israel  could  learn  their  misery  in 
some  measure  from  the  ceremonial  law,  because  all  the  blood-shed- 
dings  and  washings,  which  were  enjoined   on  them,  showed  them 
their  capital  uncleanness,  and  that  they  could  not  look  for  salvation, 
except  through  the  perfect  sacrifice  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come, 
as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  x.  1,  10.     The  civil  law  discovered  also  after 
a  certain  manner  the  sins  of  Israel  :  for  when  the  judges  punished 
the  outward  abominations  of  the  people,  often  with  great  severity, 
the  people  of  the  Lord  might  conclude  thence,  with  the  greatest  pro- 
priety, that  he,  who  was  a  righteous,  all-knowing,  and  almighty  judge, 
would  much  more,  and  with  much  greater  severity,  mark  and  punish 
sins,  yea,  even  those  of  the  soul.    But  the  moral  law  is  much  better 
calculated  to  convince  the  sinner  of  his  misery.     The  law  of  cere- 
monies, and  the  civil  law  were  given  to  Israel  only,  and  determined 
merely  the  outward  worship,  and  the  outward  righteousness  among 
men  :  but  the  moral  law  w*s  given,  not  to  Israel  only,  but  to  all  the 
posterity  of  x^dam  :  "  it  proves  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  be  all  un- 
der sin  ;  it  stops  every  mouth,    and  declares  the  whole  world  to  be 
g'M\y  before  God,"  Rom.  lii.  9,  19.  and  it  discovers  the  inmost  and 
rnoRi  hidden  corruption  and  sinful  lusting  of  the  heart:  "  I  had  not 
known   lust  to  be  sin,"  saith  Paul,  "  if  the  law  had  not  said,  Thou 
ahalt  net   co^t,"  Rom.  vii.  T.    Of  this  law  the  text  also  speaks,  as 


n  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

appears  from  what  the  apostle  had  said  before,  that  he  had  "proved 
according  to  this  law  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  all  under 
sin,"  and  particularly  that  they  were  guilty  of  the  sins,  which  are 
condemned  in  this  law,  and  were  therefore  "  all  guilty  before  God," 
vrs.  9,  19.  And  to  this  law  the  instructor  also  hath  respect  here,  as 
he  shows  from  the  demand  of  the  law  in  the  fourth  question. 

II.  But  how  shall  we  be  convinced  of  our  misery  out  of  the  law? 
We  must  in  the  first  place  know  what  God  requires  in  his  law,  and 
then  compare  ourselves  therewith.  The  instructor  asks,  with  respect 
to  the  first  particular,  "  What  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  ?" 
and  he  answers,  that ''  Christ  teacheth  us  that  briefly.  Matt.  xxii.  37, 
38,  39,  40  "  where  the  Saviour  reduces  the  v/hole  sum  of  the  law 
to  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  so  to  two  commandments, 
or  tables,  according  lo  Deut.  vi.  5,  and  Lev.  xix.  18.  The  first  table^ 
or  first  commandment  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God," 
who  is  the  self  existent,  and  the  only  existing  God,  and  who  promis- 
ed himself  as  such  by  his  covenant  to  his  people,  and  is  therefore 
worthy  to  be  loved.  "  To  love  him"  is  to  have  a  high  esteem  of  him  ; 
to  desire  him,  in  order  to  be  most  intimately  united  to  him  and  to 
enjoy  him,  to  be  satisfied  and  rejoice  in  hiuj,  and  to  conduct  in  all 
things  according  to  his  mind.  1  may  not  expatiate  here  :  see  only 
Song  V.  8  — 16.  vii.  6.  John  xiv.  21,  23.  We  must  love  God  "  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mmd,"  and  according  to 
Luke  X.  27,  "  with  all  our  strength,"  and  so,  "  with  all  our  mijjht," 
Deut.  vi.  S.  These  several  words  betoken  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul;  if  we  will  distinguish  them,  the  heart  v/ill  then  denote  the  in- 
most desire  and  inclination  oi  the  mind  ;  the  soul  will  be  the  will ; 
the  mind  expresseth  the  apprehension,  judgment,  and  all  the  thoughts ; 
emd  the  strength  and  might  represent  in  what  manner  the  soul  and 
body  should  contribute  all  that  they  have,  and  exert  themselves  to 
love  God  :  and  thus  the  Saviour  would  show  by  this  accumulation  of 
words,  that  we  ought  to  love  God  perfectly,  and  without  any  defect. 
For  it  will  soon  appear,  that  the  perfect  demand  of  the  covenant  of 
works  is  exhibited  in  this  passage  ;  yea,  in  whatever  condition  man 
may  be,  he  is,  and  remains  obligated  by  nature  to  love  God  perfectly, 
on  account  of  his  loveliness  :  and  if  there  be  any  defect  in  his  love, 
h€  sins,  and  must  humble  himself,  and  seek  reconciliation.  To  love- 
God  thus  is  "the  first  commandment,"  because  it  is  commanded 
before  the  love  of  o\u'  neighbour,  and  because  love  to  God  is  ..'jie 
source,  from  which  love  to  our  neighbour  must  flow  :  "  Belov  (j, " 
saith  the  disciple,  wiiom  Jesus  loved,  "  let  us  love  one  another  .  for 
love  is  of  God,"  1  John  iv.  7,     This  is  also  the  first  copimap<Jment, 


OUT  OF  TflE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  3,  4,  5, 
because  the  second  commandment  of  loving  our  neighbour  must  yield 
to  this ;  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men,"  Acts  v.  29, 
This  was  nobly  exemplified  by  Levi,  Exod.  xxxii.  27,  28.  Deut. 
xxxiii.  9.  See  also  Matt.  x.  37.  This  first  is  also  "  the  great  com- 
mandment." The  second  commandment  is  also  called  great.  Mark 
xii.  31.  and  therefore  great  must  denote  in  Matthew  the  greatest :  God 
is  indeed  the  greatest  and  most  worthy  object,  whom  we  must  love 
with  the  greatest  and  the  strongest  affection,  with  the  whole  heart, 
&c.  as  he  is  worthy.  But  we  must  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 
Our  neighbour  is  here  not  only  our  kinsman  and  friend,  but  even 
our  enemy  :  the  Egyptians,  the  enemies  of  the  Israelites  were  also 
their  neighbours,  Exod  xi.  2.  The  Samaritans,  who  were  enemies 
of  the  Jews,  were  their  neiejhbours,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Jesus, 
Luke  x.  29 — 37.  "  We  must  indeed  love  enemies,"  Matt  v.  44, 
For  that  which  constitutes  one  man  a  neighbour  of  another  is,  that 
"  God  hath  made  all  the  nations  of  men  of  one  blood,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
and  because  one  man  is  the  brother  and  "  flesh  "  of  another,  Isaiah 
Ivii.  7.  since  we  have  all  proceeded  from  one  father  and  mother, 
Adam  and  Eve.  Therefore  we  must  love  our  neighbour,  and  so  es- 
teem him  highly,  as  the  most  glorious  creature  of  God  on  earth,  and 
as  our  brother  :  we  must  cleave  to  him  with  a  tender  affection,  and 
do  well  to  him.  But  must  I  "  love  him  with  my  whole  heart,  soul," 
&c.  as  I  must  love  God  ?  No,  but  as  myself.  The  love  which  a  man 
beareth  to  himself  is  the  pattern,  but  not  the  rule  of  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  the  law  of  God  alone  is  the  rule  ;  yea,  a  man  may  not  even 
propose  himself  in  all  things,  as  a  pattern  of  his  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  for  he  loves  himself  with  such  a  sottish  self-love,  that  "  he  sets 
his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  2.  All  that  he  should  do 
for  God's  sake,  he  doth  for  his  own  sake  :  he  may  not  love  his  neigh- 
bour so  :  but  as  he  ought  to  love  himself  sincerely,  heartily,  nnd 
steadfastly  in  God,  and  for  God's  sake,  so  he  ought  to  love  his 
neighbour  also  in  this  manner,  and  therefore  perfectly.  For  it  is 
the  nature  of  a  man  to  love  himself  perfectly  ;  for  '•  no  man  ever  yet 
hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,"  Eph.  v.  29o 
But  although  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  perfectly,  it  must  never- 
theless be  with  a  certain  distinction  :  one  is  nearer  to  me  than 
another.  We  ought  to  love  the  godly  more  than  others  :  *'  we  must 
do  good  to  all  men,  but  especially  to  them  who  are  of  the  household 
of  faith,"  Gal.  vi.  10.  "  This  second  commandment  is  like  the  first," 
because  it  proceeds  from  the  same  Lawgiver,  and  commands  one 
and  the  same  act  of  love,  although  toward  different  objects,  and  love 
to  our  neighbour  always  accompanies  love  to  God.     "  If  any  man 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

say,  I  love  God»  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar ;  for  he  who 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God 
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  And  this  commandment  have  we  from 
him,  that  he  who  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also,"  1  John  iv.  20, 
21.  These  two  commandments  are  exceedingly  weighty  ;  for  "on 
them  hang'  the  whole  law  and  the  prophets."  The  law  and  the 
prophets  denote  here  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  Luke  xvi. 
29.  xxiv.  27.  And  all  these  scriptures  urge  men  to  love.  For  all 
the  histories,  commandments,  doctrines,  and  prophecies  that  have 
been  written,  serve  to  excite  man  to  love  God  and  his  neighbour. 
For  "  the  end  of  the  commandments  is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart, 
and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned,  1  Tim.  i.  5. 

If  this  law  of  love  shall  conduct  the  sinner  to  a  knowledge  of  his 
misery,  he  must  then  know  that  it  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant 
of  grace,  as  a  rule  of  gratitude.     Paul  views  it  thus,   Rom.  xii.  and 
xiii.  and  the  instructor,  in  the  doctrine  of  gratitude.     This  law  hath 
a  respect  also  to  the  covenant  of  vv'orks,  as  the  condition  of  it,  which 
God  demanded  of  man,  with  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of 
death.     In  this  manner  is  the  law  exhibited  in  the  text,  as  appears 
from  the  connexion  :  and  it  is  thus  also  proposed  by  the  instructor 
in  our  present  Lord's  day,  in  order  to  convince  and  humble  the  sin- 
ner.    It  is  necessary  to  explain  here  in  some  measure  the  covenant 
of  works    Tlie  good,  holy,  and  righteous  Creator,  and  Supreme  Ruler 
established  this  covenant  before  the  fall  with  Adam,  who  was  holy 
and  able    to  fulfil  the  condition  of  it,  and  it  was  established  in  him, 
as  the  head,  with  the  whole  human  race.    The  Lord  demanded  that 
Adam  should  obey  him  perfectly,  and  thus  love  God  and  his  neigh- 
bour.   This  demand  was  co  natural  to  him  and  all  his  posterity  with 
the  image  of  God  ;  which  appears  from  the  remains  of  this  law  in 
the  heathens,  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.     It  is  true,  we  read  only  of"  the  cov- 
enant of  eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  Gen.  ii. 
17.  but  this  can  be  considered  only  as  a  probationary  command, 
whereby  Adam  was  to  be  proved  for  some  time,  whether  he  would 
continue  good,  or  become  evil,  and    whether  he  would  love  God 
more  than  the  creature,   or  the  creature  more  than  God  ;  as  the 
Saviour  commanded  that  presumptuous  young  man  "  to  sell  all  his 
goods,  and  give  to  the  poor,"  that  he  might  prove  him,  whether  he 
had,  as  he  pretended,  truly  "  kept  the  whole  law  from  his  youth  up," 
Matt.  xix.  17,  22.     This  demand  God  enforced  with  the  promise  of 
life,  that  he  might  encourage   Adam  to  observe  it  perfectly  :  "For 
Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man 
who  doth  those  things  shall  live  by  them,"  as  Paul  explains  it,  Rom. 


feUT  OF  THE  liAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.         25 

X.  5.     Which  hfe  was  sealed  to  him  by  the  tree  of  life.     By  this 
life  we  must  understand  not  only  corporal  and  spiritual,  but  ako  eter- 
nal life  :  and  that  not  only  in  Paradise,  but  also  in  heaven  itself,  into 
which  he  should  be  admitted  after    he  time  of  his  probation.     For 
whatever  the  elect  sinner  obtains  by  Christ,  he  lost  in  Adam,  and 
therefore  also  everlasting  life  in   heaven.     This  is  shown  with  the 
utmost  evidence  by  the  apostle,  Rom.  v.  12,  19.  viii.  3,  4.     God  en- 
forced his  commi^ind  also  with  a  threatening,  that  "  he  should  surely 
die,"  if  he  transgressed.     See  Gen.  ii.  If.  By  which  we  must  neces- 
sarily understand  corporal,  spiritual  and  eternal  death  ;   ^vhich  threat- 
ening is  otherwise  called  the  curse  :  "  For   it  is  written,  cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  Arritten  m  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10.     Neither  our  time  nor  method  will 
permit  us  to  enter  largely  upon  this  subject,  in  order  to  prove  the 
reality  of  this  covenant.     We  say  briefly,  that  the  constituent  parts 
of  the  covenant,   to   wit,  the   covenanting   parties,   the  condition, 
promise,  threatening,  and  the  seal  of  the  covenant,  or  the  tree  of 
life,,  occur  in   many  passages  of  scripture,  particularly  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Certainly  Hosea  vi.  7,  compared  with  Job  xxxi.  3S,  supposeth  that 
Adam  stood  in  a  covenant  relation  with  God.     Paul  teacheth  Rom» 
yii.  1,  2,  3.  that  the  sinner  ib  bound  to  the  law,  as  the  woman  is  to 
her  husband  by  a  marriage  covenant.     All  the  parts  of  the  covenant 
of  works  are  opposed  to  all  the  parts  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  as 
"  Adam  and  Christ,"  Rom.  v.  1  Cor.  xv.  "  Works  and  grace,"  Rom. 
vi.  U.  xi.  6.   "  The  law  of  works  and  the  law  of  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  ! 
37,  28.  See  also  Rom.  viii.  3,  4. 

Inasmuch  now  as  Adam,  and  in  him  all  his  posterity,  have  broken 

this  covenant,  as  will  appear  upon  the  seventh  question,  therefore  the 

law  that  promised  life  to  them  upon  their  keeping  of  it,  could  not 

adjudge  them  to  life.     For  "  the  law  cannot  do  this,  because  it  is 

weak  through  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii.  3.     The  law  condemns  them, 

«  it  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15.  it  declares  to  them  that  »'  tlicy  are 

sunder  the  curse, '  Ga!.  iii.  10.  and  discovereth  to  thern  that  they  are 

■wretched  and   miserable  ;  for  "  we  know  "  as  Paul   declares,  Roiti. 

iii.  19,  20.  "  that  whatsoever  things  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them 

who  are   under  the  law  -•  that  every  mouth  may  be   stopped,  and  all 

the  world   may  become  guilty  before   God.  Therefore  by  the  deeds 

•f  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in   his  sight :  for  by  the 

law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  And  for  this  end,  namely,  that  the  law 

may  convince  man  of  his  misery,  it  still  remains  m  *'  the  heathens, 

who  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,  accusing  or  else 

excusing  themselves,"  Rom-  ii.  14,  15.     But  the  law  is  become  ^ 

H 


36  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

obscure,  that  it  is  scarcely  legible  any  more,  and  it  is  therelbre  not 
su-iicisini  to  drscover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him.  God  nevertheless 
\villinij;  through  his  free  mercy  to  prepare  sinners  for  salvation,  and 
for  this  end  to  humble  them  by  the  knowledge  of  their  misery,  re- 
published hi<^  law  in  the  clearest,  and  most  solemn  manner  from 
mount  Hort^b,  with  exceedmgly  dreadful  tokens,  that  he  might  by 
that  law  convince  the  breakers  of  the  covenant  of  their  damnable 
condition.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  v.  20.  "The  law  enter- 
ed, that  the  offence  might  abound-"  God  did  indeed  give  his  law 
that  it  might  be  a  rule  of  gratitude  for  those  who  were  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  Exod.  xx.  which  he  had  established  with  Israel,  Exod. 
xix.  but  also  that  he  miq^ht  teach  the  sinner  his  misery.  All  the 
Israelites  were  not  the  true  covenant  people  of  God :  many  entered 
only  outwardly  into  the  covenant,  and  viewed  it  simply  as  a  covenant 
of  works,  w^hich  they  were  bound  to  Observe  by  their  own  strength 
as  tney  said,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  we  will  do,"  Exod.  xix. 
8.  xxiv.  3.  And  in  the  same  manner  have  the  latter  Jews  also  con- 
ducted toward  the  lav,  as  Paul  accuseth  them,  Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  x. 
2,  3,  "  They  will  be  under  the  law,  and  in  bondage,"  to  it,  Gal  iv. 
21,  25.  And  so  the  law  serveth  only  to  convince  them  of  their 
misery,  and  ta  condemn  them,  and  is  "  a  ministration  of  death  and 
condemnation"  to  them,  2  Cor.  iii  7,  9.  God  gave  the  law  even  to 
the  believing  Israelites  under  the  Old  Testament,  to  humble  them, 
by  discovering  their  imperfection  to  them,  and  that  he  might  cause 
them  to  seek  their  salvation  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come.  For 
"  tJie  law  was  added  to  the  promise,"  to  discover  "  transgressions :" 
the  church  was  *'  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up,  and  the  law  was  her 
school  master,  to  bring  her  to  Christ,"  Gal.  iii.  19,  23,  24.  And  the 
law  serveth  still  to  convince  Jews  and  Gentiles  of  their  misery :  as 
Paul  mtimates  in  the  text,  and  in  \.hat  he  had  said  before,  vrs.  9, 
30.  The  law  is  also  exceedingly  well  calculated  to  teach  the  sinner 
his  misery  :  for  it  is  Hke  a  glass,  to  show  him  his  spots  and  defor- 
mity ;  and  like  a  right  rule,  to  show  him  his  declinations,  crooked 
ways,  and  unrighteousness,  1  John  iii-  4. 

if  the  sinner  shall  learn  his  misery  from  the  law,  he  must  come 
to  himseif,  compare,  and  examine  himself  by  the  law.  Therefore 
the  instructor  brings  him  to  himself,  and  asks  him,  "  Canst  thou  keep 
all  these  things  perfectly  ?"  and  he,  surveying;  himself  and  his  ac- 
tionr,saith,  >■'  In  no  wise  :  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and 
my  neighbour  "  It  is  supposed  here,  that  we  must  keep  the  law 
perfccllvj  according  to  the  covenant  of  works,  if  we  shall  enter  into 
lifcr    *'  If  tb.ou  v.ilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments,"  saith 


OUT  OF  TilC  LAW.     ? 


Christ  to  the  young  man,  who  sousjht  his  righteousness  by  the  law, 
Matt.  xix.  17.  See  also  Luke  x.  2S,  26,  27,  28.  It  is  shown  in  the 
exposition  of  the  seventh  question,  that  naan  was  once  able  to  keep 
the  law,  and  in  the  exposition  of  the  eighth,  that  he  cannot  keep  it 
now,  and  of  the  ninth,  that  he  is  still  obligated  to  keep  it.  We  will 
therefore  not  busy  ourselves  at  present  with  proving,  that  man  is 
without  strength  for  that  which  is  good,  because  we  must  do  this  in 
order  upon  the  eighth  and  ninth  questions.  It  will  suffice  at  present, 
to  know  that  the  sinner  hath  not  kept  the  law,  "  but  is  prone  l)y 
nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour."  This  ansv/er  is  an  occasion 
of  great  offence  to  the  Pelagians  :  they  imagine  that  human  nature 
hath  not  been  violated,  or  that  it  hath  been  at  most  only  weakened, 
and  that  the  will  of  man  is  free,  and  that  he  can  keep  the  law  per- 
fectly ;  but  they  add  for  decency's  sake,  «  with  the  help  of  God,"  and 
they  say  "  that  nature,  although  corrupt,  is  inclined  with  the  help  of 
grace  to  love  God  and  our  neighoour."  But  the  grace  of  God  doth 
not  help,  but  it  changes  nature  :  >'  We  must  be  changed  by  the  re- 
newing of  our  mind,"  Rom.  xii.  2,  and  "  become  new  creatures/'  2 
Cor.  V.  17.  Eph.  ii.  10.  Nature  is  indeed  wholly  degenerate,  men 
are  "  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  5. 

But  it  behooves  us,  lest  we  should  be  misconstrued.te  inquire  what 
we  are  to  understand  here  by  nature,  and  how  it  is  prone  to  hate 
God  and  our  neighbour.  By  nature  we  do  not  understand  here  the 
upright,  or  the  new  created  nature  of  man  ;  for  this  is  inchned  to 
love  God  and  our  neighbour ;  but  the  corruption  of  man,  which  is 
become  as  it  were,  his  nature,  so  that  "  he  is  a  natural  man,  not 
having  the  Spirit,"  Jude  vrs.  19.  2  Cor.  ii.  14.  and  thus  nature  is 
"  the  old  man,  and  the  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6,  which  remains  still 
in  part  in  the  regenerate,  as  Paul  complains,  Rom.  vii.  This  is  the 
sense  in  which  the  catechism  useth  the  word  nature  here  ;  for  it 
speaks  of  a  man  who  lives  yet  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works, 
w!io  is  "  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  and  who  is  not  yet 
delivered,  but  must  be  dealt  with,  in  order  to  his  deliverance. 

This  corrupt  "  nature  is  prone  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour.'* 
Thus  speaks  the  instructor  according  to  the  word  oftiod:  If  we 
should  cite  every  passage  of  scripture,  which  declares  this  expressly, 
we  should  extend  our  discourse  to  an  undue  length,  and  weary  both 
you  and  ourselves.  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  Exod.  xx.  5« 
Numb.  X.  35.  Deut.  vii.  10.  xxxii.  41.  Job.  xv  25,  26.  Psalm  xxi- 
8.  Ixviii.  1.  Ixxxi.  15.  cxxxix.  20.  Prov.  viii.  36.  John  xv.  IS,  23, 
24.  Rom.  i.  30.  viii.  7.  And  not  only  the  nature  of  some  abomina- 
ble wretches,  who  sin  against  God  with  a  high  hand,  but  the  nature 


28  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

of  every  individual,  is  so  degenerate.  Paul  "  proves  that  Jev^^s  and 
(Gentiles  are  all  under  sin  ;  as  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous, 
no  not  one  :  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,"  Rom.  iii  9?  18,  and 
although  the  word  of  Crod  did  not  assert  this,  experience  would  still 
teach  it.  He  who  attends  to  the  emotions,  issues,  and  inclinations 
of  the  heart  in  himself,  and  in  others,  will  be  convinced  by  experi- 
ence, that  what  the  instructor  saith  here  is  the  truth.  For  (1)  all 
the  thoughts,  considerations,  and  imaginations  of  sinful  nature  con- 
cerning what  God  hath  revealed  or  commanded,  are  wholly  "con- 
trary to  God's  thoughts,"  Isaiah  Iv.  8.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God  :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed 
can  il  he,"  saith  the  apostle,  Rom.  viii.  7.  There  are  "  imaginations 
and  high  things,  that  exalt  themselves  a5i:ainst  the  knowledge  of 
God,"  2  Cor  X.  5.  For  whence  else  proceed  so  many  evil  and  hate- 
ful opinions  and  iniquities,  that  do,  as  it  were,  deluge  the  world  ?  (2) 
Sinful  nature  doth  not  surely  love  God  ;  for  where,  and  in  what  man, 
who  hath  no  more  than  nature,  do  we  see  tliat  high  estimation  of 
the  Lord,  that  ardent  desire  of  union  with  him,  and  of  enjoying  him, 
that  cheerful  satisfaction  in  God,  and  that  steadfast  inclination  to  do 
his  will,  and  that  of  hone  other,  heartily  ?  It  is  certain,  that  where 
there  is  no  love,  there  must  be  hatred  :  and  that  v/here  there  is 
hatred,  there  is  no  love  :  See  this.  Judges  xiv.  16.  xvi.  15.  (3)  The 
sinner  loves  nothing  by  nature  but  sin.  This  appears  from  all  those 
evil  emotions  of  the  sinful  nature,  and  from  the  sinners  cherishing 
of  thos'j  emotions..  He  seeks  his  honour,  pleasiire  and  profit  in  sin» 
I^e  is  so  closely  wedded  to  it,  that  "  though  such  a  fool  should  be  brayed 
in  a  mortar  with  a  pestil  among  wheat,  yet  would  not  his  foolishness 
depart  from  him,"  Prov.  xxvii.  22.  Now  he  who  so  loves  that  which 
the  Lord  hates,  doth  not  he  hate  the  Lord  ?  surely  the  Lord  judges 
so  :  '*  He  I'aat  sinneth  against  me,  wrongeth  his  own  soul ;  all  they 
that  hate  me  love  death,"  saith  he  by  the  mouth  of  Solomon,  Prov. 
viii.  36.  (4)  The  sinner  ends  with  all  that  he  ieth  in  himself.  It  is 
the  nature  of  love  to  God  to  do  all  things  for  the  Lord's  sake,  even 
"  eating  and  drinking,"  1  Cor.  x.  31,  but  the  sinner  is  prone  by  na- 
ture to  do  all  things  for  his  own  sake  :  he  imagines  "  that  he  is  some- 
thing, and  some  great  one,"  with  Theudas  and  Simon  the  sorcerer, 
Acts  V.  36.  viii.  9,  and  he  therefore  wishes  that  all  things  should 
issue  for  him,  and  so  "  he  sets  his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxviii. 
2.  He  aims  even  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God  :  for  "  he  stretch- 
eth  out  his  hand  against  God,  and  strengtheneth  himself  against  the 
Almighty  ;  he  runneth  upon  him,  even  upon  his  neck,  upon  the 
thick  bosses  of  his  buckler/'  saith  Eliph^3,  Job  xy.  25,  26,     And  this 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  S,  4  5.        29 

is  natural  to  the  sinner,  he  hath  inherited  it  with  his  nature  from  his 
parents,  who,  while  they  were  in  Paradise,  wished  to  "  be  hke  Ood," 
Gen.  iii.  5,  6,  22.  And  what  think  ye  ?  is  not  this  hating  God  ?  (5) 
Kow  doth  the  nature  of  man  act,  when  God  walketh  contrary  to 
man  !  How  fretful  and  sullen  is  nature  !  how  doth  she  censure  the 
dealings  of  God,  and  complain  with  great  discontentment,  as  though 
God  afflicted  her  wron:^-fully  !  When  the  sinner  is  hardly  bestead 
and  hungry,  he  then  frets,  curses  his  God  and  king,  and  looks  up- 
ward," Isaiah  viii.  21.  Even  when  the  wind  and  weather  arc  not  as 
he  wishes,  he  murmurs,  and  requires  that  God  should  wait  on  him 
as  his  slave  with  all  his  elements ;  and  when  he  doth  not,  he  cen- 
sures the  government  of  the  Lord.  What  an  abominable  monster 
is  man  !  and  into  what  a  bottomless  pit  of  horrible  wickedness  is  he 
fallen  headlong  1  (6)  Further,  doth  God  attempt  to  excite  the  sinner 
to  obey  and  love  him,  by  convincmg  him  sensibly  of  his  hateful 
heart,  and  of  his  abominal)le  condition,  and  by  drawing  him  from 
his  sweet  sins,  that  he  may  bring  him  under  his  yoke,  how  doth  hQ 
struggle  against  it,  "  like  a  heifer  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke,  that  he 
may  break  those  bands,  and  cast  away  those  cords  from  him  1" 
Psalm  ii.  3.  He  will  not  bov/  and  yield  to  such  strait  bonds  :  "  He 
is  stiff-necked,  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears,  he  resists  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  Acts  vii.  51.  Yea,  he  is  unwilling  to  do  the  least 
thuig,  by  which  he  may  serve  God  :  "  he  says.  Behold  what  a  weari- 
ness is  it !  and  ye  have  snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Mai. 
1.  13.  Once  more,  (7)  The  natural  man  hates  his  neighbour,  and 
therefore  he  doth  not  love  God,  but  hates  him.  This  the  beloved 
disciple  of  Christ  teacheth  us,  I  John  iv.  20. 

Sinful  man  is  prone  by  nature  not  only  to  hate  God,  but  "  his 
neighbour  also,"  We  were  sometimes  hateful  and  hating  one 
another,"  saith  Paul,  Tit.  iii.  3.  Do  wc  not  see  this  daily  in  our- 
selves and  in  others  ?  (a)  For  nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  one 
man  despises  another :  every  one  thinks  that  he  is  the  best,  and  the 
worthiest,  and  he  therefore  esteems  his  neighbour  less  than  himself, 
and  he  cannot  endure  it,  that  he  is  honoured  and  loved  more  than 
himself:  he  will  be  angry  with  him,  and  will  not  be  able  to  "  speak 
peaceably  to  him,"  as  Joseph's  brethren  manifested  their  hatred  to 
him,  "  when  they  saw  that  his  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his 
brethren,"  Gen.  xxxvii.  4.  (b)  It  is  certain,  and  daily  experience 
sheweth  it,  that  the  natural  man  hath  but  little  inclination  to  do  good 
to  his  neighbour,  when  he  cannot  gain  aught  by  it  himself.  When 
his  neighbour  hath  need  of  him,  and  desires  aught  of  him,  he  will 
behave  himself  proudly  and  despitefully  toward  him,  because  he  will 


3p  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

pot  spare  aught  of  what  he  hath,  as  Nabal  showed  his  hatred  to 
David,  1  Sam.  xxv.  10,  11.  (c)  Who  knows  not  that  the  sinner  can- 
not endure  to  see  the  welfare  of  his  neighbour  ?  will  not  the  honour, 
profit  or  pleasure  of  another,  fill  him  with  envy,  and  cause  him  to 
persecute  his  neighbour  even  to  death  ?  The  Pharisees  had  no  other 
reason  for  opposing  Jesus  and  his  apostles  with  such  a  great  malig- 
nity. Matt,  xxvii.  18.  Acts  v,  14 — 18.  (d)  How  often  do  we  see  the 
smncr  start  up,  inflamed  with  intense  hatred  and  violent  anger,  on 
account  of  the  smallest  injury,  which  he  suffers,  or  only  imagines 
that  he  suffers  :  he  is  forthwith  ready  with  wicked  Lamech  to  re- 
venge it  sevenfold,"  Gen.  iv.  23,  24.  (e)  How  can  any  one  under- 
take to  vindicate  the  wicked  inclinations  of  sinful  nature,"  it  surely 
manifests  its  v.'ickedness,  when  it  hates  even  those  who  endeavour 
to  amend  and  save  it  by  faithful  reproofs  and  admonitions  :  the  sin- 
ner cannot  indeed  brook  that  his  sins  and  eternal  misery  should  be 
so  plainly  and  nakedly  discovered  to  him.  "  He  hates  him  who  re- 
bukes in  the  gate,  and  he  abhors  him  who  speaks  uprightly,"  Amos 
V.  10.     See  also  Isaiah  xxix.  21.   t  Kings  xxii   8. 

But  with  what  cloaks  of  shame  will  men  hide  this  filth  of  sin  ?  (1; 
Will  it  be  said,  that  the  person  v/ho  speaks  here  is  a  believer,  who 
professed  in  the  first  question  that  he  belonged  to  Christ,  and  who  is 
truly  inclined  tolove  God  and  his  neighbour  ?  This  v/ould  appear  some- 
what plausible,  if  the  catechism  were  a  confession,  which  every  be- 
liever made  upon  each  question  concerning  himself  and  the  temper 
of  his  mind,  and  not  an  instruction  in  the  Christian  doctrine,  which 
introduceth  one  while  a  believer  as  speaking,  and  then  an  unconvert- 
ed  person,  and  thus  here  a  smner,  who  is  subject  to  a  broken  cove-, 
nant  ot  works.  And  admit  that  a  believer  speaks  here,  it  is  never- 
theless with  respect  to  his  former  condition,  when  he  had  such  a 
v/icked  nature,  and  with  respect  to  the  old  man  and  nature,  which 
still  remains  in  him  in  a  great  measure,  as  Paul  speaks  of  himself, 
Rom.  vii.  (c)  Doth  this  answer  disturb  the  weak  tvoo  much,  we  may 
not  therefore  reject  any  necessary  article  of  the  fundamental  doctrines 
of  Christianity.  The  weak  must  be  instructed,  and  convinced  of 
their  corrupt  nature  :  but  I  do  not  believe  that  weak  believers  are 
offended  at  this ;  for  they  see,  and  are  too  much  grieved  on  account 
of  their  evil  nature.  They  are  the  Pelagians  who  are  offended  here, 
for  they  will  not  be  discovered  to  themselves  that  they  may  seek 
their  whole  salvation  in  Christ  alone.  (3)  If  we  do  not  see  such  de- 
pravity in  all  men,  it  is  either  because  we  have  not  eyes  to  see  it, 
because  m  my  lu.ve  no::  an  opportunity  to  exert  their  hateful  nature. 
Peter  could  suv  from  his  iove  to  Christ,  "  I  will  in  no  wise  deny 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3i 

thes;"  but  not  -when  he  ^vas  in  the  hall  of  Caiaphas  :  others  are 
prevented  by  restraining  grace  from  sinning  against  the  Lord,  as 
Abirnelech,  Gen.  xx.  6  :  and  some  are  converted  and  strive  against 
themselves.  (4)  If  men  cannot  hate  God  as  the  supreme  f^ood,  they 
can  hate  l;im  as  the  supreme  evil.  The  sinner  is  blind,  and  the 
loveliness  of  God  is  hidden  from  him  :  the  opinions  that  he  forms 
of  God  are  hateful  :  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,"  saith  the 
sinner,  Lzek.  xxxiii.  20,  and  "  it  is  vain  to  serve  God,"  2cc.  Mai.  iii. 
14,  15,  and  therefore  he  hates  God. 

If  we  now  compare  our  evil  nature  with  the  commands  of  God,  we 
will  see  clearly  and  plainly,   that  we  are  miserable  and  abominable. 
For  it  appears  kence,  (a)  that  we  are  altogether  different  from  what 
v/e  ought  to  be.   We  ought  to  love  God  and  our  neighbour  perfectly, 
and  this  ought  to  be  natural  to  us.    But  instead  of  this  we  are  prone 
by  nature  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  we  are  thus  *'  a  crook- 
ed and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.   xxxii.  5.  Philip,  ii.    15.  (b)  It 
appears  hence  also,  that  v/e   have  no  portion  in  the  life  which  was 
promis'jd  upon  the  perfect  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  :  but  that 
we  deserve  death  and  the  curse,  and  are  already  condemned  thereto. 
"  For  as  many  as  art  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  : 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written   in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 
(c)  It  is  also  evident,  that  as  long  as  we  are  thus  disposed,  we  cannot 
amend  our  conduct,  and  therefore  cannot  surmount  our  misery.  For 
our  nature  is  wholly  degenera.e,  we  cannot  do  any  thing  but  sin  and 
transgress  the  law  of  God  by  hating  him  and  our  neighbour  ;  this  is 
indeed  become  our  nature  ;  and  who  can  alter  his  nature  and  natural 
disposition  ?  "  Can   the  Ethiopian  change   his  skin,  or  the  leopard 
his  spots  ?  then  ye  also  may  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil," 
saith  the  Lord  to  his  own  people,  Jer.  xiii.  23. 

And  thus  the  law  teacheth  the  sinner  his  misery,  (1)  As  a  rule, 
which  showeth  him  that  he  v/as  obli  cd  under  the  sanction  of  a 
promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love  God  and  his 
neighbour  perfectly.  The  conscience,  enlightened  and  informed  by 
the  law,  acknowledges  and  approves  of  this  obligation,  and  saith 
\vith  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  i2.  "  The  law  is  holy  ;  and  the  com.raandment 
is  holy,  and  just,  and  good." 

2.  The  law  is  also  an  accu-^er,  and  witness  to  him,  and  as  such 
awakens  his  sleeping  conscience,  and  calls  him  to  himself,  and  be- 
fore the  tribunal  of  God,  to  behold  there  with  shaine  his  hateful  and 
evil  nature,  and  his  abominable  conduct.  *' There  is  one  that  ac- 
cuseth  you,  even  Moses,"  saith  the  Saviour,  John  v.  45.     And  thus 


32  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

"  the  word"  of  the  law  "  is  a  judge  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
hearts,"  Heb.  iv.  12      See  also  Rom.  li    14,  15. 

3.  The  law  teacheth  him  his  misery  also  as  a  judge,  who  upon 
comparing;  the  duty  of  man  with  his  irregular  conduct,  pronounces 
the  dreadful  sentence  of  eternal  condemnation  on  him  :  *'  For  the  law 
worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  5.  "  It  stops  the  moutli"  of  the  trans- 
gressor, Rom.  iii.  19,  renders  him  anxious,  ashamed,  humble,  con- 
cerned, and  tender,  1  Kings  xxii.  11,  10,  and  causes  him  to  confess 
his  sins,  and  to  justify  God,  Psalm  li.  4. 

liut  as  no  word  of  God,  nor  any  use  which  man  can  make  of  it 
will  affect  the  mind,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  himself  influence 
the  heart,  so  neither  can  the  law  of  God,  nor  a  man's  meditations, 
teach  him  his  misery,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  accompany  them, 
and  "  convince  him  of  sin,  of  righteousness  and  judgment,"  John 
xvii.  8,  cause  him  to  "  mourn  and  lament  bitterly,"  Zech.  xii.  10, 
and  thus  become  to  him  "  a  Spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,"  Rom.  viii.  15. 
APPLICATION. 

If  time  would  permit,  we  might  easily  show  fiom  Vk'hat  hath  been 
said,  (a)  in  opposition  to  the  Socinians,  that  the  love  of  our  enemies 
was  commanded  under  the  Old  Testament  also,  inasmuch  as  our 
enemies  are  also  our  neighbours,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour  is 
enjoined  by  the  law  and  the  prophets  :  (b)  in  opposition  to  the  Pa- 
pists, that  a  sinner  is  not  justified  before  God  by  the  law,  because 
*'  by  the  Jaw  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  Paul  teacheth  us  this,  Rom. 
iii.  19,  20.  (c)  and  in  opposition  to  the  Aniinomians,  or  adversaries 
of  the  law,  that  the  law  must  siill  be  preached  strictly  :  for  we  learn 
thus  to  know  our  misery,  which  is  certainly  necessary.  But  we  may 
not  busy  ourselves  with  these,  though  othet  wise  exceedingly  weighty 
matters.  We  hasten  to  conclude,  and  have  still  many  important 
matters  to  lay  before  you  for  your  profit. 

Behold,  friends,  how  we  learn  our  misery  from  the  law,  and  how 
we  are  conducted  by  it  to  deliverance,  and  to  a  blessed  consolation. 
What  think  ye  '  have  ye,  (I  speak  to  you  all,  and  to  each  of  you  in 
particular)  have  ye  I  say  already  seen  in  the  law  your  misery  with 
sorroiv,  shame,  and  concern  ?  Is  it  evident  to  you,  and  do  ye  know 
experimentally,  and  with  anxiety,  that  ye  have  such  an  evil  disposi- 
tion, and  are  therefore  hateful,  and  deserve  condemnation  ?  Ye  have 
been  now  so  long  instructed  in  the  law.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  it  hath 
been  *ead  in  your  hearing ;  *  if  ye  have   had  any  decent  edueation, 

•  Tins  refers  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hollancf,  of  reading  the  ten 
commandments  every  sabbath,  at  the  beginning;  of  publick  worship,  which 
custom  is  still  retained  in  some  o*"  the  Dutch  churches  in  America,  It  is  the 
practice  to  read  also  the  creed,  and  a  chapter  from  either  the  Old  or  New- 
Testament,  at  the  beginning  of  worship- 


dtjT  OF  THE  LAW.       

ye  have  been  made  to  learn  and  say  it  by  heart ;  and  how  often  hath 
t.he  law  been  explained  to  you  fully,  and  in  order.  But  who,  yea  who 
hath  learned  his  misery  out  of  it,  so  that  it  hath  humbled  him  ? 
surely  very  few.  With  the  church  of  Laodicea,  our  present  Chris- 
tians imagine  that  '^'  they  arc  become  rich,  and  increased  in  c;oods, 
and  have  need  of  nothing  :  and  they  know  not  that  they  arc  v.'retch- 
ed,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blintl,  and  naked,"  Rev.  iii.  17.  Is 
not  this  true,  is  it  not  a  glaring  truth  ?  For, 

1.  The  most  of  you  have  never  yet  "  come  to  yourselves"  with 
the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv.  17.  Ye  concern  yourselves  with  every 
thing  that  doth  not  belong  to  yoii,  but  with  respect  to  yourselves,  ye 
are  never  at  home,  and  always  r,trangers  ;  the  honours,  pleasures 
and  profits  of  the  world  do  so  influence  your  whole  heart,  your  whole 
soul,  your  whole  understanding,  and  your  whole  strength,  and  do  so 
captivate  your  affections,  that  those  visible  things  "  have  shut  your 
eyes,  that  ye  cannot  ses  ;  and  your  heart  that  ye  cannot  understand  ; 
ye  feed  upon  ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  you  aside,  so  that 
ye  cannot  deliver  your  souls,  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  our  right 
hand  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  18,20.  And  therefore  "  ye  do  not  repent  of 
your  wickedness,  saying,  what  have  I  done  ?"  Jer   viii.  6. 

2.  Many  of  you  think  that  your  heart  is  good :  ye  depend  upon  it 
and  "trust  in  it,  like  the  fool,"  Prov.  xxviii.  26.  Because  ye  are 
not  guilty  of  any  public  and  scandalous  enormities,  which  are  cog- 
nisable by  the  magistrate,  but  are  decent  and  devout,  therefore  ye 
are  ready  to  say  v/ith  that  presumptuous  young  man,  Matt.  xix.  "  All 
these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up  :  v>^hat  lack  I  yet  ?" 
Sometimes  ye  survey  yourselves  with  pleasure  and  admiration,  be- 
cause ye  are  so  wise,  diligent,  good  natured,  exceedingly  virtuous, 
and  not  so  wicked  and  abominable  as  this  and  that  person :  and  ye 
are  even  ready  to  thank  God  for  it  v/ith  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  1 1, 
12.  Ye  will  never  believe  that  ye  hate  God,  and  your  neighbour, 
and  no  man  is  able  to  convince  you  of  it.  Ye  may  believe,  and  be 
'able  to  deriionstrate  from  the  word  of  God  against  the  adversaries. 
that  man  is  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour;  but 
that  ye  in  particular  are  co  evil  and  perverse,  ye  cannot  either  see 
or  believe. 

3.  It  is  true,  ye  ail  know  that  ye  are  great  sinners  :  but  how  do 
ye  knov/  this  ?  out  of  the  lav/,  and  by  comparing  yourselves  with  it? 
No,  but  only  from  report  and  heresay.  For  how  many  sins  have  ye  ? 
ye  say  indeed  that  your  r/ms  are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of 
your  head  ;  this  ye  have  heard  from  others,  and  ye  only  repeat  it 
without  thought  arr.ertheTT* :  for  ve  c?nnot  mention  six  sinr.,  of  which 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERV 

ye  are  guiUy.  For  ye  are  not,  as  ye  imagine,  idolaters,  profancrs  of 
God's  name  and  day  :  ye  have  always  been,  (according  to  your  opin- 
ion) even  during  your  childhood,  obedient  to  your  parents :  ye  are 
strangers  to  murder,  whoredomj  theft,  lying,  and  coveting  your  neigh- 
bour's goods,  and  have  an  aversion  from  such  abominations.  Where 
then  are  all  your  sins,  about  which  ye  make  such  an  ado,  as  if  ye 
knew  them  all  exceedingly  well  ?  But  ye  know  neither  the  spiritu- 
ality of  the  law,  nor  the  hateful  sink  of  your  own  heaits. 

4.  And,  friends,  if  ye  knew  your  misery,  would  ye  have  so  many 
cloaks  of  shame  at  hand  to  excuse  your  sins,  when  they  are  discoY- 
cred  to  you,  and  also  "  flatter  yourselves  so  in  your  own  eyes,  when 
your  iniquity  is  found  to  be  hateful  ?"  Psalm  xxxvi.  2.  Would  it 
indeed  displease  you  so,  when  your  abominable  and  miserable  condi- 
tion was  clearly  discovered  to  you,  and  when  we  would  awaken  you 
out  of  your  beloved  carelesness  ?  would  y  e  take  it  so  ill,  when  men 
did  not  honour  nor  love  you,  but  exposed  you  to  shame,  loss  and 
pain  ?  If  ye  knew  your  hateful  and  damnable  character,  ye  would 
certainly  see  that  ye  deserved  every  reproach  and  vexation ;  yea,  ye 
would  be  amazed,  that  such  monsters  as  ye  are,  should  enjoy  any 
good. 

5»  It  is  true,  some  of  you  know  their  misery,  they  see  without 
searching  that  they  are  abominable  :  for  their  sins  are  manifest,  and 
every  one  sees  them  ;  or  do  they  commit  sins  privately,  conscience 
accuseth  them,  and  tells  them  that  while  they  conduct  in  this  man- 
ner, they  cannot  be  saved.  But  I  pray  you  who  are  thus,  tell  us, 
have  your  sins  and  misery  ever  affected  your  hearts,  and  rendered 
you  concerned  and  anxious,  so  that  they  caused  you  to  cry  out  ear- 
nestly, "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  30.  Others  are 
seized  like  "  Felix,  with  fear,"  Acts  xxiv.  25,  but  they  soon  recover 
from  their  seasick  qualms  :  when  your  hearts  are  wounded  in  this 
manner  with  a  sharp  arrow,  what  is  it  that  relieves  you  so  soon  ?  yc 
cannot  retain  those  grievous  thougjhts  with  you,  but  endeavour  to 
divert,  or  banish  them  by  doing  this  or  that :  or  ye  suppress  them  by 
some  duty,  by  breaking  off  this  or  that  sin,  by  reading  your  bible, 
baying  a  prayer,  weeping  heartily,  until  your  mind  be  somewhat 
cased,  and  upon  this  all  your  distress,  and  according  to  your  imagi- 
nation, all  your  misery  is  at  an  end  :  or  ye  dispel  your  concern  by 
vain  imaginations,  that  it  is  your  duty  to  believe  in  Christ,  that  your 
gloomy  thoughts  proceed  only  from  the  devil  and  from  your  unbe- 
lief:  and  thus  ye  deceive  yourselves  with  vain  imaginations,  and 
'•  say  not,  there  is  no  hope  ;  for  ye  have  found  the  life  of  your  hands; 
therefore  ye  ar^  not  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.     Or  ye  become  des- 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3:. 

perate,  and  think  it  is  so  now  :  if  I  must  perish,  how  can  I  help  it  ? 
as  well  1  as  another  :  and  so  ye  indulge  &  pernicious  discouragement 
and  carelessness,  saying  with  your  heart  and  actions,  like  the  impeni- 
tent Jews,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10.  *•  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  be 
upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we  then  live  ?" 

But,  hearers,  ye  who  are  thus  disposed,  this  aggravates  your 
misery,  that  ye  do  not  yet  know  it.  To  hate  so,  and  to  be  so  hate- 
ful, and  not  to  know  it,  or  not  to  know  it  rightly,  how  dreadful  is  it ' 
How  shall  ye  be  delivered  ?  '•  Are  we  blind  also  r"  said  the  Pharisees. 
Jesus  said  unto  them.  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  woidd  have  no  sin  ;  buf 
now  ye  say,  v/e  see,  therefore  your  sin  remaineth,"  John  ix,  40,  41. 
If  ye  knew  your  misery  out  of  me  mw,  as  ye  ought,  ye  would  flee 
to  the  Mediator  and  be  deliverea :  but  now  ye  remain  in  yourselves, 
and  so  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  as  Paul 
speaks.  Gal.  iii.  10  .\nd  ye  do  not  yet  possess  "Christ  for  justifi- 
cation, which  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  What  hath  bewitch- 
ed you  ?  what  do  ye  imagine  ?  Have  ye  nothing  to  do  with  God  ? 
Is  he  not  holy  and  just  f  do  ye  think  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indiffer- 
ence to  him,  whether  ye  love  or  hate  him  and  your  neighbour  ?  He 
will  most  surely  and  most  severely  recompense  and  punish  the 
abominations  of  your  hearts  and  actions.  Do  ye  not  believe  it,  hear 
then  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  say,  Psalm  xxi  8 — 12.  "  Thine 
hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  enemies  ;  thy  right  hand  shall  find  out 
all  them  that  hate  thee.  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 
the  time  of  thine  anger  :  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  his 
wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them,"  &c. 

What  say  ye  ?  Arc  ye  desirous  to  be  delivered  from  your  misery, 
and  to  become  other  persons,  than  ye  are,  or  are  ye  not  ?  Will  ye 
remain  as  ye  are,  and  suffer  your  hearts  to  wander  after  the  W'  rid 
and  sin  without  concern  ?  Go  on  then,  but  know  that  your  end  will 
be  bitterness.  But  are  ye  desirous  to  obtain  grace  and  salvation,  and 
will  ye  earnestly  endeavour  henceforth  to  save  your  souls  in  God'f? 
way. 

1.  Believe  then  that  ye  are  so  abominable,  that  ye  hate  God  and 
your  neighbour,  and  are  therefore  in  the  highest  degree  punishable 
before  that  dreadful  judge,  that  ye  may  begin  to  suspect  yourselveSj 
and  to  be  afraid.  Whether  ye  see  it  or  not,  it  is  nevertheless  the 
truth,  that  ye  are  hateful,  and  hate  one  another.  God  saith  it  in  his 
word  ;  the  reformed  church,  with  which  ye  hold,  teaches  it  from  the 
scripture,  and  there  is  not  one  of  those  who  are  delivered,  but  he 
sees  it  experimentally  in  himself,   and  it  would  lead  you  also  into 


36  TKE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

the  way  of  cleliverance,  if  ye  saw  it.     "  Only  acknowledge  thine  \nU 
quity,"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  iii.  3. 

2.  Know  that  ye  are  still  bound  to  the  law  of  works  in  order,  under 
the  san'  tion  of  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love 
God  and  your  neighbour  perfectly  :  and  that  since  ye  have  not  done 
this,  and  because  of  youi  wicked  nature,  cannot  do  it,  ye  are  still 
under  the  curse.  For  as  long  as  the  sinner  is  and  abides  in  l.is 
misery,  and  hath  not  been  convinced,  truly  regenerated,  and  convert- 
ed, and  haih  not  saving  faith  in  Christ,  so  long  he  is  and  abides  under 
the  law  of  works,  and  therefore  *'  under  the  curse,"  Gal,  iii.  10. 

3.  Examine  yourselves  with  a  full  purpose  of  heart  by  the  law, 
and  see  lio  w  far  ye  have  declined  from  the  demands  of  it.  Read  the 
catechism  once  and  again  from  the  thirty  third  to  the  forty  fifth 
Lord's  day,  and  see  what  virtues  are  commanded  and  what  vices  are 
forbidden  in  the  law:  and  consider  thoroughly  your  heat  and  ac- 
tions, that  ye  may  see  by  the  law  how  crooked  and  pervt  rse  ye  are. 
"  Lxamint:  yourselves  strictly,  yea  examine  yourselves  strictly,  O  ye 
listless  people,"  Zcph.  ii.  1. 

4.  Is  there  any  one,  who  beholds  with  shame,  concern  and  distress, 
his  hating,  hateful  and  punishable  nature,  let  him  flee  to  *'  Christ, 
the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  Sinner,  thou  who  art  concerned  ; 
he  calls  to  thee,  and  invites  thee,  *' Look  unto  me,  and  be  saved," 
saith  he,  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  "Come,  he  will  not  cast  thee  out,"  as  he 
saith,  John  vi  37  Do  not  stand  still  and  ponder  on  the  abominable- 
ness  and  gieatness  of  thy  sins,  nor  on  the  small  measure  of  thy  sor^ 
row;  It  is  great  enough,  if  it  render  thee  distressed,  and  dri^e  thee 
out  of  thyself:  our  concern  is  not  our  Saviour,  nor  is  it  in  itself 
agreeable  to  the  Lord  ;  but  it  must  serve  merely  to  cause  the  sinner 
to  seek  his  salvation  cut  of  himself  in  the  Son  of  God. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  (a)  See  from  what,  and  how  ye 
are  delivered  :  that  hateful  sin  of  yours,  with  wliich  ye  formerly  hated 
God  and  your  neighbour,  is  through  the  love  of  God  to  mankind  for- 
given :  ye  are  renewed  after  the  image  and  love  of  God,  and  have 
obtained  a  new,  yea,  "a  divine  nature,"  Titus  iii.  5,6.  2  Peter  i.  4. 
The  lav/  cannot  condemn  you  any  lon;j,er  :  "  for  ye  are  dead  to  the  law 
through  the  body  of  Christ,"  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Sin,"  even  your  wicked 
nature,  "  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom  vi.  14.  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  haih  borne 
for  you  the  curse,  to  which  ye  had  exposed  y©urselves  by  your  wicked 
hatred,  and  "  hath  delivered  you  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been 
made  a  curse  for  you,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Yea,  the  Lord  God  hath  made 
t'.r't  In-'  M'hich  condemned  you,  serve  you,  tliat  ye  might  be  delivered 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.      

from  it  by  Christ,  when  he  convinced  you  by  the  law,  that  he  might 
drive  you  out  of  yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  seek  life  with  him : 
<^«  For  f  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live  unto 
God,"  saith  the  apostle.  Gal.  ii.  19.  Behold  this  is  what  we  say, 
observe  God's  great  and  free  grace  and  love  in  this,  admire  it,  and 
praise  the  Lord,  with  Paul,  1  Tim.  i?  13,  14,  15.  (b)  Love  now  the 
Lord  your  God  with  all  your  might  and  most  heartily.  "  I  will  love 
thee  heartily,  O  Lord  my  strength,"  said  David,  v/hen  the  Lord  had 
deUvered  him  from  all  his  enemies.  Psalm  xviii.  1.  And  love,  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  your  neighbour  as  yourselves.  "  For  this  commandment 
have  we  from  him,  that  he  v/ho  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also," 
1  John  iv.  21.  Ye  are  indeed  dead  to  the  lav/,  and  it  is  not  given  to 
you,  as  a  condition  of  the  covenant  of  %^  orks,  to  seek  life  by  it,  and 
to  be  condemned  by  it ;  but  it  is  given  to  you  a-;  a  rule  of  gratitude  : 
it  is  indeed  an  expression  of  the  image  of  God.  Ye  are  and  always 
remain  bound  to  the  Lord,  to  love  him  and  your  neighbour :  he  is 
worthy  to  be  loved  and  obeyed  on  his  own  account ;  he  hath  imprint- 
ed the  law  of  love  on  your  hearts  ;  yea  his  great  love  to  you  hath 
bound  your  natural  obligation  to  love  him,  more  strongly  on  you, 
and  the  love  of  Christ  should  constrain  you,"  2  Cor.  v.  14.  (c)  Exer- 
cise yourselves  yet  daily  in  seeking  a  knowledc^e  of  your  miseries 
through  the  lav/,  with  Paul,  Rom>.  vii.  Is  it  become  your  nature  to 
love  God  and  your  neighbour,  your  nature  is  nevertheless  not  per- 
fect :  there  are  still  many  wicked  humours  in  it,  which  oppose  God 
and  your  neighbour:  "Ye  knov/,"  with  the  apostle,  Rom.  vii.  18, 
"  that  in  you,  that  is,  in  your  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing  :  for 
to  will  is  present  with  you  ;  but  hew  to  perform  that  which  is  good, 
ye  find  not."  This  would  conduce  to  your  happiness,  it  would  hum- 
ble your  souls,  cause  you  to  make  use  of  Christ  more,  and  to  be  more 
watchful,  (d)  Humble  and  abase  yourselves  in  secret  before  the 
Lord,  and  before  your  neighbour.  Will  ye  exalt  yourselves  on  ac- 
count of  the  excellency  of  the  revelation,  tliat  God  hath  delivered  you 
out  of  your  hateful  and  miserable  condition  ?  We  cannot  boast  of 
aught  but  what  we  have  of  ourselves,  and  what  is  worthy  to  be  boast- 
^A  of.  But  what  is  it  that  ye  have  of  and  in  yourselves  ?  is  it  not 
that  ye  hate  God  and  your  neighbour,  and  have  rendered  yourselves 
damnable  and  detestable  ?  are  yc  not  so  hateful  now  ?  Is  there  not 
now  yet  wickedness  enough  in  your  nature  to  make  you  repeatedly 
ashamed  ?  Is  there  aught  that  is  good  in  your  soul  ?  "  Who  maketh 
you  to  differ  ?  and  v/hat  have  ye  that  ye  have  not  received  ?  and  if 
ye  have  received  it,  why  do  yc  glory,  as  if  ye  had  not  received  it  ?" 
1  C>or.  iv.  7.     And  why  have  ye  received  it  ?  becau^.e  yc  were  sq 


38  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY,  &c. 

virtuous  and  amiable,  or  should  become  so  of  yourselves  ?  Ye  know 
v/hat  ye  have  been,  and  still  would  be,  if  God  should  leave  you  to 
yourselves  ;  "  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that 
not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  Therefore  acknowledge  your  unworthi- 
ness,  and  shrink  into  nothing  in  your  owa  eyes  on  account  of  this 
divine  grace,  with  Paul  1  Cor.  xv.  8,  9,  10,  Do  ye  stand  in  need  of 
any  thing,  ask  it  of  the  Lord  with  humility.  Doth  he  chastise  you, 
justify  him,  and  submit  to  his  hand  ;  for  though  it  should  lie  ever  so 
heavy  on  you,  **  he  doth  still  not  deal  with  you  after  your  sins,  nor 
reward  you  according  to  your  iniquities,"  Psalm  ciii.  10.  If  he 
should  afflict  you  more  grievously  than  he  dotb,  it  would  be  only 
according  to  the  demerit  of  your  wickedness.  Do  evil  men  trample 
upon  you,  and  tread  you  under  foot,  ye  ought  not  to  be  so  angry  • 
can  any  man  wrong  you,  who  have  so  often,  and  in  the  highest  de- 
gree wronged  and  hated  both  God  and  man  ?  lay  your  hand  then. 
upon  your  mouth,  with  David,  who  said,  3  Sam.  xvi.  10.  "Let  him 
curse  :  for  the  Lord  hath  said  to  him,  Curse  David.  Who  shall  then 
say.  Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  Hear  how  Paul  enjoins  on  be- 
lievers, Titus  iii.  2 — 7,  "  To  speak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawlers, 
but  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  men.  For  we  ourselves  also 
were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts 
and  pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another.  But  after  that  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
toward  man  appeared,  he  saved  us,"  Sec.  Do  ye  see  any  one  fall  into 
a  hateful  iniquity,  do  not  wonder  at  it,  and  do  not  despise  him  ;  that 
root  of  wickedness  exists  in  you  also;  and  God  restrains  it,  that  it 
doth  not  spring  up,  and  bring  forth  still  more  abominable  fruits : 
"but  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  your^ 
selves,  lest  ye  also  be  tempted,"  Gal.  vi.  1. 

Thus  ye  will  "  use  the  law  lawfully,  and  it  will  be  good  for  you," 
agreeably  to  I  Tim.  i.  8.  For  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle, 
Gal.  vi.  16.  "As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace  and 
inercy  shall  be  upon  them."  Amon. 
(   39   ) 
THE 

FIRST   CAUSE   OF 

GOOD  AND  EVILe 

III  LORD'S  DAY. 

Eccl.  vii.  29.  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made  mart 
upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions.

Q,  4.    fVhat  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  ? 

A.  Christ  teaches  us  that  briefly,  Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40.  «  Thou 
shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul, 
with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength.  This  is  the  first  and 
the  great  command,  and  the  second  is  like  to  this.  Thou  sValt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  On  these  two  commands  hang  the  whole 
law  and  the  prophets." 

Q.  5.  Canst  thou  keefi  all  these  things  perfectly  ? 

A.  In  no  wise ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  my 
neighbour. 


B 


LESSED  are  they  that  moum :  for  they  shall  be  comforted,"  saith 
the  Consolation  of  Israel,  Matt.  v.  4.  Altliough  the  sinner  is  so  ex- 
ceedingly miserable,  he  will  not  mourn :  mourning  would  indeed 
disturb  his  sinful  joy.  Doth  his  conscience  reprove  him  at  times,  he 
stifles  it,  and  blesses  himself  in  his  heart,  saying  that  he  shall  have 
peace,  although  he  walks  in  the  imagination  of  his  heart.  But  hi& 
comfort  is  vain,  and  will  forsake  him,  when  death  seizeth  on  him- 
True  and  godl>  comfort  belongs  to  none  but  those  who  mourn  for 
their  misi^ry  :  for  they  only  are  capable  of  comfort :  "  The  Messiah 
was  sent  to  comfort  those  only  who  mourn,"  Isaiah  Ixi.  2.  There- 
fore the  Lord  requires  first  and  chiefly  of  his  people,  that  they  should 
acknowledge  their  iniquity,  in  order  that  he  may  restrain  his  anger 
which  is  kindled  against  them,  and  favour  them  with  his  loving  kind- 
ness, Jer.  iii.  11,13.    It  is  the  first  work  of  the  Comforter,  the  Hdy 


20  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

Ghost,  when  he  is  about  to  dispose  the  sinner  for  comfort,  to  "  con- 
vince him  of  his  sins."  The  men  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  the  jailer, 
and  Paul,  did  not  obtain  comfort,  before  they  knew  their  misery,  and 
cried  out  with  concern,  "  What  shall  we  do?"  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 
xvi.  30. 

Our  instructor  proceeds  also  in  this  manner,  in  order  to  comfort 
the  sinner.  He  had  set  before  his  pupil  the  only  comfort  in  all  its 
lustre,  in  the  first  question.  The  pupil,  eager  to  obtain  this  comfort, 
asks  his  teacher,  what  he  must  know,  and  therefore  do,  that  he  may 
live  and  die  happily  in  this  comfort.  Hereupon  he  is  taught  that 
he  must  know,  first,  how  great  his  sins  and  miseries  are,  in  the  second 
question.  But  inasmuch  as  the  sinner  cannot  learn  his  sins  and 
misery  of  himself,  therefore  he  inquires,  1.  Whence  he  shall  learn 
his  misery  in  the  third  and  fourth  question,  2.  Wherein  it  consists, 
from  the  fifth  to  the  eleventh  question. 
In  this  Lord's  day  we  are  taught, 

I.  In  general  that  we  know  our  misery  out  of  the  law,  in  the  third 
question. 

II.  And  it  is  then  explained  in  particular,  how  we  are  convinced 
out  of  the  law  of  our  misery,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  questions. 

I.  Truly  the  angels,  who  apostatized  from  God,  are  also  exceed- 
ingly miserable  :  their  sins  have  made  them  devils,  and  subjected 
them  to  eternal  damnation.  For  "  God  spared  not  tl  e  angels  who 
sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains 
of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Jude  vs. 
6.  "  Everlasting  fire  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt. 
XXV.  41.  "  The  whole  creation  also  is  become  subject  to  vanity,  and 
to  the  bondage  of  corruption  :  it  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  until 
now,"  Rom.  viii.  20,  21,  22.  But  the  instructor  speaks  not  of  the 
misery  of  the  angels,  nor  of  the  misery  of  the  whole  creation,  but 
only  of  man's  misery  :  because  we  have  the  greatest  concern  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  own  misery,  and  we  are  thereby  led  to  seek  for 
deliverance :  but  there  is  no  hope  of  deliverance  for  the  angels : 
"  For  verily  the  Saviour  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but 
he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Heb.  ii.  16.  Is  the  whole 
creation  miserable,  it  is  on  account  of,  and  to  aggravate  the  misery 
of  man,  which  he  ought  to  know. 

That  man  is  miserable,  and  that  his  misery  consists  in  sin,  in 
punishment,  and  in  an  inability  lo  deliver  himself,  this  the  instructor 
will  show  in  the  sequel,  out  of  the  law.  He  teaches  us  now  only 
how  we  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  our  misery  by  the  law.  There  is 
none  so  near  to  a  man,  as  the  man  himself :  "  The  spirit  of  man 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.      21 

which  is  in  him,  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,"  saith  the  apostle,  1 
Cor.  ii.  11.     And  yet  we  must  shew  him  his  misery,  which  cleaveth 
to  him,  and  the  means,  whereby  he  may  attain  to  the  knowledge  of 
it-     This  appears  strange  ;  but  his  misery  is  natural  to  him,  and  he 
is  so  accustomed  to  it,  that  he  doth  not  consider  it  as  misery  :  he 
thinks  that  it  ought  to  be  with  him  as  it  is.     But  sin  hath  so  bewil- 
dered him  :  he  is,  as  it  were,  through  the  bewitching  power  of  ini- 
quity, beside  himself,  and  bereaved  of  his  reason,  and  he  busies  him- 
self only  with  things,  which  do  not  concern  him.  If  he  shall  be  healed, 
he  must,  with  "  the  prodigal  son,  come  to  himself,"  Luke   xv.  17, 
and  like  "  Ephraim,  become  acquainted  v/ith  himself,"  Jer.  xxxi.  19. 
But  what  shall  discover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him  ?  The  law  of 
God  is  the  best  mean  ;  *'  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  saith 
the  text.     We  read  of  a  ceremonial  Jaw,  by  which  God  prescribed 
to  Israel  the  manner  of  the  external   worship.     Paul  calls  it,  "  the 
law  of  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,"  Eph.  ii.  15.     God 
gave  also  a  civil  law,  by  which  the  civil   state  of  Israel  was  to  be 
regulated.     Of  this  law  Nichodemus  spoke,  when  he  said,  John  vii. 
51.     "  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  know 
•what  he  doth  ?"  The  word  of  God   speaks  also  of  a  moral  law,  ex- 
pressed in  ten  commandments.     Israel  could  learn  their  misery  in 
some  measure  from  the  ceremonial  law,  because  all  the  blood-shed- 
dings  and  washings,  which  were  enjoined   on  them,  showed  them 
their  capital  uncleanness,  and  that  they  could  not  look  for  salvation, 
except  through  the  perfect  sacrifice  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come, 
as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  x.  1,  10.     The  civil  law  discovered  also  after 
a  certain  manner  the  sins  of  Israel  :  for  when  the  judges  punished 
the  outward  abominations  of  the  people,  often  with  great  severity, 
the  people  of  the  Lord  might  conclude  thence,  with  the  greatest  pro- 
priety, that  he,  who  was  a  righteous,  all-knowing,  and  almighty  judge, 
would  much  more,  and  with  much  greater  severity,  mark  and  punish 
sins,  yea,  even  those  of  the  soul.    But  the  moral  law  is  much  better 
calculated  to  convince  the  sinner  of  his  misery.     The  law  of  cere- 
monies, and  the  civil  law  were  given  to  Israel  only,  and  determined 
merely  the  outward  worship,  and  the  outward  righteousness  among 
men  :  but  the  moral  law  w*s  given,  not  to  Israel  only,  but  to  all  the 
posterity  of  x^dam  :  "  it  proves  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  be  all  un- 
der sin  ;  it  stops  every  mouth,    and  declares  the  whole  world  to  be 
g'M\y  before  God,"  Rom.  lii.  9,  19.  and  it  discovers  the  inmost  and 
rnoRi  hidden  corruption  and  sinful  lusting  of  the  heart:  "  I  had  not 
known   lust  to  be  sin,"  saith  Paul,  "  if  the  law  had  not  said,  Thou 
ahalt  net   co^t,"  Rom.  vii.  T.    Of  this  law  the  text  also  speaks,  as 


n  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

appears  from  what  the  apostle  had  said  before,  that  he  had  "proved 
according  to  this  law  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  all  under 
sin,"  and  particularly  that  they  were  guilty  of  the  sins,  which  are 
condemned  in  this  law,  and  were  therefore  "  all  guilty  before  God," 
vrs.  9,  19.  And  to  this  law  the  instructor  also  hath  respect  here,  as 
he  shows  from  the  demand  of  the  law  in  the  fourth  question. 

II.  But  how  shall  we  be  convinced  of  our  misery  out  of  the  law? 
We  must  in  the  first  place  know  what  God  requires  in  his  law,  and 
then  compare  ourselves  therewith.  The  instructor  asks,  with  respect 
to  the  first  particular,  "  What  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  ?" 
and  he  answers,  that ''  Christ  teacheth  us  that  briefly.  Matt.  xxii.  37, 
38,  39,  40  "  where  the  Saviour  reduces  the  v/hole  sum  of  the  law 
to  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  so  to  two  commandments, 
or  tables,  according  lo  Deut.  vi.  5,  and  Lev.  xix.  18.  The  first  table^ 
or  first  commandment  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God," 
who  is  the  self  existent,  and  the  only  existing  God,  and  who  promis- 
ed himself  as  such  by  his  covenant  to  his  people,  and  is  therefore 
worthy  to  be  loved.  "  To  love  him"  is  to  have  a  high  esteem  of  him  ; 
to  desire  him,  in  order  to  be  most  intimately  united  to  him  and  to 
enjoy  him,  to  be  satisfied  and  rejoice  in  hiuj,  and  to  conduct  in  all 
things  according  to  his  mind.  1  may  not  expatiate  here  :  see  only 
Song  V.  8  — 16.  vii.  6.  John  xiv.  21,  23.  We  must  love  God  "  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mmd,"  and  according  to 
Luke  X.  27,  "  with  all  our  strength,"  and  so,  "  with  all  our  mijjht," 
Deut.  vi.  S.  These  several  words  betoken  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul;  if  we  will  distinguish  them,  the  heart  v/ill  then  denote  the  in- 
most desire  and  inclination  oi  the  mind  ;  the  soul  will  be  the  will ; 
the  mind  expresseth  the  apprehension,  judgment,  and  all  the  thoughts ; 
emd  the  strength  and  might  represent  in  what  manner  the  soul  and 
body  should  contribute  all  that  they  have,  and  exert  themselves  to 
love  God  :  and  thus  the  Saviour  would  show  by  this  accumulation  of 
words,  that  we  ought  to  love  God  perfectly,  and  without  any  defect. 
For  it  will  soon  appear,  that  the  perfect  demand  of  the  covenant  of 
works  is  exhibited  in  this  passage  ;  yea,  in  whatever  condition  man 
may  be,  he  is,  and  remains  obligated  by  nature  to  love  God  perfectly, 
on  account  of  his  loveliness  :  and  if  there  be  any  defect  in  his  love, 
h€  sins,  and  must  humble  himself,  and  seek  reconciliation.  To  love- 
God  thus  is  "the  first  commandment,"  because  it  is  commanded 
before  the  love  of  o\u'  neighbour,  and  because  love  to  God  is  ..'jie 
source,  from  which  love  to  our  neighbour  must  flow  :  "  Belov  (j, " 
saith  the  disciple,  wiiom  Jesus  loved,  "  let  us  love  one  another  .  for 
love  is  of  God,"  1  John  iv.  7,     This  is  also  the  first  copimap<Jment, 


OUT  OF  TflE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  3,  4,  5, 
because  the  second  commandment  of  loving  our  neighbour  must  yield 
to  this ;  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men,"  Acts  v.  29, 
This  was  nobly  exemplified  by  Levi,  Exod.  xxxii.  27,  28.  Deut. 
xxxiii.  9.  See  also  Matt.  x.  37.  This  first  is  also  "  the  great  com- 
mandment." The  second  commandment  is  also  called  great.  Mark 
xii.  31.  and  therefore  great  must  denote  in  Matthew  the  greatest :  God 
is  indeed  the  greatest  and  most  worthy  object,  whom  we  must  love 
with  the  greatest  and  the  strongest  affection,  with  the  whole  heart, 
&c.  as  he  is  worthy.  But  we  must  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 
Our  neighbour  is  here  not  only  our  kinsman  and  friend,  but  even 
our  enemy  :  the  Egyptians,  the  enemies  of  the  Israelites  were  also 
their  neighbours,  Exod  xi.  2.  The  Samaritans,  who  were  enemies 
of  the  Jews,  were  their  neiejhbours,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Jesus, 
Luke  x.  29 — 37.  "  We  must  indeed  love  enemies,"  Matt  v.  44, 
For  that  which  constitutes  one  man  a  neighbour  of  another  is,  that 
"  God  hath  made  all  the  nations  of  men  of  one  blood,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
and  because  one  man  is  the  brother  and  "  flesh  "  of  another,  Isaiah 
Ivii.  7.  since  we  have  all  proceeded  from  one  father  and  mother, 
Adam  and  Eve.  Therefore  we  must  love  our  neighbour,  and  so  es- 
teem him  highly,  as  the  most  glorious  creature  of  God  on  earth,  and 
as  our  brother  :  we  must  cleave  to  him  with  a  tender  affection,  and 
do  well  to  him.  But  must  I  "  love  him  with  my  whole  heart,  soul," 
&c.  as  I  must  love  God  ?  No,  but  as  myself.  The  love  which  a  man 
beareth  to  himself  is  the  pattern,  but  not  the  rule  of  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  the  law  of  God  alone  is  the  rule  ;  yea,  a  man  may  not  even 
propose  himself  in  all  things,  as  a  pattern  of  his  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  for  he  loves  himself  with  such  a  sottish  self-love,  that  "  he  sets 
his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  2.  All  that  he  should  do 
for  God's  sake,  he  doth  for  his  own  sake  :  he  may  not  love  his  neigh- 
bour so  :  but  as  he  ought  to  love  himself  sincerely,  heartily,  nnd 
steadfastly  in  God,  and  for  God's  sake,  so  he  ought  to  love  his 
neighbour  also  in  this  manner,  and  therefore  perfectly.  For  it  is 
the  nature  of  a  man  to  love  himself  perfectly  ;  for  '•  no  man  ever  yet 
hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,"  Eph.  v.  29o 
But  although  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  perfectly,  it  must  never- 
theless be  with  a  certain  distinction  :  one  is  nearer  to  me  than 
another.  We  ought  to  love  the  godly  more  than  others  :  *'  we  must 
do  good  to  all  men,  but  especially  to  them  who  are  of  the  household 
of  faith,"  Gal.  vi.  10.  "  This  second  commandment  is  like  the  first," 
because  it  proceeds  from  the  same  Lawgiver,  and  commands  one 
and  the  same  act  of  love,  although  toward  different  objects,  and  love 
to  our  neighbour  always  accompanies  love  to  God.     "  If  any  man 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

say,  I  love  God»  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar ;  for  he  who 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God 
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  And  this  commandment  have  we  from 
him,  that  he  who  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also,"  1  John  iv.  20, 
21.  These  two  commandments  are  exceedingly  weighty  ;  for  "on 
them  hang'  the  whole  law  and  the  prophets."  The  law  and  the 
prophets  denote  here  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  Luke  xvi. 
29.  xxiv.  27.  And  all  these  scriptures  urge  men  to  love.  For  all 
the  histories,  commandments,  doctrines,  and  prophecies  that  have 
been  written,  serve  to  excite  man  to  love  God  and  his  neighbour. 
For  "  the  end  of  the  commandments  is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart, 
and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned,  1  Tim.  i.  5. 

If  this  law  of  love  shall  conduct  the  sinner  to  a  knowledge  of  his 
misery,  he  must  then  know  that  it  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant 
of  grace,  as  a  rule  of  gratitude.     Paul  views  it  thus,   Rom.  xii.  and 
xiii.  and  the  instructor,  in  the  doctrine  of  gratitude.     This  law  hath 
a  respect  also  to  the  covenant  of  vv'orks,  as  the  condition  of  it,  which 
God  demanded  of  man,  with  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of 
death.     In  this  manner  is  the  law  exhibited  in  the  text,  as  appears 
from  the  connexion  :  and  it  is  thus  also  proposed  by  the  instructor 
in  our  present  Lord's  day,  in  order  to  convince  and  humble  the  sin- 
ner.    It  is  necessary  to  explain  here  in  some  measure  the  covenant 
of  works    Tlie  good,  holy,  and  righteous  Creator,  and  Supreme  Ruler 
established  this  covenant  before  the  fall  with  Adam,  who  was  holy 
and  able    to  fulfil  the  condition  of  it,  and  it  was  established  in  him, 
as  the  head,  with  the  whole  human  race.    The  Lord  demanded  that 
Adam  should  obey  him  perfectly,  and  thus  love  God  and  his  neigh- 
bour.   This  demand  was  co  natural  to  him  and  all  his  posterity  with 
the  image  of  God  ;  which  appears  from  the  remains  of  this  law  in 
the  heathens,  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.     It  is  true,  we  read  only  of"  the  cov- 
enant of  eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  Gen.  ii. 
17.  but  this  can  be  considered  only  as  a  probationary  command, 
whereby  Adam  was  to  be  proved  for  some  time,  whether  he  would 
continue  good,  or  become  evil,  and    whether  he  would  love  God 
more  than  the  creature,   or  the  creature  more  than  God  ;  as  the 
Saviour  commanded  that  presumptuous  young  man  "  to  sell  all  his 
goods,  and  give  to  the  poor,"  that  he  might  prove  him,  whether  he 
had,  as  he  pretended,  truly  "  kept  the  whole  law  from  his  youth  up," 
Matt.  xix.  17,  22.     This  demand  God  enforced  with  the  promise  of 
life,  that  he  might  encourage   Adam  to  observe  it  perfectly  :  "For 
Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man 
who  doth  those  things  shall  live  by  them,"  as  Paul  explains  it,  Rom. 


feUT  OF  THE  liAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.         25 

X.  5.     Which  hfe  was  sealed  to  him  by  the  tree  of  life.     By  this 
life  we  must  understand  not  only  corporal  and  spiritual,  but  ako  eter- 
nal life  :  and  that  not  only  in  Paradise,  but  also  in  heaven  itself,  into 
which  he  should  be  admitted  after    he  time  of  his  probation.     For 
whatever  the  elect  sinner  obtains  by  Christ,  he  lost  in  Adam,  and 
therefore  also  everlasting  life  in   heaven.     This  is  shown  with  the 
utmost  evidence  by  the  apostle,  Rom.  v.  12,  19.  viii.  3,  4.     God  en- 
forced his  commi^ind  also  with  a  threatening,  that  "  he  should  surely 
die,"  if  he  transgressed.     See  Gen.  ii.  If.  By  which  we  must  neces- 
sarily understand  corporal,  spiritual  and  eternal  death  ;   ^vhich  threat- 
ening is  otherwise  called  the  curse  :  "  For   it  is  written,  cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  Arritten  m  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10.     Neither  our  time  nor  method  will 
permit  us  to  enter  largely  upon  this  subject,  in  order  to  prove  the 
reality  of  this  covenant.     We  say  briefly,  that  the  constituent  parts 
of  the  covenant,   to   wit,  the   covenanting   parties,   the  condition, 
promise,  threatening,  and  the  seal  of  the  covenant,  or  the  tree  of 
life,,  occur  in   many  passages  of  scripture,  particularly  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Certainly  Hosea  vi.  7,  compared  with  Job  xxxi.  3S,  supposeth  that 
Adam  stood  in  a  covenant  relation  with  God.     Paul  teacheth  Rom» 
yii.  1,  2,  3.  that  the  sinner  ib  bound  to  the  law,  as  the  woman  is  to 
her  husband  by  a  marriage  covenant.     All  the  parts  of  the  covenant 
of  works  are  opposed  to  all  the  parts  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  as 
"  Adam  and  Christ,"  Rom.  v.  1  Cor.  xv.  "  Works  and  grace,"  Rom. 
vi.  U.  xi.  6.   "  The  law  of  works  and  the  law  of  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  ! 
37,  28.  See  also  Rom.  viii.  3,  4. 

Inasmuch  now  as  Adam,  and  in  him  all  his  posterity,  have  broken 

this  covenant,  as  will  appear  upon  the  seventh  question,  therefore  the 

law  that  promised  life  to  them  upon  their  keeping  of  it,  could  not 

adjudge  them  to  life.     For  "  the  law  cannot  do  this,  because  it  is 

weak  through  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii.  3.     The  law  condemns  them, 

«  it  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15.  it  declares  to  them  that  »'  tlicy  are 

sunder  the  curse, '  Ga!.  iii.  10.  and  discovereth  to  thern  that  they  are 

■wretched  and   miserable  ;  for  "  we  know  "  as  Paul   declares,  Roiti. 

iii.  19,  20.  "  that  whatsoever  things  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them 

who  are   under  the  law  -•  that  every  mouth  may  be   stopped,  and  all 

the  world   may  become  guilty  before   God.  Therefore  by  the  deeds 

•f  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in   his  sight :  for  by  the 

law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  And  for  this  end,  namely,  that  the  law 

may  convince  man  of  his  misery,  it  still  remains  m  *'  the  heathens, 

who  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,  accusing  or  else 

excusing  themselves,"  Rom-  ii.  14,  15.     But  the  law  is  become  ^ 

H 


36  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

obscure,  that  it  is  scarcely  legible  any  more,  and  it  is  therelbre  not 
su-iicisini  to  drscover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him.  God  nevertheless 
\villinij;  through  his  free  mercy  to  prepare  sinners  for  salvation,  and 
for  this  end  to  humble  them  by  the  knowledge  of  their  misery,  re- 
published hi<^  law  in  the  clearest,  and  most  solemn  manner  from 
mount  Hort^b,  with  exceedmgly  dreadful  tokens,  that  he  might  by 
that  law  convince  the  breakers  of  the  covenant  of  their  damnable 
condition.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  v.  20.  "The  law  enter- 
ed, that  the  offence  might  abound-"  God  did  indeed  give  his  law 
that  it  might  be  a  rule  of  gratitude  for  those  who  were  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  Exod.  xx.  which  he  had  established  with  Israel,  Exod. 
xix.  but  also  that  he  miq^ht  teach  the  sinner  his  misery.  All  the 
Israelites  were  not  the  true  covenant  people  of  God :  many  entered 
only  outwardly  into  the  covenant,  and  viewed  it  simply  as  a  covenant 
of  works,  w^hich  they  were  bound  to  Observe  by  their  own  strength 
as  tney  said,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  we  will  do,"  Exod.  xix. 
8.  xxiv.  3.  And  in  the  same  manner  have  the  latter  Jews  also  con- 
ducted toward  the  lav,  as  Paul  accuseth  them,  Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  x. 
2,  3,  "  They  will  be  under  the  law,  and  in  bondage,"  to  it,  Gal  iv. 
21,  25.  And  so  the  law  serveth  only  to  convince  them  of  their 
misery,  and  ta  condemn  them,  and  is  "  a  ministration  of  death  and 
condemnation"  to  them,  2  Cor.  iii  7,  9.  God  gave  the  law  even  to 
the  believing  Israelites  under  the  Old  Testament,  to  humble  them, 
by  discovering  their  imperfection  to  them,  and  that  he  might  cause 
them  to  seek  their  salvation  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come.  For 
"  tJie  law  was  added  to  the  promise,"  to  discover  "  transgressions :" 
the  church  was  *'  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up,  and  the  law  was  her 
school  master,  to  bring  her  to  Christ,"  Gal.  iii.  19,  23,  24.  And  the 
law  serveth  still  to  convince  Jews  and  Gentiles  of  their  misery :  as 
Paul  mtimates  in  the  text,  and  in  \.hat  he  had  said  before,  vrs.  9, 
30.  The  law  is  also  exceedingly  well  calculated  to  teach  the  sinner 
his  misery  :  for  it  is  Hke  a  glass,  to  show  him  his  spots  and  defor- 
mity ;  and  like  a  right  rule,  to  show  him  his  declinations,  crooked 
ways,  and  unrighteousness,  1  John  iii-  4. 

if  the  sinner  shall  learn  his  misery  from  the  law,  he  must  come 
to  himseif,  compare,  and  examine  himself  by  the  law.  Therefore 
the  instructor  brings  him  to  himself,  and  asks  him,  "  Canst  thou  keep 
all  these  things  perfectly  ?"  and  he,  surveying;  himself  and  his  ac- 
tionr,saith,  >■'  In  no  wise  :  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and 
my  neighbour  "  It  is  supposed  here,  that  we  must  keep  the  law 
perfccllvj  according  to  the  covenant  of  works,  if  we  shall  enter  into 
lifcr    *'  If  tb.ou  v.ilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments,"  saith 


OUT  OF  TilC  LAW.     ? 


Christ  to  the  young  man,  who  sousjht  his  righteousness  by  the  law, 
Matt.  xix.  17.  See  also  Luke  x.  2S,  26,  27,  28.  It  is  shown  in  the 
exposition  of  the  seventh  question,  that  naan  was  once  able  to  keep 
the  law,  and  in  the  exposition  of  the  eighth,  that  he  cannot  keep  it 
now,  and  of  the  ninth,  that  he  is  still  obligated  to  keep  it.  We  will 
therefore  not  busy  ourselves  at  present  with  proving,  that  man  is 
without  strength  for  that  which  is  good,  because  we  must  do  this  in 
order  upon  the  eighth  and  ninth  questions.  It  will  suffice  at  present, 
to  know  that  the  sinner  hath  not  kept  the  law,  "  but  is  prone  l)y 
nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour."  This  ansv/er  is  an  occasion 
of  great  offence  to  the  Pelagians  :  they  imagine  that  human  nature 
hath  not  been  violated,  or  that  it  hath  been  at  most  only  weakened, 
and  that  the  will  of  man  is  free,  and  that  he  can  keep  the  law  per- 
fectly ;  but  they  add  for  decency's  sake,  «  with  the  help  of  God,"  and 
they  say  "  that  nature,  although  corrupt,  is  inclined  with  the  help  of 
grace  to  love  God  and  our  neighoour."  But  the  grace  of  God  doth 
not  help,  but  it  changes  nature  :  >'  We  must  be  changed  by  the  re- 
newing of  our  mind,"  Rom.  xii.  2,  and  "  become  new  creatures/'  2 
Cor.  V.  17.  Eph.  ii.  10.  Nature  is  indeed  wholly  degenerate,  men 
are  "  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  5. 

But  it  behooves  us,  lest  we  should  be  misconstrued.te  inquire  what 
we  are  to  understand  here  by  nature,  and  how  it  is  prone  to  hate 
God  and  our  neighbour.  By  nature  we  do  not  understand  here  the 
upright,  or  the  new  created  nature  of  man  ;  for  this  is  inchned  to 
love  God  and  our  neighbour ;  but  the  corruption  of  man,  which  is 
become  as  it  were,  his  nature,  so  that  "  he  is  a  natural  man,  not 
having  the  Spirit,"  Jude  vrs.  19.  2  Cor.  ii.  14.  and  thus  nature  is 
"  the  old  man,  and  the  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6,  which  remains  still 
in  part  in  the  regenerate,  as  Paul  complains,  Rom.  vii.  This  is  the 
sense  in  which  the  catechism  useth  the  word  nature  here  ;  for  it 
speaks  of  a  man  who  lives  yet  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works, 
w!io  is  "  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  and  who  is  not  yet 
delivered,  but  must  be  dealt  with,  in  order  to  his  deliverance. 

This  corrupt  "  nature  is  prone  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour.'* 
Thus  speaks  the  instructor  according  to  the  word  oftiod:  If  we 
should  cite  every  passage  of  scripture,  which  declares  this  expressly, 
we  should  extend  our  discourse  to  an  undue  length,  and  weary  both 
you  and  ourselves.  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  Exod.  xx.  5« 
Numb.  X.  35.  Deut.  vii.  10.  xxxii.  41.  Job.  xv  25,  26.  Psalm  xxi- 
8.  Ixviii.  1.  Ixxxi.  15.  cxxxix.  20.  Prov.  viii.  36.  John  xv.  IS,  23, 
24.  Rom.  i.  30.  viii.  7.  And  not  only  the  nature  of  some  abomina- 
ble wretches,  who  sin  against  God  with  a  high  hand,  but  the  nature 


28  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

of  every  individual,  is  so  degenerate.  Paul  "  proves  that  Jev^^s  and 
(Gentiles  are  all  under  sin  ;  as  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous, 
no  not  one  :  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,"  Rom.  iii  9?  18,  and 
although  the  word  of  Crod  did  not  assert  this,  experience  would  still 
teach  it.  He  who  attends  to  the  emotions,  issues,  and  inclinations 
of  the  heart  in  himself,  and  in  others,  will  be  convinced  by  experi- 
ence, that  what  the  instructor  saith  here  is  the  truth.  For  (1)  all 
the  thoughts,  considerations,  and  imaginations  of  sinful  nature  con- 
cerning what  God  hath  revealed  or  commanded,  are  wholly  "con- 
trary to  God's  thoughts,"  Isaiah  Iv.  8.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God  :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed 
can  il  he,"  saith  the  apostle,  Rom.  viii.  7.  There  are  "  imaginations 
and  high  things,  that  exalt  themselves  a5i:ainst  the  knowledge  of 
God,"  2  Cor  X.  5.  For  whence  else  proceed  so  many  evil  and  hate- 
ful opinions  and  iniquities,  that  do,  as  it  were,  deluge  the  world  ?  (2) 
Sinful  nature  doth  not  surely  love  God  ;  for  where,  and  in  what  man, 
who  hath  no  more  than  nature,  do  we  see  tliat  high  estimation  of 
the  Lord,  that  ardent  desire  of  union  with  him,  and  of  enjoying  him, 
that  cheerful  satisfaction  in  God,  and  that  steadfast  inclination  to  do 
his  will,  and  that  of  hone  other,  heartily  ?  It  is  certain,  that  where 
there  is  no  love,  there  must  be  hatred  :  and  that  v/here  there  is 
hatred,  there  is  no  love  :  See  this.  Judges  xiv.  16.  xvi.  15.  (3)  The 
sinner  loves  nothing  by  nature  but  sin.  This  appears  from  all  those 
evil  emotions  of  the  sinful  nature,  and  from  the  sinners  cherishing 
of  thos'j  emotions..  He  seeks  his  honour,  pleasiire  and  profit  in  sin» 
I^e  is  so  closely  wedded  to  it,  that  "  though  such  a  fool  should  be  brayed 
in  a  mortar  with  a  pestil  among  wheat,  yet  would  not  his  foolishness 
depart  from  him,"  Prov.  xxvii.  22.  Now  he  who  so  loves  that  which 
the  Lord  hates,  doth  not  he  hate  the  Lord  ?  surely  the  Lord  judges 
so  :  '*  He  I'aat  sinneth  against  me,  wrongeth  his  own  soul ;  all  they 
that  hate  me  love  death,"  saith  he  by  the  mouth  of  Solomon,  Prov. 
viii.  36.  (4)  The  sinner  ends  with  all  that  he  ieth  in  himself.  It  is 
the  nature  of  love  to  God  to  do  all  things  for  the  Lord's  sake,  even 
"  eating  and  drinking,"  1  Cor.  x.  31,  but  the  sinner  is  prone  by  na- 
ture to  do  all  things  for  his  own  sake  :  he  imagines  "  that  he  is  some- 
thing, and  some  great  one,"  with  Theudas  and  Simon  the  sorcerer, 
Acts  V.  36.  viii.  9,  and  he  therefore  wishes  that  all  things  should 
issue  for  him,  and  so  "  he  sets  his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxviii. 
2.  He  aims  even  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God  :  for  "  he  stretch- 
eth  out  his  hand  against  God,  and  strengtheneth  himself  against  the 
Almighty  ;  he  runneth  upon  him,  even  upon  his  neck,  upon  the 
thick  bosses  of  his  buckler/'  saith  Eliph^3,  Job  xy.  25,  26,     And  this 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  S,  4  5.        29 

is  natural  to  the  sinner,  he  hath  inherited  it  with  his  nature  from  his 
parents,  who,  while  they  were  in  Paradise,  wished  to  "  be  hke  Ood," 
Gen.  iii.  5,  6,  22.  And  what  think  ye  ?  is  not  this  hating  God  ?  (5) 
Kow  doth  the  nature  of  man  act,  when  God  walketh  contrary  to 
man  !  How  fretful  and  sullen  is  nature  !  how  doth  she  censure  the 
dealings  of  God,  and  complain  with  great  discontentment,  as  though 
God  afflicted  her  wron:^-fully  !  When  the  sinner  is  hardly  bestead 
and  hungry,  he  then  frets,  curses  his  God  and  king,  and  looks  up- 
ward," Isaiah  viii.  21.  Even  when  the  wind  and  weather  arc  not  as 
he  wishes,  he  murmurs,  and  requires  that  God  should  wait  on  him 
as  his  slave  with  all  his  elements ;  and  when  he  doth  not,  he  cen- 
sures the  government  of  the  Lord.  What  an  abominable  monster 
is  man  !  and  into  what  a  bottomless  pit  of  horrible  wickedness  is  he 
fallen  headlong  1  (6)  Further,  doth  God  attempt  to  excite  the  sinner 
to  obey  and  love  him,  by  convincmg  him  sensibly  of  his  hateful 
heart,  and  of  his  abominal)le  condition,  and  by  drawing  him  from 
his  sweet  sins,  that  he  may  bring  him  under  his  yoke,  how  doth  hQ 
struggle  against  it,  "  like  a  heifer  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke,  that  he 
may  break  those  bands,  and  cast  away  those  cords  from  him  1" 
Psalm  ii.  3.  He  will  not  bov/  and  yield  to  such  strait  bonds  :  "  He 
is  stiff-necked,  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears,  he  resists  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  Acts  vii.  51.  Yea,  he  is  unwilling  to  do  the  least 
thuig,  by  which  he  may  serve  God  :  "  he  says.  Behold  what  a  weari- 
ness is  it !  and  ye  have  snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Mai. 
1.  13.  Once  more,  (7)  The  natural  man  hates  his  neighbour,  and 
therefore  he  doth  not  love  God,  but  hates  him.  This  the  beloved 
disciple  of  Christ  teacheth  us,  I  John  iv.  20. 

Sinful  man  is  prone  by  nature  not  only  to  hate  God,  but  "  his 
neighbour  also,"  We  were  sometimes  hateful  and  hating  one 
another,"  saith  Paul,  Tit.  iii.  3.  Do  wc  not  see  this  daily  in  our- 
selves and  in  others  ?  (a)  For  nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  one 
man  despises  another :  every  one  thinks  that  he  is  the  best,  and  the 
worthiest,  and  he  therefore  esteems  his  neighbour  less  than  himself, 
and  he  cannot  endure  it,  that  he  is  honoured  and  loved  more  than 
himself:  he  will  be  angry  with  him,  and  will  not  be  able  to  "  speak 
peaceably  to  him,"  as  Joseph's  brethren  manifested  their  hatred  to 
him,  "  when  they  saw  that  his  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his 
brethren,"  Gen.  xxxvii.  4.  (b)  It  is  certain,  and  daily  experience 
sheweth  it,  that  the  natural  man  hath  but  little  inclination  to  do  good 
to  his  neighbour,  when  he  cannot  gain  aught  by  it  himself.  When 
his  neighbour  hath  need  of  him,  and  desires  aught  of  him,  he  will 
behave  himself  proudly  and  despitefully  toward  him,  because  he  will 


3p  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

pot  spare  aught  of  what  he  hath,  as  Nabal  showed  his  hatred  to 
David,  1  Sam.  xxv.  10,  11.  (c)  Who  knows  not  that  the  sinner  can- 
not endure  to  see  the  welfare  of  his  neighbour  ?  will  not  the  honour, 
profit  or  pleasure  of  another,  fill  him  with  envy,  and  cause  him  to 
persecute  his  neighbour  even  to  death  ?  The  Pharisees  had  no  other 
reason  for  opposing  Jesus  and  his  apostles  with  such  a  great  malig- 
nity. Matt,  xxvii.  18.  Acts  v,  14 — 18.  (d)  How  often  do  we  see  the 
smncr  start  up,  inflamed  with  intense  hatred  and  violent  anger,  on 
account  of  the  smallest  injury,  which  he  suffers,  or  only  imagines 
that  he  suffers  :  he  is  forthwith  ready  with  wicked  Lamech  to  re- 
venge it  sevenfold,"  Gen.  iv.  23,  24.  (e)  How  can  any  one  under- 
take to  vindicate  the  wicked  inclinations  of  sinful  nature,"  it  surely 
manifests  its  v.'ickedness,  when  it  hates  even  those  who  endeavour 
to  amend  and  save  it  by  faithful  reproofs  and  admonitions  :  the  sin- 
ner cannot  indeed  brook  that  his  sins  and  eternal  misery  should  be 
so  plainly  and  nakedly  discovered  to  him.  "  He  hates  him  who  re- 
bukes in  the  gate,  and  he  abhors  him  who  speaks  uprightly,"  Amos 
V.  10.     See  also  Isaiah  xxix.  21.   t  Kings  xxii   8. 

But  with  what  cloaks  of  shame  will  men  hide  this  filth  of  sin  ?  (1; 
Will  it  be  said,  that  the  person  v/ho  speaks  here  is  a  believer,  who 
professed  in  the  first  question  that  he  belonged  to  Christ,  and  who  is 
truly  inclined  tolove  God  and  his  neighbour  ?  This  v/ould  appear  some- 
what plausible,  if  the  catechism  were  a  confession,  which  every  be- 
liever made  upon  each  question  concerning  himself  and  the  temper 
of  his  mind,  and  not  an  instruction  in  the  Christian  doctrine,  which 
introduceth  one  while  a  believer  as  speaking,  and  then  an  unconvert- 
ed  person,  and  thus  here  a  smner,  who  is  subject  to  a  broken  cove-, 
nant  ot  works.  And  admit  that  a  believer  speaks  here,  it  is  never- 
theless with  respect  to  his  former  condition,  when  he  had  such  a 
v/icked  nature,  and  with  respect  to  the  old  man  and  nature,  which 
still  remains  in  him  in  a  great  measure,  as  Paul  speaks  of  himself, 
Rom.  vii.  (c)  Doth  this  answer  disturb  the  weak  tvoo  much,  we  may 
not  therefore  reject  any  necessary  article  of  the  fundamental  doctrines 
of  Christianity.  The  weak  must  be  instructed,  and  convinced  of 
their  corrupt  nature  :  but  I  do  not  believe  that  weak  believers  are 
offended  at  this ;  for  they  see,  and  are  too  much  grieved  on  account 
of  their  evil  nature.  They  are  the  Pelagians  who  are  offended  here, 
for  they  will  not  be  discovered  to  themselves  that  they  may  seek 
their  whole  salvation  in  Christ  alone.  (3)  If  we  do  not  see  such  de- 
pravity in  all  men,  it  is  either  because  we  have  not  eyes  to  see  it, 
because  m  my  lu.ve  no::  an  opportunity  to  exert  their  hateful  nature. 
Peter  could  suv  from  his  iove  to  Christ,  "  I  will  in  no  wise  deny 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3i 

thes;"  but  not  -when  he  ^vas  in  the  hall  of  Caiaphas  :  others  are 
prevented  by  restraining  grace  from  sinning  against  the  Lord,  as 
Abirnelech,  Gen.  xx.  6  :  and  some  are  converted  and  strive  against 
themselves.  (4)  If  men  cannot  hate  God  as  the  supreme  f^ood,  they 
can  hate  l;im  as  the  supreme  evil.  The  sinner  is  blind,  and  the 
loveliness  of  God  is  hidden  from  him  :  the  opinions  that  he  forms 
of  God  are  hateful  :  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,"  saith  the 
sinner,  Lzek.  xxxiii.  20,  and  "  it  is  vain  to  serve  God,"  2cc.  Mai.  iii. 
14,  15,  and  therefore  he  hates  God. 

If  we  now  compare  our  evil  nature  with  the  commands  of  God,  we 
will  see  clearly  and  plainly,   that  we  are  miserable  and  abominable. 
For  it  appears  kence,  (a)  that  we  are  altogether  different  from  what 
v/e  ought  to  be.   We  ought  to  love  God  and  our  neighbour  perfectly, 
and  this  ought  to  be  natural  to  us.    But  instead  of  this  we  are  prone 
by  nature  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  we  are  thus  *'  a  crook- 
ed and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.   xxxii.  5.  Philip,  ii.    15.  (b)  It 
appears  hence  also,  that  v/e   have  no  portion  in  the  life  which  was 
promis'jd  upon  the  perfect  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  :  but  that 
we  deserve  death  and  the  curse,  and  are  already  condemned  thereto. 
"  For  as  many  as  art  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  : 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written   in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 
(c)  It  is  also  evident,  that  as  long  as  we  are  thus  disposed,  we  cannot 
amend  our  conduct,  and  therefore  cannot  surmount  our  misery.  For 
our  nature  is  wholly  degenera.e,  we  cannot  do  any  thing  but  sin  and 
transgress  the  law  of  God  by  hating  him  and  our  neighbour  ;  this  is 
indeed  become  our  nature  ;  and  who  can  alter  his  nature  and  natural 
disposition  ?  "  Can   the  Ethiopian  change   his  skin,  or  the  leopard 
his  spots  ?  then  ye  also  may  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil," 
saith  the  Lord  to  his  own  people,  Jer.  xiii.  23. 

And  thus  the  law  teacheth  the  sinner  his  misery,  (1)  As  a  rule, 
which  showeth  him  that  he  v/as  obli  cd  under  the  sanction  of  a 
promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love  God  and  his 
neighbour  perfectly.  The  conscience,  enlightened  and  informed  by 
the  law,  acknowledges  and  approves  of  this  obligation,  and  saith 
\vith  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  i2.  "  The  law  is  holy  ;  and  the  com.raandment 
is  holy,  and  just,  and  good." 

2.  The  law  is  also  an  accu-^er,  and  witness  to  him,  and  as  such 
awakens  his  sleeping  conscience,  and  calls  him  to  himself,  and  be- 
fore the  tribunal  of  God,  to  behold  there  with  shaine  his  hateful  and 
evil  nature,  and  his  abominable  conduct.  *' There  is  one  that  ac- 
cuseth  you,  even  Moses,"  saith  the  Saviour,  John  v.  45.     And  thus 


32  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

"  the  word"  of  the  law  "  is  a  judge  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
hearts,"  Heb.  iv.  12      See  also  Rom.  li    14,  15. 

3.  The  law  teacheth  him  his  misery  also  as  a  judge,  who  upon 
comparing;  the  duty  of  man  with  his  irregular  conduct,  pronounces 
the  dreadful  sentence  of  eternal  condemnation  on  him  :  *'  For  the  law 
worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  5.  "  It  stops  the  moutli"  of  the  trans- 
gressor, Rom.  iii.  19,  renders  him  anxious,  ashamed,  humble,  con- 
cerned, and  tender,  1  Kings  xxii.  11,  10,  and  causes  him  to  confess 
his  sins,  and  to  justify  God,  Psalm  li.  4. 

liut  as  no  word  of  God,  nor  any  use  which  man  can  make  of  it 
will  affect  the  mind,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  himself  influence 
the  heart,  so  neither  can  the  law  of  God,  nor  a  man's  meditations, 
teach  him  his  misery,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  accompany  them, 
and  "  convince  him  of  sin,  of  righteousness  and  judgment,"  John 
xvii.  8,  cause  him  to  "  mourn  and  lament  bitterly,"  Zech.  xii.  10, 
and  thus  become  to  him  "  a  Spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,"  Rom.  viii.  15. 
APPLICATION. 

If  time  would  permit,  we  might  easily  show  fiom  Vk'hat  hath  been 
said,  (a)  in  opposition  to  the  Socinians,  that  the  love  of  our  enemies 
was  commanded  under  the  Old  Testament  also,  inasmuch  as  our 
enemies  are  also  our  neighbours,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour  is 
enjoined  by  the  law  and  the  prophets  :  (b)  in  opposition  to  the  Pa- 
pists, that  a  sinner  is  not  justified  before  God  by  the  law,  because 
*'  by  the  Jaw  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  Paul  teacheth  us  this,  Rom. 
iii.  19,  20.  (c)  and  in  opposition  to  the  Aniinomians,  or  adversaries 
of  the  law,  that  the  law  must  siill  be  preached  strictly  :  for  we  learn 
thus  to  know  our  misery,  which  is  certainly  necessary.  But  we  may 
not  busy  ourselves  with  these,  though  othet  wise  exceedingly  weighty 
matters.  We  hasten  to  conclude,  and  have  still  many  important 
matters  to  lay  before  you  for  your  profit. 

Behold,  friends,  how  we  learn  our  misery  from  the  law,  and  how 
we  are  conducted  by  it  to  deliverance,  and  to  a  blessed  consolation. 
What  think  ye  '  have  ye,  (I  speak  to  you  all,  and  to  each  of  you  in 
particular)  have  ye  I  say  already  seen  in  the  law  your  misery  with 
sorroiv,  shame,  and  concern  ?  Is  it  evident  to  you,  and  do  ye  know 
experimentally,  and  with  anxiety,  that  ye  have  such  an  evil  disposi- 
tion, and  are  therefore  hateful,  and  deserve  condemnation  ?  Ye  have 
been  now  so  long  instructed  in  the  law.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  it  hath 
been  *ead  in  your  hearing ;  *  if  ye  have   had  any  decent  edueation, 

•  Tins  refers  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hollancf,  of  reading  the  ten 
commandments  every  sabbath,  at  the  beginning;  of  publick  worship,  which 
custom  is  still  retained  in  some  o*"  the  Dutch  churches  in  America,  It  is  the 
practice  to  read  also  the  creed,  and  a  chapter  from  either  the  Old  or  New- 
Testament,  at  the  beginning  of  worship- 


dtjT  OF  THE  LAW.       

ye  have  been  made  to  learn  and  say  it  by  heart ;  and  how  often  hath 
t.he  law  been  explained  to  you  fully,  and  in  order.  But  who,  yea  who 
hath  learned  his  misery  out  of  it,  so  that  it  hath  humbled  him  ? 
surely  very  few.  With  the  church  of  Laodicea,  our  present  Chris- 
tians imagine  that  '^'  they  arc  become  rich,  and  increased  in  c;oods, 
and  have  need  of  nothing  :  and  they  know  not  that  they  arc  v.'retch- 
ed,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blintl,  and  naked,"  Rev.  iii.  17.  Is 
not  this  true,  is  it  not  a  glaring  truth  ?  For, 

1.  The  most  of  you  have  never  yet  "  come  to  yourselves"  with 
the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv.  17.  Ye  concern  yourselves  with  every 
thing  that  doth  not  belong  to  yoii,  but  with  respect  to  yourselves,  ye 
are  never  at  home,  and  always  r,trangers  ;  the  honours,  pleasures 
and  profits  of  the  world  do  so  influence  your  whole  heart,  your  whole 
soul,  your  whole  understanding,  and  your  whole  strength,  and  do  so 
captivate  your  affections,  that  those  visible  things  "  have  shut  your 
eyes,  that  ye  cannot  ses  ;  and  your  heart  that  ye  cannot  understand  ; 
ye  feed  upon  ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  you  aside,  so  that 
ye  cannot  deliver  your  souls,  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  our  right 
hand  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  18,20.  And  therefore  "  ye  do  not  repent  of 
your  wickedness,  saying,  what  have  I  done  ?"  Jer   viii.  6. 

2.  Many  of  you  think  that  your  heart  is  good :  ye  depend  upon  it 
and  "trust  in  it,  like  the  fool,"  Prov.  xxviii.  26.  Because  ye  are 
not  guilty  of  any  public  and  scandalous  enormities,  which  are  cog- 
nisable by  the  magistrate,  but  are  decent  and  devout,  therefore  ye 
are  ready  to  say  v/ith  that  presumptuous  young  man,  Matt.  xix.  "  All 
these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up  :  v>^hat  lack  I  yet  ?" 
Sometimes  ye  survey  yourselves  with  pleasure  and  admiration,  be- 
cause ye  are  so  wise,  diligent,  good  natured,  exceedingly  virtuous, 
and  not  so  wicked  and  abominable  as  this  and  that  person :  and  ye 
are  even  ready  to  thank  God  for  it  v/ith  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  1 1, 
12.  Ye  will  never  believe  that  ye  hate  God,  and  your  neighbour, 
and  no  man  is  able  to  convince  you  of  it.  Ye  may  believe,  and  be 
'able  to  deriionstrate  from  the  word  of  God  against  the  adversaries. 
that  man  is  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour;  but 
that  ye  in  particular  are  co  evil  and  perverse,  ye  cannot  either  see 
or  believe. 

3.  It  is  true,  ye  ail  know  that  ye  are  great  sinners  :  but  how  do 
ye  knov/  this  ?  out  of  the  lav/,  and  by  comparing  yourselves  with  it? 
No,  but  only  from  report  and  heresay.  For  how  many  sins  have  ye  ? 
ye  say  indeed  that  your  r/ms  are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of 
your  head  ;  this  ye  have  heard  from  others,  and  ye  only  repeat  it 
without  thought  arr.ertheTT* :  for  ve  c?nnot  mention  six  sinr.,  of  which 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERV 

ye  are  guiUy.  For  ye  are  not,  as  ye  imagine,  idolaters,  profancrs  of 
God's  name  and  day  :  ye  have  always  been,  (according  to  your  opin- 
ion) even  during  your  childhood,  obedient  to  your  parents :  ye  are 
strangers  to  murder,  whoredomj  theft,  lying,  and  coveting  your  neigh- 
bour's goods,  and  have  an  aversion  from  such  abominations.  Where 
then  are  all  your  sins,  about  which  ye  make  such  an  ado,  as  if  ye 
knew  them  all  exceedingly  well  ?  But  ye  know  neither  the  spiritu- 
ality of  the  law,  nor  the  hateful  sink  of  your  own  heaits. 

4.  And,  friends,  if  ye  knew  your  misery,  would  ye  have  so  many 
cloaks  of  shame  at  hand  to  excuse  your  sins,  when  they  are  discoY- 
cred  to  you,  and  also  "  flatter  yourselves  so  in  your  own  eyes,  when 
your  iniquity  is  found  to  be  hateful  ?"  Psalm  xxxvi.  2.  Would  it 
indeed  displease  you  so,  when  your  abominable  and  miserable  condi- 
tion was  clearly  discovered  to  you,  and  when  we  would  awaken  you 
out  of  your  beloved  carelesness  ?  would  y  e  take  it  so  ill,  when  men 
did  not  honour  nor  love  you,  but  exposed  you  to  shame,  loss  and 
pain  ?  If  ye  knew  your  hateful  and  damnable  character,  ye  would 
certainly  see  that  ye  deserved  every  reproach  and  vexation ;  yea,  ye 
would  be  amazed,  that  such  monsters  as  ye  are,  should  enjoy  any 
good. 

5»  It  is  true,  some  of  you  know  their  misery,  they  see  without 
searching  that  they  are  abominable  :  for  their  sins  are  manifest,  and 
every  one  sees  them  ;  or  do  they  commit  sins  privately,  conscience 
accuseth  them,  and  tells  them  that  while  they  conduct  in  this  man- 
ner, they  cannot  be  saved.  But  I  pray  you  who  are  thus,  tell  us, 
have  your  sins  and  misery  ever  affected  your  hearts,  and  rendered 
you  concerned  and  anxious,  so  that  they  caused  you  to  cry  out  ear- 
nestly, "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  30.  Others  are 
seized  like  "  Felix,  with  fear,"  Acts  xxiv.  25,  but  they  soon  recover 
from  their  seasick  qualms  :  when  your  hearts  are  wounded  in  this 
manner  with  a  sharp  arrow,  what  is  it  that  relieves  you  so  soon  ?  yc 
cannot  retain  those  grievous  thougjhts  with  you,  but  endeavour  to 
divert,  or  banish  them  by  doing  this  or  that :  or  ye  suppress  them  by 
some  duty,  by  breaking  off  this  or  that  sin,  by  reading  your  bible, 
baying  a  prayer,  weeping  heartily,  until  your  mind  be  somewhat 
cased,  and  upon  this  all  your  distress,  and  according  to  your  imagi- 
nation, all  your  misery  is  at  an  end  :  or  ye  dispel  your  concern  by 
vain  imaginations,  that  it  is  your  duty  to  believe  in  Christ,  that  your 
gloomy  thoughts  proceed  only  from  the  devil  and  from  your  unbe- 
lief:  and  thus  ye  deceive  yourselves  with  vain  imaginations,  and 
'•  say  not,  there  is  no  hope  ;  for  ye  have  found  the  life  of  your  hands; 
therefore  ye  ar^  not  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.     Or  ye  become  des- 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3:. 

perate,  and  think  it  is  so  now  :  if  I  must  perish,  how  can  I  help  it  ? 
as  well  1  as  another  :  and  so  ye  indulge  &  pernicious  discouragement 
and  carelessness,  saying  with  your  heart  and  actions,  like  the  impeni- 
tent Jews,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10.  *•  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  be 
upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we  then  live  ?" 

But,  hearers,  ye  who  are  thus  disposed,  this  aggravates  your 
misery,  that  ye  do  not  yet  know  it.  To  hate  so,  and  to  be  so  hate- 
ful, and  not  to  know  it,  or  not  to  know  it  rightly,  how  dreadful  is  it ' 
How  shall  ye  be  delivered  ?  '•  Are  we  blind  also  r"  said  the  Pharisees. 
Jesus  said  unto  them.  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  woidd  have  no  sin  ;  buf 
now  ye  say,  v/e  see,  therefore  your  sin  remaineth,"  John  ix,  40,  41. 
If  ye  knew  your  misery  out  of  me  mw,  as  ye  ought,  ye  would  flee 
to  the  Mediator  and  be  deliverea :  but  now  ye  remain  in  yourselves, 
and  so  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  as  Paul 
speaks.  Gal.  iii.  10  .\nd  ye  do  not  yet  possess  "Christ  for  justifi- 
cation, which  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  What  hath  bewitch- 
ed you  ?  what  do  ye  imagine  ?  Have  ye  nothing  to  do  with  God  ? 
Is  he  not  holy  and  just  f  do  ye  think  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indiffer- 
ence to  him,  whether  ye  love  or  hate  him  and  your  neighbour  ?  He 
will  most  surely  and  most  severely  recompense  and  punish  the 
abominations  of  your  hearts  and  actions.  Do  ye  not  believe  it,  hear 
then  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  say,  Psalm  xxi  8 — 12.  "  Thine 
hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  enemies  ;  thy  right  hand  shall  find  out 
all  them  that  hate  thee.  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 
the  time  of  thine  anger  :  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  his 
wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them,"  &c. 

What  say  ye  ?  Arc  ye  desirous  to  be  delivered  from  your  misery, 
and  to  become  other  persons,  than  ye  are,  or  are  ye  not  ?  Will  ye 
remain  as  ye  are,  and  suffer  your  hearts  to  wander  after  the  W'  rid 
and  sin  without  concern  ?  Go  on  then,  but  know  that  your  end  will 
be  bitterness.  But  are  ye  desirous  to  obtain  grace  and  salvation,  and 
will  ye  earnestly  endeavour  henceforth  to  save  your  souls  in  God'f? 
way. 

1.  Believe  then  that  ye  are  so  abominable,  that  ye  hate  God  and 
your  neighbour,  and  are  therefore  in  the  highest  degree  punishable 
before  that  dreadful  judge,  that  ye  may  begin  to  suspect  yourselveSj 
and  to  be  afraid.  Whether  ye  see  it  or  not,  it  is  nevertheless  the 
truth,  that  ye  are  hateful,  and  hate  one  another.  God  saith  it  in  his 
word  ;  the  reformed  church,  with  which  ye  hold,  teaches  it  from  the 
scripture,  and  there  is  not  one  of  those  who  are  delivered,  but  he 
sees  it  experimentally  in  himself,   and  it  would  lead  you  also  into 


36  TKE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

the  way  of  cleliverance,  if  ye  saw  it.     "  Only  acknowledge  thine  \nU 
quity,"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  iii.  3. 

2.  Know  that  ye  are  still  bound  to  the  law  of  works  in  order,  under 
the  san'  tion  of  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love 
God  and  your  neighbour  perfectly  :  and  that  since  ye  have  not  done 
this,  and  because  of  youi  wicked  nature,  cannot  do  it,  ye  are  still 
under  the  curse.  For  as  long  as  the  sinner  is  and  abides  in  l.is 
misery,  and  hath  not  been  convinced,  truly  regenerated,  and  convert- 
ed, and  haih  not  saving  faith  in  Christ,  so  long  he  is  and  abides  under 
the  law  of  works,  and  therefore  *'  under  the  curse,"  Gal,  iii.  10. 

3.  Examine  yourselves  with  a  full  purpose  of  heart  by  the  law, 
and  see  lio  w  far  ye  have  declined  from  the  demands  of  it.  Read  the 
catechism  once  and  again  from  the  thirty  third  to  the  forty  fifth 
Lord's  day,  and  see  what  virtues  are  commanded  and  what  vices  are 
forbidden  in  the  law:  and  consider  thoroughly  your  heat  and  ac- 
tions, that  ye  may  see  by  the  law  how  crooked  and  pervt  rse  ye  are. 
"  Lxamint:  yourselves  strictly,  yea  examine  yourselves  strictly,  O  ye 
listless  people,"  Zcph.  ii.  1. 

4.  Is  there  any  one,  who  beholds  with  shame,  concern  and  distress, 
his  hating,  hateful  and  punishable  nature,  let  him  flee  to  *'  Christ, 
the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  Sinner,  thou  who  art  concerned  ; 
he  calls  to  thee,  and  invites  thee,  *' Look  unto  me,  and  be  saved," 
saith  he,  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  "Come,  he  will  not  cast  thee  out,"  as  he 
saith,  John  vi  37  Do  not  stand  still  and  ponder  on  the  abominable- 
ness  and  gieatness  of  thy  sins,  nor  on  the  small  measure  of  thy  sor^ 
row;  It  is  great  enough,  if  it  render  thee  distressed,  and  dri^e  thee 
out  of  thyself:  our  concern  is  not  our  Saviour,  nor  is  it  in  itself 
agreeable  to  the  Lord  ;  but  it  must  serve  merely  to  cause  the  sinner 
to  seek  his  salvation  cut  of  himself  in  the  Son  of  God. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  (a)  See  from  what,  and  how  ye 
are  delivered  :  that  hateful  sin  of  yours,  with  wliich  ye  formerly  hated 
God  and  your  neighbour,  is  through  the  love  of  God  to  mankind  for- 
given :  ye  are  renewed  after  the  image  and  love  of  God,  and  have 
obtained  a  new,  yea,  "a  divine  nature,"  Titus  iii.  5,6.  2  Peter  i.  4. 
The  lav/  cannot  condemn  you  any  lon;j,er  :  "  for  ye  are  dead  to  the  law 
through  the  body  of  Christ,"  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Sin,"  even  your  wicked 
nature,  "  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom  vi.  14.  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  haih  borne 
for  you  the  curse,  to  which  ye  had  exposed  y©urselves  by  your  wicked 
hatred,  and  "  hath  delivered  you  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been 
made  a  curse  for  you,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Yea,  the  Lord  God  hath  made 
t'.r't  In-'  M'hich  condemned  you,  serve  you,  tliat  ye  might  be  delivered 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.      

from  it  by  Christ,  when  he  convinced  you  by  the  law,  that  he  might 
drive  you  out  of  yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  seek  life  with  him : 
<^«  For  f  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live  unto 
God,"  saith  the  apostle.  Gal.  ii.  19.  Behold  this  is  what  we  say, 
observe  God's  great  and  free  grace  and  love  in  this,  admire  it,  and 
praise  the  Lord,  with  Paul,  1  Tim.  i?  13,  14,  15.  (b)  Love  now  the 
Lord  your  God  with  all  your  might  and  most  heartily.  "  I  will  love 
thee  heartily,  O  Lord  my  strength,"  said  David,  v/hen  the  Lord  had 
deUvered  him  from  all  his  enemies.  Psalm  xviii.  1.  And  love,  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  your  neighbour  as  yourselves.  "  For  this  commandment 
have  we  from  him,  that  he  v/ho  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also," 
1  John  iv.  21.  Ye  are  indeed  dead  to  the  lav/,  and  it  is  not  given  to 
you,  as  a  condition  of  the  covenant  of  %^  orks,  to  seek  life  by  it,  and 
to  be  condemned  by  it ;  but  it  is  given  to  you  a-;  a  rule  of  gratitude  : 
it  is  indeed  an  expression  of  the  image  of  God.  Ye  are  and  always 
remain  bound  to  the  Lord,  to  love  him  and  your  neighbour :  he  is 
worthy  to  be  loved  and  obeyed  on  his  own  account ;  he  hath  imprint- 
ed the  law  of  love  on  your  hearts  ;  yea  his  great  love  to  you  hath 
bound  your  natural  obligation  to  love  him,  more  strongly  on  you, 
and  the  love  of  Christ  should  constrain  you,"  2  Cor.  v.  14.  (c)  Exer- 
cise yourselves  yet  daily  in  seeking  a  knowledc^e  of  your  miseries 
through  the  lav/,  with  Paul,  Rom>.  vii.  Is  it  become  your  nature  to 
love  God  and  your  neighbour,  your  nature  is  nevertheless  not  per- 
fect :  there  are  still  many  wicked  humours  in  it,  which  oppose  God 
and  your  neighbour:  "Ye  knov/,"  with  the  apostle,  Rom.  vii.  18, 
"  that  in  you,  that  is,  in  your  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing  :  for 
to  will  is  present  with  you  ;  but  hew  to  perform  that  which  is  good, 
ye  find  not."  This  would  conduce  to  your  happiness,  it  would  hum- 
ble your  souls,  cause  you  to  make  use  of  Christ  more,  and  to  be  more 
watchful,  (d)  Humble  and  abase  yourselves  in  secret  before  the 
Lord,  and  before  your  neighbour.  Will  ye  exalt  yourselves  on  ac- 
count of  the  excellency  of  the  revelation,  tliat  God  hath  delivered  you 
out  of  your  hateful  and  miserable  condition  ?  We  cannot  boast  of 
aught  but  what  we  have  of  ourselves,  and  what  is  worthy  to  be  boast- 
^A  of.  But  what  is  it  that  ye  have  of  and  in  yourselves  ?  is  it  not 
that  ye  hate  God  and  your  neighbour,  and  have  rendered  yourselves 
damnable  and  detestable  ?  are  yc  not  so  hateful  now  ?  Is  there  not 
now  yet  wickedness  enough  in  your  nature  to  make  you  repeatedly 
ashamed  ?  Is  there  aught  that  is  good  in  your  soul  ?  "  Who  maketh 
you  to  differ  ?  and  v/hat  have  ye  that  ye  have  not  received  ?  and  if 
ye  have  received  it,  why  do  yc  glory,  as  if  ye  had  not  received  it  ?" 
1  C>or.  iv.  7.     And  why  have  ye  received  it  ?  becau^.e  yc  were  sq 


38  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY,  &c. 

virtuous  and  amiable,  or  should  become  so  of  yourselves  ?  Ye  know 
v/hat  ye  have  been,  and  still  would  be,  if  God  should  leave  you  to 
yourselves  ;  "  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that 
not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  Therefore  acknowledge  your  unworthi- 
ness,  and  shrink  into  nothing  in  your  owa  eyes  on  account  of  this 
divine  grace,  with  Paul  1  Cor.  xv.  8,  9,  10,  Do  ye  stand  in  need  of 
any  thing,  ask  it  of  the  Lord  with  humility.  Doth  he  chastise  you, 
justify  him,  and  submit  to  his  hand  ;  for  though  it  should  lie  ever  so 
heavy  on  you,  **  he  doth  still  not  deal  with  you  after  your  sins,  nor 
reward  you  according  to  your  iniquities,"  Psalm  ciii.  10.  If  he 
should  afflict  you  more  grievously  than  he  dotb,  it  would  be  only 
according  to  the  demerit  of  your  wickedness.  Do  evil  men  trample 
upon  you,  and  tread  you  under  foot,  ye  ought  not  to  be  so  angry  • 
can  any  man  wrong  you,  who  have  so  often,  and  in  the  highest  de- 
gree wronged  and  hated  both  God  and  man  ?  lay  your  hand  then. 
upon  your  mouth,  with  David,  who  said,  3  Sam.  xvi.  10.  "Let  him 
curse  :  for  the  Lord  hath  said  to  him,  Curse  David.  Who  shall  then 
say.  Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  Hear  how  Paul  enjoins  on  be- 
lievers, Titus  iii.  2 — 7,  "  To  speak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawlers, 
but  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  men.  For  we  ourselves  also 
were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts 
and  pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another.  But  after  that  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
toward  man  appeared,  he  saved  us,"  Sec.  Do  ye  see  any  one  fall  into 
a  hateful  iniquity,  do  not  wonder  at  it,  and  do  not  despise  him  ;  that 
root  of  wickedness  exists  in  you  also;  and  God  restrains  it,  that  it 
doth  not  spring  up,  and  bring  forth  still  more  abominable  fruits : 
"but  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  your^ 
selves,  lest  ye  also  be  tempted,"  Gal.  vi.  1. 

Thus  ye  will  "  use  the  law  lawfully,  and  it  will  be  good  for  you," 
agreeably  to  I  Tim.  i.  8.  For  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle, 
Gal.  vi.  16.  "As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace  and 
inercy  shall  be  upon  them."  Amon. 
(   39   ) 
THE 

FIRST   CAUSE   OF 

GOOD  AND  EVILe 

III  LORD'S  DAY. 

Eccl.  vii.  29.  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made  mart 
upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions.

Q.  5.  Canst  thou  keefi  all  these  things  perfectly  ? 

A.  In  no  wise ;  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  my 
neighbour. 


B 


LESSED  are  they  that  moum :  for  they  shall  be  comforted,"  saith 
the  Consolation  of  Israel,  Matt.  v.  4.  Altliough  the  sinner  is  so  ex- 
ceedingly miserable,  he  will  not  mourn :  mourning  would  indeed 
disturb  his  sinful  joy.  Doth  his  conscience  reprove  him  at  times,  he 
stifles  it,  and  blesses  himself  in  his  heart,  saying  that  he  shall  have 
peace,  although  he  walks  in  the  imagination  of  his  heart.  But  hi& 
comfort  is  vain,  and  will  forsake  him,  when  death  seizeth  on  him- 
True  and  godl>  comfort  belongs  to  none  but  those  who  mourn  for 
their  misi^ry  :  for  they  only  are  capable  of  comfort :  "  The  Messiah 
was  sent  to  comfort  those  only  who  mourn,"  Isaiah  Ixi.  2.  There- 
fore the  Lord  requires  first  and  chiefly  of  his  people,  that  they  should 
acknowledge  their  iniquity,  in  order  that  he  may  restrain  his  anger 
which  is  kindled  against  them,  and  favour  them  with  his  loving  kind- 
ness, Jer.  iii.  11,13.    It  is  the  first  work  of  the  Comforter,  the  Hdy 


20  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

Ghost,  when  he  is  about  to  dispose  the  sinner  for  comfort,  to  "  con- 
vince him  of  his  sins."  The  men  at  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  the  jailer, 
and  Paul,  did  not  obtain  comfort,  before  they  knew  their  misery,  and 
cried  out  with  concern,  "  What  shall  we  do?"  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 
xvi.  30. 

Our  instructor  proceeds  also  in  this  manner,  in  order  to  comfort 
the  sinner.  He  had  set  before  his  pupil  the  only  comfort  in  all  its 
lustre,  in  the  first  question.  The  pupil,  eager  to  obtain  this  comfort, 
asks  his  teacher,  what  he  must  know,  and  therefore  do,  that  he  may 
live  and  die  happily  in  this  comfort.  Hereupon  he  is  taught  that 
he  must  know,  first,  how  great  his  sins  and  miseries  are,  in  the  second 
question.  But  inasmuch  as  the  sinner  cannot  learn  his  sins  and 
misery  of  himself,  therefore  he  inquires,  1.  Whence  he  shall  learn 
his  misery  in  the  third  and  fourth  question,  2.  Wherein  it  consists, 
from  the  fifth  to  the  eleventh  question. 
In  this  Lord's  day  we  are  taught, 

I.  In  general  that  we  know  our  misery  out  of  the  law,  in  the  third 
question. 

II.  And  it  is  then  explained  in  particular,  how  we  are  convinced 
out  of  the  law  of  our  misery,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  questions. 

I.  Truly  the  angels,  who  apostatized  from  God,  are  also  exceed- 
ingly miserable  :  their  sins  have  made  them  devils,  and  subjected 
them  to  eternal  damnation.  For  "  God  spared  not  tl  e  angels  who 
sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell,  and  delivered  them  into  chains 
of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Jude  vs. 
6.  "  Everlasting  fire  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt. 
XXV.  41.  "  The  whole  creation  also  is  become  subject  to  vanity,  and 
to  the  bondage  of  corruption  :  it  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  until 
now,"  Rom.  viii.  20,  21,  22.  But  the  instructor  speaks  not  of  the 
misery  of  the  angels,  nor  of  the  misery  of  the  whole  creation,  but 
only  of  man's  misery  :  because  we  have  the  greatest  concern  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  own  misery,  and  we  are  thereby  led  to  seek  for 
deliverance :  but  there  is  no  hope  of  deliverance  for  the  angels : 
"  For  verily  the  Saviour  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but 
he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham."  Heb.  ii.  16.  Is  the  whole 
creation  miserable,  it  is  on  account  of,  and  to  aggravate  the  misery 
of  man,  which  he  ought  to  know. 

That  man  is  miserable,  and  that  his  misery  consists  in  sin,  in 
punishment,  and  in  an  inability  lo  deliver  himself,  this  the  instructor 
will  show  in  the  sequel,  out  of  the  law.  He  teaches  us  now  only 
how  we  attain  to  a  knowledge  of  our  misery  by  the  law.  There  is 
none  so  near  to  a  man,  as  the  man  himself :  "  The  spirit  of  man 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.      21 

which  is  in  him,  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,"  saith  the  apostle,  1 
Cor.  ii.  11.     And  yet  we  must  shew  him  his  misery,  which  cleaveth 
to  him,  and  the  means,  whereby  he  may  attain  to  the  knowledge  of 
it-     This  appears  strange  ;  but  his  misery  is  natural  to  him,  and  he 
is  so  accustomed  to  it,  that  he  doth  not  consider  it  as  misery  :  he 
thinks  that  it  ought  to  be  with  him  as  it  is.     But  sin  hath  so  bewil- 
dered him  :  he  is,  as  it  were,  through  the  bewitching  power  of  ini- 
quity, beside  himself,  and  bereaved  of  his  reason,  and  he  busies  him- 
self only  with  things,  which  do  not  concern  him.  If  he  shall  be  healed, 
he  must,  with  "  the  prodigal  son,  come  to  himself,"  Luke   xv.  17, 
and  like  "  Ephraim,  become  acquainted  v/ith  himself,"  Jer.  xxxi.  19. 
But  what  shall  discover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him  ?  The  law  of 
God  is  the  best  mean  ;  *'  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  saith 
the  text.     We  read  of  a  ceremonial  Jaw,  by  which  God  prescribed 
to  Israel  the  manner  of  the  external   worship.     Paul  calls  it,  "  the 
law  of  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,"  Eph.  ii.  15.     God 
gave  also  a  civil  law,  by  which  the  civil   state  of  Israel  was  to  be 
regulated.     Of  this  law  Nichodemus  spoke,  when  he  said,  John  vii. 
51.     "  Doth  our  law  judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  know 
•what  he  doth  ?"  The  word  of  God   speaks  also  of  a  moral  law,  ex- 
pressed in  ten  commandments.     Israel  could  learn  their  misery  in 
some  measure  from  the  ceremonial  law,  because  all  the  blood-shed- 
dings  and  washings,  which  were  enjoined   on  them,  showed  them 
their  capital  uncleanness,  and  that  they  could  not  look  for  salvation, 
except  through  the  perfect  sacrifice  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come, 
as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  x.  1,  10.     The  civil  law  discovered  also  after 
a  certain  manner  the  sins  of  Israel  :  for  when  the  judges  punished 
the  outward  abominations  of  the  people,  often  with  great  severity, 
the  people  of  the  Lord  might  conclude  thence,  with  the  greatest  pro- 
priety, that  he,  who  was  a  righteous,  all-knowing,  and  almighty  judge, 
would  much  more,  and  with  much  greater  severity,  mark  and  punish 
sins,  yea,  even  those  of  the  soul.    But  the  moral  law  is  much  better 
calculated  to  convince  the  sinner  of  his  misery.     The  law  of  cere- 
monies, and  the  civil  law  were  given  to  Israel  only,  and  determined 
merely  the  outward  worship,  and  the  outward  righteousness  among 
men  :  but  the  moral  law  w*s  given,  not  to  Israel  only,  but  to  all  the 
posterity  of  x^dam  :  "  it  proves  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  be  all  un- 
der sin  ;  it  stops  every  mouth,    and  declares  the  whole  world  to  be 
g'M\y  before  God,"  Rom.  lii.  9,  19.  and  it  discovers  the  inmost  and 
rnoRi  hidden  corruption  and  sinful  lusting  of  the  heart:  "  I  had  not 
known   lust  to  be  sin,"  saith  Paul,  "  if  the  law  had  not  said,  Thou 
ahalt  net   co^t,"  Rom.  vii.  T.    Of  this  law  the  text  also  speaks,  as 


n  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

appears  from  what  the  apostle  had  said  before,  that  he  had  "proved 
according  to  this  law  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  all  under 
sin,"  and  particularly  that  they  were  guilty  of  the  sins,  which  are 
condemned  in  this  law,  and  were  therefore  "  all  guilty  before  God," 
vrs.  9,  19.  And  to  this  law  the  instructor  also  hath  respect  here,  as 
he  shows  from  the  demand  of  the  law  in  the  fourth  question. 

II.  But  how  shall  we  be  convinced  of  our  misery  out  of  the  law? 
We  must  in  the  first  place  know  what  God  requires  in  his  law,  and 
then  compare  ourselves  therewith.  The  instructor  asks,  with  respect 
to  the  first  particular,  "  What  doth  the  law  of  God  require  of  us  ?" 
and  he  answers,  that ''  Christ  teacheth  us  that  briefly.  Matt.  xxii.  37, 
38,  39,  40  "  where  the  Saviour  reduces  the  v/hole  sum  of  the  law 
to  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  so  to  two  commandments, 
or  tables,  according  lo  Deut.  vi.  5,  and  Lev.  xix.  18.  The  first  table^ 
or  first  commandment  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God," 
who  is  the  self  existent,  and  the  only  existing  God,  and  who  promis- 
ed himself  as  such  by  his  covenant  to  his  people,  and  is  therefore 
worthy  to  be  loved.  "  To  love  him"  is  to  have  a  high  esteem  of  him  ; 
to  desire  him,  in  order  to  be  most  intimately  united  to  him  and  to 
enjoy  him,  to  be  satisfied  and  rejoice  in  hiuj,  and  to  conduct  in  all 
things  according  to  his  mind.  1  may  not  expatiate  here  :  see  only 
Song  V.  8  — 16.  vii.  6.  John  xiv.  21,  23.  We  must  love  God  "  with 
all  our  heart,  with  all  our  soul,  with  all  our  mmd,"  and  according  to 
Luke  X.  27,  "  with  all  our  strength,"  and  so,  "  with  all  our  mijjht," 
Deut.  vi.  S.  These  several  words  betoken  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul;  if  we  will  distinguish  them,  the  heart  v/ill  then  denote  the  in- 
most desire  and  inclination  oi  the  mind  ;  the  soul  will  be  the  will ; 
the  mind  expresseth  the  apprehension,  judgment,  and  all  the  thoughts ; 
emd  the  strength  and  might  represent  in  what  manner  the  soul  and 
body  should  contribute  all  that  they  have,  and  exert  themselves  to 
love  God  :  and  thus  the  Saviour  would  show  by  this  accumulation  of 
words,  that  we  ought  to  love  God  perfectly,  and  without  any  defect. 
For  it  will  soon  appear,  that  the  perfect  demand  of  the  covenant  of 
works  is  exhibited  in  this  passage  ;  yea,  in  whatever  condition  man 
may  be,  he  is,  and  remains  obligated  by  nature  to  love  God  perfectly, 
on  account  of  his  loveliness  :  and  if  there  be  any  defect  in  his  love, 
h€  sins,  and  must  humble  himself,  and  seek  reconciliation.  To  love- 
God  thus  is  "the  first  commandment,"  because  it  is  commanded 
before  the  love  of  o\u'  neighbour,  and  because  love  to  God  is  ..'jie 
source,  from  which  love  to  our  neighbour  must  flow  :  "  Belov  (j, " 
saith  the  disciple,  wiiom  Jesus  loved,  "  let  us  love  one  another  .  for 
love  is  of  God,"  1  John  iv.  7,     This  is  also  the  first  copimap<Jment, 


OUT  OF  TflE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  3,  4,  5, 
because  the  second  commandment  of  loving  our  neighbour  must  yield 
to  this ;  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men,"  Acts  v.  29, 
This  was  nobly  exemplified  by  Levi,  Exod.  xxxii.  27,  28.  Deut. 
xxxiii.  9.  See  also  Matt.  x.  37.  This  first  is  also  "  the  great  com- 
mandment." The  second  commandment  is  also  called  great.  Mark 
xii.  31.  and  therefore  great  must  denote  in  Matthew  the  greatest :  God 
is  indeed  the  greatest  and  most  worthy  object,  whom  we  must  love 
with  the  greatest  and  the  strongest  affection,  with  the  whole  heart, 
&c.  as  he  is  worthy.  But  we  must  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves. 
Our  neighbour  is  here  not  only  our  kinsman  and  friend,  but  even 
our  enemy  :  the  Egyptians,  the  enemies  of  the  Israelites  were  also 
their  neighbours,  Exod  xi.  2.  The  Samaritans,  who  were  enemies 
of  the  Jews,  were  their  neiejhbours,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Jesus, 
Luke  x.  29 — 37.  "  We  must  indeed  love  enemies,"  Matt  v.  44, 
For  that  which  constitutes  one  man  a  neighbour  of  another  is,  that 
"  God  hath  made  all  the  nations  of  men  of  one  blood,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
and  because  one  man  is  the  brother  and  "  flesh  "  of  another,  Isaiah 
Ivii.  7.  since  we  have  all  proceeded  from  one  father  and  mother, 
Adam  and  Eve.  Therefore  we  must  love  our  neighbour,  and  so  es- 
teem him  highly,  as  the  most  glorious  creature  of  God  on  earth,  and 
as  our  brother  :  we  must  cleave  to  him  with  a  tender  affection,  and 
do  well  to  him.  But  must  I  "  love  him  with  my  whole  heart,  soul," 
&c.  as  I  must  love  God  ?  No,  but  as  myself.  The  love  which  a  man 
beareth  to  himself  is  the  pattern,  but  not  the  rule  of  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  the  law  of  God  alone  is  the  rule  ;  yea,  a  man  may  not  even 
propose  himself  in  all  things,  as  a  pattern  of  his  love  to  his  neigh- 
bour :  for  he  loves  himself  with  such  a  sottish  self-love,  that  "  he  sets 
his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxxviii.  2.  All  that  he  should  do 
for  God's  sake,  he  doth  for  his  own  sake  :  he  may  not  love  his  neigh- 
bour so  :  but  as  he  ought  to  love  himself  sincerely,  heartily,  nnd 
steadfastly  in  God,  and  for  God's  sake,  so  he  ought  to  love  his 
neighbour  also  in  this  manner,  and  therefore  perfectly.  For  it  is 
the  nature  of  a  man  to  love  himself  perfectly  ;  for  '•  no  man  ever  yet 
hated  his  own  flesh,  but  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  it,"  Eph.  v.  29o 
But  although  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  perfectly,  it  must  never- 
theless be  with  a  certain  distinction  :  one  is  nearer  to  me  than 
another.  We  ought  to  love  the  godly  more  than  others  :  *'  we  must 
do  good  to  all  men,  but  especially  to  them  who  are  of  the  household 
of  faith,"  Gal.  vi.  10.  "  This  second  commandment  is  like  the  first," 
because  it  proceeds  from  the  same  Lawgiver,  and  commands  one 
and  the  same  act  of  love,  although  toward  different  objects,  and  love 
to  our  neighbour  always  accompanies  love  to  God.     "  If  any  man 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

say,  I  love  God»  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar ;  for  he  who 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God 
whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  And  this  commandment  have  we  from 
him,  that  he  who  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also,"  1  John  iv.  20, 
21.  These  two  commandments  are  exceedingly  weighty  ;  for  "on 
them  hang'  the  whole  law  and  the  prophets."  The  law  and  the 
prophets  denote  here  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  Luke  xvi. 
29.  xxiv.  27.  And  all  these  scriptures  urge  men  to  love.  For  all 
the  histories,  commandments,  doctrines,  and  prophecies  that  have 
been  written,  serve  to  excite  man  to  love  God  and  his  neighbour. 
For  "  the  end  of  the  commandments  is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart, 
and  of  a  good  conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned,  1  Tim.  i.  5. 

If  this  law  of  love  shall  conduct  the  sinner  to  a  knowledge  of  his 
misery,  he  must  then  know  that  it  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant 
of  grace,  as  a  rule  of  gratitude.     Paul  views  it  thus,   Rom.  xii.  and 
xiii.  and  the  instructor,  in  the  doctrine  of  gratitude.     This  law  hath 
a  respect  also  to  the  covenant  of  vv'orks,  as  the  condition  of  it,  which 
God  demanded  of  man,  with  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of 
death.     In  this  manner  is  the  law  exhibited  in  the  text,  as  appears 
from  the  connexion  :  and  it  is  thus  also  proposed  by  the  instructor 
in  our  present  Lord's  day,  in  order  to  convince  and  humble  the  sin- 
ner.    It  is  necessary  to  explain  here  in  some  measure  the  covenant 
of  works    Tlie  good,  holy,  and  righteous  Creator,  and  Supreme  Ruler 
established  this  covenant  before  the  fall  with  Adam,  who  was  holy 
and  able    to  fulfil  the  condition  of  it,  and  it  was  established  in  him, 
as  the  head,  with  the  whole  human  race.    The  Lord  demanded  that 
Adam  should  obey  him  perfectly,  and  thus  love  God  and  his  neigh- 
bour.   This  demand  was  co  natural  to  him  and  all  his  posterity  with 
the  image  of  God  ;  which  appears  from  the  remains  of  this  law  in 
the  heathens,  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.     It  is  true,  we  read  only  of"  the  cov- 
enant of  eating  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,"  Gen.  ii. 
17.  but  this  can  be  considered  only  as  a  probationary  command, 
whereby  Adam  was  to  be  proved  for  some  time,  whether  he  would 
continue  good,  or  become  evil,  and    whether  he  would  love  God 
more  than  the  creature,   or  the  creature  more  than  God  ;  as  the 
Saviour  commanded  that  presumptuous  young  man  "  to  sell  all  his 
goods,  and  give  to  the  poor,"  that  he  might  prove  him,  whether  he 
had,  as  he  pretended,  truly  "  kept  the  whole  law  from  his  youth  up," 
Matt.  xix.  17,  22.     This  demand  God  enforced  with  the  promise  of 
life,  that  he  might  encourage   Adam  to  observe  it  perfectly  :  "For 
Moses  describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man 
who  doth  those  things  shall  live  by  them,"  as  Paul  explains  it,  Rom. 


feUT  OF  THE  liAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.         25 

X.  5.     Which  hfe  was  sealed  to  him  by  the  tree  of  life.     By  this 
life  we  must  understand  not  only  corporal  and  spiritual,  but  ako  eter- 
nal life  :  and  that  not  only  in  Paradise,  but  also  in  heaven  itself,  into 
which  he  should  be  admitted  after    he  time  of  his  probation.     For 
whatever  the  elect  sinner  obtains  by  Christ,  he  lost  in  Adam,  and 
therefore  also  everlasting  life  in   heaven.     This  is  shown  with  the 
utmost  evidence  by  the  apostle,  Rom.  v.  12,  19.  viii.  3,  4.     God  en- 
forced his  commi^ind  also  with  a  threatening,  that  "  he  should  surely 
die,"  if  he  transgressed.     See  Gen.  ii.  If.  By  which  we  must  neces- 
sarily understand  corporal,  spiritual  and  eternal  death  ;   ^vhich  threat- 
ening is  otherwise  called  the  curse  :  "  For   it  is  written,  cursed  is 
every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  Arritten  m  the  book  of  the 
law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10.     Neither  our  time  nor  method  will 
permit  us  to  enter  largely  upon  this  subject,  in  order  to  prove  the 
reality  of  this  covenant.     We  say  briefly,  that  the  constituent  parts 
of  the  covenant,   to   wit,  the   covenanting   parties,   the  condition, 
promise,  threatening,  and  the  seal  of  the  covenant,  or  the  tree  of 
life,,  occur  in   many  passages  of  scripture,  particularly  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Certainly  Hosea  vi.  7,  compared  with  Job  xxxi.  3S,  supposeth  that 
Adam  stood  in  a  covenant  relation  with  God.     Paul  teacheth  Rom» 
yii.  1,  2,  3.  that  the  sinner  ib  bound  to  the  law,  as  the  woman  is  to 
her  husband  by  a  marriage  covenant.     All  the  parts  of  the  covenant 
of  works  are  opposed  to  all  the  parts  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  as 
"  Adam  and  Christ,"  Rom.  v.  1  Cor.  xv.  "  Works  and  grace,"  Rom. 
vi.  U.  xi.  6.   "  The  law  of  works  and  the  law  of  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  ! 
37,  28.  See  also  Rom.  viii.  3,  4. 

Inasmuch  now  as  Adam,  and  in  him  all  his  posterity,  have  broken 

this  covenant,  as  will  appear  upon  the  seventh  question,  therefore  the 

law  that  promised  life  to  them  upon  their  keeping  of  it,  could  not 

adjudge  them  to  life.     For  "  the  law  cannot  do  this,  because  it  is 

weak  through  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii.  3.     The  law  condemns  them, 

«  it  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15.  it  declares  to  them  that  »'  tlicy  are 

sunder  the  curse, '  Ga!.  iii.  10.  and  discovereth  to  thern  that  they  are 

■wretched  and   miserable  ;  for  "  we  know  "  as  Paul   declares,  Roiti. 

iii.  19,  20.  "  that  whatsoever  things  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them 

who  are   under  the  law  -•  that  every  mouth  may  be   stopped,  and  all 

the  world   may  become  guilty  before   God.  Therefore  by  the  deeds 

•f  the  law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in   his  sight :  for  by  the 

law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  And  for  this  end,  namely,  that  the  law 

may  convince  man  of  his  misery,  it  still  remains  m  *'  the  heathens, 

who  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,  accusing  or  else 

excusing  themselves,"  Rom-  ii.  14,  15.     But  the  law  is  become  ^ 

H 


36  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

obscure,  that  it  is  scarcely  legible  any  more,  and  it  is  therelbre  not 
su-iicisini  to  drscover  the  sinner's  misery  to  him.  God  nevertheless 
\villinij;  through  his  free  mercy  to  prepare  sinners  for  salvation,  and 
for  this  end  to  humble  them  by  the  knowledge  of  their  misery,  re- 
published hi<^  law  in  the  clearest,  and  most  solemn  manner  from 
mount  Hort^b,  with  exceedmgly  dreadful  tokens,  that  he  might  by 
that  law  convince  the  breakers  of  the  covenant  of  their  damnable 
condition.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  v.  20.  "The  law  enter- 
ed, that  the  offence  might  abound-"  God  did  indeed  give  his  law 
that  it  might  be  a  rule  of  gratitude  for  those  who  were  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  Exod.  xx.  which  he  had  established  with  Israel,  Exod. 
xix.  but  also  that  he  miq^ht  teach  the  sinner  his  misery.  All  the 
Israelites  were  not  the  true  covenant  people  of  God :  many  entered 
only  outwardly  into  the  covenant,  and  viewed  it  simply  as  a  covenant 
of  works,  w^hich  they  were  bound  to  Observe  by  their  own  strength 
as  tney  said,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  we  will  do,"  Exod.  xix. 
8.  xxiv.  3.  And  in  the  same  manner  have  the  latter  Jews  also  con- 
ducted toward  the  lav,  as  Paul  accuseth  them,  Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  x. 
2,  3,  "  They  will  be  under  the  law,  and  in  bondage,"  to  it,  Gal  iv. 
21,  25.  And  so  the  law  serveth  only  to  convince  them  of  their 
misery,  and  ta  condemn  them,  and  is  "  a  ministration  of  death  and 
condemnation"  to  them,  2  Cor.  iii  7,  9.  God  gave  the  law  even  to 
the  believing  Israelites  under  the  Old  Testament,  to  humble  them, 
by  discovering  their  imperfection  to  them,  and  that  he  might  cause 
them  to  seek  their  salvation  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come.  For 
"  tJie  law  was  added  to  the  promise,"  to  discover  "  transgressions :" 
the  church  was  *'  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up,  and  the  law  was  her 
school  master,  to  bring  her  to  Christ,"  Gal.  iii.  19,  23,  24.  And  the 
law  serveth  still  to  convince  Jews  and  Gentiles  of  their  misery :  as 
Paul  mtimates  in  the  text,  and  in  \.hat  he  had  said  before,  vrs.  9, 
30.  The  law  is  also  exceedingly  well  calculated  to  teach  the  sinner 
his  misery  :  for  it  is  Hke  a  glass,  to  show  him  his  spots  and  defor- 
mity ;  and  like  a  right  rule,  to  show  him  his  declinations,  crooked 
ways,  and  unrighteousness,  1  John  iii-  4. 

if  the  sinner  shall  learn  his  misery  from  the  law,  he  must  come 
to  himseif,  compare,  and  examine  himself  by  the  law.  Therefore 
the  instructor  brings  him  to  himself,  and  asks  him,  "  Canst  thou  keep 
all  these  things  perfectly  ?"  and  he,  surveying;  himself  and  his  ac- 
tionr,saith,  >■'  In  no  wise  :  for  I  am  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and 
my  neighbour  "  It  is  supposed  here,  that  we  must  keep  the  law 
perfccllvj  according  to  the  covenant  of  works,  if  we  shall  enter  into 
lifcr    *'  If  tb.ou  v.ilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments,"  saith 


OUT  OF  TilC  LAW.     ? 


Christ  to  the  young  man,  who  sousjht  his  righteousness  by  the  law, 
Matt.  xix.  17.  See  also  Luke  x.  2S,  26,  27,  28.  It  is  shown  in  the 
exposition  of  the  seventh  question,  that  naan  was  once  able  to  keep 
the  law,  and  in  the  exposition  of  the  eighth,  that  he  cannot  keep  it 
now,  and  of  the  ninth,  that  he  is  still  obligated  to  keep  it.  We  will 
therefore  not  busy  ourselves  at  present  with  proving,  that  man  is 
without  strength  for  that  which  is  good,  because  we  must  do  this  in 
order  upon  the  eighth  and  ninth  questions.  It  will  suffice  at  present, 
to  know  that  the  sinner  hath  not  kept  the  law,  "  but  is  prone  l)y 
nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour."  This  ansv/er  is  an  occasion 
of  great  offence  to  the  Pelagians  :  they  imagine  that  human  nature 
hath  not  been  violated,  or  that  it  hath  been  at  most  only  weakened, 
and  that  the  will  of  man  is  free,  and  that  he  can  keep  the  law  per- 
fectly ;  but  they  add  for  decency's  sake,  «  with  the  help  of  God,"  and 
they  say  "  that  nature,  although  corrupt,  is  inclined  with  the  help  of 
grace  to  love  God  and  our  neighoour."  But  the  grace  of  God  doth 
not  help,  but  it  changes  nature  :  >'  We  must  be  changed  by  the  re- 
newing of  our  mind,"  Rom.  xii.  2,  and  "  become  new  creatures/'  2 
Cor.  V.  17.  Eph.  ii.  10.  Nature  is  indeed  wholly  degenerate,  men 
are  "  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  5. 

But  it  behooves  us,  lest  we  should  be  misconstrued.te  inquire  what 
we  are  to  understand  here  by  nature,  and  how  it  is  prone  to  hate 
God  and  our  neighbour.  By  nature  we  do  not  understand  here  the 
upright,  or  the  new  created  nature  of  man  ;  for  this  is  inchned  to 
love  God  and  our  neighbour ;  but  the  corruption  of  man,  which  is 
become  as  it  were,  his  nature,  so  that  "  he  is  a  natural  man,  not 
having  the  Spirit,"  Jude  vrs.  19.  2  Cor.  ii.  14.  and  thus  nature  is 
"  the  old  man,  and  the  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6,  which  remains  still 
in  part  in  the  regenerate,  as  Paul  complains,  Rom.  vii.  This  is  the 
sense  in  which  the  catechism  useth  the  word  nature  here  ;  for  it 
speaks  of  a  man  who  lives  yet  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works, 
w!io  is  "  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  and  who  is  not  yet 
delivered,  but  must  be  dealt  with,  in  order  to  his  deliverance. 

This  corrupt  "  nature  is  prone  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour.'* 
Thus  speaks  the  instructor  according  to  the  word  oftiod:  If  we 
should  cite  every  passage  of  scripture,  which  declares  this  expressly, 
we  should  extend  our  discourse  to  an  undue  length,  and  weary  both 
you  and  ourselves.  See  what  is  said  on  this  subject,  Exod.  xx.  5« 
Numb.  X.  35.  Deut.  vii.  10.  xxxii.  41.  Job.  xv  25,  26.  Psalm  xxi- 
8.  Ixviii.  1.  Ixxxi.  15.  cxxxix.  20.  Prov.  viii.  36.  John  xv.  IS,  23, 
24.  Rom.  i.  30.  viii.  7.  And  not  only  the  nature  of  some  abomina- 
ble wretches,  who  sin  against  God  with  a  high  hand,  but  the  nature 


28  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

of  every  individual,  is  so  degenerate.  Paul  "  proves  that  Jev^^s  and 
(Gentiles  are  all  under  sin  ;  as  it  is  written,  There  is  none  righteous, 
no  not  one  :  they  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,"  Rom.  iii  9?  18,  and 
although  the  word  of  Crod  did  not  assert  this,  experience  would  still 
teach  it.  He  who  attends  to  the  emotions,  issues,  and  inclinations 
of  the  heart  in  himself,  and  in  others,  will  be  convinced  by  experi- 
ence, that  what  the  instructor  saith  here  is  the  truth.  For  (1)  all 
the  thoughts,  considerations,  and  imaginations  of  sinful  nature  con- 
cerning what  God  hath  revealed  or  commanded,  are  wholly  "con- 
trary to  God's  thoughts,"  Isaiah  Iv.  8.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity 
against  God  :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed 
can  il  he,"  saith  the  apostle,  Rom.  viii.  7.  There  are  "  imaginations 
and  high  things,  that  exalt  themselves  a5i:ainst  the  knowledge  of 
God,"  2  Cor  X.  5.  For  whence  else  proceed  so  many  evil  and  hate- 
ful opinions  and  iniquities,  that  do,  as  it  were,  deluge  the  world  ?  (2) 
Sinful  nature  doth  not  surely  love  God  ;  for  where,  and  in  what  man, 
who  hath  no  more  than  nature,  do  we  see  tliat  high  estimation  of 
the  Lord,  that  ardent  desire  of  union  with  him,  and  of  enjoying  him, 
that  cheerful  satisfaction  in  God,  and  that  steadfast  inclination  to  do 
his  will,  and  that  of  hone  other,  heartily  ?  It  is  certain,  that  where 
there  is  no  love,  there  must  be  hatred  :  and  that  v/here  there  is 
hatred,  there  is  no  love  :  See  this.  Judges  xiv.  16.  xvi.  15.  (3)  The 
sinner  loves  nothing  by  nature  but  sin.  This  appears  from  all  those 
evil  emotions  of  the  sinful  nature,  and  from  the  sinners  cherishing 
of  thos'j  emotions..  He  seeks  his  honour,  pleasiire  and  profit  in  sin» 
I^e  is  so  closely  wedded  to  it,  that  "  though  such  a  fool  should  be  brayed 
in  a  mortar  with  a  pestil  among  wheat,  yet  would  not  his  foolishness 
depart  from  him,"  Prov.  xxvii.  22.  Now  he  who  so  loves  that  which 
the  Lord  hates,  doth  not  he  hate  the  Lord  ?  surely  the  Lord  judges 
so  :  '*  He  I'aat  sinneth  against  me,  wrongeth  his  own  soul ;  all  they 
that  hate  me  love  death,"  saith  he  by  the  mouth  of  Solomon,  Prov. 
viii.  36.  (4)  The  sinner  ends  with  all  that  he  ieth  in  himself.  It  is 
the  nature  of  love  to  God  to  do  all  things  for  the  Lord's  sake,  even 
"  eating  and  drinking,"  1  Cor.  x.  31,  but  the  sinner  is  prone  by  na- 
ture to  do  all  things  for  his  own  sake  :  he  imagines  "  that  he  is  some- 
thing, and  some  great  one,"  with  Theudas  and  Simon  the  sorcerer, 
Acts  V.  36.  viii.  9,  and  he  therefore  wishes  that  all  things  should 
issue  for  him,  and  so  "  he  sets  his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  Ezek.  xxviii. 
2.  He  aims  even  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God  :  for  "  he  stretch- 
eth  out  his  hand  against  God,  and  strengtheneth  himself  against  the 
Almighty  ;  he  runneth  upon  him,  even  upon  his  neck,  upon  the 
thick  bosses  of  his  buckler/'  saith  Eliph^3,  Job  xy.  25,  26,     And  this 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     11.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  S,  4  5.        29 

is  natural  to  the  sinner,  he  hath  inherited  it  with  his  nature  from  his 
parents,  who,  while  they  were  in  Paradise,  wished  to  "  be  hke  Ood," 
Gen.  iii.  5,  6,  22.  And  what  think  ye  ?  is  not  this  hating  God  ?  (5) 
Kow  doth  the  nature  of  man  act,  when  God  walketh  contrary  to 
man  !  How  fretful  and  sullen  is  nature  !  how  doth  she  censure  the 
dealings  of  God,  and  complain  with  great  discontentment,  as  though 
God  afflicted  her  wron:^-fully  !  When  the  sinner  is  hardly  bestead 
and  hungry,  he  then  frets,  curses  his  God  and  king,  and  looks  up- 
ward," Isaiah  viii.  21.  Even  when  the  wind  and  weather  arc  not  as 
he  wishes,  he  murmurs,  and  requires  that  God  should  wait  on  him 
as  his  slave  with  all  his  elements ;  and  when  he  doth  not,  he  cen- 
sures the  government  of  the  Lord.  What  an  abominable  monster 
is  man  !  and  into  what  a  bottomless  pit  of  horrible  wickedness  is  he 
fallen  headlong  1  (6)  Further,  doth  God  attempt  to  excite  the  sinner 
to  obey  and  love  him,  by  convincmg  him  sensibly  of  his  hateful 
heart,  and  of  his  abominal)le  condition,  and  by  drawing  him  from 
his  sweet  sins,  that  he  may  bring  him  under  his  yoke,  how  doth  hQ 
struggle  against  it,  "  like  a  heifer  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke,  that  he 
may  break  those  bands,  and  cast  away  those  cords  from  him  1" 
Psalm  ii.  3.  He  will  not  bov/  and  yield  to  such  strait  bonds  :  "  He 
is  stiff-necked,  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears,  he  resists  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  Acts  vii.  51.  Yea,  he  is  unwilling  to  do  the  least 
thuig,  by  which  he  may  serve  God  :  "  he  says.  Behold  what  a  weari- 
ness is  it !  and  ye  have  snuffed  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Mai. 
1.  13.  Once  more,  (7)  The  natural  man  hates  his  neighbour,  and 
therefore  he  doth  not  love  God,  but  hates  him.  This  the  beloved 
disciple  of  Christ  teacheth  us,  I  John  iv.  20. 

Sinful  man  is  prone  by  nature  not  only  to  hate  God,  but  "  his 
neighbour  also,"  We  were  sometimes  hateful  and  hating  one 
another,"  saith  Paul,  Tit.  iii.  3.  Do  wc  not  see  this  daily  in  our- 
selves and  in  others  ?  (a)  For  nothing  is  more  evident,  than  that  one 
man  despises  another :  every  one  thinks  that  he  is  the  best,  and  the 
worthiest,  and  he  therefore  esteems  his  neighbour  less  than  himself, 
and  he  cannot  endure  it,  that  he  is  honoured  and  loved  more  than 
himself:  he  will  be  angry  with  him,  and  will  not  be  able  to  "  speak 
peaceably  to  him,"  as  Joseph's  brethren  manifested  their  hatred  to 
him,  "  when  they  saw  that  his  father  loved  him  more  than  all  his 
brethren,"  Gen.  xxxvii.  4.  (b)  It  is  certain,  and  daily  experience 
sheweth  it,  that  the  natural  man  hath  but  little  inclination  to  do  good 
to  his  neighbour,  when  he  cannot  gain  aught  by  it  himself.  When 
his  neighbour  hath  need  of  him,  and  desires  aught  of  him,  he  will 
behave  himself  proudly  and  despitefully  toward  him,  because  he  will 


3p  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

pot  spare  aught  of  what  he  hath,  as  Nabal  showed  his  hatred  to 
David,  1  Sam.  xxv.  10,  11.  (c)  Who  knows  not  that  the  sinner  can- 
not endure  to  see  the  welfare  of  his  neighbour  ?  will  not  the  honour, 
profit  or  pleasure  of  another,  fill  him  with  envy,  and  cause  him  to 
persecute  his  neighbour  even  to  death  ?  The  Pharisees  had  no  other 
reason  for  opposing  Jesus  and  his  apostles  with  such  a  great  malig- 
nity. Matt,  xxvii.  18.  Acts  v,  14 — 18.  (d)  How  often  do  we  see  the 
smncr  start  up,  inflamed  with  intense  hatred  and  violent  anger,  on 
account  of  the  smallest  injury,  which  he  suffers,  or  only  imagines 
that  he  suffers  :  he  is  forthwith  ready  with  wicked  Lamech  to  re- 
venge it  sevenfold,"  Gen.  iv.  23,  24.  (e)  How  can  any  one  under- 
take to  vindicate  the  wicked  inclinations  of  sinful  nature,"  it  surely 
manifests  its  v.'ickedness,  when  it  hates  even  those  who  endeavour 
to  amend  and  save  it  by  faithful  reproofs  and  admonitions  :  the  sin- 
ner cannot  indeed  brook  that  his  sins  and  eternal  misery  should  be 
so  plainly  and  nakedly  discovered  to  him.  "  He  hates  him  who  re- 
bukes in  the  gate,  and  he  abhors  him  who  speaks  uprightly,"  Amos 
V.  10.     See  also  Isaiah  xxix.  21.   t  Kings  xxii   8. 

But  with  what  cloaks  of  shame  will  men  hide  this  filth  of  sin  ?  (1; 
Will  it  be  said,  that  the  person  v/ho  speaks  here  is  a  believer,  who 
professed  in  the  first  question  that  he  belonged  to  Christ,  and  who  is 
truly  inclined  tolove  God  and  his  neighbour  ?  This  v/ould  appear  some- 
what plausible,  if  the  catechism  were  a  confession,  which  every  be- 
liever made  upon  each  question  concerning  himself  and  the  temper 
of  his  mind,  and  not  an  instruction  in  the  Christian  doctrine,  which 
introduceth  one  while  a  believer  as  speaking,  and  then  an  unconvert- 
ed  person,  and  thus  here  a  smner,  who  is  subject  to  a  broken  cove-, 
nant  ot  works.  And  admit  that  a  believer  speaks  here,  it  is  never- 
theless with  respect  to  his  former  condition,  when  he  had  such  a 
v/icked  nature,  and  with  respect  to  the  old  man  and  nature,  which 
still  remains  in  him  in  a  great  measure,  as  Paul  speaks  of  himself, 
Rom.  vii.  (c)  Doth  this  answer  disturb  the  weak  tvoo  much,  we  may 
not  therefore  reject  any  necessary  article  of  the  fundamental  doctrines 
of  Christianity.  The  weak  must  be  instructed,  and  convinced  of 
their  corrupt  nature  :  but  I  do  not  believe  that  weak  believers  are 
offended  at  this ;  for  they  see,  and  are  too  much  grieved  on  account 
of  their  evil  nature.  They  are  the  Pelagians  who  are  offended  here, 
for  they  will  not  be  discovered  to  themselves  that  they  may  seek 
their  whole  salvation  in  Christ  alone.  (3)  If  we  do  not  see  such  de- 
pravity in  all  men,  it  is  either  because  we  have  not  eyes  to  see  it, 
because  m  my  lu.ve  no::  an  opportunity  to  exert  their  hateful  nature. 
Peter  could  suv  from  his  iove  to  Christ,  "  I  will  in  no  wise  deny 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3i 

thes;"  but  not  -when  he  ^vas  in  the  hall  of  Caiaphas  :  others  are 
prevented  by  restraining  grace  from  sinning  against  the  Lord,  as 
Abirnelech,  Gen.  xx.  6  :  and  some  are  converted  and  strive  against 
themselves.  (4)  If  men  cannot  hate  God  as  the  supreme  f^ood,  they 
can  hate  l;im  as  the  supreme  evil.  The  sinner  is  blind,  and  the 
loveliness  of  God  is  hidden  from  him  :  the  opinions  that  he  forms 
of  God  are  hateful  :  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,"  saith  the 
sinner,  Lzek.  xxxiii.  20,  and  "  it  is  vain  to  serve  God,"  2cc.  Mai.  iii. 
14,  15,  and  therefore  he  hates  God. 

If  we  now  compare  our  evil  nature  with  the  commands  of  God,  we 
will  see  clearly  and  plainly,   that  we  are  miserable  and  abominable. 
For  it  appears  kence,  (a)  that  we  are  altogether  different  from  what 
v/e  ought  to  be.   We  ought  to  love  God  and  our  neighbour  perfectly, 
and  this  ought  to  be  natural  to  us.    But  instead  of  this  we  are  prone 
by  nature  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour,  and  we  are  thus  *'  a  crook- 
ed and  perverse  generation,"  Deut.   xxxii.  5.  Philip,  ii.    15.  (b)  It 
appears  hence  also,  that  v/e   have  no  portion  in  the  life  which  was 
promis'jd  upon  the  perfect  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  :  but  that 
we  deserve  death  and  the  curse,  and  are  already  condemned  thereto. 
"  For  as  many  as  art  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  : 
for  it  is  written.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written   in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 
(c)  It  is  also  evident,  that  as  long  as  we  are  thus  disposed,  we  cannot 
amend  our  conduct,  and  therefore  cannot  surmount  our  misery.  For 
our  nature  is  wholly  degenera.e,  we  cannot  do  any  thing  but  sin  and 
transgress  the  law  of  God  by  hating  him  and  our  neighbour  ;  this  is 
indeed  become  our  nature  ;  and  who  can  alter  his  nature  and  natural 
disposition  ?  "  Can   the  Ethiopian  change   his  skin,  or  the  leopard 
his  spots  ?  then  ye  also  may  do  good,  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil," 
saith  the  Lord  to  his  own  people,  Jer.  xiii.  23. 

And  thus  the  law  teacheth  the  sinner  his  misery,  (1)  As  a  rule, 
which  showeth  him  that  he  v/as  obli  cd  under  the  sanction  of  a 
promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love  God  and  his 
neighbour  perfectly.  The  conscience,  enlightened  and  informed  by 
the  law,  acknowledges  and  approves  of  this  obligation,  and  saith 
\vith  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  i2.  "  The  law  is  holy  ;  and  the  com.raandment 
is  holy,  and  just,  and  good." 

2.  The  law  is  also  an  accu-^er,  and  witness  to  him,  and  as  such 
awakens  his  sleeping  conscience,  and  calls  him  to  himself,  and  be- 
fore the  tribunal  of  God,  to  behold  there  with  shaine  his  hateful  and 
evil  nature,  and  his  abominable  conduct.  *' There  is  one  that  ac- 
cuseth  you,  even  Moses,"  saith  the  Saviour,  John  v.  45.     And  thus 


32  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

"  the  word"  of  the  law  "  is  a  judge  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
hearts,"  Heb.  iv.  12      See  also  Rom.  li    14,  15. 

3.  The  law  teacheth  him  his  misery  also  as  a  judge,  who  upon 
comparing;  the  duty  of  man  with  his  irregular  conduct,  pronounces 
the  dreadful  sentence  of  eternal  condemnation  on  him  :  *'  For  the  law 
worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  5.  "  It  stops  the  moutli"  of  the  trans- 
gressor, Rom.  iii.  19,  renders  him  anxious,  ashamed,  humble,  con- 
cerned, and  tender,  1  Kings  xxii.  11,  10,  and  causes  him  to  confess 
his  sins,  and  to  justify  God,  Psalm  li.  4. 

liut  as  no  word  of  God,  nor  any  use  which  man  can  make  of  it 
will  affect  the  mind,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  himself  influence 
the  heart,  so  neither  can  the  law  of  God,  nor  a  man's  meditations, 
teach  him  his  misery,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  accompany  them, 
and  "  convince  him  of  sin,  of  righteousness  and  judgment,"  John 
xvii.  8,  cause  him  to  "  mourn  and  lament  bitterly,"  Zech.  xii.  10, 
and  thus  become  to  him  "  a  Spirit  of  bondage  to  fear,"  Rom.  viii.  15. 
APPLICATION. 

If  time  would  permit,  we  might  easily  show  fiom  Vk'hat  hath  been 
said,  (a)  in  opposition  to  the  Socinians,  that  the  love  of  our  enemies 
was  commanded  under  the  Old  Testament  also,  inasmuch  as  our 
enemies  are  also  our  neighbours,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour  is 
enjoined  by  the  law  and  the  prophets  :  (b)  in  opposition  to  the  Pa- 
pists, that  a  sinner  is  not  justified  before  God  by  the  law,  because 
*'  by  the  Jaw  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  Paul  teacheth  us  this,  Rom. 
iii.  19,  20.  (c)  and  in  opposition  to  the  Aniinomians,  or  adversaries 
of  the  law,  that  the  law  must  siill  be  preached  strictly  :  for  we  learn 
thus  to  know  our  misery,  which  is  certainly  necessary.  But  we  may 
not  busy  ourselves  with  these,  though  othet  wise  exceedingly  weighty 
matters.  We  hasten  to  conclude,  and  have  still  many  important 
matters  to  lay  before  you  for  your  profit. 

Behold,  friends,  how  we  learn  our  misery  from  the  law,  and  how 
we  are  conducted  by  it  to  deliverance,  and  to  a  blessed  consolation. 
What  think  ye  '  have  ye,  (I  speak  to  you  all,  and  to  each  of  you  in 
particular)  have  ye  I  say  already  seen  in  the  law  your  misery  with 
sorroiv,  shame,  and  concern  ?  Is  it  evident  to  you,  and  do  ye  know 
experimentally,  and  with  anxiety,  that  ye  have  such  an  evil  disposi- 
tion, and  are  therefore  hateful,  and  deserve  condemnation  ?  Ye  have 
been  now  so  long  instructed  in  the  law.  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  it  hath 
been  *ead  in  your  hearing ;  *  if  ye  have   had  any  decent  edueation, 

•  Tins  refers  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hollancf,  of  reading  the  ten 
commandments  every  sabbath,  at  the  beginning;  of  publick  worship,  which 
custom  is  still  retained  in  some  o*"  the  Dutch  churches  in  America,  It  is  the 
practice  to  read  also  the  creed,  and  a  chapter  from  either  the  Old  or  New- 
Testament,  at  the  beginning  of  worship- 


dtjT  OF  THE  LAW.       

ye  have  been  made  to  learn  and  say  it  by  heart ;  and  how  often  hath 
t.he  law  been  explained  to  you  fully,  and  in  order.  But  who,  yea  who 
hath  learned  his  misery  out  of  it,  so  that  it  hath  humbled  him  ? 
surely  very  few.  With  the  church  of  Laodicea,  our  present  Chris- 
tians imagine  that  '^'  they  arc  become  rich,  and  increased  in  c;oods, 
and  have  need  of  nothing  :  and  they  know  not  that  they  arc  v.'retch- 
ed,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blintl,  and  naked,"  Rev.  iii.  17.  Is 
not  this  true,  is  it  not  a  glaring  truth  ?  For, 

1.  The  most  of  you  have  never  yet  "  come  to  yourselves"  with 
the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv.  17.  Ye  concern  yourselves  with  every 
thing  that  doth  not  belong  to  yoii,  but  with  respect  to  yourselves,  ye 
are  never  at  home,  and  always  r,trangers  ;  the  honours,  pleasures 
and  profits  of  the  world  do  so  influence  your  whole  heart,  your  whole 
soul,  your  whole  understanding,  and  your  whole  strength,  and  do  so 
captivate  your  affections,  that  those  visible  things  "  have  shut  your 
eyes,  that  ye  cannot  ses  ;  and  your  heart  that  ye  cannot  understand  ; 
ye  feed  upon  ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  you  aside,  so  that 
ye  cannot  deliver  your  souls,  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  our  right 
hand  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  18,20.  And  therefore  "  ye  do  not  repent  of 
your  wickedness,  saying,  what  have  I  done  ?"  Jer   viii.  6. 

2.  Many  of  you  think  that  your  heart  is  good :  ye  depend  upon  it 
and  "trust  in  it,  like  the  fool,"  Prov.  xxviii.  26.  Because  ye  are 
not  guilty  of  any  public  and  scandalous  enormities,  which  are  cog- 
nisable by  the  magistrate,  but  are  decent  and  devout,  therefore  ye 
are  ready  to  say  v/ith  that  presumptuous  young  man,  Matt.  xix.  "  All 
these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up  :  v>^hat  lack  I  yet  ?" 
Sometimes  ye  survey  yourselves  with  pleasure  and  admiration,  be- 
cause ye  are  so  wise,  diligent,  good  natured,  exceedingly  virtuous, 
and  not  so  wicked  and  abominable  as  this  and  that  person :  and  ye 
are  even  ready  to  thank  God  for  it  v/ith  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  1 1, 
12.  Ye  will  never  believe  that  ye  hate  God,  and  your  neighbour, 
and  no  man  is  able  to  convince  you  of  it.  Ye  may  believe,  and  be 
'able  to  deriionstrate  from  the  word  of  God  against  the  adversaries. 
that  man  is  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour;  but 
that  ye  in  particular  are  co  evil  and  perverse,  ye  cannot  either  see 
or  believe. 

3.  It  is  true,  ye  ail  know  that  ye  are  great  sinners  :  but  how  do 
ye  knov/  this  ?  out  of  the  lav/,  and  by  comparing  yourselves  with  it? 
No,  but  only  from  report  and  heresay.  For  how  many  sins  have  ye  ? 
ye  say  indeed  that  your  r/ms  are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of 
your  head  ;  this  ye  have  heard  from  others,  and  ye  only  repeat  it 
without  thought  arr.ertheTT* :  for  ve  c?nnot  mention  six  sinr.,  of  which 


34  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERV 

ye  are  guiUy.  For  ye  are  not,  as  ye  imagine,  idolaters,  profancrs  of 
God's  name  and  day  :  ye  have  always  been,  (according  to  your  opin- 
ion) even  during  your  childhood,  obedient  to  your  parents :  ye  are 
strangers  to  murder,  whoredomj  theft,  lying,  and  coveting  your  neigh- 
bour's goods,  and  have  an  aversion  from  such  abominations.  Where 
then  are  all  your  sins,  about  which  ye  make  such  an  ado,  as  if  ye 
knew  them  all  exceedingly  well  ?  But  ye  know  neither  the  spiritu- 
ality of  the  law,  nor  the  hateful  sink  of  your  own  heaits. 

4.  And,  friends,  if  ye  knew  your  misery,  would  ye  have  so  many 
cloaks  of  shame  at  hand  to  excuse  your  sins,  when  they  are  discoY- 
cred  to  you,  and  also  "  flatter  yourselves  so  in  your  own  eyes,  when 
your  iniquity  is  found  to  be  hateful  ?"  Psalm  xxxvi.  2.  Would  it 
indeed  displease  you  so,  when  your  abominable  and  miserable  condi- 
tion was  clearly  discovered  to  you,  and  when  we  would  awaken  you 
out  of  your  beloved  carelesness  ?  would  y  e  take  it  so  ill,  when  men 
did  not  honour  nor  love  you,  but  exposed  you  to  shame,  loss  and 
pain  ?  If  ye  knew  your  hateful  and  damnable  character,  ye  would 
certainly  see  that  ye  deserved  every  reproach  and  vexation ;  yea,  ye 
would  be  amazed,  that  such  monsters  as  ye  are,  should  enjoy  any 
good. 

5»  It  is  true,  some  of  you  know  their  misery,  they  see  without 
searching  that  they  are  abominable  :  for  their  sins  are  manifest,  and 
every  one  sees  them  ;  or  do  they  commit  sins  privately,  conscience 
accuseth  them,  and  tells  them  that  while  they  conduct  in  this  man- 
ner, they  cannot  be  saved.  But  I  pray  you  who  are  thus,  tell  us, 
have  your  sins  and  misery  ever  affected  your  hearts,  and  rendered 
you  concerned  and  anxious,  so  that  they  caused  you  to  cry  out  ear- 
nestly, "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  30.  Others  are 
seized  like  "  Felix,  with  fear,"  Acts  xxiv.  25,  but  they  soon  recover 
from  their  seasick  qualms  :  when  your  hearts  are  wounded  in  this 
manner  with  a  sharp  arrow,  what  is  it  that  relieves  you  so  soon  ?  yc 
cannot  retain  those  grievous  thougjhts  with  you,  but  endeavour  to 
divert,  or  banish  them  by  doing  this  or  that :  or  ye  suppress  them  by 
some  duty,  by  breaking  off  this  or  that  sin,  by  reading  your  bible, 
baying  a  prayer,  weeping  heartily,  until  your  mind  be  somewhat 
cased,  and  upon  this  all  your  distress,  and  according  to  your  imagi- 
nation, all  your  misery  is  at  an  end  :  or  ye  dispel  your  concern  by 
vain  imaginations,  that  it  is  your  duty  to  believe  in  Christ,  that  your 
gloomy  thoughts  proceed  only  from  the  devil  and  from  your  unbe- 
lief:  and  thus  ye  deceive  yourselves  with  vain  imaginations,  and 
'•  say  not,  there  is  no  hope  ;  for  ye  have  found  the  life  of  your  hands; 
therefore  ye  ar^  not  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.     Or  ye  become  des- 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.     II.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3,  4,  5.        3:. 

perate,  and  think  it  is  so  now  :  if  I  must  perish,  how  can  I  help  it  ? 
as  well  1  as  another  :  and  so  ye  indulge  &  pernicious  discouragement 
and  carelessness,  saying  with  your  heart  and  actions,  like  the  impeni- 
tent Jews,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10.  *•  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  be 
upon  us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we  then  live  ?" 

But,  hearers,  ye  who  are  thus  disposed,  this  aggravates  your 
misery,  that  ye  do  not  yet  know  it.  To  hate  so,  and  to  be  so  hate- 
ful, and  not  to  know  it,  or  not  to  know  it  rightly,  how  dreadful  is  it ' 
How  shall  ye  be  delivered  ?  '•  Are  we  blind  also  r"  said  the  Pharisees. 
Jesus  said  unto  them.  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  woidd  have  no  sin  ;  buf 
now  ye  say,  v/e  see,  therefore  your  sin  remaineth,"  John  ix,  40,  41. 
If  ye  knew  your  misery  out  of  me  mw,  as  ye  ought,  ye  would  flee 
to  the  Mediator  and  be  deliverea :  but  now  ye  remain  in  yourselves, 
and  so  under  the  curse  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  as  Paul 
speaks.  Gal.  iii.  10  .\nd  ye  do  not  yet  possess  "Christ  for  justifi- 
cation, which  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  What  hath  bewitch- 
ed you  ?  what  do  ye  imagine  ?  Have  ye  nothing  to  do  with  God  ? 
Is  he  not  holy  and  just  f  do  ye  think  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indiffer- 
ence to  him,  whether  ye  love  or  hate  him  and  your  neighbour  ?  He 
will  most  surely  and  most  severely  recompense  and  punish  the 
abominations  of  your  hearts  and  actions.  Do  ye  not  believe  it,  hear 
then  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  say,  Psalm  xxi  8 — 12.  "  Thine 
hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  enemies  ;  thy  right  hand  shall  find  out 
all  them  that  hate  thee.  Thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in 
the  time  of  thine  anger  :  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  his 
wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them,"  &c. 

What  say  ye  ?  Arc  ye  desirous  to  be  delivered  from  your  misery, 
and  to  become  other  persons,  than  ye  are,  or  are  ye  not  ?  Will  ye 
remain  as  ye  are,  and  suffer  your  hearts  to  wander  after  the  W'  rid 
and  sin  without  concern  ?  Go  on  then,  but  know  that  your  end  will 
be  bitterness.  But  are  ye  desirous  to  obtain  grace  and  salvation,  and 
will  ye  earnestly  endeavour  henceforth  to  save  your  souls  in  God'f? 
way. 

1.  Believe  then  that  ye  are  so  abominable,  that  ye  hate  God  and 
your  neighbour,  and  are  therefore  in  the  highest  degree  punishable 
before  that  dreadful  judge,  that  ye  may  begin  to  suspect  yourselveSj 
and  to  be  afraid.  Whether  ye  see  it  or  not,  it  is  nevertheless  the 
truth,  that  ye  are  hateful,  and  hate  one  another.  God  saith  it  in  his 
word  ;  the  reformed  church,  with  which  ye  hold,  teaches  it  from  the 
scripture,  and  there  is  not  one  of  those  who  are  delivered,  but  he 
sees  it  experimentally  in  himself,   and  it  would  lead  you  also  into 


36  TKE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY 

the  way  of  cleliverance,  if  ye  saw  it.     "  Only  acknowledge  thine  \nU 
quity,"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  iii.  3. 

2.  Know  that  ye  are  still  bound  to  the  law  of  works  in  order,  under 
the  san'  tion  of  a  promise  of  life,  and  a  threatening  of  death,  to  love 
God  and  your  neighbour  perfectly  :  and  that  since  ye  have  not  done 
this,  and  because  of  youi  wicked  nature,  cannot  do  it,  ye  are  still 
under  the  curse.  For  as  long  as  the  sinner  is  and  abides  in  l.is 
misery,  and  hath  not  been  convinced,  truly  regenerated,  and  convert- 
ed, and  haih  not  saving  faith  in  Christ,  so  long  he  is  and  abides  under 
the  law  of  works,  and  therefore  *'  under  the  curse,"  Gal,  iii.  10. 

3.  Examine  yourselves  with  a  full  purpose  of  heart  by  the  law, 
and  see  lio  w  far  ye  have  declined  from  the  demands  of  it.  Read  the 
catechism  once  and  again  from  the  thirty  third  to  the  forty  fifth 
Lord's  day,  and  see  what  virtues  are  commanded  and  what  vices  are 
forbidden  in  the  law:  and  consider  thoroughly  your  heat  and  ac- 
tions, that  ye  may  see  by  the  law  how  crooked  and  pervt  rse  ye  are. 
"  Lxamint:  yourselves  strictly,  yea  examine  yourselves  strictly,  O  ye 
listless  people,"  Zcph.  ii.  1. 

4.  Is  there  any  one,  who  beholds  with  shame,  concern  and  distress, 
his  hating,  hateful  and  punishable  nature,  let  him  flee  to  *'  Christ, 
the  end  of  the  law,"  Rom.  x.  4.  Sinner,  thou  who  art  concerned  ; 
he  calls  to  thee,  and  invites  thee,  *' Look  unto  me,  and  be  saved," 
saith  he,  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  "Come,  he  will  not  cast  thee  out,"  as  he 
saith,  John  vi  37  Do  not  stand  still  and  ponder  on  the  abominable- 
ness  and  gieatness  of  thy  sins,  nor  on  the  small  measure  of  thy  sor^ 
row;  It  is  great  enough,  if  it  render  thee  distressed,  and  dri^e  thee 
out  of  thyself:  our  concern  is  not  our  Saviour,  nor  is  it  in  itself 
agreeable  to  the  Lord  ;  but  it  must  serve  merely  to  cause  the  sinner 
to  seek  his  salvation  cut  of  himself  in  the  Son  of  God. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  (a)  See  from  what,  and  how  ye 
are  delivered  :  that  hateful  sin  of  yours,  with  wliich  ye  formerly  hated 
God  and  your  neighbour,  is  through  the  love  of  God  to  mankind  for- 
given :  ye  are  renewed  after  the  image  and  love  of  God,  and  have 
obtained  a  new,  yea,  "a  divine  nature,"  Titus  iii.  5,6.  2  Peter  i.  4. 
The  lav/  cannot  condemn  you  any  lon;j,er  :  "  for  ye  are  dead  to  the  law 
through  the  body  of  Christ,"  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Sin,"  even  your  wicked 
nature,  "  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  ye  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom  vi.  14.  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  haih  borne 
for  you  the  curse,  to  which  ye  had  exposed  y©urselves  by  your  wicked 
hatred,  and  "  hath  delivered  you  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been 
made  a  curse  for  you,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Yea,  the  Lord  God  hath  made 
t'.r't  In-'  M'hich  condemned  you,  serve  you,  tliat  ye  might  be  delivered 


OUT  OF  THE  LAW.      

from  it  by  Christ,  when  he  convinced  you  by  the  law,  that  he  might 
drive  you  out  of  yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  seek  life  with  him : 
<^«  For  f  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  live  unto 
God,"  saith  the  apostle.  Gal.  ii.  19.  Behold  this  is  what  we  say, 
observe  God's  great  and  free  grace  and  love  in  this,  admire  it,  and 
praise  the  Lord,  with  Paul,  1  Tim.  i?  13,  14,  15.  (b)  Love  now  the 
Lord  your  God  with  all  your  might  and  most  heartily.  "  I  will  love 
thee  heartily,  O  Lord  my  strength,"  said  David,  v/hen  the  Lord  had 
deUvered  him  from  all  his  enemies.  Psalm  xviii.  1.  And  love,  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  your  neighbour  as  yourselves.  "  For  this  commandment 
have  we  from  him,  that  he  v/ho  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  also," 
1  John  iv.  21.  Ye  are  indeed  dead  to  the  lav/,  and  it  is  not  given  to 
you,  as  a  condition  of  the  covenant  of  %^  orks,  to  seek  life  by  it,  and 
to  be  condemned  by  it ;  but  it  is  given  to  you  a-;  a  rule  of  gratitude  : 
it  is  indeed  an  expression  of  the  image  of  God.  Ye  are  and  always 
remain  bound  to  the  Lord,  to  love  him  and  your  neighbour :  he  is 
worthy  to  be  loved  and  obeyed  on  his  own  account ;  he  hath  imprint- 
ed the  law  of  love  on  your  hearts  ;  yea  his  great  love  to  you  hath 
bound  your  natural  obligation  to  love  him,  more  strongly  on  you, 
and  the  love  of  Christ  should  constrain  you,"  2  Cor.  v.  14.  (c)  Exer- 
cise yourselves  yet  daily  in  seeking  a  knowledc^e  of  your  miseries 
through  the  lav/,  with  Paul,  Rom>.  vii.  Is  it  become  your  nature  to 
love  God  and  your  neighbour,  your  nature  is  nevertheless  not  per- 
fect :  there  are  still  many  wicked  humours  in  it,  which  oppose  God 
and  your  neighbour:  "Ye  knov/,"  with  the  apostle,  Rom.  vii.  18, 
"  that  in  you,  that  is,  in  your  flesh,  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing  :  for 
to  will  is  present  with  you  ;  but  hew  to  perform  that  which  is  good, 
ye  find  not."  This  would  conduce  to  your  happiness,  it  would  hum- 
ble your  souls,  cause  you  to  make  use  of  Christ  more,  and  to  be  more 
watchful,  (d)  Humble  and  abase  yourselves  in  secret  before  the 
Lord,  and  before  your  neighbour.  Will  ye  exalt  yourselves  on  ac- 
count of  the  excellency  of  the  revelation,  tliat  God  hath  delivered  you 
out  of  your  hateful  and  miserable  condition  ?  We  cannot  boast  of 
aught  but  what  we  have  of  ourselves,  and  what  is  worthy  to  be  boast- 
^A  of.  But  what  is  it  that  ye  have  of  and  in  yourselves  ?  is  it  not 
that  ye  hate  God  and  your  neighbour,  and  have  rendered  yourselves 
damnable  and  detestable  ?  are  yc  not  so  hateful  now  ?  Is  there  not 
now  yet  wickedness  enough  in  your  nature  to  make  you  repeatedly 
ashamed  ?  Is  there  aught  that  is  good  in  your  soul  ?  "  Who  maketh 
you  to  differ  ?  and  v/hat  have  ye  that  ye  have  not  received  ?  and  if 
ye  have  received  it,  why  do  yc  glory,  as  if  ye  had  not  received  it  ?" 
1  C>or.  iv.  7.     And  why  have  ye  received  it  ?  becau^.e  yc  were  sq 


38  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MISERY,  &c. 

virtuous  and  amiable,  or  should  become  so  of  yourselves  ?  Ye  know 
v/hat  ye  have  been,  and  still  would  be,  if  God  should  leave  you  to 
yourselves  ;  "  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that 
not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man 
should  boast,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  Therefore  acknowledge  your  unworthi- 
ness,  and  shrink  into  nothing  in  your  owa  eyes  on  account  of  this 
divine  grace,  with  Paul  1  Cor.  xv.  8,  9,  10,  Do  ye  stand  in  need  of 
any  thing,  ask  it  of  the  Lord  with  humility.  Doth  he  chastise  you, 
justify  him,  and  submit  to  his  hand  ;  for  though  it  should  lie  ever  so 
heavy  on  you,  **  he  doth  still  not  deal  with  you  after  your  sins,  nor 
reward  you  according  to  your  iniquities,"  Psalm  ciii.  10.  If  he 
should  afflict  you  more  grievously  than  he  dotb,  it  would  be  only 
according  to  the  demerit  of  your  wickedness.  Do  evil  men  trample 
upon  you,  and  tread  you  under  foot,  ye  ought  not  to  be  so  angry  • 
can  any  man  wrong  you,  who  have  so  often,  and  in  the  highest  de- 
gree wronged  and  hated  both  God  and  man  ?  lay  your  hand  then. 
upon  your  mouth,  with  David,  who  said,  3  Sam.  xvi.  10.  "Let  him 
curse  :  for  the  Lord  hath  said  to  him,  Curse  David.  Who  shall  then 
say.  Wherefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  Hear  how  Paul  enjoins  on  be- 
lievers, Titus  iii.  2 — 7,  "  To  speak  evil  of  no  man,  to  be  no  brawlers, 
but  gentle,  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  men.  For  we  ourselves  also 
were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts 
and  pleasures,  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another.  But  after  that  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour 
toward  man  appeared,  he  saved  us,"  Sec.  Do  ye  see  any  one  fall  into 
a  hateful  iniquity,  do  not  wonder  at  it,  and  do  not  despise  him  ;  that 
root  of  wickedness  exists  in  you  also;  and  God  restrains  it,  that  it 
doth  not  spring  up,  and  bring  forth  still  more  abominable  fruits : 
"but  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  considering  your^ 
selves,  lest  ye  also  be  tempted,"  Gal.  vi.  1. 

Thus  ye  will  "  use  the  law  lawfully,  and  it  will  be  good  for  you," 
agreeably  to  I  Tim.  i.  8.  For  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle, 
Gal.  vi.  16.  "As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace  and 
inercy  shall  be  upon  them."  Amon. 
(   39   ) 
THE 

FIRST   CAUSE   OF 

GOOD  AND  EVILe 

III  LORD'S  DAY. 

Eccl.  vii.  29.  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made  mart 
upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions.