Q.  6.  Did  God  then  create  man  so  evil  and  perverse  f 

A.  By  no  means  ;  but  God  created  iiian  good,  and  after  his  own 
image,  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  that  he  might  rightly  know 
God  his  Creator,  heartily  love  him,  and  live  with  him  in  eternal  hap- 
piness to  glorify  and  praise  him. 

Q.  7.   Whence  then  proceeds  this  depravity  of  human  7iature  ? 

A.  From  the  fall  and  disobedience  of  our  first  parents,  Adam  and 
Eve,  in  Paradise  ;  hence  our  nature  is  become  so  corrupt,  that  we 
are  all  conceived  and  born  in  sin. 


H 


APPY  is  the  man  who  knoweth  the  cause  of  things  ;  for  hav- 
ing such  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  matters,  he  hath  a  wonderful 
delight  in  his  contemplations.  It  tends  more  especially  to  render  a 
person  happy,  that  he  knows  the  first  cause  of  good  and  evil ;  since 
he  learns  thus  to  avoid  the  evil,  and  pursue  the  good,  to  praise  the 
first  cause  of  the  good,  and  to  detest  the  evil.  If  I  know  not  the  first 
cause  of  the  good  that  I  enjoy,  I  shall  foolishly  kiss  my  own  hands ; 
and  if  I  understand  not  the  origin  of  the  evil  that  befalls  me,  I  shall 
soon  with  the  wicked  Jews  say,  "  The  Way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal," 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  17,  20.  The  foul  head  spring  of  all  the  errors,  that 
have  deluged  the  heathen,  Jewish  and  Christian  world  hath  bubbled 
up  only  from  an  ignorance  of  the  true  causes  of  good  and  evil.  Many 
of  the  ancient  heathens  imagined  that  there  were  two  God's,  a  good 
God,  who  was  the  cause  of  all  that  was  good,  and  an  evil  God,  who 
was  tiie  author  of  all  that  ivas  shameful,  hurtful  and  painful ;  and  in 
this  they  were  followed  by  thr  ManicheeS;  otherwise  called  Chris- 


40  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EViL 

tians.     Others  thought  that  the  cause  of  good  and  evil  in  man  was 
the  contrariety  of  his  soul  and  body,  two  principles,  or  parts  of  man, 
which  were  opposed  one  to  another.    The  ancient  and  modern  Pela- 
f  ians  have  adopted  this  opinion,  and  they  say  that  the  soul  is  created 
with  a  free  will,  and  the  body  with  a  certain  carnal  concupisence,  and 
that  the  former  is  the  cause  of  good,  and  the  latter  of  evil;  It  is  also 
natural  to  the  sinner,  through  self  love,  to  excuse  himself,  and  to 
accuse  his  Maker  of  the  evil.  It  is  an  evil  disposition,  which  he  hath 
inherited  of  his  father  Adam,  who  said  to  the  Lord,  "  The  woman, 
whom  tiiou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  1  did 
eat,"  Gen.  iii.  !-•    Therefore  if  the  foolish  sinner  shall  become  wise 
and  happy,  he  must  learn  to  ascribe  righteousness  to  his  Maker,  and 
accuse  hunself  to  his  own  shame,  that  he  is  himself  the  cause  of  his 
destruction,  like  Daniel,  who  said,  "  O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth 
lo  the^,  but  to  us,  confusion  of  faces,"  Dan.  ix.  7.    Indeed  nothing 
is  more  ceViuin,  than  that  God  alone  is  the  author  of  all  happiness, 
and  man  the  author  of  all  his  misery.  Therefore  the  wisest  of  king? 
saith,  tccl.  vii.  29.  "  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made 
man  upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions." 

It  is  therefore  the  glory,  the  wisdom  and  happiness  of  the  reform- 
ed church,  that  she  teaches  more  than  all  others  who  are  out  of  her 
pale,  that  the  Lord  God  alone  is  the  source  bf  all  good,  and  the  sin- 
ner the  cause  of  ail  his  evil,  that  she  may  thus  humble  miserable 
man  by  the  knowledge  of  his  misery,  which  he  hath  procured  to 
himselfi)  arid  may  induce  him  to  seek  deliverance,  and  a  happy  con- 
solation of  the  Lord.  For  to  this  end  doth  the  i  istructor  show  him 
how  evil  and  perverse  he  is,  in  the  fifth  question  ;  and  that  God  is 
not  the  cause  thereof,  in  the  sixth  question  ;  but  he  himself  through 
his  parents,  in  the  seventh  question. 

There  are  therefore  two  particulars  here,  that  require  our  illus- 
tration. 

I-  That  the  wickedness  of  man  doth  not  proceed  from  God, 
Question  six. 

II.  But  from  man  himself,  Question  seven. 

I.  Ws  have  taught  in  the  loregoing  discourse,  that  "we  are  by 
nature  prone  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour."  Nearly  all  those  who 
are  out  of  our  church  take  occasion  hence  to  slander  us,  as  though 
-.ve  taught  that  God  was  the  author  of  sin,  and  of  our  wickedness  and 
perversencss,  because  we  receive  our  nature  from  God.  But  we 
protest  against  this  in  the  strongest  terms,  and  say  that  God  neither 
is,  nor  can  be  the  author  of  sin.  We  proclaim  to  the  whole  world 
with  Elihu,  "  Far  be  it  from  God  that  he  iJiould  do  wickedness,  and 


 

from  the  Almighty,  that  he  should  commit  iniquity,"  Job  xxxiv.  16. 
Sin  is  more  contrary  to  the  nature  of  God,  than  darkness  to  light, 
and  hell  to  heaven  ;  "  He  is  not  a  God  who  hath  pleasure  in  wicked- 
ness," Psalm  V.  4.  "He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  he 
cannot  look  upon  iniquity."  Hab.  i.  13.  "  Let  no  man  say,  when  he 
is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God :  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with 
evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man,"  James  i.  IS.  Neither  can  any 
one  infer  from  our  doctrine  by  a  just  consequence,  that  we  represent 
God  as  the  author  of  our  wickedness  and  perverseness  ;  for  although 
our  nature  is  of  God,  it  v/as  not  created  by  God  so  wicked  ;  for 
«  God  made  man  good  :"  so  our  church  teaches  with  the  catechism 
from  the  word  of  God,  which  saith.  Gen.  i.  31.  "  God  saw  all  that 
he  had  made,  and  behold,  it  was  very  good." 

And  wherein  doth  that  goodness  consist  ?  The  Socinians  say,  in 
the  essence  and  in  the  essential  parts  of  man,  without  any  original 
righteousness,  and  only  in  fiuris  naturalibus^  or  that  man  was  neither 
good  nor  evil,  when  he  v/as  created  :  they  even  maintain  that  man 
•was  created  as  ignorant  as  a  child,  not  knowing  that  he  was  naked. 
And  the  Jesuits  and  Remonstrants  proceed  so  far,  that  they  dare 
maintain  that  thert  v/as  a  certain  carnal  lusting  in  man  immediately 
after  his  creation,  and  that  his  flesh  and  lusts  strove  and  rebelled 
against  his  reason  and  spirit.  If  this  were  so,  man  would  have  come 
out  of  his  Maker's  hands  a  sinful,  ignorant  and  unholy  creature.  And 
this  reproach  ought  therefore  not  to  be  cast  upon  us,  but  upon  our 
adversaries  ;  for  it  will  naturally  follow  from  these  heterodox  asser- 
tions, that  God  made  man  evil  and  perverse.  But  it  will  appear  more 
clearly  anon. 

Wc  teach  better  things  concerning  the  innate  goodness  of  man. 
We  say  that  it  consists  in  a  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  whereby 
man  is  qualified,  as  a  reasonable  creature,  to  glorify  his  Maker  ;  for 
the  goodness  of  evejry  creature  consists  in  its  possessing  such  per- 
fections, as  belong  to  the  nature  of  that  creature,  that  it  may  ex- 
press and  declare,  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  its  nature,  the  glorious 
perfections  of  its  Creator.  Man  being  a  reasonable  creature,  and 
therefore  much  m.cre  excellent  than  other  creatures,  ought  to  glorify 
God  in  a  reasonable  manner,  and  thus  more  than  other  creatures. 
But  how  could  he  glorify  his  Maker  in  a  reasonable  manner,  if  he 
were  created  without  ori^^lnal  righteousness,  in  such  ignorance,  and 
with  a  certain  lusting  against  his  spirit  ?  The  reasonable  creature  can- 
not exist  in  a  state  of  indifference,  or  be  neither  good  nor  evil,  any 
more  than  he  can  be  neither  alive  nor  dead  :  he  must  necessarily  be 
one  or  the  other,  either  good  or  evil :  and  he  cannot  be  good,  unles*^ 

K 


42  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

he  have  a  moral  goodness,  and  be  endued  with  a  pure  apprchensidh 
of  God's  perfections,  and  a  sincere  love  to  God,  so  as  to  know,  lov^, 
enjoy  and  praise  him.  Solomon  saith  also,  '*  that  God  made  mart 
upright,"  and  he  opposes  that  uprightness  to  "  man's  inventions  which 
he  hath  sought  out,"  and  to  his  perverseness,  Eccl.  vii.  29.  And 
therefore  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  God  did  not  create  man  so  wick- 
ed and  perverse,  but  good,  and  thus  alter  his  image." 

The  Lord  God  having  created  the  heaven,  the  earth  and  the  sea, 
with  all  that  in  them  is,  "  did  last  of  all  form  man  out  of  the  dust  of 
the  earth,  and  he  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life  ;  thus 
man  became  a  living  soul,"  Gen.  ii.  7.  "  But  as  it  was  not  good  that 
man  should  be  alone,  God  made  Adam  an  help  meet  for  him,"  even 
his  wife,  "  out  of  one  of  his  ribs,"  and  brought  her  to  him  for  his 
lawful  wife.  Adam  also  owned,  took,  and  loved  her  as  such,  Gen. 
ii.  18 — 25.  God  gave  them  both  also  the  law  of  marriage,  that  they 
should  cleave  to  one  another,"  Gen.  ii.  3*,  25,  "  and  be  fruitful,  and 
multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,"  Gen.  i.  28,  and  thus  "  hath  God 
made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  of  men,  to  dwell  upon  the  face 
of  all  the  earth,"  Acts  xvii.  26,  That  man  might  be  the  chief  orna- 
ment of  all  God's  works,  God  created  him  after  his  image.  There- 
fore the  Father,  acting  after  the  manner  of  men,  excited,  as  it  were, 
tlie  ^on  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  perform  some  great  work  in  the 
creation  of  man,  saying.  Gen.  i.  26.  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  im- 
age, after  our  likeness.  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the 
image  of  God  created  he  him."  It  is  absurd  in  the  Papists  to  dis- 
tinguish these  two  words  so,  as  if  "  image"  related  to  natural  endow- 
ments, and  likeness  to  graces  and  supernatural  endowments,  as 
though  the  image  of  GoJ  were  not  natural  to  man.  Image  and  like- 
ness denote  the  selfsame  thing,  and  are  joined  together  to  express  it 
with  greater  emphasis  and  force,  and  to  show  that  the  image  was 
exceedingly  like  God,  and  a  likeness  that  expressed  and  depicted 
God  in  man :  one  thing  can  be  like  another,  as  one  cg^  may  be  like 
another,  but  it  is  not  therefore  an  image  of  that  other.  But  an  im- 
age is  sr;niething,  which  is  fashioned  after  something  else,  and  is 
therefore  like  it.  Man  was  then  made  m  the  image  of  God,  because 
God  was  the  pattern  after  which  he  was  made  ;  and  if  I  may  so 
speak,  because  God  depicted  himself  in  man,  and  made  man  like 
himself.  Not  that  God  gave  his  essence  and  life,  as  he  hath  it  in 
himself,  to  man  ;  for  in  this  manner  **  hath  he  given  only  to  his  Son 
to  have  life  in  himself,"  John  \.  26.  The  Son  of  God  alone  is  "  the 
brightness  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  person," 
Ileb.  i.  3.     Neither  is  God  a  body  after  which  the  body  of  man  was 


 

formed,  as  the  ancient  A.nthropomorphists  imagined  ;  for  «  God  is  a 
spirit,"  John  iv.  24.  But  God  made  man  so  after  his  ima^e,  that  he 
expressed  a  certain  likeness  of  his  communicable  attributes  in  him, 
whereby  he  became  "  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,"  2  Peter  i.  4. 
Not  that  God  transferred  his  attributes  to  man,  for  he  would  then 
have  made  him  a  God  :  but  that  man  was  made  after  them,  so  as  to 
possess  a  certain  hkeness  to  them,  and  that  he  obtained  a  certain 
sketch  of  those  divine  perfections. 

We  must  inquire  more  particularly  wherein  that  ima^e  and  Hke- 
ness, in  which  man  was  made,  consists.  The  soul,  the  spirit  of  man, 
which  hath  in  itself  an  ability  to  act  from  itself,  though  in  dependence 
on  God,  with  understanding  and  will,  is  an  image  of  God,  and  ex- 
hibits a  certain  likeness  of  God.  Some  maintain  that  the  image  of 
God  doth  not  consist  in  the  essence  of  the  soul,  but  that  the  soul  is 
only  the  panel,  on  which  the  image  is  expressed :  we  may  assert 
that  the  soul  is  the  panel  ot  the  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  of  man. 
But  that  the  soul  itself  is  not  the  ima8;e  of  God,  but  only  the  panel 
and  subject  of  God's  image,  this  we  do  not  assert,  because  the  nature 
of  the  thing  and  the  word  of  God  forbid  it.  For  the  essence  and  the 
spirituality  of  the  soul  are  matters,  in  which  it  is  like  God,  "who  is 
a  spirit,"  John  iv.  24..  Are  not  the  heathens,  who  are  destitute  of 
the  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  of  God's  image,  still  "  the  offspring 
of  God,"  so  far  as  he  is  a  spirit,  which  cannot  be  expressed  by  an 
image  ?  Acts  xvii.  28,  29.  We  may  "  not  curse,  nor  kill  any  man, 
because  he  is  made  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,"  Gen.  ix.  6, 
James  iii.  9.  Not  because  he  was  once  made  in  the  image  of  God  ;  but 
because  he  is  still  God's  image  :  for  otherwise  the  reason  why  we 
may  not  kill  or  curse  any  man  ceaseth.  Doth  the  sinner  now  "  come 
short  of"  the  image  and  "  glory  of  God,"  according  to  Pom.  iii.  23, 
it  is  with  respect  to  the  virtuous  goodness,  in  which  he  was  created. 

This  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  is  indeed  the  principal  and 
most  glorious  part  of  God's  image.  It  is  also  called  original  right- 
eousness, and  consists  (1)  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  divine 
things.  We  must  now  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  renewed  in 
knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him,"  according  to. 
Paul,  Cell.  iii.  10.  He  hath  certainly  respect  to  the  image  in  which 
man  v/as  created  in  the  beginning  :  he  saith  that  it  consisted  in  knowl- 
edge :  he  supposeth  that  this  knowledge  is  obscured,  and  that  the 
image  of  God  is  now  become  old,  and  that  we  must  be  again  renew- 
ed after  that  same  image.  The  first  man  was  therefore  not  so  sim- 
ple and  ignorant :  for  we  must  be  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  that  man  :  if  ke  had  been  created  in  a  childish  ingorance, 


44.  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

he  would  have  been  ridiculously  foolish  ;  for  a  full  grown  man,  as 
Adam  was  when  he  came  out  of  his  Maker's  hands,  who  is  childish, 
IS  contemptible  :  surely  ^*  the  soul  without  knowledge  is  not  good," 
Prov.  xix.  2.  If  Adam  were  created  in  such  ingorance,  how  did  he 
know  the  nature  of  the  animals,  and  of  his  wife  ?  Gen.  ii.  19 — 23. 
He  certainly  knew  Cod,  he  was  accustomed  to  his  visits,  Gen.  iii.  8, 
and  was  acquainted  with  his  law,  Gen.  ii.  16,  17.  iii.  2,  5,  surely  not 
only  by  divine  revelation,  but  also  by  creation  ;  for  if  that  law  be 
still  written  in  the  hearts  of  his  posterity  ;  accordiug  to  Rom.  ii.  14, 
15,  how  much  more  was  it  then  written  in  his  heart,  when  he  came 
new  and  pure  out  of  the  hands  of  his  Maker.  After  the  fall,  his  eyes 
"Were  indeed  opened,  and  he  knew  that  he  was  naked,"  Gen.  iii.  7, 
but  this  doth  not  imply  that  he  knew  not  before  that  he  was  without 
any  clotliing ;  for  otherwise  sin  would  have  made  him  wiser,  and  the 
lying  promises  of  Satan,  "  that  his  eyes  should  be  opened,  and  that 
he  should  like  God  know  both  good  and  evil,"  Gen.  iii.  5.  would  not 
then  have  been  detestable.  It  remains  therefore  certain  that  Adam 
knew  God,  and  his  obligation  to  him,  by  the  image  of  God,  by  which 
he  knew,  as  by  a  beam  from  God's  own  light,  what  God  knew,  and 
what  he  would  reveal  to  him.  For  the  knov/ledge  that  depicts  God, 
IS  not  barely  a  common  and  literal  apprehension  of  divine  things,  but 
"  a  seeing  of  the  light  in  God's  light,"  Psalm  xxxvi.  9,  and  "  an  in= 
shining  of  God  into  the  heart,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God,"  2  Cor.  iv.  6,  Now  such  a  knowledge  and  seeing 
of  God  must  necessarily  produce  a  divine  holinsss  in  the  soul ;  for 
"  we,  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  13.  And  therefore  the  moral 
goodness  of  God's  image  consists  also  (2)  "  in  true  righteousness 
and  holiness,"  by  vrhich  man  surrendered  himself  with  a  perfect 
heart  to  the  Lord,  to  do  his  will,  according  to  that  la^7  and  truth  of 
God,  which  his  understanding  represented  to  him  to  be  holy,  just 
and  good.  That  the  image  of  God  consisted  in  this  also,  the  apostle 
teacheth  us  when  he  saith,  Fph.  iv.  24.  "  And  put  on  the  new  man* 
which  after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness,  and  holiness."  So 
our  translators  render  the  Greek  words,  according  to  the  usual  style 
of  the  scriptures  :  but  others,  ibllov/ing  mofe  the  order  of  the  Greek 
words  read,  "  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth."  The  sense  is 
the  same  :  righteousness  and  holiness  are  two  words,  which  design 
one  and  the  same  thing,  but  with  great  beauty,  and  with  a  strong 
emphasis,  as  if  wc  should  say,  a  righteous  holiness,  and  a  holy  right- 
eousness. But  if  we  will  distinguish  the  words,  and  consider  each  as 
t»ignifying  something  different  from  the  other,  we  must  then  refe? 


 

righteousness,  not  to  a  right  to  demand  life,  inasmuch  as  Adam  had 
not  that  right,  and  it  moreover  doth  not  now  flow  from  the  image  of 
God,  but  from  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ ;  but  we  must  re- 
fer the  righteousness  of  the  image  of  God  to  our  neighbour,  and  the 
holiness  to  God :  and  so  these  two  words  express  the  whole  sum  of 
the  law,  which  was  innate  to  man  with  the  image  of  God. 

Man  being  endowed  with  such  a  rational  and  virtuous  soul,  was 
also  created  lord  of  all  the  creatures,  that  he  might  govern  and  make 
use  of  them,  as  the  vicegerent  of  God,  under  him,  and  to  his  ser- 
vice :  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness,  and  let 
them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,"  &c.  saith  the  Lordj 
Gen.  i.  26,  29.  The  Socinians,  who  will  not  allow  that  man  had  any 
original  righteousness  before  the  fall,  and  are  nevertheless  forced  to 
believe  that  nian  was  created  after  the  image  of  God,  say  that  the 
image  of  God  consisted  only  in  dominion.  But  how  could  man  gov- 
ern the  creatures  according  to  the  will  of  God,  if  he  had  no  virtuous 
goodness  ?  The  creature  would  have  groaned  against  him,  as  it  doth 
now  against  its  sinful  and  rigorous  lord,  Rom.  viii.  19 — 22.  That 
the  image  of  God  consists  nevertheless  partly  in  dominion,  and  that 
this  dominion  is  not  only  a  consequence  of  the  image,  this  Paul 
teacheth  us,  when  he  saith  that  "  the  man,"  on  account  of  his  domin- 
ion over  the  woman,  "  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God  ;"  and  that 
"the  woman,  on  account  of  her  dominion  under  and  by  reason  of  the 
man,  "  is  the  glory  of  the  man,"  1  Cor.  xi.  7.  Inasmuch  as  this 
excellency  of  the  soul  presently  extended  itself  to  the  body,  and  the 
image  of  God  pertaineth  to  the  whole  man,  therefore  man  was  im- 
mortal, not  only  according  to  the  soul,  but  also  according  to  the  body, 
which  being  created  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  consisting  of  flesh 
and  blood,  could  die  ;  but  would,  through  the  sustaining  power  of 
God,  have  continued  alive  for  ever,  if  man  had  not  sinned.  For  how 
could  such  a  destructive  and  horrible  evil  as  death  is  befall  man, 
while  he  was  not  guilty  of  any  iniquity  ?  Death  was  threatened  only 
in  consequence  of  sin,  Gen.  i.  17,  and  '^  the  wages  of  sin  is  death," 
Rom,  vi.  23.  God  did  not,  moreover,  pronounce  the  sentence  of 
death  upon  Adam,  until  he  had  sinned.  Gen.  iii.  13.  That  the  image 
of  God  consists  in  immortality,  this  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  49,  where 
he  teaches  that  when  we  shall  receive  our  immortality  again,  "  we 
shall  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 

The  image  of  God,  in  which  man  was  created,  had  its  ends,  and 
served  (1)  "  That  man  might  rightly  know  his  Creator."  For  to  this 
end  was  his  understanding  filled  with  such  a  clear  light,  that  he 
might  behold  God  in  his  glory  and  lovelin&ss:  (2)  «  That  he  might 


46  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

love  him  heartily."  For  God's  law  of  love  was  innate  to  him  with 
the  imaijje  of  God  through  that  righteousness  and  holiness.  Wheia 
he  pursued  this  through  the  image  of  God,  it  served  also,  that  he. 
might  (3)  *'  live  with  God  in  eternal  happiness."  For  when  he  knew 
and  loved  God  so,  the  Lord  could  not  but  manifest  his  pleasure  in 
him  by  a  reciprocal  love,  and  this  would  render  him  happy.  By 
such  a  conduct,  so  worthy  of  God,  he  fulfilled  the  law  of  the  cove- 
nant, which  promised  him  eternal  happiness  ;  for  wliich  end  he  had 
also  the  tree  of  life,  in  order  to  seal  that  happy  life  to  him  by  a  sac- 
rament, Gen.  ii.  9.  But  the  chief  end  of  the  divine  image  was,  (4) 
"  that  he  might  glorify  and  praise  God  ;"  for  since  he  knew  that  God 
was  the  most  worthy,  and  since  he  loved  and  enjoyed  him  as  such, 
he  could  not  but  exait  him  in  the  highest  degree. 

The  Remonstrants  imagine,  that   these   things   could  not  be  the 
ends  of  God's  image,  no,  not  according  to  our  opinion,  because  God 
would  then  have  failed  of  his  end  by  the  fall  of  Adam,   and  of  all 
mankind  in  him,  and  because  we  teach  that  God  created  the  great- 
est part  of  ma!;ikind  to  be  damned  ;  but  this  is  a  horrible  calumny  : 
v/e  do  not  teach  that  God  created  man  to  be  damned,  as  if  the  crea- 
tion of  man  were  a  cause  of  his  damnation  :  sin  alone  is  the  caus^  o$ 
his   damnation,   on   account  of  which  God  punishcth  him,  as  he 
threatened  according  to  his  eternal  decree,  in  which  he  purposed  to. 
pass  by  certain  persons  with   his  grace,  and  to  punish  them  justly  : 
but  besides  this,  we  say,  that  when  God  created  man  in  his  image, 
he  did  not  intend  to  effect  that  all  men  should  live  with  him  in  eter- 
nal happiness :  for  this  would  then  undoubtedly  be  accomplished  ; 
since  he  always  obtains  his   end  by  his  almighty  power,  on   account 
of  the  unchangeableness  of  his  counsel :  for  "  he  w^orketh  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will,  "  Eph.  i.  1 1.  We  must  also  distin- 
guish between  the  end  of  the  worker  and  of  the  work.     The  end  of 
God's  work,  to  wit,  the  creation  of  man  in  his  image,  was  indeed, 
that  he  might,  by  knowing  and  loving  God,  live  with  him  in  eternal 
happiness  :  for  the   image  of  God  qualified  him  for  this  end,  and 
urged  him  to  pursue  it :  but  this  was  not  the  end  of  the   V/orker, 
even  of  God  :  for  he  intended  to  render  the   glory  of  his  justice, 
mercy  and  grace,  wonderful  in  fallen  men,   and  for  this  end  he  suf- 
fered them  to  fall.  See  Rom,  xi.  32,     And   God  hath  also  obtained 
this  end. 

The  Jesuites  aesert  that  this  image  was  a  supernatural  gift,  be- 
stowed upon  man  in  order  to  restrain  the  furious  lusts  of  the  flesh, 
as  it  were,  with  a  golden  bridle  :  and  therefore  that  man,  having  lost 
that  image,  is  now  indeed  without  that  supernatural  gift ;  but  that 


 

liis  nature  is  not  therefore  so  corrupt,  as  we  teach.  In  opposition  to 
Hvhich  we  say,  that  the  ima^e  of  God,  and  particularly  that  virtuous 
goodness,  or  original  righteousness,  iid  not  constitute  any  essential 
part  of  man,  by  which  he  \'  as  made  man,  as  his  soul  and  body  do  ; 
but  it  is  evident  that  this  righteousness,  and  permit  me  to  say  in  a 
good  sense,  supernatural  grace  was  nevertheless  natural  to  man,  that 
is,  his  nature  could  not  have  been  good,  if  he  had  not  been  created 
in  the  image  of  God.  For  (a)  the  image  of  God  was  innate  to  man 
with  his  nature.  Gen.  i.  26,  37.  (b)  His  nature  would  not  otherwise 
have  been  created  good,  since  a  man  without  knowledge,  righteous- 
ness and  holiness  is  sinful  and  hateful  to  God.  See  this  Eph.  iv.  18. 
(c)  Man  could  not  then  have  pursued  nor  obtained  the  end  of  his 
creation  ;  lor  how  can  he,  who  is  naturally  without  knowledge,  and 
filled  with  fleshly  lusts,  warring  against  his  spirit,  know,  love  and 
praise  God  aright  ?  (d)  Adam,  though  fallen,  hath  transmitted  the 
remains  of  God's  image  with  his  nature,  to  his  posterity  ;  for  "  the 
Gentiles  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  14, 
15.  How  much  more  would  he  then,  if  he  had  continued  to  stand, 
have  transmitted  the  divine  image  itself  to  his  seed  ?  but  this  would 
mot  have  been  possible,  if  the  image  of  God  had  not  been  natural  to 
him.  What  our  adversaries  object  here,  that  man  could  not  then 
have  fallen,  is  of  no  force,  because  Adam,  although  naturally  good, 
Vas  nevertheless  created  changeable,  and  was  capable  of  being  seduc- 
edi  Were  not  the  angels  created  naturally  good  and  holy  ?  and  some 
of  them  nevertheless  fell. 

How  dare  our  adversaries  then  reproach  us  in  such  a  shameless 
manner,  and  say  that  we  teach  that  man  was  created  by  God  so 
wicked  and  perverse  ?  They  give  us  reason  to  suspect  them  of  such 
a  wicked  opinion.  For  if  man  were  created  so  ignorant,  and  with  a 
certain  evil  lusting,  then  God  created  him  wicked  and  perverse,  in- 
asmuch as  ignorance,  and  lusting  after  evil  is  wicked  and  perverse. 
They  will  doubtless  allow  that  man  fell  through  his  natural  inclina- 
tions to  evil,  (admitting  that  these  inclinations  were  not  sinful  in 
themselves.)  Ought  not  man  then  to  be  excused,  since  he  only  fol- 
lowed his  natural  and  innate  inclination  ?  yea,  ought  not  God  to  be 
accused,  since  he  created  man  with  such  an  inclination,  and  no 
better  ?  but  our  adversaries  have  need  of  such  cloaks  of  shame,  if 
they  will  defend  with  any  plausibility  their  un violated  reason,  and 
indifferent  freewill. 

Is  man  nevertheless  so  wicked  and  perverse,  and  did  not  God 
Create  him  so,  but  good  and  in  his  image,  '*  whence  then  pro- 
ceeds this*  depravity  •f  human  nature  ?"  We  ought  to  know  this,  it 


48  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL 

concerns  us,  that  knowing  the  ground  of  our  disease,  we  may  seek 
in  a  right  manj^tr  to  be  healed.  The  wisest  of  kings  had  found  that 
"  man  himself  had  songlit  out  many  inventions,"  Eccl.  vii.  29.  And 
the  instructor,  escplaining  this  more  particularly  from  the  word  of 
God,  leads  us  to  "  the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  whereby  our  nature 
is  become  so  corrupt." 

If  we  will  form  proper  conceptions  of  our  corruption  through  the 
fall  of  Adam,  we  must  know  that  God  entered  into  a  covenant  of 
works  with  Adam,  and  that  Adam  was  able  to  keep  the  covenant. 
We  have  shown  before  on  the  second  Lord's  Day  the  nature  and 
reality  of  this  covenant.  We  must  now  see  that  he  could  keep  the  cove= 
nant.  For  God  would  not  otherwise  have  made  a  covenant  with  him, 
it  would  indeed  have  been  to  no  purpose.  Adam's  understanding 
and  will  being  endued  with  original  righteousness,  he  was  able  to  know 
and  love  God  perfectly,  and  thus  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  the  cove- 
nant. He  needed  without  doubt,  God's  preventing  influence :  but 
we  may  nevertheless  say,  that  he  had  an  ability  to  continue  in  the 
covenant,  on  account  of  his  habitual  virtuDusness,  in  consequence  of 
his  having  been  created  in  the  image  of  God,  as  a  man  in  health 
hath  an  abilicy  to  do  his  daily  work,  although  he  needeth  the  ordinary 
influence  of  God  for  that  also,  according  to  Acts  xvii.  28.  P'or  that 
God  created  man  independent  in  his  actions,  so  that,  when  left  to 
himself,  he  could  do  his  duty  without  the  preventing  influence  of 
God,  is  a  most  absurd  imagination  ;  for  man  would  then  have  been 
made  a  God,  who  could  govern  himself,  of  and  by  himself. 

We  must  also  know  that  Adam  and  Eve,  the  first  human  couple, 
were  our  parents,  of  whom  God  hath  made  the  whole  race  of  men, 
as  we  have  shown  before.  Now  when  God  entered  into  a  covenant 
with  Adam,  he  established  it  with  Tve  also,  yet  so  that  she  was  reck- 
oned in  her  husband.  And  therefore  the  misery  of  their  posterity  is 
generally  referred  more  to  Adam  than  to  Eve.  But  God  did  not 
enter  into  a  covenant  with  Adam,  as  a  private  person,  who  should 
stand  or  fall  only  for  himself,  but  also  as  the  father,  and  as  the  head 
of  all  mankind,  who  should  descend  from  him,  and  for  whom  he 
should  stand  and  fall :  as  kings  and  princes  enter  into  covenants  with 
one  another,  not  only  for  themselves,  but  also  for  their  children  and 
subjects,  who  exist  now,  and  will  exist  hereafter.  And  in  this  man- 
ner did  God  establish  the  covenant  of  works  with  Adam,  and  in  him, 
as  the  head,  with  the  whole  human  race.  For  the  appendix  of  the 
;;ovenant  of  works,  to  wit,  the  law  of  marriage.  Gen.  i.  28.  ii.  24, 
25,  was  e:iven  to  Adam,  and  in  him  to  all  his  posterity.  See  this 
Matt.  xix.  3,  4,  5,  6»  Eph.  v.  31.     All  Adam's  posterity  were  crea- 


III.  LORD  S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  49 

ttd  in  him  after  the  image  of  God,  as  the  remains  of  that  image  in 
the  Gentiles  still  manifest,  Rom.,  ii.  14,  15.  Paul  requireth,  Rom. 
V.  14 — 19,  that  we  should  consider  ('hrist  as  the  head  of  believers  in 
the  covenant  of  grace,  after  the  example  of  Adam  :  but  how  shall 
we  understand  this,  unless  Adam  be  also  the  head  of  his  posterity  in 
the  covenant  of  works. 

But  although  Adam  possessed  such  a  glory  and  excellency,  he 
nevertheless  fell  into  a  deep  abyss  of  horrible  misery  through  Lis  diso- 
bedience, by  which,  contrary  to  the  command  of  God,  enforced  with 
the  promise  of  life,  and  the  threatening  of  death,  he  ate  of  the  tree 
cf  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  by  which  he  also  broke  the  covenant, 
as  the  Lord  saith,  Hosea  vi.  7  :  for  that  tree  was  prohibited  to  him, 
as  a  trial  of  his  obedience. 

But  how  could  these  exceedingly  wise  and  holy  persons,  who  had 
such  an  ability,  be  guilty  of  such  a  base  conduct.  The  serpent  be- 
guiled Eve  through  his  suhtilty,  saith  Paul,  2  Cor.  xi.  3.  from  Gen. 
iii.  1 — 6.  "  The  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  beast  of  the  field," 
saith  Moses,  Gen.  iii.  1.  But  although  he  were  ever  so  subtil,  and 
more  so  than  any  beast  of  the  field,  he  could  nevertheless  not  per- 
form such  an  evil  and  subtil  work  of  himself,  for  he  was  irrational 
and  speechless :  but  the  devil  having  apostatized  from  God,  and 
l^emg  subjected  by  him  to  eternal  punishment,  without  any  hope  of 
mercy,  inflamed  with  hatred  against  Ciod,  and  envy  against  the  hap- 
py man,  and  with  an  ambitious  desire  to  rule  over  him,  made  use 
of,  and  possessed  this  beast  for  that  purpose,  and  so  enticed  man  by 
means  of  it.  For  "  the  devil  was  a  murderer  of  man  from  the  be- 
ginning," John  viii.  44,  and  he  is  on  this  account  himself  called  "  the 
great  dragon,  and  the  old  serpent,"  Rev.  xii.  9.  It  is  therefore  de- 
testable in  a  certain  person  *  to  say  that  the  devil  was  the  first  author 
of  sin,  according  to  the  declaration  of  scripture,  and  nevertheless  to 
teach  that  neither  the  serpent,  nor  the  devil  could  deceive  man,  and 
thus  to  deride  the  whole  account  of  Moses.  Perhaps  he  could  not 
speak  otherwise,  after  he  had  once  determined  that  the  essence  of  a 
spirit  was  simply  thought,  and  that  it  hath  no  power  at  all  to  act 
upon  that  which  is  bodily. 

•  The  author  hath  respect  here  to  Dr.  Balihazer  Becker,  a  pastor  of  the  re- 
f«rm«d  church  of  Amsterdam.  He  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  Cartesian  phi- 
Josophy,  and  was  so  far  nrisled  by  it,  as  to  deny  all  the  accounts,  which  the 
scripture  p;ives  of  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  evil  spirits:  as  also  the  exis- 
tence of  ghosts  and  wjzards.  He  published  these  sentiments  in  a  book,  which 
he  intitled.  The  world  bewitched.  He  was  deposed  from  his  pastoral  offisf 
-90  accouat  of  these  opinions ;  but  persevered  in  them  until  hia  deaths 

L 


50  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

The  devil  belni^  exceedingly  subtil,  and  abusing  also  the  subtil 
nature  of  the  serpent,  conducted  his  temptation  in  a  most  subtil  man- 
ner. For  (I)  it  was  subtil  in  him,  that  he  did  not  tempt  man  from 
'vithin,  by  acting  upon  his  imap,ination,  with  wicked  injections :  for 
he  would  then  have  met  with  an  immediate  repuls-i :  there  were  no 
traitors  as  yet  in  the  mind  of  man,  with  whom  he  could  correspond 
and  conspire  to  destroy  him.  But  he  attacked  man  from  without, 
that  he  mig;ht  penetrate  into  his  soul  by  means  of  his  sight  and  hear- 
ing, and  etfect  a  total  confusion  there.  (2)  He  appears  not  to  man 
in  a  terrifying  form,  but  conceals  his  hideousness  under  the  serpent^ 
which  was  not  a  disagreeable  object  to  upright  man  ;  by  which  he 
might  induce  him  to  think  that  he  was  favoured  with  a  message 
from  God  by  an  angel  of  light  through  the  means  of  this  serpent,  in 
an  extraordinary  manner ;  for  the  wise  man  knew  that  the  serpent 
v/as  not  endued  with  reason,  and  that  he  had  not  a  man's  voice.  (S) 
He  doth  not  tempt  him  in  opposition  to  any  command  of  the  moral 
law  of  love,  which  was  written  upon  his  heart ;  for  he  knew  very  well 
that  his  soul  would  be  immediately  seized  with  horror,  and  would 
forthwith  resist  such  an  attack  ;  but  he  assails  him  with  the  positive 
and  probationary  command,  that  he  should  not  eat  of  the  tree  of 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  because  man  might  be  more  easily 
brought  to  this,  since  there  was  neither  good  nor  evil  in  eating  or 
not  eating  of  that  tree,  considered  in  itself  and  without  respect  to  the 
divine  prohibition.  (4)  It  ^yas  also  exceedingly  crafty  in  the  devil, 
that  he  did  not  attack  the  man  first,  but  the  woman,  who  was  the 
weakest,  and  that  wnen  she  was  in  her  weakest  condition  and  alone, 
that  he  might  by  her  seduce  the  man  (5)  He  doth  not  tempt  her  to 
sin  forthwith,  and  like  an  open  enemy  ;  fer  he  would  then  have  been 
soon  resisted ;  but  he  tempts  in  a  very  gradual  manner,  and  with 
subtil  reasons,  that  he  may  conceal  his  deceit.  He  doth  it  (a)  by 
asking  a  question  .  "  Yea,  hath  God  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every 
tree  of  the  garden  ?"  He  speaks  not  of  the  tree  of  knowledge,  but  of 
every  tree  of  the  garden,  in  general :  he  feigns  as  though  he  were 
a  stranger  who  knew  of  nothing  ;  and  that  he  may  not  create  suspi- 
cion, he  asks  as  one  who  was  ignorant,  and  wished  for  information, 
that  he  may  thus  obtain  an  opportunity  of  entering  into  a  discourse 
with  her,  and  of  causing  her  to  stagger,  and  doubt  whether  God, 
when  he  permitted  her  to  eat  of  every  tree,  forbade  her  to  cat  just  of 
that  one  tree.  He  olfers  to  her  for  consideration  hereby,  whether 
she  had  not  misunderstood,  or  whether  she  rightly  remembered  the 
Olds  of  God.  (b)  The  woman  not  thinking  that  it  was  her  enemy, 


 

who  was  before  her,  enters  into  a  discourse  with  him,  and  declares 
lo  him  how  kindly  God  had  permitted  them  to  eat  of  every  tree,  but 
that  he  had  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  kno\vledtj;e,  and  had 
threatened  them  with  deaih  in  the  severest  terms,  if  they  did  eat- 
The  subtil  serpent,  the  father  of  lies,  that  he  may  rid  her  of  the  fear 
of  the  danger,  which  attended  her  eatinp:  of  the  forbidden  tree,  de- 
fies the  threatening   and  saith,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die,"  and  per- 
haps he  feigns  as  though  he  were  a  good  angel,  who  was  sent  by 
God  to   inform  her  that  her  time  of  probation  was  at  an  end,  that 
God  had  therefore  revoked  that  command  and  his  threatening,  and 
that  she  had  consequently  no  reason  to  fear  death,  inasmuch  as  God 
did  now  freely  permit  them  to  eat  of  that  tree,  as  well  as  of  the  rest, 
(c)  But  God  had  nevertheless  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  that  tree,  and 
those  holy  persons  did  not  wish  to  act  contrary  to  the  divine  prohi- 
bition,  although  it  were  not  dangerous ;  and  why  then  should  they 
eat  of  the  tree  ?  was  there  no  danger  in  eating,  there  was  no  advan- 
tage neither.     Therefore  the   subtil  deceiver  saith,  that  they  should 
derive  a  great  advantage  from  eating  :  "  In  the  day  ye   eat  thereof, 
your  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  ye  shall  be  as  Gods,  knowing  good 
and  evil."   He  endeavours  to  persuade  them  that  they  were  yet  very 
simple  pe'^sons,  who  knew  but  little  ;  but  that  by  eating  of  that  tree 
they  should  attain  to  a   great,  yea,  to  a  godlike  knowledge,  which 
was  exceedingly  desirable  for  man  :  yea,  he  endeavours  to  insinu- 
ate to  the  woman  that  the  tree  was  on  this  account  called  the  tree  of 
knowledge*  And  that  she  may  believe  him,  and  eat  of  the  fruit  with- 
out scruple,  he  swears,  and  appeals  to  the  allknowingness  of  God,  to 
satisfy  her,  "  God  doth  know"  saith  he. 

The  woman  huving  entered  into  such  a  discourse  with  her  enemy, 
listened  attentively  to  his  false  sophistry,  doubted  whether  God  had 
so  strictly  forbidden  her  to  eat,  or  whether  she  had  rightly  under- 
stood him,  believed  the  devil,  dismissed  her  fear  of  death,  coveted 
the  good  which  he  had  falsely  promised  her,  and  stirred  up  her  de- 
sire by  "  seeing  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  pleasant  to  the 
eye,  and  desirable  to  make  one  wise  :  and  she  took  of  the  fruit,  and 
ate,  :md  gave  also  to  her  husbaad  with  her,  and  he  did  eat."  Thus 
the  woman  was  deceived  by  the  devil,  and  she,  perhaps  solicited  by 
the  devil,  deceives  her  husband :  in  what  manner  Moses  relates 
not  :  but  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  she  proposed  the 
arguments  of  the  serpent  to  him  with  a  womanly  and  sweet  voice, 
by  which  Adam  suffered  himself  to  be  enticed,  and  thus  imitated 
the  sin  of  his  wife.  Therefore  when  it  is  said,  I  Tim.  ii.  14,  "  Adam 
was  not  deceived  ;  but  the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  trans- 


H2  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

gression,"  v^e  must  understand  it  so  that  he  was  not  deceived  firsts 
nor  immediately  by  the  devil,  but  by  the  woman. 

We  cannot  believe  that  our  parents  fell  on  the  same  day,  on  which 
they  were  created.  For  the  many  events  which  happened  on  that 
day  left  no  time  for  the  fall,  which  is  related  briefly,  but  happened 
more  circumstantially  ;  since  on  that  day  the  beasts  of  the  field  were 
created,  Adam  was  made,  Eve  formed  of  one  of  his  ribs,  while 
Adam  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  marriage,  and  the  law  of  marriage  insti- 
tuted, and  the  covenant  of  works  established.  Besides  this,  God 
pronounced  all  things  good  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  day,  Gen.  i.  31, 
Add  to  this,  that  "  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works, 
and  was  refreshed,"  Exod.  xxxi.  17,  which  God  would  not  have  done, 
if  man  had  fallen  en  the  sixth  day,  for"tht.t  grieved  him  at  his 
heart,"  Gen  vi.  6.  It  is  also  improbable  that  man  continued  not  a 
certain  space  of  time,  and  at  least  not  a  few  days  or  weeks  in  his 
happy  state,  that  he  might  employ  himself  in  contemplating  God, 
loving  him,  and  delighting  himself  in  glorifying  him.  He  was  un- 
doubtedly accustomed  to  God's  drawing  near  to  him,  since  he  knew 
it  by  "  the  cool  "  or  wind  '*  of  the  day."  Gen.  iii.  8. 

Let  none  of  us  think  that  our  first  parents  were  guilty  of  a  small 
sin  in  eating  of  the  forbidden  tree  ;  for  it  was  an  exceedingly  great 
and  dreadful  sin.  Paul  calls  it  "  a  sin,  transgression,  offence,  disobe- 
dience," Rom.  v.  They  transgressed  by  this  sin  the  whole  law  of 
love,  loving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator :  they  broke  God's 
covenant  of  friendship  :  they  despised  his  threatening  of  death,  and 
contemned  the  promised  life  :  they  believed  the  devil  more  than  their 
gracious  Creator  :  they  refused  the  blessed  enjoyment  of  God,  and 
sought  their  pleasure  in  the  forbidden  creature  :  they  fell  from  God 
to  his  malicious  enemy,  the  devil ;  yea,  they  wished  to  be  Gods, 
and  like  God,  for  which  they  arc  derided,  Gen.  iii.  22,  and  that  at 
the  suggestion  of  the  wicked  spirit,  who  hid  himself  in  a  beast.  All 
this  was  so  much  the  more  aggravated,  because  God  had  created 
them  exceedingly  glorious,  and  had  given  them  a  noble,  wise  and 
holy  soul,  which  could  govern  all  the  other  creatures  ;  they  were 
able  to  abstain  from  the  forbidden  tree,  the  command  was  not  diffi- 
cult to  observe,  nothing  compelled  them  to  eat  of  it,  they  had  all 
things  richly  in  the  garden  to  enjoy.  But  that  which  causes  this  sin 
to  appear  still  more  detestable,  is  the  misery  which  they  procured 
by  it,  not  only  to  themselves,  but  also  to  all  their  posterity^ 

But  although  this  sin  was  so  detestable,  it  did  nevertheless  not 
happen  without  the  providence  of  Ciod.  If  "  even  a  sparrow  fall  not 
to  the  ground  without  the  will  of  God,"  how  much  less  then  could 
^Xjan,  who  was  created  perfect,  and  all  mankind  fall  inlo  such  a  gricv^ 


n 

ous  sin  and  misery  ?  God  did  not  compel  man  to  sin,  nor  move  him 
to  it,  yea,  he  did  not  deprive  him  of  his  natural  abilities,  and  habitual 
powers :  but  it  is  certain  that  God  decreed  to  permit  his  fall.  How 
could  the  Mediator  otherwise  have  been  *'  foreordained,  and  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  I  Peter  i.  20.  Rev.  xiii.  8.  Further, 
we  cannot  doubt  but  that  God  suffered  the  devil  to  tempt  him  ;  for 
even  "  the  Spirit  of  God  led  Jesus  into  the  wilderness,  that  he  might 
be  tempted  by  the  devil,"  Matt.  iv.  1.  We  must  also  allow  that  God 
did  not  powerfully  influence  man,  to  preserve  him  from  falling,  but 
that  he  left  him  to  himself;  for  he  should  otherv/ise  not  have  fallen  : 
God  was  also  not  obliged  to  bestow  such  a  powerful  influence  upon 
man.  It  is  true,  man  fell  necessarily,  but  not  by  a  necessity  of  com- 
pulsion, but  of  consequence  :  since  neither  the  decree  of  God,  nor 
his  permission  of  Satan,  nor  his  withholding  of  his  active  influence- 
either  moved  or  compelled  him  inwardly  ;  but  he  fell  by  himself, 
and  by  his  own  free  choice,  and  by  seeking  out  many  inventions. 
We  know  that  many  inexplicable  difficulties  occur  here  :  but  we  also 
know  that  not  only  the  word  of  God,  but  reason  also  teacheth  us 
that  God  is  an  independent  sovereign,  that  nothing  happens  without 
his  will,  that  man  depends  upon  God  in  all  that  he  doth,  and  that 
there  cannot  be  any  religion  that  doth  not  contain  unsearchable 
mysteries,  and  that  if  we  exempt  this  fall  from  the  providence  and 
government  of  God,  we  will  deprive  him  of  his  sovereign  jurisdic- 
tion, and  introduce  the  fortune  of  the  Epicureans,  or  the  fate  of  the 
Stoics. 

The  Lord  also  remembered  this  sin,  by  punishing  it  severely  :  not 
only  the  devil  was  cursed  in  his  instrument ;  but  our  first  parents 
also  were  punished  with  death,  accordmg  to  the  divine  threatening, 
Gen.  ii.  17.  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die."  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  understand  death  here 
in  its  greatest  extent,  of  temporal,  spiritual  and  eternal  death  :  they 
did  not  indeed  die  temporally  on  the  day  on  which  they  sinned :  but 
the  Lord  may,  consistently  with  his  justice  and  truth,  moderate  and 
defer  punishment :  the  sentence  of  death  was  pronounced  upon  them 
that  same  day  :  yea,  on  that  very  day  they  began  to  die  by  all  the 
evil  occurences,  which  were  presently  denounced  and  inflicted  upon 
them.  Gen.  iii.  16—24.  They  died  also  spiritually  ;  for  they  were 
instantly  deprived  of  the  image  of  God,  "  their  understanding  was 
darkened,  and  they  were  alienated  from  the  life  of  God."  B'ph.  iv. 
18.  This  soon  appeared,  since  they  knew  not  that  God  was  allknow- 
ing  and  every  where  present,  when  "  they  thought  to  hide  themselves 
ft'om  him  among  the  trees  of  the  garden,  and  Adam  covered  his 


54  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

transgression,   and  hid  his  iniquity  in  his  bosom,"  Jcb  xxxi.  53.  The 
man  excused  himself,  and  blamed  hi?  ^vife,  who  had  deceived  him, 
yea,  blamed  God,  who   had  given  him  such  a  deceiving  wife  :  and 
the  woman  shifted  the  blame  from  herself  upon  the  serpent ;  Gen. 
iii.  12,    13.     Let  us  not  ask  here,  how  a  single  action  could  do  all 
this,  since  a  wise  man  doth  not  lose  all  his  wisdom  by  one  foolish 
action  :  for  this  sin  of  Adam  was  a  bond  of  iniquity,  which  disorder- 
ed the  whole  human  constitution.  They  deserved  by  this  one  sin  to  be 
deprived  of  the  divine  image,  since  they  did  not  make  a  good  use  of 
it.  When  man  withdrew  from  his  obedience  to  his  Creator  and  Law- 
giver, and  apostatized  to  the  creature,  to  sin  and  Satan,  he  was  then 
justly  condemned  to  become  a  slave   of  the  creature  and  of  Satan. 
''  For  of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of  the  same  is  he  brought  in  bon- 
dage," 2  Peter  ii.  19.     Our  first  parents  undoudtedly  deserved  eter« 
nal  death  :  and  they  soon  experienced  the  bitter  beginnings  of  it ; 
*^  they  hid  themselves  for  fear  of  the  Lord  among  the  trees  of  the 
garden,"  Gen.  iii.  8,  9,    10.  They  endeavoured,  though  in  vain,  to 
escape  from  the  wrath  of  God,  which  was  kindled  against  them  on 
account  of  their  sin  :  they  felt  indeed  that  they  deserved  "  to  be  pun- 
ished with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power,  and  that  he  would  take  vengeance  in 
flaming  fire,"  2  Thess.  i.  8,  9  ;  for  they  were  forthwith  driven  from 
his  presence  and  "  from  the  tree  of  life,  out  of  Paradise,  the  entrance 
of  which  was  guarded  by  Cherubims  with  a  flaming  sword,"  Gen, 
iii.  23,  23,  24.    Since  it  was  now  "  impossible  for  the  law"  to  justify 
them,  because  "  it  was  become  weak  through  the  flesh,"  they  should 
not  have  escaped  the  wmth  to  come,  if  God  had  not,  according  to 
his  inconceivable  grace,  entertained  thoughts  of  peace  toward  them, 
and  promised  them  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the   Mediator,  in  his 
humiliation  and  exaltation,  in  order  to  conquer  Satan,  and  to  procure 
them  regeneration,  justification,  sanctification,  perseverance  and  sal- 
vation.    And  therefore  we  must  believe  that  they  were  delivered 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  were  rendered  partakers  of  all  the 
benefits  of  the  Mediator  with  eternal  salvation. 

**  By  this  fall  and  disobedience  our  nature  is  become  so  corrupt,, 
that  we  are  all  conceived  and  born  in  sin,"  saith  the  instructor.  This 
corruption  of  our  nature  is  usually  called  by  divines  "  Original  (or 
hereditary)  sin,  because  we  inherit  it  of  our  parents  by  our  concep- 
tion and  birth.  Hear  what  David  saith.  Psalm  li.  5  "  Behold  I 
■was  shapen  in  iuiquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  We 
do  not  inherit  the  sin  of  our  immediate  parents,  but  of  Adam,  and 
we  inherit  particularly  his  first  sin  by  our  birth  of  our  parents  :  for 


Jir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  -'  65 

it  was  only  that  first  sin,  by  which  he  broke  the  covenant  of  God  for 
himself  and  his  posterity.  See  Rom.  v.  12,  18. 

Original  sin  is  either  our  natural  guilt,  or  our  natural  pollution, 
flowing  from  our  natural  guilt.  Our  natural  guilt  is  called  imputed 
original  sin,  and  our  natural  pollution  is  called  inherent  original  sin. 
Imputed  original  sin  is  Adam's  first  sin,  which  is  imputed  by  God 
to  every  individual  of  his  posterity  in  consequence  of  the  broken 
covenant  of  works,  on  account  of  which  every  individual  is  declared 
guilty.  The  most  of  those  who  are  out  of  our  church,  as  the  Pela- 
gians, Socinians,  Mennonites  and  Remonstrants,  deny  this  imputed 
original  sin, :  yea,  the  J:insenists  also  oppose  it,  although  they  admit 
inherent  original  sin  But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this  imputed 
original  sin :  for  the  covenant  of  works,  which  we  have  explained 
and  proved  before,  was  m?de  not  only  with  Adam,  but  in  him,  as  the 
head  of  the  covenant,  with  all  mankind  also,  wlio  should  descend 
from  him,  from  which  it  necessarily  follows  that  Adam  did  not  break 
that  covenant  only  for  himself,  but  also  for  all  his  posterity,  and  that 
he  rendered  both  himself  and  us  guilty.  Further,  "  v/e  are  children 
of  \.rath  by  nature,  "  Eph.  ii.  3.  Children,  who  have  not  yet  any 
actual  sin,  are  subject  to  every  kind  of  misery,  and  to  death.  How 
can_^  God  conduct  toward  them  with  so  much  severity,  if  they  have 
no  sin  ?  is  there  unrighteousness  with  God  ?  God  forbid :  it  must 
then  be  on  account  of  Adam's  sin.  Paul  explains  this  at  large,  Rom. 
V.  12 — 22.  His  design  is  to  show  that  believers  obtain  reconciliation 
and  righteousness  by  one  Christ,  vrs.  8 — 1 1.  He  explains  this  by 
the  connexion  between  Adam  and  us  his  members  in  his  first  sin, 
and  the  manner  in  which  we  become  guilty  by  that  sin  ;  therefore 
he  saith,  vrs.  14,  that  "  Adam  was  a  figure  of  him  who  was  to  come." 
In  what  wanner  was  he  a  figure  ?  "  as  by  the  disobedience  of  that 
one  man  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  many 
shall  be  made  righteous,"  vrs.  17,  18,  19.  From  which  it  therefore 
evidently  appears,  that  the  sin  of  Adam  v.'as  reckoned  our  sin,  as 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  reckoned  the  righteousness  of  believers. 
He  sa'th  also  to  the  same  purspose,  vrs.  12,  "  By  one  man  sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin,  and  so  death  psssed  upon 
all  men."  Therefore  the  sin  of  Adam  is  the  cause  ot  the  death  of 
all  men,  yea,  even  of  the  death  of  children,  who  have  not  sinned  after 
the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression,  vrs.  14.  How  is  this  possible 
if  Adam  s  sin  be  not  imputed  to  all  ?  The  apostle  saith  also,  vrs.  12, 
"  in  whom,"  namely  Adam,  "  ail  have  sinned  :"  surely  not  actually, 
but  in  him,  considered  as  their  head.  And  if  we  translate  the  words 
r/iA  hoo  fiantes  eemarton,  not  "  in  whom,"  but  "  because  all  have  sin- 


irb  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

fled,"  as  many  do,  the  sense  will  be  the  same,  and  teach  us  that  sili 
have  sinned  by  Adam's  sin,  and  are  therefore  worthy  of  death.  He 
illustrates  this  further,  when  lie  saith  vrs.  15 — 19,  "  Through  the 
dffence  of  one,  many  be  dead.  The  judgment  is  by  one  who  sin- 
ned. The  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemnation.  By  the  offence 
of  one  liian  death  reigned  by  one.  By  the  offence  of  one  judgment 
ta.me  upon  all  men  to  condemnation.  By  one  man's  disobedience 
many  were  made  sinners."  Who  can  preser^e  the  fot'ce  of  these 
words  without  admitting  such  an  imputed  guilt  ?  It  is  not  just,  say 
our  adversaries,  that  anolher  man's  sin,  which  we  ourselves  have 
neither  committed,  nor  consented  to  beforehand,  should  be  imputed 
10  us,  and  that  v/e  should  be  reckoned  guilty  on  account  of  that  sin* 
But  how  will  it  consist  with  the  justice  of  God,  that  he  inflicts  so 
many,  and  such  grievous  judgments,  yea,  death  itself  upon  children, 
if  they  inherit  not  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin,  and  have  not  themselves* 
any  actual  sin  ?  Moreover,  we  must  not  consider  Adam's  sin,  as  the 
bin  of  any  other  private  man,  but  as  the  sin  of  all  mankind  in  Adamj 
as  their  covenant  head. 

Inasmuch  as  the  sin  of  Adam  corrupted  his  nature,  therefore  our 
nature  is  also  become  corrupt  through  his  sin  imputed  to  us :  which 
corrupt  nature  constitutes  our  inherent  original  sin,  whereby  all  the 
children  of  Adam  being  deprived  from  their  birth  of  the  image  of 
God,  having  their  understanding  darkened,  their  conscience  defiled, 
being  disinclined  to  that  Avhich  is  good  and  prone  to  evil,  possess  a 
wicked  disposition  of  heart,  the  active  source  of  every  wicked  desire, 
and  of  every  sinful  action  :  Surely  this  inherent  original  sin  consists 
not  in  a  mere  deprivation  of  the  divine  image,  but  also  in  a  wicked 
disposition  of  the  heart :  therefore  it  is  called  "  the  old  man,  the  body 
of  sin,  fiesh,  the  law  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  and  vii.  The  Pelagians,  Soci- 
nians.  Remonstrants  and  Mennonites,  deny  also  this  inherent  original 
sin.  The  Jansenists,  who  deny  imputed  original  sin,  confess  never- 
theless the  inherent ;  but  the  Jesuits,  who  acknowledge  imputed 
original  sin,  deny  the  inherent :  they  vvill  indeed  allow  that  man  is 
nov,'  destitute  of  the  divine  image,  which  was  given  to  him  before 
tiie  fail,  as  a  golden  bridle,  to  restrain  the  lusts  of  the  fiesh  :  but  they 
believe  not  that  he  hath  such  a  wicked  disposition.  But  all  this  is 
(a)  directly  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  which  teachcth  us  this  in- 
herent original  sin :  Adam,  created  at  first  in  the  image  of  God, 
which  he  lost  by  sin,  "  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his 
image,"  Gen.  v.  1,  3,  Adam  was  sinful,  and  his  son  was  born  after 
that  sinful  image  of  him.  "  Every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of 
myn'8  hvart  is  only  evil,  and  that  continually,"  Gen.  vi,  S,  and  indeed 


«? 

««fpom  his  youth,"  Gen.  viii»SK  Man  is  called  "a  transgressor 
from  the  womb,"  Tsakh  xIviH.  8.  And  it  is  thus  with  all  men,  who 
proceed  from  Adam  by  ordinary  generation,  Mary,  the  mother  of 
the  Lord  i50t  excepted.  Job  asserts  it :  "  Who  can  brin?:  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?"  Job  xiv*  4.  The  Saviour  also  saith,  John 
iii.  6.  "  That  which  is  born  of  Hesh  is  flesh  "  (b)  The  general  pre- 
valence of  ignorance  and  concupiscence  manifests  also  our  inherent 
original  sin  ;  for  if  it  were  not  natural  to  man,  and  innate  to  him,  it 
would  not  be  so  general,  and  cleave  so  fast  to  him ;  at  least  his  un- 
violated  freewill,  of  which  our  adversaries  boast  so  much,  would  sub- 
due it  at  last,  and  the  world  would  become  better,  (c)  The  necessity 
of  the  new  birth,  the  circumcision  and  baptism  of  children  manifests 
the  depravity  and  impurity  of  the  first  birth.  (<l)  Let  the  actions  of 
children  speak,  their  wicked  humors  soon  show  the  depravity  of  their 
nature.  They  do  not  surely  derive  this  depravity  from  evil  exam- 
ples, which  they  imitate,  for  they  are  often  guilty  of  sins  which  they 
do  not  observe  in  others  :  why  do  they  not  imitate  good  examples  as 
well  as  evil,  if  their  nature  do  not  cleave  to  sin  ?  Though  godly 
parents  educate  their  children  ever  so  carefully  by  good  examples^ 
admonitions  and  chastisements,  they  experience  nevertheless  to  their 
sorrow  that  their  depravity  still  cleaves  to  their  children.  The  child- 
ren are  indeed  called  holy,  1  Cor.  vii.  14.  but  not  with  respect  to  the 
covenant  of  works  but  of  grace,  into  which  they  are  admitted  with 
their  believing  parents  :  for  they  are  otherwise  unclean,  as  Paul  saith 
in  the  same  text,  who  doth  not  therefore  deny  inherent  original  sinj 
but  confirms  it. 

But  a  greater  difficulty  occurs  here,  to  wit,  m  What  manner  the 
soul  which  is  created  immediately  by  God  becomes  so  sinful.  It  is 
absurd  to  say,  that  the  soul  is  propagated  by  the  parents :  for  the 
soul  is  created  immediately  by  G©d  in  the  body,  Eccl  vii.  7.  Zech. 
xii.  I.  It  is  also  a  spirit,  which  cannot  be  produced  by  a  bodily  gen- 
eration :  and  although  the  parents  produce  the  body  only,  and  not 
the  soul,  they  can  nevertheless  with  great  propriety  be  said  to  pro- 
duce a  man  into  the  world,  as  vvell  as  those  who  kill  the  body  only, 
and  not  the  soul,  may  be  said  to  kill  a  man*  1  declare  that  I  can- 
not comprehend  how  the  soul  is  created  holy  in  a  sinful  body,  and 
becomes  polluted  by  the  sinful  body,  nor  how  the  corruption  of  the 
soul  proceeds  from  a  polluted  seed,  or  from  a  sinful  and  irregular 
conduct  of  the  parents  in  generation  i  for  we  should  not  then  inherit 
so  much  the  sin  of  Adam,  as  the  sin  of  our  immediate  parents,  and 
their  irregular  conduct,  which  is  contrary  to  the  word  of  God  ;  fof 
*hat  saith  that  we  inherit  the  sin  of  Adam,  and  particularly  his  first 


58  TfiE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

sin,  and  that  "  the  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,'' 
Ezck.  xviii.  20.  Neither  may  it  be  said,  that  the  essence  of  the  soul 
consists  in  thdUG^ht,  that  it  had  evil  thoughts  in  its  mother's  womb, 
and  polluted  itself  in  that  manner:  for  this  is  contrary  to  Rom.  ix. 
1 1,  and  it  would  still  remain  a  difficulty,  whence  such  a  sinful  think- 
ing should  proceed.  Such  an  assertion  is  also  dangerous,  as  appears 
in  the  Pelagians,  who,  while  they  maintained  this  opinion,  denied 
original  sin,  and  were  therefore  condemned  hi  the  council  of  Mile- 
vitum  But  we  must  look  higher  here,  and  consider  God  as  a  judge, 
who  imputing  the  sin  of  Adam  justly  to  his  posterity,  and  pronounc- 
ing them  guilty  in  consequence  thereof,  withholds  his  image  from 
them,  and  surrenders  them  to  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan,  as  God 
often  punisheth  one  sin  with  another,  Psalm  Ixxxi.  11,  12.  Rom  i. 
21 — 32.  But  how  do  we  then  inherit  the  sin  of  our  parents  by  our 
birth  ?  according  to  Psalm  li.  5.  We  will  understand  this,  when  we 
consider  that  our  parents  propagate  us  under  a  broken  covenant  of 
works,  and  so  as  children  of  our  sinful  father  Adam,  who  begat  a 
son  after  his  own  disposition,  and  "  after  his  image  and  likeness," 
Gen.  i.  3.  We  are  born  of  our  parents  not  simply  in  a  natural,  but 
also  in  a  moral  state  under  Adam,  not  only  as  our  natural,  but  also 
as  our  moral  head  in  the  covenant  of  works.  The  marriage  law, 
Gen,  i.  28.  "Be  fruitful  and  multiply,'*  was  added  to  the  covenant 
of  works,  that  children  might  be  born  under  that  covenant  of  works. 
If  Adam  had  continued  to  stand,  the  image  of  God  would  have  been 
transmitted  to  us,  his  posterity  by  our  birth  ;  but  now  the  sinful 
image  of  Adam  is  transmitted  to  all  who  proceed  from  his  loins,  by 
their  birlh  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works.  And  thus  our 
parents  serve  as  instruments  of  God's  justice  to  •'  conclude  all  under 
the  disobedience  of  Adam,"  Rom.  xi.  32.  If  we  understand  the  mat- 
ter thus,  we  shall  presently  see  that  Mary  also  was  born  with  original 
sin,  and  not  her  Son  the  Lord  Jesus ;  inasmnch  as  he  was  not  born 
in  consequence  of  the  law,  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,"  and  so  not 
under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  cannot  be  reckoned  in  Adam  as 
the  head  of  the  covenant,  although  he  may,  as  his  natural  head  :  and 
there  fore  h*  is  opposed  to  Adam  in  a  moral  and  covenant  relation, 
Rom.  v.  14 — 19  1  Cor.  xv.  32 — 47,  48,  49,  although  he  is  referred 
to  Adam,  as  his  first  father  in  a  natural  relation,  Luke  iii.  23 — 38. 
God  saith,  Ezek.  xviii.  20.  "  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of 
tlie  father.'*  From  this  passage  our  adversaries  conclude,  that  the 
children  of  Adam  do  not  inherit  his  sin  by  their  birth,  and  that  they 
cannot  be  punished  on  account  of  it.  But  we  cannot  conclude  this 
from  that  text :  for  our  fathers  besides  Adam  do  not  stand  nor  fall 


in.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  59 

for  us,  as  covenant  heads  in  the  covenant  of  works.  It  is  not  a  gene- 
ral case,  that  the  son  doth  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  since 
God  sometimes  "  visits  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  child- 
ren," Exod.  XX.  5.  But  in  Ezek.  xviii.  20,  there  is  a  mitigation  of 
that  righteous  vengeance,  on  account  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  The 
son  bears  the  iniquity  of  the  father  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  works, 
but  not  on  account  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  See  this  Jer.  xxxi. 
38—31. 

APPLICATION. 

Behold,  hearers,  so  glorious  were  ye  created,  and  after  the  image 
of  God,  and  so  wretched  and  abominable  are  ye  become  through 
your  birth  1  Do  ye  see  it  in  yourselves  ?  doth  it  affect  you  with  grief? 
do  ye  humble  and  abase  yourselves  on  account  of  it,  as  the  matter 
requires  ?  Surely  ye  do  not,  who  are  still  such  as  ye  were  at  your 
birth,  and  who  have  never  yet  departed  out  of  Adam,  and  out  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  and  entered  into  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  and 
into  the  covenant  of  grace.  For, 

1.  Ye  have  never  yet  come  to  yourselves,  so  as  to  see  your  natu- 
ral guilt  and  abominable  corruption,  to  bewail  it,  and  to  humble  your- 
selves on  account  of  it.  Yea,  as  miserable  and  hatefully  wicked  as 
ye  have  been  from  your  birth,  ye  are  nevertheless  proud  and  haughty 
on  account  of  it.  Ye  know  wonderfully  well  how  to  boast  of  your 
noble  parentage,  to  relate  ftom  what  family  ye  have  sprung,  this  and 
that  great  personage  was  your  kinsman ;  and  ye  consider  not  that 
your  first  father  sinned,  and  was  a  covenant  breaker,  and  that  ye  are 
by  your  natural  birth  "  af  your  father  the  devil."  John  viii.  44.  Ye 
boast  of  your  good  heart,  of  your  great  understanding,  and  your  noble 
virtues,  and  require  that  every  one  should  esteem  and  love  you,  and 
when  they  do  not,  ye  are  angry  :  do  ye  perceive  that  any  one  hath 
an  esteem  for  you,  your  heart  is  immediately  tickled,  and  swells 
with  pride,  as  a  bladder  with  wind,  and  ye  speak,  with  a  lofty  air. 
Your  foolish  imagination,  that  ye  are  something,  emboldens  you  to 
draw  near  to  God,  like  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12,  in  an  arro- 
gant manner,  and  to  display  your  specious  virtues  before  him  :  and 
ye  doubt  not  but  that  God  will  be  favourable  to  you,  yea,  ye  think 
that  if  he  did  not  bestow  heaven  upon  you,  he  would  deal  unjustly 
by  you ;  and  so  ye  possess  your  father's  disposition,  who  "  would  be 
like  God,"  Gen.  iii.  3,  22.  Do  ye  once  see  your  damnable  sins,  it 
doth  not  however  render  you  concerned,  but  yc  presently  turn  away 
from  beholding  them,  and  excuse  them  as  weaknesses,  which  yc 
ought  not  much  to  regard. 


60         THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

2.  Ye  know  indeed  that  yo  are  not  as  ye  ought  to  be,  and  as  your 
father  Adam  was  before  the  fall :  but  ye  never  inquire  by  what 
means  ye  have  become  so  miserable  r  ye  do  not  concern  yourselve* 
therewith)  but  rej^ard  it  as  a  matter,  which  hath  happened  lona-  since, 
and  which  is  far  off,  and  doth  not  relate  to  you.  Yea,  many  of  yoa 
are  still  so  ignorant,  that  they  know  not  even  from  the  word  of  God, 
and  as  a  truth,  that  man  is  so  miserable  on  account  of  Adam's  sin 
through  bis  birth  ;  how  should  they  then  know  from  a  thorough  con- 
templation  of  themselves,  their  own  misery  and  the  causes  of  it? 

3.  Are  ye  ever  led  to  a  fair  view  of  your  iniquity,  either  by  a  wis» 
reprover,  or  by  the  conviction  of  your  own  consciences,  ye  seek,  pre- 
ZfCTifiy  for  the  cause  of  the  sin,  which  is  discovered  to  you,  yet  ye  do 
not  ftnd  the  true  cause,  but  a  false  one,  which  ye  do  then  pretend, 
in  order  to  excuse  yourselves :  one  thinks,  or  says,  the  flesh  is  weak, 
and  he  doth  not  see  the  wickedness  of  his  flesh ;  another  alledges^ 
the  devil  is  busy,  and  he  says  with  Eve,  "  the  serpent  deceived  me,'^ 
Gen.  ii.  IS.  It  is  as  though  the  devil  did  every  sin  through  the  sin- 
ner, as  he  deceived  the  woman  through  the  serpent,  and  as  though 
the  binner  himself  were  not  abominable,  and  did  not  commit  sin  : 
a  third  pretends  custom,  he  knows  not  that  he  doth  it,  as  if  custom 
would  excuse  him,  and  as  if  it  did  not  greatly  aggravate  his  iniquity, 
that  he  was  accustomed  to  sin,  and  it  wasbecome,  asit  were,  hisnature: 
a  fourth  wi!i  lay  the  blame  upon  his  calling,  th^t  it  is  difficult  and 
that  it  cannot  be  followed  without  a  piofanation  of  the  name  and  day 
of  God,  or  without  cheating  and  wronging  others  :  but  such  a  calling 
is  not  lawfiji  and  is  itself  sinful ;  he  will  then  atso  accuse  his  neigh- 
bour, he  brought  me  to  it,  saith  the  sinner,  when  his  iniquity  is 
found,  which  is  hatehil :  or  his  parents  have  done  it  by  an  evil  ex- 
ftmple,  or  i  careless  education  :  they  have  eaten  sour  grapes  :  or  he 
excuses  himself  with  the  conduct  of  the  man  or  the  woman,  yea, 
what  i»  ^tUl  more  abominable,  the  sinner  is  so  wicked,  that  he  dares 
with  Adam  blame  his  Maker  for  his  s|n,  and  say  that  he  is  the  cause 
of  It,  Gen  ill  iS.  A  man  hath  not  made  himself,  saith  he  often  O 
wicked  monster,  that  thou  wilt  excuse  thine  own  hateful  heart  and 
conduct,  and  accuse  others,  yea,  even  thy  pure  Maker. 

4.  Dq  ye  know  that  the  sinner  is  become  50  evil  and  pen^ersc 
through  the  fall  gf  Adam,  ye  know  il  only  as  a  truth,  which  occurs 
in  the  word,  but  ye  do  not  see  it  in  yourselves  ;  for  ye  have  never 
yet  looked  into  yourselves,  in  order  to  condemn  yourselves  with  de- 
testation and  concern.  All  men  are  considered  by  you  as  abomina- 
ble,  according  to  the  word  of  God  :  but  vhen  ye  come  to  yourselves, 
ye  then  think  that  ve  are  not  so  wicked  as  this  and  that  one,  byt 


lit.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  6) 

rather  somewhat  better.  Ye  are  perhaps  so  expert  in  the  word  of 
righteousness,  that  ye  are  able  to  refute  all  the  objections  of  the 
adversaries:  but  when  ye  are  only  a  little  concerned  about  your 
evil  character,  and  fearful  of  eternal  perdition,  bow  do  your  hearts 
rise  up  in  displeasure  against  the  Lord,  and  say  within  you,  with 
the  wicked  Jews  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,' '  Ezek.  xviii, 
25,  29,  and  "  why  doth  he  yet  find  fault  ?  for  who  hath  resisted  his 
will  ?"  Rom.  ix.  19.  This  is  not  a  subtle  injection  of  Satan  into  you, 
but  it  is  a  dictate  of  your  own  evil  hearts,  and  ye  cherish  that  wicked 
thought ;  yea,  rise  up  against  the  Lord  and  seek  to  disengage  your* 
selves  from  him  and  his  service. 

Is  it  not  thus  with  you  ?  attend  only  to  the  workings,  the  thoughts 
and  imaginations  of  your  hearts,  to  the  words  of  your  mouths,  and 
your  whole  conversation,  and  ye  will  see  it.  Do  not  make  light  of 
it  by  thinking,  I  know  that  it  is  sad  enough,  and  not  meddling  any 
further  with  it :  but  stand  still  a  while  by  it,  and  see  your  great 
misery,  that  ye  come  short  of  the  image  and  glory  of  God,  Rom.  iii. 
23.  Ye  have  the  sinful  image  of  your  father  Adam,  Gen.  v.  3,  where- 
by ye  have  apostatized  from  God  to  yourselves,  yea,  to  his  enemy; 
"  your  actions  and  birth  are  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  your  father  M'as 
an  Ammonite,  and  your  mother  a  Hitlite :"  your  birth  is  hateful  and 
loathsome,  Ezek.  xvi.  3,  4,  S.  Ye  are  "  a  seed  of  evildoers,  and 
transgressors  from  the  womb,"  Isaiah  i.  4.  xlviii.  8.  Your  hearts 
work  up  nothing  "  but  mire  and  dirt,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  20.  Ye  are  "  by 
nature  children  of  wrath,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  And  know  that  if  ye  remain 
as  ye  are,  heaven  will  be  shut  against  you,  as  Paradise  was  against 
your  parents :  for  "  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing 
that  defileth,  or  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie,"  Rev.  xxi.  27. 

Alas  1  friends,  endeavour  to  escape  from  your  destruction,  and  to 
surmount  your  miserable  condition  and  situation.  And  for  this  pur- 
pose. 

1 .  Look  upon  Adam's  condition  as  yours.  Ye  were  indeed  contained 
m  his  loins,  ye  have  sprung  from  him,  and  were  born  under  his  rove* 
ii  ant,  and  the  covenant  of  works  was  estabhshed  with  you  in  him, 
and  ye  do  yet  daily  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  ye  say  inconsider- 
ately with  the  carnal  Israelites,  Exod.  xix.  8.  "  All  that  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  will  we  do  :"  and  when  ye  rest  and  seek  your  life  in 
your  doings.  Yea,  ye  have  broken  the  covenant  in  Adam,  and  ye 
break  it  daily,  when  ye  commit  the  same  sin  that  Adam  committed 
by  transgressing  the  law  of  God,  aiming  at  high  things,  seeking  the 
creature  more  than  God,  listening  to  the  suggestions  of  Satan,  and 
following  them.    Do  not  »U  the  judgmeius  which  were  threatened 


62  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

and  inflicted  by  God  on  account  of  the  sin  of  Adam,  lie  also  upon 
you,  as  they  respect  the  man,  the  woman  and  the  earth  ? 

2.  (Compare  your  condition  before  the  fall  with  your  condition 
since.  How  glorious  was  it  before  the  fall !  Ye  were,  like  the  image 
of  God,  perfectly  wise,  holy,  without  any  sinful  emotions,  lords  of  all 
things,  immortal,  provided  in  the  perfect  garden  of  pleasure  with  an 
abundance  of  all  things,  created  to  know,  to  love  your  Creator,  and 
to  live  with  him  in  eternal  happiness,  to  glorify  and  praise  him. 
But  ye  are  now  foolish,  abominable,  slaves  of  the  creatures  and  of 
sm,  ye  must  seek  your  bread  with  much  anxiety,  and  must  every 
moment  expect  and  fear  death,  yea,  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  Be  grieved  and  lament  on  account  of  your 
fathers,  yea,  on  account  of  your  own  sins,  which  have  procured  all 
these  thmgs  to  you.  Ye  have  more  reason  than  the  church  had  to 
complain.  Lam.  v.  16.  "  The  crown  is  fallen  from  our  head  :  wo 
unto  us  that  we  have  sinned." 

3.  Endeavour  to  obtam  a  thorough  knowledge  of  your  sinfulness^ 
and  woful  misery.  Attend  not  only  to  your  evil  actions,  but  descend 
to  the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  which  are  indeed  more  abominable 
than  your  sinful  actions :  behold  there  the  headspring  of  all  your 
abominable  deeds.  Observe  all  the  workings,  motions,  and  inclina- 
tions of  your  hearts,  whence  they  arise,  and  whither  they  would  lead 
you.  So  David  acted,  when  he  confessed  his  heinous  sins.  He  con- 
sidered his  iniquity  and  sin  in  which  he  was  conceived  and  brought 
forth,"  as  the  cause  of  those  ainh,  and  hq  humbled  himself  on  ac- 
count of  it,  Psalm  li.  5.  And  beware  of  "  covering  your  transgres- 
sions like  Adam,  by  hiding  your  iniquity  in  your  bosom,"  Job  xxxi. 
33.  Do  not  esteem  any  sin  small ;  the  least,  like  Adam's  eating  of 
the  fruit,  is  a  bond  of  iniquity :  every  sin,  yea,  even  the  least  de- 
serves death  and  the  curse  ;  for  "  cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them,"  Gal.  iii.  10.  Do  but  see  this,  subdue  your  pride,  bemoan  and 
humble  yourselves. 

4.  Flee  to  the  second  Adam,  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  may  take 
away  your  evil  iniquities.  God,  willing  to  manifest  kindness  to  sin- 
ners, and  to  glorify  himself  as  a  gracious  God  ;  and  this  being  im- 
possible by  the  law  of  the  co\enant  of  works  "  gave  his  Son  to  be  a 
covenant  to  tlie  people,  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  xlix.  6.  He 
took  sin  on  him,  satisfied  for  the  guilt  of  it,  and  obtained  the  right- 
eousness of  God  :  "  For  what  the  lav/  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  fiei^h,  and  that  for  sin,  condemned  fcin  in  the  flesh  ;  that  the 


iii.  LORID'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  63 

righteousness  of  tlie  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Rorri.  viii.  S,  4. 
"  for  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by 
the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous,"  Rom.  v.  19, 
<•  God  sets  him  forth  to  you,"  that  ye  may  seek  '»  recoRciliation  in 
hira  through  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  He  calls  to  you,  that  ye  may 
"  come  to  him,  and  that  he  may  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
you,  and  give  you  all  the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  the  Messiah,  Isaiah 
Iv.  I,  2,  3.  Do  not  refuse,  but  betake  yourselves  to  Christ,  cast  your- 
selves upon  him,  accept  of  him,  and  endeavour  to  "  receive  of  his 
fullness,  and  grace  for  grace.'*  John  i.  16. 

5.  Take  good  heed  that  ye  do  not  destroy  nor  deface  the  image 
of  God  still  more  with  respect  to  that  which  remains  of  it.  Do  not 
injure  your  neighbour,  who  is  made  after  the  image  of  God  :  for  ye 
should  violate  the  image  of  God  in  him,  Gen  ix.  6,  James  iii.  8,  9, 
Beware  that  ye  do  not,  by  hardening  yourselves,  and  accustoming 
yourselves  to  sin,  lay  waste  your  conscience,  (in  which  there  is  still 
something  of  the  image  of  God  left,  and  which  reminds  you  of  your 
duty,  and  convinceth  you  of  sin  and  the  wrath  of  God),  but  stir  up, 
and  animate  your  conscience  continually,  endeavour  to  be  renewed 
again  after  the  image  of  God.  "  Make  yourselves  a  new  heart,  and 
anew  spirit,"  Ezek,  xviii.  31.  Cast  yourselves  upon  Christ,  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  that  he  may  be  formed  in  you  ;  for  «if 
any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Look 
steadfastly  at  his  holy  and  beaming  glory,  that  ye  may  be  *'  changed 
into  the  same  image  from  glorj  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18. 

6.  Lest  ye  should  be  insnared  again,  beware  of  the  wiles  of  the 
devil :  "  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  because  your  adversary  the  devil,  as 
a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  I 
Peter  v.  8.  "  He  beguiled  Eve,"  as  wise  and  holy  as  she  was, 
"through  his  subtilty,"  2  Cor.  xi.  3,  it  will  not  then  be  difficult  for 
him  to  seduce  you,  who  harbour  his  abetters,  your  corruptions  in 
you :  endeavour  therefore  to  learn  his  devices.  Suspect  such  ques- 
tions as,  should  this  and  that  be  true,  or  a  sin  ?  representations  of 
the  creatures  of  God,  and  of  sins,  calculated  to  allure  the  mind,  ex- 
citations to  aim  at  high  things,  unfavourable  thoughts  of  God,  as  if 
he  had  no  incl^iation  to  do  you  good,  and  particularly  blasphemous, 
and  unnatural  injections ;  I  say,  suspect  all  these,  as  proceeding 
from  the  devil,  and  resist  them  at  the  first  attack,  and  repel  them 
from  you,  as  ye  would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes.  If  ye  enter 
into  a  conversation  with  him,  he  will  insnare  you,  before  ye  are 
av^are,  as  he  did  Eve :  reject  him  again  aiid  again,  like  the  Saviour^, 


6i  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

Matt.  !V.  II.  "Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you,"  James 
iv.  7, 

T.  Parents,  who  afe  favoured  by  God  with  children,  oppose  be- 
times the  corruption  of  your  children  :  inform  them  of  their  con-up- 
tion  and  damnable  condition,  and  how  they  must  be  delivered  by 
Christ.  Ye  have  connected  them  by  their  birth  with  Adam,  endeav* 
our  therefore  to  connect  them  also  with  Christ :  "  Ye  fathers,  pro- 
voke  not  your  children  to  wrath  :  but  bringj  them  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,**  saith  Paul,  Eph.  vi.  4.  So  Abraham 
conducted.  Gen.  xviii.  If,  18.  David,  Prov.  iv.  5,  4,  5,  6,  and  the 
mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5  .  iii.  15. 

How  happy  are  they  who  have  fled  to  the  second  Adam,  and 
sheltered  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings  I  Whatsoever 
they  had  lost  in  the  first  Adam  they  obtain  again  in  him  :  "  Of  God 
they  are  in  Christ  JesUs  who  of  God  is  made  unto  them  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification  and  redemption,"  1  Cor.  i.  30* 
Adam  was  seduced  by  the  wicked  one,  but,  partakers  of  Christ,  "the 
Lord  will  establish  and  keep  you  from  the  wicked  one,"  Sj  Thess. 
iii.  3.  Adam,  and  ye  in  Adam,  broke  the  covenant  of  God:  but 
**  the  Lord  hath  now  made  another,"  and  better  "  covenant  with  you, 
which  cannot  be  broken,"  and  which  is  everlasting)  that  he  will  not 
turn  away  from  you,  to  do  you  good  ;  he  hath  put  his  fear  into  your 
hearts,  so  that  ye  shall  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  Ye  lost 
the  image  of  God  in  Adam,  but  in  the  Son  of  God  ye  are  "  again 
become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  2  Peter  i.  4.  And  how  will 
his  image  be  glorified  in  your  immortality,  and  eternal  happiness  S 
I'or  "  as  ye  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly,  ye  shall  also  bear 
the  image  of  the  heavenly,"  1  Cor.  xv.  49.  Yea,  *'  ye  shall  behold 
the  face  of  God  in  righteousness  ;  ye  shall  be  satisfied,  when  ye 
awake,  with  his  likeness,"  Psalm  xvii  15.  Adam  was  dismissed  out 
of  Paradise,  but  the  second  Adam,  Jesus  the  King  will  call  you  into 
the  Paradise  of  God,  the  third  heaven  ;  and  how  happy  will  ye  be, 
when  he  will  say,  according  to  Matt.  xxv.  34.  **  Come  ye  blessed  of 
my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world  !"  Amen. 


(   i5    ) 


THE 


INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER 
TO  DO  GOOD. 

SEQUEL  OF  tH£  III.  LORD'S  DAY. 

Rom.  viii.  f .     The  carrial  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it  it 
not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be. 

Q.  8.  jire  we  then  so  corrupt,  that  %ve  are  wholly  incapable  of  doing 
any  good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness  f 

A.  Indeed  we  are,  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God« 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY.

Q.  7.   Whence  then  proceeds  this  depravity  of  human  7iature  ? 

A.  From  the  fall  and  disobedience  of  our  first  parents,  Adam  and 
Eve,  in  Paradise  ;  hence  our  nature  is  become  so  corrupt,  that  we 
are  all  conceived  and  born  in  sin. 


H 


APPY  is  the  man  who  knoweth  the  cause  of  things  ;  for  hav- 
ing such  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  matters,  he  hath  a  wonderful 
delight  in  his  contemplations.  It  tends  more  especially  to  render  a 
person  happy,  that  he  knows  the  first  cause  of  good  and  evil ;  since 
he  learns  thus  to  avoid  the  evil,  and  pursue  the  good,  to  praise  the 
first  cause  of  the  good,  and  to  detest  the  evil.  If  I  know  not  the  first 
cause  of  the  good  that  I  enjoy,  I  shall  foolishly  kiss  my  own  hands ; 
and  if  I  understand  not  the  origin  of  the  evil  that  befalls  me,  I  shall 
soon  with  the  wicked  Jews  say,  "  The  Way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal," 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  17,  20.  The  foul  head  spring  of  all  the  errors,  that 
have  deluged  the  heathen,  Jewish  and  Christian  world  hath  bubbled 
up  only  from  an  ignorance  of  the  true  causes  of  good  and  evil.  Many 
of  the  ancient  heathens  imagined  that  there  were  two  God's,  a  good 
God,  who  was  the  cause  of  all  that  was  good,  and  an  evil  God,  who 
was  tiie  author  of  all  that  ivas  shameful,  hurtful  and  painful ;  and  in 
this  they  were  followed  by  thr  ManicheeS;  otherwise  called  Chris- 


40  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EViL 

tians.     Others  thought  that  the  cause  of  good  and  evil  in  man  was 
the  contrariety  of  his  soul  and  body,  two  principles,  or  parts  of  man, 
which  were  opposed  one  to  another.    The  ancient  and  modern  Pela- 
f  ians  have  adopted  this  opinion,  and  they  say  that  the  soul  is  created 
with  a  free  will,  and  the  body  with  a  certain  carnal  concupisence,  and 
that  the  former  is  the  cause  of  good,  and  the  latter  of  evil;  It  is  also 
natural  to  the  sinner,  through  self  love,  to  excuse  himself,  and  to 
accuse  his  Maker  of  the  evil.  It  is  an  evil  disposition,  which  he  hath 
inherited  of  his  father  Adam,  who  said  to  the  Lord,  "  The  woman, 
whom  tiiou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  1  did 
eat,"  Gen.  iii.  !-•    Therefore  if  the  foolish  sinner  shall  become  wise 
and  happy,  he  must  learn  to  ascribe  righteousness  to  his  Maker,  and 
accuse  hunself  to  his  own  shame,  that  he  is  himself  the  cause  of  his 
destruction,  like  Daniel,  who  said,  "  O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth 
lo  the^,  but  to  us,  confusion  of  faces,"  Dan.  ix.  7.    Indeed  nothing 
is  more  ceViuin,  than  that  God  alone  is  the  author  of  all  happiness, 
and  man  the  author  of  all  his  misery.  Therefore  the  wisest  of  king? 
saith,  tccl.  vii.  29.  "  Lo,  this  only  have  I  found,  that  God  hath  made 
man  upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inventions." 

It  is  therefore  the  glory,  the  wisdom  and  happiness  of  the  reform- 
ed church,  that  she  teaches  more  than  all  others  who  are  out  of  her 
pale,  that  the  Lord  God  alone  is  the  source  bf  all  good,  and  the  sin- 
ner the  cause  of  ail  his  evil,  that  she  may  thus  humble  miserable 
man  by  the  knowledge  of  his  misery,  which  he  hath  procured  to 
himselfi)  arid  may  induce  him  to  seek  deliverance,  and  a  happy  con- 
solation of  the  Lord.  For  to  this  end  doth  the  i  istructor  show  him 
how  evil  and  perverse  he  is,  in  the  fifth  question  ;  and  that  God  is 
not  the  cause  thereof,  in  the  sixth  question  ;  but  he  himself  through 
his  parents,  in  the  seventh  question. 

There  are  therefore  two  particulars  here,  that  require  our  illus- 
tration. 

I-  That  the  wickedness  of  man  doth  not  proceed  from  God, 
Question  six. 

II.  But  from  man  himself,  Question  seven. 

I.  Ws  have  taught  in  the  loregoing  discourse,  that  "we  are  by 
nature  prone  to  hate  God  and  our  neighbour."  Nearly  all  those  who 
are  out  of  our  church  take  occasion  hence  to  slander  us,  as  though 
-.ve  taught  that  God  was  the  author  of  sin,  and  of  our  wickedness  and 
perversencss,  because  we  receive  our  nature  from  God.  But  we 
protest  against  this  in  the  strongest  terms,  and  say  that  God  neither 
is,  nor  can  be  the  author  of  sin.  We  proclaim  to  the  whole  world 
with  Elihu,  "  Far  be  it  from  God  that  he  iJiould  do  wickedness,  and 


 

from  the  Almighty,  that  he  should  commit  iniquity,"  Job  xxxiv.  16. 
Sin  is  more  contrary  to  the  nature  of  God,  than  darkness  to  light, 
and  hell  to  heaven  ;  "  He  is  not  a  God  who  hath  pleasure  in  wicked- 
ness," Psalm  V.  4.  "He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  he 
cannot  look  upon  iniquity."  Hab.  i.  13.  "  Let  no  man  say,  when  he 
is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God :  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with 
evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man,"  James  i.  IS.  Neither  can  any 
one  infer  from  our  doctrine  by  a  just  consequence,  that  we  represent 
God  as  the  author  of  our  wickedness  and  perverseness  ;  for  although 
our  nature  is  of  God,  it  v/as  not  created  by  God  so  wicked  ;  for 
«  God  made  man  good  :"  so  our  church  teaches  with  the  catechism 
from  the  word  of  God,  which  saith.  Gen.  i.  31.  "  God  saw  all  that 
he  had  made,  and  behold,  it  was  very  good." 

And  wherein  doth  that  goodness  consist  ?  The  Socinians  say,  in 
the  essence  and  in  the  essential  parts  of  man,  without  any  original 
righteousness,  and  only  in  fiuris  naturalibus^  or  that  man  was  neither 
good  nor  evil,  when  he  v/as  created  :  they  even  maintain  that  man 
•was  created  as  ignorant  as  a  child,  not  knowing  that  he  was  naked. 
And  the  Jesuits  and  Remonstrants  proceed  so  far,  that  they  dare 
maintain  that  thert  v/as  a  certain  carnal  lusting  in  man  immediately 
after  his  creation,  and  that  his  flesh  and  lusts  strove  and  rebelled 
against  his  reason  and  spirit.  If  this  were  so,  man  would  have  come 
out  of  his  Maker's  hands  a  sinful,  ignorant  and  unholy  creature.  And 
this  reproach  ought  therefore  not  to  be  cast  upon  us,  but  upon  our 
adversaries  ;  for  it  will  naturally  follow  from  these  heterodox  asser- 
tions, that  God  made  man  evil  and  perverse.  But  it  will  appear  more 
clearly  anon. 

Wc  teach  better  things  concerning  the  innate  goodness  of  man. 
We  say  that  it  consists  in  a  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  whereby 
man  is  qualified,  as  a  reasonable  creature,  to  glorify  his  Maker  ;  for 
the  goodness  of  evejry  creature  consists  in  its  possessing  such  per- 
fections, as  belong  to  the  nature  of  that  creature,  that  it  may  ex- 
press and  declare,  in  a  manner  agreeable  to  its  nature,  the  glorious 
perfections  of  its  Creator.  Man  being  a  reasonable  creature,  and 
therefore  much  m.cre  excellent  than  other  creatures,  ought  to  glorify 
God  in  a  reasonable  manner,  and  thus  more  than  other  creatures. 
But  how  could  he  glorify  his  Maker  in  a  reasonable  manner,  if  he 
were  created  without  ori^^lnal  righteousness,  in  such  ignorance,  and 
with  a  certain  lusting  against  his  spirit  ?  The  reasonable  creature  can- 
not exist  in  a  state  of  indifference,  or  be  neither  good  nor  evil,  any 
more  than  he  can  be  neither  alive  nor  dead  :  he  must  necessarily  be 
one  or  the  other,  either  good  or  evil :  and  he  cannot  be  good,  unles*^ 

K 


42  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

he  have  a  moral  goodness,  and  be  endued  with  a  pure  apprchensidh 
of  God's  perfections,  and  a  sincere  love  to  God,  so  as  to  know,  lov^, 
enjoy  and  praise  him.  Solomon  saith  also,  '*  that  God  made  mart 
upright,"  and  he  opposes  that  uprightness  to  "  man's  inventions  which 
he  hath  sought  out,"  and  to  his  perverseness,  Eccl.  vii.  29.  And 
therefore  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  God  did  not  create  man  so  wick- 
ed and  perverse,  but  good,  and  thus  alter  his  image." 

The  Lord  God  having  created  the  heaven,  the  earth  and  the  sea, 
with  all  that  in  them  is,  "  did  last  of  all  form  man  out  of  the  dust  of 
the  earth,  and  he  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life  ;  thus 
man  became  a  living  soul,"  Gen.  ii.  7.  "  But  as  it  was  not  good  that 
man  should  be  alone,  God  made  Adam  an  help  meet  for  him,"  even 
his  wife,  "  out  of  one  of  his  ribs,"  and  brought  her  to  him  for  his 
lawful  wife.  Adam  also  owned,  took,  and  loved  her  as  such,  Gen. 
ii.  18 — 25.  God  gave  them  both  also  the  law  of  marriage,  that  they 
should  cleave  to  one  another,"  Gen.  ii.  3*,  25,  "  and  be  fruitful,  and 
multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,"  Gen.  i.  28,  and  thus  "  hath  God 
made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  of  men,  to  dwell  upon  the  face 
of  all  the  earth,"  Acts  xvii.  26,  That  man  might  be  the  chief  orna- 
ment of  all  God's  works,  God  created  him  after  his  image.  There- 
fore the  Father,  acting  after  the  manner  of  men,  excited,  as  it  were, 
tlie  ^on  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  perform  some  great  work  in  the 
creation  of  man,  saying.  Gen.  i.  26.  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  im- 
age, after  our  likeness.  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the 
image  of  God  created  he  him."  It  is  absurd  in  the  Papists  to  dis- 
tinguish these  two  words  so,  as  if  "  image"  related  to  natural  endow- 
ments, and  likeness  to  graces  and  supernatural  endowments,  as 
though  the  image  of  GoJ  were  not  natural  to  man.  Image  and  like- 
ness denote  the  selfsame  thing,  and  are  joined  together  to  express  it 
with  greater  emphasis  and  force,  and  to  show  that  the  image  was 
exceedingly  like  God,  and  a  likeness  that  expressed  and  depicted 
God  in  man :  one  thing  can  be  like  another,  as  one  cg^  may  be  like 
another,  but  it  is  not  therefore  an  image  of  that  other.  But  an  im- 
age is  sr;niething,  which  is  fashioned  after  something  else,  and  is 
therefore  like  it.  Man  was  then  made  m  the  image  of  God,  because 
God  was  the  pattern  after  which  he  was  made  ;  and  if  I  may  so 
speak,  because  God  depicted  himself  in  man,  and  made  man  like 
himself.  Not  that  God  gave  his  essence  and  life,  as  he  hath  it  in 
himself,  to  man  ;  for  in  this  manner  **  hath  he  given  only  to  his  Son 
to  have  life  in  himself,"  John  \.  26.  The  Son  of  God  alone  is  "  the 
brightness  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  person," 
Ileb.  i.  3.     Neither  is  God  a  body  after  which  the  body  of  man  was 


 

formed,  as  the  ancient  A.nthropomorphists  imagined  ;  for  «  God  is  a 
spirit,"  John  iv.  24.  But  God  made  man  so  after  his  ima^e,  that  he 
expressed  a  certain  likeness  of  his  communicable  attributes  in  him, 
whereby  he  became  "  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,"  2  Peter  i.  4. 
Not  that  God  transferred  his  attributes  to  man,  for  he  would  then 
have  made  him  a  God  :  but  that  man  was  made  after  them,  so  as  to 
possess  a  certain  hkeness  to  them,  and  that  he  obtained  a  certain 
sketch  of  those  divine  perfections. 

We  must  inquire  more  particularly  wherein  that  ima^e  and  Hke- 
ness, in  which  man  was  made,  consists.  The  soul,  the  spirit  of  man, 
which  hath  in  itself  an  ability  to  act  from  itself,  though  in  dependence 
on  God,  with  understanding  and  will,  is  an  image  of  God,  and  ex- 
hibits a  certain  likeness  of  God.  Some  maintain  that  the  image  of 
God  doth  not  consist  in  the  essence  of  the  soul,  but  that  the  soul  is 
only  the  panel,  on  which  the  image  is  expressed :  we  may  assert 
that  the  soul  is  the  panel  ot  the  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  of  man. 
But  that  the  soul  itself  is  not  the  ima8;e  of  God,  but  only  the  panel 
and  subject  of  God's  image,  this  we  do  not  assert,  because  the  nature 
of  the  thing  and  the  word  of  God  forbid  it.  For  the  essence  and  the 
spirituality  of  the  soul  are  matters,  in  which  it  is  like  God,  "who  is 
a  spirit,"  John  iv.  24..  Are  not  the  heathens,  who  are  destitute  of 
the  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  of  God's  image,  still  "  the  offspring 
of  God,"  so  far  as  he  is  a  spirit,  which  cannot  be  expressed  by  an 
image  ?  Acts  xvii.  28,  29.  We  may  "  not  curse,  nor  kill  any  man, 
because  he  is  made  in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,"  Gen.  ix.  6, 
James  iii.  9.  Not  because  he  was  once  made  in  the  image  of  God  ;  but 
because  he  is  still  God's  image  :  for  otherwise  the  reason  why  we 
may  not  kill  or  curse  any  man  ceaseth.  Doth  the  sinner  now  "  come 
short  of"  the  image  and  "  glory  of  God,"  according  to  Pom.  iii.  23, 
it  is  with  respect  to  the  virtuous  goodness,  in  which  he  was  created. 

This  moral  and  virtuous  goodness  is  indeed  the  principal  and 
most  glorious  part  of  God's  image.  It  is  also  called  original  right- 
eousness, and  consists  (1)  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  divine 
things.  We  must  now  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  renewed  in 
knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him,"  according  to. 
Paul,  Cell.  iii.  10.  He  hath  certainly  respect  to  the  image  in  which 
man  v/as  created  in  the  beginning  :  he  saith  that  it  consisted  in  knowl- 
edge :  he  supposeth  that  this  knowledge  is  obscured,  and  that  the 
image  of  God  is  now  become  old,  and  that  we  must  be  again  renew- 
ed after  that  same  image.  The  first  man  was  therefore  not  so  sim- 
ple and  ignorant :  for  we  must  be  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the 
image  of  that  man  :  if  ke  had  been  created  in  a  childish  ingorance, 


44.  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

he  would  have  been  ridiculously  foolish  ;  for  a  full  grown  man,  as 
Adam  was  when  he  came  out  of  his  Maker's  hands,  who  is  childish, 
IS  contemptible  :  surely  ^*  the  soul  without  knowledge  is  not  good," 
Prov.  xix.  2.  If  Adam  were  created  in  such  ingorance,  how  did  he 
know  the  nature  of  the  animals,  and  of  his  wife  ?  Gen.  ii.  19 — 23. 
He  certainly  knew  Cod,  he  was  accustomed  to  his  visits,  Gen.  iii.  8, 
and  was  acquainted  with  his  law,  Gen.  ii.  16,  17.  iii.  2,  5,  surely  not 
only  by  divine  revelation,  but  also  by  creation  ;  for  if  that  law  be 
still  written  in  the  hearts  of  his  posterity  ;  accordiug  to  Rom.  ii.  14, 
15,  how  much  more  was  it  then  written  in  his  heart,  when  he  came 
new  and  pure  out  of  the  hands  of  his  Maker.  After  the  fall,  his  eyes 
"Were  indeed  opened,  and  he  knew  that  he  was  naked,"  Gen.  iii.  7, 
but  this  doth  not  imply  that  he  knew  not  before  that  he  was  without 
any  clotliing ;  for  otherwise  sin  would  have  made  him  wiser,  and  the 
lying  promises  of  Satan,  "  that  his  eyes  should  be  opened,  and  that 
he  should  like  God  know  both  good  and  evil,"  Gen.  iii.  5.  would  not 
then  have  been  detestable.  It  remains  therefore  certain  that  Adam 
knew  God,  and  his  obligation  to  him,  by  the  image  of  God,  by  which 
he  knew,  as  by  a  beam  from  God's  own  light,  what  God  knew,  and 
what  he  would  reveal  to  him.  For  the  knov/ledge  that  depicts  God, 
IS  not  barely  a  common  and  literal  apprehension  of  divine  things,  but 
"  a  seeing  of  the  light  in  God's  light,"  Psalm  xxxvi.  9,  and  "  an  in= 
shining  of  God  into  the  heart,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  God,"  2  Cor.  iv.  6,  Now  such  a  knowledge  and  seeing 
of  God  must  necessarily  produce  a  divine  holinsss  in  the  soul ;  for 
"  we,  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  13.  And  therefore  the  moral 
goodness  of  God's  image  consists  also  (2)  "  in  true  righteousness 
and  holiness,"  by  vrhich  man  surrendered  himself  with  a  perfect 
heart  to  the  Lord,  to  do  his  will,  according  to  that  la^7  and  truth  of 
God,  which  his  understanding  represented  to  him  to  be  holy,  just 
and  good.  That  the  image  of  God  consisted  in  this  also,  the  apostle 
teacheth  us  when  he  saith,  Fph.  iv.  24.  "  And  put  on  the  new  man* 
which  after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness,  and  holiness."  So 
our  translators  render  the  Greek  words,  according  to  the  usual  style 
of  the  scriptures  :  but  others,  ibllov/ing  mofe  the  order  of  the  Greek 
words  read,  "  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth."  The  sense  is 
the  same  :  righteousness  and  holiness  are  two  words,  which  design 
one  and  the  same  thing,  but  with  great  beauty,  and  with  a  strong 
emphasis,  as  if  wc  should  say,  a  righteous  holiness,  and  a  holy  right- 
eousness. But  if  we  will  distinguish  the  words,  and  consider  each  as 
t»ignifying  something  different  from  the  other,  we  must  then  refe? 


 

righteousness,  not  to  a  right  to  demand  life,  inasmuch  as  Adam  had 
not  that  right,  and  it  moreover  doth  not  now  flow  from  the  image  of 
God,  but  from  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ ;  but  we  must  re- 
fer the  righteousness  of  the  image  of  God  to  our  neighbour,  and  the 
holiness  to  God :  and  so  these  two  words  express  the  whole  sum  of 
the  law,  which  was  innate  to  man  with  the  image  of  God. 

Man  being  endowed  with  such  a  rational  and  virtuous  soul,  was 
also  created  lord  of  all  the  creatures,  that  he  might  govern  and  make 
use  of  them,  as  the  vicegerent  of  God,  under  him,  and  to  his  ser- 
vice :  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness,  and  let 
them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,"  &c.  saith  the  Lordj 
Gen.  i.  26,  29.  The  Socinians,  who  will  not  allow  that  man  had  any 
original  righteousness  before  the  fall,  and  are  nevertheless  forced  to 
believe  that  nian  was  created  after  the  image  of  God,  say  that  the 
image  of  God  consisted  only  in  dominion.  But  how  could  man  gov- 
ern the  creatures  according  to  the  will  of  God,  if  he  had  no  virtuous 
goodness  ?  The  creature  would  have  groaned  against  him,  as  it  doth 
now  against  its  sinful  and  rigorous  lord,  Rom.  viii.  19 — 22.  That 
the  image  of  God  consists  nevertheless  partly  in  dominion,  and  that 
this  dominion  is  not  only  a  consequence  of  the  image,  this  Paul 
teacheth  us,  when  he  saith  that  "  the  man,"  on  account  of  his  domin- 
ion over  the  woman,  "  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God  ;"  and  that 
"the  woman,  on  account  of  her  dominion  under  and  by  reason  of  the 
man,  "  is  the  glory  of  the  man,"  1  Cor.  xi.  7.  Inasmuch  as  this 
excellency  of  the  soul  presently  extended  itself  to  the  body,  and  the 
image  of  God  pertaineth  to  the  whole  man,  therefore  man  was  im- 
mortal, not  only  according  to  the  soul,  but  also  according  to  the  body, 
which  being  created  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  consisting  of  flesh 
and  blood,  could  die  ;  but  would,  through  the  sustaining  power  of 
God,  have  continued  alive  for  ever,  if  man  had  not  sinned.  For  how 
could  such  a  destructive  and  horrible  evil  as  death  is  befall  man, 
while  he  was  not  guilty  of  any  iniquity  ?  Death  was  threatened  only 
in  consequence  of  sin,  Gen.  i.  17,  and  '^  the  wages  of  sin  is  death," 
Rom,  vi.  23.  God  did  not,  moreover,  pronounce  the  sentence  of 
death  upon  Adam,  until  he  had  sinned.  Gen.  iii.  13.  That  the  image 
of  God  consists  in  immortality,  this  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  49,  where 
he  teaches  that  when  we  shall  receive  our  immortality  again,  "  we 
shall  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly." 

The  image  of  God,  in  which  man  was  created,  had  its  ends,  and 
served  (1)  "  That  man  might  rightly  know  his  Creator."  For  to  this 
end  was  his  understanding  filled  with  such  a  clear  light,  that  he 
might  behold  God  in  his  glory  and  lovelin&ss:  (2)  «  That  he  might 


46  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

love  him  heartily."  For  God's  law  of  love  was  innate  to  him  with 
the  imaijje  of  God  through  that  righteousness  and  holiness.  Wheia 
he  pursued  this  through  the  image  of  God,  it  served  also,  that  he. 
might  (3)  *'  live  with  God  in  eternal  happiness."  For  when  he  knew 
and  loved  God  so,  the  Lord  could  not  but  manifest  his  pleasure  in 
him  by  a  reciprocal  love,  and  this  would  render  him  happy.  By 
such  a  conduct,  so  worthy  of  God,  he  fulfilled  the  law  of  the  cove- 
nant, which  promised  him  eternal  happiness  ;  for  wliich  end  he  had 
also  the  tree  of  life,  in  order  to  seal  that  happy  life  to  him  by  a  sac- 
rament, Gen.  ii.  9.  But  the  chief  end  of  the  divine  image  was,  (4) 
"  that  he  might  glorify  and  praise  God  ;"  for  since  he  knew  that  God 
was  the  most  worthy,  and  since  he  loved  and  enjoyed  him  as  such, 
he  could  not  but  exait  him  in  the  highest  degree. 

The  Remonstrants  imagine,  that   these   things   could  not  be  the 
ends  of  God's  image,  no,  not  according  to  our  opinion,  because  God 
would  then  have  failed  of  his  end  by  the  fall  of  Adam,   and  of  all 
mankind  in  him,  and  because  we  teach  that  God  created  the  great- 
est part  of  ma!;ikind  to  be  damned  ;  but  this  is  a  horrible  calumny  : 
v/e  do  not  teach  that  God  created  man  to  be  damned,  as  if  the  crea- 
tion of  man  were  a  cause  of  his  damnation  :  sin  alone  is  the  caus^  o$ 
his   damnation,   on   account  of  which  God  punishcth  him,  as  he 
threatened  according  to  his  eternal  decree,  in  which  he  purposed  to. 
pass  by  certain  persons  with   his  grace,  and  to  punish  them  justly  : 
but  besides  this,  we  say,  that  when  God  created  man  in  his  image, 
he  did  not  intend  to  effect  that  all  men  should  live  with  him  in  eter- 
nal happiness :  for  this  would  then  undoubtedly  be  accomplished  ; 
since  he  always  obtains  his   end  by  his  almighty  power,  on   account 
of  the  unchangeableness  of  his  counsel :  for  "  he  w^orketh  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will,  "  Eph.  i.  1 1.  We  must  also  distin- 
guish between  the  end  of  the  worker  and  of  the  work.     The  end  of 
God's  work,  to  wit,  the  creation  of  man  in  his  image,  was  indeed, 
that  he  might,  by  knowing  and  loving  God,  live  with  him  in  eternal 
happiness  :  for  the   image  of  God  qualified  him  for  this  end,  and 
urged  him  to  pursue  it :  but  this  was  not  the  end  of  the   V/orker, 
even  of  God  :  for  he  intended  to  render  the   glory  of  his  justice, 
mercy  and  grace,  wonderful  in  fallen  men,   and  for  this  end  he  suf- 
fered them  to  fall.  See  Rom,  xi.  32,     And   God  hath  also  obtained 
this  end. 

The  Jesuites  aesert  that  this  image  was  a  supernatural  gift,  be- 
stowed upon  man  in  order  to  restrain  the  furious  lusts  of  the  flesh, 
as  it  were,  with  a  golden  bridle  :  and  therefore  that  man,  having  lost 
that  image,  is  now  indeed  without  that  supernatural  gift ;  but  that 


 

liis  nature  is  not  therefore  so  corrupt,  as  we  teach.  In  opposition  to 
Hvhich  we  say,  that  the  ima^e  of  God,  and  particularly  that  virtuous 
goodness,  or  original  righteousness,  iid  not  constitute  any  essential 
part  of  man,  by  which  he  \'  as  made  man,  as  his  soul  and  body  do  ; 
but  it  is  evident  that  this  righteousness,  and  permit  me  to  say  in  a 
good  sense,  supernatural  grace  was  nevertheless  natural  to  man,  that 
is,  his  nature  could  not  have  been  good,  if  he  had  not  been  created 
in  the  image  of  God.  For  (a)  the  image  of  God  was  innate  to  man 
with  his  nature.  Gen.  i.  26,  37.  (b)  His  nature  would  not  otherwise 
have  been  created  good,  since  a  man  without  knowledge,  righteous- 
ness and  holiness  is  sinful  and  hateful  to  God.  See  this  Eph.  iv.  18. 
(c)  Man  could  not  then  have  pursued  nor  obtained  the  end  of  his 
creation  ;  lor  how  can  he,  who  is  naturally  without  knowledge,  and 
filled  with  fleshly  lusts,  warring  against  his  spirit,  know,  love  and 
praise  God  aright  ?  (d)  Adam,  though  fallen,  hath  transmitted  the 
remains  of  God's  image  with  his  nature,  to  his  posterity  ;  for  "  the 
Gentiles  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  14, 
15.  How  much  more  would  he  then,  if  he  had  continued  to  stand, 
have  transmitted  the  divine  image  itself  to  his  seed  ?  but  this  would 
mot  have  been  possible,  if  the  image  of  God  had  not  been  natural  to 
him.  What  our  adversaries  object  here,  that  man  could  not  then 
have  fallen,  is  of  no  force,  because  Adam,  although  naturally  good, 
Vas  nevertheless  created  changeable,  and  was  capable  of  being  seduc- 
edi  Were  not  the  angels  created  naturally  good  and  holy  ?  and  some 
of  them  nevertheless  fell. 

How  dare  our  adversaries  then  reproach  us  in  such  a  shameless 
manner,  and  say  that  we  teach  that  man  was  created  by  God  so 
wicked  and  perverse  ?  They  give  us  reason  to  suspect  them  of  such 
a  wicked  opinion.  For  if  man  were  created  so  ignorant,  and  with  a 
certain  evil  lusting,  then  God  created  him  wicked  and  perverse,  in- 
asmuch as  ignorance,  and  lusting  after  evil  is  wicked  and  perverse. 
They  will  doubtless  allow  that  man  fell  through  his  natural  inclina- 
tions to  evil,  (admitting  that  these  inclinations  were  not  sinful  in 
themselves.)  Ought  not  man  then  to  be  excused,  since  he  only  fol- 
lowed his  natural  and  innate  inclination  ?  yea,  ought  not  God  to  be 
accused,  since  he  created  man  with  such  an  inclination,  and  no 
better  ?  but  our  adversaries  have  need  of  such  cloaks  of  shame,  if 
they  will  defend  with  any  plausibility  their  un violated  reason,  and 
indifferent  freewill. 

Is  man  nevertheless  so  wicked  and  perverse,  and  did  not  God 
Create  him  so,  but  good  and  in  his  image,  '*  whence  then  pro- 
ceeds this*  depravity  •f  human  nature  ?"  We  ought  to  know  this,  it 


48  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL 

concerns  us,  that  knowing  the  ground  of  our  disease,  we  may  seek 
in  a  right  manj^tr  to  be  healed.  The  wisest  of  kings  had  found  that 
"  man  himself  had  songlit  out  many  inventions,"  Eccl.  vii.  29.  And 
the  instructor,  escplaining  this  more  particularly  from  the  word  of 
God,  leads  us  to  "  the  fall  of  our  first  parents,  whereby  our  nature 
is  become  so  corrupt." 

If  we  will  form  proper  conceptions  of  our  corruption  through  the 
fall  of  Adam,  we  must  know  that  God  entered  into  a  covenant  of 
works  with  Adam,  and  that  Adam  was  able  to  keep  the  covenant. 
We  have  shown  before  on  the  second  Lord's  Day  the  nature  and 
reality  of  this  covenant.  We  must  now  see  that  he  could  keep  the  cove= 
nant.  For  God  would  not  otherwise  have  made  a  covenant  with  him, 
it  would  indeed  have  been  to  no  purpose.  Adam's  understanding 
and  will  being  endued  with  original  righteousness,  he  was  able  to  know 
and  love  God  perfectly,  and  thus  to  fulfil  the  condition  of  the  cove- 
nant. He  needed  without  doubt,  God's  preventing  influence :  but 
we  may  nevertheless  say,  that  he  had  an  ability  to  continue  in  the 
covenant,  on  account  of  his  habitual  virtuDusness,  in  consequence  of 
his  having  been  created  in  the  image  of  God,  as  a  man  in  health 
hath  an  abilicy  to  do  his  daily  work,  although  he  needeth  the  ordinary 
influence  of  God  for  that  also,  according  to  Acts  xvii.  28.  P'or  that 
God  created  man  independent  in  his  actions,  so  that,  when  left  to 
himself,  he  could  do  his  duty  without  the  preventing  influence  of 
God,  is  a  most  absurd  imagination  ;  for  man  would  then  have  been 
made  a  God,  who  could  govern  himself,  of  and  by  himself. 

We  must  also  know  that  Adam  and  Eve,  the  first  human  couple, 
were  our  parents,  of  whom  God  hath  made  the  whole  race  of  men, 
as  we  have  shown  before.  Now  when  God  entered  into  a  covenant 
with  Adam,  he  established  it  with  Tve  also,  yet  so  that  she  was  reck- 
oned in  her  husband.  And  therefore  the  misery  of  their  posterity  is 
generally  referred  more  to  Adam  than  to  Eve.  But  God  did  not 
enter  into  a  covenant  with  Adam,  as  a  private  person,  who  should 
stand  or  fall  only  for  himself,  but  also  as  the  father,  and  as  the  head 
of  all  mankind,  who  should  descend  from  him,  and  for  whom  he 
should  stand  and  fall :  as  kings  and  princes  enter  into  covenants  with 
one  another,  not  only  for  themselves,  but  also  for  their  children  and 
subjects,  who  exist  now,  and  will  exist  hereafter.  And  in  this  man- 
ner did  God  establish  the  covenant  of  works  with  Adam,  and  in  him, 
as  the  head,  with  the  whole  human  race.  For  the  appendix  of  the 
;;ovenant  of  works,  to  wit,  the  law  of  marriage.  Gen.  i.  28.  ii.  24, 
25,  was  e:iven  to  Adam,  and  in  him  to  all  his  posterity.  See  this 
Matt.  xix.  3,  4,  5,  6»  Eph.  v.  31.     All  Adam's  posterity  were  crea- 


III.  LORD  S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  49 

ttd  in  him  after  the  image  of  God,  as  the  remains  of  that  image  in 
the  Gentiles  still  manifest,  Rom.,  ii.  14,  15.  Paul  requireth,  Rom. 
V.  14 — 19,  that  we  should  consider  ('hrist  as  the  head  of  believers  in 
the  covenant  of  grace,  after  the  example  of  Adam  :  but  how  shall 
we  understand  this,  unless  Adam  be  also  the  head  of  his  posterity  in 
the  covenant  of  works. 

But  although  Adam  possessed  such  a  glory  and  excellency,  he 
nevertheless  fell  into  a  deep  abyss  of  horrible  misery  through  Lis  diso- 
bedience, by  which,  contrary  to  the  command  of  God,  enforced  with 
the  promise  of  life,  and  the  threatening  of  death,  he  ate  of  the  tree 
cf  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  by  which  he  also  broke  the  covenant, 
as  the  Lord  saith,  Hosea  vi.  7  :  for  that  tree  was  prohibited  to  him, 
as  a  trial  of  his  obedience. 

But  how  could  these  exceedingly  wise  and  holy  persons,  who  had 
such  an  ability,  be  guilty  of  such  a  base  conduct.  The  serpent  be- 
guiled Eve  through  his  suhtilty,  saith  Paul,  2  Cor.  xi.  3.  from  Gen. 
iii.  1 — 6.  "  The  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  beast  of  the  field," 
saith  Moses,  Gen.  iii.  1.  But  although  he  were  ever  so  subtil,  and 
more  so  than  any  beast  of  the  field,  he  could  nevertheless  not  per- 
form such  an  evil  and  subtil  work  of  himself,  for  he  was  irrational 
and  speechless :  but  the  devil  having  apostatized  from  God,  and 
l^emg  subjected  by  him  to  eternal  punishment,  without  any  hope  of 
mercy,  inflamed  with  hatred  against  Ciod,  and  envy  against  the  hap- 
py man,  and  with  an  ambitious  desire  to  rule  over  him,  made  use 
of,  and  possessed  this  beast  for  that  purpose,  and  so  enticed  man  by 
means  of  it.  For  "  the  devil  was  a  murderer  of  man  from  the  be- 
ginning," John  viii.  44,  and  he  is  on  this  account  himself  called  "  the 
great  dragon,  and  the  old  serpent,"  Rev.  xii.  9.  It  is  therefore  de- 
testable in  a  certain  person  *  to  say  that  the  devil  was  the  first  author 
of  sin,  according  to  the  declaration  of  scripture,  and  nevertheless  to 
teach  that  neither  the  serpent,  nor  the  devil  could  deceive  man,  and 
thus  to  deride  the  whole  account  of  Moses.  Perhaps  he  could  not 
speak  otherwise,  after  he  had  once  determined  that  the  essence  of  a 
spirit  was  simply  thought,  and  that  it  hath  no  power  at  all  to  act 
upon  that  which  is  bodily. 

•  The  author  hath  respect  here  to  Dr.  Balihazer  Becker,  a  pastor  of  the  re- 
f«rm«d  church  of  Amsterdam.  He  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  Cartesian  phi- 
Josophy,  and  was  so  far  nrisled  by  it,  as  to  deny  all  the  accounts,  which  the 
scripture  p;ives  of  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  evil  spirits:  as  also  the  exis- 
tence of  ghosts  and  wjzards.  He  published  these  sentiments  in  a  book,  which 
he  intitled.  The  world  bewitched.  He  was  deposed  from  his  pastoral  offisf 
-90  accouat  of  these  opinions ;  but  persevered  in  them  until  hia  deaths 

L 


50  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

The  devil  belni^  exceedingly  subtil,  and  abusing  also  the  subtil 
nature  of  the  serpent,  conducted  his  temptation  in  a  most  subtil  man- 
ner. For  (I)  it  was  subtil  in  him,  that  he  did  not  tempt  man  from 
'vithin,  by  acting  upon  his  imap,ination,  with  wicked  injections :  for 
he  would  then  have  met  with  an  immediate  repuls-i :  there  were  no 
traitors  as  yet  in  the  mind  of  man,  with  whom  he  could  correspond 
and  conspire  to  destroy  him.  But  he  attacked  man  from  without, 
that  he  mig;ht  penetrate  into  his  soul  by  means  of  his  sight  and  hear- 
ing, and  etfect  a  total  confusion  there.  (2)  He  appears  not  to  man 
in  a  terrifying  form,  but  conceals  his  hideousness  under  the  serpent^ 
which  was  not  a  disagreeable  object  to  upright  man  ;  by  which  he 
might  induce  him  to  think  that  he  was  favoured  with  a  message 
from  God  by  an  angel  of  light  through  the  means  of  this  serpent,  in 
an  extraordinary  manner ;  for  the  wise  man  knew  that  the  serpent 
v/as  not  endued  with  reason,  and  that  he  had  not  a  man's  voice.  (S) 
He  doth  not  tempt  him  in  opposition  to  any  command  of  the  moral 
law  of  love,  which  was  written  upon  his  heart ;  for  he  knew  very  well 
that  his  soul  would  be  immediately  seized  with  horror,  and  would 
forthwith  resist  such  an  attack  ;  but  he  assails  him  with  the  positive 
and  probationary  command,  that  he  should  not  eat  of  the  tree  of 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  because  man  might  be  more  easily 
brought  to  this,  since  there  was  neither  good  nor  evil  in  eating  or 
not  eating  of  that  tree,  considered  in  itself  and  without  respect  to  the 
divine  prohibition.  (4)  It  ^yas  also  exceedingly  crafty  in  the  devil, 
that  he  did  not  attack  the  man  first,  but  the  woman,  who  was  the 
weakest,  and  that  wnen  she  was  in  her  weakest  condition  and  alone, 
that  he  might  by  her  seduce  the  man  (5)  He  doth  not  tempt  her  to 
sin  forthwith,  and  like  an  open  enemy  ;  fer  he  would  then  have  been 
soon  resisted ;  but  he  tempts  in  a  very  gradual  manner,  and  with 
subtil  reasons,  that  he  may  conceal  his  deceit.  He  doth  it  (a)  by 
asking  a  question  .  "  Yea,  hath  God  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every 
tree  of  the  garden  ?"  He  speaks  not  of  the  tree  of  knowledge,  but  of 
every  tree  of  the  garden,  in  general :  he  feigns  as  though  he  were 
a  stranger  who  knew  of  nothing  ;  and  that  he  may  not  create  suspi- 
cion, he  asks  as  one  who  was  ignorant,  and  wished  for  information, 
that  he  may  thus  obtain  an  opportunity  of  entering  into  a  discourse 
with  her,  and  of  causing  her  to  stagger,  and  doubt  whether  God, 
when  he  permitted  her  to  eat  of  every  tree,  forbade  her  to  cat  just  of 
that  one  tree.  He  olfers  to  her  for  consideration  hereby,  whether 
she  had  not  misunderstood,  or  whether  she  rightly  remembered  the 
Olds  of  God.  (b)  The  woman  not  thinking  that  it  was  her  enemy, 


 

who  was  before  her,  enters  into  a  discourse  with  him,  and  declares 
lo  him  how  kindly  God  had  permitted  them  to  eat  of  every  tree,  but 
that  he  had  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  kno\vledtj;e,  and  had 
threatened  them  with  deaih  in  the  severest  terms,  if  they  did  eat- 
The  subtil  serpent,  the  father  of  lies,  that  he  may  rid  her  of  the  fear 
of  the  danger,  which  attended  her  eatinp:  of  the  forbidden  tree,  de- 
fies the  threatening   and  saith,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die,"  and  per- 
haps he  feigns  as  though  he  were  a  good  angel,  who  was  sent  by 
God  to   inform  her  that  her  time  of  probation  was  at  an  end,  that 
God  had  therefore  revoked  that  command  and  his  threatening,  and 
that  she  had  consequently  no  reason  to  fear  death,  inasmuch  as  God 
did  now  freely  permit  them  to  eat  of  that  tree,  as  well  as  of  the  rest, 
(c)  But  God  had  nevertheless  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  that  tree,  and 
those  holy  persons  did  not  wish  to  act  contrary  to  the  divine  prohi- 
bition,  although  it  were  not  dangerous ;  and  why  then  should  they 
eat  of  the  tree  ?  was  there  no  danger  in  eating,  there  was  no  advan- 
tage neither.     Therefore  the   subtil  deceiver  saith,  that  they  should 
derive  a  great  advantage  from  eating  :  "  In  the  day  ye   eat  thereof, 
your  eyes  shall  be  opened,  and  ye  shall  be  as  Gods,  knowing  good 
and  evil."   He  endeavours  to  persuade  them  that  they  were  yet  very 
simple  pe'^sons,  who  knew  but  little  ;  but  that  by  eating  of  that  tree 
they  should  attain  to  a   great,  yea,  to  a  godlike  knowledge,  which 
was  exceedingly  desirable  for  man  :  yea,  he  endeavours  to  insinu- 
ate to  the  woman  that  the  tree  was  on  this  account  called  the  tree  of 
knowledge*  And  that  she  may  believe  him,  and  eat  of  the  fruit  with- 
out scruple,  he  swears,  and  appeals  to  the  allknowingness  of  God,  to 
satisfy  her,  "  God  doth  know"  saith  he. 

The  woman  huving  entered  into  such  a  discourse  with  her  enemy, 
listened  attentively  to  his  false  sophistry,  doubted  whether  God  had 
so  strictly  forbidden  her  to  eat,  or  whether  she  had  rightly  under- 
stood him,  believed  the  devil,  dismissed  her  fear  of  death,  coveted 
the  good  which  he  had  falsely  promised  her,  and  stirred  up  her  de- 
sire by  "  seeing  that  the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  pleasant  to  the 
eye,  and  desirable  to  make  one  wise  :  and  she  took  of  the  fruit,  and 
ate,  :md  gave  also  to  her  husbaad  with  her,  and  he  did  eat."  Thus 
the  woman  was  deceived  by  the  devil,  and  she,  perhaps  solicited  by 
the  devil,  deceives  her  husband :  in  what  manner  Moses  relates 
not  :  but  we  may  reasonably  suppose  that  she  proposed  the 
arguments  of  the  serpent  to  him  with  a  womanly  and  sweet  voice, 
by  which  Adam  suffered  himself  to  be  enticed,  and  thus  imitated 
the  sin  of  his  wife.  Therefore  when  it  is  said,  I  Tim.  ii.  14,  "  Adam 
was  not  deceived  ;  but  the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  trans- 


H2  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

gression,"  v^e  must  understand  it  so  that  he  was  not  deceived  firsts 
nor  immediately  by  the  devil,  but  by  the  woman. 

We  cannot  believe  that  our  parents  fell  on  the  same  day,  on  which 
they  were  created.  For  the  many  events  which  happened  on  that 
day  left  no  time  for  the  fall,  which  is  related  briefly,  but  happened 
more  circumstantially  ;  since  on  that  day  the  beasts  of  the  field  were 
created,  Adam  was  made,  Eve  formed  of  one  of  his  ribs,  while 
Adam  was  in  a  deep  sleep,  marriage,  and  the  law  of  marriage  insti- 
tuted, and  the  covenant  of  works  established.  Besides  this,  God 
pronounced  all  things  good  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  day,  Gen.  i.  31, 
Add  to  this,  that  "  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works, 
and  was  refreshed,"  Exod.  xxxi.  17,  which  God  would  not  have  done, 
if  man  had  fallen  en  the  sixth  day,  for"tht.t  grieved  him  at  his 
heart,"  Gen  vi.  6.  It  is  also  improbable  that  man  continued  not  a 
certain  space  of  time,  and  at  least  not  a  few  days  or  weeks  in  his 
happy  state,  that  he  might  employ  himself  in  contemplating  God, 
loving  him,  and  delighting  himself  in  glorifying  him.  He  was  un- 
doubtedly accustomed  to  God's  drawing  near  to  him,  since  he  knew 
it  by  "  the  cool  "  or  wind  '*  of  the  day."  Gen.  iii.  8. 

Let  none  of  us  think  that  our  first  parents  were  guilty  of  a  small 
sin  in  eating  of  the  forbidden  tree  ;  for  it  was  an  exceedingly  great 
and  dreadful  sin.  Paul  calls  it  "  a  sin,  transgression,  offence,  disobe- 
dience," Rom.  v.  They  transgressed  by  this  sin  the  whole  law  of 
love,  loving  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator :  they  broke  God's 
covenant  of  friendship  :  they  despised  his  threatening  of  death,  and 
contemned  the  promised  life  :  they  believed  the  devil  more  than  their 
gracious  Creator  :  they  refused  the  blessed  enjoyment  of  God,  and 
sought  their  pleasure  in  the  forbidden  creature  :  they  fell  from  God 
to  his  malicious  enemy,  the  devil ;  yea,  they  wished  to  be  Gods, 
and  like  God,  for  which  they  arc  derided,  Gen.  iii.  22,  and  that  at 
the  suggestion  of  the  wicked  spirit,  who  hid  himself  in  a  beast.  All 
this  was  so  much  the  more  aggravated,  because  God  had  created 
them  exceedingly  glorious,  and  had  given  them  a  noble,  wise  and 
holy  soul,  which  could  govern  all  the  other  creatures  ;  they  were 
able  to  abstain  from  the  forbidden  tree,  the  command  was  not  diffi- 
cult to  observe,  nothing  compelled  them  to  eat  of  it,  they  had  all 
things  richly  in  the  garden  to  enjoy.  But  that  which  causes  this  sin 
to  appear  still  more  detestable,  is  the  misery  which  they  procured 
by  it,  not  only  to  themselves,  but  also  to  all  their  posterity^ 

But  although  this  sin  was  so  detestable,  it  did  nevertheless  not 
happen  without  the  providence  of  Ciod.  If  "  even  a  sparrow  fall  not 
to  the  ground  without  the  will  of  God,"  how  much  less  then  could 
^Xjan,  who  was  created  perfect,  and  all  mankind  fall  inlo  such  a  gricv^ 


n 

ous  sin  and  misery  ?  God  did  not  compel  man  to  sin,  nor  move  him 
to  it,  yea,  he  did  not  deprive  him  of  his  natural  abilities,  and  habitual 
powers :  but  it  is  certain  that  God  decreed  to  permit  his  fall.  How 
could  the  Mediator  otherwise  have  been  *'  foreordained,  and  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  I  Peter  i.  20.  Rev.  xiii.  8.  Further, 
we  cannot  doubt  but  that  God  suffered  the  devil  to  tempt  him  ;  for 
even  "  the  Spirit  of  God  led  Jesus  into  the  wilderness,  that  he  might 
be  tempted  by  the  devil,"  Matt.  iv.  1.  We  must  also  allow  that  God 
did  not  powerfully  influence  man,  to  preserve  him  from  falling,  but 
that  he  left  him  to  himself;  for  he  should  otherv/ise  not  have  fallen  : 
God  was  also  not  obliged  to  bestow  such  a  powerful  influence  upon 
man.  It  is  true,  man  fell  necessarily,  but  not  by  a  necessity  of  com- 
pulsion, but  of  consequence  :  since  neither  the  decree  of  God,  nor 
his  permission  of  Satan,  nor  his  withholding  of  his  active  influence- 
either  moved  or  compelled  him  inwardly  ;  but  he  fell  by  himself, 
and  by  his  own  free  choice,  and  by  seeking  out  many  inventions. 
We  know  that  many  inexplicable  difficulties  occur  here  :  but  we  also 
know  that  not  only  the  word  of  God,  but  reason  also  teacheth  us 
that  God  is  an  independent  sovereign,  that  nothing  happens  without 
his  will,  that  man  depends  upon  God  in  all  that  he  doth,  and  that 
there  cannot  be  any  religion  that  doth  not  contain  unsearchable 
mysteries,  and  that  if  we  exempt  this  fall  from  the  providence  and 
government  of  God,  we  will  deprive  him  of  his  sovereign  jurisdic- 
tion, and  introduce  the  fortune  of  the  Epicureans,  or  the  fate  of  the 
Stoics. 

The  Lord  also  remembered  this  sin,  by  punishing  it  severely  :  not 
only  the  devil  was  cursed  in  his  instrument ;  but  our  first  parents 
also  were  punished  with  death,  accordmg  to  the  divine  threatening, 
Gen.  ii.  17.  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely 
die."  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  understand  death  here 
in  its  greatest  extent,  of  temporal,  spiritual  and  eternal  death  :  they 
did  not  indeed  die  temporally  on  the  day  on  which  they  sinned :  but 
the  Lord  may,  consistently  with  his  justice  and  truth,  moderate  and 
defer  punishment :  the  sentence  of  death  was  pronounced  upon  them 
that  same  day  :  yea,  on  that  very  day  they  began  to  die  by  all  the 
evil  occurences,  which  were  presently  denounced  and  inflicted  upon 
them.  Gen.  iii.  16—24.  They  died  also  spiritually  ;  for  they  were 
instantly  deprived  of  the  image  of  God,  "  their  understanding  was 
darkened,  and  they  were  alienated  from  the  life  of  God."  B'ph.  iv. 
18.  This  soon  appeared,  since  they  knew  not  that  God  was  allknow- 
ing  and  every  where  present,  when  "  they  thought  to  hide  themselves 
ft'om  him  among  the  trees  of  the  garden,  and  Adam  covered  his 


54  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

transgression,   and  hid  his  iniquity  in  his  bosom,"  Jcb  xxxi.  53.  The 
man  excused  himself,  and  blamed  hi?  ^vife,  who  had  deceived  him, 
yea,  blamed  God,  who   had  given  him  such  a  deceiving  wife  :  and 
the  woman  shifted  the  blame  from  herself  upon  the  serpent ;  Gen. 
iii.  12,    13.     Let  us  not  ask  here,  how  a  single  action  could  do  all 
this,  since  a  wise  man  doth  not  lose  all  his  wisdom  by  one  foolish 
action  :  for  this  sin  of  Adam  was  a  bond  of  iniquity,  which  disorder- 
ed the  whole  human  constitution.  They  deserved  by  this  one  sin  to  be 
deprived  of  the  divine  image,  since  they  did  not  make  a  good  use  of 
it.  When  man  withdrew  from  his  obedience  to  his  Creator  and  Law- 
giver, and  apostatized  to  the  creature,  to  sin  and  Satan,  he  was  then 
justly  condemned  to  become  a  slave   of  the  creature  and  of  Satan. 
''  For  of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of  the  same  is  he  brought  in  bon- 
dage," 2  Peter  ii.  19.     Our  first  parents  undoudtedly  deserved  eter« 
nal  death  :  and  they  soon  experienced  the  bitter  beginnings  of  it ; 
*^  they  hid  themselves  for  fear  of  the  Lord  among  the  trees  of  the 
garden,"  Gen.  iii.  8,  9,    10.  They  endeavoured,  though  in  vain,  to 
escape  from  the  wrath  of  God,  which  was  kindled  against  them  on 
account  of  their  sin  :  they  felt  indeed  that  they  deserved  "  to  be  pun- 
ished with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power,  and  that  he  would  take  vengeance  in 
flaming  fire,"  2  Thess.  i.  8,  9  ;  for  they  were  forthwith  driven  from 
his  presence  and  "  from  the  tree  of  life,  out  of  Paradise,  the  entrance 
of  which  was  guarded  by  Cherubims  with  a  flaming  sword,"  Gen, 
iii.  23,  23,  24.    Since  it  was  now  "  impossible  for  the  law"  to  justify 
them,  because  "  it  was  become  weak  through  the  flesh,"  they  should 
not  have  escaped  the  wmth  to  come,  if  God  had  not,  according  to 
his  inconceivable  grace,  entertained  thoughts  of  peace  toward  them, 
and  promised  them  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the   Mediator,  in  his 
humiliation  and  exaltation,  in  order  to  conquer  Satan,  and  to  procure 
them  regeneration,  justification,  sanctification,  perseverance  and  sal- 
vation.    And  therefore  we  must  believe  that  they  were  delivered 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  were  rendered  partakers  of  all  the 
benefits  of  the  Mediator  with  eternal  salvation. 

**  By  this  fall  and  disobedience  our  nature  is  become  so  corrupt,, 
that  we  are  all  conceived  and  born  in  sin,"  saith  the  instructor.  This 
corruption  of  our  nature  is  usually  called  by  divines  "  Original  (or 
hereditary)  sin,  because  we  inherit  it  of  our  parents  by  our  concep- 
tion and  birth.  Hear  what  David  saith.  Psalm  li.  5  "  Behold  I 
■was  shapen  in  iuiquity,  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  We 
do  not  inherit  the  sin  of  our  immediate  parents,  but  of  Adam,  and 
we  inherit  particularly  his  first  sin  by  our  birth  of  our  parents  :  for 


Jir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  -'  65 

it  was  only  that  first  sin,  by  which  he  broke  the  covenant  of  God  for 
himself  and  his  posterity.  See  Rom.  v.  12,  18. 

Original  sin  is  either  our  natural  guilt,  or  our  natural  pollution, 
flowing  from  our  natural  guilt.  Our  natural  guilt  is  called  imputed 
original  sin,  and  our  natural  pollution  is  called  inherent  original  sin. 
Imputed  original  sin  is  Adam's  first  sin,  which  is  imputed  by  God 
to  every  individual  of  his  posterity  in  consequence  of  the  broken 
covenant  of  works,  on  account  of  which  every  individual  is  declared 
guilty.  The  most  of  those  who  are  out  of  our  church,  as  the  Pela- 
gians, Socinians,  Mennonites  and  Remonstrants,  deny  this  imputed 
original  sin, :  yea,  the  J:insenists  also  oppose  it,  although  they  admit 
inherent  original  sin  But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this  imputed 
original  sin :  for  the  covenant  of  works,  which  we  have  explained 
and  proved  before,  was  m?de  not  only  with  Adam,  but  in  him,  as  the 
head  of  the  covenant,  with  all  mankind  also,  wlio  should  descend 
from  him,  from  which  it  necessarily  follows  that  Adam  did  not  break 
that  covenant  only  for  himself,  but  also  for  all  his  posterity,  and  that 
he  rendered  both  himself  and  us  guilty.  Further,  "  v/e  are  children 
of  \.rath  by  nature,  "  Eph.  ii.  3.  Children,  who  have  not  yet  any 
actual  sin,  are  subject  to  every  kind  of  misery,  and  to  death.  How 
can_^  God  conduct  toward  them  with  so  much  severity,  if  they  have 
no  sin  ?  is  there  unrighteousness  with  God  ?  God  forbid :  it  must 
then  be  on  account  of  Adam's  sin.  Paul  explains  this  at  large,  Rom. 
V.  12 — 22.  His  design  is  to  show  that  believers  obtain  reconciliation 
and  righteousness  by  one  Christ,  vrs.  8 — 1 1.  He  explains  this  by 
the  connexion  between  Adam  and  us  his  members  in  his  first  sin, 
and  the  manner  in  which  we  become  guilty  by  that  sin  ;  therefore 
he  saith,  vrs.  14,  that  "  Adam  was  a  figure  of  him  who  was  to  come." 
In  what  wanner  was  he  a  figure  ?  "  as  by  the  disobedience  of  that 
one  man  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  many 
shall  be  made  righteous,"  vrs.  17,  18,  19.  From  which  it  therefore 
evidently  appears,  that  the  sin  of  Adam  v.'as  reckoned  our  sin,  as 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  reckoned  the  righteousness  of  believers. 
He  sa'th  also  to  the  same  purspose,  vrs.  12,  "  By  one  man  sin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin,  and  so  death  psssed  upon 
all  men."  Therefore  the  sin  of  Adam  is  the  cause  ot  the  death  of 
all  men,  yea,  even  of  the  death  of  children,  who  have  not  sinned  after 
the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression,  vrs.  14.  How  is  this  possible 
if  Adam  s  sin  be  not  imputed  to  all  ?  The  apostle  saith  also,  vrs.  12, 
"  in  whom,"  namely  Adam,  "  ail  have  sinned  :"  surely  not  actually, 
but  in  him,  considered  as  their  head.  And  if  we  translate  the  words 
r/iA  hoo  fiantes  eemarton,  not  "  in  whom,"  but  "  because  all  have  sin- 


irb  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

fled,"  as  many  do,  the  sense  will  be  the  same,  and  teach  us  that  sili 
have  sinned  by  Adam's  sin,  and  are  therefore  worthy  of  death.  He 
illustrates  this  further,  when  lie  saith  vrs.  15 — 19,  "  Through  the 
dffence  of  one,  many  be  dead.  The  judgment  is  by  one  who  sin- 
ned. The  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemnation.  By  the  offence 
of  one  liian  death  reigned  by  one.  By  the  offence  of  one  judgment 
ta.me  upon  all  men  to  condemnation.  By  one  man's  disobedience 
many  were  made  sinners."  Who  can  preser^e  the  fot'ce  of  these 
words  without  admitting  such  an  imputed  guilt  ?  It  is  not  just,  say 
our  adversaries,  that  anolher  man's  sin,  which  we  ourselves  have 
neither  committed,  nor  consented  to  beforehand,  should  be  imputed 
10  us,  and  that  v/e  should  be  reckoned  guilty  on  account  of  that  sin* 
But  how  will  it  consist  with  the  justice  of  God,  that  he  inflicts  so 
many,  and  such  grievous  judgments,  yea,  death  itself  upon  children, 
if  they  inherit  not  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin,  and  have  not  themselves* 
any  actual  sin  ?  Moreover,  we  must  not  consider  Adam's  sin,  as  the 
bin  of  any  other  private  man,  but  as  the  sin  of  all  mankind  in  Adamj 
as  their  covenant  head. 

Inasmuch  as  the  sin  of  Adam  corrupted  his  nature,  therefore  our 
nature  is  also  become  corrupt  through  his  sin  imputed  to  us :  which 
corrupt  nature  constitutes  our  inherent  original  sin,  whereby  all  the 
children  of  Adam  being  deprived  from  their  birth  of  the  image  of 
God,  having  their  understanding  darkened,  their  conscience  defiled, 
being  disinclined  to  that  Avhich  is  good  and  prone  to  evil,  possess  a 
wicked  disposition  of  heart,  the  active  source  of  every  wicked  desire, 
and  of  every  sinful  action  :  Surely  this  inherent  original  sin  consists 
not  in  a  mere  deprivation  of  the  divine  image,  but  also  in  a  wicked 
disposition  of  the  heart :  therefore  it  is  called  "  the  old  man,  the  body 
of  sin,  fiesh,  the  law  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  and  vii.  The  Pelagians,  Soci- 
nians.  Remonstrants  and  Mennonites,  deny  also  this  inherent  original 
sin.  The  Jansenists,  who  deny  imputed  original  sin,  confess  never- 
theless the  inherent ;  but  the  Jesuits,  who  acknowledge  imputed 
original  sin,  deny  the  inherent :  they  vvill  indeed  allow  that  man  is 
nov,'  destitute  of  the  divine  image,  which  was  given  to  him  before 
tiie  fail,  as  a  golden  bridle,  to  restrain  the  lusts  of  the  fiesh  :  but  they 
believe  not  that  he  hath  such  a  wicked  disposition.  But  all  this  is 
(a)  directly  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  which  teachcth  us  this  in- 
herent original  sin :  Adam,  created  at  first  in  the  image  of  God, 
which  he  lost  by  sin,  "  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his 
image,"  Gen.  v.  1,  3,  Adam  was  sinful,  and  his  son  was  born  after 
that  sinful  image  of  him.  "  Every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of 
myn'8  hvart  is  only  evil,  and  that  continually,"  Gen.  vi,  S,  and  indeed 


«? 

««fpom  his  youth,"  Gen.  viii»SK  Man  is  called  "a  transgressor 
from  the  womb,"  Tsakh  xIviH.  8.  And  it  is  thus  with  all  men,  who 
proceed  from  Adam  by  ordinary  generation,  Mary,  the  mother  of 
the  Lord  i50t  excepted.  Job  asserts  it :  "  Who  can  brin?:  a  clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?"  Job  xiv*  4.  The  Saviour  also  saith,  John 
iii.  6.  "  That  which  is  born  of  Hesh  is  flesh  "  (b)  The  general  pre- 
valence of  ignorance  and  concupiscence  manifests  also  our  inherent 
original  sin  ;  for  if  it  were  not  natural  to  man,  and  innate  to  him,  it 
would  not  be  so  general,  and  cleave  so  fast  to  him ;  at  least  his  un- 
violated  freewill,  of  which  our  adversaries  boast  so  much,  would  sub- 
due it  at  last,  and  the  world  would  become  better,  (c)  The  necessity 
of  the  new  birth,  the  circumcision  and  baptism  of  children  manifests 
the  depravity  and  impurity  of  the  first  birth.  (<l)  Let  the  actions  of 
children  speak,  their  wicked  humors  soon  show  the  depravity  of  their 
nature.  They  do  not  surely  derive  this  depravity  from  evil  exam- 
ples, which  they  imitate,  for  they  are  often  guilty  of  sins  which  they 
do  not  observe  in  others  :  why  do  they  not  imitate  good  examples  as 
well  as  evil,  if  their  nature  do  not  cleave  to  sin  ?  Though  godly 
parents  educate  their  children  ever  so  carefully  by  good  examples^ 
admonitions  and  chastisements,  they  experience  nevertheless  to  their 
sorrow  that  their  depravity  still  cleaves  to  their  children.  The  child- 
ren are  indeed  called  holy,  1  Cor.  vii.  14.  but  not  with  respect  to  the 
covenant  of  works  but  of  grace,  into  which  they  are  admitted  with 
their  believing  parents  :  for  they  are  otherwise  unclean,  as  Paul  saith 
in  the  same  text,  who  doth  not  therefore  deny  inherent  original  sinj 
but  confirms  it. 

But  a  greater  difficulty  occurs  here,  to  wit,  m  What  manner  the 
soul  which  is  created  immediately  by  God  becomes  so  sinful.  It  is 
absurd  to  say,  that  the  soul  is  propagated  by  the  parents :  for  the 
soul  is  created  immediately  by  G©d  in  the  body,  Eccl  vii.  7.  Zech. 
xii.  I.  It  is  also  a  spirit,  which  cannot  be  produced  by  a  bodily  gen- 
eration :  and  although  the  parents  produce  the  body  only,  and  not 
the  soul,  they  can  nevertheless  with  great  propriety  be  said  to  pro- 
duce a  man  into  the  world,  as  vvell  as  those  who  kill  the  body  only, 
and  not  the  soul,  may  be  said  to  kill  a  man*  1  declare  that  I  can- 
not comprehend  how  the  soul  is  created  holy  in  a  sinful  body,  and 
becomes  polluted  by  the  sinful  body,  nor  how  the  corruption  of  the 
soul  proceeds  from  a  polluted  seed,  or  from  a  sinful  and  irregular 
conduct  of  the  parents  in  generation  i  for  we  should  not  then  inherit 
so  much  the  sin  of  Adam,  as  the  sin  of  our  immediate  parents,  and 
their  irregular  conduct,  which  is  contrary  to  the  word  of  God  ;  fof 
*hat  saith  that  we  inherit  the  sin  of  Adam,  and  particularly  his  first 


58  TfiE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

sin,  and  that  "  the  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,'' 
Ezck.  xviii.  20.  Neither  may  it  be  said,  that  the  essence  of  the  soul 
consists  in  thdUG^ht,  that  it  had  evil  thoughts  in  its  mother's  womb, 
and  polluted  itself  in  that  manner:  for  this  is  contrary  to  Rom.  ix. 
1 1,  and  it  would  still  remain  a  difficulty,  whence  such  a  sinful  think- 
ing should  proceed.  Such  an  assertion  is  also  dangerous,  as  appears 
in  the  Pelagians,  who,  while  they  maintained  this  opinion,  denied 
original  sin,  and  were  therefore  condemned  hi  the  council  of  Mile- 
vitum  But  we  must  look  higher  here,  and  consider  God  as  a  judge, 
who  imputing  the  sin  of  Adam  justly  to  his  posterity,  and  pronounc- 
ing them  guilty  in  consequence  thereof,  withholds  his  image  from 
them,  and  surrenders  them  to  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan,  as  God 
often  punisheth  one  sin  with  another,  Psalm  Ixxxi.  11,  12.  Rom  i. 
21 — 32.  But  how  do  we  then  inherit  the  sin  of  our  parents  by  our 
birth  ?  according  to  Psalm  li.  5.  We  will  understand  this,  when  we 
consider  that  our  parents  propagate  us  under  a  broken  covenant  of 
works,  and  so  as  children  of  our  sinful  father  Adam,  who  begat  a 
son  after  his  own  disposition,  and  "  after  his  image  and  likeness," 
Gen.  i.  3.  We  are  born  of  our  parents  not  simply  in  a  natural,  but 
also  in  a  moral  state  under  Adam,  not  only  as  our  natural,  but  also 
as  our  moral  head  in  the  covenant  of  works.  The  marriage  law, 
Gen,  i.  28.  "Be  fruitful  and  multiply,'*  was  added  to  the  covenant 
of  works,  that  children  might  be  born  under  that  covenant  of  works. 
If  Adam  had  continued  to  stand,  the  image  of  God  would  have  been 
transmitted  to  us,  his  posterity  by  our  birth  ;  but  now  the  sinful 
image  of  Adam  is  transmitted  to  all  who  proceed  from  his  loins,  by 
their  birlh  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works.  And  thus  our 
parents  serve  as  instruments  of  God's  justice  to  •'  conclude  all  under 
the  disobedience  of  Adam,"  Rom.  xi.  32.  If  we  understand  the  mat- 
ter thus,  we  shall  presently  see  that  Mary  also  was  born  with  original 
sin,  and  not  her  Son  the  Lord  Jesus ;  inasmnch  as  he  was  not  born 
in  consequence  of  the  law,  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,"  and  so  not 
under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  cannot  be  reckoned  in  Adam  as 
the  head  of  the  covenant,  although  he  may,  as  his  natural  head  :  and 
there  fore  h*  is  opposed  to  Adam  in  a  moral  and  covenant  relation, 
Rom.  v.  14 — 19  1  Cor.  xv.  32 — 47,  48,  49,  although  he  is  referred 
to  Adam,  as  his  first  father  in  a  natural  relation,  Luke  iii.  23 — 38. 
God  saith,  Ezek.  xviii.  20.  "  The  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of 
tlie  father.'*  From  this  passage  our  adversaries  conclude,  that  the 
children  of  Adam  do  not  inherit  his  sin  by  their  birth,  and  that  they 
cannot  be  punished  on  account  of  it.  But  we  cannot  conclude  this 
from  that  text :  for  our  fathers  besides  Adam  do  not  stand  nor  fall 


in.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  59 

for  us,  as  covenant  heads  in  the  covenant  of  works.  It  is  not  a  gene- 
ral case,  that  the  son  doth  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  since 
God  sometimes  "  visits  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the  child- 
ren," Exod.  XX.  5.  But  in  Ezek.  xviii.  20,  there  is  a  mitigation  of 
that  righteous  vengeance,  on  account  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  The 
son  bears  the  iniquity  of  the  father  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  works, 
but  not  on  account  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  See  this  Jer.  xxxi. 
38—31. 

APPLICATION. 

Behold,  hearers,  so  glorious  were  ye  created,  and  after  the  image 
of  God,  and  so  wretched  and  abominable  are  ye  become  through 
your  birth  1  Do  ye  see  it  in  yourselves  ?  doth  it  affect  you  with  grief? 
do  ye  humble  and  abase  yourselves  on  account  of  it,  as  the  matter 
requires  ?  Surely  ye  do  not,  who  are  still  such  as  ye  were  at  your 
birth,  and  who  have  never  yet  departed  out  of  Adam,  and  out  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  and  entered  into  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  and 
into  the  covenant  of  grace.  For, 

1.  Ye  have  never  yet  come  to  yourselves,  so  as  to  see  your  natu- 
ral guilt  and  abominable  corruption,  to  bewail  it,  and  to  humble  your- 
selves on  account  of  it.  Yea,  as  miserable  and  hatefully  wicked  as 
ye  have  been  from  your  birth,  ye  are  nevertheless  proud  and  haughty 
on  account  of  it.  Ye  know  wonderfully  well  how  to  boast  of  your 
noble  parentage,  to  relate  ftom  what  family  ye  have  sprung,  this  and 
that  great  personage  was  your  kinsman ;  and  ye  consider  not  that 
your  first  father  sinned,  and  was  a  covenant  breaker,  and  that  ye  are 
by  your  natural  birth  "  af  your  father  the  devil."  John  viii.  44.  Ye 
boast  of  your  good  heart,  of  your  great  understanding,  and  your  noble 
virtues,  and  require  that  every  one  should  esteem  and  love  you,  and 
when  they  do  not,  ye  are  angry  :  do  ye  perceive  that  any  one  hath 
an  esteem  for  you,  your  heart  is  immediately  tickled,  and  swells 
with  pride,  as  a  bladder  with  wind,  and  ye  speak,  with  a  lofty  air. 
Your  foolish  imagination,  that  ye  are  something,  emboldens  you  to 
draw  near  to  God,  like  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12,  in  an  arro- 
gant manner,  and  to  display  your  specious  virtues  before  him  :  and 
ye  doubt  not  but  that  God  will  be  favourable  to  you,  yea,  ye  think 
that  if  he  did  not  bestow  heaven  upon  you,  he  would  deal  unjustly 
by  you ;  and  so  ye  possess  your  father's  disposition,  who  "  would  be 
like  God,"  Gen.  iii.  3,  22.  Do  ye  once  see  your  damnable  sins,  it 
doth  not  however  render  you  concerned,  but  yc  presently  turn  away 
from  beholding  them,  and  excuse  them  as  weaknesses,  which  yc 
ought  not  much  to  regard. 


60         THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

2.  Ye  know  indeed  that  yo  are  not  as  ye  ought  to  be,  and  as  your 
father  Adam  was  before  the  fall :  but  ye  never  inquire  by  what 
means  ye  have  become  so  miserable  r  ye  do  not  concern  yourselve* 
therewith)  but  rej^ard  it  as  a  matter,  which  hath  happened  lona-  since, 
and  which  is  far  off,  and  doth  not  relate  to  you.  Yea,  many  of  yoa 
are  still  so  ignorant,  that  they  know  not  even  from  the  word  of  God, 
and  as  a  truth,  that  man  is  so  miserable  on  account  of  Adam's  sin 
through  bis  birth  ;  how  should  they  then  know  from  a  thorough  con- 
templation  of  themselves,  their  own  misery  and  the  causes  of  it? 

3.  Are  ye  ever  led  to  a  fair  view  of  your  iniquity,  either  by  a  wis» 
reprover,  or  by  the  conviction  of  your  own  consciences,  ye  seek,  pre- 
ZfCTifiy  for  the  cause  of  the  sin,  which  is  discovered  to  you,  yet  ye  do 
not  ftnd  the  true  cause,  but  a  false  one,  which  ye  do  then  pretend, 
in  order  to  excuse  yourselves :  one  thinks,  or  says,  the  flesh  is  weak, 
and  he  doth  not  see  the  wickedness  of  his  flesh ;  another  alledges^ 
the  devil  is  busy,  and  he  says  with  Eve,  "  the  serpent  deceived  me,'^ 
Gen.  ii.  IS.  It  is  as  though  the  devil  did  every  sin  through  the  sin- 
ner, as  he  deceived  the  woman  through  the  serpent,  and  as  though 
the  binner  himself  were  not  abominable,  and  did  not  commit  sin  : 
a  third  pretends  custom,  he  knows  not  that  he  doth  it,  as  if  custom 
would  excuse  him,  and  as  if  it  did  not  greatly  aggravate  his  iniquity, 
that  he  was  accustomed  to  sin,  and  it  wasbecome,  asit  were,  hisnature: 
a  fourth  wi!i  lay  the  blame  upon  his  calling,  th^t  it  is  difficult  and 
that  it  cannot  be  followed  without  a  piofanation  of  the  name  and  day 
of  God,  or  without  cheating  and  wronging  others  :  but  such  a  calling 
is  not  lawfiji  and  is  itself  sinful ;  he  will  then  atso  accuse  his  neigh- 
bour, he  brought  me  to  it,  saith  the  sinner,  when  his  iniquity  is 
found,  which  is  hatehil :  or  his  parents  have  done  it  by  an  evil  ex- 
ftmple,  or  i  careless  education  :  they  have  eaten  sour  grapes  :  or  he 
excuses  himself  with  the  conduct  of  the  man  or  the  woman,  yea, 
what  i»  ^tUl  more  abominable,  the  sinner  is  so  wicked,  that  he  dares 
with  Adam  blame  his  Maker  for  his  s|n,  and  say  that  he  is  the  cause 
of  It,  Gen  ill  iS.  A  man  hath  not  made  himself,  saith  he  often  O 
wicked  monster,  that  thou  wilt  excuse  thine  own  hateful  heart  and 
conduct,  and  accuse  others,  yea,  even  thy  pure  Maker. 

4.  Dq  ye  know  that  the  sinner  is  become  50  evil  and  pen^ersc 
through  the  fall  gf  Adam,  ye  know  il  only  as  a  truth,  which  occurs 
in  the  word,  but  ye  do  not  see  it  in  yourselves  ;  for  ye  have  never 
yet  looked  into  yourselves,  in  order  to  condemn  yourselves  with  de- 
testation and  concern.  All  men  are  considered  by  you  as  abomina- 
ble,  according  to  the  word  of  God  :  but  vhen  ye  come  to  yourselves, 
ye  then  think  that  ve  are  not  so  wicked  as  this  and  that  one,  byt 


lit.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  6) 

rather  somewhat  better.  Ye  are  perhaps  so  expert  in  the  word  of 
righteousness,  that  ye  are  able  to  refute  all  the  objections  of  the 
adversaries:  but  when  ye  are  only  a  little  concerned  about  your 
evil  character,  and  fearful  of  eternal  perdition,  bow  do  your  hearts 
rise  up  in  displeasure  against  the  Lord,  and  say  within  you,  with 
the  wicked  Jews  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,' '  Ezek.  xviii, 
25,  29,  and  "  why  doth  he  yet  find  fault  ?  for  who  hath  resisted  his 
will  ?"  Rom.  ix.  19.  This  is  not  a  subtle  injection  of  Satan  into  you, 
but  it  is  a  dictate  of  your  own  evil  hearts,  and  ye  cherish  that  wicked 
thought ;  yea,  rise  up  against  the  Lord  and  seek  to  disengage  your* 
selves  from  him  and  his  service. 

Is  it  not  thus  with  you  ?  attend  only  to  the  workings,  the  thoughts 
and  imaginations  of  your  hearts,  to  the  words  of  your  mouths,  and 
your  whole  conversation,  and  ye  will  see  it.  Do  not  make  light  of 
it  by  thinking,  I  know  that  it  is  sad  enough,  and  not  meddling  any 
further  with  it :  but  stand  still  a  while  by  it,  and  see  your  great 
misery,  that  ye  come  short  of  the  image  and  glory  of  God,  Rom.  iii. 
23.  Ye  have  the  sinful  image  of  your  father  Adam,  Gen.  v.  3,  where- 
by ye  have  apostatized  from  God  to  yourselves,  yea,  to  his  enemy; 
"  your  actions  and  birth  are  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  your  father  M'as 
an  Ammonite,  and  your  mother  a  Hitlite :"  your  birth  is  hateful  and 
loathsome,  Ezek.  xvi.  3,  4,  S.  Ye  are  "  a  seed  of  evildoers,  and 
transgressors  from  the  womb,"  Isaiah  i.  4.  xlviii.  8.  Your  hearts 
work  up  nothing  "  but  mire  and  dirt,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  20.  Ye  are  "  by 
nature  children  of  wrath,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  And  know  that  if  ye  remain 
as  ye  are,  heaven  will  be  shut  against  you,  as  Paradise  was  against 
your  parents :  for  "  there  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing 
that  defileth,  or  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie,"  Rev.  xxi.  27. 

Alas  1  friends,  endeavour  to  escape  from  your  destruction,  and  to 
surmount  your  miserable  condition  and  situation.  And  for  this  pur- 
pose. 

1 .  Look  upon  Adam's  condition  as  yours.  Ye  were  indeed  contained 
m  his  loins,  ye  have  sprung  from  him,  and  were  born  under  his  rove* 
ii  ant,  and  the  covenant  of  works  was  estabhshed  with  you  in  him, 
and  ye  do  yet  daily  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  ye  say  inconsider- 
ately with  the  carnal  Israelites,  Exod.  xix.  8.  "  All  that  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  will  we  do  :"  and  when  ye  rest  and  seek  your  life  in 
your  doings.  Yea,  ye  have  broken  the  covenant  in  Adam,  and  ye 
break  it  daily,  when  ye  commit  the  same  sin  that  Adam  committed 
by  transgressing  the  law  of  God,  aiming  at  high  things,  seeking  the 
creature  more  than  God,  listening  to  the  suggestions  of  Satan,  and 
following  them.    Do  not  »U  the  judgmeius  which  were  threatened 


62  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

and  inflicted  by  God  on  account  of  the  sin  of  Adam,  lie  also  upon 
you,  as  they  respect  the  man,  the  woman  and  the  earth  ? 

2.  (Compare  your  condition  before  the  fall  with  your  condition 
since.  How  glorious  was  it  before  the  fall !  Ye  were,  like  the  image 
of  God,  perfectly  wise,  holy,  without  any  sinful  emotions,  lords  of  all 
things,  immortal,  provided  in  the  perfect  garden  of  pleasure  with  an 
abundance  of  all  things,  created  to  know,  to  love  your  Creator,  and 
to  live  with  him  in  eternal  happiness,  to  glorify  and  praise  him. 
But  ye  are  now  foolish,  abominable,  slaves  of  the  creatures  and  of 
sm,  ye  must  seek  your  bread  with  much  anxiety,  and  must  every 
moment  expect  and  fear  death,  yea,  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  Be  grieved  and  lament  on  account  of  your 
fathers,  yea,  on  account  of  your  own  sins,  which  have  procured  all 
these  thmgs  to  you.  Ye  have  more  reason  than  the  church  had  to 
complain.  Lam.  v.  16.  "  The  crown  is  fallen  from  our  head  :  wo 
unto  us  that  we  have  sinned." 

3.  Endeavour  to  obtam  a  thorough  knowledge  of  your  sinfulness^ 
and  woful  misery.  Attend  not  only  to  your  evil  actions,  but  descend 
to  the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  which  are  indeed  more  abominable 
than  your  sinful  actions :  behold  there  the  headspring  of  all  your 
abominable  deeds.  Observe  all  the  workings,  motions,  and  inclina- 
tions of  your  hearts,  whence  they  arise,  and  whither  they  would  lead 
you.  So  David  acted,  when  he  confessed  his  heinous  sins.  He  con- 
sidered his  iniquity  and  sin  in  which  he  was  conceived  and  brought 
forth,"  as  the  cause  of  those  ainh,  and  hq  humbled  himself  on  ac- 
count of  it,  Psalm  li.  5.  And  beware  of  "  covering  your  transgres- 
sions like  Adam,  by  hiding  your  iniquity  in  your  bosom,"  Job  xxxi. 
33.  Do  not  esteem  any  sin  small ;  the  least,  like  Adam's  eating  of 
the  fruit,  is  a  bond  of  iniquity :  every  sin,  yea,  even  the  least  de- 
serves death  and  the  curse  ;  for  "  cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth 
not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them,"  Gal.  iii.  10.  Do  but  see  this,  subdue  your  pride,  bemoan  and 
humble  yourselves. 

4.  Flee  to  the  second  Adam,  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  may  take 
away  your  evil  iniquities.  God,  willing  to  manifest  kindness  to  sin- 
ners, and  to  glorify  himself  as  a  gracious  God  ;  and  this  being  im- 
possible by  the  law  of  the  co\enant  of  works  "  gave  his  Son  to  be  a 
covenant  to  tlie  people,  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  xlix.  6.  He 
took  sin  on  him,  satisfied  for  the  guilt  of  it,  and  obtained  the  right- 
eousness of  God  :  "  For  what  the  lav/  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  fiei^h,  and  that  for  sin,  condemned  fcin  in  the  flesh  ;  that  the 


iii.  LORID'S  DAY,  Q.  6,  7.  63 

righteousness  of  tlie  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Rorri.  viii.  S,  4. 
"  for  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by 
the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous,"  Rom.  v.  19, 
<•  God  sets  him  forth  to  you,"  that  ye  may  seek  '»  recoRciliation  in 
hira  through  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  He  calls  to  you,  that  ye  may 
"  come  to  him,  and  that  he  may  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
you,  and  give  you  all  the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  the  Messiah,  Isaiah 
Iv.  I,  2,  3.  Do  not  refuse,  but  betake  yourselves  to  Christ,  cast  your- 
selves upon  him,  accept  of  him,  and  endeavour  to  "  receive  of  his 
fullness,  and  grace  for  grace.'*  John  i.  16. 

5.  Take  good  heed  that  ye  do  not  destroy  nor  deface  the  image 
of  God  still  more  with  respect  to  that  which  remains  of  it.  Do  not 
injure  your  neighbour,  who  is  made  after  the  image  of  God  :  for  ye 
should  violate  the  image  of  God  in  him,  Gen  ix.  6,  James  iii.  8,  9, 
Beware  that  ye  do  not,  by  hardening  yourselves,  and  accustoming 
yourselves  to  sin,  lay  waste  your  conscience,  (in  which  there  is  still 
something  of  the  image  of  God  left,  and  which  reminds  you  of  your 
duty,  and  convinceth  you  of  sin  and  the  wrath  of  God),  but  stir  up, 
and  animate  your  conscience  continually,  endeavour  to  be  renewed 
again  after  the  image  of  God.  "  Make  yourselves  a  new  heart,  and 
anew  spirit,"  Ezek,  xviii.  31.  Cast  yourselves  upon  Christ,  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  that  he  may  be  formed  in  you  ;  for  «if 
any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Look 
steadfastly  at  his  holy  and  beaming  glory,  that  ye  may  be  *'  changed 
into  the  same  image  from  glorj  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18. 

6.  Lest  ye  should  be  insnared  again,  beware  of  the  wiles  of  the 
devil :  "  Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  because  your  adversary  the  devil,  as 
a  roaring  lion,  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  I 
Peter  v.  8.  "  He  beguiled  Eve,"  as  wise  and  holy  as  she  was, 
"through  his  subtilty,"  2  Cor.  xi.  3,  it  will  not  then  be  difficult  for 
him  to  seduce  you,  who  harbour  his  abetters,  your  corruptions  in 
you :  endeavour  therefore  to  learn  his  devices.  Suspect  such  ques- 
tions as,  should  this  and  that  be  true,  or  a  sin  ?  representations  of 
the  creatures  of  God,  and  of  sins,  calculated  to  allure  the  mind,  ex- 
citations to  aim  at  high  things,  unfavourable  thoughts  of  God,  as  if 
he  had  no  incl^iation  to  do  you  good,  and  particularly  blasphemous, 
and  unnatural  injections ;  I  say,  suspect  all  these,  as  proceeding 
from  the  devil,  and  resist  them  at  the  first  attack,  and  repel  them 
from  you,  as  ye  would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes.  If  ye  enter 
into  a  conversation  with  him,  he  will  insnare  you,  before  ye  are 
av^are,  as  he  did  Eve :  reject  him  again  aiid  again,  like  the  Saviour^, 


6i  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL. 

Matt.  !V.  II.  "Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  flee  from  you,"  James 
iv.  7, 

T.  Parents,  who  afe  favoured  by  God  with  children,  oppose  be- 
times the  corruption  of  your  children  :  inform  them  of  their  con-up- 
tion  and  damnable  condition,  and  how  they  must  be  delivered  by 
Christ.  Ye  have  connected  them  by  their  birth  with  Adam,  endeav* 
our  therefore  to  connect  them  also  with  Christ :  "  Ye  fathers,  pro- 
voke  not  your  children  to  wrath  :  but  bringj  them  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,**  saith  Paul,  Eph.  vi.  4.  So  Abraham 
conducted.  Gen.  xviii.  If,  18.  David,  Prov.  iv.  5,  4,  5,  6,  and  the 
mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5  .  iii.  15. 

How  happy  are  they  who  have  fled  to  the  second  Adam,  and 
sheltered  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings  I  Whatsoever 
they  had  lost  in  the  first  Adam  they  obtain  again  in  him  :  "  Of  God 
they  are  in  Christ  JesUs  who  of  God  is  made  unto  them  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification  and  redemption,"  1  Cor.  i.  30* 
Adam  was  seduced  by  the  wicked  one,  but,  partakers  of  Christ,  "the 
Lord  will  establish  and  keep  you  from  the  wicked  one,"  Sj  Thess. 
iii.  3.  Adam,  and  ye  in  Adam,  broke  the  covenant  of  God:  but 
**  the  Lord  hath  now  made  another,"  and  better  "  covenant  with  you, 
which  cannot  be  broken,"  and  which  is  everlasting)  that  he  will  not 
turn  away  from  you,  to  do  you  good  ;  he  hath  put  his  fear  into  your 
hearts,  so  that  ye  shall  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  Ye  lost 
the  image  of  God  in  Adam,  but  in  the  Son  of  God  ye  are  "  again 
become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  2  Peter  i.  4.  And  how  will 
his  image  be  glorified  in  your  immortality,  and  eternal  happiness  S 
I'or  "  as  ye  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly,  ye  shall  also  bear 
the  image  of  the  heavenly,"  1  Cor.  xv.  49.  Yea,  *'  ye  shall  behold 
the  face  of  God  in  righteousness  ;  ye  shall  be  satisfied,  when  ye 
awake,  with  his  likeness,"  Psalm  xvii  15.  Adam  was  dismissed  out 
of  Paradise,  but  the  second  Adam,  Jesus  the  King  will  call  you  into 
the  Paradise  of  God,  the  third  heaven  ;  and  how  happy  will  ye  be, 
when  he  will  say,  according  to  Matt.  xxv.  34.  **  Come  ye  blessed  of 
my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world  !"  Amen. 


(   i5    ) 


THE 


INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER 
TO  DO  GOOD. 

SEQUEL  OF  tH£  III.  LORD'S  DAY. 

Rom.  viii.  f .     The  carrial  mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it  it 
not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be. 

Q.  8.  jire  we  then  so  corrupt,  that  %ve  are  wholly  incapable  of  doing 
any  good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness  f 

A.  Indeed  we  are,  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God« 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY.

Q.  8.  jire  we  then  so  corrupt,  that  %ve  are  wholly  incapable  of  doing 
any  good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness  f 

A.  Indeed  we  are,  except  we  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God« 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY.