Q.  9.  Doth  not  God  then  do  injustice  to  man,  by  requiring  from  him 
m  his  law,  that  which  he  cannot  perform  f 

A.  Not  at  all :  for  God  made  man  capable  of  performing  it :  but 
man,  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,  and  his  own  wilful  disobedience, 
deprived  himself  and  all  his  posterity  of  those  divine  gifts. 


JL  O  be  miserable,  and  to  be  unable  to  help  one's  self,  renders 
•ne  doubly  miserable.  When  a  person  falls  into  the  fire  or  water, 
and  cannot  deliver  himself,  he  must  perish,  unless  another,  moved 
to  compassion  by  his  misery  and  crying,  help  him.  The  sinner  is 
become  both  abominable  and  miserable  by  his  sins  ;  for  he  hates  the 
most  lovely  God  and  his  neighbour,  who  is  made  after  the  image  of 
God ;  "  We  were  sometimes  foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving 
divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  hving  in  malice,  and  envy,  hateful  and  hating 
♦ne  another,"  saith  the  apostle,  Tit.  iii.  3,  God  had  created  him  in 
the  beginning  after  his  image,  he  was  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature  ; 
lut  he  hath  sinned,  hath  defaced  that  image,  and  "  comes  short  of 
t^€  glory  of  God,"  Rom,  iii.  33,  and  he  hath  now  an  abominable 


66      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  UOuD. 

disposition  of  heart,  the  image  of  Satan,  for  "  he  is  his  father,"  John 
viii.  44.  He  is  ''cursed,  because  he  hath  not  continued  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,"  Cial.  iii.  10.  God  hath 
withdrawn  his  love  and  his  kindness  from  him>"he!  is  angry  with  him, 
and  "'  will  take  vengeance  on  him  in  flaming  fire,  and  punish  him 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  gl  »ry  of  his  power,"  2  i'hess.  i.  8,  9.  If  the  sinner  could  deliver 
himself,  he  would  surmount  his  wretchedness:  but  that  which  aggra- 
vates his  miserv  to  the  uttermost  is,  that  he  cannot  recover  himself: 
he  cannot  disengage  himself  from  sin,  and  the  sinfulness  of  his  na~ 
ture,  he  is  too  effectually  intangled  in  it,  "  his  iniquities  compass  him 
about,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins,"  Prov.  v.  22.  It  is 
impossible  for  him  to  convert,  to  regenerate  himself,  and  to  keep 
the  law  of  God  ;  for  "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,  it  is 
not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be,"  saith  Paul  in 
the  text.  The  instructor  also  teacheth  us  this  in  these  two  questions^ 
that  he  may  humble  the  sinner,  and  prepare  him  for  deliverance. 

The  instructor,  that  he  may  lead  the  sinner  to  his  Deliverer, 
teacheth  him  his  misery  out  of  the  law,  and  particularly  that  he  is 
prone  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour,  Questions  3,  4,  5,  and  that 
though  he  was  created  at  first  in  the  image  of  God,  he  hath  lost  that 
image  by  sin,  and  is  now  born  in  sin.  Questions  6,  7.  What  must 
he  do  now  ?  he  ought  to  reform  and  restore  himself ;  but  he  is  un- 
able to  do  this  ;  for  he  is  so  corrupt,  that  he  is  wholly  incapable  of 
doing  any  good,  and  is  inclined  to  all  wickedness. 

The  instructor,  that  he  may  exhibit  the  doctrine  of  the  sinner's 
inability,  proposes, 

I.  The  doctrine.  Question  8,  and  then  refutes, 

II.  An  objection  against  it.  Question  9. 

I.  We  teach  with  the  catechism  according  to  the  word  of  Godi 
that  "  man  is  so  corrupt,  that  he  is  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any. 
good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness."  This  was  gain-said  of  old  by 
the  Pelagians,  and  Semipelagians,  and  is  still  by  the  Socinians,  Re- 
monstrants, Jesuits  and  many  Mennonites.  Although  they  allow 
that  man  is  become  somewhat  weak  by  sm,  as  a  sick  man,  and  can- 
not do  that  which  is  good  without  difficulty,  they  nevertheless  hold 
that  he  hath  still  an  ability  to  understand  clearly  all  that  is  necessary 
for  him  to  believe,  hope  and  do,  in  order  to  obtain  salvation :  yea, 
also  to  desire,  to  hunger,  to  thirst,  and  pray  for  grace,  to  purpose 
and  resolve  to  do  good :  yea,  the  Socinians  think  that  man  is  still 
able  to  perform  <^hat  which  is  good,  and  obey  the  will  of  God,  and 
That  he  needs  only  to  exert  himself  for  this  purpose.     They  talk 


in.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  8,     IV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  9.        6? 

indeed  of  God's  as&isting  grace,  but  they  do  not  mean  any  thing  by- 
it,  but  the  nature  of  the  free  and  indifferent  will,  or  a  general  and 
suiiicicnt  grace,  vriiich  God  bestows,  according  to  the  new  covenant, 
on  every  man,  but  which  doth  not  effect  any  thing,  until  our  good 
free  will  first  seek,  and  render  it  effectual.     The  reason  why  they 
entertain  this  opinion  is,  their  idea  that  *'  God  created  man  only  with 
natural  endowments,  or  neither  good  nor  evil ;  that  the  image  of 
God  is  not  natural  to  man,  but  supernatural ;  that  therefore  the  sin- 
i.i,er  hath  not  lost  any  natural  but  only  supernatural  gifts  and  powers; 
that  original  sin  consists  not  in  a  sinful,  but  only  in   the  want  of  a 
holy  disposition,  ^nd  that  the  freedom  of  the  will  consists  in  indiffer- 
ence, whereby  a  person  can  incline  himself  to  good  as  well  as  evil." 
And  if  ne  will  examine  the  foundation  of  this  erroneous  conception 
somewhat  more  thoroughly,  we  shall  perceive  that  the  fundamental 
cause  of  it  is  pride,  self-love,  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  sin  and  hG.i- 
ness.     For  why  else  dp  these  men  plead  so  much  in  favour  of  sinful 
nature,  and  teach  that  the  first  motions  of  lust  are  not  sinful,  and 
that  the  virtuous  actions  of  the  heathens  are  pleasing  to  God  ? 

That  we  may  not  merely  beat  the  air,  we  must  also  explain  our 
opinion,  and  therefore  the  state  ot  this  controversy ,  and  to  this  end 
observe,  (a)  that  man  as  man  depends  in  all  his  natural  actions  and 
motions  upon  God.  God  hath  indeed  given  him,  as  a  rational  and 
living  creature,  a  natural  ability  and  habit  to  do  whatever  is  human, 
but  he  is  determined  by  God's  eternal  decree,  and  hath  need  of  the 
preventing,  co-operating  and  determining  influence  of  God's  ordinary 
providence  for  each  action,  and  is  unable  to  do  aught  without  it.  See 
Isaiah  x.  15.  Acts  xvii.  28.  But  we  do  not  treat  of  this  inability 
here,  but  on  the  tenth  Lord's  day.  (b)  The  sinner,  being  guilty,  is 
unable  to  satisfy  for  himself.  Matt.  xvi.  26.  \^' e  do  not  treat  of  this 
inability  neither  here,  but  on  the  fifth  Lord's  Efay.  (c)  Moreover,  the 
di  .pute  is  not  concerning  the  state  of  integrity,  of  grace,  or  of  gloiy ; 
for  man  hath  power  in  these  conditions  to  do  that  which  is  good. 
But  the  dispute  relates  to  the  state  of  nature  and  of  sin,  after  the 
fall,  before  regeneration,  in  which  the  sinner  is  wholly  unable  to  do 
that  which  is  good,  (d)  When  we  say  that  man  is  unable  to  do  that 
which  is  good,  we  do  not  speak  then  of  natural  good,  as  eating, 
drinking,  working  ;  nor  of  civil  good,  as  honesty  and  justice  in  our 
dealings  with  others  ;  nor  of  ecclesiastical  good,  as  performing  eccle- 
siastical duties  ;  for  we  allow  that  an  unregenerate  sinner  can  do  very 
much,  in  his  endeavours  to  perform  these  good  things,  Mark  vi.  20. 
Luke  xviii.  U,  12.  But  we  speak  hereof  the  true  saving  good, 
/<  those  better  things  that  accompany  salvation,"  Heb.  vi.  9,  which 


m      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOB. 

are  good  by  their  own  nature,  as  conversion,  faith,  hope  and  love 
with  respect  to  God  ;  or  that  are  indifferent  in  themselves,  neither 
good  nor  evil,  but  which   become  good  and  agreeable  to  God,  by- 
certain  good  qualifications,  to  vrit,  that  they  are  done  in  faith,  to  the 
glory  of  God,  and  according  to  his  law  :  these  qualifications  render 
all  ecclesiastical,  civil  and  natui'al  good  pleasing  to  God,  and  without 
them  the  Lord  detests  it,  Prov.  xv.  8.    See  this  demonstrated  more 
at  large  upon  the  ninety  first  question,  (e)  Inasmuch  as  we  say  that 
the  siiiner  is  unable  to  do  good,  and  our  adversaries  also  acknowledge 
that  man  is  in  some  measure  not  able,  it  therefore  behooves  us  t» 
inquire  wherein  we  differ  from  them  with  respect  to  their  inability. 
They  assert  that  the  inability  consists  only  in  the  loss  of  the  super- 
natural gift  of  God's  image,  whereby  the  sinner  is  indeed  destitute 
of  that  good,  but  is  not  wholly  corrupt,  and  is  only  as  it  were  half 
dead,  as  though  a  person  could  exist  in  an  intermediate  state,  or  be 
neither  alive  nor  dead.     They  liken  impotent  man  also  to  a  blind, 
deaf  and  dumb  person,  who  is  indeed  unable  to  see,  hear  and  speak^ 
but  nevertheless  still  desires  and  endeavours  to  be  healed  :  and  they 
gay,  that  God,  seeing  this  desire  and  endeavour,  assists  him  by  his 
grace,  which  heals  him,  when  he  only  makes  a  proper  use  of  it.  But 
we  assert  with  the  word  of  God.  (1)  that  the  inability  of  the  sinner 
to  do  good  consisteth  in  the  loss  and  v^ant  of  spiritual  life,  that ''  he 
is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  1.     He  is  separated  from 
God,  the  life  of  the  soul,  ^*  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,"  Eph.  iv. 
18,  without  either  smell  or  taste :  he  hath  no  spiritual  judgment  to 
discern  spiritual  things,  1  Cor.  li.  14.  "  Ke  calls  evil  good,  and  good 
evil,"  Isaiah  v.  20.    He  hath  no  relish  nor  delight  in  good,  Isaiah  vi. 
10,  "  evil  is  sweet  in  his  mouth,"  Job  xx.  12,    13.  Yea,  "  he  is  past 
feeling,"  Eph  iv.  10.    And  it  is  thus  not  only  with  the  Gentiles,  but 
aliso  with  the  Jews,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 18,  and  with  nominal  Christians,  to 
whom  the  gospel  is  preached  :  "  they  have  the  name  that  they  live, 
but  are  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  1.  (2)  This  inability  to  do  good  consists  not 
ijnly  in  the  loss  of  good,  but  also  in  a  willing  subjection  and  bondage 
to,  and  under  the  dominion  of  sin  and  Satan.  The  sinner  is  not  free, 
but  "  a  servant  of  sin,"  he  must  "  be  made  free,"  John  viii.  32 — 56. 
Rom.  vi.  17.  He  is  overcome  by  corruption,  and  is  thus  a  servant  of 
it,  2  Peter  ii.  19.    He  is  "  taken  captive  in  the  snare  of  the  devil," 
2  Tim.  ii.  26.    And  that  willingly  :  for  "  he  walketh  according  to 
thfe  course  of  this  world,  according  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience,"  Eph, 
u.  3»     This  inability  to  do  good  consists  also  in  the  natural  aversion 
gf  th^  sinppr  frcm  good,  and  in  his  natural  inclination  to  e\iKvf 


 

which  he  hath  a  wonderful  delight  and  pleasure.  "  The  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God  :  it  is  not  subject  to  the  la\v  of  God,  neither 
indeed  can  be,"  Rom.  viii.  7.  Yea,  the  sinner  "  hath  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness," 2  Thess.  ii.  12,   Therefore 

The  question  and  the  state  of  this  controversy  is,  -whether  the  sin- 
ner hath  any  capacity  at  present  for  true  saving  good,  which  our 
adversaries  assert,  but  we  deny :  also  whether  he  is  wholly  incapable 
of  doing  any  good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness.  This  the  Pela- 
gians and  Semipelagians  deny  :  but  we  affirm,  according  to  the  word 
of  God.     For, 

1.  That  saith  expressly,  that  man  is  incapable  in  this  respect: 
•"'  When  we  were  yet  without  strength,  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly," 
saith  Paul,  Rom.  v.  6.  What  ability  or  inclination  to  do  that  which 
is  good  can  he  have,  whose  "  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God , 
for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  it  be," 
Rom.  viii.  7.  BeHevers  themselves  are  in  a  great  measure  unable, 
according  to  their  sinful  part :  "  they  are  ready  to  halt,"  Psalm 
xxxviii.  17.  <•  In  their  flesh  there  dweileth  no  good  thing,"  Rom. 
vii.  18.  "Of  themselves  they  are  not  sufficient  to  think  any  thing, 
as  of  themselves :  but  their  sufficiency  is  of  God,"  2  Cor.  iii  5- 
^  Without  Christ  they  can  do  nothing,"  John  xv.  5.  How  th^n  shall 
tiie  sinner,  who  is  yet  left  to  himself,  be  capable  of  doing  that  which 
is  good  ? 

2.  ^t  hath  been  shown  before  from  the  word  of  God,  that  the  sin- 
ner is  spiritually  dead,  a  slave  of  sin  and  of  Satan,  backward  to  good, 
and  inclined  to  evil ;  how  then  can  he  heartily  pursue  that  which  is 
good  ?  is  it  not  contrary  to  his  nature  ?  a  dead  man  surely  cannot 
stir :  a  slave  who  is  fast  bound  with  cords,  must  not  he  do  the  will 
of  his  lord  ?  If  he  were  not  a  willing  slave,  we  should  then  observe 
certain  virtuous  essays  in  him,  in  order  to  be  delivered  :  but  no,  he 
struggles  against  his  deliverance,  he  is  pleased  with  the  shackles  of 
his  sins.  And  can  he  then  either  desire  or  perform  any  good  thing, 
that  is  pleasing  to  God  ?  it  would  be  contrary  to  his  nature,  "  He 
counts  the  excellent  things  of  God's  law  strange,"  Hosea  viii.  12. 
He  is  like  "  a  withered  branch,  which  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself," 
John  xv-  4,  5,  6,  like  ''  a  corrupt  tree,  that  cannot  bring  forth  good 
fruit,"  Matt.  vii.  16,  17,  18,  hke  "  an  offspring  of  vipers:  how  can 
he  speak  good  things,  when  he  is  evil,  and  when  his  mouth  speaketh 
out  of  the  abundance  of  his  evil  heart,"  Matt.  xvii.  34,  35,  and, "  hke 
an  Ethiopian,  who  cannot  change  his  skin,  and  a  leopard,  who  can- 
not change  his  spots,  so  the  sinner  who  is  accustomed  to  do  evil, 
'lannot  do  good,"  Jer.  xiii.  23.    <'  He  is  hard,  his  neck  ia  an  iron 


ro      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

sinew,  and  his  brow  brass,"  Isaiah  xlviii.  4.   So  immovable  is  he  :; 
what  then  can  he  do  of  himself? 

3.  The  corruption  of  the  smner  hath  taken  entire  possession  of 
iiim  :  he  is  altogether  "  flesh,"  John  iii.  3.  "  In  which  there  dwelleth 
no  good  thing,"  Rom»  >ii.  l«.  "  His  mind  is  fleshly,"  Coll.  ii.  18.  It 
is  not  only  "  darkened,"  Eph.  iv.  18.  but  *'  darkness"  itself,  Eph.  v. 
8.  *'  It  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  :  they  are  fool- 
ishness to  it,  neither  can  it  know  them,"  I  Cor.  ii-  14.    "  The  con- 
science of  the  sinner  is  also  evil,"  Heb.  x.  22.  *^  Deceitful  above  all 
things  and  desperately  wicked,"  Jer.  xvii.  9.  "  defiled,"   Titus  i.  IS, 
and  it  hath  '«  dead  works,"  Heb.  ix.  14.    The  will  is  wholly  corrupt, 
it  is  "  a  will  of  the  flesh,"  Eph.  ii.  5.  It  suggesteth  every  abomina- 
tion, as  "  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  foriaications,  thefts,  false 
witnesses,  blasphemies,"  Matt.  xv.  19.    It  rebels  against  God  ;  "  re- 
sists his  holy  bpirit,"  Acts  vii.   51.     It  pursues  after  iniquity,  and 
delights  therein,  Prov-  ii  14.     The  greedy  desire  of  the  sinner  can- 
not be  bridled,  but  is  like  a  furious  horse  ;  it  is  eat^er  and  pants  like 
insatiable  dogs  only  after  the  things  that  are  visible,  apd  that  are 
abominable,  Isaiah  Ivi.  11.  12.     Doth  any  one  endeavour  to  restrain 
it,  It  becomes  more  eager  and  vehement.  "  Sin  takes  occasion  by  the 
commandment,  and  works  all   manner  of  concupiscence"  in  man, 
Rom.  vii.  8,   and  all  his  motions  are  crooked  and  perverse,  he  is 
"  disobedient,  deceived-  serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  living  in 
malice  and  envy,  &c    Titus  iii   3.  Yea,  the  whole  body,  and  all  the 
members  of  it  are  "  instruments  of  unrighteousness,  servants  of  un- 
cleanness  and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"  Rom.  vi.  18,  19.  "  The  eyes 
have  their  lust,"  1  John  ii.  16.  Behold  the  abomination  of  the  tongue, 
^^it  is  a  world  of  iniquity,"  James  iii.  6,  7,  8.  The  ears  are  uncir- 
cumcised  and  heavy,  they  cannot  hear,"  Jer.  vi.  10.  Matt.  xiii.  15. 
"  The  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre,  the  tongue  useth  deceit,  the  poi- 
son of  asps  is  under  the  lips,  the  mouth  is  fuU  of  cursing  and  bitter- 
ness, and  the  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood,"   Bom.  iii.    15,  14,  15. 
How  can  such  a  disordered  creature  cither  conceive,  desire  or  do 
aught  that  is  good,  when  all  that  is  in  him  is  corrupt  ? 

4.  This  corruption  is  natural  to  man,  and  is  become  proper  t© 
him  by  his  birth  :  "  The  imaginations  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart 
are  only  evil  continually  from  his  youth,"  Gen.  vi.  5.  viii.  21.  Sin 
cleaves  to  him  most  intimately,  defiles  and  poisons  all  the  good  that 
he  endeavours  to  do  :  «  nothing  is  pure  to  him,"  Titus  i.  15.  "  His 
sacrifice  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  Prov.  xv.  8.  Sin  is  become 
necessary  to  the  sinner,  on  accounfof  his  sinful  nature :  he  cannot, 
yea,  he  will  not  do  aught  but  »in,  Rom.  viii.  f.  What  ability;  can  hr 
then  have  to  do  th?.t  which  is  irood  ^ 


n 

5.  The  sinner  must  be  regenerated,  "whereby  he  is  renewed  after 
the  image  of  God  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the  seed  of  the  word, 
and  obtains  a  new  divine  light  and  life,  the  power  of  sin  is  broken  in 
him,  and  he  thus  receives  a  new  ability  to  do  the  will  of  God."  See 
Titus  iii.  5.  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  Eph.  ii.  5,  10.  Jer.  xxxi.  33,  34.  xxxii.  40. 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27.  It  will  not  be  proper  to  say  more  of  regenera- 
tion here,  for  we  have  introduced  it  only  to  explain  the  misery  and 
inability  of  man.  Must  the  sinner  be  reg^enerated,  as  Jesus  sailh, 
John  ill,  3,  5,  he  is  then,  without  regeneration,  incapable  of  doing 
good  ;  for  he  should  not  otherwise  have  need  of  it.  Regeneration 
fumisheth  him  with  new  powers,  which  would  not  be  necessary,  if 
he  had  them  before  regeneration.  The  sinner  would  also  be  able  to 
regenerate  himself,  for  regeneration  is  the  principle  of  every  good, 
that  is  acceptable  to  God  ;  but  man  cannot  effect  his  regeneration  : 
for  regeneration  is  a  "  renewing  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Titus  iii.  5. 
•'  a  new  creation,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Eph.  ii.  10,  "  a  resurrection  from  the 
dead,"  Eph.  ii.  5.  6,  "a  taking  away  the  stony  heart,  and  givinc^  an 
heart  of  flesh,"  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  and  ''  a  drawing,"  John  vi.  44.  Coll. 
i.  13. 

n.  The  creature,  though  ever  so  corrupt,  will  through  his  pride 
not  know  it,  will  not  see  his  abominableness,  nor  be  ashamed  of  it ; 
but  seeks  every  cloak  of  shame,  and  saith  therefore  by  the  mouth  of 
our  adversaries,  that  "  God  would  do  injustice  to  man,  if  he  required 
of  him  in  his  law,  that  which  he  could  not  perform."  The  adver- 
saries of  the  light  think  that  God  ought  to  establish  a  new  covenant 
with  the  sinner,  and  grant  him  a  sufficient  grace,  that  he  may  be 
able  to  mcline  his  will  to  keep  the  law  of  God,  before  he  requires  aught 
of  him  in  his  law.  (a)  But  this  mind  of  the  flesh  is  enmity  against 
God,  it  disputes  unrighteously  against  God's  right  with  respect  to 
man,  and  accuseth  him  falsely  of  iniquity.  For  God's  right  is  not 
founded  upon  man's  ability,  but  upon  his  own  incomparable  glory 
and  absolute  sovereignty  over  all ;  '<  For-asmuch  as  there  is  none 
like  unto  the  Lord,  therefore  he  is  great,  and  his  name  is  great  in 
might,  and  therefore  it  appertaineth  to  him  that  men  should  fear 
him,"  Jer.  x.  6,  7.  Man  could  not  deprive  him  of  that  right  by  his 
sinful  inability  ;  for  if  he  could,  he  would  be  able  by  his  sin  to  dis- 
solve his  obligation  to  obey  God,  to  set  himself  free  fiom  his  Maker, 
and  to  excuse  his  impenitent  and  obstinate  rebellion,  (b)  God  doth 
not  demand  in  his  law  of  the  impotent  sinner  that  which  is  absolute- 
ly and  always  impossible  for  him  ;  for  instance,  that  he  should  "  mea- 
sure the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  mete  out  the  heavens 
with  a  span,"  Sec.  Isaiah  xl.  12.     This  would  be  ion  just,  since  God 


72      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

hath  not  given  him  power  to  do  it ;  but  God  demands  in  his  law  of 
the  sinner  that  which  was  once  possible  for  him,  and  for  which  he 
gave  him  an  abiHty,  when  he  created  him  after  his  imaeje  :  "  God 
made  man  capable  of  performing  it,"  saith  the  instructor.  This  hath 
been  shown  before  ;  now  God  may  surely  demand  that  of  man  with 
usury,  which  he  had  given  him,  that  he  might  gain  by  it  for  hiS 
Lord.  See  Matt.  xxiv.  19,  30.  (c)  Is  the  sinner  now  unable,  he  is 
himself  the  cause  of  it :  *'  Man  by  the  instigation  of  the  devil,  and 
his  own  wilful  disobedience,  deprived  himself  and  all  his  posterity  of 
those  divine  gifts."  It  is  not  therefore  unrighteous  in  God  to  de- 
mand of  the  waster  of  his  gifts  that  which  through  his  own  default 
he  can  now  neither  give  nor  do.  "  The  master  justly  demands  of  his 
servant  the  ten  thousand  talents,  which  he  oweth  him,  although  he 
hath  not  wherewith  to  pay,"  Matt,  xviii.  24,  25.  See  also  Luke 
xvi.   1,  2. 

It  is  not  proper  to  object  here,  that  it  was  sinful  in  man  to  deprive 
himself  of  that  gift,  even  the  image  of  God,  and  an  ability  to  do  good, 
but  that  God  deprived  him  of  it  as  a  punishment :  for  God  deprived 
him  of  it  on  account  of  his  sin,  in  order  to  punish  him,  and  man  de- 
prived himself  of  it,  because  he  deserved  such  a  punishment  by  his 
bin,  and  also  actually  defaced  and  destroyed  the  image  of  God  im 
himself  by  his  sin.  It  happens  in  other  cases,  as  well  as  in  this,  that 
a  man's  sin  is  also  a  punishment  inflicted  by  God,  who  often  punish- 
eth  one  sin  with  another,  Rom.  i.  21 — 28. 

Doth  the  instructor  say,  that  man  deprived  himself  of  those  gifts 
"•  by  his  wilful  disobedience,"  we  need  not  say  instead  of  this  by 
"his  voluntary  apostacy,"  in  order  to  gratify  the  Remonstrants; 
aeeing  Paul  calls  Adam's  sin  "  his  disobedience."  Was  it  not  suffi- 
ciently great  ?  was  it  not  committed  without  necessity  ?  had  man 
need  of  aught,  that  he  was  forced  to  eat  of  the  forbidden  tree  ?  did 
he  not  commit  that  sin  against  his  better  knowledge  ?  Eve  certainly 
knew  that  God  had  forbidden  her  to  eat  of  that  tree.  Gen.  iii.  3, 
Why  should  we  not  then  call  that  sin,  wilful  disobedience  ? 

God,  say  they,  did  not  give  Adam  power  to  believe  in  Christ,  and 
bo  he  could  not  deprive  himself  and  his  posterity  of  that  gift ;  there- 
fore God  cannot  demand  faith  in  Christ  of  the  sinner,  unless  he  give 
liim  power  to  exercise  that  faith.  But  this  is  a  vain  objection  :  for 
Adam  was  able  to  believe  all  that  God  declared  and  revealed  to  him : 
but  in^ismuch  as  the  Son  of  God  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  Adam, 
'as  Tvltdiator  and  Saviour,  before  the  fall,  and  was  therefore  not  re- 
vealed to  him  as  such,  we  may  therefore  say,  that  Adam  had  ne 
vevclaiion  nor  opportunity  to  believe  in  Christ,  but  not  that  he  had 


Iir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  8.      

no  power  to  believe  in  him.  Our  adversaries,  not  satisfied  yet,  con- 
ceive that  it  would  not  become  God,  and  that  it  would  not  be  wise  in 
him  to  demand  of  man  that  which  he  cannot  perform,  because  it 
Would  be  to  no  purpose. 

But  although  the  sinner  be  ever  so  impotent,  God's  demand  in  his 
law  is  not  to  no  purpose  :  the  forty  fourth  Lords  day  will  inform  us 
of  what  service  the  strict  preaching  of  the  law  is  to  the  regenerate, 
although  they  cannot  keep  the  law  perfectly.  But  we  speak  here  of 
unregenerate  sinners,  who  are  either  elect  sinners,  or  reprobates. 
God's  demand  in  his  law  is  not  to  no  purpose  with  respect  to  repro- 
bates, inasmuch  as  that  demand  restrains  them  from  enormous  out- 
breakings  in  wickedness,  whicii  v.ouid  destroy  human  society,  (iod's 
demand  serves  also  to  condemn  them,  and  teach  them  to  justify  God, 
when  he  destroys  them.  God's  demand  would  appear  to  be  to  no 
purpose,  if  he  could  not  indemnify  himself  upon  them  :  but  God 
can  now  punish  them  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice,  according  to 
his  demand,  enforced  by  threatenings :  as  <'  the  lord  demanded  pay- 
ment of  his  servant,  who  owed  him  ten  thousand  talents  :  and  v/iien 
he  had  nothing  wherewith  to  pay,  his  lord  commanded  him  to  be 
sold,  with  his  wife  and  children  and  all  that  he  had,  and  payment  to 
be  made,"  Matt,  xviii.  24,  25.  With  regard  to  the  elect,  the  de- 
mand of  God  serves  to  convince  them,  and  drive  them  to  the  Media- 
tor, that  they  may  be  regenerated  and  converted  ;  "  For  Christ  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth,'* 
Rom.  X.  4.  Therefore  God  accompanieth  his  demand  in  the  law 
with  the  offer  and  promise  of  the  gospel,  which  is  "  the  power  of 
God  to  salvation,"  Rom,  i.  16,  yea,  also  with  his  Spirit,  John  xvi. 
8—11  1  Thess.  i.  5.  Dead  Lazarus  was  unable  to  arise  from  the 
dead,  but  the  command  of  Christ  was  not  therefore  to  no  pu'^pose, 
since  his  calling  v/ith  a  loud  voice  was  the  mean  of  raising  Lazarus 
from  the  dead,  v/hen  he  added  his  lifegiving  power  to  his  voice,  John 
xi.  41,  42,  43,  44. 

The  tolal  inability  of  the  sinner  to  do  good  doth  not  however  de- 
stroy the  freedom  of  his  will.  The  freedom  of  the  will  is  essential 
to  man,  and  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  will,  therefore  he  cannot 
lose  his  freedom,  unless  he  also  lose  his  humanity  :  but  he  hath  by 
sin  lost  the  virtuousness  and  holiness  of  his  v/iil ;  and  hence  he  wills 
nothing  but  evil,  and  is  unable  to  will  that  which  is  good.  Our  ad- 
versaries hold  that  the  freedom  of  the  will  consists  in  indifference, 
or  an  ability  to  incline,  like  a  balance,  to  good  or  evil:  but  if  the 
freedom  of  the  will  consists  therein,  we  will  then  confess  that  the 
inability  of  the  sinner  destroys  the  freedom  of  his  will ;  for  the  vJiJ! 

O 


ri       THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

is  in  this  respect  a  slave,  "  a  servant  of  sin,"  and  niiust  "  be  made 
fiee,"  Jolm  viii.  3  4,  3ft.  But  the  freedom  of  the  will  consists  not  in 
indifference;  for  it  is  certain,  that  the  will  cannot  will  an^^ht,  but 
whut  the  understanding^  representeth  to  it  as  good,  and  that  Avhich 
is  represented  to  it  by  the  understanding:  as  evil,  it  cannot  embrace. 
Since  now  the  understanding  is  darkened,  and  ^*  calls  evil  erood,  and 
good  evil,"  Isaiah  v.  20,  how  can  the  will  then  be  indifferent,  and 
'desire  the  good,  as  wjli  us  t'le  evil  ?  :;od,  t'.e  angels  ;  nd  ulorified 
men  'lave  a  perfect  free  \vill,  and  yet  they  are  not  indifferent,  nor 
can  they  wiii  evil  as  well  as  good  :  but  the  freedom  of  the  will  con- 
sists in  being  able  to  will  something  with  inclination  and  pleasure,  in 
a  r^- jsonable  manner,  after  a  previous  consideration,  and  without 
constraint;  and  in  (his  manner  the  sinner  wills  evil  freely,  and  not 
good  :  *'-  ile  hath  pleasure  in  unrighttousness,"  2  Thess  ii.  12. 
Have  not  tiie  devils  a  free  will  ?  do  they  not  deli^j^ht  in  every  kind 
of  wickedness  ?  surely  they  do  :  and  they  art  siili  unable  to  do  good. 
vSee  John  viii.  44,  Free  will  consists  not  therefore  in  indifference, 
but  in  doing  something  with  inclination  and  pleasure;  and  so  it  is 
not  d;.-stroyed  by  an  inabilty  to  do  good. 

Is  man  then  like  a  stock  or  a  stone,  with  respect  to  that  which  is 
good  ?  thus  ask  our  adversaries.  We  answer  t'  at  the  dinner,  though 
Wfiolly  un.ble  to  do  good,  is  not  so  unfit  and  incapuble  of  being  con- 
verted and  regenerated  as  a  stock  or  stone  •  for  as  a  stock  or  stone 
are  wholly  incapable  of  forming  an  image  of  themselves,  and  are 
nevertheless  more  capa!.)Ie  of  being  formed  into  an  image  tlian  water, 
so  impotent  man  is  more  capable  of  being  renewed  after  the  image 
of  God,  of  being  converted  and  regenerated,  than  a  stock  or  a  stone  ; 
as  dead  Lazarus  >  as  more  capable  and  fit  to  be  raised  to  life  by  the 
voice  of  the  Saviour,  than  the  grave-stone,  John  xi.  43,  44.  The 
smner,  t'.ough  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  retai  s  still  his  natural 
powers  of  unde'-standing  and  will,  which  are  capable  of  being  endued 
witn  light  b\v\  iifc  ;  oe  hath  also  certam  remains  of  God's  image, 
(aLhough  he  hatj  lost  the  holy  and  v.rtuous  part  of  it)  and  he  hath 
tlius  also  a  ceitam  obscure  knowledge  of  (^od  and  his  law,  Rom.  i. 
Si.  ii.  14,  15,  an.l  this  renders  iiim  fit  to  be  influenced  to  con- 
version. Paul  endeavoured  to  convince  the  Athenians  by  their  natu- 
ral knowiedge  and  bcrvicc  of  Ggd,  Acts  xvii.  23—29. 


1;W.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  9.         75 


APPLICATION. 

The  doctrine  of  human  inability  remnlns  then  irrefia9;able.  And 
therefore  those  do  exceedingly  ill,  wiio  say  that  man  retains  yet  in 
his  fallen  condition  an  ability  to  p.-eserve  himself  continually  from 
erroufs.  This  according  to  our  opinion  cannot  and  ought  not  to  be 
said  :  it  is  indeed  contrary  to  tlie  word  of  God,  which  saith  thai 
« the  curiud  mind  is  enmitv  against  God,"  Rom.  "viii.  7,  and  that 
*'  we  are  not  suilkient  of  ourselves,  to  think  any  thing  as  of  our- 
selves," 2  Cor.  iii.  5.  This  assertion  seems  also  to  contradict  the 
fourteenth  article  of  our  Netherland  confession,  which  saith  that, 
"  the  light  which  is  in  us  is  changed  into  darkness,"  &c.  yea,  it  is 
»ieeting  oiu  adversaries  half  way. 

The  instructor  saith  "  that  we  are  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any 
good,  and  incUned  to  all  wickedness,  except  we  be  rejjenerated  by 
the  Spirit  oi  God."  Is  the  regenerated  mim  then  perfectly  restored, 
and  hath  he  a  perfect  ability  to  do  that  which  is  good  ?  no,  but  he  is 
still  m  a  great  measure  unable,  as  Jesus  and  Paul  say,  John  vi.  5. 
2  Cor.  iii.  5.  1  his  will  also  be  s!iown  more  fully  on  the  forty  fourth 
Lord's  divy.  There  is  nevertheless  a  great  difference  between  the 
inability  of  a  regenerate,  and  an  unregenerate  man.  For  (a)  the 
Haiural  man  is  altogether  dead  in  sins,  and  must  be  made  alive,  if  he 
shall  be  capable  of  receiving  tlie  inHuence  of  God,  in  order  to  per- 
for  n  living  actions :  but  tlie  regenerate  hath  only  need  that  his 
h  .bitaal  life  should  be  awakened,  enkindled  and  pronioted  by  the  in- 
fluence of  ood  in  order  that  he  may  do  thxt  which  is  pleasing  to 
God.  (b)  A  reg--nerate  man  is  workingly  and  actively  employed 
with  and  on  account  of  the  mflucnce  of  God  in  endeavouring  *o  do 
thai  which  is  good  :  ''  He  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  strength- 
ening him,"  Philip,  iv.  13,  and  he  is  thus  himself  a  secondary  cause 
of  his  good  actions  :  but  an  unregenerate  man  is  altogether  passive 
in  receiving  the  grace  ol  regeneration  and  conversion,  as  a  dead  man, 
who  doth  not  co-operate  to  his  resurrection,  (c)  A  believer  enjoys 
always  a  greater  or  less  influence  of  divine  grace,  and  doth  good  in 
X^roportion  to  it :  ''  The  Lord  doth  not  turn  away  from  him  to  do 
him  good,  but  puts  his  fear  into  his  heart,  that  he  may  not  depart 
from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  But  the  unregenerate  is  wholly  left  to 
himself,  and  is  without  the  influence  of  divine  grace,"  like  a  branch, 
wiiich  is  separated  from  the  vine,  and  is  withered,"  Jo:  n  xv.  6. 

What  think  ye  now,  hearers  ?  are  ye  also  so   incapable  of  doing 
gOQdj  and  incline.-!  to  all  wickedness  ?  do  ye  eee  it  experimemallf 


76      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

and  with  concern  in  yourselves  ?  or  are  ye  regenerated  by  the  Spirit 
of  God  ?  have  ye  learned  your  inability  thereby,  and  hath  your  soul 
obtained  a  desire  and  a  power  to  conduct  acceptably  to  God  ?  Surely 
ye  have  not. 

1.  Who  are  indifferent  and  unconcerned,  whether  ye  must,  or  can 
do  good,  and  whether  ye  must  be  regenerated.  Your  thoughts  ex- 
tend not  so  far,  ye  think  that  ye  must  provide  for  something  else, 
even  youi  bodily  welfare,  as  if  ye  had  nothing  to  do  with  God,  and 
were  not  under  any  obUgations  to  him.  "  Ye  slide  back,  like  a  back- 
sliding heifer,"  Hosea,  iv.  1 6. 

2.  Nor  ye  neither,  who  with  *='  Herod  do  many  things,"  Mark  vi. 
20,  and  with  the  Jews  "  have  a  zeal  for  God,"  Rom.  x.  2.  But  are 
these  good  things  better  than  heathenish,  or  Socinian,  civil  and  ex= 
ternally  rehgious  virtues,  consisting  in  a  forsaking  of  evil,  and  doing 
good  externally,  without  any  chancre  or  regeneration  of  the  heart? 
things  which  do  not  accompany  salvation,  which  men  can  do  from  a 
natural  conscience,  and  by  common  grace,  like  Abimelech,  Gen, 
XX.  4,  5,  6.  But  ye  do  not  perform  them  from  a  principle  of  the 
life  of  regeneration,  nor  from  an  union  of  your  souls  v/ith  Jesus,  as 
the  true  vine :  "  to  be  dead  to  yourselves,  and  to  live  in  God  with 
Christ  is  hidden  from  you,"  Coll.  iii.  3.  If  ye  knew  this,  and  en- 
deavoured to  practise  it,  ye  would  see  experimentally  your  inability 
to  do  good,  and  your  inclination  to  all  wickedness,  and  would  be 
concerned. 

3.  And  ye  do  not  know  your  inability,  and  are  not  regenerated, 
who,  when  ye  have  once  discovered  your  duty,  and  are  convinced  of 
your  abominable  conduct,  defer  your  conversion  until  this  or  that 
opportunity,  and  so  think  that  ye  are  able  to  convert  yourselves  at 
any  time.  Or  if  ye  do  not  defer  your  conversion,  ye  are  however  not 
so  convinced  of  your  inability,  that  ye  are  concerned  ;  for  ye  are 
presently  ready  to  purpose  and  promise  idly  that  ye  will  not  com- 
mit this  vY  that  sin  any  more,  and  that  ye  will  now  live  better  lives 
than  heretofore,  which  commonly  ends  in  a  certain  outward  morality, 
or  not  even  in  that,  as  Isriel  promised  inconsiderately,  that  "what- 
soever the  Lord  had  spoken  they  would  do,"  Exod.  xix.  8.  xxiv.  3. 
But  what  became  of  their  promise  ?  they  violated  it  in  a  shameful 
manner,  when  they  made  a  molten  calf  for  themselves,  and  wor- 
shipped it,  Exod.  xxxii. 

4.  Do  ye  say,  we  know  that  we  cannot  do  any  good  of  ourselves, 
but  only  by  the  grace  of  Ciod  ?  Do  ye  then  do  all  things,  not  of 
yourselves,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  ?  or  doth  the  knowledge  of  our 
Inability,  of  regeneration,  and  doing  all  things  by  the  grace  of  God 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  9.        77 

consist  in  a  bare  understanding;  of  these  things,  or  in  empty  words  ? 
hath  not  the  grace  of  God  only  the  name,  and  your  natural  endeav- 
ours the  deed  ?  And  how  do  ye  know  this  ?  only  from  hearsay  ? 
Ye  do  not  then  know  your  inability,  as  ye  ought,  to  your  salvation. 
"The  Spirit  of  God  alone  conAinceth  the  world  of  sin,"  and  of  ina- 
bility, by  means  of  the  word,  John  xvi.  8.  He  causeth  a  person  to 
see  the  strength  of  his  corruption,  and  his  wicked  inclinations,  he 
teaches  him  the  spuntuality  of  the  law,  and  he  sets  him  to  work,  and 
so  he  sees  his  frequent  deviations  from  his  duty,  and  consequently 
his  mability  also  with  concern  and  grief,  and  he  cries  for  help,  iiee 
this  in  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  Have  ye  not  learned  your  inability  in  this 
manner,  ye  do  not  then  know  it  as  ye  ought,  and  your  knowledge  of 
your  misery  doth  not  yet  conduce  to  your  deliverance. 

5.  Perhaps  one  or  another  of  you  will  say,  I  see  indeed,  and  that 
experimentally,  that  I  have  no  strength ;  for  I  have  indeed  purposed 
in  my  mind  to  forsake  this  and  that  sin,  and  lead  a  better  life,  but  I 
have  learned  by  the  event  that  I  am  unable  to  accomplish  my  pur- 
pose :  but  what  effect  hath  such  a  discovery  upon  you  ?  doth  it  pro- 
duce distress  of  raind,  and  an  earnest  desire  to  be  regenerated  ?  it 
doth  not  in  many  :  but  it  renders  them  careless,  they  seek  to  excuse 
themselves  of  doing  tlieir  duty,  and  think,  if  God  do  not  grant  me 
his  grace,  how  can  I  help  it,  that  I  do  not  perform  that  which  is 
good  :  in  the  mean  while  they  do  inwardly  and  secretly  rejoice  that 
they  have  found  such  a  cloak  lor  their  shame,  and  they  indulge  their 
depravity :  and  when  they  are  exhorted  to  do  their  duty,  and  are 
reproved  on  account  of  their  sins,  they  think  or  say,  what  can  I  do, 
when  God  doth  not  give  me  what  he  commands  ?  and  so  with  oui* 
adversaries  they  accuse  God  of  "doing  them  injustice,  by  requiring 
of  them  what  they  cannot  perform,"  and  they  cry  out  with  the  Jews, 
"  If  our  transgressions  and  our  sins  be  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away 
in  them,  how  should  we  then  live  ?"  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10. 

Is  it  thus  with  you,  know  then  that  ye  are  still  under  the  broken 
covenant  of  works  :  and  therefore  the  whole  law,  and  the  curse  of  it 
are  against  you  :  tor  ye  have  done  nothing  hitherto  but  break  the 
law  by  sinning,  and  the  cur  ,e  is  denounced  against  him,  who  "  con= 
tinueth  not  in  all  things  that  the  law  commands,"  Gal-  iii.  10.  Ye 
have  yet  your  evil  nature,  which  is  "  wholly  incapable  of  doing  any 
good,  and  inclined  to  all  wickedness,"  ye  are  not  yet  "  born  again, 
and  cannot  therefore  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  John  iii.  5, 
And  how  shall  ye,  continuing  thus,  be  delivered  ?  for  ye  cannot  do 
aught  else  but  sin,  ye  cannot  regenerate  yourselves,  nor  pay  your 
debt,  nor  escape  from  the  hands  of  your  Judge. 


r8      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  COOt>. 

Are  ye  in  some  measure  concerned  about  your  salvation,  behold 
then  your  desperate  misery,  be  anxious,  cry  out,  ''  there  is  no  hope,** 
Isaiah  Ivii.  10,  and  ask  with  sohcitude,  "What  shall  we  do  to  be 
saved  ?"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30,  Abide  under  tlie  niinistration  of  tliei 
gospel,  if  it  may  please  God  to  beget  you  with  the  word  of  truth," 
J..n)es  i.  18,  and  cry  unto  God  that  he  would  exert  his  power  upon 
you,  to  convert  you,  like  the  church,  Lam.  v,  20.  '^  Turn  us  O  Lord, 
unto  thee,  and  we  shall  be  turned." 

liut,  believers,  who  have  been  regenerated  b)  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  favoured  by  the  free  grace  of  the  Lord  with  a  new  light  and 
life: 

1.  Consider  yourselves  as  obligated  to  obsu've  and  keep  al!  God's 
commandments,  and  to  be  a  praise  in  the  earth.  For  ye  are  net 
only  his  creatures,  connected  with  him  by  nature,  to  do  his  will,  but 
also  ''  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works, 
which  God  hath  before  ordained,  that  ye  should  walk  in  them,"  Ejjh* 
ii.  10.  Ye  have  the  beginnings  of  the  new  life,  new  powers,  and 
"  help  is  laid  for  you  upon  one  who  is  mighty,"  Psalm  Ixxxix.  19, 
"  and  ye  receive  of  his  fvdnebs,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16, 
Are  ye  still  subject  to  a  great  impotency,  as  well  as  to  other  corrup- 
tions, this  doth  not  discii  rge  you  from  your  duty  :  but  the  Lord  re- 
veals this  to  you,  not  to  discharge  you  from  your  duty,  but  that  he 
may  induce  you  to  depend  on  nim  and  his  power,  to  strengthen 
yourselves  in  him,  that  "  his  power  may  be  perfected  in  your  weak- 
ness," and  that  ye  may  thus  ''-  be  strong,  when  ye  are  weak,"  2  Core 
xii.  9,  10. 

2.  Beuare  that  ye  never  begin,  nor  endeavour  to  perform  your, 
duty  in  your  own  strength.  The  regenerate  often  act  in  this  manner, 
and  particularly  (a)  when  they  set  about  a  dut\ ,  which  tV.ey  judge  to 
be  necessary,  rashly,  with  might  and  main,  witliout  serious  considera- 
tion, and  without  humbly  looking  up  to  the  Lord  for  his  influence. 
(b)  V^'hen  they  expect  so  much  good  from  their  own  resolutions : 
they  have  a  great  desire  to  do  the  will  oF  God  in  all  things,  and  they 
measure  their  ability  by  tl-.eir  desire,  thcr.°fore  they  form  great  reso- 
lutions, and  they  are  confident  that  they  will  accomplish  those  reso- 
lutions ;  but  they  are  ashamed  of  the  event :  for  God  willing  to  ac- 
quaint them  with  themselves,  suffers  them  to  fall  iiAo  grievous  sins. 
See  this  in  Peter,  Matt,  xxvi  33,  34,  35.  xxvii.  69—75.  (c)  Then 
also,  when  they  endeavour  to  eft'ect,  and  to  force  themselves  into  a 
good  frame  by  their  natural  meditations,  by  their  elTorts  in  their 
own  strength,  and  their  bodily  exertions,  (d)  They  work  also  in 
their  own  strength,  when  they  endeavour  to  woik  above  their  st-at^. 


ttto  wit,  when  a  child  attempts  to  do  the  work  of  a  young  man,  or  of 
n  father  in  Christ.  He  sees  with  how  much  assurance,  light  purity, 
holiness  and  strength,  this  and  the  other  advanced  Christian  works, 
and  he  hath  a  mind  to  do  the  same  after  him ;  but  he  doth  not  suc- 
ceed, It  is  above  the  power,  and  beyond  the  attainment  of  a  child, 
(d)  \lso  w-icn  they  work  above  their  frame.  We  are  sometimes 
in  a  dark  and  in  a  dull  frame,  and  far  from  the  Lord  :  but  if  we  will 
do  our  duly  then  in  such  a  clear,  lively  and  hearty  manner,  as  when 
we  are  in  the  licfbt,  and  enlivened,  and  near  to  God,  we  go  in  our 
Own  might,  and  not  "  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God,"  Psalm  Ixxi. 
16  (f)  Once  more,  we  work  in  our  own  strength,  when  we  become 
fretful  and  are  discouraged,  because  we  have  not  done  our  duty  as 
we  wished  and  'loped  to  t'o  it,  we  show  by  this  conduct  that  we  look- 
ed for  much  good  from  our  own  exertions  :  whereas  whatever  we 
do  but  sin,  we  do  only  by  the  free  grace  of  God. 

The  Christian,  we  say,  ought  to  beware  of  working  in  his  own 
strength  :  he  cannot  of  himself  do  aught  that  is  pleasing  to  God  ; 
**  Not  by  miglit  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,"  Zech.  iv.  6.  Works  done  in  our  own  strength  are  strav  ge 
fire,  and  they  will  exceedingly  darken,  perplex  and  disturb  the  soul. 

3.  Learn  by  all  means  to  perform  your  duty  in  a  manner  that  is 
'suitable  to  your  state  and  frame.  By  a  state  we  must  understand 
that  measure  of  advancement  in  the  spiritual  life,  vvhich  one  hath 
above  another.  One  is  a  child,  and  another  is  a  youth  and  a  man  in 
Christ,  according  to  1  John  ii.  12,  13,  14.  A  child  hath  not  that 
steadfast  assurance  ot  the  love  of  God,  which  a  jouth  and  a  man 
have.  A  youth  and  a  man  are  more  intent  upon  a  knowledge  of 
<Uvine  mysteries,  that  they  may  govern  themselves  wisely,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  word  of  God  in  all  their  conversation,  and  a  child  is 
more  taken  with  pleasant  and  a5;reeable  feelings,  and  delightful  ex- 
periences of  grace.  A  youth  and  a  man  pursue  holiness  more,  and 
more  singly  and  steadfastly  than  a  child,  who  is  chiefly  intent  upon 
assurance  and  comfort.  A  youth  and  a  man  are  more  workingly 
and  actively  engaged  in  their  pious  exercises,  but  a  child  is  more 
passively,  and  looks  out  only  for  immediate  influences. 

A  person  ought  to  be  active  in  his  holy  ex-rcises  in  proportion  to 
his  advancement  in  his  state,  that  he  may  not  by  exerting  himself 
above  his  ability,  fatigue  himself  too  much,  and  overweary  himself: 
«  as  the  man  is,  so  is  his  strength,"  Judges  viii.  21.  "  Whereto  we 
have  already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,"  Philip,  iii.  16. 

By  a  frame  we  understand  that  particular  situation  and  disposition 
•f  mind,  whereby  a  Christian  is  one  while  in  darkness,  and  another 


BO      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

while  in  the  light,  one  while  dull  and  another  lively,  one  \vhile  sor- 
rowtiil  and  another  joyful.  When  a  Christian  is  in  darkness,  when 
he  IS  (lull  and  sorrowful,  he  cannot  work  as  he  can,  when  he  is  in 
tlie  light,  when  he  is  lively,  and  wheH  he  rejoiceth,  or  he  will  over- 
work and  fatigue  Iiimself  to  no  purpose.  If  he*>hall  then  work  ac- 
cording to  his  ability,  he  must  observe  and  inquire  where,  and  in 
what  manner  God  wotketh  in  him  ;  say  not,  when  I  am  barren,  dark, 
dull  and  sor  owful,  the  Lord  doth  not  then  work  in  me,  and  I  can- 
not then  effect  any  thin'.i: :  for  in  whatsoever  evil  frame  the  soul  may 
be,  the  i  ord  doth  still  work  in  her  in  one  way  or  another;  for  "the 
Spirit  iibideth  in  and  with  you  for  ever,"  John  xiv.  16.  And  he  is 
ttever  mactive  in  you.  When  the  mind  is  in  an  evil  frame,  we  see 
it  with  more  or  less  compunction,  and  this  proceeds  from  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  couvinceth  of  sins.  We  ought  to  begin  our  work  here 
by  looking  into  our  sinful  frame,  which  would  excite  in  us  shame 
and  sorrow,  would  cause  us  to  inhale  the  influence  of  "  the  north 
and  south  wind"  of  the  Spirit,  Song  iv.  16,  and  in  all  our  exercises 
'^  run  after  the  Lord,  when  he  draweth"  us.  Song  i.  4. 

4.  Stir  lip  the  divine  gift  of  regeneration,  "  which  is  in  you,"  2 
Tim.  i  6,  that  it  may  mcrease,  be  improved  and  confirmed  in  you  ; 
we  must  "  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  according  to  2  Peter  iii.  18,  and  we  must  "be 
strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,"  Eph.  vi.  10. 
Ttierefore  abide  under  the  dispensation  of  the  means  of  grace,  for 
they  are  the  nourishment  of  our  spiritual  life  :  As  newborn  babes 
desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby,"  1 
Peter  ii.  2.  Converse  much  with  the  most  zealous  and  lively  of  the 
godly  :  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,"  saith  the 
wisest  of  kings,  Prov.  xiii.  30,  and  "  iron  sharpcneth  iron  :  so  a  man 
sharpcMieth  tiie  countenance  of  his  friend,"  Prov,  xxvii.  17.  When 
we  observe  our  neigl. hour's  improvement  in  wisdom,  his  weaned- 
ntss  from  the  world,  his  heavenly-mindeilness  and  zealousness  in 
that  which  is  good,  wc  are  then  scizt^d  with  a  holy  emulation  to  imi- 
tate his  noble  example,  as  "the  zeal  of  the  Corinthians  provoked 
very  many,"  2  Cor.  ix.  2.  Engage  also  much  m  acts  of  communion 
with  God  :  "  Acqu  int  now  youi'selves  with  him,  and  be  at  peace  ' 
thereby  ti:ood  shall  come  unto  you,"  Job  xxii.  21.  Yea,  stir  up  your- 
selves daily,  "  lift  up  your  hearts  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  with 
Je!\osbaphat  2  Chron.  xvii.  6.  lnduk:e  not  any  manner  of  slackness, 
looking  dili'^eiuly,  lest  any  mm  fail  of  tie  grace  of  God,"  Heb.  xii. 
15.  Are  yt  sometimes  seized  wiil»  spiritual  bluttgishness  and  drowsi- 
ness, like  the  spouse,  Song  v.  2,   3,  do  not  nourish  it,  but  rouse. 


III.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q-  8.      

bestir  yourselves,  and  "  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  the 
feeble  knees,  and  make  straight  path    for  your  teet,"  8cc.  Heb.  xii. 
12,  13,  14o     Look  up  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  "who  is  become  all  things 
to  you,  yea,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption," 
Coll.  iii.    11-  I  Cor.  i.  30.     Go  to  him,  open  your  hearts  to  him. 
employ  your  faith,  that  it  may  "  receive"  of  all  his  influences,  and 
♦'  grace  for  -race  of  his  fulness,"  John  i.   16,  and  seek  through  the 
conduits  of  the  promises ;  yea,  let  your  operative  faith  employ  him, 
and  improve  him  with  respect  to   his  office,  in  order  to  live  by  him 
and  by  his  power,  like  Paul,  who  saith,"  I  am  crucified  with  Christ ; 
and  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me :  and  the  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  fuith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me,"  Gal.  ii.  20.    We  must  enter  into  the 
strictest  union  with  him,  if  we  will  perform  aught  that  is  acceptable 
to  God :  "  I  am   the  vine,"  saith  he,   John  xv.   5.  "  and  ye  are  the 
branches  :  he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth 
forth   much  fruit:  £;r  without   ine   ye  can  do  nothing."     In  every 
condition  wait  for  the  inbreathings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  conduct 
according  to  it,  like  the  apostles,  who  being  "  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  spake  as  the  Spirit  gave  tliem  utterance,"  Acts  ii.  4.     And 
therefore  turn  the  sails  of  your  understanding  and  will  toward  him 
with  hearty  desires,  sighings  and  prayers,  and  catch  tlie  wind  of  his 
grace,  that  it  may  drive  you  on  with  a  full  gale  in  all  your  exercises, 
like  "  Jesus,  who  returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  unto  Galilee,** 
Luke  iv.  U. 

5.  Are  ye  regenerated,  behold  your  happiness  and  salvation.  "  Ye 
who  were  dead,  have  been  made  alive,  are  risen  with  Christ,  and  set 
with  him  in  heavenly  places,"  Eph.  ii.  5,  6.  Give  him  also  the 
honour  of  it :  "  he  hath  formed  you,  that  ye  should  show  forth  his 
praise,"  Isaiah  xliii.  21.  "Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  Peter  'who  according  to  liis  great  mercy 
hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope,"  1  Peter  i.  3.  "  Is  it  given 
you  to  grow  in  the  courts  of  our  God,  to  be  fat  and  flourishing  in 
old  age,  it  is  that  ye  may  show  that  the  Lord  is  upright,"  Psalm 
xcii.  13 — 16.  Have  ye  the  power  and  the  ability  to  perform  any 
good  work,  "  do  not  say  in  your  heart,  My  strength  and  the  might 
of  my  hand  hath  gotten  me  tiiis  power:  but  ye  shall  remember  the 
Lord  your  God  ;  for  it  is  he  that  giveth  you  power,"  Dent.  viii.  17, 
18.  "  For  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another  ?  and  what  hast 
thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ?  now  if  thou  didst  receive  it,  why 
dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it  ?"  I  Cor.  iv.  7.  "  I 
have  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all :  vet  not  I,  but  the  grace 

P 


82      THE  INABILITY  OF  THE  SINNER  TO  DO  GOOD. 

of  God,  which  was  with  me,"  saith  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  10.  Whatever 
ye  have,  bring  it  to  the  source  from  which  it  hatii  flowed  to  you, 
like  Dai/ id,  who  considered  his  own,  and  his  people's  wilHngness  to 
contribute  abundantly  for  the  building  of  the  temple,  as  wrought  in 
thera  by  lh«  i^^ord,  and  glorified  the  Lord  on  account  of  it,  saying, 
1  Chron.  xxix.  14.  "  V^' ho  am  I,  and  what  is  my  people,  that  we 
should  be  able  to  offer  so  willingly  after  this  sort  ?  for  all  things  come 
of  thee,  and  of  thine  own  have  wc  given  thee." 

Doth  it  afflict  you,  that  there  remains  so  great  a  force,  and  often 
such  an  overbearing  power  of  corruption  in  you,  '•  sin  shall  neveithe- 
less  not  have  dominion  over  you  ;  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace,"  Rom.  vi.  1 4.  Doth  it  grieve  you,  that  ye  have  so 
little  strength  to  walk  m  a  manner,  that  is  acceptable  to  God,  remem- 
ber that  ye  have  to  do  with  a  most  gracious  Lord,  who  accepteth  of 
our  sincere  endeavours  ;  "  For  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is 
accepted  according  to  what  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  what 
he  hath  not,"  2  Cor,  viii,  12.  Your  God,  who  hath  given  you  the 
life  of  regeneration,  and  "  hath  begun  the  good  work  in  you,  will 
perform  it,  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,"  Philip,  i.  6,  "  and  he  will 
fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work  of  faith 
with  power  ;  that  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glori- 
fied in  you,  and  ye  in  him,  according  to  the  grace  of  our  God,  and 
the  LiOrd  Jesus  Christ,"  2  Thess.  i.  1 1,  12.  He  will  waft  your  souls 
on  by  his  power,  until  he  shall  bring  them  to  those  regions,  where 
no  sin,  nor  any  inclination  to  iniquity  shall  be  found,  and  where  ye 
shall  with  perfect  ability  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth. 
How  "  blessed  is  the  man,  whose  strength  is  in  God,  in  whose  heart 
are  the  ways  of  them,  who  passing  through  the  valley  of  Baca  make 
it  a  well :  the  rain  also  filleth  the  pools.  They  go  from  strength  to 
strength  :  every  one  of  them  in  Zion  appeareth  before  God."  Amen- 


(  83  ) 


THE 


P  LM\T  I  S  H  M  E  N  T    OF    SI  N. 


SEQUEL  OF  THE  IV.  LORD'S  DAY, 


Romans  i.  18.  •  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against 
all  ungodliness,  and  unripjhteousness  of  men. 

Q.  10.  Will  God  sjiffer  such  disolKdienct  and  rebellion  to  go  un- 
punished  ? 

.  A.  By  no  means  ;  but  is  terribly  displeased  with  our  original  as 
well  as  actual  sins;  and  will  punish  them  in  his  just  judgment, 
temporally  and  eternally,  as  he  hath  declared,  *'  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law  to  do  them," 

Q.  11.  lis  not  God  then  also  tnerafidf 

A.  God  is  indeed  merciful,  but  also  just ;  therefore  his  justice  re- 
quires, that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  also  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting  pun- 
ishment, both  of  body  and  souL 


T, 


HINE  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslid- 
ings  shall  reprove  thee :  know  therefore  and  see,  that  it  is  an  evil 
thing  and  bitter,  that  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  that 
my  fear  is  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  Jer,  ii.  19, 
The  sinner  delights  and  rejoices  in  the  evil  of  sin,  as  though  it  were 
exceedingly  good  and  pleasant :  for  "  he  calls  good  evil,  and  evil 
good,"  Isaiah  v.  20.  "  His  taste  is  corrupt,  and  therefore  evil  is 
sweet  in  his  mouth :  he  spares  it,  and  forsakes  it  not ;  but  keeps  it 
still  within  his  mouth."  Yet  hoAv  bitter  will  it  prove  to  him  !  "  His 
meat  in  his  bowels  shall  be  turned,  it  shall  be  the  gall  of  asps  within 
bim,"  Job  XX.  12,  13,  14.  Sin  is  in  itself  exceedingly  evil  and  bitter: 


84  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

for  thereby  we  forsake  the  Lord,  the  rock  of  salvation  :  we  deny  hit. 
holiness,  righteousness,  and  supreme  authority,  we  "  stretch  out  our 
hands  against  God,  and  strengthen  ourselves  against  the  xMmighty  : 
we  run  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck,  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his 
buckler,"  as  Eliphas  speaks,  Job  xv.  25,  26.  Godly  persons,  seeing 
their  sins,  and  th^  abominable  disposition  of  their  mind  are  exceed- 
ingly sorry  for  their  sms,  the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  more  than 
the  punishment  of  it,  causeth  them  M'ith  Job  to  "  abhor  themselves, 
and  to  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  But  that  which  renders  sin,  so 
exceedingly  evil  and  bitter  in  itself,  still  more  evil  and  bitter,  is  the 
evil  consequence  of  it :  for  sin  not  only  blinds  a  person,  renders  him 
a  slave  of  himself,  averse  from  God,  and  unable  to  do  good  ;  but  it 
renders  him  also  guilty,  and  subjects  him  to  the  most  bitter  punish- 
ment. "  Thy  way,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Judah,  who  had  been  so 
severely  punished,  Jer.  iv.  18,  '<  and  thy  doin8:s  have  procured  these 
things  unto  thee,  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  bitter,  because 
it  reacheth  unto  thy  heart."  God  requireth  that  the  sinner  should 
*«know  and  see  this,"  that  he  may  lay  it  to  heart,  Jer.  ii.  19.  Where- 
fore? will  the  Lord  torment  him  before  the  time?  No,  but  he  chooseth 
that  the  sinner  should  humble  himself,  should  look  out  for  deliver- 
ance, and  become  capable  of  it.  The  Lord  God  would  "remember 
his  cov'-nant"  for  the  salvation  of  his  people,  v/ho  had  Ijeen  griev- 
ously punislied,"  if  their  uncircumcised  hearts  sliould  be  humbled, 
and  they  should  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity,"  Lev, 
xxvi.  41,  42.  Behold  how  the  rod  of  God's  chastisement  humbled 
Ephraim,  and  conduced  to  his  deliverance,  Jer.  xxxi.  19,  20. 

This  is  the  design  of  our  instructor,  when  he  teacheth  the  sinner 
the  knowledge  of  his  misery,  as  the  first  mean  of  obtaining  deliver- 
ance. Question  2,  for  which  purpose  he  shows  him  in  the  first  place 
•whence  he  must  learn  to  know  his  misery,  Question  3,  4,  and  then 
wherein  it  consists,  namely  (a)  in  sin,  the  abominable  nature  and 
cause  of  which  are  shown,  Question  5,  6,  7.  (b)  In  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  it,  as  an  inability  to  do  good.  Question  8,  9,  and  the 
grievous  punishment  which  God  inflicts  upon  the  sinner.  Question 
10,  11.  We  have  seen  formerly,  to  wit.  Question  6,  7,  in  what 
manner  the  sin  of  Adam  is  punished  ;  we  must  now  attend  to  the 
manner  in  which  God  is  displeased  with  sins  in  general. 

The  instructor  doth  two  things  here  : 

I.  He  declares  the  punishment  of  sin,  Question  10. 
,    II.  He  refutes  an  argument  against  the  punishment  of  sin,  Ques- 
tion 11. 

I,  The  deserving  cause  of  the  evil  of  punishment  is  the  evil  of  sin 


&5 

for  "  God  is  displeased  both  with  our  original  and  actual  sins»"  Ori- 
ginal sin  is  that  which  we  have  inherited  by  our  birth,  and  hath  been 
exhibited  in  the  foregoing  7th  question.  Actual  sin  is  that  which 
we  ourselves  commit  and  act  in  thought,  word  and  deed,  by  omitting 
to  do  that  which  is  commanded  us,  and  by  doing  that  which  is  for= 
bidden  us,  whether  against  the  first  or  second  table  of  the  law,  with 
respect  to  God,  ourselves,  and  our  neighbour.  These  several  sins 
are  either  reigning  in  the  unregenerate,  who  are  willing  slaves  of 
sin  :  *'  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin,"  John  viH. 

3,  4,  or  sins  which  do  not  reign,  to  wit,  in  the  regenerate,  who  are 
often  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  their 
members,"  contrary  to  their  will  and  inclination,  by  the  power  of 
corruption,  Rom.  vii.  23.  Every  sin  deserves  death  by  its  own  nature  : 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  vi.  23.  And  there- 
fore  the  Papists  contradict  the  word  of  God,  when  they  distinguish 
sins  into  venial,  wliich  do  not  deserve  death,  and  mortal,  which  de- 
serve death  by  their  abominable  nature  more  than  other  sins.  One 
sin  is  indeed  greater,  and  is  punished  with  greater  severity  than 
another.  See  John  xix.  11.  Matt.  xi.  21 — 24  but  the  least  sin  de- 
serves death,  inasmuch  as  it  is  committed  asjainst  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  and  against  his  law,  which  threatens  the  trans- 
gressor with  death.  John  speaks  indeed  of  "  a  sin  unto  death,  and 
of  a  sin,  which  is  not  unto  death,"  1  John  v.  16,  17,  but  a  sin  which 
is  not  tinto  death,  doth  not  mean  a  sm  which  by  its  own  nature  doth 
not  deserve  death,  and  is  pardonable,  but  only  a  sin  which  God  doth 
not  punish  with  death  in  all  who  are  guilty  of  it,  and  of  which  many 
obtain  forgiveness,  >•  hich  cannot  be  said  of  the  sin  unto  death,  since 
that  is  the  unpardonable  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  whereby  a 
person  maliciously  rejects  and  opposes,  without  a  powerful  tempta- 
tion of  endangering  his  life,  or  other  temptations  of  such  a  nature, 
the  truth  of  tlie  gospel,  which  is  according  to  godliness,  of  which  he 
hath  been  assured  by  an  inward  enlightening  and  conviction  of  the 
Holy  Spirit."     See  concerning  this  sin,  Matt.  xii.  31,  32.   Heb.  vi. 

4,  5,  C.  x  26 — 29.  Because  this  sin  is  unpardonable,  therefore  John 
calls  it  "  a  sin  unto  death,  for  which  a  person  may  not  pray,  and 
which  thejfcwho  are  bom  of  God  cannot  commit,"  1  John  v.  16,  17, 
1 8.  God  could  indeed  forgive  that  sin,  but  it  doth  not  please  him 
to  forgive  it,  because  it  obstinately,  and  with  a  final  and  persevering 
impenitence,  rejects  the  conviction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the 
last  mean  of  conversion  :  "  For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were 
once  enhghtened,  &c.  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance,"  Heb,  vi,  4,  5,  6, 


86  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

God  inflicts  punishment  on  account  of  all  these  sins  in  his  displease 
ure,  or  anger.  Anger  in  man  is  a  vehement  and  vexaiious  peitur^ 
bation  of  nis  mind,  whereby  he  is  urgtd  to  avenge  hi'x.seli  of  his 
neighbour,  on  account  of  some  real,  or  supposed  injui'y  doiic  to  him. 
Bui  the  i-ord  God  being  simple,  independent,  and  uhchangeabiy  an4 
perfectly  happy,  cannot  suffer  such  a  painful  agitation  of  mind. 
When  nevertheless  anger  is  ascribed  to  him,  ''.ve  must  understand  it 
in  a  sense  which  is  worthy  of  him,  and  by  way  of  analogy,  agreeably 
to  his  word,  which  designs  by  the  anger  of  God,  (a)  his  holy  aver- 
sion and  dislike  to  the  sinner  and  his  sin,  by  which  he  is  injured  in 
the  highest  degree  ;  as  a  man,  who  is  angry,  is  averse  from  the  per- 
son, who  hath  injured  him.  And  so  it  is  said  of  God,  that  "  he  is 
of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  that  he  cannot  look  upoi^ 
iniquity,"  Kab.  i.  13.  "  Jesus  looked  round  about  upon  the  Jews  with 
anger,  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  Mark  iii.  5» 
Therefore  the  anger  of  God  is  called  also,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
"  the  grief  of  his  heart,"  Gen.  vi.  6.  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10,  "  his  hatred,'*- 
Psalm  V.  5,  6,  and  "  his  vexation,"  Psalm  xcv.  10.  (b)  His  holy  and 
righteous  will  and  purpose  to  punish  the  sinner.  "  God  will  punish 
sin,"  saith  the  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  tlie  anger  of  God.  ''  He 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  John  iii.  56.  That  is,  the  will  of  God  to  punish 
him  in  due  time,  although  his  long  suffering  spare  him  yet.  'I'here- 
fore  the  anger  of  Gud  is  also  called  "  his  desire,"  Hosea  x.  10.  (c) 
Finally,  the  anger  of  God  denotes  also  the  punishments  and  judg= 
ments,  which  he  inflicts  on  the  sinner,  \ipon  account  of  his  sins  : 
''  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodHness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  signification 
also,  iVlatt.  iii.  7.  Rom.  iii.  5.  Thus  the  catechism  also  explains  the 
anger  of  God  by  "  his  just  judgment,  by  which  he  punisheth  sins 
temporally  and  eternally."  Since  now  God,  when  he  punisheth, 
takes  vengeance  of  sin,  obtains  satisfaction,  and  glorifies  his  hohness, 
justice  and  power,  therefore  he  is  said  "  to  rejoice,"  Deut.  xxviii. 
63,  "to  comfort  hmiselt,"  Isaiah  i.  24,  and  *' to  be  refreshed,'* 
Amos  v.  9,  when  he  punishes  sin. 

"God  punishes  sin  then  by  his  just  judgment,  temporally  and 
eternally."  Temporally  in  this  life,  both  with  bodily  and  spiritual 
plagues.  Bodily  punishments  are  all  that  is  shameful,  hurtful,  and 
painful  to  the  sinner.  "  God  pouretli  contempt  upon  him,  even  upon 
princes,"  Psalm  cvii.  40,  which  is  the  most  intolerable  evil,  that  can 
befall  the  proud  sinner:  Saul  and  Ahithophel  slew  themselves,  because 
they  could  not  endure  contempt,  I  Sam   xxxi.  4,  5.  2  Sam.  xviii.  2f?- 


f 

The  Lord  plagues  the  transgressor  also  sometimes  with  poverty  : 
"  he  becomes  as  a  moth  and  rottenness  unto  him,"  Hosea  \\  12,  and 
"  curses  hi.s  blessings,"  Mai.  ii  2,  so  ti.at  the  sinner  must  cry  out 
with  distress,  "  What  shall  I  eat  ?  what  shall  1  drink  ?  and  where- 
witnal  shall  I  be  clothed?"  Matt.  vi.  25.  And  as  if  thisvWere  not 
grievous  enough,  "  God  distributeth  sorrows  to  him  in  his  anger," 
Job  xxi.  17.  "  He  is  also  chastened  with  pain  upon  his  bed,  and  the 
multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong  pain  :  so  that  his  life  abhorreth 
bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat.  His  flesh  is  consumed  away,  that 
it  cannot  be  seen,  and  his  bones  that  were  not  seen  stick  out.  Yea, 
his  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  grave,  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers," 
Job  xxxiii.  19 — 22.  God  visits  the  sinner  with  fevers,  consumptions, 
pestilence,  biles,  wounds,  and  other  plagues  of  that  kind,  which 
"  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terrours,  drive  him  out  of  light  into  dark- 
ness, and  chase  him  out  of  the  world,"  Job  xviii.  14,  18.  He  is 
attacked  wnthall  these  evil  plagues  immediately  by  God  himself,  and 
by  his  evil  enemies  in  his  own  person,  in  his  household,  and  in  the 
land  in  which  he  dwells.  See  how  all  this  and  still  more  is  threaten- 
ed, Lev.  xxvi.  and  Dent,  xxviii. 

But  man  sins  chiefly  with  his  soul,  and  therefore  his  soul  also  is 
attacked  with  the  most  grievous  spiritual  judgments,  (a)  God  smites 
the  soul  with  blindness  and  darkness  of  understanding.  Man  is  by 
nature  spiritually  blind :  nevertheless  he  hath  still  some  natural 
knowledge  of  divine  things  ;  but  even  "that  which  he  still  hath  is 
justly  taken  away  from  him,"  Matt.  xiii.  12.  "  His  foolish  heart  is 
still  more  darkened,"  Rom.  ii  21,  and  so  he  deceives  himself:  "  he 
saith,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  in  goods,  rnd  he  knows  not  that  he 
is  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,"  Rev. 
iii.  17.  God,  in  whom  he  hath  the  greatest  concern,  is  hidden  from 
him  :  "  the  gospel  of  salvation  is  hidden  from  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  3, 
and  "  God  sends  him  a  strong  delusion,  so  that  he  believes  a  lie  ;" 
2  Thess  ii.  11.  (b)  To  this  is  added  hardness  of  heart,  so  that  he 
becomes  hke  a  stone,  insensible  and  impenitent.  Before  this  he 
could  sometimes  relent  on  account  of  his  sins,  and  be  afraid  of  des- 
truction ;  but  God,  being  greatly  displeased  with  him,  suffers  "  his 
heart  to  wax  gross,  makes  his  ears  heavy,  and  shuts  his  eyes,  lest  he 
should  see  with  his  eyes,  and  hear  with  his  ears,  and  understand  with 
his  heart,  and  be  converted  and  healed,"  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10.  (c)  God 
also  abandons  him  to  the  thraldom  of  his  sins,  so  that  "  his  own  ini- 
quities take  him,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins,"  Rev. 
V.  22.  Yea,  the  Lord  lets  his  lusts  loose  on  him,  which  seize  him 
and  drive  him  forward,  and  so  he  is  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind, 


AS  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  do  those  things  which  ar«  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  28.  (d)  He  is 
also  punished  by  God  with  the  overlording  of  Satan.  ''  The  God  of 
this  world  blinds  his  mind,  that  the  light  of  the  gospel  may  not  shine 
unto  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  That  potent  ruler  drives  him  from  sin  to 
sin,  "  he  v,^orks  in  the  children  of  disobedience,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3,  and 
^*  takes  them  captive  in  his  snare  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  Yea,  he 
will  sometimes  •' terrify"  them,  as  he  did  Saul,  1  Sam  xvi.  14.  (e) 
God  s  spiritual  judgment  sometimes  proceeds  so  far  with  the  sinner, 
that  he  gives  him  up  to  a  restless  conscience,  which  torments  him 
contLUually.  Ihat  will  upbraid  him  continually  with  his  improper 
conduct,  will  present  God  to  him  with  teriour,  as  a  righteous  judge, 
and  will  even  in  laughter  afflict  his  heart  with  sorrow  ;  and  that 
gnawmg  worm  will  cause  him  to  choose  with  Judas  even  strangling. 
Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

But  what  danger  would  there  be,  if  the  sinner  were  punished  only 
in  this  life,  his  end  draws  near,  and  after  death  he  will  not  suffer  any 
more  :  but  that  which  must  cause  him  to  cry  out  for  grief  of  heart 
is,  that  God  will  plague  him  for  ever  with  '*  the  punishmtnt  of  ever- 
lasting fire,"  Jude  vrs.  7,  and  with  "  the  damnation  of  hell,"  Matt, 
xxiii.  33.  By  which,  (1)  he  will  be  depi'ived  of  all  that  was  honoura- 
ble, pleasant  and  profitable  to  him  in  this  life,  and  that  did  in  some 
measure  divert  and  moderate  his  distress :  he  may  not  have  "  a 
mioistencd  finger  to  cool  his  tongue  :"  and  nothing  but  a  painful  re- 
membrance of  "  the  good  things,  v/hich  he  had  received  in  his  life- 
time," will  remain  with  him,  and  afflict  him  g  evously,  Luke  xvi. 
24,  25.  Yea,  what  will  distress  him  most,  he  w Ml  be  excluded  from 
the  enjoyment  of  the  only  blessed  God  ;  for  "  he  will  be  punished 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power,"  2  Thess.  i.  9,  He  is  now  indeed  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  ;  but  he  doth  not  knew  God,  nor  the  happiness 
of  communion  with  him^  and  he  doth  not  concern  himself  witn  these 
things;  and  therefore  his  separation  from  Cod  doth  not  grieve  him, 
or  he  flatters  himself  with  a  vain  hope,  that  God  will  yet  be  favoura- 
ble to  him :  but  when  a  dreadful  eternity  shall  surprize  him,  he  will 
then  know  expenmentally,  and  with  anguish  of  soul  what  God  is, 
what  it  is  to  enjoy  him,  what  to  be  separated  and  estranged  from 
Iiim  ;  how  his  vain  hope  will  abhor  him,  and  leave  him  to  the  great- 
est distress,  without  any  relief.  (2)  He  will  not  only  miss  all  that  is 
good,  but  he  will  also  be  subjected  to  a  painful  feeling  of  all  that  is 
evil :  for  (a)  "  God  will  not  meet  him  as  a  man,"  Isaiah  xlvii.  3, 
but  "  he  will  stir  up  all  his  wrath,"  Psalm  Ixxviii.  38,  and  cause  the 
sinner  to  ►<  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty,"  Job  xxi.  20.     Can 


IV,  LORD'S  DAY,  ^.  10,  U.  89 

a  man  not  endure  that  his  neighbour,  whose  good  will  he  seeks  and 
needeth,  should  behold  him  in  wrath,  how  insupportable  then  will 
"  the  power  of  God's  anj^er  and  indii^nution  be  to  liim  I"  Psalm  xc. 
ii.  The  damned  will  cry  out  n.ore  than  t-.e  heathen  and  Roman 
persecutors,  when  they  were  defeated  at  the  bpening  of  the  sixth 
seal,  Rev.  vi.  16,  17.  "  to  the  mountains  and  rocks.  Fall  on  uy,  and 
hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitieth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb  :  for  the  great  day  of  his  vvraih  is  come  ;  and 
who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?"  (b)  The  sinner's  conscience  will  also 
rage  terribly  against  him,  and  gnaw  and  sting  him  like  a  *'  worm,'* 
Mark  ix.  44,  46,  48.  Ii  will  continually  upbraid  him  with  all  his 
iniquities,  in  their  ag^^ravating  circumstances :  that  he  hath  sinned 
dreadfully  against  such  an  exalted  Majesty,  against  so  many  obliga- 
tions and  faithful  warnings,  and  that  he  hath  in  such  a  senseless 
manner  lost  his  invaluable  salvation  for  a  few  insignificant  trifles,  (c) 
And  what  will  afflict  him  equally  with  this  is,  that  he  will  always 
persist  in  sinning,  that  he  will,  in  the  most  horrible  manner  curse 
himself  and  his  neighbour,  with  whom  he  had  sinned  during  his  life, 
yea,  that  he  will  "  blaspheme  God  because  of  his  pains,"  like  the 
worshipers  of  the  beast,  when  "  the  fifth  viol  shall  be  poured  out 
Upon  his  seat,"  Rev.  xvi.  10,  11.  Sin  is  now  indeed  the  element  of 
the  sinner,  but  it  will  then  be  to  him  like  seething  water  to  aliving 
fish,  although  it  cannot  live  out  of  the  water,  which  is  its  element. 

This  misery  will  be  aggravated  by  the  circumstances  of  place,  of 
society,  and  duration.  The  transgressor  will  be  cast  and  shut  up  in 
a  most  dreary  place,  as  '*  in  a  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  ".in  hell," 
Luke  xvi.  23.  "the  deep,"  Luke  viii.  31.  "  the  lake  which  burneth 
with  fire  and  brimstone,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  ''the  outer  darkness,'*  Matt. 
viii.  11.  All  these  terrifying  descriptions  of  the  place  of  the  damned 
ought  to  affect  the  sinner  with  the  greatest  horrour,  and  cause  him 
to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

There  the  wicked  wight  will  also  be  with  the  most  horrible  sinnersj 
with  whom  no  person  of  the  least  morality  could  converse  here.  For 
"  the  lake  of  fire  is  the  portion  of  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and 
abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and 
idolators,  and  all  liars,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  There  is  no  person  who  is 
more  hated  than  a  hypocrite  ;  but  hell  is  the  proper  abode  of  such, 
Matt.  xxiv.  51.  And  surely  those  monsters  will  not  be  there  to 
practise  their  enormities  for  sport,  but  to  torment  one  another,  when 
they  will  upbraid  one  another  with  a  hellish  mafignity,  that  they  have 
occasioned  each  others'  perdition.     The  devils  will  also  be  there,  a?* 

Q 


do  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SlS\ 

in  their  inheritance,   Matt.  sxv.  41,  and  will  sene  as  "  tormentors" 
of  the  guilty  sinner.  Matt,  xviii.  34. 

If  the  season  ot  punishment  continued  thous:^nds  of  years,  there 
would  still  be  an  end  of  it ;  but  that  which  will  be  insupportable  to 
the  damned  person,  and  which  will  sink  him  into  the  lowest  depth  of 
despair  i^.  that  his  pains  will  be  eternal,  eternal  beyond  the  utmost 
reach  of  thouglit.  For  there  will  be  *'  an  everlasting  fire,  and  ever- 
lasung  punishment,"  Matt.  xxv.  41,  46.  "  He  may  seek  death,  but 
it  will  flee  from  him  ;  his  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
quenched." 

The  s  ul  of  the  sinner  must  undergo  this,  as  soon  as  in  death  it 
departs  from  the  body.  For  we  consider  it  as  an  opinion,  to  which 
we  ouo-ht  not  to  assent,  because  it  is  too  dangerous,  that  the  essence 
of  the  soul  consists  only  in  thought,  and  that  it  is  not  therefore  capa- 
ble of  residing  in  any  place  :  for  thou.2:ht  being  an  act  must  there- 
for.^ proceed  from  a  being,  which  actually  thinketh,  and  besides  this, 
we  must  sav  that  the  soul  being  in  no  place,  and  therefore  no  where, 
doth  really  not  exist  at  all :  and  what  becomes  of  tl^e  soul,  whea  it 
departs  from  the  body  ?  is  it  no  where  ?  how  is  the  believer  thea 
blessed,  when  he  dies  ?  according  to  Rev.  xiv.  1 3,  and  how  are  the  un- 
godly punished  ?  "  do  not  the  spirits  go  into  prison  then  ?"  I  Peter  iii, 
19.  And  how  do  those  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  suffer  the  vengeance 
of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7,  according  to  the  body  ?  No,  the  fire  by 
which  their  cities  and  bodies  were  burned,  hath  been  quenched  long 
since. 

The  body  is  indeed  freed  from  the  condemnation  of  hell  some- 
time ,  but  it  will  be  raised  up  again,  and  united  to  the  soul,  which  it 
had  served  as  an  nistrument  in  sinning,  in  o**der  to  be  punished  like- 
wise :  for  ''  many  shall  arise  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt," 
Dan.  xii.  2,  to  be  cast  with  body  and  soul  into  hell,"  where  they  will 
weep  with  their  eyes,  and  gnash  their  teeth,"  Matt.  xiii.  42,  and 
gnaw  their  tongues  for  pain,"  Rev.  xvi,  10. 

But  how  do  the  Socinians  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ungodly, 
when  they  teach  that  the  heathens,  who  have  not  had  the  gospel, 
will  be  annihilated,  and  suffer  only  a  painless  punishment  of  loss  and 
deprivation,  that  they  shall  not  see  the  face  of  God  ;  but  that  those 
who  have  had  the  gospel,  and  nevertheless  shghted  and  rejected  it, 
shall  be  consumed  by  a  dreadful  fire  at  the  last  day,  with  great  tor- 
ment, and  then  be  annihilated.  If  an  ungodly  man  can  believe  this, 
he  will  become  still  more  ungodly.  Such  a  doctrine  supposes  that 
the  soul  is  mortal,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  it,  and  to  the  Avord  of 
God*    The  word  of  God  testifieth  also,  that  all  the  ungodly  "shall 


i  u  ^l 

depart  into  everlasting  fire,  and  into  everlasting  torment,"  Matt.  xxv. 
41,  46,  and  that  '^  their  worm  shall  not  die,  and  that  their  fire  shall 
not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  "■  The  heathens  do  not  know  God," 
saith  Paul,  i  Thess.  iv.  5.  Now  "  God  will  take  vengeance  in  fli.m- 
ing  fire  on  them  who  do  not  know  him,  as  well  as  on  them,  who  do 
not  obey  the  gospel,"  2  Thess.  i  8.  The  men  of  Sodom  and  Go- 
morrah, who  were  heathens,  and  not  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  nor 
in  the  covenant,  *'  suffer  even  until  this  day  the  ver.geance  of  eternal 
nre,"  Jude  vrs.  7.  Surely  the  apostle  doth  not  mean  the  fire  by  which 
they  were  consumed,  since  that  was  not  the  eternal  fire,  for  it  doth 
Rot  burn  any  more. 

Behold  in  this  manner  doth  God  punish  sins  ;  but  dotli  he  pimish 
only  actual  sins  thus?  and  not  original  sin  alho  ?  suely  he  is  dis- 
pleased with  that  also,  and  will  punish  it  with  temporal  an.'  eternal 
judgments  ;  for  must  not  young  children,  who  have  only  original, 
and  not  actual  sins,  suffer  many  sorrows,  yea,  death  itself  ?  and  are 
not  these  miseries  a  punishment  of  their  original  sin  ?  we  may  not 
think  that  these  miseries  are  not  inflicted  upon  them  by  God,  nor 
that  God  visits  them  therewith,  without  regard  to  any  sinfulness  or 
punishment;  for  we  should  then  deny  either  tlie  providence  of  Clod, 
or  his  mercy  ;  but  may  we  think  that  children  who  die  without  com- 
mitting any  actual  sins  are  punished  for  ever  and  damned  ?  We  must 
speak  cautiously  here.  It  is  certain,  that  the  children  of  believing 
parents  are  received  with  their  parents  into  covenant  with  God,  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Acts  ii.  39,  and  are  therefore  called  "  holy" 
1  Cor.  i'.  14,  and  "the  kingdom  of  God  is  promised  to  them," 
Matt,  xix,  13,  14,  15.  See  our  exposition  uf  iafant  baptism,  Lord's 
Day  27.  But  this  is  not  the  subject  of  inquiry  here,  but  w."  e'her 
God  is  displeased  with  the  original  sin  of  children,  and  whether  he 
will  punish  it,  as  the  instructor  speaks  ?  and  truly  the  word  of  God 
teaches  us  this,  when  it  saith  that  "  the  whole  world,"  and  therefore 
children  also  "  are  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii  19.  We  are  also 
«  children  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  Children  are  sometin^s 
punished  with  their  parents,  who  are  punished  eternally,  as  we  sec 
in  the  children  of  the  first  world,  who  perished  in  the  flood  with  their 
parents,  **  who  are  in  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  and  this  grievous  judg* 
ment  befell  them  on  account  of  original  sin  also,  according  to  Gen. 
vi.  5,  6,  7.  Were  not  children  punished  in  the  fire  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  ?  and  do  not  these  suffer  even  until  this  day  "  the  punish- 
ment of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7.  * 

*  Our  author  doth  not  assert  here  absolutely,  that  any  infants  arc  actually 
lost,  bat  h«  only  argweg  frem   r«rfain  passage*  of  scriptur*,  with  rMpect  to 


Is  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Because  original  sin  is  a  punishment  of  Adam's  sin,  therefore  the 
Remonstrants  assert  that  God  doth  not  punish  original  sin  in  this 
manner ;  since  one  punishment  would  then  be  unjustly  punished 
■with  another.  But  original  sin  is  not  only  a  punishment  by  a  right- 
eous imputation  of  Adam's  guilt,  but  it  is  also  an  inherent  depravity, 
rendering  man  liable  to  punisiiment  from  his  birth  :  he  is  called  in- 
deed "  a  transgressor  from  the  womb,"  Isaiah  xlviii.  8-  We  must 
humble  ourselves  on  account  of  it,  with  David,  Psalm  li.  5,  and  with 
him  seek  for  the  pardon  of  it,  and  God  punishetb  one  sin  in  other 
instances  with  another,  which  sin  is  then  again  justly  punished. 

It  IS  contrary  to  the  word  of  Ciod,  as  we  will  show  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  Day,  that  Crod  hath  received  all  mankind,  who  fell  in  Adam, 
^nd  therefore  children  also  into  favour,  and  that  he  doth  not  conse- 
quently punish  original  sin.  \V  e  do  not  speak  here  of  the  covenant 
of  grace,  mto  which  some  children  are  received,  but  of  the  covenant 
of  works,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  God  punisheth  the  posterity 
of  Adam  on  account  of  the  breach  of  this  covenant.  Doth  God  re- 
ceive all  men  graciously  into  a  general  covenant  of  grace,  he  will 
nevertheless,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  Remonstrants, 
punish  many  of  them  ;  for  they  teach  that  every  individual  of  man- 
kind will  not  be  eternally  happy. 

It  is  true  God  forgave  the  sin  of  Adam,  when  he  promised  him 
the  seed  of  the  w  mian  .  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom,  that  he 
forgave  the  whole  human  race,  who  had  sinned  in  him,  that  sin,  and 

this  matter,  In  such  a  manner,  as  to  show,  that  we  must  not  presume  to  decide 
positively,  that  all  infants  are  saved  ;  neither  doth  the  catechism,  or  any 
other  standard  of  our  church  declare  absolutely,  that  any  infants,  who  die 
before  I  hey  have  committed  £Ctual  sins,  are  damned,  but  only  with  the  word 
of  God,  that  we  are  by  nature  child»-en  of  wrath,  and  that  unless  a  person  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  and  that  those  who  die  in 
their  natural,  or  unregenerate  state  suffer  not  only  for  actual  sins  ,  but  als© 
for  their  or.ginal,  or  birth  sin.  We  cannot  indeed  tell,  but  that  it  may  please 
God,  of  ^is  nilinite  compassion,  to  regenerate  all  those  chrildren,  whom  he 
takes  out  of  the  world  before  they  have  committed  ;iCtual  sins.  Leading 
divines  have  differed  in  their  opinions  concerning  the  future  condition  of  in- 
fants. But  although  we  cannot  decide  positively  u'hat  the  actual  state  of 
infants  may  be  after  this  life,  nevertheless  Christians  in  general  have  always 
conceived,  tnat  we  have  greater  encouragement  from  scripture  to  hope  well  of 
infants,  who  die  within  the  pale  of  the  church,  than  of  those  who  die  without 
that  pale,  since  the  fermer  are  entitled  to  the  promises,  and  therefore  may  be 
baptized,  but  the  latter  have  no  express  promise,  and  therefore  may  not  be 
btptired.  Those  Christians  who  have  conceived  that  any  children  were  lost, 
Jiave  always  holden  that  the.e  was  a  great  diflerence  between  the  unhappines.-i 
p,f  such,  and  of  persons  who  have  committed  actual  sins- 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  10.  li,  99 

that  he  doth  not  punish  them  for  it ;  for  if  God  forgave  Kim  his  per- 
sonal sin,  he  did  not  therefore  forgive  the  whole  human  race  that  sinj 
unless  Adam  were  the  head  of  the  whole  human  race  in  the  cove- 
nant of  i^race,  as  well  as  in  the  covenant  of  works,  which  no  man  can 
say,  who  holds  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  ac* 
cording  to  Rom.  v.  15 — 19.  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22,  49. 

But  how  is  God  displeased  with  sin  ?  **  terribly,"  sai^h  the  in- 
structor. Therefore  the  an^^er  of  C^od  is  likened  to  the  most  terrible 
things,  to  wit,  to  't  a  fire  whjch  burns  to  the  lowest  hell,"  Deut.  xxxii. 
22.  to  "  instruments  of  death,  a  sharp  sword,  a  bent  bow  and  arrows," 
Psalm  vii.  11,  12,  13,  to  "a  grievous  whirlwind  from  the  Lord."  Jer. 
xxiii.  19,  to  the  "  dregs"  of  a  poisonous  cup,  Psalm  Ixxv.  8.  Jtr,  xxv. 
15,  16,  and  to  the  raging  of  a  •'  fierce  lion,  leopard  and  bear,"  Hosea 
xiii.  7.  8.     There   are  also  many  examples  of  God's  terrible  anger. 
We  will  not  speak  now  of  the  dreadful  judgments  that  befell  the  old 
world.   Sodom  and  the  seditious  company  of  Korah,  see  only  how 
even  the  most   1  oly  men  have  roared  under  a  sense  of  (iod's  anger. 
How  was  Job  forced  to  complain  of  "  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty," 
chap.  vi.  4.      Feman  was  "  afflicted  and  ready  to  die  from  his  youth 
iip,\  8cc.  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  15 — 19.  Row  grievously  the  Son  of  God 
himself  was  oppressed  l)y  tlie  wrath  ot   God   we   may  see  from  his 
bitter  complaints  m  the  garden,  and  on  the  cross,  and  the  distress  of 
heaven  and  earth,  whicli  seemed  to  suffer  with  him,  and  on  account 
of  him.    Matt.  xxvi.  37 — 44.  chap    xxvii.  45 — 54      And  when  God 
attacks  impenitent  sinners,  how  doth  it  affright  them,  and  what 
trembling  siezes  on  them,  saying,  "  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with 
devouring  fire  ?  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burn- 
ings r"  Isaiah   xxxiii    14.   Only  represent   to  yourselves  how  sadly 
the  damned  weep  with  their  eyes,  how  they  gnash  their  teeth,  how 
they  gnaw  their  tongues,  wring  their  hands,  how  they  seek  for  death 
in  vain,  and  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.     We  can  also  conceive 
that  God  is  terribly  displeased,  when  we  consider  that  he  is  not  de- 
ficient in  wisdom  to  contrive  terrible  punishmepts,  nor  in  power  to 
execute  them  upon  those  who  reproach  his  name.     He  denounceth 
his  curse   against  the  least  sin,   Gal.   iii.    10.     Many  Bethshemites 
were  punished  with  death,  because  they  looked  inquisitively  into  the 
ark,  and  Uzza,  because  he  laid  hold  of  it  in  an  indiscreet  manner, 
1  Sam.  vi.  19,  20.  2  Sam.  vi.  6,  7.     When  we  add  to  this  that  God 
will  punish  sin  eternally,  we  may  then  also  imagine  how  terribly 
God  is  displeased  with  sin. 

Since  God  is  so  terribly  displeased  with  sin,  he  will  also  "  cer- 
tainly" punish  it,  as  he  hath  spokei;i,  Deut.  xxvii-  26.  Gal.  iii.  10c 


04  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

"Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  thini^s  that  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  This  is  the  threatening  of  the 
covenant  of  works :  for  Paul  proves  from  this  sentence  of  cursing, 
that  "  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,'* 
Gal.  iii.  10 ;  to  which  curse  pertain  likewise  all  the  threatenings  de- 
nounced in  the.  word  of  God  against  the  unconverted  sinner  ;  for  it 
is  *  the  law  only  that  worket  •  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  therefore 
this  sentence  ot  the  curse  is  very  properly  referred  by  the  inslructoi* 
to  original,  as  well  as  to  actual  sin,  inasmuch  as  both  belong  to  the 
covenant  of  works.  When  this  curse  v/as  announced  to  the  Israelites* 
with  whom  God  had  already  established  his  covenant  of  grace,  Deut» 
xxxvi.  16,  it  was  not,  because  he  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works 
with  them,  but  because  he  chose  to  exhibit  the  broken  covenant  of 
works  to  them  by  the  legal  administration  of  the  covenant  of  gr^ce^ 
in  order  that  he  might  convince  them,  and  urge  them  to  the  Mes- 
siah, who  was  to  come.  See  Gal  iii.  10 — 24.  V'hen  God  saith  this, 
we  must  also  believe  it,  and  be  assu-ed  that  he  will  certainly  punish 
sin  ;  for  he  is  true  in  his  threateninjjs  as  well  as  in  his  promises  ; 
therefore  Samuel  said  with  respect  to  the  judgment  denounced 
against  Saul,  "  He  who  is  the  strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  ror  re- 
pent ;  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  repent,"  1  Sam.  xv.  29. 
When  the  curses  were  denounced  from  mount  Ebal,  "  all  the  people- 
should  say  Amen,"  Deut.  xxvii.  IS — 26. 

It  is  also  "  necessary,"  that  God  should  punish  sin,  not  only  on 
account  of  his  truth,  since  he  hath  said  it,  but  also  because  it  is  natu- 
ral to  him  ;  for  it  doth  not  proceed  merely  from  his  free  good  pleas- 
ure, but  also  from  his  nature,  that  he  doth  punish  sin.  For  (1)  "sin 
is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God,"  his  glory  and 
sovereignty,  which  we  must  acknowledge,  and  also  that  we  have  to 
do  with  him.  AH  this  is  denied  and  rejected  by  the  sinner,  when  he 
sinneth-  as  though  God  were  not  worthy  to  be  feared,  loved  and  serv- 
ed ;  and  so  his  most  high  majesty  is  dishonoured.  Sirce  now  God 
loves  himself,  and  therefore  also  his  glorious  majesty,  with  the 
greatest  love,  he  cannot  but  be  jealous  of  sin  ;  and  what  is  the  jeal- 
ousy of  God,  but  an  avenging  punishment,  whereby  he  restores  his 
injured  majesty  to  its  proper  lustre  ?  "  He  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty.  His  name  is  jealous,  and  he  is  a  jealous  God,"  Exod. 
xxxiv.  7,  14.  Nahum  i.  1,2.  Therefore  it  is  said,  that  he  is  glori-. 
fied,  when  he  punishes  sin.  Numb.  xiv.  2 1,  22,  23,  and  that  he  "com- 
forts" himself,  when  he  taketh  vengeance,  Isaiah  i.  24.  (2)  The. 
holiness  of  God  hath  a  natural  aversion  from  the  sinner  on  acount  of 
his  sin,  and  it  is  natural  to  God  to  hate   sin  :  "  He  is  of  purer  eyoG.. 


lu  9i 

than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab.  i.  13  Can  he  therefore,  who  is  holiness 
itself,  exercise  communion  with  the  sinner,  as  he  wouW  do,  if  he  did 
not  punish  him,  but  showed  him  favour r  If  it  were  possibk-  for  him 
not  to  hate  sin,  it  would  be  possible  for  him  to  love  it.  How  contrary 
this  is  to  the  holy  nature  of  God,  how  averse  he  is  from  sin,  and  on 
account  of  it  from  the  sinner,  is  known  to  all.  What  is  God's  hatred 
and  aversion  from  sin  and  the  sinner  ?  is  it  not  the  greatest  punish- 
ment ?  see  Psalm  v.  5,  6,  7.  2  Thess.  i.  9.  If  God  did  not  punish  sin, 
he  would  then  seem  to  be  "  like  the  sinner,"  Psalm  1  21,  but  when 
he  punishes  sin,  he  then  shows  that  he  is  holy.  Lev.  x  I,  2,  3.  Ezek. 
xxviii.  22.  (3)  The  justice  of  God,  as  judge  of  the  whole  earth  re» 
quires  also,  that  he  should  punish  sin,  surely  the  judiciary  punish- 
ment of  sin  is  an  act  not  only  of  anger,  but  also  of  justice,  "  God  is 
indeed  a  righteous  judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry  every  day,"  Psalm 
vii-  12.  cxxix.  4.  Rom.  ii.  5.  Is  not  this  punitive  justice  of  God  as 
judge,  natural  to  him,  as  well  as  his  other  natural  perfections,  which 
he  cannot  deny  ?  can  we  indeed  conceive  of  God,  as  contrary  to  this 
judiciary  justice,  and  as  a  judge,  who  is  not  righteous  ?  "  The  Gen- 
tiles know  the  judgment  of  God ;  that  they  who  commit  such  things 
are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  How  do  the  Gentiles  know  this  ? 
by  a  revelation  ?  no,  but  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  by  their  own 
consciences,  whereby  "  they  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in 
the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.  Now  it  is  certain  that  they  cannot  know 
this  judgment  of  God  by  the  light  of  nature,  if  the  punitive  justice 
of  God  be  not  natural  to  him  :  for  that  which  depends  upon  the  free 
good  pleasure  of  Cod,  and  upon  his  government  no  man  can  know 
by  the  light  of  nature,  but  only  by  revelation.  If  God  did  not  punish 
sin,  he  would  not  do  right,  as  a  judge,  either  to  himself  or  to  the 
sinful  creature,  and  therefore  God  is  said  to  declare  his  righteousness 
when  he  punishes  sin,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  (4)  The  authority  of  God 
as  a  lawgiver,  by  which  he  requireth  obedience  of  his  rational  crea- 
tures is  natural  to  him  :  he  cannot  discharge  man  of  his  duty  and 
obligation  to  keep  his  commands  :  "  On  account  of  his  incomparable 
glory  he  may  justly  require  that  every  one  should  fear  him,"  Jer» 
X.  6,  7  If  God  can  suffer  the  sinner  to  remain  unpunished,  he  can 
then  also  discharge  him  of  his  obligation  to  obedience  ;  for  when  he 
did  not  punish  the  sinner,  he  would  say  that  he  could  endure  that 
tnan  should  not  obey  him,  which  surely  cannot  be. 

Let  no  man  say  that  punishment  is  a  strange  work  of  God,  and  is 
not  natural  to  him,  because  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxviii.  21.  "The  Lord 
shall  rise  up  as  in  mount  Perazim,  he  shall  be  wroth  as  in  the  valley 
x>{  Gibeon,  tliat  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work ;  and  bring 


91^  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act ;"  for  the  Socinians  and  others,  who 
object  this  to  us,  must  answer  this  objection  themselves,  inasmuch 
as  they  say  that  it  is  natural  to  God  to  punish  the  impenitent  sinner^ 
who  persists  in  sinning  without  reformation  ;  yet  they  will  not  allow 
this  with  regard  to  every  sin,  as  they  do  with  regard  to  impenitence, 
when  nevertlieless  impenitence  is  punishable  only  on  account  of  its 
sinfulness,  and  not  on  account  of  its  duration  ;  for  duration  is  of  itself 
pot  si.'Kul,  but  in  several  mstances  commendable.  With  regardi-to 
Jsaiaa  xxviii  21,  we  do  not  read  there,  that  God's  work  and  act  of 
punishing  is  strange  to  God,  but  only  that  it  is  strange :  and  to 
^hom  should  it  be  strange  ?  to  God?  no:  but  to  the  transgressors, 
on  whom  God  would  inflict  a  strange  and  unusual  pUi  ishment. 

As  God  punishes  sin  terribly,  certainly,  and  necessarily,  so  he  pun- 
ishes it  ''justly."  In  order  that  the  punishment  may  be  just,  it  must 
be  equal  to  the  sin^  and  not  exct- ed  it :  and  so  a  just  punishment  is 
that  "  recompence  of  an  errour  which  is  meet,"  Rom.  i-  2f  ii.  6, 
Kow  sin  is  committ.  d  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God :  but 
sin  is  grievous  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  of  the  pefson,  against 
whom  it  is  committed.  See  Job  xxxiv.  18,  19.  1  Sam  ii.  25.  Since 
now  sin  is  committed  against  the  infinite  God,  and  his  most  high 
majesty,  therefore  sin  is  also,  in  a  certain  respect,  infinite,  to  wit, 
with  respect  to  the  infinite  object  of  sin  :  "  and  therefore  the  justice 
of  God  requireth  that  sin,  which  is  cbmmitted  against  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting 
punishment,  both  of  body  and  soul."  Since  now  it  doth  not  please 
God  to  annihilate  the  sinner,  but  to  suffer  him  to  exist  for  ever,  there- 
fore it  is  also  an  act  of  justice  to  punish  him  for  ever  with  a  sensible 
punishment,  because  he  hath  sinned  against  God,  who  will  exist  for 
ever,  and  because  he  will  continue  to  sin,  on  account  of  his  abomi- 
nableness,  which  will  cleave  to  him  for  ever. 

II.  The  careless  sinner,  unwilling  to  be  disturbed  by  the  terrible- 
ness  and  justice  of  the  punishment,  sooths  and  hardens  himself  with 
the  mercy  of  God,  as  if  that  Would  overcome  and  swallow  up  his 
justice  ;  in  which  he  is  strengthened  by  the  Socinians,  when  they 
alledge  the  mercy  of  God  against  the  doctrine  of  his  punishing  jus* 
tice,  asking,  "  Is  not  God  then  also  merciful?"  We  allow  that  God 
is  indeed  merciful,  as  well  as  just ;  but  God  will  not  exercise  mercy 
to  the  disparagement  of  his  justice.  To  illustrate  this  we  will  ex- 
plain wherein  the  mercy  of  God  consists,  and  in  what  manner  it  is 
exercised,  and  we  will  then  show  that  it  doth  not  militate  against 
bis  strict  justice. 

Mercy  in  man  is  a  sorrowful  perturbation  of  mind,  on  account  of 


 

the  suffering  of  another,  disposing  him  to  rescue  the  sufferer.  But 
the  Lord  God  being  independent,  simple,  unchangable,  and  perfectly- 
happy,  cannot  be  affected  with  such  an  agitation  and  perturbation  of 
mind :  therefore,  when  it  is  said  of  him,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
that  he  is  merciful,  it  must  be  understood  in  a  sense  which  is  wor- 
thy of  the  nature  of  God  ;  and  so  the  mercy  of  God  is  only  his  good- 
ness to  the  miserable,  which  he  exerciseth,  either  by  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  even  upon  the  vilest  sinners,  as  Jesus  aaith,  Luke  vi. 
35,  Sec.  '*  He  is  kind  to  the  unthankful,  and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye, 
therefore,  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful."  Or  God  exer» 
cises  his  mercy  by  conferring  special  and  saving  benefits  in  Christ 
upon  the  elect.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  of  this,  Eph.  ii.  45.  "  God, 
who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even 
when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ." 
But  although  God  is  so  merciful,  he  is  also  just :  and,  he  requires 
that  sin  should  be  punished,  and  his  mercy  doth  not  abolish  his  vin- 
dictive justice  ;  for  the  attributes  of  God  cannot  militate,  one  ag-ainst 
anothef,  whereby  one  wouh;  detract  from  the  lustre  of  another  ;  b\it 
one  must  increase  the  lustre  of  the  other:  therefore,  the  justice  and 
mercy  of  God  are  joined  together  to  his  praise.  See  Exod.  xxxiv. 
6,  7.    Psalm  cxi   3,  4.  cxii   4.  cxvi.  5. 

When  this  is  rightly  considered,  we  will  see,  (a)  that  there  is  no 
force  in  this  objection  to  deny  the  vindictive  justice  of  God  :  for  al- 
though God  is  merciful  to  the  unthankful  and  evil,  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  on  them,  he  will  nevertheless  punish  them  severely,  if 
not  in  this  life,  yet  after  this  life.  Common  mercy  is  not  shown  to 
them  in  order  to  exempt  them  from  eternal  punishment,  but  it  only- 
moderates  their  punishment  for  a  season,  in  order  to  afford  them  a 
testimony  of  the  divine  goodness,  and  invite  them  to  repentance. 
2  Peter,  iii.  9.  "that  they  may  be  without  excuse."  Rom.  i.  19,20. 
"  Do  they  despise  the  riches  of  the  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and 
longsuffering  of  God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth 
them  to  repentance,  they  do  after  their  hardness  and  impenitent 
hearts,  treasure  up  wrath  to  themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Rom.  ii.  4,  5« 
Doth  he  show  his  special  mercy  to  the  salvation  of  the  elect,  this 
supposeth  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice  by  Christ,  whereby  he  hath 
borne  their  punishment.  Isaiah  liii.  4,  5.  Rom.  iii.  25,  26. (b)  We 
may  also  learn  from  what  hath  been  said  before,  that  this  objection 
proceeds  from  a  mistaken  notion  of  tlie  divine  mercy,  and  of  man's 
sinful  misery.  The  Socinians  imagine  tliat  God,  as  well  as  man,  is 
subject  to  the  passions  «f  anger,  sorix)w,  and  so  also  of  mercy;  and 

R 


9i  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN, 

that  he  is  moved  by  the  misery  of  men,  to  abstain  from  punisbih^ 
him.  and  to  dehver  him.  But  such  agitations  of  mind  raihtatc 
against  the  independence,  simplicity,  unchangableness,  and  hap- 
piness of  God  ;  and  besides  this,  the  sinful  misery  of  man  is  not 
adapted  to  excite  mercy  and  compassion,  whereby  God  should  be 
moved  to  deliver  him  ;  but  it  is  a  misery  Avhich  excites  hatred  and 
detestation,  and  thus  calls  for  the  righteous  anger  of  God.  Psalm  v. 
4,5,6.  J  lab.  i.  13.  See  how  loathsome  the  sinner  is  described, 
Ezek.  xvi.  1.5.  How  tan  God  be  moved  by  such  a  misery  to  com- 
passion ?  Must  he  not  remove  the  Avorker  of  iniquity  from  his  pre- 
sence ?  "  The  way  of  the  sinner  is  before  God  like  the  uncleanness 
of  a  lAenstruous  woman  ;  therefore  he  pours  his  fury  out  upon 
him."  Ezek.  xxxvi.  17,  18.  Can  any  man  from  pity  take  up 
a  toad  that  hath  been  trodden  under  foot,  and  that  wallows  in  its 
blood  and  poisonous  spittle,  lick  )t,  or  kiss  it,  in  order  to  heal  it? 
surely  no :  he  cannot  look  upon  it,  but  must  remove  it  from  his  sight. 
Much  less  can  the  holy  God,  wiiO  is  holiness  itself,  embrace  in  his 
special  kindness  and  love,  the  hateful  tinner,  without  a  satisfaction  to 
his  justice. (e)  We  add  also,  that  this  objection  is  out  of  its  place. 
God  is  merciful  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  not  in  the  covenant  of 
works,  which  the  sinner  hath  broken.  Mercy  hath  no  place  in  the 
broken  covenant  of  works,  but  only  justice  ;  "  The  law  worketh 
wratli."  Rom.  iv.  15.  All  the  mercy  whereby  God  honours  his 
people  with  saving  grace,  proceeds  from  the  covenant  of  grace 
which  supposeth  the  death  of  the  iVTediator,  and  therefore  God's  vin- 
dictive justice.  ITeb.  ix  15.  Since  now  this  Lord's  day  treats  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  on  account  of  our  breach  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  therefore  the  objection  from  the  mercy  of  God 
in  the  covenant  of  Grace  is  out  o(  its  proper  place  here. 


APPLICATION. 

In  this  manner  do  the  Socinians  deny  by  their  doctrine  the  terrible 
displeasure  of  God,  by  which  he  punisheth  sin.  temporally  and  eter- 
nally, certainly  and  justly  :  but  this  is  denied  by  you  also,  who  have 
not  yet  tied  to  Christ  by  faith  and  conversion,  in  order  to  obtain  his 
righteousness.     For, 

1.  Ye  do  not  yet  know  the  demerit  of  your  sins.  If  ye  knew  it, 
and  believed  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God  on  account  of  your  sins, 
would  ye  not  then  fear  and  tremble  more  because  of  your  sins,  and 
those  terrible  punishments,  which  ye  must  expect  ?  woujd  ye  be  sc*' 
careless,  and  "when  ye  do  evil,  skip  for  joy  ?"  Jer.  xi,  15. 


\.  99 

2.  When  God  punishes  you  in  this  life  with  many  and  grievous 
calamities,  ye  do  not  then  perceive  Ihat  God  doth  this  on  account  of 
your  sins  and  impenitence  :  ye  look  not  at  him  who  smites  you,  but 
think  that  time  and  chance  bring  these  things  forth  :  ye  think  that 
they  come  to  pass,  as  though  "  afflictions  came  forth  out  of  the  earth, 
and  trouble  sprang  up  out  of  the  ground,"  Job  v.  6.  And  so  ye  say 
with  your  deeds,  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do 
evil,"  Zeph.  i.  12, 

3.  How  often  do  ye  harden  yourselves  against  God's  terrible  judg- 
ments !  for  when  he  smites  you,  ye  do  not  relent ;  and  it  doth  not 
induce  you  to  br.?ak  oif  your  iniquities  :  but  ye  start  up  against  his 
procedure,  and  add  to  your  abominable  sins,  like  "  Ahaz,  who  in  the 
time  of  his  trouble,  trespassed  still  more  against  the  Lord,"  2  Chron. 
xxviii.  22.  "  Doth  God  smite  you,  ye  are  not  grieved  ;  doth  he 
consume  you,  ye  refuse  to  receive  correction  ;  ye  make  your  faces 
harder  than  a  rock,  and  refuse  to  return,"  Jer.  v.  3.  Doth  a  fear 
for  the  wrath  to  come  ever  take  hold  of  you,  it  is  irksome  to  you,  ye 
endeavour  to  stifle  your  consciences,  and  to  "  cover  your  transg:res  ■ 
sions  like  Adam,  by  hiding  your  iniquity  in  your  bosom,"  Job  xxxi. 
33.  Gen.  iii.  1?. 

4.  Ye  flatter  and  deceive  yourselves,  thinking  that  ye  wil^  not  be 
punished  &o  severely :  "  When  ye  hear  the  words  of  this  curse,  ye 
do  then  bless  yourselves  in  your  hearts,  saying,  We  shall  have  peace, 
though  we  walk  in  the  imagination  of  ©ur  hearts,"  Deut.  xxix.  19. 
Ye  think  these  threatenings  have  been  denounced  so  long,  nothing 
v/ill  come  of  them,  like  '*  the  scoffers  in  the  last  days,'  2  Peter  iii. 
4.  If  yc  dare  not  be  so  wicked,  ye  put  the  evil  day  far  off,  and 
think,  the  vision  is  yet  for  many  days,  and  a  man  will  not  be  misera- 
ble before  the  time  ;  but,  friends,  when  God  c'efers,  he  dot,ii  not  then 
desert,  and  when  he  defers,  it  ought  not  to  render  you  more  care- 
less and  wicked,  but  it  ought  to  '^  lead  you  to  repentance,"  Rom.  ii. 
4.  2  Peter  iii,  9.  Dotli  fear  beset  you,  ye  banish  it,  and  flatter  your= 
selves  with  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for 
sin.  But  is  G,od  merciful  to  you  with  his  saving  favour  ?  and  hath 
Jesus  suff*ered  for  your  sins  ?  he  hath  surely  suff'ered  for  none  but 
those  ^'^  who  turn  from  transgression,"  Isaiah  lix.  20.  Do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  turn  yet  ?  wken  ?  when  this  or  that  opportunity  occurs  I 
but  perhaps  ere  such  an  opportunity  occurs,  "  the  decree  of  God  will; 
bring  forth,  the  day  will  pass  as  the  chaff",  the  fierce  anger  of  the 
Lord  will  come  upon  you,"  Zeph.  ii.  2.  Ye  say.  We  hope  not ;  but 
your  hope  is  vain  and  ungrounded,  it  will  forsake  you.  Do  ye  suffer 
niany  affUctions,  and  do  ye  comfort  yourselves  with  a  hope,  ths^t 


100  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

these  will  be  the  full  measure  of  your  sufferings,  and  that  ye  win  not 
be  obliged  to  suffer  hereafter  ?  this  is  nothing  but  deceit ;  your  suf- 
ferings in  this  world  vill  not  diminish  aught  froncs  your  eternal  pui>- 
ishment ;  the>  are  only  the  beginnings  of  eternal  sorrows.  Or  do- 
ye  inna^nie,  that  ye  are  delivered  from  tht.  wrath  of  God,  because  ye 
arc  not  so  wicked  as  this  or  that  person,  but  are  civil  and  devout  ? 
But  was  not  the  Pharisee  so  virtuous  as  thiS)  and  did  not  "  he  go 
down  to  his  house  unjustified  ?"  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.  When  ye  have 
no  more  cloaks  for  your  shame,  when  they  have  all  been  taken  from 
you,  and  your  abominableness  and  misery  have  been  discovered  to 
you,  ye  then  think,  it  would  be  truly  sad,  that  ye  should  be  aban- 
doned to  wretchedness ;  and  because  your  self-love  will  not  suffer 
you  to  think  the  worst  of  yourselves,  ye  imagine  that  this  Mill  not 
befall  you.  But  how  exceedingly  will  ye  be  disappointed,  when  Cod 
will  attack  you,  while  ye  do  not  expect  it,  with  his  almighty  anger, 
and  not  as  a  man,  when  ye  will  bewail  yourselves  too  late,  and 
"  mourn  at  the  last,  saying,  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my 
heart  despised  reproof?  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teach- 
ers, nor  inchneJ  mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?  Prov  v.  1 1, 
12,  13.  Do  ye  ask,  What  shall  we  nevertheless  do  ?  will  ye  indeed 
do  aught?  if  ye  will,  come  then  hither,  and  I  will  instruct  you.  (1) 
Behold  your  utter  abominableness  and  woful  misery:  ye  have  ariginal 
and  actual  sins  :  the  terrible  wrath  of  God  lieth  upon  you,  and  ye 
have  reason  to  expect  that  God  will  attack  you  shortly  vvith  his  fiery 
indignation.  Because  ye  do  not  attend  to  this,  therefore  ye  remain 
hardened,  careless,  and  do  not  seek  for  any  real  recovery.  That  ye 
may  therefore  awake,  behold  the  greatness  of  your  misery,  pause, 
and  endeavour  to  understand  it,  that  ye  may  be  penetrated  with 
grief  and  concern,  "  Examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  your- 
selves strictly,  O  ye  listless  people."  Zeph.  ii.  1,  See  Jer,  ii.  19,  23. 

2.  Beware  of  accusing  the  Lord  of  excessive  severity,  or  of  in- 
justice :  "  Is  God  unrighteous,  who  taketh  vengeance  ?  God  forbid  : 
for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?"  Rom.  iii.  5,  6.  Not  only 
David  said,  Psalm  cxix.  37.  "  Righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord,  and  up- 
right are  thy  judgments  ;"  but  even  the  hardened  Pharaoh  cried  out, 
Exod-  ix.  2f .  "  The  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are 
wicked."  Do  not  do  less  than  this,  that  the  Lord  may  not  compel . 
you  by  his  mighty  displeasure  to  such  an  acknoM'ledgment. 

3.  Earnestly  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  your  great  misery. 
To  be  unconcerned  whether  we  shall  be  saved  or  damned,  to  do 
nothing  in  order  to  escape  damnation,  and  obtain  salvation,  is  cer- 
tainly the  greatest  madness,  of  which  a  human  being  is  capable : 


iO,  U.  ipi 

«Be  zealous  therefore  and  repent,"  Rev.  iii.  19.  Do  not  imagine 
that  a  few  ceremonies,  or  a  mere  heartless  sigh  will  save  a  sinner : 
no,  he  must  strive  earnestly :  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  £^ate  i 
for  many  shall  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be- able,"  saith  the 
Saviour,  Luke  xiii.  24.  "  The  violent  only  take  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  force,"  Matt.  xl.  12.  We  must,  like  one  who  is  pursued 
and  afraid,  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  Matt.  iii.  7. 

4.  Do  not  seek  any  happiness  or  deliverance  by  your  oWn  doings, 
but  only  by  fleeing  to  the  Mediator  Jesus,  that  "  ye  may  be  found  in 
him,  and  obtain  his  righteousness,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  7,  8,  9,  for 
'•  there  is  salvation  in  none  other,"  Acts  iv.  12.  Jesus  alone  is  "  set 
forth  of  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Therefore  look  unto  him  and  ha 
saved,"  Thus  he  calls  to  you,  Isaiah  xlv  22. 

5.  Be  afraid  of  the  least  sin  ;  for  it  is  committed  against  the 
niost  high  majesty  of  God,  and  he  punishes  it  terribly.  This  should 
render  every  one  fearful  of  sinning,  like  Job,  who  said — *'  Destruc- 
tion from  God  was  a  terrour  to  me,  and  by  reason  of  his  highness  I 
could  not  endure."  Job  xxxi.  23.  He  who  persists  in  sinnine:  wilful- 
ly and  wittingly,  cannot  expect  any  mercy  ;  "but  he  who  confesseth 
and  forsaketh  sin,  shall  obtain  mercy  "  Prov.  xxviii.  13.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well.  Come  now,  and  let  us  rea- 
son together,  saith  the  Lord  :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool."     Isaiah  i    l6,  18. 

But  permit  me  to  address  you  also,  O  believers,  who,  from  a  pain- 
ful and  distressing  view  of  your  sins  and  demerits,  have  fled  to  the 
Mediator,  and  reject,  with  a  holy  displeasure,  your  indweUing  corrup- 
tions >(i)  see  from  v/hat  ye  are  delivered.  God,  the  Lord,  was  terri- 
bly displeased  with  you  also,  on  account  of  your  original  and  actual 
sins :  but  "  Jesus  hath  delivered  you  from  the  wrath  to  come." 
!  Thes.  i.  10,  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  that  he  will  not  be  any 
more  wroth  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you."  Isaiah  liv.  9.  '*  There  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  v/hich  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Rom.  viii.  1. 
^'  To  you  also,"  who'have  considered  yourselves  as  "the  greatest  sin- 
ners, hath  mercy  been  shown."    1  Tim.  i.   13,  16. 

2.  Behold  now,  also,  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  done  for  you. 
From  pure  and  inconceivable  love,  he  took  all  your  original  and  actu- 
al sins  upon  himself,  in  order  to  deliver  you  :  on  account  of  them  he 
subjected  himself  to  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God,  he  suffered  it  in 
its  utmost  extent,  and  thus  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  you.  "  To 
redeem  you  from  the  curse  of  th*-.  law,  he  became  a  curse  for  you^** 


1Q2  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Gal.  iii.  1 3.  With  what  an  ardent  love  did  he  love  you,  and  how^ 
did  the  zeal  of  God's  house  eat  him  up,  when  your  reproacheSit 
wherewith  ye  had  reproached  the  Lord,  fell  on  him!"  Psalm  Ixix. 
9.  Attend  a  while  to  this  matter,  endeavour  to  lof.^k  deep  into  it, 
that  ye  may  be  filled  with  wonder,  with  abasins^  thoughts  of  your- 
selves, with  joy  and  praise,  and  so  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with 
all  the  saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and 
hei8:ht ;  and  may  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  know^ 
ledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Eph.  iii. 
18,  19. 

Conduct  yourselves  v/ortbily  of  the  inexpressible  love  and  mercy 
that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  How  great  an  aversion  ought  ye  to 
manifest  in  all  your  behaviour  to  your  original  and  actual  sins  !  how 
ought  ye  to  strive  against  them,  and  mortify  them  !  and  how  to  ex- 
ert yourselves  to  conduct  in  a  manner  that  is  pleasing  to  tht*  Lord  ! 
for  what  end  did  '^  Jesus  give  himself  for  you?"  was  it  not,  "that 
he  might  redeem  you  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  you  to  himself  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  ?"  Titus  ii.  14.  Let  then 
*'  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  you  to  live  no  more  unto  yourselves, 
but  to  him  who  died  for  you,  and  rose  again-"    2  Cor.  v.  14,  15. 

4.  Have  compassion  and  take  pity  on  tho-^e  poor  and  miserable 
persons,  who  manifest  by  all  their  conversation,  that  they  lie  yet  un-. 
der  the  terrible  wrath  of  God,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lies  to  save 
them  :  *^  Of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference,  and  others 
save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,"  saith  holy  Jude  in  his, 
epistle,  verse  22,  23. 

Are  ye  yet  often  afraid  of  the  displeasure  of  God,  because  ye  have 
still  so  great  a  power  of  inbred  corruption  in  yourselves,  and  com- 
mit so  many  actual  sins  ?  Well,  the  terrible  displeasure,  and  vin- 
dictive justice  of  God  cannot  assail  you  on  account  of  these  things ; 
Christ  hath  borne  them,  and  delivered  you  theref  om.  It  is  true,  the 
lawworketh  wrath,  and  denounceth  the  curse  against  the  sinner  ;  but 
your  "  sin  was  condemned  in  the  flesh  of , Christ,  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  you."  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Doth 
the  Lord  render  your  condition  unhappy  by  visiting  you  with  many 
opiritual  and  bodily  afflictions  ?  Those  do  not,  however,  proceed 
from  the  wrath  oi  God,  but  from  his  fatherly  love  and  care  ;  *'  that 
ye  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  Heb.  xii.  5,  11.  Ye  shall  one 
day  be  perfectly  and  for  ever  delivered  from  all  your  calamities,  and 
be  instated  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  God's  blissful  mercy  and  love  : 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  saith,  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  "our  light  affliction,  which 
is  but  for  a  moment,  worneth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternssj 
weight  of  glory"     Amen. 


(103) 


THE 


NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTIOT^ 


Y.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Romans  viii.  3,  4.  For  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak,  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son,  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  :  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.

Q.  10.  Will  God  sjiffer  such  disolKdienct  and  rebellion  to  go  un- 
punished  ? 

.  A.  By  no  means  ;  but  is  terribly  displeased  with  our  original  as 
well  as  actual  sins;  and  will  punish  them  in  his  just  judgment, 
temporally  and  eternally,  as  he  hath  declared,  *'  Cursed  is  every  one 
that  continueth  not  in  all  things,  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law  to  do  them," 

Q.  11.  lis  not  God  then  also  tnerafidf 

A.  God  is  indeed  merciful,  but  also  just ;  therefore  his  justice  re- 
quires, that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  also  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting  pun- 
ishment, both  of  body  and  souL 


T, 


HINE  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslid- 
ings  shall  reprove  thee :  know  therefore  and  see,  that  it  is  an  evil 
thing  and  bitter,  that  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  that 
my  fear  is  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  Jer,  ii.  19, 
The  sinner  delights  and  rejoices  in  the  evil  of  sin,  as  though  it  were 
exceedingly  good  and  pleasant :  for  "  he  calls  good  evil,  and  evil 
good,"  Isaiah  v.  20.  "  His  taste  is  corrupt,  and  therefore  evil  is 
sweet  in  his  mouth :  he  spares  it,  and  forsakes  it  not ;  but  keeps  it 
still  within  his  mouth."  Yet  hoAv  bitter  will  it  prove  to  him  !  "  His 
meat  in  his  bowels  shall  be  turned,  it  shall  be  the  gall  of  asps  within 
bim,"  Job  XX.  12,  13,  14.  Sin  is  in  itself  exceedingly  evil  and  bitter: 


84  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

for  thereby  we  forsake  the  Lord,  the  rock  of  salvation  :  we  deny  hit. 
holiness,  righteousness,  and  supreme  authority,  we  "  stretch  out  our 
hands  against  God,  and  strengthen  ourselves  against  the  xMmighty  : 
we  run  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck,  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his 
buckler,"  as  Eliphas  speaks,  Job  xv.  25,  26.  Godly  persons,  seeing 
their  sins,  and  th^  abominable  disposition  of  their  mind  are  exceed- 
ingly sorry  for  their  sms,  the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  more  than 
the  punishment  of  it,  causeth  them  M'ith  Job  to  "  abhor  themselves, 
and  to  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  But  that  which  renders  sin,  so 
exceedingly  evil  and  bitter  in  itself,  still  more  evil  and  bitter,  is  the 
evil  consequence  of  it :  for  sin  not  only  blinds  a  person,  renders  him 
a  slave  of  himself,  averse  from  God,  and  unable  to  do  good  ;  but  it 
renders  him  also  guilty,  and  subjects  him  to  the  most  bitter  punish- 
ment. "  Thy  way,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Judah,  who  had  been  so 
severely  punished,  Jer.  iv.  18,  '<  and  thy  doin8:s  have  procured  these 
things  unto  thee,  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  bitter,  because 
it  reacheth  unto  thy  heart."  God  requireth  that  the  sinner  should 
*«know  and  see  this,"  that  he  may  lay  it  to  heart,  Jer.  ii.  19.  Where- 
fore? will  the  Lord  torment  him  before  the  time?  No,  but  he  chooseth 
that  the  sinner  should  humble  himself,  should  look  out  for  deliver- 
ance, and  become  capable  of  it.  The  Lord  God  would  "remember 
his  cov'-nant"  for  the  salvation  of  his  people,  v/ho  had  Ijeen  griev- 
ously punislied,"  if  their  uncircumcised  hearts  sliould  be  humbled, 
and  they  should  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity,"  Lev, 
xxvi.  41,  42.  Behold  how  the  rod  of  God's  chastisement  humbled 
Ephraim,  and  conduced  to  his  deliverance,  Jer.  xxxi.  19,  20. 

This  is  the  design  of  our  instructor,  when  he  teacheth  the  sinner 
the  knowledge  of  his  misery,  as  the  first  mean  of  obtaining  deliver- 
ance. Question  2,  for  which  purpose  he  shows  him  in  the  first  place 
•whence  he  must  learn  to  know  his  misery,  Question  3,  4,  and  then 
wherein  it  consists,  namely  (a)  in  sin,  the  abominable  nature  and 
cause  of  which  are  shown,  Question  5,  6,  7.  (b)  In  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  it,  as  an  inability  to  do  good.  Question  8,  9,  and  the 
grievous  punishment  which  God  inflicts  upon  the  sinner.  Question 
10,  11.  We  have  seen  formerly,  to  wit.  Question  6,  7,  in  what 
manner  the  sin  of  Adam  is  punished  ;  we  must  now  attend  to  the 
manner  in  which  God  is  displeased  with  sins  in  general. 

The  instructor  doth  two  things  here  : 

I.  He  declares  the  punishment  of  sin,  Question  10. 
,    II.  He  refutes  an  argument  against  the  punishment  of  sin,  Ques- 
tion 11. 

I,  The  deserving  cause  of  the  evil  of  punishment  is  the  evil  of  sin 


&5 

for  "  God  is  displeased  both  with  our  original  and  actual  sins»"  Ori- 
ginal sin  is  that  which  we  have  inherited  by  our  birth,  and  hath  been 
exhibited  in  the  foregoing  7th  question.  Actual  sin  is  that  which 
we  ourselves  commit  and  act  in  thought,  word  and  deed,  by  omitting 
to  do  that  which  is  commanded  us,  and  by  doing  that  which  is  for= 
bidden  us,  whether  against  the  first  or  second  table  of  the  law,  with 
respect  to  God,  ourselves,  and  our  neighbour.  These  several  sins 
are  either  reigning  in  the  unregenerate,  who  are  willing  slaves  of 
sin  :  *'  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin,"  John  viH. 

3,  4,  or  sins  which  do  not  reign,  to  wit,  in  the  regenerate,  who  are 
often  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  their 
members,"  contrary  to  their  will  and  inclination,  by  the  power  of 
corruption,  Rom.  vii.  23.  Every  sin  deserves  death  by  its  own  nature  : 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  vi.  23.  And  there- 
fore  the  Papists  contradict  the  word  of  God,  when  they  distinguish 
sins  into  venial,  wliich  do  not  deserve  death,  and  mortal,  which  de- 
serve death  by  their  abominable  nature  more  than  other  sins.  One 
sin  is  indeed  greater,  and  is  punished  with  greater  severity  than 
another.  See  John  xix.  11.  Matt.  xi.  21 — 24  but  the  least  sin  de- 
serves death,  inasmuch  as  it  is  committed  asjainst  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  and  against  his  law,  which  threatens  the  trans- 
gressor with  death.  John  speaks  indeed  of  "  a  sin  unto  death,  and 
of  a  sin,  which  is  not  unto  death,"  1  John  v.  16,  17,  but  a  sin  which 
is  not  tinto  death,  doth  not  mean  a  sm  which  by  its  own  nature  doth 
not  deserve  death,  and  is  pardonable,  but  only  a  sin  which  God  doth 
not  punish  with  death  in  all  who  are  guilty  of  it,  and  of  which  many 
obtain  forgiveness,  >•  hich  cannot  be  said  of  the  sin  unto  death,  since 
that  is  the  unpardonable  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  whereby  a 
person  maliciously  rejects  and  opposes,  without  a  powerful  tempta- 
tion of  endangering  his  life,  or  other  temptations  of  such  a  nature, 
the  truth  of  tlie  gospel,  which  is  according  to  godliness,  of  which  he 
hath  been  assured  by  an  inward  enlightening  and  conviction  of  the 
Holy  Spirit."     See  concerning  this  sin,  Matt.  xii.  31,  32.   Heb.  vi. 

4,  5,  C.  x  26 — 29.  Because  this  sin  is  unpardonable,  therefore  John 
calls  it  "  a  sin  unto  death,  for  which  a  person  may  not  pray,  and 
which  thejfcwho  are  bom  of  God  cannot  commit,"  1  John  v.  16,  17, 
1 8.  God  could  indeed  forgive  that  sin,  but  it  doth  not  please  him 
to  forgive  it,  because  it  obstinately,  and  with  a  final  and  persevering 
impenitence,  rejects  the  conviction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the 
last  mean  of  conversion  :  "  For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were 
once  enhghtened,  &c.  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance,"  Heb,  vi,  4,  5,  6, 


86  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

God  inflicts  punishment  on  account  of  all  these  sins  in  his  displease 
ure,  or  anger.  Anger  in  man  is  a  vehement  and  vexaiious  peitur^ 
bation  of  nis  mind,  whereby  he  is  urgtd  to  avenge  hi'x.seli  of  his 
neighbour,  on  account  of  some  real,  or  supposed  injui'y  doiic  to  him. 
Bui  the  i-ord  God  being  simple,  independent,  and  uhchangeabiy  an4 
perfectly  happy,  cannot  suffer  such  a  painful  agitation  of  mind. 
When  nevertheless  anger  is  ascribed  to  him,  ''.ve  must  understand  it 
in  a  sense  which  is  worthy  of  him,  and  by  way  of  analogy,  agreeably 
to  his  word,  which  designs  by  the  anger  of  God,  (a)  his  holy  aver- 
sion and  dislike  to  the  sinner  and  his  sin,  by  which  he  is  injured  in 
the  highest  degree  ;  as  a  man,  who  is  angry,  is  averse  from  the  per- 
son, who  hath  injured  him.  And  so  it  is  said  of  God,  that  "  he  is 
of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  that  he  cannot  look  upoi^ 
iniquity,"  Kab.  i.  13.  "  Jesus  looked  round  about  upon  the  Jews  with 
anger,  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  Mark  iii.  5» 
Therefore  the  anger  of  God  is  called  also,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
"  the  grief  of  his  heart,"  Gen.  vi.  6.  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10,  "  his  hatred,'*- 
Psalm  V.  5,  6,  and  "  his  vexation,"  Psalm  xcv.  10.  (b)  His  holy  and 
righteous  will  and  purpose  to  punish  the  sinner.  "  God  will  punish 
sin,"  saith  the  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  tlie  anger  of  God.  ''  He 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  John  iii.  56.  That  is,  the  will  of  God  to  punish 
him  in  due  time,  although  his  long  suffering  spare  him  yet.  'I'here- 
fore  the  anger  of  Gud  is  also  called  "  his  desire,"  Hosea  x.  10.  (c) 
Finally,  the  anger  of  God  denotes  also  the  punishments  and  judg= 
ments,  which  he  inflicts  on  the  sinner,  \ipon  account  of  his  sins  : 
''  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodHness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  signification 
also,  iVlatt.  iii.  7.  Rom.  iii.  5.  Thus  the  catechism  also  explains  the 
anger  of  God  by  "  his  just  judgment,  by  which  he  punisheth  sins 
temporally  and  eternally."  Since  now  God,  when  he  punisheth, 
takes  vengeance  of  sin,  obtains  satisfaction,  and  glorifies  his  hohness, 
justice  and  power,  therefore  he  is  said  "  to  rejoice,"  Deut.  xxviii. 
63,  "to  comfort  hmiselt,"  Isaiah  i.  24,  and  *' to  be  refreshed,'* 
Amos  v.  9,  when  he  punishes  sin. 

"God  punishes  sin  then  by  his  just  judgment,  temporally  and 
eternally."  Temporally  in  this  life,  both  with  bodily  and  spiritual 
plagues.  Bodily  punishments  are  all  that  is  shameful,  hurtful,  and 
painful  to  the  sinner.  "  God  pouretli  contempt  upon  him,  even  upon 
princes,"  Psalm  cvii.  40,  which  is  the  most  intolerable  evil,  that  can 
befall  the  proud  sinner:  Saul  and  Ahithophel  slew  themselves,  because 
they  could  not  endure  contempt,  I  Sam   xxxi.  4,  5.  2  Sam.  xviii.  2f?- 


f 

The  Lord  plagues  the  transgressor  also  sometimes  with  poverty  : 
"  he  becomes  as  a  moth  and  rottenness  unto  him,"  Hosea  \\  12,  and 
"  curses  hi.s  blessings,"  Mai.  ii  2,  so  ti.at  the  sinner  must  cry  out 
with  distress,  "  What  shall  I  eat  ?  what  shall  1  drink  ?  and  where- 
witnal  shall  I  be  clothed?"  Matt.  vi.  25.  And  as  if  thisvWere  not 
grievous  enough,  "  God  distributeth  sorrows  to  him  in  his  anger," 
Job  xxi.  17.  "  He  is  also  chastened  with  pain  upon  his  bed,  and  the 
multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong  pain  :  so  that  his  life  abhorreth 
bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat.  His  flesh  is  consumed  away,  that 
it  cannot  be  seen,  and  his  bones  that  were  not  seen  stick  out.  Yea, 
his  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  grave,  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers," 
Job  xxxiii.  19 — 22.  God  visits  the  sinner  with  fevers,  consumptions, 
pestilence,  biles,  wounds,  and  other  plagues  of  that  kind,  which 
"  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terrours,  drive  him  out  of  light  into  dark- 
ness, and  chase  him  out  of  the  world,"  Job  xviii.  14,  18.  He  is 
attacked  wnthall  these  evil  plagues  immediately  by  God  himself,  and 
by  his  evil  enemies  in  his  own  person,  in  his  household,  and  in  the 
land  in  which  he  dwells.  See  how  all  this  and  still  more  is  threaten- 
ed, Lev.  xxvi.  and  Dent,  xxviii. 

But  man  sins  chiefly  with  his  soul,  and  therefore  his  soul  also  is 
attacked  with  the  most  grievous  spiritual  judgments,  (a)  God  smites 
the  soul  with  blindness  and  darkness  of  understanding.  Man  is  by 
nature  spiritually  blind :  nevertheless  he  hath  still  some  natural 
knowledge  of  divine  things  ;  but  even  "that  which  he  still  hath  is 
justly  taken  away  from  him,"  Matt.  xiii.  12.  "  His  foolish  heart  is 
still  more  darkened,"  Rom.  ii  21,  and  so  he  deceives  himself:  "  he 
saith,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  in  goods,  rnd  he  knows  not  that  he 
is  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,"  Rev. 
iii.  17.  God,  in  whom  he  hath  the  greatest  concern,  is  hidden  from 
him  :  "  the  gospel  of  salvation  is  hidden  from  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  3, 
and  "  God  sends  him  a  strong  delusion,  so  that  he  believes  a  lie  ;" 
2  Thess  ii.  11.  (b)  To  this  is  added  hardness  of  heart,  so  that  he 
becomes  hke  a  stone,  insensible  and  impenitent.  Before  this  he 
could  sometimes  relent  on  account  of  his  sins,  and  be  afraid  of  des- 
truction ;  but  God,  being  greatly  displeased  with  him,  suffers  "  his 
heart  to  wax  gross,  makes  his  ears  heavy,  and  shuts  his  eyes,  lest  he 
should  see  with  his  eyes,  and  hear  with  his  ears,  and  understand  with 
his  heart,  and  be  converted  and  healed,"  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10.  (c)  God 
also  abandons  him  to  the  thraldom  of  his  sins,  so  that  "  his  own  ini- 
quities take  him,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins,"  Rev. 
V.  22.  Yea,  the  Lord  lets  his  lusts  loose  on  him,  which  seize  him 
and  drive  him  forward,  and  so  he  is  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind, 


AS  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  do  those  things  which  ar«  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  28.  (d)  He  is 
also  punished  by  God  with  the  overlording  of  Satan.  ''  The  God  of 
this  world  blinds  his  mind,  that  the  light  of  the  gospel  may  not  shine 
unto  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  That  potent  ruler  drives  him  from  sin  to 
sin,  "  he  v,^orks  in  the  children  of  disobedience,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3,  and 
^*  takes  them  captive  in  his  snare  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  Yea,  he 
will  sometimes  •' terrify"  them,  as  he  did  Saul,  1  Sam  xvi.  14.  (e) 
God  s  spiritual  judgment  sometimes  proceeds  so  far  with  the  sinner, 
that  he  gives  him  up  to  a  restless  conscience,  which  torments  him 
contLUually.  Ihat  will  upbraid  him  continually  with  his  improper 
conduct,  will  present  God  to  him  with  teriour,  as  a  righteous  judge, 
and  will  even  in  laughter  afflict  his  heart  with  sorrow  ;  and  that 
gnawmg  worm  will  cause  him  to  choose  with  Judas  even  strangling. 
Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

But  what  danger  would  there  be,  if  the  sinner  were  punished  only 
in  this  life,  his  end  draws  near,  and  after  death  he  will  not  suffer  any 
more  :  but  that  which  must  cause  him  to  cry  out  for  grief  of  heart 
is,  that  God  will  plague  him  for  ever  with  '*  the  punishmtnt  of  ever- 
lasting fire,"  Jude  vrs.  7,  and  with  "  the  damnation  of  hell,"  Matt, 
xxiii.  33.  By  which,  (1)  he  will  be  depi'ived  of  all  that  was  honoura- 
ble, pleasant  and  profitable  to  him  in  this  life,  and  that  did  in  some 
measure  divert  and  moderate  his  distress :  he  may  not  have  "  a 
mioistencd  finger  to  cool  his  tongue  :"  and  nothing  but  a  painful  re- 
membrance of  "  the  good  things,  v/hich  he  had  received  in  his  life- 
time," will  remain  with  him,  and  afflict  him  g  evously,  Luke  xvi. 
24,  25.  Yea,  what  will  distress  him  most,  he  w Ml  be  excluded  from 
the  enjoyment  of  the  only  blessed  God  ;  for  "  he  will  be  punished 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power,"  2  Thess.  i.  9,  He  is  now  indeed  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  ;  but  he  doth  not  knew  God,  nor  the  happiness 
of  communion  with  him^  and  he  doth  not  concern  himself  witn  these 
things;  and  therefore  his  separation  from  Cod  doth  not  grieve  him, 
or  he  flatters  himself  with  a  vain  hope,  that  God  will  yet  be  favoura- 
ble to  him :  but  when  a  dreadful  eternity  shall  surprize  him,  he  will 
then  know  expenmentally,  and  with  anguish  of  soul  what  God  is, 
what  it  is  to  enjoy  him,  what  to  be  separated  and  estranged  from 
Iiim  ;  how  his  vain  hope  will  abhor  him,  and  leave  him  to  the  great- 
est distress,  without  any  relief.  (2)  He  will  not  only  miss  all  that  is 
good,  but  he  will  also  be  subjected  to  a  painful  feeling  of  all  that  is 
evil :  for  (a)  "  God  will  not  meet  him  as  a  man,"  Isaiah  xlvii.  3, 
but  "  he  will  stir  up  all  his  wrath,"  Psalm  Ixxviii.  38,  and  cause  the 
sinner  to  ►<  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty,"  Job  xxi.  20.     Can 


IV,  LORD'S  DAY,  ^.  10,  U.  89 

a  man  not  endure  that  his  neighbour,  whose  good  will  he  seeks  and 
needeth,  should  behold  him  in  wrath,  how  insupportable  then  will 
"  the  power  of  God's  anj^er  and  indii^nution  be  to  liim  I"  Psalm  xc. 
ii.  The  damned  will  cry  out  n.ore  than  t-.e  heathen  and  Roman 
persecutors,  when  they  were  defeated  at  the  bpening  of  the  sixth 
seal,  Rev.  vi.  16,  17.  "  to  the  mountains  and  rocks.  Fall  on  uy,  and 
hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitieth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb  :  for  the  great  day  of  his  vvraih  is  come  ;  and 
who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?"  (b)  The  sinner's  conscience  will  also 
rage  terribly  against  him,  and  gnaw  and  sting  him  like  a  *'  worm,'* 
Mark  ix.  44,  46,  48.  Ii  will  continually  upbraid  him  with  all  his 
iniquities,  in  their  ag^^ravating  circumstances :  that  he  hath  sinned 
dreadfully  against  such  an  exalted  Majesty,  against  so  many  obliga- 
tions and  faithful  warnings,  and  that  he  hath  in  such  a  senseless 
manner  lost  his  invaluable  salvation  for  a  few  insignificant  trifles,  (c) 
And  what  will  afflict  him  equally  with  this  is,  that  he  will  always 
persist  in  sinning,  that  he  will,  in  the  most  horrible  manner  curse 
himself  and  his  neighbour,  with  whom  he  had  sinned  during  his  life, 
yea,  that  he  will  "  blaspheme  God  because  of  his  pains,"  like  the 
worshipers  of  the  beast,  when  "  the  fifth  viol  shall  be  poured  out 
Upon  his  seat,"  Rev.  xvi.  10,  11.  Sin  is  now  indeed  the  element  of 
the  sinner,  but  it  will  then  be  to  him  like  seething  water  to  aliving 
fish,  although  it  cannot  live  out  of  the  water,  which  is  its  element. 

This  misery  will  be  aggravated  by  the  circumstances  of  place,  of 
society,  and  duration.  The  transgressor  will  be  cast  and  shut  up  in 
a  most  dreary  place,  as  '*  in  a  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  ".in  hell," 
Luke  xvi.  23.  "the  deep,"  Luke  viii.  31.  "  the  lake  which  burneth 
with  fire  and  brimstone,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  ''the  outer  darkness,'*  Matt. 
viii.  11.  All  these  terrifying  descriptions  of  the  place  of  the  damned 
ought  to  affect  the  sinner  with  the  greatest  horrour,  and  cause  him 
to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

There  the  wicked  wight  will  also  be  with  the  most  horrible  sinnersj 
with  whom  no  person  of  the  least  morality  could  converse  here.  For 
"  the  lake  of  fire  is  the  portion  of  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and 
abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and 
idolators,  and  all  liars,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  There  is  no  person  who  is 
more  hated  than  a  hypocrite  ;  but  hell  is  the  proper  abode  of  such, 
Matt.  xxiv.  51.  And  surely  those  monsters  will  not  be  there  to 
practise  their  enormities  for  sport,  but  to  torment  one  another,  when 
they  will  upbraid  one  another  with  a  hellish  mafignity,  that  they  have 
occasioned  each  others'  perdition.     The  devils  will  also  be  there,  a?* 

Q 


do  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SlS\ 

in  their  inheritance,   Matt.  sxv.  41,  and  will  sene  as  "  tormentors" 
of  the  guilty  sinner.  Matt,  xviii.  34. 

If  the  season  ot  punishment  continued  thous:^nds  of  years,  there 
would  still  be  an  end  of  it ;  but  that  which  will  be  insupportable  to 
the  damned  person,  and  which  will  sink  him  into  the  lowest  depth  of 
despair  i^.  that  his  pains  will  be  eternal,  eternal  beyond  the  utmost 
reach  of  thouglit.  For  there  will  be  *'  an  everlasting  fire,  and  ever- 
lasung  punishment,"  Matt.  xxv.  41,  46.  "  He  may  seek  death,  but 
it  will  flee  from  him  ;  his  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
quenched." 

The  s  ul  of  the  sinner  must  undergo  this,  as  soon  as  in  death  it 
departs  from  the  body.  For  we  consider  it  as  an  opinion,  to  which 
we  ouo-ht  not  to  assent,  because  it  is  too  dangerous,  that  the  essence 
of  the  soul  consists  only  in  thought,  and  that  it  is  not  therefore  capa- 
ble of  residing  in  any  place  :  for  thou.2:ht  being  an  act  must  there- 
for.^ proceed  from  a  being,  which  actually  thinketh,  and  besides  this, 
we  must  sav  that  the  soul  being  in  no  place,  and  therefore  no  where, 
doth  really  not  exist  at  all :  and  what  becomes  of  tl^e  soul,  whea  it 
departs  from  the  body  ?  is  it  no  where  ?  how  is  the  believer  thea 
blessed,  when  he  dies  ?  according  to  Rev.  xiv.  1 3,  and  how  are  the  un- 
godly punished  ?  "  do  not  the  spirits  go  into  prison  then  ?"  I  Peter  iii, 
19.  And  how  do  those  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  suffer  the  vengeance 
of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7,  according  to  the  body  ?  No,  the  fire  by 
which  their  cities  and  bodies  were  burned,  hath  been  quenched  long 
since. 

The  body  is  indeed  freed  from  the  condemnation  of  hell  some- 
time ,  but  it  will  be  raised  up  again,  and  united  to  the  soul,  which  it 
had  served  as  an  nistrument  in  sinning,  in  o**der  to  be  punished  like- 
wise :  for  ''  many  shall  arise  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt," 
Dan.  xii.  2,  to  be  cast  with  body  and  soul  into  hell,"  where  they  will 
weep  with  their  eyes,  and  gnash  their  teeth,"  Matt.  xiii.  42,  and 
gnaw  their  tongues  for  pain,"  Rev.  xvi,  10. 

But  how  do  the  Socinians  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ungodly, 
when  they  teach  that  the  heathens,  who  have  not  had  the  gospel, 
will  be  annihilated,  and  suffer  only  a  painless  punishment  of  loss  and 
deprivation,  that  they  shall  not  see  the  face  of  God  ;  but  that  those 
who  have  had  the  gospel,  and  nevertheless  shghted  and  rejected  it, 
shall  be  consumed  by  a  dreadful  fire  at  the  last  day,  with  great  tor- 
ment, and  then  be  annihilated.  If  an  ungodly  man  can  believe  this, 
he  will  become  still  more  ungodly.  Such  a  doctrine  supposes  that 
the  soul  is  mortal,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  it,  and  to  the  Avord  of 
God*    The  word  of  God  testifieth  also,  that  all  the  ungodly  "shall 


i  u  ^l 

depart  into  everlasting  fire,  and  into  everlasting  torment,"  Matt.  xxv. 
41,  46,  and  that  '^  their  worm  shall  not  die,  and  that  their  fire  shall 
not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  "■  The  heathens  do  not  know  God," 
saith  Paul,  i  Thess.  iv.  5.  Now  "  God  will  take  vengeance  in  fli.m- 
ing  fire  on  them  who  do  not  know  him,  as  well  as  on  them,  who  do 
not  obey  the  gospel,"  2  Thess.  i  8.  The  men  of  Sodom  and  Go- 
morrah, who  were  heathens,  and  not  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  nor 
in  the  covenant,  *'  suffer  even  until  this  day  the  ver.geance  of  eternal 
nre,"  Jude  vrs.  7.  Surely  the  apostle  doth  not  mean  the  fire  by  which 
they  were  consumed,  since  that  was  not  the  eternal  fire,  for  it  doth 
Rot  burn  any  more. 

Behold  in  this  manner  doth  God  punish  sins  ;  but  dotli  he  pimish 
only  actual  sins  thus?  and  not  original  sin  alho  ?  suely  he  is  dis- 
pleased with  that  also,  and  will  punish  it  with  temporal  an.'  eternal 
judgments  ;  for  must  not  young  children,  who  have  only  original, 
and  not  actual  sins,  suffer  many  sorrows,  yea,  death  itself  ?  and  are 
not  these  miseries  a  punishment  of  their  original  sin  ?  we  may  not 
think  that  these  miseries  are  not  inflicted  upon  them  by  God,  nor 
that  God  visits  them  therewith,  without  regard  to  any  sinfulness  or 
punishment;  for  we  should  then  deny  either  tlie  providence  of  Clod, 
or  his  mercy  ;  but  may  we  think  that  children  who  die  without  com- 
mitting any  actual  sins  are  punished  for  ever  and  damned  ?  We  must 
speak  cautiously  here.  It  is  certain,  that  the  children  of  believing 
parents  are  received  with  their  parents  into  covenant  with  God,  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Acts  ii.  39,  and  are  therefore  called  "  holy" 
1  Cor.  i'.  14,  and  "the  kingdom  of  God  is  promised  to  them," 
Matt,  xix,  13,  14,  15.  See  our  exposition  uf  iafant  baptism,  Lord's 
Day  27.  But  this  is  not  the  subject  of  inquiry  here,  but  w."  e'her 
God  is  displeased  with  the  original  sin  of  children,  and  whether  he 
will  punish  it,  as  the  instructor  speaks  ?  and  truly  the  word  of  God 
teaches  us  this,  when  it  saith  that  "  the  whole  world,"  and  therefore 
children  also  "  are  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii  19.  We  are  also 
«  children  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  Children  are  sometin^s 
punished  with  their  parents,  who  are  punished  eternally,  as  we  sec 
in  the  children  of  the  first  world,  who  perished  in  the  flood  with  their 
parents,  **  who  are  in  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  and  this  grievous  judg* 
ment  befell  them  on  account  of  original  sin  also,  according  to  Gen. 
vi.  5,  6,  7.  Were  not  children  punished  in  the  fire  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  ?  and  do  not  these  suffer  even  until  this  day  "  the  punish- 
ment of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7.  * 

*  Our  author  doth  not  assert  here  absolutely,  that  any  infants  arc  actually 
lost,  bat  h«  only  argweg  frem   r«rfain  passage*  of  scriptur*,  with  rMpect  to 


Is  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Because  original  sin  is  a  punishment  of  Adam's  sin,  therefore  the 
Remonstrants  assert  that  God  doth  not  punish  original  sin  in  this 
manner ;  since  one  punishment  would  then  be  unjustly  punished 
■with  another.  But  original  sin  is  not  only  a  punishment  by  a  right- 
eous imputation  of  Adam's  guilt,  but  it  is  also  an  inherent  depravity, 
rendering  man  liable  to  punisiiment  from  his  birth  :  he  is  called  in- 
deed "  a  transgressor  from  the  womb,"  Isaiah  xlviii.  8-  We  must 
humble  ourselves  on  account  of  it,  with  David,  Psalm  li.  5,  and  with 
him  seek  for  the  pardon  of  it,  and  God  punishetb  one  sin  in  other 
instances  with  another,  which  sin  is  then  again  justly  punished. 

It  IS  contrary  to  the  word  of  Ciod,  as  we  will  show  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  Day,  that  Crod  hath  received  all  mankind,  who  fell  in  Adam, 
^nd  therefore  children  also  into  favour,  and  that  he  doth  not  conse- 
quently punish  original  sin.  \V  e  do  not  speak  here  of  the  covenant 
of  grace,  mto  which  some  children  are  received,  but  of  the  covenant 
of  works,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  God  punisheth  the  posterity 
of  Adam  on  account  of  the  breach  of  this  covenant.  Doth  God  re- 
ceive all  men  graciously  into  a  general  covenant  of  grace,  he  will 
nevertheless,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  Remonstrants, 
punish  many  of  them  ;  for  they  teach  that  every  individual  of  man- 
kind will  not  be  eternally  happy. 

It  is  true  God  forgave  the  sin  of  Adam,  when  he  promised  him 
the  seed  of  the  w  mian  .  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom,  that  he 
forgave  the  whole  human  race,  who  had  sinned  in  him,  that  sin,  and 

this  matter,  In  such  a  manner,  as  to  show,  that  we  must  not  presume  to  decide 
positively,  that  all  infants  are  saved  ;  neither  doth  the  catechism,  or  any 
other  standard  of  our  church  declare  absolutely,  that  any  infants,  who  die 
before  I  hey  have  committed  £Ctual  sins,  are  damned,  but  only  with  the  word 
of  God,  that  we  are  by  nature  child»-en  of  wrath,  and  that  unless  a  person  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  and  that  those  who  die  in 
their  natural,  or  unregenerate  state  suffer  not  only  for  actual  sins  ,  but  als© 
for  their  or.ginal,  or  birth  sin.  We  cannot  indeed  tell,  but  that  it  may  please 
God,  of  ^is  nilinite  compassion,  to  regenerate  all  those  chrildren,  whom  he 
takes  out  of  the  world  before  they  have  committed  ;iCtual  sins.  Leading 
divines  have  differed  in  their  opinions  concerning  the  future  condition  of  in- 
fants. But  although  we  cannot  decide  positively  u'hat  the  actual  state  of 
infants  may  be  after  this  life,  nevertheless  Christians  in  general  have  always 
conceived,  tnat  we  have  greater  encouragement  from  scripture  to  hope  well  of 
infants,  who  die  within  the  pale  of  the  church,  than  of  those  who  die  without 
that  pale,  since  the  fermer  are  entitled  to  the  promises,  and  therefore  may  be 
baptized,  but  the  latter  have  no  express  promise,  and  therefore  may  not  be 
btptired.  Those  Christians  who  have  conceived  that  any  children  were  lost, 
Jiave  always  holden  that  the.e  was  a  great  diflerence  between  the  unhappines.-i 
p,f  such,  and  of  persons  who  have  committed  actual  sins- 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  10.  li,  99 

that  he  doth  not  punish  them  for  it ;  for  if  God  forgave  Kim  his  per- 
sonal sin,  he  did  not  therefore  forgive  the  whole  human  race  that  sinj 
unless  Adam  were  the  head  of  the  whole  human  race  in  the  cove- 
nant of  i^race,  as  well  as  in  the  covenant  of  works,  which  no  man  can 
say,  who  holds  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  ac* 
cording  to  Rom.  v.  15 — 19.  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22,  49. 

But  how  is  God  displeased  with  sin  ?  **  terribly,"  sai^h  the  in- 
structor. Therefore  the  an^^er  of  C^od  is  likened  to  the  most  terrible 
things,  to  wit,  to  't  a  fire  whjch  burns  to  the  lowest  hell,"  Deut.  xxxii. 
22.  to  "  instruments  of  death,  a  sharp  sword,  a  bent  bow  and  arrows," 
Psalm  vii.  11,  12,  13,  to  "a  grievous  whirlwind  from  the  Lord."  Jer. 
xxiii.  19,  to  the  "  dregs"  of  a  poisonous  cup,  Psalm  Ixxv.  8.  Jtr,  xxv. 
15,  16,  and  to  the  raging  of  a  •'  fierce  lion,  leopard  and  bear,"  Hosea 
xiii.  7.  8.     There   are  also  many  examples  of  God's  terrible  anger. 
We  will  not  speak  now  of  the  dreadful  judgments  that  befell  the  old 
world.   Sodom  and  the  seditious  company  of  Korah,  see  only  how 
even  the  most   1  oly  men  have  roared  under  a  sense  of  (iod's  anger. 
How  was  Job  forced  to  complain  of  "  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty," 
chap.  vi.  4.      Feman  was  "  afflicted  and  ready  to  die  from  his  youth 
iip,\  8cc.  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  15 — 19.  Row  grievously  the  Son  of  God 
himself  was  oppressed  l)y  tlie  wrath  ot   God   we   may  see  from  his 
bitter  complaints  m  the  garden,  and  on  the  cross,  and  the  distress  of 
heaven  and  earth,  whicli  seemed  to  suffer  with  him,  and  on  account 
of  him.    Matt.  xxvi.  37 — 44.  chap    xxvii.  45 — 54      And  when  God 
attacks  impenitent  sinners,  how  doth  it  affright  them,  and  what 
trembling  siezes  on  them,  saying,  "  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with 
devouring  fire  ?  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burn- 
ings r"  Isaiah   xxxiii    14.   Only  represent   to  yourselves  how  sadly 
the  damned  weep  with  their  eyes,  how  they  gnash  their  teeth,  how 
they  gnaw  their  tongues,  wring  their  hands,  how  they  seek  for  death 
in  vain,  and  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.     We  can  also  conceive 
that  God  is  terribly  displeased,  when  we  consider  that  he  is  not  de- 
ficient in  wisdom  to  contrive  terrible  punishmepts,  nor  in  power  to 
execute  them  upon  those  who  reproach  his  name.     He  denounceth 
his  curse   against  the  least  sin,   Gal.   iii.    10.     Many  Bethshemites 
were  punished  with  death,  because  they  looked  inquisitively  into  the 
ark,  and  Uzza,  because  he  laid  hold  of  it  in  an  indiscreet  manner, 
1  Sam.  vi.  19,  20.  2  Sam.  vi.  6,  7.     When  we  add  to  this  that  God 
will  punish  sin  eternally,  we  may  then  also  imagine  how  terribly 
God  is  displeased  with  sin. 

Since  God  is  so  terribly  displeased  with  sin,  he  will  also  "  cer- 
tainly" punish  it,  as  he  hath  spokei;i,  Deut.  xxvii-  26.  Gal.  iii.  10c 


04  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

"Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  thini^s  that  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  This  is  the  threatening  of  the 
covenant  of  works :  for  Paul  proves  from  this  sentence  of  cursing, 
that  "  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,'* 
Gal.  iii.  10 ;  to  which  curse  pertain  likewise  all  the  threatenings  de- 
nounced in  the.  word  of  God  against  the  unconverted  sinner  ;  for  it 
is  *  the  law  only  that  worket  •  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  therefore 
this  sentence  ot  the  curse  is  very  properly  referred  by  the  inslructoi* 
to  original,  as  well  as  to  actual  sin,  inasmuch  as  both  belong  to  the 
covenant  of  works.  When  this  curse  v/as  announced  to  the  Israelites* 
with  whom  God  had  already  established  his  covenant  of  grace,  Deut» 
xxxvi.  16,  it  was  not,  because  he  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works 
with  them,  but  because  he  chose  to  exhibit  the  broken  covenant  of 
works  to  them  by  the  legal  administration  of  the  covenant  of  gr^ce^ 
in  order  that  he  might  convince  them,  and  urge  them  to  the  Mes- 
siah, who  was  to  come.  See  Gal  iii.  10 — 24.  V'hen  God  saith  this, 
we  must  also  believe  it,  and  be  assu-ed  that  he  will  certainly  punish 
sin  ;  for  he  is  true  in  his  threateninjjs  as  well  as  in  his  promises  ; 
therefore  Samuel  said  with  respect  to  the  judgment  denounced 
against  Saul,  "  He  who  is  the  strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  ror  re- 
pent ;  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  repent,"  1  Sam.  xv.  29. 
When  the  curses  were  denounced  from  mount  Ebal,  "  all  the  people- 
should  say  Amen,"  Deut.  xxvii.  IS — 26. 

It  is  also  "  necessary,"  that  God  should  punish  sin,  not  only  on 
account  of  his  truth,  since  he  hath  said  it,  but  also  because  it  is  natu- 
ral to  him  ;  for  it  doth  not  proceed  merely  from  his  free  good  pleas- 
ure, but  also  from  his  nature,  that  he  doth  punish  sin.  For  (1)  "sin 
is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God,"  his  glory  and 
sovereignty,  which  we  must  acknowledge,  and  also  that  we  have  to 
do  with  him.  AH  this  is  denied  and  rejected  by  the  sinner,  when  he 
sinneth-  as  though  God  were  not  worthy  to  be  feared,  loved  and  serv- 
ed ;  and  so  his  most  high  majesty  is  dishonoured.  Sirce  now  God 
loves  himself,  and  therefore  also  his  glorious  majesty,  with  the 
greatest  love,  he  cannot  but  be  jealous  of  sin  ;  and  what  is  the  jeal- 
ousy of  God,  but  an  avenging  punishment,  whereby  he  restores  his 
injured  majesty  to  its  proper  lustre  ?  "  He  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty.  His  name  is  jealous,  and  he  is  a  jealous  God,"  Exod. 
xxxiv.  7,  14.  Nahum  i.  1,2.  Therefore  it  is  said,  that  he  is  glori-. 
fied,  when  he  punishes  sin.  Numb.  xiv.  2 1,  22,  23,  and  that  he  "com- 
forts" himself,  when  he  taketh  vengeance,  Isaiah  i.  24.  (2)  The. 
holiness  of  God  hath  a  natural  aversion  from  the  sinner  on  acount  of 
his  sin,  and  it  is  natural  to  God  to  hate   sin  :  "  He  is  of  purer  eyoG.. 


lu  9i 

than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab.  i.  13  Can  he  therefore,  who  is  holiness 
itself,  exercise  communion  with  the  sinner,  as  he  wouW  do,  if  he  did 
not  punish  him,  but  showed  him  favour r  If  it  were  possibk-  for  him 
not  to  hate  sin,  it  would  be  possible  for  him  to  love  it.  How  contrary 
this  is  to  the  holy  nature  of  God,  how  averse  he  is  from  sin,  and  on 
account  of  it  from  the  sinner,  is  known  to  all.  What  is  God's  hatred 
and  aversion  from  sin  and  the  sinner  ?  is  it  not  the  greatest  punish- 
ment ?  see  Psalm  v.  5,  6,  7.  2  Thess.  i.  9.  If  God  did  not  punish  sin, 
he  would  then  seem  to  be  "  like  the  sinner,"  Psalm  1  21,  but  when 
he  punishes  sin,  he  then  shows  that  he  is  holy.  Lev.  x  I,  2,  3.  Ezek. 
xxviii.  22.  (3)  The  justice  of  God,  as  judge  of  the  whole  earth  re» 
quires  also,  that  he  should  punish  sin,  surely  the  judiciary  punish- 
ment of  sin  is  an  act  not  only  of  anger,  but  also  of  justice,  "  God  is 
indeed  a  righteous  judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry  every  day,"  Psalm 
vii-  12.  cxxix.  4.  Rom.  ii.  5.  Is  not  this  punitive  justice  of  God  as 
judge,  natural  to  him,  as  well  as  his  other  natural  perfections,  which 
he  cannot  deny  ?  can  we  indeed  conceive  of  God,  as  contrary  to  this 
judiciary  justice,  and  as  a  judge,  who  is  not  righteous  ?  "  The  Gen- 
tiles know  the  judgment  of  God ;  that  they  who  commit  such  things 
are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  How  do  the  Gentiles  know  this  ? 
by  a  revelation  ?  no,  but  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  by  their  own 
consciences,  whereby  "  they  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in 
the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.  Now  it  is  certain  that  they  cannot  know 
this  judgment  of  God  by  the  light  of  nature,  if  the  punitive  justice 
of  God  be  not  natural  to  him  :  for  that  which  depends  upon  the  free 
good  pleasure  of  Cod,  and  upon  his  government  no  man  can  know 
by  the  light  of  nature,  but  only  by  revelation.  If  God  did  not  punish 
sin,  he  would  not  do  right,  as  a  judge,  either  to  himself  or  to  the 
sinful  creature,  and  therefore  God  is  said  to  declare  his  righteousness 
when  he  punishes  sin,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  (4)  The  authority  of  God 
as  a  lawgiver,  by  which  he  requireth  obedience  of  his  rational  crea- 
tures is  natural  to  him  :  he  cannot  discharge  man  of  his  duty  and 
obligation  to  keep  his  commands  :  "  On  account  of  his  incomparable 
glory  he  may  justly  require  that  every  one  should  fear  him,"  Jer» 
X.  6,  7  If  God  can  suffer  the  sinner  to  remain  unpunished,  he  can 
then  also  discharge  him  of  his  obligation  to  obedience  ;  for  when  he 
did  not  punish  the  sinner,  he  would  say  that  he  could  endure  that 
tnan  should  not  obey  him,  which  surely  cannot  be. 

Let  no  man  say  that  punishment  is  a  strange  work  of  God,  and  is 
not  natural  to  him,  because  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxviii.  21.  "The  Lord 
shall  rise  up  as  in  mount  Perazim,  he  shall  be  wroth  as  in  the  valley 
x>{  Gibeon,  tliat  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work ;  and  bring 


91^  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act ;"  for  the  Socinians  and  others,  who 
object  this  to  us,  must  answer  this  objection  themselves,  inasmuch 
as  they  say  that  it  is  natural  to  God  to  punish  the  impenitent  sinner^ 
who  persists  in  sinning  without  reformation  ;  yet  they  will  not  allow 
this  with  regard  to  every  sin,  as  they  do  with  regard  to  impenitence, 
when  nevertlieless  impenitence  is  punishable  only  on  account  of  its 
sinfulness,  and  not  on  account  of  its  duration  ;  for  duration  is  of  itself 
pot  si.'Kul,  but  in  several  mstances  commendable.  With  regardi-to 
Jsaiaa  xxviii  21,  we  do  not  read  there,  that  God's  work  and  act  of 
punishing  is  strange  to  God,  but  only  that  it  is  strange :  and  to 
^hom  should  it  be  strange  ?  to  God?  no:  but  to  the  transgressors, 
on  whom  God  would  inflict  a  strange  and  unusual  pUi  ishment. 

As  God  punishes  sin  terribly,  certainly,  and  necessarily,  so  he  pun- 
ishes it  ''justly."  In  order  that  the  punishment  may  be  just,  it  must 
be  equal  to  the  sin^  and  not  exct- ed  it :  and  so  a  just  punishment  is 
that  "  recompence  of  an  errour  which  is  meet,"  Rom.  i-  2f  ii.  6, 
Kow  sin  is  committ.  d  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God :  but 
sin  is  grievous  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  of  the  pefson,  against 
whom  it  is  committed.  See  Job  xxxiv.  18,  19.  1  Sam  ii.  25.  Since 
now  sin  is  committed  against  the  infinite  God,  and  his  most  high 
majesty,  therefore  sin  is  also,  in  a  certain  respect,  infinite,  to  wit, 
with  respect  to  the  infinite  object  of  sin  :  "  and  therefore  the  justice 
of  God  requireth  that  sin,  which  is  cbmmitted  against  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting 
punishment,  both  of  body  and  soul."  Since  now  it  doth  not  please 
God  to  annihilate  the  sinner,  but  to  suffer  him  to  exist  for  ever,  there- 
fore it  is  also  an  act  of  justice  to  punish  him  for  ever  with  a  sensible 
punishment,  because  he  hath  sinned  against  God,  who  will  exist  for 
ever,  and  because  he  will  continue  to  sin,  on  account  of  his  abomi- 
nableness,  which  will  cleave  to  him  for  ever. 

II.  The  careless  sinner,  unwilling  to  be  disturbed  by  the  terrible- 
ness  and  justice  of  the  punishment,  sooths  and  hardens  himself  with 
the  mercy  of  God,  as  if  that  Would  overcome  and  swallow  up  his 
justice  ;  in  which  he  is  strengthened  by  the  Socinians,  when  they 
alledge  the  mercy  of  God  against  the  doctrine  of  his  punishing  jus* 
tice,  asking,  "  Is  not  God  then  also  merciful?"  We  allow  that  God 
is  indeed  merciful,  as  well  as  just ;  but  God  will  not  exercise  mercy 
to  the  disparagement  of  his  justice.  To  illustrate  this  we  will  ex- 
plain wherein  the  mercy  of  God  consists,  and  in  what  manner  it  is 
exercised,  and  we  will  then  show  that  it  doth  not  militate  against 
bis  strict  justice. 

Mercy  in  man  is  a  sorrowful  perturbation  of  mind,  on  account  of 


 

the  suffering  of  another,  disposing  him  to  rescue  the  sufferer.  But 
the  Lord  God  being  independent,  simple,  unchangable,  and  perfectly- 
happy,  cannot  be  affected  with  such  an  agitation  and  perturbation  of 
mind :  therefore,  when  it  is  said  of  him,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
that  he  is  merciful,  it  must  be  understood  in  a  sense  which  is  wor- 
thy of  the  nature  of  God  ;  and  so  the  mercy  of  God  is  only  his  good- 
ness to  the  miserable,  which  he  exerciseth,  either  by  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  even  upon  the  vilest  sinners,  as  Jesus  aaith,  Luke  vi. 
35,  Sec.  '*  He  is  kind  to  the  unthankful,  and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye, 
therefore,  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful."  Or  God  exer» 
cises  his  mercy  by  conferring  special  and  saving  benefits  in  Christ 
upon  the  elect.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  of  this,  Eph.  ii.  45.  "  God, 
who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even 
when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ." 
But  although  God  is  so  merciful,  he  is  also  just :  and,  he  requires 
that  sin  should  be  punished,  and  his  mercy  doth  not  abolish  his  vin- 
dictive justice  ;  for  the  attributes  of  God  cannot  militate,  one  ag-ainst 
anothef,  whereby  one  wouh;  detract  from  the  lustre  of  another  ;  b\it 
one  must  increase  the  lustre  of  the  other:  therefore,  the  justice  and 
mercy  of  God  are  joined  together  to  his  praise.  See  Exod.  xxxiv. 
6,  7.    Psalm  cxi   3,  4.  cxii   4.  cxvi.  5. 

When  this  is  rightly  considered,  we  will  see,  (a)  that  there  is  no 
force  in  this  objection  to  deny  the  vindictive  justice  of  God  :  for  al- 
though God  is  merciful  to  the  unthankful  and  evil,  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  on  them,  he  will  nevertheless  punish  them  severely,  if 
not  in  this  life,  yet  after  this  life.  Common  mercy  is  not  shown  to 
them  in  order  to  exempt  them  from  eternal  punishment,  but  it  only- 
moderates  their  punishment  for  a  season,  in  order  to  afford  them  a 
testimony  of  the  divine  goodness,  and  invite  them  to  repentance. 
2  Peter,  iii.  9.  "that  they  may  be  without  excuse."  Rom.  i.  19,20. 
"  Do  they  despise  the  riches  of  the  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and 
longsuffering  of  God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth 
them  to  repentance,  they  do  after  their  hardness  and  impenitent 
hearts,  treasure  up  wrath  to  themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Rom.  ii.  4,  5« 
Doth  he  show  his  special  mercy  to  the  salvation  of  the  elect,  this 
supposeth  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice  by  Christ,  whereby  he  hath 
borne  their  punishment.  Isaiah  liii.  4,  5.  Rom.  iii.  25,  26. (b)  We 
may  also  learn  from  what  hath  been  said  before,  that  this  objection 
proceeds  from  a  mistaken  notion  of  tlie  divine  mercy,  and  of  man's 
sinful  misery.  The  Socinians  imagine  tliat  God,  as  well  as  man,  is 
subject  to  the  passions  «f  anger,  sorix)w,  and  so  also  of  mercy;  and 

R 


9i  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN, 

that  he  is  moved  by  the  misery  of  men,  to  abstain  from  punisbih^ 
him.  and  to  dehver  him.  But  such  agitations  of  mind  raihtatc 
against  the  independence,  simplicity,  unchangableness,  and  hap- 
piness of  God  ;  and  besides  this,  the  sinful  misery  of  man  is  not 
adapted  to  excite  mercy  and  compassion,  whereby  God  should  be 
moved  to  deliver  him  ;  but  it  is  a  misery  Avhich  excites  hatred  and 
detestation,  and  thus  calls  for  the  righteous  anger  of  God.  Psalm  v. 
4,5,6.  J  lab.  i.  13.  See  how  loathsome  the  sinner  is  described, 
Ezek.  xvi.  1.5.  How  tan  God  be  moved  by  such  a  misery  to  com- 
passion ?  Must  he  not  remove  the  Avorker  of  iniquity  from  his  pre- 
sence ?  "  The  way  of  the  sinner  is  before  God  like  the  uncleanness 
of  a  lAenstruous  woman  ;  therefore  he  pours  his  fury  out  upon 
him."  Ezek.  xxxvi.  17,  18.  Can  any  man  from  pity  take  up 
a  toad  that  hath  been  trodden  under  foot,  and  that  wallows  in  its 
blood  and  poisonous  spittle,  lick  )t,  or  kiss  it,  in  order  to  heal  it? 
surely  no :  he  cannot  look  upon  it,  but  must  remove  it  from  his  sight. 
Much  less  can  the  holy  God,  wiiO  is  holiness  itself,  embrace  in  his 
special  kindness  and  love,  the  hateful  tinner,  without  a  satisfaction  to 
his  justice. (e)  We  add  also,  that  this  objection  is  out  of  its  place. 
God  is  merciful  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  not  in  the  covenant  of 
works,  which  the  sinner  hath  broken.  Mercy  hath  no  place  in  the 
broken  covenant  of  works,  but  only  justice  ;  "  The  law  worketh 
wratli."  Rom.  iv.  15.  All  the  mercy  whereby  God  honours  his 
people  with  saving  grace,  proceeds  from  the  covenant  of  grace 
which  supposeth  the  death  of  the  iVTediator,  and  therefore  God's  vin- 
dictive justice.  ITeb.  ix  15.  Since  now  this  Lord's  day  treats  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  on  account  of  our  breach  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  therefore  the  objection  from  the  mercy  of  God 
in  the  covenant  of  Grace  is  out  o(  its  proper  place  here. 


APPLICATION. 

In  this  manner  do  the  Socinians  deny  by  their  doctrine  the  terrible 
displeasure  of  God,  by  which  he  punisheth  sin.  temporally  and  eter- 
nally, certainly  and  justly  :  but  this  is  denied  by  you  also,  who  have 
not  yet  tied  to  Christ  by  faith  and  conversion,  in  order  to  obtain  his 
righteousness.     For, 

1.  Ye  do  not  yet  know  the  demerit  of  your  sins.  If  ye  knew  it, 
and  believed  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God  on  account  of  your  sins, 
would  ye  not  then  fear  and  tremble  more  because  of  your  sins,  and 
those  terrible  punishments,  which  ye  must  expect  ?  woujd  ye  be  sc*' 
careless,  and  "when  ye  do  evil,  skip  for  joy  ?"  Jer.  xi,  15. 


\.  99 

2.  When  God  punishes  you  in  this  life  with  many  and  grievous 
calamities,  ye  do  not  then  perceive  Ihat  God  doth  this  on  account  of 
your  sins  and  impenitence  :  ye  look  not  at  him  who  smites  you,  but 
think  that  time  and  chance  bring  these  things  forth  :  ye  think  that 
they  come  to  pass,  as  though  "  afflictions  came  forth  out  of  the  earth, 
and  trouble  sprang  up  out  of  the  ground,"  Job  v.  6.  And  so  ye  say 
with  your  deeds,  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do 
evil,"  Zeph.  i.  12, 

3.  How  often  do  ye  harden  yourselves  against  God's  terrible  judg- 
ments !  for  when  he  smites  you,  ye  do  not  relent ;  and  it  doth  not 
induce  you  to  br.?ak  oif  your  iniquities  :  but  ye  start  up  against  his 
procedure,  and  add  to  your  abominable  sins,  like  "  Ahaz,  who  in  the 
time  of  his  trouble,  trespassed  still  more  against  the  Lord,"  2  Chron. 
xxviii.  22.  "  Doth  God  smite  you,  ye  are  not  grieved  ;  doth  he 
consume  you,  ye  refuse  to  receive  correction  ;  ye  make  your  faces 
harder  than  a  rock,  and  refuse  to  return,"  Jer.  v.  3.  Doth  a  fear 
for  the  wrath  to  come  ever  take  hold  of  you,  it  is  irksome  to  you,  ye 
endeavour  to  stifle  your  consciences,  and  to  "  cover  your  transg:res  ■ 
sions  like  Adam,  by  hiding  your  iniquity  in  your  bosom,"  Job  xxxi. 
33.  Gen.  iii.  1?. 

4.  Ye  flatter  and  deceive  yourselves,  thinking  that  ye  wil^  not  be 
punished  &o  severely :  "  When  ye  hear  the  words  of  this  curse,  ye 
do  then  bless  yourselves  in  your  hearts,  saying,  We  shall  have  peace, 
though  we  walk  in  the  imagination  of  ©ur  hearts,"  Deut.  xxix.  19. 
Ye  think  these  threatenings  have  been  denounced  so  long,  nothing 
v/ill  come  of  them,  like  '*  the  scoffers  in  the  last  days,'  2  Peter  iii. 
4.  If  yc  dare  not  be  so  wicked,  ye  put  the  evil  day  far  off,  and 
think,  the  vision  is  yet  for  many  days,  and  a  man  will  not  be  misera- 
ble before  the  time  ;  but,  friends,  when  God  c'efers,  he  dot,ii  not  then 
desert,  and  when  he  defers,  it  ought  not  to  render  you  more  care- 
less and  wicked,  but  it  ought  to  '^  lead  you  to  repentance,"  Rom.  ii. 
4.  2  Peter  iii,  9.  Dotli  fear  beset  you,  ye  banish  it,  and  flatter  your= 
selves  with  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for 
sin.  But  is  G,od  merciful  to  you  with  his  saving  favour  ?  and  hath 
Jesus  suff*ered  for  your  sins  ?  he  hath  surely  suff'ered  for  none  but 
those  ^'^  who  turn  from  transgression,"  Isaiah  lix.  20.  Do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  turn  yet  ?  wken  ?  when  this  or  that  opportunity  occurs  I 
but  perhaps  ere  such  an  opportunity  occurs,  "  the  decree  of  God  will; 
bring  forth,  the  day  will  pass  as  the  chaff",  the  fierce  anger  of  the 
Lord  will  come  upon  you,"  Zeph.  ii.  2.  Ye  say.  We  hope  not ;  but 
your  hope  is  vain  and  ungrounded,  it  will  forsake  you.  Do  ye  suffer 
niany  affUctions,  and  do  ye  comfort  yourselves  with  a  hope,  ths^t 


100  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

these  will  be  the  full  measure  of  your  sufferings,  and  that  ye  win  not 
be  obliged  to  suffer  hereafter  ?  this  is  nothing  but  deceit ;  your  suf- 
ferings in  this  world  vill  not  diminish  aught  froncs  your  eternal  pui>- 
ishment ;  the>  are  only  the  beginnings  of  eternal  sorrows.  Or  do- 
ye  inna^nie,  that  ye  are  delivered  from  tht.  wrath  of  God,  because  ye 
arc  not  so  wicked  as  this  or  that  person,  but  are  civil  and  devout  ? 
But  was  not  the  Pharisee  so  virtuous  as  thiS)  and  did  not  "  he  go 
down  to  his  house  unjustified  ?"  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.  When  ye  have 
no  more  cloaks  for  your  shame,  when  they  have  all  been  taken  from 
you,  and  your  abominableness  and  misery  have  been  discovered  to 
you,  ye  then  think,  it  would  be  truly  sad,  that  ye  should  be  aban- 
doned to  wretchedness ;  and  because  your  self-love  will  not  suffer 
you  to  think  the  worst  of  yourselves,  ye  imagine  that  this  Mill  not 
befall  you.  But  how  exceedingly  will  ye  be  disappointed,  when  Cod 
will  attack  you,  while  ye  do  not  expect  it,  with  his  almighty  anger, 
and  not  as  a  man,  when  ye  will  bewail  yourselves  too  late,  and 
"  mourn  at  the  last,  saying,  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my 
heart  despised  reproof?  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teach- 
ers, nor  inchneJ  mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?  Prov  v.  1 1, 
12,  13.  Do  ye  ask,  What  shall  we  nevertheless  do  ?  will  ye  indeed 
do  aught?  if  ye  will,  come  then  hither,  and  I  will  instruct  you.  (1) 
Behold  your  utter  abominableness  and  woful  misery:  ye  have  ariginal 
and  actual  sins  :  the  terrible  wrath  of  God  lieth  upon  you,  and  ye 
have  reason  to  expect  that  God  will  attack  you  shortly  vvith  his  fiery 
indignation.  Because  ye  do  not  attend  to  this,  therefore  ye  remain 
hardened,  careless,  and  do  not  seek  for  any  real  recovery.  That  ye 
may  therefore  awake,  behold  the  greatness  of  your  misery,  pause, 
and  endeavour  to  understand  it,  that  ye  may  be  penetrated  with 
grief  and  concern,  "  Examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  your- 
selves strictly,  O  ye  listless  people."  Zeph.  ii.  1,  See  Jer,  ii.  19,  23. 

2.  Beware  of  accusing  the  Lord  of  excessive  severity,  or  of  in- 
justice :  "  Is  God  unrighteous,  who  taketh  vengeance  ?  God  forbid  : 
for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?"  Rom.  iii.  5,  6.  Not  only 
David  said,  Psalm  cxix.  37.  "  Righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord,  and  up- 
right are  thy  judgments  ;"  but  even  the  hardened  Pharaoh  cried  out, 
Exod-  ix.  2f .  "  The  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are 
wicked."  Do  not  do  less  than  this,  that  the  Lord  may  not  compel . 
you  by  his  mighty  displeasure  to  such  an  acknoM'ledgment. 

3.  Earnestly  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  your  great  misery. 
To  be  unconcerned  whether  we  shall  be  saved  or  damned,  to  do 
nothing  in  order  to  escape  damnation,  and  obtain  salvation,  is  cer- 
tainly the  greatest  madness,  of  which  a  human  being  is  capable : 


iO,  U.  ipi 

«Be  zealous  therefore  and  repent,"  Rev.  iii.  19.  Do  not  imagine 
that  a  few  ceremonies,  or  a  mere  heartless  sigh  will  save  a  sinner : 
no,  he  must  strive  earnestly :  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  £^ate  i 
for  many  shall  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be- able,"  saith  the 
Saviour,  Luke  xiii.  24.  "  The  violent  only  take  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  force,"  Matt.  xl.  12.  We  must,  like  one  who  is  pursued 
and  afraid,  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  Matt.  iii.  7. 

4.  Do  not  seek  any  happiness  or  deliverance  by  your  oWn  doings, 
but  only  by  fleeing  to  the  Mediator  Jesus,  that  "  ye  may  be  found  in 
him,  and  obtain  his  righteousness,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  7,  8,  9,  for 
'•  there  is  salvation  in  none  other,"  Acts  iv.  12.  Jesus  alone  is  "  set 
forth  of  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Therefore  look  unto  him  and  ha 
saved,"  Thus  he  calls  to  you,  Isaiah  xlv  22. 

5.  Be  afraid  of  the  least  sin  ;  for  it  is  committed  against  the 
niost  high  majesty  of  God,  and  he  punishes  it  terribly.  This  should 
render  every  one  fearful  of  sinning,  like  Job,  who  said — *'  Destruc- 
tion from  God  was  a  terrour  to  me,  and  by  reason  of  his  highness  I 
could  not  endure."  Job  xxxi.  23.  He  who  persists  in  sinnine:  wilful- 
ly and  wittingly,  cannot  expect  any  mercy  ;  "but  he  who  confesseth 
and  forsaketh  sin,  shall  obtain  mercy  "  Prov.  xxviii.  13.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well.  Come  now,  and  let  us  rea- 
son together,  saith  the  Lord  :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool."     Isaiah  i    l6,  18. 

But  permit  me  to  address  you  also,  O  believers,  who,  from  a  pain- 
ful and  distressing  view  of  your  sins  and  demerits,  have  fled  to  the 
Mediator,  and  reject,  with  a  holy  displeasure,  your  indweUing  corrup- 
tions >(i)  see  from  v/hat  ye  are  delivered.  God,  the  Lord,  was  terri- 
bly displeased  with  you  also,  on  account  of  your  original  and  actual 
sins :  but  "  Jesus  hath  delivered  you  from  the  wrath  to  come." 
!  Thes.  i.  10,  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  that  he  will  not  be  any 
more  wroth  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you."  Isaiah  liv.  9.  '*  There  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  v/hich  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Rom.  viii.  1. 
^'  To  you  also,"  who'have  considered  yourselves  as  "the  greatest  sin- 
ners, hath  mercy  been  shown."    1  Tim.  i.   13,  16. 

2.  Behold  now,  also,  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  done  for  you. 
From  pure  and  inconceivable  love,  he  took  all  your  original  and  actu- 
al sins  upon  himself,  in  order  to  deliver  you  :  on  account  of  them  he 
subjected  himself  to  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God,  he  suffered  it  in 
its  utmost  extent,  and  thus  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  you.  "  To 
redeem  you  from  the  curse  of  th*-.  law,  he  became  a  curse  for  you^** 


1Q2  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Gal.  iii.  1 3.  With  what  an  ardent  love  did  he  love  you,  and  how^ 
did  the  zeal  of  God's  house  eat  him  up,  when  your  reproacheSit 
wherewith  ye  had  reproached  the  Lord,  fell  on  him!"  Psalm  Ixix. 
9.  Attend  a  while  to  this  matter,  endeavour  to  lof.^k  deep  into  it, 
that  ye  may  be  filled  with  wonder,  with  abasins^  thoughts  of  your- 
selves, with  joy  and  praise,  and  so  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with 
all  the  saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and 
hei8:ht ;  and  may  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  know^ 
ledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Eph.  iii. 
18,  19. 

Conduct  yourselves  v/ortbily  of  the  inexpressible  love  and  mercy 
that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  How  great  an  aversion  ought  ye  to 
manifest  in  all  your  behaviour  to  your  original  and  actual  sins  !  how 
ought  ye  to  strive  against  them,  and  mortify  them  !  and  how  to  ex- 
ert yourselves  to  conduct  in  a  manner  that  is  pleasing  to  tht*  Lord  ! 
for  what  end  did  '^  Jesus  give  himself  for  you?"  was  it  not,  "that 
he  might  redeem  you  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  you  to  himself  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  ?"  Titus  ii.  14.  Let  then 
*'  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  you  to  live  no  more  unto  yourselves, 
but  to  him  who  died  for  you,  and  rose  again-"    2  Cor.  v.  14,  15. 

4.  Have  compassion  and  take  pity  on  tho-^e  poor  and  miserable 
persons,  who  manifest  by  all  their  conversation,  that  they  lie  yet  un-. 
der  the  terrible  wrath  of  God,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lies  to  save 
them  :  *^  Of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference,  and  others 
save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,"  saith  holy  Jude  in  his, 
epistle,  verse  22,  23. 

Are  ye  yet  often  afraid  of  the  displeasure  of  God,  because  ye  have 
still  so  great  a  power  of  inbred  corruption  in  yourselves,  and  com- 
mit so  many  actual  sins  ?  Well,  the  terrible  displeasure,  and  vin- 
dictive justice  of  God  cannot  assail  you  on  account  of  these  things ; 
Christ  hath  borne  them,  and  delivered  you  theref  om.  It  is  true,  the 
lawworketh  wrath,  and  denounceth  the  curse  against  the  sinner  ;  but 
your  "  sin  was  condemned  in  the  flesh  of , Christ,  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  you."  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Doth 
the  Lord  render  your  condition  unhappy  by  visiting  you  with  many 
opiritual  and  bodily  afflictions  ?  Those  do  not,  however,  proceed 
from  the  wrath  oi  God,  but  from  his  fatherly  love  and  care  ;  *'  that 
ye  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  Heb.  xii.  5,  11.  Ye  shall  one 
day  be  perfectly  and  for  ever  delivered  from  all  your  calamities,  and 
be  instated  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  God's  blissful  mercy  and  love  : 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  saith,  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  "our  light  affliction,  which 
is  but  for  a  moment,  worneth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternssj 
weight  of  glory"     Amen. 


(103) 


THE 


NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTIOT^ 


Y.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Romans  viii.  3,  4.  For  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak,  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son,  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  :  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.

Q.  11.  lis  not  God  then  also  tnerafidf 

A.  God  is  indeed  merciful,  but  also  just ;  therefore  his  justice  re- 
quires, that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  also  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting  pun- 
ishment, both  of  body  and  souL 


T, 


HINE  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslid- 
ings  shall  reprove  thee :  know  therefore  and  see,  that  it  is  an  evil 
thing  and  bitter,  that  thou  hast  forsaken  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  that 
my  fear  is  not  in  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God  of  hosts,"  Jer,  ii.  19, 
The  sinner  delights  and  rejoices  in  the  evil  of  sin,  as  though  it  were 
exceedingly  good  and  pleasant :  for  "  he  calls  good  evil,  and  evil 
good,"  Isaiah  v.  20.  "  His  taste  is  corrupt,  and  therefore  evil  is 
sweet  in  his  mouth :  he  spares  it,  and  forsakes  it  not ;  but  keeps  it 
still  within  his  mouth."  Yet  hoAv  bitter  will  it  prove  to  him  !  "  His 
meat  in  his  bowels  shall  be  turned,  it  shall  be  the  gall  of  asps  within 
bim,"  Job  XX.  12,  13,  14.  Sin  is  in  itself  exceedingly  evil  and  bitter: 


84  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

for  thereby  we  forsake  the  Lord,  the  rock  of  salvation  :  we  deny  hit. 
holiness,  righteousness,  and  supreme  authority,  we  "  stretch  out  our 
hands  against  God,  and  strengthen  ourselves  against  the  xMmighty  : 
we  run  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck,  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his 
buckler,"  as  Eliphas  speaks,  Job  xv.  25,  26.  Godly  persons,  seeing 
their  sins,  and  th^  abominable  disposition  of  their  mind  are  exceed- 
ingly sorry  for  their  sms,  the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  more  than 
the  punishment  of  it,  causeth  them  M'ith  Job  to  "  abhor  themselves, 
and  to  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  But  that  which  renders  sin,  so 
exceedingly  evil  and  bitter  in  itself,  still  more  evil  and  bitter,  is  the 
evil  consequence  of  it :  for  sin  not  only  blinds  a  person,  renders  him 
a  slave  of  himself,  averse  from  God,  and  unable  to  do  good  ;  but  it 
renders  him  also  guilty,  and  subjects  him  to  the  most  bitter  punish- 
ment. "  Thy  way,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Judah,  who  had  been  so 
severely  punished,  Jer.  iv.  18,  '<  and  thy  doin8:s  have  procured  these 
things  unto  thee,  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  bitter,  because 
it  reacheth  unto  thy  heart."  God  requireth  that  the  sinner  should 
*«know  and  see  this,"  that  he  may  lay  it  to  heart,  Jer.  ii.  19.  Where- 
fore? will  the  Lord  torment  him  before  the  time?  No,  but  he  chooseth 
that  the  sinner  should  humble  himself,  should  look  out  for  deliver- 
ance, and  become  capable  of  it.  The  Lord  God  would  "remember 
his  cov'-nant"  for  the  salvation  of  his  people,  v/ho  had  Ijeen  griev- 
ously punislied,"  if  their  uncircumcised  hearts  sliould  be  humbled, 
and  they  should  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity,"  Lev, 
xxvi.  41,  42.  Behold  how  the  rod  of  God's  chastisement  humbled 
Ephraim,  and  conduced  to  his  deliverance,  Jer.  xxxi.  19,  20. 

This  is  the  design  of  our  instructor,  when  he  teacheth  the  sinner 
the  knowledge  of  his  misery,  as  the  first  mean  of  obtaining  deliver- 
ance. Question  2,  for  which  purpose  he  shows  him  in  the  first  place 
•whence  he  must  learn  to  know  his  misery,  Question  3,  4,  and  then 
wherein  it  consists,  namely  (a)  in  sin,  the  abominable  nature  and 
cause  of  which  are  shown,  Question  5,  6,  7.  (b)  In  the  evil  conse- 
quences of  it,  as  an  inability  to  do  good.  Question  8,  9,  and  the 
grievous  punishment  which  God  inflicts  upon  the  sinner.  Question 
10,  11.  We  have  seen  formerly,  to  wit.  Question  6,  7,  in  what 
manner  the  sin  of  Adam  is  punished  ;  we  must  now  attend  to  the 
manner  in  which  God  is  displeased  with  sins  in  general. 

The  instructor  doth  two  things  here  : 

I.  He  declares  the  punishment  of  sin,  Question  10. 
,    II.  He  refutes  an  argument  against  the  punishment  of  sin,  Ques- 
tion 11. 

I,  The  deserving  cause  of  the  evil  of  punishment  is  the  evil  of  sin 


&5 

for  "  God  is  displeased  both  with  our  original  and  actual  sins»"  Ori- 
ginal sin  is  that  which  we  have  inherited  by  our  birth,  and  hath  been 
exhibited  in  the  foregoing  7th  question.  Actual  sin  is  that  which 
we  ourselves  commit  and  act  in  thought,  word  and  deed,  by  omitting 
to  do  that  which  is  commanded  us,  and  by  doing  that  which  is  for= 
bidden  us,  whether  against  the  first  or  second  table  of  the  law,  with 
respect  to  God,  ourselves,  and  our  neighbour.  These  several  sins 
are  either  reigning  in  the  unregenerate,  who  are  willing  slaves  of 
sin  :  *'  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin,"  John  viH. 

3,  4,  or  sins  which  do  not  reign,  to  wit,  in  the  regenerate,  who  are 
often  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  their 
members,"  contrary  to  their  will  and  inclination,  by  the  power  of 
corruption,  Rom.  vii.  23.  Every  sin  deserves  death  by  its  own  nature  : 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  vi.  23.  And  there- 
fore  the  Papists  contradict  the  word  of  God,  when  they  distinguish 
sins  into  venial,  wliich  do  not  deserve  death,  and  mortal,  which  de- 
serve death  by  their  abominable  nature  more  than  other  sins.  One 
sin  is  indeed  greater,  and  is  punished  with  greater  severity  than 
another.  See  John  xix.  11.  Matt.  xi.  21 — 24  but  the  least  sin  de- 
serves death,  inasmuch  as  it  is  committed  asjainst  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  and  against  his  law,  which  threatens  the  trans- 
gressor with  death.  John  speaks  indeed  of  "  a  sin  unto  death,  and 
of  a  sin,  which  is  not  unto  death,"  1  John  v.  16,  17,  but  a  sin  which 
is  not  tinto  death,  doth  not  mean  a  sm  which  by  its  own  nature  doth 
not  deserve  death,  and  is  pardonable,  but  only  a  sin  which  God  doth 
not  punish  with  death  in  all  who  are  guilty  of  it,  and  of  which  many 
obtain  forgiveness,  >•  hich  cannot  be  said  of  the  sin  unto  death,  since 
that  is  the  unpardonable  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  whereby  a 
person  maliciously  rejects  and  opposes,  without  a  powerful  tempta- 
tion of  endangering  his  life,  or  other  temptations  of  such  a  nature, 
the  truth  of  tlie  gospel,  which  is  according  to  godliness,  of  which  he 
hath  been  assured  by  an  inward  enlightening  and  conviction  of  the 
Holy  Spirit."     See  concerning  this  sin,  Matt.  xii.  31,  32.   Heb.  vi. 

4,  5,  C.  x  26 — 29.  Because  this  sin  is  unpardonable,  therefore  John 
calls  it  "  a  sin  unto  death,  for  which  a  person  may  not  pray,  and 
which  thejfcwho  are  bom  of  God  cannot  commit,"  1  John  v.  16,  17, 
1 8.  God  could  indeed  forgive  that  sin,  but  it  doth  not  please  him 
to  forgive  it,  because  it  obstinately,  and  with  a  final  and  persevering 
impenitence,  rejects  the  conviction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the 
last  mean  of  conversion  :  "  For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were 
once  enhghtened,  &c.  if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance,"  Heb,  vi,  4,  5,  6, 


86  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

God  inflicts  punishment  on  account  of  all  these  sins  in  his  displease 
ure,  or  anger.  Anger  in  man  is  a  vehement  and  vexaiious  peitur^ 
bation  of  nis  mind,  whereby  he  is  urgtd  to  avenge  hi'x.seli  of  his 
neighbour,  on  account  of  some  real,  or  supposed  injui'y  doiic  to  him. 
Bui  the  i-ord  God  being  simple,  independent,  and  uhchangeabiy  an4 
perfectly  happy,  cannot  suffer  such  a  painful  agitation  of  mind. 
When  nevertheless  anger  is  ascribed  to  him,  ''.ve  must  understand  it 
in  a  sense  which  is  worthy  of  him,  and  by  way  of  analogy,  agreeably 
to  his  word,  which  designs  by  the  anger  of  God,  (a)  his  holy  aver- 
sion and  dislike  to  the  sinner  and  his  sin,  by  which  he  is  injured  in 
the  highest  degree  ;  as  a  man,  who  is  angry,  is  averse  from  the  per- 
son, who  hath  injured  him.  And  so  it  is  said  of  God,  that  "  he  is 
of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  that  he  cannot  look  upoi^ 
iniquity,"  Kab.  i.  13.  "  Jesus  looked  round  about  upon  the  Jews  with 
anger,  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  Mark  iii.  5» 
Therefore  the  anger  of  God  is  called  also,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
"  the  grief  of  his  heart,"  Gen.  vi.  6.  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10,  "  his  hatred,'*- 
Psalm  V.  5,  6,  and  "  his  vexation,"  Psalm  xcv.  10.  (b)  His  holy  and 
righteous  will  and  purpose  to  punish  the  sinner.  "  God  will  punish 
sin,"  saith  the  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  tlie  anger  of  God.  ''  He 
that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  John  iii.  56.  That  is,  the  will  of  God  to  punish 
him  in  due  time,  although  his  long  suffering  spare  him  yet.  'I'here- 
fore  the  anger  of  Gud  is  also  called  "  his  desire,"  Hosea  x.  10.  (c) 
Finally,  the  anger  of  God  denotes  also  the  punishments  and  judg= 
ments,  which  he  inflicts  on  the  sinner,  \ipon  account  of  his  sins  : 
''  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodHness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  signification 
also,  iVlatt.  iii.  7.  Rom.  iii.  5.  Thus  the  catechism  also  explains  the 
anger  of  God  by  "  his  just  judgment,  by  which  he  punisheth  sins 
temporally  and  eternally."  Since  now  God,  when  he  punisheth, 
takes  vengeance  of  sin,  obtains  satisfaction,  and  glorifies  his  hohness, 
justice  and  power,  therefore  he  is  said  "  to  rejoice,"  Deut.  xxviii. 
63,  "to  comfort  hmiselt,"  Isaiah  i.  24,  and  *' to  be  refreshed,'* 
Amos  v.  9,  when  he  punishes  sin. 

"God  punishes  sin  then  by  his  just  judgment,  temporally  and 
eternally."  Temporally  in  this  life,  both  with  bodily  and  spiritual 
plagues.  Bodily  punishments  are  all  that  is  shameful,  hurtful,  and 
painful  to  the  sinner.  "  God  pouretli  contempt  upon  him,  even  upon 
princes,"  Psalm  cvii.  40,  which  is  the  most  intolerable  evil,  that  can 
befall  the  proud  sinner:  Saul  and  Ahithophel  slew  themselves,  because 
they  could  not  endure  contempt,  I  Sam   xxxi.  4,  5.  2  Sam.  xviii.  2f?- 


f 

The  Lord  plagues  the  transgressor  also  sometimes  with  poverty  : 
"  he  becomes  as  a  moth  and  rottenness  unto  him,"  Hosea  \\  12,  and 
"  curses  hi.s  blessings,"  Mai.  ii  2,  so  ti.at  the  sinner  must  cry  out 
with  distress,  "  What  shall  I  eat  ?  what  shall  1  drink  ?  and  where- 
witnal  shall  I  be  clothed?"  Matt.  vi.  25.  And  as  if  thisvWere  not 
grievous  enough,  "  God  distributeth  sorrows  to  him  in  his  anger," 
Job  xxi.  17.  "  He  is  also  chastened  with  pain  upon  his  bed,  and  the 
multitude  of  his  bones  with  strong  pain  :  so  that  his  life  abhorreth 
bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat.  His  flesh  is  consumed  away,  that 
it  cannot  be  seen,  and  his  bones  that  were  not  seen  stick  out.  Yea, 
his  soul  draweth  near  unto  the  grave,  and  his  life  to  the  destroyers," 
Job  xxxiii.  19 — 22.  God  visits  the  sinner  with  fevers,  consumptions, 
pestilence,  biles,  wounds,  and  other  plagues  of  that  kind,  which 
"  bring  him  to  the  king  of  terrours,  drive  him  out  of  light  into  dark- 
ness, and  chase  him  out  of  the  world,"  Job  xviii.  14,  18.  He  is 
attacked  wnthall  these  evil  plagues  immediately  by  God  himself,  and 
by  his  evil  enemies  in  his  own  person,  in  his  household,  and  in  the 
land  in  which  he  dwells.  See  how  all  this  and  still  more  is  threaten- 
ed, Lev.  xxvi.  and  Dent,  xxviii. 

But  man  sins  chiefly  with  his  soul,  and  therefore  his  soul  also  is 
attacked  with  the  most  grievous  spiritual  judgments,  (a)  God  smites 
the  soul  with  blindness  and  darkness  of  understanding.  Man  is  by 
nature  spiritually  blind :  nevertheless  he  hath  still  some  natural 
knowledge  of  divine  things  ;  but  even  "that  which  he  still  hath  is 
justly  taken  away  from  him,"  Matt.  xiii.  12.  "  His  foolish  heart  is 
still  more  darkened,"  Rom.  ii  21,  and  so  he  deceives  himself:  "  he 
saith,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  in  goods,  rnd  he  knows  not  that  he 
is  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,"  Rev. 
iii.  17.  God,  in  whom  he  hath  the  greatest  concern,  is  hidden  from 
him  :  "  the  gospel  of  salvation  is  hidden  from  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  3, 
and  "  God  sends  him  a  strong  delusion,  so  that  he  believes  a  lie  ;" 
2  Thess  ii.  11.  (b)  To  this  is  added  hardness  of  heart,  so  that  he 
becomes  hke  a  stone,  insensible  and  impenitent.  Before  this  he 
could  sometimes  relent  on  account  of  his  sins,  and  be  afraid  of  des- 
truction ;  but  God,  being  greatly  displeased  with  him,  suffers  "  his 
heart  to  wax  gross,  makes  his  ears  heavy,  and  shuts  his  eyes,  lest  he 
should  see  with  his  eyes,  and  hear  with  his  ears,  and  understand  with 
his  heart,  and  be  converted  and  healed,"  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10.  (c)  God 
also  abandons  him  to  the  thraldom  of  his  sins,  so  that  "  his  own  ini- 
quities take  him,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins,"  Rev. 
V.  22.  Yea,  the  Lord  lets  his  lusts  loose  on  him,  which  seize  him 
and  drive  him  forward,  and  so  he  is  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind, 


AS  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  do  those  things  which  ar«  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  28.  (d)  He  is 
also  punished  by  God  with  the  overlording  of  Satan.  ''  The  God  of 
this  world  blinds  his  mind,  that  the  light  of  the  gospel  may  not  shine 
unto  him,"  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  That  potent  ruler  drives  him  from  sin  to 
sin,  "  he  v,^orks  in  the  children  of  disobedience,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3,  and 
^*  takes  them  captive  in  his  snare  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  Yea,  he 
will  sometimes  •' terrify"  them,  as  he  did  Saul,  1  Sam  xvi.  14.  (e) 
God  s  spiritual  judgment  sometimes  proceeds  so  far  with  the  sinner, 
that  he  gives  him  up  to  a  restless  conscience,  which  torments  him 
contLUually.  Ihat  will  upbraid  him  continually  with  his  improper 
conduct,  will  present  God  to  him  with  teriour,  as  a  righteous  judge, 
and  will  even  in  laughter  afflict  his  heart  with  sorrow  ;  and  that 
gnawmg  worm  will  cause  him  to  choose  with  Judas  even  strangling. 
Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

But  what  danger  would  there  be,  if  the  sinner  were  punished  only 
in  this  life,  his  end  draws  near,  and  after  death  he  will  not  suffer  any 
more  :  but  that  which  must  cause  him  to  cry  out  for  grief  of  heart 
is,  that  God  will  plague  him  for  ever  with  '*  the  punishmtnt  of  ever- 
lasting fire,"  Jude  vrs.  7,  and  with  "  the  damnation  of  hell,"  Matt, 
xxiii.  33.  By  which,  (1)  he  will  be  depi'ived  of  all  that  was  honoura- 
ble, pleasant  and  profitable  to  him  in  this  life,  and  that  did  in  some 
measure  divert  and  moderate  his  distress :  he  may  not  have  "  a 
mioistencd  finger  to  cool  his  tongue  :"  and  nothing  but  a  painful  re- 
membrance of  "  the  good  things,  v/hich  he  had  received  in  his  life- 
time," will  remain  with  him,  and  afflict  him  g  evously,  Luke  xvi. 
24,  25.  Yea,  what  will  distress  him  most,  he  w Ml  be  excluded  from 
the  enjoyment  of  the  only  blessed  God  ;  for  "  he  will  be  punished 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power,"  2  Thess.  i.  9,  He  is  now  indeed  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God  ;  but  he  doth  not  knew  God,  nor  the  happiness 
of  communion  with  him^  and  he  doth  not  concern  himself  witn  these 
things;  and  therefore  his  separation  from  Cod  doth  not  grieve  him, 
or  he  flatters  himself  with  a  vain  hope,  that  God  will  yet  be  favoura- 
ble to  him :  but  when  a  dreadful  eternity  shall  surprize  him,  he  will 
then  know  expenmentally,  and  with  anguish  of  soul  what  God  is, 
what  it  is  to  enjoy  him,  what  to  be  separated  and  estranged  from 
Iiim  ;  how  his  vain  hope  will  abhor  him,  and  leave  him  to  the  great- 
est distress,  without  any  relief.  (2)  He  will  not  only  miss  all  that  is 
good,  but  he  will  also  be  subjected  to  a  painful  feeling  of  all  that  is 
evil :  for  (a)  "  God  will  not  meet  him  as  a  man,"  Isaiah  xlvii.  3, 
but  "  he  will  stir  up  all  his  wrath,"  Psalm  Ixxviii.  38,  and  cause  the 
sinner  to  ►<  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty,"  Job  xxi.  20.     Can 


IV,  LORD'S  DAY,  ^.  10,  U.  89 

a  man  not  endure  that  his  neighbour,  whose  good  will  he  seeks  and 
needeth,  should  behold  him  in  wrath,  how  insupportable  then  will 
"  the  power  of  God's  anj^er  and  indii^nution  be  to  liim  I"  Psalm  xc. 
ii.  The  damned  will  cry  out  n.ore  than  t-.e  heathen  and  Roman 
persecutors,  when  they  were  defeated  at  the  bpening  of  the  sixth 
seal,  Rev.  vi.  16,  17.  "  to  the  mountains  and  rocks.  Fall  on  uy,  and 
hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitieth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the 
wrath  of  the  Lamb  :  for  the  great  day  of  his  vvraih  is  come  ;  and 
who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?"  (b)  The  sinner's  conscience  will  also 
rage  terribly  against  him,  and  gnaw  and  sting  him  like  a  *'  worm,'* 
Mark  ix.  44,  46,  48.  Ii  will  continually  upbraid  him  with  all  his 
iniquities,  in  their  ag^^ravating  circumstances :  that  he  hath  sinned 
dreadfully  against  such  an  exalted  Majesty,  against  so  many  obliga- 
tions and  faithful  warnings,  and  that  he  hath  in  such  a  senseless 
manner  lost  his  invaluable  salvation  for  a  few  insignificant  trifles,  (c) 
And  what  will  afflict  him  equally  with  this  is,  that  he  will  always 
persist  in  sinning,  that  he  will,  in  the  most  horrible  manner  curse 
himself  and  his  neighbour,  with  whom  he  had  sinned  during  his  life, 
yea,  that  he  will  "  blaspheme  God  because  of  his  pains,"  like  the 
worshipers  of  the  beast,  when  "  the  fifth  viol  shall  be  poured  out 
Upon  his  seat,"  Rev.  xvi.  10,  11.  Sin  is  now  indeed  the  element  of 
the  sinner,  but  it  will  then  be  to  him  like  seething  water  to  aliving 
fish,  although  it  cannot  live  out  of  the  water,  which  is  its  element. 

This  misery  will  be  aggravated  by  the  circumstances  of  place,  of 
society,  and  duration.  The  transgressor  will  be  cast  and  shut  up  in 
a  most  dreary  place,  as  '*  in  a  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  ".in  hell," 
Luke  xvi.  23.  "the  deep,"  Luke  viii.  31.  "  the  lake  which  burneth 
with  fire  and  brimstone,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  ''the  outer  darkness,'*  Matt. 
viii.  11.  All  these  terrifying  descriptions  of  the  place  of  the  damned 
ought  to  affect  the  sinner  with  the  greatest  horrour,  and  cause  him 
to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

There  the  wicked  wight  will  also  be  with  the  most  horrible  sinnersj 
with  whom  no  person  of  the  least  morality  could  converse  here.  For 
"  the  lake  of  fire  is  the  portion  of  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and 
abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and 
idolators,  and  all  liars,"  Rev.  xxi.  8.  There  is  no  person  who  is 
more  hated  than  a  hypocrite  ;  but  hell  is  the  proper  abode  of  such, 
Matt.  xxiv.  51.  And  surely  those  monsters  will  not  be  there  to 
practise  their  enormities  for  sport,  but  to  torment  one  another,  when 
they  will  upbraid  one  another  with  a  hellish  mafignity,  that  they  have 
occasioned  each  others'  perdition.     The  devils  will  also  be  there,  a?* 

Q 


do  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SlS\ 

in  their  inheritance,   Matt.  sxv.  41,  and  will  sene  as  "  tormentors" 
of  the  guilty  sinner.  Matt,  xviii.  34. 

If  the  season  ot  punishment  continued  thous:^nds  of  years,  there 
would  still  be  an  end  of  it ;  but  that  which  will  be  insupportable  to 
the  damned  person,  and  which  will  sink  him  into  the  lowest  depth  of 
despair  i^.  that  his  pains  will  be  eternal,  eternal  beyond  the  utmost 
reach  of  thouglit.  For  there  will  be  *'  an  everlasting  fire,  and  ever- 
lasung  punishment,"  Matt.  xxv.  41,  46.  "  He  may  seek  death,  but 
it  will  flee  from  him  ;  his  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
quenched." 

The  s  ul  of  the  sinner  must  undergo  this,  as  soon  as  in  death  it 
departs  from  the  body.  For  we  consider  it  as  an  opinion,  to  which 
we  ouo-ht  not  to  assent,  because  it  is  too  dangerous,  that  the  essence 
of  the  soul  consists  only  in  thought,  and  that  it  is  not  therefore  capa- 
ble of  residing  in  any  place  :  for  thou.2:ht  being  an  act  must  there- 
for.^ proceed  from  a  being,  which  actually  thinketh,  and  besides  this, 
we  must  sav  that  the  soul  being  in  no  place,  and  therefore  no  where, 
doth  really  not  exist  at  all :  and  what  becomes  of  tl^e  soul,  whea  it 
departs  from  the  body  ?  is  it  no  where  ?  how  is  the  believer  thea 
blessed,  when  he  dies  ?  according  to  Rev.  xiv.  1 3,  and  how  are  the  un- 
godly punished  ?  "  do  not  the  spirits  go  into  prison  then  ?"  I  Peter  iii, 
19.  And  how  do  those  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  suffer  the  vengeance 
of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7,  according  to  the  body  ?  No,  the  fire  by 
which  their  cities  and  bodies  were  burned,  hath  been  quenched  long 
since. 

The  body  is  indeed  freed  from  the  condemnation  of  hell  some- 
time ,  but  it  will  be  raised  up  again,  and  united  to  the  soul,  which  it 
had  served  as  an  nistrument  in  sinning,  in  o**der  to  be  punished  like- 
wise :  for  ''  many  shall  arise  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt," 
Dan.  xii.  2,  to  be  cast  with  body  and  soul  into  hell,"  where  they  will 
weep  with  their  eyes,  and  gnash  their  teeth,"  Matt.  xiii.  42,  and 
gnaw  their  tongues  for  pain,"  Rev.  xvi,  10. 

But  how  do  the  Socinians  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  ungodly, 
when  they  teach  that  the  heathens,  who  have  not  had  the  gospel, 
will  be  annihilated,  and  suffer  only  a  painless  punishment  of  loss  and 
deprivation,  that  they  shall  not  see  the  face  of  God  ;  but  that  those 
who  have  had  the  gospel,  and  nevertheless  shghted  and  rejected  it, 
shall  be  consumed  by  a  dreadful  fire  at  the  last  day,  with  great  tor- 
ment, and  then  be  annihilated.  If  an  ungodly  man  can  believe  this, 
he  will  become  still  more  ungodly.  Such  a  doctrine  supposes  that 
the  soul  is  mortal,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  it,  and  to  the  Avord  of 
God*    The  word  of  God  testifieth  also,  that  all  the  ungodly  "shall 


i  u  ^l 

depart  into  everlasting  fire,  and  into  everlasting  torment,"  Matt.  xxv. 
41,  46,  and  that  '^  their  worm  shall  not  die,  and  that  their  fire  shall 
not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  "■  The  heathens  do  not  know  God," 
saith  Paul,  i  Thess.  iv.  5.  Now  "  God  will  take  vengeance  in  fli.m- 
ing  fire  on  them  who  do  not  know  him,  as  well  as  on  them,  who  do 
not  obey  the  gospel,"  2  Thess.  i  8.  The  men  of  Sodom  and  Go- 
morrah, who  were  heathens,  and  not  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  nor 
in  the  covenant,  *'  suffer  even  until  this  day  the  ver.geance  of  eternal 
nre,"  Jude  vrs.  7.  Surely  the  apostle  doth  not  mean  the  fire  by  which 
they  were  consumed,  since  that  was  not  the  eternal  fire,  for  it  doth 
Rot  burn  any  more. 

Behold  in  this  manner  doth  God  punish  sins  ;  but  dotli  he  pimish 
only  actual  sins  thus?  and  not  original  sin  alho  ?  suely  he  is  dis- 
pleased with  that  also,  and  will  punish  it  with  temporal  an.'  eternal 
judgments  ;  for  must  not  young  children,  who  have  only  original, 
and  not  actual  sins,  suffer  many  sorrows,  yea,  death  itself  ?  and  are 
not  these  miseries  a  punishment  of  their  original  sin  ?  we  may  not 
think  that  these  miseries  are  not  inflicted  upon  them  by  God,  nor 
that  God  visits  them  therewith,  without  regard  to  any  sinfulness  or 
punishment;  for  we  should  then  deny  either  tlie  providence  of  Clod, 
or  his  mercy  ;  but  may  we  think  that  children  who  die  without  com- 
mitting any  actual  sins  are  punished  for  ever  and  damned  ?  We  must 
speak  cautiously  here.  It  is  certain,  that  the  children  of  believing 
parents  are  received  with  their  parents  into  covenant  with  God,  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Acts  ii.  39,  and  are  therefore  called  "  holy" 
1  Cor.  i'.  14,  and  "the  kingdom  of  God  is  promised  to  them," 
Matt,  xix,  13,  14,  15.  See  our  exposition  uf  iafant  baptism,  Lord's 
Day  27.  But  this  is  not  the  subject  of  inquiry  here,  but  w."  e'her 
God  is  displeased  with  the  original  sin  of  children,  and  whether  he 
will  punish  it,  as  the  instructor  speaks  ?  and  truly  the  word  of  God 
teaches  us  this,  when  it  saith  that  "  the  whole  world,"  and  therefore 
children  also  "  are  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii  19.  We  are  also 
«  children  of  wrath  by  nature,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  Children  are  sometin^s 
punished  with  their  parents,  who  are  punished  eternally,  as  we  sec 
in  the  children  of  the  first  world,  who  perished  in  the  flood  with  their 
parents,  **  who  are  in  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  and  this  grievous  judg* 
ment  befell  them  on  account  of  original  sin  also,  according  to  Gen. 
vi.  5,  6,  7.  Were  not  children  punished  in  the  fire  of  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  ?  and  do  not  these  suffer  even  until  this  day  "  the  punish- 
ment of  eternal  fire  ?"  Jude  vrs.  7.  * 

*  Our  author  doth  not  assert  here  absolutely,  that  any  infants  arc  actually 
lost,  bat  h«  only  argweg  frem   r«rfain  passage*  of  scriptur*,  with  rMpect  to 


Is  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Because  original  sin  is  a  punishment  of  Adam's  sin,  therefore  the 
Remonstrants  assert  that  God  doth  not  punish  original  sin  in  this 
manner ;  since  one  punishment  would  then  be  unjustly  punished 
■with  another.  But  original  sin  is  not  only  a  punishment  by  a  right- 
eous imputation  of  Adam's  guilt,  but  it  is  also  an  inherent  depravity, 
rendering  man  liable  to  punisiiment  from  his  birth  :  he  is  called  in- 
deed "  a  transgressor  from  the  womb,"  Isaiah  xlviii.  8-  We  must 
humble  ourselves  on  account  of  it,  with  David,  Psalm  li.  5,  and  with 
him  seek  for  the  pardon  of  it,  and  God  punishetb  one  sin  in  other 
instances  with  another,  which  sin  is  then  again  justly  punished. 

It  IS  contrary  to  the  word  of  Ciod,  as  we  will  show  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  Day,  that  Crod  hath  received  all  mankind,  who  fell  in  Adam, 
^nd  therefore  children  also  into  favour,  and  that  he  doth  not  conse- 
quently punish  original  sin.  \V  e  do  not  speak  here  of  the  covenant 
of  grace,  mto  which  some  children  are  received,  but  of  the  covenant 
of  works,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  God  punisheth  the  posterity 
of  Adam  on  account  of  the  breach  of  this  covenant.  Doth  God  re- 
ceive all  men  graciously  into  a  general  covenant  of  grace,  he  will 
nevertheless,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  Remonstrants, 
punish  many  of  them  ;  for  they  teach  that  every  individual  of  man- 
kind will  not  be  eternally  happy. 

It  is  true  God  forgave  the  sin  of  Adam,  when  he  promised  him 
the  seed  of  the  w  mian  .  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom,  that  he 
forgave  the  whole  human  race,  who  had  sinned  in  him,  that  sin,  and 

this  matter,  In  such  a  manner,  as  to  show,  that  we  must  not  presume  to  decide 
positively,  that  all  infants  are  saved  ;  neither  doth  the  catechism,  or  any 
other  standard  of  our  church  declare  absolutely,  that  any  infants,  who  die 
before  I  hey  have  committed  £Ctual  sins,  are  damned,  but  only  with  the  word 
of  God,  that  we  are  by  nature  child»-en  of  wrath,  and  that  unless  a  person  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  and  that  those  who  die  in 
their  natural,  or  unregenerate  state  suffer  not  only  for  actual  sins  ,  but  als© 
for  their  or.ginal,  or  birth  sin.  We  cannot  indeed  tell,  but  that  it  may  please 
God,  of  ^is  nilinite  compassion,  to  regenerate  all  those  chrildren,  whom  he 
takes  out  of  the  world  before  they  have  committed  ;iCtual  sins.  Leading 
divines  have  differed  in  their  opinions  concerning  the  future  condition  of  in- 
fants. But  although  we  cannot  decide  positively  u'hat  the  actual  state  of 
infants  may  be  after  this  life,  nevertheless  Christians  in  general  have  always 
conceived,  tnat  we  have  greater  encouragement  from  scripture  to  hope  well  of 
infants,  who  die  within  the  pale  of  the  church,  than  of  those  who  die  without 
that  pale,  since  the  fermer  are  entitled  to  the  promises,  and  therefore  may  be 
baptized,  but  the  latter  have  no  express  promise,  and  therefore  may  not  be 
btptired.  Those  Christians  who  have  conceived  that  any  children  were  lost, 
Jiave  always  holden  that  the.e  was  a  great  diflerence  between  the  unhappines.-i 
p,f  such,  and  of  persons  who  have  committed  actual  sins- 


IV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  10.  li,  99 

that  he  doth  not  punish  them  for  it ;  for  if  God  forgave  Kim  his  per- 
sonal sin,  he  did  not  therefore  forgive  the  whole  human  race  that  sinj 
unless  Adam  were  the  head  of  the  whole  human  race  in  the  cove- 
nant of  i^race,  as  well  as  in  the  covenant  of  works,  which  no  man  can 
say,  who  holds  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  ac* 
cording  to  Rom.  v.  15 — 19.  1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22,  49. 

But  how  is  God  displeased  with  sin  ?  **  terribly,"  sai^h  the  in- 
structor. Therefore  the  an^^er  of  C^od  is  likened  to  the  most  terrible 
things,  to  wit,  to  't  a  fire  whjch  burns  to  the  lowest  hell,"  Deut.  xxxii. 
22.  to  "  instruments  of  death,  a  sharp  sword,  a  bent  bow  and  arrows," 
Psalm  vii.  11,  12,  13,  to  "a  grievous  whirlwind  from  the  Lord."  Jer. 
xxiii.  19,  to  the  "  dregs"  of  a  poisonous  cup,  Psalm  Ixxv.  8.  Jtr,  xxv. 
15,  16,  and  to  the  raging  of  a  •'  fierce  lion,  leopard  and  bear,"  Hosea 
xiii.  7.  8.     There   are  also  many  examples  of  God's  terrible  anger. 
We  will  not  speak  now  of  the  dreadful  judgments  that  befell  the  old 
world.   Sodom  and  the  seditious  company  of  Korah,  see  only  how 
even  the  most   1  oly  men  have  roared  under  a  sense  of  (iod's  anger. 
How  was  Job  forced  to  complain  of  "  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty," 
chap.  vi.  4.      Feman  was  "  afflicted  and  ready  to  die  from  his  youth 
iip,\  8cc.  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  15 — 19.  Row  grievously  the  Son  of  God 
himself  was  oppressed  l)y  tlie  wrath  ot   God   we   may  see  from  his 
bitter  complaints  m  the  garden,  and  on  the  cross,  and  the  distress  of 
heaven  and  earth,  whicli  seemed  to  suffer  with  him,  and  on  account 
of  him.    Matt.  xxvi.  37 — 44.  chap    xxvii.  45 — 54      And  when  God 
attacks  impenitent  sinners,  how  doth  it  affright  them,  and  what 
trembling  siezes  on  them,  saying,  "  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with 
devouring  fire  ?  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burn- 
ings r"  Isaiah   xxxiii    14.   Only  represent   to  yourselves  how  sadly 
the  damned  weep  with  their  eyes,  how  they  gnash  their  teeth,  how 
they  gnaw  their  tongues,  wring  their  hands,  how  they  seek  for  death 
in  vain,  and  blaspheme  the  God  of  heaven.     We  can  also  conceive 
that  God  is  terribly  displeased,  when  we  consider  that  he  is  not  de- 
ficient in  wisdom  to  contrive  terrible  punishmepts,  nor  in  power  to 
execute  them  upon  those  who  reproach  his  name.     He  denounceth 
his  curse   against  the  least  sin,   Gal.   iii.    10.     Many  Bethshemites 
were  punished  with  death,  because  they  looked  inquisitively  into  the 
ark,  and  Uzza,  because  he  laid  hold  of  it  in  an  indiscreet  manner, 
1  Sam.  vi.  19,  20.  2  Sam.  vi.  6,  7.     When  we  add  to  this  that  God 
will  punish  sin  eternally,  we  may  then  also  imagine  how  terribly 
God  is  displeased  with  sin. 

Since  God  is  so  terribly  displeased  with  sin,  he  will  also  "  cer- 
tainly" punish  it,  as  he  hath  spokei;i,  Deut.  xxvii-  26.  Gal.  iii.  10c 


04  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

"Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  thini^s  that  are  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  This  is  the  threatening  of  the 
covenant  of  works :  for  Paul  proves  from  this  sentence  of  cursing, 
that  "  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse,'* 
Gal.  iii.  10 ;  to  which  curse  pertain  likewise  all  the  threatenings  de- 
nounced in  the.  word  of  God  against  the  unconverted  sinner  ;  for  it 
is  *  the  law  only  that  worket  •  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  therefore 
this  sentence  ot  the  curse  is  very  properly  referred  by  the  inslructoi* 
to  original,  as  well  as  to  actual  sin,  inasmuch  as  both  belong  to  the 
covenant  of  works.  When  this  curse  v/as  announced  to  the  Israelites* 
with  whom  God  had  already  established  his  covenant  of  grace,  Deut» 
xxxvi.  16,  it  was  not,  because  he  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works 
with  them,  but  because  he  chose  to  exhibit  the  broken  covenant  of 
works  to  them  by  the  legal  administration  of  the  covenant  of  gr^ce^ 
in  order  that  he  might  convince  them,  and  urge  them  to  the  Mes- 
siah, who  was  to  come.  See  Gal  iii.  10 — 24.  V'hen  God  saith  this, 
we  must  also  believe  it,  and  be  assu-ed  that  he  will  certainly  punish 
sin  ;  for  he  is  true  in  his  threateninjjs  as  well  as  in  his  promises  ; 
therefore  Samuel  said  with  respect  to  the  judgment  denounced 
against  Saul,  "  He  who  is  the  strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  ror  re- 
pent ;  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  repent,"  1  Sam.  xv.  29. 
When  the  curses  were  denounced  from  mount  Ebal,  "  all  the  people- 
should  say  Amen,"  Deut.  xxvii.  IS — 26. 

It  is  also  "  necessary,"  that  God  should  punish  sin,  not  only  on 
account  of  his  truth,  since  he  hath  said  it,  but  also  because  it  is  natu- 
ral to  him  ;  for  it  doth  not  proceed  merely  from  his  free  good  pleas- 
ure, but  also  from  his  nature,  that  he  doth  punish  sin.  For  (1)  "sin 
is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God,"  his  glory  and 
sovereignty,  which  we  must  acknowledge,  and  also  that  we  have  to 
do  with  him.  AH  this  is  denied  and  rejected  by  the  sinner,  when  he 
sinneth-  as  though  God  were  not  worthy  to  be  feared,  loved  and  serv- 
ed ;  and  so  his  most  high  majesty  is  dishonoured.  Sirce  now  God 
loves  himself,  and  therefore  also  his  glorious  majesty,  with  the 
greatest  love,  he  cannot  but  be  jealous  of  sin  ;  and  what  is  the  jeal- 
ousy of  God,  but  an  avenging  punishment,  whereby  he  restores  his 
injured  majesty  to  its  proper  lustre  ?  "  He  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty.  His  name  is  jealous,  and  he  is  a  jealous  God,"  Exod. 
xxxiv.  7,  14.  Nahum  i.  1,2.  Therefore  it  is  said,  that  he  is  glori-. 
fied,  when  he  punishes  sin.  Numb.  xiv.  2 1,  22,  23,  and  that  he  "com- 
forts" himself,  when  he  taketh  vengeance,  Isaiah  i.  24.  (2)  The. 
holiness  of  God  hath  a  natural  aversion  from  the  sinner  on  acount  of 
his  sin,  and  it  is  natural  to  God  to  hate   sin  :  "  He  is  of  purer  eyoG.. 


lu  9i 

than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab.  i.  13  Can  he  therefore,  who  is  holiness 
itself,  exercise  communion  with  the  sinner,  as  he  wouW  do,  if  he  did 
not  punish  him,  but  showed  him  favour r  If  it  were  possibk-  for  him 
not  to  hate  sin,  it  would  be  possible  for  him  to  love  it.  How  contrary 
this  is  to  the  holy  nature  of  God,  how  averse  he  is  from  sin,  and  on 
account  of  it  from  the  sinner,  is  known  to  all.  What  is  God's  hatred 
and  aversion  from  sin  and  the  sinner  ?  is  it  not  the  greatest  punish- 
ment ?  see  Psalm  v.  5,  6,  7.  2  Thess.  i.  9.  If  God  did  not  punish  sin, 
he  would  then  seem  to  be  "  like  the  sinner,"  Psalm  1  21,  but  when 
he  punishes  sin,  he  then  shows  that  he  is  holy.  Lev.  x  I,  2,  3.  Ezek. 
xxviii.  22.  (3)  The  justice  of  God,  as  judge  of  the  whole  earth  re» 
quires  also,  that  he  should  punish  sin,  surely  the  judiciary  punish- 
ment of  sin  is  an  act  not  only  of  anger,  but  also  of  justice,  "  God  is 
indeed  a  righteous  judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry  every  day,"  Psalm 
vii-  12.  cxxix.  4.  Rom.  ii.  5.  Is  not  this  punitive  justice  of  God  as 
judge,  natural  to  him,  as  well  as  his  other  natural  perfections,  which 
he  cannot  deny  ?  can  we  indeed  conceive  of  God,  as  contrary  to  this 
judiciary  justice,  and  as  a  judge,  who  is  not  righteous  ?  "  The  Gen- 
tiles know  the  judgment  of  God ;  that  they  who  commit  such  things 
are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  How  do  the  Gentiles  know  this  ? 
by  a  revelation  ?  no,  but  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  by  their  own 
consciences,  whereby  "  they  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in 
the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.  Now  it  is  certain  that  they  cannot  know 
this  judgment  of  God  by  the  light  of  nature,  if  the  punitive  justice 
of  God  be  not  natural  to  him  :  for  that  which  depends  upon  the  free 
good  pleasure  of  Cod,  and  upon  his  government  no  man  can  know 
by  the  light  of  nature,  but  only  by  revelation.  If  God  did  not  punish 
sin,  he  would  not  do  right,  as  a  judge,  either  to  himself  or  to  the 
sinful  creature,  and  therefore  God  is  said  to  declare  his  righteousness 
when  he  punishes  sin,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  (4)  The  authority  of  God 
as  a  lawgiver,  by  which  he  requireth  obedience  of  his  rational  crea- 
tures is  natural  to  him  :  he  cannot  discharge  man  of  his  duty  and 
obligation  to  keep  his  commands  :  "  On  account  of  his  incomparable 
glory  he  may  justly  require  that  every  one  should  fear  him,"  Jer» 
X.  6,  7  If  God  can  suffer  the  sinner  to  remain  unpunished,  he  can 
then  also  discharge  him  of  his  obligation  to  obedience  ;  for  when  he 
did  not  punish  the  sinner,  he  would  say  that  he  could  endure  that 
tnan  should  not  obey  him,  which  surely  cannot  be. 

Let  no  man  say  that  punishment  is  a  strange  work  of  God,  and  is 
not  natural  to  him,  because  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxviii.  21.  "The  Lord 
shall  rise  up  as  in  mount  Perazim,  he  shall  be  wroth  as  in  the  valley 
x>{  Gibeon,  tliat  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work ;  and  bring 


91^  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act ;"  for  the  Socinians  and  others,  who 
object  this  to  us,  must  answer  this  objection  themselves,  inasmuch 
as  they  say  that  it  is  natural  to  God  to  punish  the  impenitent  sinner^ 
who  persists  in  sinning  without  reformation  ;  yet  they  will  not  allow 
this  with  regard  to  every  sin,  as  they  do  with  regard  to  impenitence, 
when  nevertlieless  impenitence  is  punishable  only  on  account  of  its 
sinfulness,  and  not  on  account  of  its  duration  ;  for  duration  is  of  itself 
pot  si.'Kul,  but  in  several  mstances  commendable.  With  regardi-to 
Jsaiaa  xxviii  21,  we  do  not  read  there,  that  God's  work  and  act  of 
punishing  is  strange  to  God,  but  only  that  it  is  strange :  and  to 
^hom  should  it  be  strange  ?  to  God?  no:  but  to  the  transgressors, 
on  whom  God  would  inflict  a  strange  and  unusual  pUi  ishment. 

As  God  punishes  sin  terribly,  certainly,  and  necessarily,  so  he  pun- 
ishes it  ''justly."  In  order  that  the  punishment  may  be  just,  it  must 
be  equal  to  the  sin^  and  not  exct- ed  it :  and  so  a  just  punishment  is 
that  "  recompence  of  an  errour  which  is  meet,"  Rom.  i-  2f  ii.  6, 
Kow  sin  is  committ.  d  against  the  most  high  majesty  of  God :  but 
sin  is  grievous  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  of  the  pefson,  against 
whom  it  is  committed.  See  Job  xxxiv.  18,  19.  1  Sam  ii.  25.  Since 
now  sin  is  committed  against  the  infinite  God,  and  his  most  high 
majesty,  therefore  sin  is  also,  in  a  certain  respect,  infinite,  to  wit, 
with  respect  to  the  infinite  object  of  sin  :  "  and  therefore  the  justice 
of  God  requireth  that  sin,  which  is  cbmmitted  against  the  most  high 
majesty  of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme,  that  is,  with  everlasting 
punishment,  both  of  body  and  soul."  Since  now  it  doth  not  please 
God  to  annihilate  the  sinner,  but  to  suffer  him  to  exist  for  ever,  there- 
fore it  is  also  an  act  of  justice  to  punish  him  for  ever  with  a  sensible 
punishment,  because  he  hath  sinned  against  God,  who  will  exist  for 
ever,  and  because  he  will  continue  to  sin,  on  account  of  his  abomi- 
nableness,  which  will  cleave  to  him  for  ever. 

II.  The  careless  sinner,  unwilling  to  be  disturbed  by  the  terrible- 
ness  and  justice  of  the  punishment,  sooths  and  hardens  himself  with 
the  mercy  of  God,  as  if  that  Would  overcome  and  swallow  up  his 
justice  ;  in  which  he  is  strengthened  by  the  Socinians,  when  they 
alledge  the  mercy  of  God  against  the  doctrine  of  his  punishing  jus* 
tice,  asking,  "  Is  not  God  then  also  merciful?"  We  allow  that  God 
is  indeed  merciful,  as  well  as  just ;  but  God  will  not  exercise  mercy 
to  the  disparagement  of  his  justice.  To  illustrate  this  we  will  ex- 
plain wherein  the  mercy  of  God  consists,  and  in  what  manner  it  is 
exercised,  and  we  will  then  show  that  it  doth  not  militate  against 
bis  strict  justice. 

Mercy  in  man  is  a  sorrowful  perturbation  of  mind,  on  account  of 


 

the  suffering  of  another,  disposing  him  to  rescue  the  sufferer.  But 
the  Lord  God  being  independent,  simple,  unchangable,  and  perfectly- 
happy,  cannot  be  affected  with  such  an  agitation  and  perturbation  of 
mind :  therefore,  when  it  is  said  of  him,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
that  he  is  merciful,  it  must  be  understood  in  a  sense  which  is  wor- 
thy of  the  nature  of  God  ;  and  so  the  mercy  of  God  is  only  his  good- 
ness to  the  miserable,  which  he  exerciseth,  either  by  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  even  upon  the  vilest  sinners,  as  Jesus  aaith,  Luke  vi. 
35,  Sec.  '*  He  is  kind  to  the  unthankful,  and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye, 
therefore,  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful."  Or  God  exer» 
cises  his  mercy  by  conferring  special  and  saving  benefits  in  Christ 
upon  the  elect.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  of  this,  Eph.  ii.  45.  "  God, 
who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even 
when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ." 
But  although  God  is  so  merciful,  he  is  also  just :  and,  he  requires 
that  sin  should  be  punished,  and  his  mercy  doth  not  abolish  his  vin- 
dictive justice  ;  for  the  attributes  of  God  cannot  militate,  one  ag-ainst 
anothef,  whereby  one  wouh;  detract  from  the  lustre  of  another  ;  b\it 
one  must  increase  the  lustre  of  the  other:  therefore,  the  justice  and 
mercy  of  God  are  joined  together  to  his  praise.  See  Exod.  xxxiv. 
6,  7.    Psalm  cxi   3,  4.  cxii   4.  cxvi.  5. 

When  this  is  rightly  considered,  we  will  see,  (a)  that  there  is  no 
force  in  this  objection  to  deny  the  vindictive  justice  of  God  :  for  al- 
though God  is  merciful  to  the  unthankful  and  evil,  bestowing  com- 
mon benefits  on  them,  he  will  nevertheless  punish  them  severely,  if 
not  in  this  life,  yet  after  this  life.  Common  mercy  is  not  shown  to 
them  in  order  to  exempt  them  from  eternal  punishment,  but  it  only- 
moderates  their  punishment  for  a  season,  in  order  to  afford  them  a 
testimony  of  the  divine  goodness,  and  invite  them  to  repentance. 
2  Peter,  iii.  9.  "that  they  may  be  without  excuse."  Rom.  i.  19,20. 
"  Do  they  despise  the  riches  of  the  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and 
longsuffering  of  God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth 
them  to  repentance,  they  do  after  their  hardness  and  impenitent 
hearts,  treasure  up  wrath  to  themselves  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  Rom.  ii.  4,  5« 
Doth  he  show  his  special  mercy  to  the  salvation  of  the  elect,  this 
supposeth  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice  by  Christ,  whereby  he  hath 
borne  their  punishment.  Isaiah  liii.  4,  5.  Rom.  iii.  25,  26. (b)  We 
may  also  learn  from  what  hath  been  said  before,  that  this  objection 
proceeds  from  a  mistaken  notion  of  tlie  divine  mercy,  and  of  man's 
sinful  misery.  The  Socinians  imagine  tliat  God,  as  well  as  man,  is 
subject  to  the  passions  «f  anger,  sorix)w,  and  so  also  of  mercy;  and 

R 


9i  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN, 

that  he  is  moved  by  the  misery  of  men,  to  abstain  from  punisbih^ 
him.  and  to  dehver  him.  But  such  agitations  of  mind  raihtatc 
against  the  independence,  simplicity,  unchangableness,  and  hap- 
piness of  God  ;  and  besides  this,  the  sinful  misery  of  man  is  not 
adapted  to  excite  mercy  and  compassion,  whereby  God  should  be 
moved  to  deliver  him  ;  but  it  is  a  misery  Avhich  excites  hatred  and 
detestation,  and  thus  calls  for  the  righteous  anger  of  God.  Psalm  v. 
4,5,6.  J  lab.  i.  13.  See  how  loathsome  the  sinner  is  described, 
Ezek.  xvi.  1.5.  How  tan  God  be  moved  by  such  a  misery  to  com- 
passion ?  Must  he  not  remove  the  Avorker  of  iniquity  from  his  pre- 
sence ?  "  The  way  of  the  sinner  is  before  God  like  the  uncleanness 
of  a  lAenstruous  woman  ;  therefore  he  pours  his  fury  out  upon 
him."  Ezek.  xxxvi.  17,  18.  Can  any  man  from  pity  take  up 
a  toad  that  hath  been  trodden  under  foot,  and  that  wallows  in  its 
blood  and  poisonous  spittle,  lick  )t,  or  kiss  it,  in  order  to  heal  it? 
surely  no :  he  cannot  look  upon  it,  but  must  remove  it  from  his  sight. 
Much  less  can  the  holy  God,  wiiO  is  holiness  itself,  embrace  in  his 
special  kindness  and  love,  the  hateful  tinner,  without  a  satisfaction  to 
his  justice. (e)  We  add  also,  that  this  objection  is  out  of  its  place. 
God  is  merciful  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  but  not  in  the  covenant  of 
works,  which  the  sinner  hath  broken.  Mercy  hath  no  place  in  the 
broken  covenant  of  works,  but  only  justice  ;  "  The  law  worketh 
wratli."  Rom.  iv.  15.  All  the  mercy  whereby  God  honours  his 
people  with  saving  grace,  proceeds  from  the  covenant  of  grace 
which  supposeth  the  death  of  the  iVTediator,  and  therefore  God's  vin- 
dictive justice.  ITeb.  ix  15.  Since  now  this  Lord's  day  treats  of 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  on  account  of  our  breach  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  therefore  the  objection  from  the  mercy  of  God 
in  the  covenant  of  Grace  is  out  o(  its  proper  place  here. 


APPLICATION. 

In  this  manner  do  the  Socinians  deny  by  their  doctrine  the  terrible 
displeasure  of  God,  by  which  he  punisheth  sin.  temporally  and  eter- 
nally, certainly  and  justly  :  but  this  is  denied  by  you  also,  who  have 
not  yet  tied  to  Christ  by  faith  and  conversion,  in  order  to  obtain  his 
righteousness.     For, 

1.  Ye  do  not  yet  know  the  demerit  of  your  sins.  If  ye  knew  it, 
and  believed  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God  on  account  of  your  sins, 
would  ye  not  then  fear  and  tremble  more  because  of  your  sins,  and 
those  terrible  punishments,  which  ye  must  expect  ?  woujd  ye  be  sc*' 
careless,  and  "when  ye  do  evil,  skip  for  joy  ?"  Jer.  xi,  15. 


\.  99 

2.  When  God  punishes  you  in  this  life  with  many  and  grievous 
calamities,  ye  do  not  then  perceive  Ihat  God  doth  this  on  account  of 
your  sins  and  impenitence  :  ye  look  not  at  him  who  smites  you,  but 
think  that  time  and  chance  bring  these  things  forth  :  ye  think  that 
they  come  to  pass,  as  though  "  afflictions  came  forth  out  of  the  earth, 
and  trouble  sprang  up  out  of  the  ground,"  Job  v.  6.  And  so  ye  say 
with  your  deeds,  "  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do 
evil,"  Zeph.  i.  12, 

3.  How  often  do  ye  harden  yourselves  against  God's  terrible  judg- 
ments !  for  when  he  smites  you,  ye  do  not  relent ;  and  it  doth  not 
induce  you  to  br.?ak  oif  your  iniquities  :  but  ye  start  up  against  his 
procedure,  and  add  to  your  abominable  sins,  like  "  Ahaz,  who  in  the 
time  of  his  trouble,  trespassed  still  more  against  the  Lord,"  2  Chron. 
xxviii.  22.  "  Doth  God  smite  you,  ye  are  not  grieved  ;  doth  he 
consume  you,  ye  refuse  to  receive  correction  ;  ye  make  your  faces 
harder  than  a  rock,  and  refuse  to  return,"  Jer.  v.  3.  Doth  a  fear 
for  the  wrath  to  come  ever  take  hold  of  you,  it  is  irksome  to  you,  ye 
endeavour  to  stifle  your  consciences,  and  to  "  cover  your  transg:res  ■ 
sions  like  Adam,  by  hiding  your  iniquity  in  your  bosom,"  Job  xxxi. 
33.  Gen.  iii.  1?. 

4.  Ye  flatter  and  deceive  yourselves,  thinking  that  ye  wil^  not  be 
punished  &o  severely :  "  When  ye  hear  the  words  of  this  curse,  ye 
do  then  bless  yourselves  in  your  hearts,  saying,  We  shall  have  peace, 
though  we  walk  in  the  imagination  of  ©ur  hearts,"  Deut.  xxix.  19. 
Ye  think  these  threatenings  have  been  denounced  so  long,  nothing 
v/ill  come  of  them,  like  '*  the  scoffers  in  the  last  days,'  2  Peter  iii. 
4.  If  yc  dare  not  be  so  wicked,  ye  put  the  evil  day  far  off,  and 
think,  the  vision  is  yet  for  many  days,  and  a  man  will  not  be  misera- 
ble before  the  time  ;  but,  friends,  when  God  c'efers,  he  dot,ii  not  then 
desert,  and  when  he  defers,  it  ought  not  to  render  you  more  care- 
less and  wicked,  but  it  ought  to  '^  lead  you  to  repentance,"  Rom.  ii. 
4.  2  Peter  iii,  9.  Dotli  fear  beset  you,  ye  banish  it,  and  flatter  your= 
selves  with  the  mercy  of  God,  and  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for 
sin.  But  is  G,od  merciful  to  you  with  his  saving  favour  ?  and  hath 
Jesus  suff*ered  for  your  sins  ?  he  hath  surely  suff'ered  for  none  but 
those  ^'^  who  turn  from  transgression,"  Isaiah  lix.  20.  Do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  turn  yet  ?  wken  ?  when  this  or  that  opportunity  occurs  I 
but  perhaps  ere  such  an  opportunity  occurs,  "  the  decree  of  God  will; 
bring  forth,  the  day  will  pass  as  the  chaff",  the  fierce  anger  of  the 
Lord  will  come  upon  you,"  Zeph.  ii.  2.  Ye  say.  We  hope  not ;  but 
your  hope  is  vain  and  ungrounded,  it  will  forsake  you.  Do  ye  suffer 
niany  affUctions,  and  do  ye  comfort  yourselves  with  a  hope,  ths^t 


100  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

these  will  be  the  full  measure  of  your  sufferings,  and  that  ye  win  not 
be  obliged  to  suffer  hereafter  ?  this  is  nothing  but  deceit ;  your  suf- 
ferings in  this  world  vill  not  diminish  aught  froncs  your  eternal  pui>- 
ishment ;  the>  are  only  the  beginnings  of  eternal  sorrows.  Or  do- 
ye  inna^nie,  that  ye  are  delivered  from  tht.  wrath  of  God,  because  ye 
arc  not  so  wicked  as  this  or  that  person,  but  are  civil  and  devout  ? 
But  was  not  the  Pharisee  so  virtuous  as  thiS)  and  did  not  "  he  go 
down  to  his  house  unjustified  ?"  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.  When  ye  have 
no  more  cloaks  for  your  shame,  when  they  have  all  been  taken  from 
you,  and  your  abominableness  and  misery  have  been  discovered  to 
you,  ye  then  think,  it  would  be  truly  sad,  that  ye  should  be  aban- 
doned to  wretchedness ;  and  because  your  self-love  will  not  suffer 
you  to  think  the  worst  of  yourselves,  ye  imagine  that  this  Mill  not 
befall  you.  But  how  exceedingly  will  ye  be  disappointed,  when  Cod 
will  attack  you,  while  ye  do  not  expect  it,  with  his  almighty  anger, 
and  not  as  a  man,  when  ye  will  bewail  yourselves  too  late,  and 
"  mourn  at  the  last,  saying,  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my 
heart  despised  reproof?  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teach- 
ers, nor  inchneJ  mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?  Prov  v.  1 1, 
12,  13.  Do  ye  ask,  What  shall  we  nevertheless  do  ?  will  ye  indeed 
do  aught?  if  ye  will,  come  then  hither,  and  I  will  instruct  you.  (1) 
Behold  your  utter  abominableness  and  woful  misery:  ye  have  ariginal 
and  actual  sins  :  the  terrible  wrath  of  God  lieth  upon  you,  and  ye 
have  reason  to  expect  that  God  will  attack  you  shortly  vvith  his  fiery 
indignation.  Because  ye  do  not  attend  to  this,  therefore  ye  remain 
hardened,  careless,  and  do  not  seek  for  any  real  recovery.  That  ye 
may  therefore  awake,  behold  the  greatness  of  your  misery,  pause, 
and  endeavour  to  understand  it,  that  ye  may  be  penetrated  with 
grief  and  concern,  "  Examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  your- 
selves strictly,  O  ye  listless  people."  Zeph.  ii.  1,  See  Jer,  ii.  19,  23. 

2.  Beware  of  accusing  the  Lord  of  excessive  severity,  or  of  in- 
justice :  "  Is  God  unrighteous,  who  taketh  vengeance  ?  God  forbid  : 
for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?"  Rom.  iii.  5,  6.  Not  only 
David  said,  Psalm  cxix.  37.  "  Righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord,  and  up- 
right are  thy  judgments  ;"  but  even  the  hardened  Pharaoh  cried  out, 
Exod-  ix.  2f .  "  The  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are 
wicked."  Do  not  do  less  than  this,  that  the  Lord  may  not  compel . 
you  by  his  mighty  displeasure  to  such  an  acknoM'ledgment. 

3.  Earnestly  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  your  great  misery. 
To  be  unconcerned  whether  we  shall  be  saved  or  damned,  to  do 
nothing  in  order  to  escape  damnation,  and  obtain  salvation,  is  cer- 
tainly the  greatest  madness,  of  which  a  human  being  is  capable : 


iO,  U.  ipi 

«Be  zealous  therefore  and  repent,"  Rev.  iii.  19.  Do  not  imagine 
that  a  few  ceremonies,  or  a  mere  heartless  sigh  will  save  a  sinner : 
no,  he  must  strive  earnestly :  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  £^ate  i 
for  many  shall  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be- able,"  saith  the 
Saviour,  Luke  xiii.  24.  "  The  violent  only  take  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  force,"  Matt.  xl.  12.  We  must,  like  one  who  is  pursued 
and  afraid,  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  Matt.  iii.  7. 

4.  Do  not  seek  any  happiness  or  deliverance  by  your  oWn  doings, 
but  only  by  fleeing  to  the  Mediator  Jesus,  that  "  ye  may  be  found  in 
him,  and  obtain  his  righteousness,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  7,  8,  9,  for 
'•  there  is  salvation  in  none  other,"  Acts  iv.  12.  Jesus  alone  is  "  set 
forth  of  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare 
his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Therefore  look  unto  him  and  ha 
saved,"  Thus  he  calls  to  you,  Isaiah  xlv  22. 

5.  Be  afraid  of  the  least  sin  ;  for  it  is  committed  against  the 
niost  high  majesty  of  God,  and  he  punishes  it  terribly.  This  should 
render  every  one  fearful  of  sinning,  like  Job,  who  said — *'  Destruc- 
tion from  God  was  a  terrour  to  me,  and  by  reason  of  his  highness  I 
could  not  endure."  Job  xxxi.  23.  He  who  persists  in  sinnine:  wilful- 
ly and  wittingly,  cannot  expect  any  mercy  ;  "but  he  who  confesseth 
and  forsaketh  sin,  shall  obtain  mercy  "  Prov.  xxviii.  13.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well.  Come  now,  and  let  us  rea- 
son together,  saith  the  Lord  :  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool."     Isaiah  i    l6,  18. 

But  permit  me  to  address  you  also,  O  believers,  who,  from  a  pain- 
ful and  distressing  view  of  your  sins  and  demerits,  have  fled  to  the 
Mediator,  and  reject,  with  a  holy  displeasure,  your  indweUing  corrup- 
tions >(i)  see  from  v/hat  ye  are  delivered.  God,  the  Lord,  was  terri- 
bly displeased  with  you  also,  on  account  of  your  original  and  actual 
sins :  but  "  Jesus  hath  delivered  you  from  the  wrath  to  come." 
!  Thes.  i.  10,  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  that  he  will  not  be  any 
more  wroth  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you."  Isaiah  liv.  9.  '*  There  is  no 
condemnation  to  them  v/hich  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Rom.  viii.  1. 
^'  To  you  also,"  who'have  considered  yourselves  as  "the  greatest  sin- 
ners, hath  mercy  been  shown."    1  Tim.  i.   13,  16. 

2.  Behold  now,  also,  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  done  for  you. 
From  pure  and  inconceivable  love,  he  took  all  your  original  and  actu- 
al sins  upon  himself,  in  order  to  deliver  you  :  on  account  of  them  he 
subjected  himself  to  the  terrible  displeasure  of  God,  he  suffered  it  in 
its  utmost  extent,  and  thus  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  you.  "  To 
redeem  you  from  the  curse  of  th*-.  law,  he  became  a  curse  for  you^** 


1Q2  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN. 

Gal.  iii.  1 3.  With  what  an  ardent  love  did  he  love  you,  and  how^ 
did  the  zeal  of  God's  house  eat  him  up,  when  your  reproacheSit 
wherewith  ye  had  reproached  the  Lord,  fell  on  him!"  Psalm  Ixix. 
9.  Attend  a  while  to  this  matter,  endeavour  to  lof.^k  deep  into  it, 
that  ye  may  be  filled  with  wonder,  with  abasins^  thoughts  of  your- 
selves, with  joy  and  praise,  and  so  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with 
all  the  saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and 
hei8:ht ;  and  may  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  know^ 
ledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Eph.  iii. 
18,  19. 

Conduct  yourselves  v/ortbily  of  the  inexpressible  love  and  mercy 
that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  How  great  an  aversion  ought  ye  to 
manifest  in  all  your  behaviour  to  your  original  and  actual  sins  !  how 
ought  ye  to  strive  against  them,  and  mortify  them  !  and  how  to  ex- 
ert yourselves  to  conduct  in  a  manner  that  is  pleasing  to  tht*  Lord  ! 
for  what  end  did  '^  Jesus  give  himself  for  you?"  was  it  not,  "that 
he  might  redeem  you  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  you  to  himself  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  ?"  Titus  ii.  14.  Let  then 
*'  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  you  to  live  no  more  unto  yourselves, 
but  to  him  who  died  for  you,  and  rose  again-"    2  Cor.  v.  14,  15. 

4.  Have  compassion  and  take  pity  on  tho-^e  poor  and  miserable 
persons,  who  manifest  by  all  their  conversation,  that  they  lie  yet  un-. 
der  the  terrible  wrath  of  God,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lies  to  save 
them  :  *^  Of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference,  and  others 
save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire,"  saith  holy  Jude  in  his, 
epistle,  verse  22,  23. 

Are  ye  yet  often  afraid  of  the  displeasure  of  God,  because  ye  have 
still  so  great  a  power  of  inbred  corruption  in  yourselves,  and  com- 
mit so  many  actual  sins  ?  Well,  the  terrible  displeasure,  and  vin- 
dictive justice  of  God  cannot  assail  you  on  account  of  these  things ; 
Christ  hath  borne  them,  and  delivered  you  theref  om.  It  is  true,  the 
lawworketh  wrath,  and  denounceth  the  curse  against  the  sinner  ;  but 
your  "  sin  was  condemned  in  the  flesh  of , Christ,  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  you."  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Doth 
the  Lord  render  your  condition  unhappy  by  visiting  you  with  many 
opiritual  and  bodily  afflictions  ?  Those  do  not,  however,  proceed 
from  the  wrath  oi  God,  but  from  his  fatherly  love  and  care  ;  *'  that 
ye  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  Heb.  xii.  5,  11.  Ye  shall  one 
day  be  perfectly  and  for  ever  delivered  from  all  your  calamities,  and 
be  instated  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  God's  blissful  mercy  and  love  : 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  saith,  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  "our  light  affliction,  which 
is  but  for  a  moment,  worneth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternssj 
weight  of  glory"     Amen. 


(103) 


THE 


NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTIOT^ 


Y.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Romans  viii.  3,  4.  For  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was 
weak,  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son,  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh  :  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.