Q.  13.  Since  then  by  the  righteoiis  judgment  of  God,  we  deserve 
temporal  and  eternal  fiunishrrient,  is  there  no  ivay  by  ivhich  we  may  es- 
CB/ie  that  /lunishmeiit,  and  6e  again  received  into  favour  ? 

A.  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied  ;  and  therefore  we  must 
make  this  full  satisfaction  either  by  ourselves  or  by  another. 

Q,    13.   Can  we  ourselves,  then,  make  this  satisfaction  ? 

A.  By  no  means;  But  on  the  contrary,  we  daily  increase  our 
debt. 

Q,  14.  Can  there,  then,  be  found  any  where,  one  who  is  a  mere  crea- 
ture, able  to  satisfy  for  us  ? 

None :  for  first,  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature  for  the 
sin  which  man  hath  committed  ;  and  fhrther,  no  mere  creature  can 
sustain  the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath  against  sin,  so  as  to  deliver 
others  from  it, 

Q.   15.    What  sort  of  a  Mediator  and  deliverer  must  we  then  *  eekfor  ? 

A.  For  one  who  is  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous  ;  and  yet 
more  powerful  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is,  one  who  is  also  very 
God. 


'A. 


.  LTHOUGH  angels  and  men  are  the  most  glorious  of  all  the 
creatures  of  God,  nevertheless,  many  of  the  angels,  and  all  men,  have 
become  the  most  miserable  creatures,  since  they  have  revolted  from; 


\04  TIIE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

their  Maker,  and  have  rebelled  against  him  ;  and  are  therefore  con* 
demned  by  him  to   eternal   punishment :  *'  God  spared  not  the  an-, 
gels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell."   2  Peter  ii.  4.     Thus, 
also,  all  men,  "  the  whole  world  is  become  i^uilty  before  God ;  for 
they  have  all  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."    Rom.  iii. 
19,  23.     Although  the  nature  of  angels,  yea,  of  the  fallen  angels,  is 
much  more  excellent  than   that  of  men,   nevertheless,   fallen    men 
have  this  eminent  privilege  above  fallen  angels,  that  God   hath    re- 
vealed a  deliverance  for  fallen  men,  but  not  for  fallen  angels.     The 
fallen  angels  have  no  hope  of  deliverance  from  their  misery  ;  for 
»'  God  hath  reserved  them  in  everlasting  chains,  under  darkness  unto 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day."  Jude,  verse  6.    He  hath  not  appointed 
a  mediator  and  deliverer  for  them,  as  he  hath  given  the  man  Christ 
Jesus  to  be  a  mediator  between  God  and  men,  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  who  did 
not  therefore  unite  the  nature  of  angels  to  his  Godhead,  but  that  of 
men  :  for  '*  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of 
Abraham,"  Heb.  ii.  16.     Therefore  Paul  extols  so  highly  the  love  of 
God  to  man,  when  he  saith,  Titus  iii,  4,  5.     "  After  that  the  kind- 
ness and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,  he  saved 
Us,"  Sec.  In  order  now  that  the  miserable  sinner  may  become  capa- 
ble of  the  deliverance,  he  teaches  him  his  misery,  that  he  may  hum- 
ble him,  and  he  reveals  to   him  the   deliverance  in  his  Son.     The 
Holy  Spirit,  who  is  sent  by  Jesus  "  convinceth  the  world  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,"  John  xvi.  8,     For  *♦  they  who  are  whole  need  not 
a  physician,  but  they  who  are  sick  :  and  the  Deliverei   came  not  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repen-ance,"   .'^att.  ix.  12,   13. 

This  the  instructor  also  teacheth  us,  when  he  sreaks  in  his  second 
part  concerning  tlie  deliverance  of  man,  for  which  he  had  prepared 
him  in  his  first  part,  by  teaching  him  his  misery.  The  catechism 
instructs  us  in  three  things  with  respect  to  the  deliverance  :  (1)  the 
conditions  which  are  required  to  the  deliverance,  Question  1 2 —  1 7- 
(2)  The  person  who  delivers,  Question  18.  19.  (3)  The  manner  in 
which  we  become  partakers  '^f  him  by  faith.  Lord's  day  vii. — xxxi* 

In  this  Lord's  day  we  see, 

I.  That  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  in  order 
that  we  may  be  delivered.  Question  12. 

II.  By  whom  the  satisfaction  cannot,  and  by  whom  it  can  be  made, 
Questions  13,  14,  15. 

I.  The  instructor  saith  that  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is 
necessary,  in  order  tu  our  deliverance.  The  sinner  hath  by  his  sins 
deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgrpent  of  God,  temporal 
and  eternal  punishment.     Therefore  it  belongs  to  his  deliverance, 


V.  LORD'S  BAY,  Q.  12— l5o  105 

(a)  *'  that  he  should  escape  from  that  punishment"  by  a  forgiveness 
of  his  sins,  whereby  he  is  discharged  from  his  guilt,  so  that  God  is 
no  more  wroth  with  him,  nor  rebukes  him,  and  there  is  no  condem- 
nation to  him.  In  this  manner  doth  the  apostle  describe  the  deliver- 
ance, saying,  "  We  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,"  Eph.  i.  7.  (b)  "  That  he  should  be  again  received  into 
favour."  whereby  he  is  restored  to  the  kindness  and  love  of  God, 
and  obtains  grace  and  glory.  The  same  apostle  teacheth  (.;s  this, 
when  he  saith,  ^  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance^ 
until  the  redemption  ot  the  purchased  possession,"  Eph.  i.  14. 
^  Concerning,  and  with  respect  to  such  a  deliverance,  a  distressed 
sinner,  whom  the  catechism  introduceth  here  as  speaking,  asks, 
Whether  there  be  any  way  to  obtain  a  deliverance  ?  For  in  this  man- 
ner IS  the  elect  sinner  affected,  when  God  disposes  him  for  u  deliv- 
erance :  for  (a)  he  is  convinced  ef  his  abominable  temper  and  con- 
duct ;  he  sees  that  he  is  guilty  in  the  highest  degree,  according  to 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  and  that  not  only  with  a  buie  con- 
templation, and  with  his  judgment,  but  so  that  he  lays  it  to  heart : 
he  sees  with  shame  and  aversion  from  himself  his  horrible  deformity; 
this  distresses  and  afflicts  him,  so  that  he  cries  out,  '*  Wo  unto  me 
that  I  have  sinned,"  Lam  v.  16.  With  Ephraim  "he  bemoans 
himself,  repents,  is  instructed,  smites  upon  his  thigh,  is  ashamed, 
yea,  even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  (b)  He  is  also  desirous  to 
be  delivered ;  as  he  is  at  first  exceedingly  dark  and  confused,  and 
doth  not  rightly  know  the  true  way  to  escape  punishment,  and  to 
be  again  received  into  favour,  therefoi  e  he  begins  to  exert  himself, 
in  order  that  he  may  do  all  that  he  can  devise,  and  that  his  confused 
apprehensions  suggest,  as  conducive  to  his  deliverance  :  one  while 
he  resolves  that  he  will  not  sin  any  more,  and  then  that  he  will  serve 
God  better :  but  he  cannot  advance,  the  power  of  his  conuptions 
forces  him  repeatedly  out  of  his  way,  and  when  he  expects  enlarge- 
ment under  his  distress,  he  is  afflicted  still  more  than  he  was  before, 
because  he  sees  by  experience  that  matters  become  worse  with  him 
instead  of  better.  What  shall  he  do?  he  will  pray  most  earnestly  to 
God,  that  he  would  be  gracious  to  him  :  but  as  soon  as  he  begins, 
he  finds  his  access  unto  God  so  barred  up,  that  he  cannot  approach 
to  him,  and  he  becomes  so  confused  that  he  cannot  utter  in  an 
orderly  manner  a  single  sentence,  capable  of  moving  God.  He  begins 
anew,  but  it  doth  not  avail ;  this  disturbs  and  perplexes  him  so,  that 
he  is  ready  to  despair  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  he  doth,  and  ''  he 
gaith,  There  is  no  hope  ;  for  he  doth  not  find  the  life  of  his  handi 
and  he  is  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  Yea,  he  is  afraid  that  there  ii  nt^ 
106  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

help  for  him,  and  that  lie  i<  perhaps  a  reprobate  ;  and  therefore  ht 
sometimes  resolves  that  he  will  not  endeavour  any  more  to  be  saved. 
But  his  distrcbs  and  fear  of  perdition  will  not  suffer  him  to  rest^ 
until,  being  wholly  stripped  and  bare,  he  asks  the  word  and  servants 
of  God,  *'  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved  ?"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  30. 

What  doth  the  instructor  now  do  with  such  a  person  ?  doth  he  say, 
like  physicians  of  no  value,  Thou  must  not  be  so  sad,  this  Sorrow- 
fulness proceeds  from  Satan,  thou  must  banish  it,  God  is  merciful, 
Christ  hath  died  for  us,  thou  must  beheve  this  firmly,  forsake  evil, 
and  do  good,  and  pray  to  God  ?  no :  for  this  is  only  daubing  with 
untempered  mortar,  it  neither  heals,  nor  relieves  the  soul.  But  the 
instructor,  desirous  that  a  godly  sorro^v  should  penetrate  the  sinner, 
that  the  tranquillity  of  his  mind  may  be  perfect  and  established  by  a 
perfect  righteousness  of  an  all-sufficient  Mediator,  detains  him  a  while 
under  his  concern,  yea,  he  increaseth  it  by  showing  him,  that  there 
is  no  way  to  obtain  deliverance,  as  long  as  the  justice  of  God  is  not 
satisfied  :  he  saith,  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  &c. 

The  justice  of  God  denotes  here  his  natural  right,  by  which  he  is 
entitled,  on  account  of  his  glory  and  sovereignty,  to  require  a  perfect 
obedience  of  man.  Therefore  the  prophet  saith,  "  Who  would  not 
fear  thee,  thou  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  thee  doth  it  appertain,"  Jer. 
X.  7,  and  when  man  doth  not  obey  him,  to  punish  him  temporally 
and  eternally.  Even  "  the  Gentiles  know  the  judgment  (or  right)  of 
God,  that  they  who  do  such  things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i. 
32.  This  right  God  hath  expressed  in  his  law,  and  it  is  therefore 
called,  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law,"  Rom.  viii.  4.  "  For  Moses 
describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man  who 
doth  these  things  shall  live  by  them,"  Rom.  x.  5,  and  "  cursed  is 
every  one  who  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 

This  is  satisfied,  (I)  by  suffering  fully  and  completely  the  punish- 
ment threatened  in  consequence  of  sin  :  thus  "  God'  made  his  Son, 
who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin,"  2  Cor.  v.  21,  to  wit,  by  inflicting  the 
punishment  of  sin  upon  him.  This  is  indeed  sufficient  to  deliver  the 
sinner  from  punishment,  but  it  doth  not  give  him  a  right  to  life  ;  and 
therefore  a  satisfaction  requires  also,  (2)  a  perfect  obedience,  which 
the  law  of  God  demands  in  order  to  life  :  **  By  the  obedience  of  one 
many  shall  be  made  righteous,"  Rom.  v.  19. 

God  *'  will  "  have  his  justice  satisfied.  The  Socinians  deny  that 
God  will  have  this,  and  they  conceive  that  such  a  satisfaction  is  not 
necessary  ;  yea,  that  God  can  recede  from  his  right,  and  that  he  hath 
actually  receded  from  it,  and  hath  therefore  abolished  the  law  of 


V^  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15.  i07 

Moses,  and  established  a  better  law  by  Christ,  as  a  new  lawgiver^ 
=,nstead  of  the  old  law.  The  Remonstrants  will  indeed  admit,  that 
satisfaction  must  be  made  to  God,  in  order  to  our  deUvt^rance  ;  but 
not  that  the  justice  of  God  must  be  perfectly  satisfied  :  but  that 
nothing  more  is  necessary,  than  that  the  will  of  God  should  be  satis- 
fied, which  doth  not  demand  all  that  the  sinner  hath  forfeited  ;  and 
that  God,  by  a  gracious  estimation  accepts  of  this,  instead  of  a  per- 
fect satisfaction.  And  they  must  speak  ^lus,  if  they  will  maintain 
their  doctrine,  that  Christ  suffered  for  all  men  ;  for  if  he  satisfied  the 
justice  of  God  for  ail  men,  then  all  men  must  be  saved.  Now  all 
men  are  not  saved,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  our  adversaries, 
and  so  Christ  could  not  have  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  them. 
And  therefore  they  say,  that  he  hath  by  his  death  satisfied  the  will 
of  God,  and  that  God  was  moved  thereby  to  establish  a  covenant  of 
grace  with  all  men,  and  to  require  of  them,  as  the  condition  of  that 
covenant,  faith,  obedience  and  perseverance,  and  that  he  gives  them 
a  sutiicient  grace  to  fulfil  those  conditions. 

This  doctrine  is  opposed  by  all  the  orthodox,  who  say  that  "God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied."  But  how  doth  God  will  this  ?  only 
by  his  decree,  and  mere  good  pleasure,  by  which  he  could  even  have 
willed  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction,  as  he  wills  many  things 
by  his  decree,  which  he  might  have  willed  otherwise,  as  that  there 
should  be  more  or  fei^^er  men  than  there  are  ?  Thus  some  divines 
think  on  this  subject.  Or  doth  God  will  that  there  should  be  a  satis- 
faction, on  account  of  his  holy  and  righteous  nature,  whereby  he 
cannot  be  willing  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction  :  for  instance, 
God  will  be  obeyed  by  his  reasonable  creatures,  and  it  is  his  will  that 
what  is  reasonable  should  be  holy,  and  he  cannot  will  otherwise  ? 
This  we  maintain  with  the  most  divines,  and  this  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  catechism  also,  as  appears  from  the  words,  "  The  justice  of  Gotl 
requires  that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme  punishment,"  Questisn  2,  "  God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  Question  12.  "  With  respect  to  the 
justice  and  truth  of  God,  satisfaction  can  be  made  for  our  sins  no 
otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,"  Question  40.  And 
we  do  not  teach  without  reason,  that  God  cannot,  without  a  satisfac- 
tion to  his  justice,  suffer  the  sinner  to  escape  punishment,  and  re- 
ceive him  again  into  favour:  for,  (besides  what  we  have  safid  on  the 
foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  sin  must  necessarily  be  punished)  Paui 
saith. 

1.  Heb.  ii.  10.  "  It  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by 
whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  son^  to  glory,  to  make  th^ 


m         THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION- 

Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings."  To  make 
this  Captain  perfect  through  sufferings,  signifies  to  make  him  a  sacri- 
fic-.  by  his  sufferings,  and  thereby  to  bring  the  children  of  God  to 
salvation.  This  now  became  the  high  Ciod,  of,  and  through  whom, 
are  a'l  things ;  and  it  would  not  have  become  him,  either  to  bring 
his  children  to  glory  without  such  a  satisfying  sacrifice,  or  if  he 
pould  have  done  it  without  that  sufferini^,  to  subject  his  Son,  never- 
theless to  such  a  painful  'suffering.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were 
certainly  unnecessary,  nnd  to  no  purpose,  if  God  could  forgive  sin  of 
his  mere  good  pleasure  and  free  will,  without  satisfaction. 

2.  It  was  surely  an  evidence  of  the  greatest  love,  that  God  gave 
his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation,  and  punished  him  for  the  sinner.  See 
Rom.  v.  8.  I  John  iv.  10.  But  there  would  not  have  been  such  an 
illustrious  display  of  love  in  thiS,  if  God  could  have  received  the  sin- 
ner into  favour  without  a  satisfaction  ;  since  it  would  be  a  great  in- 
stance of  love  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  the  sinner,  if  he  did  not  de- 
mand a  satisfaction,  and  forgive  him  his  sin  for  nought. 

3.  The  apostle  saith  also,  that  "  God  hath  set  Christ  Jesus  forth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  right- 
eousness for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  during  the  forbear- 
ance of  God."*  Rom,  iii.  25.  During  the  forbearance  of  God,  that 
is,  during  the  time  of  the  Old  Testament,  many  sins  were  commit- 
ted, and  many  of  them  forgiven,  while  there  was  yet  no  satisfaction 
made  for  sin,  and  it  appeared  thus,  that  God  was  merciful  and  for- 
bearing, but  not  that  he  was  righteous  (or  just).  God  then,  that  he 
might  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  set  his  Son 
forth  in  his  sufferings  for  that  purpose  ;  but  why  was  this  necessa- 
ry ?  the  sins  w^ere  already  forgiven,  if  the  satisfaction  were  not  so 
necessary. 

4.  Add  to  this  what  the  apostle  saith,  Heb.  x.  4,  "  It  is  impossible 
that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sin."  Why  is 
this  impossible  ?  Only  because  it  did  not  please  God  to  take  away 
sins  by  the  blood  of  beasts  ?  No  :  but  also  bccatise  the  blood  of  irra- 
tional creatures  bears  no  proportion  to  the  sins  of  rational  creatures, 
which  are  too  abominable  and  filthy  to  be  washen  away  by  such  irra- 
tional blood.  If  God  could  then  take  away  sins  without  a  satisfaction, 
why  could  they  not  be  taken  away  by  the  blood  of  beasts  offered  up 
in  sacrifice  ?  Since  this,  according  to  Heb.  x  1,  4,  1 1,  is  impossible, 
\t  is  also  impossible  that  God  should  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfac- 

*  In  rendering  this  passage,  we  have  followed  the  Dutch  translation  ;  the 
reason  for  which  here,  aa  well  as  elsewhere,  we  have  mentioned  in  cur  adver- 
^aen|)cn^ 


V.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  12^15.  109 

tioa.  If  any  wish  to  see  these  reasons  enlarged,  and*  enforced 
with  others,  we  refer  them  to  Witsius's  Kconomy  of  the  covenants 
hook  1.  chapter  5,  an;l  book  I(.  chapter  8. 

It  is  needless  to  object  here,  (a)  that  God  may  recede  from  his 
strict  right,  since  man  ran  do  this,  and  that  it  is  an  eminent  virtue 
to  forgive  injuries  with  a  noble  greatness  of  mind  ;  for  though  this 
is  true  with  respect  to  private  injuries,  which  one  man  doth  to  an- 
other ;  and  although  man  is  bound  to  do  this,  because  one  man  is  a 
neighbour  of  another,  and  the  law  of  God  obligeth  him  to  it ;  never* 
theless,  God  cannot  therefore  recede  fro  -n  his  right,  since  he  is  not 
bound  by  any  law  to  exercise  such  a  virtue  toward  his  creatures ; 
and  since  he  cannot  reeede  from  his  right  as  a  Judge  in  punishing 
sins,  who  m.ust  do  right,  (b)  Were  the  sins  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment forgiven,  without  a  foregoing  satisfaction  of  the  divme  justice, 
they  were,  nevertheless,  not  forgiven,  except  on  account  of  the  sat- 
isfaction of  the  Surety  who  was  ro  come.  See  this  Kom.  iii.  25. 
Heb.  ix.  15,  In  order  that  the  ancient  believers  might  look  stead- 
fiistly  to  the  future  satisfaction  of  the  Messiah,  God  described  him, 
promised,  and  shadowed  him  forth  to  them  in  the  ancient  sacrifices. 
See  Isaiah  liii.  Acts  x.  43.  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb.  x.  1,  14.  (c)  God 
could  not,  as  the  Socinians  conceive,  graciously  abolish  the  law 
which  threatens  the  curse  in  consequence  of  the  least  transgression  • 
and  establish  another,  which  should  require  nothing  but  faith  ;  for 
the  law  is  the  transcript  of  God's  holiness,  which  cannot  be  expres- 
sed bv  any  other  law,  ueless  the  divine  holiness  can  have  another 
form  than  it  had  before.  God  would  then  also  deny  his  truth  :  for 
he  hath  said,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  ;"  and  he  would 
now  say,  thou  shalt  not  die  according  to  my  threatening,  although 
my  justice  is  not  satisfied  for  thy  sin.  Doth  the  sinner  not  die  noWf 
it  is  not  in  consequence  of  a  hew  law,  but  of  a  satisfaction  for  the 
establishment  of  the  law,  Roiii.  iii.  2  1,  31.  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  (d) 
They  think  that  God  could  bestow  his  Spirit,  as  well  as  his  Son,  to 
aRect  the  sinner  with  sorrow  for  his  sin,  and  induce  him  lo  confess 
th^t  he  had  dishonoured  (iod,  that  he  might  thus  sanctify  the  name 
cf  God;  and  that  therefore  a  satisfaction  was  not  necessary  for  this 
purpose.  But  this  is  an  idle  pretence  ;  for  this  would  be  an  act  of 
kindness^  and  not  of  justice.  See  Zech.  xii.  JO.  Now  God  must 
surely  be  glorified  in  his  justice,  as  well  as  in  his  kindness,  as  he  is 
by  the  satisfaction,  Eph.  i.  7*  (e)  They  say  further  to  no  purpose,^ 
t.hat  if  vve  hold  a  satisfaction  to  be  necessary  from  the  nature  of 
God,  we  do  then  lim't  God  too  much  with  respect  to  his  power  and 
liberty  ;  but'can  we  indeed  say  nftt  Paul  iim-ts  tlie  Lord  too  much;^ 
^hen  he  tsacheth  that  "  God  cannot  lie."    litus  i,  2.  Heb.  yi,   18, 


1  Id  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

It  is  no  impotency  nor  imperfection  in  God,  that  he  cannot  forgJYc 
tin  without  a  satisfaction,  any  more  than  that  I'*  he  cannot  be  terript* 
cd  of  evil,"  James  iii.  13.  (f;  Finally,  some  say  that  God  might,  ia 
the  work  of  redemption,  have  willed  somethi'i^  different  from  what 
he  hath  willed  For  instance,  God  willed  that  Christ  should  s  aisff 
for  some  sinners  ;  but  he  might  have  willed  that  he  should  satisfy  fop 
all.  And  so  they  conceive  that  God,  who  hath  now  willed  that  satis- 
faction  should  be  made  for  sin,  might  have  willed  to  forgive  sin  with- 
out a  satisfaction.  But  a  satisfaction  for  some,  or  for  all,  affects 
not  the  divine  holiness  and  justice,  and  so  not  the  nature  of  thesatis> 
fcic'i'jn,  but  oaly  ths  ohjecr.s  of  the  satisfaction.  God  mig'tt  have  de- 
creed from  all  eternity  that  his  Son  should  suffer  for  all  men,  but 
not  that  some,  or  many  sinners,  should  escape  punishment,  and  ht 
again  received  into  favour  without  a  satisfaction. 

Since  now  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  we 
therefore  conclude  "  that  we  must  make  this  satisfaction,  either  by 
ourselves,  or  by  another." 

"  We  must  make  full  satisfaction  then,  either  by  ourselves  or  by 
another."  We  should  satisfy  by  ourselves,  if  we  suffered  and  fulfil- 
led in  our  own  persons  the  selfi-ame  things,  which  aje  required  hj 
the  law,  in  its  strictest  demands,  and  if  this  should  deliver  us  with- 
out any  intervening  grace,  or  forgiveness  :  for  it  is  the  judgment 
of  God  that  they  who  do  evil  things  are  worthy  of  death."  Rom.  i. 
52.  This  is  called  by  lawyers  soliaio,  payment,  and  by  divines,  "  the 
righteousness  of  the  law,"  accorc'ing  Rum.  x  5.  And  we  should 
satisfy  by  another,  if  some  other  should  take  our  pUce,  as  a  surety, 
to  stisfy  for  us,  and  in  our  stead  This  would,  nevertheless,  not  ef- 
fect our  deliverance  by  itself,  but  only  by  a  favourable  permission  of 
the  divine  Judge,  who  should  admit  the  surety,  impute  our  debt  to 
him,  and  his  righteousness  to  us.  And  we  should  thus  satisfy  by 
another,  not  actively  and  indeed,  but  passively ;  inasmuch  as 
the  satisfaction  is  made  by  another  in  our  stead,  and  by  imputa- 
tion. Arid  therefore  we  cannot  say  that  believers  satisfy  properly 
by  t!ie  surety,  as  if  the  Son  of  God  were  not  a.i  absolute  surety,  cjC^ 
firomisso^'^  under  the  Old  Testament,  who  did  not  take  the  debt  upon 
himself  absolutely,  but  conditionally,  to  wit,  if  the  elect  should  not 
mak-  satisfaction  themselves,  and  that  he  left  it  on  them,  and  that 
God  did  on  this  occount  continually  charge  and  upbraid  them  with 
their  sins  ;  for  then  they  must  have  proffered  the  surety  themseves, 
and  God  would  not  have  trusted  that  his  ^on  would  certainly  satisfy  i 
neither  would  he  then  have  been  "  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
■w«rlU,"  Rev.  xiii.  8.     Neither  wcndd  the  sacritfiaes  of  the  Old  Tes- 


— 15,  HI 

tament  have  been  shadows,  which  certified,  like  sacraments,  the 
old  believers,  that  he  would  truly  take  away  sins  ;  and  they  would 
not  have  been  admitted  into  heaven,  inasmuch  as  they  were  still  sub- 
ject to  guilt.  Therefore  we  must  say  that  we  satisfy  passively  by 
another,  and  throtigh  the  gracious  imputation  of  God  ;  and  this  is 
called  by  lawyers,  satisfaction  satisfaction  ;  and  by  divines,  "  the  right- 
eousness of  the  gospel,  and  of  faith,"  according  to  Rora.  i.  16,  17-^ 
X.  6,  11;  because  the  law  knoweth  nothing  of  such  a  satisfaction,  and 
it  is  revealed  only  in  the  gospel,  and  received  by  faith,  although  the 
law  cannot  disapprove  of  it,  if  the  Lawgiver  will  admit  and  accept 
it ;  for  "  the  law  is  not  made  void  by  faith,  but  established."  Rom. 
iii.  31. 

This  satisfaction,  whether  it  be  made  by  ourselves,  or  by  another, 
must  be  a  "  full  "  satisfaction.  All  that  the  law  threatens  must  be 
suffered,  and  all  that  it  commands  must  be  obeyed  :  for  otherwise 
God  will  still  be  "  wroth  "  with  the  sinner,  "  and  deliver  him  to  the 
tormentors,  till  he  shall  pay  all  that  is  due  to  him,"  Matt,  xviii.  34. 
And  therefore  the  acceptilati*^  or  gracious  estimation  of  the  Remon- 
strants, by  which  God  would  accept  of  a  part  of  the  satisfaction, 
instead  of  the  whole,  cannot  be  admitted  here  :  for  "  the  judgment 
of  God  is  according  to  truth,"  Rom   ii.  2. 

But  can  a  satisfaction  for  a  guilty  person  by  another  be  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal  ?  The  Socinians  say,  nay,  because  humau 
tribunals  will  not  permit  an  innocent  person  to  be  punished,  and  to 
make  satisfaction,  as  a  surety  for  another  who  is  guilty  ;  but  we  con- 
ceive that  this  may  very  properly  be  admitted  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, if  the  supreme  Judge  will  graciously  permit  it ;  for  (a)  a 
surety  is  admitted  in  cases  of  debt  by  a  secular  judge.  We  may 
derive  a  proof  from  this,  because  the  Socinians  themselves  infer  from 
suretiship  for  debts,  that  grace  and  pardon  cannot  be  exercised,  if 
Christ  made  a  perfect  satisfaction,  (b)  One  man  hath  also  frequently 
been  permitted  to  become  a  surety  for  another  in  cases  of  guilt,  as 
Reuben  and  Judah  becam.e  sureties  for  Benjamin,  Gen.  xlii,  37.  xliii. 
9.  xliv.  32,  33.  See  also  Rom.  v.  7.  (c)  It  hath  appeared  from  the 
seventh  question,  that  the  sin  of  Adam,  whereby  he  became  guilty, 
was  imputed  to  us  :  why  then  cannot  our  guilt  also  be  imputed  to  a 
proper  surety  ?  (d)  It  will  appear  moreover  hereafter  that  Christ 
became  a  surety,  and  that  he  satisfied ;  and  was  therefore  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal,  (e)  Cannot  one  be  admitted  as  a  surety  for 
another  before  a  human  tribunal  in  case  of  guiit,  it  is  because  no 
human  judge  is  lord  of  the  life  of  another,  as  neither  is  any  man  lord 
of  his  own"  life,  so  as  to  become  a  surety  for  another  x   it  would  also 


VH  Ti^E  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

be  an  injury  to  the  community,  if  a  good  citizen  should  perish  in 
making  satisfaction  for  another,  and  the  evil  citizen  should  remain 
alive  ;  but  \ye  must  consider  matters  otherwise  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, since  Gr>d  is  lord  of  every  man's  life,  and  the  surety,  who  is 
required  here,  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  according:  to  the  fifteenth  ques- 
tion :  he  can  also  deliver  himself  from  death,  and  can  reforii*  and 
sanctify  the  abominab'e  sinner,  and  so  the  kingdom  of  God  will  not 
be  injured,  but  profited  by  his  death. 

But  would  not  God  then  recede  from  his  right,  contraty  to  what 
hath  been  ta'ight  before  ?  no,  for  God's  right  would  be  satisfied,  and 
there  would  only  be  a  gracious  translation,  by  which  God's  right,  and 
the  guilt  of  the  sinner  would  be  transferred  from  the  sinner  to  the 
^^rety,  which  was  also  done,  according  to  Rom.  iii.  20,  21.  viii.  3, 
4.  2  Cor.  V.  21. 

If  the  sinner  could  now  make  full  satisfaction  by  himself,  or  by 
another    he  would  be  delivered  ;  but  it  is  certain,  that  he  cannot 
satisfy  by  himself.     The  Papists  imagine,  "  that  we  can  make  a  par- 
tial satisfaction  by  ourselves.,  if  we  do  not  daily  increase  our  debt  by 
adding  sm  to  sin."     They  distinguish  between  an  equivalent   satis- 
faction, which  we  cannot  make  by  ourselves,  and  between  an  imper- 
fect satisfaction,  which  should  nevertheless  be  sufficient,  because  God 
should  forgive  sins  in  consequence  of  it  with  a  certain  fitness.     Wc 
can  effect  this  imperfect  satisfaction  by  many  good  works  and  suffer- 
ings, in  and  after  this  life,  according  to  the  Romanists  ;  but  the  word 
of  God  doth  not  acknowledge  an  imperfect  satisfaction,  but  only  a 
perfect  one,  and  "  man  cannot  answer  God  one       a  thousand,  whea 
he  contends  with  him,"  and  demands  satisfaction,  according  to  Job 
X.  2,  3,  Psalm  cxxx.  3.  and  besides  this  we  say,  (a)  that  the  price  of 
the  redemption  necessary  for  a  satisfaction  is  too  precious  for  a  man 
to  pay  it ;  "  he  owes  ten  thousand  talents,"  perfect  obedience  and 
«ternal  punishment,  and  "  he  hath  nothing  wherewith  to  pay»"  Matt, 
xvii.  24,  25.  (b)  <'  We  also  increase  our  debt  daily."     This  is  done 
not  only  by  those,  who  are  uncommonly  wicked,   as  the  spiritual 
**  Babylon,  whose  sins,"  heaped  one  upon  another,    "  reach  unto 
heaven,"  Rev.  xviii.  5,  but  by  all  other  men,  who  are  still  under  a 
broken  covenant  of  works,  of  which  the  instructor  speaks  here,  <^  hav- 
ing, according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  G©d,  deserved  temporal 
and  eternal  punishments."  Sec  how  they  are  exhibited  in  their  com- 
plicated iniquities,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 19.     Believers  themselves  do  all 
offend  in  many  instances,  James  iii'  2.  See  also    1  Kings  viii.  46. 
Rev.  XX.  9.  Eccl.  vii.  20.  (c)  Let  us  admit,  that  we  should  hencefor- 
ward be  perfectly  holy  and  sinless,  wc  could  not  thereby  atone  for 
our  past  guilt,  because  we  owe  this  both  at  present  and  in  future, 


V.  tORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15,  112 

and  are  thus  unprofitable  servants,  Luke  xviii.  10,  and  therefore  our 
former  debt  would  remain  unpaid,  and  we  have  nothing  wherewith 
to  satisfy  for  it. 

But  "  can  there  not  be  found  any  where  one,  v/ho  is  a  mere  crea- 
ture, able  to  satisfy  for  us  ?"  If  a  mere  creature  should  satisfy  for  us, 
he  behooved  to  be  either  a  rational,  or  an  irrational  creature.  A  ra- 
tional creature  is  either  a  mere  man,  or  an  angel ;  but  no  mere  man, 
who  is  not  more  than  a  man,  can  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for 
another.  For,  (1)  no  man  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  and  hath  therefore 
no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  another,  in  order  to  bear  his  guilt : 
therefore  God  also  rejected  the  proffer  of  Moses,  "  that  he  would  be 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  God  for  the  people,"  Exod.  xxxii.  30 — 35, 

(2)  That  ^Vhich  a  man  would  be  willing  to  do  for  another,  he  oweth 
for  himself;  for  "  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,"  Gal.  vi.  5. 

(3)  A  man  cannot  satisfy  for  himself,  as  we  have  shown  before ; 
how  shall  he  then  satisfy  for  another  ?  (4)  He  who  should  satisfy 
for  another,  would  be  obliged  to  render  that  other,  by  an  almighty 
and  heart-changing  grace,  a  partaker  of  his  satisfaction  and  righteous- 
ness, if  it  should  be  profitable  to  him.  Now  no  mere  man  can  do 
this  :  he  can  at  most  only  "  plant  and  water  ;  but  God  giveth  the 
increase,"  I  Cor,  iii.  4,  5.  (5)  Yea,  if  a  mere  man  were  even  able  tc 
do  this,  he  would  not  be  deemed  worthy  to  do  it,  because  those  who 
were  delivered  by  him,  would  be  obliged  to  offer  him  the  divine 
honours  of  faith^  love,  hope,  fear  and  worship,  since  he  would  truly 
have  merited  such  honours  of  them  -  but  no  mere  man  may  be  hon- 
oured thus.  See  Isaiah  xliv,  2  1 — 25.  Jer.  xvii,  5 — 8.  (6)  Add  to  this, 
that  "no  mere  man  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  wrath,  so  as  to 
deliver  others  from  it."  Trulv  the  wrath  of  God  is  dreadful  and  in- 
supportable :  hear  what  an  eminently  holy  man  saith  of  it,  "  Thou, 
even  thou  art  to  be  feared,  and  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight,  when 
once  thou  art  angry  ?"  Psalm  Ixxvi.  7.  xc.  11.  And  therefore  "  none 
can  by  any  means  redeem  liis  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for 
him  ;  for  the  redemption  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  it  ceaseth  for 
ever,"  Psalm  xhx.  7,  8. 

Say  not,  could  not  God  create  a  new  man,  who  should  be  perfectly 
holy,  and  endue  him  with  such  strength,  that  he  would  be  able  to 
satisfy,  to  sustain  his  wrath,  and  effectually  apply  his  righteousness 
to  another :  for  thou  shouldest  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  this, 
since  no  such  man  can  proceed  from  the  corrupt  posterity  of  Adam, 
nor  love  the  sinner  as  his  neighbour,  and  thus  sa^sfy  the  demand  of 
tbe  law  :  moreover  no  man  is  capable  -tof  such  power,  inasmuch  a* 

T 


114  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

it  is  an  almig^hty  power,  since  he  would  then  be  God,  and  no  longef 
a  creature,  which  is  impossible. 

An  anj^el,  aU)iou5:h  he  excells  in  strength,  and  can  slay  a  wholtJ 
army  of  a  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand  n^en,  cannot  satisfy 
for  a  sinner  ,  for  an  anc^el  hath  no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  the 
sinner,  and  he  would  not  be  able  to  apply  tlie  rir!;htcov,snes8  procu- 
red bv  him,  and  would  not  be  worthy  to  bt  adn'itteci  lo  such  an  hon- 
ourable work ;  and  besides  this.  "  God  will  not  punish  any  other 
creatur'*"  but  man,  "  fo"  the  sin  whirh  man  bath  committed,"  be- 
cause no  an^el  can  sufter  tne  iiUman  punishment  of  death,  so  as  to 
satisfv  the  demand  of  the  hiW,  nor  love  his  ici2:hbonr  as  h'msclf, 
sinc^  he  is  not  a  neighbour  of  man.  "  Moreover^  no  mere  creature" 
■(as  an  angel  is)  '^  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath,  so 
as  to  deliver  others  therefrom."  The  glorious  angers  cannot  endure 
even  the  bright  lustre  of  the  most  holy  countenance  of  God  :  they 
must  hide  and  cover  themselves  before  it,  Isaiah  vi.  2,  3  *'  The 
devils,"  though  exceedingly  mi,a;hty  and  dreadful,  *'  tremble  before 
the  one  only  God,'*  James  iii.  19.  How  earnestly  "do  they  pray, 
that  they  may  not  be  tormented  before  the  time,  and  be  sent  away 
into  the  deep  !"  Luke  viii.  27 — 31. 

Cannot  a  satisfaction  be  made  by  any  rational  creature,  perhaps 
irrational  creatures,  either  living  or  dead,  may  effect  something,  if 
we  offer  them  up  to  God  for  an  atonement.  This  was  the  opinion, 
not  only  of  the  blind  heathens,  but  also  of  the  carnal  Jews  who 
sought  their  righteousness  by  keeping  the  moral  law,  and  when  they 
were  guilty  of  sinning  in  one  instance  or  another,  imagined  that  they 
should  be  able  to  atone  for  their  sins  by  bringing  this  or  that  gift  for 
a  sacrifice.  This  notion  was  also  somewhat  specious,  since  God  him- 
self had  enjoined  by  the  ceremonial  law,  the  sacrificial  service  of  sin 
offerings,  trespass  offerings,  and  sacrifices  of  atonement ;  but  this  is  a 
false  pretence.  The  justice  of  God  cannot  be  satisfied  by  any  sacri- 
ficial service  :  "  for  it  is  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  should  take  away  sin,"  Heb.  x.  4*  There  is  no  proportion  be- 
tween irrational  or  inanimate  sacrifices,  and  the  guilt  of  the  soul : 
God  doth  not  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  nor  drink  the  blood  of  goats," 
Psalm,  1  11.  When  the  Jews  would  appease  God  by  their  sacri- 
ficing, he  then  said,  that  "  he  had  not  required  this  at  their  hands,'* 
Jer.  vii.  21,  22,  and  he  rejected  it,  Isaiah  i.  13.  Jer.  vi.  20.  Micha  vi. 
6,  7,  8.  When  he  demands  a  satisfaction,  he  then  refiiseth  the  sac- 
rificial service,  and  he  substitutes  a  more  perfect  service  in  the  stead 
of  it.  See  Heb.  x.  1 — 9,  Did  Ciod  himself  enjoin  sacrifices  for  atone- 
Tsient,  it  was  however  not  done  in  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  in 


—15.  115 

©rder  that  men  might  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  in- 
to favour  ;  but  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  was  estabUshed  with 
Israel,  Exod.  xix.  which  supposeth  a  satisfaction  by  a  sufficient  sure- 
ty. And  thus,  all  those  offerings,  enjoined  by  the  church-law  of 
Israel,  did  not  serve  to  effect  a  real  satisfaction  and  atonement ;  but 
to  shadow  forth  and  to  prefigure  the  Surety,  and  his  satisfying  sacri- 
fice, that  the  covenant  people  of  the  Old  Testament  might  look 
through  all  that  outward  service  to  him,  and  seek  in  his  perfect  sac- 
rifice, the  real  atonement.  And  thus,  *'  the  law  of  sacrifices  had  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the 
things,"  Hcb.  x.  1. 

Therefore  the  sinner  cannot  have  a  hope  of  effecting  a  satisfaction 
either  by  himself,  or  by  any  mere  creature,  in  order  that  he  may  es- 
cape punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour.     Is  there  then 
no  door  of  hope  open  for  him  ?     There  is  none,  unless   he  can  find 
a  sufficient  mediator  and  deliverer.     He  must  indeed  have  a  media- 
tor between  God  and  himself,  to  deliver  him  ;  not  only  a  mediator  of 
advocacy  and  intercession,  for  a  mere  creature  could  be  such  a  me- 
diator :    Moses  was  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  Exod.  xxxii. 
Deut.  v.  5,  but  the  sinner  must  have  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  who 
can  dehver  him  from  his   guilt,  and  satisfy   the  justice  of  God  for 
him  by  a  sufficient  ransom  ;  and  therefore  he  must  have  '•  a  medi- 
ator for  the  redempi  ion  of  transgressions."     Heb.  ix.  15.     But  who, 
who  in  heaven  or  on  earth  is  worthy  or  able  to  be  such  a  mediator  ? 
The  instructer  saith,  he  must  have  four  great  qualifications.     Ques- 
tion 15.  (a)   **  Ihat  he  must  be  very  man,"   who  hath  a  human  soul 
with  a  human  body,  and  particularly  of  a  human  being,  and  so  he 
must  be  man  of  man.  (b)  "  That  he  must  be  a  righteous  man,"  one 
who  is  perfectly  righteous  and  holy,  agreeably  to  the  demand  of  the 
law,  (c)  "  And,  nevertheless,  more  perfect  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is, 
one  who  is  very  God. "(d)    He  must  also  be  God  and  man  in  one  per- 
son ;  therefore  our  catechism  saith,  who  is    "  also"  very  God  ;  and 
in  the  Latin  catechism  we  read,  qui  simul  etiam  sit  verus  Deus^  "  who 
is  withal,  or  at  the  same  time  also  very  God."     Why  the  mediator 
must  have  these  four  qualifications,  the  instructor  will  teach  us  here- 
after. Question  16,  17  ;  and  so  the  sinner  is  still  kept  under  his  con- 
cern  to  know  how  he  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received 
into  favour,  that  his  distress  may  be  perfect,  and  he  may  be  the  more 
capable  of  a  complete  consolation. 


116  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  how  shall  ye  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punish- 
ment, which  ye  have  deserved  according  lo  the  righteous  judgment 
o(  God,  and  be  again  received  into  favour  ?  Many  do  not  even  think 
of  this,  at  least  many  of  yx3U  are  not  concerned  about  it ;  '•  the  lust 
Of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,  whoredom, 
wine  and  new  wine  take  av/ay  their  hearts,"  1  John  ii.  16.  Hosea 
iv.  11.  Or  the  cares  and  business  of  this  life,  render  them  careless 
and  unconcerned  about  their  eternal  welfare,  and  suffer  them  not  to 
l>onder  seriously  upon  their  eternal  salvation.  But  hear,  voluptuous 
and  poor  worldling,  whose  *^  end  is  destruction?  is  not  thine,  whose 
Cod  is  tliy  be'ly,  whose  glory  is  in  thy  shame,  and  who  mindest 
earthly  things,"     Phil.  iii.  19^ 

Some  think  it  is  unnecessary  to  be  solicitous  about  their  eternal 
salvation.  Is  there  any  person  who  is  afraid  of  eternal  perdition, 
presently  another  will  scoff  at  him,  as  if  such  a  fearful  person  were 
silly  and  disordered  in  his  understanding.  Hath  such  a  reviler  of 
good  things  any  compassion  Vt'ith  such  a  sorrowful  person  :  how 
will  he  bestir  himself  to  discourse  with  him,  in  order  to  dispel  his 
anxiety  1  he  will  at  least  take  care  that  he  doth  not  himself  become 
so  melancholic  ;  he  thinks  ihat  if  he  should,  he  would  despair,  and 
he  doth  not  intend  to  listen  so  much  to  the  devil,  as  if  that  conviction 
were  a  work  of  the  devil,  and  not  of  "  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  convin- 
cet*}  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment,"  John 
xvi.  8.  Christ,  he  thinkb,  hath  died  for  our  sins,  and  this  he  wili 
believe  firmly,  without  doubting  ;  and  he  imagineth  that  such 
sorrow  doth  not  agree  with  the  joyful  season  of  the  New  Testament, 
But,  inendo  ye  who  i^ardtn  and  deceive  your  hearts  in  this  careless 
manner,  how  can  ye  so  i-ely  upon,  and  be  so  assured  of  an  interest 
in  the  salisfa  tion  of  Christ,  which  he  hath  accomplished  ?  Doth  it 
belong  to  all  men  ?  to  you  also  ?  must,  and  can  ye  believe  this  with- 
out ever  having  been  concerned  about  your  woful  misery  ?  and  do 
ye  think,  that  under  the  New  Testament  we  must  not  have  any 
'  godly  sorrow,  which  worketh  repentance  not  to  be  repented  ofj" 
'  oiiiraiy  to  2  Cor.  vii.  8 — 1 1,  Surely  none  but  "  those  who  mourn, 
arc  comforted  and  blessed,"  Mat.  v.  4.  Do  ye  say,  we  repent  in- 
f'.eed  of  our  sins  ?  is  it  indeed  true,  and  not  merely  a  vain  assertion  r 
iire  ye  ever  affected  with  concern,  distress,  and  a  restless,  earnest 
desire  to  escyj.'i  iht-  :  ust  !ved  p'..n»shment,  and  to  be  again  received 
.'ito  favour  ?  Suui  and  Jndas  said  also,    "  I  have  sinned,"     I  Sam- 


]2— 15, 
svi.  24— Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4  ;  but  Ihey  both  «  died  in  their  iniquity/' 
yea,  they  murdered  themselves.  1  Chron  x.  13 — 1:5am.  xxxi.*4. 
— .Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

OtWers  experience  severe  twinges  of  conscience,  and  are  accord- 
ingly fearful,  when  with  *'  Felix,  they  hear  of  righteousness,  tem- 
perance, and  the  judgment  to  come  ;"  Acts  xxiv.  25  ;  but  they  do 
not  earnestly  inquire  after  the  way  which  is  above,  to  depart  from 
hell  beneath  ;  for  one  endeavours  to  divert  his  anxiety  by  business  or 
amusement,  or  by  hardening  and  barring  .up  his  heart,  that  the 
anguish  of  his  heart  may  not  be  too  much  enlarged,  or  by  turning 
away  his  ear  from  hearing  severe  preaching,  which  would  convince 
him.  Paul,  who  preaches  so  seserely,  and  who  goads  so  sharply, 
must  then  "go  his  way."  Acts  xxiv.  25.  Another  gives  up  all 
hope,  and  thinks,  how  can  I  help  it,  if  God  will  not  receive  me  gra- 
ciously ?  and  he  abandons  himself  to  his  careless  sinfulness,  or  sin- 
ful carelessness.  "  This  evil,"  saith  he,  "  is  of  the  Lord,  what  should 
I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  ?"  2  Kings  vi.  33.  A  third  will 
convert  himself,  he  intends  and  promises  it,  he  will  not  commit  this 
and  that  sin  any  more  ;  he  will  serve  God  better,  and  attend  public 
worship  more  dihgently  than  he  used  ;  and  he  will  offer  this  to  God 
as  a  payment,  at  least  in  part ;  and  he  hopes  that  God  will  remit 
the  rest  of  what  he  oweth  :  but  his  promise  is  generally  empty 
words,  without  effect :  when  his  distress  is  over,  his  promise  is  also 
puffed  away  by  the  least  blast  of  concupiscence.  Doth  he  conduct 
:n  some  measure  as  he  proposed,  by  forsaking  a  few  sins,  and  doing 
a  little  good,  he  is  then  perfer  lly  easy,  and  trows  that  he  is  already  a 
great  saint,  and  a  dearly  beloved  child  of  God.  .And  a  fourth  quiets 
himself  with  the  calamities  which  he  suffers  in  this  world  ;  he  hopes, 
and  it  is  his  comfort  in  his  sorrow,  that  his  present  misery  will  con- 
stitute the  full  measure  of  his  sufferings,  and  that  he  will  not  be  obli- 
-ged  to  suffer  any  more  hereafter  ;  as  if  his  *uiFerings  were  a  satis- 
faction to  the  justice  of  God,  and  not  the  beginning  of  his  sorrows, 
atid  so  "  he  doth  not  say,  there  is  no  liope :  he  finds  the  life  of  his 
hand,  and  is  not  grieved."     Isaiah  Ivii.  10. 

"  Hear  this,  O  foolish  people,  and  without  understanding,  who 
have  eyes,  but  see  not ;  who  have  ears,  but  hear  not."  Jer.  v.  21. 
1  speak  to  you,  who  have  not  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
welfare,  and  to  you  also,  who  consider  all  distress  on  account  of  your 
wicked  condition  to  be  unnecessary :  to  you  also,  who  deceive  your- 
selves with  vain  and  false  imaginations,  and  hush  in  such  a  careless 
manner,  your  awakened  conscience  Knov/  that  ye  will  not  by  these 
means  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  nor  return    again 


tit  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION^. 

into  favour,  for  "  God  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  Exod» 
xxxiv.  7.  Do  you  think  to  harden  your  hearts  against  the  Lord, 
and  to  have  peace  f  God  is  able  to  trouble  you.  See  how  he 
dashed  in  pieces  the  hardened  Israelites  :  "  Therefore,"  saith  he, 
Hosea  xiii.  7,  8,  *'  I  will  be  unto  them  as  a  lion ;  as  a  leopard  by 
the  way  will  I  observe  them.  I  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  that  is  be- 
reaved  of  her  whelps,  and  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there 
will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion  ;  the  wild  beast  shall  tear  them."  Ob- 
serve how  he  troubled  the  proud  Belshazzar,  "  his  countenance  was 
changed,  and  his  thoughts  troubled  him  ;  the  joints  of  his  loins  were 
loosed,  and  his  kness  smote  one  against  another  "  Dan.  v.  6.  Ye 
know  how  Cain  fared,  when  he  would  conceal  his  brother-slaughter. 
Gen  iv.  9 — 13.  Judas  sought  to  hide  his  abominable  deed  with  a 
kiss  ;  but  how  did  his  conscience  awake  and  terrify  him,  and  with 
what  fury  did  it  attack  him !  Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4,  5,  6  ;  do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  not  fare  so  ill,  because  ye  are  not  the  worst  sinners  ;  be- 
cause ye  intend  to  conduct  better  hereafter  than  ye  have  heretofore  ; 
because  ye  must  suffer  so  much  at  present  ?  Do  ye  think  then  with 
the  Papists,  that  your  doings  and  sufferings  will  cancel  your  debt, 
and  merit  the  grace  of  (iod  ?  doth  not  God  require  that  his  justice 
should  be  satisfied  ?  and  must  ye  not  pay  fully,  either  by  youi-selves, 
or  by  another  ?  Do  ye  know  how  to  deliver  yourselves  by  a  few 
outward  ceremonies,  and  by  suffering  a  few  afflictions,  and  then  "  ex- 
acting all  your  labours  "  Isaiah  Iviii.  2,  3.  Therefore,  *'  awake  yc 
who  sleep,  and  arise  from  the  dead."  Eph.  v.  14.  "  God  will  punish 
the  men  who  are  settled  on  their  lees  "  Zeph,  i.  12.  *'  Rise  up,  ye 
women  that  are  at  ease ;  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give 
ear  unto  my  speech.  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  be 
troubled,  ye  careless  ones ;  strip  ye,  make  ye  bare,  and  gird  sack- 
cloth upon  your  loins."  Isaiah  xxxii.  9.  Or  do  ye  think  it  is  need- 
less for  you  to  be  concerned  and  distressed  about  your  eternal  condi- 
tion ?  Doth  not  God  then  threaten  *•  a  wo  to  those  who  are  at  ease 
in  Zion,  and  careless  m  the  mountains  of  Samaria?"  Amos  vi,  1. 
Is  not  your  misery,  your  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  which  ye 
have  deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  griev- 
ous enough  to  affect  you  with  the  greatest  concern  ?  can  ye  deliver 
yourselves,  and  satisfy  the  justice  of  God,  either  by  your  own  suffeiv 
ings  and  doings,  or  by  those  of  another  creature  '  will  ye  not  be 
wholly  at  a  loss  here  ?  How  v/ill  a  sinner  deny  all  his  own  righteous- 
ness, and  6eek  the  righteousness  of  another,  unless  he  be  perfectly 
stripped  and  bare  ? 
f»  Will  yc  therefore  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into- 


—15.  H^ 

favour:  (!)•  Entertain  a  greater  concern  about  your  salvation  and 
damnation  than   ye  have  had  heretofore.     Will  ye  value  .ind  bestit 
yoiirbclves  so  for  your  body,  your  food  and  clothing,  and  neglect  from 
mere  iibikssness,  your  noble  souls,  and  be  so  careless  of  them?  Oh 
detestable  madness  1  ye  will  strive  to   pass  with  honour  through  the 
world,  but  are  unconctrneu  i.cv/  it  will  fare  with   you,  after  ye  are 
througn  tiie  world  1  How  will  ye  btmoan  yourselves,  and  say  when 
it  IS  too  late,  "  How  have  J  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised 
reproo*',    and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined 
mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?"  Prov.  v,  12,  13.    What  will 
ye  then  have  of  all  these  earthly  goods,  for  which  ye  consume  both 
your  bodies  and  souls  in  so  many  difficult  occupations  ?  '  for  what 
doth  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,   and  lose  his  own 
soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?"  Matt, 
xvi.  26.  Therefore  value,  and  bestir  yourselves  more  for  the  welfare 
of  you;  souls,  and  *^  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  you,"  Matt.  vi.  33  (2) 
Impress  it  upon  your  minds,  that  all  your  own  doings,  as  long  as  ye 
are  not  received  into  favour,  will  not  avail  to  escape  punishment,  that 
ye  may  look  off  from  them  altogether,  and  may  be  wholly  at  a  loss 
and  confounded  in  yourselves.     All  your  own  works,  how  much 
soever  ye  bestir  yourselves,  are  but  "  a  vain  oblation,"  Isaiah  i.  12. 
Ye  must  be  first  received  into  favour  through  the  perfect  satisfaction 
of  another^  if  what  ye  do  shall  be  acceptable  to  God.     "  The  sacri- 
fice of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  :  but  the  prayer  of 
the  upright  is  his  delight,"  Pror.  xv.  8.     "  The  Lord   had  respect 
first  to  Abel  and   then  to  his  offering  ;  but  when  he  hath  no  respect 
unto  Cain,  he  is  not  pleased  with  his  offeiing  neither,"   Gen.  iv.  3, 
4,  5.  (3)  Is  there  any  one  among  us,  who  is  thoroughly  anxious,  and 
desirous  of  escaping  the  punishment,  which  he  hath  deserved,  and 
of  being  again  received  into  favour,  and   doth  he  cry  out  with  the 
Igaoler,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  CO,  let  him  know, 
that  God  hath  demanded  the  satisfaction  at  the  hands  of  his  Son,  and 
that  he   hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  our  guilt,  even  to  the 
uttermost  farthing,  that  God  proffereth  his  Son  to  him,  and  that  he 
must  accept  of  him  upon  this  offer,  and  choose  him  for  himself:  for 
**  God  hath  set  his  Son   forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith,  in 
his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Kom   iii.  25-  See  also  Isaiah 
xxvii.  4,   5,  and  chap.  xlv.  22,  24,   and  what  will  be  said  upon  the 
sixth  and  seventh  Lord's  day.  (4)  Believers,  who  have  betaken  your- 
selves to  the  Mediator  c-nd  Deliverer,  and  have  denied  all,  yea,  even 
your  best  performan<jcs  and  all  your  outward  privilegesj  and  "  count- 


kiO  THE  NECESSITY  O^  A  SATISFACTION. 

cd  them  but  loss  and  dunp;,  that  ye  might  be  found  in  Christ,  atid 
have  his  righteousness  through  faith,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  4 — 10, 
behold  your  happiness,  wonder  and  rejoice,  yea,  praise  the  Lord, 
that  ye  have  escaped  punishment,  and  are  again  received  into  favour, 
and  that  through  the  suffering  and  obedience  of  the  great  Mediator 
and  Deliverer,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  following  Lord's  days  will 
urge  you  to  this  more  particularly.  (5)  Let  all  those,  who  have  the 
cstre  ot"  souls,  take  heed  that  they  lead  sinners  in  and  according  to 
this  sure  way  to  Christ.  To  comfort  sinners  in  general,  while  they 
ire  unconcerned,  and  do  not  mourn,  and  to  apply  the  promises  to 
them  without  distinction,  and  without  taking  the  precious  from  the 
vile  ;  or  to  direct  poor  and  concerned  souls  only  to  certain  legal  ob- 
servances ;  or  to  deal  harshly  with  them,  and  oppose  them,  this  is 
''  making  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies,  and  strengthening 
the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  not  turn  from  his  wicked 
way  and  live  ;"  which  God  will  punish  with  severity,  according:  to 
Ezek.  xiii.  Spiritual  guides  must  endeavour  to  convince  sinners  of 
their  guilt,  and  awaken  them  to  concern,  they  ought  not  to  comfort 
them  hastily,  but  should  urge  them  to  '^  the  Lord  our  righteousness,'" 
that  they  may  escape  the  deserved  punishment,  and  be  again  receiv- 
ed into  favour.  This  is  the  way,  in  which  the  instructor  leads  souls^ 
and  he  doth  it  after  the  example  of  Paul  and  his  fellow  labourers : 
"  We  knowing,"  saith  he,  2  Cor  v.  11."  the  terrour  of  the  Lord,  per- 
suade men."  Thus  we  should  deliver  our  own  souls,  **  save  our= 
selves,  and  them  that  hear  us,"  1  Tim.  iv.  16.  "  We  should  justify 
many,"  afford  a  ♦veil-grounded  consolation  to  souls,  their  sanctifica- 
tion  would  be  real  and  3/angehcal,  and  "we  should  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  feriRament,  and  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever/' 
\men. 
CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 


VI.  LORD'S  DAYo 


Heb.  vii.  25 — 28.  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost,  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  For  such  a  high  priest  became  uSj 
who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separated  from  sinners,  and  made 
higher  than  the  heavens ;  who  ncedcth  not  daily,  as  those  high 
priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's ;  for  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself. 
For  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which  have  infirmity  ;  but 
the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh  the  Son^ 
who  is  consecrated  for  e\er  more.

Q,  14.  Can  there,  then,  be  found  any  where,  one  who  is  a  mere  crea- 
ture, able  to  satisfy  for  us  ? 

None :  for  first,  God  will  not  punish  any  other  creature  for  the 
sin  which  man  hath  committed  ;  and  fhrther,  no  mere  creature  can 
sustain  the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath  against  sin,  so  as  to  deliver 
others  from  it, 

Q.   15.    What  sort  of  a  Mediator  and  deliverer  must  we  then  *  eekfor  ? 

A.  For  one  who  is  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous  ;  and  yet 
more  powerful  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is,  one  who  is  also  very 
God. 


'A. 


.  LTHOUGH  angels  and  men  are  the  most  glorious  of  all  the 
creatures  of  God,  nevertheless,  many  of  the  angels,  and  all  men,  have 
become  the  most  miserable  creatures,  since  they  have  revolted  from; 


\04  TIIE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

their  Maker,  and  have  rebelled  against  him  ;  and  are  therefore  con* 
demned  by  him  to   eternal   punishment :  *'  God  spared  not  the  an-, 
gels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell."   2  Peter  ii.  4.     Thus, 
also,  all  men,  "  the  whole  world  is  become  i^uilty  before  God ;  for 
they  have  all  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."    Rom.  iii. 
19,  23.     Although  the  nature  of  angels,  yea,  of  the  fallen  angels,  is 
much  more  excellent  than   that  of  men,   nevertheless,   fallen    men 
have  this  eminent  privilege  above  fallen  angels,  that  God   hath    re- 
vealed a  deliverance  for  fallen  men,  but  not  for  fallen  angels.     The 
fallen  angels  have  no  hope  of  deliverance  from  their  misery  ;  for 
»'  God  hath  reserved  them  in  everlasting  chains,  under  darkness  unto 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day."  Jude,  verse  6.    He  hath  not  appointed 
a  mediator  and  deliverer  for  them,  as  he  hath  given  the  man  Christ 
Jesus  to  be  a  mediator  between  God  and  men,  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  who  did 
not  therefore  unite  the  nature  of  angels  to  his  Godhead,  but  that  of 
men  :  for  '*  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of 
Abraham,"  Heb.  ii.  16.     Therefore  Paul  extols  so  highly  the  love  of 
God  to  man,  when  he  saith,  Titus  iii,  4,  5.     "  After  that  the  kind- 
ness and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,  he  saved 
Us,"  Sec.  In  order  now  that  the  miserable  sinner  may  become  capa- 
ble of  the  deliverance,  he  teaches  him  his  misery,  that  he  may  hum- 
ble him,  and  he  reveals  to   him  the   deliverance  in  his  Son.     The 
Holy  Spirit,  who  is  sent  by  Jesus  "  convinceth  the  world  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,"  John  xvi.  8,     For  *♦  they  who  are  whole  need  not 
a  physician,  but  they  who  are  sick  :  and  the  Deliverei   came  not  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repen-ance,"   .'^att.  ix.  12,   13. 

This  the  instructor  also  teacheth  us,  when  he  sreaks  in  his  second 
part  concerning  tlie  deliverance  of  man,  for  which  he  had  prepared 
him  in  his  first  part,  by  teaching  him  his  misery.  The  catechism 
instructs  us  in  three  things  with  respect  to  the  deliverance  :  (1)  the 
conditions  which  are  required  to  the  deliverance,  Question  1 2 —  1 7- 
(2)  The  person  who  delivers,  Question  18.  19.  (3)  The  manner  in 
which  we  become  partakers  '^f  him  by  faith.  Lord's  day  vii. — xxxi* 

In  this  Lord's  day  we  see, 

I.  That  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  in  order 
that  we  may  be  delivered.  Question  12. 

II.  By  whom  the  satisfaction  cannot,  and  by  whom  it  can  be  made, 
Questions  13,  14,  15. 

I.  The  instructor  saith  that  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is 
necessary,  in  order  tu  our  deliverance.  The  sinner  hath  by  his  sins 
deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgrpent  of  God,  temporal 
and  eternal  punishment.     Therefore  it  belongs  to  his  deliverance, 


V.  LORD'S  BAY,  Q.  12— l5o  105 

(a)  *'  that  he  should  escape  from  that  punishment"  by  a  forgiveness 
of  his  sins,  whereby  he  is  discharged  from  his  guilt,  so  that  God  is 
no  more  wroth  with  him,  nor  rebukes  him,  and  there  is  no  condem- 
nation to  him.  In  this  manner  doth  the  apostle  describe  the  deliver- 
ance, saying,  "  We  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,"  Eph.  i.  7.  (b)  "  That  he  should  be  again  received  into 
favour."  whereby  he  is  restored  to  the  kindness  and  love  of  God, 
and  obtains  grace  and  glory.  The  same  apostle  teacheth  (.;s  this, 
when  he  saith,  ^  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance^ 
until  the  redemption  ot  the  purchased  possession,"  Eph.  i.  14. 
^  Concerning,  and  with  respect  to  such  a  deliverance,  a  distressed 
sinner,  whom  the  catechism  introduceth  here  as  speaking,  asks, 
Whether  there  be  any  way  to  obtain  a  deliverance  ?  For  in  this  man- 
ner IS  the  elect  sinner  affected,  when  God  disposes  him  for  u  deliv- 
erance :  for  (a)  he  is  convinced  ef  his  abominable  temper  and  con- 
duct ;  he  sees  that  he  is  guilty  in  the  highest  degree,  according  to 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  and  that  not  only  with  a  buie  con- 
templation, and  with  his  judgment,  but  so  that  he  lays  it  to  heart : 
he  sees  with  shame  and  aversion  from  himself  his  horrible  deformity; 
this  distresses  and  afflicts  him,  so  that  he  cries  out,  '*  Wo  unto  me 
that  I  have  sinned,"  Lam  v.  16.  With  Ephraim  "he  bemoans 
himself,  repents,  is  instructed,  smites  upon  his  thigh,  is  ashamed, 
yea,  even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  (b)  He  is  also  desirous  to 
be  delivered ;  as  he  is  at  first  exceedingly  dark  and  confused,  and 
doth  not  rightly  know  the  true  way  to  escape  punishment,  and  to 
be  again  received  into  favour,  therefoi  e  he  begins  to  exert  himself, 
in  order  that  he  may  do  all  that  he  can  devise,  and  that  his  confused 
apprehensions  suggest,  as  conducive  to  his  deliverance  :  one  while 
he  resolves  that  he  will  not  sin  any  more,  and  then  that  he  will  serve 
God  better :  but  he  cannot  advance,  the  power  of  his  conuptions 
forces  him  repeatedly  out  of  his  way,  and  when  he  expects  enlarge- 
ment under  his  distress,  he  is  afflicted  still  more  than  he  was  before, 
because  he  sees  by  experience  that  matters  become  worse  with  him 
instead  of  better.  What  shall  he  do?  he  will  pray  most  earnestly  to 
God,  that  he  would  be  gracious  to  him  :  but  as  soon  as  he  begins, 
he  finds  his  access  unto  God  so  barred  up,  that  he  cannot  approach 
to  him,  and  he  becomes  so  confused  that  he  cannot  utter  in  an 
orderly  manner  a  single  sentence,  capable  of  moving  God.  He  begins 
anew,  but  it  doth  not  avail ;  this  disturbs  and  perplexes  him  so,  that 
he  is  ready  to  despair  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  he  doth,  and  ''  he 
gaith,  There  is  no  hope  ;  for  he  doth  not  find  the  life  of  his  handi 
and  he  is  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  Yea,  he  is  afraid  that  there  ii  nt^ 
106  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

help  for  him,  and  that  lie  i<  perhaps  a  reprobate  ;  and  therefore  ht 
sometimes  resolves  that  he  will  not  endeavour  any  more  to  be  saved. 
But  his  distrcbs  and  fear  of  perdition  will  not  suffer  him  to  rest^ 
until,  being  wholly  stripped  and  bare,  he  asks  the  word  and  servants 
of  God,  *'  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved  ?"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  30. 

What  doth  the  instructor  now  do  with  such  a  person  ?  doth  he  say, 
like  physicians  of  no  value,  Thou  must  not  be  so  sad,  this  Sorrow- 
fulness proceeds  from  Satan,  thou  must  banish  it,  God  is  merciful, 
Christ  hath  died  for  us,  thou  must  beheve  this  firmly,  forsake  evil, 
and  do  good,  and  pray  to  God  ?  no :  for  this  is  only  daubing  with 
untempered  mortar,  it  neither  heals,  nor  relieves  the  soul.  But  the 
instructor,  desirous  that  a  godly  sorro^v  should  penetrate  the  sinner, 
that  the  tranquillity  of  his  mind  may  be  perfect  and  established  by  a 
perfect  righteousness  of  an  all-sufficient  Mediator,  detains  him  a  while 
under  his  concern,  yea,  he  increaseth  it  by  showing  him,  that  there 
is  no  way  to  obtain  deliverance,  as  long  as  the  justice  of  God  is  not 
satisfied  :  he  saith,  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  &c. 

The  justice  of  God  denotes  here  his  natural  right,  by  which  he  is 
entitled,  on  account  of  his  glory  and  sovereignty,  to  require  a  perfect 
obedience  of  man.  Therefore  the  prophet  saith,  "  Who  would  not 
fear  thee,  thou  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  thee  doth  it  appertain,"  Jer. 
X.  7,  and  when  man  doth  not  obey  him,  to  punish  him  temporally 
and  eternally.  Even  "  the  Gentiles  know  the  judgment  (or  right)  of 
God,  that  they  who  do  such  things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i. 
32.  This  right  God  hath  expressed  in  his  law,  and  it  is  therefore 
called,  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law,"  Rom.  viii.  4.  "  For  Moses 
describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man  who 
doth  these  things  shall  live  by  them,"  Rom.  x.  5,  and  "  cursed  is 
every  one  who  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 

This  is  satisfied,  (I)  by  suffering  fully  and  completely  the  punish- 
ment threatened  in  consequence  of  sin  :  thus  "  God'  made  his  Son, 
who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin,"  2  Cor.  v.  21,  to  wit,  by  inflicting  the 
punishment  of  sin  upon  him.  This  is  indeed  sufficient  to  deliver  the 
sinner  from  punishment,  but  it  doth  not  give  him  a  right  to  life  ;  and 
therefore  a  satisfaction  requires  also,  (2)  a  perfect  obedience,  which 
the  law  of  God  demands  in  order  to  life  :  **  By  the  obedience  of  one 
many  shall  be  made  righteous,"  Rom.  v.  19. 

God  *'  will  "  have  his  justice  satisfied.  The  Socinians  deny  that 
God  will  have  this,  and  they  conceive  that  such  a  satisfaction  is  not 
necessary  ;  yea,  that  God  can  recede  from  his  right,  and  that  he  hath 
actually  receded  from  it,  and  hath  therefore  abolished  the  law  of 


V^  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15.  i07 

Moses,  and  established  a  better  law  by  Christ,  as  a  new  lawgiver^ 
=,nstead  of  the  old  law.  The  Remonstrants  will  indeed  admit,  that 
satisfaction  must  be  made  to  God,  in  order  to  our  deUvt^rance  ;  but 
not  that  the  justice  of  God  must  be  perfectly  satisfied  :  but  that 
nothing  more  is  necessary,  than  that  the  will  of  God  should  be  satis- 
fied, which  doth  not  demand  all  that  the  sinner  hath  forfeited  ;  and 
that  God,  by  a  gracious  estimation  accepts  of  this,  instead  of  a  per- 
fect satisfaction.  And  they  must  speak  ^lus,  if  they  will  maintain 
their  doctrine,  that  Christ  suffered  for  all  men  ;  for  if  he  satisfied  the 
justice  of  God  for  ail  men,  then  all  men  must  be  saved.  Now  all 
men  are  not  saved,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  our  adversaries, 
and  so  Christ  could  not  have  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  them. 
And  therefore  they  say,  that  he  hath  by  his  death  satisfied  the  will 
of  God,  and  that  God  was  moved  thereby  to  establish  a  covenant  of 
grace  with  all  men,  and  to  require  of  them,  as  the  condition  of  that 
covenant,  faith,  obedience  and  perseverance,  and  that  he  gives  them 
a  sutiicient  grace  to  fulfil  those  conditions. 

This  doctrine  is  opposed  by  all  the  orthodox,  who  say  that  "God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied."  But  how  doth  God  will  this  ?  only 
by  his  decree,  and  mere  good  pleasure,  by  which  he  could  even  have 
willed  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction,  as  he  wills  many  things 
by  his  decree,  which  he  might  have  willed  otherwise,  as  that  there 
should  be  more  or  fei^^er  men  than  there  are  ?  Thus  some  divines 
think  on  this  subject.  Or  doth  God  will  that  there  should  be  a  satis- 
faction, on  account  of  his  holy  and  righteous  nature,  whereby  he 
cannot  be  willing  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction  :  for  instance, 
God  will  be  obeyed  by  his  reasonable  creatures,  and  it  is  his  will  that 
what  is  reasonable  should  be  holy,  and  he  cannot  will  otherwise  ? 
This  we  maintain  with  the  most  divines,  and  this  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  catechism  also,  as  appears  from  the  words,  "  The  justice  of  Gotl 
requires  that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme  punishment,"  Questisn  2,  "  God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  Question  12.  "  With  respect  to  the 
justice  and  truth  of  God,  satisfaction  can  be  made  for  our  sins  no 
otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,"  Question  40.  And 
we  do  not  teach  without  reason,  that  God  cannot,  without  a  satisfac- 
tion to  his  justice,  suffer  the  sinner  to  escape  punishment,  and  re- 
ceive him  again  into  favour:  for,  (besides  what  we  have  safid  on  the 
foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  sin  must  necessarily  be  punished)  Paui 
saith. 

1.  Heb.  ii.  10.  "  It  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by 
whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  son^  to  glory,  to  make  th^ 


m         THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION- 

Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings."  To  make 
this  Captain  perfect  through  sufferings,  signifies  to  make  him  a  sacri- 
fic-.  by  his  sufferings,  and  thereby  to  bring  the  children  of  God  to 
salvation.  This  now  became  the  high  Ciod,  of,  and  through  whom, 
are  a'l  things ;  and  it  would  not  have  become  him,  either  to  bring 
his  children  to  glory  without  such  a  satisfying  sacrifice,  or  if  he 
pould  have  done  it  without  that  sufferini^,  to  subject  his  Son,  never- 
theless to  such  a  painful  'suffering.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were 
certainly  unnecessary,  nnd  to  no  purpose,  if  God  could  forgive  sin  of 
his  mere  good  pleasure  and  free  will,  without  satisfaction. 

2.  It  was  surely  an  evidence  of  the  greatest  love,  that  God  gave 
his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation,  and  punished  him  for  the  sinner.  See 
Rom.  v.  8.  I  John  iv.  10.  But  there  would  not  have  been  such  an 
illustrious  display  of  love  in  thiS,  if  God  could  have  received  the  sin- 
ner into  favour  without  a  satisfaction  ;  since  it  would  be  a  great  in- 
stance of  love  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  the  sinner,  if  he  did  not  de- 
mand a  satisfaction,  and  forgive  him  his  sin  for  nought. 

3.  The  apostle  saith  also,  that  "  God  hath  set  Christ  Jesus  forth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  right- 
eousness for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  during  the  forbear- 
ance of  God."*  Rom,  iii.  25.  During  the  forbearance  of  God,  that 
is,  during  the  time  of  the  Old  Testament,  many  sins  were  commit- 
ted, and  many  of  them  forgiven,  while  there  was  yet  no  satisfaction 
made  for  sin,  and  it  appeared  thus,  that  God  was  merciful  and  for- 
bearing, but  not  that  he  was  righteous  (or  just).  God  then,  that  he 
might  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  set  his  Son 
forth  in  his  sufferings  for  that  purpose  ;  but  why  was  this  necessa- 
ry ?  the  sins  w^ere  already  forgiven,  if  the  satisfaction  were  not  so 
necessary. 

4.  Add  to  this  what  the  apostle  saith,  Heb.  x.  4,  "  It  is  impossible 
that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sin."  Why  is 
this  impossible  ?  Only  because  it  did  not  please  God  to  take  away 
sins  by  the  blood  of  beasts  ?  No  :  but  also  bccatise  the  blood  of  irra- 
tional creatures  bears  no  proportion  to  the  sins  of  rational  creatures, 
which  are  too  abominable  and  filthy  to  be  washen  away  by  such  irra- 
tional blood.  If  God  could  then  take  away  sins  without  a  satisfaction, 
why  could  they  not  be  taken  away  by  the  blood  of  beasts  offered  up 
in  sacrifice  ?  Since  this,  according  to  Heb.  x  1,  4,  1 1,  is  impossible, 
\t  is  also  impossible  that  God  should  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfac- 

*  In  rendering  this  passage,  we  have  followed  the  Dutch  translation  ;  the 
reason  for  which  here,  aa  well  as  elsewhere,  we  have  mentioned  in  cur  adver- 
^aen|)cn^ 


V.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  12^15.  109 

tioa.  If  any  wish  to  see  these  reasons  enlarged,  and*  enforced 
with  others,  we  refer  them  to  Witsius's  Kconomy  of  the  covenants 
hook  1.  chapter  5,  an;l  book  I(.  chapter  8. 

It  is  needless  to  object  here,  (a)  that  God  may  recede  from  his 
strict  right,  since  man  ran  do  this,  and  that  it  is  an  eminent  virtue 
to  forgive  injuries  with  a  noble  greatness  of  mind  ;  for  though  this 
is  true  with  respect  to  private  injuries,  which  one  man  doth  to  an- 
other ;  and  although  man  is  bound  to  do  this,  because  one  man  is  a 
neighbour  of  another,  and  the  law  of  God  obligeth  him  to  it ;  never* 
theless,  God  cannot  therefore  recede  fro  -n  his  right,  since  he  is  not 
bound  by  any  law  to  exercise  such  a  virtue  toward  his  creatures ; 
and  since  he  cannot  reeede  from  his  right  as  a  Judge  in  punishing 
sins,  who  m.ust  do  right,  (b)  Were  the  sins  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment forgiven,  without  a  foregoing  satisfaction  of  the  divme  justice, 
they  were,  nevertheless,  not  forgiven,  except  on  account  of  the  sat- 
isfaction of  the  Surety  who  was  ro  come.  See  this  Kom.  iii.  25. 
Heb.  ix.  15,  In  order  that  the  ancient  believers  might  look  stead- 
fiistly  to  the  future  satisfaction  of  the  Messiah,  God  described  him, 
promised,  and  shadowed  him  forth  to  them  in  the  ancient  sacrifices. 
See  Isaiah  liii.  Acts  x.  43.  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb.  x.  1,  14.  (c)  God 
could  not,  as  the  Socinians  conceive,  graciously  abolish  the  law 
which  threatens  the  curse  in  consequence  of  the  least  transgression  • 
and  establish  another,  which  should  require  nothing  but  faith  ;  for 
the  law  is  the  transcript  of  God's  holiness,  which  cannot  be  expres- 
sed bv  any  other  law,  ueless  the  divine  holiness  can  have  another 
form  than  it  had  before.  God  would  then  also  deny  his  truth  :  for 
he  hath  said,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  ;"  and  he  would 
now  say,  thou  shalt  not  die  according  to  my  threatening,  although 
my  justice  is  not  satisfied  for  thy  sin.  Doth  the  sinner  not  die  noWf 
it  is  not  in  consequence  of  a  hew  law,  but  of  a  satisfaction  for  the 
establishment  of  the  law,  Roiii.  iii.  2  1,  31.  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  (d) 
They  think  that  God  could  bestow  his  Spirit,  as  well  as  his  Son,  to 
aRect  the  sinner  with  sorrow  for  his  sin,  and  induce  him  lo  confess 
th^t  he  had  dishonoured  (iod,  that  he  might  thus  sanctify  the  name 
cf  God;  and  that  therefore  a  satisfaction  was  not  necessary  for  this 
purpose.  But  this  is  an  idle  pretence  ;  for  this  would  be  an  act  of 
kindness^  and  not  of  justice.  See  Zech.  xii.  JO.  Now  God  must 
surely  be  glorified  in  his  justice,  as  well  as  in  his  kindness,  as  he  is 
by  the  satisfaction,  Eph.  i.  7*  (e)  They  say  further  to  no  purpose,^ 
t.hat  if  vve  hold  a  satisfaction  to  be  necessary  from  the  nature  of 
God,  we  do  then  lim't  God  too  much  with  respect  to  his  power  and 
liberty  ;  but'can  we  indeed  say  nftt  Paul  iim-ts  tlie  Lord  too  much;^ 
^hen  he  tsacheth  that  "  God  cannot  lie."    litus  i,  2.  Heb.  yi,   18, 


1  Id  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

It  is  no  impotency  nor  imperfection  in  God,  that  he  cannot  forgJYc 
tin  without  a  satisfaction,  any  more  than  that  I'*  he  cannot  be  terript* 
cd  of  evil,"  James  iii.  13.  (f;  Finally,  some  say  that  God  might,  ia 
the  work  of  redemption,  have  willed  somethi'i^  different  from  what 
he  hath  willed  For  instance,  God  willed  that  Christ  should  s  aisff 
for  some  sinners  ;  but  he  might  have  willed  that  he  should  satisfy  fop 
all.  And  so  they  conceive  that  God,  who  hath  now  willed  that  satis- 
faction  should  be  made  for  sin,  might  have  willed  to  forgive  sin  with- 
out a  satisfaction.  But  a  satisfaction  for  some,  or  for  all,  affects 
not  the  divine  holiness  and  justice,  and  so  not  the  nature  of  thesatis> 
fcic'i'jn,  but  oaly  ths  ohjecr.s  of  the  satisfaction.  God  mig'tt  have  de- 
creed from  all  eternity  that  his  Son  should  suffer  for  all  men,  but 
not  that  some,  or  many  sinners,  should  escape  punishment,  and  ht 
again  received  into  favour  without  a  satisfaction. 

Since  now  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  we 
therefore  conclude  "  that  we  must  make  this  satisfaction,  either  by 
ourselves,  or  by  another." 

"  We  must  make  full  satisfaction  then,  either  by  ourselves  or  by 
another."  We  should  satisfy  by  ourselves,  if  we  suffered  and  fulfil- 
led in  our  own  persons  the  selfi-ame  things,  which  aje  required  hj 
the  law,  in  its  strictest  demands,  and  if  this  should  deliver  us  with- 
out any  intervening  grace,  or  forgiveness  :  for  it  is  the  judgment 
of  God  that  they  who  do  evil  things  are  worthy  of  death."  Rom.  i. 
52.  This  is  called  by  lawyers  soliaio,  payment,  and  by  divines,  "  the 
righteousness  of  the  law,"  accorc'ing  Rum.  x  5.  And  we  should 
satisfy  by  another,  if  some  other  should  take  our  pUce,  as  a  surety, 
to  stisfy  for  us,  and  in  our  stead  This  would,  nevertheless,  not  ef- 
fect our  deliverance  by  itself,  but  only  by  a  favourable  permission  of 
the  divine  Judge,  who  should  admit  the  surety,  impute  our  debt  to 
him,  and  his  righteousness  to  us.  And  we  should  thus  satisfy  by 
another,  not  actively  and  indeed,  but  passively ;  inasmuch  as 
the  satisfaction  is  made  by  another  in  our  stead,  and  by  imputa- 
tion. Arid  therefore  we  cannot  say  that  believers  satisfy  properly 
by  t!ie  surety,  as  if  the  Son  of  God  were  not  a.i  absolute  surety,  cjC^ 
firomisso^'^  under  the  Old  Testament,  who  did  not  take  the  debt  upon 
himself  absolutely,  but  conditionally,  to  wit,  if  the  elect  should  not 
mak-  satisfaction  themselves,  and  that  he  left  it  on  them,  and  that 
God  did  on  this  occount  continually  charge  and  upbraid  them  with 
their  sins  ;  for  then  they  must  have  proffered  the  surety  themseves, 
and  God  would  not  have  trusted  that  his  ^on  would  certainly  satisfy  i 
neither  would  he  then  have  been  "  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
■w«rlU,"  Rev.  xiii.  8.     Neither  wcndd  the  sacritfiaes  of  the  Old  Tes- 


— 15,  HI 

tament  have  been  shadows,  which  certified,  like  sacraments,  the 
old  believers,  that  he  would  truly  take  away  sins  ;  and  they  would 
not  have  been  admitted  into  heaven,  inasmuch  as  they  were  still  sub- 
ject to  guilt.  Therefore  we  must  say  that  we  satisfy  passively  by 
another,  and  throtigh  the  gracious  imputation  of  God  ;  and  this  is 
called  by  lawyers,  satisfaction  satisfaction  ;  and  by  divines,  "  the  right- 
eousness of  the  gospel,  and  of  faith,"  according  to  Rora.  i.  16,  17-^ 
X.  6,  11;  because  the  law  knoweth  nothing  of  such  a  satisfaction,  and 
it  is  revealed  only  in  the  gospel,  and  received  by  faith,  although  the 
law  cannot  disapprove  of  it,  if  the  Lawgiver  will  admit  and  accept 
it ;  for  "  the  law  is  not  made  void  by  faith,  but  established."  Rom. 
iii.  31. 

This  satisfaction,  whether  it  be  made  by  ourselves,  or  by  another, 
must  be  a  "  full  "  satisfaction.  All  that  the  law  threatens  must  be 
suffered,  and  all  that  it  commands  must  be  obeyed  :  for  otherwise 
God  will  still  be  "  wroth  "  with  the  sinner,  "  and  deliver  him  to  the 
tormentors,  till  he  shall  pay  all  that  is  due  to  him,"  Matt,  xviii.  34. 
And  therefore  the  acceptilati*^  or  gracious  estimation  of  the  Remon- 
strants, by  which  God  would  accept  of  a  part  of  the  satisfaction, 
instead  of  the  whole,  cannot  be  admitted  here  :  for  "  the  judgment 
of  God  is  according  to  truth,"  Rom   ii.  2. 

But  can  a  satisfaction  for  a  guilty  person  by  another  be  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal  ?  The  Socinians  say,  nay,  because  humau 
tribunals  will  not  permit  an  innocent  person  to  be  punished,  and  to 
make  satisfaction,  as  a  surety  for  another  who  is  guilty  ;  but  we  con- 
ceive that  this  may  very  properly  be  admitted  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, if  the  supreme  Judge  will  graciously  permit  it ;  for  (a)  a 
surety  is  admitted  in  cases  of  debt  by  a  secular  judge.  We  may 
derive  a  proof  from  this,  because  the  Socinians  themselves  infer  from 
suretiship  for  debts,  that  grace  and  pardon  cannot  be  exercised,  if 
Christ  made  a  perfect  satisfaction,  (b)  One  man  hath  also  frequently 
been  permitted  to  become  a  surety  for  another  in  cases  of  guilt,  as 
Reuben  and  Judah  becam.e  sureties  for  Benjamin,  Gen.  xlii,  37.  xliii. 
9.  xliv.  32,  33.  See  also  Rom.  v.  7.  (c)  It  hath  appeared  from  the 
seventh  question,  that  the  sin  of  Adam,  whereby  he  became  guilty, 
was  imputed  to  us  :  why  then  cannot  our  guilt  also  be  imputed  to  a 
proper  surety  ?  (d)  It  will  appear  moreover  hereafter  that  Christ 
became  a  surety,  and  that  he  satisfied ;  and  was  therefore  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal,  (e)  Cannot  one  be  admitted  as  a  surety  for 
another  before  a  human  tribunal  in  case  of  guiit,  it  is  because  no 
human  judge  is  lord  of  the  life  of  another,  as  neither  is  any  man  lord 
of  his  own"  life,  so  as  to  become  a  surety  for  another  x   it  would  also 


VH  Ti^E  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

be  an  injury  to  the  community,  if  a  good  citizen  should  perish  in 
making  satisfaction  for  another,  and  the  evil  citizen  should  remain 
alive  ;  but  \ye  must  consider  matters  otherwise  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, since  Gr>d  is  lord  of  every  man's  life,  and  the  surety,  who  is 
required  here,  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  according:  to  the  fifteenth  ques- 
tion :  he  can  also  deliver  himself  from  death,  and  can  reforii*  and 
sanctify  the  abominab'e  sinner,  and  so  the  kingdom  of  God  will  not 
be  injured,  but  profited  by  his  death. 

But  would  not  God  then  recede  from  his  right,  contraty  to  what 
hath  been  ta'ight  before  ?  no,  for  God's  right  would  be  satisfied,  and 
there  would  only  be  a  gracious  translation,  by  which  God's  right,  and 
the  guilt  of  the  sinner  would  be  transferred  from  the  sinner  to  the 
^^rety,  which  was  also  done,  according  to  Rom.  iii.  20,  21.  viii.  3, 
4.  2  Cor.  V.  21. 

If  the  sinner  could  now  make  full  satisfaction  by  himself,  or  by 
another    he  would  be  delivered  ;  but  it  is  certain,  that  he  cannot 
satisfy  by  himself.     The  Papists  imagine,  "  that  we  can  make  a  par- 
tial satisfaction  by  ourselves.,  if  we  do  not  daily  increase  our  debt  by 
adding  sm  to  sin."     They  distinguish  between  an  equivalent   satis- 
faction, which  we  cannot  make  by  ourselves,  and  between  an  imper- 
fect satisfaction,  which  should  nevertheless  be  sufficient,  because  God 
should  forgive  sins  in  consequence  of  it  with  a  certain  fitness.     Wc 
can  effect  this  imperfect  satisfaction  by  many  good  works  and  suffer- 
ings, in  and  after  this  life,  according  to  the  Romanists  ;  but  the  word 
of  God  doth  not  acknowledge  an  imperfect  satisfaction,  but  only  a 
perfect  one,  and  "  man  cannot  answer  God  one       a  thousand,  whea 
he  contends  with  him,"  and  demands  satisfaction,  according  to  Job 
X.  2,  3,  Psalm  cxxx.  3.  and  besides  this  we  say,  (a)  that  the  price  of 
the  redemption  necessary  for  a  satisfaction  is  too  precious  for  a  man 
to  pay  it ;  "  he  owes  ten  thousand  talents,"  perfect  obedience  and 
«ternal  punishment,  and  "  he  hath  nothing  wherewith  to  pay»"  Matt, 
xvii.  24,  25.  (b)  <'  We  also  increase  our  debt  daily."     This  is  done 
not  only  by  those,  who  are  uncommonly  wicked,   as  the  spiritual 
**  Babylon,  whose  sins,"  heaped  one  upon  another,    "  reach  unto 
heaven,"  Rev.  xviii.  5,  but  by  all  other  men,  who  are  still  under  a 
broken  covenant  of  works,  of  which  the  instructor  speaks  here,  <^  hav- 
ing, according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  G©d,  deserved  temporal 
and  eternal  punishments."  Sec  how  they  are  exhibited  in  their  com- 
plicated iniquities,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 19.     Believers  themselves  do  all 
offend  in  many  instances,  James  iii'  2.  See  also    1  Kings  viii.  46. 
Rev.  XX.  9.  Eccl.  vii.  20.  (c)  Let  us  admit,  that  we  should  hencefor- 
ward be  perfectly  holy  and  sinless,  wc  could  not  thereby  atone  for 
our  past  guilt,  because  we  owe  this  both  at  present  and  in  future, 


V.  tORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15,  112 

and  are  thus  unprofitable  servants,  Luke  xviii.  10,  and  therefore  our 
former  debt  would  remain  unpaid,  and  we  have  nothing  wherewith 
to  satisfy  for  it. 

But  "  can  there  not  be  found  any  where  one,  v/ho  is  a  mere  crea- 
ture, able  to  satisfy  for  us  ?"  If  a  mere  creature  should  satisfy  for  us, 
he  behooved  to  be  either  a  rational,  or  an  irrational  creature.  A  ra- 
tional creature  is  either  a  mere  man,  or  an  angel ;  but  no  mere  man, 
who  is  not  more  than  a  man,  can  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for 
another.  For,  (1)  no  man  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  and  hath  therefore 
no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  another,  in  order  to  bear  his  guilt : 
therefore  God  also  rejected  the  proffer  of  Moses,  "  that  he  would  be 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  God  for  the  people,"  Exod.  xxxii.  30 — 35, 

(2)  That  ^Vhich  a  man  would  be  willing  to  do  for  another,  he  oweth 
for  himself;  for  "  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,"  Gal.  vi.  5. 

(3)  A  man  cannot  satisfy  for  himself,  as  we  have  shown  before ; 
how  shall  he  then  satisfy  for  another  ?  (4)  He  who  should  satisfy 
for  another,  would  be  obliged  to  render  that  other,  by  an  almighty 
and  heart-changing  grace,  a  partaker  of  his  satisfaction  and  righteous- 
ness, if  it  should  be  profitable  to  him.  Now  no  mere  man  can  do 
this  :  he  can  at  most  only  "  plant  and  water  ;  but  God  giveth  the 
increase,"  I  Cor,  iii.  4,  5.  (5)  Yea,  if  a  mere  man  were  even  able  tc 
do  this,  he  would  not  be  deemed  worthy  to  do  it,  because  those  who 
were  delivered  by  him,  would  be  obliged  to  offer  him  the  divine 
honours  of  faith^  love,  hope,  fear  and  worship,  since  he  would  truly 
have  merited  such  honours  of  them  -  but  no  mere  man  may  be  hon- 
oured thus.  See  Isaiah  xliv,  2  1 — 25.  Jer.  xvii,  5 — 8.  (6)  Add  to  this, 
that  "no  mere  man  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  wrath,  so  as  to 
deliver  others  from  it."  Trulv  the  wrath  of  God  is  dreadful  and  in- 
supportable :  hear  what  an  eminently  holy  man  saith  of  it,  "  Thou, 
even  thou  art  to  be  feared,  and  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight,  when 
once  thou  art  angry  ?"  Psalm  Ixxvi.  7.  xc.  11.  And  therefore  "  none 
can  by  any  means  redeem  liis  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for 
him  ;  for  the  redemption  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  it  ceaseth  for 
ever,"  Psalm  xhx.  7,  8. 

Say  not,  could  not  God  create  a  new  man,  who  should  be  perfectly 
holy,  and  endue  him  with  such  strength,  that  he  would  be  able  to 
satisfy,  to  sustain  his  wrath,  and  effectually  apply  his  righteousness 
to  another :  for  thou  shouldest  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  this, 
since  no  such  man  can  proceed  from  the  corrupt  posterity  of  Adam, 
nor  love  the  sinner  as  his  neighbour,  and  thus  sa^sfy  the  demand  of 
tbe  law  :  moreover  no  man  is  capable  -tof  such  power,  inasmuch  a* 

T 


114  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

it  is  an  almig^hty  power,  since  he  would  then  be  God,  and  no  longef 
a  creature,  which  is  impossible. 

An  anj^el,  aU)iou5:h  he  excells  in  strength,  and  can  slay  a  wholtJ 
army  of  a  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand  n^en,  cannot  satisfy 
for  a  sinner  ,  for  an  anc^el  hath  no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  the 
sinner,  and  he  would  not  be  able  to  apply  tlie  rir!;htcov,snes8  procu- 
red bv  him,  and  would  not  be  worthy  to  bt  adn'itteci  lo  such  an  hon- 
ourable work ;  and  besides  this.  "  God  will  not  punish  any  other 
creatur'*"  but  man,  "  fo"  the  sin  whirh  man  bath  committed,"  be- 
cause no  an^el  can  sufter  tne  iiUman  punishment  of  death,  so  as  to 
satisfv  the  demand  of  the  hiW,  nor  love  his  ici2:hbonr  as  h'msclf, 
sinc^  he  is  not  a  neighbour  of  man.  "  Moreover^  no  mere  creature" 
■(as  an  angel  is)  '^  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath,  so 
as  to  deliver  others  therefrom."  The  glorious  angers  cannot  endure 
even  the  bright  lustre  of  the  most  holy  countenance  of  God  :  they 
must  hide  and  cover  themselves  before  it,  Isaiah  vi.  2,  3  *'  The 
devils,"  though  exceedingly  mi,a;hty  and  dreadful,  *'  tremble  before 
the  one  only  God,'*  James  iii.  19.  How  earnestly  "do  they  pray, 
that  they  may  not  be  tormented  before  the  time,  and  be  sent  away 
into  the  deep  !"  Luke  viii.  27 — 31. 

Cannot  a  satisfaction  be  made  by  any  rational  creature,  perhaps 
irrational  creatures,  either  living  or  dead,  may  effect  something,  if 
we  offer  them  up  to  God  for  an  atonement.  This  was  the  opinion, 
not  only  of  the  blind  heathens,  but  also  of  the  carnal  Jews  who 
sought  their  righteousness  by  keeping  the  moral  law,  and  when  they 
were  guilty  of  sinning  in  one  instance  or  another,  imagined  that  they 
should  be  able  to  atone  for  their  sins  by  bringing  this  or  that  gift  for 
a  sacrifice.  This  notion  was  also  somewhat  specious,  since  God  him- 
self had  enjoined  by  the  ceremonial  law,  the  sacrificial  service  of  sin 
offerings,  trespass  offerings,  and  sacrifices  of  atonement ;  but  this  is  a 
false  pretence.  The  justice  of  God  cannot  be  satisfied  by  any  sacri- 
ficial service  :  "  for  it  is  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  should  take  away  sin,"  Heb.  x.  4*  There  is  no  proportion  be- 
tween irrational  or  inanimate  sacrifices,  and  the  guilt  of  the  soul : 
God  doth  not  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  nor  drink  the  blood  of  goats," 
Psalm,  1  11.  When  the  Jews  would  appease  God  by  their  sacri- 
ficing, he  then  said,  that  "  he  had  not  required  this  at  their  hands,'* 
Jer.  vii.  21,  22,  and  he  rejected  it,  Isaiah  i.  13.  Jer.  vi.  20.  Micha  vi. 
6,  7,  8.  When  he  demands  a  satisfaction,  he  then  refiiseth  the  sac- 
rificial service,  and  he  substitutes  a  more  perfect  service  in  the  stead 
of  it.  See  Heb.  x.  1 — 9,  Did  Ciod  himself  enjoin  sacrifices  for  atone- 
Tsient,  it  was  however  not  done  in  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  in 


—15.  115 

©rder  that  men  might  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  in- 
to favour  ;  but  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  was  estabUshed  with 
Israel,  Exod.  xix.  which  supposeth  a  satisfaction  by  a  sufficient  sure- 
ty. And  thus,  all  those  offerings,  enjoined  by  the  church-law  of 
Israel,  did  not  serve  to  effect  a  real  satisfaction  and  atonement ;  but 
to  shadow  forth  and  to  prefigure  the  Surety,  and  his  satisfying  sacri- 
fice, that  the  covenant  people  of  the  Old  Testament  might  look 
through  all  that  outward  service  to  him,  and  seek  in  his  perfect  sac- 
rifice, the  real  atonement.  And  thus,  *'  the  law  of  sacrifices  had  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the 
things,"  Hcb.  x.  1. 

Therefore  the  sinner  cannot  have  a  hope  of  effecting  a  satisfaction 
either  by  himself,  or  by  any  mere  creature,  in  order  that  he  may  es- 
cape punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour.     Is  there  then 
no  door  of  hope  open  for  him  ?     There  is  none,  unless   he  can  find 
a  sufficient  mediator  and  deliverer.     He  must  indeed  have  a  media- 
tor between  God  and  himself,  to  deliver  him  ;  not  only  a  mediator  of 
advocacy  and  intercession,  for  a  mere  creature  could  be  such  a  me- 
diator :    Moses  was  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  Exod.  xxxii. 
Deut.  v.  5,  but  the  sinner  must  have  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  who 
can  dehver  him  from  his   guilt,  and  satisfy   the  justice  of  God  for 
him  by  a  sufficient  ransom  ;  and  therefore  he  must  have  '•  a  medi- 
ator for  the  redempi  ion  of  transgressions."     Heb.  ix.  15.     But  who, 
who  in  heaven  or  on  earth  is  worthy  or  able  to  be  such  a  mediator  ? 
The  instructer  saith,  he  must  have  four  great  qualifications.     Ques- 
tion 15.  (a)   **  Ihat  he  must  be  very  man,"   who  hath  a  human  soul 
with  a  human  body,  and  particularly  of  a  human  being,  and  so  he 
must  be  man  of  man.  (b)  "  That  he  must  be  a  righteous  man,"  one 
who  is  perfectly  righteous  and  holy,  agreeably  to  the  demand  of  the 
law,  (c)  "  And,  nevertheless,  more  perfect  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is, 
one  who  is  very  God. "(d)    He  must  also  be  God  and  man  in  one  per- 
son ;  therefore  our  catechism  saith,  who  is    "  also"  very  God  ;  and 
in  the  Latin  catechism  we  read,  qui  simul  etiam  sit  verus  Deus^  "  who 
is  withal,  or  at  the  same  time  also  very  God."     Why  the  mediator 
must  have  these  four  qualifications,  the  instructor  will  teach  us  here- 
after. Question  16,  17  ;  and  so  the  sinner  is  still  kept  under  his  con- 
cern  to  know  how  he  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received 
into  favour,  that  his  distress  may  be  perfect,  and  he  may  be  the  more 
capable  of  a  complete  consolation. 


116  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  how  shall  ye  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punish- 
ment, which  ye  have  deserved  according  lo  the  righteous  judgment 
o(  God,  and  be  again  received  into  favour  ?  Many  do  not  even  think 
of  this,  at  least  many  of  yx3U  are  not  concerned  about  it ;  '•  the  lust 
Of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,  whoredom, 
wine  and  new  wine  take  av/ay  their  hearts,"  1  John  ii.  16.  Hosea 
iv.  11.  Or  the  cares  and  business  of  this  life,  render  them  careless 
and  unconcerned  about  their  eternal  welfare,  and  suffer  them  not  to 
l>onder  seriously  upon  their  eternal  salvation.  But  hear,  voluptuous 
and  poor  worldling,  whose  *^  end  is  destruction?  is  not  thine,  whose 
Cod  is  tliy  be'ly,  whose  glory  is  in  thy  shame,  and  who  mindest 
earthly  things,"     Phil.  iii.  19^ 

Some  think  it  is  unnecessary  to  be  solicitous  about  their  eternal 
salvation.  Is  there  any  person  who  is  afraid  of  eternal  perdition, 
presently  another  will  scoff  at  him,  as  if  such  a  fearful  person  were 
silly  and  disordered  in  his  understanding.  Hath  such  a  reviler  of 
good  things  any  compassion  Vt'ith  such  a  sorrowful  person  :  how 
will  he  bestir  himself  to  discourse  with  him,  in  order  to  dispel  his 
anxiety  1  he  will  at  least  take  care  that  he  doth  not  himself  become 
so  melancholic  ;  he  thinks  ihat  if  he  should,  he  would  despair,  and 
he  doth  not  intend  to  listen  so  much  to  the  devil,  as  if  that  conviction 
were  a  work  of  the  devil,  and  not  of  "  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  convin- 
cet*}  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment,"  John 
xvi.  8.  Christ,  he  thinkb,  hath  died  for  our  sins,  and  this  he  wili 
believe  firmly,  without  doubting  ;  and  he  imagineth  that  such 
sorrow  doth  not  agree  with  the  joyful  season  of  the  New  Testament, 
But,  inendo  ye  who  i^ardtn  and  deceive  your  hearts  in  this  careless 
manner,  how  can  ye  so  i-ely  upon,  and  be  so  assured  of  an  interest 
in  the  salisfa  tion  of  Christ,  which  he  hath  accomplished  ?  Doth  it 
belong  to  all  men  ?  to  you  also  ?  must,  and  can  ye  believe  this  with- 
out ever  having  been  concerned  about  your  woful  misery  ?  and  do 
ye  think,  that  under  the  New  Testament  we  must  not  have  any 
'  godly  sorrow,  which  worketh  repentance  not  to  be  repented  ofj" 
'  oiiiraiy  to  2  Cor.  vii.  8 — 1 1,  Surely  none  but  "  those  who  mourn, 
arc  comforted  and  blessed,"  Mat.  v.  4.  Do  ye  say,  we  repent  in- 
f'.eed  of  our  sins  ?  is  it  indeed  true,  and  not  merely  a  vain  assertion  r 
iire  ye  ever  affected  with  concern,  distress,  and  a  restless,  earnest 
desire  to  escyj.'i  iht-  :  ust  !ved  p'..n»shment,  and  to  be  again  received 
.'ito  favour  ?  Suui  and  Jndas  said  also,    "  I  have  sinned,"     I  Sam- 


]2— 15, 
svi.  24— Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4  ;  but  Ihey  both  «  died  in  their  iniquity/' 
yea,  they  murdered  themselves.  1  Chron  x.  13 — 1:5am.  xxxi.*4. 
— .Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

OtWers  experience  severe  twinges  of  conscience,  and  are  accord- 
ingly fearful,  when  with  *'  Felix,  they  hear  of  righteousness,  tem- 
perance, and  the  judgment  to  come  ;"  Acts  xxiv.  25  ;  but  they  do 
not  earnestly  inquire  after  the  way  which  is  above,  to  depart  from 
hell  beneath  ;  for  one  endeavours  to  divert  his  anxiety  by  business  or 
amusement,  or  by  hardening  and  barring  .up  his  heart,  that  the 
anguish  of  his  heart  may  not  be  too  much  enlarged,  or  by  turning 
away  his  ear  from  hearing  severe  preaching,  which  would  convince 
him.  Paul,  who  preaches  so  seserely,  and  who  goads  so  sharply, 
must  then  "go  his  way."  Acts  xxiv.  25.  Another  gives  up  all 
hope,  and  thinks,  how  can  I  help  it,  if  God  will  not  receive  me  gra- 
ciously ?  and  he  abandons  himself  to  his  careless  sinfulness,  or  sin- 
ful carelessness.  "  This  evil,"  saith  he,  "  is  of  the  Lord,  what  should 
I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  ?"  2  Kings  vi.  33.  A  third  will 
convert  himself,  he  intends  and  promises  it,  he  will  not  commit  this 
and  that  sin  any  more  ;  he  will  serve  God  better,  and  attend  public 
worship  more  dihgently  than  he  used  ;  and  he  will  offer  this  to  God 
as  a  payment,  at  least  in  part ;  and  he  hopes  that  God  will  remit 
the  rest  of  what  he  oweth  :  but  his  promise  is  generally  empty 
words,  without  effect :  when  his  distress  is  over,  his  promise  is  also 
puffed  away  by  the  least  blast  of  concupiscence.  Doth  he  conduct 
:n  some  measure  as  he  proposed,  by  forsaking  a  few  sins,  and  doing 
a  little  good,  he  is  then  perfer  lly  easy,  and  trows  that  he  is  already  a 
great  saint,  and  a  dearly  beloved  child  of  God.  .And  a  fourth  quiets 
himself  with  the  calamities  which  he  suffers  in  this  world  ;  he  hopes, 
and  it  is  his  comfort  in  his  sorrow,  that  his  present  misery  will  con- 
stitute the  full  measure  of  his  sufferings,  and  that  he  will  not  be  obli- 
-ged  to  suffer  any  more  hereafter  ;  as  if  his  *uiFerings  were  a  satis- 
faction to  the  justice  of  God,  and  not  the  beginning  of  his  sorrows, 
atid  so  "  he  doth  not  say,  there  is  no  liope :  he  finds  the  life  of  his 
hand,  and  is  not  grieved."     Isaiah  Ivii.  10. 

"  Hear  this,  O  foolish  people,  and  without  understanding,  who 
have  eyes,  but  see  not ;  who  have  ears,  but  hear  not."  Jer.  v.  21. 
1  speak  to  you,  who  have  not  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
welfare,  and  to  you  also,  who  consider  all  distress  on  account  of  your 
wicked  condition  to  be  unnecessary :  to  you  also,  who  deceive  your- 
selves with  vain  and  false  imaginations,  and  hush  in  such  a  careless 
manner,  your  awakened  conscience  Knov/  that  ye  will  not  by  these 
means  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  nor  return    again 


tit  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION^. 

into  favour,  for  "  God  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  Exod» 
xxxiv.  7.  Do  you  think  to  harden  your  hearts  against  the  Lord, 
and  to  have  peace  f  God  is  able  to  trouble  you.  See  how  he 
dashed  in  pieces  the  hardened  Israelites  :  "  Therefore,"  saith  he, 
Hosea  xiii.  7,  8,  *'  I  will  be  unto  them  as  a  lion ;  as  a  leopard  by 
the  way  will  I  observe  them.  I  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  that  is  be- 
reaved  of  her  whelps,  and  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there 
will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion  ;  the  wild  beast  shall  tear  them."  Ob- 
serve how  he  troubled  the  proud  Belshazzar,  "  his  countenance  was 
changed,  and  his  thoughts  troubled  him  ;  the  joints  of  his  loins  were 
loosed,  and  his  kness  smote  one  against  another  "  Dan.  v.  6.  Ye 
know  how  Cain  fared,  when  he  would  conceal  his  brother-slaughter. 
Gen  iv.  9 — 13.  Judas  sought  to  hide  his  abominable  deed  with  a 
kiss  ;  but  how  did  his  conscience  awake  and  terrify  him,  and  with 
what  fury  did  it  attack  him !  Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4,  5,  6  ;  do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  not  fare  so  ill,  because  ye  are  not  the  worst  sinners  ;  be- 
cause ye  intend  to  conduct  better  hereafter  than  ye  have  heretofore  ; 
because  ye  must  suffer  so  much  at  present  ?  Do  ye  think  then  with 
the  Papists,  that  your  doings  and  sufferings  will  cancel  your  debt, 
and  merit  the  grace  of  (iod  ?  doth  not  God  require  that  his  justice 
should  be  satisfied  ?  and  must  ye  not  pay  fully,  either  by  youi-selves, 
or  by  another  ?  Do  ye  know  how  to  deliver  yourselves  by  a  few 
outward  ceremonies,  and  by  suffering  a  few  afflictions,  and  then  "  ex- 
acting all  your  labours  "  Isaiah  Iviii.  2,  3.  Therefore,  *'  awake  yc 
who  sleep,  and  arise  from  the  dead."  Eph.  v.  14.  "  God  will  punish 
the  men  who  are  settled  on  their  lees  "  Zeph,  i.  12.  *'  Rise  up,  ye 
women  that  are  at  ease ;  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give 
ear  unto  my  speech.  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  be 
troubled,  ye  careless  ones ;  strip  ye,  make  ye  bare,  and  gird  sack- 
cloth upon  your  loins."  Isaiah  xxxii.  9.  Or  do  ye  think  it  is  need- 
less for  you  to  be  concerned  and  distressed  about  your  eternal  condi- 
tion ?  Doth  not  God  then  threaten  *•  a  wo  to  those  who  are  at  ease 
in  Zion,  and  careless  m  the  mountains  of  Samaria?"  Amos  vi,  1. 
Is  not  your  misery,  your  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  which  ye 
have  deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  griev- 
ous enough  to  affect  you  with  the  greatest  concern  ?  can  ye  deliver 
yourselves,  and  satisfy  the  justice  of  God,  either  by  your  own  suffeiv 
ings  and  doings,  or  by  those  of  another  creature  '  will  ye  not  be 
wholly  at  a  loss  here  ?  How  v/ill  a  sinner  deny  all  his  own  righteous- 
ness, and  6eek  the  righteousness  of  another,  unless  he  be  perfectly 
stripped  and  bare  ? 
f»  Will  yc  therefore  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into- 


—15.  H^ 

favour:  (!)•  Entertain  a  greater  concern  about  your  salvation  and 
damnation  than   ye  have  had  heretofore.     Will  ye  value  .ind  bestit 
yoiirbclves  so  for  your  body,  your  food  and  clothing,  and  neglect  from 
mere  iibikssness,  your  noble  souls,  and  be  so  careless  of  them?  Oh 
detestable  madness  1  ye  will  strive  to   pass  with  honour  through  the 
world,  but  are  unconctrneu  i.cv/  it  will  fare  with   you,  after  ye  are 
througn  tiie  world  1  How  will  ye  btmoan  yourselves,  and  say  when 
it  IS  too  late,  "  How  have  J  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised 
reproo*',    and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined 
mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?"  Prov.  v,  12,  13.    What  will 
ye  then  have  of  all  these  earthly  goods,  for  which  ye  consume  both 
your  bodies  and  souls  in  so  many  difficult  occupations  ?  '  for  what 
doth  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,   and  lose  his  own 
soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?"  Matt, 
xvi.  26.  Therefore  value,  and  bestir  yourselves  more  for  the  welfare 
of  you;  souls,  and  *^  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  you,"  Matt.  vi.  33  (2) 
Impress  it  upon  your  minds,  that  all  your  own  doings,  as  long  as  ye 
are  not  received  into  favour,  will  not  avail  to  escape  punishment,  that 
ye  may  look  off  from  them  altogether,  and  may  be  wholly  at  a  loss 
and  confounded  in  yourselves.     All  your  own  works,  how  much 
soever  ye  bestir  yourselves,  are  but  "  a  vain  oblation,"  Isaiah  i.  12. 
Ye  must  be  first  received  into  favour  through  the  perfect  satisfaction 
of  another^  if  what  ye  do  shall  be  acceptable  to  God.     "  The  sacri- 
fice of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  :  but  the  prayer  of 
the  upright  is  his  delight,"  Pror.  xv.  8.     "  The  Lord   had  respect 
first  to  Abel  and   then  to  his  offering  ;  but  when  he  hath  no  respect 
unto  Cain,  he  is  not  pleased  with  his  offeiing  neither,"   Gen.  iv.  3, 
4,  5.  (3)  Is  there  any  one  among  us,  who  is  thoroughly  anxious,  and 
desirous  of  escaping  the  punishment,  which  he  hath  deserved,  and 
of  being  again  received  into  favour,  and   doth  he  cry  out  with  the 
Igaoler,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  CO,  let  him  know, 
that  God  hath  demanded  the  satisfaction  at  the  hands  of  his  Son,  and 
that  he   hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  our  guilt,  even  to  the 
uttermost  farthing,  that  God  proffereth  his  Son  to  him,  and  that  he 
must  accept  of  him  upon  this  offer,  and  choose  him  for  himself:  for 
**  God  hath  set  his  Son   forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith,  in 
his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Kom   iii.  25-  See  also  Isaiah 
xxvii.  4,   5,  and  chap.  xlv.  22,  24,   and  what  will  be  said  upon  the 
sixth  and  seventh  Lord's  day.  (4)  Believers,  who  have  betaken  your- 
selves to  the  Mediator  c-nd  Deliverer,  and  have  denied  all,  yea,  even 
your  best  performan<jcs  and  all  your  outward  privilegesj  and  "  count- 


kiO  THE  NECESSITY  O^  A  SATISFACTION. 

cd  them  but  loss  and  dunp;,  that  ye  might  be  found  in  Christ,  atid 
have  his  righteousness  through  faith,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  4 — 10, 
behold  your  happiness,  wonder  and  rejoice,  yea,  praise  the  Lord, 
that  ye  have  escaped  punishment,  and  are  again  received  into  favour, 
and  that  through  the  suffering  and  obedience  of  the  great  Mediator 
and  Deliverer,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  following  Lord's  days  will 
urge  you  to  this  more  particularly.  (5)  Let  all  those,  who  have  the 
cstre  ot"  souls,  take  heed  that  they  lead  sinners  in  and  according  to 
this  sure  way  to  Christ.  To  comfort  sinners  in  general,  while  they 
ire  unconcerned,  and  do  not  mourn,  and  to  apply  the  promises  to 
them  without  distinction,  and  without  taking  the  precious  from  the 
vile  ;  or  to  direct  poor  and  concerned  souls  only  to  certain  legal  ob- 
servances ;  or  to  deal  harshly  with  them,  and  oppose  them,  this  is 
''  making  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies,  and  strengthening 
the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  not  turn  from  his  wicked 
way  and  live  ;"  which  God  will  punish  with  severity,  according:  to 
Ezek.  xiii.  Spiritual  guides  must  endeavour  to  convince  sinners  of 
their  guilt,  and  awaken  them  to  concern,  they  ought  not  to  comfort 
them  hastily,  but  should  urge  them  to  '^  the  Lord  our  righteousness,'" 
that  they  may  escape  the  deserved  punishment,  and  be  again  receiv- 
ed into  favour.  This  is  the  way,  in  which  the  instructor  leads  souls^ 
and  he  doth  it  after  the  example  of  Paul  and  his  fellow  labourers : 
"  We  knowing,"  saith  he,  2  Cor  v.  11."  the  terrour  of  the  Lord,  per- 
suade men."  Thus  we  should  deliver  our  own  souls,  **  save  our= 
selves,  and  them  that  hear  us,"  1  Tim.  iv.  16.  "  We  should  justify 
many,"  afford  a  ♦veil-grounded  consolation  to  souls,  their  sanctifica- 
tion  would  be  real  and  3/angehcal,  and  "we  should  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  feriRament,  and  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever/' 
\men. 
CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 


VI.  LORD'S  DAYo 


Heb.  vii.  25 — 28.  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost,  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  For  such  a  high  priest  became  uSj 
who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separated  from  sinners,  and  made 
higher  than  the  heavens ;  who  ncedcth  not  daily,  as  those  high 
priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's ;  for  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself. 
For  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which  have  infirmity  ;  but 
the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh  the  Son^ 
who  is  consecrated  for  e\er  more.

Q.   15.    What  sort  of  a  Mediator  and  deliverer  must  we  then  *  eekfor  ? 

A.  For  one  who  is  very  man,  and  perfectly  righteous  ;  and  yet 
more  powerful  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is,  one  who  is  also  very 
God. 


'A. 


.  LTHOUGH  angels  and  men  are  the  most  glorious  of  all  the 
creatures  of  God,  nevertheless,  many  of  the  angels,  and  all  men,  have 
become  the  most  miserable  creatures,  since  they  have  revolted  from; 


\04  TIIE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

their  Maker,  and  have  rebelled  against  him  ;  and  are  therefore  con* 
demned  by  him  to   eternal   punishment :  *'  God  spared  not  the  an-, 
gels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  hell."   2  Peter  ii.  4.     Thus, 
also,  all  men,  "  the  whole  world  is  become  i^uilty  before  God ;  for 
they  have  all  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."    Rom.  iii. 
19,  23.     Although  the  nature  of  angels,  yea,  of  the  fallen  angels,  is 
much  more  excellent  than   that  of  men,   nevertheless,   fallen    men 
have  this  eminent  privilege  above  fallen  angels,  that  God   hath    re- 
vealed a  deliverance  for  fallen  men,  but  not  for  fallen  angels.     The 
fallen  angels  have  no  hope  of  deliverance  from  their  misery  ;  for 
»'  God  hath  reserved  them  in  everlasting  chains,  under  darkness  unto 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day."  Jude,  verse  6.    He  hath  not  appointed 
a  mediator  and  deliverer  for  them,  as  he  hath  given  the  man  Christ 
Jesus  to  be  a  mediator  between  God  and  men,  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  who  did 
not  therefore  unite  the  nature  of  angels  to  his  Godhead,  but  that  of 
men  :  for  '*  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of 
Abraham,"  Heb.  ii.  16.     Therefore  Paul  extols  so  highly  the  love  of 
God  to  man,  when  he  saith,  Titus  iii,  4,  5.     "  After  that  the  kind- 
ness and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,  he  saved 
Us,"  Sec.  In  order  now  that  the  miserable  sinner  may  become  capa- 
ble of  the  deliverance,  he  teaches  him  his  misery,  that  he  may  hum- 
ble him,  and  he  reveals  to   him  the   deliverance  in  his  Son.     The 
Holy  Spirit,  who  is  sent  by  Jesus  "  convinceth  the  world  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,"  John  xvi.  8,     For  *♦  they  who  are  whole  need  not 
a  physician,  but  they  who  are  sick  :  and  the  Deliverei   came  not  to 
call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repen-ance,"   .'^att.  ix.  12,   13. 

This  the  instructor  also  teacheth  us,  when  he  sreaks  in  his  second 
part  concerning  tlie  deliverance  of  man,  for  which  he  had  prepared 
him  in  his  first  part,  by  teaching  him  his  misery.  The  catechism 
instructs  us  in  three  things  with  respect  to  the  deliverance  :  (1)  the 
conditions  which  are  required  to  the  deliverance,  Question  1 2 —  1 7- 
(2)  The  person  who  delivers,  Question  18.  19.  (3)  The  manner  in 
which  we  become  partakers  '^f  him  by  faith.  Lord's  day  vii. — xxxi* 

In  this  Lord's  day  we  see, 

I.  That  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  in  order 
that  we  may  be  delivered.  Question  12. 

II.  By  whom  the  satisfaction  cannot,  and  by  whom  it  can  be  made, 
Questions  13,  14,  15. 

I.  The  instructor  saith  that  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is 
necessary,  in  order  tu  our  deliverance.  The  sinner  hath  by  his  sins 
deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgrpent  of  God,  temporal 
and  eternal  punishment.     Therefore  it  belongs  to  his  deliverance, 


V.  LORD'S  BAY,  Q.  12— l5o  105 

(a)  *'  that  he  should  escape  from  that  punishment"  by  a  forgiveness 
of  his  sins,  whereby  he  is  discharged  from  his  guilt,  so  that  God  is 
no  more  wroth  with  him,  nor  rebukes  him,  and  there  is  no  condem- 
nation to  him.  In  this  manner  doth  the  apostle  describe  the  deliver- 
ance, saying,  "  We  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins,"  Eph.  i.  7.  (b)  "  That  he  should  be  again  received  into 
favour."  whereby  he  is  restored  to  the  kindness  and  love  of  God, 
and  obtains  grace  and  glory.  The  same  apostle  teacheth  (.;s  this, 
when  he  saith,  ^  The  Holy  Ghost  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance^ 
until  the  redemption  ot  the  purchased  possession,"  Eph.  i.  14. 
^  Concerning,  and  with  respect  to  such  a  deliverance,  a  distressed 
sinner,  whom  the  catechism  introduceth  here  as  speaking,  asks, 
Whether  there  be  any  way  to  obtain  a  deliverance  ?  For  in  this  man- 
ner IS  the  elect  sinner  affected,  when  God  disposes  him  for  u  deliv- 
erance :  for  (a)  he  is  convinced  ef  his  abominable  temper  and  con- 
duct ;  he  sees  that  he  is  guilty  in  the  highest  degree,  according  to 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  and  that  not  only  with  a  buie  con- 
templation, and  with  his  judgment,  but  so  that  he  lays  it  to  heart : 
he  sees  with  shame  and  aversion  from  himself  his  horrible  deformity; 
this  distresses  and  afflicts  him,  so  that  he  cries  out,  '*  Wo  unto  me 
that  I  have  sinned,"  Lam  v.  16.  With  Ephraim  "he  bemoans 
himself,  repents,  is  instructed,  smites  upon  his  thigh,  is  ashamed, 
yea,  even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  (b)  He  is  also  desirous  to 
be  delivered ;  as  he  is  at  first  exceedingly  dark  and  confused,  and 
doth  not  rightly  know  the  true  way  to  escape  punishment,  and  to 
be  again  received  into  favour,  therefoi  e  he  begins  to  exert  himself, 
in  order  that  he  may  do  all  that  he  can  devise,  and  that  his  confused 
apprehensions  suggest,  as  conducive  to  his  deliverance  :  one  while 
he  resolves  that  he  will  not  sin  any  more,  and  then  that  he  will  serve 
God  better :  but  he  cannot  advance,  the  power  of  his  conuptions 
forces  him  repeatedly  out  of  his  way,  and  when  he  expects  enlarge- 
ment under  his  distress,  he  is  afflicted  still  more  than  he  was  before, 
because  he  sees  by  experience  that  matters  become  worse  with  him 
instead  of  better.  What  shall  he  do?  he  will  pray  most  earnestly  to 
God,  that  he  would  be  gracious  to  him  :  but  as  soon  as  he  begins, 
he  finds  his  access  unto  God  so  barred  up,  that  he  cannot  approach 
to  him,  and  he  becomes  so  confused  that  he  cannot  utter  in  an 
orderly  manner  a  single  sentence,  capable  of  moving  God.  He  begins 
anew,  but  it  doth  not  avail ;  this  disturbs  and  perplexes  him  so,  that 
he  is  ready  to  despair  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  he  doth,  and  ''  he 
gaith,  There  is  no  hope  ;  for  he  doth  not  find  the  life  of  his  handi 
and  he  is  grieved,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  Yea,  he  is  afraid  that  there  ii  nt^ 
106  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

help  for  him,  and  that  lie  i<  perhaps  a  reprobate  ;  and  therefore  ht 
sometimes  resolves  that  he  will  not  endeavour  any  more  to  be  saved. 
But  his  distrcbs  and  fear  of  perdition  will  not  suffer  him  to  rest^ 
until,  being  wholly  stripped  and  bare,  he  asks  the  word  and  servants 
of  God,  *'  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved  ?"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  30. 

What  doth  the  instructor  now  do  with  such  a  person  ?  doth  he  say, 
like  physicians  of  no  value,  Thou  must  not  be  so  sad,  this  Sorrow- 
fulness proceeds  from  Satan,  thou  must  banish  it,  God  is  merciful, 
Christ  hath  died  for  us,  thou  must  beheve  this  firmly,  forsake  evil, 
and  do  good,  and  pray  to  God  ?  no :  for  this  is  only  daubing  with 
untempered  mortar,  it  neither  heals,  nor  relieves  the  soul.  But  the 
instructor,  desirous  that  a  godly  sorro^v  should  penetrate  the  sinner, 
that  the  tranquillity  of  his  mind  may  be  perfect  and  established  by  a 
perfect  righteousness  of  an  all-sufficient  Mediator,  detains  him  a  while 
under  his  concern,  yea,  he  increaseth  it  by  showing  him,  that  there 
is  no  way  to  obtain  deliverance,  as  long  as  the  justice  of  God  is  not 
satisfied  :  he  saith,  God  will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  &c. 

The  justice  of  God  denotes  here  his  natural  right,  by  which  he  is 
entitled,  on  account  of  his  glory  and  sovereignty,  to  require  a  perfect 
obedience  of  man.  Therefore  the  prophet  saith,  "  Who  would  not 
fear  thee,  thou  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  thee  doth  it  appertain,"  Jer. 
X.  7,  and  when  man  doth  not  obey  him,  to  punish  him  temporally 
and  eternally.  Even  "  the  Gentiles  know  the  judgment  (or  right)  of 
God,  that  they  who  do  such  things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i. 
32.  This  right  God  hath  expressed  in  his  law,  and  it  is  therefore 
called,  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law,"  Rom.  viii.  4.  "  For  Moses 
describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man  who 
doth  these  things  shall  live  by  them,"  Rom.  x.  5,  and  "  cursed  is 
every  one  who  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Gal.  iii.  10. 

This  is  satisfied,  (I)  by  suffering  fully  and  completely  the  punish- 
ment threatened  in  consequence  of  sin  :  thus  "  God'  made  his  Son, 
who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin,"  2  Cor.  v.  21,  to  wit,  by  inflicting  the 
punishment  of  sin  upon  him.  This  is  indeed  sufficient  to  deliver  the 
sinner  from  punishment,  but  it  doth  not  give  him  a  right  to  life  ;  and 
therefore  a  satisfaction  requires  also,  (2)  a  perfect  obedience,  which 
the  law  of  God  demands  in  order  to  life  :  **  By  the  obedience  of  one 
many  shall  be  made  righteous,"  Rom.  v.  19. 

God  *'  will  "  have  his  justice  satisfied.  The  Socinians  deny  that 
God  will  have  this,  and  they  conceive  that  such  a  satisfaction  is  not 
necessary  ;  yea,  that  God  can  recede  from  his  right,  and  that  he  hath 
actually  receded  from  it,  and  hath  therefore  abolished  the  law  of 


V^  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15.  i07 

Moses,  and  established  a  better  law  by  Christ,  as  a  new  lawgiver^ 
=,nstead  of  the  old  law.  The  Remonstrants  will  indeed  admit,  that 
satisfaction  must  be  made  to  God,  in  order  to  our  deUvt^rance  ;  but 
not  that  the  justice  of  God  must  be  perfectly  satisfied  :  but  that 
nothing  more  is  necessary,  than  that  the  will  of  God  should  be  satis- 
fied, which  doth  not  demand  all  that  the  sinner  hath  forfeited  ;  and 
that  God,  by  a  gracious  estimation  accepts  of  this,  instead  of  a  per- 
fect satisfaction.  And  they  must  speak  ^lus,  if  they  will  maintain 
their  doctrine,  that  Christ  suffered  for  all  men  ;  for  if  he  satisfied  the 
justice  of  God  for  ail  men,  then  all  men  must  be  saved.  Now  all 
men  are  not  saved,  even  according  to  the  opinion  of  our  adversaries, 
and  so  Christ  could  not  have  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  them. 
And  therefore  they  say,  that  he  hath  by  his  death  satisfied  the  will 
of  God,  and  that  God  was  moved  thereby  to  establish  a  covenant  of 
grace  with  all  men,  and  to  require  of  them,  as  the  condition  of  that 
covenant,  faith,  obedience  and  perseverance,  and  that  he  gives  them 
a  sutiicient  grace  to  fulfil  those  conditions. 

This  doctrine  is  opposed  by  all  the  orthodox,  who  say  that  "God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied."  But  how  doth  God  will  this  ?  only 
by  his  decree,  and  mere  good  pleasure,  by  which  he  could  even  have 
willed  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction,  as  he  wills  many  things 
by  his  decree,  which  he  might  have  willed  otherwise,  as  that  there 
should  be  more  or  fei^^er  men  than  there  are  ?  Thus  some  divines 
think  on  this  subject.  Or  doth  God  will  that  there  should  be  a  satis- 
faction, on  account  of  his  holy  and  righteous  nature,  whereby  he 
cannot  be  willing  to  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfaction  :  for  instance, 
God  will  be  obeyed  by  his  reasonable  creatures,  and  it  is  his  will  that 
what  is  reasonable  should  be  holy,  and  he  cannot  will  otherwise  ? 
This  we  maintain  with  the  most  divines,  and  this  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  catechism  also,  as  appears  from  the  words,  "  The  justice  of  Gotl 
requires  that  sin,  which  is  committed  against  the  most  high  majesty 
of  God,  be  punished  with  extreme  punishment,"  Questisn  2,  "  God 
will  have  his  justice  satisfied,"  Question  12.  "  With  respect  to  the 
justice  and  truth  of  God,  satisfaction  can  be  made  for  our  sins  no 
otherwise  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,"  Question  40.  And 
we  do  not  teach  without  reason,  that  God  cannot,  without  a  satisfac- 
tion to  his  justice,  suffer  the  sinner  to  escape  punishment,  and  re- 
ceive him  again  into  favour:  for,  (besides  what  we  have  safid  on  the 
foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  sin  must  necessarily  be  punished)  Paui 
saith. 

1.  Heb.  ii.  10.  "  It  became  him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by 
whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  son^  to  glory,  to  make  th^ 


m         THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION- 

Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings."  To  make 
this  Captain  perfect  through  sufferings,  signifies  to  make  him  a  sacri- 
fic-.  by  his  sufferings,  and  thereby  to  bring  the  children  of  God  to 
salvation.  This  now  became  the  high  Ciod,  of,  and  through  whom, 
are  a'l  things ;  and  it  would  not  have  become  him,  either  to  bring 
his  children  to  glory  without  such  a  satisfying  sacrifice,  or  if  he 
pould  have  done  it  without  that  sufferini^,  to  subject  his  Son,  never- 
theless to  such  a  painful  'suffering.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were 
certainly  unnecessary,  nnd  to  no  purpose,  if  God  could  forgive  sin  of 
his  mere  good  pleasure  and  free  will,  without  satisfaction. 

2.  It  was  surely  an  evidence  of  the  greatest  love,  that  God  gave 
his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation,  and  punished  him  for  the  sinner.  See 
Rom.  v.  8.  I  John  iv.  10.  But  there  would  not  have  been  such  an 
illustrious  display  of  love  in  thiS,  if  God  could  have  received  the  sin- 
ner into  favour  without  a  satisfaction  ;  since  it  would  be  a  great  in- 
stance of  love  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  the  sinner,  if  he  did  not  de- 
mand a  satisfaction,  and  forgive  him  his  sin  for  nought. 

3.  The  apostle  saith  also,  that  "  God  hath  set  Christ  Jesus  forth 
to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  right- 
eousness for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  during  the  forbear- 
ance of  God."*  Rom,  iii.  25.  During  the  forbearance  of  God,  that 
is,  during  the  time  of  the  Old  Testament,  many  sins  were  commit- 
ted, and  many  of  them  forgiven,  while  there  was  yet  no  satisfaction 
made  for  sin,  and  it  appeared  thus,  that  God  was  merciful  and  for- 
bearing, but  not  that  he  was  righteous  (or  just).  God  then,  that  he 
might  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  set  his  Son 
forth  in  his  sufferings  for  that  purpose  ;  but  why  was  this  necessa- 
ry ?  the  sins  w^ere  already  forgiven,  if  the  satisfaction  were  not  so 
necessary. 

4.  Add  to  this  what  the  apostle  saith,  Heb.  x.  4,  "  It  is  impossible 
that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sin."  Why  is 
this  impossible  ?  Only  because  it  did  not  please  God  to  take  away 
sins  by  the  blood  of  beasts  ?  No  :  but  also  bccatise  the  blood  of  irra- 
tional creatures  bears  no  proportion  to  the  sins  of  rational  creatures, 
which  are  too  abominable  and  filthy  to  be  washen  away  by  such  irra- 
tional blood.  If  God  could  then  take  away  sins  without  a  satisfaction, 
why  could  they  not  be  taken  away  by  the  blood  of  beasts  offered  up 
in  sacrifice  ?  Since  this,  according  to  Heb.  x  1,  4,  1 1,  is  impossible, 
\t  is  also  impossible  that  God  should  forgive  sin  without  a  satisfac- 

*  In  rendering  this  passage,  we  have  followed  the  Dutch  translation  ;  the 
reason  for  which  here,  aa  well  as  elsewhere,  we  have  mentioned  in  cur  adver- 
^aen|)cn^ 


V.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  12^15.  109 

tioa.  If  any  wish  to  see  these  reasons  enlarged,  and*  enforced 
with  others,  we  refer  them  to  Witsius's  Kconomy  of  the  covenants 
hook  1.  chapter  5,  an;l  book  I(.  chapter  8. 

It  is  needless  to  object  here,  (a)  that  God  may  recede  from  his 
strict  right,  since  man  ran  do  this,  and  that  it  is  an  eminent  virtue 
to  forgive  injuries  with  a  noble  greatness  of  mind  ;  for  though  this 
is  true  with  respect  to  private  injuries,  which  one  man  doth  to  an- 
other ;  and  although  man  is  bound  to  do  this,  because  one  man  is  a 
neighbour  of  another,  and  the  law  of  God  obligeth  him  to  it ;  never* 
theless,  God  cannot  therefore  recede  fro  -n  his  right,  since  he  is  not 
bound  by  any  law  to  exercise  such  a  virtue  toward  his  creatures ; 
and  since  he  cannot  reeede  from  his  right  as  a  Judge  in  punishing 
sins,  who  m.ust  do  right,  (b)  Were  the  sins  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment forgiven,  without  a  foregoing  satisfaction  of  the  divme  justice, 
they  were,  nevertheless,  not  forgiven,  except  on  account  of  the  sat- 
isfaction of  the  Surety  who  was  ro  come.  See  this  Kom.  iii.  25. 
Heb.  ix.  15,  In  order  that  the  ancient  believers  might  look  stead- 
fiistly  to  the  future  satisfaction  of  the  Messiah,  God  described  him, 
promised,  and  shadowed  him  forth  to  them  in  the  ancient  sacrifices. 
See  Isaiah  liii.  Acts  x.  43.  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb.  x.  1,  14.  (c)  God 
could  not,  as  the  Socinians  conceive,  graciously  abolish  the  law 
which  threatens  the  curse  in  consequence  of  the  least  transgression  • 
and  establish  another,  which  should  require  nothing  but  faith  ;  for 
the  law  is  the  transcript  of  God's  holiness,  which  cannot  be  expres- 
sed bv  any  other  law,  ueless  the  divine  holiness  can  have  another 
form  than  it  had  before.  God  would  then  also  deny  his  truth  :  for 
he  hath  said,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  ;"  and  he  would 
now  say,  thou  shalt  not  die  according  to  my  threatening,  although 
my  justice  is  not  satisfied  for  thy  sin.  Doth  the  sinner  not  die  noWf 
it  is  not  in  consequence  of  a  hew  law,  but  of  a  satisfaction  for  the 
establishment  of  the  law,  Roiii.  iii.  2  1,  31.  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  (d) 
They  think  that  God  could  bestow  his  Spirit,  as  well  as  his  Son,  to 
aRect  the  sinner  with  sorrow  for  his  sin,  and  induce  him  lo  confess 
th^t  he  had  dishonoured  (iod,  that  he  might  thus  sanctify  the  name 
cf  God;  and  that  therefore  a  satisfaction  was  not  necessary  for  this 
purpose.  But  this  is  an  idle  pretence  ;  for  this  would  be  an  act  of 
kindness^  and  not  of  justice.  See  Zech.  xii.  JO.  Now  God  must 
surely  be  glorified  in  his  justice,  as  well  as  in  his  kindness,  as  he  is 
by  the  satisfaction,  Eph.  i.  7*  (e)  They  say  further  to  no  purpose,^ 
t.hat  if  vve  hold  a  satisfaction  to  be  necessary  from  the  nature  of 
God,  we  do  then  lim't  God  too  much  with  respect  to  his  power  and 
liberty  ;  but'can  we  indeed  say  nftt  Paul  iim-ts  tlie  Lord  too  much;^ 
^hen  he  tsacheth  that  "  God  cannot  lie."    litus  i,  2.  Heb.  yi,   18, 


1  Id  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

It  is  no  impotency  nor  imperfection  in  God,  that  he  cannot  forgJYc 
tin  without  a  satisfaction,  any  more  than  that  I'*  he  cannot  be  terript* 
cd  of  evil,"  James  iii.  13.  (f;  Finally,  some  say  that  God  might,  ia 
the  work  of  redemption,  have  willed  somethi'i^  different  from  what 
he  hath  willed  For  instance,  God  willed  that  Christ  should  s  aisff 
for  some  sinners  ;  but  he  might  have  willed  that  he  should  satisfy  fop 
all.  And  so  they  conceive  that  God,  who  hath  now  willed  that  satis- 
faction  should  be  made  for  sin,  might  have  willed  to  forgive  sin  with- 
out a  satisfaction.  But  a  satisfaction  for  some,  or  for  all,  affects 
not  the  divine  holiness  and  justice,  and  so  not  the  nature  of  thesatis> 
fcic'i'jn,  but  oaly  ths  ohjecr.s  of  the  satisfaction.  God  mig'tt  have  de- 
creed from  all  eternity  that  his  Son  should  suffer  for  all  men,  but 
not  that  some,  or  many  sinners,  should  escape  punishment,  and  ht 
again  received  into  favour  without  a  satisfaction. 

Since  now  a  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary,  we 
therefore  conclude  "  that  we  must  make  this  satisfaction,  either  by 
ourselves,  or  by  another." 

"  We  must  make  full  satisfaction  then,  either  by  ourselves  or  by 
another."  We  should  satisfy  by  ourselves,  if  we  suffered  and  fulfil- 
led in  our  own  persons  the  selfi-ame  things,  which  aje  required  hj 
the  law,  in  its  strictest  demands,  and  if  this  should  deliver  us  with- 
out any  intervening  grace,  or  forgiveness  :  for  it  is  the  judgment 
of  God  that  they  who  do  evil  things  are  worthy  of  death."  Rom.  i. 
52.  This  is  called  by  lawyers  soliaio,  payment,  and  by  divines,  "  the 
righteousness  of  the  law,"  accorc'ing  Rum.  x  5.  And  we  should 
satisfy  by  another,  if  some  other  should  take  our  pUce,  as  a  surety, 
to  stisfy  for  us,  and  in  our  stead  This  would,  nevertheless,  not  ef- 
fect our  deliverance  by  itself,  but  only  by  a  favourable  permission  of 
the  divine  Judge,  who  should  admit  the  surety,  impute  our  debt  to 
him,  and  his  righteousness  to  us.  And  we  should  thus  satisfy  by 
another,  not  actively  and  indeed,  but  passively ;  inasmuch  as 
the  satisfaction  is  made  by  another  in  our  stead,  and  by  imputa- 
tion. Arid  therefore  we  cannot  say  that  believers  satisfy  properly 
by  t!ie  surety,  as  if  the  Son  of  God  were  not  a.i  absolute  surety,  cjC^ 
firomisso^'^  under  the  Old  Testament,  who  did  not  take  the  debt  upon 
himself  absolutely,  but  conditionally,  to  wit,  if  the  elect  should  not 
mak-  satisfaction  themselves,  and  that  he  left  it  on  them,  and  that 
God  did  on  this  occount  continually  charge  and  upbraid  them  with 
their  sins  ;  for  then  they  must  have  proffered  the  surety  themseves, 
and  God  would  not  have  trusted  that  his  ^on  would  certainly  satisfy  i 
neither  would  he  then  have  been  "  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
■w«rlU,"  Rev.  xiii.  8.     Neither  wcndd  the  sacritfiaes  of  the  Old  Tes- 


— 15,  HI 

tament  have  been  shadows,  which  certified,  like  sacraments,  the 
old  believers,  that  he  would  truly  take  away  sins  ;  and  they  would 
not  have  been  admitted  into  heaven,  inasmuch  as  they  were  still  sub- 
ject to  guilt.  Therefore  we  must  say  that  we  satisfy  passively  by 
another,  and  throtigh  the  gracious  imputation  of  God  ;  and  this  is 
called  by  lawyers,  satisfaction  satisfaction  ;  and  by  divines,  "  the  right- 
eousness of  the  gospel,  and  of  faith,"  according  to  Rora.  i.  16,  17-^ 
X.  6,  11;  because  the  law  knoweth  nothing  of  such  a  satisfaction,  and 
it  is  revealed  only  in  the  gospel,  and  received  by  faith,  although  the 
law  cannot  disapprove  of  it,  if  the  Lawgiver  will  admit  and  accept 
it ;  for  "  the  law  is  not  made  void  by  faith,  but  established."  Rom. 
iii.  31. 

This  satisfaction,  whether  it  be  made  by  ourselves,  or  by  another, 
must  be  a  "  full  "  satisfaction.  All  that  the  law  threatens  must  be 
suffered,  and  all  that  it  commands  must  be  obeyed  :  for  otherwise 
God  will  still  be  "  wroth  "  with  the  sinner,  "  and  deliver  him  to  the 
tormentors,  till  he  shall  pay  all  that  is  due  to  him,"  Matt,  xviii.  34. 
And  therefore  the  acceptilati*^  or  gracious  estimation  of  the  Remon- 
strants, by  which  God  would  accept  of  a  part  of  the  satisfaction, 
instead  of  the  whole,  cannot  be  admitted  here  :  for  "  the  judgment 
of  God  is  according  to  truth,"  Rom   ii.  2. 

But  can  a  satisfaction  for  a  guilty  person  by  another  be  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal  ?  The  Socinians  say,  nay,  because  humau 
tribunals  will  not  permit  an  innocent  person  to  be  punished,  and  to 
make  satisfaction,  as  a  surety  for  another  who  is  guilty  ;  but  we  con- 
ceive that  this  may  very  properly  be  admitted  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, if  the  supreme  Judge  will  graciously  permit  it ;  for  (a)  a 
surety  is  admitted  in  cases  of  debt  by  a  secular  judge.  We  may 
derive  a  proof  from  this,  because  the  Socinians  themselves  infer  from 
suretiship  for  debts,  that  grace  and  pardon  cannot  be  exercised,  if 
Christ  made  a  perfect  satisfaction,  (b)  One  man  hath  also  frequently 
been  permitted  to  become  a  surety  for  another  in  cases  of  guilt,  as 
Reuben  and  Judah  becam.e  sureties  for  Benjamin,  Gen.  xlii,  37.  xliii. 
9.  xliv.  32,  33.  See  also  Rom.  v.  7.  (c)  It  hath  appeared  from  the 
seventh  question,  that  the  sin  of  Adam,  whereby  he  became  guilty, 
was  imputed  to  us  :  why  then  cannot  our  guilt  also  be  imputed  to  a 
proper  surety  ?  (d)  It  will  appear  moreover  hereafter  that  Christ 
became  a  surety,  and  that  he  satisfied ;  and  was  therefore  admitted 
before  the  divine  tribunal,  (e)  Cannot  one  be  admitted  as  a  surety  for 
another  before  a  human  tribunal  in  case  of  guiit,  it  is  because  no 
human  judge  is  lord  of  the  life  of  another,  as  neither  is  any  man  lord 
of  his  own"  life,  so  as  to  become  a  surety  for  another  x   it  would  also 


VH  Ti^E  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

be  an  injury  to  the  community,  if  a  good  citizen  should  perish  in 
making  satisfaction  for  another,  and  the  evil  citizen  should  remain 
alive  ;  but  \ye  must  consider  matters  otherwise  before  the  divine  tri- 
bunal, since  Gr>d  is  lord  of  every  man's  life,  and  the  surety,  who  is 
required  here,  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  according:  to  the  fifteenth  ques- 
tion :  he  can  also  deliver  himself  from  death,  and  can  reforii*  and 
sanctify  the  abominab'e  sinner,  and  so  the  kingdom  of  God  will  not 
be  injured,  but  profited  by  his  death. 

But  would  not  God  then  recede  from  his  right,  contraty  to  what 
hath  been  ta'ight  before  ?  no,  for  God's  right  would  be  satisfied,  and 
there  would  only  be  a  gracious  translation,  by  which  God's  right,  and 
the  guilt  of  the  sinner  would  be  transferred  from  the  sinner  to  the 
^^rety,  which  was  also  done,  according  to  Rom.  iii.  20,  21.  viii.  3, 
4.  2  Cor.  V.  21. 

If  the  sinner  could  now  make  full  satisfaction  by  himself,  or  by 
another    he  would  be  delivered  ;  but  it  is  certain,  that  he  cannot 
satisfy  by  himself.     The  Papists  imagine,  "  that  we  can  make  a  par- 
tial satisfaction  by  ourselves.,  if  we  do  not  daily  increase  our  debt  by 
adding  sm  to  sin."     They  distinguish  between  an  equivalent   satis- 
faction, which  we  cannot  make  by  ourselves,  and  between  an  imper- 
fect satisfaction,  which  should  nevertheless  be  sufficient,  because  God 
should  forgive  sins  in  consequence  of  it  with  a  certain  fitness.     Wc 
can  effect  this  imperfect  satisfaction  by  many  good  works  and  suffer- 
ings, in  and  after  this  life,  according  to  the  Romanists  ;  but  the  word 
of  God  doth  not  acknowledge  an  imperfect  satisfaction,  but  only  a 
perfect  one,  and  "  man  cannot  answer  God  one       a  thousand,  whea 
he  contends  with  him,"  and  demands  satisfaction,  according  to  Job 
X.  2,  3,  Psalm  cxxx.  3.  and  besides  this  we  say,  (a)  that  the  price  of 
the  redemption  necessary  for  a  satisfaction  is  too  precious  for  a  man 
to  pay  it ;  "  he  owes  ten  thousand  talents,"  perfect  obedience  and 
«ternal  punishment,  and  "  he  hath  nothing  wherewith  to  pay»"  Matt, 
xvii.  24,  25.  (b)  <'  We  also  increase  our  debt  daily."     This  is  done 
not  only  by  those,  who  are  uncommonly  wicked,   as  the  spiritual 
**  Babylon,  whose  sins,"  heaped  one  upon  another,    "  reach  unto 
heaven,"  Rev.  xviii.  5,  but  by  all  other  men,  who  are  still  under  a 
broken  covenant  of  works,  of  which  the  instructor  speaks  here,  <^  hav- 
ing, according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  G©d,  deserved  temporal 
and  eternal  punishments."  Sec  how  they  are  exhibited  in  their  com- 
plicated iniquities,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 19.     Believers  themselves  do  all 
offend  in  many  instances,  James  iii'  2.  See  also    1  Kings  viii.  46. 
Rev.  XX.  9.  Eccl.  vii.  20.  (c)  Let  us  admit,  that  we  should  hencefor- 
ward be  perfectly  holy  and  sinless,  wc  could  not  thereby  atone  for 
our  past  guilt,  because  we  owe  this  both  at  present  and  in  future, 


V.  tORD'S  DAY,  Q.  12—15,  112 

and  are  thus  unprofitable  servants,  Luke  xviii.  10,  and  therefore  our 
former  debt  would  remain  unpaid,  and  we  have  nothing  wherewith 
to  satisfy  for  it. 

But  "  can  there  not  be  found  any  where  one,  v/ho  is  a  mere  crea- 
ture, able  to  satisfy  for  us  ?"  If  a  mere  creature  should  satisfy  for  us, 
he  behooved  to  be  either  a  rational,  or  an  irrational  creature.  A  ra- 
tional creature  is  either  a  mere  man,  or  an  angel ;  but  no  mere  man, 
who  is  not  more  than  a  man,  can  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for 
another.  For,  (1)  no  man  is  lord  of  his  own  life,  and  hath  therefore 
no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  another,  in  order  to  bear  his  guilt : 
therefore  God  also  rejected  the  proffer  of  Moses,  "  that  he  would  be 
blotted  out  of  the  book  of  God  for  the  people,"  Exod.  xxxii.  30 — 35, 

(2)  That  ^Vhich  a  man  would  be  willing  to  do  for  another,  he  oweth 
for  himself;  for  "  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,"  Gal.  vi.  5. 

(3)  A  man  cannot  satisfy  for  himself,  as  we  have  shown  before ; 
how  shall  he  then  satisfy  for  another  ?  (4)  He  who  should  satisfy 
for  another,  would  be  obliged  to  render  that  other,  by  an  almighty 
and  heart-changing  grace,  a  partaker  of  his  satisfaction  and  righteous- 
ness, if  it  should  be  profitable  to  him.  Now  no  mere  man  can  do 
this  :  he  can  at  most  only  "  plant  and  water  ;  but  God  giveth  the 
increase,"  I  Cor,  iii.  4,  5.  (5)  Yea,  if  a  mere  man  were  even  able  tc 
do  this,  he  would  not  be  deemed  worthy  to  do  it,  because  those  who 
were  delivered  by  him,  would  be  obliged  to  offer  him  the  divine 
honours  of  faith^  love,  hope,  fear  and  worship,  since  he  would  truly 
have  merited  such  honours  of  them  -  but  no  mere  man  may  be  hon- 
oured thus.  See  Isaiah  xliv,  2  1 — 25.  Jer.  xvii,  5 — 8.  (6)  Add  to  this, 
that  "no  mere  man  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  wrath,  so  as  to 
deliver  others  from  it."  Trulv  the  wrath  of  God  is  dreadful  and  in- 
supportable :  hear  what  an  eminently  holy  man  saith  of  it,  "  Thou, 
even  thou  art  to  be  feared,  and  who  may  stand  in  thy  sight,  when 
once  thou  art  angry  ?"  Psalm  Ixxvi.  7.  xc.  11.  And  therefore  "  none 
can  by  any  means  redeem  liis  brother,  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for 
him  ;  for  the  redemption  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  it  ceaseth  for 
ever,"  Psalm  xhx.  7,  8. 

Say  not,  could  not  God  create  a  new  man,  who  should  be  perfectly 
holy,  and  endue  him  with  such  strength,  that  he  would  be  able  to 
satisfy,  to  sustain  his  wrath,  and  effectually  apply  his  righteousness 
to  another :  for  thou  shouldest  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  this, 
since  no  such  man  can  proceed  from  the  corrupt  posterity  of  Adam, 
nor  love  the  sinner  as  his  neighbour,  and  thus  sa^sfy  the  demand  of 
tbe  law  :  moreover  no  man  is  capable  -tof  such  power,  inasmuch  a* 

T 


114  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 

it  is  an  almig^hty  power,  since  he  would  then  be  God,  and  no  longef 
a  creature,  which  is  impossible. 

An  anj^el,  aU)iou5:h  he  excells  in  strength,  and  can  slay  a  wholtJ 
army  of  a  hundred  fourscore  and  five  thousand  n^en,  cannot  satisfy 
for  a  sinner  ,  for  an  anc^el  hath  no  right  to  become  a  surety  for  the 
sinner,  and  he  would  not  be  able  to  apply  tlie  rir!;htcov,snes8  procu- 
red bv  him,  and  would  not  be  worthy  to  bt  adn'itteci  lo  such  an  hon- 
ourable work ;  and  besides  this.  "  God  will  not  punish  any  other 
creatur'*"  but  man,  "  fo"  the  sin  whirh  man  bath  committed,"  be- 
cause no  an^el  can  sufter  tne  iiUman  punishment  of  death,  so  as  to 
satisfv  the  demand  of  the  hiW,  nor  love  his  ici2:hbonr  as  h'msclf, 
sinc^  he  is  not  a  neighbour  of  man.  "  Moreover^  no  mere  creature" 
■(as  an  angel  is)  '^  can  sustain  the  burden  of  God's  eternal  wrath,  so 
as  to  deliver  others  therefrom."  The  glorious  angers  cannot  endure 
even  the  bright  lustre  of  the  most  holy  countenance  of  God  :  they 
must  hide  and  cover  themselves  before  it,  Isaiah  vi.  2,  3  *'  The 
devils,"  though  exceedingly  mi,a;hty  and  dreadful,  *'  tremble  before 
the  one  only  God,'*  James  iii.  19.  How  earnestly  "do  they  pray, 
that  they  may  not  be  tormented  before  the  time,  and  be  sent  away 
into  the  deep  !"  Luke  viii.  27 — 31. 

Cannot  a  satisfaction  be  made  by  any  rational  creature,  perhaps 
irrational  creatures,  either  living  or  dead,  may  effect  something,  if 
we  offer  them  up  to  God  for  an  atonement.  This  was  the  opinion, 
not  only  of  the  blind  heathens,  but  also  of  the  carnal  Jews  who 
sought  their  righteousness  by  keeping  the  moral  law,  and  when  they 
were  guilty  of  sinning  in  one  instance  or  another,  imagined  that  they 
should  be  able  to  atone  for  their  sins  by  bringing  this  or  that  gift  for 
a  sacrifice.  This  notion  was  also  somewhat  specious,  since  God  him- 
self had  enjoined  by  the  ceremonial  law,  the  sacrificial  service  of  sin 
offerings,  trespass  offerings,  and  sacrifices  of  atonement ;  but  this  is  a 
false  pretence.  The  justice  of  God  cannot  be  satisfied  by  any  sacri- 
ficial service  :  "  for  it  is  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  should  take  away  sin,"  Heb.  x.  4*  There  is  no  proportion  be- 
tween irrational  or  inanimate  sacrifices,  and  the  guilt  of  the  soul : 
God  doth  not  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  nor  drink  the  blood  of  goats," 
Psalm,  1  11.  When  the  Jews  would  appease  God  by  their  sacri- 
ficing, he  then  said,  that  "  he  had  not  required  this  at  their  hands,'* 
Jer.  vii.  21,  22,  and  he  rejected  it,  Isaiah  i.  13.  Jer.  vi.  20.  Micha  vi. 
6,  7,  8.  When  he  demands  a  satisfaction,  he  then  refiiseth  the  sac- 
rificial service,  and  he  substitutes  a  more  perfect  service  in  the  stead 
of  it.  See  Heb.  x.  1 — 9,  Did  Ciod  himself  enjoin  sacrifices  for  atone- 
Tsient,  it  was  however  not  done  in  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  in 


—15.  115 

©rder  that  men  might  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  in- 
to favour  ;  but  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  was  estabUshed  with 
Israel,  Exod.  xix.  which  supposeth  a  satisfaction  by  a  sufficient  sure- 
ty. And  thus,  all  those  offerings,  enjoined  by  the  church-law  of 
Israel,  did  not  serve  to  effect  a  real  satisfaction  and  atonement ;  but 
to  shadow  forth  and  to  prefigure  the  Surety,  and  his  satisfying  sacri- 
fice, that  the  covenant  people  of  the  Old  Testament  might  look 
through  all  that  outward  service  to  him,  and  seek  in  his  perfect  sac- 
rifice, the  real  atonement.  And  thus,  *'  the  law  of  sacrifices  had  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image  of  the 
things,"  Hcb.  x.  1. 

Therefore  the  sinner  cannot  have  a  hope  of  effecting  a  satisfaction 
either  by  himself,  or  by  any  mere  creature,  in  order  that  he  may  es- 
cape punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour.     Is  there  then 
no  door  of  hope  open  for  him  ?     There  is  none,  unless   he  can  find 
a  sufficient  mediator  and  deliverer.     He  must  indeed  have  a  media- 
tor between  God  and  himself,  to  deliver  him  ;  not  only  a  mediator  of 
advocacy  and  intercession,  for  a  mere  creature  could  be  such  a  me- 
diator :    Moses  was  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  Exod.  xxxii. 
Deut.  v.  5,  but  the  sinner  must  have  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  who 
can  dehver  him  from  his   guilt,  and  satisfy   the  justice  of  God  for 
him  by  a  sufficient  ransom  ;  and  therefore  he  must  have  '•  a  medi- 
ator for  the  redempi  ion  of  transgressions."     Heb.  ix.  15.     But  who, 
who  in  heaven  or  on  earth  is  worthy  or  able  to  be  such  a  mediator  ? 
The  instructer  saith,  he  must  have  four  great  qualifications.     Ques- 
tion 15.  (a)   **  Ihat  he  must  be  very  man,"   who  hath  a  human  soul 
with  a  human  body,  and  particularly  of  a  human  being,  and  so  he 
must  be  man  of  man.  (b)  "  That  he  must  be  a  righteous  man,"  one 
who  is  perfectly  righteous  and  holy,  agreeably  to  the  demand  of  the 
law,  (c)  "  And,  nevertheless,  more  perfect  than  all  creatures  ;  that  is, 
one  who  is  very  God. "(d)    He  must  also  be  God  and  man  in  one  per- 
son ;  therefore  our  catechism  saith,  who  is    "  also"  very  God  ;  and 
in  the  Latin  catechism  we  read,  qui  simul  etiam  sit  verus  Deus^  "  who 
is  withal,  or  at  the  same  time  also  very  God."     Why  the  mediator 
must  have  these  four  qualifications,  the  instructor  will  teach  us  here- 
after. Question  16,  17  ;  and  so  the  sinner  is  still  kept  under  his  con- 
cern  to  know  how  he  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received 
into  favour,  that  his  distress  may  be  perfect,  and  he  may  be  the  more 
capable  of  a  complete  consolation. 


116  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  how  shall  ye  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punish- 
ment, which  ye  have  deserved  according  lo  the  righteous  judgment 
o(  God,  and  be  again  received  into  favour  ?  Many  do  not  even  think 
of  this,  at  least  many  of  yx3U  are  not  concerned  about  it ;  '•  the  lust 
Of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,  whoredom, 
wine  and  new  wine  take  av/ay  their  hearts,"  1  John  ii.  16.  Hosea 
iv.  11.  Or  the  cares  and  business  of  this  life,  render  them  careless 
and  unconcerned  about  their  eternal  welfare,  and  suffer  them  not  to 
l>onder  seriously  upon  their  eternal  salvation.  But  hear,  voluptuous 
and  poor  worldling,  whose  *^  end  is  destruction?  is  not  thine,  whose 
Cod  is  tliy  be'ly,  whose  glory  is  in  thy  shame,  and  who  mindest 
earthly  things,"     Phil.  iii.  19^ 

Some  think  it  is  unnecessary  to  be  solicitous  about  their  eternal 
salvation.  Is  there  any  person  who  is  afraid  of  eternal  perdition, 
presently  another  will  scoff  at  him,  as  if  such  a  fearful  person  were 
silly  and  disordered  in  his  understanding.  Hath  such  a  reviler  of 
good  things  any  compassion  Vt'ith  such  a  sorrowful  person  :  how 
will  he  bestir  himself  to  discourse  with  him,  in  order  to  dispel  his 
anxiety  1  he  will  at  least  take  care  that  he  doth  not  himself  become 
so  melancholic  ;  he  thinks  ihat  if  he  should,  he  would  despair,  and 
he  doth  not  intend  to  listen  so  much  to  the  devil,  as  if  that  conviction 
were  a  work  of  the  devil,  and  not  of  "  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  convin- 
cet*}  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment,"  John 
xvi.  8.  Christ,  he  thinkb,  hath  died  for  our  sins,  and  this  he  wili 
believe  firmly,  without  doubting  ;  and  he  imagineth  that  such 
sorrow  doth  not  agree  with  the  joyful  season  of  the  New  Testament, 
But,  inendo  ye  who  i^ardtn  and  deceive  your  hearts  in  this  careless 
manner,  how  can  ye  so  i-ely  upon,  and  be  so  assured  of  an  interest 
in  the  salisfa  tion  of  Christ,  which  he  hath  accomplished  ?  Doth  it 
belong  to  all  men  ?  to  you  also  ?  must,  and  can  ye  believe  this  with- 
out ever  having  been  concerned  about  your  woful  misery  ?  and  do 
ye  think,  that  under  the  New  Testament  we  must  not  have  any 
'  godly  sorrow,  which  worketh  repentance  not  to  be  repented  ofj" 
'  oiiiraiy  to  2  Cor.  vii.  8 — 1 1,  Surely  none  but  "  those  who  mourn, 
arc  comforted  and  blessed,"  Mat.  v.  4.  Do  ye  say,  we  repent  in- 
f'.eed  of  our  sins  ?  is  it  indeed  true,  and  not  merely  a  vain  assertion  r 
iire  ye  ever  affected  with  concern,  distress,  and  a  restless,  earnest 
desire  to  escyj.'i  iht-  :  ust  !ved  p'..n»shment,  and  to  be  again  received 
.'ito  favour  ?  Suui  and  Jndas  said  also,    "  I  have  sinned,"     I  Sam- 


]2— 15, 
svi.  24— Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4  ;  but  Ihey  both  «  died  in  their  iniquity/' 
yea,  they  murdered  themselves.  1  Chron  x.  13 — 1:5am.  xxxi.*4. 
— .Matt,  xxvii.  5. 

OtWers  experience  severe  twinges  of  conscience,  and  are  accord- 
ingly fearful,  when  with  *'  Felix,  they  hear  of  righteousness,  tem- 
perance, and  the  judgment  to  come  ;"  Acts  xxiv.  25  ;  but  they  do 
not  earnestly  inquire  after  the  way  which  is  above,  to  depart  from 
hell  beneath  ;  for  one  endeavours  to  divert  his  anxiety  by  business  or 
amusement,  or  by  hardening  and  barring  .up  his  heart,  that  the 
anguish  of  his  heart  may  not  be  too  much  enlarged,  or  by  turning 
away  his  ear  from  hearing  severe  preaching,  which  would  convince 
him.  Paul,  who  preaches  so  seserely,  and  who  goads  so  sharply, 
must  then  "go  his  way."  Acts  xxiv.  25.  Another  gives  up  all 
hope,  and  thinks,  how  can  I  help  it,  if  God  will  not  receive  me  gra- 
ciously ?  and  he  abandons  himself  to  his  careless  sinfulness,  or  sin- 
ful carelessness.  "  This  evil,"  saith  he,  "  is  of  the  Lord,  what  should 
I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer  ?"  2  Kings  vi.  33.  A  third  will 
convert  himself,  he  intends  and  promises  it,  he  will  not  commit  this 
and  that  sin  any  more  ;  he  will  serve  God  better,  and  attend  public 
worship  more  dihgently  than  he  used  ;  and  he  will  offer  this  to  God 
as  a  payment,  at  least  in  part ;  and  he  hopes  that  God  will  remit 
the  rest  of  what  he  oweth  :  but  his  promise  is  generally  empty 
words,  without  effect :  when  his  distress  is  over,  his  promise  is  also 
puffed  away  by  the  least  blast  of  concupiscence.  Doth  he  conduct 
:n  some  measure  as  he  proposed,  by  forsaking  a  few  sins,  and  doing 
a  little  good,  he  is  then  perfer  lly  easy,  and  trows  that  he  is  already  a 
great  saint,  and  a  dearly  beloved  child  of  God.  .And  a  fourth  quiets 
himself  with  the  calamities  which  he  suffers  in  this  world  ;  he  hopes, 
and  it  is  his  comfort  in  his  sorrow,  that  his  present  misery  will  con- 
stitute the  full  measure  of  his  sufferings,  and  that  he  will  not  be  obli- 
-ged  to  suffer  any  more  hereafter  ;  as  if  his  *uiFerings  were  a  satis- 
faction to  the  justice  of  God,  and  not  the  beginning  of  his  sorrows, 
atid  so  "  he  doth  not  say,  there  is  no  liope :  he  finds  the  life  of  his 
hand,  and  is  not  grieved."     Isaiah  Ivii.  10. 

"  Hear  this,  O  foolish  people,  and  without  understanding,  who 
have  eyes,  but  see  not ;  who  have  ears,  but  hear  not."  Jer.  v.  21. 
1  speak  to  you,  who  have  not  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
welfare,  and  to  you  also,  who  consider  all  distress  on  account  of  your 
wicked  condition  to  be  unnecessary :  to  you  also,  who  deceive  your- 
selves with  vain  and  false  imaginations,  and  hush  in  such  a  careless 
manner,  your  awakened  conscience  Knov/  that  ye  will  not  by  these 
means  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  nor  return    again 


tit  THE  NECESSITY  OF  A  SATISFACTION^. 

into  favour,  for  "  God  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  Exod» 
xxxiv.  7.  Do  you  think  to  harden  your  hearts  against  the  Lord, 
and  to  have  peace  f  God  is  able  to  trouble  you.  See  how  he 
dashed  in  pieces  the  hardened  Israelites  :  "  Therefore,"  saith  he, 
Hosea  xiii.  7,  8,  *'  I  will  be  unto  them  as  a  lion ;  as  a  leopard  by 
the  way  will  I  observe  them.  I  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  that  is  be- 
reaved  of  her  whelps,  and  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there 
will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion  ;  the  wild  beast  shall  tear  them."  Ob- 
serve how  he  troubled  the  proud  Belshazzar,  "  his  countenance  was 
changed,  and  his  thoughts  troubled  him  ;  the  joints  of  his  loins  were 
loosed,  and  his  kness  smote  one  against  another  "  Dan.  v.  6.  Ye 
know  how  Cain  fared,  when  he  would  conceal  his  brother-slaughter. 
Gen  iv.  9 — 13.  Judas  sought  to  hide  his  abominable  deed  with  a 
kiss  ;  but  how  did  his  conscience  awake  and  terrify  him,  and  with 
what  fury  did  it  attack  him !  Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4,  5,  6  ;  do  ye  hope 
that  ye  will  not  fare  so  ill,  because  ye  are  not  the  worst  sinners  ;  be- 
cause ye  intend  to  conduct  better  hereafter  than  ye  have  heretofore  ; 
because  ye  must  suffer  so  much  at  present  ?  Do  ye  think  then  with 
the  Papists,  that  your  doings  and  sufferings  will  cancel  your  debt, 
and  merit  the  grace  of  (iod  ?  doth  not  God  require  that  his  justice 
should  be  satisfied  ?  and  must  ye  not  pay  fully,  either  by  youi-selves, 
or  by  another  ?  Do  ye  know  how  to  deliver  yourselves  by  a  few 
outward  ceremonies,  and  by  suffering  a  few  afflictions,  and  then  "  ex- 
acting all  your  labours  "  Isaiah  Iviii.  2,  3.  Therefore,  *'  awake  yc 
who  sleep,  and  arise  from  the  dead."  Eph.  v.  14.  "  God  will  punish 
the  men  who  are  settled  on  their  lees  "  Zeph,  i.  12.  *'  Rise  up,  ye 
women  that  are  at  ease ;  hear  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give 
ear  unto  my  speech.  Tremble,  ye  women  that  are  at  ease ;  be 
troubled,  ye  careless  ones ;  strip  ye,  make  ye  bare,  and  gird  sack- 
cloth upon  your  loins."  Isaiah  xxxii.  9.  Or  do  ye  think  it  is  need- 
less for  you  to  be  concerned  and  distressed  about  your  eternal  condi- 
tion ?  Doth  not  God  then  threaten  *•  a  wo  to  those  who  are  at  ease 
in  Zion,  and  careless  m  the  mountains  of  Samaria?"  Amos  vi,  1. 
Is  not  your  misery,  your  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  which  ye 
have  deserved,  according  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  griev- 
ous enough  to  affect  you  with  the  greatest  concern  ?  can  ye  deliver 
yourselves,  and  satisfy  the  justice  of  God,  either  by  your  own  suffeiv 
ings  and  doings,  or  by  those  of  another  creature  '  will  ye  not  be 
wholly  at  a  loss  here  ?  How  v/ill  a  sinner  deny  all  his  own  righteous- 
ness, and  6eek  the  righteousness  of  another,  unless  he  be  perfectly 
stripped  and  bare  ? 
f»  Will  yc  therefore  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into- 


—15.  H^ 

favour:  (!)•  Entertain  a  greater  concern  about  your  salvation  and 
damnation  than   ye  have  had  heretofore.     Will  ye  value  .ind  bestit 
yoiirbclves  so  for  your  body,  your  food  and  clothing,  and  neglect  from 
mere  iibikssness,  your  noble  souls,  and  be  so  careless  of  them?  Oh 
detestable  madness  1  ye  will  strive  to   pass  with  honour  through  the 
world,  but  are  unconctrneu  i.cv/  it  will  fare  with   you,  after  ye  are 
througn  tiie  world  1  How  will  ye  btmoan  yourselves,  and  say  when 
it  IS  too  late,  "  How  have  J  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised 
reproo*',    and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined 
mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  ?"  Prov.  v,  12,  13.    What  will 
ye  then  have  of  all  these  earthly  goods,  for  which  ye  consume  both 
your  bodies  and  souls  in  so  many  difficult  occupations  ?  '  for  what 
doth  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,   and  lose  his  own 
soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?"  Matt, 
xvi.  26.  Therefore  value,  and  bestir  yourselves  more  for  the  welfare 
of  you;  souls,  and  *^  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  you,"  Matt.  vi.  33  (2) 
Impress  it  upon  your  minds,  that  all  your  own  doings,  as  long  as  ye 
are  not  received  into  favour,  will  not  avail  to  escape  punishment,  that 
ye  may  look  off  from  them  altogether,  and  may  be  wholly  at  a  loss 
and  confounded  in  yourselves.     All  your  own  works,  how  much 
soever  ye  bestir  yourselves,  are  but  "  a  vain  oblation,"  Isaiah  i.  12. 
Ye  must  be  first  received  into  favour  through  the  perfect  satisfaction 
of  another^  if  what  ye  do  shall  be  acceptable  to  God.     "  The  sacri- 
fice of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  :  but  the  prayer  of 
the  upright  is  his  delight,"  Pror.  xv.  8.     "  The  Lord   had  respect 
first  to  Abel  and   then  to  his  offering  ;  but  when  he  hath  no  respect 
unto  Cain,  he  is  not  pleased  with  his  offeiing  neither,"   Gen.  iv.  3, 
4,  5.  (3)  Is  there  any  one  among  us,  who  is  thoroughly  anxious,  and 
desirous  of  escaping  the  punishment,  which  he  hath  deserved,  and 
of  being  again  received  into  favour,  and   doth  he  cry  out  with  the 
Igaoler,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  xvi.  CO,  let  him  know, 
that  God  hath  demanded  the  satisfaction  at  the  hands  of  his  Son,  and 
that  he   hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  for  our  guilt,  even  to  the 
uttermost  farthing,  that  God  proffereth  his  Son  to  him,  and  that  he 
must  accept  of  him  upon  this  offer,  and  choose  him  for  himself:  for 
**  God  hath  set  his  Son   forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith,  in 
his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Kom   iii.  25-  See  also  Isaiah 
xxvii.  4,   5,  and  chap.  xlv.  22,  24,   and  what  will  be  said  upon  the 
sixth  and  seventh  Lord's  day.  (4)  Believers,  who  have  betaken  your- 
selves to  the  Mediator  c-nd  Deliverer,  and  have  denied  all,  yea,  even 
your  best  performan<jcs  and  all  your  outward  privilegesj  and  "  count- 


kiO  THE  NECESSITY  O^  A  SATISFACTION. 

cd  them  but  loss  and  dunp;,  that  ye  might  be  found  in  Christ,  atid 
have  his  righteousness  through  faith,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  4 — 10, 
behold  your  happiness,  wonder  and  rejoice,  yea,  praise  the  Lord, 
that  ye  have  escaped  punishment,  and  are  again  received  into  favour, 
and  that  through  the  suffering  and  obedience  of  the  great  Mediator 
and  Deliverer,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  following  Lord's  days  will 
urge  you  to  this  more  particularly.  (5)  Let  all  those,  who  have  the 
cstre  ot"  souls,  take  heed  that  they  lead  sinners  in  and  according  to 
this  sure  way  to  Christ.  To  comfort  sinners  in  general,  while  they 
ire  unconcerned,  and  do  not  mourn,  and  to  apply  the  promises  to 
them  without  distinction,  and  without  taking  the  precious  from  the 
vile  ;  or  to  direct  poor  and  concerned  souls  only  to  certain  legal  ob- 
servances ;  or  to  deal  harshly  with  them,  and  oppose  them,  this  is 
''  making  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies,  and  strengthening 
the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  not  turn  from  his  wicked 
way  and  live  ;"  which  God  will  punish  with  severity,  according:  to 
Ezek.  xiii.  Spiritual  guides  must  endeavour  to  convince  sinners  of 
their  guilt,  and  awaken  them  to  concern,  they  ought  not  to  comfort 
them  hastily,  but  should  urge  them  to  '^  the  Lord  our  righteousness,'" 
that  they  may  escape  the  deserved  punishment,  and  be  again  receiv- 
ed into  favour.  This  is  the  way,  in  which  the  instructor  leads  souls^ 
and  he  doth  it  after  the  example  of  Paul  and  his  fellow  labourers : 
"  We  knowing,"  saith  he,  2  Cor  v.  11."  the  terrour  of  the  Lord,  per- 
suade men."  Thus  we  should  deliver  our  own  souls,  **  save  our= 
selves,  and  them  that  hear  us,"  1  Tim.  iv.  16.  "  We  should  justify 
many,"  afford  a  ♦veil-grounded  consolation  to  souls,  their  sanctifica- 
tion  would  be  real  and  3/angehcal,  and  "we  should  shine  as  the 
brightness  of  the  feriRament,  and  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever/' 
\men. 
CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 


VI.  LORD'S  DAYo 


Heb.  vii.  25 — 28.  Wherefore  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost,  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  For  such  a  high  priest  became  uSj 
who  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separated  from  sinners,  and  made 
higher  than  the  heavens ;  who  ncedcth  not  daily,  as  those  high 
priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's ;  for  this  he  did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself. 
For  the  law  maketh  men  high  priests  which  have  infirmity  ;  but 
the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh  the  Son^ 
who  is  consecrated  for  e\er  more.