Q.   16.    Why  must  he  be  very  man^  and  also  jierfecily  righteous  ? 

A.  Because  the  justice  of  God  requires  that  the  same  human 
xiature,  which  bath  sinned,  should  likewise  make  satisfation  for  sin  5 
and  one  who  is  himself  a  sinner  cannot  satisfy  for  others, 

Q.    17.    Why  must  he  in  one  person  be  also  very  God  ? 

A.  That  he  might,  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead,  sustain  in  his 
human  nature,  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  ;  and  might  obtain  for, 
and  restore  to  us,  righteousness  and  Ife. 

Q.  18.  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  ivho  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ? 

A.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom? 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption." 

Q.   19.    Whence  knoivest  thou  this? 

A.  From  the  holy  gospel,  which  God  himself  revealed  first  in 
Paradise  ;  and  afterwards  published  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets, 
and  Was  pleased  to  represent  it,  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  the 
"Dther  ceremonies  of  the  law ;  and  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his 

^nly  begotten  Son- 

TT 


122  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL 

VV  -1  ^T  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
Qesli,  Gofi  sendin^j  his  own  Son,  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and 
for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fuliilled  in  us."  Thus  speaks  Paul,  Horn.  viii.  3,  4.  The 
law  cannot  justify  the  sinner.  Ciod  did  indeed  give  the  hw  to  man- 
kind before  the  fall,  that  they  might  obtain  righteousness  and  life 
by  keeping  it  perfectly,  and  it  would  thus  have  been  possible  for  the 
law  to  justify  man  :  "  For  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  the  law,  saith,  The  man  which  doth  these  things  shall  live  by 
them,"  Rom.  x.  5.  But  the  law  cannot  do  this  now,  since  it  is  be- 
come weak  through  sin  and  the  flesh  ;  it  hath  now  only  a  power  to 
curse  and  condemn  the  sinner,  according  to  the  divine  threatening, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;"  and  therefore  "  they 
who  aie  of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10, 
and  so  <•  the  law  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  declareth  that 
"  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii.  19.  If  the  sinner 
shall  then  be  justified,  the  righteousness  of  the  law  must  be  fulfilled 
in  him  by  a  sufficient  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  expressed  in 
the  law  ;  for  '•  Zion  must  be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her  con- 
verts with  righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  27,  aAd  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  must 
be  exalted  in  judgment,  and  God,  who  is  holy,  must  be  sanctified  ia 
righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  16.  The  demand,  which  the  law  of  God 
makes  against  the  sinner,  requiring  that  he  sihould  be  punished, 
cannot  be  refused,  inasmuch  as  the  law  contains  the  sentence  of  curs- 
ing, denounced  by  God.  But  who,  yea,  who  is  able  to  satisfy  this 
righteous  demand  of  the  law  ?  the  sinner  himself  cannot ;  for  he  in- 
creaseth  his  debt  daily  :  no  other  creature  can,  because  he  cannot 
sustain  the  burthen  of  God's  eternal  wrath.  If  any  one  shall  be  « 
worthy  and  able  to  do  this,  he  must  be  very  man  and  righteous,  and 
also  God  and  man  in  one  person,  according  to  what  the  foregoing 
Lord's  dav  hath  taught  us  from  the  word  of  God,  and  for  which  solid 
reasons  are  R:iven  in  this  Lord's  day.  Question  16,  17,  and  in  which 
it  is  shown,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  mediator  and  deliv- 
erer, Question  18,  and  that  this  is  made  known  in  the  gospel,  Ques- 
tion 19,  that  the  sinner,  being  concerned,  and  desirous  of  deliverance, 
may  obtain  perfect  satisfaction  and  comfort. 

There  are  three  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  otir 
consideration  : 

I.  Why  the  mediator  must  be  a  real  and  righteous  man  and  God 
in  one  person,  Question  16,  17» 


Vr.  LORD'S  rXAY,  Q.  16-19.  12S 

II.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  Ques^ 
tion  18. 

III.  And  that  we  loiow  this  from  the  gospel,  Question  19. 

I.  The  person  who.  shall  be  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  eught,  in 
the  first  place,  to  be  very  man ;  •'  because  the  justice  of  God  requires 
that  the  human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  likewise  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin  ;"  or,  as  the  Latin  catechism  expresseth  it,  Ut  cadem 
natura  humajia^  qua  fiecavit^  ifisa  firo  fieccato  defi€)ida.t  ;  "  that  the  same 
human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  make  satisfaction  for  sin." 
The  justice  of  God  requires  s.uisfliction  of  the  sinner  himself  ;  but  if 
God  will,  by  a  special  kindness,  transfer  his  demand  to  a  surety,  that 
surely  must  be  of  the  same  nature  with  the  sinner,  in  order  to  be* 
some  his  surety.     Therefore   Paul  saith,  Heb.  ii.  11,   *'  For  both  he 
that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctifkd,  are  all  of  one  :  for  which 
cause  he  is.  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."    And  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  which  he  hath   expressed  in  his  law,  demands  this  ; 
for  it  demands  that   "  man   should  love  his  nei^•hbour  as  himself." 
Luke    X.   27,28,     And   if  he   do  pot,    <' that  he  should  die."    Rom; 
i.  32.     If  the  mediator  should  then  saiisty  the  justice  of  God,  accor- 
ding: to  the  demand  of  the  law,  he  must  be  "  made  under  the   law,'* 
which  was  given  to  man  ;  "  that  he  may   redeem  him  who  was  un- 
der the  law,"^    Gal.  iv.  4,  5.     He  must  then  also  be  the  neighbour 
of  man,  and  so  "  of  one  blood  with  him ,"     Acts  xvii,  26.     And  **  by 
the  grace  of  God  must  taste  death,"  (or  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body)  "for  every  man,"    Heb.  \u  9« 

1  or  this  reason,  God  also,  foretold  that  the  Mediator  ^nd  Deliverer 
should  be  very  man  ;  for  he  promised  hira  formerly,  as  "  the  ^ecd 
of  the  woman  i"  Gen.  iii.  15  :  and  as  ''  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Is£lac, 
and  Jacob ;"  Gen.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  xxviii,  14  ;  and  that  "  he  should 
be  the  fruit  of  the  body  of  David,"  Psalm  exxxii.  1 1 .  This  was  also 
typified  under  the  Old  Testament  by  the  redeemers,  and  by  the  high 
priests :  the  Lord  had  enjoined,  that  he  who  was  the  nearest  kins- 
man, the  Goel^  should  be  the  person,  who  should  redeem  the  mortga- 
ged inheritance  of  another,  or  his  person,  if  he  were  imprisoned  for 
debt,  or  sold  for  a  slave,  and  that  he  should  be  the  avenger  of  his 
blood.  Lev.  XXV.  25:  Ruth  ii.  20,  iii.  12,  13.  iv.  1 — 10  Numb. 
XXXV.  19,21,24,25,27'  He  then,  who  shall  be  the  sinner's  re- 
deemer, must  also  be  his  kinsman,  and  therefore  the  Mediator  is  cal- 
led the  G&ri,  the  kinsman  and  *' Redeemer,  who  should  come  to 
Zion,"  Isaiah  hx.  20.  Paul,  having  respect  to  this,  saith  of  the  Me- 
diator and  Deliverer,  Heb.  ii.  14,  15,  16."  For  as  much  then,  as 
"he  children  are  partakers  of  fl^sh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  like- 


i24  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

wise  took  part  of  the  same  ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy 

him  ti^at  hud  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ;  and  deliver  them 
who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  the  r  lifetime  subject  to  bondage. 
"  For  veriljr  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  he  took 
on  him   the  seed  of  Abraham."     This  was  also  typified  by  the  high 
priests      '*  For  e  ery  high  pnest,  taken  froni  among  men,  is  ordain- 
ed for  men  ia  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts 
^nd  sacrifices  for  sins :  who  can   have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  ;   for  that  he  himself  is  also 
<:ompassed   with  infirmity,"      Heb.  v.    1,  2.      Therefore  the  true 
Higii  Priest  behooved  also  to  be  very  man,  in  order  that  he  might  of- 
fer a  perfect  sacrifice  for  sins,  and  have  suitable  compassion.     Let 
us  hear  the  same  apostle  again  ;  he  saith,  Heb.  li.  17,  18,  "Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be  made  like  his  brethren  ;  that 
he  mi'^ht  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining 
unto  G  )d,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sin  of  the  people  :  for   in 
that  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  tosuccorr  them 
that  are  tempted.     The  mediator  and  deliverer   must  not  only  be 
very  man,  bnt  also  a  perfectly  holy  man  ;  "  because  man  being  him- 
self a  sinner,  cnnnot  satisty  for  others  ;"  for  he  would  then  be    obli- 
ged to  satisfy  for  himself,  and  nevertheless  not  be    able,    much    less 
then  for  another,  as  hath   been  shown  on   a  foregoing   Lord's   day. 
He  must  then  be  a  "  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  high  priest,  who 
needeth  not  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's,"  as  the  text  speaks.     This  was   also  foretold  of  old ; 
the     'ediitor  and  Deliverer  should  be  "the  Holy  One."  Psalm  xvi. 
10.     *'  He  should  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  and  his  kw  should 
]be  within  liis  heart,"   Psalm  xl.  8  ;  and  "  vTickedness  should  be  an 
abomination  to  his  lips,"  Prov.   viii.  7,  8  ;  as  this  was  also  typified 
by  the  priests,  who  might  not   be  defiled,  v/hen  they  approached  to 
God,  the  Holv  One ;  for  *'  God  would  be  sanctified  in   them  that 
came  nigh  him  ;"  or  he  would  sanctify  himself,  by  consuming  them. 
Lev.  X.  1,2,  o.     Now  the  mediator  and  deliverer  ought   to  be  also 
the  surety  and  high  pi  iest,  and   therefore  also  holy,  "  that  he  might 
draw  near  to  God  in  those  things  which  pertained  to  God,  in  order 
to  make  reconciliation."  Jer.  xxx.  21.    Heb.  ii.  17.    The  sacrificial 
gifts  also  typified  this  ;  for  they  were  to  be  holy  and  without  blemish, 
according;  to   Lev.  xxii.   22,    25.    Mai.  i.  7,   8.     And  therefore  the 
true  sacrifice,  with  which  God  should  be  well  pleased,  behooved  also 
to  be  noly,   and   without  blemish;   "a   lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot  "   1  Peter  i.    19.     See  also  2  Cor.   v.   21,    Eph.  v.  2. 
"jYte  may  add  to  this  that  the   mediator  and  deliverer,  ought  lo  be 


—19.  itt 

ttoly,  because  it  was  necessary  that  his  human  nature  should  be  per- 
sonally united  to  his  Godhead,  and  therefore,  also  holy  ;  for  "that 
holy  thing,  which  should  be  born,  s'nould  be  called  the  Son  of  God," 
Lukei.  35. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  rrjediator  and  deliverer  should  then,  alsoj 
be  very  God.(l)  "  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead, 
sustain  in  his  human  nature  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath."  How 
heavy  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  is,  that  it  must  be  sustained,  in 
order  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  and  that  no  mere  creature  could  sus- 
tain it,  hath  been  shown  on  the  fourth  and  fiftli  Lord's  days.  Ke 
then  who  shall  sustain  it,  so  as  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  must  be  more 
powerful  than  all  the  creatures,  and  so  very  God,  that  he  may  sup- 
port his  human  nature,  while  he  suffers,  and  s\tstains  the  divine 
wrath  that  "  his  own  arm  may  bring  him  salvation,  and  his  fury 
may  uphold  him,"  Isaiah  Ixlii.  5.(2)  The  mediator  and  deliverer 
must  also  be  God, "  that  he  may  obtain  forns  righteousness  and  life," 
The  sinner,  if  he  shall  stand  before  God,  and  live,  must  have  an  in* 
finite  righteousness,  that  all  his  sins  committed  against  the  most 
high  majesty  of  God,  may  be  forgiven  him,  and  that  he  may  be  deliv- 
ered from  everlasting  death,  and  obtain  everlasting  Hfe.  in  the  ever- 
lasting favour  of  God ;  as  it  was  a'so  foretold,  that  ''the  Messiah 
should  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness."  Dan.  fx,  24.  Nov,- 
it  is  impossible,  that  the  righteousness  of  a  mere  creature 
should  he  of  infinite  dignity,  he  ought  then  himself  to  be  the  infi- 
nite God,  if  his  righteousness  shall  have  such  a  divine  dignity  (3) 
It  behooved  the  mediator  and  deliverer  to  restore  this  righteousness 
and  life  to  us,  to  apply  and  communicate  them  to  us  It  was  not 
enough  to  obtain  the  righteousness  and  life,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
impart  them  also  to  the  sinner,  if  he  should  be  delivered.  "  The 
shepherd  who  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep,"  must  also,  "  give  them 
eternal  Hfe,  and  keep  them  so,  that  they  do  never  perish,  and  that 
none  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand,"  John  x.  1 1,  28.  And' therefore 
the  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  God  ;  .for  a  man  could  not 
appropri:^tb  to  himself  the  righteousness,  which  the  mediator  obtains, 
and  the  life  which  he  merits.  There  is  need  here  oi  an  "exceeding 
greatness  of  God's  pov/cr,  according  to  tlte  v/orking  of  his  mighty 
power,"  Eph  1.  19.(4)  Moreover,  the  mediator,  who  should  su?^ 
render  his  life  to  death,  behooved  to  be  the  lord  of  his  own  life, 
and  thus  to  '*•  have  power  to  lay  his  life  down,  and  to  take  it  again." 
John  y.  18.  Now  no  mere  man  hath  such  power,  but  h(*  on  y,  who 
is  also  very  God,(5)  Add  to  this,  that  he  who  shall  deliver  sinners, 
ought  a'so  to  be  capable  of  bein^  an  object  of  all  religious  hpmag^; 


IJ5  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

faith,  love  and  gratitude  ;  for  tliose  whom  he  delivers  from  tempos 
ral  and  eternal  punishments,  whom  he  reinslates  into  favour,  and 
for  whom  he  obtains,  and  to  whom  he  restores  righteousness  and 
life,  owe  him  such  service.  See  Titus  ii.  14.  Now  such  honour 
cannot  surely  be  offered  to  one  who  is  no  more  than  a  man,  but  he 
must  be  "  God  also,  who  is  over  all,  blessed  forever,'^'  if  he  shall  be 
honoured  thus,  Rom.  ix.  5.  See  Isaiah  xlv.  21,  25.(6)  Finally,  we 
^ay  also,  that  it  v*  as  foretold,  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  should 
be  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord  our  righteousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6.  Hof 
sea,  i.  7". 

It  was  necessary  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  shotild  be  not 
only  very  man.  and  holy,  and  very  God,  but  also,  ••  at  the  same  tim^ 
God  and  man  in  one  person."  For  (a)  since  the  human  nature  can*- 
not  of  itself  sustain  the  wrath  of  God,  and  its  sufferings  cannot  be  of 
an  infinite  dignity,  and  since  the  incorruptible  Godhead  cannot  suf- 
fer, therefore  his  Godhead  must  have  its  proper  human  nature,  in 
order  to  suffer  therein  ;  and  the  human  nature  and  the  Godhead 
must  be  united*  that  the  Godhead  may  support  the  human  nature 
under  its  grievous  sufferings,  and  that  its  sufferings  may  be  of  infi- 
nite dignity,  being  "  the  proper  blood  of  God,"  Acts,  xx.  28  ;  and 
*'  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,"  1  John  i.  7.  We  cannot  say  that 
there  could  be  two  mediators,  one  of  whom  should  be  man,  that  he 
might  suffei,  and  the  other  God,  in  order  to  add  an  infinite  dignity 
to  the  huraan  sufferings  of  the  other  ;  for  no  human  sufferings  caft 
ever  be  of  infinite  dignity,  unless  the  suffering  person  himself  be  aP 
so  very  God,  and  suffer  in  his  ov/n  human  ]j^ature.(b)  We  may  al- 
so say,  that  it  behooved  him  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  be- 
cause  he  who  shall  be  the  mediator,  must  be  equally  near  to  both 
parties,  even  to  God  and  the  sinner,  that  he  may  unite  and  appease 
both  in  himself;  and  he  must  thus  be  a  "  mediator  between  God  and; 
man,  that  he  may  give  himself  a  ransom  for  many,  and  thus  Wm^ 
them  to  God,"  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  6.    I  Peter  iii.   18. 

II.  M\jst  the  sinner  now  have  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer, 
in  order  that  he  may  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  and 
be  again  i-eceived  into  favour,  he  must  then  be  exceedingly  distress- 
ed ;  for  he  himself  cannot  find  such  a  mediator,  much  less  procure 
him  ;  neither  can  any  creature,  angel,  or  man,  do  this  :  but  the  door 
of  hope,  which  Avas  hitherto  shut  to  the  concerned  sinner,  is  opened 
to  him  by  the  instructor,  when,  upon  this  question  of  the  distressed 
person, «'  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  who  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ?"  He  answers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,  &c.  He  doth  not  say,  nor  prove  now, 
that  he  is  ve  ry  God,  and  real  righteotjs  man  in  one  person,  becau§*^ 


—19.  12f 

he  will  do  this  hereafter ;  but  he  only  shows  that  he  is  4  sufficient 
mediator  and  deliverer,  through  whom  the  sinner  can  escape  punish- 
ment, and  be  again  received  into  favour,  since  *'  he  is  made  of  God 
to  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption," 
according  to  I  Cor.  1.  30. 

He  is  given  to  be  (1)  "  wisdom."  The  sinner  is  blind  and  foolish, 
and  he  knoweth  nothing  of  his  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness,  "  his 
understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God, 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,"  Eph.  iv.  18,  but  our  L6rd 
Jesus  Christ  is  ''  the  wisdom  of  God,"  1  Cor.  i.  24.  "  fn  him  arc 
hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  Coll.  ii.  3.  As 
the  great  prophet  he  makes  known  by  his  word,  and  by  his  Spirit  to 
the  elect  sinner,  "  all  that  he  hath  heard  of  the  Father,"  John  xv, 
15,  and  thus  *' he  leads  the  bHnd  by  a  way  which  they  have  not 
known,"  Sec.  Isaiah  xlii.  16.  See  Luke  xxiv.  44,  46.  Acts  xv.i  14, 
xxvi.  18. 

2  That  it  may  not  seem  unjust,  that  the  guilty  sinner  finds  favor, 
therefore  he  becomes  also  <^  righteousness"  to  him,  since  he  procures 
and  restores  to  him  an  infinite  righteousness  by  his  sufferings  and 
obedience,  whereby,  being  justified  before  God,  he  is  delivered  from 
his  guilt,  and  obtains  a  right  to  life  :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  God  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor^  v.  21. 

3.  Doth  he  leave  the  Sinner  in  and  under  the  filth  and  dominion 
of  sin  ?  No ;  but  he  becomes  also  "  sanctification  "  to  him,  by  which 
he  cleanses  him  from  his  loathsome  impurity,  subdues  the  power  of 
his  corruption,  transforms  him  into  the  image  of  God,  and  renders 
him  a  partaker  of  the  holy  nature  of  God,  which  he  doth  first  by  the 
new  birth,  and  then  by  an  increase  of  God,  "  changing  him  from 
glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Which  sanctification  he  procures  by 
his  blood,  and  communicates  by  his  Spirit ;  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  our  God,"   saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  vi.  1 1.  1  Peter  i.  2. 

4.  And  since  sinful  man  is  holden  captive  in  the  snare  of  the 
devil  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  and  misery,  on  account  of  the  justice 
of  God,  therefore  Christ  becomes  also  redemption  to  him,  by  which 
he  delivers  him  from  all  that  renders,  or  can  render  him  miserable, 
and  bestows  all  kinds  of  happiness  upon  him,  partly  in,  and  perfectly 
after  this  life  :  for  when  *<  the  Son  makes  him  free,  then  he  is  fre'6 
indeed,"  John  viii,  3€. 

H-s  "  is  made  "  such  great  benefits  to  us  **  of  God,"  saith  the  apos= 
tlc;  I  Cor,  i,  SO,     He  was  not  this,  by  the  natyr"  of  hi^  essence,  but 


1^6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

by  the  free  and  gracious  constitution  of  God  his  Father,  who  in  the 
aconomy  and  dispensation  of  f^race,  took  upon   himself  the  person 
of  judge,  whom  the  Son  should  satisfy,  as  mediator,  while  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  convey  all   jjrace  from  the  Father  through  the  Son  to 
ihe  sinner.  See  Rom.  iii.  34,  25,   36.  2  Cor.  xiii.    13.  John  xvi.  13, 
14,  15.     And  thus  was  Christ  made  of  God  wisdom.  See.  (1)  In  the 
COUMcii  of  pe^ce  from  eternity,  which  we  call  a  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, because  the  redemption  of  the  sinner  was  demanded  and  prom* 
ised  m  that  council.     God  did  from  eternity  elect  some  to  everlast- 
ing  life,  and  appoint  them  to  be  vessels  of  mercy  ;  but  as  they  could 
DQt  obtain  solvation,  except  the  justice  of  God  were  satisfied,  there- 
fore God  enters  into  a  covenant  with  his  Son-,   and  requires  ;hat  he 
should  make  satisfaction  by  his  suffering  and  obedience,  promising 
him  that  he  would  prepare  a  body  for  him,  give  him  his  Spirit,  up- 
hold him  in  his  suffering,  that  he  should  see  his  seed,  and  obtain  the 
highest  ;<h)ry.     The  Son  consents  to  all  this,  engages  to  become  his 
Father's  servant,  and  declares  it  to  be  his  delight  to  do  his  Father's 
will.:  whereupon  his  Fathtr  gives  him  his  elect,  and  ^'e  claims  thefti 
as  bis  own,  that   he  may  fulfil  the  stipulated  conditions   for  them  i 
and  thus  they  ar*?,  as  it  were,  transferred  from  the  book  of  life,  to 
witj  the  Father's  election,  into  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb.  See  this 
covenant.   Psalm  ii.  T,  8,  9.  xl.   6,   7,   8.  Ixxxix.  28.    Isaiah  xlii.  1. 
xlix.  4.  liii     10.  John  xvii,  6.  Eph  i.  4,   5.  iii.    10,  11.   Rev.  xvi.  8. 
xxi.  27,  which   covenant,  confirmed  "  with  the   word  of  the  oath, 
makes  the  Son  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and   redemp- 
tion,"  lieb.  viii.  28.     The  Lord  .lesus  Christ  is  also  made  of  God 
"Visdom,  Sec   by  the  covenant  of  grace,  which   G  d  established  with 
the  elect  sinner,  whereby  the  allsufficient,  the  only  wise,  righteour. 
and  merciful  God  promiseth  the  foolish,   guilty,  filthy  and  impotent 
sinner,  that  he  will  be  a  God  to  him,  and  will  thus  bestow  all  con- 
^ceivable  bliss  on   bins,   and  the  sinner  accepts  of  this  upon  God's 
proffer,  assents  to  it,  and  resigns  himself  to  the  Lord,  in  order  to  be 
his.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Isaiah  xlix.  5.  Iv.  3.    But  as  God  cannot  enter  intfr 
a  covenant  with  the  guilty  and  filthy  sinner  immediately,  therefore 
!ie  gives  him  his  Son  to  be  a  mediator,  that  he,  by  satisfying  his 
josticc,  may  bring  the  sintter  to  God,  and  obtain  for  him  all  the 
promises  of  the  covenant  of  grace  :  '^  Therefore  he  is  the  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death  for  the  redemption 
of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
arc  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance,"  Heb. 
i;t.  )5.  And  so  he  is  made  of  God  by  the  covenant  of  grace  wisdom, 
Sec  For  <'  the  Lord  gives  him  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  a  light 
Hf  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  y.lii^  G. 


^h  LORD'S  DAT,  Q.  16~19.  !SI 

I'hat  the  covenant  of  redemption  might  now  be  executed,  the 
covenant  of  grace  perfected,  and  the  sinner  rendered  complete  in 
wisdom,  righteousness^  sanctification  and  fedemption,  God  (a)  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  mediator,  caused  him  to  assume  the 
human  nature,  to  satisfy  his  vindictive  justice,  and  procure  wisdom, 
righteousness,  eanctification  and  redemption  for  his  people :  "  For 
what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  throu.arh  the  ^esh, 
God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin, 
condemned  sin  in  the  fl'.sh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Kom.  viij,  3,  4.  (b)  '^God  also  exalted  him  by  his 
right  hand  for  elect  men,"  gave  him  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  shed  him  forth  "  for  his  covenant  people,  "  and  made  nim  thus 
Lord  and  Christ,"  Acts  ii.  .^)3,  36.  And  by  that  exaltation  he  is  made 
of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption  :  "  for 
God  hath  exalted  him  with  his  right  hand,  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sin," 
Acts  v.  3 1  (c)  In  order  that  these  benefits  may  be  communicated  to 
the  sinner,  the  !  -ord  God  makes  his  Son,  with  all  his  fulness  known 
to  the  world  by  the  gospel,  and  proffers  him  to  men,  that  Ihey  may 
receive  and  embrace  him  ;  he  calls  to  them  with  a  voice  from  heaven* 
*'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  hear  ye 
him,"  Matt.  iii.  17.  xvii.  5.  He  sends  "  his  ambassadours  to  pray 
them  in  his,"  and  in  his  vSon's  »*  name,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2 
Cor.  V.  18,  19,  20,  and  so  "  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  brings  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  2  Tim.  i.  20.  (d)  Yet  all 
this  would  be  to  no  purpose,  if  God  did  not  actually  and  effectually 
by  his  Son  render  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  this  grace,  by  enlighten- 
ing, justifying,  sanctifying  and  redeeming  him  ;  for  which  purpose 
he  gives  the  sinner  faith,  that  he  may  thereby  receive  the  Mediator 
with  all  his  fulness,  and  may  improve  him  in  all  his  needs  :  for  '*  faith 
is  the  gift  of  God,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  Philip,  i.  29,  which  «  God  works" 
eflfectually  in  the  soul,  according  to  "  the  greatness  of  his  power," 
Eph.  i.  19,  and  it  is  faith,  which  receives  the  Son  of  God  and  his 
fulness,  John  i.  12,  16.  Eph.  iii.  17.  What  think  ye,  hearers,  had 
not  Paul  sufficient  reason  to  say,  1  Cor.  i.  30,  that  "  Christ  is  made 
of  God  to  us  wisdom,"  &c.  ?  and  may  not  this  be  called  by  the  in- 
structor a  giving  ?  *  for  there  is  not  a  greater,  nor  a  more  gracious 
Sjift,  than  the  Son  of  God,  with  all  his  benefits.  See  John  iii,  1 C, 
Rom.  viii.  32.  1  John  iv.  9,  10. 

•  This  is  the  English  of  the  word  used  in  the  Dutch  catechism,  an4  in  the 
Geermao  original. 

V 


J 

\m  CHRIS  l  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

But  for  whom  was  Christ  made  and  j»iven  to  be  this  ?  "  For  tis," 
saith  the  apostle,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  "  for  them  who  are  called  lo  be  saints," 
vrs.  2,  *'  not  many  wise  men.  mighty  or  noble  after  the  flesh,  but 
the  foolish,  weak,  ignoble  and  despised  of  the  world,  hath  God  chosen 
and  called,  tliat  th-ey  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  vrs.  26,  31.  '*  There- 
iore  all  men  without  exception  who  perished  in  Adam,  are  not  saved 
by  Christ,  but  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive^ 
all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith,"  as  the  following  Lord's  day  will 
inform  us. 

•  III.  Btit  who  will  dare  to  believe  this  great  matter  ?  what  account 
have  we  of  it?  will  the  light  of  nature  discover  it  to  us?  No,  the 
creatures  of  God,  contemplated  in  the  most  exact  manner,  will  not 
t^ach  us  aught  of  this :  we  can  learn  from  them  only  *'  God's  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  that  we  may  be  without  excuse,"  Rom.  i.  20. 
The  innate  principles  of  knowledge,  and  our  conscience  may  teach 
us,  that  there  is  an  almighty,  righteous,  wise  and  good  God,  and  that 
we  have  to  do  with  him,  according  to  Rom  i.  19.  ii.  14,  but  they 
cannot  atTord  us  the  least  intimation,  nor  excite  in  us  the  least  ap- 
prehension, whereby  we  may  be  induced  to  think,  that  God  will  de- 
liver smnersby  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  by  his  Son.  And  therefore 
a  persc^n  who  doth  not  possess  more  than  the  mere  light  of  nature, 
"  is  without  Christ,  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  a 
stranger  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  Can  this  then  be  learned  from 
the  law  ?  not  from  the  law  neitlier  :  "  For  the  promise  was  not  to 
Abraham,  or  to  his  seed  by  the  law,"  Rom.  iv.  13.  The  law  can- 
not show  the  sinner  the  means  of  deliverance,  but  can  only  discover 
his  misery  to  him,  and  condemn  him  :  "  for  the  law  worketh  wrath," 
Rom.  iv.  15.  See  Rom   iii.  19,  20.  Gal.  iii    10,   II,  12. 

Whence  then  do  we  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  medi- 
ator and  deliverer,  made  of  God,  wisdom,  Sec?  The  instructor  an- 
swereth  accordmg  to  the  word  of  God,  "  From  the  holy  gospel.*' 
The  Greek  word  Euangtlion^  signifies  joyful  and  good  tidings,  or  ti- 
dings of  good  :"  I  bring  you  good  tidings,  euangdizomaiy  or  "  evan- 
gelize you  great  joy,"  saith  the  angel  who  brought  the  first  joyful 
news  ot  the  Saviour's  birth,  Luke  ii.  10  11.  The  writers  of  the 
New  Testament  adopted  this  word,  and  learned  the  ordinary  use  of 
it  fiom  the  seventy  Greek  translators  of  the  Old  Testament,  who 
made  use  of  the  word  euangellon^  when  they  found  the  word  Bisser 
m  the  Hebrew.  See  Isaiah  x.  4,9.  Ii.  7.  Ixi.  I.  There  cannot, 
indeed,,  be  jnore  joyful  news  to  a  sinner  under  concern,  than  that 
Christ  is  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  is  made  so  great  a  salvation 


♦  — 19.  fSl 

to  him  of  God.     By  this  gospel  we   are  not  here   to  understand   so 
much  the  history  of  the  birth,  life,  doctrine,  miracles,  humiliation:) 
and  exaltation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  we  must  understand  by  it 
particularly,  *'  the  v/hole  doctrine  cf  salvation,  by  which  God  makes 
the  Mediator  and  Deliverer,  Jesus  Christ  known  to  the  sinner,  offers 
him  to  him,  commands  him  to  believe  in  him,  and  that  through  this 
mcdiatoi'  h*:*  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  aeain  received  into  fa- 
vour."   The  gospel  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  by  which  a  person  is 
conducted  to  salvation,  utcording  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  described 
in  the  books  of  the  Old  and   Nev/   Testament:  for   "the  word   of 
truth  is  the  sjospci  of  salvation,"    Eph.  i.  3,     Since  now  Christ  with 
i^is.  benefits  is  the  sum  of  the  gospel,  therefore  it  is  called  the  gospel 
of  Christ,    2  Cor,  iv.  4.  See  also  Rom.  i-  1 — 4,  16,  17.     Wherever 
then  we  read  in  the  holy  scripture  of  Christ   and  his  benefits,  there 
we  have  the  gospei   by  which  (a)  God  makes  Christ  known  to  the 
sinner,  as  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  in  him  only  the  sinner  must 
seek,  and  shall  find  all  salvation  :  for  "by  the  gospel  is  preached  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Sec.    Eph.    iii.   8 — 11. (b)     By    the 
gosptl   the  Mediator,   and  all  salvation  in  and  through  him,   is  also 
oHered  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  invited  and  called  to  him,  that  he  may 
"  turn  to  him  and  be  saved."     Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Iv.    1,  2,  S.     "He 
hath  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the   glory  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  the  aposile,  2.  Thes.   ii.  U.(e)     By  the 
gosp  1  the  sinner  is  also  commanded  to  behave  in  the   Mediator  to 
salvation  :    "  Jesus,  preaching  the  gospel,  said,  believe  the  gospel,'* 
Mark.  i.   14,  15.     On  which  account  it  is  sometimes  called  "  a  law." 
Isaiah  ii.  3.     And  also  "  the  law  of  faith/'  Rem.  iii.  27,   since  it 
obhgeth  every  one,  to  whom  it  is  brought,  and  denounces  a  severe 
threaiening  against  those,  who  "  draw  back"  from  it,     Heb.  x»38.(d) 
Purther,  the  gospel  engages  and  promises  to  the  believer,  that  he 
shall  certainly  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour, 
\>y  faith  in  Christ,  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  John  iii.  16,  36.    Acts  x.   43  j 
and  so  the  gospel  "  comforts  the  believing  people  of  God,  and  speaks 
comfortably  to  them,"  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.     ixi.    1,  2,  3. 

This  gospel  must  be  distinguished  into  the  gospel  of  promise  and 
of  fulfilment.  The  gospel  of  promise  is  that  which  foretold  and 
promised  the  Mediator,  who  was  to  come,  with  his  saving  benefits. 
The  gospel  of  fulfilment,  is  the  actual  execution  and  fulfilment  of  the 
gospel  of  promise  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  Rom.  i.  1—4,  "  That  God 
hath  promised  the  gospel  before  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scrip- 
tiu-es,  concerning  his  Son^  who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  accor- 
ding to  the  flesh,"  kc. 


in  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  • 

This  gospel  of  promise  "  God  spake  in  times  past,  anc'  »ii  diveis 
manners  to  the  fathers,"  Heb.  i.  i.  For  (1)  God  himself  revealed  it 
first  of  all  in  Paradise^  when  "he  said  to  the  serpent,  because  thou 
hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 
of  the  field:  upon  thy  belly  sh  alt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat 
all  t'le  days  of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  dn.  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  :  it  shall  bruise  thy 
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel,"  Gen.  iii.  14,  18.  We  sup^ 
pose  that  the  Lord  God  spake  these  words,  when  our  first  parents 
were  present,  not  s  >  much  to  the  material  serpent,  as  to  the  devil, 
>»ho  abused  the  serpent,  because  many  things  arc  mentioned  here, 
which  are  natural  to  the  serpent,  and  which  it  hath  m  common  with 
other  hurtful  animals  :  and  the  rather,  because  "  the  devil  and  Satan 
is  called  the  old  si^rpent."  Rev.  xii.  IS.  Our  Saviour  teacheth  us 
that  the  seed  of  the  serpent  signifies  the  ungodly,  when  he  calls 
them  *' a  generation  ofscrpents  and  vipers,"  ^;att.  xxiii  33,  and 
aailh  that  they  are  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii,  44.  We 
suppose  also,  that  these  words  were  spoken,  in  order  to  comfort  our 
parents,  as  their  malicious  ioe  was  condemned  by  these  words ; 
therefore  it  is  also  evident,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  si^nif7es 
in  the  first  place  the  Mediator,  who  should  be  <'  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham," and  thus,  also '« the  seed  of  the  woman  ;"  Gen  xxii.  18.  GaL 
jii.  16.  iv.  4,  and  it  sitrnifies  in  the  next  place,  elect  believers  with 
the  Mediator,  and  in  hini  ,  for  these  "  are  reckoned  the  seed," 
through  the  promise.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Rom.  ix.  7,  8,  And  there- 
fore  the  words,  Gen  iii.  14,  15,  promise  (a)  that  the  Mediator  should 
be  man  of  m^n,  to  wit,  of  a  woman,  (b)  1  hat  he  should  be  holy,  an 
enemy  to  the  devil,  and  to  his  seed.(r)  That  he  should  be  God  ; 
for  he  should  be  able  to  bruise  (or  crush)  the  head  of  the  devil,  or 
his  power.(d)  That  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  1 
John  iii.  8  (e)  That  he  should  suffer  in  his  human  nature  ;  for  the 
serpent  should  bruise  his  heel.(f)  That  the  serpent  should  not  con- 
quer him,  but  that  he  should  be  exalted  above  the  serpent,  whose 
head  he  should  i)ruise.(g)  That  believers,  being  united  to  him, 
dihould  be  made  like  him,  as  the  seed,  and  should  therefore  be  made 
M'ise,  be  justified,  sanctified  and  delivered  ;  but  still  by  a  conflict  with 
the  serpent  and  with  his  seed.  These  things,  and  such  like,  are 
Contained  in  the  promises.  Our  first  parents  no  doubt  understood 
ihtse  things  more  or  less,  and  were  more  fully  instructed  in  them  by 
^od,  believed  and  embraced  them  to  salvation,  and  delivered  them 
iUo  to  their  children  by  tradition.  (2)  God  published  this  gospel 
afterwards  by  Cx  holy  patriarchs  and  prophets.      The  palriar^hg 


'    ^  — lit.  1^8 

were  the  first  fathers  of  great  fdmilies  in  the  holy  line,   before    ancj 
after  the  flood  ;  to  wit,  from  Adam  lo  Noah,  before  the  flood,  Gen, 
V.  after  the  flood,    from  Noah   to  the    twelve    sons  of  Jacob,  Gen. 
X,  1.     Chron.  i.  who,  as  also  Abraham,  Heb.  vii.  4,  are  called  patri- 
archs. Acts  vii.  8.     And  since   the  promise  of  the   coming  of  the 
Messiah,  and  the  setting-  up  of  the  new  church  was  attached  to  the 
family  of  David,  2    Sam.  vii.  therefore  David    is  also  called  a  Patri- 
arch, Acts  ii.  29.     God  published  his  gospel  in  divers  ways  to  these 
patriarchs,  and  by  them  to  their  posterity.     Hovv  could  Abel  other- 
wise  "  offer  in    faith  ?"  Gen.  iv.  4.     Heb.    xi.  4.     Did  not   Cain 
and  Abel,  as  also  the   sons  of  God,  and  the  daughters  of  men    soon 
manifest  who  were  the  true  partakers  of  the  Mediator?  Gen.  iv.  anci 
vi.     When  Enos  was  born,  the  people  of  God  assembled  to  confess 
the  Lord  in  a  public  maimer,  according  to  the  gospel,  iv.  26.  Enoch 
spake  of  his  coming  to  judgment,  Jude,  verse  14,  15.  Noah  preached 
even  then  by  the  Spirit,  the  righteousness  of  the   Redeemer,    and 
prepared  the  ark,  as  a   figure  of  his  grai  e,  whicii    is  now   sealed  by 
baptism,  according  to    1  Peter,  iii,  19,  20,  21.     But  the  Rospel  was 
pubhshed  much  more  clearly  in  the  household  of  Ab'-aham  and    of 
his  sons,  Gen.  xviii.    17;  when  God  entered   into   a  covenant  with 
them,  and  promised  them  the  Messiah,  as  the  seed  in    whom  men' 
should  be  blessed,  and  particularly  as  a  seed,  whjch   should   proceed 
from  them  ;  as  the  Pvlessiah  also  appeared  sometimes  to  them,  as  the 
g.ngel  of  the  covenapt.     They   also  believed  the    gospel,  embraced 
the  Mediator,  and  obtained  thus  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness. 
Sec  Gen.  xv   6.     Heb.  xi.  13. 

To  these  patriarchs  we  may  add  also  those  great  and  holy  men, 
who  v/ere  not  of  the  holy  line,  as  Melchizedek  and  Job.  Mf^lchize- 
dek  prefigured  that  the  Mediator  should  have  a  priesthood  and  king- 
dom, which  should  not  be  transferable  to  others,  Gen.  iv.  Heb. 
vii.  And  Job  spake  of  the  Messiah,  as  his  "  Gcel  and  Redeemer," 
both  in  this  life,  and  that  to  come,  Job.  xix.   25,  26,  27. 

But  the  gospel  v/as  published  with  much  greater  clearness  by  the 
prophets :  men  chosea  by  God  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 
endued  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  might  foretell  the  future  things  of 
the  Messiah,  his  benefits,  and  the  New  Testament  church  ;  for  they 
foreshowed  that  the  Messiah  should  be  Mediator,  God  and  man  in 
one  person,  and  "  Immanuel,"  God  with  us,  and  that  "he  should  be 
born  of  a  virgin,"  Isaiah  vii.  14.  ix.  5,  that  "he  should  be  a  pro- 
phet, like  Moses,"  Deut.  xviii.  1 5,  "a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchi- 
zedek," Psalm  ex.  4.  4.  and  "  a  king  of  Zion,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  that  he 
should  be  humbled  and  exalted,"  Isaiah  liii.  that  he  should  descend 


l/4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  G05PEL. 

from  the  tribe  of  Judah  and  the  empoverishcd  family  of  Jesse,  Gen. 
xlix-  10,  Isaiah  vi.  1,  and  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  Micha  v.  1,  and  ap- 
pear in  the  second  temple,  Haggai  ii.  8.  10.  Mai.  iii.  Land  that  af- 
ter the  end  of  seventy  wteks  of  years,  Dan.  ix.  24,  27.  That  he 
should  be  made  of  God  to  his  people  wisdom,  "  to  lead  the  blind  ," 
Isaiah  xlii.  16,  righteousness,  Jer.  xxiii.  6,  sanctilication,  Isaiah  lix» 
20.  That  he  should  bring  the  Gentiles  to  fellowship  with  God,  Isaiah 
xlix.  6.  That  he  should  abolish  the  ecclesiastical  laws  of  the  Jewsy 
and  that  Jerusalem  should  be  laid  waste,  Dan  ix.  27.  And  so  "all 
the  prophets  give  witness  that  through  his  name,  whosoever  believ- 
eth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43. 

3.  God  published  this  gospel  of  promise  not  only  verbally,  b>it  alsa 
really  :  he  prefigured  it  "  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies,  or 
ecclesiastical  observances  of  the  law.  The  ceremonies  of  the  law 
were  either  (I)  the  holy  things,  as  all  the  different  ofTerings,  meats, 
drinks,  washings,  sprinklings,  incense-,  anointing  oil,  first  fruits  and 
tithes  ;  or  (2)  the  holy  persons,  who  celebrated  the  publick  worship, 
as  the  high  priest,  the  common  priests,  and  the  Levites  ;  or  (3)  the 
holy  places,  as  the  land  of  Canaan,  Jerusalem,  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  with  their  apartments,  as  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  the  holy  place  with  the  golden  dlar,  the  table  and  can- 
dlestick, also  the  porch  with  the  brazen  altar,  the  laver,  and  all  the 
inst'uments,  which  were  used  in  the  holy  service  in  the  porch  ;  or 
(4)  the  holy  seasons,  as  all  the   festivals. 

Truly  a  most  costly,  obscure,  and  burthcnsome  vv-orship,  "  a  yoke 

which  the  fathers  could  not  bear,"  Acts  xv.  10.     Why  did  God  lay 

this  yoke  upon  them  ?  he  did  notboriow  it  from  the  Egyptians,  and 

correcting  it  somewhat,  give  it  to  them,  in  order  to  detach  them    by 

the  use  of  it  from  affecting  the  customs  of  the  heathens  :  for  "  the 

laws  of  Israel  were  different  from  those  of  all  other  people,"  Esther 

iii,  9.  God  deiested  the  laws  and  religion  of  the  heathens,  Deut.  xii. 

30.     When  Israel  made  a  calf  after  the  manner  of  the   Egyptians, 

they  broke  the  covenant  of  God,   Deut.  xxxii.     Neither  do  we  think 

that  God  gave  them  this  law,  in   order  to  punish  them  for  their  sin 

with  the  golden  calf;  foj-  he  had  given  them  many  parts  of  it  before 

that  sin,  and  he  broke  off  giving  it  to  them  on  account  of  that  sin, 

and  he  began,  presently  after  he  was  reconciled  to  the   people,    to 

perfect  it.     It  is  thcre;fore  better  to  say,  that  this  law  was    given    to 

Israel  ibr  *'  a  wall  of  partition,"  to  separate  them  from  other  nations, 

Eph.  ii.  14,  15,  also  to  convince  them  of  their  uncleanness,  and  guilt, 

and  in.:uce  them  to  seek  their  perfection  in  the  Mediator,  who  was  to 

come.     See  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb,  viii.  5.  ix.  9,  10,  11.  x,  1.    The  Old 


VLLORD'SDAY,  Q.  15— ig.  j35 

Testament  church  was  in  a  state  of  imperfect  freedom,  and  of  child- 
hooi,  and  was  insiructed  in  higher  and  better  things  by  these  dif-, 
fi^;ult  rudin^ents.  If  time  would  permit,  we  would  si  ow  that  all 
these  ceremonial  observances  typified  that  the  Mediator  should  per- 
fect his  people  by  his  only  oft'erini^,  and  v/ith  his  blood  uiid  Spirit, 
that  he  siiouid  be  the  true  high  priest,  and  sliould  enter  into  the  holy 
of  holies,  even  heaven  itself,  with  his  own  blood,  and  thut  he  should 
procure  a  joyful  festival  for  his  New  Testament  church,  during  her 
whole  continuance  on  earth,  and  should  at  length  introduce  her  into 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  into  the  holy  Jerusalem,  the  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  See  only  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews; 
for  we  cannot  speak  of  these  things  in  order  now. 

Not  only  were  the  ceremonies  of  that  law  types,  but  also  wan.y 
other  things  and  persons  of  that  time.  If  any  wish  to  see  a  more 
particular  account  of  them,  we  refer  him  to  our  "  Sketch  of  the 
structure  of  the  types,  exhibited  with  respect  to  its  established  fun* 
damental  rules,  and  agreeably  to  proper  standards,"  in  which  work 
he  may  also  see  that  the  types  were  not  mere  shadows  and  sketches, 
but  also  sacraments  and  seals,  by  which  God  ceFtined  and  sealed  to 
his  ancient  people  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come,  and  his  saving 
benefits.  Therefore  we  believe  that  the  Mediator  was  an  Ex^rO' 
Diissor  for  the  Old  Testament  church,  or  such  a  surety,  as  had  taken 
the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  and  not  merely  a  Jidpjus<ior^  who  had 
undertaken  indeed  to  satisfy  for  her  debt,  but  nevertheless  suffered 
it  to  remain  on  her,  and  to  be  demanded  of  her,  until  she  should 
satisfy  in  him,  and  if  he  should  fail,  that  then  she  should  be  obliged 
<o  satisfy  for  herself,  and  atone  for  her  debt  by  eternal  misery  :  for 
if  he  had  not  taken  the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  but  left  it  on  her, 
and  suffered  it  thus  to  be  demanded  of  her,  believers  would  not  then 
have  triumphed,  as  they  did,  on  account  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
sins,  Psalm  xxxii.  ciii.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  neither 
would  that  burthensome  worship  of  the  church  have  typified,  shadow- 
ed forth  and  sealed  the  Mediator  to  them,  and  they  would  not  have 
been  able  to  enter  into  the  everlasting  rest,  so  long  as  he  had  not 
satisfied  for  their  debt. 

Behold,  in  this  manner  did  God  make  known  the  gospel  of  promise, 
and  "  he  hath  also  lastly  accomplished  it  by  his  only  begotten  Son," 
and  so  hath  revealed  it  to  us  by  the  gospel  of  fulfilment  in  the  scrips 
tures  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  we  find  in  them,  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  God  co-essential  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Gl.ost, 
took  upon  himself  the  iiuman  nature,  continuing  one  person,  of  the 
virgin  Mary,  in  the  proper  time  and  nlyce :  that  he  ff^  ^be  suprenje 


^36  CHRIST  HEVE ALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

Prophet,  Priest  and  Kin^ ;  that  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
was  thus  made  to  his  people  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,  which  we  will  illustrate  and  prove  in  order, 
when  we  speak  of  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption* 


APPLICATION. 

\Vhat  think  ye,  beloved  hearers,  ought  not  wc  to  be  fully  pet^ 
Miaded  in  our  minds,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Messiah, 
according;  to  tlie  scriptures?  May  we  not  indeed  cry  out  with  Andrew 
and  Philip  '■'  We  have  found  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets  did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of 
Joseph  ?"  John  i.  42,  45  For  all  that  was  foretold  and  prefigured 
of  the  vjessiah  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  him  :  he  also  fully  proved  this 
from  the  scriptures  from  his  miracles  and  from  his  resurrection,  sa 
as  to  silence  the  Jews  :  and  his  apostles,  who  were  ear  and  eye-wit> 
nesses  of  these  things,  testified  of  them  with  so  much  power,  that 
those  who  lived  both  in  and  after  their  time  received  their  testimony 
V'lth  a  full  persuasion  of  mind.  It  is  indeed  truly  astonishing,  that 
the  Jews,  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  denied  our 
Saviour,  as  they  do  even  until  this  day.  How  was  this  possible, 
might  we  ask  ?  But  the  word  of  Gcd  will  inform  us  that  God  hath 
forsaken  that  generation  in  his  wrath,  and  hath  abandoned  them  to 
blindness  and  hardness  of  heart.  They  know  neither  their  miserj*, 
nor  the  proper  method  of  deliverance:  they  stek  their  own  right- 
eousness, and  are  offended  at  the  humble  birth,  and  at  the  ignomi- 
nious crucifixion  of  Christ.  All  this  was  likewise  foretold  concerning 
this  people.  See  Isaiah  xi.  9,  10.  viii.  14,  15,  16.  xxix.  9—15.  Iviii, 
2 — 5.  There  is  nothing  that  they  can  endure  with  less  patience 
than  that  Jesus  hath  abolished  and  abrogated  their  ceremonial  law, 
as  though  it  were  not  foretold,  that  ihe  Messiah,  when  "  he  had 
mude  an  end  of  sins,  had  made  reconciliat  on  for  iniquity,  and  brought 
in  an  evei  lasting  rigliteousness,  should  then  also  cause  the  sacrifice 
and  oblation  to  cease,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  See  also  Jer.  iii.  15,  16,  \7. 

But  who  will  nut  de'est  the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  the  Medi- 
ator is  not  God  and  man  in  one  person,  and  that  he  did  not  by  satis- 
fying the  justice  of  God,  btcome  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  redemption  to  his  people  ?  They  say  that  he  is  not  more 
than  a  mere  man,  or  only  a  p:reat  prophet  on  account  of  his  heavenly 
doctrine,  great  miracles,  and  exemplary  conversation  and  death. 
».it  what  wonder  is  it,  that  they  degrade  Christians  in  this  manner, 


Vl,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  i6--i9.  m 

they  have  conducted  thus  also  with  the  believing:  Jews,  upon  whose 
faith  Christianity  is  founded  ;  for  '^the  law  went  forth  out  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Jerusalem  "  Isaiah  ii.  3,  and  «  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews."  John  iv,  22,    For  they  assert  that  the  fathers  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  lio  promises  concerning  the  forgive'iess  of 
sins,  or  of  eternal  life  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  c- tre  ;  that  he 
was  not  t\  pified  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law, 
and  that  the  sacrifices,  which  were  then  offered  up  for  sins,  reconci- 
led the  sins  for  which  they  were  offcx-  d.   and  that  therefore  the  be- 
lievers of  that  time  did  not  seek  their  reconciliation  in  Christ,   when 
they  offered      Do  they  not  represent  the  fathers  as  Epicureans;  who 
cared  only  for   their  bellies  ?  do  they  not  deny  the  whole  gospel, 
which  teaches  nothing  different  nor  less  of  the  Mediator,  than  we 
have  exhibited?  Doth  not  the  word  of  God  say  plainly  and  frequently, 
that  the  Lord  established  his  covenant  of  £;race  with  the  fathers,  that 
he  was  their  God  ?  Gen.  xvii,  7.  Psalm  xxxiii,    12.  Matt.   xxii.  32, 
that  he  forgave  their  sins,   Gen    xv.  6.   Psalm  xxxii.  i,  2.  ciii.  3,  4. 
They  had  spiritual  peace  and  joy.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  To  them  be- 
longed the   adoption,  Rom,  ix.   4,  sanctific'tiori,  preservation,  and 
glorificati(>n,  Psalm  xlviii.  14,   Psalm  xvii.  15.  They  had  "the  same 
Spirit  of  faith  "  with  us.  Psalm  cxvi.  10.  2  Cor.  iv.  13.  Heb  xi,  and 
indeed  faith  in  the  Messiah,  in  whom,  ana  for  whose  sake  they  de- 
sired and  obtained  all  things  of  God,  Psalm  ixxx.   17.   D>an.  ix-  17. 
Heb.  xi   27,  and  this  was  sealed  to  them  by  the  sjcraments,   which 
were  of  the  same  efficacy  with  ours,    1  Cor  x.  1 — 4.     What  think 
ye,  hearers,  may  we  look  upon  these  men,  who  deny  all  this,   either 
as  true  Israelites,  or  as  believing  Christians  ? 

But  how  forcible  are  the   right  words  of  our  instructor,  to  show 
the  concerned  sinner  the  good  way,  according  to  the  gospel,  to  es- 
cape punishment,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour-     The  dis- 
tressed sinner  asks  how  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of  God  ;  and  he 
shows  him  not  only  the  necessity  of  a  satisfaction,  and  that  there  was 
no  possibility,  that  either  he  hirriself,  or  any  other  mere  creature 
should  satisfy,  but  that  this  could  be  accomplished  only  by  one,  who 
was  a  real  and  holy  man,   and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in 
©rder  that  the  sinner  may  not  rest  upon  false  grounds,  but  may  be 
more  deeply  humbled.     And  that  he  may  not  however  through  des- 
pair wholly  neglect  to  seek  his  salvation,  he  shows  him  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  proper  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  he 
itiay  be  fully  persuaded  and   assured  of  this  by  the  gospel,  and  be- 
come a  partaker  of  him  and   his  fulness  by  faith.     Therefore  this 
information  is  perfectly  satisfactory  to  a  perplexed  mind.     For  (a> 

X 


■lS6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IX  THE  GOSPEL. 

hath  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  been  made  wisdom,  righteousness,  sane- 
tificalion  and  redemption,  then  he  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God, 
and  procured  a  deliverance  from  guilt  for  the  Imwible  sinner,  by 
^vhich  means  he  escapes  punishment.  For  there  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  becduse  he  hath  fulfilled  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  1,  3,  4.  (b)  The  sinner  is  thus 
also  again  received  into  favour,  since  he  is  brought  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  into  God's  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  "  the  Lord  causes 
him  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  brings  him  into  the  bond  of  the  cove- 
nant," Ezek.  XX.  37.  (c)  And  Christ  doth  thus  also  remedy  all  his 
grievous  cal.mities.  Is  he  foolish,  dolh  he  not  know  God's  way  of 
life  ;  Jesus  is  wisdom  to  him.  Is  he  guilty  ;  the  Mediator  is  right- 
eousness to  him.  Is  he  too  abominable,  and  hateful  to  receive  any 
favour  ;  Christ  is  sanctification  to  him.  Is  he  still  too  much  fettered 
and  bound  with  the  cords  of  misery  ;  the  Saviour  is  the  Redeemer, 
and  is  redemption  to  him.  (d)  The  sinner  needs  not  fear  that  God 
the  judge  will  not  be  pleased  with  the  Surety,  and  with  his  satisfac- 
tion. Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  made  this  of  God  to  him  :  the  Judge 
himself  appointed  him  to  be  a  surety,  sent  him  into  the  world,  de- 
manded the  debt  of  him,  and  showed  that  he  was  satisfied  with  him, 
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  exalted  bim  at  his  own  right  hand, 
and  thus  *' justified  him,"  I  1  im.  iii.  16.  And  therefore  he  swears 
that  "  he  will  not  be  wa-oth  with  the  believing  smner,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  (e)  Is  the  sinner  anxious  to  know  how  he  shall 
obtain  this  Mediator  for  himself ;  this  Saviour  is  offered  to  him  in 
the  gospel,  and  he  hath  only  to  choose  him  for  nimself  upon  that 
offer  ;  yea,  God  commands  him  to  do  this,  and  promi  eth  him  that 
"  he  w^ill  not  reject  him,"  but  will  receive  and  save  him,  John  vu  37. 
Isaiah  xlv.  22. 

May  and  must  we  not  then  say,  that  the  doctrine  of  our  reformed 
church  is  pure  and  evangelical,  according  to  the  word  of  God  ?  For 
it  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  that  it  calms 
and  comforts  the  troubled  mind  of  a  distressed  sinner  perfectly  :  For 
*^  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were  written  for  our 
learning  ;  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures, 
might  have  hope,"  Rom.  xv.  4.  And  who  of  those  who  are  not  of 
our  communion  are  comparable  to  us  in  this  respect  ?  the  Romanists 
require  that  the  distressed  sinner  should  satisfy  for  his  temporal  and 
eternal  punishment,  by  various  bodily  exercises  and  penances  of  hear- 
ing masses  for  souls'  abstaining  from  particular  meats  during  certain 
seasons,  saying  and  muttering  many  prayers,  going  upon  pilgrim- 
ages to  this  and  that  holy  place,  so  called,  and  celebrating  many  holy 


— ly.  139 

>Ay:.-     Will  this  not  suffice,  he  must  then  seek  indulgences,  and  the 
h.upererogatory  works  of  saints,  v/ho  were  more  than  perfect.     Doth 
he  come  short  still,  he  must  then  believe  and  be  assured,  that  he  will 
be  obliged   to  satisfy  for  Vrha?:  remains  in  an  exceedingly  hot  and 
burning  purgatory,  where  he  will  be  most  severely  tormented  a  long 
time,  and  vhat  he  cannot  be  delivered  out  of  it,  unless  many  prayers 
be  offered  up  for  him,  and  many  masses  for  the  dead  be  provided 
for  hira  by  the  living.     The  ISocinians  do  indeed  detest  these  trifles^ 
but  neither  do  they  heal  the  breach  in  the  spirit ;  for  they  do  not 
speak  of  a  satisfying  Mediator   but  only  say,  that  the  mourning  sin- 
ner must  believe  the  promises  of  Cod,  that  he  who  do;h   good  shall 
receive  a  good  reward.     Uoth  the  sinner  say,  that  he  hath  not  done 
any  good  work,  and  that  the  promises  do  not  therefore  belong  to 
him,  they  will  then  endeavour  to  soothe  him  with  an  exterjial  con- 
version, telling  him  that  he  must  lead  a  better  life   for  the  time  to 
come,  tnat  he  must  keep  the  easy  commandments  of  Christ,  and 
ti;at  Cod  will  then  forgive  his  former  sins.     The  Remonstrants  do 
not  condu^  t  much  better,   when  they  meet  with  a  sorrowful  sinner ; 
for  they  presently  quiet  him  with  vain  consolations,  and  say  that  he 
must  not  be  so  sorrwful,  that  his  case  is  certainly  not  so  lamentable, 
that  he  r^jpents  of  his  sins,  that  God  is  merciful,  that  Christ  hath 
died  for  every  sinner,  and  merited  a  sufficient  grace  :  that  he  must 
promise  to  lead  a  better  life,  and  to  make  a  better  use  of  the  powers 
of  his  free  v/ill,  and  that  God  will  then  grant  him  his  grace.    O  vain 
and  miserable  coniforters  of  sick  souls  !  they  show  that  they,  have 
not  yet  any  experimental  knowledge  of  the  abominable  nature  of  sin, 
nor  of  a  true  humiliation,  nor  of  the  satisfaction  nor  fulness  of  Christ, 
nor  of  a  perfect  consolation  ;  and  therefore  they  feed  the  poor  soul 
with  ashes,  and  put  a  lie  in  her  right  hand. 

But  if  our  doctrine  were  ever  so  efficacious  and  sufficient  to  quiet 
a  troubled  mind,  it  will  nevertheless,  not  administer  the  smallest  re* 
lief  unless  we  know  that  Christ  with  all  his  fulness  is  also  given  to  us 
of  God  :  that  he  is  not  given  to  all  men,  will  appear  on  the  following 
Lord's  day.  To  force  ourselves  into  a  steadfast  persuasion,  in  a  care- 
less manner,  without  any  foundation,  and  without  a  strict  examina- 
tion of  ourselves,  that  Christ  is  given  to  us,  is  building  the  hope  of 
our  salvation  upon  a  foundation  of  sand,  and  it  will  sink  the  sinner 
into  the  lake  ;  and  therefore  it  behooves  every  one  to  examine  him- 
self in  the  strictest  manner,  and  to  inquire  thoroughly  **  whether 
Christ  be  in  him,"  and  be  given  to  him.  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Is  it  your 
desire,  fi lends,  to  know  how  the  person  is  disposed,  to  whom  the 
Mediator  is  given,  that  ye  may  liken  and  compare  yourtelves  to  him  ? 


y^  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

pbserve,  (a)  such  a  person  beholds  with  grief  and  detestation  h\» 
bhndness,  guilt,  filthiness,  impotence,  and  abominable  sins,  and  that 
not  only  others,  but  also  he  himself,  hath  deserved,  accordinet  to  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,  temporal  and  eternal  punishment :  he 
is  concerned  and  distressed  on  this  account ;  he  sees  not  how  he 
shall  be  dehvered  ;  all  his  own  endeavours  and  exertions,  from  which 
he  formerly  derived  hope,  fail  him  ;  he  views  ihem  as  *'  loss  and  dung,*" 
Phil.  ii.  4 — 8  ;  and  he  cries  out  "  there  is  no  hope,  he  doth  not 
find  Liny  more  the  life  of  lis  hand,  and  therefore  he  is  grieved." 
Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  He  doth  not,  however,  wholly  abandon  himsel*  to 
an  entire  despair  ;  but  having  an  earnest  desirt-  to  escape  punish- 
mem,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour,  he  looks  about  that  he 
may  find  some  means  to  obtain  that  end  ;  and  therefore  re  asks 
others,  "  what  he  must  do  tube  saved-"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.  "He 
fas's  and  prays"  with  Saul,  Acts  ix.  11,  and  he  strives  earnestly  'to 
work  out  his  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  God  worketh 
in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do."  Pf'.ii.  ii.  12,  12.  He  will  also  not 
desist  nor  rest,  until  he  hath  some  evi  lences,  and  until  "  God  saith 
to  his  soul,  1  am  thy  salvation."  Psalm  xxxv.  3  ;  for  God  will  "  look- 
with  favour  only  '^  on  him,  wh©  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit," 
Isaiah  Ixvi.  2,  and  ''the  Redeemer  should  come  to  Zion  for  them 
who  turned  from  iniquity."  Isaiah,  lix.  20.(b)  Such  a  person  hath 
also  a  high  estimation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  To  you  who  be-, 
lieve,  he  is  puci'.  us,"  saith  the  apostle.  1  Peter,  ii  17.  He  consid- 
ers him  as  so  capable,  sufficient,  and  adapted  to  all  his  necessities, 
that  his  soul  becomes  exceedingly  eager  and  desirous  to  possess 
him  :  he  betakes  himself,  therefore  to  praying  and  wrestling  for 
!iiiji,that  he  may  impart  himself  to  him  ;  he  surrenders  himself  to 
hino,  and  casts  himself  upon  him  ;  he  calls  and  fetches  him  in,  and 
he  ceases  not  to  wrestle  thus  in  faith,  until  he  reveals  and  imparts 
himself  to  the  soul.  Thus  the  Canaanitish  woman  acted.  Matt.  xv. 
22—28,  and  Saul,  Plilip.  iii  7 — 10,(c)  Such  an  one  doth  also 
desire  bim  with  all  his  benefits,  he  wishes  not  only  that  Christ  should 
make  him  wise,  bestow  his  righteousness  upon  him,  deliver  him 
from  his  misery,  and  save  him,  but  also  that  he  should  be  ^  anctifi- 
cation  to  him,  that  he  should  take  all  his  sins  from  him,  and  slay 
them ;  those  also,  which  appear  to  him,  as  far  as  he  is  carnal,  hon- 
purable,  profitable  and  agreeable ;  that  he  should  even  take  entire 
possession  of  his  whole  heart,  and  fashion  it  according  to  his  will ; 
^e  considers  holiness,  a  being  dead  to  himself,  being  resigned  to 
pod,  and  doing  the  will  of  '.iod  in  all  things,  as  the  most  glorious 
•dip4  iTio^t  happy  portion  that  a  person  can  enjoy  ;  therefore  he  de 


'     —19.  14i 

iights  in  it,  and  cries  out  with  David  to  God,  Psalm  cxix.  45. 
*«  Thou  hast  commanded  u~^  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O 
that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes.(d)  C  hrist  and 
his  gospel  are  revealed  to  such  a  person  inwardly  and  effectually  by 
the  holy  Spirit,  to  who!»  belongs  the  dispensation  of  the  sjospel  ;  he 
not  only  reads  and  hears  out  of  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  only  apprehends  by  his  contemplations  who  and  what  be  is 
to  a  sini.er,  bm  Christ  himself  is  also  discovered  by  the  light  of  his 
Spirit  to  the  soul,  by  which  his  heart  is  warmed,  captivated  and 
drawn  forth  toward  him  in  taith  and  love.  ''  The  Lf^rd  opt-ns  his 
heart,  and  causes  him  to  give  heed  to  the  things  that  are  s  oken  by 
Paul,"  or  others  from  the  gospel,  Acts  xvi.  14.  He  obtams  "  the 
mind  of CIrist,"  I  Coi.  ii.  16.  "For  Go<l,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  si  line  opt  of  darkness,  shines  into  our  hearts,  to  give  the 
iigntofthe  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ,"    2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

Have  ye  no  knowledge  of  these  things,  have  ye  never  attended  to 
them,  nor  experienced  them,  can  ye  then  indeed  think  that  this 
great  V>ediator,  with  his  great  benefits,  is  given  of  God  to  you  ? 
surely  no:  but  it  behooves  you  to  know  that  ye  are  yet  "without 
Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from 
the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  It  is  true,  ye  have  and  hear  the  gospel,  but  "  it 
doth  not  profit  you,  not  being  mixed  with  faith,',  Heb.  iv  2.  «  It  is 
hidden  from  you-  and  ye  perish,  the  pod  of  this  woild  hath  blinded 
your  minds,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  should 
shine  unto  you,"  2  Cov.  iv.  4  How  grievous  will  it  be  to  you  to 
perish  under  the  precious  dispensation  of  the  gospel !  Will  not  the 
Ninevites,  the  queen  '  f  Sheba,  Sodom  aud  C/omorrah,  Tyre  and  Si- 
doB,  yea,  all  the  nations  who  have  not  heard  the  gospel,  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  yo'.  (,  because  ye  have  neglected  such  a  favourable 
opportunity  to  be  saved,  which  they  never  enjoyed  ?  Friends,  it  will 
be  a  hell  in  the  midst  of  hell  to  you,  that  ye  have  not  improved  such 
an  acceptable  time  and  such  a  dny  of  salvation.  "  Or  do  ye  despise 
the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering,  not 
knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repensance  ?  Ye 
do  then,  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  for 
yourselves  wrath  againit  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  li*  4,  5. 

Awake,  awake  therefore,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Ac- 
cept, and  lay  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  "  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  bitt 


44i  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL, 

a  Httle,"  Pselm  ii.  12.     For  (a)  do  ye  not  stand  in  need  of  him  ?  have 
ye  not  deserved  temporal  and  eternal  punishmetjt,  according  to  the 
righteous  judgment  ci  Ciod  ?  how  shall   ye  escape  and  be  again  re- 
ceived into  favour  r   or  do  ye  know  how  ye  can  by  wearying  your- 
selves with  certain  devoirs?  are  ye  not  foohsh,  worthy  of  condemna- 
tion, abomini»ble,_  and  altogether  miserable  ?  is  not  he  alone  sufficient 
to  fill  you  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ?     *'  He  can  save  to  the   utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  God  through   him,"   saith    the  text.     O 
do  not  then  despise  him.Cb)     Ye  can  obtain  him  and  all  his  fulness  ;; 
for  he  calls  and  invites  you  to  him  :     '•  Turn  unto  me,  and  be  saved 
S|ll  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;■'  thus  he  saith  to  you  also,  who  are  alto> 
gether  miserable,   Isaiah  xly.  22.     "  God   himself  sets  him  forth  to 
jOU,to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"   Rom*  iii.   25. 
"  Ho,  every  one   that  thirsteth  ;"  thus   he  crieth,  Isaiah  Iv.  1,  2,  S, 
**  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  ye  who  have  no   money,  come,  buy 
wine    and   milk  without  money  and  without  price."   &c.     Yea,  he 
saith,  Rev.  xxii.    17,  "Let  whosoever   will  take   the  waters  of  life 
freely."     He  invites  even  all  those  who  live   under  the  gospel,  yea, 
those  also  who  are  lukewarm,   and  those  Avho  are  puffed  up  with  a 
proud  conceit  of  themselves  like  the  Laodiceans,  for  he  snith,  Rev. 
iii.  18.     "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  geld  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich  ;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou   mayest  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not   appear  ;    and   annoint 
thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."     For  what  pur-t 
pose  have  ye  preachers  ?  and  why  do  they  publish  the  gospel  to 
you  ?  is  it  not  that  they  may  persuade  you  to  believe,  and  that  they 
niay  adure   you  to  this  sufficient  Deliverer,  and  induce  you  to  lay 
hold  on  him  ?     "  Now  then,   we    are  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as 
thougli  God  did  beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray   you  in  Christ's  stead, 
be  ye  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.  20.(c)     May  ye  indeed  neglect 
to  receive  him,  when  he  is  offered  to  you  ?  is  not  this  enjoined  on, 
you  ?  may  ye  continue   unbelieving  ?    is  it  left  to  your  choice,  to 
embrace  the  Son  of  God  or  not  ?    surely  no  :  will  ye  then   be  wil- 
fully and  knov/ingly   disobedient,  and  perish  ?     Who,  who  is  there 
of  you  vvho  will  with  such  a  wicked  heart  of  unbelief,  depart  from  the 
Jiving  God  ?     Is  there  any  one  who  is  so  wicked,  do  thou,  and  tliou 
nevertheless  "  save  thyself  from  this  untoward  generation,"  Acts  ii. 
40.     "  Take  hold  of  the  strength  of  God,    that  thou  mayest  make 
peace  with  him,"  Isaiah   xxxvii.   4.     "  BelievtJ  in   the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  Acts  xvi.   31.(cl)     Well,  sinner, 
wilt  thou  not  flee  to  him  ?  shouldest   thou  go  to  him,  and   receive 
him  in  vain  ?     No :  "  him  that  comcth  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  ca?;t 


VI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16—19.  U3 

aut,"  safth  he,  John  vi.  37.  Thou  wilt  not  fail  of  salvation,  if  thou 
wilt  only  receive  hini,  and  surrender  tnys'^lf  to  him  with  a  pertect 
heart.  "  lie  that  believeth,  and  is  baptiz  d,  shall  be  saved,"  saith 
the  moulli  of  truth  again  and  again,  Mark  xvi.  16.  John  iii.  16,  17, 
36.  He  confirms  it  with  a  double  "verily,"  Join  v.  M,  yea,  as  it 
were  with  an  oath,  Ezek.  xxxiii  1 1.  (e)  Will  yc  not  come,  but  re- 
main in  yourselves,  know  then  that  ye  are  guilty  of  a  most  heinous 
sin  ;  ye  despise  him,  his  fulness  and  love,  which  the  devils  cannot 
dj,  since  he  is  not  ofTered  to  them  ;  "  Ye  make  God  a  liiir,"  i  John 
V.  10.  He  upbraids  you  v/ilh  it  m  anger,  '*  that  ye  will  not  come  to 
him,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  "  His  wrath  lieth  and 
abideth  on  you,"  John  iii,  35.  "  When  distress  and  anguish  cometh 
upon  you,  and  ye  cali  upon  him,  thi;n  he  will  not  answer  ;  but  he 
"vvill  laugh  at  your  calamity,"  Prov.  i  20—33.  "  To-day  then,  if 
yc  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalrn  xcv.  7,  8. 
'•  For  iiow  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  gr? at  a  salvation  ? 
Heb.  ii.  3, 

But,  believers,  ye  who  have  chosen  and  received  him  ?Ione,  wholly 
and  frequently  for  j^ours,  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  because 
the  Lord  God  natn  offered  him  to  you  in  the  gospel,  and  captivated 
your  hearts  thereby  : 

1.  Believe,  and  be  assured  that  God  hath  given  him  to  you  with 
all  his  fulness,  and  tuat  he  is  yours,  aUvl  ye  are  his;  like  the  spouse 
wno  said  wiil.oi.t  do-ibtuig,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his," 
Song  ii  16.  "  Do  ye  not  know  your  own^  elves,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
in  you,"  2  Cor.  xiii,  5.  Do  ye  not  know  with  Paul,  "  that  y^.  have 
believed  in  him?"  2  Tim  i.  12.  Can  yc  deny  your  sorrow  and 
concern  for  your  miserable  condition,  the  continual  outgoings  of  your 
hearts  toward  him  in  desires  and  longings,  your  hearty  surrendering^ 
of  yourselves  to  him,  and  receiving  of  him,  as  well  to  be  sanctified 
by  him,  as  to  be  saved  ;  can  yc,  we  say.  deny  these  things  ?  and  are 
they  not  considered  by  you  as  evidences  of  your  saving  interest  in 
him  ?  Well,  let  your  hearts  then  be  perfectly  assured  before  him  of 
his  love  to  you 

2.  Live  much  in  the  contemplation  of  his  excellency.  May  ye 
not  with  Stephen,  "see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man 
stanrling  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56  ;  endeavour  to 
contemplate  him  in  his  glorious  gospel,  and  led  up  by  it,  to  entep 
wi  h  Moses  into  the  clouds,  and  with  open  face  to  behold  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  in  a  glass,  and  thus  to  see  this  King  in  his  beauty  in 
a  far  country.  He  is  certainly  worthy  of  your  wliole  understanding; 
all  th.vt  was  ever  foresaid  and  foreshown  of  him,  as  fair  and  glorious 


U4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

exists  in  him  in  the  most  perfect  m inner:  whatever  is  larking  im 
you,  can  be  found  in  him.  He  liath  a  f  ilntss  of  i^racc  to  supply  all 
your  JeficicDcics  :  he  is  perfectly  adapicd  to  all  your  necessities: 
*'  in  him,  and  in  iiis  love,  there  is  a  breadth,  length,  depth,  and 
heii^hi,  and  to  know  this  fiMs  us  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph. 
iii.  18,  19.  It  afibi'ds  a  wondef.l  joy  to  the  soul  to  contemplate 
him,  '^  she  wa  ks  in  tie  light  of  his  countenance,  and  rejoices  in  his 
name  dl  the  day  lon;^,"  Fs.ilm  Ixxxix.  15,  16.  Yea,  "  she  is  chang- 
ed ufier  ihe  glorious  imaii,e  ol  the  Lord,  which  she  beholds  with 
open  fcice,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor. 
iii.  IS. 

3.  Behold  now  your  happ-ness,  and  the  great  kindness,  that  hath 
been  shown  to  you  :  what  l5ath  God  the  Lord  done  f')r  you,  that  he 
might  deliver  you  from  punishme-nt,  and  restore  you  to  favour  ? 
He  do-.li  not  merely  admit  a  surety,  but  he  appoints  !iis  "^on,  in  his 
cverlasiiu;;- conned  lo  be  one  ;  he  sends  him  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,  inflicts  on  him  the  punishment  of  your  sins,  m  your  stead,  re- 
ceives vou  into  his  covenant,  gives  you  this  Mediator  and  D  iiverer 
to  be  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifacation  and  redemption  to  you, 
causes  you  'o  emi.race  him,  and  publishes  the  gospel,  even  the  gos- 
pel of  f'diilmeut  so  you.  How  obscutely  was  it  publsiied  to  the  fa- 
tntrs  !  but  it  is  announced  with  exceeding  clearness  to  you.  What 
a  burthensome  service  did  he  inopose  on  the  fathers  !  but  he  hath 
freed  you  therefrom.  How  earnestly  did  they  desire  these  days, 
that  they  might  see  <.  hribt  in  the  flesh  !  but  they  might  not  live  un- 
til these  days,  and  God  hath  provided  some  belter  thing  for  you  : 
"  iJlcsbcd  arc  your  eyes,  for  th'iy  see  ;  and  your  ears  for  they  hear. 
*'  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  prophets  and  righteous  men 
have  desu^ed  to  see  those  things  wldch  ye  see,  and  have  not 
seen  them:  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye  hear,  ai.d  have  not 
heard  them,"  saith  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  Malt.  xiii.  16,  i  7.  re- 
joice then  exceedingly  on  account  of  this  salvation,  which  hath  been 
accomplished  :  "  It  should  be  said  in  this  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God, 
we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  this  is  the  Lord,  we 
have  waited  for  him.  we  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation," 
Isa'ah  XXV.  9.  ''  Rejoice  then  greatly  in  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  he 
joyful  in  their  God,  for  he  hath  clothed  you  with  the  irarmenls  of 
salvation,  he  hath  covered  you  with  the  rohe  of  rig!itcousness," 
Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  Yea,  "  let  all  the  seed  of  Israel  glo.y  in  tJie  Loid," 
Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

4.  Improve  therefore   your  Mediator  and  all  bis  fulness,  as  your 
necessities  require,"  receiving  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace," 


VI.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16~19.  145 

John  i,  15.  "  That  he  may  supply  all  your  needs  acccrdiii?^  to  his 
riches,  and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work 
of  failh  with  power,"  Philip,  iv.  19.  8  Thes.  i.  1 1.  Behold  continu- 
ally your  W;ints,  your  darkness,  gui't,  sinfulness,  and  other  n-iiseiies  ; 
and  see  that  there  is  a  fulness  of  wisdom,  righteousness,  sunctification 
and  redemption  in  him  against  all  this,  particularly  for  you  ;  go  to 
him  'vitii  your  distresses,  receive  of  his  fuhiess  against  them,  and 
suck  therefrom,  through  the  conduits  of  the  p  omises,  whatever  ye 
need  ;  suffer  him  to  exe:^ute  his  office  upon  you,  for  "  he  is  all,  and 
in  all,"  Coll.  iii.  11,  and  "  is  exalted  to  he  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to 
give  repeniance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31. 

J.  Finally,  to  conclude,  "  Only  walk  worthily  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,"  Phil.  i.  27,  that  is  humbly,  bclievingly,  joyfully,  h^iily,  cir- 
cumspectly, and  Vv'ith  self-denial  toward  all  things  out  of  him. 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  sai'.h,  Titus  ii.  1 1,  12,  13,  '*  the  grace  of  God, 
which  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared  to  all  men  ;  teaching  us 
that  denying  ungodliness,  and  v/orldiy  lusts,  we  sliould  live  soberly, 
TJghteotisly,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  :  looking  for  that  bles- 
sed hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  tlie  great  God,  and  our  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,"  Amen, 


146  ) 


SAVING  FAITH 


VII.  LORDS  DAY^ 


John  iii  36.  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life  s 
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  ihe  wrath 

of  God  abideth  on  him.

Q.    17.    Why  must  he  in  one  person  be  also  very  God  ? 

A.  That  he  might,  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead,  sustain  in  his 
human  nature,  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  ;  and  might  obtain  for, 
and  restore  to  us,  righteousness  and  Ife. 

Q.  18.  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  ivho  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ? 

A.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom? 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption." 

Q.   19.    Whence  knoivest  thou  this? 

A.  From  the  holy  gospel,  which  God  himself  revealed  first  in 
Paradise  ;  and  afterwards  published  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets, 
and  Was  pleased  to  represent  it,  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  the 
"Dther  ceremonies  of  the  law ;  and  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his 

^nly  begotten  Son- 

TT 


122  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL 

VV  -1  ^T  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
Qesli,  Gofi  sendin^j  his  own  Son,  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and 
for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fuliilled  in  us."  Thus  speaks  Paul,  Horn.  viii.  3,  4.  The 
law  cannot  justify  the  sinner.  Ciod  did  indeed  give  the  hw  to  man- 
kind before  the  fall,  that  they  might  obtain  righteousness  and  life 
by  keeping  it  perfectly,  and  it  would  thus  have  been  possible  for  the 
law  to  justify  man  :  "  For  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  the  law,  saith,  The  man  which  doth  these  things  shall  live  by 
them,"  Rom.  x.  5.  But  the  law  cannot  do  this  now,  since  it  is  be- 
come weak  through  sin  and  the  flesh  ;  it  hath  now  only  a  power  to 
curse  and  condemn  the  sinner,  according  to  the  divine  threatening, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;"  and  therefore  "  they 
who  aie  of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10, 
and  so  <•  the  law  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  declareth  that 
"  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii.  19.  If  the  sinner 
shall  then  be  justified,  the  righteousness  of  the  law  must  be  fulfilled 
in  him  by  a  sufficient  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  expressed  in 
the  law  ;  for  '•  Zion  must  be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her  con- 
verts with  righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  27,  aAd  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  must 
be  exalted  in  judgment,  and  God,  who  is  holy,  must  be  sanctified  ia 
righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  16.  The  demand,  which  the  law  of  God 
makes  against  the  sinner,  requiring  that  he  sihould  be  punished, 
cannot  be  refused,  inasmuch  as  the  law  contains  the  sentence  of  curs- 
ing, denounced  by  God.  But  who,  yea,  who  is  able  to  satisfy  this 
righteous  demand  of  the  law  ?  the  sinner  himself  cannot ;  for  he  in- 
creaseth  his  debt  daily  :  no  other  creature  can,  because  he  cannot 
sustain  the  burthen  of  God's  eternal  wrath.  If  any  one  shall  be  « 
worthy  and  able  to  do  this,  he  must  be  very  man  and  righteous,  and 
also  God  and  man  in  one  person,  according  to  what  the  foregoing 
Lord's  dav  hath  taught  us  from  the  word  of  God,  and  for  which  solid 
reasons  are  R:iven  in  this  Lord's  day.  Question  16,  17,  and  in  which 
it  is  shown,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  mediator  and  deliv- 
erer, Question  18,  and  that  this  is  made  known  in  the  gospel,  Ques- 
tion 19,  that  the  sinner,  being  concerned,  and  desirous  of  deliverance, 
may  obtain  perfect  satisfaction  and  comfort. 

There  are  three  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  otir 
consideration  : 

I.  Why  the  mediator  must  be  a  real  and  righteous  man  and  God 
in  one  person,  Question  16,  17» 


Vr.  LORD'S  rXAY,  Q.  16-19.  12S 

II.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  Ques^ 
tion  18. 

III.  And  that  we  loiow  this  from  the  gospel,  Question  19. 

I.  The  person  who.  shall  be  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  eught,  in 
the  first  place,  to  be  very  man ;  •'  because  the  justice  of  God  requires 
that  the  human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  likewise  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin  ;"  or,  as  the  Latin  catechism  expresseth  it,  Ut  cadem 
natura  humajia^  qua  fiecavit^  ifisa  firo  fieccato  defi€)ida.t  ;  "  that  the  same 
human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  make  satisfaction  for  sin." 
The  justice  of  God  requires  s.uisfliction  of  the  sinner  himself  ;  but  if 
God  will,  by  a  special  kindness,  transfer  his  demand  to  a  surety,  that 
surely  must  be  of  the  same  nature  with  the  sinner,  in  order  to  be* 
some  his  surety.     Therefore   Paul  saith,  Heb.  ii.  11,   *'  For  both  he 
that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctifkd,  are  all  of  one  :  for  which 
cause  he  is.  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."    And  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  which  he  hath   expressed  in  his  law,  demands  this  ; 
for  it  demands  that   "  man   should  love  his  nei^•hbour  as  himself." 
Luke    X.   27,28,     And   if  he   do  pot,    <' that  he  should  die."    Rom; 
i.  32.     If  the  mediator  should  then  saiisty  the  justice  of  God,  accor- 
ding: to  the  demand  of  the  law,  he  must  be  "  made  under  the   law,'* 
which  was  given  to  man  ;  "  that  he  may   redeem  him  who  was  un- 
der the  law,"^    Gal.  iv.  4,  5.     He  must  then  also  be  the  neighbour 
of  man,  and  so  "  of  one  blood  with  him ,"     Acts  xvii,  26.     And  **  by 
the  grace  of  God  must  taste  death,"  (or  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body)  "for  every  man,"    Heb.  \u  9« 

1  or  this  reason,  God  also,  foretold  that  the  Mediator  ^nd  Deliverer 
should  be  very  man  ;  for  he  promised  hira  formerly,  as  "  the  ^ecd 
of  the  woman  i"  Gen.  iii.  15  :  and  as  ''  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Is£lac, 
and  Jacob ;"  Gen.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  xxviii,  14  ;  and  that  "  he  should 
be  the  fruit  of  the  body  of  David,"  Psalm  exxxii.  1 1 .  This  was  also 
typified  under  the  Old  Testament  by  the  redeemers,  and  by  the  high 
priests :  the  Lord  had  enjoined,  that  he  who  was  the  nearest  kins- 
man, the  Goel^  should  be  the  person,  who  should  redeem  the  mortga- 
ged inheritance  of  another,  or  his  person,  if  he  were  imprisoned  for 
debt,  or  sold  for  a  slave,  and  that  he  should  be  the  avenger  of  his 
blood.  Lev.  XXV.  25:  Ruth  ii.  20,  iii.  12,  13.  iv.  1 — 10  Numb. 
XXXV.  19,21,24,25,27'  He  then,  who  shall  be  the  sinner's  re- 
deemer, must  also  be  his  kinsman,  and  therefore  the  Mediator  is  cal- 
led the  G&ri,  the  kinsman  and  *' Redeemer,  who  should  come  to 
Zion,"  Isaiah  hx.  20.  Paul,  having  respect  to  this,  saith  of  the  Me- 
diator and  Deliverer,  Heb.  ii.  14,  15,  16."  For  as  much  then,  as 
"he  children  are  partakers  of  fl^sh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  like- 


i24  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

wise  took  part  of  the  same  ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy 

him  ti^at  hud  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ;  and  deliver  them 
who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  the  r  lifetime  subject  to  bondage. 
"  For  veriljr  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  he  took 
on  him   the  seed  of  Abraham."     This  was  also  typified  by  the  high 
priests      '*  For  e  ery  high  pnest,  taken  froni  among  men,  is  ordain- 
ed for  men  ia  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts 
^nd  sacrifices  for  sins :  who  can   have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  ;   for  that  he  himself  is  also 
<:ompassed   with  infirmity,"      Heb.  v.    1,  2.      Therefore  the  true 
Higii  Priest  behooved  also  to  be  very  man,  in  order  that  he  might  of- 
fer a  perfect  sacrifice  for  sins,  and  have  suitable  compassion.     Let 
us  hear  the  same  apostle  again  ;  he  saith,  Heb.  li.  17,  18,  "Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be  made  like  his  brethren  ;  that 
he  mi'^ht  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining 
unto  G  )d,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sin  of  the  people  :  for   in 
that  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  tosuccorr  them 
that  are  tempted.     The  mediator  and  deliverer   must  not  only  be 
very  man,  bnt  also  a  perfectly  holy  man  ;  "  because  man  being  him- 
self a  sinner,  cnnnot  satisty  for  others  ;"  for  he  would  then  be    obli- 
ged to  satisfy  for  himself,  and  nevertheless  not  be    able,    much    less 
then  for  another,  as  hath   been  shown  on   a  foregoing   Lord's   day. 
He  must  then  be  a  "  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  high  priest,  who 
needeth  not  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's,"  as  the  text  speaks.     This  was   also  foretold  of  old ; 
the     'ediitor  and  Deliverer  should  be  "the  Holy  One."  Psalm  xvi. 
10.     *'  He  should  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  and  his  kw  should 
]be  within  liis  heart,"   Psalm  xl.  8  ;  and  "  vTickedness  should  be  an 
abomination  to  his  lips,"  Prov.   viii.  7,  8  ;  as  this  was  also  typified 
by  the  priests,  who  might  not   be  defiled,  v/hen  they  approached  to 
God,  the  Holv  One ;  for  *'  God  would  be  sanctified  in   them  that 
came  nigh  him  ;"  or  he  would  sanctify  himself,  by  consuming  them. 
Lev.  X.  1,2,  o.     Now  the  mediator  and  deliverer  ought   to  be  also 
the  surety  and  high  pi  iest,  and   therefore  also  holy,  "  that  he  might 
draw  near  to  God  in  those  things  which  pertained  to  God,  in  order 
to  make  reconciliation."  Jer.  xxx.  21.    Heb.  ii.  17.    The  sacrificial 
gifts  also  typified  this  ;  for  they  were  to  be  holy  and  without  blemish, 
according;  to   Lev.  xxii.   22,    25.    Mai.  i.  7,   8.     And  therefore  the 
true  sacrifice,  with  which  God  should  be  well  pleased,  behooved  also 
to  be  noly,   and   without  blemish;   "a   lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot  "   1  Peter  i.    19.     See  also  2  Cor.   v.   21,    Eph.  v.  2. 
"jYte  may  add  to  this  that  the   mediator  and  deliverer,  ought  lo  be 


—19.  itt 

ttoly,  because  it  was  necessary  that  his  human  nature  should  be  per- 
sonally united  to  his  Godhead,  and  therefore,  also  holy  ;  for  "that 
holy  thing,  which  should  be  born,  s'nould  be  called  the  Son  of  God," 
Lukei.  35. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  rrjediator  and  deliverer  should  then,  alsoj 
be  very  God.(l)  "  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead, 
sustain  in  his  human  nature  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath."  How 
heavy  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  is,  that  it  must  be  sustained,  in 
order  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  and  that  no  mere  creature  could  sus- 
tain it,  hath  been  shown  on  the  fourth  and  fiftli  Lord's  days.  Ke 
then  who  shall  sustain  it,  so  as  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  must  be  more 
powerful  than  all  the  creatures,  and  so  very  God,  that  he  may  sup- 
port his  human  nature,  while  he  suffers,  and  s\tstains  the  divine 
wrath  that  "  his  own  arm  may  bring  him  salvation,  and  his  fury 
may  uphold  him,"  Isaiah  Ixlii.  5.(2)  The  mediator  and  deliverer 
must  also  be  God, "  that  he  may  obtain  forns  righteousness  and  life," 
The  sinner,  if  he  shall  stand  before  God,  and  live,  must  have  an  in* 
finite  righteousness,  that  all  his  sins  committed  against  the  most 
high  majesty  of  God,  may  be  forgiven  him,  and  that  he  may  be  deliv- 
ered from  everlasting  death,  and  obtain  everlasting  Hfe.  in  the  ever- 
lasting favour  of  God ;  as  it  was  a'so  foretold,  that  ''the  Messiah 
should  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness."  Dan.  fx,  24.  Nov,- 
it  is  impossible,  that  the  righteousness  of  a  mere  creature 
should  he  of  infinite  dignity,  he  ought  then  himself  to  be  the  infi- 
nite God,  if  his  righteousness  shall  have  such  a  divine  dignity  (3) 
It  behooved  the  mediator  and  deliverer  to  restore  this  righteousness 
and  life  to  us,  to  apply  and  communicate  them  to  us  It  was  not 
enough  to  obtain  the  righteousness  and  life,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
impart  them  also  to  the  sinner,  if  he  should  be  delivered.  "  The 
shepherd  who  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep,"  must  also,  "  give  them 
eternal  Hfe,  and  keep  them  so,  that  they  do  never  perish,  and  that 
none  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand,"  John  x.  1 1,  28.  And' therefore 
the  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  God  ;  .for  a  man  could  not 
appropri:^tb  to  himself  the  righteousness,  which  the  mediator  obtains, 
and  the  life  which  he  merits.  There  is  need  here  oi  an  "exceeding 
greatness  of  God's  pov/cr,  according  to  tlte  v/orking  of  his  mighty 
power,"  Eph  1.  19.(4)  Moreover,  the  mediator,  who  should  su?^ 
render  his  life  to  death,  behooved  to  be  the  lord  of  his  own  life, 
and  thus  to  '*•  have  power  to  lay  his  life  down,  and  to  take  it  again." 
John  y.  18.  Now  no  mere  man  hath  such  power,  but  h(*  on  y,  who 
is  also  very  God,(5)  Add  to  this,  that  he  who  shall  deliver  sinners, 
ought  a'so  to  be  capable  of  bein^  an  object  of  all  religious  hpmag^; 


IJ5  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

faith,  love  and  gratitude  ;  for  tliose  whom  he  delivers  from  tempos 
ral  and  eternal  punishments,  whom  he  reinslates  into  favour,  and 
for  whom  he  obtains,  and  to  whom  he  restores  righteousness  and 
life,  owe  him  such  service.  See  Titus  ii.  14.  Now  such  honour 
cannot  surely  be  offered  to  one  who  is  no  more  than  a  man,  but  he 
must  be  "  God  also,  who  is  over  all,  blessed  forever,'^'  if  he  shall  be 
honoured  thus,  Rom.  ix.  5.  See  Isaiah  xlv.  21,  25.(6)  Finally,  we 
^ay  also,  that  it  v*  as  foretold,  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  should 
be  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord  our  righteousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6.  Hof 
sea,  i.  7". 

It  was  necessary  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  shotild  be  not 
only  very  man.  and  holy,  and  very  God,  but  also,  ••  at  the  same  tim^ 
God  and  man  in  one  person."  For  (a)  since  the  human  nature  can*- 
not  of  itself  sustain  the  wrath  of  God,  and  its  sufferings  cannot  be  of 
an  infinite  dignity,  and  since  the  incorruptible  Godhead  cannot  suf- 
fer, therefore  his  Godhead  must  have  its  proper  human  nature,  in 
order  to  suffer  therein  ;  and  the  human  nature  and  the  Godhead 
must  be  united*  that  the  Godhead  may  support  the  human  nature 
under  its  grievous  sufferings,  and  that  its  sufferings  may  be  of  infi- 
nite dignity,  being  "  the  proper  blood  of  God,"  Acts,  xx.  28  ;  and 
*'  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,"  1  John  i.  7.  We  cannot  say  that 
there  could  be  two  mediators,  one  of  whom  should  be  man,  that  he 
might  suffei,  and  the  other  God,  in  order  to  add  an  infinite  dignity 
to  the  huraan  sufferings  of  the  other  ;  for  no  human  sufferings  caft 
ever  be  of  infinite  dignity,  unless  the  suffering  person  himself  be  aP 
so  very  God,  and  suffer  in  his  ov/n  human  ]j^ature.(b)  We  may  al- 
so say,  that  it  behooved  him  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  be- 
cause  he  who  shall  be  the  mediator,  must  be  equally  near  to  both 
parties,  even  to  God  and  the  sinner,  that  he  may  unite  and  appease 
both  in  himself;  and  he  must  thus  be  a  "  mediator  between  God  and; 
man,  that  he  may  give  himself  a  ransom  for  many,  and  thus  Wm^ 
them  to  God,"  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  6.    I  Peter  iii.   18. 

II.  M\jst  the  sinner  now  have  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer, 
in  order  that  he  may  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  and 
be  again  i-eceived  into  favour,  he  must  then  be  exceedingly  distress- 
ed ;  for  he  himself  cannot  find  such  a  mediator,  much  less  procure 
him  ;  neither  can  any  creature,  angel,  or  man,  do  this  :  but  the  door 
of  hope,  which  Avas  hitherto  shut  to  the  concerned  sinner,  is  opened 
to  him  by  the  instructor,  when,  upon  this  question  of  the  distressed 
person, «'  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  who  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ?"  He  answers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,  &c.  He  doth  not  say,  nor  prove  now, 
that  he  is  ve  ry  God,  and  real  righteotjs  man  in  one  person,  becau§*^ 


—19.  12f 

he  will  do  this  hereafter ;  but  he  only  shows  that  he  is  4  sufficient 
mediator  and  deliverer,  through  whom  the  sinner  can  escape  punish- 
ment, and  be  again  received  into  favour,  since  *'  he  is  made  of  God 
to  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption," 
according  to  I  Cor.  1.  30. 

He  is  given  to  be  (1)  "  wisdom."  The  sinner  is  blind  and  foolish, 
and  he  knoweth  nothing  of  his  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness,  "  his 
understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God, 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,"  Eph.  iv.  18,  but  our  L6rd 
Jesus  Christ  is  ''  the  wisdom  of  God,"  1  Cor.  i.  24.  "  fn  him  arc 
hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  Coll.  ii.  3.  As 
the  great  prophet  he  makes  known  by  his  word,  and  by  his  Spirit  to 
the  elect  sinner,  "  all  that  he  hath  heard  of  the  Father,"  John  xv, 
15,  and  thus  *' he  leads  the  bHnd  by  a  way  which  they  have  not 
known,"  Sec.  Isaiah  xlii.  16.  See  Luke  xxiv.  44,  46.  Acts  xv.i  14, 
xxvi.  18. 

2  That  it  may  not  seem  unjust,  that  the  guilty  sinner  finds  favor, 
therefore  he  becomes  also  <^  righteousness"  to  him,  since  he  procures 
and  restores  to  him  an  infinite  righteousness  by  his  sufferings  and 
obedience,  whereby,  being  justified  before  God,  he  is  delivered  from 
his  guilt,  and  obtains  a  right  to  life  :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  God  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor^  v.  21. 

3.  Doth  he  leave  the  Sinner  in  and  under  the  filth  and  dominion 
of  sin  ?  No ;  but  he  becomes  also  "  sanctification  "  to  him,  by  which 
he  cleanses  him  from  his  loathsome  impurity,  subdues  the  power  of 
his  corruption,  transforms  him  into  the  image  of  God,  and  renders 
him  a  partaker  of  the  holy  nature  of  God,  which  he  doth  first  by  the 
new  birth,  and  then  by  an  increase  of  God,  "  changing  him  from 
glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Which  sanctification  he  procures  by 
his  blood,  and  communicates  by  his  Spirit ;  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  our  God,"   saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  vi.  1 1.  1  Peter  i.  2. 

4.  And  since  sinful  man  is  holden  captive  in  the  snare  of  the 
devil  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  and  misery,  on  account  of  the  justice 
of  God,  therefore  Christ  becomes  also  redemption  to  him,  by  which 
he  delivers  him  from  all  that  renders,  or  can  render  him  miserable, 
and  bestows  all  kinds  of  happiness  upon  him,  partly  in,  and  perfectly 
after  this  life  :  for  when  *<  the  Son  makes  him  free,  then  he  is  fre'6 
indeed,"  John  viii,  3€. 

H-s  "  is  made  "  such  great  benefits  to  us  **  of  God,"  saith  the  apos= 
tlc;  I  Cor,  i,  SO,     He  was  not  this,  by  the  natyr"  of  hi^  essence,  but 


1^6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

by  the  free  and  gracious  constitution  of  God  his  Father,  who  in  the 
aconomy  and  dispensation  of  f^race,  took  upon   himself  the  person 
of  judge,  whom  the  Son  should  satisfy,  as  mediator,  while  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  convey  all   jjrace  from  the  Father  through  the  Son  to 
ihe  sinner.  See  Rom.  iii.  34,  25,   36.  2  Cor.  xiii.    13.  John  xvi.  13, 
14,  15.     And  thus  was  Christ  made  of  God  wisdom.  See.  (1)  In  the 
COUMcii  of  pe^ce  from  eternity,  which  we  call  a  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, because  the  redemption  of  the  sinner  was  demanded  and  prom* 
ised  m  that  council.     God  did  from  eternity  elect  some  to  everlast- 
ing  life,  and  appoint  them  to  be  vessels  of  mercy  ;  but  as  they  could 
DQt  obtain  solvation,  except  the  justice  of  God  were  satisfied,  there- 
fore God  enters  into  a  covenant  with  his  Son-,   and  requires  ;hat  he 
should  make  satisfaction  by  his  suffering  and  obedience,  promising 
him  that  he  would  prepare  a  body  for  him,  give  him  his  Spirit,  up- 
hold him  in  his  suffering,  that  he  should  see  his  seed,  and  obtain  the 
highest  ;<h)ry.     The  Son  consents  to  all  this,  engages  to  become  his 
Father's  servant,  and  declares  it  to  be  his  delight  to  do  his  Father's 
will.:  whereupon  his  Fathtr  gives  him  his  elect,  and  ^'e  claims  thefti 
as  bis  own,  that   he  may  fulfil  the  stipulated  conditions   for  them  i 
and  thus  they  ar*?,  as  it  were,  transferred  from  the  book  of  life,  to 
witj  the  Father's  election,  into  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb.  See  this 
covenant.   Psalm  ii.  T,  8,  9.  xl.   6,   7,   8.  Ixxxix.  28.    Isaiah  xlii.  1. 
xlix.  4.  liii     10.  John  xvii,  6.  Eph  i.  4,   5.  iii.    10,  11.   Rev.  xvi.  8. 
xxi.  27,  which   covenant,  confirmed  "  with  the   word  of  the  oath, 
makes  the  Son  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and   redemp- 
tion,"  lieb.  viii.  28.     The  Lord  .lesus  Christ  is  also  made  of  God 
"Visdom,  Sec   by  the  covenant  of  grace,  which   G  d  established  with 
the  elect  sinner,  whereby  the  allsufficient,  the  only  wise,  righteour. 
and  merciful  God  promiseth  the  foolish,   guilty,  filthy  and  impotent 
sinner,  that  he  will  be  a  God  to  him,  and  will  thus  bestow  all  con- 
^ceivable  bliss  on   bins,   and  the  sinner  accepts  of  this  upon  God's 
proffer,  assents  to  it,  and  resigns  himself  to  the  Lord,  in  order  to  be 
his.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Isaiah  xlix.  5.  Iv.  3.    But  as  God  cannot  enter  intfr 
a  covenant  with  the  guilty  and  filthy  sinner  immediately,  therefore 
!ie  gives  him  his  Son  to  be  a  mediator,  that  he,  by  satisfying  his 
josticc,  may  bring  the  sintter  to  God,  and  obtain  for  him  all  the 
promises  of  the  covenant  of  grace  :  '^  Therefore  he  is  the  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death  for  the  redemption 
of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
arc  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance,"  Heb. 
i;t.  )5.  And  so  he  is  made  of  God  by  the  covenant  of  grace  wisdom, 
Sec  For  <'  the  Lord  gives  him  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  a  light 
Hf  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  y.lii^  G. 


^h  LORD'S  DAT,  Q.  16~19.  !SI 

I'hat  the  covenant  of  redemption  might  now  be  executed,  the 
covenant  of  grace  perfected,  and  the  sinner  rendered  complete  in 
wisdom,  righteousness^  sanctification  and  fedemption,  God  (a)  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  mediator,  caused  him  to  assume  the 
human  nature,  to  satisfy  his  vindictive  justice,  and  procure  wisdom, 
righteousness,  eanctification  and  redemption  for  his  people :  "  For 
what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  throu.arh  the  ^esh, 
God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin, 
condemned  sin  in  the  fl'.sh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Kom.  viij,  3,  4.  (b)  '^God  also  exalted  him  by  his 
right  hand  for  elect  men,"  gave  him  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  shed  him  forth  "  for  his  covenant  people,  "  and  made  nim  thus 
Lord  and  Christ,"  Acts  ii.  .^)3,  36.  And  by  that  exaltation  he  is  made 
of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption  :  "  for 
God  hath  exalted  him  with  his  right  hand,  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sin," 
Acts  v.  3 1  (c)  In  order  that  these  benefits  may  be  communicated  to 
the  sinner,  the  !  -ord  God  makes  his  Son,  with  all  his  fulness  known 
to  the  world  by  the  gospel,  and  proffers  him  to  men,  that  Ihey  may 
receive  and  embrace  him  ;  he  calls  to  them  with  a  voice  from  heaven* 
*'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  hear  ye 
him,"  Matt.  iii.  17.  xvii.  5.  He  sends  "  his  ambassadours  to  pray 
them  in  his,"  and  in  his  vSon's  »*  name,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2 
Cor.  V.  18,  19,  20,  and  so  "  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  brings  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  2  Tim.  i.  20.  (d)  Yet  all 
this  would  be  to  no  purpose,  if  God  did  not  actually  and  effectually 
by  his  Son  render  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  this  grace,  by  enlighten- 
ing, justifying,  sanctifying  and  redeeming  him  ;  for  which  purpose 
he  gives  the  sinner  faith,  that  he  may  thereby  receive  the  Mediator 
with  all  his  fulness,  and  may  improve  him  in  all  his  needs  :  for  '*  faith 
is  the  gift  of  God,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  Philip,  i.  29,  which  «  God  works" 
eflfectually  in  the  soul,  according  to  "  the  greatness  of  his  power," 
Eph.  i.  19,  and  it  is  faith,  which  receives  the  Son  of  God  and  his 
fulness,  John  i.  12,  16.  Eph.  iii.  17.  What  think  ye,  hearers,  had 
not  Paul  sufficient  reason  to  say,  1  Cor.  i.  30,  that  "  Christ  is  made 
of  God  to  us  wisdom,"  &c.  ?  and  may  not  this  be  called  by  the  in- 
structor a  giving  ?  *  for  there  is  not  a  greater,  nor  a  more  gracious 
Sjift,  than  the  Son  of  God,  with  all  his  benefits.  See  John  iii,  1 C, 
Rom.  viii.  32.  1  John  iv.  9,  10. 

•  This  is  the  English  of  the  word  used  in  the  Dutch  catechism,  an4  in  the 
Geermao  original. 

V 


J 

\m  CHRIS  l  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

But  for  whom  was  Christ  made  and  j»iven  to  be  this  ?  "  For  tis," 
saith  the  apostle,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  "  for  them  who  are  called  lo  be  saints," 
vrs.  2,  *'  not  many  wise  men.  mighty  or  noble  after  the  flesh,  but 
the  foolish,  weak,  ignoble  and  despised  of  the  world,  hath  God  chosen 
and  called,  tliat  th-ey  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  vrs.  26,  31.  '*  There- 
iore  all  men  without  exception  who  perished  in  Adam,  are  not  saved 
by  Christ,  but  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive^ 
all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith,"  as  the  following  Lord's  day  will 
inform  us. 

•  III.  Btit  who  will  dare  to  believe  this  great  matter  ?  what  account 
have  we  of  it?  will  the  light  of  nature  discover  it  to  us?  No,  the 
creatures  of  God,  contemplated  in  the  most  exact  manner,  will  not 
t^ach  us  aught  of  this :  we  can  learn  from  them  only  *'  God's  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  that  we  may  be  without  excuse,"  Rom.  i.  20. 
The  innate  principles  of  knowledge,  and  our  conscience  may  teach 
us,  that  there  is  an  almighty,  righteous,  wise  and  good  God,  and  that 
we  have  to  do  with  him,  according  to  Rom  i.  19.  ii.  14,  but  they 
cannot  atTord  us  the  least  intimation,  nor  excite  in  us  the  least  ap- 
prehension, whereby  we  may  be  induced  to  think,  that  God  will  de- 
liver smnersby  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  by  his  Son.  And  therefore 
a  persc^n  who  doth  not  possess  more  than  the  mere  light  of  nature, 
"  is  without  Christ,  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  a 
stranger  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  Can  this  then  be  learned  from 
the  law  ?  not  from  the  law  neitlier  :  "  For  the  promise  was  not  to 
Abraham,  or  to  his  seed  by  the  law,"  Rom.  iv.  13.  The  law  can- 
not show  the  sinner  the  means  of  deliverance,  but  can  only  discover 
his  misery  to  him,  and  condemn  him  :  "  for  the  law  worketh  wrath," 
Rom.  iv.  15.  See  Rom   iii.  19,  20.  Gal.  iii    10,   II,  12. 

Whence  then  do  we  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  medi- 
ator and  deliverer,  made  of  God,  wisdom,  Sec?  The  instructor  an- 
swereth  accordmg  to  the  word  of  God,  "  From  the  holy  gospel.*' 
The  Greek  word  Euangtlion^  signifies  joyful  and  good  tidings,  or  ti- 
dings of  good  :"  I  bring  you  good  tidings,  euangdizomaiy  or  "  evan- 
gelize you  great  joy,"  saith  the  angel  who  brought  the  first  joyful 
news  ot  the  Saviour's  birth,  Luke  ii.  10  11.  The  writers  of  the 
New  Testament  adopted  this  word,  and  learned  the  ordinary  use  of 
it  fiom  the  seventy  Greek  translators  of  the  Old  Testament,  who 
made  use  of  the  word  euangellon^  when  they  found  the  word  Bisser 
m  the  Hebrew.  See  Isaiah  x.  4,9.  Ii.  7.  Ixi.  I.  There  cannot, 
indeed,,  be  jnore  joyful  news  to  a  sinner  under  concern,  than  that 
Christ  is  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  is  made  so  great  a  salvation 


♦  — 19.  fSl 

to  him  of  God.     By  this  gospel  we   are  not  here   to  understand   so 
much  the  history  of  the  birth,  life,  doctrine,  miracles,  humiliation:) 
and  exaltation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  we  must  understand  by  it 
particularly,  *'  the  v/hole  doctrine  cf  salvation,  by  which  God  makes 
the  Mediator  and  Deliverer,  Jesus  Christ  known  to  the  sinner,  offers 
him  to  him,  commands  him  to  believe  in  him,  and  that  through  this 
mcdiatoi'  h*:*  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  aeain  received  into  fa- 
vour."   The  gospel  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  by  which  a  person  is 
conducted  to  salvation,  utcording  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  described 
in  the  books  of  the  Old  and   Nev/   Testament:  for   "the  word   of 
truth  is  the  sjospci  of  salvation,"    Eph.  i.  3,     Since  now  Christ  with 
i^is.  benefits  is  the  sum  of  the  gospel,  therefore  it  is  called  the  gospel 
of  Christ,    2  Cor,  iv.  4.  See  also  Rom.  i-  1 — 4,  16,  17.     Wherever 
then  we  read  in  the  holy  scripture  of  Christ   and  his  benefits,  there 
we  have  the  gospei   by  which  (a)  God  makes  Christ  known  to  the 
sinner,  as  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  in  him  only  the  sinner  must 
seek,  and  shall  find  all  salvation  :  for  "by  the  gospel  is  preached  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Sec.    Eph.    iii.   8 — 11. (b)     By    the 
gosptl   the  Mediator,   and  all  salvation  in  and  through  him,   is  also 
oHered  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  invited  and  called  to  him,  that  he  may 
"  turn  to  him  and  be  saved."     Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Iv.    1,  2,  S.     "He 
hath  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the   glory  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  the  aposile,  2.  Thes.   ii.  U.(e)     By  the 
gosp  1  the  sinner  is  also  commanded  to  behave  in  the   Mediator  to 
salvation  :    "  Jesus,  preaching  the  gospel,  said,  believe  the  gospel,'* 
Mark.  i.   14,  15.     On  which  account  it  is  sometimes  called  "  a  law." 
Isaiah  ii.  3.     And  also  "  the  law  of  faith/'  Rem.  iii.  27,   since  it 
obhgeth  every  one,  to  whom  it  is  brought,  and  denounces  a  severe 
threaiening  against  those,  who  "  draw  back"  from  it,     Heb.  x»38.(d) 
Purther,  the  gospel  engages  and  promises  to  the  believer,  that  he 
shall  certainly  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour, 
\>y  faith  in  Christ,  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  John  iii.  16,  36.    Acts  x.   43  j 
and  so  the  gospel  "  comforts  the  believing  people  of  God,  and  speaks 
comfortably  to  them,"  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.     ixi.    1,  2,  3. 

This  gospel  must  be  distinguished  into  the  gospel  of  promise  and 
of  fulfilment.  The  gospel  of  promise  is  that  which  foretold  and 
promised  the  Mediator,  who  was  to  come,  with  his  saving  benefits. 
The  gospel  of  fulfilment,  is  the  actual  execution  and  fulfilment  of  the 
gospel  of  promise  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  Rom.  i.  1—4,  "  That  God 
hath  promised  the  gospel  before  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scrip- 
tiu-es,  concerning  his  Son^  who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  accor- 
ding to  the  flesh,"  kc. 


in  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  • 

This  gospel  of  promise  "  God  spake  in  times  past,  anc'  »ii  diveis 
manners  to  the  fathers,"  Heb.  i.  i.  For  (1)  God  himself  revealed  it 
first  of  all  in  Paradise^  when  "he  said  to  the  serpent,  because  thou 
hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 
of  the  field:  upon  thy  belly  sh  alt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat 
all  t'le  days  of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  dn.  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  :  it  shall  bruise  thy 
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel,"  Gen.  iii.  14,  18.  We  sup^ 
pose  that  the  Lord  God  spake  these  words,  when  our  first  parents 
were  present,  not  s  >  much  to  the  material  serpent,  as  to  the  devil, 
>»ho  abused  the  serpent,  because  many  things  arc  mentioned  here, 
which  are  natural  to  the  serpent,  and  which  it  hath  m  common  with 
other  hurtful  animals  :  and  the  rather,  because  "  the  devil  and  Satan 
is  called  the  old  si^rpent."  Rev.  xii.  IS.  Our  Saviour  teacheth  us 
that  the  seed  of  the  serpent  signifies  the  ungodly,  when  he  calls 
them  *' a  generation  ofscrpents  and  vipers,"  ^;att.  xxiii  33,  and 
aailh  that  they  are  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii,  44.  We 
suppose  also,  that  these  words  were  spoken,  in  order  to  comfort  our 
parents,  as  their  malicious  ioe  was  condemned  by  these  words ; 
therefore  it  is  also  evident,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  si^nif7es 
in  the  first  place  the  Mediator,  who  should  be  <'  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham," and  thus,  also '« the  seed  of  the  woman  ;"  Gen  xxii.  18.  GaL 
jii.  16.  iv.  4,  and  it  sitrnifies  in  the  next  place,  elect  believers  with 
the  Mediator,  and  in  hini  ,  for  these  "  are  reckoned  the  seed," 
through  the  promise.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Rom.  ix.  7,  8,  And  there- 
fore  the  words,  Gen  iii.  14,  15,  promise  (a)  that  the  Mediator  should 
be  man  of  m^n,  to  wit,  of  a  woman,  (b)  1  hat  he  should  be  holy,  an 
enemy  to  the  devil,  and  to  his  seed.(r)  That  he  should  be  God  ; 
for  he  should  be  able  to  bruise  (or  crush)  the  head  of  the  devil,  or 
his  power.(d)  That  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  1 
John  iii.  8  (e)  That  he  should  suffer  in  his  human  nature  ;  for  the 
serpent  should  bruise  his  heel.(f)  That  the  serpent  should  not  con- 
quer him,  but  that  he  should  be  exalted  above  the  serpent,  whose 
head  he  should  i)ruise.(g)  That  believers,  being  united  to  him, 
dihould  be  made  like  him,  as  the  seed,  and  should  therefore  be  made 
M'ise,  be  justified,  sanctified  and  delivered  ;  but  still  by  a  conflict  with 
the  serpent  and  with  his  seed.  These  things,  and  such  like,  are 
Contained  in  the  promises.  Our  first  parents  no  doubt  understood 
ihtse  things  more  or  less,  and  were  more  fully  instructed  in  them  by 
^od,  believed  and  embraced  them  to  salvation,  and  delivered  them 
iUo  to  their  children  by  tradition.  (2)  God  published  this  gospel 
afterwards  by  Cx  holy  patriarchs  and  prophets.      The  palriar^hg 


'    ^  — lit.  1^8 

were  the  first  fathers  of  great  fdmilies  in  the  holy  line,   before    ancj 
after  the  flood  ;  to  wit,  from  Adam  lo  Noah,  before  the  flood,  Gen, 
V.  after  the  flood,    from  Noah   to  the    twelve    sons  of  Jacob,  Gen. 
X,  1.     Chron.  i.  who,  as  also  Abraham,  Heb.  vii.  4,  are  called  patri- 
archs. Acts  vii.  8.     And  since   the  promise  of  the   coming  of  the 
Messiah,  and  the  setting-  up  of  the  new  church  was  attached  to  the 
family  of  David,  2    Sam.  vii.  therefore  David    is  also  called  a  Patri- 
arch, Acts  ii.  29.     God  published  his  gospel  in  divers  ways  to  these 
patriarchs,  and  by  them  to  their  posterity.     Hovv  could  Abel  other- 
wise  "  offer  in    faith  ?"  Gen.  iv.  4.     Heb.    xi.  4.     Did  not   Cain 
and  Abel,  as  also  the   sons  of  God,  and  the  daughters  of  men    soon 
manifest  who  were  the  true  partakers  of  the  Mediator?  Gen.  iv.  anci 
vi.     When  Enos  was  born,  the  people  of  God  assembled  to  confess 
the  Lord  in  a  public  maimer,  according  to  the  gospel,  iv.  26.  Enoch 
spake  of  his  coming  to  judgment,  Jude,  verse  14,  15.  Noah  preached 
even  then  by  the  Spirit,  the  righteousness  of  the   Redeemer,    and 
prepared  the  ark,  as  a   figure  of  his  grai  e,  whicii    is  now   sealed  by 
baptism,  according  to    1  Peter,  iii,  19,  20,  21.     But  the  Rospel  was 
pubhshed  much  more  clearly  in  the  household  of  Ab'-aham  and    of 
his  sons,  Gen.  xviii.    17;  when  God  entered   into   a  covenant  with 
them,  and  promised  them  the  Messiah,  as  the  seed  in    whom  men' 
should  be  blessed,  and  particularly  as  a  seed,  whjch   should   proceed 
from  them  ;  as  the  Pvlessiah  also  appeared  sometimes  to  them,  as  the 
g.ngel  of  the  covenapt.     They   also  believed  the    gospel,  embraced 
the  Mediator,  and  obtained  thus  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness. 
Sec  Gen.  xv   6.     Heb.  xi.  13. 

To  these  patriarchs  we  may  add  also  those  great  and  holy  men, 
who  v/ere  not  of  the  holy  line,  as  Melchizedek  and  Job.  Mf^lchize- 
dek  prefigured  that  the  Mediator  should  have  a  priesthood  and  king- 
dom, which  should  not  be  transferable  to  others,  Gen.  iv.  Heb. 
vii.  And  Job  spake  of  the  Messiah,  as  his  "  Gcel  and  Redeemer," 
both  in  this  life,  and  that  to  come,  Job.  xix.   25,  26,  27. 

But  the  gospel  v/as  published  with  much  greater  clearness  by  the 
prophets :  men  chosea  by  God  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 
endued  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  might  foretell  the  future  things  of 
the  Messiah,  his  benefits,  and  the  New  Testament  church  ;  for  they 
foreshowed  that  the  Messiah  should  be  Mediator,  God  and  man  in 
one  person,  and  "  Immanuel,"  God  with  us,  and  that  "he  should  be 
born  of  a  virgin,"  Isaiah  vii.  14.  ix.  5,  that  "he  should  be  a  pro- 
phet, like  Moses,"  Deut.  xviii.  1 5,  "a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchi- 
zedek," Psalm  ex.  4.  4.  and  "  a  king  of  Zion,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  that  he 
should  be  humbled  and  exalted,"  Isaiah  liii.  that  he  should  descend 


l/4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  G05PEL. 

from  the  tribe  of  Judah  and  the  empoverishcd  family  of  Jesse,  Gen. 
xlix-  10,  Isaiah  vi.  1,  and  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  Micha  v.  1,  and  ap- 
pear in  the  second  temple,  Haggai  ii.  8.  10.  Mai.  iii.  Land  that  af- 
ter the  end  of  seventy  wteks  of  years,  Dan.  ix.  24,  27.  That  he 
should  be  made  of  God  to  his  people  wisdom,  "  to  lead  the  blind  ," 
Isaiah  xlii.  16,  righteousness,  Jer.  xxiii.  6,  sanctilication,  Isaiah  lix» 
20.  That  he  should  bring  the  Gentiles  to  fellowship  with  God,  Isaiah 
xlix.  6.  That  he  should  abolish  the  ecclesiastical  laws  of  the  Jewsy 
and  that  Jerusalem  should  be  laid  waste,  Dan  ix.  27.  And  so  "all 
the  prophets  give  witness  that  through  his  name,  whosoever  believ- 
eth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43. 

3.  God  published  this  gospel  of  promise  not  only  verbally,  b>it  alsa 
really  :  he  prefigured  it  "  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies,  or 
ecclesiastical  observances  of  the  law.  The  ceremonies  of  the  law 
were  either  (I)  the  holy  things,  as  all  the  different  ofTerings,  meats, 
drinks,  washings,  sprinklings,  incense-,  anointing  oil,  first  fruits  and 
tithes  ;  or  (2)  the  holy  persons,  who  celebrated  the  publick  worship, 
as  the  high  priest,  the  common  priests,  and  the  Levites  ;  or  (3)  the 
holy  places,  as  the  land  of  Canaan,  Jerusalem,  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  with  their  apartments,  as  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  the  holy  place  with  the  golden  dlar,  the  table  and  can- 
dlestick, also  the  porch  with  the  brazen  altar,  the  laver,  and  all  the 
inst'uments,  which  were  used  in  the  holy  service  in  the  porch  ;  or 
(4)  the  holy  seasons,  as  all  the   festivals. 

Truly  a  most  costly,  obscure,  and  burthcnsome  vv-orship,  "  a  yoke 

which  the  fathers  could  not  bear,"  Acts  xv.  10.     Why  did  God  lay 

this  yoke  upon  them  ?  he  did  notboriow  it  from  the  Egyptians,  and 

correcting  it  somewhat,  give  it  to  them,  in  order  to  detach  them    by 

the  use  of  it  from  affecting  the  customs  of  the  heathens  :  for  "  the 

laws  of  Israel  were  different  from  those  of  all  other  people,"  Esther 

iii,  9.  God  deiested  the  laws  and  religion  of  the  heathens,  Deut.  xii. 

30.     When  Israel  made  a  calf  after  the  manner  of  the   Egyptians, 

they  broke  the  covenant  of  God,   Deut.  xxxii.     Neither  do  we  think 

that  God  gave  them  this  law,  in   order  to  punish  them  for  their  sin 

with  the  golden  calf;  foj-  he  had  given  them  many  parts  of  it  before 

that  sin,  and  he  broke  off  giving  it  to  them  on  account  of  that  sin, 

and  he  began,  presently  after  he  was  reconciled  to  the   people,    to 

perfect  it.     It  is  thcre;fore  better  to  say,  that  this  law  was    given    to 

Israel  ibr  *'  a  wall  of  partition,"  to  separate  them  from  other  nations, 

Eph.  ii.  14,  15,  also  to  convince  them  of  their  uncleanness,  and  guilt, 

and  in.:uce  them  to  seek  their  perfection  in  the  Mediator,  who  was  to 

come.     See  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb,  viii.  5.  ix.  9,  10,  11.  x,  1.    The  Old 


VLLORD'SDAY,  Q.  15— ig.  j35 

Testament  church  was  in  a  state  of  imperfect  freedom,  and  of  child- 
hooi,  and  was  insiructed  in  higher  and  better  things  by  these  dif-, 
fi^;ult  rudin^ents.  If  time  would  permit,  we  would  si  ow  that  all 
these  ceremonial  observances  typified  that  the  Mediator  should  per- 
fect his  people  by  his  only  oft'erini^,  and  v/ith  his  blood  uiid  Spirit, 
that  he  siiouid  be  the  true  high  priest,  and  sliould  enter  into  the  holy 
of  holies,  even  heaven  itself,  with  his  own  blood,  and  thut  he  should 
procure  a  joyful  festival  for  his  New  Testament  church,  during  her 
whole  continuance  on  earth,  and  should  at  length  introduce  her  into 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  into  the  holy  Jerusalem,  the  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  See  only  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews; 
for  we  cannot  speak  of  these  things  in  order  now. 

Not  only  were  the  ceremonies  of  that  law  types,  but  also  wan.y 
other  things  and  persons  of  that  time.  If  any  wish  to  see  a  more 
particular  account  of  them,  we  refer  him  to  our  "  Sketch  of  the 
structure  of  the  types,  exhibited  with  respect  to  its  established  fun* 
damental  rules,  and  agreeably  to  proper  standards,"  in  which  work 
he  may  also  see  that  the  types  were  not  mere  shadows  and  sketches, 
but  also  sacraments  and  seals,  by  which  God  ceFtined  and  sealed  to 
his  ancient  people  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come,  and  his  saving 
benefits.  Therefore  we  believe  that  the  Mediator  was  an  Ex^rO' 
Diissor  for  the  Old  Testament  church,  or  such  a  surety,  as  had  taken 
the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  and  not  merely  a  Jidpjus<ior^  who  had 
undertaken  indeed  to  satisfy  for  her  debt,  but  nevertheless  suffered 
it  to  remain  on  her,  and  to  be  demanded  of  her,  until  she  should 
satisfy  in  him,  and  if  he  should  fail,  that  then  she  should  be  obliged 
<o  satisfy  for  herself,  and  atone  for  her  debt  by  eternal  misery  :  for 
if  he  had  not  taken  the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  but  left  it  on  her, 
and  suffered  it  thus  to  be  demanded  of  her,  believers  would  not  then 
have  triumphed,  as  they  did,  on  account  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
sins,  Psalm  xxxii.  ciii.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  neither 
would  that  burthensome  worship  of  the  church  have  typified,  shadow- 
ed forth  and  sealed  the  Mediator  to  them,  and  they  would  not  have 
been  able  to  enter  into  the  everlasting  rest,  so  long  as  he  had  not 
satisfied  for  their  debt. 

Behold,  in  this  manner  did  God  make  known  the  gospel  of  promise, 
and  "  he  hath  also  lastly  accomplished  it  by  his  only  begotten  Son," 
and  so  hath  revealed  it  to  us  by  the  gospel  of  fulfilment  in  the  scrips 
tures  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  we  find  in  them,  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  God  co-essential  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Gl.ost, 
took  upon  himself  the  iiuman  nature,  continuing  one  person,  of  the 
virgin  Mary,  in  the  proper  time  and  nlyce :  that  he  ff^  ^be  suprenje 


^36  CHRIST  HEVE ALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

Prophet,  Priest  and  Kin^ ;  that  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
was  thus  made  to  his  people  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,  which  we  will  illustrate  and  prove  in  order, 
when  we  speak  of  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption* 


APPLICATION. 

\Vhat  think  ye,  beloved  hearers,  ought  not  wc  to  be  fully  pet^ 
Miaded  in  our  minds,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Messiah, 
according;  to  tlie  scriptures?  May  we  not  indeed  cry  out  with  Andrew 
and  Philip  '■'  We  have  found  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets  did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of 
Joseph  ?"  John  i.  42,  45  For  all  that  was  foretold  and  prefigured 
of  the  vjessiah  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  him  :  he  also  fully  proved  this 
from  the  scriptures  from  his  miracles  and  from  his  resurrection,  sa 
as  to  silence  the  Jews  :  and  his  apostles,  who  were  ear  and  eye-wit> 
nesses  of  these  things,  testified  of  them  with  so  much  power,  that 
those  who  lived  both  in  and  after  their  time  received  their  testimony 
V'lth  a  full  persuasion  of  mind.  It  is  indeed  truly  astonishing,  that 
the  Jews,  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  denied  our 
Saviour,  as  they  do  even  until  this  day.  How  was  this  possible, 
might  we  ask  ?  But  the  word  of  Gcd  will  inform  us  that  God  hath 
forsaken  that  generation  in  his  wrath,  and  hath  abandoned  them  to 
blindness  and  hardness  of  heart.  They  know  neither  their  miserj*, 
nor  the  proper  method  of  deliverance:  they  stek  their  own  right- 
eousness, and  are  offended  at  the  humble  birth,  and  at  the  ignomi- 
nious crucifixion  of  Christ.  All  this  was  likewise  foretold  concerning 
this  people.  See  Isaiah  xi.  9,  10.  viii.  14,  15,  16.  xxix.  9—15.  Iviii, 
2 — 5.  There  is  nothing  that  they  can  endure  with  less  patience 
than  that  Jesus  hath  abolished  and  abrogated  their  ceremonial  law, 
as  though  it  were  not  foretold,  that  ihe  Messiah,  when  "  he  had 
mude  an  end  of  sins,  had  made  reconciliat  on  for  iniquity,  and  brought 
in  an  evei  lasting  rigliteousness,  should  then  also  cause  the  sacrifice 
and  oblation  to  cease,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  See  also  Jer.  iii.  15,  16,  \7. 

But  who  will  nut  de'est  the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  the  Medi- 
ator is  not  God  and  man  in  one  person,  and  that  he  did  not  by  satis- 
fying the  justice  of  God,  btcome  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  redemption  to  his  people  ?  They  say  that  he  is  not  more 
than  a  mere  man,  or  only  a  p:reat  prophet  on  account  of  his  heavenly 
doctrine,  great  miracles,  and  exemplary  conversation  and  death. 
».it  what  wonder  is  it,  that  they  degrade  Christians  in  this  manner, 


Vl,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  i6--i9.  m 

they  have  conducted  thus  also  with  the  believing:  Jews,  upon  whose 
faith  Christianity  is  founded  ;  for  '^the  law  went  forth  out  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Jerusalem  "  Isaiah  ii.  3,  and  «  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews."  John  iv,  22,    For  they  assert  that  the  fathers  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  lio  promises  concerning  the  forgive'iess  of 
sins,  or  of  eternal  life  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  c- tre  ;  that  he 
was  not  t\  pified  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law, 
and  that  the  sacrifices,  which  were  then  offered  up  for  sins,  reconci- 
led the  sins  for  which  they  were  offcx-  d.   and  that  therefore  the  be- 
lievers of  that  time  did  not  seek  their  reconciliation  in  Christ,   when 
they  offered      Do  they  not  represent  the  fathers  as  Epicureans;  who 
cared  only  for   their  bellies  ?  do  they  not  deny  the  whole  gospel, 
which  teaches  nothing  different  nor  less  of  the  Mediator,  than  we 
have  exhibited?  Doth  not  the  word  of  God  say  plainly  and  frequently, 
that  the  Lord  established  his  covenant  of  £;race  with  the  fathers,  that 
he  was  their  God  ?  Gen.  xvii,  7.  Psalm  xxxiii,    12.  Matt.   xxii.  32, 
that  he  forgave  their  sins,   Gen    xv.  6.   Psalm  xxxii.  i,  2.  ciii.  3,  4. 
They  had  spiritual  peace  and  joy.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  To  them  be- 
longed the   adoption,  Rom,  ix.   4,  sanctific'tiori,  preservation,  and 
glorificati(>n,  Psalm  xlviii.  14,   Psalm  xvii.  15.  They  had  "the  same 
Spirit  of  faith  "  with  us.  Psalm  cxvi.  10.  2  Cor.  iv.  13.  Heb  xi,  and 
indeed  faith  in  the  Messiah,  in  whom,  ana  for  whose  sake  they  de- 
sired and  obtained  all  things  of  God,  Psalm  ixxx.   17.   D>an.  ix-  17. 
Heb.  xi   27,  and  this  was  sealed  to  them  by  the  sjcraments,   which 
were  of  the  same  efficacy  with  ours,    1  Cor  x.  1 — 4.     What  think 
ye,  hearers,  may  we  look  upon  these  men,  who  deny  all  this,   either 
as  true  Israelites,  or  as  believing  Christians  ? 

But  how  forcible  are  the   right  words  of  our  instructor,  to  show 
the  concerned  sinner  the  good  way,  according  to  the  gospel,  to  es- 
cape punishment,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour-     The  dis- 
tressed sinner  asks  how  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of  God  ;  and  he 
shows  him  not  only  the  necessity  of  a  satisfaction,  and  that  there  was 
no  possibility,  that  either  he  hirriself,  or  any  other  mere  creature 
should  satisfy,  but  that  this  could  be  accomplished  only  by  one,  who 
was  a  real  and  holy  man,   and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in 
©rder  that  the  sinner  may  not  rest  upon  false  grounds,  but  may  be 
more  deeply  humbled.     And  that  he  may  not  however  through  des- 
pair wholly  neglect  to  seek  his  salvation,  he  shows  him  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  proper  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  he 
itiay  be  fully  persuaded  and   assured  of  this  by  the  gospel,  and  be- 
come a  partaker  of  him  and   his  fulness  by  faith.     Therefore  this 
information  is  perfectly  satisfactory  to  a  perplexed  mind.     For  (a> 

X 


■lS6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IX  THE  GOSPEL. 

hath  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  been  made  wisdom,  righteousness,  sane- 
tificalion  and  redemption,  then  he  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God, 
and  procured  a  deliverance  from  guilt  for  the  Imwible  sinner,  by 
^vhich  means  he  escapes  punishment.  For  there  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  becduse  he  hath  fulfilled  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  1,  3,  4.  (b)  The  sinner  is  thus 
also  again  received  into  favour,  since  he  is  brought  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  into  God's  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  "  the  Lord  causes 
him  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  brings  him  into  the  bond  of  the  cove- 
nant," Ezek.  XX.  37.  (c)  And  Christ  doth  thus  also  remedy  all  his 
grievous  cal.mities.  Is  he  foolish,  dolh  he  not  know  God's  way  of 
life  ;  Jesus  is  wisdom  to  him.  Is  he  guilty  ;  the  Mediator  is  right- 
eousness to  him.  Is  he  too  abominable,  and  hateful  to  receive  any 
favour  ;  Christ  is  sanctification  to  him.  Is  he  still  too  much  fettered 
and  bound  with  the  cords  of  misery  ;  the  Saviour  is  the  Redeemer, 
and  is  redemption  to  him.  (d)  The  sinner  needs  not  fear  that  God 
the  judge  will  not  be  pleased  with  the  Surety,  and  with  his  satisfac- 
tion. Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  made  this  of  God  to  him  :  the  Judge 
himself  appointed  him  to  be  a  surety,  sent  him  into  the  world,  de- 
manded the  debt  of  him,  and  showed  that  he  was  satisfied  with  him, 
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  exalted  bim  at  his  own  right  hand, 
and  thus  *' justified  him,"  I  1  im.  iii.  16.  And  therefore  he  swears 
that  "  he  will  not  be  wa-oth  with  the  believing  smner,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  (e)  Is  the  sinner  anxious  to  know  how  he  shall 
obtain  this  Mediator  for  himself ;  this  Saviour  is  offered  to  him  in 
the  gospel,  and  he  hath  only  to  choose  him  for  nimself  upon  that 
offer  ;  yea,  God  commands  him  to  do  this,  and  promi  eth  him  that 
"  he  w^ill  not  reject  him,"  but  will  receive  and  save  him,  John  vu  37. 
Isaiah  xlv.  22. 

May  and  must  we  not  then  say,  that  the  doctrine  of  our  reformed 
church  is  pure  and  evangelical,  according  to  the  word  of  God  ?  For 
it  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  that  it  calms 
and  comforts  the  troubled  mind  of  a  distressed  sinner  perfectly  :  For 
*^  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were  written  for  our 
learning  ;  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures, 
might  have  hope,"  Rom.  xv.  4.  And  who  of  those  who  are  not  of 
our  communion  are  comparable  to  us  in  this  respect  ?  the  Romanists 
require  that  the  distressed  sinner  should  satisfy  for  his  temporal  and 
eternal  punishment,  by  various  bodily  exercises  and  penances  of  hear- 
ing masses  for  souls'  abstaining  from  particular  meats  during  certain 
seasons,  saying  and  muttering  many  prayers,  going  upon  pilgrim- 
ages to  this  and  that  holy  place,  so  called,  and  celebrating  many  holy 


— ly.  139 

>Ay:.-     Will  this  not  suffice,  he  must  then  seek  indulgences,  and  the 
h.upererogatory  works  of  saints,  v/ho  were  more  than  perfect.     Doth 
he  come  short  still,  he  must  then  believe  and  be  assured,  that  he  will 
be  obliged   to  satisfy  for  Vrha?:  remains  in  an  exceedingly  hot  and 
burning  purgatory,  where  he  will  be  most  severely  tormented  a  long 
time,  and  vhat  he  cannot  be  delivered  out  of  it,  unless  many  prayers 
be  offered  up  for  him,  and  many  masses  for  the  dead  be  provided 
for  hira  by  the  living.     The  ISocinians  do  indeed  detest  these  trifles^ 
but  neither  do  they  heal  the  breach  in  the  spirit ;  for  they  do  not 
speak  of  a  satisfying  Mediator   but  only  say,  that  the  mourning  sin- 
ner must  believe  the  promises  of  Cod,  that  he  who  do;h   good  shall 
receive  a  good  reward.     Uoth  the  sinner  say,  that  he  hath  not  done 
any  good  work,  and  that  the  promises  do  not  therefore  belong  to 
him,  they  will  then  endeavour  to  soothe  him  with  an  exterjial  con- 
version, telling  him  that  he  must  lead  a  better  life   for  the  time  to 
come,  tnat  he  must  keep  the  easy  commandments  of  Christ,  and 
ti;at  Cod  will  then  forgive  his  former  sins.     The  Remonstrants  do 
not  condu^  t  much  better,   when  they  meet  with  a  sorrowful  sinner ; 
for  they  presently  quiet  him  with  vain  consolations,  and  say  that  he 
must  not  be  so  sorrwful,  that  his  case  is  certainly  not  so  lamentable, 
that  he  r^jpents  of  his  sins,  that  God  is  merciful,  that  Christ  hath 
died  for  every  sinner,  and  merited  a  sufficient  grace  :  that  he  must 
promise  to  lead  a  better  life,  and  to  make  a  better  use  of  the  powers 
of  his  free  v/ill,  and  that  God  will  then  grant  him  his  grace.    O  vain 
and  miserable  coniforters  of  sick  souls  !  they  show  that  they,  have 
not  yet  any  experimental  knowledge  of  the  abominable  nature  of  sin, 
nor  of  a  true  humiliation,  nor  of  the  satisfaction  nor  fulness  of  Christ, 
nor  of  a  perfect  consolation  ;  and  therefore  they  feed  the  poor  soul 
with  ashes,  and  put  a  lie  in  her  right  hand. 

But  if  our  doctrine  were  ever  so  efficacious  and  sufficient  to  quiet 
a  troubled  mind,  it  will  nevertheless,  not  administer  the  smallest  re* 
lief  unless  we  know  that  Christ  with  all  his  fulness  is  also  given  to  us 
of  God  :  that  he  is  not  given  to  all  men,  will  appear  on  the  following 
Lord's  day.  To  force  ourselves  into  a  steadfast  persuasion,  in  a  care- 
less manner,  without  any  foundation,  and  without  a  strict  examina- 
tion of  ourselves,  that  Christ  is  given  to  us,  is  building  the  hope  of 
our  salvation  upon  a  foundation  of  sand,  and  it  will  sink  the  sinner 
into  the  lake  ;  and  therefore  it  behooves  every  one  to  examine  him- 
self in  the  strictest  manner,  and  to  inquire  thoroughly  **  whether 
Christ  be  in  him,"  and  be  given  to  him.  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Is  it  your 
desire,  fi lends,  to  know  how  the  person  is  disposed,  to  whom  the 
Mediator  is  given,  that  ye  may  liken  and  compare  yourtelves  to  him  ? 


y^  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

pbserve,  (a)  such  a  person  beholds  with  grief  and  detestation  h\» 
bhndness,  guilt,  filthiness,  impotence,  and  abominable  sins,  and  that 
not  only  others,  but  also  he  himself,  hath  deserved,  accordinet  to  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,  temporal  and  eternal  punishment :  he 
is  concerned  and  distressed  on  this  account ;  he  sees  not  how  he 
shall  be  dehvered  ;  all  his  own  endeavours  and  exertions,  from  which 
he  formerly  derived  hope,  fail  him  ;  he  views  ihem  as  *'  loss  and  dung,*" 
Phil.  ii.  4 — 8  ;  and  he  cries  out  "  there  is  no  hope,  he  doth  not 
find  Liny  more  the  life  of  lis  hand,  and  therefore  he  is  grieved." 
Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  He  doth  not,  however,  wholly  abandon  himsel*  to 
an  entire  despair  ;  but  having  an  earnest  desirt-  to  escape  punish- 
mem,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour,  he  looks  about  that  he 
may  find  some  means  to  obtain  that  end  ;  and  therefore  re  asks 
others,  "  what  he  must  do  tube  saved-"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.  "He 
fas's  and  prays"  with  Saul,  Acts  ix.  11,  and  he  strives  earnestly  'to 
work  out  his  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  God  worketh 
in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do."  Pf'.ii.  ii.  12,  12.  He  will  also  not 
desist  nor  rest,  until  he  hath  some  evi  lences,  and  until  "  God  saith 
to  his  soul,  1  am  thy  salvation."  Psalm  xxxv.  3  ;  for  God  will  "  look- 
with  favour  only  '^  on  him,  wh©  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit," 
Isaiah  Ixvi.  2,  and  ''the  Redeemer  should  come  to  Zion  for  them 
who  turned  from  iniquity."  Isaiah,  lix.  20.(b)  Such  a  person  hath 
also  a  high  estimation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  To  you  who  be-, 
lieve,  he  is  puci'.  us,"  saith  the  apostle.  1  Peter,  ii  17.  He  consid- 
ers him  as  so  capable,  sufficient,  and  adapted  to  all  his  necessities, 
that  his  soul  becomes  exceedingly  eager  and  desirous  to  possess 
him  :  he  betakes  himself,  therefore  to  praying  and  wrestling  for 
!iiiji,that  he  may  impart  himself  to  him  ;  he  surrenders  himself  to 
hino,  and  casts  himself  upon  him  ;  he  calls  and  fetches  him  in,  and 
he  ceases  not  to  wrestle  thus  in  faith,  until  he  reveals  and  imparts 
himself  to  the  soul.  Thus  the  Canaanitish  woman  acted.  Matt.  xv. 
22—28,  and  Saul,  Plilip.  iii  7 — 10,(c)  Such  an  one  doth  also 
desire  bim  with  all  his  benefits,  he  wishes  not  only  that  Christ  should 
make  him  wise,  bestow  his  righteousness  upon  him,  deliver  him 
from  his  misery,  and  save  him,  but  also  that  he  should  be  ^  anctifi- 
cation  to  him,  that  he  should  take  all  his  sins  from  him,  and  slay 
them ;  those  also,  which  appear  to  him,  as  far  as  he  is  carnal,  hon- 
purable,  profitable  and  agreeable ;  that  he  should  even  take  entire 
possession  of  his  whole  heart,  and  fashion  it  according  to  his  will ; 
^e  considers  holiness,  a  being  dead  to  himself,  being  resigned  to 
pod,  and  doing  the  will  of  '.iod  in  all  things,  as  the  most  glorious 
•dip4  iTio^t  happy  portion  that  a  person  can  enjoy  ;  therefore  he  de 


'     —19.  14i 

iights  in  it,  and  cries  out  with  David  to  God,  Psalm  cxix.  45. 
*«  Thou  hast  commanded  u~^  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O 
that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes.(d)  C  hrist  and 
his  gospel  are  revealed  to  such  a  person  inwardly  and  effectually  by 
the  holy  Spirit,  to  who!»  belongs  the  dispensation  of  the  sjospel  ;  he 
not  only  reads  and  hears  out  of  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  only  apprehends  by  his  contemplations  who  and  what  be  is 
to  a  sini.er,  bm  Christ  himself  is  also  discovered  by  the  light  of  his 
Spirit  to  the  soul,  by  which  his  heart  is  warmed,  captivated  and 
drawn  forth  toward  him  in  taith  and  love.  ''  The  Lf^rd  opt-ns  his 
heart,  and  causes  him  to  give  heed  to  the  things  that  are  s  oken  by 
Paul,"  or  others  from  the  gospel,  Acts  xvi.  14.  He  obtams  "  the 
mind  of CIrist,"  I  Coi.  ii.  16.  "For  Go<l,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  si  line  opt  of  darkness,  shines  into  our  hearts,  to  give  the 
iigntofthe  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ,"    2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

Have  ye  no  knowledge  of  these  things,  have  ye  never  attended  to 
them,  nor  experienced  them,  can  ye  then  indeed  think  that  this 
great  V>ediator,  with  his  great  benefits,  is  given  of  God  to  you  ? 
surely  no:  but  it  behooves  you  to  know  that  ye  are  yet  "without 
Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from 
the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  It  is  true,  ye  have  and  hear  the  gospel,  but  "  it 
doth  not  profit  you,  not  being  mixed  with  faith,',  Heb.  iv  2.  «  It  is 
hidden  from  you-  and  ye  perish,  the  pod  of  this  woild  hath  blinded 
your  minds,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  should 
shine  unto  you,"  2  Cov.  iv.  4  How  grievous  will  it  be  to  you  to 
perish  under  the  precious  dispensation  of  the  gospel !  Will  not  the 
Ninevites,  the  queen  '  f  Sheba,  Sodom  aud  C/omorrah,  Tyre  and  Si- 
doB,  yea,  all  the  nations  who  have  not  heard  the  gospel,  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  yo'.  (,  because  ye  have  neglected  such  a  favourable 
opportunity  to  be  saved,  which  they  never  enjoyed  ?  Friends,  it  will 
be  a  hell  in  the  midst  of  hell  to  you,  that  ye  have  not  improved  such 
an  acceptable  time  and  such  a  dny  of  salvation.  "  Or  do  ye  despise 
the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering,  not 
knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repensance  ?  Ye 
do  then,  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  for 
yourselves  wrath  againit  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  li*  4,  5. 

Awake,  awake  therefore,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Ac- 
cept, and  lay  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  "  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  bitt 


44i  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL, 

a  Httle,"  Pselm  ii.  12.     For  (a)  do  ye  not  stand  in  need  of  him  ?  have 
ye  not  deserved  temporal  and  eternal  punishmetjt,  according  to  the 
righteous  judgment  ci  Ciod  ?  how  shall   ye  escape  and  be  again  re- 
ceived into  favour  r   or  do  ye  know  how  ye  can  by  wearying  your- 
selves with  certain  devoirs?  are  ye  not  foohsh,  worthy  of  condemna- 
tion, abomini»ble,_  and  altogether  miserable  ?  is  not  he  alone  sufficient 
to  fill  you  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ?     *'  He  can  save  to  the   utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  God  through   him,"   saith    the  text.     O 
do  not  then  despise  him.Cb)     Ye  can  obtain  him  and  all  his  fulness  ;; 
for  he  calls  and  invites  you  to  him  :     '•  Turn  unto  me,  and  be  saved 
S|ll  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;■'  thus  he  saith  to  you  also,  who  are  alto> 
gether  miserable,   Isaiah  xly.  22.     "  God   himself  sets  him  forth  to 
jOU,to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"   Rom*  iii.   25. 
"  Ho,  every  one   that  thirsteth  ;"  thus   he  crieth,  Isaiah  Iv.  1,  2,  S, 
**  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  ye  who  have  no   money,  come,  buy 
wine    and   milk  without  money  and  without  price."   &c.     Yea,  he 
saith,  Rev.  xxii.    17,  "Let  whosoever   will  take   the  waters  of  life 
freely."     He  invites  even  all  those  who  live   under  the  gospel,  yea, 
those  also  who  are  lukewarm,   and  those  Avho  are  puffed  up  with  a 
proud  conceit  of  themselves  like  the  Laodiceans,  for  he  snith,  Rev. 
iii.  18.     "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  geld  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich  ;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou   mayest  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not   appear  ;    and   annoint 
thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."     For  what  pur-t 
pose  have  ye  preachers  ?  and  why  do  they  publish  the  gospel  to 
you  ?  is  it  not  that  they  may  persuade  you  to  believe,  and  that  they 
niay  adure   you  to  this  sufficient  Deliverer,  and  induce  you  to  lay 
hold  on  him  ?     "  Now  then,   we    are  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as 
thougli  God  did  beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray   you  in  Christ's  stead, 
be  ye  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.  20.(c)     May  ye  indeed  neglect 
to  receive  him,  when  he  is  offered  to  you  ?  is  not  this  enjoined  on, 
you  ?  may  ye  continue   unbelieving  ?    is  it  left  to  your  choice,  to 
embrace  the  Son  of  God  or  not  ?    surely  no  :  will  ye  then   be  wil- 
fully and  knov/ingly   disobedient,  and  perish  ?     Who,  who  is  there 
of  you  vvho  will  with  such  a  wicked  heart  of  unbelief,  depart  from  the 
Jiving  God  ?     Is  there  any  one  who  is  so  wicked,  do  thou,  and  tliou 
nevertheless  "  save  thyself  from  this  untoward  generation,"  Acts  ii. 
40.     "  Take  hold  of  the  strength  of  God,    that  thou  mayest  make 
peace  with  him,"  Isaiah   xxxvii.   4.     "  BelievtJ  in   the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  Acts  xvi.   31.(cl)     Well,  sinner, 
wilt  thou  not  flee  to  him  ?  shouldest   thou  go  to  him,  and   receive 
him  in  vain  ?     No :  "  him  that  comcth  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  ca?;t 


VI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16—19.  U3 

aut,"  safth  he,  John  vi.  37.  Thou  wilt  not  fail  of  salvation,  if  thou 
wilt  only  receive  hini,  and  surrender  tnys'^lf  to  him  with  a  pertect 
heart.  "  lie  that  believeth,  and  is  baptiz  d,  shall  be  saved,"  saith 
the  moulli  of  truth  again  and  again,  Mark  xvi.  16.  John  iii.  16,  17, 
36.  He  confirms  it  with  a  double  "verily,"  Join  v.  M,  yea,  as  it 
were  with  an  oath,  Ezek.  xxxiii  1 1.  (e)  Will  yc  not  come,  but  re- 
main in  yourselves,  know  then  that  ye  are  guilty  of  a  most  heinous 
sin  ;  ye  despise  him,  his  fulness  and  love,  which  the  devils  cannot 
dj,  since  he  is  not  ofTered  to  them  ;  "  Ye  make  God  a  liiir,"  i  John 
V.  10.  He  upbraids  you  v/ilh  it  m  anger,  '*  that  ye  will  not  come  to 
him,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  "  His  wrath  lieth  and 
abideth  on  you,"  John  iii,  35.  "  When  distress  and  anguish  cometh 
upon  you,  and  ye  cali  upon  him,  thi;n  he  will  not  answer  ;  but  he 
"vvill  laugh  at  your  calamity,"  Prov.  i  20—33.  "  To-day  then,  if 
yc  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalrn  xcv.  7,  8. 
'•  For  iiow  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  gr? at  a  salvation  ? 
Heb.  ii.  3, 

But,  believers,  ye  who  have  chosen  and  received  him  ?Ione,  wholly 
and  frequently  for  j^ours,  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  because 
the  Lord  God  natn  offered  him  to  you  in  the  gospel,  and  captivated 
your  hearts  thereby  : 

1.  Believe,  and  be  assured  that  God  hath  given  him  to  you  with 
all  his  fulness,  and  tuat  he  is  yours,  aUvl  ye  are  his;  like  the  spouse 
wno  said  wiil.oi.t  do-ibtuig,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his," 
Song  ii  16.  "  Do  ye  not  know  your  own^  elves,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
in  you,"  2  Cor.  xiii,  5.  Do  ye  not  know  with  Paul,  "  that  y^.  have 
believed  in  him?"  2  Tim  i.  12.  Can  yc  deny  your  sorrow  and 
concern  for  your  miserable  condition,  the  continual  outgoings  of  your 
hearts  toward  him  in  desires  and  longings,  your  hearty  surrendering^ 
of  yourselves  to  him,  and  receiving  of  him,  as  well  to  be  sanctified 
by  him,  as  to  be  saved  ;  can  yc,  we  say.  deny  these  things  ?  and  are 
they  not  considered  by  you  as  evidences  of  your  saving  interest  in 
him  ?  Well,  let  your  hearts  then  be  perfectly  assured  before  him  of 
his  love  to  you 

2.  Live  much  in  the  contemplation  of  his  excellency.  May  ye 
not  with  Stephen,  "see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man 
stanrling  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56  ;  endeavour  to 
contemplate  him  in  his  glorious  gospel,  and  led  up  by  it,  to  entep 
wi  h  Moses  into  the  clouds,  and  with  open  face  to  behold  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  in  a  glass,  and  thus  to  see  this  King  in  his  beauty  in 
a  far  country.  He  is  certainly  worthy  of  your  wliole  understanding; 
all  th.vt  was  ever  foresaid  and  foreshown  of  him,  as  fair  and  glorious 


U4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

exists  in  him  in  the  most  perfect  m inner:  whatever  is  larking  im 
you,  can  be  found  in  him.  He  liath  a  f  ilntss  of  i^racc  to  supply  all 
your  JeficicDcics  :  he  is  perfectly  adapicd  to  all  your  necessities: 
*'  in  him,  and  in  iiis  love,  there  is  a  breadth,  length,  depth,  and 
heii^hi,  and  to  know  this  fiMs  us  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph. 
iii.  18,  19.  It  afibi'ds  a  wondef.l  joy  to  the  soul  to  contemplate 
him,  '^  she  wa  ks  in  tie  light  of  his  countenance,  and  rejoices  in  his 
name  dl  the  day  lon;^,"  Fs.ilm  Ixxxix.  15,  16.  Yea,  "  she  is  chang- 
ed ufier  ihe  glorious  imaii,e  ol  the  Lord,  which  she  beholds  with 
open  fcice,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor. 
iii.  IS. 

3.  Behold  now  your  happ-ness,  and  the  great  kindness,  that  hath 
been  shown  to  you  :  what  l5ath  God  the  Lord  done  f')r  you,  that  he 
might  deliver  you  from  punishme-nt,  and  restore  you  to  favour  ? 
He  do-.li  not  merely  admit  a  surety,  but  he  appoints  !iis  "^on,  in  his 
cverlasiiu;;- conned  lo  be  one  ;  he  sends  him  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,  inflicts  on  him  the  punishment  of  your  sins,  m  your  stead,  re- 
ceives vou  into  his  covenant,  gives  you  this  Mediator  and  D  iiverer 
to  be  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifacation  and  redemption  to  you, 
causes  you  'o  emi.race  him,  and  publishes  the  gospel,  even  the  gos- 
pel of  f'diilmeut  so  you.  How  obscutely  was  it  publsiied  to  the  fa- 
tntrs  !  but  it  is  announced  with  exceeding  clearness  to  you.  What 
a  burthensome  service  did  he  inopose  on  the  fathers  !  but  he  hath 
freed  you  therefrom.  How  earnestly  did  they  desire  these  days, 
that  they  might  see  <.  hribt  in  the  flesh  !  but  they  might  not  live  un- 
til these  days,  and  God  hath  provided  some  belter  thing  for  you  : 
"  iJlcsbcd  arc  your  eyes,  for  th'iy  see  ;  and  your  ears  for  they  hear. 
*'  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  prophets  and  righteous  men 
have  desu^ed  to  see  those  things  wldch  ye  see,  and  have  not 
seen  them:  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye  hear,  ai.d  have  not 
heard  them,"  saith  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  Malt.  xiii.  16,  i  7.  re- 
joice then  exceedingly  on  account  of  this  salvation,  which  hath  been 
accomplished  :  "  It  should  be  said  in  this  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God, 
we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  this  is  the  Lord,  we 
have  waited  for  him.  we  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation," 
Isa'ah  XXV.  9.  ''  Rejoice  then  greatly  in  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  he 
joyful  in  their  God,  for  he  hath  clothed  you  with  the  irarmenls  of 
salvation,  he  hath  covered  you  with  the  rohe  of  rig!itcousness," 
Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  Yea,  "  let  all  the  seed  of  Israel  glo.y  in  tJie  Loid," 
Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

4.  Improve  therefore   your  Mediator  and  all  bis  fulness,  as  your 
necessities  require,"  receiving  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace," 


VI.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16~19.  145 

John  i,  15.  "  That  he  may  supply  all  your  needs  acccrdiii?^  to  his 
riches,  and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work 
of  failh  with  power,"  Philip,  iv.  19.  8  Thes.  i.  1 1.  Behold  continu- 
ally your  W;ints,  your  darkness,  gui't,  sinfulness,  and  other  n-iiseiies  ; 
and  see  that  there  is  a  fulness  of  wisdom,  righteousness,  sunctification 
and  redemption  in  him  against  all  this,  particularly  for  you  ;  go  to 
him  'vitii  your  distresses,  receive  of  his  fuhiess  against  them,  and 
suck  therefrom,  through  the  conduits  of  the  p  omises,  whatever  ye 
need  ;  suffer  him  to  exe:^ute  his  office  upon  you,  for  "  he  is  all,  and 
in  all,"  Coll.  iii.  11,  and  "  is  exalted  to  he  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to 
give  repeniance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31. 

J.  Finally,  to  conclude,  "  Only  walk  worthily  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,"  Phil.  i.  27,  that  is  humbly,  bclievingly,  joyfully,  h^iily,  cir- 
cumspectly, and  Vv'ith  self-denial  toward  all  things  out  of  him. 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  sai'.h,  Titus  ii.  1 1,  12,  13,  '*  the  grace  of  God, 
which  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared  to  all  men  ;  teaching  us 
that  denying  ungodliness,  and  v/orldiy  lusts,  we  sliould  live  soberly, 
TJghteotisly,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  :  looking  for  that  bles- 
sed hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  tlie  great  God,  and  our  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,"  Amen, 


146  ) 


SAVING  FAITH 


VII.  LORDS  DAY^ 


John  iii  36.  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life  s 
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  ihe  wrath 

of  God  abideth  on  him.

Q.  18.  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  ivho  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ? 

A.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom? 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption." 

Q.   19.    Whence  knoivest  thou  this? 

A.  From  the  holy  gospel,  which  God  himself  revealed  first  in 
Paradise  ;  and  afterwards  published  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets, 
and  Was  pleased  to  represent  it,  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  the 
"Dther  ceremonies  of  the  law ;  and  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his 

^nly  begotten  Son- 

TT 


122  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL 

VV  -1  ^T  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
Qesli,  Gofi  sendin^j  his  own  Son,  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and 
for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fuliilled  in  us."  Thus  speaks  Paul,  Horn.  viii.  3,  4.  The 
law  cannot  justify  the  sinner.  Ciod  did  indeed  give  the  hw  to  man- 
kind before  the  fall,  that  they  might  obtain  righteousness  and  life 
by  keeping  it  perfectly,  and  it  would  thus  have  been  possible  for  the 
law  to  justify  man  :  "  For  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  the  law,  saith,  The  man  which  doth  these  things  shall  live  by 
them,"  Rom.  x.  5.  But  the  law  cannot  do  this  now,  since  it  is  be- 
come weak  through  sin  and  the  flesh  ;  it  hath  now  only  a  power  to 
curse  and  condemn  the  sinner,  according  to  the  divine  threatening, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;"  and  therefore  "  they 
who  aie  of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10, 
and  so  <•  the  law  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  declareth  that 
"  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii.  19.  If  the  sinner 
shall  then  be  justified,  the  righteousness  of  the  law  must  be  fulfilled 
in  him  by  a  sufficient  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  expressed  in 
the  law  ;  for  '•  Zion  must  be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her  con- 
verts with  righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  27,  aAd  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  must 
be  exalted  in  judgment,  and  God,  who  is  holy,  must  be  sanctified  ia 
righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  16.  The  demand,  which  the  law  of  God 
makes  against  the  sinner,  requiring  that  he  sihould  be  punished, 
cannot  be  refused,  inasmuch  as  the  law  contains  the  sentence  of  curs- 
ing, denounced  by  God.  But  who,  yea,  who  is  able  to  satisfy  this 
righteous  demand  of  the  law  ?  the  sinner  himself  cannot ;  for  he  in- 
creaseth  his  debt  daily  :  no  other  creature  can,  because  he  cannot 
sustain  the  burthen  of  God's  eternal  wrath.  If  any  one  shall  be  « 
worthy  and  able  to  do  this,  he  must  be  very  man  and  righteous,  and 
also  God  and  man  in  one  person,  according  to  what  the  foregoing 
Lord's  dav  hath  taught  us  from  the  word  of  God,  and  for  which  solid 
reasons  are  R:iven  in  this  Lord's  day.  Question  16,  17,  and  in  which 
it  is  shown,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  mediator  and  deliv- 
erer, Question  18,  and  that  this  is  made  known  in  the  gospel,  Ques- 
tion 19,  that  the  sinner,  being  concerned,  and  desirous  of  deliverance, 
may  obtain  perfect  satisfaction  and  comfort. 

There  are  three  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  otir 
consideration  : 

I.  Why  the  mediator  must  be  a  real  and  righteous  man  and  God 
in  one  person,  Question  16,  17» 


Vr.  LORD'S  rXAY,  Q.  16-19.  12S 

II.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  Ques^ 
tion  18. 

III.  And  that  we  loiow  this  from  the  gospel,  Question  19. 

I.  The  person  who.  shall  be  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  eught,  in 
the  first  place,  to  be  very  man ;  •'  because  the  justice  of  God  requires 
that  the  human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  likewise  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin  ;"  or,  as  the  Latin  catechism  expresseth  it,  Ut  cadem 
natura  humajia^  qua  fiecavit^  ifisa  firo  fieccato  defi€)ida.t  ;  "  that  the  same 
human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  make  satisfaction  for  sin." 
The  justice  of  God  requires  s.uisfliction  of  the  sinner  himself  ;  but  if 
God  will,  by  a  special  kindness,  transfer  his  demand  to  a  surety,  that 
surely  must  be  of  the  same  nature  with  the  sinner,  in  order  to  be* 
some  his  surety.     Therefore   Paul  saith,  Heb.  ii.  11,   *'  For  both  he 
that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctifkd,  are  all  of  one  :  for  which 
cause  he  is.  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."    And  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  which  he  hath   expressed  in  his  law,  demands  this  ; 
for  it  demands  that   "  man   should  love  his  nei^•hbour  as  himself." 
Luke    X.   27,28,     And   if  he   do  pot,    <' that  he  should  die."    Rom; 
i.  32.     If  the  mediator  should  then  saiisty  the  justice  of  God,  accor- 
ding: to  the  demand  of  the  law,  he  must  be  "  made  under  the   law,'* 
which  was  given  to  man  ;  "  that  he  may   redeem  him  who  was  un- 
der the  law,"^    Gal.  iv.  4,  5.     He  must  then  also  be  the  neighbour 
of  man,  and  so  "  of  one  blood  with  him ,"     Acts  xvii,  26.     And  **  by 
the  grace  of  God  must  taste  death,"  (or  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body)  "for  every  man,"    Heb.  \u  9« 

1  or  this  reason,  God  also,  foretold  that  the  Mediator  ^nd  Deliverer 
should  be  very  man  ;  for  he  promised  hira  formerly,  as  "  the  ^ecd 
of  the  woman  i"  Gen.  iii.  15  :  and  as  ''  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Is£lac, 
and  Jacob ;"  Gen.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  xxviii,  14  ;  and  that  "  he  should 
be  the  fruit  of  the  body  of  David,"  Psalm  exxxii.  1 1 .  This  was  also 
typified  under  the  Old  Testament  by  the  redeemers,  and  by  the  high 
priests :  the  Lord  had  enjoined,  that  he  who  was  the  nearest  kins- 
man, the  Goel^  should  be  the  person,  who  should  redeem  the  mortga- 
ged inheritance  of  another,  or  his  person,  if  he  were  imprisoned  for 
debt,  or  sold  for  a  slave,  and  that  he  should  be  the  avenger  of  his 
blood.  Lev.  XXV.  25:  Ruth  ii.  20,  iii.  12,  13.  iv.  1 — 10  Numb. 
XXXV.  19,21,24,25,27'  He  then,  who  shall  be  the  sinner's  re- 
deemer, must  also  be  his  kinsman,  and  therefore  the  Mediator  is  cal- 
led the  G&ri,  the  kinsman  and  *' Redeemer,  who  should  come  to 
Zion,"  Isaiah  hx.  20.  Paul,  having  respect  to  this,  saith  of  the  Me- 
diator and  Deliverer,  Heb.  ii.  14,  15,  16."  For  as  much  then,  as 
"he  children  are  partakers  of  fl^sh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  like- 


i24  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

wise  took  part  of  the  same  ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy 

him  ti^at  hud  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ;  and  deliver  them 
who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  the  r  lifetime  subject  to  bondage. 
"  For  veriljr  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  he  took 
on  him   the  seed  of  Abraham."     This  was  also  typified  by  the  high 
priests      '*  For  e  ery  high  pnest,  taken  froni  among  men,  is  ordain- 
ed for  men  ia  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts 
^nd  sacrifices  for  sins :  who  can   have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  ;   for  that  he  himself  is  also 
<:ompassed   with  infirmity,"      Heb.  v.    1,  2.      Therefore  the  true 
Higii  Priest  behooved  also  to  be  very  man,  in  order  that  he  might  of- 
fer a  perfect  sacrifice  for  sins,  and  have  suitable  compassion.     Let 
us  hear  the  same  apostle  again  ;  he  saith,  Heb.  li.  17,  18,  "Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be  made  like  his  brethren  ;  that 
he  mi'^ht  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining 
unto  G  )d,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sin  of  the  people  :  for   in 
that  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  tosuccorr  them 
that  are  tempted.     The  mediator  and  deliverer   must  not  only  be 
very  man,  bnt  also  a  perfectly  holy  man  ;  "  because  man  being  him- 
self a  sinner,  cnnnot  satisty  for  others  ;"  for  he  would  then  be    obli- 
ged to  satisfy  for  himself,  and  nevertheless  not  be    able,    much    less 
then  for  another,  as  hath   been  shown  on   a  foregoing   Lord's   day. 
He  must  then  be  a  "  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  high  priest,  who 
needeth  not  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's,"  as  the  text  speaks.     This  was   also  foretold  of  old ; 
the     'ediitor  and  Deliverer  should  be  "the  Holy  One."  Psalm  xvi. 
10.     *'  He  should  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  and  his  kw  should 
]be  within  liis  heart,"   Psalm  xl.  8  ;  and  "  vTickedness  should  be  an 
abomination  to  his  lips,"  Prov.   viii.  7,  8  ;  as  this  was  also  typified 
by  the  priests,  who  might  not   be  defiled,  v/hen  they  approached  to 
God,  the  Holv  One ;  for  *'  God  would  be  sanctified  in   them  that 
came  nigh  him  ;"  or  he  would  sanctify  himself,  by  consuming  them. 
Lev.  X.  1,2,  o.     Now  the  mediator  and  deliverer  ought   to  be  also 
the  surety  and  high  pi  iest,  and   therefore  also  holy,  "  that  he  might 
draw  near  to  God  in  those  things  which  pertained  to  God,  in  order 
to  make  reconciliation."  Jer.  xxx.  21.    Heb.  ii.  17.    The  sacrificial 
gifts  also  typified  this  ;  for  they  were  to  be  holy  and  without  blemish, 
according;  to   Lev.  xxii.   22,    25.    Mai.  i.  7,   8.     And  therefore  the 
true  sacrifice,  with  which  God  should  be  well  pleased,  behooved  also 
to  be  noly,   and   without  blemish;   "a   lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot  "   1  Peter  i.    19.     See  also  2  Cor.   v.   21,    Eph.  v.  2. 
"jYte  may  add  to  this  that  the   mediator  and  deliverer,  ought  lo  be 


—19.  itt 

ttoly,  because  it  was  necessary  that  his  human  nature  should  be  per- 
sonally united  to  his  Godhead,  and  therefore,  also  holy  ;  for  "that 
holy  thing,  which  should  be  born,  s'nould  be  called  the  Son  of  God," 
Lukei.  35. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  rrjediator  and  deliverer  should  then,  alsoj 
be  very  God.(l)  "  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead, 
sustain  in  his  human  nature  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath."  How 
heavy  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  is,  that  it  must  be  sustained,  in 
order  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  and  that  no  mere  creature  could  sus- 
tain it,  hath  been  shown  on  the  fourth  and  fiftli  Lord's  days.  Ke 
then  who  shall  sustain  it,  so  as  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  must  be  more 
powerful  than  all  the  creatures,  and  so  very  God,  that  he  may  sup- 
port his  human  nature,  while  he  suffers,  and  s\tstains  the  divine 
wrath  that  "  his  own  arm  may  bring  him  salvation,  and  his  fury 
may  uphold  him,"  Isaiah  Ixlii.  5.(2)  The  mediator  and  deliverer 
must  also  be  God, "  that  he  may  obtain  forns  righteousness  and  life," 
The  sinner,  if  he  shall  stand  before  God,  and  live,  must  have  an  in* 
finite  righteousness,  that  all  his  sins  committed  against  the  most 
high  majesty  of  God,  may  be  forgiven  him,  and  that  he  may  be  deliv- 
ered from  everlasting  death,  and  obtain  everlasting  Hfe.  in  the  ever- 
lasting favour  of  God ;  as  it  was  a'so  foretold,  that  ''the  Messiah 
should  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness."  Dan.  fx,  24.  Nov,- 
it  is  impossible,  that  the  righteousness  of  a  mere  creature 
should  he  of  infinite  dignity,  he  ought  then  himself  to  be  the  infi- 
nite God,  if  his  righteousness  shall  have  such  a  divine  dignity  (3) 
It  behooved  the  mediator  and  deliverer  to  restore  this  righteousness 
and  life  to  us,  to  apply  and  communicate  them  to  us  It  was  not 
enough  to  obtain  the  righteousness  and  life,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
impart  them  also  to  the  sinner,  if  he  should  be  delivered.  "  The 
shepherd  who  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep,"  must  also,  "  give  them 
eternal  Hfe,  and  keep  them  so,  that  they  do  never  perish,  and  that 
none  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand,"  John  x.  1 1,  28.  And' therefore 
the  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  God  ;  .for  a  man  could  not 
appropri:^tb  to  himself  the  righteousness,  which  the  mediator  obtains, 
and  the  life  which  he  merits.  There  is  need  here  oi  an  "exceeding 
greatness  of  God's  pov/cr,  according  to  tlte  v/orking  of  his  mighty 
power,"  Eph  1.  19.(4)  Moreover,  the  mediator,  who  should  su?^ 
render  his  life  to  death,  behooved  to  be  the  lord  of  his  own  life, 
and  thus  to  '*•  have  power  to  lay  his  life  down,  and  to  take  it  again." 
John  y.  18.  Now  no  mere  man  hath  such  power,  but  h(*  on  y,  who 
is  also  very  God,(5)  Add  to  this,  that  he  who  shall  deliver  sinners, 
ought  a'so  to  be  capable  of  bein^  an  object  of  all  religious  hpmag^; 


IJ5  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

faith,  love  and  gratitude  ;  for  tliose  whom  he  delivers  from  tempos 
ral  and  eternal  punishments,  whom  he  reinslates  into  favour,  and 
for  whom  he  obtains,  and  to  whom  he  restores  righteousness  and 
life,  owe  him  such  service.  See  Titus  ii.  14.  Now  such  honour 
cannot  surely  be  offered  to  one  who  is  no  more  than  a  man,  but  he 
must  be  "  God  also,  who  is  over  all,  blessed  forever,'^'  if  he  shall  be 
honoured  thus,  Rom.  ix.  5.  See  Isaiah  xlv.  21,  25.(6)  Finally,  we 
^ay  also,  that  it  v*  as  foretold,  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  should 
be  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord  our  righteousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6.  Hof 
sea,  i.  7". 

It  was  necessary  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  shotild  be  not 
only  very  man.  and  holy,  and  very  God,  but  also,  ••  at  the  same  tim^ 
God  and  man  in  one  person."  For  (a)  since  the  human  nature  can*- 
not  of  itself  sustain  the  wrath  of  God,  and  its  sufferings  cannot  be  of 
an  infinite  dignity,  and  since  the  incorruptible  Godhead  cannot  suf- 
fer, therefore  his  Godhead  must  have  its  proper  human  nature,  in 
order  to  suffer  therein  ;  and  the  human  nature  and  the  Godhead 
must  be  united*  that  the  Godhead  may  support  the  human  nature 
under  its  grievous  sufferings,  and  that  its  sufferings  may  be  of  infi- 
nite dignity,  being  "  the  proper  blood  of  God,"  Acts,  xx.  28  ;  and 
*'  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,"  1  John  i.  7.  We  cannot  say  that 
there  could  be  two  mediators,  one  of  whom  should  be  man,  that  he 
might  suffei,  and  the  other  God,  in  order  to  add  an  infinite  dignity 
to  the  huraan  sufferings  of  the  other  ;  for  no  human  sufferings  caft 
ever  be  of  infinite  dignity,  unless  the  suffering  person  himself  be  aP 
so  very  God,  and  suffer  in  his  ov/n  human  ]j^ature.(b)  We  may  al- 
so say,  that  it  behooved  him  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  be- 
cause  he  who  shall  be  the  mediator,  must  be  equally  near  to  both 
parties,  even  to  God  and  the  sinner,  that  he  may  unite  and  appease 
both  in  himself;  and  he  must  thus  be  a  "  mediator  between  God  and; 
man,  that  he  may  give  himself  a  ransom  for  many,  and  thus  Wm^ 
them  to  God,"  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  6.    I  Peter  iii.   18. 

II.  M\jst  the  sinner  now  have  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer, 
in  order  that  he  may  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  and 
be  again  i-eceived  into  favour,  he  must  then  be  exceedingly  distress- 
ed ;  for  he  himself  cannot  find  such  a  mediator,  much  less  procure 
him  ;  neither  can  any  creature,  angel,  or  man,  do  this  :  but  the  door 
of  hope,  which  Avas  hitherto  shut  to  the  concerned  sinner,  is  opened 
to  him  by  the  instructor,  when,  upon  this  question  of  the  distressed 
person, «'  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  who  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ?"  He  answers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,  &c.  He  doth  not  say,  nor  prove  now, 
that  he  is  ve  ry  God,  and  real  righteotjs  man  in  one  person,  becau§*^ 


—19.  12f 

he  will  do  this  hereafter ;  but  he  only  shows  that  he  is  4  sufficient 
mediator  and  deliverer,  through  whom  the  sinner  can  escape  punish- 
ment, and  be  again  received  into  favour,  since  *'  he  is  made  of  God 
to  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption," 
according  to  I  Cor.  1.  30. 

He  is  given  to  be  (1)  "  wisdom."  The  sinner  is  blind  and  foolish, 
and  he  knoweth  nothing  of  his  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness,  "  his 
understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God, 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,"  Eph.  iv.  18,  but  our  L6rd 
Jesus  Christ  is  ''  the  wisdom  of  God,"  1  Cor.  i.  24.  "  fn  him  arc 
hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  Coll.  ii.  3.  As 
the  great  prophet  he  makes  known  by  his  word,  and  by  his  Spirit  to 
the  elect  sinner,  "  all  that  he  hath  heard  of  the  Father,"  John  xv, 
15,  and  thus  *' he  leads  the  bHnd  by  a  way  which  they  have  not 
known,"  Sec.  Isaiah  xlii.  16.  See  Luke  xxiv.  44,  46.  Acts  xv.i  14, 
xxvi.  18. 

2  That  it  may  not  seem  unjust,  that  the  guilty  sinner  finds  favor, 
therefore  he  becomes  also  <^  righteousness"  to  him,  since  he  procures 
and  restores  to  him  an  infinite  righteousness  by  his  sufferings  and 
obedience,  whereby,  being  justified  before  God,  he  is  delivered  from 
his  guilt,  and  obtains  a  right  to  life  :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  God  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor^  v.  21. 

3.  Doth  he  leave  the  Sinner  in  and  under  the  filth  and  dominion 
of  sin  ?  No ;  but  he  becomes  also  "  sanctification  "  to  him,  by  which 
he  cleanses  him  from  his  loathsome  impurity,  subdues  the  power  of 
his  corruption,  transforms  him  into  the  image  of  God,  and  renders 
him  a  partaker  of  the  holy  nature  of  God,  which  he  doth  first  by  the 
new  birth,  and  then  by  an  increase  of  God,  "  changing  him  from 
glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Which  sanctification  he  procures  by 
his  blood,  and  communicates  by  his  Spirit ;  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  our  God,"   saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  vi.  1 1.  1  Peter  i.  2. 

4.  And  since  sinful  man  is  holden  captive  in  the  snare  of  the 
devil  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  and  misery,  on  account  of  the  justice 
of  God,  therefore  Christ  becomes  also  redemption  to  him,  by  which 
he  delivers  him  from  all  that  renders,  or  can  render  him  miserable, 
and  bestows  all  kinds  of  happiness  upon  him,  partly  in,  and  perfectly 
after  this  life  :  for  when  *<  the  Son  makes  him  free,  then  he  is  fre'6 
indeed,"  John  viii,  3€. 

H-s  "  is  made  "  such  great  benefits  to  us  **  of  God,"  saith  the  apos= 
tlc;  I  Cor,  i,  SO,     He  was  not  this,  by  the  natyr"  of  hi^  essence,  but 


1^6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

by  the  free  and  gracious  constitution  of  God  his  Father,  who  in  the 
aconomy  and  dispensation  of  f^race,  took  upon   himself  the  person 
of  judge,  whom  the  Son  should  satisfy,  as  mediator,  while  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  convey  all   jjrace  from  the  Father  through  the  Son  to 
ihe  sinner.  See  Rom.  iii.  34,  25,   36.  2  Cor.  xiii.    13.  John  xvi.  13, 
14,  15.     And  thus  was  Christ  made  of  God  wisdom.  See.  (1)  In  the 
COUMcii  of  pe^ce  from  eternity,  which  we  call  a  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, because  the  redemption  of  the  sinner  was  demanded  and  prom* 
ised  m  that  council.     God  did  from  eternity  elect  some  to  everlast- 
ing  life,  and  appoint  them  to  be  vessels  of  mercy  ;  but  as  they  could 
DQt  obtain  solvation,  except  the  justice  of  God  were  satisfied,  there- 
fore God  enters  into  a  covenant  with  his  Son-,   and  requires  ;hat  he 
should  make  satisfaction  by  his  suffering  and  obedience,  promising 
him  that  he  would  prepare  a  body  for  him,  give  him  his  Spirit,  up- 
hold him  in  his  suffering,  that  he  should  see  his  seed,  and  obtain  the 
highest  ;<h)ry.     The  Son  consents  to  all  this,  engages  to  become  his 
Father's  servant,  and  declares  it  to  be  his  delight  to  do  his  Father's 
will.:  whereupon  his  Fathtr  gives  him  his  elect,  and  ^'e  claims  thefti 
as  bis  own,  that   he  may  fulfil  the  stipulated  conditions   for  them  i 
and  thus  they  ar*?,  as  it  were,  transferred  from  the  book  of  life,  to 
witj  the  Father's  election,  into  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb.  See  this 
covenant.   Psalm  ii.  T,  8,  9.  xl.   6,   7,   8.  Ixxxix.  28.    Isaiah  xlii.  1. 
xlix.  4.  liii     10.  John  xvii,  6.  Eph  i.  4,   5.  iii.    10,  11.   Rev.  xvi.  8. 
xxi.  27,  which   covenant,  confirmed  "  with  the   word  of  the  oath, 
makes  the  Son  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and   redemp- 
tion,"  lieb.  viii.  28.     The  Lord  .lesus  Christ  is  also  made  of  God 
"Visdom,  Sec   by  the  covenant  of  grace,  which   G  d  established  with 
the  elect  sinner,  whereby  the  allsufficient,  the  only  wise,  righteour. 
and  merciful  God  promiseth  the  foolish,   guilty,  filthy  and  impotent 
sinner,  that  he  will  be  a  God  to  him,  and  will  thus  bestow  all  con- 
^ceivable  bliss  on   bins,   and  the  sinner  accepts  of  this  upon  God's 
proffer,  assents  to  it,  and  resigns  himself  to  the  Lord,  in  order  to  be 
his.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Isaiah  xlix.  5.  Iv.  3.    But  as  God  cannot  enter  intfr 
a  covenant  with  the  guilty  and  filthy  sinner  immediately,  therefore 
!ie  gives  him  his  Son  to  be  a  mediator,  that  he,  by  satisfying  his 
josticc,  may  bring  the  sintter  to  God,  and  obtain  for  him  all  the 
promises  of  the  covenant  of  grace  :  '^  Therefore  he  is  the  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death  for  the  redemption 
of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
arc  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance,"  Heb. 
i;t.  )5.  And  so  he  is  made  of  God  by  the  covenant  of  grace  wisdom, 
Sec  For  <'  the  Lord  gives  him  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  a  light 
Hf  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  y.lii^  G. 


^h  LORD'S  DAT,  Q.  16~19.  !SI 

I'hat  the  covenant  of  redemption  might  now  be  executed,  the 
covenant  of  grace  perfected,  and  the  sinner  rendered  complete  in 
wisdom,  righteousness^  sanctification  and  fedemption,  God  (a)  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  mediator,  caused  him  to  assume  the 
human  nature,  to  satisfy  his  vindictive  justice,  and  procure  wisdom, 
righteousness,  eanctification  and  redemption  for  his  people :  "  For 
what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  throu.arh  the  ^esh, 
God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin, 
condemned  sin  in  the  fl'.sh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Kom.  viij,  3,  4.  (b)  '^God  also  exalted  him  by  his 
right  hand  for  elect  men,"  gave  him  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  shed  him  forth  "  for  his  covenant  people,  "  and  made  nim  thus 
Lord  and  Christ,"  Acts  ii.  .^)3,  36.  And  by  that  exaltation  he  is  made 
of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption  :  "  for 
God  hath  exalted  him  with  his  right  hand,  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sin," 
Acts  v.  3 1  (c)  In  order  that  these  benefits  may  be  communicated  to 
the  sinner,  the  !  -ord  God  makes  his  Son,  with  all  his  fulness  known 
to  the  world  by  the  gospel,  and  proffers  him  to  men,  that  Ihey  may 
receive  and  embrace  him  ;  he  calls  to  them  with  a  voice  from  heaven* 
*'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  hear  ye 
him,"  Matt.  iii.  17.  xvii.  5.  He  sends  "  his  ambassadours  to  pray 
them  in  his,"  and  in  his  vSon's  »*  name,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2 
Cor.  V.  18,  19,  20,  and  so  "  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  brings  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  2  Tim.  i.  20.  (d)  Yet  all 
this  would  be  to  no  purpose,  if  God  did  not  actually  and  effectually 
by  his  Son  render  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  this  grace,  by  enlighten- 
ing, justifying,  sanctifying  and  redeeming  him  ;  for  which  purpose 
he  gives  the  sinner  faith,  that  he  may  thereby  receive  the  Mediator 
with  all  his  fulness,  and  may  improve  him  in  all  his  needs  :  for  '*  faith 
is  the  gift  of  God,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  Philip,  i.  29,  which  «  God  works" 
eflfectually  in  the  soul,  according  to  "  the  greatness  of  his  power," 
Eph.  i.  19,  and  it  is  faith,  which  receives  the  Son  of  God  and  his 
fulness,  John  i.  12,  16.  Eph.  iii.  17.  What  think  ye,  hearers,  had 
not  Paul  sufficient  reason  to  say,  1  Cor.  i.  30,  that  "  Christ  is  made 
of  God  to  us  wisdom,"  &c.  ?  and  may  not  this  be  called  by  the  in- 
structor a  giving  ?  *  for  there  is  not  a  greater,  nor  a  more  gracious 
Sjift,  than  the  Son  of  God,  with  all  his  benefits.  See  John  iii,  1 C, 
Rom.  viii.  32.  1  John  iv.  9,  10. 

•  This  is  the  English  of  the  word  used  in  the  Dutch  catechism,  an4  in  the 
Geermao  original. 

V 


J 

\m  CHRIS  l  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

But  for  whom  was  Christ  made  and  j»iven  to  be  this  ?  "  For  tis," 
saith  the  apostle,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  "  for  them  who  are  called  lo  be  saints," 
vrs.  2,  *'  not  many  wise  men.  mighty  or  noble  after  the  flesh,  but 
the  foolish,  weak,  ignoble  and  despised  of  the  world,  hath  God  chosen 
and  called,  tliat  th-ey  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  vrs.  26,  31.  '*  There- 
iore  all  men  without  exception  who  perished  in  Adam,  are  not  saved 
by  Christ,  but  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive^ 
all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith,"  as  the  following  Lord's  day  will 
inform  us. 

•  III.  Btit  who  will  dare  to  believe  this  great  matter  ?  what  account 
have  we  of  it?  will  the  light  of  nature  discover  it  to  us?  No,  the 
creatures  of  God,  contemplated  in  the  most  exact  manner,  will  not 
t^ach  us  aught  of  this :  we  can  learn  from  them  only  *'  God's  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  that  we  may  be  without  excuse,"  Rom.  i.  20. 
The  innate  principles  of  knowledge,  and  our  conscience  may  teach 
us,  that  there  is  an  almighty,  righteous,  wise  and  good  God,  and  that 
we  have  to  do  with  him,  according  to  Rom  i.  19.  ii.  14,  but  they 
cannot  atTord  us  the  least  intimation,  nor  excite  in  us  the  least  ap- 
prehension, whereby  we  may  be  induced  to  think,  that  God  will  de- 
liver smnersby  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  by  his  Son.  And  therefore 
a  persc^n  who  doth  not  possess  more  than  the  mere  light  of  nature, 
"  is  without  Christ,  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  a 
stranger  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  Can  this  then  be  learned  from 
the  law  ?  not  from  the  law  neitlier  :  "  For  the  promise  was  not  to 
Abraham,  or  to  his  seed  by  the  law,"  Rom.  iv.  13.  The  law  can- 
not show  the  sinner  the  means  of  deliverance,  but  can  only  discover 
his  misery  to  him,  and  condemn  him  :  "  for  the  law  worketh  wrath," 
Rom.  iv.  15.  See  Rom   iii.  19,  20.  Gal.  iii    10,   II,  12. 

Whence  then  do  we  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  medi- 
ator and  deliverer,  made  of  God,  wisdom,  Sec?  The  instructor  an- 
swereth  accordmg  to  the  word  of  God,  "  From  the  holy  gospel.*' 
The  Greek  word  Euangtlion^  signifies  joyful  and  good  tidings,  or  ti- 
dings of  good  :"  I  bring  you  good  tidings,  euangdizomaiy  or  "  evan- 
gelize you  great  joy,"  saith  the  angel  who  brought  the  first  joyful 
news  ot  the  Saviour's  birth,  Luke  ii.  10  11.  The  writers  of  the 
New  Testament  adopted  this  word,  and  learned  the  ordinary  use  of 
it  fiom  the  seventy  Greek  translators  of  the  Old  Testament,  who 
made  use  of  the  word  euangellon^  when  they  found  the  word  Bisser 
m  the  Hebrew.  See  Isaiah  x.  4,9.  Ii.  7.  Ixi.  I.  There  cannot, 
indeed,,  be  jnore  joyful  news  to  a  sinner  under  concern,  than  that 
Christ  is  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  is  made  so  great  a  salvation 


♦  — 19.  fSl 

to  him  of  God.     By  this  gospel  we   are  not  here   to  understand   so 
much  the  history  of  the  birth,  life,  doctrine,  miracles,  humiliation:) 
and  exaltation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  we  must  understand  by  it 
particularly,  *'  the  v/hole  doctrine  cf  salvation,  by  which  God  makes 
the  Mediator  and  Deliverer,  Jesus  Christ  known  to  the  sinner,  offers 
him  to  him,  commands  him  to  believe  in  him,  and  that  through  this 
mcdiatoi'  h*:*  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  aeain  received  into  fa- 
vour."   The  gospel  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  by  which  a  person  is 
conducted  to  salvation,  utcording  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  described 
in  the  books  of  the  Old  and   Nev/   Testament:  for   "the  word   of 
truth  is  the  sjospci  of  salvation,"    Eph.  i.  3,     Since  now  Christ  with 
i^is.  benefits  is  the  sum  of  the  gospel,  therefore  it  is  called  the  gospel 
of  Christ,    2  Cor,  iv.  4.  See  also  Rom.  i-  1 — 4,  16,  17.     Wherever 
then  we  read  in  the  holy  scripture  of  Christ   and  his  benefits,  there 
we  have  the  gospei   by  which  (a)  God  makes  Christ  known  to  the 
sinner,  as  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  in  him  only  the  sinner  must 
seek,  and  shall  find  all  salvation  :  for  "by  the  gospel  is  preached  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Sec.    Eph.    iii.   8 — 11. (b)     By    the 
gosptl   the  Mediator,   and  all  salvation  in  and  through  him,   is  also 
oHered  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  invited  and  called  to  him,  that  he  may 
"  turn  to  him  and  be  saved."     Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Iv.    1,  2,  S.     "He 
hath  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the   glory  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  the  aposile,  2.  Thes.   ii.  U.(e)     By  the 
gosp  1  the  sinner  is  also  commanded  to  behave  in  the   Mediator  to 
salvation  :    "  Jesus,  preaching  the  gospel,  said,  believe  the  gospel,'* 
Mark.  i.   14,  15.     On  which  account  it  is  sometimes  called  "  a  law." 
Isaiah  ii.  3.     And  also  "  the  law  of  faith/'  Rem.  iii.  27,   since  it 
obhgeth  every  one,  to  whom  it  is  brought,  and  denounces  a  severe 
threaiening  against  those,  who  "  draw  back"  from  it,     Heb.  x»38.(d) 
Purther,  the  gospel  engages  and  promises  to  the  believer,  that  he 
shall  certainly  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour, 
\>y  faith  in  Christ,  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  John  iii.  16,  36.    Acts  x.   43  j 
and  so  the  gospel  "  comforts  the  believing  people  of  God,  and  speaks 
comfortably  to  them,"  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.     ixi.    1,  2,  3. 

This  gospel  must  be  distinguished  into  the  gospel  of  promise  and 
of  fulfilment.  The  gospel  of  promise  is  that  which  foretold  and 
promised  the  Mediator,  who  was  to  come,  with  his  saving  benefits. 
The  gospel  of  fulfilment,  is  the  actual  execution  and  fulfilment  of  the 
gospel  of  promise  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  Rom.  i.  1—4,  "  That  God 
hath  promised  the  gospel  before  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scrip- 
tiu-es,  concerning  his  Son^  who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  accor- 
ding to  the  flesh,"  kc. 


in  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  • 

This  gospel  of  promise  "  God  spake  in  times  past,  anc'  »ii  diveis 
manners  to  the  fathers,"  Heb.  i.  i.  For  (1)  God  himself  revealed  it 
first  of  all  in  Paradise^  when  "he  said  to  the  serpent,  because  thou 
hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 
of  the  field:  upon  thy  belly  sh  alt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat 
all  t'le  days  of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  dn.  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  :  it  shall  bruise  thy 
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel,"  Gen.  iii.  14,  18.  We  sup^ 
pose  that  the  Lord  God  spake  these  words,  when  our  first  parents 
were  present,  not  s  >  much  to  the  material  serpent,  as  to  the  devil, 
>»ho  abused  the  serpent,  because  many  things  arc  mentioned  here, 
which  are  natural  to  the  serpent,  and  which  it  hath  m  common  with 
other  hurtful  animals  :  and  the  rather,  because  "  the  devil  and  Satan 
is  called  the  old  si^rpent."  Rev.  xii.  IS.  Our  Saviour  teacheth  us 
that  the  seed  of  the  serpent  signifies  the  ungodly,  when  he  calls 
them  *' a  generation  ofscrpents  and  vipers,"  ^;att.  xxiii  33,  and 
aailh  that  they  are  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii,  44.  We 
suppose  also,  that  these  words  were  spoken,  in  order  to  comfort  our 
parents,  as  their  malicious  ioe  was  condemned  by  these  words ; 
therefore  it  is  also  evident,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  si^nif7es 
in  the  first  place  the  Mediator,  who  should  be  <'  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham," and  thus,  also '« the  seed  of  the  woman  ;"  Gen  xxii.  18.  GaL 
jii.  16.  iv.  4,  and  it  sitrnifies  in  the  next  place,  elect  believers  with 
the  Mediator,  and  in  hini  ,  for  these  "  are  reckoned  the  seed," 
through  the  promise.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Rom.  ix.  7,  8,  And  there- 
fore  the  words,  Gen  iii.  14,  15,  promise  (a)  that  the  Mediator  should 
be  man  of  m^n,  to  wit,  of  a  woman,  (b)  1  hat  he  should  be  holy,  an 
enemy  to  the  devil,  and  to  his  seed.(r)  That  he  should  be  God  ; 
for  he  should  be  able  to  bruise  (or  crush)  the  head  of  the  devil,  or 
his  power.(d)  That  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  1 
John  iii.  8  (e)  That  he  should  suffer  in  his  human  nature  ;  for  the 
serpent  should  bruise  his  heel.(f)  That  the  serpent  should  not  con- 
quer him,  but  that  he  should  be  exalted  above  the  serpent,  whose 
head  he  should  i)ruise.(g)  That  believers,  being  united  to  him, 
dihould  be  made  like  him,  as  the  seed,  and  should  therefore  be  made 
M'ise,  be  justified,  sanctified  and  delivered  ;  but  still  by  a  conflict  with 
the  serpent  and  with  his  seed.  These  things,  and  such  like,  are 
Contained  in  the  promises.  Our  first  parents  no  doubt  understood 
ihtse  things  more  or  less,  and  were  more  fully  instructed  in  them  by 
^od,  believed  and  embraced  them  to  salvation,  and  delivered  them 
iUo  to  their  children  by  tradition.  (2)  God  published  this  gospel 
afterwards  by  Cx  holy  patriarchs  and  prophets.      The  palriar^hg 


'    ^  — lit.  1^8 

were  the  first  fathers  of  great  fdmilies  in  the  holy  line,   before    ancj 
after  the  flood  ;  to  wit,  from  Adam  lo  Noah,  before  the  flood,  Gen, 
V.  after  the  flood,    from  Noah   to  the    twelve    sons  of  Jacob,  Gen. 
X,  1.     Chron.  i.  who,  as  also  Abraham,  Heb.  vii.  4,  are  called  patri- 
archs. Acts  vii.  8.     And  since   the  promise  of  the   coming  of  the 
Messiah,  and  the  setting-  up  of  the  new  church  was  attached  to  the 
family  of  David,  2    Sam.  vii.  therefore  David    is  also  called  a  Patri- 
arch, Acts  ii.  29.     God  published  his  gospel  in  divers  ways  to  these 
patriarchs,  and  by  them  to  their  posterity.     Hovv  could  Abel  other- 
wise  "  offer  in    faith  ?"  Gen.  iv.  4.     Heb.    xi.  4.     Did  not   Cain 
and  Abel,  as  also  the   sons  of  God,  and  the  daughters  of  men    soon 
manifest  who  were  the  true  partakers  of  the  Mediator?  Gen.  iv.  anci 
vi.     When  Enos  was  born,  the  people  of  God  assembled  to  confess 
the  Lord  in  a  public  maimer,  according  to  the  gospel,  iv.  26.  Enoch 
spake  of  his  coming  to  judgment,  Jude,  verse  14,  15.  Noah  preached 
even  then  by  the  Spirit,  the  righteousness  of  the   Redeemer,    and 
prepared  the  ark,  as  a   figure  of  his  grai  e,  whicii    is  now   sealed  by 
baptism,  according  to    1  Peter,  iii,  19,  20,  21.     But  the  Rospel  was 
pubhshed  much  more  clearly  in  the  household  of  Ab'-aham  and    of 
his  sons,  Gen.  xviii.    17;  when  God  entered   into   a  covenant  with 
them,  and  promised  them  the  Messiah,  as  the  seed  in    whom  men' 
should  be  blessed,  and  particularly  as  a  seed,  whjch   should   proceed 
from  them  ;  as  the  Pvlessiah  also  appeared  sometimes  to  them,  as  the 
g.ngel  of  the  covenapt.     They   also  believed  the    gospel,  embraced 
the  Mediator,  and  obtained  thus  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness. 
Sec  Gen.  xv   6.     Heb.  xi.  13. 

To  these  patriarchs  we  may  add  also  those  great  and  holy  men, 
who  v/ere  not  of  the  holy  line,  as  Melchizedek  and  Job.  Mf^lchize- 
dek  prefigured  that  the  Mediator  should  have  a  priesthood  and  king- 
dom, which  should  not  be  transferable  to  others,  Gen.  iv.  Heb. 
vii.  And  Job  spake  of  the  Messiah,  as  his  "  Gcel  and  Redeemer," 
both  in  this  life,  and  that  to  come,  Job.  xix.   25,  26,  27. 

But  the  gospel  v/as  published  with  much  greater  clearness  by  the 
prophets :  men  chosea  by  God  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 
endued  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  might  foretell  the  future  things  of 
the  Messiah,  his  benefits,  and  the  New  Testament  church  ;  for  they 
foreshowed  that  the  Messiah  should  be  Mediator,  God  and  man  in 
one  person,  and  "  Immanuel,"  God  with  us,  and  that  "he  should  be 
born  of  a  virgin,"  Isaiah  vii.  14.  ix.  5,  that  "he  should  be  a  pro- 
phet, like  Moses,"  Deut.  xviii.  1 5,  "a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchi- 
zedek," Psalm  ex.  4.  4.  and  "  a  king  of  Zion,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  that  he 
should  be  humbled  and  exalted,"  Isaiah  liii.  that  he  should  descend 


l/4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  G05PEL. 

from  the  tribe  of  Judah  and  the  empoverishcd  family  of  Jesse,  Gen. 
xlix-  10,  Isaiah  vi.  1,  and  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  Micha  v.  1,  and  ap- 
pear in  the  second  temple,  Haggai  ii.  8.  10.  Mai.  iii.  Land  that  af- 
ter the  end  of  seventy  wteks  of  years,  Dan.  ix.  24,  27.  That  he 
should  be  made  of  God  to  his  people  wisdom,  "  to  lead  the  blind  ," 
Isaiah  xlii.  16,  righteousness,  Jer.  xxiii.  6,  sanctilication,  Isaiah  lix» 
20.  That  he  should  bring  the  Gentiles  to  fellowship  with  God,  Isaiah 
xlix.  6.  That  he  should  abolish  the  ecclesiastical  laws  of  the  Jewsy 
and  that  Jerusalem  should  be  laid  waste,  Dan  ix.  27.  And  so  "all 
the  prophets  give  witness  that  through  his  name,  whosoever  believ- 
eth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43. 

3.  God  published  this  gospel  of  promise  not  only  verbally,  b>it  alsa 
really  :  he  prefigured  it  "  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies,  or 
ecclesiastical  observances  of  the  law.  The  ceremonies  of  the  law 
were  either  (I)  the  holy  things,  as  all  the  different  ofTerings,  meats, 
drinks,  washings,  sprinklings,  incense-,  anointing  oil,  first  fruits  and 
tithes  ;  or  (2)  the  holy  persons,  who  celebrated  the  publick  worship, 
as  the  high  priest,  the  common  priests,  and  the  Levites  ;  or  (3)  the 
holy  places,  as  the  land  of  Canaan,  Jerusalem,  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  with  their  apartments,  as  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  the  holy  place  with  the  golden  dlar,  the  table  and  can- 
dlestick, also  the  porch  with  the  brazen  altar,  the  laver,  and  all  the 
inst'uments,  which  were  used  in  the  holy  service  in  the  porch  ;  or 
(4)  the  holy  seasons,  as  all  the   festivals. 

Truly  a  most  costly,  obscure,  and  burthcnsome  vv-orship,  "  a  yoke 

which  the  fathers  could  not  bear,"  Acts  xv.  10.     Why  did  God  lay 

this  yoke  upon  them  ?  he  did  notboriow  it  from  the  Egyptians,  and 

correcting  it  somewhat,  give  it  to  them,  in  order  to  detach  them    by 

the  use  of  it  from  affecting  the  customs  of  the  heathens  :  for  "  the 

laws  of  Israel  were  different  from  those  of  all  other  people,"  Esther 

iii,  9.  God  deiested  the  laws  and  religion  of  the  heathens,  Deut.  xii. 

30.     When  Israel  made  a  calf  after  the  manner  of  the   Egyptians, 

they  broke  the  covenant  of  God,   Deut.  xxxii.     Neither  do  we  think 

that  God  gave  them  this  law,  in   order  to  punish  them  for  their  sin 

with  the  golden  calf;  foj-  he  had  given  them  many  parts  of  it  before 

that  sin,  and  he  broke  off  giving  it  to  them  on  account  of  that  sin, 

and  he  began,  presently  after  he  was  reconciled  to  the   people,    to 

perfect  it.     It  is  thcre;fore  better  to  say,  that  this  law  was    given    to 

Israel  ibr  *'  a  wall  of  partition,"  to  separate  them  from  other  nations, 

Eph.  ii.  14,  15,  also  to  convince  them  of  their  uncleanness,  and  guilt, 

and  in.:uce  them  to  seek  their  perfection  in  the  Mediator,  who  was  to 

come.     See  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb,  viii.  5.  ix.  9,  10,  11.  x,  1.    The  Old 


VLLORD'SDAY,  Q.  15— ig.  j35 

Testament  church  was  in  a  state  of  imperfect  freedom,  and  of  child- 
hooi,  and  was  insiructed  in  higher  and  better  things  by  these  dif-, 
fi^;ult  rudin^ents.  If  time  would  permit,  we  would  si  ow  that  all 
these  ceremonial  observances  typified  that  the  Mediator  should  per- 
fect his  people  by  his  only  oft'erini^,  and  v/ith  his  blood  uiid  Spirit, 
that  he  siiouid  be  the  true  high  priest,  and  sliould  enter  into  the  holy 
of  holies,  even  heaven  itself,  with  his  own  blood,  and  thut  he  should 
procure  a  joyful  festival  for  his  New  Testament  church,  during  her 
whole  continuance  on  earth,  and  should  at  length  introduce  her  into 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  into  the  holy  Jerusalem,  the  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  See  only  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews; 
for  we  cannot  speak  of  these  things  in  order  now. 

Not  only  were  the  ceremonies  of  that  law  types,  but  also  wan.y 
other  things  and  persons  of  that  time.  If  any  wish  to  see  a  more 
particular  account  of  them,  we  refer  him  to  our  "  Sketch  of  the 
structure  of  the  types,  exhibited  with  respect  to  its  established  fun* 
damental  rules,  and  agreeably  to  proper  standards,"  in  which  work 
he  may  also  see  that  the  types  were  not  mere  shadows  and  sketches, 
but  also  sacraments  and  seals,  by  which  God  ceFtined  and  sealed  to 
his  ancient  people  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come,  and  his  saving 
benefits.  Therefore  we  believe  that  the  Mediator  was  an  Ex^rO' 
Diissor  for  the  Old  Testament  church,  or  such  a  surety,  as  had  taken 
the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  and  not  merely  a  Jidpjus<ior^  who  had 
undertaken  indeed  to  satisfy  for  her  debt,  but  nevertheless  suffered 
it  to  remain  on  her,  and  to  be  demanded  of  her,  until  she  should 
satisfy  in  him,  and  if  he  should  fail,  that  then  she  should  be  obliged 
<o  satisfy  for  herself,  and  atone  for  her  debt  by  eternal  misery  :  for 
if  he  had  not  taken  the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  but  left  it  on  her, 
and  suffered  it  thus  to  be  demanded  of  her,  believers  would  not  then 
have  triumphed,  as  they  did,  on  account  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
sins,  Psalm  xxxii.  ciii.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  neither 
would  that  burthensome  worship  of  the  church  have  typified,  shadow- 
ed forth  and  sealed  the  Mediator  to  them,  and  they  would  not  have 
been  able  to  enter  into  the  everlasting  rest,  so  long  as  he  had  not 
satisfied  for  their  debt. 

Behold,  in  this  manner  did  God  make  known  the  gospel  of  promise, 
and  "  he  hath  also  lastly  accomplished  it  by  his  only  begotten  Son," 
and  so  hath  revealed  it  to  us  by  the  gospel  of  fulfilment  in  the  scrips 
tures  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  we  find  in  them,  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  God  co-essential  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Gl.ost, 
took  upon  himself  the  iiuman  nature,  continuing  one  person,  of  the 
virgin  Mary,  in  the  proper  time  and  nlyce :  that  he  ff^  ^be  suprenje 


^36  CHRIST  HEVE ALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

Prophet,  Priest  and  Kin^ ;  that  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
was  thus  made  to  his  people  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,  which  we  will  illustrate  and  prove  in  order, 
when  we  speak  of  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption* 


APPLICATION. 

\Vhat  think  ye,  beloved  hearers,  ought  not  wc  to  be  fully  pet^ 
Miaded  in  our  minds,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Messiah, 
according;  to  tlie  scriptures?  May  we  not  indeed  cry  out  with  Andrew 
and  Philip  '■'  We  have  found  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets  did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of 
Joseph  ?"  John  i.  42,  45  For  all  that  was  foretold  and  prefigured 
of  the  vjessiah  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  him  :  he  also  fully  proved  this 
from  the  scriptures  from  his  miracles  and  from  his  resurrection,  sa 
as  to  silence  the  Jews  :  and  his  apostles,  who  were  ear  and  eye-wit> 
nesses  of  these  things,  testified  of  them  with  so  much  power,  that 
those  who  lived  both  in  and  after  their  time  received  their  testimony 
V'lth  a  full  persuasion  of  mind.  It  is  indeed  truly  astonishing,  that 
the  Jews,  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  denied  our 
Saviour,  as  they  do  even  until  this  day.  How  was  this  possible, 
might  we  ask  ?  But  the  word  of  Gcd  will  inform  us  that  God  hath 
forsaken  that  generation  in  his  wrath,  and  hath  abandoned  them  to 
blindness  and  hardness  of  heart.  They  know  neither  their  miserj*, 
nor  the  proper  method  of  deliverance:  they  stek  their  own  right- 
eousness, and  are  offended  at  the  humble  birth,  and  at  the  ignomi- 
nious crucifixion  of  Christ.  All  this  was  likewise  foretold  concerning 
this  people.  See  Isaiah  xi.  9,  10.  viii.  14,  15,  16.  xxix.  9—15.  Iviii, 
2 — 5.  There  is  nothing  that  they  can  endure  with  less  patience 
than  that  Jesus  hath  abolished  and  abrogated  their  ceremonial  law, 
as  though  it  were  not  foretold,  that  ihe  Messiah,  when  "  he  had 
mude  an  end  of  sins,  had  made  reconciliat  on  for  iniquity,  and  brought 
in  an  evei  lasting  rigliteousness,  should  then  also  cause  the  sacrifice 
and  oblation  to  cease,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  See  also  Jer.  iii.  15,  16,  \7. 

But  who  will  nut  de'est  the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  the  Medi- 
ator is  not  God  and  man  in  one  person,  and  that  he  did  not  by  satis- 
fying the  justice  of  God,  btcome  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  redemption  to  his  people  ?  They  say  that  he  is  not  more 
than  a  mere  man,  or  only  a  p:reat  prophet  on  account  of  his  heavenly 
doctrine,  great  miracles,  and  exemplary  conversation  and  death. 
».it  what  wonder  is  it,  that  they  degrade  Christians  in  this  manner, 


Vl,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  i6--i9.  m 

they  have  conducted  thus  also  with  the  believing:  Jews,  upon  whose 
faith  Christianity  is  founded  ;  for  '^the  law  went  forth  out  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Jerusalem  "  Isaiah  ii.  3,  and  «  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews."  John  iv,  22,    For  they  assert  that  the  fathers  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  lio  promises  concerning  the  forgive'iess  of 
sins,  or  of  eternal  life  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  c- tre  ;  that  he 
was  not  t\  pified  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law, 
and  that  the  sacrifices,  which  were  then  offered  up  for  sins,  reconci- 
led the  sins  for  which  they  were  offcx-  d.   and  that  therefore  the  be- 
lievers of  that  time  did  not  seek  their  reconciliation  in  Christ,   when 
they  offered      Do  they  not  represent  the  fathers  as  Epicureans;  who 
cared  only  for   their  bellies  ?  do  they  not  deny  the  whole  gospel, 
which  teaches  nothing  different  nor  less  of  the  Mediator,  than  we 
have  exhibited?  Doth  not  the  word  of  God  say  plainly  and  frequently, 
that  the  Lord  established  his  covenant  of  £;race  with  the  fathers,  that 
he  was  their  God  ?  Gen.  xvii,  7.  Psalm  xxxiii,    12.  Matt.   xxii.  32, 
that  he  forgave  their  sins,   Gen    xv.  6.   Psalm  xxxii.  i,  2.  ciii.  3,  4. 
They  had  spiritual  peace  and  joy.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  To  them  be- 
longed the   adoption,  Rom,  ix.   4,  sanctific'tiori,  preservation,  and 
glorificati(>n,  Psalm  xlviii.  14,   Psalm  xvii.  15.  They  had  "the  same 
Spirit  of  faith  "  with  us.  Psalm  cxvi.  10.  2  Cor.  iv.  13.  Heb  xi,  and 
indeed  faith  in  the  Messiah,  in  whom,  ana  for  whose  sake  they  de- 
sired and  obtained  all  things  of  God,  Psalm  ixxx.   17.   D>an.  ix-  17. 
Heb.  xi   27,  and  this  was  sealed  to  them  by  the  sjcraments,   which 
were  of  the  same  efficacy  with  ours,    1  Cor  x.  1 — 4.     What  think 
ye,  hearers,  may  we  look  upon  these  men,  who  deny  all  this,   either 
as  true  Israelites,  or  as  believing  Christians  ? 

But  how  forcible  are  the   right  words  of  our  instructor,  to  show 
the  concerned  sinner  the  good  way,  according  to  the  gospel,  to  es- 
cape punishment,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour-     The  dis- 
tressed sinner  asks  how  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of  God  ;  and  he 
shows  him  not  only  the  necessity  of  a  satisfaction,  and  that  there  was 
no  possibility,  that  either  he  hirriself,  or  any  other  mere  creature 
should  satisfy,  but  that  this  could  be  accomplished  only  by  one,  who 
was  a  real  and  holy  man,   and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in 
©rder  that  the  sinner  may  not  rest  upon  false  grounds,  but  may  be 
more  deeply  humbled.     And  that  he  may  not  however  through  des- 
pair wholly  neglect  to  seek  his  salvation,  he  shows  him  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  proper  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  he 
itiay  be  fully  persuaded  and   assured  of  this  by  the  gospel,  and  be- 
come a  partaker  of  him  and   his  fulness  by  faith.     Therefore  this 
information  is  perfectly  satisfactory  to  a  perplexed  mind.     For  (a> 

X 


■lS6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IX  THE  GOSPEL. 

hath  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  been  made  wisdom,  righteousness,  sane- 
tificalion  and  redemption,  then  he  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God, 
and  procured  a  deliverance  from  guilt  for  the  Imwible  sinner,  by 
^vhich  means  he  escapes  punishment.  For  there  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  becduse  he  hath  fulfilled  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  1,  3,  4.  (b)  The  sinner  is  thus 
also  again  received  into  favour,  since  he  is  brought  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  into  God's  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  "  the  Lord  causes 
him  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  brings  him  into  the  bond  of  the  cove- 
nant," Ezek.  XX.  37.  (c)  And  Christ  doth  thus  also  remedy  all  his 
grievous  cal.mities.  Is  he  foolish,  dolh  he  not  know  God's  way  of 
life  ;  Jesus  is  wisdom  to  him.  Is  he  guilty  ;  the  Mediator  is  right- 
eousness to  him.  Is  he  too  abominable,  and  hateful  to  receive  any 
favour  ;  Christ  is  sanctification  to  him.  Is  he  still  too  much  fettered 
and  bound  with  the  cords  of  misery  ;  the  Saviour  is  the  Redeemer, 
and  is  redemption  to  him.  (d)  The  sinner  needs  not  fear  that  God 
the  judge  will  not  be  pleased  with  the  Surety,  and  with  his  satisfac- 
tion. Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  made  this  of  God  to  him  :  the  Judge 
himself  appointed  him  to  be  a  surety,  sent  him  into  the  world,  de- 
manded the  debt  of  him,  and  showed  that  he  was  satisfied  with  him, 
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  exalted  bim  at  his  own  right  hand, 
and  thus  *' justified  him,"  I  1  im.  iii.  16.  And  therefore  he  swears 
that  "  he  will  not  be  wa-oth  with  the  believing  smner,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  (e)  Is  the  sinner  anxious  to  know  how  he  shall 
obtain  this  Mediator  for  himself ;  this  Saviour  is  offered  to  him  in 
the  gospel,  and  he  hath  only  to  choose  him  for  nimself  upon  that 
offer  ;  yea,  God  commands  him  to  do  this,  and  promi  eth  him  that 
"  he  w^ill  not  reject  him,"  but  will  receive  and  save  him,  John  vu  37. 
Isaiah  xlv.  22. 

May  and  must  we  not  then  say,  that  the  doctrine  of  our  reformed 
church  is  pure  and  evangelical,  according  to  the  word  of  God  ?  For 
it  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  that  it  calms 
and  comforts  the  troubled  mind  of  a  distressed  sinner  perfectly  :  For 
*^  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were  written  for  our 
learning  ;  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures, 
might  have  hope,"  Rom.  xv.  4.  And  who  of  those  who  are  not  of 
our  communion  are  comparable  to  us  in  this  respect  ?  the  Romanists 
require  that  the  distressed  sinner  should  satisfy  for  his  temporal  and 
eternal  punishment,  by  various  bodily  exercises  and  penances  of  hear- 
ing masses  for  souls'  abstaining  from  particular  meats  during  certain 
seasons,  saying  and  muttering  many  prayers,  going  upon  pilgrim- 
ages to  this  and  that  holy  place,  so  called,  and  celebrating  many  holy 


— ly.  139 

>Ay:.-     Will  this  not  suffice,  he  must  then  seek  indulgences,  and  the 
h.upererogatory  works  of  saints,  v/ho  were  more  than  perfect.     Doth 
he  come  short  still,  he  must  then  believe  and  be  assured,  that  he  will 
be  obliged   to  satisfy  for  Vrha?:  remains  in  an  exceedingly  hot  and 
burning  purgatory,  where  he  will  be  most  severely  tormented  a  long 
time,  and  vhat  he  cannot  be  delivered  out  of  it,  unless  many  prayers 
be  offered  up  for  him,  and  many  masses  for  the  dead  be  provided 
for  hira  by  the  living.     The  ISocinians  do  indeed  detest  these  trifles^ 
but  neither  do  they  heal  the  breach  in  the  spirit ;  for  they  do  not 
speak  of  a  satisfying  Mediator   but  only  say,  that  the  mourning  sin- 
ner must  believe  the  promises  of  Cod,  that  he  who  do;h   good  shall 
receive  a  good  reward.     Uoth  the  sinner  say,  that  he  hath  not  done 
any  good  work,  and  that  the  promises  do  not  therefore  belong  to 
him,  they  will  then  endeavour  to  soothe  him  with  an  exterjial  con- 
version, telling  him  that  he  must  lead  a  better  life   for  the  time  to 
come,  tnat  he  must  keep  the  easy  commandments  of  Christ,  and 
ti;at  Cod  will  then  forgive  his  former  sins.     The  Remonstrants  do 
not  condu^  t  much  better,   when  they  meet  with  a  sorrowful  sinner ; 
for  they  presently  quiet  him  with  vain  consolations,  and  say  that  he 
must  not  be  so  sorrwful,  that  his  case  is  certainly  not  so  lamentable, 
that  he  r^jpents  of  his  sins,  that  God  is  merciful,  that  Christ  hath 
died  for  every  sinner,  and  merited  a  sufficient  grace  :  that  he  must 
promise  to  lead  a  better  life,  and  to  make  a  better  use  of  the  powers 
of  his  free  v/ill,  and  that  God  will  then  grant  him  his  grace.    O  vain 
and  miserable  coniforters  of  sick  souls  !  they  show  that  they,  have 
not  yet  any  experimental  knowledge  of  the  abominable  nature  of  sin, 
nor  of  a  true  humiliation,  nor  of  the  satisfaction  nor  fulness  of  Christ, 
nor  of  a  perfect  consolation  ;  and  therefore  they  feed  the  poor  soul 
with  ashes,  and  put  a  lie  in  her  right  hand. 

But  if  our  doctrine  were  ever  so  efficacious  and  sufficient  to  quiet 
a  troubled  mind,  it  will  nevertheless,  not  administer  the  smallest  re* 
lief  unless  we  know  that  Christ  with  all  his  fulness  is  also  given  to  us 
of  God  :  that  he  is  not  given  to  all  men,  will  appear  on  the  following 
Lord's  day.  To  force  ourselves  into  a  steadfast  persuasion,  in  a  care- 
less manner,  without  any  foundation,  and  without  a  strict  examina- 
tion of  ourselves,  that  Christ  is  given  to  us,  is  building  the  hope  of 
our  salvation  upon  a  foundation  of  sand,  and  it  will  sink  the  sinner 
into  the  lake  ;  and  therefore  it  behooves  every  one  to  examine  him- 
self in  the  strictest  manner,  and  to  inquire  thoroughly  **  whether 
Christ  be  in  him,"  and  be  given  to  him.  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Is  it  your 
desire,  fi lends,  to  know  how  the  person  is  disposed,  to  whom  the 
Mediator  is  given,  that  ye  may  liken  and  compare  yourtelves  to  him  ? 


y^  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

pbserve,  (a)  such  a  person  beholds  with  grief  and  detestation  h\» 
bhndness,  guilt,  filthiness,  impotence,  and  abominable  sins,  and  that 
not  only  others,  but  also  he  himself,  hath  deserved,  accordinet  to  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,  temporal  and  eternal  punishment :  he 
is  concerned  and  distressed  on  this  account ;  he  sees  not  how  he 
shall  be  dehvered  ;  all  his  own  endeavours  and  exertions,  from  which 
he  formerly  derived  hope,  fail  him  ;  he  views  ihem  as  *'  loss  and  dung,*" 
Phil.  ii.  4 — 8  ;  and  he  cries  out  "  there  is  no  hope,  he  doth  not 
find  Liny  more  the  life  of  lis  hand,  and  therefore  he  is  grieved." 
Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  He  doth  not,  however,  wholly  abandon  himsel*  to 
an  entire  despair  ;  but  having  an  earnest  desirt-  to  escape  punish- 
mem,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour,  he  looks  about  that  he 
may  find  some  means  to  obtain  that  end  ;  and  therefore  re  asks 
others,  "  what  he  must  do  tube  saved-"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.  "He 
fas's  and  prays"  with  Saul,  Acts  ix.  11,  and  he  strives  earnestly  'to 
work  out  his  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  God  worketh 
in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do."  Pf'.ii.  ii.  12,  12.  He  will  also  not 
desist  nor  rest,  until  he  hath  some  evi  lences,  and  until  "  God  saith 
to  his  soul,  1  am  thy  salvation."  Psalm  xxxv.  3  ;  for  God  will  "  look- 
with  favour  only  '^  on  him,  wh©  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit," 
Isaiah  Ixvi.  2,  and  ''the  Redeemer  should  come  to  Zion  for  them 
who  turned  from  iniquity."  Isaiah,  lix.  20.(b)  Such  a  person  hath 
also  a  high  estimation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  To  you  who  be-, 
lieve,  he  is  puci'.  us,"  saith  the  apostle.  1  Peter,  ii  17.  He  consid- 
ers him  as  so  capable,  sufficient,  and  adapted  to  all  his  necessities, 
that  his  soul  becomes  exceedingly  eager  and  desirous  to  possess 
him  :  he  betakes  himself,  therefore  to  praying  and  wrestling  for 
!iiiji,that  he  may  impart  himself  to  him  ;  he  surrenders  himself  to 
hino,  and  casts  himself  upon  him  ;  he  calls  and  fetches  him  in,  and 
he  ceases  not  to  wrestle  thus  in  faith,  until  he  reveals  and  imparts 
himself  to  the  soul.  Thus  the  Canaanitish  woman  acted.  Matt.  xv. 
22—28,  and  Saul,  Plilip.  iii  7 — 10,(c)  Such  an  one  doth  also 
desire  bim  with  all  his  benefits,  he  wishes  not  only  that  Christ  should 
make  him  wise,  bestow  his  righteousness  upon  him,  deliver  him 
from  his  misery,  and  save  him,  but  also  that  he  should  be  ^  anctifi- 
cation  to  him,  that  he  should  take  all  his  sins  from  him,  and  slay 
them ;  those  also,  which  appear  to  him,  as  far  as  he  is  carnal,  hon- 
purable,  profitable  and  agreeable ;  that  he  should  even  take  entire 
possession  of  his  whole  heart,  and  fashion  it  according  to  his  will ; 
^e  considers  holiness,  a  being  dead  to  himself,  being  resigned  to 
pod,  and  doing  the  will  of  '.iod  in  all  things,  as  the  most  glorious 
•dip4  iTio^t  happy  portion  that  a  person  can  enjoy  ;  therefore  he  de 


'     —19.  14i 

iights  in  it,  and  cries  out  with  David  to  God,  Psalm  cxix.  45. 
*«  Thou  hast  commanded  u~^  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O 
that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes.(d)  C  hrist  and 
his  gospel  are  revealed  to  such  a  person  inwardly  and  effectually  by 
the  holy  Spirit,  to  who!»  belongs  the  dispensation  of  the  sjospel  ;  he 
not  only  reads  and  hears  out  of  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  only  apprehends  by  his  contemplations  who  and  what  be  is 
to  a  sini.er,  bm  Christ  himself  is  also  discovered  by  the  light  of  his 
Spirit  to  the  soul,  by  which  his  heart  is  warmed,  captivated  and 
drawn  forth  toward  him  in  taith  and  love.  ''  The  Lf^rd  opt-ns  his 
heart,  and  causes  him  to  give  heed  to  the  things  that  are  s  oken  by 
Paul,"  or  others  from  the  gospel,  Acts  xvi.  14.  He  obtams  "  the 
mind  of CIrist,"  I  Coi.  ii.  16.  "For  Go<l,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  si  line  opt  of  darkness,  shines  into  our  hearts,  to  give  the 
iigntofthe  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ,"    2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

Have  ye  no  knowledge  of  these  things,  have  ye  never  attended  to 
them,  nor  experienced  them,  can  ye  then  indeed  think  that  this 
great  V>ediator,  with  his  great  benefits,  is  given  of  God  to  you  ? 
surely  no:  but  it  behooves  you  to  know  that  ye  are  yet  "without 
Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from 
the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  It  is  true,  ye  have  and  hear  the  gospel,  but  "  it 
doth  not  profit  you,  not  being  mixed  with  faith,',  Heb.  iv  2.  «  It  is 
hidden  from  you-  and  ye  perish,  the  pod  of  this  woild  hath  blinded 
your  minds,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  should 
shine  unto  you,"  2  Cov.  iv.  4  How  grievous  will  it  be  to  you  to 
perish  under  the  precious  dispensation  of  the  gospel !  Will  not  the 
Ninevites,  the  queen  '  f  Sheba,  Sodom  aud  C/omorrah,  Tyre  and  Si- 
doB,  yea,  all  the  nations  who  have  not  heard  the  gospel,  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  yo'.  (,  because  ye  have  neglected  such  a  favourable 
opportunity  to  be  saved,  which  they  never  enjoyed  ?  Friends,  it  will 
be  a  hell  in  the  midst  of  hell  to  you,  that  ye  have  not  improved  such 
an  acceptable  time  and  such  a  dny  of  salvation.  "  Or  do  ye  despise 
the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering,  not 
knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repensance  ?  Ye 
do  then,  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  for 
yourselves  wrath  againit  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  li*  4,  5. 

Awake,  awake  therefore,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Ac- 
cept, and  lay  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  "  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  bitt 


44i  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL, 

a  Httle,"  Pselm  ii.  12.     For  (a)  do  ye  not  stand  in  need  of  him  ?  have 
ye  not  deserved  temporal  and  eternal  punishmetjt,  according  to  the 
righteous  judgment  ci  Ciod  ?  how  shall   ye  escape  and  be  again  re- 
ceived into  favour  r   or  do  ye  know  how  ye  can  by  wearying  your- 
selves with  certain  devoirs?  are  ye  not  foohsh,  worthy  of  condemna- 
tion, abomini»ble,_  and  altogether  miserable  ?  is  not  he  alone  sufficient 
to  fill  you  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ?     *'  He  can  save  to  the   utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  God  through   him,"   saith    the  text.     O 
do  not  then  despise  him.Cb)     Ye  can  obtain  him  and  all  his  fulness  ;; 
for  he  calls  and  invites  you  to  him  :     '•  Turn  unto  me,  and  be  saved 
S|ll  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;■'  thus  he  saith  to  you  also,  who  are  alto> 
gether  miserable,   Isaiah  xly.  22.     "  God   himself  sets  him  forth  to 
jOU,to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"   Rom*  iii.   25. 
"  Ho,  every  one   that  thirsteth  ;"  thus   he  crieth,  Isaiah  Iv.  1,  2,  S, 
**  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  ye  who  have  no   money,  come,  buy 
wine    and   milk  without  money  and  without  price."   &c.     Yea,  he 
saith,  Rev.  xxii.    17,  "Let  whosoever   will  take   the  waters  of  life 
freely."     He  invites  even  all  those  who  live   under  the  gospel,  yea, 
those  also  who  are  lukewarm,   and  those  Avho  are  puffed  up  with  a 
proud  conceit  of  themselves  like  the  Laodiceans,  for  he  snith,  Rev. 
iii.  18.     "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  geld  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich  ;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou   mayest  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not   appear  ;    and   annoint 
thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."     For  what  pur-t 
pose  have  ye  preachers  ?  and  why  do  they  publish  the  gospel  to 
you  ?  is  it  not  that  they  may  persuade  you  to  believe,  and  that  they 
niay  adure   you  to  this  sufficient  Deliverer,  and  induce  you  to  lay 
hold  on  him  ?     "  Now  then,   we    are  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as 
thougli  God  did  beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray   you  in  Christ's  stead, 
be  ye  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.  20.(c)     May  ye  indeed  neglect 
to  receive  him,  when  he  is  offered  to  you  ?  is  not  this  enjoined  on, 
you  ?  may  ye  continue   unbelieving  ?    is  it  left  to  your  choice,  to 
embrace  the  Son  of  God  or  not  ?    surely  no  :  will  ye  then   be  wil- 
fully and  knov/ingly   disobedient,  and  perish  ?     Who,  who  is  there 
of  you  vvho  will  with  such  a  wicked  heart  of  unbelief,  depart  from  the 
Jiving  God  ?     Is  there  any  one  who  is  so  wicked,  do  thou,  and  tliou 
nevertheless  "  save  thyself  from  this  untoward  generation,"  Acts  ii. 
40.     "  Take  hold  of  the  strength  of  God,    that  thou  mayest  make 
peace  with  him,"  Isaiah   xxxvii.   4.     "  BelievtJ  in   the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  Acts  xvi.   31.(cl)     Well,  sinner, 
wilt  thou  not  flee  to  him  ?  shouldest   thou  go  to  him,  and   receive 
him  in  vain  ?     No :  "  him  that  comcth  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  ca?;t 


VI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16—19.  U3 

aut,"  safth  he,  John  vi.  37.  Thou  wilt  not  fail  of  salvation,  if  thou 
wilt  only  receive  hini,  and  surrender  tnys'^lf  to  him  with  a  pertect 
heart.  "  lie  that  believeth,  and  is  baptiz  d,  shall  be  saved,"  saith 
the  moulli  of  truth  again  and  again,  Mark  xvi.  16.  John  iii.  16,  17, 
36.  He  confirms  it  with  a  double  "verily,"  Join  v.  M,  yea,  as  it 
were  with  an  oath,  Ezek.  xxxiii  1 1.  (e)  Will  yc  not  come,  but  re- 
main in  yourselves,  know  then  that  ye  are  guilty  of  a  most  heinous 
sin  ;  ye  despise  him,  his  fulness  and  love,  which  the  devils  cannot 
dj,  since  he  is  not  ofTered  to  them  ;  "  Ye  make  God  a  liiir,"  i  John 
V.  10.  He  upbraids  you  v/ilh  it  m  anger,  '*  that  ye  will  not  come  to 
him,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  "  His  wrath  lieth  and 
abideth  on  you,"  John  iii,  35.  "  When  distress  and  anguish  cometh 
upon  you,  and  ye  cali  upon  him,  thi;n  he  will  not  answer  ;  but  he 
"vvill  laugh  at  your  calamity,"  Prov.  i  20—33.  "  To-day  then,  if 
yc  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalrn  xcv.  7,  8. 
'•  For  iiow  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  gr? at  a  salvation  ? 
Heb.  ii.  3, 

But,  believers,  ye  who  have  chosen  and  received  him  ?Ione,  wholly 
and  frequently  for  j^ours,  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  because 
the  Lord  God  natn  offered  him  to  you  in  the  gospel,  and  captivated 
your  hearts  thereby  : 

1.  Believe,  and  be  assured  that  God  hath  given  him  to  you  with 
all  his  fulness,  and  tuat  he  is  yours,  aUvl  ye  are  his;  like  the  spouse 
wno  said  wiil.oi.t  do-ibtuig,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his," 
Song  ii  16.  "  Do  ye  not  know  your  own^  elves,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
in  you,"  2  Cor.  xiii,  5.  Do  ye  not  know  with  Paul,  "  that  y^.  have 
believed  in  him?"  2  Tim  i.  12.  Can  yc  deny  your  sorrow  and 
concern  for  your  miserable  condition,  the  continual  outgoings  of  your 
hearts  toward  him  in  desires  and  longings,  your  hearty  surrendering^ 
of  yourselves  to  him,  and  receiving  of  him,  as  well  to  be  sanctified 
by  him,  as  to  be  saved  ;  can  yc,  we  say.  deny  these  things  ?  and  are 
they  not  considered  by  you  as  evidences  of  your  saving  interest  in 
him  ?  Well,  let  your  hearts  then  be  perfectly  assured  before  him  of 
his  love  to  you 

2.  Live  much  in  the  contemplation  of  his  excellency.  May  ye 
not  with  Stephen,  "see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man 
stanrling  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56  ;  endeavour  to 
contemplate  him  in  his  glorious  gospel,  and  led  up  by  it,  to  entep 
wi  h  Moses  into  the  clouds,  and  with  open  face  to  behold  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  in  a  glass,  and  thus  to  see  this  King  in  his  beauty  in 
a  far  country.  He  is  certainly  worthy  of  your  wliole  understanding; 
all  th.vt  was  ever  foresaid  and  foreshown  of  him,  as  fair  and  glorious 


U4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

exists  in  him  in  the  most  perfect  m inner:  whatever  is  larking  im 
you,  can  be  found  in  him.  He  liath  a  f  ilntss  of  i^racc  to  supply  all 
your  JeficicDcics  :  he  is  perfectly  adapicd  to  all  your  necessities: 
*'  in  him,  and  in  iiis  love,  there  is  a  breadth,  length,  depth,  and 
heii^hi,  and  to  know  this  fiMs  us  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph. 
iii.  18,  19.  It  afibi'ds  a  wondef.l  joy  to  the  soul  to  contemplate 
him,  '^  she  wa  ks  in  tie  light  of  his  countenance,  and  rejoices  in  his 
name  dl  the  day  lon;^,"  Fs.ilm  Ixxxix.  15,  16.  Yea,  "  she  is  chang- 
ed ufier  ihe  glorious  imaii,e  ol  the  Lord,  which  she  beholds  with 
open  fcice,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor. 
iii.  IS. 

3.  Behold  now  your  happ-ness,  and  the  great  kindness,  that  hath 
been  shown  to  you  :  what  l5ath  God  the  Lord  done  f')r  you,  that  he 
might  deliver  you  from  punishme-nt,  and  restore  you  to  favour  ? 
He  do-.li  not  merely  admit  a  surety,  but  he  appoints  !iis  "^on,  in  his 
cverlasiiu;;- conned  lo  be  one  ;  he  sends  him  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,  inflicts  on  him  the  punishment  of  your  sins,  m  your  stead,  re- 
ceives vou  into  his  covenant,  gives  you  this  Mediator  and  D  iiverer 
to  be  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifacation  and  redemption  to  you, 
causes  you  'o  emi.race  him,  and  publishes  the  gospel,  even  the  gos- 
pel of  f'diilmeut  so  you.  How  obscutely  was  it  publsiied  to  the  fa- 
tntrs  !  but  it  is  announced  with  exceeding  clearness  to  you.  What 
a  burthensome  service  did  he  inopose  on  the  fathers  !  but  he  hath 
freed  you  therefrom.  How  earnestly  did  they  desire  these  days, 
that  they  might  see  <.  hribt  in  the  flesh  !  but  they  might  not  live  un- 
til these  days,  and  God  hath  provided  some  belter  thing  for  you  : 
"  iJlcsbcd  arc  your  eyes,  for  th'iy  see  ;  and  your  ears  for  they  hear. 
*'  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  prophets  and  righteous  men 
have  desu^ed  to  see  those  things  wldch  ye  see,  and  have  not 
seen  them:  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye  hear,  ai.d  have  not 
heard  them,"  saith  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  Malt.  xiii.  16,  i  7.  re- 
joice then  exceedingly  on  account  of  this  salvation,  which  hath  been 
accomplished  :  "  It  should  be  said  in  this  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God, 
we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  this  is  the  Lord,  we 
have  waited  for  him.  we  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation," 
Isa'ah  XXV.  9.  ''  Rejoice  then  greatly  in  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  he 
joyful  in  their  God,  for  he  hath  clothed  you  with  the  irarmenls  of 
salvation,  he  hath  covered  you  with  the  rohe  of  rig!itcousness," 
Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  Yea,  "  let  all  the  seed  of  Israel  glo.y  in  tJie  Loid," 
Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

4.  Improve  therefore   your  Mediator  and  all  bis  fulness,  as  your 
necessities  require,"  receiving  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace," 


VI.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16~19.  145 

John  i,  15.  "  That  he  may  supply  all  your  needs  acccrdiii?^  to  his 
riches,  and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work 
of  failh  with  power,"  Philip,  iv.  19.  8  Thes.  i.  1 1.  Behold  continu- 
ally your  W;ints,  your  darkness,  gui't,  sinfulness,  and  other  n-iiseiies  ; 
and  see  that  there  is  a  fulness  of  wisdom,  righteousness,  sunctification 
and  redemption  in  him  against  all  this,  particularly  for  you  ;  go  to 
him  'vitii  your  distresses,  receive  of  his  fuhiess  against  them,  and 
suck  therefrom,  through  the  conduits  of  the  p  omises,  whatever  ye 
need  ;  suffer  him  to  exe:^ute  his  office  upon  you,  for  "  he  is  all,  and 
in  all,"  Coll.  iii.  11,  and  "  is  exalted  to  he  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to 
give  repeniance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31. 

J.  Finally,  to  conclude,  "  Only  walk  worthily  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,"  Phil.  i.  27,  that  is  humbly,  bclievingly,  joyfully,  h^iily,  cir- 
cumspectly, and  Vv'ith  self-denial  toward  all  things  out  of  him. 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  sai'.h,  Titus  ii.  1 1,  12,  13,  '*  the  grace  of  God, 
which  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared  to  all  men  ;  teaching  us 
that  denying  ungodliness,  and  v/orldiy  lusts,  we  sliould  live  soberly, 
TJghteotisly,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  :  looking  for  that  bles- 
sed hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  tlie  great  God,  and  our  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,"  Amen, 


146  ) 


SAVING  FAITH 


VII.  LORDS  DAY^ 


John  iii  36.  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life  s 
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  ihe  wrath 

of  God  abideth  on  him.

Q.   19.    Whence  knoivest  thou  this? 

A.  From  the  holy  gospel,  which  God  himself  revealed  first  in 
Paradise  ;  and  afterwards  published  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets, 
and  Was  pleased  to  represent  it,  by  the  shadows  of  sacrifices  and  the 
"Dther  ceremonies  of  the  law ;  and  lastly,  has  accomplished  it  by  his 

^nly  begotten  Son- 

TT 


122  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL 

VV  -1  ^T  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
Qesli,  Gofi  sendin^j  his  own  Son,  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and 
for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fuliilled  in  us."  Thus  speaks  Paul,  Horn.  viii.  3,  4.  The 
law  cannot  justify  the  sinner.  Ciod  did  indeed  give  the  hw  to  man- 
kind before  the  fall,  that  they  might  obtain  righteousness  and  life 
by  keeping  it  perfectly,  and  it  would  thus  have  been  possible  for  the 
law  to  justify  man  :  "  For  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  which 
is  of  the  law,  saith,  The  man  which  doth  these  things  shall  live  by 
them,"  Rom.  x.  5.  But  the  law  cannot  do  this  now,  since  it  is  be- 
come weak  through  sin  and  the  flesh  ;  it  hath  now  only  a  power  to 
curse  and  condemn  the  sinner,  according  to  the  divine  threatening, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  ;"  and  therefore  "  they 
who  aie  of  the  works  of  the  law,  are  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10, 
and  so  <•  the  law  worketh  wrath,"  Rom.  iv.  15,  and  declareth  that 
"  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God,"  Rom.  iii.  19.  If  the  sinner 
shall  then  be  justified,  the  righteousness  of  the  law  must  be  fulfilled 
in  him  by  a  sufficient  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God,  expressed  in 
the  law  ;  for  '•  Zion  must  be  redeemed  with  judgment,  and  her  con- 
verts with  righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  27,  aAd  "  the  Lord  of  hosts  must 
be  exalted  in  judgment,  and  God,  who  is  holy,  must  be  sanctified  ia 
righteousness,"  Isaiah  v.  16.  The  demand,  which  the  law  of  God 
makes  against  the  sinner,  requiring  that  he  sihould  be  punished, 
cannot  be  refused,  inasmuch  as  the  law  contains  the  sentence  of  curs- 
ing, denounced  by  God.  But  who,  yea,  who  is  able  to  satisfy  this 
righteous  demand  of  the  law  ?  the  sinner  himself  cannot ;  for  he  in- 
creaseth  his  debt  daily  :  no  other  creature  can,  because  he  cannot 
sustain  the  burthen  of  God's  eternal  wrath.  If  any  one  shall  be  « 
worthy  and  able  to  do  this,  he  must  be  very  man  and  righteous,  and 
also  God  and  man  in  one  person,  according  to  what  the  foregoing 
Lord's  dav  hath  taught  us  from  the  word  of  God,  and  for  which  solid 
reasons  are  R:iven  in  this  Lord's  day.  Question  16,  17,  and  in  which 
it  is  shown,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  mediator  and  deliv- 
erer, Question  18,  and  that  this  is  made  known  in  the  gospel,  Ques- 
tion 19,  that  the  sinner,  being  concerned,  and  desirous  of  deliverance, 
may  obtain  perfect  satisfaction  and  comfort. 

There  are  three  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  otir 
consideration  : 

I.  Why  the  mediator  must  be  a  real  and  righteous  man  and  God 
in  one  person,  Question  16,  17» 


Vr.  LORD'S  rXAY,  Q.  16-19.  12S 

II.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  Ques^ 
tion  18. 

III.  And  that  we  loiow  this  from  the  gospel,  Question  19. 

I.  The  person  who.  shall  be  the  mediator  and  deliverer,  eught,  in 
the  first  place,  to  be  very  man ;  •'  because  the  justice  of  God  requires 
that  the  human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  likewise  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin  ;"  or,  as  the  Latin  catechism  expresseth  it,  Ut  cadem 
natura  humajia^  qua  fiecavit^  ifisa  firo  fieccato  defi€)ida.t  ;  "  that  the  same 
human  nature,  which  hath  sinned,  should  make  satisfaction  for  sin." 
The  justice  of  God  requires  s.uisfliction  of  the  sinner  himself  ;  but  if 
God  will,  by  a  special  kindness,  transfer  his  demand  to  a  surety,  that 
surely  must  be  of  the  same  nature  with  the  sinner,  in  order  to  be* 
some  his  surety.     Therefore   Paul  saith,  Heb.  ii.  11,   *'  For  both  he 
that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctifkd,  are  all  of  one  :  for  which 
cause  he  is.  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."    And  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,  which  he  hath   expressed  in  his  law,  demands  this  ; 
for  it  demands  that   "  man   should  love  his  nei^•hbour  as  himself." 
Luke    X.   27,28,     And   if  he   do  pot,    <' that  he  should  die."    Rom; 
i.  32.     If  the  mediator  should  then  saiisty  the  justice  of  God,  accor- 
ding: to  the  demand  of  the  law,  he  must  be  "  made  under  the   law,'* 
which  was  given  to  man  ;  "  that  he  may   redeem  him  who  was  un- 
der the  law,"^    Gal.  iv.  4,  5.     He  must  then  also  be  the  neighbour 
of  man,  and  so  "  of  one  blood  with  him ,"     Acts  xvii,  26.     And  **  by 
the  grace  of  God  must  taste  death,"  (or  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body)  "for  every  man,"    Heb.  \u  9« 

1  or  this  reason,  God  also,  foretold  that  the  Mediator  ^nd  Deliverer 
should  be  very  man  ;  for  he  promised  hira  formerly,  as  "  the  ^ecd 
of  the  woman  i"  Gen.  iii.  15  :  and  as  ''  the  seed  of  Abraham,  Is£lac, 
and  Jacob ;"  Gen.  xxii.  18,  xxvi.  4,  xxviii,  14  ;  and  that  "  he  should 
be  the  fruit  of  the  body  of  David,"  Psalm  exxxii.  1 1 .  This  was  also 
typified  under  the  Old  Testament  by  the  redeemers,  and  by  the  high 
priests :  the  Lord  had  enjoined,  that  he  who  was  the  nearest  kins- 
man, the  Goel^  should  be  the  person,  who  should  redeem  the  mortga- 
ged inheritance  of  another,  or  his  person,  if  he  were  imprisoned  for 
debt,  or  sold  for  a  slave,  and  that  he  should  be  the  avenger  of  his 
blood.  Lev.  XXV.  25:  Ruth  ii.  20,  iii.  12,  13.  iv.  1 — 10  Numb. 
XXXV.  19,21,24,25,27'  He  then,  who  shall  be  the  sinner's  re- 
deemer, must  also  be  his  kinsman,  and  therefore  the  Mediator  is  cal- 
led the  G&ri,  the  kinsman  and  *' Redeemer,  who  should  come  to 
Zion,"  Isaiah  hx.  20.  Paul,  having  respect  to  this,  saith  of  the  Me- 
diator and  Deliverer,  Heb.  ii.  14,  15,  16."  For  as  much  then,  as 
"he  children  are  partakers  of  fl^sh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  like- 


i24  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

wise  took  part  of  the  same  ;  that  through  death  he  might  destroy 

him  ti^at  hud  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  ;  and  deliver  them 
who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  the  r  lifetime  subject  to  bondage. 
"  For  veriljr  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  he  took 
on  him   the  seed  of  Abraham."     This  was  also  typified  by  the  high 
priests      '*  For  e  ery  high  pnest,  taken  froni  among  men,  is  ordain- 
ed for  men  ia  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer  both  gifts 
^nd  sacrifices  for  sins :  who  can   have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  ;   for  that  he  himself  is  also 
<:ompassed   with  infirmity,"      Heb.  v.    1,  2.      Therefore  the  true 
Higii  Priest  behooved  also  to  be  very  man,  in  order  that  he  might  of- 
fer a  perfect  sacrifice  for  sins,  and  have  suitable  compassion.     Let 
us  hear  the  same  apostle  again  ;  he  saith,  Heb.  li.  17,  18,  "Where- 
fore in  all  things  it  behooved  him  to  be  made  like  his  brethren  ;  that 
he  mi'^ht  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining 
unto  G  )d,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sin  of  the  people  :  for   in 
that  himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  tosuccorr  them 
that  are  tempted.     The  mediator  and  deliverer   must  not  only  be 
very  man,  bnt  also  a  perfectly  holy  man  ;  "  because  man  being  him- 
self a  sinner,  cnnnot  satisty  for  others  ;"  for  he  would  then  be    obli- 
ged to  satisfy  for  himself,  and  nevertheless  not  be    able,    much    less 
then  for  another,  as  hath   been  shown  on   a  foregoing   Lord's   day. 
He  must  then  be  a  "  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled  high  priest,  who 
needeth  not  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people's,"  as  the  text  speaks.     This  was   also  foretold  of  old ; 
the     'ediitor  and  Deliverer  should  be  "the  Holy  One."  Psalm  xvi. 
10.     *'  He  should  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  and  his  kw  should 
]be  within  liis  heart,"   Psalm  xl.  8  ;  and  "  vTickedness  should  be  an 
abomination  to  his  lips,"  Prov.   viii.  7,  8  ;  as  this  was  also  typified 
by  the  priests,  who  might  not   be  defiled,  v/hen  they  approached  to 
God,  the  Holv  One ;  for  *'  God  would  be  sanctified  in   them  that 
came  nigh  him  ;"  or  he  would  sanctify  himself,  by  consuming  them. 
Lev.  X.  1,2,  o.     Now  the  mediator  and  deliverer  ought   to  be  also 
the  surety  and  high  pi  iest,  and   therefore  also  holy,  "  that  he  might 
draw  near  to  God  in  those  things  which  pertained  to  God,  in  order 
to  make  reconciliation."  Jer.  xxx.  21.    Heb.  ii.  17.    The  sacrificial 
gifts  also  typified  this  ;  for  they  were  to  be  holy  and  without  blemish, 
according;  to   Lev.  xxii.   22,    25.    Mai.  i.  7,   8.     And  therefore  the 
true  sacrifice,  with  which  God  should  be  well  pleased,  behooved  also 
to  be  noly,   and   without  blemish;   "a   lamb  without  blemish  and 
without  spot  "   1  Peter  i.    19.     See  also  2  Cor.   v.   21,    Eph.  v.  2. 
"jYte  may  add  to  this  that  the   mediator  and  deliverer,  ought  lo  be 


—19.  itt 

ttoly,  because  it  was  necessary  that  his  human  nature  should  be  per- 
sonally united  to  his  Godhead,  and  therefore,  also  holy  ;  for  "that 
holy  thing,  which  should  be  born,  s'nould  be  called  the  Son  of  God," 
Lukei.  35. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  rrjediator  and  deliverer  should  then,  alsoj 
be  very  God.(l)  "  That  he  might  by  the  power  of  his  Godhead, 
sustain  in  his  human  nature  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath."  How 
heavy  the  burthen  of  God's  wrath  is,  that  it  must  be  sustained,  in 
order  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  and  that  no  mere  creature  could  sus- 
tain it,  hath  been  shown  on  the  fourth  and  fiftli  Lord's  days.  Ke 
then  who  shall  sustain  it,  so  as  to  effect  a  satisfaction,  must  be  more 
powerful  than  all  the  creatures,  and  so  very  God,  that  he  may  sup- 
port his  human  nature,  while  he  suffers,  and  s\tstains  the  divine 
wrath  that  "  his  own  arm  may  bring  him  salvation,  and  his  fury 
may  uphold  him,"  Isaiah  Ixlii.  5.(2)  The  mediator  and  deliverer 
must  also  be  God, "  that  he  may  obtain  forns  righteousness  and  life," 
The  sinner,  if  he  shall  stand  before  God,  and  live,  must  have  an  in* 
finite  righteousness,  that  all  his  sins  committed  against  the  most 
high  majesty  of  God,  may  be  forgiven  him,  and  that  he  may  be  deliv- 
ered from  everlasting  death,  and  obtain  everlasting  Hfe.  in  the  ever- 
lasting favour  of  God ;  as  it  was  a'so  foretold,  that  ''the  Messiah 
should  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteousness."  Dan.  fx,  24.  Nov,- 
it  is  impossible,  that  the  righteousness  of  a  mere  creature 
should  he  of  infinite  dignity,  he  ought  then  himself  to  be  the  infi- 
nite God,  if  his  righteousness  shall  have  such  a  divine  dignity  (3) 
It  behooved  the  mediator  and  deliverer  to  restore  this  righteousness 
and  life  to  us,  to  apply  and  communicate  them  to  us  It  was  not 
enough  to  obtain  the  righteousness  and  life,  but  it  was  necessary  to 
impart  them  also  to  the  sinner,  if  he  should  be  delivered.  "  The 
shepherd  who  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep,"  must  also,  "  give  them 
eternal  Hfe,  and  keep  them  so,  that  they  do  never  perish,  and  that 
none  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand,"  John  x.  1 1,  28.  And' therefore 
the  mediator  and  deliverer  must  be  God  ;  .for  a  man  could  not 
appropri:^tb  to  himself  the  righteousness,  which  the  mediator  obtains, 
and  the  life  which  he  merits.  There  is  need  here  oi  an  "exceeding 
greatness  of  God's  pov/cr,  according  to  tlte  v/orking  of  his  mighty 
power,"  Eph  1.  19.(4)  Moreover,  the  mediator,  who  should  su?^ 
render  his  life  to  death,  behooved  to  be  the  lord  of  his  own  life, 
and  thus  to  '*•  have  power  to  lay  his  life  down,  and  to  take  it  again." 
John  y.  18.  Now  no  mere  man  hath  such  power,  but  h(*  on  y,  who 
is  also  very  God,(5)  Add  to  this,  that  he  who  shall  deliver  sinners, 
ought  a'so  to  be  capable  of  bein^  an  object  of  all  religious  hpmag^; 


IJ5  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

faith,  love  and  gratitude  ;  for  tliose  whom  he  delivers  from  tempos 
ral  and  eternal  punishments,  whom  he  reinslates  into  favour,  and 
for  whom  he  obtains,  and  to  whom  he  restores  righteousness  and 
life,  owe  him  such  service.  See  Titus  ii.  14.  Now  such  honour 
cannot  surely  be  offered  to  one  who  is  no  more  than  a  man,  but  he 
must  be  "  God  also,  who  is  over  all,  blessed  forever,'^'  if  he  shall  be 
honoured  thus,  Rom.  ix.  5.  See  Isaiah  xlv.  21,  25.(6)  Finally,  we 
^ay  also,  that  it  v*  as  foretold,  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  should 
be  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord  our  righteousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6.  Hof 
sea,  i.  7". 

It  was  necessary  that  the  mediator  and  deliverer  shotild  be  not 
only  very  man.  and  holy,  and  very  God,  but  also,  ••  at  the  same  tim^ 
God  and  man  in  one  person."  For  (a)  since  the  human  nature  can*- 
not  of  itself  sustain  the  wrath  of  God,  and  its  sufferings  cannot  be  of 
an  infinite  dignity,  and  since  the  incorruptible  Godhead  cannot  suf- 
fer, therefore  his  Godhead  must  have  its  proper  human  nature,  in 
order  to  suffer  therein  ;  and  the  human  nature  and  the  Godhead 
must  be  united*  that  the  Godhead  may  support  the  human  nature 
under  its  grievous  sufferings,  and  that  its  sufferings  may  be  of  infi- 
nite dignity,  being  "  the  proper  blood  of  God,"  Acts,  xx.  28  ;  and 
*'  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,"  1  John  i.  7.  We  cannot  say  that 
there  could  be  two  mediators,  one  of  whom  should  be  man,  that  he 
might  suffei,  and  the  other  God,  in  order  to  add  an  infinite  dignity 
to  the  huraan  sufferings  of  the  other  ;  for  no  human  sufferings  caft 
ever  be  of  infinite  dignity,  unless  the  suffering  person  himself  be  aP 
so  very  God,  and  suffer  in  his  ov/n  human  ]j^ature.(b)  We  may  al- 
so say,  that  it  behooved  him  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  be- 
cause  he  who  shall  be  the  mediator,  must  be  equally  near  to  both 
parties,  even  to  God  and  the  sinner,  that  he  may  unite  and  appease 
both  in  himself;  and  he  must  thus  be  a  "  mediator  between  God  and; 
man,  that  he  may  give  himself  a  ransom  for  many,  and  thus  Wm^ 
them  to  God,"  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  6.    I  Peter  iii.   18. 

II.  M\jst  the  sinner  now  have  such  a  mediator  and  deliverer, 
in  order  that  he  may  escape  temporal  and  eternal  punishment,  and 
be  again  i-eceived  into  favour,  he  must  then  be  exceedingly  distress- 
ed ;  for  he  himself  cannot  find  such  a  mediator,  much  less  procure 
him  ;  neither  can  any  creature,  angel,  or  man,  do  this  :  but  the  door 
of  hope,  which  Avas  hitherto  shut  to  the  concerned  sinner,  is  opened 
to  him  by  the  instructor,  when,  upon  this  question  of  the  distressed 
person, «'  Who  then  is  that  mediator,  who  is  in  one  person  both  very 
God,  and  a  real  righteous  man  ?"  He  answers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,  &c.  He  doth  not  say,  nor  prove  now, 
that  he  is  ve  ry  God,  and  real  righteotjs  man  in  one  person,  becau§*^ 


—19.  12f 

he  will  do  this  hereafter ;  but  he  only  shows  that  he  is  4  sufficient 
mediator  and  deliverer,  through  whom  the  sinner  can  escape  punish- 
ment, and  be  again  received  into  favour,  since  *'  he  is  made  of  God 
to  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption," 
according  to  I  Cor.  1.  30. 

He  is  given  to  be  (1)  "  wisdom."  The  sinner  is  blind  and  foolish, 
and  he  knoweth  nothing  of  his  spiritual  and  eternal  happiness,  "  his 
understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God, 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,"  Eph.  iv.  18,  but  our  L6rd 
Jesus  Christ  is  ''  the  wisdom  of  God,"  1  Cor.  i.  24.  "  fn  him  arc 
hidden  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  Coll.  ii.  3.  As 
the  great  prophet  he  makes  known  by  his  word,  and  by  his  Spirit  to 
the  elect  sinner,  "  all  that  he  hath  heard  of  the  Father,"  John  xv, 
15,  and  thus  *' he  leads  the  bHnd  by  a  way  which  they  have  not 
known,"  Sec.  Isaiah  xlii.  16.  See  Luke  xxiv.  44,  46.  Acts  xv.i  14, 
xxvi.  18. 

2  That  it  may  not  seem  unjust,  that  the  guilty  sinner  finds  favor, 
therefore  he  becomes  also  <^  righteousness"  to  him,  since  he  procures 
and  restores  to  him  an  infinite  righteousness  by  his  sufferings  and 
obedience,  whereby,  being  justified  before  God,  he  is  delivered  from 
his  guilt,  and  obtains  a  right  to  life  :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  God  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor^  v.  21. 

3.  Doth  he  leave  the  Sinner  in  and  under  the  filth  and  dominion 
of  sin  ?  No ;  but  he  becomes  also  "  sanctification  "  to  him,  by  which 
he  cleanses  him  from  his  loathsome  impurity,  subdues  the  power  of 
his  corruption,  transforms  him  into  the  image  of  God,  and  renders 
him  a  partaker  of  the  holy  nature  of  God,  which  he  doth  first  by  the 
new  birth,  and  then  by  an  increase  of  God,  "  changing  him  from 
glory  to  glory,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Which  sanctification  he  procures  by 
his  blood,  and  communicates  by  his  Spirit ;  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by 
the  Spirit  of  our  God,"   saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  vi.  1 1.  1  Peter  i.  2. 

4.  And  since  sinful  man  is  holden  captive  in  the  snare  of  the 
devil  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  and  misery,  on  account  of  the  justice 
of  God,  therefore  Christ  becomes  also  redemption  to  him,  by  which 
he  delivers  him  from  all  that  renders,  or  can  render  him  miserable, 
and  bestows  all  kinds  of  happiness  upon  him,  partly  in,  and  perfectly 
after  this  life  :  for  when  *<  the  Son  makes  him  free,  then  he  is  fre'6 
indeed,"  John  viii,  3€. 

H-s  "  is  made  "  such  great  benefits  to  us  **  of  God,"  saith  the  apos= 
tlc;  I  Cor,  i,  SO,     He  was  not  this,  by  the  natyr"  of  hi^  essence,  but 


1^6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

by  the  free  and  gracious  constitution  of  God  his  Father,  who  in  the 
aconomy  and  dispensation  of  f^race,  took  upon   himself  the  person 
of  judge,  whom  the  Son  should  satisfy,  as  mediator,  while  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  convey  all   jjrace  from  the  Father  through  the  Son  to 
ihe  sinner.  See  Rom.  iii.  34,  25,   36.  2  Cor.  xiii.    13.  John  xvi.  13, 
14,  15.     And  thus  was  Christ  made  of  God  wisdom.  See.  (1)  In  the 
COUMcii  of  pe^ce  from  eternity,  which  we  call  a  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, because  the  redemption  of  the  sinner  was  demanded  and  prom* 
ised  m  that  council.     God  did  from  eternity  elect  some  to  everlast- 
ing  life,  and  appoint  them  to  be  vessels  of  mercy  ;  but  as  they  could 
DQt  obtain  solvation,  except  the  justice  of  God  were  satisfied,  there- 
fore God  enters  into  a  covenant  with  his  Son-,   and  requires  ;hat  he 
should  make  satisfaction  by  his  suffering  and  obedience,  promising 
him  that  he  would  prepare  a  body  for  him,  give  him  his  Spirit,  up- 
hold him  in  his  suffering,  that  he  should  see  his  seed,  and  obtain  the 
highest  ;<h)ry.     The  Son  consents  to  all  this,  engages  to  become  his 
Father's  servant,  and  declares  it  to  be  his  delight  to  do  his  Father's 
will.:  whereupon  his  Fathtr  gives  him  his  elect,  and  ^'e  claims  thefti 
as  bis  own,  that   he  may  fulfil  the  stipulated  conditions   for  them  i 
and  thus  they  ar*?,  as  it  were,  transferred  from  the  book  of  life,  to 
witj  the  Father's  election,  into  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb.  See  this 
covenant.   Psalm  ii.  T,  8,  9.  xl.   6,   7,   8.  Ixxxix.  28.    Isaiah  xlii.  1. 
xlix.  4.  liii     10.  John  xvii,  6.  Eph  i.  4,   5.  iii.    10,  11.   Rev.  xvi.  8. 
xxi.  27,  which   covenant,  confirmed  "  with  the   word  of  the  oath, 
makes  the  Son  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and   redemp- 
tion,"  lieb.  viii.  28.     The  Lord  .lesus  Christ  is  also  made  of  God 
"Visdom,  Sec   by  the  covenant  of  grace,  which   G  d  established  with 
the  elect  sinner,  whereby  the  allsufficient,  the  only  wise,  righteour. 
and  merciful  God  promiseth  the  foolish,   guilty,  filthy  and  impotent 
sinner,  that  he  will  be  a  God  to  him,  and  will  thus  bestow  all  con- 
^ceivable  bliss  on   bins,   and  the  sinner  accepts  of  this  upon  God's 
proffer,  assents  to  it,  and  resigns  himself  to  the  Lord,  in  order  to  be 
his.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Isaiah  xlix.  5.  Iv.  3.    But  as  God  cannot  enter  intfr 
a  covenant  with  the  guilty  and  filthy  sinner  immediately,  therefore 
!ie  gives  him  his  Son  to  be  a  mediator,  that  he,  by  satisfying  his 
josticc,  may  bring  the  sintter  to  God,  and  obtain  for  him  all  the 
promises  of  the  covenant  of  grace  :  '^  Therefore  he  is  the  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death  for  the  redemption 
of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
arc  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance,"  Heb. 
i;t.  )5.  And  so  he  is  made  of  God  by  the  covenant  of  grace  wisdom, 
Sec  For  <'  the  Lord  gives  him  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  a  light 
Hf  the  Gentiles,"  Isaiah  y.lii^  G. 


^h  LORD'S  DAT,  Q.  16~19.  !SI 

I'hat  the  covenant  of  redemption  might  now  be  executed,  the 
covenant  of  grace  perfected,  and  the  sinner  rendered  complete  in 
wisdom,  righteousness^  sanctification  and  fedemption,  God  (a)  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  mediator,  caused  him  to  assume  the 
human  nature,  to  satisfy  his  vindictive  justice,  and  procure  wisdom, 
righteousness,  eanctification  and  redemption  for  his  people :  "  For 
what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  throu.arh  the  ^esh, 
God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for  sin, 
condemned  sin  in  the  fl'.sh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  might 
be  fulfilled  in  us,"  Kom.  viij,  3,  4.  (b)  '^God  also  exalted  him  by  his 
right  hand  for  elect  men,"  gave  him  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  shed  him  forth  "  for  his  covenant  people,  "  and  made  nim  thus 
Lord  and  Christ,"  Acts  ii.  .^)3,  36.  And  by  that  exaltation  he  is  made 
of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption  :  "  for 
God  hath  exalted  him  with  his  right  hand,  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sin," 
Acts  v.  3 1  (c)  In  order  that  these  benefits  may  be  communicated  to 
the  sinner,  the  !  -ord  God  makes  his  Son,  with  all  his  fulness  known 
to  the  world  by  the  gospel,  and  proffers  him  to  men,  that  Ihey  may 
receive  and  embrace  him  ;  he  calls  to  them  with  a  voice  from  heaven* 
*'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  hear  ye 
him,"  Matt.  iii.  17.  xvii.  5.  He  sends  "  his  ambassadours  to  pray 
them  in  his,"  and  in  his  vSon's  »*  name,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2 
Cor.  V.  18,  19,  20,  and  so  "  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  brings  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  2  Tim.  i.  20.  (d)  Yet  all 
this  would  be  to  no  purpose,  if  God  did  not  actually  and  effectually 
by  his  Son  render  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  this  grace,  by  enlighten- 
ing, justifying,  sanctifying  and  redeeming  him  ;  for  which  purpose 
he  gives  the  sinner  faith,  that  he  may  thereby  receive  the  Mediator 
with  all  his  fulness,  and  may  improve  him  in  all  his  needs  :  for  '*  faith 
is  the  gift  of  God,"  Eph.  ii.  8,  Philip,  i.  29,  which  «  God  works" 
eflfectually  in  the  soul,  according  to  "  the  greatness  of  his  power," 
Eph.  i.  19,  and  it  is  faith,  which  receives  the  Son  of  God  and  his 
fulness,  John  i.  12,  16.  Eph.  iii.  17.  What  think  ye,  hearers,  had 
not  Paul  sufficient  reason  to  say,  1  Cor.  i.  30,  that  "  Christ  is  made 
of  God  to  us  wisdom,"  &c.  ?  and  may  not  this  be  called  by  the  in- 
structor a  giving  ?  *  for  there  is  not  a  greater,  nor  a  more  gracious 
Sjift,  than  the  Son  of  God,  with  all  his  benefits.  See  John  iii,  1 C, 
Rom.  viii.  32.  1  John  iv.  9,  10. 

•  This  is  the  English  of  the  word  used  in  the  Dutch  catechism,  an4  in  the 
Geermao  original. 

V 


J 

\m  CHRIS  l  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

But  for  whom  was  Christ  made  and  j»iven  to  be  this  ?  "  For  tis," 
saith  the  apostle,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  "  for  them  who  are  called  lo  be  saints," 
vrs.  2,  *'  not  many  wise  men.  mighty  or  noble  after  the  flesh,  but 
the  foolish,  weak,  ignoble  and  despised  of  the  world,  hath  God  chosen 
and  called,  tliat  th-ey  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  vrs.  26,  31.  '*  There- 
iore  all  men  without  exception  who  perished  in  Adam,  are  not  saved 
by  Christ,  but  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive^ 
all  his  benefits  by  a  true  faith,"  as  the  following  Lord's  day  will 
inform  us. 

•  III.  Btit  who  will  dare  to  believe  this  great  matter  ?  what  account 
have  we  of  it?  will  the  light  of  nature  discover  it  to  us?  No,  the 
creatures  of  God,  contemplated  in  the  most  exact  manner,  will  not 
t^ach  us  aught  of  this :  we  can  learn  from  them  only  *'  God's  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  that  we  may  be  without  excuse,"  Rom.  i.  20. 
The  innate  principles  of  knowledge,  and  our  conscience  may  teach 
us,  that  there  is  an  almighty,  righteous,  wise  and  good  God,  and  that 
we  have  to  do  with  him,  according  to  Rom  i.  19.  ii.  14,  but  they 
cannot  atTord  us  the  least  intimation,  nor  excite  in  us  the  least  ap- 
prehension, whereby  we  may  be  induced  to  think,  that  God  will  de- 
liver smnersby  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  by  his  Son.  And  therefore 
a  persc^n  who  doth  not  possess  more  than  the  mere  light  of  nature, 
"  is  without  Christ,  an  alien  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  a 
stranger  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  Can  this  then  be  learned  from 
the  law  ?  not  from  the  law  neitlier  :  "  For  the  promise  was  not  to 
Abraham,  or  to  his  seed  by  the  law,"  Rom.  iv.  13.  The  law  can- 
not show  the  sinner  the  means  of  deliverance,  but  can  only  discover 
his  misery  to  him,  and  condemn  him  :  "  for  the  law  worketh  wrath," 
Rom.  iv.  15.  See  Rom   iii.  19,  20.  Gal.  iii    10,   II,  12. 

Whence  then  do  we  know  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  medi- 
ator and  deliverer,  made  of  God,  wisdom,  Sec?  The  instructor  an- 
swereth  accordmg  to  the  word  of  God,  "  From  the  holy  gospel.*' 
The  Greek  word  Euangtlion^  signifies  joyful  and  good  tidings,  or  ti- 
dings of  good  :"  I  bring  you  good  tidings,  euangdizomaiy  or  "  evan- 
gelize you  great  joy,"  saith  the  angel  who  brought  the  first  joyful 
news  ot  the  Saviour's  birth,  Luke  ii.  10  11.  The  writers  of  the 
New  Testament  adopted  this  word,  and  learned  the  ordinary  use  of 
it  fiom  the  seventy  Greek  translators  of  the  Old  Testament,  who 
made  use  of  the  word  euangellon^  when  they  found  the  word  Bisser 
m  the  Hebrew.  See  Isaiah  x.  4,9.  Ii.  7.  Ixi.  I.  There  cannot, 
indeed,,  be  jnore  joyful  news  to  a  sinner  under  concern,  than  that 
Christ  is  a  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  is  made  so  great  a  salvation 


♦  — 19.  fSl 

to  him  of  God.     By  this  gospel  we   are  not  here   to  understand   so 
much  the  history  of  the  birth,  life,  doctrine,  miracles,  humiliation:) 
and  exaltation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  we  must  understand  by  it 
particularly,  *'  the  v/hole  doctrine  cf  salvation,  by  which  God  makes 
the  Mediator  and  Deliverer,  Jesus  Christ  known  to  the  sinner,  offers 
him  to  him,  commands  him  to  believe  in  him,  and  that  through  this 
mcdiatoi'  h*:*  shall  escape  punishment,  and  be  aeain  received  into  fa- 
vour."   The  gospel  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation,  by  which  a  person  is 
conducted  to  salvation,  utcording  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  described 
in  the  books  of  the  Old  and   Nev/   Testament:  for   "the  word   of 
truth  is  the  sjospci  of  salvation,"    Eph.  i.  3,     Since  now  Christ  with 
i^is.  benefits  is  the  sum  of  the  gospel,  therefore  it  is  called  the  gospel 
of  Christ,    2  Cor,  iv.  4.  See  also  Rom.  i-  1 — 4,  16,  17.     Wherever 
then  we  read  in  the  holy  scripture  of  Christ   and  his  benefits,  there 
we  have  the  gospei   by  which  (a)  God  makes  Christ  known  to  the 
sinner,  as  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  in  him  only  the  sinner  must 
seek,  and  shall  find  all  salvation  :  for  "by  the  gospel  is  preached  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Sec.    Eph.    iii.   8 — 11. (b)     By    the 
gosptl   the  Mediator,   and  all  salvation  in  and  through  him,   is  also 
oHered  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  invited  and  called  to  him,  that  he  may 
"  turn  to  him  and  be  saved."     Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Iv.    1,  2,  S.     "He 
hath  called  you  by  our  gospel,  to  the  obtaining  of  the   glory  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  the  aposile,  2.  Thes.   ii.  U.(e)     By  the 
gosp  1  the  sinner  is  also  commanded  to  behave  in  the   Mediator  to 
salvation  :    "  Jesus,  preaching  the  gospel,  said,  believe  the  gospel,'* 
Mark.  i.   14,  15.     On  which  account  it  is  sometimes  called  "  a  law." 
Isaiah  ii.  3.     And  also  "  the  law  of  faith/'  Rem.  iii.  27,   since  it 
obhgeth  every  one,  to  whom  it  is  brought,  and  denounces  a  severe 
threaiening  against  those,  who  "  draw  back"  from  it,     Heb.  x»38.(d) 
Purther,  the  gospel  engages  and  promises  to  the  believer,  that  he 
shall  certainly  escape  punishment,  and  be  again  received  into  favour, 
\>y  faith  in  Christ,  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  John  iii.  16,  36.    Acts  x.   43  j 
and  so  the  gospel  "  comforts  the  believing  people  of  God,  and  speaks 
comfortably  to  them,"  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.     ixi.    1,  2,  3. 

This  gospel  must  be  distinguished  into  the  gospel  of  promise  and 
of  fulfilment.  The  gospel  of  promise  is  that  which  foretold  and 
promised  the  Mediator,  who  was  to  come,  with  his  saving  benefits. 
The  gospel  of  fulfilment,  is  the  actual  execution  and  fulfilment  of  the 
gospel  of  promise  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  Rom.  i.  1—4,  "  That  God 
hath  promised  the  gospel  before  by  his  prophets  in  the  holy  scrip- 
tiu-es,  concerning  his  Son^  who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  accor- 
ding to  the  flesh,"  kc. 


in  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  • 

This  gospel  of  promise  "  God  spake  in  times  past,  anc'  »ii  diveis 
manners  to  the  fathers,"  Heb.  i.  i.  For  (1)  God  himself  revealed  it 
first  of  all  in  Paradise^  when  "he  said  to  the  serpent,  because  thou 
hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above  every  beast 
of  the  field:  upon  thy  belly  sh  alt  thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat 
all  t'le  days  of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and 
the  woman,  dn.  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed  :  it  shall  bruise  thy 
head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel,"  Gen.  iii.  14,  18.  We  sup^ 
pose  that  the  Lord  God  spake  these  words,  when  our  first  parents 
were  present,  not  s  >  much  to  the  material  serpent,  as  to  the  devil, 
>»ho  abused  the  serpent,  because  many  things  arc  mentioned  here, 
which  are  natural  to  the  serpent,  and  which  it  hath  m  common  with 
other  hurtful  animals  :  and  the  rather,  because  "  the  devil  and  Satan 
is  called  the  old  si^rpent."  Rev.  xii.  IS.  Our  Saviour  teacheth  us 
that  the  seed  of  the  serpent  signifies  the  ungodly,  when  he  calls 
them  *' a  generation  ofscrpents  and  vipers,"  ^;att.  xxiii  33,  and 
aailh  that  they  are  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii,  44.  We 
suppose  also,  that  these  words  were  spoken,  in  order  to  comfort  our 
parents,  as  their  malicious  ioe  was  condemned  by  these  words ; 
therefore  it  is  also  evident,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  si^nif7es 
in  the  first  place  the  Mediator,  who  should  be  <'  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham," and  thus,  also '« the  seed  of  the  woman  ;"  Gen  xxii.  18.  GaL 
jii.  16.  iv.  4,  and  it  sitrnifies  in  the  next  place,  elect  believers  with 
the  Mediator,  and  in  hini  ,  for  these  "  are  reckoned  the  seed," 
through  the  promise.  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Rom.  ix.  7,  8,  And  there- 
fore  the  words,  Gen  iii.  14,  15,  promise  (a)  that  the  Mediator  should 
be  man  of  m^n,  to  wit,  of  a  woman,  (b)  1  hat  he  should  be  holy,  an 
enemy  to  the  devil,  and  to  his  seed.(r)  That  he  should  be  God  ; 
for  he  should  be  able  to  bruise  (or  crush)  the  head  of  the  devil,  or 
his  power.(d)  That  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  1 
John  iii.  8  (e)  That  he  should  suffer  in  his  human  nature  ;  for  the 
serpent  should  bruise  his  heel.(f)  That  the  serpent  should  not  con- 
quer him,  but  that  he  should  be  exalted  above  the  serpent,  whose 
head  he  should  i)ruise.(g)  That  believers,  being  united  to  him, 
dihould  be  made  like  him,  as  the  seed,  and  should  therefore  be  made 
M'ise,  be  justified,  sanctified  and  delivered  ;  but  still  by  a  conflict  with 
the  serpent  and  with  his  seed.  These  things,  and  such  like,  are 
Contained  in  the  promises.  Our  first  parents  no  doubt  understood 
ihtse  things  more  or  less,  and  were  more  fully  instructed  in  them  by 
^od,  believed  and  embraced  them  to  salvation,  and  delivered  them 
iUo  to  their  children  by  tradition.  (2)  God  published  this  gospel 
afterwards  by  Cx  holy  patriarchs  and  prophets.      The  palriar^hg 


'    ^  — lit.  1^8 

were  the  first  fathers  of  great  fdmilies  in  the  holy  line,   before    ancj 
after  the  flood  ;  to  wit,  from  Adam  lo  Noah,  before  the  flood,  Gen, 
V.  after  the  flood,    from  Noah   to  the    twelve    sons  of  Jacob,  Gen. 
X,  1.     Chron.  i.  who,  as  also  Abraham,  Heb.  vii.  4,  are  called  patri- 
archs. Acts  vii.  8.     And  since   the  promise  of  the   coming  of  the 
Messiah,  and  the  setting-  up  of  the  new  church  was  attached  to  the 
family  of  David,  2    Sam.  vii.  therefore  David    is  also  called  a  Patri- 
arch, Acts  ii.  29.     God  published  his  gospel  in  divers  ways  to  these 
patriarchs,  and  by  them  to  their  posterity.     Hovv  could  Abel  other- 
wise  "  offer  in    faith  ?"  Gen.  iv.  4.     Heb.    xi.  4.     Did  not   Cain 
and  Abel,  as  also  the   sons  of  God,  and  the  daughters  of  men    soon 
manifest  who  were  the  true  partakers  of  the  Mediator?  Gen.  iv.  anci 
vi.     When  Enos  was  born,  the  people  of  God  assembled  to  confess 
the  Lord  in  a  public  maimer,  according  to  the  gospel,  iv.  26.  Enoch 
spake  of  his  coming  to  judgment,  Jude,  verse  14,  15.  Noah  preached 
even  then  by  the  Spirit,  the  righteousness  of  the   Redeemer,    and 
prepared  the  ark,  as  a   figure  of  his  grai  e,  whicii    is  now   sealed  by 
baptism,  according  to    1  Peter,  iii,  19,  20,  21.     But  the  Rospel  was 
pubhshed  much  more  clearly  in  the  household  of  Ab'-aham  and    of 
his  sons,  Gen.  xviii.    17;  when  God  entered   into   a  covenant  with 
them,  and  promised  them  the  Messiah,  as  the  seed  in    whom  men' 
should  be  blessed,  and  particularly  as  a  seed,  whjch   should   proceed 
from  them  ;  as  the  Pvlessiah  also  appeared  sometimes  to  them,  as  the 
g.ngel  of  the  covenapt.     They   also  believed  the    gospel,  embraced 
the  Mediator,  and  obtained  thus  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness. 
Sec  Gen.  xv   6.     Heb.  xi.  13. 

To  these  patriarchs  we  may  add  also  those  great  and  holy  men, 
who  v/ere  not  of  the  holy  line,  as  Melchizedek  and  Job.  Mf^lchize- 
dek  prefigured  that  the  Mediator  should  have  a  priesthood  and  king- 
dom, which  should  not  be  transferable  to  others,  Gen.  iv.  Heb. 
vii.  And  Job  spake  of  the  Messiah,  as  his  "  Gcel  and  Redeemer," 
both  in  this  life,  and  that  to  come,  Job.  xix.   25,  26,  27. 

But  the  gospel  v/as  published  with  much  greater  clearness  by  the 
prophets :  men  chosea  by  God  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and 
endued  with  his  Spirit,  that  they  might  foretell  the  future  things  of 
the  Messiah,  his  benefits,  and  the  New  Testament  church  ;  for  they 
foreshowed  that  the  Messiah  should  be  Mediator,  God  and  man  in 
one  person,  and  "  Immanuel,"  God  with  us,  and  that  "he  should  be 
born  of  a  virgin,"  Isaiah  vii.  14.  ix.  5,  that  "he  should  be  a  pro- 
phet, like  Moses,"  Deut.  xviii.  1 5,  "a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchi- 
zedek," Psalm  ex.  4.  4.  and  "  a  king  of  Zion,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  that  he 
should  be  humbled  and  exalted,"  Isaiah  liii.  that  he  should  descend 


l/4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  G05PEL. 

from  the  tribe  of  Judah  and  the  empoverishcd  family  of  Jesse,  Gen. 
xlix-  10,  Isaiah  vi.  1,  and  be  born  at  Bethlehem,  Micha  v.  1,  and  ap- 
pear in  the  second  temple,  Haggai  ii.  8.  10.  Mai.  iii.  Land  that  af- 
ter the  end  of  seventy  wteks  of  years,  Dan.  ix.  24,  27.  That  he 
should  be  made  of  God  to  his  people  wisdom,  "  to  lead  the  blind  ," 
Isaiah  xlii.  16,  righteousness,  Jer.  xxiii.  6,  sanctilication,  Isaiah  lix» 
20.  That  he  should  bring  the  Gentiles  to  fellowship  with  God,  Isaiah 
xlix.  6.  That  he  should  abolish  the  ecclesiastical  laws  of  the  Jewsy 
and  that  Jerusalem  should  be  laid  waste,  Dan  ix.  27.  And  so  "all 
the  prophets  give  witness  that  through  his  name,  whosoever  believ- 
eth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43. 

3.  God  published  this  gospel  of  promise  not  only  verbally,  b>it  alsa 
really  :  he  prefigured  it  "  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies,  or 
ecclesiastical  observances  of  the  law.  The  ceremonies  of  the  law 
were  either  (I)  the  holy  things,  as  all  the  different  ofTerings,  meats, 
drinks,  washings,  sprinklings,  incense-,  anointing  oil,  first  fruits  and 
tithes  ;  or  (2)  the  holy  persons,  who  celebrated  the  publick  worship, 
as  the  high  priest,  the  common  priests,  and  the  Levites  ;  or  (3)  the 
holy  places,  as  the  land  of  Canaan,  Jerusalem,  the  tabernacle  and 
temple  with  their  apartments,  as  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  ark  of 
the  covenant,  the  holy  place  with  the  golden  dlar,  the  table  and  can- 
dlestick, also  the  porch  with  the  brazen  altar,  the  laver,  and  all  the 
inst'uments,  which  were  used  in  the  holy  service  in  the  porch  ;  or 
(4)  the  holy  seasons,  as  all  the   festivals. 

Truly  a  most  costly,  obscure,  and  burthcnsome  vv-orship,  "  a  yoke 

which  the  fathers  could  not  bear,"  Acts  xv.  10.     Why  did  God  lay 

this  yoke  upon  them  ?  he  did  notboriow  it  from  the  Egyptians,  and 

correcting  it  somewhat,  give  it  to  them,  in  order  to  detach  them    by 

the  use  of  it  from  affecting  the  customs  of  the  heathens  :  for  "  the 

laws  of  Israel  were  different  from  those  of  all  other  people,"  Esther 

iii,  9.  God  deiested  the  laws  and  religion  of  the  heathens,  Deut.  xii. 

30.     When  Israel  made  a  calf  after  the  manner  of  the   Egyptians, 

they  broke  the  covenant  of  God,   Deut.  xxxii.     Neither  do  we  think 

that  God  gave  them  this  law,  in   order  to  punish  them  for  their  sin 

with  the  golden  calf;  foj-  he  had  given  them  many  parts  of  it  before 

that  sin,  and  he  broke  off  giving  it  to  them  on  account  of  that  sin, 

and  he  began,  presently  after  he  was  reconciled  to  the   people,    to 

perfect  it.     It  is  thcre;fore  better  to  say,  that  this  law  was    given    to 

Israel  ibr  *'  a  wall  of  partition,"  to  separate  them  from  other  nations, 

Eph.  ii.  14,  15,  also  to  convince  them  of  their  uncleanness,  and  guilt, 

and  in.:uce  them  to  seek  their  perfection  in  the  Mediator,  who  was  to 

come.     See  Coll.  ii.  17.  Heb,  viii.  5.  ix.  9,  10,  11.  x,  1.    The  Old 


VLLORD'SDAY,  Q.  15— ig.  j35 

Testament  church  was  in  a  state  of  imperfect  freedom,  and  of  child- 
hooi,  and  was  insiructed  in  higher  and  better  things  by  these  dif-, 
fi^;ult  rudin^ents.  If  time  would  permit,  we  would  si  ow  that  all 
these  ceremonial  observances  typified  that  the  Mediator  should  per- 
fect his  people  by  his  only  oft'erini^,  and  v/ith  his  blood  uiid  Spirit, 
that  he  siiouid  be  the  true  high  priest,  and  sliould  enter  into  the  holy 
of  holies,  even  heaven  itself,  with  his  own  blood,  and  thut  he  should 
procure  a  joyful  festival  for  his  New  Testament  church,  during  her 
whole  continuance  on  earth,  and  should  at  length  introduce  her  into 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  into  the  holy  Jerusalem,  the  rest  which 
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  See  only  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews; 
for  we  cannot  speak  of  these  things  in  order  now. 

Not  only  were  the  ceremonies  of  that  law  types,  but  also  wan.y 
other  things  and  persons  of  that  time.  If  any  wish  to  see  a  more 
particular  account  of  them,  we  refer  him  to  our  "  Sketch  of  the 
structure  of  the  types,  exhibited  with  respect  to  its  established  fun* 
damental  rules,  and  agreeably  to  proper  standards,"  in  which  work 
he  may  also  see  that  the  types  were  not  mere  shadows  and  sketches, 
but  also  sacraments  and  seals,  by  which  God  ceFtined  and  sealed  to 
his  ancient  people  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come,  and  his  saving 
benefits.  Therefore  we  believe  that  the  Mediator  was  an  Ex^rO' 
Diissor  for  the  Old  Testament  church,  or  such  a  surety,  as  had  taken 
the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  and  not  merely  a  Jidpjus<ior^  who  had 
undertaken  indeed  to  satisfy  for  her  debt,  but  nevertheless  suffered 
it  to  remain  on  her,  and  to  be  demanded  of  her,  until  she  should 
satisfy  in  him,  and  if  he  should  fail,  that  then  she  should  be  obliged 
<o  satisfy  for  herself,  and  atone  for  her  debt  by  eternal  misery  :  for 
if  he  had  not  taken  the  debt  on  himself  absolutely,  but  left  it  on  her, 
and  suffered  it  thus  to  be  demanded  of  her,  believers  would  not  then 
have  triumphed,  as  they  did,  on  account  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
sins,  Psalm  xxxii.  ciii.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  neither 
would  that  burthensome  worship  of  the  church  have  typified,  shadow- 
ed forth  and  sealed  the  Mediator  to  them,  and  they  would  not  have 
been  able  to  enter  into  the  everlasting  rest,  so  long  as  he  had  not 
satisfied  for  their  debt. 

Behold,  in  this  manner  did  God  make  known  the  gospel  of  promise, 
and  "  he  hath  also  lastly  accomplished  it  by  his  only  begotten  Son," 
and  so  hath  revealed  it  to  us  by  the  gospel  of  fulfilment  in  the  scrips 
tures  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  we  find  in  them,  that  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  God  co-essential  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Gl.ost, 
took  upon  himself  the  iiuman  nature,  continuing  one  person,  of  the 
virgin  Mary,  in  the  proper  time  and  nlyce :  that  he  ff^  ^be  suprenje 


^36  CHRIST  HEVE ALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

Prophet,  Priest  and  Kin^ ;  that  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
was  thus  made  to  his  people  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,  which  we  will  illustrate  and  prove  in  order, 
when  we  speak  of  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption* 


APPLICATION. 

\Vhat  think  ye,  beloved  hearers,  ought  not  wc  to  be  fully  pet^ 
Miaded  in  our  minds,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true  Messiah, 
according;  to  tlie  scriptures?  May  we  not  indeed  cry  out  with  Andrew 
and  Philip  '■'  We  have  found  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets  did  write,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of 
Joseph  ?"  John  i.  42,  45  For  all  that  was  foretold  and  prefigured 
of  the  vjessiah  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  him  :  he  also  fully  proved  this 
from  the  scriptures  from  his  miracles  and  from  his  resurrection,  sa 
as  to  silence  the  Jews  :  and  his  apostles,  who  were  ear  and  eye-wit> 
nesses  of  these  things,  testified  of  them  with  so  much  power,  that 
those  who  lived  both  in  and  after  their  time  received  their  testimony 
V'lth  a  full  persuasion  of  mind.  It  is  indeed  truly  astonishing,  that 
the  Jews,  to  whom  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God,  denied  our 
Saviour,  as  they  do  even  until  this  day.  How  was  this  possible, 
might  we  ask  ?  But  the  word  of  Gcd  will  inform  us  that  God  hath 
forsaken  that  generation  in  his  wrath,  and  hath  abandoned  them  to 
blindness  and  hardness  of  heart.  They  know  neither  their  miserj*, 
nor  the  proper  method  of  deliverance:  they  stek  their  own  right- 
eousness, and  are  offended  at  the  humble  birth,  and  at  the  ignomi- 
nious crucifixion  of  Christ.  All  this  was  likewise  foretold  concerning 
this  people.  See  Isaiah  xi.  9,  10.  viii.  14,  15,  16.  xxix.  9—15.  Iviii, 
2 — 5.  There  is  nothing  that  they  can  endure  with  less  patience 
than  that  Jesus  hath  abolished  and  abrogated  their  ceremonial  law, 
as  though  it  were  not  foretold,  that  ihe  Messiah,  when  "  he  had 
mude  an  end  of  sins,  had  made  reconciliat  on  for  iniquity,  and  brought 
in  an  evei  lasting  rigliteousness,  should  then  also  cause  the  sacrifice 
and  oblation  to  cease,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  See  also  Jer.  iii.  15,  16,  \7. 

But  who  will  nut  de'est  the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  the  Medi- 
ator is  not  God  and  man  in  one  person,  and  that  he  did  not  by  satis- 
fying the  justice  of  God,  btcome  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  redemption  to  his  people  ?  They  say  that  he  is  not  more 
than  a  mere  man,  or  only  a  p:reat  prophet  on  account  of  his  heavenly 
doctrine,  great  miracles,  and  exemplary  conversation  and  death. 
».it  what  wonder  is  it,  that  they  degrade  Christians  in  this  manner, 


Vl,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  i6--i9.  m 

they  have  conducted  thus  also  with  the  believing:  Jews,  upon  whose 
faith  Christianity  is  founded  ;  for  '^the  law  went  forth  out  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  out  of  Jerusalem  "  Isaiah  ii.  3,  and  «  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Jews."  John  iv,  22,    For  they  assert  that  the  fathers  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  lio  promises  concerning  the  forgive'iess  of 
sins,  or  of  eternal  life  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  c- tre  ;  that  he 
was  not  t\  pified  by  the  sacrifices  and  other  ceremonies  of  the  law, 
and  that  the  sacrifices,  which  were  then  offered  up  for  sins,  reconci- 
led the  sins  for  which  they  were  offcx-  d.   and  that  therefore  the  be- 
lievers of  that  time  did  not  seek  their  reconciliation  in  Christ,   when 
they  offered      Do  they  not  represent  the  fathers  as  Epicureans;  who 
cared  only  for   their  bellies  ?  do  they  not  deny  the  whole  gospel, 
which  teaches  nothing  different  nor  less  of  the  Mediator,  than  we 
have  exhibited?  Doth  not  the  word  of  God  say  plainly  and  frequently, 
that  the  Lord  established  his  covenant  of  £;race  with  the  fathers,  that 
he  was  their  God  ?  Gen.  xvii,  7.  Psalm  xxxiii,    12.  Matt.   xxii.  32, 
that  he  forgave  their  sins,   Gen    xv.  6.   Psalm  xxxii.  i,  2.  ciii.  3,  4. 
They  had  spiritual  peace  and  joy.  Isaiah  xxxviii.  17.  To  them  be- 
longed the   adoption,  Rom,  ix.   4,  sanctific'tiori,  preservation,  and 
glorificati(>n,  Psalm  xlviii.  14,   Psalm  xvii.  15.  They  had  "the  same 
Spirit  of  faith  "  with  us.  Psalm  cxvi.  10.  2  Cor.  iv.  13.  Heb  xi,  and 
indeed  faith  in  the  Messiah,  in  whom,  ana  for  whose  sake  they  de- 
sired and  obtained  all  things  of  God,  Psalm  ixxx.   17.   D>an.  ix-  17. 
Heb.  xi   27,  and  this  was  sealed  to  them  by  the  sjcraments,   which 
were  of  the  same  efficacy  with  ours,    1  Cor  x.  1 — 4.     What  think 
ye,  hearers,  may  we  look  upon  these  men,  who  deny  all  this,   either 
as  true  Israelites,  or  as  believing  Christians  ? 

But  how  forcible  are  the   right  words  of  our  instructor,  to  show 
the  concerned  sinner  the  good  way,  according  to  the  gospel,  to  es- 
cape punishment,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour-     The  dis- 
tressed sinner  asks  how  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of  God  ;  and  he 
shows  him  not  only  the  necessity  of  a  satisfaction,  and  that  there  was 
no  possibility,  that  either  he  hirriself,  or  any  other  mere  creature 
should  satisfy,  but  that  this  could  be  accomplished  only  by  one,  who 
was  a  real  and  holy  man,   and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in 
©rder  that  the  sinner  may  not  rest  upon  false  grounds,  but  may  be 
more  deeply  humbled.     And  that  he  may  not  however  through  des- 
pair wholly  neglect  to  seek  his  salvation,  he  shows  him  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  proper  mediator  and  deliverer,  and  that  he 
itiay  be  fully  persuaded  and   assured  of  this  by  the  gospel,  and  be- 
come a  partaker  of  him  and   his  fulness  by  faith.     Therefore  this 
information  is  perfectly  satisfactory  to  a  perplexed  mind.     For  (a> 

X 


■lS6  CHRIST  REVEALED  IX  THE  GOSPEL. 

hath  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  been  made  wisdom,  righteousness,  sane- 
tificalion  and  redemption,  then  he  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God, 
and  procured  a  deliverance  from  guilt  for  the  Imwible  sinner,  by 
^vhich  means  he  escapes  punishment.  For  there  is  no  condemnation 
to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  becduse  he  hath  fulfilled  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  1,  3,  4.  (b)  The  sinner  is  thus 
also  again  received  into  favour,  since  he  is  brought  by  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ  into  God's  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  "  the  Lord  causes 
him  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  brings  him  into  the  bond  of  the  cove- 
nant," Ezek.  XX.  37.  (c)  And  Christ  doth  thus  also  remedy  all  his 
grievous  cal.mities.  Is  he  foolish,  dolh  he  not  know  God's  way  of 
life  ;  Jesus  is  wisdom  to  him.  Is  he  guilty  ;  the  Mediator  is  right- 
eousness to  him.  Is  he  too  abominable,  and  hateful  to  receive  any 
favour  ;  Christ  is  sanctification  to  him.  Is  he  still  too  much  fettered 
and  bound  with  the  cords  of  misery  ;  the  Saviour  is  the  Redeemer, 
and  is  redemption  to  him.  (d)  The  sinner  needs  not  fear  that  God 
the  judge  will  not  be  pleased  with  the  Surety,  and  with  his  satisfac- 
tion. Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  made  this  of  God  to  him  :  the  Judge 
himself  appointed  him  to  be  a  surety,  sent  him  into  the  world,  de- 
manded the  debt  of  him,  and  showed  that  he  was  satisfied  with  him, 
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  exalted  bim  at  his  own  right  hand, 
and  thus  *' justified  him,"  I  1  im.  iii.  16.  And  therefore  he  swears 
that  "  he  will  not  be  wa-oth  with  the  believing  smner,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  (e)  Is  the  sinner  anxious  to  know  how  he  shall 
obtain  this  Mediator  for  himself ;  this  Saviour  is  offered  to  him  in 
the  gospel,  and  he  hath  only  to  choose  him  for  nimself  upon  that 
offer  ;  yea,  God  commands  him  to  do  this,  and  promi  eth  him  that 
"  he  w^ill  not  reject  him,"  but  will  receive  and  save  him,  John  vu  37. 
Isaiah  xlv.  22. 

May  and  must  we  not  then  say,  that  the  doctrine  of  our  reformed 
church  is  pure  and  evangelical,  according  to  the  word  of  God  ?  For 
it  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  that  it  calms 
and  comforts  the  troubled  mind  of  a  distressed  sinner  perfectly  :  For 
*^  whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were  written  for  our 
learning  ;  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  scriptures, 
might  have  hope,"  Rom.  xv.  4.  And  who  of  those  who  are  not  of 
our  communion  are  comparable  to  us  in  this  respect  ?  the  Romanists 
require  that  the  distressed  sinner  should  satisfy  for  his  temporal  and 
eternal  punishment,  by  various  bodily  exercises  and  penances  of  hear- 
ing masses  for  souls'  abstaining  from  particular  meats  during  certain 
seasons,  saying  and  muttering  many  prayers,  going  upon  pilgrim- 
ages to  this  and  that  holy  place,  so  called,  and  celebrating  many  holy 


— ly.  139 

>Ay:.-     Will  this  not  suffice,  he  must  then  seek  indulgences,  and  the 
h.upererogatory  works  of  saints,  v/ho  were  more  than  perfect.     Doth 
he  come  short  still,  he  must  then  believe  and  be  assured,  that  he  will 
be  obliged   to  satisfy  for  Vrha?:  remains  in  an  exceedingly  hot  and 
burning  purgatory,  where  he  will  be  most  severely  tormented  a  long 
time,  and  vhat  he  cannot  be  delivered  out  of  it,  unless  many  prayers 
be  offered  up  for  him,  and  many  masses  for  the  dead  be  provided 
for  hira  by  the  living.     The  ISocinians  do  indeed  detest  these  trifles^ 
but  neither  do  they  heal  the  breach  in  the  spirit ;  for  they  do  not 
speak  of  a  satisfying  Mediator   but  only  say,  that  the  mourning  sin- 
ner must  believe  the  promises  of  Cod,  that  he  who  do;h   good  shall 
receive  a  good  reward.     Uoth  the  sinner  say,  that  he  hath  not  done 
any  good  work,  and  that  the  promises  do  not  therefore  belong  to 
him,  they  will  then  endeavour  to  soothe  him  with  an  exterjial  con- 
version, telling  him  that  he  must  lead  a  better  life   for  the  time  to 
come,  tnat  he  must  keep  the  easy  commandments  of  Christ,  and 
ti;at  Cod  will  then  forgive  his  former  sins.     The  Remonstrants  do 
not  condu^  t  much  better,   when  they  meet  with  a  sorrowful  sinner ; 
for  they  presently  quiet  him  with  vain  consolations,  and  say  that  he 
must  not  be  so  sorrwful,  that  his  case  is  certainly  not  so  lamentable, 
that  he  r^jpents  of  his  sins,  that  God  is  merciful,  that  Christ  hath 
died  for  every  sinner,  and  merited  a  sufficient  grace  :  that  he  must 
promise  to  lead  a  better  life,  and  to  make  a  better  use  of  the  powers 
of  his  free  v/ill,  and  that  God  will  then  grant  him  his  grace.    O  vain 
and  miserable  coniforters  of  sick  souls  !  they  show  that  they,  have 
not  yet  any  experimental  knowledge  of  the  abominable  nature  of  sin, 
nor  of  a  true  humiliation,  nor  of  the  satisfaction  nor  fulness  of  Christ, 
nor  of  a  perfect  consolation  ;  and  therefore  they  feed  the  poor  soul 
with  ashes,  and  put  a  lie  in  her  right  hand. 

But  if  our  doctrine  were  ever  so  efficacious  and  sufficient  to  quiet 
a  troubled  mind,  it  will  nevertheless,  not  administer  the  smallest  re* 
lief  unless  we  know  that  Christ  with  all  his  fulness  is  also  given  to  us 
of  God  :  that  he  is  not  given  to  all  men,  will  appear  on  the  following 
Lord's  day.  To  force  ourselves  into  a  steadfast  persuasion,  in  a  care- 
less manner,  without  any  foundation,  and  without  a  strict  examina- 
tion of  ourselves,  that  Christ  is  given  to  us,  is  building  the  hope  of 
our  salvation  upon  a  foundation  of  sand,  and  it  will  sink  the  sinner 
into  the  lake  ;  and  therefore  it  behooves  every  one  to  examine  him- 
self in  the  strictest  manner,  and  to  inquire  thoroughly  **  whether 
Christ  be  in  him,"  and  be  given  to  him.  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Is  it  your 
desire,  fi lends,  to  know  how  the  person  is  disposed,  to  whom  the 
Mediator  is  given,  that  ye  may  liken  and  compare  yourtelves  to  him  ? 


y^  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

pbserve,  (a)  such  a  person  beholds  with  grief  and  detestation  h\» 
bhndness,  guilt,  filthiness,  impotence,  and  abominable  sins,  and  that 
not  only  others,  but  also  he  himself,  hath  deserved,  accordinet  to  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,  temporal  and  eternal  punishment :  he 
is  concerned  and  distressed  on  this  account ;  he  sees  not  how  he 
shall  be  dehvered  ;  all  his  own  endeavours  and  exertions,  from  which 
he  formerly  derived  hope,  fail  him  ;  he  views  ihem  as  *'  loss  and  dung,*" 
Phil.  ii.  4 — 8  ;  and  he  cries  out  "  there  is  no  hope,  he  doth  not 
find  Liny  more  the  life  of  lis  hand,  and  therefore  he  is  grieved." 
Isaiah  Ivii.  10.  He  doth  not,  however,  wholly  abandon  himsel*  to 
an  entire  despair  ;  but  having  an  earnest  desirt-  to  escape  punish- 
mem,  and  to  be  again  received  into  favour,  he  looks  about  that  he 
may  find  some  means  to  obtain  that  end  ;  and  therefore  re  asks 
others,  "  what  he  must  do  tube  saved-"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.  "He 
fas's  and  prays"  with  Saul,  Acts  ix.  11,  and  he  strives  earnestly  'to 
work  out  his  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  God  worketh 
in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do."  Pf'.ii.  ii.  12,  12.  He  will  also  not 
desist  nor  rest,  until  he  hath  some  evi  lences,  and  until  "  God  saith 
to  his  soul,  1  am  thy  salvation."  Psalm  xxxv.  3  ;  for  God  will  "  look- 
with  favour  only  '^  on  him,  wh©  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit," 
Isaiah  Ixvi.  2,  and  ''the  Redeemer  should  come  to  Zion  for  them 
who  turned  from  iniquity."  Isaiah,  lix.  20.(b)  Such  a  person  hath 
also  a  high  estimation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  To  you  who  be-, 
lieve,  he  is  puci'.  us,"  saith  the  apostle.  1  Peter,  ii  17.  He  consid- 
ers him  as  so  capable,  sufficient,  and  adapted  to  all  his  necessities, 
that  his  soul  becomes  exceedingly  eager  and  desirous  to  possess 
him  :  he  betakes  himself,  therefore  to  praying  and  wrestling  for 
!iiiji,that  he  may  impart  himself  to  him  ;  he  surrenders  himself  to 
hino,  and  casts  himself  upon  him  ;  he  calls  and  fetches  him  in,  and 
he  ceases  not  to  wrestle  thus  in  faith,  until  he  reveals  and  imparts 
himself  to  the  soul.  Thus  the  Canaanitish  woman  acted.  Matt.  xv. 
22—28,  and  Saul,  Plilip.  iii  7 — 10,(c)  Such  an  one  doth  also 
desire  bim  with  all  his  benefits,  he  wishes  not  only  that  Christ  should 
make  him  wise,  bestow  his  righteousness  upon  him,  deliver  him 
from  his  misery,  and  save  him,  but  also  that  he  should  be  ^  anctifi- 
cation  to  him,  that  he  should  take  all  his  sins  from  him,  and  slay 
them ;  those  also,  which  appear  to  him,  as  far  as  he  is  carnal,  hon- 
purable,  profitable  and  agreeable ;  that  he  should  even  take  entire 
possession  of  his  whole  heart,  and  fashion  it  according  to  his  will ; 
^e  considers  holiness,  a  being  dead  to  himself,  being  resigned  to 
pod,  and  doing  the  will  of  '.iod  in  all  things,  as  the  most  glorious 
•dip4  iTio^t  happy  portion  that  a  person  can  enjoy  ;  therefore  he  de 


'     —19.  14i 

iights  in  it,  and  cries  out  with  David  to  God,  Psalm  cxix.  45. 
*«  Thou  hast  commanded  u~^  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O 
that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  statutes.(d)  C  hrist  and 
his  gospel  are  revealed  to  such  a  person  inwardly  and  effectually  by 
the  holy  Spirit,  to  who!»  belongs  the  dispensation  of  the  sjospel  ;  he 
not  only  reads  and  hears  out  of  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  not  only  apprehends  by  his  contemplations  who  and  what  be  is 
to  a  sini.er,  bm  Christ  himself  is  also  discovered  by  the  light  of  his 
Spirit  to  the  soul,  by  which  his  heart  is  warmed,  captivated  and 
drawn  forth  toward  him  in  taith  and  love.  ''  The  Lf^rd  opt-ns  his 
heart,  and  causes  him  to  give  heed  to  the  things  that  are  s  oken  by 
Paul,"  or  others  from  the  gospel,  Acts  xvi.  14.  He  obtams  "  the 
mind  of CIrist,"  I  Coi.  ii.  16.  "For  Go<l,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  si  line  opt  of  darkness,  shines  into  our  hearts,  to  give  the 
iigntofthe  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ,"    2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

Have  ye  no  knowledge  of  these  things,  have  ye  never  attended  to 
them,  nor  experienced  them,  can  ye  then  indeed  think  that  this 
great  V>ediator,  with  his  great  benefits,  is  given  of  God  to  you  ? 
surely  no:  but  it  behooves  you  to  know  that  ye  are  yet  "without 
Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from 
the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world,"  Eph.  ii.  12.  It  is  true,  ye  have  and  hear  the  gospel,  but  "  it 
doth  not  profit  you,  not  being  mixed  with  faith,',  Heb.  iv  2.  «  It  is 
hidden  from  you-  and  ye  perish,  the  pod  of  this  woild  hath  blinded 
your  minds,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ  should 
shine  unto  you,"  2  Cov.  iv.  4  How  grievous  will  it  be  to  you  to 
perish  under  the  precious  dispensation  of  the  gospel !  Will  not  the 
Ninevites,  the  queen  '  f  Sheba,  Sodom  aud  C/omorrah,  Tyre  and  Si- 
doB,  yea,  all  the  nations  who  have  not  heard  the  gospel,  rise  up  in 
judgment  against  yo'.  (,  because  ye  have  neglected  such  a  favourable 
opportunity  to  be  saved,  which  they  never  enjoyed  ?  Friends,  it  will 
be  a  hell  in  the  midst  of  hell  to  you,  that  ye  have  not  improved  such 
an  acceptable  time  and  such  a  dny  of  salvation.  "  Or  do  ye  despise 
the  riches  of  his  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  longsuffering,  not 
knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repensance  ?  Ye 
do  then,  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  for 
yourselves  wrath  againit  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  li*  4,  5. 

Awake,  awake  therefore,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Ac- 
cept, and  lay  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  "  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  bitt 


44i  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL, 

a  Httle,"  Pselm  ii.  12.     For  (a)  do  ye  not  stand  in  need  of  him  ?  have 
ye  not  deserved  temporal  and  eternal  punishmetjt,  according  to  the 
righteous  judgment  ci  Ciod  ?  how  shall   ye  escape  and  be  again  re- 
ceived into  favour  r   or  do  ye  know  how  ye  can  by  wearying  your- 
selves with  certain  devoirs?  are  ye  not  foohsh,  worthy  of  condemna- 
tion, abomini»ble,_  and  altogether  miserable  ?  is  not  he  alone  sufficient 
to  fill  you  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ?     *'  He  can  save  to  the   utter- 
most them  that  come  unto  God  through   him,"   saith    the  text.     O 
do  not  then  despise  him.Cb)     Ye  can  obtain  him  and  all  his  fulness  ;; 
for  he  calls  and  invites  you  to  him  :     '•  Turn  unto  me,  and  be  saved 
S|ll  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;■'  thus  he  saith  to  you  also,  who  are  alto> 
gether  miserable,   Isaiah  xly.  22.     "  God   himself  sets  him  forth  to 
jOU,to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"   Rom*  iii.   25. 
"  Ho,  every  one   that  thirsteth  ;"  thus   he  crieth,  Isaiah  Iv.  1,  2,  S, 
**  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  ye  who  have  no   money,  come,  buy 
wine    and   milk  without  money  and  without  price."   &c.     Yea,  he 
saith,  Rev.  xxii.    17,  "Let  whosoever   will  take   the  waters  of  life 
freely."     He  invites  even  all  those  who  live   under  the  gospel,  yea, 
those  also  who  are  lukewarm,   and  those  Avho  are  puffed  up  with  a 
proud  conceit  of  themselves  like  the  Laodiceans,  for  he  snith,  Rev. 
iii.  18.     "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  geld  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou 
mayest  be  rich  ;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou   mayest  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not   appear  ;    and   annoint 
thine  eyes  with  eye-salve,  that  thou  mayest  see."     For  what  pur-t 
pose  have  ye  preachers  ?  and  why  do  they  publish  the  gospel  to 
you  ?  is  it  not  that  they  may  persuade  you  to  believe,  and  that  they 
niay  adure   you  to  this  sufficient  Deliverer,  and  induce  you  to  lay 
hold  on  him  ?     "  Now  then,   we    are  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as 
thougli  God  did  beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray   you  in  Christ's  stead, 
be  ye  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.  20.(c)     May  ye  indeed  neglect 
to  receive  him,  when  he  is  offered  to  you  ?  is  not  this  enjoined  on, 
you  ?  may  ye  continue   unbelieving  ?    is  it  left  to  your  choice,  to 
embrace  the  Son  of  God  or  not  ?    surely  no  :  will  ye  then   be  wil- 
fully and  knov/ingly   disobedient,  and  perish  ?     Who,  who  is  there 
of  you  vvho  will  with  such  a  wicked  heart  of  unbelief,  depart  from  the 
Jiving  God  ?     Is  there  any  one  who  is  so  wicked,  do  thou,  and  tliou 
nevertheless  "  save  thyself  from  this  untoward  generation,"  Acts  ii. 
40.     "  Take  hold  of  the  strength  of  God,    that  thou  mayest  make 
peace  with  him,"  Isaiah   xxxvii.   4.     "  BelievtJ  in   the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  Acts  xvi.   31.(cl)     Well,  sinner, 
wilt  thou  not  flee  to  him  ?  shouldest   thou  go  to  him,  and   receive 
him  in  vain  ?     No :  "  him  that  comcth  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  ca?;t 


VI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16—19.  U3 

aut,"  safth  he,  John  vi.  37.  Thou  wilt  not  fail  of  salvation,  if  thou 
wilt  only  receive  hini,  and  surrender  tnys'^lf  to  him  with  a  pertect 
heart.  "  lie  that  believeth,  and  is  baptiz  d,  shall  be  saved,"  saith 
the  moulli  of  truth  again  and  again,  Mark  xvi.  16.  John  iii.  16,  17, 
36.  He  confirms  it  with  a  double  "verily,"  Join  v.  M,  yea,  as  it 
were  with  an  oath,  Ezek.  xxxiii  1 1.  (e)  Will  yc  not  come,  but  re- 
main in  yourselves,  know  then  that  ye  are  guilty  of  a  most  heinous 
sin  ;  ye  despise  him,  his  fulness  and  love,  which  the  devils  cannot 
dj,  since  he  is  not  ofTered  to  them  ;  "  Ye  make  God  a  liiir,"  i  John 
V.  10.  He  upbraids  you  v/ilh  it  m  anger,  '*  that  ye  will  not  come  to 
him,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  "  His  wrath  lieth  and 
abideth  on  you,"  John  iii,  35.  "  When  distress  and  anguish  cometh 
upon  you,  and  ye  cali  upon  him,  thi;n  he  will  not  answer  ;  but  he 
"vvill  laugh  at  your  calamity,"  Prov.  i  20—33.  "  To-day  then,  if 
yc  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalrn  xcv.  7,  8. 
'•  For  iiow  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  gr? at  a  salvation  ? 
Heb.  ii.  3, 

But,  believers,  ye  who  have  chosen  and  received  him  ?Ione,  wholly 
and  frequently  for  j^ours,  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  because 
the  Lord  God  natn  offered  him  to  you  in  the  gospel,  and  captivated 
your  hearts  thereby  : 

1.  Believe,  and  be  assured  that  God  hath  given  him  to  you  with 
all  his  fulness,  and  tuat  he  is  yours,  aUvl  ye  are  his;  like  the  spouse 
wno  said  wiil.oi.t  do-ibtuig,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his," 
Song  ii  16.  "  Do  ye  not  know  your  own^  elves,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
in  you,"  2  Cor.  xiii,  5.  Do  ye  not  know  with  Paul,  "  that  y^.  have 
believed  in  him?"  2  Tim  i.  12.  Can  yc  deny  your  sorrow  and 
concern  for  your  miserable  condition,  the  continual  outgoings  of  your 
hearts  toward  him  in  desires  and  longings,  your  hearty  surrendering^ 
of  yourselves  to  him,  and  receiving  of  him,  as  well  to  be  sanctified 
by  him,  as  to  be  saved  ;  can  yc,  we  say.  deny  these  things  ?  and  are 
they  not  considered  by  you  as  evidences  of  your  saving  interest  in 
him  ?  Well,  let  your  hearts  then  be  perfectly  assured  before  him  of 
his  love  to  you 

2.  Live  much  in  the  contemplation  of  his  excellency.  May  ye 
not  with  Stephen,  "see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man 
stanrling  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56  ;  endeavour  to 
contemplate  him  in  his  glorious  gospel,  and  led  up  by  it,  to  entep 
wi  h  Moses  into  the  clouds,  and  with  open  face  to  behold  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  as  in  a  glass,  and  thus  to  see  this  King  in  his  beauty  in 
a  far  country.  He  is  certainly  worthy  of  your  wliole  understanding; 
all  th.vt  was  ever  foresaid  and  foreshown  of  him,  as  fair  and  glorious 


U4  CHRIST  REVEALED  IN  THE  GOSPEL. 

exists  in  him  in  the  most  perfect  m inner:  whatever  is  larking  im 
you,  can  be  found  in  him.  He  liath  a  f  ilntss  of  i^racc  to  supply  all 
your  JeficicDcics  :  he  is  perfectly  adapicd  to  all  your  necessities: 
*'  in  him,  and  in  iiis  love,  there  is  a  breadth,  length,  depth,  and 
heii^hi,  and  to  know  this  fiMs  us  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph. 
iii.  18,  19.  It  afibi'ds  a  wondef.l  joy  to  the  soul  to  contemplate 
him,  '^  she  wa  ks  in  tie  light  of  his  countenance,  and  rejoices  in  his 
name  dl  the  day  lon;^,"  Fs.ilm  Ixxxix.  15,  16.  Yea,  "  she  is  chang- 
ed ufier  ihe  glorious  imaii,e  ol  the  Lord,  which  she  beholds  with 
open  fcice,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor. 
iii.  IS. 

3.  Behold  now  your  happ-ness,  and  the  great  kindness,  that  hath 
been  shown  to  you  :  what  l5ath  God  the  Lord  done  f')r  you,  that  he 
might  deliver  you  from  punishme-nt,  and  restore  you  to  favour  ? 
He  do-.li  not  merely  admit  a  surety,  but  he  appoints  !iis  "^on,  in  his 
cverlasiiu;;- conned  lo  be  one  ;  he  sends  him  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh,  inflicts  on  him  the  punishment  of  your  sins,  m  your  stead,  re- 
ceives vou  into  his  covenant,  gives  you  this  Mediator  and  D  iiverer 
to  be  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifacation  and  redemption  to  you, 
causes  you  'o  emi.race  him,  and  publishes  the  gospel,  even  the  gos- 
pel of  f'diilmeut  so  you.  How  obscutely  was  it  publsiied  to  the  fa- 
tntrs  !  but  it  is  announced  with  exceeding  clearness  to  you.  What 
a  burthensome  service  did  he  inopose  on  the  fathers  !  but  he  hath 
freed  you  therefrom.  How  earnestly  did  they  desire  these  days, 
that  they  might  see  <.  hribt  in  the  flesh  !  but  they  might  not  live  un- 
til these  days,  and  God  hath  provided  some  belter  thing  for  you  : 
"  iJlcsbcd  arc  your  eyes,  for  th'iy  see  ;  and  your  ears  for  they  hear. 
*'  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  many  prophets  and  righteous  men 
have  desu^ed  to  see  those  things  wldch  ye  see,  and  have  not 
seen  them:  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye  hear,  ai.d  have  not 
heard  them,"  saith  the  Redeemer  of  Israel,  Malt.  xiii.  16,  i  7.  re- 
joice then  exceedingly  on  account  of  this  salvation,  which  hath  been 
accomplished  :  "  It  should  be  said  in  this  day,  Lo,  this  is  our  God, 
we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  this  is  the  Lord,  we 
have  waited  for  him.  we  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation," 
Isa'ah  XXV.  9.  ''  Rejoice  then  greatly  in  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  he 
joyful  in  their  God,  for  he  hath  clothed  you  with  the  irarmenls  of 
salvation,  he  hath  covered  you  with  the  rohe  of  rig!itcousness," 
Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  Yea,  "  let  all  the  seed  of  Israel  glo.y  in  tJie  Loid," 
Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

4.  Improve  therefore   your  Mediator  and  all  bis  fulness,  as  your 
necessities  require,"  receiving  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace," 


VI.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  16~19.  145 

John  i,  15.  "  That  he  may  supply  all  your  needs  acccrdiii?^  to  his 
riches,  and  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work 
of  failh  with  power,"  Philip,  iv.  19.  8  Thes.  i.  1 1.  Behold  continu- 
ally your  W;ints,  your  darkness,  gui't,  sinfulness,  and  other  n-iiseiies  ; 
and  see  that  there  is  a  fulness  of  wisdom,  righteousness,  sunctification 
and  redemption  in  him  against  all  this,  particularly  for  you  ;  go  to 
him  'vitii  your  distresses,  receive  of  his  fuhiess  against  them,  and 
suck  therefrom,  through  the  conduits  of  the  p  omises,  whatever  ye 
need  ;  suffer  him  to  exe:^ute  his  office  upon  you,  for  "  he  is  all,  and 
in  all,"  Coll.  iii.  11,  and  "  is  exalted  to  he  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  to 
give  repeniance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31. 

J.  Finally,  to  conclude,  "  Only  walk  worthily  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ,"  Phil.  i.  27,  that  is  humbly,  bclievingly,  joyfully,  h^iily,  cir- 
cumspectly, and  Vv'ith  self-denial  toward  all  things  out  of  him. 
"  For,"  as  the  apostle  sai'.h,  Titus  ii.  1 1,  12,  13,  '*  the  grace  of  God, 
which  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared  to  all  men  ;  teaching  us 
that  denying  ungodliness,  and  v/orldiy  lusts,  we  sliould  live  soberly, 
TJghteotisly,  and  godly  in  this  present  world  :  looking  for  that  bles- 
sed hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  tlie  great  God,  and  our  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,"  Amen, 


146  ) 


SAVING  FAITH 


VII.  LORDS  DAY^ 


John  iii  36.  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son,  hath  everlasting  life  s 
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  ihe  wrath 

of  God  abideth  on  him.