Q.    20.  ^re  all  men  thtn^  as  they  furish  in  jJdam^  saved  by  Christ  ^ 

A.  No  ;  only  those  who  are  ingrafted  into  him,  and  receive  all  his 
benefits,  by  a  true  faith. 

Q.  2 1 .    Whal  is  true  faith  ? 

A.  True  faith  is  not  only  a  certain  knowledge,  whereby  I  hold 
for  truth  all  that  God  has  revealed  lo  us  in  his  word,  but  also  an  as- 
sured confidence,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  by  the  tjospel  in  my 
heart ;  that  not  only  to  others,  but  to  me  also,  remission  of  sins, 
everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation,  are  freely  given  by  God, 
merely  of  grace,  only  f  r  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits. 

Q,  22.   iVhat  is  then  necessa^  y  for  a  Christian  to  believe  ? 

A.  All  things  promised  us  in  the  gospel,  which  the  articles  of  our 
undoubted  catholic  Christian  faith  briefly  teach  us. 

Q    23.    What  are  those  articles  ? 

A.  I.  "  I  believe  in  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth. 

r.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  only  begotten  Son.  our  Lord. 

IH.  Who  vvas  conceived  by  the  Holy   Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin 

Mary. 

IV.  Suffered  «inder  Pontius  Pilate  ;  was  crucified,  dead  and  buri- 
«;d.     He  descended  into  hell : 

V.  The  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead  : 

VI.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
ihe  Father  Almighty  : 

VH.  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 
Vni.   I  believr  in  the  Holv  Gho?^t  : 


VII.  LOR'S  DAY.  Q.  20—22.  nr 

iX.  I  believe  an  holy  catholic  church  :  the  communion  of  saints  j 
X.  The  forgiveness  of  sins  ; 
Xi.  The  resurrection  of  the  body  : 
Xli.  And  the  life  ever.asting,  Amen." 

«  ri  1 

JL   HE  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,   not  being  mixed 
with   faith."     Thus  speaks  Paul  of  the  disobedient  Israelites,  "  to 
wiiom  the  gobpel  was  preached,  as  well  as  to  u","  Heb   iv.  2.     The 
gospel  is  mort  profitable  to  man  than  aught  besides  ;  for  it  reveals 
Christ  and  all   his  benefits  to  him,  it  offers  all  grace  and  salvation  to 
him,  it  orders  him  to  receive  the  Saviour  for  himself  it  promiseth 
him  all  salvation  in  the  Saviour,  and  '*  he  is  saved  only  by  the  gos- 
pel," I  Cor.  XV.  1,  2.   This  salutary  gospel  was  preached  to  the  dis- 
obedient Israelites  also  in  the  wilderness,   '.vhen  God  established  his 
covenant  of  grace  wi'h  them  on  Sinai,  although  with  a  legal  admin- 
istration, when  "he  sent"  his  Son,  "the  anii^el  in  whom  his  name 
was,  before  them,"  Exod.  xxiii.  20 — 23.   "promised  him   to  them, 
as  a  prophet,  like  Moses,"   Deut.  xviii.    16 — 19,  and  when  he  typi- 
fied him  "  by  the  manna,  by  the  rock,"  I  Cor.  x.  3,  4,  and  by  all  the 
ordinances  of  the  ceremonial  law,   Coll.  ii,    17.  Heb   viii.  5.  x.  5, 
but  although  the  gospel  is  so  exceedingly  profitable,  "  it  ihd  not  jjrof- 
it  them,  because  it  Mas  not   mixed  with   faith  ;  for  they  had  not  an 
heart  to  understand,"  Deut.  xxix.  4.     *'  They  did  not  look  to  the 
end  of  that  which  is  abolished  ;  but  their  minds  w.;re*blinded."  2  Cor. 
iii.  13,  14.     '^  When  they  heard  the  voice  of  tiie  gospe  '  they  haid- 
ened  their  hearts,  and  they  could  not  enter  in.   because  of  unbelief," 
Psalm  xcv.  7 — 11.  Heb.  iii.  14 — 19.     For  it  is  f.ith  which  renders 
the  gospel  profitable  to  man  ;  for  by  faith  a  person  not  onlv  acknowl- 
edges it  to  be  true  and   divine,  and  is  moved   and  influenced  by  it, 
1  Thess.  i.  15,  hut  he  doth  also  by  fjith  receive  the  Saviour,  Eaid  ull 
his  saving  benefits  for  himself,  according  to  the  offer  of  the  pospel, 
^vhich  saith,  "  ile  who  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,  &c. 
John  iii.  36. 

This  the  instructor  also  teacheth  us.  He  had  taught  in  the  fore- 
going Lord's  day,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  perfec  t  Sa- 
viour of  sinners  and  he  had  proved  this  from  the  gospel ;  but  now  he 
shows  that  Christ  is  nevertheless  not  a  "  Saviour,  and  that  the  gospel 
is  not  profitable  to  all  who  have  perished  in  Adam,  but  only  to  t' ose, 
who,  according  to  the  gospel,  are  ingrafted  into  him.  and  receive  all 
his  benefits  by  a  true  faith  In  order  th»t  he  may  give  us  a  proper 
account  of  this  faith,   he   speaks  of  it  at  large,  showing  (1)  how 


148  SAVING  FAITH, 

necessary  it  is,  Question  20.  (2)  Wherein  it  consists,  Question  21. 
(3)  vVhat  is  the  object  of  it,  Question  22 — 58.  (4)  In  what  respect 
it  is  profitable,  Question  59 — ^^64  (5)  Mow  it  is  wrought  and  con* 
firmed,  Question  §5 — 85. 

We  must  at  present  explain  only  three  particulars  with  respect  to 
faith. 

I.  The  necessity  of  it,  Q.  20. 

II.  The  brief  representation  of  the  object  of  it,  Q.  22,  23. 

III.  The  naiure  of  faith,  Q   21. 

1.  It  is  taken  for  granted  here,  that  "  all  men  are  cursed,"  that  is, 
eondemnable  >'  in  Adam,"  because  this  is  taufht  in  the  seventh  ques- 
tion. It  is  asked  now,  whether  "  all  men,  as  they  have  perished  in 
Adam,  are  also  saved  by  Christ  ?"  This  question  appears  strange, 
since  it  is  universally  acknowledged,  that  ail  men  are  not  saved  by 
Christ.  There  have  indeed  been  certani  persons,  who  have  taught 
that  all  men  were  saved  ;  but  they  have  been  few,  and  ther  cirone- 
ous  opmion  hath  long  since  been  dead  with  them.  The  instructor 
intends  therefore  something  else  by  this  question,  and  indeed  whether 
men  be  saved  from  their  birth  by  Christ,  without  any  intervening  act 
of  the  soul,  as  they  perish  in  Adam  by  their  birth,  without  any  act 
of  the  person  who  is  born.  For  there  are  many  careless  persons, 
who  fondly  imagine  that  they  shall  be  saved  by  Christ,  ahhough 
the^  do  nothing  to  obtain  him  for  salvation.  The  catechism,  in  or- 
der to  root  out  such  a  false  imagination,  shows  that  we  cannot  be  sa- 
ved by  Christ  from  our  birth,  without  any  act  of  our  own,  as  we 
have  perished  in  Adam  :  but  that,  in  order  to  be  saved,  we  must  be 
incorporated  into  Christ  by  faith,  since  we  are  not  m  Christ  by  na- 
ture, nor  proceed  from  him  by  our  birth,  as  we  are  by  nature  in 
Adam,  and  proceed  from  him  by  our  birth.  And  therefore  some  act 
must  be  done,  whereby  we  are  ingrafted  into  him  supernalurally, 
which  act  is  faith  ;  but  we  would  rather  say  that  this  question  is 
asked,  because  there  have  been  certain  persons  of  old,  to  wit,  the 
Pelagians  and  Semipelagians,  and  because  there  are  still  certain  per- 
sons, to  wit,  the  Jesuits  and  Remonstrants,  and  many  who.  collude 
with  them,  who  conceive  that,  as  all  men  were  brought  into  a  state 
of  perdition  by  Adam,  so  all  men  are  brought  into  a  scate  of  salvation 
by  Christ,  that  Chrifct  died  for  all  men,  and  merited  salvation  for  all, 
as  Adam,  according  to  our  doctrine,  deserved  perdition  by  his  sin  for 
all.  This  errour  proceeds  from  another  erroneous  opinion.  These 
men  hold  that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  all  the 
sins  of  his  p  .ople,  but  only  the  will  of  God,  which  did  not  demand 
all,  but  only  a  sma"l  part  j  that  Christ  having  obeyed  this  will,  God, 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— a^i^  1^, 

by  a  gracious  estimation,  accepted  of  that  small  part,  instead  of  a  full 
satisfaction  for  all  men,  and  was  moved  thereby  to  establish  a  general 
covenant  of  grace  with  all  men,  and  to  bestow  a  sufficient  grace  upon 
them  all,  whereby  they  should  be  enabled  to  make  a  proper  use  of 
their  free  will ;  for  God  requires  of  them,  as  a  condition,  in  the  cove- 
nant, that  they  should  exert  their  free  will,  in  order  to  beheve,  obey 
and  persevere.  The  reason  why  all  men  are  nevertheless  not  saved, 
though  Christ  died  for  all,  is  that  they  do  not  make  a  right  use  of 
this  free  will.  There  are  indeed  some  ot  the  Reformed,  who  also 
imagine  that  Christ  died  for  all  men ;  but  they  add,  that  saving  faith 
in  Christ  depends  not  upon  free  will,  as  those  who  are  out  of  the  Re- 
formed church  assert,  but  only  upon  the  decree  of  God  and  effectual 
grace.  *  The  instructor  opposeth  this,  and  teaches  that  all  men  are 
not  saved  by  Christ,  and  therefore  that  he  did  not  bring  them  all  by 
his  death  into  a  state  of  salvation.  And  he  doth  not  teach  this  with- 
out a  reason :  for, 

1.  Christ's  death  and  merits,  whereby  man  is  saved,  belong  not  to 
all  men,  but  are  restrained  to  a  certain  number.  He  saves  none  but 
"hjs  people,"  Matt.  i.  21,  "  his  body,  of  which  he  is  the  Saviour,  and 
his  church,  for  which  he  gave  himself,"  Eph.  v.  2S,  25.  "  He  is  the 
author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  him,"  Heb  v.  9, 
f^  He  gives  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  the  Father  hath  given  him," 
John  xvii.  2.  <♦  He  lays  his  life  down  for  his  sheep,"  Jolm  x.  1 1,  15. 
Now  all  men  are  not  his  people,  his  body,  his  church,  those  who 
obey  him,  who  are  given  to  him,  his  sheep :  "  Ye  are  not  of  my 
sheep,"  saith  he  to  the  Jews,  John  x.  26. 

2.  We  suppose  that  the  Mediator  was  obliged  to  satisfy  the  justice 
of  God  fully,  as  we  have  proved  already  upon  the  fifth  Lord's  day : 
we  also  suppose  that  he  hath  satisfied  fully,  which  we  will  show  on 
the  fifteenth  Lord's  day.  If  now  Christ  satisfied  the  justice  of  God 
for  all,  it  must  follow,  either  that  all  men  will  certainly  be  saved, 
and  cannot  be  punished  with  perdition  for  any  sin,  which  none  will 
assert ;  or  that  God  is  not  just,  since  he  would  punish  guilt  twice, 
once  in  his  Son,  and  once  in  the  sinner,  who  perisheth.  Since  we 
may  not  think  thus  of  the  righteous  God,  therefore  it  is  also  certain, 
that  the  Surety  did  not  die  for  all. 

3.  Add  to  this,  that  the  Saviour  actually  communicates,  and  effec« 

•  By  these  the  author  means  the  Amyraldisis,  or  followers  of  Moses  Amyr,^ 
jtldus  or  Amyraut,  a  professor  of  theology  in  the  univeriity  of  Saumur  in 
France,  about  the  middle  of  ihe  seventeenth  century.  They  are  also  called 
Univcrsalists,  although  they  do  not  hold  with  our  modern  sect  of  that  xiztm, 
that  all  men  shall  be  saved. 


150  SAVING  FAITH. 

tually  applies  salvation  to  them,  for  whom  he  purchased  it ;  for  "  he 
gives  eternal  life  to  his  sheep,  for  whom  he  laid  down  his  life,"  John 
X.  15,  28,  As  he  merited  salvation  by  his  humiliation,  so  he  also 
applies  il  by  his  exaltation  :  *'  he  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and 
raised  again  for  our  juslification,"  Rom,  iv.  25,  "  For  if  when  w^ 
were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  : 
much  more  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life,"  Rom, 
3/,  \0o  As  he  was  not  humbled  for  himself,  but  for  his  people,  so  he 
"aras  also  exalted  for  them,  that  he  might  be  a  "  Prince  and  a  Saviour, 
to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  5l\ 

5.  He  saith  himself,  John  xvii.  9.  «  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but 
for  them  whom  thou  hast  given  me."  Would  he  not  pray  for  the 
world,  and  vvould  he  die  f  r  it  ?  Our  adversaries^  say,  Christ  applies 
salvation  by  his  intercession,  but  he  obtained  it  by  his  death,  and  they 
thmk  that  he  was  wiUing  to  obtain  salvation  for  all,  but  not  willing 
to  apply  it  to  all.  But  he  communicates  salvation  to  all,  for  whom 
he  merited  it,  as  w^  have  just  now  seen,  and  besides  this,  he  prays 
also,  for  all  for  whom  he  died  ;  for  his  death  and  intercession  always 
accompany  each  •  ther  :  "  He  bore  the  sins  of  many,  and  made  inters 
cession  for  the  transgressors,"  Isaiah  iiii  12.  VVe  see  this  also, 
Rom.  viii.  34.  I  John  ii.  1,2. 

5.  ''  Christ  did  not  die  in  vain,"  as  Paul  supposeth.  Gal.  ii.  2  I  ; 
but  if  he  died  for  ail  men,  ^  then  he  died  in  vain  for  those  who  are 
npt  saved  :  for  they  miss  both  the  virtue  and  fruit  of  Christ's  death. 
If  not  one  man  had  made  a  good  use  of  his  free  will,  so  called,  as 
might  have  happened,  if  the  will  be  absolutely  free,  as  the  Pelagi^^ns 
say,  then  not  one  man  would  have  obtained  salvation,  although 
Christ  had  died  for  him.  And  so  his  death  wouU  have  been  alto- 
gether in  vain. 

6.  The  doctrine,  that  Christ  died  for  aU  men,  is  replete  with  ab<? 
surdities  :  for  (a)  if  he  died  for  all  men,  then  he  died  for  those  who 
were  already  damned,  as  Cain  and  others  j  for  "  his  death  was  for 
the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  tliat  were  under  the  first  testa- 
ment," Heb.  ix.  15.  (b)  He  died  then  also  for  those  who  never  hear 
ofhim,  norcan  believe  in  him,  and  who  cannot  thus  berome  par- 
takers of  him,  nor  make  use  of  their  free  will  for  that  purpose,  as 
the  heathens,  who  have  never  heard  of  the  gospel,  and  whom  God 
suffers  to  walk  in  their  own  ways  (c)  We  are  not  then  saved  on  ac- 
count of,  and  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  but  on  account  of,  and  by  our 
good  use  of  our  free  will ;  for  upon  that  alone  depends  the  efficacy 
and  fruit  of  his  death,  (d)  The  sinner  would  then  also  have  a  good 
free  will,  and  an  ability  to  make  a  pro*^.table  and  saving  use  of  th^ 


—23,  IfUr 

death  of  Christ ;  but  this  we  have  found  on  the   e'ghth  and  ninth 
questions  to  be  false. 

If  we  will  collect  all  these  reasons,  and  attend  to  each  of  them  in 
particular,  we  shall  necessarily  conclude  that  Christ  did  not  die  for 
all  men',  nor  merit  salvation  for  all. 

Let  none  object  here  the  words,  "  God  will  have  all  men  to  be 
saved,"  and  "the  Mediator  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,"  1  Timo 
ii.  4,  6.  for  this  doth  not  mean  every  individual  man,  since  it  is  added, 
«  God  will  have  all  men  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." 
Now  God  doth  not  will  this  concerning  every  individual,  for  he  doth 
not  reveal  the  truth  to  every  individual ;  but  all  men  are  here  al! 
sorts  of  men,  as  "  kings,  and  those  who  are  hi  authority,"  vrs.  1,  2, 
who  were  at  that  time  heathens,  for  whom  the  Christians  were  never- 
theless bounden  to  pray,  because  God  would  have  such  also  to  be 
saved. 

Doth  John  say,  that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  a  propitiation,  not  only  for 
our  sins,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  1  John  ii.  2,  he 
doth  not  mean  by  the  ^vhole  world  all  men,  and  every  individual  in 
particular ;  for  the  words  world,  and  the  whole  world  denote  often 
only  a  great  number  of  men.  See  Luke  ii.  I.  I  John  xii.  19.  But 
by  the  whole  world  he  means  all  kinds  of  men  in  the  world,  and 
particularly  the  heathens  in  opposition  to  the  Jews,  who  were  the 
only  persons  to  whom  salvation  pertained  under  the  Old  Testament, 
John  xi.  51,  52.  For  the  heathens  are  called  the  world  in  this  sense, 
Rom.  xi.  12.  «  Abraham  should  be  an  heir  of  the  world,"  Rom.  iv. 
13,  not  of  every  man,  but  of"  every  family  and  people,  who  should 
be  blessed  in  his  seed,"  Gen.  xii.  3.  xxii  17,  18,  "and  who  should 
believe,  to  whom  the  righteousness  of  faith  should  be  imputed,"  ac- 
cording to  Rom.  iv.  11,  12,  13. 

Paul  saith  indeed,  Rom.  v.  18.  "  As  by  the  offence  of  one,  judg- 
ment came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation:  even  so  by  the  right- 
eousness of  one,  the  free  f^ft  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of 
life."  But  he  doth  not  intimate  by  these  words,  that  all  men,  who 
have  perished  in  Adam,  are  brought  into  a  state  of  salvation  by  the' 
death  of  Christ ;  for  he  would  then  assert  that  they  would  all  be 
saved,  since  he  saith  "  that  the  free  gift  came  upon  aH  men  unto 
justification  of  life,"  which  justification  pertains  to  the  application  of 
the  purchased  salvation,  according  to  Rom.  iv,  25.  "  Grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  to  eternal  hfe,"  as  he  sahh  vrs.  21.  And  there- 
fore all  men  are  here,  not  all  who  have  perished  in  Adam,  but  all 
who  belong  by  the  covenant  of  grace  to  Christ,  as  their  head  and 
*  receive  through  him  abundance  of  grace,  and  of  the  gift  of  right* 


.15^  HAVING  FAirfl. 

eousncss,  and  reign  in  life,"  vrs.  17.  Therefore  the  apostle  designs' 
by  the  words,  vrs  18,  which  are  objected,  that  as  Adam  subjected 
all  those,  who  were  his,  and  who  were  reckoned  under  him  in 
the  covenant  of  works,  to  guilt  and  condemnation,  so  Christ  hath  de- 
livered all  the  elect,  who  are  reckoned  under  him  in  the  covenant  of 
grace,  from  condemnation,  and  hath  brought  them  into  a  state  o^ 
salvation  :  for  Adam  and  Christ  are  set  forth  in  this  chapter,  as  two 
distinct  heads,  who  govern  each  a  distinct  people,  according  to  a 
distinct  covc*nant :  and  Christ  is  represented,  0s  bringing  those  who 
are  his,  into  a  state  of  salvation,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  Adam 
brings  those  who  are  his  into  a  state  of  condemnation.  See  vrs. 
1^—21. 

Therefore  whoever  examines  the  word  of  God  without  prejudice, 
will  be  oblii^ed  to  admit,  that  Christ  did  not  purchase  salvation  for  aU 
men,  and  that  all  men  are  therefore  not  saved  by  him.     But  since 
the  careless   sinner  "  feeds  himself  without  fear,"  therefore  he  ima- 
gines that  many  will  notwithstanding  be  saved  by  Christ,  and  he  sup- 
poses that  he  will  be  one  of  that  great  number ;  for  he  will  not  think 
the  worst  of  himself,  and  he  deceives  himself  thus  with  vain  imagi- 
nations :  for  very  few  are  saved  by  Christ :    "the  gate  is  strait,  and 
the  way  is  narrow  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  find 
it,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  14.    *'  The   Father  giveth  his  king- 
dom only  to  a  little  flock,"  Luke  xii.  32.  In  the  old  world  "  all  flesh 
had  corrupted  its  way,"   Gen    vi    12,  and  only  "eight  souls  were 
saved  in  the  ark,"  1  Peter  iii.  20,  and  among  them  there  was  a  Ham» 
who  was  cursed   on  account  of  his  wickedness.    Gen.  ix.  22— 25, 
There  were  not  ten  righteous  persons  in  Sodom,  Gen.  xviii.  S2r 
We    read  of  only   one  Melchizedek  in  Canaan :  we  find  only  the 
family  of  Abraham  m  Ur,  of  the  Chaldees,   and  there  were  but  few- 
godly  persons  with  Job  in  Syria.     The  posterity  of  Abraham  multi- 
plied indeed  exceedingly,  but  God  suffered  other  nations  to  walk  in 
their  own  ways.     Salvation  came  indeed  afterwards  to  the  Gentiles, 
but  how   many  have   remained  blind  and  hardened  I  How  few  arc 
there  of  those  called  Christians,  who  have  not  declined  to  Mahome- 
tan, Antichristian  and  Pelagian  errours  !  "Many  are  "  indeed  out- 
wardly "  called  "  to  fellowship  with  God,  "  but  few  are  chosen,'" 
Matt,  xxii,  14.     And  if  we  had  no  other  proof,   it  would  still  be  suf- 
ficicnily  evident,  that  few  will  be  saved,  from  the  general  ignorance, 
carihly-mindedness,  irreligiousncss  and  ungodliness  of  those  who 
profess  the  truth.     The  number  of  those  who  arc  saved  is  in  itself 
mdccd  "  a  multitude  which   no  man  can  number,"  Rev.  vii.  9,  but 
compared  with  those  who  arc  lost,  the  number  of  those  who  are 
•avcd  is  exceedingly  small- 


VII,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20—23.  isi 

But  how  are  they  saved  ?  without  any  act  of  their  own,  as  they 
Jperished  in  Adam?  No:  for  although  Christ   purchased  salvatioii 
for  them  without  any  act  ot  their  own,  ne'.crtheless  they  do  not  be- 
come partakers  of  the  purchased  salvation,  except  by  faith  :  ^he  word 
of  God  teacheth   us  this  every  where.     See  only  at  present,    *.u'.rk. 
xvi.  16.  John  ill.  i6,   36.  Acts  x   43.  xvi.  31.     Not  ihat  faith  is  au 
Sict  of  such  great  clignity,  but  (a)  because  the  t  lect  "  are  ingrafted 
inio  Christ,"  by  faith      Without  fairh  a  man  is  without  Christ,  an 
alien  from  the   commonweaLh  of  Israel,"  Sec.  Epl-es.  ii,   12,  and 
thus  like  '^  a  branch  separated  from  the  vine,  and  cast  forth,"  John 
XV.  6.     But  faith  unites  a  person  to  Christ,  and  *  Christ  dwells  in 
the  heart  by  fai';h,"  Eph-  iii.  17,  and  we  become  one   ^  Ian*:  ard  one 
body  with  him,  obtain  his  saving  influences;  and  are  reckoned,  as 
though  we  had  been  humbled  and  exalted  V/ith  him.  See  this  Rom. 
vi.  4,  5.  2  Cor.  v    15.  Gal.  ii.  20.  Eph>  n   5,  6.  (b)  Because  by  faith 
we  receive  Christ,  and  all  his  benefits,  as  will  appf^ar  l.ercafter.  And 
thus  we  appropriate  the  Saviour  and  his  purchased  salvation  to  our» 
selves,  and  therefore  we  possess  him,  and  thus  also  salvation  in  himc 
II.  It  would  naturally  follow  now,  that  \'e  should  inquire  wb?t  is 
the  proper  nature  of  faith  ;  bat  as  this  is  out  of  order,  unless  wt-  un* 
derstand  what  is  the  object  of  faith,  we  will  therefore  inquire  firstj 
what  is  necessary  for  a  Christian  to  believco     The  instructor  saith, 
<*  All  things  promised  us  in  the  gospel,"  Question  22.    "  All  that 
God  hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,"  Question  31.  God  hath  re- 
vealed also  his  law  with  its  threatenings  in  his  word  ;  but  the  law  is 
not  so  much  the  object  of  faith,  as  of  obedience.     We  must  believe 
the  threatenings,  but  a  belief  of  the  threatenings  cannot  save  a  per- 
son, but  condemn  him  :  it  renders  the  sinner  concerned)  but  it  doth 
not  show  him  the  way  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  tome.     A  belief 
therefore  of  the  pramises  of  the  gospel  is  necessary  to  salvation  ;  for 
they  show  the  sinner  that  he  may  obtain  grice  and  salvation  in  the 
Son  of  God  ;  they  offer  the  Saviour  to  him  for  salvation,  yea,  they 
promise  the  believer  perfect  salvation  in  him,  as  we  have  taught  on 
the  nineteenth  qiiestion. 

"  All  the  things  prortiised  in  the  gospel  are  briefly  taught  us  in 
the  articles  of  our  catholic  undoubted  Christian  faith,"  For  all  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  must  be  referred  to  God  the  Father,  and  our 
creation,  to  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption,  and  to  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  oiir  sanctificationo  This  is  the  way  in  which  Paul  pro- 
ceeds, 2  Cor.  xiii.  13  Thus  also  the  Lord  Jesus  doth,  when  he  com- 
mands us  to  baptize  tnose  w'.o  confess  him,  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
^d  sealto  them  in  this  mRDiiei  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  Matt,  xxviii. 

Z 


154  SAVING  FAITH. 

19.  For  which  reason  the  ancient  Christians  arlopreu  (l.ib  form  oj'  bap' 
tism  for  their  first  creed,  und  af'erwyrds  ihcv  composed  tht;irolh'*r  sum- 
inar>'  confessions  accord iiij;  to  the  tenor  of  this.  And  we  may  see 
in  wliat  manner  all  t'sc  promises  of  the  ^osDel  are  contained  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  in  the  exposition  of  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  by  out- 
church,  for  the  instruction  of  those  who  offer  their  children  for  bap- 
tism, which  is  also  read  to  them.*  The  iustructor  doth  therefore 
xindtrtake  to  explain  these  articles  according-  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  becanse  they  comprehend  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel, 
and  must  he  believed  to  salvation. 

It  doth  not  appear  at  all  probable  that  these  articles  Of  faith  were 
composed  by  the  apostles,  and  that  each  apostle  dictated  his  particu- 
lar article,  when  they  were  about  to  separate  from  one  another  at  Je- 
rusalem: for  Luke  mentions  nothin(>  of  this  in  the  acts  of  the  apos- 
tles. They  are  indeed  called  Syinbolum  j^/iostolorum,  the  aposlles* 
creed ;  but  not  because  they  were  composed  by  the  apostles,  but  ra- 
ther because  they  contain  a  brief  compend  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles. 

We  must  thcefore  not  look  upon  thera  as  the  infallible  word  of 
God,  but  only  a  brief  compend  of  the  doctrine  of  faith,  believed  and 
professed  by  the  catholic  church,  gathered  from  the  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, since  they  were  composed  according  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
particuialy  by  the  ancient  Christian  church,  while  she  was  not  yet 
infected  with  many  errours,  which  sprang  up  afterwards.  This 
creed,  or  confession  of  faith,  and  likewise  all  others,  composed  and 
explained  according  to  the  word  of  God,  serve  for  symbols  of  the 
a?;reemcnt  of  the  church  in  the  doctrine  of  the  truth  ;  they  are  also 
means  to  preserve  purity  of  doctrine,  and  to  detect  and  restrain  erro- 
neous persons,  who  may  arise  in  the  church.  But  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  constitute  a  person  a  believer,  and  qnolify  him  to  be  admitted  to 
mcmbers'iip  in  the  church,  shat  he  makes  a  verbal  confession  of 
th  J.  creed  ;  for  ti»ere  is  no  heretic,  however  erroneous,  who  will 
noc  confess  it  veriiaiiy,  ano  if  he  should  be  admitted  into  the  church 
upon  such  a  pretence,  would  he  not  excite  m^ch  confusion  and  dii- 
turbancc  in  the  church  ?  And  tn  ref^jrc  'his  creed  must  be  received 
an'l  confessed  accordnig  to  tn-  -xposiiion  of  the  word  of  Cjod,  for  it  is 
only  on  accuuni  ol  the  woid  of  God  that  it  is  worthy  to  be  believed 
a.nd  received. 

It  IS  not  only  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  that  is  the  object  of  faith, 
but  also  the  Loid  Jesus  ;.  hrist  himself  proposed  in  the  gospel  j  for 

•  The  author  means  the  reposition  of  the  passage  alledgcd  in  the  form  for 
the  adfliini&tration  of  bapusm  l»  infanti. 


Vli.  LOl^DS  DAY,  Q.  20— 23,  I5f 

"  we  believe  in  and  on  him,"  Acts  xvi.  31,  Eph.  iii.  12,  and  *'  re» 
ceive  him  by  faith,"  John  i.  12,  and  he  dwells  in  our  hearts  by 
faith,"  Eph.  iii.  17,  and  faith  rests  not  in  him,  but  passelh  through 
him  to  the  Father,  and  thus  '*  we  believe  by  him  in  God,"  1  Pe- 
ter i.  21. 

III.  We  may  now  easily  comprehend  "  what  true  faith  is."  Faith 
in  general  is  a  holding  of  the  word  or  testimony  of  a  person  to  be 
true  ;  and  when  he  salth  something,  in  which  we  are  interested,  a 
depending  on  h.is  words.  In  tiris  sense  is  faith  used  here  also  :  for 
by  faith  a  person  holds  the  testimony  of  God,  that  he  will  save  sin- 
ners, who  flee  to  Christ,  to  be  true,'  and  he  depends  upon  it.  The 
woid  faith  denotes  sometimes  indeed  the  doctrine  of  faith :  '*  Paul 
preached  the  faith  which  he  once  destroyed,"  Gal.  i.  23.  See  also 
Acts  VI.  7.  Jutle  vrs.  3,  but  it  commonly  signifies  a  working  act  of 
the  soul  with  respect  to  God,  and  Christ,  and  the  word  of  promise, 
and  in  this  sense  do  we  speak  of  faith  here. 

The  reason  wiiy  the  instructor  asks  just  concerning  "a  true,"  or 
a  saving  and  justiiying  faith,  called  also  "  an  unfeigned  faith,"  1  Tim. 
i.  5,  and  ''the  faith  of  God's  elect,"  I'itus  i.  I,  is  because  some  have 
only  a  pretended  faith,  and  all  faith  is  not  saving  ;  for  there  is  a  bare 
historical  faith,  by  wh-ch  a  person  acknowledgeth  the  divine  truths, 
with  a  certain  persuasion  of  mind,  to  be  true  and  divine,  without  be- 
ing influenced  thereby  to  an  earnest  endeavour  after  salvation,  ac- 
cording to  those  truths.  In  this  n  anner  "  Agrippa  believed  the 
prophets,"  Acts  xxvi  27.  This  is  called  a  historical  faith,  because 
it  is  a  holdi;ig  of  what  is  related  in  the  bible  to  be  true,  as  well  with 
respect  to  that  which  hath  happened,  as  to  that  which  is  promised 
concerning  present  and  future  matters.  If  any  one  will  rather  call 
this  historical  faith  a  speculative  faith,  or  a  faith  of  bare  assent,  we 
Tvill  not  object  to  it.  There  are  some,  who,  besides  this  historical 
faith,  possess  a  temporary  faith,  by  which  they  are  exceedingly  plea- 
sed with  the  divine  mysteries,  which  they  believe,  are  ravished  with 
them,  and  have  sometimes  an  unusual  relish  in  them  :  "  They  re- 
ceive the  word  anon  with  joy,"  Matt-  xiii.  20.  «  They  taste  the 
heavenly  gift,"  &c.  Heb.  vi.  4,  5.  "They  escape  for  a  while  the 
pollutions  of  the  world,"  2  Peter  ii.  20  Heb.  x.  29.  This  is  called 
a  temporary  faith,  mt  only  because  it  usually  endures  but  for  a 
time,  at  most  only  while  it  fares  well  with  the  church,  and  the  tem^ 
porary  believer  can  maintain  a  good  name  ;  but  also  because  it  is 
promoted  and  supported  by  the  temporary  things  of  honour,  plea- 
sure, and  profit.  And  therefore  we  must  not  think  with  the  Remon- 
strants, in  order  that  they  may  defend  their  doctrine  of  the  aposta<?y 


1^6  bAV^NG  KAITHc 

of  the  4aint3,  that  a  temporary  faith  is  of  the  same  nature  with  a. 
savinj^  iaita.  as  though  there  were  no  other  difference  between  a 
tenjporary  ami  a  saving  faith,  than  that  the  one  ceaseth  after  a  time^ 
but  the  other  encJurct  i  lo  the  end  :  for  a  temporary  faith  is  essen- 
tially diHcre^it  from  a  saving  faiih,  in  as  much  as  it  remains  "with- 
out loo:  in  a  stony  hcuii,  and  doth  not  bring  forth  good  fruits ;"  but 
it  is  altogether  different  with  a  saving  faith.  See  Mai.  xiii.  23.  Luke 
viii.  t5.  he  true  believer  '<  hath  better  things,  and  such  as  accom- 
pany suhation,"  lleb.  \\.9.  Some  have  besides  this  also  a  faith  of 
nii.in  les,  iiv  which  they  trust,  in  consequence  of  some  speci  .1  pro 
miseofGod,  or  some  extraordinary  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
that  t.ome  miracle  will  be  performed,  either  by  theri),  or  upon  them. 
See  -Ua:.  xviii.  20.  A' ark  ix.  22,  23,  24.  A  person  may  have 
such  a  fait;  .  a.d  not  possess  a  saving  faith,  as  v/e  may  see  Mat  vii» 
23.     1  Cor.  xiii  2. 

This  saving  laith  consists   in  three  acts  of  the  soul,  which  it 

exerts. 

I.  "*  In  a  knowledge  of  what  God  hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  wordo 
It  is  scarcely  possible  that  every  believer  should  know  all  things  ; 
the  best  *^  knows  but  in  part,"  I  Cor.  xiii  9.  But  if  a  person  shall 
believe,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  know  the  fundamental  tmthso 
These  are  those  (a)  which  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  calls  the  founda- 
tiof)  ;^b)  with  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  which  salvation  is  insepa- 
rahly  connected  ;(e)  which  are  the  foundation  and  support  of  other 
revealed  dociiines,  and  (d)  which  teach  the  true  practice  of  piety. 
We  si.all  not  explain  these  marks  of  the  fundamental  truths  at  pres- 
ent, for  we  have  done  this  in  our  "mystery  of  God's  covenants," 
page  5,  6,  7.  \Ve  say  now  only,  that  in  order  to  believe  to  salvation, 
-./c  must  know  how  great  our  sins  and  misery  are,  how  we  may  be 
delivered  from  our  misery,  and  how  we  shall  express  our  gratitude 
to  God  for  such  deliverance. 

Every  behever  knows  and  understands  these  things  more  or  less, 
not  only  wuh  a  literal  knowledge,  but  irradiated  with  the  light  of 
God  ;  he  sees  into  the  things  themselves,  he  beholds  God  and  Christ 
and  not  only  his  word,  although  by  the  word,  by  which  his  mind  is 
drawn  forth  toward  the  Lord,  is  united  to  him,  changed  into  conform- 
ity to  him,  and  Wi»rmcd  with  love  to  him  :  "  For  God,  who  com- 
manded the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  shines  in  his  heart,  to 
give  the  light  of  the  knowle'Jge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of 
lesus  C:hrist,"  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  See  also  Psalm  xxxvi.  9.  2  Cor.  iii.  Ig. 
(Icb.  xi.  27 


Vir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20— 23o  15^ 

We  will  not  determine  precisely  whether  this  knowledge  be  a 
proper  act  of  I'aith.  It  is  certain,  that  the  soul,  when  she  exerciseth 
faith,  exerts  a  certain  activity  in  knowing  and  contemplating  her 
objects,  as  well  as  in  any  other  act  of  faith.  It  is  also  abundantly  evi- 
dent, that  no  man  can  believe  while  he  doth  not  know  the  object  of 
his  faith.  We  must  therefore  detest  popery,  which  asserts  that  au 
implicit  faith  is  sufficient,  to  wit,  when  a  person  only  believes  as  the 
church  beheves,  without  knowing  what  the  church  believes,  or  whe- 
ther her  faith  be  good  ;  yea,  the  prpists  conceive  that  faith  can  be 
described  better  by  ignorance,  than  knowledge,  and  that  ignorance  is 
the  mother  of  devotion.  Arrant  folly  1  but  in  this  manner  do  they 
retain  souls  in  blindness  and  in  bondage.  How  can  we  beheve  a 
person,  when  v/e  do  not  understand  whcft  he  saith  ?  "  I'aith  corneth 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God,"  Rom,  x.  1 7.  Must 
we  not  then  understand  what  we  hear  ?  Justifying  and  saving  faith 
is  called  knowledge,  Isaiah  liii.  11.  John  x'-di  3.  "The  soul  with- 
out knowledge  is  not  good,"  Prov.  xix.  2.  Ignorance  is  the  cause 
of  evtry  evil  action.  Because  "  the  princes  of  this  world  knew  not 
the  wisdom  of  God,  therefore  they  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,'* 

1  Cor.  ii.  7,  8.     "  Ignorance  alienates  the  sinner  from  the  lif-r  of 
God,"  Eph.  iv.  18.    "  God  will  punish  ignorance  with  flaming  fire," 

2  Thes.  i.  8,  and  "  he  will  not  have  mercy  on  a  people  of  ro  under- 
standing, nor  show  them  any  favour,"  Isaiah  xxvii.  1 1. 

2.  The  second  act  of  faith  i-  assent,  or  '*  a  certain  knowledge 
whereby  a  person  holds  for  truth  all  that  God  reveals  to  him  in  his 
word."  This  assent  we  may  also  call  a  historical  faith,  (although  it 
is  wholly  different  from  the  historical  faith  of  the  unconverted,  as 
we  will  see  more  particularly  in  the  sequel).  By  which  a  person 
receives  upon  certain  evidences,  and  upon  the  testimony  of  God,  as  a 
real,  divine,  and  acceptable  truth,  that  which  is  revealed  to  him  in 
the  word  of  God.  *'  This  is  called  "  receiving  the  testimony  of 
God,  and  setting  to  our  seal  that  God  is  tme,"  John  iii.  33.  "  a  full 
assurance  of  understanding,"  Coll.  ii.  2,  '*  an  acknowledging  of  the 
truth,"  2  Tim.  ii.  35.  W  hereby  the  soul  entertains  such  an  assu- 
rance of  the  invisible  thini^s,  discovered  in  the  word  of  God,  as  if 
3he  saw  them  with  her  eyes,  and  heard  with  her  ears  God  speak  of 
them  to  her  with  his  own  mouth  ;  in  consequence  of  which  she  can 
depend  upon  the  promises  of  God  as  upon  firm  and  immovable  foun- 
dations, and  expect  happiness  of  every  kind  from  him  :  for  "  this 
faith  is  a  sure  foundation  of  things  hoped  for,  and  an  evidence  of 
things  not  seen.  By  this  faith  Moses  had  respect  unto  the  recom- 
pence  of  the  reward,  and  endnrf  dap  seeing  him  who  is  invisible," 


1^8  SAVING  FAITH. 

Heb.  xi.  \y  26,  27,     And  therefore  this  faith  is  ©pposed  to  *'  doubting 
concerning  the  promises  of  God,"    Rom.  iv.  18,  21. 

The  reason  why  our  mind  receives  as  true  and  divine  all  that  God 
hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,  is  not  because  the  church,  or  our  o\vt. 
human  reason  teaches  and  commands  it  ;  for  then  our  belief  of  the 
divine  truth  would  not  depend  upon  a; divine  authority,  but  upon 
men,  and  upon  our  own  imagination.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the 
church  showeth  us  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  scriptures,  and  that 
reason  is  the  mean  by  which  we  apprehend  it :   but  nothing  that  is 
human  can  persuade  and  oblige  us  to  believe  the  truth  and  divinity 
of  the  scriptures  :  but  the   believer  holds   all  this  to  be  true  and  di- 
vine, on  account  of  the  evidences  of  the  truth  and  divinity  which  ap- 
pear in  the  word  itself,  and  offer  themselves  to  the    attentive  inqui- 
rer.    Therefore  we  are  directed,  in  order  that  we  may  believe,  not 
to  the  church,  or  to  our  own  reason,  but  only  to  the  word  of  Cod. 
See  Isaiah  xxxiv  16.  John  v.    39.  Acts  xvii    1 1.     The  evidences  of 
the  truth  of  scripture  are  particularly  the  credibility  of  the  prophets 
and  apostles,  who  testified,  without  regard  to  their  private  interest, 
"  that  which  they  had  saen  with  their  eyes,  and  handled    with  their 
hands,"  1  John  i.  1,2,  3,  and  they  confirmed  their  testimony  by  eve- 
ry mean,  yea,  by  suffering  the  most  painful  death.     The  evidences 
of  the  divinity  of  the  holy  scriptures  are  the   prophecies  of  future 
events,  w^hich  have  been  fulfilled  in  their  proper  time  ;   and  also  the 
miracles,  by  which  God  confirmed  his  doctrine.     To  all  this  we  must 
add  a  po\yerful  conviction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  he  illustrates 
those  evidences,  so  that  we  can  understand  them,  and  by  which  he 
conveys  and  wjorks  the  grace  and  truth  which  the  scripture  propo- 
seth,  in  our  hearts,  and  produces  thus  a  perfect  assurance.     See  hew 
Paul  teaches  this,  I  Thess.  i.  5,   "  Our  gospel  came  not  to   you  in 
word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  ip  much 
assurance,"  1  Thess.  ii.  13.  "Ye  received  the  word  of  God  which 
ye  heard  of  us,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  (as  it  is  in  truth)  the 
word  of  God,  which  effectually  worIj.eth    also  in  you  that  believe." 
And  so  *'  the  Spirit   beareth   witness   that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth." 
1  John  V.  6.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  mind  suffers  grievous  as- 
saults, when  itexerciseth  this  faith,  that  the  flesh   and  the  devil  at- 
tack one  sometimes  with  horrible,  yea,  blasphemous  injections,   by 
which  the  faith  of  the   soul  is   exceedingly   shaken ;    but  we  must 
know  that  a  historical  faith  hath    also   its  imperfections,   yea,  that 
these  shakings  tend,  by  the  wise  and  powerful  ordination  of  God,  to 
inroot  this  faith  more  firmly  and  deeply  in  the  soul ;   since  the  soul, 
shaken  in  this  manner,  endeavours  so  much  tlie  more  to  surmount 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— 2S.  15^ 

these  doubtings,  to  look  about  for  solid  grounds,  and  to  settle  herself 
upon  them. 

3.  The  mind  assured  in  this  manner  of  the  divine  revelation,  exer- 
cises also  confidence  in  acting  faith.  The  instructor,  in  order  to 
teach  the  assurance  of  believers  concerning-  their  salvation,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  Papists,  describes  their  confidence  in  its  highest  degree, 
and  in  its  most  improved  condition,  (as  we  are  used  to  do,  when  we 
describe  things  in  their  greatest  perfection)  saying  "  An  assured  con- 
fidence, that  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  me,  remission  of  sin, 
everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation,  are  freely  given  by  God,"  &c. 
Now  since  such  a  confidence  doth  not  consist  in  an  imagination,  by 
which,  with  the  Remonstrants,  we  hold  it  for  a  certain  truth,  that 
Christ  hath  died  for  me  and  all  men,  because  we  should  then  work 
by  our  faith  only  with  ourselves,  and  not  with  Christ,  and  through 
him  with  God,  contrary  to  what  we  have  taught  and  proved  before  ; 
therefore  it  follows  that  something  else  must  precede  this  confidence, 
by  which  we  obtain  such  a  happy  interest  in  Christ,  and  from  which 
we  may  conclude  upon  sufficient  foundations,  that  remission  of  sins, 
&c.  is  freely  given,  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  us.  That  which 
then  constitutes  the  proper  act  of  a  confiding  faith,  is  that  confiden- 
tial assent  to  the  proffer  of  the  crucified  Mediator,  by  which  the  be- 
lieving soul  doth  with  the  highest  satisfaction  approve  of  God's  me- 
thod of  saving  the  sinner  through  the  sufferings  of  his  Son,  chooses 
the  Saviour  for  herself,  owns  him,  and  rests  wholly  upon  him  for 
salvation 

In  order  to  explain  this  somewhat  more  fully,  we  will  eye  the  soul, 
in  her  acts  of  faith.  The  soul  being  so  concerned,  perplexed,  and 
anxious,  as  we  have  seen,  in  explaining  the  twelfth  question,  hears 
indeed  of  an  allsufficicnt  Saviour;  but  it  doth  not  relieve  her,  be- 
cause she  is  too  much  distressed,  and  fears  that  he  is  not  for  her* 
Is  she  informed  that  he  offers  himself  to  her,  and  that  he  calls  and 
invites  her  to  him,  she  dares  not  however  believe  it,  on  account  of 
her  unworthiness.  But  the  Lord  penetrating  effectually  into  the 
soul,  persuades  her  by  a  historical  faith,  and  by  working  an  assent 
in  her  through  his  word  and  Spirit,  and  he  assures  her  that  he  in- 
tends her  also  in  his  call  and  invitation.  She  believes  this,  and  is 
thus  persuaded  in  a  powerful  manner,  to  comply  with  this  method 
of  salvation,  and  is  willing  that  the  Lord  God,  sin*  c  he  manifests 
himself  so  favourable  to  her,  should  fulfil  in  her  all  the  good  pleasure 
of  his  goodness,  she  surrenders  herself  Tto  him  for  this  purpose, 
and  saith  with  Marv,   **  Behold  the   handmaid  of  the   Lord,  be  it 


160  iAVING  FAITH. 

unto  me  according;  to  thy  word/'   Luke  i-  38,     And  she  thus  *^  su}^ 
inits  herself  to  the  n:.hteousncss  of  God"  in  Chribt,  Rom.  x.  3.   She 
conducts  in  this  transaction,  as  a  maid,  "who  being  kindly  addressed 
by  a  young  man,  and  persutidec  by  him,  cheerf.lly  consent?  to  hii 
proposal,  owns  and  accepts  of  him  as  her  husband,  and  enters  into 
an   entitlement   to  be   his    wife  daring  her  life-      Jesus  allures 
the  soul,  and    speaks  kindly  to   her,  the   soul,   believing   by   her 
act  of  consent,  that  he  means  what  he  saith  to  her,  yields  herself 
up  to  him  by  her  faith  of  confidence,  owns  and   chooses  him    for 
her  bridegroom  and  husband,  and  surrenders  herself  tot^im  to  be 
his  bride  and  spouse  for  ever,  and   **  she  is  thus  betrothed  to  him 
in  faith,"   Hosea  ii.  13,  20.     By  faith  "  she  says  and  subscribes,  I 
am  the  Lord's,"  Isaiah  xlv.  5.     Yea,  her  faith  is  as  it  were  a  giving 
of  her  hand  to  the  Lord,  an  espousing  of  herself  to  the  Lord,  as   it 
were,  by  a  solemn  taking  of  his  hand,  and  by  an  oath,  2  Chron.  xxx. 
8,  by  which  "  the  Lord  brings  her  into  the  bond  of  covenant,'*  Ezek. 
XX.  37. 

We  cannot  contemplate  the  power  of  this  act  of  faith,  unless  v/e 
attend  to  several  things,  which  are  contained  in  it,  and  to  the  em- 
phasis of  the  expressionrin  the  word  of  God  that  relate  to  it.  And 
therefore  we  v/lU  busy  ourselves  a  little  with  eyeing  the  soul  in  the 
active  exercise-  of  her  faith  and  confidenise,  and  exhibit  in  the  mean 
time  the  eniphasis  of  the  phrases  used  in  the  word  of  God,  both  in 
Hebrew  and  Greek. 

1.  Previous  to  this  act  of  faith,  there  is  a  general  confidence  and 
issurance  of  this  evangelical  truth,  that  he  who  believes  in  Christ 
shall  surely  be  saved  ;  yea,  the  soul  confides  in  this  for  herself,  that 
if  she  believe  she  shall  certainly  be  saved;  by  which  s' e  is  also 
encouraged  to  come  to  Christ.  See  this  in  Bartimeus,  Mark  x.  49, 
50,  5  L  Many  believe  this  indeed  as  a  p:eneral  truth,  but  they  do 
not  regard  it  to  their  salvation  ;  but  the  believer  is  affected  with  it 
in  such  a  manner,  that  he  ^eeks  .>nd  finds  the  favour  of  his  Savioui 
for  himself.  The  sinner  hath  s©mfe^-mes  such  a  sight  and  sense  cf 
his  misery,  that  he  fcarS  there  will  be  no  mercy  for  him,  and  the 
reprobate  sinks  under  it  into  despair,  and  doth  not  attend  to  the  prof- 
fered grace  :  "  He  makes  God  a  liar,  because  he  believes  not  the 
record  which  God  hath  given  of  his  Son,"  1  John  v.  10.  But  the  elect, 
who  have  the  spirit  of  faith,  struggle  against  these  discouragements^ 
and  surmount  them,  and  they  attend  to  this  truth,  until  they  obtain 
i&n  assured  interest  in  Christ. 

2.   To  this  is  added  a  strong,  active,  and  restless  desire  for  the 
Mediator  and  his  salvation,  in  order  that  we  may  partake  of  him  and 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20—23.  161 

his  benefits.  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  saith,  "  If  any  man  thirst, 
kt  him  come  unto  me  and  drink  ;  he  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the 
scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  livinj;  wa- 
ter," John  vii  37,  38.  The  soul  sees  indeed  a  sufficiency  in  Jesus, 
and  that  he  is  able  to  remove  all  her  sinful  misery,  and  hem.e  she 
vehemently  thirsts  for  him,  sighs  and  cries  to  him,  that  he  n.ay  be 
gracious  to  her,  and  receive  her.  See  this  Psalm  xlii.  1,  2,  Matt. 
»xv.  21,  29. 

3.  Add  to  this,  that  there  is  in  this  exercise  an  actual  turning  of 
ourselves  to  him.  "This  is  called  "  a  coming  to  him,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
24.  By  which  (a)  a  person,  like  one  who  is  without  strength,  and 
unable  to  break  through  to  him,  and  draw  near  to  him,  only  looks  to 
him  from  afar,  and  shows  himself  to  him,  that  he  may  have  mercy 
on  such  a  miserable  wretch,  who  cries  to  him  out  of  the  depths," 
Psalm  cxxx.  1.  Or  (b)  as  one,  who  is  wholly  wretched,  he  casts 
himself  into  his  hands,  that  he  may  execute  his  office  of  Saviour  upon 
the  soul  ;  and  he  thus  suffers  himself  to  be  saved,  as  the  Saviour  ad- 
monisheth,  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  saved,"  which 
implies,  suffer  yourselves  to  be  saved  and  reconciled.  See  also  2 
Cor.  V.  20.  Or  (c)  as  one  who  is  pursued  and  urged  by  fear,  he 
flees  to  him,  that  he  may  sl)elter  himself  with  him,  and  be  hid- 
den from  destruction  :  '*  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower, 
the  righteous  rur.neth  into  it,  and  is  safe."  Prov.  xviii.  10.  The  He- 
brews to  denote  this,  make  use  of  the  word  chazahy  which  is  rendered 
sometimes  "  taking  refuge,"  and  at  other  times  *•  trusting."  We 
meet  with  both  expressions,  Psalm  Ivii.  1,  for  we  find  here  a  secure 
shelter  and  a  quiet  confidence.  Or  (d)  a  person,  after  proper  delib- 
eration, actually  enters  in  and  through  him  into  the  covenant,  in  or- 
der to  become  his  property,  that  he  may  rest  only  in  him,  and  live 
to  him,  Jsaitdi  Iv.  3.  Thus  ''he  saith  and  subscribes  with  his  hand, 
I  am  the  Lord's,'-  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  And  "  he  enters  into  the  cove- 
nant," Deut.  xxix.  12.  2  Chron.  xv.  12. 

4.  There  is  also  in  this  exercise  of  faith,  a  receiving  of  the  promi- 
ses, which  a  person  apprehends,  appropriates  to  himself,  depends 
upon,  and  improves,  in  order  to  exhibit  his  claims  to  the  Lord,  like 
David,  Psalm  cxix.  49.  *'  Remember  the  word  unto  thy  servant, 
upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope,"  and  also  a  receiving  of 
the  Mediator  hinjself,  of  whom  he  "  takes  hold,  as  the  strength  of 
God,"  Isaiah  xxvii-  5,  "receives,"  John  i.  12,  and  owns  for  his, 
Song  ii.  16.  A  person  unites  himself  to  him,  and  admits  him  to 
«  dwell  in  his  heart  by  fyith,"  Eph.  iii.  17. 

5.  Finally,  there  is  4iso  a  committing  of  ourselves  to  the  Lordi  and 


W2  SAVING  FAITH 

a  relying'  upon  liim  m  every  condition.  Tt/15  U  'jignified  by  the 
Greek  nord  /izateuo,  ^'  I  believe,"  which  is  often  translated  a  com- 
mittin:>^  of  aughr  to  a  person.  See  Romtiii.  2.  1  Cor.  ix  17.  Thus 
also  the  Hebrew  word  batach  signifieth  a  risting  and  setthng  of  our- 
selves on  the  Lord,  as  a  steadfast  foundation  stone,  in  seasons  of  dan- 
ger, and  when  we  might  easily  be  shaken  and  despond.  It  is  said 
of  the  righteous,  Psalm  cxii.  7,  "  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  ti- 
dings ;  his  heart  is  iixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord,"  and  Isaiah  xxvi.  4. 
»*  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever  ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  there  is 
everlasting  strength."  The  soul  wlio  confides,  remains  quiet,  and 
rests  in  the  Lord  under  trouble,  Isaiah  ^xx.  15.  Of  no  less  empha- 
sis is  the  word  keemin^  which  signifies  a  sufferinj^  of  one's  self  to  be 
carried  and  fed  like  a  child,  that  rests  upon  the  arms,  arid  in  the  bosom 
of  a  nurse,  and  trusts  and  commits  itself  to  her  without  concern. 
This  word  is  translated  '*  trusting,"  Job.  xv.  31,  but  most  commrnly 
'^  believing,"  See  Gen.  xv.  6,  and  it  is  opposed  to  an  anxious  and 
concerned  hasiening,  Isaiah  xxviii.  16,  "He  that  believeth  shall  rot 
make  haste."  The  beUever  will  be  more  or  less  employed  in  one 
or  another  act  of  fnilh,  accordimr  as  he  is  disposed  in  this  or 
tha:  manner,  is  more  or  less  advanced  or  influenced  by  the  Spirit 
of  faith. 

From  this  exercise  of  fai  h  and  confidence  follows  also  assurariccj 
and  "  an  assured  confidence,  that  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  my- 
self,  remission  of  sins,  everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation  are 
freely  given  by  God  merely  of  grace,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  mer- 
itsi"  Every  believer  is  not  always  assured,  neither  is  faith  assu* 
ranee  itself;  but  assurance  floweth  in  a  greater  or  less  proportion 
from  the  exercise  of  faith.  For,  (a)  not  only  have  eminent  believers 
possessed  assurance,  but  also  ordinary  believers,  as  is  testified,  Job. 
xix.  25,  26,  27,  I  Cor.  i.  30.  2  Cor.  v.  1.  "We  know  that  if  our 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building 
of  God,"  Sec.  The  exercise  of  faith  is  also  a  rational  act  of  the  soul, 
which  is  conscious  of  her  operations,  knowing  what  she  doth,  and 
being  able  to  say,  ''  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,"  1  Tim.  i. 
12.(c)  It  is  indeed  true,  that  imexperienced  believers  dare  not  en- 
tertain assurance  through  their  prejudice  against  God's  work  of 
grace,  and  their  matfention,  as  they  do  not  give  sufficient  heed  to  the 
work  of  the  Lord  in  the  soul,  or  because  they  are  young,  and  do 
not  yet  know  the  voice  of  the  Lord  The  Holy  Spirit  will  neverthe- 
less sometimes,  and  at  least  finally,  afford  them  a  steadfast  assurance 
by  enabling  them  to  form  a  believing  syllogism  \  for  he  assures 
them  from  the  word,  that  "  he  who  believeth  on  Jesus  shall  be  sa- 


--2S.  Ut 

ved  ;"  for  "•  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth/ 
1  John  V  6.  He  enables  them  also  to  perceive  in  their  heaits  that 
they  do  truly  believe  ;  for  "  they  receive  the  Spirit  which  is  of 
God,  that  they  may  i^now  the  things  that  are  freely  given  them  of 
God."  He  causeth  them  to  infer  therefrom  that  they  shall  also  be 
paved  :  for  *'  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  vdtness  witii  our  spirit,  that  we 
are  the  children  of  God,"  Rom.  viii.  16, 

The  Papists  imagine  that  such  an  assurance  is  only  a  presump= 
;uous  conceit,  because  we  cannot  find  any  where  such  a  special  prom- 
ise to  this  or  that  person,  as  Peter  and  Paul  had,  that  he  shall  be  sa- 
red  ;  but  the  proniises  are  made  to  them  who  believe  ;  when  there- 
fore any  person,  upon  looking  into  himself,  is  conscious  that  he  be- 
lieves, he  should  undoubtedly  assure  himself  tliat  he  shall  also  be 
saved,  and  that  v/ith  as  much  certainty^  as  if  he  were  addressed  by 
name  in  the  word  of  God. 

We  must  distinguish  the  exercise  of  a  believer's  faith,  according; 
to  the  degree  of  his  assurance.  And  so  we  contemplate  it  as  an  ex- 
ercise  of  faitii  *•  unto  '  justification,  and  to  the  obtaining  cf  salvation, 
and  "from"  justification  and  salvation  already  obtained.  *'  The  ex^ 
ercise  of  faith  to  justification,"  is  that  which  an  unexperienced  and 
weak  believer,  who  hath  not  yet  a  perfect  and  steadfast  assurance,  ex- 
erts, in  order  that  he  m.ay  be  justified  and  saved,  Gal.  ii.  16. 
"  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but 
by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  ; 
that  we  might  be  justified."  Doth  the  believer  once  attain  to  assu- 
rance, he  is  however  frequently  unsettled  by  his  improper  behaviour, 
his  darkness,  and  his  poring  on  his  misery,  and  he  thinks  that  his 
former  assurance  was  only  a  conceit :  and  tlierefore  he  will  continu- 
ally endeavour  to  exercise  faith  auew,  he  hungers  and  thirsts,  he 
runs  and  flies  to  Jesus,  he  surrenders  himself  to  him,  and  accepts  of 
him  until  his  soul  is  reduced  to  her  sweet  rest  again  ;  and  he  doth 
this  so  often,  and  so  long  a  time,  that  he  attains  unto  a  settled  assu- 
rance. "  The  exercise  of  faith  from  justification,"  is  that  which  is 
exerted  by  a  person,  who  is  further  advanced,  and  who  possesses  a 
steadfast  assurance,  that  he  is  truly  justified  and  saved  by  God,  and 
hath  an  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  all  his  saving  benefits: 
whereby  he  exerciseth  faith  in  him,  as  one  who  is  entitled  to  all  his 
salvation,  and  who  hath  therefore  "  in  him  boldness  and  access,  with 
confidence  by  the  faith  of  him,"  Eph.  iii.  12.  This  exercise  of 
faith  is  otherwise  called  "  a  living  and  walking  by  faith,"  in  opposi- 
tion to  <^  sight,"  Hab.  ii.  4.  2  Cor.  v.  7.  And  it  is  performed, 
1.  By  a  repeated  re-establishing  of  the  interrupted  reconciliati«B 


164  SAVING  FAITH. 

'  and  peace  of  mind  by  laying  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  pleading  him 
and  his  whole  salvation  before  the  Father,  witn  ^^  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God,  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Ciirist 
from  thi;  dead,"  1  Peter  iii    21, 

2.  by  mixing  fai'h  with  the  word,  and  making  use  of  it  in  all 
cases,  ai  o\>v  food,  feeding  at  it  were  upon  it,  Jer,  xv.  16.  Heb.  iv    2. 

3.  I?y  a  iVequenr  exercise  of  either  a  stronger  or  we.-ker  act  of 
faitti  on  Christ,  as  the  breathing  of  the  soul,  and  tlms  ''  from  faith  to 
fa:th,"  Horn.  i.  17. 

4.  By-  continually  uniting  ourselves  to  him,  sucking  from  his  ful- 
ness taroii^h  the  conduits  of  the  promises  against  every  calamity. 
GaJ.  ii.  20   John  i.  16 

5.  by  rejoxinvj  through  f  lith  in  our  happy  interest  in  God,  1  Peter 
1.  8,  li":  the  Ethiopian,  Acts  viii.  :>9.  and  the  gaoler,  Acts  xv.  34. 

6.  y  ordering  oui'  w'qIh  conversation,  what  we  do,  and  what  we 
forocr,  in  faith,  from  a  persuasion  of  ti.e  will  of  God,  and  with  a 
dependence  on  ins  ''  help,  which  he  hath  laid  upon  one  who  is 
mighty,"  Rom.  iv.  23.  Eph.  vi    10. 

7.  By  r  lying  through  faiti  on  his  promises,  and  expecting  all  the 
promised  salvation  with  patience  and  moderation,  though  it  appear 
ever  so  dark,  Psalm  xxvii.  13,  14.  Rom.  iv.  18    Heb.  x.  36,    37    38. 

8.  By  conducting  ourselves  courageously  through  faith  in  the 
greatest  dangers,  and  submitting  willingly  to  every  suffering  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  1  Sam   xxx.  6    Psalm  xxiii.  4.  Heb-  xi.  24 — 27. 

When  we  consider  all  these  particulars,  we  cannot  doubt  that  faith 
is  an  act,  not  only  of  the  underst-mding  and  judgment,  but  also  of 
the  will.  For  it  is  active,  not  only  with  respect  lo  its  object,  as  a 
trutli,  as  the  word  is,  but  also  as  a  benefit,  to  wit,  Christ  and  all  his 
benefits  ;  faitlj  is  not  only  an  immanent  act  of  the  soul,  but  a  tran- 
sient act,  which  goeth  out  toward  Christ  and  his  Father,  and  so  far 
faiih  is  an  act  of  the  will ;  and  truly  faith  is  like  the  y^aword  of  a 
maid,  who  hath  been  persuaded  and  consents  willingly  to  her  mar- 
riage. 

APPLICATION. 

How  happy  are  they  who  possess  this  faith  !  they  are  pronounced 
blessed,  Psalm  ii.  12.  "Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in 
him  "  It  is  ''  a  precious  faith,"  2  Peter  i.  !•  We  are  delivered  by  it 
from  condemnation,  John  v.  24.  Rom  viii.  1.  We  obtain  a  happy 
interest  in  the  Son  of  God  and  all  his  benefits,  we  become  children 
of  God,  are  justifted,  sanctified,  saved.,  how  abominable  soever  we 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— 2.Sv  165 

«re  in  ourselves,  John  i.  12.  Rom  iv.  5,  8.  Acts  xv.  9.  John  iii.  16, 
36.  ii  renders  all  our  actions  good  and  acceptable  to  God,  tl.ough 
they  are  abominable  and  loatlisome  "  without  faith,"  Rom.  xiv.  23* 
Heb-  xi.  6.  There  is  a  wonderful  power  in  faith  to  effect  great  things- 
See  this  Heb.  xi.  "It  can  do  all  things,"  Philip  iv.  13.  Mark  ix. 
13  It  causeth  Christ  to  "dwell  in  the  heart,"  Eph  iii.  17  It  ap- 
propriates every  promise,  it  claims  for  its  own  whatsoever  it  lays 
hold  on,  and  it  obtains  an  answer  to  our  pi  ayers ;  "  What  things 
soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  them,  and  ye 
shall  have  them,"  Mark  xi.  24.  "  It  overcometh  the  world,"  John  v» 
4.  "  Every  man,"  said  Cyprian,  "  obtains,  according  to  the  promises 
of  the  Lord,  as  much  help  of  God,  as  he  believes  that  he  will 
obtain.'* 

Since  then  salvation,  and  all  kinds  of  happiness  are  annexed  to 
faith,  ought  not  every  one  to  consider  his  ways,  and  with  the  i^reat- 
est  attention  examine  himself,  and  inquire  *•  whether  he  be  in  the 
faith,  and  whether  Jesus  Christ  be  in  liim,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Therefore 
impress  it  upon  your  miuds,  that  every  baptized  professor  of  the 
truth  doth  not  possess  faith  ;  for  "  all  men  have  not  faith,"  2  Tl-ess* 
iii.  2,  "but  only  the  elect  of  God,"  Titus  i.  1.  Therefore  "examine 
youi'selves  strictly,  ye  listless  people ;  before  the  decree  bring  forth, 
before  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 
come  upon  you,  before  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come  upon  you," 
Zeph.  ii.  1,  2. 

Do  ye  ask,  How  shall  we  know  whether  we  have  this  faith  or  not? 
it  is  evident  that  those  have  not  faith,  (a)  who  are  ignorant ;  for 
faith  implies  knowledge,  (b)  Who  remain  in  themselves,  and  arc 
never  concerned  how  they  shall  be  saved,  and  in  this  respect  arc 
neither  "  cold  nor  hot,  but  lukewarm,"  Rev.  iii  15.  (c)  Who  are 
ungodly,  and  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  "  The  abominable  and 
disobedient  are  unbdievers,"  Titus  i.  15.  16.  (d)  Who  are  indeed 
not  s*  abominable,  and  would  fain  enter  into  heaven,  but  do  not  do 
the  least  thing  for  that  purpose,  as  if  they  were  to  be  saved  by  Christ 
as  they  perished  in  Adam,  and  therefore  they  venture  upon  a  gene- 
ral grace  of  God,  and  death  of  Christ.  Doth  any  one  convince  thenx 
that  they  will  be  lost,  if  they  act  thus,  they  comfort  themselves,  be- 
cause they  are  not  so  ungodly  as  this  and  that  person,  but  are  civil 
and  rehgious,  hke  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12.  "  But  without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  Heb  xi.  (e)  Those  who  have 
an  erroneous  notion  of  faith  One  thinks  because  he  is  not  a  Jew, 
heathen,  or  Mahometan,  that  he  is  therefore  a  believer  ;  another, 
because  he  doubts  not  concerning;  the  word  of  God,  but  believes  it 


l^b  ,-  SAVING  F AITK. 

^rmly,  imagines  that  he  hath  a  saving  faith  ;  a  third  fondly  conceits 
and  forces  himself  to  believe  that  he  will  be  saved,  and  this  will  then 
be  his  faith ;  but  "  he  feedeth  upon  ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath 
turned  him  aside,  so  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor  say,  is  there 
not  a  lie  in  my  ripjat  hand  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 

These  things  are  so  plain  and  palpable,  that  they  who  are  such 
persons,  as  we  have  described,  may  find  without  labour  that  they 
have  not  this  faith.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to  convince  a  temporary 
^liever  of  this,  since  he  may  have  very  many  good  things,  which 
greatly  resemble  the  woik  of  sincere  believers :  for  he  may  be  ex- 
ceedingly sorry  for  his  sins  with  Cain,  Esau,  Saul,  Ahab  apd  Judas ; 
he  may  "  gladly  hear  "  a  zealous  preacher,  and  be  moved  to  "  do 
many  things"  with  Herod,  Mark  vi.  20.  He  may  have  a  great  knowl- 
edge and  belief  of  the  truth,  yea,  receive  Jesus  after  his  manner : 
^' He  may  be  enlightened,  taste  the  heavenly  gift,  be  made  a  par- 
taker of  the  Holy  Giiost,  taste  the  good  word  of  God.  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come,  and  yet  fall  away,"  Heb.  vi.  4,  5.  He  may 
also  be  unblamable,  join  himself  to  the  society  of  the  godly,  like 
Judas  and  Demas,  and  "  give  his  body  to  be  burned"  for  the  truth, 
and  yet  not  do  his  work  in  truth,  and  not  possess  "  a  faith  that  work- 
eth  by  love,"  1  Cor.  xiii,  3,  by  which  means  he  attains  to  a  fond 
imagination,  that  he  is  already  a  most  eminent  believer. 

But  tl'irtt  he  may  yet  be  convinced,  at  leas^,  that  true  believers  may 
see  the  reality  of  this  work,  v/e  will  exhibit  certain  evidences  of  a  sin- 
cere work  of  faith,  in  opposition  to  the  work  of  temporary  believers ; 
•vhich  evidences  we  will  not  derive  from  any  circumstances,  nor 
from  the  degrees  of  faiih,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  work  of  grace 
and  of  faith,  as  it  is  found  m  every  believer,  and  in  believers  only. 

1.  The  true  believer  hath  a  spiritual  knowledge,  whereby  he  not 
only  apprehends  the  words  and  mysteries  of  scripture,  as  they  occur 
therein,  but  also  contemplates  the  things  themselves,  God,  Christ 
and  the  life  hidden  v/ith  God  :  "  he  sees  the  light  in  God's  light," 
Psalm  xxxvi.  9j  although  his  knowledge  be  ever  so  small.  We  have 
shown  this  before  ;  but  the  knowledge  of  the  temporary  believer 
proceeds  not  beyond  the  word,  it  leaves  his  soul  without  God,  and  he 
obtains  it  only  by  human  instruction,  by  his  own  barren,  carnal  reas° 
onings  and  speculations,  and  hence  he  is  filled  with  an  admiration 
of  himself,  and  while  he  teaches  others  in  an  imperious  nianner,  he 
desires  that  they  also  should  admire  him  and  be  astonished  at  his, 
wisdom.  See  how  Balaam  boasted  cencerning  his  wisdom  and  rapt- 
tures.  Numbers  xxiv.  3,  4.     And  thus  •«  knowledge  puffeth  up,  buj 


VII,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20-23,  iW 

chanty  edifieth.     And  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  thing, 
he  knoweth  nothing  yet,  as  he  ought  to  know,"  1  Cor.  viii.  2,  3.      ^ 

2.  The  historical  faith  of  true  believers  is  \yroiight  in  them  by  the 
Ploly  Spirit,  who  not  only  explains  the  evidences  of  truth  and  divinity 
to  them,  but  also  impresses  the  truths  of  God  upon  their  hearts,  and. 
causes  them  to  see  those  truths,  as  we  have  proved  before  from  I 
Thess.  I.  5,  and  ii.  13,  so  that  they  are  moved  and  persuaded  to  be- 
lieve m,  and  to  love  God.  Christ,  and  his  service,  and  they  do  not 
attain  to  this  without  striving,  and  suffering  many  vexations  from 
their  unbelieving  l^.earts  and  -Satan-  See  Mark  ix.  23,  24.  But  the 
tempor^^ry  believer  hath  no  true  historical  faith  ;  it  is  commonly  only 
a  historical  knowledge^  and  a  supposing  that  the  word  of  God  is  the 
truth  ;  and  when  he  even  believes  it,  it  is  not  more  than  a  persua- 
sion, proceeding  from  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment,  and  it  hath 
no  other  efi'cct  on  him,  than  to  induce  him  to  imagine  that  he  is 
now  some  extraordinary  person,  and  so  "  he  receiveth  the  word  anon 
with  joy  ;  yet  he  hath  no  root  in  himself,"  Matt,  xiii.  20,  21. 

3.  The  believer  is  employed  in  the  confiding  act  of  faith  ''  with  his 
heart,"  Rom.  x.  9,  and  that  with  respect  to  God  and  Christ,  whom 
he  receives,  and  unites  to  himself,  John  i.  12.  Eph.  iii.  \7,  With 
his  whole  heart  he  consents  to  the  proffer  of  grace,  hungers  and 
thirsts  atter  Christ,  surrenders  himself  to  him,  and  casts  himself  upon 
him.  A  temporary  bc^liever  is  employed  only  with  his  judgment, 
with  respect  to  the  apprehensions,  which  he  forms  of  faith,  and  he 
urges  with  his  thoughts,  \^hich  are  void  of  the  Spirit,  his  exercises 
according  to  those  apprehensions,  and  claims  faith  thus  without  the 
Spirit  of  fait;  .  He  imagines  then  that  he  hath  a  true  faith,  and  he 
rejoices  greatly  :  ''  And  thus  he  kindles  a  fire  himself,  compasses 
himself  about  with  sparks,  v/alks  in  the  light  of  his  fire,  and  in  the 
Sparks  that  he  hath  kindled,"  Isaiah  1.  11. 

4.  A  true  and  sincere  faith  sanctifieth  the  soul,  not  only  outwardly, 
but  '■*it  purifieth"  also  '■'•  the  heart,"  Acts  xv.  9.  It  begets  a  wonder- 
ful love  to  God,  to  his  service,  and  to  our  neighbour  ;  "  Faith  work- 
eth  by  love,"  Gal.  v.  6.  It  renders  a  person  humble,  lowly,  self-deny- 
ing, heavenly-minded,  and  joyful  in  God,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  1  Peter  i.  8. 
But  the  temporary  beUever  retains  his  rotten  and  abominable  heart  j 
it  is  enough  for  him,  that  others  cannot  point  out  any  great  fault  in 
him,  that  lie  can  talk  wonderfully  well  of  holiness,  and  he  wishes 
that  all  men  should  consider  him  as  a  zealous  Christian,  like  Jehu-. 
Sf- Kings  X.  16 

A  true  believer  engages  frequently  in  self-exaniinaticn  :  he  would 
not  willingly  deceive  himself  in  a  matter  of  such  great  con r;-^ quench ; 


1C5  SAVING  FAITH. 

he  descends  a  thousand  times  into  his  mind,  that  he  may  know 
vrhether  his  heait  do  not  deceive  him  ;  he  often  lays  his  soul  open 
to  (iod,  that  he  may  discover  to  him  whether  he  deceives  himself, 
like  David»  Psalm  cxxxix  23,  24,  yea,  he  doth  this  sometimes  to  a 
judicious  minister,  or  to  a  private  Christian,  that  hemay^judge^ 
whet  ler  he  be  fiithful  to  the  Lord,"  like  I  ydia,  Acts  xvi.  17.  Doth 
another  suspect  him,  he  is  v^rillin^  to  be  detected,  and  saith,  "Let the 
righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness,"  Psalm  cxli.  5.  But  a 
teniporary  believer,  as  he  will  not  readily  descend  into  himself,  and 
only  contemplates  what  he  apprehends,  so  he  will  not  be  examined 
by  aaotiier  :  doth  any  one  suspect  him,  he  is  angry,  and  will  depart 
from  such  a  person,  as  Judas  departed  from  Christ,  when  he  detect- 
ed iiim,  John  xiii    20,  .26,  27,  30. 

Examine  yourselves  by  what  bath  been  said,  and  see  whether  ye 
have  faith  or  not,  and  deal  carefully  and  honestly  with  yourselves. 
If  ye  have  not  faith,  consider  in  what  a  deplorable  condition  ye  are  s 
"  Ye  are  wit  lout  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
stranjjers  from  t^e  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out -iod  in  tas  world,"  nph  ii.  12  The  word,  and  all  things  "are 
unprohtable  to  you,"  Heb  iv.  2,  "  the  wrath  of  God  licth  on  you," 
John  iii.  36,  and  *' ye  shall  be  damned,"  Mark  xvi.  16.  Alas  !  lay 
this  to  heart,  and  let  •*  the  terrour  of  the  Lord  persuade  you  to  be- 
lieve," 2  Cor.  V.  1 1.  The  Son  of  God  calls  yet  to  you, "  O  harden  not 
your  hearts,  while  to-day  yc  hear  his  voice,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.  Heb.  iii. 
7,  8.  No  sin,  though  ever  so  great,  ought  to  keep  you  from  him: 
"  he  will  in  no  wise  cas  any  one  out,  who  omes  to  him,"  John  vi. 
37.     He  rectives  t.  e  vilest  sinner.  1  Tim.  i.  13,  14,  15. 

But  with  respect  to  you  who  have  these  evidences,  permit  me  to 
say  briefly  for  your  direction,  1.  Be  assured,  that  not  only  to  others^ 
but  to  you  also,  forgiveness  of  sins,  everlasting  righteousness,  and 
salvation  are  freely  gnen  of  God ;  ye  have  the  evidences  of  it,  and 
know  n^^w  "  in  whom  ye  have  beli-jvc.,,"  2  Tim.  i.  12 

2.  Rejoice  with  the  gaoler,  that  ye  believe.  Acts  xvi  34.  Yea,, 
praise  the  Lord  on  this  account ;  for  it  is  your  great  happiness,  and 
*'  he  hath  given  it  to  you  of  his  grace,"  Philip   i.  2'^-.  Eph.  ii.  8,  9. 

3.  I'ndeavour  to  increase  in  faith,  for  which  the  apostle  prayed, 
Luke  xvii  5.  Unbelief  is  exceedingly  hurtful  to  you  in  every  rcspectj 
Matt.  xvii.  20.  Isaiah  vii.  9.  Heb.  iv.  2.  Yea,  it  is  a  sin  which  ought 
to  be  reproved.  See  Mark  ix.  19. 

4.  Livtf  now  by  faith,  by  a  frequent  exercise  of  it,  as  we  have  said 
beit-re-  foi'  It  is  the  breathing  of  the  soul. 

5.  Cherish  industriously  your  historical  faith  ^  for  that  alone  gives 


—23.  '    1^9 

Vigour  to  all  the  exercises  of  the  soul ;  "  It  is  the  substance  of  thing^ 
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1. 

6.  -onfess  also  the  doctrine  of  fajth,  though  it  should  be  with  the 
hazard  of  your  lives  :  "  P'or  with  the  heart  man  belleveth  unto  right- 
eousness, and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation," 
Rom.  X.  10.  See  also  I  Peter  iii.  5    Matt.  x.  32,  33. 

7.  Comfort  youi'selves  also  with  your  faith,  knowing  «'  that  he  who 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  hfe,"  I  John  iii.  36,  1$  your 
faitii  weak,  salvation  depends  not  on  the  degree,  but  on  ihe  essence 
of  faith  ;  "  The  bruised  reed  he  will  not  break,  and  the  smokin:^  Qax 
he  will  not  quench,"  Matt,  xii  28.  Yea,  he  will  one  day  change 
faith  into  vision,  1  Cor  xiii.  12  "  We  see  now  through  a  glass 
da.-kiy  ;  but  taen  face  to  face  :  n<»w  I  kiiOw  in  part ;  bHt  then  shali 
I  know  fcven  as  also  i  am  known,"  Amen. 


Bb 


ira; 


THE 


CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH 


IN  THE  DIVINE  TRINITY 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAYc 


SlCrn  xiii  14.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love 
of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all, 
Amen.

Q,  22.   iVhat  is  then  necessa^  y  for  a  Christian  to  believe  ? 

A.  All  things  promised  us  in  the  gospel,  which  the  articles  of  our 
undoubted  catholic  Christian  faith  briefly  teach  us. 

Q    23.    What  are  those  articles  ? 

A.  I.  "  I  believe  in  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth. 

r.  And  in  Jesus  Christ,  his  only  begotten  Son.  our  Lord. 

IH.  Who  vvas  conceived  by  the  Holy   Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin 

Mary. 

IV.  Suffered  «inder  Pontius  Pilate  ;  was  crucified,  dead  and  buri- 
«;d.     He  descended  into  hell : 

V.  The  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead  : 

VI.  He  ascended  into  heaven,  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
ihe  Father  Almighty  : 

VH.  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead 
Vni.   I  believr  in  the  Holv  Gho?^t  : 


VII.  LOR'S  DAY.  Q.  20—22.  nr 

iX.  I  believe  an  holy  catholic  church  :  the  communion  of  saints  j 
X.  The  forgiveness  of  sins  ; 
Xi.  The  resurrection  of  the  body  : 
Xli.  And  the  life  ever.asting,  Amen." 

«  ri  1 

JL   HE  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,   not  being  mixed 
with   faith."     Thus  speaks  Paul  of  the  disobedient  Israelites,  "  to 
wiiom  the  gobpel  was  preached,  as  well  as  to  u","  Heb   iv.  2.     The 
gospel  is  mort  profitable  to  man  than  aught  besides  ;  for  it  reveals 
Christ  and  all   his  benefits  to  him,  it  offers  all  grace  and  salvation  to 
him,  it  orders  him  to  receive  the  Saviour  for  himself  it  promiseth 
him  all  salvation  in  the  Saviour,  and  '*  he  is  saved  only  by  the  gos- 
pel," I  Cor.  XV.  1,  2.   This  salutary  gospel  was  preached  to  the  dis- 
obedient Israelites  also  in  the  wilderness,   '.vhen  God  established  his 
covenant  of  grace  wi'h  them  on  Sinai,  although  with  a  legal  admin- 
istration, when  "he  sent"  his  Son,  "the  anii^el  in  whom  his  name 
was,  before  them,"  Exod.  xxiii.  20 — 23.   "promised  him   to  them, 
as  a  prophet,  like  Moses,"   Deut.  xviii.    16 — 19,  and  when  he  typi- 
fied him  "  by  the  manna,  by  the  rock,"  I  Cor.  x.  3,  4,  and  by  all  the 
ordinances  of  the  ceremonial  law,   Coll.  ii,    17.  Heb   viii.  5.  x.  5, 
but  although  the  gospel  is  so  exceedingly  profitable,  "  it  ihd  not  jjrof- 
it  them,  because  it  Mas  not   mixed  with   faith  ;  for  they  had  not  an 
heart  to  understand,"  Deut.  xxix.  4.     *'  They  did  not  look  to  the 
end  of  that  which  is  abolished  ;  but  their  minds  w.;re*blinded."  2  Cor. 
iii.  13,  14.     '^  When  they  heard  the  voice  of  tiie  gospe  '  they  haid- 
ened  their  hearts,  and  they  could  not  enter  in.   because  of  unbelief," 
Psalm  xcv.  7 — 11.  Heb.  iii.  14 — 19.     For  it  is  f.ith  which  renders 
the  gospel  profitable  to  man  ;  for  by  faith  a  person  not  onlv  acknowl- 
edges it  to  be  true  and   divine,  and  is  moved   and  influenced  by  it, 
1  Thess.  i.  15,  hut  he  doth  also  by  fjith  receive  the  Saviour,  Eaid  ull 
his  saving  benefits  for  himself,  according  to  the  offer  of  the  pospel, 
^vhich  saith,  "  ile  who  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,  &c. 
John  iii.  36. 

This  the  instructor  also  teacheth  us.  He  had  taught  in  the  fore- 
going Lord's  day,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  perfec  t  Sa- 
viour of  sinners  and  he  had  proved  this  from  the  gospel ;  but  now  he 
shows  that  Christ  is  nevertheless  not  a  "  Saviour,  and  that  the  gospel 
is  not  profitable  to  all  who  have  perished  in  Adam,  but  only  to  t' ose, 
who,  according  to  the  gospel,  are  ingrafted  into  him.  and  receive  all 
his  benefits  by  a  true  faith  In  order  th»t  he  may  give  us  a  proper 
account  of  this  faith,   he   speaks  of  it  at  large,  showing  (1)  how 


148  SAVING  FAITH, 

necessary  it  is,  Question  20.  (2)  Wherein  it  consists,  Question  21. 
(3)  vVhat  is  the  object  of  it,  Question  22 — 58.  (4)  In  what  respect 
it  is  profitable,  Question  59 — ^^64  (5)  Mow  it  is  wrought  and  con* 
firmed,  Question  §5 — 85. 

We  must  at  present  explain  only  three  particulars  with  respect  to 
faith. 

I.  The  necessity  of  it,  Q.  20. 

II.  The  brief  representation  of  the  object  of  it,  Q.  22,  23. 

III.  The  naiure  of  faith,  Q   21. 

1.  It  is  taken  for  granted  here,  that  "  all  men  are  cursed,"  that  is, 
eondemnable  >'  in  Adam,"  because  this  is  taufht  in  the  seventh  ques- 
tion. It  is  asked  now,  whether  "  all  men,  as  they  have  perished  in 
Adam,  are  also  saved  by  Christ  ?"  This  question  appears  strange, 
since  it  is  universally  acknowledged,  that  ail  men  are  not  saved  by 
Christ.  There  have  indeed  been  certani  persons,  who  have  taught 
that  all  men  were  saved  ;  but  they  have  been  few,  and  ther  cirone- 
ous  opmion  hath  long  since  been  dead  with  them.  The  instructor 
intends  therefore  something  else  by  this  question,  and  indeed  whether 
men  be  saved  from  their  birth  by  Christ,  without  any  intervening  act 
of  the  soul,  as  they  perish  in  Adam  by  their  birth,  without  any  act 
of  the  person  who  is  born.  For  there  are  many  careless  persons, 
who  fondly  imagine  that  they  shall  be  saved  by  Christ,  ahhough 
the^  do  nothing  to  obtain  him  for  salvation.  The  catechism,  in  or- 
der to  root  out  such  a  false  imagination,  shows  that  we  cannot  be  sa- 
ved by  Christ  from  our  birth,  without  any  act  of  our  own,  as  we 
have  perished  in  Adam  :  but  that,  in  order  to  be  saved,  we  must  be 
incorporated  into  Christ  by  faith,  since  we  are  not  m  Christ  by  na- 
ture, nor  proceed  from  him  by  our  birth,  as  we  are  by  nature  in 
Adam,  and  proceed  from  him  by  our  birth.  And  therefore  some  act 
must  be  done,  whereby  we  are  ingrafted  into  him  supernalurally, 
which  act  is  faith  ;  but  we  would  rather  say  that  this  question  is 
asked,  because  there  have  been  certain  persons  of  old,  to  wit,  the 
Pelagians  and  Semipelagians,  and  because  there  are  still  certain  per- 
sons, to  wit,  the  Jesuits  and  Remonstrants,  and  many  who.  collude 
with  them,  who  conceive  that,  as  all  men  were  brought  into  a  state 
of  perdition  by  Adam,  so  all  men  are  brought  into  a  scate  of  salvation 
by  Christ,  that  Chrifct  died  for  all  men,  and  merited  salvation  for  all, 
as  Adam,  according  to  our  doctrine,  deserved  perdition  by  his  sin  for 
all.  This  errour  proceeds  from  another  erroneous  opinion.  These 
men  hold  that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  all  the 
sins  of  his  p  .ople,  but  only  the  will  of  God,  which  did  not  demand 
all,  but  only  a  sma"l  part  j  that  Christ  having  obeyed  this  will,  God, 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— a^i^  1^, 

by  a  gracious  estimation,  accepted  of  that  small  part,  instead  of  a  full 
satisfaction  for  all  men,  and  was  moved  thereby  to  establish  a  general 
covenant  of  grace  with  all  men,  and  to  bestow  a  sufficient  grace  upon 
them  all,  whereby  they  should  be  enabled  to  make  a  proper  use  of 
their  free  will ;  for  God  requires  of  them,  as  a  condition,  in  the  cove- 
nant, that  they  should  exert  their  free  will,  in  order  to  beheve,  obey 
and  persevere.  The  reason  why  all  men  are  nevertheless  not  saved, 
though  Christ  died  for  all,  is  that  they  do  not  make  a  right  use  of 
this  free  will.  There  are  indeed  some  ot  the  Reformed,  who  also 
imagine  that  Christ  died  for  all  men ;  but  they  add,  that  saving  faith 
in  Christ  depends  not  upon  free  will,  as  those  who  are  out  of  the  Re- 
formed church  assert,  but  only  upon  the  decree  of  God  and  effectual 
grace.  *  The  instructor  opposeth  this,  and  teaches  that  all  men  are 
not  saved  by  Christ,  and  therefore  that  he  did  not  bring  them  all  by 
his  death  into  a  state  of  salvation.  And  he  doth  not  teach  this  with- 
out a  reason :  for, 

1.  Christ's  death  and  merits,  whereby  man  is  saved,  belong  not  to 
all  men,  but  are  restrained  to  a  certain  number.  He  saves  none  but 
"hjs  people,"  Matt.  i.  21,  "  his  body,  of  which  he  is  the  Saviour,  and 
his  church,  for  which  he  gave  himself,"  Eph.  v.  2S,  25.  "  He  is  the 
author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  him,"  Heb  v.  9, 
f^  He  gives  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  the  Father  hath  given  him," 
John  xvii.  2.  <♦  He  lays  his  life  down  for  his  sheep,"  Jolm  x.  1 1,  15. 
Now  all  men  are  not  his  people,  his  body,  his  church,  those  who 
obey  him,  who  are  given  to  him,  his  sheep :  "  Ye  are  not  of  my 
sheep,"  saith  he  to  the  Jews,  John  x.  26. 

2.  We  suppose  that  the  Mediator  was  obliged  to  satisfy  the  justice 
of  God  fully,  as  we  have  proved  already  upon  the  fifth  Lord's  day : 
we  also  suppose  that  he  hath  satisfied  fully,  which  we  will  show  on 
the  fifteenth  Lord's  day.  If  now  Christ  satisfied  the  justice  of  God 
for  all,  it  must  follow,  either  that  all  men  will  certainly  be  saved, 
and  cannot  be  punished  with  perdition  for  any  sin,  which  none  will 
assert ;  or  that  God  is  not  just,  since  he  would  punish  guilt  twice, 
once  in  his  Son,  and  once  in  the  sinner,  who  perisheth.  Since  we 
may  not  think  thus  of  the  righteous  God,  therefore  it  is  also  certain, 
that  the  Surety  did  not  die  for  all. 

3.  Add  to  this,  that  the  Saviour  actually  communicates,  and  effec« 

•  By  these  the  author  means  the  Amyraldisis,  or  followers  of  Moses  Amyr,^ 
jtldus  or  Amyraut,  a  professor  of  theology  in  the  univeriity  of  Saumur  in 
France,  about  the  middle  of  ihe  seventeenth  century.  They  are  also  called 
Univcrsalists,  although  they  do  not  hold  with  our  modern  sect  of  that  xiztm, 
that  all  men  shall  be  saved. 


150  SAVING  FAITH. 

tually  applies  salvation  to  them,  for  whom  he  purchased  it ;  for  "  he 
gives  eternal  life  to  his  sheep,  for  whom  he  laid  down  his  life,"  John 
X.  15,  28,  As  he  merited  salvation  by  his  humiliation,  so  he  also 
applies  il  by  his  exaltation  :  *'  he  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and 
raised  again  for  our  juslification,"  Rom,  iv.  25,  "  For  if  when  w^ 
were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  : 
much  more  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life,"  Rom, 
3/,  \0o  As  he  was  not  humbled  for  himself,  but  for  his  people,  so  he 
"aras  also  exalted  for  them,  that  he  might  be  a  "  Prince  and  a  Saviour, 
to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  x.  5l\ 

5.  He  saith  himself,  John  xvii.  9.  «  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but 
for  them  whom  thou  hast  given  me."  Would  he  not  pray  for  the 
world,  and  vvould  he  die  f  r  it  ?  Our  adversaries^  say,  Christ  applies 
salvation  by  his  intercession,  but  he  obtained  it  by  his  death,  and  they 
thmk  that  he  was  wiUing  to  obtain  salvation  for  all,  but  not  willing 
to  apply  it  to  all.  But  he  communicates  salvation  to  all,  for  whom 
he  merited  it,  as  w^  have  just  now  seen,  and  besides  this,  he  prays 
also,  for  all  for  whom  he  died  ;  for  his  death  and  intercession  always 
accompany  each  •  ther  :  "  He  bore  the  sins  of  many,  and  made  inters 
cession  for  the  transgressors,"  Isaiah  iiii  12.  VVe  see  this  also, 
Rom.  viii.  34.  I  John  ii.  1,2. 

5.  ''  Christ  did  not  die  in  vain,"  as  Paul  supposeth.  Gal.  ii.  2  I  ; 
but  if  he  died  for  ail  men,  ^  then  he  died  in  vain  for  those  who  are 
npt  saved  :  for  they  miss  both  the  virtue  and  fruit  of  Christ's  death. 
If  not  one  man  had  made  a  good  use  of  his  free  will,  so  called,  as 
might  have  happened,  if  the  will  be  absolutely  free,  as  the  Pelagi^^ns 
say,  then  not  one  man  would  have  obtained  salvation,  although 
Christ  had  died  for  him.  And  so  his  death  wouU  have  been  alto- 
gether in  vain. 

6.  The  doctrine,  that  Christ  died  for  aU  men,  is  replete  with  ab<? 
surdities  :  for  (a)  if  he  died  for  all  men,  then  he  died  for  those  who 
were  already  damned,  as  Cain  and  others  j  for  "  his  death  was  for 
the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  tliat  were  under  the  first  testa- 
ment," Heb.  ix.  15.  (b)  He  died  then  also  for  those  who  never  hear 
ofhim,  norcan  believe  in  him,  and  who  cannot  thus  berome  par- 
takers of  him,  nor  make  use  of  their  free  will  for  that  purpose,  as 
the  heathens,  who  have  never  heard  of  the  gospel,  and  whom  God 
suffers  to  walk  in  their  own  ways  (c)  We  are  not  then  saved  on  ac- 
count of,  and  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  but  on  account  of,  and  by  our 
good  use  of  our  free  will ;  for  upon  that  alone  depends  the  efficacy 
and  fruit  of  his  death,  (d)  The  sinner  would  then  also  have  a  good 
free  will,  and  an  ability  to  make  a  pro*^.table  and  saving  use  of  th^ 


—23,  IfUr 

death  of  Christ ;  but  this  we  have  found  on  the   e'ghth  and  ninth 
questions  to  be  false. 

If  we  will  collect  all  these  reasons,  and  attend  to  each  of  them  in 
particular,  we  shall  necessarily  conclude  that  Christ  did  not  die  for 
all  men',  nor  merit  salvation  for  all. 

Let  none  object  here  the  words,  "  God  will  have  all  men  to  be 
saved,"  and  "the  Mediator  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,"  1  Timo 
ii.  4,  6.  for  this  doth  not  mean  every  individual  man,  since  it  is  added, 
«  God  will  have  all  men  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." 
Now  God  doth  not  will  this  concerning  every  individual,  for  he  doth 
not  reveal  the  truth  to  every  individual ;  but  all  men  are  here  al! 
sorts  of  men,  as  "  kings,  and  those  who  are  hi  authority,"  vrs.  1,  2, 
who  were  at  that  time  heathens,  for  whom  the  Christians  were  never- 
theless bounden  to  pray,  because  God  would  have  such  also  to  be 
saved. 

Doth  John  say,  that  "  Jesus  Christ  is  a  propitiation,  not  only  for 
our  sins,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  1  John  ii.  2,  he 
doth  not  mean  by  the  ^vhole  world  all  men,  and  every  individual  in 
particular ;  for  the  words  world,  and  the  whole  world  denote  often 
only  a  great  number  of  men.  See  Luke  ii.  I.  I  John  xii.  19.  But 
by  the  whole  world  he  means  all  kinds  of  men  in  the  world,  and 
particularly  the  heathens  in  opposition  to  the  Jews,  who  were  the 
only  persons  to  whom  salvation  pertained  under  the  Old  Testament, 
John  xi.  51,  52.  For  the  heathens  are  called  the  world  in  this  sense, 
Rom.  xi.  12.  «  Abraham  should  be  an  heir  of  the  world,"  Rom.  iv. 
13,  not  of  every  man,  but  of"  every  family  and  people,  who  should 
be  blessed  in  his  seed,"  Gen.  xii.  3.  xxii  17,  18,  "and  who  should 
believe,  to  whom  the  righteousness  of  faith  should  be  imputed,"  ac- 
cording to  Rom.  iv.  11,  12,  13. 

Paul  saith  indeed,  Rom.  v.  18.  "  As  by  the  offence  of  one,  judg- 
ment came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation:  even  so  by  the  right- 
eousness of  one,  the  free  f^ft  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of 
life."  But  he  doth  not  intimate  by  these  words,  that  all  men,  who 
have  perished  in  Adam,  are  brought  into  a  state  of  salvation  by  the' 
death  of  Christ ;  for  he  would  then  assert  that  they  would  all  be 
saved,  since  he  saith  "  that  the  free  gift  came  upon  aH  men  unto 
justification  of  life,"  which  justification  pertains  to  the  application  of 
the  purchased  salvation,  according  to  Rom.  iv,  25.  "  Grace  reigns 
through  righteousness  to  eternal  hfe,"  as  he  sahh  vrs.  21.  And  there- 
fore all  men  are  here,  not  all  who  have  perished  in  Adam,  but  all 
who  belong  by  the  covenant  of  grace  to  Christ,  as  their  head  and 
*  receive  through  him  abundance  of  grace,  and  of  the  gift  of  right* 


.15^  HAVING  FAirfl. 

eousncss,  and  reign  in  life,"  vrs.  17.  Therefore  the  apostle  designs' 
by  the  words,  vrs  18,  which  are  objected,  that  as  Adam  subjected 
all  those,  who  were  his,  and  who  were  reckoned  under  him  in 
the  covenant  of  works,  to  guilt  and  condemnation,  so  Christ  hath  de- 
livered all  the  elect,  who  are  reckoned  under  him  in  the  covenant  of 
grace,  from  condemnation,  and  hath  brought  them  into  a  state  o^ 
salvation  :  for  Adam  and  Christ  are  set  forth  in  this  chapter,  as  two 
distinct  heads,  who  govern  each  a  distinct  people,  according  to  a 
distinct  covc*nant :  and  Christ  is  represented,  0s  bringing  those  who 
are  his,  into  a  state  of  salvation,  in  the  same  manner  in  which  Adam 
brings  those  who  are  his  into  a  state  of  condemnation.  See  vrs. 
1^—21. 

Therefore  whoever  examines  the  word  of  God  without  prejudice, 
will  be  oblii^ed  to  admit,  that  Christ  did  not  purchase  salvation  for  aU 
men,  and  that  all  men  are  therefore  not  saved  by  him.     But  since 
the  careless   sinner  "  feeds  himself  without  fear,"  therefore  he  ima- 
gines that  many  will  notwithstanding  be  saved  by  Christ,  and  he  sup- 
poses that  he  will  be  one  of  that  great  number ;  for  he  will  not  think 
the  worst  of  himself,  and  he  deceives  himself  thus  with  vain  imagi- 
nations :  for  very  few  are  saved  by  Christ :    "the  gate  is  strait,  and 
the  way  is  narrow  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that  find 
it,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  14.    *'  The   Father  giveth  his  king- 
dom only  to  a  little  flock,"  Luke  xii.  32.  In  the  old  world  "  all  flesh 
had  corrupted  its  way,"   Gen    vi    12,  and  only  "eight  souls  were 
saved  in  the  ark,"  1  Peter  iii.  20,  and  among  them  there  was  a  Ham» 
who  was  cursed   on  account  of  his  wickedness.    Gen.  ix.  22— 25, 
There  were  not  ten  righteous  persons  in  Sodom,  Gen.  xviii.  S2r 
We    read  of  only   one  Melchizedek  in  Canaan :  we  find  only  the 
family  of  Abraham  m  Ur,  of  the  Chaldees,   and  there  were  but  few- 
godly  persons  with  Job  in  Syria.     The  posterity  of  Abraham  multi- 
plied indeed  exceedingly,  but  God  suffered  other  nations  to  walk  in 
their  own  ways.     Salvation  came  indeed  afterwards  to  the  Gentiles, 
but  how   many  have   remained  blind  and  hardened  I  How  few  arc 
there  of  those  called  Christians,  who  have  not  declined  to  Mahome- 
tan, Antichristian  and  Pelagian  errours  !  "Many  are  "  indeed  out- 
wardly "  called  "  to  fellowship  with  God,  "  but  few  are  chosen,'" 
Matt,  xxii,  14.     And  if  we  had  no  other  proof,   it  would  still  be  suf- 
ficicnily  evident,  that  few  will  be  saved,  from  the  general  ignorance, 
carihly-mindedness,  irreligiousncss  and  ungodliness  of  those  who 
profess  the  truth.     The  number  of  those  who  arc  saved  is  in  itself 
mdccd  "  a  multitude  which   no  man  can  number,"  Rev.  vii.  9,  but 
compared  with  those  who  arc  lost,  the  number  of  those  who  are 
•avcd  is  exceedingly  small- 


VII,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20—23.  isi 

But  how  are  they  saved  ?  without  any  act  of  their  own,  as  they 
Jperished  in  Adam?  No:  for  although  Christ   purchased  salvatioii 
for  them  without  any  act  ot  their  own,  ne'.crtheless  they  do  not  be- 
come partakers  of  the  purchased  salvation,  except  by  faith  :  ^he  word 
of  God  teacheth   us  this  every  where.     See  only  at  present,    *.u'.rk. 
xvi.  16.  John  ill.  i6,   36.  Acts  x   43.  xvi.  31.     Not  ihat  faith  is  au 
Sict  of  such  great  clignity,  but  (a)  because  the  t  lect  "  are  ingrafted 
inio  Christ,"  by  faith      Without  fairh  a  man  is  without  Christ,  an 
alien  from  the   commonweaLh  of  Israel,"  Sec.  Epl-es.  ii,   12,  and 
thus  like  '^  a  branch  separated  from  the  vine,  and  cast  forth,"  John 
XV.  6.     But  faith  unites  a  person  to  Christ,  and  *  Christ  dwells  in 
the  heart  by  fai';h,"  Eph-  iii.  17,  and  we  become  one   ^  Ian*:  ard  one 
body  with  him,  obtain  his  saving  influences;  and  are  reckoned,  as 
though  we  had  been  humbled  and  exalted  V/ith  him.  See  this  Rom. 
vi.  4,  5.  2  Cor.  v    15.  Gal.  ii.  20.  Eph>  n   5,  6.  (b)  Because  by  faith 
we  receive  Christ,  and  all  his  benefits,  as  will  appf^ar  l.ercafter.  And 
thus  we  appropriate  the  Saviour  and  his  purchased  salvation  to  our» 
selves,  and  therefore  we  possess  him,  and  thus  also  salvation  in  himc 
II.  It  would  naturally  follow  now,  that  \'e  should  inquire  wb?t  is 
the  proper  nature  of  faith  ;  bat  as  this  is  out  of  order,  unless  wt-  un* 
derstand  what  is  the  object  of  faith,  we  will  therefore  inquire  firstj 
what  is  necessary  for  a  Christian  to  believco     The  instructor  saith, 
<*  All  things  promised  us  in  the  gospel,"  Question  22.    "  All  that 
God  hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,"  Question  31.  God  hath  re- 
vealed also  his  law  with  its  threatenings  in  his  word  ;  but  the  law  is 
not  so  much  the  object  of  faith,  as  of  obedience.     We  must  believe 
the  threatenings,  but  a  belief  of  the  threatenings  cannot  save  a  per- 
son, but  condemn  him  :  it  renders  the  sinner  concerned)  but  it  doth 
not  show  him  the  way  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  tome.     A  belief 
therefore  of  the  pramises  of  the  gospel  is  necessary  to  salvation  ;  for 
they  show  the  sinner  that  he  may  obtain  grice  and  salvation  in  the 
Son  of  God  ;  they  offer  the  Saviour  to  him  for  salvation,  yea,  they 
promise  the  believer  perfect  salvation  in  him,  as  we  have  taught  on 
the  nineteenth  qiiestion. 

"  All  the  things  prortiised  in  the  gospel  are  briefly  taught  us  in 
the  articles  of  our  catholic  undoubted  Christian  faith,"  For  all  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  must  be  referred  to  God  the  Father,  and  our 
creation,  to  God  the  Son  and  our  redemption,  and  to  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  oiir  sanctificationo  This  is  the  way  in  which  Paul  pro- 
ceeds, 2  Cor.  xiii.  13  Thus  also  the  Lord  Jesus  doth,  when  he  com- 
mands us  to  baptize  tnose  w'.o  confess  him,  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
^d  sealto  them  in  this  mRDiiei  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  Matt,  xxviii. 

Z 


154  SAVING  FAITH. 

19.  For  which  reason  the  ancient  Christians  arlopreu  (l.ib  form  oj'  bap' 
tism  for  their  first  creed,  und  af'erwyrds  ihcv  composed  tht;irolh'*r  sum- 
inar>'  confessions  accord iiij;  to  the  tenor  of  this.  And  we  may  see 
in  wliat  manner  all  t'sc  promises  of  the  ^osDel  are  contained  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  in  the  exposition  of  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  by  out- 
church,  for  the  instruction  of  those  who  offer  their  children  for  bap- 
tism, which  is  also  read  to  them.*  The  iustructor  doth  therefore 
xindtrtake  to  explain  these  articles  according-  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  becanse  they  comprehend  all  the  promises  of  the  gospel, 
and  must  he  believed  to  salvation. 

It  doth  not  appear  at  all  probable  that  these  articles  Of  faith  were 
composed  by  the  apostles,  and  that  each  apostle  dictated  his  particu- 
lar article,  when  they  were  about  to  separate  from  one  another  at  Je- 
rusalem: for  Luke  mentions  nothin(>  of  this  in  the  acts  of  the  apos- 
tles. They  are  indeed  called  Syinbolum  j^/iostolorum,  the  aposlles* 
creed ;  but  not  because  they  were  composed  by  the  apostles,  but  ra- 
ther because  they  contain  a  brief  compend  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles. 

We  must  thcefore  not  look  upon  thera  as  the  infallible  word  of 
God,  but  only  a  brief  compend  of  the  doctrine  of  faith,  believed  and 
professed  by  the  catholic  church,  gathered  from  the  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, since  they  were  composed  according  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
particuialy  by  the  ancient  Christian  church,  while  she  was  not  yet 
infected  with  many  errours,  which  sprang  up  afterwards.  This 
creed,  or  confession  of  faith,  and  likewise  all  others,  composed  and 
explained  according  to  the  word  of  God,  serve  for  symbols  of  the 
a?;reemcnt  of  the  church  in  the  doctrine  of  the  truth  ;  they  are  also 
means  to  preserve  purity  of  doctrine,  and  to  detect  and  restrain  erro- 
neous persons,  who  may  arise  in  the  church.  But  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  constitute  a  person  a  believer,  and  qnolify  him  to  be  admitted  to 
mcmbers'iip  in  the  church,  shat  he  makes  a  verbal  confession  of 
th  J.  creed  ;  for  ti»ere  is  no  heretic,  however  erroneous,  who  will 
noc  confess  it  veriiaiiy,  ano  if  he  should  be  admitted  into  the  church 
upon  such  a  pretence,  would  he  not  excite  m^ch  confusion  and  dii- 
turbancc  in  the  church  ?  And  tn  ref^jrc  'his  creed  must  be  received 
an'l  confessed  accordnig  to  tn-  -xposiiion  of  the  word  of  Cjod,  for  it  is 
only  on  accuuni  ol  the  woid  of  God  that  it  is  worthy  to  be  believed 
a.nd  received. 

It  IS  not  only  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  that  is  the  object  of  faith, 
but  also  the  Loid  Jesus  ;.  hrist  himself  proposed  in  the  gospel  j  for 

•  The  author  means  the  reposition  of  the  passage  alledgcd  in  the  form  for 
the  adfliini&tration  of  bapusm  l»  infanti. 


Vli.  LOl^DS  DAY,  Q.  20— 23,  I5f 

"  we  believe  in  and  on  him,"  Acts  xvi.  31,  Eph.  iii.  12,  and  *'  re» 
ceive  him  by  faith,"  John  i.  12,  and  he  dwells  in  our  hearts  by 
faith,"  Eph.  iii.  17,  and  faith  rests  not  in  him,  but  passelh  through 
him  to  the  Father,  and  thus  '*  we  believe  by  him  in  God,"  1  Pe- 
ter i.  21. 

III.  We  may  now  easily  comprehend  "  what  true  faith  is."  Faith 
in  general  is  a  holding  of  the  word  or  testimony  of  a  person  to  be 
true  ;  and  when  he  salth  something,  in  which  we  are  interested,  a 
depending  on  h.is  words.  In  tiris  sense  is  faith  used  here  also  :  for 
by  faith  a  person  holds  the  testimony  of  God,  that  he  will  save  sin- 
ners, who  flee  to  Christ,  to  be  true,'  and  he  depends  upon  it.  The 
woid  faith  denotes  sometimes  indeed  the  doctrine  of  faith :  '*  Paul 
preached  the  faith  which  he  once  destroyed,"  Gal.  i.  23.  See  also 
Acts  VI.  7.  Jutle  vrs.  3,  but  it  commonly  signifies  a  working  act  of 
the  soul  with  respect  to  God,  and  Christ,  and  the  word  of  promise, 
and  in  this  sense  do  we  speak  of  faith  here. 

The  reason  wiiy  the  instructor  asks  just  concerning  "a  true,"  or 
a  saving  and  justiiying  faith,  called  also  "  an  unfeigned  faith,"  1  Tim. 
i.  5,  and  ''the  faith  of  God's  elect,"  I'itus  i.  I,  is  because  some  have 
only  a  pretended  faith,  and  all  faith  is  not  saving  ;  for  there  is  a  bare 
historical  faith,  by  wh-ch  a  person  acknowledgeth  the  divine  truths, 
with  a  certain  persuasion  of  mind,  to  be  true  and  divine,  without  be- 
ing influenced  thereby  to  an  earnest  endeavour  after  salvation,  ac- 
cording to  those  truths.  In  this  n  anner  "  Agrippa  believed  the 
prophets,"  Acts  xxvi  27.  This  is  called  a  historical  faith,  because 
it  is  a  holdi;ig  of  what  is  related  in  the  bible  to  be  true,  as  well  with 
respect  to  that  which  hath  happened,  as  to  that  which  is  promised 
concerning  present  and  future  matters.  If  any  one  will  rather  call 
this  historical  faith  a  speculative  faith,  or  a  faith  of  bare  assent,  we 
Tvill  not  object  to  it.  There  are  some,  who,  besides  this  historical 
faith,  possess  a  temporary  faith,  by  which  they  are  exceedingly  plea- 
sed with  the  divine  mysteries,  which  they  believe,  are  ravished  with 
them,  and  have  sometimes  an  unusual  relish  in  them  :  "  They  re- 
ceive the  word  anon  with  joy,"  Matt-  xiii.  20.  «  They  taste  the 
heavenly  gift,"  &c.  Heb.  vi.  4,  5.  "They  escape  for  a  while  the 
pollutions  of  the  world,"  2  Peter  ii.  20  Heb.  x.  29.  This  is  called 
a  temporary  faith,  mt  only  because  it  usually  endures  but  for  a 
time,  at  most  only  while  it  fares  well  with  the  church,  and  the  tem^ 
porary  believer  can  maintain  a  good  name  ;  but  also  because  it  is 
promoted  and  supported  by  the  temporary  things  of  honour,  plea- 
sure, and  profit.  And  therefore  we  must  not  think  with  the  Remon- 
strants, in  order  that  they  may  defend  their  doctrine  of  the  aposta<?y 


1^6  bAV^NG  KAITHc 

of  the  4aint3,  that  a  temporary  faith  is  of  the  same  nature  with  a. 
savinj^  iaita.  as  though  there  were  no  other  difference  between  a 
tenjporary  ami  a  saving  faith,  than  that  the  one  ceaseth  after  a  time^ 
but  the  other  encJurct  i  lo  the  end  :  for  a  temporary  faith  is  essen- 
tially diHcre^it  from  a  saving  faiih,  in  as  much  as  it  remains  "with- 
out loo:  in  a  stony  hcuii,  and  doth  not  bring  forth  good  fruits ;"  but 
it  is  altogether  different  with  a  saving  faith.  See  Mai.  xiii.  23.  Luke 
viii.  t5.  he  true  believer  '<  hath  better  things,  and  such  as  accom- 
pany suhation,"  lleb.  \\.9.  Some  have  besides  this  also  a  faith  of 
nii.in  les,  iiv  which  they  trust,  in  consequence  of  some  speci  .1  pro 
miseofGod,  or  some  extraordinary  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
that  t.ome  miracle  will  be  performed,  either  by  theri),  or  upon  them. 
See  -Ua:.  xviii.  20.  A' ark  ix.  22,  23,  24.  A  person  may  have 
such  a  fait;  .  a.d  not  possess  a  saving  faith,  as  v/e  may  see  Mat  vii» 
23.     1  Cor.  xiii  2. 

This  saving  laith  consists   in  three  acts  of  the  soul,  which  it 

exerts. 

I.  "*  In  a  knowledge  of  what  God  hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  wordo 
It  is  scarcely  possible  that  every  believer  should  know  all  things  ; 
the  best  *^  knows  but  in  part,"  I  Cor.  xiii  9.  But  if  a  person  shall 
believe,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  know  the  fundamental  tmthso 
These  are  those  (a)  which  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  calls  the  founda- 
tiof)  ;^b)  with  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  which  salvation  is  insepa- 
rahly  connected  ;(e)  which  are  the  foundation  and  support  of  other 
revealed  dociiines,  and  (d)  which  teach  the  true  practice  of  piety. 
We  si.all  not  explain  these  marks  of  the  fundamental  truths  at  pres- 
ent, for  we  have  done  this  in  our  "mystery  of  God's  covenants," 
page  5,  6,  7.  \Ve  say  now  only,  that  in  order  to  believe  to  salvation, 
-./c  must  know  how  great  our  sins  and  misery  are,  how  we  may  be 
delivered  from  our  misery,  and  how  we  shall  express  our  gratitude 
to  God  for  such  deliverance. 

Every  behever  knows  and  understands  these  things  more  or  less, 
not  only  wuh  a  literal  knowledge,  but  irradiated  with  the  light  of 
God  ;  he  sees  into  the  things  themselves,  he  beholds  God  and  Christ 
and  not  only  his  word,  although  by  the  word,  by  which  his  mind  is 
drawn  forth  toward  the  Lord,  is  united  to  him,  changed  into  conform- 
ity to  him,  and  Wi»rmcd  with  love  to  him  :  "  For  God,  who  com- 
manded the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  shines  in  his  heart,  to 
give  the  light  of  the  knowle'Jge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of 
lesus  C:hrist,"  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  See  also  Psalm  xxxvi.  9.  2  Cor.  iii.  Ig. 
(Icb.  xi.  27 


Vir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20— 23o  15^ 

We  will  not  determine  precisely  whether  this  knowledge  be  a 
proper  act  of  I'aith.  It  is  certain,  that  the  soul,  when  she  exerciseth 
faith,  exerts  a  certain  activity  in  knowing  and  contemplating  her 
objects,  as  well  as  in  any  other  act  of  faith.  It  is  also  abundantly  evi- 
dent, that  no  man  can  believe  while  he  doth  not  know  the  object  of 
his  faith.  We  must  therefore  detest  popery,  which  asserts  that  au 
implicit  faith  is  sufficient,  to  wit,  when  a  person  only  believes  as  the 
church  beheves,  without  knowing  what  the  church  believes,  or  whe- 
ther her  faith  be  good  ;  yea,  the  prpists  conceive  that  faith  can  be 
described  better  by  ignorance,  than  knowledge,  and  that  ignorance  is 
the  mother  of  devotion.  Arrant  folly  1  but  in  this  manner  do  they 
retain  souls  in  blindness  and  in  bondage.  How  can  we  beheve  a 
person,  when  v/e  do  not  understand  whcft  he  saith  ?  "  I'aith  corneth 
by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God,"  Rom,  x.  1 7.  Must 
we  not  then  understand  what  we  hear  ?  Justifying  and  saving  faith 
is  called  knowledge,  Isaiah  liii.  11.  John  x'-di  3.  "The  soul  with- 
out knowledge  is  not  good,"  Prov.  xix.  2.  Ignorance  is  the  cause 
of  evtry  evil  action.  Because  "  the  princes  of  this  world  knew  not 
the  wisdom  of  God,  therefore  they  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,'* 

1  Cor.  ii.  7,  8.     "  Ignorance  alienates  the  sinner  from  the  lif-r  of 
God,"  Eph.  iv.  18.    "  God  will  punish  ignorance  with  flaming  fire," 

2  Thes.  i.  8,  and  "  he  will  not  have  mercy  on  a  people  of  ro  under- 
standing, nor  show  them  any  favour,"  Isaiah  xxvii.  1 1. 

2.  The  second  act  of  faith  i-  assent,  or  '*  a  certain  knowledge 
whereby  a  person  holds  for  truth  all  that  God  reveals  to  him  in  his 
word."  This  assent  we  may  also  call  a  historical  faith,  (although  it 
is  wholly  different  from  the  historical  faith  of  the  unconverted,  as 
we  will  see  more  particularly  in  the  sequel).  By  which  a  person 
receives  upon  certain  evidences,  and  upon  the  testimony  of  God,  as  a 
real,  divine,  and  acceptable  truth,  that  which  is  revealed  to  him  in 
the  word  of  God.  *'  This  is  called  "  receiving  the  testimony  of 
God,  and  setting  to  our  seal  that  God  is  tme,"  John  iii.  33.  "  a  full 
assurance  of  understanding,"  Coll.  ii.  2,  '*  an  acknowledging  of  the 
truth,"  2  Tim.  ii.  35.  W  hereby  the  soul  entertains  such  an  assu- 
rance of  the  invisible  thini^s,  discovered  in  the  word  of  God,  as  if 
3he  saw  them  with  her  eyes,  and  heard  with  her  ears  God  speak  of 
them  to  her  with  his  own  mouth  ;  in  consequence  of  which  she  can 
depend  upon  the  promises  of  God  as  upon  firm  and  immovable  foun- 
dations, and  expect  happiness  of  every  kind  from  him  :  for  "  this 
faith  is  a  sure  foundation  of  things  hoped  for,  and  an  evidence  of 
things  not  seen.  By  this  faith  Moses  had  respect  unto  the  recom- 
pence  of  the  reward,  and  endnrf  dap  seeing  him  who  is  invisible," 


1^8  SAVING  FAITH. 

Heb.  xi.  \y  26,  27,     And  therefore  this  faith  is  ©pposed  to  *'  doubting 
concerning  the  promises  of  God,"    Rom.  iv.  18,  21. 

The  reason  why  our  mind  receives  as  true  and  divine  all  that  God 
hath  revealed  to  us  in  his  word,  is  not  because  the  church,  or  our  o\vt. 
human  reason  teaches  and  commands  it  ;  for  then  our  belief  of  the 
divine  truth  would  not  depend  upon  a; divine  authority,  but  upon 
men,  and  upon  our  own  imagination.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the 
church  showeth  us  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  scriptures,  and  that 
reason  is  the  mean  by  which  we  apprehend  it :   but  nothing  that  is 
human  can  persuade  and  oblige  us  to  believe  the  truth  and  divinity 
of  the  scriptures  :  but  the   believer  holds   all  this  to  be  true  and  di- 
vine, on  account  of  the  evidences  of  the  truth  and  divinity  which  ap- 
pear in  the  word  itself,  and  offer  themselves  to  the    attentive  inqui- 
rer.    Therefore  we  are  directed,  in  order  that  we  may  believe,  not 
to  the  church,  or  to  our  own  reason,  but  only  to  the  word  of  Cod. 
See  Isaiah  xxxiv  16.  John  v.    39.  Acts  xvii    1 1.     The  evidences  of 
the  truth  of  scripture  are  particularly  the  credibility  of  the  prophets 
and  apostles,  who  testified,  without  regard  to  their  private  interest, 
"  that  which  they  had  saen  with  their  eyes,  and  handled    with  their 
hands,"  1  John  i.  1,2,  3,  and  they  confirmed  their  testimony  by  eve- 
ry mean,  yea,  by  suffering  the  most  painful  death.     The  evidences 
of  the  divinity  of  the  holy  scriptures  are  the   prophecies  of  future 
events,  w^hich  have  been  fulfilled  in  their  proper  time  ;   and  also  the 
miracles,  by  which  God  confirmed  his  doctrine.     To  all  this  we  must 
add  a  po\yerful  conviction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  he  illustrates 
those  evidences,  so  that  we  can  understand  them,  and  by  which  he 
conveys  and  wjorks  the  grace  and  truth  which  the  scripture  propo- 
seth,  in  our  hearts,  and  produces  thus  a  perfect  assurance.     See  hew 
Paul  teaches  this,  I  Thess.  i.  5,   "  Our  gospel  came  not  to   you  in 
word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  ip  much 
assurance,"  1  Thess.  ii.  13.  "Ye  received  the  word  of  God  which 
ye  heard  of  us,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  (as  it  is  in  truth)  the 
word  of  God,  which  effectually  worIj.eth    also  in  you  that  believe." 
And  so  *'  the  Spirit   beareth   witness   that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth." 
1  John  V.  6.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  mind  suffers  grievous  as- 
saults, when  itexerciseth  this  faith,  that  the  flesh   and  the  devil  at- 
tack one  sometimes  with  horrible,  yea,  blasphemous  injections,   by 
which  the  faith  of  the   soul  is   exceedingly   shaken ;    but  we  must 
know  that  a  historical  faith  hath    also   its  imperfections,   yea,  that 
these  shakings  tend,  by  the  wise  and  powerful  ordination  of  God,  to 
inroot  this  faith  more  firmly  and  deeply  in  the  soul ;   since  the  soul, 
shaken  in  this  manner,  endeavours  so  much  tlie  more  to  surmount 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— 2S.  15^ 

these  doubtings,  to  look  about  for  solid  grounds,  and  to  settle  herself 
upon  them. 

3.  The  mind  assured  in  this  manner  of  the  divine  revelation,  exer- 
cises also  confidence  in  acting  faith.  The  instructor,  in  order  to 
teach  the  assurance  of  believers  concerning-  their  salvation,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  Papists,  describes  their  confidence  in  its  highest  degree, 
and  in  its  most  improved  condition,  (as  we  are  used  to  do,  when  we 
describe  things  in  their  greatest  perfection)  saying  "  An  assured  con- 
fidence, that  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  me,  remission  of  sin, 
everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation,  are  freely  given  by  God,"  &c. 
Now  since  such  a  confidence  doth  not  consist  in  an  imagination,  by 
which,  with  the  Remonstrants,  we  hold  it  for  a  certain  truth,  that 
Christ  hath  died  for  me  and  all  men,  because  we  should  then  work 
by  our  faith  only  with  ourselves,  and  not  with  Christ,  and  through 
him  with  God,  contrary  to  what  we  have  taught  and  proved  before  ; 
therefore  it  follows  that  something  else  must  precede  this  confidence, 
by  which  we  obtain  such  a  happy  interest  in  Christ,  and  from  which 
we  may  conclude  upon  sufficient  foundations,  that  remission  of  sins, 
&c.  is  freely  given,  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  us.  That  which 
then  constitutes  the  proper  act  of  a  confiding  faith,  is  that  confiden- 
tial assent  to  the  proffer  of  the  crucified  Mediator,  by  which  the  be- 
lieving soul  doth  with  the  highest  satisfaction  approve  of  God's  me- 
thod of  saving  the  sinner  through  the  sufferings  of  his  Son,  chooses 
the  Saviour  for  herself,  owns  him,  and  rests  wholly  upon  him  for 
salvation 

In  order  to  explain  this  somewhat  more  fully,  we  will  eye  the  soul, 
in  her  acts  of  faith.  The  soul  being  so  concerned,  perplexed,  and 
anxious,  as  we  have  seen,  in  explaining  the  twelfth  question,  hears 
indeed  of  an  allsufficicnt  Saviour;  but  it  doth  not  relieve  her,  be- 
cause she  is  too  much  distressed,  and  fears  that  he  is  not  for  her* 
Is  she  informed  that  he  offers  himself  to  her,  and  that  he  calls  and 
invites  her  to  him,  she  dares  not  however  believe  it,  on  account  of 
her  unworthiness.  But  the  Lord  penetrating  effectually  into  the 
soul,  persuades  her  by  a  historical  faith,  and  by  working  an  assent 
in  her  through  his  word  and  Spirit,  and  he  assures  her  that  he  in- 
tends her  also  in  his  call  and  invitation.  She  believes  this,  and  is 
thus  persuaded  in  a  powerful  manner,  to  comply  with  this  method 
of  salvation,  and  is  willing  that  the  Lord  God,  sin*  c  he  manifests 
himself  so  favourable  to  her,  should  fulfil  in  her  all  the  good  pleasure 
of  his  goodness,  she  surrenders  herself  Tto  him  for  this  purpose, 
and  saith  with  Marv,   **  Behold  the   handmaid  of  the   Lord,  be  it 


160  iAVING  FAITH. 

unto  me  according;  to  thy  word/'   Luke  i-  38,     And  she  thus  *^  su}^ 
inits  herself  to  the  n:.hteousncss  of  God"  in  Chribt,  Rom.  x.  3.   She 
conducts  in  this  transaction,  as  a  maid,  "who  being  kindly  addressed 
by  a  young  man,  and  persutidec  by  him,  cheerf.lly  consent?  to  hii 
proposal,  owns  and  accepts  of  him  as  her  husband,  and  enters  into 
an   entitlement   to  be   his    wife  daring  her  life-      Jesus  allures 
the  soul,  and    speaks  kindly  to   her,  the   soul,   believing   by   her 
act  of  consent,  that  he  means  what  he  saith  to  her,  yields  herself 
up  to  him  by  her  faith  of  confidence,  owns  and   chooses  him    for 
her  bridegroom  and  husband,  and  surrenders  herself  tot^im  to  be 
his  bride  and  spouse  for  ever,  and   **  she  is  thus  betrothed  to  him 
in  faith,"   Hosea  ii.  13,  20.     By  faith  "  she  says  and  subscribes,  I 
am  the  Lord's,"  Isaiah  xlv.  5.     Yea,  her  faith  is  as  it  were  a  giving 
of  her  hand  to  the  Lord,  an  espousing  of  herself  to  the  Lord,  as   it 
were,  by  a  solemn  taking  of  his  hand,  and  by  an  oath,  2  Chron.  xxx. 
8,  by  which  "  the  Lord  brings  her  into  the  bond  of  covenant,'*  Ezek. 
XX.  37. 

We  cannot  contemplate  the  power  of  this  act  of  faith,  unless  v/e 
attend  to  several  things,  which  are  contained  in  it,  and  to  the  em- 
phasis of  the  expressionrin  the  word  of  God  that  relate  to  it.  And 
therefore  we  v/lU  busy  ourselves  a  little  with  eyeing  the  soul  in  the 
active  exercise-  of  her  faith  and  confidenise,  and  exhibit  in  the  mean 
time  the  eniphasis  of  the  phrases  used  in  the  word  of  God,  both  in 
Hebrew  and  Greek. 

1.  Previous  to  this  act  of  faith,  there  is  a  general  confidence  and 
issurance  of  this  evangelical  truth,  that  he  who  believes  in  Christ 
shall  surely  be  saved  ;  yea,  the  soul  confides  in  this  for  herself,  that 
if  she  believe  she  shall  certainly  be  saved;  by  which  s' e  is  also 
encouraged  to  come  to  Christ.  See  this  in  Bartimeus,  Mark  x.  49, 
50,  5  L  Many  believe  this  indeed  as  a  p:eneral  truth,  but  they  do 
not  regard  it  to  their  salvation  ;  but  the  believer  is  affected  with  it 
in  such  a  manner,  that  he  ^eeks  .>nd  finds  the  favour  of  his  Savioui 
for  himself.  The  sinner  hath  s©mfe^-mes  such  a  sight  and  sense  cf 
his  misery,  that  he  fcarS  there  will  be  no  mercy  for  him,  and  the 
reprobate  sinks  under  it  into  despair,  and  doth  not  attend  to  the  prof- 
fered grace  :  "  He  makes  God  a  liar,  because  he  believes  not  the 
record  which  God  hath  given  of  his  Son,"  1  John  v.  10.  But  the  elect, 
who  have  the  spirit  of  faith,  struggle  against  these  discouragements^ 
and  surmount  them,  and  they  attend  to  this  truth,  until  they  obtain 
i&n  assured  interest  in  Christ. 

2.   To  this  is  added  a  strong,  active,  and  restless  desire  for  the 
Mediator  and  his  salvation,  in  order  that  we  may  partake  of  him  and 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20—23.  161 

his  benefits.  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  saith,  "  If  any  man  thirst, 
kt  him  come  unto  me  and  drink  ;  he  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the 
scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  livinj;  wa- 
ter," John  vii  37,  38.  The  soul  sees  indeed  a  sufficiency  in  Jesus, 
and  that  he  is  able  to  remove  all  her  sinful  misery,  and  hem.e  she 
vehemently  thirsts  for  him,  sighs  and  cries  to  him,  that  he  n.ay  be 
gracious  to  her,  and  receive  her.  See  this  Psalm  xlii.  1,  2,  Matt. 
»xv.  21,  29. 

3.  Add  to  this,  that  there  is  in  this  exercise  an  actual  turning  of 
ourselves  to  him.  "This  is  called  "  a  coming  to  him,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
24.  By  which  (a)  a  person,  like  one  who  is  without  strength,  and 
unable  to  break  through  to  him,  and  draw  near  to  him,  only  looks  to 
him  from  afar,  and  shows  himself  to  him,  that  he  may  have  mercy 
on  such  a  miserable  wretch,  who  cries  to  him  out  of  the  depths," 
Psalm  cxxx.  1.  Or  (b)  as  one,  who  is  wholly  wretched,  he  casts 
himself  into  his  hands,  that  he  may  execute  his  office  of  Saviour  upon 
the  soul  ;  and  he  thus  suffers  himself  to  be  saved,  as  the  Saviour  ad- 
monisheth,  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  saved,"  which 
implies,  suffer  yourselves  to  be  saved  and  reconciled.  See  also  2 
Cor.  V.  20.  Or  (c)  as  one  who  is  pursued  and  urged  by  fear,  he 
flees  to  him,  that  he  may  sl)elter  himself  with  him,  and  be  hid- 
den from  destruction  :  '*  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower, 
the  righteous  rur.neth  into  it,  and  is  safe."  Prov.  xviii.  10.  The  He- 
brews to  denote  this,  make  use  of  the  word  chazahy  which  is  rendered 
sometimes  "  taking  refuge,"  and  at  other  times  *•  trusting."  We 
meet  with  both  expressions,  Psalm  Ivii.  1,  for  we  find  here  a  secure 
shelter  and  a  quiet  confidence.  Or  (d)  a  person,  after  proper  delib- 
eration, actually  enters  in  and  through  him  into  the  covenant,  in  or- 
der to  become  his  property,  that  he  may  rest  only  in  him,  and  live 
to  him,  Jsaitdi  Iv.  3.  Thus  ''he  saith  and  subscribes  with  his  hand, 
I  am  the  Lord's,'-  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  And  "  he  enters  into  the  cove- 
nant," Deut.  xxix.  12.  2  Chron.  xv.  12. 

4.  There  is  also  in  this  exercise  of  faith,  a  receiving  of  the  promi- 
ses, which  a  person  apprehends,  appropriates  to  himself,  depends 
upon,  and  improves,  in  order  to  exhibit  his  claims  to  the  Lord,  like 
David,  Psalm  cxix.  49.  *'  Remember  the  word  unto  thy  servant, 
upon  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope,"  and  also  a  receiving  of 
the  Mediator  hinjself,  of  whom  he  "  takes  hold,  as  the  strength  of 
God,"  Isaiah  xxvii-  5,  "receives,"  John  i.  12,  and  owns  for  his, 
Song  ii.  16.  A  person  unites  himself  to  him,  and  admits  him  to 
«  dwell  in  his  heart  by  fyith,"  Eph.  iii.  17. 

5.  Finally,  there  is  4iso  a  committing  of  ourselves  to  the  Lordi  and 


W2  SAVING  FAITH 

a  relying'  upon  liim  m  every  condition.  Tt/15  U  'jignified  by  the 
Greek  nord  /izateuo,  ^'  I  believe,"  which  is  often  translated  a  com- 
mittin:>^  of  aughr  to  a  person.  See  Romtiii.  2.  1  Cor.  ix  17.  Thus 
also  the  Hebrew  word  batach  signifieth  a  risting  and  setthng  of  our- 
selves on  the  Lord,  as  a  steadfast  foundation  stone,  in  seasons  of  dan- 
ger, and  when  we  might  easily  be  shaken  and  despond.  It  is  said 
of  the  righteous,  Psalm  cxii.  7,  "  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  ti- 
dings ;  his  heart  is  iixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord,"  and  Isaiah  xxvi.  4. 
»*  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever  ;  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  there  is 
everlasting  strength."  The  soul  wlio  confides,  remains  quiet,  and 
rests  in  the  Lord  under  trouble,  Isaiah  ^xx.  15.  Of  no  less  empha- 
sis is  the  word  keemin^  which  signifies  a  sufferinj^  of  one's  self  to  be 
carried  and  fed  like  a  child,  that  rests  upon  the  arms,  arid  in  the  bosom 
of  a  nurse,  and  trusts  and  commits  itself  to  her  without  concern. 
This  word  is  translated  '*  trusting,"  Job.  xv.  31,  but  most  commrnly 
'^  believing,"  See  Gen.  xv.  6,  and  it  is  opposed  to  an  anxious  and 
concerned  hasiening,  Isaiah  xxviii.  16,  "He  that  believeth  shall  rot 
make  haste."  The  beUever  will  be  more  or  less  employed  in  one 
or  another  act  of  fnilh,  accordimr  as  he  is  disposed  in  this  or 
tha:  manner,  is  more  or  less  advanced  or  influenced  by  the  Spirit 
of  faith. 

From  this  exercise  of  fai  h  and  confidence  follows  also  assurariccj 
and  "  an  assured  confidence,  that  not  only  to  others,  but  also  to  my- 
self,  remission  of  sins,  everlasting  righteousness  and  salvation  are 
freely  given  by  God  merely  of  grace,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  mer- 
itsi"  Every  believer  is  not  always  assured,  neither  is  faith  assu* 
ranee  itself;  but  assurance  floweth  in  a  greater  or  less  proportion 
from  the  exercise  of  faith.  For,  (a)  not  only  have  eminent  believers 
possessed  assurance,  but  also  ordinary  believers,  as  is  testified,  Job. 
xix.  25,  26,  27,  I  Cor.  i.  30.  2  Cor.  v.  1.  "We  know  that  if  our 
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building 
of  God,"  Sec.  The  exercise  of  faith  is  also  a  rational  act  of  the  soul, 
which  is  conscious  of  her  operations,  knowing  what  she  doth,  and 
being  able  to  say,  ''  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,"  1  Tim.  i. 
12.(c)  It  is  indeed  true,  that  imexperienced  believers  dare  not  en- 
tertain assurance  through  their  prejudice  against  God's  work  of 
grace,  and  their  matfention,  as  they  do  not  give  sufficient  heed  to  the 
work  of  the  Lord  in  the  soul,  or  because  they  are  young,  and  do 
not  yet  know  the  voice  of  the  Lord  The  Holy  Spirit  will  neverthe- 
less sometimes,  and  at  least  finally,  afford  them  a  steadfast  assurance 
by  enabling  them  to  form  a  believing  syllogism  \  for  he  assures 
them  from  the  word,  that  "  he  who  believeth  on  Jesus  shall  be  sa- 


--2S.  Ut 

ved  ;"  for  "•  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth/ 
1  John  V  6.  He  enables  them  also  to  perceive  in  their  heaits  that 
they  do  truly  believe  ;  for  "  they  receive  the  Spirit  which  is  of 
God,  that  they  may  i^now  the  things  that  are  freely  given  them  of 
God."  He  causeth  them  to  infer  therefrom  that  they  shall  also  be 
paved  :  for  *'  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  vdtness  witii  our  spirit,  that  we 
are  the  children  of  God,"  Rom.  viii.  16, 

The  Papists  imagine  that  such  an  assurance  is  only  a  presump= 
;uous  conceit,  because  we  cannot  find  any  where  such  a  special  prom- 
ise to  this  or  that  person,  as  Peter  and  Paul  had,  that  he  shall  be  sa- 
red  ;  but  the  proniises  are  made  to  them  who  believe  ;  when  there- 
fore any  person,  upon  looking  into  himself,  is  conscious  that  he  be- 
lieves, he  should  undoubtedly  assure  himself  tliat  he  shall  also  be 
saved,  and  that  v/ith  as  much  certainty^  as  if  he  were  addressed  by 
name  in  the  word  of  God. 

We  must  distinguish  the  exercise  of  a  believer's  faith,  according; 
to  the  degree  of  his  assurance.  And  so  we  contemplate  it  as  an  ex- 
ercise  of  faitii  *•  unto  '  justification,  and  to  the  obtaining  cf  salvation, 
and  "from"  justification  and  salvation  already  obtained.  *'  The  ex^ 
ercise  of  faith  to  justification,"  is  that  which  an  unexperienced  and 
weak  believer,  who  hath  not  yet  a  perfect  and  steadfast  assurance,  ex- 
erts, in  order  that  he  m.ay  be  justified  and  saved,  Gal.  ii.  16. 
"  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but 
by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even  we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ  ; 
that  we  might  be  justified."  Doth  the  believer  once  attain  to  assu- 
rance, he  is  however  frequently  unsettled  by  his  improper  behaviour, 
his  darkness,  and  his  poring  on  his  misery,  and  he  thinks  that  his 
former  assurance  was  only  a  conceit :  and  tlierefore  he  will  continu- 
ally endeavour  to  exercise  faith  auew,  he  hungers  and  thirsts,  he 
runs  and  flies  to  Jesus,  he  surrenders  himself  to  him,  and  accepts  of 
him  until  his  soul  is  reduced  to  her  sweet  rest  again  ;  and  he  doth 
this  so  often,  and  so  long  a  time,  that  he  attains  unto  a  settled  assu- 
rance. "  The  exercise  of  faith  from  justification,"  is  that  which  is 
exerted  by  a  person,  who  is  further  advanced,  and  who  possesses  a 
steadfast  assurance,  that  he  is  truly  justified  and  saved  by  God,  and 
hath  an  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  all  his  saving  benefits: 
whereby  he  exerciseth  faith  in  him,  as  one  who  is  entitled  to  all  his 
salvation,  and  who  hath  therefore  "  in  him  boldness  and  access,  with 
confidence  by  the  faith  of  him,"  Eph.  iii.  12.  This  exercise  of 
faith  is  otherwise  called  "  a  living  and  walking  by  faith,"  in  opposi- 
tion to  <^  sight,"  Hab.  ii.  4.  2  Cor.  v.  7.  And  it  is  performed, 
1.  By  a  repeated  re-establishing  of  the  interrupted  reconciliati«B 


164  SAVING  FAITH. 

'  and  peace  of  mind  by  laying  hold  on  the  Mediator,  and  pleading  him 
and  his  whole  salvation  before  the  Father,  witn  ^^  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God,  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Ciirist 
from  thi;  dead,"  1  Peter  iii    21, 

2.  by  mixing  fai'h  with  the  word,  and  making  use  of  it  in  all 
cases,  ai  o\>v  food,  feeding  at  it  were  upon  it,  Jer,  xv.  16.  Heb.  iv    2. 

3.  I?y  a  iVequenr  exercise  of  either  a  stronger  or  we.-ker  act  of 
faitti  on  Christ,  as  the  breathing  of  the  soul,  and  tlms  ''  from  faith  to 
fa:th,"  Horn.  i.  17. 

4.  By-  continually  uniting  ourselves  to  him,  sucking  from  his  ful- 
ness taroii^h  the  conduits  of  the  promises  against  every  calamity. 
GaJ.  ii.  20   John  i.  16 

5.  by  rejoxinvj  through  f  lith  in  our  happy  interest  in  God,  1  Peter 
1.  8,  li":  the  Ethiopian,  Acts  viii.  :>9.  and  the  gaoler,  Acts  xv.  34. 

6.  y  ordering  oui'  w'qIh  conversation,  what  we  do,  and  what  we 
forocr,  in  faith,  from  a  persuasion  of  ti.e  will  of  God,  and  with  a 
dependence  on  ins  ''  help,  which  he  hath  laid  upon  one  who  is 
mighty,"  Rom.  iv.  23.  Eph.  vi    10. 

7.  By  r  lying  through  faiti  on  his  promises,  and  expecting  all  the 
promised  salvation  with  patience  and  moderation,  though  it  appear 
ever  so  dark,  Psalm  xxvii.  13,  14.  Rom.  iv.  18    Heb.  x.  36,    37    38. 

8.  By  conducting  ourselves  courageously  through  faith  in  the 
greatest  dangers,  and  submitting  willingly  to  every  suffering  for  the 
Lord's  sake,  1  Sam   xxx.  6    Psalm  xxiii.  4.  Heb-  xi.  24 — 27. 

When  we  consider  all  these  particulars,  we  cannot  doubt  that  faith 
is  an  act,  not  only  of  the  underst-mding  and  judgment,  but  also  of 
the  will.  For  it  is  active,  not  only  with  respect  lo  its  object,  as  a 
trutli,  as  the  word  is,  but  also  as  a  benefit,  to  wit,  Christ  and  all  his 
benefits  ;  faitlj  is  not  only  an  immanent  act  of  the  soul,  but  a  tran- 
sient act,  which  goeth  out  toward  Christ  and  his  Father,  and  so  far 
faiih  is  an  act  of  the  will ;  and  truly  faith  is  like  the  y^aword  of  a 
maid,  who  hath  been  persuaded  and  consents  willingly  to  her  mar- 
riage. 

APPLICATION. 

How  happy  are  they  who  possess  this  faith  !  they  are  pronounced 
blessed,  Psalm  ii.  12.  "Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in 
him  "  It  is  ''  a  precious  faith,"  2  Peter  i.  !•  We  are  delivered  by  it 
from  condemnation,  John  v.  24.  Rom  viii.  1.  We  obtain  a  happy 
interest  in  the  Son  of  God  and  all  his  benefits,  we  become  children 
of  God,  are  justifted,  sanctified,  saved.,  how  abominable  soever  we 


VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  20— 2.Sv  165 

«re  in  ourselves,  John  i.  12.  Rom  iv.  5,  8.  Acts  xv.  9.  John  iii.  16, 
36.  ii  renders  all  our  actions  good  and  acceptable  to  God,  tl.ough 
they  are  abominable  and  loatlisome  "  without  faith,"  Rom.  xiv.  23* 
Heb-  xi.  6.  There  is  a  wonderful  power  in  faith  to  effect  great  things- 
See  this  Heb.  xi.  "It  can  do  all  things,"  Philip  iv.  13.  Mark  ix. 
13  It  causeth  Christ  to  "dwell  in  the  heart,"  Eph  iii.  17  It  ap- 
propriates every  promise,  it  claims  for  its  own  whatsoever  it  lays 
hold  on,  and  it  obtains  an  answer  to  our  pi  ayers ;  "  What  things 
soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  them,  and  ye 
shall  have  them,"  Mark  xi.  24.  "  It  overcometh  the  world,"  John  v» 
4.  "  Every  man,"  said  Cyprian,  "  obtains,  according  to  the  promises 
of  the  Lord,  as  much  help  of  God,  as  he  believes  that  he  will 
obtain.'* 

Since  then  salvation,  and  all  kinds  of  happiness  are  annexed  to 
faith,  ought  not  every  one  to  consider  his  ways,  and  with  the  i^reat- 
est  attention  examine  himself,  and  inquire  *•  whether  he  be  in  the 
faith,  and  whether  Jesus  Christ  be  in  liim,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  Therefore 
impress  it  upon  your  miuds,  that  every  baptized  professor  of  the 
truth  doth  not  possess  faith  ;  for  "  all  men  have  not  faith,"  2  Tl-ess* 
iii.  2,  "but  only  the  elect  of  God,"  Titus  i.  1.  Therefore  "examine 
youi'selves  strictly,  ye  listless  people ;  before  the  decree  bring  forth, 
before  the  day  pass  as  the  chaff,  before  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord 
come  upon  you,  before  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  come  upon  you," 
Zeph.  ii.  1,  2. 

Do  ye  ask,  How  shall  we  know  whether  we  have  this  faith  or  not? 
it  is  evident  that  those  have  not  faith,  (a)  who  are  ignorant ;  for 
faith  implies  knowledge,  (b)  Who  remain  in  themselves,  and  arc 
never  concerned  how  they  shall  be  saved,  and  in  this  respect  arc 
neither  "  cold  nor  hot,  but  lukewarm,"  Rev.  iii  15.  (c)  Who  are 
ungodly,  and  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  "  The  abominable  and 
disobedient  are  unbdievers,"  Titus  i.  15.  16.  (d)  Who  are  indeed 
not  s*  abominable,  and  would  fain  enter  into  heaven,  but  do  not  do 
the  least  thing  for  that  purpose,  as  if  they  were  to  be  saved  by  Christ 
as  they  perished  in  Adam,  and  therefore  they  venture  upon  a  gene- 
ral grace  of  God,  and  death  of  Christ.  Doth  any  one  convince  thenx 
that  they  will  be  lost,  if  they  act  thus,  they  comfort  themselves,  be- 
cause they  are  not  so  ungodly  as  this  and  that  person,  but  are  civil 
and  rehgious,  hke  the  Pharisee,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12.  "  But  without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  Heb  xi.  (e)  Those  who  have 
an  erroneous  notion  of  faith  One  thinks  because  he  is  not  a  Jew, 
heathen,  or  Mahometan,  that  he  is  therefore  a  believer  ;  another, 
because  he  doubts  not  concerning;  the  word  of  God,  but  believes  it 


l^b  ,-  SAVING  F AITK. 

^rmly,  imagines  that  he  hath  a  saving  faith  ;  a  third  fondly  conceits 
and  forces  himself  to  believe  that  he  will  be  saved,  and  this  will  then 
be  his  faith ;  but  "  he  feedeth  upon  ashes  ;  a  deceived  heart  hath 
turned  him  aside,  so  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul,  nor  say,  is  there 
not  a  lie  in  my  ripjat  hand  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 

These  things  are  so  plain  and  palpable,  that  they  who  are  such 
persons,  as  we  have  described,  may  find  without  labour  that  they 
have  not  this  faith.  But  it  is  more  difficult  to  convince  a  temporary 
^liever  of  this,  since  he  may  have  very  many  good  things,  which 
greatly  resemble  the  woik  of  sincere  believers :  for  he  may  be  ex- 
ceedingly sorry  for  his  sins  with  Cain,  Esau,  Saul,  Ahab  apd  Judas ; 
he  may  "  gladly  hear  "  a  zealous  preacher,  and  be  moved  to  "  do 
many  things"  with  Herod,  Mark  vi.  20.  He  may  have  a  great  knowl- 
edge and  belief  of  the  truth,  yea,  receive  Jesus  after  his  manner : 
^' He  may  be  enlightened,  taste  the  heavenly  gift,  be  made  a  par- 
taker of  the  Holy  Giiost,  taste  the  good  word  of  God.  and  the  powers 
of  the  world  to  come,  and  yet  fall  away,"  Heb.  vi.  4,  5.  He  may 
also  be  unblamable,  join  himself  to  the  society  of  the  godly,  like 
Judas  and  Demas,  and  "  give  his  body  to  be  burned"  for  the  truth, 
and  yet  not  do  his  work  in  truth,  and  not  possess  "  a  faith  that  work- 
eth  by  love,"  1  Cor.  xiii,  3,  by  which  means  he  attains  to  a  fond 
imagination,  that  he  is  already  a  most  eminent  believer. 

But  tl'irtt  he  may  yet  be  convinced,  at  leas^,  that  true  believers  may 
see  the  reality  of  this  work,  v/e  will  exhibit  certain  evidences  of  a  sin- 
cere work  of  faith,  in  opposition  to  the  work  of  temporary  believers ; 
•vhich  evidences  we  will  not  derive  from  any  circumstances,  nor 
from  the  degrees  of  faiih,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  work  of  grace 
and  of  faith,  as  it  is  found  m  every  believer,  and  in  believers  only. 

1.  The  true  believer  hath  a  spiritual  knowledge,  whereby  he  not 
only  apprehends  the  words  and  mysteries  of  scripture,  as  they  occur 
therein,  but  also  contemplates  the  things  themselves,  God,  Christ 
and  the  life  hidden  v/ith  God  :  "  he  sees  the  light  in  God's  light," 
Psalm  xxxvi.  9j  although  his  knowledge  be  ever  so  small.  We  have 
shown  this  before  ;  but  the  knowledge  of  the  temporary  believer 
proceeds  not  beyond  the  word,  it  leaves  his  soul  without  God,  and  he 
obtains  it  only  by  human  instruction,  by  his  own  barren,  carnal  reas° 
onings  and  speculations,  and  hence  he  is  filled  with  an  admiration 
of  himself,  and  while  he  teaches  others  in  an  imperious  nianner,  he 
desires  that  they  also  should  admire  him  and  be  astonished  at  his, 
wisdom.  See  how  Balaam  boasted  cencerning  his  wisdom  and  rapt- 
tures.  Numbers  xxiv.  3,  4.     And  thus  •«  knowledge  puffeth  up,  buj 


VII,  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  20-23,  iW 

chanty  edifieth.     And  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  thing, 
he  knoweth  nothing  yet,  as  he  ought  to  know,"  1  Cor.  viii.  2,  3.      ^ 

2.  The  historical  faith  of  true  believers  is  \yroiight  in  them  by  the 
Ploly  Spirit,  who  not  only  explains  the  evidences  of  truth  and  divinity 
to  them,  but  also  impresses  the  truths  of  God  upon  their  hearts,  and. 
causes  them  to  see  those  truths,  as  we  have  proved  before  from  I 
Thess.  I.  5,  and  ii.  13,  so  that  they  are  moved  and  persuaded  to  be- 
lieve m,  and  to  love  God.  Christ,  and  his  service,  and  they  do  not 
attain  to  this  without  striving,  and  suffering  many  vexations  from 
their  unbelieving  l^.earts  and  -Satan-  See  Mark  ix.  23,  24.  But  the 
tempor^^ry  believer  hath  no  true  historical  faith  ;  it  is  commonly  only 
a  historical  knowledge^  and  a  supposing  that  the  word  of  God  is  the 
truth  ;  and  when  he  even  believes  it,  it  is  not  more  than  a  persua- 
sion, proceeding  from  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment,  and  it  hath 
no  other  efi'cct  on  him,  than  to  induce  him  to  imagine  that  he  is 
now  some  extraordinary  person,  and  so  "  he  receiveth  the  word  anon 
with  joy  ;  yet  he  hath  no  root  in  himself,"  Matt,  xiii.  20,  21. 

3.  The  believer  is  employed  in  the  confiding  act  of  faith  ''  with  his 
heart,"  Rom.  x.  9,  and  that  with  respect  to  God  and  Christ,  whom 
he  receives,  and  unites  to  himself,  John  i.  12.  Eph.  iii.  \7,  With 
his  whole  heart  he  consents  to  the  proffer  of  grace,  hungers  and 
thirsts  atter  Christ,  surrenders  himself  to  him,  and  casts  himself  upon 
him.  A  temporary  bc^liever  is  employed  only  with  his  judgment, 
with  respect  to  the  apprehensions,  which  he  forms  of  faith,  and  he 
urges  with  his  thoughts,  \^hich  are  void  of  the  Spirit,  his  exercises 
according  to  those  apprehensions,  and  claims  faith  thus  without  the 
Spirit  of  fait;  .  He  imagines  then  that  he  hath  a  true  faith,  and  he 
rejoices  greatly  :  ''  And  thus  he  kindles  a  fire  himself,  compasses 
himself  about  with  sparks,  v/alks  in  the  light  of  his  fire,  and  in  the 
Sparks  that  he  hath  kindled,"  Isaiah  1.  11. 

4.  A  true  and  sincere  faith  sanctifieth  the  soul,  not  only  outwardly, 
but  '■*it  purifieth"  also  '■'•  the  heart,"  Acts  xv.  9.  It  begets  a  wonder- 
ful love  to  God,  to  his  service,  and  to  our  neighbour  ;  "  Faith  work- 
eth  by  love,"  Gal.  v.  6.  It  renders  a  person  humble,  lowly,  self-deny- 
ing, heavenly-minded,  and  joyful  in  God,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  1  Peter  i.  8. 
But  the  temporary  beUever  retains  his  rotten  and  abominable  heart  j 
it  is  enough  for  him,  that  others  cannot  point  out  any  great  fault  in 
him,  that  lie  can  talk  wonderfully  well  of  holiness,  and  he  wishes 
that  all  men  should  consider  him  as  a  zealous  Christian,  like  Jehu-. 
Sf- Kings  X.  16 

A  true  believer  engages  frequently  in  self-exaniinaticn  :  he  would 
not  willingly  deceive  himself  in  a  matter  of  such  great  con r;-^ quench ; 


1C5  SAVING  FAITH. 

he  descends  a  thousand  times  into  his  mind,  that  he  may  know 
vrhether  his  heait  do  not  deceive  him  ;  he  often  lays  his  soul  open 
to  (iod,  that  he  may  discover  to  him  whether  he  deceives  himself, 
like  David»  Psalm  cxxxix  23,  24,  yea,  he  doth  this  sometimes  to  a 
judicious  minister,  or  to  a  private  Christian,  that  hemay^judge^ 
whet  ler  he  be  fiithful  to  the  Lord,"  like  I  ydia,  Acts  xvi.  17.  Doth 
another  suspect  him,  he  is  v^rillin^  to  be  detected,  and  saith,  "Let the 
righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness,"  Psalm  cxli.  5.  But  a 
teniporary  believer,  as  he  will  not  readily  descend  into  himself,  and 
only  contemplates  what  he  apprehends,  so  he  will  not  be  examined 
by  aaotiier  :  doth  any  one  suspect  him,  he  is  angry,  and  will  depart 
from  such  a  person,  as  Judas  departed  from  Christ,  when  he  detect- 
ed iiim,  John  xiii    20,  .26,  27,  30. 

Examine  yourselves  by  what  bath  been  said,  and  see  whether  ye 
have  faith  or  not,  and  deal  carefully  and  honestly  with  yourselves. 
If  ye  have  not  faith,  consider  in  what  a  deplorable  condition  ye  are  s 
"  Ye  are  wit  lout  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and 
stranjjers  from  t^e  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out -iod  in  tas  world,"  nph  ii.  12  The  word,  and  all  things  "are 
unprohtable  to  you,"  Heb  iv.  2,  "  the  wrath  of  God  licth  on  you," 
John  iii.  36,  and  *' ye  shall  be  damned,"  Mark  xvi.  16.  Alas  !  lay 
this  to  heart,  and  let  •*  the  terrour  of  the  Lord  persuade  you  to  be- 
lieve," 2  Cor.  V.  1 1.  The  Son  of  God  calls  yet  to  you, "  O  harden  not 
your  hearts,  while  to-day  yc  hear  his  voice,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.  Heb.  iii. 
7,  8.  No  sin,  though  ever  so  great,  ought  to  keep  you  from  him: 
"  he  will  in  no  wise  cas  any  one  out,  who  omes  to  him,"  John  vi. 
37.     He  rectives  t.  e  vilest  sinner.  1  Tim.  i.  13,  14,  15. 

But  with  respect  to  you  who  have  these  evidences,  permit  me  to 
say  briefly  for  your  direction,  1.  Be  assured,  that  not  only  to  others^ 
but  to  you  also,  forgiveness  of  sins,  everlasting  righteousness,  and 
salvation  are  freely  gnen  of  God ;  ye  have  the  evidences  of  it,  and 
know  n^^w  "  in  whom  ye  have  beli-jvc.,,"  2  Tim.  i.  12 

2.  Rejoice  with  the  gaoler,  that  ye  believe.  Acts  xvi  34.  Yea,, 
praise  the  Lord  on  this  account ;  for  it  is  your  great  happiness,  and 
*'  he  hath  given  it  to  you  of  his  grace,"  Philip   i.  2'^-.  Eph.  ii.  8,  9. 

3.  I'ndeavour  to  increase  in  faith,  for  which  the  apostle  prayed, 
Luke  xvii  5.  Unbelief  is  exceedingly  hurtful  to  you  in  every  rcspectj 
Matt.  xvii.  20.  Isaiah  vii.  9.  Heb.  iv.  2.  Yea,  it  is  a  sin  which  ought 
to  be  reproved.  See  Mark  ix.  19. 

4.  Livtf  now  by  faith,  by  a  frequent  exercise  of  it,  as  we  have  said 
beit-re-  foi'  It  is  the  breathing  of  the  soul. 

5.  Cherish  industriously  your  historical  faith  ^  for  that  alone  gives 


—23.  '    1^9 

Vigour  to  all  the  exercises  of  the  soul ;  "  It  is  the  substance  of  thing^ 
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1. 

6.  -onfess  also  the  doctrine  of  fajth,  though  it  should  be  with  the 
hazard  of  your  lives  :  "  P'or  with  the  heart  man  belleveth  unto  right- 
eousness, and  with  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation," 
Rom.  X.  10.  See  also  I  Peter  iii.  5    Matt.  x.  32,  33. 

7.  Comfort  youi'selves  also  with  your  faith,  knowing  «'  that  he  who 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  hfe,"  I  John  iii.  36,  1$  your 
faitii  weak,  salvation  depends  not  on  the  degree,  but  on  ihe  essence 
of  faith  ;  "  The  bruised  reed  he  will  not  break,  and  the  smokin:^  Qax 
he  will  not  quench,"  Matt,  xii  28.  Yea,  he  will  one  day  change 
faith  into  vision,  1  Cor  xiii.  12  "  We  see  now  through  a  glass 
da.-kiy  ;  but  taen  face  to  face  :  n<»w  I  kiiOw  in  part ;  bHt  then  shali 
I  know  fcven  as  also  i  am  known,"  Amen. 


Bb 


ira; 


THE 


CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH 


IN  THE  DIVINE  TRINITY 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAYc 


SlCrn  xiii  14.  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love 
of  God,  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all, 
Amen.