Q,  24.   Iloiu  are  these  articles  divided? 
A.  Into  three  parts  ;  the  first  is  of  God  the  Father,  and  our  crea- 
tion ;  the  second  of  God  the  Son,  and  our  redemption ;  the  third  of 
God  tae  Holy  Ghost,  and  our  sanctification. 

Q.   25.  Since  there  is  only  but  one  divine  essence,  why  afieakesC  thou 
of  Father^  Son^  and  Holy  Ghost  ? 

A.  Because  God  hath  so  revealed  himself  in  his  word,  that  these 
three  distinct  Persons  are  the  one  only  true  and  eternal  God. 


A 


PERSON  who  is  desirous  to  learn  any  art,  is  not  presently 
able  to  comprehend  and  exercise  it  perfectly  :  but  he  must  begin 
with  the  first  principles  of  it,  must  by  them  be  led  up  to  more  per« 
feet  conceptions,  and  must  by  frequent  exercises  render  the  ait 
familiar  to  himself.  Let  us  mstance  in  the  art  of  reading  :  no  mac 
is  able  to  attain  by  a  single  exertion  to  the  highest  degree  of  skill  ic 
it,  but  lie  must  in  the  first  place  endeavour  to  learn  the  letters,  then 
syllables,  and  afterwards  words  and  sentences.    Thus  it  is  also  with 


Wt 

knowing  God :  it  doth  not  please  God,  to  reveal  himself  in  the  clear- 
est and  highest  manner  to  the  elect  sinner  at  the  beginning.  No 
man,  who  is  yet  in  a  state  of  mortality  is  presently  able  to  receive 
such  a  revelation.  "  No  man  shall  see  God  and  live ;"  he  may  «  see 
only  his  backparts,"  No  man  is  able  to  understand  the  language  of 
God,  by  which  he  would  reveal  himself  in  the  c  earest  n»anner  t 
therefore  it  is  necessary  that  God  should  adopt  the  language  of  men, 
and  stammer  with  them  as  children,  on  account  of  the  nothingness 
and  darkness  of  the  sinner.  Thus  he  conducted,  when  the  church 
wa3  ii>  a  state  of  childhood  :  "  he  subjected  her  to  the  elements  of 
the  world,"  GaU  iv.  3.  The  Son  of  God,  manifested  in  the  flesh," 
spake  the  word  with  many  parables  to  the  Jews,  as  they  were  able  to 
htar  it,"  Mark  iv.  33  Paul  requireth  that  we  should  **  go  on  from 
5rst  principles  to  perfection.  Heb.  v.  12,  13,  14.  vi.  1.  The  primi=» 
tive  Christians  had  also  their  brief  compends,  that  they  might  be  led 
up,  as  it  were,  from  first  principles,  to  higher  conceptions :  at  first 
they  adopted  the  institution  of  baptism,  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
Matt,  xxviii.  19,  as  a  summary  of  the  whole  doctrine  of  Christianity; 
on  which  account,  when  in  aftcrtimes  they  composed  their  brief 
creeds  Tliey  arranged  them  according  to  that  short  system  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  which  is  professed  and  sealed  in  baptism : 
we  see  this  in  the  Nicene  creed,  and  in  that  of  Athanasius,  and  thus 
also  in  the  creed,  which  is  the  subject  of  our  pj  esent  consideration. 

The  instructor  having  explained  saving  faith,  and  taught  that  a 
Christian  must  believe  all  that  is  promised  to  us  in  the  gospel,  and 
knowing  that  a  beginner  is  not  able  to  comprehend  forthwith  all  those 
promises,  he  therefore  conducts  him  to  the  compendious  creed  of 
Christians,  which  he  divides  according  to  the  order  of  the  three 
Persons.  This  method  is  so  ancient,  and  so  useful  to  the  church, 
and  is  therefore  so  proper,  that  we  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  seek 
any  other. 

Three  particulars  are  exhibited  to  us  in  this  Lord's  day* 

I.  The  division  of  the  articles  of  faith,  Question  24, 

II.  An  objection  against  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  Question  25o 

III.  In  what  manner  we  believe  ni  the  Triune  God. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  part  we  will  endeavour  to  illustrate 
three  particulars.  1.  That  there  is  a  God,  2.  What  he  is,  and  3» 
Who  he  isi 

A  That  there  is  a  God  is  self-evident.  When  we  speak  of  God, 
we  and  all  others  mean  an  infinitely  perfect  being,  who  is  the  cause 
of  all  things,  and  to  whom  all  men  are  subject,  as  their  Lawgiver. 
The  scripture  doth  not  attempt  to  prove  that  there  is  such  a  being 


If 2  THE  CHRISTIAN  .S  FAITH,  kci 

as  God,  but  ohly  that  the  Creator  of  all  things  and  the  Cod  of  Tsmei 

is  the  only  true  God.  God  the  Lord  supposeth  that  he  h  -.Lh  to  dp 
-w  itli  easonable  men,  M'ho  know  of  themselves  that  there  is  a  Ciod  ; 
*'  becau?ie  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them,*^ 
Rom.  i.  29.  And  it  is  indeed  self-evident  from  the  li^jjht  of  nature,' 
that  God  is  (a)  an  iniinirt'ly  perfect  being.  The  word^God  is  under- 
stood in  ihis  sense  by  every  person,  even  when  he  denies  the  exist- 
ence of  Gpd.  r^ow  it  belonj^s  to  infinite  perfection  to  exist  neces- 
sarily ;  for  it  is  a  greater  perfection  to  exist,  tiian  not,to  exist  n'r-ressari- 
ly,  ihan  to  exisi  accidentally.  When  anyone  speaksof  God,  he  speaks  of 
a  beingN  who  is  necessary  :  and  when  any  one  saitli,  ti^re  is  no  God, 
be  saiih,  that  a  being  who  exists  necessarily,  dpth  not  exist,  and  so 
he  contradicts  himself,  and  shows  that  he  is  "  a  fool,  who  saith  in  his 
heart,  There  is  no  God,"  Psalm  xiv.  I.  (b)  !t  is  also  self-evidenty 
that  God  is  the  first  cause  of  all  things.  Nothing,  that  is  not  God^ 
can  be  the  cause  of  it-elf.  that  is,  by  the  nature  of  its  essence  ;  when 
we  therefore  contemplatt;  the  universe  with  respect  to  its  variety, 
beauty,  order  and  stability,  we  become  conscious  ol  ourselves,  that 
there  is  a  first  cause  of  all  these  things  :  ''  for  the  invisible  things  of 
him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
by  the  things  that  are  m^de,  even  his  eternal  power,  and  Godhead," 
Rom.  i.  20.  See  Job  xii  7,  8,  9  (c)  It  is  also  self-evident,  that  God 
is  a  lawgiver.  It  is  a  dictate  of  our  nature,  that  v/e  ought  to  honour 
our  parents,  and  rear  up  our  children,  and  that  we  ought  not  to  in- 
jure any  person.  According  as  we  do,  or  neglect  these  things,  we 
shall  accuse  or  excuse  ourselves,  adjudge  ourselves  to  deserved  pun- 
ishment, or  acqviit  ourselves,  Paul  also  teacheth  us  this,  Rom.  ii. 
1*,  15.  And  surely  this  teaches  me^,  tliat  there  is  a  sovereign  Law- 
giver, and  that  they  are  subject  to  him  ;  for  they  would  otherwise 
discharge  themselves  from  such  an  obligation  to  a  law,  and  from 
those  compunctions  on  account  of  their  improper  behaviour  ;  which 
tliey  have  nevertheless  not  been  able  to  do,  how  much  soever  certain 
individuals  have  endeavoured  to  do  it.  This  is  the  cause  why  the 
sense  of  a  Godl^.ead  is  universal  in  all  nations,  who  would  rather 
accept  of  the  vilest  object  for  a  God,  than  deny  the  Godhead. 

Are  there  any  nations,  who  discover  few  or  no  tr>ces  of  religiou^ 
•worship,  they  exhibit  also  but  few  traces  of  humanity.  And  there- 
fore  we  cannot  say  that  the  knowledge  of  God  is  not  natural  to  man, 
any  more  than  we  can  say  that  humanity  and  lationality  are  not  na- 
tural to  him ;  thus  we  cannot  say  neither  that  it  is  not  natural  to 
parents  to  love  their  children,  because  there  are  degenerate  parents. 
)^b2  are  "  without  natural  affe9tion,"  Rom.  i.  3-    Q  Tim.  iii.  3. 


VIII.  LOR'S  DAY.  Q.  24,  25.  ifS 

'^<  Doth  the  fool  say  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  Cioci,"  Psalm  xiv.  1, 
this  only  intimates  thut  he  endeavours  to  erase  every  idea  of  a  Uod- 
head  out  of  his  heart,  and  not  that  he  etlects  so  qjucIi,  that  he  re- 
moves every  idea  oF  a  Godhead  out  of  his  mind  ;  wh  ch  is  so  mucti 
the  more  evident,  because  that  psalm  speaks  of  the  Jews  in  general, 
as  Well  as  of  ih*i  Gentiles,  inasmuch  as  the  first  three  verses  ...re  quo- 
ted by  Paul  to  prove  that  Jews,  as  well  us  Gentiles,  "  are  ail  un- 
der sin,"  Rom.  iii.  9 — 12,  Now  certainly  ail  tiie  Jews  do  not  deny, 
and  are  not  without  some  idea  of  a  Godhead. 

Thercfoie  we  cannot  allow  tnc  ass;!rtion,  that  a  person  ought  to 
•loubl  of,  or  to  suspend  his  judgment  coiiceiiunt;  all  thintts,  yea, 
«ven  of  the  existence  of  a  God  ;  *  for  th.s  is  nb'-minable.  Doubting: 
©f  the  testimony  of  God  entered  into  the  world  first  froui  tho 
devil,  Gen.  iii.  l.  it  is  also  exceedingly  dan[;;erous,  and  scarce!/ 
possible. 

Although  we  may  know  of  ours';;lves  that  there  is  a  Godj 
nevertheless  such  a  natural  knowledge  is  not  suilicient  to  salvation  ; 
for  it  doth  not  teach  us  the  /Uithor  of  salvation,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  the  Mediator,  nor  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  it  leaves  the 
heathens,  who  have  no  more  tlian  such  a  natural  light,  estranged 
from  God  and  the  Mediator,  under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  there- 
fore under  the  curse,  Eph.  ii.  12.  iv.  18.  Gal.  iii.  10.  Rom.  iii.  19. 
3.  Since  now  we  have  to  do  v/ith  God,  therefore  it  concerns  us  to 
know  wb^God  is.  We  learn  this  from  his  names  and  attributes,  of 
both  which  we  will  speak  briefly  and  cursorily.  God  the  Lord  be- 
ing but  difte  only  God,  necUcth  no  names  to  distinguish  him  from 
any  who  are  like  him,  nevertheless  as  it  pleases  him  to  disiingu'sh 
himself  from  idols,  ttud  to  make  himself  known  to  men,  therefore  he 
hath  expressed  himself  also  by  namts.  The^e  names  of  God  are  in  the 
Hebrew,  Jehovah^  that  is  tiie  selfexistcnt,  and  alone  existing  God,  Ex- 
od.  iii.  14,  which  name  cannot  be  ascribed  to  any  creature,  Isaiah  xliio 
8.  We  find  also  the  name  Juh^  which  as  well  as  tiie  name  Jehovah, 
is  rendered  by  our  translators,  Lord,  with  capital  letters  Is aiah  xxvi. 
4.  A.nd  this  name  is  either  a  contraction  oi  Jehovah,  or  denotes  the 
God  of  propriety,  and  is  therefore  frequently  used  in  ascriptions  of 
praise.  See  psalm  cl.  6.  i  o  this  w«  add  idoiuiu  whicii  our  'runs- 
lators  render  Lord,  with  small  letters,  and  which  d^-notes  that  God  is  % 
sovereign  Lord,  who  beareth  and  up iioldeth  all  things  by  his  provi- 

'  This  was  tbe  opinion  of  the  Cartesians,  a  sec^  of  phdosnphfrs  frunded  hj 
I>es  Cartes,  a  French  philosonhar,  who  flaHrished  taward  the  micldl«  of  th* 
^evcnr«cnth  ceniurf . 


in  THE  CHRISTIANS  FAITH,  ^.c. 

dence.  F.l  r>i;^nifies  the  strong  God  :  and  lastly  we  find  the  name 
BUJitn,  si^uifying  the  ood  of  the  oath,  or  ol  the  covenant,  and  it  in- 
tliuares  also,  ds  some  ihmk,  i!^e  phiralit\  of  the  divine  Persons.  All 
these  HeDrcw  names,  t!>e  writers  of  the  New  reslament  translate 
in  Greek  by  Kurios-,  Lord,  and  T/ieo6;  God.  These  are  not  names 
ofufuce,  as  liie  Socinians  assert,  but  names  of  naiuie,  as  appears 
from  Gal.  iv.  «.  Kom.  i.  iO.  Coll.  ii.  9 

Wc  ieain  what  God  is  alro  frt.m  his  attributes  :  these  are  the 
perfcvtions  of  God,  which  are  so  p  opcir  to  him,  that  they  represent 
his  essence  to  us  m  the  most  sirikinv^  ini^nner.  Although  tiity 
are  the  most  simple  essence  itself^  without  any  composition,  they 
are  nevertheless  proposed  and  divided  us  muny,  because  we  are  in- 
capabl'.:  of  comprehending  God  perfcctiy  by  ai:y  single  act  of  our 
uiideistandinj^.  'I  he  attributes  of  God  are  with  propriety  distin- 
guished nto  incommunicable,  of  M'hich  there  is  not  the  least  resem- 
bi.ince  in  any  creature,  and  communicable,  which  doth  not  imply 
that  there  are  any  aaributes  of  God,  which  are  communicated  to  a 
creature,  as  they  are  in  God  ;  but  that  God  Iiath  expressed  in  his 
ima<>-i  a  certain  likeness  to  himiielf  in  the  reasonable  creature,  and 
that  it  thus  becomes  "  a  part^aker  of  iJie  divine  nature."  See  Gen. 
i.  2®.  2  Peier  i.  1.  We  reduce  the  incommunicable  attributes  to 
three,  to  wit, 

1.  The  independence  of  God,  which  is  his  all-suTxiency,  whereby, 
through  the  perfection  of  his  essence,  he  is,  hath,  and  ddth  all  things, 
bee  Gen.  :;vii    1.  Acts  xvii.  25. 

2.  The  simpli(  ity  of  God,  which  excludes  all  diversity  and  compo- 
sition of  parts,  and  whereby  ah  that  is  in  God  is  God  himself.  And 
so  the  attributes  are  not  accidents  of  the  divine  essence,  nor  some- 
Ih.nej  diiTerent  from  the  essence,  as  one  attribute  is  not  something 
different  from  the  other ;  but  God  is  in  all  things  the  same.  Thu« 
we  find  that  the  life  and  holmes::  of  God  are  God  himself;  for  when 
God  is  said  to  swear  by  his  life,  Deut.  xxxii.  40,  and  by  his  holiness, 
Amos  iv,  2,  he  is  also  said  to  swear  by  himself,  Amos  vi.  8.  Heb. 
vi.  1,  3,  13.  From  which  simplicity  of  God  it  also  follows,  (a)  that 
"  he  is  a  Spirit,"  John  iv.  24,  and  therefore  an  immaterial  being, 
who  acts  from,  and  in  himself,  by  his  understanding  and  will,  (b) 
That  "the  Lord  oiar  God  is  one  Lord,"  Deut.  vi.  4.  (c)  That  he  is 
unchangeable,  "  with  whom%liere  is  neiihcr  chnnj^inj^;,  nor  shadow 
of  turnin;;,"  James  i.  17.  (d)  That  be  is  also  invisible.  "  He  dwell- 
eth  in  the  li^hr  to  which  no  man  can  approach  ;  and  no  man  hath 
seen,  nor  can  see  him, '  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  (e)  That  he  cannot  be  repre- 
sented by  any  image,  we  cannot  express  God  by  any  image.     **  T# 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  34,  25.  175 

whom  will  ye  liken  God,  and  what  likeness  "will  ye  compare  unto 
him  r"  Isaiiih  xi.  8.  \Vc  are  also  iorbidden  to  make  au  imuge  of 
him,  Exod.  xx.  4. 

3.  The  third  incommunicable  attribute  of  God  is  his  infinity,  by 
^hich  he  infinitely  exceeds  every  limited  perF.ctioj;,  and  this  maf 
be  considered  wilh  respect  to  his  essence,  lo  tiuRc,  place,  and  our  con- 
ceplion.  God  is  Iniinile  (a)  wiLh  respect  to  his  essence,  which  is  in 
itseU'  as  pLiiectly  glorious,  as  it  can  be,  so  that  notijng  can  be  added 
to,  or  taken  from  his  perfect  glory.  "  For  who  in  the  heaven  can  be 
compared  to  the  Lord  ?  who  among  the  sons  of  the  mi';hty  may  be 
iikened  to  the  Lord?"  Psalm  Ixxxix.  6.  (b)  With  respect  to  time, 
the  mfinity  of  Gcd  is  his  eternity,  by  which  he  is  from  everlasting  to 
everlasting^,  without  succession  of  lime,  Paaim  xc.  L  2.  Z  Pet.  111.  8.  Cc) 
Vvilh  respect  to  place,  the  iniinity  of  God  is  his  omnipresence  or 
immensity,  his  essence  being  neither  included  rior  excluded  any 
where,  nor  bounded  by  any  conceivable  place ;  "  He  fiileth  the  hea- 
ven and  tlie  earth,"  Jer.  xxiii  24.  1  Kings  viii.  27.  (d)  VVitli  re- 
spect to  our  conception,  the  infinity  of  God  is  his  iRccmprehens'.biIit.y ; 
we  cannot  form  any  perfect,  altnough  we  may  form  a  true  idea  of 
him  ;  for  "  his  greatjiess  is  unsearchable,"  Psalm  cxlv.  3. 

The  communicable  atiributcr>  of  God  are  his  knowledge,  Vvill,  and 
power. 

1.  The  knowledge  of  Gad  is  that  perfection  of  his,  whereby  he 
knows  from  and  of  hirasclf,  in  an  independent,  simple  and  infinite 
manner  all  things,  even  those  which  are  future,  voluntary,  and  acci- 
dental :  *'  for  there  is  no  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  his  sight : 
but  ail  tijings  are  naked,  and  opened  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom 
we  have  to  do,"  Heb.  iv.  13.  God  knows  some  things  necessarily 
without  respect  to  any  decree..  After  this  manner  he  knows  hmiself 
in  his  essence  and  Persons,  and  all  possible  things.  Matt.  xi.  '-T. 
He  knows  other  things  freely  by  his  decree,  which  renders  them  fu- 
ture, and  "according  to  which  he  worketh  all  things,"  Eph.  i.  lU 
But  God  hath  no  middle  knowledge,*  whereby  he  knows  what  the 
reasonable  creature  will  do  in  this  or  that  situation,  acc)rdlng  to  its 
innate  liberty  ;  for  this  militates  against  the  independ' nee,  simpli- 
city, and  infinity  of  God  :  neither  is  any  thing  future  or  knowable, 
iiidependent  of  the  decree  of  God. 

3.  The  will  of  God  is  his  complacency,  which  he  hath  in  himself, 

*Tlae  middle  knowledge  of  Ccd,  or  the  sasniia  meiiim.  was  invfinfecJ  by  the 
Jesuits,  in  order  to  reconcile  the  diTine  fere-knevrle^g*  w*^  *^^^  doctrine 
concerning  freewiil. 


iro  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &g. 

and  in  all  those  things,  in  wnich  he  findeth  himself.  This  will  of 
God  IS  considered*  with  respect  to  iis  objects,  (1)  As  the  will  of  the 
decree,  whereby  he  hath  wisely,  freely,  independently,  and  unchange- 
ably deteraiined  from  eternit-  what  he  would  do  or  perniit  m  future: 
"  i  fe  worket!)  all  tnin,q;s  after  tho  council  of  his  own  *vil!,"  Eph.  i.  1  U 
(2)  As  tie  will  of  his  cornraand,  whereby  he  declares  what  he  will 
have  his  creaturts  to  do  or  forbear,  1  Tbess.  iv.  3.  We  will  not 
busy  onrs  Ives  with  showing  that  these  are  noi  different  wills  in 
God,  and  in  what  manner  otiiers  erroneously  divide  the  will  of  Uod : 
for  our  time  will  not  ptrmit.  But  we  must  briefly  inquire  further 
whn  virtues  are  atnbuted  to  the  m  HI  of  God  :  these  are,  (a)  the  holi- 
ness of  God,  which  is  tlic  briL^htne-s  of  all  his  perfections,  whereby 
the  greattst  becomingness  shines  forth  from  his  essence  and  works, 
Isai.ih  vi.  3.  (b)  fiis  riii'hu^ousness  which  is  ascribed  to  him.  (I)  As 
God,  being  the  rectitude  of  his  essence,  and  therefore  his  holiness, 
Psalm  xcii.  15.  (2)  s  Ruler,  and  wliich  he  manifests  in  his  words 
and  works  ;  and  so  the  righteousness  of  God  is  his  truth,  faithful- 
ness and  steadfastness  in  his  words,  so  that  he  do'h  not  repent, 
1  Jonn  i  9j  and  a  supieme  fitness  in  liis  works,  Deut.  xxxi.  4.  (3)  As 
Judjjc  of  his  rational  creaiures,  Jxiving  them  big  righteous  law,  and 
judging  them  according  to  it,  whether  he  reward  them  for  that 
"Which  is  good  with  his  kindness,  or  punish  them  for  that  which  iz 
evd,  righteously  and  equitably,  Fcom.  ii.  6.  James  iv.  12.  (c)  The 
third  virtue  of  God's  will  is  his  gofidncss,  which  is  either  the  virtu- 
ousiijss  of  God's  naiure,  in  which  respect  "  there  is  none  good  but 
one,  that  is,  God,"  Vlatt.  xix.  17,  or  his  beneficence  to  his  creatures; 
for  "  he  is  good  ?ind  doth  good,"  Psalm  cxix.  58.  In  ubich  good- 
ness of  God  we  must  also  include  his  love,  grace,  mercy,  longsuf- 
fering  and  forbearance.  God's  love  is  either  his  inclination  to  do 
good  to  his  creatures,  Kom.  v  8,  or  the  complacency  which  he  hath 
in  tlie  good  of  tliose  whom  he  favours,  Joim  xvi.  27.  His  grace  is 
his  kindness  to  the  unworthy,  Rom.  iii.  23,  24,  his  mercy  is  his 
goodness  to  the  miserable.  Psalm  Ixix.  16,  his  longsuffering  and  for- 
bearance is  his  kindness,  which  he  shows  in  deferring  the  deserved 
punishment.  Rom.  li.  4,  5. 

3.  The  third  communicable  attribute  of  God  is  his  power,  by 
■which  he  can  effect  with  an  unfailing  might  whatever  he  will  and 
Can  will,  con^jistently  with  his  holy  nature,  Jer.  xxxii.  17.  Matt, 
iii.  9. 

From  what  hath  been  said  it  follows,  that  God  alone  is  incompa- 
rably glorious,  blessed,  sovereign,  and  therefore  worthy  of  all  hon- 
our, fear,  love  and  worship  ;  "  The  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  th|? 


VIII    LORDb  DAY,  Q.  -^4,  ^..  57 r 

Kinpc  of  kings,  and  Lord  Qfiords  ;  who  only  hatli  immorfaiiLy,  dwel- 
ling in  the  light  unto  which  no  man  can  approach,  whom  no  mwi 
hath  seen,  nor  can  see  :  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  everUfsfiM  -  " 
1  Tim-  vi.  15,  16. 

C  Hut  who  is  this  infinitely  glorious  God  !  If  nature  be  bViml 
any  where,  she  is  here  :  God  remains  unknown  to  man,  until  he  le- 
veals  himself,  which  he  dolh  when  he  declares  himself  to  be  Fa- 
ther, Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  This  implies  not  that  there  are  three 
Gods,  for  there  cannot  be  more  than  one  God,  who  nevertheless  re> 
veals  himself  as  three,  to  wit,  one  in  essence,  and  three  in  Persons. 
This  we  must  first  explain,  and  then  prove. 

We  observe,  in  order  to  explain  this  doctrine,  [A]  that  the  words 
-sssence  and  persons  may  with  the  greatest  propriety,  yea,  ought  to 
be  used  in  the  church,  although  these  words  were  even  not  used  in 
the  holy  scripture,  which  the  Socinians  however  deny  ;  for  we  must 
explain  the  word  and  mysteries  of  God  to  the  people  by  such  words 
as  are  best  understood,  and  most  in  \ise  am.ong  them  ;  moreover, 
the  holy  scripture  is  not  an  entire  stranger  to  these  words  ;  for  it 
speaks  of  the  essence  of  God,  when  it  describes  God  by  his  existence 
and  essence,  Exod.  ii.  14,  *'  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  am  that  I  am. 
And  he  said,  Thus  shaltthou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  am 
hath  sent  me  unto  you.  See  also  Prov.  viii.  14.  Rev.  i.  8.  The 
scripture  speaks  also  of  "  the  nature  of  God,"  Gal.  iv.  8,  "  his  form," 
Phihp.  ii.  6,  "  Godhead,"  Acts  xvii.  29.  Coll.  ii.  9,  "  divinity,"  Rom. 
i.  20.  All  these  words  denote  only  the  essence  of  God.  TI  us  we 
find  also  the  word  Person.  The  Son  of  God  is  '*  the  express  image 
of  his  Person,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  i.  3. 

B.  It  serves  also  to  explain  this  doctrine,  to  know  what  these 
words  signify.  By  the  essence  of  God  we  must  understand  the  in- 
finitely perfect  nature  of  God,  which  is  common  to  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  words  nature,  form,  (Jodhead,  and  divinity 
of  God,  do  of  themselves  show.  By  a  divine  Person  vve  cannot  un- 
derstand a  bare  and  mere  negation  of  composition  with  something 
else,  so  that  a  divine  Person  should  not  be  something  positive  ;  for 
then  the  three  Persons  would  be  a  mere  nothing,  as  also  their  per- 
sonal properties  and  works,  of  which,  presently  ;  yea,  then  the  per- 
sonality of  the  Son  would  have  been  annihilated,  when  he  united 
himself  to  the  human  nature  ;  but  by  a  divine  Person  we  must  un^ 
derstandan  intelligent  substance  in  the  di^ine  essence,  whereby  that 
Person  is  individually  what  he  is,  without  being  a  component  part  of 
the  divine  essence,  or  of  another  divine  Person  ;  as  angels  and  men 
arc  persons,  but  not  the  ^oul  of  man,  separated  from  the  body  ;  for 


ir«  i  HE  CliRiSilAN'S  BAItH,  &:c. 


♦hough  it  remains  alive  after  death, -it  ik 'Nevertheless  a   crompoiitnt 
part  of  man,  and  is  disposed  to  an  laiion  with  the  body. 

C.  To  this  v/e  also  add,  that  there  are  tliree  Persons  in  the  divine 
essence,  to  wit,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  These 
»re  not  merely  three  names,  in  sucli  a  sense,  that  the  essence  of 
God  is  now  ca!led  Father,  then  So..,  and  then  Holy  Ghost,  as  Sabel- 
lius  fancied  in  the  ancient  churcli  ;  fcr  there  are  different  individu- 
als m  tlie  divine  essence,  not  different  Gods,  as  the  ancient  Trithe- 
i3ts  taught  ;  for  then  there  would  be  three  Gods,  but  there  are  dif- 
ferent Persons,  and  each  Person  is  individually  what  he  is,  and  is  dis- 
tini-'uished  from  the  others  by  his  peculiar  manner  of  existence. 
TIius  the  Son  said,  John  zuv.  1 S,  "  1  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he 
will  give  you  another  Comforter."  The  Persons  are  distinguished 
from  each  other  by  their  personal  properties.  These  are  ( 1 )  That 
the  Father,  as  Fatlier,  is  of  himself,  and  that  he  is  not  begotten,  and 
doth  not  proceed  from  another  Person,  but  that  he  hath  begotten 
the  Son,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  pioceedeth  from  him  :  that  the 
Son,  as  Son,  io  begotten  by  the  Father,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  we  are  taught,  John 
V.  2fij  XV.  25.(2)  That  the  Father  is  the  first,  the  Son  the  second, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  the  third  Perbon,  both  in  the  order  of  subsis- 
te3;ice  and  of  working.  See  Mcitt.  xxviii.  19.  (3)  That  the  Father 
worketh  from  himself  through  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that 
the  Son  vrorketh  from  the  Father  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  is  illustrated  to  us, 
John  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  "When  he  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come  he  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth  ;  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but 
whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak  ;  and  he  will  show  yo'j 
things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  me  :  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine, 
and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are 
mine  ;  therefore  said  I  that  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it 
unio  you."  The  works  of  God  without  himself  are  indeed  com- 
mon to  the  three  Persons,  and  therefore  creation,  v/hich  is  otherwise 
the  work  of  the  Father,  is  also  ascribed  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  John  i.  1,  2,  S,  Gen.  i.  2.  Thus  also  the  work  |of 'redemp- 
tion, which  is  especially  the  work  of  the  Son,  and  the  workof  sanc- 
tification,  which  is  the  proper  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  ascribed  to 
the  Father,  Hosea  i.  7.  Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6.  Jude  vrs.  I.  Neverthe- 
less the  divine  Persons  observe  in  these  works  a  certain  order  and 
manner  of  working,  which  follows  the  order  and  manner  of  their  sub- 
2i;itcnce,  by  which  the  Father  works  from  himself  through  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  hath  been  shown  above,  agreeably  to  John 


Vn» 

xn,  13,  14,  15.  And  therefore  when  creation  is  ascribed  to  the 
Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  said  that  the  Father  created  by 
riieni:  '*  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  wtre  the  heavens  made,  and  all 
the  nest  ©f  them  by  the  breath  of  his  nsouth,"  Psalm  xxxiii.  6,  Thus 
also  the  redemption  of  the  Son  wa-;  the  work  of  the  Father,  Rom.  iii. 
25,  26,  2  Cor.  i.  30;,  and  so  likewise  the  sanctification  cf  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  a  work  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6. 

Inaaniuch  as  a  rii^ht  knowledge  of  this   mystery  conduceth  much 
to  an  explanation  of  the  emphasis  of  the  phrases  in  the  word  of  God, 
to  an  illustration  of  the  great  mysteries  of  God,  to  the  confutation  of 
errours,  which  proceed  especially  from  an  ignorance  of  this  myste- 
ry, and  to  the  direction  of  the  people  of  God  in  all  their  ccmmunica- 
tion.s  and  intercourses  with  and  relative  to  God  ;    we  shall  therefore 
insist  somewhat  longer  on  this  subject.     We  must   know  then,  that 
God   purposing  to  glorify  himself  by    exhibdting  the   lustre   of  his 
wisdom,  justice,  goodness  and  power,  resolved  to  save   certain  per-= 
t:ons  of  mankind,  and  to  appoint  others  objects  of  his   wrath;    and 
that  in  order  to  accomplish  this  great  purpose,  he  decreed  to  create 
mankind,  to  enter  into  a  covenant  of  works    with    them,  to  permit 
them  to  fall,  and  to  send  his  Son  to  be  a  Saviour  of  some  of  them, 
and  to  give  them  his  Spirit,  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  an  inheri- 
tance with  the  saints  in  light  :  "  All    this   God    worketh    after   the 
council  of  his  own  will,"  Eph.  i.  11.     It  is  also  accordingly  evident, 
that  the  three  divine  Peisons  have,   according  tu  an  eternal  appoint- 
ment in  the  council  of  peace,  distributed   this    whole   work   among 
themselves,  and  that  each  Person  hath  taken   a  particular   work  to 
himself,  in  order  to  contribute  his  part  to  perfect  the  salvation  of  the 
sinner  ;  this  appears  from  the  event,  inasmuch  as  grace  is  attributed 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  love  is  to  God  the  Father,  and  the  com- 
munion of  the  sinner  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  their  love  and 
grace  to  the  Holy  Spirit.     We  see  this  in  our  text,  and  in  our  bap- 
tism, Matt,  xxviii.  19,     And  therefore   the   ancients  were  not  to  be 
blamed  for  reducing  ail  the  articles  of  faith  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity ;  for  which  reason  our  form    of  baptism  also   refers    God's 
whole  work  of  grace  with  the  elect  sinner  to  each    divine   Person, 
showing  what  each  Person  signifieth  and  sealeth  to  the  person  who 
is  baptized  ;  and  thus  in  the  24th  question,   creation  is  ascribed   to 
the  Father,  redemption  to  the  Son,  and  sanctificatioH  to  the  Holy 
Ghost      It  ought  to  be  particularly  noted,  that  as  the   Father  is  the 
first  in  the  order  of  subsistence,  so  he  is  also  the  first  in  the  order  of 
working,  and  that  the    Father  therefore  undertook  to  display  in  his 
person  the  majesty  of  the  Ggdhead  tf  the  Trinity,  ^i  Xh»X  the  Son 


180  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &e. 

submitted  ta  conceal  his  divinity  under  his  humanity  in  his  humilia- 
tion, i.nd  tiie  ■'  ;oIy  Ghost  consented  to  act  as  the  ambassadour  of  the 
FaUier  audofthe  Son.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Fallier  is  more 
frequently  Cdlied  God  than  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  therefore 
the  i'atiier  is  considered  as  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things,  as 
creation  and  all  that  pertaineth  to  it,  is  also  on  this  account  ascribed 
to  him  See  Rom.  xi.  36.  I  Cor.  viii.  6.  For  this  reason  also  the 
Son  is  the  mediator  and  the  servant  of  the  Father,  that  he  may  by 
rtdempt. on  bring  ihe  sinner  to  God,  Isaiah  xlix.  3.  1  Pet.  iii.  18. 
And  the  iioly  Ghost  conveys  the  great  work  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son  to  lh«  sinner  by  an  effectual  application  and  sanctification. 
See  this  John  xviii.  13,  14,  15.  We  shall  see  the  csconomy  or  work 
oi  eacn  Person,  when  we  contemplaie  each  Person  in  particular. 

D.  Finally,  it  tends  to  explain  this  doctrine,  that  these  three  Per- 
sons are  one.  They  ane  not  one  in  the  same  respect,  in  which  they 
are  three,  as  if  three  persons  wei'e  one  person,  or  three  essences  one 
essence  ;  for  this  is  a  contradiction.  Neither  are  these  three  Persont> 
one  with  respect  to  generation  or  kind,  as  Peter,  John,  and  James 
are  of  one  r.uman  generation  or  kind  ;  for  they  would  then  have  each 
his  particular  essence,  and  there  would  then  be  three  divine  essences: 
neither  are  they  one  by  composition,  as  though  each  Person  were  a 
third  part  of  the  divine  essence  ;  for  this  is  contrary  to  the  simplicity 
of  th  •  divine  essence.  Finally,  we  may  not  say,  that  these  three  Per- 
sons are  one  only  in  will,  because  in  this  sense,  all  the  saints  may  be 
said  to  be  one  with  God  ;  but  they  are  one  in  essence,  inasmuch  as 
each  Person  iii  tti  his  peculiar  manner  of  subsistence  in  one  and  the 
same  simple  essence,  by  which  means  the  Persons  subsist  through, 
and  on  account  cf  the  essence,  in  each  other.  This  the  Saviour  de- 
clares, when  he  saith,  '  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father  ; 
and  how  sayest  ihou  then,  Show  us  the  Father  ?  Believest  thou  not 
that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  ?  the  words  that  I 
speak  unto  you,  I  speak  notof  myself :  but  the  Father,  that  dwel- 
leth  in  me,  he  doth  the  works.  Believe  me  that  I  am  in  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  in  me,"  John  xiv.  9,  10,  11.  See  also  John  x. 
3D,  and  xvii.  31. 

It  v\  as  necessary  that  we  should  say  so  much  in  order  to  explain 
this  great  mystery  ;  but  we  must  also  prove  it,  that  our  minds  may 
be  established  in  the  belief  of  this  capital  article  of  the  divine  mys- 
teries, and  that  we  may  confute  the  Jews  and  the  Socinians,  who 
blaspheme  this  mystery  in  the  most  horrible  manner.  This  cannot 
be  done  by  the  light  of  reason,  as  the  schoolmen  and  others,  who  fol- 
low them,  pretend,  imagining  that  the   Father,  by   understanding 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  2^,  25,  m 

•hifnself,  produced  a  living  image  of  himself  which  was  his  Son,  and 
that  the  Father  and  the  Son  by  lovinp;  themselves,  caused  a  love  to 
proceed  and  issue  from  themselves,  which  was  ihe  Holy  Ghost.  But 
what  likeness  hath  this  to  the  mystery  under  consideration  ?  and 
where  doih  the  word  of  God  speak  thus?  There  is  nothint>  iniicxte 
in  man,  no  not  in  his  state  of  mtegrity,  thas  can  induce  him  to  think 
of  a  plurality  of  divine  persons  ;  neither  will  a  contemplation  of  the 
created  universe  suggest  this  to  him.  (iod's  understanding  and 
loving  of  himself  are  not  personal  acts,  as  the  generation  of  the  '^^on, 
and  ti-c  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  ;  but  they  are  essential 
acts  of  God,  and  so  God  v/ould  not  thereby  produce  another  Person, 
but  another  essence.  Yea,  if  God's  understanding  and  loving  of  h  m- 
self  did  produce  a  Person,  the  Persons  mii;!it  be  infinitely  muUiplied, 
Gince  each  Person  unde:  stands  and  loves  himself,  and  the  other 
Persons. 

Neither  need  we  betake  ourselves,  in  order  to  prove  this  mystery 
of  the  Trinity,  to  the  tradition  and  authority  of  the  church,  as  the 
Papists  do,  that  they  may  accuse  the  scripture  of  imperfection.  The 
purified  trrJition  and  doctrine  of  the  church  can  indeed  propose  and 
illustiate  th;3  truth  to  us ;  but  her  authority  and  doctrine  cannot 
oblige  us  to  believe  it,  any  further  than  they  prove  it  to  us  from  the 
word  of  God  :  *'  That  our  faith  may  not  stand  in  the  wisdor  of 
men,  but  in  the  power  of  God."  1  Cor.  ii,  5.  '' Faith  come^h  by 
hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God,"  Rom  x  17.  There- 
fore the  twenty-fifth  question  saith,  "  that  God  hath  revealed  himself 
thus  in  his  A\ord." 

And  verily  the  word  of  God  proves  this  truth  abundantly  ;  for  (a) 
God  speaks  in  his  word  of  liimself  in  the  plural  number  :  *<  God 
said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  Hkeness,"  Gen.  i.  26- 
This  we  find  also,  Gen.  iii.  22.  xi  7.  Isaiah  vi.  8.  We  cannot, 
say  that  God  speaks  here  of  the  angels,  since  man  was  riot  made  if; 
the  image  of  the  angels  ;  neither  may  we  say  that  God  speaks  here 
after  the  manner  of  kings,  who  say  in  their  behests,  "We"  com- 
mand this  or  that,  this  or  that  pleaseth  "  us ;"  for  this  is  a  later 
usage,  and  we  do  not  find  that  any  king  is  introduced  in  scripture 
speaking  in  this  mai.ner.(b)  We  also  find  that  one  Person  is  dis- 
tinguished from  jxnother,  as  God  and  Lord,  Psalm  xlv,  7.*  "  O  God, 
thy  God  hath  anointed  thee,"  Psalm  ex.  1.  "The  Lord  s;iid  unto 
iny  Lord."  This  silenced  the  unbelieving  Jews,  Matt.  xxii.  42—46. 
Many  cite  here  also  the  passi^ge,  Gen.    xix    24  (c)     Add   to   this, 

*  We  have  rendered  this  passage  according;  to  the  Datch  tvaTiolatior'. 


^,  TiiE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c. 

jhat  God  speaks  of  himself  as  three.  In  the  Old  testament  we  find, 
Isaiah  Ixi.  1,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me."  This  we 
:^ee  also  Psalm  xxxiii,  6.  Isaiah  Ixiii.  9.  10.  Kaggai  ii.  5,  6.  We 
shall  not  speak  now  of  the  priestly  blessing,  Num.  vi.  24,  25,26, 
nor  of  the  churches  reciting  the  name  of  the  Lord  three  several 
limes  in  her  celebration  of -him,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  Attend  only  to 
Jsaiah  vi.  3,  where  God  is  celebrated  thrice  as  "  the  Holy  Lord. 
That  the  Father  alone  is  not  praised  there  as  holy  appears,  because 
more  than  one  person  is  spoken  of  in  that  passage  ;  "  Whom  shall 
I  seiuJ,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?"  vrs.  8.  Therefore  John  also  saith, 
that  '  the  glory  of  Jesus  also  was  seen"  there,  John  xii.  41,  and 
Paul  applies  that  vision  to  the  Holy  Ghost  also,  Acts  xxviii,  25.  In 
the  New  Tcsiament  we  fmd  these  three  Persons  in  the  bgptism  of 
Christ,  Matt.  iii.  16,  17,  in  our  baptism,  Matt.,  xxviii.  19,  \y\  the  bles- 
sing of  Paul,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  And  that  these  three  are  one,  is  shown 
by  John,  2  John  v.  7.  Ail  these  passages  serve  to  prove  that  there 
dre  three  divine  Persons,  because  tliey  are  associated  in  them,  as 
participating  in  the  execution  of  some  divine  work.(d)  Finally,  the 
word  of  God  teacheth  us,  that  the  salvation  of  sinners  is  ascribed  un- 
togtlirec  Persons  ;  that  the  Son  saves  by  his  grace,  the  Father  by  his 
love,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  by  his  communion,  2  Cor.  xii,  13.  which 
the  three  Persons  also  seal  to  us  in  baptism.  Mat  xxviii,  and  believ- 
ers also  experience,  that  they  are  brought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  through 
the  Son  to  the  Father,  Eph.  ii.  18.  Therefore  our  Netherland  con- 
fession also  saith.  Article  9,  "  All  this  we  know,  as  well  from  the  tes- 
timonies of  holy  writ,  as  from  their  operations  ;  and  chiefly  by  those 
we  feel  in  ourselves."  Now  it  is  certain,  that  it 'is  a  divine  work  to 
save  sinners.  See  this,  Isaiah  xlv.  21 — 24.  Hqsea  i.  7,  Titus  iii. 
4.  Consequently  there  are  three,  who  are  God.  We  could  now  fur- 
thermore prove,  that  divine  names,  attributes,  works,  and  worship  are 
ascribed  to  the  Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  to  the  Father  : 
but  since  we  must  treat  formally  of  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  hereafter,  we  shall  therefore  defer  these  proofs  for 
the  present. 

In  order  to  form  now  a  conclusion  from  what  halh  been  said,  we 
know,  and  it  is  evident  of  itself,  that  there  is  only  one  God  ;  and 
since  we  have  now  proved  that  there  are  three,  who  are  God,  it  fol^ 
lows  that  these  three  are  the  one  God  in  essence,  agreeably  to  our 
explanation.  And  therefore  we  say  from  I  John  v.  7.  "  There  are 
three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  ;.  ^lud  these  three  ^re  one."     The  brevity  of  our  method 


Vlll.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  24,  25.  iSf^ 

^vi!!  not  permit  lis  to    enlarge  here,  in  order  to  rescue  this  passage 
from  the  cavils  of  the  Socinians. 

II.  "  Since  there  is  but  one  divine  essence,  why  speakest  thou  of 
Father,  Son,  and  F!o!y  Ghost?"  thus  asks  the  instructor.  The 
force  of  this  objection  consists  herein,  that  three  cannot  be  one,  nor 
one  three.  But  we  satisfy  it  fully  by  sayinj^,  that  God  hath  revealed 
himself  as  three  and  one  in  his  word.  To  this  we  must  submit,  and 
brint^  our  thoughts,  which  cannot  fully  comprehend  it,  into  captivity. 
Should  it  be  said  that  there  cannot  be  any  contradictions  in  God, 
and  that  the  word  of  God  cannot  reveal  contradictions  ;  we  say,  that 
this  is  true,  and  that  there  are  no  contradictions  in  this  mystery,  as 
there  would  be,  if  God  were  one  and  three  in  the  same  respect  ; 
but  God  is  one  in  respect  of  his  essence,  and  in  another  respect,  to 
wit,  inrtRpect  of  his  Persons,  he  is  three ;  which  is  by  no  means  u 
contradiction. 

They  object  also,  John  xviii.  3.  "This  is  eternal  life,  to  know 
thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent." 
Hence,  say  they,  the  Father  alone  is  called  God,  and  the  only  God, 
and  therefore  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  cannot  be  God.  We 
say,  the  Father  is  only,  that  is,  nothing  but  God,  ac  the  words  only 
and  alone  are  used.  See  Jer.  xxxii.  30  But  the  Son  is  sometbing- 
besides  God,  he  is  man  also  ;  and  therefore  we  must  connect  the 
word  *'  only"  with  "  God,"  and  not  with  "  thou." 

We  shall  not  attend  here  to  other  objections,  since  they  must  be 
referred  to  the  thirteenth,  and  to  the  twentieth  Lord's  days ;  oji 
which  we  must  prove  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

But  there  are  still  two  things,  which  require  our  consideration  ;(a) 
First,  whether  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  be  a  fundamental  article 
of  the  faith,  upon  which  our  salvation  depends  ?  or  whether  it  be 
only  a  scholastic  question,  which  we  may  believe,  or  not  believe, 
without  injury  to  our  salvation  ?  This  is  the  opinion  of  the  Remon- 
strants, which  they  entertain  to  gratify  the  Socinians,  although  in 
other  respects  they  maintain  this  doctrine  :  but  we  reckon  this  to  be 
a  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  faith,  upon  which  our  everlasting  life 
depends,  according  to  John  xvii.  3.  It  is  the  first  principle  of  Christ- 
ianity, which  is  proposed  before  all  others  to  those  who  arc  to  be 
baptised,  as  the  foundation  of  their  salvation,  and  which  they  are 
obliged  to  believe.  If  we  believe  not  this  doctrine,  we  deny  then 
other  fundamental  articles  also,  as  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in 
Christ,  his  satisfaction  and  eff'-'ctual  ^rae^.  as  oppears  in  the  So- 
cinians, 


YMh  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &r. 

(b)  Tlie  second  subject  of  consUteration  is,  whether  this  docinDC 
be  adv.nta?;eous  and  necessary  to  godliness.  The  Remonstrants 
deny  this  also:  but  we  say  tiiere  is  no  real  godliness*  which  flows 
ao:  fiom  the  ?rrace  of  the  Soa,  from  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  the 
COfnnHinioo  oi  uhe  Holy  Ghos  ;  for  why  else  doth  the  apostle  so 
tuBT&tlv  dcsi  e  these  blessings  for  believers  r  3  Cor.  adlL  IS.  The 
power  of  gc^l^ne-s  consiss  [>articularly  in  exercising  communioc 
"Wit  Jrod,  in  being  dead  to  ^il  besides,  and  m  havin-'  "  our  life  hidden 
-wiia  Carist  in  Grod,'"  Coll.  ii:.  5.  Now  this  godliness  cannot  be  ex- 
ercised, except  ibrougb  the  on  and  the  Koly  Ghost,  '*  by  whom  wc 
iave  accrsstothe  Father,**  Eph-  ii.  IS.  And  what  is  the  Socinian 
<yodliness.  which  denies  this  mystery,  but  a  heathenish  morality  ? 

in.  But  how  do  we  believe  m  the  Triune  God  I  for  this  we  pro- 
fszss  wftrn  we  say,  *•  I  believe  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  his  Son 
Jevas  i_hnct ;  1  believe  m  the  Holy  Gh-5t."  Therefore  Christ  also 
said.  John  xiv.  I,  *-  Yc  believe  in  God.  believe  also  in  me."  Accor- 
ding to  our  explanation  of  tie  nature  of  faith  on  the  foregoing  Lord's 
<^v  th.3  laitn  ia  the  Triune  God  will  consist,  (a)  in  the  knowledge 
of  ira  ^  1  nunc,  according  to  th^  word  of  God  ;  see  John  xvii.  3.(b> 
In  an  assest  to  the  witness  of  God  concerning  himself  ;n  his  word. 
as  i  riune,  oltjough  ive  cannot  fathom  the  mystery  vdth  our  senses 
or  r«jasoa ;  and  thus.  **  faith  is  an  evidence  of  the  things  which  are  not 
seen."  Heb.  xi.  l.^c)  In  erab'-icing  and  trusting-  in  the  Persons, 
'nritr.  respect  to  t'leir  saving  disper.sations  and  works,  as  the  apostle 
;equ.rcih,  -  Cor.  siii.  13,  that  believers  s'jdiIc*  place  all  their  salrr>- 
tioo  in  this  ocly . 


/vPPLICATION. 

Although  these  several  particula  s  are  truths,  which  none  who 
*re  of  cur  co-nrauatoa  will  deny,  and  although  they  are  also  of  the 
grc*«tc5t  importance,  it  is  nevertheless  plain,  that  they  cither  are  not. 
or  are  scarcely  believed.     For, 

1  Ye  certainly  do  not  believe  tbem.  who  have  not  any  knowledge 
of  them  ;  for  a  person  cannot  believe  without  knowledge.  Ye  will 
kaow  all  things,  bu.  do  no:  endeavour  to  know  God  :  ye  never  re- 
tire "mto  your  minds,  nor  attempt  to  search  the  word  of  God,  and 
seriously  learn  what  -iod  hath  revealed  concerning  himself. 
Woul<^  ye  be  able  to  offer  a  single  proof  for  yourselves,  or  others, 
tbat  there  is   a  God  ?  cr  even   to  declare  what   or  who  be  is  ?  yr 


Vnr  M- 

;grope  here  Ifike  the  blind,  and  stumble  as  these  who  ivalk  in  <iark- 
ness.  Your  underbtandi.g  is  darkened,  and  ye  are  alisr^.ttd  from  the 
life  of  God,  through  the  ignoraDce  tha  is  in  ycu."  EpL.  iv.  is.  Do 
ye  worship  him,  it  is  but  ••  an  unknown  God  whom  ye  rrorsrip," 
A<ts  xvii.  23.  What  a  horrid  state  is  this  1  It  is  the  black  mark  cf 
the  i.eathens,  that  *^  ihey  know  not  God,"  Gal.  iv.  8.  1  Thess.  iv.  5, 
and  they  are  not  excusable,  because  God  hath  revealed  himself  to 
them  m  their  minds,  and  in  rhe  creatures,  Rom.  i.  19,  20.  But  that 
a  p>ers©n.  who  lives  under  l  e  gospel,  to  Trhcm  God  discovers  him- 
self in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  should  not  know  God,  this  is  :.bomi* 
nabie,  a  diabolical  Ji'=posiMon,  and  a  palpable  evidence  of  your  un- 
done condition  :  -  for  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are 
lost :  in  whom  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  tr.e  minds  of  th-enrt 
which  believe  not,  lest  tue  light  of  tht  g-Jorious  gospel  of  Christ,  who 
is  the  image  of  Cod,  should  shine  unto  them,"  2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4.  B^ 
concerned  on  account  of  this,  an-i  be  ashamed  :  th'-s  Paul  re- 
quireth,  1  Cor.  xv.  3-i  ••  Some  have  not  the  knowledge  cf  God :  I 
speak  this  to  your  shame." 

2.  It  is  certain,  that  we  have  the  greatest  concern  in  ihe  Lord 
God,  and  that  '•  we  have  to  do  with  him,  before  whose  eyes  all  things 
are  naked,  and  opened,'  Heb,  iv.  13.  Every  one  is  of,  by,  to,  and 
for  him.  If  ye  believed  this,  would  ye  not  regard  it  ?  would  not  his 
oninipresence  and  omniscience  render  you  circumsp^-  ct  ?  wculd  net 
his  truth  induce  you  to  believe  ?  his  goodness  to  seek  and  love  him : 
his  allsufficiency  satisfy  you,  and  persuade  you  to  exert  all  your 
faculties  in  his  service  r  certainly  yes.  It  is  then  surely  cTident, 
that  ye  do  not  belie-  e  in  God  :  ibr  "  ye  do  not  regard  him,  scd  do 
not  fear  him,  Isaiah  Ivii.  il.  He  is  not  the  on'y  object  cf  Ul  your 
actions  :  but  the  things  that  ye  see,  your  money  and  ^ood?^,  aftsr 
these  things  j^e  pant  and  long  with  eager  dcssres.  and  ccmmii  idola- 
try with  them,  Eph.  v.  5.  Coll.  iii.  5.  Ye  are  proud  and  hau.t^ity  oTi 
account  of  them.  Job  xxxi.  2-;.  Are  they  taken  from  you,  it  is  as 
though  your  Gods,  your  all  were  taken  from  you,  Judges  xviii.  24. 
Or  ye  take  your  fill  of  pleasure,  and  make  **  your  belJy  ycur  God," 
Philip,  iii-  19.  Yea,  "ye  set  your  hearts  as  Gods  heart,"  Ijie  the 
prince  of  Tyre.  Ezek.  xxviii  2 — 5.  Ye  imagine  that  ye  are  great 
ooes,  and  make  yourselves  the  only  objects  of  all  your  ccticns;  and 
set  yourselves  thus  in  the  room  of  God,  and,  as  much  as  in  you  licth, 
thmst  him  from  his  throne.  And  ye  show  thus  that  ye  have  chosen 
**  the  God  of  this  world  "  for  your  God,  **  walking  according  to  the 
prince  of  ihe  power  of  the  air.  the  spirit  that  now  -^orkcth  ir.  the 
children  cf  disobedience,  fulfilling  the  desires  nf  the  flesh  and  of  the^ 


1^6  itit  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  m 

mind,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3.  Alas  !  how  far  have  ye  departed  from  Cod! 
how  do  ye  come  short  of  his  glory,  how  are  ye  become  as  it  were 
inonsters  !  and  walk  in  the  way  to  destruction  I  and  how  will  God 
once  avenge  himself  of  you  ! 

3.  It  is  true,  many  have  stilf  a  certain  sense  of  God,  and  of  their 
obligation  to  hin^  yea,  so  far,  that  they  have  a  lively  conscience, 
which  coiivinceth  them  of  their  (iuty,  reproves  them  for  their  evil 
conduct,  and  excites  in  them  a  fear  of  avenging  punishment.  But 
do  ye  encourage  and  stir  up  your  conscience,  in  order  that  k  may 
lead  you  to  repentance  ?  or  do  y-e  endeavour  to  silence  it,  and  to 
thwart  it,  by  seeking  to  stifle  it  ?  Alas  !  how  many  are  there,  who 
cannot  endure  the  twinges  of  their  conscience  !  they  rush  headlong 
against  warnings,  and  '*  suppress  the  truth  in  unrighteousness,"  Rom. 
i.  18.  Yea,  many  wil!  seek  for  reasons  to  persuade  themselves  "  that 
there  is  no  God,"  Psalm  xiv.  1,  that  they  may  break  the  yoke  and 
burst  the  bonds :  and  they  show  that  they  are  children  of  Bel'al* 
without  yoke,  and  that  they  are  like  "  an  unruly  heifer,"  Jer.  v.  5. 
Hosea  iv.  16.  And  hence  the  Lord  God  will  sometimes  "  give  such 
persons  up  to  a  reprobate  mind,"  to  the  most  dreadful  atheism,  and 
*'  to  ('o  those  things  that  are  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  28  Our  own 
days  show  to  what  a  dreadful  ungodhnt-ss  a  person  may  be  abandon- 
ed, when  we  observe  so  many  Spinozists,  Bekkerists,  Leenhofists, 
Hattemists,  Brillists,  and  others,  who  have  settled  in  whole  swarms 
here  and  there,  and  conceal  themselves  under  the  names  of  God, 
Christ,  the  Word,  Patience,  Selfdenial,  but  all  in  the  Spirit,  that  is., 
accordint;^  to  the  real  opinion  af  those  Libertines,  all  things  are  God. 
and  the  creatures  are  different  modifications  of  that  God.  Doth  any 
one  desire  to  see  this  mystery  of  iniquity  unfolded,  let  him  read,  I. 
Calvins  instruction  a^rainst  the  Libertines,  and  their  agreement  wi.h 
the  modern  Libertines  by  C   Tuinman. 

4.  Perhaps  ye  may  think,  all  this,  doth  not  concern  us,  for  we 
know  Gofl :  we  could  prove  by  passages  from  the  word  of  God  that 
he  exists,  auvl  show  what  and  who  he  is,  and  we  endeavour  to  live 
according  to  our  knowledge,  by  forsaking  evil,  and  doing  good.  It 
is  well ;. but  doth  your  knowledge  warm  your  hearts,  unite  you  to 
God  and  Christ  ?  and  are  your  works  "done  in  God,"  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  saith  ?  John  iii.  21.  But  how  few  are  there,  who  know  God 
thus  ?  tht  re  are  many  who  have  not  been  taught  so  by  God  ;  they 
have  only  a  Hteral  knowledge  of  the  word,  which  leaves  their  souls 
alienated  from  God,  and  doih  not  influence  and  urge  them  to  do  all 
things  in  union  v;ith  the  Tritm«  God-    Their  knowledge  puffs  them 


Vn,  35.  tSf 

i:p,  and  "  their  zeal  for  God  is  not  according  to  knowledge,  leading 
them  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,"  Rom.  x*.  2,  3. 

Whoever  ye  are,  apply  your  hea\ti>  to  this,  and  see  whether  ye 
be  not  in  one  or  other  respect  thus  disposed.  And  is  it  still  tLus  with 
you  ?  hear  then  what  God  saith  to  you,  Titus  i.  16.  "They  profess 
that  they  know  God  ;  but  in  works  they  deny  hirn,  being;  abomina- 
ble, and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate,"  hph.  ii. 
12.  «  Without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  worlci."  Know  that  each  Person  will  employ  his 
wisdom,  will,  pov/er  and  work  to  destroy  you  :  the  Father  is  your 
*<  righteous  judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry  every  day,"  Psalm  vii, 
1 1.  The  Son  "  will  not  pardon  your  transfrres^inns  ;  for  the  name  of 
God  is  m  him,"  Exod  xxiii.  21.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  "  tcrnc^d  to  be 
yoer  enemy,"  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10.  ''  Can  your  hrart  then  enduie,  or  your 
hands  be  strong  in  the  day  when  God  shall  deal  with  you?"  Eztk. 
xxii.  14.  Hear  what  he  saith,  Isaiah  xlvii.  3.  '' I  will  take  ven- 
geance, and  I  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man." 

Therefore  be  concerned  and  solicitous  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  Regard  God  and  his  favour  more  ;  the  Lord  is  yet  willing 
to  become  your  God,  and  offers  you  for  that  purpose  his  free  grace. 
Therefore  refuse  not,  accept  of  it,  and  lay  hold  on  his  Son,  that  ye 
may  be  hidden  from  his  indignation.  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted 
time,  the  day  of  salvation  :  *'  To  day  then  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv-  7.  8.  Isaiah  Iv.  €,  7. 

But  ye,  who  know  God,  yea,  rather  are  known  of  him,  who  hath 
also  given  you  an  understanding,  that  ye  should  know  him  who  is 
true,  conduct  by  ^11  means  worthily  of  this  allworthy  Lord,  and 
therefore, 

1.  Believe  with  a  strong  faith,  and  impress  it  deeply  on  your 
minds,  that  he  is,  and  especially  that  he  is  infinitely  perfect,  and  Tri- 
une, and  that  ye  have  to  do  with  him  :  "  He  who  cometh  to  God 
must  beheve  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  dili-j 
gently  seek  him,"  Heb.  xi.  6.  Ye  have  as  many  proofs  of  this  within 
and  without  you,  as  of  any  other  thing  in  the  world,  and  more  :  yfr 
need  only  attend,  and  the  Lord  God  will  "  beset  you  behind  and  be- 
fore, and  lay  his  hand  upon  you,"  Psalm  cxxxix.  5.  Doth  Satan  as- 
sault you  with  wicked  injections  and  fiery  darts,  maintain  a  compo- 
sed mind,  and  suffer  them  not  to  disturb  you  too  much,  yea,  do  not 
argue  against  them,  in  order  to  refute  them,  but  repel  them  from 
you,  as  ye  would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes,  that  the  enemy  may 
^  discouraged,  wheu  he  perceives  that  ye  do  hot  greatly  regard  his 


«te  I'ftE  CimiSTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c 

assaults.  Do  not  endeavonr  neither  to  penetrate  with  your  undciw 
standing  too  far  into  tins  mystery,  but  believe  it  solely  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  God  ;  the  first  apprehensions  which  we  form  of  God  are 
generally  the  purest;  but  when  we  will  find  out  the  Almighty  to 
perfection,  we  then  become  dull  and  perplexed  :  eveiy  one  must 
•confess  here  "  that  he  is  more  brutish  than  any  man,  and  that  he 
hath  not  the  understanding  of  a  m^m,  that  he  hath  neither  learned 
wisdom,  nor  hath  the  knowledge  of  the  holy,"  Prov-  xxx.  2,  3.  See 
also  2  (or.  X.  f*. 

2.  Let  the  Lord  God  also  be  the  object  of  all  your  observances  ~ 
for  he  is  the  most  worthy  object,  in  whom  the  reasonable  creature 
can  obtain  complete  satisfaction  in  all  that  he  doth.  Therefore  cotw 
template  him  alone  in  his  excellencies,  **  beholding  as  in  a  glass,  with 
open  face,  the  gloiy  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  "  Let  your  medita- 
tion of  him  be  sweet,"  Psalm  civ.  34.  "  Let  him  be  yoi'r  fear  and 
dre  d,"  Isaiah  viii.  13,  the  object  of  your  faith,  hope  and  love,  1 
Thess.  i.  3,  of  your  joy,  Phil.  iv.  4,  praise,  Neh.  ix.  5,  service,  Psalm 
ii.  11,  aims,  1  Cor.  x.  31,  and  imitation,  Eph.  v.  1.  I  Peter  i    15,  16. 

3.  Prais'j  and  glorify  the  Triune  God  on  account  of  his  wonderful 
counsel  of  grace  r    O  that  noble  device,  so  wisely  contrived  and  ex- 
ecuted, to  save  sinners  by  a  crucified  Mediator,  to  the  glory  of  the 
divine  justice  and  mercy  1  "  angels  desire  to  look  into  these  things," 
!  Peter  i.  1 1.     How  do  they  praise  the  Lord  on  account  of  them  l 
Luke  ii.  13,  14.     That  the  Lord  may  be  glorified   for  them  by  an- 
gels and  men,  "the  church  must  make  known  to  the  principalities 
and  powers  in  heavenly  places,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  eternal  purpose,  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,"  Eph.  iii    lo>   1  L      Here  we  "  acknowledge  the  breadth   and 
length,  and  de;th,  and  heighth  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which   passeth 
knowledge,  and  are  filled  with   all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph.  iii.  18, 
19.     All  God's  works  praise  him,  but  in  this  way  all  his    praisewor- 
thy glory  appears,  as  it  were,  united.     The  creature  loses  himself, 
when  he  is  led   into  it,  and  must  cry  out   enraptured,  "  O  the  depth 
of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  ^of  God  I  how  un- 
searchable his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !  for  of  him, 
and  through  him,  and  to  him,  are  all  things  ;  to  whom  be   glory  for 
ever.  Amen,"  Rom.  xi-  33 — 36. 

4.  Lay  the  v/hole  burthen  of  your  salvation  upon  the  divine  Trin- 
ity, committing  the  accomplishment  of  it  entirely  to  the  Triune  God  • 
'^  For  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward  you  ;  that  ye  at- 
ways  liaving  all-sufficiency  m  all  things,  may  abound  in  every  good 
^ork,"  2  Cor.  ix.  8.     Each  Person  in  the  divine   essence   hath   en^ 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  ^4,  25.  t^ 

gaged  to  effect  your  salvation  through  grace,  love,  and  coTnmunion> 
and  will  confirm  it:  "  The  Father  will  perfect  it  for  you,  his  merer 
endureth  for  ever  ;  he  will  not  forsake  the  works  of  his  hands  *' 
Psalm  cxxxviii.  8,  The  Son  will  "daily  load  you  with  benefits - 
for  this  God  is  our  salvation,  Selah,  this  God  is  a  God  of  perfect  sal- 
vation to  us  ;  and  to  God  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death," 
JPsalm  Ixviii.  19,  2o.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  "our  God  for  ever  and 
ever;  he  will  be  our  guide  even  uuto  death,"  Psalm  xlviii.  U.  Rev„ 
xiv.  13,  For  these  reasons  we  ought  to  deny  all  our  own  works 
devices,  and  contrivances,  with  respect  to  this  matter,  to  cast  all 
our  care  upon  him,  and  ucpend  in  a  hojy  manner  on  him,  Psalm 
xxxviii.  5. 

5.  Improve  each  Person  distinctly  with  respect  to  his  special  work 
of  grace.     Do  ye  need  justification,  and  all  that   pertains   to   it,   let 
tlie  love  of  the  Father  be  your  refuge.     Do  ye  find  yourselves  empty 
and  destitute  of  necessary  grace,  betake  yourselves  to  the  Son  ;  for 
'^^  of  his  fulness  we  all  receive,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16.    Do 
ye  perceive  that  ye  are    estranged  from  the  Lord,  have  recourse  to 
the  fioly  Spirit,  whose  proper  work  it  is  to  introduce  to  communion 
with  God,  by  teaching  the  soul,  by  leading,  and  bringing   her  to 
God,  and  by  comforting  her  ;  but  beware  of  ending  or  resting  in  the 
Son  or  Holy  Spirit,  but  end  and  rest  through    them  in  the  Father ; 
for  »'  by  the  Son  we  have  an  access  through  the  Spirit   unto  the  Fa* 
ther,"  Eph.  ii.  8.     That  we   may  receive  all   things  again   of  the 
Father  through  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost ;  therefore  the  Lord  Jesus 
^aid,  xvi.  13,  14,  15.     «•  The  Spirit  of  truth  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth  ;  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but  whatsoever  he  shall 
hear,  that  shall  he  speak  ;  and  he   will  show  you   things   to  come- 
He  shall  glorify  me  ;    for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  show  it  unto 
you.     All  things  that  the  Father  hath   are  mine  ;   therefore  said  I, 
he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  show  it  unto  you/'  See  also  John  xiv.   16. 
6    Live  and  converse  much  in  union  and  com.munion  with  the 
divine  Trinity,  "  that  your  fellowship  may  be  with  the  Father,  and 
with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"   1  John  i.  3.     This   was  the  petition  of 
the  Son  for  you  to  the  Father,  John  xvii.  21.     Therefore  it  behooves 
you  to  present  the  Lord  before  your  eyes,  and  to  "  set  him  always 
before  you,"  Psalm,  xvi.  8,  "  to  follow  hard  after  him,"   Psalm  Ixiii. 
8,  to  "  be  near  him,  and  to  draw  nigh  to  him,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  28.  James 
iv.  8,  yea,  "to  walk"  and  converse  "with  him,  and   before   him," 
Gen.  V  22,  24,  27.  ^ 

7.  Be  also,  according  to  this  great  pattern,  most  closely  united  to 
one  ^other^  and  exercise   frequently,  tbft  communion  of  saints. 


n%^  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c. 

Howgreatjy  did  it  redound  to  the  glory  of  the  first  Christian*,  th^t. 
^  the  muliitutie  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart,  and  of  one 
soul,"  Acts  iv.  32.  We  must  "  all  be  one  in  the  Father  and  in  the 
Son,  as  the  Father  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son  in  the  Father,  are  one,** 
John  xvii  21.  "Be  like-minded,  have  the  same  love,  being  of  ene 
accord,  of  one  mind,"  Philip,  li.  2  1  Cor.  i.  10.  "  The  Lord  hath 
given  you  all  one  heart  and  one  way,  that  ye  may  fear  him,"  Jer. 
xxxii.  39.  '*  Therefore  endeavour  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one  body  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling  One  Lord,  one  fuith,  and 
one  baptism.  One  God  and  Fatner  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and 
through  all,  and  in  you  all,"  Eph.  iv.  3 — 6. 

8.  Behold  now  albo  your  great  portion  and  possession,  since  this 
infinitely  glorious  God  is  yours.  By  your  entrance  into  the  proffered 
covenant  of  ^:race,  "  ye  have  avouched  the  Lord  to  be  your  God,'* 
Deut.  xxvt  17  How  great  thep  is  your  portion  !  yea,  the  Lord 
cannot  bestow  aught  upon  you  greater  or  worthier  than  himself;  ye 
may  indeed  challenge  the  world  to  show  you  a  portion  beiter  thian 
yours.  See  Deut.  xxxii.  31.  Jer.  x.  Yea,  all  that  the  Lord  hath  is 
also  yours,  1  Cor.  ii.  21,  52,  23.  Doth  it  not  please  him  to  com- 
municate much  f  himself  to  you  at  present,  ye  will  hereafter  be  so 
much  the  more  filled  and  satisfied  with  bim  :  for  according  to  Psalm 
xvii.  15.  "Ye  shall  behold  his  face  in  righteousness:  ye  plmll  hjf 
^tisfied,  when  ye  avrake,  with  hi^  likeiiess,',  Awe.»i 


(im 


FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER 


IX,  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  cKlvi.  5,  6.  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for 
his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God  ;  which  made  heaven 
and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  therein  is  :  which  keepeth  truth 
for  ever, 

Q»  26.  What  bdievest  thouytohen  thou  my  est,  ^^  I  believe  in  God 
the  Father^  Almighty  Mtiker  of  heaven  and  earth?** 

A.  That  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (who  'of 
nothing  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  ail  that  in  them  is  ;  who  like- 
wise upholds  and  governs  the  same  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  pro- 
vidence,) is  for  the  sake  of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God,  and  my  Father; 
on  whom  1  rely  so  entirely,  that  1  have  no  doubt  but  he  will  provide 
me  with  all  thinc^s  necessary  for  soul  and  body  :  and  further,  that  he 
will  make  whatever  evils  he  sends  upon  me,  in  this  valley  of  tears, 
turn  out  to  my  advantaire  ;  for  he  is  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty 
God,  and  willing  ;  being  a  faithful  Father. 


G 


OD,  the  Lord,  willing  to  reveal  himself  unto  Moses,  as  far  as 
his  capacity  would  admit,  promiseth  him  that  "  he  should  see  his  back- 
parts,"  Exod.  xxxiii.  23.  Moses  had  prayed  to  the  Lord  to  '*  show 
him  his  glory,"  vrs.  18,  wishing  to  see  his  face  in  a  posture  in  which 
his  fore-parts  were  toward  him  ;  but  the  Lord  informs  him  that  na 
mortal  was  capable  of  seeing  him  thus,  ^'  Thou  canst  not  see  my 
face  ;  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me  and  live  ;  my  face  shall  not  be 
seen,"  vrs.  23.  The  Lord  was  nevertheless  too  kind  to  deny  him 
his  request  altogether,  but  granted  it  fully,  when  he  said,  "  Tbou 


lV2  -?AITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHETt.      ^ 

«halt  see  my  back-parts."  The  Lord  God,  being  a  spirit,  hathliS'iv 
ther  fore-parts  nor  back-parts  :  but  this  is  a  figurative  manner  df 
speaking,  taken  from  men,  whom  we  behold  in  a  posture  in  which 
their  back-parts  are  toward  US|  and  thus  know  imperfectly,  by  theif 
ierect  and  well  formed  bodies,  their  shape  and  ordinary  gait.  Thu« 
also  the  Lord  God,  who  is  one  in  essence  and  three  in  Persons,  can- 
not be  seen  in  a  posture  wherein  his  fore-parts  are  toward  us,  and 
face  to  face,  but  is  perceived  in  a  posture  wherein  his  back-parts  are 
to'vard  us.  But  what  are  the  back-parts  of  the  Lord  ?  in  the  first 
place,  the  divine  virtues  and  perfections,  which  Moses  saw,  "  when 
the  Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaimed,  the  Lord,  the  Lord 
God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  good- 
ness and  truth,"  &;c.  Exod  xxxiv,  6.  And  also  the  works  of  the 
Lord  which  are,  as  it  were,  his  gait,  and  goings,  particularly  in  the 
sanctuary,  Psalm  Ixviii.  24.  The  Lord  reveals  himself  by  his  works 
evtn  to  the  heathens :  "  For  his  invisible  things  from  the  creation  of 
the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  thai  are 
made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,"  Rom.  i.  20  This  was 
sufficient  indeed  to  render  them  inexcusable,  but  it  could  not  con- 
duct them  to  salvation  :  it  taught  them  indeed  the  eternal  power  and 
godhead  of  God,  but  not  the  manner  in  which  the  sinner  must  be 
reconcilcv!  to  him  :  God  is  not  only  one  in  essence,  but  also  three 
ID  Persons  :  we  must  also  know  him  as  such,  if  we  shall  be  saved  ; 
^<  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God, 
and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent,"  sai;.h  the  Saviour,  John  xvii, 
S.  But  who  is  able  to  behold  this  in  a  posture  in  which  the  fore-parts 
of  it  are  toward  him  ?  no  mortal ;  he  becomes  blind,  when  he  gazes  at 
this  sun  :  he  must  therefore  endeavour  to  survey  this  God  in  a  pos- 
ture wherein  his  back-parts  are  toward  him,  to  wit,  in  the  saving 
operations  of  the  three  Per  :ons.  It  hath  indeed  seemed  good  to  the 
divine  Persons  to  contrive  unitedly  a  council  of  grace,  and  that 
each  Person  should  contribute  his  part,  in  order  to  effect  the  salva- 
tion of  tliC  sinner :  the  Father  should  love  the  sinner  with  a  raving 
love,  the  Son  should  purchase  grace,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  should  re^n- 
dcr  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  the  grace  of 
the  Son.  This  Paul  teacheth  us,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  Therefore  the 
catechism  proposing  to  exhibit  God  to  us  as  Triune,  discovers  him  to 
us  in  a  posture,  wherein  his  back-parts  are  toward  us,  to  wit,  by  his 
works  in  the  division  of  the  articles  of  the  creed,  speaking  in  the. 
eighth  Lord's  day,  of  God  the  Father  and  our  creation,  of  God  the 
Son  and  our  redemption,  and  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  our  sancti- 
'  ficatirtn.     This  bumg  thira  briefly  proposed,  each  Person  is  exhibited 


$3 

to  us  "vvith  respect  to  his  particular  works  in  order.  Since  now  the 
Fatiier  is  the  first  in  the  order  of  subsistence  and  working,  therefore 
fuith  in  God  the  Father,  Ahiiighty  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  is 
first  treated  of. 

Two  particulars  require  our  further  consideration  here  ; 

I.  The  object  of  the  Christian's  regard,  "God  the  Father,  Al- 
mighty Maker  of  heaven  and  earth," 

II.  The  Christian's  believing  exercise  relative  to  that  object, 
"  I  believe." 

I.  When  mention  is  made  here  of  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Ma» 
ker,  Sec.  it  is  evidtnt,  that  this  relates  not  to  God  considered  essen^ 
tially,  but  personally,  and  indeed  to  the  first  Person,  whose  personal 
property  it  is,  that  he  is  the  Father,  as  will  appear  more  fully  here- 
after ;  and  therefore  he  is  distinguished  here  from  the  Son,  the  Re- 
deemer, and  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Sanctifier.  Wherefore  wx 
shall  inquire,  1,  why  he  is  called  "  God,"  2,  why  <^  Father,"  and  3, 
why  «'  Almighty  Makei;." 

It  is  known  that  the -Father  is  called  God  more  frequently 
than  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  see  this  John  xvii.  3.  "  Thi& 
is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Je- 
sus Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  See  also  Rom.  iii.  25.  1  Cor. 
xiii.  13.  Gal.  iv.  6.  TUls  is  a  stone  of  stumbHng,  and  a  rock  of 
offence  to  the  Socinians,  as  though  the  Father  were  God  rather  than 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  while  nevertheless  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  God  coessential  with  the  Father.  But  this  mystery 
contains  another,  to  wit,  that  the  Father,  according  to  the  distribution 
of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine  Persons,  undertook  to  display 
in  his  Person  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead,  and  to  reveal  it  in  its 
glory,  as  the  Son  undertook  to  make  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  act  as  the  ambassadour  of  the  P'ather  and  of 
the  Son.  See  John  vi.  13,  14,  15.  For  this  reason  he  is  to  be  con-- 
aidered  as  the  first  cause  of  all  things  :  "  We  have  but  one  God, 
the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,"  1  Cor.  viii.  6,  as  the  all-suffi- 
cient, *'  who  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound,"  2  Cor.  ix.  8,  whose 
also  the  wisdom,  to  contrive  a  way  of  reconciliation,  1  Cor.  i.  24, 
the  holiness  to  reveal  it  in  purity,  to  the  salvation  of  sinners,  JohA 
xvii.  11,  the  justice  to  avenge  himself  of  sin,  and  to  forgive  it,  Rom. 
iii*  25,  26,  the  love  for  the  manifestation  of  all  grace,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13. 
Yea,  the  Father  is  considered  as  the  end,  to  whose  praise  we  must 
refer  the  whole  work  of  grace,  Rom.  xi.  33  —36.  Therefore  the 
favoured  people  of  God  mwst  not  end  in  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost; 
Vit  must,  through  th^m  end  in  the  Father,  with  all  their  esercisef 

Ec 


\n  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

of  faiih,  love,  hope,  fear,  and  praise,  Eph.  ii.  13.  1  Peter  i.  12.  Co|. 
iii.  17.  And  when  the  saivation  of  the  sinner  shall  be  completed, 
"then  shall  the  ^on  deliver  up  the  king  .om  unto  God,  evtin  the  Fa- 
ther, and  be  subject  to  him,  who  put  ail  things  under  him,"  1  Cor, 
XV.  24,  28.. 

Consi  lering  all  these  particulars,  we  are  naturally  led  to  the  con- 
tem^)lat!oii  of  tlie  ceconomical  dispensation  of  grace  appertauiing  to 
tile  rather. 

1.  First  with  respect  to  the  eternal  co'msel  of  peace,  which  we 
also  ca.i  a  to've'-saiit  of  redemption,  because  the  redemption  of  the 
sinner  was  contrived  in  it.  1  his  covci^ant  of  redemption  is  the  dis- 
pLTis  '.ioii  o[  the  Father,  and'it  is  ascribed  to  bis  <'  manifold  wisdom^ 
according  to  the  eternal  purpose,  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord,"  I'ph.  iii.  I!.  Iheiein  he  appointed  his  Son  to  be  a 
surety,  and  delivered  the  elect  to  him,  that  he  might  redeem  them, 
JtT.  XXX.  21.  John  xvii.  6. 

2.  Furiher  creation  is  also  the  work  of  the  Father,  as  the  mean 
of  executing  his  counsel' :  for  it  w  as  necessary  that  he  should  pro- 
duce the  elect  into  being,  if  he  should  render  them  partakers  of  his 
grace,  "te  Tsaiiih  xlv.  17,  18.  Eph.  iii.  19,  and  also  that  he  should 
reveal  the  covenant  of  works,  wfiich  the  Father  established  with 
mankind,  ?.nd  that  he  siiouh'  suffer  it  to  be  broken  by  sin,  to  the  end 
that  he  might  glorify  liis  ju'3-tice  and  inconceivable  grace,  Rom. 
xi.  32. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  it  belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Father 
to  establish  the  covenant  of  grace  with  the  elect  sinner,  to  whom  he 
promises  iiimself,  and  that  he  will  be  his  God,  in  which  every  great 
and  precious  promise  is  imphed,  Jer.  33,  3-4.  2  Cor.  vi.  16—18,  as 
the  administraiion  of  tiiat  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament  also 
belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  the  l^ather^ 

4.  Add  to  this,  that  the  Father  exerciseth  an  csconomical  dispen- 
sation with  respect  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  ,  It  was  the 
work  of  the  Father  to  send  the  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  and  under 
the  law,  Gal.  iv.  4,  to  lay  iniquity  upon  him,  to  demand  the  debt  of 
him,  and  therefore  to  bruise  him,  Isaiah  liii.  And  thus  "  God  was 
in  Christ,  reconcilins;  the  world  to  himself,"  2  Cor.  v,  19.  And  in 
order  to  bestow  on  him  the  reward  of  his  arduous  labour,  he  raised 
hini  from  the  dead.  Acts  ii.  24,  set  him  iu  heaven  at  his  own  right 
hand,  and  made  him  Judge  of  the  quick  and. dead.  Acts  x.  42.  Eph. 
i.  10 — 23.  Philip,  ii.  10.  11.  1  Peter  iii.  22.  The  Father  performs 
also  a  certain  work  with  respect  to  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  for  he  gave  him 
without  measure  to  his  Son,  in  order  to  qualify  him  for  the  media* 


IX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  26.  195 

Worship,  and  also  that  he  might  communicate  the  Spirit  by  him  to 
his  cnurch,  Jolm  iii.  34.  Isaiali  Ixi.  i.  Acts.  ii.  33.  And  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  seni  likewise  by  God  the  Father  into  the  hearts  of  believers, 
to  influence  them,  Gal.  iv.  6 

5.  Finally,  the  Father  hath  his  special  dispensation  wiih  respect 
to  tbe  elect,  to  wit,  that  he  bestows  his  Son  and  all  his  sovereign  ben- 
efits upon  them,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Therefore  •'  he  calls  them  to  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son,"  I  Cor  i.  9.  "justifies  them,"  Rom.  viii.  33. 
"adopts  them,"  2  Cor,  vi.  17,  18,  and  brings  them  infb  a  s.ate  of 
peace  with  him,  Rom.  v.  1. 

It  is  necessary  and  profitable  to  view  the  different  dispensations  of 
the  father  in  this  manner,  since  this  removes  the  offence,  which  the 
Socinians  take  at  thr:;  Godhead  of  the  Father,  the  humiliation  of  the 
Son,  and  the  sending  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  may  thus  clearly  com- 
prehend in  v/hat  manner  the  Son  and  the  lloly  Spirit,  who  are  con- 
substantial  with  the  Father,  can  be  sent,  and  in  what  manner  the  ^^on, 
who  is  himself  God.  is  the  servant  of  God,  and  satisfied  the  justice 
of  God  ;  it  also  teaches  believers  how  they  receive  all  things  of  the 
Father  through  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  how  they  draw  near 
to  him,  and  refer  all  back  to  him. 

Wc  must  now  inquire  why  the  first  Person  is  called  Father:  a 
person  is  a  father,  in  consequence  of  his  having  a  child  or  children, 
and  so  God  is  a  Father. 

First,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose  etcraal  Father  the  first 
Person  is,  by  an  etenihl  and  inconceivable  generation.  Psalm  ii.  7. 
*'  For  as  the  Father  hath  lifv  in  himself,  so  hat!)  he  clso  given  to  the 
Son  to  have  life  in  himself,  John  v.  26.  But  of  this  we  must  speak 
more  particularly  on  the  thirteenth  Lord's  day. 

In  the  second  place,  God  is  tne  Father  of  true  believers  for  the 
sake  of  his  Sen  Christ,  who  is,  as  it  were,  their  brother  ;  and  there- 
fore "  his  God  and  Father,  is  also  tueir  God  and  Father,"  as  he  lam- 
self  declaies,  John  XX.  17.  The  reason  of  this  is,  (I)  their  n^w 
birth,  by  which  they  partake,  hke  children,  of  the  life  and  iinaece  of 
God  ;  for  "  they  are  not  born  of  blood,  nor  of  ti»e  will  of  man,  h'lt  of 
God,"  John  i.  13,  13,  (2)  Their  spiritnal  marriage  with  the  Son  of 
God,  *'who  hath  betrothed  them  to  himself  in  faithfulness,"  Flosea 
ii.  19.  Therefore  he  is,  "  the  husband"  of  believers,  Isaiah  liv.  5, 
and  they  are  ''  the  bride  and  wife  of  the  Lamb,"  Rev,  xxi.  9.  And 
therefore  God,  the  Father  of  the  Son,  is  also  the  Father  of  his  bride 
and  wife,  who  is  therefore  called  *'  the  daughter"  of  the  Father, 
Psalm  xlv.  16.  (3)  The  adoption  of  grace  by  which  the  Lord  trans- 
latts  them  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  into  his  family,  furnisheth 


19a  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER^ 

them  with  a  plentiful  support,  and  renders  them  heirs  of  all  his  sa^ 

ving  benefits,  yea,  of  himself,  and  of  his  Son  ;  and  thus  they  are  not 
strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow  citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of 
the  household  of  God,"  Eph  ii.  19.  "  Being  children,  they  are  also 
heiiS  of  God,  and  joint  iieir^  with  Christ,"  Rom.  viii.  17. 

In  the  third  place,  God  is  also  a  Father  of  all  his  creatures,  and 
particularly  of  all  mankind  ;  inasmuch  as  they  have  received  life  of 
him  by  creation  ;  therefore  it  is  said,  Mai.  li.  10.  "  Have  we  not 
all  one  leather  I    liath  not  one  God  created  us  ?" 

And  so  this  God  and  Father  is  also  the  Almighty  Maker  of  hea- 
ven and  earth.  To  create,  s  ex  .ressed  in  the  Hebrew  by  the  word 
bara,  which  signifies  to  make  a  new  thing,  as  we  see,  Numb  xvi.  30, 
"  If  the  Lord  njake  a  new  thing."  See  also  Jer.  xxxi.  22.  With 
this  agrees  also  nearly  the  Greek  word  ktizo,  which  words,  as  also 
the  word  create,  are  commonly  used  by  divines  to  denote  the  making 
of  something  out  oi  nothing.  Whether  the  word  bara  signify  to 
give  any  thing  its  beginning,  and  the  word  jatzar  to  give  that  which 
is  oegun,  its  proper  form  and  shape,  and  the  Vv'ord  ^nasah^  to  perfect 
any  thing,  this  may  admit  of  much  disputation  .  some  think  thus, 
because  we  find  these  words  together,  Isaiah  xlii.  7,  "  I  have  crea- 
ted him  for  my  glory,  I  have  formed  him,  yea,  I  have  made  him." 
However  this  be,  the  work  of  creation  is  "a  transient  act  of  God's 
almighty  power,  by  which  he  produced  the  whol**  universe,  without 
any  previous  matter,  only  by  his  powerful  word,  in  the  space  of  six 
successive  days,  to  the  glory  of  his  name." 

In  order  to  explain  the  work  of  creation  we  must  consider,  (1) 
what  was  created,  (2)  Of  what  it  was  created,  (3)  By  whom,  and  by 
-what  power,  (4)  The  act  of  creating,  (5)  The  time,  and  (5)  The 
end  or  design  of  the  creation. 

1.  We  must  inquire  in  the  first  place  what  was  created.  It  was 
"  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  therein  is,"  accord- 
ing to  our  text.  *'  Things  visible  and  invisible,"  Coll.  i.  16,  Indeed 
there  is  not  any  thing  that  exists  without  God  of  itself,  and  that  was 
not  created  :  all  these  things  arc  called  with  one  word,  the  world, 
and  the  universe.  Although  this  world  is  exceedingly  great,  and  we, 
on  account  of  our  weakness,  do  not  know  the  bounds  of  it,  neverthe- 
less we  may  not  say  that  the  world  is  infinite  ;  for  we  should  then 
be  obUged  to  say  also  that  it  could  not  have  been  made  greater  by 
Cod,  inasmuch  as  nothing  can  be  added  to  that  which  is  infinite  : 
moreover,  the  world  cannot  be  infinite,  because  it  consists  of  finite 
parts,  which  cannot  have  place  in  that  which  is  infinite  :  infinity  is  a 
perfection  that  belongs  to  God  only,  and  it  cannot  be  communicated 


I^ 

to  any  creature.  It  is  ulso  exceedingly  absurd  to  say  that  there  cbuld 
not  be  more  worlds  made  than  this,  becaue  we  cannot  conceive  or 
imagine  any  space  beyond  this  world,  in  which  other  worlds  might; 
be  placed  :  for  as  it  was  no  rontradiction,  that  God  created  this  world, 
where  there  was  no  space  before,  so  it  is  no  contradiction,  that  God, 
at^reeably  to  his  inexhaustible  omnipotence,  should  produce  other 
worlds,  where  there  is  no  space  at  present.  * 

2.  But  of  what  was  this  beautiful  world  created  ?  we  must  say  that 
all  things  were  created  out  of  nothing,  by  which  vye  do  not  meau 
that  '^  nothing  was  a  certain  matter,  out  of  which  all  things  were 
produced  :  but  that  all  things  were  created  by  God's  powerful  Word, 
%\'ithout  any  previous  matter  :  "  God  calleth  the  things  which  be  not, 
as  though  they  were,"  Rom.  iv.  17.  "Through  faith  we  understand 
that  the  worlds  were  formed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so  that  things 
which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear,"  Heb.  xi. 
3.  Therefore  it  is  detestable  in  Vorstius  and  the  Socinians,  to  con- 
ceive that  the  earth  was  made  of  that  unshapely  mass,  "which  was 
without  form  and  void,"  Gen.  i.  2,  when  nevertheless  Moses  had 
said  before  he  mentioned  that,  "  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  in  the  beginning,"  vrs.  1.  heaven  perfect  at  its  first  production; 
but  the  earth  without  form  and  void.  Others  fancy  that  the  world 
was  created  of  some  unsightly  matter,  which  had  neither  form  nor 
any  sightly  appearance^  and  that  this  is  called,  by  Paul  me  phainom- 
cna,  "  the  things  which  are  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  3.  but  that  text  doth 
not  say,  ek  me  fihainomena^  oi"  things  which  are  not  seen  ;  but  me  ek 
phainomena^  not  of  things  that  are  seen,  which  is  very  different.  Let 
us  allov/  that  he  speaks  of  things,  which  are  not  seen  ;  but  things 
which  are  not  seen,  are  things  which  do  not  exist :  "  It  was  never 
so  seen  in  Israel,"  said  the  multitude  wondering  at  Christ,  when  be 
cast  the  devil  out  of  the  dumb  man,  and  caused  the  dumb  man  to 
speak.  Matt.  ix.  oo.  And  what  would  the  multitude  say,  but  that  it 
had  never  been  so  in  Israel.  The  apostle  showeth  that  "  the  worlds 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God  ;"  but  what  doth  thjs  mean  but  by 
his  power,  without  any  previous  matter ;  but  to  such  sentiments 
must  these  men  decline,  that  they  may  unsinew,  with  a  certain  ap- 
pearance of  reason,  our  argument  for  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  their  eternity.  Even  the  smallest  atoms  of  the 
world  had  their  beginning,  and  were  created  by  God,  Prcv.  viii.  26. 

*  Tho  author  opposes  here  the  opinions  of  the  Cartesjfans,  wlio  deny  ibat 
there  is  any  void  space  in  nature,  or  that  there  ever  hath  been  ;  and  assert 
that  the  world  is  infinite  in  extension,  and  wai  P?v-r;Vjgl««?s  rrfated.  He 
•%rg;n»s  "c;^'n»  t  them  open  their  own  rrinc'p)<*r-. 


in  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

otherwise  the  world  would  have  existed  from  eternity,  and  thus  also 
be  God.  When  we  say  that  the  worlo  was  created  out  of  nothing,  * 
we  mean  that  the  work  of  the  first  day  was  abboh;tely  out  of  nothinjj, 
without  the  least  previous  m^Uer  ;  but  the  work  of  the  following 
days  of  a  matter  altogether  unfit,  which  was  as  unfit  as  nothing  to 
make  such  a  beautiful  world  of  it. 

3.   We  can  now  see  by  whom,  and  by  what  power  all  things  were 
created:  "  He  that  built  all  things  is  God,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  iii   4. 
It  is  a  silly  opinion  of  the  Jews,  that  the  angels  were  felk.w-workers 
with  God.     The  Arians  held  that  Christ  was  an  organ  and  instru- 
ment of    God  in    creation,    und  the   Socinians  pretend  that  God 
could  produce  a  creature,  whieh  would  be  so   ])owerful,  that  he  could 
create  the  world  by  it,  that  they  may  thus    evade  our  argument  for 
the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and   Hoiv  Cihost  from  their  work  of  crea- 
tion :  but  it  is  most  d. testable;  in  the  mass-priests,  to  imagine  that 
they  can  create  their  Creator  of  bread  and  wine,   and  that  only  by 
muttering  fiive  words.     No,  tiie  Lord  God  alone  is  the  Creator,  and 
he  glorits  in  it,   Isniah  xhv.  24.  ''  I  am  the   Lord  that  maketh  all 
things  ;  that  stielcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone,    and  that   spreadeth 
abroad  the  earth  by  myself."  I'herefore  the  Lord  God  is  distinguish- 
ed from  the  idols  by  creation,  and  it  is  proved  therefrom,  that  they 
are  not  Gods,   Psuim  xcvi.  5.  Jer.  x.  11.     To  create  is  a   work  of 
almighty  power  ;  therefore  we  must  all  confess  that  he  is  an  almighty 
Maker,  as  "  Ciod's  eternal  power  and  Godhead  are  also  understood 
by  the  thmgs  that  he  hath  made,"  Rom.  i.  20.    He  who  shall  create 
must  possess  in  himself  eminently  and  actually  all  the  perfections  of 
all  the  creatures :  and   who  is  able   to  remove  the  infinite  distance 
between  something  and  nothing,  but  he   who  possesseth  an  infinite 
power  ?  No  creature  can  be  even  an  instrument  of  God  in  creating, 
since  an  instrur^ient  must  hdve  a  fit  matter  for  its  work,  and  this  can- 
not sxist  in  creating.      Although  creation  is  ascribed  also  to  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  it  is  particularly  the  work  of  the  Father,  as 
we  have  shown  above,  and  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day. 

4.  The  act  of  God,  whereby  he  created  was  not,  that  he  impress- 
ed a  certain  physical  motion  upon  matter,  which  did  then  produce 
such  a  world,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  motion,  and  God's  ordinary 
co-operation  ;  but  the  work  of  creation  was  performed,  ( 1 )  by  God's 
powerful  and  effectual  wordy  whereby  he  commanded  the  cieature  to 
exist,  and  so  gave  it  existence :  "  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and 
there  was  light,"  Gen.  i.  3.  See  also  Psalm  xxxiii.  9.  (2)  By  giving 
such  an  order  and  disposition  to  the  creatures,  that  each  creature 
ihould,  in  consequence  thereof,  be  and  work  according  to  its  nature 


IX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  26.  J99 

and  disposition  :  thus  the  earth  should  be  disposed  to  fruitfulness, 
Gen.  i.  i  K  and  the  hc;hts  to  disiin^^iiish  the  times,  and  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth,  Gen.  i.  14 — 18.  '^3)  By  establishing  all  things  in 
such  a  manner,  that  they  should  remain  fixed  and  steadfast :  thus 
"  God  hath  established  the  earth,  and  it  abideth  :  all  things  continue 
this  day  accordin;,  to  his  ordinances,  for  all  are  his  servants,"  Psalm 
cxix.  90,  91.  See  also  Gen.  viii,  22.  Jer.  xxxi.  35,  36.  xxxiii.  20.  (4) 
By  God's  approbation  and  blessing,  by  which  he  blessed  the  creutures^ 
that  they  might  be  useiul  to  the  generations  following  :  thus  God 
blessed  the  earth,  beasts  and  men,  so  that  they  became  fruitful,  Gen. 
i.  11,  12,  22,  28. 

5,  But  when  did  God  create  the  world?  Moses  saith,  *' In  the 
beginning,"  Gen.  i.  1,  namely,  in  the  beginning  of  time,  which  was 
when  the  creatures  began,  so  that  we  find  an  earlier  or  later  date 
only  in  the  first  existence  and  continuance  of  the  creatures  ;  for  we 
cannot  conceive  of  any  time  before  the  beginning  of  the  creatures, 
but  only  an  unbounded  eternity.  We  leave  it  to  others  to  inquire 
how  long  it  is  since  the  world  was  created,  in  what  season  of  the 
year,  whether  in  the  spring  or  autumn,  how  long  God  was  engaged 
each  day,  a  moment,  or  lon^yjer.  or  a  whole  day  :  there  are  many  who 
enlarge  much  on  these  things  ;  we  only  say,  that  although  God  the 
Lord  was  able  to  produce  the  whole  world  in  a  moment,  in  a  perfect 
state,  it  nevertheless  pleased  him  to  employ  six  days  upon  it,  that 
We  might  contemplate  his  several  works  with  the  greater  attention. 
On  the  first  day  God  created  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  light,  GeTX, 
i.  i — 5,  and  undoubtedly  the  angels  also  in  heaven,  Job  xxxviii.  6,  7. 
On  the  second  day  he  created  the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters, 
which  were  above  the  firmament,  from  the  waters  which  were  below 
the  firmament.  Gen.  6,  7,  8.  God  did  not  bless  the  second  day,  but 
he  bestowed  a  double  blessing  on  the  third  day,  because  the  work  of 
the  second  day  was  completed  by  the  work  of  the  third  day,  ''to  wit, 
the  sea,  the  herbs  and  plants,  ch.  i.  9^ — 13.  On  the  fourth  day,  God 
created  the  sun,  moon  and  stars,  ch,  i.  14— -19  ;  on  the  fifth  day, 
the  fishes  and  fowls,  ch.  i.  20 — 23  ;  and  on  the  sixth  day  he  created 
the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  last  of  all  man,  because  the  Lord  would 
introduce  him  into  a  plentiful  habitation,  and  thus  manifest  that  he 
had  created  aU  things  for  the  good  of  man,  ch.  i.  24 — 31.  On  the 
seventh  day  God  rested,  ch.  ii.  2  ;  not  because  he  was  weary  :  "The 
Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  ea'th  fainteth  not,  neither  is  be  weary," 
Isaiah  xl.  28.  But  it  is  said  that  God  rested,  because  he  ceased  to 
produce  new  kinds  of  creatures,  and  solaced  himself  in  his  works, 
inasmuch  as  they  displayed  his  glory  in  its  proper  lustre,  Exod.  xxxi- 


S^  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER, 

17.  This  rest  God  prescribed  as  a  pattern  to  man,  requiring  that 
he  should  rest  every  seventh  day  from  his  daily  labour,  after  the  ex- 
ample of  his  Creator ;  and  thus,  separating  himself  from  all  besides, 
solace  himself  in  God.  See  Gen.  ii.  2,  3.  Exod  xx.  8 — 11.  Isaiah 
Iviii.  13,  13. 

6.  Finally,  we  must  know  that  God  the  Lord,  who  h  perfectly 
wisL*,  did  not  create  all  these  things  without  a  holy  and  great  end. 
Solomon  saith,  Prov.  xvi.  4.  "  The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for 
himself;  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evih"  This  doth  not 
imply  that  God  had  need  of  the  creatures,  in  order  to  perfect  his 
glory  :  for  "  he  is  not  worshipped  by  men's  hands,  as  though  he 
needed  any  thing,  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  all  things;"  Acts 
xvii.  25.  No  creature  can  be  profitable  to  God  ;  it  is  no  advantage 
to  the  Almighty,  tha^  any  one  ib  righteous,  neither  is  it  gain  to  him, 
that  he  maketh  his  w^iys  perfect :  our  goodness  extendeth  not  to 
him  ;  he  is  exalted  above  all  honour  and  praise,  but  because  he  is 
good,  therefore  he  v/ould  communicate  himself,  that  his  eternal 
power,  Godhead  and  glory  might  be  seen  and  acknowledged  ;  God 
hath  therefore  impressed  his  glory  upon  all  the  inanimate  and  irra- 
tional  creatures,  and  endowed  rational  men  viith  his  image,  that  all 
might  thank  and  glorify  the  Creator,  according  to  their  nature.  See 
this  Psalm  xix  1 — 5,  and  Psalm  viiu  Have  mankind  departed  from 
God,  and  honoured  and  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator. 
%vho  is  blessed  for  evermore,  the  Lord  hath  nevertheless  not  failed  of 
his  end,  inasmuch  as  he  manifests  his  power,  justice  and  longsuffer- 
ing  ift  the  vessels  of  wrath,  fitted  to  destruction  ;  and  displays  the 
riches  of  his  glory  in  his  power,  v/isdom,  and  inconceivable  gi'ace  in 
the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  he  had  b-fore  prepared  for  glory  :  for 
surely  God  hath  filled  the  world  with  men,  that  he  may  gather  a  peo- 
ple out  of  them,  in  whom  he  will  be  glorified  ;  for  it  would  other- 
wise appear  as  if"  Cod  had  created  all  the  children  of  men  in  vain," 
Psalm  Ixxxix.  48.  Isaiah  xlv.  17,  18.  Eph.  iii.  9.  And  verily  if 
God  had  not  intended  this,  the  world  would  long  ere  now  have  been 
destroyed  in  a  dreadful  manner ;  but  the  Lord  is  longsuffering  to- 
ward us,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come 
to  repentance,"  2  Peter  iii.  9.  God  the  Father  doth  also  "  uphold 
ind  govern  the  world,  which  he  hath  created,  by  his  eternal  counsel 
and  providence,"  as  the  in^itructo^  saith  heie  ;  but  of  this  he  treats 
more  particularly  ^n  the  following  Lord's  day. 

II.-  The  believing  exercise  of  a  Christian  with  recpect  to  the  object 
proposed,  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker,  is  that  he  believes  in 
him.     II':  doth  not  say,  <*  we"  believe,  as  he  saith,  when  he  prays. 


^m 

*-  out  "  Father ;  but  "  I  "  believe,  because  we  can  indeed  pray  for 
another,  but  we  canriot  believe  for  another  :  "  The  righteous  shall 
live  by  his  faith,"  Hab.  ii.  4.  To  believe  in  God  the  Father,  the 
Almighty  Maker  is. 

1.  Ariously  to  hold  upon  the  declaration  of  God,  ail  the  foregoing 
particuiarb  to  be  true.     It  is  indeed  manifest  from  reason,  that  God 
created  the  world  out  of  nothing,  inasmuch   as  it  cannot  exist  of 
itself,  but  must  have  an  allsufficieni  cause,  as  "the  heathens  also  un- 
derstood and  clearly  saw  the  invisible  things  of  God,  even  bis  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  by  the  things  that  are  made,"   Rom.  i.  20- 
Nevtirtheless  v/e  obtain  a  clearer  knowledge  of  this  by  the  testimony 
of  God,  that  he  created  all  these  things  out  of  nbthmg,  and  in  such 
a  manner  :  for  "  through   faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were 
framed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not 
made  of  things  which  do  appear,"  Heb.  xi,  3.  Verily  reason  cannot 
teach  us  that  the  God  and   Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
hath  such  an  inconceivable  purpose   to  save  sinners,  is  the  Creator ; 
this  is  "  hidden   from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and   is  revealed  unto 
babes,  according  to  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of  God,"   Matt,  xio 
25,  26.     See  also  John  i.  18.     And  our  holding  that  this  revelation 
is  truth,  ife  believing  in   God  the  Father,   Almighty  Muker  in  the 
sense  of  the  Creed  ;  for  thus  we  "  receive  the  testimony  of  God,  and 
set  to  our  seal  that  he  is  true,"  John  iii.  33.     But  do  not  the  devils 
also  believe  this  and  tremble  ?  yes,  according  to  the  divine  declara- 
tion, James  iii.  9.     For  this  reason  the  Christian's  faith  proceedeth 
further  ;  yea,  he  believes  that  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker  is 
also  his  God  and  Father  for  Christ  his  Son's  sake.  It  is  true,  it  is  no 
where  said  to   this  and   that  person  in   particular,  that  God  is  his 
Father  in  Christ :  nevertheless  God  testifieth  in  his  word,  that  "  to 
as  many  as  receive  his  Son,  he  gives  power  to  becorhe  the  sons  of 
God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name,". John  i.  12i.    When  a 
believer  examines  his  actions,  and  the   Holy  Ghost  enables  him  to 
"  know  the  things  that  are  freely  given  him  of  God,"  according  to 
1  Cor.  ii.  12,   he  then  perceives  that  he  hath  truly  received  the  Son 
of  God  by  faith,  from  which  he  safely  concludes  that  he  is  a  child  of 
God,  and  "the   Spirit  of  God  also  beareth  witness  to  this  with  his 
spirit,"  Rom.  viii.  16.     And  his  faith  depends  thus  upon  the  witness 
of  God,  he  admires  and  rejoices  in  "  the  great  love  of  the  Father," 
manifested  to  him,  that  he  is  called  "  n  child  of  God,"  I  John  iii.  I. 
2.  To  believe,  denotes  here  to  commit  and  confide  our  whole  con- 
dition in  every  circumstance  to  God  our  Father,  Almighty  Maker? 
as  David  exhorteth,  Psalm  xxxvii.  5.     "Commit  thy  way  unto  the 

Ff 


202  FAITfl  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

Lord  ;  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass,"  See  1  Peter 
iv.  19.  V.  7.  Is  the  believer  in  want  of  any  thing  with  respect  to 
soul,  or  body,  he  is  not  anxiously  careful,  and  he  doth  not  say,  "  What 
shall  we  eat,  or  what  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewithal!  shall  we  be 
clothed  r"  Matt.  vi.  31,  for  he  doubts  not  but  that  his  Father  will 
provide  him  Avith  all  that  he  needs:  "at  destruction  and  famine  he 
'lau?"hs,"  Job  V.  ti2.  This  confidence  causes  him  sometimes  to  say, 
*'  rvlthou^h  the  fi^-*ree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in 
(he  vines,  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield 
no  meat,  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be 
no  herd  in  the  stalls,  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the 
God  of  my  salvation,"  Hab.  iii.  17,  18.  Yea,  he  confides  and  doubts 
not  but  that  his  Father  will  cause  all  the  evils,  which  he  sends  upoa 
him  in  this  valley  of  tears,  to  turn  out  to  his  advantage  :  for  "  we 
know  that  all  things  work  to:^ether  for  good  to  them  that  love  God," 
Rom.  viii.  23.  "  The  Lord  chastens  them  who  are  his  for  their 
profit,  that  they  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness,"  Heb.  xii.  10.  And 
therefore  "  they  glory  in  tribulation,  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh 
patience  ;  and  patience  experience  ;  and  experience  hope  ;  and  hope 
mdkcth  not  ashamed,"  &c.  Rom.  v.  3,  4,  5.  This  confidence  is  not 
a  sinful  indifference,  nor  a  secure  imagination,  but  an  active  reposing 
on  the  Lord  upon  certain  grounds,  which  are,  in  the  first  place, 
that  the  Lord  "  can"  do  this,  being  almighty  God."  However  un- 
likely it  may  appear  to  him,  that  he  should  be  delivered,  nevertheless 
he  will  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings,  because  he  hath  a  lively  appre- 
hensioi  of  God's  almighty  power,  by  which'  he  created  all  things^ 
and  '*  for  whom  nothing  is  too  hard,"  as  God's  almighty  creating 
power  supported  Jeremiah,  Jer.  xxxii.  1 7.  See  this  also  in  Abraham, 
Rom.  iv.  17,  21.  But  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  infer  from  God's 
almighty  power  that  he  will  do  any  thing,  so  long  as  we  are  not  as- 
sured that  he  is  willing,  therefore  the  true  Christian  assumes,  as  his 
second  ground  of  confidence,  that  "  God  is  willing,  being  a  faithful 
Father."  He  knows  that  God  is  his  Father,  that  he  hath  taken  upon 
him  to  provide  for  his  children,  and  hath  promised  them  all  things  ; 
the  Chiistian  having  a  clear  conviction  of  these  things,  cannot  doubt 
but  that  his  Father  will  keep  truth  for  ever,  and  provide  for,  and  pro- 
tect him  sufficiently.  Our  Lord  Jesus  recommends  this  ground  to 
the  children  of  God,  when  he  saith,  Matt.  vii.  I  U  "  If  ye,  being  evil, 
know  how  to  give  gOx5d  gifts  to  your  children,  how  much  more  shall 
your  Father,  which  is  in  heaven,^  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask 
him  r"  Matt.  vii.  11.  "         . 


 


APPLICATION. 


May  not  the  believer  now  speak  of  his  happiness,  and  i};lory  in  it, 
that  he  may  thus  believe  in  God  tiie  Falser,  Almighty  Maker  ?  Had 
not  the  holy  Psalmist  sufficient  reason  to  say,  "  Happy  is  he  that 
hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  tiie  Lord  his 
God  :  which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the   sea,  and  all  that  therein 
is  :  which  keepeth  truth  for   ever."    Psalm   cxlvi.   5,  6.     Such  an 
Almighty  Maker  is  his  God  :  "  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose  God  is 
the  Lord  :  the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  inheritance," 
Psalm  xxxiii,  12.  Because  the  Lord  had  nothing  more  precious  than 
himself,  therefore  he  hath  given  himself  to  him,  saying  in  his  cove- 
nant, "  I  will  be  a  God  to  thee  ;"  on  this  account  he  hath  made  him 
a  vessel  of  honour,  and  an  object  of  all  his  l^indness,  hath  given  his 
Son  to  be  his  surety,  hath  established  a  covenant  bf  grace  with  him, 
and  bestowed  on  him   from  that  covenant  all  the  sure  mercies  of 
David.     And  as  if  this  were  yet  too  little,  the   Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  his  God  and  Father,  "  of  whose  nature  he  is  become 
a  partaker:  his  Maker  is  his  husband,  whose  name  is  the  I  or..'  of 
hosts  ;    he  is  of  the  household  of  God,  and  an  heir  of  God  :  behold, 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  uponjas,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  sons  of  God,"  1  John  iii.  1.  Yea,  believers,  what- 
ever belongs  to  your  Father  belongs  also  to  you  ;  for  "  all  Is  yours  ; 
whether  Paul,  or  A  polios,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death, 
or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  ;  all  are  yours  ;  and  ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's,"  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22,  23.     Will   ye  now 
still  be  concerned  about  what  ye  shall  eat  or  drink  ?  "  He  that  spared 
not  his  owri  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
■with  him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?"  Rom.  viii.  32.     Will  ye  now 
yet  let  your  heads  hang  down  on  account. of  the  evils  that  befall  you? 
no  ;  they  are  your  Father's  gracious  cjiastisements  for  your  good, 
and  he  will  deliver  you  out  of  them :  "  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six 
troubles;  yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee,"  Job  v.   19. 
How  safely  may  ye  rely  on   ycur  Father's  power,  will  and  faithful- 
ness, and  indulge  a  sweet  aad  quiet  confidence,  like  David  !  Psalra 
xxiii  4.  *'  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
I  will  fear  no  evil ;  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they 
comfort  me."  ^ 

I3ut  dost  thou  and  thou  believe  that  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  is  also  thy  God 
and  Father?  or  do  thy  thonghtn  not  as(iend  so  high  as  this  ?  or  dost 


9^4  FAITH  IM  GOD  THE  FATHERc 

thou  hope  that  this  is  so,  because  it  is  so  desirable  a  case  ?  or  dost 
thou  not  doubt  of  it,  because  thou  hast  forced  thyself  by  a  strong 
imagination  to  believe  it  ?  But  hast  thou  any  ground  for  this  belief 
of  thine  ?  or  dost  thou  believe  only  because  thou  thinkest  that  tho\t 
oug'itest  not  to  doubt  ?  butrought  not  a  person  to  doubt  when  in  an 
affair  of  so  trreat  importance,  he  h?.th  no  ground  for  his  faith,  and 
when  so  many  deceive  themselves,  and  v/hen  deceiving  ourselves  is 
so  dangerous  here  ?  Or  dost  thou  say,  I  have  a  ground  ?  but  what 
IS  thy  ground  ?  that  thou  art  a  member  of  the  church  of  God,  that 
thou  art  devout,  not  so  wicked  as  this  or  that  person,  and  that  thou 
hast  many  virtues  ?  But  did  not  the  Pharisee  proceed  so  far  ;  Luke 
xviii.  10,  11,  and  was  he  a  child  of  God?  surely  no;  for  he  v/ent 
down  to  his  house  unjustified.  Or  is  it  thy  ground,  that  God  bles- 
seth  and  provideth  for  thee  more  than  for  others  ?  But  how  doth 
>^saph  complain,  Psalm-lxxiii.  1^.  '<  Behold,  these  are  the  ungodly, 
who  prosper  in  the  world,  they  increase  in  riches."  The  wisest  of 
the  sons  of  men  said,  Prov.  i.  32.  "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  de- 
stroy them."  Or  dost  thou  think  the  Lord  visits  me  with  so  many 
evils  in  this  valley  of  tears,  and  I  must  suffer  so  much  here,  that  I 
shall  not  need  to  suffer  hereafter,  *'  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  v/hom  he  receiveth,"  according 
to  Heb.  xii.  6,  but  "the  wicked  have  also  many  sorrows,"  as  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart  saith,  Psalm  xxxii.  10.  And  what  thinkest 
thou,  would  not  one,  who  is  a  child  of  God,  have  striven  more  to 
become  such  au  one,  than  thpu  perhaps  hast  done  ?  wouldest  thou, 
if  thou  vvAt  a  child  of  God,  coiiitent  thyself  so  with  the  creatures^ 
and  pursue  afier  them  more  than  after  the  Creator,  yea.  employ  the 
creatures  of  God  against  him,  as  instruments  of  unrighteousness  ? 

All  ye  then,  who  neither  are,  nor  do  aught  else  than  thus,  "  ye  are 
not  his  children,  but  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  as  Moses 
said  to  the  carnal  Israelites,  Deut.  xxxii.  5.  Is  God  your  Maker 
and  Father  by  creation,  it  doth  nqt  pro.it  you,  because  ye  do  not 
know,  seek»nor  love  him  :  yea,  if  ye  remain  as  ye  are,  he  will  not  re- 
gard the  misery  that  will  betide  you.  Hear  what  the  Lord  himself 
saith,  and  regard  it,  that  ye  may  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  Isaiah 
xxvii.  11.  *^  It  is  a  people  of  no  understanding  ;  therefore  he  that 
made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  them,  and  he  that  formed 
Ihem  will  show  them  no  favour." 

Therefore  be  more  earnestly  desirous  to  have  God  for  your  Fa- 
ther ;  <«  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  litrle,"  as  the  Psalmist  cries  to  yoi?, 
ipsalm  ii.  \^, 


 

I  know  exceedingly  well  that  many  sincere  believers,  though  they 
have  even  the  truest  grounds  of  confidence,  do  still  doubt,  and  dar^ 
not  firmly  believe  for  themselves,  that  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Almighty  Maker,  is  also  their  God  and  Far 
ther.  But  what  is  the  reason,  ye  weak  believers,  that  ye  dare  not 
hold  fast  the  confidence,  and  the  rejoicing  of  your  hope  firm  unto 
the  end  ?  is  this  privilege  too  great  for  you,  that  so  great  and  wor- 
thy a  God,  Father,  and  Maker,  is  your  God  and  Father  ?  Well,  the 
Lord  God  doth  only  great  things,  and  that  to  the  most  unworthy  i  if 
this  be  not  too  great  for  God  to  give,  let  it  not  be  too  great  for  you 
to  receive.  Or  is  it  your  thouglit,  that  if  the  Lord  God  were  your 
Father,  he  would  not  inflict  so  many  evils  on  you  ?  that  ye  should 
not  lack  so  many  things,  which  ye  need  for  your  soul  and  body  ? 
but  is  not  the  gate  straight,  and  the  way  naiTOW  that  leadeth  unto 
life  I  lead  the  book  of  God  from  the  begmning  to  the  end,  and  see 
whether  there  ever  hath  been  a  child  of  God,  to  whom  the  waters  of 
affliction  have  not  been  Wrung  out  in  full  cups.  To  experience 
no  affliction,  is  rather  an  evidence  ^hat  a  person  is  a  bastard  than 
a  son. 

Conje  hither  then,  and  behold  neat  ^t  hand  the  true  grounds  upon 
which  a  person  may  believe  that  he  is  a  cfiild  of  God,  and  examine 
yourselves  by  them,  and  see  whether  y?  have  no  foundation  to  be- 
lieve that  this  is  your  great  privilege. 

1.  lie  who  is  a  child  of  God,  hath  chosen  the  Lord  God  alone, 
and  above  all  others  for  his  God  and  Father,  and  is  satisfied  with 
him  alone,  as  that  afflicted  person  declared  of  himself,  Psalm  Ixxiii, 
25,  26,  "  Wiiom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  dasire  besides  thee,  iA>ly  <iesh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but 
God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever."  Can  ye 
deny  that  ye  have  done  this  sincerely  and  heartily  ;  yea,  frequently, 
and  that  ye  still  do  it  ?  can  your  souls  find  satisfaction,  rest  and 
tranquility  out  of  the  Lord  ? 

2.  He  who  is  a  child  of  God  hath  detached  himself  from  all  things, 
yea,  from  himself,  and  hath  surrendered  himself  to  the  Lord,  to  be 
his  property,  and  to  be  wholly  at  his  service.  This  was  foretold  con- 
cerning these  days,  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  •'  One  shall  say,  I  am  the 
Lord's  ;  and  another  shal!  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  ;  and 
another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  to  the  Lord,  and  surname  him- 
self by  the  name  of  Israel."  Ye  cannot  surely  deny  tliis,  ye  are  con- 
scious that  ye  have,  with  the  straui^ers,  '*  joined  yourselves  to  the 
Lord,"  not  only  to  be  saved,  but  also  '*  to  serve  him,  to  love  the  name 
qf  the  Lord,  to  be  his  servants."     **  Now  to  these  the  Lord  would 


205  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

give  a  name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters."     See  Isaiah 
Ivi.  3,  6« 

3.  He  who  is  a  child  of  God  hath  also  received  the  Son  of  God 
by  faith,  John  i.  12,  "As  many  as  received  him,  to  them  he  gave 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  lo  them  that  believe  on  his 
name."  See  also  Gal.  iii.  26.  Is  any  thing  indeed  more  evident  to 
3'ou,  than  (when  ye  were  concerned  about  your  damnable  condition, 
were  bowed  down  to  the  dust,  and  did  not  find  the  life  of  your  hand, 
and  said,  there  is  no  hope,)  that  ye  were  then  truly  urged  to  him  by 
an  insatiable  desire,  that  ye  cast  yourselves  upon  him,  received  him, 
and  united  yourselves  to  him,  that  ye  might  be  found  in  him  only 
and  might  have  his  righteousness.  Let  your  souls  then  be  ai  length 
established,  and  cast  not  away  your  confidence,  whicr.  hath  a  great 
recompence  of  reward. 

Is  the  God  and  Father  of  out  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  made  hea- 
ven and  earth,  and  ail  that  in  them  is  out  of  nothing,  yourGod  and 
Father  ?    conduct  yourselves  then  worthily  of  him,  and  therefore, 

1.  See  what  he  hath  done  for  you,  that  ye  may  perceive  to  your 
joy  and  satisfactiojil^  and  with  admiration,  his  transcendent  wisdom, 
power,  good^^  love  and  free  grace,  in  all  his  doings,  and  espe- 
cially in  creaTmg  and  furnishing  such  a  glorious  and  illustrious 
world :  So  the  sweet  Psalmi&t  acted  ;  "  How  great  are  thy  works, 
()  Lord  I  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all  :  the  earth  is  full  of 
thy  riches  ;  my  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet ;  I  will  be  glad  in 
the  Lord,"  Psaim  civ.  24.  34.  Therefore  he  also  cried  out  with  a 
heart  filled  with  the  praises  of  God,  "  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  made  me 
glad  through  thy  work  :  I  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  liands. 
O  l-.ord,  how  great  are  thy  works  !  and  thy  thoughts  are  very  deep," 
Psalm  xcii.  5,  6,  We  ought  certainly  pot  to  be  worse  than  the  hea- 
thens, <'  who  understood  and  saw  clearly  by  the  creatures,  the  invisible 
things  of  God,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,'*  Rom.  i.  20. 
Even  *'  the  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;" 
•liov.' shameful  *vould  it  be  then,  that  "  Israel  should  not  know,  and 
that  the  people  of  God  should  not  consider."  See  Isaiah  i.  3,  Yea, 
the  inanimate  "  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firma- 
ment showeth  his  handy  work,"  Psalm  xix.  I.  And  shall  ye,  who 
are  the  children  of  God,  be  dumb  here  ?  the  Lord  hath  formed  you, 
that  ye  should  show  forth  his  praise  ;  let  youi'  souls  then  awake  up, 
and  endeavour  to  know  and  to  praise  the  Lord,  in  all  your,  yea,  also 
in  all  his  ways.  Ye  are  certainly  bound  and  obliged  to  him  by  a 
thousand  bonds. 


V  -  ^Of 

■  "2.  Penetrate  also  to  the  eternal  counsel  of  p^race,  that  ye  may-see 
the  Father's  v/isdom,  holiness,  righteousness  and  love  in  it.  It  be- 
hooves you  to  stand  still  a  while  here,  that  ye  may  behold  it  in  order, 
and  may  look  into  it  ;  by  this  ye  have  become  children  of  God,  arc 
called  to  pjlory,  and  virtue,  and  are  made  "  a  chosen  pjeneration,  a 
royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people  ;  that  ye  should 
show  forth*  le  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 
into  his  marvellous  light,"  I  Peter  ii.  9.  We  may  see  more  of 
the  divine  glory  in  this,  even  in  this,  than  in  all  things  beside ;  but 
since  we  have  urged  you  to  this  duty  on  the  former  Lord's  day,  we 
will  not  enlarge  on  it  further  at  present. 

-    3.  Rely  and  doubt  not  but  that  he  will  provide  you  with  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body  ;  and  that  he  will  make  whatever  evils 
he  sends  upon  you,  in  this  \  alley  of  tsars,  turn  out  to  your   advan- 
tage.    How,  he    who  hath  provided  you  with  great  things,  will  he 
withhold  small  things  from  you  ?     Who  dares  suspect  him  of  un- 
faithfulness,  or   indifference  ?  do   evils  innumerable    compass    you 
about,  is  it  without  his   appointment  or  ordination  ?  and   when  he 
sends  these  evils  upon  you,   doth  he  then  forsake    you  ?     By   no 
means.     Hear  what  he  commands  us  to  proclaim  to  you  from  Isaiah 
xliii.  l,-2,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  he 
that  formed  thee,  ()  Israel,  Fear  not ;  for  I  have  redeemed    thee,  I 
have  called   thee  by  thy  name,  thou  art  mine  ;  when  thou   passest 
through  the  waters,  I    will  be  with    thee  ;    and  through   the    rivers, 
they  shall  not   overflow  thee :  when   thou  walkest  through  the  fire, 
thou  shalt  not  be  burnt ;  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee." 
Let  not  the  heart  of  any  one  of  you  fail,  his  God   and  Father  is  al- 
mighty and   willing  to  deliver    him  ;  "  His  hand  is   not   shortened, 
that  it  cannot  save  ;  neither  is  his  ear  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear  ;" 
this  is  his  own  declaration,  Isaiah  lix.   1.     Are    your    adversities  so 
grievous,  and  have  they  continued  so  long,   that   ye  are  weary  of 
them,  he  who  intends  to  come,  will  come,  and  he  will  show  you  that 
your  miseries  are  only  the  corrections  of  a  loving  Father,  and   his 
chastistment  will  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them 
who  are  exercised  thereby. 

4.  Devote  yourselves  now  wholly  to  his  service.  This  David 
purposed  when  he  said,  Psalm  cxvi.  16,  "  O  Lord,  truly  I  am  thy 
-servant,  I  am  thy  servant."  What  a  noble  and  exceedingly  glori- 
ous testimony  v/as  that,  which  was  given  of  those,  who  were  sent  by 
the  worthy  ecclesiastical  council  of  Jerusalem,  that  they  were  "  men 
who  had  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
Acts  XV.  26.     Whatever  ye   are,  O  beli^ivers,  yo  are  of  your  God 


£08  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FAl  HER. 

and  Father  ;  ye  are  his  creatures,  yea,  his  children  ;  and  for  what 
end  ?  is  it  not  that  ye  may  be  wholly  for  him,  and  for  his  service  ?" 
Is  not  he  thy  Father,  who  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not  made 
thee,  and  established  thee  ?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  *'  Ye  are  his  wovk- 
manship,  created  in  Chir'st  Jestjs  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  ordained,  that  ye  should  walk  in  them,"  Eph.  ii.  10.  Ye 
stand,  as  it  were,  in  a  direct  subordination  to  him,  that  ye  should  be 
for  him  only,  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  ac- 
ceptable to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  Rom.  xii.  1. 

5.  Let  me  stir  you  up,  finally,  to  conduct  yotirselves  as  creatures  and 
children  worthy  of  such  a  God  and  Father,  Almighty  JVIaker.  Ah 
his  creatures  and  children,  it  behooves  you  to  fear  him,  and  to  trem- 
ble in  a  holy  manner  before  him  :  »*  Fear  ye  not  me,  saith  the 
Lord  ?  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence,  who  have  ^placed  the 
sand  for  a  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  decree  ?"  Jer*  v.  22. 
If  ye  call  on  him  as  a  Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons,  judg- 
eth  according  to  every  man's  work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning 
here  in  fear."  Thus  ye  are  admonished,  1  Peter  i.  17.  It  behooves 
you,  as  creatures  and  children,  to  conduct  yourselves  patiently  under 
his  rod  of  correction.  *'  We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh,  who  cor- 
rected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  i  shall  we  not  much  rather 
be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live  ?"  Heb.  xii  9.  As 
creatures  and  children  we  must  also  be  obedient  to  him  in  all  things 
which  he  commands  us :  "  As  obedient  children,  not  fashioning 
yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  ignorance,"  as  ye 
are  exhorted,  I  Peter  io  14.  As  creatures  and  children,  ye  must 
be  like  your  Lord  and  God  :  ye  are  created  and  newmade  after  bis 
image :  therefore,  "  as  he  who  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  also 
holy  in  all  nianrer  of  conversation :  because  it  is  written.  Be  ye 
holy,  for  1  am  holy,"  I  Peter  i.  15,  16.  Are  ye  his  creatures  and 
children,  live  then  without  care,  and  only  for  his  hand.  It  is  the 
temper  of  children  to  be  without  concern,  and  to  seek  all  tilings  of 
their  father,  being  assured,  that  he  will  not  refuse  them  what  is  ne- 
cessary for  them.  This  our  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us,  when  he  directs 
us  to  pray,  "  Our  Fathel%  give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.'  Crea- 
tures and  children  ou.^ht  also  to  glory  in  their  God  and  Father : 
children  are  used  to  glory  m  their  father's  wisdom,  power,  riches  and 
goodness  :  but  ye,  believers,  have  the  greatest  reason  to  glory  on 
their  account :  "  The  portion  of  Jacob  is  not  like  them  ;  for  he  is 
the  former  of  all  things,  and  Israel  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance  :  the 
Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name,"  Jer.  x.  1 6.    May  not  believers  challenge 


IX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  26.  209 

^ny  one  to  show  them  a  portion  equal  to  theirs  ?  Moses  did  thus, 
Deut.  xxxii.  51."  For  their  rock  is  not  as  our  rock,  even  our  ene- 
mies themselves  bein^  judges."  Once  more  ;  creatures  and  children, 
who  have  such  a  God  and  Father,  need  not  fear  any  danger,  or  the 
malice  of  any  creature  :  your  God  and  Father  is  above  them  ;  there- 
fore do  not  fear,  or  ye  will  deny  the  supreme  power  and  goodness  of 
your  God  and  Father.  Hear  what  he  saith  to  you,  Isaiah  li.  12,  13. 
"  I,  even  I  am  he  that  comforteth  you  :  who  art  thou,  that  thou 
shoulclest  be  afraid  of  a  man,  that  shall  die,  and  of  the  son  of  man, 
who  shall  be  made  as  grass  ?  and  forgeitest  the  Lord  thy  Maker, 
that  hath  stretched  forth  the  hjeavens,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  ?"  Are  ye  despised  in  the  world,  let  it  suffice  you,  that  ye  are 
precious  in  the  eyes  of  your  God  and  Father,  the  Almighty  Maker. 
He  commands  the  angels,  his  most  worthy  creatures,  to  serve  you  : 
"  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?"  thus  asks  Paul,  Heb.  i.  14.  Are  ye 
chased  from  your  dwelling,  country  and  people,  ye  are  every  wlere 
on  your  God  and  Father's  ground  :  for  »'  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,'* 
Psalm  xxiv.  1 .  And  though  ye  were  chased  even  out  of  the  world, 
your  Father  and  God  will  provide  for  you  a  better,  a  more  spacious 
and  happy  dwellingplace  :  for,  according  to  Heb.  xi.  10,  16.  »'  He 
will  not  be  ashamed  to  be  called  your  God  ;  for  he  hath  prepared  a 
city  for  you :  and  that  city  hath  foundations,  and  tfee  builder  and 
maker  thereof  is  God  himself."  Amen. 


^  210  ) 


THE 


DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


X.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Acts  xvii.  28.     For  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  beings

Q.   25.  Since  there  is  only  but  one  divine  essence,  why  afieakesC  thou 
of  Father^  Son^  and  Holy  Ghost  ? 

A.  Because  God  hath  so  revealed  himself  in  his  word,  that  these 
three  distinct  Persons  are  the  one  only  true  and  eternal  God. 


A 


PERSON  who  is  desirous  to  learn  any  art,  is  not  presently 
able  to  comprehend  and  exercise  it  perfectly  :  but  he  must  begin 
with  the  first  principles  of  it,  must  by  them  be  led  up  to  more  per« 
feet  conceptions,  and  must  by  frequent  exercises  render  the  ait 
familiar  to  himself.  Let  us  mstance  in  the  art  of  reading  :  no  mac 
is  able  to  attain  by  a  single  exertion  to  the  highest  degree  of  skill  ic 
it,  but  lie  must  in  the  first  place  endeavour  to  learn  the  letters,  then 
syllables,  and  afterwards  words  and  sentences.    Thus  it  is  also  with 


Wt 

knowing  God :  it  doth  not  please  God,  to  reveal  himself  in  the  clear- 
est and  highest  manner  to  the  elect  sinner  at  the  beginning.  No 
man,  who  is  yet  in  a  state  of  mortality  is  presently  able  to  receive 
such  a  revelation.  "  No  man  shall  see  God  and  live ;"  he  may  «  see 
only  his  backparts,"  No  man  is  able  to  understand  the  language  of 
God,  by  which  he  would  reveal  himself  in  the  c  earest  n»anner  t 
therefore  it  is  necessary  that  God  should  adopt  the  language  of  men, 
and  stammer  with  them  as  children,  on  account  of  the  nothingness 
and  darkness  of  the  sinner.  Thus  he  conducted,  when  the  church 
wa3  ii>  a  state  of  childhood  :  "  he  subjected  her  to  the  elements  of 
the  world,"  GaU  iv.  3.  The  Son  of  God,  manifested  in  the  flesh," 
spake  the  word  with  many  parables  to  the  Jews,  as  they  were  able  to 
htar  it,"  Mark  iv.  33  Paul  requireth  that  we  should  **  go  on  from 
5rst  principles  to  perfection.  Heb.  v.  12,  13,  14.  vi.  1.  The  primi=» 
tive  Christians  had  also  their  brief  compends,  that  they  might  be  led 
up,  as  it  were,  from  first  principles,  to  higher  conceptions :  at  first 
they  adopted  the  institution  of  baptism,  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
Matt,  xxviii.  19,  as  a  summary  of  the  whole  doctrine  of  Christianity; 
on  which  account,  when  in  aftcrtimes  they  composed  their  brief 
creeds  Tliey  arranged  them  according  to  that  short  system  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  which  is  professed  and  sealed  in  baptism : 
we  see  this  in  the  Nicene  creed,  and  in  that  of  Athanasius,  and  thus 
also  in  the  creed,  which  is  the  subject  of  our  pj  esent  consideration. 

The  instructor  having  explained  saving  faith,  and  taught  that  a 
Christian  must  believe  all  that  is  promised  to  us  in  the  gospel,  and 
knowing  that  a  beginner  is  not  able  to  comprehend  forthwith  all  those 
promises,  he  therefore  conducts  him  to  the  compendious  creed  of 
Christians,  which  he  divides  according  to  the  order  of  the  three 
Persons.  This  method  is  so  ancient,  and  so  useful  to  the  church, 
and  is  therefore  so  proper,  that  we  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  seek 
any  other. 

Three  particulars  are  exhibited  to  us  in  this  Lord's  day* 

I.  The  division  of  the  articles  of  faith,  Question  24, 

II.  An  objection  against  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  Question  25o 

III.  In  what  manner  we  believe  ni  the  Triune  God. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  part  we  will  endeavour  to  illustrate 
three  particulars.  1.  That  there  is  a  God,  2.  What  he  is,  and  3» 
Who  he  isi 

A  That  there  is  a  God  is  self-evident.  When  we  speak  of  God, 
we  and  all  others  mean  an  infinitely  perfect  being,  who  is  the  cause 
of  all  things,  and  to  whom  all  men  are  subject,  as  their  Lawgiver. 
The  scripture  doth  not  attempt  to  prove  that  there  is  such  a  being 


If 2  THE  CHRISTIAN  .S  FAITH,  kci 

as  God,  but  ohly  that  the  Creator  of  all  things  and  the  Cod  of  Tsmei 

is  the  only  true  God.  God  the  Lord  supposeth  that  he  h  -.Lh  to  dp 
-w  itli  easonable  men,  M'ho  know  of  themselves  that  there  is  a  Ciod  ; 
*'  becau?ie  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifest  in  them,*^ 
Rom.  i.  29.  And  it  is  indeed  self-evident  from  the  li^jjht  of  nature,' 
that  God  is  (a)  an  iniinirt'ly  perfect  being.  The  word^God  is  under- 
stood in  ihis  sense  by  every  person,  even  when  he  denies  the  exist- 
ence of  Gpd.  r^ow  it  belonj^s  to  infinite  perfection  to  exist  neces- 
sarily ;  for  it  is  a  greater  perfection  to  exist,  tiian  not,to  exist  n'r-ressari- 
ly,  ihan  to  exisi  accidentally.  When  anyone  speaksof  God,  he  speaks  of 
a  beingN  who  is  necessary  :  and  when  any  one  saitli,  ti^re  is  no  God, 
be  saiih,  that  a  being  who  exists  necessarily,  dpth  not  exist,  and  so 
he  contradicts  himself,  and  shows  that  he  is  "  a  fool,  who  saith  in  his 
heart,  There  is  no  God,"  Psalm  xiv.  I.  (b)  !t  is  also  self-evidenty 
that  God  is  the  first  cause  of  all  things.  Nothing,  that  is  not  God^ 
can  be  the  cause  of  it-elf.  that  is,  by  the  nature  of  its  essence  ;  when 
we  therefore  contemplatt;  the  universe  with  respect  to  its  variety, 
beauty,  order  and  stability,  we  become  conscious  ol  ourselves,  that 
there  is  a  first  cause  of  all  these  things  :  ''  for  the  invisible  things  of 
him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood 
by  the  things  that  are  m^de,  even  his  eternal  power,  and  Godhead," 
Rom.  i.  20.  See  Job  xii  7,  8,  9  (c)  It  is  also  self-evident,  that  God 
is  a  lawgiver.  It  is  a  dictate  of  our  nature,  that  v/e  ought  to  honour 
our  parents,  and  rear  up  our  children,  and  that  we  ought  not  to  in- 
jure any  person.  According  as  we  do,  or  neglect  these  things,  we 
shall  accuse  or  excuse  ourselves,  adjudge  ourselves  to  deserved  pun- 
ishment, or  acqviit  ourselves,  Paul  also  teacheth  us  this,  Rom.  ii. 
1*,  15.  And  surely  this  teaches  me^,  tliat  there  is  a  sovereign  Law- 
giver, and  that  they  are  subject  to  him  ;  for  they  would  otherwise 
discharge  themselves  from  such  an  obligation  to  a  law,  and  from 
those  compunctions  on  account  of  their  improper  behaviour  ;  which 
tliey  have  nevertheless  not  been  able  to  do,  how  much  soever  certain 
individuals  have  endeavoured  to  do  it.  This  is  the  cause  why  the 
sense  of  a  Godl^.ead  is  universal  in  all  nations,  who  would  rather 
accept  of  the  vilest  object  for  a  God,  than  deny  the  Godhead. 

Are  there  any  nations,  who  discover  few  or  no  tr>ces  of  religiou^ 
•worship,  they  exhibit  also  but  few  traces  of  humanity.  And  there- 
fore  we  cannot  say  that  the  knowledge  of  God  is  not  natural  to  man, 
any  more  than  we  can  say  that  humanity  and  lationality  are  not  na- 
tural to  him ;  thus  we  cannot  say  neither  that  it  is  not  natural  to 
parents  to  love  their  children,  because  there  are  degenerate  parents. 
)^b2  are  "  without  natural  affe9tion,"  Rom.  i.  3-    Q  Tim.  iii.  3. 


VIII.  LOR'S  DAY.  Q.  24,  25.  ifS 

'^<  Doth  the  fool  say  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  Cioci,"  Psalm  xiv.  1, 
this  only  intimates  thut  he  endeavours  to  erase  every  idea  of  a  Uod- 
head  out  of  his  heart,  and  not  that  he  etlects  so  qjucIi,  that  he  re- 
moves every  idea  oF  a  Godhead  out  of  his  mind  ;  wh  ch  is  so  mucti 
the  more  evident,  because  that  psalm  speaks  of  the  Jews  in  general, 
as  Well  as  of  ih*i  Gentiles,  inasmuch  as  the  first  three  verses  ...re  quo- 
ted by  Paul  to  prove  that  Jews,  as  well  us  Gentiles,  "  are  ail  un- 
der sin,"  Rom.  iii.  9 — 12,  Now  certainly  ail  tiie  Jews  do  not  deny, 
and  are  not  without  some  idea  of  a  Godhead. 

Thercfoie  we  cannot  allow  tnc  ass;!rtion,  that  a  person  ought  to 
•loubl  of,  or  to  suspend  his  judgment  coiiceiiunt;  all  thintts,  yea, 
«ven  of  the  existence  of  a  God  ;  *  for  th.s  is  nb'-minable.  Doubting: 
©f  the  testimony  of  God  entered  into  the  world  first  froui  tho 
devil,  Gen.  iii.  l.  it  is  also  exceedingly  dan[;;erous,  and  scarce!/ 
possible. 

Although  we  may  know  of  ours';;lves  that  there  is  a  Godj 
nevertheless  such  a  natural  knowledge  is  not  suilicient  to  salvation  ; 
for  it  doth  not  teach  us  the  /Uithor  of  salvation,  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  the  Mediator,  nor  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  it  leaves  the 
heathens,  who  have  no  more  tlian  such  a  natural  light,  estranged 
from  God  and  the  Mediator,  under  the  covenant  of  works,  and  there- 
fore under  the  curse,  Eph.  ii.  12.  iv.  18.  Gal.  iii.  10.  Rom.  iii.  19. 
3.  Since  now  we  have  to  do  v/ith  God,  therefore  it  concerns  us  to 
know  wb^God  is.  We  learn  this  from  his  names  and  attributes,  of 
both  which  we  will  speak  briefly  and  cursorily.  God  the  Lord  be- 
ing but  difte  only  God,  necUcth  no  names  to  distinguish  him  from 
any  who  are  like  him,  nevertheless  as  it  pleases  him  to  disiingu'sh 
himself  from  idols,  ttud  to  make  himself  known  to  men,  therefore  he 
hath  expressed  himself  also  by  namts.  The^e  names  of  God  are  in  the 
Hebrew,  Jehovah^  that  is  tiie  selfexistcnt,  and  alone  existing  God,  Ex- 
od.  iii.  14,  which  name  cannot  be  ascribed  to  any  creature,  Isaiah  xliio 
8.  We  find  also  the  name  Juh^  which  as  well  as  tiie  name  Jehovah, 
is  rendered  by  our  translators,  Lord,  with  capital  letters  Is aiah  xxvi. 
4.  A.nd  this  name  is  either  a  contraction  oi  Jehovah,  or  denotes  the 
God  of  propriety,  and  is  therefore  frequently  used  in  ascriptions  of 
praise.  See  psalm  cl.  6.  i  o  this  w«  add  idoiuiu  whicii  our  'runs- 
lators  render  Lord,  with  small  letters,  and  which  d^-notes  that  God  is  % 
sovereign  Lord,  who  beareth  and  up iioldeth  all  things  by  his  provi- 

'  This  was  tbe  opinion  of  the  Cartesians,  a  sec^  of  phdosnphfrs  frunded  hj 
I>es  Cartes,  a  French  philosonhar,  who  flaHrished  taward  the  micldl«  of  th* 
^evcnr«cnth  ceniurf . 


in  THE  CHRISTIANS  FAITH,  ^.c. 

dence.  F.l  r>i;^nifies  the  strong  God  :  and  lastly  we  find  the  name 
BUJitn,  si^uifying  the  ood  of  the  oath,  or  ol  the  covenant,  and  it  in- 
tliuares  also,  ds  some  ihmk,  i!^e  phiralit\  of  the  divine  Persons.  All 
these  HeDrcw  names,  t!>e  writers  of  the  New  reslament  translate 
in  Greek  by  Kurios-,  Lord,  and  T/ieo6;  God.  These  are  not  names 
ofufuce,  as  liie  Socinians  assert,  but  names  of  naiuie,  as  appears 
from  Gal.  iv.  «.  Kom.  i.  iO.  Coll.  ii.  9 

Wc  ieain  what  God  is  alro  frt.m  his  attributes  :  these  are  the 
perfcvtions  of  God,  which  are  so  p  opcir  to  him,  that  they  represent 
his  essence  to  us  m  the  most  sirikinv^  ini^nner.  Although  tiity 
are  the  most  simple  essence  itself^  without  any  composition,  they 
are  nevertheless  proposed  and  divided  us  muny,  because  we  are  in- 
capabl'.:  of  comprehending  God  perfcctiy  by  ai:y  single  act  of  our 
uiideistandinj^.  'I  he  attributes  of  God  are  with  propriety  distin- 
guished nto  incommunicable,  of  M'hich  there  is  not  the  least  resem- 
bi.ince  in  any  creature,  and  communicable,  which  doth  not  imply 
that  there  are  any  aaributes  of  God,  which  are  communicated  to  a 
creature,  as  they  are  in  God  ;  but  that  God  Iiath  expressed  in  his 
ima<>-i  a  certain  likeness  to  himiielf  in  the  reasonable  creature,  and 
that  it  thus  becomes  "  a  part^aker  of  iJie  divine  nature."  See  Gen. 
i.  2®.  2  Peier  i.  1.  We  reduce  the  incommunicable  attributes  to 
three,  to  wit, 

1.  The  independence  of  God,  which  is  his  all-suTxiency,  whereby, 
through  the  perfection  of  his  essence,  he  is,  hath,  and  ddth  all  things, 
bee  Gen.  :;vii    1.  Acts  xvii.  25. 

2.  The  simpli(  ity  of  God,  which  excludes  all  diversity  and  compo- 
sition of  parts,  and  whereby  ah  that  is  in  God  is  God  himself.  And 
so  the  attributes  are  not  accidents  of  the  divine  essence,  nor  some- 
Ih.nej  diiTerent  from  the  essence,  as  one  attribute  is  not  something 
different  from  the  other ;  but  God  is  in  all  things  the  same.  Thu« 
we  find  that  the  life  and  holmes::  of  God  are  God  himself;  for  when 
God  is  said  to  swear  by  his  life,  Deut.  xxxii.  40,  and  by  his  holiness, 
Amos  iv,  2,  he  is  also  said  to  swear  by  himself,  Amos  vi.  8.  Heb. 
vi.  1,  3,  13.  From  which  simplicity  of  God  it  also  follows,  (a)  that 
"  he  is  a  Spirit,"  John  iv.  24,  and  therefore  an  immaterial  being, 
who  acts  from,  and  in  himself,  by  his  understanding  and  will,  (b) 
That  "the  Lord  oiar  God  is  one  Lord,"  Deut.  vi.  4.  (c)  That  he  is 
unchangeable,  "  with  whom%liere  is  neiihcr  chnnj^inj^;,  nor  shadow 
of  turnin;;,"  James  i.  17.  (d)  That  be  is  also  invisible.  "  He  dwell- 
eth  in  the  li^hr  to  which  no  man  can  approach  ;  and  no  man  hath 
seen,  nor  can  see  him, '  1  Tim.  vi.  16.  (e)  That  he  cannot  be  repre- 
sented by  any  image,  we  cannot  express  God  by  any  image.     **  T# 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  34,  25.  175 

whom  will  ye  liken  God,  and  what  likeness  "will  ye  compare  unto 
him  r"  Isaiiih  xi.  8.  \Vc  are  also  iorbidden  to  make  au  imuge  of 
him,  Exod.  xx.  4. 

3.  The  third  incommunicable  attribute  of  God  is  his  infinity,  by 
^hich  he  infinitely  exceeds  every  limited  perF.ctioj;,  and  this  maf 
be  considered  wilh  respect  to  his  essence,  lo  tiuRc,  place,  and  our  con- 
ceplion.  God  is  Iniinile  (a)  wiLh  respect  to  his  essence,  which  is  in 
itseU'  as  pLiiectly  glorious,  as  it  can  be,  so  that  notijng  can  be  added 
to,  or  taken  from  his  perfect  glory.  "  For  who  in  the  heaven  can  be 
compared  to  the  Lord  ?  who  among  the  sons  of  the  mi';hty  may  be 
iikened  to  the  Lord?"  Psalm  Ixxxix.  6.  (b)  With  respect  to  time, 
the  mfinity  of  Gcd  is  his  eternity,  by  which  he  is  from  everlasting  to 
everlasting^,  without  succession  of  lime,  Paaim  xc.  L  2.  Z  Pet.  111.  8.  Cc) 
Vvilh  respect  to  place,  the  iniinity  of  God  is  his  omnipresence  or 
immensity,  his  essence  being  neither  included  rior  excluded  any 
where,  nor  bounded  by  any  conceivable  place ;  "  He  fiileth  the  hea- 
ven and  tlie  earth,"  Jer.  xxiii  24.  1  Kings  viii.  27.  (d)  VVitli  re- 
spect to  our  conception,  the  infinity  of  God  is  his  iRccmprehens'.biIit.y ; 
we  cannot  form  any  perfect,  altnough  we  may  form  a  true  idea  of 
him  ;  for  "  his  greatjiess  is  unsearchable,"  Psalm  cxlv.  3. 

The  communicable  atiributcr>  of  God  are  his  knowledge,  Vvill,  and 
power. 

1.  The  knowledge  of  Gad  is  that  perfection  of  his,  whereby  he 
knows  from  and  of  hirasclf,  in  an  independent,  simple  and  infinite 
manner  all  things,  even  those  which  are  future,  voluntary,  and  acci- 
dental :  *'  for  there  is  no  creature  that  is  not  manifest  in  his  sight : 
but  ail  tijings  are  naked,  and  opened  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom 
we  have  to  do,"  Heb.  iv.  13.  God  knows  some  things  necessarily 
without  respect  to  any  decree..  After  this  manner  he  knows  hmiself 
in  his  essence  and  Persons,  and  all  possible  things.  Matt.  xi.  '-T. 
He  knows  other  things  freely  by  his  decree,  which  renders  them  fu- 
ture, and  "according  to  which  he  worketh  all  things,"  Eph.  i.  lU 
But  God  hath  no  middle  knowledge,*  whereby  he  knows  what  the 
reasonable  creature  will  do  in  this  or  that  situation,  acc)rdlng  to  its 
innate  liberty  ;  for  this  militates  against  the  independ' nee,  simpli- 
city, and  infinity  of  God  :  neither  is  any  thing  future  or  knowable, 
iiidependent  of  the  decree  of  God. 

3.  The  will  of  God  is  his  complacency,  which  he  hath  in  himself, 

*Tlae  middle  knowledge  of  Ccd,  or  the  sasniia  meiiim.  was  invfinfecJ  by  the 
Jesuits,  in  order  to  reconcile  the  diTine  fere-knevrle^g*  w*^  *^^^  doctrine 
concerning  freewiil. 


iro  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &g. 

and  in  all  those  things,  in  wnich  he  findeth  himself.  This  will  of 
God  IS  considered*  with  respect  to  iis  objects,  (1)  As  the  will  of  the 
decree,  whereby  he  hath  wisely,  freely,  independently,  and  unchange- 
ably deteraiined  from  eternit-  what  he  would  do  or  perniit  m  future: 
"  i  fe  worket!)  all  tnin,q;s  after  tho  council  of  his  own  *vil!,"  Eph.  i.  1  U 
(2)  As  tie  will  of  his  cornraand,  whereby  he  declares  what  he  will 
have  his  creaturts  to  do  or  forbear,  1  Tbess.  iv.  3.  We  will  not 
busy  onrs  Ives  with  showing  that  these  are  noi  different  wills  in 
God,  and  in  what  manner  otiiers  erroneously  divide  the  will  of  Uod : 
for  our  time  will  not  ptrmit.  But  we  must  briefly  inquire  further 
whn  virtues  are  atnbuted  to  the  m  HI  of  God  :  these  are,  (a)  the  holi- 
ness of  God,  which  is  tlic  briL^htne-s  of  all  his  perfections,  whereby 
the  greattst  becomingness  shines  forth  from  his  essence  and  works, 
Isai.ih  vi.  3.  (b)  fiis  riii'hu^ousness  which  is  ascribed  to  him.  (I)  As 
God,  being  the  rectitude  of  his  essence,  and  therefore  his  holiness, 
Psalm  xcii.  15.  (2)  s  Ruler,  and  wliich  he  manifests  in  his  words 
and  works  ;  and  so  the  righteousness  of  God  is  his  truth,  faithful- 
ness and  steadfastness  in  his  words,  so  that  he  do'h  not  repent, 
1  Jonn  i  9j  and  a  supieme  fitness  in  liis  works,  Deut.  xxxi.  4.  (3)  As 
Judjjc  of  his  rational  creaiures,  Jxiving  them  big  righteous  law,  and 
judging  them  according  to  it,  whether  he  reward  them  for  that 
"Which  is  good  with  his  kindness,  or  punish  them  for  that  which  iz 
evd,  righteously  and  equitably,  Fcom.  ii.  6.  James  iv.  12.  (c)  The 
third  virtue  of  God's  will  is  his  gofidncss,  which  is  either  the  virtu- 
ousiijss  of  God's  naiure,  in  which  respect  "  there  is  none  good  but 
one,  that  is,  God,"  Vlatt.  xix.  17,  or  his  beneficence  to  his  creatures; 
for  "  he  is  good  ?ind  doth  good,"  Psalm  cxix.  58.  In  ubich  good- 
ness of  God  we  must  also  include  his  love,  grace,  mercy,  longsuf- 
fering  and  forbearance.  God's  love  is  either  his  inclination  to  do 
good  to  his  creatures,  Kom.  v  8,  or  the  complacency  which  he  hath 
in  tlie  good  of  tliose  whom  he  favours,  Joim  xvi.  27.  His  grace  is 
his  kindness  to  the  unworthy,  Rom.  iii.  23,  24,  his  mercy  is  his 
goodness  to  the  miserable.  Psalm  Ixix.  16,  his  longsuffering  and  for- 
bearance is  his  kindness,  which  he  shows  in  deferring  the  deserved 
punishment.  Rom.  li.  4,  5. 

3.  The  third  communicable  attribute  of  God  is  his  power,  by 
■which  he  can  effect  with  an  unfailing  might  whatever  he  will  and 
Can  will,  con^jistently  with  his  holy  nature,  Jer.  xxxii.  17.  Matt, 
iii.  9. 

From  what  hath  been  said  it  follows,  that  God  alone  is  incompa- 
rably glorious,  blessed,  sovereign,  and  therefore  worthy  of  all  hon- 
our, fear,  love  and  worship  ;  "  The  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  th|? 


VIII    LORDb  DAY,  Q.  -^4,  ^..  57 r 

Kinpc  of  kings,  and  Lord  Qfiords  ;  who  only  hatli  immorfaiiLy,  dwel- 
ling in  the  light  unto  which  no  man  can  approach,  whom  no  mwi 
hath  seen,  nor  can  see  :  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  everUfsfiM  -  " 
1  Tim-  vi.  15,  16. 

C  Hut  who  is  this  infinitely  glorious  God  !  If  nature  be  bViml 
any  where,  she  is  here  :  God  remains  unknown  to  man,  until  he  le- 
veals  himself,  which  he  dolh  when  he  declares  himself  to  be  Fa- 
ther, Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  This  implies  not  that  there  are  three 
Gods,  for  there  cannot  be  more  than  one  God,  who  nevertheless  re> 
veals  himself  as  three,  to  wit,  one  in  essence,  and  three  in  Persons. 
This  we  must  first  explain,  and  then  prove. 

We  observe,  in  order  to  explain  this  doctrine,  [A]  that  the  words 
-sssence  and  persons  may  with  the  greatest  propriety,  yea,  ought  to 
be  used  in  the  church,  although  these  words  were  even  not  used  in 
the  holy  scripture,  which  the  Socinians  however  deny  ;  for  we  must 
explain  the  word  and  mysteries  of  God  to  the  people  by  such  words 
as  are  best  understood,  and  most  in  \ise  am.ong  them  ;  moreover, 
the  holy  scripture  is  not  an  entire  stranger  to  these  words  ;  for  it 
speaks  of  the  essence  of  God,  when  it  describes  God  by  his  existence 
and  essence,  Exod.  ii.  14,  *'  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  am  that  I  am. 
And  he  said,  Thus  shaltthou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  am 
hath  sent  me  unto  you.  See  also  Prov.  viii.  14.  Rev.  i.  8.  The 
scripture  speaks  also  of  "  the  nature  of  God,"  Gal.  iv.  8,  "  his  form," 
Phihp.  ii.  6,  "  Godhead,"  Acts  xvii.  29.  Coll.  ii.  9,  "  divinity,"  Rom. 
i.  20.  All  these  words  denote  only  the  essence  of  God.  TI  us  we 
find  also  the  word  Person.  The  Son  of  God  is  '*  the  express  image 
of  his  Person,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  i.  3. 

B.  It  serves  also  to  explain  this  doctrine,  to  know  what  these 
words  signify.  By  the  essence  of  God  we  must  understand  the  in- 
finitely perfect  nature  of  God,  which  is  common  to  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  words  nature,  form,  (Jodhead,  and  divinity 
of  God,  do  of  themselves  show.  By  a  divine  Person  vve  cannot  un- 
derstand a  bare  and  mere  negation  of  composition  with  something 
else,  so  that  a  divine  Person  should  not  be  something  positive  ;  for 
then  the  three  Persons  would  be  a  mere  nothing,  as  also  their  per- 
sonal properties  and  works,  of  which,  presently  ;  yea,  then  the  per- 
sonality of  the  Son  would  have  been  annihilated,  when  he  united 
himself  to  the  human  nature  ;  but  by  a  divine  Person  we  must  un^ 
derstandan  intelligent  substance  in  the  di^ine  essence,  whereby  that 
Person  is  individually  what  he  is,  without  being  a  component  part  of 
the  divine  essence,  or  of  another  divine  Person  ;  as  angels  and  men 
arc  persons,  but  not  the  ^oul  of  man,  separated  from  the  body  ;  for 


ir«  i  HE  CliRiSilAN'S  BAItH,  &:c. 


♦hough  it  remains  alive  after  death, -it  ik 'Nevertheless  a   crompoiitnt 
part  of  man,  and  is  disposed  to  an  laiion  with  the  body. 

C.  To  this  v/e  also  add,  that  there  are  tliree  Persons  in  the  divine 
essence,  to  wit,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  These 
»re  not  merely  three  names,  in  sucli  a  sense,  that  the  essence  of 
God  is  now  ca!led  Father,  then  So..,  and  then  Holy  Ghost,  as  Sabel- 
lius  fancied  in  the  ancient  churcli  ;  fcr  there  are  different  individu- 
als m  tlie  divine  essence,  not  different  Gods,  as  the  ancient  Trithe- 
i3ts  taught  ;  for  then  there  would  be  three  Gods,  but  there  are  dif- 
ferent Persons,  and  each  Person  is  individually  what  he  is,  and  is  dis- 
tini-'uished  from  the  others  by  his  peculiar  manner  of  existence. 
TIius  the  Son  said,  John  zuv.  1 S,  "  1  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he 
will  give  you  another  Comforter."  The  Persons  are  distinguished 
from  each  other  by  their  personal  properties.  These  are  ( 1 )  That 
the  Father,  as  Fatlier,  is  of  himself,  and  that  he  is  not  begotten,  and 
doth  not  proceed  from  another  Person,  but  that  he  hath  begotten 
the  Son,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  pioceedeth  from  him  :  that  the 
Son,  as  Son,  io  begotten  by  the  Father,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
proceeds  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  we  are  taught,  John 
V.  2fij  XV.  25.(2)  That  the  Father  is  the  first,  the  Son  the  second, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  the  third  Perbon,  both  in  the  order  of  subsis- 
te3;ice  and  of  working.  See  Mcitt.  xxviii.  19.  (3)  That  the  Father 
worketh  from  himself  through  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that 
the  Son  vrorketh  from  the  Father  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  is  illustrated  to  us, 
John  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  "When  he  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come  he  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth  ;  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but 
whatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak  ;  and  he  will  show  yo'j 
things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  me  :  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine, 
and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All  things  that  the  Father  hath  are 
mine  ;  therefore  said  I  that  he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it 
unio  you."  The  works  of  God  without  himself  are  indeed  com- 
mon to  the  three  Persons,  and  therefore  creation,  v/hich  is  otherwise 
the  work  of  the  Father,  is  also  ascribed  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  John  i.  1,  2,  S,  Gen.  i.  2.  Thus  also  the  work  |of 'redemp- 
tion, which  is  especially  the  work  of  the  Son,  and  the  workof  sanc- 
tification,  which  is  the  proper  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  ascribed  to 
the  Father,  Hosea  i.  7.  Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6.  Jude  vrs.  I.  Neverthe- 
less the  divine  Persons  observe  in  these  works  a  certain  order  and 
manner  of  working,  which  follows  the  order  and  manner  of  their  sub- 
2i;itcnce,  by  which  the  Father  works  from  himself  through  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  hath  been  shown  above,  agreeably  to  John 


Vn» 

xn,  13,  14,  15.  And  therefore  when  creation  is  ascribed  to  the 
Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  said  that  the  Father  created  by 
riieni:  '*  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  wtre  the  heavens  made,  and  all 
the  nest  ©f  them  by  the  breath  of  his  nsouth,"  Psalm  xxxiii.  6,  Thus 
also  the  redemption  of  the  Son  wa-;  the  work  of  the  Father,  Rom.  iii. 
25,  26,  2  Cor.  i.  30;,  and  so  likewise  the  sanctification  cf  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  a  work  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6. 

Inaaniuch  as  a  rii^ht  knowledge  of  this   mystery  conduceth  much 
to  an  explanation  of  the  emphasis  of  the  phrases  in  the  word  of  God, 
to  an  illustration  of  the  great  mysteries  of  God,  to  the  confutation  of 
errours,  which  proceed  especially  from  an  ignorance  of  this  myste- 
ry, and  to  the  direction  of  the  people  of  God  in  all  their  ccmmunica- 
tion.s  and  intercourses  with  and  relative  to  God  ;    we  shall  therefore 
insist  somewhat  longer  on  this  subject.     We  must   know  then,  that 
God   purposing  to  glorify  himself  by    exhibdting  the   lustre   of  his 
wisdom,  justice,  goodness  and  power,  resolved  to  save   certain  per-= 
t:ons  of  mankind,  and  to  appoint  others  objects  of  his   wrath;    and 
that  in  order  to  accomplish  this  great  purpose,  he  decreed  to  create 
mankind,  to  enter  into  a  covenant  of  works    with    them,  to  permit 
them  to  fall,  and  to  send  his  Son  to  be  a  Saviour  of  some  of  them, 
and  to  give  them  his  Spirit,  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  an  inheri- 
tance with  the  saints  in  light  :  "  All    this   God    worketh    after   the 
council  of  his  own  will,"  Eph.  i.  11.     It  is  also  accordingly  evident, 
that  the  three  divine  Peisons  have,   according  tu  an  eternal  appoint- 
ment in  the  council  of  peace,  distributed   this    whole   work   among 
themselves,  and  that  each  Person  hath  taken   a  particular   work  to 
himself,  in  order  to  contribute  his  part  to  perfect  the  salvation  of  the 
sinner  ;  this  appears  from  the  event,  inasmuch  as  grace  is  attributed 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  love  is  to  God  the  Father,  and  the  com- 
munion of  the  sinner  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  their  love  and 
grace  to  the  Holy  Spirit.     We  see  this  in  our  text,  and  in  our  bap- 
tism, Matt,  xxviii.  19,     And  therefore   the   ancients  were  not  to  be 
blamed  for  reducing  ail  the  articles  of  faith  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity ;  for  which  reason  our  form    of  baptism  also   refers    God's 
whole  work  of  grace  with  the  elect  sinner  to  each    divine   Person, 
showing  what  each  Person  signifieth  and  sealeth  to  the  person  who 
is  baptized  ;  and  thus  in  the  24th  question,   creation  is  ascribed   to 
the  Father,  redemption  to  the  Son,  and  sanctificatioH  to  the  Holy 
Ghost      It  ought  to  be  particularly  noted,  that  as  the   Father  is  the 
first  in  the  order  of  subsistence,  so  he  is  also  the  first  in  the  order  of 
working,  and  that  the    Father  therefore  undertook  to  display  in  his 
person  the  majesty  of  the  Ggdhead  tf  the  Trinity,  ^i  Xh»X  the  Son 


180  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &e. 

submitted  ta  conceal  his  divinity  under  his  humanity  in  his  humilia- 
tion, i.nd  tiie  ■'  ;oIy  Ghost  consented  to  act  as  the  ambassadour  of  the 
FaUier  audofthe  Son.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Fallier  is  more 
frequently  Cdlied  God  than  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  therefore 
the  i'atiier  is  considered  as  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things,  as 
creation  and  all  that  pertaineth  to  it,  is  also  on  this  account  ascribed 
to  him  See  Rom.  xi.  36.  I  Cor.  viii.  6.  For  this  reason  also  the 
Son  is  the  mediator  and  the  servant  of  the  Father,  that  he  may  by 
rtdempt. on  bring  ihe  sinner  to  God,  Isaiah  xlix.  3.  1  Pet.  iii.  18. 
And  the  iioly  Ghost  conveys  the  great  work  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son  to  lh«  sinner  by  an  effectual  application  and  sanctification. 
See  this  John  xviii.  13,  14,  15.  We  shall  see  the  csconomy  or  work 
oi  eacn  Person,  when  we  contemplaie  each  Person  in  particular. 

D.  Finally,  it  tends  to  explain  this  doctrine,  that  these  three  Per- 
sons are  one.  They  ane  not  one  in  the  same  respect,  in  which  they 
are  three,  as  if  three  persons  wei'e  one  person,  or  three  essences  one 
essence  ;  for  this  is  a  contradiction.  Neither  are  these  three  Persont> 
one  with  respect  to  generation  or  kind,  as  Peter,  John,  and  James 
are  of  one  r.uman  generation  or  kind  ;  for  they  would  then  have  each 
his  particular  essence,  and  there  would  then  be  three  divine  essences: 
neither  are  they  one  by  composition,  as  though  each  Person  were  a 
third  part  of  the  divine  essence  ;  for  this  is  contrary  to  the  simplicity 
of  th  •  divine  essence.  Finally,  we  may  not  say,  that  these  three  Per- 
sons are  one  only  in  will,  because  in  this  sense,  all  the  saints  may  be 
said  to  be  one  with  God  ;  but  they  are  one  in  essence,  inasmuch  as 
each  Person  iii  tti  his  peculiar  manner  of  subsistence  in  one  and  the 
same  simple  essence,  by  which  means  the  Persons  subsist  through, 
and  on  account  cf  the  essence,  in  each  other.  This  the  Saviour  de- 
clares, when  he  saith,  '  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father  ; 
and  how  sayest  ihou  then,  Show  us  the  Father  ?  Believest  thou  not 
that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me  ?  the  words  that  I 
speak  unto  you,  I  speak  notof  myself :  but  the  Father,  that  dwel- 
leth  in  me,  he  doth  the  works.  Believe  me  that  I  am  in  the  Father, 
and  the  Father  in  me,"  John  xiv.  9,  10,  11.  See  also  John  x. 
3D,  and  xvii.  31. 

It  v\  as  necessary  that  we  should  say  so  much  in  order  to  explain 
this  great  mystery  ;  but  we  must  also  prove  it,  that  our  minds  may 
be  established  in  the  belief  of  this  capital  article  of  the  divine  mys- 
teries, and  that  we  may  confute  the  Jews  and  the  Socinians,  who 
blaspheme  this  mystery  in  the  most  horrible  manner.  This  cannot 
be  done  by  the  light  of  reason,  as  the  schoolmen  and  others,  who  fol- 
low them,  pretend,  imagining  that  the   Father,  by   understanding 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  2^,  25,  m 

•hifnself,  produced  a  living  image  of  himself  which  was  his  Son,  and 
that  the  Father  and  the  Son  by  lovinp;  themselves,  caused  a  love  to 
proceed  and  issue  from  themselves,  which  was  ihe  Holy  Ghost.  But 
what  likeness  hath  this  to  the  mystery  under  consideration  ?  and 
where  doih  the  word  of  God  speak  thus?  There  is  nothint>  iniicxte 
in  man,  no  not  in  his  state  of  mtegrity,  thas  can  induce  him  to  think 
of  a  plurality  of  divine  persons  ;  neither  will  a  contemplation  of  the 
created  universe  suggest  this  to  him.  (iod's  understanding  and 
loving  of  himself  are  not  personal  acts,  as  the  generation  of  the  '^^on, 
and  ti-c  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  ;  but  they  are  essential 
acts  of  God,  and  so  God  v/ould  not  thereby  produce  another  Person, 
but  another  essence.  Yea,  if  God's  understanding  and  loving  of  h  m- 
self  did  produce  a  Person,  the  Persons  mii;!it  be  infinitely  muUiplied, 
Gince  each  Person  unde:  stands  and  loves  himself,  and  the  other 
Persons. 

Neither  need  we  betake  ourselves,  in  order  to  prove  this  mystery 
of  the  Trinity,  to  the  tradition  and  authority  of  the  church,  as  the 
Papists  do,  that  they  may  accuse  the  scripture  of  imperfection.  The 
purified  trrJition  and  doctrine  of  the  church  can  indeed  propose  and 
illustiate  th;3  truth  to  us ;  but  her  authority  and  doctrine  cannot 
oblige  us  to  believe  it,  any  further  than  they  prove  it  to  us  from  the 
word  of  God  :  *'  That  our  faith  may  not  stand  in  the  wisdor  of 
men,  but  in  the  power  of  God."  1  Cor.  ii,  5.  '' Faith  come^h  by 
hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God,"  Rom  x  17.  There- 
fore the  twenty-fifth  question  saith,  "  that  God  hath  revealed  himself 
thus  in  his  A\ord." 

And  verily  the  word  of  God  proves  this  truth  abundantly  ;  for  (a) 
God  speaks  in  his  word  of  liimself  in  the  plural  number  :  *<  God 
said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  Hkeness,"  Gen.  i.  26- 
This  we  find  also,  Gen.  iii.  22.  xi  7.  Isaiah  vi.  8.  We  cannot, 
say  that  God  speaks  here  of  the  angels,  since  man  was  riot  made  if; 
the  image  of  the  angels  ;  neither  may  we  say  that  God  speaks  here 
after  the  manner  of  kings,  who  say  in  their  behests,  "We"  com- 
mand this  or  that,  this  or  that  pleaseth  "  us ;"  for  this  is  a  later 
usage,  and  we  do  not  find  that  any  king  is  introduced  in  scripture 
speaking  in  this  mai.ner.(b)  We  also  find  that  one  Person  is  dis- 
tinguished from  jxnother,  as  God  and  Lord,  Psalm  xlv,  7.*  "  O  God, 
thy  God  hath  anointed  thee,"  Psalm  ex.  1.  "The  Lord  s;iid  unto 
iny  Lord."  This  silenced  the  unbelieving  Jews,  Matt.  xxii.  42—46. 
Many  cite  here  also  the  passi^ge,  Gen.    xix    24  (c)     Add   to   this, 

*  We  have  rendered  this  passage  according;  to  the  Datch  tvaTiolatior'. 


^,  TiiE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c. 

jhat  God  speaks  of  himself  as  three.  In  the  Old  testament  we  find, 
Isaiah  Ixi.  1,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me."  This  we 
:^ee  also  Psalm  xxxiii,  6.  Isaiah  Ixiii.  9.  10.  Kaggai  ii.  5,  6.  We 
shall  not  speak  now  of  the  priestly  blessing,  Num.  vi.  24,  25,26, 
nor  of  the  churches  reciting  the  name  of  the  Lord  three  several 
limes  in  her  celebration  of -him,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  Attend  only  to 
Jsaiah  vi.  3,  where  God  is  celebrated  thrice  as  "  the  Holy  Lord. 
That  the  Father  alone  is  not  praised  there  as  holy  appears,  because 
more  than  one  person  is  spoken  of  in  that  passage  ;  "  Whom  shall 
I  seiuJ,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?"  vrs.  8.  Therefore  John  also  saith, 
that  '  the  glory  of  Jesus  also  was  seen"  there,  John  xii.  41,  and 
Paul  applies  that  vision  to  the  Holy  Ghost  also,  Acts  xxviii,  25.  In 
the  New  Tcsiament  we  fmd  these  three  Persons  in  the  bgptism  of 
Christ,  Matt.  iii.  16,  17,  in  our  baptism,  Matt.,  xxviii.  19,  \y\  the  bles- 
sing of  Paul,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  And  that  these  three  are  one,  is  shown 
by  John,  2  John  v.  7.  Ail  these  passages  serve  to  prove  that  there 
dre  three  divine  Persons,  because  tliey  are  associated  in  them,  as 
participating  in  the  execution  of  some  divine  work.(d)  Finally,  the 
word  of  God  teacheth  us,  that  the  salvation  of  sinners  is  ascribed  un- 
togtlirec  Persons  ;  that  the  Son  saves  by  his  grace,  the  Father  by  his 
love,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  by  his  communion,  2  Cor.  xii,  13.  which 
the  three  Persons  also  seal  to  us  in  baptism.  Mat  xxviii,  and  believ- 
ers also  experience,  that  they  are  brought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  through 
the  Son  to  the  Father,  Eph.  ii.  18.  Therefore  our  Netherland  con- 
fession also  saith.  Article  9,  "  All  this  we  know,  as  well  from  the  tes- 
timonies of  holy  writ,  as  from  their  operations  ;  and  chiefly  by  those 
we  feel  in  ourselves."  Now  it  is  certain,  that  it 'is  a  divine  work  to 
save  sinners.  See  this,  Isaiah  xlv.  21 — 24.  Hqsea  i.  7,  Titus  iii. 
4.  Consequently  there  are  three,  who  are  God.  We  could  now  fur- 
thermore prove,  that  divine  names,  attributes,  works,  and  worship  are 
ascribed  to  the  Son  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  to  the  Father  : 
but  since  we  must  treat  formally  of  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  hereafter,  we  shall  therefore  defer  these  proofs  for 
the  present. 

In  order  to  form  now  a  conclusion  from  what  halh  been  said,  we 
know,  and  it  is  evident  of  itself,  that  there  is  only  one  God  ;  and 
since  we  have  now  proved  that  there  are  three,  who  are  God,  it  fol^ 
lows  that  these  three  are  the  one  God  in  essence,  agreeably  to  our 
explanation.  And  therefore  we  say  from  I  John  v.  7.  "  There  are 
three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  ;.  ^lud  these  three  ^re  one."     The  brevity  of  our  method 


Vlll.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  24,  25.  iSf^ 

^vi!!  not  permit  lis  to    enlarge  here,  in  order  to  rescue  this  passage 
from  the  cavils  of  the  Socinians. 

II.  "  Since  there  is  but  one  divine  essence,  why  speakest  thou  of 
Father,  Son,  and  F!o!y  Ghost?"  thus  asks  the  instructor.  The 
force  of  this  objection  consists  herein,  that  three  cannot  be  one,  nor 
one  three.  But  we  satisfy  it  fully  by  sayinj^,  that  God  hath  revealed 
himself  as  three  and  one  in  his  word.  To  this  we  must  submit,  and 
brint^  our  thoughts,  which  cannot  fully  comprehend  it,  into  captivity. 
Should  it  be  said  that  there  cannot  be  any  contradictions  in  God, 
and  that  the  word  of  God  cannot  reveal  contradictions  ;  we  say,  that 
this  is  true,  and  that  there  are  no  contradictions  in  this  mystery,  as 
there  would  be,  if  God  were  one  and  three  in  the  same  respect  ; 
but  God  is  one  in  respect  of  his  essence,  and  in  another  respect,  to 
wit,  inrtRpect  of  his  Persons,  he  is  three ;  which  is  by  no  means  u 
contradiction. 

They  object  also,  John  xviii.  3.  "This  is  eternal  life,  to  know 
thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent." 
Hence,  say  they,  the  Father  alone  is  called  God,  and  the  only  God, 
and  therefore  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  cannot  be  God.  We 
say,  the  Father  is  only,  that  is,  nothing  but  God,  ac  the  words  only 
and  alone  are  used.  See  Jer.  xxxii.  30  But  the  Son  is  sometbing- 
besides  God,  he  is  man  also  ;  and  therefore  we  must  connect  the 
word  *'  only"  with  "  God,"  and  not  with  "  thou." 

We  shall  not  attend  here  to  other  objections,  since  they  must  be 
referred  to  the  thirteenth,  and  to  the  twentieth  Lord's  days ;  oji 
which  we  must  prove  the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

But  there  are  still  two  things,  which  require  our  consideration  ;(a) 
First,  whether  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  be  a  fundamental  article 
of  the  faith,  upon  which  our  salvation  depends  ?  or  whether  it  be 
only  a  scholastic  question,  which  we  may  believe,  or  not  believe, 
without  injury  to  our  salvation  ?  This  is  the  opinion  of  the  Remon- 
strants, which  they  entertain  to  gratify  the  Socinians,  although  in 
other  respects  they  maintain  this  doctrine  :  but  we  reckon  this  to  be 
a  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  faith,  upon  which  our  everlasting  life 
depends,  according  to  John  xvii.  3.  It  is  the  first  principle  of  Christ- 
ianity, which  is  proposed  before  all  others  to  those  who  arc  to  be 
baptised,  as  the  foundation  of  their  salvation,  and  which  they  are 
obliged  to  believe.  If  we  believe  not  this  doctrine,  we  deny  then 
other  fundamental  articles  also,  as  the  union  of  the  two  natures  in 
Christ,  his  satisfaction  and  eff'-'ctual  ^rae^.  as  oppears  in  the  So- 
cinians, 


YMh  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &r. 

(b)  Tlie  second  subject  of  consUteration  is,  whether  this  docinDC 
be  adv.nta?;eous  and  necessary  to  godliness.  The  Remonstrants 
deny  this  also:  but  we  say  tiiere  is  no  real  godliness*  which  flows 
ao:  fiom  the  ?rrace  of  the  Soa,  from  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  the 
COfnnHinioo  oi  uhe  Holy  Ghos  ;  for  why  else  doth  the  apostle  so 
tuBT&tlv  dcsi  e  these  blessings  for  believers  r  3  Cor.  adlL  IS.  The 
power  of  gc^l^ne-s  consiss  [>articularly  in  exercising  communioc 
"Wit  Jrod,  in  being  dead  to  ^il  besides,  and  m  havin-'  "  our  life  hidden 
-wiia  Carist  in  Grod,'"  Coll.  ii:.  5.  Now  this  godliness  cannot  be  ex- 
ercised, except  ibrougb  the  on  and  the  Koly  Ghost,  '*  by  whom  wc 
iave  accrsstothe  Father,**  Eph-  ii.  IS.  And  what  is  the  Socinian 
<yodliness.  which  denies  this  mystery,  but  a  heathenish  morality  ? 

in.  But  how  do  we  believe  m  the  Triune  God  I  for  this  we  pro- 
fszss  wftrn  we  say,  *•  I  believe  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  his  Son 
Jevas  i_hnct ;  1  believe  m  the  Holy  Gh-5t."  Therefore  Christ  also 
said.  John  xiv.  I,  *-  Yc  believe  in  God.  believe  also  in  me."  Accor- 
ding to  our  explanation  of  tie  nature  of  faith  on  the  foregoing  Lord's 
<^v  th.3  laitn  ia  the  Triune  God  will  consist,  (a)  in  the  knowledge 
of  ira  ^  1  nunc,  according  to  th^  word  of  God  ;  see  John  xvii.  3.(b> 
In  an  assest  to  the  witness  of  God  concerning  himself  ;n  his  word. 
as  i  riune,  oltjough  ive  cannot  fathom  the  mystery  vdth  our  senses 
or  r«jasoa ;  and  thus.  **  faith  is  an  evidence  of  the  things  which  are  not 
seen."  Heb.  xi.  l.^c)  In  erab'-icing  and  trusting-  in  the  Persons, 
'nritr.  respect  to  t'leir  saving  disper.sations  and  works,  as  the  apostle 
;equ.rcih,  -  Cor.  siii.  13,  that  believers  s'jdiIc*  place  all  their  salrr>- 
tioo  in  this  ocly . 


/vPPLICATION. 

Although  these  several  particula  s  are  truths,  which  none  who 
*re  of  cur  co-nrauatoa  will  deny,  and  although  they  are  also  of  the 
grc*«tc5t  importance,  it  is  nevertheless  plain,  that  they  cither  are  not. 
or  are  scarcely  believed.     For, 

1  Ye  certainly  do  not  believe  tbem.  who  have  not  any  knowledge 
of  them  ;  for  a  person  cannot  believe  without  knowledge.  Ye  will 
kaow  all  things,  bu.  do  no:  endeavour  to  know  God  :  ye  never  re- 
tire "mto  your  minds,  nor  attempt  to  search  the  word  of  God,  and 
seriously  learn  what  -iod  hath  revealed  concerning  himself. 
Woul<^  ye  be  able  to  offer  a  single  proof  for  yourselves,  or  others, 
tbat  there  is   a  God  ?  cr  even   to  declare  what   or  who  be  is  ?  yr 


Vnr  M- 

;grope  here  Ifike  the  blind,  and  stumble  as  these  who  ivalk  in  <iark- 
ness.  Your  underbtandi.g  is  darkened,  and  ye  are  alisr^.ttd  from  the 
life  of  God,  through  the  ignoraDce  tha  is  in  ycu."  EpL.  iv.  is.  Do 
ye  worship  him,  it  is  but  ••  an  unknown  God  whom  ye  rrorsrip," 
A<ts  xvii.  23.  What  a  horrid  state  is  this  1  It  is  the  black  mark  cf 
the  i.eathens,  that  *^  ihey  know  not  God,"  Gal.  iv.  8.  1  Thess.  iv.  5, 
and  they  are  not  excusable,  because  God  hath  revealed  himself  to 
them  m  their  minds,  and  in  rhe  creatures,  Rom.  i.  19,  20.  But  that 
a  p>ers©n.  who  lives  under  l  e  gospel,  to  Trhcm  God  discovers  him- 
self in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  should  not  know  God,  this  is  :.bomi* 
nabie,  a  diabolical  Ji'=posiMon,  and  a  palpable  evidence  of  your  un- 
done condition  :  -  for  if  our  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are 
lost :  in  whom  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  tr.e  minds  of  th-enrt 
which  believe  not,  lest  tue  light  of  tht  g-Jorious  gospel  of  Christ,  who 
is  the  image  of  Cod,  should  shine  unto  them,"  2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4.  B^ 
concerned  on  account  of  this,  an-i  be  ashamed  :  th'-s  Paul  re- 
quireth,  1  Cor.  xv.  3-i  ••  Some  have  not  the  knowledge  cf  God :  I 
speak  this  to  your  shame." 

2.  It  is  certain,  that  we  have  the  greatest  concern  in  ihe  Lord 
God,  and  that  '•  we  have  to  do  with  him,  before  whose  eyes  all  things 
are  naked,  and  opened,'  Heb,  iv.  13.  Every  one  is  of,  by,  to,  and 
for  him.  If  ye  believed  this,  would  ye  not  regard  it  ?  would  not  his 
oninipresence  and  omniscience  render  you  circumsp^-  ct  ?  wculd  net 
his  truth  induce  you  to  believe  ?  his  goodness  to  seek  and  love  him : 
his  allsufficiency  satisfy  you,  and  persuade  you  to  exert  all  your 
faculties  in  his  service  r  certainly  yes.  It  is  then  surely  cTident, 
that  ye  do  not  belie-  e  in  God  :  ibr  "  ye  do  not  regard  him,  scd  do 
not  fear  him,  Isaiah  Ivii.  il.  He  is  not  the  on'y  object  cf  Ul  your 
actions  :  but  the  things  that  ye  see,  your  money  and  ^ood?^,  aftsr 
these  things  j^e  pant  and  long  with  eager  dcssres.  and  ccmmii  idola- 
try with  them,  Eph.  v.  5.  Coll.  iii.  5.  Ye  are  proud  and  hau.t^ity  oTi 
account  of  them.  Job  xxxi.  2-;.  Are  they  taken  from  you,  it  is  as 
though  your  Gods,  your  all  were  taken  from  you,  Judges  xviii.  24. 
Or  ye  take  your  fill  of  pleasure,  and  make  **  your  belJy  ycur  God," 
Philip,  iii-  19.  Yea,  "ye  set  your  hearts  as  Gods  heart,"  Ijie  the 
prince  of  Tyre.  Ezek.  xxviii  2 — 5.  Ye  imagine  that  ye  are  great 
ooes,  and  make  yourselves  the  only  objects  of  all  your  ccticns;  and 
set  yourselves  thus  in  the  room  of  God,  and,  as  much  as  in  you  licth, 
thmst  him  from  his  throne.  And  ye  show  thus  that  ye  have  chosen 
**  the  God  of  this  world  "  for  your  God,  **  walking  according  to  the 
prince  of  ihe  power  of  the  air.  the  spirit  that  now  -^orkcth  ir.  the 
children  cf  disobedience,  fulfilling  the  desires  nf  the  flesh  and  of  the^ 


1^6  itit  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  m 

mind,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3.  Alas  !  how  far  have  ye  departed  from  Cod! 
how  do  ye  come  short  of  his  glory,  how  are  ye  become  as  it  were 
inonsters  !  and  walk  in  the  way  to  destruction  I  and  how  will  God 
once  avenge  himself  of  you  ! 

3.  It  is  true,  many  have  stilf  a  certain  sense  of  God,  and  of  their 
obligation  to  hin^  yea,  so  far,  that  they  have  a  lively  conscience, 
which  coiivinceth  them  of  their  (iuty,  reproves  them  for  their  evil 
conduct,  and  excites  in  them  a  fear  of  avenging  punishment.  But 
do  ye  encourage  and  stir  up  your  conscience,  in  order  that  k  may 
lead  you  to  repentance  ?  or  do  y-e  endeavour  to  silence  it,  and  to 
thwart  it,  by  seeking  to  stifle  it  ?  Alas  !  how  many  are  there,  who 
cannot  endure  the  twinges  of  their  conscience  !  they  rush  headlong 
against  warnings,  and  '*  suppress  the  truth  in  unrighteousness,"  Rom. 
i.  18.  Yea,  many  wil!  seek  for  reasons  to  persuade  themselves  "  that 
there  is  no  God,"  Psalm  xiv.  1,  that  they  may  break  the  yoke  and 
burst  the  bonds :  and  they  show  that  they  are  children  of  Bel'al* 
without  yoke,  and  that  they  are  like  "  an  unruly  heifer,"  Jer.  v.  5. 
Hosea  iv.  16.  And  hence  the  Lord  God  will  sometimes  "  give  such 
persons  up  to  a  reprobate  mind,"  to  the  most  dreadful  atheism,  and 
*'  to  ('o  those  things  that  are  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  28  Our  own 
days  show  to  what  a  dreadful  ungodhnt-ss  a  person  may  be  abandon- 
ed, when  we  observe  so  many  Spinozists,  Bekkerists,  Leenhofists, 
Hattemists,  Brillists,  and  others,  who  have  settled  in  whole  swarms 
here  and  there,  and  conceal  themselves  under  the  names  of  God, 
Christ,  the  Word,  Patience,  Selfdenial,  but  all  in  the  Spirit,  that  is., 
accordint;^  to  the  real  opinion  af  those  Libertines,  all  things  are  God. 
and  the  creatures  are  different  modifications  of  that  God.  Doth  any 
one  desire  to  see  this  mystery  of  iniquity  unfolded,  let  him  read,  I. 
Calvins  instruction  a^rainst  the  Libertines,  and  their  agreement  wi.h 
the  modern  Libertines  by  C   Tuinman. 

4.  Perhaps  ye  may  think,  all  this,  doth  not  concern  us,  for  we 
know  Gofl :  we  could  prove  by  passages  from  the  word  of  God  that 
he  exists,  auvl  show  what  and  who  he  is,  and  we  endeavour  to  live 
according  to  our  knowledge,  by  forsaking  evil,  and  doing  good.  It 
is  well ;. but  doth  your  knowledge  warm  your  hearts,  unite  you  to 
God  and  Christ  ?  and  are  your  works  "done  in  God,"  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  saith  ?  John  iii.  21.  But  how  few  are  there,  who  know  God 
thus  ?  tht  re  are  many  who  have  not  been  taught  so  by  God  ;  they 
have  only  a  Hteral  knowledge  of  the  word,  which  leaves  their  souls 
alienated  from  God,  and  doih  not  influence  and  urge  them  to  do  all 
things  in  union  v;ith  the  Tritm«  God-    Their  knowledge  puffs  them 


Vn,  35.  tSf 

i:p,  and  "  their  zeal  for  God  is  not  according  to  knowledge,  leading 
them  to  establish  their  own  righteousness,"  Rom.  x*.  2,  3. 

Whoever  ye  are,  apply  your  hea\ti>  to  this,  and  see  whether  ye 
be  not  in  one  or  other  respect  thus  disposed.  And  is  it  still  tLus  with 
you  ?  hear  then  what  God  saith  to  you,  Titus  i.  16.  "They  profess 
that  they  know  God  ;  but  in  works  they  deny  hirn,  being;  abomina- 
ble, and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate,"  hph.  ii. 
12.  «  Without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel, 
strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  with- 
out God  in  the  worlci."  Know  that  each  Person  will  employ  his 
wisdom,  will,  pov/er  and  work  to  destroy  you  :  the  Father  is  your 
*<  righteous  judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry  every  day,"  Psalm  vii, 
1 1.  The  Son  "  will  not  pardon  your  transfrres^inns  ;  for  the  name  of 
God  is  m  him,"  Exod  xxiii.  21.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  "  tcrnc^d  to  be 
yoer  enemy,"  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10.  ''  Can  your  hrart  then  enduie,  or  your 
hands  be  strong  in  the  day  when  God  shall  deal  with  you?"  Eztk. 
xxii.  14.  Hear  what  he  saith,  Isaiah  xlvii.  3.  '' I  will  take  ven- 
geance, and  I  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man." 

Therefore  be  concerned  and  solicitous  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  Regard  God  and  his  favour  more  ;  the  Lord  is  yet  willing 
to  become  your  God,  and  offers  you  for  that  purpose  his  free  grace. 
Therefore  refuse  not,  accept  of  it,  and  lay  hold  on  his  Son,  that  ye 
may  be  hidden  from  his  indignation.  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted 
time,  the  day  of  salvation  :  *'  To  day  then  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv-  7.  8.  Isaiah  Iv.  €,  7. 

But  ye,  who  know  God,  yea,  rather  are  known  of  him,  who  hath 
also  given  you  an  understanding,  that  ye  should  know  him  who  is 
true,  conduct  by  ^11  means  worthily  of  this  allworthy  Lord,  and 
therefore, 

1.  Believe  with  a  strong  faith,  and  impress  it  deeply  on  your 
minds,  that  he  is,  and  especially  that  he  is  infinitely  perfect,  and  Tri- 
une, and  that  ye  have  to  do  with  him  :  "  He  who  cometh  to  God 
must  beheve  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  dili-j 
gently  seek  him,"  Heb.  xi.  6.  Ye  have  as  many  proofs  of  this  within 
and  without  you,  as  of  any  other  thing  in  the  world,  and  more  :  yfr 
need  only  attend,  and  the  Lord  God  will  "  beset  you  behind  and  be- 
fore, and  lay  his  hand  upon  you,"  Psalm  cxxxix.  5.  Doth  Satan  as- 
sault you  with  wicked  injections  and  fiery  darts,  maintain  a  compo- 
sed mind,  and  suffer  them  not  to  disturb  you  too  much,  yea,  do  not 
argue  against  them,  in  order  to  refute  them,  but  repel  them  from 
you,  as  ye  would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes,  that  the  enemy  may 
^  discouraged,  wheu  he  perceives  that  ye  do  hot  greatly  regard  his 


«te  I'ftE  CimiSTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c 

assaults.  Do  not  endeavonr  neither  to  penetrate  with  your  undciw 
standing  too  far  into  tins  mystery,  but  believe  it  solely  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  God  ;  the  first  apprehensions  which  we  form  of  God  are 
generally  the  purest;  but  when  we  will  find  out  the  Almighty  to 
perfection,  we  then  become  dull  and  perplexed  :  eveiy  one  must 
•confess  here  "  that  he  is  more  brutish  than  any  man,  and  that  he 
hath  not  the  understanding  of  a  m^m,  that  he  hath  neither  learned 
wisdom,  nor  hath  the  knowledge  of  the  holy,"  Prov-  xxx.  2,  3.  See 
also  2  (or.  X.  f*. 

2.  Let  the  Lord  God  also  be  the  object  of  all  your  observances  ~ 
for  he  is  the  most  worthy  object,  in  whom  the  reasonable  creature 
can  obtain  complete  satisfaction  in  all  that  he  doth.  Therefore  cotw 
template  him  alone  in  his  excellencies,  **  beholding  as  in  a  glass,  with 
open  face,  the  gloiy  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  "  Let  your  medita- 
tion of  him  be  sweet,"  Psalm  civ.  34.  "  Let  him  be  yoi'r  fear  and 
dre  d,"  Isaiah  viii.  13,  the  object  of  your  faith,  hope  and  love,  1 
Thess.  i.  3,  of  your  joy,  Phil.  iv.  4,  praise,  Neh.  ix.  5,  service,  Psalm 
ii.  11,  aims,  1  Cor.  x.  31,  and  imitation,  Eph.  v.  1.  I  Peter  i    15,  16. 

3.  Prais'j  and  glorify  the  Triune  God  on  account  of  his  wonderful 
counsel  of  grace  r    O  that  noble  device,  so  wisely  contrived  and  ex- 
ecuted, to  save  sinners  by  a  crucified  Mediator,  to  the  glory  of  the 
divine  justice  and  mercy  1  "  angels  desire  to  look  into  these  things," 
!  Peter  i.  1 1.     How  do  they  praise  the  Lord  on  account  of  them  l 
Luke  ii.  13,  14.     That  the  Lord  may  be  glorified   for  them  by  an- 
gels and  men,  "the  church  must  make  known  to  the  principalities 
and  powers  in  heavenly  places,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  eternal  purpose,  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,"  Eph.  iii    lo>   1  L      Here  we  "  acknowledge  the  breadth   and 
length,  and  de;th,  and  heighth  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which   passeth 
knowledge,  and  are  filled  with   all  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph.  iii.  18, 
19.     All  God's  works  praise  him,  but  in  this  way  all  his    praisewor- 
thy glory  appears,  as  it  were,  united.     The  creature  loses  himself, 
when  he  is  led   into  it,  and  must  cry  out   enraptured,  "  O  the  depth 
of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  ^of  God  I  how  un- 
searchable his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out !  for  of  him, 
and  through  him,  and  to  him,  are  all  things  ;  to  whom  be   glory  for 
ever.  Amen,"  Rom.  xi-  33 — 36. 

4.  Lay  the  v/hole  burthen  of  your  salvation  upon  the  divine  Trin- 
ity, committing  the  accomplishment  of  it  entirely  to  the  Triune  God  • 
'^  For  God  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  toward  you  ;  that  ye  at- 
ways  liaving  all-sufficiency  m  all  things,  may  abound  in  every  good 
^ork,"  2  Cor.  ix.  8.     Each  Person  in  the  divine   essence   hath   en^ 


VIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  ^4,  25.  t^ 

gaged  to  effect  your  salvation  through  grace,  love,  and  coTnmunion> 
and  will  confirm  it:  "  The  Father  will  perfect  it  for  you,  his  merer 
endureth  for  ever  ;  he  will  not  forsake  the  works  of  his  hands  *' 
Psalm  cxxxviii.  8,  The  Son  will  "daily  load  you  with  benefits - 
for  this  God  is  our  salvation,  Selah,  this  God  is  a  God  of  perfect  sal- 
vation to  us  ;  and  to  God  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death," 
JPsalm  Ixviii.  19,  2o.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  "our  God  for  ever  and 
ever;  he  will  be  our  guide  even  uuto  death,"  Psalm  xlviii.  U.  Rev„ 
xiv.  13,  For  these  reasons  we  ought  to  deny  all  our  own  works 
devices,  and  contrivances,  with  respect  to  this  matter,  to  cast  all 
our  care  upon  him,  and  ucpend  in  a  hojy  manner  on  him,  Psalm 
xxxviii.  5. 

5.  Improve  each  Person  distinctly  with  respect  to  his  special  work 
of  grace.     Do  ye  need  justification,  and  all  that   pertains   to   it,   let 
tlie  love  of  the  Father  be  your  refuge.     Do  ye  find  yourselves  empty 
and  destitute  of  necessary  grace,  betake  yourselves  to  the  Son  ;  for 
'^^  of  his  fulness  we  all  receive,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16.    Do 
ye  perceive  that  ye  are    estranged  from  the  Lord,  have  recourse  to 
the  fioly  Spirit,  whose  proper  work  it  is  to  introduce  to  communion 
with  God,  by  teaching  the  soul,  by  leading,  and  bringing   her  to 
God,  and  by  comforting  her  ;  but  beware  of  ending  or  resting  in  the 
Son  or  Holy  Spirit,  but  end  and  rest  through    them  in  the  Father ; 
for  »'  by  the  Son  we  have  an  access  through  the  Spirit   unto  the  Fa* 
ther,"  Eph.  ii.  8.     That  we   may  receive  all   things  again   of  the 
Father  through  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost ;  therefore  the  Lord  Jesus 
^aid,  xvi.  13,  14,  15.     «•  The  Spirit  of  truth  will  guide  you  into  all 
truth  ;  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but  whatsoever  he  shall 
hear,  that  shall  he  speak  ;  and  he   will  show  you   things   to  come- 
He  shall  glorify  me  ;    for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  show  it  unto 
you.     All  things  that  the  Father  hath   are  mine  ;   therefore  said  I, 
he  shall  take  of  mine,  and  show  it  unto  you/'  See  also  John  xiv.   16. 
6    Live  and  converse  much  in  union  and  com.munion  with  the 
divine  Trinity,  "  that  your  fellowship  may  be  with  the  Father,  and 
with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,"   1  John  i.  3.     This   was  the  petition  of 
the  Son  for  you  to  the  Father,  John  xvii.  21.     Therefore  it  behooves 
you  to  present  the  Lord  before  your  eyes,  and  to  "  set  him  always 
before  you,"  Psalm,  xvi.  8,  "  to  follow  hard  after  him,"   Psalm  Ixiii. 
8,  to  "  be  near  him,  and  to  draw  nigh  to  him,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  28.  James 
iv.  8,  yea,  "to  walk"  and  converse  "with  him,  and   before   him," 
Gen.  V  22,  24,  27.  ^ 

7.  Be  also,  according  to  this  great  pattern,  most  closely  united  to 
one  ^other^  and  exercise   frequently,  tbft  communion  of  saints. 


n%^  THE  CHRISTIAN'S  FAITH,  &c. 

Howgreatjy  did  it  redound  to  the  glory  of  the  first  Christian*,  th^t. 
^  the  muliitutie  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart,  and  of  one 
soul,"  Acts  iv.  32.  We  must  "  all  be  one  in  the  Father  and  in  the 
Son,  as  the  Father  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son  in  the  Father,  are  one,** 
John  xvii  21.  "Be  like-minded,  have  the  same  love,  being  of  ene 
accord,  of  one  mind,"  Philip,  li.  2  1  Cor.  i.  10.  "  The  Lord  hath 
given  you  all  one  heart  and  one  way,  that  ye  may  fear  him,"  Jer. 
xxxii.  39.  '*  Therefore  endeavour  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one  body  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling  One  Lord,  one  fuith,  and 
one  baptism.  One  God  and  Fatner  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and 
through  all,  and  in  you  all,"  Eph.  iv.  3 — 6. 

8.  Behold  now  albo  your  great  portion  and  possession,  since  this 
infinitely  glorious  God  is  yours.  By  your  entrance  into  the  proffered 
covenant  of  ^:race,  "  ye  have  avouched  the  Lord  to  be  your  God,'* 
Deut.  xxvt  17  How  great  thep  is  your  portion  !  yea,  the  Lord 
cannot  bestow  aught  upon  you  greater  or  worthier  than  himself;  ye 
may  indeed  challenge  the  world  to  show  you  a  portion  beiter  thian 
yours.  See  Deut.  xxxii.  31.  Jer.  x.  Yea,  all  that  the  Lord  hath  is 
also  yours,  1  Cor.  ii.  21,  52,  23.  Doth  it  not  please  him  to  com- 
municate much  f  himself  to  you  at  present,  ye  will  hereafter  be  so 
much  the  more  filled  and  satisfied  with  bim  :  for  according  to  Psalm 
xvii.  15.  "Ye  shall  behold  his  face  in  righteousness:  ye  plmll  hjf 
^tisfied,  when  ye  avrake,  with  hi^  likeiiess,',  Awe.»i 


(im 


FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER 


IX,  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  cKlvi.  5,  6.  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for 
his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God  ;  which  made  heaven 
and  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  therein  is  :  which  keepeth  truth 
for  ever, 

Q»  26.  What  bdievest  thouytohen  thou  my  est,  ^^  I  believe  in  God 
the  Father^  Almighty  Mtiker  of  heaven  and  earth?** 

A.  That  the  eternal  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  (who  'of 
nothing  made  heaven  and  earth,  with  ail  that  in  them  is  ;  who  like- 
wise upholds  and  governs  the  same  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  pro- 
vidence,) is  for  the  sake  of  Christ  his  Son,  my  God,  and  my  Father; 
on  whom  1  rely  so  entirely,  that  1  have  no  doubt  but  he  will  provide 
me  with  all  thinc^s  necessary  for  soul  and  body  :  and  further,  that  he 
will  make  whatever  evils  he  sends  upon  me,  in  this  valley  of  tears, 
turn  out  to  my  advantaire  ;  for  he  is  able  to  do  it,  being  Almighty 
God,  and  willing  ;  being  a  faithful  Father. 


G 


OD,  the  Lord,  willing  to  reveal  himself  unto  Moses,  as  far  as 
his  capacity  would  admit,  promiseth  him  that  "  he  should  see  his  back- 
parts,"  Exod.  xxxiii.  23.  Moses  had  prayed  to  the  Lord  to  '*  show 
him  his  glory,"  vrs.  18,  wishing  to  see  his  face  in  a  posture  in  which 
his  fore-parts  were  toward  him  ;  but  the  Lord  informs  him  that  na 
mortal  was  capable  of  seeing  him  thus,  ^'  Thou  canst  not  see  my 
face  ;  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me  and  live  ;  my  face  shall  not  be 
seen,"  vrs.  23.  The  Lord  was  nevertheless  too  kind  to  deny  him 
his  request  altogether,  but  granted  it  fully,  when  he  said,  "  Tbou 


lV2  -?AITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHETt.      ^ 

«halt  see  my  back-parts."  The  Lord  God,  being  a  spirit,  hathliS'iv 
ther  fore-parts  nor  back-parts  :  but  this  is  a  figurative  manner  df 
speaking,  taken  from  men,  whom  we  behold  in  a  posture  in  which 
their  back-parts  are  toward  US|  and  thus  know  imperfectly,  by  theif 
ierect  and  well  formed  bodies,  their  shape  and  ordinary  gait.  Thu« 
also  the  Lord  God,  who  is  one  in  essence  and  three  in  Persons,  can- 
not be  seen  in  a  posture  wherein  his  fore-parts  are  toward  us,  and 
face  to  face,  but  is  perceived  in  a  posture  wherein  his  back-parts  are 
to'vard  us.  But  what  are  the  back-parts  of  the  Lord  ?  in  the  first 
place,  the  divine  virtues  and  perfections,  which  Moses  saw,  "  when 
the  Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaimed,  the  Lord,  the  Lord 
God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in  good- 
ness and  truth,"  &;c.  Exod  xxxiv,  6.  And  also  the  works  of  the 
Lord  which  are,  as  it  were,  his  gait,  and  goings,  particularly  in  the 
sanctuary,  Psalm  Ixviii.  24.  The  Lord  reveals  himself  by  his  works 
evtn  to  the  heathens :  "  For  his  invisible  things  from  the  creation  of 
the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  thai  are 
made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,"  Rom.  i.  20  This  was 
sufficient  indeed  to  render  them  inexcusable,  but  it  could  not  con- 
duct them  to  salvation  :  it  taught  them  indeed  the  eternal  power  and 
godhead  of  God,  but  not  the  manner  in  which  the  sinner  must  be 
reconcilcv!  to  him  :  God  is  not  only  one  in  essence,  but  also  three 
ID  Persons  :  we  must  also  know  him  as  such,  if  we  shall  be  saved  ; 
^<  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God, 
and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent,"  sai;.h  the  Saviour,  John  xvii, 
S.  But  who  is  able  to  behold  this  in  a  posture  in  which  the  fore-parts 
of  it  are  toward  him  ?  no  mortal ;  he  becomes  blind,  when  he  gazes  at 
this  sun  :  he  must  therefore  endeavour  to  survey  this  God  in  a  pos- 
ture wherein  his  back-parts  are  toward  him,  to  wit,  in  the  saving 
operations  of  the  three  Per  :ons.  It  hath  indeed  seemed  good  to  the 
divine  Persons  to  contrive  unitedly  a  council  of  grace,  and  that 
each  Person  should  contribute  his  part,  in  order  to  effect  the  salva- 
tion of  tliC  sinner :  the  Father  should  love  the  sinner  with  a  raving 
love,  the  Son  should  purchase  grace,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  should  re^n- 
dcr  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  the  grace  of 
the  Son.  This  Paul  teacheth  us,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  Therefore  the 
catechism  proposing  to  exhibit  God  to  us  as  Triune,  discovers  him  to 
us  in  a  posture,  wherein  his  back-parts  are  toward  us,  to  wit,  by  his 
works  in  the  division  of  the  articles  of  the  creed,  speaking  in  the. 
eighth  Lord's  day,  of  God  the  Father  and  our  creation,  of  God  the 
Son  and  our  redemption,  and  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  our  sancti- 
'  ficatirtn.     This  bumg  thira  briefly  proposed,  each  Person  is  exhibited 


$3 

to  us  "vvith  respect  to  his  particular  works  in  order.  Since  now  the 
Fatiier  is  the  first  in  the  order  of  subsistence  and  working,  therefore 
fuith  in  God  the  Father,  Ahiiighty  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  is 
first  treated  of. 

Two  particulars  require  our  further  consideration  here  ; 

I.  The  object  of  the  Christian's  regard,  "God  the  Father,  Al- 
mighty Maker  of  heaven  and  earth," 

II.  The  Christian's  believing  exercise  relative  to  that  object, 
"  I  believe." 

I.  When  mention  is  made  here  of  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Ma» 
ker,  Sec.  it  is  evidtnt,  that  this  relates  not  to  God  considered  essen^ 
tially,  but  personally,  and  indeed  to  the  first  Person,  whose  personal 
property  it  is,  that  he  is  the  Father,  as  will  appear  more  fully  here- 
after ;  and  therefore  he  is  distinguished  here  from  the  Son,  the  Re- 
deemer, and  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Sanctifier.  Wherefore  wx 
shall  inquire,  1,  why  he  is  called  "  God,"  2,  why  <^  Father,"  and  3, 
why  «'  Almighty  Makei;." 

It  is  known  that  the -Father  is  called  God  more  frequently 
than  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  see  this  John  xvii.  3.  "  Thi& 
is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Je- 
sus Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  See  also  Rom.  iii.  25.  1  Cor. 
xiii.  13.  Gal.  iv.  6.  TUls  is  a  stone  of  stumbHng,  and  a  rock  of 
offence  to  the  Socinians,  as  though  the  Father  were  God  rather  than 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  while  nevertheless  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  God  coessential  with  the  Father.  But  this  mystery 
contains  another,  to  wit,  that  the  Father,  according  to  the  distribution 
of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine  Persons,  undertook  to  display 
in  his  Person  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead,  and  to  reveal  it  in  its 
glory,  as  the  Son  undertook  to  make  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  act  as  the  ambassadour  of  the  P'ather  and  of 
the  Son.  See  John  vi.  13,  14,  15.  For  this  reason  he  is  to  be  con-- 
aidered  as  the  first  cause  of  all  things  :  "  We  have  but  one  God, 
the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,"  1  Cor.  viii.  6,  as  the  all-suffi- 
cient, *'  who  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound,"  2  Cor.  ix.  8,  whose 
also  the  wisdom,  to  contrive  a  way  of  reconciliation,  1  Cor.  i.  24, 
the  holiness  to  reveal  it  in  purity,  to  the  salvation  of  sinners,  JohA 
xvii.  11,  the  justice  to  avenge  himself  of  sin,  and  to  forgive  it,  Rom. 
iii*  25,  26,  the  love  for  the  manifestation  of  all  grace,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13. 
Yea,  the  Father  is  considered  as  the  end,  to  whose  praise  we  must 
refer  the  whole  work  of  grace,  Rom.  xi.  33  —36.  Therefore  the 
favoured  people  of  God  mwst  not  end  in  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost; 
Vit  must,  through  th^m  end  in  the  Father,  with  all  their  esercisef 

Ec 


\n  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

of  faiih,  love,  hope,  fear,  and  praise,  Eph.  ii.  13.  1  Peter  i.  12.  Co|. 
iii.  17.  And  when  the  saivation  of  the  sinner  shall  be  completed, 
"then  shall  the  ^on  deliver  up  the  king  .om  unto  God,  evtin  the  Fa- 
ther, and  be  subject  to  him,  who  put  ail  things  under  him,"  1  Cor, 
XV.  24,  28.. 

Consi  lering  all  these  particulars,  we  are  naturally  led  to  the  con- 
tem^)lat!oii  of  tlie  ceconomical  dispensation  of  grace  appertauiing  to 
tile  rather. 

1.  First  with  respect  to  the  eternal  co'msel  of  peace,  which  we 
also  ca.i  a  to've'-saiit  of  redemption,  because  the  redemption  of  the 
sinner  was  contrived  in  it.  1  his  covci^ant  of  redemption  is  the  dis- 
pLTis  '.ioii  o[  the  Father,  and'it  is  ascribed  to  bis  <'  manifold  wisdom^ 
according  to  the  eternal  purpose,  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord,"  I'ph.  iii.  I!.  Iheiein  he  appointed  his  Son  to  be  a 
surety,  and  delivered  the  elect  to  him,  that  he  might  redeem  them, 
JtT.  XXX.  21.  John  xvii.  6. 

2.  Furiher  creation  is  also  the  work  of  the  Father,  as  the  mean 
of  executing  his  counsel' :  for  it  w  as  necessary  that  he  should  pro- 
duce the  elect  into  being,  if  he  should  render  them  partakers  of  his 
grace,  "te  Tsaiiih  xlv.  17,  18.  Eph.  iii.  19,  and  also  that  he  should 
reveal  the  covenant  of  works,  wfiich  the  Father  established  with 
mankind,  ?.nd  that  he  siiouh'  suffer  it  to  be  broken  by  sin,  to  the  end 
that  he  might  glorify  liis  ju'3-tice  and  inconceivable  grace,  Rom. 
xi.  32. 

3.  In  the  third  place,  it  belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Father 
to  establish  the  covenant  of  grace  with  the  elect  sinner,  to  whom  he 
promises  iiimself,  and  that  he  will  be  his  God,  in  which  every  great 
and  precious  promise  is  imphed,  Jer.  33,  3-4.  2  Cor.  vi.  16—18,  as 
the  administraiion  of  tiiat  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament  also 
belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  the  l^ather^ 

4.  Add  to  this,  that  the  Father  exerciseth  an  csconomical  dispen- 
sation with  respect  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  ,  It  was  the 
work  of  the  Father  to  send  the  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  and  under 
the  law,  Gal.  iv.  4,  to  lay  iniquity  upon  him,  to  demand  the  debt  of 
him,  and  therefore  to  bruise  him,  Isaiah  liii.  And  thus  "  God  was 
in  Christ,  reconcilins;  the  world  to  himself,"  2  Cor.  v,  19.  And  in 
order  to  bestow  on  him  the  reward  of  his  arduous  labour,  he  raised 
hini  from  the  dead.  Acts  ii.  24,  set  him  iu  heaven  at  his  own  right 
hand,  and  made  him  Judge  of  the  quick  and. dead.  Acts  x.  42.  Eph. 
i.  10 — 23.  Philip,  ii.  10.  11.  1  Peter  iii.  22.  The  Father  performs 
also  a  certain  work  with  respect  to  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  for  he  gave  him 
without  measure  to  his  Son,  in  order  to  qualify  him  for  the  media* 


IX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  26.  195 

Worship,  and  also  that  he  might  communicate  the  Spirit  by  him  to 
his  cnurch,  Jolm  iii.  34.  Isaiali  Ixi.  i.  Acts.  ii.  33.  And  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  seni  likewise  by  God  the  Father  into  the  hearts  of  believers, 
to  influence  them,  Gal.  iv.  6 

5.  Finally,  the  Father  hath  his  special  dispensation  wiih  respect 
to  tbe  elect,  to  wit,  that  he  bestows  his  Son  and  all  his  sovereign  ben- 
efits upon  them,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Therefore  •'  he  calls  them  to  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son,"  I  Cor  i.  9.  "justifies  them,"  Rom.  viii.  33. 
"adopts  them,"  2  Cor,  vi.  17,  18,  and  brings  them  infb  a  s.ate  of 
peace  with  him,  Rom.  v.  1. 

It  is  necessary  and  profitable  to  view  the  different  dispensations  of 
the  father  in  this  manner,  since  this  removes  the  offence,  which  the 
Socinians  take  at  thr:;  Godhead  of  the  Father,  the  humiliation  of  the 
Son,  and  the  sending  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  may  thus  clearly  com- 
prehend in  v/hat  manner  the  Son  and  the  lloly  Spirit,  who  are  con- 
substantial  with  the  Father,  can  be  sent,  and  in  what  manner  the  ^^on, 
who  is  himself  God.  is  the  servant  of  God,  and  satisfied  the  justice 
of  God  ;  it  also  teaches  believers  how  they  receive  all  things  of  the 
Father  through  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  how  they  draw  near 
to  him,  and  refer  all  back  to  him. 

Wc  must  now  inquire  why  the  first  Person  is  called  Father:  a 
person  is  a  father,  in  consequence  of  his  having  a  child  or  children, 
and  so  God  is  a  Father. 

First,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose  etcraal  Father  the  first 
Person  is,  by  an  etenihl  and  inconceivable  generation.  Psalm  ii.  7. 
*'  For  as  the  Father  hath  lifv  in  himself,  so  hat!)  he  clso  given  to  the 
Son  to  have  life  in  himself,  John  v.  26.  But  of  this  we  must  speak 
more  particularly  on  the  thirteenth  Lord's  day. 

In  the  second  place,  God  is  tne  Father  of  true  believers  for  the 
sake  of  his  Sen  Christ,  who  is,  as  it  were,  their  brother  ;  and  there- 
fore "  his  God  and  Father,  is  also  tueir  God  and  Father,"  as  he  lam- 
self  declaies,  John  XX.  17.  The  reason  of  this  is,  (I)  their  n^w 
birth,  by  which  they  partake,  hke  children,  of  the  life  and  iinaece  of 
God  ;  for  "  they  are  not  born  of  blood,  nor  of  ti»e  will  of  man,  h'lt  of 
God,"  John  i.  13,  13,  (2)  Their  spiritnal  marriage  with  the  Son  of 
God,  *'who  hath  betrothed  them  to  himself  in  faithfulness,"  Flosea 
ii.  19.  Therefore  he  is,  "  the  husband"  of  believers,  Isaiah  liv.  5, 
and  they  are  ''  the  bride  and  wife  of  the  Lamb,"  Rev,  xxi.  9.  And 
therefore  God,  the  Father  of  the  Son,  is  also  the  Father  of  his  bride 
and  wife,  who  is  therefore  called  *'  the  daughter"  of  the  Father, 
Psalm  xlv.  16.  (3)  The  adoption  of  grace  by  which  the  Lord  trans- 
latts  them  out  of  the  kingdom  of  Satan  into  his  family,  furnisheth 


19a  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER^ 

them  with  a  plentiful  support,  and  renders  them  heirs  of  all  his  sa^ 

ving  benefits,  yea,  of  himself,  and  of  his  Son  ;  and  thus  they  are  not 
strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow  citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of 
the  household  of  God,"  Eph  ii.  19.  "  Being  children,  they  are  also 
heiiS  of  God,  and  joint  iieir^  with  Christ,"  Rom.  viii.  17. 

In  the  third  place,  God  is  also  a  Father  of  all  his  creatures,  and 
particularly  of  all  mankind  ;  inasmuch  as  they  have  received  life  of 
him  by  creation  ;  therefore  it  is  said,  Mai.  li.  10.  "  Have  we  not 
all  one  leather  I    liath  not  one  God  created  us  ?" 

And  so  this  God  and  Father  is  also  the  Almighty  Maker  of  hea- 
ven and  earth.  To  create,  s  ex  .ressed  in  the  Hebrew  by  the  word 
bara,  which  signifies  to  make  a  new  thing,  as  we  see,  Numb  xvi.  30, 
"  If  the  Lord  njake  a  new  thing."  See  also  Jer.  xxxi.  22.  With 
this  agrees  also  nearly  the  Greek  word  ktizo,  which  words,  as  also 
the  word  create,  are  commonly  used  by  divines  to  denote  the  making 
of  something  out  oi  nothing.  Whether  the  word  bara  signify  to 
give  any  thing  its  beginning,  and  the  word  jatzar  to  give  that  which 
is  oegun,  its  proper  form  and  shape,  and  the  Vv'ord  ^nasah^  to  perfect 
any  thing,  this  may  admit  of  much  disputation  .  some  think  thus, 
because  we  find  these  words  together,  Isaiah  xlii.  7,  "  I  have  crea- 
ted him  for  my  glory,  I  have  formed  him,  yea,  I  have  made  him." 
However  this  be,  the  work  of  creation  is  "a  transient  act  of  God's 
almighty  power,  by  which  he  produced  the  whol**  universe,  without 
any  previous  matter,  only  by  his  powerful  word,  in  the  space  of  six 
successive  days,  to  the  glory  of  his  name." 

In  order  to  explain  the  work  of  creation  we  must  consider,  (1) 
what  was  created,  (2)  Of  what  it  was  created,  (3)  By  whom,  and  by 
-what  power,  (4)  The  act  of  creating,  (5)  The  time,  and  (5)  The 
end  or  design  of  the  creation. 

1.  We  must  inquire  in  the  first  place  what  was  created.  It  was 
"  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  the  sea,  and  all  that  therein  is,"  accord- 
ing to  our  text.  *'  Things  visible  and  invisible,"  Coll.  i.  16,  Indeed 
there  is  not  any  thing  that  exists  without  God  of  itself,  and  that  was 
not  created  :  all  these  things  arc  called  with  one  word,  the  world, 
and  the  universe.  Although  this  world  is  exceedingly  great,  and  we, 
on  account  of  our  weakness,  do  not  know  the  bounds  of  it,  neverthe- 
less we  may  not  say  that  the  world  is  infinite  ;  for  we  should  then 
be  obUged  to  say  also  that  it  could  not  have  been  made  greater  by 
Cod,  inasmuch  as  nothing  can  be  added  to  that  which  is  infinite  : 
moreover,  the  world  cannot  be  infinite,  because  it  consists  of  finite 
parts,  which  cannot  have  place  in  that  which  is  infinite  :  infinity  is  a 
perfection  that  belongs  to  God  only,  and  it  cannot  be  communicated 


I^ 

to  any  creature.  It  is  ulso  exceedingly  absurd  to  say  that  there  cbuld 
not  be  more  worlds  made  than  this,  becaue  we  cannot  conceive  or 
imagine  any  space  beyond  this  world,  in  which  other  worlds  might; 
be  placed  :  for  as  it  was  no  rontradiction,  that  God  created  this  world, 
where  there  was  no  space  before,  so  it  is  no  contradiction,  that  God, 
at^reeably  to  his  inexhaustible  omnipotence,  should  produce  other 
worlds,  where  there  is  no  space  at  present.  * 

2.  But  of  what  was  this  beautiful  world  created  ?  we  must  say  that 
all  things  were  created  out  of  nothing,  by  which  vye  do  not  meau 
that  '^  nothing  was  a  certain  matter,  out  of  which  all  things  were 
produced  :  but  that  all  things  were  created  by  God's  powerful  Word, 
%\'ithout  any  previous  matter  :  "  God  calleth  the  things  which  be  not, 
as  though  they  were,"  Rom.  iv.  17.  "Through  faith  we  understand 
that  the  worlds  were  formed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so  that  things 
which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear,"  Heb.  xi. 
3.  Therefore  it  is  detestable  in  Vorstius  and  the  Socinians,  to  con- 
ceive that  the  earth  was  made  of  that  unshapely  mass,  "which  was 
without  form  and  void,"  Gen.  i.  2,  when  nevertheless  Moses  had 
said  before  he  mentioned  that,  "  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth  in  the  beginning,"  vrs.  1.  heaven  perfect  at  its  first  production; 
but  the  earth  without  form  and  void.  Others  fancy  that  the  world 
was  created  of  some  unsightly  matter,  which  had  neither  form  nor 
any  sightly  appearance^  and  that  this  is  called,  by  Paul  me  phainom- 
cna,  "  the  things  which  are  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  3.  but  that  text  doth 
not  say,  ek  me  fihainomena^  oi"  things  which  are  not  seen  ;  but  me  ek 
phainomena^  not  of  things  that  are  seen,  which  is  very  different.  Let 
us  allov/  that  he  speaks  of  things,  which  are  not  seen  ;  but  things 
which  are  not  seen,  are  things  which  do  not  exist :  "  It  was  never 
so  seen  in  Israel,"  said  the  multitude  wondering  at  Christ,  when  be 
cast  the  devil  out  of  the  dumb  man,  and  caused  the  dumb  man  to 
speak.  Matt.  ix.  oo.  And  what  would  the  multitude  say,  but  that  it 
had  never  been  so  in  Israel.  The  apostle  showeth  that  "  the  worlds 
were  framed  by  the  word  of  God  ;"  but  what  doth  thjs  mean  but  by 
his  power,  without  any  previous  matter ;  but  to  such  sentiments 
must  these  men  decline,  that  they  may  unsinew,  with  a  certain  ap- 
pearance of  reason,  our  argument  for  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  from  their  eternity.  Even  the  smallest  atoms  of  the 
world  had  their  beginning,  and  were  created  by  God,  Prcv.  viii.  26. 

*  Tho  author  opposes  here  the  opinions  of  the  Cartesjfans,  wlio  deny  ibat 
there  is  any  void  space  in  nature,  or  that  there  ever  hath  been  ;  and  assert 
that  the  world  is  infinite  in  extension,  and  wai  P?v-r;Vjgl««?s  rrfated.  He 
•%rg;n»s  "c;^'n»  t  them  open  their  own  rrinc'p)<*r-. 


in  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

otherwise  the  world  would  have  existed  from  eternity,  and  thus  also 
be  God.  When  we  say  that  the  worlo  was  created  out  of  nothing,  * 
we  mean  that  the  work  of  the  first  day  was  abboh;tely  out  of  nothinjj, 
without  the  least  previous  m^Uer  ;  but  the  work  of  the  following 
days  of  a  matter  altogether  unfit,  which  was  as  unfit  as  nothing  to 
make  such  a  beautiful  world  of  it. 

3.   We  can  now  see  by  whom,  and  by  what  power  all  things  were 
created:  "  He  that  built  all  things  is  God,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  iii   4. 
It  is  a  silly  opinion  of  the  Jews,  that  the  angels  were  felk.w-workers 
with  God.     The  Arians  held  that  Christ  was  an  organ  and  instru- 
ment of    God  in    creation,    und  the   Socinians  pretend  that  God 
could  produce  a  creature,  whieh  would  be  so   ])owerful,  that  he  could 
create  the  world  by  it,  that  they  may  thus    evade  our  argument  for 
the  Godhead  of  the  Son  and   Hoiv  Cihost  from  their  work  of  crea- 
tion :  but  it  is  most  d. testable;  in  the  mass-priests,  to  imagine  that 
they  can  create  their  Creator  of  bread  and  wine,   and  that  only  by 
muttering  fiive  words.     No,  tiie  Lord  God  alone  is  the  Creator,  and 
he  glorits  in  it,   Isniah  xhv.  24.  ''  I  am  the   Lord  that  maketh  all 
things  ;  that  stielcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone,    and  that   spreadeth 
abroad  the  earth  by  myself."  I'herefore  the  Lord  God  is  distinguish- 
ed from  the  idols  by  creation,  and  it  is  proved  therefrom,  that  they 
are  not  Gods,   Psuim  xcvi.  5.  Jer.  x.  11.     To  create  is  a   work  of 
almighty  power  ;  therefore  we  must  all  confess  that  he  is  an  almighty 
Maker,  as  "  Ciod's  eternal  power  and  Godhead  are  also  understood 
by  the  thmgs  that  he  hath  made,"  Rom.  i.  20.    He  who  shall  create 
must  possess  in  himself  eminently  and  actually  all  the  perfections  of 
all  the  creatures :  and   who  is  able   to  remove  the  infinite  distance 
between  something  and  nothing,  but  he   who  possesseth  an  infinite 
power  ?  No  creature  can  be  even  an  instrument  of  God  in  creating, 
since  an  instrur^ient  must  hdve  a  fit  matter  for  its  work,  and  this  can- 
not sxist  in  creating.      Although  creation  is  ascribed  also  to  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  it  is  particularly  the  work  of  the  Father,  as 
we  have  shown  above,  and  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day. 

4.  The  act  of  God,  whereby  he  created  was  not,  that  he  impress- 
ed a  certain  physical  motion  upon  matter,  which  did  then  produce 
such  a  world,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  motion,  and  God's  ordinary 
co-operation  ;  but  the  work  of  creation  was  performed,  ( 1 )  by  God's 
powerful  and  effectual  wordy  whereby  he  commanded  the  cieature  to 
exist,  and  so  gave  it  existence :  "  God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and 
there  was  light,"  Gen.  i.  3.  See  also  Psalm  xxxiii.  9.  (2)  By  giving 
such  an  order  and  disposition  to  the  creatures,  that  each  creature 
ihould,  in  consequence  thereof,  be  and  work  according  to  its  nature 


IX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  26.  J99 

and  disposition  :  thus  the  earth  should  be  disposed  to  fruitfulness, 
Gen.  i.  i  K  and  the  hc;hts  to  disiin^^iiish  the  times,  and  to  give  light 
upon  the  earth,  Gen.  i.  14 — 18.  '^3)  By  establishing  all  things  in 
such  a  manner,  that  they  should  remain  fixed  and  steadfast :  thus 
"  God  hath  established  the  earth,  and  it  abideth  :  all  things  continue 
this  day  accordin;,  to  his  ordinances,  for  all  are  his  servants,"  Psalm 
cxix.  90,  91.  See  also  Gen.  viii,  22.  Jer.  xxxi.  35,  36.  xxxiii.  20.  (4) 
By  God's  approbation  and  blessing,  by  which  he  blessed  the  creutures^ 
that  they  might  be  useiul  to  the  generations  following  :  thus  God 
blessed  the  earth,  beasts  and  men,  so  that  they  became  fruitful,  Gen. 
i.  11,  12,  22,  28. 

5,  But  when  did  God  create  the  world?  Moses  saith,  *' In  the 
beginning,"  Gen.  i.  1,  namely,  in  the  beginning  of  time,  which  was 
when  the  creatures  began,  so  that  we  find  an  earlier  or  later  date 
only  in  the  first  existence  and  continuance  of  the  creatures  ;  for  we 
cannot  conceive  of  any  time  before  the  beginning  of  the  creatures, 
but  only  an  unbounded  eternity.  We  leave  it  to  others  to  inquire 
how  long  it  is  since  the  world  was  created,  in  what  season  of  the 
year,  whether  in  the  spring  or  autumn,  how  long  God  was  engaged 
each  day,  a  moment,  or  lon^yjer.  or  a  whole  day  :  there  are  many  who 
enlarge  much  on  these  things  ;  we  only  say,  that  although  God  the 
Lord  was  able  to  produce  the  whole  world  in  a  moment,  in  a  perfect 
state,  it  nevertheless  pleased  him  to  employ  six  days  upon  it,  that 
We  might  contemplate  his  several  works  with  the  greater  attention. 
On  the  first  day  God  created  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  light,  GeTX, 
i.  i — 5,  and  undoubtedly  the  angels  also  in  heaven,  Job  xxxviii.  6,  7. 
On  the  second  day  he  created  the  firmament,  and  divided  the  waters, 
which  were  above  the  firmament,  from  the  waters  which  were  below 
the  firmament.  Gen.  6,  7,  8.  God  did  not  bless  the  second  day,  but 
he  bestowed  a  double  blessing  on  the  third  day,  because  the  work  of 
the  second  day  was  completed  by  the  work  of  the  third  day,  ''to  wit, 
the  sea,  the  herbs  and  plants,  ch.  i.  9^ — 13.  On  the  fourth  day,  God 
created  the  sun,  moon  and  stars,  ch,  i.  14— -19  ;  on  the  fifth  day, 
the  fishes  and  fowls,  ch.  i.  20 — 23  ;  and  on  the  sixth  day  he  created 
the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  last  of  all  man,  because  the  Lord  would 
introduce  him  into  a  plentiful  habitation,  and  thus  manifest  that  he 
had  created  aU  things  for  the  good  of  man,  ch.  i.  24 — 31.  On  the 
seventh  day  God  rested,  ch.  ii.  2  ;  not  because  he  was  weary  :  "The 
Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  ea'th  fainteth  not,  neither  is  be  weary," 
Isaiah  xl.  28.  But  it  is  said  that  God  rested,  because  he  ceased  to 
produce  new  kinds  of  creatures,  and  solaced  himself  in  his  works, 
inasmuch  as  they  displayed  his  glory  in  its  proper  lustre,  Exod.  xxxi- 


S^  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER, 

17.  This  rest  God  prescribed  as  a  pattern  to  man,  requiring  that 
he  should  rest  every  seventh  day  from  his  daily  labour,  after  the  ex- 
ample of  his  Creator ;  and  thus,  separating  himself  from  all  besides, 
solace  himself  in  God.  See  Gen.  ii.  2,  3.  Exod  xx.  8 — 11.  Isaiah 
Iviii.  13,  13. 

6.  Finally,  we  must  know  that  God  the  Lord,  who  h  perfectly 
wisL*,  did  not  create  all  these  things  without  a  holy  and  great  end. 
Solomon  saith,  Prov.  xvi.  4.  "  The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for 
himself;  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evih"  This  doth  not 
imply  that  God  had  need  of  the  creatures,  in  order  to  perfect  his 
glory  :  for  "  he  is  not  worshipped  by  men's  hands,  as  though  he 
needed  any  thing,  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  life,  and  all  things;"  Acts 
xvii.  25.  No  creature  can  be  profitable  to  God  ;  it  is  no  advantage 
to  the  Almighty,  tha^  any  one  ib  righteous,  neither  is  it  gain  to  him, 
that  he  maketh  his  w^iys  perfect :  our  goodness  extendeth  not  to 
him  ;  he  is  exalted  above  all  honour  and  praise,  but  because  he  is 
good,  therefore  he  v/ould  communicate  himself,  that  his  eternal 
power,  Godhead  and  glory  might  be  seen  and  acknowledged  ;  God 
hath  therefore  impressed  his  glory  upon  all  the  inanimate  and  irra- 
tional  creatures,  and  endowed  rational  men  viith  his  image,  that  all 
might  thank  and  glorify  the  Creator,  according  to  their  nature.  See 
this  Psalm  xix  1 — 5,  and  Psalm  viiu  Have  mankind  departed  from 
God,  and  honoured  and  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator. 
%vho  is  blessed  for  evermore,  the  Lord  hath  nevertheless  not  failed  of 
his  end,  inasmuch  as  he  manifests  his  power,  justice  and  longsuffer- 
ing  ift  the  vessels  of  wrath,  fitted  to  destruction  ;  and  displays  the 
riches  of  his  glory  in  his  power,  v/isdom,  and  inconceivable  gi'ace  in 
the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  he  had  b-fore  prepared  for  glory  :  for 
surely  God  hath  filled  the  world  with  men,  that  he  may  gather  a  peo- 
ple out  of  them,  in  whom  he  will  be  glorified  ;  for  it  would  other- 
wise appear  as  if"  Cod  had  created  all  the  children  of  men  in  vain," 
Psalm  Ixxxix.  48.  Isaiah  xlv.  17,  18.  Eph.  iii.  9.  And  verily  if 
God  had  not  intended  this,  the  world  would  long  ere  now  have  been 
destroyed  in  a  dreadful  manner ;  but  the  Lord  is  longsuffering  to- 
ward us,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come 
to  repentance,"  2  Peter  iii.  9.  God  the  Father  doth  also  "  uphold 
ind  govern  the  world,  which  he  hath  created,  by  his  eternal  counsel 
and  providence,"  as  the  in^itructo^  saith  heie  ;  but  of  this  he  treats 
more  particularly  ^n  the  following  Lord's  day. 

II.-  The  believing  exercise  of  a  Christian  with  recpect  to  the  object 
proposed,  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker,  is  that  he  believes  in 
him.     II':  doth  not  say,  <*  we"  believe,  as  he  saith,  when  he  prays. 


^m 

*-  out  "  Father ;  but  "  I  "  believe,  because  we  can  indeed  pray  for 
another,  but  we  canriot  believe  for  another  :  "  The  righteous  shall 
live  by  his  faith,"  Hab.  ii.  4.  To  believe  in  God  the  Father,  the 
Almighty  Maker  is. 

1.  Ariously  to  hold  upon  the  declaration  of  God,  ail  the  foregoing 
particuiarb  to  be  true.     It  is  indeed  manifest  from  reason,  that  God 
created  the  world  out  of  nothing,  inasmuch   as  it  cannot  exist  of 
itself,  but  must  have  an  allsufficieni  cause,  as  "the  heathens  also  un- 
derstood and  clearly  saw  the  invisible  things  of  God,  even  bis  eternal 
power  and  Godhead,  by  the  things  that  are  made,"   Rom.  i.  20- 
Nevtirtheless  v/e  obtain  a  clearer  knowledge  of  this  by  the  testimony 
of  God,  that  he  created  all  these  things  out  of  nbthmg,  and  in  such 
a  manner  :  for  "  through   faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were 
framed  by  the  Word  of  God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not 
made  of  things  which  do  appear,"  Heb.  xi,  3.  Verily  reason  cannot 
teach  us  that  the  God  and   Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
hath  such  an  inconceivable  purpose   to  save  sinners,  is  the  Creator ; 
this  is  "  hidden   from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and   is  revealed  unto 
babes,  according  to  the  sovereign  good  pleasure  of  God,"   Matt,  xio 
25,  26.     See  also  John  i.  18.     And  our  holding  that  this  revelation 
is  truth,  ife  believing  in   God  the  Father,   Almighty  Muker  in  the 
sense  of  the  Creed  ;  for  thus  we  "  receive  the  testimony  of  God,  and 
set  to  our  seal  that  he  is  true,"  John  iii.  33.     But  do  not  the  devils 
also  believe  this  and  tremble  ?  yes,  according  to  the  divine  declara- 
tion, James  iii.  9.     For  this  reason  the  Christian's  faith  proceedeth 
further  ;  yea,  he  believes  that  God  the  Father,  Almighty  Maker  is 
also  his  God  and  Father  for  Christ  his  Son's  sake.  It  is  true,  it  is  no 
where  said  to   this  and   that  person  in   particular,  that  God  is  his 
Father  in  Christ :  nevertheless  God  testifieth  in  his  word,  that  "  to 
as  many  as  receive  his  Son,  he  gives  power  to  becorhe  the  sons  of 
God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name,". John  i.  12i.    When  a 
believer  examines  his  actions,  and  the   Holy  Ghost  enables  him  to 
"  know  the  things  that  are  freely  given  him  of  God,"  according  to 
1  Cor.  ii.  12,   he  then  perceives  that  he  hath  truly  received  the  Son 
of  God  by  faith,  from  which  he  safely  concludes  that  he  is  a  child  of 
God,  and  "the   Spirit  of  God  also  beareth  witness  to  this  with  his 
spirit,"  Rom.  viii.  16.     And  his  faith  depends  thus  upon  the  witness 
of  God,  he  admires  and  rejoices  in  "  the  great  love  of  the  Father," 
manifested  to  him,  that  he  is  called  "  n  child  of  God,"  I  John  iii.  I. 
2.  To  believe,  denotes  here  to  commit  and  confide  our  whole  con- 
dition in  every  circumstance  to  God  our  Father,  Almighty  Maker? 
as  David  exhorteth,  Psalm  xxxvii.  5.     "Commit  thy  way  unto  the 

Ff 


202  FAITfl  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

Lord  ;  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass,"  See  1  Peter 
iv.  19.  V.  7.  Is  the  believer  in  want  of  any  thing  with  respect  to 
soul,  or  body,  he  is  not  anxiously  careful,  and  he  doth  not  say,  "  What 
shall  we  eat,  or  what  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewithal!  shall  we  be 
clothed  r"  Matt.  vi.  31,  for  he  doubts  not  but  that  his  Father  will 
provide  him  Avith  all  that  he  needs:  "at  destruction  and  famine  he 
'lau?"hs,"  Job  V.  ti2.  This  confidence  causes  him  sometimes  to  say, 
*'  rvlthou^h  the  fi^-*ree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in 
(he  vines,  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield 
no  meat,  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be 
no  herd  in  the  stalls,  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the 
God  of  my  salvation,"  Hab.  iii.  17,  18.  Yea,  he  confides  and  doubts 
not  but  that  his  Father  will  cause  all  the  evils,  which  he  sends  upoa 
him  in  this  valley  of  tears,  to  turn  out  to  his  advantage  :  for  "  we 
know  that  all  things  work  to:^ether  for  good  to  them  that  love  God," 
Rom.  viii.  23.  "  The  Lord  chastens  them  who  are  his  for  their 
profit,  that  they  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness,"  Heb.  xii.  10.  And 
therefore  "  they  glory  in  tribulation,  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh 
patience  ;  and  patience  experience  ;  and  experience  hope  ;  and  hope 
mdkcth  not  ashamed,"  &c.  Rom.  v.  3,  4,  5.  This  confidence  is  not 
a  sinful  indifference,  nor  a  secure  imagination,  but  an  active  reposing 
on  the  Lord  upon  certain  grounds,  which  are,  in  the  first  place, 
that  the  Lord  "  can"  do  this,  being  almighty  God."  However  un- 
likely it  may  appear  to  him,  that  he  should  be  delivered,  nevertheless 
he  will  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings,  because  he  hath  a  lively  appre- 
hensioi  of  God's  almighty  power,  by  which'  he  created  all  things^ 
and  '*  for  whom  nothing  is  too  hard,"  as  God's  almighty  creating 
power  supported  Jeremiah,  Jer.  xxxii.  1 7.  See  this  also  in  Abraham, 
Rom.  iv.  17,  21.  But  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  infer  from  God's 
almighty  power  that  he  will  do  any  thing,  so  long  as  we  are  not  as- 
sured that  he  is  willing,  therefore  the  true  Christian  assumes,  as  his 
second  ground  of  confidence,  that  "  God  is  willing,  being  a  faithful 
Father."  He  knows  that  God  is  his  Father,  that  he  hath  taken  upon 
him  to  provide  for  his  children,  and  hath  promised  them  all  things  ; 
the  Chiistian  having  a  clear  conviction  of  these  things,  cannot  doubt 
but  that  his  Father  will  keep  truth  for  ever,  and  provide  for,  and  pro- 
tect him  sufficiently.  Our  Lord  Jesus  recommends  this  ground  to 
the  children  of  God,  when  he  saith,  Matt.  vii.  I  U  "  If  ye,  being  evil, 
know  how  to  give  gOx5d  gifts  to  your  children,  how  much  more  shall 
your  Father,  which  is  in  heaven,^  give  good  things  to  them  that  ask 
him  r"  Matt.  vii.  11.  "         . 


 


APPLICATION. 


May  not  the  believer  now  speak  of  his  happiness,  and  i};lory  in  it, 
that  he  may  thus  believe  in  God  tiie  Falser,  Almighty  Maker  ?  Had 
not  the  holy  Psalmist  sufficient  reason  to  say,  "  Happy  is  he  that 
hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  tiie  Lord  his 
God  :  which  made  heaven  and  earth,  the   sea,  and  all  that  therein 
is  :  which  keepeth  truth  for   ever."    Psalm   cxlvi.   5,  6.     Such  an 
Almighty  Maker  is  his  God  :  "  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose  God  is 
the  Lord  :  the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  inheritance," 
Psalm  xxxiii,  12.  Because  the  Lord  had  nothing  more  precious  than 
himself,  therefore  he  hath  given  himself  to  him,  saying  in  his  cove- 
nant, "  I  will  be  a  God  to  thee  ;"  on  this  account  he  hath  made  him 
a  vessel  of  honour,  and  an  object  of  all  his  l^indness,  hath  given  his 
Son  to  be  his  surety,  hath  established  a  covenant  bf  grace  with  him, 
and  bestowed  on  him   from  that  covenant  all  the  sure  mercies  of 
David.     And  as  if  this  were  yet  too  little,  the   Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  his  God  and  Father,  "  of  whose  nature  he  is  become 
a  partaker:  his  Maker  is  his  husband,  whose  name  is  the  I  or..'  of 
hosts  ;    he  is  of  the  household  of  God,  and  an  heir  of  God  :  behold, 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  uponjas,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  sons  of  God,"  1  John  iii.  1.  Yea,  believers,  what- 
ever belongs  to  your  Father  belongs  also  to  you  ;  for  "  all  Is  yours  ; 
whether  Paul,  or  A  polios,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death, 
or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  ;  all  are  yours  ;  and  ye  are 
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's,"  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22,  23.     Will   ye  now 
still  be  concerned  about  what  ye  shall  eat  or  drink  ?  "  He  that  spared 
not  his  owri  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
■with  him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?"  Rom.  viii.  32.     Will  ye  now 
yet  let  your  heads  hang  down  on  account. of  the  evils  that  befall  you? 
no  ;  they  are  your  Father's  gracious  cjiastisements  for  your  good, 
and  he  will  deliver  you  out  of  them :  "  He  shall  deliver  thee  in  six 
troubles;  yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee,"  Job  v.   19. 
How  safely  may  ye  rely  on   ycur  Father's  power,  will  and  faithful- 
ness, and  indulge  a  sweet  aad  quiet  confidence,  like  David  !  Psalra 
xxiii  4.  *'  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
I  will  fear  no  evil ;  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they 
comfort  me."  ^ 

I3ut  dost  thou  and  thou  believe  that  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  is  also  thy  God 
and  Father?  or  do  thy  thonghtn  not  as(iend  so  high  as  this  ?  or  dost 


9^4  FAITH  IM  GOD  THE  FATHERc 

thou  hope  that  this  is  so,  because  it  is  so  desirable  a  case  ?  or  dost 
thou  not  doubt  of  it,  because  thou  hast  forced  thyself  by  a  strong 
imagination  to  believe  it  ?  But  hast  thou  any  ground  for  this  belief 
of  thine  ?  or  dost  thou  believe  only  because  thou  thinkest  that  tho\t 
oug'itest  not  to  doubt  ?  butrought  not  a  person  to  doubt  when  in  an 
affair  of  so  trreat  importance,  he  h?.th  no  ground  for  his  faith,  and 
when  so  many  deceive  themselves,  and  v/hen  deceiving  ourselves  is 
so  dangerous  here  ?  Or  dost  thou  say,  I  have  a  ground  ?  but  what 
IS  thy  ground  ?  that  thou  art  a  member  of  the  church  of  God,  that 
thou  art  devout,  not  so  wicked  as  this  or  that  person,  and  that  thou 
hast  many  virtues  ?  But  did  not  the  Pharisee  proceed  so  far  ;  Luke 
xviii.  10,  11,  and  was  he  a  child  of  God?  surely  no;  for  he  v/ent 
down  to  his  house  unjustified.  Or  is  it  thy  ground,  that  God  bles- 
seth  and  provideth  for  thee  more  than  for  others  ?  But  how  doth 
>^saph  complain,  Psalm-lxxiii.  1^.  '<  Behold,  these  are  the  ungodly, 
who  prosper  in  the  world,  they  increase  in  riches."  The  wisest  of 
the  sons  of  men  said,  Prov.  i.  32.  "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  de- 
stroy them."  Or  dost  thou  think  the  Lord  visits  me  with  so  many 
evils  in  this  valley  of  tears,  and  I  must  suffer  so  much  here,  that  I 
shall  not  need  to  suffer  hereafter,  *'  For  whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  v/hom  he  receiveth,"  according 
to  Heb.  xii.  6,  but  "the  wicked  have  also  many  sorrows,"  as  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart  saith,  Psalm  xxxii.  10.  And  what  thinkest 
thou,  would  not  one,  who  is  a  child  of  God,  have  striven  more  to 
become  such  au  one,  than  thpu  perhaps  hast  done  ?  wouldest  thou, 
if  thou  vvAt  a  child  of  God,  coiiitent  thyself  so  with  the  creatures^ 
and  pursue  afier  them  more  than  after  the  Creator,  yea.  employ  the 
creatures  of  God  against  him,  as  instruments  of  unrighteousness  ? 

All  ye  then,  who  neither  are,  nor  do  aught  else  than  thus,  "  ye  are 
not  his  children,  but  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  as  Moses 
said  to  the  carnal  Israelites,  Deut.  xxxii.  5.  Is  God  your  Maker 
and  Father  by  creation,  it  doth  nqt  pro.it  you,  because  ye  do  not 
know,  seek»nor  love  him  :  yea,  if  ye  remain  as  ye  are,  he  will  not  re- 
gard the  misery  that  will  betide  you.  Hear  what  the  Lord  himself 
saith,  and  regard  it,  that  ye  may  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  Isaiah 
xxvii.  11.  *^  It  is  a  people  of  no  understanding  ;  therefore  he  that 
made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  them,  and  he  that  formed 
Ihem  will  show  them  no  favour." 

Therefore  be  more  earnestly  desirous  to  have  God  for  your  Fa- 
ther ;  <«  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  litrle,"  as  the  Psalmist  cries  to  yoi?, 
ipsalm  ii.  \^, 


 

I  know  exceedingly  well  that  many  sincere  believers,  though  they 
have  even  the  truest  grounds  of  confidence,  do  still  doubt,  and  dar^ 
not  firmly  believe  for  themselves,  that  the  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Almighty  Maker,  is  also  their  God  and  Far 
ther.  But  what  is  the  reason,  ye  weak  believers,  that  ye  dare  not 
hold  fast  the  confidence,  and  the  rejoicing  of  your  hope  firm  unto 
the  end  ?  is  this  privilege  too  great  for  you,  that  so  great  and  wor- 
thy a  God,  Father,  and  Maker,  is  your  God  and  Father  ?  Well,  the 
Lord  God  doth  only  great  things,  and  that  to  the  most  unworthy  i  if 
this  be  not  too  great  for  God  to  give,  let  it  not  be  too  great  for  you 
to  receive.  Or  is  it  your  thouglit,  that  if  the  Lord  God  were  your 
Father,  he  would  not  inflict  so  many  evils  on  you  ?  that  ye  should 
not  lack  so  many  things,  which  ye  need  for  your  soul  and  body  ? 
but  is  not  the  gate  straight,  and  the  way  naiTOW  that  leadeth  unto 
life  I  lead  the  book  of  God  from  the  begmning  to  the  end,  and  see 
whether  there  ever  hath  been  a  child  of  God,  to  whom  the  waters  of 
affliction  have  not  been  Wrung  out  in  full  cups.  To  experience 
no  affliction,  is  rather  an  evidence  ^hat  a  person  is  a  bastard  than 
a  son. 

Conje  hither  then,  and  behold  neat  ^t  hand  the  true  grounds  upon 
which  a  person  may  believe  that  he  is  a  cfiild  of  God,  and  examine 
yourselves  by  them,  and  see  whether  y?  have  no  foundation  to  be- 
lieve that  this  is  your  great  privilege. 

1.  lie  who  is  a  child  of  God,  hath  chosen  the  Lord  God  alone, 
and  above  all  others  for  his  God  and  Father,  and  is  satisfied  with 
him  alone,  as  that  afflicted  person  declared  of  himself,  Psalm  Ixxiii, 
25,  26,  "  Wiiom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  dasire  besides  thee,  iA>ly  <iesh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but 
God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever."  Can  ye 
deny  that  ye  have  done  this  sincerely  and  heartily  ;  yea,  frequently, 
and  that  ye  still  do  it  ?  can  your  souls  find  satisfaction,  rest  and 
tranquility  out  of  the  Lord  ? 

2.  He  who  is  a  child  of  God  hath  detached  himself  from  all  things, 
yea,  from  himself,  and  hath  surrendered  himself  to  the  Lord,  to  be 
his  property,  and  to  be  wholly  at  his  service.  This  was  foretold  con- 
cerning these  days,  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  •'  One  shall  say,  I  am  the 
Lord's  ;  and  another  shal!  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  ;  and 
another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  to  the  Lord,  and  surname  him- 
self by  the  name  of  Israel."  Ye  cannot  surely  deny  tliis,  ye  are  con- 
scious that  ye  have,  with  the  straui^ers,  '*  joined  yourselves  to  the 
Lord,"  not  only  to  be  saved,  but  also  '*  to  serve  him,  to  love  the  name 
qf  the  Lord,  to  be  his  servants."     **  Now  to  these  the  Lord  would 


205  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FATHER. 

give  a  name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters."     See  Isaiah 
Ivi.  3,  6« 

3.  He  who  is  a  child  of  God  hath  also  received  the  Son  of  God 
by  faith,  John  i.  12,  "As  many  as  received  him,  to  them  he  gave 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  lo  them  that  believe  on  his 
name."  See  also  Gal.  iii.  26.  Is  any  thing  indeed  more  evident  to 
3'ou,  than  (when  ye  were  concerned  about  your  damnable  condition, 
were  bowed  down  to  the  dust,  and  did  not  find  the  life  of  your  hand, 
and  said,  there  is  no  hope,)  that  ye  were  then  truly  urged  to  him  by 
an  insatiable  desire,  that  ye  cast  yourselves  upon  him,  received  him, 
and  united  yourselves  to  him,  that  ye  might  be  found  in  him  only 
and  might  have  his  righteousness.  Let  your  souls  then  be  ai  length 
established,  and  cast  not  away  your  confidence,  whicr.  hath  a  great 
recompence  of  reward. 

Is  the  God  and  Father  of  out  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  made  hea- 
ven and  earth,  and  ail  that  in  them  is  out  of  nothing,  yourGod  and 
Father  ?    conduct  yourselves  then  worthily  of  him,  and  therefore, 

1.  See  what  he  hath  done  for  you,  that  ye  may  perceive  to  your 
joy  and  satisfactiojil^  and  with  admiration,  his  transcendent  wisdom, 
power,  good^^  love  and  free  grace,  in  all  his  doings,  and  espe- 
cially in  creaTmg  and  furnishing  such  a  glorious  and  illustrious 
world :  So  the  sweet  Psalmi&t  acted  ;  "  How  great  are  thy  works, 
()  Lord  I  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all  :  the  earth  is  full  of 
thy  riches  ;  my  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet ;  I  will  be  glad  in 
the  Lord,"  Psaim  civ.  24.  34.  Therefore  he  also  cried  out  with  a 
heart  filled  with  the  praises  of  God,  "  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  made  me 
glad  through  thy  work  :  I  will  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  liands. 
O  l-.ord,  how  great  are  thy  works  !  and  thy  thoughts  are  very  deep," 
Psalm  xcii.  5,  6,  We  ought  certainly  pot  to  be  worse  than  the  hea- 
thens, <'  who  understood  and  saw  clearly  by  the  creatures,  the  invisible 
things  of  God,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead,'*  Rom.  i.  20. 
Even  *'  the  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;" 
•liov.' shameful  *vould  it  be  then,  that  "  Israel  should  not  know,  and 
that  the  people  of  God  should  not  consider."  See  Isaiah  i.  3,  Yea, 
the  inanimate  "  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firma- 
ment showeth  his  handy  work,"  Psalm  xix.  I.  And  shall  ye,  who 
are  the  children  of  God,  be  dumb  here  ?  the  Lord  hath  formed  you, 
that  ye  should  show  forth  his  praise  ;  let  youi'  souls  then  awake  up, 
and  endeavour  to  know  and  to  praise  the  Lord,  in  all  your,  yea,  also 
in  all  his  ways.  Ye  are  certainly  bound  and  obliged  to  him  by  a 
thousand  bonds. 


V  -  ^Of 

■  "2.  Penetrate  also  to  the  eternal  counsel  of  p^race,  that  ye  may-see 
the  Father's  v/isdom,  holiness,  righteousness  and  love  in  it.  It  be- 
hooves you  to  stand  still  a  while  here,  that  ye  may  behold  it  in  order, 
and  may  look  into  it  ;  by  this  ye  have  become  children  of  God,  arc 
called  to  pjlory,  and  virtue,  and  are  made  "  a  chosen  pjeneration,  a 
royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people  ;  that  ye  should 
show  forth*  le  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 
into  his  marvellous  light,"  I  Peter  ii.  9.  We  may  see  more  of 
the  divine  glory  in  this,  even  in  this,  than  in  all  things  beside ;  but 
since  we  have  urged  you  to  this  duty  on  the  former  Lord's  day,  we 
will  not  enlarge  on  it  further  at  present. 

-    3.  Rely  and  doubt  not  but  that  he  will  provide  you  with  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body  ;  and  that  he  will  make  whatever  evils 
he  sends  upon  you,  in  this  \  alley  of  tsars,  turn  out  to  your   advan- 
tage.    How,  he    who  hath  provided  you  with  great  things,  will  he 
withhold  small  things  from  you  ?     Who  dares  suspect  him  of  un- 
faithfulness,  or   indifference  ?  do   evils  innumerable    compass    you 
about,  is  it  without  his   appointment  or  ordination  ?  and   when  he 
sends  these  evils  upon  you,   doth  he  then  forsake    you  ?     By   no 
means.     Hear  what  he  commands  us  to  proclaim  to  you  from  Isaiah 
xliii.  l,-2,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  he 
that  formed  thee,  ()  Israel,  Fear  not ;  for  I  have  redeemed    thee,  I 
have  called   thee  by  thy  name,  thou  art  mine  ;  when  thou   passest 
through  the  waters,  I    will  be  with    thee  ;    and  through   the    rivers, 
they  shall  not   overflow  thee :  when   thou  walkest  through  the  fire, 
thou  shalt  not  be  burnt ;  neither  shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee." 
Let  not  the  heart  of  any  one  of  you  fail,  his  God   and  Father  is  al- 
mighty and   willing  to  deliver    him  ;  "  His  hand  is   not   shortened, 
that  it  cannot  save  ;  neither  is  his  ear  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear  ;" 
this  is  his  own  declaration,  Isaiah  lix.   1.     Are    your    adversities  so 
grievous,  and  have  they  continued  so  long,   that   ye  are  weary  of 
them,  he  who  intends  to  come,  will  come,  and  he  will  show  you  that 
your  miseries  are  only  the  corrections  of  a  loving  Father,  and   his 
chastistment  will  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them 
who  are  exercised  thereby. 

4.  Devote  yourselves  now  wholly  to  his  service.  This  David 
purposed  when  he  said,  Psalm  cxvi.  16,  "  O  Lord,  truly  I  am  thy 
-servant,  I  am  thy  servant."  What  a  noble  and  exceedingly  glori- 
ous testimony  v/as  that,  which  was  given  of  those,  who  were  sent  by 
the  worthy  ecclesiastical  council  of  Jerusalem,  that  they  were  "  men 
who  had  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
Acts  XV.  26.     Whatever  ye   are,  O  beli^ivers,  yo  are  of  your  God 


£08  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  FAl  HER. 

and  Father  ;  ye  are  his  creatures,  yea,  his  children  ;  and  for  what 
end  ?  is  it  not  that  ye  may  be  wholly  for  him,  and  for  his  service  ?" 
Is  not  he  thy  Father,  who  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not  made 
thee,  and  established  thee  ?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  *'  Ye  are  his  wovk- 
manship,  created  in  Chir'st  Jestjs  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  ordained,  that  ye  should  walk  in  them,"  Eph.  ii.  10.  Ye 
stand,  as  it  were,  in  a  direct  subordination  to  him,  that  ye  should  be 
for  him  only,  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  ac- 
ceptable to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  Rom.  xii.  1. 

5.  Let  me  stir  you  up,  finally,  to  conduct  yotirselves  as  creatures  and 
children  worthy  of  such  a  God  and  Father,  Almighty  JVIaker.  Ah 
his  creatures  and  children,  it  behooves  you  to  fear  him,  and  to  trem- 
ble in  a  holy  manner  before  him  :  »*  Fear  ye  not  me,  saith  the 
Lord  ?  will  ye  not  tremble  at  my  presence,  who  have  ^placed  the 
sand  for  a  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  decree  ?"  Jer*  v.  22. 
If  ye  call  on  him  as  a  Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons,  judg- 
eth  according  to  every  man's  work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning 
here  in  fear."  Thus  ye  are  admonished,  1  Peter  i.  17.  It  behooves 
you,  as  creatures  and  children,  to  conduct  yourselves  patiently  under 
his  rod  of  correction.  *'  We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh,  who  cor- 
rected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  i  shall  we  not  much  rather 
be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live  ?"  Heb.  xii  9.  As 
creatures  and  children  we  must  also  be  obedient  to  him  in  all  things 
which  he  commands  us :  "  As  obedient  children,  not  fashioning 
yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  your  ignorance,"  as  ye 
are  exhorted,  I  Peter  io  14.  As  creatures  and  children,  ye  must 
be  like  your  Lord  and  God  :  ye  are  created  and  newmade  after  bis 
image :  therefore,  "  as  he  who  hath  called  you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  also 
holy  in  all  nianrer  of  conversation :  because  it  is  written.  Be  ye 
holy,  for  1  am  holy,"  I  Peter  i.  15,  16.  Are  ye  his  creatures  and 
children,  live  then  without  care,  and  only  for  his  hand.  It  is  the 
temper  of  children  to  be  without  concern,  and  to  seek  all  tilings  of 
their  father,  being  assured,  that  he  will  not  refuse  them  what  is  ne- 
cessary for  them.  This  our  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us,  when  he  directs 
us  to  pray,  "  Our  Fathel%  give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.'  Crea- 
tures and  children  ou.^ht  also  to  glory  in  their  God  and  Father : 
children  are  used  to  glory  m  their  father's  wisdom,  power,  riches  and 
goodness  :  but  ye,  believers,  have  the  greatest  reason  to  glory  on 
their  account :  "  The  portion  of  Jacob  is  not  like  them  ;  for  he  is 
the  former  of  all  things,  and  Israel  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance  :  the 
Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name,"  Jer.  x.  1 6.    May  not  believers  challenge 


IX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  26.  209 

^ny  one  to  show  them  a  portion  equal  to  theirs  ?  Moses  did  thus, 
Deut.  xxxii.  51."  For  their  rock  is  not  as  our  rock,  even  our  ene- 
mies themselves  bein^  judges."  Once  more  ;  creatures  and  children, 
who  have  such  a  God  and  Father,  need  not  fear  any  danger,  or  the 
malice  of  any  creature  :  your  God  and  Father  is  above  them  ;  there- 
fore do  not  fear,  or  ye  will  deny  the  supreme  power  and  goodness  of 
your  God  and  Father.  Hear  what  he  saith  to  you,  Isaiah  li.  12,  13. 
"  I,  even  I  am  he  that  comforteth  you  :  who  art  thou,  that  thou 
shoulclest  be  afraid  of  a  man,  that  shall  die,  and  of  the  son  of  man, 
who  shall  be  made  as  grass  ?  and  forgeitest  the  Lord  thy  Maker, 
that  hath  stretched  forth  the  hjeavens,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  ?"  Are  ye  despised  in  the  world,  let  it  suffice  you,  that  ye  are 
precious  in  the  eyes  of  your  God  and  Father,  the  Almighty  Maker. 
He  commands  the  angels,  his  most  worthy  creatures,  to  serve  you  : 
"  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?"  thus  asks  Paul,  Heb.  i.  14.  Are  ye 
chased  from  your  dwelling,  country  and  people,  ye  are  every  wlere 
on  your  God  and  Father's  ground  :  for  »'  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,'* 
Psalm  xxiv.  1 .  And  though  ye  were  chased  even  out  of  the  world, 
your  Father  and  God  will  provide  for  you  a  better,  a  more  spacious 
and  happy  dwellingplace  :  for,  according  to  Heb.  xi.  10,  16.  »'  He 
will  not  be  ashamed  to  be  called  your  God  ;  for  he  hath  prepared  a 
city  for  you :  and  that  city  hath  foundations,  and  tfee  builder  and 
maker  thereof  is  God  himself."  Amen. 


^  210  ) 


THE 


DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE 


X.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Acts  xvii.  28.     For  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  beings