Q.  27.    What  dost  thou  mean  by  the  providence  of  God  ? 

A.  The  Almighty  and  every  where  present  power  of  God;  Where- 
by, as  it  were  by  his  hand  he  upholds  and  governs  heaven,  earth,  and 
all  creatures  ;  so  that  herbs  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  fruitful  and 
barren  years,  meat  and  drink,  health  and  sickness,  riches  and  poverty, 
yea,  all  thinrs  come  not  by  chance^but  by  his  fatherly  hand. 

Q,  28.  What  advantage  is  it  to  us  to  know  that  God  hath  created, 
and  by  his  firovidencc  doth  still  uphold  all  things  ? 

A.  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity,  thankful  in  prosperity  ^ 
and  that  in  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we  place  our 
firm  trust  in  oar  faithful  God  and  Father,  that  nothing  shall  separafe 
us  from  his  love,  since  all  creatures  are  so  in  his  hand,  that  without 
his  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move. 


D 


AVID,  having  experienced  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  with 
respect  to  his  soul  and  body,  did  not  only  trust  that  he  would  per- 
fect that  which  concerned  him,  because  his  mercy  endured  for  ever, 
but  prayed  also  for  it,  when  he  said,  "  Forsake  not  the  works  of 
thine  own  hands,"  Psalm  cxxxviii.  8.  The  Lord  God,  being  un- 
changeable in  his  goodness  to  his  people,  as  well  as  in  his  nature,  is 
not  like  a  workman,  who  having  finished  his  work,  withdraws  hi? 


 

hand  from  it,  and  surrenders  it  to  the  care  of  others.  No,  he  con- 
tinueth  to  attend  to  his  work  ;  the  Lord  conducts  thus  with  respect 
to  the  work  of  grace  in  the  souls  of  his  people  :  "  Havintj  loved  his 
own,  he  loveth  them  to  the  end,"  John  xiii.  I.  "  His  gifts  aiid  calUng 
are  without  repentance,"  Kom.  xi.  29.  "God,  who  had  begun  a 
good  work  in  the  believing  Pliilippians,  would  also  finish  it  until  the 
day  of  Jesus  Christ,','  Philip,  i.  6.  But  the  Lord  doth  not  only  con- 
tinue to  attend  to  the  work  of  grace  m  his  people,  but  also  tojl^ 
whole  universe,  which  he  hath  created.  It  was  not  indeed  thJKie- 
sign  of  the  Lord  first  to  make  the  world,  and  presently  after  to  de- 
stroy it;  wheie  and  by  whom  should  his  glory  then  be  acknowledged, 
which  was  the  great  end  that  he  proposed  to  himself  in  makint^  the 
v/orld  ?  It  was  his  intention  to  uphold  it,  and  also  to  provide  for  it, 
that  it  might  not  perish  ;  therefore  he  is  also  called  '^  a  faithful  ( Te- 
ator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19,.  which  he  manifests  himself  to  be  by  his  provi- 
dence, by  which  ♦'  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  in  him,"  as 
Paul  teacheth  in  our  text,  Acts  xvii.  28,  He,  wishing  to  lead  the 
Athenians  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Gedl,  who  was  unknown  to  them, 
shows  that  he  is  that  God,  who  made  the  world,  and  all  the  nations 
of  men,  that  they  might  all  seek  him  ;  but  had  that  God  nov/  v/ith« 
drawn  from  the  world,  and  its  inhabitants,  and  had  he  left  them  to 
provide  for  themselves  ?  No,  he  manifested  himself  near  at  hand,  by- 
providing  for  them  ;  for,  saith  the  apostle,  "  in  him  we  live,"  8cg. 
The  instructor  conducts  also  in  this  manner  ;  for  having  taught  in 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day  the  doctrine  of  creation,  he  informs  us  now 
also  in  this  Lor's  day,  that  God  doth  not  suffer  the  created  universe 
to  proceed  at  random,  but  that  he  upholds  and  governs  it  by  his 
fatherly  hand. 

There  are  therefore  two  general  heads  here,  which  require  our 
consideration  ; 

I.  The  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  providence.  Question  27. 

II.  The  advantage  of  the  knowledge  of  creation  and  providence, 
Question  28.  " 

J.  Wiih  respect  to  the  first  general  head  we  must  attend,  1.  to 
the  signification  of  the  word  providence,  what  it  signifitth  here,  2.  to 
whom  providence  is  ascribed,  3.  to  what  providence  extends,  4.  the 
various  acts  which  constitute  the  work  of  providence,  5.  the  several- 
methods  of  pi-ovidence,  6.  the  difficulties  that  are  objected  to  the 
eflicacy^of  providence,  and  then  we  will,  7.  prove  in  general  the  truth 
of  the  doctrine  of  providence.  We  propose  so  many  particulars  for 
our  consideration,  that  we  may  avoid  a  great  number  of  subdivisions, 
v/hich  sometimes  render  subject3  obscure.. 


2n        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE, 

1 .  The  words  providence  and  provide  signify  literally  foreseeing 
and  foreknowing  a  matter,  and  thus  the  word  providence  signifies 
also  God's  foreknowledge ;  "  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  saith  James,  Acts  xv.  18.  And 
no  marvel  >  lor  God  decreed  from  eternity  that  he  would  work,  and 
hence  he  foreknows  his  work,  and  he  "  worketh  all  thirtgs  after  the 
counsel  of  his  oAvn  will,"  Eph.  i.  1 1.  Therefore  the  instructoi  had 
also  said  in  the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  "  God  upholds  and  gov- 
er"  all  things,  which  he  hath  made,  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  pro- 
vidence ;"  for  all  God's  works  are  performed  according  to  that  eter- 
nal counsel,  which  may  also  be  called  a  providence,  according  to 
Heb.  xi.  40.  *'  God  having  provided  some  better  things  for  us."  But 
we  must  not  understand  the  word  providence  in  the  present  Lord's 
day  of  God's  knowledge  and  counsel ;  for  God  also  created  the  world 
according  to  that  foreknowledge  and  counsel  ;  now,  as  creating  is 
distinct  from  God's  foreknowledge  and  counsel,  so  providence  is  also 
distinct  therefrom.  We  must  therefore  understand  this  word  here 
in  a  different  sense,  as  the  word  providei-ce  denotes  also  to  provide 
for,  and  to  take  care  of  any  thing  :  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him, 
for  he  careth  for  you,"  1  Peter  v.  7.  Thus  also  the  Hebrew  word 
jRaahy  to  see,  to  behold,  denotes  to  take  care  of,  to  provide  :  "  God 
will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering.  And  Abraham 
called  the  name  of  that  pljce  Js/iovah-Jtreh"  (the  Lord  will  provide) 
*'  as  it  is  said  to  this  day.  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  pro- 
vided," Gen.  xxii.  8,  14.  Thus  also  the  Greek  word  fironoeo,  which 
signifies  in  the  first  place  tofoiesee  and  foreknow  something  with 
our  understanding,  is  used  for  "providing  for  our  own,"  1  Tim. 
V.  8. 

2.  No  creature  can  provide  for  itself,  much  less  for  the  universe. 
Providing  for  the  universe  must  be  ascribed  to  God  only  ;  for  it  is 
a  work  of  almighty  power,  as  David  saith  of  it,  1  Chron  xxix.  12. 
"  Thou  reignest  over  all,  and  in  thy  hand  is  power  and  might :  and 
in  thy  hand  it  is  to  make  great  and  give  strengtii  to  all."  See  also 
Isaiah  xl.  26.  Which  is  not  to  be  understood  in  such  a  sense  as 
though  God  exerted  force  upon  his  creatures,  compelled  and  thwart- 
ed them  :  no,  God,  who  is  the  supreme  reason  itself,  regulates  his 
almighty  power  by  his  wisdom,  according  to  the  nature  of  his  crea- 
tures ;  "  He  is  the  only  wise  God,  to  whom  belongeth  dominion  and 
power,"  as  holy  Jude  speaks  m  his  epistle,  vrs.  25.  Moreover,  pro- 
viderxe  is  a  work  not  only  of  the  almighty,  but  also  of  the  every 
where  present  power  of  God,  who  is,  and  M'orks  immediately  with 
all  his  creatures ;  «  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us  j  for  in  him 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  21S 

we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  Acts  xvii.  2r,  2a.  And  it 
is  the  work  of  the  Father  thiouj^h  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
shice  it  is  referred  to  creation,  as  it  was  said  in  the  foregoing  Lord's 
day,  that  "the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  made  all  things, 
doth  still  uphold  and  govern  them  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  provi- 
dence," Providence  is  a  continual  creation,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  also 
refers  providence  to  his  Father,  Matt.  vi.  26 — 34.  And  this  work 
is  thus  ascribed  to  the  Father,  because  he  is  the  Father  of  all  the 
creatures,  but  especially  of  believers,  for  the  sake  of  his  Son  Christ, 
as  was  also  said  io  the  26th  question,  and  therefore  the  Father's  work 
here  is  to  be  considered  as  the  execution  of  his  dispensation  of  grace  ; 
and  whatsoever  he  bestows  upon  believers  in  his  providence,  comes 
to  them  by  his  fatherly  hand,  and  is  bestowed  from  special  love  with 
Christ,  Rom.  viii.  32. 

3.  The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all  things  that  he  hath  crea- 
ted :  to  "  the  heaven,  the  earth,  together  with  all  tl^e  creatures"  in 
general,  and  to  "  the  herbs,  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  &c.  in  par- 
ticular. That  we  may  apprehend  all  this  in  a  proper  and  orderly 
manner,  we  will  proceed  according  to  the  method  which  God  obser- 
ved in  the  six  days  creation  '  and  so  we  must  say  that  the  providence 
of  God  extends  (a)  to  the  works  of  the  first  day,  the  heaven,  the  an- 
gels, and  the  light :  "  The  Lord  covereth  himself  with  light  as 
with  a  garment,  he  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain,  he 
maketh  his  angels  spirits,  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire,"  Psalm  civ.  2 
4.  The  earth  :  "  He  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place,  and  the 
pillars  thereof  tremble,"  Job  ix.  6.  (b)  The  providence  of  God  ex- 
tends also  to  the  works  of  the  second  day,  as  the  waters  above  and 
below  ;  "  When  he  uttereth  his  voice,  there  is  a  multitude  of  waters 
ill  the  heavens  :  he  causeth  the  vapors  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of 
the  earth  ;  he  maketh  lightnings  with  the  rain  :  he  bringeth  the 
wind  out  of  his  treasuries."  See  also  Psalm  cxxxv.  7,  and  Psalm 
cxlvii.  15,  38.  Jer»  x.  13.  And  thus  he  gives  "rain  and  drought," 
the  Lord  saith,  Amos  iv.  7.  *'  I  have  withholden  the  rain  from  you, 
when  there  were  yet  three  months  to  the  harvest,  and  I  caused  it  to 
rain  upon  one  city,  and  caused  it  not  to  rain  upon  another  city  ;  one 
piece  was  rained  upon,  an^  the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not,  ^yith- 
ered."  See  Job  xxxvii.  6.  Isaiah  v.  6.  Jamts  v.  17,  1.8. (c)  The 
work  of  the  third  day  was  the  creation  of  the  heibs  and  plants..  The 
providence  of  God  extendeth  to  these  also,  and  therefore  "  herbs 
and  grass,  meat  and  drink"  come  from  God.  *'  He  causeth  the  gf ass 
to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herb  for  the  service  of  man  :  that  he  may 
bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth,  Psalm  civ.  14.    Thus  also  '*  fruit 


2  U       THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

ful  years  and  seasons"  proceed  from  the  Lord,  Acts  iv.  17  :  and  like* 
wise  "  barren  years,  when  he  muketh  the    heaven   as  iron,    and  the 
earth  as  brass,"  Lev.  xxvi.  I9.(d)     On  the  fourth  day  God  created 
the  lights  of  heaven.     He  takes  care  ol  these  also.     "  He  appointeth 
the  moon  for  seaisons,  the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down  :  he  maketh 
darkness,  and  it  is  night,"  Psalm  civ.  19,  20.     See  also  Job  ix,  7.(e) 
The  fishes  and  fowls  were  the  work  of  the  fifth  day.     And   God  at- 
tends to  these  also.     "  He  slew  the  fish  of  Egypt."   Psalm    cv  .  ^9, 
and  enabled  Peter  to  catch  a  great  multitude,  Luke  v.  5.  6.     "  He 
provideth  food  for  the  fowls,"  Jobxxxviii.  41.   Matt.  vi.   26.  yea,  the 
meanest  sparrow  falls  not  to  tlie  ground  without  your  Father,  Matt. 
X.  29. (f)     On  the  sixth  day  God  made  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and 
*'*  he  takes  care  of  oxen,"  Deut.  xxv.  4.    I  Cor.  ix.  9.     God  directs 
even  vermin,  as  we  see    in  the    lice,   frogs,   and   locusts  of  Egypt, 
*'The  locust,  the  cankerworm,  the  caterpillar,  and  the  palmerworm, 
are  God's  great  army,"  Joel  ii.  25.     But  God  orders  and  directs  es- 
pecially man,  the  chief  of  all  the  works  that  he  hath  made,  and  that 
"vvith  respect  to  his  natural  and  spiritual   condition.     With  respect 
tjo  his  natural  condition,  the  providence  of  God   extends  (2)   to  his 
birth  and  life.     How  beautifully  doth  Job  describe  the  providence  of 
God  with  respect  to  his  birth  1     "  Hast  thou  not  poured  me    cut  as 
milk,  and  curdled  me  like  cheese  ?   thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin 
an'd  flesh,  and  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews.     Thou    hast 
granted  me  life  and  favour,  and  thy    visitation  hath    preserved  my 
spirit,"  Job  X.  10,  11,  12,     (2)  To  every  occurrence,  as  "  riches  and 
poverty."     For  "  the  Lord  maketh  pour  and  maketh  rich,  he  bringeth 
low,  and  lifteth  up,"   1  Sara.  ii.  7,  "  Health  and  sickness."    For  "  he 
rnaketh  sore  and  bindeth  up  ;  he    woundeth,  and  his   hands   make 
who^c,"  Job  V.  18,     War  and  peace.     "  He  maketh  peace,  and  crea- 
tetli  evil,"  Isaiah  xlv.  7.     "  Kings  obtain    victory   of  him."    Psalm 
cxliv.  10,     '^  The  horse  is  prepared  against  the  day  of  battle  ;    but 
safety  is  of  the  Lord,"  Prov.  xxi.  31.  Yea,   the    providence  of  God 
*'num.bers  also  the  hairs  of  our  head,"  Matt.   x.  30.    Luke  xxi.  18. 

(3)  The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all  the  voluntary  actions  of 
man,  as  "  his  thoughts,  his  downsitting,  uprisiujj:,  walking,  downly- 
jng,  ways  and  words,"  Psalm  cxxxix.  3,  3,  4.  This  is  evident  also 
from  Prov.  xvi.  9.   xxi.  1.     James  iv.    ^3,  14>  15.     1  Sara.   x.    26. 

(4)  Also  to  his  death,  tlie  manner,  the  time  and  the  place  of  his 
death  are  ordered  by  God  in  his  piovidence,  according  to  his  counsel. 
So  Job  speaks  to  the  Lord  concerning  man  :  "  Seeing  his  days  are 
determined,  the  number  of  his  months  are  with  thee  ;  thou  hast  ap- 
po.Dted  his  bounds  th:.t  he  cannot   pass,"  Job  xiv.  5,     Verily  the 


B 

s^reatest  revolutions  depend  upon  the  death  of  men,  which  cannot 
happen  without  the  providence  of  God.  Did  the  Lord  add  fifteen 
years  to  the  life  of  Hezekiah,  Isaiah  xxxviii.  1 — 5,  lie  did  not  add 
them  to  the  ytars  which  he  had  decreed  that  he  should  live  ;  bwt  to 
to  the  life  of  Hezekiah,  when  he  should  otherwise  have  died  of  his 
deadly  -ickness ;  those  fifteen  years  also  showed  that  his  lifetime 
was  detennmed,  and  the  whole  procedure  of  God  in  that  affair  de- 
monstrates his  providence,  •*  Do  not  wicked  men  live  out  half  their 
days,"  as  David  speaks,  Psalm  Iv.  23,  this  doth  not  mean  that  their 
untimely  death  happens  M'ithout  the  providence  of  God,  l^ut  it  re- 
sjfects  only  a  possibility  of  their  living  longer,  and  their  injuring  and 
forfeiting  of  their  health  by  their  wickedness  ;  for  which  reason  God 
lakes  them  away  suddenly  in  his  anger.  (5)  The  providence  of 
God  extends  also  to  those  occurrences,  which  happen  to  a  man  acci- 
dentally without  any  direction  of  the  man  himself,  or  of  others  :  "  The 
disposing  of  the  lot  is  of  the  Lord,"  Prov.  xvi.  33.  Is  a  man  slain 
unawares,  "  God  delivers  him  into  the  slayer's  hand,"  Exod.  xxi, 
13.   compare  herewith,  Deut.  xix,  5. 

But  the  providence  of  God  extends  not  only  to  the  natural^  but  also 
to  the  moral  condition  of  man,  since  he  is  subject  to  God  as  his  law- 
giver :  **  The  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord 
is  our  king,"  saith  the  church,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  The  Lord  mani- 
fests this  by  establishing  his  covenant  of  works,  and  of  grace  with 
man  ;  and  thus  "  God  works  in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do  after  his 
good  pleasure,"  Philip,  ii.  13,  and  he  inflicts  a  judgment  of  blindness 
and  hardness  upon  particular  persons..  We  shall  speak  of  this  more 
fully  hereafter. 

4.  God  exerciseth  his  p-^ovidence,  either  with  respect  to  the  es- 
sence and  existence  of  his  creatures,  or  with  respet  to  their  actions,  or 
with  respect  to  their  ends,  in  their  actions. 

With  respect  to  the  essence  and  existence  of  the  creatures,  the 
providence  of  God  consists  in  upholding  them,  by  which  he  causeth 
all  things,  which  he  hath  created  to  exist,  and  continue  in  being  : 
**  The  Lord  preserveth  man  and  beast,"  Psalm  xxxvi,  6.  "  By  him 
all  things  consist."  CqU.  i.  17.  God  upholds  some  things  with  re- 
spect to  their  essence,  as  the  heaven,  angels,  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  and 
the  earth  ;  these  are  all  still  the  same  that  they  were  when  they 
were  created  and  produced  :  he  upholds  others  with  respect  to  their 
kind  by  generation,  as  men,  beasts,  herbs,  and  plants.  God  upholds 
those  things  not  merely  by  not  annihilating  and  destroying  them,  as 
a  person  may  be  said  to  preserve  a  thini^  that  he  hath  made,  when 
he  doth  not  destroy  it,  which  is  the  notion  of  the   Pelagian^  concern- 


216      THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

ing  this  matter  :  but  God  upholds  by  an  actual,  operative  and  pow- 
erful influence,  which  is  God's  almighty  and  every  where  present 
power :  for  we  cannot  otherwise  understand  how  '*  we  live,  move, 
and  have  our  being  in  God."  God's  upholding  is,  as  it  were,  his 
continual  creation,  as  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  when  they  ascribe 
honour  to  him,  Sviy,  Rev.  iv.  II,  "  Thou  hast  created  all  things, 
and  by  thy  will  they  are,  and  are  created."*  It  is  a  continual  vivifi- 
calion  of  them,  Neh.  ix.  6,  therefore  it  is  also  said.  Psalm  civ.  30, 
**  Thou  sendest  forth  thy  spirit,  they  are  created  ;  and  thou  renew* 
est  the  face  of  the  earth."  Yea,  this  upholding  is,  as  it  were,  a  bear- 
ing with  a  strong  hand  ;  "  God  beartth  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
power,  t  Heb.  i.  3  ;  otherwise  the  creature  would  perish  of  itself, 
since  it  hath  nothing  in  itself  that  causesth  it  to  exist  in  future  :  and 
annihilation  takes  place  only  when  God  withholds  his  influence : 
^'  when  he  lets  his  hand  loose,  he  cuts  man  off,"  Job  vi.  9.  See  also 
Psalm  civ.  29. 

With  respect  to  the  actions  of  the  creatures,  the  providence  6f 
God  co-operates  with  them,  whereby  he  prevents,  excites  and  main- 
tains  their  motions  and  actions,  by  an  active,  but  secret  power,  so 
that  "  they  move  in  him,  for  the  Lord  works  both  to  will  and  to  do," 
Philip,  ii.  13.  "Il  is  God  himself  who  worketh  all  in  all,"  I  Cor. 
xii.  6.  Read  this  also  emphatically,  Isaiah  x.  5,  6.  It  is  not  there- 
fore enough  to  assert  a  general  preservation  of  the  creature's  power 
and  ability  to  act,  or  a  general,  undetermining  influence,  which  is  de- 
termined by  the  creature  itself,  as  the  wind  i.npels  the  ship  forward, 
while  it  nevertheless  moves  hither  and  thither  by  the  conduct  of  the 
steersman.  It  is  moreover  not  enough  to  assert  a  co-ordinate  acting 
of  God,  with  the  actions  of  the  creature,  as  the  Pelagians  speak ;  for 
this  renders  the  creature  in  its  actions,  independent  of  God,  and  God 
dependent  in  his  act  on  the  action  of  the  creature,  which  he  must 
only  follow  :  yea,  the  Lord  God  is  not  then  the  principal,  but  the 
3ubordinate  cause. 

With  respect  to  the  end  of  the  creature,  the  providence  of  God 
works  by  governing,  whereby  God  directs,  in  a  sovereign  manner, 
every  event,  and  the  designs  of  his  creaturf;s,Jto  certain  ends,  which 
he  himself  proposeth,  according  to  certain  laws  which  he  hath  given  ; 
"  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  and  his  kingdom  is  from 
generation  to  generation. '  And  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are 
reputed  as  nothing  ;  and  he  doth  according  to  his  will   in    the  army 

*  We  have  rendered  this  passage  accorcling  to  the  Dutch  translation, 
t  This  13  according  to  the  Dutch  translation* 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  31/ 

of  heaven,  and  among  the  Inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;  and  none  can 
stay  iiis  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  whjit  dost  thou  i"  Dan.  iv.  34,  35. 
God  hath  for  this  purpose  given  his  creatures  certain  laws,  according 
to  which  he  governs  and  directs  them  ;  which  are  either  the  estab- 
lished order  of  nature,  which  God  hath  given  to  the  inanimate  crea- 
tures, so  "  that  hencefortii,  while  the  earth  remaineth,  seed-time  and 
harvest,  cold  and  heat,  summer  and  winter,  day  and  night,  shall  not 
cease,"  Gen.  viii.  22.  See  also  Jer.  xxxi.  35,  36,  or  the  natural  in- 
stinct of  animate  creatures,  according  to  which  they  perform  all 
their  actions  ;  "  Even  the  stork  in  the  hcavtns  knoweth  her  appoin- 
ted times,  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and  the  swallow  observe  the 
time  of  their  coming,"  Jer,  viii  7,  or  *'  the  royal  law,"  which  he  hath 
given  to  rational  creatures,  James  ii.  8.  Yea,  we  may  also  say,  thaS 
"the  counsel  of  the  Lord's  will,  after  which  he  worketh  all  things," 
is  the  law  of  the  Lord,  or  the  plan,  according  to  which  he  doth  all 
things.  According  to  these  laws  doth  God  govern  all  his  creatures, 
and  that  in  a  manner  suited  to  their  nature.  Doth  the  crcaiure 
swerve  in  any  instance  from  that  law,  either  by  some  miraculous  act 
of  God,  or  by  its  own  vice,  God  directs  it  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  is 
agreeable  to  his  decree,  and  issues  to  his  honour,  and  for  the  welfare 
of  the  good,  by  vvhich  the  Lord  always  obtains  the  end,  which  he 
proposeth,  even  against  the  purpose  and  end  of  the  creature.  This 
Joseph  observed,  when  he  said  to  his  brethren,  Gen.  1.  20,  **  Ye 
thought  evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  for  good."  See  Isaiah 
X.  5,6,7. 

5.  God  the  Lord  provides  for  all  his  creatures,  and  at  all  times,  in 
different  methods  ;  and  therefore  we  consider  providence,  as  (1)  me- 
diate and  immediate  :  the  mediate  providence  is  that  by  which  God 
provides  for  some  creatures  by  means.  The  Lord  saith,  Hosea  ii. 
21,  22,  "  I  will  hear  the  heavens  ;  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth  ; 
and  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil  ;  and 
they  shall  hear  Jezreel,"  See  also  Psalm  civ.  13,  14,  15,  Rom  i, 
16.  X.  17.  Immediate  providence  is  that  by  which  God  provides 
for  some  things  without  means,  as  the  third  heaven,  and  the  angels  ; 
in  this  manner  the  Lord  also  provided  for  Moses  and  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  forty  days,  without  the  means  of  meat  and  drink  ;  but  when  he 
makes  use  of  means,  he  doth  not  do  it  from  any  defect,  as  though  he 
had  need  of  them,  for  he  is  allsufficient ;  but  he  doth  it  from  his  c  ood- 
ness,  as  he  is  willing  to  honour  the  creature  by  making  it  his  fellow- 
worker.  See  1  Cor.  iii.  9,  For  he  makes  use  sometimes  of  the 
most  insignificant  means  :  three  hundred  men  sufficed  to  discomfit 
the  innumerable  host  of  the  Mtdianites.     God  sometimes  renders 

Hh 


?i«        THE  DOCTRIVE  OF  DiVlNE  PROVIt)ENC£.. 

the  most  powerful  means  inefficacious,  so  that  "  a  lun^  is  n©t  saved 
by  the  multitude  of  an  host ;  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by 
much  strength.  An  horse  is  a  vain  tiling  for  safety  :  neither  shali 
he  deliver  any  by  his  great  strength,"  Psalm  xxxili.  16,  17.  G6d 
works  somttimes  in  a  manner  that  is  above,  and  contrary  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  means  ;  for  instance,  causing  that  the  fire  doth  not  burn  and 
simge,  Dan.  iii.  And  when  God  useth  means,  their  power  doth  still 
€lepend  on  him.  See  Deut.  viii.  3.  I  Cor.  iii.  5,  6.  (2)  Provi- 
dence is  also  distinguished  into  an  ordinary  and  extraordinary.  The 
ordin  .ry  providence  is,  that  God  works  according  to  the  ordinary 
and  established  course  of  nature  :  but  the  extraordinary,  or  super- 
ordinary  is.  that  Ciod  works  sometimes  above  the  ordinary  and  es- 
t.iblished  coiirse  of  nature,  by  a  miracle :  iov  instance,  when  God 
gives  bread  frOiti  heaven  brings  water  out  of  the  rock,  makes  the 
sun  and  inooii  stand  still,  effects  that  ti^e  cruel  lions  do  not  rend  Dan- 
iel, and  that  the  hungry  ravens  brinp^  Elijah  bread  and  flesh  :  which, 
and  like  wonders,  Got!  the  L&rd  ak)fie  can  do.  according  to 
Psalm  Ixxii.  18.  Psalm  cxxxvi.  4.  Are  they  sometimes  ascribed  to 
men,  it  i-i  only  because  they  were  mere  moral  instruments  by  their 
faith  and  pray crsv  See  Acts  iii.  12,  13,  16.  Miracles  or  wonders, 
are  certain  great  events^,  which  take  place  beside  the  ordinary  laws 
at  nature,  through  the  aim  ghty  power  of  God,  for  the  confirnjation 
of  the  divine  truth  :  but  we  riiay  not  look  upon  that  as  a  miracle, 
whichapersondothby  amo^re  than  ordinary  strength,  like  Samson  ; 
lor  that  is  only  an  increase  of  strength,  which  doth  not  exist  in  a 
miracle.  .Moreover,  it  doth  not  enter  into  the  nature  of  a  miracle, 
that  we  do  not  know  the  precise  reason  of  a  thing,  and  that  it  hap- 
pens s-ldom,  as  some  bpeak,  who  are  unwilling  to  allow  that  God 
ever  doth  any  thing  beside  the  laws  of  nature,  or  contrary  to  the 
estaoiished  motions  of  matter  :  for  when  we  speak  thus,  we  lessen, 
yea,  Ave  vilify  the  great  miracles  of  God  :  at  this  rate,  there  would 
ha])pen  many  miracles  every  day,  \thich  no  man  will  consider  as 
miracles,  because  we  can  assign  'he  precise  reason  of  but  few  of 
God's  works.  Can  we  discover  the  reason  why  the  iron  swims  upon 
the  water,  the  sun  and  moon  stand  stll.  and  the  fire  dotii  not  burn  ? 
Such  wonders  hath  God  sometimes  wrought,  in  order  to  confirm 
the  truth  :  but  shall  our  ignorance  of  the  precise  reason  of  such 
things  be  a  poweiful  confirmation  of  the  divuie  truth  ?{$'>  Finally, 
we  distinguish  the  providence  ol  God  into  a  common  and  special  pro- 
vidence. The  common  providence  is  tnat  by  which  he  showeth  fa- 
vour, irom  a  common  good-will  to  all  his  creatures  ;  yea,  to  the  un- 
godly, as  well  as  .to  the  godly  :  '*  God  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on 


 

the:  evil  and  on  ihe  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  un- 
just,-' Matt.  V.  45.     The  special  providence  is  that  by  which  Cicd,  as 
a  Father  in  Christ,  from  a  special  good-will,  providrs  believers  with 
all'things  :  "  God  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  tsperitiUy  of  those  that 
believe,"  I  Tim.  iv.  10.     See  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  God  gives  in  the  leust 
f^ift  also  himself  and  his  Son  to  believers,  as  his  children  and  heirs : 
but  he  withholds  himself  from  others,  although  he  gives  them  also 
jnany  gifts,  as  we  give  a  begj^ar  an  alms  from  a  common  food  iiuli- 
nation  to  him,  but  do  not  unite  ourselves  to   him.   do  not  take  him 
into  our  house,  or  make  him  our  heir,  as  though  he  were  our  child. 
6.  But  what  dotli  the  carnal  mind  object  here,  by  the  putrons  of 
Pelagianism.  ?  (1)  That  to  take  care  of  the  smallest  thinf,s  with  so 
much  labour  and  trouble,  agrees  not  with  the  exalted  dignity  of  God. 
But- if  it  aerecd  with  the  exalted  dignity  of  Gcd  to  create  those  thiiK^s., 
it  can  also  to  take  care  of  them.    It  doth  not  occasion  God  t}i-  l.ofd 
more  labour  and  trouble  to  take   care  of  %hf  smaHes'  thinprs,  than 
the  greatest;  for  he  doth  all  thirds   with  a  word  and  a  beck  :  "He 
Gpeaks,  and  it  is  done  ;  he  c<^mm  nds,   and   it  stands  fast,"  Psalm 
Kxxiii   9.     While  he  provides  for  small  things,   he  doih  not  nef'lect 
great  things,  like  a  king,  w' o  by  frequeiiily  employing  hims'^lf  with 
.  inferior  things,  would  overlook  those   that  '^n'e  most  weighty  ;  yea, 
by  the  meanest  things,  God  often  accomntishes  the  grfatest  matters, 
as  by  means  of  hce,  frogs,  locusts,  and  all  kinds  of  vtrm'n  he  meek- 
ened  the  stubborn  Pharaoh,  obliged  him  to  acknowledpe  his  hand, 
and  delivered   his  people.  (2)  T'jiey  also  object  that  all  things  hap- 
pen then  necessarily,  and  notliing  by  chance,  when  nevertheless  the 
word  of  God  oCten  sptaks- of  things  v.'hich  happen  by  chance,   as  we 
see  Ruth  ii.  3.   2  Sam.  i.  6.   xx    1.  Luke  x.  31.     But  we  say,  that 
with  respect  to  the  Lord,  nothing  happens  by  chance,  since  then 
many  things  which  depend  upon  such  a  chance,  would  happen  be- 
side providence ;  for  how  can  it  be,  that  any  event  should  ocettr  in 
-the  kingdom  of  God,   without  his  cognizance  and  direction,   and 
.  wherein  he  should  not  take  any  concern.    Those  things  that  happen 
to  us  by  chance  often  disconcert  us  e^itirely,  and  compel  us  to  es- 
tablish a  totally  different  order  than  before.     Can  now  things  which 
happen  by  chance  disconcert  God  likewise,  so  that  he  should  be 
obliged  to  accommodate  himself  to  those  things  ?  what  must  we  not 
admit,  if  v/e  will  be  Pelagians  ?  It  is  true,  many  things  happen  to 
us  by  chance,  but  this  is  so,  not  with  rtspect  to  Gcd,  but  with  respect 
to  ua,  who  cannot  foresee  nor  direct  such  things.  (3)  They  say  also, 
that  5uch  an  efficacious  providence  and  co-operation  of  God  in  and 
'f.vith  the  actions  of  xht  creatures,  destroys  the  liberty  of  human  ac- 


220        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

tions.  This  must  be  allowed  by  those,  (although  many  of  them  abhw 
such  a  consequence,  and  therefore  deny  it)  who  say  that  the  soul  is 
a  mere  thouij^ht,  and  is  unable  to  act  upon  any  body,  and  that  the 
body  is  in  like  manner  unable  to  act  upon  the  soul  :  but  that  God 
effects  Ufon  each  thought  of  the  soul,  immediately  a  correspondent 
motion  in  the  body ;  and  upon  each  motion  of  the  body,  a  corres- 
ponilent  thought  in  the  soul ;  and  that  therefore  the  reasonable  crea- 
ture is  not  the  true  author  of  its  actions.  Whither  this  tends  we  may 
see  in  -pinoza,  Van  Hattem,  Letnhof  and  Bril,  who  assert  either  in 
a  more  publick,  or  in  a  more  private  manner,  that  the  rational  crea- 
ture is  not  active,  but  passive,  and  that  God  works  all  in  all,  and  that 
there  is  nn  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  and  that  whoever 
maintains  a  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  sins,  and  is  not  in  the 
Spirit,  but  in  the  flesh  :  and  would  we  know  the  secret  ?  it  is  this ; 
man  is  not  a  substantial  being  by  himself,  distinct  from  God,  but 
subsists  in  God,  and  is  only  a  form  and  mode  of  God  ;  that  is,  the 
world  is  God,  and  we  and  all  other  creatures  are  forms,  modes  and 
parts  of  God.  Is  it  necessary  to  confute  this  opinion  ?  will  it  not  suf- 
fice to  mention  it,  in  order  to  shame  it,  and  induce  every  one  to 
abhor  it  ?  is  it  not  a  denial  of  divine  providence  ?  doth  it  not  make 
God  the  author  of  the  most  abominable  enormities  ?  and  doth  it  not 
unman  man  ?  Who  dolh  not  know  of  himself,  that  he  is  a  substantial 
bemg  distinct  from  God  ?  that  he  apprehends  by  his  spirit  ?  that  he 
himself  judges,  assents,  denies,  reasons,  follows  his  judgment,  pro- 
poseth  an  end  to  himself,  excites,  urges,  moves,  and  acts  himself  by 
that  end,  that  he  may  by  certain  means  attain  unto  his  end  ?  It  is 
true,  God  works  effectually  in  and  with  the  working  of  his  creatures  ; 
but  this  doth  not  hinder  man  from  acting  willingly,  and  from  being 
a  real  author  of  his  actions  ;  for  God  doth  not  act  man  by  a  violent 
urging  of  his  will,  as  a  person  moves  a  stock  or  a  stone,  but  in  a 
reasonable  manner,  agreeably  to  his  nature,  enabling  us  to  under- 
stand, judge  and  will  by  objects,  and  by  an  inward  light  and  motion  ; 
so  that  understanding,  judging  and  willing  are  our  actions,  r.s  much 
as  eating,  drinking,  standing,  walking  and  lying  down,  are  our  ac- 
tions, and  not  God's,  although  he  works  effectually  in  and  with  us, 
when  we  do  an  action  ;  for  actions  belong  to  him,  who  is  the  next 
subject  of  them.  (4)  Finally,  they  pretend  that  by  asserting  such  an 
efficacious  providence,  we  make  God  an  author  of  sin  ;  but  our  doc- 
trine canrot  be  charged  with  such  a  consequence ;  for  we  are  far 
from  holding  such  an  evil  opinion,  and  say.  "  Far  be  it  from  God, 
that  he  should  do  wickedness,  and  from  the  Almighty,  that  he  should 
commit  iniquity.**    But  doth  not  the  word  of  God  use  as  forcible 


l 

expressions  concerning  the  providence  of  God,  with  respect  to  sin, 
as  any  of  our  divines  ?  for  we  read  that  '*  God  hardens  and  blinds 
the  hearts  of  men,"  Exod.  vii.  3,  Roin.  ix.  27,  18,  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10, 
« that  he  turned  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians  to  hate  his  people," 
Psalm  cv#.25,  "  that  he  said  to  Shimei,  Curse  David,"  2  Sam.  xvi. 
10,  *'that  he  gave  Israel  up  to  their  own  hearts*  lust,  so  that  they 
walked  in  their  own  counsels,"  Psalm  Ixxxi.  12.  *'  that  he  gave  the 
heathens  up  to  uncleanness,  and  to  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  things 
which  are  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  24 — 28,  *nhat  he  send^"  the  fol» 
lowers  of  the  man  of  sin  "  a  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  be- 
lieve a  lie,"  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  and  other  expressions  of  a  similar  nature. 
To  explain  these  and  such  sxpressions  in  the  Pelagian  way,  of  a  bare 
permission,  is  weakening  the  force  of  the  words,  and  being  wilfully 
bhnd ;  therefore  if  these  words  of  God  signify  any  thing  at  all,  it  is  the 
same  with  what  we  teach,  to  wit,  that  sin  happei*eth  according  to  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  agreeably  to  Acts  ii. 
23.  iv.  27,  28.  Isaiah  xlviii.  8,  that  God  marks  it  carefully  and  re- 
gards it,  Job  xxxiv.  21,  22,  and  particularly,  which  is  the  principal 
subject  of  controversy  here,  that  God  powerfully  co-operates,  not  with 
and  in  sin,  but  in  the  actions  of  men,  which  are  sinful.  If  this  be 
not  so,  the  above  cited  and  other  expressions  of  God's  word  are  ua- 
intelUgible  with  respect  to  this  matter. 

In  order  to  illustrate  this  somewhat  more  fully,  we  must  consider 
sinfulness  with  respect  to  its  beginning,  progress  and  end. 

,  With  respect  to  the  beginning  of  sin,  the  providence  of  God,  works 
sometimes  by  hindering  and  restraining  it :  thus  "  God  withheld 
king  Abimciech  from  sinning  against  him,"  Gen.  xx.  6.  David 
prayed  for  this.  Psalm  xix.  13.  At  other  times  by  permitting  it, 
not  by  giving  license  to  sin,  but  by  not  hindering  it :  and  that  not 
like  a  mere  spectator ;  for  this  militates  against  the  above  mentioned 
expressions,  but  by  a  powerful  permission,  which  is  certainly  follow- 
ed by  sin.  For  (a)  God  suflers  occasions  to  occur  to  the  sinner, 
which  are  in  themselves  good,  but  which  the  sinner  abuses  by  his 
sinfulness,  tis  Abel's  acceptable  sacrifice  to  Cain,  Joseph's  dreams  to 
his  brethren,  the  request  of  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  that  he  would  let 
Israel  go,  as  also  the  word  of  grace  to  reprobates,  Rom.  ii.  4,  5.  2 
Cor.  ii.  15,  16.  (b)  God  also  withholds  his  restraining  grace,  where- 
upon the  sinner  indulges  himself  in  sin,  as  *'  when  the  Lord  forsook. 
Hezekiah,  his  heart  was  lifted  up,"  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31.  God  doth  not 
sin,  when  he  acts  thus,  since  he  is  not  bound  to  bestovi^  his  grace- 
upon  man,  in  order  that  he  may  not  sin.  (c)  The  Lord  God  some- 
times also  gives  the  sinner  up  to  himself,  to  sin,  and  to  the  enexnie5> 


%2t        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE, 

who  are  then  also  let  loose  on  him :  "  God  gives  him  up  to  his  lusts^ 
to  vile  affections,  and  to  a  veprobate  mini,"  Rom,  i.  24,  26,  28.  bee 
also  I  Kings  xxii.  25^,  23.  1  iSam.  xxiv.  1,  compared  with  1  Chron* 
xxi.  1.  2  J  hess.  li.  9,  10.  And  in  all  this  God  manifests  himself 
holy  and  just,  punisliing  one  sm  with  another,  Psalm  Ixxxi.  U,  12. 
Horn  i.  22 — 28.  With  respect  to  the  pro^.ress  of  sm,  the  pron- 
denc  of  God  works  by  limiting  it,  tiiat  it  may  not  proceed  further 
tijan  the  bounds  which  he  hath  appoi'.ted.  When  the  devil  bereaved 
Job  of  his  goods,  he  might  not  at  first  touch  his  body,  and  alterwards 
he  was  obliged  to  spare  his  life,  Job  i.  12.  ii.  6, 

With  respect  to  the  end  of  sin,  the  providence  of  (iod  works  by 
directing  it  to  the  destruction  of  the  ungodly  :  *^  He  sends  them  a 
strong  delusion,  so  that  they  believe  a  lie,  that  they  may  all  be  dam- 
ned," 2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12,  and  to  the  good  of  liis  peoph,  as  we  see 
in  the  selling  of  Joseph,  Gen.  xlv.  8.  1.20,  and  in  the  delivering  up 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  Acts  ii.  23.  iv.  27,  28,  and  also  to  their  humilia- 
tion, "  that  they  may  not  be  exalted  above  measure,  because  of  the 
excellency  of  their  revelation,"  2  Cor.  xii  .7.  But  the  Lord  doth  more 
especially  direct  sin  most  wisely  to  the  honour  of  his  justice,  grace 
and  mercy,  which  are  manifested  ;nost  gloriously  upon  occasion  of 
sin,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  v.  10.  xi.  32. 

Whence  it  appears  then  plainly,  that  the  doctrine  of  effectual  pro- 
vidence doth  not  make  God  an  author  of  sin  :  especially  since  God 
neither  advises  nor  commands,  nor  works  sin  by  his  providence : 
moreover,  we  ought  to  know  that  sin,  being  a  defect,  and  not  some- 
thing that  hath  a  real  being,  hath  not  properly  a  working,  but  only 
a  defective  author,  to  wit,  the  sinner  himself ;  furthermore,  the  sin- 
Ker  commits  sin  horn  his  own  inclination,  and  is  not  compelled  to  it 
by  providence  :  we  say  also,  that  the  action  of  God  with  respect  to 
sin,  even  his  v/orking  the  physical  a^t,  is  good,  but  it  becomes  cor- 
rupt through  the  corruption  of  man,  as  a  lame  f<)ot  causes  a  horse 
to  halt,  but  not  the  action  of  the  rider,  who  drives  the  horse.  Doth 
our  dojctrine  still  remain  somewhat  obscure,  it  ought  not  to  create 
•<4ny  prejudice  against  it,  inasmuch  as  no  creature  may  undertake  to 
fathom  all  the  judgments  of  God,  which  are  a  great  deep,  for  they 
are  unsearchable  and  past  finding  it.  « 

7.  Without  doubt  the  whole  universe  is  subject  to  the  providence 
cf  God.  We  have  indeed  proved  tiiis  with  respect  to  each  part  in 
particular  from  the  word  of  God  ;  but  we  v/ill  now  prove  this  matter 
iVom  reason,  that  our  minds  may  be  more  fully  persuaded  of  it.  This 
truth  appears  then,  (a)  from  the  nature  of  God,  unto  whom  the  whole 
creation  is  subjvict,  and  who,  on  account  of  his  supremacy  and  sp\= 


« 

treign  dominion,  cannot  discharge  bimself  from  directing  and  pro- 
viding iov  his  creatures,  any  more  than  be  can  be  unwilling  that 
they  should  acknowledge  his  glory  (b)  The  nature  of  the  creature 
also  teacheth  us  this,  since  it  is  so  empty  and  defective,  that  it  can- 
not provide  for  itself,  all  things  must  come  and  be  brought  to  \t  from 
without,  (c)  Contemplate  the  perfection,  beauty,  order  and  stability 
of  the  universe.  Yea,  though  all  the  elements  frequently  seem  to 
dash  and  b^at  one  against  another,  as  if  heaven  and  earth  would  re- 
turn to  their  first  nothing,  nevertheless  all  things  abide  in  their  pro- 
per state  ;  yea,  all  these  commotions  only  contribute  to  preserve  the 
vast  creation. 

Who  doth  not  tiow  know  by  all  these  things,  that  the  baad  of  the 
Lord  hath  wrought  tbis  ?  (b)  We  shall  not  speak  now  of  the  won- 
derful and  extraordinary  events,  nor  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophe- 
cies,  which  are  related  in  the  scriptures  :  attend  only  to  this,  that  if 
no  universal  Ruler  directed  whatsoever  comes  to  pass,  how  should 
good  men  be  able  to  quiet  and  comfort  themselves  in  all  their  tribu- 
lations ?  would  noc  their  condition  be  worse  than  that  of  the  wicked  ? 

It  is  indeed  true,  that  sometimes,  through  the  divine  direction  of 
providence,  there  are  righteous  persons,  to  whom  it  happeneth  accor- 
ding to  the  work  of  the  wicked,  and  wicked  persons,  to  whom  it  hap- 
peneth according  to  the  work  of  the  righteous ;  but  this  is  not  so 
with  respect  to  things  that  are  essential,  to  wit,  having  God  for  our 
father  and  our  portion,  and  enjoying  his  love,  which  is  the  chief  and 
only  real  good  ;  but  only  with  respect  to  visible  things,  which  are 
not  essential  ?  It  is  true,  it  sometimes  greatly  afflicts  and  disturbs 
the  godly,  when  they  see  that  the  wicked  are  often  preferred  by  pro- 
vidence before  them  ;  but  the  joy  of  the  wicked  is  only  for  a  mo- 
ment, and  they  are  afterwards  cast  down  into  destructioji,  when  God 
despiseth  their  image  :  on  the  contrary,  tlie  sorrow  of  the  upright 
doth  not  last  long,  but  hath  soon  an  end  ;  and  then  they  will  be  for 
ever  with  the  Lord ,  for  he  holdeth  them  by  their  right  hand,  he 
will  guide  them  with  his  counsel,  and  afterwards  receive  them  to 
glory.     See  more  of  this  in  the  seventy-third  Psalm. 

II.  We  should  speak  now  to  the  second  general  head,  according 
to  the  twenty-eighth  question,  "  What  ad^^antage  is  it  to  us  to  know 
that  God  hath  created,  and  by  his  providence  doth  still  uphold  all 
things  ?"  The  instructor  mentions  three  great  advantages  of  this  ; 
first,  *'  that  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity  ;'•  secondly,  "  that  we 
may  be  thankful  in  prosperity  j"  and  finally,  **  that  in  all  things 
which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we  place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faith- 
ful God  and  Father  ;"  the  reason  of  which  i»  assigned  in  that  which 


%U        THE  DOGTRINL  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

followeth,  ''  since  all  creatures,"  Sec.  but  we  shall  not  speak  of  these 
several  things  at  present,  but  (kfer  them  to  our  application. 


APPLICATION. 

Behold  then  this  precious  and  profitable  truth  of  God's  efTectual 
providence  ;  but  how  is  it  practically  denied,  and  shamefully  oppo- 
sed in  our  Christian  nation,  even  by  those,  who  confess  it  in  words  J 
For, 

1.  Many  see  not  the  hand  of  God  in  that  which  befalls  them. 
Do  they  look  downward,  or  do  they  lift  their  eyes  upward,  do  they 
receive  meat  or  drink,  are  they  in  health  or  sick,  are  thy  rich  or 
poor,  they  see  not  in  all  these  thinf;!:s,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath 
•wreught  this ;  tliey  act  as  if  they  were  Epicureans,  fancying  that 
God  doth  not  attend  to  the  things  on  earth,  and  that  all  things  hap- 
pen only  by  chance  :  or  like  the  l^toics,  they  imagine  a  fate,  and  that 
every  vicissitude  and  event  happens  necessarily,  because  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  ail  thinf';-s  have  continued  as  they  are  now  ; 
or  with  the  Peripatetics,  they  think  that  all  sublunary  things  arc  gov- 
erned by  tlie  heavenly  ?  and  thus  they  cry  aloud  with  their  actions, 
*'The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil,"  Zeph-  i.  12, 
**■  And  hov/  doth  God  know  ?  can  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ? 
thick  clouds  are  a  covering  to  him  that  he  seeth  not,  and  he  walketh 
in  the  circuit  of  the  heaven,"  Job  xxii.  13,  14.  The  proper  work  of 
the  v/iched,  "  who  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance  will  not 
peek  after  God  ;  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts,"  Psalm  x.  4.  For, 
didst  thou,  hearer,  see  with  observation  a  God  in  all  those  things, 
would  not  a  sense  of  a  God,  a  wonder,  and  a  holy  awe  for  him  pos- 
sess thy  soul  ?  but  now  men  do  not  attend  to  him  with  their  hearts, 
and  tiiey  walk,  as  it  were,  without  God. 

2.  This  appears  still  moi'e,  because  they  will  take  care  of,  and  di- 
rect all  things  themselves.  They  propose  some  advantageous  end 
to  themselves  ;  and  in  order  to  obtain  it,  they  devise  means,  and 
fTideavour  to  execute  them ;  this  is  in  itself  acting  in  a  rational 
manner  ;  but  it  is  acting  in  a  brutal  manner,  not  to  do  this  in  obedi- 
ence to  God,  and  not  to  expect  a  happy  isstie  from  him,  but  from 
ourselves,  from  onr  own  wise  management  and  diligence  ;  "  this  is 
rayint;,  to-day  or  to-morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and  con- 
tinue there  a  year,  and  buy,  and  sell,  and  get  gain  ;"  (and  thus  men 
conduct  in  all  their  undertakings)  "whereas  they  know  not  what 
shall  be  on  the  moirow.     For  that  they  onght  to  say,   if  the   Lord 


•     r,  28.  325 

will,  we  shall  do  this  or  that,"  James  iv.  13,  14,  15.  Doth  their  un- 
taking  prosper,  they  bless  themselves,  because- they  obtain  the  desire 
of  their  souls,  they  wonder  at  their  own  wisdom  and  ability  ;  and 
»<  say  in  their  hearts,  our  power  and  the  might  of  our  hands  hath 
gotten  us  this  wealth,"  Deiit.  viii.  17,  and  thus  "they  sacrifice  to 
their  own  net,  and  burn  incense  to  their  own  drag  ;  because  by  them 
their  portion  is  fal,  and  their  meat  plenteous,"  Hab.  i.  16.  But  doth 
their  conduct  and  their  labour  not  speed  well,  they  either  fret  at 
themselves,  or  they  blame  this  or  that  event  ;  but  God  is  not  uc- 
knowleged  in  it. 

3.  Do  they  acknowledge  a  providence,  it  is  only  from  hearsay, 
and  because  they  either  cannot  from  ignorance  gainsay  it,  or  be- 
cause for  fear  of  reproach  they  dare  not  ;  for  it  appears  that  the  di- 
vine providence  doth  not  influence  their  hearts,  since,  (a)  they  abuse 
it  to  slothfulness  and  sluggishness,  and  do  not  make  use  of  proper 
means,  in  order  to  execute  the  designs  of  providence.  The  sluggard 
thinks  that  God  will  provide  for  him  :  is  one  compelled  by  his  lust 
to  a  shameful  marriage,  he  pacifies  his  co?iscience  by  thinking 
that  such  a  partner  was  allotted  him  by  divine  providence:  must  he 
suffer  through  his  own  misconduct,  he  comforts  himself  with  the 
providence  of  God,  and  he  hardens  himself  against  his  suffering  :  is 
he  cast  upon  the  bed  of  sickness,  he  will  not  make  use  of  medicines, 
because  he  persuades  hiuiself  that  if  ihe  appointed  time  of  his  death 
be  not  come,  he  will  certainly  recover;  and  if  that  time  be  come, 
medicines  cannot  avail  :  doth  he  begin  to  think  of  salvation  and 
damnation,  because  he  will  not  be  in  earnest,  he  thinks,  if  I 
be  elected,  I  shall  be  saved  ;  and  if  I  be  a  reprobate,  I  shall  cer- 
tainly be  damned  :  what  then  can  all  my  endeavours  to  be  saved 
profit  me  ?  as  if  God  would  show  his  providential  kindness  to  tho' e 
who  despise  his  institutions.  When  God  hadpiomised  that  not  one 
of  those  who  were  in  the  ship  with  Paul  should  perish  in  the  ship- 
wreck, and  they  sought  to  flee  out  of  the  ship,  "  Paul  said  to  the 
centurion,  except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot  be  saved,"  Acts 
xxvii.  31.  Though  the  divine  appointment  concerning  man  be 
ever  so  certain,  God  will  nevertheless  not  execute  it,  but  by  a  dili- 
gent use  of  the  means  (b)  Because  men  become  heartless  and  fret- 
ful on  account  of  adversities,  they  will  not  submit  to  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  nor  be  meek,  but  they  struggle  against  him,  they  strive  with 
the  Almighty,  even  when  they  suffer  the  smallest  misfortune,  and 
when  the  wind  and  weather  are  not  as  they  wish:  Yea,  "  if  the 
sinner  be  hardly  bestead  and  hungry,  he  will  fret  himself  and  curse 


i!Si6      THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

his  Gcd,"  fsa-ali  viii.  21  ;  and  he  will  sometimes  make  a  desperate 
attempt  to  deliver  himself  without  God  by  some  horrible  action,  like 
the  k.  nij  of  Israel,  wiio  would,  in  the  gieat  famine,  take  off  the  head 
of  Elisha.  saymg;,""  Behold,  this  evil  ib  of  the  Lord;  what  should  I 
Mait  for  the  Lord  any  Ioniser  ?"  2  Kin^js  vi.  33.  But  "  the  Lord  is 
%yise  in  heart,  and  mi.^hty  in  strenii,th  ;  who  hath  hardened  himself 
ag-dinst  him,  and  prospered?"  Job  ix  4.(c)  Because  they  are  envi- 
ous and  grudge,  when  another  fares  better  than  they  :  the  sinner 
will  cavil  at,  and  argue  against  the  conduct  of  God,  and  ask  why  he 
Cloth  not  favour  him,  as  well  as  this  and  that  person  :  but  "  wo  to 
him  that  striveth  with  liis  Maker;  let  the  potsherds  strive  with  the 
potsherds  of  tl^e  earth:  shall  the  clay  say  to  him  that  fashionelh  it, 
what  makcst  thou  ?  or  thy  work,  He  hath  no  hands?"  Isaiah  xlv« 
9.  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  him  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own?  is 
thine  eye  evil  because  he  is  good  ?"  (d)  Because,  when  they  enjoy 
any  favourable  dispensation  of  providence,  they  forget  God,  they  for- 
saKe  him,  and  light  against  him  with  his  blessings,  and  employ  them 
as  "  weapons  of  unrijrhteousness,  saying  to  God,  Depart  from  us, 
and  what  hath  the  Almighty  done  ?  yet  he  filled  their  houses  with 
good  things,"  Job  xxii.  17,  18,  like  "  Jeshurun,  who  when  he  was 
waxen  fat,  kicked ;  then  he  forsook  God  who  made  him,  and  lightly 
esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  15. 

O  horrid  !  that  a  creature  should  not  acknowledge  his  Creator, 
and  Benefactor.  What  is  this  but  a  denial  of  God,  and  of  his  allup- 
holding,  v/orking  and  directing  hand  ?  A  brutish  stupidity,  which 
doth  not  look  upward  The  Lofd  v/ill  compel  you  to  acknowledge 
his  hand,  when  he  will  afflict  and  distress  you  to  the  uttermost. 
j\ttend  to  what  the  church  saith,  Isaiah  xxvi.  10,  II.  "  Let  favour 
be  showed  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness :  in  the 
}and  of  uprightness  will  he  deal  unjust'y,  and  will  not  behold  the 
majesty  of  the  Lord.  Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  lifted  up  they  will  not 
see  :  but  they  shall  see  and  be  ashamed."  Nourish  yourselves  like 
an  ox  for  the  day  of  slaughter,  the  Lord  will  one  day  exert  his 
almighty  arm  for  your  destruction,  unless  ye  be  converted  :  for 
"  because  ye  regard  not  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  operation 
of  his  hands,  he  will  destroy  you,  and  not  build  you  up,"  Psalm 
xxviii.  5. 

Therefore  ye,  who  do  not  know  nor  acknowledge  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  and  live  altogether  without  God,  O  seek  to  obtain  an  interest 
in  his  special  and  fatherly  providence,  and  to  become  his  children. 
O  seek  him  for  this  purpose  ;  for  God  hath  created  you,  and  pro- 


X.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q    27,  28.  227 

vkles  for  you,  "  that  ye  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  ye  might  feel 
after  him,  and  firid  hina,  thoa^^li  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us  : 
for  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  Acts  xvii.  27, 
28,  "  Receive  his  Son  by  faith,  that  ye  may  obtain  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,"  John  i.  12. 

But  ye,  O  believers,  who  have  tjie  great  Crea'or,  the  almighty 
and  every  where  present  Provider  of  the  universe  for  your  Father, 
und.r  whose  special  and  favourable  providential  care  ye  are  placed, 
who  are  the  blessing  in  the  cluster  of  our  grapes,  for  whose  sake 
they  are  yet  spared,  and  who  are  therefore  the  holy  seed,  the  support 
of  the  land,  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  your  Creator,  and  allsuf- 
ficient  Pro.vider,  and  therefore, 

1.  Attend  diligently  to  all  that  ye  see  and  hear,  that  ye  may  be- 
hold the  almighty  and  every  where  present  hand  of  C.od  in  it,  as  the 
sun  in  a  glass.  *'  Whoso  is  wise,  and  will  observe  these  things,  even 
they  shall  understand  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord,"  Psalm  c.vii. 
43.  We  should  pause  at  every  event,  and  consider  that  it  comes 
not  by  chance,  l)ut  by  his  fatherly  hnnd  Obstrve  how  wondt;rtiilly 
God  orders  matters  with  respect  to  you,  in  eiving  you  breath  and 
life,  and  all  things  ;  look  at  the  meat  and  drink  on  your  tables,  con- 
sider why  ye  have  just  this  grain  from  tlie  field  for  your  bread,  this 
fowl  of  the  air,  tha  flesh  of  this  beast,  this  fish  of  the  sea  or  river: 
bow  many  have  laboured  at  it,  before  it  was  brought  lo  you  :  what 
wisdom,  what  power,  what  goodness :  \vhut  care  your  Father  hath 
bestowed,  in  his  love  to  you,  to  furnish  you  with  it,  even  you  in  par- 
ticular, who  are  so  unworthy  :  *■•  Lift  up  your  "^yes  on  high,  and  be- 
hold, who  hath  created  these  things,  that  bringeth  out  their  hos^  by 
number:  he  calleth  them  all  by  nam^es,  by  the  greatness  of  his  might, 
because  he  is  strong  in  power:  not  one  faileth,"  Isaiah  xl.  26.  How- 
was  David  transported  at  this  in  the  eighth  psalm  1  Yea,  "  ask  now 
tlie  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee  i  and  the  fowls  of  'he  air,  and 
they  shall  tell  thee  ;  or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee, 
and  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee.  Who  knoweth  not 
in  all  these,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  this?"  Job  xii- 
7 — 10.  With  Isaac  we  should  go  out  into  the  field,  that  our  medi- 
tation of  the  Lord  may  be  sweet : 

Facii  plant  that  we  behold, 
Each  herb  that  we  do  see. 
The  praise  of  God  proclaims, 
And  saith.  Attempt  by  me 


228       THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

To  learn  how  wise,  how  good, 
IJow  [)leasant  is  the  J^ord  ! 
How  passing  sweet.   He  doih 
What  e'er  i  am  afford. 

A  child  of  God  ought  certainly  to  be  reproved,  when  he  looks  only 
at  his  state  of  grace,  that  we  miy  see  God  in  that, and  reckons  it  too 
ignoble  a  work  for  a  citizen  of  heaven  to  contemplate  the  whole  gov- 
ernrpent  of  God  in  the  universe,  as  if  this  were  too  low  an  employ- 
meiu  ior  liim :  no,  this  rejoices,  this  enlivens,  this  causes  that  God 
besets  us  befoiC  and  behind?  it  discovers  the  divine  perfections  to  us, 
and  enraptures  the  soul.  See  this  Psalm  civ. 

2.  Let  a  holy  fear  and  awe  for  God,  who  manifests  himself  worthy 
to  be  feared  in  tliis  great  work  of  providence,  fall  on  your  souls : 
**  For  the  Lord  is  a  threat  God,  and  a  great  King  above  all  gods :  in 
his  hand  are  the  deep  places  of  the  earth,  the  strength  of  the  hills  is 
his  also.  The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  ;  and  his  hands  formed  the 
dry  land,"  Psalm  xcv.  3,  4,  5i  "  I  know  that  the  Lord  is  great,  and 
that  our  Lord  is  above  all  Gods.  Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased, 
that  did  he  in  heaven,  and  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  seas,  and  all  deep 
p'aces,"  Psalm  cxxxv,  5,  6.  Who  would  not  then  fear  him,  for  to 
him  doth  it  appertain,  and  he  manifests  himself  incomparably  glo- 
rious in  all  that  he  doth  :  *■'  Let  all  the  earth  therefore  fear  the  Lord; 
let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand  m  awe  of  him  :  for  he  spake, 
and  it  was  done  ;  he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast,"  Psalm  xxxiii. 
8,  9,  See  what  the  Lord  saith,  Jer.  v.  22.  Surely  a  todly  person 
ought  not  to  be  like  the  ungodly,  "  who  say  not  in  their  hearts ;  Let 
us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and 
the  lalier  rain  in  his  season:  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed 
weeks  of  harvest,"  Jer.  v.  24. 

3.  Be  patient  in  adversity,  that  is,  composed  and  calmly  resigned 
to  'he  Lord,  l)y  which,  from  a  view  of  the  sovereignty  and  justice  of 
God,  and  from  a  sense  of  our  own  demerits,  we  submit  willingly  to 
the  Lord,  bow  to  him,  and  praise  him,  yea,  even  thank  him  with 
silent  satisfaction  So  Aaron  acted  when  his  two  sons  were  consum- 
ed by  that  most  dreadful  judgment,  even  fire  from  heaven.  Lev.  x. 
3.  "  And  .iaron  held  his  peace."  When  the  Lord  threatened  to  in- 
flict the  most  fearful  plagues  upon  Israel,  upon  Eli,  and  his  house, 
Eli  said,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  scemeth  him  good,"  1 
Sam.  iii.  18.  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,"  said 
David,  Psalm  cxix,  71.     How  well  did  Job  demean  himftelf  under 


^ 

all  those  gnevous  afflictions,  which  befell  him,  Job  i.  21,  22,  "  He 
said,  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord.     In  all  this  Job  sinned  not,   nor  charged  God 
foolishly."     See  how  he  reproves  his  impatient-  wife.  Job  ii.  9,  10. 
And  this  becomes  you  also,  believers  ;  for  nothinc;  comes  to  you  by 
chance,  but  by  his  fatherly  hand  :    *«  For  affliction  doth  not  come 
forth  out  of  the  dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  ground," 
Joi3  V.  6.    '   Promotion  cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the 
west,  nor  from  the  south  :  but  God  is  the  judge  ;  he  putteth  down 
one,  and  setteth  up  another,"  Psalm  Ixxv.  6,  7.  For  "  he  is  the  Lord. 
he  doth  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  according  to  his  will ;  who 
can,  or  dares  stay  his  hand  ?  or  say  to  him,  What  dost  thou  ?"     Dc 
ye  not  deserve  the  most  grievous  afflictions  ?  is  not  he  happy  whom 
God  chastiseth,    that  he  may  not    be  condemned    with  the  world  ? 
We  are  never  taught   better  by  Go<3,  than   when   he  chastises  us  ; 
yea,  if  we  considered  this  matter  aright,  we  should  glory  in  tribula- 
tion, because  tribulation  worketh   paiieneet  experience,   and  hope% 
Will  your  impatience,  frctfulness,  peevishness,  and  striving  with  the 
Lord  deliver  you  from  your  affliction  ?    will  ye  not  thereby   render 
your  boiids  stronger  ?     Yes,  but,  say  ye,  if  my  trouble  proceeded 
immediately  from  God,  1  could  bear  it ;    but  this  and  that  persoD, 
from  whom  I   did  not  expect  it,  and  of  whom  I  do  not  deserve  it, 
inflicts  it  upon  me.     Will  ye  then,  like  the  dog,  bite  the  stone,  and 
not  look  up  at  him  who   casts  it  ?     ^*  W^ho  is  he  that   saith,  and   it 
cometh  to  pass,  when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not  ?    doth  not  both 
good  and  evil,  proceed  out  of  the  month  of  the  Most  High  ?  where- 
fore doth  a  livmg  man  then  complain  ?     Let  every  man  complain  on 
account  of  his  sins,"  Lam.  iii.  37 — 39.     Conduct  therefore  like  Da- 
vid, who,  when  Shimei  cursed  him,  and  Abishai  would  on   that  ac- 
count take  off  his  head,  said,  *'  So  let  him  curse,  because  the  Lord 
hath  said  unto  him,  curse  David.     Who  then   shall  say  unto  him, 
H'herefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  2Sam.  xvi.  10. 

4.  Be  thankful  in  prosperity,  by  which,  from  a  sense  of  cur  un- 
wortliiness,  and  a  view  of  the  preciousness  of  the  benefits,  we  are 
concerned  to  know  what  we  shall  render  unto  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
mean  time  acknov.ledge  his  free  favour  with  our  hearts,  words,  and 
actions,  by  ourselves,  and  with  others.  So  David  acted.  Psalm cxvi^ 
12,  13,  14,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord,  for  all  his  bene- 
fits toward  mc  ?  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upen  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  I  will  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord,  now  in  the 
jrc^ence  of  all  his  people."     This  is  also  your  duly,  b^slieverfs ;  foV 

\  "^Ve  have  r<?rd€i?d  \].h  passage  accoitlingto  the  Dutcli  traryslatian. 


130        THE  DOCTRINE  0F  DIVINE  PROVIDENXE. 

whatever  ye  have  enjoyed  Vrlth  respect  to  your  soul  or  body,  or  do 
yet  possess,  or  expect  hereafter,  it  "was  not  brought  to  you  by  any 
■creature,  nor  by,  nor  on  account  of  yourselves  :  ♦*  For  who  maketh 
you  to  differ  from  another  ?  and  what  have  ye  that  ye  have  not  re- 
ceived? now  if  ye  have  received  it,  why  do  ye  glory,  as  if  ye  had 
not  received  it?"  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  But  '*  all  things  are  of  him,  and 
through  him,  that  they  may  be  to  him,  and  that  ye  may  give  him 
honour  and  glory,"  Rom.  xi.  36.  Endeavour,  as  constrained  in  a 
holy  manner  by  the  gracious  providence  of  God,  to  praise  him  with 
a  holy  solicitude  and  admiration,  and  to  employ  yourselves  wholly  in 
his  service ;  this  is  required  of  you,  Rom.  xii.  1. 

5.  In  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  you,  place  a  firm  trust 
in  your  faithful  God  and  Father.  A  believer  is  often  anxious  and 
concerned  how  he  shall  pass  through  the  world  with  honour,  ho^v  he 
shall  obtain  his  bread  and  clothing  ;  he  is  afraid  of  these  and  those 
evil-minded  persons,  of  diseases,  and  a  painful  death  ;  yea,  the  devil 
acts  the  prophet  with  him,  telling  him  that  this  and  that  misfortune 
■will  yet  befall  him,  which  therefore  disturbs  him.  But  the  creation 
and  providence  of  his  faithful  God  and  Father  teaches  him,  that  he 
ought  to  place  a  firm  trust  in  the  Lord,  by  which  he  attains  to  a  holy 
carelessness  concerning  future  events,  commits  himself  in  all  things 
to  the  Lord  with  a  believing  confidence,  tranquil  hope,  and  expecta- 
tion placed  on  him,  that  he  will  bring  it  to  pass.  This  is  the  duty  of 
believers  according  to  Psalm  xxxvii.  5,  '*  Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord  :  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass,"  1  Peter  v.  7. 
Let  your  souls  then  exercise  themselves  herein  ;  for  the  Lord  is  a 
faithful  God,  he  doth  not  forsake  the  woik  of  his  hands  :  "  He  is  a 
faithful  Creator,  to  whom  ye  must  commit  yourselves  in  welldoing," 
1  Pet.  iv.  19.  He  is  your  Father:  a  father  will  sure'y  provide  for 
his  children.  What  can  the  creatures  do  to  you  ?  They  are  all  sr» 
in  his  hand,  that  without  his  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move  ;  they 
are  but  "  as  the  staff  m  his  hand,"  Isaiah  x.  5,  15.  God  hath  takers 
upon  himself  to  care  for  you  ;  will  ye  then  take  the  work  out  of  his 
hand  by  caring  for  yourselves  :  therefore  "  cast  all  your  care  upon 
him,  for  he  careth  for  you,"  1  Peter  v.  7.  <*  He  takes  care  of  the 
grass,  and  tiie  fowl?  ;  and  will  he  not  attend  to  you  ?'*  JNIat.  vi.  2  6, 
'J8,  29,  30.  He  takes  care  of  the  greater,  your  body  and  life,  which 
ye  have  not  by  your  own,  but  by  his  care  ;  will  he  then  neglect  your 
smaller  affairs  ?  "  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than 
raiment,"  Mat.  vi,  25.  Yea,  "  he  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  de- 
livered him  up  far  you  all :    how  shall  he  not  thc-n  with  'nim  freely 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  231 

give  you  all  things  ?"  Rom  viii.  53.  Your  care  cannot  avail  ;  "  Ye 
cannot  by  taking  thought  add  one  cubit  to  your  stature,"  Matt,  vi- 
27.  Yea,  let  whatever  will  befall  you,  no  creature  shall  be  able  to 
separate  you  from  the  love  of  God,  according  to  his  words  by  the 
apostle,  Rom.  viii.  35,  37,  38,  39,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  fa* 
mine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Nay,  in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am 
persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."    Amen, 


(  232  ) 

JESUS,  THE  ONLY 
COMPLETE  SAVIOUR, 


XI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Matt.  i.  21.  And  she  shall  bring  forth  a  Son,  tnd  thou  shalt  call  his 
name  Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.

Q,  28.  What  advantage  is  it  to  us  to  know  that  God  hath  created, 
and  by  his  firovidencc  doth  still  uphold  all  things  ? 

A.  That  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity,  thankful  in  prosperity  ^ 
and  that  in  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we  place  our 
firm  trust  in  oar  faithful  God  and  Father,  that  nothing  shall  separafe 
us  from  his  love,  since  all  creatures  are  so  in  his  hand,  that  without 
his  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move. 


D 


AVID,  having  experienced  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord  with 
respect  to  his  soul  and  body,  did  not  only  trust  that  he  would  per- 
fect that  which  concerned  him,  because  his  mercy  endured  for  ever, 
but  prayed  also  for  it,  when  he  said,  "  Forsake  not  the  works  of 
thine  own  hands,"  Psalm  cxxxviii.  8.  The  Lord  God,  being  un- 
changeable in  his  goodness  to  his  people,  as  well  as  in  his  nature,  is 
not  like  a  workman,  who  having  finished  his  work,  withdraws  hi? 


 

hand  from  it,  and  surrenders  it  to  the  care  of  others.  No,  he  con- 
tinueth  to  attend  to  his  work  ;  the  Lord  conducts  thus  with  respect 
to  the  work  of  grace  in  the  souls  of  his  people  :  "  Havintj  loved  his 
own,  he  loveth  them  to  the  end,"  John  xiii.  I.  "  His  gifts  aiid  calUng 
are  without  repentance,"  Kom.  xi.  29.  "God,  who  had  begun  a 
good  work  in  the  believing  Pliilippians,  would  also  finish  it  until  the 
day  of  Jesus  Christ,','  Philip,  i.  6.  But  the  Lord  doth  not  only  con- 
tinue to  attend  to  the  work  of  grace  m  his  people,  but  also  tojl^ 
whole  universe,  which  he  hath  created.  It  was  not  indeed  thJKie- 
sign  of  the  Lord  first  to  make  the  world,  and  presently  after  to  de- 
stroy it;  wheie  and  by  whom  should  his  glory  then  be  acknowledged, 
which  was  the  great  end  that  he  proposed  to  himself  in  makint^  the 
v/orld  ?  It  was  his  intention  to  uphold  it,  and  also  to  provide  for  it, 
that  it  might  not  perish  ;  therefore  he  is  also  called  '^  a  faithful  ( Te- 
ator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19,.  which  he  manifests  himself  to  be  by  his  provi- 
dence, by  which  ♦'  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  in  him,"  as 
Paul  teacheth  in  our  text,  Acts  xvii.  28,  He,  wishing  to  lead  the 
Athenians  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Gedl,  who  was  unknown  to  them, 
shows  that  he  is  that  God,  who  made  the  world,  and  all  the  nations 
of  men,  that  they  might  all  seek  him  ;  but  had  that  God  nov/  v/ith« 
drawn  from  the  world,  and  its  inhabitants,  and  had  he  left  them  to 
provide  for  themselves  ?  No,  he  manifested  himself  near  at  hand,  by- 
providing  for  them  ;  for,  saith  the  apostle,  "  in  him  we  live,"  8cg. 
The  instructor  conducts  also  in  this  manner  ;  for  having  taught  in 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day  the  doctrine  of  creation,  he  informs  us  now 
also  in  this  Lor's  day,  that  God  doth  not  suffer  the  created  universe 
to  proceed  at  random,  but  that  he  upholds  and  governs  it  by  his 
fatherly  hand. 

There  are  therefore  two  general  heads  here,  which  require  our 
consideration  ; 

I.  The  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  providence.  Question  27. 

II.  The  advantage  of  the  knowledge  of  creation  and  providence, 
Question  28.  " 

J.  Wiih  respect  to  the  first  general  head  we  must  attend,  1.  to 
the  signification  of  the  word  providence,  what  it  signifitth  here,  2.  to 
whom  providence  is  ascribed,  3.  to  what  providence  extends,  4.  the 
various  acts  which  constitute  the  work  of  providence,  5.  the  several- 
methods  of  pi-ovidence,  6.  the  difficulties  that  are  objected  to  the 
eflicacy^of  providence,  and  then  we  will,  7.  prove  in  general  the  truth 
of  the  doctrine  of  providence.  We  propose  so  many  particulars  for 
our  consideration,  that  we  may  avoid  a  great  number  of  subdivisions, 
v/hich  sometimes  render  subject3  obscure.. 


2n        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE, 

1 .  The  words  providence  and  provide  signify  literally  foreseeing 
and  foreknowing  a  matter,  and  thus  the  word  providence  signifies 
also  God's  foreknowledge ;  "  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world,"  saith  James,  Acts  xv.  18.  And 
no  marvel  >  lor  God  decreed  from  eternity  that  he  would  work,  and 
hence  he  foreknows  his  work,  and  he  "  worketh  all  thirtgs  after  the 
counsel  of  his  oAvn  will,"  Eph.  i.  1 1.  Therefore  the  instructoi  had 
also  said  in  the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  "  God  upholds  and  gov- 
er"  all  things,  which  he  hath  made,  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  pro- 
vidence ;"  for  all  God's  works  are  performed  according  to  that  eter- 
nal counsel,  which  may  also  be  called  a  providence,  according  to 
Heb.  xi.  40.  *'  God  having  provided  some  better  things  for  us."  But 
we  must  not  understand  the  word  providence  in  the  present  Lord's 
day  of  God's  knowledge  and  counsel ;  for  God  also  created  the  world 
according  to  that  foreknowledge  and  counsel  ;  now,  as  creating  is 
distinct  from  God's  foreknowledge  and  counsel,  so  providence  is  also 
distinct  therefrom.  We  must  therefore  understand  this  word  here 
in  a  different  sense,  as  the  word  providei-ce  denotes  also  to  provide 
for,  and  to  take  care  of  any  thing  :  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him, 
for  he  careth  for  you,"  1  Peter  v.  7.  Thus  also  the  Hebrew  word 
jRaahy  to  see,  to  behold,  denotes  to  take  care  of,  to  provide  :  "  God 
will  provide  himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering.  And  Abraham 
called  the  name  of  that  pljce  Js/iovah-Jtreh"  (the  Lord  will  provide) 
*'  as  it  is  said  to  this  day.  In  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  pro- 
vided," Gen.  xxii.  8,  14.  Thus  also  the  Greek  word  fironoeo,  which 
signifies  in  the  first  place  tofoiesee  and  foreknow  something  with 
our  understanding,  is  used  for  "providing  for  our  own,"  1  Tim. 
V.  8. 

2.  No  creature  can  provide  for  itself,  much  less  for  the  universe. 
Providing  for  the  universe  must  be  ascribed  to  God  only  ;  for  it  is 
a  work  of  almighty  power,  as  David  saith  of  it,  1  Chron  xxix.  12. 
"  Thou  reignest  over  all,  and  in  thy  hand  is  power  and  might :  and 
in  thy  hand  it  is  to  make  great  and  give  strengtii  to  all."  See  also 
Isaiah  xl.  26.  Which  is  not  to  be  understood  in  such  a  sense  as 
though  God  exerted  force  upon  his  creatures,  compelled  and  thwart- 
ed them  :  no,  God,  who  is  the  supreme  reason  itself,  regulates  his 
almighty  power  by  his  wisdom,  according  to  the  nature  of  his  crea- 
tures ;  "  He  is  the  only  wise  God,  to  whom  belongeth  dominion  and 
power,"  as  holy  Jude  speaks  m  his  epistle,  vrs.  25.  Moreover,  pro- 
viderxe  is  a  work  not  only  of  the  almighty,  but  also  of  the  every 
where  present  power  of  God,  who  is,  and  M'orks  immediately  with 
all  his  creatures ;  «  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us  j  for  in  him 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  21S 

we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  Acts  xvii.  2r,  2a.  And  it 
is  the  work  of  the  Father  thiouj^h  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
shice  it  is  referred  to  creation,  as  it  was  said  in  the  foregoing  Lord's 
day,  that  "the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  made  all  things, 
doth  still  uphold  and  govern  them  by  his  eternal  counsel  and  provi- 
dence," Providence  is  a  continual  creation,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  also 
refers  providence  to  his  Father,  Matt.  vi.  26 — 34.  And  this  work 
is  thus  ascribed  to  the  Father,  because  he  is  the  Father  of  all  the 
creatures,  but  especially  of  believers,  for  the  sake  of  his  Son  Christ, 
as  was  also  said  io  the  26th  question,  and  therefore  the  Father's  work 
here  is  to  be  considered  as  the  execution  of  his  dispensation  of  grace  ; 
and  whatsoever  he  bestows  upon  believers  in  his  providence,  comes 
to  them  by  his  fatherly  hand,  and  is  bestowed  from  special  love  with 
Christ,  Rom.  viii.  32. 

3.  The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all  things  that  he  hath  crea- 
ted :  to  "  the  heaven,  the  earth,  together  with  all  tl^e  creatures"  in 
general,  and  to  "  the  herbs,  and  grass,  rain  and  drought,  &c.  in  par- 
ticular. That  we  may  apprehend  all  this  in  a  proper  and  orderly 
manner,  we  will  proceed  according  to  the  method  which  God  obser- 
ved in  the  six  days  creation  '  and  so  we  must  say  that  the  providence 
of  God  extends  (a)  to  the  works  of  the  first  day,  the  heaven,  the  an- 
gels, and  the  light :  "  The  Lord  covereth  himself  with  light  as 
with  a  garment,  he  stretcheth  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain,  he 
maketh  his  angels  spirits,  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire,"  Psalm  civ.  2 
4.  The  earth  :  "  He  shaketh  the  earth  out  of  her  place,  and  the 
pillars  thereof  tremble,"  Job  ix.  6.  (b)  The  providence  of  God  ex- 
tends also  to  the  works  of  the  second  day,  as  the  waters  above  and 
below  ;  "  When  he  uttereth  his  voice,  there  is  a  multitude  of  waters 
ill  the  heavens  :  he  causeth  the  vapors  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of 
the  earth  ;  he  maketh  lightnings  with  the  rain  :  he  bringeth  the 
wind  out  of  his  treasuries."  See  also  Psalm  cxxxv.  7,  and  Psalm 
cxlvii.  15,  38.  Jer»  x.  13.  And  thus  he  gives  "rain  and  drought," 
the  Lord  saith,  Amos  iv.  7.  *'  I  have  withholden  the  rain  from  you, 
when  there  were  yet  three  months  to  the  harvest,  and  I  caused  it  to 
rain  upon  one  city,  and  caused  it  not  to  rain  upon  another  city  ;  one 
piece  was  rained  upon,  an^  the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not,  ^yith- 
ered."  See  Job  xxxvii.  6.  Isaiah  v.  6.  Jamts  v.  17,  1.8. (c)  The 
work  of  the  third  day  was  the  creation  of  the  heibs  and  plants..  The 
providence  of  God  extendeth  to  these  also,  and  therefore  "  herbs 
and  grass,  meat  and  drink"  come  from  God.  *'  He  causeth  the  gf ass 
to  grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herb  for  the  service  of  man  :  that  he  may 
bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth,  Psalm  civ.  14.    Thus  also  '*  fruit 


2  U       THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

ful  years  and  seasons"  proceed  from  the  Lord,  Acts  iv.  17  :  and  like* 
wise  "  barren  years,  when  he  muketh  the    heaven   as  iron,    and  the 
earth  as  brass,"  Lev.  xxvi.  I9.(d)     On  the  fourth  day  God  created 
the  lights  of  heaven.     He  takes  care  ol  these  also.     "  He  appointeth 
the  moon  for  seaisons,  the  sun  knoweth  his  going  down  :  he  maketh 
darkness,  and  it  is  night,"  Psalm  civ.  19,  20.     See  also  Job  ix,  7.(e) 
The  fishes  and  fowls  were  the  work  of  the  fifth  day.     And   God  at- 
tends to  these  also.     "  He  slew  the  fish  of  Egypt."   Psalm    cv  .  ^9, 
and  enabled  Peter  to  catch  a  great  multitude,  Luke  v.  5.  6.     "  He 
provideth  food  for  the  fowls,"  Jobxxxviii.  41.   Matt.  vi.   26.  yea,  the 
meanest  sparrow  falls  not  to  tlie  ground  without  your  Father,  Matt. 
X.  29. (f)     On  the  sixth  day  God  made  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and 
*'*  he  takes  care  of  oxen,"  Deut.  xxv.  4.    I  Cor.  ix.  9.     God  directs 
even  vermin,  as  we  see    in  the    lice,   frogs,   and   locusts  of  Egypt, 
*'The  locust,  the  cankerworm,  the  caterpillar,  and  the  palmerworm, 
are  God's  great  army,"  Joel  ii.  25.     But  God  orders  and  directs  es- 
pecially man,  the  chief  of  all  the  works  that  he  hath  made,  and  that 
"vvith  respect  to  his  natural  and  spiritual   condition.     With  respect 
tjo  his  natural  condition,  the  providence  of  God   extends  (2)   to  his 
birth  and  life.     How  beautifully  doth  Job  describe  the  providence  of 
God  with  respect  to  his  birth  1     "  Hast  thou  not  poured  me    cut  as 
milk,  and  curdled  me  like  cheese  ?   thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin 
an'd  flesh,  and  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  sinews.     Thou    hast 
granted  me  life  and  favour,  and  thy    visitation  hath    preserved  my 
spirit,"  Job  X.  10,  11,  12,     (2)  To  every  occurrence,  as  "  riches  and 
poverty."     For  "  the  Lord  maketh  pour  and  maketh  rich,  he  bringeth 
low,  and  lifteth  up,"   1  Sara.  ii.  7,  "  Health  and  sickness."    For  "  he 
rnaketh  sore  and  bindeth  up  ;  he    woundeth,  and  his   hands   make 
who^c,"  Job  V.  18,     War  and  peace.     "  He  maketh  peace,  and  crea- 
tetli  evil,"  Isaiah  xlv.  7.     "  Kings  obtain    victory   of  him."    Psalm 
cxliv.  10,     '^  The  horse  is  prepared  against  the  day  of  battle  ;    but 
safety  is  of  the  Lord,"  Prov.  xxi.  31.  Yea,   the    providence  of  God 
*'num.bers  also  the  hairs  of  our  head,"  Matt.   x.  30.    Luke  xxi.  18. 

(3)  The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all  the  voluntary  actions  of 
man,  as  "  his  thoughts,  his  downsitting,  uprisiujj:,  walking,  downly- 
jng,  ways  and  words,"  Psalm  cxxxix.  3,  3,  4.  This  is  evident  also 
from  Prov.  xvi.  9.   xxi.  1.     James  iv.    ^3,  14>  15.     1  Sara.   x.    26. 

(4)  Also  to  his  death,  tlie  manner,  the  time  and  the  place  of  his 
death  are  ordered  by  God  in  his  piovidence,  according  to  his  counsel. 
So  Job  speaks  to  the  Lord  concerning  man  :  "  Seeing  his  days  are 
determined,  the  number  of  his  months  are  with  thee  ;  thou  hast  ap- 
po.Dted  his  bounds  th:.t  he  cannot   pass,"  Job  xiv.  5,     Verily  the 


B 

s^reatest  revolutions  depend  upon  the  death  of  men,  which  cannot 
happen  without  the  providence  of  God.  Did  the  Lord  add  fifteen 
years  to  the  life  of  Hezekiah,  Isaiah  xxxviii.  1 — 5,  lie  did  not  add 
them  to  the  ytars  which  he  had  decreed  that  he  should  live  ;  bwt  to 
to  the  life  of  Hezekiah,  when  he  should  otherwise  have  died  of  his 
deadly  -ickness ;  those  fifteen  years  also  showed  that  his  lifetime 
was  detennmed,  and  the  whole  procedure  of  God  in  that  affair  de- 
monstrates his  providence,  •*  Do  not  wicked  men  live  out  half  their 
days,"  as  David  speaks,  Psalm  Iv.  23,  this  doth  not  mean  that  their 
untimely  death  happens  M'ithout  the  providence  of  God,  l^ut  it  re- 
sjfects  only  a  possibility  of  their  living  longer,  and  their  injuring  and 
forfeiting  of  their  health  by  their  wickedness  ;  for  which  reason  God 
lakes  them  away  suddenly  in  his  anger.  (5)  The  providence  of 
God  extends  also  to  those  occurrences,  which  happen  to  a  man  acci- 
dentally without  any  direction  of  the  man  himself,  or  of  others  :  "  The 
disposing  of  the  lot  is  of  the  Lord,"  Prov.  xvi.  33.  Is  a  man  slain 
unawares,  "  God  delivers  him  into  the  slayer's  hand,"  Exod.  xxi, 
13.   compare  herewith,  Deut.  xix,  5. 

But  the  providence  of  God  extends  not  only  to  the  natural^  but  also 
to  the  moral  condition  of  man,  since  he  is  subject  to  God  as  his  law- 
giver :  **  The  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord 
is  our  king,"  saith  the  church,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  The  Lord  mani- 
fests this  by  establishing  his  covenant  of  works,  and  of  grace  with 
man  ;  and  thus  "  God  works  in  him  both  to  will  and  to  do  after  his 
good  pleasure,"  Philip,  ii.  13,  and  he  inflicts  a  judgment  of  blindness 
and  hardness  upon  particular  persons..  We  shall  speak  of  this  more 
fully  hereafter. 

4.  God  exerciseth  his  p-^ovidence,  either  with  respect  to  the  es- 
sence and  existence  of  his  creatures,  or  with  respet  to  their  actions,  or 
with  respect  to  their  ends,  in  their  actions. 

With  respect  to  the  essence  and  existence  of  the  creatures,  the 
providence  of  God  consists  in  upholding  them,  by  which  he  causeth 
all  things,  which  he  hath  created  to  exist,  and  continue  in  being  : 
**  The  Lord  preserveth  man  and  beast,"  Psalm  xxxvi,  6.  "  By  him 
all  things  consist."  CqU.  i.  17.  God  upholds  some  things  with  re- 
spect to  their  essence,  as  the  heaven,  angels,  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  and 
the  earth  ;  these  are  all  still  the  same  that  they  were  when  they 
were  created  and  produced  :  he  upholds  others  with  respect  to  their 
kind  by  generation,  as  men,  beasts,  herbs,  and  plants.  God  upholds 
those  things  not  merely  by  not  annihilating  and  destroying  them,  as 
a  person  may  be  said  to  preserve  a  thini^  that  he  hath  made,  when 
he  doth  not  destroy  it,  which  is  the  notion  of  the   Pelagian^  concern- 


216      THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

ing  this  matter  :  but  God  upholds  by  an  actual,  operative  and  pow- 
erful influence,  which  is  God's  almighty  and  every  where  present 
power :  for  we  cannot  otherwise  understand  how  '*  we  live,  move, 
and  have  our  being  in  God."  God's  upholding  is,  as  it  were,  his 
continual  creation,  as  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  when  they  ascribe 
honour  to  him,  Sviy,  Rev.  iv.  II,  "  Thou  hast  created  all  things, 
and  by  thy  will  they  are,  and  are  created."*  It  is  a  continual  vivifi- 
calion  of  them,  Neh.  ix.  6,  therefore  it  is  also  said.  Psalm  civ.  30, 
**  Thou  sendest  forth  thy  spirit,  they  are  created  ;  and  thou  renew* 
est  the  face  of  the  earth."  Yea,  this  upholding  is,  as  it  were,  a  bear- 
ing with  a  strong  hand  ;  "  God  beartth  all  things  by  the  word  of  his 
power,  t  Heb.  i.  3  ;  otherwise  the  creature  would  perish  of  itself, 
since  it  hath  nothing  in  itself  that  causesth  it  to  exist  in  future  :  and 
annihilation  takes  place  only  when  God  withholds  his  influence : 
^'  when  he  lets  his  hand  loose,  he  cuts  man  off,"  Job  vi.  9.  See  also 
Psalm  civ.  29. 

With  respect  to  the  actions  of  the  creatures,  the  providence  6f 
God  co-operates  with  them,  whereby  he  prevents,  excites  and  main- 
tains  their  motions  and  actions,  by  an  active,  but  secret  power,  so 
that  "  they  move  in  him,  for  the  Lord  works  both  to  will  and  to  do," 
Philip,  ii.  13.  "Il  is  God  himself  who  worketh  all  in  all,"  I  Cor. 
xii.  6.  Read  this  also  emphatically,  Isaiah  x.  5,  6.  It  is  not  there- 
fore enough  to  assert  a  general  preservation  of  the  creature's  power 
and  ability  to  act,  or  a  general,  undetermining  influence,  which  is  de- 
termined by  the  creature  itself,  as  the  wind  i.npels  the  ship  forward, 
while  it  nevertheless  moves  hither  and  thither  by  the  conduct  of  the 
steersman.  It  is  moreover  not  enough  to  assert  a  co-ordinate  acting 
of  God,  with  the  actions  of  the  creature,  as  the  Pelagians  speak ;  for 
this  renders  the  creature  in  its  actions,  independent  of  God,  and  God 
dependent  in  his  act  on  the  action  of  the  creature,  which  he  must 
only  follow  :  yea,  the  Lord  God  is  not  then  the  principal,  but  the 
3ubordinate  cause. 

With  respect  to  the  end  of  the  creature,  the  providence  of  God 
works  by  governing,  whereby  God  directs,  in  a  sovereign  manner, 
every  event,  and  the  designs  of  his  creaturf;s,Jto  certain  ends,  which 
he  himself  proposeth,  according  to  certain  laws  which  he  hath  given  ; 
"  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  and  his  kingdom  is  from 
generation  to  generation. '  And  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are 
reputed  as  nothing  ;  and  he  doth  according  to  his  will   in    the  army 

*  We  have  rendered  this  passage  accorcling  to  the  Dutch  translation, 
t  This  13  according  to  the  Dutch  translation* 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  31/ 

of  heaven,  and  among  the  Inhabitants  of  the  earth  ;  and  none  can 
stay  iiis  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  whjit  dost  thou  i"  Dan.  iv.  34,  35. 
God  hath  for  this  purpose  given  his  creatures  certain  laws,  according 
to  which  he  governs  and  directs  them  ;  which  are  either  the  estab- 
lished order  of  nature,  which  God  hath  given  to  the  inanimate  crea- 
tures, so  "  that  hencefortii,  while  the  earth  remaineth,  seed-time  and 
harvest,  cold  and  heat,  summer  and  winter,  day  and  night,  shall  not 
cease,"  Gen.  viii.  22.  See  also  Jer.  xxxi.  35,  36,  or  the  natural  in- 
stinct of  animate  creatures,  according  to  which  they  perform  all 
their  actions  ;  "  Even  the  stork  in  the  hcavtns  knoweth  her  appoin- 
ted times,  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and  the  swallow  observe  the 
time  of  their  coming,"  Jer,  viii  7,  or  *'  the  royal  law,"  which  he  hath 
given  to  rational  creatures,  James  ii.  8.  Yea,  we  may  also  say,  thaS 
"the  counsel  of  the  Lord's  will,  after  which  he  worketh  all  things," 
is  the  law  of  the  Lord,  or  the  plan,  according  to  which  he  doth  all 
things.  According  to  these  laws  doth  God  govern  all  his  creatures, 
and  that  in  a  manner  suited  to  their  nature.  Doth  the  crcaiure 
swerve  in  any  instance  from  that  law,  either  by  some  miraculous  act 
of  God,  or  by  its  own  vice,  God  directs  it  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  is 
agreeable  to  his  decree,  and  issues  to  his  honour,  and  for  the  welfare 
of  the  good,  by  vvhich  the  Lord  always  obtains  the  end,  which  he 
proposeth,  even  against  the  purpose  and  end  of  the  creature.  This 
Joseph  observed,  when  he  said  to  his  brethren,  Gen.  1.  20,  **  Ye 
thought  evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  for  good."  See  Isaiah 
X.  5,6,7. 

5.  God  the  Lord  provides  for  all  his  creatures,  and  at  all  times,  in 
different  methods  ;  and  therefore  we  consider  providence,  as  (1)  me- 
diate and  immediate  :  the  mediate  providence  is  that  by  which  God 
provides  for  some  creatures  by  means.  The  Lord  saith,  Hosea  ii. 
21,  22,  "  I  will  hear  the  heavens  ;  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth  ; 
and  the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil  ;  and 
they  shall  hear  Jezreel,"  See  also  Psalm  civ.  13,  14,  15,  Rom  i, 
16.  X.  17.  Immediate  providence  is  that  by  which  God  provides 
for  some  things  without  means,  as  the  third  heaven,  and  the  angels  ; 
in  this  manner  the  Lord  also  provided  for  Moses  and  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  forty  days,  without  the  means  of  meat  and  drink  ;  but  when  he 
makes  use  of  means,  he  doth  not  do  it  from  any  defect,  as  though  he 
had  need  of  them,  for  he  is  allsufficient ;  but  he  doth  it  from  his  c  ood- 
ness,  as  he  is  willing  to  honour  the  creature  by  making  it  his  fellow- 
worker.  See  1  Cor.  iii.  9,  For  he  makes  use  sometimes  of  the 
most  insignificant  means  :  three  hundred  men  sufficed  to  discomfit 
the  innumerable  host  of  the  Mtdianites.     God  sometimes  renders 

Hh 


?i«        THE  DOCTRIVE  OF  DiVlNE  PROVIt)ENC£.. 

the  most  powerful  means  inefficacious,  so  that  "  a  lun^  is  n©t  saved 
by  the  multitude  of  an  host ;  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by 
much  strength.  An  horse  is  a  vain  tiling  for  safety  :  neither  shali 
he  deliver  any  by  his  great  strength,"  Psalm  xxxili.  16,  17.  G6d 
works  somttimes  in  a  manner  that  is  above,  and  contrary  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  means  ;  for  instance,  causing  that  the  fire  doth  not  burn  and 
simge,  Dan.  iii.  And  when  God  useth  means,  their  power  doth  still 
€lepend  on  him.  See  Deut.  viii.  3.  I  Cor.  iii.  5,  6.  (2)  Provi- 
dence is  also  distinguished  into  an  ordinary  and  extraordinary.  The 
ordin  .ry  providence  is,  that  God  works  according  to  the  ordinary 
and  established  course  of  nature  :  but  the  extraordinary,  or  super- 
ordinary  is.  that  Ciod  works  sometimes  above  the  ordinary  and  es- 
t.iblished  coiirse  of  nature,  by  a  miracle :  iov  instance,  when  God 
gives  bread  frOiti  heaven  brings  water  out  of  the  rock,  makes  the 
sun  and  inooii  stand  still,  effects  that  ti^e  cruel  lions  do  not  rend  Dan- 
iel, and  that  the  hungry  ravens  brinp^  Elijah  bread  and  flesh  :  which, 
and  like  wonders,  Got!  the  L&rd  ak)fie  can  do.  according  to 
Psalm  Ixxii.  18.  Psalm  cxxxvi.  4.  Are  they  sometimes  ascribed  to 
men,  it  i-i  only  because  they  were  mere  moral  instruments  by  their 
faith  and  pray crsv  See  Acts  iii.  12,  13,  16.  Miracles  or  wonders, 
are  certain  great  events^,  which  take  place  beside  the  ordinary  laws 
at  nature,  through  the  aim  ghty  power  of  God,  for  the  confirnjation 
of  the  divine  truth  :  but  we  riiay  not  look  upon  that  as  a  miracle, 
whichapersondothby  amo^re  than  ordinary  strength,  like  Samson  ; 
lor  that  is  only  an  increase  of  strength,  which  doth  not  exist  in  a 
miracle.  .Moreover,  it  doth  not  enter  into  the  nature  of  a  miracle, 
that  we  do  not  know  the  precise  reason  of  a  thing,  and  that  it  hap- 
pens s-ldom,  as  some  bpeak,  who  are  unwilling  to  allow  that  God 
ever  doth  any  thing  beside  the  laws  of  nature,  or  contrary  to  the 
estaoiished  motions  of  matter  :  for  when  we  speak  thus,  we  lessen, 
yea,  Ave  vilify  the  great  miracles  of  God  :  at  this  rate,  there  would 
ha])pen  many  miracles  every  day,  \thich  no  man  will  consider  as 
miracles,  because  we  can  assign  'he  precise  reason  of  but  few  of 
God's  works.  Can  we  discover  the  reason  why  the  iron  swims  upon 
the  water,  the  sun  and  moon  stand  stll.  and  the  fire  dotii  not  burn  ? 
Such  wonders  hath  God  sometimes  wrought,  in  order  to  confirm 
the  truth  :  but  shall  our  ignorance  of  the  precise  reason  of  such 
things  be  a  poweiful  confirmation  of  the  divuie  truth  ?{$'>  Finally, 
we  distinguish  the  providence  ol  God  into  a  common  and  special  pro- 
vidence. The  common  providence  is  tnat  by  which  he  showeth  fa- 
vour, irom  a  common  good-will  to  all  his  creatures  ;  yea,  to  the  un- 
godly, as  well  as  .to  the  godly  :  '*  God  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on 


 

the:  evil  and  on  ihe  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  un- 
just,-' Matt.  V.  45.     The  special  providence  is  that  by  which  Cicd,  as 
a  Father  in  Christ,  from  a  special  good-will,  providrs  believers  with 
all'things  :  "  God  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  tsperitiUy  of  those  that 
believe,"  I  Tim.  iv.  10.     See  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  God  gives  in  the  leust 
f^ift  also  himself  and  his  Son  to  believers,  as  his  children  and  heirs : 
but  he  withholds  himself  from  others,  although  he  gives  them  also 
jnany  gifts,  as  we  give  a  begj^ar  an  alms  from  a  common  food  iiuli- 
nation  to  him,  but  do  not  unite  ourselves  to   him.   do  not  take  him 
into  our  house,  or  make  him  our  heir,  as  though  he  were  our  child. 
6.  But  what  dotli  the  carnal  mind  object  here,  by  the  putrons  of 
Pelagianism.  ?  (1)  That  to  take  care  of  the  smallest  thinf,s  with  so 
much  labour  and  trouble,  agrees  not  with  the  exalted  dignity  of  God. 
But- if  it  aerecd  with  the  exalted  dignity  of  Gcd  to  create  those  thiiK^s., 
it  can  also  to  take  care  of  them.    It  doth  not  occasion  God  t}i-  l.ofd 
more  labour  and  trouble  to  take   care  of  %hf  smaHes'  thinprs,  than 
the  greatest;  for  he  doth  all  thirds   with  a  word  and  a  beck  :  "He 
Gpeaks,  and  it  is  done  ;  he  c<^mm  nds,   and   it  stands  fast,"  Psalm 
Kxxiii   9.     While  he  provides  for  small  things,   he  doih  not  nef'lect 
great  things,  like  a  king,  w' o  by  frequeiiily  employing  hims'^lf  with 
.  inferior  things,  would  overlook  those   that  '^n'e  most  weighty  ;  yea, 
by  the  meanest  things,  God  often  accomntishes  the  grfatest  matters, 
as  by  means  of  hce,  frogs,  locusts,  and  all  kinds  of  vtrm'n  he  meek- 
ened  the  stubborn  Pharaoh,  obliged  him  to  acknowledpe  his  hand, 
and  delivered   his  people.  (2)  T'jiey  also  object  that  all  things  hap- 
pen then  necessarily,  and  notliing  by  chance,  when  nevertheless  the 
word  of  God  oCten  sptaks- of  things  v.'hich  happen  by  chance,   as  we 
see  Ruth  ii.  3.   2  Sam.  i.  6.   xx    1.  Luke  x.  31.     But  we  say,  that 
with  respect  to  the  Lord,  nothing  happens  by  chance,  since  then 
many  things  which  depend  upon  such  a  chance,  would  happen  be- 
side providence ;  for  how  can  it  be,  that  any  event  should  ocettr  in 
-the  kingdom  of  God,   without  his  cognizance  and  direction,   and 
.  wherein  he  should  not  take  any  concern.    Those  things  that  happen 
to  us  by  chance  often  disconcert  us  e^itirely,  and  compel  us  to  es- 
tablish a  totally  different  order  than  before.     Can  now  things  which 
happen  by  chance  disconcert  God  likewise,  so  that  he  should  be 
obliged  to  accommodate  himself  to  those  things  ?  what  must  we  not 
admit,  if  v/e  will  be  Pelagians  ?  It  is  true,  many  things  happen  to 
us  by  chance,  but  this  is  so,  not  with  rtspect  to  Gcd,  but  with  respect 
to  ua,  who  cannot  foresee  nor  direct  such  things.  (3)  They  say  also, 
that  5uch  an  efficacious  providence  and  co-operation  of  God  in  and 
'f.vith  the  actions  of  xht  creatures,  destroys  the  liberty  of  human  ac- 


220        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

tions.  This  must  be  allowed  by  those,  (although  many  of  them  abhw 
such  a  consequence,  and  therefore  deny  it)  who  say  that  the  soul  is 
a  mere  thouij^ht,  and  is  unable  to  act  upon  any  body,  and  that  the 
body  is  in  like  manner  unable  to  act  upon  the  soul  :  but  that  God 
effects  Ufon  each  thought  of  the  soul,  immediately  a  correspondent 
motion  in  the  body ;  and  upon  each  motion  of  the  body,  a  corres- 
ponilent  thought  in  the  soul ;  and  that  therefore  the  reasonable  crea- 
ture is  not  the  true  author  of  its  actions.  Whither  this  tends  we  may 
see  in  -pinoza,  Van  Hattem,  Letnhof  and  Bril,  who  assert  either  in 
a  more  publick,  or  in  a  more  private  manner,  that  the  rational  crea- 
ture is  not  active,  but  passive,  and  that  God  works  all  in  all,  and  that 
there  is  nn  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  and  that  whoever 
maintains  a  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  sins,  and  is  not  in  the 
Spirit,  but  in  the  flesh  :  and  would  we  know  the  secret  ?  it  is  this ; 
man  is  not  a  substantial  being  by  himself,  distinct  from  God,  but 
subsists  in  God,  and  is  only  a  form  and  mode  of  God  ;  that  is,  the 
world  is  God,  and  we  and  all  other  creatures  are  forms,  modes  and 
parts  of  God.  Is  it  necessary  to  confute  this  opinion  ?  will  it  not  suf- 
fice to  mention  it,  in  order  to  shame  it,  and  induce  every  one  to 
abhor  it  ?  is  it  not  a  denial  of  divine  providence  ?  doth  it  not  make 
God  the  author  of  the  most  abominable  enormities  ?  and  doth  it  not 
unman  man  ?  Who  dolh  not  know  of  himself,  that  he  is  a  substantial 
bemg  distinct  from  God  ?  that  he  apprehends  by  his  spirit  ?  that  he 
himself  judges,  assents,  denies,  reasons,  follows  his  judgment,  pro- 
poseth  an  end  to  himself,  excites,  urges,  moves,  and  acts  himself  by 
that  end,  that  he  may  by  certain  means  attain  unto  his  end  ?  It  is 
true,  God  works  effectually  in  and  with  the  working  of  his  creatures  ; 
but  this  doth  not  hinder  man  from  acting  willingly,  and  from  being 
a  real  author  of  his  actions  ;  for  God  doth  not  act  man  by  a  violent 
urging  of  his  will,  as  a  person  moves  a  stock  or  a  stone,  but  in  a 
reasonable  manner,  agreeably  to  his  nature,  enabling  us  to  under- 
stand, judge  and  will  by  objects,  and  by  an  inward  light  and  motion  ; 
so  that  understanding,  judging  and  willing  are  our  actions,  r.s  much 
as  eating,  drinking,  standing,  walking  and  lying  down,  are  our  ac- 
tions, and  not  God's,  although  he  works  effectually  in  and  with  us, 
when  we  do  an  action  ;  for  actions  belong  to  him,  who  is  the  next 
subject  of  them.  (4)  Finally,  they  pretend  that  by  asserting  such  an 
efficacious  providence,  we  make  God  an  author  of  sin  ;  but  our  doc- 
trine canrot  be  charged  with  such  a  consequence ;  for  we  are  far 
from  holding  such  an  evil  opinion,  and  say.  "  Far  be  it  from  God, 
that  he  should  do  wickedness,  and  from  the  Almighty,  that  he  should 
commit  iniquity.**    But  doth  not  the  word  of  God  use  as  forcible 


l 

expressions  concerning  the  providence  of  God,  with  respect  to  sin, 
as  any  of  our  divines  ?  for  we  read  that  '*  God  hardens  and  blinds 
the  hearts  of  men,"  Exod.  vii.  3,  Roin.  ix.  27,  18,  Isaiah  vi.  9,  10, 
« that  he  turned  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians  to  hate  his  people," 
Psalm  cv#.25,  "  that  he  said  to  Shimei,  Curse  David,"  2  Sam.  xvi. 
10,  *'that  he  gave  Israel  up  to  their  own  hearts*  lust,  so  that  they 
walked  in  their  own  counsels,"  Psalm  Ixxxi.  12.  *'  that  he  gave  the 
heathens  up  to  uncleanness,  and  to  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  things 
which  are  not  convenient,"  Rom.  i.  24 — 28,  *nhat  he  send^"  the  fol» 
lowers  of  the  man  of  sin  "  a  strong  delusion,  that  they  should  be- 
lieve a  lie,"  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  and  other  expressions  of  a  similar  nature. 
To  explain  these  and  such  sxpressions  in  the  Pelagian  way,  of  a  bare 
permission,  is  weakening  the  force  of  the  words,  and  being  wilfully 
bhnd ;  therefore  if  these  words  of  God  signify  any  thing  at  all,  it  is  the 
same  with  what  we  teach,  to  wit,  that  sin  happei*eth  according  to  the 
determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  agreeably  to  Acts  ii. 
23.  iv.  27,  28.  Isaiah  xlviii.  8,  that  God  marks  it  carefully  and  re- 
gards it,  Job  xxxiv.  21,  22,  and  particularly,  which  is  the  principal 
subject  of  controversy  here,  that  God  powerfully  co-operates,  not  with 
and  in  sin,  but  in  the  actions  of  men,  which  are  sinful.  If  this  be 
not  so,  the  above  cited  and  other  expressions  of  God's  word  are  ua- 
intelUgible  with  respect  to  this  matter. 

In  order  to  illustrate  this  somewhat  more  fully,  we  must  consider 
sinfulness  with  respect  to  its  beginning,  progress  and  end. 

,  With  respect  to  the  beginning  of  sin,  the  providence  of  God,  works 
sometimes  by  hindering  and  restraining  it :  thus  "  God  withheld 
king  Abimciech  from  sinning  against  him,"  Gen.  xx.  6.  David 
prayed  for  this.  Psalm  xix.  13.  At  other  times  by  permitting  it, 
not  by  giving  license  to  sin,  but  by  not  hindering  it :  and  that  not 
like  a  mere  spectator ;  for  this  militates  against  the  above  mentioned 
expressions,  but  by  a  powerful  permission,  which  is  certainly  follow- 
ed by  sin.  For  (a)  God  suflers  occasions  to  occur  to  the  sinner, 
which  are  in  themselves  good,  but  which  the  sinner  abuses  by  his 
sinfulness,  tis  Abel's  acceptable  sacrifice  to  Cain,  Joseph's  dreams  to 
his  brethren,  the  request  of  Moses  to  Pharaoh,  that  he  would  let 
Israel  go,  as  also  the  word  of  grace  to  reprobates,  Rom.  ii.  4,  5.  2 
Cor.  ii.  15,  16.  (b)  God  also  withholds  his  restraining  grace,  where- 
upon the  sinner  indulges  himself  in  sin,  as  *'  when  the  Lord  forsook. 
Hezekiah,  his  heart  was  lifted  up,"  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31.  God  doth  not 
sin,  when  he  acts  thus,  since  he  is  not  bound  to  bestovi^  his  grace- 
upon  man,  in  order  that  he  may  not  sin.  (c)  The  Lord  God  some- 
times also  gives  the  sinner  up  to  himself,  to  sin,  and  to  the  enexnie5> 


%2t        THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE, 

who  are  then  also  let  loose  on  him :  "  God  gives  him  up  to  his  lusts^ 
to  vile  affections,  and  to  a  veprobate  mini,"  Rom,  i.  24,  26,  28.  bee 
also  I  Kings  xxii.  25^,  23.  1  iSam.  xxiv.  1,  compared  with  1  Chron* 
xxi.  1.  2  J  hess.  li.  9,  10.  And  in  all  this  God  manifests  himself 
holy  and  just,  punisliing  one  sm  with  another,  Psalm  Ixxxi.  U,  12. 
Horn  i.  22 — 28.  With  respect  to  the  pro^.ress  of  sm,  the  pron- 
denc  of  God  works  by  limiting  it,  tiiat  it  may  not  proceed  further 
tijan  the  bounds  which  he  hath  appoi'.ted.  When  the  devil  bereaved 
Job  of  his  goods,  he  might  not  at  first  touch  his  body,  and  alterwards 
he  was  obliged  to  spare  his  life,  Job  i.  12.  ii.  6, 

With  respect  to  the  end  of  sin,  the  providence  of  (iod  works  by 
directing  it  to  the  destruction  of  the  ungodly  :  *^  He  sends  them  a 
strong  delusion,  so  that  they  believe  a  lie,  that  they  may  all  be  dam- 
ned," 2  Thess.  ii.  11,  12,  and  to  the  good  of  liis  peoph,  as  we  see 
in  the  selling  of  Joseph,  Gen.  xlv.  8.  1.20,  and  in  the  delivering  up 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  Acts  ii.  23.  iv.  27,  28,  and  also  to  their  humilia- 
tion, "  that  they  may  not  be  exalted  above  measure,  because  of  the 
excellency  of  their  revelation,"  2  Cor.  xii  .7.  But  the  Lord  doth  more 
especially  direct  sin  most  wisely  to  the  honour  of  his  justice,  grace 
and  mercy,  which  are  manifested  ;nost  gloriously  upon  occasion  of 
sin,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  v.  10.  xi.  32. 

Whence  it  appears  then  plainly,  that  the  doctrine  of  effectual  pro- 
vidence doth  not  make  God  an  author  of  sin  :  especially  since  God 
neither  advises  nor  commands,  nor  works  sin  by  his  providence : 
moreover,  we  ought  to  know  that  sin,  being  a  defect,  and  not  some- 
thing that  hath  a  real  being,  hath  not  properly  a  working,  but  only 
a  defective  author,  to  wit,  the  sinner  himself ;  furthermore,  the  sin- 
Ker  commits  sin  horn  his  own  inclination,  and  is  not  compelled  to  it 
by  providence  :  we  say  also,  that  the  action  of  God  with  respect  to 
sin,  even  his  v/orking  the  physical  a^t,  is  good,  but  it  becomes  cor- 
rupt through  the  corruption  of  man,  as  a  lame  f<)ot  causes  a  horse 
to  halt,  but  not  the  action  of  the  rider,  who  drives  the  horse.  Doth 
our  dojctrine  still  remain  somewhat  obscure,  it  ought  not  to  create 
•<4ny  prejudice  against  it,  inasmuch  as  no  creature  may  undertake  to 
fathom  all  the  judgments  of  God,  which  are  a  great  deep,  for  they 
are  unsearchable  and  past  finding  it.  « 

7.  Without  doubt  the  whole  universe  is  subject  to  the  providence 
cf  God.  We  have  indeed  proved  tiiis  with  respect  to  each  part  in 
particular  from  the  word  of  God  ;  but  we  v/ill  now  prove  this  matter 
iVom  reason,  that  our  minds  may  be  more  fully  persuaded  of  it.  This 
truth  appears  then,  (a)  from  the  nature  of  God,  unto  whom  the  whole 
creation  is  subjvict,  and  who,  on  account  of  his  supremacy  and  sp\= 


« 

treign  dominion,  cannot  discharge  bimself  from  directing  and  pro- 
viding iov  his  creatures,  any  more  than  be  can  be  unwilling  that 
they  should  acknowledge  his  glory  (b)  The  nature  of  the  creature 
also  teacheth  us  this,  since  it  is  so  empty  and  defective,  that  it  can- 
not provide  for  itself,  all  things  must  come  and  be  brought  to  \t  from 
without,  (c)  Contemplate  the  perfection,  beauty,  order  and  stability 
of  the  universe.  Yea,  though  all  the  elements  frequently  seem  to 
dash  and  b^at  one  against  another,  as  if  heaven  and  earth  would  re- 
turn to  their  first  nothing,  nevertheless  all  things  abide  in  their  pro- 
per state  ;  yea,  all  these  commotions  only  contribute  to  preserve  the 
vast  creation. 

Who  doth  not  tiow  know  by  all  these  things,  that  the  baad  of  the 
Lord  hath  wrought  tbis  ?  (b)  We  shall  not  speak  now  of  the  won- 
derful and  extraordinary  events,  nor  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophe- 
cies,  which  are  related  in  the  scriptures  :  attend  only  to  this,  that  if 
no  universal  Ruler  directed  whatsoever  comes  to  pass,  how  should 
good  men  be  able  to  quiet  and  comfort  themselves  in  all  their  tribu- 
lations ?  would  noc  their  condition  be  worse  than  that  of  the  wicked  ? 

It  is  indeed  true,  that  sometimes,  through  the  divine  direction  of 
providence,  there  are  righteous  persons,  to  whom  it  happeneth  accor- 
ding to  the  work  of  the  wicked,  and  wicked  persons,  to  whom  it  hap- 
peneth according  to  the  work  of  the  righteous ;  but  this  is  not  so 
with  respect  to  things  that  are  essential,  to  wit,  having  God  for  our 
father  and  our  portion,  and  enjoying  his  love,  which  is  the  chief  and 
only  real  good  ;  but  only  with  respect  to  visible  things,  which  are 
not  essential  ?  It  is  true,  it  sometimes  greatly  afflicts  and  disturbs 
the  godly,  when  they  see  that  the  wicked  are  often  preferred  by  pro- 
vidence before  them  ;  but  the  joy  of  the  wicked  is  only  for  a  mo- 
ment, and  they  are  afterwards  cast  down  into  destructioji,  when  God 
despiseth  their  image  :  on  the  contrary,  tlie  sorrow  of  the  upright 
doth  not  last  long,  but  hath  soon  an  end  ;  and  then  they  will  be  for 
ever  with  the  Lord ,  for  he  holdeth  them  by  their  right  hand,  he 
will  guide  them  with  his  counsel,  and  afterwards  receive  them  to 
glory.     See  more  of  this  in  the  seventy-third  Psalm. 

II.  We  should  speak  now  to  the  second  general  head,  according 
to  the  twenty-eighth  question,  "  What  ad^^antage  is  it  to  us  to  know 
that  God  hath  created,  and  by  his  providence  doth  still  uphold  all 
things  ?"  The  instructor  mentions  three  great  advantages  of  this  ; 
first,  *'  that  we  may  be  patient  in  adversity  ;'•  secondly,  "  that  we 
may  be  thankful  in  prosperity  j"  and  finally,  **  that  in  all  things 
which  may  hereafter  befall  us,  we  place  our  firm  trust  in  our  faith- 
ful God  and  Father  ;"  the  reason  of  which  i»  assigned  in  that  which 


%U        THE  DOGTRINL  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

followeth,  ''  since  all  creatures,"  Sec.  but  we  shall  not  speak  of  these 
several  things  at  present,  but  (kfer  them  to  our  application. 


APPLICATION. 

Behold  then  this  precious  and  profitable  truth  of  God's  efTectual 
providence  ;  but  how  is  it  practically  denied,  and  shamefully  oppo- 
sed in  our  Christian  nation,  even  by  those,  who  confess  it  in  words  J 
For, 

1.  Many  see  not  the  hand  of  God  in  that  which  befalls  them. 
Do  they  look  downward,  or  do  they  lift  their  eyes  upward,  do  they 
receive  meat  or  drink,  are  they  in  health  or  sick,  are  thy  rich  or 
poor,  they  see  not  in  all  these  thinf;!:s,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath 
•wreught  this ;  tliey  act  as  if  they  were  Epicureans,  fancying  that 
God  doth  not  attend  to  the  things  on  earth,  and  that  all  things  hap- 
pen only  by  chance  :  or  like  the  l^toics,  they  imagine  a  fate,  and  that 
every  vicissitude  and  event  happens  necessarily,  because  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation  ail  thinf';-s  have  continued  as  they  are  now  ; 
or  with  the  Peripatetics,  they  think  that  all  sublunary  things  arc  gov- 
erned by  tlie  heavenly  ?  and  thus  they  cry  aloud  with  their  actions, 
*'The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil,"  Zeph-  i.  12, 
**■  And  hov/  doth  God  know  ?  can  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ? 
thick  clouds  are  a  covering  to  him  that  he  seeth  not,  and  he  walketh 
in  the  circuit  of  the  heaven,"  Job  xxii.  13,  14.  The  proper  work  of 
the  v/iched,  "  who  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance  will  not 
peek  after  God  ;  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts,"  Psalm  x.  4.  For, 
didst  thou,  hearer,  see  with  observation  a  God  in  all  those  things, 
would  not  a  sense  of  a  God,  a  wonder,  and  a  holy  awe  for  him  pos- 
sess thy  soul  ?  but  now  men  do  not  attend  to  him  with  their  hearts, 
and  tiiey  walk,  as  it  were,  without  God. 

2.  This  appears  still  moi'e,  because  they  will  take  care  of,  and  di- 
rect all  things  themselves.  They  propose  some  advantageous  end 
to  themselves  ;  and  in  order  to  obtain  it,  they  devise  means,  and 
fTideavour  to  execute  them ;  this  is  in  itself  acting  in  a  rational 
manner  ;  but  it  is  acting  in  a  brutal  manner,  not  to  do  this  in  obedi- 
ence to  God,  and  not  to  expect  a  happy  isstie  from  him,  but  from 
ourselves,  from  onr  own  wise  management  and  diligence  ;  "  this  is 
rayint;,  to-day  or  to-morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a  city,  and  con- 
tinue there  a  year,  and  buy,  and  sell,  and  get  gain  ;"  (and  thus  men 
conduct  in  all  their  undertakings)  "whereas  they  know  not  what 
shall  be  on  the  moirow.     For  that  they  onght  to  say,   if  the   Lord 


•     r,  28.  325 

will,  we  shall  do  this  or  that,"  James  iv.  13,  14,  15.  Doth  their  un- 
taking  prosper,  they  bless  themselves,  because- they  obtain  the  desire 
of  their  souls,  they  wonder  at  their  own  wisdom  and  ability  ;  and 
»<  say  in  their  hearts,  our  power  and  the  might  of  our  hands  hath 
gotten  us  this  wealth,"  Deiit.  viii.  17,  and  thus  "they  sacrifice  to 
their  own  net,  and  burn  incense  to  their  own  drag  ;  because  by  them 
their  portion  is  fal,  and  their  meat  plenteous,"  Hab.  i.  16.  But  doth 
their  conduct  and  their  labour  not  speed  well,  they  either  fret  at 
themselves,  or  they  blame  this  or  that  event  ;  but  God  is  not  uc- 
knowleged  in  it. 

3.  Do  they  acknowledge  a  providence,  it  is  only  from  hearsay, 
and  because  they  either  cannot  from  ignorance  gainsay  it,  or  be- 
cause for  fear  of  reproach  they  dare  not  ;  for  it  appears  that  the  di- 
vine providence  doth  not  influence  their  hearts,  since,  (a)  they  abuse 
it  to  slothfulness  and  sluggishness,  and  do  not  make  use  of  proper 
means,  in  order  to  execute  the  designs  of  providence.  The  sluggard 
thinks  that  God  will  provide  for  him  :  is  one  compelled  by  his  lust 
to  a  shameful  marriage,  he  pacifies  his  co?iscience  by  thinking 
that  such  a  partner  was  allotted  him  by  divine  providence:  must  he 
suffer  through  his  own  misconduct,  he  comforts  himself  with  the 
providence  of  God,  and  he  hardens  himself  against  his  suffering  :  is 
he  cast  upon  the  bed  of  sickness,  he  will  not  make  use  of  medicines, 
because  he  persuades  hiuiself  that  if  ihe  appointed  time  of  his  death 
be  not  come,  he  will  certainly  recover;  and  if  that  time  be  come, 
medicines  cannot  avail  :  doth  he  begin  to  think  of  salvation  and 
damnation,  because  he  will  not  be  in  earnest,  he  thinks,  if  I 
be  elected,  I  shall  be  saved  ;  and  if  I  be  a  reprobate,  I  shall  cer- 
tainly be  damned  :  what  then  can  all  my  endeavours  to  be  saved 
profit  me  ?  as  if  God  would  show  his  providential  kindness  to  tho' e 
who  despise  his  institutions.  When  God  hadpiomised  that  not  one 
of  those  who  were  in  the  ship  with  Paul  should  perish  in  the  ship- 
wreck, and  they  sought  to  flee  out  of  the  ship,  "  Paul  said  to  the 
centurion,  except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot  be  saved,"  Acts 
xxvii.  31.  Though  the  divine  appointment  concerning  man  be 
ever  so  certain,  God  will  nevertheless  not  execute  it,  but  by  a  dili- 
gent use  of  the  means  (b)  Because  men  become  heartless  and  fret- 
ful on  account  of  adversities,  they  will  not  submit  to  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  nor  be  meek,  but  they  struggle  against  him,  they  strive  with 
the  Almighty,  even  when  they  suffer  the  smallest  misfortune,  and 
when  the  wind  and  weather  are  not  as  they  wish:  Yea,  "  if  the 
sinner  be  hardly  bestead  and  hungry,  he  will  fret  himself  and  curse 


i!Si6      THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

his  Gcd,"  fsa-ali  viii.  21  ;  and  he  will  sometimes  make  a  desperate 
attempt  to  deliver  himself  without  God  by  some  horrible  action,  like 
the  k.  nij  of  Israel,  wiio  would,  in  the  gieat  famine,  take  off  the  head 
of  Elisha.  saymg;,""  Behold,  this  evil  ib  of  the  Lord;  what  should  I 
Mait  for  the  Lord  any  Ioniser  ?"  2  Kin^js  vi.  33.  But  "  the  Lord  is 
%yise  in  heart,  and  mi.^hty  in  strenii,th  ;  who  hath  hardened  himself 
ag-dinst  him,  and  prospered?"  Job  ix  4.(c)  Because  they  are  envi- 
ous and  grudge,  when  another  fares  better  than  they  :  the  sinner 
will  cavil  at,  and  argue  against  the  conduct  of  God,  and  ask  why  he 
Cloth  not  favour  him,  as  well  as  this  and  that  person  :  but  "  wo  to 
him  that  striveth  with  liis  Maker;  let  the  potsherds  strive  with  the 
potsherds  of  tl^e  earth:  shall  the  clay  say  to  him  that  fashionelh  it, 
what  makcst  thou  ?  or  thy  work,  He  hath  no  hands?"  Isaiah  xlv« 
9.  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  him  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own?  is 
thine  eye  evil  because  he  is  good  ?"  (d)  Because,  when  they  enjoy 
any  favourable  dispensation  of  providence,  they  forget  God,  they  for- 
saKe  him,  and  light  against  him  with  his  blessings,  and  employ  them 
as  "  weapons  of  unrijrhteousness,  saying  to  God,  Depart  from  us, 
and  what  hath  the  Almighty  done  ?  yet  he  filled  their  houses  with 
good  things,"  Job  xxii.  17,  18,  like  "  Jeshurun,  who  when  he  was 
waxen  fat,  kicked ;  then  he  forsook  God  who  made  him,  and  lightly 
esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  15. 

O  horrid  !  that  a  creature  should  not  acknowledge  his  Creator, 
and  Benefactor.  What  is  this  but  a  denial  of  God,  and  of  his  allup- 
holding,  v/orking  and  directing  hand  ?  A  brutish  stupidity,  which 
doth  not  look  upward  The  Lofd  v/ill  compel  you  to  acknowledge 
his  hand,  when  he  will  afflict  and  distress  you  to  the  uttermost. 
j\ttend  to  what  the  church  saith,  Isaiah  xxvi.  10,  II.  "  Let  favour 
be  showed  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness :  in  the 
}and  of  uprightness  will  he  deal  unjust'y,  and  will  not  behold  the 
majesty  of  the  Lord.  Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  lifted  up  they  will  not 
see  :  but  they  shall  see  and  be  ashamed."  Nourish  yourselves  like 
an  ox  for  the  day  of  slaughter,  the  Lord  will  one  day  exert  his 
almighty  arm  for  your  destruction,  unless  ye  be  converted  :  for 
"  because  ye  regard  not  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  operation 
of  his  hands,  he  will  destroy  you,  and  not  build  you  up,"  Psalm 
xxviii.  5. 

Therefore  ye,  who  do  not  know  nor  acknowledge  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  and  live  altogether  without  God,  O  seek  to  obtain  an  interest 
in  his  special  and  fatherly  providence,  and  to  become  his  children. 
O  seek  him  for  this  purpose  ;  for  God  hath  created  you,  and  pro- 


X.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q    27,  28.  227 

vkles  for  you,  "  that  ye  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  ye  might  feel 
after  him,  and  firid  hina,  thoa^^li  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us  : 
for  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  Acts  xvii.  27, 
28,  "  Receive  his  Son  by  faith,  that  ye  may  obtain  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God,"  John  i.  12. 

But  ye,  O  believers,  who  have  tjie  great  Crea'or,  the  almighty 
and  every  where  present  Provider  of  the  universe  for  your  Father, 
und.r  whose  special  and  favourable  providential  care  ye  are  placed, 
who  are  the  blessing  in  the  cluster  of  our  grapes,  for  whose  sake 
they  are  yet  spared,  and  who  are  therefore  the  holy  seed,  the  support 
of  the  land,  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  your  Creator,  and  allsuf- 
ficient  Pro.vider,  and  therefore, 

1.  Attend  diligently  to  all  that  ye  see  and  hear,  that  ye  may  be- 
hold the  almighty  and  every  where  present  hand  of  C.od  in  it,  as  the 
sun  in  a  glass.  *'  Whoso  is  wise,  and  will  observe  these  things,  even 
they  shall  understand  the  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord,"  Psalm  c.vii. 
43.  We  should  pause  at  every  event,  and  consider  that  it  comes 
not  by  chance,  l)ut  by  his  fatherly  hnnd  Obstrve  how  wondt;rtiilly 
God  orders  matters  with  respect  to  you,  in  eiving  you  breath  and 
life,  and  all  things  ;  look  at  the  meat  and  drink  on  your  tables,  con- 
sider why  ye  have  just  this  grain  from  tlie  field  for  your  bread,  this 
fowl  of  the  air,  tha  flesh  of  this  beast,  this  fish  of  the  sea  or  river: 
bow  many  have  laboured  at  it,  before  it  was  brought  lo  you  :  what 
wisdom,  what  power,  what  goodness :  \vhut  care  your  Father  hath 
bestowed,  in  his  love  to  you,  to  furnish  you  with  it,  even  you  in  par- 
ticular, who  are  so  unworthy  :  *■•  Lift  up  your  "^yes  on  high,  and  be- 
hold, who  hath  created  these  things,  that  bringeth  out  their  hos^  by 
number:  he  calleth  them  all  by  nam^es,  by  the  greatness  of  his  might, 
because  he  is  strong  in  power:  not  one  faileth,"  Isaiah  xl.  26.  How- 
was  David  transported  at  this  in  the  eighth  psalm  1  Yea,  "  ask  now 
tlie  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee  i  and  the  fowls  of  'he  air,  and 
they  shall  tell  thee  ;  or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee, 
and  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee.  Who  knoweth  not 
in  all  these,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  this?"  Job  xii- 
7 — 10.  With  Isaac  we  should  go  out  into  the  field,  that  our  medi- 
tation of  the  Lord  may  be  sweet : 

Facii  plant  that  we  behold, 
Each  herb  that  we  do  see. 
The  praise  of  God  proclaims, 
And  saith.  Attempt  by  me 


228       THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE. 

To  learn  how  wise,  how  good, 
IJow  [)leasant  is  the  J^ord  ! 
How  passing  sweet.   He  doih 
What  e'er  i  am  afford. 

A  child  of  God  ought  certainly  to  be  reproved,  when  he  looks  only 
at  his  state  of  grace,  that  we  miy  see  God  in  that, and  reckons  it  too 
ignoble  a  work  for  a  citizen  of  heaven  to  contemplate  the  whole  gov- 
ernrpent  of  God  in  the  universe,  as  if  this  were  too  low  an  employ- 
meiu  ior  liim :  no,  this  rejoices,  this  enlivens,  this  causes  that  God 
besets  us  befoiC  and  behind?  it  discovers  the  divine  perfections  to  us, 
and  enraptures  the  soul.  See  this  Psalm  civ. 

2.  Let  a  holy  fear  and  awe  for  God,  who  manifests  himself  worthy 
to  be  feared  in  tliis  great  work  of  providence,  fall  on  your  souls : 
**  For  the  Lord  is  a  threat  God,  and  a  great  King  above  all  gods :  in 
his  hand  are  the  deep  places  of  the  earth,  the  strength  of  the  hills  is 
his  also.  The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  ;  and  his  hands  formed  the 
dry  land,"  Psalm  xcv.  3,  4,  5i  "  I  know  that  the  Lord  is  great,  and 
that  our  Lord  is  above  all  Gods.  Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased, 
that  did  he  in  heaven,  and  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  seas,  and  all  deep 
p'aces,"  Psalm  cxxxv,  5,  6.  Who  would  not  then  fear  him,  for  to 
him  doth  it  appertain,  and  he  manifests  himself  incomparably  glo- 
rious in  all  that  he  doth  :  *■'  Let  all  the  earth  therefore  fear  the  Lord; 
let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  stand  m  awe  of  him  :  for  he  spake, 
and  it  was  done  ;  he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast,"  Psalm  xxxiii. 
8,  9,  See  what  the  Lord  saith,  Jer.  v.  22.  Surely  a  todly  person 
ought  not  to  be  like  the  ungodly,  "  who  say  not  in  their  hearts ;  Let 
us  now  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  that  giveth  rain,  both  the  former  and 
the  lalier  rain  in  his  season:  he  reserveth  unto  us  the  appointed 
weeks  of  harvest,"  Jer.  v.  24. 

3.  Be  patient  in  adversity,  that  is,  composed  and  calmly  resigned 
to  'he  Lord,  l)y  which,  from  a  view  of  the  sovereignty  and  justice  of 
God,  and  from  a  sense  of  our  own  demerits,  we  submit  willingly  to 
the  Lord,  bow  to  him,  and  praise  him,  yea,  even  thank  him  with 
silent  satisfaction  So  Aaron  acted  when  his  two  sons  were  consum- 
ed by  that  most  dreadful  judgment,  even  fire  from  heaven.  Lev.  x. 
3.  "  And  .iaron  held  his  peace."  When  the  Lord  threatened  to  in- 
flict the  most  fearful  plagues  upon  Israel,  upon  Eli,  and  his  house, 
Eli  said,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  scemeth  him  good,"  1 
Sam.  iii.  18.  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,"  said 
David,  Psalm  cxix,  71.     How  well  did  Job  demean  himftelf  under 


^ 

all  those  gnevous  afflictions,  which  befell  him,  Job  i.  21,  22,  "  He 
said,  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord.     In  all  this  Job  sinned  not,   nor  charged  God 
foolishly."     See  how  he  reproves  his  impatient-  wife.  Job  ii.  9,  10. 
And  this  becomes  you  also,  believers  ;  for  nothinc;  comes  to  you  by 
chance,  but  by  his  fatherly  hand  :    *«  For  affliction  doth  not  come 
forth  out  of  the  dust,  neither  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  ground," 
Joi3  V.  6.    '   Promotion  cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the 
west,  nor  from  the  south  :  but  God  is  the  judge  ;  he  putteth  down 
one,  and  setteth  up  another,"  Psalm  Ixxv.  6,  7.  For  "  he  is  the  Lord. 
he  doth  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  according  to  his  will ;  who 
can,  or  dares  stay  his  hand  ?  or  say  to  him,  What  dost  thou  ?"     Dc 
ye  not  deserve  the  most  grievous  afflictions  ?  is  not  he  happy  whom 
God  chastiseth,    that  he  may  not    be  condemned    with  the  world  ? 
We  are  never  taught   better  by  Go<3,  than   when   he  chastises  us  ; 
yea,  if  we  considered  this  matter  aright,  we  should  glory  in  tribula- 
tion, because  tribulation  worketh   paiieneet  experience,   and  hope% 
Will  your  impatience,  frctfulness,  peevishness,  and  striving  with  the 
Lord  deliver  you  from  your  affliction  ?    will  ye  not  thereby   render 
your  boiids  stronger  ?     Yes,  but,  say  ye,  if  my  trouble  proceeded 
immediately  from  God,  1  could  bear  it ;    but  this  and  that  persoD, 
from  whom  I   did  not  expect  it,  and  of  whom  I  do  not  deserve  it, 
inflicts  it  upon  me.     Will  ye  then,  like  the  dog,  bite  the  stone,  and 
not  look  up  at  him  who   casts  it  ?     ^*  W^ho  is  he  that   saith,  and   it 
cometh  to  pass,  when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not  ?    doth  not  both 
good  and  evil,  proceed  out  of  the  month  of  the  Most  High  ?  where- 
fore doth  a  livmg  man  then  complain  ?     Let  every  man  complain  on 
account  of  his  sins,"  Lam.  iii.  37 — 39.     Conduct  therefore  like  Da- 
vid, who,  when  Shimei  cursed  him,  and  Abishai  would  on   that  ac- 
count take  off  his  head,  said,  *'  So  let  him  curse,  because  the  Lord 
hath  said  unto  him,  curse  David.     Who  then   shall  say  unto  him, 
H'herefore  hast  thou  done  so?"  2Sam.  xvi.  10. 

4.  Be  thankful  in  prosperity,  by  which,  from  a  sense  of  cur  un- 
wortliiness,  and  a  view  of  the  preciousness  of  the  benefits,  we  are 
concerned  to  know  what  we  shall  render  unto  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
mean  time  acknov.ledge  his  free  favour  with  our  hearts,  words,  and 
actions,  by  ourselves,  and  with  others.  So  David  acted.  Psalm cxvi^ 
12,  13,  14,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord,  for  all  his  bene- 
fits toward  mc  ?  I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  upen  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  I  will  pay  my  vows  unto  the  Lord,  now  in  the 
jrc^ence  of  all  his  people."     This  is  also  your  duly,  b^slieverfs ;  foV 

\  "^Ve  have  r<?rd€i?d  \].h  passage  accoitlingto  the  Dutcli  traryslatian. 


130        THE  DOCTRINE  0F  DIVINE  PROVIDENXE. 

whatever  ye  have  enjoyed  Vrlth  respect  to  your  soul  or  body,  or  do 
yet  possess,  or  expect  hereafter,  it  "was  not  brought  to  you  by  any 
■creature,  nor  by,  nor  on  account  of  yourselves  :  ♦*  For  who  maketh 
you  to  differ  from  another  ?  and  what  have  ye  that  ye  have  not  re- 
ceived? now  if  ye  have  received  it,  why  do  ye  glory,  as  if  ye  had 
not  received  it?"  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  But  '*  all  things  are  of  him,  and 
through  him,  that  they  may  be  to  him,  and  that  ye  may  give  him 
honour  and  glory,"  Rom.  xi.  36.  Endeavour,  as  constrained  in  a 
holy  manner  by  the  gracious  providence  of  God,  to  praise  him  with 
a  holy  solicitude  and  admiration,  and  to  employ  yourselves  wholly  in 
his  service ;  this  is  required  of  you,  Rom.  xii.  1. 

5.  In  all  things  which  may  hereafter  befall  you,  place  a  firm  trust 
in  your  faithful  God  and  Father.  A  believer  is  often  anxious  and 
concerned  how  he  shall  pass  through  the  world  with  honour,  ho^v  he 
shall  obtain  his  bread  and  clothing  ;  he  is  afraid  of  these  and  those 
evil-minded  persons,  of  diseases,  and  a  painful  death  ;  yea,  the  devil 
acts  the  prophet  with  him,  telling  him  that  this  and  that  misfortune 
■will  yet  befall  him,  which  therefore  disturbs  him.  But  the  creation 
and  providence  of  his  faithful  God  and  Father  teaches  him,  that  he 
ought  to  place  a  firm  trust  in  the  Lord,  by  which  he  attains  to  a  holy 
carelessness  concerning  future  events,  commits  himself  in  all  things 
to  the  Lord  with  a  believing  confidence,  tranquil  hope,  and  expecta- 
tion placed  on  him,  that  he  will  bring  it  to  pass.  This  is  the  duty  of 
believers  according  to  Psalm  xxxvii.  5,  '*  Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord  :  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass,"  1  Peter  v.  7. 
Let  your  souls  then  exercise  themselves  herein  ;  for  the  Lord  is  a 
faithful  God,  he  doth  not  forsake  the  woik  of  his  hands  :  "  He  is  a 
faithful  Creator,  to  whom  ye  must  commit  yourselves  in  welldoing," 
1  Pet.  iv.  19.  He  is  your  Father:  a  father  will  sure'y  provide  for 
his  children.  What  can  the  creatures  do  to  you  ?  They  are  all  sr» 
in  his  hand,  that  without  his  will  they  cannot  so  much  as  move  ;  they 
are  but  "  as  the  staff  m  his  hand,"  Isaiah  x.  5,  15.  God  hath  takers 
upon  himself  to  care  for  you  ;  will  ye  then  take  the  work  out  of  his 
hand  by  caring  for  yourselves  :  therefore  "  cast  all  your  care  upon 
him,  for  he  careth  for  you,"  1  Peter  v.  7.  <*  He  takes  care  of  the 
grass,  and  tiie  fowl?  ;  and  will  he  not  attend  to  you  ?'*  JNIat.  vi.  2  6, 
'J8,  29,  30.  He  takes  care  of  the  greater,  your  body  and  life,  which 
ye  have  not  by  your  own,  but  by  his  care  ;  will  he  then  neglect  your 
smaller  affairs  ?  "  Is  not  the  life  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than 
raiment,"  Mat.  vi,  25.  Yea,  "  he  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  de- 
livered him  up  far  you  all :    how  shall  he  not  thc-n  with  'nim  freely 


X.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  27,  28.  231 

give  you  all  things  ?"  Rom  viii.  53.  Your  care  cannot  avail  ;  "  Ye 
cannot  by  taking  thought  add  one  cubit  to  your  stature,"  Matt,  vi- 
27.  Yea,  let  whatever  will  befall  you,  no  creature  shall  be  able  to 
separate  you  from  the  love  of  God,  according  to  his  words  by  the 
apostle,  Rom.  viii.  35,  37,  38,  39,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Christ  ?  shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  persecution,  or  fa* 
mine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Nay,  in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us.  For  I  am 
persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor 
depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."    Amen, 


(  232  ) 

JESUS,  THE  ONLY 
COMPLETE  SAVIOUR, 


XI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Matt.  i.  21.  And  she  shall  bring  forth  a  Son,  tnd  thou  shalt  call  his 
name  Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins.