Q.  29.    JV/iy  is  the  Son  of  God  called  Jesus ,  that  is^  a  Saviour? 

A.  Because  he  saveth  us,  and  delivereth  us  from  our  sins ;  and 
likewise,  because  we  ought  not  to  seek,  neither  can  find  salvation  in 
any  other. 

Q.  30.  Do  such  then  believe  in  Jesus  the  only  Saviour,  'who  seek 
their  salvation  and  happiness  of  saints^  of  themselves,  or  any  where 
else  ? 

A.  They  do  not  ;  for  though  they  boast  of  him  in  words,  yet  in 
deeds  they  deny  Jesus  the  only  Deliverer  and  Saviour  ;  for  one  of 
these  two  things  must  be  true,  that  either  Jesus  is  not  a  complete 
Saviour  ;  or  that  they  who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Saviour  must 
find  in  him  all  things  necessary  to  their  salvation. 


A^ 


.S  it  is  necessary  to  know  and  believe  in  God  the  Father,  so  it 
is  not  less  necessary  to  know  and  believe  in  God  the  Son.  There- 
fore the  Lord  Jesus  said,  John  xiv.  1,  *<  Ye  believe  in  God,  believe 
^Iso  in  me."    For  he  who  knows  and  believes  only  in  the   Father, 


XI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  29,  30.  233 

and  not  in  the  Son,  knows  indeed  that  he  is  become  a  man  by  crea- 
tion and  providence,  and  that  he  is  a  sinner  by  breakin^^-  the 
covenant  of  works  :•  but  -he  doth  not  know  how-  he  may  become 
a  Christian,  and  be  saved ;  for  "  this,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Jolin  xvii. 
3,  *•  is  life  eternal,  tliat  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent."  Yea,  we  do  not  know,  nor  be- 
lieve in  the  Father  without  the  Son  ;  for  "whosoever  denieth  the 
Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father,"  1  John  ii.  23.  God  is  also  not 
a  fiither,  neither  is  he  known  as  such,  except  with  relation  to  his 
Son,  "who  iS  the  brightness  of  his  Father's  glory^,  and  the  express 
image  of  his  Person,"  Heb.  K  3.  "  He  who  seeth  the  Son,  seeth 
the  Father  also,  because  the  Son  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in 
the  bon,"  John  xiv.  9,  10.  It  is  also  the  Son  only,  who  reveals  the 
Father  to  sinners  :  "No  man  knoweth  the  rather,  save  the  Son, and 
he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him,"  'VJatt.  xi.  27.  The 
same  is  said  also,  John  i.  18.  Yea,  on  this  account  also,  God  the 
Lord  irradiates  the  sinner  with  his  light,  that  he  may  behold  his 
glory  in  his  ^on  :  "  For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 
out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  2 
Cor.  iv.  6.  Therefor^  the  ancients,  in  their  creeds,  conduct  us  not 
only  to  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Father,  as  Creator,  but  also 
of  the  bon  as  Deliverer  ;  which  order  the  instructor  also  following, 
conducts  us  from  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Father,  to  the 
knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Son.  In  order  now  that  we  naay  know 
and  believe  in  him,  we  are  instruc'ed  in  three  particulars.  1,  His 
names,  Jesus  Christ,  m  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  Lord's  days.  2»  His 
divine  nature,  government,  and  human  nature  in  the  thirteenth  and 
fourteenth  Lord's  days.  3,  His  states  in  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,' 
seventeenth,  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  Lord's  days.  Jn  this 
Lord's  day,  the  name  of  Jesus  is  spoken  of,  which  signifieth  that  he 
is  the  only  and  complete  Saviour ;  as  now  the  ceconomy  of  the 
Father  is  referred  to  the  creation,  so  that  of  the  Son  is  explained  of 
redemption,  which  he  effects  by  his  names,  natures  and  states. 

In  this  Lord's  day  we  have  two  important  particulars  proposed  for 
our  consideration. 

I.  Our  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  is  the  only  and  complete 
Saviour  Question  29. 

II.  The  memner  in  which  this  great  truth  is  denied  by  some,  who 
are  not  of  our  church,  Question  SO. 

I.  Our  whole  faitli  in   this  matter  is  compreliended  in  one  word, 
*hat  the  Son  of  God  is  called  "  Jesus."     lie  is  also  surnamed  Christ, 

Kk 

( 


2S4     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

on  account  of  his  three  offices,    Malt,  xxvii.  22.     On  account  of  his 
human  nature  he   calls  himself "  the  bon  of  man,"  Matt,   xvi    IS. 
From  his  Godhead  he  is  naaied  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord.  God."  Hosea 
i-  7      From  the   union  of  his  two  natures  he  is  calkd  Ira'/^anuel," 
Isaiaii  vii.  14.     On  account  of  his  humiliation,  ''a  worm,  he  whom 
man  (!es{>iseth,"  Psalm  xxii.  6,  Isaiah  xlix.  7.  On  account  of  his  ex- 
altation  he   hath  a  name,   which  is   above  eVery  name,   that  every 
tonj^ue  should  confess  that  he  is  Lord,"  Fhilio.  ii.  9,  11.  And  because 
)ie  obtains  justification  and   every  kind  of  salvation  for  his  people, 
therefore  his  name  is,  "  Tne  Lord  our  rii^htcousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6- 
Vca  because  he  is  all  in  all,  he  is  named  *'  David,  The  Word,  Wis- 
dom,  'ihe  Lion,.  The  Lamb,  Th^  Hoot  of  David,  The  Amen,  The 
f^khfui  y.nd  true  Witness,  The  Beginning  of  the  creation,  Head, 
Leader,  Teacher,    Shepherd,    Bridegroom,  Sun,  Morning-stai,  Life, 
Rock,"  and  to  sum  up  all  in  one  word,  "  he  is-called  Wonderful, 
Gounsellor,  The  Migiity  God,.  The  Evtjrlasting  Father,  The  Prince 
of  peace,"   Isaiah  ix.  5.     But  the  nanie  Jesus   is  his  proper  name, 
which  name  alone  expresseth   the   virtue  of  all  those  other  names. 
Therefore   it  behooves  u&  to  kno.\v   what  this  name  signifielh  ;  for 
which  purpose  we  must-  not  betake  ourselves  to  the  Greeks,  but  to  the 
Hebrews,  from  whose  lang^uage  this  name  is  derived,  and  who  pro- 
nounce it,  according  to  the  namre  of  their  language,  Joshua,  or  Hosea-, 
or  that  it  may  contain  all  the  letters  of  that  name  of  God.   which  is 
his  memorial,   Jehoshua,  the  v^aviour  of  the  Lord,  or  Save  Lord,  as 
Joshua  was  called  with  design,  vjshen  his  name  Hoshea  was  changed 
into  Joshua,  or  Jehoshua,  Num.  xiii.  16,  which  name  the  Greeks, 
according  to  their  manner  of  pronunciation,  call  Jesous,  and  we  Jesus, 
signifying  Preserver,  Deliverer,  Saviour*  Many  other  men  have  had 
this  name,  and  particularly  Joshua,   who  led  the  children  of  Israel 
into  Canaan,  Heb.  iv.  8,  and  Joshua,  the  Son  of  Josedek  the  high 
priest,  Zech.  iii.  1.  vi.    11    They  were  both  holy  men,  who  obtained 
a  great  salvation  and  deliverance  for  Israel;  but  the  Son  of  God  hath 
inherited  this  name  in  a  more  excellent  manner  than  those  most 
worthy  men  ;  for  they  were   mere  men,  but  our  Jesus  is  also  the 
true  God   and  eternal   life  :  they  w<  i  e  his  servants,   and-  he  is  their 
Lord  :  they  procur.'d  only  a  certain  outward  salvation  for  the  people 
of  God,  but  he  a  spiritual  and  eternal :  we  can  considei   them  at  the 
best  only  as  types,  but  we  must  honour  him,  as  their  antitype:  they 
rxtccived  their  name,  f>r  aught  that  we  know,  of  men  only,  but  the 
Son  of  Gor)  obtained  his  of  his  Father  by  an  ani^el,  Matt.  i.  21,  25, 
Luke  ii.  2  1,  that  we  might  acknowledge  and  receive  him  upon  thc^ 
authority  of  God,  as  the,  true  Saviour  of  sinners. 


 

Havrng  proposed  this  in  general,  we  must  in  the  next  place  inquire 
why  the  Son  of  Gcd  is  called  Jesus,  thut  is,  buviour.  In  order  to 
consider  this  formally,  we  will  attend  lo  three  particulars,  1.  How 
he  saves,  2.-  That  he  alone  is  the  Saviour,  and  3.  that  we  must  be- 
lieve in  hii^  as  s-uch;* 

I .  We  must   in  the  first  place,   we  say,   inquire  how  he  saves. 
Every  person  must  consider,  with  a  detestation  of  himself,  with  shame 
und  sorrow,  that  he,  -nd  the  whole  world  is  gudty  before  God,  that 
he  is  a  child  of  wr..th  by  nature  on  account  of  his  sins,  whether  ori- 
ginal or  actual,  whereby  he   halh  subjected   himself  to  guilt,  wrath 
and  condemnation  ;  yea,  thtil;  he  neither  knows,  how,  nor  is  able,  nor 
willing,   to  deliver   himself:  "  Because  the  cainal   mind  is  enmity 
against  God,  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can 
be,"  Rom.  viii.  7.    But  Jesus,  the  Saviour  saves  the  elect  sinner,  and 
delivers  him  from  sin.     What  is  salvation?  may  it  be  asked  bere. 
It  is  a  deliverance  from   the  {greatest  evil,  namely  sin,  which  is  in 
itself  evil  and  bad,    renders  the   sinner  guilty,  and  subjects  him  to 
every  kind  of  punisliment.  temporal  and  eternal.   The  Saviour  thei  e- 
[  fore  saves  by  delivering  his  people  from  their  sins,  which  David  cele- 
brates, Psahii  XXX.  8.  '^He  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  iniqui- 
ties."    This  is  the  lea^^on  that  the  angel  assigns  why  he   should  be 
called  Jesus  ;  "  For  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  s'ns."     And 
truly  he  delivers  his  people  not  only  from  original  sin  before  baptism, 
but  also  from  actual  sins  ;  and  not  only  from  the  guilt,  but  also  from 
the  punishment  of  sin  ;  and  not  only  fr«rn  temporal,  but  also  fioni 
.    eternal  punishrneiit.     AH   which    we  maintain,  ag-ainst  the  Papists, 
because  *'  he  redeems  Israel  from   all  his  iniquities,  and   his  blood 
cleanseth   from   all  sin,"  Psalm   cxxx.   8.  1  John  i.  7,  and  because 
*'  there  is  no  condemnation  to  th^m  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Rem., 
viii.  I.  But  salvation  consists  not  only  in  deliverance  from  lh6  great- 
est evil,  but  also  in  having  and  possessing  the  greatest  gnod,  namely, 
God,  by  seeing,  enjoying  him,  being  conformed  to  him  in  holiness, 
and  praising  him/.     This,  yea,  ti  is  alone  can  So  fully  satisfy  the  ra- 
tional creaiure,  that  it  desires  nothing  besides  him  in  heaven,  or  on 
earlh  :  "  Fulness  of  joy  is  in  his  presence,  at  his  right  hand  there 
are  pleasures  for  evermore."  Psalm  xvi.  1 1.  Since  sin  separates  man 
from  God,  and  Jesus  delivers  him  from   sin,   therefore  he   procures 
for  him  also  this  fellowsb.ip.  and  the  salvation  of  God  ;  for  "  he  obtains 
for  him  not  only  forgiveness  of  sin,  but  also  «n  inheritance  among 
the  saints,"  Acts  xxvi.  18. 

But  doth  he  save  only  by  revealing  the  way  of  salvation,  and  con- 
firming his  revelation  by  miracles,  a  holy  life,  and  a  patient  death  ? 


236     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR, 

Yea,  he  hath  done  this  also  to  procure  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  s 
for  "  he  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gos-. 
pt-l,"  2  Tim  i  10.  But  this  alone  was  not  sufficient :  the  sinner  is 
subject  to  guili  and  to  the  wrath  of  Ciod,  this  was  to  be<satisfied  and 
borne,  as  we  have  shown  on  ihe  fourih  and  fifth  Lord's  days.  And 
therefore  Jesus  saves, 

L  As  he  purchaseth  salvation  by  satisfying  the  justice  of  God, 
according  to  tie  demind  of  the  law,  by  whict  he  endured  .»11  the 
grievous  punishment  of  the  sinner  in  his  stead,  that  he  might  dehver 
him  from  condemn'ation  :  "  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and 
carried  our  sorrows  ;  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was 
bruised  for  our  iniquities  ;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  Isaiah  hii.  4.  5.  Yea, 
*•  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  This  also  became  Ged  :  "For  it  became 
him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bring- 
ing many  sons  to  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  per- 
fect through  sufferings,"  Heb.  ii.  10.  Yea,  he  hath  not  only  delivered 
them  from  condemnation  through  his  suffering,  by  making  satisfac- 
tion to  tJic  vindictive  justice  of  God,  according  to  the  threatening  of 
the  law  ;  but  he  hatli  also  purchased  salvation  fbr  them  by  obeying 
God  in  their  stead,  according  to  the  condition  of  the  law  ;  "  The  man 
who  doth  these  tilings  shall  live  by  them;"  for  his  whole  life  was 
spent  in  domg  that  which  was  pleasing  to  God  ;  he  even  suffered, 
"  in  order  to  obey  his  father, unto  death,"  Philip,  ii.  8.  Now  he  did 
not  do  this  so  much  for  himself,  but  as  Surety  for  the  elect ;  by  which 
he  also  saves  them,  and  merits  salvation  for  them  ;  "For  as  by  one 
man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of 
one,  many  shall  be  made  righteous,"  Rom  v.  19,  and  thus  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  "  Zion  is 
redeemed  by  judgment."  Isaiah  i.  27.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  ex- 
alted in  judgment,  and  God  that  is  holy  is  sanctified  in  righteous- 
ness," Isa^h  V.  16. 

2.  Jesus  saves  also  by  an  effectual  application  and  communication 
of  tliis  purchased  salvation  to  the  sinner.  Truly  the  sinner  cannot 
do  this  himself,  although  his  understanding  were  ever  so  enlightened 
■with  resp'xt  to  the  purchased  salvation,  and  the  means  whereby  it  is 
communicated  lo  him  ;  is  his  will  free,  he  hath  nevertheless  no  ability 
to  effect  this  .  "  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  bis  sins  :"  he  would 
be  obliged  to  change  his  heart,  to  give  himself  faith,  to  justify,  sanc- 
tify and  preserve  himself;  for  this  there  is  need  of  nothing  less  than 
the  exceeding  greatness  of  God's  power,  according  to  the  working 


? 

of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised 
hira  from  the  dead.  And  therefore  it  is  the  work  of  the  great  God 
and  Saviour  alone,  who  was  for  this  purpose  after  his  humiliation* 
«  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel, 
and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31.  '*  For,  if  when  we  were  enemies, 
we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  ;  much  more 
being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  hfe,"  Rom.  v.  10.  There- 
fore he  also  prays,  as  a  high  priest,  who  is  gone  into  the  true  sanc- 
tuary, for  those  whom  he  hath  delivered,  that  the  Father  would  help 
them  and  would  not  withhold  from  them  the  purchased  salvation. 
See  John  xvii,  where  he  presupposeth  his  exaltation,  as  though  he 
were  already  in  heaven  :  therefore  the  apostle  glorying  in  this 
privilege,  s^iith,  Rom.  viii.  S3,  34.  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the 
charj^e  of  God's  elect  ?  it  is  God  that  justifieth  :  who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  ?  Ii  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  r^tther,  that  is  risen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for 
us  "  As  Jesus  also,  exulted  to  be  a  Saviour,  hath  sent  his  Spirit, 
that  he  may  by  him  cause  "  the  rebellious  to  dwell  with  him,  and 
that  they  may  praise  him,  as  a  God  of  perfect  salvation,"  Psalm 
Ixviii.  18,  19,  20. 

He  doth  not  apply  salvation  instantaneously,  but  progressively. 
First  in  this  life,  so  that  he  saves  the  elect  sinner  even  in  this  life, 
Titus  iii.  5,  he  doth  this  by  bestowing  on  him  all  the  blessed  and 
saving  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  even  by  "  rep-enerating  and 
renewing  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit,"  Titus  iii.  5,  by  "  calling  him  with 
a  holy  calling,"  2  Tim.  i.  9.  For  by  this  he  is  brought  to  the  feilovr- 
ship  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour,  1  Cor,  i.  9,  by  "giving  him 
faith,"  whereby  he  is  saved,  and  appropriates  the  Saviour  to  nimself, 
Eph.  ii.  8.  John  i.  12,  by  •*  justifying"  him,  by  which  he  is  absolved 
from  guilt,  and  the  purchased  salvation  is  imputed  to  him,  Rom.  iv, 
6,  7,  8,  by  giving  him  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghosi,"  Rom. 
xiv.  17,  by  granting  him  a  hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed,  by  which 
he  is  saved  even  at  present,  Rom.  viii.  24.  Coll.  i.  27,  by  imparting 
to  him  "  the  adoption  of  children,"  and  the  Spirit,  whereby  he  hath 
'4  free  access  to  the  Father,  and  is  made  an  heir  of  salvation,  Gal. 
iv.  5,  6,  by  sanctifying  him,  which  is  the  beginning  of  his  glorifica- 
tion, I  Peter  i.  5.  John  x.  28.  But  he  also  renders  him  a  perfect 
partaker  of  salvation  after  this  life  at  his  death  :  the  believer  is  pro- 
nounced blessed  immediately  after  his  death,  Rev.  xiv.  13.  "Laza- 
rus dying,  his  soul  was  forthwith  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom,"  Luke  xiv.  22,  and  the  Saviour  said  to  the  converted  thief, 
Luke  xxii.  43«  «  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise  ;"  by 


238    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

which  we  cannot  understand  some  happy  place,  different  from  the 
third  heaven  itself,  whither  Christ  ascended,  when  he  was  exalted, 
and  where  hesitieth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Heb  i.  3,  where  Paul 
should  be,  after  he  was  dissolved.  Phil,  i-  23.  As  Christ  is  a  Saviour 
of  the  whvole  man,  therefore  he  will  save  the  body  also  by  raising  it 
from  the  dead,  uniting  it  to  the  soul,  and  taking  it  up  to  him  into 
heaven,  1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17,  18, 

In  the  second  place,  Jesus  alone  is  the   Saviour.     The    Father  is 
also  the  Saviour  and  the  Holy  Ghost  also ;  for  he  accomplisheth  the 
salvation  of  the   sinner;  for  we  read  of  "  the  kindness  of  God  our 
Saviour,  who  hath  saved  us  by   the   renewing   of  the   Holy    Ghost, 
which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour," 
Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6.     But  the  Father  hath  appointed  his   Son  to  be  a 
Saviour,   and  committed  the    work  of  salvation  to  him   as  an   office, 
and  hath  therefore  ordered  that  all   fulness    should  dwell  in     him, 
which  the  Holy-Ghost  communicates  to  the  people  of  Jesus.     See 
this  John  xvi.    13,  14,    1 5.     And    so   Jesus   alone    is    the   Saviour: 
*'  There  is  salvation  in  none  other :  for  there  is  no  other  name   un- 
der heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must   be  saved,"    Acts 
iv.  12.     He  himself,  who  is  the  Amen,  the   faithful  witness,    saiih, 
<^  I,  even  I  am  the  Lord,  and  beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour,"  Isaiah 
xliii.  n.     Thus   he  speaks  of  himself  also,   Isaiah  xlv.   21.     Hosea, 
xiii.  4,  and  no  marvel,  for  (a)  he  only  hath  the, necessary  qualifica- 
tions of  a  Saviour.     He  who  shall  be  a  Saviour  of  sinners  must  be  a 
real  and  righteous  man,  and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  as  we 
have  proved  upon  the  fifth  and  sixth  Lord's  days.     Now  there  is  no 
such  person  but  Christ ;  for  ''  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  King  of  Israel, 
and  his  Redeemer,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  am  the  first,  and    I  am  the 
last,  and  bestdes  me  there  is  no  God."  Isaiah  xliv.  6.  (b)     To  this  we 
add  also,  that  he  is  the  perfect  and  allsuflicient  Saviour.     "  This  God 
is  our  salvation,  Selah.      This  God  is  a    God  of    perfect  salvation 
to  us,"   Psalm  Ixviii.   19,20,     "Wherefore  he  is  also  able  to  save 
them  to  the  uttermost,  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them,"  Heb.  vii.  25.     See  also  Heb. 
X.  14.     And  verily  believers  find  all  things  in  him  necessary  to  their 
salvation.     It  is  necessary  to  their  salvation,  that  it  should  be  pur- 
chased for  them  by  suift^ring  and  obedience,  and  that  it  should  be 
applied  by  all  kinds  of  grace  in  and  aft^r  this  life.     Now  believers 
have  all  this  in  him,  as  we  have  shown  !above  t  it   therefore  follovv- 
eth  that  he  alone  is  the  Saviour,  and  that  there  is  no  other  besides 
him.     Will  ye  have  more  ?  we  say  (c)    toat   salvation  is  not  to  be 
sought  nor  lound  in  any  other  ;  for  salvation  is  not  to  be  sought  nor 


XI.  LORD'S  D^Y,  Q.  29j  30,  259 

found  in  the  saints,  no  not  in  Mary  ;  for  even    she  had  need  of  a 
Saviour:  for,  ''her  spirit  rejoiced  in  God  her  Saviour,"  Luke  i.  47. 
The  church  also  sought  no  salvation  in  "Abraham  or  Israel,  for 
they  were  ignorant  of  her,"  Isaiah   Ixiii.  16.     Further,   salvation  is 
not  to  be  sought  nor  found  in  ourselves  :  for  man  is  in  himself  guilty, 
a  child   of  wrath,  dead   in  trespasses  and  sins,  he  cannot  of  himself 
submit  to  the  law,  his  righteousnesses   are  as  filthy  rags  ;  if  he  shall 
be  saved,  it  must  be  through  the  kindness  of  his  Saviour  :  and  "  by 
the  grace  of  God  he  is  what  he  is,"  though  he  were  even   like  Paul, 
1  Cor.  XV.  10.     Neither    is  salvation   to  be   sought  or   found    any 
where  else  :  not  in  ministers,  though  when  they  are  faithful,   "  they 
save  both  theniselves,  and  those  who  hear  ihem,'*^  I  Tim.  iv.  16,  for 
they  do  not  save  in  any  other  way,  than  by  directing  sinners  to  Je- 
sus.    See  this  concerning  Paul  and  Timothy,  2  Cor.  iv.  5.  7.  "  We 
preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  ourselves  your 
servants  for  Jesus  sake.     But   we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  ves- 
sels, that  the  excellency  of   the  power  may  be  of  God,   and  not   of 
us."     See  also  1  Cor.  iii.  4 — 9.     Man    is   saved   by    the  word,  but 
only  as  it  leads  him  to  the  Saviour,  and  as  God  works  by  it  through 
his  Spirit :    for  "  it  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  unto  every  one 
that  believeth,"  Rom.  i.  16. 

The  last  particular  which  we  must  observe  concerning  'the  rea- 
sons why  the  Son  of  God  is  called  Jesus,  that  is,  Saviour,  is  that  we 
must  believe  in  him  as  such  ;  for  when  we  say  in  our  creed,  "  I  be- 
lieve in  God  the  Father,  and  in  Jesus  Christ,"  it  is  as  though  we 
said,  and  I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  verily  we  must  believe  in 
him  as  well  as  in  the  Father,  John  xiv.  1  :  for  the  Father  appointed 
him  to  be  a  Saviour,  that  we  should  believe  in  him  ;  for  "  God  hath 
set  him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"  Rom, 
iii.  25,  and  that  we  should  through  him  beHeve  in  the  Father  :  for 
"by  him  we  believe  in  God,"  1  Pettr  i.  21.  We  are  not  to  show 
i«)w  wherein  faith  in  Jesus  the  Saviour  consists,  since  we  hate  done 
this  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day,  but  we  must  show  here  that  a  guilty 
sinner,  if  he  will  be  saved,  must  believe  in  him.     For, 

1 .  We  become  partakers  of  the  Saviour  only  by  faith,  because 
faith  owns  and  receives  him  :  "  for  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  his  name,"  John  i,  12.  And  in  this  manner  are  we  saved  hj 
him  ;  but  without  faith  in  him  we  are  damned  :  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life  :  and  he  that  believeth  not  in  the 
Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abide th  on  him,"  John 


24d    JESUS  THE  ONLY  ANf)  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

iii.  36.    Mark  xvi,  16.     This  ought  suniy  to  constrain  and  move   a 
sinner  to  believe  in  him. 

2.  There  is  nothing  which  we  can  believe  on  better  grounds  than 
that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  :  for  there  is  nothin?^  that  can  be  more 
fully  proved  than  that  he  is  the  only  and  coTr»]ilete  Saviour:  "  It  is 
a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  1  Tim.  i.  15,  for  '*  to  him 
gave  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name  whosoever  be=- 
lieveth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x*  43.  But 
besides  this,  every  one  is  also  called  and  invited  by  him  to  come  unto 
him  through  faith  for  salvation  :  he  himself  cries,  "  Turn  unto  me 
and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,"  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  Iv.  1. 
John  vii.  37,  38.  Rev.  xxii.  17.  This  ought  surely  to  allure  thee, 
O  sinner. 

3.  Without  faith  in  him  we  cannot  find  either  salvation  or  advan- 
tage in  aughi  else,  though  it  may  otherwise  serve  as  a  mean  to 
salvation.  Reading  or  hearing  the  word  of  God  is  of  no  advantage 
*•  if  it  be  not  mixed  with  faith,"  Heb.  iv.  2.  There  is  no  better 
mean  to  obtain  the  favour  of  God  than  prayer,  bat  this  also  is  sinful, 
**  if  it  proceed  not  from  faith,"  Rom.  xiv,  24.  Though  I  were  as 
virtuous  as  any  man  living,  if  I  have  not  faith,  I  will  not  please  God, 
See  this,  Heb.  xi,  6.     Let  this  urge  you  to  him. 

4.  They  who  receive  him  by  a  true  faith,  find  in  him  all  things 
necessary  to  their  salvation,  as  we  have  just  now  shown.  Now  we 
must  either  be  wholly  unconcerned  about  our  salvation,  or  this  must 
determine  our  hearts  to  believe  in  him. 

II.  Many  who  are  not  of  our  communion  deny  this  great  truth. 
There  are  not  any  among  those  called  Christians,  who  will  not  con- 
fess that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  ;  yea,  they  will  all  boast  of  him  with 
their  mouths  :  b\it  if  v/c  will  attend  to  the  matter  more  strictly,  we 
shall  find  that  they  deny  the  only  Saviour  with  their  deeds,  since 
they  seek  their  salvation  of  the  saints,  of  themselves,  or  somewhere 
eke. 

It  is  evident,  that  the  instructor  hath  respect  here  to  the  Papists, 
who  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness, 

].  Of  the  saints,  since  they  make  the  saints,  and  especially  Mary, 
tlie  objects  of  all  their  devotions,  and  therefore  prav  to  them  for  all 
kinds  of  happiness,  dedicate  temples,  cities  and  countries  to  them  ; 
yea,  they  proceed  so  far,  that  a  great  champion  of  popery  *  hath 

•  Th'.s  was  Bonaventurc,  whom  the  Papists  style  the  seraphJcal  doctor :  ^'* 
was  an  eminent  scholastic  divine  of  the  thirteenth  century. 


j  30.  241 

Inserted  the  name  of  Mary  in  the  Psalter,  wherever  he  found  the 
names  and  titles  of  God.  Yea,  that  the  Papists  seek  thtir  salvation 
and  happiness  of  the  saints  appears  from  their  employing  them  as 
mediators  with  Cod  and  his  Son  ;  for  they  will  not  draw  near  to 
God  through  Christ,  until  they  have  first  sought  the  favour  and 
assistance  of  some  saint ;  therefore  they  are  so  shamdess,  that  ihey 
compare  Mary  to  the  neck,  by  which  salvation  flovveth  down  to  us 
from  Christ,  as  the  head.  They  endeavour  to  hide  their  filih  in  some 
measure,  by  saying  that  the  saints  are  mediators  of  intercession,  and 
that  we  must  seek  our  salvation  through  them  of  Jesus  :  but  even 
then  the  Papists  show  that  they  seek  their  salvalion  so  far  of  the 
saints.  The  word  of  God  knows  of  no  intercessors  besides  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous :  it  is  also  certain,  that  the  Romish.church  re- 
presents the  saints  not  only  as  mediators  of  intercession,  but  also  of 
merit ;  we  will  not  transcribe  here  any  prayers  of  the  Papists,  in 
which  they  pray  for  grace  through  the  most  precious  merits  of  the 
saints,  for  it  is  sufficiently  evident  without  this,  that  th'ey  consider 
the  saints  as  mediators  of  merit,  since  it  is  the  uniform  doctrine  of 
the  Papists,  that  the  saints  perform  many  v/orks  of  supererogation, 
which  are  laid  up  by  the  Pope,  out  of  which  treasure  the  deficiencies 
of  others  are  supplied,  and  indulgencies,  or  pardons  of  sins  granttf'. 

2.  The  Papists  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness  also  of  them- 
selves; for  they  imagine  that  they  merit  salvation  of  God  by 
their  good  works.  When  they  sin,  they  will  satisfy  for  it  in  this 
life  by  certain  chastisements  of  fasting,  pilgrimages  and  almsgivings, 
by  muttering  a  great  number  of  paternosters,  and  avemarys,  and  by 
practising  other  trifles,  enjoined  on  them  by  the  priest ;  or  after  this 
life  by  suffering  a  severe  punisiiment  in  a  hot  burning  purgatory. 

3.  If  all  this  will  not  suffice,  they  will  then  stek  their  salvation 
and  happiness  somewhere  else,  as  in  the  agnus  Deis,  the  v/pod  of  the 
cross,  masses  for  souls,  shriving  their  sins. to  the  priest,  who  will  for- 
give them  the  sins  which  they  have  shriven,  and  these  things  quiet 
them  so  perfectly,  that  it  is  as  though  it  were  proclaimed  to  them 
from  heaven,  that  when  they  do  thus,  they  are  saved  by  Jesus 
himself. 

It  follows  certainly  from  this,  that  the  Papists  deny  the  only  Sa- 
viour Jlsus  ;  for  one  of  these  two  things  must  be  true,  and  not  both, 
that  Jesus  is  not  a  complete  Saviour  ;  or  that  he  is  a  complete  Sa- 
viour, in  whom  believers  find  all  things  necessary  to  their  salvation. 
Now  it  is  certain,  that  he  is  a  complete  Saviour,  as  we  have  proved 
before ;  and  therefore  when  the  Papists  seek  their  salvation  out  of 
Jesus  of  the  saints,  or  of  tbemselres,  or  of  aught  else,  they  deny  tise 

LI 


242     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

only  Oeliverer  and  Saviour,  and  do  not  consider  bin)  as  a  complete. 
Saviour. 

It  is  true,  they  boast  of  h'm  w  ih  their  mouths,  and  say  that  he  is 
the  supreme  and  the  principal  Saviour,  and  that  the  saints  are  saviours 
of  an  inferior  order ;  Jesus  is  with  them  indeed  the  supreme  and 
most  worthy,  but  not  the  only  and  complete  Saviour.  To  consti- 
tute Iiim  ttie.  supreme  Saviour,  and  the  saints  inferior  ones,  what  !& 
it  but  nukiUi^  Christians  heathens,  who  held  that  there  was  a 
supieme  God  and  inferior  Cods,  and  that  the  inferior  Gods  were 
mediators,  by  »vhom  fhey  drew  near  to  the  supreme  God,  and  by 
whom  that  supreme  God  drew  near  to  them,  with  his  favours.  The 
jRomanists  boast  indeed  much  of  the  name  Jesus,  and  inscribe  it 
upon  almost  eveiy  thing,  in  order  to  sanctify  it ;  they  will  also  hang 
this  name  about  thrir  neciss,  that  k  may  preserve  them  f  om  malig- 
nant diseases,  and  they  make  use  of  it  to  cast  out  the  devil,  as  if  this 
name  were^a  charm,  as  it  was  used  by  the  seven  exorcists  to  their 
shame  and  loss,  Acts  xix.  13 — 16.  But  what  do  these  men  find  in 
Jesus  that  stiould  constitute  him  the  suprerjfle  and  principal  Saviour  ? 
in  truth  notiung  more  than  that  he  delivers  them  from  sins,  which 
they  have  before  baptism,  and  then  only  from  the  guik,  but  not  from 
the  punishment  of  sm,  or  only  from  temj^oral,  and  not  from  eternal 
punishment;  and  thus  he  leaves  the  principal  work  to  the  saints, 
and  to  tl.e  sinner  himself,  all  his  sufferings  and  obedience  serving 
only  to  render  our  works  capable  of  meriting,  and  thus  Jesus  will  be 
the  servant  to  assist  these  great  lorda  ;  and  so  this  great  Bame  proves 
with  these  men  to  be  a  mere  nothing,  yea,  a  blasphemy,  of  which 
it  is  not  the  least  part,  that  some  of  them  arrogate  to  themselves  the 
name  of  Jesuits,  as  if  they  were  associates  of  Jesus,  and  partakers 
with  him  in  the  work  of  saving  the  sinner, 

Hatli  not  the  instructor  therefore  reason  to  say  that  this  people 
deny  him  with  their  deeds  ? 

But  some  will  perhaps  ask,  Can  no  man  then  be  saved  in  the 
church  of  Rome  ?  we  say,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  some  vcre 
saved  in  the  Romish  church,  before  the  true  church  separated  her- 
self from  her,  since  tliere  were  man^y  who  groaned  under  the  Romish 
yoke,  and  bore  witness  against  the  denial  of  Jesus  ;  but  we  cannot 
speak  so  liberally  now ;  because  since  that  separation,  Vvhen  the 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  were  sealed,  and  the  gospel 
preached,  an  everlasting  wo  was  denounced  against  all  those  who 
worship  the  beast,  and  hijs  image,  and  receive  his  mark  in  their  fore- 
head. Read  attentively  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  revelation  of- 
Toftn.     It  may  also  happen,  that  there  are    certain  persons  in  that 


 

church,  \vho  not  knowing  the  depths  of  Satan,  possscss  a  certain 
measure  of  faith,  and  of  love  to  Jesus,  Cind  do  not  trust  in  themselves, 
or  in  tlie  creatures  and  reveal  themselves  particulSily  on  their  death 
beds,  and  are  thus  saved  :  but  how  dark  and  sad  is  their  condition, 
and  how  are  they  saved  as  it  were  by  fire  i 

The  Socinians  will  without  doubt  detest  the  erroneous  opinion  of 
the  Papists,  but  neither  are  they  justifiable  in  what  they  teach  con- 
cerning the  Saviour  Jesus  ;  for  the  Socinians  imagine,  that  !^e  is  a 
Saviour  only  because  he  taught  a  better  law  than  that  of  Moses,  en- 
forced it  by  miracles,  and  confirmed  it  by  liis  holy  life  and  palieiit 
death :  but  what  influence  hath  all  this  upon  the  soul  without  his 
Godhead,  satisfaction  and  effectual  changing  of  the  heart  ?  and  never- 
thtloss  they  deny  all  this,  and  show  thus  that  they  also  deny  the  only 
and  complete  Saviour. 

The  Remonstrants  approach  somewhat  nearer,  when  they  teach 
that  Jesus  merited  the  salvation  of  a  possibility  to  be  saved  :  but 
Ihey  will  not  allow  that  Jesus  applies  his  merited  salvation  effectu- 
ally, saying,  that  he  hath  left  thjs  to  our  fieew-ill.  But  then  Jesu  sis 
only  a  possible  Saviour ;  and  so  it  might  have  happened,  that  though 
Jesus  were  a  Saviour,  no  man  had  been  saved,  as  the  will  of  all  men 
is  free  to  accept  of  him  or  not.  What  doth  all  this  mean,  but  that 
Jesus  is  not  a  comple  e  Saviour  ?  that  believers  do  not  fina  all  things 
in  him  necessary  to  their  salvation  ?  t^nd  consequently  they  also  de- 
ny in  deed,  the  only  Saviour  Jesus,  though  ihey  boast  of  him  with 
their  mouths. 

Though  we  cannot  censure  the  Lutherans  on  this  head,  never- 
theless we  cannot  command  their  superstitious  behaviour  toward 
the  b^re  name  of  Jesus,  bowing  when  it  is  only  mentioned  :  "  At  the 
name  of  Jesus  every  knee  'must  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things 
in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,"  according  to  Philip,  ii.  10, 
But  this  doth  not  relate  to  the  name  of  Jesus,'  but  to  his  person,  to 
v.'hich  all  must  be  subject.  If  we  OMght  to  understand  any  mere 
name  here,  it  ought  rather  to  be  his  name  Lord,  "which  every 
tongue  m-ust  confess,'- according  to  vs.  11.  Those  also,  who  are 
under  the  earth,  to  wit,  the  evil  spirits,  have  no  knees.  Yea,  the 
Lutherans  themselves  do  not  bow  their  knees,  >vhen  this  name  ia 
mentioned,  but  only  their  heads. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  all  that  hath  been    said,  must  we  not   justify 
our  fathers  in  separating  frctfn  the  church  »i  Rome,  according  to  the 


1244    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR» 

divine  command.  Rev.  xviii.  4,  "  Come  out  of  her,  my  people, 
that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sinr,  and^  that  ye  receive  not  her 
plagues  f "  How  could  they  remain  in  such  an  assembly,  who  de- 
nied their  Sa\ionr,  was  become  Idolatrous,  would  not  be  persuaded, 
and  persecuted  those  who  would  heal  her,  even  unto  death  ? 

Tea  more,  ougiit  we  to  be  charged  with  improper  severity,  be* 
cause  we  would  never  receive  the  abominable  Socinians  as  brethren  ? 
They  had  indeed  utterly  subverted  all  the  foundations  of  the  Chris- 
tian faith,  w!th  respect  to  J'isus,  as  his  Godhead,  salisfaction,  and 
heartchanging  grace  ;  on  which  account  the  Remonstrants  also  were 
justly  cast  out  of  our  purified  church  ;  for  they  would  establish  free- 
will as  an  associate  \\ith  Jesus  in  the  salvation  of  sinners,  and  would 
also  erect  an  altar  to  it  :  and  hence  they  soon  deviated  to  other  er- 
roneous opinions,  embraced  the  Socinians  as  their  brethren,  and  en- 
deavoured to  bring  those  uncircumcised  into  the  temple  of  God. 
How  were  they  then  to  be  endured  ! 

Permit  me  to  offer  also  this  inference  from  what  hath  been  said, 
that  our  leformed  church  alone  exhibits  the  pure  doctrine  of  the 
ivord  of  God  without  errour.  Who  can  suspect  her  of  errours  and 
misapprehensions,  unless  it  be  an  errour  that  she  conceives  too  highly 
of  the  only  and  complete  Saviour,  that  she  humbles  the  sinner  too 
low,  comforts  the  sorrowful  too  perfectly,  and  glorifies  God  too  much, 
as  a  God  of  perfect  salvationr'  And  do  we  err  herein**  we  err  then 
with  the  word  of  God.  which  teacheth  us  these  things  ;  yea,  we  es- 
teem it  our  happiness,  that  w-e  may  err  herein  so,  that  we  lose  our- 
selves who'ly  in  Jesus,  and  are  swallowed  up  in  his  salvation,  that 
we  may  be  found  only  in  him 

May  we  not  now  also  extol  those  as  happy,  who  have  Jesus  for 
their  Saviour  ?  For  (a)  he  is  the  most  worthy,  the  Son  of  God, 
made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  .hath  by  inheritance 
obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they.  Who  in  heaven  can  be 
compared  to  him  ?  who  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty  can  be  liken- 
ed to  him  ?  he  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints, 
and  to  be  reverenced  by  all  those  who  are  round  about  him.  He  is 
the  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings  ;  yea,  he  is  terrible  to  the  kings 
of  the  earth.  "His  name  is  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The 
mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  peace,"  Isaiah 
ix.  6-  To  have  the  great  God  for  our  Saviour  is  surely  a  great  hap- 
piness, (b)  Let  the  benefited  sinner  only  consider  from  what  Je- 
sus saves  him.  It  is  indeed  from  sin  ;  -all  that  is  abominable,  evil 
and  hateful,  is  comprehended  under  that  one  word,  sin  ;  for  it  ren* 
ders  man  hke  the  devil,  it  subjects  him  to  the   wrath  t)f  God)  the 


 

.^Uise  of  the  law  and  eternal  damnation  ;  it  is  the  cause  of  all  our- 
imisery,  and  it  deprives  the  sinner  of  all  h'is  faculties,  so  that  he 
cannot  deliver  his  soul.  When  a  person  hath  had  a  heartfelt  sense 
oi  this,  and  sees  that  he  is  delivered  by  Jesus,  must  it  not  fill  his 
heart  with  wonder,  astonishment,  joy,  and  praise  to  God,  and  induce 
him  to  cry  out,  "  He  who  hath  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death, 
and  who  still  delivereth  us,  and  in  whom  we  trust,  that  he  will  yet 
deliver  us  ?"  (c)  Believers,  consider  also  what  Jblessedness  and  sal- 
vation he  hath  bestowed  on  you.  He  hath  united  you  to  God, 
translated  you  into  communion  with  him,  so  that  ye  know  him  wlio 
is  true,  and  are  in  him  who  is  true  :  your  life  is  hidden  with  him  in 
God,  ye  have  an  interest  in  his  favour  and  love,  and  shall  always  re- 
tain it ;  and  all  this  is  but  a  small  beginning  ;  yea,  although  ye  were 
now  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,  it  could  not  yet  be  compared 
to  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  you  at  the  last  day.  And 
therefore,  •'  behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed 
on  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  :  therefore  the  world 
knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  him  not.  Beloved,  now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  ;  but 
we  know,  that  when  he  shall  apper,  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  1  John  iii.  1,  2.  (d)  And  what  hath  Jesus 
done  to  save  you  ?  he  poured  forth  his  soul  unto  death,  he  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors,  he"  bore  the  sins  of  many,  and 
made  in^:ercession  for  the  transgressors ;  he  made  his  soul  an  offer- 
ing for  sin,  that  he  might  see  you  as  his  seed  ;  and  therefore  he 
hath  also  given  you  his  Spirit,  he  regenerates  you,  he  hath  made 
you  partakers  of  his  divine  nature,  he  hath  obtained  your  acquittal 
of  the  judge,  he  hath  sanctified  you,  he  will  love  you  to  the  end,  and 
will  not  withdraw  his  hand  from  you,  until  he  hath  introduced  you 
into  glory,  and  hath  saved  you  perfectly  in  soul  and  body.  In  this, 
Job  gloried  under  his  greatest  troubles  ;  '*  I  know  that  my  Redeem- 
er liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day,  upon  the  earth. 
And  though  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God  ;  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes 
sh^U  behold,  and  not  another  ;  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within 
me","  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Will  ye  have  more  ?  Behold  (e)  he  is 
the  only  and  complete  Saviour,  ye  have  all  things  in  him  that  arc 
necessary  to  your  tiaivaticn.  There  is  no  defect  in  any  sinner  so 
great  and  griirvous,  but  there  is  a  fulness  in  every  respect  sufficient 
in  him  against  it:  •' Christ  is  all  in  all,"  Coll.  iii,  11.  "  Of  his 
fulness  do  wt^all  receive  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16-  "  He  is  made 
o  us  of  God  wisdoiuj  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redempiicn/* 


545    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

1  Cor.  i.  30.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,  that  com^ 
unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
them,"  Heb.  vii.  25.  And  he  alone  is  this,  we  may  not  seek,  and 
cannot  find  salvation  out  of  him  ;  whatsoever  the  sinner  pursues,  in 
order  to  obtain  happiness,  is  only  broken  cisterns,  v/hich  can  hold  no 
water,  (f)  And  whose  Saviour  is  he  ?  the  Saviour  of  all  men  ?  no  : 
but  only  of  his  people,  and  there  are  many  who  are  not  his  people 
and  sheep.  That  just  ye,  even  ye,  O  believers,  arc  his  people,  and 
the  objects  of  his  saving  kindness,  and  that  others,  perhaps  as  good, 
yea,  better  by  nature  than  ye,  come  short  hereof;  ought  this  not  to 
humble  you  to  the  uttermost  under  a  sense  of  your  unworthiness, 
and  cause  you  to  ask  v/ith  Hagar  "  Have  |I  here  also  looked  after 
him,  who  sceth  me  ?"  Gen.  xvi.  13, 

I  know  that  there  are  believers,  who  labour  under  a  grievous  un- 
certainty, whether  they  have  a  saving  interest  in  Jesus,  and  that 
there  are  others,  who  are  unconcerned,  and  think  that  they  ought 
not  to  doubt  that  Jesus  is  their  Saviour,  deceiving  themselves  with 
Tain  imaginations  :  -  and  therefore  it  will  not  be  unserviceable  to  in- 
quire for  the  conviction  of  the  one  and  the  other  who  are  the  real 
partakers  of  the  Saviour.     They  are, 

1 .  Those  who  regard  their  sins  and  misery  with  concern  and  anx- 
iety :  they  cry  out,  '^  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  ii.  37* 
ix.  6.  xvi.  30.  "  For  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  that  which  was 
lost."  Matt,  xviii.  1 1.  How  is  it  possible  that  a  sinner  should  be  de- 
livered from  all  his  sins,  and  dreadful  misery,  as  long  as  he  doth  not 
behold  his  wretchedness,  so  as  to  be  humbled.  We  know  indeed 
that  some  are  brought  to  Jesus  by  a  word,  or  by  a  calm  contempla- 
tion of  the  saving  truths,  or  by  a  flood  of  saving  joy,  which  Jesus 
sheds  abroad  in  their  hearts,  and  they  do  not  experience  much  per- 
turbation, as  Matthew,  Lydia,  and  Zaccheus,  Matt.  ix.  9.  Acts  xvi. 
14.  Luke  ix.  5,  6,  but  we  also  know,  that  this  is  not  common  ;  and 
moreover,  that  such  persons,  although  they  are  not  greatly  distres- 
sed at  the  first  on  account  of  their  sins  and  misery,  because  it  is 
swallowed  up  by  the  enjoyment  of  their  love,  are  afterwards  so 
much  the  more  dejected,  and  thus  humbled  on  account  of  their  for- 
mer and  present  sins.  And  is  not  humiliation  the  daily  work  of 
every  believer  ?     burcly  it  is. 

2.  They  have  an  enlarged  view  of  the  perfect  ability  of  Jesus  to 
save  sinners,  which  causeth  them  to  set  a  high  value  on  him  :  "  To 
you  who  believe  he  is  precious,"  I  Peter  ii.  IT.  They  have  not  a 
bare  apprehension  of  this,  but  they  perceive  through  the  irradiation 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  beauty  of  Jesus,  which  allures  their  hearts, 
excites  a  desire  in  them  to   Jesus,  and  indiiceth  them  to   seek  him 


i 


Xr.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  29,  30.  24r 

earnestly,  to  look  from  self,  and  from  all  self  and  imaginary  worth 
and  works,  to  surrender  themselves  to  him,  to  turn  to  him,  and 
receive  him,  in  order  to  be  saved  by  him  alone.  **  They  account 
all  things,"  yea,  even  their  best  performances,  "  loss  and  dung,  that 
they  may  vi'in  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,"  like  Paul,  Phil.  iii.  7 — lo. 
Let  none,  think  that  since  Jesus  alone  is  the  Saviour,  'hat  he  will  obtain 
an  interest  in  him,  without  any  activity  on  his  part.  No  :  those  whom 
he  saves,  he  renders  active  in  their  endeavours  to  be  saved  by  him  ; 
therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Philip,  ii.  12,  13.  *<  Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in 
you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  See  also  Matt. 
xi.  2. 

3.  Such  are  also  his  people  :  he  saves  his  people.  They  surren- 
der themselves  willingly  and  readily  to  him,  and  "  join  themselves 
to  him,"  not  only  to  be  saved  by  him,  but  also  to  be  sanctified,  and 
*'  to  serve  him,  to  love  him,  and  to  be  his  servants,"  as  it  is  said  of 
those  who  are  saved,  Isaiah  Ivi.  6.  "  They  are  willing  to  swear,  and 
to  perform  it,  that  they  will  keep  his  righteous  judgments,"  like 
David,  Psalm  cxix.  106.  And  therefore  they  join  themselves  to 
that  people  whom  he  saves,  and  who  serve  him,  "  saying,  we  will  go 
with  you  ;  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you,"  Zech.  viii.  23. 
Ysa,  •'  they  are  of  one  heart  and  one  soul  "  with  that  people.  Acts 
iv.  32.  And  thus  "  we  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren,"  1  John  iii.  14. 

Whoever  ye  are,  examine  yourselves  by  these  characteristics,  and 
see  whether  ye  have  been  thus  exercised,  and  whether  ye  be  still 
exercised  in  this  manner.  But  how  many  are  there,  who  know 
nothing  at  all  of  these  things  !  Verily  ye  know  nothing  of  them 
who  have  never  yet  come  to  yourselves,  to  examine  whether  ye  were 
in  the  faith,  or  whether  Christ  were  in  you  ;  who  show  by  your  care- 
lessness, that  ye  are  unconcerned  whether  ye  be  saved  or  damned  : 
for  this  seldom  or  never  enters  into  your  thofights  ;  the  things  of 
this  life,  and  worldly  and  fleshly  desires  possess  your  minds,  so  that 
there  is  no  room  for  serious  reflections  upon  your  eternal  condition  ; 
and  ye  show  thus,  that  ye  are  not  of  that  people,  but  of  the  world, 
Psalm  xvii.  14.  l.Johniv.  5.  Or  doth  a  sudden  and  transient 
thought  concerning  a  life  after  this  life  enter  your  hearts,  your  self- 
love  induceth  you  to  think,  that  ye  in  particular  will  not  be  lost,  but 
saved ;  ye  take  this  for  granted,  as  somt thing  that  is  evident  of 
itself,  because  ye  have  heard  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  that  Je- 
sus is  the  Saviour,  just  as  if  he  were  a  Saviour  of  these  who  never 
apply  to  him  ss  such. 


ta    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

Neither  have  ye  the  evidences  vhich  we  have  mentioned,  that  U* 
*sus  is  your  Saviour,  vho  endeavour  to  do  something,  in  order  to  be 
.saved,  yet  do  not  embrace  Jesus  as  your  Saviour,  but  seek  other  Sa- 
viours. This  vrill  appear  strange  to  you,  and  induce  you  to  say, 
\ve  certainly  know  that  Jesus  alone  is  the  Saviour  :  but  it  is  perfectly- 
evident  that  we  look  upon  that  as  our  Saviour,  in  which  we  place 
our  only  trust  and  hope  of  being  saved.  But  is  Jesus  your  trust  and 
liope  ?  do  ye  flee  to  him  ?  have  ye  received  him  truly,  heartily,  and 
entirely  ?  and  do  ye  still  do  this  ?  ye  do  then  show  that  ye  esteena 
'Iiim  your  Saviour  ;  but  is  it  your  hope  and  trust,  that  ye  will  be  sa- 
ved, because  ye  have  been  born  in  a  Christian  covuitry,  have  been 
e:lucate(l  in  the  pure  church,  have  made  a  confession  of  yonr  faith, 
that  ye  partake  of  the  Lord's  supper,  have  a  considerable  knowledge, 
do  not  commit  any  wicked  abominations,  are  sometimes  sorry  for 
iyour  sins,  have  a  relish  for  the  word,  associate  with  the  godly,  yea, 
liave  a  great  zeal  for  God,  without  having  ever  received  Jesus  him- 
self, or  sought  to  viin  him  by  faith,  ye  do  then  surely  declare  that  ye 
Vlo  not' seek  Jesus,  but  only  those  things  and  works  for  your  Saviour. 
With  the  Papiists,  Socinians,  and  Remonstrants  ye  fetch  Jesus  in  as 
ifar  as  concerns  his  names,  thinking  that  if  ye  do  all  ye  can,  Jesus 
will  do  all  that  he  can  ;  but  Jesus  iiimselfis  not  the  object  of  your 
exercises.  Therefore  know  that  ye  are  yet  without  Christ.  What 
can  it  profit  you,  to  boast  of  him  with  your  mouths,  while  ye  deny  him . 
with  your  Works  ?  He  will  not  save  you,  while  ye  .rem  in  thus,  but 
condemn  you  :  alas  !  how  much  more  grievous  will  your  condition  be, 
than  that  of  those  who  never  heard  of  him  :  for  he  hath  urged  you 
to  receive  him  f'>r  salvation,  but  ye  have  suffered  him  to  labour  and 
cry  in  vain.  Hear  what  he  saith,  John  xv.  22,  "  If  I  had  not  come 
and  spoken  to  them,  they  had  not  had  sin ;  but  now  they  have  no 
cloak  for  theh' sin." 

Alas  !  friends,  behold  your  fearful  and  wretched  condition,  jand 
entertain  an  earnest  desire  to  be  saved,  and  therefore  to  receive  the 
Saviour  by  faith.  And  why  should  ye  not  ?  have  ye  too  much  to  do 
in  the  world  ?  are  your  thoughts  too  much  taken  up  with  the  things 
of  this  life  ?  <'  What  will  it  profit  you,  if  ye  should  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  your  own  souls  I  or  what  would  ye  give  in  exchange 
for  your  souls  ?"  Matt.  xvi.  26.  Or  will  ye  not,  because  sin  is  sweet 
to  you?  how  bitter  \vill  it  be  to  you,  when  that  momentary  sweetness 
shall  be  past,  to  hear  him  upbraid  you,  saying,  "  Ye  would  not  come 
unio  me,  that  ye  might  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  Yea,  "  the  wicked- 
ness that  is  sweet  in  your  mouth,  shall  be  turned  in  your  bowels  ;  it 
^h-ilLbe  the  gall  of. asps  within  you,"  Job  xx.  12,   13,  14.     Or  v:ill 


a  249 

ye  defer  tt,  until  this  or  that  opportunity  ?  but  ye  will  then  perhaps 
have  no  opportunity,  or  less  inclination  than   ye  hav^c  now  to  believe 
in  him  :  therefore  "  to  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.     Or  do  ye  not  dare,  because  ye  have  sin- 
ned too  long  a  time,  aid  too  grievously?  He  is  a  complete  Savioupj 
who  is  able  to  subdue  all  your  sins,  although  ye  were  the  greatest 
sinners :  <^  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  :  of  whom  I 
am  chief,"   said  Paul,    1  Tim.  i,  15,     Or  are  ye  afraid,   that  such 
grievous  sinners  may  not  come  to  him,  and  that  he  would  thrust  you 
away  ?  He  himself  calls  to  you,  *'  to  look  unto  him,  and  be  saved," 
Isaiah  xlv.  22,  and  promiseth  that  "  him  that  comcth  to  him  he  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,"  John  vi    37.     Ye  may  not  linger,  without  ex- 
posing yourselves  to  the  peril  of  a  grievous  condemnation,   Heb.  Xo 
38.  I  John  v.  10.     Or  can  ye  not  come  to  him,  because  ye  are  so 
dark  and  weak,  and  he  is  so  far  off,  that  ye  cannot  draw  near  to  him? 
only  offer  yourselves   to  him,  although  it  were  afar  off;  call  upon 
bim  to  give  you  faith,  and  to  draw  you  to  him  j  for  this  also  belong* 
to  the  work  of  saving,  namely,  to  give  faith,  Eph.  ii.  8. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  who  have  been  driven  out  of  yourselves^ 
hare  truly  embraced  the  Saviour  for  salvation,  and  are,  like  his  people, 
zealous  of  good  works,  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  his  name,  and 
therefore, 

1 .  Rejoice  and  glory  in  him :  he  is  matter  of  the  greatest  joy  s 
"  In  this  day  it  should  be  said,  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God,  we  have  waited 
for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  sal- 
vation," Isaiah  xxv.  9.  The  angel  published,  as  the  greatest  joy,  that 
the  Saviour  was  bom,  Luke  ii.  10,  11.  Mary's  spirit  rejoiced  in 
God  her  Saviour,  Luke  i.,47.  Ponder  a  while  on  your  happiness, 
that  just  ye  have  been  delivered  by  so  great  a  God  and  Saviour  from 
such  a  grievous  condemnation,  that  such  a  great  salvation  hath  been 
bestowed  on  you,  and  that  even  he,  who  knew  no  sin,  was  made  sin 
for  you,  that  ye  might  be  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  Pause 
and  contemplate  this,  until  your  souls  are  enraptui-ed  with  joy,  and 
are  transported  out  of  themselves  into  him. 

2.  Glorify  and  praise  him  on  account  of  his  name  :  "  As  his  name 
is,  so  is  his  praise,"  Psalm  xlviii.  10.  "  He  hath  a  name  above  every 
name,  that  in  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,"  Philip,  ii, 
9,  10.  All  that  ye  have  and  expect,  proceeds  from  his  name  :  how 
well  doth  it  then  become  you  to  give  him  the  honour  of  it.  It  is  the 
blessedness  of  the  rational  creature  to  glorify  God  :  but  how  doth  it 
increase  h'8  blessedness,  that  having  a  view  of  the  power  ©f  this 

Mm 


250:   JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVlOtJR. 

name,  he  can  praise  it  with  his  whole  heart  to  the  utmost :  in  this 
the  blessed  soul  will  exercise  herself  for  ever  ;  and  it  would  there* 
fore  be  pioper,  that  she  should  begin  it  now. 

3.  L;it  liim  also  be  your  only  refuge  and  trust  on  account  of  his 
narae  :  <'  They  that  know  thy  name  will  trust  in  thee,"  said  David, 
Psalm  ix.  11.  Tliey  who  believe  in  Jesus  find  all  things  in  him 
necfssaiy  to  their  salvation  :  therefore  in  whatever  respect  ye  may- 
be deficient,  ye  must  betake  yourselves  to  him  alone,  that  ye  may 
receive  of  his  fulness  grace  for  grace  :  *'  It  should  be  said  of  him, 
Surely  in  the  L^rd  have  I  righteousness  and  strength,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
2  4.  Those  who  are  saved  ought  certainly  not  to  deny  his  name  by 
being  discouraged  on  account  of  their  afflictions,  or  by  looking  for 
any  blessedness  in  their  own  endeavours,  purposes,  exercises  or 
duties  :  in  him  alone  is  the  salvation  of  Israel,  and  he  alone  is  a  God 
of  perfect  salvation. 

4.  Love  him  and  his  name  heartily  :  whatever  is  lovely  and  love- 
worthy he  discovers  and  imparts  to  you  by  means  of  this  name^,  that 
he  may  allure  your  hearts  and  love  to  him  :  "He  is  fairer  than  the 
children  of  men,"  Psalm  xlv.  2.  Behold  his  beauty  from  the  crown 
of  his  head  to  the  soles  of  his  feet,  and  ye  will  find  that  «'  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely,"  Song  v.  10 — 16.  "  His  name  is  as  ointment  poured 
forth  ;  therefore  the  virgins  do  love  him,"  Song  i.  3.  Let  his  love 
then  constrain  you  to  love  him  also.  Our  love  to  Jesus  fills  us  wholly 
with  pleasure  and  perfect  delight.  This  Bernard  experienced  when, 
he  sang, 

I  see  now  what  I  sought  before, 
Enjoy  now  all  my  soul's  desire : 
I  melt  in  Jesus' ardent  love, 
His  love  doth  my  whole  heart  enfire. 
O  heavenly  fire^  blessed  flame  ! 
End  of  the  law,  perfection's  bond  I 
O  dear  refreshment,  ah,  how  fair 
Jesus  to  love,  who  is  God's  Son  ! 
'Tis  Jesus  who  delights  the  soul : 
'Tis  Jesus,  whom  the  soul  doth  crave ; 
O  that  in  which  I  boast,  my  bliss 
Is  Jesus,  who  the  world  doth  save. 

5-  Conduct  yourselves  as  the  people  whom  Jesus  saves,  separating 
yourselves  from  whatever  is  sinful,  surrendering  yourselves  to  him, 
in  order  to  do  his  wiil  in  all  things,  and  to  be  conformable  to  him- 


 

The  life  of  Jesus  must  be  manifest  in  your  mortal  bodies  :  «  He  that 
hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure,"  1  John 
iii.  3.  Men  ought  to  see  that  ye  have  been  with  Jesus;  for  what 
other  end  hath  he  saved  you  ?  '*  He  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  pecuhar 
l^eople,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Tilus  ii.  14. 

It  is  true,  that  notwithstanding  ye  are  the  people  whom  Jesus 
saves  ye  are  siill  in  an  evil  condition  through  your  manifold  inward 
and  outward  afflictions,  and  the  righteous  are  scarcely  saved  :  never- 
theless he  can  and  will  save  you  perfectly  and  certainly.  At  your 
death  he  will  command  the  angeis  to  carry  you  into  Abraham's 
bosom,  and  will  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  to  salvation  by  his 
Spirit  who  dwelleth  in  you.  With  what  tranquillity  may  ye,  O  be- 
lievers, lay  yourselves  down  upon  your  death-beds,  and  say,  "  Now, 
Lord,  Icttest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peac«,  according  to  thy  word; 
for  roine  eyes  have  even  seen  thy  salvation."    Amen. 


(253) 


THE  NAMES 


CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN^ 


Xn.  LORD'S  DAY. 


John  i.  41.     We  have  found  the  Messiah,  which  is,  being  interpre- 
ted, the  Christ. 

^.31.    WAy  18  he  called  Christy  that  iff,  (^minted  ? 

A.  Because  he  is  ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghosi,  to  be  our  chitf  prophet  and  teacher  ;  who  has  fully 
revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  concerning  our  re- 
demption :  anf^  to  be  our  only  high  priest,  who  by  the  one  'sacrifice 
of  his  body,  has  redeeir.ed  us,  and  makes  continual  intercession  with 
the  Father  for  us  ;  and  also  to  be  our  eternal  kini?,  who  governs  us 
by  his  word  and  Spirit ;  and  who  defends  and  preserves  us  in  the 
enjoyment  of  that  ^Ivation  he  has  purchased  for  us.

Q.  30.  Do  such  then  believe  in  Jesus  the  only  Saviour,  'who  seek 
their  salvation  and  happiness  of  saints^  of  themselves,  or  any  where 
else  ? 

A.  They  do  not  ;  for  though  they  boast  of  him  in  words,  yet  in 
deeds  they  deny  Jesus  the  only  Deliverer  and  Saviour  ;  for  one  of 
these  two  things  must  be  true,  that  either  Jesus  is  not  a  complete 
Saviour  ;  or  that  they  who  by  a  true  faith  receive  this  Saviour  must 
find  in  him  all  things  necessary  to  their  salvation. 


A^ 


.S  it  is  necessary  to  know  and  believe  in  God  the  Father,  so  it 
is  not  less  necessary  to  know  and  believe  in  God  the  Son.  There- 
fore the  Lord  Jesus  said,  John  xiv.  1,  *<  Ye  believe  in  God,  believe 
^Iso  in  me."    For  he  who  knows  and  believes  only  in  the   Father, 


XI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  29,  30.  233 

and  not  in  the  Son,  knows  indeed  that  he  is  become  a  man  by  crea- 
tion and  providence,  and  that  he  is  a  sinner  by  breakin^^-  the 
covenant  of  works  :•  but  -he  doth  not  know  how-  he  may  become 
a  Christian,  and  be  saved ;  for  "  this,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Jolin  xvii. 
3,  *•  is  life  eternal,  tliat  they  might  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent."  Yea,  we  do  not  know,  nor  be- 
lieve in  the  Father  without  the  Son  ;  for  "whosoever  denieth  the 
Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  Father,"  1  John  ii.  23.  God  is  also  not 
a  fiither,  neither  is  he  known  as  such,  except  with  relation  to  his 
Son,  "who  iS  the  brightness  of  his  Father's  glory^,  and  the  express 
image  of  his  Person,"  Heb.  K  3.  "  He  who  seeth  the  Son,  seeth 
the  Father  also,  because  the  Son  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in 
the  bon,"  John  xiv.  9,  10.  It  is  also  the  Son  only,  who  reveals  the 
Father  to  sinners  :  "No  man  knoweth  the  rather,  save  the  Son, and 
he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him,"  'VJatt.  xi.  27.  The 
same  is  said  also,  John  i.  18.  Yea,  on  this  account  also,  God  the 
Lord  irradiates  the  sinner  with  his  light,  that  he  may  behold  his 
glory  in  his  ^on  :  "  For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine 
out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  2 
Cor.  iv.  6.  Therefor^  the  ancients,  in  their  creeds,  conduct  us  not 
only  to  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Father,  as  Creator,  but  also 
of  the  bon  as  Deliverer  ;  which  order  the  instructor  also  following, 
conducts  us  from  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Father,  to  the 
knowledge  and  belief  of  the  Son.  In  order  now  that  we  naay  know 
and  believe  in  him,  we  are  instruc'ed  in  three  particulars.  1,  His 
names,  Jesus  Christ,  m  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  Lord's  days.  2»  His 
divine  nature,  government,  and  human  nature  in  the  thirteenth  and 
fourteenth  Lord's  days.  3,  His  states  in  the  fifteenth,  sixteenth,' 
seventeenth,  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  Lord's  days.  Jn  this 
Lord's  day,  the  name  of  Jesus  is  spoken  of,  which  signifieth  that  he 
is  the  only  and  complete  Saviour ;  as  now  the  ceconomy  of  the 
Father  is  referred  to  the  creation,  so  that  of  the  Son  is  explained  of 
redemption,  which  he  effects  by  his  names,  natures  and  states. 

In  this  Lord's  day  we  have  two  important  particulars  proposed  for 
our  consideration. 

I.  Our  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  is  the  only  and  complete 
Saviour  Question  29. 

II.  The  memner  in  which  this  great  truth  is  denied  by  some,  who 
are  not  of  our  church,  Question  SO. 

I.  Our  whole  faitli  in   this  matter  is  compreliended  in  one  word, 
*hat  the  Son  of  God  is  called  "  Jesus."     lie  is  also  surnamed  Christ, 

Kk 

( 


2S4     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

on  account  of  his  three  offices,    Malt,  xxvii.  22.     On  account  of  his 
human  nature  he   calls  himself "  the  bon  of  man,"  Matt,   xvi    IS. 
From  his  Godhead  he  is  naaied  "  Jehovah,  the  Lord.  God."  Hosea 
i-  7      From  the   union  of  his  two  natures  he  is  calkd  Ira'/^anuel," 
Isaiaii  vii.  14.     On  account  of  his  humiliation,  ''a  worm,  he  whom 
man  (!es{>iseth,"  Psalm  xxii.  6,  Isaiah  xlix.  7.  On  account  of  his  ex- 
altation  he   hath  a  name,   which  is   above  eVery  name,   that  every 
tonj^ue  should  confess  that  he  is  Lord,"  Fhilio.  ii.  9,  11.  And  because 
)ie  obtains  justification  and   every  kind  of  salvation  for  his  people, 
therefore  his  name  is,  "  Tne  Lord  our  rii^htcousness,"  Jer.  xxiii.  6- 
Vca  because  he  is  all  in  all,  he  is  named  *'  David,  The  Word,  Wis- 
dom,  'ihe  Lion,.  The  Lamb,  Th^  Hoot  of  David,  The  Amen,  The 
f^khfui  y.nd  true  Witness,  The  Beginning  of  the  creation,  Head, 
Leader,  Teacher,    Shepherd,    Bridegroom,  Sun,  Morning-stai,  Life, 
Rock,"  and  to  sum  up  all  in  one  word,  "  he  is-called  Wonderful, 
Gounsellor,  The  Migiity  God,.  The  Evtjrlasting  Father,  The  Prince 
of  peace,"   Isaiah  ix.  5.     But  the  nanie  Jesus   is  his  proper  name, 
which  name  alone  expresseth   the   virtue  of  all  those  other  names. 
Therefore   it  behooves  u&  to  kno.\v   what  this  name  signifielh  ;  for 
which  purpose  we  must-  not  betake  ourselves  to  the  Greeks,  but  to  the 
Hebrews,  from  whose  lang^uage  this  name  is  derived,  and  who  pro- 
nounce it,  according  to  the  namre  of  their  language,  Joshua,  or  Hosea-, 
or  that  it  may  contain  all  the  letters  of  that  name  of  God.   which  is 
his  memorial,   Jehoshua,  the  v^aviour  of  the  Lord,  or  Save  Lord,  as 
Joshua  was  called  with  design,  vjshen  his  name  Hoshea  was  changed 
into  Joshua,  or  Jehoshua,  Num.  xiii.  16,  which  name  the  Greeks, 
according  to  their  manner  of  pronunciation,  call  Jesous,  and  we  Jesus, 
signifying  Preserver,  Deliverer,  Saviour*  Many  other  men  have  had 
this  name,  and  particularly  Joshua,   who  led  the  children  of  Israel 
into  Canaan,  Heb.  iv.  8,  and  Joshua,  the  Son  of  Josedek  the  high 
priest,  Zech.  iii.  1.  vi.    11    They  were  both  holy  men,  who  obtained 
a  great  salvation  and  deliverance  for  Israel;  but  the  Son  of  God  hath 
inherited  this  name  in  a  more  excellent  manner  than  those  most 
worthy  men  ;  for  they  were   mere  men,  but  our  Jesus  is  also  the 
true  God   and  eternal   life  :  they  w<  i  e  his  servants,   and-  he  is  their 
Lord  :  they  procur.'d  only  a  certain  outward  salvation  for  the  people 
of  God,  but  he  a  spiritual  and  eternal :  we  can  considei   them  at  the 
best  only  as  types,  but  we  must  honour  him,  as  their  antitype:  they 
rxtccived  their  name,  f>r  aught  that  we  know,  of  men  only,  but  the 
Son  of  Gor)  obtained  his  of  his  Father  by  an  ani^el,  Matt.  i.  21,  25, 
Luke  ii.  2  1,  that  we  might  acknowledge  and  receive  him  upon  thc^ 
authority  of  God,  as  the,  true  Saviour  of  sinners. 


 

Havrng  proposed  this  in  general,  we  must  in  the  next  place  inquire 
why  the  Son  of  Gcd  is  called  Jesus,  thut  is,  buviour.  In  order  to 
consider  this  formally,  we  will  attend  lo  three  particulars,  1.  How 
he  saves,  2.-  That  he  alone  is  the  Saviour,  and  3.  that  we  must  be- 
lieve in  hii^  as  s-uch;* 

I .  We  must   in  the  first  place,   we  say,   inquire  how  he  saves. 
Every  person  must  consider,  with  a  detestation  of  himself,  with  shame 
und  sorrow,  that  he,  -nd  the  whole  world  is  gudty  before  God,  that 
he  is  a  child  of  wr..th  by  nature  on  account  of  his  sins,  whether  ori- 
ginal or  actual,  whereby  he   halh  subjected   himself  to  guilt,  wrath 
and  condemnation  ;  yea,  thtil;  he  neither  knows,  how,  nor  is  able,  nor 
willing,   to  deliver   himself:  "  Because  the  cainal   mind  is  enmity 
against  God,  it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can 
be,"  Rom.  viii.  7.    But  Jesus,  the  Saviour  saves  the  elect  sinner,  and 
delivers  him  from  sin.     What  is  salvation?  may  it  be  asked  bere. 
It  is  a  deliverance  from   the  {greatest  evil,  namely  sin,  which  is  in 
itself  evil  and  bad,    renders  the   sinner  guilty,  and  subjects  him  to 
every  kind  of  punisliment.  temporal  and  eternal.   The  Saviour  thei  e- 
[  fore  saves  by  delivering  his  people  from  their  sins,  which  David  cele- 
brates, Psahii  XXX.  8.  '^He  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  iniqui- 
ties."    This  is  the  lea^^on  that  the  angel  assigns  why  he   should  be 
called  Jesus  ;  "  For  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  s'ns."     And 
truly  he  delivers  his  people  not  only  from  original  sin  before  baptism, 
but  also  from  actual  sins  ;  and  not  only  from  the  guilt,  but  also  from 
the  punishment  of  sin  ;  and  not  only  fr«rn  temporal,  but  also  fioni 
.    eternal  punishrneiit.     AH   which    we  maintain,  ag-ainst  the  Papists, 
because  *'  he  redeems  Israel  from   all  his  iniquities,  and   his  blood 
cleanseth   from   all  sin,"  Psalm   cxxx.   8.  1  John  i.  7,  and  because 
*'  there  is  no  condemnation  to  th^m  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Rem., 
viii.  I.  But  salvation  consists  not  only  in  deliverance  from  lh6  great- 
est evil,  but  also  in  having  and  possessing  the  greatest  gnod,  namely, 
God,  by  seeing,  enjoying  him,  being  conformed  to  him  in  holiness, 
and  praising  him/.     This,  yea,  ti  is  alone  can  So  fully  satisfy  the  ra- 
tional creaiure,  that  it  desires  nothing  besides  him  in  heaven,  or  on 
earlh  :  "  Fulness  of  joy  is  in  his  presence,  at  his  right  hand  there 
are  pleasures  for  evermore."  Psalm  xvi.  1 1.  Since  sin  separates  man 
from  God,  and  Jesus  delivers  him  from   sin,   therefore  he   procures 
for  him  also  this  fellowsb.ip.  and  the  salvation  of  God  ;  for  "  he  obtains 
for  him  not  only  forgiveness  of  sin,  but  also  «n  inheritance  among 
the  saints,"  Acts  xxvi.  18. 

But  doth  he  save  only  by  revealing  the  way  of  salvation,  and  con- 
firming his  revelation  by  miracles,  a  holy  life,  and  a  patient  death  ? 


236     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR, 

Yea,  he  hath  done  this  also  to  procure  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  s 
for  "  he  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gos-. 
pt-l,"  2  Tim  i  10.  But  this  alone  was  not  sufficient :  the  sinner  is 
subject  to  guili  and  to  the  wrath  of  Ciod,  this  was  to  be<satisfied  and 
borne,  as  we  have  shown  on  ihe  fourih  and  fifth  Lord's  days.  And 
therefore  Jesus  saves, 

L  As  he  purchaseth  salvation  by  satisfying  the  justice  of  God, 
according  to  tie  demind  of  the  law,  by  whict  he  endured  .»11  the 
grievous  punishment  of  the  sinner  in  his  stead,  that  he  might  dehver 
him  from  condemn'ation  :  "  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and 
carried  our  sorrows  ;  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was 
bruised  for  our  iniquities  ;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed,"  Isaiah  hii.  4.  5.  Yea, 
*•  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a 
curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  This  also  became  Ged  :  "For  it  became 
him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bring- 
ing many  sons  to  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  per- 
fect through  sufferings,"  Heb.  ii.  10.  Yea,  he  hath  not  only  delivered 
them  from  condemnation  through  his  suffering,  by  making  satisfac- 
tion to  tJic  vindictive  justice  of  God,  according  to  the  threatening  of 
the  law  ;  but  he  hatli  also  purchased  salvation  fbr  them  by  obeying 
God  in  their  stead,  according  to  the  condition  of  the  law  ;  "  The  man 
who  doth  these  tilings  shall  live  by  them;"  for  his  whole  life  was 
spent  in  domg  that  which  was  pleasing  to  God  ;  he  even  suffered, 
"  in  order  to  obey  his  father, unto  death,"  Philip,  ii.  8.  Now  he  did 
not  do  this  so  much  for  himself,  but  as  Surety  for  the  elect ;  by  which 
he  also  saves  them,  and  merits  salvation  for  them  ;  "For  as  by  one 
man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of 
one,  many  shall  be  made  righteous,"  Rom  v.  19,  and  thus  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  "  Zion  is 
redeemed  by  judgment."  Isaiah  i.  27.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  ex- 
alted in  judgment,  and  God  that  is  holy  is  sanctified  in  righteous- 
ness," Isa^h  V.  16. 

2.  Jesus  saves  also  by  an  effectual  application  and  communication 
of  tliis  purchased  salvation  to  the  sinner.  Truly  the  sinner  cannot 
do  this  himself,  although  his  understanding  were  ever  so  enlightened 
■with  resp'xt  to  the  purchased  salvation,  and  the  means  whereby  it  is 
communicated  lo  him  ;  is  his  will  free,  he  hath  nevertheless  no  ability 
to  effect  this  .  "  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of  bis  sins  :"  he  would 
be  obliged  to  change  his  heart,  to  give  himself  faith,  to  justify,  sanc- 
tify and  preserve  himself;  for  this  there  is  need  of  nothing  less  than 
the  exceeding  greatness  of  God's  power,  according  to  the  working 


? 

of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised 
hira  from  the  dead.  And  therefore  it  is  the  work  of  the  great  God 
and  Saviour  alone,  who  was  for  this  purpose  after  his  humiliation* 
«  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel, 
and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31.  '*  For,  if  when  we  were  enemies, 
we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  ;  much  more 
being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  hfe,"  Rom.  v.  10.  There- 
fore he  also  prays,  as  a  high  priest,  who  is  gone  into  the  true  sanc- 
tuary, for  those  whom  he  hath  delivered,  that  the  Father  would  help 
them  and  would  not  withhold  from  them  the  purchased  salvation. 
See  John  xvii,  where  he  presupposeth  his  exaltation,  as  though  he 
were  already  in  heaven  :  therefore  the  apostle  glorying  in  this 
privilege,  s^iith,  Rom.  viii.  S3,  34.  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the 
charj^e  of  God's  elect  ?  it  is  God  that  justifieth  :  who  is  he  that  con- 
demneth  ?  Ii  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  r^tther,  that  is  risen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for 
us  "  As  Jesus  also,  exulted  to  be  a  Saviour,  hath  sent  his  Spirit, 
that  he  may  by  him  cause  "  the  rebellious  to  dwell  with  him,  and 
that  they  may  praise  him,  as  a  God  of  perfect  salvation,"  Psalm 
Ixviii.  18,  19,  20. 

He  doth  not  apply  salvation  instantaneously,  but  progressively. 
First  in  this  life,  so  that  he  saves  the  elect  sinner  even  in  this  life, 
Titus  iii.  5,  he  doth  this  by  bestowing  on  him  all  the  blessed  and 
saving  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  even  by  "  rep-enerating  and 
renewing  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit,"  Titus  iii.  5,  by  "  calling  him  with 
a  holy  calling,"  2  Tim.  i.  9.  For  by  this  he  is  brought  to  the  feilovr- 
ship  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  Saviour,  1  Cor,  i.  9,  by  "giving  him 
faith,"  whereby  he  is  saved,  and  appropriates  the  Saviour  to  nimself, 
Eph.  ii.  8.  John  i.  12,  by  •*  justifying"  him,  by  which  he  is  absolved 
from  guilt,  and  the  purchased  salvation  is  imputed  to  him,  Rom.  iv, 
6,  7,  8,  by  giving  him  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghosi,"  Rom. 
xiv.  17,  by  granting  him  a  hope  that  maketh  not  ashamed,  by  which 
he  is  saved  even  at  present,  Rom.  viii.  24.  Coll.  i.  27,  by  imparting 
to  him  "  the  adoption  of  children,"  and  the  Spirit,  whereby  he  hath 
'4  free  access  to  the  Father,  and  is  made  an  heir  of  salvation,  Gal. 
iv.  5,  6,  by  sanctifying  him,  which  is  the  beginning  of  his  glorifica- 
tion, I  Peter  i.  5.  John  x.  28.  But  he  also  renders  him  a  perfect 
partaker  of  salvation  after  this  life  at  his  death  :  the  believer  is  pro- 
nounced blessed  immediately  after  his  death,  Rev.  xiv.  13.  "Laza- 
rus dying,  his  soul  was  forthwith  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom,"  Luke  xiv.  22,  and  the  Saviour  said  to  the  converted  thief, 
Luke  xxii.  43«  «  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise  ;"  by 


238    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

which  we  cannot  understand  some  happy  place,  different  from  the 
third  heaven  itself,  whither  Christ  ascended,  when  he  was  exalted, 
and  where  hesitieth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Heb  i.  3,  where  Paul 
should  be,  after  he  was  dissolved.  Phil,  i-  23.  As  Christ  is  a  Saviour 
of  the  whvole  man,  therefore  he  will  save  the  body  also  by  raising  it 
from  the  dead,  uniting  it  to  the  soul,  and  taking  it  up  to  him  into 
heaven,  1  Thess.  iv.  16,  17,  18, 

In  the  second  place,  Jesus  alone  is  the   Saviour.     The    Father  is 
also  the  Saviour  and  the  Holy  Ghost  also ;  for  he  accomplisheth  the 
salvation  of  the   sinner;  for  we  read  of  "  the  kindness  of  God  our 
Saviour,  who  hath  saved  us  by   the   renewing   of  the   Holy    Ghost, 
which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour," 
Titus  iii.  4,  5,  6.     But  the  Father  hath  appointed  his   Son  to  be  a 
Saviour,   and  committed  the    work  of  salvation  to  him   as  an   office, 
and  hath  therefore  ordered  that  all   fulness    should  dwell  in     him, 
which  the  Holy-Ghost  communicates  to  the  people  of  Jesus.     See 
this  John  xvi.    13,  14,    1 5.     And    so   Jesus   alone    is    the   Saviour: 
*'  There  is  salvation  in  none  other :  for  there  is  no  other  name   un- 
der heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must   be  saved,"    Acts 
iv.  12.     He  himself,  who  is  the  Amen,  the   faithful  witness,    saiih, 
<^  I,  even  I  am  the  Lord,  and  beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour,"  Isaiah 
xliii.  n.     Thus   he  speaks  of  himself  also,   Isaiah  xlv.   21.     Hosea, 
xiii.  4,  and  no  marvel,  for  (a)  he  only  hath  the, necessary  qualifica- 
tions of  a  Saviour.     He  who  shall  be  a  Saviour  of  sinners  must  be  a 
real  and  righteous  man,  and  very  God  and  man  in  one  person,  as  we 
have  proved  upon  the  fifth  and  sixth  Lord's  days.     Now  there  is  no 
such  person  but  Christ ;  for  ''  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  King  of  Israel, 
and  his  Redeemer,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  am  the  first,  and    I  am  the 
last,  and  bestdes  me  there  is  no  God."  Isaiah  xliv.  6.  (b)     To  this  we 
add  also,  that  he  is  the  perfect  and  allsuflicient  Saviour.     "  This  God 
is  our  salvation,  Selah.      This  God  is  a    God  of    perfect  salvation 
to  us,"   Psalm  Ixviii.   19,20,     "Wherefore  he  is  also  able  to  save 
them  to  the  uttermost,  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them,"  Heb.  vii.  25.     See  also  Heb. 
X.  14.     And  verily  believers  find  all  things  in  him  necessary  to  their 
salvation.     It  is  necessary  to  their  salvation,  that  it  should  be  pur- 
chased for  them  by  suift^ring  and  obedience,  and  that  it  should  be 
applied  by  all  kinds  of  grace  in  and  aft^r  this  life.     Now  believers 
have  all  this  in  him,  as  we  have  shown  !above  t  it   therefore  follovv- 
eth  that  he  alone  is  the  Saviour,  and  that  there  is  no  other  besides 
him.     Will  ye  have  more  ?  we  say  (c)    toat   salvation  is  not  to  be 
sought  nor  lound  in  any  other  ;  for  salvation  is  not  to  be  sought  nor 


XI.  LORD'S  D^Y,  Q.  29j  30,  259 

found  in  the  saints,  no  not  in  Mary  ;  for  even    she  had  need  of  a 
Saviour:  for,  ''her  spirit  rejoiced  in  God  her  Saviour,"  Luke  i.  47. 
The  church  also  sought  no  salvation  in  "Abraham  or  Israel,  for 
they  were  ignorant  of  her,"  Isaiah   Ixiii.  16.     Further,   salvation  is 
not  to  be  sought  nor  found  in  ourselves  :  for  man  is  in  himself  guilty, 
a  child   of  wrath,  dead   in  trespasses  and  sins,  he  cannot  of  himself 
submit  to  the  law,  his  righteousnesses   are  as  filthy  rags  ;  if  he  shall 
be  saved,  it  must  be  through  the  kindness  of  his  Saviour  :  and  "  by 
the  grace  of  God  he  is  what  he  is,"  though  he  were  even   like  Paul, 
1  Cor.  XV.  10.     Neither    is  salvation   to  be   sought  or   found    any 
where  else  :  not  in  ministers,  though  when  they  are  faithful,   "  they 
save  both  theniselves,  and  those  who  hear  ihem,'*^  I  Tim.  iv.  16,  for 
they  do  not  save  in  any  other  way,  than  by  directing  sinners  to  Je- 
sus.    See  this  concerning  Paul  and  Timothy,  2  Cor.  iv.  5.  7.  "  We 
preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  ourselves  your 
servants  for  Jesus  sake.     But   we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  ves- 
sels, that  the  excellency  of   the  power  may  be  of  God,   and  not   of 
us."     See  also  1  Cor.  iii.  4 — 9.     Man    is   saved   by    the  word,  but 
only  as  it  leads  him  to  the  Saviour,  and  as  God  works  by  it  through 
his  Spirit :    for  "  it  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  unto  every  one 
that  believeth,"  Rom.  i.  16. 

The  last  particular  which  we  must  observe  concerning  'the  rea- 
sons why  the  Son  of  God  is  called  Jesus,  that  is,  Saviour,  is  that  we 
must  believe  in  him  as  such  ;  for  when  we  say  in  our  creed,  "  I  be- 
lieve in  God  the  Father,  and  in  Jesus  Christ,"  it  is  as  though  we 
said,  and  I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  And  verily  we  must  believe  in 
him  as  well  as  in  the  Father,  John  xiv.  1  :  for  the  Father  appointed 
him  to  be  a  Saviour,  that  we  should  believe  in  him  ;  for  "  God  hath 
set  him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,"  Rom, 
iii.  25,  and  that  we  should  through  him  beHeve  in  the  Father  :  for 
"by  him  we  believe  in  God,"  1  Pettr  i.  21.  We  are  not  to  show 
i«)w  wherein  faith  in  Jesus  the  Saviour  consists,  since  we  hate  done 
this  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day,  but  we  must  show  here  that  a  guilty 
sinner,  if  he  will  be  saved,  must  believe  in  him.     For, 

1 .  We  become  partakers  of  the  Saviour  only  by  faith,  because 
faith  owns  and  receives  him  :  "  for  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them 
gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
on  his  name,"  John  i,  12.  And  in  this  manner  are  we  saved  hj 
him  ;  but  without  faith  in  him  we  are  damned  :  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life  :  and  he  that  believeth  not  in  the 
Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abide th  on  him,"  John 


24d    JESUS  THE  ONLY  ANf)  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

iii.  36.    Mark  xvi,  16.     This  ought  suniy  to  constrain  and  move   a 
sinner  to  believe  in  him. 

2.  There  is  nothing  which  we  can  believe  on  better  grounds  than 
that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  :  for  there  is  nothin?^  that  can  be  more 
fully  proved  than  that  he  is  the  only  and  coTr»]ilete  Saviour:  "  It  is 
a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus 
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  1  Tim.  i.  15,  for  '*  to  him 
gave  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name  whosoever  be=- 
lieveth  in  him,  shall  receive  remission  of  sins,"  Acts  x*  43.  But 
besides  this,  every  one  is  also  called  and  invited  by  him  to  come  unto 
him  through  faith  for  salvation  :  he  himself  cries,  "  Turn  unto  me 
and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,"  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  Iv.  1. 
John  vii.  37,  38.  Rev.  xxii.  17.  This  ought  surely  to  allure  thee, 
O  sinner. 

3.  Without  faith  in  him  we  cannot  find  either  salvation  or  advan- 
tage in  aughi  else,  though  it  may  otherwise  serve  as  a  mean  to 
salvation.  Reading  or  hearing  the  word  of  God  is  of  no  advantage 
*•  if  it  be  not  mixed  with  faith,"  Heb.  iv.  2.  There  is  no  better 
mean  to  obtain  the  favour  of  God  than  prayer,  bat  this  also  is  sinful, 
**  if  it  proceed  not  from  faith,"  Rom.  xiv,  24.  Though  I  were  as 
virtuous  as  any  man  living,  if  I  have  not  faith,  I  will  not  please  God, 
See  this,  Heb.  xi,  6.     Let  this  urge  you  to  him. 

4.  They  who  receive  him  by  a  true  faith,  find  in  him  all  things 
necessary  to  their  salvation,  as  we  have  just  now  shown.  Now  we 
must  either  be  wholly  unconcerned  about  our  salvation,  or  this  must 
determine  our  hearts  to  believe  in  him. 

II.  Many  who  are  not  of  our  communion  deny  this  great  truth. 
There  are  not  any  among  those  called  Christians,  who  will  not  con- 
fess that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  ;  yea,  they  will  all  boast  of  him  with 
their  mouths  :  b\it  if  v/c  will  attend  to  the  matter  more  strictly,  we 
shall  find  that  they  deny  the  only  Saviour  with  their  deeds,  since 
they  seek  their  salvation  of  the  saints,  of  themselves,  or  somewhere 
eke. 

It  is  evident,  that  the  instructor  hath  respect  here  to  the  Papists, 
who  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness, 

].  Of  the  saints,  since  they  make  the  saints,  and  especially  Mary, 
tlie  objects  of  all  their  devotions,  and  therefore  prav  to  them  for  all 
kinds  of  happiness,  dedicate  temples,  cities  and  countries  to  them  ; 
yea,  they  proceed  so  far,  that  a  great  champion  of  popery  *  hath 

•  Th'.s  was  Bonaventurc,  whom  the  Papists  style  the  seraphJcal  doctor :  ^'* 
was  an  eminent  scholastic  divine  of  the  thirteenth  century. 


j  30.  241 

Inserted  the  name  of  Mary  in  the  Psalter,  wherever  he  found  the 
names  and  titles  of  God.  Yea,  that  the  Papists  seek  thtir  salvation 
and  happiness  of  the  saints  appears  from  their  employing  them  as 
mediators  with  Cod  and  his  Son  ;  for  they  will  not  draw  near  to 
God  through  Christ,  until  they  have  first  sought  the  favour  and 
assistance  of  some  saint ;  therefore  they  are  so  shamdess,  that  ihey 
compare  Mary  to  the  neck,  by  which  salvation  flovveth  down  to  us 
from  Christ,  as  the  head.  They  endeavour  to  hide  their  filih  in  some 
measure,  by  saying  that  the  saints  are  mediators  of  intercession,  and 
that  we  must  seek  our  salvation  through  them  of  Jesus  :  but  even 
then  the  Papists  show  that  they  seek  their  salvalion  so  far  of  the 
saints.  The  word  of  God  knows  of  no  intercessors  besides  Jesus 
Christ  the  righteous :  it  is  also  certain,  that  the  Romish.church  re- 
presents the  saints  not  only  as  mediators  of  intercession,  but  also  of 
merit ;  we  will  not  transcribe  here  any  prayers  of  the  Papists,  in 
which  they  pray  for  grace  through  the  most  precious  merits  of  the 
saints,  for  it  is  sufficiently  evident  without  this,  that  th'ey  consider 
the  saints  as  mediators  of  merit,  since  it  is  the  uniform  doctrine  of 
the  Papists,  that  the  saints  perform  many  v/orks  of  supererogation, 
which  are  laid  up  by  the  Pope,  out  of  which  treasure  the  deficiencies 
of  others  are  supplied,  and  indulgencies,  or  pardons  of  sins  granttf'. 

2.  The  Papists  seek  their  salvation  and  happiness  also  of  them- 
selves; for  they  imagine  that  they  merit  salvation  of  God  by 
their  good  works.  When  they  sin,  they  will  satisfy  for  it  in  this 
life  by  certain  chastisements  of  fasting,  pilgrimages  and  almsgivings, 
by  muttering  a  great  number  of  paternosters,  and  avemarys,  and  by 
practising  other  trifles,  enjoined  on  them  by  the  priest ;  or  after  this 
life  by  suffering  a  severe  punisiiment  in  a  hot  burning  purgatory. 

3.  If  all  this  will  not  suffice,  they  will  then  stek  their  salvation 
and  happiness  somewhere  else,  as  in  the  agnus  Deis,  the  v/pod  of  the 
cross,  masses  for  souls,  shriving  their  sins. to  the  priest,  who  will  for- 
give them  the  sins  which  they  have  shriven,  and  these  things  quiet 
them  so  perfectly,  that  it  is  as  though  it  were  proclaimed  to  them 
from  heaven,  that  when  they  do  thus,  they  are  saved  by  Jesus 
himself. 

It  follows  certainly  from  this,  that  the  Papists  deny  the  only  Sa- 
viour Jlsus  ;  for  one  of  these  two  things  must  be  true,  and  not  both, 
that  Jesus  is  not  a  complete  Saviour  ;  or  that  he  is  a  complete  Sa- 
viour, in  whom  believers  find  all  things  necessary  to  their  salvation. 
Now  it  is  certain,  that  he  is  a  complete  Saviour,  as  we  have  proved 
before ;  and  therefore  when  the  Papists  seek  their  salvation  out  of 
Jesus  of  the  saints,  or  of  tbemselres,  or  of  aught  else,  they  deny  tise 

LI 


242     JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

only  Oeliverer  and  Saviour,  and  do  not  consider  bin)  as  a  complete. 
Saviour. 

It  is  true,  they  boast  of  h'm  w  ih  their  mouths,  and  say  that  he  is 
the  supreme  and  the  principal  Saviour,  and  that  the  saints  are  saviours 
of  an  inferior  order ;  Jesus  is  with  them  indeed  the  supreme  and 
most  worthy,  but  not  the  only  and  complete  Saviour.  To  consti- 
tute Iiim  ttie.  supreme  Saviour,  and  the  saints  inferior  ones,  what  !& 
it  but  nukiUi^  Christians  heathens,  who  held  that  there  was  a 
supieme  God  and  inferior  Cods,  and  that  the  inferior  Gods  were 
mediators,  by  »vhom  fhey  drew  near  to  the  supreme  God,  and  by 
whom  that  supreme  God  drew  near  to  them,  with  his  favours.  The 
jRomanists  boast  indeed  much  of  the  name  Jesus,  and  inscribe  it 
upon  almost  eveiy  thing,  in  order  to  sanctify  it ;  they  will  also  hang 
this  name  about  thrir  neciss,  that  k  may  preserve  them  f  om  malig- 
nant diseases,  and  they  make  use  of  it  to  cast  out  the  devil,  as  if  this 
name  were^a  charm,  as  it  was  used  by  the  seven  exorcists  to  their 
shame  and  loss,  Acts  xix.  13 — 16.  But  what  do  these  men  find  in 
Jesus  that  stiould  constitute  him  the  suprerjfle  and  principal  Saviour  ? 
in  truth  notiung  more  than  that  he  delivers  them  from  sins,  which 
they  have  before  baptism,  and  then  only  from  the  guik,  but  not  from 
the  punishment  of  sm,  or  only  from  temj^oral,  and  not  from  eternal 
punishment;  and  thus  he  leaves  the  principal  work  to  the  saints, 
and  to  tl.e  sinner  himself,  all  his  sufferings  and  obedience  serving 
only  to  render  our  works  capable  of  meriting,  and  thus  Jesus  will  be 
the  servant  to  assist  these  great  lorda  ;  and  so  this  great  Bame  proves 
with  these  men  to  be  a  mere  nothing,  yea,  a  blasphemy,  of  which 
it  is  not  the  least  part,  that  some  of  them  arrogate  to  themselves  the 
name  of  Jesuits,  as  if  they  were  associates  of  Jesus,  and  partakers 
with  him  in  the  work  of  saving  the  sinner, 

Hatli  not  the  instructor  therefore  reason  to  say  that  this  people 
deny  him  with  their  deeds  ? 

But  some  will  perhaps  ask,  Can  no  man  then  be  saved  in  the 
church  of  Rome  ?  we  say,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  some  vcre 
saved  in  the  Romish  church,  before  the  true  church  separated  her- 
self from  her,  since  tliere  were  man^y  who  groaned  under  the  Romish 
yoke,  and  bore  witness  against  the  denial  of  Jesus  ;  but  we  cannot 
speak  so  liberally  now ;  because  since  that  separation,  Vvhen  the 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  were  sealed,  and  the  gospel 
preached,  an  everlasting  wo  was  denounced  against  all  those  who 
worship  the  beast,  and  hijs  image,  and  receive  his  mark  in  their  fore- 
head. Read  attentively  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  the  revelation  of- 
Toftn.     It  may  also  happen,  that  there  are    certain  persons  in  that 


 

church,  \vho  not  knowing  the  depths  of  Satan,  possscss  a  certain 
measure  of  faith,  and  of  love  to  Jesus,  Cind  do  not  trust  in  themselves, 
or  in  tlie  creatures  and  reveal  themselves  particulSily  on  their  death 
beds,  and  are  thus  saved  :  but  how  dark  and  sad  is  their  condition, 
and  how  are  they  saved  as  it  were  by  fire  i 

The  Socinians  will  without  doubt  detest  the  erroneous  opinion  of 
the  Papists,  but  neither  are  they  justifiable  in  what  they  teach  con- 
cerning the  Saviour  Jesus  ;  for  the  Socinians  imagine,  that  !^e  is  a 
Saviour  only  because  he  taught  a  better  law  than  that  of  Moses,  en- 
forced it  by  miracles,  and  confirmed  it  by  liis  holy  life  and  palieiit 
death :  but  what  influence  hath  all  this  upon  the  soul  without  his 
Godhead,  satisfaction  and  effectual  changing  of  the  heart  ?  and  never- 
thtloss  they  deny  all  this,  and  show  thus  that  they  also  deny  the  only 
and  complete  Saviour. 

The  Remonstrants  approach  somewhat  nearer,  when  they  teach 
that  Jesus  merited  the  salvation  of  a  possibility  to  be  saved  :  but 
Ihey  will  not  allow  that  Jesus  applies  his  merited  salvation  effectu- 
ally, saying,  that  he  hath  left  thjs  to  our  fieew-ill.  But  then  Jesu  sis 
only  a  possible  Saviour ;  and  so  it  might  have  happened,  that  though 
Jesus  were  a  Saviour,  no  man  had  been  saved,  as  the  will  of  all  men 
is  free  to  accept  of  him  or  not.  What  doth  all  this  mean,  but  that 
Jesus  is  not  a  comple  e  Saviour  ?  that  believers  do  not  fina  all  things 
in  him  necessary  to  their  salvation  ?  t^nd  consequently  they  also  de- 
ny in  deed,  the  only  Saviour  Jesus,  though  ihey  boast  of  him  with 
their  mouths. 

Though  we  cannot  censure  the  Lutherans  on  this  head,  never- 
theless we  cannot  command  their  superstitious  behaviour  toward 
the  b^re  name  of  Jesus,  bowing  when  it  is  only  mentioned  :  "  At  the 
name  of  Jesus  every  knee  'must  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things 
in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,"  according  to  Philip,  ii.  10, 
But  this  doth  not  relate  to  the  name  of  Jesus,'  but  to  his  person,  to 
v.'hich  all  must  be  subject.  If  we  OMght  to  understand  any  mere 
name  here,  it  ought  rather  to  be  his  name  Lord,  "which  every 
tongue  m-ust  confess,'- according  to  vs.  11.  Those  also,  who  are 
under  the  earth,  to  wit,  the  evil  spirits,  have  no  knees.  Yea,  the 
Lutherans  themselves  do  not  bow  their  knees,  >vhen  this  name  ia 
mentioned,  but  only  their  heads. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  all  that  hath  been    said,  must  we  not   justify 
our  fathers  in  separating  frctfn  the  church  »i  Rome,  according  to  the 


1244    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR» 

divine  command.  Rev.  xviii.  4,  "  Come  out  of  her,  my  people, 
that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sinr,  and^  that  ye  receive  not  her 
plagues  f "  How  could  they  remain  in  such  an  assembly,  who  de- 
nied their  Sa\ionr,  was  become  Idolatrous,  would  not  be  persuaded, 
and  persecuted  those  who  would  heal  her,  even  unto  death  ? 

Tea  more,  ougiit  we  to  be  charged  with  improper  severity,  be* 
cause  we  would  never  receive  the  abominable  Socinians  as  brethren  ? 
They  had  indeed  utterly  subverted  all  the  foundations  of  the  Chris- 
tian faith,  w!th  respect  to  J'isus,  as  his  Godhead,  salisfaction,  and 
heartchanging  grace  ;  on  which  account  the  Remonstrants  also  were 
justly  cast  out  of  our  purified  church  ;  for  they  would  establish  free- 
will as  an  associate  \\ith  Jesus  in  the  salvation  of  sinners,  and  would 
also  erect  an  altar  to  it  :  and  hence  they  soon  deviated  to  other  er- 
roneous opinions,  embraced  the  Socinians  as  their  brethren,  and  en- 
deavoured to  bring  those  uncircumcised  into  the  temple  of  God. 
How  were  they  then  to  be  endured  ! 

Permit  me  to  offer  also  this  inference  from  what  hath  been  said, 
that  our  leformed  church  alone  exhibits  the  pure  doctrine  of  the 
ivord  of  God  without  errour.  Who  can  suspect  her  of  errours  and 
misapprehensions,  unless  it  be  an  errour  that  she  conceives  too  highly 
of  the  only  and  complete  Saviour,  that  she  humbles  the  sinner  too 
low,  comforts  the  sorrowful  too  perfectly,  and  glorifies  God  too  much, 
as  a  God  of  perfect  salvationr'  And  do  we  err  herein**  we  err  then 
with  the  word  of  God.  which  teacheth  us  these  things  ;  yea,  we  es- 
teem it  our  happiness,  that  w-e  may  err  herein  so,  that  we  lose  our- 
selves who'ly  in  Jesus,  and  are  swallowed  up  in  his  salvation,  that 
we  may  be  found  only  in  him 

May  we  not  now  also  extol  those  as  happy,  who  have  Jesus  for 
their  Saviour  ?  For  (a)  he  is  the  most  worthy,  the  Son  of  God, 
made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  .hath  by  inheritance 
obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they.  Who  in  heaven  can  be 
compared  to  him  ?  who  among  the  sons  of  the  mighty  can  be  liken- 
ed to  him  ?  he  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints, 
and  to  be  reverenced  by  all  those  who  are  round  about  him.  He  is 
the  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings  ;  yea,  he  is  terrible  to  the  kings 
of  the  earth.  "His  name  is  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The 
mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  peace,"  Isaiah 
ix.  6-  To  have  the  great  God  for  our  Saviour  is  surely  a  great  hap- 
piness, (b)  Let  the  benefited  sinner  only  consider  from  what  Je- 
sus saves  him.  It  is  indeed  from  sin  ;  -all  that  is  abominable,  evil 
and  hateful,  is  comprehended  under  that  one  word,  sin  ;  for  it  ren* 
ders  man  hke  the  devil,  it  subjects  him  to  the   wrath  t)f  God)  the 


 

.^Uise  of  the  law  and  eternal  damnation  ;  it  is  the  cause  of  all  our- 
imisery,  and  it  deprives  the  sinner  of  all  h'is  faculties,  so  that  he 
cannot  deliver  his  soul.  When  a  person  hath  had  a  heartfelt  sense 
oi  this,  and  sees  that  he  is  delivered  by  Jesus,  must  it  not  fill  his 
heart  with  wonder,  astonishment,  joy,  and  praise  to  God,  and  induce 
him  to  cry  out,  "  He  who  hath  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  death, 
and  who  still  delivereth  us,  and  in  whom  we  trust,  that  he  will  yet 
deliver  us  ?"  (c)  Believers,  consider  also  what  Jblessedness  and  sal- 
vation he  hath  bestowed  on  you.  He  hath  united  you  to  God, 
translated  you  into  communion  with  him,  so  that  ye  know  him  wlio 
is  true,  and  are  in  him  who  is  true  :  your  life  is  hidden  with  him  in 
God,  ye  have  an  interest  in  his  favour  and  love,  and  shall  always  re- 
tain it ;  and  all  this  is  but  a  small  beginning  ;  yea,  although  ye  were 
now  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,  it  could  not  yet  be  compared 
to  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  you  at  the  last  day.  And 
therefore,  •'  behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed 
on  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God  :  therefore  the  world 
knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  him  not.  Beloved,  now  are  we 
the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  ;  but 
we  know,  that  when  he  shall  apper,  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  1  John  iii.  1,  2.  (d)  And  what  hath  Jesus 
done  to  save  you  ?  he  poured  forth  his  soul  unto  death,  he  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors,  he"  bore  the  sins  of  many,  and 
made  in^:ercession  for  the  transgressors ;  he  made  his  soul  an  offer- 
ing for  sin,  that  he  might  see  you  as  his  seed  ;  and  therefore  he 
hath  also  given  you  his  Spirit,  he  regenerates  you,  he  hath  made 
you  partakers  of  his  divine  nature,  he  hath  obtained  your  acquittal 
of  the  judge,  he  hath  sanctified  you,  he  will  love  you  to  the  end,  and 
will  not  withdraw  his  hand  from  you,  until  he  hath  introduced  you 
into  glory,  and  hath  saved  you  perfectly  in  soul  and  body.  In  this, 
Job  gloried  under  his  greatest  troubles  ;  '*  I  know  that  my  Redeem- 
er liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day,  upon  the  earth. 
And  though  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my 
flesh  shall  I  see  God  ;  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes 
sh^U  behold,  and  not  another  ;  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within 
me","  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Will  ye  have  more  ?  Behold  (e)  he  is 
the  only  and  complete  Saviour,  ye  have  all  things  in  him  that  arc 
necessary  to  your  tiaivaticn.  There  is  no  defect  in  any  sinner  so 
great  and  griirvous,  but  there  is  a  fulness  in  every  respect  sufficient 
in  him  against  it:  •' Christ  is  all  in  all,"  Coll.  iii,  11.  "  Of  his 
fulness  do  wt^all  receive  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16-  "  He  is  made 
o  us  of  God  wisdoiuj  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redempiicn/* 


545    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

1  Cor.  i.  30.  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,  that  com^ 
unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
them,"  Heb.  vii.  25.  And  he  alone  is  this,  we  may  not  seek,  and 
cannot  find  salvation  out  of  him  ;  whatsoever  the  sinner  pursues,  in 
order  to  obtain  happiness,  is  only  broken  cisterns,  v/hich  can  hold  no 
water,  (f)  And  whose  Saviour  is  he  ?  the  Saviour  of  all  men  ?  no  : 
but  only  of  his  people,  and  there  are  many  who  are  not  his  people 
and  sheep.  That  just  ye,  even  ye,  O  believers,  arc  his  people,  and 
the  objects  of  his  saving  kindness,  and  that  others,  perhaps  as  good, 
yea,  better  by  nature  than  ye,  come  short  hereof;  ought  this  not  to 
humble  you  to  the  uttermost  under  a  sense  of  your  unworthiness, 
and  cause  you  to  ask  v/ith  Hagar  "  Have  |I  here  also  looked  after 
him,  who  sceth  me  ?"  Gen.  xvi.  13, 

I  know  that  there  are  believers,  who  labour  under  a  grievous  un- 
certainty, whether  they  have  a  saving  interest  in  Jesus,  and  that 
there  are  others,  who  are  unconcerned,  and  think  that  they  ought 
not  to  doubt  that  Jesus  is  their  Saviour,  deceiving  themselves  with 
Tain  imaginations  :  -  and  therefore  it  will  not  be  unserviceable  to  in- 
quire for  the  conviction  of  the  one  and  the  other  who  are  the  real 
partakers  of  the  Saviour.     They  are, 

1 .  Those  who  regard  their  sins  and  misery  with  concern  and  anx- 
iety :  they  cry  out,  '^  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Acts  ii.  37* 
ix.  6.  xvi.  30.  "  For  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  that  which  was 
lost."  Matt,  xviii.  1 1.  How  is  it  possible  that  a  sinner  should  be  de- 
livered from  all  his  sins,  and  dreadful  misery,  as  long  as  he  doth  not 
behold  his  wretchedness,  so  as  to  be  humbled.  We  know  indeed 
that  some  are  brought  to  Jesus  by  a  word,  or  by  a  calm  contempla- 
tion of  the  saving  truths,  or  by  a  flood  of  saving  joy,  which  Jesus 
sheds  abroad  in  their  hearts,  and  they  do  not  experience  much  per- 
turbation, as  Matthew,  Lydia,  and  Zaccheus,  Matt.  ix.  9.  Acts  xvi. 
14.  Luke  ix.  5,  6,  but  we  also  know,  that  this  is  not  common  ;  and 
moreover,  that  such  persons,  although  they  are  not  greatly  distres- 
sed at  the  first  on  account  of  their  sins  and  misery,  because  it  is 
swallowed  up  by  the  enjoyment  of  their  love,  are  afterwards  so 
much  the  more  dejected,  and  thus  humbled  on  account  of  their  for- 
mer and  present  sins.  And  is  not  humiliation  the  daily  work  of 
every  believer  ?     burcly  it  is. 

2.  They  have  an  enlarged  view  of  the  perfect  ability  of  Jesus  to 
save  sinners,  which  causeth  them  to  set  a  high  value  on  him  :  "  To 
you  who  believe  he  is  precious,"  I  Peter  ii.  IT.  They  have  not  a 
bare  apprehension  of  this,  but  they  perceive  through  the  irradiation 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  beauty  of  Jesus,  which  allures  their  hearts, 
excites  a  desire  in  them  to   Jesus,  and  indiiceth  them  to   seek  him 


i 


Xr.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  29,  30.  24r 

earnestly,  to  look  from  self,  and  from  all  self  and  imaginary  worth 
and  works,  to  surrender  themselves  to  him,  to  turn  to  him,  and 
receive  him,  in  order  to  be  saved  by  him  alone.  **  They  account 
all  things,"  yea,  even  their  best  performances,  "  loss  and  dung,  that 
they  may  vi'in  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him,"  like  Paul,  Phil.  iii.  7 — lo. 
Let  none,  think  that  since  Jesus  alone  is  the  Saviour,  'hat  he  will  obtain 
an  interest  in  him,  without  any  activity  on  his  part.  No  :  those  whom 
he  saves,  he  renders  active  in  their  endeavours  to  be  saved  by  him  ; 
therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Philip,  ii.  12,  13.  *<  Work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling  ;  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in 
you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  See  also  Matt. 
xi.  2. 

3.  Such  are  also  his  people  :  he  saves  his  people.  They  surren- 
der themselves  willingly  and  readily  to  him,  and  "  join  themselves 
to  him,"  not  only  to  be  saved  by  him,  but  also  to  be  sanctified,  and 
*'  to  serve  him,  to  love  him,  and  to  be  his  servants,"  as  it  is  said  of 
those  who  are  saved,  Isaiah  Ivi.  6.  "  They  are  willing  to  swear,  and 
to  perform  it,  that  they  will  keep  his  righteous  judgments,"  like 
David,  Psalm  cxix.  106.  And  therefore  they  join  themselves  to 
that  people  whom  he  saves,  and  who  serve  him,  "  saying,  we  will  go 
with  you  ;  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you,"  Zech.  viii.  23. 
Ysa,  •'  they  are  of  one  heart  and  one  soul  "  with  that  people.  Acts 
iv.  32.  And  thus  "  we  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren,"  1  John  iii.  14. 

Whoever  ye  are,  examine  yourselves  by  these  characteristics,  and 
see  whether  ye  have  been  thus  exercised,  and  whether  ye  be  still 
exercised  in  this  manner.  But  how  many  are  there,  who  know 
nothing  at  all  of  these  things  !  Verily  ye  know  nothing  of  them 
who  have  never  yet  come  to  yourselves,  to  examine  whether  ye  were 
in  the  faith,  or  whether  Christ  were  in  you  ;  who  show  by  your  care- 
lessness, that  ye  are  unconcerned  whether  ye  be  saved  or  damned  : 
for  this  seldom  or  never  enters  into  your  thofights  ;  the  things  of 
this  life,  and  worldly  and  fleshly  desires  possess  your  minds,  so  that 
there  is  no  room  for  serious  reflections  upon  your  eternal  condition  ; 
and  ye  show  thus,  that  ye  are  not  of  that  people,  but  of  the  world, 
Psalm  xvii.  14.  l.Johniv.  5.  Or  doth  a  sudden  and  transient 
thought  concerning  a  life  after  this  life  enter  your  hearts,  your  self- 
love  induceth  you  to  think,  that  ye  in  particular  will  not  be  lost,  but 
saved ;  ye  take  this  for  granted,  as  somt thing  that  is  evident  of 
itself,  because  ye  have  heard  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  that  Je- 
sus is  the  Saviour,  just  as  if  he  were  a  Saviour  of  these  who  never 
apply  to  him  ss  such. 


ta    JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVIOUR. 

Neither  have  ye  the  evidences  vhich  we  have  mentioned,  that  U* 
*sus  is  your  Saviour,  vho  endeavour  to  do  something,  in  order  to  be 
.saved,  yet  do  not  embrace  Jesus  as  your  Saviour,  but  seek  other  Sa- 
viours. This  vrill  appear  strange  to  you,  and  induce  you  to  say, 
\ve  certainly  know  that  Jesus  alone  is  the  Saviour  :  but  it  is  perfectly- 
evident  that  we  look  upon  that  as  our  Saviour,  in  which  we  place 
our  only  trust  and  hope  of  being  saved.  But  is  Jesus  your  trust  and 
liope  ?  do  ye  flee  to  him  ?  have  ye  received  him  truly,  heartily,  and 
entirely  ?  and  do  ye  still  do  this  ?  ye  do  then  show  that  ye  esteena 
'Iiim  your  Saviour  ;  but  is  it  your  hope  and  trust,  that  ye  will  be  sa- 
ved, because  ye  have  been  born  in  a  Christian  covuitry,  have  been 
e:lucate(l  in  the  pure  church,  have  made  a  confession  of  yonr  faith, 
that  ye  partake  of  the  Lord's  supper,  have  a  considerable  knowledge, 
do  not  commit  any  wicked  abominations,  are  sometimes  sorry  for 
iyour  sins,  have  a  relish  for  the  word,  associate  with  the  godly,  yea, 
liave  a  great  zeal  for  God,  without  having  ever  received  Jesus  him- 
self, or  sought  to  viin  him  by  faith,  ye  do  then  surely  declare  that  ye 
Vlo  not' seek  Jesus,  but  only  those  things  and  works  for  your  Saviour. 
With  the  Papiists,  Socinians,  and  Remonstrants  ye  fetch  Jesus  in  as 
ifar  as  concerns  his  names,  thinking  that  if  ye  do  all  ye  can,  Jesus 
will  do  all  that  he  can  ;  but  Jesus  iiimselfis  not  the  object  of  your 
exercises.  Therefore  know  that  ye  are  yet  without  Christ.  What 
can  it  profit  you,  to  boast  of  him  with  your  mouths,  while  ye  deny  him . 
with  your  Works  ?  He  will  not  save  you,  while  ye  .rem  in  thus,  but 
condemn  you  :  alas  !  how  much  more  grievous  will  your  condition  be, 
than  that  of  those  who  never  heard  of  him  :  for  he  hath  urged  you 
to  receive  him  f'>r  salvation,  but  ye  have  suffered  him  to  labour  and 
cry  in  vain.  Hear  what  he  saith,  John  xv.  22,  "  If  I  had  not  come 
and  spoken  to  them,  they  had  not  had  sin ;  but  now  they  have  no 
cloak  for  theh' sin." 

Alas  !  friends,  behold  your  fearful  and  wretched  condition,  jand 
entertain  an  earnest  desire  to  be  saved,  and  therefore  to  receive  the 
Saviour  by  faith.  And  why  should  ye  not  ?  have  ye  too  much  to  do 
in  the  world  ?  are  your  thoughts  too  much  taken  up  with  the  things 
of  this  life  ?  <'  What  will  it  profit  you,  if  ye  should  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  your  own  souls  I  or  what  would  ye  give  in  exchange 
for  your  souls  ?"  Matt.  xvi.  26.  Or  will  ye  not,  because  sin  is  sweet 
to  you?  how  bitter  \vill  it  be  to  you,  when  that  momentary  sweetness 
shall  be  past,  to  hear  him  upbraid  you,  saying,  "  Ye  would  not  come 
unio  me,  that  ye  might  have  life,"  John  v.  40.  Yea,  "  the  wicked- 
ness that  is  sweet  in  your  mouth,  shall  be  turned  in  your  bowels  ;  it 
^h-ilLbe  the  gall  of. asps  within  you,"  Job  xx.  12,   13,  14.     Or  v:ill 


a  249 

ye  defer  tt,  until  this  or  that  opportunity  ?  but  ye  will  then  perhaps 
have  no  opportunity,  or  less  inclination  than   ye  hav^c  now  to  believe 
in  him  :  therefore  "  to  day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.     Or  do  ye  not  dare,  because  ye  have  sin- 
ned too  long  a  time,  aid  too  grievously?  He  is  a  complete  Savioupj 
who  is  able  to  subdue  all  your  sins,  although  ye  were  the  greatest 
sinners :  <^  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation, 
that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  :  of  whom  I 
am  chief,"   said  Paul,    1  Tim.  i,  15,     Or  are  ye  afraid,   that  such 
grievous  sinners  may  not  come  to  him,  and  that  he  would  thrust  you 
away  ?  He  himself  calls  to  you,  *'  to  look  unto  him,  and  be  saved," 
Isaiah  xlv.  22,  and  promiseth  that  "  him  that  comcth  to  him  he  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,"  John  vi    37.     Ye  may  not  linger,  without  ex- 
posing yourselves  to  the  peril  of  a  grievous  condemnation,   Heb.  Xo 
38.  I  John  v.  10.     Or  can  ye  not  come  to  him,  because  ye  are  so 
dark  and  weak,  and  he  is  so  far  off,  that  ye  cannot  draw  near  to  him? 
only  offer  yourselves   to  him,  although  it  were  afar  off;  call  upon 
bim  to  give  you  faith,  and  to  draw  you  to  him  j  for  this  also  belong* 
to  the  work  of  saving,  namely,  to  give  faith,  Eph.  ii.  8. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  who  have  been  driven  out  of  yourselves^ 
hare  truly  embraced  the  Saviour  for  salvation,  and  are,  like  his  people, 
zealous  of  good  works,  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  his  name,  and 
therefore, 

1 .  Rejoice  and  glory  in  him :  he  is  matter  of  the  greatest  joy  s 
"  In  this  day  it  should  be  said,  "  Lo,  this  is  our  God,  we  have  waited 
for  him,  and  he  will  save  us  :  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  sal- 
vation," Isaiah  xxv.  9.  The  angel  published,  as  the  greatest  joy,  that 
the  Saviour  was  bom,  Luke  ii.  10,  11.  Mary's  spirit  rejoiced  in 
God  her  Saviour,  Luke  i.,47.  Ponder  a  while  on  your  happiness, 
that  just  ye  have  been  delivered  by  so  great  a  God  and  Saviour  from 
such  a  grievous  condemnation,  that  such  a  great  salvation  hath  been 
bestowed  on  you,  and  that  even  he,  who  knew  no  sin,  was  made  sin 
for  you,  that  ye  might  be  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  Pause 
and  contemplate  this,  until  your  souls  are  enraptui-ed  with  joy,  and 
are  transported  out  of  themselves  into  him. 

2.  Glorify  and  praise  him  on  account  of  his  name  :  "  As  his  name 
is,  so  is  his  praise,"  Psalm  xlviii.  10.  "  He  hath  a  name  above  every 
name,  that  in  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,"  Philip,  ii, 
9,  10.  All  that  ye  have  and  expect,  proceeds  from  his  name  :  how 
well  doth  it  then  become  you  to  give  him  the  honour  of  it.  It  is  the 
blessedness  of  the  rational  creature  to  glorify  God  :  but  how  doth  it 
increase  h'8  blessedness,  that  having  a  view  of  the  power  ©f  this 

Mm 


250:   JESUS  THE  ONLY  AND  COMPLETE  SAVlOtJR. 

name,  he  can  praise  it  with  his  whole  heart  to  the  utmost :  in  this 
the  blessed  soul  will  exercise  herself  for  ever  ;  and  it  would  there* 
fore  be  pioper,  that  she  should  begin  it  now. 

3.  L;it  liim  also  be  your  only  refuge  and  trust  on  account  of  his 
narae  :  <'  They  that  know  thy  name  will  trust  in  thee,"  said  David, 
Psalm  ix.  11.  Tliey  who  believe  in  Jesus  find  all  things  in  him 
necfssaiy  to  their  salvation  :  therefore  in  whatever  respect  ye  may- 
be deficient,  ye  must  betake  yourselves  to  him  alone,  that  ye  may 
receive  of  his  fulness  grace  for  grace  :  *'  It  should  be  said  of  him, 
Surely  in  the  L^rd  have  I  righteousness  and  strength,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
2  4.  Those  who  are  saved  ought  certainly  not  to  deny  his  name  by 
being  discouraged  on  account  of  their  afflictions,  or  by  looking  for 
any  blessedness  in  their  own  endeavours,  purposes,  exercises  or 
duties  :  in  him  alone  is  the  salvation  of  Israel,  and  he  alone  is  a  God 
of  perfect  salvation. 

4.  Love  him  and  his  name  heartily  :  whatever  is  lovely  and  love- 
worthy he  discovers  and  imparts  to  you  by  means  of  this  name^,  that 
he  may  allure  your  hearts  and  love  to  him  :  "He  is  fairer  than  the 
children  of  men,"  Psalm  xlv.  2.  Behold  his  beauty  from  the  crown 
of  his  head  to  the  soles  of  his  feet,  and  ye  will  find  that  «'  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely,"  Song  v.  10 — 16.  "  His  name  is  as  ointment  poured 
forth  ;  therefore  the  virgins  do  love  him,"  Song  i.  3.  Let  his  love 
then  constrain  you  to  love  him  also.  Our  love  to  Jesus  fills  us  wholly 
with  pleasure  and  perfect  delight.  This  Bernard  experienced  when, 
he  sang, 

I  see  now  what  I  sought  before, 
Enjoy  now  all  my  soul's  desire : 
I  melt  in  Jesus' ardent  love, 
His  love  doth  my  whole  heart  enfire. 
O  heavenly  fire^  blessed  flame  ! 
End  of  the  law,  perfection's  bond  I 
O  dear  refreshment,  ah,  how  fair 
Jesus  to  love,  who  is  God's  Son  ! 
'Tis  Jesus  who  delights  the  soul : 
'Tis  Jesus,  whom  the  soul  doth  crave ; 
O  that  in  which  I  boast,  my  bliss 
Is  Jesus,  who  the  world  doth  save. 

5-  Conduct  yourselves  as  the  people  whom  Jesus  saves,  separating 
yourselves  from  whatever  is  sinful,  surrendering  yourselves  to  him, 
in  order  to  do  his  wiil  in  all  things,  and  to  be  conformable  to  him- 


 

The  life  of  Jesus  must  be  manifest  in  your  mortal  bodies  :  «  He  that 
hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure,"  1  John 
iii.  3.  Men  ought  to  see  that  ye  have  been  with  Jesus;  for  what 
other  end  hath  he  saved  you  ?  '*  He  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  pecuhar 
l^eople,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Tilus  ii.  14. 

It  is  true,  that  notwithstanding  ye  are  the  people  whom  Jesus 
saves  ye  are  siill  in  an  evil  condition  through  your  manifold  inward 
and  outward  afflictions,  and  the  righteous  are  scarcely  saved  :  never- 
theless he  can  and  will  save  you  perfectly  and  certainly.  At  your 
death  he  will  command  the  angeis  to  carry  you  into  Abraham's 
bosom,  and  will  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  to  salvation  by  his 
Spirit  who  dwelleth  in  you.  With  what  tranquillity  may  ye,  O  be- 
lievers, lay  yourselves  down  upon  your  death-beds,  and  say,  "  Now, 
Lord,  Icttest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peac«,  according  to  thy  word; 
for  roine  eyes  have  even  seen  thy  salvation."    Amen. 


(253) 


THE  NAMES 


CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN^ 


Xn.  LORD'S  DAY. 


John  i.  41.     We  have  found  the  Messiah,  which  is,  being  interpre- 
ted, the  Christ. 

^.31.    WAy  18  he  called  Christy  that  iff,  (^minted  ? 

A.  Because  he  is  ordained  of  God  the  Father,  and  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghosi,  to  be  our  chitf  prophet  and  teacher  ;  who  has  fully 
revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  concerning  our  re- 
demption :  anf^  to  be  our  only  high  priest,  who  by  the  one  'sacrifice 
of  his  body,  has  redeeir.ed  us,  and  makes  continual  intercession  with 
the  Father  for  us  ;  and  also  to  be  our  eternal  kini?,  who  governs  us 
by  his  word  and  Spirit ;  and  who  defends  and  preserves  us  in  the 
enjoyment  of  that  ^Ivation  he  has  purchased  for  us.