Q.  32.  But  tvhy%rt  thou  called  p  Christian  ? 

A  Because  I  am  a  member  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  thus  a  partaker 
of  his  anointing,  that  so  I  may  confess  his  name,  and  present  my- 
self a  living  sacrifice  of  thankfulness  to  him  ;  and  also  that  with  a 
free  and  good  conscience  I  may  fight  against  sin  and  Satan  in  this 
life,  and  afterwards  reign  with  him  eternally,  over  all  creatures. 


JL  r  is  said,  and  not  without  reason,  "  that  we  know  a  person  by  hi9 
surname  *"  It  is  known,  that  men  are  distinguished  from  each  other 

^This  is  the  literal  franilation  of  a  Dutch  proverb,  which  hath  none  thft 
answers  to  it  in  tn^lish. 


XII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  31,  32.  2S» 

bynames:  but  inasmuch  as  men  multiplied  faster  than  they  could 
devise  names  for  them,  and  thus  many,  having  the  same  name 
could  not  be  distinguished  from  each  other,  therefore  surnames  were 
invented,  by  which  one  was  called  to  distinguish  him  from  others. 
For  this  reason  the  Lord  God^  sending  his  Son  in  the  flesh,  ordered 
that  not  only  a  proper  name,  to  wit,  Jesus,  should  be  given  him* 
when  he  was  circumcised,  to  distinguish  him  from  other  men,  but 
also  a  surname,  to  wit,  Christ.  There  were  indeed  many,  who  were 
called  Jesus,  we  find  several  both  in  the  Old  and  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment :  now,  that  the  Son  of  God  might  be  distinguished  from  them 
find  be  better  known*  the  surname  Christ  was  given  him :  therefore 
it  is  said,  ''Jesus,  who  is  called  Christ,"  Matt.  i.  16.  And  verily 
this  surname  was  also  properly  adapted  to  distinguish  him  from 
others,  who  were  called  Jesus,  and  to  convey  to  us  a  most  distinct 
knowledge  of  him  ;  for  it  evidenced  that  he  was  called  Jesus,  and 
possessed  the  office  of  Saviour  by  a  divine  authority,  and  that  he 
should  also  execute  this  office  in  an  effectual  manner,  seeing  he  was 
surnamed  Christ,  because  he  was  ordained  by  God  the  Father,  and 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  pur  prophet,  priest  and  king. 
Thus  also  the  catechism,  having  explained  his  proper  name  Jesus 
in  the  eleventh  Lord's  day,  is  not  satisfied  with  this,  and  therefore 
explains  also  distinctly  in  the  twelfth  Lord's  day  his  surname  Christ, 
and  also  how  believers  are  denominated  from  him. 

There  are  two  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  our 
explanation : 

I.  Why  Jesus  is  called  also  Christ,  Question  31. 

II.  Why  believers  are  called  Christians,  Question  32. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular  it  is  asked,  "  Why  is  h^  • 
cajled  Christ,  that  is,  anointed  ?"  Christ  is  a  Greek  word,  and  is  -. 
derived  from  the  word  c&rio,  which  signifies,  I  anoint,  and  therefore 
Christ  is  an  anointed  :  the  Hebrews  express  the  same  by  the  name 
Maachiach^  or  Messiah  ;  thus  Andrew  said  to  his  brother  Peter, 
"  We  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the  Christ,"!  ^ 
John  i.  41.  See  also  John  iv.  25.    Therefore  the  Hebrew  word  Mas- 
chiach  is  frequenily  translated  anointed,  as  sevei^al  persons,  on  account  -_ 
of  their  divine  appointment  to  their  office  by  anointing,  were  also  i 
called  the  Lord's  anointed :  such  were  the  prophets ;  Elijah  was 
conr.manded  to  "  anoint  Elisha  (o  be  prophet  in  his  room,'-  1  Kings- 
xix.  16.     Therefore  the  Lord  God  said,  Psalm  cv.  15.  "  Touch  not  _ 
mine  anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no  harm."     The  priests  were 
also  anointed :  "  Moses  should  anoint  Aaron  and  his  sons,  that  they 
might  niinister  to  the  Lord  in  the  priest's  office,"  Exodi  xiix.  30', 


254  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN, 

Therefore  the  high  priest  is  emphatically  styled,  "  the  anointed 
priest,"  Lev.  iv.  5.  And  thus  also  were  the  kings  anointed,  and 
therefore  also  called 'the  Lord's  anointed,"  1  bam.  xxiv.  7.  Lam. 
iv.  20.'But  there  was  one  promised  and  expected  of  old,  who  should 
be  in  the  perfect  sense  of  the  words,  the  Lord's  anointed,  \he  Mes- 
siah and  the  Christ,  namely,  the  natural  L>on  of  God,  "  against  whom 
the  kint^s  of  the  earth  bhouid  set* themselves,"  Psalm  ii.  2.  "  'I  he 
Messiah,  the  Prince,  who  iShocild  be  cut  off,  that  he  might  bring  in 
an  everlasting  righteousness,"  Dan.  ix.  25,  26.  whom  the  Samari- 
tans also  expected,  John  iv.  25.  And  who  must  not  say,  with  a  full 
persuasion  of  mind  concerning  our  Jesus,  "  We  have  found  the  Mes- 
sias,  the  Christ;"  seeing  all  that  was  foretold  and  typified  of  the- 
Messiah,  hath  betn  perfectly  fulfilled  in  him, 

Jesus  is  called  the  Christ,  or  the  anointed,  because  he  was  ordain- 
ed to  these  three  great  offices,  and  anointed  to  them  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Two  things  are  to  be  more  particularly' noticed  here,  1. 
The  offices  to  which  Jesus  was  anointed,  2.  What  the  anointing 
signifieth. 

1,  The  offices  to  which  Jesus  was  anointed,  are  (a)  the  office  of" 
prophet  (b)  of  priest,  and  (c)  of  king.  And  this  renders  him  more- 
excellent  than  all  the  children  of  men,  that  these  three  high  offices 
are  found  in  him  alone  at  the  same  time.  Jeremiah  and  others  were 
prophets  and  priests  at  the  same  tims,  but  not  kings  ^  David  was  a 
prophet  and  king,  but  no  priest :  but  Jesus  is  a  prophet,  priest  and 
king  at  the  same  time,  and  thus  "  anointed  above  his  fellows,"  Psalm, 
xlv.  7.  In  order  that  we  may  have  a  clear  view  of  his  excellency, 
let  us  consider  each  office  distinctly. 

1.  Jesus  is  '' a  prophet  like  iMosea,  raised  up  from  among  his 
brethren,  to  whom  we  must  hearken,"  Deul.  xviii.  15,  18.  Acts  iii. 
22,  23.  The  prophets  were  holy  men,  who  were  raised  up  by  Ciod 
in  an  extraordinary  manner,  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  infal- 
libly moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  declare  the  mysteries  of  God  to 
his  people,  to  foretell  things  to  come,  and  to  enforce  and  confirm  all 
this.     And  thus  Jesu5  also  is  a  prophet ;  for 

1.  As  a  prophet  aiiH*  teacher  he  declares  the  mysteries  of  God, 
and  therefore  the  instructor  also  saith,  that  he  hath  as  a  prophet  and 
teacher  '*  fully  revealed  to  us  the  secret  counsel  and  will  of  God  con- 
cerning our  redemption,"  The  Loid  God  had  in  his  eternal  counsel 
devised  a  wonderful  way  to  lead  sinners  to  salvation,  to  the  glory  of 
Lis  justice  and  mercy  ;  but  that  way  wa^  unknown  to  the  sinner,  and 
hidden  in  God  ;  no  creature  was  able  to  discover  it ;  the  Son  of  God, 
-who  was  sent  in  the  fleshj  was  privy  to  that  counsel,  and  was  able 


XII.LORD'SDAY,  Q.  31,  S3.  255 

Stld  authorised  to  reveal  it ;  «  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ; 
the  only  begotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  de- 
clared him,"  John  i.  18,  "For  he  whom  God  hath  sent,  speaketht 
the  words  of  God  ;  for  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  iint(* 
him,"  John  iii.  34.  Even  the  Samaritan  woman  "knew  that  the 
Messias*  who  is  called  the  Christ,  when  he  was  come,  should  tell  us 
all  things,"  John  iv.  25,  as  he  hath  also  done  :  "  All  things  that  I 
have  heard  of  my  Father,  I  have  made  known  unto  you,"  said  he  to 
his  friends,  John  xv.  1 5 . 

He  doth  this  (a)  outwardly  by  the  word  of  the  gospel,  by  whxh 
"he  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light,"  2  Tim.  i.  10.  But 
this  would  remain  as  a  sealed  book  to  the  dark  and  deaf  sinner,  if  he 
were  not  also  (b)  inwardly  addressed  by  this  prophet,  speaking  to  his 
heart,  by  which  he  hears  twice  that  which  the  Lord  speaks  once  in 
his  word,"  Psalm  Ixii.  11.  Therefore  he  teaches  and  explains  the 
mysteries  of  God  also  inwardly,  for  he  sends  with  his  word  his  lJ§ht 
also  into  the  soul,  by  which  the  mysteries  of  God  are  seen  in  then* 
proper  lustre  :  *'He  opens  the  understanding,  so  thai  we  undcrstanc^ 
the  scriptures,"  Luke  xxiv.  45.  See  also  Psalm  xxxvi.  9.  2  Cor. 
iv.  6.  Eph.  i.  17,  18.  Yea,  he  penetrates  to  the  heart,  that  it  may 
regard  this  mystery  ;  "  the  heart  is  opened  that  it  may  attend  to  the 
word,"  Acts  xvi.  14.  He  inclines  the  soul  to  embrace  it ;  "He 
teacheth  her  to  do  his'will,"  Psalm  cxliii.  10.  He  causes  the  "heart 
to  burn  "  with  love,  Luke  xxiv.  32.  *«  And  he  brings  the  blind  by 
a  way  that  they  know  not,  and  leads  them  in  paths  which  they  have 
not  known  ;  he  makes  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crookecl 
things  straight,"  Isaiah  xlii.   16. 

And  he  did  not  do  this  only  himself,  while  he  was  on  e^;rth  in  the 
hody,  but  he  doth  it  also  by  his  servants  and  ambassadours,  "  who' 
pray  sinners  in  his  name,  that  they  would  be  reconciled  to  God." 
1  Cor.  iv.  1.  2  Co..  V.  20-  For  "no  man  hath  a  right  to  preach, 
unless  he  be  sent,"  Rom.  x.  15.  He  doth  this  during  the  whole  time 
since  his  ascension,  "  giving  some  prophets,  some  evangelists,  some 
pastors  and  teachers,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  v/ork  of 
the  ministry,"  Sec.  Eph.  iv.  11,  12.  He  did  this  also  even  in  the  days 
of  the  Old  Testament  ;  for  "  in  the  days  of  Noah  he  went  in  thcf 
Spirit  and  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,"  I  Peter  iii.  19.  1  Peter 
i.  11. 

2.  He  doth  not  only  declare  the  mysteries  of  God  to  us,  but,  as 
a  prophet,  he  also  foretold  things  lo  come,  which  was  likewise  the 
proper  work  of  the  prophets.  The  Lord  Christ  did  this  also  ;  ail 
that  the  prophets  foretold,  they  foretold  by  his  spirit,"    I  Peter  i,  11. 


256  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

He  declared  to  the  New  Testament  Church  beforehand,  whatever 
should  befall  her,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  Matt.  xxiv.  and  xxv. 
he  revealed  to  Joiin  all  the  great  events,  which  should  happen  to  the 
New  Testament  Church,  Rev.  i.  I,  19-  He,  even  "  the  Lion  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  the  root  of  David,  prevailed  to  open  the  book,  and  to 
loose  the  seven  seals  thereof,"  Rev.  v. 

3.  As  a  prophet  he  also  confirmed  and  strengthened  this  by  an 
extraordinary  holy  life,  as  an  example,  that  his  disciples  might  walk 
in  his  steps,  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  his  doctrine  and  prophe- 
cies were  "  the  true  words  of  God,"  I  Peter  ii.  21,  22,  23,  as  also 
by  his  many  miracles,  "  which  no  man  could  do  except  God  were 
with  him,"  which  also  manifests  that  he  was  a  teacher  corne  from 
Cod,  John  iii.  2.  As  he  was  therefore  acknowledged  "a  prophet* 
ihighty  in  deed  and  word  befoie  God  and  all  the  people,"  Luke 
xxiv.  19.  And  it  contributed  not  a  Httle  to  confirm  his  doctrine, 
tha^  he  died  such  a  painful  death  for  it,  that  he  might  *'  witness  a 
good  confession  before  Pontius  Pilate,"  1  Tim.  vi.  13. 

Therefore  the  catechism  saith  very  properly  that  he  is  the  "  chief" 
prophet  and  teaclier.     Moses  had   great  privileges  above  other  pro- 
phets. Num.  xii.  5,  7,   8,  but   Jesus  was  a  prophet  not  only  "  like 
Mos»;s,"  Deut.  xviii.  15,    18,   but  also  much   more    excellent:  '*  for 
this  man  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory  than  Moses,  inasmuch  as 
he  who  hath  builded  the  house,  hath  more  honour  than  the  house," 
Heb.  iii.  3,     "See  also  vrs.  4,  5,  (5.     He  is  a  messenger,  an  interpre- 
ter, one  among  a  thousand,   to  show  unto   man   his   uprightness,'* 
Job  xxxi.  25.     "  Who  is  a  teacher  like  him  ?"  Job.  xxxvi,  22.     He 
it»  indeed  the  essential  wisdom  and  word  of  the  Father  ;   he  could  by 
his  discourses  so  affect  those  who  were  sent  to  take  him,  that  they 
could  not  stretch  out  their  hands  against  him,  but  were  constrained 
to  cry  out,  "  No  man  ever  spake  like  this  man,"  John  vii.  46.    "  The 
multitude  was  astonished  at  his  doctrine,"  Matt.  vii.  28.     If  the  pro- 
phets possessed  any  wisdom,  or  were  in  any  respect  acceptable  or 
venerable,  it  was  wholly  from  him  ;  his  Spirit  wrought  and  did  all 
things  by  and  in  them,  I  Peter  i.  11.     The  prophets  could   indeed 
preach  to  the  ears,   but  not  to  the  heart,  like  Jesus.     The  prophets 
had  their  limited  time,  m  which  they  administered  their  office,  after 
which,  death   put  an  end  to  their   labour,  with    their  lives  :  but  this 
prophet  continues  and  exerciseth  his  ministry  from   the   beginning 
until  the  end  of  the  world. 

B.  He  is  not  only  a  prophet,  but  also  "  a  priest,  and  that  for  ever 
by  an  oath,"  Psalm  ex.  4.  Zech.  vi.  I3y  as  he  also  did  the  work  of 
priest,  and  still  doth  :   "  Every  high  priest,  taken  from  among  men> 


fil,  SsT 

is  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  that  he  may  offer 
both  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  sins,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  v.  1 .  Our  Lord 
lesus  Christ  is  »*  a  merciful  and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertain* 
ing  to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people,"  H«b. 
ii.  17.     For  which  purpose, 

1.  He  offered  up  a  sacrifice  lo  God  in  order  to  atone  for  sins,  as 
this  was  the  work  of  the  priests  under  the  Old  Testament :  "  For 
every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  :  wherefore 
it  is  of  necessity  that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  offer,"  Heb. 
tiii.  3.  But  he  did  not  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  according  to  the 
law,  which  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience,  but  he 
offered  his  own  body  :  "  Therefore,  when  he  cometh  into  the  world, 
he  saith,  sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouKlest  not,  but  a  body  hast 
thou  prepared  for  me  :  lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God.  He  taketh 
away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second.  By  the  which 
will  we  are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  his  body  once,"  Heb. 
X.  1 — 10.  But  he  gave  not  only  his  body,  but  also  his  soul  a  ransom 
for  many  :  for  "  he  should  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,"  Isaiah 
liii.  10.  As  the  trespass  offerings,  sin  offerings,  and  the  sacrifices 
of  atonement,  effected  a  typical  atonement  for  sin,  according  to  the 
law,  so  he  by  his  t>ne  sacrifice  hath  truly  and  really  atoned  for  the 
sins  of  the  elect :  "  For  if  the  blood  of  bulls,  and  of  goats,  and  the 
ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  .the  purifying 
of  the  flesh,  how  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through 
the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your 
conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God?"  Heb.  ix. 
13,    14. 

As  he  was  himself  the  sacrifice,  so  he  was  also  himself  the  sacri- 
fleer,  according  to  his  divine  and  human  nature :  "  The  word  of 
the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh  the  Son  an  high  priest, 
who  is  consecrated  for  evermore,"  Heb.  vii.  23,  See  also  Eph.  v.  2. 
Heb.  ix.  15.  X.  5,7.  If  it  be  necessary  to  inquire  what  his  altar 
was,  (of  wluch  Paul  doth  not  speak  designedly  in  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews)  we  might  say  that  the  cross  served  him  for  an  altar,  since 
the  sacrifice  of  his  body  was  laid  upon  the  cross  ;  for  •'  he  bore  our 
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  Peter  ii.  24.  We  might  also  say- 
that  his  Godhead  was  the  altar  which  sanctified  the  gift,  inasmuch  as 
"  he  offered  up  himself  through  the  eternal  Spirit,"  Heb.  ix..  14. 
Do  we  desire  to  know  what  the  fire  was  that  consumed  his  sacrifice  j 
we  must  understand  by  it,  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  that  was  kin- 
dled as  a  fire  against  sin,  which  was  transferred  to  this  true  sacrifice, 
on  which  account  he  mourned  so  bitterly  under  it,"  Matt.  xxvi.  37, 
38,  39,  42,  44.     xxvii,  46,    By  the  fire  we  may  also  «nil««»tand  liis 

Nn 


'i«N  THE  NAMtS 'CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

"^  fiery  zeal,  and  love  to  the  honour  of  his  Father's  name,  and  the  sat* 
vation  of  tije  elect  ;  »'  For  the  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him  up," 
Psalm  Ixix.  9. 

*  2.  But  it  behooved  him  not  only  to  offer  a  sacrifice  for  the  salva- 
tion of  the  sinmr,  but  also  to  pray  for  him,  that  he  might  apply  by 
•  his  mtercession  the  atonement  w'liich  he  had  purchased  by  his  sac- 
'  rifice  ;  as  it  was  the  work  of  the  priests  not  only  to  offer,  but  also  to 
pray  for  the  people.  This  the  common  priests  did,  according  to 
Joel  ii,  17;  but  it  was  especially  the  business  of  the  high  priest  on 
the  great  day  of  atonement ;  for  which  purpose  he  was  to  enter  mto 
tlie  holy  place  with  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice.  Lev.  xvi.  Thus  "  Christ 
also  entered  into  heaven  itself,  that  he  might  appear  in  the  presence 
of  God  for  us,"  Heb.  ix.  24.  See  also  Rom.  viii.  3,  4,  The  Lord 
Christ  prayed  indeed  on  earth  for  his  people,  John  xvii.  but  it  is 
there  supposed,  that  he  was  already  in  heaven,  and  no  longer  on 
earth,  seeing  his  ascension  was  as  certain  and  near  at  hand,  as  if  he 
were  already  in  heaven.     See  vrs.  11,  12. 

This  intercession  of  Christ  consists  not  in  a  humble  supplication, 
as  though  he  were  a  sinner,  who  had  forfeited  all  things,  and  was 
obliged  to  entreat  the  free  grace  of  God  for  himself;  but  it  consists 
in  an  effectual  willing,  whereby  he  requests  of  his  Father  the  just 
rights  purchased  by  him  for  his  people  through  his  sacrifice.  And 
so  his  intercession  denotes  (a)  his  appearing  before  the  throne  of 
God  with  his  blood,  representing  to  the  Father,  that  "  he  hath  finished 
the  work,  which  the  Father  gave  him  to  do,"  for  the  elect,  John  xvii. 
as  the  high  priest  behooved  to  enter  into  the  holy  of  holies,  in  the 
presence  of  God  with  incense  and  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices, 
which  he  was  to  sprinkle  on  the  mercy  seat,  Lev.  xvi.  12 — 16.  The 
apostle  alludes  to  this,  Heb.  ix.  24,  25. (b)  Hereupon  he  requests  of 
Mns  Father  that  which  was  meriited  by  him  for  his  people;  saying, 
*'  Father,  I  will  that  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  where  I  am," 
'John  xvii  24. (c)  He  also  pleads  upon  his  accomplished  atonement, 
'his  people's  causes  against  those  who  accuse  them  ;  this  the  apostle 
"teacheth,  1  John  ii-  1,  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with 
the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  ;  and  he  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins."  We  find  the  same  also,  Kom.  viii.  33,  34. (d)  He  like- 
wise ftanctifios  their  prayers,  and  presents  them  to  his  Father.  Thus 
he  is  represented,  as  "  the  Angel  who  stands  at  the  altar,  having  a 
j;oldcn  censer,  and  receiving  much  incense,  that  he  might  offer  it 
with  the  prayers  of  the  saints  on  the  golden  altar,  which  is  before 
the  throne  ;  and  the  smoke  of  the  incense,  which  came  with  the 
prayers  of  the  saints,  ascended  up  b'efore  God,  out  of  the  Angcrr 


/'AtTX«-:  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  31,  32.     --.   >«|-.         259 

hand,';  Rev.  vili.  3,  4  (a)  Finally,  he  prays  in  them  by  his  Spirit,, 
who  enaliles  them  to  pray  :  "  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray 
for  as  we  ought :  but  the  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us,^ 
with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered.  And  he  that  searcheth  the. 
hearts,  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  because  he  maketh 
intercession  for  the  saints,  according  to  the  will  of  God,"  Rom.  viii. 
26,  2r.     See  Gal.  iv.  6. 

3.  As  a  priest,  Jesus  the  anointed  priest  also  blesses  ;  for  it  was 
thii  business  of  the  priests  to  bless  Israel  in  the  name  of  God,  Numb, 
yi.  23,  27.  Chh'st  also  did  this,  not  only  in  words,  when  he  gave  them 
his  last  farewell,  John  xiv.  17 — Luke  xxii.  50,  but  also  in  deed  and 
in  fact.  Therefore  Peter  said  to  the  Jews,  Acts  iii.  26,  "  God  ha- 
ving raised  up  hii  Son  Jesus,  sent  him  to  bless  you,  in  turning  every 
one  of  you  from  his  iniquities  "  as  all  the  blessings  of  the  Father  are 
also  given  to  us  only  in  Christ,  Eph.  i.  8. 

And  thus  he  is  also  the  "  only  "  high  priest,  or  as  the  Latin  cate- 
chism hath  it,  "  the  highest  ;"   for  "  we  have  a  great  high  priest," 
Heb.  iv..  14.     How  worthy  soever  the  high   priests  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament were,  they   were  nevertheless  not  more  than  men,  who    had 
infirmiiies  ;  whose  sacrifices  were  not  more  than  irrational  and  inan- 
imate things,  wiiich  could  not  of  themselves   please  God,  and  did 
not  effect  a  veal,  but  only  a  typical  atonement  :  but  the  Lord  Christ 
is  the  Son  of  God,  *'  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate   from   sin- 
ners, and  made  higher  than  the  heavens,"  who  offered  himself  up  to 
Kiake  a  true  atonement  ;  "  who  was  not  made   a  priest  by  the  law, 
after  the  order  of  Aaron,  but  by  the  word  of  the   oath,  after  the  or- 
der of  Melchizedek."     See  Heb.  vii.     Of  this   man   we    read   only 
Gen.  xiv.  18,  19,  20,  and  Psalm  ex.  4.     Of  whom  the  apostle  saith, 
<*that  he  was  king  of  Salem,  a  priest  of  the  most  high  God  :  without 
father,  without  mother,  without  descent,  having  neither  begmning  of 
days,  nor  end  of  life  ;  but  made    like  the  Son   of  God,   abideth    for 
ever,"   Heb,  vii.    1,4.     It  is  a  notion  that  confutes   itself  that   Mel- 
chizedek was  Shem,  or  Ham,  or  a  person  created   immediately  by 
God,  perfect,  hply  and  immortal ;  or  an  angel,   who  appeared   to 
Abraham  in  a  human  form  ;   or  a  certain  excellent  power   ol  God, 
which  was  greater  than  Christ,  or  that  he  was  the  Holy    Ghost  ;  or 
the  Son  of  God  himself.     Thus  one    and   another  have  thought' of 
Melchizedek ;  vfi  approve  most  of  the  opinion    of  those,  who  con- 
ceive he  was  a  famous  and  holy  man,  a  king  and  priest,  and  thus  an 
eminent  type  of  the  Lord  Christ ;  for  we  see  nothing  more  in  him, 
Gen.  xiv.  18,  19,  20.     It  dot  noth  indeed  appear  to  agree  with  his 
jTQanhcod,  that  "  he  v/as  ^vithout  father,  without  mother,"  &«.   but' 


$m  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

this  is  said  of  him  because  his  birth,  generation,  and  death  are  no* 
mentioned,  and  are  not  known  to  us  ;  and  this  declaration  will  not 
appear  so  improbable,  if  we  insert  the  word  "  only  "  in  the  eighth 
verse,  and  read,  *<  Here  men  who  die  receive  gifts  :  but  there  he  re* 
cciveth  them,  of  whom  it  is  only  witnessed,  that  he  liveth.'*  We 
might  also  say  that  he  was  without  father,  &c.  in  an  ecclesiastical 
respect,  as  he  was  not  of  priestly  descent,  and  as  his  i>rie$thood  was 
not  transferred  to  another,  and  was  thus  wholly  different  from  the 
Aaron  ical  priesthood. 

Christ  being  made  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  was 
much  more  excellent  than  the  priests  according  to  the  law,  since  he 
is  veriJy  wiih  respect  to  his  Godhead,  wiihout  mother,  without  de- 
scent, beginning  and  end  of  life,  and  with  respect  to  his  manhood, 
wiihout  fjther.  He  blessed  Abraham,  the  father  of  Levi,  and  was 
thus  greater  than  the  Leviiical  priests.  Levi  gave  tithes  in  Abra- 
ham to  Melchizedek,  therefore  Melchizedek  was  greater  than  Levi, 
and  consequently  Christ  was  much  greater.  The  Lord  Jesus  was 
made  a  priest  by  an  oath,  he  hatli  an  everlasting,  and  an  untransfer- 
nble  p.iesthood,  and  he  is  priest  and  king  at  the  same  time  ;  all  this 
was  not  found  in  the  weak  Aaronical  priesthood. 

C.  And  he  is  not  only  a  prophet  and  priest,  but  also  a  king.  As 
God  he  is  by  iiimself  king  over  all ;  but  as  Christ  and  anointed,  he  is 
king  of  the  elect :  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of 
Zion,"  saith  tue  Father,  Psalm  ii.  6.  But  "  his  kingdom  is  not  of 
this  world,"  as  he  himself  testifieth,  John  xvii.  36.  For  he  doth  as 
king  (a)  subdue  by  the  sword  and  sceptre  of  his  word  and  Spirit, 
sinners,  his  enemies,  to  himself  so  that  "  people  fall  under  him,  the 
rebellious  dwell  with  him,  and  become  a  willing  people  in  the  beau- 
tics  of  holiness,"  Psalm  cxlv.  3—6.  Ixviii.  I8.  ex.  1,  2,  3.  (b)  He 
gives  them  his  word,  laws  and  gospel :  "  For  the  Lord  is  our  judge, 
the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,"  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22. 
See  James  ii.  8.  (c)  He  rules,  governs  and  directs  then»  by  his  kingly 
iaw;  <*He  teaches  them  to  do  his  will,  and  his  good  Spirit  leads 
them  in  the  land  of  uprightness,"  Psalm  cxliii.  10.  Ixxxvi.  ii.  (d)  He 
defends  and  preserves  them  by  his  power  in  the  enjoyment  of  the 
purchased  redemption,  "  so  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  them,"  Matt.  xvi.  16.  1  Peter  i.  5.  (e)  As  a  king  he  also 
glorifies  and  saves  them  :  "  The  King  shall  say  unto  them  on  his 
right  hand,  Come  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  pre- 
pared for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  Matt.  xxv.  34. 

Yea,  he  is  a  great  God,  and  a  king  above  all  Gods  :  *'  Fie  hath  on 
his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  King  of  kings  and  Lord 


of  lords;"  Rev.  xix.  16.  He  hath,  as  Mediator,  an  unlimited  "power 
over  all  things  in  hea"ven  and  on  earth,"  tor  the  good  of  his  real  sub- 
jects, Matt,  xxviii.  1 8,  and  that  for  ever,  "  Of  his  kingdom  there  is 
no  end,"  Luke  i  33.  "  He  will  indeed  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to 
God,  even  the  Father,  and  be  subject  himself,"  according  to  I  Cor, 
XV.  24,  28,  but  he  will  do  this  only  with  respect  to  his  outward  ad- 
ministration as  Mediator,  for  the  Triune  God  will  influence  all  the 
blessed  immediately,  and  so  "  be  all  in  all:"  nevertheless  the  Lord 
Jesas  will  be  acknowledged  king  of  his  perfected  church  throughout 
eternity.  See  Rev.  xxii.  1,3. 

We  must  now  inquire  what  the  anointing  signifieth.  Il  was  an 
ancient  custom  to  anoint  prophets,  priests  and  kings  with  sweet- 
smelling  oil :  but  the  Lord  Christ  •*  was  anointed  above  his  fellows 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  power,"  Acts  x.  38.  Which  anoint- 
ing denotes, 

1.  His  ordination,  by  which  he  was  appointed  to  these  three  great 
offices.  Samutl  said  to  Saul,  after  he  had  anointed,  and  in  token  of  his 
submission  to  him,  kissed  him,  "Is  it  not  because  the  Lord  hath 
anointed  thee  to  be  captain  over  his  inheritance?"  1  Sam.  x.  L 
Thus  also  God  the  Lord  appointed  his  Son,  as  it  were  by  anointing, 
in  the  eternal  counsel  of  peace,  or  covenant  of  redemption,  to  be  a 
prophet,  priest  and  king  ;  for  •'  he  was  anointed  from  everlasting," 
Prov.  vui,  23.  And  thus,  "  his  Father  appointed  him  a  kingdom,'* 
Luke  xxii.  29.  See  also  Acts  x.  38,  42.  And  so  "  the  Father  sanc- 
tified him,  and  sent  him  into  the  world,"  John  x.  36.  The  Father 
also  solemnly  inaugurated  and  made  him  known  for  this  purpose  in 
his  baptism,  when  the  heavens  were  opened  to  him,  the  Spirit  de* 
scended  on  him,  and  the  Father  witnessed  before  the  whole  world 
with  an  audible  voice,  that  '*  Jesus  was  his  beloved  Son,  in  whom  he 
was  well  pleased,  and  that  they  ought  to  hear  him,"  Matt.  iii.  16_, 
17,  as  also  on  the  holy  mountain.  Matt.  xvii.  1 — 3,  and  among  the 
people,  John  xii.  28.  Yea,  "  God  the  Lord  witnessed  both  with 
signs  and  v/onders,  and  with  divers  miracles  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  Heb.  ii.  4,  and  thus  «  God  the  Father  sealed  him,"  John  vi. 
27.  But  this  was  more  particularly  manifested  in  his  exaltation,  and 
in  the  outpouring  of  his  Spirit ;  therefore  Peter  said  to  the  Jews, 
Acts  ii.  36.  "  Let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly,  that  Go^ 
hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
Christ." 

2.  To  anoint  denotes  also  to  qualify  for  a  certain  office.  When 
Saul  was  anointed,  "  God  gave  him  another  heart,  and  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  came  upon  him,"  I  Sam.  x*  9,  10.    The  Father  also  quali-- 


262  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

fiecl  the  Mediator  "by  preparing  a  boJy  for  him,"  Heb.  x.  5,  ^'-  hy 
giving  him  the  Spirit  without  measure,"  John  iii.  34.  See  this  alsO' 
Isaiah  xlii.  l.xli.  1,2,  3,  by  upholding  him  in  his  laborious  service; 
for  "the  Lord,  who  called  him  in  righteousness,  held  his  hand,  and 
kept  hira, '  Isaiah  xiii.  6.  See  Psalm  Ixxxix.  21 — 24,  by  giving  him 
a  fulness  of  grace  for  all  the  necessities  of  liis  people :  "  For  it  was 
the  Father's  good  pleasure,  that  in  him  *'  all  fulness  should  dwell," 
Coll.  i-  19.  Psalm  Ixviii.  18,  Acts  ii.  33.  And  therefore'"  the  Father 
h':\th  also  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  should  give  etcinuL 
life  to  as  many  as  the  Father  hath  given  him,"  John  xviii.  2. 

This  anointing  was  also  necessary,  (a)  becavise  these  great  offices 
might  not  be  assumed  by  him,^  except  he  weie  called  to  thtm  :  "  For 
no  man  takelh  this  honour  to  himselt^  but  he  that  is  called  of  God, 
as  uas  Aaron;  so  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made  an 
high  priest ;  but  he  that  said  unto  him,  Thou  art  my  Son,  to  day 
have  I  begotten  thee,"  Heb.  v.  4,  5.  This  anointing  was  necessary 
also>  (b)  to  fulfil  the  types.  The  anointed  prop'nets,  priests  and 
kings- were  types  of  Christ ;  and  it  was  therefore  necessary,  that  he 
also  should  be  anointed,  but  "  above  his  fellows,"  Psalm  x'v.  7.  (c). 
If  Jesus  were  not  anointed,  he  could  not  then  be  an  object  of  faith  ; 
for  faith  must  find  in  him  all  things  necessary  to  salvation-  The  sin- 
ner is  blind,  guilty,  and  hath  no  strength  ;  therefore  Jesus  behooved 
to  be  the  anointed  prophet,  priest  and  kmg,  in  order  to  "  be  made  of 
God  to  his  people,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redempi- 
tion,"  1  Cor.  i.  20.  And  though  he  were  a  prophet,  priest  and  king» 
and  were  not  called  and  anointed  by  God  to  theso  ofnces,  who  would 
dare  draw  near  to  God  by  him  ;  since  without  the  anointing,  h^ 
y/ould  have  no  right  to  befriend  sinn,ers. 

.  11.  We  come  now  to  our  second  general  head,  according  to  tlic 
thirty-second  question,  in  which  a  true  believer  is  asked,  "  Why  art 
thou  called  a  Christian  ?"  The  Christians  were  at  first  called  believerfi, 
children  of  God,  disciples;  but  their  numbers  increasing  greatly, 
they  were  at  length  called  Christians  ;  which  happened  first  at  An- 
ticch,  ibe  capital  city  of  Syria,  and  indeed  the  greatest  and  most 
famous  of  all  Asia,  Acts  xi.  26.  From  which  place  liiis  name  could 
then  be  made  known  far  and  near,  and  be  generally  adopted. 
AVhether  this  happened  in  consequence  of  an  order  of  the  apostles, 
or  by  accident,  or  whether  it  proceeded  from  custom,  which  calljs 
disciples  after  the  names  of  their  masters,  this  is  not  so  well  known, 
as  that  the  believeis  in  general  adopted  this  name,  and  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  pleased  to  approve  of  it,  1  Peter  iv.  16.  "Ifanymasi 
eulFcr  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not  be  ashamed  ;  but  let  him  glorify 


Xli;  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3 1,  32.  265 

Cod  on  thrs  behalf."     So   iniich  the  inore,  as  they  are   thus  called 
after  their  Master  Christ,  and  therefore  also  anointed. 

We  will  inquire  therefore  with  respect  to  this  name  also,  i.  To 
What  believers    are  anointed.     2.  What   their  anointing  signiiieth, 

-and  3.  What  foundation  there  is  for  this  name. 

'  •    I.  We  observe  that   believers  also  are   anointed  to    be   prophets, 

'priests  and  kings. 

*■    A.  Believers  are   prophets  :  "  In  the  last  days,  saith  Cod,  I    -will 

■^our  out  of  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons  and  your  daugh- 
ters shall  prophesy,  and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  your 
old  men  dream  dreams  ;  and  on  my  servants,  and  on  my  handmaid- 
ens I  will  pour  out  in  those  days  of  my  Spirit,  and  they  shall  pro- 
phesy," Acts  ii.  17,  18.  from  Joel  li.  28,  29.  Rut  they  are  not  pro-- 
phets  by  an  extraordinary  office  and  revelation,  but  by  their  state  of 
grace,  and  by  an  ordinary  revelation,  which  they  receive  of  God,  and 
reveal  again  to  others,  as  prophets. 

1.  Christians  receive  of  God,  as  prophets,  the  revelation  of  his 
blessed  mysteries.  This  was  promised,  Isaiah  liv.  13.  "All  thy 
children  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord."  See  John  vi.  55.  Jer,  xxxi. 
34.  Believers  are  like  Moses,  since  they  "  with  open  face,  behold- 
ing as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same 
image,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii. 
18.  Compare  herewith,  Exod.  xxxiv.  29 — 35.  And  this  is  called 
prophesying,  I  Cor.  xiii.  9.  "  We  know  in  part,  and  we  prophesy 
in  part."  As  certahi  of  God's  ancient  people,  and  some  of  the  primi- 
tive Christians  were  constituted  prophets  by  receiving  the  reveLition 
of  divine  mysteries  through  the  Spirit,  so  true  Christians  receive  also 
divine  revelations,  not  only  through  "  the  word  of  prophecy,  to  which 
they  take  heed,  as  to  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place,"  2  Peter  i.  19, 
but  also  "  through  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation,  in  the  know- 
ledge of  God,"  Eph.  i.  17,  18,  19.  For  they  are  taught  inwardly  by 
the  great  Prophet  Christ,  as  we  have  shown  before.  Yea,  they  are 
sometimes  led  so  far  into  the  mysteries  of  God,  and  are  so  well  assu- 
red of  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  that  it  differs  but  little  from  a 
prophetical  rapture  ;  for  "  he  brings  them  into  his  chambers,  and 
reveals  himself  to  them,"  Song  i.  4.  John  xiv.  21, 

2.  Like  prophets,  they  reveal  again,  that  which  was  revealed  to 
them :  either  by  teaching  others  the  secrets  of  God  with  their 
mouths,  and  thus,  "  showing  "  and  confessing  "  his  name  ;"  or  prais- 
ing the  Lord  in  an  audible  manner,  by  speaking  and  singing  to,  and 
concerning  him  ;  for  as  "  the  word  of  Christ  dwclleth  richly  in  them, 
they  teach  and  admonish  one  another  with  psalms,  and  bvmns,  and 


4^4  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN^ 

«piritual  sotigs,  singing  with  grace  in  their  hearts  to  the  Lord,"  Colic 
iii.  16.      eph.  v.  18.     It  is  said  of  the  singers  in  the  temple,  "  that 
they  prophesied  with  harps,  giving  thanks  and  praising   the  Lord," 
1  Chron.  xxv.  1,  2,  3,  or  by  a  holy  conversation,  whereby  they  adorn 
the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour,  and  excite  in  others   an  opinion,  that 
there  is  something  divine  in  their  profession,  and  that  it  is  worthy  to 
be  embraced  by  every  one.     So  Paul  required  that   the  Christians 
Bhould  conduct  themselves  "  unblamably,  and  shine  as  lights,  and  so 
hold  forth  the  word  of  life,"  Philip,  ii.  15,  16.     See  also  Malt.  v.  16. 
Titiis  ii.   10.   1  Peter  iii.  1 — 4,  or  by  their  death  either  passing  with 
a  tranquil  depehdence  on  the  divine  revelation  into  eternity,  or  seal- 
ing the  truth  of  God  by  martyrdom,  by  which  the  spectators  must  be 
convinced  that  the  truth  which    they  profess  contains   something 
more  than  human.     Yea,  dying  Christians  have  often  been  more 
useful  in  their  death  to  persecutors,  outward  professors,  and  weak  be- 
lievers, than  tliey  were  in  their  lives.     See  what  Paul  saith,  Philip,  i. 
12,, 13,  14,  20. 

B.  Christians  are  also  priests  :  it  was  foretold  of  them,  Isaiah  lxi» 
€.  "  Ye  shall  be  named  the  priests  of  the  Lord  :  men  shall  call  you 
the  ministers  of  our  God."  And  they  are  not  so  called  without  a 
reason  ;  for 

L  They  have  a  priestly  perfection.  The  priests  were  to  be  per- 
fect in  body,  and  without  any  fault,  Lev  xxi.  16—21,  but  Christians 
also  are  "  perfect  in  Christ,"  through  their  justification,  Coll.  ii.  10; 
So  the  great  Bridegroom  commended  the  bride,  Song  iv.  7,  "  Thou 
art  all  fair,  my  love  :  there  is  no  spot  in  thee."  It  is  true,  Christians 
have  still  their  sinful  imperfections,  their  sanctificaticn  is  yet  defec* 
tive  :  but  they  have  notwithstanding  a  perfection  of  parts  in  this  re- 
spect J  "If any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature;  old  things 
are  passed  away,  beliold  all  things  are  become  new,"  2  Cor.  v.  17, 
1  Thess.  v.  2. 

2.  Christians  have  also,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  a  priestly  clothing. 
Priests  had  among  other  garments,  clothes  of  fine  linen  ;  so  also 
Cliristians  ;  for  "  it  is  given  to  them  to  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean 
and  white  ;  for  the  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints  ;  Rev. 
xix.  8.  The  priests  had  also  garments  embroidered  with  gold : 
thus  also  '*  the  king's  daughter,  through  the  image  of  God,  her  many 
^ifts  of  grace  anrl  comely  virtues,  "  is  all  glorious  within,  her  cloth- 
ing is  of  wrought  gold.  She  shall  be  brought  unto  the  king  in  lai- 
inL-nt  of  needlework,"  Psalm  xlv.  13,  14.  Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  And  as 
the  g;olden  pLte,  engraven  v/ith  "  holiness  to  the  Lord  shone  forth 
from  the  priests  fordiead,  so -also  a  divine  lustre  shines  from  the  con- 


 

duct  ef  sanctified  Chrisuans  :  **  He  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  hq 
that  hath  the  key  of  David,  saith  of  the  Christian,  who  overcometh, 
that  he  will  make  him  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  his  God,  and  will 
write  upon  him  the  uame  of  his  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  his 
God,  even  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  which  cometh  down  out  of  heaven 
from  his  God,,  and  al?o  his  new  name,"  Kev.  iii.  7,  12.  This  will 
beam  forth  especially  in  the  happy  eternity,  Rev.  xxii.  4, 

3.  Christians  perform  also  a  pnesLly  service  :  ''Every  priest  stood 
daily  ministering,"  Heb.  x.  1  U  And  thus  also  Christians  "  have 
boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest,"  that  they  may  draw  near  to  the 
Lord,  ch.  x.  19,  yea,  '♦  into  that  within  the  veil,"'  ch.  vi.  19.  And  so 
they  are  cohenim^  which  signifies  priests,  but  also  princes  ;  thus  it  is 
used  of  the  sons  of  Dav.d,  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  which  is  explained 
1  Chrcn.xviii.  17.  "  The  sons  of  David  were  chief  about  the  king.'' 
Yea,  it  belongs  also  to  the  priesdy  service  of  Christians,  "  that  bemga 
holy  priesthood,  they  offer  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God,  by 
Jesus  Christ,"  1  Peter  ii.  5.  "  Their  reasonable  service  consists  in 
presenting  their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  to 
God,"  Rom.  xii.  1.  They  offer  to  God  *' a  broken  and  comrite 
heart,"  Psalm  h.  17.  Their  liberality  is  "  an  acceptable  sacrifice  to 
God,"  Heb.  xiii  16.  <*^The  prayers  of  the  saints  ascend  out  of  the 
hand  of  the"  uncreated  <*^  angel,"  as  a  sacrifice  "before  God,"  Rev. 
viii.  3,  4.  And  if  the  Lord  require  it  of  Christians,  they  will  offer 
themselves  readily  "  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  to  him,"  by  suffer- 
ing the  most  grievous  martyrdom,  2  Tim.  iv.  6. 

C.  Christians  are  not  only  prophets  and  priests,  but  also  kings.; 
"  Christ  hath  made  them  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father," 
Rev.  i.  6.     For  as  kings  they  have, 

1.  A  kingly  spirit,  they  are  of  an  elevated  mind,  and  have  a  fr.ee 
and  good  conscience,  which  is  not  enslaved  to  ignoble  things  :  they 
can  esteem  all  their  own  privileges  loss  and  dung,  that  they  may 
pursue  nobler  objects,  and  be  found  only  in.Christ,  Philip,  iii.  7 — 10, 
Moses  was  elevated  so  far  above  visible  thint^s,*  that  *'  he  refused  to 
be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  he  endured,  as  seeing 
him  who  is  invisible,"  Heb.  xi.  24 — 27.  See  lhi;5  also  2  Cor.  iv* 
17,  18. 

2.  As  kings  they  v/age  war  with,  and  overcome  the  world,  sin, 
and  the  devil  ;  "The  Lord  makes  them  as  his  goodly  horse  in  tlie 
battle,  and  therefore  they  are  as  mighty  men,  who  tread  down  their 
enemies  in  the  mire  of  the  streets,  in  the  battle,  and  they  confound 
them  who  ride  on  horses,"  Zech.  x.  3,  5.  "  Their  faith  overcometh 
the  world,"  1  John  v.  4.  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  them,' 

Oo 


26$  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN* 

Rom.  vi.  14.     And  so  "they  overcome  also  the  accuser  of  the  breth- 
ren," Rev.  xii.  11. 

3.  They  have  also  kingly  riches,  although  they  may  be  the  poor- 
est in  the  world  ;  for  they  have  a  true  title  to  whatsoever  exists.  Head 
only  what  Paul  saith  of  this,  1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23.  The  ungodly  may 
scoff  at  this,  as  a  vain  boasting  but  the  godly  shall  leign  in  an  open 
manner,  "eternally  with  Christ  over  iill  creatures,"  in  spite  of  those 
vrho  are  vexed  at  it ;  for  "  he  will  grant  to  them  to  sit  down  with 
him  in  his  throne,"  Rev.  iii   21.     Compare  herewith,  Rev.  ii.  26,  27. 

4.  Christians  have  also  a  kingly  majesty  and  dignity.  They  are 
indeed  *'  the  holy  and  the  excellent  m  the  earth,"  Psalm  xvi,  3. 
Yea,  "the  saints  of  the  high  places,"  Dan.  vii.  18.  "Of  the  rest 
no  man  dares  to  join  himself  to  tnem  ;  but  the  people  magnify 
them,"  Acts  v.  13. 

2.  But  v/hat  doth  their  anointing  signify  ?  Paul  teacheth  us  that 
Christians  are  anointed,  2  Cor.  121.  »'  He  who  hath  anointed  us  is 
God."     This  anointing  denotes, 

1.  The  ordination  and  appointment  of  Christians,  to  these  offices. 
So  the  Lord  saith  to  his  people,  Exod.  xix  6,  *'  Ye  shall  be  to  me  a 
kingdom  of  priests."  They  are  ordained  and  appointed  to  this  by 
their  eternal  election,  redemption  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  sanc- 
tification  and  calling,  I  Peter  ii.  9,  "  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a 
royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,  that  ye  should 
show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 
into  his  marvellous  light."  Yea,  they  bear,  as  it  were,  a  mark,  by 
\yhich  they  may  be  known  as  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  his  sealed, 
Rev.  vii.  3 — 8    Isaiah  Ixi.  9. 

2.  Their  anointing  denotes  their  qualification  to  these  offices. 
They  are  by  nature  ''reprobate  to  every  good  work  ;"  but  they  are 
qualified  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  therefore  the  apostle  saith  ;  "  Ve  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things,"  1  John  ii. 
20,  27. 

*3.  We  are  to  consider  in  the  last  place  the  foundation  of  this 
name  and  anointing.  The  catechism  saith,  "  Because  I  am  by  faith 
a  member  of  Christ,  and  thus  a  partaker  of  his  anointing."  God  hath 
given  his  Son  to  be  the  head  of  the  church,  so  that  behevers  are 
"members  of  his  body,"  Eph.  i.  22,  v.  30.  Hence  arises  the  closest 
union  between  Christ  and  ChristiaijS,  which  is  effected  by  liis  ^plrit 
and  their  faith,  1  Cor.  xii.  13,  Eph.  iii.  17,  and  so  they  become  par- 
takers of  his  anointing  ;  for  "  he  hath  received  gifts  to  distribute 
them  among  men,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  18,  and  "  they  receive  of  his  fulness 
grace  for  grace,"  John  i.  16.  For  the  head  being  anointed,  the 
arointing  dcscendcth  also  to  the  members,  as  this  is  beautifully  re- 
presented to  us  in  the  anointing  of  Aaron,  Psalm  cxxxiii.  2,  and  so. 
"  his  name  i^ias  ointment  poured  forth,"  Song  i.  3. 


,  ^67 


APPLICATION. 

Behold,  Christians,  is  not  this  our  doctrine  agreeable  to  the  word 
of  God  ?  can  it  be  censured  as  erroneous  ?  doth  it  not  fully  answer 
ail  the  needs  of  a  sinner  ?  doth  it  not  render  Christiai)ity  glorious  ? 
and  may  we  not  rest  in  it  with  perfect  satisfaction  ?  Surely  yes.  But 
how  do  those  who  are  not  of  our  church  act  here.^   The  Papists  es- 
teem the  pope  on  earth  the  only  and  infallible  prophet,  high-priest, 
and  king,   with  his  triple  crovcn  ;  wc  must  depend  on  him  for  the 
sense  of  the  word  of  God  :  he  hath  invented  priests,  altars  and  sacri- 
fices, and  will  offer  Christ  in  the  mass  for  the  quick  and  the  dead :  he 
weens  that  he  is  the  king  of  kings,  and  that  he   hath  a  right  to  de- 
pose and  confirm  kings,  and  to  change  times  and  seasons  :  yea.   he 
fancies  that  his  vassals,  and  those  who  propagate  his  doctriire,  are  the 
only  heritage  of  God,  eve^  those  v.'ho  call  themselves  after  Dominic, 
i-'rancis,  Sec.  and  that  Christians  are  but  laymen,  dogs  and  swine. 
And  so  he  manifests  himself  to  be  »*  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  son  of 
perdition,"  according  to  the  description  of  Paul,  2  Thess.  ii.  3,   12. 
'i  he  vSocinians  conduct  no  better ;  for  as  they  deny  his  Godhead  and 
satisfaction,  they  evacuate   his  offices.     Christ  is  indeed  a  prophet 
and  king,  but  only  because   he  taught  a  new  doctrine  and  enacted 
new  laws,  his  Spirit  doth  nothing  at  all ;  if  he  be  a  priest,  it  is  only 
in  name  and  by  analogy  :  the  common  priests  were  not  types  of  him^ 
but  only  the   high  priest,  and  he  is  a  higri   priest  so  fa    as  ht-  is  a 
king  :  he  offered  no  satisfactory  sacrifice  on  earth,  but  only  his  inter- 
cession in  heaven:  believers  aie  indeed  ciiHed  Cliristians  afterChrist^ 
but  it  is  only  because  they  receive  the  new  doctr'ne  of  Christ,  and 
not  on  account  of  the  reasons  which  the  gospel  exhibits  to  us.     And 
so  the  scripture  saith  many  things  of  Christ  and  Christians,  but  they 
are  without  meaning  and   force,  if  the  doctrme  of  the  Papists  and 
Socinians  be  true.     But  let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar.    We 
will  not  attempt  now  to  show  the  falsehood  of  these  erroneous  opin- 
ions, for  we  have  been  already  too  diffuse  on  this  Lord's  day.     The 
bare  proposing  and  comparing  of  these  opinions  with  our  doctrine, 
^vhich  is  according  to  the  word  of  God,  fully  manifests  that  they  are 
only  wood,  straw  and  stubble,  which  will  not  endure  the  day  of  trial. 
We  will  rather  attend  to  those  who  profess   this  truth,  and  will 
contemplate  a  while  the  excellence  of  true  Christians.     What  a  pre- 
cious Head  have  they  !  the  Son  of  God  is  their  prophet,  priest  and 
king.     Who  is  comparable  to  him  ?  collect  together  whatever  was 
glorious  i.i  all  the  prophets,  priests  and  kings,  and  it  will  all  vanish 


t«il  THE  KAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

before  him.  He  is  much  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,  he  is 
anointed  above  his  fellows.  And  what  should  induce  Christians  to 
triumph  more,  is  that  he  possesseth  all  this  glory  not  merely  for 
himself,  but  for  them  also  :  for  is  he  a  prophet,  it  is  that  he  may 
reveal  to  them  the  true  ways  of  God,  and  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ^ 
is  he  a  priest,  it  is  to  reconcile  them  to  God  by  a  perfect  sacrifice 
for  all  their  iniquities  :  is  he  a  king,  it  is  that  he  may  subject  their 
souls  to  his  pleasant  yoke,  and  unite  them  to  the  fear  of  God's  name. 
And  thus  he  is  allsufficicnt  to  supply  all  their  needs  ;  and  verily  no 
Christian  needs  to  fear  that  it  will  displease  God,  that  he  seeks  and 
places  his  whole  salvation  in  Chrisi,  as  a  prophet,  priest  and  king,  a» 
though  he  had  usurped  these  offices,  or  Christians  had  thrust  him 
into  them.  No,  he  is  by  a  most  just  title,  prophet,  priest  and  king: 
the  Lord  God  himself  hath  anointed  him  to  these  offices  with  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  with  power.  Will  ye  have  more,  Christians,  that 
ye  may  rejoice  in  him  ?  behold,  he  hath  made  you  conformable  to 
himself,  so  that  ye  also  are  prophets,  priests  and  kings ;  ye  are  par- 
takers of  his  anointing  ;  as  ye  are  members  of  him  by  faith,  and  he 
is.  your  head,  his  grace  and  Spirit  hath  flowed  down  from  him  on  you. 
And  tiierefore  "  your  beauty  is  perfect  through  his  comeliness,  which 
he  hath  put  upon  you,"  Ezek.  xvi.  14. 

But,  friends,  imagine  not  that  all  who  bear  this  name  are  Chris- 
tians indeed  Many  have  thenname  that  they  live,  while  they  are 
dead.  It  doth  not  constitute  a  person  a  Christian,  that  he  is  one  out- 
wardly ;  therefore  we  ask  you,  and  each  of  you  in  particular,  why 
ye  are  called  Christians?  Is  it  because  ye  were  born  of  Christian 
parents  have  been  educated  among  Christians,  and  partake  of  the 
outward  p»'ivileges  of  Christendom,  the  word  and  sacraments  ?  Ye 
would  then  mistake  in  a  dreadful  manner,  and  deceive  yourselves 
with  vain  imaginations  ;  for  if  ill,  who  are  such,  were  really  Chris- 
tians, would  so  many  then  conduct  like  Jews,  Turks  and  heathens  ? 
and  is  it  not  true,  that  many  of  you  conduct  themselves,  as  if  they 
had  never  heard  of  Christianity  ?  For, 

1 .  Are  ye  indeed  so  well  pleased  with  it^  that  ye  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  the  Lord  Christ,  and  of  your  name  ?  is  it  not  your 
aim  to  have  only  the  name  that  ye  are  wise,  mighty,  rich  and  reli- 
gious ?  If  Paul  should  see  such  Christians,  would  he  not  say  now, 
as  he  did,  Philip,  ii.  21.  "  They  all  seek  their  own,  and  not  the 
things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's  ?" 

2.  Do  ye  not  rest  in  your  name,  that  ye  are  called  Christians  ? 
ye  conduct  as  the  Jews,  of  whom  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  ii  17.  "  Be- 
hold, thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and  restest  in  the  law,  and'roakest  thy 


XII.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  3U  3?.  369 

boast  of  <3od."    Have  ye  indeed  any  other  ground  of  secuiity  wit^ 
respect  to  your  eternal  condition  ? 

3.  Do  not  many  become  more  wicked  on  account  of  their  name  ? 
Alas  I  how  many  think  that  they  may  practise  every  kind  of  iniquity 
greedily,  because  they  imagine  that  they  have  a  Christ,  and  are  call- 
ed Christians,  and  thus  they  commit  whoredom,  because  of  their 
renown,"  like  the  Jews,  Ezek  xvi.  15.  "  Ungodly  men,  who  turn 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  lasciviousness,  and  deny  the 
only  Lord  Goa,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  Jude  vrs.  4. 

4.  Will  not  many  "  blaspheme  that  worthy  name,  by  which  a  true 
Christian  is  called  ?"  James  ii.  7.  Let  a  Christian  only  conduct 
laimself  like  a  Christian  by  abstaining  from  sin,  and  living  with  much 
seriousness  only  for  God  and  Christ,  will  not  a  nominal  Christian 
then,  who  cannot  endure  this  light,  presently  despise  such  an  one 
in  his  heart,  consider  him  as  a  subject  of  a  taunting  proverb,  and 
heap  every  kind  of  reproach  upon  him  ?  abominable  :  But  "  against 
whom  do  ye  sport  yourselves  ?  against  whom  do  ye  make  a  wide 
mouth,  and  draw  out  the  tongue  ?  are  ye  not  children  of  transgres- 
sion, a  seed  of  falsehood  ?"  thus  asks  the  Lord,  Isaiah  Ivii.  4. 

5.  It  is  true,  many  will  not  be  so  abominable,  at  leaat  will  not  con^ 
tinue  so :  they  now  and  then  repent  of  their  shameful  conduct,  and 
intend  also  to  become  at  length  true  and  better  Christians,  yea,  they 
do  also  many  things ;  but  they  never  become  members  of  Christ  by 
faith,  and  thus  partakers  of  his  anointing,  and  so  they  are  with 
Agrippa  only  "  almost  persuaded  to  become  Christians,"  but  not 
altogether,  Acts  xxvi.  28,  29.  And  they  never  enter  wholly  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,  although  they  "  are  not  far  from  thai  king- 
dom," Mark  xii   34. 

.  Alas  I  that  those  who  are  thus  disposed  knew  that  they  were  yet 
<<  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  strangers 
from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God 
in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii,  12.  For  they  have  never  become  members' 
of  Christ,  and  partakers  of  his  anointing  by  faith.  Nominal  Chris- 
tians, ye  pretend  to  be  true  Christians,  but  ye  lie,  and  shall  be  proved 
liars  in  the  day  of  trial :  ye  are  an  occasion  of  reproach  to  God  and 
Christ :  "  For  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  through  you,  amongi 
the  Gentiles,  as  it  is  written,"  Rom.  ii.  24,  and  also  among-  all  who 
are  not  of  our  communion.  Your  name  shall  be  changed ;  the  Lord 
calls  your  name  **  Loruhamah,  not  having  obtained  mercy,  Loammi, 
not  my  people,"  Hosea  i.  6 — 9.  "  Magormissabib,  a  terrour  round 
about,"  Jer.  xx.  3.  "  And  ye  ^all  leave  your  name  for  a  curse  to 
God's  choseTi,"  Isaiah  Ixv.  15,    And  bo  your  name  shall  bear  wit* 


270  THE  NAMES  CHRIST  AND  CHRISTIAN. 

ness  against  you  at  the  last  day,  and  condemn  you.  Behold  it,  we 
entreat  you,  that  your  concern  may  drive  you  out  of  yourselves  to 
Christ,  in  order  to  become  members  of  liim  by  faith  and  pariakers 
of  his  anointing,  and  thus  not  only  almost,  but  altogether  true 
Christians. 

But  who  are  true  Christians  ?  They  are  those,  (a)  who  see  with 
grief  and  concern  their  misery,  that  they  are  poor,  and  wretched,  and 
blind,  and  naked ;  for  such  are  capable  and  proper  objects  of  his 
offices,  (b)  Who  have  chosen,  and  still  choose  him  with  respect  to 
his  offices  to  supply  their  needs,  that  he  may  remove  their  blindness, 
reconcile  their  guilt,  and  slay  their  sins,  as  his  enem.ies  ;  for  they 
become  members  of  him  through  faith,  (c)  They  have  chosen  him 
entirely*  not  only  to  be  their  prophet,  and  priest,  but  also  their  km^  ; 
they  do  not  desire  to  have  him  more  for  wisdom,  as  their  prophet, 
for  justification,  as  their  priest,  than  for  sanctification,  as  their  king* 
If  he  will  subject  them  wholly  to  himself,  will  cleanse  them  from 
their  seemingly  honourable,  pleasant,  and  profitable  sins,  and  direct 
their  ways  to  keep  his  statutes,  they  will  esteem  it  a  great  joy.  (d) 
These  persons  endeavour  to  be  conformed  to  him  in  their  behaviour, 
as  well  as  in  their  name  :  they  strive,  pray,  stir  up,  and  exert  them- 
selves for  this  end  :  "  for  he  that  saith  he  abideth  m  him,  ought  also 
50  to  walk,  as  he  v/alked,"  1  John  ii.  6   iii.  3. 

But  since  we  have  exhibited  nearly  the  same  evidences  in  treat- 
ing on  the  name  Jesus,  we  will  not  enlarge  further  on  this  matter  at 
present.  Let  each  of  you  only  examine  himself  by  what  hath  been 
said  now,  and  before,  and  see  whether  he  be  a  true  Christian,  and 
let  Ixim  bestir  himself,  in  order  to  conduct  as  becometh  a  Christian* 
And  therefore, 

1  Christians,  make  use  of  your  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  ;  there 
is  in  him,  a  fulness  suited  to  your  necessities  :  are  ye  in  darkness, 
"  he  is  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,"  Luke  ii.  32.  Do  ye  perceive 
that  ye  are  guilty  through  your  frequent  misbehaviour,  *'  we  have 
an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  rii^hteous;  and  he  is 
the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  1  John  ii.  1,2.  He  saith  in  behalf  of 
the  Christian  to  his  Father,  ''  deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the 
pit,  I  have  found  a  ransom,"  Job  xxxiii,  24.  Are  ye  overmatched, 
by  your  enemies,  "  the  Lord  is  our  defence,  and  the  holy  One  of  Is- 
rael is  our  King.  Help  is  laid  upon  one  who  is  mighty,"  Psalm 
Ixxxix.  19,  20.  This  grace  ought  not  to  remain  in  him  useless  and 
unemployed,  but  every  one  should  derive  by  faith  f'oni  his  fulness, 
grace  for  grace  :  yea,  it  is  his  office  and  work  to  bestow  this  grace 
upon  you,  he  is  anointed  and  exalted' for  this  purpose,  Isaiah  Ixi-  Ij 


Xir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  31,32.  271 

S,  3.  Acts  V.  31.  Do  not  then  endeavour  to  deliver  yonrselves  by 
Tour  own  exertions,  but  rather,  employ  him,  as  his  office  and  work 
require. 

2.  Rejoice  and  glory  in  a  holy  manner  on  account  of  your  name. 
The  great  Theodosiu^  esteemed  it  a  greater  honour  to  be  a  Chris- 
tian, than  an  emperour.  A  certain  martyr  being  asked  what  his 
name  was,  said,  by  men  I  am  called  Probus,  but  my  most  honoura- 
ble name  is  Christian.  The  emperour  Julian,  who  had  been  only  a 
nominal  Christian,  and  knew  the  excellency  of  this  name,  envied  the 
believers  the  honour  of  it,  and  therefore  ordered  them  to  be  called 
Galileans,  and  not  Christians.  This  name  implies  indeed  that  ye 
are  prophets,  priests  and  kings  ;  ye  have  the  greatest  right  'o  it 
through  your  anointing,  yea,  this  renders  you  like  the  Son  of  God  in 
his  glorious  offices. 

3.  Conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  the  names  Christ  and  Christian 
that  yc  may  plainly  manifest  by  your  behaviour,  that  ye  are  parta- 
kers of  his  anointing,  prophets,  priests,  and  kings.  Let  his  name  be 
known  and  professed  by  you  :  dedicate  yourselves  wholly  in  all 
that  ye  are,  have,  and  do,  to  be  a  sacrifice  unto  him,  as  "  men  who 
have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  " 
Acts  XV.  26.  Yea,  conduct  yourselves  with  a  lioly,  but  humble  f^reat- 
tiess  of  mind,  as  kings,  "  who  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  any,"  as  that  great  man  said,  1  Cor.  vi.  12.  Ye  are  too  noble, 
and  of  toD  high  a  condition  to  suffer  yourselves  to  be  enslaved  to  any 
sin,  or  to  any  creature,  without  and  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  ;  yc 
must  bow  down  only  to  your  Lord,  snd  be  only  to  his  praise  :  for  "  ye 
are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  pecu- 
liar people  ;  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him,  who  hath 
called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light,"  I  Peter  ii.  9 
and  ye  rtust  lay  aside  whatever  opposeth  this  name  :  '« Let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  n.me  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity,"  2  Tim. 
ii.  19. 

Are  ye  poor,  let  it  suffice  you,  that  ye  are  rich  in  Christ :  «  Fop 
ye  know  the  grace  of  oo.r  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though  he  was 
rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  poverty 
might  become  rich,"  2  Cor*  viii.  9.  Do  men  reproach  you,  he 
will  behold  and  visit  it :  "  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong  ; 
yea,  he  reproved  kings .  for  their  sakes,  saying,  *'  touch  not  mine 
anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no  harm,"  Psalm  cv.  14,  15,  Doth 
your  glory  not  beam  forth  much  at  present,  the  Lord  will  perfect  it 
hereafter  ;  "  for  ye  shall  see  his  face,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  your 
foreheads,"  Rev.  xxii,  4.  And  so  ^*  the  right^oKs  ^ball  shine  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."     Amen, 


(272) 


THE  SONSHIP 


AND 


GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST^ 


XIII.  LORD'S  DAYo 


•John  i.  4§.    Nathanael  answered  and  said  un^^  hini)  Rabbi,  thoU  art 
the  Son  of  God,  thou  art  the  King  of  Israel.