Q.  33.  Why  is  Christ  called  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  since 
we  are  also  ^he  children  of  God  P 

A.  Because  Christ  alone  is  the  eternal  ahJ  natural  Son, of  God  i 
but  we  are  children  adopted  of  God,  by  grace,  for  his  sake. 

Q,  vl4.    Wherefore  callest  thou  him  our  Lord? 

A.  Because  he  hath  redeemed  us,  both  soul  and  body,  from  all  ouf 
sins ;  not  with  j^jold  and  silver,  but  with  bis  precious  blood,  and  hath 
delivered  us  from  all  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  hath  thus  made  us 
kis  own  property. 

THE  Lord,  moved  with  compas«;ion  toward  his  afflicted  church, 
promiseth  her,  Hosea  i.  7,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  the  house 
ol  Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their  God,  and  will  not  save 
them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horse- 
men." Judah  was  often  afflicted  by  malicious  neighbours,  end  the 
Lord  had  often  delivered  them  by  bow,  swoid,  battle,  horses,  and 


XIIL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  34.  275 

horsemen  ;  but  this  was  too  little  for  the  Lord,  he  chose  to  bestow  a 
greater  salvation  on  them,  and  to  deliver  them  by  tiie  Lord  their 
God.  The  misery  of  Judah  was  indeed  not  only  a  bodily,  but  also  a 
spiritual  and  sinful  miseYy;^Kkh"s.HbjeQted  them  to  the  wrath  of 
God,  to  the  curse  of  the  law,  ai^d  to  death,  against  which  no  weap- 
ons could  avail,  and  from  which  none  but  the  Lord  their  Cod,  the 
Messiah,  could  deliver  them.  It  was  necessary,  in  order  to  deliver 
them  fi'om  this  misery,  that  the  infinite  v»^rath  of  God  sho\ild  be 
borne,  an  everlasting  righteousness  procured,  an  i  etfectually  app'.ed  ' 
and  he  v/ho  did  this  behooved  to  be  the  object  of  all  reli  ious  thanks- 
givings. No  rational,  nor  irrational  crt^ature  was  capable  of  this  .-  it 
was  therefote  necessary,  that  he  who  should  deliver  Judah,  should  be 
the  Lord  God  ;  th^i'efcrelhe  gr(?^rt'Peti\'ei'6r\8dso  sailh  '•'there  is  no 
God  beside"  tile,"  iSal^h  xfv;  21.  *  FoY  which  reason  the  instructor^ 
having  taught  in  the  eleventh  Lord's  day  that  the  Deliverer  is  Jesus 
the  Saviour,  and  in  the  twelfth  Lord's  day  that  he  is  lor  this  end  the 
Christ,  the  anointed  Prophet,  Priest  and  King,  he  now  s'.ov.s  that  he 
is  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus  also  the  true  God  and  Lord  in  this  Lord's 
tlay.  He  had  indeed  declared* in  the  fiiteenth  question,  that  the  Me- 
diator and  Redeemer  must  be  God,  and  therefore  he  judged  it  also 
necessary  to  inform  us  that  he  is  God,  and  particularly  the  Son  of 
God,  who  is  mighty  to  redeem. 

,   The  present  UpI^d's  day  affords  two.paftlculaustliat  require  our  ex- 
planation :  " 

L  Why  Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  Son  of  God,  Q.  23. 
IL  yVhy  believers  call  Jiim  their  Lord,  Q.  34. 
1.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular  it  is  asked,*'  Why  is  he  cal- 
led the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  since  we  are  also  the  children  of 
God?"  It  is  therefore  proposed  as  a  difficulty,  that  since  v/e  are 
children  of  God,  Christ  cannot  be  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  be- 
cause he  should  then  have  brethren,  and  Gcd  would  have  more  than 
one  Son. 

In  order  to  understand  this  properly,  %ve  must  consider  that  Christ 
is  called  the  Son  of  God  in  one  sense,  and  that  reasonable  creatures 
are  called  sons  and  children  of  God  in  another  sense.  The  angels, 
because  they  were  created  immediately  by  God  in  special  glory,  after 
his  image,  are  called  *'  sons  of  God,"  Job  xxxviii:  7,  as  also  Adam, 
Luke  iii.  38.  And  so  likewise  all  men,  who  have  proceeded  from 
God  through  Adam,  Mai.  ii.  iO.  Magistrates  are  also  called  '*  chil- 
dien  of  the  Most  High,"  Psalm  Ixxxii.  6,  because  God  hath  given 
them  great  glory,  and  dominion  over  their  fellow-men :  but  true  be- 
lievers are  especially  the  children  of  God  by  a  gracious  adoption,  rt?- 


274    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST. 

generation  and  spiritual  marriage  with  the  Son  of  God,  as  we  havft 
shown  on  the  ninth  Lord's  day.  Because  others  join  themselves  to 
believers  by  an  outward  profession,  they  also  are  called  the  children 
of  God  from  the  better  part  of  the  church,  though  they  are  not  so 
in  spirit  and  truth,  but  only  in  the  letter,Gen.  vii.  12. 

But  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  in  another,  and  a  more  exalted  sense, 
on  account  of  which  he  is  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  and  indeed 
so  that  he  is  the  proper  Son  of  God,  bein^  "  the  eternal  and  natural 
Son  of  God,"  of  the  same  essence  with  the  Father,  as  one  man  is  a 
son  of  another,  who  is  a  partaker  of  his  Father's  nature  by  his  birth. 
In  order  to  explain  this,  we  will  show,  1.  That  he  is  of  the  same 
essence  with  the  Father,  very  God.  2.  What  is  the  ground  and 
tru"  reason  of  his  Sonship. 

I.  We  must  show  that  he  is  of  the  same  essence  wi'h  the  Father 
and  so  very  God  for  our  own  confirmation,  and  in  order  to  confute 
the  Socinians,  who  assert  that  he  was  but  a  mere  man,  who  had 
no  existence  at  all  before  his  birth  of  Mary :  they  would  indeed  with 
feigned  words  make  merchandize  of  us,  in  order  to  beguile  us,  say- 
ign,  that  many  titles  which  belong  to  God  are  given  to  Christ,  and 
that  he  i^  therefore  Ciod  ;  but  they  will  not  allow  that  he  is  the  su- 
preme God,  and  God  co-essential  with  the  Father  ;  but  that  he  is 
truly  the  supreme  God,  co-essential  with  the  Father,  appears  not 
only  from  the  equality  and  oneness  of  his  essence  with  that  of  the 
Father  and .  Moly  Ghobt,  John  v.  18.  x.  30  as  we  have  proved  more 
■oarticularly  on  the  eigiith  Lord's  day,  but  also  from  tlie  names,  attri- 
butes, works  and  honour  of  Cod,  which  are  ascribed  to  him  in  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  he  who  is  called  God,  who  hath  the  attributes  of 
God,  and  doth  the  works  of  God,  and  whom  we  must  honour  and 
serve  as  God,  he  is  the  true  and  supreme  God.  Now  Christ  is  cal- 
led God.  he  halh  the  attrihutes,  and  doth  the  works  of  God,  and  we 
must  honour  and  serve  him  as  God ;  consequently  he  is  the  true 
God.  The  first  proposition  cannot  be  denied  ;  for  how  should  we 
otherwise  prove  hat  any  one  is  God  ?  The  second  proposition  is 
also  evident :  for 

(a)  The  names  of  God  are  ascribed  to  Christ ,  for  he  is  called  God 
Psalm  xlv.  6,  7.  Heb.  i.  8,  9.  ''  To  the  'on  he  Saith,  thy  throne 
O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever  ;  thei^efofe,  O  God,  (hy  God  hath  anoin- 
ted thee."  And  the  name  of  God  is  given  to  him,  not  only  as  a 
name  of  honour  and  office,  but  also  subjectively,  as  that  which  is 
ascribed  to  him  as  a  subject ;  "  God  v  as  manifest  in  the  flesh," 
l!  Tim.  iii.  16.  See  also  John  xx.  28.  Acts  xx.  28.  And  so  it  is 
froid,  that  <'  he  was  in  the  fcim  of  God,"   Philip,  ii,  8— <''the  tnie 


XIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  33^34.  275 

God,"  1  John  v.  SO.—*'  the  mighty  God,"  Isaiah  ix.  5-^"  God  our 
all,  blessed  for  evermore,"  Pom.  ix.  5.  Therefore  the  name  Jeho- 
vah is  also  appropriated  to  him  :  "  Me  is  called  the  Lord  our  right- 
,eousness,"  Jer  xxiii.  5,  6.  This  we  tind  also,  Hosca  i.  7.  Isaiah 
vi,  /— 10,  comparc;d  with  1  Cor.  x.  9,  10.  Compare  also  Psalm 
Ixviii.  18,  with  Eph.  iv.  7,  8.  It  is  true  that  when  the  Jews  would 
stone  him  for  blasphemy,  because  he,  being  a  man,  made  hims;ilf 
God^  he  s?.id,  "  Is  it  nm  written,  in  your  law,  I  have  said  •■  t  are 
j^ods  ?"  Joim  X.  but  we  cannot  infer  frr-m  this  that  he  Ccdls  himself 
God  in  the  same  sense,  in  which  the  magistrates  ae  called  gods  ; 
for  he  saith,  vrs  30,  that  *'  he  is  one  with  the  Father  ;"  but  he  con- 
cludt".  fr-m  the  less  to  the  greater,  that  if  magistrates  be  called  gods, 
he  did  not  blaspheme  when  he  called  himself  the  son  of  God,  be- 
cause he  was  greater  and  worthier  than  the  magistrates,  John  x. 
30 — 38. 

(b)  The  divine  attributes  of  supreme  perfection,  independence, 
simplicity,  and  unchangeableness  are  ascribed  to  Christ.  Rev.  i.  8, 
"He  is  before  all  things,  from  everlasting,"  Coll.  i.  17.  Micha  v.  1. 
He  is  allknowing,  "  knowing  all  things,'  John  xxi.  17.  See  John 
ii.  24,  25.  Rev.  ii.  23.  Ye.^,  he  is  "the  Almighty,"  Rev.  i.  8. 
Philip,  iii.  2U 

(c)  He  doth  the  works  of  God  :  «  for  what  the  Father  doth,  the 
same  doth  the  Son  likewise,"  John  v.  l9.  «  Of  old  he  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  his  hands," 
Psalm  cii.  26,  27,  28.  Heb.  i.  10,  11,  12.  Psalm  xxviii.  6.  John 
i.  1,  2,  3.  Coil.  i.  17.  The  work  of  providence  is  also  ascribed  to 
him  ;  "  for  all  things  consist  by  him,"  Coll.  i.  17.  Heb.  i.  3.  Doing 
miracles  and  wonders  by  his  own  power,  was  his  proper  work, 
and  it  is  "  God  alone,  who  doth  wonderous  things,"  Psalm  Ixxii.  18. 
cxxxvi.  4.  Yea,  the  whole  work  of  redemption  is  ascribed  to  him, 
as  his  ceconomy ;  but  this  is  the  work  of  God  the  Lord  only,"  Hosea 
i.  7. 

(d)  "  All  men  must  honour  him  also,  even  as  they  honour  the 
Father,"  John  V.  23.  Isaiah  xlv.  23.  Rom.  xiv.  10,11.  For  we 
must  worship  him,  as  btephen  did.  Acts  vii.  59.  60,  and  all  the  Chris- 
tians, I  Cor.  i.  2.  It  is  the  will  of  God  '*  that  all  the  angels  should 
worship  him,"  Heb.  1.  6.  And  this  is  also  a  divine  honour,  which  we 
must  offer  to  none  but  God,  Matt.  iv.  10.  We  must  be  baptised  in 
his  name.  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  but  not  in  the  "lame  of  cuiy  creature, 
I  Cor.  i.  13.  We  must  believe  in  him  as  wed  as  in  God  the  Fa- 
ther John  xiv.  1.  Psalm  ii.  12.  But  "cursed  is  the  man  who  trust- 
•sth  in  nmn,"  xvii.  5. 


^76    THE  50NSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST. 

It  naturally  follows  from  these  several  particulars,  considered  in 
connexion,  that  he  is  the  supreme  and  true  God,  co-essen- 
tial with  the  Father,  it  is  of  no  avail  what  the  Socinians  object 
here,  thai  Christ  is  a  man,  inferior  to  the  Father,  the  Father's  ser- 
vanr,  that  he  humbled  himself  so  low,  and  more  of  this  kind  ;  for  we 
do  not  say  tiiat  he  is  God,  as  far  as  he  is  man,  inferior  to  the  Fa- 
ther, or  humbled  ;  and  therefore  these  suggestions  do  not  affect  our 
opinion.  Yea,  the  Socinians  are  obliged  to  explain  how  it  is  possible 
that  he  who  is  inferior  to  the  Father,  should  nevertheless  be  God, 
See  Matt,  xxii.  43 — 4&.  They  cannot  say  that  he  is  a  God,  inferi- 
or to  the  Father  ;  for  then  we  should  have  two  Gods  ;  besides,  there  is 
no  superiority,  nor  inferiority  in  the  Godhead,  the  inferior  God  is 
no  God. 

2.  But  that  on  which  we  must  insist  most  of  all  with  the  instruc- 
tor, is,  what  is  the  ground  and  true  reason  of  his  Sonship.  The 
Arians  imagined  that  Christ  was  called  the  Son  of  God,  because 
God  created  him  before  all  things  ;  but  this  opinion  is  become  obso- 
lete. The  Socinians  imagine  that  the  grounds  of  Christ's  Sonship 
are,  (a)  that  he  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  (b)  that  he  was 
sanctified  by  the  Father  ;  which  imports  that  he  received  abundantly 
the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  was  sent  into  the  world  with  a  divine 
authority  and  power  to  save  mankind,  (c)  that  the  Father  loves 
him  in  a  special  manner,  and  more  than  others,  (d)  that  he  was  rais- 
ed from  the  dead,  (e)  and  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  ; 
but  these  are  not  the  true  grounds  of  his  Sonship  ;  for  he  was  the 
Son  of  God  before  he  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  sanctified, 
raised  from  the  dead,  and  exalted  ;  for  *^  he  was  brought  forth  when 
there  were  no  depths,"  Prov.  viii.  24.  If  these  be  the  grounds  of 
his  Sonship,  then  be  is  the  Son  of  God  only  according  to  his  human 
nature,  but  not  according  to  his  divine  nature,  contrary  to  Rom.  i. 
3,  4,  where  it  is  said,  that  "  he  was  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to 
the  flesh,"  (and  so  David's  son  according  to  the  human  nature,)  "  but 
the  Son  of  God  according  to  the  Spint  of  holiness."  And  truly  the 
Socinian  grounds  do  not  constitute  him  the  Son  of  God,  but  suppose, 
and  prove  that  he  is  the  Son.     See  Rom.  i.  4. 

The  church  hath  always  opposed  these  errours,  even  to  the  pres- 
ent day,  and  taught  that  the  only  and  true  ground  of  the  Sonship 
of  Christ  is  his  eternal  an  J  natural  generatFon  by  the  Father,  who 
communicated  his  essence  in  and  by  himself  to  the  Son,  in  an  incom- 
prehensible manner,  without  change.  This  was  properly  expressed 
by  the  council  of  Nice  against  Arius,  in  the  year  325,  when  that  as- 
sembly obliged  the  professors  of  Christianity  to  say,    *'  We  believe 


-      -  -      S7r 

in  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  the  Father  before  all 
worlds,  God  of  God,  light  of  light,  very  God  of  very  God,  begotten^ 
not  made,  being  of  one  substance  with  the  Father." 

But  is  it  not  a  lamentable  consideration  ?  men  have  risen  up 
among  us,  speaking  perverse  things,  for  they  deny  the  eternal  and 
natural  generation  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  say  that  he  is  called  the 
Son  of  God,  because  he  is  co-essential  with  the  Father.  So  they 
taught  at  tlie  first,  but  seeing  that  this  could  not  be  the  proper 
ground  of  his  sonship,  they  have  devised  and  pretended  something 
else,  to  wit,  that  the  ground  of  Christ's  sonship  is,  that  he  was  or- 
dained, disposed,  or  appointed  and  sent  by  the  Father  to  perform  the 
office  of  Mediator.  And  are  ye  desir^ius  of  knowing  the  secret  ?  these 
men  have  penuaded  themselves,  that  man  is  possessed  of  a  treasure 
of  innate  ideas,  which  are  to  be  the  rule  of  all  the  conceptions,  that 
he  ought  to  form  of  the  truth,  and  that  whatever  agrees  not  with 
those  ideas  ought  to  be  rejected  as  an  errour.  Now  since  they  can- 
not find  in  themselves  an  idea  of  such  a  divine  generation,  they  have 
therefore  rejected  it,  and  substituted  something  else  in  the  place 
of  it.  * 

But  it  is  evident  to  us,  that  Christ  is  the  eternal  and  natural  Soxk 
of  God  by  an  eternal  and  inconceivable  generation. 

1.  Because  the  Son  of  God  saith  this  of  himself,  John  v.  26.  «  As 
the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  he  given  to  the  bon  to  have 
life  in  himself."  It  is  certain  that  the  life  of  the  Father  is  his  es» 
Scne-e  ;  that  he  hath  this  life  and  ^sence  in  himself ;  that  he  hath 
it  essentially,  necessarily  and  independently  ;  that  the  Son  hath  life 
in  himself  thus  also ;  but  how  hath  he  this  life  and  etesence  in  him- 
self; it  is  given  to  him  by  his  father,  to  have  it  in  himself.  Who 
can  understand  this,  unless  he  will  admit  such  a  generation  of  the 
Son  of  God  ?  Add  to  this, 

2.  That  the  word  of  God  expressly  informs  us,  that  he  was  begot- 
ten of  the  Father  from  eternity.  Thus  he  speaks  of  himself,  Rev. 
viii.  24,  25.  "  When  there  were  no  depths,  1  was  brought  forth. 
Before  the  hills  I  was  brought  forth."  Therefore  the  Father  said 
also  to  his  Son,  before  he  had  promised  him  an  inheritance,  and  so 

^  Our  author  hath  rejpect  here  to  Herman  Alexander  Rncll,  and  his  disci- 
ples.. Hflfwasa  professor  cf  theology  in  the  uni.versity  of  Fpaneker,  and  after- 
wards of  Utrecht,  m  the  United  Provinces.  His  opinions  were  condemned  by 
the  synods  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  he  consented  to  bury  them  in  silence 
for  the  peace  of  the  church.  Although  his  disciples  gave  solemn  protestations 
cf  the  soundness  of  iheir  religious  sentiments,  they  were  nevertheless  suspect- 
ed of  concealed  errours. 


\ 


2rs    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST. 

from  eternity,  *'  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  clay  liave  I  begotten  thee," 
psalm  ii.  7.  Therefore  lie  is  also  called  the  only  begotten  Son  of 
God,  John  i.  14,  18.  iii-  16.  it  ought  not  to  be  said,  that  Psalm  ii. 
7,  speaks  of  th»  resurrection  of  Christ,  because  Paul  suith,  Acts  xiii. 
32,  33,  *'  We  declare  unto  you  glad  tidin:^s,  how  that  the  promise 
which  was  made  unlo  the  fatheis,  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto 
us  their  children,  in  that  he  hath  raised  'ip  Jesus  again  :  as  it  is  also 
written  in  the  second  plalm,  Phou  art  my  ^on,  this  day  have  1  be- 
gotten thee ;"  for  he  only  showeth  in  whom  God  hath  fulfilled  the 
promise,  namely  in  his  >on,  whom  he  hath  begotten,  of  whom  he 
spoke  in  the  second  psalm  ;  bui  in  the  thirty-fourth  verse  the  apostle 
undertakes  to  prove  that  God  had  raised  him  from  the  dead,  for  he 
begins  there  a  new  proposition,  sayini;,  "  and  that  he  raised  him  up 
from  the  dead  now  no  more  to  return  to  corruption ;"  he  proves  this 
not  from  Psalm  ii.  7,  bu*  from  Isaiah  Iv,  33,  and  from  Psalm  xvi. 
10.  Should  it  be  said,  that  the  phrase  "to  bring  forth"  signifies 
someti  es  to  reveal  or  discover,  as  Prov.  xvii.l7,  "  A  brother  is 
born  (or  brought  forth)  in  adveraiiy,"  and  Prov.  xxvii.  1.  "Thou 
knov/est  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forti),"  we  will  admit,  that  to 
bring  forth,  denotes  in  these  passages  improperly  to  reveal,  or  dis- 
cover; but  must  it  therefore  be  understood  in  such  a  sense  in  those 
passages  which  sptak  of  the  feneration  of  the  ^ion  ?  surely  no  :  for 
Christ  is  always  said  to  ha'v  e  been  brought  fgrih  in  such  a  manner, 
that  he  became  a  Son  therebv,  and  that  the  Father  gave  hira  life. 
Moreover  the  phrase,  to  bring  ^orth  signifies  in  those  passages  not 
only  to  reveal,  but  <ilso  to  bring  forlh,  as  a  mother  brings  forth  a 
child. 

3.  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God  so,  that  "  he  is  the  express  image  of 
the  Father's  Person,"  Heb.  i.  4.  God  hath  expressed  his  image  also 
in  angels  and  men,  but  they  cannot  on  that  account  be  called  the  ex- 
press image  of  his  person,  as  the  apostle  also  shows,  when  he  adds, 
vrs.  34,  "  Being  made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  fie  hat'a 
by  inheritance  obtained  a  more  cxccUtnt  name  than  they.  For  unto 
which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time,  Thou  art  ray  Son,  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee  ?  and  again,  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  and  he 
shall  be  to  me  a  Son"  We  cannot  surely  understand  this  any  other 
way,  than  of  a  proper  generation,  by  which  the  Father  communi- 
cated his  essence  to  his  Son. 

4.  Christ  is  God's  "  own  Son,"  Rom.  viii.  32,  and  God  is  "his  own 
Father,"  John  v.  18.     Now  we  never  say  that  any  person  is  an  own 

•6on,  or  own  father,  except  on  account  of  a  proper  and  natural  gen- 


XIII.  LOD'S  DAY,  Q.  33,  34.  279 

^l^ation  :  therefore  Christ  also,  as  God's  own  Son,  must  have  been 
properly  begotten  by  his  Father.     We  say  further, 

5.  That  he  is  the  .*-on  of  God  according  to  his  divine  nature,  as 
he  is  the  Son  of  David  according  to  his  human  nature..  This  the 
apostle  showeth  us,  Rom.  i.  3,  4.  **  Concerning  his  Son,  which  was 
made  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh,  and  declared  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness." 
How  was  he  made  according  to  the  flesh  of  the  seed  of  David  ?  was 
it  not  by  being  born  in  a  proper  manner  of  Mary,  David's  daughter? 
so  then  he  was  the  Son  of  God  also  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holi- 
ness by  a  proper  generation  of  God.     Finally, 

6.  If  Christ  be  not  properly  begotten  ot  God,  then  there  is  no 
ground  for  his  being  called  the  Son  of  God,  and  for  calling  God  his 
Father  ;  for  the  only  ground  of  the  relation  of  st  son  to  a  father,  or 
of  a  father  to  a  son,  is  the  generation  of  the  son  by  the  father.  Yea 
if  Christ  be  not  begotten  by  the  Father,  the  Son  may  be  called  the 
Father,  and  the  Fa' her  the  Son.  They  then  who  deny  the  genera- 
tion of  the  Son  by  the  Father  must  necessarily  decline  either  to  the 
opinion  of  Sabellius,  who  denied  all  distinction  of  Persons  in  the 
Godhead,  confounding  them  with  one  another,  and  holding  that  there 
Were  only  three  distinct  names  of  Father  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  and 
thus  si'bverting  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  :  for  when  we  deny  that 
the  Son  is  begotten,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth,  we  then 
destroy  the  only  foundation  of  every  distinction  of  the  Persons,  and 
of  their  personal  properties,  and  must  therefore  say  that  the  Father 
is  the  Son,  and  the  Son  is  the  Holy  Ghost :  and  thus  the  Persons 
will  be  no  more  than  three  negations,  and  only  three  names.  Or  if 
thosij  who  deny  the  generation  of  tlie  Son  will  not  decline  to  the  er- 
rour  of  the  Sabellians,  they  must  necessarily  abandon  themselves  to 
the  impious  heresay  of  the  Tritheists,  who  held  m  the  ancient  church 
that  there  were  three  Gods :  for  when  they  deny  that  the  Son  is 
begotten,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth,  and  do  thus  subvert 
the  only  foundationof  a  distinction  of  Persona,  they  necessarily  assert 
three  distinct  essences,  which  are  essentially  distinct  from  each 
other :  and  so  there  will  be  not  only  three  divine  Persons,  but  also 
three  divine  essences.  And  they  do  thus  also  wholly  subvert  the 
foundation  of  the  oneness  of  ihe  essence  of  the  three  Persons,  since 
we  cannot  say  that  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  one  and  the 
same  essence  with  the  Father,  as  this  is  founded  only  in  the  genera- 
lion  of  the  Son,  and  the  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the 
Father.  See  how  riiariy  grievous  consequences  unavoidably  follow 
from  denying  the  generation  of  the  Son, 


no    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHllISt. 

We  know  that  they  would  put  us  off  here,  by  saying  that  (a)  th« 
ground  of  the  sonship  of  Christ  is,  that  he  is  co-essential  with  the 
Father ;  but  this  cannot  be  the  ground  of  his  beinj;  the  Son  of  God  : 
the  expression  co-essential,  doth  not  require  this  ;  this  would  rather 
make  him  a  brother  of  God  ;  therefore  dismissing  this  pretence, 
these  men  say  (b)  that  his  appointment  and  delagation  to  the  office 
of  Mediator  intimates  his  generation  of  the  Father,  and  is  the  ground 
of  his  sonship  ;  but  neither  can  this  suggest  to  any  one  a  notion  of 
generation,  nor  a  foundation  of  sonship  ;  his  office  of  Mediator,  and 
his  appointment  and  delegation  thereto  constitute  him  indeed  a  ser- 
vant and  a  Christ,  but  not  a  :.on  of  the  Father  ;  he  was  also  a  Son 
of  God  before  this.  See  John  iii.  16.  Rom.  viii.  3.  Gal.  iv.  4.  But 
lest  it  should  leak  out,  that  these  men  believe  that  there  are  three 
Gods,  they  say  that  the  ti.ree  Persons  have  always  the  same  supreme 
and  perfect  ideas,  and  acts  of  thinking.  But  how  doth  it  happen,  that 
three  distinct  persons  have  always  the  same  ideas  ?  this  is  inexplica- 
ble by  those  who  deny  that  the  Son  is  begotten,  and  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  proceedeth  from,  and  still  subsists  in  the  essence  ot  the 
Father  :  but  perhaps  we  may  see  by  this  what  these  men  think  of  the 
onenessof  the  three  Persons  in  tile  Godhe:.d,  to  wit,  that  they  are 
not  one  in  essence,  but  only  in  acts  of  thinking. 

So  much  da  these  men  say,  though  to  no  purpose,  in  order  to 
excuse  their  errour.  But  what  do  they  object,  in  order  to  subvert 
the  doctrine  of  the  church  concerning  the  generation  of  the  Son  by 
the  Father  ?  They  say,  (1)  that  the  third  Person  is  called  Spirit  to 
express  his  spiritual  work  of  grace,  and  that  therefore  the  second 
Person  must  also  be  called  Son,  to  express  his  Mediatorship  and 
work  of  grace  ;  but  it  is  not  true,  that  the  third  Person  is  called  the 
Spirit  on  account  of  his  work,  but  he  is  so  called  on  account  of  his 
personal  proceeding  from  the  Father,  and  from  the  Son.  The  epithet 
"  holy"  denotes  indeed  his  work  of  grace :  but  his  personal  name 
Spirit  doth  not,  as  we  must  show  upon  the  twentieth  Lord's  day. 
They  say  further,  (2)  that  the  names  "  Son"  and  '"  Word"  are  used 
one  for  the  other  as  sii'nifying  the  same  thing  ;  for  he  who  is  called 
in  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  "Son"  is  called  1  John  v.  7,  the  •*  Word."  Now, 
say  they,  the  name  "  Word  "  hath  respect  to  the  Mediatorship  of 
Christ,  and  therefore  the  name  "  Son  "  hath  also  respect  to  his  Me- 
diatorship. But  the  names  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  and  King  of  Israel 
^re  also  used  one  for  another.  Matt.  xvi.  16.  John  i.  50,  yet  who 
sees  not  thar  the  one  name  exhibits  him  to  our  thoughts  somewhat 
difterent  from  the  other  ?  Moreover  the  names  "  God  "  and  "  Word" 
are  used  one  foi  the  other,  John  i.    U.  1  Tim.  iii.  J 6.     Jf  now  the 


■  XIII.  XORD'S  DAT,  Q.  33,  34„  281 

name  "  Word  "  express  his  Mediatorship,  will  not  the  name  "  God" 
aUo  express  his  Mediatorship  ?  God  forbid.     Who  knows  not  that 
Chiist  is  God  and  man  in  one  person,  and  thus  ^also  Mediator,  and 
that  he  is  therefore  sometimes  denominated  from  one,  and  at  other 
times  from  the   other  nature,  and  also  by  different  names  from  his 
offices  ?  They  say  finally,  (3)  that  such  a  proper  generation  implies 
that  the  Son  is  inferior  and  later,  than  the  Father,  and  therefore  that 
he  is  not  independent,  eternal  and  impassible  :  but  if  these  men  had 
not  suffered  themselves  to  be  spoiled  by  philosophy,  they  would  have 
considered,  that  "  such  knowledge  was  too  high  for  us,  that  we  can- 
not attain  to  it,  and  that  we  cannot  find  out  the   Almighty  to  perfec- 
tion."    bee   Psalm  cxxxix.  6,  14,    18.  Job  Xi.  7,   8,  9.     It  is  indeed 
true,  tha-  a  father,   who  begets  a  son  withoiJt  his  essence,  is  before 
and  greater  than  his  son  ;  so  also  when  God  produced  the  creatures 
by  creation  without  his  essence,  tliey  could  not  be   mdep'-ndent  nor 
eternal ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  the  Son  ;  for  he  was  not  created  with- 
out tne  essence  of  Gt>d,  but  be-otten  of  him  in  his  essence,  by  an 
immanent  act  of  the   Faiher  within   him.     And  thertlort^  we  say 
with  the  anctents  that  this  generation  of  the  Son  by  the  Father  was 
(a)  akatalcfitos^  inconceivable,  Prov.  xxx.  4.  (b)  achroma,  without  suc» 
cession  of  time,   Micha  v.  1'  (c)   acho^istos,  inseparable,  John  i.  1. 
xiv    10,  11.  (d)  a/uit/ios,   impassible,  and  without   any  change  in  the 
Father,  or  in  the    on,  James  i.  IS. 

We  have  insisted  so  long  on  the  sonship  of  Christ,  because  the 
instructor  speaks  of  it  particularly  in  this  1  ord's  day,  and  also  be- 
cause it  is  the  scope  of  the  whole  gospel,  that  man  should  know  and 
believe  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God,  John  xx.  31,  as  the  Father  there- 
fore proclaims  him  before  the  whrle  world  to  be  "  his  Son,  whom 
we  must  hear,"  Matt.  iii.  17.  Yea,  "whosoever  deni^th  the  Sen, 
the  same  hath  not  the  Father,"  1  John  iii.  23,  And  therefore  we 
hold  the  generation  of  the  Son  to  be  a  fundamental  doctrine  of  the 
faith  ;  for  that  is  a  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  faith  which  is  the 
foundation  of  other  doctrines  of  revelation,  which  are  either  bcheved 
or  denied,  according  as  that  first  foundation  is  believed  or  denied. 
Now  it  is  evident,  that  if  we  deny  this  generation  of  the  Son,  we 
must  then  also  deny  that  Christ  is  truly  the  Son  of  God  ;  that  there 
are  three  distinct  Persons  in  the  divine  essence,  because  the  only 
foundation  of  the  distinction  between  the  Persons  is  then  destroyed  ; 
or  we  must  deny  the  oneness  of  the  essence  of  the  three  Pe^sons^ 
We  have  shown  all  this  more  fully  above. 

.  Since  then  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  *'  the  Father  hath  made  him 
heir  of  all  things,"  Heb.  i,  1,2.    And  so  he  is  also  "  King  of  Israel," 

Qq 


232    THE  SOXSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST, 

John  i.  49,  and  thus  also   ''our  Lord,"  as  he    is   also    called  in   the 
Christian  creed,  which  is  explained  in  the  thirty-fourth  question. 

H.  The  catecliisni  doth  not  ask  barely,  "  Why  callest  thou  him 
Lord  ?"  for  we  should  then  answer  because  he  is  God,  and  hath  re- 
ceived, as  Mediator,  power  over  all  things,  that  he  may  employ  them 
for  the  furtherance  of  his  kingdom  ;  for  "  he  hath  received  all  power 
in  hedven  and  in  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  And  therefore  "he  hath 
bought  the  false  teachers  also,  who  deny  him,  their  Lord,  and  bring 
swift  destruction  upon  themselves,"  2  Peter  ii.  1.  But  it  is  asked 
here,  Why  callest  thou  him  "  our  "  (or  thy)  Lord  ?  and  we  answer 
not,  because  he  rules  us  by  his  word  and  Spirit,  and  defends  and 
preserves  us  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  purchased  salvation,  as  we  an^ 
swer  to  explain  h's  government  as  king,  in  the  thirty-first  question  : 
for  the  instructor  doth  not  desire  to  know  now  how  he  governs  us 
as  Lord,  but  how  he  hath  made  us  his  property,  by  which  he  hath 
an  indisputable  right  to  us.  "We  might  answer  here,  because  the 
Fatlier  gave  us  to  him  from  eternity  ;  becanse  he  hath  owned  us  as 
his  bride  and  spouse,  and  because,  having  been  drawn  by  the  Spirit, 
we  have  surrendered  ourselves  to  him  cheerfully,  as  his  own.  But 
the  catechism  having  respect  here  to  servants*  as  entire  bondmen, 
who  have  buen  rendered  the  property  of  their  masters,  either  by  be- 
ing purchased  with  money,  or  by  conqiwst,  assigns  two  reasons  why 
believers  are  Iiis  property,  I.  "Because  he  hath  redeemed  them^, 
both  soul  and  botly,  from  all  their  sins,  not  with  gold  or  silver,  but 
with  his  precious  blood."  2".  Because  he  hath  delivered  them  from 
all  the  power  of  the  devil.**^  The  instructor  had  mentioned  this  alsa 
in  the  first  question.  But  as  we  have  explained  this  in  treating  on 
that  question,  we  shall  refer  our  reader  thither,  and  hasten  to  impress 
the  minds  of  all  with  what  we  have  now  said  of  the  Soiiship  and  gov 
ernment  of  Christi. 


APPLICATIOI^- 

We  might  insist  here  somewhat  on  the  m?.tter,  fhat  believers  are 
adopted  to  be  children  of  God  through  grace,  for  Christ's  sake,  as  is 
said  in  the  thirty-third  question  ;  but  as  we  have  treated  upon  that 
subject  distinctly  on  the  twenty-sixth  question,  we  will  wave  any  fur» 
ther  cont-idcration  of  it  at  present,  and  say,  that  the  sum  of  the 
IhjiDgs  of  which  wc  now  speak  is,  that  the  cialdren  of  God  have  thir. 


 

triumph  of  faith,  that  the  Son  of  God  is  their  Lord  and  King.  This 
is  professed  by  every  behever,  when  he  sailh,  1  beheve  in  the  Son  of 
God  our  Lord.  This  conducetli  indeed  to  the  glory  of  the  people 
of  God,  for  the  glory  of  the  lord  and  king,  is  also  the  glory  of  the  peo- 
ple ;  therefore  the  greatest  of  Israel's  kings  said,  Led.  x.  17,  «  Bles- 
sed art  thou,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  the  son  of  Nobles."  Are  not 
they  then  a  happy  people,  who  have  the  Son  of  God  for  their  lord 
and  king?  The  church  gloried  in  him  as  such,  saying,  Isaiah  xxiii. 
22,  "  The  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lerd  is 
our  king,  he  will  save  us."  Nathanael  praised  him  thus,  John  i.  49. 
"  Rabbi,  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  thou  art  the  king  of  Israel." 
For  if  our  Lord  be  the  Son  of  God,  then  he  is  (a)  a  most  excellent 
lord  and  king  :  "  I  am  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  my 
name  is  dreadful  among  the  heathen,"  Mai.  i.  14.  Solomon  was  a 
great  king  ;  his  name  was  celebrated  far  and  near,  «'  but  behold  a 
greater  than  Solors^on  is  here,"  Matt.  xii.  1 1.  Our  Lord  is  the  Son 
of  God,  yea  God  himself:  "He  is  a  great  God,  yea,  a  great  King 
above  all  gods  ;  in  his  hand  are  the  deep  places  of  the  earth  ;  the 
strength  of  the  hill  is  his  also :  the  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it  : 
and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  land,"  Psalm  xcv.  3,  4,  5.  How  did 
the  church  exult  in  her  expectation  of  him  1  Isaiah  ix.  5,  "  Unto  us 
a  child  is  born  ;  unto  us  a  son  is  given,  and  the  government  shall  be 
upon  his  shoulder  ;  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Coun- 
sellor, The  mighty  God,  The  everlasting  Father,  The  Prince  of 
peace  :  He  is  fairer  than  the  children  of  men,"  Psalm  xlv.  2.  Solo- 
mon was  the  wisest  of  Israel's  kings  ;  but  Jesus  is  the  essential,  the 
3upreme  Wisdom:  <'The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  rests  upon  him,  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  might, 
the  Spirit  of  knowledge,  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  xi  2. 
See  how  the  spouse  describes  him.  Song,  v.  10—16.  He  hath  an 
unlimited  jurisdiction,  he  hath  all  power  in  htaven  and  in  earth  : 
*'  he  rules  from  sea,  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth,"  Psalm  Ixxii.  8.  "  Who  in  the  heaven  can  be  compared  to  the 
Lord?  who  among  the  bons  of  the  migiity  can  be  liktned  to  him  V* 
Behold  him  in  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  which  no  mortal  can  sustain, 
Rev.  i.  10-18,  and  that  which  increastth  your  triumph,  believers, 
is  (b)  that  he  is  a  Lord  of  you,  not  as  hateful  and  despicable  slaves, 
but  as  his  special  property,  precious  above  all  other  men,  Exod.  xix. 
5,  6.  He  makes  you  also  children  of  God.  John  i.  12,  his  sister  and 
spouse.  Song  v.  1.  Yea,  he  makes  you  *'  a  chosen  generation,  a 
royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,"  1  Peter  ii.  9.  (c> 
XI  the  Son  of  God  be  your  Lord,  then  ye  arc  under  the  most  desira- 


284    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST. 

ble  govemTnent  and  jurisdiction  ;  for  he  is  also  just :  *<  The  sceptre 
of  his  kint;dom  is  a  ric^bt  sceptre  :  he  loves  rigliteousness,  and  hates 
wickedness,"  Psalm  xlv.  6,  7.  "  He  is  of  quickunderslandiRgin  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  and  he  judges  not  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  and 
reproves  not  afier  the  heunng  of  ears  :  but  with  righteousness  doth 
he  judge  the  poor ;  and  with  equity  doth  he  reprove  for  the  meek  of 
the  earth,"  Isaiah  xi.  3,  4.  Therefore  his  government  is  also  pleas- 
ant and  gen'Je.  Though  Israel  prospered  exceedingly  under  the 
reign  of  "  olomon,  he  nevertheless  imposed  such  heavy  burthens 
upon  themj  that  they  refused  to  be  governed  by  his  son  under  those 
grievous  impositions  ;  but  the  yoke  of  *  the  Son  of  God  is  easy,  and 
his  burthen  is  light,"  Matt  xi.  30.  His  commandments  are  not 
grievous ;  "  There  is  no  nation  that  hath  statutes  and  judgments  so 
rghteous,"  Deut,  iv.  8.  He  doth  not  hate  the  mean  nor  the  weaky 
but  ''  he  feeds  his  flock  like  a  shepherd  ;  he  gathers  the  Iambs  in  hia 
arms,  he  carries  them  in  his  bosom,  and  gently  laads  those  that  ard 
with  young,"  Isaiah  xl.  11.  Doth  he  chasten  them,  when  they 
transgress,  it  is  with  mt-asure,  and  "  for  their  profit,  that  they  may- 
be partakers  of  his  holiness,"  Heb-  xii.  6— 1 1.  Neither  doth  he 
empoverish  his  subjects,  as  many  kings  do,  "  wl^o  eat  the  flesh  of 
their  subjects,  flay  their  skin,  and  break  their  bones  to  enrich  them- 
selves :"  but  be  enriches  them  greatly,  so  that  the  apostle  could  say 
to  behevers,  1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22,23,  "  All  things  are  yours;  whether 
Paul,  or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  thir.gs 
present,  or  things  to  come  ;  all  are  yours ;  and  ye  are  Christ's  ;  and 
Christ  is  God's."  It  is  true,  ye  have  many  enemie?,  who  endeavour 
to  detach  you  from  his  desirable  government,  and  to  carry  you  cap- 
tive to  your  destruction  ;  but  he  sees  it,  and  it  is  evil  in  his  eyes  : 
«  For  lie  who  loucheth  you,  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye,"  Zech. 
ii.  8.  Think  not  that  he  is  deficient  in  power  to  revenge  the  wrongs 
tliat'are  done  to  you :  no,  he  is  mighty  to  redeem  :  "  Your  Redeem- 
er  is  strong,  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name  ;  he  shall  thoroughly  plead 
your  cause,"-  Jer.  1.  3  4.  ''  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against 
you,  none  shall  pluck  you  out  of  his  hand."  (d)  Let  me  add  this 
also  :  what  a  high  price  did  he  piy,  before  he  became  your  Lord,  and 
ve  his  properly  1  It  cost  him  his  own  blood  and  life  ;  «  Ye  were 
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  frcm  your 
vain  conversation  ;  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  a  lamb 
n»ithout  blemish  and  without  spot,"  1  Peter  i.  18,  19.  How  sad  was 
his  condition,  when  he  was  obliged  to  wrestle  under  the  burthei  of 
God's  w  rath  with  the  powers  of  hell  1  Hear  and  see  how  he  mourn- 
ed, Luke  xii.  50.    Matt.  xxvi.  36—44.    xxvii.  46.    How  much  was 


^$ 

to  be  done  to  you,  before  he  broke  your  yoke,  and  burst  your  bonds ! 
It  was  necessary  that  he  should  bind  the  strong  devil,  tliat  he  might 
spoil  him  of  you,  Matt.  xii.  29.  How  did  ye  struggle  against  it; 
before  ye  would  submit  to  his  governmuit  1  he  was  therefore  obliged 
to  exert  the  exceedin.g  greatness  of  his  power,  that  he  might  cause 
such  rebels  as  ye  were  to  dwell  vvilh  him.  With  good  reason  thea 
do  we  cry  out  concerning  you  :  "  Happy  art  thou,  <  >  Israel,  who  ift 
like  unto  thee,  O  people  savtd  by  the  Lord,  the  shield  of  thy  help, 
and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  excellency  !  and  thine  enemies  shall  be 
found  liars  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt  treod  upon  their  high  placts,'* 
Deut.  xxxiii.  29. 

Are  ye  desirous  now  of  knowing  who  can  triumph  thus  in  t>ie  faiih, 
behold^  1.  They  are  those  who  have  disengaged  themselves  from  all 
things,  and  from  themselves,  and  have  resigntd  and  surrendered 
themsL-lves  unto  him,  in  order  to  be  his  property.  Thus  it  is  said, 
Isaiah  xliv.  5.  *•  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's,  and  another  shall 
subscribe  with  his  hand,  I  am  the  Lord's."  And  tl.at  not  only  to  be 
saved  by  him,  but  also  to  be  sanctified  by  him  ;  therefore:  they  cry 
unto  him,  ''  Unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name,"  Psaim  Ixxxvi  11, 
"  They  join  themselves  to  him  lo  serve  him,  to  love  his  name  and 
to  be  his  sevrants,"  Isaiah  Ivi.  6.  They  submit  themstlves  to  him 
in  a  most  hearty,  willing  and  ready  manner,  and  say,  "  O  I^ord, 
truly  I  am  thy  servant,  I  am  thy  servant,"  Psalm  cxvi.  16,  They 
esteem  all  his  commandments  to  be  holy,  just  and  good,  with  David, 
Psulm  cxix.  128.  "  I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  concerning  all  thinp;s 
to  be  right :  I  hate  every  false  way."  They  choose  them,  also  for 
their  treasure  and  possession,  and  keep  them  as  such  ;  "  Thy  testi- 
iRonies  have  I  taken  as  an  heritage  for  ever ;  for  they  are  the  rejoi- 
cing of  my  heart.  1  have  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  thy  statutes 
always,  even  unto  the  end,"  saith  David,  Psalm  cxix.  Ill,  112.  And 
as  they  are  so  intent  upon  doing  the  will  of  the  Lord,  « they  will 

^  swear  and  will  perform  it,  that  they  will  keep  his  righteous  judg- 
ments," Psalm  cxix.  106.  And  though  they  cannot  attain  to  per- 
fection, yet  knowing  that  they  can  be  more   perfect  than  they  are, 

'.  they  will  still  seek,  strive,  and  follow  after  perfection,  like  Paul, 
Philip,  iii.   12,    13,   14.     Yea,  this  is  their  glory,  their  soul  saith, 

!  "  The  Lord  is  my  poitiop,  1  have  said  that  I  would  keep  thy  words," 

.  psalm  cxix.  57. 

Others  who  cannot  triumph  herein,  that  the  Son  of  God  is  their 
Lord,  remain  in  themselves,  they  set  themselves  against  him,  and 
they  will  not  have  him  to  rule  over  them.     It  is  forsooth  too  strict  a 

-^adj  and  they  ^iU  not  be  brought  uoder  it.    Doth  he  call  them, 


286    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  CHRIST, 

they  cry  aloud  with  their  actions,  "  We  are  lords,  we  will  not  come 
unio  thee,"  Jer.  ii.  31.  They  think  that  it  doth  not  concern  others, 
what  they  either  say  or  do,  and  therefore  they  say,  ♦'  Our  lips  are 
our  own  ;  who  is  lord  over  us  ?  Psalm  xii.  4.  And  *'  they  do  the 
will  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,"  Eph,  ii.  3.  Do  the  servants  of 
God  reprove  and  convince  them,  they  become  angry,  and  are  wroth, 
like  the  Jewish  council,  Acts  vii.  51,54.  They  are  indeed  not  all 
so  wicked,  many  will  own  the  Son  of  God  for  their  Lord ;  but  they 
will  nevertheless  not  yield  themselves  up  to  him  in  truth  and  sin^ 
cerity,  to  be  actually  and  inwardly  ruled  by  him,  but  they  content 
themselves  with  a  little  civility,  with  an  outward  devotion,  with 
knowing  and  talking  somewhat  about  him  :  but  he  saith,  IMatt. 
vii.  21.  «  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  but  he  that  doth  tlie  will  of  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven. 

2.  They  who  can  triumph  thus  in  the  faith,  do  also  choose  the 
party  of  the  Lord  ;  they  join  themselves  to  the  people  of  God,  and 
cleave  to  them  ;  "  Ten  men  of  all  languages  of  the  nations  take  hold 
of  the  skirt  of  him  that  is  a  Jew,  saying.  We  will  go  with  you  ;  for  we 
have  heard  that  God  is  with  you,"  Zech.  viii.  23.  They  love  heartily 
and  really  what  their  Lord  and  his  people  love :  "  They  choose  that 
in  which  the  l^ord  delighleth,"  Isaiah  Ivi.  4.  ''  The  Lord  delighteth 
in  his  people,"  Isaiah  Ixii.  4.  But  they  who  triumph  thus  delight 
also  in  the  saints,  who  are  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  excellent,"  Psalm 
XVI.  3.  Doth  the  Lord  hate  sin,  they  also  "  hate  every  f^lse  way," 
Psalm  cxix.  128,  Doth  the  Lord  abhor  the  uhgodly,  they  can  say 
with  David,  Psalm  cxxxix.  21.  "  Do  not  I  hate  them,  O  Lord,  that 
hate  thee  ?  and  am  not  I  grieved  with  them  that  rise  up  against 
thee  ?  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred  ;  I  count  them  mine  ene- 
mies." 

Others  choose  the  party  of  the  world  ;  it  appears  by  their  looks, 
their  clothing,  their  thoughts,  and  discourse,  "  They  are  of  the 
world,  therefore  speak  thou  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth 
them,"  1  John  iv.  5.  Yea,  they  oppose  the  people  of  Jesus,  because 
they  separate  themselves  from  them  :  therefore  this  Lord  said  tovhis 
people-  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  woald  would  love  his  own  ; 
but  because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you,'*  John  xv.  19. 

To  whom  do  ye  now  belong  ?  to  us,  or  to  our  foes  ?  have  y«  never 
yet  surrendered  yourselves  to  him  to  serve  him,  nor  chosen  his  party> 
ye  cannot  then  triumph  thus  in  the  faith  :  but  it  is  your  reproach, 
lh«rt  the  ruler  of  this  world  is  your  lord  and  king.     And  what  'a 


Si,  34.  237 

Wretchcct,  despicable,  cursed  and  cruel  lord  do  ye  then  serve  ?  and 
what  a  wretched  reward  will  he  bestow  on  you  for  your  faithful  ser* 
vice  ?  (for  ye  serve  him  with  great  faithfulness)  Your  reward  will  be 
"  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt.  xxy» 
41.  Think  not  that  ye  shall  escape  the  hands  of  our  great  Lord, 
he  will  command  you  to  be  broiight  to  him,  and  to  be  slain  before  hii 
face,  Luke  xix.  27.  "  Ye  shall  perish  froiti  the  way,  when  his  wrath 
is  kindled  but  a  httle,"  Psdlm  ii.  12.  O  that  ye  might  recover  out 
of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  whicb  ye  are  taken  captive  at  his  will  j 
flee,  I  beseech  you,  from  him  ^.nd  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  join 
yourselves  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  people,  that  ye  may  prevent 
your  destruction* 

But  with  respect  to  you,  who  have  jvoined  yourselves  to  the  Lord, 
and  chosen  his  party,  conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  your  Lord* 
And  therefore. 

1.  Believe,  and  be  assured,  that  the  Son  of  God  is  also  your  Lord. 
Ye  certainly  confess  this  >n  your  creed  ;  he  hath  bought  you  with  his 
blood,  delivered  you  from  all  the  power  Of  the  devij,  and  rendered 
you  his  property.  Hath  he  not  drawn  your  souls,  so  that  ye  have 
run  after  him  ?  have  ye  not  dedicated  yourselves  sincerely  and 
heartily  to  him  and  to  his  service,  and  do  ye  not  still  do  this  ?  Are 
not  your  sins  your  greatest  grief,  and  do  ye  not  withstand  them  f  can 
ye  deny  this  ?  do  ye  not  know  then  that  ye  have  believed  in  him  ? 
Why  are  ye  then  so  mistrustful,  and  say,  *'  The  Lord  hath  utterly 
separated  me  from  his  people,  and  I  am  a  dry  tree  r*'  Isaiah  Ivi,  3. 
As  long  as  your  souls  indulge  such  imaginations,  they  will  never 
exert  a  single  act  towards  him,  which  will  be  worthy  of  him  ;  there- 
fore encourage  yourselves  in  this,  and  say  with  David,  Psalm  xlii. 
11.  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul,  snd  why  art  thou  dis- 
quieted within  me  ?  hope  thou  in  God ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him, 
who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God." 

2.  Contemplate  much  the  glory  of  the  Son  of  God,  as  your  Lord* 
Are  ye  not  permitted  with  Stephen  to  see  the  heavens  opened,  and 
the  Son  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  behold  him  then 
with  an  enlightened  eye  of  faith,  according  to  his  word,  and  see  hoW 
the  Father  anointed  him  from  eternity  King  of  Zion,  how  he  sent 
him  into  the  world,  so  that  every  one  beheld  his  glory j  as  the  glory 
of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  how  he  spoiled  on  the  crOss  prin- 
cipalities and  powers,  and  made  a  shovi^  of  them  openly,  and  trium- 
phed over  them  ;  how  his  Father  hath  therefore  exalted  him,  and 
given  him  a  name  above  every  name,  that  in  his  name  every  knee 
should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  on  earth,  and  things 


288    THE  SONSHIP  AND  GOVERNMEN  T  OF  CHRIST. 

under  the  earth ;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  ;  how  by  his  gospel 
he  subdues  the  world  to  himself,  causes  the  rebellious  to  dwell  with 
him,  governs  the  hearts  of  all,  how  the  angels  worship  him,  the  souls 
of  the  blessed  glorify  him,  and  every  believer  looks  to  him,  to  re- 
ceive of  his  fullness,  and  grace  for  grace.  Ye  are  exhorttfd  to  this, 
Song  iii.  1  I.  "  Go  forth,  O  ye  daughters  of  Zion,  and  behold  king 
Solomon  with  the  crown  wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him  in  the 
day  of  his  espousals,  and  in  the  day  of  the  gladness  of  his  heart.'* 
Ye  endeavour  to  be  conformed  to  him  in  a  glorious  hohness,  but 
this  vie  w  of  hun  transforms  the  soul :  for  "  we  all  with  open  face, 
beholdiniir  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the 
same  ima-e,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  spirit  of  the  Lord," 
2  Cor.  iii.   18. 

3.  Acknowledge  the  Son  of  God,  as  your  Lord,  this  ye   must  do 
(a)  by  extolling  him  as  your  Lord,  praising  him,  and  crying  to  him 
^vith  elevated  minds,  in  order  to  glo?ify  him,  like  Nathanael,  *' Rabbi, 
thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  thou  art  t)ie  king  of  Israel,"  John  i.  4.    Hear 
how   his  people  shout  to  him,  (unite  witi  them  in  heart  and  voice) 
Psalm  xlvii.    7 — 10,   "  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  ;  sing  prai- 
ses unto  our  King,   sing  praises      For  God  is   the  King  of  all   the 
earth,  sing  ye  praises  with  understanding.     God  reigneth  over  the 
heathen  :  God   sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holiness.     The  princes 
of  the  people  are  gathered  together  to  the  people  of  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham ;  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  belong  unto  God  j  he  is   greatly 
exalted."  (b)     It  behooves  you  to  acknowledge  him  as   your  Lord 
also  by  submitting  yourselves  wholly  to  him,  and  in  all  things,  bow- 
ing to  him,  with  a  total  denial  of  yourselves,  not  seeking  yourselves, 
nor  following  your  inclination,  but  him  only ;  as  well  in  adversity  as 
in  prosperity,  as  well  in  darkness  as  in  light,  he  is  your  Lord,  ye  are 
his  servants,  and  his  property  :  he  may  do  with  his  own,  as  seemeth- 
good  to  him  :  "  Because  he  is  your  Lord,  therefore  worship  ye  him," 
Psalm  xlv,  11.  (c)     Acknowledge    him  as  your   Lord  byldevoting 
yourselves  wholly  to  his  service  ;  he  hath  rendered  you  his  property 
m  s6i.ll  and  body  :  it  is  therefore  your  duty  to  dedicate   yourselves 
with  soul  and  body  to  him,  and  to  employ  them  in  his  service :  "  He 
gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and 
purify  unto  himself,  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works  ,"  Titus 
ii.  U.     «  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God, 
that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  un- 
to Cod,  which  is  your  reasonable  service"  Rom.   xii.   1.   (d)     Ye 
must  also  acknowledge  him  as  your  Lord  by  improving  him  as  such. 


Xltl.  LORD'S  DAYjQ.  33,  34.  :289 

and  putting  your  sinful  hearts  into  his  hand,  with  every  foe  that  he 
mav  destroy  them,  and  subject  them  to  himself:  "  As  for  those  mine 
enemies,"  saith  he,  '*  who  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  ihem, ' 
bring  them  hither,  anci  slay  them  b  fore  my  face,"  Luke  xix.  27. 
For  this  David  prayed,  Psalm  xix.  IS,  I4.(c;  Lis  your  duty  to  ac- 
knowledge him  as  your  Lord  by  intrusting  yonr  own,  and  his  church's 
cause  to  him,  even  when  it  appears  exceedingly  gloomy,  consider- 
ing th?.t  he  will  orde-  mat  crs  arij^ht  ^'  Why  dost  thou  cry  aloun  ? 
is  there  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  counsellor  perished  ?  for  pangs  have 
taken  thee  as  a  woman  in  travail,"  Micha  iv.  9. 

4.  Commend  him  also  to  others  that  they  may  love  him,  and  may 
also  surrender  themselves  t.)  him,  in  order  to  serve  him,  like  the 
spouse,  Song  v.  10—16,  which  had  siich  art  effect,  that  the  daughters 
of  Jerusalem  would  also  seek  him.  Song  vi.  I,  for  "  in  the  multitude 
of  people  is  the  king's  honour,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xiv.  28.  Ought 
not  every  subject  of  the  King  then,  whose  glory  is  the  glory  of  his 
people,  endeavour  to  procure  people  for  him,  and  encouiage  every 
one  to  join  himself  to  this  King  ?  We  ought  not  to  be  content,  that 
we  ourselves  have  been  favoured  and  honoured  by  him,  but  we  ought 
to  bring  others  also  to  him,  as  Andrew  brought  his  brother  Peter, 
and  PhiHp  brought  Nathanael  to  Jesus,  who  also  acknowledged  him 
to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  King  of  Israel,  John  i.  40 — 49.  We 
ought  all  of  us  to  "  bring  forth  twins,  and  there  ought  not  to  be  one 
barren  among  us,"  as  it  is  said  concerning  the  spiritual  sheep, 
Song  Ti.  6. 

5.  Trnimph  and  rejoice  also  in  him,  since  he,  who  is  the  Son  of 
God,  is  also  your  king.  Therefore  the  Lord  said,  Jer.  ix.  23,  24* 
"  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let  the  mighty 
man  g'ory  in  his  might,  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches; 
but  let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  this  that  he  understundeth  and 
knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord."  To  this  ye  are  exhorted,  Psalm 
cxhx.  2.  "  Let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him  ;  let  the  chil- 
dren of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King."  Therefore  he  sends  his  ser- 
vants to  you,  "who  say  to  Zion,  Thy  God  rtigfreth,"  Isaiah  iii.  7.  - 
It  is  true,  his  glory^  and  your  happmess  and  triumphing  in  and 
through  him  are  not  perceived  so  much  at  present ;  but  when  the 
curtains  of  darkness,  of  sin,  adversity  and  mortality  shall  be  drawn,, 
then  will  he  appear  in  all  his  brightness  to  your  joy  :  yea,  *' thea 
will  the  King  say  to  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world."  Amen. 

R  V 


(  290  ) 


THE  INCARNATION 


OF 


THE   SON  OF  GOD 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Philip,  ii.  6,  7.  Who  being  in  the -form  of  God,  thought  it  not  rob- 
bery to  be  equal  with  God :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation, 
and  took  .  pon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  men.