Q,  35.  W/iat  28  the  meaning  of  these  words j  "  I£e  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary  ? 

A.  That  God's  eternal  Son,  who  is  and  continueth  true  and  eter- 
nal God,  took  upon  him  the  very  nature  of  man,  of  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  the  virgin  Mary,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that 
he  might  also  be  tlie  true  seed  of  David,  like  unto  his  brethren  in  all 
things,  sin  excepted. 

Q.  36.  What  firojit  dost  thou  then  receive  by  Christ's  holy  concefi- 
tion  and  nativity  ? 

A.  That  he  is  the  Mediator  ;  and  with  his  innocence  and  perfect 
holiness,  covers  in  the  sight  of  God  my  sins,  wherein  I  was  conceived 
and  brought  forth. 


A, 


.^lONG  the  several  great  promises  of  the  Lord  God  to  his 
ancient  people  concerning  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come,  this  was 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  291 

particularly  emphatical,  that  «  a  Redeemer  should  come  unto  Zion," 
Isaiah  lix.  20.  The  Lord  had  oj^ered  in  the  civil  law,  which  he 
gave  to  Israel,  that  the  nearest  kinsman  should  be  the  redeemer  of 
his  brother,  who  was  therefore  obliged,  besides  other  duties,  to  re- 
deem the  possession  of  his  brother,  when  it  was  sold,  and  also  his 
person  from  slavery,  and  to  avenge  his  blood,  which  was  shed.  The 
Messiah  should  also  be  such  a  Redeemer ;  not  with  respect  to  a 
bodily  redemption,  this  was  too  it^noble  for  him ;  the  redemption 
which  he  obtains  is  «  an  eternal  redemption,"  Heb  ix.  12,  Those 
whom  he  should  redeem  had  lost  their  eternal  inheritance,  they  were 
slaves  to  thse  devil  and  to  bin,  and  therefore  slain  with  respect  to  their 
so*  Is.  If  he  should  then  redeem  them,  he  behoo\ed  to  be  greater 
than  those  redeemers,  yea,  even  their  GikI  and  Lord  :  therefore  the 
Father  promiseth  '-  that  he  would  redeem  his  people  by  the  Lord 
their  God."  irloseai.  7.  He  ought  indeed  to  possess  an  infirtite  power, 
if  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  bind  him.  and  spoil  his 
goods,  thus  taking  vengeance  of  him  :  but  tins  alone  was  not  enough, 
he  brhooved  also  to  pay  the  price  of  redemption,  which  was  more 
precious  than  perishable  things,  silver,  or  gold,  i'  could  be  effected 
only  by  the  precious  blood  of  a  Lamb  without  blemish,  and  without 
spot :  and  it  was  therefore  necessary,  that  he  should  also  be  man, 
and  indeed  man  of  man,  more  especially  since  he  was  obliged  to  be 
the  nearest  kinsman  and  brother,  if  he  should  be  a  Redeemer. 
Therefore  the  Lord,  when  he  promiseth  that  the  Redeemer  should 
come  to  Zion,  intimates  that  he  would  send  him  in  the  flesh,  and 
that  he  should  become  man,  and  that  he  should  therefore  redeem 
Zion,  as  the  ancient  redeemers  redeemed  their  brethren  ;  which  the 
Lord  also  fulfilled,  when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  become  man. 
The  apostle  having  respect  to  this  man-  ner  of  redeeming,  said 
therefore  concerning  him,  Heb.  ii.  11)  14,  15.  "For  both  he  that 
sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one :  for  which 
cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.  For  as  much 
then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same  :  that  he  through  death 
might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil; 
and  deliver  them,  who  through  fear  of  death,  are  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage."  Having  shown  how  necessary  it  was  for  the 
Mediator  and  Redeemer  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in  the 
fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  sevcnteentk  questions,  the  instructor  explain- 
ing the  doctrine  of  redemption,  sho  vs  therefore  that  the  Redeemer 
Jesus  Christ,  is  not  only  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus  very  God,  in  the 
thirteenth  Lord's  day,  but  also  that  he  is  man,  made  like  his  breth= 
ren  in  all  things,  sin  excepted,  ia  this  fourteenth  Lord's  day. 


292       TH^  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOB. 

There  are  two  particulars  here,  that  require  our  explanation, 

I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  incarnation,  Question  35. 

II.  The  advantage  which  results  from  it,  Question  36. 

I.  We  have  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  Christ's  incarnation  in, 
the  thirty-fifih  question  :  with  respect  to  v/hich  we  learn,  (a)  who 
became  incarnate,  or  man,  (b)  the  nature  of  his  manhood,  (c)  of 
wliom  he  received  his  manhood,  (d)  by  whose  operation,  (e)  in  what 
manner,  and  (f )  to  \yhat  end  he  became  incarnate,  or  man. 

A.  It  is  inquired  in  the  first  place  who  became  incarnate  or  man. 
It  is  said  m  general,  that  "  God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,"  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  It  was  not  the  essence  of  God  ;  for  he  who  became  man  is 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  which  could  not  be,  if  the  whole 
essence  became  man :  but  it  was  one  of  the  divine  Persons,  who. 
became  man  :  "  he  who  was  in  the  form  of  God,  and  was  equal  to 
God,  toolvupon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,"  Phil,  ii  6,  7.  But 
it  was  neither  the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Giiost,  who  became  man, 
but  the  Son  only  ;  for  "  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman," 
Gal.  iv.  4.  And  so  the  instructor  saith  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God, 
•who  is  and  continuetb  true  and  eternal  God,  became  man.  He  is 
indeed  God,  co-esscntial  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we 
have  proved  on  the  foregoing-  Lord's  day  ;  it  doth  not  however  follow, 
therefore,  that  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  are  co-essential 
with  the  Son,  became  man,  because  the  Godhead  of  the  Son,  which 
is  also  the  Godhead  of  the  Feather  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  did  not 
become  man,  but  the  Person  of  the  Son.  F^or  although  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  prepared  a  body  for  him,  according  to  Heb.  x. 
5.  Luke  i.  35,  nevertheless  the  Son  alone  took  upon  himself  the 
nature  of  man,  and  united  it  to  himself. 

Although   It  proceeded  only  from  the  free  good  pleasure  of  God, 
that  the  Son  was  made  man,  we  may  however  learn  from  the  con- 
sequences how  well  this  became  God,  and  how  proper  it  was  ;  for,  (a) 
as  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  he  could  be  sent  by  the  Father,  and  also 
himself  send  the  Holy  Spirit,  Gal.  iv.  4,   5,   6.   (b)   As  he  was  the 
personal  Word  of  God,  God  could  speak  by  him  to  us,  and  also  re- 
veal his  secrets  to  us  by  him,  John  i.  1 .  iii.  34.  Heb.  i.  1 .  (c)  As  man 
•was  created  by  him,  therefore   man  could   also  be  new-created  by 
him,  Eph.  ii.  10.  (d)  As  he  is  the  Son  of  God  by  nature,  he  can  also 
make  us  the  sons  of  God  by  grace.  Gal.  iv.  4,  5.  (e)  He  who  is  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  can  restore  us  after  the  image  of  God 
.  Col.  iv.   19.  (f )  Thus   also  the  love  of  God  appears  in  the  highest 
degree,  that  he  sends  his  Son  for  the  salvation  of  sinners,  John 
iii.  16. 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  39ii 

B.The  second  particular  that  requires  our  consideration  with  res- 
pect to  the  incarnation  of  Christ  is  the  nature  of  his  manhood.  Of 
this,  the  instructor  saith,  that  he  took  on  him  the  very  nature  of 
man.  This  was  opposed  by  many  erroneous  spirits  in  the  early 
ages  of  Christianity.  The  Ibllowers  of  Mareion,  Manes  and  Cerdo» 
asserted  that  Christ  was  man  only  in  appearance.  The  Arians  said 
indeed  that  he  had  a  real  body,  but  they  imagined  that  it  was  a  body 
without  a*'soui,  and  that  instead  of  a  human  soul,  an  excellent  spirit 
was  created  for  him,  before  the  creation  of  the  world.  And  the 
Apollinarists  held  that  his  Godhead  served  him  instead  of  a  soul- 
But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  u3  that  he  hath  a  real  and  perfect 
human  nature.     Fcr, 

Ir  He  is  suck  a  man  as  we  are  j  "  in  all  things  IIUq  his  brethren," 
Heb.  ii.  17.  Yea,  he  is  opposed  to  a  mere  appearance,  as  he  him- 
self proved  to  his  apostles,  when  "they  supposed  they  had  seen  a 
spirit,"  Luke  xxiv.  57 — 43. 

2.  He  hath  the  constituent  parts  of  a  man,  to  wit,  a  human  body, 
and  a  human  soul  :  his  body  was  born,  it  grew,  was  seen  and  hand- 
led by  men  ;  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  had  a  soul ;  for  "■  he  came  to 
give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many, "Mate.  xx.  28. 

3.  All  that  can  be  said  of  a  man  as  man,  is  found  in  him  ;  for  be- 
sides his  birth,  growth,  conversation  with  men,  and  other  particulare 
of  this  kind,  he  v/as  also,  like  men,  hungry  and  thirsty,  he  wept> 
complained,  was  weary,  and  rested.  He  had  a  human  understand- 
ini;,  will,  and  affections  ;  he  loved,  v/as  angry,  rejoiced  and  was  sorry* 
as  the  evangelical  historians  inform  us. 

4.  He  was  a  man  of  man.  of  the  same  human  race  with  other 
men  :  "  l^or  he  that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified,  are  all 
of  one  ;  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
took  part  of  the  same,"  Heb.  ii.  11,  14.  Therefore  he  is  also  cal- 
led "the  seed  of  the  woman,"  Gen.  iii.  15,  "the  seed  of  Abraham,'^ 
Gen.  xxii.  18,  compared  with  Gal,  iii.  16.  He  is  said  to  "  have  been 
of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh,"  Rom.  i.  3,  "the  fruit  of 
the  loins  of  David,"  Acts  ii.  30,  "  a  son  of  man,"  Mat.  xvi.  13,  "a 
son  of  Mary,"  Matt.  i.  18.  "He  was  conceived  in  her,"  Matt.  i.  20c 
"  He  is  the  fruit  of  her  body,"  Luke  i.  4.2,  Was  made  of  her," 
Gal.  iv.  4,  and  "  was  born  of  her,"  Matt.  i.  16, 

What  can  be  objected  against  this,  but  what  is  exceedingly  tri- 
fling, as  that  "  he  was  sent  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  Rom. 
viii.  3,  and  that  "  he  was  made  like  men,"  Philip,  ii.  7.  But  it  is 
easy  to  comprehend,  that  this  doth  not  disprove,  but  rather  evince 
that  he  was  a  real  man,  as  he  \yas  in  ail  things  made  like  us,   Heb= 


294.        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

ii.  ir,  and  if  it  assert  any  unlikeness  to  us,  it  is  only  with  respect  to 
sill,  which  he  had  not,  although  he  was  considered  as  a  sinner,  and 
treated  as  such,  as  his  Father  also  sent  him,  that  he  might  be  a  sacri- 
fice for  sin  ;  for  "  him  who  knew  no  sin  he  made  lo  be  sin  for  us," 
2  Cor.  V.  2 1 . 

C.  The  third  particular  that  must  be  considered  with  respect  (o 
t^is  incarnation  is  of  wliom  he  received  his  manhood.  The  catechism 
saith,  "of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  virgin  Mary."  The  Valentin- 
ians  of  old  said,  as  the  Menonites  do  still,  that  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  was  not  born  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Mary,  but  through 
her,  and  that  he  brought  it  with  him  from  heaven  of  the  seed  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Word,  or  from  elsewhere,  we  do  not  know  whence, 
and  that  he  only  passed  through  Mary,  as  water  through  a  conduit, 
and  as  the  sun  shines  through  glass.  The  ^iocinians  assert  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  suppUed  tlie  place  of  a  natural  Father,  and  that  he  crea- 
ted and  pro  Uiced  a  new  substance  in  Mary  :  but  then  (1)  Christ  was 
not  in  all  things  like  us,  nor  man  of  man,  contrary  to  what  we  have 
proved  before.  (2)  Then  also  the  genealogy  of  Ciirist  could  not  be 
refet-red  to  Mary,  Matt.  i.  and  Luke  3.  (3)  Neither  was  he  then, 
according  to  his  human  nature,  without  father,  contrary  to  Heb.  vii. 
3.  (4)  ivloreover,  the  guilt  of  man  might  not  be  punished  in  any 
other  besides  the  human  nature,  as  we  have  proved  on  the  sixteenth 
question. 

It  is  indeed  said,  that  "  he  came  down  from  heaven,"  John  vi. 
38,  and  that  "  he  is  the  Lord  from  heaven,"  1  Cor  xv.  47,  but  this 
doth  not  mean  that  he  brought  his  manhood  from  heaven,  but  (a) 
that  his  Godhead  manifested  itself,  present  in  his  manhood  in  a  par- 
ticular manner,  when  he  assumed  bis  manhood  :  "  For  the  Word 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father)  John  i.  14,  as  it  is  said 
that  the  Lord  God  came  down  from  heaven,  when  he  manifested 
himself  present  any  where  in  a  glorious  manner,  Exod.  xix.  20. 
Neh.  xix.  13.  Or  we  may  understand  by  it  (b)  the  original  and 
institution  of  his  office,  which  was  not  of  men,  but  from  heaven,  as 
it  is  said  of  the  baptism  of  John,  that  "  it  was  from  heaven,"  Matt. 
xxi.  2j. 

lie  received  his  manhood  of  Mary  without  any  previous  inter- 
vn  se  of  her  with  a  man,  for  she  was  a  virgin,  and  conceived,  bore 
and  bi'ought  forth  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  as  a  virgin  without  knowing 
man.  See  Matt.  i.  18.  This  was  not  less  necessary  than  it  was 
true,  not  only  because  it  was  foretold,  Isaiah  vii.  15,  *'  Behold  a  vir- 
gin shall  conceive,  and  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  c:dl  his  name  Imman-^ 


,      XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  295 

uel,"  to  which  the  an^el  also  appealed,  and  referred  Joseph,  the  be- 
trothed hubbaiid  of  Mary,  when  he  suspected  her,  Malt.  i.  23.  But 
it  was  also  necesrary  that  he  should  recei/e  his  manhood  of  a  virgin, 
because  he  sliouid  be  born  holy,  and  without  original  sin  :  Christ 
should  be  "that  holy  thing,  which  should  be  born  of  her,"  Luke  i. 
35.  The  reason  of  winch  was  not  that  the  virgin  had  not  any  origin- 
al sin,  as  the  Papists  without  any  reason  pretend  ;  but  the  reason  of 
Christ's  holy  birtti  of  the  virgin  Was,  that  he  was  thus  born  out  of 
the  broken  covenant  of  works,  which  transmits  original  sin  by  the 
intercourse  of  the  man  and  woman  to  the  posterity  of  Adam.  This 
is  not  so  difficult  to  understand,  if  we  consider  that  Adam  and  Eve 
received  the  marriage  law,  and  the  blessing,  that  they  should  "  be 
fruitful  and  multiply,"  while  they  were  in  the  covenant  of  works, 
Gen  i.  28,  and  hence  all  men  should  be  born  in  that  covenant  of 
works,  and  thus  all  men  since  the  fall  are  born  nnder  the  breach  of 
that  covenant  in  iniquity,  and  conceived  in  sin«  Therefore  because 
the  Saviour  was  born  of  a  virgin,-  who  had  not  any  fellowship  with  a 
man,  it  is  evident  that  he  was  born  out  of  the  covenant  of  works, 
under  which  all  other  men  are  born  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  mar- 
riage. And  thus  Christ  cannot  be  reckoned  under  Adam  in  the  cov- 
enant of  works  ;  wherefore  he  is  also  opposed  to  Adam  in  this  re- 
spect, I  Cor.  XV.  45,  47. 

D.  But  how  could  this  be  ?  Mary  also  proposed  this  difficulty, 
when  Gabriel  brouglit  her  the  tidings,  that  she  should  conceive, 
L>uke  4.  34,  25,  "  And  Mary  said  to  the  angel,  how  shall  this  be, 
seeing  I  know  not  a  man  ?  and  the  angel  answered,  and  said  unto 
her,  the  floly  Ghost  siiall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the 
Highest  shall  overshadow  thee."  The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
this  matter  was,  ( 1 )  that  he  formed  and  disposed,  in  an  extraordi- 
nary and  superordinary  manner,  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  of  the 
seed  of  Mary,  and  thus  he  was  conceived  in  Mary,  born  and  brought 
forth  by  her  without  miscarriage.  (2)  The  Holy  Ghost  also  sancti- 
fied him,  by  forming  him  in  the  image  of  God,  that  he  who  should 
be  born  ot  Mary  might  be  holy,  and  also  by  separating  and  disposing 
him  in  his  Father's  name  for  a  suitable  sacrifice  :  so  Paul  considers 
this  matter,  Heb  x.  5.  (3)  Many  also  affirm  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
united  the  human  nature  from  the  time  of  its  conception,  to  the  di- 
vine nature :  but  we  rather  consider  this  as  a  personal  act  of  the 
Son,  who  united  his  human  nature  to  himself,  as  we  will  see  hereaf- 
ter, more  particularly. 

E.  In  what  manner  did  the  Son  of  God  become  man  ?  the  cate- 
chism saith  that  « th»  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  is,  and   continueth 


5?96        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

true  and  eternal  God,  took  upon  himself  the  very  nature  of  man." 
He  did  not  become  a  man  as  other  men  do,  who  had  no  manner  of 
existence  before :  but  he  who  was  before  true  and  eternal  God,  and 
coniinueth  such,  became  also  man.  Not  by  a  changing  of  his  God- 
head into  the  manhood,  as  the  Menonitcs  imagine  ;  for  his  Godhead 
5s  unchaiM^eable.  James  i.  17.  "  The  Word  indeed  .became  flesh," 
according  to  John  i.  14,  but  we  do  not  read  that  it  was  changed  into 
flcsh  :  the  ^vord  "  became  "  doth  not  always  intimate  a  change  ; 
lor  otnerwise  the  body  of  Adam,  which  was  formed  oi  the  dust  of 
the  earth,  and  "  became  a  living  soul,"  Gen.  ii.  7y  was  changed  into 
a  living  soul;  and  "Christ,  who  became  a  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  13^ 
would  have  been  changed  into  a  curse  ;  but  the  Son  of  God  became 
man  by  taking  upon  himself  the  nature  of  man,  and  uniting  it  in  the 
strictt;st  mar^.ner  to  his  divine  nature. 

We  must  consider  this  union  somewhat  more  particularly,  and 
must  take  special  care,  that  we  do  not  misunderstand  this  matter, 
as  the  smallest  misconception  of  it  is  exceedingly  mischievous  and 
pernicious.  We  must  therefore  know  that  this  union  of  the  two 
natures  in  ChHst  is  not  an  essential  union,  like  that  of  the  three  Per- 
sons in  the  Go  ihead  ;  for  then  there  would  be  but  one  essence  or 
nature,  and  two  Persons  in  Chiist,  whereas  we  find  two  natures  in 
him,  and  only  one  Person,  since  there  is  but  "one  Mediator,  as 
there  is  but  one  God,"  1  Tim.  ii.  5.  Moreover,  the  union  of  the 
two  natures  in  Christ  is  hot  a  physical  union,  like  that  of  the  soul  and 
body,  which  beinu:  physically  united  to  each  other,  make  one  person ; 
for  he  was  a  person  before  he  became  man.  Neither  is  this  union,  a 
merely  relative  union,  consisting  in  the  love  of  the  Godhead  to  the 
human  nature,  disposing  the  Godhead  to  assist  the  human  nature, 
'-md  show  kindness  to  it,  as  the  husband  is  united  to  the  wife,  and 
Christ  to  the  church  ;  for  then  there  would  be  two  persons,  as  well 
AS  two  natures  in  Christ,  and  we  should  have  twb  Mediators,  contrary 
to  1  Tim.  ii.^* 

This  was  the  opinion  of  Nestorius,  bishop  of  Constantinople  ; 
but  it  -vVaS  condemned  by  the  great  council  of  Ephesiis,  in  the  year 
431.  In  opposition  to  his  opinion  it  was  c^etermined,  that  the  union 
of  the  two  natures  was  czr//ar:'/'tf5,  "  indivisible,"  and  ac/^om/o.?,  "insep- 
arable," and  thus  that  there  were  not  two  divisible  and  separable  per- 
sons in  the  Mediator.  Eutyches.  Abbot  of  Constantinople,  fell,  from 
an  excess  of  opposition  to  Nestorius,  to  another  extreme,  for  he 
taught  that  the  two  natures  of  Christ,  and  their  properties  were  mix- 
ed, so  that  Christ,  who  had  two  natures  before  they  were  united, 
^as,  after  they  were  united,  no  longer  such  a  man  as  we  are.     He 


T 

v/as  condemned  for  this  opinion  in  the  general  council  of  Chalcedon, 
in  the  year  451,  and  in  order  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  this  union, 
it  was  said,  it  was  atrefitos^  "  unchangeable,"  and  a-mnchutos^  «  unmix- 
ed." And  they  signified  thus,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  incarna- 
tion continued  what  he  was,  namely  God,  and  became  what  he  was 
not,  namely  man ;  for  otherwise  his  Godhead  would  have  been  chan- 
ged into  the  manhood,  and  the  manhood  into  the  Godhead. 

We  say  then  with  the  catholic  church,  that  this  union  was  a  per- 
sonal and  hypostatical  union,  that  is,  the  divine  Person  took  upon 
himself  the  human  nature,  and  continued  one  Person  :  we  have 
shown  on  the  eighth  Lord's  day  that  a  person  is  an  intelligent  sub- 
stance, by  which  he  is  individually  what  he  is,  without  constituting 
a  part  of  another.  We  must  now  know  that  the  human  nature  is 
not  an  individual  person,  and  that  it  doth  not  svbsist  individually, 
but  that  it  subsists  in,  and  by  the  personality  of  the  Son  of  God  : 
not  that  the  personality  of  the  ^on  of  God  is  communicated  to  his 
manhood,  as  the  Lutherans  suppose ;  for  the  personality  and  self- 
mibsistence  a;  e  incommunicable  :  but  that  the  divine  nature,  consti- 
tuting the  human  nature  in  its  person,  causeth  it  to  subsist ;  for 
otherwise  the  several  phrases  used  with  respect  to  this  matter  will  be 
unintelligible,  as  John  i.  14.  *' The  Word  was  made  flesh."  Rom. 
viii.  3.  "  God  sent  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  Gal.  iv.- 
4.  ''Made  of  a  woman,'*  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  *^  God  was  manifest  in 
the  flesh,  Philip  ii.  6,  7.  **  Who  being  in  the  form  of  God  thought 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion, and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant." 

This  personal  union  is  illustrated  also  by  an  observation  of  the 
consequences  of  it,  which  are  three  : 

\,  That  from  this  union  follows  a  communion  of  the  properties  of 
both  natures,  which  the  person  hath  by  virtue  of  the  union  of  the 
two  natures.  This  doth  not  imply,  that  the  divine  attributes  of  om- 
nipotence, omniscience,  omnipresence,  vivification  and  adorableness, 
are  communicated  to  the  manfeood,  as  the  Lutherans  imagine  ;  for 
the  manhood  of  Christ  is  not  capable  of  divine  attributes,  and  this 
would  make  the  manhood  a  God.  In  this  manner  the  divine  attri- 
butes are  incommunicable;  if  this  followed  from  the  personal  union, 
not  a  few  only  of  the  divine  attributes  would  be  communicated  to 
the  manhood,  but  all  of  them,  because  the  manhood  is  united  to  the 
-^vhole  Person  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  but  this  is  to  be  understood  in 
such  a  manner,  that  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  doth  perfectly  pos« 
sess  the  properties  of  the  divine  and  human  natures.  This  hath 
occasioned  a  vanstv  of  phrases,  to  wit,  that  which   is  proper  to 


^98        THE  INCARNATION  Ot  THE  SON  OF  GOt). 

him  with  respect  to  his  Person,  is  ascribed  to  hjm  with  respect  to 
the  one  or  the  other  of  his  natures,  and  what  is  i  roper  to  him  with 
respect  to  ihe  one  nature,  is  ascribed  to  him  with  respect  to  the 
other,  or  to  his  Person.  We  may  say*  for  instance  of  his  Person, 
that  Christ  is  eternal,  was  born  m  time,  is  our  rij^hteousness  :  with 
respect  to  liis  divine  nature,  we  can  say  that  Christ  who  is  God,  is  in- 
finite, the  Lord  of  glory  was  crucified,  God  hath  boui^ht  his  church 
with  his  own  blood,  I  Cor.  ii.  8.  Acts  xx.  28.  We  may  say  also 
•vrith  respect  to  his  human  nature,  that  Christ  the  man  died,  is  in 
heaven,  John  iii.  13,  is  Mediator,  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  All  which  is  unintel- 
ligible withou'.  a  respect  to  this  personal  union.  But  we  cannot  use 
these  phi'ases  In  ihe  abstract ;  for  we  cannot  say  that  the  Godhead  of 
Christ  was  crucified,  that  his  manliood  was  in  l^eaven,  while  he  was 
on  earth,  because  then  the  Godhead  would  necessarily  be  the  man- 
hood, «nd  tlie  manhood  the  Godhead. 

2.  From  this  personal  union  follows  also  the  communion  of  the 
works  and  actions  of  both  natures  ;  by  which  we  understand  that 
both  natures  co-operate  iti  that  one  Person  in  the  same  work  of  re- 
demption, so  th.it  we  have  here  (a')  a  working  person  of  the  Media- 
tor, (b)  a  work  of  redemption,  and  (c)  a  twofold  principle,  his  divine 
and  human  nature,  which  do  each  contribute  their  proper  share  to 
the  work  of  redemption,  the  manhood  suffers,  and  the  Godhead  adds 
an  infinite  value  to  it,  Acts  xx.  28.  Whence  it  is  easy  to  understand 
tl)at  he  is  Mediator  according;  to  both  natures. 

3  The  third  consequence  of  this  personal  union  is,  that  many 
clorious  shifts  of  §f race  arc  communicated  to  the  mmhood  ;  and  par- 
ticularly, that  it  is  dignified  with  a  personal  union  with  the  Godhead, 
and  is  in  consequence  of  this  become  endued  with  exalted  wisdom, 
perfect  holiness,  power  and  dignity  above  all  men  and  angels.  See 
all  this  Luke  i    35      John  iii.  34.     Psalm  xlv.  7,     l^hilip.  iii.  6—9. 

F.  We  must  finally  inquire  for  what  en.-l  the  Son  of  God  became 
man.  The  threat  end  was  that  the  sinner  might  by  him  be  reconci- 
led to  God.  and  saved  :  the  whole  word  of  God  aims  at  this  only, 
and  the  name  Jesus  was  given  to  him  on  this  account.  It  is  there- 
fore an  idle  assertion  of  the  schoolmen  among  the  Papists,  of  the  So- 
cinians  and  Osiander,  that  Christ  would  have  become  man,  although 
man  had  not  sinned.  But  how  do  they  know  this  ?  have  they  been 
in  the  council  of  Ciod  .>  no  :  do  they  find  it  in  the  word  of  God  ?  the 
word  of  God  saith  nothing  of  it,  It  is  then  an  idle  fiction  of  their 
own  brains. 

But  inasmuch  as  the  instructor  adds  this  great  end  to  the  advan- 
tages of  the  incarnation  of  Christ  in  the  thirty-sixth  question,  there- 


S6.  2V9 

fore  he  shows  in  the  thirty-fifth  question  the  end  why  he  became  in^ 
carnate  particularly  of  the  virgin  Mary      Which  ends  are, 

1,  "  That  he  might  be  the  seed  of  David."  It  is  here  suppost-d 
thai- Mary  was  of  .the  seed  of  David,  and  indeed  truly  ;  for  she  was 
♦wo  ways  of  the  seed  of  David. (a)  By  her  marriage,  as  she  was 
espoused  to  Joseph,  who  wa?  of  the  family  of  David  by  Solomon, 
according  to  the  genealogy  of  Matthew,  Matt.  i.  And  thus  Mary 
■was  also  reckoned  of  the  seed  of  David,  because  women  were  con- 
sidered in  genealogical  accounts,  as  comprehended  in  tfie  men. 
But  she  was  not  only  in  this  way  of  the  seed  of  David,  but  al^o  by 
natural  descent,  (b)  in  consequence  of  lur  birth  of  Heli  according  to 
Luke  iii.  23,  who  was  indeed  the  father-in-law  of  Joseph  ;  but  the 
proper  father  of  his  spouse  Mary.  Now  Heli,  the  father  of  Mary, 
was  a  descendant  of  David  by  Nathan,  I^u*ke  iii. 

This  is  not  denied  by  the  words    '  thai    Elizabeth,  t'.e  cousin    of 
Mary,  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,"  Luke  i.  5,  and  so  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi,  and  not  oft  e  family  of  David,  and  of  th.  tribe  of  Judah  : 
from  which  it  would  seem  to  fellow,  that  Mary  wus  not  of  the  family 
of  David.     But  we  must  know  that  Mury  could  very  well  be  of  the 
family  of  David,  although  Elizabeth  were  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron: 
for  the  mother  or  griind-mother  of  .Viary   might   have  been   of  the 
family  of  Aaron,  and  have   married  a  husband  of  David's  family,  of 
whom  Mary  was  then  born  in  the  family  of  David.     Or   it  might 
have  been,  that  the  motl)er,  or  grand-mother  of  Elizabeth  v/as  of  the 
family  of  David,  and  married  to  a  husband  of  Aaron's  family,    from 
•whom  Elizabeth  then  sprang.     And  therefore  it  is  no   contradiction 
•when  it  is  sa  dr  that  Elizabeth  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  of  the 
tribe  of  Levi,  Mid  Mary  of  the  family  of  David,  and  tribe  of  Judah. 
If  any  one  ask  vviiethe-  the  families  and  tribes  might  intermarry,  we 
say,  yes  ;  for  *' .  aron  of  the  tiibe  of  Levi,    married    the    sister   of 
Nahshon,  who  was  a  prince  of  tlie  children  of  Judah,"  Exod.  vi.  22. 
I  Cijron,  ii.    10.     The  priest  Jthoiada  had  the  sister  of  the  king  of 
Judah  to  wife,  2  CiiroD.  xxii.   11     and  David,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah^ 
had  the   daughter  of  Saul,  who  was  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,   to 
wife.     It  was  ordered  indeed,  Numb,  xxxvi.  6,  that  the  daughters  of 
Zelophehad  should  marry  only  in  a  family  of  the  tribe  of  their  fa- 
ther :  but  this  was  only  a  special   order   for  daughters   who  were 
heiresses,  and  not  for  all,  who,  having  brethren,  did  not  inherit,  and 
who,  by  marrying  into  another  tribe,  did  not  bring  the    possession  of 
their  father  to  another  trilie,  as  daughters,  who  were  heiresses,  would 
do  if  they  married  into  another  tribe  '  ?.nd  thersfore  they  were   for- 
bidden to  marry  out  of  their  tribe. 


300        THE  INCARNx\TION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

Whence  it  therefore  follows,  that  the   Lord   Jesus  was  the  true 
seed  of  David,  and  thus  also   of  the   tribe  of  Judah,  Heb.  vii.  14. 
God  the  Lord  had  promised  David,  "  that  he  would  raise  up  the  Mes- 
siah of  his  loins,  and  that  he  should  sit  upon  his  throne,"  Psalm  cxxxii. 
1 1.  Acts  ii.  30.  That  this  promise  might  now  be  fulfilled,  the  Son  of 
God  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  the  virgin  Mary, 
that  he  might  sit  upon  the  throne  of  D^.vid  :  therefore   the  angel 
said  to  Mary,  when  he  brought  her  the  tidings,  that  she  should  con- 
ceive and  bear  the  Messiah,  Luke  i.  52,  33,  *'  He  shall  be  grefet,and 
shall  be  called  the  vSon  of  the  Highest  ;  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give 
him  the  throne  of  his  father  David  ;  and   he  shall   reign  over   the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end." 
2.  The  second  end  which  the   instructor  mentioneih  is,  "  that  he 
might  be  like  his  brethren  in  all  things,  sin  excepted."     The  breth- 
ren of  Jesus  are  not  here  his  natural  brethren,  born  of  Mary ;  for 
we  do  not  find  that  Mary  ever  had  children  after   Jesus.     James   is 
indeed  called  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  Gal.  i.    19,   as   also   others, 
Matt  xiii.  35.     But  these  were,  according  to  the  style  of  scripture, 
only  cousins  after  the  flesh.     All  men  who  have   sprung  with  him 
from  Adam  by  natural    generation,   are  also  his  brethren  after  the 
flesh,  Luke  iii.  23 — 38.     Acts  xvii.  26,  but  they  are  not  his  spirit- 
ual brethren  ;  the  elect  only,  who   are  sanctified,  to   whom  he  de- 
clares the  name  of  the  Lord,  whom  !^c  receives  as  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham, and  redeems  after  the  example  of  the  ancient  redeemers,  are 
his  spiritual  brethren,   Heb.   ii.    11  — 15.     It   behooved   him  to  be 
like  them  in    all  things,    if  he  should   redeem  them,  as  the  apostle 
saith,  Heb,  ii.  17,  which  we   have    also  shown    upon  the    sixteenth 
question.     Since  now  he  took  upon  him  the  true  human  nature,  of 
the  flesh  and  blood  of  Mary,  therefore  he  v/as  in  all   things   like  the 
brethren  ;  yea,  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,"  Rom.  viii.  29, 
and  therefore  also  his    Father's  heir,  Heb.  i.  12.     "Of  whom  the 
whole  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth   is   named,"  Eph.  iii.  15,  to 
whom  it  also  belongs  to  rule  over  his  brethren,   Psalm  Ixxxix.  27, 
for  these  things  were  the  privileges  of  the  firstborn. 

But  when  he  is  said  to  be  like  his  brethren  in  all  things,  "  sin  is 
excepted  ;"  which  we  have  also  proved  before,  when  we  shoived  that 
he  was  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  out  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works. 
"We  maintain  this,  and  also  that  he  could  not  sin,  against  the  patrons 
of  freewill,  who  imagine  that  he  could  sin  ;  observe,  so  exceedingly 
are  they  enamoured  of  their  darling  freewill,  that  they  will  reproach 
even  the  Son  of  God  with  it.     But  how  could  he  sin,  v/hen  he  was 


XIV.  LORD'S  BAY,  Q.  35,  36.  30  i 

conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  united  to  the  divine  nature,  and 
had  received  the  Spirit  without  measure  ? 

II.  The  advantai;es  of  Christ's  incarnation  are,  according  to  the 
thirty  sixth  question,  these  two : 

1.  «That  he  is  our  Mediator."  He  is  a  Mediator  not  only  of 
intercession,  but  also  of  reconciliation,  as  it  behooved  him  to  be,  ac- 
cording to  what  we  have  taught  on  the  fifteenth  question.  The 
Mediator  behooved  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  as  we  have 
shown  upon  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  questions.  Since  now 
the  Son  of  Cod  took  upon  himself  the  true  human  nature  in  one 
person,  therefore  he  is  also  the  Mediator  of  believers  ;  *♦  for  there 
is  one  God,  there  is  also  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the 
man  Ciirist  Jesus  :  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,"  1  Tim.  ii. 
5,  6.  This  is  truly  a  great  adv  ntagc  and  profit  to  his  brethren  ; 
they  were  indeed  alienated  from  God,  sin  had  separated  them  and 
their  God,  they  could  not  draw  near  to  him,  t'  make  reconciliation 
for  their  guilt,  or  to  ask  any  thing  of  him  ;  he  was  a  consuming  fire 
to  them.  But  behold,  the  Lord  God  himself  gives  tliem  his  Son, 
that  he  may  make  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  take  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  become  their  brother  and  so  their  mediator,  who 
reconciles  them  to  their  Judge,  entreats  his  Father,  that  they  may 
not  go  down  into  the  pit,  but  may  draw  near  to  him  vmh  confidenccj 
both  in  their  state  of  grace  and  of  glory:  "If  any  man  sin, 
we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous. 
And  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  I  John  ii.  1,  2.  See,  believ- 
ers, what  is  said  on  this  t>ubject  for  your  profit,  Rom,  viii.  33,  34, 
Heb.  X.  19—22. 

2.  The  second  advantage  of  Christ's  incarafition  is,  "  that  he  with 
his  innocence  covers  in  the  sight  of  God  our  sins,  wherein  we  were 
conceived  and  brought  forth."  We  have  explained  and  proved  on 
the  seventh  question,  that  every  man  is  conceived  and  brought  forth 
in  sin.  These  sins,  and  also  actual  sins  proceeding  from  them  are 
offences,  which  deserve  punishment,  and  are  recorded  before  God, 
that  he  may  recompense  them.  See  this  Isaiah  Ixv.  6,  Yea,  "  he 
S'jts  them  before  him  m  the  light  of  his  countenance,"  Psalm  xc.  3. 
But  Christ  the  Mediator  interposeth  between  God  and  the  sinner, 
and  thus  covers  and  hides  his  sins  from  the  face  of  God  by  taking 
them  away,  so  that  the  Lord  God  cannot  behold  them,  so  as  to  be 
wroth  on  account  of  them,  and  to  rebuke  the  sinner.  The  Mediator 
doth  this  "  v/ith  his  innocence  and  perfect  holiness."  This  innocence 
and  perfect  holiness  of  Christ  must  be  viewed,  either  as  a  requisite 
ouahfication  of  the  Mediator,  as  we  havf  ta\;ght  on  the  fifteenth 


S02        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

question :  or  as  meritorious,  because  his  holy  birth  is  advantageous 
to  beUevers,  as  well  as  his  sufferings.  See  Luke  ii.  10,  1 1.  The  law 
demands  a  holy  birth,  as  well  as  a  holy  life.     Whrn  a  man  hath  not 
this,  the  law  curses  him    But  the   iVledialor  substitutes  his  holy, 
though  humble  incarnaiion,  in  the  stead  of  it     Or  we  must  consider 
the  Mediator's  innocent  and  perfectly  hgly  manhood,  us  an  acceptable 
offering  to  God,  which  he  should  "  give  to  the  Father,as  an   offering 
and  a  sacrifice  for  a  sweet  smeUing  savour,"  Eph.  v.  2,  by  which  our 
sins  should  be  covered  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  Paul  teacheth  us  most 
emphatically,  Htb.  x.  i — 18.     And  this  is  also  a  great  advantage 
to  the  brethren  of  Christ.     For  noihing  is  more  grievous  to  them, 
than  that  their  sins  stand  uncancelled  in  the  sight  of  God,  yea,  they 
also  see  them  then  in  their  dreadful  nature,  and  the  wrath  of  God  on 
account  of  them  :  "  '^'•'y  sin  is   ever  before  me,"  said  David,  Psalm 
li.  3     Their  iniquities  do  then  go  over  their  heads,  and  as  a  heavy 
burthen,  become  too  heavy  for  them  ;  yea   God's  hand  presses,  and 
is  heavy  on  them  day  and  night,  and  thei    moisture  is  turned  into 
the  drought  of  summer,  and  with   Job  they  must  comp»lain  to  the 
Lord.     "  Thou  writest  bitter  things  against  me,  and  makest  me  to 
possess  the   iniquities  of  my  youth,"  Job  xiii.  26.     But  when  their 
sins  are  covered  m  the  sight  of  God,  then  ?11  their  distress  and  per- 
turbation  ceases,  a  won  lerfu'ly  sweet  and  tranquil  peace  and  calm 
takes  place  in  the  soul,  and  she  is  compassed  with  joyful  songs  of 
deliverance  ;  the  Lord  takes  pleasure  in  his  people,  and  they  behold 
his  countenance  with  joy.  Therefore  David  saith  with  reason,  "  Bles- 
sed is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered," 
Psalm  xxxii.  1.  Since  now  this  happiness  is  procured  by  the  holy 
incarnation  of  '..hrist,  therefore  this  is  of  the  greatest  advantage. 

This  then  is  the  faith  of  Christians,  that  the  Son  of  God  was  made 
man,  and  indeed  for  such  an  advantageous  purpose,  according  to  the 
■word  of  God,  which  proposes  him  thus,  as  the  object  of  faith  :  to 
■whom  the  ancients  looked,  John  viii.  56,  and  this  is  a  fundamental 
a,rticle  of  the  faith,  1  John  iv.  2,  3. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  that  which  is  of  the  f,reatest  concern  to  you,  and 
^"rtiich  is  also  of  special  importance,  is,  whether  ye  too  arc  paitakers 


$,  36.  303 

of  the  advantages  of  Christ's  incarnation,  and  whether  he  is.youp 
iBrother  and  P*^ediator,  who  with  his  innocence  and  perfect  holiness 
covers  your  sins.  Do  ye  believe  this  for  yourselves  ?  do  ye  say, 
yea  ? 

1.  Have  your  sins  then  been  discovered  to  you,  so  that  ye  see 
them  clearly  in  the  sight  of  God,  not  merely  with  a  simple  appre- 
hension, knowing  that  ye  are  sinners,  but  so  that  ye  see  them  in 
'  yourselves,  and  in  their  circumstances,  ye  have  a  clear  view  of  them, 
ye  are  tioubled,  grieved  and  concerned  on  account  of  them  ;  ye  do 
not  cover  them,  nor  palliate  your  guilt  with  the  fool,  but  confess 
them  wilUiigly  before  the  Lord,  and  earnestly  desire  that  they  may 
be  covered  in  the  sight  of  God  with  the  innocence  and  perfect  holi* 
ness  of  Christ.  If  it  be  thus  with  you,  then  Christ  came  for  your 
salvation  ;  "  For  the  Son  of  man  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was   lost,"    Matt.  xvii.  11.    See  also  Matt.  ix.  13.    1  Tim,   i.    15. 

Or  do  ye  know  nothing  of  this  ?  and  do  ye  endeavour  to  cover 
your  sins  ?  are  ye  unwilling  that  tiiey  should  be  exposed  to  your 
view,  and  doth  such  an  exposure  provoke  you  to  anger  ?  and  when 
your  conscience  convinceth  and  distresses  you,  do  ye  then  stifle  it, 
and  endeavour  to  divert  your  anxiety  by  pursuing  this  or  that  amuse- 
ment, or  by  indulging  yourselves  in  abominations,  or  by  doing 
some  duty,  or  by  flattering  yourselves  "  that  ye  shall  have  peace, 
though  ye  walk  in  the  imagination  of  your  hearts  ;"  know  then  that 
*'  the  Lord  will  not  spare  you,  but  that  his  anger  and  jealousy  will 
smoke  against  you,  Deui.  xxix.  19,  20. 

2.  Ye  who  think  that  Christ  became  incarnate  for  you,  and  who 
are  sometimes  troubled  on  account  of  your  sins,  do  ye  also  turn  from 
your  sins  ?  do  ye  part  with  them  ?  do  ye  cast  them  away,  as  a 
menstruous  cloth  ?  and  do  ye  say  to  every  one  of  them,  and  not  only 
to  this  and  that  one,  get  thee  hence  ?  do  ye  turn  to  the  Lord  heartily, 
sincerely  and  continually,  that  ye  may  keep  his  commandments,  for 
ever  ?  and  when  your  iniquities  take  hold  of  you,  ;ind  cast  you  down, 
do  ye  rise  up  again,  mourn  and  fight  against  them  ?  then  the  incar- 
nation of  Christ  is  profitable  to  you  ;  for  he  was  promised  for  you, 
Isaiah  lix.  20.  "  The  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto  them 
that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob,  saith  the  Lord." 

But  are  ye  still  the  samt:  that  ye  always  were,  without  any  change 
for  the  better  ?  or  have  ye  in  some  measure  forsaken  this  and  that 
sin,  while  ye. retain  knowingly  and  wilfully,  without  opposition,  your 
constitutional  sin,  as  a  delicate  morsel  under  your  tongue  ?  ye  will 
not  be  just  the  most  wicked  wretches,  but  moral  and  devaut ;  and 


504        THE  INCARNATION  Or  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

ye  will  not  turn  tnily  and  wholly  to  the  Lord  ;  how  can  ye  then 
thrnkthal  ye  will  receive  proSt  from  the  incarnation  of  Christ  ? 
^  3.  Ye  who  believe  that  the  man  Christ  Jesus  is  your  brother  and 
mediator,  who  covers  your  sins  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  how  did  he  be- 
come your  brother  and  mediator?  have  ye  united  yourselves  to  him,  ^ 
and  procured  him  to  "  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith  ?"  Eph.  iii.  17, 
have  vc  received  him,  and  obtained  power  to  become  the  sons  of 
God«  and  so  the  brethren  of  Christ,  and  to  obtain  reconciliation  by 
his  blood,  because  your  sins  are  covered  in  the  sight  of  Goi  ?  then 
it  is  evident  that  he  is  iruly  your  brothei,  according  to  John  i.  12. 
Rom.  iii.  25. 

Or  do  ye  know  nothing  of  this  by  an  actual  experience  ?  Ye  know 
indeed  thai  we  must  believe  in  him,  and  that  we  are  united  to  him 
by  faith,  t)ut  ye  have  never  yet  exercised  this  act  of  faith  by  receiv- 
ing him,  though  he  came  to  you  by  the  offer  of  the  gospel ;  there- 
fore ye  are  yet  "  without  Christ,"  Eph.  ii.  12. 

4.  Are  ye  certain,  that  the  great  benefit  of  the  incarnation  of 
Christ  belongs  to  you  ?  are  ye  then  become  like  him  even  conforma- 
ble to  his  image,  as  he  became  like  you  by  taking  upon  himself 
the  human  nature  ?  have  ye  been  conceived  and  born  again  of  his 
Spirit,  so  that  he  hath  been  formed  in  you  ?  as  he  separated  himself 
fi'om  whatever  was  sinful,  and  dedicated  himself  to  God,  that  he 
might  live  in  and  for  him,  and  to  his  service,  have  ye  also  thus  died 
to  yourselves  r  and  is  your  life  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  ?  then  he 
is  also  your  brother  and  mediator,  and  covers  in  the  sight  of  God 
all  your  sins.  And  so  ye  have  the  evidence,  that  "  God  fore-ordained 
you  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,"  Rom.  viii.  29.  Yea, 
»'  that  which  is  true  in  him,  is  also  true  in  you,"  1  John  ii.  8. 

But  if  it  be  not  thus  v^'ith  you,  and  if  ye  be  still  conformed  to  the 

world,  and  act  as  this  and   that  worldling  acts,   and   think  that  it  is 

lawful  for  you,'  because  this  and  that  one  doth  so,  and  if  ye  have  no 

more  of  Christianity  than  the  name,  and  the  outward  profession,  with 

a  fev/  religious   ceremonies  ;  how  can  ye  then  think  that  Christ  be- 

cime   incarnate  for  your  good  !  ye  have  indeed  not  one  solid  proof 

t'i'  this  ;  and  did  he  not  become  incarnate  for  your  good,  it  will  then 

be  to  your  harm,  and  will  greatly  aggravate  your  sins  ?  Hear  him 

say  himself,  John  xv.  22.  "If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  to  them, 

they  had  not  had  sin  ;  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin.  He 

is  set  as  well  for  a  fall,  as  for  a  rising  again,"  Luke  ii.  34.    See  only 

how  dreadful  and  intolerable  his  coming  will  be  to  them,  who  are 

straiit^ers  to  him,   Mai.  iii.  2.     Doth  this  not  affect  you,  consider 

what  ye  will  do,  when  his  second  coming  will  awaken  and  consume 


Xr 

you :  for  concerning  this  we  can  say.  "  Behold,  the  day  comcth 
that  shall  burn  as  an  oven,  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do 
wickedly,  shall  be  stubble,  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them 
up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch,"  Mai.  iv,  1. 

Therefore,  behold  your  perdition,  endea's^our  to  escape  from  it, 
receive  him  still,  while  he  still  offers  himself  to  you,  yea,  invites  you 
to  him,  that  he  may  manifest  his  kindness  to  you,  and  save  you, 
Isaiah  xlv.  22.  Matt.  ix.  13. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  who  have  been  convinced  of  your  sins, 
have  turned  from  them.,  have  received  the  Son  of  man,  and  are  born 
again  after  his  image,  manifest  now  that  ye  believe  this  great  truth 
©f  the  incarnation  of  Christ.     And  therefore, 

1.  Endeavour  to  contemplate  the  length,  breadth,  depth  and  height 
of  it :  "  iMary  kept  ail  these  things,  which  concerned  her  child,  and 
pondered  them  in  her  heart,"  Luke  ii.  19.  "The  angels  desire  to 
look  into  these  things,"  1  Peter  i.  12,  for  "  without  controversy  great  is 
the  mystery  of  godliness  :  God  was  manifest  in  the  6esh,"  1  Tim.  liu 
16.  Of  ail  the  great  and  inconceivable  wonders,  which  God  hath  ever 
w^rought,  none  is  comparable  to  tiiis  wonder  ;  it  is  a  wonder  which 
surpasseth  all  wonders,  that  the  Son  of  God  was  made  man  ;  that  he 
who  was  equal  with  God  took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant  ; 
that  he  was  made  man  of  a  virgin  ;  that  the  Holy  One  was  sent  in 
the  likeaess  of  sinful  flesh  ;  that  he  was  born  perfectly  holy  of  a  sin- 
ner, that  although  he  became  man,  he  nevertheless  is  and  continueth 
true  and  eternal  God  :  yea,  that  he  became  man  to  suffer,  tlius  to 
cover  our  sins  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  like  your  eldest  brother  and 
mediator  to  redeem  you,  and  that  "  God  made  him  who  knew  no 
sin,  to  be  sin  for  you  ;  that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  him,"  2  Cor.  v.  21.  The  jwonderful  power  of  God  shines 
forth  here  in  the  brightest  manner,  since  he  hath  effected  so  many 
wonders,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  beams  forth  here  in  the  clear- 
est manner,  since  he  knew  how  to  devise  a  way  for  the  salvation  of 
sinners,  and  order  it  so,  that  neither  his  justice  nor  his  mercy  should 
be  in  the  least  dishonoured,  but  that  God  who  is  holy  should  be 
sanctified  by  righteousness ;  the  power  of  the  divine  love  appears 
here  in  the  most  lovely  manner ,  "  For  herein  is  love,  not  tliat  we 
loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  prophia- 
tion  for  our  sins,"  1  John  iv.  10.  O  how  ought  ye  to  wonder  at  this  ! 
Did  Elisabeth  wonder  so,  that  she  said,  "  Whence  is  this  to  me,  that 
%he  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me,"  Luke  i.  43,  how  ought 

Tt 


306        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

it  then  to  ravish  you,  that  your  Lord  himself  cmo«s  to  you  !  yea> 
your  wonder  oug-ht  to  transport  yi:)U  out  of  rour^^elves.  and  cause  you 
to  celebrate  c.c  praises  of  the  Lord.  Hehold  how  Klis^beth,  Mary, 
the  shepherds,  Simeon  and  Anna  praised  the  Lord  on  account  of 
this  matter.  Yea,  the  angels  came  down  from  heaven  on  earth, 
"  P'':iising  'Joel,  and  sayini^,  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on 
earth  fjcace,  good  will  lowards  men,"  Luke  ii.  13,  14. 

2.  Exercise  yourselves  much  in  acts  of  union  with  him.  Ye  are 
united  to  him,  he  hath  taken  your  nature  upon  him,  and  united  it  to 
himself;  ye  are  considered  by  God  as  in  him  ;  his  Spirit  hath  in- 
grafted you  into  him  ;  ye  have  united  him  to  you  by  faith  :  but  how 
great  an  estrangement  doth  there  often  take  place  between  him  and 
you  !  Oh,  do  not  suffer  it,  but  *'  acquaint  yourselves  with  him,  and 
be  at  peace,"  Job  xxii.  21.  Let  your  souls  "follow  hard  after  him," 
with  strong  desires  and  aspirations,  like  David,  Psalm  Ixiii.  8. 
Maintain  an  active  faith,  that  ye  may  cause  him  to  dwell  in  your 
hearts,  and  exert  often  an  ardent  love,  that  ye  may  hold  him  fast, 
like  the  spouse,  "  who  would  hold  him,  and  not  let  him  go,"  Song 
iii.  4.  For  "  he  who  cleaves  to  the  Lord  is  thus  one  spirit  with  hira," 
1  Cor.  vi.   \7. 

3.  Show  now  also  by  your  conversation  that  he  became  like  you  as 
his  brethren,  and  that  ye  are  become  like  him  by  your  regeneration 
and  sanctification  :  "Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery 
to  be  equal  with  God  :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  hkeness  of 
men,"  Philip,  ii.  5,  6.  His  humility,  low'liness,  self-denial,  heavenly- 
mindedness,  obedience  to  his  Father,  love  to  God  and  his  brethren, 
ought  to  beam  forth  also  in  you  :  "  He  that  saiih  he  abideth  in  him, 
ought  also  so  to  walk,  as  he  hath  walked,"  J  John  ii.  6. 

4.  Is  he  become  your  brother,  and  indeed  your  eldest  brother  hj 
his  incarnation,  submit  yourselves  then  to  him.  It  was  the  privilege 
of  the  first-born  in  ancient  times  to  rule  over  the  younger  brethren,  as 
we  have  shown  in  our  explanation  ;  therefore  Paul  also  saith,  Coll.  i. 
18.  '<  He  is  he  head  of  the  body,  the  church,  he  is  the  beginning, 
the  first-bo»T  from  the  dead  ;  that  in  all  thing's  he  might  have  the  pre- 
eminence." The  t-ord  said  to  Cain  concerning  Abel,  Gen.  iv.  7. 
"  His  desir:;  iiall  be  unto  thee,  and  t  lou  s^  dt  rule  over  him  "  But  is 
not  your  desire  also  to  your  Brother,  tiiat  he  should  rule  over  you  ? 
verily  he  hath  deserved  it  of  you,  since  he  became  man  and  mediator 
for  you,  that  he  might  cover  your  sins  in  ths  sight  of  God.   And  for 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  307 

what  purpose  is  he  the  true  seed  of  David  ?  is  it  not,  that  he  may 
reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  ? 

5.  By  his  incarnation  he  hath  also  become  a  Mediator  for  you  be- 
tween God  and  you.  Do  not  expect  then  that  God  will  draw  nigh 
to  your  souls  in  his  grace,  except  through  him  :  "  He  is  made  of 
God  unto  you  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemp- 
tion," 1  Cor.  i.  30.  Neither  should  ye  draw  nigh  to  God,  except 
through  hira ;  "  Jesus  said,  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth  and  the 
life  :  no  man  comelh  to  the  P'ather  but  by  me,"  John  xiv.  6.  Let 
this,  that  your  Mediator  is  also  your  Brother,  encourage  you  to 
go  boldly  to  the  throne  :  '*  For  we  have  boldness  to  enter  mto 
the  hoUest  by  the  blood  of  JeSus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which 
he  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is,  his  fltsh,"  Heb. 
ix.  19,  20.     Eph.  iii.   12. 

6.  He  hath  covered  your  sins  in  the  sight  of  God  by  his  holy  incar- 
r.ation  :  Beware  then  of  uncovering  them  again,  either  by  a  careless 
and  dissolute  behaviour,  by  which  your  iniquity  will  rise  up,  and  be 
disGOVf-red  in  tie  sight  of  God,  yea,  of  men,  and  distress  your  souls 
in  a  giievous  manner:  "  When  the  Lord  speaketh  pe 'ce  to  his 
Saints,  let  them  not  return  again  to  folly,"  Psalm  Ixxxv.  8.  or  by  un- 
belief, whereby  we  mistrust  the  grace  of  God  and  of  his  Son,  either 
through  a  mere  conceit,  or  on  account  of  adversity,  as  if  our  sins 
were  not  covered  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  he  had  not  testified  this 
to  the  soul.  May  we  not  apply  here  that  which  is  said,  Joo.  xv.  1 1, 
12,  13.  "  Are  the  consolations  of  God  small  with  thee  ?  is  there 
any  secret  thing  with  thee  ?  wiiy  doth  tlii  le  heart  carry  thee  away  ? 
and  what  do  thine  eyes  wink  at  ?  that  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against 
God,  and  lettcst  such  words  ^o  out  of  thy  n;ou  '".  ?" 

7.  Finally,  let  the  incarnation  of  Jesus  supnort  you  under  your 
dejections-  The  incarnation  of  Jesus  is  truly  ''the  consolation  of 
Israel,"  Luke  ii  25.  Are  ye  mean  and  despised  in  the  vorld,  and 
doth  this  disturb  you,  let  it  suffice  you  that  the  Son  of  God  is  your 
brother,  and  that  ye  are  of  one  family  with  your  Brother,  Heb.  ii. 
II.  Do  ye  suffer  many  afflictions  in  soul  and  body  ;  *'  he  was  made 
like  you  his  brethren  in  all  things  ;  that  he  might  be  a  merciful 
and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconcil- 
iation for  the  sins  of  the  people  :  for  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered, 
being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted,"  Heb.  ii. 
17,  18.  Are  ye  troubled  mostly  on  account  of  your  sins?  "Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  yea,  the  chief  of  sinners," 
3  Tim.  i.  15.  Are  your  bodies  exceedingly  weak  and  languid  ?  The 
*^on  of  God,  who  was  make  like  you,  "Bhall  change  your  vile  bo- 


30t        THE  INCARNATION  OP  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

dies,  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,"  PhilTp^ 
iii  3 1 .  Must  ye  often  stand  aloof  from  him,  and  be  separated  from  hin\> 
so  that  ye  are  even  hidden  from  his  face,  it  will  not  be  long  ere  «  ye 
shall  be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  And  s» 
ye  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  comfort  oae  aaothcr 
with  those  words,"  Ajnen^ 


(  34)9  } 


CHRIST^S  SUFFERINGS 


AND 


CROSS  UNDER  PONTIUS  PILATE. 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY» 


1  Peter  iii.  18.    For  Christ  hath  also  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  jwt 
for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God.

Q.  36.  What  firojit  dost  thou  then  receive  by  Christ's  holy  concefi- 
tion  and  nativity  ? 

A.  That  he  is  the  Mediator  ;  and  with  his  innocence  and  perfect 
holiness,  covers  in  the  sight  of  God  my  sins,  wherein  I  was  conceived 
and  brought  forth. 


A, 


.^lONG  the  several  great  promises  of  the  Lord  God  to  his 
ancient  people  concerning  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come,  this  was 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  291 

particularly  emphatical,  that  «  a  Redeemer  should  come  unto  Zion," 
Isaiah  lix.  20.  The  Lord  had  oj^ered  in  the  civil  law,  which  he 
gave  to  Israel,  that  the  nearest  kinsman  should  be  the  redeemer  of 
his  brother,  who  was  therefore  obliged,  besides  other  duties,  to  re- 
deem the  possession  of  his  brother,  when  it  was  sold,  and  also  his 
person  from  slavery,  and  to  avenge  his  blood,  which  was  shed.  The 
Messiah  should  also  be  such  a  Redeemer ;  not  with  respect  to  a 
bodily  redemption,  this  was  too  it^noble  for  him ;  the  redemption 
which  he  obtains  is  «  an  eternal  redemption,"  Heb  ix.  12,  Those 
whom  he  should  redeem  had  lost  their  eternal  inheritance,  they  were 
slaves  to  thse  devil  and  to  bin,  and  therefore  slain  with  respect  to  their 
so*  Is.  If  he  should  then  redeem  them,  he  behoo\ed  to  be  greater 
than  those  redeemers,  yea,  even  their  GikI  and  Lord  :  therefore  the 
Father  promiseth  '-  that  he  would  redeem  his  people  by  the  Lord 
their  God."  irloseai.  7.  He  ought  indeed  to  possess  an  infirtite  power, 
if  he  should  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  bind  him.  and  spoil  his 
goods,  thus  taking  vengeance  of  him  :  but  tins  alone  was  not  enough, 
he  brhooved  also  to  pay  the  price  of  redemption,  which  was  more 
precious  than  perishable  things,  silver,  or  gold,  i'  could  be  effected 
only  by  the  precious  blood  of  a  Lamb  without  blemish,  and  without 
spot :  and  it  was  therefore  necessary,  that  he  should  also  be  man, 
and  indeed  man  of  man,  more  especially  since  he  was  obliged  to  be 
the  nearest  kinsman  and  brother,  if  he  should  be  a  Redeemer. 
Therefore  the  Lord,  when  he  promiseth  that  the  Redeemer  should 
come  to  Zion,  intimates  that  he  would  send  him  in  the  flesh,  and 
that  he  should  become  man,  and  that  he  should  therefore  redeem 
Zion,  as  the  ancient  redeemers  redeemed  their  brethren  ;  which  the 
Lord  also  fulfilled,  when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  become  man. 
The  apostle  having  respect  to  this  man-  ner  of  redeeming,  said 
therefore  concerning  him,  Heb.  ii.  11)  14,  15.  "For  both  he  that 
sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one :  for  which 
cause  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.  For  as  much 
then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same  :  that  he  through  death 
might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil; 
and  deliver  them,  who  through  fear  of  death,  are  all  their  lifetime 
subject  to  bondage."  Having  shown  how  necessary  it  was  for  the 
Mediator  and  Redeemer  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  in  the 
fifteenth,  sixteenth,  and  sevcnteentk  questions,  the  instructor  explain- 
ing the  doctrine  of  redemption,  sho  vs  therefore  that  the  Redeemer 
Jesus  Christ,  is  not  only  the  Son  of  God,  and  thus  very  God,  in  the 
thirteenth  Lord's  day,  but  also  that  he  is  man,  made  like  his  breth= 
ren  in  all  things,  sin  excepted,  ia  this  fourteenth  Lord's  day. 


292       TH^  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOB. 

There  are  two  particulars  here,  that  require  our  explanation, 

I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  incarnation,  Question  35. 

II.  The  advantage  which  results  from  it,  Question  36. 

I.  We  have  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  Christ's  incarnation  in, 
the  thirty-fifih  question  :  with  respect  to  v/hich  we  learn,  (a)  who 
became  incarnate,  or  man,  (b)  the  nature  of  his  manhood,  (c)  of 
wliom  he  received  his  manhood,  (d)  by  whose  operation,  (e)  in  what 
manner,  and  (f )  to  \yhat  end  he  became  incarnate,  or  man. 

A.  It  is  inquired  in  the  first  place  who  became  incarnate  or  man. 
It  is  said  m  general,  that  "  God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,"  1  Tim. 
iii.  16,  It  was  not  the  essence  of  God  ;  for  he  who  became  man  is 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  which  could  not  be,  if  the  whole 
essence  became  man :  but  it  was  one  of  the  divine  Persons,  who. 
became  man  :  "  he  who  was  in  the  form  of  God,  and  was  equal  to 
God,  toolvupon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,"  Phil,  ii  6,  7.  But 
it  was  neither  the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Giiost,  who  became  man, 
but  the  Son  only  ;  for  "  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman," 
Gal.  iv.  4.  And  so  the  instructor  saith  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God, 
•who  is  and  continuetb  true  and  eternal  God,  became  man.  He  is 
indeed  God,  co-esscntial  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we 
have  proved  on  the  foregoing-  Lord's  day  ;  it  doth  not  however  follow, 
therefore,  that  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  are  co-essential 
with  the  Son,  became  man,  because  the  Godhead  of  the  Son,  which 
is  also  the  Godhead  of  the  Feather  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  did  not 
become  man,  but  the  Person  of  the  Son.  F^or  although  the  Father 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  prepared  a  body  for  him,  according  to  Heb.  x. 
5.  Luke  i.  35,  nevertheless  the  Son  alone  took  upon  himself  the 
nature  of  man,  and  united  it  to  himself. 

Although   It  proceeded  only  from  the  free  good  pleasure  of  God, 
that  the  Son  was  made  man,  we  may  however  learn  from  the  con- 
sequences how  well  this  became  God,  and  how  proper  it  was  ;  for,  (a) 
as  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  he  could  be  sent  by  the  Father,  and  also 
himself  send  the  Holy  Spirit,  Gal.  iv.  4,   5,   6.   (b)   As  he  was  the 
personal  Word  of  God,  God  could  speak  by  him  to  us,  and  also  re- 
veal his  secrets  to  us  by  him,  John  i.  1 .  iii.  34.  Heb.  i.  1 .  (c)  As  man 
•was  created  by  him,  therefore   man  could   also  be  new-created  by 
him,  Eph.  ii.  10.  (d)  As  he  is  the  Son  of  God  by  nature,  he  can  also 
make  us  the  sons  of  God  by  grace.  Gal.  iv.  4,  5.  (e)  He  who  is  the 
image  of  the  invisible  God,  can  restore  us  after  the  image  of  God 
.  Col.  iv.   19.  (f )  Thus   also  the  love  of  God  appears  in  the  highest 
degree,  that  he  sends  his  Son  for  the  salvation  of  sinners,  John 
iii.  16. 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  39ii 

B.The  second  particular  that  requires  our  consideration  with  res- 
pect to  the  incarnation  of  Christ  is  the  nature  of  his  manhood.  Of 
this,  the  instructor  saith,  that  he  took  on  him  the  very  nature  of 
man.  This  was  opposed  by  many  erroneous  spirits  in  the  early 
ages  of  Christianity.  The  Ibllowers  of  Mareion,  Manes  and  Cerdo» 
asserted  that  Christ  was  man  only  in  appearance.  The  Arians  said 
indeed  that  he  had  a  real  body,  but  they  imagined  that  it  was  a  body 
without  a*'soui,  and  that  instead  of  a  human  soul,  an  excellent  spirit 
was  created  for  him,  before  the  creation  of  the  world.  And  the 
Apollinarists  held  that  his  Godhead  served  him  instead  of  a  soul- 
But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  u3  that  he  hath  a  real  and  perfect 
human  nature.     Fcr, 

Ir  He  is  suck  a  man  as  we  are  j  "  in  all  things  IIUq  his  brethren," 
Heb.  ii.  17.  Yea,  he  is  opposed  to  a  mere  appearance,  as  he  him- 
self proved  to  his  apostles,  when  "they  supposed  they  had  seen  a 
spirit,"  Luke  xxiv.  57 — 43. 

2.  He  hath  the  constituent  parts  of  a  man,  to  wit,  a  human  body, 
and  a  human  soul  :  his  body  was  born,  it  grew,  was  seen  and  hand- 
led by  men  ;  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  had  a  soul ;  for  "■  he  came  to 
give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many, "Mate.  xx.  28. 

3.  All  that  can  be  said  of  a  man  as  man,  is  found  in  him  ;  for  be- 
sides his  birth,  growth,  conversation  with  men,  and  other  particulare 
of  this  kind,  he  v/as  also,  like  men,  hungry  and  thirsty,  he  wept> 
complained,  was  weary,  and  rested.  He  had  a  human  understand- 
ini;,  will,  and  affections  ;  he  loved,  v/as  angry,  rejoiced  and  was  sorry* 
as  the  evangelical  historians  inform  us. 

4.  He  was  a  man  of  man.  of  the  same  human  race  with  other 
men  :  "  l^or  he  that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified,  are  all 
of  one  ;  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also 
took  part  of  the  same,"  Heb.  ii.  11,  14.  Therefore  he  is  also  cal- 
led "the  seed  of  the  woman,"  Gen.  iii.  15,  "the  seed  of  Abraham,'^ 
Gen.  xxii.  18,  compared  with  Gal,  iii.  16.  He  is  said  to  "  have  been 
of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh,"  Rom.  i.  3,  "the  fruit  of 
the  loins  of  David,"  Acts  ii.  30,  "  a  son  of  man,"  Mat.  xvi.  13,  "a 
son  of  Mary,"  Matt.  i.  18.  "He  was  conceived  in  her,"  Matt.  i.  20c 
"  He  is  the  fruit  of  her  body,"  Luke  i.  4.2,  Was  made  of  her," 
Gal.  iv.  4,  and  "  was  born  of  her,"  Matt.  i.  16, 

What  can  be  objected  against  this,  but  what  is  exceedingly  tri- 
fling, as  that  "  he  was  sent  in  the  hkeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  Rom. 
viii.  3,  and  that  "  he  was  made  like  men,"  Philip,  ii.  7.  But  it  is 
easy  to  comprehend,  that  this  doth  not  disprove,  but  rather  evince 
that  he  was  a  real  man,  as  he  \yas  in  ail  things  made  like  us,   Heb= 


294.        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

ii.  ir,  and  if  it  assert  any  unlikeness  to  us,  it  is  only  with  respect  to 
sill,  which  he  had  not,  although  he  was  considered  as  a  sinner,  and 
treated  as  such,  as  his  Father  also  sent  him,  that  he  might  be  a  sacri- 
fice for  sin  ;  for  "  him  who  knew  no  sin  he  made  lo  be  sin  for  us," 
2  Cor.  V.  2 1 . 

C.  The  third  particular  that  must  be  considered  with  respect  (o 
t^is  incarnation  is  of  wliom  he  received  his  manhood.  The  catechism 
saith,  "of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  virgin  Mary."  The  Valentin- 
ians  of  old  said,  as  the  Menonites  do  still,  that  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  was  not  born  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Mary,  but  through 
her,  and  that  he  brought  it  with  him  from  heaven  of  the  seed  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Word,  or  from  elsewhere,  we  do  not  know  whence, 
and  that  he  only  passed  through  Mary,  as  water  through  a  conduit, 
and  as  the  sun  shines  through  glass.  The  ^iocinians  assert  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  suppUed  tlie  place  of  a  natural  Father,  and  that  he  crea- 
ted and  pro  Uiced  a  new  substance  in  Mary  :  but  then  (1)  Christ  was 
not  in  all  things  like  us,  nor  man  of  man,  contrary  to  what  we  have 
proved  before.  (2)  Then  also  the  genealogy  of  Ciirist  could  not  be 
refet-red  to  Mary,  Matt.  i.  and  Luke  3.  (3)  Neither  was  he  then, 
according  to  his  human  nature,  without  father,  contrary  to  Heb.  vii. 
3.  (4)  ivloreover,  the  guilt  of  man  might  not  be  punished  in  any 
other  besides  the  human  nature,  as  we  have  proved  on  the  sixteenth 
question. 

It  is  indeed  said,  that  "  he  came  down  from  heaven,"  John  vi. 
38,  and  that  "  he  is  the  Lord  from  heaven,"  1  Cor  xv.  47,  but  this 
doth  not  mean  that  he  brought  his  manhood  from  heaven,  but  (a) 
that  his  Godhead  manifested  itself,  present  in  his  manhood  in  a  par- 
ticular manner,  when  he  assumed  bis  manhood  :  "  For  the  Word 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father)  John  i.  14,  as  it  is  said 
that  the  Lord  God  came  down  from  heaven,  when  he  manifested 
himself  present  any  where  in  a  glorious  manner,  Exod.  xix.  20. 
Neh.  xix.  13.  Or  we  may  understand  by  it  (b)  the  original  and 
institution  of  his  office,  which  was  not  of  men,  but  from  heaven,  as 
it  is  said  of  the  baptism  of  John,  that  "  it  was  from  heaven,"  Matt. 
xxi.  2j. 

lie  received  his  manhood  of  Mary  without  any  previous  inter- 
vn  se  of  her  with  a  man,  for  she  was  a  virgin,  and  conceived,  bore 
and  bi'ought  forth  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  as  a  virgin  without  knowing 
man.  See  Matt.  i.  18.  This  was  not  less  necessary  than  it  was 
true,  not  only  because  it  was  foretold,  Isaiah  vii.  15,  *'  Behold  a  vir- 
gin shall  conceive,  and  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  c:dl  his  name  Imman-^ 


,      XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  295 

uel,"  to  which  the  an^el  also  appealed,  and  referred  Joseph,  the  be- 
trothed hubbaiid  of  Mary,  when  he  suspected  her,  Malt.  i.  23.  But 
it  was  also  necesrary  that  he  should  recei/e  his  manhood  of  a  virgin, 
because  he  sliouid  be  born  holy,  and  without  original  sin  :  Christ 
should  be  "that  holy  thing,  which  should  be  born  of  her,"  Luke  i. 
35.  The  reason  of  winch  was  not  that  the  virgin  had  not  any  origin- 
al sin,  as  the  Papists  without  any  reason  pretend  ;  but  the  reason  of 
Christ's  holy  birtti  of  the  virgin  Was,  that  he  was  thus  born  out  of 
the  broken  covenant  of  works,  which  transmits  original  sin  by  the 
intercourse  of  the  man  and  woman  to  the  posterity  of  Adam.  This 
is  not  so  difficult  to  understand,  if  we  consider  that  Adam  and  Eve 
received  the  marriage  law,  and  the  blessing,  that  they  should  "  be 
fruitful  and  multiply,"  while  they  were  in  the  covenant  of  works, 
Gen  i.  28,  and  hence  all  men  should  be  born  in  that  covenant  of 
works,  and  thus  all  men  since  the  fall  are  born  nnder  the  breach  of 
that  covenant  in  iniquity,  and  conceived  in  sin«  Therefore  because 
the  Saviour  was  born  of  a  virgin,-  who  had  not  any  fellowship  with  a 
man,  it  is  evident  that  he  was  born  out  of  the  covenant  of  works, 
under  which  all  other  men  are  born  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  mar- 
riage. And  thus  Christ  cannot  be  reckoned  under  Adam  in  the  cov- 
enant of  works  ;  wherefore  he  is  also  opposed  to  Adam  in  this  re- 
spect, I  Cor.  XV.  45,  47. 

D.  But  how  could  this  be  ?  Mary  also  proposed  this  difficulty, 
when  Gabriel  brouglit  her  the  tidings,  that  she  should  conceive, 
L>uke  4.  34,  25,  "  And  Mary  said  to  the  angel,  how  shall  this  be, 
seeing  I  know  not  a  man  ?  and  the  angel  answered,  and  said  unto 
her,  the  floly  Ghost  siiall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  power  of  the 
Highest  shall  overshadow  thee."  The  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
this  matter  was,  ( 1 )  that  he  formed  and  disposed,  in  an  extraordi- 
nary and  superordinary  manner,  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  of  the 
seed  of  Mary,  and  thus  he  was  conceived  in  Mary,  born  and  brought 
forth  by  her  without  miscarriage.  (2)  The  Holy  Ghost  also  sancti- 
fied him,  by  forming  him  in  the  image  of  God,  that  he  who  should 
be  born  ot  Mary  might  be  holy,  and  also  by  separating  and  disposing 
him  in  his  Father's  name  for  a  suitable  sacrifice  :  so  Paul  considers 
this  matter,  Heb  x.  5.  (3)  Many  also  affirm  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
united  the  human  nature  from  the  time  of  its  conception,  to  the  di- 
vine nature :  but  we  rather  consider  this  as  a  personal  act  of  the 
Son,  who  united  his  human  nature  to  himself,  as  we  will  see  hereaf- 
ter, more  particularly. 

E.  In  what  manner  did  the  Son  of  God  become  man  ?  the  cate- 
chism saith  that  « th»  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  is,  and   continueth 


5?96        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

true  and  eternal  God,  took  upon  himself  the  very  nature  of  man." 
He  did  not  become  a  man  as  other  men  do,  who  had  no  manner  of 
existence  before :  but  he  who  was  before  true  and  eternal  God,  and 
coniinueth  such,  became  also  man.  Not  by  a  changing  of  his  God- 
head into  the  manhood,  as  the  Menonitcs  imagine  ;  for  his  Godhead 
5s  unchaiM^eable.  James  i.  17.  "  The  Word  indeed  .became  flesh," 
according  to  John  i.  14,  but  we  do  not  read  that  it  was  changed  into 
flcsh  :  the  ^vord  "  became  "  doth  not  always  intimate  a  change  ; 
lor  otnerwise  the  body  of  Adam,  which  was  formed  oi  the  dust  of 
the  earth,  and  "  became  a  living  soul,"  Gen.  ii.  7y  was  changed  into 
a  living  soul;  and  "Christ,  who  became  a  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  13^ 
would  have  been  changed  into  a  curse  ;  but  the  Son  of  God  became 
man  by  taking  upon  himself  the  nature  of  man,  and  uniting  it  in  the 
strictt;st  mar^.ner  to  his  divine  nature. 

We  must  consider  this  union  somewhat  more  particularly,  and 
must  take  special  care,  that  we  do  not  misunderstand  this  matter, 
as  the  smallest  misconception  of  it  is  exceedingly  mischievous  and 
pernicious.  We  must  therefore  know  that  this  union  of  the  two 
natures  in  ChHst  is  not  an  essential  union,  like  that  of  the  three  Per- 
sons in  the  Go  ihead  ;  for  then  there  would  be  but  one  essence  or 
nature,  and  two  Persons  in  Chiist,  whereas  we  find  two  natures  in 
him,  and  only  one  Person,  since  there  is  but  "one  Mediator,  as 
there  is  but  one  God,"  1  Tim.  ii.  5.  Moreover,  the  union  of  the 
two  natures  in  Christ  is  hot  a  physical  union,  like  that  of  the  soul  and 
body,  which  beinu:  physically  united  to  each  other,  make  one  person ; 
for  he  was  a  person  before  he  became  man.  Neither  is  this  union,  a 
merely  relative  union,  consisting  in  the  love  of  the  Godhead  to  the 
human  nature,  disposing  the  Godhead  to  assist  the  human  nature, 
'-md  show  kindness  to  it,  as  the  husband  is  united  to  the  wife,  and 
Christ  to  the  church  ;  for  then  there  would  be  two  persons,  as  well 
AS  two  natures  in  Christ,  and  we  should  have  twb  Mediators,  contrary 
to  1  Tim.  ii.^* 

This  was  the  opinion  of  Nestorius,  bishop  of  Constantinople  ; 
but  it  -vVaS  condemned  by  the  great  council  of  Ephesiis,  in  the  year 
431.  In  opposition  to  his  opinion  it  was  c^etermined,  that  the  union 
of  the  two  natures  was  czr//ar:'/'tf5,  "  indivisible,"  and  ac/^om/o.?,  "insep- 
arable," and  thus  that  there  were  not  two  divisible  and  separable  per- 
sons in  the  Mediator.  Eutyches.  Abbot  of  Constantinople,  fell,  from 
an  excess  of  opposition  to  Nestorius,  to  another  extreme,  for  he 
taught  that  the  two  natures  of  Christ,  and  their  properties  were  mix- 
ed, so  that  Christ,  who  had  two  natures  before  they  were  united, 
^as,  after  they  were  united,  no  longer  such  a  man  as  we  are.     He 


T 

v/as  condemned  for  this  opinion  in  the  general  council  of  Chalcedon, 
in  the  year  451,  and  in  order  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  this  union, 
it  was  said,  it  was  atrefitos^  "  unchangeable,"  and  a-mnchutos^  «  unmix- 
ed." And  they  signified  thus,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  incarna- 
tion continued  what  he  was,  namely  God,  and  became  what  he  was 
not,  namely  man ;  for  otherwise  his  Godhead  would  have  been  chan- 
ged into  the  manhood,  and  the  manhood  into  the  Godhead. 

We  say  then  with  the  catholic  church,  that  this  union  was  a  per- 
sonal and  hypostatical  union,  that  is,  the  divine  Person  took  upon 
himself  the  human  nature,  and  continued  one  Person  :  we  have 
shown  on  the  eighth  Lord's  day  that  a  person  is  an  intelligent  sub- 
stance, by  which  he  is  individually  what  he  is,  without  constituting 
a  part  of  another.  We  must  now  know  that  the  human  nature  is 
not  an  individual  person,  and  that  it  doth  not  svbsist  individually, 
but  that  it  subsists  in,  and  by  the  personality  of  the  Son  of  God  : 
not  that  the  personality  of  the  ^on  of  God  is  communicated  to  his 
manhood,  as  the  Lutherans  suppose ;  for  the  personality  and  self- 
mibsistence  a;  e  incommunicable  :  but  that  the  divine  nature,  consti- 
tuting the  human  nature  in  its  person,  causeth  it  to  subsist ;  for 
otherwise  the  several  phrases  used  with  respect  to  this  matter  will  be 
unintelligible,  as  John  i.  14.  *' The  Word  was  made  flesh."  Rom. 
viii.  3.  "  God  sent  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  Gal.  iv.- 
4.  ''Made  of  a  woman,'*  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  *^  God  was  manifest  in 
the  flesh,  Philip  ii.  6,  7.  **  Who  being  in  the  form  of  God  thought 
it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputa- 
tion, and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant." 

This  personal  union  is  illustrated  also  by  an  observation  of  the 
consequences  of  it,  which  are  three  : 

\,  That  from  this  union  follows  a  communion  of  the  properties  of 
both  natures,  which  the  person  hath  by  virtue  of  the  union  of  the 
two  natures.  This  doth  not  imply,  that  the  divine  attributes  of  om- 
nipotence, omniscience,  omnipresence,  vivification  and  adorableness, 
are  communicated  to  the  manfeood,  as  the  Lutherans  imagine  ;  for 
the  manhood  of  Christ  is  not  capable  of  divine  attributes,  and  this 
would  make  the  manhood  a  God.  In  this  manner  the  divine  attri- 
butes are  incommunicable;  if  this  followed  from  the  personal  union, 
not  a  few  only  of  the  divine  attributes  would  be  communicated  to 
the  manhood,  but  all  of  them,  because  the  manhood  is  united  to  the 
-^vhole  Person  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  but  this  is  to  be  understood  in 
such  a  manner,  that  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  doth  perfectly  pos« 
sess  the  properties  of  the  divine  and  human  natures.  This  hath 
occasioned  a  vanstv  of  phrases,  to  wit,  that  which   is  proper  to 


^98        THE  INCARNATION  Ot  THE  SON  OF  GOt). 

him  with  respect  to  his  Person,  is  ascribed  to  hjm  with  respect  to 
the  one  or  the  other  of  his  natures,  and  what  is  i  roper  to  him  with 
respect  to  ihe  one  nature,  is  ascribed  to  him  with  respect  to  the 
other,  or  to  his  Person.  We  may  say*  for  instance  of  his  Person, 
that  Christ  is  eternal,  was  born  m  time,  is  our  rij^hteousness  :  with 
respect  to  liis  divine  nature,  we  can  say  that  Christ  who  is  God,  is  in- 
finite, the  Lord  of  glory  was  crucified,  God  hath  boui^ht  his  church 
with  his  own  blood,  I  Cor.  ii.  8.  Acts  xx.  28.  We  may  say  also 
•vrith  respect  to  his  human  nature,  that  Christ  the  man  died,  is  in 
heaven,  John  iii.  13,  is  Mediator,  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  All  which  is  unintel- 
ligible withou'.  a  respect  to  this  personal  union.  But  we  cannot  use 
these  phi'ases  In  ihe  abstract ;  for  we  cannot  say  that  the  Godhead  of 
Christ  was  crucified,  that  his  manliood  was  in  l^eaven,  while  he  was 
on  earth,  because  then  the  Godhead  would  necessarily  be  the  man- 
hood, «nd  tlie  manhood  the  Godhead. 

2.  From  this  personal  union  follows  also  the  communion  of  the 
works  and  actions  of  both  natures  ;  by  which  we  understand  that 
both  natures  co-operate  iti  that  one  Person  in  the  same  work  of  re- 
demption, so  th.it  we  have  here  (a')  a  working  person  of  the  Media- 
tor, (b)  a  work  of  redemption,  and  (c)  a  twofold  principle,  his  divine 
and  human  nature,  which  do  each  contribute  their  proper  share  to 
the  work  of  redemption,  the  manhood  suffers,  and  the  Godhead  adds 
an  infinite  value  to  it,  Acts  xx.  28.  Whence  it  is  easy  to  understand 
tl)at  he  is  Mediator  according;  to  both  natures. 

3  The  third  consequence  of  this  personal  union  is,  that  many 
clorious  shifts  of  §f race  arc  communicated  to  the  mmhood  ;  and  par- 
ticularly, that  it  is  dignified  with  a  personal  union  with  the  Godhead, 
and  is  in  consequence  of  this  become  endued  with  exalted  wisdom, 
perfect  holiness,  power  and  dignity  above  all  men  and  angels.  See 
all  this  Luke  i    35      John  iii.  34.     Psalm  xlv.  7,     l^hilip.  iii.  6—9. 

F.  We  must  finally  inquire  for  what  en.-l  the  Son  of  God  became 
man.  The  threat  end  was  that  the  sinner  might  by  him  be  reconci- 
led to  God.  and  saved  :  the  whole  word  of  God  aims  at  this  only, 
and  the  name  Jesus  was  given  to  him  on  this  account.  It  is  there- 
fore an  idle  assertion  of  the  schoolmen  among  the  Papists,  of  the  So- 
cinians  and  Osiander,  that  Christ  would  have  become  man,  although 
man  had  not  sinned.  But  how  do  they  know  this  ?  have  they  been 
in  the  council  of  Ciod  .>  no  :  do  they  find  it  in  the  word  of  God  ?  the 
word  of  God  saith  nothing  of  it,  It  is  then  an  idle  fiction  of  their 
own  brains. 

But  inasmuch  as  the  instructor  adds  this  great  end  to  the  advan- 
tages of  the  incarnation  of  Christ  in  the  thirty-sixth  question,  there- 


S6.  2V9 

fore  he  shows  in  the  thirty-fifth  question  the  end  why  he  became  in^ 
carnate  particularly  of  the  virgin  Mary      Which  ends  are, 

1,  "  That  he  might  be  the  seed  of  David."  It  is  here  suppost-d 
thai- Mary  was  of  .the  seed  of  David,  and  indeed  truly  ;  for  she  was 
♦wo  ways  of  the  seed  of  David. (a)  By  her  marriage,  as  she  was 
espoused  to  Joseph,  who  wa?  of  the  family  of  David  by  Solomon, 
according  to  the  genealogy  of  Matthew,  Matt.  i.  And  thus  Mary 
■was  also  reckoned  of  the  seed  of  David,  because  women  were  con- 
sidered in  genealogical  accounts,  as  comprehended  in  tfie  men. 
But  she  was  not  only  in  this  way  of  the  seed  of  David,  but  al^o  by 
natural  descent,  (b)  in  consequence  of  lur  birth  of  Heli  according  to 
Luke  iii.  23,  who  was  indeed  the  father-in-law  of  Joseph  ;  but  the 
proper  father  of  his  spouse  Mary.  Now  Heli,  the  father  of  Mary, 
was  a  descendant  of  David  by  Nathan,  I^u*ke  iii. 

This  is  not  denied  by  the  words    '  thai    Elizabeth,  t'.e  cousin    of 
Mary,  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,"  Luke  i.  5,  and  so  of  the  tribe 
of  Levi,  and  not  oft  e  family  of  David,  and  of  th.  tribe  of  Judah  : 
from  which  it  would  seem  to  fellow,  that  Mary  wus  not  of  the  family 
of  David.     But  we  must  know  that  Mury  could  very  well  be  of  the 
family  of  David,  although  Elizabeth  were  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron: 
for  the  mother  or  griind-mother  of  .Viary   might   have  been   of  the 
family  of  Aaron,  and  have   married  a  husband  of  David's  family,  of 
whom  Mary  was  then  born  in  the  family  of  David.     Or   it  might 
have  been,  that  the  motl)er,  or  grand-mother  of  Elizabeth  v/as  of  the 
family  of  David,  and  married  to  a  husband  of  Aaron's  family,    from 
•whom  Elizabeth  then  sprang.     And  therefore  it  is  no   contradiction 
•when  it  is  sa  dr  that  Elizabeth  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  of  the 
tribe  of  Levi,  Mid  Mary  of  the  family  of  David,  and  tribe  of  Judah. 
If  any  one  ask  vviiethe-  the  families  and  tribes  might  intermarry,  we 
say,  yes  ;  for  *' .  aron  of  the  tiibe  of  Levi,    married    the    sister   of 
Nahshon,  who  was  a  prince  of  tlie  children  of  Judah,"  Exod.  vi.  22. 
I  Cijron,  ii.    10.     The  priest  Jthoiada  had  the  sister  of  the  king  of 
Judah  to  wife,  2  CiiroD.  xxii.   11     and  David,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah^ 
had  the   daughter  of  Saul,  who  was  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,   to 
wife.     It  was  ordered  indeed,  Numb,  xxxvi.  6,  that  the  daughters  of 
Zelophehad  should  marry  only  in  a  family  of  the  tribe  of  their  fa- 
ther :  but  this  was  only  a  special   order   for  daughters   who  were 
heiresses,  and  not  for  all,  who,  having  brethren,  did  not  inherit,  and 
who,  by  marrying  into  another  tribe,  did  not  bring  the    possession  of 
their  father  to  another  trilie,  as  daughters,  who  were  heiresses,  would 
do  if  they  married  into  another  tribe  '  ?.nd  thersfore  they  were   for- 
bidden to  marry  out  of  their  tribe. 


300        THE  INCARNx\TION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

Whence  it  therefore  follows,  that  the   Lord   Jesus  was  the  true 
seed  of  David,  and  thus  also   of  the   tribe  of  Judah,  Heb.  vii.  14. 
God  the  Lord  had  promised  David,  "  that  he  would  raise  up  the  Mes- 
siah of  his  loins,  and  that  he  should  sit  upon  his  throne,"  Psalm  cxxxii. 
1 1.  Acts  ii.  30.  That  this  promise  might  now  be  fulfilled,  the  Son  of 
God  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  the  virgin  Mary, 
that  he  might  sit  upon  the  throne  of  D^.vid  :  therefore   the  angel 
said  to  Mary,  when  he  brought  her  the  tidings,  that  she  should  con- 
ceive and  bear  the  Messiah,  Luke  i.  52,  33,  *'  He  shall  be  grefet,and 
shall  be  called  the  vSon  of  the  Highest  ;  and  the  Lord  God  shall  give 
him  the  throne  of  his  father  David  ;  and   he  shall   reign  over   the 
house  of  Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end." 
2.  The  second  end  which  the   instructor  mentioneih  is,  "  that  he 
might  be  like  his  brethren  in  all  things,  sin  excepted."     The  breth- 
ren of  Jesus  are  not  here  his  natural  brethren,  born  of  Mary ;  for 
we  do  not  find  that  Mary  ever  had  children  after   Jesus.     James   is 
indeed  called  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  Gal.  i.    19,   as   also   others, 
Matt  xiii.  35.     But  these  were,  according  to  the  style  of  scripture, 
only  cousins  after  the  flesh.     All  men  who  have   sprung  with  him 
from  Adam  by  natural    generation,   are  also  his  brethren  after  the 
flesh,  Luke  iii.  23 — 38.     Acts  xvii.  26,  but  they  are  not  his  spirit- 
ual brethren  ;  the  elect  only,  who   are  sanctified,  to   whom  he  de- 
clares the  name  of  the  Lord,  whom  !^c  receives  as  the  seed  of  Abra- 
ham, and  redeems  after  the  example  of  the  ancient  redeemers,  are 
his  spiritual  brethren,   Heb.   ii.    11  — 15.     It   behooved   him  to  be 
like  them  in    all  things,    if  he  should   redeem  them,  as  the  apostle 
saith,  Heb,  ii.  17,  which  we   have    also  shown    upon  the    sixteenth 
question.     Since  now  he  took  upon  him  the  true  human  nature,  of 
the  flesh  and  blood  of  Mary,  therefore  he  v/as  in  all   things   like  the 
brethren  ;  yea,  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,"  Rom.  viii.  29, 
and  therefore  also  his    Father's  heir,  Heb.  i.  12.     "Of  whom  the 
whole  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth   is   named,"  Eph.  iii.  15,  to 
whom  it  also  belongs  to  rule  over  his  brethren,   Psalm  Ixxxix.  27, 
for  these  things  were  the  privileges  of  the  firstborn. 

But  when  he  is  said  to  be  like  his  brethren  in  all  things,  "  sin  is 
excepted  ;"  which  we  have  also  proved  before,  when  we  shoived  that 
he  was  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  out  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works. 
"We  maintain  this,  and  also  that  he  could  not  sin,  against  the  patrons 
of  freewill,  who  imagine  that  he  could  sin  ;  observe,  so  exceedingly 
are  they  enamoured  of  their  darling  freewill,  that  they  will  reproach 
even  the  Son  of  God  with  it.     But  how  could  he  sin,  v/hen  he  was 


XIV.  LORD'S  BAY,  Q.  35,  36.  30  i 

conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  united  to  the  divine  nature,  and 
had  received  the  Spirit  without  measure  ? 

II.  The  advantai;es  of  Christ's  incarnation  are,  according  to  the 
thirty  sixth  question,  these  two : 

1.  «That  he  is  our  Mediator."  He  is  a  Mediator  not  only  of 
intercession,  but  also  of  reconciliation,  as  it  behooved  him  to  be,  ac- 
cording to  what  we  have  taught  on  the  fifteenth  question.  The 
Mediator  behooved  to  be  God  and  man  in  one  person,  as  we  have 
shown  upon  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  questions.  Since  now 
the  Son  of  Cod  took  upon  himself  the  true  human  nature  in  one 
person,  therefore  he  is  also  the  Mediator  of  believers  ;  *♦  for  there 
is  one  God,  there  is  also  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the 
man  Ciirist  Jesus  :  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,"  1  Tim.  ii. 
5,  6.  This  is  truly  a  great  adv  ntagc  and  profit  to  his  brethren  ; 
they  were  indeed  alienated  from  God,  sin  had  separated  them  and 
their  God,  they  could  not  draw  near  to  him,  t'  make  reconciliation 
for  their  guilt,  or  to  ask  any  thing  of  him  ;  he  was  a  consuming  fire 
to  them.  But  behold,  the  Lord  God  himself  gives  tliem  his  Son, 
that  he  may  make  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  take  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,  become  their  brother  and  so  their  mediator,  who 
reconciles  them  to  their  Judge,  entreats  his  Father,  that  they  may 
not  go  down  into  the  pit,  but  may  draw  near  to  him  vmh  confidenccj 
both  in  their  state  of  grace  and  of  glory:  "If  any  man  sin, 
we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous. 
And  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,"  I  John  ii.  1,  2.  See,  believ- 
ers, what  is  said  on  this  t>ubject  for  your  profit,  Rom,  viii.  33,  34, 
Heb.  X.  19—22. 

2.  The  second  advantage  of  Christ's  incarafition  is,  "  that  he  with 
his  innocence  covers  in  the  sight  of  God  our  sins,  wherein  we  were 
conceived  and  brought  forth."  We  have  explained  and  proved  on 
the  seventh  question,  that  every  man  is  conceived  and  brought  forth 
in  sin.  These  sins,  and  also  actual  sins  proceeding  from  them  are 
offences,  which  deserve  punishment,  and  are  recorded  before  God, 
that  he  may  recompense  them.  See  this  Isaiah  Ixv.  6,  Yea,  "  he 
S'jts  them  before  him  m  the  light  of  his  countenance,"  Psalm  xc.  3. 
But  Christ  the  Mediator  interposeth  between  God  and  the  sinner, 
and  thus  covers  and  hides  his  sins  from  the  face  of  God  by  taking 
them  away,  so  that  the  Lord  God  cannot  behold  them,  so  as  to  be 
wroth  on  account  of  them,  and  to  rebuke  the  sinner.  The  Mediator 
doth  this  "  v/ith  his  innocence  and  perfect  holiness."  This  innocence 
and  perfect  holiness  of  Christ  must  be  viewed,  either  as  a  requisite 
ouahfication  of  the  Mediator,  as  we  havf  ta\;ght  on  the  fifteenth 


S02        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

question :  or  as  meritorious,  because  his  holy  birth  is  advantageous 
to  beUevers,  as  well  as  his  sufferings.  See  Luke  ii.  10,  1 1.  The  law 
demands  a  holy  birth,  as  well  as  a  holy  life.     Whrn  a  man  hath  not 
this,  the  law  curses  him    But  the   iVledialor  substitutes  his  holy, 
though  humble  incarnaiion,  in  the  stead  of  it     Or  we  must  consider 
the  Mediator's  innocent  and  perfectly  hgly  manhood,  us  an  acceptable 
offering  to  God,  which  he  should  "  give  to  the  Father,as  an   offering 
and  a  sacrifice  for  a  sweet  smeUing  savour,"  Eph.  v.  2,  by  which  our 
sins  should  be  covered  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  Paul  teacheth  us  most 
emphatically,  Htb.  x.  i — 18.     And  this  is  also  a  great  advantage 
to  the  brethren  of  Christ.     For  noihing  is  more  grievous  to  them, 
than  that  their  sins  stand  uncancelled  in  the  sight  of  God,  yea,  they 
also  see  them  then  in  their  dreadful  nature,  and  the  wrath  of  God  on 
account  of  them  :  "  '^'•'y  sin  is   ever  before  me,"  said  David,  Psalm 
li.  3     Their  iniquities  do  then  go  over  their  heads,  and  as  a  heavy 
burthen,  become  too  heavy  for  them  ;  yea   God's  hand  presses,  and 
is  heavy  on  them  day  and  night,  and  thei    moisture  is  turned  into 
the  drought  of  summer,  and  with   Job  they  must  comp»lain  to  the 
Lord.     "  Thou  writest  bitter  things  against  me,  and  makest  me  to 
possess  the   iniquities  of  my  youth,"  Job  xiii.  26.     But  when  their 
sins  are  covered  m  the  sight  of  God,  then  ?11  their  distress  and  per- 
turbation  ceases,  a  won  lerfu'ly  sweet  and  tranquil  peace  and  calm 
takes  place  in  the  soul,  and  she  is  compassed  with  joyful  songs  of 
deliverance  ;  the  Lord  takes  pleasure  in  his  people,  and  they  behold 
his  countenance  with  joy.  Therefore  David  saith  with  reason,  "  Bles- 
sed is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered," 
Psalm  xxxii.  1.  Since  now  this  happiness  is  procured  by  the  holy 
incarnation  of  '..hrist,  therefore  this  is  of  the  greatest  advantage. 

This  then  is  the  faith  of  Christians,  that  the  Son  of  God  was  made 
man,  and  indeed  for  such  an  advantageous  purpose,  according  to  the 
■word  of  God,  which  proposes  him  thus,  as  the  object  of  faith  :  to 
■whom  the  ancients  looked,  John  viii.  56,  and  this  is  a  fundamental 
a,rticle  of  the  faith,  1  John  iv.  2,  3. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  that  which  is  of  the  f,reatest  concern  to  you,  and 
^"rtiich  is  also  of  special  importance,  is,  whether  ye  too  arc  paitakers 


$,  36.  303 

of  the  advantages  of  Christ's  incarnation,  and  whether  he  is.youp 
iBrother  and  P*^ediator,  who  with  his  innocence  and  perfect  holiness 
covers  your  sins.  Do  ye  believe  this  for  yourselves  ?  do  ye  say, 
yea  ? 

1.  Have  your  sins  then  been  discovered  to  you,  so  that  ye  see 
them  clearly  in  the  sight  of  God,  not  merely  with  a  simple  appre- 
hension, knowing  that  ye  are  sinners,  but  so  that  ye  see  them  in 
'  yourselves,  and  in  their  circumstances,  ye  have  a  clear  view  of  them, 
ye  are  tioubled,  grieved  and  concerned  on  account  of  them  ;  ye  do 
not  cover  them,  nor  palliate  your  guilt  with  the  fool,  but  confess 
them  wilUiigly  before  the  Lord,  and  earnestly  desire  that  they  may 
be  covered  in  the  sight  of  God  with  the  innocence  and  perfect  holi* 
ness  of  Christ.  If  it  be  thus  with  you,  then  Christ  came  for  your 
salvation  ;  "  For  the  Son  of  man  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was   lost,"    Matt.  xvii.  11.    See  also  Matt.  ix.  13.    1  Tim,   i.    15. 

Or  do  ye  know  nothing  of  this  ?  and  do  ye  endeavour  to  cover 
your  sins  ?  are  ye  unwilling  that  tiiey  should  be  exposed  to  your 
view,  and  doth  such  an  exposure  provoke  you  to  anger  ?  and  when 
your  conscience  convinceth  and  distresses  you,  do  ye  then  stifle  it, 
and  endeavour  to  divert  your  anxiety  by  pursuing  this  or  that  amuse- 
ment, or  by  indulging  yourselves  in  abominations,  or  by  doing 
some  duty,  or  by  flattering  yourselves  "  that  ye  shall  have  peace, 
though  ye  walk  in  the  imagination  of  your  hearts  ;"  know  then  that 
*'  the  Lord  will  not  spare  you,  but  that  his  anger  and  jealousy  will 
smoke  against  you,  Deui.  xxix.  19,  20. 

2.  Ye  who  think  that  Christ  became  incarnate  for  you,  and  who 
are  sometimes  troubled  on  account  of  your  sins,  do  ye  also  turn  from 
your  sins  ?  do  ye  part  with  them  ?  do  ye  cast  them  away,  as  a 
menstruous  cloth  ?  and  do  ye  say  to  every  one  of  them,  and  not  only 
to  this  and  that  one,  get  thee  hence  ?  do  ye  turn  to  the  Lord  heartily, 
sincerely  and  continually,  that  ye  may  keep  his  commandments,  for 
ever  ?  and  when  your  iniquities  take  hold  of  you,  ;ind  cast  you  down, 
do  ye  rise  up  again,  mourn  and  fight  against  them  ?  then  the  incar- 
nation of  Christ  is  profitable  to  you  ;  for  he  was  promised  for  you, 
Isaiah  lix.  20.  "  The  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto  them 
that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob,  saith  the  Lord." 

But  are  ye  still  the  samt:  that  ye  always  were,  without  any  change 
for  the  better  ?  or  have  ye  in  some  measure  forsaken  this  and  that 
sin,  while  ye. retain  knowingly  and  wilfully,  without  opposition,  your 
constitutional  sin,  as  a  delicate  morsel  under  your  tongue  ?  ye  will 
not  be  just  the  most  wicked  wretches,  but  moral  and  devaut ;  and 


504        THE  INCARNATION  Or  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

ye  will  not  turn  tnily  and  wholly  to  the  Lord  ;  how  can  ye  then 
thrnkthal  ye  will  receive  proSt  from  the  incarnation  of  Christ  ? 
^  3.  Ye  who  believe  that  the  man  Christ  Jesus  is  your  brother  and 
mediator,  who  covers  your  sins  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  how  did  he  be- 
come your  brother  and  mediator?  have  ye  united  yourselves  to  him,  ^ 
and  procured  him  to  "  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith  ?"  Eph.  iii.  17, 
have  vc  received  him,  and  obtained  power  to  become  the  sons  of 
God«  and  so  the  brethren  of  Christ,  and  to  obtain  reconciliation  by 
his  blood,  because  your  sins  are  covered  in  the  sight  of  Goi  ?  then 
it  is  evident  that  he  is  iruly  your  brothei,  according  to  John  i.  12. 
Rom.  iii.  25. 

Or  do  ye  know  nothing  of  this  by  an  actual  experience  ?  Ye  know 
indeed  thai  we  must  believe  in  him,  and  that  we  are  united  to  him 
by  faith,  t)ut  ye  have  never  yet  exercised  this  act  of  faith  by  receiv- 
ing him,  though  he  came  to  you  by  the  offer  of  the  gospel ;  there- 
fore ye  are  yet  "  without  Christ,"  Eph.  ii.  12. 

4.  Are  ye  certain,  that  the  great  benefit  of  the  incarnation  of 
Christ  belongs  to  you  ?  are  ye  then  become  like  him  even  conforma- 
ble to  his  image,  as  he  became  like  you  by  taking  upon  himself 
the  human  nature  ?  have  ye  been  conceived  and  born  again  of  his 
Spirit,  so  that  he  hath  been  formed  in  you  ?  as  he  separated  himself 
fi'om  whatever  was  sinful,  and  dedicated  himself  to  God,  that  he 
might  live  in  and  for  him,  and  to  his  service,  have  ye  also  thus  died 
to  yourselves  r  and  is  your  life  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  ?  then  he 
is  also  your  brother  and  mediator,  and  covers  in  the  sight  of  God 
all  your  sins.  And  so  ye  have  the  evidence,  that  "  God  fore-ordained 
you  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,"  Rom.  viii.  29.  Yea, 
»'  that  which  is  true  in  him,  is  also  true  in  you,"  1  John  ii.  8. 

But  if  it  be  not  thus  v^'ith  you,  and  if  ye  be  still  conformed  to  the 

world,  and  act  as  this  and   that  worldling  acts,   and   think  that  it  is 

lawful  for  you,'  because  this  and  that  one  doth  so,  and  if  ye  have  no 

more  of  Christianity  than  the  name,  and  the  outward  profession,  with 

a  fev/  religious   ceremonies  ;  how  can  ye  then  think  that  Christ  be- 

cime   incarnate  for  your  good  !  ye  have  indeed  not  one  solid  proof 

t'i'  this  ;  and  did  he  not  become  incarnate  for  your  good,  it  will  then 

be  to  your  harm,  and  will  greatly  aggravate  your  sins  ?  Hear  him 

say  himself,  John  xv.  22.  "If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  to  them, 

they  had  not  had  sin  ;  but  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin.  He 

is  set  as  well  for  a  fall,  as  for  a  rising  again,"  Luke  ii.  34.    See  only 

how  dreadful  and  intolerable  his  coming  will  be  to  them,  who  are 

straiit^ers  to  him,   Mai.  iii.  2.     Doth  this  not  affect  you,  consider 

what  ye  will  do,  when  his  second  coming  will  awaken  and  consume 


Xr 

you :  for  concerning  this  we  can  say.  "  Behold,  the  day  comcth 
that  shall  burn  as  an  oven,  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do 
wickedly,  shall  be  stubble,  and  the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them 
up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch,"  Mai.  iv,  1. 

Therefore,  behold  your  perdition,  endea's^our  to  escape  from  it, 
receive  him  still,  while  he  still  offers  himself  to  you,  yea,  invites  you 
to  him,  that  he  may  manifest  his  kindness  to  you,  and  save  you, 
Isaiah  xlv.  22.  Matt.  ix.  13. 

But  with  respect  to  you,  who  have  been  convinced  of  your  sins, 
have  turned  from  them.,  have  received  the  Son  of  man,  and  are  born 
again  after  his  image,  manifest  now  that  ye  believe  this  great  truth 
©f  the  incarnation  of  Christ.     And  therefore, 

1.  Endeavour  to  contemplate  the  length,  breadth,  depth  and  height 
of  it :  "  iMary  kept  ail  these  things,  which  concerned  her  child,  and 
pondered  them  in  her  heart,"  Luke  ii.  19.  "The  angels  desire  to 
look  into  these  things,"  1  Peter  i.  12,  for  "  without  controversy  great  is 
the  mystery  of  godliness  :  God  was  manifest  in  the  6esh,"  1  Tim.  liu 
16.  Of  ail  the  great  and  inconceivable  wonders,  which  God  hath  ever 
w^rought,  none  is  comparable  to  tiiis  wonder  ;  it  is  a  wonder  which 
surpasseth  all  wonders,  that  the  Son  of  God  was  made  man  ;  that  he 
who  was  equal  with  God  took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant  ; 
that  he  was  made  man  of  a  virgin  ;  that  the  Holy  One  was  sent  in 
the  likeaess  of  sinful  flesh  ;  that  he  was  born  perfectly  holy  of  a  sin- 
ner, that  although  he  became  man,  he  nevertheless  is  and  continueth 
true  and  eternal  God  :  yea,  that  he  became  man  to  suffer,  tlius  to 
cover  our  sins  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  like  your  eldest  brother  and 
mediator  to  redeem  you,  and  that  "  God  made  him  who  knew  no 
sin,  to  be  sin  for  you  ;  that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of 
God  in  him,"  2  Cor.  v.  21.  The  jwonderful  power  of  God  shines 
forth  here  in  the  brightest  manner,  since  he  hath  effected  so  many 
wonders,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  beams  forth  here  in  the  clear- 
est manner,  since  he  knew  how  to  devise  a  way  for  the  salvation  of 
sinners,  and  order  it  so,  that  neither  his  justice  nor  his  mercy  should 
be  in  the  least  dishonoured,  but  that  God  who  is  holy  should  be 
sanctified  by  righteousness ;  the  power  of  the  divine  love  appears 
here  in  the  most  lovely  manner ,  "  For  herein  is  love,  not  tliat  we 
loved  God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  prophia- 
tion  for  our  sins,"  1  John  iv.  10.  O  how  ought  ye  to  wonder  at  this  ! 
Did  Elisabeth  wonder  so,  that  she  said,  "  Whence  is  this  to  me,  that 
%he  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me,"  Luke  i.  43,  how  ought 

Tt 


306        THE  INCARNATION  OF  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

it  then  to  ravish  you,  that  your  Lord  himself  cmo«s  to  you  !  yea> 
your  wonder  oug-ht  to  transport  yi:)U  out  of  rour^^elves.  and  cause  you 
to  celebrate  c.c  praises  of  the  Lord.  Hehold  how  Klis^beth,  Mary, 
the  shepherds,  Simeon  and  Anna  praised  the  Lord  on  account  of 
this  matter.  Yea,  the  angels  came  down  from  heaven  on  earth, 
"  P'':iising  'Joel,  and  sayini^,  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on 
earth  fjcace,  good  will  lowards  men,"  Luke  ii.  13,  14. 

2.  Exercise  yourselves  much  in  acts  of  union  with  him.  Ye  are 
united  to  him,  he  hath  taken  your  nature  upon  him,  and  united  it  to 
himself;  ye  are  considered  by  God  as  in  him  ;  his  Spirit  hath  in- 
grafted you  into  him  ;  ye  have  united  him  to  you  by  faith  :  but  how 
great  an  estrangement  doth  there  often  take  place  between  him  and 
you  !  Oh,  do  not  suffer  it,  but  *'  acquaint  yourselves  with  him,  and 
be  at  peace,"  Job  xxii.  21.  Let  your  souls  "follow  hard  after  him," 
with  strong  desires  and  aspirations,  like  David,  Psalm  Ixiii.  8. 
Maintain  an  active  faith,  that  ye  may  cause  him  to  dwell  in  your 
hearts,  and  exert  often  an  ardent  love,  that  ye  may  hold  him  fast, 
like  the  spouse,  "  who  would  hold  him,  and  not  let  him  go,"  Song 
iii.  4.  For  "  he  who  cleaves  to  the  Lord  is  thus  one  spirit  with  hira," 
1  Cor.  vi.   \7. 

3.  Show  now  also  by  your  conversation  that  he  became  like  you  as 
his  brethren,  and  that  ye  are  become  like  him  by  your  regeneration 
and  sanctification  :  "Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery 
to  be  equal  with  God  :  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  hkeness  of 
men,"  Philip,  ii.  5,  6.  His  humility,  low'liness,  self-denial,  heavenly- 
mindedness,  obedience  to  his  Father,  love  to  God  and  his  brethren, 
ought  to  beam  forth  also  in  you  :  "  He  that  saiih  he  abideth  in  him, 
ought  also  so  to  walk,  as  he  hath  walked,"  J  John  ii.  6. 

4.  Is  he  become  your  brother,  and  indeed  your  eldest  brother  hj 
his  incarnation,  submit  yourselves  then  to  him.  It  was  the  privilege 
of  the  first-born  in  ancient  times  to  rule  over  the  younger  brethren,  as 
we  have  shown  in  our  explanation  ;  therefore  Paul  also  saith,  Coll.  i. 
18.  '<  He  is  he  head  of  the  body,  the  church,  he  is  the  beginning, 
the  first-bo»T  from  the  dead  ;  that  in  all  thing's  he  might  have  the  pre- 
eminence." The  t-ord  said  to  Cain  concerning  Abel,  Gen.  iv.  7. 
"  His  desir:;  iiall  be  unto  thee,  and  t  lou  s^  dt  rule  over  him  "  But  is 
not  your  desire  also  to  your  Brother,  tiiat  he  should  rule  over  you  ? 
verily  he  hath  deserved  it  of  you,  since  he  became  man  and  mediator 
for  you,  that  he  might  cover  your  sins  in  ths  sight  of  God.   And  for 


XIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  35,  36.  307 

what  purpose  is  he  the  true  seed  of  David  ?  is  it  not,  that  he  may 
reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  ? 

5.  By  his  incarnation  he  hath  also  become  a  Mediator  for  you  be- 
tween God  and  you.  Do  not  expect  then  that  God  will  draw  nigh 
to  your  souls  in  his  grace,  except  through  him  :  "  He  is  made  of 
God  unto  you  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemp- 
tion," 1  Cor.  i.  30.  Neither  should  ye  draw  nigh  to  God,  except 
through  hira ;  "  Jesus  said,  I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth  and  the 
life  :  no  man  comelh  to  the  P'ather  but  by  me,"  John  xiv.  6.  Let 
this,  that  your  Mediator  is  also  your  Brother,  encourage  you  to 
go  boldly  to  the  throne  :  '*  For  we  have  boldness  to  enter  mto 
the  hoUest  by  the  blood  of  JeSus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which 
he  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is,  his  fltsh,"  Heb. 
ix.  19,  20.     Eph.  iii.   12. 

6.  He  hath  covered  your  sins  in  the  sight  of  God  by  his  holy  incar- 
r.ation  :  Beware  then  of  uncovering  them  again,  either  by  a  careless 
and  dissolute  behaviour,  by  which  your  iniquity  will  rise  up,  and  be 
disGOVf-red  in  tie  sight  of  God,  yea,  of  men,  and  distress  your  souls 
in  a  giievous  manner:  "  When  the  Lord  speaketh  pe 'ce  to  his 
Saints,  let  them  not  return  again  to  folly,"  Psalm  Ixxxv.  8.  or  by  un- 
belief, whereby  we  mistrust  the  grace  of  God  and  of  his  Son,  either 
through  a  mere  conceit,  or  on  account  of  adversity,  as  if  our  sins 
were  not  covered  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  he  had  not  testified  this 
to  the  soul.  May  we  not  apply  here  that  which  is  said,  Joo.  xv.  1 1, 
12,  13.  "  Are  the  consolations  of  God  small  with  thee  ?  is  there 
any  secret  thing  with  thee  ?  wiiy  doth  tlii  le  heart  carry  thee  away  ? 
and  what  do  thine  eyes  wink  at  ?  that  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against 
God,  and  lettcst  such  words  ^o  out  of  thy  n;ou  '".  ?" 

7.  Finally,  let  the  incarnation  of  Jesus  supnort  you  under  your 
dejections-  The  incarnation  of  Jesus  is  truly  ''the  consolation  of 
Israel,"  Luke  ii  25.  Are  ye  mean  and  despised  in  the  vorld,  and 
doth  this  disturb  you,  let  it  suffice  you  that  the  Son  of  God  is  your 
brother,  and  that  ye  are  of  one  family  with  your  Brother,  Heb.  ii. 
II.  Do  ye  suffer  many  afflictions  in  soul  and  body  ;  *'  he  was  made 
like  you  his  brethren  in  all  things  ;  that  he  might  be  a  merciful 
and  faithful  high  priest,  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconcil- 
iation for  the  sins  of  the  people  :  for  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered, 
being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted,"  Heb.  ii. 
17,  18.  Are  ye  troubled  mostly  on  account  of  your  sins?  "Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  yea,  the  chief  of  sinners," 
3  Tim.  i.  15.  Are  your  bodies  exceedingly  weak  and  languid  ?  The 
*^on  of  God,  who  was  make  like  you,  "Bhall  change  your  vile  bo- 


30t        THE  INCARNATION  OP  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

dies,  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,"  PhilTp^ 
iii  3 1 .  Must  ye  often  stand  aloof  from  him,  and  be  separated  from  hin\> 
so  that  ye  are  even  hidden  from  his  face,  it  will  not  be  long  ere  «  ye 
shall  be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.  And  s» 
ye  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord.  Wherefore  comfort  oae  aaothcr 
with  those  words,"  Ajnen^ 


(  34)9  } 


CHRIST^S  SUFFERINGS 


AND 


CROSS  UNDER  PONTIUS  PILATE. 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY» 


1  Peter  iii.  18.    For  Christ  hath  also  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  jwt 
for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God.