Q.  37.   What  dofit  thou  understand  by  the  word  ^^  he  suffered?" 

A.  That  he,  all  the  time  he  Hved  upon  earth,  but  especially  at 
the  end  of  his  Hfe,  sustained  in  body  and  soul,  the  wrath  of  God 
against  the  sins  of  all  mankind,  that  so  by  his  passion,  as  the  only 
propitiatory  sacrifice,  he  might  redeem  our  body  anc'  fcoul  from  ever- 
lasting damnation,  and  obtain  for  us  the  favour  of  God,  righteousness 
and  eternal  life. 

Q,  38.    Why  did  he  then  suffer  under  Pontius  Filafe  as  his  Judge? 

A.  That  he,  being  innocent,  and  yet  condemned  by  a  temporal 
judge,  might  thereby  free  us  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God,  to 
tvhich  we  were  exposed. 

Q.  39.  Is  there  any  thing  more  in  his  being  cruci^ed,  than  if  he  had 
died  some  other  death  ? 

A.  Yes  there  is :  tor  thereby  I  am  assured,  that  he  took  on  him 
the  curse  which  lay  on  me  ;  for  the  death  of  the  cross  was  accursed 
of  God. 

'HE  Saviour  Jesus  speaking  of  himself,  saith  Matt.  xx.  28.  "  The 
Son  of  roan  came  xm\  to  be  miiustered  UDto,  but  to  nunister,  and 


S19  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Sec. 

jlve  his  life  a  ransom  for  many."  It  was  indeed  foretold,  that  Israel 
should  serve  David  their  King,  the  Messiah,  Jer.  xxx.  9,  as  the 
Father  also  promised  to  him  in  the  council  of  peace,  "  that  he  should 
have  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  his  possess'on,"  Psalm  ii.  8,  wherefore  he  also  went  by  his 
incarnatioa,  like  a  nobleman,  into  a  far  country,  that  he  might  re- 
ceive a  kingdom  for  himself,  Luke  xix.  12,  but  it  i:ehQpved  him  first 
to  humble  himself,  and  "  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  if  he 
ahould  see  his  seed,"  Isaiah  liii.  10  And  so  he  came  in  a  humbl© 
manner,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  mmister,  and  to  give  his 
Jife  a  ransom  for  many,  inasmuch  as  he  came  to  suffer ;  therefore 
he  is  also  represented  to  us,  as  "  one  whom  man  despised,  whom 
the  nation  abhorred,  and  a  servant  of  rulers,"  Isaiah  xlix.  7.  On 
which  account  he  also  withdrew,  when  "  he  knew  that  they  would 
come,  and  take  him  by  force,  and  mak'C  him  a  king,"  John  vi.  15. 
His  design  in  coming  into  the  vvorM  was,  "  to  save  sinners,"  1  Tim* 
i.  15.  As  it  was  also  foretold,  that  he  should  come  in  a  most  de- 
spised condition,  in  order  to  suffer,  and  give  his  soul  a  ransom,  and 
an  offering  for  sin,  Isniah  liii.  And  therefore  his  suffering  and 
humilialion  for  the  redemption  of  the  elect  sinner  arc  usually  joined 
to  his  incarnation,  as  we  see  not  only,  Matt,  xx.  28,  but  also  Matt* 
xviii.  U.|Philip,  ii.  7,  8,  In  this  manner  do  the  compilers  of  the  Chris- 
tian creed  proceed,  when  they  teach  us  to  say,  "  Who  was  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius 
Pilate."  And  in  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed  j  for 
after  explaining  the  doctrme  of  Christ's  incarnation  in  the  fourteenth^ 
Lord's  day,  he  exhibits  his  suffering  in  this  Lord's  day. 

We  have  three  general  heads  proposed  in  this  Lord's  day  : 

I.  The  exposition  of  the  word'  **  suffered,"  Question  37. 

II.  the  reason  why  he  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  Question  38. 

III.  The  grievousness  of  his  crucifixion.  Question  39. 

1.  Although  tiie  word,  "  suffered  "  is  very  small,  yet  it  implies  the 
whole  of  Christ's  sufferings,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his 
life  :  *'  Christ  suffered  once  for  sis,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  also. 
Heb.  ii.  18.  1  Peter  ii.  2i.  The  captious  Remonstrants  will  not 
allow  that  the  whole  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  expressed  by  the  word^ 
''  suffered."  The  creed  restrains  the  suffering  indeed  to  Pontius 
Pilate  ;  yet  this  doth  not  exclude  Christ's  former  sufferings,  but  only 
shows  when  he  suffered  most  grievously. 

Ill  order  then  to  explain  this  word  in  its  more  extensive  significa- 
tion., we  will  consider  particularly,  (a)  who  suffered,  (b)  what  he  suf- 
fered, (c)  when  he  sulfered,  (d)  for  what  end  he  suffered,  and  (e) 
for  whom  he  suffered. 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  S6,  3#*  311 

A.  If  we  believe  the  word  of  God,  we  must  say  that  the  Son  of 
God,  who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  the  virgin 
Mary,  suffered ;  and  that  not  only  in  appearance,  but  in  reality.  We 
do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  refute  here  the  anci  nt  and  long  since 
obsolete  opinions  of  the  Patripassians,  who  taught  that  the  I-  aihet 
suffered  :  neither  will  we  busy  ourselves  with  Marcion,  and  others, 
■who  held  that  the  Son  of  God  suft'ere; '  only  in  appearance,  and  not 
in  reality.  These  opinions  have  confuted  themselves  and  they  have 
therefore  also  perished,  and  we  know  not  that  they  are  patronized 
by  a  single  person  at  present.  Sabellius  taught  in  former  times  that 
the  divine  and  human  natures  of  Christ  were  mixed,  the  one  with 
the  other,  or  that  the  Godhead  was  changed  into  the  manhood,  which 
opinion  is  still  maintained  by  certain  Anabaptists,  who  also  say  that 
the  Son  of  God  suffered  in  his  Godhead.  But  what  can  be  imagined 
more  absurd  ?  For  since  he  is  the  blessed  and  unchangeable  God,  he 
is  also  "immortal  and  incorruptible,"  1  Tim.  i.  17.  vi.  16.  The 
apostle  saith  indeed  that  "  God  hath  purchased  his  church  with  his 
own  blood,"  Acts  xx.  38,  but  he  doth  not  say  that  the  Godhead  pur- 
chased the  church  with  its  own  blood  :  he  only  intimateth  that  the 
person,  who  gave  the  blood  of  his  manhood  to  redeem  and  purchase 
his  church,  was  God. 

But  when  we  say  that  he  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  we  do  not 
understand  it  only  of  his  body,  as  the  Papists  do,  in  order  to  deny 
the  perfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  but  also  of "  his  soul,  which 
was  exceedingly  sorrowful  even  unto  death,"  Matt.  xxvi.  38.  We 
must  understand  this  not  only  of  the  inferior  and  less  ncble  parts  of' 
his  soul,  which  were  affected  With  sorrow,  fear  and  compassion,  on 
account  of  his  approaching  bodily  suffering,  as  the  Papists  speak  s 
for  he  suffered  properly  the  power  of  God's  wrath  in  his  soul ;  inas- 
much as  compassion  and  fear  alone  could  not  cause  him  to  mourn 
and  sweat  blood,  as  he  did,  because  he  would  then  have  manifested 
greater  weakness  than  many  martyrs,  whose  souls  sustained  the 
most  grievous  suffering  with  the  greatest  courage,  triuuiph  and  joy. 
He  was  also  obliged  to  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  of  the 
soul,  and  thus  to  give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many,"  Matt.  xx.  28. 
It  was  also  foretold,  that  "  he  should  make  his  soul  an  offering  for 
sin,"  Isaiah  liii.  10,  as  it  was  also  typified;  when  the  blood  of  beasts, 
and  therefore  their  soul  was  offered  upon  the  altar,  to  make  recon- 
ciliation for  souls.  Lev.  xviii.  1 1 . 

But  although  Jesus  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  yet  he  did  not 
suffer  without  any  relation  to  his  Godhead:  but  his  Godhead  (1) 
surrendered  the  manhood  to  be  an  offering  for  sin,  and  .dedicated  i' 


312  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Stc. 

to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  :  «  He  offered  himself  without  spdt 
to  God  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  to  purge  the  conscience,"  Heb. 
ix.  14.  See  John  X.  18.  Eph.  v.  2.(2)  His  Godhead  veiled  its 
glory  under  the  manhood,  so  that  it  could  not  beam  forth  in  its  great- 
est lustre  :  "For  he,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness 
of  men  :  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself, 
and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,"  Philip, 
ii.  6 J  7,  8-  (r>)  The  Godhead  sustained  the  manhood  under  its  suf- 
fering :  "  His  own  arm  brought  him  salvation,  and  his  fury  it  upheld 
him  ;  for  tlie  Lord  God  helped  him,  therefore  he  was  not  confoun- 
ded :  therefore  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint,  knowing  that  he  should 
not  be  ashamed."  Isainh  1.  7.  (4)  The  Godhead  also  added  the 
value  to  his  suffering  ;  by  which  the  sufifering  of  the  manhood  being 
the  suffering  of  him  who  was  also  God,  "  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,"  Dan.  ix.  24.     Acts  xx.  28.     1  John  i.  7, 

5.  We  shall  now  consider  what  he  suffered.  The  instructor  saith 
"  that  he  suffered  the  wratii  of  God  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind." 
God  was  terribly  displeased  with  the  sins  of  mankind,  as  we  have 
shown  on  the  tenth  question.  S:nce  now  the  Son  of  God  was  be- 
come surety,  and  had  taken  all  the  sins  of  elect  men  upon  himself, 
in  order  to  satisfy  for  them,  therefore  the  righteous  God  also  stirred 
up  his  whole  wrath,  and  poured  it  out  upon  the  Surety.  It  is  indeed 
true,  that  he  suffered  from  devils  and  from  men,  from  friends  and 
from  enem.ies  ;  but  in  all  this  he  still  suffered  the  wrath  of  God. 
For  (1)  the  men  who  procured  this  suffering  to  him,  were  the  rods 
of  God's  anger,"  Isaiah  x  5.  Therefore  Peter  also  saith,  Acts  ii. 
23.  "  Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  council  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God,  ye  havt  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  cruci- 
fied and  slain."  (2)  He  suffered  all  that  was  necessary  to  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  sequel.  Now  sin  could  not 
he  satisfied  for,  but  by  bearing  the  wrath  of  God  :  this  hath  been 
proved  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  (5)  The  suffering  was  a  cup  of 
God's  wrath,  as  we  see  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  compared  with  Psalm  xl.  6. 
Isaiah  Ii.  ir — 33.  Jer.  xxv.  15 — 29.  (4)  He  suffered  the  death  of 
the  cross,  inflicted  on  him  by  men,  as  a  curse,  and  indeed  so,  that  he 
hath  delivered  the  elect  from  the  carse.  Gal.  iii.  13. 

He  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  thus  from  wicked  instruments  ;  but 
lie  suffered  it  also  immediately  in  his  soul,  when  his  Father  whhheld 
his  light  and  lovingkindness  from  him,  abandoned  him  to  a  dreadful 
darkness,  subjected  him  to  his  grievous  wrsth  on  account  of  all  the 


XV.  LORD'S  IJAY,  Q.  37,  38,  39  iJ13 

sins  6f  the  elect,  and  let  all  the  powers  of  hell  loose  upon  him.  \Ve 
niight  speak  of  this  somewhat  more  largely  here,  but  it  will  be  more 
proper  to  do  it  in  order  oq  the  forty-fourth  question. 

C.  We  must  observe  in  the  third  place,  with  respect  to  the  wori 
suffered,  when  Christ  suffered.  The  catechism  saiih,  that  he  suf- 
fered m  body  and  soul  "  during  his  whole  life."  This  is  also  true  : 
for  he  Was  born  in  a  poor  and  needy  conditio/i  ;  when  he  was  only 
eight  days  old,  he  underwent  the  bloody  and  painful  rite  of  circum- 
cision: he  was  obliged  to  flee  for  his  life  into  Egypt,  while  hfc  was 
yet  very  young.  He  had  no  sooner  be.<un  his  puhlick  ministry,  than 
he  fasted  forty  days,  was  tempted  by  the  devil,  blasphemed,  threat- 
ened, and  insidiously  watched  by  the  Jews  ;  and  thoilg^h  the  foxes 
had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  had  nests,  yet  the  Son  of  Man 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  And  who  knows  what  spiritual  dis- 
tresses and  desertions  he  wms  obliged  to  suffer,  when  he  spent  so 
great  a  part  of  his  linne  alonb,  ahd  in  the  dreary  night,  that  he  might 
wrestle  in  prayer  with  his  Father. 

But  he  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  particularly  "  at  the  end  of  his 
life."  Then  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness  surprised  him,  when 
his  Father  attacked  him  with  his  anger  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross  ;  when  he  was  betrayed  by  his  own  apostle  Judas,  was  appre- 
hended as  a  thief  by  the  Jews  with  swords  and  staves^  was  deserted 
by  his  pious  disciples,  and  denied  by  his  zealous  Peter,  dragged 
from  tribunal  to  tribunal,  falsely  accused  there  of  sedition  and  blasphe- 
my, condemned,  mocked,  spitten  upon,  scourged,  and  finally  put  to 
death  in  the  most  shameful,  and  most  painful  manner  on  the  cross. 
Alas,  how  bitter  was  all  this  to  him  1  The  anguish  of  his  heart  for- 
ced that  dismal  complaint  fronti  hitn,  which  he  uttered  with  a  loud 
voice,  *'  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thoU  forsaken  me  ?"  All  na- 
ture was  disturbed  at  this  grievous  suffering  :  "  For  the  sun  was 
darkened,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,  the  earth  quaked,  the  rocks  rent,  the  graves  were  opened^ 
and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept  arose/'  Matt,  xxviii  45,  46, 
50,  51,  52. 

D.  The  fourth  particular  that  requires  our  consideration  with 
respect  to  the  word  suffered,  is  the  end  for  which  Christ  suffered. 
Surely  it  could  not  be  by  accident,  and  without  a  regard  to  some 
great  end,  that  God's  innocent  Son  suffered  so  long  a  time,  and  sO 
grievously.  The  word  of  God  informs  us,  that  he  suffered,  (a)  "  Be- 
cause the  hand  and  counsel  of  God  had  before  determined,  that  htt 
should  suffer,"  Acts  iv.  28.  He  had  entered  into  an  engagement  to 
his  Father  in  the  council  of  peace  to  suffer,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  S.     Ill 

Uu 


$U  CHRlSt'S  SUFJ?ER1NGS,  kt^ 

order  to  fulSl  this  council,  he  submitted  w.Ilinp^ly  to  suffering  ;  thetc^ 
fore  he  said  to  Peter,  who  would  protect  hi  in  from  suffering,  *'  The 
cup  which  n»y  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?"  John  xviii. 
11.  The  word  of  C.od  also  tc.chelh  us,  (b)  »hat  he  suffered  in  or- 
der to  fulfil  tlie  prophecies.  It  was  often  foretold,  ;and  particularly 
in  the  xxii.  Psalm,  ..nd  Isaiah  iiii.  that  Christ  should  suffer.  He 
would  therefore  suffer,  thai  he  might  fulfil  the  scriptures  in  thi& 
respect :  wherefore,  when  he  con^plains  of  the  injui-tice  of  his  ene- 
mies, that  they  took  him  with  swords  and  staves,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  thief,  he  stilicomfo  t5  himself  therewith,  that  "all  this  came  to 
pitss,  that  the  scriptures  of  the' prophet .  might  be  fulfilled,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  56.  (c)  His  suffering  was  not  only  foretold,  but  also  typified 
by  all  the  trespass-offermgs,  sin-offerings,  sacrifices  of  atonement, 
and  of  slain  beasts,  which  were  shadows  of  him,  Heb.  x.  i.  In  or- 
der to  show  that  he  was  the  body  of  them,  "  he  gave  himself  up  an 
offermg  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph-  v.  2.  We  must  also  say  that 
he  suflered,  (d)  to  affonl  a  perfect  example  of  obedience  to  his  Father, 
and  of  holy  patience  ;  for  "  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us,  leavir^  us 
an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,"   1  Pet   ii.  21. 

But  the  chief  end  of  his  suffering,  and  of  God's  appointing,  fore- 
teUing  and  typifying  that  he  should  suffer  thus,  was  that  he  might 
by  his  suffering  fully  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  and  guilt 
of  his  people,  "  that  so  by  his  passion,  as  the  only  propitiatory  sacri- 
fice, he  might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from  everlasting  damnation, 
andobtain  for  usthe  favor  of  God ^  righteousness  and  eternal  life." 
That  such  a  satisfaction  was  necessary,  we  have  proved  on  the  fifth 
Lord's  dciy.  We  must  now  prove  (1)  against  the  Socinians,  that  he 
hath  by  his  suffering  "  really  "  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  ;  and 
(2)  against  the  Papists,  that  he  hath  satisfied  fully. 

1.  We  say  \hat  the  Son  of  God  hath  by  his  suffering  really  satis- 
fied the  justice  of  God  for  the  sinner.  The  Socinians,  who  reject 
all  those  particulars  in  the  gospel,  that  can  afford  comfort  to  the 
people  of  God,  have  dared  to  deny  this  great  ground  of  salvation 
also  ;  but  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this  truth,  and  therefore  we 
•^cleave  to  it  : 

1.  Because  the  suffering  of  Christ  is  put  in  the  stead  of  all  the 
sacrifices  of  atonement  under  the  Old  Testament,  which  atoned 
for  sin  typically.  See  Lev.  iv.  snd  xvi.  Now  it  was  impossible  that 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins  ;  he  neverthe- 
-  less  being  willing  to  reconcile  the  sinner  to  God,  substituted  and  of- 
fered his  body  and  soul  for  a  trespass-offering,  instead  of  those  sacri- 
fices ;  and  thus  "  by  one  offering  hath  perfected  for  ever,  them  that 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Qj  57.  58,  39.  3i5 

iie  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  4—14.  And  he  thus  really  effected  the 
atonement,  which  the  sacrifices  could  not  accomphsh,  but  which  only 
pointed  to  Christ-  See  John  i.  29, 

2.  Because  the  sins  of  ihe  elect  were  laid  upon  him,  and  punished 
in  him,  that  he  might  take  them  away.  The  ancient  church  fore- 
saw this  long  before  it  came  to  pa^,  when  she  said,  "  Surely  he  hath 
borne  our  grief,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  He  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastistment 
of  our  peace  was  upoa  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He  was  oppressed, 
when  it  was  required  of  him,"  *  Isaiah  liii.  4 — 7.  Peter  having  re- 
spect to  this,  saith  that  '<  Christ  bore  our  sins  on  the  tree,"  1  Peter 
ii.   24. 

3  The  reality  of  the  satisfaction  appears  still  more,  when  we  con' 
sider  that  liis  sufferings  were  the  ransom  and  ])rice  of  redemption 
for  the  sinner,  who  was  taken  captive  on  account  of  his  guilt.  Be- 
lievers "are  not  redeemed  Avith  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and 
gold  :  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lam^-,"  1  Peter  i.  18,  19. 
"  He  gave  his  life  and  himself  a  ransom,"  Matt.  xx.  28.  I  Tim.  ii.  6. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  Christ  suffered  for  the  elect,  and  in  their 
stead  :  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were 
yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  Rom.  v.  8.  "  Christ  was  made  a 
curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  1 3.  So  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are  con- 
sidered as  the  sufferings  of  the  elect,  2  Cor.  v.  15.  "  We  judge 
thus,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  and  he  died  for 
all." 

.5,  *'  God  declares  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  sins 
through  his  blood,"  and  suffering,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  How  can  this 
be.  if  he  did  not  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  Oy  his  suffering  ?  for  when 
God  forgives  sin  without  the  satisfaction  of  his  Son,  he  declares  in- 
deed his  grace,  but  not  his  righteousness  ;  and  it  wou'd  not  then  be 
necessary,  that  remissior.  should  be  obtained  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

6.  If  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  not  for  satisfaction,  why  did 
God  then  punish  his  guiltless  Son  ?  It  could  not  be  only  to  afford  a 
perfect  example  of  obedience  and  patience,  nor  to  confirm  his  doC^ 
trine  by  his  sufferings,  seeing  any  ordinary  man,  who  was  eminently 
sanctified  by  God,  was  sufficiently  qualified  for  this  ;  but  Peter  show- 
eth  that  "  Christ  suffered  in  the  stead  of  the  unjust,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God,"  \  Peter  iii.  18. 

7.  Pinally,  we  say  also  that  Christ  by  his  suffering  delivered  the. 

*  Thi?  is  agreeable  to  ih«  Dutch  transktion. 


8l<i  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

elect  from  eternal  damnation :  for  "  Christ  hath  delivered  us  from 
the  Gurse  of  the  law,  beinj^  made  a  curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Eph. 
i.  7.  By  his  sufferint;  he  also  obtained  for  them  the  favour  of  God, 
righteousness,  and  eternal  life  :  "  God  made  him  to  be  sin,  that  we 
might  be  made  the  ri^^hteousness  of  God  in  him,"  3  Cor.  v.  21.  I 
Cor.  V.  30.  "  The  gift  of  Gpd  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
pur  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  23. 

Whoever  considers  without  prejudice  these,  and  such  proofs  of 
the  doctrine,  that  Christ  huth  really  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  by 
his  sufferinj^  for  sin,  will  be  obliged  to  do  violence  to  himself,  if  he 
will  deny  the  satisfaction.  The  Socinians  indeed  deny  this  great 
truth,  but  it  proceeds  only  from  a  prejudice,  that  Christ  is  not  God, 
coessential  with  the  Father  ;  and  therefore  they  say  that  the  transient 
sufferings  of  one  man  could  not  satisfy  for  so  many  sins  of  such  a 
number  of  men,  who  should  have  been  punished  for  ever.  We  also 
should  say  this,  if  Christ  were  not  more  than  a  mere  man,  but  since 
he  is  also  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  and  since  his  blood  is  thus 
the  blood  and  sufferings  of  God,  therefore  his  sufferings  were  of  such 
an  infinite  value,  that  he  could  take  away  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect 
"  in  one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9. 

They  deny  th's  truth  also  fro^i  another  prejudice,  to  wit,  they 
look  upon  sins,  as  pecuniary  debts,  and  therefore  say,  that  if  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ  satisfied  for  sins,  there  can  then  be  no  forgiveness 
nor  grace  shown  to  men.  This  would  he  true,  if  sins  were  pecuniary 
debtb,  which  are  not  forgiven  from  kindness,  when  they  are  paid  : 
but  inasmuch  as  sins  are  debts  that  deserve  punishment,  which  God 
can  exact  of  the  sinner  himself,  therefore  great  grace  is  shown  to 
him,  when  they  are  forgiven  him  on  accoynt  of  a  satisfaction ;  be- 
cause God  demands  this,  pot  of  the  sinner  himself,  but  of  his  Surety, 
and  because  God  will  admit  of  a  surety*  bestows  one  himself,  and 
particularly  his  Son,  and  that  just  for  this,  and  not  for  that  sinner. 

2.  Having  thus  proved  the  reality  of  Christ's  satisfaction  against 
the  Socinians,  we  must  also  prove  the  perfection  of  his  satisfaction 
against  the  Papists.  These  will  have  that  he  satisfied  merely  for 
sins  committed  before  baptism  ;  or  if  he  satisfied  for  all  sins,  that  he 
then  satisfied  only  for  the  guilt,  and  not  for  the  punishment  of  sin  ; 
and  if  he  satisfied  for  any  punishment,  that  it  v/as  only  for  eternal, 
and  not  f«>r  temporal  punishments,  thinking  that  they  themselves 
must  satisfy  for  these  in  this  life  by  afflicting  their  bodies,  and  after 
this  life  in  pm'gatory.     But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us, 

1.  *'  That  with  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that 
fire  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  14.     If  he  satisfied  only  for  some  sins,  an^ 


? 

not  for  guilt,  but  only  for  certain  punishments,  then  he  did  not  per* 
feet  his  delivered  people  with  one  offering  ;  and  so  these  men  con^ 
tradict  the  apostle  to  his  face. 

2.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  of  infinite  value,  as  hath  been 
shown  ;  the  Papists  must  also  allow  this,  for  they  say  that  he  could 
redeem  the  whole  world  with  one  drop  of  his  blood.  No^y  to  say 
that  he  hath  not  fully  satisfied,  what  is  it  but  reproaching  him,  and 
his  great  work.  ? 

3.  The  Saviour  himself  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30.  His 
Father  also  showed  that  he  had  finished  all, things,  when  he  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  and  so  gave  him  an  acquittance,  certifying  that 
he  had  discharged  the  debt,  Acts  ii.  24.  1  Tim.  iii,  16.  1  Peter  iii. 
21.     How  could  all  this  be,  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

4.  Believers  obtain  by  his  suffering  redtmption,  the  favour  of 
God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life,  and  so  all  that  they  need.  How 
can  this  be  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

When  the  apostle  saith.  Cell.  i.  24.  «  I  now  rejoice  in  my  suffer- 
ing  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ 
jn  my  fiesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church,"  he  doth  not 
teach  by  these  words  the  imperfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  and 
that  he  left  any  punishment  for  us,  that  we  might  satisfy  by  bearing 
it:  for  he  doth  not  say  that  he  suffered  for  himself,  but  for  the 
church,  which  was  nevertheless  not  for  satisfaction,  according  to  1 
Cor.  i.  13,  but  for  her  confirmation  and  edification.  When  he  speaks 
of  that  which  was  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ,  he  rr»eans  not 
the  Person  of  Christ,  but  the  church,  which  is  by  virtue  of  ner  union 
with  him  the  mystical  Christ,  l  Cor  xii.  12,  and  therefore  her  afflic- 
tion, which  she  siiffereth  for  his  sake,  is  also  called  tlie  affliction  of 
Christ.  See  all  this,  2  Cor.  i.  5,  6.  "As  the  sufferine^s  of  Christ 
abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundelh  by  t  hrist  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation  and  salvbiion,  which 
is  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings,  which  we  also 
suffer^." 

When  we  say  that  Christ  satisfied  by  his  suffering,  we  do  not  then 
exclude  his  obedience,  but  suppose  that  he  satisfied  by  his  obedience 
also  ;  for  the  law  demands,  in  order  to  a  satisfaction,  not  only  a  bear- 
ing of  the  curse.  Gal.  iii.  10,  but  also  keeping  the  law  by  obedience, 
that  we  may  live,  Rom.  x.  5.  He  suffered  also  in  obedience,  Philip, 
ii.  8«  And  so  "  many  are  made  righteous  by  the  obedience  of  one," 
Rom.  v.  19. 

And  therefore  the  Remonstrants  must  also  be  condemned,  when 
tl]ey  assert  that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  the  justice,  hut  only  the  will  of 


318  eHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  8cc. 

God,  who  required  merely  something  of  his  Son,  in  order  that  he 
mij^ht  merit  a  covenant  ef  grace  for  all  men,  of  which  they  must 
accept  by  their  ficiewill,  which  is  sufficiently  able  to  believe ;  for 
Ciirist  did  not  merit  fdith,  according  to  them  :  but  at  this  rate  he 
would  not  have  reconciled  God  with  man,  but  only  rendered  him  recon- 
cileabie,  and  it  would  depend  upon  man  to  reconcile  God  with  him- 
self, and  himself  with  God  actually.  But,  as  we  have  proved  just 
riow,  ilie  bins  of  the  elect  were  punished  in  him  ;  his  sufferings  were 
the  ra  isom  ;  he  was  punished  in  their  stead;  God  forgives  sins 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to  declare  his  ri  hteousness, 
and  so  he  hatli  satisfied  the  justice  of  God,  which  was  also  necessary, 
as  hdtli  been  bhown  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  iVJoreover,  "  he  hath 
iuliiilcd  the  rignteousness  of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  so 
hath  obtained  redemption,  j^race,  righteousness,  and  therefore 
faith  also  ;  for  faith  is  grace,  Eph.  ii.  8.  Philip,  i.  29. 

E.  We  must  finally  observe  with  respect  to  the  word  "  suffered," 
for  whom  Christ  suffered.  The  instructor  saith  that  he  suffered  the 
wratn  of  God  "  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind  "  He  doth  not  teach 
us  by  these  words  that  Chribt  suffered  for  every  man  in  particular; 
for  he  had  denied  this  in  the  thirteenth  question  ;  but  he  declares 
the  grieviousness  of  Christ's  sufferings,  inasmuch  as  he  sustained 
the  wrath  of  God,  v/hich  was  kindled  against  the  sins  of  all  man- 
kind ;  or  he  shov/s  that  he  sustained  the  wrath  of  God,  not  only  for 
tiie  sins  of  the  Jews,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
Gentiles  ;  as  therefore  the  multitude  of  the  delivered  praise  him  for 
**  redeeming  them  to  God  by  his  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation,"  Rev.  v.  9.  Add  to  this  1  John  iic 
1.  We  will  not  say-anymore  on  this  subject  at  present,  having 
exhibited  it  more  largely  on  the  twentit:th  question. 

II.  But  why  did  he  suffer  "  under  Pontius,  Pilate?"  This  man 
was  a  heathen,  severe,  and  cruel,  nevertheless  appointed  by  the 
Roman  emperour  governour  of  Judea  ;  he  was  however  deposed  on 
account  of  his  evil  government,  and  banished  to  Vienne  in  Fr^ance, 
xvhere  he  stabbed  himself  to  death.  But  though  he  was  such  an  evil 
man,  nevertheless  the  compilers  of  our  creed  thought  proper  to  in- 
troduce him  here,  not  only  to  evidence  that  we  speak  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  who  was  born  of  Mary,  and  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate  ; 
but  also  to  show  that  he  was  the  true  Messiah,  since  it  thus  appear- 
ed, that,  a  heathen  being  judge  of  the  Jews,  ''  the  sceptre  was  depart- 
ed from  Judah,  and  the  ^rihiloh  was  therefore  come,"  according  to 
the  prophecy  of  Jacob,  Gen.  xlii.  10,  as  Augustus  and  Tiberius, 
Roman  emperours,  are  also  mentioned  for  this  reason  by  the  cvan- 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  37,  38,  39.  3i? 

Relists,  Luke  ii.  I.  iii.  1.  But  it  is  shown,  that  Christ  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate  particularly  to  manifest  »' that  he,  tlough  innocent, 
was  condemned  by  a  temporal  judge."  Jesus  was  pronounced  inno« 
cent  by  Judas,  by  Pilate's  wife,  by  the  centurion,  and  others  :  but 
Pilate  did  this  several  times  as  judge,  See  John  xviii.  38.  xix.  4,  6. 
Luke  xxiii.  14,  15.  Matt,  xxvii  34.  Pilate  however  condemned  him, 
though  he  was  innocent.  The  faith  of  Christians  must  conclude 
hence,  "  that  he  hath  delivered  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of 
God,  to  which  they  were  exposed."  The  reason  is,  because  he  stood 
before  Pilate,  as  their  surety,  who  having  no  guilt  of  his  own,  was 
condemned  on  account  of  theif  guilt,  that  the  judgment  of  God  might 
not  pass  on  them.  Which  we  must  believe  the  rather,  because 
Pilate's  tribunal  was  God's  tribunal,  in  whose  name,  and  by  whose 
judiciary  appointment,  he  was  pronounced  innocent  and  condemned: 
in  this,  and  in  no  other  light  was  the  matter  viewed  by  our  Surety  ; 
for  when  "  Pilate  said  to  him,  Knowest  thou  not  that  I  have  power 
to  crucify  thee,  and  power  to  release  thee  ?  Jesus  answered,  Thou 
coudest  hare  no  power  at  all  against  me,  except  it  were  given  thee 
from  above,"  John  xix.  10,  11. 

IIL  He  suffered  under  this  judge  crucifixion,  the  grievousness 
of  which  we  must  now  consider,  as  our  third  general  head,  and  show 
that  **  there  was  something  more  in  his  being  crucified,  than  if  he 
had  died  any  other  death."  There  were  several  kinds  of  capital 
punishments  among  the  Jews  and  Komans  ;  bat  the  Romans  inflict- 
ed most  commonly  upon  odious  malefactors  the  punishment  of  cru- 
xifixion,  in  which  the  criminal  was  raised  up  on  an  erect  post,  hav- 
ing his  arms  stretched  oiit  upon  a  cross-beam,  and  the  lower  parts 
of  his  body  resting  upon  a  prominence,  his  hands  being  nailed  to 
the  cross-beam,  and  his  feet  below  to  the  post.  This  punishment 
was  indeed  (a)  exceedingly  grievous  and  painful ;  for  it  could  not 
but  be  most  excruciating  to  be  pierced  with  nails  through  the  tender 
sinews,  and  obhged  to  hang  in  this  manner,  until  a  person  either 
died  of  hunger,  or  was  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  The  punishment 
of  crucifixion  was  also  (b)  a  most  shameful  death,  as  it  was  not  a 
Jewish,  but  a  heathen  punishment,  which  they  inflicted,  not  upon  a 
citizen,  but  only  upon  their  slaves.  To  be  obliged  to  hang  naked 
between  heaven  and  earth,  as  unworthy  of  either,  was  sufficient  to 
depress  the  heart  of  the  most  shameless,  and  the  most  stout-hearted* 
The  death  of  the  cross  was  also  (c)  an  accursed  deatb,  yea,  it  was 
accursed  of  God  himself,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  "  He  that  is  hanged  is 
accursed  of  God."  Paul  having  respect  to  this  saith,  "  For  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree/'  Gal.  iii,  IS  To 


5§0,  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  kt. 

he  a  curse,  and  accursed  is  to  be  devoted  and  given  up  to  destructiohi 
Deut.  vii.  25,  26.  Joshua  vi.  17.  Deut.  xxvii.  15 — 26.  But  how  is 
he  wlio  is  hanged  accursed  of  God  ?  Many  and  various  are  the  opih* 
ions  of  the  learned  upon  this  subject,  which  we  will  not  recite  at 
present,  that  we  may  not  be  too  diffuse  ;  we  will  only  say,  that  he 
"who  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God,  inasmuch  as  he  is  given  up,  offer- 
ed and  devoted  to  God  and  to  his  vindictive  justice,  for  his  destruc- 
tion, in  order  that  he  may  make  satisfaction  ;  and  therefore  he  who 
is  hanged  is  said,  as  it  were  to  the  honour  of  God,  to  be  a  curse  to 
God,  Deut.  xxi  23.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is  killath  elohimy  a  curse  of 
God,  as  the  sacrifices  are  called  God*s  sacrifices,  because  they  were 
offered  up  to  God,  Psalm  li.  17.  This  is  exceedingly  plain  from 
Numb.  XXV.  4«  "  Israel  joined  himself  unto  Badpeor  :  and  the  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Take  all  the  heads  of  the  people,  and  hang  them  up  to  the 
Lord,  laihovah^  against  the  sun,  that  the  fierce  anger  of  the  I^ord 
may  be  turned  away  from  Israel,"  See  also  the  same,  2  Sam.  xxi.  6, 
y.  And  this  capital  punisliment  was  accursed  of  God  more  than 
any  other,  because  the  malefactor  was  lifted  up  toward  heaven,  the 
habitation  of  God,  like  the  heave-offenngs  ;  so  also  the  burnt  offer- 
ings, and  the  devoted  Jericho  were  sent  up  toward  heaven  by  fire. 
See  Joshua  vi.  \7 — 27.  And  thus  was  the  Lord  Jesus  also  made  a 
curse,  and  truly  a  curse  to  God,  when  he  was  hanged  on  the  cross, 
not  for  his  own  sins,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  which  the  Lord 
had  laid  upon  him  ;  for  "  he  made  him,  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin, 
for  us  ;"  and  therefore  the  apostle  saith  emphatically,  that  *^  he  bore 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  I  Peter  ii.  24.  And  so  be- 
lievers are  assured,  "  that  he  took  on  him  the  curse  which  lay  on 
them  ;"  whereby  they  are  also  delivered  from  the  curse  ;  for  "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for 
us  :  for  it  is  writt'^n.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree," 
Gal.  iii.  And  it  was  therefore  also  necessary,  as  likewise  on  account 
of  the  prophecies,  which  foretold  that  "  they  should  pierce  his  hands 
and  his  feet,  and  pierce  him  through,"  Psalm  xxii.  16.  Zech.  xiio 
10.  His  crucifixion  was  necessary  also,  because  it  was  typified  by 
the  heave-offerings,  and  also  by  the  burnt-offerings,  which  were 
ordered  upon  the  wood,  and  offered  up  to  God.  Many  refer 
hither  also  the  brazen  serpent,  which  was  lifted  up  upon  a  polej 
uccording  to  John  iii.  14,  15. 


^    521 

APPLICATIOxNe 

If  there  be  any  doctrine  in  the  word  of  God,  which  is  important, 
and  requires  our  serious  and  dili,^ent  improvement,  it  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  suffering  of  Christ.     And  therefore/ 

1.  See  only  the  grievousness  of  his  suffering.     Piiate,  after  insult- 
ing him  in  a  cruel  manner   by  his   oifcers,   and   clothing  him   in  a 
ridiculous  habit,  showed  him  thus  to  the  Jews,  and  said,  "  Behold 
the  man,"  John  xix.  5.    But  do  ye  also  go  near  hiiti,  and  follow  him 
from  his  manger  to  his  cross,  and  see  how  he  was  contemned,  how  the 
nation  abhorred  him  ;  how  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a 
man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.    One  while  Herod  would 
slay  him,  another  while  the  Nazarenes  would  cast  him  down  head- 
long from  the  brow  of  their  hill,  and  often  the  Jews  took  up  stones 
to  stone  him :  now  he  was  reviled  as  a  Samaritan,  who  had  a  devil, 
and  who  cast  out  devils  by  the  prince  of  devils,  and  then  he  was  re- 
proached as  a  glutton  and  a  wine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners,  yea,  even  as  a   blasphemer:  and  to  what  a  length  did  their 
scoffing  and  mocking  proceed  !  when  he  was  treated  in  the  hall  of 
Caiaphas  and  of  Pilate  as  a  fool,  and  when  he  was  reproached  to  the 
utmost  upon  the  cross  with  a  wagging  of  their  heads  by  the  officers, 
the  chief  priests,  the  common  people,  yea,  even  by  one  of  the  thieves, 
who  suffered  the  same  condemnation  with  him.     It  was  not  there- 
fore so  strange,  that  he  complained,  "  Reproach   hath   broken   my 
heart,"  Psalm  lix.  20.  And  how  grievous  was  it  to  him,  to  be  bound 
with  chains,   to  be  dragged  from  one  tribunal  to  another,  to  be  buf- 
feted, crowned  with  thorns,  cruelly  scourged,  laden  with  his  cross, 
and  nailed  to  it  by  his  hands  and  feet,  yet  all  this  he  might  have 
endured  ;  but  when  the  powers  of  hell  also   attacked  him,  while  he 
was  in  a  profound  separation  from  God,  whose  sword  of  veageance 
smote  him  on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  elect,  this  was  almost  intol- 
erable to  him  :  this  filled  him  with  such  anguish,  caused  his   sweat 
to  fail  down  from  him,  like  great  drops  of  blood,  and  forced  him  to 
complain  so  bitterly,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me."    And  what  rendered  his  suffering  still  more  grievous  was,  that 
every  one  attacked  him,  high  and  low,  learned  and  uTjJearned,  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  God,  the  devil,  and  men,  friends  and  enemies  were 
all  against  him,  "  every  one  hid  as  it  were  his  face  from  him,"  Isaiah 
liii.  3.     None  can  imagine  that  he  was  so  stout  and  unfeeling,  that 
he  knew  but  little  of  this ;  no,  he  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with 
us  J  his  bitter  complaints  show  the  painful  sensations  of  his  heart, 

Vv 


3:*.     •  CHRIST'S  SUFf^ERlNGS,  Stc. 

and  how  ?;;nevous  his  sufferings  were  to  him.  See,  believers,  so  hard 
was  your  Jesus  beset,  he  who  is  the  desire  of  your  souls,  the  delight 
of  your  eyes,  the  joy  of  your  hearts,  the  object  of  all  the  outj^oinj^s 
of  your  mi»:ds,  and  your  only  and  perfect  satisfaction.  Doth  it  not 
affect  your  hearts,  that  your  dearly  Beloved,  your  Bridepjroom  and 
Husuund,  suffered  so  {;rievously  ?  a  heurt  of  stone  inij2jht  relent 
at  this. 

2  But  ye,  who  seek  not  yet  the  suffering  Jesus  who  pursue  your 
happiness  in  your  own  works,  to  whom  Jesus  is  not  yet  precious  ia 
his  sufferings,  who  mind  earthly  things,  and  are  thus  enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ ;  who  once  seemed  to  have  chosen  his  side,  but  have 
again  loA'ed  the  present  world,  and  do  thus  crucify  the  Son  of  God 
afresJi,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame  ;  who  v/ithstand  the  people 
of  Jesus,  and  therefore  Jesus  himself,  see  in  these  sufferings  of  Jesus 
what  will  betide  you  also  :  for  ^'  if  these  things  were  done  in  the 
green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?"  Luke  xxiii.  31.  If  the 
Son  ot  God  experienced  so  much  wo,  when  he  was  guiltless,  and 
had  done  all  things  well,  how  will  ye,  O  vile  wretches,  endure,  when 
he  will  attack  you  not  as  a  man,  but  when  he  will  stir  up  all  his 
wrath,  and  oring  you  to  his  seat,  that  he  may  accuse  you  of  all  your 
misdemeanours,  your  sedition  against  him,  your  blasphemy,  re- 
proaching and  transgressing  of  his  law  ;  that  he  may  condemn  you 
as  guilty,  and  send  you  away  as  accursed,  when  he  will  say  to  you, 
standing  en  his  left  hand,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt.  xxv.  41. 
How  will  ye  then  be  crucified  ?  for  "  your  worm  shall  not  die,  and 
your  fire  shall  not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  Either  ye  must  suf- 
fer, or  Jesus  for  you.  Since  now  ye  evidence  by  your  behaviour, 
that  ye  have  never  sought  him  in  truth,  ye  have  therefore  no  proof, 
that  he  suffered  for  you  :  therefore  be  anxious  and  concerned,  look 
unto  him,  that  ye  may  be  saved,  He  stretched  out  his  hands,  pierced 
with  the  nails,  to  you,  and  invites  you  to  come  unto  him. 

3,  But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  to  wiiom  sin  is  so  bitter, 
your  heaviest  cross,  who  condemn  and  detest  yourselves  on  account 
of  It ;  who  have  sought  all  your  salvation  in  his  sufferings,  and  who 
hate  and  curse  sin,  as  a  crucified  one,  see  from  what  this  grievous 
'oufftring  of  Christ  pi'oceeded  ;  will  ye  be  angry  with  the  wicked  Jews 
and  Gentiles  ?  or  will  ye  complain  of  the  Lord  for  causing  his  be- 
loved Son  and  your  dear  Jesus  to  suffer  in  this  manner  ?  No,  look 
at  yourselves  ;  your  way,  and  your  doings  procured  these  things  to 
him,  and  Miade  it  so  bitter  to  h-m,  and  that  it  reached  to  his  heart, 
Ye  were  the  seditious  persons,  who  broke  his  yoke,  and  burst  his 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  58,  39,  325 

bonds  ;  ye,  by  your  wicked  dispositions,  opinions,  and  conduct,  bias- 
phieined  God,  your  iniquities  stirred  up  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
ali  the  -^yrath  of  God  against  the  Son  of  his  icve.  It  behooves  you 
to  see  this,  and  to  behold  in  it  the  dreadful  nature  of  sin,  it  ou^ht  to 
incense  you  against  it,  and  induce  you  to  take  vengeance  of  it,  and 
to  crucify  it ;  yea,  this  should  cause  your  iiearts  to  bleed  for  shame 
and  grief,  that  ye,  even  ye  procured  these  grievous  tiuiferir.gs  to 
Christ.  He  foretold  this,  "  that  ye  should  look  on  hirn,  whora  ye 
had  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him,  as  ona  mourneth  for  his  only  son^ 
and  be  in  bitterness  for  hirn,  as  one  that  is  in  biiterness  fur  his  first- 
born," Zech.  xii.  iO. 

4.  Look  deeper  into  this  matter,  and  see  the  efficacy  of  Christ's 
sufferings  for  you,  in  your  stead,  and  for  your  advantage.  By  his 
sufferings  Ai  your  sins  have  been  taken  away  in  one  day  ;  your  sins 
and  iniquities,  when  they  shall  be  sought,  shall  not  be  found ;  when 
ye  were  enemies,  ye  v/ere  reconciled  lo  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son: 
he  harh  redeemed  your  body  and  soul  from  eternal  damnation  by 
h;s  passion,  as  the  only  atoning  sacrifice  :  God  will  be  no  more 
angry  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you ;  in  him  ye  have  redemption  through 
his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
grace  :  by  his  suffering  he  hath  obtained  for  you  an  everlasting 
righteousness.  This  is  youi  hope,  your  joy  and  boasting ;  "  God 
forbid  that  ye  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  Gal.  vi.  14.  Bathe,  swim,  delight  yourselves  in  his  suffei- 
ing,  yea,  ye  shou  d  wake  and  sleep  in  it,  that  ye  may  inhale  the  fla- 
vour and  efficacy  of  it,  with  the  spouse.  Song  1.  13.  <»  A  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  rae  ;  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt 
my  breasts."  Behold  therefore  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  you,  and 
in  your  stead,  with  Paul,  Gal.  ii.  20.  •<  I  am  crucified  with  Christ, 
and  1  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  iiveth  in  ftie  ;  and  the  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  To  cast  away  your  hope  with  re- 
spect to  this,  after  so  many  evidences  of  iJs  love,  and  the  witnessing 
of  his  Spirit,  upon  every  casual  thought,  deprives  your  souls  of  the 
bweetness,  relish  and  efncacy  of  Christ's  sufferings. 

5.  Open  your  eyes,  that  ye  may  see  how  mucii  of  God  ye  can 
discover  in  this.  The  inconceivable  and  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is 
exhibited  to  you  here,  in  devising  this  way  of  saving  you  by  the 
grievous  sufferings  of  his  Son,  when  it  was  impossible  for  any  created 
understanding  to  contrive  this  proper  way.  The  supreme  power  of 
God  is  discovered  here,  in  accomplishing  it  against  all  the  power  of 
the  irates  of  heil  :  this  is  the  sum  of  the  ivhole  gospel,  that  '■'  Christ 


52i  CHRISTS  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

is  the  po'.ver  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God,"  TCor.  i.  24.  But 
that  which  shines  forth  no  less  in  this  suffering,  is  the  unfathomable 
love  of  God  and  of  his  Son ;  that  God  surrendered  his  Son,  yea, 
thai  the  Son  surrendered  himsel!  to  such  bitter  sufferings  for  such 
vile  sinners  as  ye  are  :  how  ardent  was  the  love  that  urged  him  lo 
this  !  could  his  love  have  manifested  itself  to  you  in  a  stronger  man- 
ner ?  Christians,  stand  still  awhile  here,  ancJ  let  your  souls  endeav- 
our to  contemplate  this  love,  and  be  assured,  that  it  will  overwhelm 
you  with  wonder  and  joy  :  th^efore  the  apostle  said,  Eph.  iii.  18,  19, 
"  That  ye  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  the  saints,  what  is 
the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  kiow  the  love 
of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God." 

6.  Look  at  these  sufferings,  that  ye  may  imitate  Christ  in  his  holy 
suffering  :  "  For  hereunto  were  ye  called,  because  Christ  also  suf- 
fered for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,'* 
1  Peter  ii.  21.  Jesus  suffered  in  obedience  'to  his  Father,  Philip. 
ii.  8.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thy  will  be  done,"  was  his  language. 
He  suffered  with  meekness  ;  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
agam,  and  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not,"  1  Peter  ii.  21.  Yea,  he 
prayed  for  his  enemies,  who  crucified  him,  Lukexxiii.  54.  He  suffer- 
ed also  very  patiently  :  <'  He  was  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter, 
and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb-  so  he  opened  not  his 
mouth,"  Isaiah  liii.  7.  He  suffered  also  from  special  love  to  his  peo- 
ple, Eph.  V.  2.  Behold  this  love  of  Jesus  ought  also  to  manifest  it- 
self in  your  mortal  bodies,  in  your  whole  conversation  as  well  as  in 
y cur  suffering.  Doth  the  Lord  subject  you  to  suffering,  "keep 
silence,  because  he  hath  inflicted  it  upon  you,"  Lam.  ili.  28.  Are 
ye  injured,  be  not  displej^ed,  render  not  evil  for  evil,  insist  not  upon 
your  utmofit  right,  but  abate  somewhat  of  it ;  consider  v/hat  Jesus 
hath  done  for  you;though  ye  had  injured  him  to  the  utmost,  he  for- 
gave you.  See  how  Paul  exhorts  you.  Coll.  iii.  12,  13,  "Put  on 
therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies, 
kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  lomgsuffering  ;  forbearing 
one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any  :  even  as  Christ 
forgave  you,  so  do  ye  also."  Read  also,  Eph.  iv.  31  32.  v.  1,  2. 
Doth  the  hand  of  the  Lord  press  you  with  any  heavy  cross,  open 
not  your  mouth  to  reprove  his  way  ;  all  that  God  doth  is  glory  and 
majesty  :  Jesus  suffered  more  grievously  than  ye  do,  and  he  endured 
it :  ye  must  "  suffer  with  him  that  ye  may  be  glorified  with  him," 
Rom.  vii.  17.  Doth  the  Lord  expose  you  to  the  danger  of  losing  your 
honour,  property,  ease  aud  life  for  his  name's  sake  j  suffer  it  from 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  38,  39.  SS-f 

love  to  him,  and  do  not  shrink  from  it,  as  he  also  suffered  for  you  in 
the  most  grievous  manner  from  love  to  you.  So  that  great  follower 
of  Christ  would  conduct,  Acts  xxi.  13,  "I  am  ready,  not  to  be  bound 
only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
So  also  the  other  apostles  conducted  ;  yea,  "  they  rejoiced  that  they 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name,"  Acts  v.  41. 

7.  Look  at  this  suffering  for  your  support ;    for  this  suffering  hath 
taken  away  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  curse  from  your  sufferings. 
Doth  he  smite,  it  is  only  love  ;   "  For  whom   the   Lord   loveth,  he 
chasteneth,  and  he  scourgeth  every  son  whom   he  receiveth,"   Heb, 
xii.  6.     Yea,  Jesus  knoweth  by  experience  what  ye  feel,  yea,  he  suf- 
fers with  you :  For  we  have  not  an   high   priest,   which   cannot   be 
touched   with  the  feeling  of  our  infiimities  ;  but  was    in    all   points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,   yet  without  sin,"  Heb.  iv.  15.     ii.   17,    18. 
Are  ye  grieved  on  account  of  your  iniquities,  on  account  of  the  se- 
vere judgment  of  God,  and  on  account  of  the  curse  of  the  law  ;  the 
Lord  Jesus  hath  fully    satisfied  for  all  your  iniquities,  and  therefore 
God  will  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  your   sins,'* 
Rom.  iii.  25,  26.    1  John  i.  9,     Jesus  was  condemned,  though"  inno- 
cent, and  was  made  a  curse  for  you,  that  ye  might  be  delivered  from 
the  severe  judgments  of  God  and  from  the  curse  :  ''There  is  there- 
fore no  condemnation  to   them  which    are  in   Christ  Jesus  ;  "who' 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?    it  is  God  that  jus- 
tifieth  ;   who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?     It  is  Christ  that  died,"  Rom- 
viii.  1,  33,  34.     Did  he  pray  to  his  Father  to  forgive  them  who  cru- 
cified him  the  evil  which  they  did  to  him,  Luke  xxiii.  34  ;  will  he 
not  then  pray  for  you,  when   "  he  is  your  advocate  with  the  Father, 
and  when  he  is  a  propitiation  for  your  sins  ?"    1   John  ii.  1,2.     Or 
are  ye  concerned  about  your  bodily  wants,  notknowing  what  ye  shall 
eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye«,shall  be  clothed?  do 
ye  not  know,  "  that  if  God  spared  not  his   own  Son,   but   delivered 
liim  up  for  you  all,  he  will  also  freely  give  you  all  things  with  him  ?*' 
Jesus,  even  while  he  suffered,   provided    for  his  mother,  when   he 
commended  her  to  his  beloved  disciple,  John  xix  26,  27,  will  he  not 
then,  now  he   is    m   heaven,  his  full   treasury,   provide  for   you  ?" 
Cast  then  all  your  care  upon  jiim,  for  he  careth  for  you,"   1  Peter,  v. 
17.     Ye  are  indeed  as  dear  to  him  as  his  mother  was,  Matt.  xii.  50, 
Do  ye  often    consider  how    ye   shall  pass    through    this  howling 
wilderness  to  him  in  heaven .?  he,  who  when  he  was  under  the  penal 
curse,  said  to  the  converted  thief,  "  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise,"  Luke  xxiii.  43,  even  "  he  is  gone  before  you,  to  prepare 
a  place  for  you,"  which  when  he  hath  done,  **  he  will  take  you  to 


326  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

himself,  that  yc  may  be  where  he  is,"  John  xiv.  2,  3.  Is  it  matter 
of  sorr'ow  to  you,  that  God  delivers  you  up  to  desertions,  God  doth 
not  however  do  this  ii>  his  anger,  which  Jesus  suffered  for  yo  i,  when 
he  complained,  '*  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  tiiou  forsaken  me  ?" 
Matt,  xxvii.  47.  Neither  will  it  be  always  thus  with  you,  for  a  time 
is  coming,  when  ye  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  :  ye  shall  not 
then  be  obliged  to  complain,  like  Jesus  on  the  cross, ''  1  thirst,"  John 
xix.  28.  F©r  since  Jesus  hath  thirsted  for  you,  therefore  "  ye  shall 
not  thirst  any  more  ;  for  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne,  shall  feed  you,  and  shall  lead  you  to  living  fountains  of  water; 
and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes,"  Rev.  vii.  16,  17. 
Do  ye  think  that  all  would  be  well  with  you,  if  ye  were  not  so  defi- 
cient in  sanctificat'on,  and  did  not  come  short  so  much  ?  yea,  it 
would  indeed  be  exceeeingly  ill  with  you,  if  your  sanctification  should 
be  your  righteousness  before  God  :  but  bt:hol(i,  Jesus  hath  fulfilled 
the  righteousness  of  the  law  for  you,  and  proclaimed  before  the 
whole  world,  *'  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30,  And  he  hath  thus 
cancelled  the  bond,  **  having  nailed  it  to  the  cross,"  and  hath  obtain- 
ed that  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law  should  be  fulfilled  in  you,  and 
that  ye  should  be  perfect  in  him,"  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Coll.  ii.  10 — 15j 
and  *'  he  is  also  made  sanctification  to  you,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  There 
remains  nothing  for  you  to  do,  but  to  forget  that  which  is  behind, 
and  to  reach  forth  to  that  which  is  before,  pressing  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  that,  laying 
yourselves  as  it  were  upon  his  cross,  ye  may  pour  forth  your  souls 
with  him  in  death,  and  commend  them  into  the  hands  of  his  Father, 
as  he  also  did,  Luke  xxiii,  46.  And  truly,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth  ;  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that 
Ihey  may  rest  trom  their  labours  j  and  their  works  do  follow  them.'' 
Amen. 


(  327  ) 


CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL 


AND 


DESCENT   INTO    HELL 


XVI.  LORDS  DAY, 


1  Cor.  XV.  3,  4.  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all,  that  which  I 
also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the 
scriptures,  and  that  he  was  buried.

Q,  38.    Why  did  he  then  suffer  under  Pontius  Filafe  as  his  Judge? 

A.  That  he,  being  innocent,  and  yet  condemned  by  a  temporal 
judge,  might  thereby  free  us  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God,  to 
tvhich  we  were  exposed. 

Q.  39.  Is  there  any  thing  more  in  his  being  cruci^ed,  than  if  he  had 
died  some  other  death  ? 

A.  Yes  there  is :  tor  thereby  I  am  assured,  that  he  took  on  him 
the  curse  which  lay  on  me  ;  for  the  death  of  the  cross  was  accursed 
of  God. 

'HE  Saviour  Jesus  speaking  of  himself,  saith  Matt.  xx.  28.  "  The 
Son  of  roan  came  xm\  to  be  miiustered  UDto,  but  to  nunister,  and 


S19  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Sec. 

jlve  his  life  a  ransom  for  many."  It  was  indeed  foretold,  that  Israel 
should  serve  David  their  King,  the  Messiah,  Jer.  xxx.  9,  as  the 
Father  also  promised  to  him  in  the  council  of  peace,  "  that  he  should 
have  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  his  possess'on,"  Psalm  ii.  8,  wherefore  he  also  went  by  his 
incarnatioa,  like  a  nobleman,  into  a  far  country,  that  he  might  re- 
ceive a  kingdom  for  himself,  Luke  xix.  12,  but  it  i:ehQpved  him  first 
to  humble  himself,  and  "  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  if  he 
ahould  see  his  seed,"  Isaiah  liii.  10  And  so  he  came  in  a  humbl© 
manner,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  mmister,  and  to  give  his 
Jife  a  ransom  for  many,  inasmuch  as  he  came  to  suffer ;  therefore 
he  is  also  represented  to  us,  as  "  one  whom  man  despised,  whom 
the  nation  abhorred,  and  a  servant  of  rulers,"  Isaiah  xlix.  7.  On 
which  account  he  also  withdrew,  when  "  he  knew  that  they  would 
come,  and  take  him  by  force,  and  mak'C  him  a  king,"  John  vi.  15. 
His  design  in  coming  into  the  vvorM  was,  "  to  save  sinners,"  1  Tim* 
i.  15.  As  it  was  also  foretold,  that  he  should  come  in  a  most  de- 
spised condition,  in  order  to  suffer,  and  give  his  soul  a  ransom,  and 
an  offering  for  sin,  Isniah  liii.  And  therefore  his  suffering  and 
humilialion  for  the  redemption  of  the  elect  sinner  arc  usually  joined 
to  his  incarnation,  as  we  see  not  only,  Matt,  xx.  28,  but  also  Matt* 
xviii.  U.|Philip,  ii.  7,  8,  In  this  manner  do  the  compilers  of  the  Chris- 
tian creed  proceed,  when  they  teach  us  to  say,  "  Who  was  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius 
Pilate."  And  in  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed  j  for 
after  explaining  the  doctrme  of  Christ's  incarnation  in  the  fourteenth^ 
Lord's  day,  he  exhibits  his  suffering  in  this  Lord's  day. 

We  have  three  general  heads  proposed  in  this  Lord's  day  : 

I.  The  exposition  of  the  word'  **  suffered,"  Question  37. 

II.  the  reason  why  he  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  Question  38. 

III.  The  grievousness  of  his  crucifixion.  Question  39. 

1.  Although  tiie  word,  "  suffered  "  is  very  small,  yet  it  implies  the 
whole  of  Christ's  sufferings,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his 
life  :  *'  Christ  suffered  once  for  sis,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  also. 
Heb.  ii.  18.  1  Peter  ii.  2i.  The  captious  Remonstrants  will  not 
allow  that  the  whole  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  expressed  by  the  word^ 
''  suffered."  The  creed  restrains  the  suffering  indeed  to  Pontius 
Pilate  ;  yet  this  doth  not  exclude  Christ's  former  sufferings,  but  only 
shows  when  he  suffered  most  grievously. 

Ill  order  then  to  explain  this  word  in  its  more  extensive  significa- 
tion., we  will  consider  particularly,  (a)  who  suffered,  (b)  what  he  suf- 
fered, (c)  when  he  sulfered,  (d)  for  what  end  he  suffered,  and  (e) 
for  whom  he  suffered. 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  S6,  3#*  311 

A.  If  we  believe  the  word  of  God,  we  must  say  that  the  Son  of 
God,  who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  the  virgin 
Mary,  suffered ;  and  that  not  only  in  appearance,  but  in  reality.  We 
do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  refute  here  the  anci  nt  and  long  since 
obsolete  opinions  of  the  Patripassians,  who  taught  that  the  I-  aihet 
suffered  :  neither  will  we  busy  ourselves  with  Marcion,  and  others, 
■who  held  that  the  Son  of  God  suft'ere; '  only  in  appearance,  and  not 
in  reality.  These  opinions  have  confuted  themselves  and  they  have 
therefore  also  perished,  and  we  know  not  that  they  are  patronized 
by  a  single  person  at  present.  Sabellius  taught  in  former  times  that 
the  divine  and  human  natures  of  Christ  were  mixed,  the  one  with 
the  other,  or  that  the  Godhead  was  changed  into  the  manhood,  which 
opinion  is  still  maintained  by  certain  Anabaptists,  who  also  say  that 
the  Son  of  God  suffered  in  his  Godhead.  But  what  can  be  imagined 
more  absurd  ?  For  since  he  is  the  blessed  and  unchangeable  God,  he 
is  also  "immortal  and  incorruptible,"  1  Tim.  i.  17.  vi.  16.  The 
apostle  saith  indeed  that  "  God  hath  purchased  his  church  with  his 
own  blood,"  Acts  xx.  38,  but  he  doth  not  say  that  the  Godhead  pur- 
chased the  church  with  its  own  blood  :  he  only  intimateth  that  the 
person,  who  gave  the  blood  of  his  manhood  to  redeem  and  purchase 
his  church,  was  God. 

But  when  we  say  that  he  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  we  do  not 
understand  it  only  of  his  body,  as  the  Papists  do,  in  order  to  deny 
the  perfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  but  also  of "  his  soul,  which 
was  exceedingly  sorrowful  even  unto  death,"  Matt.  xxvi.  38.  We 
must  understand  this  not  only  of  the  inferior  and  less  ncble  parts  of' 
his  soul,  which  were  affected  With  sorrow,  fear  and  compassion,  on 
account  of  his  approaching  bodily  suffering,  as  the  Papists  speak  s 
for  he  suffered  properly  the  power  of  God's  wrath  in  his  soul ;  inas- 
much as  compassion  and  fear  alone  could  not  cause  him  to  mourn 
and  sweat  blood,  as  he  did,  because  he  would  then  have  manifested 
greater  weakness  than  many  martyrs,  whose  souls  sustained  the 
most  grievous  suffering  with  the  greatest  courage,  triuuiph  and  joy. 
He  was  also  obliged  to  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  of  the 
soul,  and  thus  to  give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many,"  Matt.  xx.  28. 
It  was  also  foretold,  that  "  he  should  make  his  soul  an  offering  for 
sin,"  Isaiah  liii.  10,  as  it  was  also  typified;  when  the  blood  of  beasts, 
and  therefore  their  soul  was  offered  upon  the  altar,  to  make  recon- 
ciliation for  souls.  Lev.  xviii.  1 1 . 

But  although  Jesus  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  yet  he  did  not 
suffer  without  any  relation  to  his  Godhead:  but  his  Godhead  (1) 
surrendered  the  manhood  to  be  an  offering  for  sin,  and  .dedicated  i' 


312  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Stc. 

to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  :  «  He  offered  himself  without  spdt 
to  God  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  to  purge  the  conscience,"  Heb. 
ix.  14.  See  John  X.  18.  Eph.  v.  2.(2)  His  Godhead  veiled  its 
glory  under  the  manhood,  so  that  it  could  not  beam  forth  in  its  great- 
est lustre  :  "For  he,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness 
of  men  :  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself, 
and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,"  Philip, 
ii.  6 J  7,  8-  (r>)  The  Godhead  sustained  the  manhood  under  its  suf- 
fering :  "  His  own  arm  brought  him  salvation,  and  his  fury  it  upheld 
him  ;  for  tlie  Lord  God  helped  him,  therefore  he  was  not  confoun- 
ded :  therefore  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint,  knowing  that  he  should 
not  be  ashamed."  Isainh  1.  7.  (4)  The  Godhead  also  added  the 
value  to  his  suffering  ;  by  which  the  sufifering  of  the  manhood  being 
the  suffering  of  him  who  was  also  God,  "  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,"  Dan.  ix.  24.     Acts  xx.  28.     1  John  i.  7, 

5.  We  shall  now  consider  what  he  suffered.  The  instructor  saith 
"  that  he  suffered  the  wratii  of  God  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind." 
God  was  terribly  displeased  with  the  sins  of  mankind,  as  we  have 
shown  on  the  tenth  question.  S:nce  now  the  Son  of  God  was  be- 
come surety,  and  had  taken  all  the  sins  of  elect  men  upon  himself, 
in  order  to  satisfy  for  them,  therefore  the  righteous  God  also  stirred 
up  his  whole  wrath,  and  poured  it  out  upon  the  Surety.  It  is  indeed 
true,  that  he  suffered  from  devils  and  from  men,  from  friends  and 
from  enem.ies  ;  but  in  all  this  he  still  suffered  the  wrath  of  God. 
For  (1)  the  men  who  procured  this  suffering  to  him,  were  the  rods 
of  God's  anger,"  Isaiah  x  5.  Therefore  Peter  also  saith,  Acts  ii. 
23.  "  Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  council  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God,  ye  havt  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  cruci- 
fied and  slain."  (2)  He  suffered  all  that  was  necessary  to  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  sequel.  Now  sin  could  not 
he  satisfied  for,  but  by  bearing  the  wrath  of  God  :  this  hath  been 
proved  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  (5)  The  suffering  was  a  cup  of 
God's  wrath,  as  we  see  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  compared  with  Psalm  xl.  6. 
Isaiah  Ii.  ir — 33.  Jer.  xxv.  15 — 29.  (4)  He  suffered  the  death  of 
the  cross,  inflicted  on  him  by  men,  as  a  curse,  and  indeed  so,  that  he 
hath  delivered  the  elect  from  the  carse.  Gal.  iii.  13. 

He  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  thus  from  wicked  instruments  ;  but 
lie  suffered  it  also  immediately  in  his  soul,  when  his  Father  whhheld 
his  light  and  lovingkindness  from  him,  abandoned  him  to  a  dreadful 
darkness,  subjected  him  to  his  grievous  wrsth  on  account  of  all  the 


XV.  LORD'S  IJAY,  Q.  37,  38,  39  iJ13 

sins  6f  the  elect,  and  let  all  the  powers  of  hell  loose  upon  him.  \Ve 
niight  speak  of  this  somewhat  more  largely  here,  but  it  will  be  more 
proper  to  do  it  in  order  oq  the  forty-fourth  question. 

C.  We  must  observe  in  the  third  place,  with  respect  to  the  wori 
suffered,  when  Christ  suffered.  The  catechism  saiih,  that  he  suf- 
fered m  body  and  soul  "  during  his  whole  life."  This  is  also  true  : 
for  he  Was  born  in  a  poor  and  needy  conditio/i  ;  when  he  was  only 
eight  days  old,  he  underwent  the  bloody  and  painful  rite  of  circum- 
cision: he  was  obliged  to  flee  for  his  life  into  Egypt,  while  hfc  was 
yet  very  young.  He  had  no  sooner  be.<un  his  puhlick  ministry,  than 
he  fasted  forty  days,  was  tempted  by  the  devil,  blasphemed,  threat- 
ened, and  insidiously  watched  by  the  Jews  ;  and  thoilg^h  the  foxes 
had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  had  nests,  yet  the  Son  of  Man 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  And  who  knows  what  spiritual  dis- 
tresses and  desertions  he  wms  obliged  to  suffer,  when  he  spent  so 
great  a  part  of  his  linne  alonb,  ahd  in  the  dreary  night,  that  he  might 
wrestle  in  prayer  with  his  Father. 

But  he  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  particularly  "  at  the  end  of  his 
life."  Then  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness  surprised  him,  when 
his  Father  attacked  him  with  his  anger  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross  ;  when  he  was  betrayed  by  his  own  apostle  Judas,  was  appre- 
hended as  a  thief  by  the  Jews  with  swords  and  staves^  was  deserted 
by  his  pious  disciples,  and  denied  by  his  zealous  Peter,  dragged 
from  tribunal  to  tribunal,  falsely  accused  there  of  sedition  and  blasphe- 
my, condemned,  mocked,  spitten  upon,  scourged,  and  finally  put  to 
death  in  the  most  shameful,  and  most  painful  manner  on  the  cross. 
Alas,  how  bitter  was  all  this  to  him  1  The  anguish  of  his  heart  for- 
ced that  dismal  complaint  fronti  hitn,  which  he  uttered  with  a  loud 
voice,  *'  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thoU  forsaken  me  ?"  All  na- 
ture was  disturbed  at  this  grievous  suffering  :  "  For  the  sun  was 
darkened,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,  the  earth  quaked,  the  rocks  rent,  the  graves  were  opened^ 
and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept  arose/'  Matt,  xxviii  45,  46, 
50,  51,  52. 

D.  The  fourth  particular  that  requires  our  consideration  with 
respect  to  the  word  suffered,  is  the  end  for  which  Christ  suffered. 
Surely  it  could  not  be  by  accident,  and  without  a  regard  to  some 
great  end,  that  God's  innocent  Son  suffered  so  long  a  time,  and  sO 
grievously.  The  word  of  God  informs  us,  that  he  suffered,  (a)  "  Be- 
cause the  hand  and  counsel  of  God  had  before  determined,  that  htt 
should  suffer,"  Acts  iv.  28.  He  had  entered  into  an  engagement  to 
his  Father  in  the  council  of  peace  to  suffer,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  S.     Ill 

Uu 


$U  CHRlSt'S  SUFJ?ER1NGS,  kt^ 

order  to  fulSl  this  council,  he  submitted  w.Ilinp^ly  to  suffering  ;  thetc^ 
fore  he  said  to  Peter,  who  would  protect  hi  in  from  suffering,  *'  The 
cup  which  n»y  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?"  John  xviii. 
11.  The  word  of  C.od  also  tc.chelh  us,  (b)  »hat  he  suffered  in  or- 
der to  fulfil  tlie  prophecies.  It  was  often  foretold,  ;and  particularly 
in  the  xxii.  Psalm,  ..nd  Isaiah  iiii.  that  Christ  should  suffer.  He 
would  therefore  suffer,  thai  he  might  fulfil  the  scriptures  in  thi& 
respect :  wherefore,  when  he  con^plains  of  the  injui-tice  of  his  ene- 
mies, that  they  took  him  with  swords  and  staves,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  thief,  he  stilicomfo  t5  himself  therewith,  that  "all  this  came  to 
pitss,  that  the  scriptures  of  the' prophet .  might  be  fulfilled,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  56.  (c)  His  suffering  was  not  only  foretold,  but  also  typified 
by  all  the  trespass-offermgs,  sin-offerings,  sacrifices  of  atonement, 
and  of  slain  beasts,  which  were  shadows  of  him,  Heb.  x.  i.  In  or- 
der to  show  that  he  was  the  body  of  them,  "  he  gave  himself  up  an 
offermg  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph-  v.  2.  We  must  also  say  that 
he  suflered,  (d)  to  affonl  a  perfect  example  of  obedience  to  his  Father, 
and  of  holy  patience  ;  for  "  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us,  leavir^  us 
an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,"   1  Pet   ii.  21. 

But  the  chief  end  of  his  suffering,  and  of  God's  appointing,  fore- 
teUing  and  typifying  that  he  should  suffer  thus,  was  that  he  might 
by  his  suffering  fully  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  and  guilt 
of  his  people,  "  that  so  by  his  passion,  as  the  only  propitiatory  sacri- 
fice, he  might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from  everlasting  damnation, 
andobtain  for  usthe  favor  of  God ^  righteousness  and  eternal  life." 
That  such  a  satisfaction  was  necessary,  we  have  proved  on  the  fifth 
Lord's  dciy.  We  must  now  prove  (1)  against  the  Socinians,  that  he 
hath  by  his  suffering  "  really  "  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  ;  and 
(2)  against  the  Papists,  that  he  hath  satisfied  fully. 

1.  We  say  \hat  the  Son  of  God  hath  by  his  suffering  really  satis- 
fied the  justice  of  God  for  the  sinner.  The  Socinians,  who  reject 
all  those  particulars  in  the  gospel,  that  can  afford  comfort  to  the 
people  of  God,  have  dared  to  deny  this  great  ground  of  salvation 
also  ;  but  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this  truth,  and  therefore  we 
•^cleave  to  it  : 

1.  Because  the  suffering  of  Christ  is  put  in  the  stead  of  all  the 
sacrifices  of  atonement  under  the  Old  Testament,  which  atoned 
for  sin  typically.  See  Lev.  iv.  snd  xvi.  Now  it  was  impossible  that 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins  ;  he  neverthe- 
-  less  being  willing  to  reconcile  the  sinner  to  God,  substituted  and  of- 
fered his  body  and  soul  for  a  trespass-offering,  instead  of  those  sacri- 
fices ;  and  thus  "  by  one  offering  hath  perfected  for  ever,  them  that 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Qj  57.  58,  39.  3i5 

iie  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  4—14.  And  he  thus  really  effected  the 
atonement,  which  the  sacrifices  could  not  accomphsh,  but  which  only 
pointed  to  Christ-  See  John  i.  29, 

2.  Because  the  sins  of  ihe  elect  were  laid  upon  him,  and  punished 
in  him,  that  he  might  take  them  away.  The  ancient  church  fore- 
saw this  long  before  it  came  to  pa^,  when  she  said,  "  Surely  he  hath 
borne  our  grief,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  He  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastistment 
of  our  peace  was  upoa  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He  was  oppressed, 
when  it  was  required  of  him,"  *  Isaiah  liii.  4 — 7.  Peter  having  re- 
spect to  this,  saith  that  '<  Christ  bore  our  sins  on  the  tree,"  1  Peter 
ii.   24. 

3  The  reality  of  the  satisfaction  appears  still  more,  when  we  con' 
sider  that  liis  sufferings  were  the  ransom  and  ])rice  of  redemption 
for  the  sinner,  who  was  taken  captive  on  account  of  his  guilt.  Be- 
lievers "are  not  redeemed  Avith  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and 
gold  :  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lam^-,"  1  Peter  i.  18,  19. 
"  He  gave  his  life  and  himself  a  ransom,"  Matt.  xx.  28.  I  Tim.  ii.  6. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  Christ  suffered  for  the  elect,  and  in  their 
stead  :  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were 
yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  Rom.  v.  8.  "  Christ  was  made  a 
curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  1 3.  So  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are  con- 
sidered as  the  sufferings  of  the  elect,  2  Cor.  v.  15.  "  We  judge 
thus,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  and  he  died  for 
all." 

.5,  *'  God  declares  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  sins 
through  his  blood,"  and  suffering,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  How  can  this 
be.  if  he  did  not  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  Oy  his  suffering  ?  for  when 
God  forgives  sin  without  the  satisfaction  of  his  Son,  he  declares  in- 
deed his  grace,  but  not  his  righteousness  ;  and  it  wou'd  not  then  be 
necessary,  that  remissior.  should  be  obtained  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

6.  If  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  not  for  satisfaction,  why  did 
God  then  punish  his  guiltless  Son  ?  It  could  not  be  only  to  afford  a 
perfect  example  of  obedience  and  patience,  nor  to  confirm  his  doC^ 
trine  by  his  sufferings,  seeing  any  ordinary  man,  who  was  eminently 
sanctified  by  God,  was  sufficiently  qualified  for  this  ;  but  Peter  show- 
eth  that  "  Christ  suffered  in  the  stead  of  the  unjust,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God,"  \  Peter  iii.  18. 

7.  Pinally,  we  say  also  that  Christ  by  his  suffering  delivered  the. 

*  Thi?  is  agreeable  to  ih«  Dutch  transktion. 


8l<i  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

elect  from  eternal  damnation :  for  "  Christ  hath  delivered  us  from 
the  Gurse  of  the  law,  beinj^  made  a  curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Eph. 
i.  7.  By  his  sufferint;  he  also  obtained  for  them  the  favour  of  God, 
righteousness,  and  eternal  life  :  "  God  made  him  to  be  sin,  that  we 
might  be  made  the  ri^^hteousness  of  God  in  him,"  3  Cor.  v.  21.  I 
Cor.  V.  30.  "  The  gift  of  Gpd  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
pur  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  23. 

Whoever  considers  without  prejudice  these,  and  such  proofs  of 
the  doctrine,  that  Christ  huth  really  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  by 
his  sufferinj^  for  sin,  will  be  obliged  to  do  violence  to  himself,  if  he 
will  deny  the  satisfaction.  The  Socinians  indeed  deny  this  great 
truth,  but  it  proceeds  only  from  a  prejudice,  that  Christ  is  not  God, 
coessential  with  the  Father  ;  and  therefore  they  say  that  the  transient 
sufferings  of  one  man  could  not  satisfy  for  so  many  sins  of  such  a 
number  of  men,  who  should  have  been  punished  for  ever.  We  also 
should  say  this,  if  Christ  were  not  more  than  a  mere  man,  but  since 
he  is  also  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  and  since  his  blood  is  thus 
the  blood  and  sufferings  of  God,  therefore  his  sufferings  were  of  such 
an  infinite  value,  that  he  could  take  away  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect 
"  in  one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9. 

They  deny  th's  truth  also  fro^i  another  prejudice,  to  wit,  they 
look  upon  sins,  as  pecuniary  debts,  and  therefore  say,  that  if  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ  satisfied  for  sins,  there  can  then  be  no  forgiveness 
nor  grace  shown  to  men.  This  would  he  true,  if  sins  were  pecuniary 
debtb,  which  are  not  forgiven  from  kindness,  when  they  are  paid  : 
but  inasmuch  as  sins  are  debts  that  deserve  punishment,  which  God 
can  exact  of  the  sinner  himself,  therefore  great  grace  is  shown  to 
him,  when  they  are  forgiven  him  on  accoynt  of  a  satisfaction ;  be- 
cause God  demands  this,  pot  of  the  sinner  himself,  but  of  his  Surety, 
and  because  God  will  admit  of  a  surety*  bestows  one  himself,  and 
particularly  his  Son,  and  that  just  for  this,  and  not  for  that  sinner. 

2.  Having  thus  proved  the  reality  of  Christ's  satisfaction  against 
the  Socinians,  we  must  also  prove  the  perfection  of  his  satisfaction 
against  the  Papists.  These  will  have  that  he  satisfied  merely  for 
sins  committed  before  baptism  ;  or  if  he  satisfied  for  all  sins,  that  he 
then  satisfied  only  for  the  guilt,  and  not  for  the  punishment  of  sin  ; 
and  if  he  satisfied  for  any  punishment,  that  it  v/as  only  for  eternal, 
and  not  f«>r  temporal  punishments,  thinking  that  they  themselves 
must  satisfy  for  these  in  this  life  by  afflicting  their  bodies,  and  after 
this  life  in  pm'gatory.     But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us, 

1.  *'  That  with  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that 
fire  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  14.     If  he  satisfied  only  for  some  sins,  an^ 


? 

not  for  guilt,  but  only  for  certain  punishments,  then  he  did  not  per* 
feet  his  delivered  people  with  one  offering  ;  and  so  these  men  con^ 
tradict  the  apostle  to  his  face. 

2.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  of  infinite  value,  as  hath  been 
shown  ;  the  Papists  must  also  allow  this,  for  they  say  that  he  could 
redeem  the  whole  world  with  one  drop  of  his  blood.  No^y  to  say 
that  he  hath  not  fully  satisfied,  what  is  it  but  reproaching  him,  and 
his  great  work.  ? 

3.  The  Saviour  himself  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30.  His 
Father  also  showed  that  he  had  finished  all, things,  when  he  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  and  so  gave  him  an  acquittance,  certifying  that 
he  had  discharged  the  debt,  Acts  ii.  24.  1  Tim.  iii,  16.  1  Peter  iii. 
21.     How  could  all  this  be,  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

4.  Believers  obtain  by  his  suffering  redtmption,  the  favour  of 
God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life,  and  so  all  that  they  need.  How 
can  this  be  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

When  the  apostle  saith.  Cell.  i.  24.  «  I  now  rejoice  in  my  suffer- 
ing  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ 
jn  my  fiesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church,"  he  doth  not 
teach  by  these  words  the  imperfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  and 
that  he  left  any  punishment  for  us,  that  we  might  satisfy  by  bearing 
it:  for  he  doth  not  say  that  he  suffered  for  himself,  but  for  the 
church,  which  was  nevertheless  not  for  satisfaction,  according  to  1 
Cor.  i.  13,  but  for  her  confirmation  and  edification.  When  he  speaks 
of  that  which  was  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ,  he  rr»eans  not 
the  Person  of  Christ,  but  the  church,  which  is  by  virtue  of  ner  union 
with  him  the  mystical  Christ,  l  Cor  xii.  12,  and  therefore  her  afflic- 
tion, which  she  siiffereth  for  his  sake,  is  also  called  tlie  affliction  of 
Christ.  See  all  this,  2  Cor.  i.  5,  6.  "As  the  sufferine^s  of  Christ 
abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundelh  by  t  hrist  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation  and  salvbiion,  which 
is  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings,  which  we  also 
suffer^." 

When  we  say  that  Christ  satisfied  by  his  suffering,  we  do  not  then 
exclude  his  obedience,  but  suppose  that  he  satisfied  by  his  obedience 
also  ;  for  the  law  demands,  in  order  to  a  satisfaction,  not  only  a  bear- 
ing of  the  curse.  Gal.  iii.  10,  but  also  keeping  the  law  by  obedience, 
that  we  may  live,  Rom.  x.  5.  He  suffered  also  in  obedience,  Philip, 
ii.  8«  And  so  "  many  are  made  righteous  by  the  obedience  of  one," 
Rom.  v.  19. 

And  therefore  the  Remonstrants  must  also  be  condemned,  when 
tl]ey  assert  that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  the  justice,  hut  only  the  will  of 


318  eHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  8cc. 

God,  who  required  merely  something  of  his  Son,  in  order  that  he 
mij^ht  merit  a  covenant  ef  grace  for  all  men,  of  which  they  must 
accept  by  their  ficiewill,  which  is  sufficiently  able  to  believe ;  for 
Ciirist  did  not  merit  fdith,  according  to  them  :  but  at  this  rate  he 
would  not  have  reconciled  God  with  man,  but  only  rendered  him  recon- 
cileabie,  and  it  would  depend  upon  man  to  reconcile  God  with  him- 
self, and  himself  with  God  actually.  But,  as  we  have  proved  just 
riow,  ilie  bins  of  the  elect  were  punished  in  him  ;  his  sufferings  were 
the  ra  isom  ;  he  was  punished  in  their  stead;  God  forgives  sins 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to  declare  his  ri  hteousness, 
and  so  he  hatli  satisfied  the  justice  of  God,  which  was  also  necessary, 
as  hdtli  been  bhown  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  iVJoreover,  "  he  hath 
iuliiilcd  the  rignteousness  of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  so 
hath  obtained  redemption,  j^race,  righteousness,  and  therefore 
faith  also  ;  for  faith  is  grace,  Eph.  ii.  8.  Philip,  i.  29. 

E.  We  must  finally  observe  with  respect  to  the  word  "  suffered," 
for  whom  Christ  suffered.  The  instructor  saith  that  he  suffered  the 
wratn  of  God  "  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind  "  He  doth  not  teach 
us  by  these  words  that  Chribt  suffered  for  every  man  in  particular; 
for  he  had  denied  this  in  the  thirteenth  question  ;  but  he  declares 
the  grieviousness  of  Christ's  sufferings,  inasmuch  as  he  sustained 
the  wrath  of  God,  v/hich  was  kindled  against  the  sins  of  all  man- 
kind ;  or  he  shov/s  that  he  sustained  the  wrath  of  God,  not  only  for 
tiie  sins  of  the  Jews,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
Gentiles  ;  as  therefore  the  multitude  of  the  delivered  praise  him  for 
**  redeeming  them  to  God  by  his  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation,"  Rev.  v.  9.  Add  to  this  1  John  iic 
1.  We  will  not  say-anymore  on  this  subject  at  present,  having 
exhibited  it  more  largely  on  the  twentit:th  question. 

II.  But  why  did  he  suffer  "  under  Pontius,  Pilate?"  This  man 
was  a  heathen,  severe,  and  cruel,  nevertheless  appointed  by  the 
Roman  emperour  governour  of  Judea  ;  he  was  however  deposed  on 
account  of  his  evil  government,  and  banished  to  Vienne  in  Fr^ance, 
xvhere  he  stabbed  himself  to  death.  But  though  he  was  such  an  evil 
man,  nevertheless  the  compilers  of  our  creed  thought  proper  to  in- 
troduce him  here,  not  only  to  evidence  that  we  speak  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  who  was  born  of  Mary,  and  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate  ; 
but  also  to  show  that  he  was  the  true  Messiah,  since  it  thus  appear- 
ed, that,  a  heathen  being  judge  of  the  Jews,  ''  the  sceptre  was  depart- 
ed from  Judah,  and  the  ^rihiloh  was  therefore  come,"  according  to 
the  prophecy  of  Jacob,  Gen.  xlii.  10,  as  Augustus  and  Tiberius, 
Roman  emperours,  are  also  mentioned  for  this  reason  by  the  cvan- 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  37,  38,  39.  3i? 

Relists,  Luke  ii.  I.  iii.  1.  But  it  is  shown,  that  Christ  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate  particularly  to  manifest  »' that  he,  tlough  innocent, 
was  condemned  by  a  temporal  judge."  Jesus  was  pronounced  inno« 
cent  by  Judas,  by  Pilate's  wife,  by  the  centurion,  and  others  :  but 
Pilate  did  this  several  times  as  judge,  See  John  xviii.  38.  xix.  4,  6. 
Luke  xxiii.  14,  15.  Matt,  xxvii  34.  Pilate  however  condemned  him, 
though  he  was  innocent.  The  faith  of  Christians  must  conclude 
hence,  "  that  he  hath  delivered  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of 
God,  to  which  they  were  exposed."  The  reason  is,  because  he  stood 
before  Pilate,  as  their  surety,  who  having  no  guilt  of  his  own,  was 
condemned  on  account  of  theif  guilt,  that  the  judgment  of  God  might 
not  pass  on  them.  Which  we  must  believe  the  rather,  because 
Pilate's  tribunal  was  God's  tribunal,  in  whose  name,  and  by  whose 
judiciary  appointment,  he  was  pronounced  innocent  and  condemned: 
in  this,  and  in  no  other  light  was  the  matter  viewed  by  our  Surety  ; 
for  when  "  Pilate  said  to  him,  Knowest  thou  not  that  I  have  power 
to  crucify  thee,  and  power  to  release  thee  ?  Jesus  answered,  Thou 
coudest  hare  no  power  at  all  against  me,  except  it  were  given  thee 
from  above,"  John  xix.  10,  11. 

IIL  He  suffered  under  this  judge  crucifixion,  the  grievousness 
of  which  we  must  now  consider,  as  our  third  general  head,  and  show 
that  **  there  was  something  more  in  his  being  crucified,  than  if  he 
had  died  any  other  death."  There  were  several  kinds  of  capital 
punishments  among  the  Jews  and  Komans  ;  bat  the  Romans  inflict- 
ed most  commonly  upon  odious  malefactors  the  punishment  of  cru- 
xifixion,  in  which  the  criminal  was  raised  up  on  an  erect  post,  hav- 
ing his  arms  stretched  oiit  upon  a  cross-beam,  and  the  lower  parts 
of  his  body  resting  upon  a  prominence,  his  hands  being  nailed  to 
the  cross-beam,  and  his  feet  below  to  the  post.  This  punishment 
was  indeed  (a)  exceedingly  grievous  and  painful ;  for  it  could  not 
but  be  most  excruciating  to  be  pierced  with  nails  through  the  tender 
sinews,  and  obhged  to  hang  in  this  manner,  until  a  person  either 
died  of  hunger,  or  was  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  The  punishment 
of  crucifixion  was  also  (b)  a  most  shameful  death,  as  it  was  not  a 
Jewish,  but  a  heathen  punishment,  which  they  inflicted,  not  upon  a 
citizen,  but  only  upon  their  slaves.  To  be  obliged  to  hang  naked 
between  heaven  and  earth,  as  unworthy  of  either,  was  sufficient  to 
depress  the  heart  of  the  most  shameless,  and  the  most  stout-hearted* 
The  death  of  the  cross  was  also  (c)  an  accursed  deatb,  yea,  it  was 
accursed  of  God  himself,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  "  He  that  is  hanged  is 
accursed  of  God."  Paul  having  respect  to  this  saith,  "  For  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree/'  Gal.  iii,  IS  To 


5§0,  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  kt. 

he  a  curse,  and  accursed  is  to  be  devoted  and  given  up  to  destructiohi 
Deut.  vii.  25,  26.  Joshua  vi.  17.  Deut.  xxvii.  15 — 26.  But  how  is 
he  wlio  is  hanged  accursed  of  God  ?  Many  and  various  are  the  opih* 
ions  of  the  learned  upon  this  subject,  which  we  will  not  recite  at 
present,  that  we  may  not  be  too  diffuse  ;  we  will  only  say,  that  he 
"who  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God,  inasmuch  as  he  is  given  up,  offer- 
ed and  devoted  to  God  and  to  his  vindictive  justice,  for  his  destruc- 
tion, in  order  that  he  may  make  satisfaction  ;  and  therefore  he  who 
is  hanged  is  said,  as  it  were  to  the  honour  of  God,  to  be  a  curse  to 
God,  Deut.  xxi  23.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is  killath  elohimy  a  curse  of 
God,  as  the  sacrifices  are  called  God*s  sacrifices,  because  they  were 
offered  up  to  God,  Psalm  li.  17.  This  is  exceedingly  plain  from 
Numb.  XXV.  4«  "  Israel  joined  himself  unto  Badpeor  :  and  the  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Take  all  the  heads  of  the  people,  and  hang  them  up  to  the 
Lord,  laihovah^  against  the  sun,  that  the  fierce  anger  of  the  I^ord 
may  be  turned  away  from  Israel,"  See  also  the  same,  2  Sam.  xxi.  6, 
y.  And  this  capital  punisliment  was  accursed  of  God  more  than 
any  other,  because  the  malefactor  was  lifted  up  toward  heaven,  the 
habitation  of  God,  like  the  heave-offenngs  ;  so  also  the  burnt  offer- 
ings, and  the  devoted  Jericho  were  sent  up  toward  heaven  by  fire. 
See  Joshua  vi.  \7 — 27.  And  thus  was  the  Lord  Jesus  also  made  a 
curse,  and  truly  a  curse  to  God,  when  he  was  hanged  on  the  cross, 
not  for  his  own  sins,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  which  the  Lord 
had  laid  upon  him  ;  for  "  he  made  him,  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin, 
for  us  ;"  and  therefore  the  apostle  saith  emphatically,  that  *^  he  bore 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  I  Peter  ii.  24.  And  so  be- 
lievers are  assured,  "  that  he  took  on  him  the  curse  which  lay  on 
them  ;"  whereby  they  are  also  delivered  from  the  curse  ;  for  "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for 
us  :  for  it  is  writt'^n.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree," 
Gal.  iii.  And  it  was  therefore  also  necessary,  as  likewise  on  account 
of  the  prophecies,  which  foretold  that  "  they  should  pierce  his  hands 
and  his  feet,  and  pierce  him  through,"  Psalm  xxii.  16.  Zech.  xiio 
10.  His  crucifixion  was  necessary  also,  because  it  was  typified  by 
the  heave-offerings,  and  also  by  the  burnt-offerings,  which  were 
ordered  upon  the  wood,  and  offered  up  to  God.  Many  refer 
hither  also  the  brazen  serpent,  which  was  lifted  up  upon  a  polej 
uccording  to  John  iii.  14,  15. 


^    521 

APPLICATIOxNe 

If  there  be  any  doctrine  in  the  word  of  God,  which  is  important, 
and  requires  our  serious  and  dili,^ent  improvement,  it  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  suffering  of  Christ.     And  therefore/ 

1.  See  only  the  grievousness  of  his  suffering.     Piiate,  after  insult- 
ing him  in  a  cruel  manner   by  his   oifcers,   and   clothing  him   in  a 
ridiculous  habit,  showed  him  thus  to  the  Jews,  and  said,  "  Behold 
the  man,"  John  xix.  5.    But  do  ye  also  go  near  hiiti,  and  follow  him 
from  his  manger  to  his  cross,  and  see  how  he  was  contemned,  how  the 
nation  abhorred  him  ;  how  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a 
man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.    One  while  Herod  would 
slay  him,  another  while  the  Nazarenes  would  cast  him  down  head- 
long from  the  brow  of  their  hill,  and  often  the  Jews  took  up  stones 
to  stone  him :  now  he  was  reviled  as  a  Samaritan,  who  had  a  devil, 
and  who  cast  out  devils  by  the  prince  of  devils,  and  then  he  was  re- 
proached as  a  glutton  and  a  wine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners,  yea,  even  as  a   blasphemer:  and  to  what  a  length  did  their 
scoffing  and  mocking  proceed  !  when  he  was  treated  in  the  hall  of 
Caiaphas  and  of  Pilate  as  a  fool,  and  when  he  was  reproached  to  the 
utmost  upon  the  cross  with  a  wagging  of  their  heads  by  the  officers, 
the  chief  priests,  the  common  people,  yea,  even  by  one  of  the  thieves, 
who  suffered  the  same  condemnation  with  him.     It  was  not  there- 
fore so  strange,  that  he  complained,  "  Reproach   hath   broken   my 
heart,"  Psalm  lix.  20.  And  how  grievous  was  it  to  him,  to  be  bound 
with  chains,   to  be  dragged  from  one  tribunal  to  another,  to  be  buf- 
feted, crowned  with  thorns,  cruelly  scourged,  laden  with  his  cross, 
and  nailed  to  it  by  his  hands  and  feet,  yet  all  this  he  might  have 
endured  ;  but  when  the  powers  of  hell  also   attacked  him,  while  he 
was  in  a  profound  separation  from  God,  whose  sword  of  veageance 
smote  him  on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  elect,  this  was  almost  intol- 
erable to  him  :  this  filled  him  with  such  anguish,  caused  his   sweat 
to  fail  down  from  him,  like  great  drops  of  blood,  and  forced  him  to 
complain  so  bitterly,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me."    And  what  rendered  his  suffering  still  more  grievous  was,  that 
every  one  attacked  him,  high  and  low,  learned  and  uTjJearned,  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  God,  the  devil,  and  men,  friends  and  enemies  were 
all  against  him,  "  every  one  hid  as  it  were  his  face  from  him,"  Isaiah 
liii.  3.     None  can  imagine  that  he  was  so  stout  and  unfeeling,  that 
he  knew  but  little  of  this ;  no,  he  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with 
us  J  his  bitter  complaints  show  the  painful  sensations  of  his  heart, 

Vv 


3:*.     •  CHRIST'S  SUFf^ERlNGS,  Stc. 

and  how  ?;;nevous  his  sufferings  were  to  him.  See,  believers,  so  hard 
was  your  Jesus  beset,  he  who  is  the  desire  of  your  souls,  the  delight 
of  your  eyes,  the  joy  of  your  hearts,  the  object  of  all  the  outj^oinj^s 
of  your  mi»:ds,  and  your  only  and  perfect  satisfaction.  Doth  it  not 
affect  your  hearts,  that  your  dearly  Beloved,  your  Bridepjroom  and 
Husuund,  suffered  so  {;rievously  ?  a  heurt  of  stone  inij2jht  relent 
at  this. 

2  But  ye,  who  seek  not  yet  the  suffering  Jesus  who  pursue  your 
happiness  in  your  own  works,  to  whom  Jesus  is  not  yet  precious  ia 
his  sufferings,  who  mind  earthly  things,  and  are  thus  enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ ;  who  once  seemed  to  have  chosen  his  side,  but  have 
again  loA'ed  the  present  world,  and  do  thus  crucify  the  Son  of  God 
afresJi,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame  ;  who  v/ithstand  the  people 
of  Jesus,  and  therefore  Jesus  himself,  see  in  these  sufferings  of  Jesus 
what  will  betide  you  also  :  for  ^'  if  these  things  were  done  in  the 
green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?"  Luke  xxiii.  31.  If  the 
Son  ot  God  experienced  so  much  wo,  when  he  was  guiltless,  and 
had  done  all  things  well,  how  will  ye,  O  vile  wretches,  endure,  when 
he  will  attack  you  not  as  a  man,  but  when  he  will  stir  up  all  his 
wrath,  and  oring  you  to  his  seat,  that  he  may  accuse  you  of  all  your 
misdemeanours,  your  sedition  against  him,  your  blasphemy,  re- 
proaching and  transgressing  of  his  law  ;  that  he  may  condemn  you 
as  guilty,  and  send  you  away  as  accursed,  when  he  will  say  to  you, 
standing  en  his  left  hand,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt.  xxv.  41. 
How  will  ye  then  be  crucified  ?  for  "  your  worm  shall  not  die,  and 
your  fire  shall  not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  Either  ye  must  suf- 
fer, or  Jesus  for  you.  Since  now  ye  evidence  by  your  behaviour, 
that  ye  have  never  sought  him  in  truth,  ye  have  therefore  no  proof, 
that  he  suffered  for  you  :  therefore  be  anxious  and  concerned,  look 
unto  him,  that  ye  may  be  saved,  He  stretched  out  his  hands,  pierced 
with  the  nails,  to  you,  and  invites  you  to  come  unto  him. 

3,  But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  to  wiiom  sin  is  so  bitter, 
your  heaviest  cross,  who  condemn  and  detest  yourselves  on  account 
of  It ;  who  have  sought  all  your  salvation  in  his  sufferings,  and  who 
hate  and  curse  sin,  as  a  crucified  one,  see  from  what  this  grievous 
'oufftring  of  Christ  pi'oceeded  ;  will  ye  be  angry  with  the  wicked  Jews 
and  Gentiles  ?  or  will  ye  complain  of  the  Lord  for  causing  his  be- 
loved Son  and  your  dear  Jesus  to  suffer  in  this  manner  ?  No,  look 
at  yourselves  ;  your  way,  and  your  doings  procured  these  things  to 
him,  and  Miade  it  so  bitter  to  h-m,  and  that  it  reached  to  his  heart, 
Ye  were  the  seditious  persons,  who  broke  his  yoke,  and  burst  his 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  58,  39,  325 

bonds  ;  ye,  by  your  wicked  dispositions,  opinions,  and  conduct,  bias- 
phieined  God,  your  iniquities  stirred  up  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
ali  the  -^yrath  of  God  against  the  Son  of  his  icve.  It  behooves  you 
to  see  this,  and  to  behold  in  it  the  dreadful  nature  of  sin,  it  ou^ht  to 
incense  you  against  it,  and  induce  you  to  take  vengeance  of  it,  and 
to  crucify  it ;  yea,  this  should  cause  your  iiearts  to  bleed  for  shame 
and  grief,  that  ye,  even  ye  procured  these  grievous  tiuiferir.gs  to 
Christ.  He  foretold  this,  "  that  ye  should  look  on  hirn,  whora  ye 
had  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him,  as  ona  mourneth  for  his  only  son^ 
and  be  in  bitterness  for  hirn,  as  one  that  is  in  biiterness  fur  his  first- 
born," Zech.  xii.  iO. 

4.  Look  deeper  into  this  matter,  and  see  the  efficacy  of  Christ's 
sufferings  for  you,  in  your  stead,  and  for  your  advantage.  By  his 
sufferings  Ai  your  sins  have  been  taken  away  in  one  day  ;  your  sins 
and  iniquities,  when  they  shall  be  sought,  shall  not  be  found ;  when 
ye  were  enemies,  ye  v/ere  reconciled  lo  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son: 
he  harh  redeemed  your  body  and  soul  from  eternal  damnation  by 
h;s  passion,  as  the  only  atoning  sacrifice  :  God  will  be  no  more 
angry  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you ;  in  him  ye  have  redemption  through 
his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
grace  :  by  his  suffering  he  hath  obtained  for  you  an  everlasting 
righteousness.  This  is  youi  hope,  your  joy  and  boasting ;  "  God 
forbid  that  ye  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  Gal.  vi.  14.  Bathe,  swim,  delight  yourselves  in  his  suffei- 
ing,  yea,  ye  shou  d  wake  and  sleep  in  it,  that  ye  may  inhale  the  fla- 
vour and  efficacy  of  it,  with  the  spouse.  Song  1.  13.  <»  A  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  rae  ;  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt 
my  breasts."  Behold  therefore  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  you,  and 
in  your  stead,  with  Paul,  Gal.  ii.  20.  •<  I  am  crucified  with  Christ, 
and  1  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  iiveth  in  ftie  ;  and  the  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  To  cast  away  your  hope  with  re- 
spect to  this,  after  so  many  evidences  of  iJs  love,  and  the  witnessing 
of  his  Spirit,  upon  every  casual  thought,  deprives  your  souls  of  the 
bweetness,  relish  and  efncacy  of  Christ's  sufferings. 

5.  Open  your  eyes,  that  ye  may  see  how  mucii  of  God  ye  can 
discover  in  this.  The  inconceivable  and  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is 
exhibited  to  you  here,  in  devising  this  way  of  saving  you  by  the 
grievous  sufferings  of  his  Son,  when  it  was  impossible  for  any  created 
understanding  to  contrive  this  proper  way.  The  supreme  power  of 
God  is  discovered  here,  in  accomplishing  it  against  all  the  power  of 
the  irates  of  heil  :  this  is  the  sum  of  the  ivhole  gospel,  that  '■'  Christ 


52i  CHRISTS  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

is  the  po'.ver  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God,"  TCor.  i.  24.  But 
that  which  shines  forth  no  less  in  this  suffering,  is  the  unfathomable 
love  of  God  and  of  his  Son ;  that  God  surrendered  his  Son,  yea, 
thai  the  Son  surrendered  himsel!  to  such  bitter  sufferings  for  such 
vile  sinners  as  ye  are  :  how  ardent  was  the  love  that  urged  him  lo 
this  !  could  his  love  have  manifested  itself  to  you  in  a  stronger  man- 
ner ?  Christians,  stand  still  awhile  here,  ancJ  let  your  souls  endeav- 
our to  contemplate  this  love,  and  be  assured,  that  it  will  overwhelm 
you  with  wonder  and  joy  :  th^efore  the  apostle  said,  Eph.  iii.  18,  19, 
"  That  ye  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  the  saints,  what  is 
the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  kiow  the  love 
of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God." 

6.  Look  at  these  sufferings,  that  ye  may  imitate  Christ  in  his  holy 
suffering  :  "  For  hereunto  were  ye  called,  because  Christ  also  suf- 
fered for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,'* 
1  Peter  ii.  21.  Jesus  suffered  in  obedience  'to  his  Father,  Philip. 
ii.  8.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thy  will  be  done,"  was  his  language. 
He  suffered  with  meekness  ;  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
agam,  and  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not,"  1  Peter  ii.  21.  Yea,  he 
prayed  for  his  enemies,  who  crucified  him,  Lukexxiii.  54.  He  suffer- 
ed also  very  patiently  :  <'  He  was  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter, 
and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb-  so  he  opened  not  his 
mouth,"  Isaiah  liii.  7.  He  suffered  also  from  special  love  to  his  peo- 
ple, Eph.  V.  2.  Behold  this  love  of  Jesus  ought  also  to  manifest  it- 
self in  your  mortal  bodies,  in  your  whole  conversation  as  well  as  in 
y cur  suffering.  Doth  the  Lord  subject  you  to  suffering,  "keep 
silence,  because  he  hath  inflicted  it  upon  you,"  Lam.  ili.  28.  Are 
ye  injured,  be  not  displej^ed,  render  not  evil  for  evil,  insist  not  upon 
your  utmofit  right,  but  abate  somewhat  of  it ;  consider  v/hat  Jesus 
hath  done  for  you;though  ye  had  injured  him  to  the  utmost,  he  for- 
gave you.  See  how  Paul  exhorts  you.  Coll.  iii.  12,  13,  "Put  on 
therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies, 
kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  lomgsuffering  ;  forbearing 
one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any  :  even  as  Christ 
forgave  you,  so  do  ye  also."  Read  also,  Eph.  iv.  31  32.  v.  1,  2. 
Doth  the  hand  of  the  Lord  press  you  with  any  heavy  cross,  open 
not  your  mouth  to  reprove  his  way  ;  all  that  God  doth  is  glory  and 
majesty  :  Jesus  suffered  more  grievously  than  ye  do,  and  he  endured 
it :  ye  must  "  suffer  with  him  that  ye  may  be  glorified  with  him," 
Rom.  vii.  17.  Doth  the  Lord  expose  you  to  the  danger  of  losing  your 
honour,  property,  ease  aud  life  for  his  name's  sake  j  suffer  it  from 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  38,  39.  SS-f 

love  to  him,  and  do  not  shrink  from  it,  as  he  also  suffered  for  you  in 
the  most  grievous  manner  from  love  to  you.  So  that  great  follower 
of  Christ  would  conduct,  Acts  xxi.  13,  "I  am  ready,  not  to  be  bound 
only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
So  also  the  other  apostles  conducted  ;  yea,  "  they  rejoiced  that  they 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name,"  Acts  v.  41. 

7.  Look  at  this  suffering  for  your  support ;    for  this  suffering  hath 
taken  away  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  curse  from  your  sufferings. 
Doth  he  smite,  it  is  only  love  ;   "  For  whom   the   Lord   loveth,  he 
chasteneth,  and  he  scourgeth  every  son  whom   he  receiveth,"   Heb, 
xii.  6.     Yea,  Jesus  knoweth  by  experience  what  ye  feel,  yea,  he  suf- 
fers with  you :  For  we  have  not  an   high   priest,   which   cannot   be 
touched   with  the  feeling  of  our  infiimities  ;  but  was    in    all   points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,   yet  without  sin,"  Heb.  iv.  15.     ii.   17,    18. 
Are  ye  grieved  on  account  of  your  iniquities,  on  account  of  the  se- 
vere judgment  of  God,  and  on  account  of  the  curse  of  the  law  ;  the 
Lord  Jesus  hath  fully    satisfied  for  all  your  iniquities,  and  therefore 
God  will  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  your   sins,'* 
Rom.  iii.  25,  26.    1  John  i.  9,     Jesus  was  condemned,  though"  inno- 
cent, and  was  made  a  curse  for  you,  that  ye  might  be  delivered  from 
the  severe  judgments  of  God  and  from  the  curse  :  ''There  is  there- 
fore no  condemnation  to   them  which    are  in   Christ  Jesus  ;  "who' 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?    it  is  God  that  jus- 
tifieth  ;   who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?     It  is  Christ  that  died,"  Rom- 
viii.  1,  33,  34.     Did  he  pray  to  his  Father  to  forgive  them  who  cru- 
cified him  the  evil  which  they  did  to  him,  Luke  xxiii.  34  ;  will  he 
not  then  pray  for  you,  when   "  he  is  your  advocate  with  the  Father, 
and  when  he  is  a  propitiation  for  your  sins  ?"    1   John  ii.  1,2.     Or 
are  ye  concerned  about  your  bodily  wants,  notknowing  what  ye  shall 
eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye«,shall  be  clothed?  do 
ye  not  know,  "  that  if  God  spared  not  his   own  Son,   but   delivered 
liim  up  for  you  all,  he  will  also  freely  give  you  all  things  with  him  ?*' 
Jesus,  even  while  he  suffered,   provided    for  his  mother,  when   he 
commended  her  to  his  beloved  disciple,  John  xix  26,  27,  will  he  not 
then,  now  he   is    m   heaven,  his  full   treasury,   provide  for   you  ?" 
Cast  then  all  your  care  upon  jiim,  for  he  careth  for  you,"   1  Peter,  v. 
17.     Ye  are  indeed  as  dear  to  him  as  his  mother  was,  Matt.  xii.  50, 
Do  ye  often    consider  how    ye   shall  pass    through    this  howling 
wilderness  to  him  in  heaven .?  he,  who  when  he  was  under  the  penal 
curse,  said  to  the  converted  thief,  "  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise,"  Luke  xxiii.  43,  even  "  he  is  gone  before  you,  to  prepare 
a  place  for  you,"  which  when  he  hath  done,  **  he  will  take  you  to 


326  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

himself,  that  yc  may  be  where  he  is,"  John  xiv.  2,  3.  Is  it  matter 
of  sorr'ow  to  you,  that  God  delivers  you  up  to  desertions,  God  doth 
not  however  do  this  ii>  his  anger,  which  Jesus  suffered  for  yo  i,  when 
he  complained,  '*  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  tiiou  forsaken  me  ?" 
Matt,  xxvii.  47.  Neither  will  it  be  always  thus  with  you,  for  a  time 
is  coming,  when  ye  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  :  ye  shall  not 
then  be  obliged  to  complain,  like  Jesus  on  the  cross, ''  1  thirst,"  John 
xix.  28.  F©r  since  Jesus  hath  thirsted  for  you,  therefore  "  ye  shall 
not  thirst  any  more  ;  for  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne,  shall  feed  you,  and  shall  lead  you  to  living  fountains  of  water; 
and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes,"  Rev.  vii.  16,  17. 
Do  ye  think  that  all  would  be  well  with  you,  if  ye  were  not  so  defi- 
cient in  sanctificat'on,  and  did  not  come  short  so  much  ?  yea,  it 
would  indeed  be  exceeeingly  ill  with  you,  if  your  sanctification  should 
be  your  righteousness  before  God  :  but  bt:hol(i,  Jesus  hath  fulfilled 
the  righteousness  of  the  law  for  you,  and  proclaimed  before  the 
whole  world,  *'  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30,  And  he  hath  thus 
cancelled  the  bond,  **  having  nailed  it  to  the  cross,"  and  hath  obtain- 
ed that  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law  should  be  fulfilled  in  you,  and 
that  ye  should  be  perfect  in  him,"  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Coll.  ii.  10 — 15j 
and  *'  he  is  also  made  sanctification  to  you,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  There 
remains  nothing  for  you  to  do,  but  to  forget  that  which  is  behind, 
and  to  reach  forth  to  that  which  is  before,  pressing  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  that,  laying 
yourselves  as  it  were  upon  his  cross,  ye  may  pour  forth  your  souls 
with  him  in  death,  and  commend  them  into  the  hands  of  his  Father, 
as  he  also  did,  Luke  xxiii,  46.  And  truly,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth  ;  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that 
Ihey  may  rest  trom  their  labours  j  and  their  works  do  follow  them.'' 
Amen. 


(  327  ) 


CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL 


AND 


DESCENT   INTO    HELL 


XVI.  LORDS  DAY, 


1  Cor.  XV.  3,  4.  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all,  that  which  I 
also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the 
scriptures,  and  that  he  was  buried.

Q.  39.  Is  there  any  thing  more  in  his  being  cruci^ed,  than  if  he  had 
died  some  other  death  ? 

A.  Yes  there  is :  tor  thereby  I  am  assured,  that  he  took  on  him 
the  curse  which  lay  on  me  ;  for  the  death  of  the  cross  was  accursed 
of  God. 

'HE  Saviour  Jesus  speaking  of  himself,  saith  Matt.  xx.  28.  "  The 
Son  of  roan  came  xm\  to  be  miiustered  UDto,  but  to  nunister,  and 


S19  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Sec. 

jlve  his  life  a  ransom  for  many."  It  was  indeed  foretold,  that  Israel 
should  serve  David  their  King,  the  Messiah,  Jer.  xxx.  9,  as  the 
Father  also  promised  to  him  in  the  council  of  peace,  "  that  he  should 
have  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  his  possess'on,"  Psalm  ii.  8,  wherefore  he  also  went  by  his 
incarnatioa,  like  a  nobleman,  into  a  far  country,  that  he  might  re- 
ceive a  kingdom  for  himself,  Luke  xix.  12,  but  it  i:ehQpved  him  first 
to  humble  himself,  and  "  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  if  he 
ahould  see  his  seed,"  Isaiah  liii.  10  And  so  he  came  in  a  humbl© 
manner,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  mmister,  and  to  give  his 
Jife  a  ransom  for  many,  inasmuch  as  he  came  to  suffer ;  therefore 
he  is  also  represented  to  us,  as  "  one  whom  man  despised,  whom 
the  nation  abhorred,  and  a  servant  of  rulers,"  Isaiah  xlix.  7.  On 
which  account  he  also  withdrew,  when  "  he  knew  that  they  would 
come,  and  take  him  by  force,  and  mak'C  him  a  king,"  John  vi.  15. 
His  design  in  coming  into  the  vvorM  was,  "  to  save  sinners,"  1  Tim* 
i.  15.  As  it  was  also  foretold,  that  he  should  come  in  a  most  de- 
spised condition,  in  order  to  suffer,  and  give  his  soul  a  ransom,  and 
an  offering  for  sin,  Isniah  liii.  And  therefore  his  suffering  and 
humilialion  for  the  redemption  of  the  elect  sinner  arc  usually  joined 
to  his  incarnation,  as  we  see  not  only,  Matt,  xx.  28,  but  also  Matt* 
xviii.  U.|Philip,  ii.  7,  8,  In  this  manner  do  the  compilers  of  the  Chris- 
tian creed  proceed,  when  they  teach  us  to  say,  "  Who  was  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius 
Pilate."  And  in  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed  j  for 
after  explaining  the  doctrme  of  Christ's  incarnation  in  the  fourteenth^ 
Lord's  day,  he  exhibits  his  suffering  in  this  Lord's  day. 

We  have  three  general  heads  proposed  in  this  Lord's  day  : 

I.  The  exposition  of  the  word'  **  suffered,"  Question  37. 

II.  the  reason  why  he  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  Question  38. 

III.  The  grievousness  of  his  crucifixion.  Question  39. 

1.  Although  tiie  word,  "  suffered  "  is  very  small,  yet  it  implies  the 
whole  of  Christ's  sufferings,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his 
life  :  *'  Christ  suffered  once  for  sis,"  saith  our  text.  See  this  also. 
Heb.  ii.  18.  1  Peter  ii.  2i.  The  captious  Remonstrants  will  not 
allow  that  the  whole  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  expressed  by  the  word^ 
''  suffered."  The  creed  restrains  the  suffering  indeed  to  Pontius 
Pilate  ;  yet  this  doth  not  exclude  Christ's  former  sufferings,  but  only 
shows  when  he  suffered  most  grievously. 

Ill  order  then  to  explain  this  word  in  its  more  extensive  significa- 
tion., we  will  consider  particularly,  (a)  who  suffered,  (b)  what  he  suf- 
fered, (c)  when  he  sulfered,  (d)  for  what  end  he  suffered,  and  (e) 
for  whom  he  suffered. 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  S6,  3#*  311 

A.  If  we  believe  the  word  of  God,  we  must  say  that  the  Son  of 
God,  who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  the  virgin 
Mary,  suffered ;  and  that  not  only  in  appearance,  but  in  reality.  We 
do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  refute  here  the  anci  nt  and  long  since 
obsolete  opinions  of  the  Patripassians,  who  taught  that  the  I-  aihet 
suffered  :  neither  will  we  busy  ourselves  with  Marcion,  and  others, 
■who  held  that  the  Son  of  God  suft'ere; '  only  in  appearance,  and  not 
in  reality.  These  opinions  have  confuted  themselves  and  they  have 
therefore  also  perished,  and  we  know  not  that  they  are  patronized 
by  a  single  person  at  present.  Sabellius  taught  in  former  times  that 
the  divine  and  human  natures  of  Christ  were  mixed,  the  one  with 
the  other,  or  that  the  Godhead  was  changed  into  the  manhood,  which 
opinion  is  still  maintained  by  certain  Anabaptists,  who  also  say  that 
the  Son  of  God  suffered  in  his  Godhead.  But  what  can  be  imagined 
more  absurd  ?  For  since  he  is  the  blessed  and  unchangeable  God,  he 
is  also  "immortal  and  incorruptible,"  1  Tim.  i.  17.  vi.  16.  The 
apostle  saith  indeed  that  "  God  hath  purchased  his  church  with  his 
own  blood,"  Acts  xx.  38,  but  he  doth  not  say  that  the  Godhead  pur- 
chased the  church  with  its  own  blood  :  he  only  intimateth  that  the 
person,  who  gave  the  blood  of  his  manhood  to  redeem  and  purchase 
his  church,  was  God. 

But  when  we  say  that  he  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  we  do  not 
understand  it  only  of  his  body,  as  the  Papists  do,  in  order  to  deny 
the  perfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  but  also  of "  his  soul,  which 
was  exceedingly  sorrowful  even  unto  death,"  Matt.  xxvi.  38.  We 
must  understand  this  not  only  of  the  inferior  and  less  ncble  parts  of' 
his  soul,  which  were  affected  With  sorrow,  fear  and  compassion,  on 
account  of  his  approaching  bodily  suffering,  as  the  Papists  speak  s 
for  he  suffered  properly  the  power  of  God's  wrath  in  his  soul ;  inas- 
much as  compassion  and  fear  alone  could  not  cause  him  to  mourn 
and  sweat  blood,  as  he  did,  because  he  would  then  have  manifested 
greater  weakness  than  many  martyrs,  whose  souls  sustained  the 
most  grievous  suffering  with  the  greatest  courage,  triuuiph  and  joy. 
He  was  also  obliged  to  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  of  the 
soul,  and  thus  to  give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many,"  Matt.  xx.  28. 
It  was  also  foretold,  that  "  he  should  make  his  soul  an  offering  for 
sin,"  Isaiah  liii.  10,  as  it  was  also  typified;  when  the  blood  of  beasts, 
and  therefore  their  soul  was  offered  upon  the  altar,  to  make  recon- 
ciliation for  souls.  Lev.  xviii.  1 1 . 

But  although  Jesus  suffered  only  in  his  manhood,  yet  he  did  not 
suffer  without  any  relation  to  his  Godhead:  but  his  Godhead  (1) 
surrendered  the  manhood  to  be  an  offering  for  sin,  and  .dedicated  i' 


312  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  Stc. 

to  God,  to  make  reconciliation  :  «  He  offered  himself  without  spdt 
to  God  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  to  purge  the  conscience,"  Heb. 
ix.  14.  See  John  X.  18.  Eph.  v.  2.(2)  His  Godhead  veiled  its 
glory  under  the  manhood,  so  that  it  could  not  beam  forth  in  its  great- 
est lustre  :  "For  he,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness 
of  men  :  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself, 
and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,"  Philip, 
ii.  6 J  7,  8-  (r>)  The  Godhead  sustained  the  manhood  under  its  suf- 
fering :  "  His  own  arm  brought  him  salvation,  and  his  fury  it  upheld 
him  ;  for  tlie  Lord  God  helped  him,  therefore  he  was  not  confoun- 
ded :  therefore  he  set  his  face  like  a  flint,  knowing  that  he  should 
not  be  ashamed."  Isainh  1.  7.  (4)  The  Godhead  also  added  the 
value  to  his  suffering  ;  by  which  the  sufifering  of  the  manhood  being 
the  suffering  of  him  who  was  also  God,  "  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,"  Dan.  ix.  24.     Acts  xx.  28.     1  John  i.  7, 

5.  We  shall  now  consider  what  he  suffered.  The  instructor  saith 
"  that  he  suffered  the  wratii  of  God  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind." 
God  was  terribly  displeased  with  the  sins  of  mankind,  as  we  have 
shown  on  the  tenth  question.  S:nce  now  the  Son  of  God  was  be- 
come surety,  and  had  taken  all  the  sins  of  elect  men  upon  himself, 
in  order  to  satisfy  for  them,  therefore  the  righteous  God  also  stirred 
up  his  whole  wrath,  and  poured  it  out  upon  the  Surety.  It  is  indeed 
true,  that  he  suffered  from  devils  and  from  men,  from  friends  and 
from  enem.ies  ;  but  in  all  this  he  still  suffered  the  wrath  of  God. 
For  (1)  the  men  who  procured  this  suffering  to  him,  were  the  rods 
of  God's  anger,"  Isaiah  x  5.  Therefore  Peter  also  saith,  Acts  ii. 
23.  "  Him,  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  council  and  fore- 
knowledge of  God,  ye  havt  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  cruci- 
fied and  slain."  (2)  He  suffered  all  that  was  necessary  to  make  sat- 
isfaction for  sin,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  sequel.  Now  sin  could  not 
he  satisfied  for,  but  by  bearing  the  wrath  of  God  :  this  hath  been 
proved  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  (5)  The  suffering  was  a  cup  of 
God's  wrath,  as  we  see  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  compared  with  Psalm  xl.  6. 
Isaiah  Ii.  ir — 33.  Jer.  xxv.  15 — 29.  (4)  He  suffered  the  death  of 
the  cross,  inflicted  on  him  by  men,  as  a  curse,  and  indeed  so,  that  he 
hath  delivered  the  elect  from  the  carse.  Gal.  iii.  13. 

He  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  thus  from  wicked  instruments  ;  but 
lie  suffered  it  also  immediately  in  his  soul,  when  his  Father  whhheld 
his  light  and  lovingkindness  from  him,  abandoned  him  to  a  dreadful 
darkness,  subjected  him  to  his  grievous  wrsth  on  account  of  all  the 


XV.  LORD'S  IJAY,  Q.  37,  38,  39  iJ13 

sins  6f  the  elect,  and  let  all  the  powers  of  hell  loose  upon  him.  \Ve 
niight  speak  of  this  somewhat  more  largely  here,  but  it  will  be  more 
proper  to  do  it  in  order  oq  the  forty-fourth  question. 

C.  We  must  observe  in  the  third  place,  with  respect  to  the  wori 
suffered,  when  Christ  suffered.  The  catechism  saiih,  that  he  suf- 
fered m  body  and  soul  "  during  his  whole  life."  This  is  also  true  : 
for  he  Was  born  in  a  poor  and  needy  conditio/i  ;  when  he  was  only 
eight  days  old,  he  underwent  the  bloody  and  painful  rite  of  circum- 
cision: he  was  obliged  to  flee  for  his  life  into  Egypt,  while  hfc  was 
yet  very  young.  He  had  no  sooner  be.<un  his  puhlick  ministry,  than 
he  fasted  forty  days,  was  tempted  by  the  devil,  blasphemed,  threat- 
ened, and  insidiously  watched  by  the  Jews  ;  and  thoilg^h  the  foxes 
had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  had  nests,  yet  the  Son  of  Man 
had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  And  who  knows  what  spiritual  dis- 
tresses and  desertions  he  wms  obliged  to  suffer,  when  he  spent  so 
great  a  part  of  his  linne  alonb,  ahd  in  the  dreary  night,  that  he  might 
wrestle  in  prayer  with  his  Father. 

But  he  suffered  the  wrath  of  God  particularly  "  at  the  end  of  his 
life."  Then  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness  surprised  him,  when 
his  Father  attacked  him  with  his  anger  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross  ;  when  he  was  betrayed  by  his  own  apostle  Judas,  was  appre- 
hended as  a  thief  by  the  Jews  with  swords  and  staves^  was  deserted 
by  his  pious  disciples,  and  denied  by  his  zealous  Peter,  dragged 
from  tribunal  to  tribunal,  falsely  accused  there  of  sedition  and  blasphe- 
my, condemned,  mocked,  spitten  upon,  scourged,  and  finally  put  to 
death  in  the  most  shameful,  and  most  painful  manner  on  the  cross. 
Alas,  how  bitter  was  all  this  to  him  1  The  anguish  of  his  heart  for- 
ced that  dismal  complaint  fronti  hitn,  which  he  uttered  with  a  loud 
voice,  *'  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thoU  forsaken  me  ?"  All  na- 
ture was  disturbed  at  this  grievous  suffering  :  "  For  the  sun  was 
darkened,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  the  top  to 
the  bottom,  the  earth  quaked,  the  rocks  rent,  the  graves  were  opened^ 
and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept  arose/'  Matt,  xxviii  45,  46, 
50,  51,  52. 

D.  The  fourth  particular  that  requires  our  consideration  with 
respect  to  the  word  suffered,  is  the  end  for  which  Christ  suffered. 
Surely  it  could  not  be  by  accident,  and  without  a  regard  to  some 
great  end,  that  God's  innocent  Son  suffered  so  long  a  time,  and  sO 
grievously.  The  word  of  God  informs  us,  that  he  suffered,  (a)  "  Be- 
cause the  hand  and  counsel  of  God  had  before  determined,  that  htt 
should  suffer,"  Acts  iv.  28.  He  had  entered  into  an  engagement  to 
his  Father  in  the  council  of  peace  to  suffer,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  S.     Ill 

Uu 


$U  CHRlSt'S  SUFJ?ER1NGS,  kt^ 

order  to  fulSl  this  council,  he  submitted  w.Ilinp^ly  to  suffering  ;  thetc^ 
fore  he  said  to  Peter,  who  would  protect  hi  in  from  suffering,  *'  The 
cup  which  n»y  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?"  John  xviii. 
11.  The  word  of  C.od  also  tc.chelh  us,  (b)  »hat  he  suffered  in  or- 
der to  fulfil  tlie  prophecies.  It  was  often  foretold,  ;and  particularly 
in  the  xxii.  Psalm,  ..nd  Isaiah  iiii.  that  Christ  should  suffer.  He 
would  therefore  suffer,  thai  he  might  fulfil  the  scriptures  in  thi& 
respect :  wherefore,  when  he  con^plains  of  the  injui-tice  of  his  ene- 
mies, that  they  took  him  with  swords  and  staves,  as  if  he  had  been 
a  thief,  he  stilicomfo  t5  himself  therewith,  that  "all  this  came  to 
pitss,  that  the  scriptures  of  the' prophet .  might  be  fulfilled,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  56.  (c)  His  suffering  was  not  only  foretold,  but  also  typified 
by  all  the  trespass-offermgs,  sin-offerings,  sacrifices  of  atonement, 
and  of  slain  beasts,  which  were  shadows  of  him,  Heb.  x.  i.  In  or- 
der to  show  that  he  was  the  body  of  them,  "  he  gave  himself  up  an 
offermg  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph-  v.  2.  We  must  also  say  that 
he  suflered,  (d)  to  affonl  a  perfect  example  of  obedience  to  his  Father, 
and  of  holy  patience  ;  for  "  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us,  leavir^  us 
an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,"   1  Pet   ii.  21. 

But  the  chief  end  of  his  suffering,  and  of  God's  appointing,  fore- 
teUing  and  typifying  that  he  should  suffer  thus,  was  that  he  might 
by  his  suffering  fully  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sins  and  guilt 
of  his  people,  "  that  so  by  his  passion,  as  the  only  propitiatory  sacri- 
fice, he  might  redeem  our  body  and  soul  from  everlasting  damnation, 
andobtain  for  usthe  favor  of  God ^  righteousness  and  eternal  life." 
That  such  a  satisfaction  was  necessary,  we  have  proved  on  the  fifth 
Lord's  dciy.  We  must  now  prove  (1)  against  the  Socinians,  that  he 
hath  by  his  suffering  "  really  "  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  ;  and 
(2)  against  the  Papists,  that  he  hath  satisfied  fully. 

1.  We  say  \hat  the  Son  of  God  hath  by  his  suffering  really  satis- 
fied the  justice  of  God  for  the  sinner.  The  Socinians,  who  reject 
all  those  particulars  in  the  gospel,  that  can  afford  comfort  to  the 
people  of  God,  have  dared  to  deny  this  great  ground  of  salvation 
also  ;  but  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this  truth,  and  therefore  we 
•^cleave  to  it  : 

1.  Because  the  suffering  of  Christ  is  put  in  the  stead  of  all  the 
sacrifices  of  atonement  under  the  Old  Testament,  which  atoned 
for  sin  typically.  See  Lev.  iv.  snd  xvi.  Now  it  was  impossible  that 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins  ;  he  neverthe- 
-  less  being  willing  to  reconcile  the  sinner  to  God,  substituted  and  of- 
fered his  body  and  soul  for  a  trespass-offering,  instead  of  those  sacri- 
fices ;  and  thus  "  by  one  offering  hath  perfected  for  ever,  them  that 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Qj  57.  58,  39.  3i5 

iie  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  4—14.  And  he  thus  really  effected  the 
atonement,  which  the  sacrifices  could  not  accomphsh,  but  which  only 
pointed  to  Christ-  See  John  i.  29, 

2.  Because  the  sins  of  ihe  elect  were  laid  upon  him,  and  punished 
in  him,  that  he  might  take  them  away.  The  ancient  church  fore- 
saw this  long  before  it  came  to  pa^,  when  she  said,  "  Surely  he  hath 
borne  our  grief,  and  carried  our  sorrows.  He  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastistment 
of  our  peace  was  upoa  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He  was  oppressed, 
when  it  was  required  of  him,"  *  Isaiah  liii.  4 — 7.  Peter  having  re- 
spect to  this,  saith  that  '<  Christ  bore  our  sins  on  the  tree,"  1  Peter 
ii.   24. 

3  The  reality  of  the  satisfaction  appears  still  more,  when  we  con' 
sider  that  liis  sufferings  were  the  ransom  and  ])rice  of  redemption 
for  the  sinner,  who  was  taken  captive  on  account  of  his  guilt.  Be- 
lievers "are  not  redeemed  Avith  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and 
gold  :  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Lam^-,"  1  Peter  i.  18,  19. 
"  He  gave  his  life  and  himself  a  ransom,"  Matt.  xx.  28.  I  Tim.  ii.  6. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  Christ  suffered  for  the  elect,  and  in  their 
stead  :  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were 
yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  Rom.  v.  8.  "  Christ  was  made  a 
curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  1 3.  So  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  are  con- 
sidered as  the  sufferings  of  the  elect,  2  Cor.  v.  15.  "  We  judge 
thus,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  and  he  died  for 
all." 

.5,  *'  God  declares  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  sins 
through  his  blood,"  and  suffering,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  How  can  this 
be.  if  he  did  not  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  Oy  his  suffering  ?  for  when 
God  forgives  sin  without  the  satisfaction  of  his  Son,  he  declares  in- 
deed his  grace,  but  not  his  righteousness  ;  and  it  wou'd  not  then  be 
necessary,  that  remissior.  should  be  obtained  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

6.  If  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  not  for  satisfaction,  why  did 
God  then  punish  his  guiltless  Son  ?  It  could  not  be  only  to  afford  a 
perfect  example  of  obedience  and  patience,  nor  to  confirm  his  doC^ 
trine  by  his  sufferings,  seeing  any  ordinary  man,  who  was  eminently 
sanctified  by  God,  was  sufficiently  qualified  for  this  ;  but  Peter  show- 
eth  that  "  Christ  suffered  in  the  stead  of  the  unjust,  that  he  might 
bring  us  to  God,"  \  Peter  iii.  18. 

7.  Pinally,  we  say  also  that  Christ  by  his  suffering  delivered  the. 

*  Thi?  is  agreeable  to  ih«  Dutch  transktion. 


8l<i  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

elect  from  eternal  damnation :  for  "  Christ  hath  delivered  us  from 
the  Gurse  of  the  law,  beinj^  made  a  curse  for  us,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Eph. 
i.  7.  By  his  sufferint;  he  also  obtained  for  them  the  favour  of  God, 
righteousness,  and  eternal  life  :  "  God  made  him  to  be  sin,  that  we 
might  be  made  the  ri^^hteousness  of  God  in  him,"  3  Cor.  v.  21.  I 
Cor.  V.  30.  "  The  gift  of  Gpd  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
pur  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  23. 

Whoever  considers  without  prejudice  these,  and  such  proofs  of 
the  doctrine,  that  Christ  huth  really  satisfied  the  justice  of  God  by 
his  sufferinj^  for  sin,  will  be  obliged  to  do  violence  to  himself,  if  he 
will  deny  the  satisfaction.  The  Socinians  indeed  deny  this  great 
truth,  but  it  proceeds  only  from  a  prejudice,  that  Christ  is  not  God, 
coessential  with  the  Father  ;  and  therefore  they  say  that  the  transient 
sufferings  of  one  man  could  not  satisfy  for  so  many  sins  of  such  a 
number  of  men,  who  should  have  been  punished  for  ever.  We  also 
should  say  this,  if  Christ  were  not  more  than  a  mere  man,  but  since 
he  is  also  God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,  and  since  his  blood  is  thus 
the  blood  and  sufferings  of  God,  therefore  his  sufferings  were  of  such 
an  infinite  value,  that  he  could  take  away  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect 
"  in  one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9. 

They  deny  th's  truth  also  fro^i  another  prejudice,  to  wit,  they 
look  upon  sins,  as  pecuniary  debts,  and  therefore  say,  that  if  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ  satisfied  for  sins,  there  can  then  be  no  forgiveness 
nor  grace  shown  to  men.  This  would  he  true,  if  sins  were  pecuniary 
debtb,  which  are  not  forgiven  from  kindness,  when  they  are  paid  : 
but  inasmuch  as  sins  are  debts  that  deserve  punishment,  which  God 
can  exact  of  the  sinner  himself,  therefore  great  grace  is  shown  to 
him,  when  they  are  forgiven  him  on  accoynt  of  a  satisfaction ;  be- 
cause God  demands  this,  pot  of  the  sinner  himself,  but  of  his  Surety, 
and  because  God  will  admit  of  a  surety*  bestows  one  himself,  and 
particularly  his  Son,  and  that  just  for  this,  and  not  for  that  sinner. 

2.  Having  thus  proved  the  reality  of  Christ's  satisfaction  against 
the  Socinians,  we  must  also  prove  the  perfection  of  his  satisfaction 
against  the  Papists.  These  will  have  that  he  satisfied  merely  for 
sins  committed  before  baptism  ;  or  if  he  satisfied  for  all  sins,  that  he 
then  satisfied  only  for  the  guilt,  and  not  for  the  punishment  of  sin  ; 
and  if  he  satisfied  for  any  punishment,  that  it  v/as  only  for  eternal, 
and  not  f«>r  temporal  punishments,  thinking  that  they  themselves 
must  satisfy  for  these  in  this  life  by  afflicting  their  bodies,  and  after 
this  life  in  pm'gatory.     But  the  word  of  God  teacheth  us, 

1.  *'  That  with  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that 
fire  sanctified,"  Heb.  x.  14.     If  he  satisfied  only  for  some  sins,  an^ 


? 

not  for  guilt,  but  only  for  certain  punishments,  then  he  did  not  per* 
feet  his  delivered  people  with  one  offering  ;  and  so  these  men  con^ 
tradict  the  apostle  to  his  face. 

2.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  were  of  infinite  value,  as  hath  been 
shown  ;  the  Papists  must  also  allow  this,  for  they  say  that  he  could 
redeem  the  whole  world  with  one  drop  of  his  blood.  No^y  to  say 
that  he  hath  not  fully  satisfied,  what  is  it  but  reproaching  him,  and 
his  great  work.  ? 

3.  The  Saviour  himself  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30.  His 
Father  also  showed  that  he  had  finished  all, things,  when  he  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  and  so  gave  him  an  acquittance,  certifying  that 
he  had  discharged  the  debt,  Acts  ii.  24.  1  Tim.  iii,  16.  1  Peter  iii. 
21.     How  could  all  this  be,  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

4.  Believers  obtain  by  his  suffering  redtmption,  the  favour  of 
God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life,  and  so  all  that  they  need.  How 
can  this  be  if  he  did  not  satisfy  fully  ? 

When  the  apostle  saith.  Cell.  i.  24.  «  I  now  rejoice  in  my  suffer- 
ing  for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ 
jn  my  fiesh  for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  church,"  he  doth  not 
teach  by  these  words  the  imperfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  and 
that  he  left  any  punishment  for  us,  that  we  might  satisfy  by  bearing 
it:  for  he  doth  not  say  that  he  suffered  for  himself,  but  for  the 
church,  which  was  nevertheless  not  for  satisfaction,  according  to  1 
Cor.  i.  13,  but  for  her  confirmation  and  edification.  When  he  speaks 
of  that  which  was  behind  of  the  affliction  of  Christ,  he  rr»eans  not 
the  Person  of  Christ,  but  the  church,  which  is  by  virtue  of  ner  union 
with  him  the  mystical  Christ,  l  Cor  xii.  12,  and  therefore  her  afflic- 
tion, which  she  siiffereth  for  his  sake,  is  also  called  tlie  affliction  of 
Christ.  See  all  this,  2  Cor.  i.  5,  6.  "As  the  sufferine^s  of  Christ 
abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundelh  by  t  hrist  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation  and  salvbiion,  which 
is  effectual  in  the  enduring  of  the  same  sufferings,  which  we  also 
suffer^." 

When  we  say  that  Christ  satisfied  by  his  suffering,  we  do  not  then 
exclude  his  obedience,  but  suppose  that  he  satisfied  by  his  obedience 
also  ;  for  the  law  demands,  in  order  to  a  satisfaction,  not  only  a  bear- 
ing of  the  curse.  Gal.  iii.  10,  but  also  keeping  the  law  by  obedience, 
that  we  may  live,  Rom.  x.  5.  He  suffered  also  in  obedience,  Philip, 
ii.  8«  And  so  "  many  are  made  righteous  by  the  obedience  of  one," 
Rom.  v.  19. 

And  therefore  the  Remonstrants  must  also  be  condemned,  when 
tl]ey  assert  that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  the  justice,  hut  only  the  will  of 


318  eHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  8cc. 

God,  who  required  merely  something  of  his  Son,  in  order  that  he 
mij^ht  merit  a  covenant  ef  grace  for  all  men,  of  which  they  must 
accept  by  their  ficiewill,  which  is  sufficiently  able  to  believe ;  for 
Ciirist  did  not  merit  fdith,  according  to  them  :  but  at  this  rate  he 
would  not  have  reconciled  God  with  man,  but  only  rendered  him  recon- 
cileabie,  and  it  would  depend  upon  man  to  reconcile  God  with  him- 
self, and  himself  with  God  actually.  But,  as  we  have  proved  just 
riow,  ilie  bins  of  the  elect  were  punished  in  him  ;  his  sufferings  were 
the  ra  isom  ;  he  was  punished  in  their  stead;  God  forgives  sins 
through  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to  declare  his  ri  hteousness, 
and  so  he  hatli  satisfied  the  justice  of  God,  which  was  also  necessary, 
as  hdtli  been  bhown  on  the  fifth  Lord's  day.  iVJoreover,  "  he  hath 
iuliiilcd  the  rignteousness  of  the  law  in  us,"  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  so 
hath  obtained  redemption,  j^race,  righteousness,  and  therefore 
faith  also  ;  for  faith  is  grace,  Eph.  ii.  8.  Philip,  i.  29. 

E.  We  must  finally  observe  with  respect  to  the  word  "  suffered," 
for  whom  Christ  suffered.  The  instructor  saith  that  he  suffered  the 
wratn  of  God  "  against  the  sins  of  all  mankind  "  He  doth  not  teach 
us  by  these  words  that  Chribt  suffered  for  every  man  in  particular; 
for  he  had  denied  this  in  the  thirteenth  question  ;  but  he  declares 
the  grieviousness  of  Christ's  sufferings,  inasmuch  as  he  sustained 
the  wrath  of  God,  v/hich  was  kindled  against  the  sins  of  all  man- 
kind ;  or  he  shov/s  that  he  sustained  the  wrath  of  God,  not  only  for 
tiie  sins  of  the  Jews,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  all  the  kindreds  of  the 
Gentiles  ;  as  therefore  the  multitude  of  the  delivered  praise  him  for 
**  redeeming  them  to  God  by  his  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and 
tongue,  and  people,  and  nation,"  Rev.  v.  9.  Add  to  this  1  John  iic 
1.  We  will  not  say-anymore  on  this  subject  at  present,  having 
exhibited  it  more  largely  on  the  twentit:th  question. 

II.  But  why  did  he  suffer  "  under  Pontius,  Pilate?"  This  man 
was  a  heathen,  severe,  and  cruel,  nevertheless  appointed  by  the 
Roman  emperour  governour  of  Judea  ;  he  was  however  deposed  on 
account  of  his  evil  government,  and  banished  to  Vienne  in  Fr^ance, 
xvhere  he  stabbed  himself  to  death.  But  though  he  was  such  an  evil 
man,  nevertheless  the  compilers  of  our  creed  thought  proper  to  in- 
troduce him  here,  not  only  to  evidence  that  we  speak  of  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  who  was  born  of  Mary,  and  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate  ; 
but  also  to  show  that  he  was  the  true  Messiah,  since  it  thus  appear- 
ed, that,  a  heathen  being  judge  of  the  Jews,  ''  the  sceptre  was  depart- 
ed from  Judah,  and  the  ^rihiloh  was  therefore  come,"  according  to 
the  prophecy  of  Jacob,  Gen.  xlii.  10,  as  Augustus  and  Tiberius, 
Roman  emperours,  are  also  mentioned  for  this  reason  by  the  cvan- 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  37,  38,  39.  3i? 

Relists,  Luke  ii.  I.  iii.  1.  But  it  is  shown,  that  Christ  suffered  under 
Pontius  Pilate  particularly  to  manifest  »' that  he,  tlough  innocent, 
was  condemned  by  a  temporal  judge."  Jesus  was  pronounced  inno« 
cent  by  Judas,  by  Pilate's  wife,  by  the  centurion,  and  others  :  but 
Pilate  did  this  several  times  as  judge,  See  John  xviii.  38.  xix.  4,  6. 
Luke  xxiii.  14,  15.  Matt,  xxvii  34.  Pilate  however  condemned  him, 
though  he  was  innocent.  The  faith  of  Christians  must  conclude 
hence,  "  that  he  hath  delivered  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of 
God,  to  which  they  were  exposed."  The  reason  is,  because  he  stood 
before  Pilate,  as  their  surety,  who  having  no  guilt  of  his  own,  was 
condemned  on  account  of  theif  guilt,  that  the  judgment  of  God  might 
not  pass  on  them.  Which  we  must  believe  the  rather,  because 
Pilate's  tribunal  was  God's  tribunal,  in  whose  name,  and  by  whose 
judiciary  appointment,  he  was  pronounced  innocent  and  condemned: 
in  this,  and  in  no  other  light  was  the  matter  viewed  by  our  Surety  ; 
for  when  "  Pilate  said  to  him,  Knowest  thou  not  that  I  have  power 
to  crucify  thee,  and  power  to  release  thee  ?  Jesus  answered,  Thou 
coudest  hare  no  power  at  all  against  me,  except  it  were  given  thee 
from  above,"  John  xix.  10,  11. 

IIL  He  suffered  under  this  judge  crucifixion,  the  grievousness 
of  which  we  must  now  consider,  as  our  third  general  head,  and  show 
that  **  there  was  something  more  in  his  being  crucified,  than  if  he 
had  died  any  other  death."  There  were  several  kinds  of  capital 
punishments  among  the  Jews  and  Komans  ;  bat  the  Romans  inflict- 
ed most  commonly  upon  odious  malefactors  the  punishment  of  cru- 
xifixion,  in  which  the  criminal  was  raised  up  on  an  erect  post,  hav- 
ing his  arms  stretched  oiit  upon  a  cross-beam,  and  the  lower  parts 
of  his  body  resting  upon  a  prominence,  his  hands  being  nailed  to 
the  cross-beam,  and  his  feet  below  to  the  post.  This  punishment 
was  indeed  (a)  exceedingly  grievous  and  painful ;  for  it  could  not 
but  be  most  excruciating  to  be  pierced  with  nails  through  the  tender 
sinews,  and  obhged  to  hang  in  this  manner,  until  a  person  either 
died  of  hunger,  or  was  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  The  punishment 
of  crucifixion  was  also  (b)  a  most  shameful  death,  as  it  was  not  a 
Jewish,  but  a  heathen  punishment,  which  they  inflicted,  not  upon  a 
citizen,  but  only  upon  their  slaves.  To  be  obliged  to  hang  naked 
between  heaven  and  earth,  as  unworthy  of  either,  was  sufficient  to 
depress  the  heart  of  the  most  shameless,  and  the  most  stout-hearted* 
The  death  of  the  cross  was  also  (c)  an  accursed  deatb,  yea,  it  was 
accursed  of  God  himself,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  "  He  that  is  hanged  is 
accursed  of  God."  Paul  having  respect  to  this  saith,  "  For  it  is 
written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree/'  Gal.  iii,  IS  To 


5§0,  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  kt. 

he  a  curse,  and  accursed  is  to  be  devoted  and  given  up  to  destructiohi 
Deut.  vii.  25,  26.  Joshua  vi.  17.  Deut.  xxvii.  15 — 26.  But  how  is 
he  wlio  is  hanged  accursed  of  God  ?  Many  and  various  are  the  opih* 
ions  of  the  learned  upon  this  subject,  which  we  will  not  recite  at 
present,  that  we  may  not  be  too  diffuse  ;  we  will  only  say,  that  he 
"who  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God,  inasmuch  as  he  is  given  up,  offer- 
ed and  devoted  to  God  and  to  his  vindictive  justice,  for  his  destruc- 
tion, in  order  that  he  may  make  satisfaction  ;  and  therefore  he  who 
is  hanged  is  said,  as  it  were  to  the  honour  of  God,  to  be  a  curse  to 
God,  Deut.  xxi  23.  In  the  Hebrew  it  is  killath  elohimy  a  curse  of 
God,  as  the  sacrifices  are  called  God*s  sacrifices,  because  they  were 
offered  up  to  God,  Psalm  li.  17.  This  is  exceedingly  plain  from 
Numb.  XXV.  4«  "  Israel  joined  himself  unto  Badpeor  :  and  the  anger 
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel.  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Take  all  the  heads  of  the  people,  and  hang  them  up  to  the 
Lord,  laihovah^  against  the  sun,  that  the  fierce  anger  of  the  I^ord 
may  be  turned  away  from  Israel,"  See  also  the  same,  2  Sam.  xxi.  6, 
y.  And  this  capital  punisliment  was  accursed  of  God  more  than 
any  other,  because  the  malefactor  was  lifted  up  toward  heaven,  the 
habitation  of  God,  like  the  heave-offenngs  ;  so  also  the  burnt  offer- 
ings, and  the  devoted  Jericho  were  sent  up  toward  heaven  by  fire. 
See  Joshua  vi.  \7 — 27.  And  thus  was  the  Lord  Jesus  also  made  a 
curse,  and  truly  a  curse  to  God,  when  he  was  hanged  on  the  cross, 
not  for  his  own  sins,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  which  the  Lord 
had  laid  upon  him  ;  for  "  he  made  him,  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin, 
for  us  ;"  and  therefore  the  apostle  saith  emphatically,  that  *^  he  bore 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  I  Peter  ii.  24.  And  so  be- 
lievers are  assured,  "  that  he  took  on  him  the  curse  which  lay  on 
them  ;"  whereby  they  are  also  delivered  from  the  curse  ;  for  "  Christ 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for 
us  :  for  it  is  writt'^n.  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree," 
Gal.  iii.  And  it  was  therefore  also  necessary,  as  likewise  on  account 
of  the  prophecies,  which  foretold  that  "  they  should  pierce  his  hands 
and  his  feet,  and  pierce  him  through,"  Psalm  xxii.  16.  Zech.  xiio 
10.  His  crucifixion  was  necessary  also,  because  it  was  typified  by 
the  heave-offerings,  and  also  by  the  burnt-offerings,  which  were 
ordered  upon  the  wood,  and  offered  up  to  God.  Many  refer 
hither  also  the  brazen  serpent,  which  was  lifted  up  upon  a  polej 
uccording  to  John  iii.  14,  15. 


^    521 

APPLICATIOxNe 

If  there  be  any  doctrine  in  the  word  of  God,  which  is  important, 
and  requires  our  serious  and  dili,^ent  improvement,  it  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  suffering  of  Christ.     And  therefore/ 

1.  See  only  the  grievousness  of  his  suffering.     Piiate,  after  insult- 
ing him  in  a  cruel  manner   by  his   oifcers,   and   clothing  him   in  a 
ridiculous  habit,  showed  him  thus  to  the  Jews,  and  said,  "  Behold 
the  man,"  John  xix.  5.    But  do  ye  also  go  near  hiiti,  and  follow  him 
from  his  manger  to  his  cross,  and  see  how  he  was  contemned,  how  the 
nation  abhorred  him  ;  how  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a 
man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.    One  while  Herod  would 
slay  him,  another  while  the  Nazarenes  would  cast  him  down  head- 
long from  the  brow  of  their  hill,  and  often  the  Jews  took  up  stones 
to  stone  him :  now  he  was  reviled  as  a  Samaritan,  who  had  a  devil, 
and  who  cast  out  devils  by  the  prince  of  devils,  and  then  he  was  re- 
proached as  a  glutton  and  a  wine-bibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners,  yea,  even  as  a   blasphemer:  and  to  what  a  length  did  their 
scoffing  and  mocking  proceed  !  when  he  was  treated  in  the  hall  of 
Caiaphas  and  of  Pilate  as  a  fool,  and  when  he  was  reproached  to  the 
utmost  upon  the  cross  with  a  wagging  of  their  heads  by  the  officers, 
the  chief  priests,  the  common  people,  yea,  even  by  one  of  the  thieves, 
who  suffered  the  same  condemnation  with  him.     It  was  not  there- 
fore so  strange,  that  he  complained,  "  Reproach   hath   broken   my 
heart,"  Psalm  lix.  20.  And  how  grievous  was  it  to  him,  to  be  bound 
with  chains,   to  be  dragged  from  one  tribunal  to  another,  to  be  buf- 
feted, crowned  with  thorns,  cruelly  scourged,  laden  with  his  cross, 
and  nailed  to  it  by  his  hands  and  feet,  yet  all  this  he  might  have 
endured  ;  but  when  the  powers  of  hell  also   attacked  him,  while  he 
was  in  a  profound  separation  from  God,  whose  sword  of  veageance 
smote  him  on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  elect,  this  was  almost  intol- 
erable to  him  :  this  filled  him  with  such  anguish,  caused  his   sweat 
to  fail  down  from  him,  like  great  drops  of  blood,  and  forced  him  to 
complain  so  bitterly,  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me."    And  what  rendered  his  suffering  still  more  grievous  was,  that 
every  one  attacked  him,  high  and  low,  learned  and  uTjJearned,  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  God,  the  devil,  and  men,  friends  and  enemies  were 
all  against  him,  "  every  one  hid  as  it  were  his  face  from  him,"  Isaiah 
liii.  3.     None  can  imagine  that  he  was  so  stout  and  unfeeling,  that 
he  knew  but  little  of  this ;  no,  he  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with 
us  J  his  bitter  complaints  show  the  painful  sensations  of  his  heart, 

Vv 


3:*.     •  CHRIST'S  SUFf^ERlNGS,  Stc. 

and  how  ?;;nevous  his  sufferings  were  to  him.  See,  believers,  so  hard 
was  your  Jesus  beset,  he  who  is  the  desire  of  your  souls,  the  delight 
of  your  eyes,  the  joy  of  your  hearts,  the  object  of  all  the  outj^oinj^s 
of  your  mi»:ds,  and  your  only  and  perfect  satisfaction.  Doth  it  not 
affect  your  hearts,  that  your  dearly  Beloved,  your  Bridepjroom  and 
Husuund,  suffered  so  {;rievously  ?  a  heurt  of  stone  inij2jht  relent 
at  this. 

2  But  ye,  who  seek  not  yet  the  suffering  Jesus  who  pursue  your 
happiness  in  your  own  works,  to  whom  Jesus  is  not  yet  precious  ia 
his  sufferings,  who  mind  earthly  things,  and  are  thus  enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ ;  who  once  seemed  to  have  chosen  his  side,  but  have 
again  loA'ed  the  present  world,  and  do  thus  crucify  the  Son  of  God 
afresJi,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame  ;  who  v/ithstand  the  people 
of  Jesus,  and  therefore  Jesus  himself,  see  in  these  sufferings  of  Jesus 
what  will  betide  you  also  :  for  ^'  if  these  things  were  done  in  the 
green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry  ?"  Luke  xxiii.  31.  If  the 
Son  ot  God  experienced  so  much  wo,  when  he  was  guiltless,  and 
had  done  all  things  well,  how  will  ye,  O  vile  wretches,  endure,  when 
he  will  attack  you  not  as  a  man,  but  when  he  will  stir  up  all  his 
wrath,  and  oring  you  to  his  seat,  that  he  may  accuse  you  of  all  your 
misdemeanours,  your  sedition  against  him,  your  blasphemy,  re- 
proaching and  transgressing  of  his  law  ;  that  he  may  condemn  you 
as  guilty,  and  send  you  away  as  accursed,  when  he  will  say  to  you, 
standing  en  his  left  hand,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt.  xxv.  41. 
How  will  ye  then  be  crucified  ?  for  "  your  worm  shall  not  die,  and 
your  fire  shall  not  be  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  44.  Either  ye  must  suf- 
fer, or  Jesus  for  you.  Since  now  ye  evidence  by  your  behaviour, 
that  ye  have  never  sought  him  in  truth,  ye  have  therefore  no  proof, 
that  he  suffered  for  you  :  therefore  be  anxious  and  concerned,  look 
unto  him,  that  ye  may  be  saved,  He  stretched  out  his  hands,  pierced 
with  the  nails,  to  you,  and  invites  you  to  come  unto  him. 

3,  But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  to  wiiom  sin  is  so  bitter, 
your  heaviest  cross,  who  condemn  and  detest  yourselves  on  account 
of  It ;  who  have  sought  all  your  salvation  in  his  sufferings,  and  who 
hate  and  curse  sin,  as  a  crucified  one,  see  from  what  this  grievous 
'oufftring  of  Christ  pi'oceeded  ;  will  ye  be  angry  with  the  wicked  Jews 
and  Gentiles  ?  or  will  ye  complain  of  the  Lord  for  causing  his  be- 
loved Son  and  your  dear  Jesus  to  suffer  in  this  manner  ?  No,  look 
at  yourselves  ;  your  way,  and  your  doings  procured  these  things  to 
him,  and  Miade  it  so  bitter  to  h-m,  and  that  it  reached  to  his  heart, 
Ye  were  the  seditious  persons,  who  broke  his  yoke,  and  burst  his 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  58,  39,  325 

bonds  ;  ye,  by  your  wicked  dispositions,  opinions,  and  conduct,  bias- 
phieined  God,  your  iniquities  stirred  up  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
ali  the  -^yrath  of  God  against  the  Son  of  his  icve.  It  behooves  you 
to  see  this,  and  to  behold  in  it  the  dreadful  nature  of  sin,  it  ou^ht  to 
incense  you  against  it,  and  induce  you  to  take  vengeance  of  it,  and 
to  crucify  it ;  yea,  this  should  cause  your  iiearts  to  bleed  for  shame 
and  grief,  that  ye,  even  ye  procured  these  grievous  tiuiferir.gs  to 
Christ.  He  foretold  this,  "  that  ye  should  look  on  hirn,  whora  ye 
had  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him,  as  ona  mourneth  for  his  only  son^ 
and  be  in  bitterness  for  hirn,  as  one  that  is  in  biiterness  fur  his  first- 
born," Zech.  xii.  iO. 

4.  Look  deeper  into  this  matter,  and  see  the  efficacy  of  Christ's 
sufferings  for  you,  in  your  stead,  and  for  your  advantage.  By  his 
sufferings  Ai  your  sins  have  been  taken  away  in  one  day  ;  your  sins 
and  iniquities,  when  they  shall  be  sought,  shall  not  be  found ;  when 
ye  were  enemies,  ye  v/ere  reconciled  lo  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son: 
he  harh  redeemed  your  body  and  soul  from  eternal  damnation  by 
h;s  passion,  as  the  only  atoning  sacrifice  :  God  will  be  no  more 
angry  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you ;  in  him  ye  have  redemption  through 
his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his 
grace  :  by  his  suffering  he  hath  obtained  for  you  an  everlasting 
righteousness.  This  is  youi  hope,  your  joy  and  boasting ;  "  God 
forbid  that  ye  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  Gal.  vi.  14.  Bathe,  swim,  delight  yourselves  in  his  suffei- 
ing,  yea,  ye  shou  d  wake  and  sleep  in  it,  that  ye  may  inhale  the  fla- 
vour and  efficacy  of  it,  with  the  spouse.  Song  1.  13.  <»  A  bundle  of 
myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  unto  rae  ;  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt 
my  breasts."  Behold  therefore  the  sufferings  of  Christ  for  you,  and 
in  your  stead,  with  Paul,  Gal.  ii.  20.  •<  I  am  crucified  with  Christ, 
and  1  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  iiveth  in  ftie  ;  and  the  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved 
me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  To  cast  away  your  hope  with  re- 
spect to  this,  after  so  many  evidences  of  iJs  love,  and  the  witnessing 
of  his  Spirit,  upon  every  casual  thought,  deprives  your  souls  of  the 
bweetness,  relish  and  efncacy  of  Christ's  sufferings. 

5.  Open  your  eyes,  that  ye  may  see  how  mucii  of  God  ye  can 
discover  in  this.  The  inconceivable  and  manifold  wisdom  of  God  is 
exhibited  to  you  here,  in  devising  this  way  of  saving  you  by  the 
grievous  sufferings  of  his  Son,  when  it  was  impossible  for  any  created 
understanding  to  contrive  this  proper  way.  The  supreme  power  of 
God  is  discovered  here,  in  accomplishing  it  against  all  the  power  of 
the  irates  of  heil  :  this  is  the  sum  of  the  ivhole  gospel,  that  '■'  Christ 


52i  CHRISTS  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

is  the  po'.ver  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God,"  TCor.  i.  24.  But 
that  which  shines  forth  no  less  in  this  suffering,  is  the  unfathomable 
love  of  God  and  of  his  Son ;  that  God  surrendered  his  Son,  yea, 
thai  the  Son  surrendered  himsel!  to  such  bitter  sufferings  for  such 
vile  sinners  as  ye  are  :  how  ardent  was  the  love  that  urged  him  lo 
this  !  could  his  love  have  manifested  itself  to  you  in  a  stronger  man- 
ner ?  Christians,  stand  still  awhile  here,  ancJ  let  your  souls  endeav- 
our to  contemplate  this  love,  and  be  assured,  that  it  will  overwhelm 
you  with  wonder  and  joy  :  th^efore  the  apostle  said,  Eph.  iii.  18,  19, 
"  That  ye  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  the  saints,  what  is 
the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  kiow  the  love 
of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge,  that  ye  may  be  filled  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God." 

6.  Look  at  these  sufferings,  that  ye  may  imitate  Christ  in  his  holy 
suffering  :  "  For  hereunto  were  ye  called,  because  Christ  also  suf- 
fered for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps,'* 
1  Peter  ii.  21.  Jesus  suffered  in  obedience  'to  his  Father,  Philip. 
ii.  8.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thy  will  be  done,"  was  his  language. 
He  suffered  with  meekness  ;  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not 
agam,  and  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not,"  1  Peter  ii.  21.  Yea,  he 
prayed  for  his  enemies,  who  crucified  him,  Lukexxiii.  54.  He  suffer- 
ed also  very  patiently  :  <'  He  was  brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter, 
and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb-  so  he  opened  not  his 
mouth,"  Isaiah  liii.  7.  He  suffered  also  from  special  love  to  his  peo- 
ple, Eph.  V.  2.  Behold  this  love  of  Jesus  ought  also  to  manifest  it- 
self in  your  mortal  bodies,  in  your  whole  conversation  as  well  as  in 
y cur  suffering.  Doth  the  Lord  subject  you  to  suffering,  "keep 
silence,  because  he  hath  inflicted  it  upon  you,"  Lam.  ili.  28.  Are 
ye  injured,  be  not  displej^ed,  render  not  evil  for  evil,  insist  not  upon 
your  utmofit  right,  but  abate  somewhat  of  it ;  consider  v/hat  Jesus 
hath  done  for  you;though  ye  had  injured  him  to  the  utmost,  he  for- 
gave you.  See  how  Paul  exhorts  you.  Coll.  iii.  12,  13,  "Put  on 
therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,  bowels  of  mercies, 
kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  lomgsuffering  ;  forbearing 
one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any  :  even  as  Christ 
forgave  you,  so  do  ye  also."  Read  also,  Eph.  iv.  31  32.  v.  1,  2. 
Doth  the  hand  of  the  Lord  press  you  with  any  heavy  cross,  open 
not  your  mouth  to  reprove  his  way  ;  all  that  God  doth  is  glory  and 
majesty  :  Jesus  suffered  more  grievously  than  ye  do,  and  he  endured 
it :  ye  must  "  suffer  with  him  that  ye  may  be  glorified  with  him," 
Rom.  vii.  17.  Doth  the  Lord  expose  you  to  the  danger  of  losing  your 
honour,  property,  ease  aud  life  for  his  name's  sake  j  suffer  it  from 


XV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  37,  38,  39.  SS-f 

love  to  him,  and  do  not  shrink  from  it,  as  he  also  suffered  for  you  in 
the  most  grievous  manner  from  love  to  you.  So  that  great  follower 
of  Christ  would  conduct,  Acts  xxi.  13,  "I  am  ready,  not  to  be  bound 
only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
So  also  the  other  apostles  conducted  ;  yea,  "  they  rejoiced  that  they 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name,"  Acts  v.  41. 

7.  Look  at  this  suffering  for  your  support ;    for  this  suffering  hath 
taken  away  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  curse  from  your  sufferings. 
Doth  he  smite,  it  is  only  love  ;   "  For  whom   the   Lord   loveth,  he 
chasteneth,  and  he  scourgeth  every  son  whom   he  receiveth,"   Heb, 
xii.  6.     Yea,  Jesus  knoweth  by  experience  what  ye  feel,  yea,  he  suf- 
fers with  you :  For  we  have  not  an   high   priest,   which   cannot   be 
touched   with  the  feeling  of  our  infiimities  ;  but  was    in    all   points 
tempted  like  as  we  are,   yet  without  sin,"  Heb.  iv.  15.     ii.   17,    18. 
Are  ye  grieved  on  account  of  your  iniquities,  on  account  of  the  se- 
vere judgment  of  God,  and  on  account  of  the  curse  of  the  law  ;  the 
Lord  Jesus  hath  fully    satisfied  for  all  your  iniquities,  and  therefore 
God  will  declare  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of  your   sins,'* 
Rom.  iii.  25,  26.    1  John  i.  9,     Jesus  was  condemned,  though"  inno- 
cent, and  was  made  a  curse  for  you,  that  ye  might  be  delivered  from 
the  severe  judgments  of  God  and  from  the  curse  :  ''There  is  there- 
fore no  condemnation  to   them  which    are  in   Christ  Jesus  ;  "who' 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?    it  is  God  that  jus- 
tifieth  ;   who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?     It  is  Christ  that  died,"  Rom- 
viii.  1,  33,  34.     Did  he  pray  to  his  Father  to  forgive  them  who  cru- 
cified him  the  evil  which  they  did  to  him,  Luke  xxiii.  34  ;  will  he 
not  then  pray  for  you,  when   "  he  is  your  advocate  with  the  Father, 
and  when  he  is  a  propitiation  for  your  sins  ?"    1   John  ii.  1,2.     Or 
are  ye  concerned  about  your  bodily  wants,  notknowing  what  ye  shall 
eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye«,shall  be  clothed?  do 
ye  not  know,  "  that  if  God  spared  not  his   own  Son,   but   delivered 
liim  up  for  you  all,  he  will  also  freely  give  you  all  things  with  him  ?*' 
Jesus,  even  while  he  suffered,   provided    for  his  mother,  when   he 
commended  her  to  his  beloved  disciple,  John  xix  26,  27,  will  he  not 
then,  now  he   is    m   heaven,  his  full   treasury,   provide  for   you  ?" 
Cast  then  all  your  care  upon  jiim,  for  he  careth  for  you,"   1  Peter,  v. 
17.     Ye  are  indeed  as  dear  to  him  as  his  mother  was,  Matt.  xii.  50, 
Do  ye  often    consider  how    ye   shall  pass    through    this  howling 
wilderness  to  him  in  heaven .?  he,  who  when  he  was  under  the  penal 
curse,  said  to  the  converted  thief,  "  To  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
paradise,"  Luke  xxiii.  43,  even  "  he  is  gone  before  you,  to  prepare 
a  place  for  you,"  which  when  he  hath  done,  **  he  will  take  you  to 


326  CHRIST'S  SUFFERINGS,  &c. 

himself,  that  yc  may  be  where  he  is,"  John  xiv.  2,  3.  Is  it  matter 
of  sorr'ow  to  you,  that  God  delivers  you  up  to  desertions,  God  doth 
not  however  do  this  ii>  his  anger,  which  Jesus  suffered  for  yo  i,  when 
he  complained,  '*  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  tiiou  forsaken  me  ?" 
Matt,  xxvii.  47.  Neither  will  it  be  always  thus  with  you,  for  a  time 
is  coming,  when  ye  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord  :  ye  shall  not 
then  be  obliged  to  complain,  like  Jesus  on  the  cross, ''  1  thirst,"  John 
xix.  28.  F©r  since  Jesus  hath  thirsted  for  you,  therefore  "  ye  shall 
not  thirst  any  more  ;  for  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
throne,  shall  feed  you,  and  shall  lead  you  to  living  fountains  of  water; 
and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes,"  Rev.  vii.  16,  17. 
Do  ye  think  that  all  would  be  well  with  you,  if  ye  were  not  so  defi- 
cient in  sanctificat'on,  and  did  not  come  short  so  much  ?  yea,  it 
would  indeed  be  exceeeingly  ill  with  you,  if  your  sanctification  should 
be  your  righteousness  before  God  :  but  bt:hol(i,  Jesus  hath  fulfilled 
the  righteousness  of  the  law  for  you,  and  proclaimed  before  the 
whole  world,  *'  It  is  finished,"  John  xix.  30,  And  he  hath  thus 
cancelled  the  bond,  **  having  nailed  it  to  the  cross,"  and  hath  obtain- 
ed that  "  the  righteousness  of  the  law  should  be  fulfilled  in  you,  and 
that  ye  should  be  perfect  in  him,"  Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Coll.  ii.  10 — 15j 
and  *'  he  is  also  made  sanctification  to  you,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  There 
remains  nothing  for  you  to  do,  but  to  forget  that  which  is  behind, 
and  to  reach  forth  to  that  which  is  before,  pressing  toward  the  mark 
for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  that,  laying 
yourselves  as  it  were  upon  his  cross,  ye  may  pour  forth  your  souls 
with  him  in  death,  and  commend  them  into  the  hands  of  his  Father, 
as  he  also  did,  Luke  xxiii,  46.  And  truly,  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth  ;  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that 
Ihey  may  rest  trom  their  labours  j  and  their  works  do  follow  them.'' 
Amen. 


(  327  ) 


CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL 


AND 


DESCENT   INTO    HELL 


XVI.  LORDS  DAY, 


1  Cor.  XV.  3,  4.  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all,  that  which  I 
also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the 
scriptures,  and  that  he  was  buried.