Q,  40.  TVAy  was  it  necessary  for  Christ  to  humble  himself  even  to 
death  ? 

A.  Because  with  respect  to  the  justice  and  truth  of  God,  satisfac- 
tion for  our  sins  could  be  made  no  otherwise  than  by  the  death  of 
the  Son  of  God. 

^.41.   Why  was  he  also  buried? 

A    Tliereby  to  prove  that  he  was  really  dead. 

Q.  42.  Since  then  Christ  died  for  us^  why  must  we  also  die  ? 

A.  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,  but  only  an  abol- 
ishing of  sin,  and  a  passage  into  eternal  life. 

.Q  43.  What  further  heripfit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacrifice  and 
death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ? 

A.  That  by  virtue  thereof,  our  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and 
buried  with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  may  no 
more  reign  in  us ;  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves  to  him  a  sacrifice 
of  thanksgiving. 


328  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

Q.  44.  JV/iy  is  there  added,  <'  He  descended  into  hell?" 
A.  That  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  assured,  and  wholly 
comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  his  inexp'-essi- 
kle  anguish,  pains,  tcrrours,  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was 
plunged  during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath 
delivered  me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

JLt  is  related  of  Samson,  that  "  the  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  death, 
•were  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life,"  Judges  xvi  30.  It 
was  wonderful,  that  after  the  death  of  Elisha,  when  a  dead  man  was 
cast  into  his  grave,  he  was  restored  to  life  upon  touching  the  bones 
of  the  prophet,  2  Kings  xiii.  20,  21,  but  it  was  still  more  wonderful, 
not  only  that  one  man  destroyed  so  many  men  in  his  life,  but  also 
that  he  slew  still  more  in  his  death,  when  he  lost  his  own  life.  We 
do  not  read,  that,  besides  those  whom  he  smote  hip  and  thigh,  he 
slew  more  than  a  thousand  and  thirty  men  in  his  life  ;  but  when  he 
was  brought  by  the  Philistines  into  their  idol  temple,  which  was  full 
of  men  and  women,  and  of  the  lords  of  the  Phihstines,  and  upon  the 
roof  of  which  there  were  also  three  thousand  men  and  women,  he 
bowed  the  two  pillars,  upon  which  the  house  stood,  and  it  fell  upon 
himself,  and  upon  all  the  people  ;  and  so  the  dead  whom  he  slew 
at  his  death,  were  more  than  they  whom  he  slew  in  his  life. 

Truly  this  is  a  beautiful  emblem,  if  not  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
v/hose  conception,  and  birth  were  announced  by  an  angel,  as  well  as 
Samson's ;  Jesus   was  an  Israelite,  as  well  as  Samson  :  Jesus  was 
also  like   Samson  a  Judge  in  Israel :  was  Samson  strong,  our  Jesus 
13  not  less  so,  for  he  is  the  mighty  God  ;  did  Samson  surrender  him- 
self willingly  to  death,  Jesus  did  so  likewise,  John  x.  18.    Were  the 
dead  whom  Samson  slew  at  his  death,  more  than  they  whom  he  slew 
in  his  life,  Jesus  also  slew  more  by  his  death,  than  in  his  life.     It  is 
true,  he  never>  on  account  of  his  meekness,  destroyed  any  man  with 
a  bodily  death,  though  he  once  smote  to  the  ground  with  a  word 
those   wicked  men,    who   came   to  take  him ;   but,   which  required 
more  strength,  he  slew  many  spiritually  "  by  the  breath  of  his  lips," 
Isaiah  xi.  4,  when  he  convniced  them  of  their  wickedness,  and  con- 
demned them  to  death,  so  that  they  could  not  alledge,  in  vindication 
of  themselves  more  thrai  the  dead,   and  many  died  to  themselves  by 
conversion  ;  although  he  slew  so  many  in  his  life,  he  slew  still  more 
at  his  death  ;  for  by  his  death  he  slew  the  law,  and   caused  all  the 
elect  to  die  to  themselves  and  to  the  law,  Rom.  \i.  6,  5.    "  He  abol- 
ished death  itself,"  2  Tim.  i.  10.-  Yea,  *'by  his  death  he  destroyed 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  329 

htm  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  Heb.  ii.  14, 
By  the  power  of  his  death  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  dead 
and  buried,  as  it  is  said  in  the  sixteenth  Lord's  day  and  foriythird 
question.  Christ's  humble  incarnation  and  his  suffcrini^  on  the  cross 
htiving  been  spoken  of  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Lord's  days, 
the  three  last  degrees  of  his  huniihation,  to  wit,  his  death,  burial,  and 
descent  into  hell,  are  now  treated  of  for  ou«^  information* 

In  order  that  we  may  avoid  too  many  subdivisions,  we  will  accor- 
ding to  the  number  of  the  live  questions  in  this  Lord's  day,  attend 
also  to  five  general  heads. 

I.  The  reasons  of  the  necessity  of  Christ's  death,  Q.  40. 

II,  The  reasons  of  his  burial,  Q.  4L 

IIL  The    refutation   of  a  pretended   reason   from   our  death 
against  the  death  of  Christ,  as  a  satisfaction,  Q.  42. 

IV.  The  benefits  of  Christ's  death,  Q,  43. 

V.  Why  it  is  said  that  Christ  descended  into  hell,  Q.  44. 

I.  Our  first  general  head  contains  the  reasons  why  the    death  of 
Christ  was  necessary,  for  so    it   is  asked   in  the    fortieth   question, 
•<  Why  was  it  necessary   for  Christ  to  humble  himself  even    unto 
death  ?"     It  is  here  supposed  that    he  was   dead  ;  which  we,   since 
we  have  many  other  weighty    matters    to   observe,   and   intend   to 
abide  here  strictly  by  the  instructor,  do  also  presuppose  ;  and  partic- 
ularly that  Christ  suffered  a  real,  painful,  and  bloody  death  ,  although 
he  died  being  guiltless^  and  willingly,  and  yet  necessarily :  but   that 
which  is  of  the  principal  importance  is,  whether  he  was  obliged  to 
humble  himself  even  to  death,  in  order   to  make    satisfaction,    and 
whether  a  single  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  si^fficient  to  deliver   all 
mankind,  as  the  Papists  imagine,  that  they  may  lay  up   whatever  he 
suffered  more  than  a  drop  of  blood,  as  a  treasure,  out  of  which  the 
pope  may  dispense  so  many  indulgences.     In  opposition  to  which 
v^e  teach  that  one  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  sufficient  to  make  satis- 
faction, but  that  he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  even  unto   death 
for  this  purpose.     We  might  adduce   many  reasons  for  this,  as  that 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  which  redemption  and 'forgiveness  of  sins 
are  promised,  is  a  testament,  which  he  was  obliged  to  confirm  by  his 
death,  Heb.  ix.  15,  16,  17,  that   he  was  obliged  to   obey  his  Father, 
who  had  ordered  him  to  die,  Philip,  ii.  8,  that  he  had  promised   his 
Father  this,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8,  that  his   ardent  and  supreme  love  to 
the  elect  urged  him  so  far,  Psalm  Ixix.  9.  John  xv.  13,  and  that,  if  it 
had  not  been  necessary,  his  Father  would  not  have  subjected  him  to 
death.    But  that  we  may  abide  by  the   instructor,   we  say  that 

Xx 


33d  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  to  death  in   order  to   satisfy,  &r 
two  reasons  ; 

1.  Berau':e  the  justice  of  God  required  it  t  for  man  had  by  sin  in- 
jured, and,  sit  were,  corrupted  the  majesty  of  God  ;  saying  with 
his  actions  that  he  was  not  God,  that  he  was  not  glorious,  and  that 
he  oug'ht  not  to  be  obeyed  :  now  the  justice  of  God  demands,  ac- 
cording to  tlie  law  of  retribution,  that  man  should  also  be  corrupted 
by  death,  and  thus  "receive  in  himself  th?t  recompence  of  his  error 
that  was  meet,"  Rom-  i.  27.  The  law  in  which  God  has  expressed 
his  demand,  declares  him  also  to  be  guilty  of  death,  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Rom.  vi.  23,  as  the  Gentiles  likewise  know  by  the  law  written  upon 
their  hearts,  "  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  Now  since  the  Son  of 
God  was  become  the  surety  of  the  sinner,  in  order  to  satisfy  for  him, 
according  to  Job.  xxxiii.  24.  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8.  Heb.  x.  4 — 9. 
Jer.  XXX.  2 1  ;  therefore  sin  could  not  be  atoned  for  in  any  other 
■way  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  Further,  he  was  obliged 
to  humble  himself  to  death,  in  order  to  satisfy, 

2.  Because  the  truth  of  God  required  it ;  for  it  was  foretold,  that 
he  should  die  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  Isaiah  liii.  8.  "  For  he  was 
cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living:  for  the  transgression  of  my 
people  was  he  stricken,"  vrs.  10.  «  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  ^bruise 
him,  he  hath  put  him  to  grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed,"  vrs.  12.  «He  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death  ;  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors, 
and  he  bore  the  sins  of  many."  It  was  also  typified,  and  therefore 
sealed,  that  he  should  die,  in  ord'r-r  to  make  satisfaction,  as  well  by 
the  slaying  of  the  paschal  lamb:  "  For  even  Christ  our  passover  is 
sacrificed  for  us,"  I  Cor.  v.  7,  as  by  all  the  sacrifices  of  slain  beasts  : 
for  he  gave  himself  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph.  v.  2.  Now  he  could 
not  do  this,  unless  he  humb'ed  himself  to  death  ;  for  the  scripture 
cannot  be  broken.  And  therefore  he  would  not  be  rescued,  either 
by  Peter,  or  by  the  angels  from  death,  saying,  "  How  then  shall  the 
scriptui-es  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be  ?"  Matt.  xxvi.  54.  And 
so  we  see  in  what  sense  the  anostle  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  «  That 
Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the  scriptures. 

II.  But  Christ,  after  he  had  died  on  the  cross,  did  not  remain 
hanging  on  it,  to  be  consumed  by  the  air,  or  to  be  devoured  by  the 
fowls  of  heaven,  or  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  like  other  crucified 
per~,ons,  but  he  was  buried.  We  show  upon  other  occasions  by 
whom,  where,  when,  in  what  manner,  and  in  whose  presence  he  was 
buried,  what  are  the  consequences  of  his  burial,  and  how  long  he  re- 


XVr.  LORD'3  DAY.  Q.  10— 44,.  331 

inained  in  the  grave.*  We  shall  now  treat  only  of  the  reasons, 
"  why  he  was  buried,"  accoi  ding  to  the  forty-first  question.  We 
need  not  inquire  here  why  his  friends  buried  him  :  they  did  this 
from  special  affection,  to  preserve  Inm  from  further  improper  treat- 
ment, and  against  the  day  of  his  resurrection,  whetiier  the  last  day, 
or  the  third  day,  agreeably  to  his  prediction,  in  proportion  to  the 
weakness,  or  strength  of  their  faith.  But  that  which  we  must  chief- 
ly consider  here,  is,  what  was  the  reason  and  end  proposed  by  God 
in  this  burial,  why  he  appointed  that  his  ton  should  be  buried.  The 
reason  was  not,  that  he  might,  like  others,  see  corruption,  s.nce  this 
was  contrary  to  his  steadfast  hope,  expressed  in  the  sixteenth 
Psalm;  neither  can  we  think  tnat  ne  was  buriej,  that  he  might  as 
an  antitype  of  the  sabbath  day,  rest  in  the  grave  on  the  sabbath,  and 
thus  abolish  the  fourth  commandment  ;  for  we  cannot  discover  any 
proof  of  t!)is  opinion.     But  he  was  buried, 

1.  ••  Thereby  to  prove  that  he  was  really  dead"  Christians  have 
the  greatest  concern  in  knowing  tnat  he  was  really  dead,  because 
they  cannot  otherwise  know  whether  he  fully  satisfied  ;  and  if  tiiey 
do  not  know  this,  they  cannot  become  partakers  of  his  satisfaction. 
Therefore  his  death  and  burial  are  dehvered  as  two  fundamental 
points  of  the  doctrine  of  faith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4.  There  could  not  be 
a  stronger  proof,  that  he  was  really  dead,  than  that  he  was  buried: 
for  we  do  not  bury  the  living,  but  the  dead  ;  at  least  in  an  ordinary 
judicial  process,  such  as  was  holden  with  Christ,  the  living  are  not 
buried,  but  only  the  dead.  His  friends  also  loved  him  too  well  to 
thrust  hmi  into  the  grave  alive.  And  his  judge  would  not  consent 
that  he  should  be  buried,  before  he  was  well  assured  that  he  was 
dead,  Mark  xv.  44,  45.     He  was  buried  also, 

2.  Because  it  was  foretold,  Isaiah  liii.  9.  <*  He  made  his  grave 
with  the  wicked,  and  was  with  the  rich  in  his  death  ;  his  soul  should 
not  be  left  in  hell,"  that  is,  the  grave,  "  to  see  corruption,"  Psalm 
xvi.  10.  Sec  Acts  xiii.  35,  36,  37.  Therefore  he  should  enter  into 
the  grave  by  a  burial ;  the  Saviour  himself  foretold  it,  Matt.  xii.  40, 
"  As  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so 
shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of 
the  earth."  The  scriptures  ought  also  to  be  fulfilled,  and  so  "  he 
was  buried  according  to  the  scriptures,"  i.  Cor.  xv.  4.  He  was 
buried  also, 

3.  That  he  might  be  humbled  to  the  lowest  degree.     The  human 

•  The  Author  hath  respect  here  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hol- 
land, of  preaching,  during  certain  weeks  previoua  to  Easter,  on  tlic  history 
of  the  passion,  death,  and  bcrial  ©f  Christ, 


332  CHRIST'S  DEATH.  BURIAL,  ho. 

body  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  humbler  condition,  than  to  betaken  away 
from  ambng  men,  and  shut  up  in  a  dark  pit  of  the  earth  :  the  lowest 
humiliation  of  Tyre  is  expressed  by  this  figure,  Ezck.  xxvi,  20.  And 
thus  Jes\is  also  "  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth," 
Eph.  iv.  9. 

4.  That  he  might  wholly  take  away  the  curse,  and  hide  it  in  the 
grave  from  the  face  of  God  and  of  his  people,  and  stifle  it,  as  those 
who  were  hanged,  being  accursed  of  God,  were  ordered  to  be  buried 
the  same  day  on  which  they  were  hanged,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  So  all 
things  that  were  devoted  to  God,  were  to  be  taken  away  from  among^ 
men,  as  Jericho  was  devoted  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  by  fire, 
and  therefore  might  not  be  rebuilt,  Joshua  vi.  21,  24,  26.  See  also 
Joshua  viii.  28,  29,  for  the  guilt  and  uncleanness  would  have  re- 
mained, if  he  had  not  been  buried,  accordinj^  to  Deut.  xxi.  23,  but 
"when  he  was  buried,  "the  Lord  removed  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in 
one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9.  And  thus  also  the  curse  of  returning  to  the 
dust,  inflicted  upon  the  sinner,  Gen.  iii.  19,  was  taken  away,  the 
graves  were  made  agreeable  restingplaces  of  the  saints,  Isaiah  Ivii.  2, 
^d  the  old  man  was  buried  wnth  him,  Rom  vi.  4. 

in.  But  did  Christ  die  to  satisfy  the  divine  justice,  why  must  wc 
then  also  die?  th\is  asks  the  instructor  in  the  forty-second  question. 
For  if  Christ  died  to  satisfy  for  the  guilt,  by  which  the  elect  deserv* 
ed  ptinishment  and  death,  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  they  OTip;ht 
T^ot  then  to  die,  or  that  God  would  demand  the  debt  twice,  which 
militates  against  the  justice  of  God  ;  from  which  the  Socinians  con- 
clude that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  by  his  death,  and  the  Papists  that 
he  did  not  satisfy  perfectly,  but  that  we  ourselves  must  still  satisfy 
by  our  own  death,  as  a  proper  punishment.  Others  justly  condemn- 
ed by  the  synods  of  our  own  country,  say  that  death,  and  all  the 
temporal  afflictions  of  believers  are  proper  punishments  of  their 
sins.* 

In  order  to  confute  this  pretended  ar9:ument,  and  to  show  that  our 
death  detracts  not  from  the  perfect  satisfaction  of  Christ  by  his  death, 
we  must  know  that  a  proper  punishment  of  sin  is  not  any  misery 
inflicted  upor>  believers,  on  occasion,  and  from  a  consideration  of 
sin,  for  their  chastisement,  amendment,  humiliation,  and  glorifica- 
tion ;  but  misery  inflicted  upon  the  sinner  for  his  destruction  by 
God,  as  a  judge  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice.  Thus  the  mstruc- 
tor  also  understands  this,  when   he  saith  to  the  proposed  objection, 

*  The  author  hath  rcipcct  here  to  Professor  Roel,   ^vhom  vc  have  men- 
t\oned  before. 


—44  S35 

"  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,"  and  thus  also  must 
those  who  oppose  us  consider  it,  as  they  verily  do  ;  but  they  disguise 
the  matter,  that  their  opinion  may  not  be  exposed  and  detested. 

That  the  death  of  believers,  and  all  their  temporal  misery  is 
not  a  proper  punishment  of  sins,  and  a  compensation  for  them, 
appears, 

1.  From  the  reality  and  perfection  orchrist's  satisfaction,  which 
we  have  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  P'or  if  he  satisfied 
fully  for  ail  their  sins,  there  cannot  then  remain  any  proper  punish-= 
ment  for  them,  and  they  are  not  obliged  to  make  satisfaction,  nor  to 
discharge  their  debt  by  their  death  and  temporal  afflictions. 

2.  The  guilt  of  behevers  is  removed  from  their  afflictions,  because 
God  hath  forgiven  and  taken  away  their  sins,  so  that  they  cannot, 
properly  speaking,  be  punished  any  more  on  account  of  them  ;  for 
the  Lord  saith,  "  I  have  sworn  that  I  would  not  be  wroth  with  thee, 
nor  rebuke  thee,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  "  He  is  a  God  who  forgiveth  his 
people,  but  who  still  taketh  vengeance  of  their  inventions,"  Psalm 
xcix.  8.  "Nathan  said  unto  David,  the  Lord  hath  put  away  thy 
sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die.  Howbeit,  because  by  this  deed  ihou  hast 
given  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme,  the  child 
also  that  is  born  unto  thee  shall  surely  die,  2  Sam.  xii.  15,  14.  Af- 
flictions are  indeed  called  vengeance,  after  sins  are  forgiven  :  and 
punishment  is  indeed  inflicted  on  account  of  sins,  yet  they  are  not 
therefore  a  proper  punishment  for  the  satisfaction  of  sins,  because 
these  were  taken  away  ;  but  they  are  desij^ned  for  chastisements, 
which  are  inflicted  on  believers  upon  account  of  sins,  and  so  retain  a 
semblance  of  vengeance  for  their  advantage,  humili':ition  and  amend- 
ment. We  see  this  in  many  passages  of  the  word  of  God,  Heb» 
xii.  6—11.     Pslam  xciv.  12,  13.     cxix.  71. 

3.  Temporal  afflictions  and  death  are  welcome  to  believers,  for 
they  glory  and  take  pleasure  in  them,  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10.  Death  is 
their  treasure,  1  Cor.  iii.  22,  their  gain  and  they  long  for  it,  Philip. 
i.  21,  23.  Could  this  be  so,  if  it  were  a  proper  punishment  ?  could 
a  malefactor  speak  thus,  when  he  was  punished  for  his  abomin- 
ations ? 

4.  Death  delivers  believers  from  every  misery,  and  procures  the 
greatest  happiness  to  them  :  shame,  loss,  and  pain  may  remain  wi^h 
them  until  death,  but  they  must  then  depart :  "  Blessed  are  the 
dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth,  yea,  saith  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours,"  Kev.  xiv.  15.  By  death 
they  die  also  to  their  sins,  which  are  their  greatest  afflictions  :  "  For 
he  ths^t  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  7.    Yea,  death  is  to  them 


334  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

a  passage  into  eternal  life  :  "  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house 
of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an 
houss  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the  heavens,"  2  Cor.  v.  1 . 
If  it  be  asked,  why  God  still  inflicts  death  not  only  upon  the  un- 
godly, but  also  upon  his  people,  when  it  is  so  bitter  to  them,  seeing 
i\is  Son  hath  fully  satisfied  his  justice  by  suffering  every  punishment, 
and  death  also  ?  we  answer  briefly,  that  God  could  indeed  glorify  the 
elect,    and  take  them  up   into  heaven  immediately,  without  seeing 
death  ;  for  it  doth  not  militate  either  against  his  power,  or  his  justice, 
as  he  showed  in  the  ascension  of  Enoch  and  Elijah  ;  but  Cod  haih 
wise  reasons  for  not  doing  this,  since  it  is  his  will  to  apply  the  merits 
of  his   Son   gradually  ;    and   therefore  he   doth    not  sanctify  them 
neither  perfectly  in  a  moment  from  their  conception  and  birth,  that 
they  may  observe  his  wonderful  way  in  order ;   he  desires  by  such 
a  bitter  frait  to  show  them,  and  cause  tiiem  to  bevv  til  the  abominable 
nature  of  sin,  that  they  raay  humble   Themselves  for  it;  to  induce 
them  to  consider  the  exceeding   grievousness  of  the  suffering  and 
death  of  Christ:  he  hath  also  ordered  this  so,  that  they  may  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son  in    dealh  ;  the   Lord  teacheth  his 
people  thus  the  greatness  of  his  power  by  leading  them  tlirough 
every  opposition,  and  in  such  an  unsightly  way  to  life.     Finally,  we 
say  also  that  it  is  a  wonderful  goodness  of  God,    that   he  doth  not 
take  his  people  up  into  heaven  in  the  body  without  death  ;  for  if  he 
did,  then  those  who  remained  alive,    would  know  infallibly  that  all 
those  who  died,  were  lost.     This  would  be  an  insupportable  grief  to 
those  who  remained  alive,  especially  when   they  saw  their  dearest 
friends  and  relations  die.  That  the  Lord  might  now  manifest  his  good- 
ness, and  not  willingly  afflict,  or  grieve  the  children  of  men,  there- 
fore he  hath  appointed   it  to  all  men  once  to  die,   the  righteous  as 
well  as  the  wicked. 

IV.  But  "  what  further  benefit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacrifice 
and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  I"  Many  and  great  benefits  of  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  under  Pontius  Pilate  are 
exhibited  in  the  fifteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but  there  are  also  other  bene- 
fits, and  particularly,  that  "  by  virtue  thereof  our  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of 
the  flesh  may  no  more  reign  in  us,  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves 
to  him  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving." 

The  old  man  is  the  natural  corruption  of  man,  which  possesseth 
him  entirely  from  his  birth,  and  is  a  continual  source  of  evil  lusts, 
which  reign  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  as  a  king,  according  to  a  sinful 
laW:.  which  they  prescribe  to  him,  and  under,  and  according  to  which 


—44.  335 

they  hold  him  captive,  and  compel  him,  while  he  is  neither  able,  nor 
willing  to  be  delivered  from  his  bondage.  -See  Rom.  vii.  5,  23,  Eph« 
ii.  1,  2,  3,  Which  old  man  is  also  called  "  indwelling  sin,  the  mo- 
lions  of  sin,  the  law  of  the  members,  the  flesh,'*  &c.  Rom.  vi. 
and  vii. 

This  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  not  only  with  respect  to  guilt 
by  justification,  since  our  guilt  was  nailed  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  slain, 
and  thrust  in  his  grave.  Coll.  ii.  14,  of  which  we  have  treated  on  the 
fifteenth  Lord's  day,  when  we  showed  that  he  obtained  redemption, 
the  favour  of  God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life  for  the  elect,  and 
freed  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God,  and  from  the  curse 
by  his  suJBTering  ;  but  also  with  respect  to  the  power  and  dominion 
of  the  old  man,  which  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  by  sanctification, 
partly  in  this  life,  so  that  the  evil  lusts  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any 
more  :  *'  for  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,"  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  Yi.  14,  whereby  believers,  being  thus  freed  and  separated,  offer 
thems^ves  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  to  God,  Rom.  xii.  1.  "  We 
beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  pre- 
sent your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God, 
which  is  your  reasonable  service."  But  after  this  life  the  old  man 
will  be  perfectly  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  Heb.  xii.  23. 

The  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ  by  virtue 
of  his  crucifixion,  death  and  burial, 

1 .  Because  he  by  his  death  on  the  crosi,  and  by  his  burial,  depri- 
ved sin  of  its  strength,  whereby  it  reigneth  :  "  The  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law,"  I  Cor.  xv.  56.  The  law  condemns  the  sinner  to  be  a  slave 
of  sin,  it  discovereth  sin,  yea,  sin  works  effectually  by  occasion  of 
the  law.  Sec  this,  Rom.  v.  20.  vii.  5,  13.  Now  Christ  hath  deprived 
this  law,  which  is  the  strength  of  sin,  of  its  strength,  by  his  death 
on  the  cross,  and  by  their  burial,  inasmuch  as  he  satisfied  it,  and  so 
it  cannot  hold  the  elect  sinner  any  longer  under  sin.  Therefore 
Paul  saith,  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye  also  are 
become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ."  And  thus  "  sin  hath 
no  longer  dominion  over  believers,  because  they  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom.  vii.  14. 

2.  Christ  hath  merited  satisfaction  for  them  ;  for  "  he  gave  him- 
self for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14. 
For  they  are  reckoned  in  him,  when  he  is  made  sanctification  to 
them,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  and  so  are  said  to  be  crucified,  dead,  and  buried 
with  him.  "  We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  to  the  glory  of  the  Father? 


336  CHRIST'S  DEATH,- BURIAL,  &c. 

even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have 
been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  shall  be  also 
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection  ;  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man 
is  crucified  witli  him,"  Gal.  ii.  20.  Coll.  ii.  11.  12. 

3.  By  his  death  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial  he  hath  also  merited 
and  given  the  Holy  Ghost  to  them.  Gal.  iii  13,  14,  whereby  they 
'<  mortify  "  theii  sins,  the  old  man,  and  "  the  deeds  of  the  body,'* 
Rom.  viii.  13.  So  the  apostle  speaks,  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  "Ye  are  wash- 
ed, ye  are  sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 

4.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial,  affords  them 
a  powerful  motive  to  crucify,  mortify  and  bury  the  old  man  ;  for 
when  they  see  the  love  of  Christ,  the  grievousncss  of  his  sufferings 
for  them  and  that  their  old  man  procured  all  this  distress  to  him, 
they  are  then  powerfully  moved  to  dedicate  and  offer  themselves  up 
to  him,  in  order  to  serve  him,  and  to  recompense  that  evil  upon  the 
old  man,  and  to  take  vengeance  of  him  :  for  "  they  who  are  Christ's 
have  crucified  the  the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  This  Peier  also  intimateth,  when  he  saith,  "  Forasmuch  then  as 
Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise  with 
the  same  mind,  to  wit,  that  he  who  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath 
ceased  from  sin  ,"  1  Peter,  iv.  1. 

5.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  and  his  burial  is  also  a  lively 
figure  of  the  manner  in  which  believers  ought  to  crucify,  mortify, 
and  bury  the  old  man.  As  Christ  was  sought  until  he  was  found, 
seized,  arraigned  before  the  tribunal,  accused,  reproached,  spitten 
upon,  scourged,  stripped  naked,  tortured,  deprived  of  food,  slain,  and 
taken  from  among  men,  so  also  must  believers  deal  with  the  old 
man  :  in  this  manner  would  Paul  "  be  conformed  to  the  death  of 
Christ,"  Philip,  iii.  10.  For  this  end  Christ  also  suffered,  1  Peter 
ii.  21— .24. 

y .  We  must  inquire  further  why  it  is  said,  "  that  he  descended 
into  hell."  We  must  not  understand  this  so,  as  though  Christ  de- 
scended properly  into  the  place  of  the  damned,  to  triumph  there  over 
the  powers  of  hell,  as  the  Lutherans  in.agine  :  or  that  he  entered 
into  a  porch  of  hell,  where  the  believing  fathers  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment were  kept,  to  deliver  them  out  of  it  ;  for  the  word  of  God  know- 
eth  nothing  of  such  a  descending  into  hell.  His  body  was  in  the 
gr.ive,  and  his  soul  in  the  hi»nds'of  his  leather,  during  his  death,  wheli 
he  should  have  descended  into  hell.  It  hath  never  been  heard  of, 
that  a  general  triumph  before  a  prison  ;  Christ  triumphed  on  the 
cross,  Coll.  ii.  15;  and  in  his  exaltation,  Psalm  Ixviii.  18.    The  be- 


— 4U  337 

lieving  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  entered  into  heaven  in  conse- 
quence of  the  suretiship  of  Christ,  and  by  the  reflex  virtue  of  hi» 
sufferings ;  we  see  this  not  only  in  Enoch  and  h.iijah,  but  also  in 
Abraham,  Luke  xvi.  22,  in  Jacob,  Gen.  xlix.  18.  "  Christ  preached 
indeed  to  the  spirits  in  prison,'^  1  Peter  lii.  19,  but  he  did  not  de- 
scend in  the  body  into  the  prison,  but  oy  his  Spirit,  in  which  he  went, 
and  preached  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and  by  him,  to  the  inhabitants  of 
ihe  old  world,  who  are  the  spirits,  and  who  were,  when  Peter  wrote 
this,  in  prison,  but  not  when  Christ  preached  to  them. 

It  is  true,  our  creed  sa'.th  that  "  Christ  descvrnded  into  hell  :"  but 
We  also  know  that  this  creed,  being  a  human  composition,  must 
ihertfore  be  explained  accordin;^  to  the  word  of  God ;  that  the  de- 
scent into  hell  is  not  found  in  the  most  ancient  creeds,  and  that  it 
occurs  indeed  in  the  creed  of  Athanasius,  but  that  then  the  burial  is 
left  out,  as  the  burial  is  mserted  in  the  creed  of  Nice,  but  the  descent 
into  hell  is  not  found  there.  All  which  proves  that  the  ancitnts  under- 
stood by  the  descent  into  hell  the  burial ;  which  is  also  agreeable  to  the 
word  of  God.  David  charges  his  son  Solomon, "  not  to  let  the  gray  hairs 
of  Joab  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace,"  1  Kings  ii,  6.  We  must  re- 
member that  the  Hebrew  word  sc/ieol,  and  the  Greek  word  hadtfs  signi- 
fies hell  and  the  grave  both,  for  which  reason  they  are  translated  some- 
times by  hell,  and  sometimes  by  the  grave.  And  thus  the  descent  of 
Jesus  into  hell  is  the  same  with  hisburial ;  therefore  he  saith,  Psalm  xvi. 
10.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer 
thine  holy  One  to  see  corruption,"  Peter  and  Paul  prove  that  he 
speaks  here  of  the  burial  of  his  body,  Acts  ii.  24 — 31.  xiii.  35,  36, 
37.  But  as  his  burial  was  expressed  before  in  proper  language, 
hence  it  is  not  suitable,  at  least  not  in  such  a  short  compend  of  the 
articles  of  our  faith,  to  repeat  the  selfsame  thing  in  the  figurative 
words  of  descending  into  hell.  And  therefore  we  understand  by  this 
with  the  instructor  the  suffering  of  Christ's  soul,  "  his  unspeakable 
anguish,  pains,  terrours  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged 
during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross."  As  David 
also  expresseth  the  suffering  of  his  soul  by  the  pains  of  hell.  Psalm 
cxvi.  3.  The  pains  of  hell  got  hold  on  me  :  I  found  trouble  and 
sorrow."  See  Psalm  xviii.  4,  5.  As  he  also  truly  suffered  the  anguish 
of  hell ;  for  "  his  soul  was  troubled,"  John  xii.  27.  xiii.  21.  *'  How 
am  I  straitened  ?"  thus  he  complained,  Luke  xii.  50.  "  He  was  sor- 
rowful and  very  heavy.  Then  said  he  to  his  disciples.  My  soul  is 
exceedingly  sorrowful,"  Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38.  Yea,  '*  he  was  sore 
amazed,"  Mark  xiv.  33,  and  "  he  was  in  a  great  agony,"  Luke  xxii, 
44.     But  he  suffered  still  more  grievously  on  the  crots,  when  "  he 

Yy 


J38  CHRIST^S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &g- 

cried  out"  in  such  great  distress,  "  with  a  loud  voice,  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Matt,  xxvii.  46. 

We  showed  briefly  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day  wherein  this  suf- 
fering of  his  soul  properly  consibted  :  we  will  exhibit  this  now  mor^ 
fully  And  O  that  every  one  would  earnest- y  endeavour  to  obtain 
a  proper  understanding  of  this  matter,  that  the  believer  may  pe'ceive 
^'om  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  delivered  him,  ^nd  others  what  they 
must  yet  expect ;  for  ihey  will  also  be  obliged  to  suffer  that  which 
Christ  suffered,  if  they  do  not  become  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ. 
The  suffe:in;^  of  Christ's  soul,  and  his  hellish  anguish  consisted  in 
these  things  : 

1.  That  he  had  a  deep  sense  O'f  the  power  and  abominable  nature 
of  all  the  sins  of  all  his  dear  elect,  since  he  was  made  sin  for  them," 
2  Cor.  V.  21,  for  he  had  a  deep  sense  of  their  guilt,  the  dreadful 
nature  of  sin,  their  aiming  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God,  their 
breaking  of  his  yoke,  and  bursting  of  his  bonds,  all  this  he  was 
obliged  to  sustain  now.  Let  a  believer  only  imagine  how  he  is 
pierced  with  sorrow,  when  he  hath  a  feeling  sense  of  sins  and  when 
they  become  like  a  heavy  burthen  too  heavy  for  him,  but  how  then 
was  the  soul  of  Christ  burthened,  when  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect, 
"with  all  the  curses  and  p-^nalties,  which  ai'e  threatened  on  account  oi 
sin,  were  laid  with  ail  their  weight  upon  him,  when  he  was  neverthe- 
less perfectly  innocent  ?  verily  he  was  not  insensible,  but  complained 
"  1  restored  that  which  I  took  not  away,"  Psalm  Ixix.  4» 

2.  That  he  was  obliged  taexperience  a  deprivation  of  the  ordinary 
and  sensible  influence,  tha  kindness  and  love  of  his  Father  He  who 
•was  the  Son  of  the  Father's  bosom,  and  brought  up  with  him,  who 
v/as  wont  ^o  bathe  in  his  Father's  light  and  love,  was  now  thrust  far 
away  from:  peace^  and  abandoned  to  hellish  darkness ;  no  pleasing 
sensations  occtjpied  his  soul  ;  nothing  but  darkness,  distress  and 
lerrour  possessed  his  miad  ;.  for  he  complained  that  he  was  forsaken; 
to  this  was  also  added, 

3.  That  even  his  Father  set?  himself  against  him  ;  for  he  kindled 
his  wrath  against  him,  like  a  fire*  Did  Job  complain,  ♦'  The  arrows 
of  the  Almighty  are  within  me,  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my 
spirit :  the  terrours  of  God  set  themselves  in  array  aofainst  me,"  Job 
vi.  4.  "  Thou  art  become  cruel  against  me:  with  thy  strong  hand 
thou  opposest  thysel-f  against  me,"  chap.  xxx.  21,  how  grievous  was 
then  the  condition  of  Jesus,  against  whom  God  stirred  up  his  whole 
indignaLionl  The  hardened  sinner  doth  not  apprehend  this:  hut  let 
him  only  represent  to  himself,  that  those  whom  he  heartily  loves^ 
and  without  whose  mutual  love  he  canjiot  live,  depart  from  hUa  with. 


—44.  S3^ 

nversioh,  that  Ihey  behold  iiim  v'ith  anger  and  d'splecisure,  and  m- 
veigh  against  him  with  vehement  indignation,  will  it  not  be  insup- 
portable to  him  ?  How  grievous  then  was  the  condition  of  Christ, 
when  not  any  beloved  creature,  but  his  allsufficient  and  loving  Father 
himself  atvacked  him  in  such  a  severe  manner  with  his  anger  I 

4.  That  the  whole  power  of  hell  was  let  loose  upon  him  ;  '•  It  was 
now  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness,"  Luke  xxii.  53.  *'  The  prince 
of  this  world  came  against  him,"  John  xiv.  30.  He  stirred  up  against 
him  all  those  who  scoffed  at  his  sonship,  kingdom,  and  trusting  in 
God  ;  and  must  we  not  think  that  he  who  sought  to  bereave  him  in 
a  crafty  manner  in  the  wilderness,  of  his  behef  in  his  sonship,  and 
of  his  trusting  in  his  Father,  did  now  much  more  do  this?  Who  can 
doubt  but  that  he  assaulted  him  m  this,  or  some  other  disquieting 
manner  If  thou  wert  the  iSon  of  God*  would  thy  Father  himself  be 
so  wroth  with  thee  ?  would  he  depart  from  thee  ?  would  he  affiict  thee 
in  this  manner  for  the  sins  of  others,  when  thou  hast  not  committed 
any  offences  thyself?  is  this  indeed  just  ?  dost  thou  intend  to  be  the 
surety  of  the  elect  in  thy  sufferings  ?  is  it  possible  that  one  should 
satisfy  for  ail  ?  dost  thou  hope  tiiat  thou  wilt  j'et  surmount  thy  suf- 
fering ?  no,  thou  must  suffer  for  ever,  and  thou  wilt  never  surmount 
it ;  desist,  curse  God  ana  die.  Every  person  who  hath  at  any  time 
been  the  object  of  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one,  knows  hoW 
grievous  this  is  ?  If  we  consider  further,  that  his  clear  understanding 
was  overclouded  with  the  greatest  darkness,  although  without  sin, 
that  he  was  forsaken  by  God  in  all  the  torments  of  his  body  and 
soul,  that  the  bright  noonday  was  darkened  over  him,  and  that  the 
sun  withdrew  its  light  from  him,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  he  suf- 
fered the  anguish  of  hell  in  the  most  grievous  manner. 

Why  did  it  please  the  Lord,  might  it  be  asked  here,  to  bruise  him 
thus  ?  It  was  foretold.  Psalm  xxii.  1 .  He  was  obliged  to  satisfy 
for  souls,  and  therefore  '*  to  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,"  Isaiah 
liii.  10,  and  deliver  the  elect  from  the  anguish  and  pains  of 
hell,  Hosea  xiii.  14.  And  thus  «' hath  Jesus  delivered  them  from 
the  wrath  to  come,"  1  Thess.  i.  10, 


APPLICATION, 

When  we  attend  carefully  to  all  this,  and  also  to  what  hath  been 
said  on  the  foregoing  Loid's  day,  must  we  not  then  be  astonished  at 
iht  inconceivable  love  of  Christ  to  bis  people  ?    When  he  wept  orer 


:^  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

Lazarus  who  was  dead,  "  The  Jews  said,  behold  how  he  loved  him," 
John  xi.  35,  36.  But  if  his  tears  were  evidences  of  his  great  love, 
was  it  not  then  the  greatest  evidence  of  his  love,  that  he  poured  out 
even  his  soul  unto  death,  descended  into  the  lowermost  parts  of  the 
earth,  yea,  suffered  such  grievous,  hellish  agonies,  that  he  might 
deliver  his  people  from  the  power  of  hell  ? 

But  ye  surely  know  that  he  did  not  suffer  thus  in  the  stead  of  all 
men,  and  that  all  do  not  partake  of  the  benefits  of  his  death,  burial, 
and  descent  into  hell.  Therefore  examine  yourselves,  and  see  how 
it  is  with  you  in  this  respect.  And  that  we  may  assist  you  herein^ 
we  will  show  you  who  may  believe  that  these  things  belong  to 
them. 

1.  These  persons  have  died  in  their  knap;inalion  that  they  were 
spiritually  alive,  having  learned  with  distress  and  concern,  that  they 
were  under  the  sentence  of  death.  This  appears  from  Rom  v'lu 
9,  *'  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once  ;  but,  when  the  command- 
ment came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died,"  Gal.  ii.  19,  20.  "Itlirough 
the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  1  might  live  unto  God.  I  am  cru- 
cified with  Christ."  The  sinner,  born  and  educated  under  the  gos- 
pel, imagineth  that  he  is  alive,  because  he  enjoys  the  privileges  of 
the  Christian  worship,  because  God  is  merciful,  Christ  hath  died,  and 
lie  is  civil  and  devout;  is  he  convinced  that  he  hath  corrupted  himself 
in  a  horrible  manner,  he  doth  not  yet  say,  there  is  no  hope,  he  finds 
still  the  life  of  his  hand,  for  he  will  amend  his  ways.  But  those  for 
whom  Christ  became  a  surety  in  his  death,  are  convinced  by  him  of 
their  folly,  their  imaginations  fail  them,  they  see  that  they  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  they  are  amazed  that  they  have  so  long  a  time 
fed  upon  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  and  upon  ashes.  And  so  "  they 
are  pricked  in  their  hearts,"  Acts.  ii.  37.  Yea,  all  their  great  vir- 
tues, with  which  they  were  formerly  so  well  pleased,  fail  there,  like 
loss  and  dung,  Philip,  jii.  4 — 9. 

2.  These  persons  are  more  disturbed  and  concerned  about  the 
wrath  of  God,  under  grievous  adversities,  and  crosses,  than  about 
the  most  grievous  cross  itself.  Extraordinary  disgrace,  losses  and 
pains  depress  them  exceedingly  :  but  when  they  suspect  that  they 
may  be  proper  punishments,  inflicted  by  an  angry  God,  this  is  in- 
supportable to  them,  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  descending  into  hell : 
"  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  and  I  was  troubled,"  said  David,  Psalm 
XXX.  9.  They  can  sometimes  rejoice  and  glory  in  their  sufferings, 
but  not  unless  they  know  that  they  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  have 
peace  with  him,  Rom.  V.  1,  2,3.  Therefore  they  pray  so  exceed- 
ingly against  the  wrath  of  God  m  his  judgments  t    <'  O   Lord,''  said 


—44  ^ 

David,  Psalm  vi.  1,  "rebuke me  not  in  thine  anger,  neither  chasten 
me  in  thine  hot  displeasure  "  And  Jeremiah  prayed  in  his  grievous 
tribulations;  "  Be  not  a  terrour  to  me,"  Jer.  xvii.  17.  Others  do 
not  concern  themselves  about  the  anger  of  God,  but  only  that  God 
would  remove  the  death  of  misery  from  them. 

3.  They  are  such  whose  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  so 
that  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any  more  in 
them.  We  see  this  Rom.  vi.  4,  5.  6,  Coll,  ii.  11,  12.  Gal.  v. 
24.  They  are  sometimes  indeed  hurried  to  evil  lusts,,  yet  not  like 
slaves  and  servants  of  sin,  but  like  prisoners,  who  are  drag?:ed  along  ; 
they  follow  indeed,  but  at  every  step  they  withstand  their  mighty 
enemy,  and  endeavour  to  disengage  them.selves  from  him  ;  there- 
fore they  pray  and  strive  against  the  old  man,  and  when  they  are 
cast  down  by  him,  they  rise  up  anew,  and  bewail  themselves  with 
Paul,  Rom.  vii.  23,  24.  Yea,  they  surrender  themselves  to  the 
Lord,  as  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  that  they  may  serve  him,  and 
they  dedicae  themselves  to  him,  and  exert  themselves  for  him. 
This  we  are  taught,  Rom.  vi.  17.  "  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were 
the  servants  of  sin  ;  but  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart,  that  form  of 
doctrine  which  was  delivered  you,"  Others  esteem  sin  a  pleasure, 
they  swim  in  it,  as  a  fish  in  the  water,  they  follow  nature  :  doth  their 
conscience  reprove  them,  they  are  displeased,  they  even  wish  that  this 
and  that  action  v/ere  no  sin :  are  they  moral,  would  they  not  by  any 
means  commit  heinous  sins,  it  is  not  because  their  old  man  is  m.orti- 
fied  by  the -death  of  Christ,  for  their  heart  hath  never  yet  been  chan- 
ged^ nor  the  new  man  formed  in  them  ;  but  it  proceeds  from  a  mor- 
al disposition,  a  virtuous  education,  and  natural  conscience  ;  as  they 
have  never  yet  surrendered  themselves  to  him,  but  li?e  only  to  them- 
selves, and  for  themselves,  and  that  even  as  far  as  they  are  religious, 
Isaiah  Iviii.  3.     Zech.  vii.  5,  6. 

If  now,  hearers,  ye  have  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
weilbeing  or  illbeing,  and  attend  seriously  to  what  hath  been  said, 
and  examine  yourselves,  ye  will  indeed  see  how  it  is  situated  with 
you  in  this  respect ;  but  if  ye  do  not  regard  it,  if  ye  know  not  of 
such  a  dying  to  yourselves,  if  ye  will  not  suffer  such  an  anxious 
mind,  if  ye  do  not  think  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  adversity,  but  coh^ 
sider  all  as  well,  so  long  as  ye  enjoy  peace,  and  are  without  feat*, 
if  sin  do  still  hve  in  you,  and  ye  live  in  sin :  know  then,  that  "  ye  are 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  1.  **  Ye  have  indeed  the  name 
that  ye  hve.  but  ye-  are  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  I.  It  is  true,  ye  live,  but 
like  a  dead  carcase,  which  is  alive  with  worms  :  •<  The  widow  that 
iiveth  in  pleasure)  is  d^ad  while  she  liv€ti^j"  1  Sam  v.  6,    All  your 


S45  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

adversities  are  only  the  beginnings  af  sorrow:  God  "  distributeth 
sorrows  to  you  in  his  anger,"  Job  xxi.  i7.  But  it  will  be  much 
more  grievous  for  you,  when  God  will  require  your  souls  of  you, 
when  your  bodies  shall  be  laid  in  a  dark  cave,  to  be  food  for  worms, 
and  your  souls  shall  descend  into  hell,  to  die  eternally  without  living, 
and  to  live  eternally  without  dying,  and  thus  to  satisfy  by  yourselves 
the  justice  and  truth  of  God  ;  for  "  death  shall  seize  upon  you,  and 
ye  shall  thus  go  down  quick  into  hell,"  Psalm  Iv.  15. 

O  that  ye  would  lay  this  to  heart,  would  shake  off  your  carnal 
security,  and  endeavour  to  prevent  your  destruction.  This  is  indeed 
the  only  way  to  cause  you  to  flee  out  of  yourselves  to  him,  who  is 
set  forth  to  you  by  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood. 

But  ye,  who  cannot  disown  these  evidences  of  your  interest  in  the 
death,  burial,  and  descent  of  Christ  into  hell,  will  ye  still  indulge  this 
and  that  corrupt  inclination  of  the  mortified  old  man  ?  '*  will  yt  con- 
tinue in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  Gcd  forbid  ;  how  shall  we  that 
are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein?"  Rom.  vi.  1,  2.     Your  old 
man  is  indeed  crucified,  d<^ad,   and  buried  with  Christ,  but  it  is  only 
initially  ;  ye  know  how  often  ye  are  seized  by  him,  and  carried  cap- 
tive, and  therefore  it  is,  and  remains  your  duty  to  crucify,   mortify, 
and  bury  him  :  exert  yourselves  then  for  this  purpose.     And  should 
ye  not  do  this  ?  (a)  Have  not  your  sins  done  this  to  him,  who  is  the 
beloved  of  your  soul  ?    '*  Ye  have  pierced  him"  by  them,  Zech.  xii. 
10.     He  received  the  wounds  of  his  hands  and  feet  in   the  house  of 
his  friends ,  yea,  ye  still  cause  him  to  *'  serve  with  your  sins,  and 
weary  him  with  your  iniquities,"  Isaiah  xliii.  24.  Can  ye  suffer  this; 
and  will  ye  not  revenge  it  ?  (b)  How  many  crosses  do  your  sins  pro- 
cure to  you  ?  "  Your  iniquities  separate  between  you  and  your  God, 
and  your  sins  hide  his  face  from   you,  that  he  will  not  hear,"  Isaiah 
lix.  2,     Whence   proceed  all  your  afflictions  with  respect  to  your 
body  and  soul,  *'  that  it  is  so  bitter,  that  it  reacheth  even  to  your 
heart  ?"  Is   it  not  "  from  your  way,  your  doings  and  your  wicked- 
ness ?"  Jer.  iv.  is.     When  do  ye  experience   most  pain,  anguish, 
terrour,  and  hellish  sorrows  ?  Is  it  not  after  ye  have  suffered  your- 
selves to  be  ensnared  in  sinful  actions  through  your  unwatchfulness? 
wdl  ye  not  then  attack  your  sins,  that  ye  may  slay  them,  although 
they  should  be  like  a  right  eye,  a  right  hand,  or  a  right  foot  ?   (c)  A 
Christian  surely  never  lives  content,  while  he  doth  not  slay  his  sins  ; 
because  his  oki  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  there- 
fore bin  doth  not  agree  with  his  nature :  he  cannot  make  sin  his  prop- 
er work,  like  Satan  and  his  people ;  "  for  he  who  is  born  of  God 


—44.  343 

doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  :  and  he  cannot 
sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God,"  1  John  iii.  9,  Doth  sin  surprize 
him  sometimes,  '•  bringing  him  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin, 
which  is  in  his  members,"  he  is  not  pleased  with  it,  but  complams? 
«  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  diiath  ?"  Rom,  viii.  23,  24.  But  when  he  crucifies,  mortifies 
and  buries  sin,  how  free  and  unconstrained  doth  he  then  hve  i  What 
clearness  is  there  then  in  his  soul  1  How  doth  he  triumph  over  his 
enemy !  yea,  with  what  joy  is  he  then  admitted  to  the  life  which  is 
hidden  with  Christ  in  God  !  for  we  may  then  especially  apply  to  the 
Christian  that  which  we  find,  Coll.  iii.  3.  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your 
life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  "  Have  ye  no  mind  to  that  hfe,  nor 
any  great  inchnation  to  it?  Surely  ye  have:  '^mortify  then  your 
members  which  are  upon  earth,"  Coll.  iii.  5.  (d)  If  your  old  man  be 
crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  he  hath  taken  you  for  his 
soldiers,  to  fight  with  laira  against  his  enemies,  who  i-.re  also  your 
enemies.  Will  ye  then  prove  faithless,  or  suffer  yourselves,  through 
cowardice,  to  be  wounded,  or  taken  captive  ?  he  stands  upon  mount 
Zion,  and  sees  who  among  you  fights  valiantly,  and  manfully,  and 
him  he  will  crown.  Shall  not  his  eye,  which  is  upon  you,  encourage 
you  to  fight  I  victory  is  certain  ;  "The  Philistines  are  already  fallen 
before  the  face  of  our  Jonathan,  and  ye,  his  armourbearcrs,  have 
only  to  slay  them  after  him,"  See  1  Sam.  xiv.  13. 

Do  ye  not  know  how  ye  should  conduct  in  this  warfare  ?  are  ye 
desirous  of  knowing  how  ye  must  act,  in  order  to  crucify  and  mortify 
them  ?  are  ye  willing  to  exert  yourselves,  in  order  to  subdue  them  ? 
consider  then  (a)  in  what  condition  ye  are  ;  that  ye  belong  not  any 
more  to  the  old  man,  nor  he  to  you,  and  that  your  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  ye  have  therefore  nothing  to  do 
with  him,  but  to  fic^ht  against  and  slay  him  ;  "  therefore  reckon  ye 
also  yourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin,  but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  11.  As  long  as  we  waver  between  both 
parties,  and  know  not  whether  we  belong  to  Jesus,  or  to  his  enemies, 
so  long  we  will  be  in  a  maze,  and  will  not  be  able  to  learn  this  war- 
fare. Examine  yourselves  therefore,  thitt  ye  may  see  whether  the 
above  mentioned  evidences  be  truly  in  you  ;  and  if  they  be,  why  do 
ye  then  doubt  ?  (b)  Learn  to  distinguish  properly  between  the  mo- 
tions of  the  new  and  of  the  old  man  :  it  often  happeneth,  when  we 
see  corrupt  inclinations  in  ourselves,  proceeding  from  the  old  man^ 
that  we  are  discouraged,  as  though  we  were  traitors,  who  had  still 
such  an  evil  heart,  which  retained  yet  so  many  inclinations  to  the 
enemies  >  l?ut  if  ye  were  skilful  soldiers  in  this  warfare,  y«  would  se^ 


%i%  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  ke. 

that  ye  yourselves  were  not  the  authors  of  these  things,  but  sin  that 
dwell'-th  in  you,  and  ye  would  witlistand  these  inclinations  coura* 
geously,  like  that  experienced  captain,  Paul ;  see  his  manner  of  act- 
ing in  his  warfure,  Rom.  vii.   15 — 23. 

He  who  will  fig^hl  well,  must  know  his  enemies.  These  enemies 
sometimes  change  their  military  ensigns,  but  their  surest  sign,  by 
which  they  may  be  known,  and  which  they  never  lay  aside,  is  selfseek-? 
ing,  and  aiming  at  self,  tiiough  they  often  disguise  this  sign  with  an  ai> 
pearance  of  virtue,  as  zeal  for  God,  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  necesv 
sity.and  other  things  of  this  kind,  (c)  If  ye  will  destroy  them, 
maintain  a  perfect  and  irreconci'eable  hatred  to  them ;  the  Jews 
would  never  have  crucified  Christ,  if  a  malicious  hatred  to  him 
had  n(;t  possessed  their  souls.  If  we  have  other  enemies  we  must 
love  them  ;  but  our  souls  must  hale  these  lame  and  blind  so  that 
v/e  will  never  make  any  league  with  them. 

And  verily,  when  such  a  hatred  possesseth  your  souls,  it  will  ren- 
der you  active  and  strong  against  the  enemy,  (d)  Stand  upon  your 
guard,  and  take  care  that  the  enemy  fall  not  upon  you  unawares,  or 
surprise  you;  sin  endeavcars  to  assault  you  secretly  by  silent  mo- 
tions of  your  corrupt  nature,  or  by  selfish  ends  in  your  good  works, 
or  by  means  of  opportunities  that  offer  themselves,  or  by  your  out- 
ward members.  Therefore  lake  good  heed,  and  look  on  every  side, 
tiiat  ye  may  see  whether  some  enemy  do  not  appear.  Learn  how 
to  keep  this  watch  from  Prov.  ii.  10,  II,  "  When  wisdom  entereth 
into  iliy  heart,  and  knov/ledge  is  pleasant  to  thy  soul,  discretion 
shall  preserve  thee,  and  understanding  shall  keep  thee.  Also  from 
chapter  iv.  23 — 27,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence  :  for  out 
of  It  are  the  issues  of  life.  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth, 
and  perverse  lips  put  far  from  thee.  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on, 
and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before  thee.  Ponder  the  path  of 
thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established.  Turn  not  to  the  right 
hand,  nor  to  the  left :  remove  thy  foot  from  evil."  We  ought  indeed 
to  take  the  lantern,  and  the  torch  of  the  word  of  God  with  us,  that 
we  may  see  the  enemy  who  endeavours  to  conceal  himself  under 
cloaks  of  shame,  as  the  Jews  sought  Christ  with  lanterns  and  torch- 
es, (e)  Seize  and  take  your  enemies,  and  even  **  the  little  foxes 
that  spoil  the  vines,"  Song  ii.  15.  Ye  ought  not  to  let  one  of  them 
escape  from  you,  but  ought  to  hold  and  bind  them  fast,  that  not  one 
j>iu  may  break  loose  and  mislead  you :  "  Abstain  from  all  appear- 
ance of  evil,"  1  Thess.  V.  22.  "  Hate  even  the  garment  spotted  by 
the  flesh,"  Jude  vrs.  23.(f)  Inflict  punishment  upon  your  enemies 
by  arraigning  them  before   the  high  tribunal,  accusing  them  of  scdi- 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  545 

tion  and  blasphemy  j  deride  them  as  vain  and  foolish  ;  scourge  your 
body  of  sin,  restrain  it,  and  subject  it  to  bondage  ;  deprive  your  enemy 
of  his  food,  and  of  whatever  maintains  his  life,  and  dectives  you ; 
nail  and  slay  him  on  the  cross  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be  buried,  and 
taken  away  from  among  men  ;  for  *'  they  who  are  Christ's  have  cru- 
cified the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v.  24.  Your  King 
requires  this,  Luke  xix  27.  (g)  But  forget  not  to  put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,  which  Paul  describes,  Eph.  vi.  11 — 18,  especially 
prayer ;  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  41,  that  he  may  afford  you  his  help;  so  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat 
acted,  2  Chron.  xiv.  1 1.  xx.  12,  for  there  "  is  help  laid  upon  one 
that  is  mighty  "  for  you,  Psalm  Ixxxix.  19,  Urge  him  with  your 
claim  which  ye  have  upon  his  death,  burial,  and  descent  into  hell, 
for  which  he  hath  given  you  the  seal  of  baptism,  Rom.  vi.  3 — 6. 

If  ye  conduct  in  this  manner,  ye  will  be  able  to  shout  and  triumph 
over  your  enemies  in  his  appointed  time,  like  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8« 
"  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,"  &c.  Are  ye  still  burthened  with 
many  crosses,  it  is  not  in  God's  wrath,  and  for  youi  destruction}  but 
it  is  from  his  love,  and  for  your  advantage,  Heb.  xii.  6 — 11.  Are 
ye  afraid  of  death,  it  is  unstung  ;  death  will  deliver  you  from  every 
sorrow,  and  be  a  passage  for  you  into  everlasting  life.  Are  ye 
afraid  of  the  dreary  grave  ;  it  hath  been  sanctified  for  you  by  the 
grave  of  Christ,  "so  that  ye  shall  enter  into  peace,  ye  shall  rest  in 
your  beds  "  Isaiah  Ivii.  2.  Are  ye  sometimes  afflicted  ^ith  many 
terrours,  and  sorrows  of  hell,  let  itj  not  seem  strange  to  you  ;  Jesus, 
who  is  yours,  drank  a  more  bitter  cup :  he  pities  you,  and  will  de- 
liver you  finally  from  these  evils.  Hear  what  he  saith,  Isaiah  Iviip 
18.  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him  :  I  will  lead  him  also 
and  restore  comforts  unto  him,  and  to  his  mourners."  Or  are  ye 
afraid  of  an  everlasting  descent  into  hell :  *'  He  that  believeth  hath 
everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation  ;  but  is  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  John  v  24.  He  hath  delivered  you  from  the 
anguish  and  pains  of  hell,  by  his  descent  into  hell ;  yea,  whatever  is, 
as  it  were,  a  death  and  hell  to  you,  shall  itself  be  cast  into  the  fire  of 
hell,  as  was  shown  to  John,  Rev.  xx.  14,  "  Death  and  hell  were  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire."  But  Jesus,  who  was  once  offered  to  taktf 
away  the  sins  of  many,  shall  appear  the  second  time  \Vithout  S»  tart^ 
them  that  look  for  him  to  salvation.    Amenr 


g« 


I J^ ) 


TrtE 


PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION 


OF  CHRISTc 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Horn.  X.  9.  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jefius, 
and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  has  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.

Q.  42.  Since  then  Christ  died  for  us^  why  must  we  also  die  ? 

A.  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,  but  only  an  abol- 
ishing of  sin,  and  a  passage  into  eternal  life. 

.Q  43.  What  further  heripfit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacrifice  and 
death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ? 

A.  That  by  virtue  thereof,  our  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and 
buried  with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  may  no 
more  reign  in  us ;  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves  to  him  a  sacrifice 
of  thanksgiving. 


328  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

Q.  44.  JV/iy  is  there  added,  <'  He  descended  into  hell?" 
A.  That  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  assured,  and  wholly 
comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  his  inexp'-essi- 
kle  anguish,  pains,  tcrrours,  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was 
plunged  during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath 
delivered  me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

JLt  is  related  of  Samson,  that  "  the  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  death, 
•were  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life,"  Judges  xvi  30.  It 
was  wonderful,  that  after  the  death  of  Elisha,  when  a  dead  man  was 
cast  into  his  grave,  he  was  restored  to  life  upon  touching  the  bones 
of  the  prophet,  2  Kings  xiii.  20,  21,  but  it  was  still  more  wonderful, 
not  only  that  one  man  destroyed  so  many  men  in  his  life,  but  also 
that  he  slew  still  more  in  his  death,  when  he  lost  his  own  life.  We 
do  not  read,  that,  besides  those  whom  he  smote  hip  and  thigh,  he 
slew  more  than  a  thousand  and  thirty  men  in  his  life  ;  but  when  he 
was  brought  by  the  Philistines  into  their  idol  temple,  which  was  full 
of  men  and  women,  and  of  the  lords  of  the  Phihstines,  and  upon  the 
roof  of  which  there  were  also  three  thousand  men  and  women,  he 
bowed  the  two  pillars,  upon  which  the  house  stood,  and  it  fell  upon 
himself,  and  upon  all  the  people  ;  and  so  the  dead  whom  he  slew 
at  his  death,  were  more  than  they  whom  he  slew  in  his  life. 

Truly  this  is  a  beautiful  emblem,  if  not  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
v/hose  conception,  and  birth  were  announced  by  an  angel,  as  well  as 
Samson's ;  Jesus   was  an  Israelite,  as  well  as  Samson  :  Jesus  was 
also  like   Samson  a  Judge  in  Israel :  was  Samson  strong,  our  Jesus 
13  not  less  so,  for  he  is  the  mighty  God  ;  did  Samson  surrender  him- 
self willingly  to  death,  Jesus  did  so  likewise,  John  x.  18.    Were  the 
dead  whom  Samson  slew  at  his  death,  more  than  they  whom  he  slew 
in  his  life,  Jesus  also  slew  more  by  his  death,  than  in  his  life.     It  is 
true,  he  never>  on  account  of  his  meekness,  destroyed  any  man  with 
a  bodily  death,  though  he  once  smote  to  the  ground  with  a  word 
those   wicked  men,    who   came   to  take  him ;   but,   which  required 
more  strength,  he  slew  many  spiritually  "  by  the  breath  of  his  lips," 
Isaiah  xi.  4,  when  he  convniced  them  of  their  wickedness,  and  con- 
demned them  to  death,  so  that  they  could  not  alledge,  in  vindication 
of  themselves  more  thrai  the  dead,   and  many  died  to  themselves  by 
conversion  ;  although  he  slew  so  many  in  his  life,  he  slew  still  more 
at  his  death  ;  for  by  his  death  he  slew  the  law,  and   caused  all  the 
elect  to  die  to  themselves  and  to  the  law,  Rom.  \i.  6,  5.    "  He  abol- 
ished death  itself,"  2  Tim.  i.  10.-  Yea,  *'by  his  death  he  destroyed 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  329 

htm  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  Heb.  ii.  14, 
By  the  power  of  his  death  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  dead 
and  buried,  as  it  is  said  in  the  sixteenth  Lord's  day  and  foriythird 
question.  Christ's  humble  incarnation  and  his  suffcrini^  on  the  cross 
htiving  been  spoken  of  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Lord's  days, 
the  three  last  degrees  of  his  huniihation,  to  wit,  his  death,  burial,  and 
descent  into  hell,  are  now  treated  of  for  ou«^  information* 

In  order  that  we  may  avoid  too  many  subdivisions,  we  will  accor- 
ding to  the  number  of  the  live  questions  in  this  Lord's  day,  attend 
also  to  five  general  heads. 

I.  The  reasons  of  the  necessity  of  Christ's  death,  Q.  40. 

II,  The  reasons  of  his  burial,  Q.  4L 

IIL  The    refutation   of  a  pretended   reason   from   our  death 
against  the  death  of  Christ,  as  a  satisfaction,  Q.  42. 

IV.  The  benefits  of  Christ's  death,  Q,  43. 

V.  Why  it  is  said  that  Christ  descended  into  hell,  Q.  44. 

I.  Our  first  general  head  contains  the  reasons  why  the    death  of 
Christ  was  necessary,  for  so    it   is  asked   in  the    fortieth   question, 
•<  Why  was  it  necessary   for  Christ  to  humble  himself  even    unto 
death  ?"     It  is  here  supposed  that    he  was   dead  ;  which  we,   since 
we  have  many  other  weighty    matters    to   observe,   and   intend   to 
abide  here  strictly  by  the  instructor,  do  also  presuppose  ;  and  partic- 
ularly that  Christ  suffered  a  real,  painful,  and  bloody  death  ,  although 
he  died  being  guiltless^  and  willingly,  and  yet  necessarily :  but   that 
which  is  of  the  principal  importance  is,  whether  he  was  obliged  to 
humble  himself  even  to  death,  in  order   to  make    satisfaction,    and 
whether  a  single  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  si^fficient  to  deliver   all 
mankind,  as  the  Papists  imagine,  that  they  may  lay  up   whatever  he 
suffered  more  than  a  drop  of  blood,  as  a  treasure,  out  of  which  the 
pope  may  dispense  so  many  indulgences.     In  opposition  to  which 
v^e  teach  that  one  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  sufficient  to  make  satis- 
faction, but  that  he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  even  unto   death 
for  this  purpose.     We  might  adduce   many  reasons  for  this,  as  that 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  which  redemption  and 'forgiveness  of  sins 
are  promised,  is  a  testament,  which  he  was  obliged  to  confirm  by  his 
death,  Heb.  ix.  15,  16,  17,  that   he  was  obliged  to   obey  his  Father, 
who  had  ordered  him  to  die,  Philip,  ii.  8,  that  he  had  promised   his 
Father  this,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8,  that  his   ardent  and  supreme  love  to 
the  elect  urged  him  so  far,  Psalm  Ixix.  9.  John  xv.  13,  and  that,  if  it 
had  not  been  necessary,  his  Father  would  not  have  subjected  him  to 
death.    But  that  we  may  abide  by  the   instructor,   we  say  that 

Xx 


33d  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  to  death  in   order  to   satisfy,  &r 
two  reasons  ; 

1.  Berau':e  the  justice  of  God  required  it  t  for  man  had  by  sin  in- 
jured, and,  sit  were,  corrupted  the  majesty  of  God  ;  saying  with 
his  actions  that  he  was  not  God,  that  he  was  not  glorious,  and  that 
he  oug'ht  not  to  be  obeyed  :  now  the  justice  of  God  demands,  ac- 
cording to  tlie  law  of  retribution,  that  man  should  also  be  corrupted 
by  death,  and  thus  "receive  in  himself  th?t  recompence  of  his  error 
that  was  meet,"  Rom-  i.  27.  The  law  in  which  God  has  expressed 
his  demand,  declares  him  also  to  be  guilty  of  death,  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Rom.  vi.  23,  as  the  Gentiles  likewise  know  by  the  law  written  upon 
their  hearts,  "  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  Now  since  the  Son  of 
God  was  become  the  surety  of  the  sinner,  in  order  to  satisfy  for  him, 
according  to  Job.  xxxiii.  24.  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8.  Heb.  x.  4 — 9. 
Jer.  XXX.  2 1  ;  therefore  sin  could  not  be  atoned  for  in  any  other 
■way  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  Further,  he  was  obliged 
to  humble  himself  to  death,  in  order  to  satisfy, 

2.  Because  the  truth  of  God  required  it ;  for  it  was  foretold,  that 
he  should  die  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  Isaiah  liii.  8.  "  For  he  was 
cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living:  for  the  transgression  of  my 
people  was  he  stricken,"  vrs.  10.  «  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  ^bruise 
him,  he  hath  put  him  to  grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed,"  vrs.  12.  «He  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death  ;  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors, 
and  he  bore  the  sins  of  many."  It  was  also  typified,  and  therefore 
sealed,  that  he  should  die,  in  ord'r-r  to  make  satisfaction,  as  well  by 
the  slaying  of  the  paschal  lamb:  "  For  even  Christ  our  passover  is 
sacrificed  for  us,"  I  Cor.  v.  7,  as  by  all  the  sacrifices  of  slain  beasts  : 
for  he  gave  himself  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph.  v.  2.  Now  he  could 
not  do  this,  unless  he  humb'ed  himself  to  death  ;  for  the  scripture 
cannot  be  broken.  And  therefore  he  would  not  be  rescued,  either 
by  Peter,  or  by  the  angels  from  death,  saying,  "  How  then  shall  the 
scriptui-es  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be  ?"  Matt.  xxvi.  54.  And 
so  we  see  in  what  sense  the  anostle  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  «  That 
Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the  scriptures. 

II.  But  Christ,  after  he  had  died  on  the  cross,  did  not  remain 
hanging  on  it,  to  be  consumed  by  the  air,  or  to  be  devoured  by  the 
fowls  of  heaven,  or  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  like  other  crucified 
per~,ons,  but  he  was  buried.  We  show  upon  other  occasions  by 
whom,  where,  when,  in  what  manner,  and  in  whose  presence  he  was 
buried,  what  are  the  consequences  of  his  burial,  and  how  long  he  re- 


XVr.  LORD'3  DAY.  Q.  10— 44,.  331 

inained  in  the  grave.*  We  shall  now  treat  only  of  the  reasons, 
"  why  he  was  buried,"  accoi  ding  to  the  forty-first  question.  We 
need  not  inquire  here  why  his  friends  buried  him  :  they  did  this 
from  special  affection,  to  preserve  Inm  from  further  improper  treat- 
ment, and  against  the  day  of  his  resurrection,  whetiier  the  last  day, 
or  the  third  day,  agreeably  to  his  prediction,  in  proportion  to  the 
weakness,  or  strength  of  their  faith.  But  that  which  we  must  chief- 
ly consider  here,  is,  what  was  the  reason  and  end  proposed  by  God 
in  this  burial,  why  he  appointed  that  his  ton  should  be  buried.  The 
reason  was  not,  that  he  might,  like  others,  see  corruption,  s.nce  this 
was  contrary  to  his  steadfast  hope,  expressed  in  the  sixteenth 
Psalm;  neither  can  we  think  tnat  ne  was  buriej,  that  he  might  as 
an  antitype  of  the  sabbath  day,  rest  in  the  grave  on  the  sabbath,  and 
thus  abolish  the  fourth  commandment  ;  for  we  cannot  discover  any 
proof  of  t!)is  opinion.     But  he  was  buried, 

1.  ••  Thereby  to  prove  that  he  was  really  dead"  Christians  have 
the  greatest  concern  in  knowing  tnat  he  was  really  dead,  because 
they  cannot  otherwise  know  whether  he  fully  satisfied  ;  and  if  tiiey 
do  not  know  this,  they  cannot  become  partakers  of  his  satisfaction. 
Therefore  his  death  and  burial  are  dehvered  as  two  fundamental 
points  of  the  doctrine  of  faith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4.  There  could  not  be 
a  stronger  proof,  that  he  was  really  dead,  than  that  he  was  buried: 
for  we  do  not  bury  the  living,  but  the  dead  ;  at  least  in  an  ordinary 
judicial  process,  such  as  was  holden  with  Christ,  the  living  are  not 
buried,  but  only  the  dead.  His  friends  also  loved  him  too  well  to 
thrust  hmi  into  the  grave  alive.  And  his  judge  would  not  consent 
that  he  should  be  buried,  before  he  was  well  assured  that  he  was 
dead,  Mark  xv.  44,  45.     He  was  buried  also, 

2.  Because  it  was  foretold,  Isaiah  liii.  9.  <*  He  made  his  grave 
with  the  wicked,  and  was  with  the  rich  in  his  death  ;  his  soul  should 
not  be  left  in  hell,"  that  is,  the  grave,  "  to  see  corruption,"  Psalm 
xvi.  10.  Sec  Acts  xiii.  35,  36,  37.  Therefore  he  should  enter  into 
the  grave  by  a  burial ;  the  Saviour  himself  foretold  it,  Matt.  xii.  40, 
"  As  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so 
shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of 
the  earth."  The  scriptures  ought  also  to  be  fulfilled,  and  so  "  he 
was  buried  according  to  the  scriptures,"  i.  Cor.  xv.  4.  He  was 
buried  also, 

3.  That  he  might  be  humbled  to  the  lowest  degree.     The  human 

•  The  Author  hath  respect  here  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hol- 
land, of  preaching,  during  certain  weeks  previoua  to  Easter,  on  tlic  history 
of  the  passion,  death,  and  bcrial  ©f  Christ, 


332  CHRIST'S  DEATH.  BURIAL,  ho. 

body  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  humbler  condition,  than  to  betaken  away 
from  ambng  men,  and  shut  up  in  a  dark  pit  of  the  earth  :  the  lowest 
humiliation  of  Tyre  is  expressed  by  this  figure,  Ezck.  xxvi,  20.  And 
thus  Jes\is  also  "  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth," 
Eph.  iv.  9. 

4.  That  he  might  wholly  take  away  the  curse,  and  hide  it  in  the 
grave  from  the  face  of  God  and  of  his  people,  and  stifle  it,  as  those 
who  were  hanged,  being  accursed  of  God,  were  ordered  to  be  buried 
the  same  day  on  which  they  were  hanged,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  So  all 
things  that  were  devoted  to  God,  were  to  be  taken  away  from  among^ 
men,  as  Jericho  was  devoted  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  by  fire, 
and  therefore  might  not  be  rebuilt,  Joshua  vi.  21,  24,  26.  See  also 
Joshua  viii.  28,  29,  for  the  guilt  and  uncleanness  would  have  re- 
mained, if  he  had  not  been  buried,  accordinj^  to  Deut.  xxi.  23,  but 
"when  he  was  buried,  "the  Lord  removed  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in 
one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9.  And  thus  also  the  curse  of  returning  to  the 
dust,  inflicted  upon  the  sinner,  Gen.  iii.  19,  was  taken  away,  the 
graves  were  made  agreeable  restingplaces  of  the  saints,  Isaiah  Ivii.  2, 
^d  the  old  man  was  buried  wnth  him,  Rom  vi.  4. 

in.  But  did  Christ  die  to  satisfy  the  divine  justice,  why  must  wc 
then  also  die?  th\is  asks  the  instructor  in  the  forty-second  question. 
For  if  Christ  died  to  satisfy  for  the  guilt,  by  which  the  elect  deserv* 
ed  ptinishment  and  death,  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  they  OTip;ht 
T^ot  then  to  die,  or  that  God  would  demand  the  debt  twice,  which 
militates  against  the  justice  of  God  ;  from  which  the  Socinians  con- 
clude that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  by  his  death,  and  the  Papists  that 
he  did  not  satisfy  perfectly,  but  that  we  ourselves  must  still  satisfy 
by  our  own  death,  as  a  proper  punishment.  Others  justly  condemn- 
ed by  the  synods  of  our  own  country,  say  that  death,  and  all  the 
temporal  afflictions  of  believers  are  proper  punishments  of  their 
sins.* 

In  order  to  confute  this  pretended  ar9:ument,  and  to  show  that  our 
death  detracts  not  from  the  perfect  satisfaction  of  Christ  by  his  death, 
we  must  know  that  a  proper  punishment  of  sin  is  not  any  misery 
inflicted  upor>  believers,  on  occasion,  and  from  a  consideration  of 
sin,  for  their  chastisement,  amendment,  humiliation,  and  glorifica- 
tion ;  but  misery  inflicted  upon  the  sinner  for  his  destruction  by 
God,  as  a  judge  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice.  Thus  the  mstruc- 
tor  also  understands  this,  when   he  saith  to  the  proposed  objection, 

*  The  author  hath  rcipcct  here  to  Professor  Roel,   ^vhom  vc  have  men- 
t\oned  before. 


—44  S35 

"  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,"  and  thus  also  must 
those  who  oppose  us  consider  it,  as  they  verily  do  ;  but  they  disguise 
the  matter,  that  their  opinion  may  not  be  exposed  and  detested. 

That  the  death  of  believers,  and  all  their  temporal  misery  is 
not  a  proper  punishment  of  sins,  and  a  compensation  for  them, 
appears, 

1.  From  the  reality  and  perfection  orchrist's  satisfaction,  which 
we  have  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  P'or  if  he  satisfied 
fully  for  ail  their  sins,  there  cannot  then  remain  any  proper  punish-= 
ment  for  them,  and  they  are  not  obliged  to  make  satisfaction,  nor  to 
discharge  their  debt  by  their  death  and  temporal  afflictions. 

2.  The  guilt  of  behevers  is  removed  from  their  afflictions,  because 
God  hath  forgiven  and  taken  away  their  sins,  so  that  they  cannot, 
properly  speaking,  be  punished  any  more  on  account  of  them  ;  for 
the  Lord  saith,  "  I  have  sworn  that  I  would  not  be  wroth  with  thee, 
nor  rebuke  thee,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  "  He  is  a  God  who  forgiveth  his 
people,  but  who  still  taketh  vengeance  of  their  inventions,"  Psalm 
xcix.  8.  "Nathan  said  unto  David,  the  Lord  hath  put  away  thy 
sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die.  Howbeit,  because  by  this  deed  ihou  hast 
given  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme,  the  child 
also  that  is  born  unto  thee  shall  surely  die,  2  Sam.  xii.  15,  14.  Af- 
flictions are  indeed  called  vengeance,  after  sins  are  forgiven  :  and 
punishment  is  indeed  inflicted  on  account  of  sins,  yet  they  are  not 
therefore  a  proper  punishment  for  the  satisfaction  of  sins,  because 
these  were  taken  away  ;  but  they  are  desij^ned  for  chastisements, 
which  are  inflicted  on  believers  upon  account  of  sins,  and  so  retain  a 
semblance  of  vengeance  for  their  advantage,  humili':ition  and  amend- 
ment. We  see  this  in  many  passages  of  the  word  of  God,  Heb» 
xii.  6—11.     Pslam  xciv.  12,  13.     cxix.  71. 

3.  Temporal  afflictions  and  death  are  welcome  to  believers,  for 
they  glory  and  take  pleasure  in  them,  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10.  Death  is 
their  treasure,  1  Cor.  iii.  22,  their  gain  and  they  long  for  it,  Philip. 
i.  21,  23.  Could  this  be  so,  if  it  were  a  proper  punishment  ?  could 
a  malefactor  speak  thus,  when  he  was  punished  for  his  abomin- 
ations ? 

4.  Death  delivers  believers  from  every  misery,  and  procures  the 
greatest  happiness  to  them  :  shame,  loss,  and  pain  may  remain  wi^h 
them  until  death,  but  they  must  then  depart :  "  Blessed  are  the 
dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth,  yea,  saith  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours,"  Kev.  xiv.  15.  By  death 
they  die  also  to  their  sins,  which  are  their  greatest  afflictions  :  "  For 
he  ths^t  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  7.    Yea,  death  is  to  them 


334  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

a  passage  into  eternal  life  :  "  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house 
of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an 
houss  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the  heavens,"  2  Cor.  v.  1 . 
If  it  be  asked,  why  God  still  inflicts  death  not  only  upon  the  un- 
godly, but  also  upon  his  people,  when  it  is  so  bitter  to  them,  seeing 
i\is  Son  hath  fully  satisfied  his  justice  by  suffering  every  punishment, 
and  death  also  ?  we  answer  briefly,  that  God  could  indeed  glorify  the 
elect,    and  take  them  up   into  heaven  immediately,  without  seeing 
death  ;  for  it  doth  not  militate  either  against  his  power,  or  his  justice, 
as  he  showed  in  the  ascension  of  Enoch  and  Elijah  ;  but  Cod  haih 
wise  reasons  for  not  doing  this,  since  it  is  his  will  to  apply  the  merits 
of  his   Son   gradually  ;    and   therefore  he   doth    not  sanctify  them 
neither  perfectly  in  a  moment  from  their  conception  and  birth,  that 
they  may  observe  his  wonderful  way  in  order ;   he  desires  by  such 
a  bitter  frait  to  show  them,  and  cause  tiiem  to  bevv  til  the  abominable 
nature  of  sin,  that  they  raay  humble   Themselves  for  it;  to  induce 
them  to  consider  the  exceeding   grievousness  of  the  suffering  and 
death  of  Christ:  he  hath  also  ordered  this  so,  that  they  may  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son  in    dealh  ;  the   Lord  teacheth  his 
people  thus  the  greatness  of  his  power  by  leading  them  tlirough 
every  opposition,  and  in  such  an  unsightly  way  to  life.     Finally,  we 
say  also  that  it  is  a  wonderful  goodness  of  God,    that   he  doth  not 
take  his  people  up  into  heaven  in  the  body  without  death  ;  for  if  he 
did,  then  those  who  remained  alive,    would  know  infallibly  that  all 
those  who  died,  were  lost.     This  would  be  an  insupportable  grief  to 
those  who  remained  alive,  especially  when   they  saw  their  dearest 
friends  and  relations  die.  That  the  Lord  might  now  manifest  his  good- 
ness, and  not  willingly  afflict,  or  grieve  the  children  of  men,  there- 
fore he  hath  appointed   it  to  all  men  once  to  die,   the  righteous  as 
well  as  the  wicked. 

IV.  But  "  what  further  benefit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacrifice 
and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  I"  Many  and  great  benefits  of  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  under  Pontius  Pilate  are 
exhibited  in  the  fifteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but  there  are  also  other  bene- 
fits, and  particularly,  that  "  by  virtue  thereof  our  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of 
the  flesh  may  no  more  reign  in  us,  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves 
to  him  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving." 

The  old  man  is  the  natural  corruption  of  man,  which  possesseth 
him  entirely  from  his  birth,  and  is  a  continual  source  of  evil  lusts, 
which  reign  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  as  a  king,  according  to  a  sinful 
laW:.  which  they  prescribe  to  him,  and  under,  and  according  to  which 


—44.  335 

they  hold  him  captive,  and  compel  him,  while  he  is  neither  able,  nor 
willing  to  be  delivered  from  his  bondage.  -See  Rom.  vii.  5,  23,  Eph« 
ii.  1,  2,  3,  Which  old  man  is  also  called  "  indwelling  sin,  the  mo- 
lions  of  sin,  the  law  of  the  members,  the  flesh,'*  &c.  Rom.  vi. 
and  vii. 

This  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  not  only  with  respect  to  guilt 
by  justification,  since  our  guilt  was  nailed  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  slain, 
and  thrust  in  his  grave.  Coll.  ii.  14,  of  which  we  have  treated  on  the 
fifteenth  Lord's  day,  when  we  showed  that  he  obtained  redemption, 
the  favour  of  God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life  for  the  elect,  and 
freed  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God,  and  from  the  curse 
by  his  suJBTering  ;  but  also  with  respect  to  the  power  and  dominion 
of  the  old  man,  which  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  by  sanctification, 
partly  in  this  life,  so  that  the  evil  lusts  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any 
more  :  *'  for  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,"  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  Yi.  14,  whereby  believers,  being  thus  freed  and  separated,  offer 
thems^ves  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  to  God,  Rom.  xii.  1.  "  We 
beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  pre- 
sent your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God, 
which  is  your  reasonable  service."  But  after  this  life  the  old  man 
will  be  perfectly  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  Heb.  xii.  23. 

The  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ  by  virtue 
of  his  crucifixion,  death  and  burial, 

1 .  Because  he  by  his  death  on  the  crosi,  and  by  his  burial,  depri- 
ved sin  of  its  strength,  whereby  it  reigneth  :  "  The  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law,"  I  Cor.  xv.  56.  The  law  condemns  the  sinner  to  be  a  slave 
of  sin,  it  discovereth  sin,  yea,  sin  works  effectually  by  occasion  of 
the  law.  Sec  this,  Rom.  v.  20.  vii.  5,  13.  Now  Christ  hath  deprived 
this  law,  which  is  the  strength  of  sin,  of  its  strength,  by  his  death 
on  the  cross,  and  by  their  burial,  inasmuch  as  he  satisfied  it,  and  so 
it  cannot  hold  the  elect  sinner  any  longer  under  sin.  Therefore 
Paul  saith,  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye  also  are 
become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ."  And  thus  "  sin  hath 
no  longer  dominion  over  believers,  because  they  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom.  vii.  14. 

2.  Christ  hath  merited  satisfaction  for  them  ;  for  "  he  gave  him- 
self for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14. 
For  they  are  reckoned  in  him,  when  he  is  made  sanctification  to 
them,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  and  so  are  said  to  be  crucified,  dead,  and  buried 
with  him.  "  We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  to  the  glory  of  the  Father? 


336  CHRIST'S  DEATH,- BURIAL,  &c. 

even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have 
been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  shall  be  also 
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection  ;  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man 
is  crucified  witli  him,"  Gal.  ii.  20.  Coll.  ii.  11.  12. 

3.  By  his  death  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial  he  hath  also  merited 
and  given  the  Holy  Ghost  to  them.  Gal.  iii  13,  14,  whereby  they 
'<  mortify  "  theii  sins,  the  old  man,  and  "  the  deeds  of  the  body,'* 
Rom.  viii.  13.  So  the  apostle  speaks,  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  "Ye  are  wash- 
ed, ye  are  sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 

4.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial,  affords  them 
a  powerful  motive  to  crucify,  mortify  and  bury  the  old  man  ;  for 
when  they  see  the  love  of  Christ,  the  grievousncss  of  his  sufferings 
for  them  and  that  their  old  man  procured  all  this  distress  to  him, 
they  are  then  powerfully  moved  to  dedicate  and  offer  themselves  up 
to  him,  in  order  to  serve  him,  and  to  recompense  that  evil  upon  the 
old  man,  and  to  take  vengeance  of  him  :  for  "  they  who  are  Christ's 
have  crucified  the  the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  This  Peier  also  intimateth,  when  he  saith,  "  Forasmuch  then  as 
Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise  with 
the  same  mind,  to  wit,  that  he  who  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath 
ceased  from  sin  ,"  1  Peter,  iv.  1. 

5.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  and  his  burial  is  also  a  lively 
figure  of  the  manner  in  which  believers  ought  to  crucify,  mortify, 
and  bury  the  old  man.  As  Christ  was  sought  until  he  was  found, 
seized,  arraigned  before  the  tribunal,  accused,  reproached,  spitten 
upon,  scourged,  stripped  naked,  tortured,  deprived  of  food,  slain,  and 
taken  from  among  men,  so  also  must  believers  deal  with  the  old 
man  :  in  this  manner  would  Paul  "  be  conformed  to  the  death  of 
Christ,"  Philip,  iii.  10.  For  this  end  Christ  also  suffered,  1  Peter 
ii.  21— .24. 

y .  We  must  inquire  further  why  it  is  said,  "  that  he  descended 
into  hell."  We  must  not  understand  this  so,  as  though  Christ  de- 
scended properly  into  the  place  of  the  damned,  to  triumph  there  over 
the  powers  of  hell,  as  the  Lutherans  in.agine  :  or  that  he  entered 
into  a  porch  of  hell,  where  the  believing  fathers  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment were  kept,  to  deliver  them  out  of  it  ;  for  the  word  of  God  know- 
eth  nothing  of  such  a  descending  into  hell.  His  body  was  in  the 
gr.ive,  and  his  soul  in  the  hi»nds'of  his  leather,  during  his  death,  wheli 
he  should  have  descended  into  hell.  It  hath  never  been  heard  of, 
that  a  general  triumph  before  a  prison  ;  Christ  triumphed  on  the 
cross,  Coll.  ii.  15;  and  in  his  exaltation,  Psalm  Ixviii.  18.    The  be- 


— 4U  337 

lieving  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  entered  into  heaven  in  conse- 
quence of  the  suretiship  of  Christ,  and  by  the  reflex  virtue  of  hi» 
sufferings ;  we  see  this  not  only  in  Enoch  and  h.iijah,  but  also  in 
Abraham,  Luke  xvi.  22,  in  Jacob,  Gen.  xlix.  18.  "  Christ  preached 
indeed  to  the  spirits  in  prison,'^  1  Peter  lii.  19,  but  he  did  not  de- 
scend in  the  body  into  the  prison,  but  oy  his  Spirit,  in  which  he  went, 
and  preached  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and  by  him,  to  the  inhabitants  of 
ihe  old  world,  who  are  the  spirits,  and  who  were,  when  Peter  wrote 
this,  in  prison,  but  not  when  Christ  preached  to  them. 

It  is  true,  our  creed  sa'.th  that  "  Christ  descvrnded  into  hell  :"  but 
We  also  know  that  this  creed,  being  a  human  composition,  must 
ihertfore  be  explained  accordin;^  to  the  word  of  God ;  that  the  de- 
scent into  hell  is  not  found  in  the  most  ancient  creeds,  and  that  it 
occurs  indeed  in  the  creed  of  Athanasius,  but  that  then  the  burial  is 
left  out,  as  the  burial  is  mserted  in  the  creed  of  Nice,  but  the  descent 
into  hell  is  not  found  there.  All  which  proves  that  the  ancitnts  under- 
stood by  the  descent  into  hell  the  burial ;  which  is  also  agreeable  to  the 
word  of  God.  David  charges  his  son  Solomon, "  not  to  let  the  gray  hairs 
of  Joab  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace,"  1  Kings  ii,  6.  We  must  re- 
member that  the  Hebrew  word  sc/ieol,  and  the  Greek  word  hadtfs  signi- 
fies hell  and  the  grave  both,  for  which  reason  they  are  translated  some- 
times by  hell,  and  sometimes  by  the  grave.  And  thus  the  descent  of 
Jesus  into  hell  is  the  same  with  hisburial ;  therefore  he  saith,  Psalm  xvi. 
10.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer 
thine  holy  One  to  see  corruption,"  Peter  and  Paul  prove  that  he 
speaks  here  of  the  burial  of  his  body,  Acts  ii.  24 — 31.  xiii.  35,  36, 
37.  But  as  his  burial  was  expressed  before  in  proper  language, 
hence  it  is  not  suitable,  at  least  not  in  such  a  short  compend  of  the 
articles  of  our  faith,  to  repeat  the  selfsame  thing  in  the  figurative 
words  of  descending  into  hell.  And  therefore  we  understand  by  this 
with  the  instructor  the  suffering  of  Christ's  soul,  "  his  unspeakable 
anguish,  pains,  terrours  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged 
during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross."  As  David 
also  expresseth  the  suffering  of  his  soul  by  the  pains  of  hell.  Psalm 
cxvi.  3.  The  pains  of  hell  got  hold  on  me  :  I  found  trouble  and 
sorrow."  See  Psalm  xviii.  4,  5.  As  he  also  truly  suffered  the  anguish 
of  hell ;  for  "  his  soul  was  troubled,"  John  xii.  27.  xiii.  21.  *'  How 
am  I  straitened  ?"  thus  he  complained,  Luke  xii.  50.  "  He  was  sor- 
rowful and  very  heavy.  Then  said  he  to  his  disciples.  My  soul  is 
exceedingly  sorrowful,"  Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38.  Yea,  '*  he  was  sore 
amazed,"  Mark  xiv.  33,  and  "  he  was  in  a  great  agony,"  Luke  xxii, 
44.     But  he  suffered  still  more  grievously  on  the  crots,  when  "  he 

Yy 


J38  CHRIST^S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &g- 

cried  out"  in  such  great  distress,  "  with  a  loud  voice,  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Matt,  xxvii.  46. 

We  showed  briefly  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day  wherein  this  suf- 
fering of  his  soul  properly  consibted  :  we  will  exhibit  this  now  mor^ 
fully  And  O  that  every  one  would  earnest- y  endeavour  to  obtain 
a  proper  understanding  of  this  matter,  that  the  believer  may  pe'ceive 
^'om  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  delivered  him,  ^nd  others  what  they 
must  yet  expect ;  for  ihey  will  also  be  obliged  to  suffer  that  which 
Christ  suffered,  if  they  do  not  become  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ. 
The  suffe:in;^  of  Christ's  soul,  and  his  hellish  anguish  consisted  in 
these  things  : 

1.  That  he  had  a  deep  sense  O'f  the  power  and  abominable  nature 
of  all  the  sins  of  all  his  dear  elect,  since  he  was  made  sin  for  them," 
2  Cor.  V.  21,  for  he  had  a  deep  sense  of  their  guilt,  the  dreadful 
nature  of  sin,  their  aiming  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God,  their 
breaking  of  his  yoke,  and  bursting  of  his  bonds,  all  this  he  was 
obliged  to  sustain  now.  Let  a  believer  only  imagine  how  he  is 
pierced  with  sorrow,  when  he  hath  a  feeling  sense  of  sins  and  when 
they  become  like  a  heavy  burthen  too  heavy  for  him,  but  how  then 
was  the  soul  of  Christ  burthened,  when  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect, 
"with  all  the  curses  and  p-^nalties,  which  ai'e  threatened  on  account  oi 
sin,  were  laid  with  ail  their  weight  upon  him,  when  he  was  neverthe- 
less perfectly  innocent  ?  verily  he  was  not  insensible,  but  complained 
"  1  restored  that  which  I  took  not  away,"  Psalm  Ixix.  4» 

2.  That  he  was  obliged  taexperience  a  deprivation  of  the  ordinary 
and  sensible  influence,  tha  kindness  and  love  of  his  Father  He  who 
•was  the  Son  of  the  Father's  bosom,  and  brought  up  with  him,  who 
v/as  wont  ^o  bathe  in  his  Father's  light  and  love,  was  now  thrust  far 
away  from:  peace^  and  abandoned  to  hellish  darkness ;  no  pleasing 
sensations  occtjpied  his  soul  ;  nothing  but  darkness,  distress  and 
lerrour  possessed  his  miad  ;.  for  he  complained  that  he  was  forsaken; 
to  this  was  also  added, 

3.  That  even  his  Father  set?  himself  against  him  ;  for  he  kindled 
his  wrath  against  him,  like  a  fire*  Did  Job  complain,  ♦'  The  arrows 
of  the  Almighty  are  within  me,  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my 
spirit :  the  terrours  of  God  set  themselves  in  array  aofainst  me,"  Job 
vi.  4.  "  Thou  art  become  cruel  against  me:  with  thy  strong  hand 
thou  opposest  thysel-f  against  me,"  chap.  xxx.  21,  how  grievous  was 
then  the  condition  of  Jesus,  against  whom  God  stirred  up  his  whole 
indignaLionl  The  hardened  sinner  doth  not  apprehend  this:  hut  let 
him  only  represent  to  himself,  that  those  whom  he  heartily  loves^ 
and  without  whose  mutual  love  he  canjiot  live,  depart  from  hUa  with. 


—44.  S3^ 

nversioh,  that  Ihey  behold  iiim  v'ith  anger  and  d'splecisure,  and  m- 
veigh  against  him  with  vehement  indignation,  will  it  not  be  insup- 
portable to  him  ?  How  grievous  then  was  the  condition  of  Christ, 
when  not  any  beloved  creature,  but  his  allsufficient  and  loving  Father 
himself  atvacked  him  in  such  a  severe  manner  with  his  anger  I 

4.  That  the  whole  power  of  hell  was  let  loose  upon  him  ;  '•  It  was 
now  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness,"  Luke  xxii.  53.  *'  The  prince 
of  this  world  came  against  him,"  John  xiv.  30.  He  stirred  up  against 
him  all  those  who  scoffed  at  his  sonship,  kingdom,  and  trusting  in 
God  ;  and  must  we  not  think  that  he  who  sought  to  bereave  him  in 
a  crafty  manner  in  the  wilderness,  of  his  behef  in  his  sonship,  and 
of  his  trusting  in  his  Father,  did  now  much  more  do  this?  Who  can 
doubt  but  that  he  assaulted  him  m  this,  or  some  other  disquieting 
manner  If  thou  wert  the  iSon  of  God*  would  thy  Father  himself  be 
so  wroth  with  thee  ?  would  he  depart  from  thee  ?  would  he  affiict  thee 
in  this  manner  for  the  sins  of  others,  when  thou  hast  not  committed 
any  offences  thyself?  is  this  indeed  just  ?  dost  thou  intend  to  be  the 
surety  of  the  elect  in  thy  sufferings  ?  is  it  possible  that  one  should 
satisfy  for  ail  ?  dost  thou  hope  tiiat  thou  wilt  j'et  surmount  thy  suf- 
fering ?  no,  thou  must  suffer  for  ever,  and  thou  wilt  never  surmount 
it ;  desist,  curse  God  ana  die.  Every  person  who  hath  at  any  time 
been  the  object  of  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one,  knows  hoW 
grievous  this  is  ?  If  we  consider  further,  that  his  clear  understanding 
was  overclouded  with  the  greatest  darkness,  although  without  sin, 
that  he  was  forsaken  by  God  in  all  the  torments  of  his  body  and 
soul,  that  the  bright  noonday  was  darkened  over  him,  and  that  the 
sun  withdrew  its  light  from  him,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  he  suf- 
fered the  anguish  of  hell  in  the  most  grievous  manner. 

Why  did  it  please  the  Lord,  might  it  be  asked  here,  to  bruise  him 
thus  ?  It  was  foretold.  Psalm  xxii.  1 .  He  was  obliged  to  satisfy 
for  souls,  and  therefore  '*  to  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,"  Isaiah 
liii.  10,  and  deliver  the  elect  from  the  anguish  and  pains  of 
hell,  Hosea  xiii.  14.  And  thus  «' hath  Jesus  delivered  them  from 
the  wrath  to  come,"  1  Thess.  i.  10, 


APPLICATION, 

When  we  attend  carefully  to  all  this,  and  also  to  what  hath  been 
said  on  the  foregoing  Loid's  day,  must  we  not  then  be  astonished  at 
iht  inconceivable  love  of  Christ  to  bis  people  ?    When  he  wept  orer 


:^  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

Lazarus  who  was  dead,  "  The  Jews  said,  behold  how  he  loved  him," 
John  xi.  35,  36.  But  if  his  tears  were  evidences  of  his  great  love, 
was  it  not  then  the  greatest  evidence  of  his  love,  that  he  poured  out 
even  his  soul  unto  death,  descended  into  the  lowermost  parts  of  the 
earth,  yea,  suffered  such  grievous,  hellish  agonies,  that  he  might 
deliver  his  people  from  the  power  of  hell  ? 

But  ye  surely  know  that  he  did  not  suffer  thus  in  the  stead  of  all 
men,  and  that  all  do  not  partake  of  the  benefits  of  his  death,  burial, 
and  descent  into  hell.  Therefore  examine  yourselves,  and  see  how 
it  is  with  you  in  this  respect.  And  that  we  may  assist  you  herein^ 
we  will  show  you  who  may  believe  that  these  things  belong  to 
them. 

1.  These  persons  have  died  in  their  knap;inalion  that  they  were 
spiritually  alive,  having  learned  with  distress  and  concern,  that  they 
were  under  the  sentence  of  death.  This  appears  from  Rom  v'lu 
9,  *'  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once  ;  but,  when  the  command- 
ment came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died,"  Gal.  ii.  19,  20.  "Itlirough 
the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  1  might  live  unto  God.  I  am  cru- 
cified with  Christ."  The  sinner,  born  and  educated  under  the  gos- 
pel, imagineth  that  he  is  alive,  because  he  enjoys  the  privileges  of 
the  Christian  worship,  because  God  is  merciful,  Christ  hath  died,  and 
lie  is  civil  and  devout;  is  he  convinced  that  he  hath  corrupted  himself 
in  a  horrible  manner,  he  doth  not  yet  say,  there  is  no  hope,  he  finds 
still  the  life  of  his  hand,  for  he  will  amend  his  ways.  But  those  for 
whom  Christ  became  a  surety  in  his  death,  are  convinced  by  him  of 
their  folly,  their  imaginations  fail  them,  they  see  that  they  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  they  are  amazed  that  they  have  so  long  a  time 
fed  upon  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  and  upon  ashes.  And  so  "  they 
are  pricked  in  their  hearts,"  Acts.  ii.  37.  Yea,  all  their  great  vir- 
tues, with  which  they  were  formerly  so  well  pleased,  fail  there,  like 
loss  and  dung,  Philip,  jii.  4 — 9. 

2.  These  persons  are  more  disturbed  and  concerned  about  the 
wrath  of  God,  under  grievous  adversities,  and  crosses,  than  about 
the  most  grievous  cross  itself.  Extraordinary  disgrace,  losses  and 
pains  depress  them  exceedingly  :  but  when  they  suspect  that  they 
may  be  proper  punishments,  inflicted  by  an  angry  God,  this  is  in- 
supportable to  them,  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  descending  into  hell : 
"  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  and  I  was  troubled,"  said  David,  Psalm 
XXX.  9.  They  can  sometimes  rejoice  and  glory  in  their  sufferings, 
but  not  unless  they  know  that  they  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  have 
peace  with  him,  Rom.  V.  1,  2,3.  Therefore  they  pray  so  exceed- 
ingly against  the  wrath  of  God  m  his  judgments  t    <'  O   Lord,''  said 


—44  ^ 

David,  Psalm  vi.  1,  "rebuke me  not  in  thine  anger,  neither  chasten 
me  in  thine  hot  displeasure  "  And  Jeremiah  prayed  in  his  grievous 
tribulations;  "  Be  not  a  terrour  to  me,"  Jer.  xvii.  17.  Others  do 
not  concern  themselves  about  the  anger  of  God,  but  only  that  God 
would  remove  the  death  of  misery  from  them. 

3.  They  are  such  whose  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  so 
that  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any  more  in 
them.  We  see  this  Rom.  vi.  4,  5.  6,  Coll,  ii.  11,  12.  Gal.  v. 
24.  They  are  sometimes  indeed  hurried  to  evil  lusts,,  yet  not  like 
slaves  and  servants  of  sin,  but  like  prisoners,  who  are  drag?:ed  along  ; 
they  follow  indeed,  but  at  every  step  they  withstand  their  mighty 
enemy,  and  endeavour  to  disengage  them.selves  from  him  ;  there- 
fore they  pray  and  strive  against  the  old  man,  and  when  they  are 
cast  down  by  him,  they  rise  up  anew,  and  bewail  themselves  with 
Paul,  Rom.  vii.  23,  24.  Yea,  they  surrender  themselves  to  the 
Lord,  as  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  that  they  may  serve  him,  and 
they  dedicae  themselves  to  him,  and  exert  themselves  for  him. 
This  we  are  taught,  Rom.  vi.  17.  "  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were 
the  servants  of  sin  ;  but  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart,  that  form  of 
doctrine  which  was  delivered  you,"  Others  esteem  sin  a  pleasure, 
they  swim  in  it,  as  a  fish  in  the  water,  they  follow  nature  :  doth  their 
conscience  reprove  them,  they  are  displeased,  they  even  wish  that  this 
and  that  action  v/ere  no  sin :  are  they  moral,  would  they  not  by  any 
means  commit  heinous  sins,  it  is  not  because  their  old  man  is  m.orti- 
fied  by  the -death  of  Christ,  for  their  heart  hath  never  yet  been  chan- 
ged^ nor  the  new  man  formed  in  them  ;  but  it  proceeds  from  a  mor- 
al disposition,  a  virtuous  education,  and  natural  conscience  ;  as  they 
have  never  yet  surrendered  themselves  to  him,  but  li?e  only  to  them- 
selves, and  for  themselves,  and  that  even  as  far  as  they  are  religious, 
Isaiah  Iviii.  3.     Zech.  vii.  5,  6. 

If  now,  hearers,  ye  have  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
weilbeing  or  illbeing,  and  attend  seriously  to  what  hath  been  said, 
and  examine  yourselves,  ye  will  indeed  see  how  it  is  situated  with 
you  in  this  respect ;  but  if  ye  do  not  regard  it,  if  ye  know  not  of 
such  a  dying  to  yourselves,  if  ye  will  not  suffer  such  an  anxious 
mind,  if  ye  do  not  think  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  adversity,  but  coh^ 
sider  all  as  well,  so  long  as  ye  enjoy  peace,  and  are  without  feat*, 
if  sin  do  still  hve  in  you,  and  ye  live  in  sin :  know  then,  that  "  ye  are 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  1.  **  Ye  have  indeed  the  name 
that  ye  hve.  but  ye-  are  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  I.  It  is  true,  ye  live,  but 
like  a  dead  carcase,  which  is  alive  with  worms  :  •<  The  widow  that 
iiveth  in  pleasure)  is  d^ad  while  she  liv€ti^j"  1  Sam  v.  6,    All  your 


S45  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

adversities  are  only  the  beginnings  af  sorrow:  God  "  distributeth 
sorrows  to  you  in  his  anger,"  Job  xxi.  i7.  But  it  will  be  much 
more  grievous  for  you,  when  God  will  require  your  souls  of  you, 
when  your  bodies  shall  be  laid  in  a  dark  cave,  to  be  food  for  worms, 
and  your  souls  shall  descend  into  hell,  to  die  eternally  without  living, 
and  to  live  eternally  without  dying,  and  thus  to  satisfy  by  yourselves 
the  justice  and  truth  of  God  ;  for  "  death  shall  seize  upon  you,  and 
ye  shall  thus  go  down  quick  into  hell,"  Psalm  Iv.  15. 

O  that  ye  would  lay  this  to  heart,  would  shake  off  your  carnal 
security,  and  endeavour  to  prevent  your  destruction.  This  is  indeed 
the  only  way  to  cause  you  to  flee  out  of  yourselves  to  him,  who  is 
set  forth  to  you  by  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood. 

But  ye,  who  cannot  disown  these  evidences  of  your  interest  in  the 
death,  burial,  and  descent  of  Christ  into  hell,  will  ye  still  indulge  this 
and  that  corrupt  inclination  of  the  mortified  old  man  ?  '*  will  yt  con- 
tinue in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  Gcd  forbid  ;  how  shall  we  that 
are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein?"  Rom.  vi.  1,  2.     Your  old 
man  is  indeed  crucified,  d<^ad,   and  buried  with  Christ,  but  it  is  only 
initially  ;  ye  know  how  often  ye  are  seized  by  him,  and  carried  cap- 
tive, and  therefore  it  is,  and  remains  your  duty  to  crucify,   mortify, 
and  bury  him  :  exert  yourselves  then  for  this  purpose.     And  should 
ye  not  do  this  ?  (a)  Have  not  your  sins  done  this  to  him,  who  is  the 
beloved  of  your  soul  ?    '*  Ye  have  pierced  him"  by  them,  Zech.  xii. 
10.     He  received  the  wounds  of  his  hands  and  feet  in   the  house  of 
his  friends ,  yea,  ye  still  cause  him  to  *'  serve  with  your  sins,  and 
weary  him  with  your  iniquities,"  Isaiah  xliii.  24.  Can  ye  suffer  this; 
and  will  ye  not  revenge  it  ?  (b)  How  many  crosses  do  your  sins  pro- 
cure to  you  ?  "  Your  iniquities  separate  between  you  and  your  God, 
and  your  sins  hide  his  face  from   you,  that  he  will  not  hear,"  Isaiah 
lix.  2,     Whence   proceed  all  your  afflictions  with  respect  to  your 
body  and  soul,  *'  that  it  is  so  bitter,  that  it  reacheth  even  to  your 
heart  ?"  Is   it  not  "  from  your  way,  your  doings  and  your  wicked- 
ness ?"  Jer.  iv.  is.     When  do  ye  experience   most  pain,  anguish, 
terrour,  and  hellish  sorrows  ?  Is  it  not  after  ye  have  suffered  your- 
selves to  be  ensnared  in  sinful  actions  through  your  unwatchfulness? 
wdl  ye  not  then  attack  your  sins,  that  ye  may  slay  them,  although 
they  should  be  like  a  right  eye,  a  right  hand,  or  a  right  foot  ?   (c)  A 
Christian  surely  never  lives  content,  while  he  doth  not  slay  his  sins  ; 
because  his  oki  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  there- 
fore bin  doth  not  agree  with  his  nature :  he  cannot  make  sin  his  prop- 
er work,  like  Satan  and  his  people ;  "  for  he  who  is  born  of  God 


—44.  343 

doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  :  and  he  cannot 
sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God,"  1  John  iii.  9,  Doth  sin  surprize 
him  sometimes,  '•  bringing  him  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin, 
which  is  in  his  members,"  he  is  not  pleased  with  it,  but  complams? 
«  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  diiath  ?"  Rom,  viii.  23,  24.  But  when  he  crucifies,  mortifies 
and  buries  sin,  how  free  and  unconstrained  doth  he  then  hve  i  What 
clearness  is  there  then  in  his  soul  1  How  doth  he  triumph  over  his 
enemy !  yea,  with  what  joy  is  he  then  admitted  to  the  life  which  is 
hidden  with  Christ  in  God  !  for  we  may  then  especially  apply  to  the 
Christian  that  which  we  find,  Coll.  iii.  3.  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your 
life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  "  Have  ye  no  mind  to  that  hfe,  nor 
any  great  inchnation  to  it?  Surely  ye  have:  '^mortify  then  your 
members  which  are  upon  earth,"  Coll.  iii.  5.  (d)  If  your  old  man  be 
crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  he  hath  taken  you  for  his 
soldiers,  to  fight  with  laira  against  his  enemies,  who  i-.re  also  your 
enemies.  Will  ye  then  prove  faithless,  or  suffer  yourselves,  through 
cowardice,  to  be  wounded,  or  taken  captive  ?  he  stands  upon  mount 
Zion,  and  sees  who  among  you  fights  valiantly,  and  manfully,  and 
him  he  will  crown.  Shall  not  his  eye,  which  is  upon  you,  encourage 
you  to  fight  I  victory  is  certain  ;  "The  Philistines  are  already  fallen 
before  the  face  of  our  Jonathan,  and  ye,  his  armourbearcrs,  have 
only  to  slay  them  after  him,"  See  1  Sam.  xiv.  13. 

Do  ye  not  know  how  ye  should  conduct  in  this  warfare  ?  are  ye 
desirous  of  knowing  how  ye  must  act,  in  order  to  crucify  and  mortify 
them  ?  are  ye  willing  to  exert  yourselves,  in  order  to  subdue  them  ? 
consider  then  (a)  in  what  condition  ye  are  ;  that  ye  belong  not  any 
more  to  the  old  man,  nor  he  to  you,  and  that  your  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  ye  have  therefore  nothing  to  do 
with  him,  but  to  fic^ht  against  and  slay  him  ;  "  therefore  reckon  ye 
also  yourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin,  but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  11.  As  long  as  we  waver  between  both 
parties,  and  know  not  whether  we  belong  to  Jesus,  or  to  his  enemies, 
so  long  we  will  be  in  a  maze,  and  will  not  be  able  to  learn  this  war- 
fare. Examine  yourselves  therefore,  thitt  ye  may  see  whether  the 
above  mentioned  evidences  be  truly  in  you  ;  and  if  they  be,  why  do 
ye  then  doubt  ?  (b)  Learn  to  distinguish  properly  between  the  mo- 
tions of  the  new  and  of  the  old  man  :  it  often  happeneth,  when  we 
see  corrupt  inclinations  in  ourselves,  proceeding  from  the  old  man^ 
that  we  are  discouraged,  as  though  we  were  traitors,  who  had  still 
such  an  evil  heart,  which  retained  yet  so  many  inclinations  to  the 
enemies  >  l?ut  if  ye  were  skilful  soldiers  in  this  warfare,  y«  would  se^ 


%i%  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  ke. 

that  ye  yourselves  were  not  the  authors  of  these  things,  but  sin  that 
dwell'-th  in  you,  and  ye  would  witlistand  these  inclinations  coura* 
geously,  like  that  experienced  captain,  Paul ;  see  his  manner  of  act- 
ing in  his  warfure,  Rom.  vii.   15 — 23. 

He  who  will  fig^hl  well,  must  know  his  enemies.  These  enemies 
sometimes  change  their  military  ensigns,  but  their  surest  sign,  by 
which  they  may  be  known,  and  which  they  never  lay  aside,  is  selfseek-? 
ing,  and  aiming  at  self,  tiiough  they  often  disguise  this  sign  with  an  ai> 
pearance  of  virtue,  as  zeal  for  God,  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  necesv 
sity.and  other  things  of  this  kind,  (c)  If  ye  will  destroy  them, 
maintain  a  perfect  and  irreconci'eable  hatred  to  them ;  the  Jews 
would  never  have  crucified  Christ,  if  a  malicious  hatred  to  him 
had  n(;t  possessed  their  souls.  If  we  have  other  enemies  we  must 
love  them  ;  but  our  souls  must  hale  these  lame  and  blind  so  that 
v/e  will  never  make  any  league  with  them. 

And  verily,  when  such  a  hatred  possesseth  your  souls,  it  will  ren- 
der you  active  and  strong  against  the  enemy,  (d)  Stand  upon  your 
guard,  and  take  care  that  the  enemy  fall  not  upon  you  unawares,  or 
surprise  you;  sin  endeavcars  to  assault  you  secretly  by  silent  mo- 
tions of  your  corrupt  nature,  or  by  selfish  ends  in  your  good  works, 
or  by  means  of  opportunities  that  offer  themselves,  or  by  your  out- 
ward members.  Therefore  lake  good  heed,  and  look  on  every  side, 
tiiat  ye  may  see  whether  some  enemy  do  not  appear.  Learn  how 
to  keep  this  watch  from  Prov.  ii.  10,  II,  "  When  wisdom  entereth 
into  iliy  heart,  and  knov/ledge  is  pleasant  to  thy  soul,  discretion 
shall  preserve  thee,  and  understanding  shall  keep  thee.  Also  from 
chapter  iv.  23 — 27,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence  :  for  out 
of  It  are  the  issues  of  life.  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth, 
and  perverse  lips  put  far  from  thee.  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on, 
and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before  thee.  Ponder  the  path  of 
thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established.  Turn  not  to  the  right 
hand,  nor  to  the  left :  remove  thy  foot  from  evil."  We  ought  indeed 
to  take  the  lantern,  and  the  torch  of  the  word  of  God  with  us,  that 
we  may  see  the  enemy  who  endeavours  to  conceal  himself  under 
cloaks  of  shame,  as  the  Jews  sought  Christ  with  lanterns  and  torch- 
es, (e)  Seize  and  take  your  enemies,  and  even  **  the  little  foxes 
that  spoil  the  vines,"  Song  ii.  15.  Ye  ought  not  to  let  one  of  them 
escape  from  you,  but  ought  to  hold  and  bind  them  fast,  that  not  one 
j>iu  may  break  loose  and  mislead  you :  "  Abstain  from  all  appear- 
ance of  evil,"  1  Thess.  V.  22.  "  Hate  even  the  garment  spotted  by 
the  flesh,"  Jude  vrs.  23.(f)  Inflict  punishment  upon  your  enemies 
by  arraigning  them  before   the  high  tribunal,  accusing  them  of  scdi- 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  545 

tion  and  blasphemy  j  deride  them  as  vain  and  foolish  ;  scourge  your 
body  of  sin,  restrain  it,  and  subject  it  to  bondage  ;  deprive  your  enemy 
of  his  food,  and  of  whatever  maintains  his  life,  and  dectives  you ; 
nail  and  slay  him  on  the  cross  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be  buried,  and 
taken  away  from  among  men  ;  for  *'  they  who  are  Christ's  have  cru- 
cified the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v.  24.  Your  King 
requires  this,  Luke  xix  27.  (g)  But  forget  not  to  put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,  which  Paul  describes,  Eph.  vi.  11 — 18,  especially 
prayer ;  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  41,  that  he  may  afford  you  his  help;  so  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat 
acted,  2  Chron.  xiv.  1 1.  xx.  12,  for  there  "  is  help  laid  upon  one 
that  is  mighty  "  for  you,  Psalm  Ixxxix.  19,  Urge  him  with  your 
claim  which  ye  have  upon  his  death,  burial,  and  descent  into  hell, 
for  which  he  hath  given  you  the  seal  of  baptism,  Rom.  vi.  3 — 6. 

If  ye  conduct  in  this  manner,  ye  will  be  able  to  shout  and  triumph 
over  your  enemies  in  his  appointed  time,  like  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8« 
"  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,"  &c.  Are  ye  still  burthened  with 
many  crosses,  it  is  not  in  God's  wrath,  and  for  youi  destruction}  but 
it  is  from  his  love,  and  for  your  advantage,  Heb.  xii.  6 — 11.  Are 
ye  afraid  of  death,  it  is  unstung  ;  death  will  deliver  you  from  every 
sorrow,  and  be  a  passage  for  you  into  everlasting  life.  Are  ye 
afraid  of  the  dreary  grave  ;  it  hath  been  sanctified  for  you  by  the 
grave  of  Christ,  "so  that  ye  shall  enter  into  peace,  ye  shall  rest  in 
your  beds  "  Isaiah  Ivii.  2.  Are  ye  sometimes  afflicted  ^ith  many 
terrours,  and  sorrows  of  hell,  let  itj  not  seem  strange  to  you  ;  Jesus, 
who  is  yours,  drank  a  more  bitter  cup :  he  pities  you,  and  will  de- 
liver you  finally  from  these  evils.  Hear  what  he  saith,  Isaiah  Iviip 
18.  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him  :  I  will  lead  him  also 
and  restore  comforts  unto  him,  and  to  his  mourners."  Or  are  ye 
afraid  of  an  everlasting  descent  into  hell :  *'  He  that  believeth  hath 
everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation  ;  but  is  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  John  v  24.  He  hath  delivered  you  from  the 
anguish  and  pains  of  hell,  by  his  descent  into  hell ;  yea,  whatever  is, 
as  it  were,  a  death  and  hell  to  you,  shall  itself  be  cast  into  the  fire  of 
hell,  as  was  shown  to  John,  Rev.  xx.  14,  "  Death  and  hell  were  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire."  But  Jesus,  who  was  once  offered  to  taktf 
away  the  sins  of  many,  shall  appear  the  second  time  \Vithout  S»  tart^ 
them  that  look  for  him  to  salvation.    Amenr 


g« 


I J^ ) 


TrtE 


PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION 


OF  CHRISTc 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Horn.  X.  9.  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jefius, 
and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  has  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.

Q.  44.  JV/iy  is  there  added,  <'  He  descended  into  hell?" 
A.  That  in  my  greatest  temptations,  I  may  be  assured,  and  wholly 
comfort  myself  in  this,  that  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  his  inexp'-essi- 
kle  anguish,  pains,  tcrrours,  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was 
plunged  during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross,  hath 
delivered  me  from  the  anguish  and  torments  of  hell. 

JLt  is  related  of  Samson,  that  "  the  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  death, 
•were  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life,"  Judges  xvi  30.  It 
was  wonderful,  that  after  the  death  of  Elisha,  when  a  dead  man  was 
cast  into  his  grave,  he  was  restored  to  life  upon  touching  the  bones 
of  the  prophet,  2  Kings  xiii.  20,  21,  but  it  was  still  more  wonderful, 
not  only  that  one  man  destroyed  so  many  men  in  his  life,  but  also 
that  he  slew  still  more  in  his  death,  when  he  lost  his  own  life.  We 
do  not  read,  that,  besides  those  whom  he  smote  hip  and  thigh,  he 
slew  more  than  a  thousand  and  thirty  men  in  his  life  ;  but  when  he 
was  brought  by  the  Philistines  into  their  idol  temple,  which  was  full 
of  men  and  women,  and  of  the  lords  of  the  Phihstines,  and  upon  the 
roof  of  which  there  were  also  three  thousand  men  and  women,  he 
bowed  the  two  pillars,  upon  which  the  house  stood,  and  it  fell  upon 
himself,  and  upon  all  the  people  ;  and  so  the  dead  whom  he  slew 
at  his  death,  were  more  than  they  whom  he  slew  in  his  life. 

Truly  this  is  a  beautiful  emblem,  if  not  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
v/hose  conception,  and  birth  were  announced  by  an  angel,  as  well  as 
Samson's ;  Jesus   was  an  Israelite,  as  well  as  Samson  :  Jesus  was 
also  like   Samson  a  Judge  in  Israel :  was  Samson  strong,  our  Jesus 
13  not  less  so,  for  he  is  the  mighty  God  ;  did  Samson  surrender  him- 
self willingly  to  death,  Jesus  did  so  likewise,  John  x.  18.    Were  the 
dead  whom  Samson  slew  at  his  death,  more  than  they  whom  he  slew 
in  his  life,  Jesus  also  slew  more  by  his  death,  than  in  his  life.     It  is 
true,  he  never>  on  account  of  his  meekness,  destroyed  any  man  with 
a  bodily  death,  though  he  once  smote  to  the  ground  with  a  word 
those   wicked  men,    who   came   to  take  him ;   but,   which  required 
more  strength,  he  slew  many  spiritually  "  by  the  breath  of  his  lips," 
Isaiah  xi.  4,  when  he  convniced  them  of  their  wickedness,  and  con- 
demned them  to  death,  so  that  they  could  not  alledge,  in  vindication 
of  themselves  more  thrai  the  dead,   and  many  died  to  themselves  by 
conversion  ;  although  he  slew  so  many  in  his  life,  he  slew  still  more 
at  his  death  ;  for  by  his  death  he  slew  the  law,  and   caused  all  the 
elect  to  die  to  themselves  and  to  the  law,  Rom.  \i.  6,  5.    "  He  abol- 
ished death  itself,"  2  Tim.  i.  10.-  Yea,  *'by  his  death  he  destroyed 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  329 

htm  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  Heb.  ii.  14, 
By  the  power  of  his  death  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  dead 
and  buried,  as  it  is  said  in  the  sixteenth  Lord's  day  and  foriythird 
question.  Christ's  humble  incarnation  and  his  suffcrini^  on  the  cross 
htiving  been  spoken  of  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Lord's  days, 
the  three  last  degrees  of  his  huniihation,  to  wit,  his  death,  burial,  and 
descent  into  hell,  are  now  treated  of  for  ou«^  information* 

In  order  that  we  may  avoid  too  many  subdivisions,  we  will  accor- 
ding to  the  number  of  the  live  questions  in  this  Lord's  day,  attend 
also  to  five  general  heads. 

I.  The  reasons  of  the  necessity  of  Christ's  death,  Q.  40. 

II,  The  reasons  of  his  burial,  Q.  4L 

IIL  The    refutation   of  a  pretended   reason   from   our  death 
against  the  death  of  Christ,  as  a  satisfaction,  Q.  42. 

IV.  The  benefits  of  Christ's  death,  Q,  43. 

V.  Why  it  is  said  that  Christ  descended  into  hell,  Q.  44. 

I.  Our  first  general  head  contains  the  reasons  why  the    death  of 
Christ  was  necessary,  for  so    it   is  asked   in  the    fortieth   question, 
•<  Why  was  it  necessary   for  Christ  to  humble  himself  even    unto 
death  ?"     It  is  here  supposed  that    he  was   dead  ;  which  we,   since 
we  have  many  other  weighty    matters    to   observe,   and   intend   to 
abide  here  strictly  by  the  instructor,  do  also  presuppose  ;  and  partic- 
ularly that  Christ  suffered  a  real,  painful,  and  bloody  death  ,  although 
he  died  being  guiltless^  and  willingly,  and  yet  necessarily :  but   that 
which  is  of  the  principal  importance  is,  whether  he  was  obliged  to 
humble  himself  even  to  death,  in  order   to  make    satisfaction,    and 
whether  a  single  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  si^fficient  to  deliver   all 
mankind,  as  the  Papists  imagine,  that  they  may  lay  up   whatever  he 
suffered  more  than  a  drop  of  blood,  as  a  treasure,  out  of  which  the 
pope  may  dispense  so  many  indulgences.     In  opposition  to  which 
v^e  teach  that  one  drop  of  his  blood  was  not  sufficient  to  make  satis- 
faction, but  that  he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  even  unto   death 
for  this  purpose.     We  might  adduce   many  reasons  for  this,  as  that 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  which  redemption  and 'forgiveness  of  sins 
are  promised,  is  a  testament,  which  he  was  obliged  to  confirm  by  his 
death,  Heb.  ix.  15,  16,  17,  that   he  was  obliged  to   obey  his  Father, 
who  had  ordered  him  to  die,  Philip,  ii.  8,  that  he  had  promised   his 
Father  this,  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8,  that  his   ardent  and  supreme  love  to 
the  elect  urged  him  so  far,  Psalm  Ixix.  9.  John  xv.  13,  and  that,  if  it 
had  not  been  necessary,  his  Father  would  not  have  subjected  him  to 
death.    But  that  we  may  abide  by  the   instructor,   we  say  that 

Xx 


33d  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

he  was  obliged  to  humble  himself  to  death  in   order  to   satisfy,  &r 
two  reasons  ; 

1.  Berau':e  the  justice  of  God  required  it  t  for  man  had  by  sin  in- 
jured, and,  sit  were,  corrupted  the  majesty  of  God  ;  saying  with 
his  actions  that  he  was  not  God,  that  he  was  not  glorious,  and  that 
he  oug'ht  not  to  be  obeyed  :  now  the  justice  of  God  demands,  ac- 
cording to  tlie  law  of  retribution,  that  man  should  also  be  corrupted 
by  death,  and  thus  "receive  in  himself  th?t  recompence  of  his  error 
that  was  meet,"  Rom-  i.  27.  The  law  in  which  God  has  expressed 
his  demand,  declares  him  also  to  be  guilty  of  death,  Gen.  ii.  17. 
Rom.  vi.  23,  as  the  Gentiles  likewise  know  by  the  law  written  upon 
their  hearts,  "  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such 
things  are  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i.  32.  Now  since  the  Son  of 
God  was  become  the  surety  of  the  sinner,  in  order  to  satisfy  for  him, 
according  to  Job.  xxxiii.  24.  Psalm  xl.  6,  7,  8.  Heb.  x.  4 — 9. 
Jer.  XXX.  2 1  ;  therefore  sin  could  not  be  atoned  for  in  any  other 
■way  than  by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  Further,  he  was  obliged 
to  humble  himself  to  death,  in  order  to  satisfy, 

2.  Because  the  truth  of  God  required  it ;  for  it  was  foretold,  that 
he  should  die  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  Isaiah  liii.  8.  "  For  he  was 
cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living:  for  the  transgression  of  my 
people  was  he  stricken,"  vrs.  10.  «  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  ^bruise 
him,  he  hath  put  him  to  grief;  when  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
offering  for  sin,  he  shall  see  his  seed,"  vrs.  12.  «He  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death  ;  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors, 
and  he  bore  the  sins  of  many."  It  was  also  typified,  and  therefore 
sealed,  that  he  should  die,  in  ord'r-r  to  make  satisfaction,  as  well  by 
the  slaying  of  the  paschal  lamb:  "  For  even  Christ  our  passover  is 
sacrificed  for  us,"  I  Cor.  v.  7,  as  by  all  the  sacrifices  of  slain  beasts  : 
for  he  gave  himself  a  sacrifice  to  God,"  Eph.  v.  2.  Now  he  could 
not  do  this,  unless  he  humb'ed  himself  to  death  ;  for  the  scripture 
cannot  be  broken.  And  therefore  he  would  not  be  rescued,  either 
by  Peter,  or  by  the  angels  from  death,  saying,  "  How  then  shall  the 
scriptui-es  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be  ?"  Matt.  xxvi.  54.  And 
so  we  see  in  what  sense  the  anostle  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  «  That 
Christ  died  for  our  sins,  according  to  the  scriptures. 

II.  But  Christ,  after  he  had  died  on  the  cross,  did  not  remain 
hanging  on  it,  to  be  consumed  by  the  air,  or  to  be  devoured  by  the 
fowls  of  heaven,  or  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field,  like  other  crucified 
per~,ons,  but  he  was  buried.  We  show  upon  other  occasions  by 
whom,  where,  when,  in  what  manner,  and  in  whose  presence  he  was 
buried,  what  are  the  consequences  of  his  burial,  and  how  long  he  re- 


XVr.  LORD'3  DAY.  Q.  10— 44,.  331 

inained  in  the  grave.*  We  shall  now  treat  only  of  the  reasons, 
"  why  he  was  buried,"  accoi  ding  to  the  forty-first  question.  We 
need  not  inquire  here  why  his  friends  buried  him  :  they  did  this 
from  special  affection,  to  preserve  Inm  from  further  improper  treat- 
ment, and  against  the  day  of  his  resurrection,  whetiier  the  last  day, 
or  the  third  day,  agreeably  to  his  prediction,  in  proportion  to  the 
weakness,  or  strength  of  their  faith.  But  that  which  we  must  chief- 
ly consider  here,  is,  what  was  the  reason  and  end  proposed  by  God 
in  this  burial,  why  he  appointed  that  his  ton  should  be  buried.  The 
reason  was  not,  that  he  might,  like  others,  see  corruption,  s.nce  this 
was  contrary  to  his  steadfast  hope,  expressed  in  the  sixteenth 
Psalm;  neither  can  we  think  tnat  ne  was  buriej,  that  he  might  as 
an  antitype  of  the  sabbath  day,  rest  in  the  grave  on  the  sabbath,  and 
thus  abolish  the  fourth  commandment  ;  for  we  cannot  discover  any 
proof  of  t!)is  opinion.     But  he  was  buried, 

1.  ••  Thereby  to  prove  that  he  was  really  dead"  Christians  have 
the  greatest  concern  in  knowing  tnat  he  was  really  dead,  because 
they  cannot  otherwise  know  whether  he  fully  satisfied  ;  and  if  tiiey 
do  not  know  this,  they  cannot  become  partakers  of  his  satisfaction. 
Therefore  his  death  and  burial  are  dehvered  as  two  fundamental 
points  of  the  doctrine  of  faith,  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4.  There  could  not  be 
a  stronger  proof,  that  he  was  really  dead,  than  that  he  was  buried: 
for  we  do  not  bury  the  living,  but  the  dead  ;  at  least  in  an  ordinary 
judicial  process,  such  as  was  holden  with  Christ,  the  living  are  not 
buried,  but  only  the  dead.  His  friends  also  loved  him  too  well  to 
thrust  hmi  into  the  grave  alive.  And  his  judge  would  not  consent 
that  he  should  be  buried,  before  he  was  well  assured  that  he  was 
dead,  Mark  xv.  44,  45.     He  was  buried  also, 

2.  Because  it  was  foretold,  Isaiah  liii.  9.  <*  He  made  his  grave 
with  the  wicked,  and  was  with  the  rich  in  his  death  ;  his  soul  should 
not  be  left  in  hell,"  that  is,  the  grave,  "  to  see  corruption,"  Psalm 
xvi.  10.  Sec  Acts  xiii.  35,  36,  37.  Therefore  he  should  enter  into 
the  grave  by  a  burial ;  the  Saviour  himself  foretold  it,  Matt.  xii.  40, 
"  As  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so 
shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of 
the  earth."  The  scriptures  ought  also  to  be  fulfilled,  and  so  "  he 
was  buried  according  to  the  scriptures,"  i.  Cor.  xv.  4.  He  was 
buried  also, 

3.  That  he  might  be  humbled  to  the  lowest  degree.     The  human 

•  The  Author  hath  respect  here  to  a  custom  of  the  Dutch  church  in  Hol- 
land, of  preaching,  during  certain  weeks  previoua  to  Easter,  on  tlic  history 
of  the  passion,  death,  and  bcrial  ©f  Christ, 


332  CHRIST'S  DEATH.  BURIAL,  ho. 

body  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  humbler  condition,  than  to  betaken  away 
from  ambng  men,  and  shut  up  in  a  dark  pit  of  the  earth  :  the  lowest 
humiliation  of  Tyre  is  expressed  by  this  figure,  Ezck.  xxvi,  20.  And 
thus  Jes\is  also  "  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth," 
Eph.  iv.  9. 

4.  That  he  might  wholly  take  away  the  curse,  and  hide  it  in  the 
grave  from  the  face  of  God  and  of  his  people,  and  stifle  it,  as  those 
who  were  hanged,  being  accursed  of  God,  were  ordered  to  be  buried 
the  same  day  on  which  they  were  hanged,  Deut.  xxi.  23.  So  all 
things  that  were  devoted  to  God,  were  to  be  taken  away  from  among^ 
men,  as  Jericho  was  devoted  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  by  fire, 
and  therefore  might  not  be  rebuilt,  Joshua  vi.  21,  24,  26.  See  also 
Joshua  viii.  28,  29,  for  the  guilt  and  uncleanness  would  have  re- 
mained, if  he  had  not  been  buried,  accordinj^  to  Deut.  xxi.  23,  but 
"when  he  was  buried,  "the  Lord  removed  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in 
one  day,"  Zech.  iii.  9.  And  thus  also  the  curse  of  returning  to  the 
dust,  inflicted  upon  the  sinner,  Gen.  iii.  19,  was  taken  away,  the 
graves  were  made  agreeable  restingplaces  of  the  saints,  Isaiah  Ivii.  2, 
^d  the  old  man  was  buried  wnth  him,  Rom  vi.  4. 

in.  But  did  Christ  die  to  satisfy  the  divine  justice,  why  must  wc 
then  also  die?  th\is  asks  the  instructor  in  the  forty-second  question. 
For  if  Christ  died  to  satisfy  for  the  guilt,  by  which  the  elect  deserv* 
ed  ptinishment  and  death,  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that  they  OTip;ht 
T^ot  then  to  die,  or  that  God  would  demand  the  debt  twice,  which 
militates  against  the  justice  of  God  ;  from  which  the  Socinians  con- 
clude that  Christ  did  not  satisfy  by  his  death,  and  the  Papists  that 
he  did  not  satisfy  perfectly,  but  that  we  ourselves  must  still  satisfy 
by  our  own  death,  as  a  proper  punishment.  Others  justly  condemn- 
ed by  the  synods  of  our  own  country,  say  that  death,  and  all  the 
temporal  afflictions  of  believers  are  proper  punishments  of  their 
sins.* 

In  order  to  confute  this  pretended  ar9:ument,  and  to  show  that  our 
death  detracts  not  from  the  perfect  satisfaction  of  Christ  by  his  death, 
we  must  know  that  a  proper  punishment  of  sin  is  not  any  misery 
inflicted  upor>  believers,  on  occasion,  and  from  a  consideration  of 
sin,  for  their  chastisement,  amendment,  humiliation,  and  glorifica- 
tion ;  but  misery  inflicted  upon  the  sinner  for  his  destruction  by 
God,  as  a  judge  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  justice.  Thus  the  mstruc- 
tor  also  understands  this,  when   he  saith  to  the  proposed  objection, 

*  The  author  hath  rcipcct  here  to  Professor  Roel,   ^vhom  vc  have  men- 
t\oned  before. 


—44  S35 

"  Our  death  is  not  a  satisfaction  for  our  sins,"  and  thus  also  must 
those  who  oppose  us  consider  it,  as  they  verily  do  ;  but  they  disguise 
the  matter,  that  their  opinion  may  not  be  exposed  and  detested. 

That  the  death  of  believers,  and  all  their  temporal  misery  is 
not  a  proper  punishment  of  sins,  and  a  compensation  for  them, 
appears, 

1.  From  the  reality  and  perfection  orchrist's  satisfaction,  which 
we  have  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  P'or  if  he  satisfied 
fully  for  ail  their  sins,  there  cannot  then  remain  any  proper  punish-= 
ment  for  them,  and  they  are  not  obliged  to  make  satisfaction,  nor  to 
discharge  their  debt  by  their  death  and  temporal  afflictions. 

2.  The  guilt  of  behevers  is  removed  from  their  afflictions,  because 
God  hath  forgiven  and  taken  away  their  sins,  so  that  they  cannot, 
properly  speaking,  be  punished  any  more  on  account  of  them  ;  for 
the  Lord  saith,  "  I  have  sworn  that  I  would  not  be  wroth  with  thee, 
nor  rebuke  thee,"  Isaiah  liv.  9.  "  He  is  a  God  who  forgiveth  his 
people,  but  who  still  taketh  vengeance  of  their  inventions,"  Psalm 
xcix.  8.  "Nathan  said  unto  David,  the  Lord  hath  put  away  thy 
sin  ;  thou  shalt  not  die.  Howbeit,  because  by  this  deed  ihou  hast 
given  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme,  the  child 
also  that  is  born  unto  thee  shall  surely  die,  2  Sam.  xii.  15,  14.  Af- 
flictions are  indeed  called  vengeance,  after  sins  are  forgiven  :  and 
punishment  is  indeed  inflicted  on  account  of  sins,  yet  they  are  not 
therefore  a  proper  punishment  for  the  satisfaction  of  sins,  because 
these  were  taken  away  ;  but  they  are  desij^ned  for  chastisements, 
which  are  inflicted  on  believers  upon  account  of  sins,  and  so  retain  a 
semblance  of  vengeance  for  their  advantage,  humili':ition  and  amend- 
ment. We  see  this  in  many  passages  of  the  word  of  God,  Heb» 
xii.  6—11.     Pslam  xciv.  12,  13.     cxix.  71. 

3.  Temporal  afflictions  and  death  are  welcome  to  believers,  for 
they  glory  and  take  pleasure  in  them,  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10.  Death  is 
their  treasure,  1  Cor.  iii.  22,  their  gain  and  they  long  for  it,  Philip. 
i.  21,  23.  Could  this  be  so,  if  it  were  a  proper  punishment  ?  could 
a  malefactor  speak  thus,  when  he  was  punished  for  his  abomin- 
ations ? 

4.  Death  delivers  believers  from  every  misery,  and  procures  the 
greatest  happiness  to  them  :  shame,  loss,  and  pain  may  remain  wi^h 
them  until  death,  but  they  must  then  depart :  "  Blessed  are  the 
dead  which  die  in  the  Lord,  from  henceforth,  yea,  saith  the  Spirit, 
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours,"  Kev.  xiv.  15.  By  death 
they  die  also  to  their  sins,  which  are  their  greatest  afflictions  :  "  For 
he  ths^t  is  dead  is  freed  from  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  7.    Yea,  death  is  to  them 


334  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

a  passage  into  eternal  life  :  "  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  house 
of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  an 
houss  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the  heavens,"  2  Cor.  v.  1 . 
If  it  be  asked,  why  God  still  inflicts  death  not  only  upon  the  un- 
godly, but  also  upon  his  people,  when  it  is  so  bitter  to  them,  seeing 
i\is  Son  hath  fully  satisfied  his  justice  by  suffering  every  punishment, 
and  death  also  ?  we  answer  briefly,  that  God  could  indeed  glorify  the 
elect,    and  take  them  up   into  heaven  immediately,  without  seeing 
death  ;  for  it  doth  not  militate  either  against  his  power,  or  his  justice, 
as  he  showed  in  the  ascension  of  Enoch  and  Elijah  ;  but  Cod  haih 
wise  reasons  for  not  doing  this,  since  it  is  his  will  to  apply  the  merits 
of  his   Son   gradually  ;    and   therefore  he   doth    not  sanctify  them 
neither  perfectly  in  a  moment  from  their  conception  and  birth,  that 
they  may  observe  his  wonderful  way  in  order ;   he  desires  by  such 
a  bitter  frait  to  show  them,  and  cause  tiiem  to  bevv  til  the  abominable 
nature  of  sin,  that  they  raay  humble   Themselves  for  it;  to  induce 
them  to  consider  the  exceeding   grievousness  of  the  suffering  and 
death  of  Christ:  he  hath  also  ordered  this  so,  that  they  may  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son  in    dealh  ;  the   Lord  teacheth  his 
people  thus  the  greatness  of  his  power  by  leading  them  tlirough 
every  opposition,  and  in  such  an  unsightly  way  to  life.     Finally,  we 
say  also  that  it  is  a  wonderful  goodness  of  God,    that   he  doth  not 
take  his  people  up  into  heaven  in  the  body  without  death  ;  for  if  he 
did,  then  those  who  remained  alive,    would  know  infallibly  that  all 
those  who  died,  were  lost.     This  would  be  an  insupportable  grief  to 
those  who  remained  alive,  especially  when   they  saw  their  dearest 
friends  and  relations  die.  That  the  Lord  might  now  manifest  his  good- 
ness, and  not  willingly  afflict,  or  grieve  the  children  of  men,  there- 
fore he  hath  appointed   it  to  all  men  once  to  die,   the  righteous  as 
well  as  the  wicked. 

IV.  But  "  what  further  benefit  do  we  receive  from  the  sacrifice 
and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  I"  Many  and  great  benefits  of  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  under  Pontius  Pilate  are 
exhibited  in  the  fifteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but  there  are  also  other  bene- 
fits, and  particularly,  that  "  by  virtue  thereof  our  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  so  the  corrupt  inclinations  of 
the  flesh  may  no  more  reign  in  us,  but  that  we  may  offer  ourselves 
to  him  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving." 

The  old  man  is  the  natural  corruption  of  man,  which  possesseth 
him  entirely  from  his  birth,  and  is  a  continual  source  of  evil  lusts, 
which  reign  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  as  a  king,  according  to  a  sinful 
laW:.  which  they  prescribe  to  him,  and  under,  and  according  to  which 


—44.  335 

they  hold  him  captive,  and  compel  him,  while  he  is  neither  able,  nor 
willing  to  be  delivered  from  his  bondage.  -See  Rom.  vii.  5,  23,  Eph« 
ii.  1,  2,  3,  Which  old  man  is  also  called  "  indwelling  sin,  the  mo- 
lions  of  sin,  the  law  of  the  members,  the  flesh,'*  &c.  Rom.  vi. 
and  vii. 

This  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  not  only  with  respect  to  guilt 
by  justification,  since  our  guilt  was  nailed  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  slain, 
and  thrust  in  his  grave.  Coll.  ii.  14,  of  which  we  have  treated  on  the 
fifteenth  Lord's  day,  when  we  showed  that  he  obtained  redemption, 
the  favour  of  God,  righteousness  and  eternal  life  for  the  elect,  and 
freed  them  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God,  and  from  the  curse 
by  his  suJBTering  ;  but  also  with  respect  to  the  power  and  dominion 
of  the  old  man,  which  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  by  sanctification, 
partly  in  this  life,  so  that  the  evil  lusts  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any 
more  :  *'  for  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,"  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  Yi.  14,  whereby  believers,  being  thus  freed  and  separated,  offer 
thems^ves  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  to  God,  Rom.  xii.  1.  "  We 
beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  pre- 
sent your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God, 
which  is  your  reasonable  service."  But  after  this  life  the  old  man 
will  be  perfectly  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  Heb.  xii.  23. 

The  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ  by  virtue 
of  his  crucifixion,  death  and  burial, 

1 .  Because  he  by  his  death  on  the  crosi,  and  by  his  burial,  depri- 
ved sin  of  its  strength,  whereby  it  reigneth  :  "  The  strength  of  sin  is 
the  law,"  I  Cor.  xv.  56.  The  law  condemns  the  sinner  to  be  a  slave 
of  sin,  it  discovereth  sin,  yea,  sin  works  effectually  by  occasion  of 
the  law.  Sec  this,  Rom.  v.  20.  vii.  5,  13.  Now  Christ  hath  deprived 
this  law,  which  is  the  strength  of  sin,  of  its  strength,  by  his  death 
on  the  cross,  and  by  their  burial,  inasmuch  as  he  satisfied  it,  and  so 
it  cannot  hold  the  elect  sinner  any  longer  under  sin.  Therefore 
Paul  saith,  Rom.  vii.  4.  "  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye  also  are 
become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ."  And  thus  "  sin  hath 
no  longer  dominion  over  believers,  because  they  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace,"  Rom.  vii.  14. 

2.  Christ  hath  merited  satisfaction  for  them  ;  for  "  he  gave  him- 
self for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify 
unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14. 
For  they  are  reckoned  in  him,  when  he  is  made  sanctification  to 
them,  I  Cor.  i.  30,  and  so  are  said  to  be  crucified,  dead,  and  buried 
with  him.  "  We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that 
like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  to  the  glory  of  the  Father? 


336  CHRIST'S  DEATH,- BURIAL,  &c. 

even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.  For  if  we  have 
been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  shall  be  also 
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection  ;  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man 
is  crucified  witli  him,"  Gal.  ii.  20.  Coll.  ii.  11.  12. 

3.  By  his  death  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial  he  hath  also  merited 
and  given  the  Holy  Ghost  to  them.  Gal.  iii  13,  14,  whereby  they 
'<  mortify  "  theii  sins,  the  old  man,  and  "  the  deeds  of  the  body,'* 
Rom.  viii.  13.  So  the  apostle  speaks,  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  "Ye  are  wash- 
ed, ye  are  sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 

4.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  and  his  burial,  affords  them 
a  powerful  motive  to  crucify,  mortify  and  bury  the  old  man  ;  for 
when  they  see  the  love  of  Christ,  the  grievousncss  of  his  sufferings 
for  them  and  that  their  old  man  procured  all  this  distress  to  him, 
they  are  then  powerfully  moved  to  dedicate  and  offer  themselves  up 
to  him,  in  order  to  serve  him,  and  to  recompense  that  evil  upon  the 
old  man,  and  to  take  vengeance  of  him  :  for  "  they  who  are  Christ's 
have  crucified  the  the  flesh,  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  This  Peier  also  intimateth,  when  he  saith,  "  Forasmuch  then  as 
Christ  hath  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise  with 
the  same  mind,  to  wit,  that  he  who  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath 
ceased  from  sin  ,"  1  Peter,  iv.  1. 

5.  The  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross  and  his  burial  is  also  a  lively 
figure  of  the  manner  in  which  believers  ought  to  crucify,  mortify, 
and  bury  the  old  man.  As  Christ  was  sought  until  he  was  found, 
seized,  arraigned  before  the  tribunal,  accused,  reproached,  spitten 
upon,  scourged,  stripped  naked,  tortured,  deprived  of  food,  slain,  and 
taken  from  among  men,  so  also  must  believers  deal  with  the  old 
man  :  in  this  manner  would  Paul  "  be  conformed  to  the  death  of 
Christ,"  Philip,  iii.  10.  For  this  end  Christ  also  suffered,  1  Peter 
ii.  21— .24. 

y .  We  must  inquire  further  why  it  is  said,  "  that  he  descended 
into  hell."  We  must  not  understand  this  so,  as  though  Christ  de- 
scended properly  into  the  place  of  the  damned,  to  triumph  there  over 
the  powers  of  hell,  as  the  Lutherans  in.agine  :  or  that  he  entered 
into  a  porch  of  hell,  where  the  believing  fathers  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment were  kept,  to  deliver  them  out  of  it  ;  for  the  word  of  God  know- 
eth  nothing  of  such  a  descending  into  hell.  His  body  was  in  the 
gr.ive,  and  his  soul  in  the  hi»nds'of  his  leather,  during  his  death,  wheli 
he  should  have  descended  into  hell.  It  hath  never  been  heard  of, 
that  a  general  triumph  before  a  prison  ;  Christ  triumphed  on  the 
cross,  Coll.  ii.  15;  and  in  his  exaltation,  Psalm  Ixviii.  18.    The  be- 


— 4U  337 

lieving  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  entered  into  heaven  in  conse- 
quence of  the  suretiship  of  Christ,  and  by  the  reflex  virtue  of  hi» 
sufferings ;  we  see  this  not  only  in  Enoch  and  h.iijah,  but  also  in 
Abraham,  Luke  xvi.  22,  in  Jacob,  Gen.  xlix.  18.  "  Christ  preached 
indeed  to  the  spirits  in  prison,'^  1  Peter  lii.  19,  but  he  did  not  de- 
scend in  the  body  into  the  prison,  but  oy  his  Spirit,  in  which  he  went, 
and  preached  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and  by  him,  to  the  inhabitants  of 
ihe  old  world,  who  are  the  spirits,  and  who  were,  when  Peter  wrote 
this,  in  prison,  but  not  when  Christ  preached  to  them. 

It  is  true,  our  creed  sa'.th  that  "  Christ  descvrnded  into  hell  :"  but 
We  also  know  that  this  creed,  being  a  human  composition,  must 
ihertfore  be  explained  accordin;^  to  the  word  of  God ;  that  the  de- 
scent into  hell  is  not  found  in  the  most  ancient  creeds,  and  that  it 
occurs  indeed  in  the  creed  of  Athanasius,  but  that  then  the  burial  is 
left  out,  as  the  burial  is  mserted  in  the  creed  of  Nice,  but  the  descent 
into  hell  is  not  found  there.  All  which  proves  that  the  ancitnts  under- 
stood by  the  descent  into  hell  the  burial ;  which  is  also  agreeable  to  the 
word  of  God.  David  charges  his  son  Solomon, "  not  to  let  the  gray  hairs 
of  Joab  go  down  to  the  grave  in  peace,"  1  Kings  ii,  6.  We  must  re- 
member that  the  Hebrew  word  sc/ieol,  and  the  Greek  word  hadtfs  signi- 
fies hell  and  the  grave  both,  for  which  reason  they  are  translated  some- 
times by  hell,  and  sometimes  by  the  grave.  And  thus  the  descent  of 
Jesus  into  hell  is  the  same  with  hisburial ;  therefore  he  saith,  Psalm  xvi. 
10.  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer 
thine  holy  One  to  see  corruption,"  Peter  and  Paul  prove  that  he 
speaks  here  of  the  burial  of  his  body,  Acts  ii.  24 — 31.  xiii.  35,  36, 
37.  But  as  his  burial  was  expressed  before  in  proper  language, 
hence  it  is  not  suitable,  at  least  not  in  such  a  short  compend  of  the 
articles  of  our  faith,  to  repeat  the  selfsame  thing  in  the  figurative 
words  of  descending  into  hell.  And  therefore  we  understand  by  this 
with  the  instructor  the  suffering  of  Christ's  soul,  "  his  unspeakable 
anguish,  pains,  terrours  and  hellish  agonies,  in  which  he  was  plunged 
during  all  his  sufferings,  but  especially  on  the  cross."  As  David 
also  expresseth  the  suffering  of  his  soul  by  the  pains  of  hell.  Psalm 
cxvi.  3.  The  pains  of  hell  got  hold  on  me  :  I  found  trouble  and 
sorrow."  See  Psalm  xviii.  4,  5.  As  he  also  truly  suffered  the  anguish 
of  hell ;  for  "  his  soul  was  troubled,"  John  xii.  27.  xiii.  21.  *'  How 
am  I  straitened  ?"  thus  he  complained,  Luke  xii.  50.  "  He  was  sor- 
rowful and  very  heavy.  Then  said  he  to  his  disciples.  My  soul  is 
exceedingly  sorrowful,"  Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38.  Yea,  '*  he  was  sore 
amazed,"  Mark  xiv.  33,  and  "  he  was  in  a  great  agony,"  Luke  xxii, 
44.     But  he  suffered  still  more  grievously  on  the  crots,  when  "  he 

Yy 


J38  CHRIST^S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &g- 

cried  out"  in  such  great  distress,  "  with  a  loud  voice,  My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Matt,  xxvii.  46. 

We  showed  briefly  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day  wherein  this  suf- 
fering of  his  soul  properly  consibted  :  we  will  exhibit  this  now  mor^ 
fully  And  O  that  every  one  would  earnest- y  endeavour  to  obtain 
a  proper  understanding  of  this  matter,  that  the  believer  may  pe'ceive 
^'om  what  the  Son  of  God  hath  delivered  him,  ^nd  others  what  they 
must  yet  expect ;  for  ihey  will  also  be  obliged  to  suffer  that  which 
Christ  suffered,  if  they  do  not  become  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ. 
The  suffe:in;^  of  Christ's  soul,  and  his  hellish  anguish  consisted  in 
these  things  : 

1.  That  he  had  a  deep  sense  O'f  the  power  and  abominable  nature 
of  all  the  sins  of  all  his  dear  elect,  since  he  was  made  sin  for  them," 
2  Cor.  V.  21,  for  he  had  a  deep  sense  of  their  guilt,  the  dreadful 
nature  of  sin,  their  aiming  at  the  throne  and  crown  of  God,  their 
breaking  of  his  yoke,  and  bursting  of  his  bonds,  all  this  he  was 
obliged  to  sustain  now.  Let  a  believer  only  imagine  how  he  is 
pierced  with  sorrow,  when  he  hath  a  feeling  sense  of  sins  and  when 
they  become  like  a  heavy  burthen  too  heavy  for  him,  but  how  then 
was  the  soul  of  Christ  burthened,  when  all  the  sins  of  all  the  elect, 
"with  all  the  curses  and  p-^nalties,  which  ai'e  threatened  on  account  oi 
sin,  were  laid  with  ail  their  weight  upon  him,  when  he  was  neverthe- 
less perfectly  innocent  ?  verily  he  was  not  insensible,  but  complained 
"  1  restored  that  which  I  took  not  away,"  Psalm  Ixix.  4» 

2.  That  he  was  obliged  taexperience  a  deprivation  of  the  ordinary 
and  sensible  influence,  tha  kindness  and  love  of  his  Father  He  who 
•was  the  Son  of  the  Father's  bosom,  and  brought  up  with  him,  who 
v/as  wont  ^o  bathe  in  his  Father's  light  and  love,  was  now  thrust  far 
away  from:  peace^  and  abandoned  to  hellish  darkness ;  no  pleasing 
sensations  occtjpied  his  soul  ;  nothing  but  darkness,  distress  and 
lerrour  possessed  his  miad  ;.  for  he  complained  that  he  was  forsaken; 
to  this  was  also  added, 

3.  That  even  his  Father  set?  himself  against  him  ;  for  he  kindled 
his  wrath  against  him,  like  a  fire*  Did  Job  complain,  ♦'  The  arrows 
of  the  Almighty  are  within  me,  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my 
spirit :  the  terrours  of  God  set  themselves  in  array  aofainst  me,"  Job 
vi.  4.  "  Thou  art  become  cruel  against  me:  with  thy  strong  hand 
thou  opposest  thysel-f  against  me,"  chap.  xxx.  21,  how  grievous  was 
then  the  condition  of  Jesus,  against  whom  God  stirred  up  his  whole 
indignaLionl  The  hardened  sinner  doth  not  apprehend  this:  hut  let 
him  only  represent  to  himself,  that  those  whom  he  heartily  loves^ 
and  without  whose  mutual  love  he  canjiot  live,  depart  from  hUa  with. 


—44.  S3^ 

nversioh,  that  Ihey  behold  iiim  v'ith  anger  and  d'splecisure,  and  m- 
veigh  against  him  with  vehement  indignation,  will  it  not  be  insup- 
portable to  him  ?  How  grievous  then  was  the  condition  of  Christ, 
when  not  any  beloved  creature,  but  his  allsufficient  and  loving  Father 
himself  atvacked  him  in  such  a  severe  manner  with  his  anger  I 

4.  That  the  whole  power  of  hell  was  let  loose  upon  him  ;  '•  It  was 
now  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness,"  Luke  xxii.  53.  *'  The  prince 
of  this  world  came  against  him,"  John  xiv.  30.  He  stirred  up  against 
him  all  those  who  scoffed  at  his  sonship,  kingdom,  and  trusting  in 
God  ;  and  must  we  not  think  that  he  who  sought  to  bereave  him  in 
a  crafty  manner  in  the  wilderness,  of  his  behef  in  his  sonship,  and 
of  his  trusting  in  his  Father,  did  now  much  more  do  this?  Who  can 
doubt  but  that  he  assaulted  him  m  this,  or  some  other  disquieting 
manner  If  thou  wert  the  iSon  of  God*  would  thy  Father  himself  be 
so  wroth  with  thee  ?  would  he  depart  from  thee  ?  would  he  affiict  thee 
in  this  manner  for  the  sins  of  others,  when  thou  hast  not  committed 
any  offences  thyself?  is  this  indeed  just  ?  dost  thou  intend  to  be  the 
surety  of  the  elect  in  thy  sufferings  ?  is  it  possible  that  one  should 
satisfy  for  ail  ?  dost  thou  hope  tiiat  thou  wilt  j'et  surmount  thy  suf- 
fering ?  no,  thou  must  suffer  for  ever,  and  thou  wilt  never  surmount 
it ;  desist,  curse  God  ana  die.  Every  person  who  hath  at  any  time 
been  the  object  of  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one,  knows  hoW 
grievous  this  is  ?  If  we  consider  further,  that  his  clear  understanding 
was  overclouded  with  the  greatest  darkness,  although  without  sin, 
that  he  was  forsaken  by  God  in  all  the  torments  of  his  body  and 
soul,  that  the  bright  noonday  was  darkened  over  him,  and  that  the 
sun  withdrew  its  light  from  him,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  he  suf- 
fered the  anguish  of  hell  in  the  most  grievous  manner. 

Why  did  it  please  the  Lord,  might  it  be  asked  here,  to  bruise  him 
thus  ?  It  was  foretold.  Psalm  xxii.  1 .  He  was  obliged  to  satisfy 
for  souls,  and  therefore  '*  to  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,"  Isaiah 
liii.  10,  and  deliver  the  elect  from  the  anguish  and  pains  of 
hell,  Hosea  xiii.  14.  And  thus  «' hath  Jesus  delivered  them  from 
the  wrath  to  come,"  1  Thess.  i.  10, 


APPLICATION, 

When  we  attend  carefully  to  all  this,  and  also  to  what  hath  been 
said  on  the  foregoing  Loid's  day,  must  we  not  then  be  astonished  at 
iht  inconceivable  love  of  Christ  to  bis  people  ?    When  he  wept  orer 


:^  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

Lazarus  who  was  dead,  "  The  Jews  said,  behold  how  he  loved  him," 
John  xi.  35,  36.  But  if  his  tears  were  evidences  of  his  great  love, 
was  it  not  then  the  greatest  evidence  of  his  love,  that  he  poured  out 
even  his  soul  unto  death,  descended  into  the  lowermost  parts  of  the 
earth,  yea,  suffered  such  grievous,  hellish  agonies,  that  he  might 
deliver  his  people  from  the  power  of  hell  ? 

But  ye  surely  know  that  he  did  not  suffer  thus  in  the  stead  of  all 
men,  and  that  all  do  not  partake  of  the  benefits  of  his  death,  burial, 
and  descent  into  hell.  Therefore  examine  yourselves,  and  see  how 
it  is  with  you  in  this  respect.  And  that  we  may  assist  you  herein^ 
we  will  show  you  who  may  believe  that  these  things  belong  to 
them. 

1.  These  persons  have  died  in  their  knap;inalion  that  they  were 
spiritually  alive,  having  learned  with  distress  and  concern,  that  they 
were  under  the  sentence  of  death.  This  appears  from  Rom  v'lu 
9,  *'  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once  ;  but,  when  the  command- 
ment came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died,"  Gal.  ii.  19,  20.  "Itlirough 
the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  1  might  live  unto  God.  I  am  cru- 
cified with  Christ."  The  sinner,  born  and  educated  under  the  gos- 
pel, imagineth  that  he  is  alive,  because  he  enjoys  the  privileges  of 
the  Christian  worship,  because  God  is  merciful,  Christ  hath  died,  and 
lie  is  civil  and  devout;  is  he  convinced  that  he  hath  corrupted  himself 
in  a  horrible  manner,  he  doth  not  yet  say,  there  is  no  hope,  he  finds 
still  the  life  of  his  hand,  for  he  will  amend  his  ways.  But  those  for 
whom  Christ  became  a  surety  in  his  death,  are  convinced  by  him  of 
their  folly,  their  imaginations  fail  them,  they  see  that  they  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  and  they  are  amazed  that  they  have  so  long  a  time 
fed  upon  a  lie  in  their  right  hand,  and  upon  ashes.  And  so  "  they 
are  pricked  in  their  hearts,"  Acts.  ii.  37.  Yea,  all  their  great  vir- 
tues, with  which  they  were  formerly  so  well  pleased,  fail  there,  like 
loss  and  dung,  Philip,  jii.  4 — 9. 

2.  These  persons  are  more  disturbed  and  concerned  about  the 
wrath  of  God,  under  grievous  adversities,  and  crosses,  than  about 
the  most  grievous  cross  itself.  Extraordinary  disgrace,  losses  and 
pains  depress  them  exceedingly  :  but  when  they  suspect  that  they 
may  be  proper  punishments,  inflicted  by  an  angry  God,  this  is  in- 
supportable to  them,  and  is,  as  it  were,  a  descending  into  hell : 
"  thou  didst  hide  thy  face,  and  I  was  troubled,"  said  David,  Psalm 
XXX.  9.  They  can  sometimes  rejoice  and  glory  in  their  sufferings, 
but  not  unless  they  know  that  they  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  have 
peace  with  him,  Rom.  V.  1,  2,3.  Therefore  they  pray  so  exceed- 
ingly against  the  wrath  of  God  m  his  judgments  t    <'  O   Lord,''  said 


—44  ^ 

David,  Psalm  vi.  1,  "rebuke me  not  in  thine  anger,  neither  chasten 
me  in  thine  hot  displeasure  "  And  Jeremiah  prayed  in  his  grievous 
tribulations;  "  Be  not  a  terrour  to  me,"  Jer.  xvii.  17.  Others  do 
not  concern  themselves  about  the  anger  of  God,  but  only  that  God 
would  remove  the  death  of  misery  from  them. 

3.  They  are  such  whose  old  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried,  so 
that  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the  flesh  do  not  reign  any  more  in 
them.  We  see  this  Rom.  vi.  4,  5.  6,  Coll,  ii.  11,  12.  Gal.  v. 
24.  They  are  sometimes  indeed  hurried  to  evil  lusts,,  yet  not  like 
slaves  and  servants  of  sin,  but  like  prisoners,  who  are  drag?:ed  along  ; 
they  follow  indeed,  but  at  every  step  they  withstand  their  mighty 
enemy,  and  endeavour  to  disengage  them.selves  from  him  ;  there- 
fore they  pray  and  strive  against  the  old  man,  and  when  they  are 
cast  down  by  him,  they  rise  up  anew,  and  bewail  themselves  with 
Paul,  Rom.  vii.  23,  24.  Yea,  they  surrender  themselves  to  the 
Lord,  as  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  that  they  may  serve  him,  and 
they  dedicae  themselves  to  him,  and  exert  themselves  for  him. 
This  we  are  taught,  Rom.  vi.  17.  "  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were 
the  servants  of  sin  ;  but  ye  have  obeyed  from  the  heart,  that  form  of 
doctrine  which  was  delivered  you,"  Others  esteem  sin  a  pleasure, 
they  swim  in  it,  as  a  fish  in  the  water,  they  follow  nature  :  doth  their 
conscience  reprove  them,  they  are  displeased,  they  even  wish  that  this 
and  that  action  v/ere  no  sin :  are  they  moral,  would  they  not  by  any 
means  commit  heinous  sins,  it  is  not  because  their  old  man  is  m.orti- 
fied  by  the -death  of  Christ,  for  their  heart  hath  never  yet  been  chan- 
ged^ nor  the  new  man  formed  in  them  ;  but  it  proceeds  from  a  mor- 
al disposition,  a  virtuous  education,  and  natural  conscience  ;  as  they 
have  never  yet  surrendered  themselves  to  him,  but  li?e  only  to  them- 
selves, and  for  themselves,  and  that  even  as  far  as  they  are  religious, 
Isaiah  Iviii.  3.     Zech.  vii.  5,  6. 

If  now,  hearers,  ye  have  the  least  concern  about  your  eternal 
weilbeing  or  illbeing,  and  attend  seriously  to  what  hath  been  said, 
and  examine  yourselves,  ye  will  indeed  see  how  it  is  situated  with 
you  in  this  respect ;  but  if  ye  do  not  regard  it,  if  ye  know  not  of 
such  a  dying  to  yourselves,  if  ye  will  not  suffer  such  an  anxious 
mind,  if  ye  do  not  think  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  adversity,  but  coh^ 
sider  all  as  well,  so  long  as  ye  enjoy  peace,  and  are  without  feat*, 
if  sin  do  still  hve  in  you,  and  ye  live  in  sin :  know  then,  that  "  ye  are 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  Eph.  ii.  1.  **  Ye  have  indeed  the  name 
that  ye  hve.  but  ye-  are  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  I.  It  is  true,  ye  live,  but 
like  a  dead  carcase,  which  is  alive  with  worms  :  •<  The  widow  that 
iiveth  in  pleasure)  is  d^ad  while  she  liv€ti^j"  1  Sam  v.  6,    All  your 


S45  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  &c. 

adversities  are  only  the  beginnings  af  sorrow:  God  "  distributeth 
sorrows  to  you  in  his  anger,"  Job  xxi.  i7.  But  it  will  be  much 
more  grievous  for  you,  when  God  will  require  your  souls  of  you, 
when  your  bodies  shall  be  laid  in  a  dark  cave,  to  be  food  for  worms, 
and  your  souls  shall  descend  into  hell,  to  die  eternally  without  living, 
and  to  live  eternally  without  dying,  and  thus  to  satisfy  by  yourselves 
the  justice  and  truth  of  God  ;  for  "  death  shall  seize  upon  you,  and 
ye  shall  thus  go  down  quick  into  hell,"  Psalm  Iv.  15. 

O  that  ye  would  lay  this  to  heart,  would  shake  off  your  carnal 
security,  and  endeavour  to  prevent  your  destruction.  This  is  indeed 
the  only  way  to  cause  you  to  flee  out  of  yourselves  to  him,  who  is 
set  forth  to  you  by  God  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood. 

But  ye,  who  cannot  disown  these  evidences  of  your  interest  in  the 
death,  burial,  and  descent  of  Christ  into  hell,  will  ye  still  indulge  this 
and  that  corrupt  inclination  of  the  mortified  old  man  ?  '*  will  yt  con- 
tinue in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  Gcd  forbid  ;  how  shall  we  that 
are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein?"  Rom.  vi.  1,  2.     Your  old 
man  is  indeed  crucified,  d<^ad,   and  buried  with  Christ,  but  it  is  only 
initially  ;  ye  know  how  often  ye  are  seized  by  him,  and  carried  cap- 
tive, and  therefore  it  is,  and  remains  your  duty  to  crucify,   mortify, 
and  bury  him  :  exert  yourselves  then  for  this  purpose.     And  should 
ye  not  do  this  ?  (a)  Have  not  your  sins  done  this  to  him,  who  is  the 
beloved  of  your  soul  ?    '*  Ye  have  pierced  him"  by  them,  Zech.  xii. 
10.     He  received  the  wounds  of  his  hands  and  feet  in   the  house  of 
his  friends ,  yea,  ye  still  cause  him  to  *'  serve  with  your  sins,  and 
weary  him  with  your  iniquities,"  Isaiah  xliii.  24.  Can  ye  suffer  this; 
and  will  ye  not  revenge  it  ?  (b)  How  many  crosses  do  your  sins  pro- 
cure to  you  ?  "  Your  iniquities  separate  between  you  and  your  God, 
and  your  sins  hide  his  face  from   you,  that  he  will  not  hear,"  Isaiah 
lix.  2,     Whence   proceed  all  your  afflictions  with  respect  to  your 
body  and  soul,  *'  that  it  is  so  bitter,  that  it  reacheth  even  to  your 
heart  ?"  Is   it  not  "  from  your  way,  your  doings  and  your  wicked- 
ness ?"  Jer.  iv.  is.     When  do  ye  experience   most  pain,  anguish, 
terrour,  and  hellish  sorrows  ?  Is  it  not  after  ye  have  suffered  your- 
selves to  be  ensnared  in  sinful  actions  through  your  unwatchfulness? 
wdl  ye  not  then  attack  your  sins,  that  ye  may  slay  them,  although 
they  should  be  like  a  right  eye,  a  right  hand,  or  a  right  foot  ?   (c)  A 
Christian  surely  never  lives  content,  while  he  doth  not  slay  his  sins  ; 
because  his  oki  man  is  crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  there- 
fore bin  doth  not  agree  with  his  nature :  he  cannot  make  sin  his  prop- 
er work,  like  Satan  and  his  people ;  "  for  he  who  is  born  of  God 


—44.  343 

doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  remaineth  in  him  :  and  he  cannot 
sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God,"  1  John  iii.  9,  Doth  sin  surprize 
him  sometimes,  '•  bringing  him  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin, 
which  is  in  his  members,"  he  is  not  pleased  with  it,  but  complams? 
«  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body 
of  this  diiath  ?"  Rom,  viii.  23,  24.  But  when  he  crucifies,  mortifies 
and  buries  sin,  how  free  and  unconstrained  doth  he  then  hve  i  What 
clearness  is  there  then  in  his  soul  1  How  doth  he  triumph  over  his 
enemy !  yea,  with  what  joy  is  he  then  admitted  to  the  life  which  is 
hidden  with  Christ  in  God  !  for  we  may  then  especially  apply  to  the 
Christian  that  which  we  find,  Coll.  iii.  3.  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your 
life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  "  Have  ye  no  mind  to  that  hfe,  nor 
any  great  inchnation  to  it?  Surely  ye  have:  '^mortify  then  your 
members  which  are  upon  earth,"  Coll.  iii.  5.  (d)  If  your  old  man  be 
crucified,  dead  and  buried  with  Christ,  he  hath  taken  you  for  his 
soldiers,  to  fight  with  laira  against  his  enemies,  who  i-.re  also  your 
enemies.  Will  ye  then  prove  faithless,  or  suffer  yourselves,  through 
cowardice,  to  be  wounded,  or  taken  captive  ?  he  stands  upon  mount 
Zion,  and  sees  who  among  you  fights  valiantly,  and  manfully,  and 
him  he  will  crown.  Shall  not  his  eye,  which  is  upon  you,  encourage 
you  to  fight  I  victory  is  certain  ;  "The  Philistines  are  already  fallen 
before  the  face  of  our  Jonathan,  and  ye,  his  armourbearcrs,  have 
only  to  slay  them  after  him,"  See  1  Sam.  xiv.  13. 

Do  ye  not  know  how  ye  should  conduct  in  this  warfare  ?  are  ye 
desirous  of  knowing  how  ye  must  act,  in  order  to  crucify  and  mortify 
them  ?  are  ye  willing  to  exert  yourselves,  in  order  to  subdue  them  ? 
consider  then  (a)  in  what  condition  ye  are  ;  that  ye  belong  not  any 
more  to  the  old  man,  nor  he  to  you,  and  that  your  old  man  is  cruci- 
fied, dead  and  buried  with  him,  that  ye  have  therefore  nothing  to  do 
with  him,  but  to  fic^ht  against  and  slay  him  ;  "  therefore  reckon  ye 
also  yourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin,  but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,"  Rom.  vi.  11.  As  long  as  we  waver  between  both 
parties,  and  know  not  whether  we  belong  to  Jesus,  or  to  his  enemies, 
so  long  we  will  be  in  a  maze,  and  will  not  be  able  to  learn  this  war- 
fare. Examine  yourselves  therefore,  thitt  ye  may  see  whether  the 
above  mentioned  evidences  be  truly  in  you  ;  and  if  they  be,  why  do 
ye  then  doubt  ?  (b)  Learn  to  distinguish  properly  between  the  mo- 
tions of  the  new  and  of  the  old  man  :  it  often  happeneth,  when  we 
see  corrupt  inclinations  in  ourselves,  proceeding  from  the  old  man^ 
that  we  are  discouraged,  as  though  we  were  traitors,  who  had  still 
such  an  evil  heart,  which  retained  yet  so  many  inclinations  to  the 
enemies  >  l?ut  if  ye  were  skilful  soldiers  in  this  warfare,  y«  would  se^ 


%i%  CHRIST'S  DEATH,  BURIAL,  ke. 

that  ye  yourselves  were  not  the  authors  of  these  things,  but  sin  that 
dwell'-th  in  you,  and  ye  would  witlistand  these  inclinations  coura* 
geously,  like  that  experienced  captain,  Paul ;  see  his  manner  of  act- 
ing in  his  warfure,  Rom.  vii.   15 — 23. 

He  who  will  fig^hl  well,  must  know  his  enemies.  These  enemies 
sometimes  change  their  military  ensigns,  but  their  surest  sign,  by 
which  they  may  be  known,  and  which  they  never  lay  aside,  is  selfseek-? 
ing,  and  aiming  at  self,  tiiough  they  often  disguise  this  sign  with  an  ai> 
pearance  of  virtue,  as  zeal  for  God,  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  necesv 
sity.and  other  things  of  this  kind,  (c)  If  ye  will  destroy  them, 
maintain  a  perfect  and  irreconci'eable  hatred  to  them ;  the  Jews 
would  never  have  crucified  Christ,  if  a  malicious  hatred  to  him 
had  n(;t  possessed  their  souls.  If  we  have  other  enemies  we  must 
love  them  ;  but  our  souls  must  hale  these  lame  and  blind  so  that 
v/e  will  never  make  any  league  with  them. 

And  verily,  when  such  a  hatred  possesseth  your  souls,  it  will  ren- 
der you  active  and  strong  against  the  enemy,  (d)  Stand  upon  your 
guard,  and  take  care  that  the  enemy  fall  not  upon  you  unawares,  or 
surprise  you;  sin  endeavcars  to  assault  you  secretly  by  silent  mo- 
tions of  your  corrupt  nature,  or  by  selfish  ends  in  your  good  works, 
or  by  means  of  opportunities  that  offer  themselves,  or  by  your  out- 
ward members.  Therefore  lake  good  heed,  and  look  on  every  side, 
tiiat  ye  may  see  whether  some  enemy  do  not  appear.  Learn  how 
to  keep  this  watch  from  Prov.  ii.  10,  II,  "  When  wisdom  entereth 
into  iliy  heart,  and  knov/ledge  is  pleasant  to  thy  soul,  discretion 
shall  preserve  thee,  and  understanding  shall  keep  thee.  Also  from 
chapter  iv.  23 — 27,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence  :  for  out 
of  It  are  the  issues  of  life.  Put  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth, 
and  perverse  lips  put  far  from  thee.  Let  thine  eyes  look  right  on, 
and  let  thine  eyelids  look  straight  before  thee.  Ponder  the  path  of 
thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established.  Turn  not  to  the  right 
hand,  nor  to  the  left :  remove  thy  foot  from  evil."  We  ought  indeed 
to  take  the  lantern,  and  the  torch  of  the  word  of  God  with  us,  that 
we  may  see  the  enemy  who  endeavours  to  conceal  himself  under 
cloaks  of  shame,  as  the  Jews  sought  Christ  with  lanterns  and  torch- 
es, (e)  Seize  and  take  your  enemies,  and  even  **  the  little  foxes 
that  spoil  the  vines,"  Song  ii.  15.  Ye  ought  not  to  let  one  of  them 
escape  from  you,  but  ought  to  hold  and  bind  them  fast,  that  not  one 
j>iu  may  break  loose  and  mislead  you :  "  Abstain  from  all  appear- 
ance of  evil,"  1  Thess.  V.  22.  "  Hate  even  the  garment  spotted  by 
the  flesh,"  Jude  vrs.  23.(f)  Inflict  punishment  upon  your  enemies 
by  arraigning  them  before   the  high  tribunal,  accusing  them  of  scdi- 


XVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  40—44  545 

tion  and  blasphemy  j  deride  them  as  vain  and  foolish  ;  scourge  your 
body  of  sin,  restrain  it,  and  subject  it  to  bondage  ;  deprive  your  enemy 
of  his  food,  and  of  whatever  maintains  his  life,  and  dectives  you ; 
nail  and  slay  him  on  the  cross  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be  buried,  and 
taken  away  from  among  men  ;  for  *'  they  who  are  Christ's  have  cru- 
cified the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v.  24.  Your  King 
requires  this,  Luke  xix  27.  (g)  But  forget  not  to  put  on  the  whole 
armour  of  God,  which  Paul  describes,  Eph.  vi.  11 — 18,  especially 
prayer ;  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  41,  that  he  may  afford  you  his  help;  so  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat 
acted,  2  Chron.  xiv.  1 1.  xx.  12,  for  there  "  is  help  laid  upon  one 
that  is  mighty  "  for  you,  Psalm  Ixxxix.  19,  Urge  him  with  your 
claim  which  ye  have  upon  his  death,  burial,  and  descent  into  hell, 
for  which  he  hath  given  you  the  seal  of  baptism,  Rom.  vi.  3 — 6. 

If  ye  conduct  in  this  manner,  ye  will  be  able  to  shout  and  triumph 
over  your  enemies  in  his  appointed  time,  like  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8« 
"  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,"  &c.  Are  ye  still  burthened  with 
many  crosses,  it  is  not  in  God's  wrath,  and  for  youi  destruction}  but 
it  is  from  his  love,  and  for  your  advantage,  Heb.  xii.  6 — 11.  Are 
ye  afraid  of  death,  it  is  unstung  ;  death  will  deliver  you  from  every 
sorrow,  and  be  a  passage  for  you  into  everlasting  life.  Are  ye 
afraid  of  the  dreary  grave  ;  it  hath  been  sanctified  for  you  by  the 
grave  of  Christ,  "so  that  ye  shall  enter  into  peace,  ye  shall  rest  in 
your  beds  "  Isaiah  Ivii.  2.  Are  ye  sometimes  afflicted  ^ith  many 
terrours,  and  sorrows  of  hell,  let  itj  not  seem  strange  to  you  ;  Jesus, 
who  is  yours,  drank  a  more  bitter  cup :  he  pities  you,  and  will  de- 
liver you  finally  from  these  evils.  Hear  what  he  saith,  Isaiah  Iviip 
18.  "  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him  :  I  will  lead  him  also 
and  restore  comforts  unto  him,  and  to  his  mourners."  Or  are  ye 
afraid  of  an  everlasting  descent  into  hell :  *'  He  that  believeth  hath 
everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation  ;  but  is  passed 
from  death  unto  life,"  John  v  24.  He  hath  delivered  you  from  the 
anguish  and  pains  of  hell,  by  his  descent  into  hell ;  yea,  whatever  is, 
as  it  were,  a  death  and  hell  to  you,  shall  itself  be  cast  into  the  fire  of 
hell,  as  was  shown  to  John,  Rev.  xx.  14,  "  Death  and  hell  were  cast 
into  the  lake  of  fire."  But  Jesus,  who  was  once  offered  to  taktf 
away  the  sins  of  many,  shall  appear  the  second  time  \Vithout  S»  tart^ 
them  that  look  for  him  to  salvation.    Amenr 


g« 


I J^ ) 


TrtE 


PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION 


OF  CHRISTc 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Horn.  X.  9.  If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jefius, 
and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  has  raised  him  from  the 
dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.