Q.  45.  JV/mt  doth  the  resurrection  of  Christ  fir o^t  us  P 
A.  That  by  his  resurrection  iie  hath  overcome  death,  that  he 
might  make  us  partakers  of  that  righteousness,  which  he  had  pur- 
chased for  us  by  his  death  :  secondly,  we  are  also  by  his  power 
raised  up  to  a  new  life  :  and  lastly,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure 
pledge  of  our  blessed  resurrection. 


*'Oug; 


UGHT  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to  enter 
into  his  glory  ?"  Thus  spake  Jesus  to  the  men  who  were  going  to 
Emmaus,  Luke  xxiv,  26.  Nothing  can  appear  more  wonderful  ta 
the  world,  than  that  he,  who  was  the  hope  of  mankind,  suffered  so 
much  :  "  Therefore  he  was  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews,  and  to 
the  Greeks  foolishness,"  1  Cor.  1  23.  Yea,  this  greatly  weakened 
the  hopes  of  his  disciples  also  ;  the  notion  of  an  earthly  and  ever 
prosperous  kingdom  hindered  them  from  thinking  of  a  Messiah^ 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  45.  347 

Vho  was  to  be  h«mJ)Ied  :  but  if  they  had  had  access  to  the  counsel  of 
God,  they  would  ha  e  known,  that  Christ  ought  to  suffer  these 
things,  and  so  enter  into  his  glory.  The  Son  indeed  promised  the 
Father,  in  the  eternal  counsel  oT  peace,  that  "  he  would  make  his 
soul  an  ofTering  for  sin  :  and  the  Father  promised  hiin,  that  he  should 
then  "  see  his  seed,  sliould  prolong  his  days,  have  a  portion  with  the 
great,  and  divide  the  spoil  with  tne  strong,"  Isaiah  liii.  10,  12.  As 
"the  prophets *alsb  tesuiied  beforehand  through  his  Spirit, -the  suf- 
•ferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow,"  I  Peter  i.  II. 
See  Psalm  xc.  7.  cxviii.  22.  Isaiah  xlix.  4,  5.  He  should  be 
glorified  for  a  reward  of  his  painful  labour,  Isaiah  xlix.  4,5.  The 
Father  glorified  him  also,  because  he  had  humbled  himself;  so  the 
apostle  speaks,  Philip  ii.  8,  9,  '<  Bi  ing  found  in  fashion  as  a  man, 
he  humbled  hims'df  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death 
of  the  cross;  wherefore  God  hath  also  highly  exalted  him."  And 
so  he  is  not  a  stumbling-block  or  foolishness  to  tl  em  who  are  called, 
but  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  as  the  instructor 
therefore,  having  spoken  largely  enough  of  the  state  of  his  humilia- 
tion, shows  also  that  he  was  exalted  and  glorified  by  'he  four  degrees 
of  his  resurrection,  ascension  to  heaven,  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of 
God  and  coming  again  to  judgment. 

We  must  discourse  at  present  only  of  his  resurrection  from  tha 
ijead  ;  with  respect  to  which  we  shall  observe, 

I.  The  nature, 

II.  The  circumstances, 

III.  The  reality, 

IV.  The  necessity,  and 

V.  The  advantages  of  his  resurrection. 

I.  We  shall  attend  in  the  first  place  to  the  nature  of  Christ's  res* 
U^rection, 

We  suppose  that  he  did  not  rise  according  to  his  Godhead,  but 
according  to  his  manhood,  which  died  ;  "  That  which  thou  sowest 
is  not  quickened,  except  it  die,"  1  Coi.  xv.  36.  This  resurrection 
consisted  in  the  re-union  of  his  body,  which  had  been  dead,  with  hi5 
soul,  and  in  the  revival  of  his  body.  Therefore  Saul  saith  that  "  he 
rose  and  revived,"  Rom.  xiv.  9.  Having  revived,  he  remained  not 
with  the  dead,  but  departed  out  of  the  grave  ;  therefore  when  the 
women  sought  him  in  the  grave,  the  angels  said  to  them,  Lukexxiv. 
5,  6.  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  I  he  is  not  here,  but 
is  risen."  Yet  he  rose  not  in  the  same  weak  and  humble  condition, 
in  which  he  was  before  his  death ;  but  with  a  glorified,  incorrupti- 
ble, and  immortal  body  ;  for  "  we  know  that  Christ,  being  raised 


348    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST. 

from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more  ;  death  hath  no  more  dominioii  over 
him,"  Rom.  vi.  9.  The  Socinians  deny  this,  and  imagine  that  he 
had  not  a  glorified,  incorruptible  and  immortal  body  during  the  forty 
days  before  his  ascension,  but  that  he  was  still  mortal  and  corrupti- 
ble, so  that  he  might  still  have  ditd,  as  long  as  he  was  not  ascended 
into  heaven.  And  do  ye  wish  to  know  the  reason  why  they  think 
so  dishonourably  of  him  ?  it  is  that  they  may  evade  the  proof  which 
"we  adduce  for  our  resurrection  with  the  same  body.  We  teach  that 
we  shall  rise  again  vith  the  same  body  in  which  we  die,  because 
Christ  arose  with  his  own  body  :  the  Socinians  say  in  opposition  to 
this,  that  we  shall  not  rise,  as  Christ  arose,  but  that  we  shall  arise^ 
glo  ified,  immortal  and  incorruptible  ;  that  Christ  had  not  a  glorified, 
incorruptible  and  immortal  body  in  his  resurrection,  because  after 
his  resurrection  he  had  still  the  humble  marks  of  his  wounds,  that 
he  aLfe  and  drank ;  but  these  things  were  not  proofs  of  a  humbled 
and  mortal  body,  but  of  the  reality  of  his  resurrection,  and  he  pre- 
duceci  them  as  such  to  iiis  unbelieving  discipks,  Luke  xxiv.  38 — 43, 
John  XX.  27,  23,  The  marks  of  the  wounds  were  indeed  proofs  that 
he  ha3  been  humbled,  but  not  that  he  was  still  humbled  :  they  were 
rather  nonourable  tokens  of  tiie  conqueror. 

But  when  we  say,  that  he  arose  glorified,  incorruptible  and  immortal, 
we  do  no.i  then  say  with  the  Lutherans,  that  he  became  omnipresent 
with  respect  to  his  manhood  in  his  resurrection  :  for  this  militates 
agaiiist  the  nature  of  his  real  manhood  :  omnipresence  is  an  attiibute 
of  his  divine  nature  which  cannot  be  communicated  to  the  human 
nature,  neither  is  the  human  nature  capable  of  it  ;  for  otherwise  the 
human  nature  would  be  changed  into  the  divine  nature  itself.  It  is 
silly  what  they  say  in  order  to  maintain  this  erroneous  opinion,  that 
his  body  penetrated  through  the  grave-stone,  when  he  arose,  and 
throjgh  the  door,  when  he  came  unexpectedly  to  his  disciples,  "the 
doors  being  shut,"  John  xx.  19,  26:  for  "the  angel  of  the  Lord 
rolled  the  stone  from  the  mouth  of  his  grave,"  Matt,  xxviii.  2,  and 
he  opened  the  door  of  the  house,  to  which  he  came,  by  his  power. 
That  the  doors  were  shut,  when  he  came  in,  only  shows  us  the  time 
when  he  came  to  them,  to  wit,  in  the  evening,  when  men  are  wont 
to  shut  the  doors  :  and  it  manifests  also  their  fear  for  the  Jews,  that 
they  shut  the  doors :  but  it  doth  not  declare  that  he  passed  through 
the  doors,  while  they  were  shut. 

II.  The  circumstances  of  his  resurrection  relate  either  to  the 
Person  who  raised  him,  or  to  the  time,  or  to  the  manner  of  his  res- 
urrection from  the  dead. 

L  The  Person  who  raised  him  was  himself.     This  he  showed 


.    XVU.  LORD'S  DAY>^.  44^.       -^     .        549 

when  he  said,  John  x.  17,  19.  <' Therefore  the  Father  doth  love 
me,  because  I  lay  down  ray  life,  that  I  may  take  it  again.  No  man 
taketh  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  for  myself:  I  have  power  to  lay 
it  down,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  See  John  ii.  19.  l  Pet. 
iii.  18.  The  Socinians,  whose  eirours  pervade  every  considerable 
point  of  doctrine,  deny,  yea,  deride  this,  imagining  it  to  be  impossi- 
ble, that  one,  who  is  himself  dead,  should  raise  himself  from  the 
dead  ;  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  they  think  thus  ;  for  they 
look  upon  him  to  be  no  more  than  a  feeble  man,  who  hath  nothing 
hut  his  human  nature  to  quicken  him.  But  since  he  is  also  the 
almighty  God,  as  v/e  have  shown  in  its  proper  place,  therefore  it  is 
not  so  absurd  and  ridiculous  to  say,  that  he  raised  himself.  It  is 
indeed  true,  that  the  Father  is  most  usually  said  to  have  raised  him  ; 
but  as  he  is  co-essential  with  the  Father,  it  was  also  his  own  work, 
which  be  did  from  the  Father,  and  the  Father  by  him  :  "  For  what 
things  soever  the  Father  doth,  these  doth  the  Son  likewise  ;  for  as 
the  Father  niiseth  up  the  dead,  and  quickeneth  them  ;  even  so  the 
Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will,"  John  v.  19,  21.  And  it  is  truly  a 
mystery,  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead  is  sometimes 
ascribed  to  himself,  and  at  other  times  to  the  Father  ;  as  we  shall 
show  in  the  sequel,  that  the  Father  ought  to  have  raised  his  Son, 
and  the  Son  to  have  raised  himself,  when  v/e  shall  explain  our  fourth 
head.  The  Socinians,  who  do  not  comprehend  this,  blaspheme  what 
they  do  not  understand. 

2.  The  time  of  his  resurrection  was  the  third  day  after  his  burial  t 
this  is  the  declaration  of  the  creed,  agreeably  to  the  scriptures,  1  Cor. 
XV.  3.  We  must  know,  that  the  Jews  began  their  days  with  sunset, 
and  that  Jesus  was  laid  in  the  grave  on  Friday,  before  the  sun  was 
set,  and  this  was  the  first  day  ;  the  second,  beginning,  according  to 
the  reckoning  of  the  Jews,  with  sunset  on  Friday,  was  Saturday  ;  the 
third  day,  beginning  with  sunset  on  our  Saturday,  was  Sunday,  or 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  on  which  day,  after  he  had  lain  the  whole 
night  in  the  grave,  he  rose  early  in  the  morning.  It  is  said  indeed, 
that  he  should  rise  after  three  days,  Mark  xiii.  31,  but  it  is  usual  in 
scripture  to  say,  after  a  day,  when  the  day  is  not  yet  past :  so  Mat- 
thev/ saith,  ^^  after  six  days,"  Matt.  xvii.  1,  which  Luke  expresseth 
by  "  about  eight  days,"  Luke  ix.  28.  Christ  was  circumcised  on  the 
eighth  day,  and  it  is  said,  "  that  eight  days  were  accomplished," 
Luke  ii.  21.  See  also  Acts  ii,  1.  And  so  it  is  not  difficult  to  under- 
stand what  Jesub  saith,  Matt.  xii.  40.  "  As  Jonas  was  three  days 
^nd  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so  also  shall  the  Son  of  man 
bs  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  j"  for  it  was 


550    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST, 

customary  with  the  Jews  to  express  a  part  by  a  whole.     Esther  en* 
joined  on  ihe  Jews,  that  they  should   neither  eat  nor  drink  in  three 
days,  nii^ht  nor  day  ;  and  then  she  would  go  to  the  king,  Esther  iv. 
16,   yet  she  went  not  alter,   but  on  the  third  day  to  the  king,  chap. 
V.  1    See  this  also,  1  Sam   xxx.  1,  12,  13.     There  were  also  certain 
reasons,  why  he  did  not  rise  later  than  the  tliird  day,  to  wit,  that  he 
might  not  see  corruption,   according  to  Psalm  xvi.  10,  like  Lazarus, 
who  having  lain  three  days  in  the   grave,  stank,  John  xi.  3.9  ;  also, 
because  the  faith  of  his  disciples  would  have  been  too  much  v.cak- 
ened,  if  he  had  risen  later  than  the   third  day  ;  their  faith  began  to 
fail  even  on  the  third  day,  Luke  xxiv.  21,  what  would  then  have  be- 
come of  them,  if  he  had  risen  later  ?  Wc  might  add,  that  if  he  had 
risen  after  three  days,  it  would  have  strengthened  the  unhelief  of  the 
wicked  Jews  ;  for  they  knew  that  he  had  said,   'after  three  days  I 
will  rise  again,"  Matt,  xxvii.  63.   Moreover,  he  would  not  rise  before, 
that  he  might  not  tender  his  death  uncertain,  as  though  he  had  only 
fainted.     And  he  chose  the  first  day  of  the  week  in  particular  for  his 
resurrection,  that  he  might  hallow  it  to  be  the  Christian'    sabbath  ; 
and  therefore  that  day  is  called  the   Lord's  day,  Rev.  i.  10,  as  the 
seventh  day  of  the  week  is  called  the  sabbath  day  of  the  Lord. 

3.  The  manner  of  his  resurieclion  was  exceedingly  glorious,  aS 
the  e..rthquaK.e,  the  descent  of  the  gloricus  angel,  and  the  flight  of 
the  keepers  manifested,  Matt  xxviii.  2,  5,  4,  Vov  the  Lord  of  glory 
arose,  and  desiied  to  display  m  this  nianner  his  triumph  over  death, 
thexlevil,  sin,  and  hell. 

III.  But  that  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  is  the  reality  of 
his  resurrection.  Christians  have  not  followed  in  this  matter  cun- 
ningly devised  fables  ;  b\it  they  can  say  with  a  full  persuasion  of 
mind,  ''  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed,"  Luke  xxiv.  34.  For  there  never 
was  any  matter  of  fact,  which  was  attended  with  so  many  evidences 
of  Its  credibility,  as  that  Jesus  arose  from  the  dead.  We  v/ill  not 
speak  now  of  the  empty  grave,  from  which  the  Jews  must  have  taken 
him,  if  he  did  not  .ise,  since  they  v/ere  the  persons,  who  had  the 
care  of  it ;  neither  will  we  alledge  tliat  God  testified  from  heaven 
above  by  an  angtl,  and  from  the  earth  beneath  by  an  earthquake, 
that  his  Son  arose  ,  hut  we  will  prove  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
particularly, 

1.  From  the  testimony  of  the  keepers,  who  showed  the  chief 
priests  all  the  things  that  were  done,"  f^Jatt,  xxviii.  11.  They  re- 
lated not  only  the  earthquake,  and  the  appearing  of  t!^e  angel,  but 
also  that  Jusus  v/as  risen  ;  for,  to  conceal  this  "  the  chief  priests  gave 
ttie  keepers  large  money^"  vrs.  12.     There  cannot  be  a  better  te^ti- 


XVH.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  45.  35\ 

jmony  than  this  of  the  keepers  ;  for  they  were  enemies,  who  would 
l^ot  bear  witness  to  the   truth,   if  they  were  not  constrained  ;  more- 
over, they  were  appointed  to  watch  the  grave,   that  the  disciples  of 
Christ  might  not  steal   him  by  nit^ht,  and  say  to  the  people.   He  is 
risen   from   the   dead,    Matt,  xxvii.   62 — C6.     When  such  persons 
testify  that  he  arose,  it  ought  to  convince  us  fully  ;  for  they  were 
best  and  fully  assured  of  it.     When  they  afterwards  said,  '-  His  dis- 
ciples c^me  by  night,  and  stole   him  away  while   we  slept,"  Matt, 
xxviii,  13,  14,  15,  they  relate  an  arrant  falsehood  ;  for  they  retracted 
their  first  testimony,  not  because  they  were  convinced,  that  they  had 
testified  a  falsehood  at  the  first,  but  because  the  chief  priests  instruct- 
ed them  to  do  so,  bribed  them  with  money,  and  secured  thtm  from 
punishment  by  the  governour.  Yea,  vvhen  they  say,  "  His  disciples 
came  by  night,  and  stole  him  away  while  we  slept,"  they  lie  so  noto- 
riously, that  it  hath  become  proverbial,  In  speaking  of  ^reat  liars,  to 
say,  he  lies  like  a  *  person  whose   office  it  is  to  watch  ;  for  this  is 
such  a  palpable  falsehood,   that  it  shames  itself,  and  establisheth  the 
truth  :  for  how  was  it  possible,  that  the  fearful  and  offended  disciples 
should  dare  to  undertake  this  ?  how  could  they  effect  it  ?  for  the 
grave  was  sealed  and  guarded  by  armed  men.  Did  the  keepers  sleep, 
and  indeed  all  of  them  ?  how  is  this  credible  ?  why  were  they  not 
punished  for  sleeping,  and  suffering  the  body  to  be  stolen,  when  they 
opght  to  have  watched  in  a  matter  of  such  great  importance  ?  When 
the  keepers  suffered   Peter  to  be  taken  from  them,  they  were  im- 
prisoned for  it,  Acts  xii.  18,  19.  If  the  keepers  slept,  how  could  they 
know  that  he  was  not  risen,  but  stolen,  and  indeed  by  his  disciples  ? 
if  the  council  themselves  believed  that  the  disciples  had  stolen  him, 
why  did  they  not  summon  the  disciples  before  them,  accuse  them, 
and  punish  them,  as  the  council  indeed  acted,  when  the  apostles  pub- 
lished his  resurrection  ?  but  the  council  never  accused  any  of  his 
disciples  of  such  a  robbery.    And  therefore  the  first  testimony  of  the 
keepers,  that  Christ  was  risen  from  the  dead,  remains  in   full  force. 
The  reality  of  Christ's  lesurrection  appears  also, 

2.  From  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  and  other  disciples.  These 
"testified  of  God,  that  he  raised  up  Christ,"  1  Cor.  xv.  15.  Their 
testimony  cannot  be  deemed  suspicious  ;  for  (a)  they  were  eye  and 
ear-witnesses,  who  had  handled  him,  had  eaten  and  drunk  with  him 
forty  days,  I  John  i.  1,  3  Acts  i.  3.  x.  40.  41.  (b)  They  were  not 
only  two  or  thrc^e  witnesses,  by  whose  mouth  every  matter  was  to  be 
established,  but  very  many,  the  twelve  apostles,  and  more  than  five 

•  This  is  the  literal  translation  of  a  Dutch  proverb^ 


352    THE  PROFltABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST. 

hundred  brethren,  who  saw  him  at  one  time,  after  his  resurrection, 
of  whom  the  greater  part  were  ahve  in  Paul's  time,  and  to  whose 
testimony  he  appeals,  1  Cor.  xv.  5,  6,  7.  (c)  Ihey  were  even  slow 
to  believe  this  matter,  and  they  would  not  admit  it,  before  they  were 
assured  by  the  most  palpable  proofs,  that  he,  whom  they  saw,  was 
not  a  spirit,  but  Christ  himself,  Luke  xxiv.  37 — 48.  John  xx.  20 — 28. 
(d)  They  te5;ified  this,  not  many  years  after  it  had  happened,  and 
when  those,  who  could  confound  them,  if  they  did  not  testify  the 
truth,  were  dead,  but  at  the  very  time,  when  it  happened  ;  and  thai 
not  only  in  distant  countries,  but  in  Jerusalem  itself,  near  which  it 
happened,  and  near  the  stations  of  tlie  soldiers,  who  were  in  Jerusa- 
lem, (e)  These  witnesses  were  men,  who  loved  the  truth  ;  and 
abominated  ihe  least  lie,  as  they  manifest  in  their  writings,  (f)  They 
had  no  reason  for  propagating  their  testimony,  that  Jesus  was  risenj 
if  they  were  not  fully  assured  of  the  truth  of  it ;  for  they  could  not 
promise  themselves  any  honour  or  profit  from  it,  but  rather  shame, 
loss  and  reproach,  (g)  "  They  were  unlearned  and  ignorant  men," 
Acts  iv.  13,  and  therefore  unable  to  contrive  and  propagate  that 
Jesus  was  risen,  if  it  had  not  been  true.  They  co'ild  not  do  it  by 
force,  like  Mahomet,  who  pushed  his  fictions  in  this  manner  ;  since 
they  had  neither  riches,  arms,  nor  friends  to  assist  them.  The  reality 
of  Christ's  resurrection  appears  further, 

3.  When  we  attend  to  the  consequences  of  it.  For  instance,  (a) 
the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  apostles,  so  that  those 
rude  Galileeans  were  endued  with  the  greatest  wisdom,  and  enabled 
to  utter  it  in  every  language,  (b)  That  the  world  received  the  testimony 
of  simple  fishermen,  and  was  converted  from  its  evil  manners  to 
God  ;  yea,  though  many  were  einaged  at  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 
rection of  Jesus,  they  were  nevertheless  subdued,  and  subjected  to 
him.  (c)  Observe  only  how  Saul  became  a  Paul ;  and  add  to  this, 
(d)  the  destruction  of  the  city,  the  temple,  and  commonwealth  of 
the  Jews.  When  we  attend  to  all  these  consequences,  and  know 
that  they  happened  agreeably  to  the  prophecies  of  Christ,  yea,  that 
they  were  foretold  even  before  him  by  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  are 
not  our  minds  then  perfectly  convinced,  that  our  Jesus,  who  was 
crucified,  dead  and  buried,  is  truly  alive,  and  that  he  arose  from  the 
dead« 

IV.  But  as  his  resurrection  was  real,  so  it  was  also  necessary,  that 
he  should  arise,  for  "  as  it  behooved  him  to  suffer,  so  it  behooved 
him  also  to  rise  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day,"  Luke  xxiv.  46. 
It  was  not  possibL,  that  he  shguld  be  holden  of  death,"  Acts  ii.  24. 
The  reasons  are, 


XVii.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q,  45.  353 

A.  Because  it  concerned  the  Father,  that  his  Son  should  arise 
from  the  dead  ;  for,  (a)  the  Father  had  pronriised  him  this  and  fore- 
told it,  Isaiah  iiii.  8,  10.  "  He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from 
judgment :  and  who  shall  declare  his  generation,  ?  He  shall  pro- 
long his  days,"  Isaiah  Iv.  3,  "  I  will  give  you  the  sure  mercies  of 
David."  Upon  which  the  Saviour  also  grounded  his  expectation. 
when -he  said  to  his  Father,  PsaJm  xvi.  lO,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave 
my  soul  in  hell ;  thou  wilt  not  suffer  thy  holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion." By  which  Peter  and  Paul  also  prov:?  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  Acts  ii.  24 — 31.  xlii.  34—37  And  the  Saviour  also  frequent- 
ly foretold  it,  as  he  had  a  certam  knov/ledge  that  he  should  live  again 
after  his  death,  Matt.  xii.  40.  xvii.  9,  23.  John  ii.  19,  22.  (b)  The 
Father  had  proclaimed  him  to  be  his  Son  before  the  whole  worid? 
Matt.  iii.  17.  xviio  5,  This  is  denied  by  the  JeWs,  and  Jesus  had 
maintained  it.  This  dispute  was  therefore  brought  to  the  throne 
and  the  judgment-seat  of  God;  that  the  supreme  Judge  might  decide 
it :  for  Caiaphas  had  adjured  him  by  the  hving  God,  and  Jesus,  ad- 
jured in  this  manner,  confessed  it  before  God,  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64. 
Ought  not  now  the  Judge  of  the  whole  earth  to  do  right,  and  to 
show  that  he  had  proclaimed  him  to  be  his  Son  in  truth,  and  that 
his  Son  had  been  put  to  death  unjustly  on  account  of  this  confession? 
And  how  could  the  Father  decide  this  better  than  by  raising  him 
from  the  dead,  and  so  publicly  manifesting  that  he  still  acknowledg- 
ed him  to  be  his  Son  ?  and  thus  "  he  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  df 
God  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead,"  Rom.  i.  4.  And  so  "  he  was  also  raised  up 
from  the  dead  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,"  who  had  proclaimed 
him  to  be  his  Son  before  the  world,  Rom.  vi.  4.  (&)  The  Father  had 
constituted  him  Suretv,  that  he  might  satisfy  his  vindictive  justice 
for  the  guilt  of  the  elect.  He  had  also  fully  satisfied  for  their  guilt, 
and  had  therefore  proclaimed,  John  xix.  30.  "  It  is  finished."  And 
so  it  behooved  the  Father  to  manifest  this  by  his  resurrection,  fo 
give  him  an  acquittance,  to  discharge  him  from  his  obligation  to  die, 
to  raise  him  from  the  dead,  and  so  to  justify  him  :  therefore  Paul 
saith,  that  "  he  was  justiiied  in  the  Spirit,"  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  He  said 
himself  from  a  foresight  of  this,  that  the  Lord  would  help  him,  and 
would  raise  him  up  to  justify  him,  because  none  could  emplead  him 
any  more,  Isaiah  1.  8,  9.  "  He  is  near,  that  justifieth  me,  who  will 
contend  with  me  ?  let  us  stand  together  ;  who  is  mine  adversary  ? 
let  him  come  near  to  me.  Behold  the  Lord  God  will  help  me,  who 
is  he  that  shall  condemn  me  ? 

5o  It  was  necessary,  that  tlie  Saviour  should  rise  from   the  dead; 

3  A 


354    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRlSTe 

because  it  concerned  himself  that  he  should  rise.  For  (a)  his  hu- 
man nature  was  united  to  his  divine  nature  ;  now  it  was  impossible 
that  he  should  suffer  his  body  to  see  corruption,  after  he  had  fully 
satisfied  by  his  death,  (b)  He  was  anointed  to  be  king  of  Zion, 
and  the  government  was  to  be  on  his  shoulders  :  but  this  could  not 
be,  unless  he  lived  and  arose  from  the  dead ;  for  how  should  it  ap- 
pear that  he  was  a  king  as  long  as  he  continued  under  the  power  of 
death  ?  how  could  he  rule  over  others,  as  long  as  he  was  himself  dead  ? 
therefoe  it  is  said,  Rom.  xiv,  9.  "  For  this  end  Christ  both  died, 
and  arose,  and  revived,  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  living  and 
dead,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  neces- 
sary also, 

3.  Because  it  concerns  believers ;  for  it  was  necessary  that  he 
should  be  piofitable  and  advantageous  to  them  by  his  resurrection, 
as  well  as  by  his  death.     We  must  now  therefore  explain, 

V.  the  advantages  which  believers  receive  from  his  resurrection. 
The  catechism  mtntioneth  three. 

1.  The  first  advantage  is,  '^  that  he  by  his  resurrection  hath  over- 
come death,  tliat  he  might  make  us  partakers  of  that  righteousness 
which  he  had  purchased  for  us  by  his  death-"  Since  he  satisfied 
for  guilt  by  his  death,  therefore  he  also  destroyed  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,"  Heb.  ii.  14.  Because  the  devil 
could  not  hold  him  under  the  power  of  death,  as  a  creditor,  since 
the  Judge  was  satisfied  he  endeavours  to  do  it  as  a  tyrant,  stirring 
up  his  instruments  to  keep  him  shut  up  under  death,  and  in  the  grave 
by  a  seal  and  watch.  But  since  it  was  impossible  that  he  sliould  be 
holden  any  longer  by  death,  he  manifests  that  he  is  the  mighty  God, 
he  bursts  the  prison  open,  and  goes  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer : 
therefore  he  said,  Rev.  i.  18,  "I  am  he  that  liveth,  and  was  dead  ; 
and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore.  Amen.  And  I  have  the  keys 
of  hell  and  of  death."  Ashe  was  alive,  he  could  render  us  parta- 
kers of  the  righteousness,  which  he  had  purchased  by  his  death, 
that  we  by  his  righteousness  might  be  justified  before  God  : 
whereas  if  he  had  not  risen,  he  could  not  impart  his  righteousness 
to  any  man,  and  would  have  evidenced  that  he  had  not  satisfie-d,  anp 
that  he  had  not  been  constituted  surety  by  God.  So  the  apostle 
Gaith,  1  Cor.  xv.  7,  "If  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain,  ye 
are  yet  in  your  sins."  But,  as  ''he  was  delivered  for  our  offences, 
so  he  was  also  raised  again  for  our  justification,"  Rom.  iv.  25.  And 
therefore  believers  may,  in  consequence  of  his  resurrection,  as  an  in- 
strument of  acquittance,  showing  that  he  had  satisfied  for  guilt,  and 
purchased  righteousness,   "come  unto  God  with  the  answer  of  ?i 


XVIf.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  4S.  355 

••--ood  conscience,"  and  hunibly  request  whatsoever  he  hath  purchased 
for  thtm.     See  this  1  Peter  ill.  21. 

2.  The  second  advantage  is,   "that  v/e  by  his  power  are  raised  up 
to  a  new  life."     By  his  sacrifice  and  death  the  old  man  is  crucified, 
dead  and  buried  with  him,  as  is  shown  on  the  43d  question ;  but  it  is 
more  especially  a  fruit  of  his  resurrection,  that  the  new  life  is  raised 
up.     The  new  hfe  is  the  spiritual  life,  which  is  dead  in  the  sinner, 
but  which  is  raised  up  in  regeneration  and  sanctification,  whereby  the 
cUjct  receive  a  principle  of  life,  new  habits  and  powers,  according  to 
the  image  of  God,  are  united  to  him  by   his  Spirit,  grow  up  continu- 
ally, and  surrender  themselves  unto  him  to  serve  him,  Eph.  ii.    1. 
1  Peter  iv.  2.     Rom.  vi.  13.     This  is  effected  by  the  power  of  the 
upraised  Christ:  for  "  as  the  first  man  Adam  was  made  a   living 
soul,  so  the  last  Adam  was   made  a  quickening  Spirit,"    1  Cor.  xv. 
45.     This  pov/er  of  his  resurrecdon   Paul  wished  to  know,  Philip. 
iii.  10.     And  truly  this  new  life  is  raised  up  by  the  power  of  his  res- 
urrection, because,  (a)  he,   being  risen,  raiseth  up  the  dead  sinner, 
and  admonisheth  him  to  rise  up  also  from  the  dead  ;  "  Therefore  he 
saith,  awake  thou  that  aleepest,  and  arise  from  the   dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light,"  Eph.  v.  14.     If  Jesus  were  not  risen,  he  would 
never  send  the  word  of  life  to  any  sinner,  (b)     His   resurrection   is 
the  pattern  after  which  we  must  raise  up  and  dispose  the  new  life  ; 
*'\ye  are  b'lrie:!  with  him  by  baptism  into  death,  that  like  as  Christ 
was  raised  up  to  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even   so   we  also  should 
walk  in  nev/ness  of  life,"  Rom.  vi.  4.  (c)     As  the   elect  are  consid- 
ered as  dying-  with  him,  so  ihey  are  also  considered  as  rising  from 
the  dead  with   him,  by  which  his  life  becomes  also  their  life  ;  for 
"  they  are  quickened  and   raised  up  with    him,"  Eph.  ii.   5,  6,    and 
"are  thus  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection,"  Rom. 
vi.  5,  (d)     By  virtue  of  his  resurrection  he  also  works  this  new  life 
in  them  through  his  Spirit ;  therefore  he  said,   "  Because  I  hve,  ye 
shall  live  also,"  John  xiv.    i9.     And  he  works  this  fife  by  living  in 
them  himself,  Gal.  ii.  20.  (e)     His   resurrection  is  also  a  powerful 
motive  to  believers  to  live  for  him,  and  to  his  service  ;  as  they  are 
also  urged  to  this  by  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  a  motive,  Rom.  vu 
%  10,  11.  (f)     Christ  being  risen  is  also   "a  fountain  of  life"  to 
them.  Psalm  xxxvi.  9,  by  which  he  hath  a  fulness  of  life,  to  commu- 
nicate  "out  of  his  fulness,  grace  for  grace,"  John  i.    16      xiv.  6» 
Finally,  (g)  he  is  the  object,  and,  as  it  were,  the  breath  of  their  life  ; 
*'  your  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God,"  Coll.  iii.  3.    «  To  me  to 
live  is  Christ,"  Philip,  i,  21. 

a»  The  third  advantage  is,  "  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a 


356     THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST- 

sure  pledge  of  our  blessed  resurrection."     We  will  show  in  its  proper 
place,  tuu  both  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  shall  rise  again.     We 
speak  now  of  his  resuJTection  only  ac  a  sure  pledge  of  the  rcburrec* 
tion  of  birlievers  ;  but  nut  of  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked.     They 
will  surely  be  raised  up  by  Chiist  as  a  Judge,  but  not  as  a  Mediator, 
bince  he  is  not  their  »)ediator.     Because   he   arose  from  the  dead, 
they  also  surely  shall  be  raised  up  by  him,  but  not  to  be  saved,  but 
to  lie  condemned  by  him  :  for  •'  God  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  which 
he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he  hath 
ordained ;  wiiereof  he  hath  given  assurance  to    all  men,  in  that   he 
huth  raised  him  f  om  the  dead,"  Acts  xviii.  3K     But  believers  shall 
arise  to  salvation,  of  which   the  resurrection  of  Christ  is   a  certahi 
pledge  to  assure  them  of  it ;  for  (a)  he   rose    again,  as  *'  the  first 
fruits  of  them  that  slept,"    1  Cor.  xv.  20,  frcm  which  it  is  certain, 
that  the  whole  harvest  of  believers  is  sanctified,  and  shall  be  gathered 
in,  1  Cor.  xv.  22.  (b)     Christ  arose  as  a  conqueror  of  death,  not  only 
for  himself,  but  also  for  hi    friends,  whom  he  loved  dez^rly  :  for  "  he 
died,  and  rose  agtiin  for  them,"   2   Cor.  v    15,  from  which  it  is  cer- 
tain, that  they  shall  not  be  holdea   by  death,  but  shall  be  raised  up. 
This  is  evident  from    I  Cor,   xv.  54 — 57,     "  When  this  corruptible 
shall  have  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortai  shall  have  put  on  im- 
Xnortality,  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the   saying  that  is   written. 
Death  is  swallowed  up  in  \ictory.     O  death,    where    is  thy    sting  ? 
O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?    The  sting  of  death  is   sin  ;  and  the 
strength  of  sin  is  the  law.     But  thank's  be  to  God,  which  giveth   us 
the  victory   through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (c)     He  rose  also  as 
the  Head  of  believers,  who  are  his  members,  and  who  must  therefore 
be  also  raised  up  ;  for  he  cannot  be  a  living  head  of  dead  members. 
And  therefore  believers  may  say  with  a  sure  expectation  of  him, 
"  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
his  glorious  body,"  Philip,  iii.  21,  (d)     He  rose  also  as  Lord  to  rule 
over  them  ;  now  he   could  not  rule  over  them,   if  he   did  not  raise 
them  from  the  dead  ;  "  for,  to  this  end  Christ  died,   and  rose,   and 
revived,  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living,"    Rom. 
xiv.  9.  (e)     And  he  rose  also  as  their   pattern,  to  which   they  must 
be    made  conformable  :  for  *'  as  we    have    borne    the    image    of 
the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly,"     1  Cor. 
vv.  49. 


 


APPLICATION. 

What  we  have  now  observed  must  certainly  tend  to  demonstrate 
the  sincerity  of  our  doctrine  against  the  Socinians,  who  slander  us,  as 
though  we  ascribed  the  whole  efficacy  of  the  salvation  of  believers 
only  to  the  death  of  Chist,  and  no  parr  to  his  resurrection.  For  we 
say  that  his  death  would  have  been  of  no  avail,  and  he  could  not 
have  rendered  believers  partakers  of  it,  if  he  had  not  been  raiised- 
from  the  dead.  And  therefore  the  resurrection  of  Christ  perfects  the 
consolation,  which  the  saints  receive  from  his  death,  so  that  they 
may  say  with  the  high  praises  of  God  in  their  mouths,  on  account  of 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  "  Who  is  he  that  condemneth,  it  is 
Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather  that  is  also  risen  fiom  the  dead," 
Rom.  viii.  34. 

See  also  herein  the  greatest  proof  of  the  truth  and  purity  of  the 
Christian  faith  against  heathens  and  Jews  ;  for  if  Christ  be  risen, 
his  doctrine  is  also  true  and  divine ;  for  he  rested  th«^  final  decision 
of  the  matter,  whether  he  was  the  true  Messiah,  who  was  sent  by 
God,  or  not,  upon  the  reality  of  his  resurrection  ;  for  when  his  adver- 
saries asked  of  him  a  sign,  as  a  proof  that  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Messiah,  he  gave  them  no  other  sign  than  that  as  Jonas  had  been 
three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  so  he  should  be 
three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth,  Matt.  xii.  40, 
See  also  John  ii.  18,  19.  The  Jews  had  also  observed  this  sayings 
and  therefore  they  also  secured  the  grave,  that  Jesus  might  not  be 
taken  from  them  by  stealth,  and  it  might  appear,  as  though  he  were 
risen  Matt,  xxviii.  Yea,  the  apostles  also  rested  the  truth  of  Chris- 
tianity  upon  the  reality  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  See  particularly 
1  Cor.  XV.  14 — 19.  As  v/e  have  now  fully  proved,  that  Jesus  really 
arose  from  the  dead,  we  conclude  with  perfect  assurance,  that  the 
faith  of  Christians  is  the  pure  truth. 

Although  all  who  profess  themselves  to  be  Christians  will  own 
that  Jesus  is  risen,  and  is  therefore  the  true  Messiah,  according  to 
the  scripture,  and  that  the  doctrine  which  he  and  the  apostles 
taught  is  consequently  the  truth  ;  nevertheless,  when  the  matter  is 
rightly  considered,  we  shall  find  that  the  Pelagians  and  Semipelagi- 
ans,  to  whom  nearly  all  those,  who  ai'e  not  of  our  church,  have  joined 
themselves,  deny  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  ;  for  the  Socin- 
ians hold  that  the  rightco\isness  purchased  by  his  death  is  nothing 
but  the  publication  of  a  new  law,  which  is  an  improvement  of  the 
Uv/  of  Moses  :  the  Remonstrants  teach  nothing  of  it,  but  only  that  he 


358    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST. 

satisfied  the  v/i!I  of  God,  and  rendered  God  in  some  manner  recon- 
cikahle  to  us  ;  and  the  Papists  say  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
merited  that  their  good  works  can  merit,  and  thus  become  their 
righteousness  before  God,  or  a  pan  of  it.  And  so  Christ  hath  no 
righteousness  to  apply.  Do  they  speak  of  any  application,  they  deny 
It  in  fact ;  for  t!iey  ascribe  all  efficacious  working  to  free-will,  and  to 
their  own  activity.  The  reformed  church  alone  confesses  and  be- 
lieves the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  in  her  doctrine  of  this 
Loid's  day,  because  this  is  according  to  the  word  of  God,  which  we 
have  shown  in  order. 

Let  none  of  us  however  think  that  we  believe  the  power  of  the 
resurrection  of  Christ,  and  partake  of  the  advantages  of  iu  because  it 
is  preached  to  us,  is  understood  and  professed  by  us ,  for  "  many 
have  the  name  that  they  live,  v/hile  they  are  dead,"  Rev.  ii.  1.  There- 
fore it  becomes  us  to  examine  ourselves  whether  v/e  do  truly  partake 
of  the  advantages  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  Itit  each  one  attend 
diligently,  and  see  whether  he  can  apply  to  himself  what  v;e  shall 
say.     These  do  nov/  truly  partake  of  these  advantages  : 

1 .  They  who  partake  of  his  righteousness.  He  doth  not  render  u 
person  a  partaker  of  his  righteousness  immediately,  without  any  in- 
tervening act  of  the  person  J  but  by  faith, -which  he  giveth  to  him; 
the  apostle  mentions  this  evidence,  Rom.  x.  9,  10,  "If  thou  shalt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine 
heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved, 
*5  For  v/ith  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness,  and  with  the 
mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  They  see  by  faith  that 
there  is  no  righteousness  nor  worthiness  at  all  in  themselves,  or  ia 
their  best  works,  by  v/hich  they  can  stand  before  Cod.  They  see 
this  not  only  as  a  truth  out^of  them.selves  in  the  word,  but  in  them- 
selves, so  that  they  regard  it  with  concern  and  solicitude  ;  and  as 
persons  who  are  self-condemned,  hungering  and  thirsting  through 
faith,  they  take  their  refuge  to  him,  that  they  may  be  found  in  him., 
and  have  his  rigliteousness,  may  rest  and  glory  in  him,  and  thus  con- 
fess him.     See  this  in  the  example  of  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  7 — 10. 

2.  They  who  are  raised  up  by  his  resurrection  to  a  new  life.  A 
life  altogether  different  from  the  former  takes  place  in  them  ;  for 
»'  if  any  man  be  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  new  creature  ;  old  things  are 
passed  away,  behold  all  things  are  become  new,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  They 
who  were  dead  are  made  alive,  Eph.  ii.  5,  G.  The  eyes  of  their 
understandings  are  opened,  so  that  they  see  and  know  God  and 
C.'irist  by  a  new  and  heavenly  light,  which  beams  on  them  from  the 
face  of  God,    2  Cor.    iv-  C.     They   have  ears  to  hear,  so  that   the 


XVir.  LORD'S  DAY,  Q.  45,  359 

word  of  God  penetrates  to  their  hearts,  and  subjects  their  souls  to 
the  obedience  of  the  Lord,  2  Cor.  x.  4,  5.  Thev  have  also  a  right 
taste  and  rehsh  for  the  good  things  of  God's  house  :  to  Uve  with 
and  for  God,  and  in  fellowship  with  him,  is  the  sweetest  of  ail  sweet 
things  to  them ;  ''  They  taste  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  and  there- 
fore they  are  exceedingly  desirous  of  this,  1  Peter  ii.  2,  3.  May 
they  not  attain  to  the  enjoyment  of  it,  and  doth  the  Lord  hide  his 
countenance  from  them,  tiiey  have  a  painful  feehng  of  it :  yea,  the 
Jeast  sin  which  occasioneth  it,  is  bitter  to  them,  and  their  hearts, 
smite  them  on  account  of  it,  1  Sam.  xxiv.  6.  2  Sam.  xxiv.  10.  Yea, 
since  they  are  alive,  they  will  be  averse  from  dead  sinners,  and  their 
dead  sins,  and  they  choose  the  society  and  coversation  of  the  living  : 
"  They  contemn  viie  persons,  and  honour  them  that  fear  the  Lord,'* 
Psalm  XV.  4.  1  John  iii.   14, 

3.  They  to  whom  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is  a  sure  pledge  of 
their  blessed  resurrection.  This  doth  not  imp'y  that  they  are  always 
assured  of  their  blessed  resurrection  :  O  no,  they  are  again  and 
again  distressed  with  fear  :  yet  they  are  exceedingly  set  upon  the 
blessed  resurrectionv  and  exceedingly  d-^sirous  of  it,  on  account  of, 
and  through  tiie  resurrection  of  Jesus.  See  2  Cor.  v.  2 — 5.  And 
that  they  may  not  deceive  themselves  here  with  vain  imaginations, 
they  will  examine  themselves  repeatedly,  and  will  give  themselves 
no  rest,  until  they  have  indisputable  evidences,  and  the  testimony  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  that  they  are  the  children  of  God,  and  that  "  he 
saith  to  their  souls,  I  am  thy  salvation,"  Psalm  xxxv.  3. 

Is  it  thus  with  you,  hearers  ?  or  do  ye  know  nothing  of  all  this  ? 
doth  it  suffice  you  that  ye  have  only  an  agreeable  hope  that  all  will 
be  well  with  you  ?  know  then,  that  ye  have  not  yet  any  part  in  the 
righteousness  of  Christ,  in  the  new  life  and  blessed  resurrection  ; 
for  ye  are,  though  not  heathens  by  profession,  nevertheless  without 
grace ;  "  ye  are  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope, 
and  without  God  in  the  world,"  Eph.  ii.  12,  and  therefore  ye  are  not 
yet  "  born  again,  and  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  John 
iii.  5.  And  what  a  deplorable  case  I  ye  shall  die  and  be  buried, 
without  ever  having  yet  lived.  It  is  true,  ye  shall  rise  again  :  but 
alas !  what  will  it  be  !  wlien  ye  shall  "  go  forth  to  the  resurrection 
of  damnation?"  John  v.  29.  "Ye  shall  awake  to  shame  and  ever- 
lasting contempt,"  Dan.  xii.  2.  And  therefore,  friends,  "  to  day,  if 
ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  3« 
"Awake,  tliou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ 
shall  give  thee  light,"  Eph,  v»  14, 


S60    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRiSTc 

But,  believers,  ye  who  ate  partakers  of  his  righteousness,  the 
new  life,  and  the  hope  of  the  blessed  resurrestion  through  his  res- 
tirrection. 

1.  Exercise  often  fuith  in,  and  with  respect  to  his  resurrection-  This 
is  the  greatest  object  of  faith,  and  wt-  render  his  resurrection  profita" 
ble  to  us  by  faitii,  as  we  have  jUst  now  shown  from  Rom  x  9,  10*. 
Let  yout  faith  then  be  active  here,  (a)  in  acknowledging  and  receiv- 
int>,  upon  so  many  evidences,  the  doctrine  of  his  resurrection,  with 
an  trievation  of  mind,  as  a  great  and  real  truth.  It  is  not  enough  to 
suppose!  to  be  a  truth,  for  ttiis  doth  not  derive  any  power  to  the 
soul  from  his  resuirection  ;  but  there  must  he  an  actual  assent  to  it 
With  an  elevation  of  mind,  so  that  we  can  say  from  the  contemplation 
of  tiiia  truth,  *'•  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed,"  as  the  apostle  saith,  Luke 
xxiv*  Si.  Because  we  do  not  do  this  more,  therefore  we  mourn  and 
compLiin,  like  the  disciples,  who  did  not  believe  the  testimony  con- 
cerning his  resurrection  :  yea,  this  is  the  reason  why  our  hearts  are 
distmbed  with  so  many  wicked  injeciions  concerning  God,  his  truth, 
and  our  blessed  exoectation.  What  causes  the  soul  to  fear  so  from 
time  to  time  that  her  faith  will  be  in  vain,  that  she  is  yet  in  her  .sins, 
that  she  will  be  lost,  and  be  of  all  men  the  most  miserable  ?  Is  it  not 
because  she  doth  not  exercise  an  active  historical  faith  in  this  truth  ? 
See  what  shakings  it  occasions,  when  we  neglect  to  exercise  an 
active  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  I  Cor.  xv.  14,  15,  17,  18^ 
19.  (b)  Exercise  faith  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  in  order  to  infer 
therelVoiTi  your  grer^t  advantage  and  happiness;  for  if  he  be  risen, 
ye  have  an  interest  and  property  in  his  righteousness  ;  he  hath  also 
made  you  alive,  and  "  begotten  you  to  a  lively  hope,  through  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,"  I  Peter  i.  3.  Can  ye  not  perceive 
this,  because  ye  are  not  led  into  it  so  clearly,  in  such  a  lively  manner, 
and  so  sensibly  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  Christians  have  their  ra- 
tional understanding,  and  must  therefore  endeavour  to  be  active  here 
not  only  with  their  feehngs,  and  with  wonderful  raptures;  but  also 
with  their  rational  faculties  ;  what  else  is  the  meaning  of  those  words, 
which  we  read,  Rom.  vi  10,  11.  '' In  that  he  died,  he  died  unto 
sin  once  ;  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God.  Likewise 
reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  sin  ;  but  alive  unto 
God  through  Jesus  Clirist  our  Lord."  What  is  the  consequence^ 
when  "the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,"  is  it  not,  "  that  we  judge 
that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  ?"  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15,  and 
doth  it  not  also  cause  us  to  judge  that  if  one  be  risen  for  all, 
then  are  all  risen  ?  if  we  were  only  active  in  a  rational  manner,  we 
should  obtain  more  and  higher  actings  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord*  (c,'* 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  45.  361 

liCt  your  faith  act  also  upon  the  resiirrection  of  Christ,  by  improving 
it  to  your  advantage  and  profit ;  (a)  by  pleading  with  the  Father  by  • 
**  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience,"  1  Peter  lii.  21,  upon  ihe  ground 
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  iiath  porrured  for  you  an  interest' 
in  his  purchased  righteousness,  as  Vv-e  do,  v»'hen  praying  for  purchas-' 
ed  grace,  we  say  to  God  in  this,  or  some  other  manner,  hath  r-ot 
thy  Son  satisfied  for  me,  and  purchased  all  righteousness  and  g-race  ? 
hast  tliou  not  raised  h?m  up  from  the  dead,  and  thus  manifested  that 
thou  wast  satisfied,  and  that  be  v.as  made  to  me  of  thee  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption  ?  This  truly  conveys 
much  grace  to  the  soul.  Or,  (b)  by  uniting  yourse  ves  to  the  living 
Jesus,  in  order  to  receive  from  him  continually  the  influence  of  the 
new  life  :  «  I  live,"  saith  that  great  man,  Gal.  ii.  20,  "  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  livelh  in  me  :  and  the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I 
live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  As  Elisha  stretched  himself 
once  and  again  upon  the  dead  child,  and  thus  restored  it  to  life,  2 
Kings  iv.  33,  34,  35,  so  ought  the  believer  often  to  cast  and  stretch 
himself  upon  the  living  Jesus,  until  he  receives  warmth  and  life 
from  him.  Or  (c)  by  looking  for  your  blessed  resurrection  through 
him  with  a  lively  hope,  as  Job  did,  when  he  said,  "  I  know  that  my 
Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the 
earth.  And  though,  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in 
my  flesh  shall  I  see  God  :  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine 
eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another :  my  reins  long  exceedingly 
within  me,"  *  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27. 

2.  Let  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  be  your  boasting  and 
joy.  When  ye  contemplate  the  wonders,  the  reality,  and  advan* 
tages  of  his  resurrection,  it  will  ravish  and  transport  your  souls  with 
marvellous  joy.  \''erily  Christ,  the  angels,  and  all  the  beUevers  wer6 
wonderfully  pleased,  when  he  was  risen  ;  yea,  the  ancient  believers 
rejoiced  in  the  expectation  of  his  resurrection,  when  they  said  in  the 
Spirit,  "  The  stone  which  the  builders  refused  is  become  the  head- 
stone of  the  corner.  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous 
in  our  eyes.  This  is  the  day  that  the  Lord  hath  made,  we  will  re- 
joice and  be  glad  in  it."  Christians  ought  then  also  especially  to 
abstain  from  labour  on  their  day  of  rest ;  and  they  ought  therefore 
to  meditate  much  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  to  speak  much  of  it, 
and  rejoice  together  on  account  of  it.  Hear  how  the  scripture  calls 
on  you  to  do  this,  2  Tim.  ii.  8.  "  Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
raised  from  the  dead." 

*  Thig  16  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  tratislation, 
3  B 


362    THE  PROFITABLE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST. 

3.  Show  yourselves  now  also  alive,  and  raised  from  the  dead  i 
**  His  love  ought  to  constrain  you  to  live,  not  any  more  to  yourselves, 
but  to  him  who  died  for  yoi',  and  rose  again,"  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15. 
Read  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Romans,  and 
see  what  motives  he  derives  from  a  consideration  of  his,  and  there- 
fore also  of  your  spiritual  death  and  resurrection,  to  live  to  your 
living  Lord  ;  dismiss  therefore  from  you  the  dead,  your  deadly  sins, 
and  your  dead  languor  in  good  works,  that  ye  may  not  seek  the 
living  Jesus  among  the  dead,  and  may  do  his  will  heartily,  with 
sincere  love,  and  with  liveliness. 

4.  Let  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  also  administer  consola* 
tion  to  you.  Are  ye  fearful  of  any  bodily  or  spiritual  danger  ?  "  Fear 
not  ye ;  for  ye  seek  Jesus  who  was  crucified  ;  he  is  risen,"  Matt* 
xxviii.  5,  6.  Do  ye  miss  him,  hath  he  withdrawn  so  far  from  you, 
that  he  seems  to  be  entirely  and  for  ever  taken  away  from  you,  he 
will  retuni  to  you  again  in  mercy,  and  say,  "  Mary,"  behold  here 
am  I,  See  John  xx.  11 — 16.  Doth  your  hope  begin  to  languish,  like 
that  of  the  men  who  went  to  Emmaus ;  he  will  new-quicken  and 
new-enliven  it,  and  enable  you  to  say,  "  Did  not  our  hearts  burn 
within  us,  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way,  and  while  he  opened 
to  us  the  scriptures?"  Luke  xxiv.  32.  Is  your  peace  interrupted; 
your  Lord,  who  is  risen,  "  saith,  Peace  be  unto  you,"  John  xx.  19, 
21.  Doth  it  grieve  you,  that  ye  are  so  little  influenced  by  the  Spirit 
with  respect  to  your  hearts  and  actions ;  since  Jesus  is  risen,  he  will 
in  his  own  time  breathe  upon  you,  and  say,  "  Receive  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  John  xx.  22.  Yea,  his  Spirit  shall  not  be  taken  away  from 
you,  but  abide  with  you,  to  raise  you  also  from  the  dead,  according 
to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  viii.  1 1.  "If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised 
up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from 
the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit  that 
dwelleih  in  you."  Amen. 


(^63  ) 


CHRIST^S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION 


INTO  HEAVEN. 


XVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Acts  i.  9,  10)  1 1,  And  when  he  had  spoken  these  things,  while 
they  beheld,  he  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  recei\ed  him  out  of 
their  sight.  And,  while  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  heaven, 
as  he  went  up,  behold,  two  men  stood  by  them  in  white  apparel; 
which  also  said,  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazm^  up  into 
heaven  ?  this  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven? 
shall  so  come,  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven. 

Q*  46.  Hqw  dost  thou  understand  these  words^  ^^  He  ascended  into 
heaven  .?'* 

A.  That  Christ,  in  sight  of  his  disciples,  was  taken  up  from  earth 
inle  heaven,  and  that  he  continues  there  for  our  interest,  until  he 
come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

Q*  4t7.  Is  710 1  Christ  tfien  with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the  iworid,  as^ 
he  hath  promised  ? 

A-  Christ  is  very  man  and  very  God  :  with  respect  to  his  humaU 
nature,  he  is  no  more  on  earth  ;  but  with  respect  to  his  Godhead, 
majesty,  grace  and  Spirit,  he  is  at  no  time  absent  from  us.