Q.  48.  £iit  if  his  human  nature  is  not  firesent,  ivherever  his  God- 
head isy  are  not  then  these  ttvo  natures  in  Christ  separate  from  one 
another  ?' 


36i  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  Sec 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  since  his  Godhead  is  incomprehensible  and 
omnipresent,  it  must  necessarily  follow,  that  the  same  is  not  limited 
with  the  human  nature  he  assumed,  and  yet  remains  personally 
united  to  it. 

Q.  49.  0/  what  advantage  to  us  is  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  ? 

A.  First,  that  he  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  his  Father  in 
heaven  ;  secondly,  that  we  have  our  flesh  in  heaven  as  a  sure  pledge, 
that  he  as  the  head  will  also  take  up  to  himself  us  his  members: 
thirdiy,  tliat  he  sends  us  his  Spirit,  as  an  earnest,  by  whose  power 
^Te  ''  seek  the  things  which  ar?  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the 
ngat  hand  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth." 


\N^ 


HEN  the  high  priest  was  about  to  make  an  atonement  for 
himself,  for  his  household,  and  all  the  people,  on  the  great  day  of 
atonement,  according  to  Lev.  xvi.  he  was  obliged,  besides  other  cere- 
mon  es,  to  slay  a  bullock  and  a  ram,  to  enter  with  their  blood  into 
the  holy  of  holies,  to  sprinkle  it  on  the  mercy-seat,  and  to  take  a 
censer  with  burning  coals,  and  put  incense  thereon,  that  he  might 
cover  the  mercy-seat  with  the  cloud  of  the  incense. 

These  things  were  certainly  allegorical.  This  law  was  "  a  shadow 
of  things  lo  come,  ths  body  of  which  is  Christ,"  Coll  ii  17.  We 
may  not  doubt  but  that  the  holy  of  holies  signified  the  third  heaven  ; 
the  high  pricst  shadowed  forth  the  Messiah  ;  the  slaying  of  the  bul- 
lock and  of  the  ram,  had  respect  to  the  suffering  and  death  of  our 
Mediator  ;  the  entrance  of  the  high  priest  into  the  holy  of  holies 
withihe  blood  and  incense  represented  the  emrance  and  ascension 
of  Christ  into  heaven,  to  present  the  blood  of  his  atonement  to  his 
Father,  and  enforce  it  with  the  incense  of  his  intercession,  as  an  of- 
fering. Let  none  imagine  that  this,  though  a  pleasant,  is  an  un- 
grounded allusion,  contrived  by  one  or  another ;  the  Holy  Ghost 
himself  reveals  this  mystery  to  us  by  his  wise  apostle,  Heb.  ix, 
12—24. 

Inasmuch  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  us  in  the  fifteenth  and 
sixteenth  Lord's  days,  as  a  sacrifice  slain  for  atonement,  v/e  see  him, 
^afte""  he  had  shown  himself  alive  by  many  infallible  tokens,  as  it  is 
represented  in  the  seventeenth  Lord's  day)  enter  by  his  ascension 
into  heaven,  into  the  true  sanctuary,  with  his  own  blood,  in  order 
to  be  our  advocate  in  the -presence  of  his  Father,  to  fix  our  hopes 
"upon  heaven,  and  to  render  us  heavenly-minded.  This  is  the  sum 
of  the  eighteenth  Lord's  day. 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  365 

There  are  four  particulars  in  this  Lord's  clay,  which  reqitire  our 
consideration,  with  respect  to  the  ascension  of  Christ. 

I.  The  nature. 

II.  The  reality. 

III.  The  necessity,  and 

IV.  The  advantages  of  his  ascension. 

I.  The  first  particular  is  (1)  explained  in  the  forty  sixth  qiiestior/^ 
and  (2)  rescued  from  two  objections  in  the  forty-eighth  question. 

We  ir.ust  explain  then  in  the  first  place  the  nature'  of  Christ's 
ascension,  that  Ave  may  the  more  easily  refute  those  who  oppose  us 
in  this  matter,  and  may  exhibit  more  emphatically  the  important 
salvation,  which  is  procured  for  believers  by  this  ascension.  We 
iTiust  know  beforehand,  that  neiiher  the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  only  the  Son  of  God,  or  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  :  not  ac- 
cording to  his  divine,  but  according  to  his  human  nature,  which 
alone  was  capable  of  a  change  of  place  ;  but  the  divine  nature,  being- 
omnipresent,  is  incapable  of  a  change  of  place.  It  is  true,  that  the 
Godhead  is  sometimes  said  to  ascend :  "  God  went  up  from  Abra- 
ham," saith  Mosjs,  Gen.  xvii.  22,  but  this  doth  not  denote  that  God 
departs  from  earth,  and  enters  into  heaven  with  his  essence,  but  that  he 
takes  up  the  visible  token  of  his  special  presence  from  men  :  as 
when  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  visible  token  of  the  divine  presence, 
was  carried  up  to  Zion,  they  sang,  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout," 
Psalm  xlvii.  S.  And  we  might  also  say  that  Christ  ascended  in  this 
manner  into  heaven  with  respect  to  his  Godhead,  because  the  God- 
head took  up  its  human  nature,  in  which  it  manifested  itself  especi- 
ally and  personally  present,  into  heaven  from  among  men.  And  so 
"he  ascended  even  as  he  descended.  See  John  iii.  13.  xvi.  28  Eph. 
iv.  9,  10.  He  did  not  descend  from  the  Father  out  of  heaven,  ac- 
cording to  his  manhood,  but  according  to  his  Godhead,  v/hich  mani- 
fested itself  personally  present  in  its  human  nature.  John  teacheth 
us  this  most  emphatically,  when  he  saith,  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of 
the  only  begotten  of  the  Father),"  John  i.  14.  In  the  same  manner 
he  also  ascended,  when  the  Godhead  took  up  its  human  nature  into 
heaven. 

This  being  premised,  we  will  explain  his  ascension  into  heaven 
more  particularly  with  respect  to  the  circumstances  1,  of  place,  2, 
of  time,  3,  of  persons,  4,  of  agents,  and  5,  of  qualities. 

1.  The  first  circumstance  of  Christ's  ascension  is  the  place  from 
which,  and  the  place  to  which  he  ascended.  The  place  from  which 
he  ascended  was  the  earth  ;  this  lower  world  ;  ^-  He  should  depart 


365  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

out  of  this  world,  and  go  unto  the  Father,"  John  xiii.  1.  "  When 
he  should  go  to  the  Father,  he  should  leave  the  world,"  chaj).  xvi. 
28.  And  it  was  particularly  "  the  mouut  of  Olives,  lying  a  sabbath- 
days  journey  from  Jerusalem,"  Acts  i.  12.  This  mountain  he  had 
made  the  place  of  his  usual  resort  for  prayer :  there  where  he  had 
so  often  sent  up  his  scul  toward  heaven,  he  would  now  ascend  up  to 
heaven  in  body  and  soul  together. 

By  this  mountain  lay  the  village  of  Bethany,  and  it  was  near  this 
village  where  he  ascended  into  heaven,  as  Luke  relates,  Luke  xxiv. 
50,  51.     He  would  thus  make  that  house  of  affliction  *  a  house  of 
glorification   for   himself.     The   place   to  which   he  ascended  was 
"  heaven,  into  which  he  was  taken  up,"  Luke  xxiv.  51.  Acts  i.  1 1. 
He  was  not  taken  up  only  into  the  air,  which  is  also  called  heaven^ 
Matt.  vi.  2(i,  nor  into  the  firmament,  the  starry  heaven,  called  *'  God's 
heaven,"  Psalm  viii.  3,  but  "  far  above  all"  visible  "  heavens,"  Eph. 
iv.  10,  and  so  into  the  third  heaven,  mto  which  Paul  was  caught  up> 
2  Cor.  xii.  2,  called  "  the  heaven  of  heavens,"    1  Kings  viii-  27,  by 
which  we  cannot  understand  with  the  Lutherans,  who  hold  that  the 
body  of  Christ  became  omnipresent,  the  state  of  happiness,  and  God 
himself,  who  is  every  where  ;  but  a  real  place  so  called,  into  which 
he  entered  by   his  ascension,  and  from  which  he  is  not  absent  with 
respect  to  his  manhood  ;  for  "  he   left  the  world,   and  went  to  the 
Father,"  John  xvi.  28,  and  "  he  departed  out  of  the  world  unto  the 
Father,"  John  xiii.  1.   As  this  third  heaven,  into  which  he  ascended, 
is  also  described  as  a  limited  place,  distinct  from  the  earth,  and  is 
therefore  called  "  Paradise,"  2  Cor.  xii.  4,  "  The  house  of  his  Father, 
in  which  there  are  many  mansions,"  John  xiv.  2,   "  The  palace,  and 
throne  of  God,"  Psalm  xi.  4.  Isaiah  Ixvi.  1.     "The  city  which  hath 
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,"   Heb.  xi.  10,  beings 
the  high'cst  heaven,"  Heb.  i.  3,  where  Jesu-.  is,  as  in  a  place,  "  sitting 
on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Coll.  iii.  1,  "  from  which  place  believers 
albo  wait  for  him,"  I  Thess.  i.  10,  and  "  to  which  he  will  also  take 
up  "  all  the  saints  to  him,  John  xiv.    3.  Paul  saith   indeed  that  "  he 
ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens,"  Eph.  iv.    10,  but  this  doth  not 
denote  that  he  is  not  in   heaven,    as  in  a  place,  but  present  every 
where  with  his   human   nature :  for   his  ascending  up  far  above  all 
heavens  is  opposed  to  his  descending  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth,  vrs.  9.     Now  as  we  cannot   say  that  his  descending  into  the 
lower  parts  of  the  earth  denotes  that  he  became  omnipresent,  so  we 
cannot  say  that  his  ascending  up  far  above  all  heavens  denotes  that 

•  The  anthor  alludes  to  the  meaning  of  the  name  Bethany,  which  signifies 
•\  houae  of  affliction. 


XVlIi.  LOilD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  36/ 

he  became  omnipresent ;  but  the  apostle  intimateth  that  Christ  was 
by  his  ascension  glorified  to  the  highest  degree  in  the  third  heaven, 
(which  is  far  above  all  visible  heavens)  as  he  was  humbled  to  the 
lowest  degree  in  his  incarnation,  descending  into  the  lower  parts  of 
Ihe  earth. 

2  The  time  of  his  ascension  desetves  our  attention,  as  well  as  the 
place.  This  was  forty  days  after  his  resurrection.  Moses  was  forty 
days  with  God  on  the  mount ;  just  so  many  days  Elijah  travelled  in 
the  strength  of  the  meat  which  he  had  received  of  the  angel,  until  he 
came  to  the  mount  of  God  :  Jesus  was  presented  to  the  Lord  on  the 
fortieth  day  after  his  birth,  Luke  ii.  22,  according  to  the  law,  Lev, 
xii  2,  4,  6.  He  was  also  forty  days  in  the  wilderness,  fasting,  that 
he  might  be  tempted  of  the  devil,  Matt.  iv.  1^-1 1.  Thus  he  also 
ascended  into  heaven  forty  days  after  his  resurrection.  He  would 
not  ascend  sooner,  that  he  might  instruct  his  apostles  so  long  in  the 
things  pertaining  to  his  kingdom,  and  give  them  the  most  certain 
proef  that  he  was  really  arisen,  that  there  might  not  remain  the  least 
suspicion  concerning  this  matter  ;  for  "  he  was  taken  up,  after  he 
had  through  the  Holy  Ghost  giveii  commandments  unto  the  apos- 
tles, whom  he  had  chosen.  To  whom  also  he  showed  himself  alive 
after  his  passion,  by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty 
days,  and  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God," 
Acts  i.  S,  3.  Therefore  Paul  also  alledgeth  as  a  proof  of  the  reality 
of  his  resurrection,  that  "  he  was  seen  many  days  of  them  which 
came  up  with  him  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  who  were  his  witnes= 
ses  unto  the  people,"  Acts  xiii.  31.  Neither  would  he  remain  with 
them  longer,  that  he  might  not  confirm  them  in  their  opinion  that  he 
was  about  to  erect  a  temporal  kingdom,  and  also  strengthen  their 
excessive  attachment  to  his  bodily  presence.     See  Acts  i.  6,7. 

3.  But  he  did  not  ascend  privately,  at  a  distance  from  the  society 
of  men,  but  before  the  eyes  of  many  who  were  present.  We  do  not 
read  that  there  was  any  person  present  wlien  Enoch  was  taken  up  to 
heaven.  Gen.  v.  24,  and  we  do  not  find  that  any  one  saw  near  at 
hand  Elijah  ascend  up  into  heaven,  except  Elisha,  2  Kings,  ii.  12. 
But  Jesus  ascended  <*  in  the  sight  of  his  disciples,"  saith  the  instruc- 
tor. These  were  his  eleven  apostles.  Acts  i.  2,  9.  Those  who  had 
been  with  him  during  all  his  sufferings,  he  wished  to  be  with  him 
also  when  he  was  glorified,  that  they  might  be  witnesses  of  his  glory, 
as  they  had  been  of  his  sufferings  ;  but  the  holy  apostles  were  not 
the  only  persons  who  were  present,  but  there  were  also  two  men  in 
white  apparel,  doubtless  angels,  present ;  in  order  to  inform  the  apos- 
ties  of  the  manner,  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  ascended  and  should 


568  CFIRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  kc 

come  again.  See  this  Acts  i.  10,  1 1,  and  also  to  honour  him  as  well 
by  their  presence,  as  by  their  acclamations  on  accrmnt  of  this  glory 
of  his.  And  who  can  doubt  but  that  there  was  a  great  multitude  of 
the  heavenly  host  present,  although  invisible,  who  surrounded,  ac- 
companied and  welcomed  him,  and  shouted  aloud  his  praise  ?  This 
was  seen  at  his  birth,  when  he  came  to  fight,  Luke  ii.  13,  14. ^  After 
he  had  put  the  devil  to  flight,  '•'  the  angels  came  and  ministered  to 
him,"  Matt.  iv.  11.  May  we  not  then  conceive  that  they  came  to 
him.  in  order  to  increase  his  glory,  after  he  had  accomplished  his 
fight,  and  when  he  ascended  triumphantly  into  his  palace  ?  Suiely 
"when  *'  he  ascended  up  on  high,  when  he  led  captivity  captive,  and 
received  gifts  for  men,  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  they  might 
dwell  with  him,  then  the  chariots  of  God  were  twenty  thousand,  yea, 
thousands  of  angels  :  the  Lord  was  among  them,  as  in  Sinai,  the 
holy  place,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  17,  18. 

4.  But  w^e  must  inquire  particularly  who  were  the  agents  in  this 
asceniiion.  These  were  the  Father,  and  Christ  himself.  When  the 
divine  work  of  ascension  is  ascribed  to  the  leather,  it  is  then  called 
"staking  up,"  Mark  xvi.  19.  Luke  xxiv.  51,  and  "  an  exaltation 
by  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  ii.  S3,  in  order  to  evince,  (a)  that 
the  Father  acknowledged  and  accepted  him  as  his  Son,  though  he 
was  not  acknowledged  as  such  by  the  Jews,  but  slain  by  them,  as  a 
Wasphemer.  (b)  That  the  Father  himself  declared  that'  he  had 
finished  the  work  which  had  been  given  him  to  do,  and  that  he  would 
therefore  bestow  upon  him  the  stipulated  reward  of  his  labour.  This 
Jesus  urged  with  his  Father,  when  he  said,  John  xvii.  4,  5.  '*'I  have 
glorified  thee  on  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thougavest 
me  to  do.  And  now,  O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  ownself, 
with  the  gl'>ry  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was."  The 
Father  had  promised  him  this,  as  a  reward  of  his  grievous  labour, 
Isaiah  xlix.  4,  5.  lii.  13.  liii.  10.  And  thus  **  the  Father  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  because  he  obeyed  him  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross,"  Philip,  ii.  8,  9.  But  the  divine  work  of  the 
ascension  is  also  ascribed  to  the  Son,  who  is  co-essential  with  the 
Father,  and  then  the  ascension  is  called  "  a  departing  to  the  Father," 
John  xiii. — "  a  going,"  John  xiv.  2,  3, — "a  going  away,"  John  xvi. 
7, — ^' a  passing  into  the  heavens,"  lieb.  iv.  14,  and  "an  entering 
mto  that  within  the  veil,"  lleb.  vi.  19,  20,  as  an  evidence  of  his  di- 
vine power,  and  his  right  as  Mediator  to  take  possession  by  himself 
of  the  glory  which  he  had  merited  ;  for  "  all  i)ower  was  given  him 
in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  But  we  ought  not  to 
forget  that  a  clcud  was  employed   in  this  ascension  into  heaven. 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  369 

either  (a)  to  conceal  Jesus  from  the  eyes  of  the;  beholders,  who  wera 
yet  too  much  attached  to  his  bodily  presence  ;  for  "  a  cloud  received 
him  outof  tlieir  sight,"  Acts  i.  9  ;  or  (b)  to  serve  as  an  instrument 
and  vehicle  to  take  him  up,  as  the  chariot  and  horses  of  tire  took 
Elijah  up,  2  Kings  ii.  11  $  or  (c)  to  serve  as  a  triumphal  car,  in  order 
to  display  his  glory;  as  God,  watn  he  displuyeth  his  glory  in  trie 
cIo'iJs,  is  said  ''to  make  the  clouds  his  chariot,"  Psalm  civ.  3. 

5.  In  ordei  to  illustrate  the  ascension  of  Christ  further,  we  must 
attend  also  to  the  qualities  of  it.     These  qualities  are  many  and  va- 
rious, particularly,  (a)  That  he  ascended  only  once  into  heaven,  as 
"  the  high  priest  went  once  a  year   into  the  sanctuary,  not  without 
blood,  so  Jesus,  the  true  High    Priest  entered  into  the  holy  place  by 
his  own  blood,"  Heb.  ix.  7,  11,  12.     We  must   therefore  condemn 
the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  Christ  ascended   twice  into  heav- 
en,  once  about  the    time  of  his  baptism,  in  order  to  be  instructed, 
and  then  also  forty  days  after  his  resurrection  ;  for  it  was  not  neces- 
sary that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven  in  order  to  be  instructed,  see- 
ing he  was  the  essential   Word  and  Wisdom  of  the  Father.     The 
scripture  doth  not  mention  aught  of  such  a  first  ascension  about  the 
time  of  his  baptism  ;  doth  it  speak  of  his  descending  from  heaven, 
we  have  explained  before  the  meaning  of  this.     Christ  saith  indeed 
that "  he  who  had  descended  from  heaven,  had  also  ascended,"  and 
that  before  he  ascended  forty   days  after  his   resurrection,  John  iii. 
13,  but  he  speaks  not  then  of  his  bodily  ascension,  but  of  an  ascen- 
sion  into   heaven   with  his  understanding,    either  according  to  his 
divine,  or  his  human  nature,  which   had   penetrated   to  the    highest 
matters  in  the  highest  manner,  which   was  not  permitted  to   every 
man,  but  only  to  him  "  who  had  descended  from  heaven,  and  was 
notwithstanding   still  in  heaven,"  John    iii.  13.     For  "  who   hath   a- 
scended  up  into  heaven,  or  descended  ?  who  hath  gathered  the  wind 
in  his  fists  ?  who  hath   bound   the  waters  in  a  garment  ?  who   hath 
established  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  what  is  his  name,  and   what 
is  his  Son's  name,  if  thou  canst  tell?"     Thus  asks  Agur  that  he 
may  humble  himself,  and  all  other  men,  on  account  of  the  diminu- 
tive capacity  of  man.     Sec  this  Prov.  XXX.   1 — 4. 

(b)  When  he  ascended  in  this  manner,  he  was  not  silent,  but  dis- 
coursed till  the  last  moment :  "  After  he  had  spoken  these  things, 
to  wit,  that  they  should  receive  power  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
they  might  be  his  witnesses,  he  was  taken  up,"  Acts  i.  8,  9.  Jesus 
v'ould  be  profitable  to  the  last,  no  less  than  Elijah,  who  was  taken 
up  while  he  talked  witli  Elisha. 

(c)  But  did   he   depart  from  his  friends  with  severity  ?    no,  but 
3C 


370  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c* 

with  a  blessing ;  for  "  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them,  he 
was  parted  from  them,"  Luke  xxiv.  51.  Although  he  withdrew,  he 
would  not  take  his  blessing  with  him  ;  yea,  by  and  after  his  ascen- 
sion he  poured  out  his  Spirit  upon  them.  He  premised  this,  Acts  i.« 
8,  and  he  also  performed  it,  Acts  ii.  1,  4,  33.  After  Elijah  was 
ascended  into  heaven,  his  spirit  rested  upon  Elisha,  according  to  his 
petition,  2  Kings  ii.  9,  15.  But  Jesus,  possessing  the  fulness  of  all 
grace,  bestowed  a  greater  measure  of  his  Spirit  upon  his  apostles. 

(d)  He  ascended  also  visibly  into  heaven  j  for  "  he  was  taken  up, 
while  they  beheld,"  Acts  i.  9.  Yea,  they  doubtless  looked  a  long 
time  after  him,  even  until  the  intervening  cloud  hid  him  from  their 
sight,  and  they  saw  him  no  more,  as  it  is  said  of  Elisha,  that  "  he 
saw  Elijah  no  more,"  after  he  was  ascended,  2  Kings  ii.  12. 

(e)  Nevertheless  he  did  not  ascend  into  heaven  to  remain  there  for 
ever,  but  **  to  return,  in  order  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead." 
The  two  men  in  white  apparel  said  to  the  apostles,  "  This  Jesus  which 
is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come,  in  like  manner  as 
ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven,"  Acts  i.  10,  11.  As  his  coming 
again  will  be  to  the  terrour  of  the  wicked,"  who  will  mourn,  when 
they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt, 
xxiv.  30,  so  it  will  be  to  the  joy  and  comfort  of  his  favourites  ;  for 
he  promised  them,  that  "  if  he  went  away  from  them,  he  would  pre- 
pare a  place  for  them,  and  after  ihat,  he  would  come  again,  and 
receive  them  to  himself,  that  they  might  be  where  he  was,"  John 
xvi.  3. 

(f)  But  the  quality  thai  discovereth  most  of  all  the  nature  of  his 
ascension  is,  that  he  w?s  taken  up  locally  from  earth  into  heaven, 
leaving  the  earth,  and  going  into  heaven.  This  is  denied  by  the 
Lutherans,  who  pretend  that  Christ  became  omnipresent  with  his 
body,  as  though  he  were  now  on  earth  with  his  body,  as  well  as  in 
heaven.  This  opinion  which  confutes  itself,  these  men  will  by  all 
means  maintain,  that  they  may  the  more  easily  defend  their  errone- 
ou::,  opinion  concerning  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's 
supper ;  but  it  is  untenable,  inasmuch  as  (a)  he  according;  to  his  man- 
hood, "  left  the  world,  and  went  to  the  Father,"  John  xvi.  28.  There- 
fore he  said,  ''  Me  ye  have  not  always,"  Matt.  xxvi.  11.  (b)  He  is 
also  with  respect  to  his  manhood  in  heaven  ;  for  the  heaven  must 
receive  him  until  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,"  Acts  iii. 
21-  (c)  He  ascended  visibly  ;  for  "he  was  taken  up  while  they  be- 
held," Acts  i-  9,  but  they  never  saw  him  become  omnipresent.  Was 
he  concealed  from  their  sight  by  a  cloud,  Iiis  body  was  however  not 
extended  and  rarified  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  vanished,  (d)  He  will 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  -16— 49.  371 

come  again  in  the  same  manner,  in  which  he  departed  ;  but  he  will 
come  locally  from  heaven  in  the  clouds,  accoidinpj  to  PhiHp.  iii.  20. 
1  Thess.  i.  10,  iv.  16,  therefore  he  also  ascended  locally  (e)  The 
phrases  of  *' receiving  up,  departing  to  the  Father,  going,  and  going 
away,"  which  are  used  here,  intimate  a  change  of  place,  (f)  The 
omnipresence  of  Christ's  body  militates  against  the  nature  of  that 
body,  which  cannot  be  present  in  more  than  one  place  at  the  same 
time  I  moreover,  oixmi presence  is  an  incommunicable  attribute  of 
God. 

We  must  now  defend  the  orthodoxy  of  our  church  on  this  head 
against  two  objections,  which  arc  offered  by  the  Lutherans. 

(a)  The  first  is  thus  proposed  in  the  forty  seventh  question  :  "  Is 
not  Christ  then  with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  as  he  hath 
promised?"  This  he  promised,  Matt,  xxviii.  2Q,  but  it  follows  not 
from  this  promise,  that  he  is  present  with  us  according  to  his  body  ; 
for,  seeing  he  is  God  and  man  in  one  person,  therc&re  he  can  be 
truly  present  with  his  people  according  to  his  Godhead,  majesty, 
grace,  and  Spirit,  although  he  be  not  present  with  them  according 
to  his  body  :  when  he  had  no  body,  he  was  present  with  his  people, 
by  his  ^pir^t  and  grace,  for  he  promised,  Exod»  xx.  24.  "  In  all 
places  where  I  record  my  name,  I  will  come  unto  thee,  and  bless 
thee."  Why  then  cannot  he,  now  he  hath  a  finite  and  limited  body, 
also  be  present  with  us  without  his  body  ?  yea,  when  he  promiseth 
that  he  will  be  present  with  his  Spirit  and  grace,  he  denies  that  he 
"will  be  present  with  his  body  :  "  If  I  go  not  away,"  saith  he,  "the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but,  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him 
unto  you,"  John  xvi.  7. 

(b)  The  second  objection  is,  that  the  human  nature  ought  to  be 
wherever  the  Godhead  is,  or  that  otherwise  those  tv/o  natures  will 
be  separated,  one  from  the  other,  which  being  impossible,  the  human 
nature  must  be  present  wherever  the  Godhead  is-  We  should  allow 
this  consequence;  to  wit,  that  the  human  nature  is  in  all  places  with 
the  Godhead,  on.  account  of  the  union  of  the  two  natures,  if  those 
two  natures  were  united  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  mixed,  or  to  be 
equal  one  to  the  other  ;  but  the  two  natures  are  not  united  in  this 
manner,  but  the  divine  nature,  which  is  infinite,  assumed  the  human 
nature,  which  is  finite,  into  a  personal  union  with  itself.  It  follows 
from  this,  that  wherever  the  human  nature  is,  there  also  the  God- 
head is,  and  that  it  remains  personally  united  to  the  human  nature ; 
but  it  doth  not  follow  that  the  human  nature  is  wherever  the  God- 
head is,  For  instance,  the  sun  iz  uniiied  to  its  beams,  but  the  sun  is 
jiot;  "iyhereYer  it3  beams  ?>ic3 


tin  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

(c)  They  say  also,  that  "  Christ  fiUeth  all  things,"  according  to 
iEph.  iv.  10.  But  it  is  not  said,  that  he  fills  all  places  with  his  body ; 
bill  the  apostle  speaks  only  of  his  filling  up  that  which  was  lacking 
in  his  church  with  the  gifts  of  grace,  by  means  of  his  servants,  whom 
he  gives.  See  Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  13. 

I  .  Our  second  general  head  is  the  reality  of  his  ascension  into 
heaven.  And  verily  we  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables, 
when  we  made  known  to  you  the  glory  of  his  ascension,  for  it  can 
be  proved  by  the  most  forcible  arguments  ;  (a)  Set^iHg  he  is  risen, 
as  we  have  ^ully  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day  that  he  really 
arose.  The  iorce  of  this  argument  lies  herein,  that  since  he  is  risen, 
if  he  did  not  ascend  into  heaven,  he  must  then  either  have  died 
again,  which  none  can  imagine  with  any  probabihty,  or  he  must  have 
been  found  here  or  there,  as  it  was  a  manifest  evidence,  that  Elijah 
was  really  ascended,  because  he  could  not  be  found,  2  Kings  ii.  16, 
17,  18.  Now  our  Jesus  was  not  found,  (b)  It  is  also  certain,  that  he 
ascewded  into  heaven,  because  those  who  testified  it,  saw  it  with 
their  eyes  ;  "lie  was  taken  up,  while  they  belield,"  Acts  i.  9.  Yea, 
feince  this  uptaking  he  hath  been  seen  in  heaven :  "  Stephen  saw  the 
heavens  opened,  and  the  -on  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 
God,"  Acts  vii.  56.  And  "  he  was  seen  last  of  all  by  Paul,  as  by 
one  born  out  of  due  time,"  1  Cor.  xv.  8,  to  wit,  when  he  appeared 
to  him  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  Acts  ix.  4 — 7,  \7  The  testimony 
of  these  persons  cannot  be  deemed  suspicious,  as  we  have  proved  on 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  (c)  If  v/e  attend  to  the  events  following  his 
ascension,  as  the  outpouring  of  h's  Spirit,  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  conversion  of  the  v/orld,  and  all  this  according  to  his 
prophecies  ;  and  also  the  outgoings  of  the  hearts  of  believers  toward 
him  in  heaven,  through  the  operation  of  his  Spirit,  who  is  sent  ta 
them  from  heaven  by  Christ,  and  leads  them  up  to  him,  wc  must 
conclude  with  a  full  persuasion  of  mind,  that  he  really  ascended  into 
heaven. 

in.  We  must  also  be  certain,  that  this  ascension  into  heaven  was 
necessary,  (a)  because  it  v/as  foretold,  and  indeed  with  such  an  assu- 
rance of  mind,  as  if  it  had  already  happened  ;  thus  they  shouted  to 
him.  Psalm  Ixviii.  18,  "  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast 
led  captivity  captive  :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men  :  yea,  for  the 
ifebellious  aho,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  Jesus 
himself  foretold  it,  John  :dv.  15,  16,  20.  Now  this  could  not  fail, 
(b)  it  was  also  typified  ;  we  do  not  speak  now  of  Enoch  and  Elijah, 
ftee  only  how  the  high  priest  went  once  a  year  with  strange  blood 
Itito  the  holy  of  holies,  and  thereby  plainly  represented  that  the  true 


"kVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  373 

Kigh  Priest  should  enter  into  heaven  itself  with  his  own  blood.  Paul 
assures  of  this,  Heb.  ix.  7,  12,  24,  25.  It  was  also  typified  by  the 
bringing  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  up  .into  the  city  of  David,  and 
into  the  temple,  2  Sam.  vi.  12,  15.  1  Kings  viii.  1 — 6  That  thb 
had  a  respect  to  the  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  into  heaven,  the 
people  of  the  Lord  inform  us,  when  they  cry  one  to  another,  while 
they  were  bringing  the  ark  up,  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the 
Lord  with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,"  Psalm  xlvii.  5.  Since  now  these 
types  foreshowed  the  people  of  the  Lord,  yea,  sealed  to  them  on  the 
part  of  God,  that  his  Son  should  ascend  into  heaven,  therefore  it 
was  also  necessary,  that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven. 

(( )  The  ascension  of  Christ  was  necessary  also  en  the  Father's 
account,  who  would  not  suffer  that  his  Son  should  always  remain 
absent  from  him.  inasmuch  as  '*  he  v/as  his  delight,"  Prov.  viii.  3, 
and  also  on  the  Son's  account,  who  ought  to  receive  in  this  manner, 
his  promised  reward,  that  "  he  should  lift  up  the  head,"  according 
to  that  which  is  said,  Psalm  ex.  7.  It  was  necessary  also  on  account 
of  the  elect,  who  would  otherwise  have  missed  the  greatest  and  most 
necessary  advantage  of  his  ascension  :  therefore  he  quieted  them 
with  this  consideration,  when  they  were  greatly  disturbed  on  account 
of  his  departure,  saying,  '*  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away," 
John  xvi.  7.     And  thus, 

IV.  We  proceed  to  our  fourth  general  head,  to  wit,  the  advanta- 
ges of  the  ascension  of  the  Lord.  The  instructor  mentions  three 
advantap:es : 

1.  "  That  he  is  our  advocate  inthe  presence  of  his  Father  in  heav- 
en." We  explained  the  nature  of  Christ's  advocacy,  when  we 
discoursed  of  his  priesthood  on  the  twelfth  Lord's  day  ;  to  perfect 
which,  it  was  necessary  tliat  he  should  ascend  into  heaven,  ;  "  for 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  would  not  be  a  priest,"  lieb.  vii.  5.  It  was 
therefore  necessary,  that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven,  and  thus, 
like  the  high  priest  under  the  Old  Testament,  enter  into  the  sanctu- 
ary, "  to  appeal  m  the  presence  of  God  for  us,"  Rom.  viii.  34.  It 
is  true,  he  could  pray  for  his  people  on  earth,  as  he  also  did,  John 
xvii.  but  on  account  of  his  certain  expectation,  that  he  would  shortly 
be  taken  up  into  heaven,  he  prays,  John  xvii.  as  if  he  were  already 
in  heaven :  therefore  he  saith,  vrs.  1 1,  ^'  I  am  no  more  in  the  world," 
and  vrs.  24.  "  I  will  also  that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be 
where  I  am."  And  it  is  truly  a  great  advantage  to  his  people,  that 
they  have  such  an  advocate  at  court,  before  the  throne,  who  pleads 
for  them,  and  who  will  assuredly  gain  their  cause.  With  this  John 
supported  the  minds  of  believers  under  their  dejection  on  account 


374,         CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION.  &c. 

of  their  sins,  when  he  s^id,  1  John  ii.   1,  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." 

2.  Of  no  less  consequence  is  the  second  advantage,  to  wit,   "  that 
we  have  our  flesh  in  heaven,  as  a   sure  pledge,  that  he  as  the  head 
will  also  take  up  to   himself,  us  his  members."     Believers  know  of 
nothing  worthier  or  more  blessed  than  that  Christ  will  take  them  up 
to  him  in  heaven  :  "  For  this  beinij  far  the  best,  Paul  was  thevefore 
desiious  to  depart,    and   to  be  with   Christ,"   Philip,  i.    23.      The 
words  with  Vrhich  believers  must  comfort  one  another,  are  that  they 
shall  be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so 
shall  ever  be   with  the  Lord,"    1  Thess.  iv.  IT,  )8.     This  great  ad- 
vantage  follows  from  his  ascension,  as  he    himself  testifieth,  John 
xiv.  3,  "  If  I  go,  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I    will  come  agaia, 
and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 
It  is  not  strange,  that  being  ascended  into  heaven,  he  will  take  them 
also  to  himself  into  heaven  ;  for  (a)  he  is  there,  as  their  sure  pledge, 
sirce  he  is  their  portion  and  treasure,  given   to   them  in   behalf  of 
that  house  of  their  Father,  which  confirms    and   ensures   heaven  to 
them,  as  their   properly,  and  therefore  the  apostle  saith   that  "  they 
were   set  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eph.    ii.  6, 
For  he  is  only  gone  before  them,  to   take  possession,  and  to  prepare 
a  place  for  them  beforehand,   as  their   forerunner,  Heb,   v.  1  9,    20. 
John  xiv.  2,  3.  (b)     He  is  there  also  as  their   own  flesh.     On   ac- 
count of  the  mystical  marriage,  they  are  one  with  him,  and  are  thus 
''  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  bones,"  Eph.  v.  30.     Now  it  is  certain  that 
a  part  of  their  flesh  and  bones,  yea,   their  bridegroom  and   husband, 
being  in  heaven,  he  will  not  suffer  his  own  flesh  and  bones,  his  other 
half,  his  beloved  bride  and  wife,  to  remain  ahvays  absent  from  him. 
(c)  He  is  also  in  heaven,  as  their  head  :  therefore  he  will  take  them 
up  to  himself  as  his  memvbers. 

3,  Moreover,  "  he  sends  his  Spirit  as  an  earnest,  by  whose  power 
we  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the 
right  bind  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth."  The  sending  of  his 
Spirit  is  a  consequence  of  his  ascension  into  heaven  :  this  he  de- 
clares, John  xvi.  7,  "  If  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  wiU  not  come 
unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you."  As  this  was 
also  foretold,  Psalm  Ixviii  18,  and  fulfiiied  by  him,  Acts  ii.  33.  The 
Spirit  is  also  an  earnest  to  believers,  whereby  they  are  assured,  as 
by  a  sealed  epistle,  of  their  right  to  Jesus  and  to  heaven  ;  for  "  God 
hath  sealed  them,  and  given  them  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  their 
hearts,"  2  Cor.  i.  21.  See  also  Epii.  i.  13,  14.  iv.  30.  Yea,  the  Ho]y 
Spirit  is  like  a  pledge  in  the  stead  of  Christ ;  therefore  he  said,  Then 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46-^49.  STB 

he  was  about  to  go  away  ;  "  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  will  give 
you  another  Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever,"  John 
xiv,  16.  And  truly  he  is  an  infallible  seal  and  pledge,  ai  he  not  only 
sets  the  mark  of  Jesus  upon  their  souls,  by  '*  changing  them  fiom 
glory  to  glory  after  his  image,"  2  Cor.  iii.  i8,  and  assures  them, 
"  bcariiTj^  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God,"  Rom.  viii.  1 6,  but  as  he  also  directs  them  to  Jesus,  and  leads 
them  to  him,  yea,  causes  them  by  his  power  to  "  seek  those  things 
•which  are  above,  where  Christ  is,  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  not  the  things  which  are  on  earth,"  according  to  Coll.  iii.  3,  and 
that  not  only  by  admonitions,  but  also  by  efficaciously  directing  and 
leading  them  thither,  by  which  means  their  conversation  is  in 
heaven  ;  for  <^  the  good  Spirit  of  God  leads  them  into  the  land  of 
uprightness,"  Psalm  cxliii.  10.  Is  not  this  now  a  precious  advantage 
of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  ?  is  it  now  possible,  that  they 
should  lose  their  right  and  expectation  ?  Have  they  not  a  double 
ensurance  upon  heaven  ?  certainly  they  have :  for  they  have  their 
own  flesh,  as  a  pledge,  in  heaven,  and  also  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  an 
earnest  in  their  souls,  in  the  stead  of  Jesus, 


APPLICATION* 

Since  then  Christ  is  in  heaven,  we  conclude,  that  he  is  not  in 
or  with  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper,  either  by  a 
consubstantiation,  as  the  Lutherans  conceive,  or  by  a  transubstantia* 
tion,  to  wit,  a  real  change  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  Cnrist,  as  the  Papists  imagine  :  for  as  he  is  with  his  human 
nature  in  heaven,  and  continueth  there  in  that  nature  until  his  final 
coming,  therefore  he  cannot  be  with  his  human  nature  in  the  Lord's 
supper. 

We  conclude  also  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  believers  have 
a  glorious  Saviour  ;  for  "  they  have  a  great  High  priest,  v/ho  is  pass- 
ed into  the  heavens,"  Heb.  iv.  14,  **  Who  is  made  higher  than  the 
heavens,"  Heb.  vii.  26,  and  that  by  his  own  power.  Wonderfully 
■were  Enoch  and  Elijah  glorified  above  other  saints,  when  they 
ascended  into  heaven  with  body  and  soul  together,  without  tasting 
of  death  ;  but  it  was  not  through  their  own  power,  but  through 
Christ's  power,  who  took  them  up  :  but  he  was  raised  to  heaven  by 
his  own  power  and  strength.  Yea,  more  he  ascended  for  the  good 
of  believers,  and  to  procure  them  the  greatest  and  most  precious 


376  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  £cc. 

advantages ;  Enoch  and  Elijah  left  only  a  blessed  remembrance  of 
themselves  to  their  people,  but  they  could  not  be  advocates  for  one 
human  being  in  heaven,  nor  tdke  their  fvllowers  to  themselves,  nor 
send  them  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  an  earnest,  all  which  our  Jesus  doth 
by  his  ascension  into  heaven.  It  is  true,  after  Elijah  was  ascended 
into  heaven,  his  spirit  rested  upon  Elisha :  yet  he  did  not  send  his 
spirit  by  himself,  except  only  as  a  moral  instrument  by  faith  and 
prayer  ;  but  Jesus  sends  his  Spirit  immediately  by  himself,  and 
causes  "  all  to  receive  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace,"  aid  there- 
fore "all  the  seed  of  Israel  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

But,  hearers,  can  ye  also  glory  in  him  as  your  head  and  pledge, 
•syho  is  ascended  into  heav^en  for  your  good  ?  ye  ought  to  think  of 
this  ;  for  if  ye  know  aught  of  Jesus,  ye  do  surely  know,  that  he  was 
not  glorified  for  all  men,  and  that  it  behooves  you  to  inquire  whether 
ye  are  partakers  of  the  advantages  of  his  ascension  :  do  ye  ask, 
whereby  ye  may  know  this  ?  I  will  inform  you,  and  examine  your- 
selves by  it. 

1.  Those  who  are  partakers  of  these  advantages,  have  him  as  well 
by  his  Spirit  in  their  hearts,  as  in  heaven  ;  "  for  they  are  builded 
for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit,"  Eph.  ii.  22.  Sec  this 
evidence  also  Rom  viii.  9,  10.  The  Holy  Spirit  works  faith  in  their 
souls  effectually,  whereby  they  embrace  him,  and  cause  him  to  dwell 
in  them ;  in  as  much  as  "  they  are  strengthened  with  might  by  the 
Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  that  Christ  may  dwell  by  faith  in  their 
hearts,"  Eph.  iii.  16,  17.  Others  are  yet  without  Christ ;  they  know 
not  this  hidden  work  of  faith,  their  souls  have  never  wrought  thus 
with  him,  they  are  strangers  to  him,  and  he  is  a  stranger  to  them» 

2.  These  persons  look  upon  God  and  Christ  alone  as  their  allsuf- 
ficient  portion  ;  they  have  sought  and  chosen  him  as  such,  in  oppo- 
sition to  all  others :  they  seek  their  rest  and  full  satisfaction  im  him 
only.  They  can  say  to  him  in  truth,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee.  My 
fle^sh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart, 
and  my  portion  for  ever,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  25,  26.  Others  are  "  men 
of  the  world,  who  have  their  portion  in  this  life,"  Psalm  xvii.  14. 
They  pursue  after  the  world,  the  world  possesseth  their  hearts,  they 
think  of  it,  speak  of  it,  and  are  cheerful  or  sorrowful  in  proportion 
to  the  measure  of  worldly  goods  which  thev  enjoy  ;  it  is  their  con- 
tinuid  cry,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good?  who  will  increase  cur 
corn  and  wine  ?"  Psalm  iv.  7,  8. 

3.  These  persons   know  experimentally  what  it  is  to  be  near  to, 
and  fai  from  him,  and  they  are  joyful  or  sorrowful  in  proportion  to 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  37r 

this.  When  he  permits  them  to  come  near  him,  and  into  his  bowels, 
and  when  he  reveals  himself  to  tlieir  souls,  it  is  to  them  "  a  supphig 
with  Jesus,  and  of  Jesus  with  them,"  Rev.  iii.  20.  "  They  rejoice  in 
the  shadow  of  his  wings,"  Psalm  Ixiii.  T.  "It  is  good  for  them  to 
draw  near  to  God,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  28.  But  when  he  withdraw?  him- 
self, and  hides  his  face,  how  is  their  soul  then  troubled  ?  "  My  bowels 
were  moved  for  him,"  saith  the  spouse,  when  he  had  withdrawn  him- 
self from  her.  Song  v.  4.  See  this  also  in  David,  Psalm  xxx.  7,  8,  9. 
Others  know  nothing  of  this.  Jesus  hath  never  been  revealed  to 
them,  they  have  never  tasted  of  this  honey,  and  therefore  their  eyes 
have  not  been  enlightened,  neither  d  )  they  know  wherein  it  consists 
Xo  be  far  from  him  ;  as  he  is  out  of  their  sight,  so  he  is  out  of  their 
mmd  ;  they  think  that  it  is  enough  "  to  draw  near  him  with  their 
mouth,  and  honour  him  with  their  lips,  though  their  hearts  be  far 
from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.   13, 

4.  It  is  also  the  aim  of  those  vvho  partake  of  the  advantages  of  his 
ascension,  to  seek  those  things  which   are  above,  where  Christ  isj 
and  not  the   things  on  the  earth,  "  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven, 
whence  we  look  also  for  the   Saviour,"  saith  that  heavenly-minded 
man,  Philip,  iii.  20,     They  are  citizens  of  heaven,   and  not  of  the 
earth ;  they  are  strangers  here,  they  will  not  settle  themselves  here, 
the  earth  holds  them  fast  to  their  sorrow,   more   than  they  would 
hold  the  earth  fast ;  their  thoughts,  desires,  and  longings  are  for  and 
toward  heaven,  and  heavenly  things.     If  they  be  at  any  time  drawn 
away  from  these  things,  they  are  grieved,   and  they  will  time  after 
time  break  loose  from  the  world,   that  they  may  pursue  heaven 
only;  "  For  we,"  saith  that  great  man,  Heb.  xiii.  14,  "  have  here 
no  continuing  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come."     For  Jesus  is  there, 
and  he  is  their  treasure,  and  therefore  their  heart  is  there  also,  Matt. 
vi.  21.     Yea,  they  love  all  who  seek  heaven,  as  their  fellow-citizens, 
and  consider  those  who  are  citizens  here  as  strangers.     "  A  citizen 
of  Zion  contemns  a  vile  person  ;  but   he  honoureth  them  that  fear 
the  Lord,"  Psalm  xv.  4.     Others  aim  only  at  being  acknowledged 
and  established  here  on  earth  :  they  are  best  acquainted  with  the 
men  of  this  world,  for  they  are  their  fellow-citizens  ;  they  cannot 
converse  with  the  citizens  of  heaven,  as  well  as   they  ran  with  the 
most  perfect  strangers,  who  speak  another  language  :  yea,  how  like- 
minded  are  they  with  those  who  are  most  woiidly  wise  ;  "  they  are  in- 
deed of  the  world  ;  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
heareth  them,"  1  John  iv.  5.  See   how  Paul  describes  the  citizens, 
who  are  from  beneath,  in  opposition  to  the  citizens  of  heaven,  Philip. 
:ii.  18,  19.  <<  Many  walk  otherwise,  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose 

3D 


378  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

God  is  their  belly  :  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mintl 
earthly  things." 

Look  now  in  this  glass,  and  see  whether  ye  can  discover  in  your- 
selves the  features  of  those,  who  are  partakers  of  Christ's  ascension, 
and  whether  ye  have  good  reason  to  glory  in  him.  But  are  not 
these  features  in  you,  alas,  how  unhappy  are  ye !  ye  have  no  advo- 
cate at  court,  Jesus  is  not  your  head,  ye  are  yet  without  his  Spirit: 
and  therefore  he  will  net  take  you  up  to  him,  but  thrust  you  down 
to  heil  though  ye  were  exalted  even  to  heaven,  except  ye  will  yet 
humble  yourselves,  and  flee  to  him,  who  dwelleth  in  heaven.  There- 
fore attend  more  to  the  ascended  Jesus,  and  to  heaven,  than  ye  have 
done  hitherto.  Hear  what  Jesus  commands  you  to  do.  Matt,  vi  33. 
*'  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  to  you  "  Do  not  suppose  that  one  faint  sigh 
in  the  air  will  carry  you  to  heaven  ;  no,  we  must  be  in  earnest,  we 
must  exercise  violence,  if  we  will  enter  in  :  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
suffcreth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force,"  Matt.  xi.  12. 
But,  true  citizens  of  heaven,  improve  the  ascension  of  Christ  into 
heaven.     And  therefore, 

1.  Rejoice  in  it,  shout  and  sing  aloud  after  him  in  this  glory. 
Who  knows  how  the  heavenly  host  shouted,  when  heaven  was  open- 
ed to  him  !  how  gloriously  the  Father  seated  him  on  his  throne  at 
his  right  hand  1  how  the  angels  attended  on  him  !  how  the  souls  of 
the  blessed  rose  up  from  their  thrones,  "  fell  down  before  him,  cast 
their  crowns  from  their  heads,  before  the  throne,  and  cried  one  to 
another  with  a  loud  voice.  The  Lamb  which  was  slain  is  worthy  to 
receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour, 
and  glory,  and  blessmg  !"  as  they  did.  Rev.  iv.  and  v*  It  behooves 
you  also  to  unite  with  them,  that  ye  may  proclaim  his  glory  with 
rejoicing  to  the  utmost ;  for  he  ascended  into  heaven  also  for  your 
salvation  and  happiness.  Behold  how  the  congregation  of  Israel  did 
this  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  great  type  of  Christ,  Psalm 

xlvii.  5 9.  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the  Lord  with  the  sound 

of  a  trumpet.  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sine;:  praises.  For  God  i^  the  King  of  all  the  earth,  sing 
ye  praises  with  understanding.  God  reigneth  over  the  heathen : 
God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holiness.  The  princes  of  the 
people  are  gathered  together,  even  the  people  of  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham :  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  belong  unto  God  ;  he  is  greatly 
exalted." 

2.  Is  he  ascended  into  heaven,  do  not  lament  that  ye  may  not  see 
him  any  loiiger  in  the  body  on  eaith.     It  discovers  ignorance,  yea? 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  46—49.  379 

fieshly-mindedness  in  you,  to  be  desirous  of  seeing  him  in  the  flesh, 
as  though  your  souls  would  then  be  more  influenced  toward  and  by 
him  to  faith  and  love.     We  know  to  what  this  vanity  hath   betrayed 
the  Lutherans  and  Papists  ;  if  he  were  still  on  earth,  he  would  not 
be  a  priest :  ye  should  never  have  had  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
nor  any  expectation  of  your  ascension  into  heaven,  ye  should  not 
have  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  nor  sought  the  things  in  heaven,  if  he 
had  always  continued  on  earth.     Because  the  believing  apostles  un- 
derstood not  this  before  his  ascension,  therefore  "  sorrow  filled  their 
hearts  ;"  and  therefore  he  said   unto   them,  "  I  tell  you  the  truth  ; 
it  ib  expedient  for  you    that  I  go  away  ;  for  if  1  go  not  away,   the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but  if  1  depart,  I  will  send  him 
unto  you,"  John  xvi.  6,  7.     It  is  also  your  glory,  that  he   who  is 
your  Lord,  hath  ascended  up  from  you  in  such  a  glorious  and   illus- 
trious manner.     Is   he    absent   from  you  with  his  body,  he   doth 
never  depart  from  you  with  his  Godhead,  majesty,  grace  and  Spirit : 
"Heis  with  you  alway,  even   unto   the  end   of  the  world,"  Matt, 
xxviii.  20.     **  Where  only    two  or  three  are  gathered    together    in 
his  name,  there  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them,"  Matt,  xviii.  20  .Yea,  he 
is  with  you,  when  your  soul  unbosoms  herself  to   him  in   private  : 
"He  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  destitute,"  Psalm  cii.   17.     Doth 
he  hide  himself,  and  forbear  to  show  his  kindness  to  you,  he  is  stili 
with  you  in  secret,  and  also  -'when  ye  pass  through  the  fire  and  wa- 
ter," Isaiah  xliii.  2,     For  he  hath   said,  "  I  will  not  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii    5      Yea,  he  will  come  again,  ye    shall  see 
him  with  your  eyes,  and  he  will  take  you  to  himself. 

3.  Is  he  your  advocate  in  heaven,  in  the  presence  of  his  Father, 
bring  then  all  your  complaints  to  him  and  before  him,  that  they  may 
ascend  up  from  his  hands  before  the  throne  of  God  ;  for  to  this  end 
he  stands  at  the  golden  altar,  as  John  saw.  Rev.  viii.  3,  4.  Why 
do  ye  deprive  Jesus  of  his  honourable  office,  by  neglecting  to  give 
him  more  employment  in  it,  through  discouragement  smothering 
your  complaints  and  difficulties  in  your  own  bosoms,  and  seeking  re- 
lief in  sorrow  ?  Do  iniquities  prevail  over  you,  and  render  you  ir- 
resolute, so  that  ye  dare  not  draw  nigh  to  him,  because  ye  provoke 
him  so  often  ;  he  is  your  advocate  for  this  end  also ;  it  is  your  duty 
to  be  ashamed,  and  to  humble  yourselves,  but  ye  ought  not  to  re- 
main aloof  from  him  ;  for  "  if  aay  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate 
•with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous :  and  he  is  the  propitia- 
tion for  our  sinSj'M  John  ii.  1,  2.  Doth  he  not  also  frequently 
show  that  he  prays  for  you,  when  he  rebukes  your  enemies,  looses 
your  heart  and  tongue,  th*t  ye  may  plead  heartily  for  yourselves 


3^9         CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  Uc. 

before  the  throne  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  and  when 
he  speaks  peace  to  your  souls,  and  gives  you  much  life  of  grace  ? 
for  all  tiiese  things  proceed  from  his  intercession. 

4.  Entertain  now  an  assured  hope  and  expectation,  that  he  will 
take  you  up  to  himself  into  heaven.  What  causes  you  to  doubt  so? 
vhai  renders  the  adversities  that  befal  you,  so  grievous  to  you  ?  is  it 
rot  because  ye  do  not  perceive  that  ye  have  an  assured  title  to  heav- 
en ?  if  ye  had  a  certain  and  clear  expectation,  would  ye  not  laugh  at 
whatever  is  otherwise  dreadful,  and  say  courageously,  *'Our  light  af- 
fliction, which  endureth  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor^ 
iv.  17.  Have  ye  not  also  reasons  enow  to  entertain  such  an  assu- 
rance ?  did  not  he  promise  you,  when  he  departed,  that  "  he  would 
come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  himself  ?"  John  xiv.  3.  Is  he 
not  in  heaven  as  your  pledge,  your  flesh  and  head  ?  hath  he  not  sent 
you  his  Spirit  as  an  earnest  of  it  ?  dare  ye  not  think  thus  of  your- 
selves, because  ye  perceive  so  many  earthly  inclinations  still  in  you  ? 
are  they  not  matter  of  grief  to  you  ?  do  ye  not  mourn  on  account  of 
them,  and  strive  against  them  ?  doth  not  your  soul  lift  up  itself, 
time  after  time,  toward  heaven  ?  well,  assure  yourselves  then,  "  that 
if  your  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  ye  have  a 
building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the 
heavens,"  2  Cur.  v.  1.  Yea,  that  '-when  after  your  skin  worms  de- 
stroy this  body,  yet  in  your  flesh  ye  shall  see  God  :  whom  ye  shall 
see  for  yourselves,  and  your  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another." 
Let  "your  reins  then  long  exceedingly  within  you,"  Job.  xix. 
26,  27. 

5.  In  the  mem  while,  endeavour  more  than  ye  have  heretofore  to 
be  heavenly-minded.  It  is  indeed  your  element,  ye  have  received 
the  Spirit  from  heaven  for  this  purpose  ;  it  is  also  your  duty.  For 
it  is  enjoined  on  you,  Coll.  iii.  1,  2,  3.  "  Seek  those  things  which 
are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Set  your 
affection  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  For  ye  are 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Therefore  let  your 
souls  detach  and  withdraw  themselves  from  visible  things,  and  sur- 
render and  devote  themselves  to  those  that  are  heavenly,  musing  on 
them  with  your  thoughts,  directing  your  desires  toward  them,  and 
opening  unto  Christ,  that  he  may  enter  in,  and  may  be  fetched  in  by 
you ;  '«  Lift  up  your  hands,  O  ye  gates  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlast- 
ing doors,  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in,"  Psalm  xxiv.  7. 

Do  afflictions  discourage  you  ;  '•  Look  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and 
finisher  of  the  faith,  who,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  endu- 


XVm.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  381 

red  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  God,"  Heb.  xii  2.  "It  behooved  Christ  to  suffer 
all  things  first,  and  then  to  enter  into  his  glory,"  Lukexxiv.  26.  *'If 
we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  be  glorified  with  him,"  Rom.  viii. 
17.  O  friends,  how  doubly  sweet  will  your  sorrows  be,  when  ye 
shall  be  revealed  with  him  in  glory  !  what  a  fair  prospect  will  it  be, 
when  "  ye  shall  be  taken  up  "  in  the  sight  of  your,  and  the  Lord's 
enemies,  "  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord  I  My  soul  saith,  yea,  let  all  the  people  say 
Amen,  yea  Amen»" 


(  382  ) 


CHRIST 


KING  AND  JUDGE. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  ex.  1.  2.  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool.  The  Lord  shall 
send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion  ;  rule  thou  in  the  midst 
of  thine  enemies.

Q.  49.  0/  what  advantage  to  us  is  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  ? 

A.  First,  that  he  is  our  advocate  in  the  presence  of  his  Father  in 
heaven  ;  secondly,  that  we  have  our  flesh  in  heaven  as  a  sure  pledge, 
that  he  as  the  head  will  also  take  up  to  himself  us  his  members: 
thirdiy,  tliat  he  sends  us  his  Spirit,  as  an  earnest,  by  whose  power 
^Te  ''  seek  the  things  which  ar?  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the 
ngat  hand  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth." 


\N^ 


HEN  the  high  priest  was  about  to  make  an  atonement  for 
himself,  for  his  household,  and  all  the  people,  on  the  great  day  of 
atonement,  according  to  Lev.  xvi.  he  was  obliged,  besides  other  cere- 
mon  es,  to  slay  a  bullock  and  a  ram,  to  enter  with  their  blood  into 
the  holy  of  holies,  to  sprinkle  it  on  the  mercy-seat,  and  to  take  a 
censer  with  burning  coals,  and  put  incense  thereon,  that  he  might 
cover  the  mercy-seat  with  the  cloud  of  the  incense. 

These  things  were  certainly  allegorical.  This  law  was  "  a  shadow 
of  things  lo  come,  ths  body  of  which  is  Christ,"  Coll  ii  17.  We 
may  not  doubt  but  that  the  holy  of  holies  signified  the  third  heaven  ; 
the  high  pricst  shadowed  forth  the  Messiah  ;  the  slaying  of  the  bul- 
lock and  of  the  ram,  had  respect  to  the  suffering  and  death  of  our 
Mediator  ;  the  entrance  of  the  high  priest  into  the  holy  of  holies 
withihe  blood  and  incense  represented  the  emrance  and  ascension 
of  Christ  into  heaven,  to  present  the  blood  of  his  atonement  to  his 
Father,  and  enforce  it  with  the  incense  of  his  intercession,  as  an  of- 
fering. Let  none  imagine  that  this,  though  a  pleasant,  is  an  un- 
grounded allusion,  contrived  by  one  or  another ;  the  Holy  Ghost 
himself  reveals  this  mystery  to  us  by  his  wise  apostle,  Heb.  ix, 
12—24. 

Inasmuch  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  us  in  the  fifteenth  and 
sixteenth  Lord's  days,  as  a  sacrifice  slain  for  atonement,  v/e  see  him, 
^afte""  he  had  shown  himself  alive  by  many  infallible  tokens,  as  it  is 
represented  in  the  seventeenth  Lord's  day)  enter  by  his  ascension 
into  heaven,  into  the  true  sanctuary,  with  his  own  blood,  in  order 
to  be  our  advocate  in  the -presence  of  his  Father,  to  fix  our  hopes 
"upon  heaven,  and  to  render  us  heavenly-minded.  This  is  the  sum 
of  the  eighteenth  Lord's  day. 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  365 

There  are  four  particulars  in  this  Lord's  clay,  which  reqitire  our 
consideration,  with  respect  to  the  ascension  of  Christ. 

I.  The  nature. 

II.  The  reality. 

III.  The  necessity,  and 

IV.  The  advantages  of  his  ascension. 

I.  The  first  particular  is  (1)  explained  in  the  forty  sixth  qiiestior/^ 
and  (2)  rescued  from  two  objections  in  the  forty-eighth  question. 

We  ir.ust  explain  then  in  the  first  place  the  nature'  of  Christ's 
ascension,  that  Ave  may  the  more  easily  refute  those  who  oppose  us 
in  this  matter,  and  may  exhibit  more  emphatically  the  important 
salvation,  which  is  procured  for  believers  by  this  ascension.  We 
iTiust  know  beforehand,  that  neiiher  the  Father,  nor  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  only  the  Son  of  God,  or  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  :  not  ac- 
cording to  his  divine,  but  according  to  his  human  nature,  which 
alone  was  capable  of  a  change  of  place  ;  but  the  divine  nature,  being- 
omnipresent,  is  incapable  of  a  change  of  place.  It  is  true,  that  the 
Godhead  is  sometimes  said  to  ascend :  "  God  went  up  from  Abra- 
ham," saith  Mosjs,  Gen.  xvii.  22,  but  this  doth  not  denote  that  God 
departs  from  earth,  and  enters  into  heaven  with  his  essence,  but  that  he 
takes  up  the  visible  token  of  his  special  presence  from  men  :  as 
when  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  visible  token  of  the  divine  presence, 
was  carried  up  to  Zion,  they  sang,  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout," 
Psalm  xlvii.  S.  And  we  might  also  say  that  Christ  ascended  in  this 
manner  into  heaven  with  respect  to  his  Godhead,  because  the  God- 
head took  up  its  human  nature,  in  which  it  manifested  itself  especi- 
ally and  personally  present,  into  heaven  from  among  men.  And  so 
"he  ascended  even  as  he  descended.  See  John  iii.  13.  xvi.  28  Eph. 
iv.  9,  10.  He  did  not  descend  from  the  Father  out  of  heaven,  ac- 
cording to  his  manhood,  but  according  to  his  Godhead,  v/hich  mani- 
fested itself  personally  present  in  its  human  nature.  John  teacheth 
us  this  most  emphatically,  when  he  saith,  "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  (and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of 
the  only  begotten  of  the  Father),"  John  i.  14.  In  the  same  manner 
he  also  ascended,  when  the  Godhead  took  up  its  human  nature  into 
heaven. 

This  being  premised,  we  will  explain  his  ascension  into  heaven 
more  particularly  with  respect  to  the  circumstances  1,  of  place,  2, 
of  time,  3,  of  persons,  4,  of  agents,  and  5,  of  qualities. 

1.  The  first  circumstance  of  Christ's  ascension  is  the  place  from 
which,  and  the  place  to  which  he  ascended.  The  place  from  which 
he  ascended  was  the  earth  ;  this  lower  world  ;  ^-  He  should  depart 


365  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

out  of  this  world,  and  go  unto  the  Father,"  John  xiii.  1.  "  When 
he  should  go  to  the  Father,  he  should  leave  the  world,"  chaj).  xvi. 
28.  And  it  was  particularly  "  the  mouut  of  Olives,  lying  a  sabbath- 
days  journey  from  Jerusalem,"  Acts  i.  12.  This  mountain  he  had 
made  the  place  of  his  usual  resort  for  prayer :  there  where  he  had 
so  often  sent  up  his  scul  toward  heaven,  he  would  now  ascend  up  to 
heaven  in  body  and  soul  together. 

By  this  mountain  lay  the  village  of  Bethany,  and  it  was  near  this 
village  where  he  ascended  into  heaven,  as  Luke  relates,  Luke  xxiv. 
50,  51.     He  would  thus  make  that  house  of  affliction  *  a  house  of 
glorification   for   himself.     The   place   to  which   he  ascended  was 
"  heaven,  into  which  he  was  taken  up,"  Luke  xxiv.  51.  Acts  i.  1 1. 
He  was  not  taken  up  only  into  the  air,  which  is  also  called  heaven^ 
Matt.  vi.  2(i,  nor  into  the  firmament,  the  starry  heaven,  called  *'  God's 
heaven,"  Psalm  viii.  3,  but  "  far  above  all"  visible  "  heavens,"  Eph. 
iv.  10,  and  so  into  the  third  heaven,  mto  which  Paul  was  caught  up> 
2  Cor.  xii.  2,  called  "  the  heaven  of  heavens,"    1  Kings  viii-  27,  by 
which  we  cannot  understand  with  the  Lutherans,  who  hold  that  the 
body  of  Christ  became  omnipresent,  the  state  of  happiness,  and  God 
himself,  who  is  every  where  ;  but  a  real  place  so  called,  into  which 
he  entered  by   his  ascension,  and  from  which  he  is  not  absent  with 
respect  to  his  manhood  ;  for  "  he   left  the  world,   and  went  to  the 
Father,"  John  xvi.  28,  and  "  he  departed  out  of  the  world  unto  the 
Father,"  John  xiii.  1.   As  this  third  heaven,  into  which  he  ascended, 
is  also  described  as  a  limited  place,  distinct  from  the  earth,  and  is 
therefore  called  "  Paradise,"  2  Cor.  xii.  4,  "  The  house  of  his  Father, 
in  which  there  are  many  mansions,"  John  xiv.  2,   "  The  palace,  and 
throne  of  God,"  Psalm  xi.  4.  Isaiah  Ixvi.  1.     "The  city  which  hath 
foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,"   Heb.  xi.  10,  beings 
the  high'cst  heaven,"  Heb.  i.  3,  where  Jesu-.  is,  as  in  a  place,  "  sitting 
on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Coll.  iii.  1,  "  from  which  place  believers 
albo  wait  for  him,"  I  Thess.  i.  10,  and  "  to  which  he  will  also  take 
up  "  all  the  saints  to  him,  John  xiv.    3.  Paul  saith   indeed  that  "  he 
ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens,"  Eph.  iv.    10,  but  this  doth  not 
denote  that  he  is  not  in   heaven,    as  in  a  place,  but  present  every 
where  with  his   human   nature :  for   his  ascending  up  far  above  all 
heavens  is  opposed  to  his  descending  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth,  vrs.  9.     Now  as  we  cannot   say  that  his  descending  into  the 
lower  parts  of  the  earth  denotes  that  he  became  omnipresent,  so  we 
cannot  say  that  his  ascending  up  far  above  all  heavens  denotes  that 

•  The  anthor  alludes  to  the  meaning  of  the  name  Bethany,  which  signifies 
•\  houae  of  affliction. 


XVlIi.  LOilD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  36/ 

he  became  omnipresent ;  but  the  apostle  intimateth  that  Christ  was 
by  his  ascension  glorified  to  the  highest  degree  in  the  third  heaven, 
(which  is  far  above  all  visible  heavens)  as  he  was  humbled  to  the 
lowest  degree  in  his  incarnation,  descending  into  the  lower  parts  of 
Ihe  earth. 

2  The  time  of  his  ascension  desetves  our  attention,  as  well  as  the 
place.  This  was  forty  days  after  his  resurrection.  Moses  was  forty 
days  with  God  on  the  mount ;  just  so  many  days  Elijah  travelled  in 
the  strength  of  the  meat  which  he  had  received  of  the  angel,  until  he 
came  to  the  mount  of  God  :  Jesus  was  presented  to  the  Lord  on  the 
fortieth  day  after  his  birth,  Luke  ii.  22,  according  to  the  law,  Lev, 
xii  2,  4,  6.  He  was  also  forty  days  in  the  wilderness,  fasting,  that 
he  might  be  tempted  of  the  devil,  Matt.  iv.  1^-1 1.  Thus  he  also 
ascended  into  heaven  forty  days  after  his  resurrection.  He  would 
not  ascend  sooner,  that  he  might  instruct  his  apostles  so  long  in  the 
things  pertaining  to  his  kingdom,  and  give  them  the  most  certain 
proef  that  he  was  really  arisen,  that  there  might  not  remain  the  least 
suspicion  concerning  this  matter  ;  for  "  he  was  taken  up,  after  he 
had  through  the  Holy  Ghost  giveii  commandments  unto  the  apos- 
tles, whom  he  had  chosen.  To  whom  also  he  showed  himself  alive 
after  his  passion,  by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty 
days,  and  speaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God," 
Acts  i.  S,  3.  Therefore  Paul  also  alledgeth  as  a  proof  of  the  reality 
of  his  resurrection,  that  "  he  was  seen  many  days  of  them  which 
came  up  with  him  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  who  were  his  witnes= 
ses  unto  the  people,"  Acts  xiii.  31.  Neither  would  he  remain  with 
them  longer,  that  he  might  not  confirm  them  in  their  opinion  that  he 
was  about  to  erect  a  temporal  kingdom,  and  also  strengthen  their 
excessive  attachment  to  his  bodily  presence.     See  Acts  i.  6,7. 

3.  But  he  did  not  ascend  privately,  at  a  distance  from  the  society 
of  men,  but  before  the  eyes  of  many  who  were  present.  We  do  not 
read  that  there  was  any  person  present  wlien  Enoch  was  taken  up  to 
heaven.  Gen.  v.  24,  and  we  do  not  find  that  any  one  saw  near  at 
hand  Elijah  ascend  up  into  heaven,  except  Elisha,  2  Kings,  ii.  12. 
But  Jesus  ascended  <*  in  the  sight  of  his  disciples,"  saith  the  instruc- 
tor. These  were  his  eleven  apostles.  Acts  i.  2,  9.  Those  who  had 
been  with  him  during  all  his  sufferings,  he  wished  to  be  with  him 
also  when  he  was  glorified,  that  they  might  be  witnesses  of  his  glory, 
as  they  had  been  of  his  sufferings  ;  but  the  holy  apostles  were  not 
the  only  persons  who  were  present,  but  there  were  also  two  men  in 
white  apparel,  doubtless  angels,  present ;  in  order  to  inform  the  apos- 
ties  of  the  manner,  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  ascended  and  should 


568  CFIRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  kc 

come  again.  See  this  Acts  i.  10,  1 1,  and  also  to  honour  him  as  well 
by  their  presence,  as  by  their  acclamations  on  accrmnt  of  this  glory 
of  his.  And  who  can  doubt  but  that  there  was  a  great  multitude  of 
the  heavenly  host  present,  although  invisible,  who  surrounded,  ac- 
companied and  welcomed  him,  and  shouted  aloud  his  praise  ?  This 
was  seen  at  his  birth,  when  he  came  to  fight,  Luke  ii.  13,  14. ^  After 
he  had  put  the  devil  to  flight,  '•'  the  angels  came  and  ministered  to 
him,"  Matt.  iv.  11.  May  we  not  then  conceive  that  they  came  to 
him.  in  order  to  increase  his  glory,  after  he  had  accomplished  his 
fight,  and  when  he  ascended  triumphantly  into  his  palace  ?  Suiely 
"when  *'  he  ascended  up  on  high,  when  he  led  captivity  captive,  and 
received  gifts  for  men,  yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  they  might 
dwell  with  him,  then  the  chariots  of  God  were  twenty  thousand,  yea, 
thousands  of  angels  :  the  Lord  was  among  them,  as  in  Sinai,  the 
holy  place,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  17,  18. 

4.  But  w^e  must  inquire  particularly  who  were  the  agents  in  this 
asceniiion.  These  were  the  Father,  and  Christ  himself.  When  the 
divine  work  of  ascension  is  ascribed  to  the  leather,  it  is  then  called 
"staking  up,"  Mark  xvi.  19.  Luke  xxiv.  51,  and  "  an  exaltation 
by  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  ii.  S3,  in  order  to  evince,  (a)  that 
the  Father  acknowledged  and  accepted  him  as  his  Son,  though  he 
was  not  acknowledged  as  such  by  the  Jews,  but  slain  by  them,  as  a 
Wasphemer.  (b)  That  the  Father  himself  declared  that'  he  had 
finished  the  work  which  had  been  given  him  to  do,  and  that  he  would 
therefore  bestow  upon  him  the  stipulated  reward  of  his  labour.  This 
Jesus  urged  with  his  Father,  when  he  said,  John  xvii.  4,  5.  '*'I  have 
glorified  thee  on  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thougavest 
me  to  do.  And  now,  O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  ownself, 
with  the  gl'>ry  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was."  The 
Father  had  promised  him  this,  as  a  reward  of  his  grievous  labour, 
Isaiah  xlix.  4,  5.  lii.  13.  liii.  10.  And  thus  **  the  Father  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  because  he  obeyed  him  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross,"  Philip,  ii.  8,  9.  But  the  divine  work  of  the 
ascension  is  also  ascribed  to  the  Son,  who  is  co-essential  with  the 
Father,  and  then  the  ascension  is  called  "  a  departing  to  the  Father," 
John  xiii. — "  a  going,"  John  xiv.  2,  3, — "a  going  away,"  John  xvi. 
7, — ^' a  passing  into  the  heavens,"  lieb.  iv.  14,  and  "an  entering 
mto  that  within  the  veil,"  lleb.  vi.  19,  20,  as  an  evidence  of  his  di- 
vine power,  and  his  right  as  Mediator  to  take  possession  by  himself 
of  the  glory  which  he  had  merited  ;  for  "  all  i)ower  was  given  him 
in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  But  we  ought  not  to 
forget  that  a  clcud  was  employed   in  this  ascension  into  heaven. 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  369 

either  (a)  to  conceal  Jesus  from  the  eyes  of  the;  beholders,  who  wera 
yet  too  much  attached  to  his  bodily  presence  ;  for  "  a  cloud  received 
him  outof  tlieir  sight,"  Acts  i.  9  ;  or  (b)  to  serve  as  an  instrument 
and  vehicle  to  take  him  up,  as  the  chariot  and  horses  of  tire  took 
Elijah  up,  2  Kings  ii.  11  $  or  (c)  to  serve  as  a  triumphal  car,  in  order 
to  display  his  glory;  as  God,  watn  he  displuyeth  his  glory  in  trie 
cIo'iJs,  is  said  ''to  make  the  clouds  his  chariot,"  Psalm  civ.  3. 

5.  In  ordei  to  illustrate  the  ascension  of  Christ  further,  we  must 
attend  also  to  the  qualities  of  it.     These  qualities  are  many  and  va- 
rious, particularly,  (a)  That  he  ascended  only  once  into  heaven,  as 
"  the  high  priest  went  once  a  year   into  the  sanctuary,  not  without 
blood,  so  Jesus,  the  true  High    Priest  entered  into  the  holy  place  by 
his  own  blood,"  Heb.  ix.  7,  11,  12.     We  must   therefore  condemn 
the  opinion  of  the  Socinians,  that  Christ  ascended   twice  into  heav- 
en,  once  about  the    time  of  his  baptism,  in  order  to  be  instructed, 
and  then  also  forty  days  after  his  resurrection  ;  for  it  was  not  neces- 
sary that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven  in  order  to  be  instructed,  see- 
ing he  was  the  essential   Word  and  Wisdom  of  the  Father.     The 
scripture  doth  not  mention  aught  of  such  a  first  ascension  about  the 
time  of  his  baptism  ;  doth  it  speak  of  his  descending  from  heaven, 
we  have  explained  before  the  meaning  of  this.     Christ  saith  indeed 
that "  he  who  had  descended  from  heaven,  had  also  ascended,"  and 
that  before  he  ascended  forty   days  after  his   resurrection,  John  iii. 
13,  but  he  speaks  not  then  of  his  bodily  ascension,  but  of  an  ascen- 
sion  into   heaven   with  his  understanding,    either  according  to  his 
divine,  or  his  human  nature,  which   had   penetrated   to  the    highest 
matters  in  the  highest  manner,  which   was  not  permitted  to   every 
man,  but  only  to  him  "  who  had  descended  from  heaven,  and  was 
notwithstanding   still  in  heaven,"  John    iii.  13.     For  "  who   hath   a- 
scended  up  into  heaven,  or  descended  ?  who  hath  gathered  the  wind 
in  his  fists  ?  who  hath   bound   the  waters  in  a  garment  ?  who   hath 
established  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  what  is  his  name,  and   what 
is  his  Son's  name,  if  thou  canst  tell?"     Thus  asks  Agur  that  he 
may  humble  himself,  and  all  other  men,  on  account  of  the  diminu- 
tive capacity  of  man.     Sec  this  Prov.  XXX.   1 — 4. 

(b)  When  he  ascended  in  this  manner,  he  was  not  silent,  but  dis- 
coursed till  the  last  moment :  "  After  he  had  spoken  these  things, 
to  wit,  that  they  should  receive  power  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  that 
they  might  be  his  witnesses,  he  was  taken  up,"  Acts  i.  8,  9.  Jesus 
v'ould  be  profitable  to  the  last,  no  less  than  Elijah,  who  was  taken 
up  while  he  talked  witli  Elisha. 

(c)  But  did   he   depart  from  his  friends  with  severity  ?    no,  but 
3C 


370  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c* 

with  a  blessing ;  for  "  it  came  to  pass,  while  he  blessed  them,  he 
was  parted  from  them,"  Luke  xxiv.  51.  Although  he  withdrew,  he 
would  not  take  his  blessing  with  him  ;  yea,  by  and  after  his  ascen- 
sion he  poured  out  his  Spirit  upon  them.  He  premised  this,  Acts  i.« 
8,  and  he  also  performed  it,  Acts  ii.  1,  4,  33.  After  Elijah  was 
ascended  into  heaven,  his  spirit  rested  upon  Elisha,  according  to  his 
petition,  2  Kings  ii.  9,  15.  But  Jesus,  possessing  the  fulness  of  all 
grace,  bestowed  a  greater  measure  of  his  Spirit  upon  his  apostles. 

(d)  He  ascended  also  visibly  into  heaven  j  for  "  he  was  taken  up, 
while  they  beheld,"  Acts  i.  9.  Yea,  they  doubtless  looked  a  long 
time  after  him,  even  until  the  intervening  cloud  hid  him  from  their 
sight,  and  they  saw  him  no  more,  as  it  is  said  of  Elisha,  that  "  he 
saw  Elijah  no  more,"  after  he  was  ascended,  2  Kings  ii.  12. 

(e)  Nevertheless  he  did  not  ascend  into  heaven  to  remain  there  for 
ever,  but  **  to  return,  in  order  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead." 
The  two  men  in  white  apparel  said  to  the  apostles,  "  This  Jesus  which 
is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come,  in  like  manner  as 
ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven,"  Acts  i.  10,  11.  As  his  coming 
again  will  be  to  the  terrour  of  the  wicked,"  who  will  mourn,  when 
they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt, 
xxiv.  30,  so  it  will  be  to  the  joy  and  comfort  of  his  favourites  ;  for 
he  promised  them,  that  "  if  he  went  away  from  them,  he  would  pre- 
pare a  place  for  them,  and  after  ihat,  he  would  come  again,  and 
receive  them  to  himself,  that  they  might  be  where  he  was,"  John 
xvi.  3. 

(f)  But  the  quality  thai  discovereth  most  of  all  the  nature  of  his 
ascension  is,  that  he  w?s  taken  up  locally  from  earth  into  heaven, 
leaving  the  earth,  and  going  into  heaven.  This  is  denied  by  the 
Lutherans,  who  pretend  that  Christ  became  omnipresent  with  his 
body,  as  though  he  were  now  on  earth  with  his  body,  as  well  as  in 
heaven.  This  opinion  which  confutes  itself,  these  men  will  by  all 
means  maintain,  that  they  may  the  more  easily  defend  their  errone- 
ou::,  opinion  concerning  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's 
supper ;  but  it  is  untenable,  inasmuch  as  (a)  he  according;  to  his  man- 
hood, "  left  the  world,  and  went  to  the  Father,"  John  xvi.  28.  There- 
fore he  said,  ''  Me  ye  have  not  always,"  Matt.  xxvi.  11.  (b)  He  is 
also  with  respect  to  his  manhood  in  heaven  ;  for  the  heaven  must 
receive  him  until  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things,"  Acts  iii. 
21-  (c)  He  ascended  visibly  ;  for  "he  was  taken  up  while  they  be- 
held," Acts  i-  9,  but  they  never  saw  him  become  omnipresent.  Was 
he  concealed  from  their  sight  by  a  cloud,  Iiis  body  was  however  not 
extended  and  rarified  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  vanished,  (d)  He  will 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  -16— 49.  371 

come  again  in  the  same  manner,  in  which  he  departed  ;  but  he  will 
come  locally  from  heaven  in  the  clouds,  accoidinpj  to  PhiHp.  iii.  20. 
1  Thess.  i.  10,  iv.  16,  therefore  he  also  ascended  locally  (e)  The 
phrases  of  *' receiving  up,  departing  to  the  Father,  going,  and  going 
away,"  which  are  used  here,  intimate  a  change  of  place,  (f)  The 
omnipresence  of  Christ's  body  militates  against  the  nature  of  that 
body,  which  cannot  be  present  in  more  than  one  place  at  the  same 
time  I  moreover,  oixmi presence  is  an  incommunicable  attribute  of 
God. 

We  must  now  defend  the  orthodoxy  of  our  church  on  this  head 
against  two  objections,  which  arc  offered  by  the  Lutherans. 

(a)  The  first  is  thus  proposed  in  the  forty  seventh  question  :  "  Is 
not  Christ  then  with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  as  he  hath 
promised?"  This  he  promised,  Matt,  xxviii.  2Q,  but  it  follows  not 
from  this  promise,  that  he  is  present  with  us  according  to  his  body  ; 
for,  seeing  he  is  God  and  man  in  one  person,  therc&re  he  can  be 
truly  present  with  his  people  according  to  his  Godhead,  majesty, 
grace,  and  Spirit,  although  he  be  not  present  with  them  according 
to  his  body  :  when  he  had  no  body,  he  was  present  with  his  people, 
by  his  ^pir^t  and  grace,  for  he  promised,  Exod»  xx.  24.  "  In  all 
places  where  I  record  my  name,  I  will  come  unto  thee,  and  bless 
thee."  Why  then  cannot  he,  now  he  hath  a  finite  and  limited  body, 
also  be  present  with  us  without  his  body  ?  yea,  when  he  promiseth 
that  he  will  be  present  with  his  Spirit  and  grace,  he  denies  that  he 
"will  be  present  with  his  body  :  "  If  I  go  not  away,"  saith  he,  "the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but,  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him 
unto  you,"  John  xvi.  7. 

(b)  The  second  objection  is,  that  the  human  nature  ought  to  be 
wherever  the  Godhead  is,  or  that  otherwise  those  tv/o  natures  will 
be  separated,  one  from  the  other,  which  being  impossible,  the  human 
nature  must  be  present  wherever  the  Godhead  is-  We  should  allow 
this  consequence;  to  wit,  that  the  human  nature  is  in  all  places  with 
the  Godhead,  on.  account  of  the  union  of  the  two  natures,  if  those 
two  natures  were  united  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  mixed,  or  to  be 
equal  one  to  the  other  ;  but  the  two  natures  are  not  united  in  this 
manner,  but  the  divine  nature,  which  is  infinite,  assumed  the  human 
nature,  which  is  finite,  into  a  personal  union  with  itself.  It  follows 
from  this,  that  wherever  the  human  nature  is,  there  also  the  God- 
head is,  and  that  it  remains  personally  united  to  the  human  nature ; 
but  it  doth  not  follow  that  the  human  nature  is  wherever  the  God- 
head is,  For  instance,  the  sun  iz  uniiied  to  its  beams,  but  the  sun  is 
jiot;  "iyhereYer  it3  beams  ?>ic3 


tin  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

(c)  They  say  also,  that  "  Christ  fiUeth  all  things,"  according  to 
iEph.  iv.  10.  But  it  is  not  said,  that  he  fills  all  places  with  his  body ; 
bill  the  apostle  speaks  only  of  his  filling  up  that  which  was  lacking 
in  his  church  with  the  gifts  of  grace,  by  means  of  his  servants,  whom 
he  gives.  See  Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  13. 

I  .  Our  second  general  head  is  the  reality  of  his  ascension  into 
heaven.  And  verily  we  have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables, 
when  we  made  known  to  you  the  glory  of  his  ascension,  for  it  can 
be  proved  by  the  most  forcible  arguments  ;  (a)  Set^iHg  he  is  risen, 
as  we  have  ^ully  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day  that  he  really 
arose.  The  iorce  of  this  argument  lies  herein,  that  since  he  is  risen, 
if  he  did  not  ascend  into  heaven,  he  must  then  either  have  died 
again,  which  none  can  imagine  with  any  probabihty,  or  he  must  have 
been  found  here  or  there,  as  it  was  a  manifest  evidence,  that  Elijah 
was  really  ascended,  because  he  could  not  be  found,  2  Kings  ii.  16, 
17,  18.  Now  our  Jesus  was  not  found,  (b)  It  is  also  certain,  that  he 
ascewded  into  heaven,  because  those  who  testified  it,  saw  it  with 
their  eyes  ;  "lie  was  taken  up,  while  they  belield,"  Acts  i.  9.  Yea, 
feince  this  uptaking  he  hath  been  seen  in  heaven :  "  Stephen  saw  the 
heavens  opened,  and  the  -on  of  man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of 
God,"  Acts  vii.  56.  And  "  he  was  seen  last  of  all  by  Paul,  as  by 
one  born  out  of  due  time,"  1  Cor.  xv.  8,  to  wit,  when  he  appeared 
to  him  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  Acts  ix.  4 — 7,  \7  The  testimony 
of  these  persons  cannot  be  deemed  suspicious,  as  we  have  proved  on 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  (c)  If  v/e  attend  to  the  events  following  his 
ascension,  as  the  outpouring  of  h's  Spirit,  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  conversion  of  the  v/orld,  and  all  this  according  to  his 
prophecies  ;  and  also  the  outgoings  of  the  hearts  of  believers  toward 
him  in  heaven,  through  the  operation  of  his  Spirit,  who  is  sent  ta 
them  from  heaven  by  Christ,  and  leads  them  up  to  him,  wc  must 
conclude  with  a  full  persuasion  of  mind,  that  he  really  ascended  into 
heaven. 

in.  We  must  also  be  certain,  that  this  ascension  into  heaven  was 
necessary,  (a)  because  it  v/as  foretold,  and  indeed  with  such  an  assu- 
rance of  mind,  as  if  it  had  already  happened  ;  thus  they  shouted  to 
him.  Psalm  Ixviii.  18,  "  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast 
led  captivity  captive  :  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  men  :  yea,  for  the 
ifebellious  aho,  that  the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them."  Jesus 
himself  foretold  it,  John  :dv.  15,  16,  20.  Now  this  could  not  fail, 
(b)  it  was  also  typified  ;  we  do  not  speak  now  of  Enoch  and  Elijah, 
ftee  only  how  the  high  priest  went  once  a  year  with  strange  blood 
Itito  the  holy  of  holies,  and  thereby  plainly  represented  that  the  true 


"kVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  373 

Kigh  Priest  should  enter  into  heaven  itself  with  his  own  blood.  Paul 
assures  of  this,  Heb.  ix.  7,  12,  24,  25.  It  was  also  typified  by  the 
bringing  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  up  .into  the  city  of  David,  and 
into  the  temple,  2  Sam.  vi.  12,  15.  1  Kings  viii.  1 — 6  That  thb 
had  a  respect  to  the  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  into  heaven,  the 
people  of  the  Lord  inform  us,  when  they  cry  one  to  another,  while 
they  were  bringing  the  ark  up,  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the 
Lord  with  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,"  Psalm  xlvii.  5.  Since  now  these 
types  foreshowed  the  people  of  the  Lord,  yea,  sealed  to  them  on  the 
part  of  God,  that  his  Son  should  ascend  into  heaven,  therefore  it 
was  also  necessary,  that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven. 

(( )  The  ascension  of  Christ  was  necessary  also  en  the  Father's 
account,  who  would  not  suffer  that  his  Son  should  always  remain 
absent  from  him.  inasmuch  as  '*  he  v/as  his  delight,"  Prov.  viii.  3, 
and  also  on  the  Son's  account,  who  ought  to  receive  in  this  manner, 
his  promised  reward,  that  "  he  should  lift  up  the  head,"  according 
to  that  which  is  said,  Psalm  ex.  7.  It  was  necessary  also  on  account 
of  the  elect,  who  would  otherwise  have  missed  the  greatest  and  most 
necessary  advantage  of  his  ascension  :  therefore  he  quieted  them 
with  this  consideration,  when  they  were  greatly  disturbed  on  account 
of  his  departure,  saying,  '*  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away," 
John  xvi.  7.     And  thus, 

IV.  We  proceed  to  our  fourth  general  head,  to  wit,  the  advanta- 
ges of  the  ascension  of  the  Lord.  The  instructor  mentions  three 
advantap:es : 

1.  "  That  he  is  our  advocate  inthe  presence  of  his  Father  in  heav- 
en." We  explained  the  nature  of  Christ's  advocacy,  when  we 
discoursed  of  his  priesthood  on  the  twelfth  Lord's  day  ;  to  perfect 
which,  it  was  necessary  tliat  he  should  ascend  into  heaven,  ;  "  for 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  would  not  be  a  priest,"  lieb.  vii.  5.  It  was 
therefore  necessary,  that  he  should  ascend  into  heaven,  and  thus, 
like  the  high  priest  under  the  Old  Testament,  enter  into  the  sanctu- 
ary, "  to  appeal  m  the  presence  of  God  for  us,"  Rom.  viii.  34.  It 
is  true,  he  could  pray  for  his  people  on  earth,  as  he  also  did,  John 
xvii.  but  on  account  of  his  certain  expectation,  that  he  would  shortly 
be  taken  up  into  heaven,  he  prays,  John  xvii.  as  if  he  were  already 
in  heaven :  therefore  he  saith,  vrs.  1 1,  ^'  I  am  no  more  in  the  world," 
and  vrs.  24.  "  I  will  also  that  they  whom  thou  hast  given  me  be 
where  I  am."  And  it  is  truly  a  great  advantage  to  his  people,  that 
they  have  such  an  advocate  at  court,  before  the  throne,  who  pleads 
for  them,  and  who  will  assuredly  gain  their  cause.  With  this  John 
supported  the  minds  of  believers  under  their  dejection  on  account 


374,         CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION.  &c. 

of  their  sins,  when  he  s^id,  1  John  ii.   1,  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." 

2.  Of  no  less  consequence  is  the  second  advantage,  to  wit,   "  that 
we  have  our  flesh  in  heaven,  as  a   sure  pledge,  that  he  as  the  head 
will  also  take  up  to   himself,  us  his  members."     Believers  know  of 
nothing  worthier  or  more  blessed  than  that  Christ  will  take  them  up 
to  him  in  heaven  :  "  For  this  beinij  far  the  best,  Paul  was  thevefore 
desiious  to  depart,    and   to  be  with   Christ,"   Philip,  i.    23.      The 
words  with  Vrhich  believers  must  comfort  one  another,  are  that  they 
shall  be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so 
shall  ever  be   with  the  Lord,"    1  Thess.  iv.  IT,  )8.     This  great  ad- 
vantage  follows  from  his  ascension,  as  he    himself  testifieth,  John 
xiv.  3,  "  If  I  go,  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I    will  come  agaia, 
and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also." 
It  is  not  strange,  that  being  ascended  into  heaven,  he  will  take  them 
also  to  himself  into  heaven  ;  for  (a)  he  is  there,  as  their  sure  pledge, 
sirce  he  is  their  portion  and  treasure,  given   to   them  in   behalf  of 
that  house  of  their  Father,  which  confirms    and   ensures   heaven  to 
them,  as  their   properly,  and  therefore  the  apostle  saith   that  "  they 
were   set  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eph.    ii.  6, 
For  he  is  only  gone  before  them,  to   take  possession,  and  to  prepare 
a  place  for  them  beforehand,   as  their   forerunner,  Heb,   v.  1  9,    20. 
John  xiv.  2,  3.  (b)     He  is  there  also  as  their   own  flesh.     On   ac- 
count of  the  mystical  marriage,  they  are  one  with  him,  and  are  thus 
''  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  bones,"  Eph.  v.  30.     Now  it  is  certain  that 
a  part  of  their  flesh  and  bones,  yea,   their  bridegroom  and   husband, 
being  in  heaven,  he  will  not  suffer  his  own  flesh  and  bones,  his  other 
half,  his  beloved  bride  and  wife,  to  remain  ahvays  absent  from  him. 
(c)  He  is  also  in  heaven,  as  their  head  :  therefore  he  will  take  them 
up  to  himself  as  his  memvbers. 

3,  Moreover,  "  he  sends  his  Spirit  as  an  earnest,  by  whose  power 
we  seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the 
right  bind  of  God,  and  not  things  on  earth."  The  sending  of  his 
Spirit  is  a  consequence  of  his  ascension  into  heaven  :  this  he  de- 
clares, John  xvi.  7,  "  If  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  wiU  not  come 
unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you."  As  this  was 
also  foretold,  Psalm  Ixviii  18,  and  fulfiiied  by  him,  Acts  ii.  33.  The 
Spirit  is  also  an  earnest  to  believers,  whereby  they  are  assured,  as 
by  a  sealed  epistle,  of  their  right  to  Jesus  and  to  heaven  ;  for  "  God 
hath  sealed  them,  and  given  them  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  their 
hearts,"  2  Cor.  i.  21.  See  also  Epii.  i.  13,  14.  iv.  30.  Yea,  the  Ho]y 
Spirit  is  like  a  pledge  in  the  stead  of  Christ ;  therefore  he  said,  Then 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46-^49.  STB 

he  was  about  to  go  away  ;  "  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  will  give 
you  another  Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever,"  John 
xiv,  16.  And  truly  he  is  an  infallible  seal  and  pledge,  ai  he  not  only 
sets  the  mark  of  Jesus  upon  their  souls,  by  '*  changing  them  fiom 
glory  to  glory  after  his  image,"  2  Cor.  iii.  i8,  and  assures  them, 
"  bcariiTj^  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God,"  Rom.  viii.  1 6,  but  as  he  also  directs  them  to  Jesus,  and  leads 
them  to  him,  yea,  causes  them  by  his  power  to  "  seek  those  things 
•which  are  above,  where  Christ  is,  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  not  the  things  which  are  on  earth,"  according  to  Coll.  iii.  3,  and 
that  not  only  by  admonitions,  but  also  by  efficaciously  directing  and 
leading  them  thither,  by  which  means  their  conversation  is  in 
heaven  ;  for  <^  the  good  Spirit  of  God  leads  them  into  the  land  of 
uprightness,"  Psalm  cxliii.  10.  Is  not  this  now  a  precious  advantage 
of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  ?  is  it  now  possible,  that  they 
should  lose  their  right  and  expectation  ?  Have  they  not  a  double 
ensurance  upon  heaven  ?  certainly  they  have :  for  they  have  their 
own  flesh,  as  a  pledge,  in  heaven,  and  also  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  an 
earnest  in  their  souls,  in  the  stead  of  Jesus, 


APPLICATION* 

Since  then  Christ  is  in  heaven,  we  conclude,  that  he  is  not  in 
or  with  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  supper,  either  by  a 
consubstantiation,  as  the  Lutherans  conceive,  or  by  a  transubstantia* 
tion,  to  wit,  a  real  change  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  Cnrist,  as  the  Papists  imagine  :  for  as  he  is  with  his  human 
nature  in  heaven,  and  continueth  there  in  that  nature  until  his  final 
coming,  therefore  he  cannot  be  with  his  human  nature  in  the  Lord's 
supper. 

We  conclude  also  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  believers  have 
a  glorious  Saviour  ;  for  "  they  have  a  great  High  priest,  v/ho  is  pass- 
ed into  the  heavens,"  Heb.  iv.  14,  **  Who  is  made  higher  than  the 
heavens,"  Heb.  vii.  26,  and  that  by  his  own  power.  Wonderfully 
■were  Enoch  and  Elijah  glorified  above  other  saints,  when  they 
ascended  into  heaven  with  body  and  soul  together,  without  tasting 
of  death  ;  but  it  was  not  through  their  own  power,  but  through 
Christ's  power,  who  took  them  up  :  but  he  was  raised  to  heaven  by 
his  own  power  and  strength.  Yea,  more  he  ascended  for  the  good 
of  believers,  and  to  procure  them  the  greatest  and  most  precious 


376  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  £cc. 

advantages ;  Enoch  and  Elijah  left  only  a  blessed  remembrance  of 
themselves  to  their  people,  but  they  could  not  be  advocates  for  one 
human  being  in  heaven,  nor  tdke  their  fvllowers  to  themselves,  nor 
send  them  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  an  earnest,  all  which  our  Jesus  doth 
by  his  ascension  into  heaven.  It  is  true,  after  Elijah  was  ascended 
into  heaven,  his  spirit  rested  upon  Elisha :  yet  he  did  not  send  his 
spirit  by  himself,  except  only  as  a  moral  instrument  by  faith  and 
prayer  ;  but  Jesus  sends  his  Spirit  immediately  by  himself,  and 
causes  "  all  to  receive  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace,"  aid  there- 
fore "all  the  seed  of  Israel  may  glory  in  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  xlv.  25. 

But,  hearers,  can  ye  also  glory  in  him  as  your  head  and  pledge, 
•syho  is  ascended  into  heav^en  for  your  good  ?  ye  ought  to  think  of 
this  ;  for  if  ye  know  aught  of  Jesus,  ye  do  surely  know,  that  he  was 
not  glorified  for  all  men,  and  that  it  behooves  you  to  inquire  whether 
ye  are  partakers  of  the  advantages  of  his  ascension  :  do  ye  ask, 
whereby  ye  may  know  this  ?  I  will  inform  you,  and  examine  your- 
selves by  it. 

1.  Those  who  are  partakers  of  these  advantages,  have  him  as  well 
by  his  Spirit  in  their  hearts,  as  in  heaven  ;  "  for  they  are  builded 
for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit,"  Eph.  ii.  22.  Sec  this 
evidence  also  Rom  viii.  9,  10.  The  Holy  Spirit  works  faith  in  their 
souls  effectually,  whereby  they  embrace  him,  and  cause  him  to  dwell 
in  them ;  in  as  much  as  "  they  are  strengthened  with  might  by  the 
Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  that  Christ  may  dwell  by  faith  in  their 
hearts,"  Eph.  iii.  16,  17.  Others  are  yet  without  Christ ;  they  know 
not  this  hidden  work  of  faith,  their  souls  have  never  wrought  thus 
with  him,  they  are  strangers  to  him,  and  he  is  a  stranger  to  them» 

2.  These  persons  look  upon  God  and  Christ  alone  as  their  allsuf- 
ficient  portion  ;  they  have  sought  and  chosen  him  as  such,  in  oppo- 
sition to  all  others :  they  seek  their  rest  and  full  satisfaction  im  him 
only.  They  can  say  to  him  in  truth,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee.  My 
fle^sh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart, 
and  my  portion  for  ever,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  25,  26.  Others  are  "  men 
of  the  world,  who  have  their  portion  in  this  life,"  Psalm  xvii.  14. 
They  pursue  after  the  world,  the  world  possesseth  their  hearts,  they 
think  of  it,  speak  of  it,  and  are  cheerful  or  sorrowful  in  proportion 
to  the  measure  of  worldly  goods  which  thev  enjoy  ;  it  is  their  con- 
tinuid  cry,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good?  who  will  increase  cur 
corn  and  wine  ?"  Psalm  iv.  7,  8. 

3.  These  persons   know  experimentally  what  it  is  to  be  near  to, 
and  fai  from  him,  and  they  are  joyful  or  sorrowful  in  proportion  to 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  37r 

this.  When  he  permits  them  to  come  near  him,  and  into  his  bowels, 
and  when  he  reveals  himself  to  tlieir  souls,  it  is  to  them  "  a  supphig 
with  Jesus,  and  of  Jesus  with  them,"  Rev.  iii.  20.  "  They  rejoice  in 
the  shadow  of  his  wings,"  Psalm  Ixiii.  T.  "It  is  good  for  them  to 
draw  near  to  God,"  Psalm  Ixxiii.  28.  But  when  he  withdraw?  him- 
self, and  hides  his  face,  how  is  their  soul  then  troubled  ?  "  My  bowels 
were  moved  for  him,"  saith  the  spouse,  when  he  had  withdrawn  him- 
self from  her.  Song  v.  4.  See  this  also  in  David,  Psalm  xxx.  7,  8,  9. 
Others  know  nothing  of  this.  Jesus  hath  never  been  revealed  to 
them,  they  have  never  tasted  of  this  honey,  and  therefore  their  eyes 
have  not  been  enlightened,  neither  d  )  they  know  wherein  it  consists 
Xo  be  far  from  him  ;  as  he  is  out  of  their  sight,  so  he  is  out  of  their 
mmd  ;  they  think  that  it  is  enough  "  to  draw  near  him  with  their 
mouth,  and  honour  him  with  their  lips,  though  their  hearts  be  far 
from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.   13, 

4.  It  is  also  the  aim  of  those  vvho  partake  of  the  advantages  of  his 
ascension,  to  seek  those  things  which   are  above,  where  Christ  isj 
and  not  the   things  on  the  earth,  "  Our  conversation  is  in  heaven, 
whence  we  look  also  for  the   Saviour,"  saith  that  heavenly-minded 
man,  Philip,  iii.  20,     They  are  citizens  of  heaven,   and  not  of  the 
earth ;  they  are  strangers  here,  they  will  not  settle  themselves  here, 
the  earth  holds  them  fast  to  their  sorrow,   more   than  they  would 
hold  the  earth  fast ;  their  thoughts,  desires,  and  longings  are  for  and 
toward  heaven,  and  heavenly  things.     If  they  be  at  any  time  drawn 
away  from  these  things,  they  are  grieved,   and  they  will  time  after 
time  break  loose  from  the  world,   that  they  may  pursue  heaven 
only;  "  For  we,"  saith  that  great  man,  Heb.  xiii.  14,  "  have  here 
no  continuing  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come."     For  Jesus  is  there, 
and  he  is  their  treasure,  and  therefore  their  heart  is  there  also,  Matt. 
vi.  21.     Yea,  they  love  all  who  seek  heaven,  as  their  fellow-citizens, 
and  consider  those  who  are  citizens  here  as  strangers.     "  A  citizen 
of  Zion  contemns  a  vile  person  ;  but   he  honoureth  them  that  fear 
the  Lord,"  Psalm  xv.  4.     Others  aim  only  at  being  acknowledged 
and  established  here  on  earth  :  they  are  best  acquainted  with  the 
men  of  this  world,  for  they  are  their  fellow-citizens  ;  they  cannot 
converse  with  the  citizens  of  heaven,  as  well  as   they  ran  with  the 
most  perfect  strangers,  who  speak  another  language  :  yea,  how  like- 
minded  are  they  with  those  who  are  most  woiidly  wise  ;  "  they  are  in- 
deed of  the  world  ;  therefore  speak  they  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
heareth  them,"  1  John  iv.  5.  See   how  Paul  describes  the  citizens, 
who  are  from  beneath,  in  opposition  to  the  citizens  of  heaven,  Philip. 
:ii.  18,  19.  <<  Many  walk  otherwise,  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose 

3D 


378  CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  &c. 

God  is  their  belly  :  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mintl 
earthly  things." 

Look  now  in  this  glass,  and  see  whether  ye  can  discover  in  your- 
selves the  features  of  those,  who  are  partakers  of  Christ's  ascension, 
and  whether  ye  have  good  reason  to  glory  in  him.  But  are  not 
these  features  in  you,  alas,  how  unhappy  are  ye !  ye  have  no  advo- 
cate at  court,  Jesus  is  not  your  head,  ye  are  yet  without  his  Spirit: 
and  therefore  he  will  net  take  you  up  to  him,  but  thrust  you  down 
to  heil  though  ye  were  exalted  even  to  heaven,  except  ye  will  yet 
humble  yourselves,  and  flee  to  him,  who  dwelleth  in  heaven.  There- 
fore attend  more  to  the  ascended  Jesus,  and  to  heaven,  than  ye  have 
done  hitherto.  Hear  what  Jesus  commands  you  to  do.  Matt,  vi  33. 
*'  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these 
things  shall  be  added  to  you  "  Do  not  suppose  that  one  faint  sigh 
in  the  air  will  carry  you  to  heaven  ;  no,  we  must  be  in  earnest,  we 
must  exercise  violence,  if  we  will  enter  in  :  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
suffcreth  violence,  and  the  violent  take  it  by  force,"  Matt.  xi.  12. 
But,  true  citizens  of  heaven,  improve  the  ascension  of  Christ  into 
heaven.     And  therefore, 

1.  Rejoice  in  it,  shout  and  sing  aloud  after  him  in  this  glory. 
Who  knows  how  the  heavenly  host  shouted,  when  heaven  was  open- 
ed to  him  !  how  gloriously  the  Father  seated  him  on  his  throne  at 
his  right  hand  1  how  the  angels  attended  on  him  !  how  the  souls  of 
the  blessed  rose  up  from  their  thrones,  "  fell  down  before  him,  cast 
their  crowns  from  their  heads,  before  the  throne,  and  cried  one  to 
another  with  a  loud  voice.  The  Lamb  which  was  slain  is  worthy  to 
receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour, 
and  glory,  and  blessmg  !"  as  they  did.  Rev.  iv.  and  v*  It  behooves 
you  also  to  unite  with  them,  that  ye  may  proclaim  his  glory  with 
rejoicing  to  the  utmost ;  for  he  ascended  into  heaven  also  for  your 
salvation  and  happiness.  Behold  how  the  congregation  of  Israel  did 
this  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  great  type  of  Christ,  Psalm 

xlvii.  5 9.  "  God  is  gone  up  with  a  shout,  the  Lord  with  the  sound 

of  a  trumpet.  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sine;:  praises.  For  God  i^  the  King  of  all  the  earth,  sing 
ye  praises  with  understanding.  God  reigneth  over  the  heathen : 
God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  holiness.  The  princes  of  the 
people  are  gathered  together,  even  the  people  of  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham :  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  belong  unto  God  ;  he  is  greatly 
exalted." 

2.  Is  he  ascended  into  heaven,  do  not  lament  that  ye  may  not  see 
him  any  loiiger  in  the  body  on  eaith.     It  discovers  ignorance,  yea? 


XVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  46—49.  379 

fieshly-mindedness  in  you,  to  be  desirous  of  seeing  him  in  the  flesh, 
as  though  your  souls  would  then  be  more  influenced  toward  and  by 
him  to  faith  and  love.     We  know  to  what  this  vanity  hath   betrayed 
the  Lutherans  and  Papists  ;  if  he  were  still  on  earth,  he  would  not 
be  a  priest :  ye  should  never  have  had  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
nor  any  expectation  of  your  ascension  into  heaven,  ye  should  not 
have  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  nor  sought  the  things  in  heaven,  if  he 
had  always  continued  on  earth.     Because  the  believing  apostles  un- 
derstood not  this  before  his  ascension,  therefore  "  sorrow  filled  their 
hearts  ;"  and  therefore  he  said   unto   them,  "  I  tell  you  the  truth  ; 
it  ib  expedient  for  you    that  I  go  away  ;  for  if  1  go  not  away,   the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but  if  1  depart,  I  will  send  him 
unto  you,"  John  xvi.  6,  7.     It  is  also  your  glory,  that  he   who  is 
your  Lord,  hath  ascended  up  from  you  in  such  a  glorious  and   illus- 
trious manner.     Is   he    absent   from  you  with  his  body,  he   doth 
never  depart  from  you  with  his  Godhead,  majesty,  grace  and  Spirit : 
"Heis  with  you  alway,  even   unto   the  end   of  the  world,"  Matt, 
xxviii.  20.     **  Where  only    two  or  three  are  gathered    together    in 
his  name,  there  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them,"  Matt,  xviii.  20  .Yea,  he 
is  with  you,  when  your  soul  unbosoms  herself  to   him  in   private  : 
"He  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  destitute,"  Psalm  cii.   17.     Doth 
he  hide  himself,  and  forbear  to  show  his  kindness  to  you,  he  is  stili 
with  you  in  secret,  and  also  -'when  ye  pass  through  the  fire  and  wa- 
ter," Isaiah  xliii.  2,     For  he  hath   said,  "  I  will  not  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii    5      Yea,  he  will  come  again,  ye    shall  see 
him  with  your  eyes,  and  he  will  take  you  to  himself. 

3.  Is  he  your  advocate  in  heaven,  in  the  presence  of  his  Father, 
bring  then  all  your  complaints  to  him  and  before  him,  that  they  may 
ascend  up  from  his  hands  before  the  throne  of  God  ;  for  to  this  end 
he  stands  at  the  golden  altar,  as  John  saw.  Rev.  viii.  3,  4.  Why 
do  ye  deprive  Jesus  of  his  honourable  office,  by  neglecting  to  give 
him  more  employment  in  it,  through  discouragement  smothering 
your  complaints  and  difficulties  in  your  own  bosoms,  and  seeking  re- 
lief in  sorrow  ?  Do  iniquities  prevail  over  you,  and  render  you  ir- 
resolute, so  that  ye  dare  not  draw  nigh  to  him,  because  ye  provoke 
him  so  often  ;  he  is  your  advocate  for  this  end  also ;  it  is  your  duty 
to  be  ashamed,  and  to  humble  yourselves,  but  ye  ought  not  to  re- 
main aloof  from  him  ;  for  "  if  aay  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate 
•with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous :  and  he  is  the  propitia- 
tion for  our  sinSj'M  John  ii.  1,  2.  Doth  he  not  also  frequently 
show  that  he  prays  for  you,  when  he  rebukes  your  enemies,  looses 
your  heart  and  tongue,  th*t  ye  may  plead  heartily  for  yourselves 


3^9         CHRIST'S  PROFITABLE  ASCENSION,  Uc. 

before  the  throne  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,  and  when 
he  speaks  peace  to  your  souls,  and  gives  you  much  life  of  grace  ? 
for  all  tiiese  things  proceed  from  his  intercession. 

4.  Entertain  now  an  assured  hope  and  expectation,  that  he  will 
take  you  up  to  himself  into  heaven.  What  causes  you  to  doubt  so? 
vhai  renders  the  adversities  that  befal  you,  so  grievous  to  you  ?  is  it 
rot  because  ye  do  not  perceive  that  ye  have  an  assured  title  to  heav- 
en ?  if  ye  had  a  certain  and  clear  expectation,  would  ye  not  laugh  at 
whatever  is  otherwise  dreadful,  and  say  courageously,  *'Our  light  af- 
fliction, which  endureth  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor^ 
iv.  17.  Have  ye  not  also  reasons  enow  to  entertain  such  an  assu- 
rance ?  did  not  he  promise  you,  when  he  departed,  that  "  he  would 
come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  himself  ?"  John  xiv.  3.  Is  he 
not  in  heaven  as  your  pledge,  your  flesh  and  head  ?  hath  he  not  sent 
you  his  Spirit  as  an  earnest  of  it  ?  dare  ye  not  think  thus  of  your- 
selves, because  ye  perceive  so  many  earthly  inclinations  still  in  you  ? 
are  they  not  matter  of  grief  to  you  ?  do  ye  not  mourn  on  account  of 
them,  and  strive  against  them  ?  doth  not  your  soul  lift  up  itself, 
time  after  time,  toward  heaven  ?  well,  assure  yourselves  then,  "  that 
if  your  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  ye  have  a 
building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  but  eternal  in  the 
heavens,"  2  Cur.  v.  1.  Yea,  that  '-when  after  your  skin  worms  de- 
stroy this  body,  yet  in  your  flesh  ye  shall  see  God  :  whom  ye  shall 
see  for  yourselves,  and  your  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another." 
Let  "your  reins  then  long  exceedingly  within  you,"  Job.  xix. 
26,  27. 

5.  In  the  mem  while,  endeavour  more  than  ye  have  heretofore  to 
be  heavenly-minded.  It  is  indeed  your  element,  ye  have  received 
the  Spirit  from  heaven  for  this  purpose  ;  it  is  also  your  duty.  For 
it  is  enjoined  on  you,  Coll.  iii.  1,  2,  3.  "  Seek  those  things  which 
are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Set  your 
affection  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth.  For  ye  are 
dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Therefore  let  your 
souls  detach  and  withdraw  themselves  from  visible  things,  and  sur- 
render and  devote  themselves  to  those  that  are  heavenly,  musing  on 
them  with  your  thoughts,  directing  your  desires  toward  them,  and 
opening  unto  Christ,  that  he  may  enter  in,  and  may  be  fetched  in  by 
you ;  '«  Lift  up  your  hands,  O  ye  gates  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlast- 
ing doors,  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  come  in,"  Psalm  xxiv.  7. 

Do  afflictions  discourage  you  ;  '•  Look  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and 
finisher  of  the  faith,  who,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  endu- 


XVm.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  46—49.  381 

red  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  God,"  Heb.  xii  2.  "It  behooved  Christ  to  suffer 
all  things  first,  and  then  to  enter  into  his  glory,"  Lukexxiv.  26.  *'If 
we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  be  glorified  with  him,"  Rom.  viii. 
17.  O  friends,  how  doubly  sweet  will  your  sorrows  be,  when  ye 
shall  be  revealed  with  him  in  glory  !  what  a  fair  prospect  will  it  be, 
when  "  ye  shall  be  taken  up  "  in  the  sight  of  your,  and  the  Lord's 
enemies,  "  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord  I  My  soul  saith,  yea,  let  all  the  people  say 
Amen,  yea  Amen»" 


(  382  ) 


CHRIST 


KING  AND  JUDGE. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  ex.  1.  2.  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool.  The  Lord  shall 
send  the  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion  ;  rule  thou  in  the  midst 
of  thine  enemies.