Q.  50.   WM/  is  it  added,  "  Jnd  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?" 

A.  Because  Christ  is  ascended  into  heaven  for  this  end,  that  he 
xnif^ht  there  appear  as  head  of  the  church,  by  whom  the  Father 
governs  all  things. 

Q.  51.   What  firojit  is  this  glory  of  Christ  our  head  unto  us  ? 

A.  First,  that  by  liis  holy  Si)irit  he  poureth  out  heavenly  graces 
\ipon  us  his  members ;  and  then,  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and 
preserves  us  against  all  enemies. 

Q.  52.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee^  that  **  Christ  shall  come  again  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ?'* 

A.  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  uplifted  head, 
I  look  for  the  very  same  Person,  who  before  offered  himself  for  my 
«ake,  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse  from  me  ; 
to  come  as  Judge  from  heaven  :  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  ene- 
mies into  everlastin;q;  condemnation,  but  shall  translate  me  with  all 
his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly  joys  and  glory- 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  383 

X  AKE  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set  them  on  the 
head  of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedek,  the  high  priest."  Thus  the 
Lord  commanded  the  prophet  Zechariah,  Zech.  vi.  U.  Among 
the  several  ornaments  of  the  high  priest,  the  golden  plate,  inscribed 
»'  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  placed  on  his  forehead,  shone  forth 
with  special  lustre  ;  yea,  this  was  a  holy  crown  to  the  high  priest. 
Exod.  xxix.  6.  But  this  was  too  little  for  Joshua  the  high  priest  i 
the  prophet  must  make  for  him,  other  crowns,  and  set  them  on  his 
head,  and  therefore  also  say  to  him,  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  saying  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  he 
shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit,  and  rule  upon  his 
throne,  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throrae,"  Zech.  vi.  12,  13, 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  Joshua  the  high  priest  was,  like  every 
other  lawful  high  priest,  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  the  man  whose 
name  is  Branch ;  but  herein  Joshua  excelled  the  other  high  priests, 
that  crowns  of  silver  and  gold  were  set  upon  his  head,  as  a  greater 
and  worthier  type  of  the  Messiah.  The  other  high  priests  were 
types  of  this  Branch,  as  the  only  and  perfect  high  priest ;  but  Josh- 
ua, when  these  crowns  were  set  upon  his  head,  and  the  signification 
of  them  explained  to  him,  became  also  a  type  of  the  iVlessiah  as 
king,  and  fereshowed  particularly  that  the  offices  of  king  and  priest, 
which  were  never  united  together  in  one  person  and  tribe  in  Israel, 
should  both  bs  administered  by  him,  in  order  that  he  might  "  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord."  Like  Mtlchizedek,  he  should  be  also  king 
of  Salem,  and  a  priest  of  the  most  high  God.  And  truly  our  Jesus 
is  both  high  priest  and  king.  As  high  priest  he  hath  obtained  an 
eternal  redemption,  and  as  king  he  applies  it  ;  as  high  priest  he  a- 
scended  into  heaven,  and  entered  thus  into  the  true  sanctuary,  as 
we  have  seen  in  the  former  Lord's  day  ;  and  as  king  ihe  sits  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  to  rule  upon  his  throne,  which  will  appear  partic- 
ularly in  the  last  judgment ;  and  this  we  must  show  at  present. 

We  must  attend  in  this  Lord's  day  to  two  particulars  with  respect 
to  the  exalted  Mediator : 

I.  His  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  king. 

II.  His  coming  again  to  judgment,  as  judge. 

These  are  two  great  articles  of  our  faith,  and  they  contain  many 
and  important  matters  ;  but  we  cannot  exhibit  them  all  at  present  on 
account  of  the  brevity  of  our  method  ;  and  we  v/ill  therefore  remark 
only  the  principal  particulars. 

h  The  first  head  is  explained  by  the  instructor  in  the  fiftieth  ques- 


384  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

tion  ;  and  the  advantages  are  then  shown  in  the  fifty-first  question. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  GoJ,  asks  why  it  is  added,  "  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,"  to  show  that  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  is 
differ-^nt  from  his  ascension  into  heaven  ;  for  though  Enoch  and  Eli- 
jah ascended  into  heaven,  they  did  not  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ; 
but  Christ  ascended  into  heaven,  that  he  might  sit  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  Therefore  Mark  saith,  "  The  Lord  was  received  up  into 
heaven^  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Mark  xvi.  19. 

In  order  to  know  wherein  it  consists  to  be  on  the  right  hand  of 
God,  we  must  observe,  that  this  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  proper 
sense,  or  of  a  bodily  posture  ;  for  as  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  hath  there- 
fore no  hands,  the  Son  of  God  cannot  be  in  a  bodily  m..nner  at  his 
right  hand.  When  a  right  hand  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord,  we  must 
explain  it  in  a  manner  which  becomes  God,  and  according  to  his 
word  :  now  the  word  of  God  understands  by  his  right  hand,  (a)  the 
special  favour  which  he  showeth  to  them  who  are  the  objects  of  his 
favour,  as  we  show  favour  with  the  right  hand,  and  not  so  much  with 
the  left.  So  David  speaks  of  it,  Psalm  xx.  6,  "  The  saving  strength 
of  his  right  hand."  (b)  The  majesty  and  glory  of  God,  which  he 
manifests  especially  in  heaven  ;  for  the  right  hand  is  considered  as  the 
most  honourable.  So  we  read  of  "the  right  hand  of  the  majesty 
on  high,"  Hcb.  1.  2*  (c)  By  the  right  hand  of  God  is  also  under- 
stood the  power,  dominion,  and  government  of  the  Lord  over  all ;  for 
our  greatest  strength  is  in  our  right  hand,  an  1  by  that  we  govern  all 
Dur  actions.  In  this  sense  do  we  find  the  right  hand  of  God,  Psalm 
xvii.  7,  "  Thou  savest  them  which  put  their  trust  in  thee,  from  them 
'  that  rise  up  against  thy  right  hand  ;"  that  is,  against  thy  mighty  do- 
minion.    It  is  said, 

I.  That  Christ  is  at  God's  right  hand,  by   which  it   is   intimated, 
(a)  that  he  is  in  heaven  in  the  enjoyment  of  bis  Father's  special  and 
full  favour,  by  which  he  fully  enjoys  the  greatest  happiness.    There- 
fore he  saith.  Psalm  xxi.  "  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  way  of  life  :  in 
thy  presence  is  fulness  of  Joy  :  at  thy  right  hand  there  are    plea- 
sures  for  evermore."     Peter,   explaining  these   words,  represents 
the  Saviour  as  saying,  "  Thou  hast  made  known  to   me  the   ways 
of  life  ;  thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  by  thy    countenance,"   Acts 
ii.  28.     And  thus  Jesus  is  "the  man  of  God's  right  hand,"  Psalm 
Ixxx.  17.     As  Jacob  called  his  youngest  son,  on  account  of  his  spe- 
cial affection  for  him,  Benjamin,  that  is,  son  of  the   right   hand. 
(b)  Th'dt  he  is   exalted   to  the    higheL:t  honour  and  glory,   so  that 
"  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on   earth,  and  under   the 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  50—52.  385 

earth,  and  which  is  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  in  them,  must  say,  Bles- 
sing, and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power  unto  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever,"  Rev.  v.  13.  And  so 
"  God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  hath  given  him  a  name,  which 
is  above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  tl.ings  under  the 
earth  ;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,"  Philip  ii  9,  10,  11.  For 
when  we  set  any  person  at  our  right  hand  we  honour  him  ;  so  Solo- 
mon set  hi's  mother  on  his  right  hand  to  honour  her,  1  Kings  ii.  19, 
and  thus  the  bridegroom  places  the  bride  on  his  right  hand,  to  hon- 
our her,  Psalm  xlv.  9.  And  so  "  Jesus  sat  down  on  the  right  liand 
of  the  majesty  on  high,"  Heb.  i.  3.  viii.  1.  Yea,  he  is  thus  glori- 
fied more  than,  the  most  glorious  angels  ;  "  for  to  which  of  the  angels 
said  he  at  any  time,  sit  on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  ene- 
mies thy  foocstool  ?"  Heb.  i.  13.  Christ's  being  at  Gcd's  right  hnnd 
consists  also,  (c)  in  his  being  appointed  by  the  Father  to  be  a  ruler 
and  a  king  over  all,  and  particularly  over  his  church  ;  and  so  "  the 
Father  hath  made  him  sit  with  him  in  his  throne,"  Rev.  iii.  21,  and 
the  Father  therefote  governs  all  things  by  him.  This  hath  respect 
to  the  cnstom  of  sovereign  rulers,  who,  when  they  adopt  others  or 
their  followrulers,  place  them  on  their  right  hand.  So  the  mother 
of  Zebedee's  children,  when  she  desired  that  her  sons  might  be  the 
first  after  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  kingdom,  requested,  saying,  MiUt. 
XX.  21,"  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  one  on  thy  ri,9;ht 
hand,  and  the  other  on  the  leit  in  thy  kingdom."  Of  David's  sons 
it  is  said,  that  "they  were  Princes,"  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  and  so  they 
were  also  "  the  first  at  the  hand  of  the  king'"  1  Chron.  xviii. 
ir.  In  this  sense  the  catechism  explains  Christ's  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  when  it  saith,  that  "  Christ  is  ascended  into  heav- 
en for  this  end,  that  he  might  appear  there  as  head  of  his  Cbiistian 
church,  by  whom  the  Father  governs  all  things  ;  see  the  fiftitth 
question.  And  truly  the  instructor  speaks  here  according  to  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  Peter  saith.  Acts  ii.  33,  36,  "  He  therefore  being 
exalted  by  the  right  hand  of  God,  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know 
assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  s^me  Jesus  whom  ye  have  ci\ici- 
fied,  both  Lord  and  Christ."  And  Paul,  explaining  our  text,  saith, 
1  Cor.  XV.  25,  "  He  must  reign  until  he  hath  put  all  things  under 
his  feet."  Therefore  it  is  also  said,  that  "  God  hath  exalted  him  at 
his  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  Acts  v.  31.  To 
which  also  pertains,  that  "  the  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet,"  as  Paul  and  Peter  speak,  Eph.  i,  20 — 23.     1  Peter  ii.  21,  and 

3E 


':^t  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

that '<  the   Father  himself  is  at  the   Son's  right  hand,   and  striKtl 
through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  \^^alh,"  i^salm  ex.  5- 

2.  He  not  only  '*  is,"  but  Jie  also  "sits"  at  the  right  hand  of  Godv 
"  He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  saith  the  apostle,  Cell,  iii  1,, 
which  intimates,  (a)  his  ai^'reeable  resting  from  his  painful  labour; 
for  we  sit  in  order  to  rest,  {b)  his  actual  emi^loyment  in  the  exercise: 
of  his  dominion,  and  judicial  pouer :  for  a  king  sits  down  on  his 
throne,  in  order  to  exercise  his  dominion,  and  to  maintain  justice, 
Psahn  ix.  4,  "  l"l-.ou  hast  maintained  my  right  and  my  cause,  thou 
satte^t  on  tiie  throne,  judg.ng  right."  And  (c)  his  stabilty  and  con- 
tinuance in  his  government ;  for  "  he  shall  rule  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end,"  Luke  i. 
33.  For  he  who  sits  down,  shows  that  he  intends  to  continue; 
Thus  it  is  said  of  the  Saviour,  Isaiah  xvi  5.  "  A  throne  shall  be 
establislied  in  mercyy  and  hs  shall  sit  upon  it  constantly  in  the  taber- 
nacle of  David."  * 

3.  It  is  ako  said,  that  he  "  stanxls  "  on  the  riglit  hand  of  God  j 
"  Stephen  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56.  This  was  in  order  to  mani- 
fest his  readiness  and  willingness  to  assist  Stephen  against  his  ene- 
mies, to  take  him  up  to  himself  in  g'ory,  and  to  avenge  himself  of 
his  enemies  like  a  king  y  for  he  wlio  stands  shows  that  he  is  willing 
and  ready  to  do  his  work  ;  as  the  Lord  is  represented  to  us,  Isaiah 
iii.  13.  *'  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead,  and  standeth  to  judge  the 
people." 

As  this  is  a  glory  cf  his  mediiatorial  office,  so  it  'S  also  proper  to 
him  according  to  both  his  natures  ;  for  his  human  nature  is  exalted 
hereby  above  all  the  saints  ixnd  the  blessed,  and  is  acknowledged  and 
glorified  by  them  to  the  utmost,  as  "  having  redeemed  them  to  God 
by  its  blood,  and  as  having  made  them  kings  and  priests  to  God," 
Rev.  V.  9.  And  thus  "  wc  see  Jesus,  who  vvas  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowntd  with  glory  and 
honour,"  Heb.  ii.  9;  Compare  herewith  Heb.  xii.  2,  We  may  also 
say,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  according  to  his  Godhead, 
inasmuch  as  the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  Avhieh  was  concealed  before 
under  the  humbled  manhood,  was  revealed.  Therefore  he  prayed  to 
his  Fs-lher,  John  xvii*  5.  "Glorify  me,  O  Father,  with  thine  own- 
self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was." 
See  Philip,  ii.  6,  7. 

It  is  therefore  silly  in  the  Lutherans  to  hold,  that  he  is  only  ac- 

*  ^7e  have  rendered  this  ipas8ag:3  accovding  to  ihe  Ij-utch  tj*anslfttion< 


XiX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  S87 

cordin,:^  to  his  human  nature  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  that  they 
may  conclude  therefrom,  that  his  human  nature  is  every  where, 
because  the  riglit  hand  of  God  is  every  where  :  but  although  God's 
right  hand  is  every  where,  Christ  is  not  on  that  account  according  to 
his  human  niiture  every  where  at  God's  right  hand,  but  only  in 
heaven  ;  for  "  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high," 
Heb.  i.  3.  As  "  the  heaven  is  God's  throne,"  Isaiah  Ixvi.  1.  Psalm 
%i.  4,  And  therefore  "  Christ  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  the  majesty  in  tlie  heavens,"  Heb   viii.  1. 

As  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  Go4  was  his  reward,  and  con- 
duceth  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  so  it  is  alio  to  the  advantage 
of  his  elect ;  the  instructor  shows  in  the  fifty  first  question,  that  they 
receive  a  two-fold  advantage  from,  his  sitting:  on  the  right  hand  of 
God: 

1.  "  Fii-st,  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  pourelh  out  heavenly  graces 
upon  us  his  members."  That  be'ievcrs  are  maiie  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  an  earnest  of  Christ,  who  is  ascended  from  them  into 
heaven,  is  shown  in  the  forty  ninth  question ;  but  it  is  now  shown 
tliat  they  receive  by  tlie  Holy  Spirit  the  heavenly  graces,  which  are 
sent  down  to  them  from  heaven,  and  from  the  tUrone  of  God,  which 
render  tnem  iisavenly-minded,  and  lead  them  up  to  heaven  ;  which 
graces  are  many  and  divers,  as  vve  will  show  upon  tie  twentieth 
Lord's  day,  and  are  not  shed  forth  now  in  drops  only,  as  \mder  the 
Old  Testament,  but  in  whole  streams,  according  to  the  promise 
which  was  made,  Isaiah  xliv.  3.  "  1  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  ficods  upon  the  dry  g* ound :  I  wiU  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring"  And  the  out- 
pouring of  these  graces  is  an  advantage,  which  we  obtyin  by  his 
sitnng  at  the  right  iiand  of  God,  as  Peter  testifieth,  Acts  ii.  33, 
"Therefore  being  exalted  by  the  ri^^ht  hand  of  God  and  having  re- 
ceived of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed 
forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  ITe  hath  respect  here  to  the 
Spirit,  who  was  poured  out  at  the  f^ast  of  Pentecost :  of  which  every 
believer,  each  according  to  his  measure,  partakers,  as  well  as  the 
apostles,  according  to  what  was  promised,  Joel  ii.  28 — 32,  John  vii* 
38, 39, 

2  *'  And  then  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and  preserves  us 
against  all  enemies."  Believers  have  many  enemies,  who  seek  their 
destruction  ;  but  Jesus  preserves  them  :  even  "  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  preva-l  against  them,"  Matt.  xvi.  18,  for  "  all  power  is  given 
unto  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  As  he  sits  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  he  defends  and  preserves  them  by  thf-  right 


388  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

hand  of  his  power,  the  rod  of  his  strength,  with  which  he  rules  itt 
the  midst  of  his  enemifs,  as  the  text  shows. 

II  He  will  manifest  that  he  defends  and  preserves  them  against 
all  enemies  particularly  in  the  last  judgment ;  for  he  will  show  then 
as  judge,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  :  for  this  sitting  implies 
also  a  puhlic  extrcise  of  judgment  and  of  judiciary  power.  So  he 
said  to  Caiaphas,  that  he  might  terrify  him  and  the  wicked  Jewish 
Sanhedrim.  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  64.  For  God  is  said  to  ride  and  to  come  upon  the  clouds, 
when  he  draws  near  to  judge  a  people,  Isaiah  xix    1. 

Although  God  exercises  many  and  severe  judgments  upon  human 
beings,  there  are  nevertheless  more  particularly  two  general 
judgments,  which  will  pass  on  all  men  ;  one  is  exercised  in  secret 
upon  the  soul  of  every  individual,  when  it  removes  out  of  the  body 
in  death  ;  the  soul  is  then  brought  before  God,  and  receives  of  him 
the  reward  of  that  which  was  done  in  the  body,  whether  it  were 
good  or  evil  ;  the  other  will  be  exercised  in  public  upon  body  and 
soul  at  the  last  day.  Of  this  judgment  the  creed  and  the  instructor 
speak  in  the  fifty  second  question. 

In  order  to  treat  of  the  last  ludgment  in  such  a  manner  as  shall 
conduce  to  our  advantage,  we  must  attend  to  these  three  particulars, 
1,  To  the  nature  of  this  judgment,  2,  to  the  reality  of  the  judgment, 
3,  to  the  comfort  that  believers  receive  from  the  expectation  of  the 
judgment. 

1.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular,  the  nature  of  this  judg- 
ment, wc  learn  wherein  it  will  consist,  (a)  by  the  judge  who  shall 
judge,  (b)  by  the  persons  who  shall  be  judged,  (c)  the  matters  that 
shall  be  brought  into  judgment,  (d)  the  judiciary  procedure,  or  the 
manner  in  which  this  judgment  shall  be  exercised  and  holden,  and, 
(e)  the  circumstances  of  this  judgment.  The  brevity  of  our  method 
will  permit  us  to  say  only  a  few  words  to  each  of  these  particulars, 
(a)  The  Judge  in  this  judgment,  saith  Paul,  is  God,  Heb.  xii.  23. 
But  God  the  Father  will  not  judge  by  himself,  but  by  his  Son  :  *'  the 
man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  of  which  he  hath  given  assurance  to 
all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
The  Father  set  him  at  his  right  hand,  that  he  might  be  Mediator, 
and  it  belont^s  also  to  his  Mediatorship  to  judge  as  a  judge.  Yea, 
the  Father  hath  committed  the  work  of  judging  to  him,  because  it 
is  his  will,  that  it  should  be  exercised  in  a  public  and  visible  manner  ; 
for  'le.  beuig  also  man,  can  appear  visibly  :  "  For  the  Father  judgeth 
no  man  j  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son  ;  and  hath 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50^52.  389 

given  him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son 
of  man,"  John  v.  22,  27.  *'  He  came  not  indeed  to  judge,  but  to  save 
the  world,  John  iii  17.  xii.  47,  but  he  will  come  hereafter  to  judge. 
"  The  saints  also  shall  judge  the  world  and  angels,"  1  Cor.  y\.  3, 
but  it  will  be  only  with  a  judgment  of  appiobation,  by  whfch  they 
will  approve  of  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  as  they  do  with  respect  to 
"  his  judging  the  great  whore,"  Rev.  xix.  1,  2. 

(h)  Every  reasonable  creature  will  be  cited  before  this  Judge  ; 
for  '*  not  only  the  angels  will  be  judged,"  1  Cor.  vi.  3.  "  The  angels 
that  sinned  were  cast  into  hell,  and  delivered  into  chains  of  darkness, 
to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Thus  Jude  also 
speaks  in  his  epistle,  in  the  sixth  verse.  But  all  men  hkewise  will 
be  cited  before  this  Judge,  as  well  those  who  have  been,  as  t"ose 
who  are  now,  and  those  also  who  shall  be  hereafter  ;  whether  they 
be  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  men  or  women,  young  or  old,  righteous 
or  wicked,  dead  or  yet  living,  also  thou  and  I :  "  For  we  must  all 
appear  before  the  judjj^ment  seat  of  Christ,"  2  Cor.  v.  10. 

(c.)  But  upon  what  matters  shall  this  judgment  be  holden  ?  Paul 
saith  that  it  will  be  holden  upon  "  that  which  is  done  in  the  body, 
whether  it  be  good  or  evil,"  2  Cor.  v.    10.     All  the  good  actions  of 
God's  children,  although  they  have  not  considered  their  actions  as 
good  on  account  of  their  impurity  ;  but  especially  their  works  of 
mercy,  will  be  brought  to  light  by  the  great  Judge,   will  be  highly 
esteemed  by  him,  and  extolled  as  evidences  of  their  good  state.  The 
Judge  himself  showeth  this,  Matt.  xxv.  35 — 40.     The  ungodly  will 
be  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  all  their  wicked  actions,  whether 
sins  of  omission  or  commission,  or  sins  of  their  thoughts  ;  for  '*  God 
will  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  ii.  16.  1  Cor. 
iv.  5  ;  or  words,  as  well  "  idle  \\ords,"   Matt.  xii.  36,  as  "  all  hard 
words,"  according  to  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  epistle  of  Jude ;  or 
deeds,  so  Jude  speaks  also  in  the  same  verse.     We  dare  not  decide 
positively  whether  the  sins  of  believers  will  also  be  produced  in  this 
judgment,   althou^  it  is  highly  probable  that  they  will  :  for  not  to 
alledge  all  that  might  be  offered  here,  v/hen  the  sins  of  the  uns:odly, 
into  which  they  have  seduced  the  godly,   will  be  brought  to  Hght,  it 
will  then  be  necessary  that  the  sins  of  believers  should  also  be  men- 
tioned.    '*  But  however  this  may  be,  they  will  not  be  upbraided  v/ith 
their  sins,  as  unatoned,  and  as  subj^-cting  them  to  condemnation. 

(d)  In  order  that  we  may  consider  the  nature  of  this  judgment 
more  particularly,  we  must  attend  also  to  the  judiciary  procedure 
of  it.    To  this  pertains,  (a)  the  constituting  of  the  tribunal  or  the 


390  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

court  of  judgment,  (b)  the  examination,  (c)  the  sentence,  and  (d)  th^ 
execution  of  the  sentence, 

(a)  The  constitming  of  the  tribunal  or  court  of  judgment  will 
begin  with  a  terrible  commotion  m  hcuven  and  on  earth  ;  the  Judge 
Jesus  will  appear  in  the  ciouds,  beiore  the  eyes  of  every  individual, 
in  a  most  glorious  manner,  sui rounded  with  the  lios's  of  heaven,  and 
*'  he  will  taeielorc  ccme  again"  to  judge  *'  in  the  same  manner,  in 
which  tlie  apostles  saw  nim  depart,"  Acts  i.  9,  10,  11.  Upon  which 
the  dead  will  be  raisecl  up,  and  with  all  those  who  will  remain  alive, 
be  cited  and  bioughi  before  the  judgment  seat.  The  Judge  him- 
self declares  tnis,  rMatt.  XXIV.  29,  oO,  31.  "  The  sun  shall  be  dark- 
ened, and  tne  moon  stiall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  shall  fail 
from  heaven,  and  me  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken.  And 
then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  ;  and  then 
shall  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  comin,^  m  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory. 
And  he  stiall  send  his  angels  v/ah  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and 
they  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  winds,  ftom  one 
end  of  heaven  to  tiie  other."  And  that  all  things  may  be  conducted 
in  a  more  orderly  manner,  all  men  will  not  pass  confusedly  together, 
but  tiie  Judge  will  separate  the  godly  from  the  wicked,  and  he  will 
place  the  godly  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  wicked  on  his  left.  Matt. 
XXV.  31,  32,  33, 

(b)   Hereupon  will  follow  the  examination,  which  will  be  exceed- 
ingly strict,  like  an  examination  from   certain  books.     In  this  man- 
ner was  the  judgment  exhibited  to  John  in  a  vision,  Rev.  xx.  12. 
"  1  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God,   and  the  books 
were  opened  :   and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of 
life  ;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  writ- 
ten in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."  See  also  Dan   vii.  lO. 
These  are  not  real  books,  but  books  figuratively  so  called,  of  different 
kinds,  to  wit,  (a)  that  in  which  the  duty  of  man  is  written,  or  made 
known  ;  either  the  book  of  nature^   from  which  the  heathens,  who 
will  be  cited,  will  learn  what  they  ought  to  have  done,  according  to 
the  discovery  which  God  had  made  to  them  of  himself  and  of  his 
law  in  their  nature  ;  or  the  beck  of  scripture,  and  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel,  according  to  which  those  only,   who  have  had  the  scrip- 
ture,  will  be   informed   what   they  ought    to   have  been  and  done ; 
"  For  as  many  as  have  sinned  Avithout  law,  shall  also  perish  without 
law ;  and  as  many  as  have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the 
law  "  Rom.  ii.  12.  (b)  Moreover,  the  book  and  the  register  of  men's 
actions,  to  wit,  the  omniscience  of  God,  will  be  opened.     As  God 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  Sfl 

records  all  the  calamities  of  his  children,  as  it  were,  in  a  book,  so  he 
doth  all  their  virtues.  Sec  Psalm  Ivi.  8.  And  he  will  reveal  them  pub* 
licly  before  the  whole  world  in  all  their  lustre,  as  we  have  seen.  Matt. 
XXV.  35 — 40.  And  he  keeps  in  the  same  manner  by  his  omniscience 
a  book  of  remembrance  of  all  the  sins  of  the  wicked  and  *'  he  will 
set  them  in  order  before  thera"  on  that  day.  This  we  see,  Mai.  iii. 
16.  Psalm  li.  21.  But  that  the  justice  of  God  may  appear  pubhcly, 
when  he  doth  not  bring  the  sins  of  the  righteous  to  light  for  their 
condemnation,"  another  book  which  is  the  book  of  life,  will  be  open- 
ed," Rev.  XX.  12,  and  it  will  be  made  known,  that  they  were  chosen 
and  written  in  it  to  life  ;  and  not  only  this,  but  **  the  book  of  the 
life  of  the  Lamb  will  also  be  opened,"  Kev  xxi.  27.  That  is,  the 
book  of  the  council  of  peace,  or  of  the  covenant  of  redemption,  made 
from  eternity  by  the  Father  with  the  Son,  into  which  the  names  of 
the  elect  were,  if  V/e  may  so  say,  transcribed.  See  John  xvii.  6. 
This  book  will  be  opened,  that  is,  it  will  be  manifested,  that  Jesus  is 
the  Surety  of  the  elect,  and  that  he  hath  satisfied  for  them  ;  and 
that  they  therefore  cannot  be  condemned  on  account  of  their  sins, 
according  to  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  Thus  speaks  the  Saviour,  John  iii. 
18.  "  He  who  believeth  on  the  Son  is  not  condemned-"  (c)  That  it 
may  now  appear,  that  he  judgeth  according  to  truth,  the  book  of  the 
tijstimony  of  truth  will  also  be  opened,  when  all  thiogs  will  be  dis- 
covered, and  recur  in  a  lively  manner  to  the  consciences  of  men, 
how  much  soever  they  may  be  blinded  and  hardened  in  this  life ; 
for  if"  the  consciences  of  the  heathens  do  now  bear  witness,  and  if 
their  thoughts  do  now  accuse  them,"  Rom.  ii.  15,  xvhat  will  it  be 
then,"  when  the  Lord  will  come,  and  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  and  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts  ?" 
1  Cor.  iv.  5. 

(c)  After  all  things  have  been  btrictly  e^tamined  in  this  manner, 
the  sentence  will  be  pronounced,  in  the  sweetest  and  most  ravishmg 
words  upon  the  righteous,  and  every  word  will  be  most  emphatical ; 
for  the  King  will  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world,"  Matt-  xxv.  34.  But  in  a  terrible  manner  and 
in  his  wrath  "  will  he  say  to  them  on  his  lift  hand,  Depart  from  me, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlastmg  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels^" 
Matt.  xxv.  41. 

(d)  Whereupon  the  execution  of  the  sentence  will  also  imme- 
diately follow  ;  for  "  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment; 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal,"  Matt  xxv,  46.     For  which  pur- 


392  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

pose  the  angels  will  be  employed,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  foretells,  Matt, 
xiii.  40—45. 

(e)  We  must  now  also  attend  to  the  circumstances  of  this  judg- 
ment :  these  are,  (1)  the  time,  (2)  the  place,  and  (3)  the  qualities  of 
this  judgment. 

1.  The  time  when  this  judgment  will  be  holden  is  certain  and, 
determined  ;  for  "  God  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness,"  Acts  xvii.  31,  and  it  is  called  "the  last 
day,"  John  xii.  48-  But  when  that  time  will  be  is  unknown  to  us, 
no  less  than  it  was  to  the  Son  of  man,  according  to  his  human  nature, 
"srhile  he  w^as  conversant  on  earth,  Mark  xiii.  32.  Nevertheless  we 
know  that  the  time  draweth  near,  and  is  at  hand  :  "  The  end  of  all 
things  is  at  hand,"  said  the  apostle,  even  in  his  time,  I  Peter  iv.  7. 
Hov/  much  more  is  that  time  th.n  now  near  at  hand  ? 

2.  The  place  will  be  in  the  air,  upon  the  clouds  ;  for  "  we  shall 
be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,"  saith  the 
apost  e,  I  Thess.  iv.  17.  But  the  script'ue  doth  not  inform  us  near 
what  region  of  the  earth.  The  papists  say,  that  the  judgment  will 
be  holden  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  because  the  Lord  saith,  Joel 
iii.  1 — 21.  "  That  he  will  bring  the  heathen  into  the  valley  of  Jeho- 
shaphat, and  plead  with  them  there  ;"  but  that  chapter  treats  not  of 
the  general  judginent,  but  of  a  certain  particular  one  on  the  heathens, 
in  the  manner  of  a  battle  and  war,  as  every  one  may  see,  vrs.  8 — 14. 

3.  The  qualities  of  this  judgment  are,  (a)  ^hnt  it  will  be  dreadful 
to  the  wicked ;  for  when  they  will  unexpectedly  see  him,  whom  they 
despised,  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  that  to  examine  and 
destroy  them,  on  account  of  all  their  evil  doings,  how  will  their 
hearts  then  fail  for  fear  I  and  how  will  "all  the  kindreds  of  the 
earth  wail  because  of  him  I"  Rev.  i.  7,  and  so  much  the  more,  be- 
cause they  will  not  hz  able  to  deprecate  the  sentence,  nor  be  able, 
nor  be  permitted  to  appeal  from  it  to  a  higher  judicature,  (b)  It 
will  be  a  comfortable  sentence  to  the  righteous,  as  we  will  show 
anon,  (c)  It  will  also  be  a  righteous  judgment;  for  "  God  w^ill 
render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,"  Rom.  ii.  5,  6.  The 
destruction  of  the  wicked  will  be  the  deserved  recompence  of  their 
works  ;  but  eternal  salvation  will  be  recompensed  to  the  righteous 
according  to  their  works,  forasmuch  as  their  works  are  certain  evi- 
dences, that  they  are  the  favoured  people  of  the  Lord,  and  are  re- 
conciled to  God  through  Christ ;  for  Christ  will  produce  iheir  works 
of  mercy,  v.'hich  they  have  shown  to  the  least  of  his  brethren,  as 
evidences,  that  they  are  the  blessed  of  his  Father,  and  he  will  there- 
upon call  them  into  t!ie  kingdom  prepared  for  them,  Matt.  xxv.  34-40, 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  39S 

2,  Christians  believe  on  the  surest  evidences,  that  Christ  will  really 
come  to  judgment ;  for  all  the  saints  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  until  John,  the  last  of  the  holv  writers,  believed  in  Christ's 
coming  to  judgment,  they  inculcated  it  upon  their  people,  and  com- 
forted them  therewith  in  all  thf  ir  tribulations,  as  we  might  show  in 
order,  but  we  deem  it  unnecessary  on  account  of  the  brevity  of  our 
method,  to  alledge  every  passage  of  scripture  ;  those  which  wc  have 
already  cited  are  sufficient.  But  besides  this,  we  have  many  reasons, 
on  account  of  which  we  must  expect  such  a  judgment ;  for  (a) 
Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  every  knee  may  bow  to 
him  :  but  the  world  doth  not  behold  his  glory,  it  trampl  .-s  without 
concern  upon  his  laws,  and  injures  his  people.  What  think  ye  I 
doth  he  not  take  this  ill  ?  will  he  not  revenge  it  ?  M'ill  he  not  one 
day  reveal  his  glory  ?  and  how  will  he  do  it  ?  must  he  not  for  this 
end,  "  sitting  thus  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  come  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven,"  as  he  threatened  the  Jewish  council  ?  (b)  The  justice  of 
God  requireth,  that  the  good  should  fare  wtll,  and  the  bad  ill.  Now, 
this  doth  not  appear  so  much  at  pi  esent ;  the  good  are  filled  with 
bitter  things,  and  the  bad  spend  then-  days  in  good.  How  shall  it 
appear,  that  God  is  righteous,  if  he  do  not  manifest  it  after  this  life 
by  the  general  judgment?  Paul  reasoneth  thus,  2  Thess.  i.  6 — 10. 
(c)  Doth  not  the  sinner  think  that  God  is  like  himself,  as  though 
God  forgot  his  sins,  as  he  himself  forgets  them  ?  yea,  dolh  he  not 
jest  with  the  judgment,  saying  in  his  heart,  "  Every  one  that  doth 
evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them  :  or, 
**  where  is  the  God  of  judgment?"  Mai.  ii.  17.  Can  the  Lord  in- 
deed suffer  this  ?  must  he  not  one  day  bring  such  a  scoffer  into 
judgment,  '*  reprove  him,  and  set  these  things  in  order  before  him  ?'* 
Psalm  1.  21.  (d)  IVIen  have  a  natural  apprehension  of  the  general 
judgment,  yea,  even  the  heathen  have  ;  for  their  conscience  accuseth 
them,  Rom.  ii.  15.  And  if  this  judgment  were  not  to  be  expected, 
would  not  the  world  be  still  more  abominable,  and  intolerable  than 
it  is  ?  but  the  fear  of  such  a  judgment  restrains  the  wickedness  of 
the  world. 

3.  Although  the  wicked  ought  to  shudder  and  tremble  at  this 
judgment,  it  is  matter  of  joy  and  comfort  to  believers  ;  for  the  day 
of  judgment  is  to  them  '*  a  time  of  refreshing,"  Acts  iii.  19,  **  of  re- 
demption," Luke  xxi.  28,  and  of  "  crowning,"  2  Tim  iv  8.  Many 
are  their  sorrows  and  persecutions ;  but  in  the  midst  of  them  they 
may  with  courage,  with  uplifted  heads,  and  with  longing,  look  for 
the  Judge  from  heaven  to  judgment.  The  Judge  himself  encour- 
ageth  them  to  this,  Luke  xxi.   28.    «  When  these  things,"  the 

3F 


394  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

various  commotions  in  heaven  and  earth,  at  his  coming  to  judgment, 
*'  begin  to  take  place,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads  ;  for 
your  redemption  ciraweth  aigh.  **  They  may  ''  look  for,  and  hasten 
to  toe  cominj^  of  the  day  of  Cjod,"  2  Peter  in.  12.  They  have  also 
reasons  for  this ;  since,  (a)  as  the  instructor  saith,  '*  they  look  for 
the  very  same  Pei^on,  who  before  offered  hiraselt  for  their  sakes 
to  the  tribunal  of  God,  end  hatli  removed  all  curse  from  them,  to 
come  as  judge  from  heaven."  This  the  instructor  also  learned  of 
Paul  f;om  i  Thess.  i  10.  "To  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven, 
>vhom  he  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  who  delivered  us  from 
the  wrath  to  come."  This  that  apostle  teacheth  also,  Titus  ii.  13, 
14.  And  so  they  look  for  their  Surety,  Redeemer,  and  Advocate, 
whom  they  have  chosen,  sought,  and  found  to  be  their  friend,  ^o  Job 
did  in  his  book,  chap.  xix.  25  —27,  (b)  He  will  also,  when  he  cometh 
to  judgment,  '^  cast  all  his  and  their  enemies  into  everlasting  con- 
deuinaiion  "  They  frequently  wish  now,  that  they  were  delivered 
from  tneir  enemies,  nevertheless  not  from  rsvenge  :  no,  they  will 
bless,  though  they  be  cursed  :  but  it  pleaseth  the  Lord  to  try  and 
exercise  them  by  enemies  ;  yt- 1  when  that  day  comes,  (and  lo  it  will 
come)  t;ien  they  will  be  delivered  from  them.  This  expectation 
ought  to  comfort  them  ;  fear  not,  ve  afflicted,  tossed  w  ith  a  tempest, 
and  not  comforted,  stand  still,  behold  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  which 
he  will  shev,'  you ;  your  enemies,  whom  ye  see  to  day,  ye  shall  see 
BO  more  for  ever  ;  and  then  ''  death  and  hell,"  that  is,  all  that  is  as 
a  death  and  heil  to  you, ''  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev. 
XX.  U.  .-.nd  thus  *'  the  righteous  sh-iU  rejoice,  when  he  beholds  the 
ven;<eunce,"  Psalm  Iviii.  10.  (c)  Once  more,  the  great  Judge  "will 
translate  believers,  and  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly 
joys  and  glory."  1  will  come  agam,"  saith  he  to  them,  John  xiv.  3, 
"  and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be 
also."  This  is  surely  their  desire,  even  to  be  with  Christ  I  this  is 
their  great  salvation  !  to  this  the  soul  aspires  now,  and  it  is  good  for 
her  to  be  near  him.  What  will  it  be  then,  when  she  will  not  be 
row  and  then  n^ar  him  here,  and  when,  unclothed  of  her  body,  she 
-will  be  taken  up  to  Christ,  her  Head,  but  when  she  *'  will  be  taken 
up"  with  her  body,  and  that  clothed  with  immortahty,"  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord," 
I  Thess.  iv.  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q   50—52.  395 


APPLICATION' 


May  we  r,ot  infer  from  all  ihis,  (a)  that  Christ  alone  is  the  head 
of  the  church  ;  for  when  **  God  set  him  at  his  own  r  ght  hand,  he  gave 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  Epli  i.  22.  And 
therefore  the  Pope  cannot  be  the  head  of  thr  church,  since  he  doth 
not  sit  at  the  nght  hand  of  God ;  bat  manifests  by  his  exalting:  of 
himself  in  the  temple  of  God,  that  he  is  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  son 
of  perdition,  whom  the  Lord  -k'iU  consume  with  the  breath  of  his 
mo  ith,  and  destroy  with  the  brig-htness  of  his  coming,"  2  Thfss. 
^-  ^ — ^  (b:  We  infer  also  from  Christ's  sitting  at  the  rieht  band 
of  God,  and  froir  his  coming  again,  the  truth  of  the  doctnnc  of 
Christians,  in  opposition  to  Jews  and  heathens,  inasmuch  as  these 
foundations  of  Christianity  are  sure  ;  for  Christ  con^rmed  them  with 
the  strongest  proofs,  when  according  to  his  prediction,  he  as  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  destroyed  Jerusalem,  poured  out  the  Spirit, 
and  conTeited  the  world  by  the  rod  of  his  strength,  and  thus  rules 
in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  Yea.  our  faith  in  his  coming  to  judg- 
ment, and  our  resting  cf  our  doctrine  upon  it,  is  a  proof  of  it. 

But  who  are  they,  for  whose  profit  and  comfort  he  sitttth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  will  come  again  to  judgment  r  they  are  those 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces  of  regenera- 
tion, conrersion,  faith  and  s^incti 6 cation,  and  for  whom  he  offered 
himssif  to  the  tribunal  of  Gcd.  and  from  whoia  he  hath  rumored  all 
the  curse.  Who  these  are  we  have  shown  before  by  certain  marks, 
and  therefore  we  deem  it  unnecessary  to  do  it  her^  again. 

But  be^r  this  and  tremble,  ye  ignorant  persons*  ^  God  will  take 
Tengeance  in  fiaming  fire  upon  them  who  do  not  know  him,"  2  Thess. 
i.  8,  Careless  persons,  ye  **  men  who  are  settled  upon  your  lees,  the 
Lord  will  search  you  with  candles,"  Zeph.  i.  12.  ^  Rise  up.  ye  wo- 
men, who  are  at  ease,  hesr  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give  ear 
to  my  speech.  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  trouKed,  ye  care- 
less women  ;  tremble  ye  women  that  are  at  ease  ;  be  troubled  ye 
careless  ones,"  Isaiah  xxxii.  9,  10,  11.  Hypocrites,  who  make  a  &ir 
show  externally,  but  lave  rotten  hearts,  "when  the  Lord  shall 
come,  then  he  vr^U  reveal  the  counsels  of  the  heart,"*  \  Cor.  iv.  5. 
"  Ye  serpents,  ye  geiieraiion  of  vipers,  how  shall  ye  escape  the  dam- 
nation of  heil  r"  Ma't.  xxlii  33.  Stout-hearted  sinners  :  '•  Behold 
the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  e:^ecute  judgment 
up-on  all,  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among  tiiem*  of  ail 
their  ungodly  deeds,  whtch  they  have  ungodly  committed,  and  cf  all 
their  hard  speeches,  which  ungodly  sinne.*^  have  spoken  cgainst 
him,"  Jude  vrs.  U,  15.    loapeniteni  persons;  who,  nu;wiui5U::idii;g 


3»6  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

all  the  means  which  are  used  in  order  to  influence  you  to  repentance, 
continue  immovable :  ''  who  desi>ise  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repen- 
tance :  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  ye  treasure  up 
for  yourselve  wrath  against  'he  clay  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  ii.  4,5.  Oppressors,  opposers, 
scoffers  and  despisers  of  the  godly,  attend  only  to  what  we  find  in 
the  Apocryphal  book  of  wisdom,  chap.  v.  1 — 6.  "Then  shall  the 
righteous  man  stand  in  great  boldness  before  the  face  of  such  as 
have  afflicted  him,  and  made  no  account  of  his  labours.  When 
they  see  it,  they  shall  be  troubled  with  terrible  feai,  and  shall  be 
amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  his  salvation,  so  far  beyond  all  that 
they  looked  for.  And  they  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish  of 
spirit,  shall  say  within  themselves,  this  was  he  whom  we  had  some- 
times in  derision,  and  a  proverb  of  reproach.  We  fools  accounted 
his  life  madness,  and  his  end  to  be  without  honour.  How  is  he 
numbered  among  the  chitdren  of  God,  and  his  lot  is  among  the 
saints  !  Therefore  have  we  erred  from  the  way  of  truth,  and  the 
light  of  righteousness  hath  not  shined  to  us,  and  the  Sun  of  right- 
eousness rose  not  upon  us."  Unchaste  j^ersons,  "  God  will  judge 
■whoremongers  and  adulterers,"  Heb.  xiii.  4.  Covetous,  avaricious, 
unrighteous  persons,  who  swallow  up  riches,  ye  shall  vomit  them  up 
again  ;  (iod  will  cast  them  out  of  your  belly,"  Job  xx.  15.  All  who 
have  not  truly  fled  from  the  wrath  to  come,  ye  may  seek  to  banish 
the  fear  of  this  judgment  out  of  your  hearts,  and  may  jest  with  it, 
thh iking  or  saying,  where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  or  ye  may 
seek  to  put  the  evil  day  far  away  from  you,  or  with  the  foolish  vir- 
gins may  indulge  yourselves  in  carelessness,  relying  upon  your  pro- 
fession of  religion ;  this  judgment  will  overtake  you  unawares  : 
"  when  ye  shall  say,  peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  shall 
come  upon  you,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child  ;  and  ye  shall 
not  escape,"  I  Thess.  v.  3.  The  trumpet  which  will  blow  will  awa- 
ken you :  "  The  hand  of  God  will,"  with  perfect  ease  "  find  out  all 
his  enemies,  his  right  hand  shall  find  out  them  that  hate  him.  He 
shall  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  his  anger:  the  Lord 
shall  swallow  them  up  in  his  wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them," 
Psalm  xxi.  8,  9.  O  how  will  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  his  appearing  to  yon  as  a  Judge,  affright  you  1  "for  ye  will  j,ay 
to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  fall  on  us.  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 
him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  : 
for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come  ;  and  who  shall  be  able  to 
stand  ?"  Rev.vi.  16,  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52,  ^97 

0  that  the  terrour  of  the  Lord  might  persuade  you  to  believe,  to 
flee  to  his  throne  of  grace,  upon  which  he  still  sits  at  his  Father's 
right  hand.  To  this  end  are  these  things  made  known  to  you.  See 
this,  2  Cor.  v.  10,  11.  Yea,  repent  yet,  for  ye  are  still  invited  to 
this.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  the  Athenians,  and  also  to  you,  Acts 
vii.  30,  31.  •'  The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at :  but  now 
commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent ;  because  he  hath  ap- 
pointed a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoue.ness.  God 
is  longsuffering  toward  us,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance,"  2  Petej*  iii.  9.  Yea,  "  he  is  ex- 
alted by  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  be  a  Piince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give 
repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiventss  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31.  Seek 
him  then. 

But  ye,  whom  he  hath  subjected  to  himself,  that  he  may  render 
you  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces,  aid  may  cause  you  to  dwell 
with  him,  and  who  are  of  the  willing  people,  show  now  that  he  is 
your  King  and  Judge  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  by  a  frequent  con- 
templation of  him  in  his  glory,  by  exalting  him,  submitting  to  him, 
being  ready  to  serve  him.  delivering  all  your  enemies  into  his  hands, 
betrusting  all  things  to  him,  praising  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  : 
but  we  have  spoken  of  all  these  things  on  the  thirteenth  Lord's 
day.     We  must  say  something  different  to  you  at  present : 

1  Seek  of  him  the  advantages  of  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  not  only  to  be  preserved  and  defended  by  hira  against  your  ene- 
mies ;  for  ye  may  find  this  also  in  the  thirteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but 
also  particularly  that  he  would  pour  out  his  heaven' y  graces  upon 
you  by  his  Spirit.  He  hath  obtained  of  the  Father  by  his  exaltation, 
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  shed  him  forth,  as  Peter  teacheth 
us.  Acts  ii.  33.  Do  ye  therefore  need  light,  life,  wisdom,  hohness, 
joy  and  comfort,  look  unto  him,  apply  to  him,  plead  with  him,  as 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  he  would  show  you  his  glory, 
since  "  he  is  your  head,  and  ye  are  his  body,  and  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all,"  Eph.  i.  22,  23.  Ye  should  then  •*  receive  of 
his  fulness  and  grace  for  grace,'*  John  i.  1 6. 

2.  Dispose  and  prepare  yourselves  for  his  coming  again  to  judg- 
ment: **  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights  burning  ; 
and  be  ye  hke  men  who  wait  for  their  lord,  when  he  will  return 
from  the  wedding  ;  that  v;hen  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may 
open  to  him  immediately,"  Luke  xii.  34,  36.  And  for  this  end,  en- 
deavour to  make  your  state  cf  grace  sure  to  yourselves,  with  Paul, 
2  Tim.  i.  12,  "1  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persua- 
ded that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him 


3§8  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

against  that  day."  Be  also  watchful  over  yourselves,  your  conver- 
sation and  future  expectation  at  his  cominf^,  that  ye  may  not  be  sur- 
prised unawares.  It  hii<hly  misbecomes  the  wise  virgins  to  slum- 
ber and  sleep,  like  the  foolish  :  "  watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  nei- 
ther the  day  nor  the  hour,  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh,"  Matt. 
XXV.  5,  13.  Be  moderate  in  eating,  drinking,  clothing,  worldly 
cares  and  diversions,  that  ye  may  not  unfit  yourselves  for  waiting  for 
his  coming.  Thib  is  so  strictly  enjoined  on  you  by  the  Judge,  Luke 
xxi.  34..  "  Take  heei  to  yourselves,  that  your  hearts  be  not  over- 
charged with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life,  and 
so  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares  "  Yea,  do  now  what  ye  would 
wish  ye  had  done,  when  that  day  cometh.  Is  there  any  sin  to  be 
mortified,  is  this  or  that  person  to  be  convinced,  exhorted  and  com- 
forted, make  speed  to  do  it,  that,  having  done  your  work,  ye  may 
be  ready  to  meet  him.  So  your  Head  himself  conducted,  John 
xvii.  4,  5,  as  also  Paul,  who  could  say,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8,  *'  I  have 
fought  the  good  fight,  I  ha\^e  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the- 
faith  :  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge  will  give  me  in  that  day.'* 

o.  Have  and  miintain  a  holy  concern  and  solicitude  to  please  the 
Judge  in  all  that  ye  do.  Do  nothing  now,  which  ye  wish  should  not 
be  made  known  on  that  day,  but  conduct  yourselves  as  ye  wish  that 
Christ  should  find  you  at  his  comincr :  *'  We  labour,"  saith  the 
apostle,  2  Cor.  v.  9,  10,  "  that  whether  present  or  absent,  we  may 
be  accepted  of  him  :  for  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ  ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the 
body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.'* 
Emphatical  is  the  admonition  of  Peter  to  this  purpose,  2  Peter  iii. 
11,  14.  «  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what 
inc">nner  of  persons  oug')t  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  god- 
liness ?  Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  these  things,  be 
diligent  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  peace,  without  spot  and 
blameless." 

4.  Long  for  his  coming.  He  will  not  come  to  terrify,  but  to  com- 
fji't  you,  and  to  glorify  himself  in  your  glory,  as  your  Bridegroom, 
Husband,  Head,  Surety  and  Redeemer;  for  "  he  will  come  to  be 
gloritied  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe." 
2  Tliess.  i.  10.  Ye  do  surely  love  his  appearing,  as  Paul  saith,  of 
cvejy  believer,  2  Tim.  iv.  8.  Therefore  long  for  it  ;  "the  Spirit 
and  the  brifle  siy  come.  And  let  him  that  hearcth  say  come,"  Rev. 
xxii.  17.     Ye  ought  also  to  "  groan  in  this  tabernacle,  desiring  to 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  399 

be  clothed  upon  with  your  house  which  is  from  heaven/'  as  Paul 
and  the  Corinthians  did,  2  Cor,  v.  2. 

5.  Be  now  also  patient  and  courageous  in  your  adversities,  sorrows 
and  persecutions,  which  befall  you  from  without,  or  from  within : 
*'  Be  patient ;  stabhsh  your  hearts ;  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
drawelh  nigh,"  saith  James,  chap.  v.  1.  It  doth  not  become  you  to 
be  so  impatient,  and  to  hurry  so  to  be  healed,  and  delivered  from  all 
your  pains  here,  as  soon  as  they  attack  you.  It  is  not  seemly  in 
Christians  neither,  to  let  their  heads  hang  as  a  bulrush,  on  account 
of  troubles  :  let  those  act  so,  who  have  no  hope  in  the  coming  of 
Christ :  but  as  for  you,  believers,  look,  with  ■  plifted  heads,  for  the 
blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  of 
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  who  hath  given  himself  for  you,  that  he 
might  redeem  you.  Do  your  enemies,  either  your  spiritual  or  tem- 
poral enemies  harrass  you  exceedingly,  do  they  render  your  condi- 
tion exceedingly  grievous  to  you  ;  well,  they  are  also  the  enemies  of 
your  Surety,  your  Redeemer  and  Judge,  and  be  will  cast  them  into 
everlasting  condemnation.  For  he  will  bring  the  blessing  of  Abra- 
ham upon  you,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  3,  and  "  curse  them  who  curse 
you."  Think  not  that,  when  he  will  take  all  the  elect  up  to  himself, 
into  heavenly  joys  and  glory,  he  will  forget  the  meanest  among  you ; 
he  will  know  you  perfectly  well,  that  ye  are  they,  for  whom  he  offer- 
ed himself  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  from  whom  he  hath  removed 
all  the  curse.  He  will  say  then  to  his  Father,  as  he  said  formerly, 
*'  Those  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is 
lost,"  John  xvii.  12.  All  your  crosses  will  then  be  taken  away,  and 
all  your  tears  wiped  from  your  eyes  ;  and  ye  will  be  taken  up  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  "  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  Therefore  com- 
fort one  another  with  these  words,"  as  ye  are  commanded,  1  Thess. 
iv.  17.  I  conclude  with  the  blessing  and  doxology  of  Peter,  1  Peter 
V.  10,  1  !•  "  The  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eter- 
nal glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  v/e  have  suffered  a  while,  make 
you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you.  To  him  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen«" 


(  400  ) 


FAITH  IN  fcOD 


THE 


HOLY  GHOST. 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


John  xiv.  16,  17.  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  he  unay  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  even 
the  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  :  but  ye  know  him  ;  for  he 
dwelieth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.

Q.  51.   What  firojit  is  this  glory  of  Christ  our  head  unto  us  ? 

A.  First,  that  by  liis  holy  Si)irit  he  poureth  out  heavenly  graces 
\ipon  us  his  members ;  and  then,  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and 
preserves  us  against  all  enemies. 

Q.  52.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee^  that  **  Christ  shall  come  again  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ?'* 

A.  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  uplifted  head, 
I  look  for  the  very  same  Person,  who  before  offered  himself  for  my 
«ake,  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse  from  me  ; 
to  come  as  Judge  from  heaven  :  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  ene- 
mies into  everlastin;q;  condemnation,  but  shall  translate  me  with  all 
his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly  joys  and  glory- 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  383 

X  AKE  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set  them  on  the 
head  of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedek,  the  high  priest."  Thus  the 
Lord  commanded  the  prophet  Zechariah,  Zech.  vi.  U.  Among 
the  several  ornaments  of  the  high  priest,  the  golden  plate,  inscribed 
»'  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  placed  on  his  forehead,  shone  forth 
with  special  lustre  ;  yea,  this  was  a  holy  crown  to  the  high  priest. 
Exod.  xxix.  6.  But  this  was  too  little  for  Joshua  the  high  priest  i 
the  prophet  must  make  for  him,  other  crowns,  and  set  them  on  his 
head,  and  therefore  also  say  to  him,  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  saying  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  he 
shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit,  and  rule  upon  his 
throne,  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throrae,"  Zech.  vi.  12,  13, 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  Joshua  the  high  priest  was,  like  every 
other  lawful  high  priest,  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  the  man  whose 
name  is  Branch ;  but  herein  Joshua  excelled  the  other  high  priests, 
that  crowns  of  silver  and  gold  were  set  upon  his  head,  as  a  greater 
and  worthier  type  of  the  Messiah.  The  other  high  priests  were 
types  of  this  Branch,  as  the  only  and  perfect  high  priest ;  but  Josh- 
ua, when  these  crowns  were  set  upon  his  head,  and  the  signification 
of  them  explained  to  him,  became  also  a  type  of  the  iVlessiah  as 
king,  and  fereshowed  particularly  that  the  offices  of  king  and  priest, 
which  were  never  united  together  in  one  person  and  tribe  in  Israel, 
should  both  bs  administered  by  him,  in  order  that  he  might  "  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord."  Like  Mtlchizedek,  he  should  be  also  king 
of  Salem,  and  a  priest  of  the  most  high  God.  And  truly  our  Jesus 
is  both  high  priest  and  king.  As  high  priest  he  hath  obtained  an 
eternal  redemption,  and  as  king  he  applies  it  ;  as  high  priest  he  a- 
scended  into  heaven,  and  entered  thus  into  the  true  sanctuary,  as 
we  have  seen  in  the  former  Lord's  day  ;  and  as  king  ihe  sits  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  to  rule  upon  his  throne,  which  will  appear  partic- 
ularly in  the  last  judgment ;  and  this  we  must  show  at  present. 

We  must  attend  in  this  Lord's  day  to  two  particulars  with  respect 
to  the  exalted  Mediator : 

I.  His  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  king. 

II.  His  coming  again  to  judgment,  as  judge. 

These  are  two  great  articles  of  our  faith,  and  they  contain  many 
and  important  matters  ;  but  we  cannot  exhibit  them  all  at  present  on 
account  of  the  brevity  of  our  method  ;  and  we  v/ill  therefore  remark 
only  the  principal  particulars. 

h  The  first  head  is  explained  by  the  instructor  in  the  fiftieth  ques- 


384  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

tion  ;  and  the  advantages  are  then  shown  in  the  fifty-first  question. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  GoJ,  asks  why  it  is  added,  "  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,"  to  show  that  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  is 
differ-^nt  from  his  ascension  into  heaven  ;  for  though  Enoch  and  Eli- 
jah ascended  into  heaven,  they  did  not  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ; 
but  Christ  ascended  into  heaven,  that  he  might  sit  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  Therefore  Mark  saith,  "  The  Lord  was  received  up  into 
heaven^  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Mark  xvi.  19. 

In  order  to  know  wherein  it  consists  to  be  on  the  right  hand  of 
God,  we  must  observe,  that  this  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  proper 
sense,  or  of  a  bodily  posture  ;  for  as  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  hath  there- 
fore no  hands,  the  Son  of  God  cannot  be  in  a  bodily  m..nner  at  his 
right  hand.  When  a  right  hand  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord,  we  must 
explain  it  in  a  manner  which  becomes  God,  and  according  to  his 
word  :  now  the  word  of  God  understands  by  his  right  hand,  (a)  the 
special  favour  which  he  showeth  to  them  who  are  the  objects  of  his 
favour,  as  we  show  favour  with  the  right  hand,  and  not  so  much  with 
the  left.  So  David  speaks  of  it,  Psalm  xx.  6,  "  The  saving  strength 
of  his  right  hand."  (b)  The  majesty  and  glory  of  God,  which  he 
manifests  especially  in  heaven  ;  for  the  right  hand  is  considered  as  the 
most  honourable.  So  we  read  of  "the  right  hand  of  the  majesty 
on  high,"  Hcb.  1.  2*  (c)  By  the  right  hand  of  God  is  also  under- 
stood the  power,  dominion,  and  government  of  the  Lord  over  all ;  for 
our  greatest  strength  is  in  our  right  hand,  an  1  by  that  we  govern  all 
Dur  actions.  In  this  sense  do  we  find  the  right  hand  of  God,  Psalm 
xvii.  7,  "  Thou  savest  them  which  put  their  trust  in  thee,  from  them 
'  that  rise  up  against  thy  right  hand  ;"  that  is,  against  thy  mighty  do- 
minion.    It  is  said, 

I.  That  Christ  is  at  God's  right  hand,  by   which  it   is   intimated, 
(a)  that  he  is  in  heaven  in  the  enjoyment  of  bis  Father's  special  and 
full  favour,  by  which  he  fully  enjoys  the  greatest  happiness.    There- 
fore he  saith.  Psalm  xxi.  "  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  way  of  life  :  in 
thy  presence  is  fulness  of  Joy  :  at  thy  right  hand  there  are    plea- 
sures  for  evermore."     Peter,   explaining  these   words,  represents 
the  Saviour  as  saying,  "  Thou  hast  made  known  to   me  the   ways 
of  life  ;  thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  by  thy    countenance,"   Acts 
ii.  28.     And  thus  Jesus  is  "the  man  of  God's  right  hand,"  Psalm 
Ixxx.  17.     As  Jacob  called  his  youngest  son,  on  account  of  his  spe- 
cial affection  for  him,  Benjamin,  that  is,  son  of  the   right   hand. 
(b)  Th'dt  he  is   exalted   to  the    higheL:t  honour  and  glory,   so  that 
"  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on   earth,  and  under   the 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  50—52.  385 

earth,  and  which  is  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  in  them,  must  say,  Bles- 
sing, and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power  unto  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever,"  Rev.  v.  13.  And  so 
"  God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  hath  given  him  a  name,  which 
is  above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  tl.ings  under  the 
earth  ;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,"  Philip  ii  9,  10,  11.  For 
when  we  set  any  person  at  our  right  hand  we  honour  him  ;  so  Solo- 
mon set  hi's  mother  on  his  right  hand  to  honour  her,  1  Kings  ii.  19, 
and  thus  the  bridegroom  places  the  bride  on  his  right  hand,  to  hon- 
our her,  Psalm  xlv.  9.  And  so  "  Jesus  sat  down  on  the  right  liand 
of  the  majesty  on  high,"  Heb.  i.  3.  viii.  1.  Yea,  he  is  thus  glori- 
fied more  than,  the  most  glorious  angels  ;  "  for  to  which  of  the  angels 
said  he  at  any  time,  sit  on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  ene- 
mies thy  foocstool  ?"  Heb.  i.  13.  Christ's  being  at  Gcd's  right  hnnd 
consists  also,  (c)  in  his  being  appointed  by  the  Father  to  be  a  ruler 
and  a  king  over  all,  and  particularly  over  his  church  ;  and  so  "  the 
Father  hath  made  him  sit  with  him  in  his  throne,"  Rev.  iii.  21,  and 
the  Father  therefote  governs  all  things  by  him.  This  hath  respect 
to  the  cnstom  of  sovereign  rulers,  who,  when  they  adopt  others  or 
their  followrulers,  place  them  on  their  right  hand.  So  the  mother 
of  Zebedee's  children,  when  she  desired  that  her  sons  might  be  the 
first  after  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  kingdom,  requested,  saying,  MiUt. 
XX.  21,"  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  one  on  thy  ri,9;ht 
hand,  and  the  other  on  the  leit  in  thy  kingdom."  Of  David's  sons 
it  is  said,  that  "they  were  Princes,"  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  and  so  they 
were  also  "  the  first  at  the  hand  of  the  king'"  1  Chron.  xviii. 
ir.  In  this  sense  the  catechism  explains  Christ's  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  when  it  saith,  that  "  Christ  is  ascended  into  heav- 
en for  this  end,  that  he  might  appear  there  as  head  of  his  Cbiistian 
church,  by  whom  the  Father  governs  all  things  ;  see  the  fiftitth 
question.  And  truly  the  instructor  speaks  here  according  to  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  Peter  saith.  Acts  ii.  33,  36,  "  He  therefore  being 
exalted  by  the  right  hand  of  God,  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know 
assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  s^me  Jesus  whom  ye  have  ci\ici- 
fied,  both  Lord  and  Christ."  And  Paul,  explaining  our  text,  saith, 
1  Cor.  XV.  25,  "  He  must  reign  until  he  hath  put  all  things  under 
his  feet."  Therefore  it  is  also  said,  that  "  God  hath  exalted  him  at 
his  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  Acts  v.  31.  To 
which  also  pertains,  that  "  the  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet,"  as  Paul  and  Peter  speak,  Eph.  i,  20 — 23.     1  Peter  ii.  21,  and 

3E 


':^t  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

that '<  the   Father  himself  is  at  the   Son's  right  hand,   and  striKtl 
through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  \^^alh,"  i^salm  ex.  5- 

2.  He  not  only  '*  is,"  but  Jie  also  "sits"  at  the  right  hand  of  Godv 
"  He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  saith  the  apostle,  Cell,  iii  1,, 
which  intimates,  (a)  his  ai^'reeable  resting  from  his  painful  labour; 
for  we  sit  in  order  to  rest,  {b)  his  actual  emi^loyment  in  the  exercise: 
of  his  dominion,  and  judicial  pouer :  for  a  king  sits  down  on  his 
throne,  in  order  to  exercise  his  dominion,  and  to  maintain  justice, 
Psahn  ix.  4,  "  l"l-.ou  hast  maintained  my  right  and  my  cause,  thou 
satte^t  on  tiie  throne,  judg.ng  right."  And  (c)  his  stabilty  and  con- 
tinuance in  his  government ;  for  "  he  shall  rule  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end,"  Luke  i. 
33.  For  he  who  sits  down,  shows  that  he  intends  to  continue; 
Thus  it  is  said  of  the  Saviour,  Isaiah  xvi  5.  "  A  throne  shall  be 
establislied  in  mercyy  and  hs  shall  sit  upon  it  constantly  in  the  taber- 
nacle of  David."  * 

3.  It  is  ako  said,  that  he  "  stanxls  "  on  the  riglit  hand  of  God  j 
"  Stephen  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56.  This  was  in  order  to  mani- 
fest his  readiness  and  willingness  to  assist  Stephen  against  his  ene- 
mies, to  take  him  up  to  himself  in  g'ory,  and  to  avenge  himself  of 
his  enemies  like  a  king  y  for  he  wlio  stands  shows  that  he  is  willing 
and  ready  to  do  his  work  ;  as  the  Lord  is  represented  to  us,  Isaiah 
iii.  13.  *'  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead,  and  standeth  to  judge  the 
people." 

As  this  is  a  glory  cf  his  mediiatorial  office,  so  it  'S  also  proper  to 
him  according  to  both  his  natures  ;  for  his  human  nature  is  exalted 
hereby  above  all  the  saints  ixnd  the  blessed,  and  is  acknowledged  and 
glorified  by  them  to  the  utmost,  as  "  having  redeemed  them  to  God 
by  its  blood,  and  as  having  made  them  kings  and  priests  to  God," 
Rev.  V.  9.  And  thus  "  wc  see  Jesus,  who  vvas  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowntd  with  glory  and 
honour,"  Heb.  ii.  9;  Compare  herewith  Heb.  xii.  2,  We  may  also 
say,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  according  to  his  Godhead, 
inasmuch  as  the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  Avhieh  was  concealed  before 
under  the  humbled  manhood,  was  revealed.  Therefore  he  prayed  to 
his  Fs-lher,  John  xvii*  5.  "Glorify  me,  O  Father,  with  thine  own- 
self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was." 
See  Philip,  ii.  6,  7. 

It  is  therefore  silly  in  the  Lutherans  to  hold,  that  he  is  only  ac- 

*  ^7e  have  rendered  this  ipas8ag:3  accovding  to  ihe  Ij-utch  tj*anslfttion< 


XiX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  S87 

cordin,:^  to  his  human  nature  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  that  they 
may  conclude  therefrom,  that  his  human  nature  is  every  where, 
because  the  riglit  hand  of  God  is  every  where  :  but  although  God's 
right  hand  is  every  where,  Christ  is  not  on  that  account  according  to 
his  human  niiture  every  where  at  God's  right  hand,  but  only  in 
heaven  ;  for  "  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high," 
Heb.  i.  3.  As  "  the  heaven  is  God's  throne,"  Isaiah  Ixvi.  1.  Psalm 
%i.  4,  And  therefore  "  Christ  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  the  majesty  in  tlie  heavens,"  Heb   viii.  1. 

As  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  Go4  was  his  reward,  and  con- 
duceth  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  so  it  is  alio  to  the  advantage 
of  his  elect ;  the  instructor  shows  in  the  fifty  first  question,  that  they 
receive  a  two-fold  advantage  from,  his  sitting:  on  the  right  hand  of 
God: 

1.  "  Fii-st,  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  pourelh  out  heavenly  graces 
upon  us  his  members."  That  be'ievcrs  are  maiie  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  an  earnest  of  Christ,  who  is  ascended  from  them  into 
heaven,  is  shown  in  the  forty  ninth  question ;  but  it  is  now  shown 
tliat  they  receive  by  tlie  Holy  Spirit  the  heavenly  graces,  which  are 
sent  down  to  them  from  heaven,  and  from  the  tUrone  of  God,  which 
render  tnem  iisavenly-minded,  and  lead  them  up  to  heaven  ;  which 
graces  are  many  and  divers,  as  vve  will  show  upon  tie  twentieth 
Lord's  day,  and  are  not  shed  forth  now  in  drops  only,  as  \mder  the 
Old  Testament,  but  in  whole  streams,  according  to  the  promise 
which  was  made,  Isaiah  xliv.  3.  "  1  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  ficods  upon  the  dry  g* ound :  I  wiU  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring"  And  the  out- 
pouring of  these  graces  is  an  advantage,  which  we  obtyin  by  his 
sitnng  at  the  right  iiand  of  God,  as  Peter  testifieth,  Acts  ii.  33, 
"Therefore  being  exalted  by  the  ri^^ht  hand  of  God  and  having  re- 
ceived of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed 
forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  ITe  hath  respect  here  to  the 
Spirit,  who  was  poured  out  at  the  f^ast  of  Pentecost :  of  which  every 
believer,  each  according  to  his  measure,  partakers,  as  well  as  the 
apostles,  according  to  what  was  promised,  Joel  ii.  28 — 32,  John  vii* 
38, 39, 

2  *'  And  then  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and  preserves  us 
against  all  enemies."  Believers  have  many  enemies,  who  seek  their 
destruction  ;  but  Jesus  preserves  them  :  even  "  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  preva-l  against  them,"  Matt.  xvi.  18,  for  "  all  power  is  given 
unto  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  As  he  sits  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  he  defends  and  preserves  them  by  thf-  right 


388  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

hand  of  his  power,  the  rod  of  his  strength,  with  which  he  rules  itt 
the  midst  of  his  enemifs,  as  the  text  shows. 

II  He  will  manifest  that  he  defends  and  preserves  them  against 
all  enemies  particularly  in  the  last  judgment ;  for  he  will  show  then 
as  judge,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  :  for  this  sitting  implies 
also  a  puhlic  extrcise  of  judgment  and  of  judiciary  power.  So  he 
said  to  Caiaphas,  that  he  might  terrify  him  and  the  wicked  Jewish 
Sanhedrim.  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  64.  For  God  is  said  to  ride  and  to  come  upon  the  clouds, 
when  he  draws  near  to  judge  a  people,  Isaiah  xix    1. 

Although  God  exercises  many  and  severe  judgments  upon  human 
beings,  there  are  nevertheless  more  particularly  two  general 
judgments,  which  will  pass  on  all  men  ;  one  is  exercised  in  secret 
upon  the  soul  of  every  individual,  when  it  removes  out  of  the  body 
in  death  ;  the  soul  is  then  brought  before  God,  and  receives  of  him 
the  reward  of  that  which  was  done  in  the  body,  whether  it  were 
good  or  evil  ;  the  other  will  be  exercised  in  public  upon  body  and 
soul  at  the  last  day.  Of  this  judgment  the  creed  and  the  instructor 
speak  in  the  fifty  second  question. 

In  order  to  treat  of  the  last  ludgment  in  such  a  manner  as  shall 
conduce  to  our  advantage,  we  must  attend  to  these  three  particulars, 
1,  To  the  nature  of  this  judgment,  2,  to  the  reality  of  the  judgment, 
3,  to  the  comfort  that  believers  receive  from  the  expectation  of  the 
judgment. 

1.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular,  the  nature  of  this  judg- 
ment, wc  learn  wherein  it  will  consist,  (a)  by  the  judge  who  shall 
judge,  (b)  by  the  persons  who  shall  be  judged,  (c)  the  matters  that 
shall  be  brought  into  judgment,  (d)  the  judiciary  procedure,  or  the 
manner  in  which  this  judgment  shall  be  exercised  and  holden,  and, 
(e)  the  circumstances  of  this  judgment.  The  brevity  of  our  method 
will  permit  us  to  say  only  a  few  words  to  each  of  these  particulars, 
(a)  The  Judge  in  this  judgment,  saith  Paul,  is  God,  Heb.  xii.  23. 
But  God  the  Father  will  not  judge  by  himself,  but  by  his  Son  :  *'  the 
man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  of  which  he  hath  given  assurance  to 
all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
The  Father  set  him  at  his  right  hand,  that  he  might  be  Mediator, 
and  it  belont^s  also  to  his  Mediatorship  to  judge  as  a  judge.  Yea, 
the  Father  hath  committed  the  work  of  judging  to  him,  because  it 
is  his  will,  that  it  should  be  exercised  in  a  public  and  visible  manner  ; 
for  'le.  beuig  also  man,  can  appear  visibly  :  "  For  the  Father  judgeth 
no  man  j  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son  ;  and  hath 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50^52.  389 

given  him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son 
of  man,"  John  v.  22,  27.  *'  He  came  not  indeed  to  judge,  but  to  save 
the  world,  John  iii  17.  xii.  47,  but  he  will  come  hereafter  to  judge. 
"  The  saints  also  shall  judge  the  world  and  angels,"  1  Cor.  y\.  3, 
but  it  will  be  only  with  a  judgment  of  appiobation,  by  whfch  they 
will  approve  of  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  as  they  do  with  respect  to 
"  his  judging  the  great  whore,"  Rev.  xix.  1,  2. 

(h)  Every  reasonable  creature  will  be  cited  before  this  Judge  ; 
for  '*  not  only  the  angels  will  be  judged,"  1  Cor.  vi.  3.  "  The  angels 
that  sinned  were  cast  into  hell,  and  delivered  into  chains  of  darkness, 
to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Thus  Jude  also 
speaks  in  his  epistle,  in  the  sixth  verse.  But  all  men  hkewise  will 
be  cited  before  this  Judge,  as  well  those  who  have  been,  as  t"ose 
who  are  now,  and  those  also  who  shall  be  hereafter  ;  whether  they 
be  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  men  or  women,  young  or  old,  righteous 
or  wicked,  dead  or  yet  living,  also  thou  and  I :  "  For  we  must  all 
appear  before  the  judjj^ment  seat  of  Christ,"  2  Cor.  v.  10. 

(c.)  But  upon  what  matters  shall  this  judgment  be  holden  ?  Paul 
saith  that  it  will  be  holden  upon  "  that  which  is  done  in  the  body, 
whether  it  be  good  or  evil,"  2  Cor.  v.    10.     All  the  good  actions  of 
God's  children,  although  they  have  not  considered  their  actions  as 
good  on  account  of  their  impurity  ;  but  especially  their  works  of 
mercy,  will  be  brought  to  light  by  the  great  Judge,   will  be  highly 
esteemed  by  him,  and  extolled  as  evidences  of  their  good  state.  The 
Judge  himself  showeth  this,  Matt.  xxv.  35 — 40.     The  ungodly  will 
be  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  all  their  wicked  actions,  whether 
sins  of  omission  or  commission,  or  sins  of  their  thoughts  ;  for  '*  God 
will  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  ii.  16.  1  Cor. 
iv.  5  ;  or  words,  as  well  "  idle  \\ords,"   Matt.  xii.  36,  as  "  all  hard 
words,"  according  to  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  epistle  of  Jude ;  or 
deeds,  so  Jude  speaks  also  in  the  same  verse.     We  dare  not  decide 
positively  whether  the  sins  of  believers  will  also  be  produced  in  this 
judgment,   althou^  it  is  highly  probable  that  they  will  :  for  not  to 
alledge  all  that  might  be  offered  here,  v/hen  the  sins  of  the  uns:odly, 
into  which  they  have  seduced  the  godly,   will  be  brought  to  Hght,  it 
will  then  be  necessary  that  the  sins  of  believers  should  also  be  men- 
tioned.    '*  But  however  this  may  be,  they  will  not  be  upbraided  v/ith 
their  sins,  as  unatoned,  and  as  subj^-cting  them  to  condemnation. 

(d)  In  order  that  we  may  consider  the  nature  of  this  judgment 
more  particularly,  we  must  attend  also  to  the  judiciary  procedure 
of  it.    To  this  pertains,  (a)  the  constituting  of  the  tribunal  or  the 


390  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

court  of  judgment,  (b)  the  examination,  (c)  the  sentence,  and  (d)  th^ 
execution  of  the  sentence, 

(a)  The  constitming  of  the  tribunal  or  court  of  judgment  will 
begin  with  a  terrible  commotion  m  hcuven  and  on  earth  ;  the  Judge 
Jesus  will  appear  in  the  ciouds,  beiore  the  eyes  of  every  individual, 
in  a  most  glorious  manner,  sui rounded  with  the  lios's  of  heaven,  and 
*'  he  will  taeielorc  ccme  again"  to  judge  *'  in  the  same  manner,  in 
which  tlie  apostles  saw  nim  depart,"  Acts  i.  9,  10,  11.  Upon  which 
the  dead  will  be  raisecl  up,  and  with  all  those  who  will  remain  alive, 
be  cited  and  bioughi  before  the  judgment  seat.  The  Judge  him- 
self declares  tnis,  rMatt.  XXIV.  29,  oO,  31.  "  The  sun  shall  be  dark- 
ened, and  tne  moon  stiall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  shall  fail 
from  heaven,  and  me  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken.  And 
then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  ;  and  then 
shall  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  comin,^  m  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory. 
And  he  stiall  send  his  angels  v/ah  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and 
they  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  winds,  ftom  one 
end  of  heaven  to  tiie  other."  And  that  all  things  may  be  conducted 
in  a  more  orderly  manner,  all  men  will  not  pass  confusedly  together, 
but  tiie  Judge  will  separate  the  godly  from  the  wicked,  and  he  will 
place  the  godly  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  wicked  on  his  left.  Matt. 
XXV.  31,  32,  33, 

(b)   Hereupon  will  follow  the  examination,  which  will  be  exceed- 
ingly strict,  like  an  examination  from   certain  books.     In  this  man- 
ner was  the  judgment  exhibited  to  John  in  a  vision,  Rev.  xx.  12. 
"  1  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God,   and  the  books 
were  opened  :   and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of 
life  ;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  writ- 
ten in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."  See  also  Dan   vii.  lO. 
These  are  not  real  books,  but  books  figuratively  so  called,  of  different 
kinds,  to  wit,  (a)  that  in  which  the  duty  of  man  is  written,  or  made 
known  ;  either  the  book  of  nature^   from  which  the  heathens,  who 
will  be  cited,  will  learn  what  they  ought  to  have  done,  according  to 
the  discovery  which  God  had  made  to  them  of  himself  and  of  his 
law  in  their  nature  ;  or  the  beck  of  scripture,  and  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel,  according  to  which  those  only,   who  have  had  the  scrip- 
ture,  will  be   informed   what   they  ought    to   have  been  and  done ; 
"  For  as  many  as  have  sinned  Avithout  law,  shall  also  perish  without 
law ;  and  as  many  as  have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the 
law  "  Rom.  ii.  12.  (b)  Moreover,  the  book  and  the  register  of  men's 
actions,  to  wit,  the  omniscience  of  God,  will  be  opened.     As  God 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  Sfl 

records  all  the  calamities  of  his  children,  as  it  were,  in  a  book,  so  he 
doth  all  their  virtues.  Sec  Psalm  Ivi.  8.  And  he  will  reveal  them  pub* 
licly  before  the  whole  world  in  all  their  lustre,  as  we  have  seen.  Matt. 
XXV.  35 — 40.  And  he  keeps  in  the  same  manner  by  his  omniscience 
a  book  of  remembrance  of  all  the  sins  of  the  wicked  and  *'  he  will 
set  them  in  order  before  thera"  on  that  day.  This  we  see,  Mai.  iii. 
16.  Psalm  li.  21.  But  that  the  justice  of  God  may  appear  pubhcly, 
when  he  doth  not  bring  the  sins  of  the  righteous  to  light  for  their 
condemnation,"  another  book  which  is  the  book  of  life,  will  be  open- 
ed," Rev.  XX.  12,  and  it  will  be  made  known,  that  they  were  chosen 
and  written  in  it  to  life  ;  and  not  only  this,  but  **  the  book  of  the 
life  of  the  Lamb  will  also  be  opened,"  Kev  xxi.  27.  That  is,  the 
book  of  the  council  of  peace,  or  of  the  covenant  of  redemption,  made 
from  eternity  by  the  Father  with  the  Son,  into  which  the  names  of 
the  elect  were,  if  V/e  may  so  say,  transcribed.  See  John  xvii.  6. 
This  book  will  be  opened,  that  is,  it  will  be  manifested,  that  Jesus  is 
the  Surety  of  the  elect,  and  that  he  hath  satisfied  for  them  ;  and 
that  they  therefore  cannot  be  condemned  on  account  of  their  sins, 
according  to  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  Thus  speaks  the  Saviour,  John  iii. 
18.  "  He  who  believeth  on  the  Son  is  not  condemned-"  (c)  That  it 
may  now  appear,  that  he  judgeth  according  to  truth,  the  book  of  the 
tijstimony  of  truth  will  also  be  opened,  when  all  thiogs  will  be  dis- 
covered, and  recur  in  a  lively  manner  to  the  consciences  of  men, 
how  much  soever  they  may  be  blinded  and  hardened  in  this  life ; 
for  if"  the  consciences  of  the  heathens  do  now  bear  witness,  and  if 
their  thoughts  do  now  accuse  them,"  Rom.  ii.  15,  xvhat  will  it  be 
then,"  when  the  Lord  will  come,  and  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  and  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts  ?" 
1  Cor.  iv.  5. 

(c)  After  all  things  have  been  btrictly  e^tamined  in  this  manner, 
the  sentence  will  be  pronounced,  in  the  sweetest  and  most  ravishmg 
words  upon  the  righteous,  and  every  word  will  be  most  emphatical ; 
for  the  King  will  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world,"  Matt-  xxv.  34.  But  in  a  terrible  manner  and 
in  his  wrath  "  will  he  say  to  them  on  his  lift  hand,  Depart  from  me, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlastmg  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels^" 
Matt.  xxv.  41. 

(d)  Whereupon  the  execution  of  the  sentence  will  also  imme- 
diately follow  ;  for  "  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment; 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal,"  Matt  xxv,  46.     For  which  pur- 


392  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

pose  the  angels  will  be  employed,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  foretells,  Matt, 
xiii.  40—45. 

(e)  We  must  now  also  attend  to  the  circumstances  of  this  judg- 
ment :  these  are,  (1)  the  time,  (2)  the  place,  and  (3)  the  qualities  of 
this  judgment. 

1.  The  time  when  this  judgment  will  be  holden  is  certain  and, 
determined  ;  for  "  God  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness,"  Acts  xvii.  31,  and  it  is  called  "the  last 
day,"  John  xii.  48-  But  when  that  time  will  be  is  unknown  to  us, 
no  less  than  it  was  to  the  Son  of  man,  according  to  his  human  nature, 
"srhile  he  w^as  conversant  on  earth,  Mark  xiii.  32.  Nevertheless  we 
know  that  the  time  draweth  near,  and  is  at  hand  :  "  The  end  of  all 
things  is  at  hand,"  said  the  apostle,  even  in  his  time,  I  Peter  iv.  7. 
Hov/  much  more  is  that  time  th.n  now  near  at  hand  ? 

2.  The  place  will  be  in  the  air,  upon  the  clouds  ;  for  "  we  shall 
be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,"  saith  the 
apost  e,  I  Thess.  iv.  17.  But  the  script'ue  doth  not  inform  us  near 
what  region  of  the  earth.  The  papists  say,  that  the  judgment  will 
be  holden  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  because  the  Lord  saith,  Joel 
iii.  1 — 21.  "  That  he  will  bring  the  heathen  into  the  valley  of  Jeho- 
shaphat, and  plead  with  them  there  ;"  but  that  chapter  treats  not  of 
the  general  judginent,  but  of  a  certain  particular  one  on  the  heathens, 
in  the  manner  of  a  battle  and  war,  as  every  one  may  see,  vrs.  8 — 14. 

3.  The  qualities  of  this  judgment  are,  (a)  ^hnt  it  will  be  dreadful 
to  the  wicked ;  for  when  they  will  unexpectedly  see  him,  whom  they 
despised,  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  that  to  examine  and 
destroy  them,  on  account  of  all  their  evil  doings,  how  will  their 
hearts  then  fail  for  fear  I  and  how  will  "all  the  kindreds  of  the 
earth  wail  because  of  him  I"  Rev.  i.  7,  and  so  much  the  more,  be- 
cause they  will  not  hz  able  to  deprecate  the  sentence,  nor  be  able, 
nor  be  permitted  to  appeal  from  it  to  a  higher  judicature,  (b)  It 
will  be  a  comfortable  sentence  to  the  righteous,  as  we  will  show 
anon,  (c)  It  will  also  be  a  righteous  judgment;  for  "  God  w^ill 
render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,"  Rom.  ii.  5,  6.  The 
destruction  of  the  wicked  will  be  the  deserved  recompence  of  their 
works  ;  but  eternal  salvation  will  be  recompensed  to  the  righteous 
according  to  their  works,  forasmuch  as  their  works  are  certain  evi- 
dences, that  they  are  the  favoured  people  of  the  Lord,  and  are  re- 
conciled to  God  through  Christ ;  for  Christ  will  produce  iheir  works 
of  mercy,  v.'hich  they  have  shown  to  the  least  of  his  brethren,  as 
evidences,  that  they  are  the  blessed  of  his  Father,  and  he  will  there- 
upon call  them  into  t!ie  kingdom  prepared  for  them,  Matt.  xxv.  34-40, 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  39S 

2,  Christians  believe  on  the  surest  evidences,  that  Christ  will  really 
come  to  judgment ;  for  all  the  saints  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  until  John,  the  last  of  the  holv  writers,  believed  in  Christ's 
coming  to  judgment,  they  inculcated  it  upon  their  people,  and  com- 
forted them  therewith  in  all  thf  ir  tribulations,  as  we  might  show  in 
order,  but  we  deem  it  unnecessary  on  account  of  the  brevity  of  our 
method,  to  alledge  every  passage  of  scripture  ;  those  which  wc  have 
already  cited  are  sufficient.  But  besides  this,  we  have  many  reasons, 
on  account  of  which  we  must  expect  such  a  judgment ;  for  (a) 
Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  every  knee  may  bow  to 
him  :  but  the  world  doth  not  behold  his  glory,  it  trampl  .-s  without 
concern  upon  his  laws,  and  injures  his  people.  What  think  ye  I 
doth  he  not  take  this  ill  ?  will  he  not  revenge  it  ?  M'ill  he  not  one 
day  reveal  his  glory  ?  and  how  will  he  do  it  ?  must  he  not  for  this 
end,  "  sitting  thus  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  come  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven,"  as  he  threatened  the  Jewish  council  ?  (b)  The  justice  of 
God  requireth,  that  the  good  should  fare  wtll,  and  the  bad  ill.  Now, 
this  doth  not  appear  so  much  at  pi  esent ;  the  good  are  filled  with 
bitter  things,  and  the  bad  spend  then-  days  in  good.  How  shall  it 
appear,  that  God  is  righteous,  if  he  do  not  manifest  it  after  this  life 
by  the  general  judgment?  Paul  reasoneth  thus,  2  Thess.  i.  6 — 10. 
(c)  Doth  not  the  sinner  think  that  God  is  like  himself,  as  though 
God  forgot  his  sins,  as  he  himself  forgets  them  ?  yea,  dolh  he  not 
jest  with  the  judgment,  saying  in  his  heart,  "  Every  one  that  doth 
evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them  :  or, 
**  where  is  the  God  of  judgment?"  Mai.  ii.  17.  Can  the  Lord  in- 
deed suffer  this  ?  must  he  not  one  day  bring  such  a  scoffer  into 
judgment,  '*  reprove  him,  and  set  these  things  in  order  before  him  ?'* 
Psalm  1.  21.  (d)  IVIen  have  a  natural  apprehension  of  the  general 
judgment,  yea,  even  the  heathen  have  ;  for  their  conscience  accuseth 
them,  Rom.  ii.  15.  And  if  this  judgment  were  not  to  be  expected, 
would  not  the  world  be  still  more  abominable,  and  intolerable  than 
it  is  ?  but  the  fear  of  such  a  judgment  restrains  the  wickedness  of 
the  world. 

3.  Although  the  wicked  ought  to  shudder  and  tremble  at  this 
judgment,  it  is  matter  of  joy  and  comfort  to  believers  ;  for  the  day 
of  judgment  is  to  them  '*  a  time  of  refreshing,"  Acts  iii.  19,  **  of  re- 
demption," Luke  xxi.  28,  and  of  "  crowning,"  2  Tim  iv  8.  Many 
are  their  sorrows  and  persecutions ;  but  in  the  midst  of  them  they 
may  with  courage,  with  uplifted  heads,  and  with  longing,  look  for 
the  Judge  from  heaven  to  judgment.  The  Judge  himself  encour- 
ageth  them  to  this,  Luke  xxi.   28.    «  When  these  things,"  the 

3F 


394  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

various  commotions  in  heaven  and  earth,  at  his  coming  to  judgment, 
*'  begin  to  take  place,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads  ;  for 
your  redemption  ciraweth  aigh.  **  They  may  ''  look  for,  and  hasten 
to  toe  cominj^  of  the  day  of  Cjod,"  2  Peter  in.  12.  They  have  also 
reasons  for  this ;  since,  (a)  as  the  instructor  saith,  '*  they  look  for 
the  very  same  Pei^on,  who  before  offered  hiraselt  for  their  sakes 
to  the  tribunal  of  God,  end  hatli  removed  all  curse  from  them,  to 
come  as  judge  from  heaven."  This  the  instructor  also  learned  of 
Paul  f;om  i  Thess.  i  10.  "To  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven, 
>vhom  he  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  who  delivered  us  from 
the  wrath  to  come."  This  that  apostle  teacheth  also,  Titus  ii.  13, 
14.  And  so  they  look  for  their  Surety,  Redeemer,  and  Advocate, 
whom  they  have  chosen,  sought,  and  found  to  be  their  friend,  ^o  Job 
did  in  his  book,  chap.  xix.  25  —27,  (b)  He  will  also,  when  he  cometh 
to  judgment,  '^  cast  all  his  and  their  enemies  into  everlasting  con- 
deuinaiion  "  They  frequently  wish  now,  that  they  were  delivered 
from  tneir  enemies,  nevertheless  not  from  rsvenge  :  no,  they  will 
bless,  though  they  be  cursed  :  but  it  pleaseth  the  Lord  to  try  and 
exercise  them  by  enemies  ;  yt- 1  when  that  day  comes,  (and  lo  it  will 
come)  t;ien  they  will  be  delivered  from  them.  This  expectation 
ought  to  comfort  them  ;  fear  not,  ve  afflicted,  tossed  w  ith  a  tempest, 
and  not  comforted,  stand  still,  behold  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  which 
he  will  shev,'  you ;  your  enemies,  whom  ye  see  to  day,  ye  shall  see 
BO  more  for  ever  ;  and  then  ''  death  and  hell,"  that  is,  all  that  is  as 
a  death  and  heil  to  you, ''  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev. 
XX.  U.  .-.nd  thus  *'  the  righteous  sh-iU  rejoice,  when  he  beholds  the 
ven;<eunce,"  Psalm  Iviii.  10.  (c)  Once  more,  the  great  Judge  "will 
translate  believers,  and  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly 
joys  and  glory."  1  will  come  agam,"  saith  he  to  them,  John  xiv.  3, 
"  and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be 
also."  This  is  surely  their  desire,  even  to  be  with  Christ  I  this  is 
their  great  salvation  !  to  this  the  soul  aspires  now,  and  it  is  good  for 
her  to  be  near  him.  What  will  it  be  then,  when  she  will  not  be 
row  and  then  n^ar  him  here,  and  when,  unclothed  of  her  body,  she 
-will  be  taken  up  to  Christ,  her  Head,  but  when  she  *'  will  be  taken 
up"  with  her  body,  and  that  clothed  with  immortahty,"  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord," 
I  Thess.  iv.  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q   50—52.  395 


APPLICATION' 


May  we  r,ot  infer  from  all  ihis,  (a)  that  Christ  alone  is  the  head 
of  the  church  ;  for  when  **  God  set  him  at  his  own  r  ght  hand,  he  gave 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  Epli  i.  22.  And 
therefore  the  Pope  cannot  be  the  head  of  thr  church,  since  he  doth 
not  sit  at  the  nght  hand  of  God ;  bat  manifests  by  his  exalting:  of 
himself  in  the  temple  of  God,  that  he  is  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  son 
of  perdition,  whom  the  Lord  -k'iU  consume  with  the  breath  of  his 
mo  ith,  and  destroy  with  the  brig-htness  of  his  coming,"  2  Thfss. 
^-  ^ — ^  (b:  We  infer  also  from  Christ's  sitting  at  the  rieht  band 
of  God,  and  froir  his  coming  again,  the  truth  of  the  doctnnc  of 
Christians,  in  opposition  to  Jews  and  heathens,  inasmuch  as  these 
foundations  of  Christianity  are  sure  ;  for  Christ  con^rmed  them  with 
the  strongest  proofs,  when  according  to  his  prediction,  he  as  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  destroyed  Jerusalem,  poured  out  the  Spirit, 
and  conTeited  the  world  by  the  rod  of  his  strength,  and  thus  rules 
in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  Yea.  our  faith  in  his  coming  to  judg- 
ment, and  our  resting  cf  our  doctrine  upon  it,  is  a  proof  of  it. 

But  who  are  they,  for  whose  profit  and  comfort  he  sitttth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  will  come  again  to  judgment  r  they  are  those 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces  of  regenera- 
tion, conrersion,  faith  and  s^incti 6 cation,  and  for  whom  he  offered 
himssif  to  the  tribunal  of  Gcd.  and  from  whoia  he  hath  rumored  all 
the  curse.  Who  these  are  we  have  shown  before  by  certain  marks, 
and  therefore  we  deem  it  unnecessary  to  do  it  her^  again. 

But  be^r  this  and  tremble,  ye  ignorant  persons*  ^  God  will  take 
Tengeance  in  fiaming  fire  upon  them  who  do  not  know  him,"  2  Thess. 
i.  8,  Careless  persons,  ye  **  men  who  are  settled  upon  your  lees,  the 
Lord  will  search  you  with  candles,"  Zeph.  i.  12.  ^  Rise  up.  ye  wo- 
men, who  are  at  ease,  hesr  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give  ear 
to  my  speech.  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  trouKed,  ye  care- 
less women  ;  tremble  ye  women  that  are  at  ease  ;  be  troubled  ye 
careless  ones,"  Isaiah  xxxii.  9,  10,  11.  Hypocrites,  who  make  a  &ir 
show  externally,  but  lave  rotten  hearts,  "when  the  Lord  shall 
come,  then  he  vr^U  reveal  the  counsels  of  the  heart,"*  \  Cor.  iv.  5. 
"  Ye  serpents,  ye  geiieraiion  of  vipers,  how  shall  ye  escape  the  dam- 
nation of  heil  r"  Ma't.  xxlii  33.  Stout-hearted  sinners  :  '•  Behold 
the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  e:^ecute  judgment 
up-on  all,  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among  tiiem*  of  ail 
their  ungodly  deeds,  whtch  they  have  ungodly  committed,  and  cf  all 
their  hard  speeches,  which  ungodly  sinne.*^  have  spoken  cgainst 
him,"  Jude  vrs.  U,  15.    loapeniteni  persons;  who,  nu;wiui5U::idii;g 


3»6  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

all  the  means  which  are  used  in  order  to  influence  you  to  repentance, 
continue  immovable :  ''  who  desi>ise  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repen- 
tance :  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  ye  treasure  up 
for  yourselve  wrath  against  'he  clay  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  ii.  4,5.  Oppressors,  opposers, 
scoffers  and  despisers  of  the  godly,  attend  only  to  what  we  find  in 
the  Apocryphal  book  of  wisdom,  chap.  v.  1 — 6.  "Then  shall  the 
righteous  man  stand  in  great  boldness  before  the  face  of  such  as 
have  afflicted  him,  and  made  no  account  of  his  labours.  When 
they  see  it,  they  shall  be  troubled  with  terrible  feai,  and  shall  be 
amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  his  salvation,  so  far  beyond  all  that 
they  looked  for.  And  they  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish  of 
spirit,  shall  say  within  themselves,  this  was  he  whom  we  had  some- 
times in  derision,  and  a  proverb  of  reproach.  We  fools  accounted 
his  life  madness,  and  his  end  to  be  without  honour.  How  is  he 
numbered  among  the  chitdren  of  God,  and  his  lot  is  among  the 
saints  !  Therefore  have  we  erred  from  the  way  of  truth,  and  the 
light  of  righteousness  hath  not  shined  to  us,  and  the  Sun  of  right- 
eousness rose  not  upon  us."  Unchaste  j^ersons,  "  God  will  judge 
■whoremongers  and  adulterers,"  Heb.  xiii.  4.  Covetous,  avaricious, 
unrighteous  persons,  who  swallow  up  riches,  ye  shall  vomit  them  up 
again  ;  (iod  will  cast  them  out  of  your  belly,"  Job  xx.  15.  All  who 
have  not  truly  fled  from  the  wrath  to  come,  ye  may  seek  to  banish 
the  fear  of  this  judgment  out  of  your  hearts,  and  may  jest  with  it, 
thh iking  or  saying,  where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  or  ye  may 
seek  to  put  the  evil  day  far  away  from  you,  or  with  the  foolish  vir- 
gins may  indulge  yourselves  in  carelessness,  relying  upon  your  pro- 
fession of  religion ;  this  judgment  will  overtake  you  unawares  : 
"  when  ye  shall  say,  peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  shall 
come  upon  you,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child  ;  and  ye  shall 
not  escape,"  I  Thess.  v.  3.  The  trumpet  which  will  blow  will  awa- 
ken you :  "  The  hand  of  God  will,"  with  perfect  ease  "  find  out  all 
his  enemies,  his  right  hand  shall  find  out  them  that  hate  him.  He 
shall  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  his  anger:  the  Lord 
shall  swallow  them  up  in  his  wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them," 
Psalm  xxi.  8,  9.  O  how  will  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  his  appearing  to  yon  as  a  Judge,  affright  you  1  "for  ye  will  j,ay 
to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  fall  on  us.  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 
him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  : 
for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come  ;  and  who  shall  be  able  to 
stand  ?"  Rev.vi.  16,  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52,  ^97 

0  that  the  terrour  of  the  Lord  might  persuade  you  to  believe,  to 
flee  to  his  throne  of  grace,  upon  which  he  still  sits  at  his  Father's 
right  hand.  To  this  end  are  these  things  made  known  to  you.  See 
this,  2  Cor.  v.  10,  11.  Yea,  repent  yet,  for  ye  are  still  invited  to 
this.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  the  Athenians,  and  also  to  you,  Acts 
vii.  30,  31.  •'  The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at :  but  now 
commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent ;  because  he  hath  ap- 
pointed a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoue.ness.  God 
is  longsuffering  toward  us,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance,"  2  Petej*  iii.  9.  Yea,  "  he  is  ex- 
alted by  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  be  a  Piince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give 
repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiventss  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31.  Seek 
him  then. 

But  ye,  whom  he  hath  subjected  to  himself,  that  he  may  render 
you  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces,  aid  may  cause  you  to  dwell 
with  him,  and  who  are  of  the  willing  people,  show  now  that  he  is 
your  King  and  Judge  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  by  a  frequent  con- 
templation of  him  in  his  glory,  by  exalting  him,  submitting  to  him, 
being  ready  to  serve  him.  delivering  all  your  enemies  into  his  hands, 
betrusting  all  things  to  him,  praising  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  : 
but  we  have  spoken  of  all  these  things  on  the  thirteenth  Lord's 
day.     We  must  say  something  different  to  you  at  present : 

1  Seek  of  him  the  advantages  of  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  not  only  to  be  preserved  and  defended  by  hira  against  your  ene- 
mies ;  for  ye  may  find  this  also  in  the  thirteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but 
also  particularly  that  he  would  pour  out  his  heaven' y  graces  upon 
you  by  his  Spirit.  He  hath  obtained  of  the  Father  by  his  exaltation, 
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  shed  him  forth,  as  Peter  teacheth 
us.  Acts  ii.  33.  Do  ye  therefore  need  light,  life,  wisdom,  hohness, 
joy  and  comfort,  look  unto  him,  apply  to  him,  plead  with  him,  as 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  he  would  show  you  his  glory, 
since  "  he  is  your  head,  and  ye  are  his  body,  and  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all,"  Eph.  i.  22,  23.  Ye  should  then  •*  receive  of 
his  fulness  and  grace  for  grace,'*  John  i.  1 6. 

2.  Dispose  and  prepare  yourselves  for  his  coming  again  to  judg- 
ment: **  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights  burning  ; 
and  be  ye  hke  men  who  wait  for  their  lord,  when  he  will  return 
from  the  wedding  ;  that  v;hen  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may 
open  to  him  immediately,"  Luke  xii.  34,  36.  And  for  this  end,  en- 
deavour to  make  your  state  cf  grace  sure  to  yourselves,  with  Paul, 
2  Tim.  i.  12,  "1  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persua- 
ded that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him 


3§8  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

against  that  day."  Be  also  watchful  over  yourselves,  your  conver- 
sation and  future  expectation  at  his  cominf^,  that  ye  may  not  be  sur- 
prised unawares.  It  hii<hly  misbecomes  the  wise  virgins  to  slum- 
ber and  sleep,  like  the  foolish  :  "  watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  nei- 
ther the  day  nor  the  hour,  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh,"  Matt. 
XXV.  5,  13.  Be  moderate  in  eating,  drinking,  clothing,  worldly 
cares  and  diversions,  that  ye  may  not  unfit  yourselves  for  waiting  for 
his  coming.  Thib  is  so  strictly  enjoined  on  you  by  the  Judge,  Luke 
xxi.  34..  "  Take  heei  to  yourselves,  that  your  hearts  be  not  over- 
charged with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life,  and 
so  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares  "  Yea,  do  now  what  ye  would 
wish  ye  had  done,  when  that  day  cometh.  Is  there  any  sin  to  be 
mortified,  is  this  or  that  person  to  be  convinced,  exhorted  and  com- 
forted, make  speed  to  do  it,  that,  having  done  your  work,  ye  may 
be  ready  to  meet  him.  So  your  Head  himself  conducted,  John 
xvii.  4,  5,  as  also  Paul,  who  could  say,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8,  *'  I  have 
fought  the  good  fight,  I  ha\^e  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the- 
faith  :  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge  will  give  me  in  that  day.'* 

o.  Have  and  miintain  a  holy  concern  and  solicitude  to  please  the 
Judge  in  all  that  ye  do.  Do  nothing  now,  which  ye  wish  should  not 
be  made  known  on  that  day,  but  conduct  yourselves  as  ye  wish  that 
Christ  should  find  you  at  his  comincr :  *'  We  labour,"  saith  the 
apostle,  2  Cor.  v.  9,  10,  "  that  whether  present  or  absent,  we  may 
be  accepted  of  him  :  for  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ  ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the 
body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.'* 
Emphatical  is  the  admonition  of  Peter  to  this  purpose,  2  Peter  iii. 
11,  14.  «  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what 
inc">nner  of  persons  oug')t  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  god- 
liness ?  Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  these  things,  be 
diligent  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  peace,  without  spot  and 
blameless." 

4.  Long  for  his  coming.  He  will  not  come  to  terrify,  but  to  com- 
fji't  you,  and  to  glorify  himself  in  your  glory,  as  your  Bridegroom, 
Husband,  Head,  Surety  and  Redeemer;  for  "  he  will  come  to  be 
gloritied  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe." 
2  Tliess.  i.  10.  Ye  do  surely  love  his  appearing,  as  Paul  saith,  of 
cvejy  believer,  2  Tim.  iv.  8.  Therefore  long  for  it  ;  "the  Spirit 
and  the  brifle  siy  come.  And  let  him  that  hearcth  say  come,"  Rev. 
xxii.  17.     Ye  ought  also  to  "  groan  in  this  tabernacle,  desiring  to 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  399 

be  clothed  upon  with  your  house  which  is  from  heaven/'  as  Paul 
and  the  Corinthians  did,  2  Cor,  v.  2. 

5.  Be  now  also  patient  and  courageous  in  your  adversities,  sorrows 
and  persecutions,  which  befall  you  from  without,  or  from  within : 
*'  Be  patient ;  stabhsh  your  hearts ;  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
drawelh  nigh,"  saith  James,  chap.  v.  1.  It  doth  not  become  you  to 
be  so  impatient,  and  to  hurry  so  to  be  healed,  and  delivered  from  all 
your  pains  here,  as  soon  as  they  attack  you.  It  is  not  seemly  in 
Christians  neither,  to  let  their  heads  hang  as  a  bulrush,  on  account 
of  troubles  :  let  those  act  so,  who  have  no  hope  in  the  coming  of 
Christ :  but  as  for  you,  believers,  look,  with  ■  plifted  heads,  for  the 
blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  of 
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  who  hath  given  himself  for  you,  that  he 
might  redeem  you.  Do  your  enemies,  either  your  spiritual  or  tem- 
poral enemies  harrass  you  exceedingly,  do  they  render  your  condi- 
tion exceedingly  grievous  to  you  ;  well,  they  are  also  the  enemies  of 
your  Surety,  your  Redeemer  and  Judge,  and  be  will  cast  them  into 
everlasting  condemnation.  For  he  will  bring  the  blessing  of  Abra- 
ham upon  you,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  3,  and  "  curse  them  who  curse 
you."  Think  not  that,  when  he  will  take  all  the  elect  up  to  himself, 
into  heavenly  joys  and  glory,  he  will  forget  the  meanest  among  you ; 
he  will  know  you  perfectly  well,  that  ye  are  they,  for  whom  he  offer- 
ed himself  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  from  whom  he  hath  removed 
all  the  curse.  He  will  say  then  to  his  Father,  as  he  said  formerly, 
*'  Those  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is 
lost,"  John  xvii.  12.  All  your  crosses  will  then  be  taken  away,  and 
all  your  tears  wiped  from  your  eyes  ;  and  ye  will  be  taken  up  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  "  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  Therefore  com- 
fort one  another  with  these  words,"  as  ye  are  commanded,  1  Thess. 
iv.  17.  I  conclude  with  the  blessing  and  doxology  of  Peter,  1  Peter 
V.  10,  1  !•  "  The  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eter- 
nal glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  v/e  have  suffered  a  while,  make 
you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you.  To  him  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen«" 


(  400  ) 


FAITH  IN  fcOD 


THE 


HOLY  GHOST. 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


John  xiv.  16,  17.  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  he  unay  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  even 
the  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  :  but  ye  know  him  ;  for  he 
dwelieth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.

Q.  52.  What  comfort  is  it  to  thee^  that  **  Christ  shall  come  again  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ?'* 

A.  That  in  all  my  sorrows  and  persecutions,  with  uplifted  head, 
I  look  for  the  very  same  Person,  who  before  offered  himself  for  my 
«ake,  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  hath  removed  all  curse  from  me  ; 
to  come  as  Judge  from  heaven  :  who  shall  cast  all  his  and  my  ene- 
mies into  everlastin;q;  condemnation,  but  shall  translate  me  with  all 
his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly  joys  and  glory- 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  383 

X  AKE  silver  and  gold,  and  make  crowns,  and  set  them  on  the 
head  of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedek,  the  high  priest."  Thus  the 
Lord  commanded  the  prophet  Zechariah,  Zech.  vi.  U.  Among 
the  several  ornaments  of  the  high  priest,  the  golden  plate,  inscribed 
»'  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  and  placed  on  his  forehead,  shone  forth 
with  special  lustre  ;  yea,  this  was  a  holy  crown  to  the  high  priest. 
Exod.  xxix.  6.  But  this  was  too  little  for  Joshua  the  high  priest  i 
the  prophet  must  make  for  him,  other  crowns,  and  set  them  on  his 
head,  and  therefore  also  say  to  him,  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  saying  Behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  he 
shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit,  and  rule  upon  his 
throne,  and  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throrae,"  Zech.  vi.  12,  13, 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  Joshua  the  high  priest  was,  like  every 
other  lawful  high  priest,  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  the  man  whose 
name  is  Branch ;  but  herein  Joshua  excelled  the  other  high  priests, 
that  crowns  of  silver  and  gold  were  set  upon  his  head,  as  a  greater 
and  worthier  type  of  the  Messiah.  The  other  high  priests  were 
types  of  this  Branch,  as  the  only  and  perfect  high  priest ;  but  Josh- 
ua, when  these  crowns  were  set  upon  his  head,  and  the  signification 
of  them  explained  to  him,  became  also  a  type  of  the  iVlessiah  as 
king,  and  fereshowed  particularly  that  the  offices  of  king  and  priest, 
which  were  never  united  together  in  one  person  and  tribe  in  Israel, 
should  both  bs  administered  by  him,  in  order  that  he  might  "  build 
the  temple  of  the  Lord."  Like  Mtlchizedek,  he  should  be  also  king 
of  Salem,  and  a  priest  of  the  most  high  God.  And  truly  our  Jesus 
is  both  high  priest  and  king.  As  high  priest  he  hath  obtained  an 
eternal  redemption,  and  as  king  he  applies  it  ;  as  high  priest  he  a- 
scended  into  heaven,  and  entered  thus  into  the  true  sanctuary,  as 
we  have  seen  in  the  former  Lord's  day  ;  and  as  king  ihe  sits  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  to  rule  upon  his  throne,  which  will  appear  partic- 
ularly in  the  last  judgment ;  and  this  we  must  show  at  present. 

We  must  attend  in  this  Lord's  day  to  two  particulars  with  respect 
to  the  exalted  Mediator : 

I.  His  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  king. 

II.  His  coming  again  to  judgment,  as  judge. 

These  are  two  great  articles  of  our  faith,  and  they  contain  many 
and  important  matters  ;  but  we  cannot  exhibit  them  all  at  present  on 
account  of  the  brevity  of  our  method  ;  and  we  v/ill  therefore  remark 
only  the  principal  particulars. 

h  The  first  head  is  explained  by  the  instructor  in  the  fiftieth  ques- 


384  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

tion  ;  and  the  advantages  are  then  shown  in  the  fifty-first  question. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  GoJ,  asks  why  it  is  added,  "  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,"  to  show  that  Christ's  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  is 
differ-^nt  from  his  ascension  into  heaven  ;  for  though  Enoch  and  Eli- 
jah ascended  into  heaven,  they  did  not  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ; 
but  Christ  ascended  into  heaven,  that  he  might  sit  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  Therefore  Mark  saith,  "  The  Lord  was  received  up  into 
heaven^  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  Mark  xvi.  19. 

In  order  to  know  wherein  it  consists  to  be  on  the  right  hand  of 
God,  we  must  observe,  that  this  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  proper 
sense,  or  of  a  bodily  posture  ;  for  as  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  hath  there- 
fore no  hands,  the  Son  of  God  cannot  be  in  a  bodily  m..nner  at  his 
right  hand.  When  a  right  hand  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord,  we  must 
explain  it  in  a  manner  which  becomes  God,  and  according  to  his 
word  :  now  the  word  of  God  understands  by  his  right  hand,  (a)  the 
special  favour  which  he  showeth  to  them  who  are  the  objects  of  his 
favour,  as  we  show  favour  with  the  right  hand,  and  not  so  much  with 
the  left.  So  David  speaks  of  it,  Psalm  xx.  6,  "  The  saving  strength 
of  his  right  hand."  (b)  The  majesty  and  glory  of  God,  which  he 
manifests  especially  in  heaven  ;  for  the  right  hand  is  considered  as  the 
most  honourable.  So  we  read  of  "the  right  hand  of  the  majesty 
on  high,"  Hcb.  1.  2*  (c)  By  the  right  hand  of  God  is  also  under- 
stood the  power,  dominion,  and  government  of  the  Lord  over  all ;  for 
our  greatest  strength  is  in  our  right  hand,  an  1  by  that  we  govern  all 
Dur  actions.  In  this  sense  do  we  find  the  right  hand  of  God,  Psalm 
xvii.  7,  "  Thou  savest  them  which  put  their  trust  in  thee,  from  them 
'  that  rise  up  against  thy  right  hand  ;"  that  is,  against  thy  mighty  do- 
minion.    It  is  said, 

I.  That  Christ  is  at  God's  right  hand,  by   which  it   is   intimated, 
(a)  that  he  is  in  heaven  in  the  enjoyment  of  bis  Father's  special  and 
full  favour,  by  which  he  fully  enjoys  the  greatest  happiness.    There- 
fore he  saith.  Psalm  xxi.  "  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  way  of  life  :  in 
thy  presence  is  fulness  of  Joy  :  at  thy  right  hand  there  are    plea- 
sures  for  evermore."     Peter,   explaining  these   words,  represents 
the  Saviour  as  saying,  "  Thou  hast  made  known  to   me  the   ways 
of  life  ;  thou  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  by  thy    countenance,"   Acts 
ii.  28.     And  thus  Jesus  is  "the  man  of  God's  right  hand,"  Psalm 
Ixxx.  17.     As  Jacob  called  his  youngest  son,  on  account  of  his  spe- 
cial affection  for  him,  Benjamin,  that  is,  son  of  the   right   hand. 
(b)  Th'dt  he  is   exalted   to  the    higheL:t  honour  and  glory,   so  that 
"  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on   earth,  and  under   the 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  50—52.  385 

earth,  and  which  is  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  is  in  them,  must  say,  Bles- 
sing, and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power  unto  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever,"  Rev.  v.  13.  And  so 
"  God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  hath  given  him  a  name,  which 
is  above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should 
bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  tl.ings  under  the 
earth  ;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,"  Philip  ii  9,  10,  11.  For 
when  we  set  any  person  at  our  right  hand  we  honour  him  ;  so  Solo- 
mon set  hi's  mother  on  his  right  hand  to  honour  her,  1  Kings  ii.  19, 
and  thus  the  bridegroom  places  the  bride  on  his  right  hand,  to  hon- 
our her,  Psalm  xlv.  9.  And  so  "  Jesus  sat  down  on  the  right  liand 
of  the  majesty  on  high,"  Heb.  i.  3.  viii.  1.  Yea,  he  is  thus  glori- 
fied more  than,  the  most  glorious  angels  ;  "  for  to  which  of  the  angels 
said  he  at  any  time,  sit  on  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thine  ene- 
mies thy  foocstool  ?"  Heb.  i.  13.  Christ's  being  at  Gcd's  right  hnnd 
consists  also,  (c)  in  his  being  appointed  by  the  Father  to  be  a  ruler 
and  a  king  over  all,  and  particularly  over  his  church  ;  and  so  "  the 
Father  hath  made  him  sit  with  him  in  his  throne,"  Rev.  iii.  21,  and 
the  Father  therefote  governs  all  things  by  him.  This  hath  respect 
to  the  cnstom  of  sovereign  rulers,  who,  when  they  adopt  others  or 
their  followrulers,  place  them  on  their  right  hand.  So  the  mother 
of  Zebedee's  children,  when  she  desired  that  her  sons  might  be  the 
first  after  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  kingdom,  requested,  saying,  MiUt. 
XX.  21,"  Grant  that  these  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  one  on  thy  ri,9;ht 
hand,  and  the  other  on  the  leit  in  thy  kingdom."  Of  David's  sons 
it  is  said,  that  "they  were  Princes,"  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  and  so  they 
were  also  "  the  first  at  the  hand  of  the  king'"  1  Chron.  xviii. 
ir.  In  this  sense  the  catechism  explains  Christ's  sitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  when  it  saith,  that  "  Christ  is  ascended  into  heav- 
en for  this  end,  that  he  might  appear  there  as  head  of  his  Cbiistian 
church,  by  whom  the  Father  governs  all  things  ;  see  the  fiftitth 
question.  And  truly  the  instructor  speaks  here  according  to  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  Peter  saith.  Acts  ii.  33,  36,  "  He  therefore  being 
exalted  by  the  right  hand  of  God,  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know 
assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  s^me  Jesus  whom  ye  have  ci\ici- 
fied,  both  Lord  and  Christ."  And  Paul,  explaining  our  text,  saith, 
1  Cor.  XV.  25,  "  He  must  reign  until  he  hath  put  all  things  under 
his  feet."  Therefore  it  is  also  said,  that  "  God  hath  exalted  him  at 
his  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,"  Acts  v.  31.  To 
which  also  pertains,  that  "  the  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  his 
feet,"  as  Paul  and  Peter  speak,  Eph.  i,  20 — 23.     1  Peter  ii.  21,  and 

3E 


':^t  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

that '<  the   Father  himself  is  at  the   Son's  right  hand,   and  striKtl 
through  kings  in  the  day  of  his  \^^alh,"  i^salm  ex.  5- 

2.  He  not  only  '*  is,"  but  Jie  also  "sits"  at  the  right  hand  of  Godv 
"  He  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  saith  the  apostle,  Cell,  iii  1,, 
which  intimates,  (a)  his  ai^'reeable  resting  from  his  painful  labour; 
for  we  sit  in  order  to  rest,  {b)  his  actual  emi^loyment  in  the  exercise: 
of  his  dominion,  and  judicial  pouer :  for  a  king  sits  down  on  his 
throne,  in  order  to  exercise  his  dominion,  and  to  maintain  justice, 
Psahn  ix.  4,  "  l"l-.ou  hast  maintained  my  right  and  my  cause,  thou 
satte^t  on  tiie  throne,  judg.ng  right."  And  (c)  his  stabilty  and  con- 
tinuance in  his  government ;  for  "  he  shall  rule  over  the  house  of 
Jacob  for  ever,  and  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end,"  Luke  i. 
33.  For  he  who  sits  down,  shows  that  he  intends  to  continue; 
Thus  it  is  said  of  the  Saviour,  Isaiah  xvi  5.  "  A  throne  shall  be 
establislied  in  mercyy  and  hs  shall  sit  upon  it  constantly  in  the  taber- 
nacle of  David."  * 

3.  It  is  ako  said,  that  he  "  stanxls  "  on  the  riglit  hand  of  God  j 
"  Stephen  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,"  Acts  vii.  56.  This  was  in  order  to  mani- 
fest his  readiness  and  willingness  to  assist  Stephen  against  his  ene- 
mies, to  take  him  up  to  himself  in  g'ory,  and  to  avenge  himself  of 
his  enemies  like  a  king  y  for  he  wlio  stands  shows  that  he  is  willing 
and  ready  to  do  his  work  ;  as  the  Lord  is  represented  to  us,  Isaiah 
iii.  13.  *'  The  Lord  standeth  up  to  plead,  and  standeth  to  judge  the 
people." 

As  this  is  a  glory  cf  his  mediiatorial  office,  so  it  'S  also  proper  to 
him  according  to  both  his  natures  ;  for  his  human  nature  is  exalted 
hereby  above  all  the  saints  ixnd  the  blessed,  and  is  acknowledged  and 
glorified  by  them  to  the  utmost,  as  "  having  redeemed  them  to  God 
by  its  blood,  and  as  having  made  them  kings  and  priests  to  God," 
Rev.  V.  9.  And  thus  "  wc  see  Jesus,  who  vvas  made  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowntd  with  glory  and 
honour,"  Heb.  ii.  9;  Compare  herewith  Heb.  xii.  2,  We  may  also 
say,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  according  to  his  Godhead, 
inasmuch  as  the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  Avhieh  was  concealed  before 
under  the  humbled  manhood,  was  revealed.  Therefore  he  prayed  to 
his  Fs-lher,  John  xvii*  5.  "Glorify  me,  O  Father,  with  thine  own- 
self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was." 
See  Philip,  ii.  6,  7. 

It  is  therefore  silly  in  the  Lutherans  to  hold,  that  he  is  only  ac- 

*  ^7e  have  rendered  this  ipas8ag:3  accovding  to  ihe  Ij-utch  tj*anslfttion< 


XiX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  S87 

cordin,:^  to  his  human  nature  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  that  they 
may  conclude  therefrom,  that  his  human  nature  is  every  where, 
because  the  riglit  hand  of  God  is  every  where  :  but  although  God's 
right  hand  is  every  where,  Christ  is  not  on  that  account  according  to 
his  human  niiture  every  where  at  God's  right  hand,  but  only  in 
heaven  ;  for  "  he  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high," 
Heb.  i.  3.  As  "  the  heaven  is  God's  throne,"  Isaiah  Ixvi.  1.  Psalm 
%i.  4,  And  therefore  "  Christ  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  the  majesty  in  tlie  heavens,"  Heb   viii.  1. 

As  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  Go4  was  his  reward,  and  con- 
duceth  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  so  it  is  alio  to  the  advantage 
of  his  elect ;  the  instructor  shows  in  the  fifty  first  question,  that  they 
receive  a  two-fold  advantage  from,  his  sitting:  on  the  right  hand  of 
God: 

1.  "  Fii-st,  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  he  pourelh  out  heavenly  graces 
upon  us  his  members."  That  be'ievcrs  are  maiie  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  an  earnest  of  Christ,  who  is  ascended  from  them  into 
heaven,  is  shown  in  the  forty  ninth  question ;  but  it  is  now  shown 
tliat  they  receive  by  tlie  Holy  Spirit  the  heavenly  graces,  which  are 
sent  down  to  them  from  heaven,  and  from  the  tUrone  of  God,  which 
render  tnem  iisavenly-minded,  and  lead  them  up  to  heaven  ;  which 
graces  are  many  and  divers,  as  vve  will  show  upon  tie  twentieth 
Lord's  day,  and  are  not  shed  forth  now  in  drops  only,  as  \mder  the 
Old  Testament,  but  in  whole  streams,  according  to  the  promise 
which  was  made,  Isaiah  xliv.  3.  "  1  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  ficods  upon  the  dry  g* ound :  I  wiU  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring"  And  the  out- 
pouring of  these  graces  is  an  advantage,  which  we  obtyin  by  his 
sitnng  at  the  right  iiand  of  God,  as  Peter  testifieth,  Acts  ii.  33, 
"Therefore  being  exalted  by  the  ri^^ht  hand  of  God  and  having  re- 
ceived of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed 
forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  ITe  hath  respect  here  to  the 
Spirit,  who  was  poured  out  at  the  f^ast  of  Pentecost :  of  which  every 
believer,  each  according  to  his  measure,  partakers,  as  well  as  the 
apostles,  according  to  what  was  promised,  Joel  ii.  28 — 32,  John  vii* 
38, 39, 

2  *'  And  then  that  by  his  power  he  defends  and  preserves  us 
against  all  enemies."  Believers  have  many  enemies,  who  seek  their 
destruction  ;  but  Jesus  preserves  them  :  even  "  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  preva-l  against  them,"  Matt.  xvi.  18,  for  "  all  power  is  given 
unto  him  in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  As  he  sits  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  he  defends  and  preserves  them  by  thf-  right 


388  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

hand  of  his  power,  the  rod  of  his  strength,  with  which  he  rules  itt 
the  midst  of  his  enemifs,  as  the  text  shows. 

II  He  will  manifest  that  he  defends  and  preserves  them  against 
all  enemies  particularly  in  the  last  judgment ;  for  he  will  show  then 
as  judge,  that  he  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God  :  for  this  sitting  implies 
also  a  puhlic  extrcise  of  judgment  and  of  judiciary  power.  So  he 
said  to  Caiaphas,  that  he  might  terrify  him  and  the  wicked  Jewish 
Sanhedrim.  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the 
right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt. 
xxvi.  64.  For  God  is  said  to  ride  and  to  come  upon  the  clouds, 
when  he  draws  near  to  judge  a  people,  Isaiah  xix    1. 

Although  God  exercises  many  and  severe  judgments  upon  human 
beings,  there  are  nevertheless  more  particularly  two  general 
judgments,  which  will  pass  on  all  men  ;  one  is  exercised  in  secret 
upon  the  soul  of  every  individual,  when  it  removes  out  of  the  body 
in  death  ;  the  soul  is  then  brought  before  God,  and  receives  of  him 
the  reward  of  that  which  was  done  in  the  body,  whether  it  were 
good  or  evil  ;  the  other  will  be  exercised  in  public  upon  body  and 
soul  at  the  last  day.  Of  this  judgment  the  creed  and  the  instructor 
speak  in  the  fifty  second  question. 

In  order  to  treat  of  the  last  ludgment  in  such  a  manner  as  shall 
conduce  to  our  advantage,  we  must  attend  to  these  three  particulars, 
1,  To  the  nature  of  this  judgment,  2,  to  the  reality  of  the  judgment, 
3,  to  the  comfort  that  believers  receive  from  the  expectation  of  the 
judgment. 

1.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular,  the  nature  of  this  judg- 
ment, wc  learn  wherein  it  will  consist,  (a)  by  the  judge  who  shall 
judge,  (b)  by  the  persons  who  shall  be  judged,  (c)  the  matters  that 
shall  be  brought  into  judgment,  (d)  the  judiciary  procedure,  or  the 
manner  in  which  this  judgment  shall  be  exercised  and  holden,  and, 
(e)  the  circumstances  of  this  judgment.  The  brevity  of  our  method 
will  permit  us  to  say  only  a  few  words  to  each  of  these  particulars, 
(a)  The  Judge  in  this  judgment,  saith  Paul,  is  God,  Heb.  xii.  23. 
But  God  the  Father  will  not  judge  by  himself,  but  by  his  Son  :  *'  the 
man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  of  which  he  hath  given  assurance  to 
all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,"  Acts  xvii.  31. 
The  Father  set  him  at  his  right  hand,  that  he  might  be  Mediator, 
and  it  belont^s  also  to  his  Mediatorship  to  judge  as  a  judge.  Yea, 
the  Father  hath  committed  the  work  of  judging  to  him,  because  it 
is  his  will,  that  it  should  be  exercised  in  a  public  and  visible  manner  ; 
for  'le.  beuig  also  man,  can  appear  visibly  :  "  For  the  Father  judgeth 
no  man  j  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son  ;  and  hath 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50^52.  389 

given  him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  because  he  is  the  Son 
of  man,"  John  v.  22,  27.  *'  He  came  not  indeed  to  judge,  but  to  save 
the  world,  John  iii  17.  xii.  47,  but  he  will  come  hereafter  to  judge. 
"  The  saints  also  shall  judge  the  world  and  angels,"  1  Cor.  y\.  3, 
but  it  will  be  only  with  a  judgment  of  appiobation,  by  whfch  they 
will  approve  of  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  as  they  do  with  respect  to 
"  his  judging  the  great  whore,"  Rev.  xix.  1,  2. 

(h)  Every  reasonable  creature  will  be  cited  before  this  Judge  ; 
for  '*  not  only  the  angels  will  be  judged,"  1  Cor.  vi.  3.  "  The  angels 
that  sinned  were  cast  into  hell,  and  delivered  into  chains  of  darkness, 
to  be  reserved  unto  judgment,"  2  Peter  ii.  4.  Thus  Jude  also 
speaks  in  his  epistle,  in  the  sixth  verse.  But  all  men  hkewise  will 
be  cited  before  this  Judge,  as  well  those  who  have  been,  as  t"ose 
who  are  now,  and  those  also  who  shall  be  hereafter  ;  whether  they 
be  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  men  or  women,  young  or  old,  righteous 
or  wicked,  dead  or  yet  living,  also  thou  and  I :  "  For  we  must  all 
appear  before  the  judjj^ment  seat  of  Christ,"  2  Cor.  v.  10. 

(c.)  But  upon  what  matters  shall  this  judgment  be  holden  ?  Paul 
saith  that  it  will  be  holden  upon  "  that  which  is  done  in  the  body, 
whether  it  be  good  or  evil,"  2  Cor.  v.    10.     All  the  good  actions  of 
God's  children,  although  they  have  not  considered  their  actions  as 
good  on  account  of  their  impurity  ;  but  especially  their  works  of 
mercy,  will  be  brought  to  light  by  the  great  Judge,   will  be  highly 
esteemed  by  him,  and  extolled  as  evidences  of  their  good  state.  The 
Judge  himself  showeth  this,  Matt.  xxv.  35 — 40.     The  ungodly  will 
be  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  all  their  wicked  actions,  whether 
sins  of  omission  or  commission,  or  sins  of  their  thoughts  ;  for  '*  God 
will  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  ii.  16.  1  Cor. 
iv.  5  ;  or  words,  as  well  "  idle  \\ords,"   Matt.  xii.  36,  as  "  all  hard 
words,"  according  to  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  epistle  of  Jude ;  or 
deeds,  so  Jude  speaks  also  in  the  same  verse.     We  dare  not  decide 
positively  whether  the  sins  of  believers  will  also  be  produced  in  this 
judgment,   althou^  it  is  highly  probable  that  they  will  :  for  not  to 
alledge  all  that  might  be  offered  here,  v/hen  the  sins  of  the  uns:odly, 
into  which  they  have  seduced  the  godly,   will  be  brought  to  Hght,  it 
will  then  be  necessary  that  the  sins  of  believers  should  also  be  men- 
tioned.    '*  But  however  this  may  be,  they  will  not  be  upbraided  v/ith 
their  sins,  as  unatoned,  and  as  subj^-cting  them  to  condemnation. 

(d)  In  order  that  we  may  consider  the  nature  of  this  judgment 
more  particularly,  we  must  attend  also  to  the  judiciary  procedure 
of  it.    To  this  pertains,  (a)  the  constituting  of  the  tribunal  or  the 


390  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

court  of  judgment,  (b)  the  examination,  (c)  the  sentence,  and  (d)  th^ 
execution  of  the  sentence, 

(a)  The  constitming  of  the  tribunal  or  court  of  judgment  will 
begin  with  a  terrible  commotion  m  hcuven  and  on  earth  ;  the  Judge 
Jesus  will  appear  in  the  ciouds,  beiore  the  eyes  of  every  individual, 
in  a  most  glorious  manner,  sui rounded  with  the  lios's  of  heaven,  and 
*'  he  will  taeielorc  ccme  again"  to  judge  *'  in  the  same  manner,  in 
which  tlie  apostles  saw  nim  depart,"  Acts  i.  9,  10,  11.  Upon  which 
the  dead  will  be  raisecl  up,  and  with  all  those  who  will  remain  alive, 
be  cited  and  bioughi  before  the  judgment  seat.  The  Judge  him- 
self declares  tnis,  rMatt.  XXIV.  29,  oO,  31.  "  The  sun  shall  be  dark- 
ened, and  tne  moon  stiall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  shall  fail 
from  heaven,  and  me  powers  of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken.  And 
then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  ;  and  then 
shall  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of 
man  comin,^  m  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory. 
And  he  stiall  send  his  angels  v/ah  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and 
they  shall  gather  together  his  elect  from  the  four  winds,  ftom  one 
end  of  heaven  to  tiie  other."  And  that  all  things  may  be  conducted 
in  a  more  orderly  manner,  all  men  will  not  pass  confusedly  together, 
but  tiie  Judge  will  separate  the  godly  from  the  wicked,  and  he  will 
place  the  godly  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  wicked  on  his  left.  Matt. 
XXV.  31,  32,  33, 

(b)   Hereupon  will  follow  the  examination,  which  will  be  exceed- 
ingly strict,  like  an  examination  from   certain  books.     In  this  man- 
ner was  the  judgment  exhibited  to  John  in  a  vision,  Rev.  xx.  12. 
"  1  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  before  God,   and  the  books 
were  opened  :   and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of 
life  ;  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  writ- 
ten in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."  See  also  Dan   vii.  lO. 
These  are  not  real  books,  but  books  figuratively  so  called,  of  different 
kinds,  to  wit,  (a)  that  in  which  the  duty  of  man  is  written,  or  made 
known  ;  either  the  book  of  nature^   from  which  the  heathens,  who 
will  be  cited,  will  learn  what  they  ought  to  have  done,  according  to 
the  discovery  which  God  had  made  to  them  of  himself  and  of  his 
law  in  their  nature  ;  or  the  beck  of  scripture,  and  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel,  according  to  which  those  only,   who  have  had  the  scrip- 
ture,  will  be   informed   what   they  ought    to   have  been  and  done ; 
"  For  as  many  as  have  sinned  Avithout  law,  shall  also  perish  without 
law ;  and  as  many  as  have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the 
law  "  Rom.  ii.  12.  (b)  Moreover,  the  book  and  the  register  of  men's 
actions,  to  wit,  the  omniscience  of  God,  will  be  opened.     As  God 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  Sfl 

records  all  the  calamities  of  his  children,  as  it  were,  in  a  book,  so  he 
doth  all  their  virtues.  Sec  Psalm  Ivi.  8.  And  he  will  reveal  them  pub* 
licly  before  the  whole  world  in  all  their  lustre,  as  we  have  seen.  Matt. 
XXV.  35 — 40.  And  he  keeps  in  the  same  manner  by  his  omniscience 
a  book  of  remembrance  of  all  the  sins  of  the  wicked  and  *'  he  will 
set  them  in  order  before  thera"  on  that  day.  This  we  see,  Mai.  iii. 
16.  Psalm  li.  21.  But  that  the  justice  of  God  may  appear  pubhcly, 
when  he  doth  not  bring  the  sins  of  the  righteous  to  light  for  their 
condemnation,"  another  book  which  is  the  book  of  life,  will  be  open- 
ed," Rev.  XX.  12,  and  it  will  be  made  known,  that  they  were  chosen 
and  written  in  it  to  life  ;  and  not  only  this,  but  **  the  book  of  the 
life  of  the  Lamb  will  also  be  opened,"  Kev  xxi.  27.  That  is,  the 
book  of  the  council  of  peace,  or  of  the  covenant  of  redemption,  made 
from  eternity  by  the  Father  with  the  Son,  into  which  the  names  of 
the  elect  were,  if  V/e  may  so  say,  transcribed.  See  John  xvii.  6. 
This  book  will  be  opened,  that  is,  it  will  be  manifested,  that  Jesus  is 
the  Surety  of  the  elect,  and  that  he  hath  satisfied  for  them  ;  and 
that  they  therefore  cannot  be  condemned  on  account  of  their  sins, 
according  to  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  Thus  speaks  the  Saviour,  John  iii. 
18.  "  He  who  believeth  on  the  Son  is  not  condemned-"  (c)  That  it 
may  now  appear,  that  he  judgeth  according  to  truth,  the  book  of  the 
tijstimony  of  truth  will  also  be  opened,  when  all  thiogs  will  be  dis- 
covered, and  recur  in  a  lively  manner  to  the  consciences  of  men, 
how  much  soever  they  may  be  blinded  and  hardened  in  this  life ; 
for  if"  the  consciences  of  the  heathens  do  now  bear  witness,  and  if 
their  thoughts  do  now  accuse  them,"  Rom.  ii.  15,  xvhat  will  it  be 
then,"  when  the  Lord  will  come,  and  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  and  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts  ?" 
1  Cor.  iv.  5. 

(c)  After  all  things  have  been  btrictly  e^tamined  in  this  manner, 
the  sentence  will  be  pronounced,  in  the  sweetest  and  most  ravishmg 
words  upon  the  righteous,  and  every  word  will  be  most  emphatical ; 
for  the  King  will  say  unto  them  on  his  right  hand,  Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foun- 
dation of  the  world,"  Matt-  xxv.  34.  But  in  a  terrible  manner  and 
in  his  wrath  "  will  he  say  to  them  on  his  lift  hand,  Depart  from  me, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlastmg  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels^" 
Matt.  xxv.  41. 

(d)  Whereupon  the  execution  of  the  sentence  will  also  imme- 
diately follow  ;  for  "  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment; 
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal,"  Matt  xxv,  46.     For  which  pur- 


392  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

pose  the  angels  will  be  employed,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  foretells,  Matt, 
xiii.  40—45. 

(e)  We  must  now  also  attend  to  the  circumstances  of  this  judg- 
ment :  these  are,  (1)  the  time,  (2)  the  place,  and  (3)  the  qualities  of 
this  judgment. 

1.  The  time  when  this  judgment  will  be  holden  is  certain  and, 
determined  ;  for  "  God  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness,"  Acts  xvii.  31,  and  it  is  called  "the  last 
day,"  John  xii.  48-  But  when  that  time  will  be  is  unknown  to  us, 
no  less  than  it  was  to  the  Son  of  man,  according  to  his  human  nature, 
"srhile  he  w^as  conversant  on  earth,  Mark  xiii.  32.  Nevertheless  we 
know  that  the  time  draweth  near,  and  is  at  hand  :  "  The  end  of  all 
things  is  at  hand,"  said  the  apostle,  even  in  his  time,  I  Peter  iv.  7. 
Hov/  much  more  is  that  time  th.n  now  near  at  hand  ? 

2.  The  place  will  be  in  the  air,  upon  the  clouds  ;  for  "  we  shall 
be  taken  up  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,"  saith  the 
apost  e,  I  Thess.  iv.  17.  But  the  script'ue  doth  not  inform  us  near 
what  region  of  the  earth.  The  papists  say,  that  the  judgment  will 
be  holden  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  because  the  Lord  saith,  Joel 
iii.  1 — 21.  "  That  he  will  bring  the  heathen  into  the  valley  of  Jeho- 
shaphat, and  plead  with  them  there  ;"  but  that  chapter  treats  not  of 
the  general  judginent,  but  of  a  certain  particular  one  on  the  heathens, 
in  the  manner  of  a  battle  and  war,  as  every  one  may  see,  vrs.  8 — 14. 

3.  The  qualities  of  this  judgment  are,  (a)  ^hnt  it  will  be  dreadful 
to  the  wicked ;  for  when  they  will  unexpectedly  see  him,  whom  they 
despised,  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  that  to  examine  and 
destroy  them,  on  account  of  all  their  evil  doings,  how  will  their 
hearts  then  fail  for  fear  I  and  how  will  "all  the  kindreds  of  the 
earth  wail  because  of  him  I"  Rev.  i.  7,  and  so  much  the  more,  be- 
cause they  will  not  hz  able  to  deprecate  the  sentence,  nor  be  able, 
nor  be  permitted  to  appeal  from  it  to  a  higher  judicature,  (b)  It 
will  be  a  comfortable  sentence  to  the  righteous,  as  we  will  show 
anon,  (c)  It  will  also  be  a  righteous  judgment;  for  "  God  w^ill 
render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,"  Rom.  ii.  5,  6.  The 
destruction  of  the  wicked  will  be  the  deserved  recompence  of  their 
works  ;  but  eternal  salvation  will  be  recompensed  to  the  righteous 
according  to  their  works,  forasmuch  as  their  works  are  certain  evi- 
dences, that  they  are  the  favoured  people  of  the  Lord,  and  are  re- 
conciled to  God  through  Christ ;  for  Christ  will  produce  iheir  works 
of  mercy,  v.'hich  they  have  shown  to  the  least  of  his  brethren,  as 
evidences,  that  they  are  the  blessed  of  his  Father,  and  he  will  there- 
upon call  them  into  t!ie  kingdom  prepared  for  them,  Matt.  xxv.  34-40, 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  39S 

2,  Christians  believe  on  the  surest  evidences,  that  Christ  will  really 
come  to  judgment ;  for  all  the  saints  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  until  John,  the  last  of  the  holv  writers,  believed  in  Christ's 
coming  to  judgment,  they  inculcated  it  upon  their  people,  and  com- 
forted them  therewith  in  all  thf  ir  tribulations,  as  we  might  show  in 
order,  but  we  deem  it  unnecessary  on  account  of  the  brevity  of  our 
method,  to  alledge  every  passage  of  scripture  ;  those  which  wc  have 
already  cited  are  sufficient.  But  besides  this,  we  have  many  reasons, 
on  account  of  which  we  must  expect  such  a  judgment ;  for  (a) 
Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  every  knee  may  bow  to 
him  :  but  the  world  doth  not  behold  his  glory,  it  trampl  .-s  without 
concern  upon  his  laws,  and  injures  his  people.  What  think  ye  I 
doth  he  not  take  this  ill  ?  will  he  not  revenge  it  ?  M'ill  he  not  one 
day  reveal  his  glory  ?  and  how  will  he  do  it  ?  must  he  not  for  this 
end,  "  sitting  thus  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  come  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven,"  as  he  threatened  the  Jewish  council  ?  (b)  The  justice  of 
God  requireth,  that  the  good  should  fare  wtll,  and  the  bad  ill.  Now, 
this  doth  not  appear  so  much  at  pi  esent ;  the  good  are  filled  with 
bitter  things,  and  the  bad  spend  then-  days  in  good.  How  shall  it 
appear,  that  God  is  righteous,  if  he  do  not  manifest  it  after  this  life 
by  the  general  judgment?  Paul  reasoneth  thus,  2  Thess.  i.  6 — 10. 
(c)  Doth  not  the  sinner  think  that  God  is  like  himself,  as  though 
God  forgot  his  sins,  as  he  himself  forgets  them  ?  yea,  dolh  he  not 
jest  with  the  judgment,  saying  in  his  heart,  "  Every  one  that  doth 
evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in  them  :  or, 
**  where  is  the  God  of  judgment?"  Mai.  ii.  17.  Can  the  Lord  in- 
deed suffer  this  ?  must  he  not  one  day  bring  such  a  scoffer  into 
judgment,  '*  reprove  him,  and  set  these  things  in  order  before  him  ?'* 
Psalm  1.  21.  (d)  IVIen  have  a  natural  apprehension  of  the  general 
judgment,  yea,  even  the  heathen  have  ;  for  their  conscience  accuseth 
them,  Rom.  ii.  15.  And  if  this  judgment  were  not  to  be  expected, 
would  not  the  world  be  still  more  abominable,  and  intolerable  than 
it  is  ?  but  the  fear  of  such  a  judgment  restrains  the  wickedness  of 
the  world. 

3.  Although  the  wicked  ought  to  shudder  and  tremble  at  this 
judgment,  it  is  matter  of  joy  and  comfort  to  believers  ;  for  the  day 
of  judgment  is  to  them  '*  a  time  of  refreshing,"  Acts  iii.  19,  **  of  re- 
demption," Luke  xxi.  28,  and  of  "  crowning,"  2  Tim  iv  8.  Many 
are  their  sorrows  and  persecutions ;  but  in  the  midst  of  them  they 
may  with  courage,  with  uplifted  heads,  and  with  longing,  look  for 
the  Judge  from  heaven  to  judgment.  The  Judge  himself  encour- 
ageth  them  to  this,  Luke  xxi.   28.    «  When  these  things,"  the 

3F 


394  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE, 

various  commotions  in  heaven  and  earth,  at  his  coming  to  judgment, 
*'  begin  to  take  place,  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads  ;  for 
your  redemption  ciraweth  aigh.  **  They  may  ''  look  for,  and  hasten 
to  toe  cominj^  of  the  day  of  Cjod,"  2  Peter  in.  12.  They  have  also 
reasons  for  this ;  since,  (a)  as  the  instructor  saith,  '*  they  look  for 
the  very  same  Pei^on,  who  before  offered  hiraselt  for  their  sakes 
to  the  tribunal  of  God,  end  hatli  removed  all  curse  from  them,  to 
come  as  judge  from  heaven."  This  the  instructor  also  learned  of 
Paul  f;om  i  Thess.  i  10.  "To  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven, 
>vhom  he  raised  from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  who  delivered  us  from 
the  wrath  to  come."  This  that  apostle  teacheth  also,  Titus  ii.  13, 
14.  And  so  they  look  for  their  Surety,  Redeemer,  and  Advocate, 
whom  they  have  chosen,  sought,  and  found  to  be  their  friend,  ^o  Job 
did  in  his  book,  chap.  xix.  25  —27,  (b)  He  will  also,  when  he  cometh 
to  judgment,  '^  cast  all  his  and  their  enemies  into  everlasting  con- 
deuinaiion  "  They  frequently  wish  now,  that  they  were  delivered 
from  tneir  enemies,  nevertheless  not  from  rsvenge  :  no,  they  will 
bless,  though  they  be  cursed  :  but  it  pleaseth  the  Lord  to  try  and 
exercise  them  by  enemies  ;  yt- 1  when  that  day  comes,  (and  lo  it  will 
come)  t;ien  they  will  be  delivered  from  them.  This  expectation 
ought  to  comfort  them  ;  fear  not,  ve  afflicted,  tossed  w  ith  a  tempest, 
and  not  comforted,  stand  still,  behold  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  which 
he  will  shev,'  you ;  your  enemies,  whom  ye  see  to  day,  ye  shall  see 
BO  more  for  ever  ;  and  then  ''  death  and  hell,"  that  is,  all  that  is  as 
a  death  and  heil  to  you, ''  shall  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev. 
XX.  U.  .-.nd  thus  *'  the  righteous  sh-iU  rejoice,  when  he  beholds  the 
ven;<eunce,"  Psalm  Iviii.  10.  (c)  Once  more,  the  great  Judge  "will 
translate  believers,  and  all  his  chosen  ones  to  himself,  into  heavenly 
joys  and  glory."  1  will  come  agam,"  saith  he  to  them,  John  xiv.  3, 
"  and  receive  you  unto  myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be 
also."  This  is  surely  their  desire,  even  to  be  with  Christ  I  this  is 
their  great  salvation  !  to  this  the  soul  aspires  now,  and  it  is  good  for 
her  to  be  near  him.  What  will  it  be  then,  when  she  will  not  be 
row  and  then  n^ar  him  here,  and  when,  unclothed  of  her  body,  she 
-will  be  taken  up  to  Christ,  her  Head,  but  when  she  *'  will  be  taken 
up"  with  her  body,  and  that  clothed  with  immortahty,"  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord," 
I  Thess.  iv.  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q   50—52.  395 


APPLICATION' 


May  we  r,ot  infer  from  all  ihis,  (a)  that  Christ  alone  is  the  head 
of  the  church  ;  for  when  **  God  set  him  at  his  own  r  ght  hand,  he  gave 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  Epli  i.  22.  And 
therefore  the  Pope  cannot  be  the  head  of  thr  church,  since  he  doth 
not  sit  at  the  nght  hand  of  God ;  bat  manifests  by  his  exalting:  of 
himself  in  the  temple  of  God,  that  he  is  the  man  of  sin,  and  the  son 
of  perdition,  whom  the  Lord  -k'iU  consume  with  the  breath  of  his 
mo  ith,  and  destroy  with  the  brig-htness  of  his  coming,"  2  Thfss. 
^-  ^ — ^  (b:  We  infer  also  from  Christ's  sitting  at  the  rieht  band 
of  God,  and  froir  his  coming  again,  the  truth  of  the  doctnnc  of 
Christians,  in  opposition  to  Jews  and  heathens,  inasmuch  as  these 
foundations  of  Christianity  are  sure  ;  for  Christ  con^rmed  them  with 
the  strongest  proofs,  when  according  to  his  prediction,  he  as  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  destroyed  Jerusalem,  poured  out  the  Spirit, 
and  conTeited  the  world  by  the  rod  of  his  strength,  and  thus  rules 
in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  Yea.  our  faith  in  his  coming  to  judg- 
ment, and  our  resting  cf  our  doctrine  upon  it,  is  a  proof  of  it. 

But  who  are  they,  for  whose  profit  and  comfort  he  sitttth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  and  will  come  again  to  judgment  r  they  are  those 
who  have  been  made  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces  of  regenera- 
tion, conrersion,  faith  and  s^incti 6 cation,  and  for  whom  he  offered 
himssif  to  the  tribunal  of  Gcd.  and  from  whoia  he  hath  rumored  all 
the  curse.  Who  these  are  we  have  shown  before  by  certain  marks, 
and  therefore  we  deem  it  unnecessary  to  do  it  her^  again. 

But  be^r  this  and  tremble,  ye  ignorant  persons*  ^  God  will  take 
Tengeance  in  fiaming  fire  upon  them  who  do  not  know  him,"  2  Thess. 
i.  8,  Careless  persons,  ye  **  men  who  are  settled  upon  your  lees,  the 
Lord  will  search  you  with  candles,"  Zeph.  i.  12.  ^  Rise  up.  ye  wo- 
men, who  are  at  ease,  hesr  my  voice,  ye  careless  daughters,  give  ear 
to  my  speech.  Many  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  trouKed,  ye  care- 
less women  ;  tremble  ye  women  that  are  at  ease  ;  be  troubled  ye 
careless  ones,"  Isaiah  xxxii.  9,  10,  11.  Hypocrites,  who  make  a  &ir 
show  externally,  but  lave  rotten  hearts,  "when  the  Lord  shall 
come,  then  he  vr^U  reveal  the  counsels  of  the  heart,"*  \  Cor.  iv.  5. 
"  Ye  serpents,  ye  geiieraiion  of  vipers,  how  shall  ye  escape  the  dam- 
nation of  heil  r"  Ma't.  xxlii  33.  Stout-hearted  sinners  :  '•  Behold 
the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thousands  of  his  saints,  to  e:^ecute  judgment 
up-on  all,  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among  tiiem*  of  ail 
their  ungodly  deeds,  whtch  they  have  ungodly  committed,  and  cf  all 
their  hard  speeches,  which  ungodly  sinne.*^  have  spoken  cgainst 
him,"  Jude  vrs.  U,  15.    loapeniteni  persons;  who,  nu;wiui5U::idii;g 


3»6  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

all  the  means  which  are  used  in  order  to  influence  you  to  repentance, 
continue  immovable :  ''  who  desi>ise  the  riches  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repen- 
tance :  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  ye  treasure  up 
for  yourselve  wrath  against  'he  clay  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God,"  Rom.  ii.  4,5.  Oppressors,  opposers, 
scoffers  and  despisers  of  the  godly,  attend  only  to  what  we  find  in 
the  Apocryphal  book  of  wisdom,  chap.  v.  1 — 6.  "Then  shall  the 
righteous  man  stand  in  great  boldness  before  the  face  of  such  as 
have  afflicted  him,  and  made  no  account  of  his  labours.  When 
they  see  it,  they  shall  be  troubled  with  terrible  feai,  and  shall  be 
amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  his  salvation,  so  far  beyond  all  that 
they  looked  for.  And  they  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish  of 
spirit,  shall  say  within  themselves,  this  was  he  whom  we  had  some- 
times in  derision,  and  a  proverb  of  reproach.  We  fools  accounted 
his  life  madness,  and  his  end  to  be  without  honour.  How  is  he 
numbered  among  the  chitdren  of  God,  and  his  lot  is  among  the 
saints  !  Therefore  have  we  erred  from  the  way  of  truth,  and  the 
light  of  righteousness  hath  not  shined  to  us,  and  the  Sun  of  right- 
eousness rose  not  upon  us."  Unchaste  j^ersons,  "  God  will  judge 
■whoremongers  and  adulterers,"  Heb.  xiii.  4.  Covetous,  avaricious, 
unrighteous  persons,  who  swallow  up  riches,  ye  shall  vomit  them  up 
again  ;  (iod  will  cast  them  out  of  your  belly,"  Job  xx.  15.  All  who 
have  not  truly  fled  from  the  wrath  to  come,  ye  may  seek  to  banish 
the  fear  of  this  judgment  out  of  your  hearts,  and  may  jest  with  it, 
thh iking  or  saying,  where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  or  ye  may 
seek  to  put  the  evil  day  far  away  from  you,  or  with  the  foolish  vir- 
gins may  indulge  yourselves  in  carelessness,  relying  upon  your  pro- 
fession of  religion ;  this  judgment  will  overtake  you  unawares  : 
"  when  ye  shall  say,  peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  shall 
come  upon  you,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child  ;  and  ye  shall 
not  escape,"  I  Thess.  v.  3.  The  trumpet  which  will  blow  will  awa- 
ken you :  "  The  hand  of  God  will,"  with  perfect  ease  "  find  out  all 
his  enemies,  his  right  hand  shall  find  out  them  that  hate  him.  He 
shall  make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  his  anger:  the  Lord 
shall  swallow  them  up  in  his  wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them," 
Psalm  xxi.  8,  9.  O  how  will  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  his  appearing  to  yon  as  a  Judge,  affright  you  1  "for  ye  will  j,ay 
to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  fall  on  us.  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of 
him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  : 
for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come  ;  and  who  shall  be  able  to 
stand  ?"  Rev.vi.  16,  17. 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52,  ^97 

0  that  the  terrour  of  the  Lord  might  persuade  you  to  believe,  to 
flee  to  his  throne  of  grace,  upon  which  he  still  sits  at  his  Father's 
right  hand.  To  this  end  are  these  things  made  known  to  you.  See 
this,  2  Cor.  v.  10,  11.  Yea,  repent  yet,  for  ye  are  still  invited  to 
this.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  the  Athenians,  and  also  to  you,  Acts 
vii.  30,  31.  •'  The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at :  but  now 
commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent ;  because  he  hath  ap- 
pointed a  day  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoue.ness.  God 
is  longsuffering  toward  us,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but 
that  all  should  come  to  repentance,"  2  Petej*  iii.  9.  Yea,  "  he  is  ex- 
alted by  the  right  hand  of  God,  to  be  a  Piince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give 
repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiventss  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31.  Seek 
him  then. 

But  ye,  whom  he  hath  subjected  to  himself,  that  he  may  render 
you  partakers  of  his  heavenly  graces,  aid  may  cause  you  to  dwell 
with  him,  and  who  are  of  the  willing  people,  show  now  that  he  is 
your  King  and  Judge  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  by  a  frequent  con- 
templation of  him  in  his  glory,  by  exalting  him,  submitting  to  him, 
being  ready  to  serve  him.  delivering  all  your  enemies  into  his  hands, 
betrusting  all  things  to  him,  praising  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  : 
but  we  have  spoken  of  all  these  things  on  the  thirteenth  Lord's 
day.     We  must  say  something  different  to  you  at  present : 

1  Seek  of  him  the  advantages  of  his  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  not  only  to  be  preserved  and  defended  by  hira  against  your  ene- 
mies ;  for  ye  may  find  this  also  in  the  thirteenth  Lord's  day  ;  but 
also  particularly  that  he  would  pour  out  his  heaven' y  graces  upon 
you  by  his  Spirit.  He  hath  obtained  of  the  Father  by  his  exaltation, 
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  shed  him  forth,  as  Peter  teacheth 
us.  Acts  ii.  33.  Do  ye  therefore  need  light,  life,  wisdom,  hohness, 
joy  and  comfort,  look  unto  him,  apply  to  him,  plead  with  him,  as 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  he  would  show  you  his  glory, 
since  "  he  is  your  head,  and  ye  are  his  body,  and  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all,"  Eph.  i.  22,  23.  Ye  should  then  •*  receive  of 
his  fulness  and  grace  for  grace,'*  John  i.  1 6. 

2.  Dispose  and  prepare  yourselves  for  his  coming  again  to  judg- 
ment: **  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lights  burning  ; 
and  be  ye  hke  men  who  wait  for  their  lord,  when  he  will  return 
from  the  wedding  ;  that  v;hen  he  cometh  and  knocketh,  they  may 
open  to  him  immediately,"  Luke  xii.  34,  36.  And  for  this  end,  en- 
deavour to  make  your  state  cf  grace  sure  to  yourselves,  with  Paul, 
2  Tim.  i.  12,  "1  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and  I  am  persua- 
ded that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him 


3§8  CHRIST  A  KING  AND  JUDGE. 

against  that  day."  Be  also  watchful  over  yourselves,  your  conver- 
sation and  future  expectation  at  his  cominf^,  that  ye  may  not  be  sur- 
prised unawares.  It  hii<hly  misbecomes  the  wise  virgins  to  slum- 
ber and  sleep,  like  the  foolish  :  "  watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  nei- 
ther the  day  nor  the  hour,  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh,"  Matt. 
XXV.  5,  13.  Be  moderate  in  eating,  drinking,  clothing,  worldly 
cares  and  diversions,  that  ye  may  not  unfit  yourselves  for  waiting  for 
his  coming.  Thib  is  so  strictly  enjoined  on  you  by  the  Judge,  Luke 
xxi.  34..  "  Take  heei  to  yourselves,  that  your  hearts  be  not  over- 
charged with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  cares  of  this  life,  and 
so  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares  "  Yea,  do  now  what  ye  would 
wish  ye  had  done,  when  that  day  cometh.  Is  there  any  sin  to  be 
mortified,  is  this  or  that  person  to  be  convinced,  exhorted  and  com- 
forted, make  speed  to  do  it,  that,  having  done  your  work,  ye  may 
be  ready  to  meet  him.  So  your  Head  himself  conducted,  John 
xvii.  4,  5,  as  also  Paul,  who  could  say,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8,  *'  I  have 
fought  the  good  fight,  I  ha\^e  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the- 
faith  :  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge  will  give  me  in  that  day.'* 

o.  Have  and  miintain  a  holy  concern  and  solicitude  to  please  the 
Judge  in  all  that  ye  do.  Do  nothing  now,  which  ye  wish  should  not 
be  made  known  on  that  day,  but  conduct  yourselves  as  ye  wish  that 
Christ  should  find  you  at  his  comincr :  *'  We  labour,"  saith  the 
apostle,  2  Cor.  v.  9,  10,  "  that  whether  present  or  absent,  we  may 
be  accepted  of  him  :  for  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ  ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the 
body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.'* 
Emphatical  is  the  admonition  of  Peter  to  this  purpose,  2  Peter  iii. 
11,  14.  «  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what 
inc">nner  of  persons  oug')t  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  god- 
liness ?  Wherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  these  things,  be 
diligent  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  peace,  without  spot  and 
blameless." 

4.  Long  for  his  coming.  He  will  not  come  to  terrify,  but  to  com- 
fji't  you,  and  to  glorify  himself  in  your  glory,  as  your  Bridegroom, 
Husband,  Head,  Surety  and  Redeemer;  for  "  he  will  come  to  be 
gloritied  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that  believe." 
2  Tliess.  i.  10.  Ye  do  surely  love  his  appearing,  as  Paul  saith,  of 
cvejy  believer,  2  Tim.  iv.  8.  Therefore  long  for  it  ;  "the  Spirit 
and  the  brifle  siy  come.  And  let  him  that  hearcth  say  come,"  Rev. 
xxii.  17.     Ye  ought  also  to  "  groan  in  this  tabernacle,  desiring  to 


XIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  50—52.  399 

be  clothed  upon  with  your  house  which  is  from  heaven/'  as  Paul 
and  the  Corinthians  did,  2  Cor,  v.  2. 

5.  Be  now  also  patient  and  courageous  in  your  adversities,  sorrows 
and  persecutions,  which  befall  you  from  without,  or  from  within : 
*'  Be  patient ;  stabhsh  your  hearts ;  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
drawelh  nigh,"  saith  James,  chap.  v.  1.  It  doth  not  become  you  to 
be  so  impatient,  and  to  hurry  so  to  be  healed,  and  delivered  from  all 
your  pains  here,  as  soon  as  they  attack  you.  It  is  not  seemly  in 
Christians  neither,  to  let  their  heads  hang  as  a  bulrush,  on  account 
of  troubles  :  let  those  act  so,  who  have  no  hope  in  the  coming  of 
Christ :  but  as  for  you,  believers,  look,  with  ■  plifted  heads,  for  the 
blessed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  of 
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ ;  who  hath  given  himself  for  you,  that  he 
might  redeem  you.  Do  your  enemies,  either  your  spiritual  or  tem- 
poral enemies  harrass  you  exceedingly,  do  they  render  your  condi- 
tion exceedingly  grievous  to  you  ;  well,  they  are  also  the  enemies  of 
your  Surety,  your  Redeemer  and  Judge,  and  be  will  cast  them  into 
everlasting  condemnation.  For  he  will  bring  the  blessing  of  Abra- 
ham upon  you,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  3,  and  "  curse  them  who  curse 
you."  Think  not  that,  when  he  will  take  all  the  elect  up  to  himself, 
into  heavenly  joys  and  glory,  he  will  forget  the  meanest  among  you ; 
he  will  know  you  perfectly  well,  that  ye  are  they,  for  whom  he  offer- 
ed himself  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  from  whom  he  hath  removed 
all  the  curse.  He  will  say  then  to  his  Father,  as  he  said  formerly, 
*'  Those  whom  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  and  none  of  them  is 
lost,"  John  xvii.  12.  All  your  crosses  will  then  be  taken  away,  and 
all  your  tears  wiped  from  your  eyes  ;  and  ye  will  be  taken  up  before 
the  throne  of  God,  and  "  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.  Therefore  com- 
fort one  another  with  these  words,"  as  ye  are  commanded,  1  Thess. 
iv.  17.  I  conclude  with  the  blessing  and  doxology  of  Peter,  1  Peter 
V.  10,  1  !•  "  The  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his  eter- 
nal glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  v/e  have  suffered  a  while,  make 
you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you.  To  him  be  glory  and 
dominion  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen«" 


(  400  ) 


FAITH  IN  fcOD 


THE 


HOLY  GHOST. 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


John  xiv.  16,  17.  And  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you 
another  Comforter,  that  he  unay  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  even 
the  Spirit  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  receive,  because  it 
seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him  :  but  ye  know  him  ;  for  he 
dwelieth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.