Q,  53.    What  dost  thou  believe  concerning  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 

A.  First,  that  he  is  true  and  co-essential  God  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son :  secondly,  that  he  is  also  given  me,  to  make  me  by  a  true 
faith,  partaker  of  Christ,  and  all  his  benefits,  that  he  may  comfort 
me,  and  abide  with  me  for  ever. 


S  the  Father  is  not  known,  except  by  the  Son,  so  also  the  Son 
is  not  known  except  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  the  Father  is  not 
known  except  by  the  Son,  the  Son  himself  teacheth  us,  when  he 
saith,  John  i.  18.  <*  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time;  the  only 
begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared 
him."  But  the  Son  himself  is  not  known,  and  so  neither  the  Father, 
b'lt  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  "  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord, 
but  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;"  thus  speaks  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  xii.  3. 
And  no  wonder  ;  for  how  can  we  know  the  love  of  the  Father,  by 


XX.  LORD'S  bAt.  Q.  53.  401 

■which  he  prevents  his  people  with  his  everlasting  kindness,  unless 
we  know  the  grace  of  the  Son,  by  which  he  purchaseu  all  happiness 
for  them  of  the  Father?  But  how  shaJl  we  know  the  Son  t  salva- 
tion, unless  we  obtain  by  the  Holy  Ghost  communion  in  the  love  of 
the  Father,  and  in  the  grace  of  the  Son  ?  therefore  not  only  '■'■  the 
love  of  God"  the  Father,  "  and  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  " 
is  supplicated  for  believers,  but  also  "the  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  For  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  conveys  the 
lovG  of  the  Father,  and  the  grace  of  the  Son  to  the  elect,  as  the  Son 
promiseth  the  apostles,  John  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  '«  When  he  the  Spirit 
of  truth  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  (ruth  :  for  he  shall  not 
speak  of  himself ;  but  wliatsoever  he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak  : 
and  he  will  show  you  things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  me  ;  for  he 
shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you.  All  things  that 
the  Father  hath  are  mine  :  therefore  said  I,  that  he  shall  take  of 
mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you."  As  it  is  therefore  necessary, 
that  we  should  know  the  Father  and  the  Son,  so  it  is  not  less  neces- 
sary,  that  we  should  know  the  Holy  Ghost.  For  which  reason  the 
instructor  having  divided  the  Christian  creed  into  three  parts,  the 
first  relating  to  God  the  Father  and  our  creation,  the  second  to  God 
the  Son  and  our  redemption,  and  the  third  to  God  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  our  sanctificaiion  ;  and  having  explained  the  doctrine  of  God  the 
Father  and  of  God  the  Son,  he  proceeds  in  this  Lord's  day  to  the 
mystery  of  the  doctrine  concerning  God  the  Holy  Ghost. 

There  are  three  particulars  here,  which  require  our  consideration  ; 
I.  What  the  Holy  Ghost  is, 
H.  How  he  is  given,  and 
HI.  How  we  beheve  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 
I.  In  order  to  know  what  the  Holy  Ghost  is,  we  must  consider^ 
i,  the  meaning  of  the  words.  Holy  Ghost,  2,  that  he  is  a  person,  3, 
that  he  is,  together  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  true  and  eternal 
God,  and  4,  that  he  is  a   person  distinct  from  the  Father  and  the 
Son. 

I .  In  order  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  words,  Holy  Ghost, 
we  must  know  that  the  word  Ghost,  (or  Spirit)  in  Hebrew  ruach,  in 
Greek  fineuma,  and  in  Latin  sfiiritus^  denotes  primarily  a  wind,  or 
any  blast,  and  thus  something  that  is  bodily  ;  but  it  is  also  used  to 
denote  immaterial  beings,  which  act  by  a  natural  ability,  and  from 
themselves  with  understanding  and  vv^ill.  And  in  this  sense  angels 
and  souls  are  ghosts,  (or  spirits) ;  but  this  word  is  used  particularly 
of  God,  and  especially  witli  respect  to  the  essence  of  God  ;  thus  our 
Saviour  speaks,  Jolai  iv.  24,  "  God  is  a  spirit."     And  with  respect 

3  G 


402  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

to  one  of  the  divine   Persons  ;  thus  the  Son  is  called,  according  t^ 
his  divine   nature,  a  spirit ;  "  He  was   justified  in  the  Spu'it,"  saith 
Paul,    I  Tim.  iii.  16.     But  this  name  is   given   chiefly  to  the  third 
Person  in  the  divine   essence  :  and  of  this  Person  our  text  speaks, 
and  aso  the  mstructor  in  this  Lord's  day»     The  third  Person  in  the 
divine  essence  is  called   emphatically  the   Spirit,  not  because   he  is 
more  spiritual  in  his  essence  tlian  the  Father  and  the  Son,  for  he  is 
co-esseniial  with  the  Father  and  the   Son,    and  of  the  sarwe   simple 
and  spiritual  essence  ;  neither   is  this  third  Person  called  Spirit,  on 
account  of  his  spirit\ial  osconomy,  and  work  of  grace  ;  for  he  is  call- 
ed the  "  Holy  "  Spirit,  on  accj3unt  of  his  oeconomical  work  of  grace, 
as  will  appear  more  particularly  hereafter  ;  but  he  is  called  Spirit  on 
account  of  his  personal  and  spiritual  proceeding  from   the   Father 
through   the  Son  :  for  as  the  first  Person   is    called  Father,  and  the 
second  Son,  on  account  of  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son  by  the 
Father  ;  so  the  toird  i^erson   is  called  Spirit  on  account  of  his  per- 
sonal and  spiritual  proceeding  from   the  Father  through  the  Son 
from  eternity.     As  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  denominated  from 
their  ])ersonal    property,  to  wit,  the  eternal  generation,  so  also  the 
third  Person  is  denominated  from  his  personal  property,   to  vit,  his 
eternal  proceeding.     It  is  the  ancient   and  v/ell  established  doctrine 
of  the  clmrch,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  proceedeth  from  the  Father ;  and 
therefore  it  is   detestable,    not  only  in  the  Socinians,  but   also  in  a 
certain  person,  *  who  desires  to  be  esteemed  orthodox  in  our  church, 
to  d'jny  this  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     Suffering  himself  to  be 
misled  and  spoiled  by  philosophy,   he  did  not  find  any  innate  idea  of 
an  eternal  generation  of  the  Son  by  the   Father,   therefore  he  would 
deny  it,   alihoun^h  the  word  of  God  asserted  it  ever  so  plainly.     No 
marvel  then  that   he  subverted  tiie  faith  of  the  church  with  respect 
lo  the  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  but  we  reverence  the  word  of 
God  too  much  to  deny,  or  doubt  of  this  truth  ;  for  the  word  of  God 
teacheth  us  tl-.at  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from  the  Father.     Of  this 
the  Son  of  God  speaks,  John  xv.  26.    "  When  the  Comforter  shall 
come,  wiiom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  F'ather,  even  the  Spirit 
of  truth,  which  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  he  shall  testify  of  me.'* 
It  is  said  here,  that  the  Spirit  proceedeth  from  the  Father,  and  this 
is  distinguished  from  the  sending  o;  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  Son  from 
the  Father.     On  account  of  this  proceeding,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  also 
called** the  Spirit  of  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.  11.  *♦  The  Spirit  which  is  of 

*  Bj  this  person  our  author  means  Professor  Reel  , 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  53.  403 

God,*'  !  Cor.  ii.  12.  "The  Spirit  of  God's  moiUh,"   Psalm   xxxiii. 
6.     *'  The  breath  oCthe  Almighty,"  Job  xxxiii.  4. 

But  wl>en  we  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceedeth  from  the 
Father,  we  add  that  he  proceedeth  from  the  Son  also.  This  occa- 
sioned severe  disputes  in  the  seventeenth  and  following  centuries  be- 
tween the  Greek,  or  eastern,  and  the  Latin  or  Mestern  churches  ; 
for  when  the  Catholic  creed  of  Constantinople  confessed  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  proceeded  *'  from  the  Father,  the  Latins  added,  "  and 
from  the  Son."  The  Greek  church  took  this  exceedingly  ill,  con- 
sidering it  as  a  falsifying  of  that  creed  :  but  if  we  consult  the  word 
of  God,  we  shall  see  that  the  Holy  Ghost  proceeds  from  the  Son 
also  ;  for  he  is  called  "the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  of  the  Son."  Rom. 
viii.  9.  Gal.  ivi  6.  The  Son  "  sends  the  Spirit  from  the  Father," 
John  xy.  26.  And  the  Spirit  receives  all  things  from  the  Son,  who 
hath  what  he  hath  from  the  Father,  John  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  Since 
now  the  order  of  working  among  the  divine  Persons  follows  the  or- 
der of  their  subsistence,  it  is  evident,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  pro- 
ceed not  only  from  the  Father,  but  also  from  the  Son.  It  was  not 
therefore  commendable  in  the  Greek  church  to  oppose  so  vehe- 
mently the  proceeding  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  tie  Son:  neither 
can  we  approve  of  the  conduct  of  the  Latins  in  altering  the  creed 
by  iheir  own  authority,  and  insisting  upon  the  words,  "  from  the 
Son,"  and  not  rather  saying  "  through  the  Son,"  which  the  Greeks 
"were  willing  to  allow,  and  which  would  perhaps  have  been  altogether 
as  proper,  because  the  Father  works  through  the  v^on,  and  thus  also 
ca\iseth  the  Floly  Ghost  to  proceed  through  the  Son. 

The  third  Person  is  called  not  only  the  Spirit,  but  also  the  '*  Holy  " 
Spirit,  not  because  he  is  more  holy  than  the  Father  and  the  :ron  : 
for  the  hymn  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  addressed  to  each  Person,  and  not 
unto  one  only,  Isaiah  vi.  3.  But  the  third  Person  is  called  holy, 
because  the  making  of  the  Church  holy,  is  particularly  attributed  to 
him  ;  for  as  creation  is  attributed  to  the  Feather,  and  redemption  to 
the  Son,  so  sanctification  (or  making  holy)  is  attributed  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  his  peculiar  ceconomy  and  dispensation  of  grace  ;  there- 
fore Paul  saith,  2  Thess,  ii.  13,  thut  "God  hath  chosen  believers  to 
salvation,  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,"  And  thus  the  whole 
(Economy,  the  dispensation  of  grace  by  the  Spirit,  or  the  applica- 
tion of  the  foreordained  and  pu'chased  grace  of  the  Father  and  Son 
is  intimated  by  the  additional  word  "  holy,"  as  the  word  sanctifica- 
tion denotes  also  the  whole  work  of  grace,  which  belongs  to  the 
Spirit.  Peter  teacheth  us  this,  when  he  saith,  1  Peter,  i.  2  "  Elect 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,   through  sancti- 


404  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

fication  of  the  Spirit  and  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Chrisi."  Since  now  the  Holy  Spirit  effects  ihe  work  of  sane- 
tification  spiritually,  that  is,  rationally  and  internally  in  the  spirit,  or 
soul  of  man,  by  the  insirumcntality  of  the  gospel,  theiefore  the  gifts 
of  grace  are  sometimes  called  the  Spirit.  60  we  read,  John  Yi,  39, 
"  This  he  spake  of  the  ^pirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should 
receive  ;  for  the  Holy  Gliost  was  not  yet  given,  because  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified."  So  the  gospel  is  also  called  the  Spirit,  be- 
cause it  is  the  minisir<\tion  of  the  Spirit :  this  we  may  see  2  Cor« 
iii.  6.  8. 

2.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  a  Person,  that  is,  an  intelligent  substance, 
by  which  he  is  in  the  divine  essence  individually  what  he  is,  being 
neither  a  part,  accident  nor  quality  of  either  of  the  other  Persons,  or 
aught  else.  The  Arians,  Servetians  and  Socinians,  who  deny  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  Person,  are  so  perplexed  here,  that  they  knov/ 
not  what  to  make  of  him.  Some  will  have  that  he  is  an  inbreathed 
affection  of  God  ;  others  that  he  is  the  power  of  God  ;  a  third  thinks 
that  he  is  neither  God,  nor  a  creature,  but  something  wholly  different 
from  either  ;  a  fourth  that  he  is  like  one  of  the  attributes  of  God  ;  a 
fifth  saith  that  he  is  a  gift  of  God ;  a  sixth  makes  him  to  be  an  excellent 
angel,  or  a  certain  order  of  angels  ;  but  those  among  them  who  wish 
to  speak  accurately,  distinguish  between  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  t!ie 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  By  the  Holy  Ghost  they  understand  the 
power  of  God  the  Father,  which  is  naturally  in  him  ;  by  the 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  are  also  called  the  Holy  Ghost,  they 
will  have  that  the  gospel  is  signified,  and  certain  gifts  granted  to 
particular  persons. 

The  church  teaches  in  opposition  to  this,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
a  person  ;  and  not  without  reason  ;  for  (a)  the  Holy  Ghost  hath 
the  personal  properties  of  understanding  :  "  For  the  Spirit  searcheth 
all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.  10,  11  ;  and  also 
of  will:  "  For  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit, 
dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will,"  1  Cor.  xii.  11.  (b)  The 
Spirit  hath  appeared  in  divers  forms,  as  in  that  of  a  dove,  and  of 
fiery  tongues,  in  order  to  represent  his  gifts  of  Grace,  Malt.  iii.  16. 
Acts  ii.  3,  4.  Now  persons  only  do  such  things,  (c)  The  Holy- 
Ghost  hath  his  personal  works ;  for  he  sends  the  preachers.  Acts 
viii.  29,  30.  xiii.  2,  He  leads,  comforts,  assures  and  intercedes, 
Rom.  viii.  14 — 27,  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  is  also  a  person.  By  a 
personification,  personal  works  are  indeed  ascribed  to  charity,  1  Cor. 
xiii.  4 — 7,  but  this  supposeth  a  charitable  person.  We  cannot  cer- 
tainly think  that  the  personal  v/orks  of  the  Holy  Ghqst  are  personi- 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  53.  4(jw 

fied,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  distinguished  as  a  person  from  his 
works  Thus  Paul  teacheth  us  :  '^  For  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit 
the  word  of  wisdom  ;  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge  by  the  same 
Spirit,"  1  Cor.  xii.  8.  See  also  vrs.  9,  10,  11.  (d)  The  Holy  Ghost 
is  also  distinguished  from  the  other  divine  Persons,  not  only  as  a  dis- 
tinct thing,  but  as  a  distinct  Person.  See  John  xiv.  15.  xvi.  13 
14,  15.     We  have  exhibited  these  passages  at  large  before. 

The  objections  which  the  adversaries  of  the  Spirit  offer  ap-ainst 
this  doctrine  are  insignificant :  they  say  that  we  are  baptised  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  Matt.  iii.  U,  Acts  i.  5.  1  (Jor.  xii. 
13,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  power  and  gift  of  God,  Luke  i.  35, 
xxiv.  49.  Acts  x»  38,  45,  We  freely  allow  that  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
we  nnust  sometimes  understand  his  gifts,  Avith  which  we  are  bapti- 
zed and  influenced  ;  but  it  follows  not  from  this,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  not  a  person  :  for  the  Holy  Ghost  is   distinguished  as    a  person 

from  his  gifts,  as  hath  been  shown  from  1  Cor.  xii.  8 1 1.     Is  the 

Holy  Ghost  called  the  power  and  gift  of  God,  it  doth  not  denote  that 
he  is  not  a  person  ;  for  then  Christ  would  not  be  a  person  neither 
since  he  also  is  called  the  power  and  (he  gift  of  God,  1  Cor.  i.  24 
John  iv.  10. 

3.  We  profess  furthermore  concerning  tlie  Holy  Ghost,  « that 
he  is  true  and  coeternal  God  vv'ith  the  Father  and  the  Son."  The 
above-named  adversaries  of  the  Spirit  deny  this  also  ;  but  we  hold 
it  to  be  a  most  certain  truth  ;  because  the  names,  attributes,  works 
and  honour  of  God  arc  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  For, 

1,  The  Holy  Ghost  is  called  God  ;  for  Peter  said.  Acts  v.  3  4 
«  Why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  thou 
hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  God"  By  lying  to  the  Holy  Ghost 
they  liad  lied  to  God  ;  how  is  this  to  be  understood,  if  the  Holy 
Giiost  be  not  God.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  a'so  called  Jehovah  :  "  Israel 
tempted  the  Lord,"  Exod.  xvii.  7.  Num.  xx.  3 — 13,  Deut,  vi. 
16.     PsLilm  xcv.  6 — 9  ;  but  the  Lord  was  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  Paul 

showeth,  Heb.  iii    7,    8,    9.     Compare   ai^o  Isaiah  vi.   6 10,    with 

Acts  xxviii.  25,  26,  27.  Now  this  name  is  proper  to  God  only,  and 
expresseth  his  essence  as  we  have  proved  on  the  eighth  Lord's  day. 
Whence  it  therefore  follows  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  true  and  eternal 
God  with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 

2.  Divine  attributes  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  he  is 
"the  eternal  Spirit,"  Heb.  ix.  14.  He  is  also  omnipresent,  Psalm 
cxxxix.  7.  He  is  all-knowing,  so  that  "he  searcheth  not  only  the 
hearts  and  reins,"  as  it  is  said  of  God,  Jer.  xvii.  10,  but  what  is  more, 
''  he  searcheth  all  things,  ye^,  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  he  know- 


406  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

cth  them,"  1  Cor.  ii.  10.  11.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  likewise  almighty, 
yea,  he  hath  a  sovereign  might  :  ''  For  all  these  things  worketh  that 
one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he 
%vill."  It  is  now  surely  evident  that  he  is  the  true  God  ;  for  he  who 
is  not  God  cannot  be  eternal,  omnipresent,  all-knowing,  almighty, 
and  sovereignly  mighty. 

3.  We  find  also  that  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  performed  divine  works. 
He  created  the  world  ;  for  "  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the 
waters,"  Gen.  i.  5.  See  Job  xxxiii.  Psalm  xxxiii.  6.  He  also 
iipholdeth  all  things  by  a  second  creation  :  "  Thou  sendest  forth  thy 
Spirit,  they  are  created,"  saith  David,  Psalm  civ.  -30.  This  is  the 
v/ork  of  God  only,  as  he  himself  declares,  Isaiah  xliv.  24.  The 
work  of  regeneration  and  of  sanctification  fs  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  we  may  see,  John  iii.  5.  Titus  iii.  5  ;  and  he  manifests 
thus  that  '*  he  is  the  Lord  who  sanctifieth  Israel,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  28. 
"  The  Holy  Spirit  will  quicken  our  mortal  bodies,"  Rom.  viii.  11. 
Now  the  Lord  Qnly  quickens,  (or  makes  alive)  as  he  also  kills,  1. 
Sam.  ii.  6.  Deut  xxxii.  39.  "  Jesus  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,"  Matt.  xii.  28.  Now  "  the  God  of  Israel  alone  doth  won» 
derful  works,"  Psalm  Ixxii.  18.  cxxxvi.  4.  Therefore  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  also  true  God. 

4.  We  must  also  give  divine  honour  and  woiship  to  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  for  we  are  sanctified  to  be  his  temples,  "  in  which  he  dwells," 
1  Cor,  iii.  16,  17.  vi.  19.  He  is  therefore  God,  for  the  temple  of 
Solomon  was  builded  for  the  service  of  God  only,  1  Kings  v.  5  ;  and 
it  is  idolatry  to  build  temples  for  the  service  of  him  who  is  not 
God,  Hosea  viii  14.  We  must  also  obey  God,  and  therefore  the 
Holy  Ghost,  Heb.  iii  7,  8,  9,  and  therefore  we  can  "vex  him," 
Isaiah  Ixiii.  10 — "  grieve  him,"  Eph.  iv.  30 — "commit  an  unpardon-. 
.able  sin  against  him,"  Malt.  xii.  31.     How  can    all   this  be,   if  the 

Holy  Ghost  be  not  the  true  God  ?  we  must  be  baptized  in  the 
name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  This  is  a  divine  honours 
which  belongeth  to  none  but  God,  as  Paul  shows,  1  Cor.  i.  13,  14, 
15.  We  must  also  worship  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  source  of  all 
blessings,  2  Cor.  xii i.  13.  Now,  "tlie  Lord  God  only  must  we 
worship,"  Matt.  iv.  10.  We  must  show  that  we  are  commanded  to 
worship  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  we  may  silence  the  Arminians,  who 
allow  indeed  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  God,  but  nevertheless  say,  in 
order  to  flatter  their  brethren,  the  Socinians,  that  we  have  neither  a 
command  nor  example  permitting  or  obliging  us  to  worship  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  Saviour  enjoins,  Matt.  ix.  38,  "  Pray  ye  tht^ 
Lord  of  the  harvest,  to  send  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest."     The 


XX.  LORD^S  DAY.  Q.  53/  407 

Lord  of  the  harvest,  who  sends  forth  the  preachers,  is  the  Koly 
Ghost,  as  we  see,  Acts  xiii.  1,2;  and  therefore  we  are  commanded 
to  worship  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  have  also  an  example,  showing 
that  the  Holy  Glost,  the  God  who  spake  by  the  mouth  of  David, 
was  worshipped,  Acts  iv.  24,  25.  Now  "the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
spake  by  David,"  as  he  himself  saith,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  2.  When  all 
this  is  considered-  we  may  with  certainty  conclude  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  true  God. 

Although  it  is  evident  now,  that  he  is  the  same  God  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  we  may  nevertheless  not  think  with  the  Sabel- 
lians,  that  he  is  the  same  Person  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  for 
there  are  three  Persons  in  the  divine  essence,  the  Father,  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  we  are  taug;ht.  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  2  Cor. 
xiii.  13.  I  John  v.  7  ;  and  which  we  have  explained  upon  the  eighth 
Lord's  day.  Whence  it  therefore  evidently  follows,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  not  the  same  Person  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  (b)  The 
Saviour  si-ith  in  the  text,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  another  Comforter, 
or  one  distinct  from  himself,  (c)  This  matter  may  be  further  illus- 
trated by  observing  that  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  a  distinct  personal 
property  and  work  from  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  for  the  Father  is 
the  first  Person,  and  the  Son  is  the  second  in.the  order  of  subsistence 
and  working ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  third,  the  Father  hath  be- 
gotten the  Son,  the  Son  is  begotten  by  the  Father ;  but  the  Holy 
Ghost  hath  neither  begotlen  the  Son,  nor  is  he  begotten  by  the  Fa- 
ther ;  but  he  proceedeth  from  the  Father  through  the  Son.  The 
Father  works  from  himself  through  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ; 
the  Son  works  from  the  Father  through  the  Holy  Ghost;  but  the 
Holy  Ghost  works  from  the  Father  and  from  the  Son.  This  is  clear 
from  John  xvi.  13,  14,  15. 

IL  We  come  now  to  our  second  general  head,  which  teacheth  us 
how  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  in  his  sundry  workings.  Thus  the 
instructor  saith,  »*  that  he  is  given  to  me,  that  he  may  make  me  by 
a  true  faith,"  Sec.  By  which  the  Holy  Ghost  actually  and  effectu- 
ally applies  to  believers  all  that  grace,  which  was  pre-appointed  for 
them  by  the  Father,  and  purchased  by  the  ^on.  This  we  learn, 
1  Peter  i.  2.  Therefore  he  is  called  "  Spirit  of  the  Father,"  Matt. 
X.  20,  and  so  also  "  of  the  Son,"  Gal.  iv.  6,  because  he  is  given 
by  the  Father  to  the  Son,  and  hath  qualified  and  anointed  him 
for  the  work  of  Mediator,  as  the  Son  himself  testifieth,  Isaiah  Ixi.  I, 
2,  3.  And  thus  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  his  special  work  also  with 
respect  to  the  church,  on  behalf  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  as 
Christ  teacheth,  John  xvi.    13,  14,  15.     And  therefore  believers  arc 


>103  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST» 

also  called  "spiritual,"  i  Cor.  ii.  15.     In  order  to  explain  this  some** 
what  more  fully  we  shall  consider  the  manner  of  the  giving  of  the 
Spirit  to  the  cnurch  under  the  Old  and  under  the  New  Testament 
in  geiicral ;  and  then  how  he  is  given  under  the  New  Testament  in 
particular. 

The  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  under  the  Old  and  New  Testament 
arc  either  extraordinary,  or  ordinary  gifts. 

The  extraordinary,  or  superordinary  gifts  are,  (a)  gifts  of  skill  in 
arts,  whereby  some  were  qualified  to  do  this  or  that  work  of  art,  as 
^*  Bezalee!  was  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God,"  that  he  might  make 
the  artificial  work  of  the  tabernacle,  Exod.  xxxi.  1—5.  (b)  Gifts  of 
heroism  and  valour,  by  which  the  ancient  heroes  were  urged  and 
enabled  to  perform  ^;reat  exploits  for  the  preservation  and  prosperity 
of  God's  people  :  thus  "  the  Spirit  of  God  came  mightily  upon  Sam- 
son at  certain  times,"  Judges  xiii.  23.  xiv.  6,  19.  xv.  14.  (c)  Gifts 
of  office,  as  an  ability  to  conduct  in  a  kingly  manner  in  ruling.  It 
was  "  the  Holy  Spirit  who  changed  the  heart  of  Saul,"  I  Sam.  x,  9. 
*' Tiie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  David,"  1  Sam.  xvi.  13,  To 
tliS  gifts  of  office  belong  also  those  of  a  prophet,  to  reveal  secrets, 
either  such  as  are  past,  as  Daniel  revealed  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream^ 
which  he  had  forgotten,  Dan.  ii.  29,  50.  iv.  8,  Or  those  which  are  to 
come  ;  for  "  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  was  in  the  prophets,  signified 
and  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that 
should  follow,"  as  the  apostles  also  possessed  such  a  prophetical. 
Spirit,  particularly  John,  who  was  for  that  end  "  in  the  Spirit,"  Rev» 
i.  10.  iv.  2.  xxi.  10.  To  this  pertains  also,  that  the  prophets  and 
apostles  taught  the  people  of  God  infallibly  the  greatest  mysteries, 
by  word  and  writing.  We  see  this  John  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  2  Peter  i- 
19,  20,  21.  Hence  also  proceeded  the  gifis  of  all  kinds  of  languages 
and  miracles,  Acts  ii.  I — 4,  Rom.  xv.  18,  19,  as  they 3  were  also 
many  Christians  in  the  primitive  church,  who  were  endued  with 
superordinary  gifts.  Acts  x.  44,  45,  46.     See  particularly  1  Cor.  xii. 

The  ordinary  ^ifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  either  common  gifts  of 
great  light  and  joy  in  the  mysteries  of  God,  of  which  temporary  be- 
lievers do  also  p.trtake,  as  thos^  gifts  are  not  inseparably  connected 
with  salvation  ;  for  "  they  are  enlightened,  taste  the  lieavenly  gift, 
are  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  taste  the  good  word  of 
God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  ;  and  notwithstanding  fall 
away,"  Heb.  vi.  4,  5,  6.  Or  the  ordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
are  saving  gifts,  of  which  the  elect  only  partake.  These  gifts  are 
"  those  better  things,  which  accompany  salvation,"  Heb.  vi.  9.  And 
thus  the  Holy  Gbo::t  is  "  the  Spirit  of  grace,"  Zech.  xii.  10.  These 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  53.  409 

^ifis  are  many,  and  wrought  in  divers  ways  through  the  instrument- 
ality of  the  word,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  conveys  to  the  elect,  with  a 
design  to  influence  them  thereby  to  salvation.  The  Spirit  forbade 
Paul  to  preach  the  word  in  Asia  and  Bithynia,  but  sent  him  into 
Macedonia  to  convert  many,  Acts  xvi.  6 — 9.  To  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  also  adds  the  sacraments  ;  for  ail  the  elect  "  are  by  one  Spirit 
baptized  into  one  body,  and  all  made  to  drink  into  one  Spirit,"  I  Coro 
xii.  13.  By  these  means  the  elect  receive  the  following  gracious 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

1.  Regeneration,  whereby  the  Holy  Ghost  renews  them  after  the 
image  of  God,  infuseth  a  principle  of  spiritual  life  into  them,  con- 
vinces them  of  their  sins  and  damnable  condition,  subdues  the  ruling 
power  of  sin,  and  effects  in  them  new  powers  to  do  that  which  is 
good.  And  so  "  they  are  saved  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Titus  iii.  5.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27. 
And  thus  he  is  a  Spirit  of  conviction,  John  xvi.  8,  9.  Zech.  xii.  10, 
and  "  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Rom.  viii.  2. 

2.  True  faith,  whereby  the  Holy  Spirit  "  makes  them  partakers 
of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits."  We  are  taught  in  the  seventh  Lord's 
day  that  "  we  receive  and  apply  Christ  with  all  his  benefits  to  our- 
selves by  faith."  This  faith  the  Spirit  works,  and  so  he  is  "  the 
Spirit  of  faith,"  2  Cor.  iv.  13.  For  he  ei^lightens  the  understanding 
with  rcispect  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  by  which  it  discovers  the 
acceptableness  of  Christ ;  for  "  he  is  given  by  God,  as  the  Spirit  of 
wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him,  enlightening  the 
eyes  of  the  understanding,"  Eph.  i.  17,  18,  and  thus  "  he  leads  into 
the  truth,"  John  xvi.  13,  "  teaches  all  things,  and  brings  to  remem- 
brance," John  xiv.  26,  and  "testifies  of  Christ,"  John  xv.  26.  The 
Spirit  of  faith  convinces  also  the  mind  of  the  divinity  and  truth  of  all 
the  mysteries  of  Christ,  and  of  his  invitation  to  come  unto  him  ;  for 
"  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  that  the  Spirit  is  the  truth,"  I  John  v. 
6.  Yea,  he  unites  the  soul  to  Christ,  causing  her  to  receive  him 
actually  and  operatively.   This  the  apostle  teacheth,  Eph.  iii.  16,  17. 

3.  Comfort.  He  is  given  to  me,  "•  that  he  may  comfoit  me,"  saith. 
the  catechism  :  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  is  called  emphatically,  the 
Comforter,"  John  xiv.  16,  26.  xv.  26,  and  ''  he  multipHes  comfort," 
Acts  ix.  31.  Many  are  the  sorrows  of  believers,  one  while  because 
they  know  not  whether  their  state  be  good  or  not,  another  while  on 
account  of  the  power  of  corruption,  then  on  account  of  the  hiding  of 
God's  countenance,  yea,  also  on  account  of  many  bodily  afflictions, 
either  manifest  tribulations,  or  secret  vexations;  but  "  the  Holy  Ghos^ 
comforts  them,"  for  sometimes  he  assures  them  by  "his  witnessing- 

3  H 


410  FAITH  1>{  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

that  t'icy  are  the  children. of  God,  and  heirs  of  God  and  of  Christ,"".' 
Horn.  viii.  16,  17.  I  Coi.  11,  12.  At  other  times  he  favours  thera 
with  a  sense  of  the  love  of  God,  that  they  may  '*  glory  in  tribula- 
tionsi"  1-vom.  V.  3,  4,  5.  He  also  endues  ihem  sometimes  with 
coiiraije  in  their  calaniitits,  Psalm  xxiii.  4.  And  so  they  obtain  the 
benefits  of  Ciod's  kingd  )in,  righteousness,  peace  and  joy  through  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  Horn.  xiv.   17. 

4.  SiXi:cification  :  for  he  is  *<  the  Ipirit  of  sanctiilcation,"  2  Thess. 
ii.  I3«  "  He  washes"  believers  from  the  filthincss  of  sin,  1  Cor.  vi. 
1 1,  ''chanf^es  them  from  glory  to  glory  after  the  ima^e  of  the  Lord,'* 
2  Cor.  iiu  18,  directs  them  in  ail  thtir  ways  ;  for  "  he  leads  them," 
Rom  viii»  14.  Psalm  cxiiii.  10,  and  fills  them  with  all  his  holy  virtues 
of  *'  love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffering,  gentleness,  gc  odness,  faith, 
meekness,  temperance,"  Gal.  v.  22.  Yea,  he  is  especially  '^  a  Spirit 
of  prayer  to  them,"  Zech.  xii.  10,  for  he  enablelh  them  to  draw  near 
the  throne  bol.ily,  Eph.  ii.  18,  "to  cry"  as  it  were  "with  the  Spirit 
of  adoption,  Abba  Father,"  Rom.  viii.  15.  Gal.  iv.  6.  He  dictates 
their  prayers  to  them,  enables  them  to  pray  heartily,  renders  their 
prayers  acceptable,  and  procures  a  hearing  for  them,  Rom.  viii. 
26,  27. 

5.  Preservation  ;  for  **  they  are  kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  and 
thus  by  the  Holy  bpirit,  "unto  salvation,"  1  Peter  i.  5.  Since  "he 
Lbides  with  tliera  for  ever,"  as  the  instructor  speaks  agreeably  to 
o  li'  text ;  therefore  he  is  said  to  "  dwell  in  them,  as  his  temple," 
i  Cor  iiii.  15.  He  is'  "an  earnest  to  them*  seals  and  establishes 
them,"  2  Cor.  i.  20,  31,  22-  He  strengthens  and  increases  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  inner  man  in  them,  Eph.  iii.  16,  causes  them  t» 
"  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,"  to  wit,  sins,  Rom.  viii.  13.  Are 
they  at  any  time  seized  with  a  languor,  so  that  they  faint  and  are 
weak,  he  raiseih  them  up  again,  and  "  creates  in  them  a  clean  heart, 
and  renews  a  right  spirit  v/ithin  them,  he  doth  not  depart  from  them, 
but  restores  unto  them  the  joy  of  his  salvation,  and  the  free  Spirit 
upholds  them,"  Psalm  Ii.  10,  11,  12.  When  they  die,  the  Spirit 
pronounces  them  blessed,  Rev.  xiv.  13,  and  "he  will  quicken  their 
mortal  bodies,"  Rom.  viii.  1 1. 

But  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Gijost  are  given  especially  under  the 
New  Testament.  We  conclude  from  what  we  have  just  now  said 
from  mary  passages  of  the  Old  Teslameiit,  that  the  Spirit  was 
given  to  bLlievcrs  under  the  Old  Testament  :  but  he  is  given  under 
the  New  Testament  in  a  greater  measure,  and  to  a  greater  number  of 
persons.  The  church  of  the  Old  Testament  hoped  for  "the  out- 
pouring o:  the  Spirit  from  on  high,  when  the  wilderness  should  be- 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  53.  41  i 

come  a  fruitful  field,  and. the  fruitful  field  be  counted  a  forest,'*  Isaiah 
xxxii.  15,  for  the  Lord  God  promised  such  'i  an  outpouring- of  his 
Spirit,"  Isaiah  xliv.  3.  4.  Yea,  on  account  of  the  increase  of  the 
gifts  of  t!ie  S[/inr  in  the  days  of  the  New,  Teslatp.ent,  it  is  said,  that 
-'-the  Spirit  was  not  given  hefore  Jesus  was  glorified,  John  vii.  38, 
39.  Tlierefore  the  in:nisLr.uio.n  of  the  New  Testaiiienl  is  also  '■  the 
ministration  of  the  Spirit/'  2  Cor.  iii.  8. 

IIL  Tiiat  we  may  at  length  finish  our  meditations  on  the  Holy 
Ghosl,  vve  must  expound  our  .third  gcneialhead,  to  wit,  how  y\e 
must  beUeve  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Remonstrants,  wlio  have  no  ereat  regard  for  the  doc- 
.trine  o£  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  they  have  not  neither  fcr  that 
of  the  Triiiity,  say  that  there  is  no  express  command  to  believe 
in  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  but  are  we  not  conmianded  to  believe  in  the 
Holy  Ghost  when  we  are  commanded  to  believe  in  God,  since  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  God.  as  they  themselves  allow  ?  Faith  is  a  holding 
of  a  person's  testimony  to  be  true.  Kow  the  scripluic  is  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  when  then  we  arc  commanded  to  believe 
the  word  of  God,  we  are  then  also  commanded  to  believe  in  the 
lioiy  Ghost.  And  therefore  every  person,  who  confesseth  his  faith 
saith  also,  1  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

This  faith  in  the  Holy  Gliost  consists,  (a)  in  holding  with  an  as- 
sured  mind  the  lestmiony  of  t!ie  Holy  Ghost,  and  so  the  whole  word 
of  God,  to  he  true,  on  account  of  the  tejramony  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
The  Spirit  exhibits  many  evidences  of  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the- 
word,  bctivin  the.  scripture  itself,  and  in  the  hearts  of  believers;  for 
"the  Spirit  testifi'eth  thnt  the  Spirit  is  the  truth,"  1  John  v.  5,  where- 
by believers  then  become  assured  of  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the 
word,  and  do  thus  believe.     Faith  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  consists  slso, 

(b)  in  accepting  him  in  and  through  Christ  upon  his  proffer.  The 
Lord. Jesus  prochiims  to  every  sinner,  "He  that  belicveth  on  me, 
as  tJie  soipture  haih  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living 
water..  F>ut  this  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  en 
him  should  receive,"  John  vii.  38,  39.  Now  he  who  believes  in 
Christ,  accepts- also  this  promise  in  and  with  him.     Add  to  this,  that- 

(c)  hith  in  the  Holy  Ghost  consists  also  in  the  believer's  having  an 
assurance,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given  to  him  also  for  such  gifts, 
according  to  the  testin'.ony  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Holy  Ghost 
testificth  in  the  word,  that  he  who  believes  in  the  Son.  doth  also 
partake  of  him,  as  we  have  seen,  John  vii,  38,  39.  The  Spirit  enables 
the  believer  to  take  a  near  view  of  his  heart,  and  causeth  him  to  see 
that  he  himself  hath  wrought  f:\ilh  therein  ;  fcr  "the  Spirit  which  is- 


412  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GttOST. 

of  God,  causes  him  to  know  the  things,  which  are  freely  given  to 
him  of  God,"  I  Cor.  ii.  12.  Whereupon  ''the  Spirit  of  God  testi- 
fieth  v/iih  the  believer's  spirit,  that  he  is  a  child  of  God,"  Rom.  viii. 
16.  And  th^Tefore  he  doth  not  believe  this  of  his  own  imagination^ 
but  upon  the  divine  testimony  of  the  Spirit  himself, 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  now  duly  consider  all  that  bath  been  said,  must  we  not 
conclude  that  the  Spirit  works  grace  in  the  elect  effectnally,  in  such 
a  manner,  that  he  changes  the  heart,  and  irresistibly  ?  surely  yes  ; 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  true  God,  and  he  works  in  a  divine  manner 
m  the  work  of  grace,  with  *'  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power, 
according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,"  Eph.  i.  19.  Our 
reformed  church  therefore  teaches  with  good  reason,  that  there  ig 
such  an  effectual  grace  :  but  those  who  oppose  this  doctrine,  and  set 
free-will  against  the  Spirit,  deny  the  Holy  Spirit  and  his  work  of 
grace.  The  Socinians,  who  comiect  their  doctrines  better  than  the 
Remonstrants,  do  also  show  this,  when  they  deny  with  the  Godhead 
of  the  Spirit,  likewise  his  effectual  work  of  grace. 

"  Paul  finding  certain  disciples  at  Ephesus,  said  unto  them,  Have 
ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believed  ?"  Acts  xix.  1,2.  He 
spoke  of  the  superordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  which  in  those  days 
were  communicated  also  to  common  Christians,  as  \Ve  see  in  the 
sixth  verse  :  but  I  also  ask  you,  whoever  ye  be,  Have  ye  received 
the  saving  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Verily  this  a  matter  of  the 
greatest  importance  to  you,  for  if  ye  have  the  Holy  Spirit,  "  the 
Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon  you,"  according  to  1  Peter 
iv.  14,  ye  have  then  also  the  Father  and  the  Son,  "  ye  abide  in  God, 
and  God  abideth  in  you  ;"  for  "  we  know  this,  because  he  hath  given 
us  of  his  Spirit,"  1  Jolm  iv.  13.  Ye  have  then  also  saving  faith,  and 
partake  of  Christ  and  of  all  his  benefits  ;  ye  may  live  joyfully  and 
comfortably  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  love  and  of  peace  will  be  with 
you,  yea,  his  '-pirit  will  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  but  if  ye  have  not 
the  Spirit,  ye  are  then  yet  "  natural  men,  who  have  not  the  Spirit," 
as  holy  Jude  speaks  in  his  epistle,  at  the  nineteenth  verse,  and  there- 
fore "  ye  cannot  receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  for  they 
ai*e  foolishness  unto  you  ;  neither  can  ye  know  them,  because  they 
arc  spiritually  discerned,"  1  Cor,  ii.  14.     Ye  have  no  saving  interest 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  5J.-  413i 

in  Christ :  for  "  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none 
of  his.  Ye  are  yet  after  the  flesh,  and  do  mind  the  things  of  the 
flesh,  ye  cannot  please  God,  and  shall  therefore  die,"  Rom.  viii.  5, 
8,  9,  13.  Therefore  bethink  yourselves  v/ell.  What  answer  do  ye 
return  to  yourselves  upon  that  important  question.  Have  ye  receiv- 
ed the  Holy  Ghost?  Do  ye  wish  to  discover  your  condition,  that  it 
may  conduce  to  your  salvation,  attend  then  to  the  different  disposi- 
tions of  men,  and  see  whether  ye  can  find  your  own. 

1.  Many  do  not  know  at  all  what  it  is  to  have  the  Spirit;  they 
may  indeed  say  with  Uie  disciples  at  Ephesus,  Acts  xix.  2.  "  We 
have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether  there  be  any  Holy  Ghost."  The 
things  of  this  life  possess  their  hearts  so,  that  they  regard  nothing 
but  eating,  drinking,  laboring,  buying  and  selling  :  doth  any  person 
speak  to  them  concerning  the  Spirit,  and  his  experimental  works, 
they  look  upon  it  to  be  strange  talk,  which  exceeds  their  comprehen- 
sion -J  yea,  some  will  deride  it,  as  enthusiasm  ;  "  but,"  as  Peter  saith, 
"  these  as  natural  brute  beasts,  made  to  be  taken  and  destroyed, 
speak  evil  of  the  things  that  they  understand  not^  and  shall  utterly 
perish  in  their  own  corruption,"  2  Peter  ii.  12.  Thus  holy  Jude 
also  speaks  in  the  tenth  verse  of  his  epistle. 

2.  Others  are  not  so  ignorant  nor  blasphemous,  but  exceedingly 
devout,  they  hear  gladly  a  serious  sermon,  and  w-th  Herod  do  many 
things  ;  yea,  some  are  exceedingly  attentive,  und  have  also  an  under- 
standing of  the  word,  yea,  they  relish  it  so,  that  through  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  Lord  Jesus  they  escape  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  and 
show  thus  that  they  are  also  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  they 
depend  upon  this  common  work,  they  promise  themselves  heaven  in 
consequence  of  it,  and  doubt  not  that  they  will  be  saved  Unhappy 
men,  who  have  no  more  than  this,  who  have  neither  Spirit  nor  life, 
are  not  regenerated,  nor  united  to  Christ  !  1  ave  not  many  temporary 
believers  proceeded  further  than  ye  have  ?  See  it  in  Balaam,  Numb. 
Kxiii.  24,  in  Judas  and  others,  Matt.  vii.  22,  23.  xiii.  20,  21.  Heb. 
yi.  4,  5,  6.  2  Peter  ii.  20. 

3.  There  is  still  another  kind  of  persons  :  these  experience  such 
an  inward  working  of  the  Spiiit  convincing  them  of  sin  and  of  their 
unhappy  condition,  that  they  feel  an  arrow  in  their  souls :  but  some 
cannot  endure  such  a  particular  discovery,  and  therefore  they  oppose 
it  in  an  angry  manner,  and  so  "  resist  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Acts  vii. 
51.  Others  are  exceedingly  grieved,  that  they  are  so  miserable, 
but  the  work  is  not  perfected,  it  is  only  a  sea-sick  qualm,  which  soon 
ceaseth  :  they  either  reform  a  little,  and  depend  thereon,  without 
«yer  partaking  of  the  true  life  of  regeneration  and  of  faith,  or  they 


414  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

uiveit  their,  distress  by  amusemcnls,  oi*  by  necessary  business  ;  or- 
continuing  careless  and  not  bting  able  to  get  rid  cf  their  distress, 
they  diamiss  their  concern,  and  neglect  their  salvation,  and  oo  not 
slnve  any  more  to  be  saved.u  Yea,  many,  when  the  Holy  Spiiit  con- 
vincclh  thenx;,.  will,  look  upon  it  to  be  a  weakness  of  fuith,  and  an 
assault  of  the  devil,  which  they  ought  to  resist ;  and  if  tliey  cannot 
get  rid  of  their  concern, 'and  complain  of  it  to  an  unskiifiil  person, 
who  is  liot  acq^uainied  with  the  work  of  grace^  such  an  one  will  some- 
limes  iniorm  Uieni,  that  it  is  nothing'^  but  a  distemper  of  their  brain, 
lyhicii  they  muot  endeavour  to  remove.  And  thus  are  these  unhappy 
pei  sons  kept  back  from  Christ,  the  only  Saviour. 

4.  1  here  are  also  some,  who  are  exceedingly  concerned  whether 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  vviuch  they  perceive  in  themselves,  be 
indeed  the  saving  woik  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  arxording  to  the  word 
of  Cod.  They  would  not  willingly  deceive  themselves  in  this  mai- 
ler, and  therefore  they  examine  them.sclves  repeatedly,  and  ask  per- 
sons of  understanding  hov/  they  ought  to  conduct  with  themselves  in. 
this  respect,  so  that  they  may  not  be  finally  deceived,  arid  what  are 
the  true  evidences  of  the  Spirit  of  grace. 

We  inform  tliese  (a)  that  this  concern,  serious  examination,  and 
restless  desire  of  the  Spirit  of  grace,  is  a  sure  evidi^nce.  that  they 
are  truly  partakers  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  causeLh 
persons  to  "  search,"  in  this  manner,  "  all  things,  yea,  the  deep 
things  of  GoJ/'  and  particularly,  whether  that  '^  be  re'ealed  to  them, 
which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  and  which  hath  never  en- 
tered into  the  heart  of  man,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  12. 
How  much  soever  temporary  believers  may  have  of  the  Spirit,  never- 
theless, they  will  not  suspect  themselves  so  much,  they  never  labour 
with  themselves,  but  only  with  their  undtrs-tandings,  that  they  may 
apprehend  spiritual  things,  may  instruct  others  in  a  masterly  man- 
ner, and  may  imagine  that  they  partake  of  the  Spirit  of  salvation, 
(b)  The  Spirit  of  grace  humbles  a  person,  and  renders  him  lowly  ;' 
for  he  discovers  to  him  the  abominable  nature  of  his  sins^  so  t!iat 
he  is  ashamed  of  Iiimself,  detests  and  humbles  himself  on  account  of 
them;  the  Spirit  causeth  him,  not  only  when  he  is  first  convinced* 
but  also  daily,  to  bev/ail  liis  inio^uity,  to  mourn  and  lament  over  it. 
This  we  see,  Zech.  xii.  10.  The  ten^porary  believer  neglects  this, 
he  thinks  that  his  sins  arc  forgiven  him.  (c)  The  Spirit  of  grace 
imports  a  knowledge  of  himself,  by  which  the  believer  knows  from 
experience  the  working  of  tiie  Spirit;  he  sees  that  it  is  the  Spirit 
who  hum!)les  him,  stirs  uj)  his  desires  to  Christ,  detaches  him  from, 
that  which  is  visible  and  sinful,  and  works  in  him  a  delight  to  do  the 


 S 

\vili  of  the  Lord.     He  saith  with  the  spouse  ;  *'  It  is  the  voice  of  my 
Beloved,"  Song  ii.  8.     Can  he  not  venture,  through  an  unbelieving 
mistrustfulness,  to  think  that  ihe  Spirit  of  grace  influenctth  him,  he 
nevertheless  knows  how  he  would  have  it ;    when  another  exhibits 
the  true  nature  of  the  spuituai  work  of  grace,  he  thinks,  yea,  this  is 
it,  and  his  desire  goes  out  after  it,  to  possess  it  in  the  same  manner.. 
But  the  temporary  believer  doth  not  know  this:  doth  he  even,  know 
what  the  word  saith,  the  Spirit  hath  not  however  revealed  himself  to 
him  by  the  word  :    "  The  Spirit  of  truth,  the  world  cannot  receive" 
saith  the  Saviour, ''  because  it  seeth  him  not ;  neither  knoweth  hirn  ; 
but  ye  know  him,  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you,'* 
John  xiv.  17.     See  also  1  Cor.  ii.  14,  15,  16.  (d)  The  Spirit  of  grace 
unites  the  believer  to  Christ,  he  discovers  him  to  the  soul,   so  that 
she  desires  him,  surrenders  herself  to  him,  and  receives  him  ;.  for  **  the 
Spirit   of  truth   testifieih  of    Jesus,"    John  xv.  26.     "  The    Spirit 
strengthens  him  with  might  in  the  inner  man,  that  Christ  may  dwell 
by  faith  in  his  heart,"  Eph.  iii.  16,  17.     Others  remain  out  of  Christ-, 
ind  attend  only  to  certain  outward  duties,    (e)  The  Holy  Spirit  also- 
sanctifies  the  soul,  renders  her  averse  from  sin,  causes  her  to  fight 
against  it,  that   she  may   be  deUvered  from  it,  and  may  live  only  to 
God,  according  to  the  Spirit :  others  think  that  they  are  great  profi- 
cients in  holiness,  when  they  only  abstain  from  gross  iniquities,  though 
their  whole  heart  be  filled  wiih   the  things  of  the  earth.     This  evi- 
ilence  Paul  gives  us,  Rom.  viii.  5.     *•  They   that  are  after  the  flesh 
do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh  ;    but  they  that  are  after  the  Spirit, 
the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  (f)  The  Spirit  accompanies  his  word.     See 
this,  Isaiah  lix.  21.     Acts  x.  44.  xvi.  14.     Because  the  Spirit  influ- 
enceth  the  soul  by  ;he  word,  therefore  the  bchever  hath   so  great  a 
desire  to  it,  so  great  a  delight  in  it,  and  love  to  it :  but  others  excite 
certain  emotions  in  themselves  without  the  word,  by  certain  exertions, 
and  compel  themselves  to  believe  that  these  are  the  works  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;    or  they  content  themselves  with  the  word,  althougli 
their  souls  remain  cold  and  immovable,  and  without  spirit. 

Ye  may  now  see  whether  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  grace  or 
not;  and  have  ye  not  received  that  Spirit,  be  concerned,  and  be  de- 
sirous to  receive  the  Spirit,  pray  to  God  that  he  would  give  him  to 
you  :  for  "  the  heavenly  Father  giveth  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that 
ask  him,"  Luke  xi.  13.  Remain  under  a  serious  ministration  of 
the  Spirit,  even  the  word  ;  for  "  the  Holy  Ghost  falls  on  them  who 
hear  the  word,"  Acts  x.  44. 

But  do  ye  truly  and  savingly  partake  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  take 
heed  to  conduct  properly  toward  him  ;  and  therefore, 


416  FAITH  IN  GOD  THE  HOLY  GHOST. 

1.  *'  Grieve  not  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  whom  ye  are  sealed  unto  the 
day  of  redemption,"  Eph.  iv.  30.  Will  ye  know  how  we  grieve 
the  Spirit  ?  We  do  this,  (a)  by  not  obeying  his  commands,  motions, 
convictions,  and  excitations,  but  resisting  him  in  these  respects ; 
therefore  it  is  said,  Isaiah  Ixiii.  10,  "  But  they  rebelled  and  vexed 
his  Hoiy  spirit :  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and  he 
fought  against  them."  (b)  By  an  unbelieving  suspicion,  and  a  fret- 
ful discontent  with  the  leading  of  the  Hoiy  Spirit.  Concerning  this 
Eliphaz  asked  Job,  "  Are  the  consolations  of  God  small  with  thee  ? 
is  there  any  secret  thin^  with  thee  ?  Why  doth  thine  heart  carry 
thee  away  ?  and  what  do  thine  eyes  wink  at,  that  thou  turnest  thy 
Spirit  against  God,  and  lettest  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth  ?" 
Job  XV.  1 1, 12,  13.  (c)  By  scandalous  sins.  David  was  oblic^ed,  on 
account  of  such  sins,  to  pray  that  *'  God  would  not  take  his  bpirit 
from  him,  but  lestore  to  him  the  joy  of  his  salvation,"  Psalm  li.  11, 
12.  (d)  By  "  quenching  the  Spirit,"  from  which  the  apostle  dehort- 
eth  I  Thess.  v.  1  9.  This  we  do  often  in  ourselves  by  a  defect  of 
zealj  in  others  by  suspecting  and  opposing  their  gifts  and  graces : 
we  do  it  also  when  we  use  our  liberty  to  excess,  so  that  we  oflend 
those  who  are  weak  ;  for  "  thus  we  sin  against  the  brethren,  and 
wounding  their  weak  conscience,  we  sin  against  Christ,"  1  Cor.  viii. 
12.  (e)  By  envying  the  grace  and  gifts  of  others,  by  which  discon- 
tentment arises  on  both  sides,  and  the  Spirit  being  grieved  in  this 
manner,  departs  ;  therefore  James  asks,  *'  Do  ye  think  that  the 
scripture  saith  in  vain.  Doth  the  Spirit  who  dwelleth  in  us,  delight 
in  envy  ?"*  James  iv.  5.  This  ought  not  so  to  be,  my  brethreiif 
"  but  follow  after  charity,  and  covet  spiritual  gifts." 

2.  Cherish  and  stir  up  in  yourselves  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
by  a  constant  attention  to  the  inbreathings  of  the  Spirit,  by  following 
them,  depending:  on  them,  making  use  of  spiritual  means,  and  con- 
verging with  spiritual  persons.  Thus  Paul  admonished  his  Timothy, 
to  *•  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  was  in  him,"  2  Tim.  i.  6. 

Walk  and  conduct  in  all  things  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  *'  If  we  live 
by  the  Npirit,  let  us  also  walk  by  the  Spirit."!  saith  Paul,  Gal.  v.  25. 
Permit  me  to  declare  briefly,  how  v/e  walk  by  the  Spirit.  We  do 
this  (a)  when  we  walk  according  to  the  rule  or  v/ord  of  the  Spirit, 
Gal.  vi.  16  (b)  When  we  employ  ourselves  with  spiritual  things,  Eph. 
v.  18,  19.  Rom.  viii.  5.  (c)  When  we  act  from  tiic  spiritual  princi- 
ple of  liie,  1  Tim.  i.  5.  JNIatt.  xii.  35.  Psalm  xlv.  2.  (d)  When 
we  regulate  ourselves  by  spiritual  ends  in  our  aciions,  i  Cor.  x.  31. 
(e)  When  we  do  all  things  by  the  influence  of  the  Lord's  Spirit,  and 

•  This  is  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 

t  We  have  rer.devsd  this  passage  accovdinj  (o  tlic  Datch  translation. 


XX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  53.  4\7 

not  by  our  own  might  and  power,  Zech.  iv  6.  (f)  And  also  when 
we  conduct  ourselves  circumspectly,  and  courageously  through  ihe 
Holy  pirii,  and  thus  "  walk  in  the  fear  cf  the  Lord,  and  in  ihe  com- 
fort of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Acts  ix.  31. 

Thus  yc  will  have  the  clearest  evidences  that  ye  are  truly  partakers 
of  Christ  and  all  his  benefits  ;  your  souls  will  be  filled  with  the  com- 
fort of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  yea,  the  Spirit  will  abide  with  you  for  ever, 
and  your  state  will  remain  immovable  through  the  Almiu;hty  Spirit, 
until  he  pronounce  you  blessed  in  death,  and  quickeii  your  bodies  in 
the  blessed  resurrection ;  for  "  we  ourselves,  who  have  the  first 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  even  we  ourselves,  groan  within  ourselves,  wait- 
ing for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our  body,"  saith  Paul, 
Rom.  viii.  23,    Amen. 


^ 
4  is  ) 


THE 


CHURCH  OF  GOD, 


AND   HER 


BENEFITS  IN  THIS  LIFE. 


XXI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


1  Cor.  i.  2.  Unto  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them 
that  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,  with  all 
that  in  every  place  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
both  theirs  and  ours.