Q,  54.  What  believest  thou  concermng  ^^  the  holij  catholic  chuich'* 
of  Christ  ? 

A.  That  the  Son  of  God,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
world,  gathers,  defends,  and  preserves  to  himself  by  his  Spirit  and 
word,  5ut  of  the  whole  human  race,  a  church  chosen  to  everlasting 
life,  agreeing  in  true  faith  ;  and  that  I  am,  and  for  ever  shall  remain 
a  living  member  thereof.  j 

Q.  55,    What  do  you  understand  by  «  the  com?rMmon  of  the  saints  ?"     J 

A.  First,  that  all  and  every  one  who  believes,  being  members  of 
Christ,  are  in  common,  partakers  of  him,  and  of  all  his  riches  and 


XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—46.  /tlS 

i^ifts  :  secondly,  that  every  one  mii-st  know  it  to  be  his  duty  readily 
and  cheertully  to  employ  his  tjifts,  for  t'ic  advanta^ie  inid  s^dvation 
of  other  membi;rs. 

Q.  56.  JVhat  bcUevest  thou  concerning  "  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ?" 
A.  That  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  wdl  no  more 
reznembcr  ray  sins,  and  my  corrupt  nature,  against  wiiich  I  have  to 
strugi^ie  all  my  hfe  long  ;  but  will  graciously  impute  to  nie  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ,  that  I  may  never  be  condenaned  before  the  tri- 
bunal of  God. 

X  RULY  God  is  good  to  Israel,"  saith  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  1. 
<»  The  Lord  is  indeed  good  to  all ;  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over 
all  his  works,"  Psalm  cxlv.  9.  Yea,  there  is  no  creature,  whether 
rational,  or  irrational,  animate,  or  inarjmate,  that  doth  not  exhibit 
many  evidences  of  the  divine  goodness.  "  He  is  kind  also  to  the 
unthankful  and  to  the  evil."  LuJke  vi.  35.  But  God  is  good  particu- 
larly to  Israel  from  a  hearty  and  fatherly  love,  "  giving"  himself 
"  his  Son,  and  ail  things  with  him"  to  Israel,  Rom.  viii.  32.  The 
Lord  promised  once  with  respect  to  Solomon's  temple,  1  Kings  ix. 
3.  "  Mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually."  But 
this  is  especially  true  v/ith  respect  to  Israel,  his  spiritual  temple  ; 
for  God  doth  set  his  heart  upon  Isra*;!  with  a  special  affection  ;  he 
bestows  himself  wholly  upon  them  for  an  inheritance,  and  a  suffi- 
cient possession  :  "  Israel  is  that  happy  people,  whose  God  is  the 
Lord,  and  whom  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  mheritance,'*  Psalm 
xxxiii.  12.  Yea,  the  whole  divine  Trinity  is  engaged  in  showing 
favour  to  Israel ;  the  Father  elected  them,  the  Son  redeemed  them, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  sanctifies  ihem  ;  and  therefore  the  believing 
Israelites  are  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  na- 
tion, a  peculiar  people,"  I  Peter  ii.  9.  They  are  "  the  church  of  God, 
sanctified  in  Chiist  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,"  as  Paul  saith  in  our 
text ;  and  herewith  agrees  the  description,  which  the  instructor  gives 
of  the  church,  upon  vvhich  God  besto  vs  such  precious  favours,  both 
in  this  life,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come. 

Having  seen  thus  far  the  lovingkindness  of  the  three  Persons  in. 
the  divine  essence,  and  that  each  person  contributes  his  share  to  the 
salvr.tion  of  the  sinner,  it  behooves  us  now  to  srow  you  who  are  the 
Israel,  the  church  of  God,  to  v/hich  he  shows  all  his  saving  kindness- 
It  appears  that  three  particulars  are  exhibited  to  us  here : 
I.  The  faith  of  Chrit.lians  concerning  the  church,  Q.  14. 
XL  Concerning  the  ccnimunioD  of  saints,  Q.  55o 


420    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

III.  Concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sins, -Q.  56. 
].  With  respect  to  the  faith  of  Christians  concerning  the  church 
we  -will  inquire  1.  What  the  church  is,  2.  How  we  believe  this 
church. 

1 .  In  order  that  we  may  learn  what  the  church  is,  we  must  know 
that  the  word  church  is  properly  a  Greek  word,  and  that  it  signifies 
the  Lord's,  as  this  word  is  used  of  the  Lord's  supper,  and  the  Lord's, 
day,    1  Cor.  xi.  20,  Rev.  i.  10.     And  this  word  was  also  used  thus 
by  the  Christians  of  old  to  denote  the  houses  of  worship,  which  they 
set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord  ;  but  when  we  now  make  use 
of  the  word  church,  we  understand  by  it  not  only  the  ordinary  houses 
of  worship,  but  particularly  the  congregation  of  the  Lord.     This  is 
called  by  the   Hebiew^  gneda/i,  Jer.  xxx,  20,  and  kahal.     The  first 
word  is  sometimes  translated  by  the  Greeks  "  Synagogue,"  as  we 
see  in  the  septuagint,  Joshua  xxii.  16,  which  word  iscomrftonly  used 
by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  to  denote  the  Jewish  houses  of 
worship,   which  they  had   besides  the  temple ;  and  sometimes  also 
the  assembhcs  of  Christians,   who  were  of  Jewish  extraction,  as  we 
may  see,  Heb   x.  25   James  ii.  2.  But  the  Hebrews  most  commonly 
used  the  word  kahal^  as  the  Greeks  did  the  word  ekklesia,  by  which  they 
translate  that  Hebrew  word>as  v;e  may  see,  Psalm  xxii.  22,  25,  which 
word,  derived  from  e/c,  and  kaleo^   signifieth  an  assembly  of  men  call- 
ed from  among  others,  and  together.     And   so  this  word  is  used  of 
the  church  and  congregation  of  the  Lord,  which  is  called  and  gath- 
ered together  oy  his  word  and  Spirit,  Matt.  xvi.  18,  either  with  re- 
spect to  her  internal  state  ;  and   so  believers  only  are  called  "  the 
church,   which   God  hath    purchased  with  his  blood,"  Acts  xx.  28, 
Eph.  V.  25,   26,  or  with  respect  to  her  external  state,  in  the  publick 
administration  of  the  word  and  sacraments,  to  which  hypocrites  also 
join  themselves.     This,  considered  by  itself,   and  without  respect  lo 
the  leaders,  is  sometimes  called  "  the  church  of  the  living  God," 
1  Tim.  iii.  15,  as  tlie  leaders  also,  exclusively  of  the  common  mem- 
bers, are  sometimes  called  the  church.   Matt,  xviii.  17,  "Tell  it  to 
the  church."     Tliis  word  is  moreover   used  to  denote  the  body  of 
believers,  in  this  or  that  place ;  so  the  apostles  wrote  their  epistles 
to  particular  churches,  as  John  to  the  seven  churches  of  Asia,   Rev. 
i»  11.     It  is  also  used  to  der^Jte  the  catholic  (or  universal)  church  of 
all  times,  nations,  and  places,  of  which  the  particular  churches  are 
particular  members.     "  God  gave  him,"  namely  Christ,  "  to  be  the 
head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  and  the  fulness 
of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all,"  Eph.  i.  22,  23.     And  in  this  sense  the 
church  is  spoken  of  in  the  creed,  and  in  this  Lord's  day.     And  thus 


THIS  LIFE.        —56.      421 

tliis  church  is  also  called  fianeguris^  "  the  general  assembly,"  Heb* 
xii.  23,  a  word  which  was  used  to  denote  the  body  of  men,  who 
came  together  to  the  pubiick  shows.  And  'ruly  the  most  glorious 
publick  show  is  exhibited  in  the  church  :  '^  By  the  church  is  r.vdde 
known  to  the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places  the  muni-- 
fold  wisdom  of  God,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose,  which  he  pur- 
posed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,"  Eph.  iii.  10,  lU  See  also,  vrs. 
18,  19. 

Having  explained  thus  previously  the  word  church,  we  will  con- 
sider more  particularly,  A.  The  nature  of  the  church.  B.  The  epi- 
thets of  it,  holy,  catholic,  and  Christian,  C  The  different  situations 
of  it,  and  D,  the  manner  in  which  it  becomes  a  church,  which  the 
instructor  explains  in  tlie  fifty  fourth  question. 

A.  To  the  nature  of  the  church  pertains,  that  it  is  the  body  of 
Christ,  consisting  of  members,  head,  and  the  union  of  both. 

1.  The  members  of  the  church  are  not  the  angels  j  for  although 
"  Christ  hath  subjected  the  angels  to  himself,"  as  Peter  speaks,  I 
Peter  iii,  22,  and  though  believers  "  are  come  to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,"  Heb.  xii.  22,  and  they  are  '•  fellow  servants"  of 
the  preachers  of  the  word,  Rev.  xxii.  9,  and  "  are  sent  forth  to  min- 
ister for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,"  Heb.  i.  13,  neverthe- 
less the  privileges  and  benefits  of  the  church  belong  not  to  them. 
On  this  account  also  the  reprobates,  who  join  themselves  in  an  out- 
v/ard  manner  to  the  church,  are  not  true  members  of  the  church, 
which  the  Papists  nevertheless  imagine,  because  they  will  have  that 
outward  multitudes  and  splendour  are  marks  of  the  true  church,  and 
that  the  Pope  of  Home  is  the  publick  head  of  the  church.  Repro- 
bates, who  are  outwardly  in  the  church,  are  not  in  it  as  wheat,  but 
as  "  chaft',  which  shall  be  burned  wit'i  unquenchable  fire,"  Matt,  iii, 
12,  as  "  evil  fishes,  which  must  be  castaway,"  IMatt.  xiii.  48,  as 
"vessels  of  dishonour."  2  Tim.  ii.  20.  They  may  join  themselves 
to  tne  church,  but  they  are  not  of  the  church,  1  John  ii  19.  "For 
he  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly,  neither  is  that  circumcision, 
which  is  outv/ard  in  the  flesh  ;  but  he  is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inward- 
ly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in 
the  letter,  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God,"  Rom.  ii.  2S,  29. 
See  also  v/hat  is  said,  i^om  ix.  6,  7,  8  And  therefore  ^\cc\.  believers 
only  are  true  members  of  the  church  :  "  Those  who  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  in  the  text ; 
"  the  called,  the  chosen  and  faithful,  who  are  with  Christ,"  Rev.  xvii. 
14,  of  whom  Christ  is  "  the  Head  and  Saviour,"  to  whom  they  "  are 
subject  J  those  v/hom  Christ   loveth,   for  whom   he  gave   himself. 


422    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HEP  BENEFITS  IN 

whom  he  sanctifieth,  and  presents  to  himself  as  glorioui,"  Eph.  v. 
23 — 27,  for  the  church  is  '^  his  body;"  Eph.  i.  23,  "  his  bride/'  Rev» 
xxii.  17, ''  his  sheep,"  x.  26—28. 

2.  Christ  alone  is  the  head  of  the  church  ;  foF  his  headship  over 
the  churcii  is  lepresenied  as  the  same  with  his  sittiog  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  ana  wiiii  his  universal  lordshipover  all  things,  as  Paul 
explains  it,  Eph.  i.  20 — 23.  And  it  therefore  denotes  (a)  his  dcmm- 
ion  over  the  church,  he  is  therefore  called  the  Lord,  Shepherd,  King', 
Bridegroom  and  Husband  of  the  church,  (b)  his  gh-^ry  and  excel- 
lency above  all  that  is  glorious,  (c)  his  union  with  the  true  members^ 
and  also  (d)  his  influencing  of  ail  his  members. 

Therefore  Peter  is  not  the  visible  head  ol"  the  church,  much  less 
is  the  Pops  of  Rome  ;  for  (a)  then  there  would  be  two  heads  of  one 
body,  and  the  chvrch  would  thus  be  a  monster,  (b)  Such  a  glory  be- 
longs not  to  any  creature,  neither  is  any  creature  capable  of  exert- 
ing it ;  for  it  cannot  influence  the  members,  (c)  Peter  refused  every 
kind  of  headship,  and  forbade  others  to  assume  it.  See  this  I  Peter 
V.  1,  2,  3.  (d)  If  it  were  even  ao,  that  Peter  v,^as  the  head  of  the 
church,  it  would  not  follow  therefrom  that  the  Pope  is  the  head,  for 
he  hath  neither  tlie  doctrine,  nor  the  life  of  Peter,  (e)  The  Pope  by 
arrogating  this  honour  to  himself,  evincelh  that  he  is  ''the  man  of 
sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above 
all  thai  is  called  God,  and  that  is  worshipped  j  so  that  he  as  God 
sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God,"  2 
Thess.  ii.  3,  4. 

Thcrelbre  Christ  aIo:-ie  is  the  head  of  his  church  ;  and  he  was  the 
head  under  the  Old  Testament,  as  he  is  now  under  the  New  ;  for 
the  church  glcritd  in  him  as  such,  Isaiah  xxxiii-  22,  "  The  Lord  is 
our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will 
s:vYe  us,"  Therefore  it  must  appear  ey.ceedingly  strange  to  us,  that 
certain  persons  v/ill  have,  that  the  church  of  the  Old  Testament  v/as 
in  bondage  under  the  elders,  the  priests  and  prophets,  as  other  Lords, 
associates  of  Christ,  Gods  on  earth,  and  Gods  so  called.  What  is 
thiii  but  saying  that  there  were  many  heads  of  the  church  under  the 
Did  Testament,  contrary  to  its  nature.  * 

*  By  these  persons  the  author  understands  the  Coeccians,  a  party  more  es- 
pecially in  the  Refnrnfd  churches  of  Holland,  Switzerland  and  Germany, 
£o  called  from  their  founder  John  Coceeius,  a  native  of  Bremen,  and  profes- 
sor of  thc-ojogy  in  the  university  of  Leyden,  a  njan  of  eminent  piety,  but  of 
a  luxuriant  fancy.  They  entertained  several  singular  opinions  in  llieology, 
but  did  nut  deviate  from  the  btandarda  of  the  RefonreJ  church. 


THIS  LIFE.        XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        423 

3.  To  the  nature  of  the  church  pertains  yl?.a  tjic  union  of  the 
members  >vith  the  Head,  and  in  the  Head  with  one  another ;  but  as 
this  constitutes  the  nature  of  the  comniunion  of  saints,  v.-e  will  defer 
speakiiVii'  of  this  matter,  until  we  treat  of  thcvc  privilege. 

B.  This  church  is  called  ^»  a  holy,  catholic,  Christian"  church. 
The  church  is  (a)  "a  holy"  clujrcb  ;  for  '<  she  is  washtd,  and  sanc- 
titied  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  c.nd  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.  11.  she  is  separated  from  the  world,  dedicated  to  God,  aad 
lives  holily  according  to  the  will  of  God ;  and  the  Saviour  "  gave 
iiimself,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to 
himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeaious  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  (b) 
The  church  is  also  "  catholic,"  or  universal.  This  applies  not  to 
the  church  of  Rome,  as  though  it  were  her  peculiar  privilege,  and 
thus  a  title  of  honour,  and  an  evidence  that  the  true  church  is 
to  be  found  with  the  Papists  ;  for  Roman  Catholic  is  as  great  a  con- 
tradiction as  particular  universal;  the  church  of  Saidis  "  had  the 
name  that  she  lived,  and  she  was  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  I.  In  the  church 
of  Philadelphia  there  wtre  <••  t/iose  who  said  that  they  were  Jews, 
and  were  not,  but  lied,"  Rev.  iii.  9.  Thus  also  the  Romish  church 
saith  that  she  is  catholic,  or  universal,  but  she  lies  ;  for  she  hath 
apostatized  from  the  doctrine  of  the  uuiversal  church,  and  is  become 
antichristian,  as  may  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  Romish 
church  with  the  word  ol  God  :  b\it  the  church  is  ca'led  catholic,  or 
universal,  because  it  comprehendeth  all  the  believers  of  all  limes 
and  placfts  ;  hath  one  universal  doctrine  in  all  times  and  places,  and 
partakes  of  all  the  graces  and  privilej^es  of  all  the  true  members  : 
"  Thete  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  one  hope,  one  Lord,  one  faith, 
one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  h11,  who  is  above  ail,  and  through 
all,  and  m  all,"  Eph.  iv.  4,  5,  6.  But  the  church  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament is  especially  universal,  because  it  is  not,  like  tlie  Old  Testa- 
ment church,  hmited  to  one  nation  and  country,  but  is  redeemed  to 
God  by  Christ  with  his  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people,  and  nation,"  Rev.  v.  9.  This  church;  called  and  gathered 
from  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  named  "  the  general  assembly,"  Heb. 
xii.  22.  Therefore  she  is  also  surnamed  (c)  Christian,  after  Christ 
her  Head,  as  hath  been  shown  more  particularly  upon  the  thirty- 
second  question. 

C.  This  church  may  be  considered  in  different  situations,  and  in- 
deed as  (a)  militant  and  triumphant.  The  church  militant  is  here 
on  earth,  and  hath  many,  exceedingly  mi'j,hty,  crafty,  and  unwearied 
enemies  ;  the  devil,  the  world*  and  her  own  flesh  ;  but  she  will  over- 
come them,  and  triump!\  in  heaven.     That  great  champion  Paul, 


424    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

having  respect  lo  this,    said,   "  I  have   fought  a  good  fight,    I  have 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept   the  faith  ;    henceforth  there  is  laid 
up  ior  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous 
Judge  shall  give  me  in  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  to  all  them 
also  that  love  his  appearing,"  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  (b)  The  church  mili- 
tant is  invisible  and  visible.     The  church  is  invisible,  with  respect  to 
her  true  members,  whose  inward  grace  of  the  heart  God  alone  in- 
fallibly knoweth  :  '»  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,"  2  Tim. 
ii.  19.  See  also  Rom.  ii.  28,  29.  Coll.  iii.  3.     The  church  is  visible, 
with  respect  to  her  pablick  profession,  worship,  and  holy  conversa- 
tion.    And  so  the  church  is  called  "  the  light  of  the  world,  a  city 
«n  a  hill,  which  cannot  be  hid,"  Matt.  v.  14.  (c)  This  visible  church 
is  sometimes   manifest,  when  she  enjoys  great  glory  and  prosperity 
in  the  world,  and  is  not  persecuted  ;  when  "  kings  are  her  nursing 
fathers,    and  queens  her  nursing  mothers,"  Isaiah  xlix.  23.  See  this 
also,  Rev.  xi.  15.     But  the  church  is  also  sometimes  hidden,  when 
she  is  compelled,  on  account  of  the  general  prevalence  of  errours  in 
doctrine  and  ptactice,  and  on  account  of  grievous  persecutions,  to 
conceal  herself,  and  "  flee  into  the  wilderness,"  Rev.  xiu  6,  so  that 
even  a  prophet,  like  Elijah,   thinks  "  that  he  only  is  left,"  although 
the  Lord  God  "  reserves  seven  thousand  besides,  a  remnant  according 
to  the  election  of  grace,"  who  are  not  carried  away  with  the  flood  of 
seductions,   as  we  may   see,    1  Kings  xix.  14,    18,  Rom.  xi.  1 — 5. 
Therefore  it  is  no  mark  of  the  true  church,  that  she  enjoys  always 
a  great  outward  splendor  in  the  world,  as  the  Papists  fancy ;  this  is 
rather  a  mark  of  the  whore  of  Babylon,  ,*'  who  saith  in  her  heart,  I 
sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrov/,"  Rev.  xviii. 
7.     When  we  read  so  frequently  in  the  Old  Testament  concerning 
the  splendor  of  the  New  Testament  church,  this  doth  not  indicate 
that  she  should  always  possess  such  glory,  but  we  must  understand 
it  sometimes  also  of  her  inward  and  spiritual  state  ;  therefore  none 
Heeds  to  a-ik  us,  where  our  church  was  before  the  time  of  Luther  and 
Calvin,    since,   according  to  the  prophecy,   she  was  constrained  to 
"  flee  into  the  wilderness  for  a  thousand,  two  hundred  and  threescore 
days,"  Rev.  xii.  5.  (d)  The  church  is  also  considered  as  representa- 
tive, being   the  leaders,   who  represent  the  whole  church,  and  are 
therefore  called  the   church  itself.   Matt,  xviii.   17,  and  also  "the 
presbytery,"    I  Tim   iv.  14-     The  church  is  also  called  the  repre- 
sent^;d,  which  is  the  body  of  believers,  who  are  represented  by  their 
leaders  ;  as  these  are  also  called  the  church.  Acts  xx.  28.   1  Tim. 
iii.    15. 

D.  In  order  that  we  may  learn  what  the  church  is,  we  must  know 


THIS  UFEc         XXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        425 

jxlso  how  she  becomes  a  church.  This  is  explained  to  us  in  a  most 
j^eautiful  manner,  in  the  fifty  fourth  question  ;  in  which  we  are 
taught,  1.  The  essentials,  that  properly  coLstituie  her  a  church,  that 
the  bon  of  God  gathers  and  unites  her  in  the  true  i'aith,  2,  whence  he 
gathers  her,  3,  by  what  means,  4,  according  to  what  plan,  5,  when, 
and  6,  how  he  defends  and  preserves  her. 

That  we  may  not  be  too  diffuse,  we  shall  treat  of  each  particular 
briefly  :  I.  The  essentials,  that  properly  constitute  her  a  church,  are, 
that  '*  the  Son  of  God  gathers  and  unites  her  in  the  true  faith,"  that 
is,  that  ail  the  members  believe  one  doctrine  with  one  mind  ;  one 
member  conceives  not  differently  from  another  of  God,  and  of  his 
revealed  way  of  salvation.  "  Faith  is  common,"  Titus  i.  3,  as  "  sal- 
vation is  also  common,"  Jude  vrs.  3.  Yea,  all  the  members  have 
the  same  mind  of  faith,  "  one  heart,  and  one  way,"  Jer.  xxxii.  39. 
We  have  shown  this  also  in  treating  on  the  epithet  "  catholic."  To 
this  they  are  gathered  :  before  the  Lord  lays  his  hand  on  them, 
they  are  "  the  children  of  God,  scattered  abroad,  but  whom  he  gath- 
ers together,"  John  xi.  52,  as  "  sheep  that  are  not  of  his  fold,  which 
he  brings  in  ;  and  so  they  become  one  fold,  and  one  Shepherd," 
John  X.  16.  And  this  inbrin^ing  and  uniting  constitutes  the  essence 
of  the  church,  which  consists  in  the  communion  of  saints,  whereof 
ave  shall  speak  particularly  hereafter. 

2.  He  gathers  these  "  out  of  the  whole  human  race."  He  doth 
not  gather  the  whole  human  race,  as  the  Socinians  think,  as  though 
God  revealed  a  general  doctrine  of  salvation  to  all  men  ;  or,  as  the 
Remonstrants  fancy,  that  God  gave  a  general  covenant  of  grace,  and 
a  general  sufficient  grace  to  all  men,  and  called  all  men  to  salvation  : 
for  '<  God  suffered  in  times  past  the  Gentiles  to  walk  in  their  own 
ways,"  Acts  xiv.  16.  Psalm  cxlvii.  19,  20.  And  in  this  manner  doth 
the  Lord  God  still  deal  with  many  nations,  withholding  his  word  and 
Spirit  from  them.  See  Acts  xvi.  6,  7.  But  the  Son  of  God  gathers 
his  church  out  of  the  whole  human  race  ;  he  singles  out  this  and 
that  people,  this  and  that  person,  and  brings  them  to  communion 
with  himself  and  with  his  church,  while  he  leaves  others  to  them- 
selves. Under  the  Old  Testament  he  confined  himself  to  the  pos- 
terity of  Seth,  Shem  and  Abraham  ;  but  under  the  New  Testament 
*'  he  hath  visited  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  his 
name,"  Acts  xv.  14.     See  also  John  x.  16.  xi.  52.  Rev.  v.  9. 

3,  The  Son  of  God  doth  this  «  by  his  word  and  by  his  Spirit." 
He  sends  his  ministers  into  the  world  lo  call  sinners  unto  him,  and 
to  invite  them  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  come  to  fellowship  with 
him  and  with  his  people  ;  but  the  voice  of  his  ministers  is  not  pow- 

SK 


42Q    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

erRil  enou:^h  to  subdue  the  stubborn  hearts  of  shiners  to  the  Lord  f 
Jesus  nevertheless  wilhng  lo  iiave  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance, 
and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession,  exerts  his 
power,  that  he  may  render  them  obedient  to  his  word  :  Mark  relates 
of  the  apostles,  chap  xvi.  20,  ''  that  they  went  forth  and  preached 
every  where,  the  Lord  working  with  them,"  \nd  thus  he  makes 
*'  his  anovvs  sharp,"  and  wounds  with  them  *'  the  hearts  of  his  ene- 
mies, bo  that  people  fall  under  him,"  Psalm  xlv.  5.  *•  The  rebell- 
ious dwell  with  him,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  18.  And  so  "  he  rules  in  the 
midst  of  his  enemies,  making  them  a  willing  people,"  Psalm  ex.  2, 
3,  by  which  they  also  become  inclined  to  "  join  themselves  to  the 
Lord  and  to  his  people,"  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  4,  5  Ivi.  3—7.  And  so  his 
calling  is  effectual  and  irresistible,  since  he  doth  not  employ  his  word 
onlv,  but  also  his  Spirit,  '*  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power,'" 
Eph.  i.  18,  19,  20.  The  Lord  doth  not  however  influence  all  men 
in  this  manner,  but  he  bestows  on  them  only  a  common  operation 
of  his  Spirit,  through  which  some  submit  themselves  feignedly,  and 
others  resist  the  Spirit,  like  the  Jews,  Acts  vii.  51.  And  when  this 
is  rightly  considered,  we  see  how  the  calling  is  external  and  internal, 
resistible  and  irresistible;  and  so  the  opinion  of  the  Remonstrants, 
that  this  calling  can  be  resisted  by  freewill,  and  their  objections 
against  our  doctrine,  fall  to  the  ground. 

4.  As  God  worketh  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own 
will,  therefore  the  Son  of  God  also  gathers  his  church  according  to 
the  plan  of  eternal  election  :  "  The  church  was  chosen  for  h:m  to 
everlasting  life,"  that  he  might  gather  her  :  for  the  Father  who  chose 
the  church,  gave  her  to  the  Son  in  the  eternal  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, that  he  might  reveal  his  Father's  name  to  her,  which  he  hath 
also  done,  as  he  himself  testifieth,  John  xvii.  6.  This  ejection  is 
God's  eternal  counsel,  by  which  he  decreed,  according  to  his  free 
good  pleasure,  to  favour  certain  persons  with  grace,  and  to  save  them 
by  Christ,  to  ihe  glory  of  his  wisdom,  goodness  and  power.  He  hath 
certainly  not  chosen  all  men,  upon  condition  of  their  faith  and  con- 
version, as  the  Remonstrants  imagine  ;  for  this  is  not  an  election, 
"Which  selects  some  from  among  others,  but  a  receiving ;  it  is  cer- 
tainly not  an  election  of  persons,  but  only  of  conditions  and  qualifica- 
tions. Eternal  election  respects  particular  persons,  who  are  singled 
out  as  it  were  byname,  in  preference  toothers,  Rev  ix.  13,  and 
"  written  in  the  book  of  life,"  Luke  x.  20.  Philip  iv.  3,  which  elected 
persons  are  not  the  most,  but  the  fewest  in  number;  yea,  fewer  than 
even  those  who  are  called.  Matt.  xx.  16.  xxii  14.  Luke  xii.  32. 
These  are  elected  in  preference  to  others,  not  on  account  of  their 


THIS  LlFEo         XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.         427 

foreseen  faith  and  good  works,  as  the  Remonstrants  and  Jesuits  pre- 
tend ;  for  then  man  himself  would  "  make  himself  differ  from 
others,"  contrary  to  1  Cor.  iv.  7,  but  they  are  elected,  because  it 
was  the  free  good  pleasure  of  God  to  elect  them  ;  for  "  he  predes- 
tinated us  to  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  ac- 
cording to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will,"  Eph.  i.  5.  Election  is  not 
from,  but  unto  faith  and  good  works,  which  flow  from  election,  as 
Paul  showeth,  Rom.  viii.  29,  30.  Eph.  i.  4.  And  it  is  for  this  reason, 
that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  the  elect  to  the  church,  for  "  as  many 
as  are  erdained  to  eternal  life,  beHeve,"  Acts  xiii.  48. 

5.  Since  now  it  hath  not  pleased  God  to  bring  all  men  into  the 
world  at  the  same  time,  but  at  different  periods,  therefore  Christ  also 
gathers  his  church  "  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world." 
If  time  would  permit,  we  would  show  how  the  Son  of  God  gathered 
a  church  for  himseif  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs  before,  during^, 
and  after  the  time  of  Moses,  before  he  came  in  the  flesh ;  how  he 
did  this,  while  he  was  on  earth  ;  how  after  his  ascension  into  heaven, 
from  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  what  he  will  yet  do,  m  order  to  gather 
his  church.  Every  person  who  attends  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
knows  that  Christ  is  the  Head,  the  Lord,  and  King  of  his  church, 
iinows  also  that  he  hath  never  been  without  members,  and  subjects, 
and  that  he  never  will,  nor  can  be  without  them. 

6.  This  is  still  more  evident,  because  he  protects  his  church.  The 
church  is  frequently  and  most  grievously  attacked  and  assaulted  by 
her  secret  and  open  enemies  ;  but  the  Son  -■  f  God  "  defends"  hep. 
See  this  Psalm  cxxxix.  1 — 4.  Rev.  xii.  1  — 11.  He  is  "  a  wall  of 
lire  to  her ;  he  who  toucheth  her  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye," 
Zech.  ii  5,  8.  And  he  also  keeps  and  *'  preserves"  her  so,  that  she 
will  remain  steadfast  until  the  end,  and  will  be  saved.  She  is  the 
bush  which  burns,  but  is  not  consumed  :  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of 
her ;  she  shall  not  be  moved,"  Psalm  xlvi.  5.  ^'  The  purpose  of  God 
according  to  election  shall  stand,"  Rom  ix.  1 1.  The  satisfaction  of 
the  Son  cannot  be  frustrated  :  "  God  forgives  the  sins"  of  those  who 
are  redeemed  by  Christ,  "  that  iie  may  declare  his  righteousness," 
Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  "  The  Spirit  abideth  for  ever"  with  the  church, 
John  xiv.  16.  "The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repen- 
tance," Rom.  xi.  29.  "  Jesus  loveth  his  own  unto  the  end,"  John 
xiii.  1 ,  "He  gives  his  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never 
perish,"  &c.  John  x.  28,  29.  "  The  covenant  of  grace,  all  the 
promises  of  that  covenant,  and  the  foundations  of  the  church  are 
immoveable,  Isaiah  liv.  8,  9,  10»  Matt,  xvi,  18.  Do  any  fall  awayj 
they  are  only  certain  particular  njembers,  or  churches  of  this  or  that 


42J>    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

place,  who  evidence  thus,  that  they  never  were  true  members  of  the 
oil  arch,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  1  John  ii  19,  but  no  true  member 
of  the  cl.ui'ch  will  ever  fall  away, 'much  less  the  universal  church. 

2.  Having  thus  se^^n  what  t'se  church  is,  we  must  further  know 
how  we  are  to  believe  a  holy,  catholic,  Christian  church.  We  do 
not  beheve  in  the  church,  which  consists  of  men,  like  the  Romanists, 
who  trust  m  tlie  church  unreservedly  for  their  salvation  :  "  For  thus 
sauh  :he  Lord,  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh 
flesh  his  arm,"  John  xvii.  5.  But  we  believe  the  church,  which  we 
do,  (a)  when  we  assure  ourselves,  that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  such 
a  church  for  himself  on  earth,  and  when  we  earnestly  desire  to  join 
ourselves  to  her.  So  the  spouse  acted,  when  she  said.  Song  i.  7. 
"  Tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  where  thou  feedest,  where 
thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon  ;  for  why  should  I  be  as  one 
that  lurneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  companions  ?"  (b)  When  we 
have  a  ceicain  knov/iedge  of  the  true  church  according  to  the  word 
of  God,  so  that  we  abide  not  in  the  true  church  from  prejudice,  or 
opinion,  but  from  a  discovery,  that  she  hath  the  approbation  of  the 
word  of  God.  Such  was  the  faith  of  Paul,  when  he  said,  Philip,  iii. 
3,  »'  ror  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God  in  the  spirit, 
^nd  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh." 
(c)  Wlien  we  btlieve  upon  good  and  incontrovertible  grounds,  agreea- 
bly to  the  word  of  God,  that  we  ourselves  are  living  members  of  the 
church,  and  will  always  remain  such.  This  was  the  faith  of  David, 
whew  he  said.  Psalm  xxiii.  5.  « I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  ever." 

II.  We  had  so  much  to  say  on  our  first  head  ;  we  proceed  now 
to  the  second,  to  wit,  the  communion  of  saints.  Many  ancient  creeds 
did  not  contain  this  article,  because  the  communion  of  saints  consti- 
tutes the  essence  of  the  church,  and  belongs  thus  to  the  church  her- 
self. But  as  the  communion  is  now  mentioned  distinctly  in  every 
creed,  as  a  benefit  to  the  church,  we  will  also  explain  it,  as  a  distinct 
benefit.  The  Lord  God,  since  he  loves  his  church,  bestows  great 
benefits  upon  her,  and  particularly  these  four,  to  wit,  two  in  this  life, 
the  communion  of  saints,  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  two  after 
this  life,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  life  everlasting.  Of  the 
two  last  the  instructor  speaks  in  the  following  Lord's  day.  The 
first  of  the  benefits,  which  God  bestows  upon  his  church  in  this  life, 
is  the  communion  of  saints. 

Although  the  saints,  to  wit,  the  souls  of  the  blessed  and  the  angels, 
have  a  communion  with  one  another  in  heaven,  and  even  the  saints 
upon  earth  have  also  communion  with  those  in  heaven  ;  for  Paul 


THIS  LIFE.        XXr.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  54—56.      42* 

saith,  Heb.  xii.  22,  23,  that  believers  "  are  come  to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;** 
nevertheless  the  creed  speaks  of  the  saints  upon  earth,  who  are  mem- 
bers  of  the  church  militant ;  who  are  saints,  because  they  are  mem,- 
bers  of  the  holy  church. 

These  saints  have  a  communion  with  Christ,  and  with  one  another. 

1  The  saints  have  a  communion  with  Christ.  We  believe,  as  the 
instructor  explains  it,  "  that  all  and  every  one  who  believes,  being 
members  of  Christ,  are  in  comnjon  partakers  of  him,  and  of  all  hia 
riches  and  gifts."  For  Christ  is  a  publick  person,  the  Head,  the 
Lord,  the  Surety  and  Redeemer  of  his  people,  who  is  whatever  he  is 
for  his  people :  which  communion  imports,  (a)  the  strictest  tinion  cf 
believers  with  Christ,  l«ke  that  of  a  building  with  its  foundation  and 
corner  stone :  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church,"  saith  he, 
Matt.  xvi.  18  ;  like  the  union  of  inhabitants  with  their  house  ;  they 
dwell  in  him,  he  is  an  "  everlasting  habitation"  to  them,  Deut.  xxxiii. 
27,  "  a  sanctuary,"  Isaiah  viii.  14,  and  "  he  dwells  in  them,"  Eph. 
iii.  17.  They  are  "  the  house"  of  the  Son  of  God,  Heb  iii.  6.  Yea, 
they  are  united  to  him,  as  the  graff  is  to  the  stock,  John  xv.  4,  5, 
Rom.  xi.  17,  the  wife  to  the  husband,  Eph  v.  32.  Isaic^h  liv.  5,  the 
members  to  the  head.  Coll.  i.  18,  and  the  body  to  the  garments, 
Gal.  iii.  17.  (b)  This  communion  consisteth  also  in  that  special  pro- 
perty which  believers  have  in  Christ,  and  in  all  his  benefits.  He 
hath  appropriated  them  and  all  theirs  to  himself;  "  Ye  know,"  said 
Paul,  2  Cor.  viii.  9,  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though 
he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his 
poverty  might  become  rich."  And  thus  he,  and  all  that  is  his,  be- 
comes their  property.  The  believer  saith,  "  My  beloved  is  mine, 
and  I  am  his,"  Song  ii.  16.  Believers  being  "  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
he  is  therefore  made  to  them  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness?  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,"  1  Cor.  i.  30. 

2.  By  this  communion  with  Christ  believers  have  also  com.munion 
with  one  another  :  "  Ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,"  saith  the  apos- 
tle, Gal.  iii.  28.  This  communion  of  the  saints  consists  also,  (a)  in 
that  most  intimate  union,  whereby  "they  are  all  of  one  heart,  and 
one  soul,"  Acts  iv.  32.  They  all  possess  the  same  gnice,  Jer.  xxxii. 
39.  "  They  are  likeminded,  having  the  same  love,  being  of  one 
accord,  of  one  mind,"  Philip,  ii.  2.  Yea,  "  they  speak  the  snme 
thing,"  I  Cor.  i.  10.  They  have  all  the  same  religion,  the  same 
property,  the  same  enemies  and  friends ;  therefore  they  cleave  to 
one  another,  as  Ruth  cleaved  to  Naomi,  when  she  said,  "  Wliither 
thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  and  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge :  thy 


430    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

people  shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God,"  Ruth  i.  16.   The 
world  knows  nothing  of  this,  and  therefore  wonders  at  it,  "  dares  not 
join   herself  to  these  persons;  but  magnifies  them,"  Acts  v.  13. 
Yea,  the  world,  cannot  oppose   them,  without  first  putting  out  her 
own  eyes.    To  express  this  strict  union  of  the  saints,  they  are  liken- 
ed to  the  compact  stones  of  Solomon's  temple,  1  Peter  ii.  5.     They 
are  like  citizens  of  one  city,  mhabitants  of  one  house,  Eph.  \\.  19, 
table-fellows,  who  ear  of  the  same  bread,  1  Cor.  x.  17,  and  members 
of  one  body, ''being  reconciled   in  one  body."  Eph.  ii.  16.     This 
communion  consists  also,  (b)  m  a  mutual  property,  and  a  consequent 
actual  exercise  of  fellowship  one  v/ith  another,   by  viitue  of  that 
iinion ;  just  as  one  member  of  the  body  hath  a  property  in  the  other 
members,  and  exerciseth   fellows!  ip  with   them.     So  Paul  speaks, 
Eph.  iv.  25.     <*  We  are  members  one  of  another."  Pie  explains  this 
beautifully  by  a  representation  of  that  mutual  service  and  help,  which 
one  member  affords  to  another,   I  Cor.  xii.   14-^27.     And  this  mu- 
tual property  and  exercise  of  fellowship  is  manifested  by  asking  con- 
cerning each   others  welfare,  and  by  a    fellowfeeling  for    each  other 
in  difficullies.  See  Neh.  i.  2 — 10.  Heb.  xiii.  3.     Therefore  ihey  are 
forthwith  ready  to  contribute  whatever  they  can  to  assist  each  other, 
either  by  supporting  dejected  souls  with  good  comfortable  words,  or 
by  communicating  their  goods  to  the  necessitous,  in  which  the  primi^ 
tive  church  of  Jerusalem  greatly  excelled,  although  they  have  not  a 
general  community  of  goods  ;  or  by  doing  every  kind  office  to  each 
other.     Do  they  understand  that  the  saints   prosper,  they  "  rejoice 
witii  them   that  rejoice,   as  they  weep  with  them  who  weep."     See 
all  this,  Rom.  xii.  4 — 10,  13,  14.  15.     Yea,  they  exercise  this  com- 
munion not  only  in  private,  but  also  in  publick,  and  they  show  with 
whom  they  hold.     They  conduct  in  this  manner  with  respect  to  the 
publick  administration  of  the  word  and  sacraments,  1  Cor.  x.  15,  17, 
the  assembling  of  themselves  together,  Heb.  x.  25,  and  their  familiar 
conversation  with  the  saints,   though  they  be  ever  so  mean,   with 
David,  2  Sam.  vi.  20,   21,  22.     He  was  "  a  companion  of  all  them 
who  feared  the  Lord,"  Psalm  cxix.  63. 

III.  We  should  now  proceed  to  our  third  general  head,  to  wit,  the 
faith  of  Christians  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  as  the  second 
benefit,  which  God  bestoweth  upon  his  church  in  this  life  :  but  since 
we  must  treat  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  in  order,  on  the  twenty  third, 
twenty  fourth  and  fifty  first  Lord's  day,  we  will  omit  this  at  present. 


THIS  LIFE.         — 56,      4Si 

APPLICATION. 

In  order  that  we  may  now  improve  all  these  particulars  to  ouB  ad- 
-vantage,  we  will  exhibit  this  church  in  its  lustre.  Let  every  one 
"  walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about  her :  let  him  tr-U  the  towers 
thereof ;  let  him  mark  well  her  bulwarks,  and  consider  her  palaces, 
thatVe  may  tell  it  to  the  generation  following,"  as  we  are  exhorted, 
Psalm  xlviii.  12,  13.  "  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  the  city  of  God,'*" 
Psalm  Ixxxvii.  3.  The  members  of  the  church  are  "the  saints  of 
the  Most  High,  who  si.all  take  the  kingdom,  and  possess  the  king- 
dom for  ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever,"  Dan.  vii.  18.  The  Head  of 
the  church  is  most  precious,  view  him  from  his  head  to  his  feet,  as 
described  with  respect  to  his  wonderful  excellency  by  her  who  knew 
him  best  and  experimentally^  Song  v.  10 — 16.  The  union  and  com- 
munion of  the  church  with  him,  and  of  the  members  with  each  other 
is  inconceivable  :  "  They  are  all  one,  as  the  Father  in  the  bon,  and 
the  Son  in  the  Father  are  one  :  yea,  they  are  one  in  the  Father,  and 
in  the  Son."  See  John  xvii  21.  1  John  i.  3.  The  means  by  which 
they  have  become  a  church  are  indeed  excellent ;  for  they  have  by 
them  become  *'  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  na- 
tion, a  peculiar  people,"  1  Peter  ii.  9.  And  truly  the  state  of  the 
church  is  unchangeable,  she  is  "  like  mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be 
removed,  but  abideth  for  ever,"  Psalm  cxxv.  1.  Who,  when  he 
beholds  her,  must  not  cry  out  with  Moses,  Deut.  xxxiii.  29.  «  Hap- 
py art  thou,  O  Israel ;  who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  people  saved  by  the 
Lord,  the  shield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  excellency  I 
and  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
tread  upon  their  high  places." 

But  what  will  it  avail  us,  that  there  is  such  a  glorious  church,  if 
we  know  not  where  that  church  is  ?  There  are  many  assemblies, 
which  severally  pretend  to  be  the  true  church,  and  there  is  never- 
theless but  one  true  church,  which  God  will  save.  It  is  therefore 
necessary,  that  we  inquire  which  is  the  true  church.  The  Socini- 
ans,  as  if  self-condemned,  will  not  brook  this  ;  but  the  spouse  was 
wiser,  v/hen  she  inquired  of  her  bridegroom  concrning  the  true 
church.  Song  i.  7.  \Ve  must  join  ourselves  to  the  church,  as  it  was 
foretold  of  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  do  this,  Isaiah  ii.  2,  3.  xi. 
10.  Zech.  viii.  23.  Indeed  neither  grace  nor  salvation  are  to  be 
found  out  of  the  true  church  :  "  For  there  the  Lord  commandeth 
the  blessing,  even  life  for  evermore,"  Psalm  cxxxiii.  3.  "  But  the 
rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  land/'  Psalm  Ixviii,  6. 


4.Z2    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

That  we  may  have  a  propsr  knowledge  of  the  true  church,  God 
fcath  proposed  a  ceriam  mark,  or  marks  in  his  word,  by.  which  wc  - 
may  know  her.  I  will  not  busy  myself  with  the  marks  of  others, 
and  certainly  not  v.iih  tlie  fifteen  or  sixteen  marks  of  the  Romanists, 
wnich  are  either  derived  from  circumstances,  or  suit  our  church,  and. 
not  the  Romish,  and  those  which  agree  to  the  Romish  are  heathen 
and  Antichristian  marks.  But  we  will  attend  to  that  mark,  which 
the  word  of  God,  the  only  rule  of  the  church,  affords  us.  And  this 
mark  is  the  agreement  of  the  doctrine  with  the  word  of  God ;  for 
"*he  wiiO  is  of  God  heareth  the  words  of  God,"  John  viii.  47.  "  Christ's 
sheep  hear  his  voice,"  John  x.  26,  27.  The  church  is  built  on  the 
v.ord  of  God,  Eph.  ii.  19,  20.  "  We  must  try  the  spirits  thereby, 
whether  they  are  of  God,"  1  John  iv.  1,  2,  3.  *'  If  any  man  bring 
not  this  doctrine  with  him,  we  must  not  receive  him  into  our  house," 
2  John  vrs.  9,  10. 

If  we  now  compare  the  doctrine  of  our  church  with  the  word  of 
God,  we  will  perceive  with  the  utmost  evidence,  that  she  agreeth 
perfectly  v/ith  the  word  of  God,  and  that  therefore  the  Reformed  * 
alone  are  the  true  church  ;  which  appears  still  more,  since  we  sub- 
mit our  doctrine  to  the  word  of  God  only,  and  in  conformity  thereto, 
humble  the  sinner  to  the  lowest  degree,  comfort,  sanctify  him,  and 
glorify  the  free  grace  of  God.  We  know  indeed  that  all  other 
churches,  so  called,  do  also  claim  .this  mark,  as  well  as  we,  but  we 
will  find  them  to  be  liars  ;  for  they  do  all  reproach  the  word  of  God, 
and  wrest  it,  either  according  to  natural  reason,  as  all  Pelagians  and 
Semipelagians  do,  or  according  to  enthusiasm,  as  the  Quakers  do, 
or  according  to  lordship,  with  the  Papists.  How  then  can  they  boast, 
that  they  have  the  pure  doctrine,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
£0  that  they  are  the  true  church  ?  yea,  they  decline  this  mark,  and 
will  either  have  no  marks  at  all,  or  others.  Therefore  it  is  evident, 
that  the  true  church  is  found  with  us. 

But,  hearers,  it  will  not  suffice  either  you  or  mc,  to  know  that  we 
are  in  the  true  church  ;  for  we  may  notwithstanding  be  still  chaff, 
and  vessels  of  dishonour.  They  who  believe  one  holy,  catholic, 
Christian  church,  say  also  that  they  are  living  members  of  the  church, 
and  will  always  remain  such  :  is  this  so  with  you  in  truth  ?  do  ye 

.^ay,  yea  ?  have   ye  then  also  true  and  living  evidences  ?  do  ye  ask, 

*  V>y  the  Reformed  our  author  understands  here  the  Protestants,  to  wit,  the 
Lutherans  and  Calvinists,  as  distinguished  into  several  rational  churches,  or 
ecclesiastic?!  communities,  as  the  church  of  Holland,  of  England,  of  Scot- 
land, of  Sweden,  Denmark,  Sec  and  also  such  other  denominations  a»  agree 
■with  these  in  funddmcntals.     See  the  Author's  preface, 


THIS  LIFE.        XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        435 

what  are  the  marks  of  a  living  member  ?  we  will  exhibit  them  to 
^ou  according  to  the  word  of  God. 

1.  He  who  is  a  living  member  is  such  not  only  outwardly  by  pro^ 
fession,  but  also  inwardly,  being  changed  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit 
«f  God,  to  ssrve  God  inwardly^  truly  and  heariily  in  the  Spirit  :  he 
is  not  satisfied  with  his  outward  service,  unless  it  be  accompanied 
with  a  heart  that  hath  been  clianged,  that  is  alive,  warm  and  active  ; 
therefore  he  attends  to  the  motions  of  his  heart,  bemourns  his  heart- 
iessness,  and  excites  his  soul,  and  cries  to  the  Lord,  "  Unite  my 
heart  to  fear  thy  name,"  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11.  "  Incline  my  heart  to 
thy  testimonies,"  Psalm  cxix.  36.  That  this  is  a  true  mark  appears 
from  Rom.  ii.  28,  29.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly, 
neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh  ;  but  he 
is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  the  spirit,  &c. 

2.  Such  a  person  is  united  to  the  Head,  even  to  Christ,  truly,  and 
hath  communion  with  him,  hath  received  him  by  faith  truly,  heartily, 
and  in  opposition  to  all  besides,  and  affords  him  a  dwelling  in  his 
heart.  We  see  this  John  i.  12.  Eph.  iii,  17.  See  this  treated  more 
largely  in  our  discourse  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day. 

3.  Such  a  person  agrees  also  with  the  true  members  of  the  church ; 
he  knows,  he  loves  them,  and  is  familiar  with  them,  and  regards 
their  profit  and  disprofit  as  his  own,  because  he  sees  the  life,  the 
love  and  image  of  God  in  them  :  and  the  more  these  things  shine 
forth  in  them,  the  more  he  lovts  them  ;  yea,  even  when  they  oppose 
and  smite  him  :  "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,"  said  that  living 
member  of  the  church.  Psalm  cxli.  5,  "  it  shall  be  a  kindness ;  and 
let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  an  excellent  oil  which  shall  not  break 
xny  head  :  for  yet  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  calamities."  As 
he  also  exhibits  this  as  a  mark  of  a  citizen  of  Zion,  when  he  saith. 
Psalm  XV.  4.  "  In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned  ;  but  he 
honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord." 

See  now  whether  ye  are  living  members.  Alas !  how  many 
"  have  the  name  that  they  live,  while  they  are  dead,"  as  many  in  the 
church  of  Sardis  were.  Rev.  iii.  1,     For, 

1 .  Many  are  misshapen  members,  who  are  monsters  in  the  church, 
and  deform  her  exceedingly  :  is  it  not  thus  with  you,  who  are  igno- 
rant, irreligious,  violators  of  God's  name  and  day — revengeful,  lewd, 
unjust,  gluttons,  drunkards,  vain,  worldly  and  earthly  minded.  The 
Lord  may  indeed  complain  now,  as  he  did  formcily,  Jer.  v.  26^ 
*^  Among  my  people  arc  found  wicked  men." 

i-^  How  many  hgrt.f*^]   members  are  there  in   this  body   of  the 

3  L 


^^4     THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

church  !  Alas,  that  they  were  cutoff!  no  profit  accrues  from  them 
to  the  church,  but  only  disprofit ;  certainly  ye  arc  hurtful  to  the 
brethren,  who  hanker  so  after  new  and  unheard  of  things,  which 
-lire  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  and  utter  those  things  :  ye  also 
who  oppose  ihe  com  amnion  of  saints,  and  strict  and  precise  godli- 
ness, who  betray  the  church  and  her  privileges  to  unfit  persons, 
and  who  abandon  and  tramj^le  upon  them,  he  who  hath  eyes  may 
see  that  now  also  '•  truth  failcth  "  with  many,  aud  that  "  he  who  de- 
parieth  from  evil  maketh  himself  a  prey,"  Isaiah  lix.  15. 

3.  There  are  some,  who  only  seem  to  be  living  members.  They 
are  devout,  and  have  some  knowledge  of  the  mysieiies  of  God,  they 
are  outwardly  moral,  yea,  they  associate  with  the  godly  ;  but  their 
heart  within  is  dead  and  rotten,  and  in  secret  they  are  as  vile  as  the 
■vilest,  I.S  the  Saviour  describes  the  Pharisees,  saying  also  of  them, 
that  they  "  cannot  escape  the  damnation  of  hell,"  Matt,  xxiii.  25, 
27,  S3,  It  is  true,  they  conduct  so  that  they  escape  censure  ;  but 
are  not  ye  they  who  will  not  be  delected  ?  Ye  hate  them  who  detect 
you  :  when  ye  can  only  find  an  opportunity,  and  will  not  expose 
yourselves  too  much,  ye  will  reproach  them,  and  will  strive  to  ren- 
der them  universally  odious.  Conceal  yourselves  as  much  and  as 
long  as  ye  please,  God  will  oae  day  hereafter  detect  you,  as  he  dis- 
covered Judas. 

4.  Others  are  rotten  members,  who  have  fallen  from  the  truth, 
and  godliness  which  they  once  professed.  How  zealous  were  some 
for  the  truth  and  godliness  I  they  could  relish  these  things,  they  asso- 
ciated with  the  strictest  of  the  pious,  who  were  pleased  with  them, 
and  loved  them  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  novelty  was  over,  they  abandoned 
all,  and  fell  away  ;  if  they  do  not  join  themselves  to  some  apostate 
church,  they  abandon  themselves  to  the  world,  which,  like  Demas^ 
they  begin  to  love  again,  2  Tim.  iv.  10.  See  these  also  detected, 
2  Peter  ii.  20 — 22.  Ye  who  are  thus,  may  be  acknowledged  mem- 
bers, but  ye  are  not  such  in  reality,  any  more  than  those  who  "  said 
they  were  Jews,  but  were  found  liars,"  Rev.  iii.  9.  Flatter  your- 
selves as  much  as  ye  please,  ye  have  nevertheless  "  no  portion,  nor 
right,  nor  memorial  in  Jerusalem,"  Neh.  iii.  20.  Ye  shall  neither 
in  this  life,  nor  after  this  life  "  stand  in  the  congregation  of  the 
rigliteous,"   Psalm  i.  5. 

Doth  this  render  you  concemed,ahd  do  ye  desire  to  become  living 
members  of  the  church,  and  to  know  how  ye  may  become  such  ? 
Uehold,  this  is  the  way  : 

1.  Endeavour  to  become  assured  that  our  church  is  the  true 
church,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  that  it  may  be  your  steadfast 


THIS  LIFE,      XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        435 

pel  suasion,  that  with  us  alone  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  is  proposed. 
Let  it  not  suffice  you,  that  your  parents  have  told  you  tl  is,  and  that 
ye  were  educated  to  it ;  but  endea\our  to  obtain  a  proof  of  it  your 
ownselves  from  the  word  of  God  ;  and  do  therefore  like  *'  the  nobl^ 
Bereans,  who  received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of  miud,  and 
searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  those  things  were  so,"  Acts 
xvii.  11. 

2.  Separate  yourselves  from  your  former  companions,  as  far  as 
they  have  tended  to  mislead  you,  or  may  yet  do  it  :  Wherefore 
come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and 
daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almitjhty,"  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18. 

3.  Join  yourselves  to  the  saints,  who  are  upon  the  earth,  in  order 
to  seek  their  portion,  and  to  be  directed  and  conducted  by  them  to  the 
privileges  of  the  church,  as  it  was  foretold,  that  "  ten  men  out  of  alj 
the  languages  of  the  nations  should  take  hold,  should  even  take  hold 
of  the  skirl  of  him  who  was  a  Jew,  saying.  We  will  go  with  you  ; 
for  we  have  heard  tliat  God  is  with  you,"  Zech.  viii.  23 

4.  Remain  not  by  any  means  estranged  from  the  Head  of  the 
church,  but  endeavour  to  be  united  to  him,  to  receive  him,  and  to 
join  yourselves  unto  him  ;  for  "  the  Lord  will  give  unto  tlie  stran- 
gers who  join  tliemselves  unto  him,  within  his  house,  and  within  his 
walls,  a  name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters,"  Sec.  Isaiah 
Ivi.  3—7. 

5.  But  ye,  v;ho  are  true  and  living  members  of  the  church  of 
God,  maintain  diligently  the  communion  of  the  saints  :  it  is  cer- 
tainly your  privilege,  and  the  glory  of  the  church  ;  therefore  endeav- 
our to  converse  familiarly  with  the  Head  of  the  church,  and  like 
«  Enoch,  to  walk  with  God,"  Gen.  v.  22,  24.  "  Your  life  must  be 
liidden  wiih  Christ  in  God."  Coll.  iii.  3,  nevertheless  in  aiming  at 
this,  do  not  wholly  separate  yourselves  from  the  saints,  to  which  we 
easily  decline,  that  we  may  converse  and  be  satisfied  in  our  solitary 
life  with  the  Lord  alone.  No,  the  Lord  hath  called  you  for  your 
happiness  to  his  church,  and  lo  the  communion  of  saints  :  the  first 
Christians  continued  in  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  and  in  fellow- 
ship, and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers,"  Acts  ii.  42.  But 
we  must  carefully  beware  that  our  conversation  with  the  saints  do 
not  degenerate  into  a  mere  civil  intercourse ;  we  must  converse  one 
way  vnth  men  as  citizens,  and  another  way,  as  saints,  whose  citi- 
zenship is  in  heaven  ;  but  avoid  particulaily  strife  and  imperious- 
ness,  let  others  see  in  you  that  y«  are  of  one  heart,  lowly,  "  like- 
minded,  having  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind. 


436  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS,  Sec, 

Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain  glory,  but  in  lowliness 
of  mind,  let  each  esteem  others  better  than  themselves.  Look  not 
every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of 
others."  This  Paul  required,  Philip,  ii,  2,  3,  4.  Doth  the  church 
appear  to  you  to  be  exceedingly  corrupt,  do  not  separate  yourselves 
from  her,  as  long  as  the  truth  and  the  godly  are  in  her,  and  as  long 
as  the  Lord  hath  not  separated  himself  from  her.  Of  this  we  wili 
speak  further  on  the  eighty  second  question. 

6.  Let  every  one  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  church,  according 
to  liis  condition  and  ability.  Let  magistrates,  if  they  will  be  living 
members  of  the  church,  manifest  themselves  nursing  fathers  of  her, 
cherishing  her,  as  it  was  foretold  of  them,  Isaiah  xlix.  23.  But  ye, 
who  have  been  set  as  watchmen  upon  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  "  be 
diligent  to  know  the  state  of  your  flocks,  look  well  to  your  herds,'* 
Prov.  xxvii,  23.  See  what  that  great  -apostle  enjoins  upon  you, 
Acts  XX.  28.  Therefore  "  ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep 
not  silence,  and  give  him  no  rest,  till  he  estabUsh,  and  till  he  make 
Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth,"  Isaiah  Ixii,  6,  7.  Yea,  "every 
one  should  pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  Psalm  cxxii.  6,  "  should 
warn  them  who  are  unruly,  should  comfort  the  feeble  minded,  sup- 
port the  weak,  be  patient  toward  all  men,"  1  Thess.  v.  14.  Yea, 
even  women  and  maidens,  though  they  ought  to  be  silent  in  the 
church,  should  do  what  in  them  lies,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  for 
the  good  of  the  church  ;  as  "  the  daughters  of  Shallum  repaired  the 
walls  of  Jerusalem,"  Neh.  iii.  12.  See  also  Philip,  iv.  3. 

7.  Manifest  yourselves,  ye  living  members  of  the  church,  visible 
by  a  bright  and  holy  conversation,  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and 
harmless,  the  sons  of  God,  without  rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crook- 
ed and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the 
world,"  Phihp.  ii.  15.  Your  Head  also  requires  this  of  you.  Matt. 
V.    16, 

8.  If  it  should  happen,  that  the  church  should  be  compelled  to 
flee,  upon  account  of  grievous  tribulation,  do  ye  then  always  flee 
whither  the  saints  fiee :  "  Go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the 
^ock,  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents,"  Song  i.  8. 

Thus  ye  v.  ill  not  only  be  happy  here,  but  will  also  be  once  trans- 
lated into  the  church  triumphant,  since  ye  will  say  in  due  time  with 
Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished 
my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for 
me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord  the  righteous  Judge 
phall  give  me  at  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  thenj 
ttlso  that  love  his  appearing."  Amen, 


.^^,.f.,,    -  ,  w*^^,.      ^  437  ) 


THE 


BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH 


AFTER  THIS  LIFE. 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  xvii.  15.    As  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness, 
I  will  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with  thy  likeness.

Q.  56.  JVhat  bcUevest  thou  concerning  "  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ?" 
A.  That  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  satisfaction,  wdl  no  more 
reznembcr  ray  sins,  and  my  corrupt  nature,  against  wiiich  I  have  to 
strugi^ie  all  my  hfe  long  ;  but  will  graciously  impute  to  nie  the  right- 
eousness of  Christ,  that  I  may  never  be  condenaned  before  the  tri- 
bunal of  God. 

X  RULY  God  is  good  to  Israel,"  saith  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  1. 
<»  The  Lord  is  indeed  good  to  all ;  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over 
all  his  works,"  Psalm  cxlv.  9.  Yea,  there  is  no  creature,  whether 
rational,  or  irrational,  animate,  or  inarjmate,  that  doth  not  exhibit 
many  evidences  of  the  divine  goodness.  "  He  is  kind  also  to  the 
unthankful  and  to  the  evil."  LuJke  vi.  35.  But  God  is  good  particu- 
larly to  Israel  from  a  hearty  and  fatherly  love,  "  giving"  himself 
"  his  Son,  and  ail  things  with  him"  to  Israel,  Rom.  viii.  32.  The 
Lord  promised  once  with  respect  to  Solomon's  temple,  1  Kings  ix. 
3.  "  Mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually."  But 
this  is  especially  true  v/ith  respect  to  Israel,  his  spiritual  temple  ; 
for  God  doth  set  his  heart  upon  Isra*;!  with  a  special  affection  ;  he 
bestows  himself  wholly  upon  them  for  an  inheritance,  and  a  suffi- 
cient possession  :  "  Israel  is  that  happy  people,  whose  God  is  the 
Lord,  and  whom  he  hath  chosen  for  his  own  mheritance,'*  Psalm 
xxxiii.  12.  Yea,  the  whole  divine  Trinity  is  engaged  in  showing 
favour  to  Israel ;  the  Father  elected  them,  the  Son  redeemed  them, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  sanctifies  ihem  ;  and  therefore  the  believing 
Israelites  are  "  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy  na- 
tion, a  peculiar  people,"  I  Peter  ii.  9.  They  are  "  the  church  of  God, 
sanctified  in  Chiist  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,"  as  Paul  saith  in  our 
text ;  and  herewith  agrees  the  description,  which  the  instructor  gives 
of  the  church,  upon  vvhich  God  besto  vs  such  precious  favours,  both 
in  this  life,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come. 

Having  seen  thus  far  the  lovingkindness  of  the  three  Persons  in. 
the  divine  essence,  and  that  each  person  contributes  his  share  to  the 
salvr.tion  of  the  sinner,  it  behooves  us  now  to  srow  you  who  are  the 
Israel,  the  church  of  God,  to  v/hich  he  shows  all  his  saving  kindness- 
It  appears  that  three  particulars  are  exhibited  to  us  here : 
I.  The  faith  of  Chrit.lians  concerning  the  church,  Q.  14. 
XL  Concerning  the  ccnimunioD  of  saints,  Q.  55o 


420    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

III.  Concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sins, -Q.  56. 
].  With  respect  to  the  faith  of  Christians  concerning  the  church 
we  -will  inquire  1.  What  the  church  is,  2.  How  we  believe  this 
church. 

1 .  In  order  that  we  may  learn  what  the  church  is,  we  must  know 
that  the  word  church  is  properly  a  Greek  word,  and  that  it  signifies 
the  Lord's,  as  this  word  is  used  of  the  Lord's  supper,  and  the  Lord's, 
day,    1  Cor.  xi.  20,  Rev.  i.  10.     And  this  word  was  also  used  thus 
by  the  Christians  of  old  to  denote  the  houses  of  worship,  which  they 
set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord  ;  but  when  we  now  make  use 
of  the  word  church,  we  understand  by  it  not  only  the  ordinary  houses 
of  worship,  but  particularly  the  congregation  of  the  Lord.     This  is 
called  by  the   Hebiew^  gneda/i,  Jer.  xxx,  20,  and  kahal.     The  first 
word  is  sometimes  translated  by  the  Greeks  "  Synagogue,"  as  we 
see  in  the  septuagint,  Joshua  xxii.  16,  which  word  iscomrftonly  used 
by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  to  denote  the  Jewish  houses  of 
worship,   which  they  had   besides  the  temple ;  and  sometimes  also 
the  assembhcs  of  Christians,   who  were  of  Jewish  extraction,  as  we 
may  see,  Heb   x.  25   James  ii.  2.  But  the  Hebrews  most  commonly 
used  the  word  kahal^  as  the  Greeks  did  the  word  ekklesia,  by  which  they 
translate  that  Hebrew  word>as  v;e  may  see,  Psalm  xxii.  22,  25,  which 
word,  derived  from  e/c,  and  kaleo^   signifieth  an  assembly  of  men  call- 
ed from  among  others,  and  together.     And   so  this  word  is  used  of 
the  church  and  congregation  of  the  Lord,  which  is  called  and  gath- 
ered together  oy  his  word  and  Spirit,  Matt.  xvi.  18,  either  with  re- 
spect to  her  internal  state  ;  and   so  believers  only  are  called  "  the 
church,   which   God  hath    purchased  with  his  blood,"  Acts  xx.  28, 
Eph.  V.  25,   26,  or  with  respect  to  her  external  state,  in  the  publick 
administration  of  the  word  and  sacraments,  to  which  hypocrites  also 
join  themselves.     This,  considered  by  itself,   and  without  respect  lo 
the  leaders,  is  sometimes  called  "  the  church  of  the  living  God," 
1  Tim.  iii.  15,  as  tlie  leaders  also,  exclusively  of  the  common  mem- 
bers, are  sometimes  called  the  church.   Matt,  xviii.  17,  "Tell  it  to 
the  church."     Tliis  word  is  moreover   used  to  denote  the  body  of 
believers,  in  this  or  that  place ;  so  the  apostles  wrote  their  epistles 
to  particular  churches,  as  John  to  the  seven  churches  of  Asia,   Rev. 
i»  11.     It  is  also  used  to  der^Jte  the  catholic  (or  universal)  church  of 
all  times,  nations,  and  places,  of  which  the  particular  churches  are 
particular  members.     "  God  gave  him,"  namely  Christ,  "  to  be  the 
head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is  his  body,  and  the  fulness 
of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all,"  Eph.  i.  22,  23.     And  in  this  sense  the 
church  is  spoken  of  in  the  creed,  and  in  this  Lord's  day.     And  thus 


THIS  LIFE.        —56.      421 

tliis  church  is  also  called  fianeguris^  "  the  general  assembly,"  Heb* 
xii.  23,  a  word  which  was  used  to  denote  the  body  of  men,  who 
came  together  to  the  pubiick  shows.  And  'ruly  the  most  glorious 
publick  show  is  exhibited  in  the  church  :  '^  By  the  church  is  r.vdde 
known  to  the  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places  the  muni-- 
fold  wisdom  of  God,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose,  which  he  pur- 
posed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,"  Eph.  iii.  10,  lU  See  also,  vrs. 
18,  19. 

Having  explained  thus  previously  the  word  church,  we  will  con- 
sider more  particularly,  A.  The  nature  of  the  church.  B.  The  epi- 
thets of  it,  holy,  catholic,  and  Christian,  C  The  different  situations 
of  it,  and  D,  the  manner  in  which  it  becomes  a  church,  which  the 
instructor  explains  in  tlie  fifty  fourth  question. 

A.  To  the  nature  of  the  church  pertains,  that  it  is  the  body  of 
Christ,  consisting  of  members,  head,  and  the  union  of  both. 

1.  The  members  of  the  church  are  not  the  angels  j  for  although 
"  Christ  hath  subjected  the  angels  to  himself,"  as  Peter  speaks,  I 
Peter  iii,  22,  and  though  believers  "  are  come  to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,"  Heb.  xii.  22,  and  they  are  '•  fellow  servants"  of 
the  preachers  of  the  word,  Rev.  xxii.  9,  and  "  are  sent  forth  to  min- 
ister for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,"  Heb.  i.  13,  neverthe- 
less the  privileges  and  benefits  of  the  church  belong  not  to  them. 
On  this  account  also  the  reprobates,  who  join  themselves  in  an  out- 
v/ard  manner  to  the  church,  are  not  true  members  of  the  church, 
which  the  Papists  nevertheless  imagine,  because  they  will  have  that 
outward  multitudes  and  splendour  are  marks  of  the  true  church,  and 
that  the  Pope  of  Home  is  the  publick  head  of  the  church.  Repro- 
bates, who  are  outwardly  in  the  church,  are  not  in  it  as  wheat,  but 
as  "  chaft',  which  shall  be  burned  wit'i  unquenchable  fire,"  Matt,  iii, 
12,  as  "  evil  fishes,  which  must  be  castaway,"  IMatt.  xiii.  48,  as 
"vessels  of  dishonour."  2  Tim.  ii.  20.  They  may  join  themselves 
to  tne  church,  but  they  are  not  of  the  church,  1  John  ii  19.  "For 
he  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly,  neither  is  that  circumcision, 
which  is  outv/ard  in  the  flesh  ;  but  he  is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inward- 
ly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in 
the  letter,  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God,"  Rom.  ii.  2S,  29. 
See  also  v/hat  is  said,  i^om  ix.  6,  7,  8  And  therefore  ^\cc\.  believers 
only  are  true  members  of  the  church  :  "  Those  who  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  in  the  text ; 
"  the  called,  the  chosen  and  faithful,  who  are  with  Christ,"  Rev.  xvii. 
14,  of  whom  Christ  is  "  the  Head  and  Saviour,"  to  whom  they  "  are 
subject  J  those  v/hom  Christ   loveth,   for  whom   he  gave   himself. 


422    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HEP  BENEFITS  IN 

whom  he  sanctifieth,  and  presents  to  himself  as  glorioui,"  Eph.  v. 
23 — 27,  for  the  church  is  '^  his  body;"  Eph.  i.  23,  "  his  bride/'  Rev» 
xxii.  17, ''  his  sheep,"  x.  26—28. 

2.  Christ  alone  is  the  head  of  the  church  ;  foF  his  headship  over 
the  churcii  is  lepresenied  as  the  same  with  his  sittiog  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  ana  wiiii  his  universal  lordshipover  all  things,  as  Paul 
explains  it,  Eph.  i.  20 — 23.  And  it  therefore  denotes  (a)  his  dcmm- 
ion  over  the  church,  he  is  therefore  called  the  Lord,  Shepherd,  King', 
Bridegroom  and  Husband  of  the  church,  (b)  his  gh-^ry  and  excel- 
lency above  all  that  is  glorious,  (c)  his  union  with  the  true  members^ 
and  also  (d)  his  influencing  of  ail  his  members. 

Therefore  Peter  is  not  the  visible  head  ol"  the  church,  much  less 
is  the  Pops  of  Rome  ;  for  (a)  then  there  would  be  two  heads  of  one 
body,  and  the  chvrch  would  thus  be  a  monster,  (b)  Such  a  glory  be- 
longs not  to  any  creature,  neither  is  any  creature  capable  of  exert- 
ing it ;  for  it  cannot  influence  the  members,  (c)  Peter  refused  every 
kind  of  headship,  and  forbade  others  to  assume  it.  See  this  I  Peter 
V.  1,  2,  3.  (d)  If  it  were  even  ao,  that  Peter  v,^as  the  head  of  the 
church,  it  would  not  follow  therefrom  that  the  Pope  is  the  head,  for 
he  hath  neither  tlie  doctrine,  nor  the  life  of  Peter,  (e)  The  Pope  by 
arrogating  this  honour  to  himself,  evincelh  that  he  is  ''the  man  of 
sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above 
all  thai  is  called  God,  and  that  is  worshipped  j  so  that  he  as  God 
sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God,"  2 
Thess.  ii.  3,  4. 

Thcrelbre  Christ  aIo:-ie  is  the  head  of  his  church  ;  and  he  was  the 
head  under  the  Old  Testament,  as  he  is  now  under  the  New  ;  for 
the  church  glcritd  in  him  as  such,  Isaiah  xxxiii-  22,  "  The  Lord  is 
our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will 
s:vYe  us,"  Therefore  it  must  appear  ey.ceedingly  strange  to  us,  that 
certain  persons  v/ill  have,  that  the  church  of  the  Old  Testament  v/as 
in  bondage  under  the  elders,  the  priests  and  prophets,  as  other  Lords, 
associates  of  Christ,  Gods  on  earth,  and  Gods  so  called.  What  is 
thiii  but  saying  that  there  were  many  heads  of  the  church  under  the 
Did  Testament,  contrary  to  its  nature.  * 

*  By  these  persons  the  author  understands  the  Coeccians,  a  party  more  es- 
pecially in  the  Refnrnfd  churches  of  Holland,  Switzerland  and  Germany, 
£o  called  from  their  founder  John  Coceeius,  a  native  of  Bremen,  and  profes- 
sor of  thc-ojogy  in  the  university  of  Leyden,  a  njan  of  eminent  piety,  but  of 
a  luxuriant  fancy.  They  entertained  several  singular  opinions  in  llieology, 
but  did  nut  deviate  from  the  btandarda  of  the  RefonreJ  church. 


THIS  LIFE.        XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        423 

3.  To  the  nature  of  the  church  pertains  yl?.a  tjic  union  of  the 
members  >vith  the  Head,  and  in  the  Head  with  one  another ;  but  as 
this  constitutes  the  nature  of  the  comniunion  of  saints,  v.-e  will  defer 
speakiiVii'  of  this  matter,  until  we  treat  of  thcvc  privilege. 

B.  This  church  is  called  ^»  a  holy,  catholic,  Christian"  church. 
The  church  is  (a)  "a  holy"  clujrcb  ;  for  '<  she  is  washtd,  and  sanc- 
titied  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  c.nd  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.  11.  she  is  separated  from  the  world,  dedicated  to  God,  aad 
lives  holily  according  to  the  will  of  God ;  and  the  Saviour  "  gave 
iiimself,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to 
himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeaious  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  (b) 
The  church  is  also  "  catholic,"  or  universal.  This  applies  not  to 
the  church  of  Rome,  as  though  it  were  her  peculiar  privilege,  and 
thus  a  title  of  honour,  and  an  evidence  that  the  true  church  is 
to  be  found  with  the  Papists  ;  for  Roman  Catholic  is  as  great  a  con- 
tradiction as  particular  universal;  the  church  of  Saidis  "  had  the 
name  that  she  lived,  and  she  was  dead,"  Rev.  iii.  I.  In  the  church 
of  Philadelphia  there  wtre  <••  t/iose  who  said  that  they  were  Jews, 
and  were  not,  but  lied,"  Rev.  iii.  9.  Thus  also  the  Romish  church 
saith  that  she  is  catholic,  or  universal,  but  she  lies  ;  for  she  hath 
apostatized  from  the  doctrine  of  the  uuiversal  church,  and  is  become 
antichristian,  as  may  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  Romish 
church  with  the  word  ol  God  :  b\it  the  church  is  ca'led  catholic,  or 
universal,  because  it  comprehendeth  all  the  believers  of  all  limes 
and  placfts  ;  hath  one  universal  doctrine  in  all  times  and  places,  and 
partakes  of  all  the  graces  and  privilej^es  of  all  the  true  members  : 
"  Thete  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  one  hope,  one  Lord,  one  faith, 
one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father  of  h11,  who  is  above  ail,  and  through 
all,  and  m  all,"  Eph.  iv.  4,  5,  6.  But  the  church  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament is  especially  universal,  because  it  is  not,  like  tlie  Old  Testa- 
ment church,  hmited  to  one  nation  and  country,  but  is  redeemed  to 
God  by  Christ  with  his  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people,  and  nation,"  Rev.  v.  9.  This  church;  called  and  gathered 
from  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  named  "  the  general  assembly,"  Heb. 
xii.  22.  Therefore  she  is  also  surnamed  (c)  Christian,  after  Christ 
her  Head,  as  hath  been  shown  more  particularly  upon  the  thirty- 
second  question. 

C.  This  church  may  be  considered  in  different  situations,  and  in- 
deed as  (a)  militant  and  triumphant.  The  church  militant  is  here 
on  earth,  and  hath  many,  exceedingly  mi'j,hty,  crafty,  and  unwearied 
enemies  ;  the  devil,  the  world*  and  her  own  flesh  ;  but  she  will  over- 
come them,  and  triump!\  in  heaven.     That  great  champion  Paul, 


424    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

having  respect  lo  this,    said,   "  I  have   fought  a  good  fight,    I  have 
finished  my  course,  I  have  kept   the  faith  ;    henceforth  there  is  laid 
up  ior  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous 
Judge  shall  give  me  in  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  to  all  them 
also  that  love  his  appearing,"  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  (b)  The  church  mili- 
tant is  invisible  and  visible.     The  church  is  invisible,  with  respect  to 
her  true  members,  whose  inward  grace  of  the  heart  God  alone  in- 
fallibly knoweth  :  '»  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,"  2  Tim. 
ii.  19.  See  also  Rom.  ii.  28,  29.  Coll.  iii.  3.     The  church  is  visible, 
with  respect  to  her  pablick  profession,  worship,  and  holy  conversa- 
tion.    And  so  the  church  is  called  "  the  light  of  the  world,  a  city 
«n  a  hill,  which  cannot  be  hid,"  Matt.  v.  14.  (c)  This  visible  church 
is  sometimes   manifest,  when  she  enjoys  great  glory  and  prosperity 
in  the  world,  and  is  not  persecuted  ;  when  "  kings  are  her  nursing 
fathers,    and  queens  her  nursing  mothers,"  Isaiah  xlix.  23.  See  this 
also,  Rev.  xi.  15.     But  the  church  is  also  sometimes  hidden,  when 
she  is  compelled,  on  account  of  the  general  prevalence  of  errours  in 
doctrine  and  ptactice,  and  on  account  of  grievous  persecutions,  to 
conceal  herself,  and  "  flee  into  the  wilderness,"  Rev.  xiu  6,  so  that 
even  a  prophet,  like  Elijah,   thinks  "  that  he  only  is  left,"  although 
the  Lord  God  "  reserves  seven  thousand  besides,  a  remnant  according 
to  the  election  of  grace,"  who  are  not  carried  away  with  the  flood  of 
seductions,   as  we  may   see,    1  Kings  xix.  14,    18,  Rom.  xi.  1 — 5. 
Therefore  it  is  no  mark  of  the  true  church,  that  she  enjoys  always 
a  great  outward  splendor  in  the  world,  as  the  Papists  fancy ;  this  is 
rather  a  mark  of  the  whore  of  Babylon,  ,*'  who  saith  in  her  heart,  I 
sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrov/,"  Rev.  xviii. 
7.     When  we  read  so  frequently  in  the  Old  Testament  concerning 
the  splendor  of  the  New  Testament  church,  this  doth  not  indicate 
that  she  should  always  possess  such  glory,  but  we  must  understand 
it  sometimes  also  of  her  inward  and  spiritual  state  ;  therefore  none 
Heeds  to  a-ik  us,  where  our  church  was  before  the  time  of  Luther  and 
Calvin,    since,   according  to  the  prophecy,   she  was  constrained  to 
"  flee  into  the  wilderness  for  a  thousand,  two  hundred  and  threescore 
days,"  Rev.  xii.  5.  (d)  The  church  is  also  considered  as  representa- 
tive, being   the  leaders,   who  represent  the  whole  church,  and  are 
therefore  called  the   church  itself.   Matt,  xviii.   17,  and  also  "the 
presbytery,"    I  Tim   iv.  14-     The  church  is  also  called  the  repre- 
sent^;d,  which  is  the  body  of  believers,  who  are  represented  by  their 
leaders  ;  as  these  are  also  called  the  church.  Acts  xx.  28.   1  Tim. 
iii.    15. 

D.  In  order  that  we  may  learn  what  the  church  is,  we  must  know 


THIS  UFEc         XXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        425 

jxlso  how  she  becomes  a  church.  This  is  explained  to  us  in  a  most 
j^eautiful  manner,  in  the  fifty  fourth  question  ;  in  which  we  are 
taught,  1.  The  essentials,  that  properly  coLstituie  her  a  church,  that 
the  bon  of  God  gathers  and  unites  her  in  the  true  i'aith,  2,  whence  he 
gathers  her,  3,  by  what  means,  4,  according  to  what  plan,  5,  when, 
and  6,  how  he  defends  and  preserves  her. 

That  we  may  not  be  too  diffuse,  we  shall  treat  of  each  particular 
briefly  :  I.  The  essentials,  that  properly  constitute  her  a  church,  are, 
that  '*  the  Son  of  God  gathers  and  unites  her  in  the  true  faith,"  that 
is,  that  ail  the  members  believe  one  doctrine  with  one  mind  ;  one 
member  conceives  not  differently  from  another  of  God,  and  of  his 
revealed  way  of  salvation.  "  Faith  is  common,"  Titus  i.  3,  as  "  sal- 
vation is  also  common,"  Jude  vrs.  3.  Yea,  all  the  members  have 
the  same  mind  of  faith,  "  one  heart,  and  one  way,"  Jer.  xxxii.  39. 
We  have  shown  this  also  in  treating  on  the  epithet  "  catholic."  To 
this  they  are  gathered  :  before  the  Lord  lays  his  hand  on  them, 
they  are  "  the  children  of  God,  scattered  abroad,  but  whom  he  gath- 
ers together,"  John  xi.  52,  as  "  sheep  that  are  not  of  his  fold,  which 
he  brings  in  ;  and  so  they  become  one  fold,  and  one  Shepherd," 
John  X.  16.  And  this  inbrin^ing  and  uniting  constitutes  the  essence 
of  the  church,  which  consists  in  the  communion  of  saints,  whereof 
ave  shall  speak  particularly  hereafter. 

2.  He  gathers  these  "  out  of  the  whole  human  race."  He  doth 
not  gather  the  whole  human  race,  as  the  Socinians  think,  as  though 
God  revealed  a  general  doctrine  of  salvation  to  all  men  ;  or,  as  the 
Remonstrants  fancy,  that  God  gave  a  general  covenant  of  grace,  and 
a  general  sufficient  grace  to  all  men,  and  called  all  men  to  salvation  : 
for  '<  God  suffered  in  times  past  the  Gentiles  to  walk  in  their  own 
ways,"  Acts  xiv.  16.  Psalm  cxlvii.  19,  20.  And  in  this  manner  doth 
the  Lord  God  still  deal  with  many  nations,  withholding  his  word  and 
Spirit  from  them.  See  Acts  xvi.  6,  7.  But  the  Son  of  God  gathers 
his  church  out  of  the  whole  human  race  ;  he  singles  out  this  and 
that  people,  this  and  that  person,  and  brings  them  to  communion 
with  himself  and  with  his  church,  while  he  leaves  others  to  them- 
selves. Under  the  Old  Testament  he  confined  himself  to  the  pos- 
terity of  Seth,  Shem  and  Abraham  ;  but  under  the  New  Testament 
*'  he  hath  visited  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  his 
name,"  Acts  xv.  14.     See  also  John  x.  16.  xi.  52.  Rev.  v.  9. 

3,  The  Son  of  God  doth  this  «  by  his  word  and  by  his  Spirit." 
He  sends  his  ministers  into  the  world  lo  call  sinners  unto  him,  and 
to  invite  them  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  come  to  fellowship  with 
him  and  with  his  people  ;  but  the  voice  of  his  ministers  is  not  pow- 

SK 


42Q    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

erRil  enou:^h  to  subdue  the  stubborn  hearts  of  shiners  to  the  Lord  f 
Jesus  nevertheless  wilhng  lo  iiave  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance, 
and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession,  exerts  his 
power,  that  he  may  render  them  obedient  to  his  word  :  Mark  relates 
of  the  apostles,  chap  xvi.  20,  ''  that  they  went  forth  and  preached 
every  where,  the  Lord  working  with  them,"  \nd  thus  he  makes 
*'  his  anovvs  sharp,"  and  wounds  with  them  *'  the  hearts  of  his  ene- 
mies, bo  that  people  fall  under  him,"  Psalm  xlv.  5.  *•  The  rebell- 
ious dwell  with  him,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  18.  And  so  "  he  rules  in  the 
midst  of  his  enemies,  making  them  a  willing  people,"  Psalm  ex.  2, 
3,  by  which  they  also  become  inclined  to  "  join  themselves  to  the 
Lord  and  to  his  people,"  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  4,  5  Ivi.  3—7.  And  so  his 
calling  is  effectual  and  irresistible,  since  he  doth  not  employ  his  word 
onlv,  but  also  his  Spirit,  '*  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power,'" 
Eph.  i.  18,  19,  20.  The  Lord  doth  not  however  influence  all  men 
in  this  manner,  but  he  bestows  on  them  only  a  common  operation 
of  his  Spirit,  through  which  some  submit  themselves  feignedly,  and 
others  resist  the  Spirit,  like  the  Jews,  Acts  vii.  51.  And  when  this 
is  rightly  considered,  we  see  how  the  calling  is  external  and  internal, 
resistible  and  irresistible;  and  so  the  opinion  of  the  Remonstrants, 
that  this  calling  can  be  resisted  by  freewill,  and  their  objections 
against  our  doctrine,  fall  to  the  ground. 

4.  As  God  worketh  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own 
will,  therefore  the  Son  of  God  also  gathers  his  church  according  to 
the  plan  of  eternal  election  :  "  The  church  was  chosen  for  h:m  to 
everlasting  life,"  that  he  might  gather  her  :  for  the  Father  who  chose 
the  church,  gave  her  to  the  Son  in  the  eternal  covenant  of  redemp- 
tion, that  he  might  reveal  his  Father's  name  to  her,  which  he  hath 
also  done,  as  he  himself  testifieth,  John  xvii.  6.  This  ejection  is 
God's  eternal  counsel,  by  which  he  decreed,  according  to  his  free 
good  pleasure,  to  favour  certain  persons  with  grace,  and  to  save  them 
by  Christ,  to  ihe  glory  of  his  wisdom,  goodness  and  power.  He  hath 
certainly  not  chosen  all  men,  upon  condition  of  their  faith  and  con- 
version, as  the  Remonstrants  imagine  ;  for  this  is  not  an  election, 
"Which  selects  some  from  among  others,  but  a  receiving ;  it  is  cer- 
tainly not  an  election  of  persons,  but  only  of  conditions  and  qualifica- 
tions. Eternal  election  respects  particular  persons,  who  are  singled 
out  as  it  were  byname,  in  preference  toothers,  Rev  ix.  13,  and 
"  written  in  the  book  of  life,"  Luke  x.  20.  Philip  iv.  3,  which  elected 
persons  are  not  the  most,  but  the  fewest  in  number;  yea,  fewer  than 
even  those  who  are  called.  Matt.  xx.  16.  xxii  14.  Luke  xii.  32. 
These  are  elected  in  preference  to  others,  not  on  account  of  their 


THIS  LlFEo         XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.         427 

foreseen  faith  and  good  works,  as  the  Remonstrants  and  Jesuits  pre- 
tend ;  for  then  man  himself  would  "  make  himself  differ  from 
others,"  contrary  to  1  Cor.  iv.  7,  but  they  are  elected,  because  it 
was  the  free  good  pleasure  of  God  to  elect  them  ;  for  "  he  predes- 
tinated us  to  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  ac- 
cording to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will,"  Eph.  i.  5.  Election  is  not 
from,  but  unto  faith  and  good  works,  which  flow  from  election,  as 
Paul  showeth,  Rom.  viii.  29,  30.  Eph.  i.  4.  And  it  is  for  this  reason, 
that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  the  elect  to  the  church,  for  "  as  many 
as  are  erdained  to  eternal  life,  beHeve,"  Acts  xiii.  48. 

5.  Since  now  it  hath  not  pleased  God  to  bring  all  men  into  the 
world  at  the  same  time,  but  at  different  periods,  therefore  Christ  also 
gathers  his  church  "  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world." 
If  time  would  permit,  we  would  show  how  the  Son  of  God  gathered 
a  church  for  himseif  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs  before,  during^, 
and  after  the  time  of  Moses,  before  he  came  in  the  flesh ;  how  he 
did  this,  while  he  was  on  earth  ;  how  after  his  ascension  into  heaven, 
from  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  what  he  will  yet  do,  m  order  to  gather 
his  church.  Every  person  who  attends  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
knows  that  Christ  is  the  Head,  the  Lord,  and  King  of  his  church, 
iinows  also  that  he  hath  never  been  without  members,  and  subjects, 
and  that  he  never  will,  nor  can  be  without  them. 

6.  This  is  still  more  evident,  because  he  protects  his  church.  The 
church  is  frequently  and  most  grievously  attacked  and  assaulted  by 
her  secret  and  open  enemies  ;  but  the  Son  -■  f  God  "  defends"  hep. 
See  this  Psalm  cxxxix.  1 — 4.  Rev.  xii.  1  — 11.  He  is  "  a  wall  of 
lire  to  her ;  he  who  toucheth  her  toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye," 
Zech.  ii  5,  8.  And  he  also  keeps  and  *'  preserves"  her  so,  that  she 
will  remain  steadfast  until  the  end,  and  will  be  saved.  She  is  the 
bush  which  burns,  but  is  not  consumed  :  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of 
her ;  she  shall  not  be  moved,"  Psalm  xlvi.  5.  ^'  The  purpose  of  God 
according  to  election  shall  stand,"  Rom  ix.  1 1.  The  satisfaction  of 
the  Son  cannot  be  frustrated  :  "  God  forgives  the  sins"  of  those  who 
are  redeemed  by  Christ,  "  that  iie  may  declare  his  righteousness," 
Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  "  The  Spirit  abideth  for  ever"  with  the  church, 
John  xiv.  16.  "The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repen- 
tance," Rom.  xi.  29.  "  Jesus  loveth  his  own  unto  the  end,"  John 
xiii.  1 ,  "He  gives  his  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never 
perish,"  &c.  John  x.  28,  29.  "  The  covenant  of  grace,  all  the 
promises  of  that  covenant,  and  the  foundations  of  the  church  are 
immoveable,  Isaiah  liv.  8,  9,  10»  Matt,  xvi,  18.  Do  any  fall  awayj 
they  are  only  certain  particular  njembers,  or  churches  of  this  or  that 


42J>    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

place,  who  evidence  thus,  that  they  never  were  true  members  of  the 
oil  arch,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  1  John  ii  19,  but  no  true  member 
of  the  cl.ui'ch  will  ever  fall  away, 'much  less  the  universal  church. 

2.  Having  thus  se^^n  what  t'se  church  is,  we  must  further  know 
how  we  are  to  believe  a  holy,  catholic,  Christian  church.  We  do 
not  beheve  in  the  church,  which  consists  of  men,  like  the  Romanists, 
who  trust  m  tlie  church  unreservedly  for  their  salvation  :  "  For  thus 
sauh  :he  Lord,  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh 
flesh  his  arm,"  John  xvii.  5.  But  we  believe  the  church,  which  we 
do,  (a)  when  we  assure  ourselves,  that  the  Son  of  God  gathers  such 
a  church  for  himself  on  earth,  and  when  we  earnestly  desire  to  join 
ourselves  to  her.  So  the  spouse  acted,  when  she  said.  Song  i.  7. 
"  Tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  where  thou  feedest,  where 
thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon  ;  for  why  should  I  be  as  one 
that  lurneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  companions  ?"  (b)  When  we 
have  a  ceicain  knov/iedge  of  the  true  church  according  to  the  word 
of  God,  so  that  we  abide  not  in  the  true  church  from  prejudice,  or 
opinion,  but  from  a  discovery,  that  she  hath  the  approbation  of  the 
word  of  God.  Such  was  the  faith  of  Paul,  when  he  said,  Philip,  iii. 
3,  »'  ror  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God  in  the  spirit, 
^nd  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh." 
(c)  Wlien  we  btlieve  upon  good  and  incontrovertible  grounds,  agreea- 
bly to  the  word  of  God,  that  we  ourselves  are  living  members  of  the 
church,  and  will  always  remain  such.  This  was  the  faith  of  David, 
whew  he  said.  Psalm  xxiii.  5.  « I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  ever." 

II.  We  had  so  much  to  say  on  our  first  head  ;  we  proceed  now 
to  the  second,  to  wit,  the  communion  of  saints.  Many  ancient  creeds 
did  not  contain  this  article,  because  the  communion  of  saints  consti- 
tutes the  essence  of  the  church,  and  belongs  thus  to  the  church  her- 
self. But  as  the  communion  is  now  mentioned  distinctly  in  every 
creed,  as  a  benefit  to  the  church,  we  will  also  explain  it,  as  a  distinct 
benefit.  The  Lord  God,  since  he  loves  his  church,  bestows  great 
benefits  upon  her,  and  particularly  these  four,  to  wit,  two  in  this  life, 
the  communion  of  saints,  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  two  after 
this  life,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  life  everlasting.  Of  the 
two  last  the  instructor  speaks  in  the  following  Lord's  day.  The 
first  of  the  benefits,  which  God  bestows  upon  his  church  in  this  life, 
is  the  communion  of  saints. 

Although  the  saints,  to  wit,  the  souls  of  the  blessed  and  the  angels, 
have  a  communion  with  one  another  in  heaven,  and  even  the  saints 
upon  earth  have  also  communion  with  those  in  heaven  ;  for  Paul 


THIS  LIFE.        XXr.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  54—56.      42* 

saith,  Heb.  xii.  22,  23,  that  believers  "  are  come  to  an  innumerable 
company  of  angels,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;** 
nevertheless  the  creed  speaks  of  the  saints  upon  earth,  who  are  mem- 
bers  of  the  church  militant ;  who  are  saints,  because  they  are  mem,- 
bers  of  the  holy  church. 

These  saints  have  a  communion  with  Christ,  and  with  one  another. 

1  The  saints  have  a  communion  with  Christ.  We  believe,  as  the 
instructor  explains  it,  "  that  all  and  every  one  who  believes,  being 
members  of  Christ,  are  in  comnjon  partakers  of  him,  and  of  all  hia 
riches  and  gifts."  For  Christ  is  a  publick  person,  the  Head,  the 
Lord,  the  Surety  and  Redeemer  of  his  people,  who  is  whatever  he  is 
for  his  people :  which  communion  imports,  (a)  the  strictest  tinion  cf 
believers  with  Christ,  l«ke  that  of  a  building  with  its  foundation  and 
corner  stone :  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  church,"  saith  he, 
Matt.  xvi.  18  ;  like  the  union  of  inhabitants  with  their  house  ;  they 
dwell  in  him,  he  is  an  "  everlasting  habitation"  to  them,  Deut.  xxxiii. 
27,  "  a  sanctuary,"  Isaiah  viii.  14,  and  "  he  dwells  in  them,"  Eph. 
iii.  17.  They  are  "  the  house"  of  the  Son  of  God,  Heb  iii.  6.  Yea, 
they  are  united  to  him,  as  the  graff  is  to  the  stock,  John  xv.  4,  5, 
Rom.  xi.  17,  the  wife  to  the  husband,  Eph  v.  32.  Isaic^h  liv.  5,  the 
members  to  the  head.  Coll.  i.  18,  and  the  body  to  the  garments, 
Gal.  iii.  17.  (b)  This  communion  consisteth  also  in  that  special  pro- 
perty which  believers  have  in  Christ,  and  in  all  his  benefits.  He 
hath  appropriated  them  and  all  theirs  to  himself;  "  Ye  know,"  said 
Paul,  2  Cor.  viii.  9,  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though 
he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his 
poverty  might  become  rich."  And  thus  he,  and  all  that  is  his,  be- 
comes their  property.  The  believer  saith,  "  My  beloved  is  mine, 
and  I  am  his,"  Song  ii.  16.  Believers  being  "  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
he  is  therefore  made  to  them  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness?  sancti- 
fication  and  redemption,"  1  Cor.  i.  30. 

2.  By  this  communion  with  Christ  believers  have  also  com.munion 
with  one  another  :  "  Ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,"  saith  the  apos- 
tle, Gal.  iii.  28.  This  communion  of  the  saints  consists  also,  (a)  in 
that  most  intimate  union,  whereby  "they  are  all  of  one  heart,  and 
one  soul,"  Acts  iv.  32.  They  all  possess  the  same  gnice,  Jer.  xxxii. 
39.  "  They  are  likeminded,  having  the  same  love,  being  of  one 
accord,  of  one  mind,"  Philip,  ii.  2.  Yea,  "  they  speak  the  snme 
thing,"  I  Cor.  i.  10.  They  have  all  the  same  religion,  the  same 
property,  the  same  enemies  and  friends ;  therefore  they  cleave  to 
one  another,  as  Ruth  cleaved  to  Naomi,  when  she  said,  "  Wliither 
thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  and  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge :  thy 


430    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

people  shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God,"  Ruth  i.  16.   The 
world  knows  nothing  of  this,  and  therefore  wonders  at  it,  "  dares  not 
join   herself  to  these  persons;  but  magnifies  them,"  Acts  v.  13. 
Yea,  the  world,  cannot  oppose   them,  without  first  putting  out  her 
own  eyes.    To  express  this  strict  union  of  the  saints,  they  are  liken- 
ed to  the  compact  stones  of  Solomon's  temple,  1  Peter  ii.  5.     They 
are  like  citizens  of  one  city,  mhabitants  of  one  house,  Eph.  \\.  19, 
table-fellows,  who  ear  of  the  same  bread,  1  Cor.  x.  17,  and  members 
of  one  body, ''being  reconciled   in  one  body."  Eph.  ii.  16.     This 
communion  consists  also,  (b)  m  a  mutual  property,  and  a  consequent 
actual  exercise  of  fellowship  one  v/ith  another,   by  viitue  of  that 
iinion ;  just  as  one  member  of  the  body  hath  a  property  in  the  other 
members,  and  exerciseth   fellows!  ip  with   them.     So  Paul  speaks, 
Eph.  iv.  25.     <*  We  are  members  one  of  another."  Pie  explains  this 
beautifully  by  a  representation  of  that  mutual  service  and  help,  which 
one  member  affords  to  another,   I  Cor.  xii.   14-^27.     And  this  mu- 
tual property  and  exercise  of  fellowship  is  manifested  by  asking  con- 
cerning each   others  welfare,  and  by  a    fellowfeeling  for    each  other 
in  difficullies.  See  Neh.  i.  2 — 10.  Heb.  xiii.  3.     Therefore  ihey  are 
forthwith  ready  to  contribute  whatever  they  can  to  assist  each  other, 
either  by  supporting  dejected  souls  with  good  comfortable  words,  or 
by  communicating  their  goods  to  the  necessitous,  in  which  the  primi^ 
tive  church  of  Jerusalem  greatly  excelled,  although  they  have  not  a 
general  community  of  goods  ;  or  by  doing  every  kind  office  to  each 
other.     Do  they  understand  that  the  saints   prosper,  they  "  rejoice 
witii  them   that  rejoice,   as  they  weep  with  them  who  weep."     See 
all  this,  Rom.  xii.  4 — 10,  13,  14.  15.     Yea,  they  exercise  this  com- 
munion not  only  in  private,  but  also  in  publick,  and  they  show  with 
whom  they  hold.     They  conduct  in  this  manner  with  respect  to  the 
publick  administration  of  the  word  and  sacraments,  1  Cor.  x.  15,  17, 
the  assembling  of  themselves  together,  Heb.  x.  25,  and  their  familiar 
conversation  with  the  saints,   though  they  be  ever  so  mean,   with 
David,  2  Sam.  vi.  20,   21,  22.     He  was  "  a  companion  of  all  them 
who  feared  the  Lord,"  Psalm  cxix.  63. 

III.  We  should  now  proceed  to  our  third  general  head,  to  wit,  the 
faith  of  Christians  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  as  the  second 
benefit,  which  God  bestoweth  upon  his  church  in  this  life  :  but  since 
we  must  treat  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  in  order,  on  the  twenty  third, 
twenty  fourth  and  fifty  first  Lord's  day,  we  will  omit  this  at  present. 


THIS  LIFE.         — 56,      4Si 

APPLICATION. 

In  order  that  we  may  now  improve  all  these  particulars  to  ouB  ad- 
-vantage,  we  will  exhibit  this  church  in  its  lustre.  Let  every  one 
"  walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about  her :  let  him  tr-U  the  towers 
thereof ;  let  him  mark  well  her  bulwarks,  and  consider  her  palaces, 
thatVe  may  tell  it  to  the  generation  following,"  as  we  are  exhorted, 
Psalm  xlviii.  12,  13.  "  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  the  city  of  God,'*" 
Psalm  Ixxxvii.  3.  The  members  of  the  church  are  "the  saints  of 
the  Most  High,  who  si.all  take  the  kingdom,  and  possess  the  king- 
dom for  ever,  even  for  ever  and  ever,"  Dan.  vii.  18.  The  Head  of 
the  church  is  most  precious,  view  him  from  his  head  to  his  feet,  as 
described  with  respect  to  his  wonderful  excellency  by  her  who  knew 
him  best  and  experimentally^  Song  v.  10 — 16.  The  union  and  com- 
munion of  the  church  with  him,  and  of  the  members  with  each  other 
is  inconceivable  :  "  They  are  all  one,  as  the  Father  in  the  bon,  and 
the  Son  in  the  Father  are  one  :  yea,  they  are  one  in  the  Father,  and 
in  the  Son."  See  John  xvii  21.  1  John  i.  3.  The  means  by  which 
they  have  become  a  church  are  indeed  excellent ;  for  they  have  by 
them  become  *'  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  na- 
tion, a  peculiar  people,"  1  Peter  ii.  9.  And  truly  the  state  of  the 
church  is  unchangeable,  she  is  "  like  mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be 
removed,  but  abideth  for  ever,"  Psalm  cxxv.  1.  Who,  when  he 
beholds  her,  must  not  cry  out  with  Moses,  Deut.  xxxiii.  29.  «  Hap- 
py art  thou,  O  Israel ;  who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  people  saved  by  the 
Lord,  the  shield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  excellency  I 
and  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
tread  upon  their  high  places." 

But  what  will  it  avail  us,  that  there  is  such  a  glorious  church,  if 
we  know  not  where  that  church  is  ?  There  are  many  assemblies, 
which  severally  pretend  to  be  the  true  church,  and  there  is  never- 
theless but  one  true  church,  which  God  will  save.  It  is  therefore 
necessary,  that  we  inquire  which  is  the  true  church.  The  Socini- 
ans,  as  if  self-condemned,  will  not  brook  this  ;  but  the  spouse  was 
wiser,  v/hen  she  inquired  of  her  bridegroom  concrning  the  true 
church.  Song  i.  7.  \Ve  must  join  ourselves  to  the  church,  as  it  was 
foretold  of  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  do  this,  Isaiah  ii.  2,  3.  xi. 
10.  Zech.  viii.  23.  Indeed  neither  grace  nor  salvation  are  to  be 
found  out  of  the  true  church  :  "  For  there  the  Lord  commandeth 
the  blessing,  even  life  for  evermore,"  Psalm  cxxxiii.  3.  "  But  the 
rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  land/'  Psalm  Ixviii,  6. 


4.Z2    THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

That  we  may  have  a  propsr  knowledge  of  the  true  church,  God 
fcath  proposed  a  ceriam  mark,  or  marks  in  his  word,  by.  which  wc  - 
may  know  her.  I  will  not  busy  myself  with  the  marks  of  others, 
and  certainly  not  v.iih  tlie  fifteen  or  sixteen  marks  of  the  Romanists, 
wnich  are  either  derived  from  circumstances,  or  suit  our  church,  and. 
not  the  Romish,  and  those  which  agree  to  the  Romish  are  heathen 
and  Antichristian  marks.  But  we  will  attend  to  that  mark,  which 
the  word  of  God,  the  only  rule  of  the  church,  affords  us.  And  this 
mark  is  the  agreement  of  the  doctrine  with  the  word  of  God ;  for 
"*he  wiiO  is  of  God  heareth  the  words  of  God,"  John  viii.  47.  "  Christ's 
sheep  hear  his  voice,"  John  x.  26,  27.  The  church  is  built  on  the 
v.ord  of  God,  Eph.  ii.  19,  20.  "  We  must  try  the  spirits  thereby, 
whether  they  are  of  God,"  1  John  iv.  1,  2,  3.  *'  If  any  man  bring 
not  this  doctrine  with  him,  we  must  not  receive  him  into  our  house," 
2  John  vrs.  9,  10. 

If  we  now  compare  the  doctrine  of  our  church  with  the  word  of 
God,  we  will  perceive  with  the  utmost  evidence,  that  she  agreeth 
perfectly  v/ith  the  word  of  God,  and  that  therefore  the  Reformed  * 
alone  are  the  true  church  ;  which  appears  still  more,  since  we  sub- 
mit our  doctrine  to  the  word  of  God  only,  and  in  conformity  thereto, 
humble  the  sinner  to  the  lowest  degree,  comfort,  sanctify  him,  and 
glorify  the  free  grace  of  God.  We  know  indeed  that  all  other 
churches,  so  called,  do  also  claim  .this  mark,  as  well  as  we,  but  we 
will  find  them  to  be  liars  ;  for  they  do  all  reproach  the  word  of  God, 
and  wrest  it,  either  according  to  natural  reason,  as  all  Pelagians  and 
Semipelagians  do,  or  according  to  enthusiasm,  as  the  Quakers  do, 
or  according  to  lordship,  with  the  Papists.  How  then  can  they  boast, 
that  they  have  the  pure  doctrine,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
£0  that  they  are  the  true  church  ?  yea,  they  decline  this  mark,  and 
will  either  have  no  marks  at  all,  or  others.  Therefore  it  is  evident, 
that  the  true  church  is  found  with  us. 

But,  hearers,  it  will  not  suffice  either  you  or  mc,  to  know  that  we 
are  in  the  true  church  ;  for  we  may  notwithstanding  be  still  chaff, 
and  vessels  of  dishonour.  They  who  believe  one  holy,  catholic, 
Christian  church,  say  also  that  they  are  living  members  of  the  church, 
and  will  always  remain  such  :  is  this  so  with  you  in  truth  ?  do  ye 

.^ay,  yea  ?  have   ye  then  also  true  and  living  evidences  ?  do  ye  ask, 

*  V>y  the  Reformed  our  author  understands  here  the  Protestants,  to  wit,  the 
Lutherans  and  Calvinists,  as  distinguished  into  several  rational  churches,  or 
ecclesiastic?!  communities,  as  the  church  of  Holland,  of  England,  of  Scot- 
land, of  Sweden,  Denmark,  Sec  and  also  such  other  denominations  a»  agree 
■with  these  in  funddmcntals.     See  the  Author's  preface, 


THIS  LIFE.        XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        435 

what  are  the  marks  of  a  living  member  ?  we  will  exhibit  them  to 
^ou  according  to  the  word  of  God. 

1.  He  who  is  a  living  member  is  such  not  only  outwardly  by  pro^ 
fession,  but  also  inwardly,  being  changed  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit 
«f  God,  to  ssrve  God  inwardly^  truly  and  heariily  in  the  Spirit  :  he 
is  not  satisfied  with  his  outward  service,  unless  it  be  accompanied 
with  a  heart  that  hath  been  clianged,  that  is  alive,  warm  and  active  ; 
therefore  he  attends  to  the  motions  of  his  heart,  bemourns  his  heart- 
iessness,  and  excites  his  soul,  and  cries  to  the  Lord,  "  Unite  my 
heart  to  fear  thy  name,"  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11.  "  Incline  my  heart  to 
thy  testimonies,"  Psalm  cxix.  36.  That  this  is  a  true  mark  appears 
from  Rom.  ii.  28,  29.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one  outwardly, 
neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh  ;  but  he 
is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inwardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  the  spirit,  &c. 

2.  Such  a  person  is  united  to  the  Head,  even  to  Christ,  truly,  and 
hath  communion  with  him,  hath  received  him  by  faith  truly,  heartily, 
and  in  opposition  to  all  besides,  and  affords  him  a  dwelling  in  his 
heart.  We  see  this  John  i.  12.  Eph.  iii,  17.  See  this  treated  more 
largely  in  our  discourse  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day. 

3.  Such  a  person  agrees  also  with  the  true  members  of  the  church ; 
he  knows,  he  loves  them,  and  is  familiar  with  them,  and  regards 
their  profit  and  disprofit  as  his  own,  because  he  sees  the  life,  the 
love  and  image  of  God  in  them  :  and  the  more  these  things  shine 
forth  in  them,  the  more  he  lovts  them  ;  yea,  even  when  they  oppose 
and  smite  him  :  "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,"  said  that  living 
member  of  the  church.  Psalm  cxli.  5,  "  it  shall  be  a  kindness ;  and 
let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  an  excellent  oil  which  shall  not  break 
xny  head  :  for  yet  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  calamities."  As 
he  also  exhibits  this  as  a  mark  of  a  citizen  of  Zion,  when  he  saith. 
Psalm  XV.  4.  "  In  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  contemned  ;  but  he 
honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord." 

See  now  whether  ye  are  living  members.  Alas !  how  many 
"  have  the  name  that  they  live,  while  they  are  dead,"  as  many  in  the 
church  of  Sardis  were.  Rev.  iii.  1,     For, 

1 .  Many  are  misshapen  members,  who  are  monsters  in  the  church, 
and  deform  her  exceedingly  :  is  it  not  thus  with  you,  who  are  igno- 
rant, irreligious,  violators  of  God's  name  and  day — revengeful,  lewd, 
unjust,  gluttons,  drunkards,  vain,  worldly  and  earthly  minded.  The 
Lord  may  indeed  complain  now,  as  he  did  formcily,  Jer.  v.  26^ 
*^  Among  my  people  arc  found  wicked  men." 

i-^  How  many  hgrt.f*^]   members  are  there  in   this  body   of  the 

3  L 


^^4     THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS  IN 

church  !  Alas,  that  they  were  cutoff!  no  profit  accrues  from  them 
to  the  church,  but  only  disprofit ;  certainly  ye  arc  hurtful  to  the 
brethren,  who  hanker  so  after  new  and  unheard  of  things,  which 
-lire  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  and  utter  those  things  :  ye  also 
who  oppose  ihe  com  amnion  of  saints,  and  strict  and  precise  godli- 
ness, who  betray  the  church  and  her  privileges  to  unfit  persons, 
and  who  abandon  and  tramj^le  upon  them,  he  who  hath  eyes  may 
see  that  now  also  '•  truth  failcth  "  with  many,  aud  that  "  he  who  de- 
parieth  from  evil  maketh  himself  a  prey,"  Isaiah  lix.  15. 

3.  There  are  some,  who  only  seem  to  be  living  members.  They 
are  devout,  and  have  some  knowledge  of  the  mysieiies  of  God,  they 
are  outwardly  moral,  yea,  they  associate  with  the  godly  ;  but  their 
heart  within  is  dead  and  rotten,  and  in  secret  they  are  as  vile  as  the 
■vilest,  I.S  the  Saviour  describes  the  Pharisees,  saying  also  of  them, 
that  they  "  cannot  escape  the  damnation  of  hell,"  Matt,  xxiii.  25, 
27,  S3,  It  is  true,  they  conduct  so  that  they  escape  censure  ;  but 
are  not  ye  they  who  will  not  be  delected  ?  Ye  hate  them  who  detect 
you  :  when  ye  can  only  find  an  opportunity,  and  will  not  expose 
yourselves  too  much,  ye  will  reproach  them,  and  will  strive  to  ren- 
der them  universally  odious.  Conceal  yourselves  as  much  and  as 
long  as  ye  please,  God  will  oae  day  hereafter  detect  you,  as  he  dis- 
covered Judas. 

4.  Others  are  rotten  members,  who  have  fallen  from  the  truth, 
and  godliness  which  they  once  professed.  How  zealous  were  some 
for  the  truth  and  godliness  I  they  could  relish  these  things,  they  asso- 
ciated with  the  strictest  of  the  pious,  who  were  pleased  with  them, 
and  loved  them  ;  but  as  soon  as  the  novelty  was  over,  they  abandoned 
all,  and  fell  away  ;  if  they  do  not  join  themselves  to  some  apostate 
church,  they  abandon  themselves  to  the  world,  which,  like  Demas^ 
they  begin  to  love  again,  2  Tim.  iv.  10.  See  these  also  detected, 
2  Peter  ii.  20 — 22.  Ye  who  are  thus,  may  be  acknowledged  mem- 
bers, but  ye  are  not  such  in  reality,  any  more  than  those  who  "  said 
they  were  Jews,  but  were  found  liars,"  Rev.  iii.  9.  Flatter  your- 
selves as  much  as  ye  please,  ye  have  nevertheless  "  no  portion,  nor 
right,  nor  memorial  in  Jerusalem,"  Neh.  iii.  20.  Ye  shall  neither 
in  this  life,  nor  after  this  life  "  stand  in  the  congregation  of  the 
rigliteous,"   Psalm  i.  5. 

Doth  this  render  you  concemed,ahd  do  ye  desire  to  become  living 
members  of  the  church,  and  to  know  how  ye  may  become  such  ? 
Uehold,  this  is  the  way  : 

1.  Endeavour  to  become  assured  that  our  church  is  the  true 
church,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  that  it  may  be  your  steadfast 


THIS  LIFE,      XXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  54—56.        435 

pel  suasion,  that  with  us  alone  the  salvation  of  the  sinner  is  proposed. 
Let  it  not  suffice  you,  that  your  parents  have  told  you  tl  is,  and  that 
ye  were  educated  to  it ;  but  endea\our  to  obtain  a  proof  of  it  your 
ownselves  from  the  word  of  God  ;  and  do  therefore  like  *'  the  nobl^ 
Bereans,  who  received  the  word  with  all  readiness  of  miud,  and 
searched  the  scriptures  daily,  whether  those  things  were  so,"  Acts 
xvii.  11. 

2.  Separate  yourselves  from  your  former  companions,  as  far  as 
they  have  tended  to  mislead  you,  or  may  yet  do  it  :  Wherefore 
come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and 
daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almitjhty,"  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18. 

3.  Join  yourselves  to  the  saints,  who  are  upon  the  earth,  in  order 
to  seek  their  portion,  and  to  be  directed  and  conducted  by  them  to  the 
privileges  of  the  church,  as  it  was  foretold,  that  "  ten  men  out  of  alj 
the  languages  of  the  nations  should  take  hold,  should  even  take  hold 
of  the  skirl  of  him  who  was  a  Jew,  saying.  We  will  go  with  you  ; 
for  we  have  heard  tliat  God  is  with  you,"  Zech.  viii.  23 

4.  Remain  not  by  any  means  estranged  from  the  Head  of  the 
church,  but  endeavour  to  be  united  to  him,  to  receive  him,  and  to 
join  yourselves  unto  him  ;  for  "  the  Lord  will  give  unto  tlie  stran- 
gers who  join  tliemselves  unto  him,  within  his  house,  and  within  his 
walls,  a  name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters,"  Sec.  Isaiah 
Ivi.  3—7. 

5.  But  ye,  v;ho  are  true  and  living  members  of  the  church  of 
God,  maintain  diligently  the  communion  of  the  saints  :  it  is  cer- 
tainly your  privilege,  and  the  glory  of  the  church  ;  therefore  endeav- 
our to  converse  familiarly  with  the  Head  of  the  church,  and  like 
«  Enoch,  to  walk  with  God,"  Gen.  v.  22,  24.  "  Your  life  must  be 
liidden  wiih  Christ  in  God."  Coll.  iii.  3,  nevertheless  in  aiming  at 
this,  do  not  wholly  separate  yourselves  from  the  saints,  to  which  we 
easily  decline,  that  we  may  converse  and  be  satisfied  in  our  solitary 
life  with  the  Lord  alone.  No,  the  Lord  hath  called  you  for  your 
happiness  to  his  church,  and  lo  the  communion  of  saints  :  the  first 
Christians  continued  in  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  and  in  fellow- 
ship, and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers,"  Acts  ii.  42.  But 
we  must  carefully  beware  that  our  conversation  with  the  saints  do 
not  degenerate  into  a  mere  civil  intercourse ;  we  must  converse  one 
way  vnth  men  as  citizens,  and  another  way,  as  saints,  whose  citi- 
zenship is  in  heaven  ;  but  avoid  particulaily  strife  and  imperious- 
ness,  let  others  see  in  you  that  y«  are  of  one  heart,  lowly,  "  like- 
minded,  having  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind. 


436  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD,  AND  HER  BENEFITS,  Sec, 

Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain  glory,  but  in  lowliness 
of  mind,  let  each  esteem  others  better  than  themselves.  Look  not 
every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of 
others."  This  Paul  required,  Philip,  ii,  2,  3,  4.  Doth  the  church 
appear  to  you  to  be  exceedingly  corrupt,  do  not  separate  yourselves 
from  her,  as  long  as  the  truth  and  the  godly  are  in  her,  and  as  long 
as  the  Lord  hath  not  separated  himself  from  her.  Of  this  we  wili 
speak  further  on  the  eighty  second  question. 

6.  Let  every  one  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  church,  according 
to  liis  condition  and  ability.  Let  magistrates,  if  they  will  be  living 
members  of  the  church,  manifest  themselves  nursing  fathers  of  her, 
cherishing  her,  as  it  was  foretold  of  them,  Isaiah  xlix.  23.  But  ye, 
who  have  been  set  as  watchmen  upon  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  "  be 
diligent  to  know  the  state  of  your  flocks,  look  well  to  your  herds,'* 
Prov.  xxvii,  23.  See  what  that  great  -apostle  enjoins  upon  you, 
Acts  XX.  28.  Therefore  "  ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep 
not  silence,  and  give  him  no  rest,  till  he  estabUsh,  and  till  he  make 
Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth,"  Isaiah  Ixii,  6,  7.  Yea,  "every 
one  should  pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  Psalm  cxxii.  6,  "  should 
warn  them  who  are  unruly,  should  comfort  the  feeble  minded,  sup- 
port the  weak,  be  patient  toward  all  men,"  1  Thess.  v.  14.  Yea, 
even  women  and  maidens,  though  they  ought  to  be  silent  in  the 
church,  should  do  what  in  them  lies,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  for 
the  good  of  the  church  ;  as  "  the  daughters  of  Shallum  repaired  the 
walls  of  Jerusalem,"  Neh.  iii.  12.  See  also  Philip,  iv.  3. 

7.  Manifest  yourselves,  ye  living  members  of  the  church,  visible 
by  a  bright  and  holy  conversation,  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and 
harmless,  the  sons  of  God,  without  rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crook- 
ed and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the 
world,"  Phihp.  ii.  15.  Your  Head  also  requires  this  of  you.  Matt. 
V.    16, 

8.  If  it  should  happen,  that  the  church  should  be  compelled  to 
flee,  upon  account  of  grievous  tribulation,  do  ye  then  always  flee 
whither  the  saints  fiee :  "  Go  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the 
^ock,  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds'  tents,"  Song  i.  8. 

Thus  ye  v.  ill  not  only  be  happy  here,  but  will  also  be  once  trans- 
lated into  the  church  triumphant,  since  ye  will  say  in  due  time  with 
Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished 
my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for 
me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord  the  righteous  Judge 
phall  give  me  at  that  day  :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  thenj 
ttlso  that  love  his  appearing."  Amen, 


.^^,.f.,,    -  ,  w*^^,.      ^  437  ) 


THE 


BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH 


AFTER  THIS  LIFE. 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Psalm  xvii.  15.    As  for  me,  I  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness, 
I  will  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,  with  thy  likeness.