Q.  57.    IV/iat  comfort  doth  the  resurrection  of  the  body  afford  thee  ? 

A.  That  not  only  my  soul  after  this  life  shall  be  immediately 
taken  up  to  Christ  its  Head  ;  but  also  that  this  my  body,  be-ing  rais- 
ed by  the  power  of  Christ,  shall  be  re-united  with  my  soul,  and  made 
like  unto  the  glorious  body  of  Christ. 

Q.  58.  Wliat  comfort  takest  thou  from  the  article  of  "  life  everlast- 
ing ? 

A.  That  since  I  now  feel  in  my  heart  the  beginning  of  eternal  ' 
joy ;  after  tl.is  life,  I  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation,  which  "  eye  hath 
not  seen,   nor  ear  heard,   neither  hath  it  entered   into  the  heart  of 
man,"  to  conceive  1  and  that,  to  praise  God  therein  for  ever. 

<(  r~r^ 

JL  HE  gifts  and  catling  of  God  are  witliout  repentance,"  saith 
Paul,  Rom.  xi.  29.    *<  It  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man 


438         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

on  the  earth,"  Gen.  vi.  6.     This  doth  not  betoken  that  God,  pro- 
perly speaking,  is  capable  of  repeniing  ;  he  is  indeed  perfectly  wise, 
simple,  blesied,   and  unchanf^eable  ;  but  it  means  that   God  would 
maiiiiest  his  ci'spkasure  by  destroying   his  work,  even  man.     But 
^'  his  i^ifts  of  grace,  and  his  callinj^  are  without  repentance:"  these 
he  doth  not  change,  nor  take  away  ;  for  he  hath  said  to  his  people, 
Isaiah  liv   9.     "  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hilh  shall  be 
removed,  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neith<rr  shall 
the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed."     iiis  everlasting  counsel  of 
grace,  from  which  his  gifs  of  grace  and   his  calling  aie  communi- 
cated  is  unchangeable,  and  he  hath  confirmed  his  promises  with  an 
oath  by  himself,  Heb.  vi.  17.     The  covenant  of  grace  is,   as  it  were, 
an  unchangeable  testament,  rendered  irrevocable  by  the  death  of  the 
testator  Christ,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  16,  17.     Yea,  the 
Spirit,  v/ho  is  the  seal  and  pledge  of  the  heirs,  «  abides  with  them 
for  ever,"  John  xiv.  16.     Therefore  the  favourites  of  God,  making 
their  boast  in  the  Lord,  on  account  of  his  everlasting  kindness,  say 
Psalm  xlviii.  14.     *'  This   God  is  our  God  ;  he   will  be   our  guide 
even  unto  death."     Even  dec\th  itself  doth  not  interrupt  his  kindness 
to  them  ;  for  "  the  Spirit  pronounceth  those  blessed  who  die  in  the 
Lord,"  Rev.  xiv.  13.     And  though  their  bodies  dwell   in  the  dust 
and  in  silence,  the  Lord   doth  not  however  v/ithdraw  his  good  hand 
from   them,  but  he   will  raise  up  their  bodies,   as  the  bodies  of  his 
saints,  and  satisfy  them   with  the  fulness  of  his  salvation.     David^ 
trusting  in  this,  saith  in  the  text,  "I  will  behold  thy  face  in  right-^ 
eousness,  I  will  be  satisfied  when  I  awake,  with  thy  likeness."    This 
the  instructor  also  teacheth  us  in  this  Lord's  day. 

The  instructor  having  spoken   in  the  former  Lord's  day  of  the 
benefits  and  the  giftb  of  grace,  which  God  bestows  upon  his  church 
in  this  life,  shovvs  now  that  they  are  without  repentance,  since  they 
are  not  taken  away  in  death,  but  are  followed  by  those  great  benefits^ 
which  the  Lord  wilr  communicate  to  his  church  after  this  life. 
These  benefits  aie  two  : 
J.  The  resurrection  of  the  body,  Q.  57. 
11.  Life  everlasting,  Q.  58. 

J.  The  first  of  these  two  benefits  is  the  resurrection  of  the  body. 
It  is  therefore  evident,  that  the  instructor  doth  not  speak  here  of  a 
civil  resurrection,  by  which  we  are  raised  up  from  some  bodily  afRic- 
lion,  which  is  also  called  a  resurrection,  and  a  rising,  Hosea  vi-  1,  2, 
and  which  is  represented  by  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  Ezek.  xxxvii. 
1  —  U.  Neither  doth  he  make  mention  here  of  a  spiritual  resurrec- 
tion by  regeneration  and  conversion,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks, 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       435 

Eph.  V.  14,  but  of  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  after  it  hath  fallen  by 
death.  "With  respect  to  this  reiurrtction  it  h  shown  in  the  fifty 
seventh  question,  1.  What  becomes  of  the  soul,  after  its  separation 
from  the  body  by  death ;  "  That  my  soul  after  this  life  shall  be  im- 
mediately taken  up  to  Christ  its  Head."  2.  What  shall  become  of 
the  dead  body  :  "  That  this  my  body,  being  raised  by  the  power  of 
Christ,"  &c. 

When  the  instructor  saith,  *'  that  my  soul  shall  be  immediately 
taken  up  to  Christ  its  Head,"  he  then  supposeth  not  only  that  man, 
yea,  that  the  believer  also  shall  die  ;  for  "  it  is  appointed  to  men 
once  to  die,"  Htb.  ix.  27,  but  also  that  the  body  alone  dies,  and  not 
the  soul,  which  departs  from  the  body  ;  for  the  sorl  is  immortal. 
The  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this,  Eccl.  xii.  7.  "  The  dust  shall 
return  to  the  earth  as  it  was ;  and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God 
who  gave  it."  See  also  what  the  Saviour  saith.  Matt.  x.  28.  But 
reason  also  teacheth  us  that  the  soul  is  immortal ;  for  the  soul  is 
a  spirit,  an  active  substance,  having  in  itself  a  principle,  and  a  nat- 
ural ability  to  act  from  itself,  and  to  determine  itself  by  its  own  free 
choice  and  willingly  to  this  or  that  action  ;  which  cannot  happen  in 
aug^it  that  is  material  and  bodily,  for  that  must  be  itioved  by  some- 
thing without  itself.  From  which  it  therefore  follows,  that  the  soul 
is  wholly  i  umaterial,  and  so  that  it  cannot  be  dissolved,  and  there- 
fore cannot  die.  Add  to  this,  that  the  soul  hath  an  innate  desire  to 
immortality,  which  cannot  be  to  no  purpose.  Solomon  saith  indeed 
that  "  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above  a  beast"  in  his  death,  Eccl. 
iii-  18,  19,  20,  but  he  speaks  then  of  the  outward  appearance,  ac- 
cording to  which  "  none  perceives  that  the  spirit  of  the  sons  of  men 
goeth  upward,  and  that  the  spirit  of  the  beast  goeth  downward  to 
the  earth,"  as  he  speaks  in  the  twenty  first  verse,  supposing  that  the 
spirit  of  men,  that  is,  their  soul,  goeth  to  God  ;  which  is  so  much 
the  more  evident,  when  we  observe  that  he  had  taught  in  the  seven- 
teenth verse,  that  "  God  will  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked." 
See  this  opinion  of  his  also,  Eccl.  xi.  9.  xii.  14.  We  might  also  say 
that  Solomon  recites,  Eccl.  iii  18 — 22,  only  the  language  of  Athe- 
ists, who  deny  the  immortality  of  the  soul :  yea,  it  deserves  our  con- 
sideration, whether  the  ecclesiastes  of  Solomon  be  not  a  dialogue,  in 
which  one  while  Solomon  speaks,  and  then  also  a  siily  youth,  whom 
he  introduceth  speaking,  and  who  looks  upon  sensual  pleasure  as 
the  chief  good,  and  thus  denies  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  in  oppo- 
sition to  what  Solomon  had  taught  him  in  the  seventeenth  verse  In 
what  light  soever  we  view  this  text,  wc  will  see  that  it  doth  not  op- 
pose the  immortality  of  the  souK 


440         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

From  what  hath  been  said  we  may  certainly  conclude,  that  the 
soul  exists,  and  is  active  after  its  separation  from  the  dead  body,  and 
that  it  is  not  without  joy  or  sorrow,  and  that  it  doth  not  sleep  until 
the  day  of  judgment,  as  the  Socinians  and  Mennonites  imagine  ;  for 
the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  immediately  taken  up  to  Christ  their 
Head,   into  heaven,     "  We  know,"  saith  Paul  2  Cor.  v.  1,  "that  if 
our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  build- 
ing of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hunds,  but  eternal  in  the  heav- 
ens."    For  this  he  also  longed,  Philip,  i.  23.     This  the  Saviour  also 
promised  to  the  converted  thief,    Luke  xxiii.  43.     And  so  also  the 
■  souls  of  the  wicked   are  cast  down  into  hell,  as  we  see  in  the  rich 
man,    Luke  xvi.  23.     Will  souls  sleep  in   heaven  or  hell  ?  No,   in 
heaven  they  arc  active  in  the  highest  degree,  contemplating  God, 
loving  him,  praising  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  ;  ''  for  they  all  live 
lo  him,"  Luke  xx.  38.     They  do   not  sleep  in  hell    neither  without 
feeling  ;  for  "  the  rich  man  was  tormented  in  the  flame."  Luke  xvi. 
24.     v-  Sodom  and  Gomoirah,   and  the  cities  about  them  suffer  the 
vengeance  of  eterna.  fire,"   Jude  vrs.  7.     And  if  we  look  into  this 
matter  aright,  we  will  find  that  the  opinion  concerning  the  sleeping 
cf  souls  reduces  heaven  and  hell  to  a  mere  fable.     The  dead  are  in- 
deed sometimes  said  to  sleep  and  rest ;  but  this  is  to  be  understood 
cither  of  the  body,   as  the  Saviour  saith,  **  Lazarus  our  friend  sleep- 
eth,"  speaking  of  his  death,  John  xi.  1 1,  13,  or  of  resting  from  tribu- 
lation, ^' their  labour,"  Rev.  xiv.  13,  or  of  waiting  for  a  fuller  reve- 
lation of  glory,  Rev.  vi.  11. 

As  the  sleeping  of  souls,  maintained  by  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
nonites,  is  absurd,  so  the  porch  of  the  fathers,  and  purgatory,  main- 
tained by  the  Papists,  is  fabulous.  These  men,  in  order  to  vend  at 
a  high  rate  their  wares  of  auricular  confession,  indulgences,  rosaries, 
selfrighteousness,  masses  for  souls,  and  other  trifles,  have  invented 
four  different  abodes  for  the  souls  of  the  dead,  next  to,  and  above 
each  other :  the  lowest  is  hell,  which  is  for  the  damned  ;  next  to 
this  is  purgatory,  which  is  as  hot  as  hell,  and  in  which  the  souls,  who 
are  not  sufficiently  purified  here  by  their  own  satisfaction,  or  that  of 
Christ,  are  perfectly  purified  by  a  long,  though  not  an  everlasting 
torment:  above  hell  is  a  receptacle  for  unbaptized  children,  and 
above  this  is  the  porch  of  hell,  where  the  believing  fathers  of  the 
Old  Testament  were  confined,  as  in  a  prison,  until  Christ  descended 
into  hell,  and  delivered  them  out  of  it.  Trifles.  The  word  of  God 
knows  nothing  of  this,  but  saith  that  the .  ancient  believers,  when 
dying,  ''waited  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  xhx.  18,  and 
that  "  after  they  had  been  guided  by  the  counsel  of  God,  they  were 


THIS  LIFE.        XXil.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       441 

leceived  into  glory,"  Psalm  Ixxlii.  24.  *  The  Captain  of  salvation 
had  even  then  brought  many  souls  to  glory,"  Heb,  ii,  10.  The 
fathers  lived  to  God  after  their  death,  Luke  xx,  38.  The  reflex 
virtue  of  the  merits  of  their  Surety  conveyed  them  instantly  to  heaven. 
See  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  Heb.  ii.  10.  ix.  15.  Peter  saith  indeed  that 
Christ  precahed  to  the  rpirits  in  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  but  those 
were  not  the  spirits  of  the  believing  fathers,  bat  of  the  disobedient 
inhabitants  of  the  old  world,  as  appears  from  the  twentieth  verse  : 
who  were  not  in  prison  then,  but  now,  to  wit,  in  Peter's  time,  whtn 
the  fathers  were  delivered  out  of  the  prison  :  moieover,  Christ 
preached  not  to  them  in  his  own  person,  but  by  the  Spirit,  vrs.  18, 
19)  and  that  not  while  they  were  in  prison,  but  while  "they  were 
disobedient,  when  once  the  longsuffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days 
of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  preparing,"  vrs.  20.  "  The  pit  whereia 
there  is  no  water,"  Zech  ix.  11,  is  not  the  porch,  but  the  misery, 
spiritual  or  temporal,  from  which  the  people  of  the  Lord  are  deliver- 
ed by  the  blood  of  the  covenant. 

As  there  is  no  porch  of  hell,  so  there  is  no  purgatory,  in  which 
impure  sou's  must  be  purified  by  a  hot  flame  ;  for  the  word  of  God 
knows  of  only  heaven  and  hell,  and  not  of  purgatory  :  believers  are 
immediately  taken  up  to  Christ  their  Head,  as  we  have  proved  % 
«  The  blood  of  Jes-us  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin,"  I  John  i.  7.  And  the  soul  no  sooner  leaves  the  body,  than  it 
is  perfectly  "justified,"  and  therefore  also  purified,  Rom.  vi-  7. 

In  order  that  they  may  have  a  cloak  for  their  shame,  they  object 
here  what  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  iii.  12,  13.  "If  any  man  build  upon 
this  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble : 
every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest;  because  it  shall  be  reveal- 
ed by  fire  ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it 
is."  But  we  do  not  find  one  word  here  of  a  purgatory,  which  cleans- 
eth souls  from  sin  ;  this  passage  speaks  of  the  fire  of  aflliction,  which 
tries,  reveals  and  declares,  not  the  persons,  but  the  good  and  evil 
works  of  the  builders,  to  wit,  of  the  preachers,  and  not  of  every  be- 
liever. We  will  not  recite  all  the  objections  of  the  adversaries,  but 
refute  only  this  one,  which  they  alledge  from  1  Cor.  xv.  29.  "  Else 
what  shall  they  do  which  are  baptised  for  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise 
not  at  all  ?  why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead  ?"  By  baptism 
they  understand  the  baptism  of  tears,  and  of  making  satisfaction  by 
prayers,  alms,  &c.  by  which  the  dead  are  relieved  in  purgatory.  But 
from  what  doth  it  appear  that  we  must  understand  by  baptism  here 
the  baptism  of  tears  and  of  making  satisfaction  ?  that  by  the  dead 
the  souls  in  purgatoiy  are  meant  ?  and  that  they  are  purified  by  such 

3M 


442         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

a  baptism  ?  of  this  there  is  neither  word  nor  tiltle  in  the  passage 
alledged.  But  we  must  know,  in  order  to  understand  the  sense  of 
these  words,  that  the  aj^ostle  hath  not  respect  here  to  any  custorrtj 
which  took  place  in  the  cnurch  alter  his  time,  but  to  something  that 
happened  in  his  time.  And  it  was  this,  that  when  the  martyrs  were 
slain,  others  joined  themselves  to  the  afflicted  church  in  their  stead, 
and  declared  this  by  submitting  unto  baptism,  which  they  would  not 
have  done,  it'  they  had  not  had  a  certain  hope  of  a  blessf d  resurrec- 
tion, which  was  excited  in  them,  when  they  saw  that  the  martyrs, 
animated  by  such  a  hope,  suffered  courageously  the  most  painful 
death  We  conceive  that  this  is  the  simple  and  trident  sense  of  the 
passage  ;  for  by  the  dead  we  must  understand  those  who  had  been 
slain  by  the  death  of  martyrdom,  as  appears  from  vrs.  SO.  31,  32. 
Baptism  denotes  here  water  baptism,  the  piiblick  token,  that  a  person 
hath  received  the  Christian  doctrine  :  for  tiere  occurs  no  reason 
here  why  we  should  depart  from  the  literal  signification  of  baptism. 
To  be  baptised  for  the  dead,  in  Greek  ufier  toon  nekroon,  signifies  in 
tlie  stCLid  of  the  dead  ;  for  u/isr  signifies  for,  and  in  the  stead  of,  and 
thus  it  denotes  that  for,  and  in  the  stead  of  the  martyrs,  who  were 
taken  from  the  church,  others  joined  themselves  to  her  by  suffering 
themselves  to  be  baptised.  And  so  this  was  a  powerful  argument  iri 
favour  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  that  these  newly  baptized  per- 
sons appeared  to  be  so  powerfully  convinced  of  it,  in  the  midst  of  so 
much  danger  ;  for  the  hope  of  the  resurrection,  which  wrought  sa 
effectually  in  their  minds,  that  they  professed  Christianity  amidst  so 
much  d?,nger.  could  not  be  a  vain  hope.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith, 
♦'  Else  what  shall  they  do,  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?"  shall  they 
deny  the  profession,  of  which  they  have  been  weH  assured  ?  this  is 
impossible,  would  he  say. 

And  ttius  we  see  that  the  souls  of  believers  are  immediately  taken 
up  to  Christ  their  Head. 

2.  But  what  will  brcome  of  the  dead  body?  this  must  be  thrust 
into  a  dark  pit,  the  grave,  or  be  consumed  l)y  fire,  or  be  given  to  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  or  the  fishes  of  the  sea  for 
food.  But  sjiiall  the  bodies  of  the  saints  remain'  for  ever  in  this  con- 
dition ?  No,  *'  this  my  body"  saith  the  instructor,  "  being  raised  by 
the  power  of  Christ,  shall  be  re-united  with  my  soul,  and  made  like 
unto  the  gloiious  body  of  Christ.'*  That  we  may  have  a  proper 
apprehension  of  this,  we  will  consider,  l.The  nature  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body,  2.  The  univeisality  of  it,  3.  The  agent,  4.  The 
qualities,  5.  The  time,  6.  The  reality  and  certainty  of  it.  We  will 
♦i>sat  ofeach  particular  briefly. 


lllIS  LIFE.        XXir.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.         U^ 

\,  The  nature  of  the  resuvrectian  of  the  body  is  beautifully  ex- 
plained \^  the  words  of  the  catechism,  just  now  quoted,  to  wit,  (a) 
That  this  body  shall  be  raised.  The  Lord  God  having  a  knowledge 
of,  and  power  over  all  the  scattered  parts,  even  the  least,  will  unite 
them  all  n^ain,  and  produce  the  fornier  system  of  the  body  anew. 
Thus  Ezeki'.:!  saw  in  a  vision  "  a  shaking  of  the  dead  and  dry  bones, 
and  that  the  hones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone  ;  and  sinews  and 
flesh  came  up  upon  them,  and  they  were  covered  with  skin,"  Ezek. 
xxxvii.  7,  8.  (b)  This  body  will  bs  united  again  to  its  soul,  and  so  be 
made  alive  :  Ezekicl  also  saw  that  "the  breath  entered  into  the  bodies 
and  they  lived,  and  stood  upon  their  feet,"  vrs.  10.  (c)  It  belongs 
also  to  the  nature  of  the  resurrection,  th^  the  dead  will  go  forth  otit 
of  their  graves,  as  the  Saviour  teacheth,  John  v.  28,  29. 

2.  Not  only  this  and  that  person  will  rise   again  in   this  manner^ 
but  ail  the  dead.     Enoch  and  Elijah,  since    they  never  saw  death, 
need  not  rise  again.     Those  w^ho  remain  alive    at   the    end   of  the 
world  will    not   die,  and  tnerefore   will  not    rise  ;    but   "  they  will 
be  changed  in  a  moment,"  or  very  quickly,  1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52,  which 
will  be  to  them,  instead  of  death  and  the  resurrection,  and  will  render 
them  immortal  and  incorruptible.     But  these  excepted,  all  men  will 
rise,  both  the  wicked  and  the  godly.     This    son>e  of  the   Jews    and 
of  the  Socinians  deny.     But  the  word  of  God   teacheth   us  that  all 
will  arise  :  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep   in  the  dust  of  the   earth  shall 
av/ake,"  Dan.  xii   2,  We  may  not  say  that  many  are  not  all,  because 
these  many  comprehend  not  only  those  who   '*  awake  to  everlasting 
life,"  but  also  those  who   "  awake  to  shame,   and   everlasting   con- 
tempt."    Oar  Saviour  teacheth  us  the  same  thing,  saying,  John   v. 
28,  29,  "  All  that  are  in  the  graves,"  Sec.     How  shall  all  else  "  ap- 
pear before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  ?"  2  Cor.  v.  10.     Yea,  how 
tlse    should   the   justice    of  God   be  exercised    in    punishing  the 
wicked,  according  to  2  Thess.  i.  6,  if  they  rise  not  to  everlasting  con- 
demnation ?  The  blessed  rcsurrectionjof  the  body  is  indeed  a  benefit, 
and  the  hope  of  the  church,  but  it  doth  not  exclude  the  resurrection 
of  the  ungodly,  since  that  is  also   a  benefit  and  hope  ^of  the  church, 
because  she  will  see  God  glorified  thereby  in  her  enemies.     There- 
fore Paul  saith.  Acts.  xxiv.   15-  "I  have  hope  toward    God,   which 
they  themselves  also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  both  of  the  just  and  unjust." 

3.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  with  the  silly  notions  of  the  Jews, 
who  fancy  that  there  is  an  incorruptible  joint  in  the  back-bone,  which 
will  be  moistened  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  will  extend  and  dilate 
like  leaven,  and  thus  restore  the  whole  man.     We  believe  with  iho 


444        THE  BFNEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

instructor,  the  word  of  God,  which  informs  us,   •'  that  we    shall  be 
raised  by  the  po.\er  of  Christ."     The  Father  hath  committed  this 
work  to  his  Son,  as  his  dispensation.     "  This,"  saith  he,  John  vi*  30, 
'Ms  the  will  of  the  Fatlici  Wuich  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he 
hath  i^jiven  me,  1  should  lose  nothin^r,  but  should  raise  it  up  at  the 
last  day."     And  thus  he   quickeneih  whom  he    will,  as  the   Father 
raiseth  up  the  dead  and  quickeneih  them,"   John  v.    21.     And   so 
*'  God  will  raisij  us  up  by  Jesus  "  2  Cor.  iv.  14.     For  which  purpose 
Christ  will  exert  his  power  and    influence   upon    the    c^ead    bodiesj 
that  they  may  be  quickened  ;  and  this  power  will  be   manifested   by 
his  penetrating  "  Voice,  which  the  dead  will   hear,"  John  v.  28,  and 
which  will  perhaps  be  "  the  great    sound  of  the  last  trimpet    that 
shall  sound,  in  order  to  raise  the  cieac  up  incorruptible,"  Matt.  xxiv. 
31.     1  Cor.  XV.  52,  and  "  the  shout  and  voice  of  the  archangel,  with 
which  the  Lord  himself  sUall  descend  from  heaven,'*  1  Thess.  iv.  16. 
And  with  this  voice  he  will  send  forth  his  Spirit,  the  power  from  on 
high,  as  Paul  saith,  Rom.  viii.  11.     "He  shall  quicken  your  mortal 
bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dvvellethin  you."     Would  ye  see  a  figure 
of  the  resurrection,  behold  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  :  '"  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus  come  fcilh,  and    the  dead    came    forth.'* 
John  xi.  43,  41, 

4.  "  But  some  man  will  say.  How  are  tlie  dead  raised  up  ? 
and  wiih  what  body  cio  they  come  ?"  Thus  speaks  the  apostle, 
1  Cor.  XV.  45,  and  he  answers  in  a  twofolfl  manner  :  (a)  That  the 
body  will  have  different  quahfications  from  what  it  had  before  its 
death  ;  which  he  shows  vrs  36 — 52,  informing  us  that  the  body  is 
not  glorified,  except  it  first  die,  by  which  it  becomes  m  the  resurrec- 
tion a  totally  different  body  from  what  it  v/as  before,  not  in  substancej 
but  in  quahties,  of  which  he  notic:s  four  :  (1)  "  It  is  sown  in  cor- 
ruption, it  is  raised  in  incorruplion,"  vrs.  42.  It  will  be  always 
alike  vigorous  and  healthful,  and  incapable  of  any  disease  ;  Leah 
will  not  be  lendereyed,  Bartimeus,  will  not  be  blind,  Jacob  ^^ill  not 
be  halt,  Mephibosheth,  will  not  be  a  cripple,  and  Barzillai  will  not  be 
old.  (2)  "  It  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  glory,"  vrs.  43. 
It  will  be  adorned  with  a  wonderful  lustre,  "  like  the  glorious  body 
of  Christ,"  Phil.  iii.  21.  "it  will  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly," 
vrs.  49,  and  "  shine  like  the  sun,"  Matt,  xiii.  43.  (3)  "  It  is  sown 
in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power."  vrs.  43.  It  will  be  able  to  en- 
dure the  immediate  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God,  which  would 
dissolve  and  rend  it  in  its  mort.l  state,  like  the  most  brittle  sub- 
stance. (4) "  It  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual 
body,"  vrs.  44.  It  will  not  employ  itself  any  longer  with  natural 
things,   and  it  will  not  subsist  by  natural  food,   but  will    subsist  and 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD  S  DAY.  Q.  54— £6.         4<»i. 

act  immediately  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  influenced  by  the  Spirit* 
(b)  The  other  part  of  his  answer  to  the  question,  \vhich  was  propo- 
sed, is,  that  the  same  body,  which  we  have  borne  about  with  us 
here,  even  tlie  same  with  r.:spect  to  substance,  will  rise  ;  for  he 
saith,  vrs.  53,  pointing  as  it  were  with  his  linger,  to  his  own  body,, 
*'  This  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must 
put  on  immortality  "  It  is  indeed  "our  vile  body,  which  Christ 
will  fashion  like  his  glorious  bod)  s'*^  Phil.  iii.  21.  Christ  had  in  his 
resurrection  his  own  body,  we  must  theiefore,  if  "  we  bear  the  im» 
age  of  the  heavenly,"  also  have  our  own  bodies  in  the  resurrection; 
those  who  remain  alive,  will  then  also  have  their  own  bodies.  The 
justice  of  God  requireth  that  each  one  should  receive  in  his  own 
body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad," 
2  Cor.  V,  17.  The  belevers  of  old  also  believed  and  expected  the 
resurrection  of  the  same  body,  which  they  bore  about  with  them 
here,  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Isaiah  xxvi.  19.  Dan.  xii.  2.  And  so 
the  wicked  will  likewise  arise  with  their  own  bodies,  which  will  also 
have  other  qualities,  immortality  and  power,  that  they  may  be  tor^ 
mented  forever  J  but  their  bodies  will  not  partake  of  the  excel- 
lency of  the  godly. 

The  Socinians,  who  deny  the  resurrection  of  the  same  body,  do  in 
effect  deny  the  resurrection  itself:  for  if  the  dead  body  itself  arise 
not,  but  another,  it  is  not  a  resurrection,  but  a  creation.  They  oifer 
indeed  reasons,  which  apj)ear  plausible,  in  order  to  subvert  this  truth, 
but  they  are  not  of  any  force.  They  say  it  is  impossible  that  the 
dust,  which  hath  been  long  since  scattered  abroad,  should  be  gather- 
ed and  united  again  in  a  body  ;  that  maneaters  convert  the  flesh  of 
others  into  their  own,  and  that  if  the  same  bodies  arise,  those  who 
have  been  eaten  cannot  arise  with  their  own  flesh,  because  that  is 
become  the  flesh  of  the  maneaters.  We  need  not  reply  othenvise 
to  this,  than  our  Saviour  did  to  the  Saducees,  Matt.  xxii.  29,  "  Ye  do 
err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God  "  But  we 
add  over  and  above  this,  that  God  being  aliknowing  and  almighty, 
both  sees  the  scattered  dust  of  men,  and  can  also  gather  it  again. 
IManeaters  convert  only  a  small  part  of  the  flesli  of  another  person 
into  their  own  flesh,  and  God  can  in  the  resmrection  restore  it  very 
easily  to  the  flesh  of  the  person,  from  whom  it  was  taken  ;  and  th-»t 
which  is  thus  taken  from  the  mancater  can  be  recompensed  again 
from  that  which  had  perspired  from  him,  and  which  he  must  supply 
repeatedly  by  new  food  :  "  God  will  indeed  destroy  the  belly  i.nd 
pleats,"  1  Cor.  vi,  13.  and"  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kin:?;- 
dom  of  God,"   1  Ccr,  xv.  50*     But  by  the  belly  and  ments  we  must 


446        THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

understand  the  use  of  the  belly  and  meats,  and  the  corruptible  fiesh  ; 
therefore  it  is  added,  I  Cor.  xv.  50,  "  Corruption  doth  not  inherit 
incorruption." 

5.  This  resurrection  is  not  "  past   already,'*  as   Hymeneus   and 
Philetus  said,  2  Tim.  ii.  17,  t8.     But  it  will  take   plate  on  the  last 
day,  as  the  Saviour  and  Paul  have  foretold   us,  John  vi.  39,   40,    54. 
1  Cor.  XV.  23,  when  all  men  shall  be  raised  up  in  a  moment,  and  at 
the  same  time,  John  v.  28,  29,    1  Cor.  xv.    52.     And  therefore  we 
do  not  believe  that  the  martyrs  will  rise  before  the  last;  day.  in  order 
to  reign  a  thousand  years  with  Christ  on  earth,  who  will  descend  in 
the  body  from  heaven,  as  the  Chiliasts  fancy,  because    John    saithj 
Rev.  XX.  4,  5,   "I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them  :    and  I  saw 
the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  ;.  aud 
they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years ;  but  the  real  of 
the  dead  lived  not  again,  until   the  thousand   years  were    finished." 
Bat  these  words  being  emblematical,,  and  prophetical,  cannot  serve 
to  confirm  such  a  singular  opinion,  which  contradicts  other  passages 
of  God's  word.      The  true  and  proper  meaning  of  this  text  is,  that 
the  church   which  had  been  slain  in    her  martyrs    under  Antichrist, 
during  the  period  of  tJ-e  t-,velve  hundred  and  sixty  prophetical  daya, 
should  obtain    a  new  life,  and  that  her  worship  should  prevail  in  the 
world,  and  that  she  should  thus  have    "  a  life  from  the  dead,"  Ronrv. 
xi.    15.     In  this  sense  should  the  two  witnesses   be   put   to   death, 
arise  and  ascend  up  to  heaven  to  the  terrour  and  annoyance  of  Anti- 
christ, Rev.  xi.  3 — 13.     And  thus  t|ie  rest  of  the  dead,  to  wit,   anti- 
christ and  his  adherents,  did  not  life    again,  but  were  dead,  or  in  a 
low  condition,   until   the  end  of  the  thousand  years,  when  the   devil 
should  be  loosed,  that  he  might  gather  all  the  enemies  of  the  church 
under  Gog  and  Magog,  and  compass  the  camp  of  the  saints,  the  be- 
loved city,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  destroy  it ;  but  the  Lord  will  hin- 
der it  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  and   will   destroy    the   enemies  ; 
upon  which  will  follov/  the  general  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the 
judgment.     Read  this  whole  twentieth  chapter,  and  compare  there- 
with the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  revelation,  and  it  will    appear  that 
this  exposition  is  in  no  wise  contradictory  to  other  passages  of  scrip- 
ture. 

6.  But  what  comfort  will  this  afford  us,  as  long  as  we  are  not  per- 
suaded of  the  reality  and  certainty  of  this  resurrection  of  the  dead"? 
The  Sadducees  and  Atheists  deny  the  resurrection.  It  is  not  neces- 
sary to  prove  it  against  them  ;  they  shut  their  eyes  wilfully  :  but  it 
is  necessary,  that  we  shoul  1  be  certain  of  it,  because  we  are  so  attach- 
ed to  visible  and  present  objects,  that  we  cannot  represent  to  our* 
selves  what  is  invisible  and  future  in  a  lively  manner,  unless  we  be 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DMY,  Q.  57,  58.         447 

assured,  that  such  a  resurrection  is  truly  to  be  expected.     Therefore 
that  we  may  have  an  assurance  of  it,  we  must  know  beforehand  that 
this  resurrection  of  the   body  is  neither  inypossible  nor  incredible  ; 
«  With  God  all  things  are  possible,"    Mark  xvi,  36.  «  With  God 
nothing  shall  be  innpossible,"  Luke  i.  37.     The  Saviour  appealed  to 
the  power  of  God  in  this  matter  against  the  Sadducees,   Matt.  xxii. 
29.     Abraham   grounded  his  faith  upon  this  power,  when  he  was 
about  to  slay  his  son,   Heb.  xi.  17,  18.     He  who  made  the  whole 
world  out  of  nothing,  is  able  to  restore  the  scattered  dust  of  man, 
which  he  preserves,  to  its  former  state  of  a  living  body,  as  Abraham 
believed,  Rom.  iv.  17.     It  should  support  our  hope  the  more,  that 
God  hath  given  so  many  evidences  of  his  power  in  this  respect,  when 
he  raised  so  many  from  the  dead  by  his  prophets,  by  his  Son,  and 
by  his  apostles,  I  Kings  xvii.  22   2  Kings  iv.  32—36.  xiii.  31,  Matt* 
ix.  24,  25.  Luke  vii.   14,  15.  John  xi.  43,  44.  Matt,  xxviii.  52,  53. 
Acts  ix  40.  XX.  9,   10.     And  we  are  not  only  certain,  that  it  is  pos- 
sible with  God  to  raise  the  dead,  but  also  that  he  will  indeed  raise 
them  at  the  last  day.     iVTany  passages  of  the  word  of  God  teach  us 
this,  as  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Isaiah  xxvi.  19.  Dan.  xii.  2.  John  v.  28, 
29.  xi.  23,  24.  Heb.  vi.  2.    But  we  will  insist  more  particularly  upon 
two,  because  they  prove  it  designedly  against  those  who  deny  the 
resurrection.     The  first  passage   is.    Matt.  xxii.  31,  32,  where  the 
Saviour  saith  to  the  Sadducees.  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
have  ye  not  read  that  which  was   spoken  to  you  by  God,  saying,  I 
am  the  God  of  Abraham,    and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God   of 
Jacob?  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,    but  of  the  livinfr."     The 
force  of  this  proof  is  so  great,  that  it  stopped  the  mouths  of  the  Sad- 
ducees ;  see  vrs.  23y  34,  and  the  emphasis  of  it  consists  in  this,  that 
the  Lord,  being  the  God  of  the  fathers,  not  only  with  respect  to  their 
souls,  but  also  with  respect  to  their  b:idies,  which  were  now  dead,  he 
must  quicken  their  bodies,  or  otherwise  he  would  not  be  their  God, 
because  he  was  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.     The  othej 
passage  is  1  Cor.  xv.  where  the  apostle  produceth  several  arguments, 
and  particularly,  (a)  that  Christ,  the  Head  of  believers,  is  risen,  who 
will  therefore  not  leave  his  members  under  death,  vrs.  12 — 18.  (b) 
That  believers  are  otherwise  of  all  men   the  most  miserable,  which 
is  surely  impossible,  vrs.  19.  (c)   That  Christ  is  by  his  resurrection 
"  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept,"  who  are  therefore,  like  the  whole 
harvest,  sanctified  to  the   resurrection,  vrs.  20.  (d)  That  Adam  sub- 
jected those  who  were  his  to  death,  and  that  Christ  doth  not  less  re- 
store those  who  are  his  to  life,  vrs.  21,  22.  (e)  That  Christ  as  King, 
must  conquer  the  last  enemy,  deaths  which  is  not  effected,  except 


^48  THE  BErsEbliS  OF  THE  CHURCH  A?TER 

by  the  resurreclion  cf  the  dead,  vrs.  25 — 23.  (f)  That  this  truth  -^a^ 
so  efficacious,  that  certain  persons  suftered  themselves  to  be  baptized 
from  a  hope  of  the  resurrestion,  though  they  saw  that  others  were 
put  to  death  on  account  of  Chiisiianity,  as  the  twenty  ninth  verse 
must  be  explained,  which  we  have  shown  before,  (g)  That  otherwise 
all  the  sufferings  of  Christians  are  vain,  which  is  incredible,  vrs.  30. 
31,  32.  Will  we  have  more,  we  may  add,  tivat  «  Uie  bodies  of  be* 
iievers  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  uhost,  1  Cor.  vi.  19.  Now  he 
will  not  suffer  his  temples  to  remain  desolate,  as  Paul  showeth, 
Rom.  viii.   11. 

II.  Ail  men  will  rise,  not  to  di^  again,  but  to  live  for  ever,  some 
to  hnppiness,  and  others  to  misery  ■,  for  ''  they  shall  come  forth,  they 
that  have  done  good  unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and  they  that 
have  done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of  damna<ion,"  John  v.  29.  But 
we  do  not  speak  nov/  of  the  everlasung  life  of  the  wicked  in  miserVs 
but  of  the  everiasling  life  of  tne  godly  in  blessedness.  The  ever- 
lasting life  of  the  miserable  is  rather  a  death  than  a  life  ;  on  which 
account  it  is  often  called  death,  and  the  second  death,  Rev.  xxi.  8. 
But  the  life  of  the  blessed  is  a  true  and  pleasant  life  ;  therefore  it  is- 
said  to  them.  Psalm  xxii.  26.  "Your  heart  shall  live  for  ever.  We 
•6nd  the  same  also,  Psalm  Ixix.  32.  In  order  to  say  something  of 
this  everlasting  life,  we  will  observe  1,  wherein  this  everlasting  life 
consists,  and  2,  how  it  v/ill  be  communicated  to  the  elect. 

1.  No  mortal  can  fully  comprehend  wherein  this  everlasting  life 
will  consist,  much  less  ieclare  it :  Paul,  who  had  been  in  heaven, 
and  was  come  dov/n  thence,  saith  no  more  of  it,  than  that  "  he  had 
heard  unspeakable  words,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  a  man  to 
niter,"  2  Cor.  xii.  4.  The  Lord  doth  i^evertheless  reveal  something 
ot  it  to  his  favourites,  Avhen  he  permits  them  to  taste  of  the  fruits  of 
that  Canaan,  and  "  to  feel  the  beginnn^gs  of  everlasting  joy  in  their 
hearts."  Therefore  the  aposile  saith,  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10.  '•  Eye  hath 
i^ot  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man 
the  things,  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  :  "  but" 
(maik  well)  "  God  hath  revealed  them  to  us  by  his  Spirit."  Surely 
God  discovers  something  of  this  in  his  vvord,  v,'hen,  accomodivting 
■liraself  to  our  childish  capacities,  he  calls  this  everlasting  life,  *'  sal- 
vation, glory,  joy,  rest,  a  kingdom,  crown,  inheritance,  &c.  There- 
iovs  we  will,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  divine  revelation  to  us, 
.ihow  (a)  from  what  the  blessed  will  be  delivered,  (b)  what  they  wiH 
onjoy,  and  (c)  what  circumstances  will  increase  their  blessedness. 
.  (a)  Tha  blessed  will  be  delivered  from  all  that  is  shameful,  hurt- 
2ul,   and  painful  to  them,   with  respect  to  soul  and  body.     No  re- 


THIS  LIFE.        S 

proach,  nor  contempt  will  be  offered  to  them  :  no  tmxious  poverty 
will  dibtrcss  their  hearts,  they  will  not  mourn  any  more  on  account 
of  pail),  weakness,  sickness,  or  death  :  sin,  darirness,  deadness,  the 
hiding  of  God's  countenance,  the  pov/er  of  unbelief,  the  assaults  of 
Satan,  the  seductions  and  perstculions  of  the  world,  the  provocations 
of  the  flesh  to  sin,  will  be  excluded  for  ever  :  "■  They  shall  not 
hunger  any  more,  neither  shall  they  thirst  any  more,  neither  shall 
the  sun  li^ht  on  them,  nor  any  heat,"  Rev.  vii.  16.  "  God  will  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  ;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death, 
neither  sorrov/  nor  cryinp;,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain  : 
for  the  former  things  are  passed  away,"  Rev.  xxi.  4.  "  Death  and 
hell,"  that  is,  all  that  is  to  believers  like  a  death  and  hell,  *«  will  be 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev.  xx.  14. 

(b)  But  this  alone  cannot  constitute  a  perfect  blessedness  ;  for  if 
a  man  were  annihilated,  he  would  also  be  delivered  from  all  this 
evil :  and  therefore  it  belongs  also  to  everlasting  life,  that  man  should 
enjoy  a  satisfying  good.  God  hath  created  him  with  a  rational  de- 
sire for  an  everlasting  good  :  and  when  he  enjoys  this  he  is  happy. 
And  therefore  his  everlasting  bliss  will  also  consist, 

1.  In  beholding  God  and  Christ.  As  God  is  a  spirit,  he  will 
not  be  able  to  see  him  with  his  bodily  eyes  ;  but  he  vvill  behold  the 
Son  of  God  with  his  bodily  eyes,  in  his  glorious  and  exalted  human- 
ity, as  his  Redeemer.  But  he  will  employ  his  understanding  prin- 
cipally with  respect  to  God,  in  contemplating  his  perfections, 
persons,  everlasting  counsel,  and  the  wonderful  way  in  which  the 
blessed  God  hath  led  him  to  giory.  Our  text  teacheth  us  this,  say- 
ing, "  1  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness  ;  the  pure  in  heart  will 
see  God,  and  therefore  be  blessed,"  Matt.  v.  8,  and  that  not  only,  as 
they  do  at  present,  by  the  word,  which  is  like  a  glass,  and  a  dark 
saying  to  them,  so  that  they  know  now  only  in  part,  by  means  of  the 
utmost  ends  of  his  ways,  and  smcdl  portions  of  matters,  and  as  it 
were,  by  looking  at  his  back-parts,  their  understandings  being  so  be- 
clouded by  their  sinful  prejudices,  and  tlieir  mortal  body,  that  they 
cannot  form  any  other  than  exceedingly  narrow  conceptions  of  God. 
But  they  will  see  God  immediately,  and  as  it  were,  face  to  face,  and 
they  will  be  so  led  into  the  depths  of  his  wisdom,  power,  goodness, 
love,  and  glory  by  the  beams  of  his  splendid  essence,  that  they  will 
be  overwhelmed  therewith,  swallowed  up  therein,  and  enraptured 
with  everlasting  wonder :  "  For  we  shall  see  him,  as  he  is,"  1  John 
iii.  2.  It  was  the  prerogative  of  Moses  above  other  prophets,  that 
"  the  Lord  spake  to  him  mouth  to  mouth,  even  apparently,  and  not 
in  dark  speeches  ;  and  that  he  beheld  the  similitude  of  the  Lord>" 

3N 


450        THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

Num.  xii-  8.  Yet  his  vision  ^^as  not  perfect,  as  long  as  he  was  ift 
his  mortal  body  ;  but  the  blessed  will  enjoy  the  vision  of  God  in  a 
much  higher  degree  than  Moses,  even  in  the  highest  degree ;  for 
they  will  see  him  "  face  to  face  ;  they  know  now  in  part ;  but  then 
they  will  know  even  as  they  are  known,"  I  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

2.  By  seeing  God  thus,  they  will  become  perfectly  like  God  in 
his  holy  glory,  and  glorious  holiness,  even  as  much  as  a  creature 
can  be  like  him  :  "  We  shall  be  like  him,"  saith  John;  "  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  John  iii.  2.  This  blessed  ?.nd  immediate 
vision  of  God  will  be  so  efficacious,  that  it  will  transfer  the  image 
and  glory  of  God  to  them  :  for  "  beholding  the  face  of  God  in  right- 
eousness, they  will  also  be  satisfied  with  his  likeness.  "  When  be- 
lievers are  permitted  to  "  behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  with  open 
fece  as  in  a  glass,  they  are  then  changed  into  the  same  image,  from 
glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  lii.  18.  When 
Moses  spake  to  the  Lord,  his  face  shone  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
people  could  not  look  at  him,  until  he  put  a  veil  on  his  face,  Exod. 
xxxiv.  29 — 35.  What  a  wonderful  brightness  and  lustre  will  then 
be  transferred  to  the  blessed  from  the  beaming  p;lory  of  God,  when 
they  will  behold  God  immediately  in  all  his  splendour !  It  is  said  of 
the  blessed,  Rev.  xxii.  4  "  They  shall  see  his  face,  and  his  name 
shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  Even  their  bodies  will  shine  wonder- 
fully, and  "  li:ke  the  su/j,"  Matt.  xiii.  43.  If  a  mortal  man  s'  ould 
see  an  inhabitarit  of  heaven,  he  would  not  be  able  to  sustain  the 
sight,  but  would  quickly  shrink  from  it,  and  hide  himself.  See  what 
is  related,  Dan.  x.  5 — 3. 

3,  And  is  it  wonderful,  that  they  will  be  like  him  ?  for  they  will 
enjoy  the  blessed",  ailsufficient  God,  until  they  shall  be  fully  satis- 
fied :  "  Fulness  of  joy  is  in  his  presence,  at  his  right  hand  there  are 
pleasures  for  evermore,"  Psalm  xvi.  1 1.  The  believing  soul  thirsts 
and  pants  now  for  the  least  communication  of  his  favour,  and  when 
she  enjoys  that,  drinking  of  the  river  of  God's  pleasures,  she  is 
abundantly  satisfied,  when  she-  is  weary,"  Psalm  xxxvi.  8.  Jer.  xxxi. 
14,  15.  But  what  will  it  be  then,  when  God  will  favour  the  whole 
rnd  blessed  man  with  the  complete  enjoyment  of  himself,  and  when 
he  will  be  satisfied  with  God  ;.  for  the  Lord  will  fill  him  full,  even 
as  full  as  he  can  admit,  with  his  allsufficiency,  wisdom,  love,  and  glo- 
ry ;  for  then  "  God  will  be  all  in  all,"  1  Cor,  xv.  28.  How  will  the 
happy  man  tht-n  bathe,  swim,  and  lose  himself  in  the  unfathomable 
depth  of  the  allsufiicient  God  I  for  "  he  who  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
shall  feed  him  and  shall  lead  him  unto  living  fountains  of  water/ 
Rev.  vii.  15,  \7, 


THIS  LIFE.         XXir.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57—53.       45i 

4.  All  this  will  fill  him  ^vith  a  fulness  of  joy,  which  will  excite  him 
to  praise  and  bless  God  :  "  This  salvation,"  saith  the  instructor,  «  I 
shall  inherit,  and  that  to  praise  God  for  ever  therein."  He  will  unite 
himself  v/ith  all  the  blessed  men  and  angels,  that  he  may  with  them 
shout  forth  the  glory  of  God,  until  the  heaven  resounds,  as  the  an- 
gels proclaimed  the  glory  and  holiness  of  God  with  such  mighty 
voices,  that  they  made  "  the  posts  of  the  door"  shake,  Isaiah  vi.  3. 
How  then  will  <'  the  voices  of  that  great  multitude,"  proclaim  one 
to  another,  "  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  many 
thunderings.  Hallelujah  ;  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth. 
Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  honour  to  him,"  Rev.  xix.  6,  7, 
When  believing  souls  enjoy  the  lovingkindncss  of  God  here  on 
earth,  the  one  excites  the  other,  saying,  "  Magnify  the  Lord  with 
me,  and  let  us  exak  his  name  together,"  Psalm  xxxii.  4.  O  how 
will  the  blessed  then,  seeing  what  they  have  been,  what  they  are  now, 
and  how  they  have  been  brought  into  this  blessed  state,  according  to 
the  unsearchable  wisdom,  power,  and  love  of  God,  by  the  blood  of 
his  Son,  cry  mightily,  day  and  night  without  ceasing,  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  Avho  was,  and  who  is,  and  who  is  to 
come  !"  They  will  fall  down  before  him,  and  cast  their  crowns  be- 
fore the  throne  and  say  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb 
which  was  slain,  to  receive  power  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing,"  Rev.  iv.  8 — 11. 
V.  9-- 14. 

(c)  Moreover  this  blessedness  will  be  greatly  increased  by  the 
circumstances,  I  of  society,  2  of  place,  and  3  of  time* 

I.  A  godly  person  can  enjoy  a  wonderful  delight  in  his  holy^ 
lonely  life  of  communion  with  God  ;  society  often  disturbs  his  re- 
pose in  God  :  but  in  that  everlasting  life  he  will  be  in  the  society 
of  those,  who  will  not  lead  him  from,  but  up  to  his  full  satisfaction. 
For  he  vvill  be  with  all  those  eminent  saints,  "  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  \vho  will  sit  down  with  him  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  Matt, 
viii.  11,  "  He  will  walk"  with  the  angels  who  stand  before  the 
£ice  of  God,  Zech.  iii.  7.  There  never  was  a  time  of  so  much  bliss- 
ful glory  on  earth,  as  when  "  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host,"  came 
down  to  the  shepherds,  to  praise  God  to  the  utmost,  and  to  congrat- 
ulate men  upon  the  recent  birth  of  the  Saviour,  Luke  ii.  13,  14.  But 
how  glorious  will  it  be,  when  the  blessed  people  will  be  associated 
with  the  many  thousands  of  angels,  and  unite  with  them  !  But  can 
happy  men  and  holy  angels,  who  are  mere  creatures,  satisfy  the  heart 
of  man,  while  he  is  estranged  from  God  ?  No,  but  he  will  not  be 
■without  God  :  for  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  will  be  with  men,  and  he 


452         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

will  dsvell  with  them,  and  they  -svill  be  his  people,  and  God  himself 
will  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God,"  Rev.  xxi.  3.  "  The  Lamb  him- 
self will  be  in  the  midst  of  *he  throne,"  Rev.  vii.  17.  *' And  round 
about  the  throne  there  will  be  four  and  twenty  seats,  and  upon  the 
seats  four  and  twenty  elders,  sitting,  clothed  in  white  raiment,  and 
having  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold,"  Rev.  iv.  4.  The  church  mili- 
tant is  described  as  so  near  him,  and  round  about  him ;  what  then 
will  bi;  the  condition  of  them,  who  will  be  admitted  to  the  enjoyment 
of  perfect  salvation! 

2.  There  is  no  place  so  strait,  so  dark  and  mean,  but  that  God 
will  condescend  to  reveal  himself  in  it  to  his  favourites  ;  nevertheless 
a  spacious  and  lightsome  place  will  elevate  a  spiritual  heart:  but  the 
place  where  this  glory  will  be  enjoyed,  is  the  high,  the  spacious  and 
sumptuous  heaven,  where  light,  yea,  where  God  himself  dvvelleth, 
as  in  nis  palace  :  for  "■  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,  the  Lord's 
throne  is  in  heaven,,"  Psalm  xi.  4.  Look  only  with  David  at  the 
outside  of  heaven,  and  with  him  ye  will  wonder  at  its  splendour^ 
Psalm  viii.  4,  how  then  will  the  inmost  rooms  transport  the  soul  I 
No  mun,  while  he  is  yet  in  this  mortal  body,  can  conceive  the  glory 
of  heaven,  and  therefore  it  is  exhibited  to  him  only  imperfectly,  un- 
der the  figure  of  whatever  is  esteemed  precious  on  earth,  bee  Rev. 
xxi.  9 — 27,  That  on  which  God  hath  exercised  his  skill  must  be 
fair  and  glorious  indeed,  but  "  heaven  is  a  city  which  hath  founda- 
tions, whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,  Heb.  xi.  10. 

3.  If  there  be  aught  that  is  disagreeable  to  the  people  of  God  at 
present,  -t  is  that  God's  gracir>us  intercourse  with  them  is  usually  of 
suca  a  short  continuance  :  but  in  heaven  it  will  be  everlasting  with- 
out end.  It  will  be  an  everlasting  life  :  "  At  God's  right  hand  there 
are  pleasures  for  evermore,"  Psalm  xvi.  11.  "  We  shall  be  for  ever 
with  the  Lord,"  1  Thess.  iv.  IT.  Although  the  Lord  loves  the  be- 
lieving soul  always,  and  until  the  end,  there  are  nevertheless  many 
intermissions  in  the  displays  of  his  love  ;  but  it  will  not  be  so  in 
glory  :  the  blessed  soul  will  be  continually  and  incessantly  laden  with 
the  lovingkindness  of  God,  so  that  she  will  praise  him  continually, 
and  "  will  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,"  Rev.  iv.  8.  Think  not,  ye 
prisoners  of  hope,  that  ye  will  be  weary  of  it,  as  Israel  was  of  the 
manna,  or  that  ye  will  not  be  able  to  sustain  that  allsufficient  good  ; 
for  ye  will  always  have  something  new :  "  Jesus  will  drink  new 
wine  with  you  in  the  kingdom  of  his  Father,"  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  Ye 
will  also  have  more  enlarged  capacities,  and  be  more  able  to  receive 
the  supreme  revelation  and  influences  of  the  Almighty.  Ye  cannot 
now  sustain  his  extraordinary  embraces,  and  the  extraordinary  influ- 


THIS  LIFE.         XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  s7,  as.         453 

»;nce  of  his  grace  a  long  time,  but  it  would  dissolve  you,  as  the  most 
brittle  substance :  but  "  ye  who  are  sown  in  weakness,  will  be  raised 
in  power,  incorruptible  and  immortal,"  1  Cor.  xv.  43,  53. 

Though  all  the  blessed  will  be  completely  filled  with  the  glory  of 
God,  there  will  nevertheless  be  degrees  of  glory,  and  one  will  enjoy 
more  than  another  ;  "  For  there  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another 
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stai-s  ;  for  one  star  dif- 
fereth  from  another  star  in  glory  :  so  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,"  Thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  41,  42.  For  there  will  be 
degrees  of  punishment,  as  we  are  taught.  Matt.  xi.  20—24.  Luke 
xiv.  47,  48,  as  there  are  also  degrees  of  sin  and  sanctification,  John 
xix.  11.  I  Cor.  XV.  10. 

It  is  projDer  to  inquire  here  whether  the  blessed  will  know  in 
heaven  their  friends,  whom  they  knew  best  in  this  life.  We  cannot 
decide  this  question  positively ;  we  only  know  that  the  relation, 
which  subsists  here  between  parents  and  children,  husband  and  wife, 
rulers  and  subjects,  will  not  have  place  in  heaven  ;  for  "  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority  and  power,"  1  Cor. 
XV.  24-.  We  know  also  that  all  the  blessed  will,  as  blessed,  know 
each  other  with  the  sweetest  and  with  a  familiar  love,  on  account  of 
the  work  of  grace,  as  soon  as  it  appears,  because  "  they  have  one 
heart,  and  one  way  to  fear  the  Lord,"  Jer.  xxxiii.  39.  It  appears 
also  clearly,  that  the  blessed  rulers  of  the  church  will  be  known  in 
lit-aven  ;  for  they  will  excel  others  in  glory,  D^n.  xiii.  3.  The  Lord 
promiseth  that  we  shall  '*  sit  down  with  Abiahara,  Isaac  and  Jacob," 
Matt.  viii.  1 1.  We  shall  nut  be  able  to  know  whether  this  promise 
be  fulfilled,  unless  we  know  those  great  saints :  this  matter  appears 
still  more  probable,  since  the  apostle  knew  the  glorified  r^Ioses  and 
Eiias,  Matt.  xvii.  3,  4. 

2.  Having  seen  thus  wherein  everlasting  life  consists,  it  behooves 
us  to  know  also  how  it  is  communicated.  But  of  this  we  shall  not 
speak  at  present,  because  v/e  have  shov/n  on  the  eleventh  Lords  day 
lliat  the  Lord  Jesus,  ha\ing  purchased  salvation  by  his  sufferings 
and  obedience,  applies  and  communicates  it  also,  both  in  this  life  by 
all  the  blessings  and  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  after  this 
life,  first  in  the  death  of  behevers,  and  afterwards  in  their  blessed 
resurrection. 

The  children  of  God  ought  to  believe  and  be  assured,  and  present 
it  as  it  were  before  their  eyes,  that  such  an  everlasting  fife  is  to  be 
expected,  like  "  ?rIoses,  who  had  a  respect  to  the  recompence  of  ti^e 
reward  by  faith,"  Keb.  xi,  26-  Great  and  many  are  the  grounds,  on 
which   believers  may  estabiish   their   hopes.     Ail   the   arguments 


454         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

which  prove  the  resurrection,  may  also  assure  them  of  everlasting 
life  ;  but  they  may  be  certain  of  it  more  especially,  "  because  they 
now  feel  in  their  hearts  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy,"  as  the  in- 
structor speaks.  The  beginnings  of  eternal  joy  are,  (a)  that  clear 
and  heavenly  discovery,  which  the  Lord  God  makes  of  himself,  of 
his  Son,  and  of  his  mysteries  to  the  soul,  whereby  she  sees  the  effi- 
cacy of  each  word  and  of  each  matter,  and  is  influenced  to  wonder, 
joy  and  praise  on  account  of  it :  "  The  king  leads  her  into  his 
chambers,"  bong  i.  4,  and  thus  Jesus  reveals  himself  in  his  love  to 
them  who  love  him,  John  xiv.  21.  (b)  An  actual  enjoyment  of  the 
heavenly  benefiis,  which  proceed  from  the  throne  of  God,  so  that 
the  believer  '' eats  of  the  hidden  manna,"  Rev.  ii  17.  He  fines  a 
table  spread  within  him>  and  "  he  eats  with  Jeiiis,  and  Jesus  with 
him,"  Rev.  iii.  20.  And  he  is  wonderfully  entertained,  satisfied,  and, 
as  it  were,  made  drunk  with  his  heavenly  viands,  Sonty  v.  1  •  Jer. 
xxxi.  12,  13,  14,  and  Jesus  bestows  on  him  abundantly  the  kisses  of 
his  love,  his  caresses,  and  the  embraces  of  his  everlasting  arms, 
Song  i.  2.  ii  3 — 6.  The  soul  seems  to  herself  hereby  to  be  already 
elevated  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  above  this  mortal  scene,  (c) 
Further  these  first  beginnings  consist  in  the  assurarxe  which  be- 
lievers obtain  of  tiieir  blessed  hope  ;  either  the  Spirit  of  God  dis- 
covereth  to  them  the  work  of  grace  in  their  souls,  "  showing  them 
the  things,  ,  vvnich  are  freely  given  them  of  God,"  and  thus 
"  bearing  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God,"  acco-dm:^-  to  Rom.  viii.  15  ;  or  the  Lord  effects  in  a  gentle 
manner  a  tranquil  peace  and  calmness  in  the  heart,  and  so  "  the 
pe:ce  of  God  surpasseth  all  their  understanding,"  Philip,  iv.  7,  or  he 
influences  them  m  a  more  exalted  and  more  affecting  manner,  or  in 
a  more  rational  and  less  affecting  manner  by  exercises  of  faith,  which 
sometimes  excite  in  them  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory,  1 
Peter  i.  8. 

Since  now  believers  feel  these  beginnings  in  their  hearts,  they 
may  be  assured,  tliat  they  will  possess  such  an  eternal  life.  Because 
(a)  these  beginnings  are,  as  it  were,  the  first  fruits,  which  sanctify 
the  harvest  of  eternal  life,  as  the  real  property  of  believers.  To  this 
the  apostle  hath  respect,  Rom.  viii.  23.  (b)  These  beginnings  are 
«'  those  better  things,  which  accompany  salvation,"  as  Paul  speaks, 
Heb.  vi  9  (c)  They  are  also  the  evidences  of  the  love  of  God  and 
Christ ;  for  thus  "  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  hearts"  of 
those  whom  he  loves,  and  so  '^  their  hope"  of  everlasting  life  ''  can- 
not make  theAi  ashamed,"  Rom=  v.  5. 


THIS  LIFE,        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  sf,  58,        455 


APPLICATIONa 

That  now  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life  may  be  profitable  to  liSj 
it  will  be  useful,  that  each  of  us  should  impress  upon  his  mind,  that 
there  will  also  be  a  resurrection  to  eternal  damnation  :  and  not  only 
this,  but  that  the  smallest  number  will  rise  to  salvation,  and  the 
greatest  member  to  damnation,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  day.  And  therefore  it  will  be  necessary,  that  each  one  should 
also  inquire  concerning  himself,  what  will  become  of  him  at  the 
last  day .  We  should  show  here  who  will,  and  who  will  not  be  raised 
up  to  salvation  ;  but  as  we  have  done  this  largely  enough  on  the 
seventh  and  eighth  Lord's  days,  we  should  forbear  at  present ;  yel 
since  the  instructor  founds  his  hope  upon  a  feeling  of  the  beginning 
of  eternal  joy,  and  temporary  believers  also  arc  after  their  mannef 
**  enlightened,  taste  of  the  heavenly  gift,  are  made  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  taste  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come,"  Heb.  vi.  4,  5,  and  since  this  greatly  weakens  the 
expectation  of  true  believers,  and  confirms  temporary  believers  ex- 
ceedingly in  their  imaginations,  we  will  therefore  exhibit  the  differ- 
ence between  true  and  temporary  believers  in  this  respect. 

1.  The  true  believer,  feeling  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy  in  his 
heart,  becomes  humble  and  lowly,  abases  himself,  and  sinks  into 
nothing  in  his  own  estimation  ;  he  wonders  and  is  amazed,  that  God 
will  even  look  at  such  a  base  and  vile  wretch,  as  he  sees  himself 
with  shame  to  be  :  he  saith  with  Jacob,  Gen^  xxxii.  10.  "I  am  not 
worthy  of  the  least  of  all  these  mercies,  and  of  all  this  truth  ;"  and 
with  David,  2  Sam.  vii,  18.  "  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God,  and  what 
is  my  house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto  ?"  But  the  tempo- 
rary believer  becomes  proud  and  haughty  in  consequence  of  his  ex- 
ercises, and  thinks  that  he  must  be  some  great  one  ;  he  speaks 
therefore  loftily,  is  too  wise  for  everyone,  he  behaves  himself  im- 
periously, and  requires  that  every  one  should  esteem  him  an  ex- 
ceedingly spiritual  and  advanced  Christian.  Such  a  puffer  Caiaphas 
showed  himself  to  be,  when  "  he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die 
for  the  people,"  John  xi.  49,  50,  51. 

2.  The  true  believer  feels  this  be^^inning  of  eternal  joy  in  his 
heart,  that  is  the  seat  of  his  work  of  grace  and  joy,  and  from  that  do 
all  his  good  motions  proceed  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord  ;  yea,  on 
this  account  he  endeavours  to  converse  with  his  heart,  that  he  may 
abide  in  the  love  of  God  :  "  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  un- 
derstanding, keeps  his  heart  and  mind,"  Philip,  iv.  7,  yea,  "  it  rules 


4:5fe  THE  BENEFiTS  GPTHE  CHURCH  AFTE^, 

in  l.is  heart,"  Coll.  iii.  15.  But  t lie  temporary  believer  derives  his 
joy  from  superficial  miUters,  the  contemplation  of  the  lovtly  myste- 
ries (if  God  tickles  him,  and  excites  an  agreeable  emotion  of  his 
^iood  and  spirits;  but  the  word  never  penetrates  into  his  heart,-  so 
as  to  captivate  and  possess  it :  "  he  receives  the  word  indeed  anon 
with  joy  i  yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself,"  Matt.  xiii.  20,  21. 

3.  The  beginning  of  eternal  joy  is  wrought  in  the  true  believer. 
hy  the  Spirit  of  God  :  "  His  hope  doth  not  make  him  a-ihamed,  be- 
cause the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghostj 
Who  is  given  unto  him  "  Rom.  v.  5.  He  knows  not  how  to  enlighten, 
or  to  enliven  himself,  but  he  seeks,  calls,  and  waits  for  the  Spirit, 
iike  David,  Psuhn  li.  8,  12.  "  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness  ; 
restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation."  It  must  be  just  the  fire 
of  God's  altar  that  kindles  him,  and  causeth  him  to  flame  forth  with 
joy.  On  the  contrary,  the  joy  of  the  temporary  believer  is  a  work 
of  his  ov.'n,  he  imagines  this  and  that  precious  frame  of  the  people  of 
God,  he  urges  and  forces  his  passions  thither,  and  so  a  certain  self- 
wrought  joy,  or  rather  imagmation  of  joy  ariseth  in  him ;  or  he 
imagines  wdthout  foundation  that  he  is  a  believer,  a  favourite  of  God, 
and  a  partaker  of  heaven,  with  v/hich  he  is  wonderfully  tickled  and 
pleased.  And  so  '•  he  kindles  a  fire  himself,  compasses  himself  about 
v/ith  sparks,  walks  in  the  light  of  his  fire,  and  in  the  sparks  which 
he  iiath  kindled :"  but  "  this  he  shall  have  of  the  Lord's  hand,"  and 
a  judicial  blindness,  "  he  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow,"  Jer.  1.  1 1. 

4.  The  beginning  of  this  joy  of  the  true  believer  is  in  God,  and 
in  his  favour  :  "  My  soul  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord,"  said  David, 
Psalm  XXXV  9.  It  wafts  his  soul  to  God,  unites  it  to  him,  it  finds 
its  rest,  quiet  and  satisfaction  in  him,  and  in  his  love,  and  in  nought 
else  :  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee.  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but 
God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever,"  said 
Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  25,26.  We  see  this  also,  Heb.  iii.  17,  18.. 
But  the  temporary  believer  rejoices  iii  himself,  because  he  is  so  wise, 
virtuous  and  accomplished,  and  all  his  exercises  are  without  God  ;. 
he  wonders  at  himself,  like  Balaam,  Numb.  xxiv.  3,  4.  "  He  took 
up  his  parable  and  said,  l^ab.am  the  son  of  Beor,  hath  said,  and  the. 
man  whose  eyes  are  op^^n  hath  said  ;  he  hath  said,  who  heard. the 
words  of  (iod,  who  saw  the  visions  of  the  Almighty,  falling  into  a 
trance  but  having  his  eyes  open." 

5.  Finally,  this  joy  renders  tl^e  true  believer  also  holy ;  he  sees 
nothing  now  but  holiness  in  God,  and  he  will  be  holy,  as  the  Lord 
is  holy  ;  ;he  discovery  which    God  makes  of  himself  to  him,  pro- 


THIS  LIFE.        XXIf.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.    '  A.5f 

^uceth  a  likeness  to  God  in  his  soul :  "  he  is  changed  into  the  same 
image,"  2  Cor.  iii  18.  Because  he  kiT^s  that  indulging  himsc'f  la 
sin  would  cause  God  to  hide  his  countenance  from  liim,  thciefure 
he  is  exceedingly  careful  of  defihng  himself.  Yea,  this  deligh  ,  and 
this  feeling  of  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy  detaches  him  fiom  sin, 
and  transports  his  soul  into  heaven,  that  he  may  have  his  conversa- 
tion there  only,  Philip,  iii.  19.  Observe  the  temporary  believer,  he 
is  sinful  and  vain  in  proportion  to  his  joy  ;  he  can  aow  do  any  thmg, 
though  ever  so  sinful,  without  any  anxiety,  if  otners  do  not  see  it, 
and  reproach  him  for  it :  doth  his  conscience  fly  m  his  face,  he  stifles 
it,  and  endeavours  to  silence  it,  he  will  not  allow  himself  to  suspect 
his  state  of  grace,  but  thinks,  once  a  gracious  person,  always  a  gra- 
cious person.  And  so  he  is  brought,  though  not  immediately,  to 
the  gieatest  and  vilest  sins  in  pubhck,  waxing  worse,  a  .d  becoming 
more  impenitent  than  before.  See  this,  Heb.  vi.  6,  7,  8,  x.  26 — 29. 
2  Peter  ii.  20,  21,  22. 

Alas  I  ye  who  hear  this,  and  have  not  yet  a  true,  but  only  a  fanci- 
ed foretaste  of  heaven,  a  shadow,  a  waking  dream,  see,  we  pray  you, 
how  dreadfully  ye  deceive  yourselves  ;  and  *'  recover  yourselves  yet 
out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  ye  are  taken  captive  by  him 
at  his  will ;"  for  if  ye  remain  as  ye  are,  ye  "  will  awake  to  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt,"  Dan.  xii.  2.  How  grievous  will  it  be 
for  you  to  fall  short  of  that  blessed  life,  for  which  ye  had  hoped, 
though  in  vain  !  friends,  what  a  dreadful  mistake  will  it  be,  to  ex- 
pect to  go  to  heaven,  and  to  be  sent  to  that  bottomless  gulph  of  per- 
dition, with  a  Balaam,  a  Judas,  and  a!l  the  hypocrites  !  how  intolera- 
ble will  it  be !  Therefore  return,  we  beseech  you;  "let  him  who 
thinketh  that  he  is  wise  become  a  fool,  thai  he  may  be  wise,"  I 
Cor.  iii.   18. 

But  shall  not  these  wise,  enlightened,  and  apparently  virtuous  per- 
sons be  raised  up  to  salvation,  how  then,  think  ye,  will  it  f^r-  with 
you,  who  are  ignorant,  worldly-minded,  ungodly,  and  at  b-  st  only 
civil,  and  outwardly  religious  ?  can  ye  think  that  God  will  raise  you 
up  to  salvation,  if  he  should  deal  with  you  according  to  his  word,  as 
he  will  deal  with  you  ?  do  ye  hope  that  he  will  ?  have  ye  any  ground 
for  your  hope  ?  are  ye  born  again,  and  converted  ?  do  ye  be lif^ve, 
and  are  ye  holy  ?  for  such,  and  no  others,  shall,  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  see  his  kingdom.  Therefore  be  solicitous  to  know- 
how  ye  may  be  saved,  be  more  concerned,  we  pray  you,  about  your 
salvation  and  damnation,  and  -^  labour  not  for  tiie  meat  that  perish- 
eth,  but  for  that  meat  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life,"  John  vi. 
27.     Surely,  everlasting  life  is  worthy,  that  ye  should  do  more  for 

3  O 


458         Th^:  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

it,  and  think  more  of  it  than  ye  have  hitherto  done  :  therefore  re-- 
cover from  your  carelessness  :  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleeptst,  and  arise 
from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  ^ive  thee  ligiu,"  Eph.  v.  14. 

Bui,  true  believers,  who  have  this  great  expectation  cf  a  blessed 
resurrection  to  an  everlasting  life  with  God,  manifest  it  in  your  con* 
Versation.     And  therefore. 

I.  Believe  tliat  there  will  indeed  be  such  a  resurrection  and  ever- 
lasting- life  for  those  who  seek  the  Lord.  It  is  not  enough  to  sup- 
pose this  as  a  truth  :  no,  we  must  with  elevated  minds  assure  our** 
selves  of  it,  and  obtain  a  clear  apprehension  of  it  from  the  testimony 
of  God,  so  that  these  two  great  benefits,  v/hich  are  yet  afar  off,  may 
beam,  in  a  lively  manner,  and  as  if  present,  in  our  eyes  :  for  *' faith 
is  the  substance  ot  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen," 
Heb.  xi.  1.  So  '^  Moses  had  by  faith  respect  to  the  recompence  of 
the  reward,"  Heb.  xi.  8  Because  we  attend  so  little  to  this,  there- 
fore all  our  exertions,  with  respect  to  this  great  future  salvation  arc 
so  languid,  slothful,  and  sluggish,  so  that  they  have  no  influence 
upon  the  exercises  of  the  soul. 

2.  Believe  for  yourselves,  O  believers,  that  ye  yourselves  will  be 
raitied  up,  in  order  to  enjoy  everlasting  life.  So  Job  and  Paul 
acted,  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  2  Tim.  i.  12.  Ye  cannot  otherwise 
rejoice,  or  praise  the  Lord,  or  conduct  worthily  of  that  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  you.  Do  ye  think  that  it  is  safest  for  you  to 
doubt,  that  ye  may  not  become  careless,  nor  deceive  yourselves  in  a 
matter  of  such  great  importance,  let  the  Papists  say  that  such  an 
assurance  would  render  a  person  careless,  but  do  not  ye,  who  pro- 
fess a  different  doctrine  according  to  the  word  of  God  ;  for  this  as- 
surance would  stir  you  up  to  love  and  serve  God,  and  would  render 
you  fervent  in  spirit.  It  is  true,  we  ought  not  to  assure  ourselves  of 
our  blessed  resurrection,  and  everlasting  life  upon  slender  founda- 
tions, that  we  may  not  deceive  ourselves  with  vain  imaginations : 
but  when  we  have  truly,  heartily  and  frequently  received  Christ  for 
sanctification,  as  well  as  for  glorification,  then  there  is  no  danger  ; 
but  ye  sny,  I  have  never  had  a  foretaste  of  everlasting  life.  Consider 
well,  is  this  indeed  true  ?  is  it  not  a  prejudice  proceeding  from  un- 
belief that  the  consolations  of  God  are  small  with  you  ?  do  ye  know 
nothing  at  all  of  tiie  discovery  of  grace  in  your  souls,  that  ye  do  truly 
hate,  and  oppose  whatever  is  sinful,  that  ye  do  earnestly  call  on  and 
seek  the  Lord,  so  that  this  manifestation  enlivened  you,  and  gave 
you  hope  ?  are  ye  utter  strangers  to  that  calm  and  agreeable  peace 
of  soul  ?  and  tliough  ye  have  not  obtained  such  a  measure  of  grace, 
■^  fills  the  heart,  this  is  no  evidence  that  ye  are  not  interested  in  the 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       459 

divine  favour.  Many  heirs  of  everlasting  life  have  not  that  measure. 
It  is  indeed  a  sure  evidence  of  a  blessed  hope  to  those  who  enjoy,  or 
have  enjoyed  it,  because  the  Lord  doth  not  grant  it  to  any  except 
his  favourites ;  but  it  is  no  evidence,  that  others  have  no  right  to 
this  blessed  expectation,  if  they  have  not  experienced  such  a  power 
of  the  divine  favour  ;  for  thea  other  true  believers,  like  Heman  in 
the  eighty  eighth  psalm,  would  have  been  without  hope  ;  and  who 
can  think  this  ?  Therefore,  believers,  inquire  only  whether  your  sins 
excite  sorrow  in  you,  whether  Jesus  be  not  truly  and  actually  pre- 
cious to  you,  and  whether  ye  do  not  love  the  brethren,  and  thus 
manifest,  that  ye  have  passed  from  death  to  life. 

3.  Wonder,  triumph  and  rejoice  now  in  this  hope  and  expectation 
of  such  a  future  glory.  So  David  acted,  when  he  said  to  the  Lord, 
Psalm  xxxi.  19,  <"  O  how  great  is  thy  goodness,  which  thou  hast 
laid  up  for  them  that  fear  thee  1"  Paul  speaking  in  the  name  of  all 
the  saints,  saith,  Rom*  v.  2.  "  We  rejoice  in  t-he  hope  of  the  g'ory 
of  God."  Peter  said  to  the  believers  of  his  time,  *'  In  whom,"  namely 
Jesus  Christ,  "  though  now  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing  ye  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory  ;  receiving  the  end  of  your 
faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls,"  1  Peter  i.  8,  9,  Is  not  the 
blessed  resurrectioa  and  everlasting  life  worthy  of  our  wonder,  tri- 
\imph,  and  joy  ?  Consider  only  what  such  imwortby  beings  as  ye  are 
shall  enjoy,  and  will  it  not  ravish  you,  and  transport  you  so  that  ye 
will  shout  and  give  thanks  to  God  in  the  most  exalted  strains  ? 

4.  Let  this  great  expectation  also  render  you  courageous  in  your 
duty.  It  becomes  you  to  deny  yourselves,  your  inclnatinns,  all  that 
is  earthly,  and  selfish-  It  is  no  more  than  proper  that  ye  should  bear 
willingly  every  cross  and  affliction,  which  the  Lord  layeth  upon  you ; 
and  it  is  your  duty  to  conduct  yourselves  in  all  things  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  And  is  not  this  glory,  which  we  expect,  worthy  of 
our  utmost  doing  and  suffering  ?  must  an  heir  of  such  a  salvation 
have  his  own  will  also,  that  which  is  earthly,  his  erise,  and  his  sins? 
No,  Moses  was  wiser  than  this?  Heb.  xi  24,  25,  26.  "  fie  refused 
to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter ;  choosing  rather  to  suf- 
fer affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to.  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
sin  for  a  season  ;  esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 
than  the  treasures  of  Egypt :  for  he  had  respect  unto  the  recom- 
pence  of  the  reward."  This  glory  ought  surely  to  encourage  you  in 
every  condition  ;  "  for  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,^ 
M'orketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  ; 
while  v/e  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
v/hich  are  not  seen  !  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporaJ  ? 


460         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

but  the  things  that  are  not  seen  are  eternal,"  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18, 
*'  Wherefore,'  we  receivinpj  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,  let 
us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  rever- 
ence and  godly  fear ;"  so  I  speak  with  Paul,  Heb.  xii.  28. 

5.  Long  for  that  blessed  resurrection,  and  that  everlasting  life  : 
"  My  reins,"  cried  Job,  '*  long  exceedingly  within  me,"  chap.  xix. 
27.  "  He  who  testifieth  these  things  saith.  Surely  I  come  quickly, 
Amen.  Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus,"  Rev.  xxii.  20.  The  apostle 
saith  of  himself,  and  of  believers,  2  Cor.  v.  3.  "  In  this  we  groan 
earnestly,  desirmg  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  from 
heaven."  Why  should  a  Christian  cling  to  aught  that  is  here  ?  this 
country  shall  not  be  his  rest  ;  his  goods,  his  life  is  not  here  :  let  the 
wurldJmg,  who  hath  no  hope  in  futurity,  settle  iiimself  here  ;  but 
citizens  of  heaven,  saints  of  the  high  places,  "  ye  have  no  continuing 
cny  here,  but  must  seek  one  to  come,"  Heb.  xiii.  14.  There,  even 
there  wiii  ye  be  delivered  from  whatever  afiiicts  you  now,  and  enjoy 
tile  only  satisfying  good.  This  loadstone  should  draw  your  desires 
and  loUfj-iags  toward  it :  therefore  "  look  for  and  hasten  to  the  com- 
ing of  the  day  of  God,"  2  Peter  iii.  12,  Let  your  longing  never- 
theless oe  accompanied  with,  and  moderated  by  patience  :  ybuv 
longmg  ought  not  to  be  a  peevish  fretfulness  on  account  of  your  ad- 
versities, but  an  earnest  desire,  arising  from  the  greatness  of  the 
goodness,  which  the  Lord  hath  laid  up  for  them  who  fear  him,  and 
submit  themselves  to  him,  who  hath  the  times  and  seasons  in  his 
own  hands.  Be  willing  therefore  "  to  serve  the  counsel  of  God," 
with  David,  "  before  ye  fall  asleep,"  in  hope  of  a  resurrection  to 
everlasting  life,  Acts  xiii.  36. 

6.  In  the  mean  time  endeavour  to  obtain  a  foretaste,  and  a  feeling 
of  the  begmning  of  eternal  joy,  and  to  enjoy  it  often,  and  more  and 
more.  This  was  the  petition  of  the  church.  Psalm  cvi.  4,  5.  "  He- 
member  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest  unto  thy 
people  :  O  visit  me  with  thy  salvation ,  that  I  may  see  the  good  of 
thy  chosen,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation  ;  that  I 
may  glory  with  thine  inheritance."  There  cannot  be  a  sadder  case, 
than  that  the,  heirs  of  that  fruitful  country  dwell,  like  the  rebellious, 
in  a  barren  land.  Let  then  your  "  souls  thirst  for  God.  for  the  liv- 
ing God,"  as  the  soul  of  David  did.  Psalm  xUi.  1,  2.  Believe  in,  ind 
improve  your  title  to  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  of 
the  covenant  of  grace,  suck  from  them,  and  breathe  in  him,  in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  grace  ;  yea,  live  and  feast  on  all  the  bless- 
ings which  he  h  th  purchased  and  promised  you,  that  your  "souls 
may  be  saiisfied  with  mariow  and  fatness,  and  your  mouths  may 


THIS  LIFE.     XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  5d.     ^    461 

praise  him  with  joyful  lips,"  Psalm  Ixiii,  5,  And  when  ye  enjoy 
good  in  tlie  days  of  prosperity,  remember  then  also  the  days  of  ad- 
versity, laying  up  something  against  them,  and  feeding  then  on  it, 
"considering  the*  days  of  old,"  with  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxvii.  6.  It  will 
also  be  good  to  endeavour  to  continue  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  lor- 
ingkindness  of  the  Lord,  and  to  "  abide  in  his  love,  and  thus  to  ex- 
pect the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  everlasting  life."  It 
behooves  you  therefore  to  conduct  yourselves  tenderly  and  circum- 
spectly, that  he  may  not  depart  from  you  with  his  goodness :  "  Let 
your  conversation  be  in  heaven,  from  whence  ye  look  for  the  Sa- 
viour," Phihp.  iii.  20.  And  endeavour  in  all  things  to  know  the 
will  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  his  commandments,  that  he  rnay  con- 
tinue to  favour  you  with  his  kindness.  This  our  Saviour  requlrefh, 
John  XV.  9,  10.  "As  the  P'ather  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved 
you  ;  continue  ye  in  my  love.  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  yc 
shall  abide  in  my  love  ;  even  as  J  have  kept  my  Father's  command- 
ments, and  abide  in  his  love.  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto 
you,  that  my  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might 
be  full." 

7.  Do  not  sorrow  too  much,  when  your  godly  friends  die,  as 
though  they  were  lost  for  ever.  They  arc  not  dead  with  respect  to 
their  best  part,  their  soul ;  no,  that  was  imm.ediately  taken  up  to 
Christ  their  Head  :  will  ye  then  mourn  so  much  en  account  of  their 
happiness .''  have  ye  nevertheless  lost  them  ;  ye  will  recover  them 
again  for  ever ;  they  have  died,  not  to  remain  dead,  but  lo  live,  to 
live  a  better  life,  than  before  their  death  ;  for  they  vAll  be  raised  up 
in  a  conformity  to  the  glorious  body  of  your  Lord,  and  then  live  for 
ever.  So  Paul  comforts  those  who  remain,  when  he  saith,  1  Thess. 
iv.  13,  14,  "  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concern- 
ing them  which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not  as  others  which 
have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died,  and  rose  again, 
even  so  them  also  v/hich  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him." 
Finally, 

8.  As  ye  ought  not  to  sorrow  too  much  for  the  death  of  your 
godly  friends,  so  ye  ought  not  neither  to  dread  your  own  death  too 
much.  Death  is  net  a  king  of  terrours  to  the  heirs  of  the  promises, 
as  he  is  to  the  ungodly,  but  he  must  shov/  a  smiling  and  friendly 
fare  to  you.  He  will  come  only  to  loosen  your  cords  of  sins  and 
miseries,  that  he  mr.y  let  you  ily  free  out  of  your  cage  in  the  open 
air  of  the  third  heaven*  Ye  say,  it  is  nevertheless  a  bitter  thing 
to  die  ;  it  is  true,  but  itia  not  always  zo,  neither  doth  it  .endure  long  : 


46*  THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &g. 

and  although  it  may  be  exceedingly  grievous,  the  dying  person  carj 
strengthen  himself  against  it  by  the  consideration,  that  this  mortal 
must  be  dissolved  in  such  a  manner,  in  order  "  to  put  on  incormp- 
tion,  and  immortality,"  that  it  m..y  live  for  ever,  and  that  "  then,'* 
according  to  1  Cor.  xv.  54 — 57,  "shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  say- 
ing that  is  written,  Death  is  swallovi^ed  up  in  victory.  O  death, 
where,  is  thy  sting  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  The  sting  of 
death  is  sin  ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  :  but  thanks  be  la 
God,  which  giveth  us  victory  thrcugh  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,." 
Amen. 


<  463  ) 


THE 


JUSTIFICATION 


OF  THE 


SINNER  BEFORE  GOD 


XXni.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Rom.  iv.  5.  But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  in  him  that 
justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness.

Q.  58.  Wliat  comfort  takest  thou  from  the  article  of  "  life  everlast- 
ing ? 

A.  That  since  I  now  feel  in  my  heart  the  beginning  of  eternal  ' 
joy ;  after  tl.is  life,  I  shall  inherit  perfect  salvation,  which  "  eye  hath 
not  seen,   nor  ear  heard,   neither  hath  it  entered   into  the  heart  of 
man,"  to  conceive  1  and  that,  to  praise  God  therein  for  ever. 

<(  r~r^ 

JL  HE  gifts  and  catling  of  God  are  witliout  repentance,"  saith 
Paul,  Rom.  xi.  29.    *<  It  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man 


438         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

on  the  earth,"  Gen.  vi.  6.     This  doth  not  betoken  that  God,  pro- 
perly speaking,  is  capable  of  repeniing  ;  he  is  indeed  perfectly  wise, 
simple,  blesied,   and  unchanf^eable  ;  but  it  means  that   God  would 
maiiiiest  his  ci'spkasure  by  destroying   his  work,  even  man.     But 
^'  his  i^ifts  of  grace,  and  his  callinj^  are  without  repentance:"  these 
he  doth  not  change,  nor  take  away  ;  for  he  hath  said  to  his  people, 
Isaiah  liv   9.     "  The  mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hilh  shall  be 
removed,  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neith<rr  shall 
the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed."     iiis  everlasting  counsel  of 
grace,  from  which  his  gifs  of  grace  and   his  calling  aie  communi- 
cated  is  unchangeable,  and  he  hath  confirmed  his  promises  with  an 
oath  by  himself,  Heb.  vi.  17.     The  covenant  of  grace  is,   as  it  were, 
an  unchangeable  testament,  rendered  irrevocable  by  the  death  of  the 
testator  Christ,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  16,  17.     Yea,  the 
Spirit,  v/ho  is  the  seal  and  pledge  of  the  heirs,  «  abides  with  them 
for  ever,"  John  xiv.  16.     Therefore  the  favourites  of  God,  making 
their  boast  in  the  Lord,  on  account  of  his  everlasting  kindness,  say 
Psalm  xlviii.  14.     *'  This   God  is  our  God  ;  he   will  be   our  guide 
even  unto  death."     Even  dec\th  itself  doth  not  interrupt  his  kindness 
to  them  ;  for  "  the  Spirit  pronounceth  those  blessed  who  die  in  the 
Lord,"  Rev.  xiv.  13.     And  though  their  bodies  dwell   in  the  dust 
and  in  silence,  the  Lord   doth  not  however  v/ithdraw  his  good  hand 
from   them,  but  he   will  raise  up  their  bodies,   as  the  bodies  of  his 
saints,  and  satisfy  them   with  the  fulness  of  his  salvation.     David^ 
trusting  in  this,  saith  in  the  text,  "I  will  behold  thy  face  in  right-^ 
eousness,  I  will  be  satisfied  when  I  awake,  with  thy  likeness."    This 
the  instructor  also  teacheth  us  in  this  Lord's  day. 

The  instructor  having  spoken   in  the  former  Lord's  day  of  the 
benefits  and  the  giftb  of  grace,  which  God  bestows  upon  his  church 
in  this  life,  shovvs  now  that  they  are  without  repentance,  since  they 
are  not  taken  away  in  death,  but  are  followed  by  those  great  benefits^ 
which  the  Lord  wilr  communicate  to  his  church  after  this  life. 
These  benefits  aie  two  : 
J.  The  resurrection  of  the  body,  Q.  57. 
11.  Life  everlasting,  Q.  58. 

J.  The  first  of  these  two  benefits  is  the  resurrection  of  the  body. 
It  is  therefore  evident,  that  the  instructor  doth  not  speak  here  of  a 
civil  resurrection,  by  which  we  are  raised  up  from  some  bodily  afRic- 
lion,  which  is  also  called  a  resurrection,  and  a  rising,  Hosea  vi-  1,  2, 
and  which  is  represented  by  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  Ezek.  xxxvii. 
1  —  U.  Neither  doth  he  make  mention  here  of  a  spiritual  resurrec- 
tion by  regeneration  and  conversion,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks, 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       435 

Eph.  V.  14,  but  of  a  resurrection  of  the  body,  after  it  hath  fallen  by 
death.  "With  respect  to  this  reiurrtction  it  h  shown  in  the  fifty 
seventh  question,  1.  What  becomes  of  the  soul,  after  its  separation 
from  the  body  by  death ;  "  That  my  soul  after  this  life  shall  be  im- 
mediately taken  up  to  Christ  its  Head."  2.  What  shall  become  of 
the  dead  body  :  "  That  this  my  body,  being  raised  by  the  power  of 
Christ,"  &c. 

When  the  instructor  saith,  *'  that  my  soul  shall  be  immediately 
taken  up  to  Christ  its  Head,"  he  then  supposeth  not  only  that  man, 
yea,  that  the  believer  also  shall  die  ;  for  "  it  is  appointed  to  men 
once  to  die,"  Htb.  ix.  27,  but  also  that  the  body  alone  dies,  and  not 
the  soul,  which  departs  from  the  body  ;  for  the  sorl  is  immortal. 
The  word  of  God  teacheth  us  this,  Eccl.  xii.  7.  "  The  dust  shall 
return  to  the  earth  as  it  was ;  and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God 
who  gave  it."  See  also  what  the  Saviour  saith.  Matt.  x.  28.  But 
reason  also  teacheth  us  that  the  soul  is  immortal ;  for  the  soul  is 
a  spirit,  an  active  substance,  having  in  itself  a  principle,  and  a  nat- 
ural ability  to  act  from  itself,  and  to  determine  itself  by  its  own  free 
choice  and  willingly  to  this  or  that  action  ;  which  cannot  happen  in 
aug^it  that  is  material  and  bodily,  for  that  must  be  itioved  by  some- 
thing without  itself.  From  which  it  therefore  follows,  that  the  soul 
is  wholly  i  umaterial,  and  so  that  it  cannot  be  dissolved,  and  there- 
fore cannot  die.  Add  to  this,  that  the  soul  hath  an  innate  desire  to 
immortality,  which  cannot  be  to  no  purpose.  Solomon  saith  indeed 
that  "  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above  a  beast"  in  his  death,  Eccl. 
iii-  18,  19,  20,  but  he  speaks  then  of  the  outward  appearance,  ac- 
cording to  which  "  none  perceives  that  the  spirit  of  the  sons  of  men 
goeth  upward,  and  that  the  spirit  of  the  beast  goeth  downward  to 
the  earth,"  as  he  speaks  in  the  twenty  first  verse,  supposing  that  the 
spirit  of  men,  that  is,  their  soul,  goeth  to  God  ;  which  is  so  much 
the  more  evident,  when  we  observe  that  he  had  taught  in  the  seven- 
teenth verse,  that  "  God  will  judge  the  righteous  and  the  wicked." 
See  this  opinion  of  his  also,  Eccl.  xi.  9.  xii.  14.  We  might  also  say 
that  Solomon  recites,  Eccl.  iii  18 — 22,  only  the  language  of  Athe- 
ists, who  deny  the  immortality  of  the  soul :  yea,  it  deserves  our  con- 
sideration, whether  the  ecclesiastes  of  Solomon  be  not  a  dialogue,  in 
which  one  while  Solomon  speaks,  and  then  also  a  siily  youth,  whom 
he  introduceth  speaking,  and  who  looks  upon  sensual  pleasure  as 
the  chief  good,  and  thus  denies  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  in  oppo- 
sition to  what  Solomon  had  taught  him  in  the  seventeenth  verse  In 
what  light  soever  we  view  this  text,  wc  will  see  that  it  doth  not  op- 
pose the  immortality  of  the  souK 


440         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

From  what  hath  been  said  we  may  certainly  conclude,  that  the 
soul  exists,  and  is  active  after  its  separation  from  the  dead  body,  and 
that  it  is  not  without  joy  or  sorrow,  and  that  it  doth  not  sleep  until 
the  day  of  judgment,  as  the  Socinians  and  Mennonites  imagine  ;  for 
the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  immediately  taken  up  to  Christ  their 
Head,   into  heaven,     "  We  know,"  saith  Paul  2  Cor.  v.  1,  "that  if 
our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a  build- 
ing of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hunds,  but  eternal  in  the  heav- 
ens."    For  this  he  also  longed,  Philip,  i.  23.     This  the  Saviour  also 
promised  to  the  converted  thief,    Luke  xxiii.  43.     And  so  also  the 
■  souls  of  the  wicked   are  cast  down  into  hell,  as  we  see  in  the  rich 
man,    Luke  xvi.  23.     Will  souls  sleep  in   heaven  or  hell  ?  No,   in 
heaven  they  arc  active  in  the  highest  degree,  contemplating  God, 
loving  him,  praising  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  ;  ''  for  they  all  live 
lo  him,"  Luke  xx.  38.     They  do   not  sleep  in  hell    neither  without 
feeling  ;  for  "  the  rich  man  was  tormented  in  the  flame."  Luke  xvi. 
24.     v-  Sodom  and  Gomoirah,   and  the  cities  about  them  suffer  the 
vengeance  of  eterna.  fire,"   Jude  vrs.  7.     And  if  we  look  into  this 
matter  aright,  we  will  find  that  the  opinion  concerning  the  sleeping 
cf  souls  reduces  heaven  and  hell  to  a  mere  fable.     The  dead  are  in- 
deed sometimes  said  to  sleep  and  rest ;  but  this  is  to  be  understood 
cither  of  the  body,   as  the  Saviour  saith,  **  Lazarus  our  friend  sleep- 
eth,"  speaking  of  his  death,  John  xi.  1 1,  13,  or  of  resting  from  tribu- 
lation, ^' their  labour,"  Rev.  xiv.  13,  or  of  waiting  for  a  fuller  reve- 
lation of  glory,  Rev.  vi.  11. 

As  the  sleeping  of  souls,  maintained  by  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
nonites,  is  absurd,  so  the  porch  of  the  fathers,  and  purgatory,  main- 
tained by  the  Papists,  is  fabulous.  These  men,  in  order  to  vend  at 
a  high  rate  their  wares  of  auricular  confession,  indulgences,  rosaries, 
selfrighteousness,  masses  for  souls,  and  other  trifles,  have  invented 
four  different  abodes  for  the  souls  of  the  dead,  next  to,  and  above 
each  other :  the  lowest  is  hell,  which  is  for  the  damned  ;  next  to 
this  is  purgatory,  which  is  as  hot  as  hell,  and  in  which  the  souls,  who 
are  not  sufficiently  purified  here  by  their  own  satisfaction,  or  that  of 
Christ,  are  perfectly  purified  by  a  long,  though  not  an  everlasting 
torment:  above  hell  is  a  receptacle  for  unbaptized  children,  and 
above  this  is  the  porch  of  hell,  where  the  believing  fathers  of  the 
Old  Testament  were  confined,  as  in  a  prison,  until  Christ  descended 
into  hell,  and  delivered  them  out  of  it.  Trifles.  The  word  of  God 
knows  nothing  of  this,  but  saith  that  the .  ancient  believers,  when 
dying,  ''waited  for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  xhx.  18,  and 
that  "  after  they  had  been  guided  by  the  counsel  of  God,  they  were 


THIS  LIFE.        XXil.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       441 

leceived  into  glory,"  Psalm  Ixxlii.  24.  *  The  Captain  of  salvation 
had  even  then  brought  many  souls  to  glory,"  Heb,  ii,  10.  The 
fathers  lived  to  God  after  their  death,  Luke  xx,  38.  The  reflex 
virtue  of  the  merits  of  their  Surety  conveyed  them  instantly  to  heaven. 
See  Rom.  iii.  25,  26.  Heb.  ii.  10.  ix.  15.  Peter  saith  indeed  that 
Christ  precahed  to  the  rpirits  in  prison,"  1  Peter  iii.  19,  but  those 
were  not  the  spirits  of  the  believing  fathers,  bat  of  the  disobedient 
inhabitants  of  the  old  world,  as  appears  from  the  twentieth  verse  : 
who  were  not  in  prison  then,  but  now,  to  wit,  in  Peter's  time,  whtn 
the  fathers  were  delivered  out  of  the  prison  :  moieover,  Christ 
preached  not  to  them  in  his  own  person,  but  by  the  Spirit,  vrs.  18, 
19)  and  that  not  while  they  were  in  prison,  but  while  "they  were 
disobedient,  when  once  the  longsuffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days 
of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  preparing,"  vrs.  20.  "  The  pit  whereia 
there  is  no  water,"  Zech  ix.  11,  is  not  the  porch,  but  the  misery, 
spiritual  or  temporal,  from  which  the  people  of  the  Lord  are  deliver- 
ed by  the  blood  of  the  covenant. 

As  there  is  no  porch  of  hell,  so  there  is  no  purgatory,  in  which 
impure  sou's  must  be  purified  by  a  hot  flame  ;  for  the  word  of  God 
knows  of  only  heaven  and  hell,  and  not  of  purgatory  :  believers  are 
immediately  taken  up  to  Christ  their  Head,  as  we  have  proved  % 
«  The  blood  of  Jes-us  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin,"  I  John  i.  7.  And  the  soul  no  sooner  leaves  the  body,  than  it 
is  perfectly  "justified,"  and  therefore  also  purified,  Rom.  vi-  7. 

In  order  that  they  may  have  a  cloak  for  their  shame,  they  object 
here  what  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  iii.  12,  13.  "If  any  man  build  upon 
this  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble : 
every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest;  because  it  shall  be  reveal- 
ed by  fire  ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it 
is."  But  we  do  not  find  one  word  here  of  a  purgatory,  which  cleans- 
eth souls  from  sin  ;  this  passage  speaks  of  the  fire  of  aflliction,  which 
tries,  reveals  and  declares,  not  the  persons,  but  the  good  and  evil 
works  of  the  builders,  to  wit,  of  the  preachers,  and  not  of  every  be- 
liever. We  will  not  recite  all  the  objections  of  the  adversaries,  but 
refute  only  this  one,  which  they  alledge  from  1  Cor.  xv.  29.  "  Else 
what  shall  they  do  which  are  baptised  for  the  dead,  if  the  dead  rise 
not  at  all  ?  why  are  they  then  baptized  for  the  dead  ?"  By  baptism 
they  understand  the  baptism  of  tears,  and  of  making  satisfaction  by 
prayers,  alms,  &c.  by  which  the  dead  are  relieved  in  purgatory.  But 
from  what  doth  it  appear  that  we  must  understand  by  baptism  here 
the  baptism  of  tears  and  of  making  satisfaction  ?  that  by  the  dead 
the  souls  in  purgatoiy  are  meant  ?  and  that  they  are  purified  by  such 

3M 


442         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

a  baptism  ?  of  this  there  is  neither  word  nor  tiltle  in  the  passage 
alledged.  But  we  must  know,  in  order  to  understand  the  sense  of 
these  words,  that  the  aj^ostle  hath  not  respect  here  to  any  custorrtj 
which  took  place  in  the  cnurch  alter  his  time,  but  to  something  that 
happened  in  his  time.  And  it  was  this,  that  when  the  martyrs  were 
slain,  others  joined  themselves  to  the  afflicted  church  in  their  stead, 
and  declared  this  by  submitting  unto  baptism,  which  they  would  not 
have  done,  it'  they  had  not  had  a  certain  hope  of  a  blessf d  resurrec- 
tion, which  was  excited  in  them,  when  they  saw  that  the  martyrs, 
animated  by  such  a  hope,  suffered  courageously  the  most  painful 
death  We  conceive  that  this  is  the  simple  and  trident  sense  of  the 
passage  ;  for  by  the  dead  we  must  understand  those  who  had  been 
slain  by  the  death  of  martyrdom,  as  appears  from  vrs.  SO.  31,  32. 
Baptism  denotes  here  water  baptism,  the  piiblick  token,  that  a  person 
hath  received  the  Christian  doctrine  :  for  tiere  occurs  no  reason 
here  why  we  should  depart  from  the  literal  signification  of  baptism. 
To  be  baptised  for  the  dead,  in  Greek  ufier  toon  nekroon,  signifies  in 
tlie  stCLid  of  the  dead  ;  for  u/isr  signifies  for,  and  in  the  stead  of,  and 
thus  it  denotes  that  for,  and  in  the  stead  of  the  martyrs,  who  were 
taken  from  the  church,  others  joined  themselves  to  her  by  suffering 
themselves  to  be  baptised.  And  so  this  was  a  powerful  argument  iri 
favour  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  that  these  newly  baptized  per- 
sons appeared  to  be  so  powerfully  convinced  of  it,  in  the  midst  of  so 
much  danger  ;  for  the  hope  of  the  resurrection,  which  wrought  sa 
effectually  in  their  minds,  that  they  professed  Christianity  amidst  so 
much  d?,nger.  could  not  be  a  vain  hope.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith, 
♦'  Else  what  shall  they  do,  if  the  dead  rise  not  at  all  ?"  shall  they 
deny  the  profession,  of  which  they  have  been  weH  assured  ?  this  is 
impossible,  would  he  say. 

And  ttius  we  see  that  the  souls  of  believers  are  immediately  taken 
up  to  Christ  their  Head. 

2.  But  what  will  brcome  of  the  dead  body?  this  must  be  thrust 
into  a  dark  pit,  the  grave,  or  be  consumed  l)y  fire,  or  be  given  to  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowls  of  the  air,  or  the  fishes  of  the  sea  for 
food.  But  sjiiall  the  bodies  of  the  saints  remain'  for  ever  in  this  con- 
dition ?  No,  *'  this  my  body"  saith  the  instructor,  "  being  raised  by 
the  power  of  Christ,  shall  be  re-united  with  my  soul,  and  made  like 
unto  the  gloiious  body  of  Christ.'*  That  we  may  have  a  proper 
apprehension  of  this,  we  will  consider,  l.The  nature  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body,  2.  The  univeisality  of  it,  3.  The  agent,  4.  The 
qualities,  5.  The  time,  6.  The  reality  and  certainty  of  it.  We  will 
♦i>sat  ofeach  particular  briefly. 


lllIS  LIFE.        XXir.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.         U^ 

\,  The  nature  of  the  resuvrectian  of  the  body  is  beautifully  ex- 
plained \^  the  words  of  the  catechism,  just  now  quoted,  to  wit,  (a) 
That  this  body  shall  be  raised.  The  Lord  God  having  a  knowledge 
of,  and  power  over  all  the  scattered  parts,  even  the  least,  will  unite 
them  all  n^ain,  and  produce  the  fornier  system  of  the  body  anew. 
Thus  Ezeki'.:!  saw  in  a  vision  "  a  shaking  of  the  dead  and  dry  bones, 
and  that  the  hones  came  together,  bone  to  his  bone  ;  and  sinews  and 
flesh  came  up  upon  them,  and  they  were  covered  with  skin,"  Ezek. 
xxxvii.  7,  8.  (b)  This  body  will  bs  united  again  to  its  soul,  and  so  be 
made  alive  :  Ezekicl  also  saw  that  "the  breath  entered  into  the  bodies 
and  they  lived,  and  stood  upon  their  feet,"  vrs.  10.  (c)  It  belongs 
also  to  the  nature  of  the  resurrection,  th^  the  dead  will  go  forth  otit 
of  their  graves,  as  the  Saviour  teacheth,  John  v.  28,  29. 

2.  Not  only  this  and  that  person  will  rise   again  in   this  manner^ 
but  ail  the  dead.     Enoch  and  Elijah,  since    they  never  saw  death, 
need  not  rise  again.     Those  w^ho  remain  alive    at   the    end   of  the 
world  will    not   die,  and  tnerefore   will  not    rise  ;    but   "  they  will 
be  changed  in  a  moment,"  or  very  quickly,  1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52,  which 
will  be  to  them,  instead  of  death  and  the  resurrection,  and  will  render 
them  immortal  and  incorruptible.     But  these  excepted,  all  men  will 
rise,  both  the  wicked  and  the  godly.     This    son>e  of  the   Jews    and 
of  the  Socinians  deny.     But  the  word  of  God   teacheth   us  that  all 
will  arise  :  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep   in  the  dust  of  the   earth  shall 
av/ake,"  Dan.  xii   2,  We  may  not  say  that  many  are  not  all,  because 
these  many  comprehend  not  only  those  who   '*  awake  to  everlasting 
life,"  but  also  those  who   "  awake  to  shame,   and   everlasting   con- 
tempt."    Oar  Saviour  teacheth  us  the  same  thing,  saying,  John   v. 
28,  29,  "  All  that  are  in  the  graves,"  Sec.     How  shall  all  else  "  ap- 
pear before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ  ?"  2  Cor.  v.  10.     Yea,  how 
tlse    should   the   justice    of  God   be  exercised    in    punishing  the 
wicked,  according  to  2  Thess.  i.  6,  if  they  rise  not  to  everlasting  con- 
demnation ?  The  blessed  rcsurrectionjof  the  body  is  indeed  a  benefit, 
and  the  hope  of  the  church,  but  it  doth  not  exclude  the  resurrection 
of  the  ungodly,  since  that  is  also   a  benefit  and  hope  ^of  the  church, 
because  she  will  see  God  glorified  thereby  in  her  enemies.     There- 
fore Paul  saith.  Acts.  xxiv.   15-  "I  have  hope  toward    God,   which 
they  themselves  also  allow,  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  both  of  the  just  and  unjust." 

3.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  with  the  silly  notions  of  the  Jews, 
who  fancy  that  there  is  an  incorruptible  joint  in  the  back-bone,  which 
will  be  moistened  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  will  extend  and  dilate 
like  leaven,  and  thus  restore  the  whole  man.     We  believe  with  iho 


444        THE  BFNEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

instructor,  the  word  of  God,  which  informs  us,   •'  that  we    shall  be 
raised  by  the  po.\er  of  Christ."     The  Father  hath  committed  this 
work  to  his  Son,  as  his  dispensation.     "  This,"  saith  he,  John  vi*  30, 
'Ms  the  will  of  the  Fatlici  Wuich  hath  sent  me,  that  of  all  which  he 
hath  i^jiven  me,  1  should  lose  nothin^r,  but  should  raise  it  up  at  the 
last  day."     And  thus  he   quickeneih  whom  he    will,  as  the   Father 
raiseth  up  the  dead  and  quickeneih  them,"   John  v.    21.     And   so 
*'  God  will  raisij  us  up  by  Jesus  "  2  Cor.  iv.  14.     For  which  purpose 
Christ  will  exert  his  power  and    influence   upon    the    c^ead    bodiesj 
that  they  may  be  quickened  ;  and  this  power  will  be   manifested   by 
his  penetrating  "  Voice,  which  the  dead  will   hear,"  John  v.  28,  and 
which  will  perhaps  be  "  the  great    sound  of  the  last  trimpet    that 
shall  sound,  in  order  to  raise  the  cieac  up  incorruptible,"  Matt.  xxiv. 
31.     1  Cor.  XV.  52,  and  "  the  shout  and  voice  of  the  archangel,  with 
which  the  Lord  himself  sUall  descend  from  heaven,'*  1  Thess.  iv.  16. 
And  with  this  voice  he  will  send  forth  his  Spirit,  the  power  from  on 
high,  as  Paul  saith,  Rom.  viii.  11.     "He  shall  quicken  your  mortal 
bodies  by  his  Spirit  that  dvvellethin  you."     Would  ye  see  a  figure 
of  the  resurrection,  behold  the  resurrection  of  Lazarus  :  '"  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus  come  fcilh,  and    the  dead    came    forth.'* 
John  xi.  43,  41, 

4.  "  But  some  man  will  say.  How  are  tlie  dead  raised  up  ? 
and  wiih  what  body  cio  they  come  ?"  Thus  speaks  the  apostle, 
1  Cor.  XV.  45,  and  he  answers  in  a  twofolfl  manner  :  (a)  That  the 
body  will  have  different  quahfications  from  what  it  had  before  its 
death  ;  which  he  shows  vrs  36 — 52,  informing  us  that  the  body  is 
not  glorified,  except  it  first  die,  by  which  it  becomes  m  the  resurrec- 
tion a  totally  different  body  from  what  it  v/as  before,  not  in  substancej 
but  in  quahties,  of  which  he  notic:s  four  :  (1)  "  It  is  sown  in  cor- 
ruption, it  is  raised  in  incorruplion,"  vrs.  42.  It  will  be  always 
alike  vigorous  and  healthful,  and  incapable  of  any  disease  ;  Leah 
will  not  be  lendereyed,  Bartimeus,  will  not  be  blind,  Jacob  ^^ill  not 
be  halt,  Mephibosheth,  will  not  be  a  cripple,  and  Barzillai  will  not  be 
old.  (2)  "  It  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  glory,"  vrs.  43. 
It  will  be  adorned  with  a  wonderful  lustre,  "  like  the  glorious  body 
of  Christ,"  Phil.  iii.  21.  "it  will  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly," 
vrs.  49,  and  "  shine  like  the  sun,"  Matt,  xiii.  43.  (3)  "  It  is  sown 
in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power."  vrs.  43.  It  will  be  able  to  en- 
dure the  immediate  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God,  which  would 
dissolve  and  rend  it  in  its  mort.l  state,  like  the  most  brittle  sub- 
stance. (4) "  It  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual 
body,"  vrs.  44.  It  will  not  employ  itself  any  longer  with  natural 
things,   and  it  will  not  subsist  by  natural  food,   but  will    subsist  and 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD  S  DAY.  Q.  54— £6.         4<»i. 

act  immediately  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  influenced  by  the  Spirit* 
(b)  The  other  part  of  his  answer  to  the  question,  \vhich  was  propo- 
sed, is,  that  the  same  body,  which  we  have  borne  about  with  us 
here,  even  tlie  same  with  r.:spect  to  substance,  will  rise  ;  for  he 
saith,  vrs.  53,  pointing  as  it  were  with  his  linger,  to  his  own  body,, 
*'  This  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must 
put  on  immortality  "  It  is  indeed  "our  vile  body,  which  Christ 
will  fashion  like  his  glorious  bod)  s'*^  Phil.  iii.  21.  Christ  had  in  his 
resurrection  his  own  body,  we  must  theiefore,  if  "  we  bear  the  im» 
age  of  the  heavenly,"  also  have  our  own  bodies  in  the  resurrection; 
those  who  remain  alive,  will  then  also  have  their  own  bodies.  The 
justice  of  God  requireth  that  each  one  should  receive  in  his  own 
body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad," 
2  Cor.  V,  17.  The  belevers  of  old  also  believed  and  expected  the 
resurrection  of  the  same  body,  which  they  bore  about  with  them 
here,  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Isaiah  xxvi.  19.  Dan.  xii.  2.  And  so 
the  wicked  will  likewise  arise  with  their  own  bodies,  which  will  also 
have  other  qualities,  immortality  and  power,  that  they  may  be  tor^ 
mented  forever  J  but  their  bodies  will  not  partake  of  the  excel- 
lency of  the  godly. 

The  Socinians,  who  deny  the  resurrection  of  the  same  body,  do  in 
effect  deny  the  resurrection  itself:  for  if  the  dead  body  itself  arise 
not,  but  another,  it  is  not  a  resurrection,  but  a  creation.  They  oifer 
indeed  reasons,  which  apj)ear  plausible,  in  order  to  subvert  this  truth, 
but  they  are  not  of  any  force.  They  say  it  is  impossible  that  the 
dust,  which  hath  been  long  since  scattered  abroad,  should  be  gather- 
ed and  united  again  in  a  body  ;  that  maneaters  convert  the  flesh  of 
others  into  their  own,  and  that  if  the  same  bodies  arise,  those  who 
have  been  eaten  cannot  arise  with  their  own  flesh,  because  that  is 
become  the  flesh  of  the  maneaters.  We  need  not  reply  othenvise 
to  this,  than  our  Saviour  did  to  the  Saducees,  Matt.  xxii.  29,  "  Ye  do 
err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God  "  But  we 
add  over  and  above  this,  that  God  being  aliknowing  and  almighty, 
both  sees  the  scattered  dust  of  men,  and  can  also  gather  it  again. 
IManeaters  convert  only  a  small  part  of  the  flesli  of  another  person 
into  their  own  flesh,  and  God  can  in  the  resmrection  restore  it  very 
easily  to  the  flesh  of  the  person,  from  whom  it  was  taken  ;  and  th-»t 
which  is  thus  taken  from  the  mancater  can  be  recompensed  again 
from  that  which  had  perspired  from  him,  and  which  he  must  supply 
repeatedly  by  new  food  :  "  God  will  indeed  destroy  the  belly  i.nd 
pleats,"  1  Cor.  vi,  13.  and"  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kin:?;- 
dom  of  God,"   1  Ccr,  xv.  50*     But  by  the  belly  and  ments  we  must 


446        THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

understand  the  use  of  the  belly  and  meats,  and  the  corruptible  fiesh  ; 
therefore  it  is  added,  I  Cor.  xv.  50,  "  Corruption  doth  not  inherit 
incorruption." 

5.  This  resurrection  is  not  "  past   already,'*  as   Hymeneus   and 
Philetus  said,  2  Tim.  ii.  17,  t8.     But  it  will  take   plate  on  the  last 
day,  as  the  Saviour  and  Paul  have  foretold   us,  John  vi.  39,   40,    54. 
1  Cor.  XV.  23,  when  all  men  shall  be  raised  up  in  a  moment,  and  at 
the  same  time,  John  v.  28,  29,    1  Cor.  xv.    52.     And  therefore  we 
do  not  believe  that  the  martyrs  will  rise  before  the  last;  day.  in  order 
to  reign  a  thousand  years  with  Christ  on  earth,  who  will  descend  in 
the  body  from  heaven,  as  the  Chiliasts  fancy,  because    John    saithj 
Rev.  XX.  4,  5,   "I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them  :    and  I  saw 
the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  ;.  aud 
they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years ;  but  the  real  of 
the  dead  lived  not  again,  until   the  thousand   years  were    finished." 
Bat  these  words  being  emblematical,,  and  prophetical,  cannot  serve 
to  confirm  such  a  singular  opinion,  which  contradicts  other  passages 
of  God's  word.      The  true  and  proper  meaning  of  this  text  is,  that 
the  church   which  had  been  slain  in    her  martyrs    under  Antichrist, 
during  the  period  of  tJ-e  t-,velve  hundred  and  sixty  prophetical  daya, 
should  obtain    a  new  life,  and  that  her  worship  should  prevail  in  the 
world,  and  that  she  should  thus  have    "  a  life  from  the  dead,"  Ronrv. 
xi.    15.     In  this  sense  should  the  two  witnesses   be   put   to   death, 
arise  and  ascend  up  to  heaven  to  the  terrour  and  annoyance  of  Anti- 
christ, Rev.  xi.  3 — 13.     And  thus  t|ie  rest  of  the  dead,  to  wit,   anti- 
christ and  his  adherents,  did  not  life    again,  but  were  dead,  or  in  a 
low  condition,   until   the  end  of  the  thousand  years,  when  the   devil 
should  be  loosed,  that  he  might  gather  all  the  enemies  of  the  church 
under  Gog  and  Magog,  and  compass  the  camp  of  the  saints,  the  be- 
loved city,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  destroy  it ;  but  the  Lord  will  hin- 
der it  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  and   will   destroy    the   enemies  ; 
upon  which  will  follov/  the  general  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the 
judgment.     Read  this  whole  twentieth  chapter,  and  compare  there- 
with the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  revelation,  and  it  will    appear  that 
this  exposition  is  in  no  wise  contradictory  to  other  passages  of  scrip- 
ture. 

6.  But  what  comfort  will  this  afford  us,  as  long  as  we  are  not  per- 
suaded of  the  reality  and  certainty  of  this  resurrection  of  the  dead"? 
The  Sadducees  and  Atheists  deny  the  resurrection.  It  is  not  neces- 
sary to  prove  it  against  them  ;  they  shut  their  eyes  wilfully  :  but  it 
is  necessary,  that  we  shoul  1  be  certain  of  it,  because  we  are  so  attach- 
ed to  visible  and  present  objects,  that  we  cannot  represent  to  our* 
selves  what  is  invisible  and  future  in  a  lively  manner,  unless  we  be 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DMY,  Q.  57,  58.         447 

assured,  that  such  a  resurrection  is  truly  to  be  expected.     Therefore 
that  we  may  have  an  assurance  of  it,  we  must  know  beforehand  that 
this  resurrection  of  the   body  is  neither  inypossible  nor  incredible  ; 
«  With  God  all  things  are  possible,"    Mark  xvi,  36.  «  With  God 
nothing  shall  be  innpossible,"  Luke  i.  37.     The  Saviour  appealed  to 
the  power  of  God  in  this  matter  against  the  Sadducees,   Matt.  xxii. 
29.     Abraham   grounded  his  faith  upon  this  power,  when  he  was 
about  to  slay  his  son,   Heb.  xi.  17,  18.     He  who  made  the  whole 
world  out  of  nothing,  is  able  to  restore  the  scattered  dust  of  man, 
which  he  preserves,  to  its  former  state  of  a  living  body,  as  Abraham 
believed,  Rom.  iv.  17.     It  should  support  our  hope  the  more,  that 
God  hath  given  so  many  evidences  of  his  power  in  this  respect,  when 
he  raised  so  many  from  the  dead  by  his  prophets,  by  his  Son,  and 
by  his  apostles,  I  Kings  xvii.  22   2  Kings  iv.  32—36.  xiii.  31,  Matt* 
ix.  24,  25.  Luke  vii.   14,  15.  John  xi.  43,  44.  Matt,  xxviii.  52,  53. 
Acts  ix  40.  XX.  9,   10.     And  we  are  not  only  certain,  that  it  is  pos- 
sible with  God  to  raise  the  dead,  but  also  that  he  will  indeed  raise 
them  at  the  last  day.     iVTany  passages  of  the  word  of  God  teach  us 
this,  as  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  Isaiah  xxvi.  19.  Dan.  xii.  2.  John  v.  28, 
29.  xi.  23,  24.  Heb.  vi.  2.    But  we  will  insist  more  particularly  upon 
two,  because  they  prove  it  designedly  against  those  who  deny  the 
resurrection.     The  first  passage   is.    Matt.  xxii.  31,  32,  where  the 
Saviour  saith  to  the  Sadducees.  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
have  ye  not  read  that  which  was   spoken  to  you  by  God,  saying,  I 
am  the  God  of  Abraham,    and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God   of 
Jacob?  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,    but  of  the  livinfr."     The 
force  of  this  proof  is  so  great,  that  it  stopped  the  mouths  of  the  Sad- 
ducees ;  see  vrs.  23y  34,  and  the  emphasis  of  it  consists  in  this,  that 
the  Lord,  being  the  God  of  the  fathers,  not  only  with  respect  to  their 
souls,  but  also  with  respect  to  their  b:idies,  which  were  now  dead,  he 
must  quicken  their  bodies,  or  otherwise  he  would  not  be  their  God, 
because  he  was  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.     The  othej 
passage  is  1  Cor.  xv.  where  the  apostle  produceth  several  arguments, 
and  particularly,  (a)  that  Christ,  the  Head  of  believers,  is  risen,  who 
will  therefore  not  leave  his  members  under  death,  vrs.  12 — 18.  (b) 
That  believers  are  otherwise  of  all  men   the  most  miserable,  which 
is  surely  impossible,  vrs.  19.  (c)   That  Christ  is  by  his  resurrection 
"  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept,"  who  are  therefore,  like  the  whole 
harvest,  sanctified  to  the   resurrection,  vrs.  20.  (d)  That  Adam  sub- 
jected those  who  were  his  to  death,  and  that  Christ  doth  not  less  re- 
store those  who  are  his  to  life,  vrs.  21,  22.  (e)  That  Christ  as  King, 
must  conquer  the  last  enemy,  deaths  which  is  not  effected,  except 


^48  THE  BErsEbliS  OF  THE  CHURCH  A?TER 

by  the  resurreclion  cf  the  dead,  vrs.  25 — 23.  (f)  That  this  truth  -^a^ 
so  efficacious,  that  certain  persons  suftered  themselves  to  be  baptized 
from  a  hope  of  the  resurrestion,  though  they  saw  that  others  were 
put  to  death  on  account  of  Chiisiianity,  as  the  twenty  ninth  verse 
must  be  explained,  which  we  have  shown  before,  (g)  That  otherwise 
all  the  sufferings  of  Christians  are  vain,  which  is  incredible,  vrs.  30. 
31,  32.  Will  we  have  more,  we  may  add,  tivat  «  Uie  bodies  of  be* 
iievers  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  uhost,  1  Cor.  vi.  19.  Now  he 
will  not  suffer  his  temples  to  remain  desolate,  as  Paul  showeth, 
Rom.  viii.   11. 

II.  Ail  men  will  rise,  not  to  di^  again,  but  to  live  for  ever,  some 
to  hnppiness,  and  others  to  misery  ■,  for  ''  they  shall  come  forth,  they 
that  have  done  good  unto  the  resurrection  of  life  ;  and  they  that 
have  done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of  damna<ion,"  John  v.  29.  But 
we  do  not  speak  nov/  of  the  everlasung  life  of  the  wicked  in  miserVs 
but  of  the  everiasling  life  of  tne  godly  in  blessedness.  The  ever- 
lasting life  of  the  miserable  is  rather  a  death  than  a  life  ;  on  which 
account  it  is  often  called  death,  and  the  second  death,  Rev.  xxi.  8. 
But  the  life  of  the  blessed  is  a  true  and  pleasant  life  ;  therefore  it  is- 
said  to  them.  Psalm  xxii.  26.  "Your  heart  shall  live  for  ever.  We 
•6nd  the  same  also,  Psalm  Ixix.  32.  In  order  to  say  something  of 
this  everlasting  life,  we  will  observe  1,  wherein  this  everlasting  life 
consists,  and  2,  how  it  v/ill  be  communicated  to  the  elect. 

1.  No  mortal  can  fully  comprehend  wherein  this  everlasting  life 
will  consist,  much  less  ieclare  it :  Paul,  who  had  been  in  heaven, 
and  was  come  dov/n  thence,  saith  no  more  of  it,  than  that  "  he  had 
heard  unspeakable  words,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  a  man  to 
niter,"  2  Cor.  xii.  4.  The  Lord  doth  i^evertheless  reveal  something 
ot  it  to  his  favourites,  Avhen  he  permits  them  to  taste  of  the  fruits  of 
that  Canaan,  and  "  to  feel  the  beginnn^gs  of  everlasting  joy  in  their 
hearts."  Therefore  the  aposile  saith,  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10.  '•  Eye  hath 
i^ot  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man 
the  things,  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  :  "  but" 
(maik  well)  "  God  hath  revealed  them  to  us  by  his  Spirit."  Surely 
God  discovers  something  of  this  in  his  vvord,  v,'hen,  accomodivting 
■liraself  to  our  childish  capacities,  he  calls  this  everlasting  life,  *'  sal- 
vation, glory,  joy,  rest,  a  kingdom,  crown,  inheritance,  &c.  There- 
iovs  we  will,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  divine  revelation  to  us, 
.ihow  (a)  from  what  the  blessed  will  be  delivered,  (b)  what  they  wiH 
onjoy,  and  (c)  what  circumstances  will  increase  their  blessedness. 
.  (a)  Tha  blessed  will  be  delivered  from  all  that  is  shameful,  hurt- 
2ul,   and  painful  to  them,   with  respect  to  soul  and  body.     No  re- 


THIS  LIFE.        S 

proach,  nor  contempt  will  be  offered  to  them  :  no  tmxious  poverty 
will  dibtrcss  their  hearts,  they  will  not  mourn  any  more  on  account 
of  pail),  weakness,  sickness,  or  death  :  sin,  darirness,  deadness,  the 
hiding  of  God's  countenance,  the  pov/er  of  unbelief,  the  assaults  of 
Satan,  the  seductions  and  perstculions  of  the  world,  the  provocations 
of  the  flesh  to  sin,  will  be  excluded  for  ever  :  "■  They  shall  not 
hunger  any  more,  neither  shall  they  thirst  any  more,  neither  shall 
the  sun  li^ht  on  them,  nor  any  heat,"  Rev.  vii.  16.  "  God  will  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  ;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death, 
neither  sorrov/  nor  cryinp;,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain  : 
for  the  former  things  are  passed  away,"  Rev.  xxi.  4.  "  Death  and 
hell,"  that  is,  all  that  is  to  believers  like  a  death  and  hell,  *«  will  be 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev.  xx.  14. 

(b)  But  this  alone  cannot  constitute  a  perfect  blessedness  ;  for  if 
a  man  were  annihilated,  he  would  also  be  delivered  from  all  this 
evil :  and  therefore  it  belongs  also  to  everlasting  life,  that  man  should 
enjoy  a  satisfying  good.  God  hath  created  him  with  a  rational  de- 
sire for  an  everlasting  good  :  and  when  he  enjoys  this  he  is  happy. 
And  therefore  his  everlasting  bliss  will  also  consist, 

1.  In  beholding  God  and  Christ.  As  God  is  a  spirit,  he  will 
not  be  able  to  see  him  with  his  bodily  eyes  ;  but  he  vvill  behold  the 
Son  of  God  with  his  bodily  eyes,  in  his  glorious  and  exalted  human- 
ity, as  his  Redeemer.  But  he  will  employ  his  understanding  prin- 
cipally with  respect  to  God,  in  contemplating  his  perfections, 
persons,  everlasting  counsel,  and  the  wonderful  way  in  which  the 
blessed  God  hath  led  him  to  giory.  Our  text  teacheth  us  this,  say- 
ing, "  1  will  behold  thy  face  in  righteousness  ;  the  pure  in  heart  will 
see  God,  and  therefore  be  blessed,"  Matt.  v.  8,  and  that  not  only,  as 
they  do  at  present,  by  the  word,  which  is  like  a  glass,  and  a  dark 
saying  to  them,  so  that  they  know  now  only  in  part,  by  means  of  the 
utmost  ends  of  his  ways,  and  smcdl  portions  of  matters,  and  as  it 
were,  by  looking  at  his  back-parts,  their  understandings  being  so  be- 
clouded by  their  sinful  prejudices,  and  tlieir  mortal  body,  that  they 
cannot  form  any  other  than  exceedingly  narrow  conceptions  of  God. 
But  they  will  see  God  immediately,  and  as  it  were,  face  to  face,  and 
they  will  be  so  led  into  the  depths  of  his  wisdom,  power,  goodness, 
love,  and  glory  by  the  beams  of  his  splendid  essence,  that  they  will 
be  overwhelmed  therewith,  swallowed  up  therein,  and  enraptured 
with  everlasting  wonder :  "  For  we  shall  see  him,  as  he  is,"  1  John 
iii.  2.  It  was  the  prerogative  of  Moses  above  other  prophets,  that 
"  the  Lord  spake  to  him  mouth  to  mouth,  even  apparently,  and  not 
in  dark  speeches  ;  and  that  he  beheld  the  similitude  of  the  Lord>" 

3N 


450        THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

Num.  xii-  8.  Yet  his  vision  ^^as  not  perfect,  as  long  as  he  was  ift 
his  mortal  body  ;  but  the  blessed  will  enjoy  the  vision  of  God  in  a 
much  higher  degree  than  Moses,  even  in  the  highest  degree ;  for 
they  will  see  him  "  face  to  face  ;  they  know  now  in  part ;  but  then 
they  will  know  even  as  they  are  known,"  I  Cor.  xiii.  12. 

2.  By  seeing  God  thus,  they  will  become  perfectly  like  God  in 
his  holy  glory,  and  glorious  holiness,  even  as  much  as  a  creature 
can  be  like  him  :  "  We  shall  be  like  him,"  saith  John;  "  for  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  John  iii.  2.  This  blessed  ?.nd  immediate 
vision  of  God  will  be  so  efficacious,  that  it  will  transfer  the  image 
and  glory  of  God  to  them  :  for  "  beholding  the  face  of  God  in  right- 
eousness, they  will  also  be  satisfied  with  his  likeness.  "  When  be- 
lievers are  permitted  to  "  behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  with  open 
fece  as  in  a  glass,  they  are  then  changed  into  the  same  image,  from 
glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  lii.  18.  When 
Moses  spake  to  the  Lord,  his  face  shone  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
people  could  not  look  at  him,  until  he  put  a  veil  on  his  face,  Exod. 
xxxiv.  29 — 35.  What  a  wonderful  brightness  and  lustre  will  then 
be  transferred  to  the  blessed  from  the  beaming  p;lory  of  God,  when 
they  will  behold  God  immediately  in  all  his  splendour !  It  is  said  of 
the  blessed,  Rev.  xxii.  4  "  They  shall  see  his  face,  and  his  name 
shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  Even  their  bodies  will  shine  wonder- 
fully, and  "  li:ke  the  su/j,"  Matt.  xiii.  43.  If  a  mortal  man  s'  ould 
see  an  inhabitarit  of  heaven,  he  would  not  be  able  to  sustain  the 
sight,  but  would  quickly  shrink  from  it,  and  hide  himself.  See  what 
is  related,  Dan.  x.  5 — 3. 

3,  And  is  it  wonderful,  that  they  will  be  like  him  ?  for  they  will 
enjoy  the  blessed",  ailsufficient  God,  until  they  shall  be  fully  satis- 
fied :  "  Fulness  of  joy  is  in  his  presence,  at  his  right  hand  there  are 
pleasures  for  evermore,"  Psalm  xvi.  1 1.  The  believing  soul  thirsts 
and  pants  now  for  the  least  communication  of  his  favour,  and  when 
she  enjoys  that,  drinking  of  the  river  of  God's  pleasures,  she  is 
abundantly  satisfied,  when  she-  is  weary,"  Psalm  xxxvi.  8.  Jer.  xxxi. 
14,  15.  But  what  will  it  be  then,  when  God  will  favour  the  whole 
rnd  blessed  man  with  the  complete  enjoyment  of  himself,  and  when 
he  will  be  satisfied  with  God  ;.  for  the  Lord  will  fill  him  full,  even 
as  full  as  he  can  admit,  with  his  allsufficiency,  wisdom,  love,  and  glo- 
ry ;  for  then  "  God  will  be  all  in  all,"  1  Cor,  xv.  28.  How  will  the 
happy  man  tht-n  bathe,  swim,  and  lose  himself  in  the  unfathomable 
depth  of  the  allsufiicient  God  I  for  "  he  who  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
shall  feed  him  and  shall  lead  him  unto  living  fountains  of  water/ 
Rev.  vii.  15,  \7, 


THIS  LIFE.         XXir.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57—53.       45i 

4.  All  this  will  fill  him  ^vith  a  fulness  of  joy,  which  will  excite  him 
to  praise  and  bless  God  :  "  This  salvation,"  saith  the  instructor,  «  I 
shall  inherit,  and  that  to  praise  God  for  ever  therein."  He  will  unite 
himself  v/ith  all  the  blessed  men  and  angels,  that  he  may  with  them 
shout  forth  the  glory  of  God,  until  the  heaven  resounds,  as  the  an- 
gels proclaimed  the  glory  and  holiness  of  God  with  such  mighty 
voices,  that  they  made  "  the  posts  of  the  door"  shake,  Isaiah  vi.  3. 
How  then  will  <'  the  voices  of  that  great  multitude,"  proclaim  one 
to  another,  "  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  many 
thunderings.  Hallelujah  ;  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth. 
Let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice,  and  give  honour  to  him,"  Rev.  xix.  6,  7, 
When  believing  souls  enjoy  the  lovingkindncss  of  God  here  on 
earth,  the  one  excites  the  other,  saying,  "  Magnify  the  Lord  with 
me,  and  let  us  exak  his  name  together,"  Psalm  xxxii.  4.  O  how 
will  the  blessed  then,  seeing  what  they  have  been,  what  they  are  now, 
and  how  they  have  been  brought  into  this  blessed  state,  according  to 
the  unsearchable  wisdom,  power,  and  love  of  God,  by  the  blood  of 
his  Son,  cry  mightily,  day  and  night  without  ceasing,  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy  is  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  Avho  was,  and  who  is,  and  who  is  to 
come  !"  They  will  fall  down  before  him,  and  cast  their  crowns  be- 
fore the  throne  and  say  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb 
which  was  slain,  to  receive  power  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing,"  Rev.  iv.  8 — 11. 
V.  9-- 14. 

(c)  Moreover  this  blessedness  will  be  greatly  increased  by  the 
circumstances,  I  of  society,  2  of  place,  and  3  of  time* 

I.  A  godly  person  can  enjoy  a  wonderful  delight  in  his  holy^ 
lonely  life  of  communion  with  God  ;  society  often  disturbs  his  re- 
pose in  God  :  but  in  that  everlasting  life  he  will  be  in  the  society 
of  those,  who  will  not  lead  him  from,  but  up  to  his  full  satisfaction. 
For  he  vvill  be  with  all  those  eminent  saints,  "  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  \vho  will  sit  down  with  him  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  Matt, 
viii.  11,  "  He  will  walk"  with  the  angels  who  stand  before  the 
£ice  of  God,  Zech.  iii.  7.  There  never  was  a  time  of  so  much  bliss- 
ful glory  on  earth,  as  when  "  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host,"  came 
down  to  the  shepherds,  to  praise  God  to  the  utmost,  and  to  congrat- 
ulate men  upon  the  recent  birth  of  the  Saviour,  Luke  ii.  13,  14.  But 
how  glorious  will  it  be,  when  the  blessed  people  will  be  associated 
with  the  many  thousands  of  angels,  and  unite  with  them  !  But  can 
happy  men  and  holy  angels,  who  are  mere  creatures,  satisfy  the  heart 
of  man,  while  he  is  estranged  from  God  ?  No,  but  he  will  not  be 
■without  God  :  for  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  will  be  with  men,  and  he 


452         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

will  dsvell  with  them,  and  they  -svill  be  his  people,  and  God  himself 
will  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God,"  Rev.  xxi.  3.  "  The  Lamb  him- 
self will  be  in  the  midst  of  *he  throne,"  Rev.  vii.  17.  *' And  round 
about  the  throne  there  will  be  four  and  twenty  seats,  and  upon  the 
seats  four  and  twenty  elders,  sitting,  clothed  in  white  raiment,  and 
having  on  their  heads  crowns  of  gold,"  Rev.  iv.  4.  The  church  mili- 
tant is  described  as  so  near  him,  and  round  about  him ;  what  then 
will  bi;  the  condition  of  them,  who  will  be  admitted  to  the  enjoyment 
of  perfect  salvation! 

2.  There  is  no  place  so  strait,  so  dark  and  mean,  but  that  God 
will  condescend  to  reveal  himself  in  it  to  his  favourites  ;  nevertheless 
a  spacious  and  lightsome  place  will  elevate  a  spiritual  heart:  but  the 
place  where  this  glory  will  be  enjoyed,  is  the  high,  the  spacious  and 
sumptuous  heaven,  where  light,  yea,  where  God  himself  dvvelleth, 
as  in  nis  palace  :  for  "■  the  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple,  the  Lord's 
throne  is  in  heaven,,"  Psalm  xi.  4.  Look  only  with  David  at  the 
outside  of  heaven,  and  with  him  ye  will  wonder  at  its  splendour^ 
Psalm  viii.  4,  how  then  will  the  inmost  rooms  transport  the  soul  I 
No  mun,  while  he  is  yet  in  this  mortal  body,  can  conceive  the  glory 
of  heaven,  and  therefore  it  is  exhibited  to  him  only  imperfectly,  un- 
der the  figure  of  whatever  is  esteemed  precious  on  earth,  bee  Rev. 
xxi.  9 — 27,  That  on  which  God  hath  exercised  his  skill  must  be 
fair  and  glorious  indeed,  but  "  heaven  is  a  city  which  hath  founda- 
tions, whose  builder  and  maker  is  God,  Heb.  xi.  10. 

3.  If  there  be  aught  that  is  disagreeable  to  the  people  of  God  at 
present,  -t  is  that  God's  gracir>us  intercourse  with  them  is  usually  of 
suca  a  short  continuance  :  but  in  heaven  it  will  be  everlasting  with- 
out end.  It  will  be  an  everlasting  life  :  "  At  God's  right  hand  there 
are  pleasures  for  evermore,"  Psalm  xvi.  11.  "  We  shall  be  for  ever 
with  the  Lord,"  1  Thess.  iv.  IT.  Although  the  Lord  loves  the  be- 
lieving soul  always,  and  until  the  end,  there  are  nevertheless  many 
intermissions  in  the  displays  of  his  love  ;  but  it  will  not  be  so  in 
glory  :  the  blessed  soul  will  be  continually  and  incessantly  laden  with 
the  lovingkindness  of  God,  so  that  she  will  praise  him  continually, 
and  "  will  have  no  rest  day  nor  night,"  Rev.  iv.  8.  Think  not,  ye 
prisoners  of  hope,  that  ye  will  be  weary  of  it,  as  Israel  was  of  the 
manna,  or  that  ye  will  not  be  able  to  sustain  that  allsufficient  good  ; 
for  ye  will  always  have  something  new :  "  Jesus  will  drink  new 
wine  with  you  in  the  kingdom  of  his  Father,"  Matt.  xxvi.  29.  Ye 
will  also  have  more  enlarged  capacities,  and  be  more  able  to  receive 
the  supreme  revelation  and  influences  of  the  Almighty.  Ye  cannot 
now  sustain  his  extraordinary  embraces,  and  the  extraordinary  influ- 


THIS  LIFE.         XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  s7,  as.         453 

»;nce  of  his  grace  a  long  time,  but  it  would  dissolve  you,  as  the  most 
brittle  substance :  but  "  ye  who  are  sown  in  weakness,  will  be  raised 
in  power,  incorruptible  and  immortal,"  1  Cor.  xv.  43,  53. 

Though  all  the  blessed  will  be  completely  filled  with  the  glory  of 
God,  there  will  nevertheless  be  degrees  of  glory,  and  one  will  enjoy 
more  than  another  ;  "  For  there  is  one  glory  of  the  sun,  and  another 
glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  stai-s  ;  for  one  star  dif- 
fereth  from  another  star  in  glory  :  so  also  is  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,"  Thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  41,  42.  For  there  will  be 
degrees  of  punishment,  as  we  are  taught.  Matt.  xi.  20—24.  Luke 
xiv.  47,  48,  as  there  are  also  degrees  of  sin  and  sanctification,  John 
xix.  11.  I  Cor.  XV.  10. 

It  is  projDer  to  inquire  here  whether  the  blessed  will  know  in 
heaven  their  friends,  whom  they  knew  best  in  this  life.  We  cannot 
decide  this  question  positively ;  we  only  know  that  the  relation, 
which  subsists  here  between  parents  and  children,  husband  and  wife, 
rulers  and  subjects,  will  not  have  place  in  heaven  ;  for  "  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  put  down  all  rule,  and  all  authority  and  power,"  1  Cor. 
XV.  24-.  We  know  also  that  all  the  blessed  will,  as  blessed,  know 
each  other  with  the  sweetest  and  with  a  familiar  love,  on  account  of 
the  work  of  grace,  as  soon  as  it  appears,  because  "  they  have  one 
heart,  and  one  way  to  fear  the  Lord,"  Jer.  xxxiii.  39.  It  appears 
also  clearly,  that  the  blessed  rulers  of  the  church  will  be  known  in 
lit-aven  ;  for  they  will  excel  others  in  glory,  D^n.  xiii.  3.  The  Lord 
promiseth  that  we  shall  '*  sit  down  with  Abiahara,  Isaac  and  Jacob," 
Matt.  viii.  1 1.  We  shall  nut  be  able  to  know  whether  this  promise 
be  fulfilled,  unless  we  know  those  great  saints :  this  matter  appears 
still  more  probable,  since  the  apostle  knew  the  glorified  r^Ioses  and 
Eiias,  Matt.  xvii.  3,  4. 

2.  Having  seen  thus  wherein  everlasting  life  consists,  it  behooves 
us  to  know  also  how  it  is  communicated.  But  of  this  we  shall  not 
speak  at  present,  because  v/e  have  shov/n  on  the  eleventh  Lords  day 
lliat  the  Lord  Jesus,  ha\ing  purchased  salvation  by  his  sufferings 
and  obedience,  applies  and  communicates  it  also,  both  in  this  life  by 
all  the  blessings  and  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  after  this 
life,  first  in  the  death  of  behevers,  and  afterwards  in  their  blessed 
resurrection. 

The  children  of  God  ought  to  believe  and  be  assured,  and  present 
it  as  it  were  before  their  eyes,  that  such  an  everlasting  fife  is  to  be 
expected,  like  "  ?rIoses,  who  had  a  respect  to  the  recompence  of  ti^e 
reward  by  faith,"  Keb.  xi,  26-  Great  and  many  are  the  grounds,  on 
which   believers  may  estabiish   their   hopes.     Ail   the   arguments 


454         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

which  prove  the  resurrection,  may  also  assure  them  of  everlasting 
life  ;  but  they  may  be  certain  of  it  more  especially,  "  because  they 
now  feel  in  their  hearts  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy,"  as  the  in- 
structor speaks.  The  beginnings  of  eternal  joy  are,  (a)  that  clear 
and  heavenly  discovery,  which  the  Lord  God  makes  of  himself,  of 
his  Son,  and  of  his  mysteries  to  the  soul,  whereby  she  sees  the  effi- 
cacy of  each  word  and  of  each  matter,  and  is  influenced  to  wonder, 
joy  and  praise  on  account  of  it :  "  The  king  leads  her  into  his 
chambers,"  bong  i.  4,  and  thus  Jesus  reveals  himself  in  his  love  to 
them  who  love  him,  John  xiv.  21.  (b)  An  actual  enjoyment  of  the 
heavenly  benefiis,  which  proceed  from  the  throne  of  God,  so  that 
the  believer  '' eats  of  the  hidden  manna,"  Rev.  ii  17.  He  fines  a 
table  spread  within  him>  and  "  he  eats  with  Jeiiis,  and  Jesus  with 
him,"  Rev.  iii.  20.  And  he  is  wonderfully  entertained,  satisfied,  and, 
as  it  were,  made  drunk  with  his  heavenly  viands,  Sonty  v.  1  •  Jer. 
xxxi.  12,  13,  14,  and  Jesus  bestows  on  him  abundantly  the  kisses  of 
his  love,  his  caresses,  and  the  embraces  of  his  everlasting  arms, 
Song  i.  2.  ii  3 — 6.  The  soul  seems  to  herself  hereby  to  be  already 
elevated  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  above  this  mortal  scene,  (c) 
Further  these  first  beginnings  consist  in  the  assurarxe  which  be- 
lievers obtain  of  tiieir  blessed  hope  ;  either  the  Spirit  of  God  dis- 
covereth  to  them  the  work  of  grace  in  their  souls,  "  showing  them 
the  things,  ,  vvnich  are  freely  given  them  of  God,"  and  thus 
"  bearing  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God,"  acco-dm:^-  to  Rom.  viii.  15  ;  or  the  Lord  effects  in  a  gentle 
manner  a  tranquil  peace  and  calmness  in  the  heart,  and  so  "  the 
pe:ce  of  God  surpasseth  all  their  understanding,"  Philip,  iv.  7,  or  he 
influences  them  m  a  more  exalted  and  more  affecting  manner,  or  in 
a  more  rational  and  less  affecting  manner  by  exercises  of  faith,  which 
sometimes  excite  in  them  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory,  1 
Peter  i.  8. 

Since  now  believers  feel  these  beginnings  in  their  hearts,  they 
may  be  assured,  tliat  they  will  possess  such  an  eternal  life.  Because 
(a)  these  beginnings  are,  as  it  were,  the  first  fruits,  which  sanctify 
the  harvest  of  eternal  life,  as  the  real  property  of  believers.  To  this 
the  apostle  hath  respect,  Rom.  viii.  23.  (b)  These  beginnings  are 
«'  those  better  things,  which  accompany  salvation,"  as  Paul  speaks, 
Heb.  vi  9  (c)  They  are  also  the  evidences  of  the  love  of  God  and 
Christ ;  for  thus  "  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the  hearts"  of 
those  whom  he  loves,  and  so  '^  their  hope"  of  everlasting  life  ''  can- 
not make  theAi  ashamed,"  Rom=  v.  5. 


THIS  LIFE,        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  sf,  58,        455 


APPLICATIONa 

That  now  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life  may  be  profitable  to  liSj 
it  will  be  useful,  that  each  of  us  should  impress  upon  his  mind,  that 
there  will  also  be  a  resurrection  to  eternal  damnation  :  and  not  only 
this,  but  that  the  smallest  number  will  rise  to  salvation,  and  the 
greatest  member  to  damnation,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  day.  And  therefore  it  will  be  necessary,  that  each  one  should 
also  inquire  concerning  himself,  what  will  become  of  him  at  the 
last  day .  We  should  show  here  who  will,  and  who  will  not  be  raised 
up  to  salvation  ;  but  as  we  have  done  this  largely  enough  on  the 
seventh  and  eighth  Lord's  days,  we  should  forbear  at  present ;  yel 
since  the  instructor  founds  his  hope  upon  a  feeling  of  the  beginning 
of  eternal  joy,  and  temporary  believers  also  arc  after  their  mannef 
**  enlightened,  taste  of  the  heavenly  gift,  are  made  partakers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  taste  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come,"  Heb.  vi.  4,  5,  and  since  this  greatly  weakens  the 
expectation  of  true  believers,  and  confirms  temporary  believers  ex- 
ceedingly in  their  imaginations,  we  will  therefore  exhibit  the  differ- 
ence between  true  and  temporary  believers  in  this  respect. 

1.  The  true  believer,  feeling  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy  in  his 
heart,  becomes  humble  and  lowly,  abases  himself,  and  sinks  into 
nothing  in  his  own  estimation  ;  he  wonders  and  is  amazed,  that  God 
will  even  look  at  such  a  base  and  vile  wretch,  as  he  sees  himself 
with  shame  to  be  :  he  saith  with  Jacob,  Gen^  xxxii.  10.  "I  am  not 
worthy  of  the  least  of  all  these  mercies,  and  of  all  this  truth  ;"  and 
with  David,  2  Sam.  vii,  18.  "  Who  am  I,  O  Lord  God,  and  what 
is  my  house,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto  ?"  But  the  tempo- 
rary believer  becomes  proud  and  haughty  in  consequence  of  his  ex- 
ercises, and  thinks  that  he  must  be  some  great  one  ;  he  speaks 
therefore  loftily,  is  too  wise  for  everyone,  he  behaves  himself  im- 
periously, and  requires  that  every  one  should  esteem  him  an  ex- 
ceedingly spiritual  and  advanced  Christian.  Such  a  puffer  Caiaphas 
showed  himself  to  be,  when  "  he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die 
for  the  people,"  John  xi.  49,  50,  51. 

2.  The  true  believer  feels  this  be^^inning  of  eternal  joy  in  his 
heart,  that  is  the  seat  of  his  work  of  grace  and  joy,  and  from  that  do 
all  his  good  motions  proceed  to  the  praise  of  the  Lord  ;  yea,  on 
this  account  he  endeavours  to  converse  with  his  heart,  that  he  may 
abide  in  the  love  of  God  :  "  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  un- 
derstanding, keeps  his  heart  and  mind,"  Philip,  iv.  7,  yea,  "  it  rules 


4:5fe  THE  BENEFiTS  GPTHE  CHURCH  AFTE^, 

in  l.is  heart,"  Coll.  iii.  15.  But  t lie  temporary  believer  derives  his 
joy  from  superficial  miUters,  the  contemplation  of  the  lovtly  myste- 
ries (if  God  tickles  him,  and  excites  an  agreeable  emotion  of  his 
^iood  and  spirits;  but  the  word  never  penetrates  into  his  heart,-  so 
as  to  captivate  and  possess  it :  "  he  receives  the  word  indeed  anon 
with  joy  i  yet  hath  he  not  root  in  himself,"  Matt.  xiii.  20,  21. 

3.  The  beginning  of  eternal  joy  is  wrought  in  the  true  believer. 
hy  the  Spirit  of  God  :  "  His  hope  doth  not  make  him  a-ihamed,  be- 
cause the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghostj 
Who  is  given  unto  him  "  Rom.  v.  5.  He  knows  not  how  to  enlighten, 
or  to  enliven  himself,  but  he  seeks,  calls,  and  waits  for  the  Spirit, 
iike  David,  Psuhn  li.  8,  12.  "  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness  ; 
restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation."  It  must  be  just  the  fire 
of  God's  altar  that  kindles  him,  and  causeth  him  to  flame  forth  with 
joy.  On  the  contrary,  the  joy  of  the  temporary  believer  is  a  work 
of  his  ov.'n,  he  imagines  this  and  that  precious  frame  of  the  people  of 
God,  he  urges  and  forces  his  passions  thither,  and  so  a  certain  self- 
wrought  joy,  or  rather  imagmation  of  joy  ariseth  in  him ;  or  he 
imagines  wdthout  foundation  that  he  is  a  believer,  a  favourite  of  God, 
and  a  partaker  of  heaven,  with  v/hich  he  is  wonderfully  tickled  and 
pleased.  And  so  '•  he  kindles  a  fire  himself,  compasses  himself  about 
v/ith  sparks,  walks  in  the  light  of  his  fire,  and  in  the  sparks  which 
he  iiath  kindled :"  but  "  this  he  shall  have  of  the  Lord's  hand,"  and 
a  judicial  blindness,  "  he  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow,"  Jer.  1.  1 1. 

4.  The  beginning  of  this  joy  of  the  true  believer  is  in  God,  and 
in  his  favour  :  "  My  soul  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord,"  said  David, 
Psalm  XXXV  9.  It  wafts  his  soul  to  God,  unites  it  to  him,  it  finds 
its  rest,  quiet  and  satisfaction  in  him,  and  in  his  love,  and  in  nought 
else  :  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon 
earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee.  My  flesh  and  my  heart  faileth  ;  but 
God  is  the  strength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever,"  said 
Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  25,26.  We  see  this  also,  Heb.  iii.  17,  18.. 
But  the  temporary  believer  rejoices  iii  himself,  because  he  is  so  wise, 
virtuous  and  accomplished,  and  all  his  exercises  are  without  God  ;. 
he  wonders  at  himself,  like  Balaam,  Numb.  xxiv.  3,  4.  "  He  took 
up  his  parable  and  said,  l^ab.am  the  son  of  Beor,  hath  said,  and  the. 
man  whose  eyes  are  op^^n  hath  said  ;  he  hath  said,  who  heard. the 
words  of  (iod,  who  saw  the  visions  of  the  Almighty,  falling  into  a 
trance  but  having  his  eyes  open." 

5.  Finally,  this  joy  renders  tl^e  true  believer  also  holy ;  he  sees 
nothing  now  but  holiness  in  God,  and  he  will  be  holy,  as  the  Lord 
is  holy  ;  ;he  discovery  which    God  makes  of  himself  to  him,  pro- 


THIS  LIFE.        XXIf.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.    '  A.5f 

^uceth  a  likeness  to  God  in  his  soul :  "  he  is  changed  into  the  same 
image,"  2  Cor.  iii  18.  Because  he  kiT^s  that  indulging  himsc'f  la 
sin  would  cause  God  to  hide  his  countenance  from  liim,  thciefure 
he  is  exceedingly  careful  of  defihng  himself.  Yea,  this  deligh  ,  and 
this  feeling  of  the  beginning  of  eternal  joy  detaches  him  fiom  sin, 
and  transports  his  soul  into  heaven,  that  he  may  have  his  conversa- 
tion there  only,  Philip,  iii.  19.  Observe  the  temporary  believer,  he 
is  sinful  and  vain  in  proportion  to  his  joy  ;  he  can  aow  do  any  thmg, 
though  ever  so  sinful,  without  any  anxiety,  if  otners  do  not  see  it, 
and  reproach  him  for  it :  doth  his  conscience  fly  m  his  face,  he  stifles 
it,  and  endeavours  to  silence  it,  he  will  not  allow  himself  to  suspect 
his  state  of  grace,  but  thinks,  once  a  gracious  person,  always  a  gra- 
cious person.  And  so  he  is  brought,  though  not  immediately,  to 
the  gieatest  and  vilest  sins  in  pubhck,  waxing  worse,  a  .d  becoming 
more  impenitent  than  before.  See  this,  Heb.  vi.  6,  7,  8,  x.  26 — 29. 
2  Peter  ii.  20,  21,  22. 

Alas  I  ye  who  hear  this,  and  have  not  yet  a  true,  but  only  a  fanci- 
ed foretaste  of  heaven,  a  shadow,  a  waking  dream,  see,  we  pray  you, 
how  dreadfully  ye  deceive  yourselves  ;  and  *'  recover  yourselves  yet 
out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  ye  are  taken  captive  by  him 
at  his  will ;"  for  if  ye  remain  as  ye  are,  ye  "  will  awake  to  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt,"  Dan.  xii.  2.  How  grievous  will  it  be 
for  you  to  fall  short  of  that  blessed  life,  for  which  ye  had  hoped, 
though  in  vain  !  friends,  what  a  dreadful  mistake  will  it  be,  to  ex- 
pect to  go  to  heaven,  and  to  be  sent  to  that  bottomless  gulph  of  per- 
dition, with  a  Balaam,  a  Judas,  and  a!l  the  hypocrites  !  how  intolera- 
ble will  it  be !  Therefore  return,  we  beseech  you;  "let  him  who 
thinketh  that  he  is  wise  become  a  fool,  thai  he  may  be  wise,"  I 
Cor.  iii.   18. 

But  shall  not  these  wise,  enlightened,  and  apparently  virtuous  per- 
sons be  raised  up  to  salvation,  how  then,  think  ye,  will  it  f^r-  with 
you,  who  are  ignorant,  worldly-minded,  ungodly,  and  at  b-  st  only 
civil,  and  outwardly  religious  ?  can  ye  think  that  God  will  raise  you 
up  to  salvation,  if  he  should  deal  with  you  according  to  his  word,  as 
he  will  deal  with  you  ?  do  ye  hope  that  he  will  ?  have  ye  any  ground 
for  your  hope  ?  are  ye  born  again,  and  converted  ?  do  ye  be lif^ve, 
and  are  ye  holy  ?  for  such,  and  no  others,  shall,  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  see  his  kingdom.  Therefore  be  solicitous  to  know- 
how  ye  may  be  saved,  be  more  concerned,  we  pray  you,  about  your 
salvation  and  damnation,  and  -^  labour  not  for  tiie  meat  that  perish- 
eth,  but  for  that  meat  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life,"  John  vi. 
27.     Surely,  everlasting  life  is  worthy,  that  ye  should  do  more  for 

3  O 


458         Th^:  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

it,  and  think  more  of  it  than  ye  have  hitherto  done  :  therefore  re-- 
cover from  your  carelessness  :  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleeptst,  and  arise 
from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  ^ive  thee  ligiu,"  Eph.  v.  14. 

Bui,  true  believers,  who  have  this  great  expectation  cf  a  blessed 
resurrection  to  an  everlasting  life  with  God,  manifest  it  in  your  con* 
Versation.     And  therefore. 

I.  Believe  tliat  there  will  indeed  be  such  a  resurrection  and  ever- 
lasting- life  for  those  who  seek  the  Lord.  It  is  not  enough  to  sup- 
pose this  as  a  truth  :  no,  we  must  with  elevated  minds  assure  our** 
selves  of  it,  and  obtain  a  clear  apprehension  of  it  from  the  testimony 
of  God,  so  that  these  two  great  benefits,  v/hich  are  yet  afar  off,  may 
beam,  in  a  lively  manner,  and  as  if  present,  in  our  eyes  :  for  *' faith 
is  the  substance  ot  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen," 
Heb.  xi.  1.  So  '^  Moses  had  by  faith  respect  to  the  recompence  of 
the  reward,"  Heb.  xi.  8  Because  we  attend  so  little  to  this,  there- 
fore all  our  exertions,  with  respect  to  this  great  future  salvation  arc 
so  languid,  slothful,  and  sluggish,  so  that  they  have  no  influence 
upon  the  exercises  of  the  soul. 

2.  Believe  for  yourselves,  O  believers,  that  ye  yourselves  will  be 
raitied  up,  in  order  to  enjoy  everlasting  life.  So  Job  and  Paul 
acted,  Job  xix.  25,  26,  27.  2  Tim.  i.  12.  Ye  cannot  otherwise 
rejoice,  or  praise  the  Lord,  or  conduct  worthily  of  that  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  you.  Do  ye  think  that  it  is  safest  for  you  to 
doubt,  that  ye  may  not  become  careless,  nor  deceive  yourselves  in  a 
matter  of  such  great  importance,  let  the  Papists  say  that  such  an 
assurance  would  render  a  person  careless,  but  do  not  ye,  who  pro- 
fess a  different  doctrine  according  to  the  word  of  God  ;  for  this  as- 
surance would  stir  you  up  to  love  and  serve  God,  and  would  render 
you  fervent  in  spirit.  It  is  true,  we  ought  not  to  assure  ourselves  of 
our  blessed  resurrection,  and  everlasting  life  upon  slender  founda- 
tions, that  we  may  not  deceive  ourselves  with  vain  imaginations : 
but  when  we  have  truly,  heartily  and  frequently  received  Christ  for 
sanctification,  as  well  as  for  glorification,  then  there  is  no  danger  ; 
but  ye  sny,  I  have  never  had  a  foretaste  of  everlasting  life.  Consider 
well,  is  this  indeed  true  ?  is  it  not  a  prejudice  proceeding  from  un- 
belief that  the  consolations  of  God  are  small  with  you  ?  do  ye  know 
nothing  at  all  of  tiie  discovery  of  grace  in  your  souls,  that  ye  do  truly 
hate,  and  oppose  whatever  is  sinful,  that  ye  do  earnestly  call  on  and 
seek  the  Lord,  so  that  this  manifestation  enlivened  you,  and  gave 
you  hope  ?  are  ye  utter  strangers  to  that  calm  and  agreeable  peace 
of  soul  ?  and  tliough  ye  have  not  obtained  such  a  measure  of  grace, 
■^  fills  the  heart,  this  is  no  evidence  that  ye  are  not  interested  in  the 


THIS  LIFE.        XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  58.       459 

divine  favour.  Many  heirs  of  everlasting  life  have  not  that  measure. 
It  is  indeed  a  sure  evidence  of  a  blessed  hope  to  those  who  enjoy,  or 
have  enjoyed  it,  because  the  Lord  doth  not  grant  it  to  any  except 
his  favourites ;  but  it  is  no  evidence,  that  others  have  no  right  to 
this  blessed  expectation,  if  they  have  not  experienced  such  a  power 
of  the  divine  favour  ;  for  thea  other  true  believers,  like  Heman  in 
the  eighty  eighth  psalm,  would  have  been  without  hope  ;  and  who 
can  think  this  ?  Therefore,  believers,  inquire  only  whether  your  sins 
excite  sorrow  in  you,  whether  Jesus  be  not  truly  and  actually  pre- 
cious to  you,  and  whether  ye  do  not  love  the  brethren,  and  thus 
manifest,  that  ye  have  passed  from  death  to  life. 

3.  Wonder,  triumph  and  rejoice  now  in  this  hope  and  expectation 
of  such  a  future  glory.  So  David  acted,  when  he  said  to  the  Lord, 
Psalm  xxxi.  19,  <"  O  how  great  is  thy  goodness,  which  thou  hast 
laid  up  for  them  that  fear  thee  1"  Paul  speaking  in  the  name  of  all 
the  saints,  saith,  Rom*  v.  2.  "  We  rejoice  in  t-he  hope  of  the  g'ory 
of  God."  Peter  said  to  the  believers  of  his  time,  *'  In  whom,"  namely 
Jesus  Christ,  "  though  now  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing  ye  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory  ;  receiving  the  end  of  your 
faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls,"  1  Peter  i.  8,  9,  Is  not  the 
blessed  resurrectioa  and  everlasting  life  worthy  of  our  wonder,  tri- 
\imph,  and  joy  ?  Consider  only  what  such  imwortby  beings  as  ye  are 
shall  enjoy,  and  will  it  not  ravish  you,  and  transport  you  so  that  ye 
will  shout  and  give  thanks  to  God  in  the  most  exalted  strains  ? 

4.  Let  this  great  expectation  also  render  you  courageous  in  your 
duty.  It  becomes  you  to  deny  yourselves,  your  inclnatinns,  all  that 
is  earthly,  and  selfish-  It  is  no  more  than  proper  that  ye  should  bear 
willingly  every  cross  and  affliction,  which  the  Lord  layeth  upon  you ; 
and  it  is  your  duty  to  conduct  yourselves  in  all  things  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  And  is  not  this  glory,  which  we  expect,  worthy  of 
our  utmost  doing  and  suffering  ?  must  an  heir  of  such  a  salvation 
have  his  own  will  also,  that  which  is  earthly,  his  erise,  and  his  sins? 
No,  Moses  was  wiser  than  this?  Heb.  xi  24,  25,  26.  "  fie  refused 
to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter ;  choosing  rather  to  suf- 
fer affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to.  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
sin  for  a  season  ;  esteeming  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches 
than  the  treasures  of  Egypt :  for  he  had  respect  unto  the  recom- 
pence  of  the  reward."  This  glory  ought  surely  to  encourage  you  in 
every  condition  ;  "  for  our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,^ 
M'orketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  ; 
while  v/e  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things 
v/hich  are  not  seen  !  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporaJ  ? 


460         THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH  AFTER 

but  the  things  that  are  not  seen  are  eternal,"  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18, 
*'  Wherefore,'  we  receivinpj  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved,  let 
us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  rever- 
ence and  godly  fear ;"  so  I  speak  with  Paul,  Heb.  xii.  28. 

5.  Long  for  that  blessed  resurrection,  and  that  everlasting  life  : 
"  My  reins,"  cried  Job,  '*  long  exceedingly  within  me,"  chap.  xix. 
27.  "  He  who  testifieth  these  things  saith.  Surely  I  come  quickly, 
Amen.  Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus,"  Rev.  xxii.  20.  The  apostle 
saith  of  himself,  and  of  believers,  2  Cor.  v.  3.  "  In  this  we  groan 
earnestly,  desirmg  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  from 
heaven."  Why  should  a  Christian  cling  to  aught  that  is  here  ?  this 
country  shall  not  be  his  rest  ;  his  goods,  his  life  is  not  here  :  let  the 
wurldJmg,  who  hath  no  hope  in  futurity,  settle  iiimself  here  ;  but 
citizens  of  heaven,  saints  of  the  high  places,  "  ye  have  no  continuing 
cny  here,  but  must  seek  one  to  come,"  Heb.  xiii.  14.  There,  even 
there  wiii  ye  be  delivered  from  whatever  afiiicts  you  now,  and  enjoy 
tile  only  satisfying  good.  This  loadstone  should  draw  your  desires 
and  loUfj-iags  toward  it :  therefore  "  look  for  and  hasten  to  the  com- 
ing of  the  day  of  God,"  2  Peter  iii.  12,  Let  your  longing  never- 
theless oe  accompanied  with,  and  moderated  by  patience  :  ybuv 
longmg  ought  not  to  be  a  peevish  fretfulness  on  account  of  your  ad- 
versities, but  an  earnest  desire,  arising  from  the  greatness  of  the 
goodness,  which  the  Lord  hath  laid  up  for  them  who  fear  him,  and 
submit  themselves  to  him,  who  hath  the  times  and  seasons  in  his 
own  hands.  Be  willing  therefore  "  to  serve  the  counsel  of  God," 
with  David,  "  before  ye  fall  asleep,"  in  hope  of  a  resurrection  to 
everlasting  life,  Acts  xiii.  36. 

6.  In  the  mean  time  endeavour  to  obtain  a  foretaste,  and  a  feeling 
of  the  begmning  of  eternal  joy,  and  to  enjoy  it  often,  and  more  and 
more.  This  was  the  petition  of  the  church.  Psalm  cvi.  4,  5.  "  He- 
member  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest  unto  thy 
people  :  O  visit  me  with  thy  salvation ,  that  I  may  see  the  good  of 
thy  chosen,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation  ;  that  I 
may  glory  with  thine  inheritance."  There  cannot  be  a  sadder  case, 
than  that  the,  heirs  of  that  fruitful  country  dwell,  like  the  rebellious, 
in  a  barren  land.  Let  then  your  "  souls  thirst  for  God.  for  the  liv- 
ing God,"  as  the  soul  of  David  did.  Psalm  xUi.  1,  2.  Believe  in,  ind 
improve  your  title  to  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  of 
the  covenant  of  grace,  suck  from  them,  and  breathe  in  him,  in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  grace  ;  yea,  live  and  feast  on  all  the  bless- 
ings which  he  h  th  purchased  and  promised  you,  that  your  "souls 
may  be  saiisfied  with  mariow  and  fatness,  and  your  mouths  may 


THIS  LIFE.     XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  57,  5d.     ^    461 

praise  him  with  joyful  lips,"  Psalm  Ixiii,  5,  And  when  ye  enjoy 
good  in  tlie  days  of  prosperity,  remember  then  also  the  days  of  ad- 
versity, laying  up  something  against  them,  and  feeding  then  on  it, 
"considering  the*  days  of  old,"  with  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxvii.  6.  It  will 
also  be  good  to  endeavour  to  continue  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  lor- 
ingkindness  of  the  Lord,  and  to  "  abide  in  his  love,  and  thus  to  ex- 
pect the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  everlasting  life."  It 
behooves  you  therefore  to  conduct  yourselves  tenderly  and  circum- 
spectly, that  he  may  not  depart  from  you  with  his  goodness :  "  Let 
your  conversation  be  in  heaven,  from  whence  ye  look  for  the  Sa- 
viour," Phihp.  iii.  20.  And  endeavour  in  all  things  to  know  the 
will  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  his  commandments,  that  he  rnay  con- 
tinue to  favour  you  with  his  kindness.  This  our  Saviour  requlrefh, 
John  XV.  9,  10.  "As  the  P'ather  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved 
you  ;  continue  ye  in  my  love.  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  yc 
shall  abide  in  my  love  ;  even  as  J  have  kept  my  Father's  command- 
ments, and  abide  in  his  love.  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto 
you,  that  my  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might 
be  full." 

7.  Do  not  sorrow  too  much,  when  your  godly  friends  die,  as 
though  they  were  lost  for  ever.  They  arc  not  dead  with  respect  to 
their  best  part,  their  soul ;  no,  that  was  imm.ediately  taken  up  to 
Christ  their  Head  :  will  ye  then  mourn  so  much  en  account  of  their 
happiness .''  have  ye  nevertheless  lost  them  ;  ye  will  recover  them 
again  for  ever ;  they  have  died,  not  to  remain  dead,  but  lo  live,  to 
live  a  better  life,  than  before  their  death  ;  for  they  vAll  be  raised  up 
in  a  conformity  to  the  glorious  body  of  your  Lord,  and  then  live  for 
ever.  So  Paul  comforts  those  who  remain,  when  he  saith,  1  Thess. 
iv.  13,  14,  "  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren,  concern- 
ing them  which  are  asleep,  that  ye  sorrow  not  as  others  which 
have  no  hope.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died,  and  rose  again, 
even  so  them  also  v/hich  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  him." 
Finally, 

8.  As  ye  ought  not  to  sorrow  too  much  for  the  death  of  your 
godly  friends,  so  ye  ought  not  neither  to  dread  your  own  death  too 
much.  Death  is  net  a  king  of  terrours  to  the  heirs  of  the  promises, 
as  he  is  to  the  ungodly,  but  he  must  shov/  a  smiling  and  friendly 
fare  to  you.  He  will  come  only  to  loosen  your  cords  of  sins  and 
miseries,  that  he  mr.y  let  you  ily  free  out  of  your  cage  in  the  open 
air  of  the  third  heaven*  Ye  say,  it  is  nevertheless  a  bitter  thing 
to  die  ;  it  is  true,  but  itia  not  always  zo,  neither  doth  it  .endure  long  : 


46*  THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  &g. 

and  although  it  may  be  exceedingly  grievous,  the  dying  person  carj 
strengthen  himself  against  it  by  the  consideration,  that  this  mortal 
must  be  dissolved  in  such  a  manner,  in  order  "  to  put  on  incormp- 
tion,  and  immortality,"  that  it  m..y  live  for  ever,  and  that  "  then,'* 
according  to  1  Cor.  xv.  54 — 57,  "shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  say- 
ing that  is  written,  Death  is  swallovi^ed  up  in  victory.  O  death, 
where,  is  thy  sting  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  The  sting  of 
death  is  sin  ;  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law  :  but  thanks  be  la 
God,  which  giveth  us  victory  thrcugh  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,." 
Amen. 


<  463  ) 


THE 


JUSTIFICATION 


OF  THE 


SINNER  BEFORE  GOD 


XXni.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Rom.  iv.  5.  But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  in  him  that 
justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness.