Q,  59.  But  what  doth  it  profit  thee  noiv^  that  thou  believest  all  this  ? 

A.  That  I  am  righteous  in  Christ  before  God,  and  an  heir  of 
eternal  life. 

Q.  60.  Hoti)  art  thou  righteous  before  God? 

A.  Only  by  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  so  that  though  my  con- 
science accuse  me,  that  I  have  grossly  transgressed  all  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  and  kept  none  of  them,  and  am  still  mclined 
to  all  evil,  notwithstanding  God,  without  any  merit  of  mine,  but 
only  of  mere  grace,  grants  and  imputes  to  me  the  perfect  satisfac- 
tion, righteousness  and  holiness  of  Christ ;  even  so,  as  if  I  never  had 
had,  nor  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as  if  I  had  fully  accomplished 
all  that  obedience,  which  Christ  hath  accomplished  for  me,  inas- 
much as  I  embrace  such  a  benefit  with  a  believing  hearts 


454  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

Q    61.   W/iy  saycst  thuu^  tfiat  thou  art  righteous  by  faith  only  ? 

A.  Not  that  I  am  acceptable  to  God  on  account  of  the  worthiness 
of  iTiy  faith  ;  but  only  because  the  satisfaction,  righteousness  and  hi> 
liness  of  Christ  is  my  righteousness  before  God,  and  that  I  cai  not 
receive  and  apply  the  same  lo  myself  any  other  way  than  by  faith 
only. 


A: 


MONG  the  various  titles,  with  which  faith  is  adorned  in  the 
word  of  God,  the  most  goodly  is  that  ol  *  precious  faith,"  2  Peter  i.  1, 
Faiih  is  precious,  inasmuch  as  it  doth  not  belong  to  ail  men,  but  only 
to  tlie  precious  elect  of  God,  for  "  all  men  have  not  faith,"  2  Thes. 
iii.  2,  hui  only  '*  the  elect  of  God,"  Titus  i.  1.  Faith  is  precious  in 
itself,  for  it  denies  its  own  mgcnuity  and  reason,  that  it  may  acknowl- 
edge the  invisible  God  upon  his  single  declaration  to  be  true,  and 
rtiay  rest  in  his  revelation  with  respect  to  future  and  invisible  things. 
It  "  receives  the  testimony  of  God,  and  sets  to  its  seal  that  God  is 
true,"  John  iii,  33.  "  It  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped,  for,  and 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1.  Moreover,  faith  is  pre- 
cious, because  it  hath  the  most  precious  objects  of  its  holy  nature, 
exceedingly  great  and  precious  promises,"  2  Peter  i.  4.  The  Triune 
God,  all  his  blessed  and  profound  mysteries,  ;'  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  law  and  the  prophets,"  Acts  xxiv,  14,  which  the  be- 
lieving sou!  contenjplates  and  embraceth,  and  which  fill  her  full, 
with  "  ali  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph  iii.  18,  l- .  And  will  ye  have 
more  ?  Faith  is  precious  also,  because  it  is  so  profitable  and  advan- 
Uigeous"  to  the  person  who  possesses  it.  It  unites  him  to  God  and 
Christ,  whom  it  causes  to  *' dwell  in  his  heart,"  Eph,  iii.  17.  "It 
gives  him  power  to  become  a  son  of  God,  Jol\n  i  12.  "  It  cleanses 
tCiQ  heart,"  Arts  xv.  9.  It  renders  prayer  effectual,  so  that ''  it  saves 
the  sick,"  James  V.  15.  "It  overcomes  the  world,"  1  John,  v.  4, 
It  can  do  all  things  ;  *'  all  things  are  possible  to  him  who  believeth," 
Mark  ix.  23.  See  what  all  the  saints  of  God  have  done  by  faith, 
Heb  xi.  And  that  which  is  the  greatest  and  most  precious  is,  that 
"it  justifieth"  the  guilty  sinner  "before  God  in  Christ,  and  renders 
him  an  heii  of  everlasting  life,"  Thus  speaks  the  instructor,  and 
thus  also  the  word  of  God  speaks,  as  we  will  sho.v  anon. 

The  instructor  doth  not  deem  it  sufficient,  in  order  to  excite  in 
his  pupil  a  relish  for  precious  faith,  to  declare  the  necessity  and  na- 
ture of  it  in  the  seventh  Lord's  day,  and  the  great  object  of  it  from 
the  eighth  to  the  twenty-second  Lord's  day  ;  but  he  proceeds  also 
to  exhibit  the   greatest  advantage  of  fuith,  to  wit,  the  justification  of 


JSETORE  GOO.      —61.     465 

the  sinner  before  God  by  faith  ;  which  he  first  explains  in  this  Lord's 
day,  and  then  defends  in  the  following. 

In  order  to  explain  this  justification  of  the  sinner  before  God,  the 
catecliism  exhibits  four  particulars  : 

I.  It  speaks  of  it  m  general,  Q.  59. 

II.  It  explains  the  manner,  in  which  the  sinneris  justified  by  God, 
Q.  50. 

III.  It  shows  how  we  are  justified  by  faith  only,  Q.  61.     We  will 
add  to  this, 

IV.  The  ciicumstances  and  qualities  oiP  justification. 

L  We  say,  the  catechism  speaks  first  of  justification   in  general, 
showing  "  that  a  person  is  righteous  before  God.  and  an  heir  of  eter- 
nal life  by  faith  in  Christ,"  as  it  speaks  in  the  fifty-ninth  question. 
In  order  to  understand  this  rightly,   we  must  observe   beforehand 
concerning  the  word  "justify,"  that  we  must  not  attend  so  much  to 
the  literal  signification  of  the  word  in  oui  (Low  Dutch)    languae:e, 
nor  to  that  of  the  Latin  word  justi/icare^  as  though  it  intimated   the 
making  of  a  sinful  person  righteous  and  holy,  by  an  infusion  of  holi- 
ness into  him,  as  the  Papists  speak,  when  they  assert  a  first  and  sec- 
ond jusiification,  that  is,  according  to  their  opinion,  a  fiist  and  second 
conversion  ;  for  we  must  seek  for  the  pro})er  import  of  this   word 
and  matter  in  the  word  of  God.  to  which  we  must  submit  ourselves 
in  every  doctrme.     V/e  f.nd  there  in  ihe  Hebrew,  the  word  hitzdik^ 
and  in  the  GvQ^\i  dikaiotm^hoih.  signifying  to  acquit,  and  pronounce  a 
person  righteous  before  a  tribunal.      For  these  words  are   derived 
from  judicatures,  and  are  therefore  opposed   to  accusin'^  and   con- 
demning ;  this  we  see,  Prov,  xvii.  15,  "  Ue  that  justifieth  the  wick- 
ed, and  he  that   condemneth  the  righteous,  even  they  both   are   an 
abomination  to  the  Lord,"     And  in  this  sense  must  we  understand 
this  word   in  all  its  significations,  v^^hether  a  itian  justify  God,  Luke 
vii.  29.  Rom  iii.  4,  or  whether  God  justify  his  Son,  1  Tim.  iii.  17,  or 
whether  he  justify ^man,  as  well  with  respect  to  his  actions  in  them- 
selves. Psalm  cvi.  30,  31,  in  comoarison  with  others,  Ezek.  xvi.   51, 
52j  and  in  opposition  to  others,  1  Kings  viii.  32,  as  with  respect   to 
his  condition,  approving  it  from  his  works,  James  ii.  21 — 25.     And 
so  "  Abraham  and  Rahab  were  justified  by  works."     But  we  will 
not  enlarge  upon  this  subject ;  we  refer  the  curious  reader   to  Wit- 
sius's  ceeonomy  of  the  covenants,    in    the  chapter   on   justification, 
where  he  treats  of  this  matter  both  largely  and  clearly.     We  would 
only  show  that  the  words  justifying,  and  justifying  the  sinner  before 
God,  signify  no  more  than  declaring  him  to  be  righteous,  and  acquit- 
ting him  of  his  guilt,  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of  the  Son  of 


466  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

God,  since  it  is  opposed  here  also  to  accusing  and  condemning. 
This  the  apostle  teacheth  us,  Rom.  viii.  33,  34,  "Who  shall  lay 
any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth  : 
who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died."  As  therefore 
accusing  and  condemning  is  not  an  infusion  of  guilt,  and  of  that 
which  deserves  condemnation,  into  a  person,  so  justification  is  not  a 
making  of  a  person  just  or  righteous,  or  an  infusion  of  righteousness 
and  holiness  into  him  Will  any  man  insist  upon  the  word  justify, 
and  say  that  it  signifieth  literally  the  making  of  a  dinner  ria;hteous, 
v/e  will  allow  that  God  makes  the  sinner  righteous  by  justification, 
not  by  infusing  righteousness  and  holiness  into  him  ;  for  that  is  done 
by  sanrtification,  but  by  imputing  to  him,  and  rendering  him  a  par- 
taker of  the  righteousness  of  his  Son,  by  which  he,  who  was  guilty, 
is  acquitted,  and  declared  to  be  entitled  to  eternal  life.  And  that 
this  word  must  be  unders'.ood  so  here,  appe*irs  still  more,  since  to 
justify  tilt"  sinner  is  to  impute  r'glueousness  to  him,  and  to  forgive 
his  sins :  ''  Even  as  David  also,"  according  to  the  words  of  Paul, 
Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  ^  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man,  unto  whom 
God  impuieth  righteous;  i?s9  without  works,  saying,  Blessed  are  they 
whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  whose  sins  are  covered  :  blessed  is  the 
man  to  vthom  the  i.ord  will  not  impute  sin." 

But  that  we  may  understand  the  matter  itself,  we  must  know 
that  man,  in  order  to  be  declared  righteous  by  God,  must  have  ei» 
ther  a  rigiiteousness  of  his  ovvn,  or  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 
AVbich  we  apprehend  thus: 

God  had  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works  with  man,  and  had  de* 
manded  of  him  a  perfect  obedience,  according  to  his  law,  and  had 
promised  that  he  would  bestow  life  upon  him,  if  he  obeyed  ;  but  if 
man  did  not  obey,  he  should  die  :  now  if  man  had  obeyed  perfectly, 
he  v;ould  have  had  a  righteousness  and  a  right  to  demand  life  of 
God,  on  account  of  his  promise  annexed  to  perfect  obedience  ;  and 
thus  God  would  have  justified  him  according  to  his  law.  And  this 
is  the  justification  of  the  law  by  works;  "for  Moses,"  saith  the 
apostle,  Rom.  X.  5,  "describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the 
law,  that  t!ie  man  who  doth  those  things  shall  live  by  them."  Since 
now  man  hath  transgressed  the  law  of  God,  he  cannot  be  justified 
by  his  wo.'ks,  because  he  hath  no  righteousness,  upon  which  he  can 
demand, life  :  "  For  this  the  law  could  not  do,"  saith  Paul,  Rom. 
>iii.  3,  '*  in  that  it  v/as  weak  through  the  flesh."  The  law  condemns 
and  cuiseth  him  ;  "  Now  we  know,"  saith  also  the  same  aposlk* 
Rom.  iii  19,20,  "  that  what  things  soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to 
them  wiiC  are  under  the  law  ;  that   every  mouth  may    be   stopped, 


JJi^rORtGOD.     X.^IIi:     LOKD'SDAY.  Q.  59— 61,     467 

and  all  the  world  may  become  i^uilty  before  God.  Therefore  by  the 
deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sighi ;  for  by  the 
kavv  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  See  also  how  he  speaks.  Gal.  iii.  10. 
The  Lord  God  having  nevertheless  not  created  all  men  in  vain, 
made  his  Son  under  the  law  for  the  elect  sinner,  caused  tim  to  !:L'S- 
tain  the  curse  by  his  sufferings,  and  to  fulfil  tie  demand  of  the  law 
by  his  obedience,  that  he  might  satisfy  ti.e  jus  ice  of  (  od,  accorrimg 
to  the  demand  cf  the  law;  and  so  the  Son  of  Gcd  merited  a  right- 
eousness before  God  for  the  sinntr,  in  order  to  aischarge  him  from 
the  cursii,  ond  give  him  a  right  to  life.  See  Rom.  viii.  5,  4.  Whea 
Gad  renders  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  (his  righteousness  of  his  Son, 
and  imputes  it  to  him,  and  he  receives  it  by  faith,  then  God  justifies 
him.  And  so  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  he  is  righteous  in  Christ 
before  God,  and  an  heir  of  eternal  life."  This  is  the  righteousness 
of  the  gospel  and  of  faith,  of  which  Paul  speaks,  Philip  iii.  9,  "  And 
be  found  in  him.  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the 
hv/,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  God  by  faith."     See  also,  Rom.  iii.  21,  22. 

II.  In  order  to  explain  more  particularly  the  manner  in  v.hich  God 
justifieih  the  sinner,  we  must  observe  that  the  word  justification,  be- 
in^;-  a  forensic  term,  intimates  that  Gcd  deals  in  justificat'on  agreeably 
to  the  customs  of  courts  of  justice,  in  which  the  judges,  when  they  find 
that  the  cited  and  accused  person  is  righteous,  acquit,  and  pronounce 
him  righteous.  And  therefore  we  will  consider  in  God's  judiciary 
procedure  v/ith  the  sinner,  in  order  to  justify  him,  1,  the  Judge, 
2,  tlie  persons  cited,  S,  the  accusers^  4,  the  advocate,  and  5,  the 
sentence. 

i.  God  alone  is  the  judge  ;  for  he  alone  hath  the  supreme  right 
to  prescribe  laws  to  man  :  "  For  the  Lord  is  cur  Judge,  the  Lord  is 
our  la\vji:iver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will  save  us,"  suith  the  church, 
Isaicih  xxxiii.  22.  "  There  is  one  Lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  save  and 
to  destroy,"  James  iv.  12.  Against  him  only  do  we  sin,  as  David 
confesseth,  Psalm  li.  4.  "  Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I  sinned." 
And  therefore  he  alone  forgives  sins,  as  he  himself  declares,  Isaiah 
xliii.  25,  "I  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  mine 
own  sake,"  It  is  therefore  blasphemous  in  the  Romish  priests  to 
forgive  sinners  their  sins,  and  to  justify  them,  according  to  Mark  ii. 
7.  Is  it  said  that  the  preachers  "jus  ify  many,"*  Dan  xii.  3,  and 
that  they  "  remit  sins,"  Jolm  xx.  23,  we  must  understand  it  only  of 
a  ministerial  power,  by  v/hich  they,  as  mc3sengers  of  God,  make 

*  Ibis  i?  according  tc  the  Dutch  tsranslat ion. 


468  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

known  his  gracious  sentence  of  absolution  to  penitent  sinners,  by 
proffering  them  pardon,  if  they  will  "be  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor. 
y.  20,  and  by  assuring  them  that  God  hath  forgiven  their  sins,  as 
the  pr(  achers  are  commanded  to  do,  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.  For  they  for- 
give s.ns,  when  they  prc-ach  repentance  and  forgiveness  of  sins,  in 
the  riame  of  Christ,  as  appears  from  Luke  xxiv.  47,  compared  with 
John  XX.  23.  Although  justification  is  the  work  of  the  whole  divine 
Trinity,  nevertheless  it  is  especially  appropriated  to  the  Father,  as  it 
is  the  dispensation  of  the  ^3on  to  be  the  advocate,  and  as  it  is  the 
special  work  of  the  JJoly  Spirit  to  make  the  sentence  known,  and  to 
suggest  it  to  believers.  Therefore  ive  read,  Rom.  viii,  S3,  S4. 
*'  Who  shall  lay  any  think  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  it  is  God 
that  jubtifieih  ;  who  is  he  thsit  condemneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died.'* 
In  tjie  distribution  of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine  Persons, 
the  exercise  of  justice  is  assigned  to  the  Father  as  Judge,"  -who 
hath  set  his  Son  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood, 
to  declare  his  righteousness  ior  the  remission  of  sins,"  as  we  see, 
Rom.  iii  25.  But  as  God  could  not  declare  his  righteousness  in 
justifying  sinners,  and  forgiving  their  sins,  unless  he  also  exercised 
his  grace,  he  hath  therefore  sltten  down,  not  only  on  his  throne  of 
justice,  but  also  on  his  throne  of  grace,  to  which  the  sinner  must 
therefore  "  come  with  boldness,  that  he  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  iv.  16. 

2.  The  person  who  is  cited  is  a  sinner,  "  y/ho  hath  sinned  griev- 
ously against  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and  hath  kept  none  of 
them,  and  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil."  Not  all  who  are  such,  but 
*'  those  whom  God  hath  foreordained,  and  also  called"  to  justifica- 
tion, Rom.  viih  29,  30,  33.  Neither  do  they  remain  so  abominable, 
but  they  are  also  "  washed  and  sanctified,  when  they  are  justified," 
1  Cor.  vi.  11.  But  v/e  only  say,  that  man  is  considered  in  justifica- 
tion, as  such  a  sinner.  The  Remonstrants  deem  the  words,  "  that 
he  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  to  be  a  hard  saying,  and  contrary  to 
the  sixty  fourth  and  hundred  and  fourteenth  questions,  which  teach, 
that  b'lievers  delight  in  all  righteousness,  and  that  it  is  impossible 
that  t^LY  should  not  brin?  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness."  But  we 
need  not  wonder  that  those  men  manifest  displeasure  at  this  asser- 
tion, for  they  imagine  that  man  hath  lost  nothing  by  the  fall,  but  his 
supernatural  gifts,  and  that  he  is  not  become  so  corrupt  ;  they  also 
"Will  have  that  God  doth  not  justify  man,  before  he  perceives  a  good 
inclination  of  his  will  in  hiiu  ;  but  we  need  not  concern  ourselves 
about  what  they  say,  since  this  answer  ngreeth  with  the  word  of 
Qod  :  our  text  saith  "  be  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him  that 


BEFORE  GOD.     XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.     46» 

justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  And 
can  a  man  be  considered  differently  from  this  in  justification,  which 
is  a  f?»rgiving  of  sins  ?  must  not  a  man  appear  then  to  God  as  a  sin- 
ner ?  yea,  when  the  sinner  comes  to  God  in  order  to  be  justified, 
must  he  not  with  the  deepest  humility  accuse  himself  before  God  ? 
is  not  his  mouth  stopped  ?  would  he  then  dare  to  speak  of  his  good 
inclinations,  and  of  his  free  will  ?  no,  the  prodigal  son  spoke  only  of 
his  sins  and  unworthiness,  Luke  xv.  17,  18,  19.  The  Pharisee  spoke 
like  a  Remonstrant,  he  thanked  God  in  a  flattering  manner,  that  he 
was  not  so  abominable,  but  had  many  good  qualifications  ;  but  the 
publican  spoke  and  acted  differently  from  this,  and  more  humbly  ; 
for  "  standing  afar  off,  he  would  fiot  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  to- 
ward heaven,  but  smote  on  his  breast,  saying,  God,  be  merciful  ta 
me  a  sinner.  And  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather 
than  the  other,"  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.  When  therefore  the  instruc- 
tor saith,  that  "  I  am  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  he  understands  it  of  a 
sinner  considered  in  himself,  who  comes,  that  he  may  be  justified  ; 
and  that  such  an  one  is  inclined  to  evil  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  iii. 
9 — 20,  and  therefore  the  sixty  fourth,  and  hundred  and  fourteenth 
questions  do  not  contradict  this  assertion,  inasmuch  as  they  speak  of 
man  in  his  state  of  sanctifiration,  as  a  fruit  of  his  justification.  And 
if  we  did  say  that  a  sanctified  person  was  still  inclined  to  all  evil, 
would  we  then  contradict  the  word  of  God  ?  Verily,  sanctification  is 
not  perfect :  is  there  a  new  man,  who  delights  in  all  righteousness, 
and  brings  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness,  there  remains  still  an  old 
man,  and  a  great  power  of  corruption  :  *'  The  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,"  Gal.  v.  17.  Can  tlie  flesh  lust  against  the  Spirit,  with- 
out being  inclined  to  all  evil  ?  Was  net  Paul  obliged  to  bemoan  him- 
self on  account  of  those  evil  incUnations  ?  Rom.  viii.  When  the 
saii^ts  were  hurried  to  evil  sins,  did  that  happen  without  an  inclina- 
tion to  evil  ?  The  reason  why  those  evil  inclinations  do  not  always 
mislead  the  soul,  is  not  because  ihey  do  not  exist  in  the  soul,  but  be- 
cause God  restrains  them  by  his  grace,  and  the  old  man  hath  not 
always  an  opportunity  to  bestir  himself.  Peter  thought  that  he  would 
by  no  means  deny  his  master ;  but  when  he  was  in  the  hall  of  Ca-^ 
iaphas,  he  then  showed  how  strongly  he  was  urged  by  his  evil  incli- 
nations to  deny  his  Master  thrice,  and  to  curse  himself  in  a  grievous 
manner,  in  order  to  save  his  life. 

The  sinner,  seeing  himself  to  be  such  an  one,  is  seized  with  ter- 
rour,  and  will  endeavour,  fike  Adam,  to  hide  himself  from  the  Lord; 
but  he  is  called  and  cited  to  God's  throne  of  grace,  that  he  may  re«. 
ceive  a  ^ra^ious  sentence  ;  "  God  sets  his  Son  forth  to  him  to  be  % 


47Q  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  The  Son  of  God  ciies^ 
"  Look  unto  me  and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
22.  "  The  Holy  Spirit  affords,"  and  effects  for  hira  "  an  access  to 
the  Father,"  Eph.  ii.  18,  so  that  he  "  goes  with"  a  humble  ''  boldness 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  he  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to 
help  in  time  of  need,"  H^tb.  iv.  16. 

•  3.  But  while  he  stands  there,  his  accusers  bestir  themselves 
against  him,  and  set  themselves  at  his  right  hand,  to  resist  him.  The 
accusers  are,  (a)  the  law  :  "  Moses  aecuseth  him  to  the  Fat!\er," 
John  V.  45.  For  the  law  saith  to  him  in  his  face,  that  "  he  ought  to 
have  done  those  things,"  all  that  was  commanded,  "  if  he  would 
}ive,"  Rom.  x,  5.  The  law  saith  also  to  him,  that  he  hath  not  done 
those  things ;  for  "  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  and  that 
therefore  "  no  flesh  can  be  jusiifie  *  before  God  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law,"  Rom.  iii.  20,  and  it  denounceth  the  curse  against  the  sinner, 
Gal.  iii.  10.  The  Holy  Ghost,  convincing  him  of  this  by  the  law, 
according  to  what  the  Saviour  saith,  John  xvi.  8,  the  sinner's  "  moutil 
is  stopped  by  the  law,"  Romi.  iii.  19.  The  sinner  cannot  allege 
aught  against  this  accusation  of  the  law  :  with  Paul  he  aeknovvlcdgea 
that ''  tlie  law,  and  the  commandment  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good,'* 
Rom.  viii.  12.  He  confc'sses  that  he  hath  not  kept  any  of  those 
commandments,  and  that  therefore,  if  the  Judge  will  deal  whh  him 
according  to  the  demands  of  the  law,  "  he  cannot  stand,"  Psalm 
cxxx.  3,  and  thus  he  "  dies  to  the  law  through  the  law,"  Gal.  ii.  19. 
(b)  And  so  his  conscience  is  also  his  accuser,  "  which  accuseth  him 
that  he  hath  gix)ssly  transgressed  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and 
hath  kept  none  of  them,  and  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  v/hich  he 
ihereforc  confesses  with  shame  and  detestation  of  himself  before  the 
Judge,  crying  out,  ''  O  my  God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up 
my  face  to  thee,  my  God :  for  mine  iniquities  are  increased  over 
my  h'jad,  and  my  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens,"  Ezra  ix. 
6.  But  being  come  to  the  throne  of  grace,  he  pleads  mercy,  and 
not  riglit,  like  the  publican,  Luke  xviii.  13,  and  like  David,  Psalm 
cxliii;  2.  (c)  Satan,  knowing  the  unfathomable  grace  and  mercy  of 
the  Lord,  strives  to  prevent  the  sinner  from  finding  grace,  and  he 
therefore  also  sets  iiimself  as  an  accuser  at  his  right  hand,  in  order 
to  resist  him,"  Zech.  iii.  I.  He  endeavours  to  persuade  the  sinner^ 
that  it  is  not  possible,  that  such  a  vile  wretch  as  he  is,  should  obtain 
grace  ;  yea,  he  seeks  to  stir  the  Judge  himself  up  against  the  sinuer^ 
as  though  he  were  a  hypocrite,  as  he  did,  Job.  i.  y,  10.  ii.  4,  5. 
4»  Tnii  would  sink  the  poor  and  exceedingly  burthened  sinnci'^ 


tiEFORE  GOD.     XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  5^—51.      471 

mto  a  total  despair,  it  would  cause  him  to  "  take  his  flesh  in  his  teeth, 
anJ  to  put  his  life  in  his  hands,"  if  Jesus  the  Mediator  and  Advocate 
at  the  throne,  did  not  interpose  between  God  and  him.  Therefore 
John  saith,  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous ;  and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins," 
1  John  ii.  1,  2,  and  Jesus,  when  he  pleadeth,  saiih  to  his  Father  for 
the  sinner,  Job  xxxiii.  24.  *' Deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the 
pit,  1  have  found  a  ransom."  He  represents  to  the  Father  his  satis- 
faction, righteousness  and  holiness,  and  that  he  hath  accomplished 
a  perfect  obedience  for  the  sinner.  Do  the  accusers  allege,  that 
the  sinner  is  accursed,  **  because  he  hath  not  continued  in  all  things 
writien  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  according  to  Gal.  iii.  10. 
the  Advocate  shows  that  "  he  hath  delivered  him  from  the  curse  of 
the  law,  having  been  made  a  curse  for  him,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Do  thej!" 
say  that  the  sinner  cannot  live,  because  he  hath  not  done  those 
things,  which  are  commanded,  as  the  righteousness,  which  is  of  the 
law  required  of  him,  according  to  Rom.  x.  5,  Jesus  sets  his  active 
obedience  against  this,  that  the  sinner  may  be  made  righteous,"  as 
Paul  speaks,  Rom.  v.  19. 

5.  The  Judge  of  the  whole  earth,  determined  to  do  right,  passeth 
sentence  in  favour  of  the  sinner.  That  we  may  have  a  proper  idea 
of  the  nature  of  this  sentence,  we  will  consider,  (a)  the  import  of  this 
sentence,  (b)  the  causes  of  it,  and,  (c)  the  manner  in  which  the  sin- 
ner obtains  an  interest  in  it. 

(a)  The  import  of  the  sentence  is  favourable  to  the  sinner.  This 
doth  not  imply  that  the  Judge  saith.  Thou  hast  not  had,  and  thoa 
hast  not  committed  any  sin,  the  accusations  which  have  been  exhib- 
ited against  thee  are  false  ;  for  then  ^'  God's  judgment  would  not  be 
according  to  truth,"  contrary  to  Rom.  ii.  2,  and  "  God  will  not  justify 
the  wicked,"  in  this  manner,  as  he  himself  declares,  Exod.  xxiii.  7, 
But  this  sentence  imports,  (1)  that  God  discharges  and  acquits  the 
sinner  from  his  deserved  guilt  by  forgiving  him  his  sin,  and  not  im- 
puting it  lo  him  :  "  As  David  also  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the 
man,  to  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works,  saying, 
Blessed  are  tney  whose  iniquities  aie  forgiven,  whose  sins  are  cov- 
ered. Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin," 
this  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  from  Psalm  xxxiii.  1,  2. 
Therefore  the  Lord  also  saith  to  the  sinner,  Isaiah  liv.  9,  "  I  have 
sworn  that  I  will  not  be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee,"  (2)  This 
sentence  consists  also  in  adjudging  to  the  sinner  a  right  to  life,  which 
he  had  forfeited  by  his  sins  ;  for  when  "  he  obtains  forgiveness  of 
his  sins,  he  also  receives  an  inheritance  among  them  v/ho  are  sane- 


472  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

tified,"  Acts  xxiv.  18.  Bein^  justified,  he  becomes  "an  heir  ac- 
cording to  the  hope  of  eternal  life,"  Tit.  iii.  7.  And  he  thus  also 
obtains  a  ri^ht  to  all  the  benefits  of  that  great  covenant  of  grace  : 
for  "  Christ  is  made  to  him  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifi- 
cation  and  redemption,"  I  Cor.  1.  30*  And  he  is  thus  as  perfectly 
justiiiied,  **  as  if  he  had  ne?er  had,  not*  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as 
if  he  had  fully  accomplished  all  that  obediencej  "which  Christ  hath 
accomplished  for  him,"  as  the  instructor  speaks,  according  to  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  Paul  saith,  2  Cor.  v*  21,  "  Him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  he,"  to  wit,  God,  ''  made  to  he  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  By  which  means  the  accu- 
sers are  silenced,  according  to  what  Paul  saithj  Rom.  viii.  33,  34. 
"  The  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  the  sinner,"  by  his 
Surety,  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  Satan  is  rebuked.  All  this  is  beautifully 
exhibited  to  us  in  Joshiia  the  high  priest,  as  a  pattern,  Zech  iii» 
1—5. 

(b)  But  \vhat  inHuenccth  the  great  Judge  to  this  ?  what  are  the 
causes  which  move  him  to  deal  so  favourably  with  such  a  vile  sin- 
ner? Paul  tells  us  this  in  one  word,  Rom.  iii.  24.  "  They  are  justi- 
fied freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  On  the  part  of  the  sinner  it  is  "  freely."  The  sinner  hath 
nothing  to  move  the  Lord  ;  all  that  he  hath  is  abominable,  hateful 
and  loathsome.  His  misery  would  not  move  God  to  mercy,  for  his 
misery  is  not  adapted  to  excite  compassion,  but  abhorrence  ;  his 
misery  demanus  the  righteous  aversion  of  God,  and  the  vengeance 
cf  God  upon  him,  as  we  have  shown  upon  the  first  part  of  the  cate- 
chism. We  think  therefore  that  no  doctrine  can  be  more  detestable 
in  the  sight  of  God  aod  of  his  saints,  than  that  a  man  is  justified  for 
aught  that  is  in  him,  whether  it  be  called  good  works,  or  faith  ;  but 
we  will  speak  more  fully  to  this  on  the  following  Lord's  day.  What 
therefore  moves  the  Lord  ?  the  apostle  saith  in  the  passage  before 
cited,  that  on  God's  part  it  is  "  his  grace,"  that  is,  his  unmerited 
g;oodness  to  the  unworthy  sinner,  by  which  he  is  mbved  from  and 
of  himself  to  manifest  himself  glorious  in  his  incomprehensible  kind- 
ness to  the  vilest.  It  is  *'  the  abundance  of  grace  and  of  the  gift  of 
righteousness  which  the  sinner  receives,"  Rom.  v.  15,  17.  Doth 
any  one  think,  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  clear  the  guilty,  and  that 
such  grace  would  be  dishonourable  to  God,  and  would  injure  his 
justice  ?  the  apostle  will  satisfy  him  in  the  passage  which  we  have 
quoted,  when  he  saith,  "through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  This  he  accomplished  by  his  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of 
God,  through  his  active  and  passive  obedience,  whereby  the  justice 


BEFORE  GOD.      XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   59—61.      473 

of  God  is  satisfied.  And  therefore  the  manifestation  of  this  ^race  to 
the  sinner,  is  not  dishonourable  to  God,  but  tends  to  the  declaration 
of  his  righteousness,  agreeably  to  what  we  hi  vc  ofien  cited  from 
Rom.  iii  25,  26  ;  for  this  must  exhibit  the  glory  of  God  in  the  most 
illustrious  manner,  that  such  a  wonderful  union  hatli  been  effected 
between  the  grace  and  the  justice  of  God  in  his  conduct  toward  tiie 
guilty  sinner.  And  therefore  it  is  an  idle  assertion  of  the  Socinians, 
that  if  it  be  of  grace,  it  cannot  be  by  the  righteousness  and  sanctifi- 
cation  of  Christ;  for  it  is  grace  in  God  to  admit  a  Surety,  to  bestow 
one  himself,  and  mdeed  his  Son,  and  that  on  this  and  not  on  that 
and  the  other  sinner.  Therefore  giace  and  satisfaction  are  very 
often  joined  together.  See  Rom.  iii.  24,  25.  Eph.  i  7.  Coll  i.  13, 
And  so  the  sinner  is  justified  on  the  part  of  I'hrist  upon  account  of 
his  righteousness,  according  to  the  language  of  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  9, 
"  Not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith."  This  righteousness  of  God,  on  account  of  which  the 
sinner  is  justified,  is  not  his  divine  and  essential  righteousness  infu- 
sed into  the  sinner,  and  so  inherent  in  him,  according  to  the  opinion 
of  Osiander  ;  for  this  righteousness  is  infinite,  and  cannot  be  com- 
municated to  man  ;  but  it  is  the  righteousness  which  he  hath  merit- 
ed and  obtained,  and  therefore  his  mediatorial  righteousness,  where- 
by "  he  is  made  righteousness  to  us,"  1  Cor.  i.  30,  Further,  the 
isinner  is  justified,  not  only  on  account  of  Christ's  passive  righteous- 
ness, but  also  on  account  of  his  active  and  obediential  righteousness, 
as  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  v.  19.  "  By  the  obedience  of  one  many 
shall  be  made  righteous."  Christ  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God 
by  his  obedience,  as  well  as  by  his  suffering,  and  the  righteousness 
of  the  law  required  of  the  sinner  obedience,  as  well  as  the  suffering 
of  punishment.  Yea,  Christ  suffered  m  obedience  to  his  Father,  and 
this  rendered  his  suffering  a  virtuous  suffering.  See  Philip,  ii.  8. 
And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  instructor,  when  he  speaks  of  "  the 
satisfaction,  righteousness  and  holiness"  of  Christ,  on  account  of 
which  man  is  justified,  as  the  satisfaction  was  effected  by  his  right- 
eousness and  holiness. 

(c)  But  how  doth  the  sinner  obtain  an  interest  in  this  favourable 
sentence?  It  is  effected,  (1)  by  God's  imputation  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness to  man,  (2)  By  the  faith  of  man,  whereby  he  appropriates 
that  sentence  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ  to  himself 

I.  When  God  justificth  man  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  he  imputes  that  righteousness  to  man  as  his  righteousness; 
that  is,  he  bestows  it  on  him,  by  which  therefore  Christ's  satisfaction. 

3Q 


474  THii  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

righteousness  and  holiness  becomes  his  righteousness  before  God, 
as  the  instructor  speaks  in  the  sixty-first  question.  And  thus  the 
sinner  is  considered  as  perfectly  righteous  by  this  imputation,  as  if 
he  had  never  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as  if  he  had  fully  accomplish- 
ed all  that  obedience,  which  Christ  hath  accomplished  for  him." 
The  Papists  and  Remonstrants  deny  this  imputation  of  Christ's 
righteousness,  that  ihey  may  teach  justification  on  account  of  our 
own  works  and  faith  ;  but  we  maintain  it,  because  David,  as  Paul 
teacheth  us,  Rom.  iv.  6,  "  pronounces  the  man  blessed,  to  whom 
God  imputeth  righteousness  without 'works."  See  also  vrs.  4,  9,  II, 
concerning  the  imputation  of  righteousness.  This  righteousness 
cannot  be  any  other  than  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  because  all  cur 
own  righteousness  is  excluded  there,  as  also  Philip,  iii.  9.  Surely 
this  imputation  is  not  so  absurd,  as  our  adversaries  pretend,  since 
the  sins  of  believers  were  imputed  to  Christ,  "that  they  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor,  v.  21,  and  that  "  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  them,"  Rom.  viii.  3, 
4,  Why  should  not  the  righteousness  of  Christ  be  imputed  to  us, 
as  well  as  the  sin  of  Adam  is  imputed  to  us  ?  Paul  shows  this  con- 
sequence very  clearly,  Rom.  v.  15,  19.  In  what  other  way  doth  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  become  ours  ?  for  "  he  is  the  Lord  our  right- 
eousness," Jer.  xxiii.  5.  And  "  he  is  made  of  God  to  us  righteous- 
ness," I  Cor.  i.  30.  Do  not  the  Papists  teach  that  the  supereroga- 
tory works  of  the  saints  are  imputed  to  others  ?  and  cannot  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  be  imputed  to  the  sinner  ?  do  not  the  Re- 
monstrants acknowledge  that  the  merits  of  Christ  are  advantageous 
to  believers .?  but  how  can  they  be  so,  except  by  imputation  ? 

2.  We  obtain  an  interest  in  this  sentence  and  this  righteousness 
also  by  faith,  whereby  we  make  these  things  our  own.  And  indeed 
by  faith  only,  v/ithout  works  :  "  We  conclude  then,"  to  adopt  the 
words  of  Paul,  Rom.  iii.  28,  "  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  with- 
out the  deeds  of  the  law."  The  apostle  teacheth  the  same  also.  Gal. 
ii.  16.  Faith  is  indeed  not  without  works  ;  or  "  it  is  dead,  when  it 
is  alone,"  James  ii.  IT,  18,  and  it  is  itself  a  good  work,  John  vi.  29, 
but  it  is  not  considered  so  here,  because  it  is  very  carefully  distin- 
guished from  works,  yea,  set  in  opposition  to  them,  as  we  see  in  the 
text,  and  Rom.  iii.  28,  and  Gal.  ii.  16. 

Hi.  We  obtain  an  occasion  of  discussing  this  matter  more  fwlly 
in  the  sixty  first  question,  which  demands  of  the  pupil  his  reason  for 
saying  "  that  he  is  righteous  by  faith  only."  This  question  is  asked, 
because  the  Papists  conceive  that  we  are  acceptable  to  God  on  ac- 
count of  the  worthiness  of  our  faith,  which  possesseth  so  great  a 


BEFORE  GOD.     XXIU-  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.     476 

worthiness,  because  it.  is  the   root  of  other  virtues,   and  produces 
others.     The  Remonstrants  will  have  that   faith  justiiieth  man,  be- 
cause God  reckons  it  by  a.  p,Tacicus  estimation,  as  a  perfect   obser- 
vation of  his  law.     But  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  I  am   not  accept- 
able to  God   on   account  of  the   worthiness  of  my  faith:"    and    he 
proves  it,- when  he  saith,  "that  only  the  satisfaction,  righteousness, 
and  holiness  of.  Christ  is  his  righteousness  before  God,"  which   he 
had  explained  in  the  sixtieth  question,  and  which  hath  been  proved 
by  us.     Therefore  the  believinr^  sinner  cannot  be  acceptable  to  Cod 
on  account  of  the  v/orthiness  of  hie-  faith.     This   appears  so  much 
the  more,  because  faith  denies  its  own  work   and   worthiness,   and 
seeks  ail  its  worthiness  in  the  righteousness   of  Christ.     See   this, 
Phil.    iii.    8,  9.     The  Remonstrants  will  not  indeed  seek   any   wor- 
thiness in  faith, but  only  a  gracious  estimation  of  God,  whereby   he 
reckons  faith  a  perfect  observation  of  his  law  i  yet  then  their  right- 
eousness is  not  in  Christ,  but  in  faith,  which  God  esteems  so  worthy  ; 
but  when  they  speak  thus,  they  deny  the  whole  gospel,   which    doth 
not  place  the  righteousness  of  the  sinner  in  faith,  as  the  work  of  the 
sinner,  but   only  in   Christ.     It  is  also  impossible,  that  God   should 
esteem  faith  a  perfect  observation  of  the  law  ;  for  then  "the   judg- 
ment of  God  v/ould  not  be  according  to  truth,"  contrary  to  Rom.  ii. 
2.     Paul  saith  indeed,  that  "faith  is  counted   for   righteousness," 
Rom.  iv.  5,  but   in  that  passage,  faith   is  put  by  a   metonymy    for 
Christ,  because  he  is  the  object  of  faith,  we  unite  ourselves  to  him, 
and  seek  our  righteousness  in  him  by  f^iith.     And  thus  faith  is  spoken 
of  in  other  passages  in  such  a  manner,  that  we  must  understand  by 
it  the  object  of  faith,  either  the  doctrine  of  faith,  or  Christ ;  so  Paul 
saith,  Gal.  iii.  23,  25.     "  Before  faith  came,  v/e  were  kept  under  the 
law  :  but  after  that  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer  under  a  school- 
master."    And  Paul  considered  the  matter  thus  also  in  Rom.  iv.  5. 
He  would  otherwise  contradict  himself,  for  he  speaks  of  an  ungodly 
person,  who  worketh  not,  and   to  whom  righteousness   is   imputed 
without  works.   See  vrs.  i.    8. 

But  the- difficulty  still  remains,  how  faith  acts  in  justification.  The 
instructor  explauis  this,  v/hen  he  saith,  "  that  I  cannot  receive  and, 
apply  the  same  to  myself  any  other  way  than  by  faith  only."  For, 
faiih  serves  here  like  an  instrument,  with  which  we  do  something, 
like  a  hand,  with  which  we  lay  hold  on  that  which  is  ofttied  to  us, 
make  it  our  own,  and  unite  it  to  ourselves.  That  faith  hath  such  a 
power,  we  have  shov.r  ftom  John  i.  12,  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day. 
We  are  to  understand  this  so,  that  the  Judge  proffering  his  Son,  his 
ri^liteousness,  and  the  gracious  sentence  in  him,  the  sinner    accepts 


4/6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

and  lays  hold  on  Christ,  and  all  grace  in  him,  and  thus  submits  to 
the  righteousnes  of  God,"  Rom.  x.  3.  It  is  indeed  the  nature  of 
love  also  to  accept  of  Christ,  to  embrace  and  unite  him  to  ourselves  ; 
but  we  are  not  therefore  justified  by  lo\e,  because  love  acts  not  like 
faith,  since  it  doth  not  seek  to  obtain  an  interest  inChrist,  as  Surety> 
but,  as  having  an  interest  in  him,  to  exercise  friendship  and  fellow- 
ship with  him.  This  is  evident,  because  we  do  by  a  justifying  faith, 
as  by  an  assent  to  the  wooing  voice  of  Christ,  say  yea  to  him,  con^? 
elude  a  match  with  him,  and  thus  obtain  an  interest  in  him,  and  his 
righteousness  to  justification  ;  but  by  love  we  exercise  fellowship 
and  friendship  with  him,  as  oui  Bridegroom.  The  sinner,  as  a  sin- 
ner, in  which  respect  he  is  justified,  cannot  love  God,  until  his  guilt 
is  first  taken  away  in  justification  ;  but  when  that  is  once  taken 
away,  his  soul  then  opens  and  expands  in  love  to  God  ;  and  so  "  faith 
worketh  by  love,"  Gal.  v.  6. 

IV.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  mystery  of  justification  more  partic- 
ularly, we  must  consider  the  circumstances  and  qualifications  which 
accompanv  it.     To  this  pertains. 

(a)  The  time  when  God  justifieth  the  sinner.     We  cannot  say 
that  he  doth  this  in  his  eternal  decree,  for  that  was  the  purpose  of 
God  to  justify  him.  and  justification  follows  from  that  decree.     IVlore- 
over,  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  is  not  justification,  but  the  meritorious 
cause  of  it :  v/e  may  say  that  God  justified  all  the  elect  in  general  so 
far,  that  he  would  never  demand  a  satisfaction  for  their  guilt,  of  them 
when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  be  their  Surety,  and  transferred   their 
sins  on  him,  as  he  took  all  their   sins  upon  him,  in  order  that  he 
might  satisfy  for  them,  and  hath  also  a:tually  satisfied  for  them  by 
his  suff'erings;    for   -'Gcdwas  inChrist,  reconciling  the  world  to 
himself,  hot  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them."  2  Cor.  v.  19.  More- 
over,  all  the  elect  were  justified  in    Christ,   when    God    raised  him 
from   the  dead,  and  declared,  as  it  were,  by  an  instrument  of    ac- 
quittance, that  Christ  had  satisfied  him  for  them  all ,  for  "  Christ 
was,  justified  in  the  Spirit,"  1  Tim.  iii.  1 6,  and  so  all   the  elect  like- 
vise  in  him  ;  but  this  is  not  properly  speaking,  the  justification  of 
the  smner  before  God,  of  which  we  speak  here  :  neither  do  we  know 
that  this  is  ever  called  justification  in  the   word  of  God.     Justifica- 
tion is  indeed  a  benefit,  of  which   every  believer   becomes  a    parta- 
ker by  himself,  whereby  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  applied  and 
communicated  to  him  upon  his  act  of  faith.     And    so  we   see  that 
justification  takes  place,  when  the  elect  sinner,  being  convinced  of 
his  guilt  by  effectual  calling,  being  cited  before  the  throne  of  grace, 
^d  appearing  there,  lays  hold  on  the  Surety  and  his  righteousness. 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.      ATT 

and  thus  receives  this  gracious  sentence.     We  see  this  represented 
to  us  in  Joshua  the  high  priest,  Zech.  iii.  1 — 5.     We  add  to  this, 

(b)  The  different  considerations  of  justification.  Justification  is- 
considered  as  activ?  or  passive.  The  active  takes  place  before  the 
tribunal  of  God,,  where  the  sinner  appears  ;  where  God  actually  ab- 
solves him  from  his  guilt,  and  awards  to  him  a  right  to  life,  upon  the 
direct  act  of  his  fdlh.  The  passive  takes  place  in  the  mind  of  the 
sinner,  whereby  the  sentence  of  God  is  made  known  to  his  mind,  so 
that  he  becomes  conscious  that  he  is  justified  before  God  ;  which 
takes  place  upon  the  reflex  act  of  his  faith,  whereby  he  sees  in  him- 
self the  indisputable  evidences  ofhis  justification^  In  order  to  illus- 
trate this  we  will  explain, 

(c)  The  manner  in  which  the   sentence   of  justification  is  made 
known  to  the  believing  sinner-     This  is  done  either  externally  or  in°. 
ternally.     God  makes  known  to  the  believing  sinner  that  he   hath 
justified  him,  externally  by  his  word  :  the  scripture  is,  as  it  were,  the 
certificate  of  his  pardon  ;  for  "  all  the   prophets  bear   witness,   that 
through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him,  shall  receive  remis- 
sion of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43.     See  also  Gal.  iii.  8.     The    Lord    sends, 
also   for  this  purpose    his    messengers  of  peace,  "  who  comfort  his 
people  from  his  mouth,  speak  comfortably  to   Jerusalem,  and   cry 
unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that   her  iniquity  is  par- 
doned," Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.  These,  as  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as  though 
God  did  beseech  by  them,  "  invite,  call  and  pray  "   the  sinner  "  in 
Christ's  stead,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.   20,  21.     When 
the  sinner  consents  to  this   by  receiving  the  Surety,   the   preachers 
are  then  empowered  to  assure  him,  that  he  hath  peace  with  God  : 
"  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips :    peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off, 
and  to  him  that  is  near,  saith  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  19.  And  in  this 
manner  do  the  preachers  justify  many  "  sinners,  Dan.  xii.  3.     Yea, 
that  the  believer  may  be  certain  of  this,  God  gives  him  not  only   his 
oath,  "  swearing  that  he  will  not  be    wroth  with    him,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  9,  but  also  his  sacraments,  or  the  seals  of  his  cove- 
nant :  thus  ".  Abraham  received  the  sign  of   circumcision,  a  seal  of 
the  righteousness  of  faith,"  Rom.  iv.  11.     In  the  same  manner  do 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper  also  seal   justification  :    see  Acts  ii» 
38.     Matt.  xxvi.  26,  27,  28.     But  the  reflex  act  of  faith,  being   yet 
very  weak,  and  the  heart  being  too  much  disturbed  on  account  of  the 
sentence  of  death,  which  the  sinner  had  already  in  himself,  this  ex- 
ternal assuring  doth  not  much    affect  the   mind,  and  therefore  the 
Judge  gives  him  also  his  Spirit  to  be  a  pledge  and  seal,  whereby  he 
is  effectually  sealed,  as  Paul  showeth  repeatedly,  2  Cor.  i.  22.  Eph= 


4ra  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

i.  IS,  U.  iv.  30.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  here  is,  (a)  that  h& 
teaches  the  beheving  sinner  to  form  a  conclusion  from  ti>e  word,  and- 
from  his  heart ;  for  he  assures  him  of  the  truth  of  the  word,  which 
saithj  that  every  one  who  believeth  in  Christ  hath  the  iS^rgiveness  o£" 
sins  ;  "  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  that  t^e  Spirit  is  the  truth,"  1  John 
V.  6.  The  Holy  Spirit  also  enhghtens  his  soul,  and  enables  him  to 
.*'  kno\\  the  things,"  to  wit,  faith,  and  the  fruits  thereoi, ''  which  are 
freely  given  him  by  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.  \2.  Whereupon  he  determines 
the  soul  to  conclude  that  slie  is  justified,  for  **•  the  Spirit  itself  beareth 
witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  che  cnildrcn  of  God,"  Rom.  viii. 
16.  (b)  The  Holy  Spirit  also  effects  a  peaceful  frame  of  mind,  and 
a  calm  tranquility  of  soul,  whereby  the  former  perturbation  and  agi- 
tation, which  had  seized  her,  is  composed,  and  she  enjoys  thus, 
"righteousness,  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghost,"  according 
to  Rom.  xiv.  17.  See  also  Philip,  iv.  7.  Rom.  v  i.  (c)  The  Holy 
Ghost  works  in  a  higher  and  in  a  more  effectual  manner,  in  order 
to  assure  a  person,  when  he  suggests  the  sentence  of  absolution  to 
the  soul,  with  much  clear  and  sensible  grace,  speaking  secretly,  but 
very  powerfully  to  the  soul,  in  this  or  that  laanner,  "  Moses,  thou 
hast  found  favour  m  my  sight,  Daniel,  thou  art  a  man  greatly  belov- 
ed ;  son,  or  daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ;"  which  is  then 
conveyed  with  so  much  light  and  power  to  the  soul,  that  she  sees 
clearly,  that  it  ?s  a  word,  which  is  sent  to  her  from  the  throne  ;  and 
so  much  the  more,  because  "  the  Holy  Ghost  sheds"  also  *'  the  love 
of  God  abroad  in  her,"  Rom.  v.  5.  Yea,  he  causeth  her  to  taste  the 
power  and  the  fruit  of  this  benefit  with  great  joy,  so  that  she  saith- 
from  Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  *'I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  my  soul 
shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  gar- 
inents  of  salvatioii,  he  hath  covered  me  v/ith  the  robe  of  righteous- 
ness/' 

(d)  VVe  say  furthermore,  that  justification  is  a  complete  act. 
Sanc'.ification  is  only  in  part,  bnt  justification  is  perfect  in  this  life  ;. 
lor  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  wholly  imputed  to  the  sinner,  in: 
consequence  of  which  all  his  sins,  past  and  present,  are  forgiven 
him  ;  and  also  his  future  sins  so  far,  that  God  v/ill  never  condemn 
him  on  account  of  them,  but  will  always  forgive  them  ;  for  God 
saith  that  '^  he  will  never  be  v/ioth  with  him,  nor  rebuke  him,"  Isaiah- 
liv.  9,  and  that  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  Rom.  viii.  1 .  Moreover,  believers  are  justined  daily,  since- 
they  Tiiust  pray  daily,  that  their  sins  may  be  forgiven  them,  Matt. 
vU.  12,     Therefore  it  is.  also,  said,  Rev.  xxii.  1 1.  "  He  that  is  right- 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59— .61.      479 

eous,    let  him  be  justified  still-"*  See  this  exhibited  more  largely 
i]pon  the  fifth  petition. 

(e)  That  our  exposition  may  not  be  too  diffuse,  we  say  lastly,  that 
this  is  a  benefit  of  the  church,  not  only  of  the  New,  but  also  of  the 
Old  Testament.     How  the   Socinians  deny  this  we  have   shown  on 
the  sixth   Lord's  day,  where  we  have  also  refuted  tliem.     We  have 
likewise  evinced  there  that  it  is  a  mistake,  that  the  fathers  under  the 
Old  Testament  were  subject  to  guilt,  to  wrath,  to  the  curse,  to  a 
restless  conscience,  and  the  fear  of  death,  which  disproves  withal  the 
assertion,  that  they  had  not  then  the  perfect  forgiveness  of  their  sins. 
They  had  certainly  the  perfect  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  as  well  as 
the  believers  of  the  New  Testament.     David  surely  saith  this  in  the 
thirty  second  psalm,  and  Paul  proves  from  that  psalm  the  forgive- 
ness of  the  New  Testament,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8.     We  do  not  however 
deny,  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  justification  of  the 
Old,  and  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  the  believers  under  the  Old 
Testament  were  justified  upon  the  ground  of  the  future  satisfaction 
of  the  Surety,  their  justification  was  administered  to  them  in  a  dark 
and  legal  manner  by  the  law  of  ceremonies,  it  was  made  known  to 
them  by  the  Holy   Ghost  in   an   exceedingly  scarce  manner,  and  it 
was  the  peculiar  privilege  of  Israel,  confined  within  the  narrow  limits 
of  Canaan  :  but  under  the   New  Testament   believers   obtain  this 
benefit  by  tlie  accomplished  satisfaction  of  the  Mediator,  it  is  ad- 
ministered to  them  in  a  clear  and  easy  manner,   and  with  a  greater 
assurance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,   and  even  to  the  Gentiles.     And  so 
"  God  is  no  longer  a  God  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles: 
seeing  it  is  one  God,  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  by  faith 
and  uncircumcision  through  faith."     Thus  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  iii. 
29,  30. 


APPLICATION. 

It  is  time  to  contemplate  this  matter  more  precisely  for  our  ad- 
vantage. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  have  not  we  reason  to  boast,  that  we 
alone  possess  the  pure  doctrine  according  to  the  word  of  God,  when 
we  teach  that  the   sinner  is   justified  before  God  by  faith  only,  on 

*  We  have  quoted  this  passajje  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


48©  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SlNNEk 

account  of  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  through  the  free  grace 
of  God  ?  Is  not  this  doctrine  the  only  foundation,  and  the  principal 
article  of  the  wliole  gospel?  Can  we  apprehend../,  rightly  the  mean* 
ing  of  Paul  in  his  epistles,  without  this  doctrine  of  ours  ?  What  can 
we  understand  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  of  the  grace  of  God, 
and  of  faith,  if  we  do  not  make  use  of  this  our  key  ?  Is  the  efficacy 
©f  the  sacrifices  of  atonement,  and  of  the  trespass  offerings  intelligi- 
ble without  this  fundamental  article  ?  What  can  quiet  the  guilty 
mind,  and  glorify  God  on  account  of  his  righteousness  and  grace  in 
saving  sinners,  but  this  opinion  of  ours  ?  can  the  good  inclination  of 
the  sinner's  will,  his  good  works,  and  evangelical  obedience,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  Christ  ?  Whose  disturbed  mind  will  be  quieted  by 
these  means  ?  The  convinced  sinner,  despairing  of  himself  must  find 
a  perfect,  a  divine,  and  an  eternal  righteousness  without  himself,  if 
he  shal;  be  able  to  support  himself  with  a  hope,  that  God  will  be 
favourable  to  him.  And  how  shall  the  Lord  obtain  his  honour,  as 
long  as  the  sinner  gazes  on  himself,  and  his  virtues  ?  And  therefore 
we  may  safely  conclude,  that  we  possess  the  puie  doctrine  of  truth, 
and  that  the  Pelagians  and  Semipelagians  do  not.  The  revelation 
of  God  is  on  our  side* 

But  what  will  this  boasting  avail  us,  if  we  ourselves  do  not  make 
a  profitable,  comfortable,  and  sanctifying  use  of  our  doctrine  ?  Per- 
mit me  therefore  to  exhibit  this  benefit  of  justification  to  you  in  its 
proper  lustre,  that  we  may  urge  you  the  mor^  to  a  suitable  improve- 
ment of  it.  Consider  then, 

1.  Whom  God  justifieth,  and  so  graciously  acquits*  Is  it  not  a 
sinner,  yea,  one  of  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  with  Paul  ?  1  Tim.  i.  15, 
ivho  hath  sinned  against  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and  hath 
not  kept  one  of  them  ;  yea,  who  hath  transgressed  most  grievously 
against  God,  who  hated  God  and  his  neighbour,  was  "  sometimes 
foolish,  disobedient,  serving  divers  lusts,  hateful,  and  hating  others," 
as  Paul  confesses  of  himself,  and  other  justified  persons,  Titus  iii.  3. 
Yea,  who  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,  "  carnal,  sold  under  sin,  in  whose 
flesh  there  dvvelleth  no  good  thing,"  Romi  vii.  14,  18,  who  is  self- 
condemned,  hopeless,  and  knows  of  no  remedy,  saying  "there  is  no 
hope,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10,  and  whose  mouth  is  stopped,  being  unable  to 
excuse  himself  in  the  least.  When  the  Lord  God  shows  favour  to 
such  an  one,  and  admits  him  to  grace,  must  it  not  be  a  great  thing, 
and  cause  the  sinner  to  humble  himself  to  the  uttermost,  and  to  lose 
himself  in  the  grace  of  God  ? 

2.  It  is  inconceivable  that  his  Judge,  whom  he  hath  injured  in  the 
highest  degree,  and  who  might  therefore  proceed  against  him  with 


BEFORE  GOD.      XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.      481 

\he  utmost  severity,  favours  him  with  the  greatest  grace.    This,  this 
ftiust  exhibit  the  Judge  as  incomparably  good  to  the  sinner,  so  that 
he   may  cry  out   With   the  church,    Micha  vii,  18,  19.     "  Who  is  a 
God  like  unto  ihee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passcth  by  tiie  trans- 
gression of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage  ?  he  retainelh  not  his  anger 
for  ever,  because   he  delighteih  in  mercy.     He  will  turn  again,  he 
will  have  compassion  on  us  ;  he  will  subdue  our  iniquities  ;  and  thou 
wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the   depths  of  the  sea."     He  dfcscei;d» 
from  his  throne  of  vindictive  justice,  and   sits  upon   his  throne    f 
grace,  and  that  witijout  injuring,  yea,  to  the  glory  of  his  justice  ;  a 
wonder,  before  which  "  Moses  bowed  himself  with  his   head  to  the 
earth,"  wnen  the  Lord  proclaimed  it  before  him,  saying,  "  The  Lord, 
The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-sufieriiig,  and  abundant 
in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  furgiving  in- 
iquity, ttansgression  ^.nd  sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty,"  Lxod.  xxxiv.  5,  8. 

3.  Is  not  this  a  wonderful  benefit,   that  God  himself  bestows  his 
Son  to  be  a  Surety,  Mediator  and  Advocate  ?  The  sinner  must  have 
been  condemned  according  to  the  law,  and  the  testimony  of  his  con- 
Science  :  but  the  boweh  of  the  tender  mercy  of  God  made  his  Son 
to  be  sin,  that  the  sinner  might  he  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him. 
He  cannot  be  condcmn-.^d  now  upon   the  allegations  of  his  accuseis, 
although  their  accusations  be  ever  so  just;  they  themselves  must 
be  condemned  ;  for  according  to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  viii.  3,  4. 
"  God  sending  his  own   Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for 
sin,  condemned   sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fulfilled  in  us."     This  is  the   great  promise  of  God,  who 
justineth  the  sinner,  that  he  saith,   Isaiah   liv-  17.     **  Every  tongue 
that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  condemn.     This 
is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord     and  tiieir  righteou«;ness 
is  of  me,  sailh  the  Lord."     Do  tlie   accusers  renew  their  complaints 
with  his  daily  offences,  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  is  his  Advocate 
with  the  Father,  and  he  ever  liveth   to  make  intercession  for  him," 
agreeably  to   the  testimony  of  John  and  Paul,    1  John  ii,  1.  Heb. 
vii.  25. 

4.  Will  ye  have  more,  look  at  the  sentence.  How  precious  is  it, 
and  like  cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul,  bowed  down  under  the  burthen 
of  so  many  and  just  accusations  !  Can  aught  be  more  joyful,  than 
that  a  justlv,  and  a  self-condemned  malefactor  is  informed,  that  he 
hath  obtained  pardon  ?  How  soul  enrapturing  is  it  to  a  sinner,  who 
bears  with  the  greatest  anxiety  the  sentence  of  everlasting  condem- 
nation in  his  bosom,  to  hear  the  Judge   say,  Thou  slialt  not  die,  but 

3  K 


482  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

Jive  :  I  will  seat  thee  upon  the  throne  of  my  Son,  I  have  set  my 
heart,  my  love  on  thee,  and  when  his  Judge  gives  him  the  kiss  of 
reconciliation  1  How  must  such  a  poor  heart  revive,  as  it  were,  from 
the  pangs  of  death,  with  the  greatest  pleasure  !  Such  a  soul  saith 
straightway,  "  O  Lord,  by  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these 
things  is  the  life  of  my  spirit :  so  wilt  thou  recover  me,  and  make 
me  to  live.  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness ;  but  thou  hast 
in  love  to  my  soul  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption ;  for  thou 
hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back,"  isaiah  xxxviii.  16,  17.  Once 
more  ; 

5.  Why  doth  God  do  such  great  things  for  such  a  vile  child  of 
hell  ?  It  cannot  be,  because  he  saw  so  much  moral  goodness  in  him; 
not  only  God,  but  the  sinner  liimself,  knew  better.  Nothing,  nothing 
but  grace  moved  the  Lord  to  glor  fy  himself  in  such  a  subject  of 
c  nacmudlion.  It  is  '*  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  f^rare,  where- 
in he  liath  m<ide  us  accepted  in  the  beloved,"  saith  the  apostle,  Eph. 
i.  6.  Yea,  the  sinner  doth  still  do  nothing  to  obtain  this  sentence^ 
he  only  assents  to  it,  that  he  may  obtain  grace  and  peace,  agreeably 
to  the  method  and  wisdom  of  the  King :  his  Advocate  saith,  *'  Fear 
not.  only  believe,"  Mark  v.  36. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  David  in  the  right,  when  he  pro- 
nounces a  sinner,  who  is  justified  in  this  manner,  blessed  ?  Psalm 
xxxii.  1,  2.  Surely  yes.  But  what  will  this  avail  you  and  me,  if  we 
ourselves  have  no  interest  in  this  great  benefit  ?  ought  we  not  then 
to  inquire  thoroughly  in  what  state  we  are  with  regard  to  this  par- 
ticular? wfiat  think  ye,  are  ye  already  acquitted  before  the  tribunal 
of  God  I  or  do  ye  not  concern  yourselves  with  this  important  matter? 
This  WGuld  indeed  be  wretched.  Oi  do  ye  say.  We  hope  that  we 
do,  and  we  trust  that  all  our  sins  are  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
merits  ?  Have  ye  any  ground  or  proof  of  this  ?  Surely  this  is  a  mat- 
ter of  too  great  importance  to  be  trifled  with  in  such  a  manner. 
Permit  me  to  inform  you  what  are  the  marks  of  a  justified  person, 
and  let  each  of  you  examine  himself  by  them,  and  see  whether  they 
can  be  found  in  him. 

1  The  person  who  hath  been  justified  before  God,  *' his  con^ 
science  hath  accused  him  that  he  hath  grossly  transgressed  all  the 
commands  of  God,  and  that  he  hath  kept  none  of  them,  and  is  still 
inclined  to  all  evil."  He  knows  this,  not  merely  from  hearsay,  but 
he  looks  back,  and  sees  that  his  whole  life  hath  been  without  God, 
he  sc-cs  even  now  clearly  and  plainly  every  evil  inclination  rise  up  in 
him  against  God,  and  his  ways,  and  against  his  neighbour.  This 
distresses  him,   and  alfects  him  with  shame  and  cooceriii  and  he 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—51.      4S3 

earnestly  desires  to  find  grace  only  ;  this  urges  him  to  prayer,  and 
to  seek  God,  that,  like  such  a  vile  wretch,  he  may  find  grace  and 
mercy  with  God.     See  this  in  the  publican,  Luke  xviii,  13.  l-i. 

2.  Such  a  person  seeks  Ivh  rigi.teousness  and  pardon  only  in 
Christ.  At  first  he  seeks  relief  for  liis  distressed  heart  in  forsaking 
evil  and  doing  good  ;  but  he  is  soon  driven  fiom  this,  for  he  sees 
that  whatever  he  doth  is  so  mixed  with  sin,  tnat  the  more  he  sinves 
to  do  any  thing,  the  more  his  e\il  inclin^.tions  a;>pcar,  and  tlie  more 
distress  of  mind  he  experiences  on  account  of  them,  until  his  soul, 
entirely  perplexed,  hears  the  good  report  of  the  ability  and  willing- 
ness of  the  Mediator,  whereupon  being  driven  out  of  himself,  he 
turns  himself  to  him,  surrenders  himself  to  him,  choosts,  and  ac- 
cepts of  him,  that  he  may  be  justified  by  him  before  the  throne. 
How  exceedingly  low  doth  ue  now  rate  his  virtues,  although  he  once 
valued  them  so  highly  !  and  how  is  Jesus  risen  in  his  esteem  !  Like 
Saul  he  saith  with  his  whole  heart,  "  Yea,  doubtless,  and  I  count  all 
things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
my  Lord ;  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  do 
count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him^ 
He  t  aavmg  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
W  :ich  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  tlie  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith,"  Philip,  iii.  8,  9.     Once  more  : 

3.  The  person  who  is  justified  before  God  is  also  sanctified. 
These  t*vo  benefits  always  ^xcompany  each  other;  see  1  Cor.  vi. 
U.  "  With  God  there  is  forgiveness,  ihat  he  may  be  feared.  Psalm 
cxxx,  4.  David  saith  also  that  in  the  spirit  of  the  justified  person 
there  is  no  guile.  Psalm  xxxii.  2.  Indeed  faith  alone  justifieth,  but 
it  doth  not  by  itself  prove  that  a  person  is  justified,  unless  he  also 
prove  it  by  good  works.  James  demonstrates  this  by  the  most  for- 
cible arguments :  see  his  epistle,  the  second  chapter,  vrs.  14 — 26. 
It  IS  also  the  nature  of  the  justified  person  to  be  holy.  He  knows, 
he  hates,  and  opposes  the  wicked  inclinations  of  the  old  man  ;  he 
knows  and  loves  the  holy  will  of  God,  and  seeks  to  do  it,  and  for 
this  purpose  surrenders  himself  to  the  Lord  ;  love  to  God  hath  cap- 
tivated his  soul,  and  urges  him  to  conduct  himself  according  to  his 
will,  and  with  justified  Paul  he  strives  to  be  conformed  to  Christ, 
and  to  be  perfect,  PhiUp.  id.  10 — 14. 

If  ye,  who  hear  this,  examine  yourselves  by  it,  ye  will  see  how  it 
is  with  you  in  this  respect ;  if  we  were  not  to  speak  of  justification 
on  the  following  Lord's  day,  we  should  show  you  now  how  many 
are  yet  estranged  from  this  great  benefit,  and  how  wretched  their 
condition  is ;  but  this  we  must  do  on  the  twenty  fourth  Lord's  day. 


484  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNEU 

But  with  respect  to  you,  whose  souls  are  h'lmbled  under  siti,  who 
have  sought  and  found  your  righteousness  in  Christ  only,  and  pur- 
sue after  hoUness,  be  active  and  zealous  in  your  improvement  of  this 
matter.     And  particularly. 

1.  L?t  this  -ruth  be  precious  to  you,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lieth 
to  retain  it  in  the  church  ;  and  therefore  endeavour  to  undei stand  it 
thoroughly,  ani  to  teach  it  to  others  ;  suspect  and  oppose  those  who 
cavil  at  it  in  the  least.  Applicable  are  here  the  words  of  holy  Jude 
in  his  epistle,  the  tiiird  verse,  "  Earnestly  contend  for  the  faith  whxh 
was  once  celivered  to  the  saints."  The  doctrine  of  the  justification 
of  tJjc  sinner,  before  God  is  the  chief  truth  of  Christianity  :  with  this 
article  the  church  either  stands  or  falls.  iSo  doctrine  can  remain 
unviolated,  when  thii.  is  im^.aired.  He  who  doth  not  hold  this  truth 
pure,  cannot  have  a  pure  opinion  of  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  nor  of 
the  state  of  grace  ;  his  humility,  his  fai;h,  his  hope,  his  charity  and 
sanciihcation  is  vain.  He  cannot  "  serve  God  in  the  Spirit,  while 
he  doth  not  giory  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  hath  confidence  in  the  flesh," 
as  Paul  speaks,  Philip,  iii   3. 

'■  2.  Let  this  truth  possess  and  captivate  your  souls  so,  tl.at  it  may 
ravish  and  transport  you  with  wonder,  joy  and  thanksgiving  to  the 
Loid.  Think  what  hath  been  done  to  you,  that  ye,  who  were  so  vile 
and  guilty,  have  been  raised  up  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  of  misery, 
and  compa'^sed  with  joyful  songs  of  deliverance,  on  account  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  such  an  exalted  grace,  upon  the 
consenting  act  of  your  faith,  that  ye  might  receive  and  praise  for 
ever  grace  for  grace.  How  should  your  souls  now  be  filled  with  the 
praises  of  God,  with  his  honour  all  the  day  I  Have  ye  not  greater 
reason  than  Hagar,  to  say  with  her,  "  Have  I  here  also  looked  after 
him  that  seeth  mtV'  Gen.  xvi.  13.  See  only  how  David  strove  to 
do  this,  when  he  said,  Psalm  ciii.  1 — 5.  *'  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  his  holy  name.  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits  ;  who  forgiveth  all  thine 
iniquities;  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases ;  who  crowneth  thee  with 
lovini^-kindness  and  tender  mercies  ;  who  satisficth  thy  mouth  with 
good  thin'^^s  ;  ^o  that  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's." 

3.  Be  and  remain  lowly  and  humble.  Remember  what  ye  were, 
(and  yet  are  in  yourselves,)  surely  a  Magor  missabib,  a  terrour  round 
about  to  yourselves  and  to  all  who  beheld  you  with  a  discerning  eye. 
Ye  know  how  loathsome  and  hateful  ye  were  in  your  own  eyes, 
when  God  first  laid  his  hand  on  you  ;  there  was  none  so  filthy,  so 
wicked  and  damnable  as  ye  were  in  your  own  opinion.  Will  ye  now 
cKalt  yourselves  on  account  of  the  excellency  of  your  revelation  ? 


BEFORE  GOD.      —61.    48$ 

will  ye  forget  yourselves,  because  ye  are  believe>s,  and  beloved? 
5'  Who  maketh  you  to  differ  ?  and  what  have  ye,  that  ye  have  not 
received  ?  and  if  ye  have  received  it,  why  do  ye  glory,  as  if  ye  had 
tiot  received  it  ?"  thus  I  ask  you  with  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  Do  ye  no 
longer  know  what  ye  have  been,  know  then  what  ye  are  now  still, 
through  the  evil  inclinations  of  your  hearts  ;  if  this  w^il  not  humble 
you,  and  render  you  lowly,  the  Lord  will  "  give  you  a  sharp  thorn  in 
your  flesh,  a  messenge;  of  vSatan,  to  buffet  you."  And  why  not  you> 
as  well  as  Paul,  "  that  ye  may  not  exalt  yourselves  ?"  2  Cor.  xii.  7» 
Why  did  the  Lord  v/ithdravv  his  hand,  and  suffer  the  greatest  saints 
to  fall  into  exceedingly  grievous  sins  ?  was  it  not  that  ihey  might 
remain  humble  ? 

4.  When  ye  have  sinned  against  your  ^reat  Benefactor,  Judge 
and  Faiher,  be  grieved  and  sorry  for  it.  Shall  one,  who  hath  beea 
delivered  from  so  great  a  death,  behave  himself  unthankfully,  basely, 
and  like  a  degenerate  child  towaid  him,  who  hath  delivered  him,  and 
who  hath  been  so  inconceivably  kind  to  him  ?  '*  Do  ye  thus  requite 
the  Lord,  O  foohsh  people  and  unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father  that 
hath  bought  thee ;  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  estaulished  thee  ?" 
thus  speaks  Aloses  lo  Israel,  Dent,  xxxii.  6.  Let  your  hea;ts  bleed 
on  account  of  tiijs,  and  bewail  it  with  biiny  te.  rs,  tike  David  and 
Peter,  Psalm  ii,  and  Mat:,  xxvi.  75.  Do  not  howev^^r  sink  down  in 
discourage nient,  but  seek  pardon  for  y^ur  ill  behaviour  with  humil- 
ity ;  draw  near  unto  God,  as  a  i  ather,  wi:ose  gracious  gift  of  right- 
eousnebS  is  witaouv"  reptntaiice,  and  w'-^o  vmII  never  mere  be  v/roth 
with  you,  as  a  Judge  ;  he  sits  yet  upon  his  throne  of  grace,  to  afford 
grace,  help  and  mercy  in  time  of  need.  Your  Surety  hath  brought 
ia  an  everlasting  righteousness  for  you,  and  hath  been  m?de  right- 
eousness to  you  of  God,  ye  have  stiil  a  tight  to  it,  it  is  imputed  to 
you  entirely,  and  for  ever.  Ke  hath  justly  turned  his  face  away  frcm 
you,  but  ye  have  not  lost  your  title  to  his  righteousness  by  youi  in- 
iquities ;  have  ye  been  unfaithful,  he  remains  faithful  :  therefore  lay 
hold  anew  on  the  ri.u;hteousnc-ss  of  your  Surety  for  reconcili-it-on, 
come  with  it  to  the  throne,  and  plead  upon  "  his  rcsurreciion,  with 
the  answer  of  a  good  conscience,"  as  Peter  requireth,  I  Peter  iii. 
21.  And  rest  not,  until  your  souls  be  really  and  actually  at  peace 
again  with  the  Father. 

5  Conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  the  great  favour,  that  hath  been 
shown  to  you.  This  Paul  enjoins,  when  he  saith,  Philip,  i.  27. 
*'  Only  let  your  conversation  be  as  beccmeth  the  gospel  of  Christ." 
The  benefit  of  justification  is  the  great  theme  of  the  gospel  ;  and 
to  what;  think  ye,  dcth  so  great  a  benefit  oblige  you  ?  doth  it  not  to 


i8&  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

fight  against  sin,  to  mortify  it,  to  live  for  God,  according  to  his  will, 
to  be  filled  with  fruits  of  righteousness,  self-denial,  vveanedness  from 
the  world,  to  be  heavenly-minded,  to  burn  with  love  to  God  and  your 
neighbour,  and  that  as  those,  who  belong  to  God  and  Christ  ?  Hear 
what  Paul  saith.  Tit.  ii.  14-  "  Who,"  namely  Christ  Jesus,  «  gave 
himsely  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  pu- 
rify unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  Show 
yourselves  thc:n  to  be  of  "  the  righteous  people,  which  keepeth  the 
truth." 

Thus  will  ye  have  the  testimony,  that  nothing  can  be  laid  to  your 
charge,  because  God  hath  justified  you,  Christ  hath  died  for  you, 
and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  to  make  intercession  for  you, 
vntil  he  shall  at  length  appear  on  the  great  day,  to  execute  judg- 
ment, that  he  may  perfect  and  complete  your  whole  state,  by  absolv- 
ing you  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  the  whole  world  from  every  sin, 
and  punishment,  and  adjudging  you  to  eternal  life,  yea,  even  insta- 
ting y  u  in  it,  when  he  will  say  to  you  from  Matt.  xxv.  34,  "  Come 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from 
the  founaation  of  the  world."  Amen, 


(  487  ) 


THE 


DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION 


DEFENDED. 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY- 


Horn.  iii.  27,  28.  Where  is  boasting  then  ?  it  is  excluded.  By  what 
law  ?  of  works  ?  nay  :  but  by  the  law  of  fairh.  Therefore  we 
conclude,  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of 
the  law.

Q.  60.  Hoti)  art  thou  righteous  before  God? 

A.  Only  by  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  so  that  though  my  con- 
science accuse  me,  that  I  have  grossly  transgressed  all  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  and  kept  none  of  them,  and  am  still  mclined 
to  all  evil,  notwithstanding  God,  without  any  merit  of  mine,  but 
only  of  mere  grace,  grants  and  imputes  to  me  the  perfect  satisfac- 
tion, righteousness  and  holiness  of  Christ ;  even  so,  as  if  I  never  had 
had,  nor  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as  if  I  had  fully  accomplished 
all  that  obedience,  which  Christ  hath  accomplished  for  me,  inas- 
much as  I  embrace  such  a  benefit  with  a  believing  hearts 


454  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

Q    61.   W/iy  saycst  thuu^  tfiat  thou  art  righteous  by  faith  only  ? 

A.  Not  that  I  am  acceptable  to  God  on  account  of  the  worthiness 
of  iTiy  faith  ;  but  only  because  the  satisfaction,  righteousness  and  hi> 
liness  of  Christ  is  my  righteousness  before  God,  and  that  I  cai  not 
receive  and  apply  the  same  lo  myself  any  other  way  than  by  faith 
only. 


A: 


MONG  the  various  titles,  with  which  faith  is  adorned  in  the 
word  of  God,  the  most  goodly  is  that  ol  *  precious  faith,"  2  Peter  i.  1, 
Faiih  is  precious,  inasmuch  as  it  doth  not  belong  to  ail  men,  but  only 
to  tlie  precious  elect  of  God,  for  "  all  men  have  not  faith,"  2  Thes. 
iii.  2,  hui  only  '*  the  elect  of  God,"  Titus  i.  1.  Faith  is  precious  in 
itself,  for  it  denies  its  own  mgcnuity  and  reason,  that  it  may  acknowl- 
edge the  invisible  God  upon  his  single  declaration  to  be  true,  and 
rtiay  rest  in  his  revelation  with  respect  to  future  and  invisible  things. 
It  "  receives  the  testimony  of  God,  and  sets  to  its  seal  that  God  is 
true,"  John  iii,  33.  "  It  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped,  for,  and 
the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1.  Moreover,  faith  is  pre- 
cious, because  it  hath  the  most  precious  objects  of  its  holy  nature, 
exceedingly  great  and  precious  promises,"  2  Peter  i.  4.  The  Triune 
God,  all  his  blessed  and  profound  mysteries,  ;'  all  things  which  are 
written  in  the  law  and  the  prophets,"  Acts  xxiv,  14,  which  the  be- 
lieving sou!  contenjplates  and  embraceth,  and  which  fill  her  full, 
with  "  ali  the  fulness  of  God,"  Eph  iii.  18,  l- .  And  will  ye  have 
more  ?  Faith  is  precious  also,  because  it  is  so  profitable  and  advan- 
Uigeous"  to  the  person  who  possesses  it.  It  unites  him  to  God  and 
Christ,  whom  it  causes  to  *' dwell  in  his  heart,"  Eph,  iii.  17.  "It 
gives  him  power  to  become  a  son  of  God,  Jol\n  i  12.  "  It  cleanses 
tCiQ  heart,"  Arts  xv.  9.  It  renders  prayer  effectual,  so  that ''  it  saves 
the  sick,"  James  V.  15.  "It  overcomes  the  world,"  1  John,  v.  4, 
It  can  do  all  things  ;  *'  all  things  are  possible  to  him  who  believeth," 
Mark  ix.  23.  See  what  all  the  saints  of  God  have  done  by  faith, 
Heb  xi.  And  that  which  is  the  greatest  and  most  precious  is,  that 
"it  justifieth"  the  guilty  sinner  "before  God  in  Christ,  and  renders 
him  an  heii  of  everlasting  life,"  Thus  speaks  the  instructor,  and 
thus  also  the  word  of  God  speaks,  as  we  will  sho.v  anon. 

The  instructor  doth  not  deem  it  sufficient,  in  order  to  excite  in 
his  pupil  a  relish  for  precious  faith,  to  declare  the  necessity  and  na- 
ture of  it  in  the  seventh  Lord's  day,  and  the  great  object  of  it  from 
the  eighth  to  the  twenty-second  Lord's  day  ;  but  he  proceeds  also 
to  exhibit  the   greatest  advantage  of  fuith,  to  wit,  the  justification  of 


JSETORE  GOO.      —61.     465 

the  sinner  before  God  by  faith  ;  which  he  first  explains  in  this  Lord's 
day,  and  then  defends  in  the  following. 

In  order  to  explain  this  justification  of  the  sinner  before  God,  the 
catecliism  exhibits  four  particulars  : 

I.  It  speaks  of  it  m  general,  Q.  59. 

II.  It  explains  the  manner,  in  which  the  sinneris  justified  by  God, 
Q.  50. 

III.  It  shows  how  we  are  justified  by  faith  only,  Q.  61.     We  will 
add  to  this, 

IV.  The  ciicumstances  and  qualities  oiP  justification. 

L  We  say,  the  catechism  speaks  first  of  justification   in  general, 
showing  "  that  a  person  is  righteous  before  God.  and  an  heir  of  eter- 
nal life  by  faith  in  Christ,"  as  it  speaks  in  the  fifty-ninth  question. 
In  order  to  understand  this  rightly,   we  must  observe   beforehand 
concerning  the  word  "justify,"  that  we  must  not  attend  so  much  to 
the  literal  signification  of  the  word  in  oui  (Low  Dutch)    languae:e, 
nor  to  that  of  the  Latin  word  justi/icare^  as  though  it  intimated   the 
making  of  a  sinful  person  righteous  and  holy,  by  an  infusion  of  holi- 
ness into  him,  as  the  Papists  speak,  when  they  assert  a  first  and  sec- 
ond jusiification,  that  is,  according  to  their  opinion,  a  fiist  and  second 
conversion  ;  for  we  must  seek  for  the  pro})er  import  of  this   word 
and  matter  in  the  word  of  God.  to  which  we  must  submit  ourselves 
in  every  doctrme.     V/e  f.nd  there  in  ihe  Hebrew,  the  word  hitzdik^ 
and  in  the  GvQ^\i  dikaiotm^hoih.  signifying  to  acquit,  and  pronounce  a 
person  righteous  before  a  tribunal.      For  these  words  are   derived 
from  judicatures,  and  are  therefore  opposed   to  accusin'^  and   con- 
demning ;  this  we  see,  Prov,  xvii.  15,  "  Ue  that  justifieth  the  wick- 
ed, and  he  that   condemneth  the  righteous,  even  they  both   are   an 
abomination  to  the  Lord,"     And  in  this  sense  must  we  understand 
this  word   in  all  its  significations,  v^^hether  a  itian  justify  God,  Luke 
vii.  29.  Rom  iii.  4,  or  whether  God  justify  his  Son,  1  Tim.  iii.  17,  or 
whether  he  justify ^man,  as  well  with  respect  to  his  actions  in  them- 
selves. Psalm  cvi.  30,  31,  in  comoarison  with  others,  Ezek.  xvi.   51, 
52j  and  in  opposition  to  others,  1  Kings  viii.  32,  as  with  respect   to 
his  condition,  approving  it  from  his  works,  James  ii.  21 — 25.     And 
so  "  Abraham  and  Rahab  were  justified  by  works."     But  we  will 
not  enlarge  upon  this  subject ;  we  refer  the  curious  reader   to  Wit- 
sius's  ceeonomy  of  the  covenants,    in    the  chapter   on   justification, 
where  he  treats  of  this  matter  both  largely  and  clearly.     We  would 
only  show  that  the  words  justifying,  and  justifying  the  sinner  before 
God,  signify  no  more  than  declaring  him  to  be  righteous,  and  acquit- 
ting him  of  his  guilt,  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of  the  Son  of 


466  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

God,  since  it  is  opposed  here  also  to  accusing  and  condemning. 
This  the  apostle  teacheth  us,  Rom.  viii.  33,  34,  "Who  shall  lay 
any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth  : 
who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died."  As  therefore 
accusing  and  condemning  is  not  an  infusion  of  guilt,  and  of  that 
which  deserves  condemnation,  into  a  person,  so  justification  is  not  a 
making  of  a  person  just  or  righteous,  or  an  infusion  of  righteousness 
and  holiness  into  him  Will  any  man  insist  upon  the  word  justify, 
and  say  that  it  signifieth  literally  the  making  of  a  dinner  ria;hteous, 
v/e  will  allow  that  God  makes  the  sinner  righteous  by  justification, 
not  by  infusing  righteousness  and  holiness  into  him  ;  for  that  is  done 
by  sanrtification,  but  by  imputing  to  him,  and  rendering  him  a  par- 
taker of  the  righteousness  of  his  Son,  by  which  he,  who  was  guilty, 
is  acquitted,  and  declared  to  be  entitled  to  eternal  life.  And  that 
this  word  must  be  unders'.ood  so  here,  appe*irs  still  more,  since  to 
justify  tilt"  sinner  is  to  impute  r'glueousness  to  him,  and  to  forgive 
his  sins :  ''  Even  as  David  also,"  according  to  the  words  of  Paul, 
Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  ^  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man,  unto  whom 
God  impuieth  righteous;  i?s9  without  works,  saying,  Blessed  are  they 
whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  whose  sins  are  covered  :  blessed  is  the 
man  to  vthom  the  i.ord  will  not  impute  sin." 

But  that  we  may  understand  the  matter  itself,  we  must  know 
that  man,  in  order  to  be  declared  righteous  by  God,  must  have  ei» 
ther  a  rigiiteousness  of  his  ovvn,  or  the  righteousness  of  Christ. 
AVbich  we  apprehend  thus: 

God  had  entered  into  a  covenant  of  works  with  man,  and  had  de* 
manded  of  him  a  perfect  obedience,  according  to  his  law,  and  had 
promised  that  he  would  bestow  life  upon  him,  if  he  obeyed  ;  but  if 
man  did  not  obey,  he  should  die  :  now  if  man  had  obeyed  perfectly, 
he  v;ould  have  had  a  righteousness  and  a  right  to  demand  life  of 
God,  on  account  of  his  promise  annexed  to  perfect  obedience  ;  and 
thus  God  would  have  justified  him  according  to  his  law.  And  this 
is  the  justification  of  the  law  by  works;  "for  Moses,"  saith  the 
apostle,  Rom.  X.  5,  "describeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of  the 
law,  that  t!ie  man  who  doth  those  things  shall  live  by  them."  Since 
now  man  hath  transgressed  the  law  of  God,  he  cannot  be  justified 
by  his  wo.'ks,  because  he  hath  no  righteousness,  upon  which  he  can 
demand, life  :  "  For  this  the  law  could  not  do,"  saith  Paul,  Rom. 
>iii.  3,  '*  in  that  it  v/as  weak  through  the  flesh."  The  law  condemns 
and  cuiseth  him  ;  "  Now  we  know,"  saith  also  the  same  aposlk* 
Rom.  iii  19,20,  "  that  what  things  soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to 
them  wiiC  are  under  the  law  ;  that   every  mouth  may    be   stopped, 


JJi^rORtGOD.     X.^IIi:     LOKD'SDAY.  Q.  59— 61,     467 

and  all  the  world  may  become  i^uilty  before  God.  Therefore  by  the 
deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sighi ;  for  by  the 
kavv  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  See  also  how  he  speaks.  Gal.  iii.  10. 
The  Lord  God  having  nevertheless  not  created  all  men  in  vain, 
made  his  Son  under  the  law  for  the  elect  sinner,  caused  tim  to  !:L'S- 
tain  the  curse  by  his  sufferings,  and  to  fulfil  tie  demand  of  the  law 
by  his  obedience,  that  he  might  satisfy  ti.e  jus  ice  of  (  od,  accorrimg 
to  the  demand  cf  the  law;  and  so  the  Son  of  Gcd  merited  a  right- 
eousness before  God  for  the  sinntr,  in  order  to  aischarge  him  from 
the  cursii,  ond  give  him  a  right  to  life.  See  Rom.  viii.  5,  4.  Whea 
Gad  renders  the  sinner  a  partaker  of  (his  righteousness  of  his  Son, 
and  imputes  it  to  him,  and  he  receives  it  by  faith,  then  God  justifies 
him.  And  so  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  he  is  righteous  in  Christ 
before  God,  and  an  heir  of  eternal  life."  This  is  the  righteousness 
of  the  gospel  and  of  faith,  of  which  Paul  speaks,  Philip  iii.  9,  "  And 
be  found  in  him.  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the 
hv/,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  God  by  faith."     See  also,  Rom.  iii.  21,  22. 

II.  In  order  to  explain  more  particularly  the  manner  in  v.hich  God 
justifieih  the  sinner,  we  must  observe  that  the  word  justification,  be- 
in^;-  a  forensic  term,  intimates  that  Gcd  deals  in  justificat'on  agreeably 
to  the  customs  of  courts  of  justice,  in  which  the  judges,  when  they  find 
that  the  cited  and  accused  person  is  righteous,  acquit,  and  pronounce 
him  righteous.  And  therefore  we  will  consider  in  God's  judiciary 
procedure  v/ith  the  sinner,  in  order  to  justify  him,  1,  the  Judge, 
2,  tlie  persons  cited,  S,  the  accusers^  4,  the  advocate,  and  5,  the 
sentence. 

i.  God  alone  is  the  judge  ;  for  he  alone  hath  the  supreme  right 
to  prescribe  laws  to  man  :  "  For  the  Lord  is  cur  Judge,  the  Lord  is 
our  la\vji:iver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will  save  us,"  suith  the  church, 
Isaicih  xxxiii.  22.  "  There  is  one  Lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  save  and 
to  destroy,"  James  iv.  12.  Against  him  only  do  we  sin,  as  David 
confesseth,  Psalm  li.  4.  "  Against  thee,  thee  only  have  I  sinned." 
And  therefore  he  alone  forgives  sins,  as  he  himself  declares,  Isaiah 
xliii.  25,  "I  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  mine 
own  sake,"  It  is  therefore  blasphemous  in  the  Romish  priests  to 
forgive  sinners  their  sins,  and  to  justify  them,  according  to  Mark  ii. 
7.  Is  it  said  that  the  preachers  "jus  ify  many,"*  Dan  xii.  3,  and 
that  they  "  remit  sins,"  Jolm  xx.  23,  we  must  understand  it  only  of 
a  ministerial  power,  by  v/hich  they,  as  mc3sengers  of  God,  make 

*  Ibis  i?  according  tc  the  Dutch  tsranslat ion. 


468  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

known  his  gracious  sentence  of  absolution  to  penitent  sinners,  by 
proffering  them  pardon,  if  they  will  "be  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor. 
y.  20,  and  by  assuring  them  that  God  hath  forgiven  their  sins,  as 
the  pr(  achers  are  commanded  to  do,  Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.  For  they  for- 
give s.ns,  when  they  prc-ach  repentance  and  forgiveness  of  sins,  in 
the  riame  of  Christ,  as  appears  from  Luke  xxiv.  47,  compared  with 
John  XX.  23.  Although  justification  is  the  work  of  the  whole  divine 
Trinity,  nevertheless  it  is  especially  appropriated  to  the  Father,  as  it 
is  the  dispensation  of  the  ^3on  to  be  the  advocate,  and  as  it  is  the 
special  work  of  the  JJoly  Spirit  to  make  the  sentence  known,  and  to 
suggest  it  to  believers.  Therefore  ive  read,  Rom.  viii,  S3,  S4. 
*'  Who  shall  lay  any  think  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  it  is  God 
that  jubtifieih  ;  who  is  he  thsit  condemneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died.'* 
In  tjie  distribution  of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine  Persons, 
the  exercise  of  justice  is  assigned  to  the  Father  as  Judge,"  -who 
hath  set  his  Son  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood, 
to  declare  his  righteousness  ior  the  remission  of  sins,"  as  we  see, 
Rom.  iii  25.  But  as  God  could  not  declare  his  righteousness  in 
justifying  sinners,  and  forgiving  their  sins,  unless  he  also  exercised 
his  grace,  he  hath  therefore  sltten  down,  not  only  on  his  throne  of 
justice,  but  also  on  his  throne  of  grace,  to  which  the  sinner  must 
therefore  "  come  with  boldness,  that  he  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  iv.  16. 

2.  The  person  who  is  cited  is  a  sinner,  "  y/ho  hath  sinned  griev- 
ously against  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and  hath  kept  none  of 
them,  and  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil."  Not  all  who  are  such,  but 
*'  those  whom  God  hath  foreordained,  and  also  called"  to  justifica- 
tion, Rom.  viih  29,  30,  33.  Neither  do  they  remain  so  abominable, 
but  they  are  also  "  washed  and  sanctified,  when  they  are  justified," 
1  Cor.  vi.  11.  But  v/e  only  say,  that  man  is  considered  in  justifica- 
tion, as  such  a  sinner.  The  Remonstrants  deem  the  words,  "  that 
he  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  to  be  a  hard  saying,  and  contrary  to 
the  sixty  fourth  and  hundred  and  fourteenth  questions,  which  teach, 
that  b'lievers  delight  in  all  righteousness,  and  that  it  is  impossible 
that  t^LY  should  not  brin?  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness."  But  we 
need  not  wonder  that  those  men  manifest  displeasure  at  this  asser- 
tion, for  they  imagine  that  man  hath  lost  nothing  by  the  fall,  but  his 
supernatural  gifts,  and  that  he  is  not  become  so  corrupt  ;  they  also 
"Will  have  that  God  doth  not  justify  man,  before  he  perceives  a  good 
inclination  of  his  will  in  hiiu  ;  but  we  need  not  concern  ourselves 
about  what  they  say,  since  this  answer  ngreeth  with  the  word  of 
Qod  :  our  text  saith  "  be  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him  that 


BEFORE  GOD.     XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.     46» 

justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  And 
can  a  man  be  considered  differently  from  this  in  justification,  which 
is  a  f?»rgiving  of  sins  ?  must  not  a  man  appear  then  to  God  as  a  sin- 
ner ?  yea,  when  the  sinner  comes  to  God  in  order  to  be  justified, 
must  he  not  with  the  deepest  humility  accuse  himself  before  God  ? 
is  not  his  mouth  stopped  ?  would  he  then  dare  to  speak  of  his  good 
inclinations,  and  of  his  free  will  ?  no,  the  prodigal  son  spoke  only  of 
his  sins  and  unworthiness,  Luke  xv.  17,  18,  19.  The  Pharisee  spoke 
like  a  Remonstrant,  he  thanked  God  in  a  flattering  manner,  that  he 
was  not  so  abominable,  but  had  many  good  qualifications  ;  but  the 
publican  spoke  and  acted  differently  from  this,  and  more  humbly  ; 
for  "  standing  afar  off,  he  would  fiot  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  to- 
ward heaven,  but  smote  on  his  breast,  saying,  God,  be  merciful  ta 
me  a  sinner.  And  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather 
than  the  other,"  Luke  xviii.  10 — 14.  When  therefore  the  instruc- 
tor saith,  that  "  I  am  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  he  understands  it  of  a 
sinner  considered  in  himself,  who  comes,  that  he  may  be  justified  ; 
and  that  such  an  one  is  inclined  to  evil  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  iii. 
9 — 20,  and  therefore  the  sixty  fourth,  and  hundred  and  fourteenth 
questions  do  not  contradict  this  assertion,  inasmuch  as  they  speak  of 
man  in  his  state  of  sanctifiration,  as  a  fruit  of  his  justification.  And 
if  we  did  say  that  a  sanctified  person  was  still  inclined  to  all  evil, 
would  we  then  contradict  the  word  of  God  ?  Verily,  sanctification  is 
not  perfect :  is  there  a  new  man,  who  delights  in  all  righteousness, 
and  brings  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness,  there  remains  still  an  old 
man,  and  a  great  power  of  corruption  :  *'  The  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  Spirit,"  Gal.  v.  17.  Can  tlie  flesh  lust  against  the  Spirit,  with- 
out being  inclined  to  all  evil  ?  Was  net  Paul  obliged  to  bemoan  him- 
self on  account  of  those  evil  incUnations  ?  Rom.  viii.  When  the 
saii^ts  were  hurried  to  evil  sins,  did  that  happen  without  an  inclina- 
tion to  evil  ?  The  reason  why  those  evil  inclinations  do  not  always 
mislead  the  soul,  is  not  because  ihey  do  not  exist  in  the  soul,  but  be- 
cause God  restrains  them  by  his  grace,  and  the  old  man  hath  not 
always  an  opportunity  to  bestir  himself.  Peter  thought  that  he  would 
by  no  means  deny  his  master ;  but  when  he  was  in  the  hall  of  Ca-^ 
iaphas,  he  then  showed  how  strongly  he  was  urged  by  his  evil  incli- 
nations to  deny  his  Master  thrice,  and  to  curse  himself  in  a  grievous 
manner,  in  order  to  save  his  life. 

The  sinner,  seeing  himself  to  be  such  an  one,  is  seized  with  ter- 
rour,  and  will  endeavour,  fike  Adam,  to  hide  himself  from  the  Lord; 
but  he  is  called  and  cited  to  God's  throne  of  grace,  that  he  may  re«. 
ceive  a  ^ra^ious  sentence  ;  "  God  sets  his  Son  forth  to  him  to  be  % 


47Q  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  The  Son  of  God  ciies^ 
"  Look  unto  me  and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,"  Isaiah  xlv. 
22.  "  The  Holy  Spirit  affords,"  and  effects  for  hira  "  an  access  to 
the  Father,"  Eph.  ii.  18,  so  that  he  "  goes  with"  a  humble  ''  boldness 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  he  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to 
help  in  time  of  need,"  H^tb.  iv.  16. 

•  3.  But  while  he  stands  there,  his  accusers  bestir  themselves 
against  him,  and  set  themselves  at  his  right  hand,  to  resist  him.  The 
accusers  are,  (a)  the  law  :  "  Moses  aecuseth  him  to  the  Fat!\er," 
John  V.  45.  For  the  law  saith  to  him  in  his  face,  that  "  he  ought  to 
have  done  those  things,"  all  that  was  commanded,  "  if  he  would 
}ive,"  Rom.  x,  5.  The  law  saith  also  to  him,  that  he  hath  not  done 
those  things ;  for  "  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  and  that 
therefore  "  no  flesh  can  be  jusiifie  *  before  God  by  the  deeds  of  the 
law,"  Rom.  iii.  20,  and  it  denounceth  the  curse  against  the  sinner, 
Gal.  iii.  10.  The  Holy  Ghost,  convincing  him  of  this  by  the  law, 
according  to  what  the  Saviour  saith,  John  xvi.  8,  the  sinner's  "  moutil 
is  stopped  by  the  law,"  Romi.  iii.  19.  The  sinner  cannot  allege 
aught  against  this  accusation  of  the  law  :  with  Paul  he  aeknovvlcdgea 
that ''  tlie  law,  and  the  commandment  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good,'* 
Rom.  viii.  12.  He  confc'sses  that  he  hath  not  kept  any  of  those 
commandments,  and  that  therefore,  if  the  Judge  will  deal  whh  him 
according  to  the  demands  of  the  law,  "  he  cannot  stand,"  Psalm 
cxxx.  3,  and  thus  he  "  dies  to  the  law  through  the  law,"  Gal.  ii.  19. 
(b)  And  so  his  conscience  is  also  his  accuser,  "  which  accuseth  him 
that  he  hath  gix)ssly  transgressed  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and 
hath  kept  none  of  them,  and  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,"  v/hich  he 
ihereforc  confesses  with  shame  and  detestation  of  himself  before  the 
Judge,  crying  out,  ''  O  my  God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up 
my  face  to  thee,  my  God :  for  mine  iniquities  are  increased  over 
my  h'jad,  and  my  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens,"  Ezra  ix. 
6.  But  being  come  to  the  throne  of  grace,  he  pleads  mercy,  and 
not  riglit,  like  the  publican,  Luke  xviii.  13,  and  like  David,  Psalm 
cxliii;  2.  (c)  Satan,  knowing  the  unfathomable  grace  and  mercy  of 
the  Lord,  strives  to  prevent  the  sinner  from  finding  grace,  and  he 
therefore  also  sets  iiimself  as  an  accuser  at  his  right  hand,  in  order 
to  resist  him,"  Zech.  iii.  I.  He  endeavours  to  persuade  the  sinner^ 
that  it  is  not  possible,  that  such  a  vile  wretch  as  he  is,  should  obtain 
grace  ;  yea,  he  seeks  to  stir  the  Judge  himself  up  against  the  sinuer^ 
as  though  he  were  a  hypocrite,  as  he  did,  Job.  i.  y,  10.  ii.  4,  5. 
4»  Tnii  would  sink  the  poor  and  exceedingly  burthened  sinnci'^ 


tiEFORE  GOD.     XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  5^—51.      471 

mto  a  total  despair,  it  would  cause  him  to  "  take  his  flesh  in  his  teeth, 
anJ  to  put  his  life  in  his  hands,"  if  Jesus  the  Mediator  and  Advocate 
at  the  throne,  did  not  interpose  between  God  and  him.  Therefore 
John  saith,  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous ;  and  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins," 
1  John  ii.  1,  2,  and  Jesus,  when  he  pleadeth,  saiih  to  his  Father  for 
the  sinner,  Job  xxxiii.  24.  *' Deliver  him  from  going  down  to  the 
pit,  1  have  found  a  ransom."  He  represents  to  the  Father  his  satis- 
faction, righteousness  and  holiness,  and  that  he  hath  accomplished 
a  perfect  obedience  for  the  sinner.  Do  the  accusers  allege,  that 
the  sinner  is  accursed,  **  because  he  hath  not  continued  in  all  things 
writien  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  according  to  Gal.  iii.  10. 
the  Advocate  shows  that  "  he  hath  delivered  him  from  the  curse  of 
the  law,  having  been  made  a  curse  for  him,"  Gal.  iii.  13.  Do  thej!" 
say  that  the  sinner  cannot  live,  because  he  hath  not  done  those 
things,  which  are  commanded,  as  the  righteousness,  which  is  of  the 
law  required  of  him,  according  to  Rom.  x.  5,  Jesus  sets  his  active 
obedience  against  this,  that  the  sinner  may  be  made  righteous,"  as 
Paul  speaks,  Rom.  v.  19. 

5.  The  Judge  of  the  whole  earth,  determined  to  do  right,  passeth 
sentence  in  favour  of  the  sinner.  That  we  may  have  a  proper  idea 
of  the  nature  of  this  sentence,  we  will  consider,  (a)  the  import  of  this 
sentence,  (b)  the  causes  of  it,  and,  (c)  the  manner  in  which  the  sin- 
ner obtains  an  interest  in  it. 

(a)  The  import  of  the  sentence  is  favourable  to  the  sinner.  This 
doth  not  imply  that  the  Judge  saith.  Thou  hast  not  had,  and  thoa 
hast  not  committed  any  sin,  the  accusations  which  have  been  exhib- 
ited against  thee  are  false  ;  for  then  ^'  God's  judgment  would  not  be 
according  to  truth,"  contrary  to  Rom.  ii.  2,  and  "  God  will  not  justify 
the  wicked,"  in  this  manner,  as  he  himself  declares,  Exod.  xxiii.  7, 
But  this  sentence  imports,  (1)  that  God  discharges  and  acquits  the 
sinner  from  his  deserved  guilt  by  forgiving  him  his  sin,  and  not  im- 
puting it  lo  him  :  "  As  David  also  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the 
man,  to  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works,  saying, 
Blessed  are  tney  whose  iniquities  aie  forgiven,  whose  sins  are  cov- 
ered. Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin," 
this  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8,  from  Psalm  xxxiii.  1,  2. 
Therefore  the  Lord  also  saith  to  the  sinner,  Isaiah  liv.  9,  "  I  have 
sworn  that  I  will  not  be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee,"  (2)  This 
sentence  consists  also  in  adjudging  to  the  sinner  a  right  to  life,  which 
he  had  forfeited  by  his  sins  ;  for  when  "  he  obtains  forgiveness  of 
his  sins,  he  also  receives  an  inheritance  among  them  v/ho  are  sane- 


472  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

tified,"  Acts  xxiv.  18.  Bein^  justified,  he  becomes  "an  heir  ac- 
cording to  the  hope  of  eternal  life,"  Tit.  iii.  7.  And  he  thus  also 
obtains  a  ri^ht  to  all  the  benefits  of  that  great  covenant  of  grace  : 
for  "  Christ  is  made  to  him  of  God  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifi- 
cation  and  redemption,"  I  Cor.  1.  30*  And  he  is  thus  as  perfectly 
justiiiied,  **  as  if  he  had  ne?er  had,  not*  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as 
if  he  had  fully  accomplished  all  that  obediencej  "which  Christ  hath 
accomplished  for  him,"  as  the  instructor  speaks,  according  to  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  Paul  saith,  2  Cor.  v*  21,  "  Him  who  knew  no  sin 
hath  he,"  to  wit,  God,  ''  made  to  he  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  By  which  means  the  accu- 
sers are  silenced,  according  to  what  Paul  saithj  Rom.  viii.  33,  34. 
"  The  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  the  sinner,"  by  his 
Surety,  Rom.  viii.  4,  and  Satan  is  rebuked.  All  this  is  beautifully 
exhibited  to  us  in  Joshiia  the  high  priest,  as  a  pattern,  Zech  iii» 
1—5. 

(b)  But  \vhat  inHuenccth  the  great  Judge  to  this  ?  what  are  the 
causes  which  move  him  to  deal  so  favourably  with  such  a  vile  sin- 
ner? Paul  tells  us  this  in  one  word,  Rom.  iii.  24.  "  They  are  justi- 
fied freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  On  the  part  of  the  sinner  it  is  "  freely."  The  sinner  hath 
nothing  to  move  the  Lord  ;  all  that  he  hath  is  abominable,  hateful 
and  loathsome.  His  misery  would  not  move  God  to  mercy,  for  his 
misery  is  not  adapted  to  excite  compassion,  but  abhorrence  ;  his 
misery  demanus  the  righteous  aversion  of  God,  and  the  vengeance 
cf  God  upon  him,  as  we  have  shown  upon  the  first  part  of  the  cate- 
chism. We  think  therefore  that  no  doctrine  can  be  more  detestable 
in  the  sight  of  God  aod  of  his  saints,  than  that  a  man  is  justified  for 
aught  that  is  in  him,  whether  it  be  called  good  works,  or  faith  ;  but 
we  will  speak  more  fully  to  this  on  the  following  Lord's  day.  What 
therefore  moves  the  Lord  ?  the  apostle  saith  in  the  passage  before 
cited,  that  on  God's  part  it  is  "  his  grace,"  that  is,  his  unmerited 
g;oodness  to  the  unworthy  sinner,  by  which  he  is  mbved  from  and 
of  himself  to  manifest  himself  glorious  in  his  incomprehensible  kind- 
ness to  the  vilest.  It  is  *'  the  abundance  of  grace  and  of  the  gift  of 
righteousness  which  the  sinner  receives,"  Rom.  v.  15,  17.  Doth 
any  one  think,  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  clear  the  guilty,  and  that 
such  grace  would  be  dishonourable  to  God,  and  would  injure  his 
justice  ?  the  apostle  will  satisfy  him  in  the  passage  which  we  have 
quoted,  when  he  saith,  "through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  This  he  accomplished  by  his  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of 
God,  through  his  active  and  passive  obedience,  whereby  the  justice 


BEFORE  GOD.      XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   59—61.      473 

of  God  is  satisfied.  And  therefore  the  manifestation  of  this  ^race  to 
the  sinner,  is  not  dishonourable  to  God,  but  tends  to  the  declaration 
of  his  righteousness,  agreeably  to  what  we  hi  vc  ofien  cited  from 
Rom.  iii  25,  26  ;  for  this  must  exhibit  the  glory  of  God  in  the  most 
illustrious  manner,  that  such  a  wonderful  union  hatli  been  effected 
between  the  grace  and  the  justice  of  God  in  his  conduct  toward  tiie 
guilty  sinner.  And  therefore  it  is  an  idle  assertion  of  the  Socinians, 
that  if  it  be  of  grace,  it  cannot  be  by  the  righteousness  and  sanctifi- 
cation  of  Christ;  for  it  is  grace  in  God  to  admit  a  Surety,  to  bestow 
one  himself,  and  mdeed  his  Son,  and  that  on  this  and  not  on  that 
and  the  other  sinner.  Therefore  giace  and  satisfaction  are  very 
often  joined  together.  See  Rom.  iii.  24,  25.  Eph.  i  7.  Coll  i.  13, 
And  so  the  sinner  is  justified  on  the  part  of  I'hrist  upon  account  of 
his  righteousness,  according  to  the  language  of  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  9, 
"  Not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith."  This  righteousness  of  God,  on  account  of  which  the 
sinner  is  justified,  is  not  his  divine  and  essential  righteousness  infu- 
sed into  the  sinner,  and  so  inherent  in  him,  according  to  the  opinion 
of  Osiander  ;  for  this  righteousness  is  infinite,  and  cannot  be  com- 
municated to  man  ;  but  it  is  the  righteousness  which  he  hath  merit- 
ed and  obtained,  and  therefore  his  mediatorial  righteousness,  where- 
by "  he  is  made  righteousness  to  us,"  1  Cor.  i.  30,  Further,  the 
isinner  is  justified,  not  only  on  account  of  Christ's  passive  righteous- 
ness, but  also  on  account  of  his  active  and  obediential  righteousness, 
as  Paul  teacheth  us,  Rom.  v.  19.  "  By  the  obedience  of  one  many 
shall  be  made  righteous."  Christ  hath  satisfied  the  justice  of  God 
by  his  obedience,  as  well  as  by  his  suffering,  and  the  righteousness 
of  the  law  required  of  the  sinner  obedience,  as  well  as  the  suffering 
of  punishment.  Yea,  Christ  suffered  m  obedience  to  his  Father,  and 
this  rendered  his  suffering  a  virtuous  suffering.  See  Philip,  ii.  8. 
And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  instructor,  when  he  speaks  of  "  the 
satisfaction,  righteousness  and  holiness"  of  Christ,  on  account  of 
which  man  is  justified,  as  the  satisfaction  was  effected  by  his  right- 
eousness and  holiness. 

(c)  But  how  doth  the  sinner  obtain  an  interest  in  this  favourable 
sentence?  It  is  effected,  (1)  by  God's  imputation  of  Christ's  right- 
eousness to  man,  (2)  By  the  faith  of  man,  whereby  he  appropriates 
that  sentence  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ  to  himself 

I.  When  God  justificth  man  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  he  imputes  that  righteousness  to  man  as  his  righteousness; 
that  is,  he  bestows  it  on  him,  by  which  therefore  Christ's  satisfaction. 

3Q 


474  THii  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

righteousness  and  holiness  becomes  his  righteousness  before  God, 
as  the  instructor  speaks  in  the  sixty-first  question.  And  thus  the 
sinner  is  considered  as  perfectly  righteous  by  this  imputation,  as  if 
he  had  never  committed  any  sin  ;  yea,  as  if  he  had  fully  accomplish- 
ed all  that  obedience,  which  Christ  hath  accomplished  for  him." 
The  Papists  and  Remonstrants  deny  this  imputation  of  Christ's 
righteousness,  that  ihey  may  teach  justification  on  account  of  our 
own  works  and  faith  ;  but  we  maintain  it,  because  David,  as  Paul 
teacheth  us,  Rom.  iv.  6,  "  pronounces  the  man  blessed,  to  whom 
God  imputeth  righteousness  without 'works."  See  also  vrs.  4,  9,  II, 
concerning  the  imputation  of  righteousness.  This  righteousness 
cannot  be  any  other  than  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  because  all  cur 
own  righteousness  is  excluded  there,  as  also  Philip,  iii.  9.  Surely 
this  imputation  is  not  so  absurd,  as  our  adversaries  pretend,  since 
the  sins  of  believers  were  imputed  to  Christ,  "that  they  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  2  Cor,  v.  21,  and  that  "  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  them,"  Rom.  viii.  3, 
4,  Why  should  not  the  righteousness  of  Christ  be  imputed  to  us, 
as  well  as  the  sin  of  Adam  is  imputed  to  us  ?  Paul  shows  this  con- 
sequence very  clearly,  Rom.  v.  15,  19.  In  what  other  way  doth  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  become  ours  ?  for  "  he  is  the  Lord  our  right- 
eousness," Jer.  xxiii.  5.  And  "  he  is  made  of  God  to  us  righteous- 
ness," I  Cor.  i.  30.  Do  not  the  Papists  teach  that  the  supereroga- 
tory works  of  the  saints  are  imputed  to  others  ?  and  cannot  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  be  imputed  to  the  sinner  ?  do  not  the  Re- 
monstrants acknowledge  that  the  merits  of  Christ  are  advantageous 
to  believers .?  but  how  can  they  be  so,  except  by  imputation  ? 

2.  We  obtain  an  interest  in  this  sentence  and  this  righteousness 
also  by  faith,  whereby  we  make  these  things  our  own.  And  indeed 
by  faith  only,  v/ithout  works  :  "  We  conclude  then,"  to  adopt  the 
words  of  Paul,  Rom.  iii.  28,  "  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  with- 
out the  deeds  of  the  law."  The  apostle  teacheth  the  same  also.  Gal. 
ii.  16.  Faith  is  indeed  not  without  works  ;  or  "  it  is  dead,  when  it 
is  alone,"  James  ii.  IT,  18,  and  it  is  itself  a  good  work,  John  vi.  29, 
but  it  is  not  considered  so  here,  because  it  is  very  carefully  distin- 
guished from  works,  yea,  set  in  opposition  to  them,  as  we  see  in  the 
text,  and  Rom.  iii.  28,  and  Gal.  ii.  16. 

Hi.  We  obtain  an  occasion  of  discussing  this  matter  more  fwlly 
in  the  sixty  first  question,  which  demands  of  the  pupil  his  reason  for 
saying  "  that  he  is  righteous  by  faith  only."  This  question  is  asked, 
because  the  Papists  conceive  that  we  are  acceptable  to  God  on  ac- 
count of  the  worthiness  of  our  faith,  which  possesseth  so  great  a 


BEFORE  GOD.     XXIU-  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.     476 

worthiness,  because  it.  is  the   root  of  other  virtues,   and  produces 
others.     The  Remonstrants  will  have  that   faith  justiiieth  man,  be- 
cause God  reckons  it  by  a.  p,Tacicus  estimation,  as  a  perfect   obser- 
vation of  his  law.     But  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  I  am   not  accept- 
able to  God   on   account  of  the   worthiness  of  my  faith:"    and    he 
proves  it,- when  he  saith,  "that  only  the  satisfaction,  righteousness, 
and  holiness  of.  Christ  is  his  righteousness  before  God,"  which   he 
had  explained  in  the  sixtieth  question,  and  which  hath  been  proved 
by  us.     Therefore  the  believinr^  sinner  cannot  be  acceptable  to  Cod 
on  account  of  the  v/orthiness  of  hie-  faith.     This   appears  so  much 
the  more,  because  faith  denies  its  own  work   and   worthiness,   and 
seeks  ail  its  worthiness  in  the  righteousness   of  Christ.     See   this, 
Phil.    iii.    8,  9.     The  Remonstrants  will  not  indeed  seek   any   wor- 
thiness in  faith, but  only  a  gracious  estimation  of  God,  whereby   he 
reckons  faith  a  perfect  observation  of  his  law  i  yet  then  their  right- 
eousness is  not  in  Christ,  but  in  faith,  which  God  esteems  so  worthy  ; 
but  when  they  speak  thus,  they  deny  the  whole  gospel,   which    doth 
not  place  the  righteousness  of  the  sinner  in  faith,  as  the  work  of  the 
sinner,  but   only  in   Christ.     It  is  also  impossible,  that  God   should 
esteem  faith  a  perfect  observation  of  the  law  ;  for  then  "the   judg- 
ment of  God  v/ould  not  be  according  to  truth,"  contrary  to  Rom.  ii. 
2.     Paul  saith  indeed,  that  "faith  is  counted   for   righteousness," 
Rom.  iv.  5,  but   in  that  passage,  faith   is  put  by  a   metonymy    for 
Christ,  because  he  is  the  object  of  faith,  we  unite  ourselves  to  him, 
and  seek  our  righteousness  in  him  by  f^iith.     And  thus  faith  is  spoken 
of  in  other  passages  in  such  a  manner,  that  we  must  understand  by 
it  the  object  of  faith,  either  the  doctrine  of  faith,  or  Christ ;  so  Paul 
saith,  Gal.  iii.  23,  25.     "  Before  faith  came,  v/e  were  kept  under  the 
law  :  but  after  that  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer  under  a  school- 
master."    And  Paul  considered  the  matter  thus  also  in  Rom.  iv.  5. 
He  would  otherwise  contradict  himself,  for  he  speaks  of  an  ungodly 
person,  who  worketh  not,  and   to  whom  righteousness   is   imputed 
without  works.   See  vrs.  i.    8. 

But  the- difficulty  still  remains,  how  faith  acts  in  justification.  The 
instructor  explauis  this,  v/hen  he  saith,  "  that  I  cannot  receive  and, 
apply  the  same  to  myself  any  other  way  than  by  faith  only."  For, 
faiih  serves  here  like  an  instrument,  with  which  we  do  something, 
like  a  hand,  with  which  we  lay  hold  on  that  which  is  ofttied  to  us, 
make  it  our  own,  and  unite  it  to  ourselves.  That  faith  hath  such  a 
power,  we  have  shov.r  ftom  John  i.  12,  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day. 
We  are  to  understand  this  so,  that  the  Judge  proffering  his  Son,  his 
ri^liteousness,  and  the  gracious  sentence  in  him,  the  sinner    accepts 


4/6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

and  lays  hold  on  Christ,  and  all  grace  in  him,  and  thus  submits  to 
the  righteousnes  of  God,"  Rom.  x.  3.  It  is  indeed  the  nature  of 
love  also  to  accept  of  Christ,  to  embrace  and  unite  him  to  ourselves  ; 
but  we  are  not  therefore  justified  by  lo\e,  because  love  acts  not  like 
faith,  since  it  doth  not  seek  to  obtain  an  interest  inChrist,  as  Surety> 
but,  as  having  an  interest  in  him,  to  exercise  friendship  and  fellow- 
ship with  him.  This  is  evident,  because  we  do  by  a  justifying  faith, 
as  by  an  assent  to  the  wooing  voice  of  Christ,  say  yea  to  him,  con^? 
elude  a  match  with  him,  and  thus  obtain  an  interest  in  him,  and  his 
righteousness  to  justification  ;  but  by  love  we  exercise  fellowship 
and  friendship  with  him,  as  oui  Bridegroom.  The  sinner,  as  a  sin- 
ner, in  which  respect  he  is  justified,  cannot  love  God,  until  his  guilt 
is  first  taken  away  in  justification  ;  but  when  that  is  once  taken 
away,  his  soul  then  opens  and  expands  in  love  to  God  ;  and  so  "  faith 
worketh  by  love,"  Gal.  v.  6. 

IV.  In  order  to  illustrate  the  mystery  of  justification  more  partic- 
ularly, we  must  consider  the  circumstances  and  qualifications  which 
accompanv  it.     To  this  pertains. 

(a)  The  time  when  God  justifieth  the  sinner.     We  cannot  say 
that  he  doth  this  in  his  eternal  decree,  for  that  was  the  purpose  of 
God  to  justify  him.  and  justification  follows  from  that  decree.     IVlore- 
over,  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  is  not  justification,  but  the  meritorious 
cause  of  it :  v/e  may  say  that  God  justified  all  the  elect  in  general  so 
far,  that  he  would  never  demand  a  satisfaction  for  their  guilt,  of  them 
when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  be  their  Surety,  and  transferred   their 
sins  on  him,  as  he  took  all  their   sins  upon  him,  in  order  that  he 
might  satisfy  for  them,  and  hath  also  a:tually  satisfied  for  them  by 
his  suff'erings;    for   -'Gcdwas  inChrist,  reconciling  the  world  to 
himself,  hot  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them."  2  Cor.  v.  19.  More- 
over,  all  the  elect  were  justified  in    Christ,   when    God    raised  him 
from   the  dead,  and  declared,  as  it  were,  by  an  instrument  of    ac- 
quittance, that  Christ  had  satisfied  him  for  them  all ,  for  "  Christ 
was,  justified  in  the  Spirit,"  1  Tim.  iii.  1 6,  and  so  all   the  elect  like- 
vise  in  him  ;  but  this  is  not  properly  speaking,  the  justification  of 
the  smner  before  God,  of  which  we  speak  here  :  neither  do  we  know 
that  this  is  ever  called  justification  in  the   word  of  God.     Justifica- 
tion is  indeed  a  benefit,  of  which   every  believer   becomes  a    parta- 
ker by  himself,  whereby  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  applied  and 
communicated  to  him  upon  his  act  of  faith.     And    so  we   see  that 
justification  takes  place,  when  the  elect  sinner,  being  convinced  of 
his  guilt  by  effectual  calling,  being  cited  before  the  throne  of  grace, 
^d  appearing  there,  lays  hold  on  the  Surety  and  his  righteousness. 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.      ATT 

and  thus  receives  this  gracious  sentence.     We  see  this  represented 
to  us  in  Joshua  the  high  priest,  Zech.  iii.  1 — 5.     We  add  to  this, 

(b)  The  different  considerations  of  justification.  Justification  is- 
considered  as  activ?  or  passive.  The  active  takes  place  before  the 
tribunal  of  God,,  where  the  sinner  appears  ;  where  God  actually  ab- 
solves him  from  his  guilt,  and  awards  to  him  a  right  to  life,  upon  the 
direct  act  of  his  fdlh.  The  passive  takes  place  in  the  mind  of  the 
sinner,  whereby  the  sentence  of  God  is  made  known  to  his  mind,  so 
that  he  becomes  conscious  that  he  is  justified  before  God  ;  which 
takes  place  upon  the  reflex  act  of  his  faith,  whereby  he  sees  in  him- 
self the  indisputable  evidences  ofhis  justification^  In  order  to  illus- 
trate this  we  will  explain, 

(c)  The  manner  in  which  the   sentence   of  justification  is  made 
known  to  the  believing  sinner-     This  is  done  either  externally  or  in°. 
ternally.     God  makes  known  to  the  believing  sinner  that  he   hath 
justified  him,  externally  by  his  word  :  the  scripture  is,  as  it  were,  the 
certificate  of  his  pardon  ;  for  "  all  the   prophets  bear   witness,   that 
through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him,  shall  receive  remis- 
sion of  sins,"  Acts  x.  43.     See  also  Gal.  iii.  8.     The    Lord    sends, 
also   for  this  purpose    his    messengers  of  peace,  "  who  comfort  his 
people  from  his  mouth,  speak  comfortably  to   Jerusalem,  and   cry 
unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that   her  iniquity  is  par- 
doned," Isaiah  xl.  1,  2.  These,  as  ambassadours  for  Christ,  as  though 
God  did  beseech  by  them,  "  invite,  call  and  pray  "   the  sinner  "  in 
Christ's  stead,  to  be  reconciled  to  God,"  2  Cor.  v.   20,  21.     When 
the  sinner  consents  to  this   by  receiving  the  Surety,   the   preachers 
are  then  empowered  to  assure  him,  that  he  hath  peace  with  God  : 
"  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips :    peace,  peace  to  him  that  is  far  off, 
and  to  him  that  is  near,  saith  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  19.  And  in  this 
manner  do  the  preachers  justify  many  "  sinners,  Dan.  xii.  3.     Yea, 
that  the  believer  may  be  certain  of  this,  God  gives  him  not  only   his 
oath,  "  swearing  that  he  will  not  be    wroth  with    him,  nor  rebuke 
him,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  9,  but  also  his  sacraments,  or  the  seals  of  his  cove- 
nant :  thus  ".  Abraham  received  the  sign  of   circumcision,  a  seal  of 
the  righteousness  of  faith,"  Rom.  iv.  11.     In  the  same  manner  do 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper  also  seal   justification  :    see  Acts  ii» 
38.     Matt.  xxvi.  26,  27,  28.     But  the  reflex  act  of  faith,  being   yet 
very  weak,  and  the  heart  being  too  much  disturbed  on  account  of  the 
sentence  of  death,  which  the  sinner  had  already  in  himself,  this  ex- 
ternal assuring  doth  not  much    affect  the   mind,  and  therefore  the 
Judge  gives  him  also  his  Spirit  to  be  a  pledge  and  seal,  whereby  he 
is  effectually  sealed,  as  Paul  showeth  repeatedly,  2  Cor.  i.  22.  Eph= 


4ra  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

i.  IS,  U.  iv.  30.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  here  is,  (a)  that  h& 
teaches  the  beheving  sinner  to  form  a  conclusion  from  ti>e  word,  and- 
from  his  heart ;  for  he  assures  him  of  the  truth  of  the  word,  which 
saithj  that  every  one  who  believeth  in  Christ  hath  the  iS^rgiveness  o£" 
sins  ;  "  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  that  t^e  Spirit  is  the  truth,"  1  John 
V.  6.  The  Holy  Spirit  also  enhghtens  his  soul,  and  enables  him  to 
.*'  kno\\  the  things,"  to  wit,  faith,  and  the  fruits  thereoi, ''  which  are 
freely  given  him  by  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.  \2.  Whereupon  he  determines 
the  soul  to  conclude  that  slie  is  justified,  for  **•  the  Spirit  itself  beareth 
witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  che  cnildrcn  of  God,"  Rom.  viii. 
16.  (b)  The  Holy  Spirit  also  effects  a  peaceful  frame  of  mind,  and 
a  calm  tranquility  of  soul,  whereby  the  former  perturbation  and  agi- 
tation, which  had  seized  her,  is  composed,  and  she  enjoys  thus, 
"righteousness,  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghost,"  according 
to  Rom.  xiv.  17.  See  also  Philip,  iv.  7.  Rom.  v  i.  (c)  The  Holy 
Ghost  works  in  a  higher  and  in  a  more  effectual  manner,  in  order 
to  assure  a  person,  when  he  suggests  the  sentence  of  absolution  to 
the  soul,  with  much  clear  and  sensible  grace,  speaking  secretly,  but 
very  powerfully  to  the  soul,  in  this  or  that  laanner,  "  Moses,  thou 
hast  found  favour  m  my  sight,  Daniel,  thou  art  a  man  greatly  belov- 
ed ;  son,  or  daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ;"  which  is  then 
conveyed  with  so  much  light  and  power  to  the  soul,  that  she  sees 
clearly,  that  it  ?s  a  word,  which  is  sent  to  her  from  the  throne  ;  and 
so  much  the  more,  because  "  the  Holy  Ghost  sheds"  also  *'  the  love 
of  God  abroad  in  her,"  Rom.  v.  5.  Yea,  he  causeth  her  to  taste  the 
power  and  the  fruit  of  this  benefit  with  great  joy,  so  that  she  saith- 
from  Isaiah  Ixi.  10.  *'I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  my  soul 
shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  ;  for  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  gar- 
inents  of  salvatioii,  he  hath  covered  me  v/ith  the  robe  of  righteous- 
ness/' 

(d)  VVe  say  furthermore,  that  justification  is  a  complete  act. 
Sanc'.ification  is  only  in  part,  bnt  justification  is  perfect  in  this  life  ;. 
lor  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  wholly  imputed  to  the  sinner,  in: 
consequence  of  which  all  his  sins,  past  and  present,  are  forgiven 
him  ;  and  also  his  future  sins  so  far,  that  God  v/ill  never  condemn 
him  on  account  of  them,  but  will  always  forgive  them  ;  for  God 
saith  that  '^  he  will  never  be  v/ioth  with  him,  nor  rebuke  him,"  Isaiah- 
liv.  9,  and  that  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  Rom.  viii.  1 .  Moreover,  believers  are  justined  daily,  since- 
they  Tiiust  pray  daily,  that  their  sins  may  be  forgiven  them,  Matt. 
vU.  12,     Therefore  it  is.  also,  said,  Rev.  xxii.  1 1.  "  He  that  is  right- 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59— .61.      479 

eous,    let  him  be  justified  still-"*  See  this  exhibited  more  largely 
i]pon  the  fifth  petition. 

(e)  That  our  exposition  may  not  be  too  diffuse,  we  say  lastly,  that 
this  is  a  benefit  of  the  church,  not  only  of  the  New,  but  also  of  the 
Old  Testament.     How  the   Socinians  deny  this  we  have   shown  on 
the  sixth   Lord's  day,  where  we  have  also  refuted  tliem.     We  have 
likewise  evinced  there  that  it  is  a  mistake,  that  the  fathers  under  the 
Old  Testament  were  subject  to  guilt,  to  wrath,  to  the  curse,  to  a 
restless  conscience,  and  the  fear  of  death,  which  disproves  withal  the 
assertion,  that  they  had  not  then  the  perfect  forgiveness  of  their  sins. 
They  had  certainly  the  perfect  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  as  well  as 
the  believers  of  the  New  Testament.     David  surely  saith  this  in  the 
thirty  second  psalm,  and  Paul  proves  from  that  psalm  the  forgive- 
ness of  the  New  Testament,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8.     We  do  not  however 
deny,  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  justification  of  the 
Old,  and  of  the  New  Testament ;  for  the  believers  under  the  Old 
Testament  were  justified  upon  the  ground  of  the  future  satisfaction 
of  the  Surety,  their  justification  was  administered  to  them  in  a  dark 
and  legal  manner  by  the  law  of  ceremonies,  it  was  made  known  to 
them  by  the  Holy   Ghost  in   an   exceedingly  scarce  manner,  and  it 
was  the  peculiar  privilege  of  Israel,  confined  within  the  narrow  limits 
of  Canaan  :  but  under  the   New  Testament   believers   obtain  this 
benefit  by  tlie  accomplished  satisfaction  of  the  Mediator,  it  is  ad- 
ministered to  them  in  a  clear  and  easy  manner,   and  with  a  greater 
assurance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,   and  even  to  the  Gentiles.     And  so 
"  God  is  no  longer  a  God  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles: 
seeing  it  is  one  God,  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  by  faith 
and  uncircumcision  through  faith."     Thus  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  iii. 
29,  30. 


APPLICATION. 

It  is  time  to  contemplate  this  matter  more  precisely  for  our  ad- 
vantage. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  have  not  we  reason  to  boast,  that  we 
alone  possess  the  pure  doctrine  according  to  the  word  of  God,  when 
we  teach  that  the   sinner  is   justified  before  God  by  faith  only,  on 

*  We  have  quoted  this  passajje  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


48©  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SlNNEk 

account  of  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  through  the  free  grace 
of  God  ?  Is  not  this  doctrine  the  only  foundation,  and  the  principal 
article  of  the  wliole  gospel?  Can  we  apprehend../,  rightly  the  mean* 
ing  of  Paul  in  his  epistles,  without  this  doctrine  of  ours  ?  What  can 
we  understand  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  of  the  grace  of  God, 
and  of  faith,  if  we  do  not  make  use  of  this  our  key  ?  Is  the  efficacy 
©f  the  sacrifices  of  atonement,  and  of  the  trespass  offerings  intelligi- 
ble without  this  fundamental  article  ?  What  can  quiet  the  guilty 
mind,  and  glorify  God  on  account  of  his  righteousness  and  grace  in 
saving  sinners,  but  this  opinion  of  ours  ?  can  the  good  inclination  of 
the  sinner's  will,  his  good  works,  and  evangelical  obedience,  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  Christ  ?  Whose  disturbed  mind  will  be  quieted  by 
these  means  ?  The  convinced  sinner,  despairing  of  himself  must  find 
a  perfect,  a  divine,  and  an  eternal  righteousness  without  himself,  if 
he  shal;  be  able  to  support  himself  with  a  hope,  that  God  will  be 
favourable  to  him.  And  how  shall  the  Lord  obtain  his  honour,  as 
long  as  the  sinner  gazes  on  himself,  and  his  virtues  ?  And  therefore 
we  may  safely  conclude,  that  we  possess  the  puie  doctrine  of  truth, 
and  that  the  Pelagians  and  Semipelagians  do  not.  The  revelation 
of  God  is  on  our  side* 

But  what  will  this  boasting  avail  us,  if  we  ourselves  do  not  make 
a  profitable,  comfortable,  and  sanctifying  use  of  our  doctrine  ?  Per- 
mit me  therefore  to  exhibit  this  benefit  of  justification  to  you  in  its 
proper  lustre,  that  we  may  urge  you  the  mor^  to  a  suitable  improve- 
ment of  it.  Consider  then, 

1.  Whom  God  justifieth,  and  so  graciously  acquits*  Is  it  not  a 
sinner,  yea,  one  of  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  with  Paul  ?  1  Tim.  i.  15, 
ivho  hath  sinned  against  all  the  commandments  of  God,  and  hath 
not  kept  one  of  them  ;  yea,  who  hath  transgressed  most  grievously 
against  God,  who  hated  God  and  his  neighbour,  was  "  sometimes 
foolish,  disobedient,  serving  divers  lusts,  hateful,  and  hating  others," 
as  Paul  confesses  of  himself,  and  other  justified  persons,  Titus  iii.  3. 
Yea,  who  is  still  inclined  to  all  evil,  "  carnal,  sold  under  sin,  in  whose 
flesh  there  dvvelleth  no  good  thing,"  Romi  vii.  14,  18,  who  is  self- 
condemned,  hopeless,  and  knows  of  no  remedy,  saying  "there  is  no 
hope,"  Isaiah  Ivii.  10,  and  whose  mouth  is  stopped,  being  unable  to 
excuse  himself  in  the  least.  When  the  Lord  God  shows  favour  to 
such  an  one,  and  admits  him  to  grace,  must  it  not  be  a  great  thing, 
and  cause  the  sinner  to  humble  himself  to  the  uttermost,  and  to  lose 
himself  in  the  grace  of  God  ? 

2.  It  is  inconceivable  that  his  Judge,  whom  he  hath  injured  in  the 
highest  degree,  and  who  might  therefore  proceed  against  him  with 


BEFORE  GOD.      XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—61.      481 

\he  utmost  severity,  favours  him  with  the  greatest  grace.    This,  this 
ftiust  exhibit  the  Judge  as  incomparably  good  to  the  sinner,  so  that 
he   may  cry  out   With   the  church,    Micha  vii,  18,  19.     "  Who  is  a 
God  like  unto  ihee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passcth  by  tiie  trans- 
gression of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage  ?  he  retainelh  not  his  anger 
for  ever,  because   he  delighteih  in  mercy.     He  will  turn  again,  he 
will  have  compassion  on  us  ;  he  will  subdue  our  iniquities  ;  and  thou 
wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the   depths  of  the  sea."     He  dfcscei;d» 
from  his  throne  of  vindictive  justice,  and   sits  upon   his  throne    f 
grace,  and  that  witijout  injuring,  yea,  to  the  glory  of  his  justice  ;  a 
wonder,  before  which  "  Moses  bowed  himself  with  his   head  to  the 
earth,"  wnen  the  Lord  proclaimed  it  before  him,  saying,  "  The  Lord, 
The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-sufieriiig,  and  abundant 
in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  furgiving  in- 
iquity, ttansgression  ^.nd  sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty,"  Lxod.  xxxiv.  5,  8. 

3.  Is  not  this  a  wonderful  benefit,   that  God  himself  bestows  his 
Son  to  be  a  Surety,  Mediator  and  Advocate  ?  The  sinner  must  have 
been  condemned  according  to  the  law,  and  the  testimony  of  his  con- 
Science  :  but  the  boweh  of  the  tender  mercy  of  God  made  his  Son 
to  be  sin,  that  the  sinner  might  he  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him. 
He  cannot  be  condcmn-.^d  now  upon   the  allegations  of  his  accuseis, 
although  their  accusations  be  ever  so  just;  they  themselves  must 
be  condemned  ;  for  according  to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  viii.  3,  4. 
"  God  sending  his  own   Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for 
sin,  condemned   sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law 
might  be  fulfilled  in  us."     This  is  the   great  promise  of  God,  who 
justineth  the  sinner,  that  he  saith,   Isaiah   liv-  17.     **  Every  tongue 
that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  judgment  thou  shalt  condemn.     This 
is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord     and  tiieir  righteou«;ness 
is  of  me,  sailh  the  Lord."     Do  tlie   accusers  renew  their  complaints 
with  his  daily  offences,  "  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  is  his  Advocate 
with  the  Father,  and  he  ever  liveth   to  make  intercession  for  him," 
agreeably  to   the  testimony  of  John  and  Paul,    1  John  ii,  1.  Heb. 
vii.  25. 

4.  Will  ye  have  more,  look  at  the  sentence.  How  precious  is  it, 
and  like  cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul,  bowed  down  under  the  burthen 
of  so  many  and  just  accusations  !  Can  aught  be  more  joyful,  than 
that  a  justlv,  and  a  self-condemned  malefactor  is  informed,  that  he 
hath  obtained  pardon  ?  How  soul  enrapturing  is  it  to  a  sinner,  who 
bears  with  the  greatest  anxiety  the  sentence  of  everlasting  condem- 
nation in  his  bosom,  to  hear  the  Judge   say,  Thou  slialt  not  die,  but 

3  K 


482  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

Jive  :  I  will  seat  thee  upon  the  throne  of  my  Son,  I  have  set  my 
heart,  my  love  on  thee,  and  when  his  Judge  gives  him  the  kiss  of 
reconciliation  1  How  must  such  a  poor  heart  revive,  as  it  were,  from 
the  pangs  of  death,  with  the  greatest  pleasure  !  Such  a  soul  saith 
straightway,  "  O  Lord,  by  these  things  men  live,  and  in  all  these 
things  is  the  life  of  my  spirit :  so  wilt  thou  recover  me,  and  make 
me  to  live.  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness ;  but  thou  hast 
in  love  to  my  soul  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption ;  for  thou 
hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back,"  isaiah  xxxviii.  16,  17.  Once 
more  ; 

5.  Why  doth  God  do  such  great  things  for  such  a  vile  child  of 
hell  ?  It  cannot  be,  because  he  saw  so  much  moral  goodness  in  him; 
not  only  God,  but  the  sinner  liimself,  knew  better.  Nothing,  nothing 
but  grace  moved  the  Lord  to  glor  fy  himself  in  such  a  subject  of 
c  nacmudlion.  It  is  '*  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  f^rare,  where- 
in he  liath  m<ide  us  accepted  in  the  beloved,"  saith  the  apostle,  Eph. 
i.  6.  Yea,  the  sinner  doth  still  do  nothing  to  obtain  this  sentence^ 
he  only  assents  to  it,  that  he  may  obtain  grace  and  peace,  agreeably 
to  the  method  and  wisdom  of  the  King :  his  Advocate  saith,  *'  Fear 
not.  only  believe,"  Mark  v.  36. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  David  in  the  right,  when  he  pro- 
nounces a  sinner,  who  is  justified  in  this  manner,  blessed  ?  Psalm 
xxxii.  1,  2.  Surely  yes.  But  what  will  this  avail  you  and  me,  if  we 
ourselves  have  no  interest  in  this  great  benefit  ?  ought  we  not  then 
to  inquire  thoroughly  in  what  state  we  are  with  regard  to  this  par- 
ticular? wfiat  think  ye,  are  ye  already  acquitted  before  the  tribunal 
of  God  I  or  do  ye  not  concern  yourselves  with  this  important  matter? 
This  WGuld  indeed  be  wretched.  Oi  do  ye  say.  We  hope  that  we 
do,  and  we  trust  that  all  our  sins  are  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
merits  ?  Have  ye  any  ground  or  proof  of  this  ?  Surely  this  is  a  mat- 
ter of  too  great  importance  to  be  trifled  with  in  such  a  manner. 
Permit  me  to  inform  you  what  are  the  marks  of  a  justified  person, 
and  let  each  of  you  examine  himself  by  them,  and  see  whether  they 
can  be  found  in  him. 

1  The  person  who  hath  been  justified  before  God,  *' his  con^ 
science  hath  accused  him  that  he  hath  grossly  transgressed  all  the 
commands  of  God,  and  that  he  hath  kept  none  of  them,  and  is  still 
inclined  to  all  evil."  He  knows  this,  not  merely  from  hearsay,  but 
he  looks  back,  and  sees  that  his  whole  life  hath  been  without  God, 
he  sc-cs  even  now  clearly  and  plainly  every  evil  inclination  rise  up  in 
him  against  God,  and  his  ways,  and  against  his  neighbour.  This 
distresses  him,   and  alfects  him  with  shame  and  cooceriii  and  he 


BEFORE  GOD.    XXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  59—51.      4S3 

earnestly  desires  to  find  grace  only  ;  this  urges  him  to  prayer,  and 
to  seek  God,  that,  like  such  a  vile  wretch,  he  may  find  grace  and 
mercy  with  God.     See  this  in  the  publican,  Luke  xviii,  13.  l-i. 

2.  Such  a  person  seeks  Ivh  rigi.teousness  and  pardon  only  in 
Christ.  At  first  he  seeks  relief  for  liis  distressed  heart  in  forsaking 
evil  and  doing  good  ;  but  he  is  soon  driven  fiom  this,  for  he  sees 
that  whatever  he  doth  is  so  mixed  with  sin,  tnat  the  more  he  sinves 
to  do  any  thing,  the  more  his  e\il  inclin^.tions  a;>pcar,  and  tlie  more 
distress  of  mind  he  experiences  on  account  of  them,  until  his  soul, 
entirely  perplexed,  hears  the  good  report  of  the  ability  and  willing- 
ness of  the  Mediator,  whereupon  being  driven  out  of  himself,  he 
turns  himself  to  him,  surrenders  himself  to  him,  choosts,  and  ac- 
cepts of  him,  that  he  may  be  justified  by  him  before  the  throne. 
How  exceedingly  low  doth  ue  now  rate  his  virtues,  although  he  once 
valued  them  so  highly  !  and  how  is  Jesus  risen  in  his  esteem  !  Like 
Saul  he  saith  with  his  whole  heart,  "  Yea,  doubtless,  and  I  count  all 
things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
my  Lord ;  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  do 
count  them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him^ 
He  t  aavmg  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that 
W  :ich  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  tlie  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith,"  Philip,  iii.  8,  9.     Once  more  : 

3.  The  person  who  is  justified  before  God  is  also  sanctified. 
These  t*vo  benefits  always  ^xcompany  each  other;  see  1  Cor.  vi. 
U.  "  With  God  there  is  forgiveness,  ihat  he  may  be  feared.  Psalm 
cxxx,  4.  David  saith  also  that  in  the  spirit  of  the  justified  person 
there  is  no  guile.  Psalm  xxxii.  2.  Indeed  faith  alone  justifieth,  but 
it  doth  not  by  itself  prove  that  a  person  is  justified,  unless  he  also 
prove  it  by  good  works.  James  demonstrates  this  by  the  most  for- 
cible arguments :  see  his  epistle,  the  second  chapter,  vrs.  14 — 26. 
It  IS  also  the  nature  of  the  justified  person  to  be  holy.  He  knows, 
he  hates,  and  opposes  the  wicked  inclinations  of  the  old  man  ;  he 
knows  and  loves  the  holy  will  of  God,  and  seeks  to  do  it,  and  for 
this  purpose  surrenders  himself  to  the  Lord  ;  love  to  God  hath  cap- 
tivated his  soul,  and  urges  him  to  conduct  himself  according  to  his 
will,  and  with  justified  Paul  he  strives  to  be  conformed  to  Christ, 
and  to  be  perfect,  PhiUp.  id.  10 — 14. 

If  ye,  who  hear  this,  examine  yourselves  by  it,  ye  will  see  how  it 
is  with  you  in  this  respect ;  if  we  were  not  to  speak  of  justification 
on  the  following  Lord's  day,  we  should  show  you  now  how  many 
are  yet  estranged  from  this  great  benefit,  and  how  wretched  their 
condition  is ;  but  this  we  must  do  on  the  twenty  fourth  Lord's  day. 


484  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNEU 

But  with  respect  to  you,  whose  souls  are  h'lmbled  under  siti,  who 
have  sought  and  found  your  righteousness  in  Christ  only,  and  pur- 
sue after  hoUness,  be  active  and  zealous  in  your  improvement  of  this 
matter.     And  particularly. 

1.  L?t  this  -ruth  be  precious  to  you,  and  do  all  that  in  you  lieth 
to  retain  it  in  the  church  ;  and  therefore  endeavour  to  undei stand  it 
thoroughly,  ani  to  teach  it  to  others  ;  suspect  and  oppose  those  who 
cavil  at  it  in  the  least.  Applicable  are  here  the  words  of  holy  Jude 
in  his  epistle,  the  tiiird  verse,  "  Earnestly  contend  for  the  faith  whxh 
was  once  celivered  to  the  saints."  The  doctrine  of  the  justification 
of  tJjc  sinner,  before  God  is  the  chief  truth  of  Christianity  :  with  this 
article  the  church  either  stands  or  falls.  iSo  doctrine  can  remain 
unviolated,  when  thii.  is  im^.aired.  He  who  doth  not  hold  this  truth 
pure,  cannot  have  a  pure  opinion  of  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  nor  of 
the  state  of  grace  ;  his  humility,  his  fai;h,  his  hope,  his  charity  and 
sanciihcation  is  vain.  He  cannot  "  serve  God  in  the  Spirit,  while 
he  doth  not  giory  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  hath  confidence  in  the  flesh," 
as  Paul  speaks,  Philip,  iii   3. 

'■  2.  Let  this  truth  possess  and  captivate  your  souls  so,  tl.at  it  may 
ravish  and  transport  you  with  wonder,  joy  and  thanksgiving  to  the 
Loid.  Think  what  hath  been  done  to  you,  that  ye,  who  were  so  vile 
and  guilty,  have  been  raised  up  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  of  misery, 
and  compa'^sed  with  joyful  songs  of  deliverance,  on  account  of  the 
righteousness  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  such  an  exalted  grace,  upon  the 
consenting  act  of  your  faith,  that  ye  might  receive  and  praise  for 
ever  grace  for  grace.  How  should  your  souls  now  be  filled  with  the 
praises  of  God,  with  his  honour  all  the  day  I  Have  ye  not  greater 
reason  than  Hagar,  to  say  with  her,  "  Have  I  here  also  looked  after 
him  that  seeth  mtV'  Gen.  xvi.  13.  See  only  how  David  strove  to 
do  this,  when  he  said,  Psalm  ciii.  1 — 5.  *'  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  his  holy  name.  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits  ;  who  forgiveth  all  thine 
iniquities;  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases ;  who  crowneth  thee  with 
lovini^-kindness  and  tender  mercies  ;  who  satisficth  thy  mouth  with 
good  thin'^^s  ;  ^o  that  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  eagle's." 

3.  Be  and  remain  lowly  and  humble.  Remember  what  ye  were, 
(and  yet  are  in  yourselves,)  surely  a  Magor  missabib,  a  terrour  round 
about  to  yourselves  and  to  all  who  beheld  you  with  a  discerning  eye. 
Ye  know  how  loathsome  and  hateful  ye  were  in  your  own  eyes, 
when  God  first  laid  his  hand  on  you  ;  there  was  none  so  filthy,  so 
wicked  and  damnable  as  ye  were  in  your  own  opinion.  Will  ye  now 
cKalt  yourselves  on  account  of  the  excellency  of  your  revelation  ? 


BEFORE  GOD.      —61.    48$ 

will  ye  forget  yourselves,  because  ye  are  believe>s,  and  beloved? 
5'  Who  maketh  you  to  differ  ?  and  what  have  ye,  that  ye  have  not 
received  ?  and  if  ye  have  received  it,  why  do  ye  glory,  as  if  ye  had 
tiot  received  it  ?"  thus  I  ask  you  with  Paul,  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  Do  ye  no 
longer  know  what  ye  have  been,  know  then  what  ye  are  now  still, 
through  the  evil  inclinations  of  your  hearts  ;  if  this  w^il  not  humble 
you,  and  render  you  lowly,  the  Lord  will  "  give  you  a  sharp  thorn  in 
your  flesh,  a  messenge;  of  vSatan,  to  buffet  you."  And  why  not  you> 
as  well  as  Paul,  "  that  ye  may  not  exalt  yourselves  ?"  2  Cor.  xii.  7» 
Why  did  the  Lord  v/ithdravv  his  hand,  and  suffer  the  greatest  saints 
to  fall  into  exceedingly  grievous  sins  ?  was  it  not  that  ihey  might 
remain  humble  ? 

4.  When  ye  have  sinned  against  your  ^reat  Benefactor,  Judge 
and  Faiher,  be  grieved  and  sorry  for  it.  Shall  one,  who  hath  beea 
delivered  from  so  great  a  death,  behave  himself  unthankfully,  basely, 
and  like  a  degenerate  child  towaid  him,  who  hath  delivered  him,  and 
who  hath  been  so  inconceivably  kind  to  him  ?  '*  Do  ye  thus  requite 
the  Lord,  O  foohsh  people  and  unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father  that 
hath  bought  thee ;  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  estaulished  thee  ?" 
thus  speaks  Aloses  lo  Israel,  Dent,  xxxii.  6.  Let  your  hea;ts  bleed 
on  account  of  tiijs,  and  bewail  it  with  biiny  te.  rs,  tike  David  and 
Peter,  Psalm  ii,  and  Mat:,  xxvi.  75.  Do  not  howev^^r  sink  down  in 
discourage nient,  but  seek  pardon  for  y^ur  ill  behaviour  with  humil- 
ity ;  draw  near  unto  God,  as  a  i  ather,  wi:ose  gracious  gift  of  right- 
eousnebS  is  witaouv"  reptntaiice,  and  w'-^o  vmII  never  mere  be  v/roth 
with  you,  as  a  Judge  ;  he  sits  yet  upon  his  throne  of  grace,  to  afford 
grace,  help  and  mercy  in  time  of  need.  Your  Surety  hath  brought 
ia  an  everlasting  righteousness  for  you,  and  hath  been  m?de  right- 
eousness to  you  of  God,  ye  have  stiil  a  tight  to  it,  it  is  imputed  to 
you  entirely,  and  for  ever.  Ke  hath  justly  turned  his  face  away  frcm 
you,  but  ye  have  not  lost  your  title  to  his  righteousness  by  youi  in- 
iquities ;  have  ye  been  unfaithful,  he  remains  faithful  :  therefore  lay 
hold  anew  on  the  ri.u;hteousnc-ss  of  your  Surety  for  reconcili-it-on, 
come  with  it  to  the  throne,  and  plead  upon  "  his  rcsurreciion,  with 
the  answer  of  a  good  conscience,"  as  Peter  requireth,  I  Peter  iii. 
21.  And  rest  not,  until  your  souls  be  really  and  actually  at  peace 
again  with  the  Father. 

5  Conduct  yourselves  worthily  of  the  great  favour,  that  hath  been 
shown  to  you.  This  Paul  enjoins,  when  he  saith,  Philip,  i.  27. 
*'  Only  let  your  conversation  be  as  beccmeth  the  gospel  of  Christ." 
The  benefit  of  justification  is  the  great  theme  of  the  gospel  ;  and 
to  what;  think  ye,  dcth  so  great  a  benefit  oblige  you  ?  doth  it  not  to 


i8&  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  SINNER 

fight  against  sin,  to  mortify  it,  to  live  for  God,  according  to  his  will, 
to  be  filled  with  fruits  of  righteousness,  self-denial,  vveanedness  from 
the  world,  to  be  heavenly-minded,  to  burn  with  love  to  God  and  your 
neighbour,  and  that  as  those,  who  belong  to  God  and  Christ  ?  Hear 
what  Paul  saith.  Tit.  ii.  14-  "  Who,"  namely  Christ  Jesus,  «  gave 
himsely  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  pu- 
rify unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  Show 
yourselves  thc:n  to  be  of  "  the  righteous  people,  which  keepeth  the 
truth." 

Thus  will  ye  have  the  testimony,  that  nothing  can  be  laid  to  your 
charge,  because  God  hath  justified  you,  Christ  hath  died  for  you, 
and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  to  make  intercession  for  you, 
vntil  he  shall  at  length  appear  on  the  great  day,  to  execute  judg- 
ment, that  he  may  perfect  and  complete  your  whole  state,  by  absolv- 
ing you  in  the  sight  and  hearing  of  the  whole  world  from  every  sin, 
and  punishment,  and  adjudging  you  to  eternal  life,  yea,  even  insta- 
ting y  u  in  it,  when  he  will  say  to  you  from  Matt.  xxv.  34,  "  Come 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from 
the  founaation  of  the  world."  Amen, 


(  487  ) 


THE 


DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION 


DEFENDED. 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY- 


Horn.  iii.  27,  28.  Where  is  boasting  then  ?  it  is  excluded.  By  what 
law  ?  of  works  ?  nay  :  but  by  the  law  of  fairh.  Therefore  we 
conclude,  that  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  deeds  of 
the  law.