Q.  62.  Bui  ivhy  cannot  our  good  ivorks  be  the  nvhole^  or  part  of  our 
righteousness  before  God  ? 

Ar  Because,  that  the  righteousness,  which  can  be  approved  of 
before  the  tribunal  of  God,  must  be  absolutely  perfect,  and  in  all  re- 
spects conformable  to  the  divine  law  ;  and  also,  that  our  best  works 
in  this  life,  are  all  imperfect,  and  defiled  with  sin. 

Q,  63.   What !  do  not  our  works  merits   which  yet  God  ivill  reward 
in  this  and  in  a  future  life  ? 
f.  A.  This  reward  is  not  of  merit,  but  of  grace. 
*■    Q.  64.  But  doth  not  this  doctrine  make  mtn  careless  and  firofane? 

A.  By  no  means  :  for  it  is  impossib'e  that  those  who  are  implant* 
ed  into  Chrisi  by  a  true  faith,  should  not  bring  forth  fruits  of  thanks 
fulness. 


w, 


HEN  "  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  which  she 
had  born  unto  Abraham,  mucking,  she  said  unto  Abrahaip,  Ca^t  out 


*88    THE  DOCXraNE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

this  bond-woman  and  her  son  ;  for  the  son  of  this  bond-woman  shall 
not  be  heir  with  my  son,  even  with   Isaac."     This  Moses  relates  to 
us,  Gen.  xxi.  9,  10.     Paul  having  respect  to  this,  saith  GaL  iv.  22, 
23.    "  It  is  written  that  Abraham  had  two  sons  ;  the  one  by  a  bond- 
maid, and  tne  other  by  a  fiee  woman.    But  he  who  was  of  the  bond- 
■woman  was  born  of  ihe  fles.- ;  bui   he  of  the  free  voman   was  by 
promise."     When  the  bondwoman  would  have  that  I  er  son  should 
inherit,  and  the  Ud  mocked,   Sarah  said,  "  Cast  out  this  bondwoman 
and  hfcf  son  :  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with 
my  son,  even  with  Isaac.     These  things   are  an  allegory,   for  these 
are  the  covenants,"   8cc.  saith  the  apostle,  Gal   iv.  24 — 31.     It  ap- 
pears very  plainly,  that  by  these  tv/o  covenants  he  understands,  Ca) 
ihe  covenant  of  works,  the  sum  of  which,  together  with  the  covenant 
of  grace,  which  was  administered  in  a  legal  manner  under  the  Old 
Testament,  was  proposed  at  mount  Sinai,  and  often  exhibited  for  the 
condemnation  of  sinners,  and  in  order  to  urge  them  to  the  Messiah, 
%vho  was  to  come  ;  and  therefore  the  Jews,  the  Jerusalem  of  Paul's 
time,  seeking  their  righteousness  and  the   inheritance  by  this  cove- 
nant, showed  that  they,  being  born  after  the  flesh,  of  the  servile  cove- 
nant of  works,  were  also  servile  with  their  children,  since  they,  like 
Ishmuel,    mocked   and    persecuted  them,   who  were    born  after  the 
Spirit,  (b)  The  second  covenant,  which  Paul  mcntioneth,  is  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  which  is  established  only  in  promises  ;  and  therefore 
all  who  believe,  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above,  the  true  church,  being 
born  like  Isaac,  after  the  Spirit,  of  this  covenant,  are  free,  and  obtain 
th'i  inheritance  by  promise.     When  now  the  carnal  Jews  sought  a 
right  to  the  inheritance  by  the  servile  covenant  of  works,  through 
their  own   doings,   yea,   when  they  m.ocked  the  free  children,  who 
sought  their  inheritance  by  the  promises,  "  saying  blasphemously 
that  they  said,  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come,"  Rom.  iii    18. 
We  say,  when  they  did  this,  the  true  Sarah,   the  believing  church, 
after  she   was  become  fruitful,  according  to  Isaiah  liv.  1,  compared 
with  Gal.  iv.    17,   cried  to  her   Abraham,   her  Maker,   the  Lord  of 
hosts,  who  is  her  husband,  '^  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son  ; 
for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son :"  and 
so  ihis  Hagar  vv  as  called   by  the  ford,  "  Loruhama,  not  having  ob- 
tained mercy,  and    Lo-ammi,  not  my  people."  See  Hosca  i.  6,  9. 
And  the  Lord  hath  ordered  that  it  should  be  said  to  her,  "  Thou  art 
not  my  w<fc.    and   I  am  not  thy  husband,"  Rosea  ii.  I.     And  thus 
*'IsiaeI,  which  followed  after  the  law  of  righteousness,   hath  not  at- 
tained to  the  lav/  of  righteousness.  Wherefore  ?  because  they  sought 
it  not  by  faith,   but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law ;  for  they 


r 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  489 

stumbled  at  that  stumblingstone."     Thus  Paul  speaks,  Rom     ix% 
31,32. 

How  long  was  the  free  Sarah,  the  true  church  with  her  children 
of  promise,  obliged  to  sigh,  on  account  of  grievous  mockings  and 
persecutions  among  the  Popish  Hagarenes,  who  sought  the  inheri- 
tance by  the  law  !  but  when  the  church  cried,  Cast  out  the  bondwo- 
man with  her  son,  the  Lord  dfove  those  Hagarenes  out  of  the  house 
of  Abraham,  his  church,  in  the  lime  of  the  reformation:  by  which 
means  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  the  promise  through  faith 
without  works,  having  been  brought  to  us,  hath  continued  with  us 
until  now,  and  is  defended,  when  we  are  taught  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  and  no  other,  is  our  nghteousness  before  God,  in  the 
foregoing  Lord's  diy  ;  and  that  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteous- 
ness before  God,  nor  a  part  of  it,  as  we  are  now  taught  in  this 
Lord's  day,  in  t  \e  sixty-second  question.  These  Hagarenes  set 
themselves  against  this  doctrine,  and  insist  on  a  reward  according  to 
the  merit  of  their  works  ;  but  being  opposed  in  th'^  sixty-third  ques- 
tion, they  show  the  temper  of  Ishmael,  by  mocking  us,  when  they 
blasphemously  say  in  the  sixty-fourth  question,  that  cur  free  doctrine 
makes  men  careless  and  profane. 

In  order  that  we  may  silence  them,  we  will,  agreeably  to  thid 
clue,  illustrate  somewhat  more  particularly  these  three  general  heads  : 

I.  That  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  Cod,  nor 
a  part  of  it,  Question  62. 

II.  That  though  Go:l  rewards  the  works  of  his  children,  they  nev- 
ertheless do  not  merit,  Question  G3. 

in  T'lat  our  doctrine  cannot  with  any  propriety  be  reproached, 
as  making  men  careless  and  profane.  Question  64. 

I,  In  order  to  render  it  evident  that  our  works  are  not  our  right- 
eousness before  God  nor  a  part  of  it,  we  must  first  exhibit  the  stale 
of  the  controversy,  and  then  produce  our  arguments  against  the  er- 
roneous opinion. 

In  order  to  represent  the  state  of  the  controversy,  we  must  show 
that  not  only  the  Papists,  but  also  many  others,  both  now  and  of  old 
have  erred  in  this  matter.  AH  men,  being  children  of  the  broken 
covenant  of  works,  are  by  nature  infected  with  this  evil,  that  they 
imagine  that  their  own  works  are  their  righteousness  before  God, 
either  in  whole,  or  in  part. 

We  see  this  in  the  l-eathcns  ;  those  at  least  among  them,  who 
were  m  any  measure  solicitous  to  enjoy  the  favour  of  the  gods, 
sought  the  atone  nent  of  their  sins  in  their  sorrov/  for  their  sins,  in 
their  prayers^  their  wachin.^s  and  sacrifice^,  either  of  beasts  or  men  : 

3  S 


490    THE  DOCTRIxME  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

also  in  afflicting  their  liodies,  yea,  they  sometimes  bereaved  them- 
selves oi'  their  lives  ;  they  thought  they  should  obtain  a  right  to  life 
by  their  good  and  virtuous  actions. 

The  carnal  Jews,  tliough  they  had  been  taught  belter  from  the 
word  of  God,  would  nevertheless  seek  their  righteousness  even  of 
old,  in  their  repentance,  sacrifices  and  virtues  ;  ^Mhey  exacted  all 
their  labors,"  Isaiah  Iviii.  3.  See  what  the  apostle  saith  of  them, 
Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  x.  2,  3.  The  Jews  had  declined  to  this  errour  es- 
pecially in  the  time  when  Jesus  came  in  the  ilesi^,  as  appears  stfFi- 
ciently  in  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament.  The  Jews  of  laier 
times,  abandoned  to  hardness  of  heart,  have  smugged  up  this  un- 
suitable notion  exceedingly.  And  indeed  thus,  seeing  that  they  all 
without  exception,  though  ever  so  virtuous,  needed  forgiveness, 
they  have  placed  a  right  to  forgiveness  of  sins  in  repentance,  alms- 
givings, prayers,  a  changing  of  their  name,  (whereby,  as  t!  ey  ima- 
gine, a  Jew  becomes  anotlier  person,  and  is  thus  reckoned  free  fiom 
his  former  guilt,)  a  change  of  work,  patience  under  sufferings,  ob- 
serving the  ecclesiastical  lav/  of  Moses,  as  circumcision,  washings, 
and  sacrifices,  and  especially  on  the  great  day  of  atonement.  Is  there 
aught  else  wanting,  they  think  that  they  sh  11  atone  for  that  by  their 
death,  or  by  suffering  the  pains  of  hell  during  one  year.  They  seek 
a  right  to  eternal  life  in  their  good  works  ;  they  speak  indeed  of 
faith,  but  they  mean  by  it  a  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law.  If  they 
mention  aught  of  the  mercy  of  God,  it  is  without  respect  to  the 
righteousness  of  the  Messiah,  and  it  only  '^fftcts  that  God  accepts 
of  the  penitent,  v;ho  satisfy  for  their  sins.  Doth  any  one  desire  a 
fuller  account  of  these  things,  let  him  read  H.  Witsius's  discourse 
on  justification,  prefixed  to  the  apostolicar  antiquities  of  William 
Cave. 

Is  it  matter  of  wonder,  that  the  Jews,  the  proper  people  of  God, 
are  so  silly,  it  is  matter  of  still  greater  wonder,  that  the  major'ty  of 
Christians,  who  have  a  clearer  discovery  of  the  righteousness  of  faith 
in  the  writings  of  the  apostles,  do,  like  those  who  pre  blind,  g.cpe 
heie  in  the  dark  :  this  apsears  in  all  those,  who  are  not  of  our  com- 
munion, or  of  the  Lutheran. 

The  Socinians,  who  deny  the  righteousness  of  works  according  to 
the  lav/  of  IVloses,  and  say  that  Christ  is  a  new  Lawgiver,  who  hath 
enlarged  and  improved  the  law  of  Moses,  assert  indeed,  that  we  are 
justified  by  faith  ;  but  they  imagine  that  fnith  consists  in  keeping 
the  commandments  of  Christ,  and  in  confiding  that  our  sins  are  forr 
given,  aiid  that  we  will  obtain  eternal  life,  not  through  the  s.stisfac- 
tion  of  Christ,  for  they  do  not  believe  in   that,  but  through   acorn- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62-*64.  491 

inon  goodness  o:  God,  Vv'ho  promiseth  that  he  \vho  doth  good,  shall  re- 
ceive a  good  reward. 

Tiie  Uemonstranis  pretend  that  Christ  hath  merited  a  genera!  cov- 
enant of  grace  for  all  men,  the  condition  \vhereof  is  faith,  perfected 
by  the  po\ver  of  freewill ;  which  is  indeed  an  ignoble  act,  but  is  nev- 
ertheless considered  and  accepted  of  God  by  a  gracious  estimation,  as 
a  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  whole  law. 

The  Mennonites  unite  either  with  the  Socinians  or  Remonstrants. 
But  as  the  instructor  opposes  more  particularly  the  Papists,  we  must 
declare  their  opinion  also.     Justification  consists,  according  to  them, 
not  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  in  granting  a  right  to  life,  but  in 
an  infusion  of  holiness,  by  which  they  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  a  right  to  life  through  the  merit  of  works.     They  say,  this  jus- 
tification is  either  of  the  ungodly,  by  which  an  ungodly   person   be- 
comes holy  ;  or  of  the  godly,  by   which    a  godly    person   becomes 
more  holy.     Works  are  either   before    regeneration,    and   proceed 
from  the  power  of  freewill,  which  merit  the  justification  of  the  un- 
godly ex  con^ruo,  from  a  certain  fitness  and   suitableness,  that   Cod 
.  should  further  in  some  measure  the  conversion,  that  is,  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  ungodly  :  or  v.orks  are  such  as  are  done    after  regenera- 
tion by  faith  and  grace,  which  a&sist  freewill,  and  merit  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  godly,  ex  condigno,  from  an  equal  value  of  the  work  with 
the  leward.     If  they  have  need   of  any    works   in  consequence   of 
their  coming  short  in  some  measure,  and  have  thus  only  a   part   of 
their  righteousness,  they  will  then  betake  themselves  to  the  supere- 
rogatory works  of  other  saints,  who  v/ere  more  than  perfect,  or  they 
will  supply   the    defect,   either  in   this  life   by   penance,   or   after 
this  life  in  purgatory.     They  speak  also  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  but 
these  do  no  more  than  obtain  that  their  works  merit.     They    allow 
that  they  are  justified  also  by  faith,  but  not  otherwise  than  that  faith 
is  the  root  of  other  virtues,  which  producing  others,  and  therefore  be- 
ing accompanied  with  others,  justifieth  on  account  of  its  superior  ex- 
cellency above  other  virtues,  and  merits  justification. 

In  opposition  to  this,  we  teach  that  the  satisfaction,  righteousness 
and  holiness  of  Christ,  received  by  faith,  is  the  righteousness  of  man 
before  God,  as  we  have  declared  and  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's 
day.  We  do  not  deny  that  good  works  are  highly  necessary  to  sal- 
vation, but  we  assert  that  they  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before 
God,  nor  a  part  of  it.  And  therefore  the  controversy  is,  whether  our 
rood  works  can  be  our  righteousness  before  God,  or  a  part  of  it ; 
■which  our  adveri::\r:e  5  aflirm,  but  we  deny. 


492    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

That  our  good  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  God, 
appears. 

1.  Because  the  holiest  persons,  and  those  who  had  done  the  most 
good  works,  have  with  humihty  acknowledged  that  they  had  no 
righteousness  at  all,  but  sought  their  salvation  only  in  the  mercy  of 
God,  and  in  the  righteousness  of  his  Son.  Job,  who  had  the  testi- 
mony of  God  that  there  was  none  like  him  in  the  earth  for  integrity, 
uprightness,  ft-aring  God  and  eschewing  evil,  said,  chapt.  ix.  2,  S, 
"how  sl'Ould  man  be  just  with  God  ?  If  he  will  contend  with  him, 
he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand."  David,  the  man  after 
God's  own  heait,  said,  Psalm  cxxx.  3,  4,  "  if  thou,  Lord,  shouldest 
mark  iniquity,  O  Lord,  who  shall  stand  ?  But  there  is  forgiveness 
with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared."  He  prayed.  Psalm  cxiiii. 
2,  "  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant  ;  for  in  thy  sight 
shall  no  man  living  be  justified  "  Daniel,  the  man  greatly  beloved, 
spoke  also  in  the  same  manner,  chapt.  ix-  18.  "  We  do  not  pre- 
sent oiar  supplications  before  thee  for  our  righteousnesses,  but  for 
thy  great  mercies  "  If  there  ever  was  a  man  that  excelled  in  holi- 
ness, it  was  Paul ;  but  even  he  a'so  *'  sought  not  his  own  righteous- 
ness, which  was  of  the  law,  but  only  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
which  is  by  faith,"  Gal.  ii,  16.  Phil.  iii.  8,  9.  Surely  if  the  good 
works  of  these  saints  could  have  been  their  righteousness  before 
God,  or  a  part  of  it,  they  would  not  have  spoken  thus. 

2,  The  word  of  God  teacheth  us  that  there  isno  righteonsness  at 
all  in  good  works  for  justification,  since  works  are  in  every  respect 
opposed  to  justification,  as  inconsistent  with  it.  For  (a)  the  judge 
doth  not  "  set  "  works,  but  "  his  Son  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of 
sins,"  Rom.  lii.  25,  26.  (b)  The  person  cired  is  one  who  is  "un- 
godly, who  worketh  not,"  Rom.  iv.  5.  (c)  The  Advocate  doth  not 
plead  the  righteousness  of  the  sinner,  which  is  of  works,  but  the 
ransom,  which  he  himself  hath  found.  Job.  xxxiii.  24.  Isaiah  liii. 
12.  1  John  iii.  I,  2.  (d)  The  sentence  is  pronounced  "freely,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus," 
Rom.  lii  24.  (e)  Works  are  not  imputed  to  the  sinner,  but  only 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  without  works,  as  Paul  speaks  from  the 
opinion  of  David,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8.  (f)  Faith  which  receives  the 
sentence  of  grace,  is  also  set  in  opposition  to  works.  See  this  in 
the  text. 

3.  Our  righteousness,  which  is  of  works,  cannot  endure  the  judg- 
ment of  God.  In  order  to  show  this,  we  must  prove,  (a)  that  the 
righteousness,  which  shall  endure  the  judgment  of  God,  must  be 


XXIV.  LORD'S  Day.  q.  62—54.  495 

perfect, and  in  every  respect  commensunite  with  the  lav.-  of  God.  This 
is  evident,  because  "  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  of  the  lav,', 
saith,  The  man  \\hichdoth  those  tilings  shall  live  by  them,"  Rom. 
X.  5.  And  what  are  those  things  ?  the  perfect  love  of  Gcd,  and  of 
our  neighbour,  as  the  Saviour  explains  the  demand  of  the  law,  (VJatt. 
xxii.  37,  38,  39.  We  must  keep  the  law  perfectly,  if  we  shall  have 
the  righteousness  whix-Ji  God  approves,  or  we  are  cursed,  as  Paul 
iiaith,  Gal.  lii.  10  Deut.  xxvii.  6.  This  is  still  more  evident,  if 
VfQ  consider  that  God,  wl^o  will  judge  men  according  to  their  works, 
niubl  judge  them  according  to  the  law  :  '*  The  judgment  of  God  is 
according  to  truth,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom-  ii.  2.  Now  he  cannot 
justify  man,  unless  he  have  a  perfect  righieousness,  according-  to  the 
Jaw  ;  for  if  a  man  incur  guilt  in  any  respect  by  his  misconduct, 
'^  God  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,"  as  he  iiaith  himself,  Lxocl.  xxxiv, 
7.  Did  not  the  Lord  himself  show  that  he  would  not  approve  of 
any  righteousness  in  his  judgment,  but  that  which  was  perfectly  con- 
formable to  his  law,  when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  satisfy  his  justice 
according  to  the  complete  demand  of  the  liuv,  "  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,"  as  Paul  saiih,  Rom.  viii.  3, 
4.  The  matter  of  the  greatest  importance  here,  is,  whether  our 
works  are  so  perfect ;  but  we  will  also  prove  (b)  that  our  works  are 
not  so  perfect,  but  that  "  even  our  best  works  in  this  life  are  all  im- 
perfect, and  defiled  with  sin,"  as  the  catechism  speaks.  Is  not  this 
true  ?  surely  it  is  ;  for  there  is  "not  one  man  wlio  sinneth  not,"  as 
the  word  of  Gcd  repeatedly  testifieth.  See  1  Kings  viii.  46.  Prov. 
XX.  9.  Eccl.  vii,  20.  IVlatt.  vi.  12.  James  iii.  2.  1  John  i.  8, 
and  the  good,  yea,  even  the  best  works  of  men  are  defiled  with  sin, 
and  imperfect  The  prophet  confesseth  this  of  the  church,  of  which 
he  was  a  member,  and  therefore  also  of  himself,  when  he  saith,  Isr- 
iah  Ixiv.  6,  "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteous- 
nesses are  as  filthy  rags."  This  doth  not  denote  that  they  were  sins  ; 
for  then  they  would  not  be  good  works,  or  righteousnesses,  but  it  de- 
notes that  they  were  imperfect,  and  proceeded  from  a  heart  that  was  not 
perfectly  purified  :  the  old  man  and  the  fiesh  hinders  and  withstands 
the  new  man  and  the  spirit,  "  so  that  he  doth  not  do  what  he  would." 
Thus  speaks  Paul  concerning  believers  and  himself,  Gal.  v.  17. 
Rom.  vii.  14,  26.  The  saints  ''did  not  indeed  defile  their  gar- 
ments," according  to  Hev.  iii.  14,  but  this  doth  not  denote  that  their 
works  were  altogether  pure  and  free  from  filth  ;  for  they  would  roi 
then  have  had  need  "  to  wash  them,  and  make  them  white  in  tiie 
blood  of  the  Lamb,"  Rev  vii.  14,  but  it  only  means,  that  they  did 
not  pollute   themselves  with  the  abominable  conduct,  and   th'^    false 


494.    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED 

doctrines  of  the  pretended  Christians  of  Sardis.  If  we  will  now  de- 
duce a  conclusion  from  these  premises,  we  will  discover  that  our 
works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  God  ;  for  if  our  righteous- 
ness must  be  perfect,  and  if  our  best  works  be  imperfect,  it  is  evident 
that  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  Cod,  but  deserve 
that  we  should  be  banished  from  his  presence,  and  that  he  should 
cast  them,  as  the  filih  of  our  holy  things,  in  our  faces. 

Say  not,  the  good  that  is  in  our  good  works  may  be  a  part  of  our 
righteousness,  and  God  may  graciously  reckon  it  as  perfect ;  for  im- 
perfect works  do  not  lessen  our  guilt,  but  increase  it.    He  who  keeps 
the  law  in  part,  by  imperfect  good  works,  sins  also  in  part,  yea,  ren- 
ders himself  altogether   guilty :  "  For   whosnever   shall    keep   the 
whole  law,  and  yet  offend   in  one   point,  is  guilty  of  all,"  as  we  are 
taught,  o'^ames  ii.  10,     Yea,  if  our  good  works  were  a   part   of  our 
righteousness  before  God,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  or   the 
gracious  estimation  of  God  supplied  their  deficiency,  then  would  our 
works  form  an  unsuitable  connexion  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
and  the  grace  of  God,  and  we  should  be  justified   partly   by  works 
and  partly  by  grace,  which  is  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  Rom. 
xi.  6,  "  If  it  be   by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more    of  works  ;  otherwise 
grace  is  no  more  grace.     But  if  it  be  of   works,  then  is  it  no  more 
grace  ;  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work."    Further,  our  adversaries 
cannot  say  with    any  reasonableness  that  our  good  works  are  a  part 
of  our  righteousness  and  not  the  whole   of  our   righteousness  ;  for 
they  who  oppose  us  say  that  a  man  can  keep   the  law  of  God   per- 
fectly ;  yea,  the  Papists  will  have  that  a  man  may  be  more  than  per- 
fect by  works  of  supererogation,  and  so  afford  a  portion  of  his  righ- 
teousness to  another.     The  Socinian  thinks  that   he   doth    more  by 
his  obedience  to  the  improved  law  of  Christ,   than   God   demanded 
in  the  law  which   he  gave  by  Closes,     what  remains  then   for   the 
righteousness  of  Christ  to  do  I  nothing  but  to  effect,  as  the  slave  of 
man,  that  his  works  should  merit,  and  that  he  should  do  more  works 
than  Moses  required,  and  that  Christ  should  merit  a    general  grace, 
by  which  man  should  be   enabled  to  will,  not   be    rendered   actually 
willing  to  keep  the  law  of  God  perfectly,  and  that  God  should  esteem 
the  faith  of  man,  a  perfect  observation  of  the  law.     And  thus    they 
place  their  righteousness  altogether  in  works,  and  all  that  is  divine 
must  subserve  this  purpose,  tiiat  the   sinner   may  find  a  righteous- 
ness  in  his  works.     Abominable  I 

4.  Add  to  this,  that  the  works  of  the  sinner  cannot  be  his  righ- 
teousness, because  he  must  have  a  righteousness,  and  be  justified 
by  it,  before  he  can  either  have,  or  do  works  that  are  acceptable   tck 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  495 

Sod.  For  *'  the  ungodly  who  vorketh  not  is  justified,"  according 
to  the  language  of  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  5.  All  his  works,  as  long  as  his 
person  is  not  justified,  reconciled  to  God,  and  thus  acceptable  to  him, 
aie  disagreeable  to  God  :  "  The  Lord  had  respect  to  Abel  and  to  his 
offering :  but  when  he  had  not  respect  to  Cain,  he  had  not  respect  to 
his  offering  neither,"  Gen.  iv.  4,  5.  With  this  agrees  wise  Solo- 
iTion,  wlien  he  saith,  "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination 
to  the  Lord  ;  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight,"  Kom.  xv. 
8.  All  the  good  works  of  men  are  wrought  in  them  by  the  Lord 
through  his  Spirit,  as  we  have  shown  from  Philip  ii.  14.  Eph.  ii.  8» 
Now  God  doth  not  bestow  his  Spirit  for  sanctification,  except  on  ac^ 
count  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ :  he  is  first  made  righteousness 
to  the  sinner,  and  then  sanctification.  See  1  Cor.  i.  30.  For  by 
the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  he  obtains  a  right  to 
life,  and  thus  also  to  all  the  benefits,  and  the  sanctification  of  the  co- 
venant of  grace.  If  the  sinner  must  now  be  justified  before  he  can 
either  have,  or  do  good  >ivorks,  he  cannot  then  obtain  righteousness 
by  his  works  j  for  he  hath  it  before  his  works,  and  his  works  are  the 
fruits  of  it. 

5.  The  doctrine,  that  our  works  are  our  righteousness  before 
God,  is  replete  with  absurdities  For  (a)  "If  righteousness  come 
Oy  the  law,  then  Christ  died  in  vain,"  Gal.  ii.  21.  (b)  Grace,  which 
alone  the  Spirit  of  God  commends  here,  hath  then  no  place,  accord- 
ing to  Rom.  xi.  6.  (c)  We  have  then  no  need  of  forgiveness  of 
sins,  contrary  to  Psalm  xxx.  4.  (d)  *'  If  they  who  are  of  the  law 
be  heirs,  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise  made  of  none  effect," 
Rom.  iv.  14.  (e)  Humility,  the  greatest  virtue  of  Christianity,  is 
then  banished  out  of  the  church,  and  pride  and  boasting  of  our 
works  obtain  the  chief  place  in  it,  contrary  to  Rom.  iii.  27,  28.  iv. 
2.  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  We  see  Luke  xviii.  11,  12,  14,  how  ill  the  Pha- 
risee fare  i  by  boasting  of  his  works,  (f)  If  the  sinner  can  merit 
so  much  by  works,  he  needs  not  then  beg  at  the  throne  of  grace  for 
his  daily  bread,  (g)  No  sinner,  Avho  hath  a  sense  of  his  sins,  and 
sees  that  his  works  are  Hke  filthy  rags,  can  then  have  any  hope 
cf  grace,  but  he  must  abandon  himself  to  despair,  must  hide  him- 
self with  Adam,  run  from  God  with  Cain,  and  flee  to  the  halter  with 
Judas.  Many  of  the  Papists,  seeing  this  absurdity,  have  boine  wit- 
ness to  the  truth,  especially  at  their  death.  The  time  would  fail  me 
if  I  should  speak  of  the  cardinals  Contarene,  l]ellarmine,  Pope  Adri- 
an the  sixth,  the  emperour  C  harlcs  the  fifih,  and  George,  duke  of 
Savoy,  (h)  Suffer  me  to  add  this  also,  if  righteousness  come  by 
works,  then  the  righteousness  of  the  gospel   is   wholly  made  void, 


496    THE  DOC  TRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED^ 

the  covenant  of  works  is  established,  the  covenant  of  grace  deniedj 
and  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  in  his  epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Gala* 
tians,  in  which  he  excludes  all  works,  is  enervated,  and  rendered 
absurd. 

Our  adversaries,  in  order  to  disintangle  themselves  Out  of  these 
snares,  which  they  lay  for  themselves,  seek  various  evasions,  and 
say, 

1,  That  the  apostle  excludes  works  done  only  by  the  power  of 
freewill,  without  the  assistance  of  grace,  but  not  those  that  are  done 
by  the  assistance  of  grace.  But  thus  our  adversaries  condemn  them- 
selves, because  they  assert  a  justification  of  the  ungodly  by  the  mer- 
its of  their  works,  which  are  performed  before  regeneration  by  free- 
v/ill,  as  we  have  sliown  before  :  Paul  needed  not  to  exclude  works, 
which  are  done  without  grace,  because  they  are  only  shining  sins, 
and  therefore  evil  v/orks,  which,  as  all  know,  deserve  death.  He 
excludes  all  works  without  any  exception  ;  we  may  not  then  make 
him  speak  of  an  exception,  where  he  himself  is  silent.  Yea,  he  ex* 
eludes  the  works  of  godly  Abraham  and  David,  Rom.  iv.  I — 8. 

2.  They  say  further  that  he  excludes  only  the  works  of  the  cere- 
monial, or  ecciesiv^stical  law  :  but  this  also  is  an  invention,  which  is 
beside  Paul ;  for  he  speaks  of  the  law  that  was  innate  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, Rom.  ii.  14,  15,  which  forbids  stealing  and  adultery,  Rom.  ii. 
21,22,  which  is  opposed  to  circumcision,  Rom.  ii.  25 — 27,  which 
accuseth  and  condemneth  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  discovers  their  sins 
to  them,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 20.  Yea,  he  speaks  of  the  law  which  Abra- 
ham had,  and  which  he  observed,  before  the  ceremonial  or  ecclesi- 
astical law  was  imposed  on  him  by  circumcision  ;  and  nevertheless 
his  works  according  to  the  moral  law  are  also  excluded.  See  Rom. 
iv.  1,  3,  3,  9-^ — 12.  It  is  true,  the  apostle  hath  respect  in  his  epistle 
to  the  Galatians  chiefly  to  the  law  of  the  fleshly  commandment, 
since  he  therein  manfully  opposes  the  false  apostles,  who  taught  jus- 
tification by  works  according  to  that  law  ;  but  he  doth  this,  because 
those  false  aposiles  looked  upon  those  ceremonies,  as  the  demand 
of  the  covenant  of  works,  and  as  the  proper  performances  to  obtain 
life  ;  for  he  alleges,  in  order  to  silence  them,  the  promise  and  the 
threatening  of  the  covenant  of  works.  See  Gal.  iii.  10,  12.  And  he 
doth  this,  in  order  to  show  that  we  cannot  be  justified  by  our  own 
performances,  either  according  to  the  moral,  or  the  ceremonial  law. 
Tiierefore  Vvhen  he  excludes  the  ceremonies  according  to  the  law 
of  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,  he  then  also  excludes 
Till  kinds  of  works. 

3.  In  this  manner  do  the  Papists  endeavour  to  disentangle  them- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  497 

Selves,  but  the  Socinians  pursue  another  nu-thocl.  Christ,  according 
to  them,  preached  a  difterent  doctrine  and  law  from  tl.at  of  Moses. 
Paul,  as  they  say,  excludes  from  justification  works  done  according 
to  the  law  of  Moses,  but  not  works  done  according  to  the  law  of 
Christ,  which  they  call  the  gospel.  The  Remonstrants  diff»;r  not 
much  from  this,  when  they  say  that  we  are  now  justified  by  ihe  faith 
of  the  gospel ;  for  they  consider  faith  as  a  work  done  according  to 
the  law  of  Christ,  containing  every  virtue  according  to  the  commands 
of  the  gospel.  But  faith  is  a  virtue  by  itself,  distinct  fi-om  oiher 
virtues,  and  may  not  be  considered  in  justification  as  a  work,  but  as 
an  instrument  and  hand,  by  which  we  receive  Christ,  and  Paul  ex- 
cludes ail  our  own  works ,  and  besides  this,  we  say,  it  is  not  true 
that  Christ  preached  another,  and  a  new  law,  as  we  will  show  in  the 
proper  place.  God  the  Lord  would  then  have  abrogated  t'  e  law  of 
Moses  ;  but  how  was  this  possble,  when  it  expressed  the  image  of 
God,  and  his  demand  against  the  sinner  ?  he  would  then  have  dis- 
pensed with  his  right,  which  was  impossible,  as  we  have  proved  ^n 
the  fifth  Lord's  day.  If  Christ  had  preached  a  new  law,  with  a  I'e- 
sign,  that  men  should  be  justified  by  works  according  to  that  law, 
then  would  that  law  have  been  "  able  to  give  life,  contrary  lo  the 
promise,"  and  so  "  righteousness  would  come  by  the  law,"  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  Gal.  iii.  21, 

IL  The  adversaries  of  the  light,   not  willing  to  be  convinced  of 
their  erroneous  opinion,  think  that  they  will  strengthen  themselves 
by  the  word  of  God,  which  promiseth  a  reward  to  works.     We  can- 
not gainsay  this,  verily  "  in  keeping  God's  commandments  there  is 
a  great  reward,"  according  lo  the  language  of  David>  Psalm  xix.  1 1. 
God  will  reward  good  works,  not  only  in  this  life,  but  also  in  that 
Which  is  to  come,   Heb.  vi.   10,  Matt.  vi.  4,  6,  18.     Yea,  the  people 
of  God  encourage  themselves  by  the  consideration  of  the  reward  to 
greater  diligence  in  doing  good  works,     Moses  "  had  respect  to  the 
recompence  of  the   reward,"   Heb.  xi,  26,   but  good  works  do  not 
therefore  merit ;  for  (a)  we  owe  good   works,  and  we  are  naturally 
bound  to  keep  the  law  of  God  perfectly.  How  can  v/e  merit  by  doing 
our  duty?  Hear  V7hat  the  Saviour  saith,  Luke  xvii,  10      "  When  ye 
shall  have  done  all  these  things,  which  are  commanded  you,  say. 
We  are  unprofitable  servants ;  we  have  done  that  which  was  our 
duty  to  do."  (b)  If  good  works  did  merit  that  great  reward,  then  we 
ought  to  do  them  of  and  by  ourselves  ;  for  we  cannot  meiit  by  the 
work  and   assistance  of  another  ;  but  good  works  are  not  of  man 
himself,  but  of  God :  •*  Faith  is  not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  gift  of 
God."  saith  the  apostle,  Eph.  ii.  8.    *'  It  is  God,  v'hich  worketh  in 

n  T 


498     THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  JDEFENDED. 

you  both  to  will  and  to  do,"  so  the  same  man  speaks,  Philip,  ii.  13. 
(c)  Works  oug-ht  to  be  equal  in  value  with  the  reward,  if  they  shall 
merit  the  reward  ;  but  «  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
Avortliy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in 
us,"  Kom.  viii.  18.  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  (d)  Can  good  works  profit  God, 
for  this  is  required  in  order  that  they  may  merit  ?  no  1  "  Can  a  man 
be  profitable  to  God,  as  he  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  to  himself? 
Is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty,  that  thou  art  righteous  ?  or  is  it 
gain  to  him,  that  thou  makest  thy  ways  perfect  ?"  These  questions 
are  rightly  asked,  in  oider  to  deny  the  assertions.  Job.  xxii.  2,  3 

Do  evil  works  merit  perdition,  because  they  are  perfectly  evil, 
good  works  do  not  therefore  merit  salvation,  for  they  are  not  per- 
fectly good.  And  if  they  ,vere  perfect,  as  they  might  have  been 
before  the  fall,  tliey  would  laot  however  merit  by  their  worthiness, 
but  only  by  the  promises  of  God  in  the  covenant  of  works. 

How  doth  God  then  reward  works,  if  they  do  not  merit  the  re- 
ward ?  Paul  wiil  declare,  when  he  teacheth  that  there  is  not  only 
*'a  reward  of  debt,"  but  also  «of  grace,"  Rom.  iv.  4.  The  reward 
ol  debt  is  bestowed  on  account  of  the  perfection  of  the  work,  which 
obligeth  the  Lord  to  bestow  on  his  servant  the  promised  recompence: 
the  rev/ard  of  grace  is  bestowed  in  consequence  of  certain  endeav- 
ours, and  a  certain  defective  work,  from  kindness,  and  it  is  of  more 
value  than  the  work,  and  is  therefore  not  merited.  Say  not,  How 
can  this  be  a  reward  ?  for  thou  shouldest  not  inquire  wisely  concern- 
ing this.  Can  any  man  "  buy  without  money,  and  without  price  ?" 
yet  this  is  asserted,  Isaiah  Iv.  I,  there  can  then  be  a  reward  of  gi'ace. 
Although  a  son  owes  his  father  obedience,  his  father  can  nevertheless 
rewjrd  him  from  kindness  ;  especially  if  his  obedience  be  not  per- 
fect, and  nevertheless  sincere.  Thus  also  the  Lord,  when  he  be- 
holds the  sincere  endeavours  of  his  children  to  please  him  by  good, 
although  defective  works,  rewards  them.  Is  the  recompence  of  God 
from  grace  called  a  reward  without  reason  ?  no :  for  as  a  proper  re- 
ward is  bestov/ed  in  cons-  quence  of  a  promise  upon  the  work,  as  it 
encourageth  the  worker,  sweeten<i  the  labour,  and  follows  the  work, 
so  also  is  the  reward  according  to  grace  bestowed. 

They  will  nevertheless  have  that  God  bestows  a  I'eward  of  merit 
'-jnd  debt  upon  works,  since  "  the  few  at  Sardis,  who  had  not  defiled 
*heir  garments,  should  walk  with  the  Saviour  in  white,  because  they 
>vere  worthy,"  Rev.  iii.  4.  But  their  works  were  not  worthy  of  this, 
for  they  should  be  "  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,"  Rev.  xii.  14.  But  their  persons  were  worthy  of  it,  because 
Lhey  WLTc   "found"  in  Christ,   and  so  were  "perfect  in  him,"  ac- 


XXIV.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  499 

corciin'^-  to  Phil.  ili.  9,     Coll.  ii    10.     And    their  g">o:l  works  were 
evidences  of  this,  since  "  they  had  not  defiled  their  garmcnis,"  and 
so  "  he  will  reward  \?ccordin^  to  works,"  as  evidences  of  a  person's 
good  state,  au;reeahly  to  the  words  of  Clirist  and  of  Paul,   Matt.  xvi. 
27,     Rom.  iii,  6,  S, 

''  Was  Abraham  justified  Uy  works,  when  he  had  offered  Isaac 
h"s  son  upon  theal'.ar?"  as  James  asks,  James  ii.  21.  This  dolh 
not  militate  against  us,  because  it  caniiot  militate  against  Pail,  who 
had  said,  that  '^  Abrnham  was  not  justified  by  works,"  Rom.  iv. 
From  which  nominal  Ciir-stians  took  occasion  to  boast  largely  of 
iheir  fliilh,  and  conceived  that  if  they  had  faith,  it  was  enough,  al- 
though they  had  not  works.  James  sets  himself  against  these,  and 
he  shows  that  faith  without  works  is  not  good,  and  that  it  must  be 
manifested  by  works  :  in  order  to  demonstrate  this  to  them,  he  al- 
leges the  example  of  Abraham,  who  was  justified  by  works,  when 
he  had  offered  hs  son  Isaac.  And  he  speaks  not  therefore  of  the 
justification  of  Abraham  as  a  sinner,  as  Paul  doth,  Rom.  iv.  but  as 
a  godly  person,  by  which  the  Lord  God  declares  of  him  to  his  pos- 
terity, that  he  had  proved  hiniLjelf  to  be  a  righteous  and  godly  per- 
son. Abraham  was  justified  by  faith,  btfore  he  had  offered  his  son; 
for  so  it  is  said  Gen.  xv.  Q.  "  Abraliam  believed  in  the  Lorr*  and  he 
counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness."  But  when  he  had  Jifered  his 
Son,  it  appeared,  and  God  declared  in  consequence  of  his  work,  and 
because  he  feared  him,  that  he  was  righteous  :  the  L'^rd  said,  Gen. 
xxii.  12,  "  For  now  I  knov/  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing  thou  hast 
not  withheld  thy  Son,  thine  only  son  from  me." 

III.  When  our  adversaries  can  do  no  more,  and  we  have  disarm- 
ed them,  they  betake  themselves  to,  slandering,  reproaching  and 
scoffing,  saying,  that  the  doctrine  of  justification  without  works 
*'  makes  men  careless  and  profane."  But  why  need  we  regard  this? 
it  is  indeed  an  ancient  slander',  which  was  cast  also  upon  Paul's  doc- 
trine of  justincation  in  his  time,  but  which  was  manfully  opposed 
and  repelled  by  him.  Sec  Rom.  iii,  8.  vi.  1.  Our  adversaries 
shov/  thusithat  they  are  in  their  temper  exceedingly  like  Ishmael, 
who  scoffed  at  the  freeborn  Isaac,  who  was  intitled  to  the  inheri- 
tance by  promise.  But  that  we  may  show  them  that  our  doctrine 
cannot  justly  be  reproached  in  this  manner,  we  say  with  the  instruc- 
tor, that  It  doth  not  make  men  careless  and  profane,  but  exceedingly 
serious,  fervent  and  godly  ,  for  no  doctrine  excites  and  influenceth 
more  th;ui  this  to  zealous  godliness,  as  we  will  shov/  at  large  upon 
the  thirty  second  Lord's  day.  We  say  no  more  at  present,  than 
"'  that  it  is  imposs\!)le,  that  those  who  are  implanted  into  Cluist  by 


■jOO    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED- 

^  true  faith,   should  not  brin^  forth  fiuits  of  thankfuhiess."     It    is 
frequently  declared  in  the  word  ot  God,  that  they  who  are  justified 
are  implanted  and  ingrafted  into  Christ,   and  thus  most   intimately 
united  to  him,  as  the  t^raft  is  united  to  the  stock.     Being  thus   uni- 
ted and  ingrafted  into  him,  "  they  partake  of  the  root  and  fatness  of 
that  olive  tree,"  Rom.  ix.  47.     Is  it  now  possible  that   they   should 
not  bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness  I   the  Saviour  saith,  John  xv.  5, 
**  I  am  the  vine,  yc  are  the  branches  ;  he  that  abideth  in  me,   and  I 
in  him,  the  same  bnngeth  forth  much  fruit,"     If  our  doctrine  make 
men  cart  less  and  profane,  then  the  doctrine  of  the  legalist  ought  to 
make  men  exceedingly  zealous  and  godly  ;  but  how   doth  this   ap- 
pear,  when   they  are  so  ignorant,  wanton  and  exceedingly   riotous 
on    their  holydays  so  called,  unless  we  will  acknowledge   that   it  is 
godliness  to  present  God  with  a  certain   number  of  mumbled  pray- 
ers, paternosters,  avemarys,  with  hearing  masses,   abstaining   from 
meats,  neglecting  the  body,  and  1  know  not  what  other  bodily  exer- 
cises ;  but  "  these  things  are  not  of  any  profit,  but  only  a  satisfying 
of  the  flesh,"  Coll.  ii.  23.     And  what  is   the  Socinian  and   Armin- 
ian  godliness.'   is  it  a  "worshipping  oij  God  in  tht  Spirit?"  no,  for 
they  "rejoice  not  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  have  confidence  in  the  flesh." 
See  Phil.  iii.  3.     The  whole  morality  of  those  men  doth  not  exceed 
the  decent  conversation  of  the  most  moral  heathens.     And  how  can 
they  say  that  our  doctrine  renders  men  careless  and  profane  ?   this 
truly  the  doctrine  of  the  Hagarenes,  the  hirelings,  and  the  servants 
who  labor  for  a  reward,  doth,  and  no  other.     Have   not  the    Papists 
proffered    for  sale  indulgences  of  sins,  heaven  and  all  that  is  holy  ? 
what  will  induce  me  to  pursue  sanctification,  if  my  money,  my  skill 
in  reckoning  bodily  exercises  can  obtain  for   me  the  pardon  of  my 
sins,  and  every  other  advantage  ?     Every  legaHst  teaches  that  a  man 
may  be  perfect  in  this  life,  if  he  will  only  exert  his  free  will :  why 
then  ara  not  all  those  men  perfect  ?  is  it  not  because   they  conceive 
that   they  can  offer  to  God  a  righteousness  by  their  own  works   for 
their  sins,  or  that  he  will  wink  at  them,  if  they  only   perform    pen- 
ance, and  amend  their  conduct?     See  to  what  all  this  tends. 


APPLICATION. 

Hearers,  ye  who  attend  to   these   things,   will    any   one  cf  yoii 
contradict  us  ?  and  will  he  not  manifest  his  aversion  from  that  impi- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  501 

ous  opinion,  that  a  man  is  justified  by  his  works?  I  believe  he  wil!. 
But  do  ye  know  that  the  most  of  you,  while  they  know  not  what  they 
do,  walk  in  the  paths  of  the  legalist,  and  seek  their  righteousness  by 
their  works;  and  thus  justify  by  their  conduct,  the  false  doctrine  of 
our  adversaries  I  it  is  certain,  that  all  men  are  by  nature  children  of 
the  covenant  of  works,  born  under  the  law,  and  after  the  flesh,  and 
that  they  do  therefore  seek  Hfe  by  their  own  works.  Our  living  un- 
der the  ministration  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  of  the  gO'jpel  and  of 
the  Spirit,  doth  not  translate  us  into  the  state  of  grace,  and  into 
Christ,  and  it  doth  not  furnish  us  with  a  justi^/ing  faith  ;  and  we  can- 
not all  say,  that  "  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,"  as 
Paul  speaks  of  believers  only,  Rom.  vi.  14.  Now  it  cannot  be  other- 
wise, but  that  those,  who  are  yet  under  the  covenant  of  works,  under 
the  law,  and  after  the  flesh,  must  work  agreeably  to  their  nature  and 
state,  and  therefore  seek  righteousness  by  works.  Luther,  consid- 
ering tliis,  said  that  every  man  had  a  Popish  priest  in  his  own 
bosom. 

Many  will  not  believe  this  concerning  themselves,  because  they 
are  not  Papists  ;  but  suffer  me  to  discover  it  to  you,  that  ye  may  have 
a  palpable  demonstration  of  it. 

1.  Ye  know  that  ye  have  sinned  against  God,  and  have  deserved 
death  and  hell ;  why  are  ye  not  concerned  and  disturbed  at  this,  and 
fearful  that  the  wrath  of  God  will  light  on  you  every  moment  ?  is  it 
not  because  ye  think  that  ye  are  not  so  ungodly  as  this  and  that  per- 
son,  that  ye  do  many  things,  are  civil,  honest,  devout,  and  zealous 
after  your  manner  ?  have  ye  committed  a  sin,  for  which  your  con- 
science reproves  you,  ye  soothe  yuurselves  with  a  little  sorrow,  and 
with  a  purpose  to  amend  your  conduct,  and  to  repent,  and  upon  this 
ye  bless  yourselves,  and  think  tiiat  God  will  forgive  your  sin.  Is  it 
:}otthen  your  own  doing  and  work,  that  renders  you  so  unconcerned, 
and  banishes  fear  out  of  yonr  hearts  ?  do  Papists  seek  lighteousnes 
by  their  works  otherwise  than  ye  do  ?  Surely  the  Pharisee  did  not 
act  otherwise,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12. 

2.  Ye  ^ay,  we  know  indeed  that  we  must  not  be  justified  by  our 
works,  but  only  by  the  merits  of  Christ.  It  is  true,  ye  know  this, 
but  doth  this  knowledge  influence  you  so,  that  it  effects  a  change  of 
your  condition  and  behaviour,  that  it  drives  you,  from  a  concern  on 
account  of  your  damnable  condition,  out  of  yourselves  to  the  Medi- 
ator' and  that  ye  accept  of  him  and  his  righteousness  truly,  heartily, 
and  frequently,  and  that  to  be  sanctified,  as  well  as  justified  and  sa- 
ved, and  are  ye  urged  thereby  to  "  pursue  after  perfection,"  with 
Paul  ?   Phil.  iii.  7—14.     Is  it  true,  that  ye  are  implanted  into  Christ 


602     THE  DOC  TRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

by  a  sincere  faith,  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  you  not  to  bring  foiih 
fruits  of  thankfulness  ;  ye  are  then  surely  justified  by  his  merits. 
But  how  few  are  there,  who  conduct  in  this  nrjannerl  Many  have 
heard  others  speak  concerning  Christ,  and  his  n\erits,  and  they  de- 
pend upon  this,  especially  when  they  are  moral,  civil  and  devout, 
thinking  that  though  their  works  arc  not  perfect,  they  will  not  how- 
ever be  condemned  on  account  of  that  imperfection  ;  that  God  will 
wink  at  their  defects,  as  the  Socinians  talk;  or  that  Christ  v/ ill  sup- 
ply that  Vv'hich  they  lack  with  his  merits  ;  and  so  they  have  u  part  of 
the  righteousness,  as  the  Papists  speak.  In  this  manner  the  Jews 
also  had  "  a  zeal  for  Gocl,  but  not  according  to  knowledge  ^  for  they, 
being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  lo  establish 
their  own  righteousness,  did  not  submit  themselves  lo  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,"  Rom.  x.  2,  3.     Once  more  : 

3.  To  what  doth  it  lead  many  of  you,  that  they  kno\y  that  they 
are  not  justified  by  their  v/orks,  hut  only  by  the  merits  of  Chriit? 
Our  doctrine  doth  not  make  men  careless  and  profane,  but  your 
imagination,  that  ye  are  justified  through  Christ,  although  ye  have 
never  truly  passed  into  him,  nor  been  implanted  into  him,  makys 
you  careless  and  profane.  If  ye  did  not  imagine  this,  but  were  con- 
vinced of  your  damnable  condition,  would  ye  not  be  more  engaged, 
and  bestir  yourselves  more  for  your  souls,  that  ye  might  not  by  ar.y 
means  perish,  but  be  saved  ?  But  now  yc  have  heard  of  Christ  and 
his  merits  only  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  therefore  ye  leave  all  to 
him  without  concern,  and  busy  yourselves  only  with  the  things  which 
are  visible,  and  with  your  lusts,  yea,  many  indulge  in  excess  of  riot, 
every  one  for  his  ov/n  ends.  And  when  they  must  die,  then  Christ 
must  save  them,  and  t?ke  them  to  heaven.  But  is  not  this  "  mak- 
ing Christ  a  minister  of  sin?"  Gak  ii.  17,  is  it  not  allowing  the 
inlander  of  our  adversaries,  when  they  rail  at  our  doctrine,  and  say 
that  it  makes  men  careless  and  profane  ?  And  tell  us,  what  is  the 
reason  of  your  reproaching  and  slandering  as  legafists  and  Pharisees, 
persons  v\?ho  separate  themsclver,  fvom  the  world,  and  pursue  a  dif- 
ferent conduct  from  the  generality,  and  v/ho  endeavour  to  shine  as 
^ights  in  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation  ?  is  it  not,  because  their 
behaviour  convinces  you  ?  because  ye  cannot  endure  such  goads  in 
your  sides,  and  such  tliorns  in  your  eyes  ?  because  ye  wish  to  be- 
come careless  and  profane  by  this  doctrine,  at  least,  because  ye  en- 
deavour to  persuade  yourselves  that  men  need  not  be  so  precise  ? 
What  think  ye,  shall  a  person,  who  is  implanted  inte  Christ,-  conduct 
only  hke  a  civil  person,  and  a  man  of  common  morality  ?  ought  not 
the  image  and  Spirit  of  Christ  to  ii'iine  forth  in  him?  And  why  do 


XXIV.  LORD'S  day:  Q.  62— 54.  60S 

ye  look  upon  such  persons  as  hypocrites,  legalists  and  Pharisees '  is 
it  not  not  on  account  of  their  modest  appearance,  their  discourse, 
■which  is  agreeable  to  godly  persons,  and  seasoned  with  salt,  or  their 
decent  behaviour  ?  must  justified  persons  then  conform  themselves 
to  the  world,  be  loose  and  disorderly  ?  Ye  will  say,  No,  but  we  hate 
their  hypocrisy,  and  those  outward  things  are  the  whole  of  their  re- 
ligion and  merit.  How  do  ye  know  this  ?  do  ye  know  the  heart  ? 
no,  but  ye  are  not  willing  that  their  behaviour  should  shame  and 
condemn  you ;  therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged,"  ac- 
cording to  Matt.  vii.  1. 

Let  each  one  now  inquire  how  he  conducts  with  respect  to  these 
matters.  Do  ye  rest  in  your  own  works  ?  is  your  religious  zeal  the 
foundation  of  your  hope,  and  would  it  appear  strange  to  you,  if  Gcd 
should  not  bestow  heaven  upon  you,  and  do  ye  with  the  Jews  "ex- 
act all  your  labours  ?"  Isaiah  Iviii.  3.  Know  then  that  ye  are  yet 
under  the  law  and  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  and  therefore 
"  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10.  And  so  God  "will  not  clear  you," 
according  to  Exod.  xxxiv.  7.  Do  not  flatter  yourselves  with  the 
merits  of  Christ,  for  ye  have  surely  no  interest  in  them  by  an  active 
faith,  which  would  implant  you  into  him  ;  for  ye  would  then  reckon 
all  your  own  doings  as  loss  and  dung  ;  but  ye  are  now  so  exceed- 
ingly pleased  with  your  own  works  ;  and  therefore  yc  are  yet  with- 
out the  ^vjediator  ;  "  Christ  is  becom.e  of  no  effect  to  you,  whosoever 
of  you  are  justified  by  the  law  ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace,"  Gal.  v. 
4.  When  God  will  enter  into  judgment  with  you,  consider  whether 
all  your  works  will  then  justify  you. 

Do  ye  say.  We  trust  not  in  our  works,  but  in  the  merits  of  Christ 
through  faith  ?  But  are  ye  implanted  into  Christ  by  faith,  and  do  ye 
therefore  bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness  ?  this  is  well  ;  but  do  ye 
think  that  works  will  not  avail  to  save  you,  but  faith  only  and  do  ye 
therefore  live  as  ye  list,  ye  are  then  a  reproach  to  our  holy  doctrine, 
and  "  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  through  you,  as  it  is  written," 
Rom.  ii.  24.  Your  faiih  is  witliout  works,  is  a  dead  faith,  as  James 
speaks  James  ii.  17.  Verily,  your  outward  ado,  and  saying,  Lord, 
Lord,  will  not  procure  you  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God  : 
"  Faith  only,  which  worketh  by  love,  avails  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Gal. 
V.  6. 

O  that  ye  would  all  of  you  see  your  misery  with  anxiety,  and  that 
ye  cannot  deliver  yourselves,  that  ye  miglit  cry  out  v/ith  concern, 
"  What  shall  we  do  ?"  as  those  did,  Acts  ii.  37.  Rest  not,  before  ye 
are  in  the  Son  of  God  ;  he  is  willing  and  able  to  bestow  a  sufficient 
righteousness  on  you.     Hear  him  cry  to  you,  I-^aiah  xlv.  22  "Look 


504    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDFD 

unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth :  Surely  shall 
one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and  strength :  to  him 
shall  men  come," 

But,  believers,  who,  according  to  your  evidences  exhibited  in  the 
former  Lord's  day,  have  indeed  been  justified  before  God  freely, 
without  works,  by  faith,  and  who  must  still  daily  seek  justification 
and  reconciliation  for  your  daily  offences,  this  leaven  of  working  with 
your  own  righteousness  is  not  wholly  purged  out  of  you,  any  more 
than  your  natural  depravity  is  wholly  rooted  out  of  you  :  for  ye  also 
are  frequently  driven  to  pursue  your  ov/n  righteousness.  This  is 
evident,  (a)  because  ye  often  dare  not  believe,  that  ye  have  gTace, 
and  are  justified,  unless  ye  have  just  such  a  measure  of  holiness.  If 
ye  depended  only  upon  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  would  ye  suffer 
yourselves  to  be  shaken  on  account  of  the  degree  of  your  sanctifica- 
tion  ?  it  vvould  humble  you,  that  ye  had  not  made  a  greater  progress, 
but  it  would  not  cause  you  to  reject  your  state,  since  your  justified 
state  is  not  fouuded  upon  any  measure  of  sanctification,  but  upon  the 
perfect  righteousness  of  the  Mediator,  (b)  It  appears  also  from  this, 
that  a  greater  or  less  progress  in  virtue  causes  you  to  draw  near 
more  or  less  boldly  to  the  throne.  When  ye  have  done  your  duty 
tolerably  well,  ye  will  then  venture  to  draw  near ;  but  when  ye  have 
behaved  improperly,  ye  then  wander  about,  and  seek  for  excuses, 
only  in  order  to  remain  aloof;  and  when  ye  dare  not  neglect  to  draw 
near,  ye  are  possessed  with  a  prejudice,  that  God  will  not  hear  you, 
ye  dare  not  persevere,  but  make  short  work,  and  wait  until  ye  have 
behaved  yourselves  better.  It  is  proper  to  go  to  God,  with  a  holy 
awe,  with  a  deep  humility  and  shame,  on  account  of  your  misbe- 
ha\nour ;  but  to  forbear  altogether  to  draw  near,  or  to  draw  near  on]\- 
with  such  an  unbelieving  trembling,  v/hen  we  have  misbehaved  our- 
selves, and  courageously  only  when  we  have  done  well,  evidences 
that  we  found  our  riglit  to  draw  near,  not  upon  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  but  on  our  ov.'n  works,  (c)  This  is  also  evident,  because  men 
are  often  urged  to  holiness  by  fear,  as  if  they  stood  near  mount 
Iloreb.  "  The  Lord  hath  delivered  you,  that  ye  might  serve  him 
without  fear,"  Luke  i,  74.  But  a  slavish  fear,  proceeding  from  lli-: 
covenant  of  works,  sometimes  possesses  the  soul,  and  urgeth  her  lu 
do  this  or  tiiat,  as  a  command  of  God,  as  if  every  misdeed  subjected 
lier  to  the  curse.  Yea,  this  renders  the  soul  so  scrupulous  and  anx- 
ious, that  she  sometimes  looks  upon  certain  actions  to  be  sinful 
which. a  Christian  may  perform  freely,  (d)  This  is  still  more  evident 
because  men  sometimes  pursue  holiness,  in  order  to  seek  and  find 
rest  for  rhcir  souls.     'J'hey  have   made  a  breach  in  their  spirits  h\ 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAt.  Q.  62—64.  505 

3in,  this  they  will  heal,  what  do  they  do  ?  embrace  the  righteousness 
and  atoning  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to- pacify  their  minds  ?  no,  they 
will  bewail  it,  and  reform,  and  thus  their  work,  and  not  Christ  will 
afford  them  rest.  Further,  (e)  Men  dare  not  embrace  the  proflered 
and  promised  grace^  and  Christ,  because  they  are  not  so  contrite  as 
they  imagine  beside  the  word  of  God  that  they  ought  to  be.  And 
thus  they  attend  to  the^r  ovv-n  doings,  and  not  to  the  perfect  righ- 
teousness of  Christ,  and  they  do  not  surrender  themselves  to  him,  as 
altogether  wretched,  and  stek  his  favour  only.  It  appears  also,  (f) 
because  they  sometimes  become  impatient,  when  they  do  not  obtain 
their  desire,  after  great  earnestntss:  what  doth  this  denote  but 
that  they  imagine,  that  their  earnestness  obliges  God  to  be  favoura- 
ble to  them. 

But  God  doth  hot  approve  of  all  this  selftormenting,  it  dishonours 
Jesus,  it  keeps  the  soul  from  her  rest,  and  confounds  the  grace  and 
i*ighteousness  of  Gud  and  Christ  with  our  unclean  andftlthy  works  : 
"  If  it  be  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works  :  otherwise  grace  is 
no  more  grace  :  but  if  it  be  of  works,  then  is  it  no  more  grace  : 
otherwise  work  is  no  more  work;"  thus  speaks  Paul,  Rom.  xi.  6- 
A  Christian  must  part  v/ith  all  that  is  his  own,  he  must  count  it  ioss- 
and  dung,  that  he  may  be  found  wholly  in  Christ :  he  must  be  strip- 
ped, naked  and  bare,  as  one  who  is  dead,  and  he  must  surrender  all 
that  is  his  own  as  one  wha  is  become  a  bankrupt,  that  he  may  be 
completely  clothed  and  enriched  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
only.  All  that  he  hath  in  himself  is  but  rags  and  tatters,  it  can  nei- 
ther- clothe  nor  feed  him. 

Shall  a  Christian  then,  as  if  he  were  not  obliged  to  any  duty,  sit 
still,  and  be  careless,  and  think  now  I  have  nothing  to  do,  Christ  hath 
done  all  for  me  ?  No,  this  is  impossible  :  his  looking  off  from  his 
own  righteousness  doth  not  teach  him  thic.  Justification  by  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  alone  through  faith  obligeth  him  to  prize 
this  truth,  to  thank  the  Lord  for  it,  to  conduct  himself  humbly  and 
worthily  of  this  truth  by  a  dilligent  pursuit  of  holiness,  which  we 
have  urged  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  But  we  must  see  that 
we  pursue  sanctification,  as  those  who  are  implanted  into  Christ,  and 
therefore, 

la  As  justified  persons  in  him  by  faith  :  for  how  can  sanclification 
be  acceptable  to  God,  as  long  as  he  hath  aught  against  the  soul  on 
account  of  her  guilt,  by  which  the  Father  is  justly  incensed  against 
her?  How  can  she  draw  near  him  boldly  with  her  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving,  except  she  be  delivered  from  doubts,  and  able  to  ac- 
Quit  herself ?  We  njust  "draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  and  a  full 
^  3  U 
506    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

assurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con 
science,  and  our  bodies  vvsshed  v/ith  pure  water,"  Heb.  x.  22.  It 
behooves  you  therefore,  believers,  to  labour  first  and  mostly  for  jus- 
tification, in  Older  to  pursue  sanctiPication  therefrom.  Endeavour 
then  to  obtan  an  assurance,  that  ye  have  been  already  justified  be- 
fore God,  as  sinners,  and  have  thus  a  right  to  request  sanctification 
on  account  of  the  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus:  for  since  he  is  made 
righteousness  to  you,  he  is  also  made  sanctification  to  you,"  as  Paul 
saith,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Labour  then,  after  any  misbehaviour  in  future? 
not  first  and  mostly  to  amend  your  conduct,  but  to  be  justified  and 
reconciled  to  the  Father,  and  to  make  your  peace  with  him  by  ac- 
cepting your  Surety,  and  pleading  on  your  title  to  him  before  the 
throne,  that  ye  may  pursue  sanctification  from  such  a  justified,  paci- 
fied and  reconciled  mind,  and  thus  begin  your  former  holy  conversa- 
tion anew. 

2.  Pursue  sanctificanon  by  all  means  from,  and  in  union  with 
Christ :  "  Your  life  must  be  hidden  with  Clirist  in  God,"  accordinp- 
toColl.  iii-3  Believers  being  implanted  into  Christ,  bring  fortl 
fruits  of  thankfulness  :  "  Having  been  planted  together  with  him  in 
the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  must  also  be  so  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection,"  as  the  apostle  requireth,  Rom.  vi.  5,  "  Our  good  con- 
versation is  in  Christ,"  as  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  iii.  6.  It  must  neces- 
sarily be  bitier  fruit  that  grows  upon  a  wild  tree,  but  the  fruit  of  ?a 
grafted  tree  is  pleasant.  No  action  can  be  agreeable  to  God  but 
that  Vv'hich  is  performed  in,  and  from  the  union  of  the  soul  with 
Chrst:  "  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  to  the  praise  and  glory  of 
God  "  only  "  through  Jesus  Christ,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Philip  i.  11. 
Hear  also  v»'hat  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  ii.  5.  "  Spiritual  sacrifices  are 
acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  Ye  must  therefore  not 
reckon  it  enough  that  ye  have  been  implanted*  into  Christ  by  faith, 
but  ye  must  also  abide  in  and  near  him  continually,  and  opera- 
lively. 

3.  Strive  to  do  all  your  works  by  his  Spirit,  influence,  virtue  and 
power,  as  the  graft  bears  no  fruit,  unless  it  derive  its  sap  from  the 
tree.  As  lonp-  as  we  exert,  fatigue  and  afflict  ourselves  without  the 
Spirit,  in  order  to  do  our  duty,  we  will  never  perform  aught  that  is 
acceptable  to  God  :  «'  Xot  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  m.y  Spir- 
it, siiiih  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  Zech.  iv.  6.  We  have  shown  on  the 
eighth  and  ninth  question  how  often  the  soul  labours  In  her  own  and 
not  in  Christ's  strength,  and  thus  mars  her  work.  If  ths  soul 
shall  labour  'ightly,  she  must  abide  near  and  by  her  stock  Jesus, 
bucking  incessantly  through  the  pipes  and  conduits  of  the  prom.iscs 


—64.  oor 

from  his  fulness,  grace  for  grace.  Therefore  the  Saviour  saith  to 
yon,  John  xv.  4,  5,  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch 
cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the -vine,  no  more  can  yc 
except  ye  abide  in  me.  He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the 
r>ame  bringetb  forth  much  fruit ;  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing.*' 

4.  Look  nevertheless  at  the  reward,  in  order  to  encourage  and  an- 
imate you  in  your  work.  The  Lord  offers  a  crown  at  the  end  of 
your  race,  to  urge  and  induce  you  to  strive  for  it,  namely,  an  incor- 
ruptible and  undefiled  inheritance,  which  fadeth  not  away.  When 
"  the  prophet  A5,ariah  said  to  king  Asa,  and  to  all  Judah  and  Benja- 
min, Be  strong,  and  let  not  your  hands  be  weak ;  for  your  work 
shall  be  rewarded  :  Asa  encouraged  himself  with  all  the  people" 
to  effect  a  great  reformation  and  amendment  among  themselves, 
2  Chron.  xvi.  Moses  having  respect  to  the  recompence  of  the  re- 
ward, esteemed  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treas- 
ure in  Egypt,"  Heb.  xi.  26.  The  Lord  is  in  himself  worthy  of  your 
universal  obedience,  faith,  love,  fear  and  service  ;  he  hath  also  de= 
served  all  this  at  your  hands ;  yea,  believers,  ye  are  yourselves 
earnestly  desirous  to  please  him,  and  pleasing  him  is  a  sufficient  re- 
v/ard  for  you.  The  Lord  will  nevertheless  be  abundantly  good  to 
you,  since  he  will  excite  you  by  a  reward.  Improve  this  therefore 
by  stirrmg  yourselves  up  thereby  to  greater  activity  in  your  way. 
Look  not  however  on  the  rewaid,  as  an  equivalent  compensation  of 
your  work,  but  have  respect  to  it,  as  the  fruit  of  the  righteousness 
of  Christ,  which  was  purchased  for  you  by  him,  that  it  should  be 
given  to  you  upon  your  work  ;  for  *' eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God 
through  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  vi.  23. 

Do  ye  lament  that  your  v/ork  is  so  imperfect,  it  doth  not  please 
the  Lord  yet  to  render  you  perfect,  that  ye  may  seek  your  perfec- 
tion in  the  righteousness  of  his  Son.  How  good  is  it  therefore,  that 
it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  seek  your  righteousness  in  your  works, 
but  in  him,  who  hath  obtained  a  perfect  righteousness  for  you,  ^'  thai 
the  rigiiteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  you, '  according  to 
Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Do  others  scofF  at  you,  on  account  of  your  zeal, 
ivhy  should  ye  regard  what  the  despicable  slaves,  the  Ilagarenes  and 
Ishmaelitcs  do  ?  Look  upon  it  to  be  of  greater  importance  what  your 
Saviour  sailh.  Matt.  v.  11,  12.  "Blessed  arc  ye,  when  men  shall 
revile  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for 
my  sake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceedingly  glad,  for  great  i»  your  reward 
in  heaven  ;  fo-  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which  were  before 
you."  Say  not  with  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  13,  14.  "Verily  I  have 
cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washedjmy  hands  in  innocency  ;  for 


508    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENtiEl^. 

till  the  day  long  have  I  been  plagued,  and  chastened  every  morn^ 
ing."  For  would  ye,  though  ye  should  suffer  ever  so  much,  ex- 
change your  condition  with  an  ungodly  person,  who  enjoys  the  great- 
est property  ?  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  condition  of  the 
ungodly  was  better  in  this  life  than  that  of  the  godly,  will  not  their 
comforts  end  with  their  lives,  and  will  not  their  sorrows  begin  then? 
But  how  will  it  be  then  with  you  ?  Peter  informs  you;  1  Peter  v.  4. 
"  When  the  chief  shepherd  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  receive  a 
crown  of  glory,  that  fadeth  not  away."  Amen» 


END  OP  THE  FIRST  VOLVMM. 
DATE  DUE                          i 

hr 

^ 

•*¥'^»'W*ini«,n,  „n.  ,™.- 

•*» 

^T****'^'*''***^ 
GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

■i»^.~ 


'gl 


I*'  ^ 




n 


Z- 


,- 

LIBRAEY 

OF   THE 

Theological    Seminar 

PRINCETON,    N.  J. 

Case,     \U.C< „V».:....EN¥j8lon 

If,  J  A  l&D Section.. 


UAk5 

look, Vi f^Ll^. 


& »  1 


•a 


. 


i  \ 


Xss*£ 


U  /£&/      THE  CHRISxiAN 

ENTIRELY  THE  PROPERTY  OF  CHRIST,  IN  LIFE 

AND  DEATH: 

EXHIBITED  IN  FIFTY-THREE 


SERMONS 


ON  THE 


HEIDELBERGH  CATECHISM. 


WHEREIN  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  FAITH,  RECEIVED  IN  THE  RE- 
FORMED CHURCH,  IS  DEFENDED  AGAINST  THE  PRINCIPAL 
OPPONENTS,  A>D  THE  PRACTICAL  IMPROVEMENT  AND  DI= 
RECTION    OF    IT    TO    EVANGELICAL    PIETY,    ENFORCED. 


By  the  Rev.  JOHN  VANDERKEMP, 

Late  Minister  of  the  Gosfiel,  in  the  Church  of  Dirksiand,  Holland* 

VRANSLA'fi'D    FROM    THE    DUtCH 

By   the  Rev.  JOHN  M.  VAN  HARLINGEN, 
VOL.  II. 


NEW-BRUNSWICK,  N.  J. 

PRINTED  EY  ABRAHAM  BLAUVELT. 

1810o 


(-3  ) 


THE 


WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION 


3F 


XXV,  LORD'S  DAY. 


Rom.  iv.  11.    He  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith. 

o 

Q.  65,  Sines  then  ive  are  made  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  bene- 
fits by  faith  only,  whence  doth  this  faith  proceed  ? 

A.  From  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  works  faith  in  our  hearts  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  confirms  it  by  the  use  of  the  sacia- 
ments.

Q,  63.   What !  do  not  our  works  merits   which  yet  God  ivill  reward 
in  this  and  in  a  future  life  ? 
f.  A.  This  reward  is  not  of  merit,  but  of  grace. 
*■    Q.  64.  But  doth  not  this  doctrine  make  mtn  careless  and  firofane? 

A.  By  no  means  :  for  it  is  impossib'e  that  those  who  are  implant* 
ed  into  Chrisi  by  a  true  faith,  should  not  bring  forth  fruits  of  thanks 
fulness. 


w, 


HEN  "  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  the  Egyptian,  which  she 
had  born  unto  Abraham,  mucking,  she  said  unto  Abrahaip,  Ca^t  out 


*88    THE  DOCXraNE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

this  bond-woman  and  her  son  ;  for  the  son  of  this  bond-woman  shall 
not  be  heir  with  my  son,  even  with   Isaac."     This  Moses  relates  to 
us,  Gen.  xxi.  9,  10.     Paul  having  respect  to  this,  saith  GaL  iv.  22, 
23.    "  It  is  written  that  Abraham  had  two  sons  ;  the  one  by  a  bond- 
maid, and  tne  other  by  a  fiee  woman.    But  he  who  was  of  the  bond- 
■woman  was  born  of  ihe  fles.- ;  bui   he  of  the  free  voman   was  by 
promise."     When  the  bondwoman  would  have  that  I  er  son  should 
inherit,  and  the  Ud  mocked,   Sarah  said,  "  Cast  out  this  bondwoman 
and  hfcf  son  :  for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with 
my  son,  even  with  Isaac.     These  things   are  an  allegory,   for  these 
are  the  covenants,"   8cc.  saith  the  apostle,  Gal   iv.  24 — 31.     It  ap- 
pears very  plainly,  that  by  these  tv/o  covenants  he  understands,  Ca) 
ihe  covenant  of  works,  the  sum  of  which,  together  with  the  covenant 
of  grace,  which  was  administered  in  a  legal  manner  under  the  Old 
Testament,  was  proposed  at  mount  Sinai,  and  often  exhibited  for  the 
condemnation  of  sinners,  and  in  order  to  urge  them  to  the  Messiah, 
%vho  was  to  come  ;  and  therefore  the  Jews,  the  Jerusalem  of  Paul's 
time,  seeking  their  righteousness  and  the   inheritance  by  this  cove- 
nant, showed  that  they,  being  born  after  the  flesh,  of  the  servile  cove- 
nant of  works,  were  also  servile  with  their  children,  since  they,  like 
Ishmuel,    mocked   and    persecuted  them,   who  were    born  after  the 
Spirit,  (b)  The  second  covenant,  which  Paul  mcntioneth,  is  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  which  is  established  only  in  promises  ;  and  therefore 
all  who  believe,  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above,  the  true  church,  being 
born  like  Isaac,  after  the  Spirit,  of  this  covenant,  are  free,  and  obtain 
th'i  inheritance  by  promise.     When  now  the  carnal  Jews  sought  a 
right  to  the  inheritance  by  the  servile  covenant  of  works,  through 
their  own   doings,   yea,   when  they  m.ocked  the  free  children,  who 
sought  their  inheritance  by  the  promises,  "  saying  blasphemously 
that  they  said,  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come,"  Rom.  iii    18. 
We  say,  when  they  did  this,  the  true  Sarah,   the  believing  church, 
after  she   was  become  fruitful,  according  to  Isaiah  liv.  1,  compared 
with  Gal.  iv.    17,   cried  to  her   Abraham,   her  Maker,   the  Lord  of 
hosts,  who  is  her  husband,  '^  Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son  ; 
for  the  son  of  this  bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son :"  and 
so  ihis  Hagar  vv  as  called   by  the  ford,  "  Loruhama,  not  having  ob- 
tained mercy,  and    Lo-ammi,  not  my  people."  See  Hosca  i.  6,  9. 
And  the  Lord  hath  ordered  that  it  should  be  said  to  her,  "  Thou  art 
not  my  w<fc.    and   I  am  not  thy  husband,"  Rosea  ii.  I.     And  thus 
*'IsiaeI,  which  followed  after  the  law  of  righteousness,   hath  not  at- 
tained to  the  lav/  of  righteousness.  Wherefore  ?  because  they  sought 
it  not  by  faith,   but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law ;  for  they 


r 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  489 

stumbled  at  that  stumblingstone."     Thus  Paul  speaks,  Rom     ix% 
31,32. 

How  long  was  the  free  Sarah,  the  true  church  with  her  children 
of  promise,  obliged  to  sigh,  on  account  of  grievous  mockings  and 
persecutions  among  the  Popish  Hagarenes,  who  sought  the  inheri- 
tance by  the  law  !  but  when  the  church  cried,  Cast  out  the  bondwo- 
man with  her  son,  the  Lord  dfove  those  Hagarenes  out  of  the  house 
of  Abraham,  his  church,  in  the  lime  of  the  reformation:  by  which 
means  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  the  promise  through  faith 
without  works,  having  been  brought  to  us,  hath  continued  with  us 
until  now,  and  is  defended,  when  we  are  taught  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  and  no  other,  is  our  nghteousness  before  God,  in  the 
foregoing  Lord's  diy  ;  and  that  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteous- 
ness before  God,  nor  a  part  of  it,  as  we  are  now  taught  in  this 
Lord's  day,  in  t  \e  sixty-second  question.  These  Hagarenes  set 
themselves  against  this  doctrine,  and  insist  on  a  reward  according  to 
the  merit  of  their  works  ;  but  being  opposed  in  th'^  sixty-third  ques- 
tion, they  show  the  temper  of  Ishmael,  by  mocking  us,  when  they 
blasphemously  say  in  the  sixty-fourth  question,  that  cur  free  doctrine 
makes  men  careless  and  profane. 

In  order  that  we  may  silence  them,  we  will,  agreeably  to  thid 
clue,  illustrate  somewhat  more  particularly  these  three  general  heads  : 

I.  That  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  Cod,  nor 
a  part  of  it,  Question  62. 

II.  That  though  Go:l  rewards  the  works  of  his  children,  they  nev- 
ertheless do  not  merit,  Question  G3. 

in  T'lat  our  doctrine  cannot  with  any  propriety  be  reproached, 
as  making  men  careless  and  profane.  Question  64. 

I,  In  order  to  render  it  evident  that  our  works  are  not  our  right- 
eousness before  God  nor  a  part  of  it,  we  must  first  exhibit  the  stale 
of  the  controversy,  and  then  produce  our  arguments  against  the  er- 
roneous opinion. 

In  order  to  represent  the  state  of  the  controversy,  we  must  show 
that  not  only  the  Papists,  but  also  many  others,  both  now  and  of  old 
have  erred  in  this  matter.  AH  men,  being  children  of  the  broken 
covenant  of  works,  are  by  nature  infected  with  this  evil,  that  they 
imagine  that  their  own  works  are  their  righteousness  before  God, 
either  in  whole,  or  in  part. 

We  see  this  in  the  l-eathcns  ;  those  at  least  among  them,  who 
were  m  any  measure  solicitous  to  enjoy  the  favour  of  the  gods, 
sought  the  atone  nent  of  their  sins  in  their  sorrov/  for  their  sins,  in 
their  prayers^  their  wachin.^s  and  sacrifice^,  either  of  beasts  or  men  : 

3  S 


490    THE  DOCTRIxME  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

also  in  afflicting  their  liodies,  yea,  they  sometimes  bereaved  them- 
selves oi'  their  lives  ;  they  thought  they  should  obtain  a  right  to  life 
by  their  good  and  virtuous  actions. 

The  carnal  Jews,  tliough  they  had  been  taught  belter  from  the 
word  of  God,  would  nevertheless  seek  their  righteousness  even  of 
old,  in  their  repentance,  sacrifices  and  virtues  ;  ^Mhey  exacted  all 
their  labors,"  Isaiah  Iviii.  3.  See  what  the  apostle  saith  of  them, 
Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  x.  2,  3.  The  Jews  had  declined  to  this  errour  es- 
pecially in  the  time  when  Jesus  came  in  the  ilesi^,  as  appears  stfFi- 
ciently  in  the  writings  of  the  New  Testament.  The  Jews  of  laier 
times,  abandoned  to  hardness  of  heart,  have  smugged  up  this  un- 
suitable notion  exceedingly.  And  indeed  thus,  seeing  that  they  all 
without  exception,  though  ever  so  virtuous,  needed  forgiveness, 
they  have  placed  a  right  to  forgiveness  of  sins  in  repentance,  alms- 
givings, prayers,  a  changing  of  their  name,  (whereby,  as  t!  ey  ima- 
gine, a  Jew  becomes  anotlier  person,  and  is  thus  reckoned  free  fiom 
his  former  guilt,)  a  change  of  work,  patience  under  sufferings,  ob- 
serving the  ecclesiastical  lav/  of  Moses,  as  circumcision,  washings, 
and  sacrifices,  and  especially  on  the  great  day  of  atonement.  Is  there 
aught  else  wanting,  they  think  that  they  sh  11  atone  for  that  by  their 
death,  or  by  suffering  the  pains  of  hell  during  one  year.  They  seek 
a  right  to  eternal  life  in  their  good  works  ;  they  speak  indeed  of 
faith,  but  they  mean  by  it  a  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law.  If  they 
mention  aught  of  the  mercy  of  God,  it  is  without  respect  to  the 
righteousness  of  the  Messiah,  and  it  only  '^fftcts  that  God  accepts 
of  the  penitent,  v;ho  satisfy  for  their  sins.  Doth  any  one  desire  a 
fuller  account  of  these  things,  let  him  read  H.  Witsius's  discourse 
on  justification,  prefixed  to  the  apostolicar  antiquities  of  William 
Cave. 

Is  it  matter  of  wonder,  that  the  Jews,  the  proper  people  of  God, 
are  so  silly,  it  is  matter  of  still  greater  wonder,  that  the  major'ty  of 
Christians,  who  have  a  clearer  discovery  of  the  righteousness  of  faith 
in  the  writings  of  the  apostles,  do,  like  those  who  pre  blind,  g.cpe 
heie  in  the  dark  :  this  apsears  in  all  those,  who  are  not  of  our  com- 
munion, or  of  the  Lutheran. 

The  Socinians,  who  deny  the  righteousness  of  works  according  to 
the  lav/  of  IVloses,  and  say  that  Christ  is  a  new  Lawgiver,  who  hath 
enlarged  and  improved  the  law  of  Moses,  assert  indeed,  that  we  are 
justified  by  faith  ;  but  they  imagine  that  fnith  consists  in  keeping 
the  commandments  of  Christ,  and  in  confiding  that  our  sins  are  forr 
given,  aiid  that  we  will  obtain  eternal  life,  not  through  the  s.stisfac- 
tion  of  Christ,  for  they  do  not  believe  in   that,  but  through   acorn- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62-*64.  491 

inon  goodness  o:  God,  Vv'ho  promiseth  that  he  \vho  doth  good,  shall  re- 
ceive a  good  reward. 

Tiie  Uemonstranis  pretend  that  Christ  hath  merited  a  genera!  cov- 
enant of  grace  for  all  men,  the  condition  \vhereof  is  faith,  perfected 
by  the  po\ver  of  freewill ;  which  is  indeed  an  ignoble  act,  but  is  nev- 
ertheless considered  and  accepted  of  God  by  a  gracious  estimation,  as 
a  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  whole  law. 

The  Mennonites  unite  either  with  the  Socinians  or  Remonstrants. 
But  as  the  instructor  opposes  more  particularly  the  Papists,  we  must 
declare  their  opinion  also.     Justification  consists,  according  to  them, 
not  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  in  granting  a  right  to  life,  but  in 
an  infusion  of  holiness,  by  which  they  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  a  right  to  life  through  the  merit  of  works.     They  say,  this  jus- 
tification is  either  of  the  ungodly,  by  which  an  ungodly   person   be- 
comes holy  ;  or  of  the  godly,  by   which    a  godly    person   becomes 
more  holy.     Works  are  either   before    regeneration,    and   proceed 
from  the  power  of  freewill,  which  merit  the  justification  of  the  un- 
godly ex  con^ruo,  from  a  certain  fitness  and   suitableness,  that   Cod 
.  should  further  in  some  measure  the  conversion,  that  is,  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  ungodly  :  or  v.orks  are  such  as  are  done    after  regenera- 
tion by  faith  and  grace,  which  a&sist  freewill,  and  merit  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  godly,  ex  condigno,  from  an  equal  value  of  the  work  with 
the  leward.     If  they  have  need   of  any    works   in  consequence   of 
their  coming  short  in  some  measure,  and  have  thus  only  a   part   of 
their  righteousness,  they  will  then  betake  themselves  to  the  supere- 
rogatory works  of  other  saints,  who  v/ere  more  than  perfect,  or  they 
will  supply   the    defect,   either  in   this  life   by   penance,   or   after 
this  life  in  purgatory.     They  speak  also  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  but 
these  do  no  more  than  obtain  that  their  works  merit.     They    allow 
that  they  are  justified  also  by  faith,  but  not  otherwise  than  that  faith 
is  the  root  of  other  virtues,  which  producing  others,  and  therefore  be- 
ing accompanied  with  others,  justifieth  on  account  of  its  superior  ex- 
cellency above  other  virtues,  and  merits  justification. 

In  opposition  to  this,  we  teach  that  the  satisfaction,  righteousness 
and  holiness  of  Christ,  received  by  faith,  is  the  righteousness  of  man 
before  God,  as  we  have  declared  and  proved  on  the  foregoing  Lord's 
day.  We  do  not  deny  that  good  works  are  highly  necessary  to  sal- 
vation, but  we  assert  that  they  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before 
God,  nor  a  part  of  it.  And  therefore  the  controversy  is,  whether  our 
rood  works  can  be  our  righteousness  before  God,  or  a  part  of  it ; 
■which  our  adveri::\r:e  5  aflirm,  but  we  deny. 


492    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

That  our  good  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  God, 
appears. 

1.  Because  the  holiest  persons,  and  those  who  had  done  the  most 
good  works,  have  with  humihty  acknowledged  that  they  had  no 
righteousness  at  all,  but  sought  their  salvation  only  in  the  mercy  of 
God,  and  in  the  righteousness  of  his  Son.  Job,  who  had  the  testi- 
mony of  God  that  there  was  none  like  him  in  the  earth  for  integrity, 
uprightness,  ft-aring  God  and  eschewing  evil,  said,  chapt.  ix.  2,  S, 
"how  sl'Ould  man  be  just  with  God  ?  If  he  will  contend  with  him, 
he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand."  David,  the  man  after 
God's  own  heait,  said,  Psalm  cxxx.  3,  4,  "  if  thou,  Lord,  shouldest 
mark  iniquity,  O  Lord,  who  shall  stand  ?  But  there  is  forgiveness 
with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared."  He  prayed.  Psalm  cxiiii. 
2,  "  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  thy  servant  ;  for  in  thy  sight 
shall  no  man  living  be  justified  "  Daniel,  the  man  greatly  beloved, 
spoke  also  in  the  same  manner,  chapt.  ix-  18.  "  We  do  not  pre- 
sent oiar  supplications  before  thee  for  our  righteousnesses,  but  for 
thy  great  mercies  "  If  there  ever  was  a  man  that  excelled  in  holi- 
ness, it  was  Paul ;  but  even  he  a'so  *'  sought  not  his  own  righteous- 
ness, which  was  of  the  law,  but  only  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
which  is  by  faith,"  Gal.  ii,  16.  Phil.  iii.  8,  9.  Surely  if  the  good 
works  of  these  saints  could  have  been  their  righteousness  before 
God,  or  a  part  of  it,  they  would  not  have  spoken  thus. 

2,  The  word  of  God  teacheth  us  that  there  isno  righteonsness  at 
all  in  good  works  for  justification,  since  works  are  in  every  respect 
opposed  to  justification,  as  inconsistent  with  it.  For  (a)  the  judge 
doth  not  "  set  "  works,  but  "  his  Son  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of 
sins,"  Rom.  lii.  25,  26.  (b)  The  person  cired  is  one  who  is  "un- 
godly, who  worketh  not,"  Rom.  iv.  5.  (c)  The  Advocate  doth  not 
plead  the  righteousness  of  the  sinner,  which  is  of  works,  but  the 
ransom,  which  he  himself  hath  found.  Job.  xxxiii.  24.  Isaiah  liii. 
12.  1  John  iii.  I,  2.  (d)  The  sentence  is  pronounced  "freely,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus," 
Rom.  lii  24.  (e)  Works  are  not  imputed  to  the  sinner,  but  only 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  without  works,  as  Paul  speaks  from  the 
opinion  of  David,  Rom.  iv.  6,  7,  8.  (f)  Faith  which  receives  the 
sentence  of  grace,  is  also  set  in  opposition  to  works.  See  this  in 
the  text. 

3.  Our  righteousness,  which  is  of  works,  cannot  endure  the  judg- 
ment of  God.  In  order  to  show  this,  we  must  prove,  (a)  that  the 
righteousness,  which  shall  endure  the  judgment  of  God,  must  be 


XXIV.  LORD'S  Day.  q.  62—54.  495 

perfect, and  in  every  respect  commensunite  with  the  lav.-  of  God.  This 
is  evident,  because  "  Moses,  describing  the  righteousness  of  the  lav,', 
saith,  The  man  \\hichdoth  those  tilings  shall  live  by  them,"  Rom. 
X.  5.  And  what  are  those  things  ?  the  perfect  love  of  Gcd,  and  of 
our  neighbour,  as  the  Saviour  explains  the  demand  of  the  law,  (VJatt. 
xxii.  37,  38,  39.  We  must  keep  the  law  perfectly,  if  we  shall  have 
the  righteousness  whix-Ji  God  approves,  or  we  are  cursed,  as  Paul 
iiaith,  Gal.  lii.  10  Deut.  xxvii.  6.  This  is  still  more  evident,  if 
VfQ  consider  that  God,  wl^o  will  judge  men  according  to  their  works, 
niubl  judge  them  according  to  the  law  :  '*  The  judgment  of  God  is 
according  to  truth,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom-  ii.  2.  Now  he  cannot 
justify  man,  unless  he  have  a  perfect  righieousness,  according-  to  the 
Jaw  ;  for  if  a  man  incur  guilt  in  any  respect  by  his  misconduct, 
'^  God  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,"  as  he  iiaith  himself,  Lxocl.  xxxiv, 
7.  Did  not  the  Lord  himself  show  that  he  would  not  approve  of 
any  righteousness  in  his  judgment,  but  that  which  was  perfectly  con- 
formable to  his  law,  when  he  appointed  his  Son  to  satisfy  his  justice 
according  to  the  complete  demand  of  the  liuv,  "  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,"  as  Paul  saiih,  Rom.  viii.  3, 
4.  The  matter  of  the  greatest  importance  here,  is,  whether  our 
works  are  so  perfect ;  but  we  will  also  prove  (b)  that  our  works  are 
not  so  perfect,  but  that  "  even  our  best  works  in  this  life  are  all  im- 
perfect, and  defiled  with  sin,"  as  the  catechism  speaks.  Is  not  this 
true  ?  surely  it  is  ;  for  there  is  "not  one  man  wlio  sinneth  not,"  as 
the  word  of  Gcd  repeatedly  testifieth.  See  1  Kings  viii.  46.  Prov. 
XX.  9.  Eccl.  vii,  20.  IVlatt.  vi.  12.  James  iii.  2.  1  John  i.  8, 
and  the  good,  yea,  even  the  best  works  of  men  are  defiled  with  sin, 
and  imperfect  The  prophet  confesseth  this  of  the  church,  of  which 
he  was  a  member,  and  therefore  also  of  himself,  when  he  saith,  Isr- 
iah  Ixiv.  6,  "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteous- 
nesses are  as  filthy  rags."  This  doth  not  denote  that  they  were  sins  ; 
for  then  they  would  not  be  good  works,  or  righteousnesses,  but  it  de- 
notes that  they  were  imperfect,  and  proceeded  from  a  heart  that  was  not 
perfectly  purified  :  the  old  man  and  the  fiesh  hinders  and  withstands 
the  new  man  and  the  spirit,  "  so  that  he  doth  not  do  what  he  would." 
Thus  speaks  Paul  concerning  believers  and  himself,  Gal.  v.  17. 
Rom.  vii.  14,  26.  The  saints  ''did  not  indeed  defile  their  gar- 
ments," according  to  Hev.  iii.  14,  but  this  doth  not  denote  that  their 
works  were  altogether  pure  and  free  from  filth  ;  for  they  would  roi 
then  have  had  need  "  to  wash  them,  and  make  them  white  in  tiie 
blood  of  the  Lamb,"  Rev  vii.  14,  but  it  only  means,  that  they  did 
not  pollute   themselves  with  the  abominable  conduct,  and   th'^    false 


494.    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED 

doctrines  of  the  pretended  Christians  of  Sardis.  If  we  will  now  de- 
duce a  conclusion  from  these  premises,  we  will  discover  that  our 
works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  God  ;  for  if  our  righteous- 
ness must  be  perfect,  and  if  our  best  works  be  imperfect,  it  is  evident 
that  our  works  cannot  be  our  righteousness  before  Cod,  but  deserve 
that  we  should  be  banished  from  his  presence,  and  that  he  should 
cast  them,  as  the  filih  of  our  holy  things,  in  our  faces. 

Say  not,  the  good  that  is  in  our  good  works  may  be  a  part  of  our 
righteousness,  and  God  may  graciously  reckon  it  as  perfect ;  for  im- 
perfect works  do  not  lessen  our  guilt,  but  increase  it.    He  who  keeps 
the  law  in  part,  by  imperfect  good  works,  sins  also  in  part,  yea,  ren- 
ders himself  altogether   guilty :  "  For   whosnever   shall    keep   the 
whole  law,  and  yet  offend   in  one   point,  is  guilty  of  all,"  as  we  are 
taught,  o'^ames  ii.  10,     Yea,  if  our  good  works  were  a   part   of  our 
righteousness  before  God,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  or   the 
gracious  estimation  of  God  supplied  their  deficiency,  then  would  our 
works  form  an  unsuitable  connexion  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
and  the  grace  of  God,  and  we  should  be  justified   partly   by  works 
and  partly  by  grace,  which  is  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  Rom. 
xi.  6,  "  If  it  be   by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more    of  works  ;  otherwise 
grace  is  no  more  grace.     But  if  it  be  of   works,  then  is  it  no  more 
grace  ;  otherwise  work  is  no  more  work."    Further,  our  adversaries 
cannot  say  with    any  reasonableness  that  our  good  works  are  a  part 
of  our  righteousness  and  not  the  whole   of  our   righteousness  ;  for 
they  who  oppose  us  say  that  a  man  can  keep   the  law  of  God   per- 
fectly ;  yea,  the  Papists  will  have  that  a  man  may  be  more  than  per- 
fect by  works  of  supererogation,  and  so  afford  a  portion  of  his  righ- 
teousness to  another.     The  Socinian  thinks  that   he   doth    more  by 
his  obedience  to  the  improved  law  of  Christ,   than   God   demanded 
in  the  law  which   he  gave  by  Closes,     what  remains  then   for   the 
righteousness  of  Christ  to  do  I  nothing  but  to  effect,  as  the  slave  of 
man,  that  his  works  should  merit,  and  that  he  should  do  more  works 
than  Moses  required,  and  that  Christ  should  merit  a    general  grace, 
by  which  man  should  be   enabled  to  will,  not   be    rendered   actually 
willing  to  keep  the  law  of  God  perfectly,  and  that  God  should  esteem 
the  faith  of  man,  a  perfect  observation  of  the  law.     And  thus    they 
place  their  righteousness  altogether  in  works,  and  all  that  is  divine 
must  subserve  this  purpose,  tiiat  the   sinner   may  find  a  righteous- 
ness  in  his  works.     Abominable  I 

4.  Add  to  this,  that  the  works  of  the  sinner  cannot  be  his  righ- 
teousness, because  he  must  have  a  righteousness,  and  be  justified 
by  it,  before  he  can  either  have,  or  do  works  that  are  acceptable   tck 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  495 

Sod.  For  *'  the  ungodly  who  vorketh  not  is  justified,"  according 
to  the  language  of  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  5.  All  his  works,  as  long  as  his 
person  is  not  justified,  reconciled  to  God,  and  thus  acceptable  to  him, 
aie  disagreeable  to  God  :  "  The  Lord  had  respect  to  Abel  and  to  his 
offering :  but  when  he  had  not  respect  to  Cain,  he  had  not  respect  to 
his  offering  neither,"  Gen.  iv.  4,  5.  With  this  agrees  wise  Solo- 
iTion,  wlien  he  saith,  "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination 
to  the  Lord  ;  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight,"  Kom.  xv. 
8.  All  the  good  works  of  men  are  wrought  in  them  by  the  Lord 
through  his  Spirit,  as  we  have  shown  from  Philip  ii.  14.  Eph.  ii.  8» 
Now  God  doth  not  bestow  his  Spirit  for  sanctification,  except  on  ac^ 
count  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ :  he  is  first  made  righteousness 
to  the  sinner,  and  then  sanctification.  See  1  Cor.  i.  30.  For  by 
the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  he  obtains  a  right  to 
life,  and  thus  also  to  all  the  benefits,  and  the  sanctification  of  the  co- 
venant of  grace.  If  the  sinner  must  now  be  justified  before  he  can 
either  have,  or  do  good  >ivorks,  he  cannot  then  obtain  righteousness 
by  his  works  j  for  he  hath  it  before  his  works,  and  his  works  are  the 
fruits  of  it. 

5.  The  doctrine,  that  our  works  are  our  righteousness  before 
God,  is  replete  with  absurdities  For  (a)  "If  righteousness  come 
Oy  the  law,  then  Christ  died  in  vain,"  Gal.  ii.  21.  (b)  Grace,  which 
alone  the  Spirit  of  God  commends  here,  hath  then  no  place,  accord- 
ing to  Rom.  xi.  6.  (c)  We  have  then  no  need  of  forgiveness  of 
sins,  contrary  to  Psalm  xxx.  4.  (d)  *'  If  they  who  are  of  the  law 
be  heirs,  faith  is  made  void,  and  the  promise  made  of  none  effect," 
Rom.  iv.  14.  (e)  Humility,  the  greatest  virtue  of  Christianity,  is 
then  banished  out  of  the  church,  and  pride  and  boasting  of  our 
works  obtain  the  chief  place  in  it,  contrary  to  Rom.  iii.  27,  28.  iv. 
2.  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  We  see  Luke  xviii.  11,  12,  14,  how  ill  the  Pha- 
risee fare  i  by  boasting  of  his  works,  (f)  If  the  sinner  can  merit 
so  much  by  works,  he  needs  not  then  beg  at  the  throne  of  grace  for 
his  daily  bread,  (g)  No  sinner,  Avho  hath  a  sense  of  his  sins,  and 
sees  that  his  works  are  Hke  filthy  rags,  can  then  have  any  hope 
cf  grace,  but  he  must  abandon  himself  to  despair,  must  hide  him- 
self with  Adam,  run  from  God  with  Cain,  and  flee  to  the  halter  with 
Judas.  Many  of  the  Papists,  seeing  this  absurdity,  have  boine  wit- 
ness to  the  truth,  especially  at  their  death.  The  time  would  fail  me 
if  I  should  speak  of  the  cardinals  Contarene,  l]ellarmine,  Pope  Adri- 
an the  sixth,  the  emperour  C  harlcs  the  fifih,  and  George,  duke  of 
Savoy,  (h)  Suffer  me  to  add  this  also,  if  righteousness  come  by 
works,  then  the  righteousness  of  the  gospel   is   wholly  made  void, 


496    THE  DOC  TRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED^ 

the  covenant  of  works  is  established,  the  covenant  of  grace  deniedj 
and  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  in  his  epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Gala* 
tians,  in  which  he  excludes  all  works,  is  enervated,  and  rendered 
absurd. 

Our  adversaries,  in  order  to  disintangle  themselves  Out  of  these 
snares,  which  they  lay  for  themselves,  seek  various  evasions,  and 
say, 

1,  That  the  apostle  excludes  works  done  only  by  the  power  of 
freewill,  without  the  assistance  of  grace,  but  not  those  that  are  done 
by  the  assistance  of  grace.  But  thus  our  adversaries  condemn  them- 
selves, because  they  assert  a  justification  of  the  ungodly  by  the  mer- 
its of  their  works,  which  are  performed  before  regeneration  by  free- 
v/ill,  as  we  have  sliown  before  :  Paul  needed  not  to  exclude  works, 
which  are  done  without  grace,  because  they  are  only  shining  sins, 
and  therefore  evil  v/orks,  which,  as  all  know,  deserve  death.  He 
excludes  all  works  without  any  exception  ;  we  may  not  then  make 
him  speak  of  an  exception,  where  he  himself  is  silent.  Yea,  he  ex* 
eludes  the  works  of  godly  Abraham  and  David,  Rom.  iv.  I — 8. 

2.  They  say  further  that  he  excludes  only  the  works  of  the  cere- 
monial, or  ecciesiv^stical  law  :  but  this  also  is  an  invention,  which  is 
beside  Paul ;  for  he  speaks  of  the  law  that  was  innate  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, Rom.  ii.  14,  15,  which  forbids  stealing  and  adultery,  Rom.  ii. 
21,22,  which  is  opposed  to  circumcision,  Rom.  ii.  25 — 27,  which 
accuseth  and  condemneth  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  discovers  their  sins 
to  them,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 20.  Yea,  he  speaks  of  the  law  which  Abra- 
ham had,  and  which  he  observed,  before  the  ceremonial  or  ecclesi- 
astical law  was  imposed  on  him  by  circumcision  ;  and  nevertheless 
his  works  according  to  the  moral  law  are  also  excluded.  See  Rom. 
iv.  1,  3,  3,  9-^ — 12.  It  is  true,  the  apostle  hath  respect  in  his  epistle 
to  the  Galatians  chiefly  to  the  law  of  the  fleshly  commandment, 
since  he  therein  manfully  opposes  the  false  apostles,  who  taught  jus- 
tification by  works  according  to  that  law  ;  but  he  doth  this,  because 
those  false  aposiles  looked  upon  those  ceremonies,  as  the  demand 
of  the  covenant  of  works,  and  as  the  proper  performances  to  obtain 
life  ;  for  he  alleges,  in  order  to  silence  them,  the  promise  and  the 
threatening  of  the  covenant  of  works.  See  Gal.  iii.  10,  12.  And  he 
doth  this,  in  order  to  show  that  we  cannot  be  justified  by  our  own 
performances,  either  according  to  the  moral,  or  the  ceremonial  law. 
Tiierefore  Vvhen  he  excludes  the  ceremonies  according  to  the  law 
of  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,  he  then  also  excludes 
Till  kinds  of  works. 

3.  In  this  manner  do  the  Papists  endeavour  to  disentangle  them- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  497 

Selves,  but  the  Socinians  pursue  another  nu-thocl.  Christ,  according 
to  them,  preached  a  difterent  doctrine  and  law  from  tl.at  of  Moses. 
Paul,  as  they  say,  excludes  from  justification  works  done  according 
to  the  law  of  Moses,  but  not  works  done  according  to  the  law  of 
Christ,  which  they  call  the  gospel.  The  Remonstrants  diff»;r  not 
much  from  this,  when  they  say  that  we  are  now  justified  by  ihe  faith 
of  the  gospel ;  for  they  consider  faith  as  a  work  done  according  to 
the  law  of  Christ,  containing  every  virtue  according  to  the  commands 
of  the  gospel.  But  faith  is  a  virtue  by  itself,  distinct  fi-om  oiher 
virtues,  and  may  not  be  considered  in  justification  as  a  work,  but  as 
an  instrument  and  hand,  by  which  we  receive  Christ,  and  Paul  ex- 
cludes ail  our  own  works ,  and  besides  this,  we  say,  it  is  not  true 
that  Christ  preached  another,  and  a  new  law,  as  we  will  show  in  the 
proper  place.  God  the  Lord  would  then  have  abrogated  t'  e  law  of 
Moses  ;  but  how  was  this  possble,  when  it  expressed  the  image  of 
God,  and  his  demand  against  the  sinner  ?  he  would  then  have  dis- 
pensed with  his  right,  which  was  impossible,  as  we  have  proved  ^n 
the  fifth  Lord's  day.  If  Christ  had  preached  a  new  law,  with  a  I'e- 
sign,  that  men  should  be  justified  by  works  according  to  that  law, 
then  would  that  law  have  been  "  able  to  give  life,  contrary  lo  the 
promise,"  and  so  "  righteousness  would  come  by  the  law,"  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  Gal.  iii.  21, 

IL  The  adversaries  of  the  light,   not  willing  to  be  convinced  of 
their  erroneous  opinion,  think  that  they  will  strengthen  themselves 
by  the  word  of  God,  which  promiseth  a  reward  to  works.     We  can- 
not gainsay  this,  verily  "  in  keeping  God's  commandments  there  is 
a  great  reward,"  according  lo  the  language  of  David>  Psalm  xix.  1 1. 
God  will  reward  good  works,  not  only  in  this  life,  but  also  in  that 
Which  is  to  come,   Heb.  vi.   10,  Matt.  vi.  4,  6,  18.     Yea,  the  people 
of  God  encourage  themselves  by  the  consideration  of  the  reward  to 
greater  diligence  in  doing  good  works,     Moses  "  had  respect  to  the 
recompence  of  the   reward,"   Heb.  xi,  26,   but  good  works  do  not 
therefore  merit ;  for  (a)  we  owe  good   works,  and  we  are  naturally 
bound  to  keep  the  law  of  God  perfectly.  How  can  v/e  merit  by  doing 
our  duty?  Hear  V7hat  the  Saviour  saith,  Luke  xvii,  10      "  When  ye 
shall  have  done  all  these  things,  which  are  commanded  you,  say. 
We  are  unprofitable  servants ;  we  have  done  that  which  was  our 
duty  to  do."  (b)  If  good  works  did  merit  that  great  reward,  then  we 
ought  to  do  them  of  and  by  ourselves  ;  for  we  cannot  meiit  by  the 
work  and   assistance  of  another  ;  but  good  works  are  not  of  man 
himself,  but  of  God :  •*  Faith  is  not  of  yourselves  ;  it  is  the  gift  of 
God."  saith  the  apostle,  Eph.  ii.  8.    *'  It  is  God,  v'hich  worketh  in 

n  T 


498     THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  JDEFENDED. 

you  both  to  will  and  to  do,"  so  the  same  man  speaks,  Philip,  ii.  13. 
(c)  Works  oug-ht  to  be  equal  in  value  with  the  reward,  if  they  shall 
merit  the  reward  ;  but  «  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
Avortliy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in 
us,"  Kom.  viii.  18.  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  (d)  Can  good  works  profit  God, 
for  this  is  required  in  order  that  they  may  merit  ?  no  1  "  Can  a  man 
be  profitable  to  God,  as  he  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  to  himself? 
Is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty,  that  thou  art  righteous  ?  or  is  it 
gain  to  him,  that  thou  makest  thy  ways  perfect  ?"  These  questions 
are  rightly  asked,  in  oider  to  deny  the  assertions.  Job.  xxii.  2,  3 

Do  evil  works  merit  perdition,  because  they  are  perfectly  evil, 
good  works  do  not  therefore  merit  salvation,  for  they  are  not  per- 
fectly good.  And  if  they  ,vere  perfect,  as  they  might  have  been 
before  the  fall,  tliey  would  laot  however  merit  by  their  worthiness, 
but  only  by  the  promises  of  God  in  the  covenant  of  works. 

How  doth  God  then  reward  works,  if  they  do  not  merit  the  re- 
ward ?  Paul  wiil  declare,  when  he  teacheth  that  there  is  not  only 
*'a  reward  of  debt,"  but  also  «of  grace,"  Rom.  iv.  4.  The  reward 
ol  debt  is  bestowed  on  account  of  the  perfection  of  the  work,  which 
obligeth  the  Lord  to  bestow  on  his  servant  the  promised  recompence: 
the  rev/ard  of  grace  is  bestowed  in  consequence  of  certain  endeav- 
ours, and  a  certain  defective  work,  from  kindness,  and  it  is  of  more 
value  than  the  work,  and  is  therefore  not  merited.  Say  not,  How 
can  this  be  a  reward  ?  for  thou  shouldest  not  inquire  wisely  concern- 
ing this.  Can  any  man  "  buy  without  money,  and  without  price  ?" 
yet  this  is  asserted,  Isaiah  Iv.  I,  there  can  then  be  a  reward  of  gi'ace. 
Although  a  son  owes  his  father  obedience,  his  father  can  nevertheless 
rewjrd  him  from  kindness  ;  especially  if  his  obedience  be  not  per- 
fect, and  nevertheless  sincere.  Thus  also  the  Lord,  when  he  be- 
holds the  sincere  endeavours  of  his  children  to  please  him  by  good, 
although  defective  works,  rewards  them.  Is  the  recompence  of  God 
from  grace  called  a  reward  without  reason  ?  no :  for  as  a  proper  re- 
ward is  bestov/ed  in  cons-  quence  of  a  promise  upon  the  work,  as  it 
encourageth  the  worker,  sweeten<i  the  labour,  and  follows  the  work, 
so  also  is  the  reward  according  to  grace  bestowed. 

They  will  nevertheless  have  that  God  bestows  a  I'eward  of  merit 
'-jnd  debt  upon  works,  since  "  the  few  at  Sardis,  who  had  not  defiled 
*heir  garments,  should  walk  with  the  Saviour  in  white,  because  they 
>vere  worthy,"  Rev.  iii.  4.  But  their  works  were  not  worthy  of  this, 
for  they  should  be  "  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,"  Rev.  xii.  14.  But  their  persons  were  worthy  of  it,  because 
Lhey  WLTc   "found"  in  Christ,   and  so  were  "perfect  in  him,"  ac- 


XXIV.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  499 

corciin'^-  to  Phil.  ili.  9,     Coll.  ii    10.     And    their  g">o:l  works  were 
evidences  of  this,  since  "  they  had  not  defiled  their  garmcnis,"  and 
so  "  he  will  reward  \?ccordin^  to  works,"  as  evidences  of  a  person's 
good  state,  au;reeahly  to  the  words  of  Clirist  and  of  Paul,   Matt.  xvi. 
27,     Rom.  iii,  6,  S, 

''  Was  Abraham  justified  Uy  works,  when  he  had  offered  Isaac 
h"s  son  upon  theal'.ar?"  as  James  asks,  James  ii.  21.  This  dolh 
not  militate  against  us,  because  it  caniiot  militate  against  Pail,  who 
had  said,  that  '^  Abrnham  was  not  justified  by  works,"  Rom.  iv. 
From  which  nominal  Ciir-stians  took  occasion  to  boast  largely  of 
iheir  fliilh,  and  conceived  that  if  they  had  faith,  it  was  enough,  al- 
though they  had  not  works.  James  sets  himself  against  these,  and 
he  shows  that  faith  without  works  is  not  good,  and  that  it  must  be 
manifested  by  works  :  in  order  to  demonstrate  this  to  them,  he  al- 
leges the  example  of  Abraham,  who  was  justified  by  works,  when 
he  had  offered  hs  son  Isaac.  And  he  speaks  not  therefore  of  the 
justification  of  Abraham  as  a  sinner,  as  Paul  doth,  Rom.  iv.  but  as 
a  godly  person,  by  which  the  Lord  God  declares  of  him  to  his  pos- 
terity, that  he  had  proved  hiniLjelf  to  be  a  righteous  and  godly  per- 
son. Abraham  was  justified  by  faith,  btfore  he  had  offered  his  son; 
for  so  it  is  said  Gen.  xv.  Q.  "  Abraliam  believed  in  the  Lorr*  and  he 
counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness."  But  when  he  had  Jifered  his 
Son,  it  appeared,  and  God  declared  in  consequence  of  his  work,  and 
because  he  feared  him,  that  he  was  righteous  :  the  L'^rd  said,  Gen. 
xxii.  12,  "  For  now  I  knov/  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing  thou  hast 
not  withheld  thy  Son,  thine  only  son  from  me." 

III.  When  our  adversaries  can  do  no  more,  and  we  have  disarm- 
ed them,  they  betake  themselves  to,  slandering,  reproaching  and 
scoffing,  saying,  that  the  doctrine  of  justification  without  works 
*'  makes  men  careless  and  profane."  But  why  need  we  regard  this? 
it  is  indeed  an  ancient  slander',  which  was  cast  also  upon  Paul's  doc- 
trine of  justincation  in  his  time,  but  which  was  manfully  opposed 
and  repelled  by  him.  Sec  Rom.  iii,  8.  vi.  1.  Our  adversaries 
shov/  thusithat  they  are  in  their  temper  exceedingly  like  Ishmael, 
who  scoffed  at  the  freeborn  Isaac,  who  was  intitled  to  the  inheri- 
tance by  promise.  But  that  we  may  show  them  that  our  doctrine 
cannot  justly  be  reproached  in  this  manner,  we  say  with  the  instruc- 
tor, that  It  doth  not  make  men  careless  and  profane,  but  exceedingly 
serious,  fervent  and  godly  ,  for  no  doctrine  excites  and  influenceth 
more  th;ui  this  to  zealous  godliness,  as  we  will  shov/  at  large  upon 
the  thirty  second  Lord's  day.  We  say  no  more  at  present,  than 
"'  that  it  is  imposs\!)le,  that  those  who  are  implanted  into  Cluist  by 


■jOO    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED- 

^  true  faith,   should  not  brin^  forth  fiuits  of  thankfuhiess."     It    is 
frequently  declared  in  the  word  ot  God,  that  they  who  are  justified 
are  implanted  and  ingrafted  into  Christ,   and  thus  most   intimately 
united  to  him,  as  the  t^raft  is  united  to  the  stock.     Being  thus   uni- 
ted and  ingrafted  into  him,  "  they  partake  of  the  root  and  fatness  of 
that  olive  tree,"  Rom.  ix.  47.     Is  it  now  possible  that   they   should 
not  bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness  I   the  Saviour  saith,  John  xv.  5, 
**  I  am  the  vine,  yc  are  the  branches  ;  he  that  abideth  in  me,   and  I 
in  him,  the  same  bnngeth  forth  much  fruit,"     If  our  doctrine  make 
men  cart  less  and  profane,  then  the  doctrine  of  the  legalist  ought  to 
make  men  exceedingly  zealous  and  godly  ;  but  how   doth  this   ap- 
pear,  when   they  are  so  ignorant,  wanton  and  exceedingly   riotous 
on    their  holydays  so  called,  unless  we  will  acknowledge   that   it  is 
godliness  to  present  God  with  a  certain   number  of  mumbled  pray- 
ers, paternosters,  avemarys,  with  hearing  masses,   abstaining   from 
meats,  neglecting  the  body,  and  1  know  not  what  other  bodily  exer- 
cises ;  but  "  these  things  are  not  of  any  profit,  but  only  a  satisfying 
of  the  flesh,"  Coll.  ii.  23.     And  what  is   the  Socinian  and   Armin- 
ian  godliness.'   is  it  a  "worshipping  oij  God  in  tht  Spirit?"  no,  for 
they  "rejoice  not  in  Christ  Jesus,  but  have  confidence  in  the  flesh." 
See  Phil.  iii.  3.     The  whole  morality  of  those  men  doth  not  exceed 
the  decent  conversation  of  the  most  moral  heathens.     And  how  can 
they  say  that  our  doctrine  renders  men  careless  and  profane  ?   this 
truly  the  doctrine  of  the  Hagarenes,  the  hirelings,  and  the  servants 
who  labor  for  a  reward,  doth,  and  no  other.     Have   not  the    Papists 
proffered    for  sale  indulgences  of  sins,  heaven  and  all  that  is  holy  ? 
what  will  induce  me  to  pursue  sanctification,  if  my  money,  my  skill 
in  reckoning  bodily  exercises  can  obtain  for   me  the  pardon  of  my 
sins,  and  every  other  advantage  ?     Every  legaHst  teaches  that  a  man 
may  be  perfect  in  this  life,  if  he  will  only  exert  his  free  will :  why 
then  ara  not  all  those  men  perfect  ?  is  it  not  because   they  conceive 
that   they  can  offer  to  God  a  righteousness  by  their  own  works   for 
their  sins,  or  that  he  will  wink  at  them,  if  they  only   perform    pen- 
ance, and  amend  their  conduct?     See  to  what  all  this  tends. 


APPLICATION. 

Hearers,  ye  who  attend  to   these   things,   will    any   one  cf  yoii 
contradict  us  ?  and  will  he  not  manifest  his  aversion  from  that  impi- 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  62—64.  501 

ous  opinion,  that  a  man  is  justified  by  his  works?  I  believe  he  wil!. 
But  do  ye  know  that  the  most  of  you,  while  they  know  not  what  they 
do,  walk  in  the  paths  of  the  legalist,  and  seek  their  righteousness  by 
their  works;  and  thus  justify  by  their  conduct,  the  false  doctrine  of 
our  adversaries  I  it  is  certain,  that  all  men  are  by  nature  children  of 
the  covenant  of  works,  born  under  the  law,  and  after  the  flesh,  and 
that  they  do  therefore  seek  Hfe  by  their  own  works.  Our  living  un- 
der the  ministration  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  of  the  gO'jpel  and  of 
the  Spirit,  doth  not  translate  us  into  the  state  of  grace,  and  into 
Christ,  and  it  doth  not  furnish  us  with  a  justi^/ing  faith  ;  and  we  can- 
not all  say,  that  "  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,"  as 
Paul  speaks  of  believers  only,  Rom.  vi.  14.  Now  it  cannot  be  other- 
wise, but  that  those,  who  are  yet  under  the  covenant  of  works,  under 
the  law,  and  after  the  flesh,  must  work  agreeably  to  their  nature  and 
state,  and  therefore  seek  righteousness  by  works.  Luther,  consid- 
ering tliis,  said  that  every  man  had  a  Popish  priest  in  his  own 
bosom. 

Many  will  not  believe  this  concerning  themselves,  because  they 
are  not  Papists  ;  but  suffer  me  to  discover  it  to  you,  that  ye  may  have 
a  palpable  demonstration  of  it. 

1.  Ye  know  that  ye  have  sinned  against  God,  and  have  deserved 
death  and  hell ;  why  are  ye  not  concerned  and  disturbed  at  this,  and 
fearful  that  the  wrath  of  God  will  light  on  you  every  moment  ?  is  it 
not  because  ye  think  that  ye  are  not  so  ungodly  as  this  and  that  per- 
son,  that  ye  do  many  things,  are  civil,  honest,  devout,  and  zealous 
after  your  manner  ?  have  ye  committed  a  sin,  for  which  your  con- 
science reproves  you,  ye  soothe  yuurselves  with  a  little  sorrow,  and 
with  a  purpose  to  amend  your  conduct,  and  to  repent,  and  upon  this 
ye  bless  yourselves,  and  think  tiiat  God  will  forgive  your  sin.  Is  it 
:}otthen  your  own  doing  and  work,  that  renders  you  so  unconcerned, 
and  banishes  fear  out  of  yonr  hearts  ?  do  Papists  seek  lighteousnes 
by  their  works  otherwise  than  ye  do  ?  Surely  the  Pharisee  did  not 
act  otherwise,  Luke  xviii.  11,  12. 

2.  Ye  ^ay,  we  know  indeed  that  we  must  not  be  justified  by  our 
works,  but  only  by  the  merits  of  Christ.  It  is  true,  ye  know  this, 
but  doth  this  knowledge  influence  you  so,  that  it  effects  a  change  of 
your  condition  and  behaviour,  that  it  drives  you,  from  a  concern  on 
account  of  your  damnable  condition,  out  of  yourselves  to  the  Medi- 
ator' and  that  ye  accept  of  him  and  his  righteousness  truly,  heartily, 
and  frequently,  and  that  to  be  sanctified,  as  well  as  justified  and  sa- 
ved, and  are  ye  urged  thereby  to  "  pursue  after  perfection,"  with 
Paul  ?   Phil.  iii.  7—14.     Is  it  true,  that  ye  are  implanted  into  Christ 


602     THE  DOC  TRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

by  a  sincere  faith,  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  you  not  to  bring  foiih 
fruits  of  thankfulness  ;  ye  are  then  surely  justified  by  his  merits. 
But  how  few  are  there,  who  conduct  in  this  nrjannerl  Many  have 
heard  others  speak  concerning  Christ,  and  his  n\erits,  and  they  de- 
pend upon  this,  especially  when  they  are  moral,  civil  and  devout, 
thinking  that  though  their  works  arc  not  perfect,  they  will  not  how- 
ever be  condemned  on  account  of  that  imperfection  ;  that  God  will 
wink  at  their  defects,  as  the  Socinians  talk;  or  that  Christ  v/ ill  sup- 
ply that  Vv'hich  they  lack  with  his  merits  ;  and  so  they  have  u  part  of 
the  righteousness,  as  the  Papists  speak.  In  this  manner  the  Jews 
also  had  "  a  zeal  for  Gocl,  but  not  according  to  knowledge  ^  for  they, 
being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  lo  establish 
their  own  righteousness,  did  not  submit  themselves  lo  the  righteous- 
ness of  God,"  Rom.  x.  2,  3.     Once  more  : 

3.  To  what  doth  it  lead  many  of  you,  that  they  kno\y  that  they 
are  not  justified  by  their  v/orks,  hut  only  by  the  merits  of  Chriit? 
Our  doctrine  doth  not  make  men  careless  and  profane,  but  your 
imagination,  that  ye  are  justified  through  Christ,  although  ye  have 
never  truly  passed  into  him,  nor  been  implanted  into  him,  makys 
you  careless  and  profane.  If  ye  did  not  imagine  this,  but  were  con- 
vinced of  your  damnable  condition,  would  ye  not  be  more  engaged, 
and  bestir  yourselves  more  for  your  souls,  that  ye  might  not  by  ar.y 
means  perish,  but  be  saved  ?  But  now  yc  have  heard  of  Christ  and 
his  merits  only  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  therefore  ye  leave  all  to 
him  without  concern,  and  busy  yourselves  only  with  the  things  which 
are  visible,  and  with  your  lusts,  yea,  many  indulge  in  excess  of  riot, 
every  one  for  his  ov/n  ends.  And  when  they  must  die,  then  Christ 
must  save  them,  and  t?ke  them  to  heaven.  But  is  not  this  "  mak- 
ing Christ  a  minister  of  sin?"  Gak  ii.  17,  is  it  not  allowing  the 
inlander  of  our  adversaries,  when  they  rail  at  our  doctrine,  and  say 
that  it  makes  men  careless  and  profane  ?  And  tell  us,  what  is  the 
reason  of  your  reproaching  and  slandering  as  legafists  and  Pharisees, 
persons  v\?ho  separate  themsclver,  fvom  the  world,  and  pursue  a  dif- 
ferent conduct  from  the  generality,  and  v/ho  endeavour  to  shine  as 
^ights  in  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation  ?  is  it  not,  because  their 
behaviour  convinces  you  ?  because  ye  cannot  endure  such  goads  in 
your  sides,  and  such  tliorns  in  your  eyes  ?  because  ye  wish  to  be- 
come careless  and  profane  by  this  doctrine,  at  least,  because  ye  en- 
deavour to  persuade  yourselves  that  men  need  not  be  so  precise  ? 
What  think  ye,  shall  a  person,  who  is  implanted  inte  Christ,-  conduct 
only  hke  a  civil  person,  and  a  man  of  common  morality  ?  ought  not 
the  image  and  Spirit  of  Christ  to  ii'iine  forth  in  him?  And  why  do 


XXIV.  LORD'S  day:  Q.  62— 54.  60S 

ye  look  upon  such  persons  as  hypocrites,  legalists  and  Pharisees '  is 
it  not  not  on  account  of  their  modest  appearance,  their  discourse, 
■which  is  agreeable  to  godly  persons,  and  seasoned  with  salt,  or  their 
decent  behaviour  ?  must  justified  persons  then  conform  themselves 
to  the  world,  be  loose  and  disorderly  ?  Ye  will  say,  No,  but  we  hate 
their  hypocrisy,  and  those  outward  things  are  the  whole  of  their  re- 
ligion and  merit.  How  do  ye  know  this  ?  do  ye  know  the  heart  ? 
no,  but  ye  are  not  willing  that  their  behaviour  should  shame  and 
condemn  you ;  therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged,"  ac- 
cording to  Matt.  vii.  1. 

Let  each  one  now  inquire  how  he  conducts  with  respect  to  these 
matters.  Do  ye  rest  in  your  own  works  ?  is  your  religious  zeal  the 
foundation  of  your  hope,  and  would  it  appear  strange  to  you,  if  Gcd 
should  not  bestow  heaven  upon  you,  and  do  ye  with  the  Jews  "ex- 
act all  your  labours  ?"  Isaiah  Iviii.  3.  Know  then  that  ye  are  yet 
under  the  law  and  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  and  therefore 
"  under  the  curse,"  Gal.  iii.  10.  And  so  God  "will  not  clear  you," 
according  to  Exod.  xxxiv.  7.  Do  not  flatter  yourselves  with  the 
merits  of  Christ,  for  ye  have  surely  no  interest  in  them  by  an  active 
faith,  which  would  implant  you  into  him  ;  for  ye  would  then  reckon 
all  your  own  doings  as  loss  and  dung  ;  but  ye  are  now  so  exceed- 
ingly pleased  with  your  own  works  ;  and  therefore  yc  are  yet  with- 
out the  ^vjediator  ;  "  Christ  is  becom.e  of  no  effect  to  you,  whosoever 
of  you  are  justified  by  the  law  ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace,"  Gal.  v. 
4.  When  God  will  enter  into  judgment  with  you,  consider  whether 
all  your  works  will  then  justify  you. 

Do  ye  say.  We  trust  not  in  our  works,  but  in  the  merits  of  Christ 
through  faith  ?  But  are  ye  implanted  into  Christ  by  faith,  and  do  ye 
therefore  bring  forth  fruits  of  thankfulness  ?  this  is  well  ;  but  do  ye 
think  that  works  will  not  avail  to  save  you,  but  faith  only  and  do  ye 
therefore  live  as  ye  list,  ye  are  then  a  reproach  to  our  holy  doctrine, 
and  "  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  through  you,  as  it  is  written," 
Rom.  ii.  24.  Your  faiih  is  witliout  works,  is  a  dead  faith,  as  James 
speaks  James  ii.  17.  Verily,  your  outward  ado,  and  saying,  Lord, 
Lord,  will  not  procure  you  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God  : 
"  Faith  only,  which  worketh  by  love,  avails  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Gal. 
V.  6. 

O  that  ye  would  all  of  you  see  your  misery  with  anxiety,  and  that 
ye  cannot  deliver  yourselves,  that  ye  miglit  cry  out  v/ith  concern, 
"  What  shall  we  do  ?"  as  those  did,  Acts  ii.  37.  Rest  not,  before  ye 
are  in  the  Son  of  God  ;  he  is  willing  and  able  to  bestow  a  sufficient 
righteousness  on  you.     Hear  him  cry  to  you,  I-^aiah  xlv.  22  "Look 


504    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDFD 

unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth :  Surely  shall 
one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and  strength :  to  him 
shall  men  come," 

But,  believers,  who,  according  to  your  evidences  exhibited  in  the 
former  Lord's  day,  have  indeed  been  justified  before  God  freely, 
without  works,  by  faith,  and  who  must  still  daily  seek  justification 
and  reconciliation  for  your  daily  offences,  this  leaven  of  working  with 
your  own  righteousness  is  not  wholly  purged  out  of  you,  any  more 
than  your  natural  depravity  is  wholly  rooted  out  of  you  :  for  ye  also 
are  frequently  driven  to  pursue  your  ov/n  righteousness.  This  is 
evident,  (a)  because  ye  often  dare  not  believe,  that  ye  have  gTace, 
and  are  justified,  unless  ye  have  just  such  a  measure  of  holiness.  If 
ye  depended  only  upon  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  would  ye  suffer 
yourselves  to  be  shaken  on  account  of  the  degree  of  your  sanctifica- 
tion  ?  it  vvould  humble  you,  that  ye  had  not  made  a  greater  progress, 
but  it  would  not  cause  you  to  reject  your  state,  since  your  justified 
state  is  not  fouuded  upon  any  measure  of  sanctification,  but  upon  the 
perfect  righteousness  of  the  Mediator,  (b)  It  appears  also  from  this, 
that  a  greater  or  less  progress  in  virtue  causes  you  to  draw  near 
more  or  less  boldly  to  the  throne.  When  ye  have  done  your  duty 
tolerably  well,  ye  will  then  venture  to  draw  near ;  but  when  ye  have 
behaved  improperly,  ye  then  wander  about,  and  seek  for  excuses, 
only  in  order  to  remain  aloof;  and  when  ye  dare  not  neglect  to  draw 
near,  ye  are  possessed  with  a  prejudice,  that  God  will  not  hear  you, 
ye  dare  not  persevere,  but  make  short  work,  and  wait  until  ye  have 
behaved  yourselves  better.  It  is  proper  to  go  to  God,  with  a  holy 
awe,  with  a  deep  humility  and  shame,  on  account  of  your  misbe- 
ha\nour ;  but  to  forbear  altogether  to  draw  near,  or  to  draw  near  on]\- 
with  such  an  unbelieving  trembling,  v/hen  we  have  misbehaved  our- 
selves, and  courageously  only  when  we  have  done  well,  evidences 
that  we  found  our  riglit  to  draw  near,  not  upon  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  but  on  our  ov.'n  works,  (c)  This  is  also  evident,  because  men 
are  often  urged  to  holiness  by  fear,  as  if  they  stood  near  mount 
Iloreb.  "  The  Lord  hath  delivered  you,  that  ye  might  serve  him 
without  fear,"  Luke  i,  74.  But  a  slavish  fear,  proceeding  from  lli-: 
covenant  of  works,  sometimes  possesses  the  soul,  and  urgeth  her  lu 
do  this  or  tiiat,  as  a  command  of  God,  as  if  every  misdeed  subjected 
lier  to  the  curse.  Yea,  this  renders  the  soul  so  scrupulous  and  anx- 
ious, that  she  sometimes  looks  upon  certain  actions  to  be  sinful 
which. a  Christian  may  perform  freely,  (d)  This  is  still  more  evident 
because  men  sometimes  pursue  holiness,  in  order  to  seek  and  find 
rest  for  rhcir  souls.     'J'hey  have   made  a  breach  in  their  spirits  h\ 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAt.  Q.  62—64.  505 

3in,  this  they  will  heal,  what  do  they  do  ?  embrace  the  righteousness 
and  atoning  blood  of  Christ,  in  order  to- pacify  their  minds  ?  no,  they 
will  bewail  it,  and  reform,  and  thus  their  work,  and  not  Christ  will 
afford  them  rest.  Further,  (e)  Men  dare  not  embrace  the  proflered 
and  promised  grace^  and  Christ,  because  they  are  not  so  contrite  as 
they  imagine  beside  the  word  of  God  that  they  ought  to  be.  And 
thus  they  attend  to  the^r  ovv-n  doings,  and  not  to  the  perfect  righ- 
teousness of  Christ,  and  they  do  not  surrender  themselves  to  him,  as 
altogether  wretched,  and  stek  his  favour  only.  It  appears  also,  (f) 
because  they  sometimes  become  impatient,  when  they  do  not  obtain 
their  desire,  after  great  earnestntss:  what  doth  this  denote  but 
that  they  imagine,  that  their  earnestness  obliges  God  to  be  favoura- 
ble to  them. 

But  God  doth  hot  approve  of  all  this  selftormenting,  it  dishonours 
Jesus,  it  keeps  the  soul  from  her  rest,  and  confounds  the  grace  and 
i*ighteousness  of  Gud  and  Christ  with  our  unclean  andftlthy  works  : 
"  If  it  be  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works  :  otherwise  grace  is 
no  more  grace  :  but  if  it  be  of  works,  then  is  it  no  more  grace  : 
otherwise  work  is  no  more  work;"  thus  speaks  Paul,  Rom.  xi.  6- 
A  Christian  must  part  v/ith  all  that  is  his  own,  he  must  count  it  ioss- 
and  dung,  that  he  may  be  found  wholly  in  Christ :  he  must  be  strip- 
ped, naked  and  bare,  as  one  who  is  dead,  and  he  must  surrender  all 
that  is  his  own  as  one  wha  is  become  a  bankrupt,  that  he  may  be 
completely  clothed  and  enriched  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
only.  All  that  he  hath  in  himself  is  but  rags  and  tatters,  it  can  nei- 
ther- clothe  nor  feed  him. 

Shall  a  Christian  then,  as  if  he  were  not  obliged  to  any  duty,  sit 
still,  and  be  careless,  and  think  now  I  have  nothing  to  do,  Christ  hath 
done  all  for  me  ?  No,  this  is  impossible  :  his  looking  off  from  his 
own  righteousness  doth  not  teach  him  thic.  Justification  by  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  alone  through  faith  obligeth  him  to  prize 
this  truth,  to  thank  the  Lord  for  it,  to  conduct  himself  humbly  and 
worthily  of  this  truth  by  a  dilligent  pursuit  of  holiness,  which  we 
have  urged  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day.  But  we  must  see  that 
we  pursue  sanctification,  as  those  who  are  implanted  into  Christ,  and 
therefore, 

la  As  justified  persons  in  him  by  faith  :  for  how  can  sanclification 
be  acceptable  to  God,  as  long  as  he  hath  aught  against  the  soul  on 
account  of  her  guilt,  by  which  the  Father  is  justly  incensed  against 
her?  How  can  she  draw  near  him  boldly  with  her  sacrifice  of 
thanksgiving,  except  she  be  delivered  from  doubts,  and  able  to  ac- 
Quit  herself ?  We  njust  "draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  and  a  full 
^  3  U 
506    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENDED. 

assurance  of  faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con 
science,  and  our  bodies  vvsshed  v/ith  pure  water,"  Heb.  x.  22.  It 
behooves  you  therefore,  believers,  to  labour  first  and  mostly  for  jus- 
tification, in  Older  to  pursue  sanctiPication  therefrom.  Endeavour 
then  to  obtan  an  assurance,  that  ye  have  been  already  justified  be- 
fore God,  as  sinners,  and  have  thus  a  right  to  request  sanctification 
on  account  of  the  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus:  for  since  he  is  made 
righteousness  to  you,  he  is  also  made  sanctification  to  you,"  as  Paul 
saith,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Labour  then,  after  any  misbehaviour  in  future? 
not  first  and  mostly  to  amend  your  conduct,  but  to  be  justified  and 
reconciled  to  the  Father,  and  to  make  your  peace  with  him  by  ac- 
cepting your  Surety,  and  pleading  on  your  title  to  him  before  the 
throne,  that  ye  may  pursue  sanctification  from  such  a  justified,  paci- 
fied and  reconciled  mind,  and  thus  begin  your  former  holy  conversa- 
tion anew. 

2.  Pursue  sanctificanon  by  all  means  from,  and  in  union  with 
Christ :  "  Your  life  must  be  hidden  with  Clirist  in  God,"  accordinp- 
toColl.  iii-3  Believers  being  implanted  into  Christ,  bring  fortl 
fruits  of  thankfulness  :  "  Having  been  planted  together  with  him  in 
the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  must  also  be  so  in  the  likeness  of  his 
resurrection,"  as  the  apostle  requireth,  Rom.  vi.  5,  "  Our  good  con- 
versation is  in  Christ,"  as  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  iii.  6.  It  must  neces- 
sarily be  bitier  fruit  that  grows  upon  a  wild  tree,  but  the  fruit  of  ?a 
grafted  tree  is  pleasant.  No  action  can  be  agreeable  to  God  but 
that  Vv'hich  is  performed  in,  and  from  the  union  of  the  soul  with 
Chrst:  "  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  to  the  praise  and  glory  of 
God  "  only  "  through  Jesus  Christ,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Philip  i.  11. 
Hear  also  v»'hat  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  ii.  5.  "  Spiritual  sacrifices  are 
acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  Ye  must  therefore  not 
reckon  it  enough  that  ye  have  been  implanted*  into  Christ  by  faith, 
but  ye  must  also  abide  in  and  near  him  continually,  and  opera- 
lively. 

3.  Strive  to  do  all  your  works  by  his  Spirit,  influence,  virtue  and 
power,  as  the  graft  bears  no  fruit,  unless  it  derive  its  sap  from  the 
tree.  As  lonp-  as  we  exert,  fatigue  and  afflict  ourselves  without  the 
Spirit,  in  order  to  do  our  duty,  we  will  never  perform  aught  that  is 
acceptable  to  God  :  «'  Xot  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  m.y  Spir- 
it, siiiih  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  Zech.  iv.  6.  We  have  shown  on  the 
eighth  and  ninth  question  how  often  the  soul  labours  In  her  own  and 
not  in  Christ's  strength,  and  thus  mars  her  work.  If  ths  soul 
shall  labour  'ightly,  she  must  abide  near  and  by  her  stock  Jesus, 
bucking  incessantly  through  the  pipes  and  conduits  of  the  prom.iscs 


—64.  oor 

from  his  fulness,  grace  for  grace.  Therefore  the  Saviour  saith  to 
yon,  John  xv.  4,  5,  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch 
cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the -vine,  no  more  can  yc 
except  ye  abide  in  me.  He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the 
r>ame  bringetb  forth  much  fruit ;  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing.*' 

4.  Look  nevertheless  at  the  reward,  in  order  to  encourage  and  an- 
imate you  in  your  work.  The  Lord  offers  a  crown  at  the  end  of 
your  race,  to  urge  and  induce  you  to  strive  for  it,  namely,  an  incor- 
ruptible and  undefiled  inheritance,  which  fadeth  not  away.  When 
"  the  prophet  A5,ariah  said  to  king  Asa,  and  to  all  Judah  and  Benja- 
min, Be  strong,  and  let  not  your  hands  be  weak ;  for  your  work 
shall  be  rewarded  :  Asa  encouraged  himself  with  all  the  people" 
to  effect  a  great  reformation  and  amendment  among  themselves, 
2  Chron.  xvi.  Moses  having  respect  to  the  recompence  of  the  re- 
ward, esteemed  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treas- 
ure in  Egypt,"  Heb.  xi.  26.  The  Lord  is  in  himself  worthy  of  your 
universal  obedience,  faith,  love,  fear  and  service  ;  he  hath  also  de= 
served  all  this  at  your  hands ;  yea,  believers,  ye  are  yourselves 
earnestly  desirous  to  please  him,  and  pleasing  him  is  a  sufficient  re- 
v/ard  for  you.  The  Lord  will  nevertheless  be  abundantly  good  to 
you,  since  he  will  excite  you  by  a  reward.  Improve  this  therefore 
by  stirrmg  yourselves  up  thereby  to  greater  activity  in  your  way. 
Look  not  however  on  the  rewaid,  as  an  equivalent  compensation  of 
your  work,  but  have  respect  to  it,  as  the  fruit  of  the  righteousness 
of  Christ,  which  was  purchased  for  you  by  him,  that  it  should  be 
given  to  you  upon  your  work  ;  for  *' eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God 
through  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  vi.  23. 

Do  ye  lament  that  your  v/ork  is  so  imperfect,  it  doth  not  please 
the  Lord  yet  to  render  you  perfect,  that  ye  may  seek  your  perfec- 
tion in  the  righteousness  of  his  Son.  How  good  is  it  therefore,  that 
it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  seek  your  righteousness  in  your  works, 
but  in  him,  who  hath  obtained  a  perfect  righteousness  for  you,  ^'  thai 
the  rigiiteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  you, '  according  to 
Rom.  viii.  3,  4.  Do  others  scofF  at  you,  on  account  of  your  zeal, 
ivhy  should  ye  regard  what  the  despicable  slaves,  the  Ilagarenes  and 
Ishmaelitcs  do  ?  Look  upon  it  to  be  of  greater  importance  what  your 
Saviour  sailh.  Matt.  v.  11,  12.  "Blessed  arc  ye,  when  men  shall 
revile  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for 
my  sake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceedingly  glad,  for  great  i»  your  reward 
in  heaven  ;  fo-  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  which  were  before 
you."  Say  not  with  Asaph,  Psalm  Ixxiii.  13,  14.  "Verily  I  have 
cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washedjmy  hands  in  innocency  ;  for 


508    THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  DEFENtiEl^. 

till  the  day  long  have  I  been  plagued,  and  chastened  every  morn^ 
ing."  For  would  ye,  though  ye  should  suffer  ever  so  much,  ex- 
change your  condition  with  an  ungodly  person,  who  enjoys  the  great- 
est property  ?  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  condition  of  the 
ungodly  was  better  in  this  life  than  that  of  the  godly,  will  not  their 
comforts  end  with  their  lives,  and  will  not  their  sorrows  begin  then? 
But  how  will  it  be  then  with  you  ?  Peter  informs  you;  1  Peter  v.  4. 
"  When  the  chief  shepherd  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  receive  a 
crown  of  glory,  that  fadeth  not  away."  Amen» 


END  OP  THE  FIRST  VOLVMM. 
DATE  DUE                          i 

hr 

^ 

•*¥'^»'W*ini«,n,  „n.  ,™.- 

•*» 

^T****'^'*''***^ 
GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

■i»^.~ 


'gl 


I*'  ^ 




n 


Z- 


,- 

LIBRAEY 

OF   THE 

Theological    Seminar 

PRINCETON,    N.  J. 

Case,     \U.C< „V».:....EN¥j8lon 

If,  J  A  l&D Section.. 


UAk5 

look, Vi f^Ll^. 


& »  1 


•a 


. 


i  \ 


Xss*£ 


U  /£&/      THE  CHRISxiAN 

ENTIRELY  THE  PROPERTY  OF  CHRIST,  IN  LIFE 

AND  DEATH: 

EXHIBITED  IN  FIFTY-THREE 


SERMONS 


ON  THE 


HEIDELBERGH  CATECHISM. 


WHEREIN  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  FAITH,  RECEIVED  IN  THE  RE- 
FORMED CHURCH,  IS  DEFENDED  AGAINST  THE  PRINCIPAL 
OPPONENTS,  A>D  THE  PRACTICAL  IMPROVEMENT  AND  DI= 
RECTION    OF    IT    TO    EVANGELICAL    PIETY,    ENFORCED. 


By  the  Rev.  JOHN  VANDERKEMP, 

Late  Minister  of  the  Gosfiel,  in  the  Church  of  Dirksiand,  Holland* 

VRANSLA'fi'D    FROM    THE    DUtCH 

By   the  Rev.  JOHN  M.  VAN  HARLINGEN, 
VOL.  II. 


NEW-BRUNSWICK,  N.  J. 

PRINTED  EY  ABRAHAM  BLAUVELT. 

1810o 


(-3  ) 


THE 


WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION 


3F 


XXV,  LORD'S  DAY. 


Rom.  iv.  11.    He  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith. 

o 

Q.  65,  Sines  then  ive  are  made  partakers  of  Christ  and  all  his  bene- 
fits by  faith  only,  whence  doth  this  faith  proceed  ? 

A.  From  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  works  faith  in  our  hearts  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  confirms  it  by  the  use  of  the  sacia- 
ments.