Q.  66.    V/hat  are  the  sacraments? 

A.  The  sacraments  are  holy  visible  signs  and  seals,  appointed  of 
God  for  this  end,  that  by  the  use  thereof  he  may  the  more  fully  de- 
clare and  seal  to  us  the  promise  of  the  gospel ;  to  wit,  that  he  grants 
us  freely  the  remission  of  sins,  and  life  eternal,  for  the  sake  of  that 
one  sacrifice  qI  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross. 

Q-  67.  Are  both  word  and  sacraments  then  ordained  and  appointed 
for  this  end,   that  they  may  direct  our  faith  to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ  on  the  cros3,  as  the  ground  of  our  salvation,, 
A.  Yes  indeed  j  for  the  Holy  Ghost  teaches  us  in  the  gospel,  and 


4    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAI  rH. 

assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  whole  of  cur  salvation  de- 
pends upon  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  he  offered  for  us  on 
the  cross. 

Q.  68.  How  many  sacraments  hath  Chr'st  instituted  in  the  new  cove* 
nant  or  testament  ? 

A.   Two,  namely,  holy  baptism,  and  the  holy  supper. 


ANT  order  to, know  the  value  and  excellence  of  any  curidiis  work, 
we  must  not  only  attend  to  its  pioper  form,  but  must  also  inquire 
concerning  the  workman  of  it ;  lor  a  reputable  workman  renders  his 
work  reputable,  since  we  cannot  look  upon  that,  winch  hath  been 
made  by  a  great  artificer,  to  be  a  bungling  work;  therefore  great 
workmasters  will  usually  stamp  their  mark  on  their  work,  that  they 
may  render  it  the  more  reputable.  The  heathens  seeing  the  shining 
heaven,  and  the  well  adorned  earth,  with  their  various  forms,  were 
urged  of  their  own  accord  to  inquire  after  the  great  \\  01  kmasler  of 
the  universe,  winch  beamed  so  in  their  eyes,  "if  haply  they  might 
feel  after  htm  and  find  him,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  to  the  Athenians, 
Acts  xxvh.  27-.  Neither  w.re  their  endeavours  altogether  in  vain  : 
as  the  great  Worker  had  stamped  the  mark  of  u  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead"  on  his  work,  '"they  understood  and  saw  clearly  his 
invisible  things,"  according  to  Rom.  i.  20  Paul,  desirous  of  dis- 
playing the  excellence  of  the  third  heaven,  leads  us  up  to  "  God,  the 
Maker  and  Builder  of  it,"  Heb.  xi.  16.  What  renders  all  the  bene- 
fits of  the  covenant  of  grace  glorious  ?  is  it  not  that  the  blessed  and 
only  Potentate,  the  King  ot  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  is  the  author  of 
them  ?  This  caused  Paul,  when  he  considered  all  those  graces,  to 
end,  rest,  and  lose  himself  in  the  Lord,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  cry 
nut  "  Of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him  are  all  things,"  Rom. 
xi.  36.  Is  it  not  thus  also  with  the  faith  of  Christians  ?  must  we 
not  inquire  concerning  the  Author  of  it,  in  order  to  know  the  value 
of  it  ?  Verily  the  great  apost  e  of  the  Gentiles  shows  us  the  worthi- 
ness cf  faith  from  the  Author  of  it,  when  he  teacheth  that  faith  and 
all  the  graces  which  accompany  it,  "are  things  that  are  given  to  ur. 
of  God,  '  1  Cor.  ii.  12.  Tne  instructor  doth  not  pursue  a  different 
method  ;  for  having  exhibited  precious  faith  with  respect  to  the  great 
necessity,  operative  nature,  comprehensive  object  and  glorious  ad- 
vantage of  it,  to  wit,  "  that  it  renders  us  partakers  of  Christ  and  all 
his  benefits,"  he  inquires  also  concerning  the  author  of  it,  that  he 
may  magnify  the  value  of  it  to  the  utmost,  asking  in  the  sixty  fifth 
question,  "  whence  doth  this  faith  proceed/'  and  teaching  us  that  the 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—63.  5 

great   Author  of  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  works  and   confims  it. 
Two  general  heads  are  exhibited   for   our  consideration   in  thil 
Lord's  day. 

I.  How  faith  is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 

II.  How  it  is  confirmed  by  him. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  general  head,  the  instructor  saith,  (a} 
that  faith  proceeds  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  (b)  that  the  mean  by  which 
it  is  wrought  is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  (c)  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  works  it  thereby  in  our  hearts. 

Faith  proceeds  indeed  from  God  the  Father,  "being  the  gift  of 
God,"  Eph.  ii.  8.  There  foie  the  Saviour  saith,  John  vi.  44,  "No 
man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me,  draw 
him."  It  is  aiso  the  work  of  the  son,  to  whom,  "the  apostles  pray- 
ed for  an  increase  of  faith,"  Luke  vii.  5.  And  it  is  also  ascribed  to 
the  Holy  Ghost,  for  he  is  «  the  Spirit  of  faith,*1  2  Cor.  iv.  IS.  We 
see  this  likewise,  1  Cor.  xii.  3,  9.  Gal.  v.  22.  The  outward  works 
are  indeed  common  to  the  three  Persons,  but  so  that  the  Father 
works  through  the  Son,  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  that,  ac- 
cording to  the  distribution  of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine 
Persons,  creation  is  ascribed  to  the  Father)  redemption  to  the  Son, 
and  sanctincation  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Fattier  foreordained  all 
grace  for  the  elect,  the  Son  purchased  it,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ap- 
plies and  dispenseth  it  to  the  favourites  of  Cod.  As  faith  is  the 
first  grace  which  is  communicated  and  applied,  therefore  faith  is  at- 
tributed to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Although  the  Holy  Ghost  alone  works  faith,  he  cloth  not  neverthe- 
less woik  it  immediately,  as  enthusiasts  fancy,  but  by  reasonable 
metns,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in  a  reasonable  manner  with  rea- 
sonable men.  The  mean  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses,  is  not  the 
light  of  nature,  either  innate,  or  acquired  by  a  contemplation  of  the 
creatures,  as  the  Socinians  persuade  themselves  ;  for  that  light  can 
indeed  discover  to  us  "  Cod's  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  that  we 
may  be  without  excuse,"  P.om  i.  20,  but  it  cannct  reveal  Christ  to 
us,  nor  lead  us  up  to  him.  For  the  Gentiles,  who  had  no  more 
than  this  natural  light,  "  were  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  com- 
monwealth of  Israel,  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having 
no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  wo  Id,"  Iph.  ii  12.  The  Hoiy 
Ghost  makes  use  of  the  word  only  as  a  mean  to  work  faith  :  it  is  in- 
deed true,  that  a  person  may  be  brought  to  faith  by  reading  the 
word,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  makes  use  of  the  preaching  of  the  word: 
"  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  saith  Paul,  Pom.  x.  17.  "  The  Holy 
Ghost  fell  on  all  them  who  heard  the  word  "  in  the  house  of  Corner 


6    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lius,  Acts  x.  44.     When  the  Holy  Ghost  would  work  faith    in   the 
Ethiopian,  he  did  not  only  direct  him  to  read  the  word,  but   he  also 
ordered  it  to  be  preached  to  him  by  Philip,   Acts  xiii.  28 — 42.     Al- 
though the  Lord  could  work  faith  by  himself  without  the  instrumen- 
tality of  men,  it  nevertheless  pleaseth  him  to  "save  them    who   be- 
lieve b>?  the  foolishness  of  preaching,"    1    Cor.  i.  22.      When   the 
Lord  Jesus  would  bring  Paul  to  the    faith,  he  called  to  him  indeed 
out  of  heaven,  and  smote  him  to  the  ground,  so  that  Paul,  who   was 
yet  called  Saul,  asked,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?"    Yet 
he  doth  not  instruct  him  in  the  faith  himself,  but  saith,  u  Arise,  and 
go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  be  told   thee  what  thou  must  do  ;"  and 
he  sends  Ananias   to  him,  who  preaches  the  word  to  him.  Acts  ix. 
3 — 18.     The  Holy  Ghost  could  have  wrought  faith  in  the  Ethiopian 
immediately  ;  but  he  would  do  it  by  Philip,  Acts  viii.  2S — 40.     We 
might  think  that  the  angels  were  better  qualified  to  bring  men   to 
the  faith  by  the  word  ;  but  the  admirable  wisdom  and  goodness   of 
God,  would  rather,  for  many  reasons,  which  we    shall  not    mention 
at  present,  do  this  '•  by   men,  who  have   infirmity,"   as    "  the  law  " 
also  formerly   "  made  such  high  priests,"  Heb.  vii-   28.       God  sent 
an  angel  indeed  to  Cornelius   the  centurion,  yet  npt  to   preach  the 
word  to  him,  but  to  direct  him  to  Peter,  "  who  should  tell  him  what 
he  ought  to  do,  and  of  whom  he  should  hear  the  words  of  salvation," 
Acts  x-  1— -48.     For  God  alone  will  have  the  honour,  and    will    ex- 
ah  his  grace    so  much  the  more,  as  the   instrument,    by   which    he 
conveys  it  to  the  sinner,  is   ignoble,  unworthy  and  unqualified  in    it- 
self.    Therefore  Paul  saith,  "•  We  have  this  treasure  in   earthern 
vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and  not  of 
us,"  2  Cor.  iv.  7.     But  it  is  not  the   word  of  the  law  by  which  faith 
is  wrought ;  that  can  indeed  discover  a  man's  sins  to  him,  and  con- 
demn him  ;  but  the  law  doth  not   discover  the  way  of  faith  to   him. 
The  Holy  Ghost  make  use  indeed  of  the  law  to  convince  man  of  his 
forlorn  condition,  John  xvi.  8,  but  the  gospel    is    the  only  capable 
mean  of  working  faith  ;  therefore  Paul  asked  the  Galatians  "  Receiv- 
ed ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  bearing  of  faitli  ?" 
Gal.  iii.   2.     "  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation,"  Rom. 
i.  16,  and  <;  the  ministration  of  th*»  Spirit,"  2  Cor.  iii.  8.     The  ob- 
ject of  faith,  God  in  Christ,  is  depicted  in  the  gospel  in  all  its  lustre, 
and  in  the   fairest  colours,  that  the  sinner  may  be  enamoured  of  it, 
and  allured  by  it  to  embrace  it  in  faith  ;    it  is  therefore   called  "the 
gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  by  which  God  shines  into  the  heart, 
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glery  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Mis  Christ."  See  2  Cor.  iv.  4,  6.    Gal.  iii,  1.     Yea,  the  gospel  is 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68, 

the  voice  of  the  Lord,  whereby  he  invites  and  calls  sinners  to  turn  to 
him  in  faith,  and  to  be  saved,  and  by  which  all  desirable  grace   is 
made  known  and  offered  to  them,  that  they    may    appropriate  that 
grace  to  themselves  by  faith.     See   Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Luke  ii.  10,  11. 
"  The  Holy  Ghost  works  faith  in  our  hearts  by  this  gospel,"  saith 
the  instructor.     But  how  ?     It  is  certain  that   "faith  is  the   syift  of 
God,  and  that  it  is  given  of  grace  to  believe  in  Christ,"  according  to 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  Eph.  ii.  8.    Phil.  i.  29.  But  it  is  not  so  evi- 
dent to  all  what  this  grace  is,  and  how  the   Holy  Ghost  works  faith 
in  our  hearts  thereby.     The  orthodox  say,  according  to  the  word  of 
God,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  infuseth  faith  operatively  and  effectually, 
by  an  almighty  and  irresistible  power,  into  the  heart,  by  which  it  be- 
lieves and  is  converted  :  but  the  ancient  Pelagians,  whose  opinion  , 
condemned  of  old,  hath  been  again  fetched  up  from  the  pit  of  hell  by 
the  Socinians,  said  that  the  work  of  God  in  this  matter  was  only  au 
outward  work,  consisting  merely  in  creating  man  a  rational  creature, 
endued  with  a  freewill,  by  which  he  is  able  of  himself  to   believe, 
and  that  no  inward  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  at  all  necessary,  in  or- 
der that  he  might  believe.     This  was  considered  by  the  Semipelagi- 
ans,  as  too  harsh  :  they  thought  that  we  ought  to  ascribe  something 
to  grace,  as  well  as  to  nature  :    grace  and   freewill,   work  together, 
grace  assists  our  will,  and  our  will  assists  grace,  they   resemble   two 
horses,  which  draw  one  carriage.    This  opinion  hath  often  been  con- 
demned by  the  church,  according  to  the  word  of  God,   but    it    hath 
been  again  revived  by  the  Remonstrants,  who  have  also  endeavoured 
to  force  it  upon  the  church.  In  order  to  conceal  themselves  under  spe- 
cious pretences,  they  spoke  at  first  very  highly  of  grace,   yea,    said 
that  man  couhl  not  believe  of  himself  but  only   by  grace  ;  but   when 
they  were  examined  more  strictly,  and  urged   to  declare   what  this 
working  grace  was,  they  showed  that  they  understood    nothing   else 
by  it  but  the  light  of  nature,  and  the  remains  of  the  divine  image  in 
man,  and  also  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  hath  an  inward  op- 
erative power;  whereby  the  understanding  is  enlightened,  and  which 
knocks  at  the  door  of  the  heart,  and  persuades  the  will   in   a    mora! 
manner  to  believe  ;  the  whole  power  of  the  grace  of  God  will  consist 
then  herein,  that  man  is  able  to  believe  ;  but  that  he  actually  believes 
proceeds  from  the  natutal  power  of  freewill :  they  will  not  allow  that 
God  the  Lord  works  and  infuses  faith  into  the  hearts  of  men  effectu- 
ally and  irresistibly,  and  thus  overcomes  and  destroys  the   resistance 
of  the  sinful  will,  and  renders  the  unwilling  sinner  willing. 

We  see  therefore  that  they  join  and  blend  in   a  shameful  manner, 
••he  grace  of  God  and  th<3  powers  of  roan,  call  nature  grace,  and  grace 


B     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRM  a  I  ION  OF  FAITH. 

nature,  leive  nothing  for  the  IL.ly  Spirit  to  do,  in  order  to  work  faith 
internally  in  the  heart  ;  ail  their  fair  speeches  concerning  grace  arc 
only  a  great  outcry  about  nothing :  and  when  the  scripture  saith 
that  faith  is  the  gift  of  Go:i,  given  of  grace,  they  will  utter  word; 
Without  a  meaning.  But  the  vvord  of  God,  which  we  revere,  speakc 
of  an  eilectually  working  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  produceth 
faith  in  the  hearts  of  the  tleet  effectually,  when  it  saith  ihat  God 
eniighteneth  the  understanding,  as  he  enlightened  the  worid  in  the 
first  creation  :  "  For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of 
darkness,  hath  sbined  in  ur  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,'!  2  Cor.  iv.  6. 
The  Lord  renders  the  unwilling  will  willing,  giving  anothet  heart 
and  another  spirit,  as  he  promisetb,  Esck.  xxxvi.  26.  "  A  new  heart 
will  1  give  you,  and  i  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your 
ft -.sh,  and  1  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh/'  And  thus  he  works,  as 
Paul  salt. i,  Eph.  i.  19,  20,  "with  the  exceeding  greatness  of  hie 
power  in  us  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty- 
power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the 
dead."  What  is  the  working  of  faith,  but  a  new  birth,  a  creation, 
and  a  raising  from  the  dead  ?  Verily  the  word  of  God  calls  it  so, 
Titus  iii.  5.  Eph.  ii  5 — 10.  But  is  not  a  person  bon\  created  and 
raised  from  the  dead  effectually  and  irresi  tably  ?  What  should  a 
sinner  indeed  go  by  his  free-will  to  effect  faith  in  himself?  is  he  not 
a  slave,  a  servant  of  sin,  and  entir  ly  impotent  ?  We  have  shown  this 
upon  the  eighth   aid  ninth  questions. 

"  Did  the  Jews  resist  the  Holy  Spirit  ?"  Acts  vii.  51,  it  was  not 
the  Spirit  of  faith,  working  faith  in  their  hearts,  but  the  Spirit  who 
wrought  in  Stephen,  and  enabled  him  to  speak  with  power,  whom 
they  resisted,  as  the  fathers  of  the  Jews  had  resisted  the  prophets, 
according  to  ?rs.  52.  Let  us  admit  that  Miey  resisted  the  Spirit,  who 
Wrought  in  their  hearts,  they  neve  theless  did  no'  resist  the  Spirit, 
who  wrought  in  them,  that  they  might  believe,  but  who  wrought  in 
*.I:em  that  he  might  convince  and  condemn  them,  as  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  strove  with  t.ve  inhabitants  of  the  old  world,  Gen.  vi.  3. 

They  discover  their  ignorance  concerning  the  working  of  the  Hoiy 
Ghost  in  effecting  faith,  when  they  say,  that  the  will  doth  not  then 
continue  free,  but  suffers  compulsion  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in 
man  agreeably  to  his  rational  nature,  enabling  him  to  behold  his 
misery,  and  the  beauty  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  which,  being  sweetly 
drawn,  he  run  .  after  the  I  ord,  and  even  cries  to  him,  "  Turn  me, 
and  I  shall  be  turned,"  as  the  church  doth,  Jer.  xxxi.  18.  Lam- 
v„  2 1 . 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  9 

We  will  consider  this  somewhat  more  particularly.     The  Holy 
Ghost  works  faith  in  all  the  elect  indeed  effectually,  nevertheless  in 
a  different  manner  and  order  in  different  persons.     In  some  by  a 
judicious  contemplation  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  bv  which  a  new 
light  ariseth  in  them,  whereby  they  contemplate  it  with  singleness, 
so  that  their  minds  are  captivated  by  it,  and  rendered  willing  to  em- 
brace it  as  an  acceptable   truth,   and  also  the  Mediator  exhibited 
therein,  and  to  surrender  themselves  unto   him.     So  it  fared  with 
Lydia,  Acts  x\\.  14.     "  Whose  heart  the  Lovd  opened,  that  she  at- 
tended to  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul."    They  hear  Jesus 
say  to  them,  "  Follow  me,"  and  they  experience  a  sweet,  but  power- 
ful drawing,  that  induces  them  to  follow  willingly,   which  was  the 
case  of  Matthew,  according  to  his  own  account,  Matt.  ix.  9.     This 
is  effected  with  great  tranquility  :  but  Jesus  embraceth  and  over- 
whelms others  in  an  exceedingly  unexpected  manner  with   his  pre- 
venting love,  which  transports  their  souls  as  it  were  out  of  them- 
selves, and  fills  them  with  so  much  joy,  that  they  cannot  contain 
themselves,  but  are  constrained  to  receive  him  within  themselves,  to 
accept  of  him,  and  to  surrender  themselves  wholly  to  him.     In  this 
manner  was  faith  wrought  in  Zaccheus  ;  for  when  Jesus  said  to  him, 
¥  Make    haste,   and  come   down  ;  for  to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
house,"  he  made  haste,  and  came  down,  and  received  him  joyfully  :" 
and  his  faith  became  forthwith  active  in  works  of  chanty,  Luke  xix. 
1 — 9.    There  are  others  in  whose  hearts  faith  is  wrought  from  their 
youth,  as  we  may  see  in  Obadiah,  the  steward  of  Ahab,   1  Kings 
xviii.  18,  in  John  the  Baptist,  and  others  :  all  these  obtain  faith  with- 
out any  remarkable  conviction  of  their  sins,  and  of  their  damnable 
condition  :  children  certainly  are  not   convinced  of  sin,   but  faith  is 
infused  into  them,  before  they  attain  to  the  use  of  reason :  but  those 
who  are  persuaded  by  a  calm  contemplation  of  the  truth,  o»-  by  the 
power  of  the  love  of  Christ,   see  indeed  that  they  are  miserable  in 
themselves,   but  they  are  not  long  exercised   in  this  manner ;  for 
their  view  of  their  misery  is  presently  swallowed  up  ;  but  they  are 
afterwards  led  so  much  the  more  into  the  valley  of  humiliation,  and 
are  daily  convinced  of  their  sinfulness  and  of  their  punishableness, 
in  order  to  humble  them. 

The  Holy  Ghost  doth  not  observe  this  manner  and  order  of  work- 
ing faith  with  all  the  elect ;  but  his  ordinary  method  with  the  most 
of  them  is  to  convince  them  of  their  sinful  and  damnable  condition ; 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  uconvinceth  of  sin,"  John  xvi.  8.  He  darts  his 
light  into  the  soul,  by  which  she  is  stopped  short  in  her  sinful  career, 
is  induced  to  attend  to  herself,  and  sees  her  abominable  state,  and 
Vol.  h.  B 


io    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

her  alienation  from  God  and  from  his  blessed  favour  ;  this  confounds 
and  afflicts  her,  and   "  she   saith,   What  have  I  done,"  Jer.  viii.  6. 
She  thinks,  what  shall  I  do  :  she  will  reform,  and  will  not  sin  so  any 
more  :  she  earnestly  endeavours  to  foisake  sin,  and  attends  diligently 
on  many  ordinances:  but  the  Holy  ^.p.rit   discovfeseth   to  her  again 
and  again  the  sinfulness  of  her  conduct,  by  which    she  becomes  so 
distressed,  that  she   cries  out,    '  There  is  no  hope,"  Isaiah  lvii.  10. 
As  she   is  not  willing  to  perish,  she  reads  the  scripture,  seeks  good 
books,   and  asks  an   understanding  person  or  preacher,  "  What  she 
must  do  :"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.    She  is  advised  to  believe  in  Christ: 
b  t  she  hath  such  an  obscure  knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  faith,  that 
she  knows  not  how  to  conduct  with  respect  to  this  matter,  until  the 
Holy  Ghost  discovers  to   her  by  his  own  light  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his 
fulness   and  ability  to  save  her  perfectly,   2  Cor.  iv.  6.     '1  bis  gives 
her  some   hope,  and  quickens  her  desire,  but  doth  not  afford  her  a 
perfect  relief,  because   she  knows  not  yet  whether  he  will  save  her, 
since  she  is  so  vile.    She  now  betakes  herself  to  prayer,  that  he  may 
behold  her  in  his  kindness  ;  but  the  poor  wavering  soul  doth  not  find 
that  he  turns  to  her.  The  Holy  Ghost,  designing  to  work  effectually, 
assures  and    persuades   her  that  Jesus   calls  and   invites  her  in  his 
word,  and    he  convinces  her  of  the  truth  of  it,  "  the  Spirit  bearing 
witness,    that  the   Spirit   is  the  truth,"    1  John  v.  6.     And  he  thus 
works  an  historical  faith,  by  which  the  soul  experienced),  that  u  the 
gospel  doth  not  come  to  her  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance,"  1  Thess.  i.  5.  And  there- 
fore it  is  not  to  her,  "  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  the  word  of  God, 
which  also  worketh  in  her,"  1  Thess.  ii.    13.     This  affords  her  en- 
largement,  she  flees,  with  a  certain   confidence  that  she  will  be  ac- 
cept d,   to  this   Saviour,   who  is   so  precious  to  her,  embraces  him, 
and  receives  him  :  for  the   Holy  Ghost   inclines   her  effectually  to 
consent  to  him  heartily,  and  with  a  full  determination  of  her  will,  in 
order  to  belong  wholly  to  him,  that  he  may  sanctify  and  save  her. 
And  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  her  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant, 
according  to  his  promise,  l:z  k.  xx.  37. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  is  this  a  forcing  of  the  free-will,  which 
cannot  be  forced,  if  it  shall  remain  a  will  ?  Yes,  it  is  a  force  that  is 
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  the  will,  which  can  endure  such  a  force. 
O  sweet  force  of  love,  which  draws  the  soul  with  the  cords  of  a  man, 
with  bands  of  love,  Hosea  xi.  4.  As  soon  as  she  is  touched,  she 
cries  out,  "  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee,"  Song  i.  4.  "  Turn 
me,  and  I  shall  be  turned,"  Jer.  xxxi.  28.  Nothing  is  more  grievous 
to  her,  than  to  find  such  a  depraved  unwillingness   in  herself:  she 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  11 

wishes  that  "  the  Lord  would  work  in  her  both  to  will  and  to  do  of 
his  good  pleasure-,"  Philip,  ii.  13.  Thus  then  the  effectual  working 
of  God  to  produce  faith  in  her  doth  not  militate  against  her  will. 

II.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  works  faith,  so  he  also  confirms  it.  It  doth 
not  please  him  to  work,  faith  from  the  beginning  in  its  greatest  per- 
fection, but  rather  to  make  it  like  "  a  strain  of  mustard  seed,  a  bruised 
reed,  and  smoking  flax,"  he  doth  not  however  leave  it  so  small  and 
weak,  but  he  increases  and  confirms  it,  and  causes  it  to  "■  grow  ex- 
ceedingly," 2  Thess.  i.  3.  In  order  to  illustrate  this,  we  will  explain, 
1.  What  a  strong  and  a  weak  faith  is,  2.  How  the  Holy  Ghost  con- 
firms faith,  3.  What  means  the   Holy  Ghost  Useth  to  confirm  faith. 

1.  Faith  is  strong,  (.»)  w.:en  it  is  able  to  believe  and  expect  great, 
yea,  almost  incredible  things.     Abraham,  though   he   and  his  wife 
were  both  old,  durst  nevertheless  "believe   that  his  sted  should  be 
like  the  stars  for  multitude,"  Gen.  xv.  5,  6.    The  virgin  Mary  show- 
ed her  great  faith,  when  she   believed  that  she  should  bear  the  Son 
of  God,  without  knowing  a  man,    Luke  i.  38—45.     See  also  Matt; 
viii.  8 — 10.     But  a  weak  faith  locks  upon  great  and  unusual  tilings, 
as  impossible  :  Moses  discovered  a  weak  faith,   when  he  smote  the 
rock  twice,  as  though  it  were  impossible,  that  the  dry  and  hard  rock 
should  afford  water,    Numb.   xx.  10,    11,  12.     Faith  is  strong,  (b) 
when  it  can  proceed  upon  the  single  word  of  God,  without  seeing, 
without  signs,  and  without  a  probability,  that  such  an  event  will 
come  to  pass.     "  Abraham,  believed  in  hope  against  hope,  that  he 
should  become  the  father  of  many  nations  ;  according  to  that  which 
was  spoken,  So  shall  thy  seed  be.     And  being  not  weak  in  faith,  he 
considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead,"  &c.  Rom.  iv.   18,  19,  20. 
But  a  weak  faith  will  have  sight,  signs  and  probability,  as  we  see  in 
the  priest  Zacharias,  in  the  Jews  and  in  Thomas,   Luke  i.  18,  19. 
John  iv.  48.   xx.  25 — 29.     It  is  a  strong  faith,  (c)   which  assures 
itself  of  God's  blessed  favour,  as  the  great  faith  of  Paul  did,  2  Tim. 
i.  12.     This  is  «  a  full  assurance  of  faith,"   H?b.  x    22,  but  faith  is 
weak,  when  it  suffers  itself  to  be  shaken,  and  cast  down  by  the  least 
conceit,  or  accident.     Faith  is  strong,  (d)  whtu  it  is  able  to  receive 
Christ  actually  and  operatively,   "  can  cause:  him  to  dwell  in  the 
heart,"  can  lean  on  him  affectionately,  and  can  derive  all  grace  fiora 
him  for  every  need,   and  can  exert  a  holy  violence  on   him,   with 
Jacob,  in  order  to  obtain  a  blessing,   Gen    xxxii.  26      But  faith  is 
weal;,  when  it  can  only  desire,  can  stretch  forth  the  hand,  the  power 
of  the  soul  toward  him,  but  cannot  fetch  him  to  her  ;  there  is,   as  it 
were,  a  weak  breathing  of  the  soul.     Further,  faith   is   strong,  (e) 
when  it  can  despise  great  shame3  losses,  hqnora,  profits,  and  pleas- 


12     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  CF  FAITH. 

ures,  as  far  as  they  would  detach  the  soul  from  her  duty,  that  it  may 
remain  faithful  to  God  only,  with  Moses,  Heb.  xi.  24,  25,  26,.  But 
it  is  weak,  when  it  becomes  slack  in  its  duty,  on  account  of  these 
dutWard  things.  Add  to  this,  that  faith  is  strong,  (f)  when  it  re- 
mains unaffrighted  in  great  dangers,  and  can  shelter  itself  with  the 
Lord,  like  the  faith  of  Moses  and  Da\id,  Psalm  xxvii.  1 — 3.  Ivii.  I. 
Heb.  xi.  27".  But  a  weak  faith  trembles  at  the  least  appearance  of 
danger,  Jer.  xii.  5.  Matt,  viii,  24,  25,  26.  xiv.  29,  30,31.  More- 
over (g)  a  strong  faith  is  able  to  improve  that  which  would  be 
against  it,  and  is  discouraging,  to  its  advantage  and  encouragement. 
This  made  the  faith  of  the  Canaanitish  woman  great,  Matt.  xv.  22— 
28.  B  it  a  weak  faith  will  abuse  that  which  should  encourage,  to 
faint-heartedness.  See  this  weak  faith  in  Manoah,  censured  by  his 
wife,  Judges  xiii.  22,  23*  I  must  add  also,  (h)  that  a  strong  faith 
doth  not  slop  at  its  unworthiness,  but  looks  beyond  it,  yea,  covers  it 
with  the  worthiness  of  the  Lord,  as  the  faith  of  the  centurion  acted, 
Matt.  viii.  8,  9,  10,  while  a  weak  faith  dares  neither  believe,  nor  at- 
tempt any  thing,  on  account  of  its  unworthiness.  Moses  manifested 
repeatedly  the  weakness  of  his  faith,  when  he  endeavoured  to  excuse 
himself,  on  account  of  his  meanness  and  incapacity,  fiom  being  the 
ambassadour  of  the  Lord  to  Pharaoh,  Exod.  iii.  v.  vi.  Finally,  ('< )  a 
strong  faith  looks  thiough  every  temporal  and  visible  object  to  those 
which  are  eternal  and  invisible,  in  order  to  encourage  itself  thereby 
in  its  course,  according  to  2  Cor.  iv,  17,  13.  Heb.  xi.  I.  But  to  a 
weak  faith  future  things  appear  exceedingly  darTcj  and  they  seldom 
affect  the  soul  with  any  abiding   impression. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  works  this  strong  faith  in  the  hearts  of  his 
people,  not  instantaneously,  bnt  progressively,  as  light,  plants  and 
men  increase  gradually.  And  he  doth  this,  (a)  by  shedding  a  greater 
measure  of  light  into  the  soul,  in  consequence  of  which  Christ  a  d 
all  his  mysteiies  are  discovered  to  her  more  fully  than  before,  and 
so  "the  path  of  the  righteous  becomes  like  a  shining  light,  shining 
more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,"  Pro  v.  iv.  18.  This  Paul  de- 
sired for  the  Ephesians,  Eph.  i.  16 — 19.  (b)  By  convincing  and  as- 
suring the  minds  of  believers  more  of  the  divine  truths,  that  they 
may  in  all  that  they  do  establish  themselves  upon  them,  by  which 
they  obtajn  u  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  understanding,"  Coll. 
ii.  2.  This  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  John  testifieth,  1  John 
v.  6.  Moreover,  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  fiith,  (c)  when  he  in- 
creases and  renders  the  habitual  life  of  faith  more  steadfast  in  the 
soul,  wheieby  she  is  enabled  to  exercise  faith  with  greater  dexterity 
and  ease,  and  is  not  so  quickly  shaken,  "  being  rooted  and  built  up 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65— €8.  13 

in  Christ,  established  in  the  faith,  and  abounding  therein,"  Coll.  iu 
7.  This  is  "being  strengthened  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man,  that  Christ  may  dwell  by  faith  in  the  heart,"  l-'ph.  ii.  16, 
17.  The  Holy  Ghost  confirms  faith  also,  fd)  by  an  abundant  and 
reviving  shedding  abroad  of  grace  :  he  speaks  to  the  heart,  and 
affords  a  feeling  sense  of  his  love  :  Hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  be- 
cause the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holv 
Ghost,"  saith  Paul,  Rom  v.  5.  Again,  (e)  The  Holy  Ghost  con- 
firms faith,  when  he  supports  the  soul  under  her  dejection  on  ac- 
count of  spiritual  and  temporal  afflictions,  either  enabling  her  to  look 
by  his  light  through  all  her  difficulties  to  a  certain  issue  ;  or  strength- 
ening her,  in  order  that  she  may  sustain  her  adversity  with  courage, 
by  which  she  therefore  "  glories  in  tribulation,"  Rom.  v.  3,  and  "  in 
her  infirmaties,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  her,"  2  Cor. 
xii.  9,  10,  or  discovering  to  her,  that  in  all  her  distresses  he  is  stilt 
with  her,  and  that  he  comforts  her  wonderfully  in  her  tribulation, 
and  so  she  laughs  at  fear,  saying  with  David,  Psalm  xxiii.  4. 
"  Though  1  walk  through  ihe  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  com- 
fort me."  Thus  the  Lord  saith  to  his  dejected  people,  Isaiah  xii. 
10.  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am 
thy  God  :  I  will  strengthen  thee,  yea,  I  will  help  thee,  yea,  I  will 
uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness."  Once  more, 
(f )  it  sometimes  happens  to  believers,  that  their  ardor  abates  exceed- 
ingly, and  that  they  forsake  their  first  love,  yea,  that  they  are  even 
hurried  to  a  very  grievous  sin  ;  which  doth  not  indeed  destroy  their 
faith,  but  shakes  it  exceedingly,  and  causeth  it  to  languish.  But  the. 
Holy  Ghost  having  begun  a  good  work  in  them,  and  designing  to 
finish  it,  raiseth  them  up  again,  and  restores  them  to  their  former 
zeal.  Thus  David  prayed  after  his  grievous  fall  for  "  the  renewing 
of  a  right  spirit,  and  for  the  upholding  of  the  free  Spirit,"  Psalm  li. 
10.  12.  Peter  having  been  greatly  shaken  by  his  sin  was  converted 
and  strengthened  again,  according  to  Luke  xxii.  31,  32. 

3.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  not  work  faith  without  means,  so  he 
doth  not  confirm  ic  neither  without  them.  In  order  to  show  his  mar- 
vellous skilfulness  in  confirming  faith,  he  will  sometimes  employ 
means  to  confirm  it,  which  are  naturally  calculated  to  weaken  it. 
A  tempestuous  wind  which  threatens  to  destroy  trees,  serves  to  en- 
root them  more  firmly.  The  horrible  blasphemies,  which  are  some*, 
times  injected  into  the  soul  by  a  messenger  of  Satan,  threaten  to 
extirpate  faith  :  but  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  them  to  establish  it  :  "  He 
thus  perfects  his  strength  in  our  weakness/'  2  Cor.  xii.    7,  S,  9, 


14     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

Who  can  maintain  his  faith,  when  he  is  tormented  by  wicked  men 
in  the  most  dreadful-manner,  that  they  may  compel  him  to  deny  it  I 
Yet  the  Holy  Ghost  cloth  even  by  tribulation  work  patience,  ex- 
perience and  hope,"  Rom  v.  3,  4.  But  the  gospel  is  belter  calcula- 
ted by  its  own  nature  to  confirm  faith  :  all  the  mysteries,  promises 
and  encouragements  of  fhe  gospel  are  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
confirm  faith  :  "  Whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were 
written  for  our  learning  ,  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of 
the  scriptures  might  have  hope,  c  aith  Paul,  Rom.  xv.  4.  But  the 
sacraments  were  more  especially  instituted,  and  are  used  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith. 

The  word  Sacrament  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  sacrare,  to 
consecrate,  or  to  dedicate.  Thus  the  heathens  called  the  money 
which  two  persons  at  law  who  had  betted,  laid  up  in  the  holy  place, 
as  a  pledge,  upon  condition  that  he  who  should  Win  the  action,  should 
receive  his  money  again,  and  that  the  other  should  leave  it  there. 
And  in  this  manner  are  the  sacraments  pledges  of  the  faithfulness 
sf  God  and  of  his  covenant  people.  The  military  oath  was  also  cal- 
itd  anciently  a  sacrament :  and  thus  also  the  use  of  the  sacraments 
serves  as  a  solemn  engaging  of  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  to  fi.ht  under 
his  banner  faithfully  against  all, his  enemies.  This  word  was  most 
probably  introduced  into  the  church  by  the  vulgar  Latin  translation 
of  the  Bible,  which  renders  the -Greek  word  musterion,  a  mystery, 
sometimes  by  zacr  amen  turn,  as  the  Latin  fathers  also  called  a  mys- 
tery sometimes  a  sacrament;  and  truly  the  scraments  contain  great 
and  profound  mysteries.  The  Papists  have  been  gulty  of  a  shame- 
ful abuse  here,  by  taking  occasion  from  this  sense  of  the  word,  to 
multiply  the  sacraments  beyond  measure.  1  will  not  however  on 
this  account  disapprove  of  using  the  word,  because  we  know  what 
we  understand  by  it,  and  the  church  makes  use  of  o.her  words, 
which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  bible.  If  we  will  be  particular,  we 
may  make  use  of  the  language  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  calls  the  sac- 
raments signs,  seals,  a  covenant,  and  tokens  of  the  covenant/'  Rom. 
iv.  11.     Gen.  xvii.  11,  13.    Excd   xii.  13. 

In  order  to  contemplate  the  matter  itself,  we  say  that  a  sacra- 
ment is  a  visible  sign,  and  seal  of  invisible  grace."  So  "  Abra- 
ham received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness 
of  faith,'!  as  Paul  speaks  in  the  text.  The  instructor,  in  order  to 
explain  this,  teacheth  us  three  things,  1,  the  nature  of  the  sacra- 
ments, Q.  66.  2,  The  agreement  of  the  word  with  the  sacraments, 
Q.  67,  and     3,  The  number  of  the  sacraments,  Q.  68, 

1.  To  the  nature  of  the  sacraments  pertains,  1,  an  outward  and  vi- 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  15 

jible  sign,  2,  an  invisible  thing  signified,  3,  an  union  between  the 
sign  and  the  thing  signified,  4,  the  foundation,  or  fundamental  reason 
of  that  union,  5,  an  end  of  tbe  institution  and  of  the  use  of  it. 

1.  w  The  sacraments,"  saith  the  instructor,  "  are  holy,  visible 
signs  ;"  they  are  therefore  calculated  to  signify  and  represent  spir- 
itual tilings,  in  order  that  we  may,  by  using  them,  attain  to  a  better 
understanding  of  spiritual  things.  It  pieaseth  the  Lord  to  work  in 
us  by  means  of  the  outward  senses,  since  we  have  not  only  a  reason- 
able soul,  but  also  a  body  :  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  and  the 
confirmation  of  it  cometh  by  seeing  ;  but  not  only  the  elements,  but 
also  the  outward  ceremonies,  which  accompany  the  elements,  are 
signs  ;  we  will  illustrate  this  more  fully,  when  we  treat  upon  bap- 
tism and  the  Lord's  Supper.  I  leave  it  to  ethers  to  show  that  signs 
are  either  natural,  or  instituted,  either  human  or  divine,  as  the  sac- 
raments a>e  holy  signs  Not  that  the  signs  are  holy  by  themselves, 
having  grace  and  the  thing  signified  in  themselves,  and  communi- 
cating it  thus  ;  for  God  alone  works  the  thing  signified,  and  the 
signs  can  work  only  in  a  moral  manner,  and  cannot  convey  grace  to 
the  soul  by  themselves.  But  they  are  holy  signs  by  a  divine  institu- 
tion signifying  holy  things,  in  order  to  render  men  holy  by  a  holy 
use  of  them.  Independent  of  this,  the  signs  are  neither  holy  nor 
profitable,  as  Paul  teacheth  with  iespect  to  circumcision,  Rom.  ii. 
25,  29. 

2.  The  thing  signified  by  a  sacrament  is  invisible  grace  :  the  in- 
structor saith  '•  the  promise  of  tie  gospel,  that  God  grants  us  freely 
the  remission  of  sin,  and  life  everlasting,  for  the  sake  of  that  one  sa- 
rifice  of  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross."  This  is  called  by  Paul 
in  one  word,  "  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  Rom.  iv.  11.  We  may 
also  siy  th  t  the  great  covenant  of  grace,  with  all  its  sure  benefits,  is 
the  thing  signified  by  the  sacraments,  and  is  therefore  called  "the 
covenant  of  feed."  Gen.  xvii.  11,  13.  Since  now  the  sacraments  dif- 
fer one  from  another,  therefore  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gives 
are  also  proposed  to  us  in  different  relations  as  will  appear  in  the  se- 
quel. 

3.  But  what  relation  hath  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified,  unless 
there  be  an  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  ?  this  sacramen- 
tal union  consists  in  the  relation  which  the  sign  hath  to  the  thing  sig- 
nified, by  which  (a)  there  is  a  resemblance,  and  an  agreement  be- 
tween the  outward  and  material  element  and  grace,  by  which  the 
sign  exhibits  and  expresseth  the  thing  signified  in  a  lively  manner,, 
(b)  This  sacramental  union  and  relation  consist?  also  in  the  conjunc- 
of  the  sign  with  the  tiling  signified  by  and  in  the  use  of  them   both-. 


16    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

We  use  and  receive  the  sign  with  our  outward  senses,  and  the  assu- 
rance that  we  partake  of  the  thing  signified,  with  our  understanding 
and  will,  through  faith,  and  the  operation  of  the  Hoiy  Ghost. 

That  such  an  union  belongs  to  the  sacraments,  we  learn  from  four 
kinds  of  sacramental  phrases,  usual  in  the  word  of  God,  by  which, 

(a)  the  name  of  the  thing  signified  is  given  to  the  sign.  Circum- 
cision, "the  sign  of  the  covenant,"  is  called  "the  covenant"  itself, 
Gen.  xviii.  ii.  13.     See  also  Exod.  xii.  11.     Matt,  xxvi-  26,  27,  28. 

(b)  The  name  of  the  sign  is  given  to  the  thing  signified  ;  thus, 
Christ  is  called  "our  passover,"  1  Cor.  v.  7.  (c)  The  properties  and 
effects  of  the  thing  signified  are  ascribed  to  the  sign  ;  so  baptism  is 
called  "the  washing  away  of  sin,"  and  "the  washing  of  regeneia- 
tion,"  Acts  xxii.  16.  Eph.  v  26.  I'itus  iii.  5.  And  (d)  the  prop- 
erties and  effects  of  the  sign  are  attributed  to  the  thing  signified  : 
when  Christ  broke  the  bread,  he  said,  "  this  is  my  body,  which  is  bro- 
ken for  you,"  1  Cot.  xi.  24. 

4.   We  find  many  similitudes  in  the  word  of  God,  in  which  spirit- 
ual things  are   expressed  by  material ;  Christ  is   called   a  vine,  a 
branch,  a  dour ;  we  can  also  spiritualize  many  material  things,   and 
ascend  up  by  them  to  spiritual  things  ;  but  they  are   not  therefore 
sacraments,  and  the  conjuction  of  a  material,  with  a  spiritual    thing 
doth   not  of  itself  constitute  a  sacrament,  but  the  word  of  God  must 
be  added  to  it  ;  the  word,  joined  to  the  element,  constitutes  it  a  sac- 
rament, according  to   Augustin.     The  word  of  God,  which  consti- 
tutes the  element  a  sacrament,  is  the  word  of  institution  and  of  pro- 
mise.    God  alone  hath  a  sovereign  right  to   constitute  any    thing  a 
sacrament,  and  therefore   we  find  that  he  alone  hath   instituted   the 
sacraments  ;  we  can  see  this  in  circumcision,  Gen.  xvii.  in  the  pass- 
over.     Exod.  xii   in  baptism.     M  it.  xxviii,  and  in  the  Supper,  Matt, 
xvi.    This  word  of  the  institution  is  the  command  of  Ck>d,  by  which 
he  chargeth  us  to  hold,  and  to  use  such  an  element  as  a  fign  of  spir- 
itual things,  as  the  Lord  said  concerning  circumcision)  "  It  shall  be  a 
sign  of  the  covenant,"  Gen.  xvii.    11.      The  word  of  the   promise 
constitutes  the  element,  instituted  for  a  sign,  also  a  seal,  which  con- 
firms and  assures,  that  believers  do  as  truly  partake  of  the  thing  sig- 
nified, as  they  make  use  of  the  sign  in  faith.     Thus  "  Abraham   re- 
ceived the  s:gn  of  circumcision  for  a  seal   of  the   righteousness   of 
faith,"  as  the  text  speaks.     Therefore  the  Socinians,    Remonstrants 
and  Mennonitts  contradict  the  scripture,  when  they  say  that  the  sa- 
craments are  only  bare  signs  of  a  profession,  and  of  our  thankfulness 
to  God  :  and  the  Papists  are  guilty  of  slander,  when  they  report  of 
us,  that  we  dispense  r.o  other  than  bare  signs  in  the  sacraments. 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  17 

5.  As  a  wise  man  doth  nothing  to  no  purpose,  so  the  Lord  also 
did  not  bestow  the  sacraments  to  no  purpose,  and  without  any  end, 
but  he  instituted  them,  not  merely  that  they  might  serve  as  duties 
of  religious  worship,  but  that  we  might,  by  using  them,  bind  our- 
selves solemnly,  as  it  were,  by  a  military  oath,  to  obey  him ,;  also, 
that  they  might  serve  for  signs  of  the  pure  worship,  of  the  commu- 
nion of  saints,  and  of  their  separation  from  the  assemblies  of  erro- 
neous persons.  Moreover  the  Lord  instituted  the  sacraments,  that 
he  might  oblige  us  to  acknowledge  his  sealed  kindness ;  but  they 
were  bestowed  especially  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith. 

We  must  illustrate  all  this  more  fully,  when  we  treat  of  the  nature 
of  baptism,  and  of  the  Lord's  supper :  we  will  now  only  show  how 
the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  our  faith  by  the  sacraments.     He  doth  this, 
(a)  by  bringing  us  to  a  better  understanding   of  the   promise  of  the 
gospel  through  the  sacraments.     The  signs  are  like  pictures  .which 
represent  Christ  and  all  his  benefits  to  us :  when  a   person  makes  a 
proper  use  of  the  signs,  he  will  be  presently  led  to  a   knowledge  of 
the  thing  signified  by  them,   and  obtain  a  lively   view  of  it.     The 
signs  are  indeed  memorials,   according  to  Exod.  xii.  14.  1  Cor.  xi. 
24,  25.     Besides  this,  the  Holy  Spirit   irradiates  the  soul  with  his 
light,  by  which  she  is  enabled  to  "  behold  the   glory  of  the  Lord  as 
in  a  glass,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  (b)    By  giving  believers  the   sacraments 
for  seals,  and  enabling  them  to  make  use  of  them  as  such,  as  Abra- 
ham was  taught  by  him,  Rom.  iv.  11.     The  sacraments  are  indeed 
seals  of  the  Testament,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  they  are,  as  it  were,    pledges   and   earnests  for  confirming  the 
faithfulness  of  Christ,  (c)  This  would  have  no  force,  and  would  have 
no  influence  on  the  soul,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  "  bestow  himself 
for  an  earnest  and  seal,  in  order  to  confirm  and  to  seal  the  soul,"  ac- 
cording to  2  Cor.  i.  21,  22.  Eph.  i.   13,  14.  iv.  30,  which  he   doth 
particularly,  when  he  causeth  her  to  enjoy  in,  and  by  the  use  of  the 
sacraments  the  thing  signified,   as  he   did  to  the   Loid  Jesus,  when 
he  was  baptized  :  "The  heavens  were  then  opened,   and  the  Spirit 
of  God  descended   upon   him  as  a  dove,  and  a   voice  from   heaven 
said.  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  Matt, 
iii.  16j  17,  "Jesus   said,  it  is  the  Spirit  that   quickeneth,  the  flesh 
profiteth  nothing  :  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  they  are   spirit, 
and  they  are  life,"  John  vi.  63. 

2.  Although  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  word  of  the 

gospel  and  the  sacraments,  since  the  word  affects  us  by  our  hearing, 

and  the  sacraments  by  the  other  senses ;  the   word  works   faith,  and 

ihe  sacraments  confirm  it ;  the  word  proraiseth  faith,  and  the  sacra- 

Vol.  ir.  '  C 


8     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

ments  seal  it,  and  the  word  can  be  profitable  without  the  sacraments, 
but  the  sacraments  cannot  without  the  word  j  nevertheless  the  word 
and  sacraments  agree  herein,  that  "  they  both  direct  our  faith  to  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  upon  the  cross,  as  the  only  ground  of  our 
salvation,"  which  the  instructor  exhibits  in  the  sixty  seventh  ques- 
tion against  the  Romanists,  who  teach  a  totally  different  doctrine, 
when  they  say  that  the  sacraments  contain  grace,  and  that  it  is  given 
(x  oficre  ofieraio,  u  from  the  work  itself,"  and  that  the  efficacy  of  the 
sacraments  nevertheless  dependsupon  the  administrator  of  them ;  yea, 
they  lead  souls  more  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  than  to  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ  on  the  cross.  And  they  direct  men  thus,  not  to  the 
bacrifice  of  Christ,  as  the  only  foundation  of  salvation,  but  to  the  sac- 
raments, to  seek  their  salvation  in  them.  The  instructor  sets  him- 
self against  this,  when  he  saith,  "The  Holy  Ghost  teacheth  us  in  the 
gospel,  and  assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  whole  of  cur  sal- 
vation depends  upon  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  he  accom- 
plished for  us  on  the  cross."  That  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth  us  this 
in  the  gospel  hath  been  abundantly  proved  on  the  sixth,  eleventh, 
twenty  third  and  twenty  fourth  Lord's  days.  The  Holy  Ghost  as- 
sures us  of  this  same  thing  by  the  sacraments ;  for  circumcision  re- 
fers to  "  the  circumcision  of  Christ,  without  hands,"  Col.  ii.  11,  12. 
The  passover  is  therefore  called  Christ  himself,  1  Cor.  v.  7.  That 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper  also  refer  only  to  the  bloody  sacrifice 
ol  Christ,  will  be  shown  in  order  on  the  following  Lord's  days. 

2.  As  we  read  of  several  covenants,  which  God  made  with  mer. 
oo  we  read  also  of  several  sacraments*;  for  the  sacraments  are 
adapted  to  the  nature  of  the  covenants,  inasmuch  as  they  are  signs 
and  seals  of  the  covenants.  We  read  of  one  covenant,  which  had 
only  temporal  promises,  to  wit,  the  covenant  that  God  made  with 
Noah>  with  all  his  posterity,  and  with  every  living  creature,  in  which 
he  promised  that  he  >ould  not  destroy  the  earth  again  with  a  gen- 
eral flood  This  covenant  had  the  rainbow  for  its  sacrament,  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  ix.  3 — 17.  Rut  this  covenant  supposed  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  since  the  Lord  made  it  only  to  preserve  an  elect  seed 
■dive,  and  to  glorify  himself,  as  a  gracious  God.  Rut  the  other  cov- 
enants have  heavenly  promises  ;  these  are  either  the  covenant  of 
works,  established  with  Adam  and  all  his  posterity,  in  which  the 
Lord  God  promised  life,  in  consequence  of  the  perfect  observation 
of  his  law.  He  gave  the  tree  of  life  as  a  sacrament  to  confirm  this 
promib'*.  Or  the  covenant  of  redemption  which  the  Father  estab- 
lished rom  eternity  Son,  in  Which  he  required  of  him,  that 
he  should  give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many,  and  promised  him   that 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  » 

he  should  see  his  seed  and  be  glorified.     The  Son  of  God  employed 
all  the  sacraments  of  the  covenant  of  grace  lo  confirm  this  covenant. 
The  covenant  of  grace  is  the  third,   which  hath  spiritual  and  heav- 
enly promises,  and  particularly  that  the  Lord  will  be  the  God  of  the 
sinner,  which  is  the  sum  of  every  gracious  promise.     This  covenant 
of  grace,  having  a  twofold  administration  or  dispensation,  to  wit,  of 
the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament,  hath  also,  according  to  the  dis- 
pensations of  those  times,  two  kinds  of  sacraments,  to  wit,  either  of 
the  Old  or  of  the  New  Testament.     These  were  extraordinary  sac- 
raments, as  the  preservation  of  Noah  with  his  household  in  the  ark 
by  water,   according  to  1    Peter  iii.    20,   21,   the  passage  of  Israel 
through  the  red  sea,  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  the  rock,  as  Paul  teach- 
eth  us,   1  Cor.  x.  1 — 4,    or  ordinary  sacraments ;  such  were  all  the 
ceremonies  of  the  typical  worship;  but  chcumcision  and  the  pass- 
over  were  move   especially  the  ordinary  sacraments  of  that  time. 
See  Gen.   xvn.  and  Exd.  xii.     The  sacraments  of  the  New   Testa- 
ment are  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper ;  these  and  no  others  did 
Christ  institute,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  xxvi.  2G,  27,  28.  He  himself  made 
use  of  no  others.     A  Christian  needeth  no  others,  inasmuch  as  bap- 
tism is  to  him  a  sacrament  of  regeneration  and  of  incorporation  into 
the  church,  and  the  supper,  of  nourishment.     Paul  hath  respect  to 
no  others,    1  Cor.  x,  1 — 4.  xii.  13.     And  therefore  the  Papists  are 
to  be  condemned,  since  they  have  added  five  others  to  these,  to  wit, 
confirmation,  auricular  confession,  extreme  unction,  orders  and  mat- 
rimony ;  for  the  first  four  were  not  instituted  by  Christ ;  was  matri- 
mony instituted,    it  was  not  however  instituted  to  be  a  sacrament, 
since  it  wants  the  constituent  parts  of  a  sacrament  ;  if  it  were  insti- 
tuted to  be  a  sacrament,  it  ought  to  be  common  to  all  believers,  and 
all  ought   to  be  bound  to  marry,   which   the  word  of  God  doth  not 
teach.     And  why  do  they  then  forbid  matrimony,  as  too  carnal,   to 
persons  whom  they  call  spiritual  ? 

No  one  disputes  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  sac- 
raments of  the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament.  The  sacraments  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  other  and  more  difficult  signs  than  the  sac- 
raments of  the  New  Testament :  those  were  instituted  by  Christ, 
while  he  was  promised,  but  these  by  him  manifested  in  the  flesh  : 
those  sealed  thai  he  should  satisfy,  but  these  seal  that  he  hath  satis- 
fied. But  that  the  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  were  types, 
which  did  not  effect  the  thing  signified  ,  and  that  tie  sacraments  of 
the  New  Testament  are  antitypes,  which  communicate  and  effect 
grace,  as  the  Romanists  assert,  this  is  disallowed  by  Paul,  when  he 
saith  concerning  the  Israelites,  1  Cor.  x,  2,  3,  4,  that  "  they,"  like 


20     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

the  Corinthians,  were  all  baptized,  and  did  all  eat  of  the  same  spirit- 
ual mtat  ;  and  did  all  drink  of  the  same  spiritual  drink  ;  (for  they 
drank  of  the. spiritual  rock,  which  followed  them  ;  and  that  ruck  was 
Christ.)"  The  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  typified  Christ  only, 
Coll.  ii.  17.  Peter  saith  indeed  that  "baptism  was  a  figure,"  (or 
antitvpe)  "  of  Noah's  ark,  in  which  he  was  saved  by  water,"  1  Peter 
iii.  20,  21,  but  he  saith  also  what  he  understands  by  that  typified  bap- 
tism, "  not  that  which  is  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but 
that  which  is  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God,  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  And  verily  the  preservation  in  the 
ark  by  water  represented  the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  to  wit, 
Christ,  his  covenant,  and  all  the  benefits  of  it. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  in  this  manner  is  faith  wrought  and  confirmed. 
What  think  ye,  is  not  he  who  hath  faith  happy  ?  it  renders  him  a 
partaker  of  Christ,  and  of  all  his  benefits:  "It  is  given  him  in  the 
behalf  of  Christ,  to  believe  on  him,"  Philip,  i.  29.  It  is  wrought  in 
him  effectually,  he  would  never  have  believed,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
not  wrougut  and  effected  it  in  him  ;  yea,  is  it  not  a  wonderful  favour 
that  "  he  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  also  perform  it, 
until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ  f"  Philip,  i.  6  .Ye,  in  whose  hearts  this 
faith  hath  been  wrought,  are  also  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time,"  as  Peter 
saith,  1  Peter  i.  5.  "  God,  who  hath  promised  you  the  hope  of  ever- 
lasting life,  and  hath  sworn,  that  he  might  show  more  abundantly 
the  immutability  of  his  counsel,  and  that  ye  might  have  a  strong 
consolation,  cannot  lie,  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  lie,"  Titus  i.  2. 
Iieb.  vi.  17,  18.  And,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  he  gives  you  also 
the  pledges  and  seals  of  his  truth,  and  of  the  righteousness  of  faith. 

But  what  think  ye  all  ?  hath  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  faith  in  your 
hearts  ?  verily  all  men  have  not  faith,  but  only  the  elect  of  God." 
according  to  the  words  of  Paul,  2  Thess.  iii.  2.  Titus  i.  3.  We  have 
shown  largely  enough  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day  who  have  not  faith, 
and  who  have  it  in  truth.  Think  only  on  what  we  have  said  there, 
that  ye  may  see  whether  the  Holy  Ghost  have  wrought  faith  in  your 
hearts,  or  not:  we  will  not  repiat  what  we  have  said  on  that  Lord's 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  21 

day.     But  how  many  are  there  among  you  to  whom  the  Spirit  hath 
not  yet  given  faith  !  For 

1.  Some  of  you  imagine  that  they  have  faith  :  but  how  have  ye 
attained  to  it  ?  by  your  birth  of  your  parents  ?  by  baptism,  or  the 
Lord's  supper  ?  by  your  good  natural  disposition  ?  by  your  virtuous 
education  ?  your  civil  or  religious  behaviour  ?  all  these  things  could 
not  have  wrought  faith  in  you.  Do  ye  say  that  ye  hope  the  Holy 
Ghost  hath  wrought  it  in  you  ?  in  what  manner  did  he  do  it  ?  did 
he  truly  humble  your  hearts,  actually  bring  you  to  Christ,  unite  you 
to  him,  that  ye  might  pursue  holiness,  as  well  as  happiness  ?  Do  not 
deceive  yourselves,  we  beseech  you,  with  vain  imaginations,  think- 
ing that  we  cannot  know  this  so  well.  How  1  can  such  a  great  work 
be  wrought  in  the  soul,  and  such  a  great  change  be  produced  in  her, 
that  she,  who  was  blind,  is  made  to  see,  she  who  was  dead,  is  made 
alive,  she,  who  was  unwilling,  is  made  willing,  and  she  not  know 
aught  of  this?  Peihaps  ye  think,  the  Holy  Ghost  cloth  not  work  faith 
in  all  after  the  same  manner.  It  is  true,  we  have  also  shown  this 
before;  but  it  is  also  certain,  that  although  the  Holy  Ghost  may 
bring  a  person  to  faith  by  a  calm  discovery  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
or  by  the  cords  of  love,  which  transport  him  out  of  himself,  and 
although  failh  may  be  infused  into  his  heart  from  his  birth,  he  will 
nevertheless  repeatedly  after  this  have  discoveries  of  his  sinfulness, 
and  be  humbled  on  account  of  it,  will  betake  himself  to  the  Son  of 
God  for  reconciliation,  and  peace  with  God,  on  account  of  his  con- 
tinual backslidings,  and  will  exercise  hitnsdf  in  serious  godliness, 
and  thus  manifest  that  faith  is  not  dead  in  him,  but  alive  and  active. 
See  this  in  Lydia,  Matthew,  Zacheus,  Micha  the  steward,  John  the 
Baptist,  Timothy  and  others,  who  manifested  that  they  had  received 
faith. 

2.  Others  of  you  know  that  they  do  not  yet  possess  faith  through 
the  Spirit.  We  should  think  that  these  would  be  exceedingly 
troubled,  and  awake  up  in  good  earnest,  that  the  y  might  obtain  Lith. 
of  the  Spirit :  but  how  careless  are  the  most  of  them,  as  if  it  wene 
of  no  consequence  to  them  whether  they  were  saved  or  damned  ! 
It  is  amazing,  that  ye,  who  see  that  ye  have  not  faith,  are  yet  so 
careless,  sluggish  and  listless.  How  is  it  possible,  might  we  ask  : 
but  we  need  not  weary  ourselves,  in  order  to  learn  what  haih  be- 
witched you  thus,  men  busy  themselves  too  much  with  the  afiairs  of 
the  world :  these  fill  and  possess  their  hearts  so,  that  they  find 
neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  think  seiiously  and  de  ibe;.  . ,  n 
their  miserable  condition,  how  they  may  be  delivered  out  oi  itj  and 
how  they  shall  obtain  faith.     Others  find  such  a  sweetness  in  the 


*2     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life,  that 
every  idea  concerning  faith,  salvation  and  damnation  which  either 
ariseth  in  their  hearts,  or  is  outwardly  proposed  is  irksome  to  them. 
There  are  those  also,  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  excites  a  concern  for 
tljeir  dangerous  condition,  and  who  even  wish  that  they  had  faith, 
and  say  with  Balaam,  Numb,  xxiii.  10.  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of 
the  righteous,  and  let  my  ast  end  be  like  his."  But  it  is  "  the  de- 
sire of  the  sbthful  which  killeth  him,  because  his  hands  refuse  to 
labour,"  Prov.  xxi.  25.  For  they  are  backward  to  believe  :  because 
they  have  heard  others  talk  somewhat  of  their  inability,  they  think, 
how  can  I  help  it :  if  God  will  not  give  me  faith  by  his  Spirit,  I  can- 
not give  it  to  myself:  but  it  is  not  your  inability,  but  your  unwilling- 
ness, that  hinders  you  from  coming  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  ye  may 
have  life,  John  v.  40  The  Spirit  works  in  you  by  convincing  you, 
by  revealing  the  way  of  life  to  you,  and  by  stirring  you  up  to  believe 
and  repent;  but  ye  oppose  him,  quench  him,  and  drive  him  fiom 
you  by  your  carelessness,  and  by  indulging  your  lusts,  and  so  ye  re- 
sist the  Holy  Spirit,  with  the  Jews. 

In  the  mean  time  ye  still  dare  to  use  the  sacraments,  as  if  ye.  who 
have  yet  no  faith,  had  a  right  to  them,  when  they  are  only  for  be- 
lievers, in  order  to  confirm  their  faith  ;  but  they  cannot  surely  con- 
firm nor  seal  faith  in  you,  when  it  doth  not  exist  in  you.  Of  what 
service  are  scais  to  an  empty  letter  ?  ©f  none  at  all.  Ye  separate 
that  which  God  hath  joined  ogether,  ior  ye  make  use  of  his  cove- 
nant seais,  but  do  noi  bestir  yourselves  in  the  least  to  enter  into  the 
covenant  by  faith ;  therefore  ye  are  not  yet  become  partakers  of 
Chri.t,  and  of  ail  his  benefits,  but  are  under  the  wrath  of  God  ;  for 
V  the  wrath  of  God  tbideth  on  him,  who  believeth  not  the  Son," 
John  iii.  36.  The  precious  gospel,  which  urgeth  you  to  believe,  is 
''a  savour  of  deatli  unto  death"  to  you,  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor.  ii. 
16.  And  of  what  set  vice  are  the  sacraments  to  your  do  they  not 
seal  perdition  to  you  ?  bear  what  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxxii.  34, 
35  "is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me,  and  sealed  up  among  my 
treasures  I  To  me  be!^ng<th  vengeance  and  recompence,  their  foot 
shall  sude  in  due  time  :  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is  at  hand,  and 
the  things  that  shall  come  upon  them  make  haste."  O  that  ye  would 
only  see  it,  and  were  concerned  about  it,  so  that  with  the  jailer  ye 
cried  out,  Acts,  xvi.  30.  "  What  must  I  do  to  he  saved  l"  we  should 
say  to  you,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  ye  shall  be  sav- 
ed," vrs.  31.  At  least,  hearers,  abide  under  the  word  of  the  gospel* 
an  J  offer  up  that  ejaculation  ,  that  "the  Holy  Ghost  would  fall  on 
you  who  hear  it."  as  it  happened,  Acts  x.  44. 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  65—68.  23 

But,  believers,  in  whose  hearts  faith  hatii  been  truly  wrought  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ye  also  are  not  unblamable  here,  since  your  faith  is 
still  so  weak  and  small,  notwithstanding  so  ra<my  means  of  the  word, 
sacraments  and  operations  of  the  Hoiy  Ghost;  for  who  among  you 
hath  yet  made  any  considerable  progress  I  what  causes  you  to  doubt 
so  often  concerning  your  hope  of  salvation,  which  ye  have  in  God 
and  Christ  ?  is  it  not  because  it  seems  too  great  for  you  ?  because 
ye  have  little  or  no  sensible  grace  I  will  not  the  least  thought,  that 
enters  your  mind  without  reason,  as,  "  O  if  I  should  deceive  myself," 
unsettle  all  your  hopes  I  How  little  ability  is  there  in  your  faith  to 
employ  Christ  and  his  grace,  instead  of  your  own  strength  !  men 
have  scarcely  any  skill  i.i  this  art.  Are  they  called  upon  to  suffer 
hatred)  pain,  shame,  or  loss  on  account  of  godliness,  they  shrink  from 
it  :  there  is  not  so  much  strength  in  their  faith,  that  they  dare  to 
come  out  resolutely  Are  they  in  any  danger,  or  under  any  heavy 
cross,  with  respect  to  their  body,  estate,  or  household  ;  their  faith 
fails,  and  they  cry  out,  We  perish  :  are  they  disturbed  with  doubtful 
apprehensions  concerning  their  faith  by  their  unbelieving  hearts,  by 
Satan,  and  by  wicked  men ;  they  give  all  up  in  their  own  imagina- 
tions, and  tneir  minds  are  oppressed  with  fear  ;  do  they  behold  their 
meanness  and  unworthiness  ;  they  tremble;  and  how  hardly  can 
they  endure  to  look  at  that  which  is  to  come  !  the  blessed  and  un- 
seen eternity,  how  dark  doth  it  appear  to  the  soul  ! 

What  think  ye,  that  this  is  only  your  misery  ?  yea,  it  is  your 
misery,  but  it  is  a  so  your  sin,  and  indeed  a  great  sin,  which  is  ex- 
ceedingly hateful,  and  blamable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  Hear  how 
he  chides  his  people  on  account  of  it,  and  believe  toat  he  chides  you 
also,  when  he  saith,  "  Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?" 
Matt,  id.ii-  26.  "  O  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?" 
Matt.  xiv.  31.  Hear  from  him  language  still  more  severe,  Mark  ix. 
19.  <v  O  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ?  how 
long  s.lall  I  suffer  you  \"  With  no  less  earnestness  and  severity  did 
he  say   Luke  xxiv   25.     "  O  fools  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  !" 

But  what  do  I  say,  that  many  are  weak  in  the  faith  ?  it  is  still 
more  sinful,  that  many  become  weaker  in  it,  when  they  ought  to 
wax  strong,  and  to  increase  in  faith.  Is  it  not  true,  when  some  of 
you  wax  cold  in  their  first  love,  and  forsake  it  ?  for  "  faith  worketh 
by  love,,"  according  to  Gal.  v.  6.  And  men  show  this,  when  they 
so  easily  indulge  their  constitutional  sin,  and  their  hearts  do  not 
bleed  on  account  of  it.  They  regard  the  things  of  this  life  too  much, 
and  their  heart*  are  filled  with  them,  so  that  they  bewilder  their  un- 
derstandings, captivate  their  affections,  and  consume  the  time,  which 


24    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

they  ought  to  devote  to  seeking  God  :  they  can  converse  now  so 
familiarly  with  worldly  men,  of  whom  they  used  to  be  suspicious ; 
they  are  exceedingly  estranged  t'tom  communion  with  God,  they  live 
without  him,  ana  are  unconcerned  about  it ;  with  respect  to  the 
frame  of  their  own  minds,  they  neglect  it,  they  seldom  look  into 
themselves,  and  are,  as  it  were,  strangers  to  themselves  :  yea,  their 
discretion,  which  used  to  preserve  t  eir  souls,  is  become  giddy  and 
extravagant:  reading  ihe  word]  family  devotion,  secret  prayers, 
mutual  conferences  are  neglected,  or  performed  heartlessly*  and  in 
a  cursory  manner  :  the  communion  of  saints,  edifying  others,  and 
being  edified  by  them  is  now  become  a  strange  work  ;  yea,  they 
Will  be  even  afraid  to  come  into  the  presence  of  a  serious,  godly  per- 
son ;  if  they  must  be  present  with  him,  they  will  not  enter  upon 
serious  discourse,  or  they  will  break,  it  off  by  something  else,  and  go 
their  way.  In  the  mean  while,  since  the  weak  soul  is  not  blind  nor 
dead,  she  sees  this  as  it  were  like  a  person  who  is  half  asleep, 
although  her  heart  is  awake,  but  she  hath  not  strength  enough  to 
break  her  chains  ;  she  complains  of  her  weakness,  she  prays  against 
at,  and  that  she  may  be  delivered  from  it,  she  will  sometimes  bestir 
and  exert  herself,  and  will  encourage  herself  amidst  her  defects  ; 
but  her  strength  is  gone,  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  the  soul,  is  de- 
parted from  her  ;  therefore  she  becomes  dejected,  languishes  still 
more,  and  declines  finally  so  far,  that  neither  she  herself,  nor  others 
can  perceive  any  difference  between  her  and  a  worldling. 

Ye,  who  are  become  so  weak  in  the  faith,  are  ye  not  ashamed  ? 
is  this  your  kindness  to  your  friend  ?  hath  he  deserved  this  at  your 
hand  ?  do  ye  reward  him  thus  for  all  his  love,  for  his  groanings  and 
writhings  under  his  Father's  wrath  ?  will  ye  thus  grieve  the  Spirit, 
by  whom  ye  are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption  ?  did  the  Father 
for  this  elect  you  from  such  a  hearty  love,  bestow  his  Son  upon  you, 
his  Spirit,  the  pardon  of  your  sins,  his  image,  a  blessed  hope  ?  is  this 
the  fruit  of  his  word,  of  his  sacraments,  and  of  all  his  operations  in 
your  souls  ?  "  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord,  O  foolish  people  and 
unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not 
anade  thee,  and  established  thee  ?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  Know  that  the 
Lord  hath  this  against  you,  that  ye  have  left  your  first  love."  Rev. 
ii.  4.  Hear  what  he  saith  to  his  people,  who  were  become  vain,  and 
regard  it  as  if  said  to  you,  Jer.  ii.  2 — 5.  "  I  remember  thee,  the 
kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  when  thou  wentest 
after  me  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  land  that  was  not  sown.  What  ini- 
quity have  your  fathers  found  in  me,  that  they  are  gone  far  from  me, 
and  have  walked  after  vanity,  and  become  vain  ?"  Do  ye  find  now 


XXV,  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65  —  63.  25 

•to  much  tranquility  of  mind,  and  pe.ce  with  (»od?  doth  it  not  grieve 
you,  that  yte  have  declined  so  far  from  your  youthful  vigour,  and  ex* 
perience  the  decripittide  of  old  age  ?  and  whereas  ye  were  once  fat 
and  Qouiishjng,  that  ve  ate  now  becomt  so  meager  and  lean  ?  would 
ye  indeed  die  in  such  a  condition  ?  surely  ye  would  not  ?  "  Remem- 
ber therefore  whence  ye  are  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  your  fiist 
works,  lest  he  come  quickly  to  you,  and  remove  your  candlestick  out 
of  his  place,"  as  he  admonisheth  and  threatens,  Rev  ii.  5,  or  he  wiil 
visit  you  with  another  grievous  judgment,  which  will  awaken  you 
out  ol^  your  sleepy  humour  :  "  Return,  return,  O  Shulamith  ;  return, 
return,  that  we  may  look  upon  tl.ee."  Thus  he  calls  to  you,  bong 
vi.    13 

Other  believers  are  in  a  better  condition,  they  are  confirmed  in  the 
faith,  although  they  do  not  perceive  it,  but  are  fearful  that  their  faith 
doth  no:  increase,  because  they  have  almost  forgotten  how  weak  they 
were  formerly  :  they  will  see  just  day  by  di\y  how  much  they  are 
confirmed*  which  is  as  impossible  as  tha'  they  should  see  how  much 
a  man,  as  a  tree  grows  :  tliey  think  that  they  are  not  confirmed,  be- 
cause they  cannot  exercise  faith  with  so  much  clearness  ;.nd  liveli- 
ness as  at  the  beginning,  when  they  were  dandled  and  fondled  like 
"..hildren  ;  but  this  is  no  evidence  that  they  do  not  grow  :  perhaps 
their  faith  is  now  more  single  :  they  are  also  too  much  prejudiced 
against  themselves,  not  daring  to  think  highly  of  the  grace  of  God, 
which  hath  been  shown  to  them  ;  and  this  hinders  them  from  seeing 
■;he  confirmation  of  their  faith. 

There  are  others  who  advance  greatly  in  the  faith,  and  like  young 
men  grow  strong  in  it,  according  to  1  John  ii.  14.  I  will  not  repeat 
now  what  *  one  of  my  highly  esteemed  teachers  huth  said  very  beau- 
tifully and  pertinently  in  his  book,  entitled  "  Reasonable  Seivice,"  when 
he  speaks  of  the  spiritual  growth,  that  the  believer  grows,  when  his 
spiritual  light  increasetfy  when  he  maintains  a  steadfast  walk  with 
God,  when  he  makes  a  v/iser,  and  a  more  believing  use  of  Christ, 
when  he  acts  in  a  more  single  manner,  and  improves  more  than 
formerly  in  active  graces,  both  by  exerting  himself  against  more  sins, 
and  in  more  virtues,  and  also  by  continuing  steadfast  in  a  vigourous, 
opposition  to  sin,  and  prosecuting  every  duty  with  more  prudence, 
with  more  firmnass,  faith  and  zeal :  but  1  would  add  to  this,  that  be- 

*The  author  intends  by  this  person  the  celebrated  William  Brakel,  a  pas- 
tor of  the  Reformed  church  in  the  ciry  of  Rotterdam.  His  book  entitled  Re- 
delyie  Godtdknst,  cr  Reasonable  Service,  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most 
excellent  treatises  en  prs%c  >Qal  ard  experimental  theology  extant  in  the  Du'.ch 
larfgfeage. 
Vol.  ii.  D 


25     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lievers  -.vho  increase  in  faith,  (a)  have  a  more  settled  and  steadfast 
assurance  of  their  state  of  grace.  Do  they  experience  darkness,  the 
hiding  of  God's  countenance,  deadness,  and  the  power  of  corruption, 
it  doth  not  s!,ake  them  so,  that  it  causes  them  to  doubt  of  their  state; 
thev  are  grieved,  and  they  humble  themselves  on  account  of  it,  but 
they  will  not  therefore  abandon  their  hope  in  the  Lord.  Continual 
exercises  of  faith.,  frequent  discoveries  of  God's  work  of  grace  in  their 
minds  by  his  Spirit,  and  manifold  expediences  of  the  goodness  of  the 
Lord  have  established  their  hearts  so,  that  all  their  doubts  concern- 
ing their  blessed  condition  are  banished  out  of  their  minds,  and  have 
no  more  hold  on  the  boul,  t>>at  is  thus  advanced  in  faith  :  "  they  have 
made  their  calling  and  election  sure,  so  that  they  will  never  fall," 
2  Peter  i.  10.  (b)  They  value  now  likewise  more  highly  the  myste- 
ries and  truths  of  the  gospel  than  formesly  :  they  have  a  better  in- 
sight into  them  ;  they  see  more  truth,  divinity,  and  glory  in  them  : 
they  can  improve  them  better,  and  direct  themselves  better  by  them. 
Formerly  the  literal  truths  were  too  high  for  them,  too  barren,  and 
h  d  but  little  influence  upon  their  apprehensions  and  exercises,  so  as 
to  comfort  and  excite  them,  their  principal  concern  was  about  their 
state  of  grace,  their  contemplations  were  exercised  chiefly  relative  to 
the  frame  of  their  minds,  and  their  desires  and  longings  were  mere 
for  immediate  influences  and  sensible  grace:  but  now  they  have  a 
greater  knowledge  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  their  understandings 
are  more  nourished  by  them,  and  their  hearts  become  thus  more 
established  ;  yea.  the  contemplation  of  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel 
transmits  the  image  and  glory  of  them  into  the  soul,  which  increases 
habitual  grace  in  the  mind,  and  establishes  it  the  more  ;  for  "  they 
ate  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God,  in  all  wisdom  and 
spiritual  understanding,  that  they  may  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto 
ail  pleasing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the 
knowledge  of  God,  strengthened  with  all  might  according  to  his 
glorious  power,"  Coll.  i.  9,  10,  11.  See  also  Heb.  v.  13,  14.  2  Cor. 
iii.  18.  2  Peter  iii.  18.  (c)  The  soul  being  confirmed  in  the  faith,  will 
pursue  sanctification  more,  and  with  more  steadfastness  and  single- 
ness than  before.  She  is  at  first  chiefly  employed  with  her  state  of 
grace,  in  order  that  she  may  obtain  assurance  :  one  while  she  is  en- 
coucaged,  but  soon  after  the  merest  trifle  discourageth  her  ;  but  when 
confirmed,  she  is  not  perplexed  with  these  matters  any- 
more, but  labours  now  only  for  sanctification.  Before  her  confirma- 
tion she  had  indeed  an  inclination  to  holiness,  and  endeavoured  to  be 
holy  ;  but  how  soon  was  she  forced  out  of  her  way,  and  she  knew 
not  how  to  enter  upon  it  again,  but  fainted  and  was  discouraged  ;  bu* 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  27 

Ib'eing-  now  confirmed,  she  doth  not  stop  at  any  difficulty,  but  pro- 
ceeds,  and  "treads  like  the  mighty  men  in  the  mire  of  the  streets," 
Zcch.  x.  5.  Do  her  feet  at  any  time  turn  out  of  the  path,  doth  she 
transgress  against  the  Lord,  she  humbles  herself  before  him,  lays 
hold  on  the  Mediator  for  reconciliation,  and  begins  her  course  anew 
in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  she  "  runs,  and  is  not  weary  nor  faint," 
Isaiah  xl.  31.  While  the  soul  is  yet  weak,  she  is  exceedingly  de- 
tective with  respect  to  singleness  in  her  sanctiftcati'  n,  she  often 
labours  in  her  own  strength,  and  with  her  own  exertions  from  a  leg^l 
motive,  pursuing  holiness,  that  she  may  the  more  easily  obtain  re- 
conciliation, peace  and  boldness  toward  God  :  how  often  is  she  ex- 
ceedingly strai  ened,  and  full  of  anxiety  whether  she  may  do  this  or 
that,  and  she  stumbles  continually,  because,  since  she  is  not  establish- 
ed in.  the  faith,  she  can  do  but  few  things  from  faith.  See  Rom.  xiv. 
22,  23.  But  when  she  is  fuither  advanced,  she  endeavours  to  do  £.11 
things  by  the  Spirit,  l*  being  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of 
his  might,"  Eph.  vi.  10.  It  is  her  highest  aim  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
because  he  commands  it,  and  that  he  may  oe  glorified  by  her:  be- 
fore this  she  aimed  at  her  own  pleasure  and  eas-e  :  but  in  whatsoever 
she  now  doth,  she  is  enlarged,  because  she  doth  it  with  an  assurance, 
and  thus  with  a  belief,  that  it  is  his  wilfc  See  Philip,  i.  H.  Cod.  iii. 
17  (d)  The  believer,  after  his  faith  is  confirmed,  is  more  actively 
busy  in  his  pursuits,  than  while  he  was  weak  ;  he  would  then  have 
just  such  immediate,  high,  mighty  and  urging  influences  of  grace  to 
do  aught,  or  he  would  stand  still,  and  was  disconcerted,  and  wist  not 
how  to  engage  in  his  duty,  or  to  excite  himself  to  it ;  he  was  more 
passive  than  active  :  but  being  now  established  in  the  faith,  he  be- 
comes more  active  and  working  in  lus  holy  exercises,  knowing  how  to 
employ  his  reason  and  habitual  grace,  according  to  the  measure  of 
preventing  grace,  to  direct  himself  thereby,  and  to  perform  his  duties 
with  a  wonderful  dexterity  and  ease,  he  knows  how  to  comfort  and 
excite  himself  by  the  word  of  God  :  when  the  law  of  his  mind  urgeth 
him  to  do  his  duty,  he  obeys  it  with  David,  Psalm  xxvii.  3.  he  hath 
learned  the  evangelic  art  to  derive  by  his  faith  influences  and  grace 
for  grace  from  the  fulness  of  Jesus,  to  improve  him  according-  to  his 
offices,  and  to  adjust  the  sails  of  his  desires,  and  to  direct  the  whole 
ship  of  his  soul  by  the  rudder  of  his  understanding  and  judgment  in 
such  a  manner,  as  to  receive  the  wind  and  breathing  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  to  proceed  thus  toward  the  land  into  pleasant  havens  ;  for 
it  is  not  only  his  happiness,  but  also  his  duty  to  be  "  filled  with  the 
Spirit,"  Eph".  v*  18,     And  thus  he  «  works  out  his  salvation  with  fear 


38     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

and  trembling  ;  for  God  wotketh  in  him,  both   to  will   and  to  do," 
Ph-iip.  ii.  12,  13. 

Truly  a  glorious  condition,  that  a  person  not  cnly  hath  fiuth,  but 
that  he  is  aii.0  so  strong  in  it.  O  that  I  could  say  of  each  of  you.  and 
"  thank  Jod,  that  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,"  as  the  apostle 
saul  ol  the  believing  Thessalonians,  2  Thess.  i.  3.  Are  ye,  O  be- 
lievers, desirous  of  growing  in  faith  i  have  ye  a  desire  to  exert  your- 
selves,  in  order  thai  your  fai'h  may  be  confirmed?  and  would  ye 
know  what  ye  must  do  for  tiiis  purpose  I  see  i:ere, 

t.  Thank  God  that  )e  have  obiamed  faith.  Though  it  may  not  bs 
strong,  but  weak,  it  is  nevertheless  a  precious  faith  :  ye  partake  of 
Christ  and  of  all  his  benefits  by  it ;  it  hath  been  «  rougbt  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  with  an  almighty  power;  yen,  he  will  confirm  it:  we  have 
shown  above  how  happy  tnis  renders  you «  behold  then  how  much 
i;  oWigeih  you  to  be  thankful  to  the  Lord,  and  how  it  exci...  e 
ing  :  "  It  is  not  of  yon,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  not  of  works  ;  lest  any 
man  should  boast,"  liph.  ii.  8,  9.  «  for  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  ? 
and  wnat  hast  thou,  which  thou  didst  not  receiver  and  if  thou 
receive  i',  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it;" 
thus  asks  the  a;;o  tie,  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  If  the  soul  would  exeicise  hei- 
self  more  in  thanksgiving  on  account  of  her  faith,  she  would  also 
obtam  more  grace,  and  a  greater  confirmation  of  her  faith  by  the 
lioiy  Spirit:  the  Lord  saith,  "  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me: 
and  to  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation  aright,  will  1  show  the  sal- 
vation of  God,"  Psalm  1.   23. 

2.  Impress  it  upon  your  minds,  and  let  it  have  a  due  influence  on 
your  souls,  that  it  is  your  duly  to  become  strong  in  the  faith.  H  is 
the  nature  ol  faith  to  grow  ;  it  is  acting  c  ntrary  to  the  nature  and 
natural  tendency  of  it,  to  keep  it  in  a  weak  and  dwarfish  condition  ; 
yea,  every  evil  frame  p.oceeds  from  the  weakness  oi  faith.  God  also 
enjoins  it  on  you  io  confirm  your  faith  ;  the  commands  are  too 
numerous  to  be  transcribed  here,  read  them,  1  Cor.  xvi.  13.  Eph.  vi. 
10  Coll.  ii.  6,  7.  Keb.  vi.  1.  2  Peter  hi  18.  When  this  hath  a  due 
weight  on  your  hearts,  ye  will  indeed  strive  for  a  confirmation  of 
your  faith,  and  will  u  go  from  strength  to  strength,"  Psalm  Ixxxiv.  7. 

3.  Study  the  truths  and  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  and  endeavour 
to  obtain  an  excellent  and  thorough  knowledge  of  them.  Ye  ought 
with  \poilos  to  be  "  mighty  in  the  scriptures,"  Acts  xviii.  24,  with 
Paul  to  have  "  a  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  (  hrist."  Eph.  iii. 
4,  and  with  the  believing  Romans  to  be  "filled  with  all  knowledge^ 
able  also  to  admonish  one  another,"  Rom.  xv.  14.  This  wouid 
nourish  your  understandings,  and  cause  your  faith  to  grow,  and  be» 


—66.  8» 

<ome  strong  to  admiration  ;  for  4>  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  x/t 
Would  grow  up  lino  him  iaali  things,  who  15  the  head,  even  Chris;," 
according  to  the  worus  ot*  Prful,  Eph.  iv    15, 

•j.  cultivate  an  historical  faith  ;  tna  is,  endeavour  to  obtain  an  z.:* 
*urance  of  the  irutfe  and  divinity  of  the  word,  so  that  ye  may  lock 
upo.i  it  to  ue  true  and  divine  on  account  of  the  declaration  of  God 
in  h.s  word,  and  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  your  minds, 
and  "  receive  thus  the  testimony  of  God,  and  set  to  your  seal,  that 
God  is  Hue,"  John  hi.  33.  Thus  "  we  obtain  all  riches  to  the  full 
assurance  of  un  erstandmg,"  Coll.  li.  2.  lour  neglect  of  historical 
faitn  is  the  reason  ,vhy  all  the  direct  and  reflex  acts  of  your  faith  are 
so  feeble,  and  like  a  maimed  hand,  or  a  wrenched  foot;  but  when 
ffc  become  strong  in  historical  faith,  then  we  can  sit  down  firm,  as 
Upon  a  rock,  and  perform  ail  things  with  strength  by  faith  :  for 
"  faith  is  tne  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1. 

5.  Collect  also  from  the  gospel  a  treasure  cf  premises,  which  the 
Lord  God  hath  made  relative  to  the  confirmation  of  your  faith.  See 
what  he  who  is  true  hath  promised  you,  Job.  xvii.  9.  Psalm  x.  17. 
xcii.  12 — 15.  Ezek  JtxJTiv.  16.  Ztch.  x  3,5,  12.  Mai.  iv.  2.  Thl* 
tends  wonderfully  to  confirm  our  faith  ;  for  all  confirming  grace  is 
conveyed  to  the  soul  according  to,  and  by  means  of  premises,  col- 
lected and  properly  improved. 

6.  Pray  lor  the  confirmation  of  your  faith.  The  Lord  hath  indeed 
promised  to  confirm  it,  but  he  will  also  be  sought  for  this,  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  26,  o7.  The  saints  have  also  prayed  much  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  their  faith,  Psalm  Ixviii.  23.  The  father  of  the  lunatic  child 
"  cried  out  with  tears,  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief," 
Mark  ix.  24.  The  apostles  said  to  the  Lord,  "  increase  our  faith*!  . 
Luke  xvii.  5,  Paul  prayed  also  for  the  Ephesians,  that  they  might 
be  "  strengthened  by  the  Spirit,"  so  that  they  should  have  a  strong 
faith,  Eph.  hi.  16,  17.  Yea,  importune  the  Lord  by  the  promises 
which  he  hath  made  to  yon,  that  lie  would  confirm  your  faith  ;  so 
David  acted.  Psalm  cxix.  49,  50.  This  would  add  much  strength  to 
your  faith. 

7.  Exercise  faith  also  much  :  if  ye  have  not  yet  an  assurance,  that 
ye  are  in  a  state  of  grace,  exercise  faith  then  to  justification  ;  if  ye 
have  an  assurance,  exercise  it  from  justification,  as  we  have  taught 
on  the  seventh  Lord's  day.  The  life  of  grace  is  nothing  but  the  life 
of  faith,  which  .must  therefore  be  exercised  repeatedly:  of  this  we 
have  also  spoken  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day.  This  the  believer  must 
therefore  exercise,  that  he  may  be  confirmed  in  it,  for  we  learn  by 


SO    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

doing;,   and   wc  strengthen  a  habit  by  exercise,   and  we   acquire  & 
facility  of  acting  by  continual  activity.    See  Htb.  v.  14. 

8.  Let  faith  improve  Jesus  in  all  his  relations,  which  he  hath 
taken  upon  himself,  in  order  to  promote  the  work  of  faith  ;  for  u  he 
is  the  finisher  of  faith,"  Heb  xii.  2.  He  merited  faith  f  r  you,  he 
hath  received  a  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  faith,  he  is  exalted  for  th:s 
purpose,  it  is  his  office  to  give  and  confirm  faith,  and  "  help  is  laid 
on  him"  for  this  end,  Psalm  lxxxix*  19.  Let  then  your  faith  make 
use  of  him,  employ  him,  and  derive  from  him  his  Spirit  lhr<  ugh  he 
conduits  of  the  promises  for  the  confirmation  of  your  faith,  that  he 
may  appear  active  in  you  by  .faith.  See  Gal.  ii.  20.  Eph.  iv,  15,  16. 
Finally, 

9.  Endeavour  to  make  a  believing  and  judicious  use  of  the  sacra- 
ments, receiving  them  as  your  seals  by  the  word  of  institution  and 
of  promise,  with  Abraham,  Rom.  iv.  11.  This  would  be  a  wonder- 
ful confirmation  of  your  faith  ;  but  wc  will  treat  more  of  this  duty 
in  the  sequel. 

Is  your  faith  greatly  assaulted  and  shaken,  consider  that  "the 
Fiuiaher  of  faith  pi  ays  for  you,  that  your  faith  may  not  fail,"  as  he 
himself  saith,  Luke  xxii.  31,  32.  It  will  therefore  not  fail,  for  "  he- 
is  always  heard;"  see  John  xi-  42.  "  The  foundation  of  Cod  stands 
cth  sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,'-* 
2  Tim.  ii.  19.  Therefore  to  conclude,  we  say  with  Paul  from  2 
Thess  i.  11,  12.  u  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  for  you,  that 
our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this  calling,  and  fulfill  all  the 
good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  (he  work  of  faith  with  power; 
that  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and 
ye  in  him,  according  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  Amen. 


<  3i  ) 


P.YP 


OF  THE 


NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Horn.  vi.  3,  4.  Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptised 
in'.o  Jesus  Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  death  ?  Therefore  we  arc 
buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that  like  as  Christ  was 
raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we 
also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.

Q.  68.  How  many  sacraments  hath  Chr'st  instituted  in  the  new  cove* 
nant  or  testament  ? 

A.   Two,  namely,  holy  baptism,  and  the  holy  supper. 


ANT  order  to, know  the  value  and  excellence  of  any  curidiis  work, 
we  must  not  only  attend  to  its  pioper  form,  but  must  also  inquire 
concerning  the  workman  of  it ;  lor  a  reputable  workman  renders  his 
work  reputable,  since  we  cannot  look  upon  that,  winch  hath  been 
made  by  a  great  artificer,  to  be  a  bungling  work;  therefore  great 
workmasters  will  usually  stamp  their  mark  on  their  work,  that  they 
may  render  it  the  more  reputable.  The  heathens  seeing  the  shining 
heaven,  and  the  well  adorned  earth,  with  their  various  forms,  were 
urged  of  their  own  accord  to  inquire  after  the  great  \\  01  kmasler  of 
the  universe,  winch  beamed  so  in  their  eyes,  "if  haply  they  might 
feel  after  htm  and  find  him,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  to  the  Athenians, 
Acts  xxvh.  27-.  Neither  w.re  their  endeavours  altogether  in  vain  : 
as  the  great  Worker  had  stamped  the  mark  of  u  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead"  on  his  work,  '"they  understood  and  saw  clearly  his 
invisible  things,"  according  to  Rom.  i.  20  Paul,  desirous  of  dis- 
playing the  excellence  of  the  third  heaven,  leads  us  up  to  "  God,  the 
Maker  and  Builder  of  it,"  Heb.  xi.  16.  What  renders  all  the  bene- 
fits of  the  covenant  of  grace  glorious  ?  is  it  not  that  the  blessed  and 
only  Potentate,  the  King  ot  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  is  the  author  of 
them  ?  This  caused  Paul,  when  he  considered  all  those  graces,  to 
end,  rest,  and  lose  himself  in  the  Lord,  so  that  he  was  obliged  to  cry 
nut  "  Of  him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him  are  all  things,"  Rom. 
xi.  36.  Is  it  not  thus  also  with  the  faith  of  Christians  ?  must  we 
not  inquire  concerning  the  Author  of  it,  in  order  to  know  the  value 
of  it  ?  Verily  the  great  apost  e  of  the  Gentiles  shows  us  the  worthi- 
ness cf  faith  from  the  Author  of  it,  when  he  teacheth  that  faith  and 
all  the  graces  which  accompany  it,  "are  things  that  are  given  to  ur. 
of  God,  '  1  Cor.  ii.  12.  Tne  instructor  doth  not  pursue  a  different 
method  ;  for  having  exhibited  precious  faith  with  respect  to  the  great 
necessity,  operative  nature,  comprehensive  object  and  glorious  ad- 
vantage of  it,  to  wit,  "  that  it  renders  us  partakers  of  Christ  and  all 
his  benefits,"  he  inquires  also  concerning  the  author  of  it,  that  he 
may  magnify  the  value  of  it  to  the  utmost,  asking  in  the  sixty  fifth 
question,  "  whence  doth  this  faith  proceed/'  and  teaching  us  that  the 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—63.  5 

great   Author  of  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  works  and   confims  it. 
Two  general  heads  are  exhibited   for   our  consideration   in  thil 
Lord's  day. 

I.  How  faith  is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 

II.  How  it  is  confirmed  by  him. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  general  head,  the  instructor  saith,  (a} 
that  faith  proceeds  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  (b)  that  the  mean  by  which 
it  is  wrought  is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  (c)  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  works  it  thereby  in  our  hearts. 

Faith  proceeds  indeed  from  God  the  Father,  "being  the  gift  of 
God,"  Eph.  ii.  8.  There  foie  the  Saviour  saith,  John  vi.  44,  "No 
man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me,  draw 
him."  It  is  aiso  the  work  of  the  son,  to  whom,  "the  apostles  pray- 
ed for  an  increase  of  faith,"  Luke  vii.  5.  And  it  is  also  ascribed  to 
the  Holy  Ghost,  for  he  is  «  the  Spirit  of  faith,*1  2  Cor.  iv.  IS.  We 
see  this  likewise,  1  Cor.  xii.  3,  9.  Gal.  v.  22.  The  outward  works 
are  indeed  common  to  the  three  Persons,  but  so  that  the  Father 
works  through  the  Son,  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  that,  ac- 
cording to  the  distribution  of  the  work  of  grace  among  the  divine 
Persons,  creation  is  ascribed  to  the  Father)  redemption  to  the  Son, 
and  sanctincation  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Fattier  foreordained  all 
grace  for  the  elect,  the  Son  purchased  it,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  ap- 
plies and  dispenseth  it  to  the  favourites  of  Cod.  As  faith  is  the 
first  grace  which  is  communicated  and  applied,  therefore  faith  is  at- 
tributed to  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Although  the  Holy  Ghost  alone  works  faith,  he  cloth  not  neverthe- 
less woik  it  immediately,  as  enthusiasts  fancy,  but  by  reasonable 
metns,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in  a  reasonable  manner  with  rea- 
sonable men.  The  mean  which  the  Holy  Ghost  uses,  is  not  the 
light  of  nature,  either  innate,  or  acquired  by  a  contemplation  of  the 
creatures,  as  the  Socinians  persuade  themselves  ;  for  that  light  can 
indeed  discover  to  us  "  Cod's  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  that  we 
may  be  without  excuse,"  P.om  i.  20,  but  it  cannct  reveal  Christ  to 
us,  nor  lead  us  up  to  him.  For  the  Gentiles,  who  had  no  more 
than  this  natural  light,  "  were  without  Christ,  aliens  from  the  com- 
monwealth of  Israel,  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having 
no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  wo  Id,"  Iph.  ii  12.  The  Hoiy 
Ghost  makes  use  of  the  word  only  as  a  mean  to  work  faith  :  it  is  in- 
deed true,  that  a  person  may  be  brought  to  faith  by  reading  the 
word,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  makes  use  of  the  preaching  of  the  word: 
"  Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  saith  Paul,  Pom.  x.  17.  "  The  Holy 
Ghost  fell  on  all  them  who  heard  the  word  "  in  the  house  of  Corner 


6    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lius,  Acts  x.  44.     When  the  Holy  Ghost  would  work  faith    in   the 
Ethiopian,  he  did  not  only  direct  him  to  read  the  word,  but   he  also 
ordered  it  to  be  preached  to  him  by  Philip,   Acts  xiii.  28 — 42.     Al- 
though the  Lord  could  work  faith  by  himself  without  the  instrumen- 
tality of  men,  it  nevertheless  pleaseth  him  to  "save  them    who   be- 
lieve b>?  the  foolishness  of  preaching,"    1    Cor.  i.  22.      When   the 
Lord  Jesus  would  bring  Paul  to  the    faith,  he  called  to  him  indeed 
out  of  heaven,  and  smote  him  to  the  ground,  so  that  Paul,  who   was 
yet  called  Saul,  asked,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?"    Yet 
he  doth  not  instruct  him  in  the  faith  himself,  but  saith,  u  Arise,  and 
go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  be  told   thee  what  thou  must  do  ;"  and 
he  sends  Ananias   to  him,  who  preaches  the  word  to  him.  Acts  ix. 
3 — 18.     The  Holy  Ghost  could  have  wrought  faith  in  the  Ethiopian 
immediately  ;  but  he  would  do  it  by  Philip,  Acts  viii.  2S — 40.     We 
might  think  that  the  angels  were  better  qualified  to  bring  men   to 
the  faith  by  the  word  ;  but  the  admirable  wisdom  and  goodness   of 
God,  would  rather,  for  many  reasons,  which  we    shall  not    mention 
at  present,  do  this  '•  by   men,  who  have   infirmity,"   as    "  the  law  " 
also  formerly   "  made  such  high  priests,"  Heb.  vii-   28.       God  sent 
an  angel  indeed  to  Cornelius   the  centurion,  yet  npt  to   preach  the 
word  to  him,  but  to  direct  him  to  Peter,  "  who  should  tell  him  what 
he  ought  to  do,  and  of  whom  he  should  hear  the  words  of  salvation," 
Acts  x-  1— -48.     For  God  alone  will  have  the  honour,  and    will    ex- 
ah  his  grace    so  much  the  more,  as  the   instrument,    by   which    he 
conveys  it  to  the  sinner,  is   ignoble,  unworthy  and  unqualified  in    it- 
self.    Therefore  Paul  saith,  "•  We  have  this  treasure  in   earthern 
vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and  not  of 
us,"  2  Cor.  iv.  7.     But  it  is  not  the   word  of  the  law  by  which  faith 
is  wrought ;  that  can  indeed  discover  a  man's  sins  to  him,  and  con- 
demn him  ;  but  the  law  doth  not   discover  the  way  of  faith  to   him. 
The  Holy  Ghost  make  use  indeed  of  the  law  to  convince  man  of  his 
forlorn  condition,  John  xvi.  8,  but  the  gospel    is    the  only  capable 
mean  of  working  faith  ;  therefore  Paul  asked  the  Galatians  "  Receiv- 
ed ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  bearing  of  faitli  ?" 
Gal.  iii.   2.     "  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation,"  Rom. 
i.  16,  and  <;  the  ministration  of  th*»  Spirit,"  2  Cor.  iii.  8.     The  ob- 
ject of  faith,  God  in  Christ,  is  depicted  in  the  gospel  in  all  its  lustre, 
and  in  the   fairest  colours,  that  the  sinner  may  be  enamoured  of  it, 
and  allured  by  it  to  embrace  it  in  faith  ;    it  is  therefore   called  "the 
gospel  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  by  which  God  shines  into  the  heart, 
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glery  of  God  in  the  face  of 
Mis  Christ."  See  2  Cor.  iv.  4,  6.    Gal.  iii,  1.     Yea,  the  gospel  is 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68, 

the  voice  of  the  Lord,  whereby  he  invites  and  calls  sinners  to  turn  to 
him  in  faith,  and  to  be  saved,  and  by  which  all  desirable  grace   is 
made  known  and  offered  to  them,  that  they    may    appropriate  that 
grace  to  themselves  by  faith.     See   Isaiah  xlv.  22.     Luke  ii.  10,  11. 
"  The  Holy  Ghost  works  faith  in  our  hearts  by  this  gospel,"  saith 
the  instructor.     But  how  ?     It  is  certain  that   "faith  is  the   syift  of 
God,  and  that  it  is  given  of  grace  to  believe  in  Christ,"  according  to 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  Eph.  ii.  8.    Phil.  i.  29.  But  it  is  not  so  evi- 
dent to  all  what  this  grace  is,  and  how  the   Holy  Ghost  works  faith 
in  our  hearts  thereby.     The  orthodox  say,  according  to  the  word  of 
God,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  infuseth  faith  operatively  and  effectually, 
by  an  almighty  and  irresistible  power,  into  the  heart,  by  which  it  be- 
lieves and  is  converted  :  but  the  ancient  Pelagians,  whose  opinion  , 
condemned  of  old,  hath  been  again  fetched  up  from  the  pit  of  hell  by 
the  Socinians,  said  that  the  work  of  God  in  this  matter  was  only  au 
outward  work,  consisting  merely  in  creating  man  a  rational  creature, 
endued  with  a  freewill,  by  which  he  is  able  of  himself  to   believe, 
and  that  no  inward  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  at  all  necessary,  in  or- 
der that  he  might  believe.     This  was  considered  by  the  Semipelagi- 
ans,  as  too  harsh  :  they  thought  that  we  ought  to  ascribe  something 
to  grace,  as  well  as  to  nature  :    grace  and   freewill,   work  together, 
grace  assists  our  will,  and  our  will  assists  grace,  they   resemble   two 
horses,  which  draw  one  carriage.    This  opinion  hath  often  been  con- 
demned by  the  church,  according  to  the  word  of  God,   but    it    hath 
been  again  revived  by  the  Remonstrants,  who  have  also  endeavoured 
to  force  it  upon  the  church.  In  order  to  conceal  themselves  under  spe- 
cious pretences,  they  spoke  at  first  very  highly  of  grace,   yea,    said 
that  man  couhl  not  believe  of  himself  but  only   by  grace  ;  but   when 
they  were  examined  more  strictly,  and  urged   to  declare   what  this 
working  grace  was,  they  showed  that  they  understood    nothing   else 
by  it  but  the  light  of  nature,  and  the  remains  of  the  divine  image  in 
man,  and  also  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  hath  an  inward  op- 
erative power;  whereby  the  understanding  is  enlightened,  and  which 
knocks  at  the  door  of  the  heart,  and  persuades  the  will   in   a    mora! 
manner  to  believe  ;  the  whole  power  of  the  grace  of  God  will  consist 
then  herein,  that  man  is  able  to  believe  ;  but  that  he  actually  believes 
proceeds  from  the  natutal  power  of  freewill :  they  will  not  allow  that 
God  the  Lord  works  and  infuses  faith  into  the  hearts  of  men  effectu- 
ally and  irresistibly,  and  thus  overcomes  and  destroys  the   resistance 
of  the  sinful  will,  and  renders  the  unwilling  sinner  willing. 

We  see  therefore  that  they  join  and  blend  in   a  shameful  manner, 
••he  grace  of  God  and  th<3  powers  of  roan,  call  nature  grace,  and  grace 


B     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRM  a  I  ION  OF  FAITH. 

nature,  leive  nothing  for  the  IL.ly  Spirit  to  do,  in  order  to  work  faith 
internally  in  the  heart  ;  ail  their  fair  speeches  concerning  grace  arc 
only  a  great  outcry  about  nothing :  and  when  the  scripture  saith 
that  faith  is  the  gift  of  Go:i,  given  of  grace,  they  will  utter  word; 
Without  a  meaning.  But  the  vvord  of  God,  which  we  revere,  speakc 
of  an  eilectually  working  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  produceth 
faith  in  the  hearts  of  the  tleet  effectually,  when  it  saith  ihat  God 
eniighteneth  the  understanding,  as  he  enlightened  the  worid  in  the 
first  creation  :  "  For  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of 
darkness,  hath  sbined  in  ur  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,'!  2  Cor.  iv.  6. 
The  Lord  renders  the  unwilling  will  willing,  giving  anothet  heart 
and  another  spirit,  as  he  promisetb,  Esck.  xxxvi.  26.  "  A  new  heart 
will  1  give  you,  and  i  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your 
ft -.sh,  and  1  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh/'  And  thus  he  works,  as 
Paul  salt. i,  Eph.  i.  19,  20,  "with  the  exceeding  greatness  of  hie 
power  in  us  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty- 
power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the 
dead."  What  is  the  working  of  faith,  but  a  new  birth,  a  creation, 
and  a  raising  from  the  dead  ?  Verily  the  word  of  God  calls  it  so, 
Titus  iii.  5.  Eph.  ii  5 — 10.  But  is  not  a  person  bon\  created  and 
raised  from  the  dead  effectually  and  irresi  tably  ?  What  should  a 
sinner  indeed  go  by  his  free-will  to  effect  faith  in  himself?  is  he  not 
a  slave,  a  servant  of  sin,  and  entir  ly  impotent  ?  We  have  shown  this 
upon  the  eighth   aid  ninth  questions. 

"  Did  the  Jews  resist  the  Holy  Spirit  ?"  Acts  vii.  51,  it  was  not 
the  Spirit  of  faith,  working  faith  in  their  hearts,  but  the  Spirit  who 
wrought  in  Stephen,  and  enabled  him  to  speak  with  power,  whom 
they  resisted,  as  the  fathers  of  the  Jews  had  resisted  the  prophets, 
according  to  ?rs.  52.  Let  us  admit  that  Miey  resisted  the  Spirit,  who 
Wrought  in  their  hearts,  they  neve  theless  did  no'  resist  the  Spirit, 
who  wrought  in  them,  that  they  might  believe,  but  who  wrought  in 
*.I:em  that  he  might  convince  and  condemn  them,  as  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  strove  with  t.ve  inhabitants  of  the  old  world,  Gen.  vi.  3. 

They  discover  their  ignorance  concerning  the  working  of  the  Hoiy 
Ghost  in  effecting  faith,  when  they  say,  that  the  will  doth  not  then 
continue  free,  but  suffers  compulsion  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in 
man  agreeably  to  his  rational  nature,  enabling  him  to  behold  his 
misery,  and  the  beauty  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  which,  being  sweetly 
drawn,  he  run  .  after  the  I  ord,  and  even  cries  to  him,  "  Turn  me, 
and  I  shall  be  turned,"  as  the  church  doth,  Jer.  xxxi.  18.  Lam- 
v„  2 1 . 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  9 

We  will  consider  this  somewhat  more  particularly.     The  Holy 
Ghost  works  faith  in  all  the  elect  indeed  effectually,  nevertheless  in 
a  different  manner  and  order  in  different  persons.     In  some  by  a 
judicious  contemplation  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  bv  which  a  new 
light  ariseth  in  them,  whereby  they  contemplate  it  with  singleness, 
so  that  their  minds  are  captivated  by  it,  and  rendered  willing  to  em- 
brace it  as  an  acceptable   truth,   and  also  the  Mediator  exhibited 
therein,  and  to  surrender  themselves  unto   him.     So  it  fared  with 
Lydia,  Acts  x\\.  14.     "  Whose  heart  the  Lovd  opened,  that  she  at- 
tended to  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul."    They  hear  Jesus 
say  to  them,  "  Follow  me,"  and  they  experience  a  sweet,  but  power- 
ful drawing,  that  induces  them  to  follow  willingly,   which  was  the 
case  of  Matthew,  according  to  his  own  account,  Matt.  ix.  9.     This 
is  effected  with  great  tranquility  :  but  Jesus  embraceth  and  over- 
whelms others  in  an  exceedingly  unexpected  manner  with   his  pre- 
venting love,  which  transports  their  souls  as  it  were  out  of  them- 
selves, and  fills  them  with  so  much  joy,  that  they  cannot  contain 
themselves,  but  are  constrained  to  receive  him  within  themselves,  to 
accept  of  him,  and  to  surrender  themselves  wholly  to  him.     In  this 
manner  was  faith  wrought  in  Zaccheus  ;  for  when  Jesus  said  to  him, 
¥  Make    haste,   and  come   down  ;  for  to  day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
house,"  he  made  haste,  and  came  down,  and  received  him  joyfully  :" 
and  his  faith  became  forthwith  active  in  works  of  chanty,  Luke  xix. 
1 — 9.    There  are  others  in  whose  hearts  faith  is  wrought  from  their 
youth,  as  we  may  see  in  Obadiah,  the  steward  of  Ahab,   1  Kings 
xviii.  18,  in  John  the  Baptist,  and  others  :  all  these  obtain  faith  with- 
out any  remarkable  conviction  of  their  sins,  and  of  their  damnable 
condition  :  children  certainly  are  not   convinced  of  sin,   but  faith  is 
infused  into  them,  before  they  attain  to  the  use  of  reason :  but  those 
who  are  persuaded  by  a  calm  contemplation  of  the  truth,  o»-  by  the 
power  of  the  love  of  Christ,   see  indeed  that  they  are  miserable  in 
themselves,   but  they  are  not  long  exercised   in  this  manner ;  for 
their  view  of  their  misery  is  presently  swallowed  up  ;  but  they  are 
afterwards  led  so  much  the  more  into  the  valley  of  humiliation,  and 
are  daily  convinced  of  their  sinfulness  and  of  their  punishableness, 
in  order  to  humble  them. 

The  Holy  Ghost  doth  not  observe  this  manner  and  order  of  work- 
ing faith  with  all  the  elect ;  but  his  ordinary  method  with  the  most 
of  them  is  to  convince  them  of  their  sinful  and  damnable  condition ; 
for  the  Holy  Ghost  uconvinceth  of  sin,"  John  xvi.  8.  He  darts  his 
light  into  the  soul,  by  which  she  is  stopped  short  in  her  sinful  career, 
is  induced  to  attend  to  herself,  and  sees  her  abominable  state,  and 
Vol.  h.  B 


io    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

her  alienation  from  God  and  from  his  blessed  favour  ;  this  confounds 
and  afflicts  her,  and   "  she   saith,   What  have  I  done,"  Jer.  viii.  6. 
She  thinks,  what  shall  I  do  :  she  will  reform,  and  will  not  sin  so  any 
more  :  she  earnestly  endeavours  to  foisake  sin,  and  attends  diligently 
on  many  ordinances:  but  the  Holy  ^.p.rit   discovfeseth   to  her  again 
and  again  the  sinfulness  of  her  conduct,  by  which    she  becomes  so 
distressed,  that  she   cries  out,    '  There  is  no  hope,"  Isaiah  lvii.  10. 
As  she   is  not  willing  to  perish,  she  reads  the  scripture,  seeks  good 
books,   and  asks  an   understanding  person  or  preacher,  "  What  she 
must  do  :"  Acts  ii.  37.  xvi.  30.    She  is  advised  to  believe  in  Christ: 
b  t  she  hath  such  an  obscure  knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  faith,  that 
she  knows  not  how  to  conduct  with  respect  to  this  matter,  until  the 
Holy  Ghost  discovers  to   her  by  his  own  light  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his 
fulness   and  ability  to  save  her  perfectly,   2  Cor.  iv.  6.     '1  bis  gives 
her  some   hope,  and  quickens  her  desire,  but  doth  not  afford  her  a 
perfect  relief,  because   she  knows  not  yet  whether  he  will  save  her, 
since  she  is  so  vile.    She  now  betakes  herself  to  prayer,  that  he  may 
behold  her  in  his  kindness  ;  but  the  poor  wavering  soul  doth  not  find 
that  he  turns  to  her.  The  Holy  Ghost,  designing  to  work  effectually, 
assures  and    persuades   her  that  Jesus   calls  and   invites  her  in  his 
word,  and    he  convinces  her  of  the  truth  of  it,  "  the  Spirit  bearing 
witness,    that  the   Spirit   is  the  truth,"    1  John  v.  6.     And  he  thus 
works  an  historical  faith,  by  which  the  soul  experienced),  that  u  the 
gospel  doth  not  come  to  her  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance,"  1  Thess.  i.  5.  And  there- 
fore it  is  not  to  her,  "  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  the  word  of  God, 
which  also  worketh  in  her,"  1  Thess.  ii.    13.     This  affords  her  en- 
largement,  she  flees,  with  a  certain   confidence  that  she  will  be  ac- 
cept d,   to  this   Saviour,   who  is   so  precious  to  her,  embraces  him, 
and  receives  him  :  for  the   Holy  Ghost   inclines   her  effectually  to 
consent  to  him  heartily,  and  with  a  full  determination  of  her  will,  in 
order  to  belong  wholly  to  him,  that  he  may  sanctify  and  save  her. 
And  thus  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  her  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant, 
according  to  his  promise,  l:z  k.  xx.  37. 

What  think  ye,  hearers,  is  this  a  forcing  of  the  free-will,  which 
cannot  be  forced,  if  it  shall  remain  a  will  ?  Yes,  it  is  a  force  that  is 
agreeable  to  the  nature  of  the  will,  which  can  endure  such  a  force. 
O  sweet  force  of  love,  which  draws  the  soul  with  the  cords  of  a  man, 
with  bands  of  love,  Hosea  xi.  4.  As  soon  as  she  is  touched,  she 
cries  out,  "  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee,"  Song  i.  4.  "  Turn 
me,  and  I  shall  be  turned,"  Jer.  xxxi.  28.  Nothing  is  more  grievous 
to  her,  than  to  find  such  a  depraved  unwillingness   in  herself:  she 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  11 

wishes  that  "  the  Lord  would  work  in  her  both  to  will  and  to  do  of 
his  good  pleasure-,"  Philip,  ii.  13.  Thus  then  the  effectual  working 
of  God  to  produce  faith  in  her  doth  not  militate  against  her  will. 

II.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  works  faith,  so  he  also  confirms  it.  It  doth 
not  please  him  to  work,  faith  from  the  beginning  in  its  greatest  per- 
fection, but  rather  to  make  it  like  "  a  strain  of  mustard  seed,  a  bruised 
reed,  and  smoking  flax,"  he  doth  not  however  leave  it  so  small  and 
weak,  but  he  increases  and  confirms  it,  and  causes  it  to  "■  grow  ex- 
ceedingly," 2  Thess.  i.  3.  In  order  to  illustrate  this,  we  will  explain, 
1.  What  a  strong  and  a  weak  faith  is,  2.  How  the  Holy  Ghost  con- 
firms faith,  3.  What  means  the   Holy  Ghost  Useth  to  confirm  faith. 

1.  Faith  is  strong,  (.»)  w.:en  it  is  able  to  believe  and  expect  great, 
yea,  almost  incredible  things.     Abraham,  though   he   and  his  wife 
were  both  old,  durst  nevertheless  "believe   that  his  sted  should  be 
like  the  stars  for  multitude,"  Gen.  xv.  5,  6.    The  virgin  Mary  show- 
ed her  great  faith,  when  she   believed  that  she  should  bear  the  Son 
of  God,  without  knowing  a  man,    Luke  i.  38—45.     See  also  Matt; 
viii.  8 — 10.     But  a  weak  faith  locks  upon  great  and  unusual  tilings, 
as  impossible  :  Moses  discovered  a  weak  faith,   when  he  smote  the 
rock  twice,  as  though  it  were  impossible,  that  the  dry  and  hard  rock 
should  afford  water,    Numb.   xx.  10,    11,  12.     Faith  is  strong,  (b) 
when  it  can  proceed  upon  the  single  word  of  God,  without  seeing, 
without  signs,  and  without  a  probability,  that  such  an  event  will 
come  to  pass.     "  Abraham,  believed  in  hope  against  hope,  that  he 
should  become  the  father  of  many  nations  ;  according  to  that  which 
was  spoken,  So  shall  thy  seed  be.     And  being  not  weak  in  faith,  he 
considered  not  his  own  body  now  dead,"  &c.  Rom.  iv.   18,  19,  20. 
But  a  weak  faith  will  have  sight,  signs  and  probability,  as  we  see  in 
the  priest  Zacharias,  in  the  Jews  and  in  Thomas,   Luke  i.  18,  19. 
John  iv.  48.   xx.  25 — 29.     It  is  a  strong  faith,  (c)   which  assures 
itself  of  God's  blessed  favour,  as  the  great  faith  of  Paul  did,  2  Tim. 
i.  12.     This  is  «  a  full  assurance  of  faith,"   H?b.  x    22,  but  faith  is 
weak,  when  it  suffers  itself  to  be  shaken,  and  cast  down  by  the  least 
conceit,  or  accident.     Faith  is  strong,  (d)  whtu  it  is  able  to  receive 
Christ  actually  and  operatively,   "  can  cause:  him  to  dwell  in  the 
heart,"  can  lean  on  him  affectionately,  and  can  derive  all  grace  fiora 
him  for  every  need,   and  can  exert  a  holy  violence  on   him,   with 
Jacob,  in  order  to  obtain  a  blessing,   Gen    xxxii.  26      But  faith  is 
weal;,  when  it  can  only  desire,  can  stretch  forth  the  hand,  the  power 
of  the  soul  toward  him,  but  cannot  fetch  him  to  her  ;  there  is,   as  it 
were,  a  weak  breathing  of  the  soul.     Further,  faith   is   strong,  (e) 
when  it  can  despise  great  shame3  losses,  hqnora,  profits,  and  pleas- 


12     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  CF  FAITH. 

ures,  as  far  as  they  would  detach  the  soul  from  her  duty,  that  it  may 
remain  faithful  to  God  only,  with  Moses,  Heb.  xi.  24,  25,  26,.  But 
it  is  weak,  when  it  becomes  slack  in  its  duty,  on  account  of  these 
dutWard  things.  Add  to  this,  that  faith  is  strong,  (f)  when  it  re- 
mains unaffrighted  in  great  dangers,  and  can  shelter  itself  with  the 
Lord,  like  the  faith  of  Moses  and  Da\id,  Psalm  xxvii.  1 — 3.  Ivii.  I. 
Heb.  xi.  27".  But  a  weak  faith  trembles  at  the  least  appearance  of 
danger,  Jer.  xii.  5.  Matt,  viii,  24,  25,  26.  xiv.  29,  30,31.  More- 
over (g)  a  strong  faith  is  able  to  improve  that  which  would  be 
against  it,  and  is  discouraging,  to  its  advantage  and  encouragement. 
This  made  the  faith  of  the  Canaanitish  woman  great,  Matt.  xv.  22— 
28.  B  it  a  weak  faith  will  abuse  that  which  should  encourage,  to 
faint-heartedness.  See  this  weak  faith  in  Manoah,  censured  by  his 
wife,  Judges  xiii.  22,  23*  I  must  add  also,  (h)  that  a  strong  faith 
doth  not  slop  at  its  unworthiness,  but  looks  beyond  it,  yea,  covers  it 
with  the  worthiness  of  the  Lord,  as  the  faith  of  the  centurion  acted, 
Matt.  viii.  8,  9,  10,  while  a  weak  faith  dares  neither  believe,  nor  at- 
tempt any  thing,  on  account  of  its  unworthiness.  Moses  manifested 
repeatedly  the  weakness  of  his  faith,  when  he  endeavoured  to  excuse 
himself,  on  account  of  his  meanness  and  incapacity,  fiom  being  the 
ambassadour  of  the  Lord  to  Pharaoh,  Exod.  iii.  v.  vi.  Finally,  ('< )  a 
strong  faith  looks  thiough  every  temporal  and  visible  object  to  those 
which  are  eternal  and  invisible,  in  order  to  encourage  itself  thereby 
in  its  course,  according  to  2  Cor.  iv,  17,  13.  Heb.  xi.  I.  But  to  a 
weak  faith  future  things  appear  exceedingly  darTcj  and  they  seldom 
affect  the  soul  with  any  abiding   impression. 

3.  The  Holy  Ghost  works  this  strong  faith  in  the  hearts  of  his 
people,  not  instantaneously,  bnt  progressively,  as  light,  plants  and 
men  increase  gradually.  And  he  doth  this,  (a)  by  shedding  a  greater 
measure  of  light  into  the  soul,  in  consequence  of  which  Christ  a  d 
all  his  mysteiies  are  discovered  to  her  more  fully  than  before,  and 
so  "the  path  of  the  righteous  becomes  like  a  shining  light,  shining 
more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day,"  Pro  v.  iv.  18.  This  Paul  de- 
sired for  the  Ephesians,  Eph.  i.  16 — 19.  (b)  By  convincing  and  as- 
suring the  minds  of  believers  more  of  the  divine  truths,  that  they 
may  in  all  that  they  do  establish  themselves  upon  them,  by  which 
they  obtajn  u  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  understanding,"  Coll. 
ii.  2.  This  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  John  testifieth,  1  John 
v.  6.  Moreover,  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  fiith,  (c)  when  he  in- 
creases and  renders  the  habitual  life  of  faith  more  steadfast  in  the 
soul,  wheieby  she  is  enabled  to  exercise  faith  with  greater  dexterity 
and  ease,  and  is  not  so  quickly  shaken,  "  being  rooted  and  built  up 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65— €8.  13 

in  Christ,  established  in  the  faith,  and  abounding  therein,"  Coll.  iu 
7.  This  is  "being  strengthened  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the 
inner  man,  that  Christ  may  dwell  by  faith  in  the  heart,"  l-'ph.  ii.  16, 
17.  The  Holy  Ghost  confirms  faith  also,  fd)  by  an  abundant  and 
reviving  shedding  abroad  of  grace  :  he  speaks  to  the  heart,  and 
affords  a  feeling  sense  of  his  love  :  Hope  maketh  not  ashamed,  be- 
cause the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holv 
Ghost,"  saith  Paul,  Rom  v.  5.  Again,  (e)  The  Holy  Ghost  con- 
firms faith,  when  he  supports  the  soul  under  her  dejection  on  ac- 
count of  spiritual  and  temporal  afflictions,  either  enabling  her  to  look 
by  his  light  through  all  her  difficulties  to  a  certain  issue  ;  or  strength- 
ening her,  in  order  that  she  may  sustain  her  adversity  with  courage, 
by  which  she  therefore  "  glories  in  tribulation,"  Rom.  v.  3,  and  "  in 
her  infirmaties,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  her,"  2  Cor. 
xii.  9,  10,  or  discovering  to  her,  that  in  all  her  distresses  he  is  stilt 
with  her,  and  that  he  comforts  her  wonderfully  in  her  tribulation, 
and  so  she  laughs  at  fear,  saying  with  David,  Psalm  xxiii.  4. 
"  Though  1  walk  through  ihe  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will 
fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  com- 
fort me."  Thus  the  Lord  saith  to  his  dejected  people,  Isaiah  xii. 
10.  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am 
thy  God  :  I  will  strengthen  thee,  yea,  I  will  help  thee,  yea,  I  will 
uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness."  Once  more, 
(f )  it  sometimes  happens  to  believers,  that  their  ardor  abates  exceed- 
ingly, and  that  they  forsake  their  first  love,  yea,  that  they  are  even 
hurried  to  a  very  grievous  sin  ;  which  doth  not  indeed  destroy  their 
faith,  but  shakes  it  exceedingly,  and  causeth  it  to  languish.  But  the. 
Holy  Ghost  having  begun  a  good  work  in  them,  and  designing  to 
finish  it,  raiseth  them  up  again,  and  restores  them  to  their  former 
zeal.  Thus  David  prayed  after  his  grievous  fall  for  "  the  renewing 
of  a  right  spirit,  and  for  the  upholding  of  the  free  Spirit,"  Psalm  li. 
10.  12.  Peter  having  been  greatly  shaken  by  his  sin  was  converted 
and  strengthened  again,  according  to  Luke  xxii.  31,  32. 

3.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  not  work  faith  without  means,  so  he 
doth  not  confirm  ic  neither  without  them.  In  order  to  show  his  mar- 
vellous skilfulness  in  confirming  faith,  he  will  sometimes  employ 
means  to  confirm  it,  which  are  naturally  calculated  to  weaken  it. 
A  tempestuous  wind  which  threatens  to  destroy  trees,  serves  to  en- 
root them  more  firmly.  The  horrible  blasphemies,  which  are  some*, 
times  injected  into  the  soul  by  a  messenger  of  Satan,  threaten  to 
extirpate  faith  :  but  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  them  to  establish  it  :  "  He 
thus  perfects  his  strength  in  our  weakness/'  2  Cor.  xii.    7,  S,  9, 


14     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

Who  can  maintain  his  faith,  when  he  is  tormented  by  wicked  men 
in  the  most  dreadful-manner,  that  they  may  compel  him  to  deny  it  I 
Yet  the  Holy  Ghost  cloth  even  by  tribulation  work  patience,  ex- 
perience and  hope,"  Rom  v.  3,  4.  But  the  gospel  is  belter  calcula- 
ted by  its  own  nature  to  confirm  faith  :  all  the  mysteries,  promises 
and  encouragements  of  fhe  gospel  are  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
confirm  faith  :  "  Whatsoever  things  were  written  aforetime,  were 
written  for  our  learning  ,  that  we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of 
the  scriptures  might  have  hope,  c  aith  Paul,  Rom.  xv.  4.  But  the 
sacraments  were  more  especially  instituted,  and  are  used  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith. 

The  word  Sacrament  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  sacrare,  to 
consecrate,  or  to  dedicate.  Thus  the  heathens  called  the  money 
which  two  persons  at  law  who  had  betted,  laid  up  in  the  holy  place, 
as  a  pledge,  upon  condition  that  he  who  should  Win  the  action,  should 
receive  his  money  again,  and  that  the  other  should  leave  it  there. 
And  in  this  manner  are  the  sacraments  pledges  of  the  faithfulness 
sf  God  and  of  his  covenant  people.  The  military  oath  was  also  cal- 
itd  anciently  a  sacrament :  and  thus  also  the  use  of  the  sacraments 
serves  as  a  solemn  engaging  of  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  to  fi.ht  under 
his  banner  faithfully  against  all, his  enemies.  This  word  was  most 
probably  introduced  into  the  church  by  the  vulgar  Latin  translation 
of  the  Bible,  which  renders  the -Greek  word  musterion,  a  mystery, 
sometimes  by  zacr  amen  turn,  as  the  Latin  fathers  also  called  a  mys- 
tery sometimes  a  sacrament;  and  truly  the  scraments  contain  great 
and  profound  mysteries.  The  Papists  have  been  gulty  of  a  shame- 
ful abuse  here,  by  taking  occasion  from  this  sense  of  the  word,  to 
multiply  the  sacraments  beyond  measure.  1  will  not  however  on 
this  account  disapprove  of  using  the  word,  because  we  know  what 
we  understand  by  it,  and  the  church  makes  use  of  o.her  words, 
which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  bible.  If  we  will  be  particular,  we 
may  make  use  of  the  language  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  calls  the  sac- 
raments signs,  seals,  a  covenant,  and  tokens  of  the  covenant/'  Rom. 
iv.  11.     Gen.  xvii.  11,  13.    Excd   xii.  13. 

In  order  to  contemplate  the  matter  itself,  we  say  that  a  sacra- 
ment is  a  visible  sign,  and  seal  of  invisible  grace."  So  "  Abra- 
ham received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  righteousness 
of  faith,'!  as  Paul  speaks  in  the  text.  The  instructor,  in  order  to 
explain  this,  teacheth  us  three  things,  1,  the  nature  of  the  sacra- 
ments, Q.  66.  2,  The  agreement  of  the  word  with  the  sacraments, 
Q.  67,  and     3,  The  number  of  the  sacraments,  Q.  68, 

1.  To  the  nature  of  the  sacraments  pertains,  1,  an  outward  and  vi- 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  15 

jible  sign,  2,  an  invisible  thing  signified,  3,  an  union  between  the 
sign  and  the  thing  signified,  4,  the  foundation,  or  fundamental  reason 
of  that  union,  5,  an  end  of  tbe  institution  and  of  the  use  of  it. 

1.  w  The  sacraments,"  saith  the  instructor,  "  are  holy,  visible 
signs  ;"  they  are  therefore  calculated  to  signify  and  represent  spir- 
itual tilings,  in  order  that  we  may,  by  using  them,  attain  to  a  better 
understanding  of  spiritual  things.  It  pieaseth  the  Lord  to  work  in 
us  by  means  of  the  outward  senses,  since  we  have  not  only  a  reason- 
able soul,  but  also  a  body  :  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  and  the 
confirmation  of  it  cometh  by  seeing  ;  but  not  only  the  elements,  but 
also  the  outward  ceremonies,  which  accompany  the  elements,  are 
signs  ;  we  will  illustrate  this  more  fully,  when  we  treat  upon  bap- 
tism and  the  Lord's  Supper.  I  leave  it  to  ethers  to  show  that  signs 
are  either  natural,  or  instituted,  either  human  or  divine,  as  the  sac- 
raments a>e  holy  signs  Not  that  the  signs  are  holy  by  themselves, 
having  grace  and  the  thing  signified  in  themselves,  and  communi- 
cating it  thus  ;  for  God  alone  works  the  thing  signified,  and  the 
signs  can  work  only  in  a  moral  manner,  and  cannot  convey  grace  to 
the  soul  by  themselves.  But  they  are  holy  signs  by  a  divine  institu- 
tion signifying  holy  things,  in  order  to  render  men  holy  by  a  holy 
use  of  them.  Independent  of  this,  the  signs  are  neither  holy  nor 
profitable,  as  Paul  teacheth  with  iespect  to  circumcision,  Rom.  ii. 
25,  29. 

2.  The  thing  signified  by  a  sacrament  is  invisible  grace  :  the  in- 
structor saith  '•  the  promise  of  tie  gospel,  that  God  grants  us  freely 
the  remission  of  sin,  and  life  everlasting,  for  the  sake  of  that  one  sa- 
rifice  of  Christ,  accomplished  on  the  cross."  This  is  called  by  Paul 
in  one  word,  "  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  Rom.  iv.  11.  We  may 
also  siy  th  t  the  great  covenant  of  grace,  with  all  its  sure  benefits,  is 
the  thing  signified  by  the  sacraments,  and  is  therefore  called  "the 
covenant  of  feed."  Gen.  xvii.  11,  13.  Since  now  the  sacraments  dif- 
fer one  from  another,  therefore  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gives 
are  also  proposed  to  us  in  different  relations  as  will  appear  in  the  se- 
quel. 

3.  But  what  relation  hath  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified,  unless 
there  be  an  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  ?  this  sacramen- 
tal union  consists  in  the  relation  which  the  sign  hath  to  the  thing  sig- 
nified, by  which  (a)  there  is  a  resemblance,  and  an  agreement  be- 
tween the  outward  and  material  element  and  grace,  by  which  the 
sign  exhibits  and  expresseth  the  thing  signified  in  a  lively  manner,, 
(b)  This  sacramental  union  and  relation  consist?  also  in  the  conjunc- 
of  the  sign  with  the  tiling  signified  by  and  in  the  use  of  them   both-. 


16    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

We  use  and  receive  the  sign  with  our  outward  senses,  and  the  assu- 
rance that  we  partake  of  the  thing  signified,  with  our  understanding 
and  will,  through  faith,  and  the  operation  of  the  Hoiy  Ghost. 

That  such  an  union  belongs  to  the  sacraments,  we  learn  from  four 
kinds  of  sacramental  phrases,  usual  in  the  word  of  God,  by  which, 

(a)  the  name  of  the  thing  signified  is  given  to  the  sign.  Circum- 
cision, "the  sign  of  the  covenant,"  is  called  "the  covenant"  itself, 
Gen.  xviii.  ii.  13.     See  also  Exod.  xii.  11.     Matt,  xxvi-  26,  27,  28. 

(b)  The  name  of  the  sign  is  given  to  the  thing  signified  ;  thus, 
Christ  is  called  "our  passover,"  1  Cor.  v.  7.  (c)  The  properties  and 
effects  of  the  thing  signified  are  ascribed  to  the  sign  ;  so  baptism  is 
called  "the  washing  away  of  sin,"  and  "the  washing  of  regeneia- 
tion,"  Acts  xxii.  16.  Eph.  v  26.  I'itus  iii.  5.  And  (d)  the  prop- 
erties and  effects  of  the  sign  are  attributed  to  the  thing  signified  : 
when  Christ  broke  the  bread,  he  said,  "  this  is  my  body,  which  is  bro- 
ken for  you,"  1  Cot.  xi.  24. 

4.   We  find  many  similitudes  in  the  word  of  God,  in  which  spirit- 
ual things  are   expressed  by  material ;  Christ  is   called   a  vine,  a 
branch,  a  dour ;  we  can  also  spiritualize  many  material  things,   and 
ascend  up  by  them  to  spiritual  things  ;  but  they  are   not  therefore 
sacraments,  and  the  conjuction  of  a  material,  with  a  spiritual    thing 
doth   not  of  itself  constitute  a  sacrament,  but  the  word  of  God  must 
be  added  to  it  ;  the  word,  joined  to  the  element,  constitutes  it  a  sac- 
rament, according  to   Augustin.     The  word  of  God,  which  consti- 
tutes the  element  a  sacrament,  is  the  word  of  institution  and  of  pro- 
mise.    God  alone  hath  a  sovereign  right  to   constitute  any    thing  a 
sacrament,  and  therefore   we  find  that  he  alone  hath   instituted   the 
sacraments  ;  we  can  see  this  in  circumcision,  Gen.  xvii.  in  the  pass- 
over.     Exod.  xii   in  baptism.     M  it.  xxviii,  and  in  the  Supper,  Matt, 
xvi.    This  word  of  the  institution  is  the  command  of  Ck>d,  by  which 
he  chargeth  us  to  hold,  and  to  use  such  an  element  as  a  fign  of  spir- 
itual things,  as  the  Lord  said  concerning  circumcision)  "  It  shall  be  a 
sign  of  the  covenant,"  Gen.  xvii.    11.      The  word  of  the   promise 
constitutes  the  element,  instituted  for  a  sign,  also  a  seal,  which  con- 
firms and  assures,  that  believers  do  as  truly  partake  of  the  thing  sig- 
nified, as  they  make  use  of  the  sign  in  faith.     Thus  "  Abraham   re- 
ceived the  s:gn  of  circumcision  for  a  seal   of  the   righteousness   of 
faith,"  as  the  text  speaks.     Therefore  the  Socinians,    Remonstrants 
and  Mennonitts  contradict  the  scripture,  when  they  say  that  the  sa- 
craments are  only  bare  signs  of  a  profession,  and  of  our  thankfulness 
to  God  :  and  the  Papists  are  guilty  of  slander,  when  they  report  of 
us,  that  we  dispense  r.o  other  than  bare  signs  in  the  sacraments. 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  17 

5.  As  a  wise  man  doth  nothing  to  no  purpose,  so  the  Lord  also 
did  not  bestow  the  sacraments  to  no  purpose,  and  without  any  end, 
but  he  instituted  them,  not  merely  that  they  might  serve  as  duties 
of  religious  worship,  but  that  we  might,  by  using  them,  bind  our- 
selves solemnly,  as  it  were,  by  a  military  oath,  to  obey  him ,;  also, 
that  they  might  serve  for  signs  of  the  pure  worship,  of  the  commu- 
nion of  saints,  and  of  their  separation  from  the  assemblies  of  erro- 
neous persons.  Moreover  the  Lord  instituted  the  sacraments,  that 
he  might  oblige  us  to  acknowledge  his  sealed  kindness ;  but  they 
were  bestowed  especially  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith. 

We  must  illustrate  all  this  more  fully,  when  we  treat  of  the  nature 
of  baptism,  and  of  the  Lord's  supper :  we  will  now  only  show  how 
the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  our  faith  by  the  sacraments.     He  doth  this, 
(a)  by  bringing  us  to  a  better  understanding   of  the   promise  of  the 
gospel  through  the  sacraments.     The  signs  are  like  pictures  .which 
represent  Christ  and  all  his  benefits  to  us :  when  a   person  makes  a 
proper  use  of  the  signs,  he  will  be  presently  led  to  a   knowledge  of 
the  thing  signified  by  them,   and  obtain  a  lively   view  of  it.     The 
signs  are  indeed  memorials,   according  to  Exod.  xii.  14.  1  Cor.  xi. 
24,  25.     Besides  this,  the  Holy  Spirit   irradiates  the  soul  with  his 
light,  by  which  she  is  enabled  to  "  behold  the   glory  of  the  Lord  as 
in  a  glass,"  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  (b)    By  giving  believers  the   sacraments 
for  seals,  and  enabling  them  to  make  use  of  them  as  such,  as  Abra- 
ham was  taught  by  him,  Rom.  iv.  11.     The  sacraments  are  indeed 
seals  of  the  Testament,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  they  are,  as  it  were,    pledges   and   earnests  for  confirming  the 
faithfulness  of  Christ,  (c)  This  would  have  no  force,  and  would  have 
no  influence  on  the  soul,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  "  bestow  himself 
for  an  earnest  and  seal,  in  order  to  confirm  and  to  seal  the  soul,"  ac- 
cording to  2  Cor.  i.  21,  22.  Eph.  i.   13,  14.  iv.  30,  which  he   doth 
particularly,  when  he  causeth  her  to  enjoy  in,  and  by  the  use  of  the 
sacraments  the  thing  signified,   as  he   did  to  the   Loid  Jesus,  when 
he  was  baptized  :  "The  heavens  were  then  opened,   and  the  Spirit 
of  God  descended   upon   him  as  a  dove,  and  a   voice  from   heaven 
said.  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  Matt, 
iii.  16j  17,  "Jesus   said,  it  is  the  Spirit  that   quickeneth,  the  flesh 
profiteth  nothing  :  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  they  are   spirit, 
and  they  are  life,"  John  vi.  63. 

2.  Although  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  word  of  the 

gospel  and  the  sacraments,  since  the  word  affects  us  by  our  hearing, 

and  the  sacraments  by  the  other  senses ;  the   word  works   faith,  and 

ihe  sacraments  confirm  it ;  the  word  proraiseth  faith,  and  the  sacra- 

Vol.  ir.  '  C 


8     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

ments  seal  it,  and  the  word  can  be  profitable  without  the  sacraments, 
but  the  sacraments  cannot  without  the  word  j  nevertheless  the  word 
and  sacraments  agree  herein,  that  "  they  both  direct  our  faith  to  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  upon  the  cross,  as  the  only  ground  of  our 
salvation,"  which  the  instructor  exhibits  in  the  sixty  seventh  ques- 
tion against  the  Romanists,  who  teach  a  totally  different  doctrine, 
when  they  say  that  the  sacraments  contain  grace,  and  that  it  is  given 
(x  oficre  ofieraio,  u  from  the  work  itself,"  and  that  the  efficacy  of  the 
sacraments  nevertheless  dependsupon  the  administrator  of  them ;  yea, 
they  lead  souls  more  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  than  to  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ  on  the  cross.  And  they  direct  men  thus,  not  to  the 
bacrifice  of  Christ,  as  the  only  foundation  of  salvation,  but  to  the  sac- 
raments, to  seek  their  salvation  in  them.  The  instructor  sets  him- 
self against  this,  when  he  saith,  "The  Holy  Ghost  teacheth  us  in  the 
gospel,  and  assures  us  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  whole  of  cur  sal- 
vation depends  upon  that  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  he  accom- 
plished for  us  on  the  cross."  That  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth  us  this 
in  the  gospel  hath  been  abundantly  proved  on  the  sixth,  eleventh, 
twenty  third  and  twenty  fourth  Lord's  days.  The  Holy  Ghost  as- 
sures us  of  this  same  thing  by  the  sacraments ;  for  circumcision  re- 
fers to  "  the  circumcision  of  Christ,  without  hands,"  Col.  ii.  11,  12. 
The  passover  is  therefore  called  Christ  himself,  1  Cor.  v.  7.  That 
baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper  also  refer  only  to  the  bloody  sacrifice 
ol  Christ,  will  be  shown  in  order  on  the  following  Lord's  days. 

2.  As  we  read  of  several  covenants,  which  God  made  with  mer. 
oo  we  read  also  of  several  sacraments*;  for  the  sacraments  are 
adapted  to  the  nature  of  the  covenants,  inasmuch  as  they  are  signs 
and  seals  of  the  covenants.  We  read  of  one  covenant,  which  had 
only  temporal  promises,  to  wit,  the  covenant  that  God  made  with 
Noah>  with  all  his  posterity,  and  with  every  living  creature,  in  which 
he  promised  that  he  >ould  not  destroy  the  earth  again  with  a  gen- 
eral flood  This  covenant  had  the  rainbow  for  its  sacrament,  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  ix.  3 — 17.  Rut  this  covenant  supposed  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  since  the  Lord  made  it  only  to  preserve  an  elect  seed 
■dive,  and  to  glorify  himself,  as  a  gracious  God.  Rut  the  other  cov- 
enants have  heavenly  promises  ;  these  are  either  the  covenant  of 
works,  established  with  Adam  and  all  his  posterity,  in  which  the 
Lord  God  promised  life,  in  consequence  of  the  perfect  observation 
of  his  law.  He  gave  the  tree  of  life  as  a  sacrament  to  confirm  this 
promib'*.  Or  the  covenant  of  redemption  which  the  Father  estab- 
lished rom  eternity  Son,  in  Which  he  required  of  him,  that 
he  should  give  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many,  and  promised  him   that 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  » 

he  should  see  his  seed  and  be  glorified.     The  Son  of  God  employed 
all  the  sacraments  of  the  covenant  of  grace  lo  confirm  this  covenant. 
The  covenant  of  grace  is  the  third,   which  hath  spiritual  and  heav- 
enly promises,  and  particularly  that  the  Lord  will  be  the  God  of  the 
sinner,  which  is  the  sum  of  every  gracious  promise.     This  covenant 
of  grace,  having  a  twofold  administration  or  dispensation,  to  wit,  of 
the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament,  hath  also,  according  to  the  dis- 
pensations of  those  times,  two  kinds  of  sacraments,  to  wit,  either  of 
the  Old  or  of  the  New  Testament.     These  were  extraordinary  sac- 
raments, as  the  preservation  of  Noah  with  his  household  in  the  ark 
by  water,   according  to  1    Peter  iii.    20,   21,   the  passage  of  Israel 
through  the  red  sea,  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  the  rock,  as  Paul  teach- 
eth  us,   1  Cor.  x.  1 — 4,    or  ordinary  sacraments ;  such  were  all  the 
ceremonies  of  the  typical  worship;  but  chcumcision  and  the  pass- 
over  were  move   especially  the  ordinary  sacraments  of  that  time. 
See  Gen.   xvn.  and  Exd.  xii.     The  sacraments  of  the  New   Testa- 
ment are  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper ;  these  and  no  others  did 
Christ  institute,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  xxvi.  2G,  27,  28.  He  himself  made 
use  of  no  others.     A  Christian  needeth  no  others,  inasmuch  as  bap- 
tism is  to  him  a  sacrament  of  regeneration  and  of  incorporation  into 
the  church,  and  the  supper,  of  nourishment.     Paul  hath  respect  to 
no  others,    1  Cor.  x,  1 — 4.  xii.  13.     And  therefore  the  Papists  are 
to  be  condemned,  since  they  have  added  five  others  to  these,  to  wit, 
confirmation,  auricular  confession,  extreme  unction,  orders  and  mat- 
rimony ;  for  the  first  four  were  not  instituted  by  Christ ;  was  matri- 
mony instituted,    it  was  not  however  instituted  to  be  a  sacrament, 
since  it  wants  the  constituent  parts  of  a  sacrament  ;  if  it  were  insti- 
tuted to  be  a  sacrament,  it  ought  to  be  common  to  all  believers,  and 
all  ought   to  be  bound  to  marry,   which   the  word  of  God  doth  not 
teach.     And  why  do  they  then  forbid  matrimony,  as  too  carnal,   to 
persons  whom  they  call  spiritual  ? 

No  one  disputes  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between  the  sac- 
raments of  the  Old  and  of  the  New  Testament.  The  sacraments  of 
the  Old  Testament  had  other  and  more  difficult  signs  than  the  sac- 
raments of  the  New  Testament :  those  were  instituted  by  Christ, 
while  he  was  promised,  but  these  by  him  manifested  in  the  flesh  : 
those  sealed  thai  he  should  satisfy,  but  these  seal  that  he  hath  satis- 
fied. But  that  the  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  were  types, 
which  did  not  effect  the  thing  signified  ,  and  that  tie  sacraments  of 
the  New  Testament  are  antitypes,  which  communicate  and  effect 
grace,  as  the  Romanists  assert,  this  is  disallowed  by  Paul,  when  he 
saith  concerning  the  Israelites,  1  Cor.  x,  2,  3,  4,  that  "  they,"  like 


20     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

the  Corinthians,  were  all  baptized,  and  did  all  eat  of  the  same  spirit- 
ual mtat  ;  and  did  all  drink  of  the  same  spiritual  drink  ;  (for  they 
drank  of  the. spiritual  rock,  which  followed  them  ;  and  that  ruck  was 
Christ.)"  The  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  typified  Christ  only, 
Coll.  ii.  17.  Peter  saith  indeed  that  "baptism  was  a  figure,"  (or 
antitvpe)  "  of  Noah's  ark,  in  which  he  was  saved  by  water,"  1  Peter 
iii.  20,  21,  but  he  saith  also  what  he  understands  by  that  typified  bap- 
tism, "  not  that  which  is  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but 
that  which  is  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God,  by  the 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  And  verily  the  preservation  in  the 
ark  by  water  represented  the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  to  wit, 
Christ,  his  covenant,  and  all  the  benefits  of  it. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  in  this  manner  is  faith  wrought  and  confirmed. 
What  think  ye,  is  not  he  who  hath  faith  happy  ?  it  renders  him  a 
partaker  of  Christ,  and  of  all  his  benefits:  "It  is  given  him  in  the 
behalf  of  Christ,  to  believe  on  him,"  Philip,  i.  29.  It  is  wrought  in 
him  effectually,  he  would  never  have  believed,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
not  wrougut  and  effected  it  in  him  ;  yea,  is  it  not  a  wonderful  favour 
that  "  he  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  also  perform  it, 
until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ  f"  Philip,  i.  6  .Ye,  in  whose  hearts  this 
faith  hath  been  wrought,  are  also  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time,"  as  Peter 
saith,  1  Peter  i.  5.  "  God,  who  hath  promised  you  the  hope  of  ever- 
lasting life,  and  hath  sworn,  that  he  might  show  more  abundantly 
the  immutability  of  his  counsel,  and  that  ye  might  have  a  strong 
consolation,  cannot  lie,  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  lie,"  Titus  i.  2. 
Iieb.  vi.  17,  18.  And,  as  if  this  were  not  enough,  he  gives  you  also 
the  pledges  and  seals  of  his  truth,  and  of  the  righteousness  of  faith. 

But  what  think  ye  all  ?  hath  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  faith  in  your 
hearts  ?  verily  all  men  have  not  faith,  but  only  the  elect  of  God." 
according  to  the  words  of  Paul,  2  Thess.  iii.  2.  Titus  i.  3.  We  have 
shown  largely  enough  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day  who  have  not  faith, 
and  who  have  it  in  truth.  Think  only  on  what  we  have  said  there, 
that  ye  may  see  whether  the  Holy  Ghost  have  wrought  faith  in  your 
hearts,  or  not:  we  will  not  repiat  what  we  have  said  on  that  Lord's 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  21 

day.     But  how  many  are  there  among  you  to  whom  the  Spirit  hath 
not  yet  given  faith  !  For 

1.  Some  of  you  imagine  that  they  have  faith  :  but  how  have  ye 
attained  to  it  ?  by  your  birth  of  your  parents  ?  by  baptism,  or  the 
Lord's  supper  ?  by  your  good  natural  disposition  ?  by  your  virtuous 
education  ?  your  civil  or  religious  behaviour  ?  all  these  things  could 
not  have  wrought  faith  in  you.  Do  ye  say  that  ye  hope  the  Holy 
Ghost  hath  wrought  it  in  you  ?  in  what  manner  did  he  do  it  ?  did 
he  truly  humble  your  hearts,  actually  bring  you  to  Christ,  unite  you 
to  him,  that  ye  might  pursue  holiness,  as  well  as  happiness  ?  Do  not 
deceive  yourselves,  we  beseech  you,  with  vain  imaginations,  think- 
ing that  we  cannot  know  this  so  well.  How  1  can  such  a  great  work 
be  wrought  in  the  soul,  and  such  a  great  change  be  produced  in  her, 
that  she,  who  was  blind,  is  made  to  see,  she  who  was  dead,  is  made 
alive,  she,  who  was  unwilling,  is  made  willing,  and  she  not  know 
aught  of  this?  Peihaps  ye  think,  the  Holy  Ghost  cloth  not  work  faith 
in  all  after  the  same  manner.  It  is  true,  we  have  also  shown  this 
before;  but  it  is  also  certain,  that  although  the  Holy  Ghost  may 
bring  a  person  to  faith  by  a  calm  discovery  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel, 
or  by  the  cords  of  love,  which  transport  him  out  of  himself,  and 
although  failh  may  be  infused  into  his  heart  from  his  birth,  he  will 
nevertheless  repeatedly  after  this  have  discoveries  of  his  sinfulness, 
and  be  humbled  on  account  of  it,  will  betake  himself  to  the  Son  of 
God  for  reconciliation,  and  peace  with  God,  on  account  of  his  con- 
tinual backslidings,  and  will  exercise  hitnsdf  in  serious  godliness, 
and  thus  manifest  that  faith  is  not  dead  in  him,  but  alive  and  active. 
See  this  in  Lydia,  Matthew,  Zacheus,  Micha  the  steward,  John  the 
Baptist,  Timothy  and  others,  who  manifested  that  they  had  received 
faith. 

2.  Others  of  you  know  that  they  do  not  yet  possess  faith  through 
the  Spirit.  We  should  think  that  these  would  be  exceedingly 
troubled,  and  awake  up  in  good  earnest,  that  the  y  might  obtain  Lith. 
of  the  Spirit :  but  how  careless  are  the  most  of  them,  as  if  it  wene 
of  no  consequence  to  them  whether  they  were  saved  or  damned  ! 
It  is  amazing,  that  ye,  who  see  that  ye  have  not  faith,  are  yet  so 
careless,  sluggish  and  listless.  How  is  it  possible,  might  we  ask  : 
but  we  need  not  weary  ourselves,  in  order  to  learn  what  haih  be- 
witched you  thus,  men  busy  themselves  too  much  with  the  afiairs  of 
the  world :  these  fill  and  possess  their  hearts  so,  that  they  find 
neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  think  seiiously  and  de  ibe;.  . ,  n 
their  miserable  condition,  how  they  may  be  delivered  out  oi  itj  and 
how  they  shall  obtain  faith.     Others  find  such  a  sweetness  in  the 


*2     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life,  that 
every  idea  concerning  faith,  salvation  and  damnation  which  either 
ariseth  in  their  hearts,  or  is  outwardly  proposed  is  irksome  to  them. 
There  are  those  also,  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  excites  a  concern  for 
tljeir  dangerous  condition,  and  who  even  wish  that  they  had  faith, 
and  say  with  Balaam,  Numb,  xxiii.  10.  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of 
the  righteous,  and  let  my  ast  end  be  like  his."  But  it  is  "  the  de- 
sire of  the  sbthful  which  killeth  him,  because  his  hands  refuse  to 
labour,"  Prov.  xxi.  25.  For  they  are  backward  to  believe  :  because 
they  have  heard  others  talk  somewhat  of  their  inability,  they  think, 
how  can  I  help  it :  if  God  will  not  give  me  faith  by  his  Spirit,  I  can- 
not give  it  to  myself:  but  it  is  not  your  inability,  but  your  unwilling- 
ness, that  hinders  you  from  coming  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  ye  may 
have  life,  John  v.  40  The  Spirit  works  in  you  by  convincing  you, 
by  revealing  the  way  of  life  to  you,  and  by  stirring  you  up  to  believe 
and  repent;  but  ye  oppose  him,  quench  him,  and  drive  him  fiom 
you  by  your  carelessness,  and  by  indulging  your  lusts,  and  so  ye  re- 
sist the  Holy  Spirit,  with  the  Jews. 

In  the  mean  time  ye  still  dare  to  use  the  sacraments,  as  if  ye.  who 
have  yet  no  faith,  had  a  right  to  them,  when  they  are  only  for  be- 
lievers, in  order  to  confirm  their  faith  ;  but  they  cannot  surely  con- 
firm nor  seal  faith  in  you,  when  it  doth  not  exist  in  you.  Of  what 
service  are  scais  to  an  empty  letter  ?  ©f  none  at  all.  Ye  separate 
that  which  God  hath  joined  ogether,  ior  ye  make  use  of  his  cove- 
nant seais,  but  do  noi  bestir  yourselves  in  the  least  to  enter  into  the 
covenant  by  faith ;  therefore  ye  are  not  yet  become  partakers  of 
Chri.t,  and  of  ail  his  benefits,  but  are  under  the  wrath  of  God  ;  for 
V  the  wrath  of  God  tbideth  on  him,  who  believeth  not  the  Son," 
John  iii.  36.  The  precious  gospel,  which  urgeth  you  to  believe,  is 
''a  savour  of  deatli  unto  death"  to  you,  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor.  ii. 
16.  And  of  what  set  vice  are  the  sacraments  to  your  do  they  not 
seal  perdition  to  you  ?  bear  what  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxxii.  34, 
35  "is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me,  and  sealed  up  among  my 
treasures  I  To  me  be!^ng<th  vengeance  and  recompence,  their  foot 
shall  sude  in  due  time  :  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is  at  hand,  and 
the  things  that  shall  come  upon  them  make  haste."  O  that  ye  would 
only  see  it,  and  were  concerned  about  it,  so  that  with  the  jailer  ye 
cried  out,  Acts,  xvi.  30.  "  What  must  I  do  to  he  saved  l"  we  should 
say  to  you,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  ye  shall  be  sav- 
ed," vrs.  31.  At  least,  hearers,  abide  under  the  word  of  the  gospel* 
an  J  offer  up  that  ejaculation  ,  that  "the  Holy  Ghost  would  fall  on 
you  who  hear  it."  as  it  happened,  Acts  x.  44. 


XXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  65—68.  23 

But,  believers,  in  whose  hearts  faith  hatii  been  truly  wrought  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ye  also  are  not  unblamable  here,  since  your  faith  is 
still  so  weak  and  small,  notwithstanding  so  ra<my  means  of  the  word, 
sacraments  and  operations  of  the  Hoiy  Ghost;  for  who  among  you 
hath  yet  made  any  considerable  progress  I  what  causes  you  to  doubt 
so  often  concerning  your  hope  of  salvation,  which  ye  have  in  God 
and  Christ  ?  is  it  not  because  it  seems  too  great  for  you  ?  because 
ye  have  little  or  no  sensible  grace  I  will  not  the  least  thought,  that 
enters  your  mind  without  reason,  as,  "  O  if  I  should  deceive  myself," 
unsettle  all  your  hopes  I  How  little  ability  is  there  in  your  faith  to 
employ  Christ  and  his  grace,  instead  of  your  own  strength  !  men 
have  scarcely  any  skill  i.i  this  art.  Are  they  called  upon  to  suffer 
hatred)  pain,  shame,  or  loss  on  account  of  godliness,  they  shrink  from 
it  :  there  is  not  so  much  strength  in  their  faith,  that  they  dare  to 
come  out  resolutely  Are  they  in  any  danger,  or  under  any  heavy 
cross,  with  respect  to  their  body,  estate,  or  household  ;  their  faith 
fails,  and  they  cry  out,  We  perish  :  are  they  disturbed  with  doubtful 
apprehensions  concerning  their  faith  by  their  unbelieving  hearts,  by 
Satan,  and  by  wicked  men ;  they  give  all  up  in  their  own  imagina- 
tions, and  tneir  minds  are  oppressed  with  fear  ;  do  they  behold  their 
meanness  and  unworthiness  ;  they  tremble;  and  how  hardly  can 
they  endure  to  look  at  that  which  is  to  come  !  the  blessed  and  un- 
seen eternity,  how  dark  doth  it  appear  to  the  soul  ! 

What  think  ye,  that  this  is  only  your  misery  ?  yea,  it  is  your 
misery,  but  it  is  a  so  your  sin,  and  indeed  a  great  sin,  which  is  ex- 
ceedingly hateful,  and  blamable  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  Hear  how 
he  chides  his  people  on  account  of  it,  and  believe  toat  he  chides  you 
also,  when  he  saith,  "  Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?" 
Matt,  id.ii-  26.  "  O  thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?" 
Matt.  xiv.  31.  Hear  from  him  language  still  more  severe,  Mark  ix. 
19.  <v  O  faithless  generation,  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ?  how 
long  s.lall  I  suffer  you  \"  With  no  less  earnestness  and  severity  did 
he  say   Luke  xxiv   25.     "  O  fools  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  !" 

But  what  do  I  say,  that  many  are  weak  in  the  faith  ?  it  is  still 
more  sinful,  that  many  become  weaker  in  it,  when  they  ought  to 
wax  strong,  and  to  increase  in  faith.  Is  it  not  true,  when  some  of 
you  wax  cold  in  their  first  love,  and  forsake  it  ?  for  "  faith  worketh 
by  love,,"  according  to  Gal.  v.  6.  And  men  show  this,  when  they 
so  easily  indulge  their  constitutional  sin,  and  their  hearts  do  not 
bleed  on  account  of  it.  They  regard  the  things  of  this  life  too  much, 
and  their  heart*  are  filled  with  them,  so  that  they  bewilder  their  un- 
derstandings, captivate  their  affections,  and  consume  the  time,  which 


24    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

they  ought  to  devote  to  seeking  God  :  they  can  converse  now  so 
familiarly  with  worldly  men,  of  whom  they  used  to  be  suspicious ; 
they  are  exceedingly  estranged  t'tom  communion  with  God,  they  live 
without  him,  ana  are  unconcerned  about  it ;  with  respect  to  the 
frame  of  their  own  minds,  they  neglect  it,  they  seldom  look  into 
themselves,  and  are,  as  it  were,  strangers  to  themselves  :  yea,  their 
discretion,  which  used  to  preserve  t  eir  souls,  is  become  giddy  and 
extravagant:  reading  ihe  word]  family  devotion,  secret  prayers, 
mutual  conferences  are  neglected,  or  performed  heartlessly*  and  in 
a  cursory  manner  :  the  communion  of  saints,  edifying  others,  and 
being  edified  by  them  is  now  become  a  strange  work  ;  yea,  they 
Will  be  even  afraid  to  come  into  the  presence  of  a  serious,  godly  per- 
son ;  if  they  must  be  present  with  him,  they  will  not  enter  upon 
serious  discourse,  or  they  will  break,  it  off  by  something  else,  and  go 
their  way.  In  the  mean  while,  since  the  weak  soul  is  not  blind  nor 
dead,  she  sees  this  as  it  were  like  a  person  who  is  half  asleep, 
although  her  heart  is  awake,  but  she  hath  not  strength  enough  to 
break  her  chains  ;  she  complains  of  her  weakness,  she  prays  against 
at,  and  that  she  may  be  delivered  from  it,  she  will  sometimes  bestir 
and  exert  herself,  and  will  encourage  herself  amidst  her  defects  ; 
but  her  strength  is  gone,  the  Lord,  the  strength  of  the  soul,  is  de- 
parted from  her  ;  therefore  she  becomes  dejected,  languishes  still 
more,  and  declines  finally  so  far,  that  neither  she  herself,  nor  others 
can  perceive  any  difference  between  her  and  a  worldling. 

Ye,  who  are  become  so  weak  in  the  faith,  are  ye  not  ashamed  ? 
is  this  your  kindness  to  your  friend  ?  hath  he  deserved  this  at  your 
hand  ?  do  ye  reward  him  thus  for  all  his  love,  for  his  groanings  and 
writhings  under  his  Father's  wrath  ?  will  ye  thus  grieve  the  Spirit, 
by  whom  ye  are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption  ?  did  the  Father 
for  this  elect  you  from  such  a  hearty  love,  bestow  his  Son  upon  you, 
his  Spirit,  the  pardon  of  your  sins,  his  image,  a  blessed  hope  ?  is  this 
the  fruit  of  his  word,  of  his  sacraments,  and  of  all  his  operations  in 
your  souls  ?  "  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord,  O  foolish  people  and 
unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not 
anade  thee,  and  established  thee  ?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  Know  that  the 
Lord  hath  this  against  you,  that  ye  have  left  your  first  love."  Rev. 
ii.  4.  Hear  what  he  saith  to  his  people,  who  were  become  vain,  and 
regard  it  as  if  said  to  you,  Jer.  ii.  2 — 5.  "  I  remember  thee,  the 
kindness  of  thy  youth,  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  when  thou  wentest 
after  me  in  the  wilderness,  in  a  land  that  was  not  sown.  What  ini- 
quity have  your  fathers  found  in  me,  that  they  are  gone  far  from  me, 
and  have  walked  after  vanity,  and  become  vain  ?"  Do  ye  find  now 


XXV,  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65  —  63.  25 

•to  much  tranquility  of  mind,  and  pe.ce  with  (»od?  doth  it  not  grieve 
you,  that  yte  have  declined  so  far  from  your  youthful  vigour,  and  ex* 
perience  the  decripittide  of  old  age  ?  and  whereas  ye  were  once  fat 
and  Qouiishjng,  that  ve  ate  now  becomt  so  meager  and  lean  ?  would 
ye  indeed  die  in  such  a  condition  ?  surely  ye  would  not  ?  "  Remem- 
ber therefore  whence  ye  are  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  your  fiist 
works,  lest  he  come  quickly  to  you,  and  remove  your  candlestick  out 
of  his  place,"  as  he  admonisheth  and  threatens,  Rev  ii.  5,  or  he  wiil 
visit  you  with  another  grievous  judgment,  which  will  awaken  you 
out  ol^  your  sleepy  humour  :  "  Return,  return,  O  Shulamith  ;  return, 
return,  that  we  may  look  upon  tl.ee."  Thus  he  calls  to  you,  bong 
vi.    13 

Other  believers  are  in  a  better  condition,  they  are  confirmed  in  the 
faith,  although  they  do  not  perceive  it,  but  are  fearful  that  their  faith 
doth  no:  increase,  because  they  have  almost  forgotten  how  weak  they 
were  formerly  :  they  will  see  just  day  by  di\y  how  much  they  are 
confirmed*  which  is  as  impossible  as  tha'  they  should  see  how  much 
a  man,  as  a  tree  grows  :  tliey  think  that  they  are  not  confirmed,  be- 
cause they  cannot  exercise  faith  with  so  much  clearness  ;.nd  liveli- 
ness as  at  the  beginning,  when  they  were  dandled  and  fondled  like 
"..hildren  ;  but  this  is  no  evidence  that  they  do  not  grow  :  perhaps 
their  faith  is  now  more  single  :  they  are  also  too  much  prejudiced 
against  themselves,  not  daring  to  think  highly  of  the  grace  of  God, 
which  hath  been  shown  to  them  ;  and  this  hinders  them  from  seeing 
■;he  confirmation  of  their  faith. 

There  are  others  who  advance  greatly  in  the  faith,  and  like  young 
men  grow  strong  in  it,  according  to  1  John  ii.  14.  I  will  not  repeat 
now  what  *  one  of  my  highly  esteemed  teachers  huth  said  very  beau- 
tifully and  pertinently  in  his  book,  entitled  "  Reasonable  Seivice,"  when 
he  speaks  of  the  spiritual  growth,  that  the  believer  grows,  when  his 
spiritual  light  increasetfy  when  he  maintains  a  steadfast  walk  with 
God,  when  he  makes  a  v/iser,  and  a  more  believing  use  of  Christ, 
when  he  acts  in  a  more  single  manner,  and  improves  more  than 
formerly  in  active  graces,  both  by  exerting  himself  against  more  sins, 
and  in  more  virtues,  and  also  by  continuing  steadfast  in  a  vigourous, 
opposition  to  sin,  and  prosecuting  every  duty  with  more  prudence, 
with  more  firmnass,  faith  and  zeal :  but  1  would  add  to  this,  that  be- 

*The  author  intends  by  this  person  the  celebrated  William  Brakel,  a  pas- 
tor of  the  Reformed  church  in  the  ciry  of  Rotterdam.  His  book  entitled  Re- 
delyie  Godtdknst,  cr  Reasonable  Service,  is  considered  as  one  of  the  most 
excellent  treatises  en  prs%c  >Qal  ard  experimental  theology  extant  in  the  Du'.ch 
larfgfeage. 
Vol.  ii.  D 


25     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

lievers  -.vho  increase  in  faith,  (a)  have  a  more  settled  and  steadfast 
assurance  of  their  state  of  grace.  Do  they  experience  darkness,  the 
hiding  of  God's  countenance,  deadness,  and  the  power  of  corruption, 
it  doth  not  s!,ake  them  so,  that  it  causes  them  to  doubt  of  their  state; 
thev  are  grieved,  and  they  humble  themselves  on  account  of  it,  but 
they  will  not  therefore  abandon  their  hope  in  the  Lord.  Continual 
exercises  of  faith.,  frequent  discoveries  of  God's  work  of  grace  in  their 
minds  by  his  Spirit,  and  manifold  expediences  of  the  goodness  of  the 
Lord  have  established  their  hearts  so,  that  all  their  doubts  concern- 
ing their  blessed  condition  are  banished  out  of  their  minds,  and  have 
no  more  hold  on  the  boul,  t>>at  is  thus  advanced  in  faith  :  "  they  have 
made  their  calling  and  election  sure,  so  that  they  will  never  fall," 
2  Peter  i.  10.  (b)  They  value  now  likewise  more  highly  the  myste- 
ries and  truths  of  the  gospel  than  formesly  :  they  have  a  better  in- 
sight into  them  ;  they  see  more  truth,  divinity,  and  glory  in  them  : 
they  can  improve  them  better,  and  direct  themselves  better  by  them. 
Formerly  the  literal  truths  were  too  high  for  them,  too  barren,  and 
h  d  but  little  influence  upon  their  apprehensions  and  exercises,  so  as 
to  comfort  and  excite  them,  their  principal  concern  was  about  their 
state  of  grace,  their  contemplations  were  exercised  chiefly  relative  to 
the  frame  of  their  minds,  and  their  desires  and  longings  were  mere 
for  immediate  influences  and  sensible  grace:  but  now  they  have  a 
greater  knowledge  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  their  understandings 
are  more  nourished  by  them,  and  their  hearts  become  thus  more 
established  ;  yea.  the  contemplation  of  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel 
transmits  the  image  and  glory  of  them  into  the  soul,  which  increases 
habitual  grace  in  the  mind,  and  establishes  it  the  more  ;  for  "  they 
ate  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God,  in  all  wisdom  and 
spiritual  understanding,  that  they  may  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto 
ail  pleasing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the 
knowledge  of  God,  strengthened  with  all  might  according  to  his 
glorious  power,"  Coll.  i.  9,  10,  11.  See  also  Heb.  v.  13,  14.  2  Cor. 
iii.  18.  2  Peter  iii.  18.  (c)  The  soul  being  confirmed  in  the  faith,  will 
pursue  sanctification  more,  and  with  more  steadfastness  and  single- 
ness than  before.  She  is  at  first  chiefly  employed  with  her  state  of 
grace,  in  order  that  she  may  obtain  assurance  :  one  while  she  is  en- 
coucaged,  but  soon  after  the  merest  trifle  discourageth  her  ;  but  when 
confirmed,  she  is  not  perplexed  with  these  matters  any- 
more, but  labours  now  only  for  sanctification.  Before  her  confirma- 
tion she  had  indeed  an  inclination  to  holiness,  and  endeavoured  to  be 
holy  ;  but  how  soon  was  she  forced  out  of  her  way,  and  she  knew 
not  how  to  enter  upon  it  again,  but  fainted  and  was  discouraged  ;  bu* 


XXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  65—68.  27 

Ib'eing-  now  confirmed,  she  doth  not  stop  at  any  difficulty,  but  pro- 
ceeds,  and  "treads  like  the  mighty  men  in  the  mire  of  the  streets," 
Zcch.  x.  5.  Do  her  feet  at  any  time  turn  out  of  the  path,  doth  she 
transgress  against  the  Lord,  she  humbles  herself  before  him,  lays 
hold  on  the  Mediator  for  reconciliation,  and  begins  her  course  anew 
in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  she  "  runs,  and  is  not  weary  nor  faint," 
Isaiah  xl.  31.  While  the  soul  is  yet  weak,  she  is  exceedingly  de- 
tective with  respect  to  singleness  in  her  sanctiftcati'  n,  she  often 
labours  in  her  own  strength,  and  with  her  own  exertions  from  a  leg^l 
motive,  pursuing  holiness,  that  she  may  the  more  easily  obtain  re- 
conciliation, peace  and  boldness  toward  God  :  how  often  is  she  ex- 
ceedingly strai  ened,  and  full  of  anxiety  whether  she  may  do  this  or 
that,  and  she  stumbles  continually,  because,  since  she  is  not  establish- 
ed in.  the  faith,  she  can  do  but  few  things  from  faith.  See  Rom.  xiv. 
22,  23.  But  when  she  is  fuither  advanced,  she  endeavours  to  do  £.11 
things  by  the  Spirit,  l*  being  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of 
his  might,"  Eph.  vi.  10.  It  is  her  highest  aim  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
because  he  commands  it,  and  that  he  may  oe  glorified  by  her:  be- 
fore this  she  aimed  at  her  own  pleasure  and  eas-e  :  but  in  whatsoever 
she  now  doth,  she  is  enlarged,  because  she  doth  it  with  an  assurance, 
and  thus  with  a  belief,  that  it  is  his  wilfc  See  Philip,  i.  H.  Cod.  iii. 
17  (d)  The  believer,  after  his  faith  is  confirmed,  is  more  actively 
busy  in  his  pursuits,  than  while  he  was  weak  ;  he  would  then  have 
just  such  immediate,  high,  mighty  and  urging  influences  of  grace  to 
do  aught,  or  he  would  stand  still,  and  was  disconcerted,  and  wist  not 
how  to  engage  in  his  duty,  or  to  excite  himself  to  it ;  he  was  more 
passive  than  active  :  but  being  now  established  in  the  faith,  he  be- 
comes more  active  and  working  in  lus  holy  exercises,  knowing  how  to 
employ  his  reason  and  habitual  grace,  according  to  the  measure  of 
preventing  grace,  to  direct  himself  thereby,  and  to  perform  his  duties 
with  a  wonderful  dexterity  and  ease,  he  knows  how  to  comfort  and 
excite  himself  by  the  word  of  God  :  when  the  law  of  his  mind  urgeth 
him  to  do  his  duty,  he  obeys  it  with  David,  Psalm  xxvii.  3.  he  hath 
learned  the  evangelic  art  to  derive  by  his  faith  influences  and  grace 
for  grace  from  the  fulness  of  Jesus,  to  improve  him  according-  to  his 
offices,  and  to  adjust  the  sails  of  his  desires,  and  to  direct  the  whole 
ship  of  his  soul  by  the  rudder  of  his  understanding  and  judgment  in 
such  a  manner,  as  to  receive  the  wind  and  breathing  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  to  proceed  thus  toward  the  land  into  pleasant  havens  ;  for 
it  is  not  only  his  happiness,  but  also  his  duty  to  be  "  filled  with  the 
Spirit,"  Eph".  v*  18,     And  thus  he  «  works  out  his  salvation  with  fear 


38     THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

and  trembling  ;  for  God  wotketh  in  him,  both   to  will   and  to  do," 
Ph-iip.  ii.  12,  13. 

Truly  a  glorious  condition,  that  a  person  not  cnly  hath  fiuth,  but 
that  he  is  aii.0  so  strong  in  it.  O  that  I  could  say  of  each  of  you.  and 
"  thank  Jod,  that  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,"  as  the  apostle 
saul  ol  the  believing  Thessalonians,  2  Thess.  i.  3.  Are  ye,  O  be- 
lievers, desirous  of  growing  in  faith  i  have  ye  a  desire  to  exert  your- 
selves,  in  order  thai  your  fai'h  may  be  confirmed?  and  would  ye 
know  what  ye  must  do  for  tiiis  purpose  I  see  i:ere, 

t.  Thank  God  that  )e  have  obiamed  faith.  Though  it  may  not  bs 
strong,  but  weak,  it  is  nevertheless  a  precious  faith  :  ye  partake  of 
Christ  and  of  all  his  benefits  by  it ;  it  hath  been  «  rougbt  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  with  an  almighty  power;  yen,  he  will  confirm  it:  we  have 
shown  above  how  happy  tnis  renders  you «  behold  then  how  much 
i;  oWigeih  you  to  be  thankful  to  the  Lord,  and  how  it  exci...  e 
ing  :  "  It  is  not  of  yon,  it  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  not  of  works  ;  lest  any 
man  should  boast,"  liph.  ii.  8,  9.  «  for  who  maketh  thee  to  differ  ? 
and  wnat  hast  thou,  which  thou  didst  not  receiver  and  if  thou 
receive  i',  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  received  it;" 
thus  asks  the  a;;o  tie,  1  Cor.  iv.  7.  If  the  soul  would  exeicise  hei- 
self  more  in  thanksgiving  on  account  of  her  faith,  she  would  also 
obtam  more  grace,  and  a  greater  confirmation  of  her  faith  by  the 
lioiy  Spirit:  the  Lord  saith,  "  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me: 
and  to  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation  aright,  will  1  show  the  sal- 
vation of  God,"  Psalm  1.   23. 

2.  Impress  it  upon  your  minds,  and  let  it  have  a  due  influence  on 
your  souls,  that  it  is  your  duly  to  become  strong  in  the  faith.  H  is 
the  nature  ol  faith  to  grow  ;  it  is  acting  c  ntrary  to  the  nature  and 
natural  tendency  of  it,  to  keep  it  in  a  weak  and  dwarfish  condition  ; 
yea,  every  evil  frame  p.oceeds  from  the  weakness  oi  faith.  God  also 
enjoins  it  on  you  io  confirm  your  faith  ;  the  commands  are  too 
numerous  to  be  transcribed  here,  read  them,  1  Cor.  xvi.  13.  Eph.  vi. 
10  Coll.  ii.  6,  7.  Keb.  vi.  1.  2  Peter  hi  18.  When  this  hath  a  due 
weight  on  your  hearts,  ye  will  indeed  strive  for  a  confirmation  of 
your  faith,  and  will  u  go  from  strength  to  strength,"  Psalm  Ixxxiv.  7. 

3.  Study  the  truths  and  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  and  endeavour 
to  obtain  an  excellent  and  thorough  knowledge  of  them.  Ye  ought 
with  \poilos  to  be  "  mighty  in  the  scriptures,"  Acts  xviii.  24,  with 
Paul  to  have  "  a  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  (  hrist."  Eph.  iii. 
4,  and  with  the  believing  Romans  to  be  "filled  with  all  knowledge^ 
able  also  to  admonish  one  another,"  Rom.  xv.  14.  This  wouid 
nourish  your  understandings,  and  cause  your  faith  to  grow,  and  be» 


—66.  8» 

<ome  strong  to  admiration  ;  for  4>  speaking  the  truth  in  love,  x/t 
Would  grow  up  lino  him  iaali  things,  who  15  the  head,  even  Chris;," 
according  to  the  worus  ot*  Prful,  Eph.  iv    15, 

•j.  cultivate  an  historical  faith  ;  tna  is,  endeavour  to  obtain  an  z.:* 
*urance  of  the  irutfe  and  divinity  of  the  word,  so  that  ye  may  lock 
upo.i  it  to  ue  true  and  divine  on  account  of  the  declaration  of  God 
in  h.s  word,  and  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  your  minds, 
and  "  receive  thus  the  testimony  of  God,  and  set  to  your  seal,  that 
God  is  Hue,"  John  hi.  33.  Thus  "  we  obtain  all  riches  to  the  full 
assurance  of  un  erstandmg,"  Coll.  li.  2.  lour  neglect  of  historical 
faitn  is  the  reason  ,vhy  all  the  direct  and  reflex  acts  of  your  faith  are 
so  feeble,  and  like  a  maimed  hand,  or  a  wrenched  foot;  but  when 
ffc  become  strong  in  historical  faith,  then  we  can  sit  down  firm,  as 
Upon  a  rock,  and  perform  ail  things  with  strength  by  faith  :  for 
"  faith  is  tne  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,"  Heb.  xi.  1. 

5.  Collect  also  from  the  gospel  a  treasure  cf  premises,  which  the 
Lord  God  hath  made  relative  to  the  confirmation  of  your  faith.  See 
what  he  who  is  true  hath  promised  you,  Job.  xvii.  9.  Psalm  x.  17. 
xcii.  12 — 15.  Ezek  JtxJTiv.  16.  Ztch.  x  3,5,  12.  Mai.  iv.  2.  Thl* 
tends  wonderfully  to  confirm  our  faith  ;  for  all  confirming  grace  is 
conveyed  to  the  soul  according  to,  and  by  means  of  premises,  col- 
lected and  properly  improved. 

6.  Pray  lor  the  confirmation  of  your  faith.  The  Lord  hath  indeed 
promised  to  confirm  it,  but  he  will  also  be  sought  for  this,  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  26,  o7.  The  saints  have  also  prayed  much  for  the  confirma- 
tion of  their  faith,  Psalm  Ixviii.  23.  The  father  of  the  lunatic  child 
"  cried  out  with  tears,  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief," 
Mark  ix.  24.  The  apostles  said  to  the  Lord,  "  increase  our  faith*!  . 
Luke  xvii.  5,  Paul  prayed  also  for  the  Ephesians,  that  they  might 
be  "  strengthened  by  the  Spirit,"  so  that  they  should  have  a  strong 
faith,  Eph.  hi.  16,  17.  Yea,  importune  the  Lord  by  the  promises 
which  he  hath  made  to  yon,  that  lie  would  confirm  your  faith  ;  so 
David  acted.  Psalm  cxix.  49,  50.  This  would  add  much  strength  to 
your  faith. 

7.  Exercise  faith  also  much  :  if  ye  have  not  yet  an  assurance,  that 
ye  are  in  a  state  of  grace,  exercise  faith  then  to  justification  ;  if  ye 
have  an  assurance,  exercise  it  from  justification,  as  we  have  taught 
on  the  seventh  Lord's  day.  The  life  of  grace  is  nothing  but  the  life 
of  faith,  which  .must  therefore  be  exercised  repeatedly:  of  this  we 
have  also  spoken  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day.  This  the  believer  must 
therefore  exercise,  that  he  may  be  confirmed  in  it,  for  we  learn  by 


SO    THE  WORKING  AND  CONFIRMATION  OF  FAITH. 

doing;,   and   wc  strengthen  a  habit  by  exercise,   and  we   acquire  & 
facility  of  acting  by  continual  activity.    See  Htb.  v.  14. 

8.  Let  faith  improve  Jesus  in  all  his  relations,  which  he  hath 
taken  upon  himself,  in  order  to  promote  the  work  of  faith  ;  for  u  he 
is  the  finisher  of  faith,"  Heb  xii.  2.  He  merited  faith  f  r  you,  he 
hath  received  a  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  faith,  he  is  exalted  for  th:s 
purpose,  it  is  his  office  to  give  and  confirm  faith,  and  "  help  is  laid 
on  him"  for  this  end,  Psalm  lxxxix*  19.  Let  then  your  faith  make 
use  of  him,  employ  him,  and  derive  from  him  his  Spirit  lhr<  ugh  he 
conduits  of  the  promises  for  the  confirmation  of  your  faith,  that  he 
may  appear  active  in  you  by  .faith.  See  Gal.  ii.  20.  Eph.  iv,  15,  16. 
Finally, 

9.  Endeavour  to  make  a  believing  and  judicious  use  of  the  sacra- 
ments, receiving  them  as  your  seals  by  the  word  of  institution  and 
of  promise,  with  Abraham,  Rom.  iv.  11.  This  would  be  a  wonder- 
ful confirmation  of  your  faith  ;  but  wc  will  treat  more  of  this  duty 
in  the  sequel. 

Is  your  faith  greatly  assaulted  and  shaken,  consider  that  "the 
Fiuiaher  of  faith  pi  ays  for  you,  that  your  faith  may  not  fail,"  as  he 
himself  saith,  Luke  xxii.  31,  32.  It  will  therefore  not  fail,  for  "  he- 
is  always  heard;"  see  John  xi-  42.  "  The  foundation  of  Cod  stands 
cth  sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,'-* 
2  Tim.  ii.  19.  Therefore  to  conclude,  we  say  with  Paul  from  2 
Thess  i.  11,  12.  u  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  for  you,  that 
our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this  calling,  and  fulfill  all  the 
good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  (he  work  of  faith  with  power; 
that  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and 
ye  in  him,  according  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  Amen. 


<  3i  ) 


P.YP 


OF  THE 


NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Horn.  vi.  3,  4.  Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptised 
in'.o  Jesus  Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  death  ?  Therefore  we  arc 
buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death  ;  that  like  as  Christ  was 
raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we 
also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.