Q.  69.  Hoio  art  thou  admonished  and  asnired  by  holy  baptism,  that 
the  one  $ac>  fee  of  Christ  upon  the  cross  is  of  real  advantage  to  thee  ? 

A.  Thus,  that  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing  with  water, 
adding  thereto  this  promise,  that  I  am  as  certainly  washed  by  his 
blood  and  Spirit  from  all  the  pollution  of  my  soul,  that  is,  from  all 
my  sins,  as  I  am  externally  washed  with  water,  by  which  the  filthi- 
oess  of  the  body  is  commonly  washed  away. 

Q.  70.    What  is  it  to  be  washed  with  the  blood  arid  Spirit  of  Christ  ? 

A.  It  is  to  receive  of  God  the  remission  of  sins  freely  for  the  sake 
of  Christ's  blood,  which  he  shtd  for  us  by  his  sacrifice  upon  the 
cross:  and  also  to  be  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to 
be  members  of  Christ,  that  so  we  may  more  and  more  die  unto  sin, 
tnd  lead  holy  and  unblamable  lives. 


$2      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

Q.  71.  Where 'has  Christ  p.rornised  us  tha'  he  will  as  certainly  waiiS 
us  by  his  blood  and  Sftirit,  as  ive  are  washed  by  ch  -  water  ofbafuism  ? 

A.  In  the  institution  of  baptism,  which  is  thus  expressed,  "Go 
ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  tlitm  in  the  name  of 
the  lather,  and  of  the  on,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  that  believ- 
eth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  thai  believeth  not  Shall 
be  damned."  This  promise  is  also  reoeated  where  the  scripture 
cails  baptism.  "  i"he  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away 
of  sins. 


A- 


.S  it  is  necessary  to  born,  in  order  to  be  a  man,  so  it  is  necessary 
so  ue  bon  again,  in  ordei  to  be  a  Christian.  It  did  not  please  the 
Lord  to  make  all  men  irarnedi;  tely  out  of  the  earth,  as  he  made  the 
first  Adam,  but  to  join  a  woman  to  Adam,  and  to  give  them  both  the 
law  of  marriage,  "  increase  «nd  multiply,"  that  he  might  make  of 
one  blootl  all  nations  of  men.  Therefore  not  one  man  hath  been  in- 
iced  into  the  world  since  that  period,  who  was  not  born  <>f  a  wo- 
rn m  ;  for  which  reason  man  hath  been  defined  and  called  from  his 
mother,  ''man  that  is  born  of  a  woman,"  Job  xiv.  xv.  1  \.  Thus 
also  a  man  doth  not  be otne  a  Christian,  except  by  a  second  birth-. 
Our  first  parents  having  been  created  in  the  image  o'  God,  would 
have  trap;  mitted  that  image  to  all  their  posterity,  ifthev  had  not 
deprived  themsel.es  of  it  by  sin,  and  it  would  then  not  have  been 
necessary  that  their  posterity  should  be  oewb  .n  ;  but  having  lost 
that  image,  they  have  transmitted  their  own  image,  even  sin,  to  all" 
their  posterity.  This  Moses  teacheth  us,  Gen.  v,  1,3,  «  In  the 
day  that  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him.  And 
\dam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image  "  The  Lord, 
willing  to  restore  man  to  his  first  condition,  appointed  for  himself  an 
everlasting  people,  and  gave  his  Son  to  them  in  a  spiritual  marriage 
>.o  be  a  bridegroom  and  husband  to  them,  that  he  might  thus  obtain 
'■*.  holy  seed  by  a  new  birth.  See  Isaiah  liv.  1 — 6.  It  was  also  ne- 
cessary that  the  sinner  should  be  born  again  of  that  marriage  ;  for  he 
is  by  his  natural  birth  as  it  were  degenerate,  unnatural,  yea,  be- 
eaved  of  humanity,  and  "  is  of  his  father  the  devil,"  John  viii  44 
He  must  therefore  become  "  a  new  creature,  the  workmanship  cf 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Eply 
ii  10.  Since  "  he  hath  sinned,  he  comes  short  of  the  glory  "  and 
image  '•'■  of  God,"  according  to  Horn.  iii.  23.  It  is  therefore  neces- 
he  should  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  crea- 
-ed  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,"  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gen* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  49— 71.  33 

tiles  requireth,  Eph  iv.  24.  He  is  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  but  by 
regeneration  he  is  '«  quickened  with  Christ,"  Eph.  ii.  1,  5.     The  sin- 
ner ts  without  strength,  the  catnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God;  for 
it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  tjod,   neither  indeed   can   be,"   H^m. 
viii.  7.     It  was  therefore    also  necessary,  trnt  new   powers,  "  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit,"   should  he  given  him  by  a  new  birth,  (s    is 
promised,  Lzek.  xxxvi.  26.     Further,  by  his  first  birth  he  is  a  stran- 
ger to  the  church  of  God,  "  he  hath  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memori- 
al in  Jerusalem,  "  as  Nenemiah  speaks,  Neh    ii.  20    If  i.e  shall  then 
partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  church,  he  must  be  incorporated  in- 
to it,  must  be  "joined  to  it,  be  a  feliowcitizen  of  the  saints,    and  of 
;he  household  of  God,"  Ac. s  ii.   41.     Eph.   ii.    19.  Permit    me   to 
add,  that  he  is  by  his  birth  unclean  and  loathsome,  and   it    if  there- 
fore necessary  that  he  should,  like  a  child  who  is  newly   born,  be 
washed  and  rinsed  ;  this  the  Lord    himself  teacheth   us,    Ezek    xvi. 
J- — 9.     This  is  also  clearly  discovered  to  us  in  baptism,  the  first  sac- 
ament  of  the   New  Testament,  by  which   regeneration,  incorpora- 
tion, into  the  church,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins  is  signified  and 
scaled. 

The  foregoing  Lord's  day  having  taught  us  that  believers  are  ad- 
monished and  assured  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
Is  advantageous  to  them,  and  that  the  sacraments  are,  holy  baptism 
and  the  holy  supper,  this  is  now  shown  with  respect  to  baptism. 

I.  We  must  discourse  somewhat  cencerning  the  word  "baptism," 
and  then, 

II.  We  will  consider  the  matter  itself. 

I.  The  noun  substantive  baptism,  bafitismos,  bafithma,  and  the  verb 
baptize,  ba/uizcin,  bafitien,  signify  to  rinse,  to  wash,  and  toclear.se  any 
thing  by  dipping.  In  this  sense  are  the  words  used  of  the  supersti- 
tious washings  of  the  Pharisees,  Mark  vii.  4,  "When  they  come 
from  the  market,  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not.  And  many  other 
things  there  be,  which  they  have  received  to  hold,  as.  the  washing  of 
cups,  and  pots,  brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables."  But  we  find  these 
words  also  used  in  a  figurative  sense  of  the  communication  of  the 
grace  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  "He  that  cometh  after  me 
shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire,"  saith  the  bap- 
tist, Matt.  iii.  10.  These  words  denote  also  sometimes  figuratively, 
suffering  tribulation,  when  Jesus  saith,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  bap- 
tized with  ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished,"  Luke 
xii.  50.  Matt.  xx.  22,  23,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  is 
confirmed  and  received  in  baptism  :  thus  "  A  polios  knew  only  the 
baptism  of  John,"  Acts^viii.  35.     The  word  baptism^  or  baptize  is 

Vol.  ii.  E 


34      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OP  BAPTISM. 

also  used  in  a  sacramental  sense  :  Paul  saith  of  the  Israelites,  that 
"  they  were  all  baptii.d  unto  kfloses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sta," 
1  Cor  x.  2.  The  ecclesiastical  and  typical  wa&hings  of  the  Old 
T/e  f  ment,  art;  called  by  the  apostle,  bap.tismoi*  "  baptisms,"  Heb.  ix« 
!0,  which  our  translators  render  "  washings."  To  these  the  Jews 
added  also  a  baptism,  when  they  would  solemnly  receive  and  incor- 
porate into  their  church  a  convert,  or  proselyte  to  Judaism  ;  for  after 
they  had  circumcised  him,  they  baptised  him,  after  -which  they  order- 
ed him  to  offer  his  gifts  ;  hence  it  was  that  the  baptism  of  John  and 
of  Christ  did  not  appear  so  strange  to  them  ;  yea,  they  seem  to  sup*, 
pose  that  Christ  when  he  came,  would  baptize,  for  they  asked, 
John  i.  35,  "  Why  baptizest  £hou  then,  if  thou  be  not  the  Christ  ?" 
But  these  words  are  mostly  used,  as  we  also  use  them  here,  of  "  the 
first  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  in  which  the  washing  away 
of  sins  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  is  signified  and  sealed 
with  water  to  believers,  by  virtue  of  the  institution  and  promise  or" 
Christ." 

II.  !n  order  that  we  may  consider  the  matter  itself,  we  must  at- 
tend, I  to  the  sign  of  baptism.  2.  To  the  thing  signified.  3.  The 
union  of  them.  4.  The  foundation  of  the  union,  and  5.  To  the 
circumstances. 

1.  The  external  sign  is  the  use  of  water,  "  the  external  washing 
wi  h  water,  by  which  the  filthiness  of  the  body  is  commonly  washed 
sway,"  saith  the  instructor,  "  John  came,  and  was  sent  to  baptize 
with  Water,"  John  i.  31,33.  '•' He  bapfzed  in  the  river  Jordan," 
Mark  i  5.  "  Also  at  Enon.  near  to  Kalim,  because  there  wis  much 
water  there,"  John  hi.  23.  «  See  here  is  water,  what  doth  hinder 
me  to  be  baptized,"  said  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36.  It  is  necessary 
that  it  should  be  pure  and  clean  water  as  those  rivers  were,  if  it  shall 
be  proper  to  represent  the  spiritual  cleansing.  And  therefore  the 
Papists  pollute  baptism,  and  trifle  with  it,  and  with  the  institntor  of 
it,  when  among  many  adjurations  of  the  devil,  and  crossings,  they  be- 
smear the  nose  and  ears  of  the  person  who  is  baptized,  with  spittle., 
and  anoint  him  with  oil.  Who  hath  required  this  at  their  hands  ? 
But  it  was  necessary  to  confirm  their  opinion  concerning  the  virtue 
of  waterbaptism  •  v>ater  alone  would  not  suffice  to  wash  away  sins — • 
popish  spittle  and  oil  are  more  efficacious.  Trifles  :  in  this  manner 
Jo  the  P.  pists  i(  make  the  commandment  of  Ccd  of  none  effect  by 
their  traditions,"  like  the  Pharisees,  Matt.  xv.  6. 

Nevertheless,  water  by  itself  cannot  cleanse,  unless  it  be  used. 
Anciently  they  obliged  the  person  who  was  to  be  baptized,  to  gc 
:n,to  the  water,  and  they  dipped  him  in  it,  by  which  means  he  seem- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  2? 

be  dead,  and  buried  under  the  water,  and  when  he   came  up 
againj  to  rise  fiom  the  dead,  and  so   his  whole    body   was  cltansed ; 
but  as  this  cannot  t>e  done  in  these  cold  countries  without  great  dan- 
ger to  the  per-on  who  is  barptized,  pouring  or  sprinkling   hath   been 
wisely   introduced      This  ceremony  is  not  to  be  disapproved  of,  as 
(hough  it  militated  against  the  institution  of  Christ,  and  the  efficacy 
of  bap'.ism,  since  dipping  und  sprinkling  are  only  circumstances    It  is 
njt  to  be  thought,  that  the  apostles  always  dipped  the  persons,  who 
were  to  be   baptized,  but  they   also   sprinkled   them   when   occasion 
required.    VVno  can  believe  that  when  they  baptized  three  thousand  at 
the  same  time,  they  dipped  them  I      Who  can    imagine   that    when 
they  baptized  Cornelius  and  Lydia  in  their  own  houses,  yea,  the  jail- 
er  by  night,  they  then  Lund  vessels  at  hand,   capacious   enough   to 
plunge  fullgrown  persons  in  and  under   the  water?     The  thing  sig- 
nified is  also  expressed  by  sprinkling,  and  is  called  "  water,  and  the 
blood  of  sprinkling,  '    Ezek.    xxxvi.  25.     Heb.  xii.  24.     We    can 
also  cleanse  as  well  by  sprinkling,  as  by   dipping  ;  it  is  of  no   conse- 
quence, whether  we  sprinkle  the  face,  or  the  whole  body,    inasmuch 
as  the    face,  being  the   principal    part,   represents   the    wi.ole  man> 
Under  the  Old  Testament,   when  one  member  was  circumcised,  the 
whole  person  was  considered  as  .circumcised.     "When    Peter  desi- 
red   that    his  bands  and  head  should  be  washed,  as  well  as  his    feet, 
Jesus  said  to  him,    He  that  is   washed   needeth  not  save  to  wash  his 
feet,  but  is    clean  every   whit,"  John    xiii.  9,   10.     Why   should  we 
not  then  look  upon  him  to  he  wholly  clean,  whose  face  is  washed  ? 

We  reckon  it  a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  we  sprinkle  or  dip 
once  or  thrice,  if  it  be  not  done  to  confirm  any  ei  roneous  opinion, 
like  the  Arians,  who,  dipped  thrice,  because  they  divided  the  God- 
head :  and  theref  re  the  council  of  Toledo,  in  the  year  633,  permit- 
ted the  church  of  Spain  to  dip  only  once,  that  they  might  thus  tes^ 
tify  the  purity  of  their  doctrine  against  the  Arians.  We  may  sprin- 
kle or  dip  once  to  testify  the  oneness  of  the  divine  essence,  and 
thrice  to  testify  that  there  are  three  distinct  divine  Persons;  but 
when  we  say  that  sprinkling  once  or  thrice  is  a  matter  of  indiffer* 
ence,  we  do  not  mean  that  every  person  who  baptizeth,  hath  a  right 
by  his  own  authority  to  sprinkle  once,  when  the  church  is  used  to 
sprinkle  thrice  ;  for  he  who  should  undertake  this  would  be  suspec^ 
ted  of  presumption  and  of  error. 

Since  baptism  must  be  administered  in  the  name  of  the  divine 
Trinity,  it  is  proper  that  the  Trinity  should  be  mentioned,  when  a  per- 
son is  baptized,  according  to  the  command  of  Jesus,  who  ordered  his 
ambassadours  m  to  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  an*l 


U      EXPL  ^NATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Matt  xxviii.  19.  It  is  true  he  doth  not  command, 
Y  •  shail  s.iy,  when  ye  baptize,  1  baptize  thee  in  the  name  ol  the 
Father,  &c.  yet  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  the  apostles  were  silent 
when  they  baptized,  but  t!ia'  they  expressed  the  virtue  of  baptism  by 
words.  They  baptized  indeed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  but 
the  whole  divine  Trinity  manifests  itself  in  Jesus:  thi  Father  is  in 
him,  and  he  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  bestows  all  grace 
fro  I  the  Son,  who  hath  it  from  the  Father,  according  t  the  words 
of  Christ,  John  xiv.  7 — 16,  and  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  And  therefore  it  is 
the  same  thing,  whether  we  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
or  in  the  n.me  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  will  show  presently  what 
is  signified  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity. 

2.  But  this  use  of  water  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity  is  not  merely 
a  commanded  duty  of  divine  worship,  but  it  is  also  significative,  or 
it  respects  something  signified.  This  is  the  blood  of  Christ, ,shed"in 
his  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  and  his  Spirit  purchased  thereby,  by  which 
the  sins  of  the  elect  are  washen  away,  according  to  the  promises  of 
the  covenant  of  grace. 

In  order  to  understand  this  properly,  we  must  remember  that 
God  enters  into  a  covenant  of  grace  with  the  believing  sinner,  and 
promises  him  therein  that  his  sins  shall  be  washen  away.  "  I  will 
cleanse  you  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  nil  your  idols,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-  But  God  could  not  do  this,  unless  a 
sufficient  sacrifice  were  offered,  upon  which  the  sinner  could  enter 
into  a  covenant  treaty  with  God,  and  God  with  the  sinner,  as  men 
were  wont  anciently  to  enter  into  covenants  by  sacrifices.  The  Lord 
having  respect  to  this  saith,  Psalm  1,  5,  "  Gather  my  saints  together 
unto  me  :  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with    me   by    sacrifice." 

When  the  Lord  had  established  his  covenant  with  all  Israel,  "  Moses 
took  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  people,  and 
said,  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hath  made 
with  you,"  Exod.  xxiv.  I — 8.  But  the  sacrifice  served  not  only 
to  confirm  the  covenant,  but  also  to  cleanse  the  Israelites,  in  order 
th  it  it  might  shadow  forth  the  true  washing  away  of  sins  by  a  better 
blood  :  <k  The  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer 
sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as 
Paul  saith,  Heb.  ix.  13.  But  since  it  is  impossible  that  the  blood  of 
buliG  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks, 
Heb.  x.  1.  therefore  the  God  of  the  covenant  gave  his  ,-^un,  who  of- 
fered himself  up  to  God  in  his  bloody  sacrifice,  that  he  might  ob- 
tain the  true  purification,  and  aho  confirm  the  covenant  of  God  with 
the  sinner.     The  same  wise  apostle  teacheth  us  this  again  ;  after  h* 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69— Tl.  3r 

had  shown  that  the  blood  of  beasts,  offered  up  in  sacrifice,  could, 
sanctify  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,  he  saith,  Heb.  ix.  14,  15,  "  How 
much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spir- 
it offered  himself  without  spit  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
Mediator  of  the  New  testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the 
redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament, 
they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheri- 
tance. "  But  we  are  baptized  not  only  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
who  establishes  the  covenant,  and  promises  the  washing  away  of 
sins,  and  in  the  name  of  the  Son,  who  purchases  the  covenant,  and 
the  promises  thereof  by  his  sacrifice,  and  his  blood,  shed  therein  ;  but 
also  m  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  likewise  signified  in 
baptism,  and  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  to  the 
washing  away  of  sins  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  effects  by  a  real  and  ac= 
tive  application  the  washing  away  of  sins,  which  the  Father  prom- 
iseth,  and  the  Son  hath  purchased  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  vi. 
11,"  But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  arc  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  And 
therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  also  brings  the  sinner  into  the  bond  of  the 
covenant,  which  is  also  signified  by  baptism,  according  to  the  promise 
of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  4,  5.  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground :  I  will  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring.  And  they 
shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  watercourses. 
One  shall  say  1  am  the  Lord's:  and  another  shall  call  himself  by  the 
name  of  Jacob:  and  another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the 
Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  Israel."  And  thus  bap- 
tism is  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  of  the  washing 
away  of  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  promised  in  that  cov- 
enant by  the  Father. 

But  "  what  is  it  to  be  washed  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ," 
thus  asks  the  instructor,  and  he  saith  that  it  is  our  justification  and 
sanclitication :  and  he  speaks  thus  with  the  scripture,  agreeably  to 
the  words  which  we  have  just  now  quoted  from  1  Cor.  vi.  1  1.  We 
have  explained,  in  treating  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day,  the  man- 
ner in  which  God  justifieth  the  sinner,  and  forgives  his  sins.  This 
forgiving  of  sins  is  expressed  by  cleansing,  when  the  Lord  promiaetb, 
Jer.  xxxiii.  8,  "  I  will  cleanse  them  from  ail  their  iniquity,  and  I 
will  pardon  all  theii  iniquities."  But  as  sin  doth  not  only  subject 
the  sinner  to  guilt,  of  which  he  is  cleansed  by  justification,  but  as  it 
renders  him  also  filthy,  that  filth  is  therefore  also  washen  a^ay  by 


P      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

ianctification.     The  catechism  describes  this  as  consisting  in  tl 
.      .  (a)  The  sinner  is  re  tewed  by  it ;  for  the  image  of  God,  after 
.  he  is  renewed,  is  restored  in  him  by  tl  putting  oii'  the  uld  man, 
and  putting  on   the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  right- 
eousness and  true   holiness,"  Eph.  iv.  22,  24.     He  is  then,  like  one 
■Who  hatb  been  arashen,  elf  an  and  new,  and  so  he  is  "  saved  by  the 
washing  of   regeneration,    and   the   renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
Titus  in.  5.  (b)  Sanctification  implies  also,  that  a  person  is  sanctified 
to  be,  a  member  of  Christ   by  which  he  is  surrendered  to  Christ,  and 
.sd  to  him  ;  Paul  saith.     "  We  all  are   baptized  by  one  Spirit 
Into  one  body,"  1  Cor.  xii.  13.     And  thus  we  partake  cf  the  holn.esa 
of  our  Head,  yea,  just  as  if  we  had  been  dead,  buried,  and  raised  up 
ytitk  him,  according  to  our  text,  (c)  It  belongs  also  to  sancuhcauon, 
..  person  dies  mors  and  more  to  sin,    and  levels  a  godly  and  un- 
blamable life.     Sanciiiication  is  not  perfect  in  a  person  at  the  begin- 
ning, but  it  advanceth  gradually,   since   the  soul  herself  becomes  ac- 
jb/ej  bewails  her  sins,  fights  against  them,  and  endeavours  to  drive 
I  out,  and  bestirs  herself  time  after  time  lo  conduct  in  a  cnannei 
to  God  :  fo;1  "  it  is  given  to  her  to  grow ,  to  be  cl 
,.i  glory  to  glory,  and  as  she    is  holy,  to  become    more  holy," 
Psalm  xcii.  13.    2  Cor   hi.  IS.    Rev,  jcxii.  11.     1'oth  these  benefits, 
\Vuiu:.  in  baptism,   are  effected  by  the  blood  and  Spirit 

of  Christ*     His  oloocl,  that  is,  his  bloody  suffering  hath  merited  jus- 
anctiii cation  ;  for  "  he  is  made  to  them  who  are  his, 
iousness  and  sanctification,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.     And  thus  "  he  is  a 
fountain   opened  to  the   house   of  David,    and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
alem  for  .  .  foi  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1.     Therefore 

loved  disciple  saith,  1  John  i.  7.     "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Son  of  Cod,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     But  how  is  jutsilication 
I   to  them  internally?  is  it  not  by  the   Holy  Spirit,    as  we 
ed   upon  the   twenty  third    Lord's  day?  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit 
effect  5  merited  sanctification  ;  for  "  Cod  hath  chosen  them 

through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,"  1  Thess.  iv.  13.  1  Peter  i.  2. 
And  therefore  the  Ho  y  Spirit  is  likened  to  water,  with  which  they 
are  born  again,  according  to  the  words  of  Ezekiel  and  of  the  Saviour, 
Ezek-  xxxvi.  2.5.  John  iii.  5. 

Since  now  the  covenant  of  God,  and  Ids  gifts  of  grace  are  un- 
changeable, and  since  the  Son  of  God  hath  made  a  perfect  satisfac- 
tion for  all  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  loveth  his  own  until  the  end, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  abides  for  ever  with  believers  for  an  everlasting 
seal  ;  therefore  the  washing  away  of  sins,  signified  in  baptism,  must 
usee  •  only  to  tins  committed  before  baptism- 


—  ?;..  ** 

as  the  church,  of  Rome  imagines,  but  also  to   sins  committed  after 
baptism. 

3.  If  water  shall  signify  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  there  must 
necessarily  be  an  union  between  the  sign,  and  the  thing-  signified, 
which  union  consists, 

I.  In  a  conformity  between  the  use  of  water,  and  the  working  of 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  indeed  such  a  conformity,  that 
ihe  u*e  of  water  represents  in  a  lively  manner  the  working  and 
power  of  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  exhibits  them  to  the 
senses  ;  for,  (a)  when  we  make  use  of  water  to  wash  and  cleanse 
ourselves,  we  suppose  that  we  are  unclean  and  filthy.  Thus  also  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  by  which  we  are  cleansed,  teach  us  that 
we  have  defiled  ourselves  by  sin,  in  order  that  we  may  humble  and 
ab.tse  ourselves,  and  seek  our  purification  out  of  ourselves  in  the1 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  When  David  had  defiled  himself  gr 
he  prayed  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  li.  2,  3.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from 
mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin  ;  fo:  I  acknowledge  mf 
transgressions ;  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me."  How  excellently 
doth  our  form  of  baptism  express  this  in  its  first  part !  thus  it  speaks, 
"  This  the  dipping  in,  or  sprinkling  with  water  teacheth  us,  where- 
by the  impurity  of  our  souls  is  signified,  and  we  admonished  10 
loathe  and  humble  ourselves  before  God,  and  seek  for  o.ir  purifica- 
tion and  salvation  without  ourselves."  (b)  As  we  are  sprinkled  with 
water,  so  we  are  also  sprinkled  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ, 
that  is,  we  are  rendered  partakers  of  the  power  and  worki  • 
Christ's  blood  and  Spirit  for  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  they  arc 
applied  to  us  :  "  the  Messiah  should  sprinkle  many  nations,"  accord- 
ing to  Isaiah  lii.  15.  (c)  We  are  united  in  the  most  intimate  manner 
to  the  water  by  the  use  of  waterbaptism  ,  so  we  are  also  united  to 
Christ  through  his  biood  and  Spirit  by  the  thing  signified  :  therefore 
the  text  asks,  "  Know  ye  not  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized 
into  Jesus  Lhrist,  were  baptized  into  his  death."  Yea,  we  put  Christ 
on  as  a  garment,  by  baptism,  Gal.  iii.  27.  (d)  Those  who  were  for- 
merly baptized  by  dipping  seemed  to  be  as  it  were  dead  and 
buried  under  the  water,  which  is  aiso  represented  in  some  measure 
by  sprinkling  and  pouring  water  on  a  person  :  but  we  are  dead  and 
buried  to  ourselves  and  to  sin  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ: 
!<  We  die  to  sin,"  saith  the  instructor  in  the  seventieth  question* 
The  text  having  respect  to  mis,  saith,  "  We  are  buried  with  him  b;a 
baptism  into  death,  (e)  As  those  who  are  baptised  ascend  up  c\ 
the  water,  as  if  they  arose  from  the  dead,  so  these  also  are  r 
abve  ny  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ;     Thei  - 


40      EXPLANATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

text,  that  believers  are  baptized  into  the  death  of  Christ,  u  that  like 
as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
even  so  we  also  should  walk,  in  newness  of  life."  (f )  As  water  washes 
away  the  tilth  of  a  person,  so  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washes 
away  our  sins  :  this  wc  have  explained  before,  (g)  When  the  r.ames 
of  the  ihree  divine  Persons  are  pronounced  upon  us.  their  grace  is  also 
supplicated  for  us  in  baptism,  as  the  apostle  wished  and  prayed  in 
behalf  of  the  Corinthians,  when  he  said,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  "The  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all." 

2.  The  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  consists  also  in 
the  joint  use  of  both.  Such  a  signifying  power  of  the  use  of  water 
is  un,  rofitable,  unless  it  be  joined  to  the  use  of  it,  by  which  we  en- 
joy  not  only  the  sign,  but  also  the  thing  signified  by  the  sign, 
through  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith  ;  thus  it  is  said, 
Titus  iii.  5.  "  He  hath  saved  us  by  the  working  of  regeneration, 
and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  so  we  "  suffer  our- 
selves," with  Paul,  Acts  xx;i.  16.  "  to  be  baotized,  and  our  sins  to 
be  washed  away."  We  art:  "  buried  by  baptism  into  death  with 
Christ,'*  that  is.  in  and  united  to  him-  Piom.  vi.  4. 

-1.  But  what  grounds  have  we  to  assert  such  an  union  «f  the  sign 
with  the  tiling  signified  ?  the  word  of  God  alone  affords  us  freedom 
and  grounds  for  this  ;  For, 

1.  "The  Lord  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing  with  water," 
saith  the  catechism  ;  whereby  he  enjoined,  that  we  should  wash  with 
water,  in  order  to  signify  and  represent  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
his  blood  and  Spirit.  John  the  Baptist  was  the  first,  who  received 
the  institution  of  baptism,  that  he  might,  as  the  forerunner  of  Jesus, 
prepare  the  Jews  to  receive  the  Christ,  to  whom  John  directed 
them  :  therefore  he  saith,  John  i.  31,  33.  "  I  Knew  him  not,"  that  is, 
the  Christ  r  '"  but  that  he  should  lie  made  manifest  to  Israel,  there- 
fore am  I  come  baptizing  with  water.  He  that  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Unon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the 
Spirit  descending,  and  remaining  on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  bap- 
tizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  After  this,  when  Christ  began  to  ex- 
ercise his  oTice  in  public,  he  commanded  his  apostles  to  baptize  in 
bis  name  ;  this  we  see  in  the  account  uiven  by  John  the  evangelist, 
when  lie  saith,  "  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard,  that  Jesus  made  and 
baptized  more  disciples  than  John,  though  Jesus  himself  baptized 
.not,  but  bis  disciples,"  John  iv.  I,  2.  But  the  institution  of  baptism 
was  not  yet  perfected,  because  the  New  Testament  was  not  yet  per- 
fected ;  the,  baptism  of  John  pointed  to  Christ,  who  should  be  mani- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7 1 .  41 

tested  to  Israel,  and  the  baptism  of  the  apostles  pointed  to  him,  who 
was  already  manifested,  and  who  was  about  to  shed  his  blood,  in 
order  that  he  might  obtain  the  Spirit,  and  so  wash  away  sins  ;  and 
therefore  baptism  was  administered  to  the  Jews  only.  But  Christ 
being  risen,  because  he  had  shed  his  blood,  obtained  the  Spirit,  and 
thus  confirmed  the  New  Testament,  he  completed  the  ins'itution  of 
baptism,  commanding  to  baptize  all  nations,  not  only  the  Jews,  but 
the  Gentiles  also,  in  the  name  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  see  this, 
Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

But  when  we  say  that  the  baptism  of  Christ  and  of  John  differed 
thus  one  from  the  other,  we  do  not  mean  that  there  was    an  essen- 
tial difference  between  them,    as  the  Papists  and    Socinians  assert. 
The  Papists  maintain  that  the  waterbaptism  of  Christ  accomplishtth 
and  effects  the  thing  itself,  to  wit,  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  that 
the  baptism  of  John   purified  the  body  only,  but  not  the  soul,    and 
only  disposed   a  person  to  conversion.     The   Socinians  ascribe  no 
virtue  at  all  to  baptism,    but  think  that  the  baptism  of  John  was  a 
necessary  ecclesiastical  duty  for  the  Jews,  as   all   the  ecclesiastical 
duties  of  the  churchlaw  of   Moses    were  ;  but  that   the  baptism  of 
Christ  was  a  mere  badge  of  the  Christian  church  for   a  short   time, 
in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  Jews   and  Gentiles,  and  that  baptism 
is  no  longer  necessary  now,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Chris- 
tianity.  In  opposition  to  this  our  church  teaches,  conformably  to  the 
\vord  of  God,  that  the  waterbaptism  of  John  and  of  Christ  was   es- 
sentially the  same  ;  for  both  have  the  same  sign,  to  wit,  water  ;  the 
thing  signified  by  the  baptism  cf  John  was  the  grace  of  the  Mess  ah, 
whicn  is  also  signified  by  the   baptism  of  Christ ;  for  according  to 
the  words  of  Paul,  "  John  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance, 
saying  unto  the  people,  that  they  should  believe  on  him,  that  is,  on 
Christ  Jesus ;  and  they  who  heard   him  were  baptized   in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  Acts  xix.  4.   The  baptism  of  John  was  of  divine 
institution,  as  well  as  that  of  Christ  :  "  John  was  sent  to  baptize  with 
water,"  John  i.  33,  "  his  baptism  was  from  heaven,"   as  Christ   inti- 
mateth,  Matt.  xxi.  25.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  baptism  of  John 
did  not  confer  the  thing  signified,  but  Christ  only  ;  but  the  wa.er  bap- 
tism, instituted  by  Christ,  confers  not  the  thing  signified  neither,  as 
will  appear  in  the  following  Lord's  dav.     When  then  the  Socinians, 
who  deny  the  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  of  baptism,  assert    that 
baptism,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Christianity,  is  a  matter 
of  indifference,  yea,  that  it  is  no  longer  necessary,  they  contrad.ct 
the  word  of  God,  which  teacheth  that  baptism  is  a  sacrament  for  the 
whole  church  of  the  New  Testament  until  the  end  of  the  world ;  for 
Vox  .ii  F 


.       EXPI  LION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

Christ  connects  baptism  with  the  preaching  of  the  word,  and  prorr.- 
iseth  his  blessed  presence  with  it  for  ever,  when  he  saith  to  his  am- 
bus dours,  Matt,  xxviit.  19,20.  "  Go  ye,  ami  teach  a!l  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  r.ame  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I 
have  commanded  you;  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world." 

The  virtue  of  this  institution  consists  herein,  that  the  ambassa- 
dours  of  the  Lord  are  obliged  to  baptize  every  penitent  person  with 
water,  and  to  signify  to  him  the  washing  awj.y  of  sins  by  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  ;  and  every  penitent  is  by  this  same  word  obliged 
to  suffer  himself  to  be  baptized  in  obedience  to  Christ,  and  must  be 
led  up  thereby  to  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be 
cleansed  by  them  ;  therefore  Ananias  said  to  penitent  Paul,  Acts 
xxii.  16,  "  Why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins."  It  was  therefore  a  blamable  disobedience  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  that  they  would  not  suffer  them  elves  to  be  baptized 
by  John  :  by  that  disobedience  "they  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 
against  themselves,"  as  Jesus  saith,  Luke  vii.  30, 

2  But  the  word  of  the  institution  is  not  the  only  thing,  that  is 
necessary  to  render  the  use  of  the  v.  ater  a  sacrament,  but  a  word  of 
promise  must  also  be  added  to  it,  whereby  the  element,  which  be- 
comes a  sign  by  the  institution,  is  made  a  seal  also.  This  is  beauti- 
fully expressed  by  the  instructor  in  the  sixty  ninth  question  :  "Christ 
hath  added  this  promise  to  the  institution  of  washing,  that  I  am  as 
certainly  washed  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  from  all  the  pollution  of  my 
SOul,  that  is,  from  all  my  sins,  as  I  am  washed  externally  with 
water. "  Doth  not  Peter  also  teach  us  this,  when  he  saith  to  the  peni- 
tent Jews,  Acts  ii.  30,  39,  «  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye 
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  the  promise  is  unto 
yon  :" 

The  instructor  inquiring  concerning  the  word  of  promise,  asks, 

;  Where  hath  Christ  promised  us,  that  he  will   as  certainly  wash  us 

blood   and    Spirit,  us   we  are  washed  with   the  water  of  bap- 

cites    su;  tges,   which  prove  this.     The  first 

;t.  .\:-:vi  i    19,   where   Christ  saith  to  his  ambassadours,  -'Go 

ye.  teach,  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 

Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."    He  showeth  that  the  doctrine  of 

jne  Trinity,  and  the  grace  of  the  Trinity,  which  each  Person 

in  the  divine  essence  should  bestow  upon  the  nations,  was  the  sum 

loctrineSj  in  which  they  should  instruct  the  nations.  Thus 


.     ,  —71.  M 

l:aul   supplicated  for   the  Corinthians  in   order  that   they  might  be 
saved,   "the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  cf  God,  and 
the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"   2  (.  or.  xiii.  13.     All  this  sal- 
vation is  promised  and  sealed   to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,   and 
thus  also  the  washing  away  of  sins.     Since  now  baptism  is  a  sea!  cf 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  whifch  God  and  man  enter  into  .an  agree- 
ment, we  will  inquire  wherein  it  consists  to  be  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  divine  Trinity.     The  Lord  on  his  part  receives  the  person, 
who  is  baptized,  into  covenant,   and  promises,   grants,  and  seals  to 
him  ail  that  grace,  which  we  have  mentioned.     This  is  taught  in  a 
most  emphatical  and  clear  manner  in  the  second  part  of  our  form  of 
baptism,  where  it  saith,  **  When  we  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  God  the  Father  witnesseth  and  sealeth  unto  us,  that  he  doth 
make  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  us,"  &c.  When  the  Lord 
established   his  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  he  promised 
that  he  would  be  a  God  to  him,   and  to  his  seed,  and  he  sealed  this 
to  him   by  circumcision,   Gen.  xvii.  1  — 12.     Peter  having   respect 
to  this,  saith,  "Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  for  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your 
ehiichvn,  and  to  all  that  arc  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call,"  Acts  ii   38,  39.     But  when  the  Lord  brings  the  per- 
son, who  is  baptized,  in  this  manner,  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant^ 
he  inclines  him  to  assent  to  the  covenant,  and  to  "  yield  himself  to 
the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xxx.  8.     He  doth  this,   when  he  suffers   him- 
self to  be  baptized  in   the  name   of  the   Trinity,  by  which  he  sur- 
renders himself  to  the  Lord,  in  such  a  solemn  sacrament,  to  be  his, 
Cl  and  saith,  yea,  subscribes  with  his  land,  1  am  the  Lord's,  and  calls 
himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,"  that  he   may  join  himself 
to  the  people  of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  5.     That  this  is  done  in  bap- 
tism is   intimated  by  Paul,    1  Cor.  i.  13.  "  Were  ye  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Paul  ?  that  is,  did  ye  declare  in  baptism  that   ye  should  be= 
long  to  Paul  ?  Yea,  the  person  who  is  baptized   obligeth    himself  in, 
and  by  this  ceremony  of  baptism,  to  cleave  to  the  Triune  God  alone, 
to  trust  in  him,  and  love  him,  to  seek,  salvation  in  him  alone,  to  serve 
him  alone,  and  to  oppose  whatsoever  opposcth  him.     The  Lord  re- 
quirts  all  this  of  the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with  him,  and 
the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with   the  Lord,   consents  to  it 
with  a  perfect  heart.  He  "  avouches  the  Lord  to  be  his  God,  and  the 
Lord  avouches  him   to  be  his  peculiar  property,   and  that  he  shall 
keep  ail  his  commandments,"  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18.   This  he  confirms 
by  this  sacrament,  as  by  an  oath,  "  swearing,  and  purposing  to  per- 


44      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTiSivi 

form  his  oath,  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous  judgments,"  at 
David  acted,  Psalm  cxix  106.  And  thus  "  he  calls  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  in  accepting  and  confirming  the  covenant,  when  "  he 
suffers  himself  lo  be  baptized,"  with  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16.  With  this 
agrees  another  passage,  which  the  instructor  cites  from  Mark  xvi. 
16,  where  the  Saviour  saith,  "  He  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized, 
shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  We 
enter  by  faitu  into  the  covenant,  which  promiseth  the  washing  away 
of  sins  ;  the  Lord  confirms  these  promises  of  his  by  the  seal  of  bap- 
tism, and  the  believer  receiving  this  seal,  protests  that  he  will  con- 
duct himself  worthily  of  the  Lord,  in  consequence  of  the  promises 
and  the  sealing  of  them  ;  to  which  then  the  promise  of  salvation  is 
annexed  :  not  that  baptism  effects  salvation  by  itself,  and  is  there- 
fore absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Papists  teach  ;  but  we  obtain  salva- 
tion by  faith,  which  embraceth  Christ  the  Saviour  and  Mediator  of 
the  covenant,  and  baptism  is  the  seal  of  it.  Therefore  the  passage, 
Mark  xvi.  16.  doth  not  threaten  the  unbaptized  with  damnation,  but 
the  unbelieving,  who  despise  Christ,  and  thus  also  his  institution  of 
baptism,  like  the  Pharisees,  Luke  vii   30. 

The  instructor  proceeds  and  says,  "  This  promise  is  also  repeated, 
where  the  scripture  calls  baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
the  washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  Paul  calls  bap  ism,  "  the  washing 
of  regeneration,  i'itus  iii.  5,  and  Ananias  calls  baptism,  "the  wash- 
ing away  of  sins,"  Acts  xxii.  15.  Waterbaptism  is  so  called,  not 
because  it  regenerates  a  person,  and  washes  away  his  sins,  as  the 
Papists  erroneously  conceive  here,  which  we  will  show  upon  the. 
twenty  seventh  Lord's  day  ;  but  because  it  is  a  seal  of  regeneration, 
and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  by  virtue  of  the  divine  promise,  that 
the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  is  as  truly  regenerated,  and  cleansed 
from  his  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  he  is  washed  with 
water.  And  so  baptism  is  called  the  washing  away  of  sins  by  a 
"sacramental  phraseology,  which  ascribes  the  properties  of  the  thing 
signified  to  the  sign-  That  outward  baptism  doth  not  effect  regen- 
eration, and  the  washing  away  of  sins  this  the  apostle  of  the  cir- 
cumcision teacheth  us,  when  he  saith,  I  Peter  iii.  21.  "  The  like 
figure  whercunto,  even  baptism,  doth  also  now  save  us,  (not  the  put- 
ting away  of  the  filth  cf  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  con- 
science toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  denies 
therefore  that  outwaul  waterbaptism  saves:  but  what  is  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God  ?  A  good  conscience  is  that  which 
js  reconciled  and  pacified  by  the  bluod  and  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
and  which  also  exerciselh   itself  to  a   holiness  that  is  acceptable  to 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  69— 71.  45 

God.  See  Heb.  ix.  14.  x.  2,  22.  1  Peter  iii.  26.  By  the  question, 
cfierotcma  of  this  good  conscience  some  understand  a  question  asked 
in  consequence  of  another  persons  question,  or  the  condition  which 
God  proposeth  to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,  in  which  he  asks, 
whether,  lie  will  maintain  a  good  conscience  toward  God ;  and  they 
say  that  God  asks  this  question,  when  the  person  who  is  baptized 
asks  whether  he  will  be  his  God  ;  or  they  understand  by  it  an 
answer,  or  promise  of  maintaining  a  good  conscience,  which  the 
person  who  is  baptized  makes  to  God. 

Although  this  is  a  learned  invention,  it  is  nevertheless  not  altogeth- 
impertinent  to  observe,  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  the  word 
eperotema.,  a  question,  by  a  question  asked  in  consequence  of  a  fore- 
going question,  or  by  a  condition,  answer  or  promise  ;  we  may  take 
it  for  a  simple  question,  by  which  the  good  conscience  asks  in  pray- 
er to  God  for  his  sealing  grace  ;  for  it  is  of  no  importance  here  in 
what  sense  the  word  efierotema  is  used  by  certain  writers,  and  how  in 
the  law  ;  but  how,  and  in  what  sense  the  holy  writers  use  it.  It 
is  certain  that  this  noun  substantive,  which  is  found  in  only  one 
passage  in  the  New  Testament,  is  derived  from  the  verb  eperolao. 
We  find  this  vern  fifty  and  nine  times  in  the  New  Testament ;  it  is 
translated  once  to  desire,  thrice  to  inquire,  and  fifty  and  five  times 
to  ask,  according  to  Trommius's  concordance.  And  doth  this  word 
ever  denote  a  question,  asked  in  consequence  of  another  person's 
question,  it  doth  not  proceed  from  the  nature  of  the  word,  as  being 
compounded  of  two  words,  but  because  the  connexion  of  the  forego- 
ing words  requires  it,  as  we  see  in  the  simple,  uncompounded  verb 
eroiao,  Matt.  xxi.  24,  25.  Luke  xx.  3.  4,  xxii.  67,  68.  But  in 
these  words  of  Peter  we  find  no  foregoing  question,  to  which  the 
question  in  the  text  should  refer.  Further,  we  cannot  easily  con- 
nect the  words,  "  a  good  conscience,"  with  the  words,  "  to  God  ;" 
but  we  can  easily  refer  the  word  '.'  question,"  to  the  words  "  to  God," 
and  so  the  good  conscience  of  the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  asks  in 
prayer,  Father,  wilt  thou  not  give  me  now  that  necessary  grace  which 
thou  hast  promised  ?  wilt  thou  not  wash  away  my  sins  ?  hast  thou 
not  been  satisfied  for  all  mine  iniquity,  and  hath  not  all  that  salvation 
been  purchased  for  me  \  didst  not  thou  thyself  declare  it,  when  thou 
raisedst  thy  Son,  my  Surety  from  the  dead,  when  thou  dischargedst 
him  from  his  prison,  when  thou  justifiedst  him  in  the  Spirit,  and  ga- 
vest  him  thus  an  acquittance,  witnessing  that  thou  wast  satisfied  ? 
hast  thou  not  now  assured  me  of  this,  and  sealed  it  to  me  by  bap- 
tism ?  This  agrees  also  exceedingly  well  with  the  words  of  Peterf 
when  he  calls  this  question  a  baptism  by  a  sacramental  phrase,  which 


4-6      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM- 

ascribes  the  name  of  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified  ;  and  this  bap« 
tism  saveth  us,  beoause  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God 
is  the  act  of  faith,  which  seeks  salvation  in  God  through  Christ, 
raised  from  the  dead. 

5.  Therefore  baptism  is  a  most  precious  and  holy  institution, 
given  by  God  to  his  church  ;  consequently  we  must  beware  that  wa 
do  not  profane  it,  with  respect  to  its  circumstances  of  persons,  time, 
or  place. 

I.  The  Papists,  who  make  a  great  ado    about  waterbaptism,  and 
seek  the  holiness  and  virtue  of  baptism  only  in   the  act  of  sprinkling 
•with  water,  as  though  that  washed  away  sins,  and  salvation  depei 
thereon;  think  that   a    woman,    yea,  that  any  other  person  hath   a 
right  to  administer  baptism  in  a  case  of  necessity  ;  but  this  is  a  pro- 
fanation of  baptism,  and  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord  ;  for   Christ 
committed  the  administration  of  baptism  only    to  the    ministers   of 
ihe  word,  when  he  said  to  his  apostles,  "  Teach  all  nations,  and  bap- 
tize them,"  Matt,  xviii.   19.     They  are  "  servants  of  Christ,  and  thus 
stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  1  Cor.  iv,  1.     Will  no  man  dare 
to  stamp  and  seal  any  thing  with  the  seal  of  the  prince,  unless  he  be 
commissioned  for  that  purpose,  and  shall  a  woman  then,  or  any  other 
human  being  presume  to  apply  the  seal   of  God  Ho  a  person,   who 
hath  entered  into  covenant  with  him  ?     Did  Zipparoh  venture  to  do 
this,  Exod.  iv.  24,  25,  26,  we  ought  not  to  imitate  her  in  that  action  ; 
for  she  did  not  do  it  agreeably  to  the  divine  command,  but  hastily,  and 
in  boisterous  anger.  God,  who  would  slay  Moses,  because  he  had  not 
circumcised   his  Son,   forbore  to  do  it,  because  his  son  was  circum- 
cised, but  not  on  account  of  the  circumstances  of  the  action,  for  they 
were  sinful,  because  the  woman  acted  with  so  little  deliberation,  and 
so  precipitately.     Moses,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  was  present :  but 
v/ill  the  Papists  permit  a  woman  to  baptize,  when  a  priest  is  at  hand  ? 
I  judge  not.     Baptism  was  however  not  so  restrained  to  the  apostles, 
that  the   ordinary  preachers  of  the  gospel  had  no  right  to  administer 
it,  and  therefore  they  also  baptized  :  surely  not  like  laymen,  as    the 
Papists  assert,  but  as  called  to  the  office  of  preachers.     We   see    it 
in  Philip  and  Ananias,  Acts.  viii.  12,  38.     ix.  10 — 18. 

The  Papists  are  not  only  guilty  of  presumption  in  permitting  any 
person  to  baptize,  but  they  are  also  guilty  of  profaneness  in  adminis- 
tering baptism  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  to  bells,  in  order  to 
consecrate  them,  that  they  may  lay  fctorms,  expel  the  devd  and  dia- 
bolical apparitions,  and  deliver  souls  out  of  purgatory.  To  what 
hath  the  Romish  whore  and  mother  of  whoredoms  and  of  abomina- 
tions not  apostatized  ?  Jesus  feath  not  taught  us  to  baptize  bells,  bu: 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7!  if 

"rations,"  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  and  therefore  human  creatures;  but 
we  may  not  baptize  human  creatures  in  general,  they  must  first  "be 
taught  and  discipled,"  according  to  the  institution  of  Christ,  Matt, 
xxviii.  19.  and  they  must  consequently  have  entered  into  covenant 
with  God,  and  believe,  according  to  Mark  xvi.  15,  they  must  be 
abe  to  profess  their  faith,  like  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36,  37,  38,  and 
exercise  it  by  the  answer  of  a  good  consience  ;  for  baptism  is  a  seal 
of  the  covenant  When  Christ  saith  that  we  must  bapt'ze  all  nations, 
he  shows  that  baptism  is  not  a  privilege  of  any  one  nation  in  particu- 
lar as  circumcision  was  the  advantage  of  the  Jews  ;  The  New  Tes- 
tament should  introduce  all  rations  to  fellowship  with  God,  and  bap- 
tism, the  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  should  seal  them.  We 
shall  inquire  on  the  next  Lord's  day,  whether  we  may  baptize  chil- 
dren. 

2.  As  the  difference  of  places  hath  ceased  under  the  New  Testa- 
ment, therefore  baptism  is  also  not  confined  to  any  particular  place. 
The  ancients  sometimes  made  use  of  the  buiying-places  of  the 
Christians,  especially  of  the  martyrs  for  this  purpose,  to  which  some 
refer,  1  Cor.  xv.  29,  but  erroneously  ;  for  that  custom  had  not  ta- 
ken place  in  Paul's  time.  They  left  off  at  length  baptizing  on  the 
graves,  because  it  savoured  of  superstition.  John,  Christ,  the  apos- 
tles and  evangelists  baptized  wherever  it  was  convenient,  and  espe- 
cially where  they  preached  ;  but  the  church  being  at  length  reduced 
to  a  settled  condition,  it  was  judged  proper  to  baptize  in  the  congre- 
gation of  the  people.  This  is  also  commendable,  inasmuch  as  bap» 
tism  must  be  joined  to  the  word,  and  is  an  incorporation  into  the 
church. 

3.  It  is  thus  also  with  respect  to  the  time  of  administering  bap- 
tism. Children  were  indeed  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day  under 
the  Old  Testament  ,  but  as  the  ceremonial  difference  of  timeris  now 
abolished,  we  are  not  therefore  bound  any  longer  to  a  particular  time 
for  administering  baptism.  We  cannot  approve  of  the  conduct  of 
the  ancients,  who,  from  an  erroneous  opinion,  that  baptism  washed 
away  all  past  sins,  deferred  it  until  the  end  of  their  lives,  and  bapti- 
zed persons  on  their  sickbeds,  neither  can  we  approve  of  their  set- 
ting apart  the  festivals  of  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide  for  this  purpose  ; 
for  this  agrees  not  with  the  spirituality  of  the  New  Testament 
church.  John  the  Baptist,  the  apostles  and  evangelists  baptized  per- 
sons as  soon  as  they  believed,  and  confessed  their  faith  :  otherwise 
the  most  proper  time  for  baptizing  is  when  the  congregation  is  as- 
sembled,  although  we  might  also  observe  ether  seasons  for  baptizing; 
in  times  of  persecution  and  other  inconveir^cle;. 


48      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM; 

After. baptism  hath  been  once  rightly  administered,  we  may   not 
repeat  it.  and  use  it  often  :  for  baptism  being  a  sacrament  of  regen- 
eration and  of  incorporation    into   the  church,  both  of  which  take 
take  place  only  once,  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  it,  as  it   is  to  re- 
peat the  Lord's  supper,  which  being  a  sacrament  of  nourishment  and 
of  confirmation,  must  therefore  be  often  received.     It  is  with  these 
saciaments,  as  it  was  with  the  ordinary  sacraments  of  the  Old   Tes- 
tament, circumcision  and  the  passover  ;  for  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of  circumcision,  which  was  administered  but   once,  and  the 
Lord's  supper  was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  the  passover,  which  used 
to  be  repeated  yearly  ;  but  when  the  essentials  of  baptism  have  not 
been  rightly    observed  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  and 
when  that  fundamental  article  of  the  faith  is  denied,  as  is  done  by 
the  Socinians,  then  we  must  look  upon  such  a  baptism   as   no  bap- 
tism, and  we  must  re-baptize  those  who  have  been  so  baptized,  when 
they  repent,  believe  in  the  Triune  God,  and  confess  him.     Whethe? 
the  Mcnnonites  do  ill,  when  they    re-baptize   those  whom  we  and 
others   have  baptiztd  in   their  youth,  this  belongs  to  the  controversy 
about  infantbnptism  :  but  of  that  we  will  speak  on  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

APPLICATION. 


What  think  ye  now,  hearers,  is  it  not  a  great  blessing,   that   the 

Lord  God  hath  given  baptism  to  his  church  foi-  a  sacrament  ?  surely 

yes.     That   the  Triune  God  should  receive  the   sinner  into  such  a. 

well  ordered  covenant,  and  unite   him  to  himself,  that  each  Person 

should  contribute  his  part  to  favour  him,  to  cleanse  and  wash  him  from 

his  sins  for  ever,  and  should   thus  set    lus  heart  upon   him  with  an 

admirable  love,  this  is  an  inconceivable  grace  :  but  it  surpasseth  even 

this,  that  he  should  join  to  this  grace  not  only  his  word,  but  also  this 

sacrament,  that  he  may  render  this  grace  clear  and  lively  to  him, 

yea,  even  assure   him  of  it,  and  seal  it  to  him,  that  he   may  render 

ins  joy  and  comfort  complete.     The  word  of  God  would  have  been 

u  Icient  to  confirm   the  believing  sinner,    as   it  is  infallible;  but 

•  God  willing  to  show  more  abundantly  to  the   heirs  of  promise  the 

immutability  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that   by  two 

immutable  things,   in   which  it  was  impossible   for  God  to  lie,   we* 

lit  have  strong  cosolation,"  Heb.   vi.    17,  18,     Behold,   in  this 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  49 

manner  doth  God  assist  the  unbelief  of  those  whom  he  favours,  and 
as  if  this  were  yet  100  little,  he  adds  to  his  word  and  oath  also  this 
pledge  and  seal,  that  their  souls  may  be  confiimed  Abraham  and 
Ids  seed  "  received  indeed  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  se;  1  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith,"  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  11, 
but  that  righteousness  was  not  yet  actually  procured  by  the  Surety, 
."  Christ  behooved  yet  to  suffer,  and  enter  into  his  glory"  for  that 
purpose.  Circumcision  sealed  to  them  indeed  that  he  would  suivly 
procure  this  righteousness,  and  that  they  were  already  justified  by 
its  reflex  virtue  i  hut  what  a  bloody  and  painful  seal  was  it  to  them  I 
but  baptism  seals  now  with  great  ease  to  the  baptized  believer  that 
the  everlasting  righteousness  is  procured,  and  that  he  is  ie.id.  buried, 
and  risen  with  Christ'  according  to  the  text.  AP.d  therefore  bapfiz  d 
believers  enjoy  now  a  much  better  condition  than  the  believing 
fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  enjoyed. 

"  Paul  asked  the  twelve  disciples  at  Ephesus,  who  had  been  bap- 
tized with  the  baptism  of  John,  whether  they  t  ad  received  the  Holy 
.Ghost?"  Acts  xix.  2.  He  spake  of  the  holy  Ghost,  who  was  com- 
municated in  those  time-,  to  believers  in  a  great  and  extraordinary 
measure.  Without  doubt  all  of  you  have  be  n  baptized  ;  but  may 
we  not  ask  you  also,  have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghqst  to  wash  a\viy 
your  sins  by  the  blood  of  Christ?  Surely  all  those  who  have  been 
outwardly  baptized  with  water,  have  not  been  baptized  with  the  Hily 
Ghost  and  with  fire.  Simon  the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized  but  kt  he 
had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter;  for  his  heart  was  not  right 
in  the  sight  of  God  ;  but  he  was  in  the  gfdl  of  bitterness,  and  in  the 
bond  of  iniquity,"  as  Peter  upbraided  him,  Acts  viii.  21,  23.  Are 
there  not  also  many  among  you,  who  have  never  partaken  of  the 
benefit  signified  by  baptism  ?  what  dost  thou  and  thou  think  ?  if  thou 
hadst  truly  entered  into  covenant  with  God,  and  if  thy  sins  were 
vvashen  away  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  wouldest  thou  then 
wallow  so  in  sin,  and  in  excess  of  riot  .?  vrouklest  thou  wholly 
forget  that  thou  wast  cleansed  from  thy  old  sins,  and  wouldest  thou 
not  keep  thy  garments  clean  ?  Suppose  that  thou  art  not  one  of  the 
vilest  sinners,  but  civil,  and  eminently  devout,  and  that  thou  hast  a 
zeal  for  God,  but  hast  not  yet  the  Spirit  of  regeneration,  nor  the  hid- 
den man  of  the  heart,  is  thy  baptism  then  indeed  aught  more  than 
."a  putting  away  of  the  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  which  doth  not  save," 
as  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  iii.  21.  «  Is  not  he  a  Jew,  who  is  only  one 
outwardly  and  in  the  flesh,  but  he  who  is  one  inwardly,"  as  Paul 
speaks,  R.om.  ii.  28,  29.  Is  he  then  truly  a  Christian,  who  hath  been 
Vol.  it.  G 


50      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF- BAPTISM. 

only  outwardly  baptized  ?  I  deem  not :  it  will  also  appear  more  fully 
on  the  following  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  ask,  who  those  ate  then,  who  have  partaken  of  the  true 
baptism,  and  of  the  thing  signified  ?  we  say, 

1.  That  they  are  concerned  and  distressed  about  the  uncleanness 
of  their  sins.  God  the  Lord,  when  he  brings  them  into  his  cove- 
nant, gives  them  his  Spirit,  who  discovers  their  guilt,  and  loathsome 
fiithiness  to  them,  whereby  they  obtain  not  only  a  general  apprehen- 
sion, that  they  are  sinners,  as  well  as  others  ;  but  they  also  see  their 
sins,  this  and  that  sin  in  particular,  and  the  great  multitude  of  their 
sins  and  their  guilt,  and  unsightly  filthiness,  with  shame,  detestation 
and  a  loathing  of  themselves.  No  leper  can  be  so  affected  with  his 
contagious  uncleanness,  as  the  true  subjects  of  baptism  are  with 
their  sinfulness.  This  is  not  a  fiction  of  our  own  brain,  but  the  Lord 
himself  teacheth  it  us  in  his  word,  as  a  promise  of  his  covenant,  and 
as  the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  he  saith,  Kzck.  xxxvi.  25, 
31.  "  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean  ;  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse 
you.  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil  ways,  and  your  doings 
that  were  not  good,  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight, 
for  your  iniquities,  and  for  your  abominations."  Those  whom  John 
baptized  "  confessed  their  sins,"  Matt.  iii.  6.  .And  they  are  afiected 
thus,  not  only  when  they  are  first  convinced,  b'tt  seeing  a  great  defi- 
ciency of  sanctification  in  themselves,  they  are  also. afterwards  often 
seized  with  shame  and  an  abhorrence  of  themselves.  See  2  Chron. 
xxx.  15.  Job  xlii.  6.  Psalm  xxxviii  and  li.  Isaiah  vi.  5.  Rom.  vii. 

2.  If  there  were  nothing  more  than  this,  it  would  not  be  a  perfect 
evidence  of  that  baptism  which  saveth ;  but  since  by  the  sadness  of 
the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better,  there  ariseth  therefore 
presently  a  wonderful  desire  to  be  cleansed  :  sin  and  the  filth  of  it 
is  irksome  to  them  in  the  extreme,  and  therefore  they  have  an  ex- 
ceedingly vehement  desire  to  be  cleansed  from  it ;  the  soul  finds  no 
rest,  until  she  hath  b^en  purified  in  the  fountain  of  Christ's  blood  by 
his  Spirit :  therefore  she  betakes  herself  to  him,  unites  herself  to 
him,  applies  his  blood  and  sufferings  to  her,  and  cries  unto  him  with 
David,  Psalm  li.  2,  7.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and 
cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be 
clean  ;  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  To  this  pur- 
pose also  is  the  saying  of  the  wise  man,  Prov.  xxii.  11.  "  He  that 
loveth  pureness  of  heart,  the  king  shall  be  his  friend." 

3.  lie  who  hath  truly  partaken  of  baptism,  as  a  seal  of  the  wash- 
ing away  of  hie  sins,  hath  also  actually  and  really  entered  into  coye* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  51 

nant  with  God  upon  his  c  II  and  invitation.     It  doth  not  suffice  him, 
that  his  parents  and  witnesses  have  dedicated  him  to  God,  but  he 
abides  also  by  what  they  transacted,  he  confirms  the  promise,  which 
they  made  for  him  to   the  Lord,   he  consents  cheerfully  lo  that  pre- 
cious covenant,  the  lustre  of  which  beams  on  him,  and  he  surrenders 
himself  in   it  to  the  Lord,  hot  only  that   he  may  have  him   for  his 
God,  and  may  obtai.i  of  him  the  benefits  of  the  covenant,  but  also  in 
order  to  serve  him,  and  to  do  his  vvill  in  all  things  heartily  and  with- 
out exception.     He  doth  this  with  a  willing  heart,    and    1  e  repeats 
this  action  often,  because  he  can  never  do  it  with  as  much  heartiness 
and  zeal  as  he  wishes.     That  those  who  are  sealed  by  God   do  this 
appears  from   the  religious  custom  of  God's  people,  who  renewed 
again  and  again  their  covenant  with  the  God  of  their  fathers.     See 
this  Exod.   xix.  2i.  Deut.   xxvi.  29.   2  Chron.   xv.   Neh.   ix  and  x- 
David  "  swore  therefore,  and  would  perform  it,  that  he  would  keep 
God's  righteous  judgments,"   Psalm  cxix.    106.     "  John   preached 
the  baptism  of  repentance,"   according  to  Mark  i.  4,  but  baptism  is 
unto  repentance,  because  by  entering  into  covenant   with   God  we 
turn  from  sin  to  God,  in  order  to  oblige  ourselves  to  serve  him,  and 
to  devote  ourselves  to  his  service. 

4.  The  person  who  partakes  of  the  grace  of  baptism,   is  also  ex- 
ceedingly desirous  of  an   assurance,  that  he   is  truly  a  favourite  of 
God.     \Ve  know  that  all  true  believers  do  not   alway  possess  an  as- 
surance of  their  good  condition  ;  but  they  are  nevertheless  habitually 
desirous  of  possessing  assurance  on  indisputable  grounds  :  therefore 
they  search  the  word  of  God,  that  they  may  learn  what  are  the  in- 
fallible evidences,  that  a  person  is  in  a  state  of  grace  :  it  is  also  their 
daily  work  to  observe  their  mind   and  conversation,   that  they  may 
perceive  whether  they  truly  correspond  with  that  word ;  they  look 
to  the  sacrament,  that  it  may  confirm  them.     All  this  affords  them 
at  times  indeed  a  certain  measure  of  light  and  enlargement,  but  no 
pe.fect  assurance,  until  the    Holy  Spirit  connects   his  working  and 
sealing  with  it,    that  he  may  enable  them  to  "know  the  things  that 
are  freely  given  them  of  God,  and  may  bear  witness  with  their  spirits, 
that  they  are  the  children  of  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,    1  Cor.  II,  12. 
Rom.  viii.  15.     Their  souls  are  set  upon  this,   <,hey  pray  to  him  for 
it,  and  cry  anxiously   with  David,  "  Say  unto  my  soul,   I  am  thy 
salvation,"  Psalm  xxxv.  3.     "Make  me   to  hear  joy  and   gladness, 
that  the  bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.     Restore  to  me 
the  joy  of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  Spirit,"  Psalm 
li.  8,  12.     Others  concern  themselves  little  about  assurance,  they 


52       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

only  suppose  that  the:r  condition  is  good,  and  they  depend  entirely 
on  an  ungrounded  hope. 

Hearers,  examine  your  hearts  by  these  tokens,  and  see  whether 
they  can  be  found  in  you  ?  Are  ye  utter  strangers  to  them  ?  do  ye 
not  know  them,  and  do  ye  not  concern  yourselves  about  them  ?  know 
then  that  your  baptism  is  nothing  but  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filthi- 
ness  of  t:ie  flesh,  which  will  not  save  you  "  And  O  that  this  might 
once  awaken  you,  so  that  ye  might  see  your  sad  plight,  that  ye 
m;ght  bewail  it,  and  cry  out  with  the  leper,  "  Unclean,  unclean," 
l»ev.  xni.  45,  that,  as  Peter  admonished  Simon  after  his  baptism,  ye 
might  «  repent  of  your  wickedness  and  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the 
thoughts  ot  your  hearts  might  be  forgiven  you." 

but,  friends  of  God,  with  whom  these  things  are  found  in  truth, 
who  neither  dare  nor  may  deny  them,  conduct  worthily  of  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you.     And  therefore, 

1.  iieheve  now  that  all  this  great  grace  hath  been  sealed  to  you, 
that  ye  are  God's  covenant  people,  partakers  of  all  that  salvation, 
whici  the  Father-)  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  bestows  on  believers,  and 
that  ye  are  cleansed  from  your  sins  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Ye 
have  certain  evidences  of  it,  your  baptism  hath  assured  you  of  it,  and 
sealed  it  to  you,  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  instamped  his  mark  on  it ; 
ye  ought  not  then  ^o  often  to  reject  your  good  iiope  upon  every  con- 
ceit, and  indulge  unbelief.  Or  do  ye  imagine  that  the  baptism  which 
was  administered  to  you  in  your  childhood  is  of  too  long  a  standing, 
and  tiiat.  it  is  too  far  spent,  so  that  ye  cannot  improve  it  to  your  com- 
fort, or  that  u  hath  been  rendered  ineffectual,  and  that  ye  are  be- 
come as  it  were  unbaptized  through  your  sinful  backslidings,  and 
that  ye  obtained  grace  too  long  after  your  baptism,  to  derive  any 
support  from  it  now  ?  Have  ye  not  then  actually,  and  indeed  cleaved 
to  that  word  and  covenant,  in  which  your  parents  and  others  dedi- 
cated you  i  hath  not  the  Lord,  in  virtue  of  that  covenant  and  of  that 
baptism,  ke,>i  his  eye  on  you,  and,  in  consequence  of  it,  influenced 
your  souls,  and  brought  you  indeed  under  the  bond  of  the  covenant? 
How  beautifully  do  the  words  of  the  fo.m  of  baptism  in  the  third 
part  apply  here  !  (i  And  if  we  sometimes  through  Weakness  fall  into 
sin,  we  >nust  not  therefore  despair  of  God's  mercy,  nor  continue  in 
Bin,  since  baptism  is  a  seal,  and  undoubted  testimony,  that  we  have 
an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  Grd."  Let  the  soul  therefore  sup- 
port herself  by  looking  upon  herself  as  certified  and  sealed,  in  con- 
sequence of  her  baptism.  This  Paul  required  ;  f.r  when  he  had 
said  that  we  are  baptized  into  th<»  death  of  Christ,  buried  and  risen 
with  him,  he  adds,  "  Reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be   dead  indeed 


XXVI    LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  52 

unto  sin,   but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  vi    11. 

2.  Thank  and  praise  the  Triune  God  for  iavouring  you  thus.  It 
is  a  great  grace  that  hath  been  bestowed  on  you,  as  we  have  shown 
before.  Ought  not  then  all  that  is  within  you  to  praise  and  magnify 
his  name  to  the  utmost  >"  "  Unto  him,"  saith  John,  Rev.  i  5,6, 
"  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,  to  him  be 
glory  and  dominion  for  ever  "  It  is  your  duty  to  devote  yourselves 
wholly  to  his  praise  and  to  his  service,  tlut  ye  may  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  his  great  k  ndness  :  ye  were  obliged  to  this  in  your 
baptism,  and  ye  have  surrendered  yourselves  for  this  purpose  hi  his 
covenant.  We  must  exhibit  this  once  more  to  you  from  our  form 
of  baptism,  which  saith  to  you,  "  Whereas  in  all  co-  enan;s  there  are 
conta  ned  two  parts;  therefore  are  we  by  God  through  baptitm,  ad- 
monished of,  and  obliged  unto  new  obedience,  namely,  that  we  cleave 
to  this  one  God,  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost ;  that  we  trust  in  him, 
and  1  >ve  him  with  all  our  hearts,  with  all  our  souls,  with  all  our 
mind,  and  with  all  our  strength  ,  that  we  forsake  the  world,  crucify 
our  old  nature,  and  walk  in  a  new  and  holy  life."  Will  ye  nt  t  hold 
to  this  obligation,  under  which  ye  were  brought  long  since  ?  Sorely 
ye  will :  let  it  then  appear  in  all  your  conversation.  "  The  woman, 
who  was  a  great  sinner,  loved  much,  because  her  sins,  which  were 
many,  v/ere  forgiven,"  Luke  vii.  47.  It  behooves  you  then  also  to 
show  the  power  of  a  great  1  ve  to  the  Lord  by  doing  all  things,  in 
order  to  serve  him  :  beware  especially  of  defiling  yourselves  airain 
with  that  filth,  from  which  ye  have  been  washen.  Would  ye  bdthe 
and  plunge  yourselves  in  thai  sink,  which  overflowed  the  Son  of  God 
to  his bitiei  sorrow  ?  It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  should  be  "  bap'izjd" 
with  blood,  that  he  might  baptize  you  with  water  and  with  his  Spirit," 
and  ''  how  was  he  straitened',  till  it  was  accomplished  ?"  Luke  xii.  50. 
Would  ye  then  s?ek  your  pleasure  therein,  and  afflict  him  witJi  new 
sorrows  ?  or  <l  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  ( od 
forbid  :  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  herein  ? 
Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  bapiizeci  in  o  Jesus,  were 
baptized  into  his  death  r"  Jcc.  See  Rom.  vi.  1—6.  "  having  there- 
fore these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselw.-  fpdm  all 
fiithiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  tear  of 
God,"  according  to  2  C  or.  vii.  1. 

3.  Make  now  a  profitable  use  of  baptism,  in  order  to  obtain,  ac- 
cording to  that  seal  of  the  covenant,  all  iealed  grace  of  the  Lord,  t  :e 
God  of  the  covenant.  Have  ye  defiled  and  poliuted  yoursehes  with 
ein,  there  is  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii. 


54       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

I,  Have  ye  need  of  strength  for  your  duty,  there  is  "  help  laid  upon 
one  who  is  mighty,"  Psalm  lxxxix.  19.  Doth  your  soul  desire 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption,  your  Surety  is 
made  all  this  to  you  of  God,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Do  ye  seek  any  divine 
*•  grace,  love  and  communion,"  the  Triune  God  hath  undertaken  to 
bestow  it  upon  you,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  Let  your  souls  seek  it  only  of 
him.  urging  him  and  pleading  upon  the  ground  of  the  unchangeable 
and  sealed  covenant,  established  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ,  In  this  manner  must  we  often  conduct  with  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God ;  for  this  is  the  baptism  that  saveth, 
1  Peter  iiU  21. 

4.  But  consider  also  that  baptism  connects  you  with  your  fellow- 
chrislian,  who  is  baptized  as  well  as  ye  are  :  '*  We  are  all  baptized 
by  one  Spirit  into  one  body?"  as  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  xii.  13.  Let 
therefore  a  strict  union  with  one  another  be  discerned  among  you, 
being  all  of  one  heart,  and  one  soul  in  your  apprehensions,  in  grace, 
peace  and  love  :  this  the  same  apostle  requireth  of  you,  when  be 
saith,  Eph.  iv.  3 — 6.  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling  ;  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  bap- 
tism ;  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and  through  ail, 
and  in  you  all." 

5.  Finally,  when  the  Lord  will  baptize  you  with  blood,  and  calls 
you  to  resist  unto  blood,  and  to  surrender  your  bodies  to  death  for 
his  name,  do  not  then  by  any  means  draw  back  ;  ye  must  submit 
willingly  to  be  "  baptized  with  the  baptism,  wherewith  Christ  was 
baptized,"  Mark  x.  31.  Would  ye  then  draw  back,  when  Jesus 
willingly  suffered  himself  to  be  baptized  for  you  ?  Yea,  do  we  not 
oblige  ourselves  by  baptism  to  !ay  down  cvpn  our  lives  for  the  Lord, 
when  he  requires  it  of  us  for  his  name  ?  How  can  we  otherwise  suf- 
fer ourselves  to  be  "  baptized  for  the  dead,"  according  to  I  Cor.  xv. 
29  ?  "  Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou  shait  suffer  :  behold  the 
devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  and  yo  shall  have  tribulation 
ten  days :  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  1  will  give  thee  a  crown 
of  life.  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last,  which  was  dead, 
and  is  alive"  to  the  church  of  Smyrna,  Rev.  ii.  8,  10. 

In  the  mean  while  ye  have  great  reason  to  rejoice,  that  ye  have 
been  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Behold  how  the  Ethiopian, 
and  the  jailer  rejoiced,  after  they  were  baptized,  Acts  viii.  39.  xvi. 
34.  So  much  the  more  because  the  Lord  will  cleanse  y.  u  perfectly, 
inconsequence  of  your  having  been  sealed  by  baptism,  "ihat  he- 
may  present  you  to  himself  a  glorious  church,   not  having  spot  or 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  55 

wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  j  but  holy  and  without  blemish,"  Eph, 
v.  27.  His  name,  which  was  put  on  you  in  baptism,  shall  remain 
on  you,  and  beam  forth  with  far  greater  lustre  ;  for  "  ye  shall  see 
his  face,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  your  foreheads,"  according  to  Rev. 
xxii.  4.  How  will  ye  walk  in  state  before  his  face  in  glory,  clothed 
with  white  raiment,  like  priests,  kings  and  conquerors,  having  his 
name,  and  he  having  your  name  !  Hear  him  say  himself,  Rev.  iii. 
4,  5.  "  They  who  have  not  defiled  their  garments  shall  w»lk  with 
me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy.  He  that  overcometh,  the  same 
shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name 
out  of  the  book  of  life,  but  I  will  confess  hia  name  before  my  Father, 
and  before  his  angels/'  Amen. 


(   S6   ) 


ERROURS 


CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED 


XXVII.  LORDS  DAY. 


1  Peicr  hi.  21.  The  like  figure  whereunto,  even  baptism,  doth  now 
also  save  us,  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

Q.  72.  Is  then  the  external  baptism  with  water  the  washing  away  of 
sin  itself? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

Q.  73.  Why  then  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  "  the  washing  of 
regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of    ins  .?" 

A  God  speaks  net  thus  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  especially,  that  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may 
assure  us,  that  we  are  spintua'ly  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really,  as 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.

Q.  70.    What  is  it  to  be  washed  with  the  blood  arid  Spirit  of  Christ  ? 

A.  It  is  to  receive  of  God  the  remission  of  sins  freely  for  the  sake 
of  Christ's  blood,  which  he  shtd  for  us  by  his  sacrifice  upon  the 
cross:  and  also  to  be  renewed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  sanctified  to 
be  members  of  Christ,  that  so  we  may  more  and  more  die  unto  sin, 
tnd  lead  holy  and  unblamable  lives. 


$2      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

Q.  71.  Where 'has  Christ  p.rornised  us  tha'  he  will  as  certainly  waiiS 
us  by  his  blood  and  Sftirit,  as  ive  are  washed  by  ch  -  water  ofbafuism  ? 

A.  In  the  institution  of  baptism,  which  is  thus  expressed,  "Go 
ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  tlitm  in  the  name  of 
the  lather,  and  of  the  on,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  that  believ- 
eth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  thai  believeth  not  Shall 
be  damned."  This  promise  is  also  reoeated  where  the  scripture 
cails  baptism.  "  i"he  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away 
of  sins. 


A- 


.S  it  is  necessary  to  born,  in  order  to  be  a  man,  so  it  is  necessary 
so  ue  bon  again,  in  ordei  to  be  a  Christian.  It  did  not  please  the 
Lord  to  make  all  men  irarnedi;  tely  out  of  the  earth,  as  he  made  the 
first  Adam,  but  to  join  a  woman  to  Adam,  and  to  give  them  both  the 
law  of  marriage,  "  increase  «nd  multiply,"  that  he  might  make  of 
one  blootl  all  nations  of  men.  Therefore  not  one  man  hath  been  in- 
iced  into  the  world  since  that  period,  who  was  not  born  <>f  a  wo- 
rn m  ;  for  which  reason  man  hath  been  defined  and  called  from  his 
mother,  ''man  that  is  born  of  a  woman,"  Job  xiv.  xv.  1  \.  Thus 
also  a  man  doth  not  be otne  a  Christian,  except  by  a  second  birth-. 
Our  first  parents  having  been  created  in  the  image  o'  God,  would 
have  trap;  mitted  that  image  to  all  their  posterity,  ifthev  had  not 
deprived  themsel.es  of  it  by  sin,  and  it  would  then  not  have  been 
necessary  that  their  posterity  should  be  oewb  .n  ;  but  having  lost 
that  image,  they  have  transmitted  their  own  image,  even  sin,  to  all" 
their  posterity.  This  Moses  teacheth  us,  Gen.  v,  1,3,  «  In  the 
day  that  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him.  And 
\dam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image  "  The  Lord, 
willing  to  restore  man  to  his  first  condition,  appointed  for  himself  an 
everlasting  people,  and  gave  his  Son  to  them  in  a  spiritual  marriage 
>.o  be  a  bridegroom  and  husband  to  them,  that  he  might  thus  obtain 
'■*.  holy  seed  by  a  new  birth.  See  Isaiah  liv.  1 — 6.  It  was  also  ne- 
cessary that  the  sinner  should  be  born  again  of  that  marriage  ;  for  he 
is  by  his  natural  birth  as  it  were  degenerate,  unnatural,  yea,  be- 
eaved  of  humanity,  and  "  is  of  his  father  the  devil,"  John  viii  44 
He  must  therefore  become  "  a  new  creature,  the  workmanship  cf 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Eply 
ii  10.  Since  "  he  hath  sinned,  he  comes  short  of  the  glory  "  and 
image  '•'■  of  God,"  according  to  Horn.  iii.  23.  It  is  therefore  neces- 
he  should  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  crea- 
-ed  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,"  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gen* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  49— 71.  33 

tiles  requireth,  Eph  iv.  24.  He  is  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  but  by 
regeneration  he  is  '«  quickened  with  Christ,"  Eph.  ii.  1,  5.     The  sin- 
ner ts  without  strength,  the  catnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God;  for 
it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  tjod,   neither  indeed   can   be,"   H^m. 
viii.  7.     It  was  therefore    also  necessary,  trnt  new   powers,  "  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit,"   should  he  given  him  by  a  new  birth,  (s    is 
promised,  Lzek.  xxxvi.  26.     Further,  by  his  first  birth  he  is  a  stran- 
ger to  the  church  of  God,  "  he  hath  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memori- 
al in  Jerusalem,  "  as  Nenemiah  speaks,  Neh    ii.  20    If  i.e  shall  then 
partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  church,  he  must  be  incorporated  in- 
to it,  must  be  "joined  to  it,  be  a  feliowcitizen  of  the  saints,    and  of 
;he  household  of  God,"  Ac. s  ii.   41.     Eph.   ii.    19.  Permit    me   to 
add,  that  he  is  by  his  birth  unclean  and  loathsome,  and   it    if  there- 
fore necessary  that  he  should,  like  a  child  who  is  newly   born,  be 
washed  and  rinsed  ;  this  the  Lord    himself  teacheth   us,    Ezek    xvi. 
J- — 9.     This  is  also  clearly  discovered  to  us  in  baptism,  the  first  sac- 
ament  of  the   New  Testament,  by  which   regeneration,  incorpora- 
tion, into  the  church,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins  is  signified  and 
scaled. 

The  foregoing  Lord's  day  having  taught  us  that  believers  are  ad- 
monished and  assured  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
Is  advantageous  to  them,  and  that  the  sacraments  are,  holy  baptism 
and  the  holy  supper,  this  is  now  shown  with  respect  to  baptism. 

I.  We  must  discourse  somewhat  cencerning  the  word  "baptism," 
and  then, 

II.  We  will  consider  the  matter  itself. 

I.  The  noun  substantive  baptism,  bafitismos,  bafithma,  and  the  verb 
baptize,  ba/uizcin,  bafitien,  signify  to  rinse,  to  wash,  and  toclear.se  any 
thing  by  dipping.  In  this  sense  are  the  words  used  of  the  supersti- 
tious washings  of  the  Pharisees,  Mark  vii.  4,  "When  they  come 
from  the  market,  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not.  And  many  other 
things  there  be,  which  they  have  received  to  hold,  as.  the  washing  of 
cups,  and  pots,  brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables."  But  we  find  these 
words  also  used  in  a  figurative  sense  of  the  communication  of  the 
grace  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  "He  that  cometh  after  me 
shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire,"  saith  the  bap- 
tist, Matt.  iii.  10.  These  words  denote  also  sometimes  figuratively, 
suffering  tribulation,  when  Jesus  saith,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  bap- 
tized with  ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished,"  Luke 
xii.  50.  Matt.  xx.  22,  23,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  is 
confirmed  and  received  in  baptism  :  thus  "  A  polios  knew  only  the 
baptism  of  John,"  Acts^viii.  35.     The  word  baptism^  or  baptize  is 

Vol.  ii.  E 


34      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OP  BAPTISM. 

also  used  in  a  sacramental  sense  :  Paul  saith  of  the  Israelites,  that 
"  they  were  all  baptii.d  unto  kfloses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sta," 
1  Cor  x.  2.  The  ecclesiastical  and  typical  wa&hings  of  the  Old 
T/e  f  ment,  art;  called  by  the  apostle,  bap.tismoi*  "  baptisms,"  Heb.  ix« 
!0,  which  our  translators  render  "  washings."  To  these  the  Jews 
added  also  a  baptism,  when  they  would  solemnly  receive  and  incor- 
porate into  their  church  a  convert,  or  proselyte  to  Judaism  ;  for  after 
they  had  circumcised  him,  they  baptised  him,  after  -which  they  order- 
ed him  to  offer  his  gifts  ;  hence  it  was  that  the  baptism  of  John  and 
of  Christ  did  not  appear  so  strange  to  them  ;  yea,  they  seem  to  sup*, 
pose  that  Christ  when  he  came,  would  baptize,  for  they  asked, 
John  i.  35,  "  Why  baptizest  £hou  then,  if  thou  be  not  the  Christ  ?" 
But  these  words  are  mostly  used,  as  we  also  use  them  here,  of  "  the 
first  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  in  which  the  washing  away 
of  sins  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  is  signified  and  sealed 
with  water  to  believers,  by  virtue  of  the  institution  and  promise  or" 
Christ." 

II.  !n  order  that  we  may  consider  the  matter  itself,  we  must  at- 
tend, I  to  the  sign  of  baptism.  2.  To  the  thing  signified.  3.  The 
union  of  them.  4.  The  foundation  of  the  union,  and  5.  To  the 
circumstances. 

1.  The  external  sign  is  the  use  of  water,  "  the  external  washing 
wi  h  water,  by  which  the  filthiness  of  the  body  is  commonly  washed 
sway,"  saith  the  instructor,  "  John  came,  and  was  sent  to  baptize 
with  Water,"  John  i.  31,33.  '•' He  bapfzed  in  the  river  Jordan," 
Mark  i  5.  "  Also  at  Enon.  near  to  Kalim,  because  there  wis  much 
water  there,"  John  hi.  23.  «  See  here  is  water,  what  doth  hinder 
me  to  be  baptized,"  said  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36.  It  is  necessary 
that  it  should  be  pure  and  clean  water  as  those  rivers  were,  if  it  shall 
be  proper  to  represent  the  spiritual  cleansing.  And  therefore  the 
Papists  pollute  baptism,  and  trifle  with  it,  and  with  the  institntor  of 
it,  when  among  many  adjurations  of  the  devil,  and  crossings,  they  be- 
smear the  nose  and  ears  of  the  person  who  is  baptized,  with  spittle., 
and  anoint  him  with  oil.  Who  hath  required  this  at  their  hands  ? 
But  it  was  necessary  to  confirm  their  opinion  concerning  the  virtue 
of  waterbaptism  •  v>ater  alone  would  not  suffice  to  wash  away  sins — • 
popish  spittle  and  oil  are  more  efficacious.  Trifles  :  in  this  manner 
Jo  the  P.  pists  i(  make  the  commandment  of  Ccd  of  none  effect  by 
their  traditions,"  like  the  Pharisees,  Matt.  xv.  6. 

Nevertheless,  water  by  itself  cannot  cleanse,  unless  it  be  used. 
Anciently  they  obliged  the  person  who  was  to  be  baptized,  to  gc 
:n,to  the  water,  and  they  dipped  him  in  it,  by  which  means  he  seem- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  2? 

be  dead,  and  buried  under  the  water,  and  when  he   came  up 
againj  to  rise  fiom  the  dead,  and  so   his  whole    body   was  cltansed ; 
but  as  this  cannot  t>e  done  in  these  cold  countries  without  great  dan- 
ger to  the  per-on  who  is  barptized,  pouring  or  sprinkling   hath   been 
wisely   introduced      This  ceremony  is  not  to  be  disapproved  of,  as 
(hough  it  militated  against  the  institution  of  Christ,  and  the  efficacy 
of  bap'.ism,  since  dipping  und  sprinkling  are  only  circumstances    It  is 
njt  to  be  thought,  that  the  apostles  always  dipped  the  persons,  who 
were  to  be   baptized,  but  they   also   sprinkled   them   when   occasion 
required.    VVno  can  believe  that  when  they  baptized  three  thousand  at 
the  same  time,  they  dipped  them  I      Who  can    imagine   that    when 
they  baptized  Cornelius  and  Lydia  in  their  own  houses,  yea,  the  jail- 
er  by  night,  they  then  Lund  vessels  at  hand,   capacious   enough   to 
plunge  fullgrown  persons  in  and  under   the  water?     The  thing  sig- 
nified is  also  expressed  by  sprinkling,  and  is  called  "  water,  and  the 
blood  of  sprinkling,  '    Ezek.    xxxvi.  25.     Heb.  xii.  24.     We    can 
also  cleanse  as  well  by  sprinkling,  as  by   dipping  ;  it  is  of  no   conse- 
quence, whether  we  sprinkle  the  face,  or  the  whole  body,    inasmuch 
as  the    face,  being  the   principal    part,   represents   the    wi.ole  man> 
Under  the  Old  Testament,   when  one  member  was  circumcised,  the 
whole  person  was  considered  as  .circumcised.     "When    Peter  desi- 
red   that    his  bands  and  head  should  be  washed,  as  well  as  his    feet, 
Jesus  said  to  him,    He  that  is   washed   needeth  not  save  to  wash  his 
feet,  but  is    clean  every   whit,"  John    xiii.  9,   10.     Why   should  we 
not  then  look  upon  him  to  he  wholly  clean,  whose  face  is  washed  ? 

We  reckon  it  a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  we  sprinkle  or  dip 
once  or  thrice,  if  it  be  not  done  to  confirm  any  ei  roneous  opinion, 
like  the  Arians,  who,  dipped  thrice,  because  they  divided  the  God- 
head :  and  theref  re  the  council  of  Toledo,  in  the  year  633,  permit- 
ted the  church  of  Spain  to  dip  only  once,  that  they  might  thus  tes^ 
tify  the  purity  of  their  doctrine  against  the  Arians.  We  may  sprin- 
kle or  dip  once  to  testify  the  oneness  of  the  divine  essence,  and 
thrice  to  testify  that  there  are  three  distinct  divine  Persons;  but 
when  we  say  that  sprinkling  once  or  thrice  is  a  matter  of  indiffer* 
ence,  we  do  not  mean  that  every  person  who  baptizeth,  hath  a  right 
by  his  own  authority  to  sprinkle  once,  when  the  church  is  used  to 
sprinkle  thrice  ;  for  he  who  should  undertake  this  would  be  suspec^ 
ted  of  presumption  and  of  error. 

Since  baptism  must  be  administered  in  the  name  of  the  divine 
Trinity,  it  is  proper  that  the  Trinity  should  be  mentioned,  when  a  per- 
son is  baptized,  according  to  the  command  of  Jesus,  who  ordered  his 
ambassadours  m  to  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  an*l 


U      EXPL  ^NATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Matt  xxviii.  19.  It  is  true  he  doth  not  command, 
Y  •  shail  s.iy,  when  ye  baptize,  1  baptize  thee  in  the  name  ol  the 
Father,  &c.  yet  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  the  apostles  were  silent 
when  they  baptized,  but  t!ia'  they  expressed  the  virtue  of  baptism  by 
words.  They  baptized  indeed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  but 
the  whole  divine  Trinity  manifests  itself  in  Jesus:  thi  Father  is  in 
him,  and  he  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  bestows  all  grace 
fro  I  the  Son,  who  hath  it  from  the  Father,  according  t  the  words 
of  Christ,  John  xiv.  7 — 16,  and  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  And  therefore  it  is 
the  same  thing,  whether  we  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
or  in  the  n.me  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  will  show  presently  what 
is  signified  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity. 

2.  But  this  use  of  water  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity  is  not  merely 
a  commanded  duty  of  divine  worship,  but  it  is  also  significative,  or 
it  respects  something  signified.  This  is  the  blood  of  Christ, ,shed"in 
his  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  and  his  Spirit  purchased  thereby,  by  which 
the  sins  of  the  elect  are  washen  away,  according  to  the  promises  of 
the  covenant  of  grace. 

In  order  to  understand  this  properly,  we  must  remember  that 
God  enters  into  a  covenant  of  grace  with  the  believing  sinner,  and 
promises  him  therein  that  his  sins  shall  be  washen  away.  "  I  will 
cleanse  you  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  nil  your  idols,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-  But  God  could  not  do  this,  unless  a 
sufficient  sacrifice  were  offered,  upon  which  the  sinner  could  enter 
into  a  covenant  treaty  with  God,  and  God  with  the  sinner,  as  men 
were  wont  anciently  to  enter  into  covenants  by  sacrifices.  The  Lord 
having  respect  to  this  saith,  Psalm  1,  5,  "  Gather  my  saints  together 
unto  me  :  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with    me   by    sacrifice." 

When  the  Lord  had  established  his  covenant  with  all  Israel,  "  Moses 
took  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  people,  and 
said,  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hath  made 
with  you,"  Exod.  xxiv.  I — 8.  But  the  sacrifice  served  not  only 
to  confirm  the  covenant,  but  also  to  cleanse  the  Israelites,  in  order 
th  it  it  might  shadow  forth  the  true  washing  away  of  sins  by  a  better 
blood  :  <k  The  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer 
sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as 
Paul  saith,  Heb.  ix.  13.  But  since  it  is  impossible  that  the  blood  of 
buliG  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks, 
Heb.  x.  1.  therefore  the  God  of  the  covenant  gave  his  ,-^un,  who  of- 
fered himself  up  to  God  in  his  bloody  sacrifice,  that  he  might  ob- 
tain the  true  purification,  and  aho  confirm  the  covenant  of  God  with 
the  sinner.     The  same  wise  apostle  teacheth  us  this  again  ;  after  h* 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69— Tl.  3r 

had  shown  that  the  blood  of  beasts,  offered  up  in  sacrifice,  could, 
sanctify  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,  he  saith,  Heb.  ix.  14,  15,  "  How 
much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spir- 
it offered  himself  without  spit  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
Mediator  of  the  New  testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the 
redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament, 
they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheri- 
tance. "  But  we  are  baptized  not  only  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
who  establishes  the  covenant,  and  promises  the  washing  away  of 
sins,  and  in  the  name  of  the  Son,  who  purchases  the  covenant,  and 
the  promises  thereof  by  his  sacrifice,  and  his  blood,  shed  therein  ;  but 
also  m  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  likewise  signified  in 
baptism,  and  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  to  the 
washing  away  of  sins  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  effects  by  a  real  and  ac= 
tive  application  the  washing  away  of  sins,  which  the  Father  prom- 
iseth,  and  the  Son  hath  purchased  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  vi. 
11,"  But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  arc  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  And 
therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  also  brings  the  sinner  into  the  bond  of  the 
covenant,  which  is  also  signified  by  baptism,  according  to  the  promise 
of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  4,  5.  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground :  I  will  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring.  And  they 
shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  watercourses. 
One  shall  say  1  am  the  Lord's:  and  another  shall  call  himself  by  the 
name  of  Jacob:  and  another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the 
Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  Israel."  And  thus  bap- 
tism is  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  of  the  washing 
away  of  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  promised  in  that  cov- 
enant by  the  Father. 

But  "  what  is  it  to  be  washed  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ," 
thus  asks  the  instructor,  and  he  saith  that  it  is  our  justification  and 
sanclitication :  and  he  speaks  thus  with  the  scripture,  agreeably  to 
the  words  which  we  have  just  now  quoted  from  1  Cor.  vi.  1  1.  We 
have  explained,  in  treating  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day,  the  man- 
ner in  which  God  justifieth  the  sinner,  and  forgives  his  sins.  This 
forgiving  of  sins  is  expressed  by  cleansing,  when  the  Lord  promiaetb, 
Jer.  xxxiii.  8,  "  I  will  cleanse  them  from  ail  their  iniquity,  and  I 
will  pardon  all  theii  iniquities."  But  as  sin  doth  not  only  subject 
the  sinner  to  guilt,  of  which  he  is  cleansed  by  justification,  but  as  it 
renders  him  also  filthy,  that  filth  is  therefore  also  washen  a^ay  by 


P      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

ianctification.     The  catechism  describes  this  as  consisting  in  tl 
.      .  (a)  The  sinner  is  re  tewed  by  it ;  for  the  image  of  God,  after 
.  he  is  renewed,  is  restored  in  him  by  tl  putting  oii'  the  uld  man, 
and  putting  on   the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  right- 
eousness and  true   holiness,"  Eph.  iv.  22,  24.     He  is  then,  like  one 
■Who  hatb  been  arashen,  elf  an  and  new,  and  so  he  is  "  saved  by  the 
washing  of   regeneration,    and   the   renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
Titus  in.  5.  (b)  Sanctification  implies  also,  that  a  person  is  sanctified 
to  be,  a  member  of  Christ   by  which  he  is  surrendered  to  Christ,  and 
.sd  to  him  ;  Paul  saith.     "  We  all  are   baptized  by  one  Spirit 
Into  one  body,"  1  Cor.  xii.  13.     And  thus  we  partake  cf  the  holn.esa 
of  our  Head,  yea,  just  as  if  we  had  been  dead,  buried,  and  raised  up 
ytitk  him,  according  to  our  text,  (c)  It  belongs  also  to  sancuhcauon, 
..  person  dies  mors  and  more  to  sin,    and  levels  a  godly  and  un- 
blamable life.     Sanciiiication  is  not  perfect  in  a  person  at  the  begin- 
ning, but  it  advanceth  gradually,   since   the  soul  herself  becomes  ac- 
jb/ej  bewails  her  sins,  fights  against  them,  and  endeavours  to  drive 
I  out,  and  bestirs  herself  time  after  time  lo  conduct  in  a  cnannei 
to  God  :  fo;1  "  it  is  given  to  her  to  grow ,  to  be  cl 
,.i  glory  to  glory,  and  as  she    is  holy,  to  become    more  holy," 
Psalm  xcii.  13.    2  Cor   hi.  IS.    Rev,  jcxii.  11.     1'oth  these  benefits, 
\Vuiu:.  in  baptism,   are  effected  by  the  blood  and  Spirit 

of  Christ*     His  oloocl,  that  is,  his  bloody  suffering  hath  merited  jus- 
anctiii cation  ;  for  "  he  is  made  to  them  who  are  his, 
iousness  and  sanctification,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.     And  thus  "  he  is  a 
fountain   opened  to  the   house   of  David,    and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
alem  for  .  .  foi  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1.     Therefore 

loved  disciple  saith,  1  John  i.  7.     "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Son  of  Cod,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     But  how  is  jutsilication 
I   to  them  internally?  is  it  not  by  the   Holy  Spirit,    as  we 
ed   upon  the   twenty  third    Lord's  day?  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit 
effect  5  merited  sanctification  ;  for  "  Cod  hath  chosen  them 

through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,"  1  Thess.  iv.  13.  1  Peter  i.  2. 
And  therefore  the  Ho  y  Spirit  is  likened  to  water,  with  which  they 
are  born  again,  according  to  the  words  of  Ezekiel  and  of  the  Saviour, 
Ezek-  xxxvi.  2.5.  John  iii.  5. 

Since  now  the  covenant  of  God,  and  Ids  gifts  of  grace  are  un- 
changeable, and  since  the  Son  of  God  hath  made  a  perfect  satisfac- 
tion for  all  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  loveth  his  own  until  the  end, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  abides  for  ever  with  believers  for  an  everlasting 
seal  ;  therefore  the  washing  away  of  sins,  signified  in  baptism,  must 
usee  •  only  to  tins  committed  before  baptism- 


—  ?;..  ** 

as  the  church,  of  Rome  imagines,  but  also  to   sins  committed  after 
baptism. 

3.  If  water  shall  signify  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  there  must 
necessarily  be  an  union  between  the  sign,  and  the  thing-  signified, 
which  union  consists, 

I.  In  a  conformity  between  the  use  of  water,  and  the  working  of 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  indeed  such  a  conformity,  that 
ihe  u*e  of  water  represents  in  a  lively  manner  the  working  and 
power  of  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  exhibits  them  to  the 
senses  ;  for,  (a)  when  we  make  use  of  water  to  wash  and  cleanse 
ourselves,  we  suppose  that  we  are  unclean  and  filthy.  Thus  also  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  by  which  we  are  cleansed,  teach  us  that 
we  have  defiled  ourselves  by  sin,  in  order  that  we  may  humble  and 
ab.tse  ourselves,  and  seek  our  purification  out  of  ourselves  in  the1 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  When  David  had  defiled  himself  gr 
he  prayed  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  li.  2,  3.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from 
mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin  ;  fo:  I  acknowledge  mf 
transgressions ;  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me."  How  excellently 
doth  our  form  of  baptism  express  this  in  its  first  part !  thus  it  speaks, 
"  This  the  dipping  in,  or  sprinkling  with  water  teacheth  us,  where- 
by the  impurity  of  our  souls  is  signified,  and  we  admonished  10 
loathe  and  humble  ourselves  before  God,  and  seek  for  o.ir  purifica- 
tion and  salvation  without  ourselves."  (b)  As  we  are  sprinkled  with 
water,  so  we  are  also  sprinkled  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ, 
that  is,  we  are  rendered  partakers  of  the  power  and  worki  • 
Christ's  blood  and  Spirit  for  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  they  arc 
applied  to  us  :  "  the  Messiah  should  sprinkle  many  nations,"  accord- 
ing to  Isaiah  lii.  15.  (c)  We  are  united  in  the  most  intimate  manner 
to  the  water  by  the  use  of  waterbaptism  ,  so  we  are  also  united  to 
Christ  through  his  biood  and  Spirit  by  the  thing  signified  :  therefore 
the  text  asks,  "  Know  ye  not  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized 
into  Jesus  Lhrist,  were  baptized  into  his  death."  Yea,  we  put  Christ 
on  as  a  garment,  by  baptism,  Gal.  iii.  27.  (d)  Those  who  were  for- 
merly baptized  by  dipping  seemed  to  be  as  it  were  dead  and 
buried  under  the  water,  which  is  aiso  represented  in  some  measure 
by  sprinkling  and  pouring  water  on  a  person  :  but  we  are  dead  and 
buried  to  ourselves  and  to  sin  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ: 
!<  We  die  to  sin,"  saith  the  instructor  in  the  seventieth  question* 
The  text  having  respect  to  mis,  saith,  "  We  are  buried  with  him  b;a 
baptism  into  death,  (e)  As  those  who  are  baptised  ascend  up  c\ 
the  water,  as  if  they  arose  from  the  dead,  so  these  also  are  r 
abve  ny  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ;     Thei  - 


40      EXPLANATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

text,  that  believers  are  baptized  into  the  death  of  Christ,  u  that  like 
as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
even  so  we  also  should  walk,  in  newness  of  life."  (f )  As  water  washes 
away  the  tilth  of  a  person,  so  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washes 
away  our  sins  :  this  wc  have  explained  before,  (g)  When  the  r.ames 
of  the  ihree  divine  Persons  are  pronounced  upon  us.  their  grace  is  also 
supplicated  for  us  in  baptism,  as  the  apostle  wished  and  prayed  in 
behalf  of  the  Corinthians,  when  he  said,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  "The  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all." 

2.  The  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  consists  also  in 
the  joint  use  of  both.  Such  a  signifying  power  of  the  use  of  water 
is  un,  rofitable,  unless  it  be  joined  to  the  use  of  it,  by  which  we  en- 
joy  not  only  the  sign,  but  also  the  thing  signified  by  the  sign, 
through  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith  ;  thus  it  is  said, 
Titus  iii.  5.  "  He  hath  saved  us  by  the  working  of  regeneration, 
and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  so  we  "  suffer  our- 
selves," with  Paul,  Acts  xx;i.  16.  "  to  be  baotized,  and  our  sins  to 
be  washed  away."  We  art:  "  buried  by  baptism  into  death  with 
Christ,'*  that  is.  in  and  united  to  him-  Piom.  vi.  4. 

-1.  But  what  grounds  have  we  to  assert  such  an  union  «f  the  sign 
with  the  tiling  signified  ?  the  word  of  God  alone  affords  us  freedom 
and  grounds  for  this  ;  For, 

1.  "The  Lord  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing  with  water," 
saith  the  catechism  ;  whereby  he  enjoined,  that  we  should  wash  with 
water,  in  order  to  signify  and  represent  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
his  blood  and  Spirit.  John  the  Baptist  was  the  first,  who  received 
the  institution  of  baptism,  that  he  might,  as  the  forerunner  of  Jesus, 
prepare  the  Jews  to  receive  the  Christ,  to  whom  John  directed 
them  :  therefore  he  saith,  John  i.  31,  33.  "  I  Knew  him  not,"  that  is, 
the  Christ  r  '"  but  that  he  should  lie  made  manifest  to  Israel,  there- 
fore am  I  come  baptizing  with  water.  He  that  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Unon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the 
Spirit  descending,  and  remaining  on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  bap- 
tizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  After  this,  when  Christ  began  to  ex- 
ercise his  oTice  in  public,  he  commanded  his  apostles  to  baptize  in 
bis  name  ;  this  we  see  in  the  account  uiven  by  John  the  evangelist, 
when  lie  saith,  "  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard,  that  Jesus  made  and 
baptized  more  disciples  than  John,  though  Jesus  himself  baptized 
.not,  but  bis  disciples,"  John  iv.  I,  2.  But  the  institution  of  baptism 
was  not  yet  perfected,  because  the  New  Testament  was  not  yet  per- 
fected ;  the,  baptism  of  John  pointed  to  Christ,  who  should  be  mani- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7 1 .  41 

tested  to  Israel,  and  the  baptism  of  the  apostles  pointed  to  him,  who 
was  already  manifested,  and  who  was  about  to  shed  his  blood,  in 
order  that  he  might  obtain  the  Spirit,  and  so  wash  away  sins  ;  and 
therefore  baptism  was  administered  to  the  Jews  only.  But  Christ 
being  risen,  because  he  had  shed  his  blood,  obtained  the  Spirit,  and 
thus  confirmed  the  New  Testament,  he  completed  the  ins'itution  of 
baptism,  commanding  to  baptize  all  nations,  not  only  the  Jews,  but 
the  Gentiles  also,  in  the  name  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  see  this, 
Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

But  when  we  say  that  the  baptism  of  Christ  and  of  John  differed 
thus  one  from  the  other,  we  do  not  mean  that  there  was    an  essen- 
tial difference  between  them,    as  the  Papists  and    Socinians  assert. 
The  Papists  maintain  that  the  waterbaptism  of  Christ  accomplishtth 
and  effects  the  thing  itself,  to  wit,  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  that 
the  baptism  of  John   purified  the  body  only,  but  not  the  soul,    and 
only  disposed   a  person  to  conversion.     The   Socinians  ascribe  no 
virtue  at  all  to  baptism,    but  think  that  the  baptism  of  John  was  a 
necessary  ecclesiastical  duty  for  the  Jews,  as   all   the  ecclesiastical 
duties  of  the  churchlaw  of   Moses    were  ;  but  that   the  baptism  of 
Christ  was  a  mere  badge  of  the  Christian  church  for   a  short   time, 
in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  Jews   and  Gentiles,  and  that  baptism 
is  no  longer  necessary  now,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Chris- 
tianity.  In  opposition  to  this  our  church  teaches,  conformably  to  the 
\vord  of  God,  that  the  waterbaptism  of  John  and  of  Christ  was   es- 
sentially the  same  ;  for  both  have  the  same  sign,  to  wit,  water  ;  the 
thing  signified  by  the  baptism  cf  John  was  the  grace  of  the  Mess  ah, 
whicn  is  also  signified  by  the   baptism  of  Christ ;  for  according  to 
the  words  of  Paul,  "  John  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance, 
saying  unto  the  people,  that  they  should  believe  on  him,  that  is,  on 
Christ  Jesus ;  and  they  who  heard   him  were  baptized   in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  Acts  xix.  4.   The  baptism  of  John  was  of  divine 
institution,  as  well  as  that  of  Christ  :  "  John  was  sent  to  baptize  with 
water,"  John  i.  33,  "  his  baptism  was  from  heaven,"   as  Christ   inti- 
mateth,  Matt.  xxi.  25.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  baptism  of  John 
did  not  confer  the  thing  signified,  but  Christ  only  ;  but  the  wa.er  bap- 
tism, instituted  by  Christ,  confers  not  the  thing  signified  neither,  as 
will  appear  in  the  following  Lord's  dav.     When  then  the  Socinians, 
who  deny  the  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  of  baptism,  assert    that 
baptism,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Christianity,  is  a  matter 
of  indifference,  yea,  that  it  is  no  longer  necessary,  they  contrad.ct 
the  word  of  God,  which  teacheth  that  baptism  is  a  sacrament  for  the 
whole  church  of  the  New  Testament  until  the  end  of  the  world ;  for 
Vox  .ii  F 


.       EXPI  LION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

Christ  connects  baptism  with  the  preaching  of  the  word,  and  prorr.- 
iseth  his  blessed  presence  with  it  for  ever,  when  he  saith  to  his  am- 
bus dours,  Matt,  xxviit.  19,20.  "  Go  ye,  ami  teach  a!l  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  r.ame  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I 
have  commanded  you;  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world." 

The  virtue  of  this  institution  consists  herein,  that  the  ambassa- 
dours  of  the  Lord  are  obliged  to  baptize  every  penitent  person  with 
water,  and  to  signify  to  him  the  washing  awj.y  of  sins  by  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  ;  and  every  penitent  is  by  this  same  word  obliged 
to  suffer  himself  to  be  baptized  in  obedience  to  Christ,  and  must  be 
led  up  thereby  to  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be 
cleansed  by  them  ;  therefore  Ananias  said  to  penitent  Paul,  Acts 
xxii.  16,  "  Why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins."  It  was  therefore  a  blamable  disobedience  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  that  they  would  not  suffer  them  elves  to  be  baptized 
by  John  :  by  that  disobedience  "they  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 
against  themselves,"  as  Jesus  saith,  Luke  vii.  30, 

2  But  the  word  of  the  institution  is  not  the  only  thing,  that  is 
necessary  to  render  the  use  of  the  v.  ater  a  sacrament,  but  a  word  of 
promise  must  also  be  added  to  it,  whereby  the  element,  which  be- 
comes a  sign  by  the  institution,  is  made  a  seal  also.  This  is  beauti- 
fully expressed  by  the  instructor  in  the  sixty  ninth  question  :  "Christ 
hath  added  this  promise  to  the  institution  of  washing,  that  I  am  as 
certainly  washed  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  from  all  the  pollution  of  my 
SOul,  that  is,  from  all  my  sins,  as  I  am  washed  externally  with 
water. "  Doth  not  Peter  also  teach  us  this,  when  he  saith  to  the  peni- 
tent Jews,  Acts  ii.  30,  39,  «  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye 
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  the  promise  is  unto 
yon  :" 

The  instructor  inquiring  concerning  the  word  of  promise,  asks, 

;  Where  hath  Christ  promised  us,  that  he  will   as  certainly  wash  us 

blood   and    Spirit,  us   we  are  washed  with   the  water  of  bap- 

cites    su;  tges,   which  prove  this.     The  first 

;t.  .\:-:vi  i    19,   where   Christ  saith  to  his  ambassadours,  -'Go 

ye.  teach,  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 

Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."    He  showeth  that  the  doctrine  of 

jne  Trinity,  and  the  grace  of  the  Trinity,  which  each  Person 

in  the  divine  essence  should  bestow  upon  the  nations,  was  the  sum 

loctrineSj  in  which  they  should  instruct  the  nations.  Thus 


.     ,  —71.  M 

l:aul   supplicated  for   the  Corinthians  in   order  that   they  might  be 
saved,   "the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  cf  God,  and 
the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"   2  (.  or.  xiii.  13.     All  this  sal- 
vation is  promised  and  sealed   to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,   and 
thus  also  the  washing  away  of  sins.     Since  now  baptism  is  a  sea!  cf 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  whifch  God  and  man  enter  into  .an  agree- 
ment, we  will  inquire  wherein  it  consists  to  be  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  divine  Trinity.     The  Lord  on  his  part  receives  the  person, 
who  is  baptized,  into  covenant,   and  promises,   grants,  and  seals  to 
him  ail  that  grace,  which  we  have  mentioned.     This  is  taught  in  a 
most  emphatical  and  clear  manner  in  the  second  part  of  our  form  of 
baptism,  where  it  saith,  **  When  we  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  God  the  Father  witnesseth  and  sealeth  unto  us,  that  he  doth 
make  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  us,"  &c.  When  the  Lord 
established   his  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  he  promised 
that  he  would  be  a  God  to  him,   and  to  his  seed,  and  he  sealed  this 
to  him   by  circumcision,   Gen.  xvii.  1  — 12.     Peter  having   respect 
to  this,  saith,  "Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  for  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your 
ehiichvn,  and  to  all  that  arc  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call,"  Acts  ii   38,  39.     But  when  the  Lord  brings  the  per- 
son, who  is  baptized,  in  this  manner,  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant^ 
he  inclines  him  to  assent  to  the  covenant,  and  to  "  yield  himself  to 
the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xxx.  8.     He  doth  this,   when  he  suffers   him- 
self to  be  baptized  in   the  name   of  the   Trinity,  by  which  he  sur- 
renders himself  to  the  Lord,  in  such  a  solemn  sacrament,  to  be  his, 
Cl  and  saith,  yea,  subscribes  with  his  land,  1  am  the  Lord's,  and  calls 
himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,"  that  he   may  join  himself 
to  the  people  of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  5.     That  this  is  done  in  bap- 
tism is   intimated  by  Paul,    1  Cor.  i.  13.  "  Were  ye  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Paul  ?  that  is,  did  ye  declare  in  baptism  that   ye  should  be= 
long  to  Paul  ?  Yea,  the  person  who  is  baptized   obligeth    himself  in, 
and  by  this  ceremony  of  baptism,  to  cleave  to  the  Triune  God  alone, 
to  trust  in  him,  and  love  him,  to  seek,  salvation  in  him  alone,  to  serve 
him  alone,  and  to  oppose  whatsoever  opposcth  him.     The  Lord  re- 
quirts  all  this  of  the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with  him,  and 
the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with   the  Lord,   consents  to  it 
with  a  perfect  heart.  He  "  avouches  the  Lord  to  be  his  God,  and  the 
Lord  avouches  him   to  be  his  peculiar  property,   and  that  he  shall 
keep  ail  his  commandments,"  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18.   This  he  confirms 
by  this  sacrament,  as  by  an  oath,  "  swearing,  and  purposing  to  per- 


44      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTiSivi 

form  his  oath,  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous  judgments,"  at 
David  acted,  Psalm  cxix  106.  And  thus  "  he  calls  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  in  accepting  and  confirming  the  covenant,  when  "  he 
suffers  himself  lo  be  baptized,"  with  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16.  With  this 
agrees  another  passage,  which  the  instructor  cites  from  Mark  xvi. 
16,  where  the  Saviour  saith,  "  He  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized, 
shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  We 
enter  by  faitu  into  the  covenant,  which  promiseth  the  washing  away 
of  sins  ;  the  Lord  confirms  these  promises  of  his  by  the  seal  of  bap- 
tism, and  the  believer  receiving  this  seal,  protests  that  he  will  con- 
duct himself  worthily  of  the  Lord,  in  consequence  of  the  promises 
and  the  sealing  of  them  ;  to  which  then  the  promise  of  salvation  is 
annexed  :  not  that  baptism  effects  salvation  by  itself,  and  is  there- 
fore absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Papists  teach  ;  but  we  obtain  salva- 
tion by  faith,  which  embraceth  Christ  the  Saviour  and  Mediator  of 
the  covenant,  and  baptism  is  the  seal  of  it.  Therefore  the  passage, 
Mark  xvi.  16.  doth  not  threaten  the  unbaptized  with  damnation,  but 
the  unbelieving,  who  despise  Christ,  and  thus  also  his  institution  of 
baptism,  like  the  Pharisees,  Luke  vii   30. 

The  instructor  proceeds  and  says,  "  This  promise  is  also  repeated, 
where  the  scripture  calls  baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
the  washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  Paul  calls  bap  ism,  "  the  washing 
of  regeneration,  i'itus  iii.  5,  and  Ananias  calls  baptism,  "the  wash- 
ing away  of  sins,"  Acts  xxii.  15.  Waterbaptism  is  so  called,  not 
because  it  regenerates  a  person,  and  washes  away  his  sins,  as  the 
Papists  erroneously  conceive  here,  which  we  will  show  upon  the. 
twenty  seventh  Lord's  day  ;  but  because  it  is  a  seal  of  regeneration, 
and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  by  virtue  of  the  divine  promise,  that 
the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  is  as  truly  regenerated,  and  cleansed 
from  his  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  he  is  washed  with 
water.  And  so  baptism  is  called  the  washing  away  of  sins  by  a 
"sacramental  phraseology,  which  ascribes  the  properties  of  the  thing 
signified  to  the  sign-  That  outward  baptism  doth  not  effect  regen- 
eration, and  the  washing  away  of  sins  this  the  apostle  of  the  cir- 
cumcision teacheth  us,  when  he  saith,  I  Peter  iii.  21.  "  The  like 
figure  whercunto,  even  baptism,  doth  also  now  save  us,  (not  the  put- 
ting away  of  the  filth  cf  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  con- 
science toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  denies 
therefore  that  outwaul  waterbaptism  saves:  but  what  is  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God  ?  A  good  conscience  is  that  which 
js  reconciled  and  pacified  by  the  bluod  and  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
and  which  also  exerciselh   itself  to  a   holiness  that  is  acceptable  to 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  69— 71.  45 

God.  See  Heb.  ix.  14.  x.  2,  22.  1  Peter  iii.  26.  By  the  question, 
cfierotcma  of  this  good  conscience  some  understand  a  question  asked 
in  consequence  of  another  persons  question,  or  the  condition  which 
God  proposeth  to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,  in  which  he  asks, 
whether,  lie  will  maintain  a  good  conscience  toward  God ;  and  they 
say  that  God  asks  this  question,  when  the  person  who  is  baptized 
asks  whether  he  will  be  his  God  ;  or  they  understand  by  it  an 
answer,  or  promise  of  maintaining  a  good  conscience,  which  the 
person  who  is  baptized  makes  to  God. 

Although  this  is  a  learned  invention,  it  is  nevertheless  not  altogeth- 
impertinent  to  observe,  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  the  word 
eperotema.,  a  question,  by  a  question  asked  in  consequence  of  a  fore- 
going question,  or  by  a  condition,  answer  or  promise  ;  we  may  take 
it  for  a  simple  question,  by  which  the  good  conscience  asks  in  pray- 
er to  God  for  his  sealing  grace  ;  for  it  is  of  no  importance  here  in 
what  sense  the  word  efierotema  is  used  by  certain  writers,  and  how  in 
the  law  ;  but  how,  and  in  what  sense  the  holy  writers  use  it.  It 
is  certain  that  this  noun  substantive,  which  is  found  in  only  one 
passage  in  the  New  Testament,  is  derived  from  the  verb  eperolao. 
We  find  this  vern  fifty  and  nine  times  in  the  New  Testament ;  it  is 
translated  once  to  desire,  thrice  to  inquire,  and  fifty  and  five  times 
to  ask,  according  to  Trommius's  concordance.  And  doth  this  word 
ever  denote  a  question,  asked  in  consequence  of  another  person's 
question,  it  doth  not  proceed  from  the  nature  of  the  word,  as  being 
compounded  of  two  words,  but  because  the  connexion  of  the  forego- 
ing words  requires  it,  as  we  see  in  the  simple,  uncompounded  verb 
eroiao,  Matt.  xxi.  24,  25.  Luke  xx.  3.  4,  xxii.  67,  68.  But  in 
these  words  of  Peter  we  find  no  foregoing  question,  to  which  the 
question  in  the  text  should  refer.  Further,  we  cannot  easily  con- 
nect the  words,  "  a  good  conscience,"  with  the  words,  "  to  God  ;" 
but  we  can  easily  refer  the  word  '.'  question,"  to  the  words  "  to  God," 
and  so  the  good  conscience  of  the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  asks  in 
prayer,  Father,  wilt  thou  not  give  me  now  that  necessary  grace  which 
thou  hast  promised  ?  wilt  thou  not  wash  away  my  sins  ?  hast  thou 
not  been  satisfied  for  all  mine  iniquity,  and  hath  not  all  that  salvation 
been  purchased  for  me  \  didst  not  thou  thyself  declare  it,  when  thou 
raisedst  thy  Son,  my  Surety  from  the  dead,  when  thou  dischargedst 
him  from  his  prison,  when  thou  justifiedst  him  in  the  Spirit,  and  ga- 
vest  him  thus  an  acquittance,  witnessing  that  thou  wast  satisfied  ? 
hast  thou  not  now  assured  me  of  this,  and  sealed  it  to  me  by  bap- 
tism ?  This  agrees  also  exceedingly  well  with  the  words  of  Peterf 
when  he  calls  this  question  a  baptism  by  a  sacramental  phrase,  which 


4-6      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM- 

ascribes  the  name  of  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified  ;  and  this  bap« 
tism  saveth  us,  beoause  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God 
is  the  act  of  faith,  which  seeks  salvation  in  God  through  Christ, 
raised  from  the  dead. 

5.  Therefore  baptism  is  a  most  precious  and  holy  institution, 
given  by  God  to  his  church  ;  consequently  we  must  beware  that  wa 
do  not  profane  it,  with  respect  to  its  circumstances  of  persons,  time, 
or  place. 

I.  The  Papists,  who  make  a  great  ado    about  waterbaptism,  and 
seek  the  holiness  and  virtue  of  baptism  only  in   the  act  of  sprinkling 
•with  water,  as  though  that  washed  away  sins,  and  salvation  depei 
thereon;  think  that   a    woman,    yea,  that  any  other  person  hath   a 
right  to  administer  baptism  in  a  case  of  necessity  ;  but  this  is  a  pro- 
fanation of  baptism,  and  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord  ;  for   Christ 
committed  the  administration  of  baptism  only    to  the    ministers   of 
ihe  word,  when  he  said  to  his  apostles,  "  Teach  all  nations,  and  bap- 
tize them,"  Matt,  xviii.   19.     They  are  "  servants  of  Christ,  and  thus 
stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  1  Cor.  iv,  1.     Will  no  man  dare 
to  stamp  and  seal  any  thing  with  the  seal  of  the  prince,  unless  he  be 
commissioned  for  that  purpose,  and  shall  a  woman  then,  or  any  other 
human  being  presume  to  apply  the  seal   of  God  Ho  a  person,   who 
hath  entered  into  covenant  with  him  ?     Did  Zipparoh  venture  to  do 
this,  Exod.  iv.  24,  25,  26,  we  ought  not  to  imitate  her  in  that  action  ; 
for  she  did  not  do  it  agreeably  to  the  divine  command,  but  hastily,  and 
in  boisterous  anger.  God,  who  would  slay  Moses,  because  he  had  not 
circumcised   his  Son,   forbore  to  do  it,  because  his  son  was  circum- 
cised, but  not  on  account  of  the  circumstances  of  the  action,  for  they 
were  sinful,  because  the  woman  acted  with  so  little  deliberation,  and 
so  precipitately.     Moses,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  was  present :  but 
v/ill  the  Papists  permit  a  woman  to  baptize,  when  a  priest  is  at  hand  ? 
I  judge  not.     Baptism  was  however  not  so  restrained  to  the  apostles, 
that  the   ordinary  preachers  of  the  gospel  had  no  right  to  administer 
it,  and  therefore  they  also  baptized  :  surely  not  like  laymen,  as    the 
Papists  assert,  but  as  called  to  the  office  of  preachers.     We   see    it 
in  Philip  and  Ananias,  Acts.  viii.  12,  38.     ix.  10 — 18. 

The  Papists  are  not  only  guilty  of  presumption  in  permitting  any 
person  to  baptize,  but  they  are  also  guilty  of  profaneness  in  adminis- 
tering baptism  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  to  bells,  in  order  to 
consecrate  them,  that  they  may  lay  fctorms,  expel  the  devd  and  dia- 
bolical apparitions,  and  deliver  souls  out  of  purgatory.  To  what 
hath  the  Romish  whore  and  mother  of  whoredoms  and  of  abomina- 
tions not  apostatized  ?  Jesus  feath  not  taught  us  to  baptize  bells,  bu: 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7!  if 

"rations,"  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  and  therefore  human  creatures;  but 
we  may  not  baptize  human  creatures  in  general,  they  must  first  "be 
taught  and  discipled,"  according  to  the  institution  of  Christ,  Matt, 
xxviii.  19.  and  they  must  consequently  have  entered  into  covenant 
with  God,  and  believe,  according  to  Mark  xvi.  15,  they  must  be 
abe  to  profess  their  faith,  like  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36,  37,  38,  and 
exercise  it  by  the  answer  of  a  good  consience  ;  for  baptism  is  a  seal 
of  the  covenant  When  Christ  saith  that  we  must  bapt'ze  all  nations, 
he  shows  that  baptism  is  not  a  privilege  of  any  one  nation  in  particu- 
lar as  circumcision  was  the  advantage  of  the  Jews  ;  The  New  Tes- 
tament should  introduce  all  rations  to  fellowship  with  God,  and  bap- 
tism, the  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  should  seal  them.  We 
shall  inquire  on  the  next  Lord's  day,  whether  we  may  baptize  chil- 
dren. 

2.  As  the  difference  of  places  hath  ceased  under  the  New  Testa- 
ment, therefore  baptism  is  also  not  confined  to  any  particular  place. 
The  ancients  sometimes  made  use  of  the  buiying-places  of  the 
Christians,  especially  of  the  martyrs  for  this  purpose,  to  which  some 
refer,  1  Cor.  xv.  29,  but  erroneously  ;  for  that  custom  had  not  ta- 
ken place  in  Paul's  time.  They  left  off  at  length  baptizing  on  the 
graves,  because  it  savoured  of  superstition.  John,  Christ,  the  apos- 
tles and  evangelists  baptized  wherever  it  was  convenient,  and  espe- 
cially where  they  preached  ;  but  the  church  being  at  length  reduced 
to  a  settled  condition,  it  was  judged  proper  to  baptize  in  the  congre- 
gation of  the  people.  This  is  also  commendable,  inasmuch  as  bap» 
tism  must  be  joined  to  the  word,  and  is  an  incorporation  into  the 
church. 

3.  It  is  thus  also  with  respect  to  the  time  of  administering  bap- 
tism. Children  were  indeed  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day  under 
the  Old  Testament  ,  but  as  the  ceremonial  difference  of  timeris  now 
abolished,  we  are  not  therefore  bound  any  longer  to  a  particular  time 
for  administering  baptism.  We  cannot  approve  of  the  conduct  of 
the  ancients,  who,  from  an  erroneous  opinion,  that  baptism  washed 
away  all  past  sins,  deferred  it  until  the  end  of  their  lives,  and  bapti- 
zed persons  on  their  sickbeds,  neither  can  we  approve  of  their  set- 
ting apart  the  festivals  of  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide  for  this  purpose  ; 
for  this  agrees  not  with  the  spirituality  of  the  New  Testament 
church.  John  the  Baptist,  the  apostles  and  evangelists  baptized  per- 
sons as  soon  as  they  believed,  and  confessed  their  faith  :  otherwise 
the  most  proper  time  for  baptizing  is  when  the  congregation  is  as- 
sembled,  although  we  might  also  observe  ether  seasons  for  baptizing; 
in  times  of  persecution  and  other  inconveir^cle;. 


48      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM; 

After. baptism  hath  been  once  rightly  administered,  we  may   not 
repeat  it.  and  use  it  often  :  for  baptism  being  a  sacrament  of  regen- 
eration and  of  incorporation    into   the  church,  both  of  which  take 
take  place  only  once,  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  it,  as  it   is  to  re- 
peat the  Lord's  supper,  which  being  a  sacrament  of  nourishment  and 
of  confirmation,  must  therefore  be  often  received.     It  is  with  these 
saciaments,  as  it  was  with  the  ordinary  sacraments  of  the  Old   Tes- 
tament, circumcision  and  the  passover  ;  for  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of  circumcision,  which  was  administered  but   once,  and  the 
Lord's  supper  was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  the  passover,  which  used 
to  be  repeated  yearly  ;  but  when  the  essentials  of  baptism  have  not 
been  rightly    observed  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  and 
when  that  fundamental  article  of  the  faith  is  denied,  as  is  done  by 
the  Socinians,  then  we  must  look  upon  such  a  baptism   as   no  bap- 
tism, and  we  must  re-baptize  those  who  have  been  so  baptized,  when 
they  repent,  believe  in  the  Triune  God,  and  confess  him.     Whethe? 
the  Mcnnonites  do  ill,  when  they    re-baptize   those  whom  we  and 
others   have  baptiztd  in   their  youth,  this  belongs  to  the  controversy 
about  infantbnptism  :  but  of  that  we  will  speak  on  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

APPLICATION. 


What  think  ye  now,  hearers,  is  it  not  a  great  blessing,   that   the 

Lord  God  hath  given  baptism  to  his  church  foi-  a  sacrament  ?  surely 

yes.     That   the  Triune  God  should  receive  the   sinner  into  such  a. 

well  ordered  covenant,  and  unite   him  to  himself,  that  each  Person 

should  contribute  his  part  to  favour  him,  to  cleanse  and  wash  him  from 

his  sins  for  ever,  and  should   thus  set    lus  heart  upon   him  with  an 

admirable  love,  this  is  an  inconceivable  grace  :  but  it  surpasseth  even 

this,  that  he  should  join  to  this  grace  not  only  his  word,  but  also  this 

sacrament,  that  he  may  render  this  grace  clear  and  lively  to  him, 

yea,  even  assure   him  of  it,  and  seal  it  to  him,  that  he   may  render 

ins  joy  and  comfort  complete.     The  word  of  God  would  have  been 

u  Icient  to  confirm   the  believing  sinner,    as   it  is  infallible;  but 

•  God  willing  to  show  more  abundantly  to  the   heirs  of  promise  the 

immutability  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that   by  two 

immutable  things,   in   which  it  was  impossible   for  God  to  lie,   we* 

lit  have  strong  cosolation,"  Heb.   vi.    17,  18,     Behold,   in  this 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  49 

manner  doth  God  assist  the  unbelief  of  those  whom  he  favours,  and 
as  if  this  were  yet  100  little,  he  adds  to  his  word  and  oath  also  this 
pledge  and  seal,  that  their  souls  may  be  confiimed  Abraham  and 
Ids  seed  "  received  indeed  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  se;  1  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith,"  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  11, 
but  that  righteousness  was  not  yet  actually  procured  by  the  Surety, 
."  Christ  behooved  yet  to  suffer,  and  enter  into  his  glory"  for  that 
purpose.  Circumcision  sealed  to  them  indeed  that  he  would  suivly 
procure  this  righteousness,  and  that  they  were  already  justified  by 
its  reflex  virtue  i  hut  what  a  bloody  and  painful  seal  was  it  to  them  I 
but  baptism  seals  now  with  great  ease  to  the  baptized  believer  that 
the  everlasting  righteousness  is  procured,  and  that  he  is  ie.id.  buried, 
and  risen  with  Christ'  according  to  the  text.  AP.d  therefore  bapfiz  d 
believers  enjoy  now  a  much  better  condition  than  the  believing 
fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  enjoyed. 

"  Paul  asked  the  twelve  disciples  at  Ephesus,  who  had  been  bap- 
tized with  the  baptism  of  John,  whether  they  t  ad  received  the  Holy 
.Ghost?"  Acts  xix.  2.  He  spake  of  the  holy  Ghost,  who  was  com- 
municated in  those  time-,  to  believers  in  a  great  and  extraordinary 
measure.  Without  doubt  all  of  you  have  be  n  baptized  ;  but  may 
we  not  ask  you  also,  have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghqst  to  wash  a\viy 
your  sins  by  the  blood  of  Christ?  Surely  all  those  who  have  been 
outwardly  baptized  with  water,  have  not  been  baptized  with  the  Hily 
Ghost  and  with  fire.  Simon  the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized  but  kt  he 
had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter;  for  his  heart  was  not  right 
in  the  sight  of  God  ;  but  he  was  in  the  gfdl  of  bitterness,  and  in  the 
bond  of  iniquity,"  as  Peter  upbraided  him,  Acts  viii.  21,  23.  Are 
there  not  also  many  among  you,  who  have  never  partaken  of  the 
benefit  signified  by  baptism  ?  what  dost  thou  and  thou  think  ?  if  thou 
hadst  truly  entered  into  covenant  with  God,  and  if  thy  sins  were 
vvashen  away  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  wouldest  thou  then 
wallow  so  in  sin,  and  in  excess  of  riot  .?  vrouklest  thou  wholly 
forget  that  thou  wast  cleansed  from  thy  old  sins,  and  wouldest  thou 
not  keep  thy  garments  clean  ?  Suppose  that  thou  art  not  one  of  the 
vilest  sinners,  but  civil,  and  eminently  devout,  and  that  thou  hast  a 
zeal  for  God,  but  hast  not  yet  the  Spirit  of  regeneration,  nor  the  hid- 
den man  of  the  heart,  is  thy  baptism  then  indeed  aught  more  than 
."a  putting  away  of  the  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  which  doth  not  save," 
as  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  iii.  21.  «  Is  not  he  a  Jew,  who  is  only  one 
outwardly  and  in  the  flesh,  but  he  who  is  one  inwardly,"  as  Paul 
speaks,  R.om.  ii.  28,  29.  Is  he  then  truly  a  Christian,  who  hath  been 
Vol.  it.  G 


50      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF- BAPTISM. 

only  outwardly  baptized  ?  I  deem  not :  it  will  also  appear  more  fully 
on  the  following  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  ask,  who  those  ate  then,  who  have  partaken  of  the  true 
baptism,  and  of  the  thing  signified  ?  we  say, 

1.  That  they  are  concerned  and  distressed  about  the  uncleanness 
of  their  sins.  God  the  Lord,  when  he  brings  them  into  his  cove- 
nant, gives  them  his  Spirit,  who  discovers  their  guilt,  and  loathsome 
fiithiness  to  them,  whereby  they  obtain  not  only  a  general  apprehen- 
sion, that  they  are  sinners,  as  well  as  others  ;  but  they  also  see  their 
sins,  this  and  that  sin  in  particular,  and  the  great  multitude  of  their 
sins  and  their  guilt,  and  unsightly  filthiness,  with  shame,  detestation 
and  a  loathing  of  themselves.  No  leper  can  be  so  affected  with  his 
contagious  uncleanness,  as  the  true  subjects  of  baptism  are  with 
their  sinfulness.  This  is  not  a  fiction  of  our  own  brain,  but  the  Lord 
himself  teacheth  it  us  in  his  word,  as  a  promise  of  his  covenant,  and 
as  the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  he  saith,  Kzck.  xxxvi.  25, 
31.  "  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean  ;  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse 
you.  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil  ways,  and  your  doings 
that  were  not  good,  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight, 
for  your  iniquities,  and  for  your  abominations."  Those  whom  John 
baptized  "  confessed  their  sins,"  Matt.  iii.  6.  .And  they  are  afiected 
thus,  not  only  when  they  are  first  convinced,  b'tt  seeing  a  great  defi- 
ciency of  sanctification  in  themselves,  they  are  also. afterwards  often 
seized  with  shame  and  an  abhorrence  of  themselves.  See  2  Chron. 
xxx.  15.  Job  xlii.  6.  Psalm  xxxviii  and  li.  Isaiah  vi.  5.  Rom.  vii. 

2.  If  there  were  nothing  more  than  this,  it  would  not  be  a  perfect 
evidence  of  that  baptism  which  saveth ;  but  since  by  the  sadness  of 
the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better,  there  ariseth  therefore 
presently  a  wonderful  desire  to  be  cleansed  :  sin  and  the  filth  of  it 
is  irksome  to  them  in  the  extreme,  and  therefore  they  have  an  ex- 
ceedingly vehement  desire  to  be  cleansed  from  it ;  the  soul  finds  no 
rest,  until  she  hath  b^en  purified  in  the  fountain  of  Christ's  blood  by 
his  Spirit :  therefore  she  betakes  herself  to  him,  unites  herself  to 
him,  applies  his  blood  and  sufferings  to  her,  and  cries  unto  him  with 
David,  Psalm  li.  2,  7.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and 
cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be 
clean  ;  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  To  this  pur- 
pose also  is  the  saying  of  the  wise  man,  Prov.  xxii.  11.  "  He  that 
loveth  pureness  of  heart,  the  king  shall  be  his  friend." 

3.  lie  who  hath  truly  partaken  of  baptism,  as  a  seal  of  the  wash- 
ing away  of  hie  sins,  hath  also  actually  and  really  entered  into  coye* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  51 

nant  with  God  upon  his  c  II  and  invitation.     It  doth  not  suffice  him, 
that  his  parents  and  witnesses  have  dedicated  him  to  God,  but  he 
abides  also  by  what  they  transacted,  he  confirms  the  promise,  which 
they  made  for  him  to   the  Lord,   he  consents  cheerfully  lo  that  pre- 
cious covenant,  the  lustre  of  which  beams  on  him,  and  he  surrenders 
himself  in   it  to  the  Lord,  hot  only  that   he  may  have  him   for  his 
God,  and  may  obtai.i  of  him  the  benefits  of  the  covenant,  but  also  in 
order  to  serve  him,  and  to  do  his  vvill  in  all  things  heartily  and  with- 
out exception.     He  doth  this  with  a  willing  heart,    and    1  e  repeats 
this  action  often,  because  he  can  never  do  it  with  as  much  heartiness 
and  zeal  as  he  wishes.     That  those  who  are  sealed  by  God   do  this 
appears  from   the  religious  custom  of  God's  people,  who  renewed 
again  and  again  their  covenant  with  the  God  of  their  fathers.     See 
this  Exod.   xix.  2i.  Deut.   xxvi.  29.   2  Chron.   xv.   Neh.   ix  and  x- 
David  "  swore  therefore,  and  would  perform  it,  that  he  would  keep 
God's  righteous  judgments,"   Psalm  cxix.    106.     "  John   preached 
the  baptism  of  repentance,"   according  to  Mark  i.  4,  but  baptism  is 
unto  repentance,  because  by  entering  into  covenant   with   God  we 
turn  from  sin  to  God,  in  order  to  oblige  ourselves  to  serve  him,  and 
to  devote  ourselves  to  his  service. 

4.  The  person  who  partakes  of  the  grace  of  baptism,   is  also  ex- 
ceedingly desirous  of  an   assurance,  that  he   is  truly  a  favourite  of 
God.     \Ve  know  that  all  true  believers  do  not   alway  possess  an  as- 
surance of  their  good  condition  ;  but  they  are  nevertheless  habitually 
desirous  of  possessing  assurance  on  indisputable  grounds  :  therefore 
they  search  the  word  of  God,  that  they  may  learn  what  are  the  in- 
fallible evidences,  that  a  person  is  in  a  state  of  grace  :  it  is  also  their 
daily  work  to  observe  their  mind   and  conversation,   that  they  may 
perceive  whether  they  truly  correspond  with  that  word ;  they  look 
to  the  sacrament,  that  it  may  confirm  them.     All  this  affords  them 
at  times  indeed  a  certain  measure  of  light  and  enlargement,  but  no 
pe.fect  assurance,  until  the    Holy  Spirit  connects   his  working  and 
sealing  with  it,    that  he  may  enable  them  to  "know  the  things  that 
are  freely  given  them  of  God,  and  may  bear  witness  with  their  spirits, 
that  they  are  the  children  of  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,    1  Cor.  II,  12. 
Rom.  viii.  15.     Their  souls  are  set  upon  this,   <,hey  pray  to  him  for 
it,  and  cry  anxiously   with  David,  "  Say  unto  my  soul,   I  am  thy 
salvation,"  Psalm  xxxv.  3.     "Make  me   to  hear  joy  and   gladness, 
that  the  bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.     Restore  to  me 
the  joy  of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  Spirit,"  Psalm 
li.  8,  12.     Others  concern  themselves  little  about  assurance,  they 


52       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

only  suppose  that  the:r  condition  is  good,  and  they  depend  entirely 
on  an  ungrounded  hope. 

Hearers,  examine  your  hearts  by  these  tokens,  and  see  whether 
they  can  be  found  in  you  ?  Are  ye  utter  strangers  to  them  ?  do  ye 
not  know  them,  and  do  ye  not  concern  yourselves  about  them  ?  know 
then  that  your  baptism  is  nothing  but  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filthi- 
ness  of  t:ie  flesh,  which  will  not  save  you  "  And  O  that  this  might 
once  awaken  you,  so  that  ye  might  see  your  sad  plight,  that  ye 
m;ght  bewail  it,  and  cry  out  with  the  leper,  "  Unclean,  unclean," 
l»ev.  xni.  45,  that,  as  Peter  admonished  Simon  after  his  baptism,  ye 
might  «  repent  of  your  wickedness  and  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the 
thoughts  ot  your  hearts  might  be  forgiven  you." 

but,  friends  of  God,  with  whom  these  things  are  found  in  truth, 
who  neither  dare  nor  may  deny  them,  conduct  worthily  of  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you.     And  therefore, 

1.  iieheve  now  that  all  this  great  grace  hath  been  sealed  to  you, 
that  ye  are  God's  covenant  people,  partakers  of  all  that  salvation, 
whici  the  Father-)  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  bestows  on  believers,  and 
that  ye  are  cleansed  from  your  sins  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Ye 
have  certain  evidences  of  it,  your  baptism  hath  assured  you  of  it,  and 
sealed  it  to  you,  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  instamped  his  mark  on  it ; 
ye  ought  not  then  ^o  often  to  reject  your  good  iiope  upon  every  con- 
ceit, and  indulge  unbelief.  Or  do  ye  imagine  that  the  baptism  which 
was  administered  to  you  in  your  childhood  is  of  too  long  a  standing, 
and  tiiat.  it  is  too  far  spent,  so  that  ye  cannot  improve  it  to  your  com- 
fort, or  that  u  hath  been  rendered  ineffectual,  and  that  ye  are  be- 
come as  it  were  unbaptized  through  your  sinful  backslidings,  and 
that  ye  obtained  grace  too  long  after  your  baptism,  to  derive  any 
support  from  it  now  ?  Have  ye  not  then  actually,  and  indeed  cleaved 
to  that  word  and  covenant,  in  which  your  parents  and  others  dedi- 
cated you  i  hath  not  the  Lord,  in  virtue  of  that  covenant  and  of  that 
baptism,  ke,>i  his  eye  on  you,  and,  in  consequence  of  it,  influenced 
your  souls,  and  brought  you  indeed  under  the  bond  of  the  covenant? 
How  beautifully  do  the  words  of  the  fo.m  of  baptism  in  the  third 
part  apply  here  !  (i  And  if  we  sometimes  through  Weakness  fall  into 
sin,  we  >nust  not  therefore  despair  of  God's  mercy,  nor  continue  in 
Bin,  since  baptism  is  a  seal,  and  undoubted  testimony,  that  we  have 
an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  Grd."  Let  the  soul  therefore  sup- 
port herself  by  looking  upon  herself  as  certified  and  sealed,  in  con- 
sequence of  her  baptism.  This  Paul  required  ;  f.r  when  he  had 
said  that  we  are  baptized  into  th<»  death  of  Christ,  buried  and  risen 
with  him,  he  adds,  "  Reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be   dead  indeed 


XXVI    LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  52 

unto  sin,   but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  vi    11. 

2.  Thank  and  praise  the  Triune  God  for  iavouring  you  thus.  It 
is  a  great  grace  that  hath  been  bestowed  on  you,  as  we  have  shown 
before.  Ought  not  then  all  that  is  within  you  to  praise  and  magnify 
his  name  to  the  utmost  >"  "  Unto  him,"  saith  John,  Rev.  i  5,6, 
"  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,  to  him  be 
glory  and  dominion  for  ever  "  It  is  your  duty  to  devote  yourselves 
wholly  to  his  praise  and  to  his  service,  tlut  ye  may  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  his  great  k  ndness  :  ye  were  obliged  to  this  in  your 
baptism,  and  ye  have  surrendered  yourselves  for  this  purpose  hi  his 
covenant.  We  must  exhibit  this  once  more  to  you  from  our  form 
of  baptism,  which  saith  to  you,  "  Whereas  in  all  co-  enan;s  there  are 
conta  ned  two  parts;  therefore  are  we  by  God  through  baptitm,  ad- 
monished of,  and  obliged  unto  new  obedience,  namely,  that  we  cleave 
to  this  one  God,  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost ;  that  we  trust  in  him, 
and  1  >ve  him  with  all  our  hearts,  with  all  our  souls,  with  all  our 
mind,  and  with  all  our  strength  ,  that  we  forsake  the  world,  crucify 
our  old  nature,  and  walk  in  a  new  and  holy  life."  Will  ye  nt  t  hold 
to  this  obligation,  under  which  ye  were  brought  long  since  ?  Sorely 
ye  will :  let  it  then  appear  in  all  your  conversation.  "  The  woman, 
who  was  a  great  sinner,  loved  much,  because  her  sins,  which  were 
many,  v/ere  forgiven,"  Luke  vii.  47.  It  behooves  you  then  also  to 
show  the  power  of  a  great  1  ve  to  the  Lord  by  doing  all  things,  in 
order  to  serve  him  :  beware  especially  of  defiling  yourselves  airain 
with  that  filth,  from  which  ye  have  been  washen.  Would  ye  bdthe 
and  plunge  yourselves  in  thai  sink,  which  overflowed  the  Son  of  God 
to  his bitiei  sorrow  ?  It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  should  be  "  bap'izjd" 
with  blood,  that  he  might  baptize  you  with  water  and  with  his  Spirit," 
and  ''  how  was  he  straitened',  till  it  was  accomplished  ?"  Luke  xii.  50. 
Would  ye  then  s?ek  your  pleasure  therein,  and  afflict  him  witJi  new 
sorrows  ?  or  <l  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  ( od 
forbid  :  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  herein  ? 
Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  bapiizeci  in  o  Jesus,  were 
baptized  into  his  death  r"  Jcc.  See  Rom.  vi.  1—6.  "  having  there- 
fore these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselw.-  fpdm  all 
fiithiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  tear  of 
God,"  according  to  2  C  or.  vii.  1. 

3.  Make  now  a  profitable  use  of  baptism,  in  order  to  obtain,  ac- 
cording to  that  seal  of  the  covenant,  all  iealed  grace  of  the  Lord,  t  :e 
God  of  the  covenant.  Have  ye  defiled  and  poliuted  yoursehes  with 
ein,  there  is  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii. 


54       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

I,  Have  ye  need  of  strength  for  your  duty,  there  is  "  help  laid  upon 
one  who  is  mighty,"  Psalm  lxxxix.  19.  Doth  your  soul  desire 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption,  your  Surety  is 
made  all  this  to  you  of  God,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Do  ye  seek  any  divine 
*•  grace,  love  and  communion,"  the  Triune  God  hath  undertaken  to 
bestow  it  upon  you,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  Let  your  souls  seek  it  only  of 
him.  urging  him  and  pleading  upon  the  ground  of  the  unchangeable 
and  sealed  covenant,  established  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ,  In  this  manner  must  we  often  conduct  with  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God ;  for  this  is  the  baptism  that  saveth, 
1  Peter  iiU  21. 

4.  But  consider  also  that  baptism  connects  you  with  your  fellow- 
chrislian,  who  is  baptized  as  well  as  ye  are  :  '*  We  are  all  baptized 
by  one  Spirit  into  one  body?"  as  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  xii.  13.  Let 
therefore  a  strict  union  with  one  another  be  discerned  among  you, 
being  all  of  one  heart,  and  one  soul  in  your  apprehensions,  in  grace, 
peace  and  love  :  this  the  same  apostle  requireth  of  you,  when  be 
saith,  Eph.  iv.  3 — 6.  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling  ;  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  bap- 
tism ;  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and  through  ail, 
and  in  you  all." 

5.  Finally,  when  the  Lord  will  baptize  you  with  blood,  and  calls 
you  to  resist  unto  blood,  and  to  surrender  your  bodies  to  death  for 
his  name,  do  not  then  by  any  means  draw  back  ;  ye  must  submit 
willingly  to  be  "  baptized  with  the  baptism,  wherewith  Christ  was 
baptized,"  Mark  x.  31.  Would  ye  then  draw  back,  when  Jesus 
willingly  suffered  himself  to  be  baptized  for  you  ?  Yea,  do  we  not 
oblige  ourselves  by  baptism  to  !ay  down  cvpn  our  lives  for  the  Lord, 
when  he  requires  it  of  us  for  his  name  ?  How  can  we  otherwise  suf- 
fer ourselves  to  be  "  baptized  for  the  dead,"  according  to  I  Cor.  xv. 
29  ?  "  Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou  shait  suffer  :  behold  the 
devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  and  yo  shall  have  tribulation 
ten  days :  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  1  will  give  thee  a  crown 
of  life.  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last,  which  was  dead, 
and  is  alive"  to  the  church  of  Smyrna,  Rev.  ii.  8,  10. 

In  the  mean  while  ye  have  great  reason  to  rejoice,  that  ye  have 
been  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Behold  how  the  Ethiopian, 
and  the  jailer  rejoiced,  after  they  were  baptized,  Acts  viii.  39.  xvi. 
34.  So  much  the  more  because  the  Lord  will  cleanse  y.  u  perfectly, 
inconsequence  of  your  having  been  sealed  by  baptism,  "ihat  he- 
may  present  you  to  himself  a  glorious  church,   not  having  spot  or 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  55 

wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  j  but  holy  and  without  blemish,"  Eph, 
v.  27.  His  name,  which  was  put  on  you  in  baptism,  shall  remain 
on  you,  and  beam  forth  with  far  greater  lustre  ;  for  "  ye  shall  see 
his  face,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  your  foreheads,"  according  to  Rev. 
xxii.  4.  How  will  ye  walk  in  state  before  his  face  in  glory,  clothed 
with  white  raiment,  like  priests,  kings  and  conquerors,  having  his 
name,  and  he  having  your  name  !  Hear  him  say  himself,  Rev.  iii. 
4,  5.  "  They  who  have  not  defiled  their  garments  shall  w»lk  with 
me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy.  He  that  overcometh,  the  same 
shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name 
out  of  the  book  of  life,  but  I  will  confess  hia  name  before  my  Father, 
and  before  his  angels/'  Amen. 


(   S6   ) 


ERROURS 


CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED 


XXVII.  LORDS  DAY. 


1  Peicr  hi.  21.  The  like  figure  whereunto,  even  baptism,  doth  now 
also  save  us,  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

Q.  72.  Is  then  the  external  baptism  with  water  the  washing  away  of 
sin  itself? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

Q.  73.  Why  then  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  "  the  washing  of 
regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of    ins  .?" 

A  God  speaks  net  thus  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  especially,  that  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may 
assure  us,  that  we  are  spintua'ly  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really,  as 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.

Q.  71.  Where 'has  Christ  p.rornised  us  tha'  he  will  as  certainly  waiiS 
us  by  his  blood  and  Sftirit,  as  ive  are  washed  by  ch  -  water  ofbafuism  ? 

A.  In  the  institution  of  baptism,  which  is  thus  expressed,  "Go 
ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  tlitm  in  the  name  of 
the  lather,  and  of  the  on,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  that  believ- 
eth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  thai  believeth  not  Shall 
be  damned."  This  promise  is  also  reoeated  where  the  scripture 
cails  baptism.  "  i"he  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away 
of  sins. 


A- 


.S  it  is  necessary  to  born,  in  order  to  be  a  man,  so  it  is  necessary 
so  ue  bon  again,  in  ordei  to  be  a  Christian.  It  did  not  please  the 
Lord  to  make  all  men  irarnedi;  tely  out  of  the  earth,  as  he  made  the 
first  Adam,  but  to  join  a  woman  to  Adam,  and  to  give  them  both  the 
law  of  marriage,  "  increase  «nd  multiply,"  that  he  might  make  of 
one  blootl  all  nations  of  men.  Therefore  not  one  man  hath  been  in- 
iced  into  the  world  since  that  period,  who  was  not  born  <>f  a  wo- 
rn m  ;  for  which  reason  man  hath  been  defined  and  called  from  his 
mother,  ''man  that  is  born  of  a  woman,"  Job  xiv.  xv.  1  \.  Thus 
also  a  man  doth  not  be otne  a  Christian,  except  by  a  second  birth-. 
Our  first  parents  having  been  created  in  the  image  o'  God,  would 
have  trap;  mitted  that  image  to  all  their  posterity,  ifthev  had  not 
deprived  themsel.es  of  it  by  sin,  and  it  would  then  not  have  been 
necessary  that  their  posterity  should  be  oewb  .n  ;  but  having  lost 
that  image,  they  have  transmitted  their  own  image,  even  sin,  to  all" 
their  posterity.  This  Moses  teacheth  us,  Gen.  v,  1,3,  «  In  the 
day  that  God  created  man,  in  the  likeness  of  God  made  he  him.  And 
\dam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image  "  The  Lord, 
willing  to  restore  man  to  his  first  condition,  appointed  for  himself  an 
everlasting  people,  and  gave  his  Son  to  them  in  a  spiritual  marriage 
>.o  be  a  bridegroom  and  husband  to  them,  that  he  might  thus  obtain 
'■*.  holy  seed  by  a  new  birth.  See  Isaiah  liv.  1 — 6.  It  was  also  ne- 
cessary that  the  sinner  should  be  born  again  of  that  marriage  ;  for  he 
is  by  his  natural  birth  as  it  were  degenerate,  unnatural,  yea,  be- 
eaved  of  humanity,  and  "  is  of  his  father  the  devil,"  John  viii  44 
He  must  therefore  become  "  a  new  creature,  the  workmanship  cf 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,"  2  Cor.  v.  17.  Eply 
ii  10.  Since  "  he  hath  sinned,  he  comes  short  of  the  glory  "  and 
image  '•'■  of  God,"  according  to  Horn.  iii.  23.  It  is  therefore  neces- 
he  should  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  crea- 
-ed  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,"  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gen* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  49— 71.  33 

tiles  requireth,  Eph  iv.  24.  He  is  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  but  by 
regeneration  he  is  '«  quickened  with  Christ,"  Eph.  ii.  1,  5.     The  sin- 
ner ts  without  strength,  the  catnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God;  for 
it  is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  tjod,   neither  indeed   can   be,"   H^m. 
viii.  7.     It  was  therefore    also  necessary,  trnt  new   powers,  "  a  new 
heart  and  a  new  spirit,"   should  he  given  him  by  a  new  birth,  (s    is 
promised,  Lzek.  xxxvi.  26.     Further,  by  his  first  birth  he  is  a  stran- 
ger to  the  church  of  God,  "  he  hath  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memori- 
al in  Jerusalem,  "  as  Nenemiah  speaks,  Neh    ii.  20    If  i.e  shall  then 
partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  church,  he  must  be  incorporated  in- 
to it,  must  be  "joined  to  it,  be  a  feliowcitizen  of  the  saints,    and  of 
;he  household  of  God,"  Ac. s  ii.   41.     Eph.   ii.    19.  Permit    me   to 
add,  that  he  is  by  his  birth  unclean  and  loathsome,  and   it    if  there- 
fore necessary  that  he  should,  like  a  child  who  is  newly   born,  be 
washed  and  rinsed  ;  this  the  Lord    himself  teacheth   us,    Ezek    xvi. 
J- — 9.     This  is  also  clearly  discovered  to  us  in  baptism,  the  first  sac- 
ament  of  the   New  Testament,  by  which   regeneration,  incorpora- 
tion, into  the  church,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins  is  signified  and 
scaled. 

The  foregoing  Lord's  day  having  taught  us  that  believers  are  ad- 
monished and  assured  by  the  sacraments,  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ 
Is  advantageous  to  them,  and  that  the  sacraments  are,  holy  baptism 
and  the  holy  supper,  this  is  now  shown  with  respect  to  baptism. 

I.  We  must  discourse  somewhat  cencerning  the  word  "baptism," 
and  then, 

II.  We  will  consider  the  matter  itself. 

I.  The  noun  substantive  baptism,  bafitismos,  bafithma,  and  the  verb 
baptize,  ba/uizcin,  bafitien,  signify  to  rinse,  to  wash,  and  toclear.se  any 
thing  by  dipping.  In  this  sense  are  the  words  used  of  the  supersti- 
tious washings  of  the  Pharisees,  Mark  vii.  4,  "When  they  come 
from  the  market,  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not.  And  many  other 
things  there  be,  which  they  have  received  to  hold,  as.  the  washing  of 
cups,  and  pots,  brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables."  But  we  find  these 
words  also  used  in  a  figurative  sense  of  the  communication  of  the 
grace  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit:  "He  that  cometh  after  me 
shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire,"  saith  the  bap- 
tist, Matt.  iii.  10.  These  words  denote  also  sometimes  figuratively, 
suffering  tribulation,  when  Jesus  saith,  "  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  bap- 
tized with  ;  and  how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished,"  Luke 
xii.  50.  Matt.  xx.  22,  23,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  is 
confirmed  and  received  in  baptism  :  thus  "  A  polios  knew  only  the 
baptism  of  John,"  Acts^viii.  35.     The  word  baptism^  or  baptize  is 

Vol.  ii.  E 


34      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OP  BAPTISM. 

also  used  in  a  sacramental  sense  :  Paul  saith  of  the  Israelites,  that 
"  they  were  all  baptii.d  unto  kfloses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sta," 
1  Cor  x.  2.  The  ecclesiastical  and  typical  wa&hings  of  the  Old 
T/e  f  ment,  art;  called  by  the  apostle,  bap.tismoi*  "  baptisms,"  Heb.  ix« 
!0,  which  our  translators  render  "  washings."  To  these  the  Jews 
added  also  a  baptism,  when  they  would  solemnly  receive  and  incor- 
porate into  their  church  a  convert,  or  proselyte  to  Judaism  ;  for  after 
they  had  circumcised  him,  they  baptised  him,  after  -which  they  order- 
ed him  to  offer  his  gifts  ;  hence  it  was  that  the  baptism  of  John  and 
of  Christ  did  not  appear  so  strange  to  them  ;  yea,  they  seem  to  sup*, 
pose  that  Christ  when  he  came,  would  baptize,  for  they  asked, 
John  i.  35,  "  Why  baptizest  £hou  then,  if  thou  be  not  the  Christ  ?" 
But  these  words  are  mostly  used,  as  we  also  use  them  here,  of  "  the 
first  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  in  which  the  washing  away 
of  sins  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  is  signified  and  sealed 
with  water  to  believers,  by  virtue  of  the  institution  and  promise  or" 
Christ." 

II.  !n  order  that  we  may  consider  the  matter  itself,  we  must  at- 
tend, I  to  the  sign  of  baptism.  2.  To  the  thing  signified.  3.  The 
union  of  them.  4.  The  foundation  of  the  union,  and  5.  To  the 
circumstances. 

1.  The  external  sign  is  the  use  of  water,  "  the  external  washing 
wi  h  water,  by  which  the  filthiness  of  the  body  is  commonly  washed 
sway,"  saith  the  instructor,  "  John  came,  and  was  sent  to  baptize 
with  Water,"  John  i.  31,33.  '•' He  bapfzed  in  the  river  Jordan," 
Mark  i  5.  "  Also  at  Enon.  near  to  Kalim,  because  there  wis  much 
water  there,"  John  hi.  23.  «  See  here  is  water,  what  doth  hinder 
me  to  be  baptized,"  said  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36.  It  is  necessary 
that  it  should  be  pure  and  clean  water  as  those  rivers  were,  if  it  shall 
be  proper  to  represent  the  spiritual  cleansing.  And  therefore  the 
Papists  pollute  baptism,  and  trifle  with  it,  and  with  the  institntor  of 
it,  when  among  many  adjurations  of  the  devil,  and  crossings,  they  be- 
smear the  nose  and  ears  of  the  person  who  is  baptized,  with  spittle., 
and  anoint  him  with  oil.  Who  hath  required  this  at  their  hands  ? 
But  it  was  necessary  to  confirm  their  opinion  concerning  the  virtue 
of  waterbaptism  •  v>ater  alone  would  not  suffice  to  wash  away  sins — • 
popish  spittle  and  oil  are  more  efficacious.  Trifles  :  in  this  manner 
Jo  the  P.  pists  i(  make  the  commandment  of  Ccd  of  none  effect  by 
their  traditions,"  like  the  Pharisees,  Matt.  xv.  6. 

Nevertheless,  water  by  itself  cannot  cleanse,  unless  it  be  used. 
Anciently  they  obliged  the  person  who  was  to  be  baptized,  to  gc 
:n,to  the  water,  and  they  dipped  him  in  it,  by  which  means  he  seem- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  2? 

be  dead,  and  buried  under  the  water,  and  when  he   came  up 
againj  to  rise  fiom  the  dead,  and  so   his  whole    body   was  cltansed ; 
but  as  this  cannot  t>e  done  in  these  cold  countries  without  great  dan- 
ger to  the  per-on  who  is  barptized,  pouring  or  sprinkling   hath   been 
wisely   introduced      This  ceremony  is  not  to  be  disapproved  of,  as 
(hough  it  militated  against  the  institution  of  Christ,  and  the  efficacy 
of  bap'.ism,  since  dipping  und  sprinkling  are  only  circumstances    It  is 
njt  to  be  thought,  that  the  apostles  always  dipped  the  persons,  who 
were  to  be   baptized,  but  they   also   sprinkled   them   when   occasion 
required.    VVno  can  believe  that  when  they  baptized  three  thousand  at 
the  same  time,  they  dipped  them  I      Who  can    imagine   that    when 
they  baptized  Cornelius  and  Lydia  in  their  own  houses,  yea,  the  jail- 
er  by  night,  they  then  Lund  vessels  at  hand,   capacious   enough   to 
plunge  fullgrown  persons  in  and  under   the  water?     The  thing  sig- 
nified is  also  expressed  by  sprinkling,  and  is  called  "  water,  and  the 
blood  of  sprinkling,  '    Ezek.    xxxvi.  25.     Heb.  xii.  24.     We    can 
also  cleanse  as  well  by  sprinkling,  as  by   dipping  ;  it  is  of  no   conse- 
quence, whether  we  sprinkle  the  face,  or  the  whole  body,    inasmuch 
as  the    face,  being  the   principal    part,   represents   the    wi.ole  man> 
Under  the  Old  Testament,   when  one  member  was  circumcised,  the 
whole  person  was  considered  as  .circumcised.     "When    Peter  desi- 
red   that    his  bands  and  head  should  be  washed,  as  well  as  his    feet, 
Jesus  said  to  him,    He  that  is   washed   needeth  not  save  to  wash  his 
feet,  but  is    clean  every   whit,"  John    xiii.  9,   10.     Why   should  we 
not  then  look  upon  him  to  he  wholly  clean,  whose  face  is  washed  ? 

We  reckon  it  a  matter  of  indifference,  whether  we  sprinkle  or  dip 
once  or  thrice,  if  it  be  not  done  to  confirm  any  ei  roneous  opinion, 
like  the  Arians,  who,  dipped  thrice,  because  they  divided  the  God- 
head :  and  theref  re  the  council  of  Toledo,  in  the  year  633,  permit- 
ted the  church  of  Spain  to  dip  only  once,  that  they  might  thus  tes^ 
tify  the  purity  of  their  doctrine  against  the  Arians.  We  may  sprin- 
kle or  dip  once  to  testify  the  oneness  of  the  divine  essence,  and 
thrice  to  testify  that  there  are  three  distinct  divine  Persons;  but 
when  we  say  that  sprinkling  once  or  thrice  is  a  matter  of  indiffer* 
ence,  we  do  not  mean  that  every  person  who  baptizeth,  hath  a  right 
by  his  own  authority  to  sprinkle  once,  when  the  church  is  used  to 
sprinkle  thrice  ;  for  he  who  should  undertake  this  would  be  suspec^ 
ted  of  presumption  and  of  error. 

Since  baptism  must  be  administered  in  the  name  of  the  divine 
Trinity,  it  is  proper  that  the  Trinity  should  be  mentioned,  when  a  per- 
son is  baptized,  according  to  the  command  of  Jesus,  who  ordered  his 
ambassadours  m  to  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  an*l 


U      EXPL  ^NATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Matt  xxviii.  19.  It  is  true  he  doth  not  command, 
Y  •  shail  s.iy,  when  ye  baptize,  1  baptize  thee  in  the  name  ol  the 
Father,  &c.  yet  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  the  apostles  were  silent 
when  they  baptized,  but  t!ia'  they  expressed  the  virtue  of  baptism  by 
words.  They  baptized  indeed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  but 
the  whole  divine  Trinity  manifests  itself  in  Jesus:  thi  Father  is  in 
him,  and  he  is  in  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  bestows  all  grace 
fro  I  the  Son,  who  hath  it  from  the  Father,  according  t  the  words 
of  Christ,  John  xiv.  7 — 16,  and  xvi.  13,  14,  15.  And  therefore  it  is 
the  same  thing,  whether  we  baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
or  in  the  n.me  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  will  show  presently  what 
is  signified  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity. 

2.  But  this  use  of  water  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity  is  not  merely 
a  commanded  duty  of  divine  worship,  but  it  is  also  significative,  or 
it  respects  something  signified.  This  is  the  blood  of  Christ, ,shed"in 
his  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  and  his  Spirit  purchased  thereby,  by  which 
the  sins  of  the  elect  are  washen  away,  according  to  the  promises  of 
the  covenant  of  grace. 

In  order  to  understand  this  properly,  we  must  remember  that 
God  enters  into  a  covenant  of  grace  with  the  believing  sinner,  and 
promises  him  therein  that  his  sins  shall  be  washen  away.  "  I  will 
cleanse  you  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  nil  your  idols,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-  But  God  could  not  do  this,  unless  a 
sufficient  sacrifice  were  offered,  upon  which  the  sinner  could  enter 
into  a  covenant  treaty  with  God,  and  God  with  the  sinner,  as  men 
were  wont  anciently  to  enter  into  covenants  by  sacrifices.  The  Lord 
having  respect  to  this  saith,  Psalm  1,  5,  "  Gather  my  saints  together 
unto  me  :  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with    me   by    sacrifice." 

When  the  Lord  had  established  his  covenant  with  all  Israel,  "  Moses 
took  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  people,  and 
said,  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hath  made 
with  you,"  Exod.  xxiv.  I — 8.  But  the  sacrifice  served  not  only 
to  confirm  the  covenant,  but  also  to  cleanse  the  Israelites,  in  order 
th  it  it  might  shadow  forth  the  true  washing  away  of  sins  by  a  better 
blood  :  <k  The  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer 
sprinkling  the  unclean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as 
Paul  saith,  Heb.  ix.  13.  But  since  it  is  impossible  that  the  blood  of 
buliG  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks, 
Heb.  x.  1.  therefore  the  God  of  the  covenant  gave  his  ,-^un,  who  of- 
fered himself  up  to  God  in  his  bloody  sacrifice,  that  he  might  ob- 
tain the  true  purification,  and  aho  confirm  the  covenant  of  God  with 
the  sinner.     The  same  wise  apostle  teacheth  us  this  again  ;  after  h* 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69— Tl.  3r 

had  shown  that  the  blood  of  beasts,  offered  up  in  sacrifice,  could, 
sanctify  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,  he  saith,  Heb.  ix.  14,  15,  "  How 
much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spir- 
it offered  himself  without  spit  to  God,  purge  your  conscience  from 
dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God  ?  And  for  this  cause  he  is  the 
Mediator  of  the  New  testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the 
redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under  the  first  testament, 
they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheri- 
tance. "  But  we  are  baptized  not  only  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
who  establishes  the  covenant,  and  promises  the  washing  away  of 
sins,  and  in  the  name  of  the  Son,  who  purchases  the  covenant,  and 
the  promises  thereof  by  his  sacrifice,  and  his  blood,  shed  therein  ;  but 
also  m  the  name  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  likewise  signified  in 
baptism,  and  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  to  the 
washing  away  of  sins  ;  for  the  Holy  Ghost  effects  by  a  real  and  ac= 
tive  application  the  washing  away  of  sins,  which  the  Father  prom- 
iseth,  and  the  Son  hath  purchased  :  therefore  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  vi. 
11,"  But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  arc  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  And 
therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  also  brings  the  sinner  into  the  bond  of  the 
covenant,  which  is  also  signified  by  baptism,  according  to  the  promise 
of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  4,  5.  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground :  I  will  pour  my  Spirit 
upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  offspring.  And  they 
shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  watercourses. 
One  shall  say  1  am  the  Lord's:  and  another  shall  call  himself  by  the 
name  of  Jacob:  and  another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the 
Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  Israel."  And  thus  bap- 
tism is  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  of  the  washing 
away  of  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  promised  in  that  cov- 
enant by  the  Father. 

But  "  what  is  it  to  be  washed  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ," 
thus  asks  the  instructor,  and  he  saith  that  it  is  our  justification  and 
sanclitication :  and  he  speaks  thus  with  the  scripture,  agreeably  to 
the  words  which  we  have  just  now  quoted  from  1  Cor.  vi.  1  1.  We 
have  explained,  in  treating  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day,  the  man- 
ner in  which  God  justifieth  the  sinner,  and  forgives  his  sins.  This 
forgiving  of  sins  is  expressed  by  cleansing,  when  the  Lord  promiaetb, 
Jer.  xxxiii.  8,  "  I  will  cleanse  them  from  ail  their  iniquity,  and  I 
will  pardon  all  theii  iniquities."  But  as  sin  doth  not  only  subject 
the  sinner  to  guilt,  of  which  he  is  cleansed  by  justification,  but  as  it 
renders  him  also  filthy,  that  filth  is  therefore  also  washen  a^ay  by 


P      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

ianctification.     The  catechism  describes  this  as  consisting  in  tl 
.      .  (a)  The  sinner  is  re  tewed  by  it ;  for  the  image  of  God,  after 
.  he  is  renewed,  is  restored  in  him  by  tl  putting  oii'  the  uld  man, 
and  putting  on   the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  right- 
eousness and  true   holiness,"  Eph.  iv.  22,  24.     He  is  then,  like  one 
■Who  hatb  been  arashen,  elf  an  and  new,  and  so  he  is  "  saved  by  the 
washing  of   regeneration,    and   the   renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
Titus  in.  5.  (b)  Sanctification  implies  also,  that  a  person  is  sanctified 
to  be,  a  member  of  Christ   by  which  he  is  surrendered  to  Christ,  and 
.sd  to  him  ;  Paul  saith.     "  We  all  are   baptized  by  one  Spirit 
Into  one  body,"  1  Cor.  xii.  13.     And  thus  we  partake  cf  the  holn.esa 
of  our  Head,  yea,  just  as  if  we  had  been  dead,  buried,  and  raised  up 
ytitk  him,  according  to  our  text,  (c)  It  belongs  also  to  sancuhcauon, 
..  person  dies  mors  and  more  to  sin,    and  levels  a  godly  and  un- 
blamable life.     Sanciiiication  is  not  perfect  in  a  person  at  the  begin- 
ning, but  it  advanceth  gradually,   since   the  soul  herself  becomes  ac- 
jb/ej  bewails  her  sins,  fights  against  them,  and  endeavours  to  drive 
I  out,  and  bestirs  herself  time  after  time  lo  conduct  in  a  cnannei 
to  God  :  fo;1  "  it  is  given  to  her  to  grow ,  to  be  cl 
,.i  glory  to  glory,  and  as  she    is  holy,  to  become    more  holy," 
Psalm  xcii.  13.    2  Cor   hi.  IS.    Rev,  jcxii.  11.     1'oth  these  benefits, 
\Vuiu:.  in  baptism,   are  effected  by  the  blood  and  Spirit 

of  Christ*     His  oloocl,  that  is,  his  bloody  suffering  hath  merited  jus- 
anctiii cation  ;  for  "  he  is  made  to  them  who  are  his, 
iousness  and  sanctification,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.     And  thus  "  he  is  a 
fountain   opened  to  the   house   of  David,    and  to  the  inhabitants  of 
alem  for  .  .  foi  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1.     Therefore 

loved  disciple  saith,  1  John  i.  7.     "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Son  of  Cod,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."     But  how  is  jutsilication 
I   to  them  internally?  is  it  not  by  the   Holy  Spirit,    as  we 
ed   upon  the   twenty  third    Lord's  day?  Thus  the  Holy  Spirit 
effect  5  merited  sanctification  ;  for  "  Cod  hath  chosen  them 

through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,"  1  Thess.  iv.  13.  1  Peter  i.  2. 
And  therefore  the  Ho  y  Spirit  is  likened  to  water,  with  which  they 
are  born  again,  according  to  the  words  of  Ezekiel  and  of  the  Saviour, 
Ezek-  xxxvi.  2.5.  John  iii.  5. 

Since  now  the  covenant  of  God,  and  Ids  gifts  of  grace  are  un- 
changeable, and  since  the  Son  of  God  hath  made  a  perfect  satisfac- 
tion for  all  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  loveth  his  own  until  the  end, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  abides  for  ever  with  believers  for  an  everlasting 
seal  ;  therefore  the  washing  away  of  sins,  signified  in  baptism,  must 
usee  •  only  to  tins  committed  before  baptism- 


—  ?;..  ** 

as  the  church,  of  Rome  imagines,  but  also  to   sins  committed  after 
baptism. 

3.  If  water  shall  signify  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  there  must 
necessarily  be  an  union  between  the  sign,  and  the  thing-  signified, 
which  union  consists, 

I.  In  a  conformity  between  the  use  of  water,  and  the  working  of 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  indeed  such  a  conformity,  that 
ihe  u*e  of  water  represents  in  a  lively  manner  the  working  and 
power  of  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  exhibits  them  to  the 
senses  ;  for,  (a)  when  we  make  use  of  water  to  wash  and  cleanse 
ourselves,  we  suppose  that  we  are  unclean  and  filthy.  Thus  also  the 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  by  which  we  are  cleansed,  teach  us  that 
we  have  defiled  ourselves  by  sin,  in  order  that  we  may  humble  and 
ab.tse  ourselves,  and  seek  our  purification  out  of  ourselves  in  the1 
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  When  David  had  defiled  himself  gr 
he  prayed  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  li.  2,  3.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from 
mine  iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin  ;  fo:  I  acknowledge  mf 
transgressions ;  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me."  How  excellently 
doth  our  form  of  baptism  express  this  in  its  first  part !  thus  it  speaks, 
"  This  the  dipping  in,  or  sprinkling  with  water  teacheth  us,  where- 
by the  impurity  of  our  souls  is  signified,  and  we  admonished  10 
loathe  and  humble  ourselves  before  God,  and  seek  for  o.ir  purifica- 
tion and  salvation  without  ourselves."  (b)  As  we  are  sprinkled  with 
water,  so  we  are  also  sprinkled  with  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ, 
that  is,  we  are  rendered  partakers  of  the  power  and  worki  • 
Christ's  blood  and  Spirit  for  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  they  arc 
applied  to  us  :  "  the  Messiah  should  sprinkle  many  nations,"  accord- 
ing to  Isaiah  lii.  15.  (c)  We  are  united  in  the  most  intimate  manner 
to  the  water  by  the  use  of  waterbaptism  ,  so  we  are  also  united  to 
Christ  through  his  biood  and  Spirit  by  the  thing  signified  :  therefore 
the  text  asks,  "  Know  ye  not  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized 
into  Jesus  Lhrist,  were  baptized  into  his  death."  Yea,  we  put  Christ 
on  as  a  garment,  by  baptism,  Gal.  iii.  27.  (d)  Those  who  were  for- 
merly baptized  by  dipping  seemed  to  be  as  it  were  dead  and 
buried  under  the  water,  which  is  aiso  represented  in  some  measure 
by  sprinkling  and  pouring  water  on  a  person  :  but  we  are  dead  and 
buried  to  ourselves  and  to  sin  through  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ: 
!<  We  die  to  sin,"  saith  the  instructor  in  the  seventieth  question* 
The  text  having  respect  to  mis,  saith,  "  We  are  buried  with  him  b;a 
baptism  into  death,  (e)  As  those  who  are  baptised  ascend  up  c\ 
the  water,  as  if  they  arose  from  the  dead,  so  these  also  are  r 
abve  ny  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ;     Thei  - 


40      EXPLANATION  O?  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

text,  that  believers  are  baptized  into  the  death  of  Christ,  u  that  like 
as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
even  so  we  also  should  walk,  in  newness  of  life."  (f )  As  water  washes 
away  the  tilth  of  a  person,  so  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washes 
away  our  sins  :  this  wc  have  explained  before,  (g)  When  the  r.ames 
of  the  ihree  divine  Persons  are  pronounced  upon  us.  their  grace  is  also 
supplicated  for  us  in  baptism,  as  the  apostle  wished  and  prayed  in 
behalf  of  the  Corinthians,  when  he  said,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  "The  grace 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all." 

2.  The  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  consists  also  in 
the  joint  use  of  both.  Such  a  signifying  power  of  the  use  of  water 
is  un,  rofitable,  unless  it  be  joined  to  the  use  of  it,  by  which  we  en- 
joy  not  only  the  sign,  but  also  the  thing  signified  by  the  sign, 
through  the  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith  ;  thus  it  is  said, 
Titus  iii.  5.  "  He  hath  saved  us  by  the  working  of  regeneration, 
and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  so  we  "  suffer  our- 
selves," with  Paul,  Acts  xx;i.  16.  "  to  be  baotized,  and  our  sins  to 
be  washed  away."  We  art:  "  buried  by  baptism  into  death  with 
Christ,'*  that  is.  in  and  united  to  him-  Piom.  vi.  4. 

-1.  But  what  grounds  have  we  to  assert  such  an  union  «f  the  sign 
with  the  tiling  signified  ?  the  word  of  God  alone  affords  us  freedom 
and  grounds  for  this  ;  For, 

1.  "The  Lord  Christ  appointed  this  external  washing  with  water," 
saith  the  catechism  ;  whereby  he  enjoined,  that  we  should  wash  with 
water,  in  order  to  signify  and  represent  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
his  blood  and  Spirit.  John  the  Baptist  was  the  first,  who  received 
the  institution  of  baptism,  that  he  might,  as  the  forerunner  of  Jesus, 
prepare  the  Jews  to  receive  the  Christ,  to  whom  John  directed 
them  :  therefore  he  saith,  John  i.  31,  33.  "  I  Knew  him  not,"  that  is, 
the  Christ  r  '"  but  that  he  should  lie  made  manifest  to  Israel,  there- 
fore am  I  come  baptizing  with  water.  He  that  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  the  same  said  unto  me,  Unon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the 
Spirit  descending,  and  remaining  on  him,  the  same  is  he  which  bap- 
tizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  After  this,  when  Christ  began  to  ex- 
ercise his  oTice  in  public,  he  commanded  his  apostles  to  baptize  in 
bis  name  ;  this  we  see  in  the  account  uiven  by  John  the  evangelist, 
when  lie  saith,  "  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard,  that  Jesus  made  and 
baptized  more  disciples  than  John,  though  Jesus  himself  baptized 
.not,  but  bis  disciples,"  John  iv.  I,  2.  But  the  institution  of  baptism 
was  not  yet  perfected,  because  the  New  Testament  was  not  yet  per- 
fected ;  the,  baptism  of  John  pointed  to  Christ,  who  should  be  mani- 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7 1 .  41 

tested  to  Israel,  and  the  baptism  of  the  apostles  pointed  to  him,  who 
was  already  manifested,  and  who  was  about  to  shed  his  blood,  in 
order  that  he  might  obtain  the  Spirit,  and  so  wash  away  sins  ;  and 
therefore  baptism  was  administered  to  the  Jews  only.  But  Christ 
being  risen,  because  he  had  shed  his  blood,  obtained  the  Spirit,  and 
thus  confirmed  the  New  Testament,  he  completed  the  ins'itution  of 
baptism,  commanding  to  baptize  all  nations,  not  only  the  Jews,  but 
the  Gentiles  also,  in  the  name  of  the  divine  Trinity.  We  see  this, 
Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

But  when  we  say  that  the  baptism  of  Christ  and  of  John  differed 
thus  one  from  the  other,  we  do  not  mean  that  there  was    an  essen- 
tial difference  between  them,    as  the  Papists  and    Socinians  assert. 
The  Papists  maintain  that  the  waterbaptism  of  Christ  accomplishtth 
and  effects  the  thing  itself,  to  wit,  the  washing  away  of  sins,  and  that 
the  baptism  of  John   purified  the  body  only,  but  not  the  soul,    and 
only  disposed   a  person  to  conversion.     The   Socinians  ascribe  no 
virtue  at  all  to  baptism,    but  think  that  the  baptism  of  John  was  a 
necessary  ecclesiastical  duty  for  the  Jews,  as   all   the  ecclesiastical 
duties  of  the  churchlaw  of   Moses    were  ;  but  that   the  baptism  of 
Christ  was  a  mere  badge  of  the  Christian  church  for   a  short   time, 
in  order  to  distinguish  it  from  Jews   and  Gentiles,  and  that  baptism 
is  no  longer  necessary  now,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Chris- 
tianity.  In  opposition  to  this  our  church  teaches,  conformably  to  the 
\vord  of  God,  that  the  waterbaptism  of  John  and  of  Christ  was   es- 
sentially the  same  ;  for  both  have  the  same  sign,  to  wit,  water  ;  the 
thing  signified  by  the  baptism  cf  John  was  the  grace  of  the  Mess  ah, 
whicn  is  also  signified  by  the   baptism  of  Christ ;  for  according  to 
the  words  of  Paul,  "  John  baptized  with  the  baptism  of  repentance, 
saying  unto  the  people,  that  they  should  believe  on  him,  that  is,  on 
Christ  Jesus ;  and  they  who  heard   him  were  baptized   in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  Acts  xix.  4.   The  baptism  of  John  was  of  divine 
institution,  as  well  as  that  of  Christ  :  "  John  was  sent  to  baptize  with 
water,"  John  i.  33,  "  his  baptism  was  from  heaven,"   as  Christ   inti- 
mateth,  Matt.  xxi.  25.     It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  baptism  of  John 
did  not  confer  the  thing  signified,  but  Christ  only  ;  but  the  wa.er  bap- 
tism, instituted  by  Christ,  confers  not  the  thing  signified  neither,  as 
will  appear  in  the  following  Lord's  dav.     When  then  the  Socinians, 
who  deny  the  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  of  baptism,  assert    that 
baptism,  since  the  general  establishment  of  Christianity,  is  a  matter 
of  indifference,  yea,  that  it  is  no  longer  necessary,  they  contrad.ct 
the  word  of  God,  which  teacheth  that  baptism  is  a  sacrament  for  the 
whole  church  of  the  New  Testament  until  the  end  of  the  world ;  for 
Vox  .ii  F 


.       EXPI  LION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

Christ  connects  baptism  with  the  preaching  of  the  word,  and  prorr.- 
iseth  his  blessed  presence  with  it  for  ever,  when  he  saith  to  his  am- 
bus dours,  Matt,  xxviit.  19,20.  "  Go  ye,  ami  teach  a!l  nations, 
baptizing  them  in  the  r.ame  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I 
have  commanded  you;  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world." 

The  virtue  of  this  institution  consists  herein,  that  the  ambassa- 
dours  of  the  Lord  are  obliged  to  baptize  every  penitent  person  with 
water,  and  to  signify  to  him  the  washing  awj.y  of  sins  by  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  ;  and  every  penitent  is  by  this  same  word  obliged 
to  suffer  himself  to  be  baptized  in  obedience  to  Christ,  and  must  be 
led  up  thereby  to  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  that  he  may  be 
cleansed  by  them  ;  therefore  Ananias  said  to  penitent  Paul,  Acts 
xxii.  16,  "  Why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away 
thy  sins."  It  was  therefore  a  blamable  disobedience  of  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  that  they  would  not  suffer  them  elves  to  be  baptized 
by  John  :  by  that  disobedience  "they  rejected  the  counsel  of  God 
against  themselves,"  as  Jesus  saith,  Luke  vii.  30, 

2  But  the  word  of  the  institution  is  not  the  only  thing,  that  is 
necessary  to  render  the  use  of  the  v.  ater  a  sacrament,  but  a  word  of 
promise  must  also  be  added  to  it,  whereby  the  element,  which  be- 
comes a  sign  by  the  institution,  is  made  a  seal  also.  This  is  beauti- 
fully expressed  by  the  instructor  in  the  sixty  ninth  question  :  "Christ 
hath  added  this  promise  to  the  institution  of  washing,  that  I  am  as 
certainly  washed  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  from  all  the  pollution  of  my 
SOul,  that  is,  from  all  my  sins,  as  I  am  washed  externally  with 
water. "  Doth  not  Peter  also  teach  us  this,  when  he  saith  to  the  peni- 
tent Jews,  Acts  ii.  30,  39,  «  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of 
you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye 
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  for  the  promise  is  unto 
yon  :" 

The  instructor  inquiring  concerning  the  word  of  promise,  asks, 

;  Where  hath  Christ  promised  us,  that  he  will   as  certainly  wash  us 

blood   and    Spirit,  us   we  are  washed  with   the  water  of  bap- 

cites    su;  tges,   which  prove  this.     The  first 

;t.  .\:-:vi  i    19,   where   Christ  saith  to  his  ambassadours,  -'Go 

ye.  teach,  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 

Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."    He  showeth  that  the  doctrine  of 

jne  Trinity,  and  the  grace  of  the  Trinity,  which  each  Person 

in  the  divine  essence  should  bestow  upon  the  nations,  was  the  sum 

loctrineSj  in  which  they  should  instruct  the  nations.  Thus 


.     ,  —71.  M 

l:aul   supplicated  for   the  Corinthians  in   order  that   they  might  be 
saved,   "the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  cf  God,  and 
the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"   2  (.  or.  xiii.  13.     All  this  sal- 
vation is  promised  and  sealed   to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,   and 
thus  also  the  washing  away  of  sins.     Since  now  baptism  is  a  sea!  cf 
the  covenant  of  grace,  in  whifch  God  and  man  enter  into  .an  agree- 
ment, we  will  inquire  wherein  it  consists  to  be  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  divine  Trinity.     The  Lord  on  his  part  receives  the  person, 
who  is  baptized,  into  covenant,   and  promises,   grants,  and  seals  to 
him  ail  that  grace,  which  we  have  mentioned.     This  is  taught  in  a 
most  emphatical  and  clear  manner  in  the  second  part  of  our  form  of 
baptism,  where  it  saith,  **  When  we  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  God  the  Father  witnesseth  and  sealeth  unto  us,  that  he  doth 
make  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  us,"  &c.  When  the  Lord 
established   his  covenant  with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  he  promised 
that  he  would  be  a  God  to  him,   and  to  his  seed,  and  he  sealed  this 
to  him   by  circumcision,   Gen.  xvii.  1  — 12.     Peter  having   respect 
to  this,  saith,  "Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  for  the  promise  is  unto  you,  and  to  your 
ehiichvn,  and  to  all  that  arc  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
God  shall  call,"  Acts  ii   38,  39.     But  when  the  Lord  brings  the  per- 
son, who  is  baptized,  in  this  manner,  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant^ 
he  inclines  him  to  assent  to  the  covenant,  and  to  "  yield  himself  to 
the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xxx.  8.     He  doth  this,   when  he  suffers   him- 
self to  be  baptized  in   the  name   of  the   Trinity,  by  which  he  sur- 
renders himself  to  the  Lord,  in  such  a  solemn  sacrament,  to  be  his, 
Cl  and  saith,  yea,  subscribes  with  his  land,  1  am  the  Lord's,  and  calls 
himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,"  that  he   may  join  himself 
to  the  people  of  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xliv.  5.     That  this  is  done  in  bap- 
tism is   intimated  by  Paul,    1  Cor.  i.  13.  "  Were  ye  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Paul  ?  that  is,  did  ye  declare  in  baptism  that   ye  should  be= 
long  to  Paul  ?  Yea,  the  person  who  is  baptized   obligeth    himself  in, 
and  by  this  ceremony  of  baptism,  to  cleave  to  the  Triune  God  alone, 
to  trust  in  him,  and  love  him,  to  seek,  salvation  in  him  alone,  to  serve 
him  alone,  and  to  oppose  whatsoever  opposcth  him.     The  Lord  re- 
quirts  all  this  of  the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with  him,  and 
the  person,  who  enters  into  covenant  with   the  Lord,   consents  to  it 
with  a  perfect  heart.  He  "  avouches  the  Lord  to  be  his  God,  and  the 
Lord  avouches  him   to  be  his  peculiar  property,   and  that  he  shall 
keep  ail  his  commandments,"  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18.   This  he  confirms 
by  this  sacrament,  as  by  an  oath,  "  swearing,  and  purposing  to  per- 


44      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTiSivi 

form  his  oath,  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous  judgments,"  at 
David  acted,  Psalm  cxix  106.  And  thus  "  he  calls  upon  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  in  accepting  and  confirming  the  covenant,  when  "  he 
suffers  himself  lo  be  baptized,"  with  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16.  With  this 
agrees  another  passage,  which  the  instructor  cites  from  Mark  xvi. 
16,  where  the  Saviour  saith,  "  He  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized, 
shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  We 
enter  by  faitu  into  the  covenant,  which  promiseth  the  washing  away 
of  sins  ;  the  Lord  confirms  these  promises  of  his  by  the  seal  of  bap- 
tism, and  the  believer  receiving  this  seal,  protests  that  he  will  con- 
duct himself  worthily  of  the  Lord,  in  consequence  of  the  promises 
and  the  sealing  of  them  ;  to  which  then  the  promise  of  salvation  is 
annexed  :  not  that  baptism  effects  salvation  by  itself,  and  is  there- 
fore absolutely  necessary,  as  the  Papists  teach  ;  but  we  obtain  salva- 
tion by  faith,  which  embraceth  Christ  the  Saviour  and  Mediator  of 
the  covenant,  and  baptism  is  the  seal  of  it.  Therefore  the  passage, 
Mark  xvi.  16.  doth  not  threaten  the  unbaptized  with  damnation,  but 
the  unbelieving,  who  despise  Christ,  and  thus  also  his  institution  of 
baptism,  like  the  Pharisees,  Luke  vii   30. 

The  instructor  proceeds  and  says,  "  This  promise  is  also  repeated, 
where  the  scripture  calls  baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and 
the  washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  Paul  calls  bap  ism,  "  the  washing 
of  regeneration,  i'itus  iii.  5,  and  Ananias  calls  baptism,  "the  wash- 
ing away  of  sins,"  Acts  xxii.  15.  Waterbaptism  is  so  called,  not 
because  it  regenerates  a  person,  and  washes  away  his  sins,  as  the 
Papists  erroneously  conceive  here,  which  we  will  show  upon  the. 
twenty  seventh  Lord's  day  ;  but  because  it  is  a  seal  of  regeneration, 
and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  by  virtue  of  the  divine  promise,  that 
the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  is  as  truly  regenerated,  and  cleansed 
from  his  sins  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  as  he  is  washed  with 
water.  And  so  baptism  is  called  the  washing  away  of  sins  by  a 
"sacramental  phraseology,  which  ascribes  the  properties  of  the  thing 
signified  to  the  sign-  That  outward  baptism  doth  not  effect  regen- 
eration, and  the  washing  away  of  sins  this  the  apostle  of  the  cir- 
cumcision teacheth  us,  when  he  saith,  I  Peter  iii.  21.  "  The  like 
figure  whercunto,  even  baptism,  doth  also  now  save  us,  (not  the  put- 
ting away  of  the  filth  cf  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  con- 
science toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  denies 
therefore  that  outwaul  waterbaptism  saves:  but  what  is  the  answer 
of  a  good  conscience  toward  God  ?  A  good  conscience  is  that  which 
js  reconciled  and  pacified  by  the  bluod  and  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
and  which  also  exerciselh   itself  to  a   holiness  that  is  acceptable  to 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  69— 71.  45 

God.  See  Heb.  ix.  14.  x.  2,  22.  1  Peter  iii.  26.  By  the  question, 
cfierotcma  of  this  good  conscience  some  understand  a  question  asked 
in  consequence  of  another  persons  question,  or  the  condition  which 
God  proposeth  to  the  person,  who  is  baptized,  in  which  he  asks, 
whether,  lie  will  maintain  a  good  conscience  toward  God ;  and  they 
say  that  God  asks  this  question,  when  the  person  who  is  baptized 
asks  whether  he  will  be  his  God  ;  or  they  understand  by  it  an 
answer,  or  promise  of  maintaining  a  good  conscience,  which  the 
person  who  is  baptized  makes  to  God. 

Although  this  is  a  learned  invention,  it  is  nevertheless  not  altogeth- 
impertinent  to  observe,  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  the  word 
eperotema.,  a  question,  by  a  question  asked  in  consequence  of  a  fore- 
going question,  or  by  a  condition,  answer  or  promise  ;  we  may  take 
it  for  a  simple  question,  by  which  the  good  conscience  asks  in  pray- 
er to  God  for  his  sealing  grace  ;  for  it  is  of  no  importance  here  in 
what  sense  the  word  efierotema  is  used  by  certain  writers,  and  how  in 
the  law  ;  but  how,  and  in  what  sense  the  holy  writers  use  it.  It 
is  certain  that  this  noun  substantive,  which  is  found  in  only  one 
passage  in  the  New  Testament,  is  derived  from  the  verb  eperolao. 
We  find  this  vern  fifty  and  nine  times  in  the  New  Testament ;  it  is 
translated  once  to  desire,  thrice  to  inquire,  and  fifty  and  five  times 
to  ask,  according  to  Trommius's  concordance.  And  doth  this  word 
ever  denote  a  question,  asked  in  consequence  of  another  person's 
question,  it  doth  not  proceed  from  the  nature  of  the  word,  as  being 
compounded  of  two  words,  but  because  the  connexion  of  the  forego- 
ing words  requires  it,  as  we  see  in  the  simple,  uncompounded  verb 
eroiao,  Matt.  xxi.  24,  25.  Luke  xx.  3.  4,  xxii.  67,  68.  But  in 
these  words  of  Peter  we  find  no  foregoing  question,  to  which  the 
question  in  the  text  should  refer.  Further,  we  cannot  easily  con- 
nect the  words,  "  a  good  conscience,"  with  the  words,  "  to  God  ;" 
but  we  can  easily  refer  the  word  '.'  question,"  to  the  words  "  to  God," 
and  so  the  good  conscience  of  the  believer,  who  is  baptized,  asks  in 
prayer,  Father,  wilt  thou  not  give  me  now  that  necessary  grace  which 
thou  hast  promised  ?  wilt  thou  not  wash  away  my  sins  ?  hast  thou 
not  been  satisfied  for  all  mine  iniquity,  and  hath  not  all  that  salvation 
been  purchased  for  me  \  didst  not  thou  thyself  declare  it,  when  thou 
raisedst  thy  Son,  my  Surety  from  the  dead,  when  thou  dischargedst 
him  from  his  prison,  when  thou  justifiedst  him  in  the  Spirit,  and  ga- 
vest  him  thus  an  acquittance,  witnessing  that  thou  wast  satisfied  ? 
hast  thou  not  now  assured  me  of  this,  and  sealed  it  to  me  by  bap- 
tism ?  This  agrees  also  exceedingly  well  with  the  words  of  Peterf 
when  he  calls  this  question  a  baptism  by  a  sacramental  phrase,  which 


4-6      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM- 

ascribes  the  name  of  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified  ;  and  this  bap« 
tism  saveth  us,  beoause  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God 
is  the  act  of  faith,  which  seeks  salvation  in  God  through  Christ, 
raised  from  the  dead. 

5.  Therefore  baptism  is  a  most  precious  and  holy  institution, 
given  by  God  to  his  church  ;  consequently  we  must  beware  that  wa 
do  not  profane  it,  with  respect  to  its  circumstances  of  persons,  time, 
or  place. 

I.  The  Papists,  who  make  a  great  ado    about  waterbaptism,  and 
seek  the  holiness  and  virtue  of  baptism  only  in   the  act  of  sprinkling 
•with  water,  as  though  that  washed  away  sins,  and  salvation  depei 
thereon;  think  that   a    woman,    yea,  that  any  other  person  hath   a 
right  to  administer  baptism  in  a  case  of  necessity  ;  but  this  is  a  pro- 
fanation of  baptism,  and  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord  ;  for   Christ 
committed  the  administration  of  baptism  only    to  the    ministers   of 
ihe  word,  when  he  said  to  his  apostles,  "  Teach  all  nations,  and  bap- 
tize them,"  Matt,  xviii.   19.     They  are  "  servants  of  Christ,  and  thus 
stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  1  Cor.  iv,  1.     Will  no  man  dare 
to  stamp  and  seal  any  thing  with  the  seal  of  the  prince,  unless  he  be 
commissioned  for  that  purpose,  and  shall  a  woman  then,  or  any  other 
human  being  presume  to  apply  the  seal   of  God  Ho  a  person,   who 
hath  entered  into  covenant  with  him  ?     Did  Zipparoh  venture  to  do 
this,  Exod.  iv.  24,  25,  26,  we  ought  not  to  imitate  her  in  that  action  ; 
for  she  did  not  do  it  agreeably  to  the  divine  command,  but  hastily,  and 
in  boisterous  anger.  God,  who  would  slay  Moses,  because  he  had  not 
circumcised   his  Son,   forbore  to  do  it,  because  his  son  was  circum- 
cised, but  not  on  account  of  the  circumstances  of  the  action,  for  they 
were  sinful,  because  the  woman  acted  with  so  little  deliberation,  and 
so  precipitately.     Moses,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  was  present :  but 
v/ill  the  Papists  permit  a  woman  to  baptize,  when  a  priest  is  at  hand  ? 
I  judge  not.     Baptism  was  however  not  so  restrained  to  the  apostles, 
that  the   ordinary  preachers  of  the  gospel  had  no  right  to  administer 
it,  and  therefore  they  also  baptized  :  surely  not  like  laymen,  as    the 
Papists  assert,  but  as  called  to  the  office  of  preachers.     We   see    it 
in  Philip  and  Ananias,  Acts.  viii.  12,  38.     ix.  10 — 18. 

The  Papists  are  not  only  guilty  of  presumption  in  permitting  any 
person  to  baptize,  but  they  are  also  guilty  of  profaneness  in  adminis- 
tering baptism  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  to  bells,  in  order  to 
consecrate  them,  that  they  may  lay  fctorms,  expel  the  devd  and  dia- 
bolical apparitions,  and  deliver  souls  out  of  purgatory.  To  what 
hath  the  Romish  whore  and  mother  of  whoredoms  and  of  abomina- 
tions not  apostatized  ?  Jesus  feath  not  taught  us  to  baptize  bells,  bu: 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—7!  if 

"rations,"  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  and  therefore  human  creatures;  but 
we  may  not  baptize  human  creatures  in  general,  they  must  first  "be 
taught  and  discipled,"  according  to  the  institution  of  Christ,  Matt, 
xxviii.  19.  and  they  must  consequently  have  entered  into  covenant 
with  God,  and  believe,  according  to  Mark  xvi.  15,  they  must  be 
abe  to  profess  their  faith,  like  the  Eunuch,  Acts  viii.  36,  37,  38,  and 
exercise  it  by  the  answer  of  a  good  consience  ;  for  baptism  is  a  seal 
of  the  covenant  When  Christ  saith  that  we  must  bapt'ze  all  nations, 
he  shows  that  baptism  is  not  a  privilege  of  any  one  nation  in  particu- 
lar as  circumcision  was  the  advantage  of  the  Jews  ;  The  New  Tes- 
tament should  introduce  all  rations  to  fellowship  with  God,  and  bap- 
tism, the  sacrament  of  the  New  Testament,  should  seal  them.  We 
shall  inquire  on  the  next  Lord's  day,  whether  we  may  baptize  chil- 
dren. 

2.  As  the  difference  of  places  hath  ceased  under  the  New  Testa- 
ment, therefore  baptism  is  also  not  confined  to  any  particular  place. 
The  ancients  sometimes  made  use  of  the  buiying-places  of  the 
Christians,  especially  of  the  martyrs  for  this  purpose,  to  which  some 
refer,  1  Cor.  xv.  29,  but  erroneously  ;  for  that  custom  had  not  ta- 
ken place  in  Paul's  time.  They  left  off  at  length  baptizing  on  the 
graves,  because  it  savoured  of  superstition.  John,  Christ,  the  apos- 
tles and  evangelists  baptized  wherever  it  was  convenient,  and  espe- 
cially where  they  preached  ;  but  the  church  being  at  length  reduced 
to  a  settled  condition,  it  was  judged  proper  to  baptize  in  the  congre- 
gation of  the  people.  This  is  also  commendable,  inasmuch  as  bap» 
tism  must  be  joined  to  the  word,  and  is  an  incorporation  into  the 
church. 

3.  It  is  thus  also  with  respect  to  the  time  of  administering  bap- 
tism. Children  were  indeed  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day  under 
the  Old  Testament  ,  but  as  the  ceremonial  difference  of  timeris  now 
abolished,  we  are  not  therefore  bound  any  longer  to  a  particular  time 
for  administering  baptism.  We  cannot  approve  of  the  conduct  of 
the  ancients,  who,  from  an  erroneous  opinion,  that  baptism  washed 
away  all  past  sins,  deferred  it  until  the  end  of  their  lives,  and  bapti- 
zed persons  on  their  sickbeds,  neither  can  we  approve  of  their  set- 
ting apart  the  festivals  of  Easter,  and  Whitsuntide  for  this  purpose  ; 
for  this  agrees  not  with  the  spirituality  of  the  New  Testament 
church.  John  the  Baptist,  the  apostles  and  evangelists  baptized  per- 
sons as  soon  as  they  believed,  and  confessed  their  faith  :  otherwise 
the  most  proper  time  for  baptizing  is  when  the  congregation  is  as- 
sembled,  although  we  might  also  observe  ether  seasons  for  baptizing; 
in  times  of  persecution  and  other  inconveir^cle;. 


48      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM; 

After. baptism  hath  been  once  rightly  administered,  we  may   not 
repeat  it.  and  use  it  often  :  for  baptism  being  a  sacrament  of  regen- 
eration and  of  incorporation    into   the  church,  both  of  which  take 
take  place  only  once,  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  it,  as  it   is  to  re- 
peat the  Lord's  supper,  which  being  a  sacrament  of  nourishment  and 
of  confirmation,  must  therefore  be  often  received.     It  is  with  these 
saciaments,  as  it  was  with  the  ordinary  sacraments  of  the  Old   Tes- 
tament, circumcision  and  the  passover  ;  for  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of  circumcision,  which  was  administered  but   once,  and  the 
Lord's  supper  was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  the  passover,  which  used 
to  be  repeated  yearly  ;  but  when  the  essentials  of  baptism  have  not 
been  rightly    observed  by  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity,  and 
when  that  fundamental  article  of  the  faith  is  denied,  as  is  done  by 
the  Socinians,  then  we  must  look  upon  such  a  baptism   as   no  bap- 
tism, and  we  must  re-baptize  those  who  have  been  so  baptized,  when 
they  repent,  believe  in  the  Triune  God,  and  confess  him.     Whethe? 
the  Mcnnonites  do  ill,  when  they    re-baptize   those  whom  we  and 
others   have  baptiztd  in   their  youth,  this  belongs  to  the  controversy 
about  infantbnptism  :  but  of  that  we  will  speak  on  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

APPLICATION. 


What  think  ye  now,  hearers,  is  it  not  a  great  blessing,   that   the 

Lord  God  hath  given  baptism  to  his  church  foi-  a  sacrament  ?  surely 

yes.     That   the  Triune  God  should  receive  the   sinner  into  such  a. 

well  ordered  covenant,  and  unite   him  to  himself,  that  each  Person 

should  contribute  his  part  to  favour  him,  to  cleanse  and  wash  him  from 

his  sins  for  ever,  and  should   thus  set    lus  heart  upon   him  with  an 

admirable  love,  this  is  an  inconceivable  grace  :  but  it  surpasseth  even 

this,  that  he  should  join  to  this  grace  not  only  his  word,  but  also  this 

sacrament,  that  he  may  render  this  grace  clear  and  lively  to  him, 

yea,  even  assure   him  of  it,  and  seal  it  to  him,  that  he   may  render 

ins  joy  and  comfort  complete.     The  word  of  God  would  have  been 

u  Icient  to  confirm   the  believing  sinner,    as   it  is  infallible;  but 

•  God  willing  to  show  more  abundantly  to  the   heirs  of  promise  the 

immutability  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that   by  two 

immutable  things,   in   which  it  was  impossible   for  God  to  lie,   we* 

lit  have  strong  cosolation,"  Heb.   vi.    17,  18,     Behold,   in  this 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  49 

manner  doth  God  assist  the  unbelief  of  those  whom  he  favours,  and 
as  if  this  were  yet  100  little,  he  adds  to  his  word  and  oath  also  this 
pledge  and  seal,  that  their  souls  may  be  confiimed  Abraham  and 
Ids  seed  "  received  indeed  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  se;  1  of  the 
righteousness  of  faith,"  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paul,  Rom.  iv.  11, 
but  that  righteousness  was  not  yet  actually  procured  by  the  Surety, 
."  Christ  behooved  yet  to  suffer,  and  enter  into  his  glory"  for  that 
purpose.  Circumcision  sealed  to  them  indeed  that  he  would  suivly 
procure  this  righteousness,  and  that  they  were  already  justified  by 
its  reflex  virtue  i  hut  what  a  bloody  and  painful  seal  was  it  to  them  I 
but  baptism  seals  now  with  great  ease  to  the  baptized  believer  that 
the  everlasting  righteousness  is  procured,  and  that  he  is  ie.id.  buried, 
and  risen  with  Christ'  according  to  the  text.  AP.d  therefore  bapfiz  d 
believers  enjoy  now  a  much  better  condition  than  the  believing 
fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  enjoyed. 

"  Paul  asked  the  twelve  disciples  at  Ephesus,  who  had  been  bap- 
tized with  the  baptism  of  John,  whether  they  t  ad  received  the  Holy 
.Ghost?"  Acts  xix.  2.  He  spake  of  the  holy  Ghost,  who  was  com- 
municated in  those  time-,  to  believers  in  a  great  and  extraordinary 
measure.  Without  doubt  all  of  you  have  be  n  baptized  ;  but  may 
we  not  ask  you  also,  have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghqst  to  wash  a\viy 
your  sins  by  the  blood  of  Christ?  Surely  all  those  who  have  been 
outwardly  baptized  with  water,  have  not  been  baptized  with  the  Hily 
Ghost  and  with  fire.  Simon  the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized  but  kt  he 
had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter;  for  his  heart  was  not  right 
in  the  sight  of  God  ;  but  he  was  in  the  gfdl  of  bitterness,  and  in  the 
bond  of  iniquity,"  as  Peter  upbraided  him,  Acts  viii.  21,  23.  Are 
there  not  also  many  among  you,  who  have  never  partaken  of  the 
benefit  signified  by  baptism  ?  what  dost  thou  and  thou  think  ?  if  thou 
hadst  truly  entered  into  covenant  with  God,  and  if  thy  sins  were 
vvashen  away  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  wouldest  thou  then 
wallow  so  in  sin,  and  in  excess  of  riot  .?  vrouklest  thou  wholly 
forget  that  thou  wast  cleansed  from  thy  old  sins,  and  wouldest  thou 
not  keep  thy  garments  clean  ?  Suppose  that  thou  art  not  one  of  the 
vilest  sinners,  but  civil,  and  eminently  devout,  and  that  thou  hast  a 
zeal  for  God,  but  hast  not  yet  the  Spirit  of  regeneration,  nor  the  hid- 
den man  of  the  heart,  is  thy  baptism  then  indeed  aught  more  than 
."a  putting  away  of  the  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  which  doth  not  save," 
as  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  iii.  21.  «  Is  not  he  a  Jew,  who  is  only  one 
outwardly  and  in  the  flesh,  but  he  who  is  one  inwardly,"  as  Paul 
speaks,  R.om.  ii.  28,  29.  Is  he  then  truly  a  Christian,  who  hath  been 
Vol.  it.  G 


50      EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF- BAPTISM. 

only  outwardly  baptized  ?  I  deem  not :  it  will  also  appear  more  fully 
on  the  following  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  ask,  who  those  ate  then,  who  have  partaken  of  the  true 
baptism,  and  of  the  thing  signified  ?  we  say, 

1.  That  they  are  concerned  and  distressed  about  the  uncleanness 
of  their  sins.  God  the  Lord,  when  he  brings  them  into  his  cove- 
nant, gives  them  his  Spirit,  who  discovers  their  guilt,  and  loathsome 
fiithiness  to  them,  whereby  they  obtain  not  only  a  general  apprehen- 
sion, that  they  are  sinners,  as  well  as  others  ;  but  they  also  see  their 
sins,  this  and  that  sin  in  particular,  and  the  great  multitude  of  their 
sins  and  their  guilt,  and  unsightly  filthiness,  with  shame,  detestation 
and  a  loathing  of  themselves.  No  leper  can  be  so  affected  with  his 
contagious  uncleanness,  as  the  true  subjects  of  baptism  are  with 
their  sinfulness.  This  is  not  a  fiction  of  our  own  brain,  but  the  Lord 
himself  teacheth  it  us  in  his  word,  as  a  promise  of  his  covenant,  and 
as  the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  he  saith,  Kzck.  xxxvi.  25, 
31.  "  Then  will  I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be 
clean  ;  from  all  your  filthiness,  and  from  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse 
you.  Then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  evil  ways,  and  your  doings 
that  were  not  good,  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight, 
for  your  iniquities,  and  for  your  abominations."  Those  whom  John 
baptized  "  confessed  their  sins,"  Matt.  iii.  6.  .And  they  are  afiected 
thus,  not  only  when  they  are  first  convinced,  b'tt  seeing  a  great  defi- 
ciency of  sanctification  in  themselves,  they  are  also. afterwards  often 
seized  with  shame  and  an  abhorrence  of  themselves.  See  2  Chron. 
xxx.  15.  Job  xlii.  6.  Psalm  xxxviii  and  li.  Isaiah  vi.  5.  Rom.  vii. 

2.  If  there  were  nothing  more  than  this,  it  would  not  be  a  perfect 
evidence  of  that  baptism  which  saveth ;  but  since  by  the  sadness  of 
the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better,  there  ariseth  therefore 
presently  a  wonderful  desire  to  be  cleansed  :  sin  and  the  filth  of  it 
is  irksome  to  them  in  the  extreme,  and  therefore  they  have  an  ex- 
ceedingly vehement  desire  to  be  cleansed  from  it ;  the  soul  finds  no 
rest,  until  she  hath  b^en  purified  in  the  fountain  of  Christ's  blood  by 
his  Spirit :  therefore  she  betakes  herself  to  him,  unites  herself  to 
him,  applies  his  blood  and  sufferings  to  her,  and  cries  unto  him  with 
David,  Psalm  li.  2,  7.  "  Wash  me  thoroughly  from  mine  iniquity,  and 
cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be 
clean  ;  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  To  this  pur- 
pose also  is  the  saying  of  the  wise  man,  Prov.  xxii.  11.  "  He  that 
loveth  pureness  of  heart,  the  king  shall  be  his  friend." 

3.  lie  who  hath  truly  partaken  of  baptism,  as  a  seal  of  the  wash- 
ing away  of  hie  sins,  hath  also  actually  and  really  entered  into  coye* 


XXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  51 

nant  with  God  upon  his  c  II  and  invitation.     It  doth  not  suffice  him, 
that  his  parents  and  witnesses  have  dedicated  him  to  God,  but  he 
abides  also  by  what  they  transacted,  he  confirms  the  promise,  which 
they  made  for  him  to   the  Lord,   he  consents  cheerfully  lo  that  pre- 
cious covenant,  the  lustre  of  which  beams  on  him,  and  he  surrenders 
himself  in   it  to  the  Lord,  hot  only  that   he  may  have  him   for  his 
God,  and  may  obtai.i  of  him  the  benefits  of  the  covenant,  but  also  in 
order  to  serve  him,  and  to  do  his  vvill  in  all  things  heartily  and  with- 
out exception.     He  doth  this  with  a  willing  heart,    and    1  e  repeats 
this  action  often,  because  he  can  never  do  it  with  as  much  heartiness 
and  zeal  as  he  wishes.     That  those  who  are  sealed  by  God   do  this 
appears  from   the  religious  custom  of  God's  people,  who  renewed 
again  and  again  their  covenant  with  the  God  of  their  fathers.     See 
this  Exod.   xix.  2i.  Deut.   xxvi.  29.   2  Chron.   xv.   Neh.   ix  and  x- 
David  "  swore  therefore,  and  would  perform  it,  that  he  would  keep 
God's  righteous  judgments,"   Psalm  cxix.    106.     "  John   preached 
the  baptism  of  repentance,"   according  to  Mark  i.  4,  but  baptism  is 
unto  repentance,  because  by  entering  into  covenant   with   God  we 
turn  from  sin  to  God,  in  order  to  oblige  ourselves  to  serve  him,  and 
to  devote  ourselves  to  his  service. 

4.  The  person  who  partakes  of  the  grace  of  baptism,   is  also  ex- 
ceedingly desirous  of  an   assurance,  that  he   is  truly  a  favourite  of 
God.     \Ve  know  that  all  true  believers  do  not   alway  possess  an  as- 
surance of  their  good  condition  ;  but  they  are  nevertheless  habitually 
desirous  of  possessing  assurance  on  indisputable  grounds  :  therefore 
they  search  the  word  of  God,  that  they  may  learn  what  are  the  in- 
fallible evidences,  that  a  person  is  in  a  state  of  grace  :  it  is  also  their 
daily  work  to  observe  their  mind   and  conversation,   that  they  may 
perceive  whether  they  truly  correspond  with  that  word ;  they  look 
to  the  sacrament,  that  it  may  confirm  them.     All  this  affords  them 
at  times  indeed  a  certain  measure  of  light  and  enlargement,  but  no 
pe.fect  assurance,  until  the    Holy  Spirit  connects   his  working  and 
sealing  with  it,    that  he  may  enable  them  to  "know  the  things  that 
are  freely  given  them  of  God,  and  may  bear  witness  with  their  spirits, 
that  they  are  the  children  of  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,    1  Cor.  II,  12. 
Rom.  viii.  15.     Their  souls  are  set  upon  this,   <,hey  pray  to  him  for 
it,  and  cry  anxiously   with  David,  "  Say  unto  my  soul,   I  am  thy 
salvation,"  Psalm  xxxv.  3.     "Make  me   to  hear  joy  and   gladness, 
that  the  bones  which  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.     Restore  to  me 
the  joy  of  thy  salvation,  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  Spirit,"  Psalm 
li.  8,  12.     Others  concern  themselves  little  about  assurance,  they 


52       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

only  suppose  that  the:r  condition  is  good,  and  they  depend  entirely 
on  an  ungrounded  hope. 

Hearers,  examine  your  hearts  by  these  tokens,  and  see  whether 
they  can  be  found  in  you  ?  Are  ye  utter  strangers  to  them  ?  do  ye 
not  know  them,  and  do  ye  not  concern  yourselves  about  them  ?  know 
then  that  your  baptism  is  nothing  but  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filthi- 
ness  of  t:ie  flesh,  which  will  not  save  you  "  And  O  that  this  might 
once  awaken  you,  so  that  ye  might  see  your  sad  plight,  that  ye 
m;ght  bewail  it,  and  cry  out  with  the  leper,  "  Unclean,  unclean," 
l»ev.  xni.  45,  that,  as  Peter  admonished  Simon  after  his  baptism,  ye 
might  «  repent  of  your  wickedness  and  pray  God,  if  perhaps  the 
thoughts  ot  your  hearts  might  be  forgiven  you." 

but,  friends  of  God,  with  whom  these  things  are  found  in  truth, 
who  neither  dare  nor  may  deny  them,  conduct  worthily  of  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you.     And  therefore, 

1.  iieheve  now  that  all  this  great  grace  hath  been  sealed  to  you, 
that  ye  are  God's  covenant  people,  partakers  of  all  that  salvation, 
whici  the  Father-)  Son  and  Holy  Ghost  bestows  on  believers,  and 
that  ye  are  cleansed  from  your  sins  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Ye 
have  certain  evidences  of  it,  your  baptism  hath  assured  you  of  it,  and 
sealed  it  to  you,  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  instamped  his  mark  on  it ; 
ye  ought  not  then  ^o  often  to  reject  your  good  iiope  upon  every  con- 
ceit, and  indulge  unbelief.  Or  do  ye  imagine  that  the  baptism  which 
was  administered  to  you  in  your  childhood  is  of  too  long  a  standing, 
and  tiiat.  it  is  too  far  spent,  so  that  ye  cannot  improve  it  to  your  com- 
fort, or  that  u  hath  been  rendered  ineffectual,  and  that  ye  are  be- 
come as  it  were  unbaptized  through  your  sinful  backslidings,  and 
that  ye  obtained  grace  too  long  after  your  baptism,  to  derive  any 
support  from  it  now  ?  Have  ye  not  then  actually,  and  indeed  cleaved 
to  that  word  and  covenant,  in  which  your  parents  and  others  dedi- 
cated you  i  hath  not  the  Lord,  in  virtue  of  that  covenant  and  of  that 
baptism,  ke,>i  his  eye  on  you,  and,  in  consequence  of  it,  influenced 
your  souls,  and  brought  you  indeed  under  the  bond  of  the  covenant? 
How  beautifully  do  the  words  of  the  fo.m  of  baptism  in  the  third 
part  apply  here  !  (i  And  if  we  sometimes  through  Weakness  fall  into 
sin,  we  >nust  not  therefore  despair  of  God's  mercy,  nor  continue  in 
Bin,  since  baptism  is  a  seal,  and  undoubted  testimony,  that  we  have 
an  eternal  covenant  of  grace  with  Grd."  Let  the  soul  therefore  sup- 
port herself  by  looking  upon  herself  as  certified  and  sealed,  in  con- 
sequence of  her  baptism.  This  Paul  required  ;  f.r  when  he  had 
said  that  we  are  baptized  into  th<»  death  of  Christ,  buried  and  risen 
with  him,  he  adds,  "  Reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be   dead  indeed 


XXVI    LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  69— 71.  52 

unto  sin,   but  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ,"  Rom.  vi    11. 

2.  Thank  and  praise  the  Triune  God  for  iavouring  you  thus.  It 
is  a  great  grace  that  hath  been  bestowed  on  you,  as  we  have  shown 
before.  Ought  not  then  all  that  is  within  you  to  praise  and  magnify 
his  name  to  the  utmost  >"  "  Unto  him,"  saith  John,  Rev.  i  5,6, 
"  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,  to  him  be 
glory  and  dominion  for  ever  "  It  is  your  duty  to  devote  yourselves 
wholly  to  his  praise  and  to  his  service,  tlut  ye  may  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  his  great  k  ndness  :  ye  were  obliged  to  this  in  your 
baptism,  and  ye  have  surrendered  yourselves  for  this  purpose  hi  his 
covenant.  We  must  exhibit  this  once  more  to  you  from  our  form 
of  baptism,  which  saith  to  you,  "  Whereas  in  all  co-  enan;s  there  are 
conta  ned  two  parts;  therefore  are  we  by  God  through  baptitm,  ad- 
monished of,  and  obliged  unto  new  obedience,  namely,  that  we  cleave 
to  this  one  God,  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost ;  that  we  trust  in  him, 
and  1  >ve  him  with  all  our  hearts,  with  all  our  souls,  with  all  our 
mind,  and  with  all  our  strength  ,  that  we  forsake  the  world,  crucify 
our  old  nature,  and  walk  in  a  new  and  holy  life."  Will  ye  nt  t  hold 
to  this  obligation,  under  which  ye  were  brought  long  since  ?  Sorely 
ye  will :  let  it  then  appear  in  all  your  conversation.  "  The  woman, 
who  was  a  great  sinner,  loved  much,  because  her  sins,  which  were 
many,  v/ere  forgiven,"  Luke  vii.  47.  It  behooves  you  then  also  to 
show  the  power  of  a  great  1  ve  to  the  Lord  by  doing  all  things,  in 
order  to  serve  him  :  beware  especially  of  defiling  yourselves  airain 
with  that  filth,  from  which  ye  have  been  washen.  Would  ye  bdthe 
and  plunge  yourselves  in  thai  sink,  which  overflowed  the  Son  of  God 
to  his bitiei  sorrow  ?  It  was  necessary  that  Jesus  should  be  "  bap'izjd" 
with  blood,  that  he  might  baptize  you  with  water  and  with  his  Spirit," 
and  ''  how  was  he  straitened',  till  it  was  accomplished  ?"  Luke  xii.  50. 
Would  ye  then  s?ek  your  pleasure  therein,  and  afflict  him  witJi  new 
sorrows  ?  or  <l  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  ( od 
forbid  :  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  herein  ? 
Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  bapiizeci  in  o  Jesus,  were 
baptized  into  his  death  r"  Jcc.  See  Rom.  vi.  1—6.  "  having  there- 
fore these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselw.-  fpdm  all 
fiithiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  tear  of 
God,"  according  to  2  C  or.  vii.  1. 

3.  Make  now  a  profitable  use  of  baptism,  in  order  to  obtain,  ac- 
cording to  that  seal  of  the  covenant,  all  iealed  grace  of  the  Lord,  t  :e 
God  of  the  covenant.  Have  ye  defiled  and  poliuted  yoursehes  with 
ein,  there  is  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii. 


54       EXPLANATION  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  BAPTISM. 

I,  Have  ye  need  of  strength  for  your  duty,  there  is  "  help  laid  upon 
one  who  is  mighty,"  Psalm  lxxxix.  19.  Doth  your  soul  desire 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification  and  redemption,  your  Surety  is 
made  all  this  to  you  of  God,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  Do  ye  seek  any  divine 
*•  grace,  love  and  communion,"  the  Triune  God  hath  undertaken  to 
bestow  it  upon  you,  2  Cor.  xiii.  13.  Let  your  souls  seek  it  only  of 
him.  urging  him  and  pleading  upon  the  ground  of  the  unchangeable 
and  sealed  covenant,  established  in  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ,  In  this  manner  must  we  often  conduct  with  the  answer  of  a 
good  conscience  toward  God ;  for  this  is  the  baptism  that  saveth, 
1  Peter  iiU  21. 

4.  But  consider  also  that  baptism  connects  you  with  your  fellow- 
chrislian,  who  is  baptized  as  well  as  ye  are  :  '*  We  are  all  baptized 
by  one  Spirit  into  one  body?"  as  Paul  saith,  1  Cor.  xii.  13.  Let 
therefore  a  strict  union  with  one  another  be  discerned  among  you, 
being  all  of  one  heart,  and  one  soul  in  your  apprehensions,  in  grace, 
peace  and  love  :  this  the  same  apostle  requireth  of  you,  when  be 
saith,  Eph.  iv.  3 — 6.  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace.  There  is  one  body,  and  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye 
are  called  in  one  hope  of  your  calling  ;  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  bap- 
tism ;  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  who  is  above  all,  and  through  ail, 
and  in  you  all." 

5.  Finally,  when  the  Lord  will  baptize  you  with  blood,  and  calls 
you  to  resist  unto  blood,  and  to  surrender  your  bodies  to  death  for 
his  name,  do  not  then  by  any  means  draw  back  ;  ye  must  submit 
willingly  to  be  "  baptized  with  the  baptism,  wherewith  Christ  was 
baptized,"  Mark  x.  31.  Would  ye  then  draw  back,  when  Jesus 
willingly  suffered  himself  to  be  baptized  for  you  ?  Yea,  do  we  not 
oblige  ourselves  by  baptism  to  !ay  down  cvpn  our  lives  for  the  Lord, 
when  he  requires  it  of  us  for  his  name  ?  How  can  we  otherwise  suf- 
fer ourselves  to  be  "  baptized  for  the  dead,"  according  to  I  Cor.  xv. 
29  ?  "  Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou  shait  suffer  :  behold  the 
devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  prison,  and  yo  shall  have  tribulation 
ten  days :  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  1  will  give  thee  a  crown 
of  life.  These  things  saith  the  first  and  the  last,  which  was  dead, 
and  is  alive"  to  the  church  of  Smyrna,  Rev.  ii.  8,  10. 

In  the  mean  while  ye  have  great  reason  to  rejoice,  that  ye  have 
been  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Behold  how  the  Ethiopian, 
and  the  jailer  rejoiced,  after  they  were  baptized,  Acts  viii.  39.  xvi. 
34.  So  much  the  more  because  the  Lord  will  cleanse  y.  u  perfectly, 
inconsequence  of  your  having  been  sealed  by  baptism,  "ihat  he- 
may  present  you  to  himself  a  glorious  church,   not  having  spot  or 


XXVI.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  69—71.  55 

wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  j  but  holy  and  without  blemish,"  Eph, 
v.  27.  His  name,  which  was  put  on  you  in  baptism,  shall  remain 
on  you,  and  beam  forth  with  far  greater  lustre  ;  for  "  ye  shall  see 
his  face,  and  his  name  shall  be  in  your  foreheads,"  according  to  Rev. 
xxii.  4.  How  will  ye  walk  in  state  before  his  face  in  glory,  clothed 
with  white  raiment,  like  priests,  kings  and  conquerors,  having  his 
name,  and  he  having  your  name  !  Hear  him  say  himself,  Rev.  iii. 
4,  5.  "  They  who  have  not  defiled  their  garments  shall  w»lk  with 
me  in  white,  for  they  are  worthy.  He  that  overcometh,  the  same 
shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not  blot  out  his  name 
out  of  the  book  of  life,  but  I  will  confess  hia  name  before  my  Father, 
and  before  his  angels/'  Amen. 


(   S6   ) 


ERROURS 


CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED 


XXVII.  LORDS  DAY. 


1  Peicr  hi.  21.  The  like  figure  whereunto,  even  baptism,  doth  now 
also  save  us,  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

Q.  72.  Is  then  the  external  baptism  with  water  the  washing  away  of 
sin  itself? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

Q.  73.  Why  then  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  "  the  washing  of 
regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of    ins  .?" 

A  God  speaks  net  thus  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  especially,  that  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may 
assure  us,  that  we  are  spintua'ly  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really,  as 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.

Q.  72.  Is  then  the  external  baptism  with  water  the  washing  away  of 
sin  itself? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  only,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

Q.  73.  Why  then  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  "  the  washing  of 
regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of    ins  .?" 

A  God  speaks  net  thus  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  especially,  that  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may 
assure  us,  that  we  are  spintua'ly  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really,  as 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.

Q.  73.  Why  then  doth  the  Holy  Ghost  call  baptism  "  the  washing  of 
regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of    ins  .?" 

A  God  speaks  net  thus  without  great  cause,  to  wit,  not  only 
thereby  to  teach  us,  that  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by 
water,  so  our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  especially,  that  by  this  divine  pledge  and  sign  he  may 
assure  us,  that  we  are  spintua'ly  cleansed  from  our  sins  as  really,  as 
we  are  externally  washed  with  water. 

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.

Q.  74.  Are  infants  also  to  be  baptized  ? 

A.  Yes,  for  since  they,  as  well  as  the  adult,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  and  church  of  God  ;  and  since  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  promised 


XXVII.  LORD'S  BAY.  Q.  72— 74.  Jff 

.to  them  no  less  than  to  the  adult  ;  they  must  therefore  by  baptism, 
as  a  sign  of  the  covenant,  oe  .lso  admitted  into  the  Christian  church; 
and  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels,  as  was  ('one  in 
the  oid  covenant  or  testa ment  by  circumcision,  instead  of  which, 
kaptism  is  instituted  in  the  new  covenant. 

M  rip 

JL   HINE  ears  shall  hear  a  voice  behind  thee,  saying,   This  is 
the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to  the  right  hand,  and  when  yc 
turn  to  the  left,"  saith  tiie  Lord  to  his  church,   Isaiah  xxx.  21.  God 
hath  given    to  man  his  law    and  his  word  to  be  a  right  rule  of   faith 
and    practice,    that    man  may   direct    his   goings  by  them  :  but  the 
heart  of  man  is  so  blinded  by  sin,  that  "  it  turneth  him  aside,  so  that 
he  cannot  deliver   his  soul,  nor  say,   Is  there  not   a  he    in  my  right 
hand  r"  Isaiah  xhv.  20.     Is  he   not  pleased  with   one  side,  he  turns 
to  the  other,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,   he  will  believe  and  do 
cither   too  much,    or  too  little  :  we   see  this  in  the  Jews,    one  while 
they  depend  altogether  upon  the   sacrifices,  as  though  they  satisfied 
the  Lord  with  them  for  their  guilt,   and  as  though  "  h«  ate  the  flesh 
of  buils,   and  'drink  the  blood  of  goats,"  Psalm   1.  13,  and  at  other 
times  they  thought  that   they  were  neither  necessary,    nor   useful  ; 
therefore  "  they  robbed  the  Lord  in  tithes  and  offerings,  and  sairi,  It 
is  vain  to  serve  God :  and  what  profit  is  it,  that  we  have  kept  his  or- 
dinance ?"  Mai.  iii.  8,  14.  The  Pharisees  did  hot  conduct  differently 
from  this,   when   they  were   exceedingly  zealous   and    superstitious 
with  respect   to  small  matters,   but  negligent   and  careless  of   great 
matters  :  "  They  paid  tithe  of  mint,  anise  and  cummin  ;  but  omit  ed 
the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  judgment,  mercy  and  faith,"  as  the 
Saviour   upbraids   them,   Matt,   xxi'i.    23.      Do  not  our  adversaries, 
hearers,  conduct  in  the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  doctrine  of 
baptism,  when  one   ascribes  too  much  to  baptism,    saying    that   the 
outward  water  washes  away  sin,    and  another  ascribes  too   little,  as 
though  it  had  no  manner  of  relation  to  sin,  and  were  no  more  than 
a  bare  sign  of  a  Christian  profession,  and  as  if  it  were  not  necessary 
to  baptize  the  children  of  the  covenant  people  of  God  ? 

Therefore  the  Lord,  desiring  that  his  words  should  be  profitable 
to  his  church,  "  who  walks  in  a  right  Way,"  causeth  her  to  "  hear 
the  word,  which  saith  to  her,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  therein," 
when  erroneous  persons  endeavour  to  turn  her  aside  "  to  the  right 
hand,  or  to  the  left."  And,  beloved,  is  not  this  scripture  fulfilled  to 
«lay  in  your  cars,"  when  the  instructor  proclaims  to  you,  according 
to  the  word  of  God,  that  onlv  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  washed 
Vob.  n.  H 


58         ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

away  bins,   and  that  we  ought  to  baptize  infants  ;  for  if  we  observe 
t  liddk  way,  we  will  not  turn  aside  cither  to  tne  right  hand,  or 

to  the  kit. 

it  appears  therefore,  that  there  are  two  particulars  with  respect  t« 
baptism  in  tins  Lord's  day,  which  r«  quire  our  exposition  : 

I.  1  he  efficacy  of  Waterbaptism,  Question  72,  73. 

II.  iiikniL  baptism,  Question  7*. 

1.  We  will  not  busy  ourselves  here  with  the  Socinians  and  Men- 
no:,  it*  s,  who  deny  that  the  sacrament  of  baptism  is  of  any  efficacy, 
and  fancy  that  baptism  is  only  a  bare  sign  of  Christianity,  «nd  that 
it  is  no  sea;,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  tne  sacraments,  which  become 
seals  by  the  word  of  promise;  but  we  wiii  attend  now  only  to  the 
Papis  s,  who  ascribe  too  great  an  efficacy  to  watci baptism,  and  say 
that  tue  outwar-d  washing  with  water  is  the  washing  away  of  sin: 
in  opposition  to  which  we  teach  that  "  only  the  blued  and  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jer>us  Christ  washeth  away  sins." 

In  outer  that  we  may  discuss  only  the  subject  of  the  controversy, 
and  may  not  eagage  in  a  mere  strife  about  words,  we  will  txhibit 
the  doctrine  of  ihe  Papists,  that  we  may  attack,  it  to  better  advantage. 
We  need  not  burthen  them  above  measure,  and  charge  then)  with 
teaching  that  the  water  in  baptism  is  changed  into  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  they  speak  concerning  the  signs  in  the  supper; 
no,  they  do  not  think  thus :  but  they  ascribe  to  the  sign  of  water, 
and  to  tne  outward  use  of  it,  even  to  the  work  itself,  without  any  act 
oi  faith,  a  power  to  wash  away  sin,  and  to  effect  regeneration,  and  to 
impress  an  indelible  maik  on  the  soul,  qualifying  her  for  the  service 
of  Jod,  and  render. ng  her  conformable  to  Christ  ;  whereby  then  the 
sins,  which  the  baptized  person  hath  before  baptism,  whether  original 
or  actual,  are  wholly  washen  away,  yea,  so  entirely,  that  nothing  re- 
maineth  in  him,  that  can  render  him  guilty,  and  that  therefore  un- 
baptiz.d  infants  are  not  saved,  but  are  sent  to  a  porch  of  hell,  where 
they  experience  neither  sorrow  nor  joy  ;  and  therefore  every  peison 
may  and  must  buptize  in  a  case  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  priest 
at  hand  ;  for  baptism  is,  according  to  them,  absolutely  necessary  , 
the  want  of  baptism  can  however  be  compensated  and  supplied  by 
the  sacrament  of  penance,  by  a  desire  to  be  baptized,  and  by  the 
b  ■:.>:ism  of  blood,  to  wit,  martyrdom.  In  this  manner  are  sins  before 
baptism  taken  away,  but  they  leave  sins  committed  after  baptism  to 
confirmation,  and  to  satisfying  in  their  own  persons  in  and  after 
this  life. 

But  the  Popish  doctors  do  not  explain   in  the  same  way  how  the 
water  v.  .         away  sins.     The  Dominicans   assert  that  there  is  an- 


•       .   ,         XXVII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  72—74.  59 

instrumental,  effectual  power  in  the  water  of  baptism,  to  produce  a 
good  disposition  in  the  soul,  which  effects  that  she  receives  grace. 
This  is  opposed  by  the  Franciscans,  who  think  that  there  is  no  such 
power  in  the  water,  but  that  God  hath  connected  grace  with  the 
water  of  baptism  by  his  promise,  in  such  a  manner,  that  all  who  are 
baptized  with  the  baptismal  water  obtain  the  grace  of  God,  and 
all  who  are  not  baptized  remain  without  that  grace.  But  this  opin- 
ion of  the  Franciscans  doth  not  prevail  so  generally  in  the  Romish 
church,  as  the  opinion  of  the  Dominicans  ;  for  the  opinion  of  the 
Franciscans  agrees  too  well  with  the  sentiments  of  the  Lutherans  to 
be  acceptable  ;  for  the  Lutherans  also  teach  that  the  water  in  bap- 
ti.\n  is,  as  it  were,  a  divine  hand  and  vehicle,  which  conveys  grace 
to  the  soul. 

In  opposition  to  this  we  teach  that  nothing  but  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  washes  away  sins,  and  that  the  water  hath  only  a 
power  to  signify  and  seal  that  grace  ;  that  the  unbaptizcd  children 
of  pei sens,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  may  possess  grace,  and 
when  they  die,  be  saved  ;  that  the  want  of  baptism  doth  not  damn 
a  person,  but  the  contempt  of  it ;  and  that  baptism  is  indeed  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  divine  institution  •  of  it,  but  not  because  it 
works  grace. 

He  who  hath  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith 
in  his  word,  will  indeed  perceive  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists 
cannot  consist  with  the  word  of  God,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform- 
ed church  doth.     For, 

1.  The  water  in  baptism  is  material,  lifeless  and  irrational,  and 
consequently  it  cannot  work  grace,  which  is  wrought  in  a  spiritual, 
lively  and  rational  manner,  in  the  spiritual.,  living  and  rational  soul; 
and  therefore  the  scripture  denies  that  the  water  in  baptism  works 
grace.  Observe  what  the  text  saith,  "  Baptism  saveth,  not  that 
which  is  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  John  the  Baptist, 
explaining  baptism,  saith,  tVlatt.  iii.  11,  "I  indeed  baptize  you  with 
water  unto  repentance  ;  but  he  that  cometh  after  me  shall  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  wiih  fire."  There  is  no  reason,  why 
washing  and  sprinkling  should  be  of  more  efficacy  now,  than  they 
were  under  the  Old  Testament,  when  they  were  also  sacramental 
signs,  yet  "  they  could  not  sanctify  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience} 
but  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Heb.  ix.  9, 
10,  13.  "  Was  it  impossible,  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
should  take  away  sins,"  as  the  same  apostle  speaks,  Heb.  x.  4,  it  is 
then  also  impossible  that  the  water  should  do  this.  The  Papists  think 
that  the  water  can  take  away  sins,  as  well  as  Peter's  shadow,  and 


50      ERR0UR5  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTES. 

Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons  could  remove  sicknesses  aijd  expei 
evil  spirits,  Acts  v.  IS,  16.  xix.  11,  12,  but  then  baptism  would  also 
work  such  an  unusual  miracle,  women  and  all  who  baptized  would 
work  miracles.  Did  that  shadow,  those  handkerchiefs,  and  aprons 
work  those  miracles  then  by  an  instrumental  power  ?  surely  those 
things  did  nothing,  but  God  alone,  immediately  by  those  things, 
upon  the  faith  and  prayers  of  Peter  and  Paul  :  let  the  Papists  prove 
to  us  that  Peter's  shadow,  and  Paul's  handkerchiefs  and  aprons 
wrought  grace  in  the  souls  of  those  persons,  and  we  will  see  whether 
it  will  help  them  at  all  to  prove  that  the  water  washes  away  sins. 

2.  The  washing  away  of  sins  is  effected  only  by  the  blood  and 
Spirit  of  Christ  We  must  believe  that  great  ambassadour  of  the 
cross.  Paul,  who  tells  us  this,  1  Cor.  vi.  11."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  i 
sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  Thus  he  teacheth  us  also,  Tit.  iii.  5.  Heb.  ix. 
14.  Peter  and  John  are  of  the  same  mind,  1  Peter,  i.  18,  19.  1  John 
i.  7.  Rev.  1,  5.  Do  we  not  therefore  deny  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles,  when  we  ascribe  the  washing  away  of  sins  to  the  water  ?  I 
conceive  that  we  do.  The  Papist  thinks  not,  because  he  will  con- 
nect the  blood  of  Christ  with  the  water  ;  this,  saith  he,  hath  merited 
that  such  a  great  power  should  accompany  the  water  of  baptism  : 
but  the  blood  of  Christ  doth  not  then  wash  away  sins,  as  the  apostles 
say,  but  the  water,  and  Christ  will  become  the  servant  of  the  water, 
and  will  have  suffered  so  much  for  that. 

3.  Whatever  baptism  doth  toward  the  washing  away  of  sins  is 
merely  of  a  sacramental  nature,  signifying  i.nd  sealing,  on  account  of 
the  word  of  institution  and  of  promise,  the  washing  away  of  sins  by 
the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is,  and  is  supposed  before  bap- 
tism. The  apostle  saith  that  "  \braham  received  the  si^n  of  circum- 
cision, a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which,"  (mark  well)  "  he 
had,  being  yet  uncircumcised,"  Rom.  iv.  1 1-  Peter  required  that  the 
Jews,  who  were  concerned,  should  "  repent,"  and  then  «  be  baptized, 
because  the  promise  was  to  them,"  Acts  ii.  38,  39.  Faith,  by  which 
we  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  was  required  of  the  Eunuch,  be- 
fore Philip  would  baptize  him,  Acts  viii.  36—38. 

4.  We  add  to  this,  that  some  persons  have  been  baptized,  who 
did  not  receive  grace  in  baptism,  as  we  may  see  in  Judas.  "  Simon 
the  sorcerer  was  also  baptized,  but  he  was,  and  continued  in  the  pall 
of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity,"  Acts  viii.  13,  23.  Water 
did  not  then  wash  away  his  sins.  Others  have  obtained  grace  with- 
out  baptism,  we  see  this  in  the  penitent  thief,  who  died  on  the  cross; 
Luke  xxiii.  42,  43,  with  which  therefore  also  the  opinion  that  unbar- 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  U 

Hzed  persons  cannot  be  saved,   and  that  baptism  is  also   absolutely 
necessaryi  falls  to  the  ground. 

5.  Would  we  have  more  ?  the  most  unmerciful  consequences  fol- 
low from  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  ;  for  they  deny  that  the  chil- 
dren of  persons  who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  if  they  die  unbapti- 
zed,  obtain  eternal  happiness,  although  they  are  partakers  ol  the 
promises  :  it  also  follows  from  their  doctrine,  that  the  efficacy  of 
baptism  doth  not  depend  upon  the  good  intention  of  the  person  who 
baptizeth,  which  the  Papists  nevertheless  teach,  or  otherwise  he  can 
render  the  virtue  of  the  water  inefficacious  ;  the  persons  who  are 
baptized  can  say  that  they  have  no  sins,  contrary  to  1  John  i.  8,  and 
they  need  not  therefore  humble  themselves  on  account  of  their  ori* 
ginai  sin,  with  David   Psalm  li.  5. 

Though  the  doctrine  of  the  Papists  is  so  absurd,  they  will  never- 
theless maintain  it,  and  they  imagine  that  they  are  able,  because  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  baptism  "  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
washing  away  of  sins."  Thus  speaks  the  instructor.  In  these 
words  he  hath  an  eye  to  Titus  iii.  5,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  hath  sa- 
ved us  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  They  quote  also  the  words  of  Ananias,  when  he 
was  about  to  baptize  Paul,  Acts  xxii.  16,  "Be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins."  But  who  will  say  that  he  speaks  there  of  water- 
baptism.  .  Baptism  doth  indeed  wash  away  sins,  because  the  blood 
and  Spirit  of  Christ  belong  to  it,  as  the  things  signified  by  it :  but 
water-baptism,  considered  in  itself,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  pres- 
ent controversy,  doth  not  wash  away  sin  ;  we  have  proved  this  from 
1  Peter  iii.  21.  And  although  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
calls  water-baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing 
away  of  sins,  the  popish  opinion  doth  not  however  follow  from 
those  phrases  ;  "  for  God  speaks  thus  not  without  great  cause,"  not 
in  order  to  teach  us  that  the  water  washes  away  sins,  but  to  teach 
us,  according  to  the  usual  sacramental  phraseology,  that  the  water 
in  baptism  is,  by  the  word  of  institution,  a  sign  of  the  washing  away 
of  sin  ;  for,  "  as  the  filth  of  the  body  is  purged  away  by  water,  so 
our  sins  are  removed  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  God 
the  Lord  teacheth  us  also  by  the  baptismal  water,  which  he  calls  the 
washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins,  on  account 
of  the  word  of  promise,  that  it  is  a  seal,  a  divine  pledge  and  sign, 
to  assure  us  that  we  are  spiritually  cleansed  from  our  sins,  as  really, 
as  we  are  externally  washed  with  water  "  And  thus  the  working 
and  efficacy  of  the  thing  signified  is,  with  great  propriety,  ascribed 


62        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

to  the  sign,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments,  agreeably  to 
what  we  have  taught  on  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  Day. 

The  Papists  insist  still  more  on  John  iii.  5,  where  our  Saviour 
saith,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Uod."  Our  adversaries  conclude  from 
this  passage  that  we  are  born  again  of  water  j  but  how  shall  we 
prove  that  the  Saviour  speaks  there  of  proper  water,  used  in  baptism  ? 
Will  any  one  conclude  that  Christ  baptizes  with  proper  fire,  because 
John  saith,  ivlatt.  iii.  11,"  He  thatcometh  after  me  shall  baptize  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire  ?"  No,  but  he  will  say  that  Jesus 
baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  fire  in  his  manner  of  ope- 
ration ;  why  then  should  we  not  say  on  John  iii.  5,  that  we  must  be 
born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  like  water  in  his  manner  of 
operation,  since  the  Holy  Ghost  is  often  likened  to  water  ?  And 
although  the  Son  of  God  did  speak  in  that  passage  of  the  baptismal 
water,  doth  that  oblige  us  to  say  that  the  baptismal  water  is  as  effec- 
tual in  working  regeneration,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ?  I  know  not 
that  any  man  would  dare  to  say  this ;  at  least  it  is  not  contained  in 
that  passage,  but  onl/  that  regeneration,  which  is  wrought  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  is  signified  and  sealed  in  Baptism,  is  necessary. 

In  this  manntr  do  the  Papists  turn  to  the  right  hand,  when  they 
superstitiously  ascribe  too  much  t4  Baptism  ;  but  the  Mennonites  and 
Socinians  turn  to  the  left,  when,  denying  original  sin,  they  ascribe 
too  little  to  baptism,  as  though  it  were  only  an  outward  sign  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  therefore  they  say  that  we  ought  not  to  baptize  any  chil- 
dren. Although  we  will  not  baptize  all  children,  as  those  of  Jews. 
Heathens,  Turks,  and  such  as  are  born  of  parents  who  have  been 
excommunicated  out  of  the  church,  we  must,  nevertiieless  bap- 
tize; the  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  covenant  with  God  ; 
'•Inch  we  prove,  not  from  the  tradition  of  the  church,  as  the  Papists 
would  do,  imagining,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  word  of  God,  that  we 
cannot  prove  infant-baptism  therefrom  ;  but  from  the  divine  word 
Uself,  which  affords  us  the  only  foundation  for  the  baptism  of  infants. 
The  instructor  produccth  seven  I  proofs  from  the  word. 

1.  He  saith  that  "children,  «  s  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the 
covenant  of  God."  That  this  is  so,  appears  herefrom,  that  God 
established  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  and  with  his  seed,  Gen.  xvii. 
7.  Peter  having  respect  to  this,  saith  that  "  the  promise  was  "  not 
only  to  the  parents,  but  also  "  to  their  children,"  Acts  ii.  33,  39. 
And  thus  children,  and  their  believing  parents  are  both  called  holy, 
I  Cor.  vii.  14.  And  so  children  must  be  baptized  ;  for  baptism  is  a 
rign  and  seal  of  the  covenant,  ai  id  therefore  children,  as  well  as  the 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74,  6£ 

elder  covenant  people,  were  to  be  circumcised  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, as  the  Lord  commanded  Abraham,  Gen.  xvii.  9 — 14.  Why 
thtrn  should  not  the  childt\  n  of  the  covenant  be  baptized  also  ?  Peter 
required  that  the  elder  covenant  people  should  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, because  the  promise  of  the  covenant  belonged  to  them  ;  the 
promise  of  tne  covenant  belongs  to  the  children  a  so,  according  to 
Ins  infallible  words:  therefore  they  ought  to  be  baptized  with  their 
parents. 

2.  •»  Children,  as  well  as  adults,  are  included  in  the  church  of 
God,"  saith  the  catechism.  1  his  is  true  ;  for  when  the  Lord  com- 
m  aids,  Joel  u.  16,  that  they  should  4i  gather  the  people,  and  sanctify 
the  congregation,"  he  reckons  among  the  congregation  not  only 
"  the  elders,  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,  but  also  the  children,  and 
those  who  suck  the  breasts.''  It  follows  from  this,  that  we  must 
bapt  ze  children,  who  belong  to  the  congregation  (or  church,)  be- 
cause baptism  is  a  sacrament  of,  and  for  incorporation  into  the 
church  :  for  when  the  three  theusand  were  baptized  on  the  feast  of 
Pentecost,  "  they  were  added  to  the  church,"  Acts  ii.  41. 

3.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  that  "  redemption  from  sin  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  and  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  author  of  faith,  is  prom- 
ised n>  less  to  children  than  to  adults."  Is  not  this  true?  the 
promise  belongs  to  them,  Acts  ii.  39.  It  deserves  our  consideration 
what  promise  is  meant.  Is  it  not  the  promise  of  the  covenant  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  ?  «  The  remission  of 
sins,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  saith  Peter,  Acts  ii.  38.  In 
order  to  confirm  the  promise  to  children,  Christ  called  them  to  him, 
and  ordered  that  they  should  be  brought  to  him.  he  said  that  "the 
kingdom  of  God  was  theirs,  he  embraced  them,  laid  his  hands  upon 
them,  and  blessed  them,"  Mark  x.  13—  16.  Ought  not  children  then' 
to  be  baptized  ?  may  we  not  say  here  also  from  Acts  x.  47.  "  Can 
any  man  forbid  water,  that  these  should  not  be  baptized,  who  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  we?" 

4.  It  is  further  added,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
must  be  distinguished  from  the  children  of  infidels."  Our  adver- 
saries allow  that  adult  believers  are  distinguished  from  infidels  by 
baptism,  as  a  sign  of  Christianity  :  but  is  there  not  also  a  difference 
between  the  children  of  believers,  and  of  infidels  ?  I  conceive  that 
there  is,  and  that  according  to  Paul,  who  saith  that  the  children  of 
infidels  are  unclean,  but  those  of  believers  holy,  I  Cor.  vii.  14.  Must 
they  not  now  be  distinguished,  as  well  as  the  adult,  from  the  children 
of  infidels  by  a  solemn  sign  ?  Was  not  this  done  under  the  Old 
Testament  by  circumcision  ?  Why  then  not  now  by  baptism  ? 


fri         ERROUR"  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REPUTED 

5.  This  proof  is  still  more  clear,  if  we  observe  with  the  instructoi 
that  '•  baptism   was  instituted  in  the  stead  of  circumcision*"     That 
this  is  certain,  appears  hence,    thai   circumcision,  the  sacrament  of 
children,  being  abolished,    i;  w;.s  necessary  that  another  sacrament 
should  come  in  the  stead  of  it,  otherwise  the  privileges  of  the  New 
Testament  would  be  less  than  those  oi  tne  Did  Testament.     Christ 
ruth  also  instituted  two  sacraments  in  the  stead  of  the  two  ordinary 
Sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  :  now  it  is  evident,  that  the  Lord's 
supper  hath    come    in  the  stead  of   die  pasSOVer,  of   ti;e   remains  of 
which   tue  supper  was  celebrated.     What  can  we   think  now  more 
readily,  ana  on  better  grounds,   than  thai  baptism  hath  come  in  the 
stead  of  circ  .meision  ?   Paul   teacheth  us  this  also,    Coll.  ii.  11,  12. 
**  Ve  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  made  without  hands,  io 
putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  fksh,  by  the  circumcision  of 
Christ:  buried  with  him  in  baptism)   wherein  ye  are  also  risen  with 
him."     The  Colossians  being  by  nature  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
converted  to  Christ,    had  not  been  circumcised.     The  false  apostle* 
tequired  that  the  converts   from  Gentilism  should   be  circumcised  : 
Paul    strenuously  opposing    this,    warns   the    converted    Collossians 
against  those  seducers,  that  they  might  not   suffer  themselves  to  be 
"spoiled  after  the  rtidiments  of  the  world,"  vis.  8.     The  rudiments 
of  the  world    are  the    law  of   ceremonies,    and  particularly  circum- 
cision,  by  which  they  were  obliged   to  keep  the  whole  law  of  cere- 
monies, Gal.  v.  3.     He  assigns    wo  reasons  of  this,  first,  that  they 
were  perfect  in  Christ,  and  therefore  had  no  need  of  those  rudiments. . 
vrs    9,  10.     The  other  reason  is,   that  they  were  pai  takers  of  the 
thing  signified    by   circumcision  :  the    circumcision   made   without 
hands,  vrs.  11.     if  they  asked,    Why  they  might   not  then   receive 
the  sign   of  circumcision,    since  they    had  the   thing  signified  ?  the 
apostle  informs  them,  that  they  had  received,   in  stead  of  that  si   n, 
the  sign  of   baptism,    which  signified  the    same   thing  with  circum- 
cision, tk  having  been  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,"  vrs.  12.    Prom 
winch  it  therefore  appears  very  clearly,  that  baptism  is  come  in  the 
stead  of   circumcision.     It  is  therefore   certain,    that  the  children  of 
persons  in  covenant  must  be   baptized,   since  the  children  of   those, 
who  wete  in  covenant  under  the  Old  Testament,  were  to  be  circum- 
cised     It  avails   nothing  against  this,    that  then  children   ought  t» 
be  baptized  just  on  the  eighth  day,  as  they  were  circumcised  on  that 
day  ;  for   this  w  is  a  circumstance  for   that  time,    which   determined 
in  many  respects  the  time  of  usiclcanncss  for  women  and   children, 
to  wit,  how  long  they  should  be  considered  as  unclean.    Neither  can 
it  he  •bjected  against  the  proof  for  infant  baptism  from  cireumcitnen, 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—71. 

that  circumcision  signified  only  the  inheritance  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
which  doth  not  belong  to  us ;  for  circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant,  that  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Abraham  and  «  f  his  seed,  of 
which  Canaan  was  a  special  pledge,  and  the  place  where  he  woul 
reveal  himself,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  See  Gen.  xviu  7 — 14.  And  so 
circumcision  was  according  to  Paul's  description  of  it,  Rom.  iv,  11, 
"  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  it  had  therefore 
the  same  signifying  and  sealing  virtue  that  baptism  hath. 
But  what  do  our  adversaries  object  against  infant-baptism  ? 

1.  Christ  hath  said,  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  l<  Teach  all  nations,  bap- 
tizing them."  We  must  first  teach  the  nations,  and  then  baptize 
them ;  we  cannot  teach  infants,  therefore  we  must  not  baptize  them, 
but  must  defer  their  baptism,  until  they  have  been  taught,  and  have 
made  a  confession  of  their  faith.  We  answer,  that  passage  relates 
to  adult  christianized  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  we  may  not  baptize, 
until  they  have  been  taught,  and  professed  their  faith,  in  order  to 
their  receiving  of  the  seal  of  it;  but  it  doth  not  follow  therefrom, 
that  we  may  not  baptize  any  children,  but  rather  that  we  ought  to 
baptize  them,  inasmuch  as  they  are  received  into  the  covenant  of 
God  with  their  parents,  who  enter  into  that  covenant,  when  they 
suffer  themselves  to  be  baptized,  as  we  have  seen  from  Gen.  xvii. 
7— .14.  Acts  ii,  38,  39, 

2.  Our  opponents  say  further,  that  there  is  no  command  to  bap- 
tize children.  But  shall  we  not  admit  women  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
because  that  is  no  where  expressly  ordered?  There  is  no  need  of 
any  command,  where  there  are  so  many  reasons.  We  are  com- 
manded to  baptize  persons  in  covenant  with  God'  Acts  ii.  38.  39. 
The  command  to  baptize  children  is  comprehended  in  the  command 
of  circumcision,  inasmuch  as  baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  cir- 
cumcision; and  there  ought  to  have  been  a  prohibition,  and  reasons 
ought  to  have  been  assigned,  why,  after  the  sacrament  of  children 
had  been  abolished,  children  might  not  now  have  a  sacrament. 

3.  They  say,  there  is  no  example,  that  the  apostles  baptized 
children.  But  have  all  things,  even  to  the  least  circumstance  been 
recorded  ?  see  John  xxi.  25.  When  whole  households  were  bap- 
tized, as  that  of  Lydia,  of  the  gaoler,  and  of  Stephanas,  Acts  xvi.  15, 
33.  1  Cor.  i.  1 6,  it  is  possible  that  there  were  also  children  baptized  ; 
and  why  need  we  seek  for  examples,  when  we  have  so  many 
reasons  ? 

4.  Moreover,  they  are  unwilling  that  children  should  be  baptized, 
because  they  do  not  understand  baptism.  But  we  must  not  baptize 
children,  because  they  understand  it,  as  the   aged  and  adult,  but  for 

Vol.  ii.  I 


bo         ERROLRS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

the  reasons,  which  we  have  assigned  before  from  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  it  is  enough,  that  the>'  are  by  their  incorporation  into  the  church 
brought  into  .a  condition  to  understand  it  afterwards,  as  also  their 
misery  and  deliverance,  which  they  do  not  understand  now  neither. 
The  children  under  the  Old  Testament  did  not  understand  circum- 
cision, and  it  was  nevertheless  necessary,  that  they  should  be  cir- 
cumcised. 

Before  we  dismiss  this  subject,  we  must  propose  and  resolve  two 
questions  :  the  fir&t  is,  whether  all  the  elect  children,  born  of  per- 
sons, who  are  in  covenant  with  God,  partake  virtually  of  the  first 
principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  before  their  baptism  ?  This  ques- 
tion relates  not  to  the  elect  children  of  heathens  and  others,  who 
are  not  in  covenant  with  God  ;  for  all  agree  that  they  are  in  their 
childhood  alienated  with  their  parents  from  the  life  of  God ;  but 
the  question  relates  to  the  elect  children  of  persons,  who  are  in  cove- 
nant with  God. 

There  are  some  eminently  learned  and  godly  men,  who  hold  the 
affirmative  of  this,  to  wit,  that  all  these  children  partake  virtually 
before  baptism  of  the  principle  and  seed  of  regeneration,  and  that 
this  seed  of  regeneratioivfemains  hidden  and  buried  in  many  a  long 
time  under  the  clods  of  youthful  and  fleshly  lasts,  until  it  springs  up, 
and  shows  itself  alive  by  an  actual  conversion.  The  foundation,  on 
which  these  worthy  men  build  their  opinion  is,  that  regeneration  is 
sealed  in  baptism,  and  must  therefore  exist  before  baptism.  To  this 
they  add  what  Paul  saith,  that  "  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
with  God  are  holy,"  1  Cor.  vii.  14,  and  that  "  God  had  separated  him 
from  Ins  mothers  womb,  and  called  him  by  his  grace,"  Gal.  i.  15. 
On  which  account  the  sponsors  are  required  in  the  form  of  baptism 
to  acknowledge,  "  that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  and  there- 
fore as  members  of  his  church  ought  to  be  baptized*"  And  if  these 
elect  children  have  not  this  privilege  above  the  elect  children  of  per- 
sons, who  are  alienated  from  the  covenant  of  God,  that  there  is  then 
no  difference  at  all  between  the  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with 
God,  and  of  heathens. 

In  order  to  express  our  thoughts  upon  this  subject,  we  must  say 
that  certainly  some  children  obtain  regeneration  from  their  birth  in 
a  mysterious,  manner.  If  we  will  no»  acknowh  A^g  this  of  Obadiah, 
Abab's  steward,  1  Kings  xviii.  12,  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  Jer.  i. 
5,  and  of  others,  who  exhibited  evidences  of  it  in  their  youth, 
it  is  nevertheless  undeniably  evident  in  John  the  Baptist,  "who 
was  filled  with  '.he  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Luke  i. 
15.  This  matter  is  also  not  impossible,  any  more,  than  it  ij 
impossible,  that  a  child  newly  born   should  have  a  virtual   ability  to 


JjLXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  67 

treason  and  to  sin,  and  should  assuredly  have  been  born  with  and  in 
the  image  of  God,   if  our  father  Adam  had  continued  to  stand  :  but 
we  cannot  believe  that  all  the  elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant 
are  regenerated  thus   before  baptism,  because  they  would  then  all  of 
them  in  their  youth,  and  as  they  grew  up  in  the  use  of  reason,  ex- 
hibit likewise  certain  evidences,  e  ach  of  them  acco'-dhig  to  his  capa- 
city,   that  they  possessed  a   good  principle,    as   well  as  they  exhibit 
evidences  of  their  rationality  and  of  sin.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Abij-th, 
the  child  of  Jeroboam,  1  Kings  xiv.  13,  and  with  Timothy,  2  Tim. 
jii.  15.     Whoever  toil!   read  the  examples  of  children   concerted  in 
their  eaily  life,  enlarged  and  reprinted  lately,  will  see  the  praises  of 
God  emphatically  puDlished  by  the  mouths  of  such  children.     Who 
can  persuade  himself,  that  a  person,   \  ho  possesseih   this  fust  prin- 
ciple of  regeneration  in  his  soul  from  his  youth,   should  not  exhibit 
the  least  evidence  of  it,  but  th*c  he  should  abandon  himself  to  every 
vicio;  s  piactice,  until  the  end  of  his  life,   and  that  that   S'jed  should 
then  first  shoot  forth  by  an  actual  conversion  ?  The  murderer  *  who 
was  converted   on  the   cross     was  a  child  of  Jewish   parents,  who 
were   in  covenant  with  God,  (for  they  who   filled  in   those   days  the 
land  of  Judea  with  insurrections  and  murders  were  Jews   who  would 
not  submit  to  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,)   who  now  can  believe  that 
this  man,  wno  had  lived  so  long  in  the   practice  of  horrible  enormi- 
ties, harboured  any  good  principle  in  his  mind  ?  We  must  say  here 
with  the   Saviour,   "  The   tree  is   known  by  his  fruit:  a  ■ ood  man, 
out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his   heart,  bi  ingeth   forth  good  things : 
and  an  evil  man,  out  ot  the  evil  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth 
evil  things,"  Malt.  xii.  33,  35. 

It  is  true,  that  baptism  supposeth  and  seakth  regeneration,  yet 
not  always  as  already  existing,  but  as  future,  and  that  the  baptized 
elect  children  of  persons  in  covenant  with  God,  will  surely  par  ake 
of  regeneration.  This  will  not  appear  so  strange  to  us,  if  we  con- 
sider that  the  sacraments  seal  not  only  piesent,but  also  many  future 
graces:  all  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  gi  ace  are  sealed  to  the 
covenant  people,  and  they  nevertheless  do  not  possess  all  these  bene- 
fits, at  the  time,  when  they  aie  sealed  ;  it  is  true  a  perfect  right  to 
all  those  benefits  is  sealed  unto  them,  but  they  do  not  therefore  pos- 
sess all  those  benefits  at  once  ;  thus  we  must  also  say  of  those  chil- 
dren, that  they  do  not  all  partake  of  regeneration,  when  they  are 
baptized,  but  that  baptism  sealeth  to  them,  that  they  have  a  right  to 

*  The  person  called  a  thief  in  the  English  ti£n&lstionf  is  called  a  murderer 
m  the  Dutch. 


68        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

it,  and  that  they  shall  obtain  it.  That  we  may  understand  this  properly 
we  must  know,  that  ;'Jod  receives  them  without  their  knowledge  into 
covenant  with  their  parents,  us  his  elect  and  redeemed  by  (  hrist  ; 
according  to  this  covenant  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  by 
the  Holy  Ghost^,  who  work?  faith,  i'  promised  to  them,  as  the  instruc- 
tor saith  :  and  thus  the  \  o.c1  acknowledges  them  for  his  children, 
as  he  calls  t'>em,  Ezeki  x\i.  0  21.  In  order  now  to  seal  this,  they 
are  baptized,  see  -cts  it.  38.  39,  and  obtain  afterward  regene- 
ration and  faith,  whereby  they  actually  enter  into  ihe  covenant;  and 
urge  and  plead  the  seal  with  tne  answer  of  a  good  conscience,  that 
they  may  obtain  of  God  all  the  grace  of  the  covenant.  See  the 
test. 

In  this  manner  "  are  the  children  also  holy,"  according  to  1  Cor. 
vii.  14,  i  ot  holy  in  feci;  as  if  the  first  principles  of  holiness  were  im- 
parled to  all  elei  '  ;hi)dren  of  persona  in  cov  mint  from  their  birth  : 
Paid  doth  not  in  end  tl  is,  anymore  than  he  doth  that  the  unbelieving 
hiisb  aid  is  sanctified  indeed  and  in  fact  by  the  believing  wife,  and  the 
unbelieving  wife  by  the  believing  husband  ;  but  the  matter  is  thus, 
that  the  children  of  a  marriage,  into  which  persons  enter  in  a  holy 
manner,  being  born  in  the  covenant,  are  also  reckoned  and  esteemed 
holy  therein  by  virtue  of  that  covenant,  which  piomiseth  them  the 
sanctification,  purchased  f  <r  them  by  the  Mediator  ;  for  "  he  is  made 
sancrification  "  to  .the  children  of  tha  covenant  also,  1  Cor.  i  30. 
An  I  so  those  "children  are  holy,"  as  elect  persons,  who  are  yet 
"  scattered  abtoad,  and  are  not  gathered  into  one  body,  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God,"  as  they  are  called.  John  xi.  ;->2.  From  this  we  may 
also  learn  in  what  manner  sponsors  are  required  to  acknowledge, 
that  the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ.  And  in  this  manner  "  was 
Paul  also  separated  from  his  mother's  womb,"  Gal.  i.  15.  lie  adds 
indeed,  "  and  called  by  his  grace,"  but  he  was  not  called  from  his 
mother's  womb,  for  he  was  not  then  yet  capable  of  being  called,  but 
afterwards,  when  "  God  revealedfhis  Son  in  him."  If  we  apprehend 
the  matter  thus,  sve  shall  see  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  elect  children  of  heathens,  and  of  the  believing  covenant  people  ; 
for  these  are  favoured  with  much  greater  privile  jea  than  those,  as 
they  are  admitted  from  their  infancy  into  the  covenant,  and  this  is 
sealed  to  them,  and  the  parents  are  greatly  encouraged  to  hope  for 
the  salvation  of  such  children,  and  those  children,  when  they  arrive 
to  yeats  of  discretion,  can  solicit  the  Lord  mi  the  scaled  covenant, 
like  David,  when  he  saith,  Psalm  xxii.  9,  10,  "thou  art  he  that 
took  me  out  of  the  womb  ;  thou  didst  make  me  hope,"  (or  didst 
render  me  secure)  when  I  was  upon   my   mother's  breasts.     I  was 


re- 
cast upon  thee  from  the  womb  :  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother's 
belly."     Yea,  the  Lord  blesses  to  them  the  me^ns  of  grace,  under 
which  they  are  born  and  brought  up,  and  "  teaches  them  from  thai? 
youth/'  Psalm  Ixxi.  17. 

The  other  question,  which  we  would  resolve,  is,  how  the  parents, 
and  the  witnesses  in  baptism  can  be  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that 
the  children  are  sanctified  in  Christ,  seeing  they  cannot  know  this 
with  respect  to  their  children,  and  the  elect  children,  who  either  do 
partake  of  the  principle  of  regeneration,  or  will  partake  of  it,  are  by 
much  the  fewest  in  number  in  the  church  :  for  "  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen,"  according  to  Matt.  xx.  16,  xxii.  14.  But 
it  is  not  asked  in  the  form,  whether  they  acknowledge  that  all,  or 
that  this  and  that  child  is  sanclified  in  Christ;  but  only  children  in 
general  are  spoken  of,  even  the  children  of  the  church,  who  arc  the 
elect  "  children,  whom  the  Lord  our  God  will  call,"  to  the  church, 
as  Peter  speaks,  Acts  ii.  39.  For  which  calling  the  parents  and 
witnesses  ought  to  prepare  the  child,  after  it  hath  arrived  to  years  of 
discretion,  to  which  they  are  also  obliged,  when  they  present  the 
child  for  baptism  ;  yea,  godly  parents  may  look  for  this  calling  with 
hope,  in  behalf  of  their  children,  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  God, 
made  with  them  and  their  seed,  if  it  be  not  for  this  child  in  particu- 
lar, nevertheless  for  their  generation  following  ;  and  therefore  'they 
can  present  a  claim  to  the  Lord,  and  solicit  him  for  their  children; 
upon  that  sealed  covenant. 


APPLICATION, 

Are  these  my  solutions  of  the  questions  proposed,  hearers,  not 
sufficiently  clear,  in  order  to  satisfy  your  minds,  ye  will  however  not 
approve  of  the  erroneous  opinion  cf  the  Papists  concerning  the  effi 
cacy  of  water-baptism,  and  of  the  Mennonites  concerning  infant-bap- 
tism,  but  condemn  it.  How  many  are  there  nevertheless  among  us, 
who,  whether  they  know  this,  or  not,  behave  not  otherwise  than  if 
they  had  never  heard  of  this  our  truth,  but  had  been  educated  among 
our  adversaries  !  For, 

1.  Do  not  many  conduct  toward  baptism,  like  the  Papists  ?  It  ap- 
pears plainly  ;  for  (a)  they  look  upon  baptism  to  be  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  their  children,  and  therefore  they  are  as  much,  yea,  more 
set  on  it  than  on  regeneration,  and  the  washing  away  of  sins ;  it 
proceeds  from  this  that  they  seek  baptism  for  the'"-  ch;!drcn  3t  incon- 


70        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISiM  REFUTED. 

vantent  seasons  ;  doth  the  child  die  before  it  can  be  baptized,  they 
are  as  much  disturbed,  as  if  it  could  not  now  be  saved.  And  mark  well, 
do  ye  make  so  much  ado,  and  are  ye  so  much  concerned  about  the 
misery  of  your  child  to  wit,  that  "  it  is  a  child  of  wrath  by  nature, 
even  as  others,"  as  the  apostle  speaks  ?  Eph.  ii.  3.  Have  ye  as 
great  a  desire  that  your  child  should  be  regenerated,  that  its  sins 
should  be  wasiien  away,  that  it  should  be  justified  and  sanctified,  as 
that  it  should  be  baptized  ?  How  few  understand,  and  heartily  seek 
the  thing  signified  by  baptism,  when  in  the  mean  time  they  dote 
upon,  and  remember  only  the  outward  sign  !  It  is  still  more  evi- 
dent that  Popish  principles  possess  the  heart,  (b)  because  they  are 
easy  and  unconcerned,  when  their  child  is  only  baptized,  they  think 
it  is  now  well,  as  if  the  child  had  now  no  more  sin,  and  were  in  a 
stale  of  grace;  as  if  baptism  had,  by  the  mere  act,  as  the  rapists 
speak,  washen  away  sins,  while  they  do  not  show  the  least  real  con- 
cern with  respect  to  the  baptism  of  their  child  ;  for  did  ye,  before 
your  child  was  baptized,  ever  retire  in  secret  to  supplicate  the  Eord 
for  your  child  ?  Did  ye  surrender  your  child  in  baptism,  in  cove- 
nant to  the  Lord  ?  And  did  ye  after  baptism  earnestly  and  frequently 
beseech  him  to  be  favourable  to  it,  in  consequence  of  the  sealed  cov- 
enant ?  Many  have  no  knowledge  of  this,  it  is  a  strange  thing  to 
them,  they  never  saw  nor  observed  it  in  others  ;  yea,  they  would 
consider  such  earnestness,  and  bowing  of  their  knees,  as  savouring  of 
Popery  and  as  not  beseeming  Reformed  Christians.  But  what  ad- 
vantage doth  your  child  derive  from  such  a  careless,  and  mere  bodily 
procuring  of  it  to  be  baptized  ?  Can  such  an  outward  baptism  save 
your  child  ?  It  is  no  more  than  "  a  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the 
flesh,"  according  to  1  Peter  iii.  21. 

2.  Others  see  no  more  in  baptism  than  the  Socinians  and  Mennon- 
ites :  for  some  look  upon  it  only  as  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  custom, 
a  mere  badge  of  Christianity,  and  a  solemn  way  of  giving  a  child 
its  name  :  they  would  never  have  procured  their  children  to  be  bap- 
tized, if  they  had  not  seen  others  do  it,  and  if  it  did  not  look  well.  Is 
not  this  true  ?  for  if  they  saw  aught  more  in  baptism,  would  they  not 
choose  better  witnesses,  than  they  often  do?  they  do  not  choose  wise 
and  godly  persons,  .who  arc  of  a  strict  conversation,  and  are  able, 
and  heartily  willing  to  discharge  their  duty  toward  the  children  for 
whom  they  solemnly  obligate  themselves ;  but  they  only  consider 
whether  they  be  relations,  and  whether  they  be  able  and  liberal 
enough  to  bestow  a  handsome  christening  present.  And  how  do 
they  array  the  child,  when  they  are  about  to  present  it  for  baptism  ? 
do  they  clothe  it  in  a  decent  and  modest  manner  ?  No,  but  as  if  they 


XXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  71 

were  about  to  dedicate  it  to,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  world,  they 
deck  it  in  a  fantastic  manner,  and  appear  with  it  attired  so  in  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  and  of  the  church,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  divine  name 
and  of  baptism.  Friends,  if  ye  knew  what  baptism  was,  and  wherein 
it  consisted  to  separate  your  child  from  the  world,  to  dedicate  it  in 
covenant  to  God,  and  procure  it  to  be  sealed,  would  ye  appear  in 
such  a  manner  in  the  presence  of  God  ?  Surely  ye  would  not  A 
solemn  awe  for  God,  for  the  church,  and  for  the  divine  mysteries 
wouid  restrain  you  from  such  vanity.  Yea,  do  not  men  show  that, 
with  the  Mennonites,  they  believe  that  baptism  is  not  very  necessary 
for  children,  when  they  so  easily  defer  the  baptism  of  their  children 
without  a  reason,  at  least  without  weighty  reasons.  The  witnesses, 
the  fine  clothes,  are  not  at  hand,  or  the  place  of  baptism  is  not  near, 
it  can  be  done  at  some  other  opportunity;  the  child,  they  think, 
will  not  be  damned,  though  it  should  not  be  baptized  :  but  is  it  not 
an  institution  of  God,  to  which  he  cbligeth  us  ?  and  if  your  child 
should  die  without  baptism  through  your  neglect,  would  it  not  grieve 
you,  and  cause  you  to  think  that  in  this  respect  ye  had  rejected  the 
institution  and  counsel  of  God,  that  ye  had  not  procured  your  child 
to  br;  baptized.     See  Luke  viii    30. 

3.  ''And  how  do  the  most  of  you  conduct  with  respect  to  their  own 
and  their  children's  baptism  ?  Observe  only  the  behaviour  of  our 
baptized  Christians.  Ye  who  are  baptized,  do  ye  ever  think  of  your 
baptism,  what  it  signifies,  and  why  it  was  administered  to  you  ?  have 
ye  indeed  endeavoured  to  undet stand  that  this  baptism  teacheth  you 
your  sinful  impurity,  and  your  damnable  condition  ?  that  the  Triune 
God  hath  received  you  into  covenant,  and  sealed  all  his  grace  to  you, 
and  that  your  sponsors  dedicated  you  to  God  for  this  purpose  ?  that 
ye  solemnly  engaged  in  baptism  to  forsake  and  deny  all  besides  the 
Triune  God,  and  to  love  and  serve  him  alone  and  wholly  ?  Have  ye 
cleaved  to  this  engagement,  which  was  made  for  you,  and  actually 
yielded  yourselves  up  for  this  purpose^  "  saying,  and  subscribing, 
I  am  the  Lord's  ?"  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  Alas,  how  few  understand  and 
regard  tltis  !  Because  they  are  baptized,  they  are  easy  and  uncon- 
cerned :  they  live  like  unbuptized  heathens :  "  they  have  forgotten 
that  they  were  purged  from  their  old  sins :  they  had  escaped  the 
pollutions  of  the  world"  outwardly  and  sacramentally ;  "  but  they 
intangle  themselves  in  them  again :  they  suffer  themselves  to  be 
overcome  ;  and  so  their  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  beginning,"  as 
Peter  speaks,  2  Peter  i.  9.  ii.  20.  What  do  ye,  who  conduct  in  this 
manner,  but  break  the  covenant  of  God,  and  testify  openly  that  ye 
will  not  abide  6y  the  er.ga  ;nesses 


72      ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

made  for  you  with  the  Lord  ?  what  think  ye,  will  not  the  Lord  re- 
venge this  breach  of  the   covenant,  and  bring  all  those  curses  of  the 
covenant  upon  the  unfaithful  breakers  of  it?  certainly  he  will,  read 
it  yourselves.  Lev.  xxvi.    25 — 39.   Jer.  xi.  1 — S.     And  to  add  this 
also,    parents  and  others,   who  have  presented  children  for  baptism, 
did  ye  indeed  understand  what  was  proposed  to  you  in  baptism,  and 
asked  you  ?  Have  ye  also   kept  your  promises  by  instructing   your 
children     and  by  causing  them  to  be  instructed  ?  what  should  many 
do.'  they  did    not  so    much    as   know   what   they    did,   when  they 
presented    their   child  for  baptism,   and    nodded    to   the    questions 
th  it    were   proposed    to    them.     If   ye  had  done  your  duty,    would 
your  children  be  so  ignorant,   irreligious,    stubborn,   worldly-minded, 
and  disorderly,    as  they  are  ?  surely  something  of  Christianity  and 
©f  morality  uonld  appear  in  them  ?  but  we  do  not  now  hear  the  lan- 
guage of  Canaan  from  the  mouths  of  your  children,  but  the  language 
of  Ashdod,  Sec  Neh.  xiii.  23,  24.     The  children  manifest  abroad  in 
what  manner,   and   by  what   kind  of  parents  they  are    educated  at 
home.     What  will  become  of  the  next  generation  ?  by  what  kind  of 
persons  will  our  church   and   state   be    yet  governed  ?  Parents  and 
witnesses,  how  will  the  children,   whose  souls  ye  have  neglected  and 
soused  in  this  manner,   rise  up  against   you  to   your  sorrow  in   that 
great  day,  and  accuse  you  on  account  of  your  conduct  toward  them  ! 
How  will  the   Lord  Cod    accuse  you  on   account   of  your  conduct 
toward    him   !    that    ye    have     snatched  his    children,    whom    ye 
had  born   and  dedicated  to   him  from  him,    and  offered  them  up  to 
the  world  !  ye  may  see  it,   Ezek.    xvi.  20,  31.     "  If  an  ox,  that  was 
wont  to  push,   had  gored  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  it  should  be  recom- 
pensed not  only  on  the  ox,  but  also  on  his  owner,  if  he  knew  before 
that  he  was  wont  to  push,"  Exod.  xxi.  29,  30,  31.   How  much  more 
then  will  the  Lord  recompense  it  upon  the  paren's  and  witnesses, 
that  they  have  not  laboured,  as  much  as  they  were  able,  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  their  children  from  destruction  ?  Did  the  Lord  God  in- 
flict grievous  judgments  on  Eli,   who  was  otherwise  a  godly  person, 
on  his  house  and  on  all  Israel  on  account  of  his  carelessness  toward 
his  children,  1  Sam.  id.  11 — 14,   and  1  Sam.  iv.    10 — 22,  what  will 
rot  the  Lord    God   then   inflict    upon  those  who    are  ungodly  them- 
selves,  and  who  educate  their  children   in  an  ungodly  manner,  and 
for  hell! 

.!  that  each  one  of  you    would   impress   this  upon  his  mind, 
and  strive  to  amend  his  conduct  in  this  respect.     Apply  your  heart? 
rs,  to  these  admonitions  of  mine 


XXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  72—74.  73 

j.  Endeavour  to  understand  the  nature  of  baptism,  read  frequently 
ihe  form  of  baptism,  and  see  what  it  signifies,  and  to  what  it  obligeth 
you,  that  ye  may  thus  learn  what  use  ye  ought  to  make  ol  your 
baptism.  Can  ye  not  understand  it,  lament  that  ye  have  lived  so 
long  in  ignorance  of  this  important  matter,  to  so  great  a  disadvantage 
of  yourselves  and  of  your  children  ;  and  suffer  others  to  teach  you 
what  ye  do  not  know  yourselves,  and  nevertheless  ought  to  know  : 
"the  doctrine  of  baptisms  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  vi.  1,2.  And  if  ye  do  not  understand 
this,  how  will  ye  understand  other  and  higher  mysteries,  which  y« 
must  necessarily  understand. 

2.  Recover  from  your  imagination,  that  water-baptism  hath  been 
by  itself  of  any  advantage  to  you.  Your  imagination,  that  baptism 
hath  constituted  you  Christians,  renders  you  continually  careless,  and 
injures  your  souli;  therefore  know  that  "  the  baptism,  which  is  a 
putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  doth  not  save  you,"  but  that  it 
is  necessary  that  ye  should  be  born  again,  in  order  that  ye  may  be 
saved.  Hear  how  the  mouth  of  truth  confirms  this  by  a  double 
verily,  John  in.  3,  "Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  Except  a  man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  therefore  be 
earnestly  desirous  to  be  born  again. 

3.  Give  yourselves  yet  up  to  the  Lord  in  the  covenant,  in  which 
ye  were  surrendered  forthwith  after  your  birth  by  others  :  abide  by 
that  engagement  which  others  made  for  you,  and  renew  it  in  truth 
and  with  your  hearts,  "  saying  and  subscribing,  I  am  the  Lord's," 
as  it  was  foretold  of  the  people,  who  should  be  sprinkled,  Isaiah 
xliv.  5.  Will  ye  refuse,  and  obstinately  persist  in  your  shameful 
carelessness  and  sinfulness,  glory  not  then  any  longer  in  the  name 
of  Christian,  but  lay  it  aside,  come  to  the  pulpit,  and  declare  in  the 
presence  of  God  and  of  the  church,  before  whom  ye  were  solemnly 
baptized,  and  engaged  to  God,  that  ye  will  not  abide  by  that  cove- 
nant and  engagement,  which  your  parents  and  witnesses  made  for 
you,  and  upon  which  they  procured  you  to  be  baptized,  but  that  ye 
revoke  it.  And  it  will  then  appear,  "  whether  ye  belong  to  us,  or 
to  our  enemies."  But  would  ye  abhor  this,  abide  then  by  the  cove- 
nant made  and  sealed,  receive  all  grace  from  it,  and  conduct  your- 
selves worthily  of  it.  In  this  manner  do  we,  like  the  Jews,  cleave 
to  the  words,  which  others  speak  for  us  to  the  Lord,  in  making  a 
covenant,  and  u  we  enter  into  the  curse  and  into  the  oath,"  Neh.  x. 
29.  Thus  would  the  seal  of  baptism,  which  hath  been  so  often  pro- 
faned by  you,  be  yet  **  a  seal  and  undoubted  testimony  to  you,  that 

Vol.  ii.  K 


74        ERROURS  CONCERNING  BAPTISM  REFUTED. 

• ;  have  an  eternal  covenant  of  grace   with   God,"  as  the   form  of 
baptism  speaks. 

4.  Give  heed  and  observe,  when  baptism  is  administered.  We 
must  sot  then  hurry  out  of  the  church,  nor  suffer  our  eyes  to  wander. 
Something  divine  is  transacted,  a  child  is  surrendered  in  covenant 
to  God,  and  sealed  in  his  name  We  must  therefore  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  is  proposed  and  asked  by  the  servant  of  the  Lord  in 
liis  name  :  we  must  also  unite  in  hearty  prayer  with  the  congrega- 
tion :  think  then  that  ye  were  baptized  in  the  same  manner,  and  for 
what  end  the  Lord  obliged  himself  to  you,  and  ye  to  hira.  Ye  would 
then  renew  your  baptism  frequently,  and  obtain  new  grace,  and 
vigor,  so  that  your  "  hearts  would,  like  Jehoshaphat's,  be  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  2  Chron.  xvii.  6. 

5.  Be  much  and  heartily  exercised  about  the  baptism  of  your 
children.  Let  it  not  be  a  matter  of  indifference  -to  you  whom  ye 
select  to  be  witnesses  for  your  children  ;  but  seek  virtuous  and  devout 
persons,  who  know  what  they  do,  and  will  earnestly  study  the  spir- 
itual welfare  of  your  children.  Do  not  present  your  child  until  ye 
have  besought  the  Lord  for  it,  and  then  dedicate  it  to  the  Lord,  and 
give  it  up  to  him,  as  Hannah  gave  her  son  Samuel,  1  Sam.  i.  27, 
28.  Enter  sincerely  and  with  a  perfect  heart  into  your  engagement 
to  the  Lord  for  your  child  ;  but  fulfil  also  your  promises,  by  separa- 
ting your  child  from  the  world,  and  by  keeping  it  separated,  "  bring- 
ing it  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Thus  Paul 
admonishcth  you,  Eph.  vi.  4,  and  Solomon,  Prov.  xxii.  6,  and  thus 
the  saints  also  acted,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  David,  Prov.  iv. 
S,  4,  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  Timothy,  2  Tim.  i.  5,  iii.  15. 
Fathers,  are  not  your  children  your  own  flesh  and  blood  ?  Mothers, 
have  ye  not  borne  them  in  your  bowels?  do  ye  not  love  them  heart- 
ilv  ?  do  ye  not  design  all  that  ye  have  for  them  ?  is  not  the  least  evil 
that  befalls  them,  intolerable  to  you  ?  would  ye  then  bring  them  up 
for  hell,  and  not  for  heaven  ?  Ye  may  not  neglect  this  duty;  neither 
may  ye,  who  have  appeared  as  witnesses  for  this  or  that  child  ;  forye 
have  all  solemnly  obligated  yourselves  thereto. 

6.  Children,  who  are  so  far  advanced  that  ye  can  in  some  measure 
understand  the  divine  mysteries,  and  know  what  is  good  or  evil  for 
vou,  begin  in  your  early  life,  to  know  and  to  seek  the  Lord  :  "  Remem- 
ber your  Creator  in  the  days  of  your  youth,  before  the  evil  days  come, 
and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which  ye  shall  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them,"  as  Solomon  saith  to  you,  Eccl.  xii.  1.  So  Abijah,  the  son  of 
Jeroboam  acted,  Obadiah,  Ahab's  steward,  David,  Jeremiah,  John 
the  baptist,  Timothy,  end  others.     Nothing  can  be  more  pleasant  to 


— r 4.  7o 

children,  than  "to  bear  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  ia  their  youth  "  Lam. 
iii.  27".  Ye  will  surely  not  hasten  to  destruction  ?  Ye  are  obliged 
by  yoar  baptism  to  serve  the  Lord  ;  therefore  obey  your  parents  ; 
beware  of  youthful  Ius:s,  separate  yourselves  from  thoughtless 
children  ;  attend  upon  preaching  and  catechising,  and  assure  your- 
selves that  ye  never  will  repent  of  it. 

Thus  ye  might  with  David,  solicit  the  Lord  to  show  you  favouv 
in  your  afflictions,  and  in  your  old  age.  Read  Psalm  xxii.  10,  11. 
Ixxi.  17.  18.  We  should  thus,  agreeably  to  the  words  of  Paid, 
Eph.  iv.  13,  "Come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Son  of  G  kJ,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  sut- 
ure of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  that  we  might,  as  he  saith  farther,  1 
Cor.  xiii.  11,12,  "put  away  childish  things,  and  no  longer  see 
through  a  glass  darkly,  but  face  to  face  ;  and  no  longei  knowin  part, 
j\rt  even  as  we  aie  known.     Amen. 


(  76  ) 


THE 


NATURE  OF  THE 


LORD'S  SUPPER  EXPLAINED. 


XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


i  Cor.  xi.  23 — 56.  For  I  have  received  of  the  I  ord,  that  which  I 
also  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same  night  in 
which  i  e  was  betrayed,  took  bread:  and  when  he  had  given 
thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  eat  ;  this  is  my  body,  which  is 
broken  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the  same 
manner  he  also  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  saying,  this 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood:  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye 
dr.nk  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  he  come.