Q.  78.  Do  then  the  bread  and  wine  become  the  very  body  and  blood 
(if  Christ  ? 

A.  Not  at  all ;  but  as  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into 
fche  blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself,  being 
only  the  sign  and  confirmation  thereof  appointed  of  God  ;  so  the 
bread  in  the  Lord's  supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very  body  of 
Christ;  though  agreeable  to  the  nature  and  properties  of  sacraments 
it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus. 

Q.  79.  Why  then  doth  Christ  call  the  bread  his  body,  and  the  cuft 
his  blood,  or  the  new  covenant  in  his  blood  ;  and  Paul  K  the  communion 
cf  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  ?" 

A.  Christ  speaks  thus  not  without  great  reason,  not  only  thereby 
to  teach  us,  that  as  bread  and  wine  support  this  temporal  life,  so  his 
crucified  body  and  shed  blood  are  the  true  meat  and  drink,  wheieby 
our  souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life  ;  but  more  especially  by  these  visible 
signs  and  pledges  to  assure  us,  that  we  are  as  really  partakers  of  hie 
Vol.  if.  N 


98  TRANSUliSTANTiATION  CONFUTED. 

true  body  and  blood  (by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost)  as  we  re- 
ceive by  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  remembrance 
of  him  ;  and  that  all  his  sufferings  and  obedience  are  as  certainly 
ours,  as  if  we  had  in  our  own  persons  suffeied  and  made  satisfaction 
for  our  sins  to  God. 

«  HP 

JL  HE  natural  man  rcceiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God : 
for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him ;  neither  can  he  know  them,  be- 
cause they  are   spiritually  discerned  ;"  thus   speaks  Paul,    1  Cor.  ii. 
14.     The  natural  man  is  one  who  hath  no  more  than  what  he  hath 
received  by  his  natural  birth  ;  "  being  born  of  the  flesh,  he  is  flesh," 
John  iii.  6,  and  bt- ing  thus  without  the  Spirit,  '•  not  having  the  Spirit," 
Jude,  vrs    19.    And  therefore  he  cannot  know  the  spiritual  things  of 
God,  they  are  foolishness  to  him,   for  his  understanding  is  nnt  dis- 
posed so,  as  to  be  able  to  know  them,  and  it  is  incapable  of  such  knowl= 
edge.     The  Spirit  must  irradiate  his   understanding  with  the  light 
of  spiritual  things,  that  he  may  behold  them  in  their  proper  light,  if 
he  shall  receive  and  discern  them  :  "  God,  who  commanded  the  I  ght 
to  shine  out  of  darkness,  must  shine  in  his  heart,  to  give  the  light  oi 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  2 
Cor.  iv.  6.     For,  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle,  Eph.  iv.  18, 
"  his  understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,  and  through   the  hardness  of 
Bis  heart."  How  then  should  he  apprehend  divine  and  spiritual  things, 
and  not  reject  them  as  foolishness  5  Natural   men  have  often  mani- 
fested   this,    when    they    have    exalted    their  "  imaginations,  their 
thoughts,"  and  imaginary  "  heights  against  the   knowledge  of  God." 
If  natural  men  could  understand  divine  things,  Hymeneus  and  Phi- 
letus  would  never  have  erred  concerning  the  truth  ;  Jannes  and  Jam- 
bres  would  not  have   withstood   Moses  ;  the  Libertines  and   others 
would  not  have  disputed   with  Stephen  ;  the   Epicurean  and   Stoic 
philosophers  would  not  have  railed  at  Paul,  as  a  babler,  and  Felix 
would  not  have  said  that  he  was  mad.     Whence  is  it,  that  so  many 
withstand  the  truth,  and  how  doth  it  happen  that  so  many  monstrous 
and  foolish  opinions  are  entertained  in  the  Christian  world  ?  do  they 
not  proceed  from  "  men  of  corrupt  minds  I"  Paul  tells   us  that  they 
do,  2  Tim.  iii.  8.     It  is  still  more  evident*  that  the  natural  man  doth 
not  receive  nor  discern   divine   things,  when   those  spiritual  things 
are    proposed  to    hfm    under  corporeal    similitudes  and   emblems. 
These  ought  to  illustrate  those   things  to  him,  but  through  the  cor« 
ruption  of  his"   understanding,  they  become  still  more  obscure  by 


—79.  99 

xneans  of  these  emblems  :  even  «*  Nicodemus,  a  master  in  Israel," 
could  not  understand  the  effectual  work  of  God  in  conversion,  when 
Jesus  explained  it  to  him  under  the  emblem  of  a  birth  ;  and  there- 
fore the  Saviour  said  to  him,  "  If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things, 
and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe,  if  I  tell  you  heavenly  things  ?" 
John  lii.  12.  When  Jesus  sp;dce  of  enjoying  fellowship  with  him 
under  the  emblem  of  eating  his  flesh,  an  J  drinking  his  blood,  the 
Capern<d'.es  could  not  discern  these  things  spiritua'Iy,  but  imagined 
that  he  spoke  of  a  bochly  eating  of  his  flesh,  and  drinking  of  his  blocd, 
which  appeared  like  foolishness  to  them,  and  caused  them  to  say, 
"  How  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ?  this  is  a  hard  saying, 
who  can  hear  it  I"  John  vi.  52,60.  Do  the  Papists,  the  true  off- 
spring of  the  Capernaites,  conduct  better,  when  they  say  that  the 
bread  and  wine  are  changed  into  the  very  body  and  blood  of  Christ, 
because  he  said  of  the  signs  in  the  supper,  "  This  is  my  body,  this 
is  my  blood,"  when  these  things  are  not  the  very  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,  but,  as  the  text  saith,  the  communion  of  his  body  and  blood  ? 
in  order  to  illustrate  this  we  must 

I.  Exhibit  the  state  of  the  controversy, 

II.  Confute  tiie  erroneous  opinion, 

III.  Answer  the  objections  of  the  adversaries. 

I.  The  state  of  the  controversy  is  whethei  "  the  bread  and  wine 
be  changed  into  the  very  budy  and  blood  of  Christ,"  as  the  instructor 
asks  in  the  seventy  eighth  question.  Therefore  we  have  not  to  do 
here  >,o  much  with  the  Lutherans,  who  fancy  that  Christ  is  present 
by  a  consubstantiation,  in,  with,  and  among  the  bread  and  wine,  in 
a  boqUy  manner,  and  that  we  eat  and  drink  him  in  this  manner. 
This  erroneous  opinion  proceeds  from  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
omnipresence  of  Christ,  as  though  he  were  present  every  where  as 
man  ;  but  we  will  not  busy  ourselves  purposely  with  this,  because 
we  have  already  proved  on  the  eighteenth  Lord's  day,  that  Christ  is 
not  present  every  where  with  his  body,  and  because  the  arguments 
Which  we  will  produce  against  the  opinion  of  which  we  shall  speak 
now,  will  for  the  most  part  confute  the  opinion  of  the  Lutherans  also. 
The  instructor  proposes  chiefly  the  controversy  between  us  and  the 
Papists,  who  fancy  that  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  suppei  are  chang- 
ed into  the  very  ,body  and-blood  of  Christ  by  a  transubstantiation,  or 
substantial  change  The^ imagine  that  upon  the  low  mumbling  of 
these  five  Latin  words,  hoc  enim  est  raeum  corpus,  "  for  this  is  my 
body,"  by  a  lawful  priest,  who  hath  a  right  intention,  the  bread  and 
wine  are  changed  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  or  that  the  sub- 
stance of  the  bread  and  v)nz  vanishcth,  and  that  the  body  and  bleo^ 


100  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

of  Chris':  descend  in  a  moment  from  heaven,  in  the  stead  of  the. 
■tibstance  of  the  breid  and  wine,  tht  outward  form  of  bread  and 
wine,  to  wit,  'he  size,  colour,  smell  and  taste  nevertheless  remaining 
After  which  essential  change  tiie  signs  of  the  supper  are  no  longer 
bread  a'td  wine,  but  the  very  body  and  blond  of  v_hrisi ;  yea,  that 
every  distinct  crumb  and  drop  is  the  whole  Christ,  as  he  was  born  of 
Mary,  and  as  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and  that  he  is  eaten  and 
diunk  in  this  manner. 

We  will  dlow  that  the  bread  and  wine  undergo  a  certain  change, 
inasmuch  as  ihey  are  set  apart  by  the  word  of  blessing  from  a  com- 
mon to  a  sacramental  use,  and  thus  have  a  special  relation  to  the  body 
and  blood  of  Curist.  We  also  acknowledge  most  readily,  that  Christ 
is  present  in  the  supper,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacrament,  in 
a  three  fold  manner,  (a)sacramentally,  signifying  and  sealing  his  suf- 
fering and  death,  (b;  According  to  his  G .'dhead,  which  is  present 
everywhere,  and  especially  with  this  institution,  (c)  He  is  also  ac- 
tively present  in  the  supper  by  his  holy  Spirit,  causing  us  to  eat  his 
body,  and  drink  his  blood  sacramentally  and  spiritually  ;  but  we  deny 
without  scruple,  that  Christ  is  bodily  present  in  the  sacrament,  that 
the  bread  and  wine  are  changed  into  his  body  and  blood,  and  that  we 
eat  and  drink  him  in  a  bodily  manner. 

II.  We  do  not  reject  this  opinion  from  levity,  but  on  account  of 
weighty  reasons ;  for, 

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  hath  a  real  body ;  for  "  he  was  made  like  his 
brethren  in  all  things,"  as  Paul  saith,  Htb.  ii.  17  ;  therefore  he  can- 
not be  present  in  many  places,  much  less  in  every  place  at  the  same 
time  :  this  hath  been  shown  more  fully  on  the  eighteenth  Lord's 
day.  How  is  it  then  possible  that  he  should  be  present  according  to 
the  body  wherever  the  supper  is  received  ;  that  the  bread  and  wine 
should  be  changed  into  his  body  and  blood  ;  and  that  every  individu- 
al should  eat  and  drink  of  them  ?  or  do  men  know  not  only  how  to 
change  bread  and  wine  into  a  whole  Christ,  but  also  how  to  change 
them  into  many  Christs  ?    to  what  doth  all  tins  tend  ? 

2.  It  hath  been  6hown  before,  that  to  a  sacrament  pertains  a  sign 
and  a  thing  signified  ;  but  by  transnbstantiation,  the  signs,  bread  and 
wine,  are  changed  into  the  things  signified,  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,  and  so  ihe  signs,  yea,  the  whole  nature  of  the  sacrament  is 
abolished. 

3.  We  do  not  find  such  a  substantial  change  in  any  of  the  othev 
sacraments.  Circumcision,  the  sacrament,  sign,  and  seal  of  God's 
covenant  was  never  changed  into  God's  covenant ;  the  paschal  lamb 
was  not  changed  into  the  Lord's  passover,  nor  the  angel  who  passed 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,79,  101 

through  Egypt,  into  Christ.  A'l  the  ceremonies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment were  sacramental  signs  and  seals  of  Christ,  and  of  his  benefits  : 
but  not  one  of  them  was  ever  changed  into  Christ.  It  cannot  be  said 
in  reply  to  this,  that  those  signs  were  not  changed  into  the  thing  sig- 
nified, because  they  were  bare  types  of  the  sacraments  of  the  New- 
Testament  ;  for  this  is  not  true,  as  we  have  proved  upon  the  twenty- 
fiftn  Lord's  day.  But  besides  this,  bap  ism  is  a  sacrament  of  the 
New-Testament ;  but  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into  the 
blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  it  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself,  as  hath  ap- 
peared before :  what  reason  then  can  there  be,  why  the  signs  of  the 
Lord's  supper  should  be  changed  into  the  things  signified,  more  than 
the  signs  of  the  other  sacraments? 

4.  This  substantial  change  militates  also  against  the  words  of  the 
institution  and  of  the  blessing,  "  this  is  my  body,"  by  the  low  mum- 
bling of  which  words  in  Latin,  they  will  make  the  body  and  blood 
of  Christ  of  the  bread  and  wine  ;  for  the  word  '•  this  "  relates  to  the 
bread,  which  Christ  took,  broke,  and  distributed  with  the  cup,  but 
not  to  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  the  verb  substantive  "is,"  doth 
not  change  these  signs,  but  simply  showeth  that  the  bread  and  wine 
are  sacramental.  The  following  words,  kt  my  body,"  do  not  effect 
any  change,  yea,  they  do  not  make  a  full  sense  by  themselves,  but 
only  as  they  are  connected  with  the  verb  substantive  "  is,"  which 
doth  not  change.  The  Papists  will  have  that  the  bread  is  not  chan- 
ged by  the  word  hoc,  "  this,"  nor  by  the  wod  est,  "  is,"  nor  rby  the 
word  cor/ms,  "  body,"  nor  by  the  word  meum,  "  my  ;"  but  only  by 
tun,  the  last  syllable  of  meum,  "  my."  But  what  is  there  in  t';is  sylla- 
ble urn,  that  it  can  do  more  than  Christ,  or  the  apostles  did  ?  for  they 
never  made  flesh  and  blood,  much  less  a  whole  Christ,  and  many 
Christs  of  bread  and  wine.  What  magician  ever  performed  any 
uncommon  feat  by  mumbling  two  letters  ?  The  Egyptian  magi- 
cians knew  how  to  change  rods  into  serpents,  and  water  into  blood 
by  their  enchantments,  but  this  was  a  mere  childish  trick  in  compar- 
ison with  the  magic  art  of  the  Papists,  who  are  able  to  do  so  much 
greater,  yea,  unheard  of  wonders,  with  two  letters.  Who  "will  be= 
lieve  this  ?  surely  none  who  will  not  renounce  his  humanity.  The 
apostle  Paul  calls  the  signs  bread  and  the  cup,  even  after  they  have 
been  bless»d,  1  Cor.  xi.  26 — 28.  It  is  true,  things  that  have  been 
changed  retain  their  names,  which  they  had  before  ;  the  serpents 
of  Moses  and  of  the  Magicians  are  called  rods  after  they  were  be. 
come  serpents,  Exod.  vii.  2,  and  Simon  is  called  a  leper  after  he 
was  cleansed,  Matt  xxvi.  6.  But  there  were  then  certain  and  indis- 
putable evidences,  that  those  things  were  truly  changed  :  every  per» 


lOi  TRANSUBSTANTIATJON  CONFUTED. 

son  could  see  that  those  rods  were  no  longer  rods,  but  serpenti, 
and  that  Simon  was  no  longer  a  leper,  since  they  were  all  changed, 
not  only  with  respect  to  their  nature,  but  also  with  respect  to  their 
accidents  :  let  the  Papists  show  us  this  also  of  the  bread  and  wine, 
and  that  it  is  no  longer  bread  and  wine,  but  the  body  and  blood  o? 
Christ,  yea,  the  whole  Christ,  as  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
we  will  then  see,  that  the  signs  are  called  bread  and  wine  ac- 
cording to  their  former,  and  not  according  to  their  prese.it  nature. 

5.  The  end  for  which  the  supper  was  instituted  was  K  the  remem- 
brance "  of  Christ.  Now  it  is  evident,  that  we  neither  institute,  nor 
give  any  thing  in  remembrance  of  aught  that  is  present  ;  the  passo- 
ver  was  a  memorial,  to  cause  Israel  anil  his  posterity  to  remember 
the  benefit  which  had  been  shown  to  them  formerly,  that  their  first- 
born were  spared,  and  not  slain  in  F.gypt,  Exod.  xii.  14,  24—  27, 
Therefore  Christ  cannot  be  present,  according  to  his  body,  in  the 
supper,  neither  can  the  bread  and  wine  be  the  real  body  and  blood  of 
Christ :  for  otherwise  the  supper  would  not  be  a  memorial  of  him. 

6.  This  Popish  pretence  militates   against    many  articles  of  the 
faith,  which  ail  Christians,  yea,   which  the  Papists  themselves  re- 
ceive :  for  every  one  confesseth    that  God  alone    is    the    Almighty 
Mdker ;  but  they  subvert  this  by  their    doctrine    of  tfansubstantia- 
tion  ;  the  priest,  since  he  makes  Christ  of  Bread  and  wine,  and  that 
as  often  as  he  pleases,  is  therefore  above  the  Almighty  Maker,  who 
cannot  make  a  God,  any  more  than  he    can  deny    himself:  but  the 
priest  can  say,   "  He  who  created  me  without  me,  is  created  by  me," 
"  We  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  ;  who  was 
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary  ;  who  Suffer- 
ed," Sec.       But  how  can    men,  who   pretend    to  believe    the    same 
things    with    us,   say    that   the   Christ   who   is   under  the   forms  of 
bread  and  wine,  is  the  only  begotten  Son   of  the   Father,  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  Mary  ?     lie  is  surely  made  of  bread. 
Did  the  breaden  God  of  the  Papists  suffer  I   did  he  die,  was  he  buri- 
ed, and  did  he  descend  into  hell  ?  did  he  rise  again  and  ascend   into 
heaven,  and  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  doth  he  come  down    out 
heaven  ?  and  is  there  no  Christ  then  in  heaven  ?  and  is  all  this  done 
at  the  beck  of  the  masspriest  ?  and  that  a    thousand    times?      I  low 
doth  this  agree  with  the  catholic  creed  ?  who  dares,   who   can    con- 
trive and  utter  such    fantastical    things  ?     Away    with    the  creed  of 
every  Christian,  if  the  Fapists  believe  rightly  here. 

7.  We  must  deny  our  senses,  if  we  shall  believe  that  bread  and 
wine  are  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ  ;  for  this  militates  against 
nearly  all  the  senses  of  every  man  at  all  limes  ;  all  men  do  at  all. 


—79.  103 

times  see  bread  and  wine  in  the  supper,  they  smell,  taste,  and  feel 
thein,  and  must  say  without  any  scruple,  that  such  a  small  fragment, 
or  round  wafer  hath  neither  the  bulk,  nor  the  form,  nor  the  mem- 
bers of  a  man,  as  Christ  was.  How  then  can  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
a  whole  Christ  be  there  ?  Could  those  priests  delude  our  senses, 
and  those  of  every  other  man,  as  they  pretend  that  they  can  change 
the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  they  would 
then  gain  much  of  us  :  but  they  fall  short  here,  and  therefore  they 
seek  to  put  us  off  with  vvords,  saying  that  the  bodily  senses  cannot 
judge  of  spiritual  mysteries.  We  say  this  also  of  mysteries,  which 
are  wholly  spiritual ;  but  the  mystery  of  the  Lord's  supper  is  partly- 
bodily,  and  the  dispute  relates  only  to  that  part  of  it  which  is  bodily  : 
they  say  that  there  is  no  bread  nor  wine  in  the  supper,  but  only 
Christ,  his  body  and  blood  ;  this  we  deny.  What  now  is  more  prop- 
er tl  an  that  we  should  judge  of  that  which  is  bodily  by  our  bodily 
senses  ?  Did  not  Christ  appeal  to  the  trial  of  the  outward  senses, 
when  the  apostles  doubted  whether  he  were  risen,  and  might  not  be 
a  Spirit?  Luke  xxiv.  36 — 41.  But  say  these  men,  the  outward 
senses  can  be  deceived.  True,  when  the  senses  are  disordered,  the 
object  far  off,  and  when  some  other  body  is  between  our  senses  and 
the  object ;  but  who  will  say  that  the  senses  fail,  when  they  are  not 
disordered,  when  the  object  is  near  at  hand,  and  when  there  is  no 
let  between  the  object  and  the  senses  ?  And  when  the  senses  of  all 
men  judge  in  the  same  manner  ai  all  times,  must  we  then  yet  pluck 
out  our  eyes,  stop  our  nostrils,  deny  our  taste,  and  cutoff  our  hands? 
must  I  be  wilfully  and  knowingly  a  fool,  that  I  may  believe  that 
horrendum  mysterium,  "  that  horrible  mystery?" 

8.  This  transubsiantiation  militates  against  the  nature  of  every 
change  ;  for  when  any  thing  is  changed,  then  (a)  that  which  is 
changed,  is  changed  not  only  in  its  nature,  but  also  in  its  forms, 
qualities  and  accidents,  which  are  changed  as  well  as  its  nature  : 
when  the  rods  were  changed  into  serpents,  the  water  into  blood,  the 
dust  into  lice,  they  had  not  then  any  longer  the  forms,  qualities,  and 
accidents  of  rods,  water,  and  dust,  but  of  serpents,  blood,  and  lice  : 
but  these  men  will  have  that  bread  and  wine  are  fltsh  and  blood,  yea, 
the  whole  Christ:  when  notwithstanding  the  colour,  smell,  taste, 
and  all  the  outward  forms  of  bread  and  wine  remain,  (b)  When  one 
thing  is  changed  into  another,  a  new  thing  is  then  produced  and 
created  by  a  miracle;  for  instance,  when  the  water  was  changed 
into  wine,  John  ii.  9,  10,  11,  the  wine,  which  did  not  exist  before, 
was  then  newly  created  by  a  miracle;  but  when  bread  and  wine  are 
changed  into  Christ,  is  he  then  newly  created  ?  he  was  not  then  be- 


104,  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED. 

fore.     And  so  transubstantiation   must  lead   a  person   to  deny  the 
Saviour. 

9.  Finally,    this   mystery  of  iniquity  is  replete  with  absurdities ; 
for  if  there  be  such  an  essential  change,  the  creature  must  then  eat 
his  God,  consume  him  in  his   stomach,    and  cast  him  forth  into  the 
draught.     Abominable  !  yea,  more  abominable  than  the  practice  of 
the  ancient  idolaters,  condemned  of  old,  "  who  made  a  God  of  part 
of  the  wood,  by  which   they  warmed   themselves,  baked  bread,  and 
Toasted  roast,"  in  order  to  satisfy  their  appetite,   and  worshiped  that 
God,    Isaiah   xliv.  1  i — 20.      The    Popish   God  may  be  devoured  by 
every  kind  of  vermin,  and  may  moulder  in  itself.     Observe  this  con- 
tradiction,   the  priest   sahh,  u  This  is  my  body,"  and  yet  the  bread 
doth  not  become   his  body  upon  those  words,   when  lie  nevertheless 
speaks  of  his  own  body,  but  it  becomes  the  body  of  another,  even  of 
Christ.  YVlut  a  wonderful  kind  of  philosophy  have  these  men,  when 
they  must  persuade  themselves  by  transubstantiation,  that  substances, 
Christ,  his  flesh  and   blood  can  exist  without  forms,  qualities,  or  ac- 
cidents,   flesh  and    blood  without  the  coiour,   smell  or  taste  of  flesh 
and  blood,  that  a  human  body  of  an  ordinary  stature  and  bulk,  can 
exist  and  be  contained  in  a  small,  and  slender  wafer  !  still  more  won- 
ders, forms,  qualities  and  accidents  can  exist  without  substances  and 
essences,  in  which  they  inhere  ;  the  colour,  smell  and  taste  of  bread 
and  wine  can  exist,  when  there  is  no  bread  and  wine  ;  yea,  one  sub- 
stance can   have  the  forms,  qualities  and  accidents  of  another  sub- 
stance, which  hath  not  those  of  its  own.  The  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ, 
which  have  not  tin.  colour,    smell  or  taste   of  flesh  and  blood,    have 
that  of  bread   and  wine.     H.,w  do  they  extricate  themselves  here  ? 
They  say,  we   must  act  hearken  to   reason,    when  we  attend  to  the 
mysteries  of  faith,  but  must  lead  reason  captive  :  but  this  is  a  matter 
in  dispute,   whether  transubstantiation   be  a   mystery  ;  we  deny  it  ; 
the  mysreries  of  faith  are  indeed  above,  but  not  contrary  to  reason  ; 
but  this  Popish  invention   is  contrary  to   reason,  and  must  therefore 
be  rejected  by  reason.     Let  it  be  admitted,  that  this  doctrine  of  the 
Papists  is  a  mystery,  it  is  however  in  part  bodily,  and  must  therefore 
be  examined  by  reason.    When  scripture  subjects  reason  to  her,  she 
doth  not  then  deprive  us  of  our  reason,  but  will  rather  employ  it  even 
with  respect  to  this  opinion,  also  ;  therefore  the  man  of  God  saith  in 
eur  text,  M  I  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  1  say  ;  the  cup  of 
blessing,"  &c.     This  cloak  of  shame  helps  still  less,  when  we  con- 
aider  that  we  attack  transubstantiation  not  only  by  arguments  from 
reason,  but  also  from  scripture. 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  l£5 

III.  But  do  not  those  men  offer  aught,  in  order  to  prove  this  doc- 
trine ?  yes,    What  do  they  alledge  ? 

1.  They  are  very  ready  to  say,  that  God  is  almighty,  and  is   able 
to  change  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  upon 
the    muttering   of  the    five   words:   Cut  can  God,   because  he   is 
almighty,    do  aught  that  is  a  contradiction  ?  God  is  almighty,  yet 
"  he  cannot   deny  himself,"  Titus  ii.  13.     «  He  cannot  lie,"  Titus  i. 
2.     "  It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,"  Heb.  vi.  18.     And  so  it  is  also 
impossible  for  him  to  change  the  bread   and  wine  into  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  j  for  it  is  a  contradiction,  that   the  body  of  Christ, 
-which  exists  already,  should  exist  afterwards  newly ;  that  his  body 
should  be  at  the   same  time   in   heaven   and   on  earth ;  and  that  it 
Should  be  at  the  same  time  both  great  and  small ;  but  although  there 
were  no  contradiction  in  this,  and  although  God  could  do  it,  doth  he 
therefore  do  it  ?  can  we  conclude   that  a  tiling   really  is,   because  it 
can  be  ?  God  could  make  thousands  of  men  more  on  the  earth  than 
he  hath  made  ;  doth  he  therefore   make  them  ?  No  :  God  doth  not 
do  all  that  he  can,  but  all  that  he  will,  and  «  w  hatsoever  he  pleaseth," 
according  to  Psalm  cxv.  S.     We  must  be  certain,  that  he  will  do  a 
thing,  before  we  conclude  from  his  power  that  he  will  do  it,  or  thai 
he  doth  it  at  present.     The  leper  reasoned   better  than  the  Papists, 
when  he  said  to  Jesus,  Matt.  viii.  2,  «  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst 
make  me  clean."     Therefore  they  must  prove  that   God  will  do  it, 
if  he  even  can  do  it. 

2.  They  imagine  that  they  are   clear  here,   because  Christ  saith, 
n  This  is   my  body,   and  the  cup  is  my  blood,"    Matt.  xxvi.  2S,  27, 
28.     But  there  are  many  learned  men  among  the  Papists,  who  per- 
ceive that  this  passage  is  not   to  be  understood  literally,   and  there- 
fore they   betake   themselves  to   their  traditions  :  Scotus  saith,  "  I 
hold  this  proposition,  because  the  church  holds  it."     G.  Athaides,  a 
divine  of  the  king  of  Portugal  at  the  council  of  Trent,  disapproved 
of  making  use  of  the  scripture  in  this  controversy,  that  they  might 
not  be  ridiculed  by  the  heretics  ;  and  he  said  that  the  words,  "  this 
is  my  body,"  were  much  plainer,  when  they  were  not  understood  in 
the  sense  of  the  church  of  Rome,  than  when  they  were   so  under- 
stood ;"  and  the  cardinal  Cajetan,  said,  "  that  there  was  no  necessity 
to  understand  these  words  in  their  literal  sense."  Was  he  not  right? 
For  (a)  Christ  calls  himself  "  a  door,"  John  x.  9,  "  the  way,"  John 
xiv.  6,  and  "  the  true  vine,"  John  xv.  1.     No  man  will  therefore  say 
that  he  was  changed  into  a  door,  a  way  and  vine.  What  reason  have 
we  then  to  say  from  Matt.  xxvi.  20,  27,  28,  that  bread  and  vrine  are 
Vol.  ii.  O 


106  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED. 

changed  into  liis  flesh  and  blood  ?   And,  that  we  may  abide  by  the 
words,  "  this  is  my  body,"  Paul  b -ith  of  believers  that  they  are  «■  the 
body  of  Christ,"  1  Cor.  >:ii.  26.     Why  should  we  then   understand 
one   and   the  same   phrase  more  literally  in   one    passage    than   in 
another,  (b)  The  words,  w  this  is  my  body,"  are  to  be  understood  ac- 
cording to  the  usual  phraseology  of  the  Hebrews,  who  said,  this  is, 
instead  of  this  signifieth.     We   see    this  in    Joseph's  exposition  of 
Pharaoh's  dream.  Gen.  xli.  26,  27.    "  The  seven  kine  and  the  seven 
ears  art    seven  years."     For  the    Hebrews  have  no  word  which  an- 
swers to  our  Avoid,   "  it  signifies."     Do  net  Ave  ourselves   say  of  a 
picture,  or  of  a  graven  ima^e,  this  is  that  man,  that  Avoman  ?  do  not 
ask  us  t  Jen,  Avhy  Christ  did  not  rather  say,  this  signifieth  my  body,  than 
this  is  my  body,  if  he  meant,  this  signifieth  my  body  ;  for  he  spoke  ac- 
cording to  the  usual  language  of  his  people,  (c)  This  is  a  sacramental 
phrase,  according  to  the   nature  of  all  the  sacraments,  in  which  the 
name  of  the  thing   signified  is   given  to  the   sign.     Circumcision  is 
called  "  the  covenant  of  God,"   Gen.   xvii.   "  The  lamb  the    Lord's 
passover,"  that   is,    passing  over,    Lxod.   xii.     Christ  also  is  called 
"our  passovur,  sacrificed  for  us,"  1  Cor.  v.  7    and  Paul  saith,  "  The 
Rock  was  Christ,"  1  Cor.  x.  4    Baptism  is  also  Called  u  the  washing 
aAvay  of  sins,"  Acts  xxii.  16.     Why  then  should  Ave  depart  from  this 
sacramental    phraseology  in   the    supper?  there  is  no    reason;  but 
there  are  indeed  reasons  and  causes  why  Christ    calls  the  bread  and 
wine  his  body  and  blood.     Surely  not  to  teach  us  transubstantiation, 
for  this  is  a  con'Li,diction,  but  for  two  reasons  ;  first,  on  at  count  of 
the   agreement  of  the  sign  Avith  the  thing  signified,   because  of  the 
Avoid  of  institution  ;  and  then  on  account  of  the  sealing  virtue  of  this 
sacrament,   according  to  the  Avord  of  promise.     This  is  clearly  dis- 
covered to  us  in  the   seventy  ninth    question,   Avhich  read  :  Ave  have 
explained   it  more  fully  on  the   former  Lord's  day    (d)    We  add  to 
this  also    that  the  words,  "  this  is  my  body,"  cannot  be  understood 
literally  ;  for  if  we  understand  them  so,  then  Christ  Avas  Avhole  and 
broken,   alive  mi  dead  at  the  table  ;  for  the  sunper  exhibits  him  as 
dead  ;  he  did  then  eat  his  own  flesh,    and  drink    his  own  blood  ;  the 
apostles  did    then  eat  his  broken   body,   and  drink    bis   shed   blood, 
while    he  s.:t  at  the   table.     Paul    explains  these   Avords   spiritually, 
when  he  calls  bread  and  wine  in  the  text  the  communion  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ.     Th<     Papists   themselves  cannot  understand 
these  words  literally*  because   they  must  explain  the  Avord  "is"  by 
"  let  it  be,   or  become,"  and  tliey  must  explain  tlv.  cup  by  the  Avine 
which  is  in  the  cup      Let  them  do  then  what  they  will,  they  cannot 
find  a  proof  of  transubstantiation  in  those  Avords.     Therefore  it  can 


XXIX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  107 

Uqt  avail  the  Romanists  to  say  that  we  must  speak  plainly  in  a  w  ill, 
and  that  Christ  made,  his  will  here  ;  for  Christ  did  not  make  his  will 
here,  hut  gave  the  seal  of  it;  .and  hesides  this,  the  figurative  tense 
is  plain,  and  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  all  sacraments.  It  it  said  that 
we  ought  to  speak  plainly  in  a  will  ;  we  deny  it:  for  Jacob  spake 
figuratively,  when  he  made  his  will,  Gen.  xlix.  It  is  not  customary 
to  speak  literally  in  sacraments;  if  ^hrist  had  spoken  literally  in 
the  supper,  his  words  would  have  been  dark  and  unintelligable  to  a 
people,  who  were  accustomed  to  figurative  phrases  in  the  sacraments. 
The  Papists  themselves,  as  hath  been  shown,  cannot  take  these 
words  in  their  literal  sense. 

3.  They  imagine  that  the  Lord  Jesus  decides  this  controversy  on 
their  side,  when  he  saith,  John  vi.  55,  56.  '•  My  flesh  is  meat  in- 
deed and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed.  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him  "  We  reply  to 
this,  first  of  all,  that  Christ  doth  not  speak  here  of  the  supper,  and 
that  these  words  do  not  therefore  serve  their  purpose  ;  for  the  sup- 
per was  not  yet  instituted,  when  Christ  spake  these  words,  and  he 
had  not  respect  in  them  to  the  breaking  ot  his  body,  and  the  shedding 
of  his  blood,  as  in  the  supper,  but  to  the  manna,  as  appeareth  from 
the  foregoing  and  following  parts  of  this  chapter.  But  however  this 
may  be,  these  words  cannot  be  understood  literally  ;  for  thin  our 
communion  with  Christ  would  be  a  bodily  communion,  and  he  would 
have  communion  with  the  ungodly.  Christ,  when  we  receive  his 
flesh  and  his  b'ood,  "  dwells  in  us,  as  we  dwell  in  him  "  that  is, 
spiritually,  for  who  can  exist  bodily  in  Christ  .?  The  Saviour  himself 
will  not  permit  us  to  understand  these  words  literaliy,  as  the  Caper- 
naites  understood  them  ;  for  he  saith,  vrs.  63.  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth,  the  flesh  profketh  nothing:  the  words  that  1  speak  unto 
you,  they  are  Spirit,  and  thty  are  life."  But  Christ  saith  that  his 
flesh  and  blood  are  meat  and  drink  "  indeed."  Mush  it  then  be 
proper  meat  and  drink?  No,  for  spiritual  meat  and  drink  is  meat 
and  drink  indeed  for  the  soul.  Christ  is  u  the  true  light,"  John  h  9, 
"the  true  vine,"  John  xv.  1,  yet  he  is  not  therefore  a  proper,  but  a 
spiritual  light  and  vine. 

4.  Antiquity  is  for  us,  say  these  men  ;  but  hear  what  others  of 
the  Popish  communion  say.  One  suth,  the  fathers  (they  spoke  n- 
deed  as  we  do  on  this  subject)  spake  unadvisedly  ;  another,  before 
the  Lateran  council,  every  one  might  believe  in  this  matter  as  he 
pleased:  a  third,  before  that  council  transubstanmtion  was  not  yet 
an  article  of  faith  ;  they  saw  indeed  that  before  the  eighth  century, 
*betr  was  neither  jot  nor  tittle  of  transubstantiation  to  be  found  m 


108  TRANSUBSTANTTATION  CONFUTES. 

the  writings  of  the  fathers.  It  is  also  evident  ;  for  when  in  the  year 
754,  the  council  of  Constantinople  condemned  the  images,  they  gave 
this  leason  for  that  condemnation,  that  they  had  the  image  of  Christ, 
the  substance,  the  nature  of  bread,  in  the  supper.  The  worship- 
pers of  images,  seeing  themselves  forshamed  and  condemned  by 
this  proceeding,  restored  the  images  in  the  year  787,  in  the  second 
council  of  Nice,  saying  that  the  bread  was  not  an  image  of  Christ, 
but  his  very  body,  not  by  a  transubstantiatidn,  but  by  the  union  of 
the  bread  and  wine  with  the  Godhead,  the  nature  of  the  bread  and 
wine  nevertheless  remaining,  as  John  Damascene  spake.  This 
caused  much  contention  among  the  ecclesiastics  in  the  following  cen- 
turies ;  but  in  the  tenth  century,  that  iron  and  leaden  age,  the  opin- 
ion of  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  in  the  supper  gained  ground  ;"* 
and  in  the  eleventh  century  Berenger,  because  he  opposed  the  bodily 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  supper,  was  condemned  in  three  councils. 
The  word  transubstantiatlon  was  used  first  of  all  by  a  certain  Stephen, 
bishop  of  Autun,  in  Burgundy,  in  the  year  11C0;  and  in  the  year 
1215,  the  council  of  Lateran  authorized  it,  allowing  it  to  be  used  of 
the  Lord's  supper.  This  new  doctrine  could  not  however  obtain 
the  approbation  of  the  council  of  Florence,  in  the  year  1439  ;  b\!t 
tlvs  mystery  of  iniquity  was  fully  established  in  the  council  of  Trent. 
How  then  can  they  talk  of  antiquity  ;  the  ancients  of  the  first  and 
best  antiquity  knew  nothing  of  the  substantial  change  of  the  bread  and 
wine  ;  and  when  the  innovators  began  to  mutter  these  things  from  a 
love  of  images,  they  were  immediately  opposed  until  they  had  mas- 
tered the  truth,  suppressed  it.  and  endeavoured  to  banish  it  out  of 
the  world  ;  but  the  witnesses,  who  had  been  slain,  were  raised  up, 
and  stand  until  this  day  on  their  feet,  to  bear  witness  against  the  Ro- 
mish apost/cy. 

But  are  we  then,  as  the  Papists  slander  us,  Socinians,  who  assert 
that  the  supper  contains  only  bare  signs,  to  serve  as  memorials  and 
representations,  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  broken,  and  his  blood 
shed  for  the  confirmation  of  his  heavenly  doctrine  ?  No,  we  have 
professed  before,  that  Christ  was  present  here  in  a  sacramental  man- 
ner ;  working  in  a  divine  and  spiritual  manner,  and  that  we  eat  and 
drink  him  thus  :  and  therefore  we  detest  the  Socinians,  who  say 
that  the  whole  virtue  of  the  covenant  consists  in  the  signification  of 
the  breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  wine,  repre- 
senting the  suffering  of  Christ,  as  a  prophet ;  for  they  deny  thus  the 
satisfaction  of  Christ  by  his  "  blood,  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins." 
the  sealing  virtue  of  the  supper,  and  the  true  and  spiritual  commu- 
nion of  believers  with  his  sufferings,  body  and  blood.     But  is  a  sa- 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  73,  79.  10? 

crament  then  nothing  more  than  a  bare  sign  and  figure,  and  not  a 
seal  also  ?  doth  Christ  say  no  more  than,  this  is  a  memorial  of  my 
body  and  blood,  when  he  calls  the  bread  and  wine  his  body  and 
blood,  and  the  New  Testament  in  his  blood  ?  and  is  nothing  but  the 
breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  wine  significative, 
and  is  not  the  eating  and  drinking  of  what  he  ca'ls  his  body  and 
blood  so  too  ?  and  have  believers  then  no  communion  with  his  body 
and  blood  ?  But  in  this  manner  must  the  Socinians,  that  they  may 
overturn  the  foundations  of  Christianity,  enervate  the  sacraments, 
and  the  words  of  Jesus,  who  never  spake  one  word  in  vain  ;  but  we 
have  learned  better,  and  have  more  reverence  than  this  for  the  insti- 
tutions and  words  of  God  ;  and  therefore  nothing  but  a  mere  desire 
to  slander  us  induces  the  Papists  to  say  that  we  give  only  bare 
signs. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  the  orthodoxy  and  unblamableness  of  our  doctrine, 
and  the  conformity  of  it  to  the  word  of  God,  since  we  do  not  ascribe 
too  much  to  the  sacraments,  that  we  may  avoid  Popery,  nor  too  lit- 
tle, that  we  may  avoid  Socinianism.  But,  hearers,  those  of  you  who 
receive  this  supper  at  any  time,  is  your  practice  likewise  so  orthodox 
and  unblamable  ?  It  would  be  your  happiness,  and  conduce  to  the 
glory  of  Jesus,  and  of  his  church  if  it  were  ;  but  how  many  are  there 
of  you,  who  do  not  conduct  aright  in  this  matter !  for, 

1.  Some  act  toward  this  supper  no  otherwise  than  Socinians,  and 
as  if  it  were  a  mere  sign  of  a  Christian  profession.  Is  it  not  true  ? 
for  have  ye  had  any  exercises  of  soul  with  respect  to  the  spiritual 
matters,  which  are  exhibited  and  sealed  in  the  supper,  so  that  ye 
did  by  faith  behold  and  enjoy  Christ  in  his  sufferings,  benefits,  and 
]cve,  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  when  ye  received  the  signs  ? 
Verily  many  know  nothing  of  this  j  it  sufficeth  them  to  be  good 
Christians,  to  appear  at  the  table,  to  receive  the  bread  and  wine,  to 
eat  and  drink  of  it,  especially  if  they  think  at  the  time  of  the  suffer- 
ings and  death  of  Christ ;  they  imagine  then  that  they  have  quitted 
themselves  well;  but  was  it  our  duty  to  forsake  the  Papists,  that  we 
might  receive  nothing  but  bare  signs  ?  doth  this  suffice  to  eat 
Christ's  flesh  and  drink  his  blood  ?  doth  this  prove  that  his  body  v/as 
broken,  and  his  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins  ?    I  conceive  not 


UO  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

I  assure  you,  who  conduct  in  this  manner,  that  ye  do  thus  deny  out' 
true  Christian  communion,  our  purified  doctrine,  and  your  profes- 
sion, that  ye  have  no  part  in  him,  and  his  sufferings,  and  that  the  sup- 
per is  no  seal  to  you  Hear  how  Jesus  confirms  this  with  a  double 
verily,  John  vi.  53,  "  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  except  ye  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in 
you." 

2.  Others  conduct  toward  the  supper  like  the  Papists,  We  have 
departed  out  of  the  Romish  Egypt,  but  many  return  thither  again 
in  their  hearts.  >t  is  evident  ;  for  they  hold  that  it  is  absolutely  ne- 
cessary to  partake  of  this  sacrament,  as  if  that  were  conversion,  an 
entering  into  Christ  and  into  his  covenant  by  faith,  u  partaking  of 
the  signs,  eating  the  flesh,  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  Lord.  Doth 
it  not  appear,  friends,  when  ye  are  perfectly  easy  and  unconcerned 
about  the  forgiveness  of  your  sins,  and  your  eternal  salvation?  for 
ye  have  no  other  ground  for  your  hope.  And  observe,  before  ye  ap- 
proach to  the  supper,  ye  are  somewhat  concerned  and  uneasy,  ye 
will  then  be  moral,  and  desist  in  some  measure  from  your  usual 
sins  and  dissoluteness  ;  but  after  ye  have  partaken,  presently  both 
your  anxiety  and  morality  are  at  an  end,  and  ye  return  to  your  old 
sins  and  dissoluteness  again*  What  think  ye,  do  ye,  who  behave 
thus,  conduct  at  all  differently  from  the  Papists,  who  think,  when  they 
eat  the  bread  in  the  supper,  that  they  eat  Christ  himself,  and  there- 
fore are  satisfied,  and  unconcerned  ?  do  ye  not  evidence  by  this  conduct 
that  ye  are  sensual,  not  having  the  Spirit  ?  do  ye  not  show  that  ye 
are  Papists  in  your  hearts  ?  What  doth  it  mean  to  trust  in  the 
flesh,  of  which  Paul  disapproveth,  Phil.  lii.  3,  if  it  be  not  this  ?  Can- 
not Christ's  flesh  profit  us,  as  he  informs  us,  John  vi.  63,  how  then 
ean  the  bread  and  wine  profit  us,  without  his  Spirit,  who  quickeneth 
us?  Mas!  how  will  your  ungrounded  rest  be  disturbed,  when  ye 
3hall  pretend  that  ye  "  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  the  presence  of 
Christ ;  for  he  will  say  to  you,  1  know  you  not,  whence  ye  are  :  de- 
part from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  He  foretels  this  himself, 
Luke  xiii.  26,    2f. 

Therefore  rouse  up  from  your  carelesncss,  awake  and  be  earnestly 
engaged  in  seeking  an  interest  in  his  body  and  blood,  that  your  sins 
may  be  forgiven,  and  that  ye  may  thus  partake  of  the  supper,'  as  a 
sign  and  seal- 
But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  whose  souls  cannot  be  satis- 
fied, nor  contented  with  the  bread  and  wine,  endeavour  to  conduct 
more  orthodoxly  toward  the  sacrament,  and  therefore, 

\,  Seek  a  distinct  knowledge  and  apprehension  of  the  nature  of 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  1 U 

the  supper  s  we  mu6t  "  discern  the  body  of  the  Lord  "  in  the  supper} 
if  we  do  not  wish  to  "eat  and  drink  judgment  to  ourselves,"  1  Cor. 
xi  29.  In  this  respect  Paul  saith  in  the  text,  '«  I  speak  as  to  wise 
men,  judge  ye  what  I  say."  We  must  therefore  become  wise,  if  we 
shall  conduct  judiciously  toward  this  seal  of  the  covenant ;  we  are 
sometimes  assaulted  by  deceivers,  who  corrupt  the  sacrament ;  if 
we  have  not  our  senses  then  well  exercised,  how  shall  we  defend 
ourselves,  and  vindicate  the  precious  truth  ?  We  must  conduct  our- 
selves  wisely,  and  according  to  the  rule  of  faith,  in  partaking  of  the 
supper  ;  but  we  cannot  do  this  if  we  have  not  a  sufficient  knowledge 
of  it  ;  therefore  endeavour  to  "  grow  not  only  in  grace,  but  also  in 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  as  Peter  admonishelh,  2 
Peter  hi.  18. 

2.  Be  not  satisfied  with  knowing  Christ  only  in  the  letter,  and  in 
the  outward  signs,  but  endeavour  to  know  him  also  in  the  Spirit, 
nevertheless  according  to  the  word  :  "  He  hath  given  you  an  under- 
standing,  that  ye  may  know  him  who  is  true,"  according  to  1  John 
v.  20.  «  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  cut  ©f  darkness, 
hath  shined  in  your  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  Paul  2  Cor.  iv.  6, 
It  behooves  you  to  exercise  yourselves  in  this,  *  that  ye  may  be  fill- 
ed with  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  under- 
standing," as  the  same  apostle  desired,  Col.  i.  9.  This  would  not 
only  warm  your  souls,  quicken  you  by  the  supper,  and  deliver  you, 
who  know  the  trijth,  from  the  powei  of  your  corruption,  but,  if  I 
may  so  speak,  would  transubstantiate,  or  change  you  into  a  confor- 
mity to  Christ ;  for  when  he  is  contemplated  in  his  excellency,  he 
i  transmits  by  such  a  contemplation  his  glorious  holiness,  and  holy 
glory  into  the  soul,  as  Paul  teacheth,  2  Cor.  iii.  IS.  "  We  all  with 
i  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord."  The  apostle  hath  respect  to  Moses,  whose  face  shone 
with  a  dazzling  brightness,  in  consequence  of  his  beholding  the  Lord 
on  the  mount.  See  Exod.  xxxiv.  29,  30,  3.  Verily  a  better  and  a 
more  real  change  than  the  Popish  transubstantiation. 

3.  Have  nevertheless  a  becoming  esteem  for  the  outward  signs, 
that  ye  may  contemplate  and  use  them  with  reverence  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord.  The  signs,  considered  in  themselves,  are  profita- 
ble only  to  the  body,  but  considered  sacramentally,  they  are  the  bread 
and  wine  of  the  Lord .  They  are  indeed  signs  instituted  by  the 
Lord  himself,  they  signify  the  mos'  important  mysteries,  the  painful 
sufferings,  the  testament,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  a  partaking  of 


112  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Lord ;  they  are  seals  and  pledges  of  fheae 
things  :  the  Lord  hath  enjoined  on  you  to  make  use  of  them,  that 
ye  may,  by  means  of  them,  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  yea, 
he  breathes  his  Spirit  into  them,  and  so  causes  you  to  eat  his  flesh 
and  to  drink  his  blood,  and  he  thereby  "  sups  with  you,  and  ye  with 
him,"  as  he  promiseth,  Rev.  iii.  20.  Therefore  the  text  saith,  "  the 
bread  and  the  cup  are  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,"  and  I  Cor.  xi.  27.     "  The  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord." 

4.  Endeavour  therefore  also  to  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood 
of  the  Lord  in  and  by  these  signs.  If  we  will  "  live,  and  desire  that 
we  should  dwell  in  him  ;  and  he  in  us,  we  must  then  eat  the  flesh 
and  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,"  according  to  his  word,  John 
vi.  53,  56.  Therefore  he  said,  when  he  gave  the  bread  and  the  cup 
to  his  disciples,  "  Take,  eat  and  drink  ;  for  this  is  my  body  and 
blood."  See  what  we  have  said  on  the  former  Lord's  day,  in  the 
application. 

Show  then  also  the  virtue  of  the  sacrament  in  all  your  conversa- 
tion, that  men  may  see  that  ye  have  not  partaken  merely  of  the 
signs,  but  also  of  the  things  signified  by  them,  to  wit,  Christ  him- 
self, his  flesh  and  blood.  Your  eyes  ought,  like  the  eyes  of  Jona- 
than, 1  Samuel  xiv.  29,  to  be  ''enlightened,"  upon  your  tasting  only 
**  a  little  of  this  honey  ;"  your  "  countenances  "  ought,  by  feeding  on 
this  "  pulse  and  this  water  "  of  life,  to  become  fairer  and  fatter  than 
the  countenances  "  of  the  courtiers  of  earthly  kings,  who  are  feasted 
with  royal  dainties.  See  Dan.  i.  15.  Did  "  Elijah  travel  forty  days 
and  nights  in  the  strength  of  a  cake  baken  on  the  coals,  until  he 
came  to  Horeb,  the  mount  of  Cod,"  1  kings  xix.  6,  T,  8,  and  ought 
not  ye  then,  by  means  of  the  bread  and  the  wine  of  the  Lord,  to  be 
"  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,  so  that  ye  could 
run  and  not  be  weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint,"  according  to  Eph. 
vi.  10,  Isaiah  xl.  10.  Ye  ought  certa:n;y  to  show  that  ye  resembled 
Christ  in  some  measure,  that  men  might  "  know  that  ye  had  been 
with  him,"  as  it  is  said  of  Peter  and  John,  Acts  ix.  13.  "  The  life  of 
Jesus  ought  to  be  manifest  in  your  mortal  flesh,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2 
Cor.  iv.  1 1.  It  was  indeed  foretold  concerning  you,  Isaiah  hi.  9. 
kJ  All  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them,  that  they  are  the 
seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed."  Let  then  the  image  of  Jesus, 
even  humility,  meekness,  self-denial  and  heuvcnly-mindedness  shine 
forth  in  you. 

Thus  ye  will  evidence  that   ye  enjoy  more  than   the  Papists  pre- 
'-end  ;  yea,  that  ye  are  even  "  crucified  with  Christ  and  live  ;  yet  no- 


—79.  lis 

ye,  but  Christ  in  you,"  as  Paul  testifieth  of  himself,  Gal.  ii.  20.  The 
erroneous  Papist  imagines  that  his  Christ,  whom  he  hath  made,  re- 
mains in  his  stomach,  while  he  nevertheless  casts  him  forth  into  the 
draught  ;  but  ye,  who  eat  and  drink  him  truly,  spiritually,  and  sac- 
ramentally,  shall  retain  him  in  your  souls  for  ever ;  "  ye  dwell  in 
him,  and  he  dwells  in  you,"  as  he  himself  sakh,  John  vi  56,  which 
will  be  more  especially  manifested,  when  the  signs  shall  be  taken 
away,  and  ye  shall  be  changed  after  his  likeness ;  for  "  we  now  see 
through  a  glass,  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face,"  as  the  apostle  saith, 
1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  This  sight  of  him  will  render  you  like  him  ;  "  We 
shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  saith  the  disciple, 
whom  Jesus  loved,  1  John  iii.  2.  Even  your  body,  which  is  now 
corruptible,  mortal  and  vile,  "the  Lord  Jesus  will,"  as  Paul  saith, 
Philip,  iii.  21,  "change,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  his  glorious 
body,  according  to  the  working,  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subduf 
fell  things  usto  himself,"  Amen, 


Vol.  ii. 


(  114  ) 


OF  THE  MASS, 


AND  THE  RIGHT  PARTAKERS 


OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


I  Cor.  x.  IS— 21.  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh  ;  are  not  they  which 
cat  of  the  sacrifice  partakers  of  the  altar?  What  say  I  then  ?  that 
the  idol  is  any  thing,  or  that  which  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols 
is  tiny  thing  ?  But  I  say,  that  the  things  which  the  Gentiles  sac- 
rifice, they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God ;  and  I  would  not 
that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils.  \'e  cannot  drink  the 
cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  devils :  ye  cannot  be  partakers  of 
the  Lord's  table,  and  of  the  table  of  devils. 

Q.  80.  What  difference  is  there  between  the  Lord's  sufifier,  and  the 
Pofiiah  ?nass  ? 

A.  The  Lord's  supper  testifies  to  us,  that  wc  have  a  full  pardon 
of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  himself  has 
once  accomplished  on  the  cross  ;  and  that  we  by  the  H«ly  Ghost  are 
ingrafted  into  Christ,  who,  according  to  his  human  nature  is  now 
not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  and 
will  there  be  worshipped  by  us  ;  but  the  mass  teacheth  that  the  liv- 
ing and  de-ad  -have  not  the  pardon  of  sins  through  the  sufferings  «t 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  IIS 

Christ,  unless  Christ  be  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests  3 
and  further,  that  Christ  is  bodily  under  the  form  of  b'ead  and  wine, 
and  therefore  is  to  be  worshipped  in  them  ;  so  that  the  mass  is  at 
bottom  nothing  else  than  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  an  accursed  idolatry. 

Q    81.  For 'uthom  is  the  Lord's    ucfifitr  instituted  $ 

A.  For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  stns,  and  yet  trust 
that  these  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  and  that  their 
remaining  infirmities  are  covered  by  i.is  passion  and  death  ;  and  who 
also  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  fith  more  and  more  strengthened, 
and  their  lives  more  holy  ;  but  hypocrites,  and  such  as  turn  not  to 
God  with  sincere  hearts,  eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves.

Q.  79.  Why  then  doth  Christ  call  the  bread  his  body,  and  the  cuft 
his  blood,  or  the  new  covenant  in  his  blood  ;  and  Paul  K  the  communion 
cf  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  ?" 

A.  Christ  speaks  thus  not  without  great  reason,  not  only  thereby 
to  teach  us,  that  as  bread  and  wine  support  this  temporal  life,  so  his 
crucified  body  and  shed  blood  are  the  true  meat  and  drink,  wheieby 
our  souls  are  fed  to  eternal  life  ;  but  more  especially  by  these  visible 
signs  and  pledges  to  assure  us,  that  we  are  as  really  partakers  of  hie 
Vol.  if.  N 


98  TRANSUliSTANTiATION  CONFUTED. 

true  body  and  blood  (by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost)  as  we  re- 
ceive by  the  mouths  of  our  bodies  these  holy  signs  in  remembrance 
of  him  ;  and  that  all  his  sufferings  and  obedience  are  as  certainly 
ours,  as  if  we  had  in  our  own  persons  suffeied  and  made  satisfaction 
for  our  sins  to  God. 

«  HP 

JL  HE  natural  man  rcceiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God : 
for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him ;  neither  can  he  know  them,  be- 
cause they  are   spiritually  discerned  ;"  thus   speaks  Paul,    1  Cor.  ii. 
14.     The  natural  man  is  one  who  hath  no  more  than  what  he  hath 
received  by  his  natural  birth  ;  "  being  born  of  the  flesh,  he  is  flesh," 
John  iii.  6,  and  bt- ing  thus  without  the  Spirit,  '•  not  having  the  Spirit," 
Jude,  vrs    19.    And  therefore  he  cannot  know  the  spiritual  things  of 
God,  they  are  foolishness  to  him,   for  his  understanding  is  nnt  dis- 
posed so,  as  to  be  able  to  know  them,  and  it  is  incapable  of  such  knowl= 
edge.     The  Spirit  must  irradiate  his   understanding  with  the  light 
of  spiritual  things,  that  he  may  behold  them  in  their  proper  light,  if 
he  shall  receive  and  discern  them  :  "  God,  who  commanded  the  I  ght 
to  shine  out  of  darkness,  must  shine  in  his  heart,  to  give  the  light  oi 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  2 
Cor.  iv.  6.     For,  according  to  the  words  of  the  apostle,  Eph.  iv.  18, 
"  his  understanding  is  darkened,  he  is  alienated  from  the  life  of  God 
through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  him,  and  through   the  hardness  of 
Bis  heart."  How  then  should  he  apprehend  divine  and  spiritual  things, 
and  not  reject  them  as  foolishness  5  Natural   men  have  often  mani- 
fested   this,    when    they    have    exalted    their  "  imaginations,  their 
thoughts,"  and  imaginary  "  heights  against  the   knowledge  of  God." 
If  natural  men  could  understand  divine  things,  Hymeneus  and  Phi- 
letus  would  never  have  erred  concerning  the  truth  ;  Jannes  and  Jam- 
bres  would  not  have   withstood   Moses  ;  the  Libertines  and   others 
would  not  have  disputed   with  Stephen  ;  the   Epicurean  and   Stoic 
philosophers  would  not  have  railed  at  Paul,  as  a  babler,  and  Felix 
would  not  have  said  that  he  was  mad.     Whence  is  it,  that  so  many 
withstand  the  truth,  and  how  doth  it  happen  that  so  many  monstrous 
and  foolish  opinions  are  entertained  in  the  Christian  world  ?  do  they 
not  proceed  from  "  men  of  corrupt  minds  I"  Paul  tells   us  that  they 
do,  2  Tim.  iii.  8.     It  is  still  more  evident*  that  the  natural  man  doth 
not  receive  nor  discern   divine   things,  when   those  spiritual  things 
are    proposed  to    hfm    under  corporeal    similitudes  and   emblems. 
These  ought  to  illustrate  those   things  to  him,  but  through  the  cor« 
ruption  of  his"   understanding,  they  become  still  more  obscure  by 


—79.  99 

xneans  of  these  emblems  :  even  «*  Nicodemus,  a  master  in  Israel," 
could  not  understand  the  effectual  work  of  God  in  conversion,  when 
Jesus  explained  it  to  him  under  the  emblem  of  a  birth  ;  and  there- 
fore the  Saviour  said  to  him,  "  If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things, 
and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe,  if  I  tell  you  heavenly  things  ?" 
John  lii.  12.  When  Jesus  sp;dce  of  enjoying  fellowship  with  him 
under  the  emblem  of  eating  his  flesh,  an  J  drinking  his  blood,  the 
Capern<d'.es  could  not  discern  these  things  spiritua'Iy,  but  imagined 
that  he  spoke  of  a  bochly  eating  of  his  flesh,  and  drinking  of  his  blocd, 
which  appeared  like  foolishness  to  them,  and  caused  them  to  say, 
"  How  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ?  this  is  a  hard  saying, 
who  can  hear  it  I"  John  vi.  52,60.  Do  the  Papists,  the  true  off- 
spring of  the  Capernaites,  conduct  better,  when  they  say  that  the 
bread  and  wine  are  changed  into  the  very  body  and  blood  of  Christ, 
because  he  said  of  the  signs  in  the  supper,  "  This  is  my  body,  this 
is  my  blood,"  when  these  things  are  not  the  very  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,  but,  as  the  text  saith,  the  communion  of  his  body  and  blood  ? 
in  order  to  illustrate  this  we  must 

I.  Exhibit  the  state  of  the  controversy, 

II.  Confute  tiie  erroneous  opinion, 

III.  Answer  the  objections  of  the  adversaries. 

I.  The  state  of  the  controversy  is  whethei  "  the  bread  and  wine 
be  changed  into  the  very  budy  and  blood  of  Christ,"  as  the  instructor 
asks  in  the  seventy  eighth  question.  Therefore  we  have  not  to  do 
here  >,o  much  with  the  Lutherans,  who  fancy  that  Christ  is  present 
by  a  consubstantiation,  in,  with,  and  among  the  bread  and  wine,  in 
a  boqUy  manner,  and  that  we  eat  and  drink  him  in  this  manner. 
This  erroneous  opinion  proceeds  from  a  misunderstanding  of  the 
omnipresence  of  Christ,  as  though  he  were  present  every  where  as 
man  ;  but  we  will  not  busy  ourselves  purposely  with  this,  because 
we  have  already  proved  on  the  eighteenth  Lord's  day,  that  Christ  is 
not  present  every  where  with  his  body,  and  because  the  arguments 
Which  we  will  produce  against  the  opinion  of  which  we  shall  speak 
now,  will  for  the  most  part  confute  the  opinion  of  the  Lutherans  also. 
The  instructor  proposes  chiefly  the  controversy  between  us  and  the 
Papists,  who  fancy  that  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  suppei  are  chang- 
ed into  the  very  ,body  and-blood  of  Christ  by  a  transubstantiation,  or 
substantial  change  The^ imagine  that  upon  the  low  mumbling  of 
these  five  Latin  words,  hoc  enim  est  raeum  corpus,  "  for  this  is  my 
body,"  by  a  lawful  priest,  who  hath  a  right  intention,  the  bread  and 
wine  are  changed  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  or  that  the  sub- 
stance of  the  bread  and  v)nz  vanishcth,  and  that  the  body  and  bleo^ 


100  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

of  Chris':  descend  in  a  moment  from  heaven,  in  the  stead  of  the. 
■tibstance  of  the  breid  and  wine,  tht  outward  form  of  bread  and 
wine,  to  wit,  'he  size,  colour,  smell  and  taste  nevertheless  remaining 
After  which  essential  change  tiie  signs  of  the  supper  are  no  longer 
bread  a'td  wine,  but  the  very  body  and  blond  of  v_hrisi ;  yea,  that 
every  distinct  crumb  and  drop  is  the  whole  Christ,  as  he  was  born  of 
Mary,  and  as  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and  that  he  is  eaten  and 
diunk  in  this  manner. 

We  will  dlow  that  the  bread  and  wine  undergo  a  certain  change, 
inasmuch  as  ihey  are  set  apart  by  the  word  of  blessing  from  a  com- 
mon to  a  sacramental  use,  and  thus  have  a  special  relation  to  the  body 
and  blood  of  Curist.  We  also  acknowledge  most  readily,  that  Christ 
is  present  in  the  supper,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacrament,  in 
a  three  fold  manner,  (a)sacramentally,  signifying  and  sealing  his  suf- 
fering and  death,  (b;  According  to  his  G .'dhead,  which  is  present 
everywhere,  and  especially  with  this  institution,  (c)  He  is  also  ac- 
tively present  in  the  supper  by  his  holy  Spirit,  causing  us  to  eat  his 
body,  and  drink  his  blood  sacramentally  and  spiritually  ;  but  we  deny 
without  scruple,  that  Christ  is  bodily  present  in  the  sacrament,  that 
the  bread  and  wine  are  changed  into  his  body  and  blood,  and  that  we 
eat  and  drink  him  in  a  bodily  manner. 

II.  We  do  not  reject  this  opinion  from  levity,  but  on  account  of 
weighty  reasons ;  for, 

1.  The  Lord  Jesus  hath  a  real  body ;  for  "  he  was  made  like  his 
brethren  in  all  things,"  as  Paul  saith,  Htb.  ii.  17  ;  therefore  he  can- 
not be  present  in  many  places,  much  less  in  every  place  at  the  same 
time  :  this  hath  been  shown  more  fully  on  the  eighteenth  Lord's 
day.  How  is  it  then  possible  that  he  should  be  present  according  to 
the  body  wherever  the  supper  is  received  ;  that  the  bread  and  wine 
should  be  changed  into  his  body  and  blood  ;  and  that  every  individu- 
al should  eat  and  drink  of  them  ?  or  do  men  know  not  only  how  to 
change  bread  and  wine  into  a  whole  Christ,  but  also  how  to  change 
them  into  many  Christs  ?    to  what  doth  all  tins  tend  ? 

2.  It  hath  been  6hown  before,  that  to  a  sacrament  pertains  a  sign 
and  a  thing  signified  ;  but  by  transnbstantiation,  the  signs,  bread  and 
wine,  are  changed  into  the  things  signified,  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,  and  so  ihe  signs,  yea,  the  whole  nature  of  the  sacrament  is 
abolished. 

3.  We  do  not  find  such  a  substantial  change  in  any  of  the  othev 
sacraments.  Circumcision,  the  sacrament,  sign,  and  seal  of  God's 
covenant  was  never  changed  into  God's  covenant ;  the  paschal  lamb 
was  not  changed  into  the  Lord's  passover,  nor  the  angel  who  passed 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,79,  101 

through  Egypt,  into  Christ.  A'l  the  ceremonies  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment were  sacramental  signs  and  seals  of  Christ,  and  of  his  benefits  : 
but  not  one  of  them  was  ever  changed  into  Christ.  It  cannot  be  said 
in  reply  to  this,  that  those  signs  were  not  changed  into  the  thing  sig- 
nified, because  they  were  bare  types  of  the  sacraments  of  the  New- 
Testament  ;  for  this  is  not  true,  as  we  have  proved  upon  the  twenty- 
fiftn  Lord's  day.  But  besides  this,  bap  ism  is  a  sacrament  of  the 
New-Testament ;  but  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into  the 
blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  it  the  washing  away  of  sin  itself,  as  hath  ap- 
peared before :  what  reason  then  can  there  be,  why  the  signs  of  the 
Lord's  supper  should  be  changed  into  the  things  signified,  more  than 
the  signs  of  the  other  sacraments? 

4.  This  substantial  change  militates  also  against  the  words  of  the 
institution  and  of  the  blessing,  "  this  is  my  body,"  by  the  low  mum- 
bling of  which  words  in  Latin,  they  will  make  the  body  and  blood 
of  Christ  of  the  bread  and  wine  ;  for  the  word  '•  this  "  relates  to  the 
bread,  which  Christ  took,  broke,  and  distributed  with  the  cup,  but 
not  to  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  the  verb  substantive  "is,"  doth 
not  change  these  signs,  but  simply  showeth  that  the  bread  and  wine 
are  sacramental.  The  following  words,  kt  my  body,"  do  not  effect 
any  change,  yea,  they  do  not  make  a  full  sense  by  themselves,  but 
only  as  they  are  connected  with  the  verb  substantive  "  is,"  which 
doth  not  change.  The  Papists  will  have  that  the  bread  is  not  chan- 
ged by  the  word  hoc,  "  this,"  nor  by  the  wod  est,  "  is,"  nor  rby  the 
word  cor/ms,  "  body,"  nor  by  the  word  meum,  "  my  ;"  but  only  by 
tun,  the  last  syllable  of  meum,  "  my."  But  what  is  there  in  t';is  sylla- 
ble urn,  that  it  can  do  more  than  Christ,  or  the  apostles  did  ?  for  they 
never  made  flesh  and  blood,  much  less  a  whole  Christ,  and  many 
Christs  of  bread  and  wine.  What  magician  ever  performed  any 
uncommon  feat  by  mumbling  two  letters  ?  The  Egyptian  magi- 
cians knew  how  to  change  rods  into  serpents,  and  water  into  blood 
by  their  enchantments,  but  this  was  a  mere  childish  trick  in  compar- 
ison with  the  magic  art  of  the  Papists,  who  are  able  to  do  so  much 
greater,  yea,  unheard  of  wonders,  with  two  letters.  Who  "will  be= 
lieve  this  ?  surely  none  who  will  not  renounce  his  humanity.  The 
apostle  Paul  calls  the  signs  bread  and  the  cup,  even  after  they  have 
been  bless»d,  1  Cor.  xi.  26 — 28.  It  is  true,  things  that  have  been 
changed  retain  their  names,  which  they  had  before  ;  the  serpents 
of  Moses  and  of  the  Magicians  are  called  rods  after  they  were  be. 
come  serpents,  Exod.  vii.  2,  and  Simon  is  called  a  leper  after  he 
was  cleansed,  Matt  xxvi.  6.  But  there  were  then  certain  and  indis- 
putable evidences,  that  those  things  were  truly  changed  :  every  per» 


lOi  TRANSUBSTANTIATJON  CONFUTED. 

son  could  see  that  those  rods  were  no  longer  rods,  but  serpenti, 
and  that  Simon  was  no  longer  a  leper,  since  they  were  all  changed, 
not  only  with  respect  to  their  nature,  but  also  with  respect  to  their 
accidents  :  let  the  Papists  show  us  this  also  of  the  bread  and  wine, 
and  that  it  is  no  longer  bread  and  wine,  but  the  body  and  blood  o? 
Christ,  yea,  the  whole  Christ,  as  he  was  humbled  and  exalted,  and 
we  will  then  see,  that  the  signs  are  called  bread  and  wine  ac- 
cording to  their  former,  and  not  according  to  their  prese.it  nature. 

5.  The  end  for  which  the  supper  was  instituted  was  K  the  remem- 
brance "  of  Christ.  Now  it  is  evident,  that  we  neither  institute,  nor 
give  any  thing  in  remembrance  of  aught  that  is  present  ;  the  passo- 
ver  was  a  memorial,  to  cause  Israel  anil  his  posterity  to  remember 
the  benefit  which  had  been  shown  to  them  formerly,  that  their  first- 
born were  spared,  and  not  slain  in  F.gypt,  Exod.  xii.  14,  24—  27, 
Therefore  Christ  cannot  be  present,  according  to  his  body,  in  the 
supper,  neither  can  the  bread  and  wine  be  the  real  body  and  blood  of 
Christ :  for  otherwise  the  supper  would  not  be  a  memorial  of  him. 

6.  This  Popish  pretence  militates   against    many  articles  of  the 
faith,  which  ail  Christians,  yea,   which  the  Papists  themselves  re- 
ceive :  for  every  one  confesseth    that  God  alone    is    the    Almighty 
Mdker ;  but  they  subvert  this  by  their    doctrine    of  tfansubstantia- 
tion  ;  the  priest,  since  he  makes  Christ  of  Bread  and  wine,  and  that 
as  often  as  he  pleases,  is  therefore  above  the  Almighty  Maker,  who 
cannot  make  a  God,  any  more  than  he    can  deny    himself:  but  the 
priest  can  say,   "  He  who  created  me  without  me,  is  created  by  me," 
"  We  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  ;  who  was 
conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary  ;  who  Suffer- 
ed," Sec.       But  how  can    men,  who   pretend    to  believe    the    same 
things    with    us,   say    that   the   Christ   who   is   under  the   forms  of 
bread  and  wine,  is  the  only  begotten  Son   of  the   Father,  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  born  of  Mary  ?     lie  is  surely  made  of  bread. 
Did  the  breaden  God  of  the  Papists  suffer  I   did  he  die,  was  he  buri- 
ed, and  did  he  descend  into  hell  ?  did  he  rise  again  and  ascend   into 
heaven,  and  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  doth  he  come  down    out 
heaven  ?  and  is  there  no  Christ  then  in  heaven  ?  and  is  all  this  done 
at  the  beck  of  the  masspriest  ?  and  that  a    thousand    times?      I  low 
doth  this  agree  with  the  catholic  creed  ?  who  dares,   who   can    con- 
trive and  utter  such    fantastical    things  ?     Away    with    the  creed  of 
every  Christian,  if  the  Fapists  believe  rightly  here. 

7.  We  must  deny  our  senses,  if  we  shall  believe  that  bread  and 
wine  are  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ  ;  for  this  militates  against 
nearly  all  the  senses  of  every  man  at  all  limes  ;  all  men  do  at  all. 


—79.  103 

times  see  bread  and  wine  in  the  supper,  they  smell,  taste,  and  feel 
thein,  and  must  say  without  any  scruple,  that  such  a  small  fragment, 
or  round  wafer  hath  neither  the  bulk,  nor  the  form,  nor  the  mem- 
bers of  a  man,  as  Christ  was.  How  then  can  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
a  whole  Christ  be  there  ?  Could  those  priests  delude  our  senses, 
and  those  of  every  other  man,  as  they  pretend  that  they  can  change 
the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  they  would 
then  gain  much  of  us  :  but  they  fall  short  here,  and  therefore  they 
seek  to  put  us  off  with  vvords,  saying  that  the  bodily  senses  cannot 
judge  of  spiritual  mysteries.  We  say  this  also  of  mysteries,  which 
are  wholly  spiritual ;  but  the  mystery  of  the  Lord's  supper  is  partly- 
bodily,  and  the  dispute  relates  only  to  that  part  of  it  which  is  bodily  : 
they  say  that  there  is  no  bread  nor  wine  in  the  supper,  but  only 
Christ,  his  body  and  blood  ;  this  we  deny.  What  now  is  more  prop- 
er tl  an  that  we  should  judge  of  that  which  is  bodily  by  our  bodily 
senses  ?  Did  not  Christ  appeal  to  the  trial  of  the  outward  senses, 
when  the  apostles  doubted  whether  he  were  risen,  and  might  not  be 
a  Spirit?  Luke  xxiv.  36 — 41.  But  say  these  men,  the  outward 
senses  can  be  deceived.  True,  when  the  senses  are  disordered,  the 
object  far  off,  and  when  some  other  body  is  between  our  senses  and 
the  object ;  but  who  will  say  that  the  senses  fail,  when  they  are  not 
disordered,  when  the  object  is  near  at  hand,  and  when  there  is  no 
let  between  the  object  and  the  senses  ?  And  when  the  senses  of  all 
men  judge  in  the  same  manner  ai  all  times,  must  we  then  yet  pluck 
out  our  eyes,  stop  our  nostrils,  deny  our  taste,  and  cutoff  our  hands? 
must  I  be  wilfully  and  knowingly  a  fool,  that  I  may  believe  that 
horrendum  mysterium,  "  that  horrible  mystery?" 

8.  This  transubsiantiation  militates  against  the  nature  of  every 
change  ;  for  when  any  thing  is  changed,  then  (a)  that  which  is 
changed,  is  changed  not  only  in  its  nature,  but  also  in  its  forms, 
qualities  and  accidents,  which  are  changed  as  well  as  its  nature  : 
when  the  rods  were  changed  into  serpents,  the  water  into  blood,  the 
dust  into  lice,  they  had  not  then  any  longer  the  forms,  qualities,  and 
accidents  of  rods,  water,  and  dust,  but  of  serpents,  blood,  and  lice  : 
but  these  men  will  have  that  bread  and  wine  are  fltsh  and  blood,  yea, 
the  whole  Christ:  when  notwithstanding  the  colour,  smell,  taste, 
and  all  the  outward  forms  of  bread  and  wine  remain,  (b)  When  one 
thing  is  changed  into  another,  a  new  thing  is  then  produced  and 
created  by  a  miracle;  for  instance,  when  the  water  was  changed 
into  wine,  John  ii.  9,  10,  11,  the  wine,  which  did  not  exist  before, 
was  then  newly  created  by  a  miracle;  but  when  bread  and  wine  are 
changed  into  Christ,  is  he  then  newly  created  ?  he  was  not  then  be- 


104,  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED. 

fore.     And  so  transubstantiation   must  lead   a  person   to  deny  the 
Saviour. 

9.  Finally,    this   mystery  of  iniquity  is  replete  with  absurdities ; 
for  if  there  be  such  an  essential  change,  the  creature  must  then  eat 
his  God,  consume  him  in  his   stomach,    and  cast  him  forth  into  the 
draught.     Abominable  !  yea,  more  abominable  than  the  practice  of 
the  ancient  idolaters,  condemned  of  old,  "  who  made  a  God  of  part 
of  the  wood,  by  which   they  warmed   themselves,  baked  bread,  and 
Toasted  roast,"  in  order  to  satisfy  their  appetite,   and  worshiped  that 
God,    Isaiah   xliv.  1  i — 20.      The    Popish   God  may  be  devoured  by 
every  kind  of  vermin,  and  may  moulder  in  itself.     Observe  this  con- 
tradiction,   the  priest   sahh,  u  This  is  my  body,"  and  yet  the  bread 
doth  not  become   his  body  upon  those  words,   when  lie  nevertheless 
speaks  of  his  own  body,  but  it  becomes  the  body  of  another,  even  of 
Christ.  YVlut  a  wonderful  kind  of  philosophy  have  these  men,  when 
they  must  persuade  themselves  by  transubstantiation,  that  substances, 
Christ,  his  flesh  and   blood  can  exist  without  forms,  qualities,  or  ac- 
cidents,   flesh  and    blood  without  the  coiour,   smell  or  taste  of  flesh 
and  blood,  that  a  human  body  of  an  ordinary  stature  and  bulk,  can 
exist  and  be  contained  in  a  small,  and  slender  wafer  !  still  more  won- 
ders, forms,  qualities  and  accidents  can  exist  without  substances  and 
essences,  in  which  they  inhere  ;  the  colour,  smell  and  taste  of  bread 
and  wine  can  exist,  when  there  is  no  bread  and  wine  ;  yea,  one  sub- 
stance can   have  the  forms,  qualities  and  accidents  of  another  sub- 
stance, which  hath  not  those  of  its  own.  The  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ, 
which  have  not  tin.  colour,    smell  or  taste   of  flesh  and  blood,    have 
that  of  bread   and  wine.     H.,w  do  they  extricate  themselves  here  ? 
They  say,  we   must  act  hearken  to   reason,    when  we  attend  to  the 
mysteries  of  faith,  but  must  lead  reason  captive  :  but  this  is  a  matter 
in  dispute,   whether  transubstantiation   be  a   mystery  ;  we  deny  it  ; 
the  mysreries  of  faith  are  indeed  above,  but  not  contrary  to  reason  ; 
but  this  Popish  invention   is  contrary  to   reason,  and  must  therefore 
be  rejected  by  reason.     Let  it  be  admitted,  that  this  doctrine  of  the 
Papists  is  a  mystery,  it  is  however  in  part  bodily,  and  must  therefore 
be  examined  by  reason.    When  scripture  subjects  reason  to  her,  she 
doth  not  then  deprive  us  of  our  reason,  but  will  rather  employ  it  even 
with  respect  to  this  opinion,  also  ;  therefore  the  man  of  God  saith  in 
eur  text,  M  I  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  1  say  ;  the  cup  of 
blessing,"  &c.     This  cloak  of  shame  helps  still  less,  when  we  con- 
aider  that  we  attack  transubstantiation  not  only  by  arguments  from 
reason,  but  also  from  scripture. 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  l£5 

III.  But  do  not  those  men  offer  aught,  in  order  to  prove  this  doc- 
trine ?  yes,    What  do  they  alledge  ? 

1.  They  are  very  ready  to  say,  that  God  is  almighty,  and  is   able 
to  change  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  upon 
the    muttering   of  the    five   words:   Cut  can  God,   because  he   is 
almighty,    do  aught  that  is  a  contradiction  ?  God  is  almighty,  yet 
"  he  cannot   deny  himself,"  Titus  ii.  13.     «  He  cannot  lie,"  Titus  i. 
2.     "  It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,"  Heb.  vi.  18.     And  so  it  is  also 
impossible  for  him  to  change  the  bread   and  wine  into  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  j  for  it  is  a  contradiction,  that   the  body  of  Christ, 
-which  exists  already,  should  exist  afterwards  newly ;  that  his  body 
should  be  at  the   same  time   in   heaven   and   on  earth ;  and  that  it 
Should  be  at  the  same  time  both  great  and  small ;  but  although  there 
were  no  contradiction  in  this,  and  although  God  could  do  it,  doth  he 
therefore  do  it  ?  can  we  conclude   that  a  tiling   really  is,   because  it 
can  be  ?  God  could  make  thousands  of  men  more  on  the  earth  than 
he  hath  made  ;  doth  he  therefore   make  them  ?  No  :  God  doth  not 
do  all  that  he  can,  but  all  that  he  will,  and  «  w  hatsoever  he  pleaseth," 
according  to  Psalm  cxv.  S.     We  must  be  certain,  that  he  will  do  a 
thing,  before  we  conclude  from  his  power  that  he  will  do  it,  or  thai 
he  doth  it  at  present.     The  leper  reasoned   better  than  the  Papists, 
when  he  said  to  Jesus,  Matt.  viii.  2,  «  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst 
make  me  clean."     Therefore  they  must  prove  that   God  will  do  it, 
if  he  even  can  do  it. 

2.  They  imagine  that  they  are   clear  here,   because  Christ  saith, 
n  This  is   my  body,   and  the  cup  is  my  blood,"    Matt.  xxvi.  2S,  27, 
28.     But  there  are  many  learned  men  among  the  Papists,  who  per- 
ceive that  this  passage  is  not   to  be  understood  literally,   and  there- 
fore they   betake   themselves  to   their  traditions  :  Scotus  saith,  "  I 
hold  this  proposition,  because  the  church  holds  it."     G.  Athaides,  a 
divine  of  the  king  of  Portugal  at  the  council  of  Trent,  disapproved 
of  making  use  of  the  scripture  in  this  controversy,  that  they  might 
not  be  ridiculed  by  the  heretics  ;  and  he  said  that  the  words,  "  this 
is  my  body,"  were  much  plainer,  when  they  were  not  understood  in 
the  sense  of  the  church  of  Rome,  than  when  they  were   so  under- 
stood ;"  and  the  cardinal  Cajetan,  said,  "  that  there  was  no  necessity 
to  understand  these  words  in  their  literal  sense."  Was  he  not  right? 
For  (a)  Christ  calls  himself  "  a  door,"  John  x.  9,  "  the  way,"  John 
xiv.  6,  and  "  the  true  vine,"  John  xv.  1.     No  man  will  therefore  say 
that  he  was  changed  into  a  door,  a  way  and  vine.  What  reason  have 
we  then  to  say  from  Matt.  xxvi.  20,  27,  28,  that  bread  and  vrine  are 
Vol.  ii.  O 


106  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED. 

changed  into  liis  flesh  and  blood  ?   And,  that  we  may  abide  by  the 
words,  "  this  is  my  body,"  Paul  b -ith  of  believers  that  they  are  «■  the 
body  of  Christ,"  1  Cor.  >:ii.  26.     Why  should  we  then   understand 
one   and   the  same   phrase  more  literally  in   one    passage    than   in 
another,  (b)  The  words,  w  this  is  my  body,"  are  to  be  understood  ac- 
cording to  the  usual  phraseology  of  the  Hebrews,  who  said,  this  is, 
instead  of  this  signifieth.     We   see    this  in    Joseph's  exposition  of 
Pharaoh's  dream.  Gen.  xli.  26,  27.    "  The  seven  kine  and  the  seven 
ears  art    seven  years."     For  the    Hebrews  have  no  word  which  an- 
swers to  our  Avoid,   "  it  signifies."     Do  net  Ave  ourselves   say  of  a 
picture,  or  of  a  graven  ima^e,  this  is  that  man,  that  Avoman  ?  do  not 
ask  us  t  Jen,  Avhy  Christ  did  not  rather  say,  this  signifieth  my  body,  than 
this  is  my  body,  if  he  meant,  this  signifieth  my  body  ;  for  he  spoke  ac- 
cording to  the  usual  language  of  his  people,  (c)  This  is  a  sacramental 
phrase,  according  to  the   nature  of  all  the  sacraments,  in  which  the 
name  of  the  thing   signified  is   given  to  the   sign.     Circumcision  is 
called  "  the  covenant  of  God,"   Gen.   xvii.   "  The  lamb  the    Lord's 
passover,"  that   is,    passing  over,    Lxod.   xii.     Christ  also  is  called 
"our  passovur,  sacrificed  for  us,"  1  Cor.  v.  7    and  Paul  saith,  "  The 
Rock  was  Christ,"  1  Cor.  x.  4    Baptism  is  also  Called  u  the  washing 
aAvay  of  sins,"  Acts  xxii.  16.     Why  then  should  Ave  depart  from  this 
sacramental    phraseology  in   the    supper?  there  is  no    reason;  but 
there  are  indeed  reasons  and  causes  why  Christ    calls  the  bread  and 
wine  his  body  and  blood.     Surely  not  to  teach  us  transubstantiation, 
for  this  is  a  con'Li,diction,  but  for  two  reasons  ;  first,  on  at  count  of 
the   agreement  of  the  sign  Avith  the  thing  signified,   because  of  the 
Avoid  of  institution  ;  and  then  on  account  of  the  sealing  virtue  of  this 
sacrament,   according  to  the  Avord  of  promise.     This  is  clearly  dis- 
covered to  us  in  the   seventy  ninth    question,   Avhich  read  :  Ave  have 
explained   it  more  fully  on  the   former  Lord's  day    (d)    We  add  to 
this  also    that  the  words,  "  this  is  my  body,"  cannot  be  understood 
literally  ;  for  if  we  understand  them  so,  then  Christ  Avas  Avhole  and 
broken,   alive  mi  dead  at  the  table  ;  for  the  sunper  exhibits  him  as 
dead  ;  he  did  then  eat  his  own  flesh,    and  drink    his  own  blood  ;  the 
apostles  did    then  eat  his  broken   body,   and  drink    bis   shed   blood, 
while    he  s.:t  at  the   table.     Paul    explains  these   Avords   spiritually, 
when  he  calls  bread  and  wine  in  the  text  the  communion  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  Christ.     Th<     Papists   themselves  cannot  understand 
these  words  literally*  because   they  must  explain  the  Avord  "is"  by 
"  let  it  be,   or  become,"  and  tliey  must  explain  tlv.  cup  by  the  Avine 
which  is  in  the  cup      Let  them  do  then  what  they  will,  they  cannot 
find  a  proof  of  transubstantiation  in  those  Avords.     Therefore  it  can 


XXIX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  107 

Uqt  avail  the  Romanists  to  say  that  we  must  speak  plainly  in  a  w  ill, 
and  that  Christ  made,  his  will  here  ;  for  Christ  did  not  make  his  will 
here,  hut  gave  the  seal  of  it;  .and  hesides  this,  the  figurative  tense 
is  plain,  and  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  all  sacraments.  It  it  said  that 
we  ought  to  speak  plainly  in  a  will  ;  we  deny  it:  for  Jacob  spake 
figuratively,  when  he  made  his  will,  Gen.  xlix.  It  is  not  customary 
to  speak  literally  in  sacraments;  if  ^hrist  had  spoken  literally  in 
the  supper,  his  words  would  have  been  dark  and  unintelligable  to  a 
people,  who  were  accustomed  to  figurative  phrases  in  the  sacraments. 
The  Papists  themselves,  as  hath  been  shown,  cannot  take  these 
words  in  their  literal  sense. 

3.  They  imagine  that  the  Lord  Jesus  decides  this  controversy  on 
their  side,  when  he  saith,  John  vi.  55,  56.  '•  My  flesh  is  meat  in- 
deed and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed.  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and 
drinketh  my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him  "  We  reply  to 
this,  first  of  all,  that  Christ  doth  not  speak  here  of  the  supper,  and 
that  these  words  do  not  therefore  serve  their  purpose  ;  for  the  sup- 
per was  not  yet  instituted,  when  Christ  spake  these  words,  and  he 
had  not  respect  in  them  to  the  breaking  ot  his  body,  and  the  shedding 
of  his  blood,  as  in  the  supper,  but  to  the  manna,  as  appeareth  from 
the  foregoing  and  following  parts  of  this  chapter.  But  however  this 
may  be,  these  words  cannot  be  understood  literally  ;  for  thin  our 
communion  with  Christ  would  be  a  bodily  communion,  and  he  would 
have  communion  with  the  ungodly.  Christ,  when  we  receive  his 
flesh  and  his  b'ood,  "  dwells  in  us,  as  we  dwell  in  him  "  that  is, 
spiritually,  for  who  can  exist  bodily  in  Christ  .?  The  Saviour  himself 
will  not  permit  us  to  understand  these  words  literaliy,  as  the  Caper- 
naites  understood  them  ;  for  he  saith,  vrs.  63.  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth,  the  flesh  profketh  nothing:  the  words  that  1  speak  unto 
you,  they  are  Spirit,  and  thty  are  life."  But  Christ  saith  that  his 
flesh  and  blood  are  meat  and  drink  "  indeed."  Mush  it  then  be 
proper  meat  and  drink?  No,  for  spiritual  meat  and  drink  is  meat 
and  drink  indeed  for  the  soul.  Christ  is  u  the  true  light,"  John  h  9, 
"the  true  vine,"  John  xv.  1,  yet  he  is  not  therefore  a  proper,  but  a 
spiritual  light  and  vine. 

4.  Antiquity  is  for  us,  say  these  men  ;  but  hear  what  others  of 
the  Popish  communion  say.  One  suth,  the  fathers  (they  spoke  n- 
deed  as  we  do  on  this  subject)  spake  unadvisedly  ;  another,  before 
the  Lateran  council,  every  one  might  believe  in  this  matter  as  he 
pleased:  a  third,  before  that  council  transubstanmtion  was  not  yet 
an  article  of  faith  ;  they  saw  indeed  that  before  the  eighth  century, 
*betr  was  neither  jot  nor  tittle  of  transubstantiation  to  be  found  m 


108  TRANSUBSTANTTATION  CONFUTES. 

the  writings  of  the  fathers.  It  is  also  evident  ;  for  when  in  the  year 
754,  the  council  of  Constantinople  condemned  the  images,  they  gave 
this  leason  for  that  condemnation,  that  they  had  the  image  of  Christ, 
the  substance,  the  nature  of  bread,  in  the  supper.  The  worship- 
pers of  images,  seeing  themselves  forshamed  and  condemned  by 
this  proceeding,  restored  the  images  in  the  year  787,  in  the  second 
council  of  Nice,  saying  that  the  bread  was  not  an  image  of  Christ, 
but  his  very  body,  not  by  a  transubstantiatidn,  but  by  the  union  of 
the  bread  and  wine  with  the  Godhead,  the  nature  of  the  bread  and 
wine  nevertheless  remaining,  as  John  Damascene  spake.  This 
caused  much  contention  among  the  ecclesiastics  in  the  following  cen- 
turies ;  but  in  the  tenth  century,  that  iron  and  leaden  age,  the  opin- 
ion of  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ  in  the  supper  gained  ground  ;"* 
and  in  the  eleventh  century  Berenger,  because  he  opposed  the  bodily 
presence  of  Christ  in  the  supper,  was  condemned  in  three  councils. 
The  word  transubstantiatlon  was  used  first  of  all  by  a  certain  Stephen, 
bishop  of  Autun,  in  Burgundy,  in  the  year  11C0;  and  in  the  year 
1215,  the  council  of  Lateran  authorized  it,  allowing  it  to  be  used  of 
the  Lord's  supper.  This  new  doctrine  could  not  however  obtain 
the  approbation  of  the  council  of  Florence,  in  the  year  1439  ;  b\!t 
tlvs  mystery  of  iniquity  was  fully  established  in  the  council  of  Trent. 
How  then  can  they  talk  of  antiquity  ;  the  ancients  of  the  first  and 
best  antiquity  knew  nothing  of  the  substantial  change  of  the  bread  and 
wine  ;  and  when  the  innovators  began  to  mutter  these  things  from  a 
love  of  images,  they  were  immediately  opposed  until  they  had  mas- 
tered the  truth,  suppressed  it.  and  endeavoured  to  banish  it  out  of 
the  world  ;  but  the  witnesses,  who  had  been  slain,  were  raised  up, 
and  stand  until  this  day  on  their  feet,  to  bear  witness  against  the  Ro- 
mish apost/cy. 

But  are  we  then,  as  the  Papists  slander  us,  Socinians,  who  assert 
that  the  supper  contains  only  bare  signs,  to  serve  as  memorials  and 
representations,  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  broken,  and  his  blood 
shed  for  the  confirmation  of  his  heavenly  doctrine  ?  No,  we  have 
professed  before,  that  Christ  was  present  here  in  a  sacramental  man- 
ner ;  working  in  a  divine  and  spiritual  manner,  and  that  we  eat  and 
drink  him  thus  :  and  therefore  we  detest  the  Socinians,  who  say 
that  the  whole  virtue  of  the  covenant  consists  in  the  signification  of 
the  breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  wine,  repre- 
senting the  suffering  of  Christ,  as  a  prophet ;  for  they  deny  thus  the 
satisfaction  of  Christ  by  his  "  blood,  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins." 
the  sealing  virtue  of  the  supper,  and  the  true  and  spiritual  commu- 
nion of  believers  with  his  sufferings,  body  and  blood.     But  is  a  sa- 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  73,  79.  10? 

crament  then  nothing  more  than  a  bare  sign  and  figure,  and  not  a 
seal  also  ?  doth  Christ  say  no  more  than,  this  is  a  memorial  of  my 
body  and  blood,  when  he  calls  the  bread  and  wine  his  body  and 
blood,  and  the  New  Testament  in  his  blood  ?  and  is  nothing  but  the 
breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  wine  significative, 
and  is  not  the  eating  and  drinking  of  what  he  ca'ls  his  body  and 
blood  so  too  ?  and  have  believers  then  no  communion  with  his  body 
and  blood  ?  But  in  this  manner  must  the  Socinians,  that  they  may 
overturn  the  foundations  of  Christianity,  enervate  the  sacraments, 
and  the  words  of  Jesus,  who  never  spake  one  word  in  vain  ;  but  we 
have  learned  better,  and  have  more  reverence  than  this  for  the  insti- 
tutions and  words  of  God  ;  and  therefore  nothing  but  a  mere  desire 
to  slander  us  induces  the  Papists  to  say  that  we  give  only  bare 
signs. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  the  orthodoxy  and  unblamableness  of  our  doctrine, 
and  the  conformity  of  it  to  the  word  of  God,  since  we  do  not  ascribe 
too  much  to  the  sacraments,  that  we  may  avoid  Popery,  nor  too  lit- 
tle, that  we  may  avoid  Socinianism.  But,  hearers,  those  of  you  who 
receive  this  supper  at  any  time,  is  your  practice  likewise  so  orthodox 
and  unblamable  ?  It  would  be  your  happiness,  and  conduce  to  the 
glory  of  Jesus,  and  of  his  church  if  it  were  ;  but  how  many  are  there 
of  you,  who  do  not  conduct  aright  in  this  matter !  for, 

1.  Some  act  toward  this  supper  no  otherwise  than  Socinians,  and 
as  if  it  were  a  mere  sign  of  a  Christian  profession.  Is  it  not  true  ? 
for  have  ye  had  any  exercises  of  soul  with  respect  to  the  spiritual 
matters,  which  are  exhibited  and  sealed  in  the  supper,  so  that  ye 
did  by  faith  behold  and  enjoy  Christ  in  his  sufferings,  benefits,  and 
]cve,  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  when  ye  received  the  signs  ? 
Verily  many  know  nothing  of  this  j  it  sufficeth  them  to  be  good 
Christians,  to  appear  at  the  table,  to  receive  the  bread  and  wine,  to 
eat  and  drink  of  it,  especially  if  they  think  at  the  time  of  the  suffer- 
ings and  death  of  Christ ;  they  imagine  then  that  they  have  quitted 
themselves  well;  but  was  it  our  duty  to  forsake  the  Papists,  that  we 
might  receive  nothing  but  bare  signs  ?  doth  this  suffice  to  eat 
Christ's  flesh  and  drink  his  blood  ?  doth  this  prove  that  his  body  v/as 
broken,  and  his  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins  ?    I  conceive  not 


UO  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

I  assure  you,  who  conduct  in  this  manner,  that  ye  do  thus  deny  out' 
true  Christian  communion,  our  purified  doctrine,  and  your  profes- 
sion, that  ye  have  no  part  in  him,  and  his  sufferings,  and  that  the  sup- 
per is  no  seal  to  you  Hear  how  Jesus  confirms  this  with  a  double 
verily,  John  vi.  53,  "  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  except  ye  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in 
you." 

2.  Others  conduct  toward  the  supper  like  the  Papists,  We  have 
departed  out  of  the  Romish  Egypt,  but  many  return  thither  again 
in  their  hearts.  >t  is  evident  ;  for  they  hold  that  it  is  absolutely  ne- 
cessary to  partake  of  this  sacrament,  as  if  that  were  conversion,  an 
entering  into  Christ  and  into  his  covenant  by  faith,  u  partaking  of 
the  signs,  eating  the  flesh,  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  Lord.  Doth 
it  not  appear,  friends,  when  ye  are  perfectly  easy  and  unconcerned 
about  the  forgiveness  of  your  sins,  and  your  eternal  salvation?  for 
ye  have  no  other  ground  for  your  hope.  And  observe,  before  ye  ap- 
proach to  the  supper,  ye  are  somewhat  concerned  and  uneasy,  ye 
will  then  be  moral,  and  desist  in  some  measure  from  your  usual 
sins  and  dissoluteness  ;  but  after  ye  have  partaken,  presently  both 
your  anxiety  and  morality  are  at  an  end,  and  ye  return  to  your  old 
sins  and  dissoluteness  again*  What  think  ye,  do  ye,  who  behave 
thus,  conduct  at  all  differently  from  the  Papists,  who  think,  when  they 
eat  the  bread  in  the  supper,  that  they  eat  Christ  himself,  and  there- 
fore are  satisfied,  and  unconcerned  ?  do  ye  not  evidence  by  this  conduct 
that  ye  are  sensual,  not  having  the  Spirit  ?  do  ye  not  show  that  ye 
are  Papists  in  your  hearts  ?  What  doth  it  mean  to  trust  in  the 
flesh,  of  which  Paul  disapproveth,  Phil.  lii.  3,  if  it  be  not  this  ?  Can- 
not Christ's  flesh  profit  us,  as  he  informs  us,  John  vi.  63,  how  then 
ean  the  bread  and  wine  profit  us,  without  his  Spirit,  who  quickeneth 
us?  Mas!  how  will  your  ungrounded  rest  be  disturbed,  when  ye 
3hall  pretend  that  ye  "  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  the  presence  of 
Christ ;  for  he  will  say  to  you,  1  know  you  not,  whence  ye  are  :  de- 
part from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  He  foretels  this  himself, 
Luke  xiii.  26,    2f. 

Therefore  rouse  up  from  your  carelesncss,  awake  and  be  earnestly 
engaged  in  seeking  an  interest  in  his  body  and  blood,  that  your  sins 
may  be  forgiven,  and  that  ye  may  thus  partake  of  the  supper,'  as  a 
sign  and  seal- 
But  with  respect  to  you,  O  believers,  whose  souls  cannot  be  satis- 
fied, nor  contented  with  the  bread  and  wine,  endeavour  to  conduct 
more  orthodoxly  toward  the  sacrament,  and  therefore, 

\,  Seek  a  distinct  knowledge  and  apprehension  of  the  nature  of 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  78,  79.  1 U 

the  supper  s  we  mu6t  "  discern  the  body  of  the  Lord  "  in  the  supper} 
if  we  do  not  wish  to  "eat  and  drink  judgment  to  ourselves,"  1  Cor. 
xi  29.  In  this  respect  Paul  saith  in  the  text,  '«  I  speak  as  to  wise 
men,  judge  ye  what  I  say."  We  must  therefore  become  wise,  if  we 
shall  conduct  judiciously  toward  this  seal  of  the  covenant ;  we  are 
sometimes  assaulted  by  deceivers,  who  corrupt  the  sacrament ;  if 
we  have  not  our  senses  then  well  exercised,  how  shall  we  defend 
ourselves,  and  vindicate  the  precious  truth  ?  We  must  conduct  our- 
selves  wisely,  and  according  to  the  rule  of  faith,  in  partaking  of  the 
supper  ;  but  we  cannot  do  this  if  we  have  not  a  sufficient  knowledge 
of  it  ;  therefore  endeavour  to  "  grow  not  only  in  grace,  but  also  in 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  as  Peter  admonishelh,  2 
Peter  hi.  18. 

2.  Be  not  satisfied  with  knowing  Christ  only  in  the  letter,  and  in 
the  outward  signs,  but  endeavour  to  know  him  also  in  the  Spirit, 
nevertheless  according  to  the  word  :  "  He  hath  given  you  an  under- 
standing,  that  ye  may  know  him  who  is  true,"  according  to  1  John 
v.  20.  «  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  cut  ©f  darkness, 
hath  shined  in  your  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,"  saith  Paul  2  Cor.  iv.  6, 
It  behooves  you  to  exercise  yourselves  in  this,  *  that  ye  may  be  fill- 
ed with  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  under- 
standing," as  the  same  apostle  desired,  Col.  i.  9.  This  would  not 
only  warm  your  souls,  quicken  you  by  the  supper,  and  deliver  you, 
who  know  the  trijth,  from  the  powei  of  your  corruption,  but,  if  I 
may  so  speak,  would  transubstantiate,  or  change  you  into  a  confor- 
mity to  Christ ;  for  when  he  is  contemplated  in  his  excellency,  he 
i  transmits  by  such  a  contemplation  his  glorious  holiness,  and  holy 
glory  into  the  soul,  as  Paul  teacheth,  2  Cor.  iii.  IS.  "  We  all  with 
i  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord."  The  apostle  hath  respect  to  Moses,  whose  face  shone 
with  a  dazzling  brightness,  in  consequence  of  his  beholding  the  Lord 
on  the  mount.  See  Exod.  xxxiv.  29,  30,  3.  Verily  a  better  and  a 
more  real  change  than  the  Popish  transubstantiation. 

3.  Have  nevertheless  a  becoming  esteem  for  the  outward  signs, 
that  ye  may  contemplate  and  use  them  with  reverence  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord.  The  signs,  considered  in  themselves,  are  profita- 
ble only  to  the  body,  but  considered  sacramentally,  they  are  the  bread 
and  wine  of  the  Lord .  They  are  indeed  signs  instituted  by  the 
Lord  himself,  they  signify  the  mos'  important  mysteries,  the  painful 
sufferings,  the  testament,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  a  partaking  of 


112  TRANSUBSTANTIATION  CONFUTED, 

the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Lord ;  they  are  seals  and  pledges  of  fheae 
things  :  the  Lord  hath  enjoined  on  you  to  make  use  of  them,  that 
ye  may,  by  means  of  them,  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood,  yea, 
he  breathes  his  Spirit  into  them,  and  so  causes  you  to  eat  his  flesh 
and  to  drink  his  blood,  and  he  thereby  "  sups  with  you,  and  ye  with 
him,"  as  he  promiseth,  Rev.  iii.  20.  Therefore  the  text  saith,  "  the 
bread  and  the  cup  are  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,"  and  I  Cor.  xi.  27.     "  The  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord." 

4.  Endeavour  therefore  also  to  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood 
of  the  Lord  in  and  by  these  signs.  If  we  will  "  live,  and  desire  that 
we  should  dwell  in  him  ;  and  he  in  us,  we  must  then  eat  the  flesh 
and  drink  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man,"  according  to  his  word,  John 
vi.  53,  56.  Therefore  he  said,  when  he  gave  the  bread  and  the  cup 
to  his  disciples,  "  Take,  eat  and  drink  ;  for  this  is  my  body  and 
blood."  See  what  we  have  said  on  the  former  Lord's  day,  in  the 
application. 

Show  then  also  the  virtue  of  the  sacrament  in  all  your  conversa- 
tion, that  men  may  see  that  ye  have  not  partaken  merely  of  the 
signs,  but  also  of  the  things  signified  by  them,  to  wit,  Christ  him- 
self, his  flesh  and  blood.  Your  eyes  ought,  like  the  eyes  of  Jona- 
than, 1  Samuel  xiv.  29,  to  be  ''enlightened,"  upon  your  tasting  only 
**  a  little  of  this  honey  ;"  your  "  countenances  "  ought,  by  feeding  on 
this  "  pulse  and  this  water  "  of  life,  to  become  fairer  and  fatter  than 
the  countenances  "  of  the  courtiers  of  earthly  kings,  who  are  feasted 
with  royal  dainties.  See  Dan.  i.  15.  Did  "  Elijah  travel  forty  days 
and  nights  in  the  strength  of  a  cake  baken  on  the  coals,  until  he 
came  to  Horeb,  the  mount  of  Cod,"  1  kings  xix.  6,  T,  8,  and  ought 
not  ye  then,  by  means  of  the  bread  and  the  wine  of  the  Lord,  to  be 
"  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,  so  that  ye  could 
run  and  not  be  weary,  and  walk  and  not  faint,"  according  to  Eph. 
vi.  10,  Isaiah  xl.  10.  Ye  ought  certa:n;y  to  show  that  ye  resembled 
Christ  in  some  measure,  that  men  might  "  know  that  ye  had  been 
with  him,"  as  it  is  said  of  Peter  and  John,  Acts  ix.  13.  "  The  life  of 
Jesus  ought  to  be  manifest  in  your  mortal  flesh,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2 
Cor.  iv.  1 1.  It  was  indeed  foretold  concerning  you,  Isaiah  hi.  9. 
kJ  All  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them,  that  they  are  the 
seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed."  Let  then  the  image  of  Jesus, 
even  humility,  meekness,  self-denial  and  heuvcnly-mindedness  shine 
forth  in  you. 

Thus  ye  will  evidence  that   ye  enjoy  more  than   the  Papists  pre- 
'-end  ;  yea,  that  ye  are  even  "  crucified  with  Christ  and  live  ;  yet  no- 


—79.  lis 

ye,  but  Christ  in  you,"  as  Paul  testifieth  of  himself,  Gal.  ii.  20.  The 
erroneous  Papist  imagines  that  his  Christ,  whom  he  hath  made,  re- 
mains in  his  stomach,  while  he  nevertheless  casts  him  forth  into  the 
draught  ;  but  ye,  who  eat  and  drink  him  truly,  spiritually,  and  sac- 
ramentally,  shall  retain  him  in  your  souls  for  ever ;  "  ye  dwell  in 
him,  and  he  dwells  in  you,"  as  he  himself  sakh,  John  vi  56,  which 
will  be  more  especially  manifested,  when  the  signs  shall  be  taken 
away,  and  ye  shall  be  changed  after  his  likeness ;  for  "  we  now  see 
through  a  glass,  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face,"  as  the  apostle  saith, 
1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  This  sight  of  him  will  render  you  like  him  ;  "  We 
shall  be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,"  saith  the  disciple, 
whom  Jesus  loved,  1  John  iii.  2.  Even  your  body,  which  is  now 
corruptible,  mortal  and  vile,  "the  Lord  Jesus  will,"  as  Paul  saith, 
Philip,  iii.  21,  "change,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  his  glorious 
body,  according  to  the  working,  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subduf 
fell  things  usto  himself,"  Amen, 


Vol.  ii. 


(  114  ) 


OF  THE  MASS, 


AND  THE  RIGHT  PARTAKERS 


OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


I  Cor.  x.  IS— 21.  Behold  Israel  after  the  flesh  ;  are  not  they  which 
cat  of  the  sacrifice  partakers  of  the  altar?  What  say  I  then  ?  that 
the  idol  is  any  thing,  or  that  which  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols 
is  tiny  thing  ?  But  I  say,  that  the  things  which  the  Gentiles  sac- 
rifice, they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God ;  and  I  would  not 
that  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  devils.  \'e  cannot  drink  the 
cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  devils :  ye  cannot  be  partakers  of 
the  Lord's  table,  and  of  the  table  of  devils. 

Q.  80.  What  difference  is  there  between  the  Lord's  sufifier,  and  the 
Pofiiah  ?nass  ? 

A.  The  Lord's  supper  testifies  to  us,  that  wc  have  a  full  pardon 
of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  himself  has 
once  accomplished  on  the  cross  ;  and  that  we  by  the  H«ly  Ghost  are 
ingrafted  into  Christ,  who,  according  to  his  human  nature  is  now 
not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  and 
will  there  be  worshipped  by  us  ;  but  the  mass  teacheth  that  the  liv- 
ing and  de-ad  -have  not  the  pardon  of  sins  through  the  sufferings  «t 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  IIS 

Christ,  unless  Christ  be  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests  3 
and  further,  that  Christ  is  bodily  under  the  form  of  b'ead  and  wine, 
and  therefore  is  to  be  worshipped  in  them  ;  so  that  the  mass  is  at 
bottom  nothing  else  than  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  an  accursed  idolatry. 

Q    81.  For 'uthom  is  the  Lord's    ucfifitr  instituted  $ 

A.  For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  stns,  and  yet  trust 
that  these  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  and  that  their 
remaining  infirmities  are  covered  by  i.is  passion  and  death  ;  and  who 
also  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  fith  more  and  more  strengthened, 
and  their  lives  more  holy  ;  but  hypocrites,  and  such  as  turn  not  to 
God  with  sincere  hearts,  eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves.

Q.  80.  What  difference  is  there  between  the  Lord's  sufifier,  and  the 
Pofiiah  ?nass  ? 

A.  The  Lord's  supper  testifies  to  us,  that  wc  have  a  full  pardon 
of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he  himself  has 
once  accomplished  on  the  cross  ;  and  that  we  by  the  H«ly  Ghost  are 
ingrafted  into  Christ,  who,  according  to  his  human  nature  is  now 
not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven,  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father,  and 
will  there  be  worshipped  by  us  ;  but  the  mass  teacheth  that  the  liv- 
ing and  de-ad  -have  not  the  pardon  of  sins  through  the  sufferings  «t 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  IIS 

Christ,  unless  Christ  be  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests  3 
and  further,  that  Christ  is  bodily  under  the  form  of  b'ead  and  wine, 
and  therefore  is  to  be  worshipped  in  them  ;  so  that  the  mass  is  at 
bottom  nothing  else  than  a  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  an  accursed  idolatry. 

Q    81.  For 'uthom  is  the  Lord's    ucfifitr  instituted  $ 

A.  For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  stns,  and  yet  trust 
that  these  are  forgiven  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ ;  and  that  their 
remaining  infirmities  are  covered  by  i.is  passion  and  death  ;  and  who 
also  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  fith  more  and  more  strengthened, 
and  their  lives  more  holy  ;  but  hypocrites,  and  such  as  turn  not  to 
God  with  sincere  hearts,  eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves.