Q.  81. 

IV.  And  he  then  defends  the  supper  by  the  keys  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  Q.  82,  83,  84. 

In  order  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  Lord's  supper,  we  will  un- 
fold, I.  the  name  and  paits,  II.  the  ends,  and  III.  the  circumstan- 
ces of  it. 

1.  This  c\crament  is  called  "the  breaking  of  bread,"  Acts  ii.  <2. 
:;x.  7.   "  the  table  of  the  Lord,"  1  Cor.  x.  21.  «  the  communion  of 


EXPLAINED.        ?5— 77.      79 

the  body  and  blcod  of  Christ,"  1  Cor.  x.  16,  but  properly,  "the 
Lord's  supper,"  I  Cor.  xi.  20.  because  the  Lord  celebrated  and  in- 
stituted il  in  the  evening  or  night,  when  he  was  betrayed ;  not  be- 
cause he  would  oblige  us  to  administer  the  supper  at  that  time,  but, 
because  he  ate  the  passover  at  that  time  according  to  the  divine  in- 
stitution, and  celebrated  this  sacrament  with  the  remains  of  it.  And 
it  is  called  particularly  "  the  Lord's  supper,  because  the  Lord  him- 
self instituted  it,  is  that  which  is  signified  by  it,  and  is  the  end  of  it : 
see  this  in  the  text. 

The  nature  of  this  sacrament  cannot  be  rightly  explained,  without 
considering  the  constituent  parts  of  it ;  these  are,  (i)the  outward 
signs,  (2)  the  thing  signified,  (3)  the  union  of  the  sign  with  the 
thing  signified,  and   (4)  the  foundation,  or  ground  of  that  union 

1.  The  outvvard  signs  are  the  use  of  bread  and  wine,  which  are 
sufficient  to  constitute  a  perfect  meal  for  feeding,  refreshing  and 
strengthening  a  person.  Whether  the  bread  must  be  leavened,  or 
unleavened,  risen  or  unrisen,  cannot  be  determined  from  the  exam- 
ple of  Christ,  because  he  made  use  of  unleavened  and  unrisen  bread 
onlv,  which  was  ready  at  hand,  on  account  of  the  passover.  It  ap- 
pears to  us  most  proper  to  use  leavened  and  risen  bread,  because 
that  is  most  nourishing  and  savoury,  and  therefore  better  adapted 
to  serve  for  a  sacramental  sign,  and  to  represent  m  a  lively  manner 
the  thing  signified.  The  other  sign  in  the  supper  is  wine:  whether 
this  must  be  white,  or  red,  mixed  with  water,  or  unmixed,  can  also 
no.  be  determined  from  the  example  of  Chris'  ;  for  he  speaks  only 
of  "the  fruit  of  the  vine,"  Matt.  xxvi.  29,  which  it  is  said  was  red 
and  mixed  with  water  in  the  passover,  according  to  the  custom  of 
those  times.  We  make  use  of  pure  wine  rather  than  of  any  other 
because  Christ  speaks  only  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  and  this  is  more 
proper  to  represent  and  seal  the  spiritual  object.  But  it  is  an  insuf- 
ferable conduct  of  the  Papists,  that  they  administer  only  wafers,  and 
thus  merely  the  lightest  kind  of  bread,  which  can  scarcely  be  called 
bread  ;  and  when  they  also  withhold  the  cup  in  the  s  spper  from  the 
people,  ;o  wit,  the  laity,  they  act  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a  supper, 
and  of  Christ's  institution,  yea,  they  commit  sacrilege.  Christ  gave 
the  cup  as  weil  as  the  bread,  to  his  disciples,  and  the  apostles  gave 
it  to  the  churches  :  the  Papists  cannot  excuse  this  conduct  of  theirs 
by  saying  that  Christ  gave  the  cup  to  the  apostles  only  ;  for  he  also 
gave  to  them  only,  and  to  no  others,  the  bread;  yet  they  'will  not 
on  this  account  withhold  the  bread  from  the  people.  Moreover  the 
apostles  did  not  receive  the  cup,  as  apostles,  but  as  common  com- 
municant^    Furthermore,  the  Papists  cannot  cencea!  this  shame  of 


80  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  Lo.M  UPPER 

theirs  by  pretending,  that  Christ's  b'ood  is  in  bis  body,  and    is   \ 
received  with  the  bread  ;  for  then  the   priest  also  would   not  need  to 
receive  the  cup,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  istfeprdscmed  in  the  supper, 
as  shed.     Neither  doth  it  help  them  that  the  supper  is  called    "  the 
breaking  of  bread;"  fort!  i  and  a  com- 

mon meal  is  so  called.     Se6  -  1.     xxiv.  3d. 

But  these  signs  cannot  be  c  .    used. 

therefore  Jesus,  when  he  i.  ..  ■  .         'took,"  and  laid 

hold  of  them  ;   he  "  gavi  -.  "    for  them,  and  !  "  them, 

by  which  means  he    an  .  ramental 

signs ;  '?  he  broke  "  the  brei    •    and"  i   the  cup,"  which 

contained  the  wine,  "  to  the  id  he  commanded  them  tip 

"take,  eat  and  drink  i  til        Je  of  him,'    to  which  he  added, 

in  order  to  explain  ne  of  the  sacrament,  that  <l  the  bread  was 

bis  body,  which  was  broken   for  them,  and  the  cup   his  blood,  the 
blood  of  the  .  .    .      ftent,  or  the  N^w  Testament  in  his  blood, 

which  «  I  for  t     :m,  and  for  many."     The  Papists  and  Luthe- 

rans  act  contra'.;,  to   this,   not  only  when  the;  er  the  bread 

whole  and  unbrok  i  therefore  cannotsignify  the  broken  body 

of  Christ;  but  alsc         h  they  do  not  give,  or  e    communi- 

cants  to  take  it  into  their  hands,  but  thrust  it  info  their  mouths  as  if 
their  hands  were  I  ;  than  their  mouths,' or  any  other  outward 

brinwaid  part  of  their  body,  and  as  if  the  hands  o^  the  masspriest 
were  purer  than  the  hands  of  the  common  believers.  It  is  usual  to 
inquire  here,  whether  Christ  himself  also  partook  of  the  Lord's  sup- 
per, and  whether  he  administered  it  also  to  the  traitor  Judas  ;  these 
are  not  matters  of  such  great  importance,  that  we  need  dispute  wilH 
any  person  about  them  ;  but  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  Christ 
himself  partook  of  the  supper,  since  he  received  all  the  o  her  sacra- 
ments, and  he  saith  himself,  "  that  he  would  not  henceforth  drink  of 
the  fruit  of  the  vine,"  Matt.  xxvi.  29:  He  had  therefore  drunk  of  it. 
It  is  also  likely,  that  Judas  did  not  Peceivt  p  r  ;  for  the  de\il 

entered  into  him  with  the  paschal  sop,  which  had  been  dipped  in 
the  dish.  Jesus  instantly  dismissed  him,  and  he  went  forthwith  out; 
John  xiii,  26,  27,  30.     This  happened  before  the  supper. 

2.  These  signs,  used  in  this  manner,  signify  something  ;  which 
is  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  that  is,  1  is  painful  suffering,  exhibi- 
ted most  visibly  in  the  breaking  of  his  body,  and  the  shedding  of  his 
blood,  called  by  Christ  himself  "the  blood  of  the  New  Testament, 
:  e  testament  in  his  blood,  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins."  In 
order  to  understand  this  rightly,  we  must  know  that  the  Lord  God 
rs  into  a  covenant  of  grace  with  all  the  elcc^,  in  order  to  be  ?■ 


EXPLAINED.     XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  75—77.      Si 

God  to  them,  and  to  forgive  their  sins.  This  covenant,  which  is  the 
same  in  all  times,  hath  a  twofold  administration,  namely,  the  admin- 
istration of  the  Old,  and  the  administration  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  Old  Testament  consisteth  in  the  promise  of  the  forgiveness  of 
gins  through  the  reflex  virtue  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah,  who 
was  to  come,  which  testament  was  dedicated,  signified,  and  seal- 
ed by  the  blood  of  the  beasts  that  were  sacrificed,  as  Paul  teacheth 
us,  Heb.  ix  18 — 22.  The  New  Testament  consists  in  the  promise 
of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  by  the  atonement,  actually  accomplished 
through  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  lor  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  testament  of  God  ;  this  the  same  apostle  teacheth  us, 
when  he  saith,  Heb.  ix.  15,  "Fortius  cause  he  is  the  Mediator 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  by  means  of  death,  for  the  redemption  of 
the  transgressions,  that  were  under  the  first  testament,  they  which 
are  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  inheritance."  The 
supper  doth  not  then  signify  the  forgiveness  of  sins  by  the  suffering 
of  the  Messiah,  who  is  yet  to  come,  as  the  passover  did  :  but  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  by  the  atonement  actually  accomplished  through 
the  shed  blood  of  Jesus.  The  Lord's  supper  excels  the  passover,  as 
much  as  the  New  Testament  excels  the  Old. 

But  the  use  of  the  elements  signifies  spiritual  things,  as  well  as 
the  elements  themselves.  We  might  say  that  the  taking,  and  bles- 
sing of  the  bread  and  cup  signify  that  the  Father  accepted,  ordained, 
sanctified  and  qualified  his  Son  to  be  Surety  and  High  Priest :  that 
the  breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  ot  the  wine  intimate 
his  dying  and  bloody  sufferings,  which  broke  his  body,  and  destroyed 
his  life;  and  also  that  Christ,  when  he  gave  the  bread  and  cup,  ex- 
pressed that  he  most  readily  would,  and  now  did  surrender  up  his 
body,  blood  and  life  for  the  sinner  to  death,  and  that  he  actually  im- 
parted himself,  with  all  the  fruits  of  his  sufferings,  to  the  penitent 
and  believing  sinner.  But  that  we  may  abide  by  the  instructor,  who 
designs  chiefly  the  thing  signified  by  the  eating  of  the  bread,  and 
the  drinking  of  the  cup,  we  say  that  this  eating  and  drinking  of  the 
signs  signifies  the  eating  and  drinking  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
Christ ;  therefore  he  saith,  "  eat  and  drink,  for  this  is  my  body,  this 
is  my  blood  ;"  and  also  John  vi.  53,  "Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of 
the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you." 

It  might  be  asked  here,  why  doth  Christ  command  us  to  eat  his 
flesh,  as  a  sacrifice  of  atonement,  and  drink  his  blood,  offered  up  for 
the  remission  of  sins,  since  under  the  Old  Testament  it  was  forbid- 
den to  eat  of  the  sacrifice  of  atonement,  according  to  Lev,  iv.  2 — 12* 
It  was  lawful  for  the  priest  to  eat  only  of  the  people's  sacrifice  •? 
Vt*.  tt.  I. 


82  THE  NATUBE  OV  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 

atonement,  as  we  see.  Lev.  vi.  30,  but  he  might  not  eat  of  his  owa 
sacrifice  o!  atonement,  for  it  was  to  be  wholly  consumed  by  fire,  as 
the  Lord  commanded,  Lev.  iv.  3 — 12.  To  this  we  must  add,  that 
"no  man  might  cat  uf  trie  blood,  because  the  Lord  ga\e  that  upon 
the  altar  to  make  an  atonement  for  souis,"  Lev.  xvi .  10,  11,  12. 
And  the  Loru  Jesus  assigns  the  selfsame  reason  for  eating  his  flesh 
and  drinking  his  blood,  for  which  they  might  not  eat  blood  :  for  he 
saith,  iliib  is  my  biooj,  which  is  shed  for  the  remission  of  tins.  This 
matter  will  appear  sull  more  strange,  if  we  consider  that  the  prohi- 
bition of  eating  of  the  flesh,  and  drinking  of  the  blood  of  atonement, 
is  founded  in  reason  ;  for,  (a)  they  who  ate  of  the  sacrifice  of  atone- 
ment were  considered  as  taking  upon  themselves,  and  as  bearing  the 
sins,  for  wnich  they  would  make  an  atonement,  which  the  priests 
dia  t»y  their  eating,  as  we  see,  Lev.  x.  17.  (b)  They  who  ate  of  the 
sacrifice,  which  was  lawful  for  evay  one  who  brought  a  Ihankoffer- 
ing,  were  admitted  to  fellowship  and  to  the  most  intimate  friendship 
Willi  Uod,  as  persons  who  ate  of  one  table  and  altar  with  him,  as 
Paul  teuchetii,  1  Lor.  x.  IS,  20.  Now  he  who  should  eat  of  his  sac- 
rifice of  atonement,  and  thus  bear  his  sins,  could  not  be  considered 
as  exercising  ieilovvship  with  God,  as  a  friend,  but  was  obliged  to 
sta,.d  afar  off',  as  a  person,  who  was  iaden  with  his  sins,  and  as  an 
enemy,  and  to  abase  himself  before  the  Lord  with  humble  fasting  : 
and  it  was  therefore  a  contradiction,  that  any  one  should  eat  of  his 
sacrifice  of  atonement.  Why  then  doth  Christ  command  us,  con- 
trary to  the  divine  institution,  to  eat  his  flesh,  as  a  sacrifice  of  atone- 
ment, and  to  drink  his  blood,  which  was  shed  for  the  remission  oi 
sins  ? 

This  is  the  difficulty.  They  might  not  eat  any  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  sacrifice  of  atonement  under  the  Old  Testament,  because  it  did 
not  take  away  sins  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  sinner  was  wholly  de- 
livered from  sin,  and  might  be  admitted  to  a  true  fellowship  and 
Friendship  with  God  ;  for  the  sins  were  transferred  to  the  sacrifice, 
and  he  who  ate  the  sacrifice,  united  himself  to  the  flesh  of  the  sacri- 
fice, and  to  the  sins  of  the  flesh  of  that  sacrifice,  and  so  the  sins  re- 
mained upon  and  in  the  sacrifice!'.  "  The  blood  of  the  sinoffering 
was  brought  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  to  make  an 
atonement  in  the  holy  place,  and  therefore  that  flesh  might  not  be 
ea  en.  but  was  to  be  burned  with  fire,''  at.ccHing  to  the  law  of  Lev. 
vi.  30,  as  an  evidence,  that  the  sins  were  retained  and  laid  up  there  ; 
as  it  were,  until  the  lime  of  reformation  :  but  when  Christ  requireth 
that  we  should  et.t  his  flesh,  and  drink  his  blood  of  atonement,  he 
shows  tint  his  priesthood  and  sacrifice  of  atonement  were  of  another 


EXPLAINED.     XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  f5-7r.        *3 

nature,  and  that  he  atoned  so  perfectly,  and  removed  so  entirely  in 
one  day  all  the  accumulated  transgressions  of  those,  who  were  under 
the  first  testament,  that  none  of  them  remained,  and  that  believers, 
oatmg  this  flesh,  and  drinking  this  bfo'od  of 'his,  do  not  retain  their 
sins  any  longer  upon  them,  bar  are  admitted  to  the  truest  and  live- 
liest fellowship  with  God  by  this  eating  and  drinking.  And  thus 
Christ  administering  a  priesthood  and  sacrifice  different  from  the 
Levitical  priests,  coui.!.  and  was  obliged  to  institute  a  different  and 
New  Testament,  and  to  deliver  different  commandments  in  it  Irom 
those,  which  were  in  the  former  testament,  ordering  us  !o  eat 
his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood  01  atonement,  which  was  forbidden  be- 
fore. Therefore  the  apostle  saitii,  He'.),  vii.  i  1,  12.  "  If  there  were 
then  perfection  by  the  Levitical  priesthood,  (for  under  it  the  people 
received  the  law,)  what  further  heed  was  there,  that  another  priest 
shuuid  arise  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  and  not  be  called  after 
the  order  of  Aaron  ?  For  the  priesthood  being  changed,  there  is 
made  of  necessity  a  change  of  the  law." 

Lui  must  we  then   eat  the  flesh   and  drink   the  blcod  of  Christ 
property;  and  in  a  corporal  manner,   as  they  did  anciently  eat  of  the 
thankofferings,  and  the  priests  of  the  sacrifices  of  atonement  ?  By  no 
means.  The  Capernaites  thought  that  Christ  m;ar.t  this     when  he 
spoke  of  eating  his  flesh  and  drinking  his  blood  ;  but  he  understood 
this  spiritually,  and  therefore  said,  John  vi.  63.  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth,  the  flesh  proftteth  nothing  ;  the  words  that  I  speak  unto 
you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life."     As  this  spiritual  eating  of 
Christ's  flesh  and  drinking  of  his  blood  is   understood   by  few,    the 
instructor  asks  in  the  seventy  sixth  question,  what  this  signifies?  It 
is,  (a)  to   «  embrace   with   a  believing  heart  all  the  sufferings  and 
death  of  Christ,  and  to  obtain  thereby  the  pardon  of  sin  and  eternal 
life."     He  is  proffered  and  presented  with  his  sacrifice  to  the  sinner 
for  the  complete  salvation  of  his  soul";  the  sinner,  perceiving  this, 
appropriates  and  accepts  him  and  his  sacrifice  by  faith,  as  a  hungry 
and  thirsty  person  accepts  and  takes  to  himself  the  proffered  meat 
and  drink  ;  therefore   he  cries,    Isaiah  lv.  1       "  Ho,  every  one  that 
thirstetb,  come  ye  to  the  waters,  and  he  tbat  hath  no  money  ;  come 
ye,  buy  and  eat ;  yea,  come  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money,  and 
without  price."  Having  opeken  of  himself,  as  the  bread  from  heaven, 
and  of  faith  iu  himself,   he  explains   this   faith   by  the  similitude  of 
eating  his  flesh,  and  drinking   his  blood,  John  vi.  32 — 63.  (b)  "  Be- 
sides this,  to  become  move  and  more  united  to  his  sacred  body  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  who  dwells  both  in  Christ  and  in  us,"  Sec.     And  so  this 
eating  and  drinking  denetes  to  unite  Christ  in  his  sufferings  and 


S4     THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 

benefits  to  ourselves  in  the  most  intimate  manner,  as  meat  and 
drink  ;  thus  the  Savi  ur  himself  explains  it,  John  vi.  56.  "  He  who. 
eateth  my  flesh,  and  druueth  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him." 
Wonderful !  Christ  is  in  heaven,  and.  believers  are  on  earth,  and  yet 
"  faith  causeth  him  to  dwell  in  their  hearts,"  Eph.  iii.  17,  so  that  they 
are  noi  only  together  «  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his 
bones,"  Eph.  v.  30,  but  as  members  of  one  body,  they  also  live  and 
are  governed  by  one  soul  and  one  Spirit  for  ever;  whereby  "that 
which  is  true  in  him,  is  also  true  in  them,"  1  John  ii.  8.  Yea,  "being 
thus  joined  10  him,  they  are  one  spirit  with  him,"  as  Paul  speaketh, 
1  Cor.  vi.  17.  (c)  To  this  we  must  also  add,  that  to  eat  the  flesh, 
and  drink  the  blood  of  Christ,  is  to  make  use  of  him,  and  his  salu- 
tary sufferings,  as  meat  and  drink,  to  Strengthen  ourselves,  when  we 
should  faint,  so  that  we  "become  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
porter  of  his  might,"  Eph.  vi.  10  Hear  what  Paul  saith  concerning 
this,  Heb.  xiii.  9,  10.  "  It  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be  estab- 
lished with  grace,  not  with  meats,  which  have  not  profited  them  that 
have  been  occupied  therein;  we  have  an  altar  whereof  they  have  no 
right  to  eat,  which  serve  the  tabernacle."  (d)  It  denotes  finally  to 
enjoy  a  full  pleasure,  and  to  delight  ourselves  in  Christ,  and  in  the 
virtue  of  his  sufferings,  as  the  dainty  food  of  the  soul  :  he  doth  in- 
deed sup  with  the  soul,  and  the  soul  with  him,  according  to  his 
promise,  Rev.  iii.  20.  He  invites  the  soul  "to  eat  that  which  is  good, 
and  to  delight  herself  in  fatness,"  Isaiah  lv.  2.  He  urges  her  to  eat 
and  drink  to  her  full  satisfaction,  crying,  Song  v.  1.  Eat,  O  friends, 
dr:ok,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  O  beloved."  That  he  may  satisfy  her 
himself  with  the  goodness  of  his  house,  even  of  his  hely  temple,  he 
puts  the  dainty  morsel,  the  power  of  his  goodness,  into  her  mouth, 
saying,  Psalm  lxxxi.  1©  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it." 
3.  We  may  do  this  at  all  times,  and  upon  every  occasion,  when 
our  faith  is  only  in  lively  exercise  ;  but  Christ  chooseth  that  we 
should  do  it  particularly  in  this  sacrament,  as  it  is  also  exceedingly 
fit  to  lead  us  up  thereto  by  the  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  sig- 
nified :  this  consists,  (1)  in  the  agreement  and  resemblance  of  the 
signs  to  the  things  signified  by  them,  whereby  they  clearly  illustrate 
Jo  us  the  nature  of  the  things  signified  by  them  ;  for  as  Christ  took, 
and  blessed  the  bread  and  cup,  so  the  Father  accepted,  blessed  and 
sanctified  him  to  be  a  surety  ;  as  Christ  broke  the  bread,  and  the 
wine  was  poured  out  into  the  cup,  so  the  body  and  life  of  Christ  was 
broken  by  the  shedding  of  Ins  blood  ;  as  he  gave  the  broken  bread 
So  be  eaten,  and  the  wine  to  be  drunk,  so  he  gives  his  fle.*h  to  be 
gaten,  and  his  blood  to  be  drunk ;  as  when  we  eat  the  bread  and  ' 


EXPLAINED.      XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  75—77.        S3 

drink  the  wine,  we  make  them  our  own,  unite  them  to  ourselves, 
strengthen  and  refresh  ourselves  with  them,  «o  we  make  the  suffer* 
ings  of  Christ  our  own,  unite  ourselves  to  them,  strengthen  and  re- 
fresh ourselves  with  them  This  is  not  sufficient,  but  to  this  union 
belongs  also,  (2)  the  conjunction  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified 
by  the  bodily  use  of  the  signs,  and  the  spiritual  use  of  the  things  sig- 
nified throu  ,h  faith.  Whiie  we  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the  wine 
with  our  mouths,  our  fouls  do  by  and  in  this  eating  and  drinking, 
raise  themselves  up  through  faith,  to  Christ,  and  eat  his  flesh  and 
drink  his  blood  :  therefore  the  deacon  in  ancient  times  cried  to  them, 
who  partook  of  the  Lord's  supper,  "  Lift  up  your  hearts  on  high  ;" 
and  we  still  cry  to  them,  "  That  we  may  now  be  fed  with  the  true 
heavenly  bread  Christ  Jesus,  let  us  not  cleave  with  our  hearts  unto 
the  external  bread  and  wine,  but  lift  them  up  on  high  in  heaven, 
where  Christ  Jesus  is."  We  must  eat  not  only  in  a  corporal  man- 
ner, and  it  is  not  enough  to  eat  and  drink  only  spiritually,  but  we 
must  do  both  at  the  same  time,  that  we  may  eat  and  drink  sacra- 
mentally,  and  that  "  the  cup  may  be  the  communion  of  the  blood  of 
Christ  to  us,  and  the  bread  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ,"" 
as  Paul  requireth,  1  Cor.  x.  16. 

It  is  true,  we  can  also  by  our  daily  meals  attain  to  heavenly  en- 
joyments, and  be  led  up  by  them  to  the  spiritual  eating  of  Christ's 
flesh,  and  drinking  of  his  blood :  but  our  ordinary  meals  were  no< 
instituted  lor  this  purpose,  and  they  have  not  the  promise,  that  our 
souls  shall  be  fed  by  them,  as  the  sacramental  feast  hath,  being  found- 
ed upon  the  word  of  the  Lord,  by  which  it  was  (1)  instituted.  Christ 
not  only  celebrated  the  supper  with  his  apostles,  but  he  also  ordered 
them  and  their  successors  to  administer  it;  after  his  example,  to  bap 
tized  believers,  until  he  came :  therefore  he  said  of  the  administra- 
tion of  the  bread,  and  of  the  administration  of  the  cup.  "  Do  this 
in  remembrance  of  me,"  1  Cor.  xi.  24,  25,  and  thus  Paul  also  de- 
livered this  institution  to  the  church,  having  received  it  of  the  Lord, 
as  he  saith  in  the  text ;  in  which  he  also  prescribes  to  the  stewards 
of  the  mysteries  of  God  a  method  of  administering  the  supper,  after 
the  example  of  Christ,  to  wit,  taking  the  bread,  breaking  it,  and  giv- 
ing it  with  the  cup  to  the  communicants  to  eat  and  to  drink,  accom* 
panying  these  actions  with  thanksgivings  and  blessings,  in  order  to 
illustrate  in  this  manner  the  virtue  of  the  sacrament,  and  apply  the 
promises  of  the  New  Testament  to  the  mind,  to  which  the  woids  of 
Paul  and  of  Christ  tend,  1  Cor.  x.  16.  xi.  24,  25.  But  it  is  enjoined 
not  only  upon  the  rulers  of  the  church,  but  also  upon  every  believer 
t»  do  this,  namely,  to  eat  and  drink  in  remembrance  of  Christ ;  there- 


86  THE   NATURE  OF  THE  LORDS  SUPPER 

fore  the  instructor  saith,  "  that  Christ  hath  commanded  me  and  every 
believer  to  eat  of  this  broken  bread,  and  to  drink  of  this  cup  in  re- 
membrance of  him,"  in  the  seventy  fifth  question.  Paul  delivered 
the  institution,  which  he  had  received,  not  only  to  the  rulers  ol  the 
church,  but  also  to  the  common  members,  w:io  were  Obliged  to  show 
the  deati  of  the  Lord  until  he  came,  and  to  examine  themselves, 
before  tin_y  partook  of  the  supper,  as  the  aposjtle  shov.cth,  1  Cor.  si. 
26,  28.  This  word  of  the  institution  obliges  believers  not  only  to 
make  use  of  the  supper,  but  aiso  to  make  use  of  the  elements,  as 
si.^ns,  and  in  remembrance  of  him,  and  by  them  to  rise  up  to  higher 
lungs,  and  to  tat  of  the  flesh  and  to  drink  of  the  blood  of  Christ 
truly  ;  but  since  the  word  of  the  institution  is  not  sufficient  for  this 
purpose,  therefoie  the  Lord  hath  added  to  it.  (2)  the  wo:d  of  the 
promise,  by  which  these  signs  are  constituted  seals  in  order  to 
assure  believers,  k'  first,  that  his  body  was  offered  and  broken  on  the 
cross,  and  his  blood  shed  for  their  sins,  as  certainly  as  the  bread  is 
broken  for  them,  and  the  cup  communicated  to  them  ;  and  further, 
lie  also  promises  that  he  will  feed  and  nourish  their  souls  to  ever- 
laying  life,  as  assuredly  as  they  receive  from  the  hand  of  the  min- 
ister, and  taste  with  their  mouths,  the  bread  and  cup  of  the  Lord,  as 
certain  signs  of  the  body  and  blo.d  of  Christ,"  as  the  instructor 
speaks  in  the  seventy  fifth  question.  That  Christ  promiseth  this  by 
these  signs,  the  seventy  seventh  question  shows  from  the  text,  and 
from  1  Cor.  x.  16.  The  apostle  relates  in  the  text,  '.hat  Christ  saith, 
that  "  the  broken  bread  was  his  body,  which  was  broken  for  his  peo- 
ple:  and  that  the  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  his  blood."  How 
must  we  understand  this  ?  is  the  bread  and  wine  changed  into  his 
body  and  bleed  ?  by  no  means,  as  we  will  show  on  the  following 
Lord's  day  ;  but  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sacraments  the  bread 
and  the  wine  are  the  memorials,  the  pledges  and  seals,  that  his  body 
was  broken,  and  his  blood  shed  for  believers.  And  therefore  the 
name  and  virtue  of  the  thing  signified  is  added  to  the  signs  ;  for 
these  signs  are  to  them  instead  of  Christ's  broken  body  and  shed 
blood.  To  this  it  is  further  added  from  1  Cor.  x.  16,  that  "the 
bread  and  the  cup  are  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ."  This  must  necessarily  denote,  that  the  bread  and  wine 
signify  and  seal  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ. 

II.  It  will  not  be  necessary  now  to  show  you,  hearers,  that  the 
end,  for  which  the  Lord  Christ  gave  his  supper  to  his  church  was, 
vhat  it  might  serve  for  a  memorial  of  him,  and  might  sea!  his  love 
an!  kindness,  since  this  hath  been  shown  sufficiently  in  treating  upon 
the  word  of  the   institution  and  of  promise:  but  that  we  may  not 


EXPLAINED.       —77.      87 

dismiss  our  subject  thus,  we  say  that  there  are  besides  this  two  other 
special  ends  of  this  supper.  The  first  is,  that  it  may  serve  for  a 
solemn  evidence  of  the  mutual  exercise  of  communion  and  friend- 
Snip  between  tiie  Lord  and  the  church.  We  know  that  sincere 
friends  are  wont  to  hold  feasts,  in  order  to  exercise  mutual  iellow- 
ship  and  friendship.  Christ,  that  he  may  allure  sinners  to  open  their 
heaits  to  him,  promiseth  his  communion  under  the  figure  of  a  feast, 
•  i  which  he  would  partake  with  them,  and  they  with  him,  Rtv.  iii. 
10.  And  thus  also  the  bread  and  wine  of  the  supper  are  «  the  com- 
munion ol  the  body  and  blood  of  Chiist,"  as  we  have  heard  repeat- 
edly from  Paul.  Those  under  the  Old  Testament,  who  ate  of  the 
thankoii'erings,  were  considered,  as  eating-  of  one  table  with  God, 
because  they  partook  of  the  portions  of  the  sacrifices  from  the  altar, 
whicn  was  God's  table.  Much  more  then  do  God  and  his  church 
exercise  communion  with  each  other  in  the  supper,  since  this  is  the 
sign  and  seal  of  Christ's  sacrifice  of  atonement,  by  which  all  the  sins 
that  separate  the  sinner  from  God,  are  taken  away.  We  see  that 
Paul  himseh  teacheth  us  this,  1  Cor.  x.  16 — 21.  Not  only  do  God 
and  every  believer  in  particular  exercise  communion  with  each  other, 
but  also  believers  in  general  with  one  another,  who,  as  tablefellows, 
partake  of  one  meat  and  drink,  and  do  thus  publicly  testify  their 
mutual  love  and  friendship  in  the  Lord.  Paul  teacheth  us  this  also  : 
for  after  he  had  said,  1  Cor.  x.  16,  that  "  the  bread  and  the  cup  are 
the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,"  he  adds,  vrs.  17. 
K  t'oi  we  being  many  are  one  bread,  and  one  body :  for  we  r  ~  all 
partakers  of  that  one  bread."  He  hath  respect  to  this,  when  he  saith 
jdso,  1  Cor.  xii.  13.  "We  have  all  been  made  to  drink  into  one 
Spirit  "  In  order  to  strengthen  the  exercise  of  this  communion  still 
more,  they  were  wont  anciently  to  make  also  a  lovefeast  after  the 
supper,  and  to  give  each  other  a  kiss  of  love.  See  Jude  vrs.  12.  1 
Peter  v.  14.  The  other  end  for  which  the  Lord  instituted  the  sup- 
per was,  that  we  should  "  show  foith  his  death,"  which  we  do.  "  as 
often  as  we  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,"  as  the  text  speaks. 
For  we  do  then  show  in  a  publick  manner  that  we  seek  our  whole 
Salvation  in  his  death  ;  then  his  death,  and  the  virtue  of  his  death 
are  shown  forth  repeatedly  by  thanksgivings  during  the  administra- 
tion ;  and  after  the  administration  we  sing,  in  imitation  of  him,  a 
hymn  of  praise,  as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  kindness  and  love ; 
yea,  we  solemnly  »bhge  ourselves  by  receiving  the  signs  to  show 
forth  his  death,  and  we  fulfil  our  obligation,  when  we  conduct  our- 
seives  in  all  things  worthily  of  his  death. 
III.  We  may  net  dismiss  this  subject  yet,  fen'  must  agreeably  t© 


86  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORD  6  SUPPER 

our  method,  speak  also  of  certain  circumstances,  and  particularly 
of  the  communicants.  1  inquire  not  at  present  who  have,  and  who 
have  not  a  right  to  the  supper,  lor  this  we  must  do,  when  we  treat  on 
the  eighty  first  question  :  but  w?  attend  to  the  posture  of  body,  in 
receiving  the  supper.  We  do  not  look  upon  it  to  be  best  to  receive 
it  standing,  as  Israel  received  the  passover,  when  they  departed  oul 
•f  Egypt ;  it  appears  exceedingly  unsuitable  to  receive  it  kneeling, 
because  this  savours  of  idola'ry,  as  it  resembles  a  worshipping  of  the 
signs,  as  the  Papists  do  ;  but  it  is  exceedingly  proper  to  sit,  not  only 
because  Christ  and  his  apostles  sat,  but  also  because  this  sacrament 
is,  as  it  were,  a  common  feast,  of  which  we  usually  partake  iilting. 
(2)  The  place  must  be  where  the  church  meets,  which  used  to  come 
together  for  this  purpose,  as  the  apostles  common Vy  administered 
the  supper  in  those  places.  See  Acts  ii.  45.  xx.  7.  1  Cor.  xi.  20. 
It  is  indeed  a  sacrament  lor  the  church  :  and  therefore  the  private 
masses  of  the  masspriests,  who  sometimes  partake  of  the  supper 
alone,  are  to  be  condemned.  (3)  The  time  when,  and  how  often  can- 
not be  deteraained  :  we  only  find  that  it  is  to  be  repeated  ;  there- 
fore the  apo>tle  saith  in  the  text,  "  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread," 
Sec.  Baptism,  which  incorporates  us  into  the  church,  is  administer- 
ed only  once,  but  the  supper,  which  nourisheth  us,  often  We  read 
that  "  the  discip;es  came  together  en  the  first  day  of  the  week  to 
break  bread,"  Acts  xx.  7,  but  this  was  done  also  daily,  Acts  ii.  46. 
It  is  nevertheless  not  to  be  thought,  that  the  whole  church  came. 
together  every  day  for  this  purpose,  but  the  apostles  administered  it 
probably  so  daen,  on  account  of  the  daily  accession  of  netv  covenant 
people,  or  they  administered  it,  on  account  of  the  perils  of  the  times, 
now  to  one  part  of  the  church,  and  then  to  another  ;  for  they  "  broke 
Hread  from  house  to  house,"  Acts  ii.  46. 


APPLICATION. 

Behold,  hearera,  what  manner  of  kindness  the  Lord  shows  to  his 
Shurch,  when  he  bestows  this  supper  on  her.  Is  it  not  a  great  fa- 
vour, that  he  surrenders  himself  for  vile  sinners,  to  take  away  their 
sins  once  for  all,  that  they  may  be  forgiven  ?  that  lie  suffers  his  bo- 
dy to  be  broken,  his  blood  tn  be  shed  ?  that  he  endures  such  griev- 
ous sufferings  and  pains,  inflicted  on  him  by  wicked  men,  by  angels, 
vea,  even  by  his  Father  ?  what  an  ardent  love   must  have  been  in- 


EXPLAINED.     XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  75—77'.        3? 

kindled  in  his  soul,  when  he  died   for   you,    O    believers,  while   ye 
were  yet  sinners  and  ungodly!     Are  ye  able  to  comprehend,  is  it  in 
your  power  to   conceive  the  breadth,  and  the  length,  the  depth  and 
the  height  of  the  love  of  Christ,  that  he  gives  you  his  flesh   to  ea% 
and   his  blood   to  drink  ?     It  was   a  privilege  cf  Israel   that    they 
might  eat  of  their    thankofferitigs   with  joy,  Deut.  xxvii.  7,  but. 
they  might  not  eat  of  their  sacrifices  of  atonement,  although   they 
were  only   irrational    animals  ;  what  a  precious  privilege  is  it  then, 
that  ye  may  eat  of  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  God,  which  was  broken, 
and  his  blood,  which  was  shed   for  atonement  as    an   evidence   that 
your  sins  are  so  perfectly  taken  away,  that  they  cannot    hinder   you 
from  exercising  the  most  lively  fellowship  with  God  !  yea,  consider 
wherein  it  consists  to  eat  the  flesh,  and  to  drink  the  blood  of  Christ : 
remember  what  hath  been  said  before,  and  it    will  excite    an   eager 
appetite  m  you  for  it,  and  ye  will  have  a  foretaste  of  it.       Dare    ye 
!iot  think,    O  weak  believers,  that  it  is  for  you  ?     Hear   then   from 
Psalm  xxii.  26,  29,  that  the  death    of  Jesus   is   also    your   bread  : 
*'  The  meek  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied  :  they  shall    praise   the    I  brd 
that  seek  him,  your  heart  shall  live  for  ever."     Not  only    "  shall  all 
that  be  fat  on  the  earth  eat  and  worship  ;  but  all  thty   likewise  that 
go  down  to   the  dust,   shall  bow  before  him  :  and    he  who   cannot 
keep  alive  his  own  soul."      Jesus  gives  you  the    seal  and    pledge  of 
this,  to  strengthen,  assure,  and  seal  you  ;  the  signs  are   the  bread 
and  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  which  he  himself  calls  his  body  and  blood. 
What  think  ye  now,  ye  Who    cannot    be   admitted  to   the   Lord's 
supper?  is  it   not  lamentable,    that  ye  have   not  yet  prepared  your- 
selves for  this,  by  a  true  faith,  and  by  a  confession  of  your  faith  ? 
do  ye  not  see    this,  when  ye   observe   what  hath   been  said    above  ? 
and  O  that  ye  might  see  it !  what  bath  hindered   you   hitherto  from 
obeying  the  truth  ?  why  have   ye    not   partaken?    will    ye    know    it 
from  me  ?     It  is  either  your  blindness  and  ignorance  of  the   excel- 
lence of  the  supper,  and  of  eating  Christ's  flesh,    and    drinking    his 
blood  ;  otherwise  ye  Would  be  eager  and  restless  for  it,  until  ye  had 
partaken  of  it  in  truth.     Or   it   is  your  carelesness,   ye  neglect  the 
aalvauon  and  happiness  of  your  souls  ;  yea,  do  not  so  much  as  think 
of  it.     Or    it  is  earthlymindedness,  your  concern  about  your  lands, 
your  cattle,    your  wife,  your  merchandizing  employs  your  heart  and 
time,  so  that  ye  have  neither  inclination  nor   op|  ortunity  to  attend 
diligently  to  the  Lord's  supper,  and  therefore  ye   excuse  yourselves, 
like  those  wttfi  were  bidden,  of  whom    the    Saviour   speaks,   Luke 
xir.   If-  20.     Because   men's  consciences  sometimes  gnaw  them, 
they  will,  in  order  to  divert  this,  persuade  themselves  that  the  sup' 
Voi  ,ii.  '    M 


90     THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 

per  is  not  necessary,  they  think  that  they  can  be  saved,  though  they 
do  not  partake  of  it  :  but  admit  that  the  supper  is  not  absolutely  ne- 
cessary, and  that   some  are  saved  without   ever    having  received  it, 
those  nevertheless  who  despise  and  neglect  it  from  ignorance,  care- 
lesness,  and  worldlymindedness,  shall  not  taste  of  God's  blessed  sup- 
per  neither,  as  Jesus  threateneth,  Luke  xiv.  24.     How  !  do  ye   not 
manifest  by  this  conduct  of  yours,  that  there  is  truly  no  life  in  your 
souls,  and  that  ye  are  not  yet  hungry  nor  thirsty  for  the    food  of  the 
soul  ;  and  therefore  ye  shall  be  "  sent  empty  away  "from  the  Lord, 
as  the  blessed  virgin  spake,  Luke  i.  53,  Friends,  do  ye  indeed  know 
what  ye  do?     Ye  have  by  your  baptism  been   surrendered  in  cove- 
nant with  God  ;  if  ye  will  not  then  also  by  a  sincere  turning  to  the 
Lord  approach  the  supper,  say  then  to  God,  that  ye  renounce    your 
covenant  engagement,    and  declare  that  ye   will   not   abide   by   the 
promise,  which  your  parents  and    witnesses  made  for   you    to   the 
Lord  ;    yea,  ye  reject  all  the  grace  of  God,  and  declare  that  ye  nev- 
er will    regard   it.     Do  ye  ask,  if  it   will  then  be    well   with   you, 
when  ye  confess  your  faith,  and  become    members?    no,  it  will  not 
be  well  with  you,  until  ye  be  truly  converted,  accept  of  the  Son   of 
GoJ,  actually  enter   into  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  oblige   your- 
selves to  serve  the  Lord,  for  otherwise  the  bread   and   the   wine    of 
the  supper  can   be  of  no  more  advantage  to  you,  than  the  real  flesh 
and  blood  of  Christ  was  to  the  Capernaites,  according  to  John  vi.  63. 
Therefore  we  may  not  approve  of  all  those  members  of  our  Church, 
who,  by  making  a  confession  of  their  faith  have  procured  their  names 
to  be  enrolled  in  the  register  of  the  church,  for  they  have  not  just 
on  that  account  been   written  by  the   Lord  with  the  righteous.     Ju- 
das was  numbered  with  the  apostles,  and  Demas   with  the  compan- 
ions of  Paul,  and  how  many  are  virgins  by  profession,  who  have  nev- 
er tasted  of  the  flesh   and  blood  of  Christ?  that  manna    is  hidden 
from  them.     Hear  this,  ye  many  members  and  communicants  of  our 
church,  is  it  not  true  ?  it  certainly  is  :  for  (a)  many  of  you   are    ex- 
ceedingly ignorant  and  unskilful  in  divine  truths,  and    especially   in 
the  nature  of  the  Lord's  supper,   "they  do  not  discern   the  body  of 
the  Lord,"  and  hence  it  is  that  they  "  cat  and  drink  unworthily,  and 
a  judgment  to  themselves,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  xi.  29.       When 
they  made  their  confession,  they  repeated   indeed  the  lesson   which 
they  had  learned  with  difficulty  ;    but  how  little  of  it  did  they  under- 
stand !  yea,  what  they  knew  of  it  then,  they  have  entirely  forgotten 
since,  they  know  no  more  of  it  at  all  ;  but  what  think  ye,  O  igno- 
i  ant  members,  is  the  soul  without  knowledge  good  ?  the    wisest  of 
kings  Baith  nay,  Prov.  xix,  3.     Did  it  suffice  when  ye  were  first  ad- 


EXPLAINED,       —77.       91 

mitted,  that  ye  knew  so  little  ?    it  can  surely  not  suffice  to  approach 
the  supper,  that  ye  know  less  now,  we  forbid  scandalous  members  to 
partake    of  the  supper  ;  but  might  we    not  with    propriety    forbid 
you  also,  on  account  of  your  gioss   ignorance  ?     1  cannot   see   how 
it  could  be  considered  as  illdone,  if  we  should   oblige    you   to    learn 
and  confess  the  divine  truths  anew,    (b)  Others,  it  is  true,  have  a  par- 
tial notion,  yea,  some  are  far  advanced  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ; 
they  know    exceedingly  well  how  to  discern  the  body  of  the    Lord, 
and  can  discourse  admirably  well  on  the  nature  of  the  supper ;  but 
this  is  indeed  all.   Ye  then,  who  have  knowledge,  what  is  your  know- 
ledge ?    hath  it   been  taught    you  by  the    Spirit  of  the  Lord,  so  that 
ye  know  God  and  Christ  also  I  have  ye  learned  the  truth,   as   it  is  in 
Jesus,  so  that  it  renders  your  souls  hungry,  and  thirsty  afttr  Christ, 
warms  and  sanctifies  your  souls?    this  would  be  precious,  acceptable 
to  the  Lord,  and  an  evidence  to  you  of  your  right  to  the  Lord,  and  to 
this  seal  of  his  covenant  :    bu>  is  your  knowledge  only  a  '^literal  and 
natural  knowledge,  and  doth  it  puff  you  up  ?    ye  do  then  know  no- 
thing,   as   ye  ought   to   know,"  as  Paul    speaks.    1  Cor.  wiii.    1,  2. 
And  therefore  ye  do  not  yet  eat  Christ's  flesh,  nor  drink  his  blood  =n 
the  supper.     O  how  well  would  it  4>c  for  you,  if  ye  knew  your  ^pi  it- 
ual  ignorance,  and   '  became  fools,  that  ye  might    b^  wise,"  as  'he 
same  apostle  speaks,  1  Cor.  iii.   18.     (c)  If  we  inquire    farther  how 
many  are  there  among  us  who  draw  near  to  tfce  Lord's  table  without 
any  motive,  or  from  a  wrong  one  ?  for  many  approach  from  custom  ; 
some  to  conceal  their  ungodliness   from    the  world,   ima  ;  aing   that 
men  must,  and  will  then  entertain  a  good  opinion  of  them  ;  others  to 
obtain  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins,  and  to  pacify  in  some  measure  a 
restless  conscience  ;    and  there    are  those  also,  who  think  that  the 
injunction  to  receive  the  supper   is    like  one  of  the   ten  command- 
ments, which  al!  men  are  obliged  to  obey,  because  Christ  saitli,  "  Do 
this  in  I'emcmbrance  of  me,"  which  is  certainly  said  to  believers  on- 
ly, as  we  will  show  in  its  proper  place  :    yet  if  we  were  to  ask  m.ny 
why,  and  for  what  end  they  partook  of  the  supper,  would  they  not  be 
speechless,  like    "  the    guest  without  a  wedding  garment  ?"  Matt. 
xxii.  12.     But  friends,  of  what  advantage  can  the  supper  be  to  you, 
when  ye  do  not  aim  at,  nor  pursue   the   true  end  of  it  ?     How  do  ye 
aggravate  your  condemnation  !     But  this   we   will  show,    when   we 
treat  on  the  thirtieth  Lord's  day.     Alas,  that  ye   would    once   open 
your  eyes,  be  concerned,  and  earnestly  desirous  to  enter  into  the 
covenant,  and  to  be  admitted  into  the  testament  of  God,  in  order    to 
obtain  a  right,  and  to   be  qualified  to  partake  of  the  supp<  r  ;   for  ye 
are  called  and  invited  to  the  covenant  of  God,  when  it  is  said  to  you, 


?J     THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER 

Luke  xiv.  17.  "  Come,  for  all  things  are  ready."  Ho  not  then  draw- 
back, for  u  if  any  ram  draw  back,"  saith  Paul,  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  Heb.  x.  38,    "  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him." 

But  with  respect  o  you  who  cannot  keep  your  souls  alive,  and 
who  haw  therefore  fled  for  refuge  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  have  en- 
tered into  Ms  covenant,  and  procured  an  admission  into  his  testament, 
in  order  to  be  found  in  him. 

1.  et  your  souls  earnestly  desire  the  atoning  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  Lord,  in  or  ler  to  eat  and  drink  of  them  until  ye  are  satisfied. 
For  the  bum  ry  and  thirsty  are  invited  :  '*  Ho,  every  one  that  thirst- 
eth.  come  ye  to  v  e  waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money  ;  come  ye, 
and  eat,  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk,  without  money,  and  without 
price,"  saith  the  Lord,  Isaiah  lv.  1.  These  have  the  promises,  that 
they  shall  be  filled  :  "  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after 
righteousness  ;  for  they  shall  be  filled,"  salt  Jesus,  Matt.  v.  6.  Ma- 
ry, the  mother  of  Jesus-  said  from  her  experience,  Luke  i.  53.  "  He 
hatii  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things."  Are  not  the  signs  served 
up  \.o  you,  that  they  may  excite  an  eager  appetite  in  you  for  this 
tasteful  meat  and  'rink,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  ?  of  what  ser- 
vice can  the  sacrament  be  to  you,  if  ye  do  not  long  for  it  ?  is  it  not 
then  a  tasteless  meat  and  drink  ?  hunger  is  indeed  the  best  sauce : 
"  The  full  soul  loatheth  the  honeycomb ;  but  to  the  hungry  soul 
every  bitter  thing  is  sweet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  7.  What 
can  be  more  precious,  and  more  worthy  of  an  eager  appetite, 
than  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Lord  ?  what  is  more  capable  of  satis- 
fying the  soul,  than  io  eat  and  drink  of  this  ?  it  is  indeed  making- 
Christ  his  sufferings,  and  all  the  good  things  of  his  testament  our 
own,  uniting  ourselves  to  him  in  the  most  intimate  manner,  strength- 
ening ourselves  more  by  that  meat  and  drink,  that  we  may  go,  not 
only  forty  days  and  nights,  but  our  whole  lifetime,  until  we  come  to 
the  mountain  of  God,  like  Elijah  by  the  bread  of  angels.  Yea,  it  is 
to  satiate  and  delight  ourselves  fully  and  abundantly  with  the  good 
things  of  the  New  Testament.  Suffer  me  to  excite  your  appetites 
by  giving  you  a  taste  from  the  covenant  of  God,  according  to  Jer. 
xxxi.  12,  13,  14,  "  Therefore  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height 
of  Zion,  and  shall  flow  together  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  for 
wheat,  and  for  wine  and  for  oil.  and  for  the  young  of  the  flock,  and 
of  the  herd :  and  their  soul  shall  be  as  a  watered  garden,  and  they 
shall  not  sorrow  any  more  at  all.  Then  shall  the  virgin  rejoice  in 
the  dance,  both  young  men  and  old  together:  for  I  will  turn  their 
mourning  into  joy,  and  will  comfort  them,  and  make  them  rejoice 
from  their  sorrow.     And  I  will  satiate  the  soul  of  the    priests  with 


EXPLAINED.        —7*/.      93 

fatness,  and  my  people  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  goodness,  saith  the 
Lord."  Do  ye  not  know  what  this  is;  believers  ?  It  is  the  new 
name,  the  hidden  manna,  pardon  of  sins,  peace  with  God,  the  shed- 
ding abroad  of  the  love  of  God,  secret  communion  and  joy  with  and 
in  the  Lord  Let  your  "  souls  "  'herefore,  with  David,  Psalm  xliii. 
1,2,  "thirst  and  pant  after  it,  as  a  thirsty  hart  after  the  water- 
brooks." 

2  Do  not  only  desire,  but  eat  and  drink  also  the  flesh  and  blood 
of  the  Lord.  Ye  have  a  right  to  it :  he  suffered  his  body  to  be  bro- 
ken, and  ';is  blood  to  be  shed  for  this  purpose  ;  he  hath  confirmed 
the  testament  by  his  death,  that  ye,  his  heirs,  might  "  receive  the 
promise  of  an  eternal  inheritance,"  Heb.  ix.  15.  He  gives  you  also 
the  bread  and  wine,  as  signs  and  seals  ;  he  instituted  this  sacrament 
that  he  might  feed  and  nourish  you  with  his  flesh  and  blood :  it  is 
his  will  that  ye  should  partake  at  his  table  plentifully.  "  Eat,  O 
friends,  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  O  beloved,"  doth  he  cry,  Song 
v.  1,  and  "  open  thy  mouth  wide,"  Psalm  lxxxi.  10.  Take  there- 
fore freely,  and  indulge  your  appetite.  "  Eat  that  which  is  good, 
and  let  your  souls  delight  themselves  in  fatness,"  as  he  commandeth, 
Isaiah  Iv  Stretch  forth  the  hand  of  your  faith,  lay  hold  on  him  and 
his  benefits,  that  ye  may  receive  him  and  his  blessings  in  your 
hearts,  may  strengthen  yourselves  therewith,  and  delight  yourselves 
therein,  "  that  he  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith,  and  that  ye 
may  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  love  ;  that  ye  may  comprehend  fully 
with  all  the  saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and 
height ;  and  may  know  the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  know- 
ledge, that  ye  may  be  fdled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  as  we  read, 
Eph.  iii.  17,  18,  19. 

3.  Eat  and  drink  nevertheless  in  a  sacramental  manner.  As  it  is 
not  enough  to  receive  the  bare  signs,  so  it  is  not  enough  to  partske 
of  his  flesh  and  blood  spiritually  ;  we  can  do  this  indeed  every  day, 
but  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  instituted  this  sacrament  more  particularly 
for  this  purpose  ;  he  also  gives  his  blessing  with  it,  of  which  he 
grants  you  to  taste  repeatedly,  and  that  he  is  good.  The  godlv 
often  act  very  improperly,  when  they  receive  the  sacrament,  looking 
for  an  immediate  supply  of  soul  satisfying  grace,  and  when  they  do 
not  obtain  it.  being  troubled  ;  but  this  is  out  of  God's  way,  in  which 
*  he  meeteth  him  who  rejoiceth,  and  those  who  remember  him  in 
their  ways,"  as  it  is  said,  Isaiah  Ixiv.  5.  "We  ought  then  to  act 
upon  and  with  the  sacrament,  that  we  may  eat  the  flesh  and 
drink  the  blood  of  Christ  thereby  ;   and  therefore  to  look   upon  the 


94  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORDS  SUPPER. 

bread  and  wine  as  signs  of  his  flesh  and  blood,  that  wc  may  by  them 
be  Jed  up  and  enabled  to  see  the  painfulness,  and  the  efficacy  of  his 
suffering  and  love  to  procure  the  pardon  of  sins,  and  to  satisfy  the 
hungry  soul,  and  that  he  hath  instituted  these  signs,  and  obligated 
us  to  use  them,  that  we  may  by  means  of  them  think  on  him,  and 
what  he  hath  done  and  suffered  :  "  Do  this,"  saith  he«  "  in  remem- 
brance of  me."  Yea.  we  ought  to  contemplate  and  receive  the  sign* 
as  seals,  to  assure  the  soul,  that  he  hath  truly  suffered  his  body  to  be 
broken,  and  his  blood  to  be  shed  for  her,  in  order  to  obtain  the  re- 
mission  of  her  sins,  and  that  he  also  will  assuredly  feed  and  nourish 
her  w.th  his  flesh  and  blood:  and  therefore  we  must  rely  upon  his 
word  of  promise,  and  urge  him  by  means  of  that  word  to  satisfy  and 
refresh  us  ;  for  this  belongs  to  the  nature  of  the  sacrament,  and  for 
this  purpose  the  apostle  delivers  the  institution  of  Christ  to  the 
churches  in  the  text. 

4.  Doth  he  thus  entertain  you,  do  ye  then  also  entertain  him  with 
the  fruits  of  his  sufferings  and  of  his  Spirit.  A  ^uest  must  some- 
times be  also  a  host ;  Jesus  feasts  you,  that  ye  may  also  feast  him. 
The  soul  so  entertained  by  him  and  bedewed  and  funned  by  his  Spirit, 
must  necessarily  become  fruitful  and  flourishing,  and  produce  abun- 
dantly the  fruits  of  humility,  faith,  love,  hope,  heavenly-niindedness. 
aeif-denial  and  thanksgivings  ;  for  when  the  Spirit,  "  the  north  wind 
awakes,"  to  humble  and  cleanse  her  from  her  sins,  and  when  "  the 
south  wind  comes,"  in  order  to  warm  the  soul  with  the  love  of  Jesus, 
and  blows  upon  the  garden  of  the  soul,  then  the  spices  thereof  flow 
ou  ,  for  which  the  spouse  wished,  Song  iv.  16.  Therefore  invite 
Je^us  also  to  eat  his  fruits  ;  the  spouse  said,  "  Let  my  beloved  come 
imo  his  garden,  and  eat  his  pleasant  fruits."  Fetch  and  call  him 
in  affectionately  ;  saying  "  Come  in,  thou  blessed  of  the  Lord,  why 
standest  thou  without  ?"  He  would  then  come  in,  and  say,  as  he  did, 
Song  v.  1.  "I  am  come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  spouse  : 
I  have  gathered  my  myrrh  with  my  spice  ;  I  ha?e  eaten  my  honey- 
comb with  my  honey;  I  have  drunk  my  wine  with  my  milk,"  Let. 
him  then  see  you  engage  in  a  solemn  manner  at  the  administration 
of  his  supper,  yea,  repeatedly,  to  s.  rve  him  ;  "  show  him  your  " 
huniuie  "  countenance,  let  him  hear  the  voice  "  of  your  earnest 
prayers:  u  for  your  voice  is  sweet  to  him,  and  your  countenance  is 
comely,"  as  he  saith.  Song  ii.  14.  Give  him  "  the  kiss,  the  spiced 
wine,  and  the  juice  of  the  pomegranates,"  of  your  faith,  hope,  self-de- 
nial, heavenly-mindedness  and  thanksgivings,  for  which  the  spouse 
was  so  ready,  Song  viii.  2.     " .While  the  king  sitteth  at  his  table- 


EXPLAINED.    XXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  75,  77.        95 

your  sp/k-nard  ought   to  send  forth  the  smell    thereof,"  Song  i.  12. 

5.  rkit  will  it  suffice  to  exercise  fellowship  with  Jesus  in  such  a 
separate  manner,  as  if  we  were  alone  with  him  in  the  world  ?  By  no 
means.  The  supper  is  a  common  feast,  designed  for  the  exercise  of 
fellowship  with  all  those  believers,  who  are  invited  to  it,  as  appears 
from  what  hath  been  said  above.  We  must  therefore,  as  one  peo- 
ple, and  as  fellow-partakers  of  Jesus  and  his  benefits,  "  eat  together 
•with  joy  and  singleness  of  heart,"  as  the  best  Christians  acted,  Acts 
ii.  46.  This  also  is  not  sufficient,  but  we  ought  to  exercise  also  a 
constant  communion  with  the  saints,  to  which  we  solemnly  obligate 
ourselves,  and  of  which  we  make  a  public  declaration  in  the  supper; 
but  of  this  we  have  spoken  more  fully  on  the  twenty  first  Lord's  day. 

6.  "  Show  forth  the  death  of  Christ  until  he  come,"  according  to 
the  admonition  of  the  apostle  in  the  text.  O  how  precious  should 
his  death  be  to  you,  for  it  is  your  bread,  your  life,  your  joy,  your 
salvation  and  satisfaction,  and  ye  should  therefore  think  on  it,  con- 
template its  virtue,  glory  in  it,  and  speak  of  it  to  others  continually  ; 
that  ye  may  excite  them  thereby  to  seek  an  interest  in  his  sufferings 
and  death.  Hear  how  Paul  acted  in  this  manner,  Gal.  vi.  14.  "  God 
forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  He  gives  you  also  the  signs  and  seals  of  his  death,  that  ye 
may  think  on  it ;  he  makes  his  death  meat  and  drink  for  you,  that 
he  may  "cause  your  lips  to  speak,  even  when  ye  sleep,"  Song  vii. 
9.  We  might  cry  out  concerning  his  death  by  his  Spirit,  according 
to  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  chap.  ix.  17.  "  How  great  is  his  good- 
ness, and  how  great  is  his  beauty  !  corn  shall  make  the  young  men 
cheerful,  and  new  wine  the  maids."  But  show  forth  his  death  not  only 
with  your  mouths  and  hearts,  but  also  with  your  conversation,  that 
men  may  see  that  ye  are  "  become  conformable  to  his  death,"  as 
Paul  endeavoured  to  be,  Philip,  iii.  10.  This  we  would  show,  if  by 
the  virtue  of  his  death  we  mortified  our  sinful  selves,  so  that  we 
lived  only  in  him  and  for  him,  as  Paul  testifieth  of  himself,  Gal.  ii. 
20.  "  1  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I  live  ;  yet  not  I, 
but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  And  he  saith  of  believers,  Col.  iii.  3,  "Ye 
are  dead  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God." 

I  add  finally,  complain  not  believers  that  ye  are  poor,  for  ye  are 
rich  in  Christ,  ye  are  enrolled  as  his  heirs  in  his  testament,  and  it  is 
sealed  :  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren,  hath  not  God  chosen  the 
poor  of  this  world,  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  ?"  Thus 
speaks  James,  chap.  ii.  5.  "  Ye  are  children,  and  therefore  heirs ; 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,"  saiih  Paul,  Rom,  viii.  If. 


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,  &c. 

Is  not  this  enough  ?  Bo  ye  not  see  many  evidences  of  it  yet,  through 
all  your  tribulations  ?  It  will  soon  appear,  when  the  full  enjoyment 
of  your  inheritance  shall  be  granted  to  you  in  that  great  supper  ot 
the  Lord ;  for  it  is  written,  "  lilesed  are  they,"  and  they  shall  be 
blessed)  "  who  are  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,"  Rev 
?six.  9.  Amen- 


?97.) 


TRANSUBSTANTIATION 


CONFUTED* 


XXIX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


>  Cor.  x.  15,  16.  I  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye,  what  I  say. 
The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  cemmunion  of 
the  blood  of  Christ  ?  the  bread,  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  com- 
munion of  the  body  of  Christ  ?

Q.  82.  Are  they  also  to  be  admitted  to  this  su/i/ier,  who  by  confession 
and  life  declare  themselves  infidels  and  ungodly  ? 

A.  No ;  for  by  this  the  covenant  of  Cod  would  be  profaned,  and 
his  wrath  kindled  against  the  whole  congregation  ;  therefore  it  is  the 
duty  of  the  Christian  church,  according  to  the  appointment  of  Christ 
and  his  apostles,  to  exclude  such  persons  by  the  keys  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  until  they  show  amendment  of  life. 


"W, 


EEDS  will  always  remain."  This  is  a  common  proverb, 
and  it  is  not  without  a  reason.  God  hath,  on  account  of  the  sin  of 
Adam,  which  was  also  the  sin  of  the  whole  human  race,  "cursed 
the  earth,  and  condemned  it  to  bring  forth  thorns  and  thistles,"  ac- 
cording to  Gen.  hi.  17,  19.  Weeds  are  also  very  fruitful :  though 
we  root  them  out  ever  so  carefully,  the  corrupt  earth  will  still  yield 
and  bring  them  forth  again.  It  is  just  so  with  heresies  and  errours 
concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  truth ;  they  will  never  in  this  life  be 
wholly  rooted  and  purged  out  of  the  church.  The  Lord  esteems 
them  to  be  always  necessary  for  the  church,  in  order  to  try  and  ex- 
ercise her.  The  apostle  saith,  1  Cor.  xi.  19.  "There  mu«t  also  be 
heresies  among  you,  that  they  which  are  approved  may  he  made 
manifest  among  you."  Yea,  when  once  an  errour  concerning  the  doc- 
trine of  the  faith  possesseth  a  person,  it  will  grow  like  weeds  :  "  Evil 
men  and  seducers  will  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  de- 
ceived," as  Paul  forewarns  us,  2  Tim.  iii.  13.  The  heretical  "words 
of  Hymeneus  and  Philetus  will  eat  like  a  canker,"  saith  the  same 
man,  2  Tim.  ii.  17.  Erroneous  persons  are  too  obstinate  to  retract 
what  they  conceive  they  have  once  rightly  apprehended ;  and  they 
cannot  maintain  one  errour  easily  without  glossing  it  over,  and  mak- 
ing it  appear  plausible  by  another.    If  we  should  not  exceed  the 


lis  O?  THE  MASS,  &c. 

Jimits  of  an  introduction,  we  should  show  distinctly  and  in  order 
how  the  firs'  erroneous  tenets  of  our  adversaries,  as  the  lordship  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  the  indifferent  freewill  of  the  Pelagians  and 
Semiptlagians,  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Quakers  have  hatched 
every  other  errour.  It  will  suffice  at  present  to  see  the  power  of 
errour  in  the  transubstantiation  of. the  Papists:  they  said  at  first,  in 
order  to  introduce  images  into  the  church,  that  Christ  was  in  a  bodily 
manner  present  in  the  supper.  Although  the  faithful  labourers 
bestirred  themselves  to  root  these  weeds  out  of  the  field  of  the  Lord, 
it  was  to  no  purpose,  the  weeds  remained  and  spread  the  more  : 
those  who  nursed  them  did  not  know  how.  to  preserve  them,  unless 
they  would  say  that  Christ  was  present  by  a  transubstantiation,  or 
substantial  changing  of  the  bread  and  wine  \mo  his  body  and  blood. 
Ha>ing  asserted  this,  they  were  ready  to  teach  also,  that  Christ  must 
be  offered  up  for  sins,  and  worshipped  in  the  supper,  which  is  called 
the  mass  by  the  Romanists  ;  verily  evil  weeds  ;  we  will  not  endeav- 
our to  root  them  out,  but  with  the  instructor  to  discover  the  abomi- 
nable nature  of  them,  that  every  one  may  beware  of  them. 

The  instructor  exhibits  three  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  as 
subjects  of  exposition. 

I.  The  abomination  of  the  Popish  mass,  Question  80. 

II.  Who  are,  and  who  arc  not  proper  partakers  of  the  Lord's  sup- 
per. Question  81. 

Ill  In  what  manner  the  church  ought  to  preserve  this  supper 
from  those  who  would  profane  it.  Question  82. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  first  particular,  the  instructor  asks,  "  What 
difference  is  there  between  the  Lord's  supper  and  the  Popish  mass?" 
Why  doth  he  ask  this  question  ?  will  he  recommend  the  Popish  mass 
to  us  ?  no,  but  he  asks  thus,  that  he  may  refute  the  mass ;  for  if 
there  be  so  great  a  difference  between  the  Lord's  supper,  and  the 
Popish  mass,  then  the  mass  is  not  the  Lord's  supper,  as  the  Roman- 
ists pretend ;  but  that  the  common  people  may  not  perceive  this, 
they  have  changed  the  name  of  the  supper,  and  called  it  the  mass. 
This  name  mass  was  not  heard  in  the  church  during  the  first  four 
centuries,  but  was  after  that,  used  by  the  Latin  church,  when  they 
dismissed  the  catechumens,  before  the  administration  of  the  supper, 
and  the  communicants  at  tht  separating  of  the  congregation  ;  for 
then  they  said,  ite,  miasa  est,  that  is,  go,  ye  are  dismissed,  or  the 
congregation  is  dismissed.  It  would  therefore  be  an  utter  absurdity 
to  seek  for  this  word,  either  in  the  Hebrew  or  Greek  language,  un- 
tess  we  would  seek  for  it  in  Daniel's  prophecy  of  Antichrist,  and  hi? 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8©— 82.  1 (  ■ 

^od  Maussim,  *  Dan.  xi  36 — 39.  We  will  indeed  find  Antichrist 
and  hia  breaden  God  depicted  tncre  in  lively  colours.  Many  have 
]>r  -ved  with  ahundant  evidence,  that  these  words  do  not  relate  to 
Anciochus  Epiphanes,  but  to  the  Romish  Antichrist.  And  therefore 
we  may  observe  the  secret  judgment  of  God  here,  that  the  Papistt 
have  given  the  name  of  mass  to  this  mystery  of  iniquity  ;  for,  ac- 
cording to  the  prophecy  of  Paul,  who  describes  Antichrist  in  nearly 
the  same  words  with  Daniel,  "  God  hath  sent  them  a  strong  delusion, 
that  they  should  believe  a  lie."  See  2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 1 1. 

But  of  what  consequence  would  the  name  be,  if  the  matter  only 
were  good  ;  but  the  matter  also  is  detestable.  They  say  that  the 
mass  is  an  unbloody  sacrifice  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  under, 
the  forms  of  bread  and  wine,  which  the  mass-priests  offer  up  to  God. 
in  order  to  procure  forgiveness  of  sins  for  the  quick  and  the  dead, 
and  which  must  be  worshipped  by  the  people.  In  order  to  serve  this 
mass  well  they  play  strange  pranks,  one  while  the  priest  walks,  then 
he  stands,  then  he  turns  round,  then  he  bows,  then  he  raises  him- 
self up,  then  he  crosses  himself,  then  he  pronouncts  a  blessing. 
J  hen  he  is  silent,  then  he  cries  aloud,  either  speaking  or  singing. 
£cc.  His  dress  is  fantastical,  and  his  expressions  are  singular :  there 
are  pontifical  and  episcopal,  high  and  low,  private  and  public,  red, 
black,  green  and  violet  masses,  masses  for  the  quick  and  the  dead, 
for  sick  kine,  sheep  and  swine.  Who  can  reckon  up  all  the  oddities 
of  the  mass  ?  What  think  ye,  hearers,  are  these  things  like  the 
Lord's  supper,  in  which  they  seek  the  mass  ?  did  Christ  either  do 
or  command  aught  like  this  in  the  supper  ? 

But  that  the  falsehood  and  abominableness  of  the  mass  may  be 
more  plainly  exhibited,  the  catechism  points  out  a  threefold  differ- 
ence between  the  Lord's  supper  and  the  popish  mass. 

1.  The  first  difference  is,  that  "  the  Lord's  supper  testifieth  to  us, 
that  we  have  a  full  pardon  of  all  sin  by  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ,  which  he  himself  has  once  accomplished  on  the  cross."  The 
word  of  God  teacheth  us,  that  "  believers  are  sanctified  through  thf* 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all.  For  by  one  offer- 
ing he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified.  Now,  Where 
remission  of  sins  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin."  Thus  speak? 
the  apostle,  Heb.  x.  10,  14,  18.  The  supper  testifieth  this,  for  "  both 
word  and  sacraments  are  appointed  to  this  end,  that  they  may  direc': 
our  faith  to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  only  ground  of  oil'. 

*  The  Dutch  translation  retains  the  original  word  Mcrttim,  v/hich  tlft 
?ngli3h  translation  renders  forces.  "      '      "   -'■' 


M8  OF  THE  MASS,  &c» 

Salvation  ;  this  we  have  shown  on  the  sixty  seventh  question.  In 
opposition  to  this  u  the  mass  teaches  that  the  living  and  dead  have 
ttot  the  pardon  of  their  sins  through  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  unless 
Christ  be  also  daily  offered  for  them  by  the  priests."  And  so  the 
nvdss  teaches  us  a  doctrine  wholly  different  from  that  which  the 
Lcrd's  supper  teaches  ;  for  (a)  in  the  institution  »f  the  supper  we 
do  uot  find  aught,  that  resembles  a  sacrifice,  nor  that  a  sacrifice  was 
instituted  :  we  find  there  indeed  a  feast,  but  no  sacrifice,  (b)  If  Christ 
had  offered  lumsell  up  in  the  supper,  his  sacrifice  on  the  cross  would 
have  been  unnecessary.  Christ's  sacrifice  on  the  cross  would  have 
been  a  repetition,  and  an  application  of  his  sacrifice  in  the  supper, 
and  thus  altogether  different  from  what  the  Papists  assert,  who  fancy 
that  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  is  a  repetition  and  application  of 
Christ's  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  (c)  If  Christ  be  offered  up  in  the  sup- 
per for  sins,  we  have  not  then  a  perfect  forgiveness  of  sins  by 
Christ's  only  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  contrary  to  what  hath  been  said 
above  from  Heb .  x.  10,  II,  18,  Christ  hath  not  then  accomplished 
all  tilings,  contrary  to  his  declaration,  u  It  is  finished,"  v,  hen  "he 
gave  up  the  ghost,"  John  xix.  30.  (d)  Then  deceased  believers  have 
still  sins,  contrary  to  what  Paul  saith,  Rem.  \i.  7.  "  He  that  is  dead 
is  freed  from  sin."  (e)  The  New  Testament,  of  which  the  supper  ie 
a  sacrament,  hath  no  priests;  we  read  only  of  priests  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedec,  of  Aaron  and  Baal  ;  the  mass-priests  cannot  be 
after  the  order  of  Melchizedec,  for  Christ  alone  is  after  that  order, 
according  to  Heb.  vii.  neither,  can  they  be  after  the  order  of  Aaron, 
because  that  order  hath  been  abolished.  If  they  will  be  priests  after 
ihc  order  of  Baal,  we  will  allow  it,  for  they  are  exceedingly  like 
those  priests,  who  "called  upon  their  idol,  and  cut  themselves  with 
knives  and  lancets,  till  the  blood  gushed  out  upon  them,"  1  Kings 
xvifi.  26,  28.  The  New  Testament  doth  noi  acknowledge  either  an 
altar,  or  proper  sacrifices.  Do  we  read  of  priests  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, they  are  not  mass-priests,  but  believers  in  general,  who  "are 
made  by  Christ  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,"  Rev.  i. 
6.  Do  we  read  of  any  altar,  Heb.  xiii.  10,  we  do  not  however  find 
many  altars,  which  the  Papists  "  have  multiplied  to  sin,"  like  idola- 
trous Ephraim,  Hosea  viii.  II,  but  only  one  altar,  to  wit,  Christ* 
Do  we  find  sacrifices  mentioned  in  tire  New  Testament,  they  are 
rhe  only  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  the  spiritual  sacrifices  of  believers, 
which  they  offer  up  to  God  by  Christ,  the  only  altar.  See  Heb.  xiii. 
10,  15,  16.  1  Peter  ii.  5.  And  (f)  how  can  either  the  Lord's  sup- 
per, or  the  Popish  mass  be  a  sacrifice  for  the  pardon  of  sins,  when 
nothing  is  destroyed  nor  consumed,  as-w.is  required  in  a  sacrifice  of 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80-*32.  119 

alonement ;  let  it  not  be  said,  that  the  substance  of  bread  and  wine 
is  destroyed  ;  for  this  is  not  true,  as  we  have  proved  before  :  Let  us 
admit,  that  the  substance  of  bread  and  wine  ceaseth,  but  then  some- 
thing greater  and  more  substantial  is  substituted  in  the  stead  of  them, 
to  wit,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  thus  we  will  receive  more 
of  God,  than  we  give  him  to  make  atonement,  contrary  to  the  na- 
ture of  sacrifices  of  atonement :  and  then  also  the  body  of  Christ, 
when  offered  to  obtain  forgiveness  must  be  consumed  ;  "  Without 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission,"  si.ith  Paul,  Heb.  ix.  22. 
How  then  can  the  mass,  which  is  an  unbloody  sacrifice,  procure  for- 
giveness ?  (g)  Add  to  this,  that  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  being  of- 
fered day  by  day,  cannot  procure  forgiveness,  any  more  than  the  le- 
gal sacrifices,  which  did  not  make  atonement,  because  they  were  re* 
peated.     See  Heb.  x.  12,   13. 

2-  The  second  particular,  in  which  the  Lord's  supper  differs  from 
the  Popish  mass  is,  that  the  supper  teacheth  us,  a  that  we  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  ingrafted  into  Christ,  who  according  to  his  human 
nature,  is  now  not  on  earth,  but  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
his  Father."  Believers  are  ingrafted  into  Christ  by  the  Spirit  in  the 
supper,  because  they  eat  and  drink  his  flesh  and  blood,  not  in  a  bodi- 
ly manner,  but  spiritually  and  sacramentally,  as  we  have  explained 
this  doctrine  upon  the  seventy-sixth  question.  And  the  Lord's  nip- 
per directs  us  thus  to  Chiist  in  heaven  ;  for  it  is  "  in  remembrance 
of  him,  and  in  order  to  show  forth  his  death  till  he  come,"  agreeably 
to  1  Cor.  xi.  24 — 26.  But  the  mass  teacheth  differently  from  this,  as» 
serting  that  "  Christ  is  bodily  present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and 
wine."  How  then  can  the  Romanists  find  the  mass  in  the  Lord's 
supper  ?  For  we  have  proved  at  laiye  on  the  former  Lord's  day, 
that  Christ  is  not  bodily  present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine, 
and  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the  supper. 

3.  The  third  particular,  in  which  the  mass  differs  from  the  sup- 
per, according  to  the  instructor  is,  M  that  the  supper  testifieth  to 
us,  that  since  Christ  is  in  heaven,  he  must  there  be  worshipped  by 
us."  For  if  the  supper  direct  us  to  Christ,  as  hath  been  now  proved, 
the  hearts  of  the  communicants  must  be  lifted  up,  as  they  cried  to 
them  of  old ;  we  must  then  also  "  seek  "  in  the  supper,  "  the  things 
which  are  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God," 
according  to  Col.  iii.  1,  that  we  may  be  blessed  with  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ,"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Eph- 
i.  3.  But  the  mass  teacheth,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  the  supper, 
that  "  Christ  must  be  worshipped  under  the  forms  of  bre,ad  and 
wine  :"  and  therefore  the  mass  ie  false,  yea,  altogether  a  mistake  ; 


».?0  OF  THE  MASS,  2cc. 

for  although  Ave  should  seek  the  mass  in  the  supper,  wc   should  not 
find  it,  but  should  miss  it. 

These  things  being  all  duly  considered,  we  must  conclude  that 
if  the  mass  is  at  bottom  nothing  else,  than 

1  A  denial  of  the  one  sacrifice  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ/' 
Tor  Christ  hath  by  his  one  sacrifice  purchased  perfect  forgiveness  of 
sins,  as  we  have  shown  before  ;  that  sacrifice  was  indeed  of  infinite 
value,  being  «  God's  own  blood,"  Acts  xx.  28.  "The  blood  of  the 
Son  of  God,  which  cleanseth  us  from  al!  sins,"  1  John  i.  7,  which 
"brings  in  an  everlasting  righteousness  and  redemption,"  Dan.  ix. 
24.  Hfb.  ix.  12.  When  we  now  say,  that  forgiveness  is  obtained 
by  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  and  not  by  the  sacrifice  and  sufferings 
of  Christ  on  the  cross,  unless  he  be  still  daily  offered  up  in  the  mass, 
do  we  not  then  deny  that  there  is  a  perfect  forgiveness  of  sins  by 
the  one  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  thus  his  sacrifice  itself?  The  sacri- 
fices of  the  Old  Testament  were  shadows  of  the  one  sacrifice  oi 
Christ :  therefore  when  we  continue  to  offer  sacrifices  day  by  day, 
to  obtain  the  pardon  of  sins,  we  deny  the  body  of  the  shadows,  the 
one  sacrifice  of  Christ; 

The  Papists  cry  out  against  this,  and  say,  that  the  sacrifice  of 
the  mass  is  a  sacrifice  of  application,  and  consequently  no  denial  oi 
Christ's  sacrifice  on  the  cross  ;  but  then  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  on 
the  cross  is  not  the  same  with  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass,  but  alto- 
gether different  from  it :  and  so  Christ,  who  was  offered  on  the 
cross,  is  not  offered  in  the  mass.  The  sacrifice  of  the  mass  cannot 
apply  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  ;  for  a  sacrifice  is  offered  to  God,  but 
the  application  is  made  to  men.  If  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  must  be 
applied  by  another  sacrifice,  then  his  death,  in  which  he  was  offered 
as  a  sacrifice,  must  be  applied  by  another  death.  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ  is  applied  by  his  exaltation,  agreeably  to  Rom  iv.  25.  v.  10. 
Acts  v.  31,  by  his  word  and  sacraments,  Eph.  v.  26.  and  by  his 
Spirit.     See  1  Cor.  vi.  1 1. 

2.  "  The  mass  is  also  at  bottom  an  accursed  idolatry  :"  for  the 
Romanists  (a)  celebrate!  he  mass,  the  chief  ceremony  of  their  reli- 
gion, in  honour  of  the  saints,  to  obtain  their  intercession  with  God. 
To  bestow  the  chief  honour  of  religion  upon  the  saints,  who  are  but 
creatures,  is  surely  an  accursed  idolatry,  (b)  They  worship  that 
which  is  not  God,  when  we  must  worship  God  only,  as  Christ  saith, 
Matt.  iv.  10,  for  they  worship  bread.  Is  it  not  an  accursed  idolatry 
to  worship  bread  as  .  •-  .1  ?  (c)  They  say  indeed  that  it  is  not  bread* 
alter  it  bath  been  blessed,  but  God  himself;  yet  the  form  of  bread  is 
not  God,  and  i  hey  nevertheless   require  that  men  should   worship 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  so— 82.  *l?A 

that,  forjn,  It  is  surely  an  abominable  idolatry  to  worship  mere  acci- 
dents, which  have  no  subsistence,  (d)  Although  it  were  granted  to 
the  church  of  Rome,  that  the  brejd  and  wine  are  changed  into  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  it  is  the  i  only  a  ma  e  God;  and  when 
they  worship  that,  ti,ey  practise  heathenish  idolatry  ;  tor  u  the  hea- 
thens served  them,  which  by  nature  are  no  Gods,"  as  Pawl  speaks* 
Gal.  iv.  8.  (e)  according  to  the  opinion  ot  the  Popisli  priests  them- 
selves, the  people  must  unavoidably  commit  shamehd  idolatry  ;  for 
if  the  bread  and  wine  should  not  be  transubstantiated,  which  may 
happen  a  thousand  limes  ;  to  wit,  when  the  priest  hath  not  been 
properly  baptized,  nor  properly  authorized  by  another  priest,  who 
hath  been  properly  baptized  and  properly  authorized,  and  when  he 
hath  not  a  steadfast  design  to  make  flesh  and  blood  of  the  bread  and 
wine,  then  transubstantiation  fails,  the  bread  and  wine  are  not  chan- 
ged. Wnen  now  the  peopp  worship  it,  do  they  not  then  commit 
idolatry  ?  The  people  indeed  can  never  be  certain  on  account  of  all 
the  requis'ue  conditions  of  transubstantiation,  that  the  bread  and 
wine  are  changed,  and  they  can  therefore  never  worship  it  in  faith, 
and  without  sin  ;  for  "  all  that  is  not  of  faith  is  sin."  (  f)  And  how 
can  the  Papists  be  so  displeased  with  us,  when  we  call  the  mass  an 
accursed  idolatry  ?  Is  not  all  idolatry  accursed  of  God  ?  There 
hath  never  been  a  more  detestable  idolatry  heard  of  than  that  which 
the  Papists  practise  with  the  mass.  Peruse  every  book,  ancient  and 
modern,  and  see  whether  ye  can  find  a  single  instance,  that  men 
have  worshipped  that  which  they  ate,  and  voided.  And  neverthe- 
less the  Romanists  do  this.  Justly  therefore  may  we  say  of 
them,  what  Paul  saith  of  the  heathens  in  the  text  "  that  what  they 
sacrifice,  they  sacrifice  to  devils,  and  not  to  God." 

How  dare  these  men  to  mutter  and  abuse  the  word  of  God  so  shame- 
fully, that  they  dare  also  to  defend  this  abomination,  (a)  with  the 
example  of  Melchizedec,  who  "  brought  forth  bread  and  wine," 
Gen.  xiv  18  Did  he  then  celebrate  the  mass?  was  the  bread  and 
wine  then  also  flesh  and  blood  ?  do  we  read  that  he  offered  bread 
and  wine  ?  no,  but  he  brought  bread  and  wine  fo;  th,  not  to  offer 
them,  but  to  refresh  Abraham  and  his  weary  soldiers,  (b)  They 
think  that  they  can  find  a  cloak  for  their  shame  in  the  divine  pre- 
diction, .VI af  .  i.  11,  "  In  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto 
my  name,  and  a  pure  offering."  But  if  we  must  understand  this  of 
a  proper  and  bodily  offering,  how  then  will  Daniel's  prediction  be 
fulfilled,  that  <w  the  Messiah  should  cause  the  oblation  to  cease?" 
Dan.  ix.  27.  And  therefore  we  must  judge  that  Mai.  i.  11,  hpeakfS 
^f  the  spiritual  sacrifices  of  believers,  which  are  exhibited  according 

VoV/.  a.  Q 


122  OF  THE  MASS,  kc. 

to  the  style  of  the  Old  Testament.  See  Psalm  cxli.  2.  1  Pete;- 
ii.  5.  (c)  It  is  still  more  shameless  that  the  Romanists  attempt 
to  defend  themselves  with  the  words  of  the  Saviour,  when  he  saith. 
"  do  this ;"  but  doth  he  say  "  offer  this  r"  is  doing  of  every  kind  of- 
fering ?  surely  no :  but  the  Lord  saiJ  do  this,  when  he  gave  those 
who  sat  at  meat  with  him  bread  and  wine,  to  eat  and  drink,  and 
therefore  do  this,  is  eat  and  drink  this  "  in  remembrance  of  me." 
(d)  Can  we  indeed  forbear  to  ridicule  the  Romanists,  when  they  at- 
tempt to  establish  their  mass  by  citing  Acts  xiii.  2,  "  As  they  minis- 
tered to  the  Lord,  and  fasted  r"  How  can  they  be  so  void  of  under- 
standing ?  must  we,  where  it  is  said,  minister  to  the  Lord,  read  min- 
ister to  the  mass  ?  what  a  fantastical  bible  shall  we  have,  if  we  pro- 
ceed thus  !  Forsooth,  the  church  of  Rome  hath  power  to  say,  this 
is  the  sense  of  that  passage,  and  we  may  not  gainsay  her.  Is  this 
wonderful  ?  she  can  change  bread  into  a  god  ;  why  then  should  she 
not  be  able  to  change  the  sense  of  the  scripture  also  ?  She  is  indeed 
eminently  skilful  in  this  art,  and  hath  rendered  the  passage,  Acts 
xiii.  2,  in  a  French  translation,  "  They  ministered  to  the  mass."  Is 
not  this  masterly  ?  (e)  But  they  say,  the  ancient  fathers  called  the 
supper  a  sacrifice.  We  do  not  deny  it :  but  is  it  therefore  a  sacri- 
fice ?  must  the  ancients  be  heard,  where  the  word  of  God  is  silent  ? 
But  how  dare  these  men  appeal  to  the  ancients,  when  they  know 
that  transubstantiation  is  a  late  invention,  as  we  have  shown  on  the 
foregoing  Lord's  day  ?  The  ancients  having  no  knowledge  of  this 
new  heresy,  and  not  thinking  that  men  would  contrive  such  a  tran- 
substantiation and  mass,  called  the  supper,  without  any  suspicion,  a 
sacrifice  by  a  sacramental  phraseology,  because  it  is  a  sign  and  seal 
of  Christ's  sacrifice  ;  and  perhaps  also,  because  believers  brought 
their  gifts  as  sacrificial  gifts,  to  be  used  in  the  supper,  and  likewise 
because  they  solemnly  engaged  there  to  offer  themselves  up  unto 
God,  in  order  to  serve  him. 

II.  But  for  whom  was  the  Lord's  supper  instituted  ?  for  the  living 
and  the  dead,  that  it  might  be  offered  up  for  them,  in  order  to  pro- 
cure the  pardon  of  their  sins,  as  the  Papists  assert  ?  By  no  means  ; 
none  but  the  living  can  use  it,  and  it  was  instituted  for  them  ;  not 
for  children,  who  cannot  discern  the  body  of  the  Lord,  but  for  adults  ; 
yet  this  seal  of  the  covenant  is  not  for  those,  who  Jive  only  a  bodily 
life,  but  for  those  who  have  a  spiritual  life  also  ;  for  it  is  a  spiritual 
food,  which  none  but  those  who  are  spiritually  alive  can  receive  : 
"Christ  hath  ordained  this  meat  only  for  the  faithful,"  saith  our 
form  for  the  supper.  The  supper  is  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of 
faith  :  we  must   therefore  be  partakers  of  that    righteousness,  if  we 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  12S 

shall  take  the  seal  of  it  to  ourselves :  but  must  we  have  an  assurance 
that  we  are  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  possess  that  righteosness  of  faith, 
in  order  that  we  may  have  a  right  to  this  feast  ?  and  must  a   person 
who  is  not  so  assured,  abstain  from  this  sacrament  ?  certainly  no.  It 
would  be   good  to  possess  assurance  upon  indisputable  grounds  ;  we 
could  then  receive  the  supper  with  more  faith,  and  to  greater  advan- 
tage ;  but  those  who  do  not  possess  assurance  can  also  have  a  right ; 
for  a  person  may  be  a  believer,  and  yet  not  be  fully  and  clearly  con- 
scious that  he  is      There   are  among  the  people  of  God,  those  who 
are  new  beginners,  and  such    as    are   further  advanced  ;  there    are 
weak  and  strong  men  ;  one  while   "  God  makes  their  mountain  to 
stand  strong,"  so  that  they  can  say,  "  I  snail  never  be  moved ;"  but 
anon  "he  hides  his  face  again,  and  they  are  troubled."   Psalm  xxx. 
6,  7.     "  1  hey  who  go  down  to  the  dust,  and  they  who  cannot   keep 
their  souls  alitfe,"  as  well  as  they  who  are  fat  on  the  earth,  "  have 
the  promise,"  that  they  shall  eat,"  Psalm  x.xii.  29      Not  only    "  the 
old  "  but  also  "  the  young  "  are    invited  "  to   flow  together   to   the 
goodness  of  the  Lord,"  Jer.  xxxi.   12,  13.     The  supper  is  designed 
to  strengthen  the  weak  faith  of  the  little  ones  also      That  none  may 
.nevertheless  flatter  himself,  and  draw   near    in   a    careless    manner, 
thinking,  I  may  be  a  believer,  although  I  be   not  assured,   and    thus 
indulge  himself  in  his  security,  when  if  he  would  consider  his  ways, 
he  might  easily  know  that   he  hath  no  interest  in  the  righteousness 
of  Christ,  and  that  a  true  believer  may   not    remain    in    uncertainty 
whether  he  have,  or  have  not  a  lawful  right  to  this  seal  of  *the  cove- 
nant, the  instructor   exhibits   in    the    eighty-first    question,    certain 
marks  for  trial,  both  for  those  who  are  qualified  to   approach  the  ta- 
ble of  the  Lord,  and  for  those  who  must  abstain  from  it. 
The  supper  of  the  Lord  was  instituted  then, 

1.  "For  those  who  are  truly  sorrowful  for  their  sins-"  Coming 
to  themselves,  they  see  their  great  guilt,  and  loathsome  sinfulness, 
which  affects  them  with  grief,  concern,  shame,  detestation  of  them- 
selves, and  anxiety  :  thus  "  they  repent  of  their  wickedness,  saying, 
What  have  I  done,"  Jer.  viii.  6.  See  this  in  Ephraim,  Jer.  xxxi. 
18,  19.  This  is  that  "sincere  sorrow,"  of  which  we  must  speak 
with  the  instructor,  on  the  eighty  ninth  question.  The  supper  was 
instituted  for  such,  since  it  teacheth  them  their  abominableness.  by 
which  they  deserve  death,  as  they  see  in  it  that  k-  they  have  pierced" 
the  Son  of  God,  according  to  Zech.  xii.  10.  It  is  given  them  from 
the  covenant  of  grace,  of  which  the  supper  is  a  seal,  to  "  remember 
their  evil  ways,  and  their  doings  that  were  not  good,  and  thus  to 
loathe  themselves  in  their  ovn  sight  for  their  iniquities  and  for  theiv 


12*  OF  THE  MASS,  fee, 

abominations,"  according-  to  the  promise  of  the  Lord,  Ezck.  xxxvi. 
Si.  iea,  tliis  humiliation  qualifies  them  for  and  renders  them  capa- 
ble of  the  grace  which  is  sealed  in  the  supper ;  for  u  the  poor  in 
spirit,  and  they  who  mourn  are  pronounced  olessed,"  Matt.  v.  3,  4. 
The  Lord  promiseth  to  *l  look  upon"  such  in  his  kindness,  Isaiah 
Ivii    15,  18.  lxvi.  2, 

2.  This  sorrow  for  sin  is  of  itself  not  sufficient,  it  doth  not  of  'tseli 
make  any  person  better,  nor  worthy  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Adam, 
Cain  and  Judas  had  great  sorrow,  but  it  drove  them  to  despair,  and 
from  the  Lord  ;  there  must  then  be  also  "'a  trust,  that  our  sins  are 
forgiven  for  the  sako  of  Christ ;  and  that  our  remaining  infirmities 
are  covered  by  his  passion  and  death."  This  trust  is  saving  faith. 
We  have  explained  largely  enough  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day  in 
what  manner  we  uust  in  this  saving  faith,  that  our  sins  are  pardon- 
ed tor  ihe  sake  of  Christ.  The  lowest  degree  of  faith,  that  active 
and  restless  desire  after  Christ,  and  after  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and 
so  a  trust  that  we  shall  be  justified,  can  give  us  a  right  to  the  sup- 
per, since  those  who  hunger  and  thirst  are  invited  to  the  benefits  of 
Christ,  and  have  the  promise,  that  they  shall  be  filled,  Isaiah  lv.  1, 
Mat  .  v  9.  Luke  i.  53  That  the  instructor  doth  not  require  here 
the  highest  degree  of  trust  appears  from  his  speaking  also  of  weak 
believers,  u  who  earnestly  desire  to  have  their  faith  more  and  more 
strengthened."  It  is  the  nature  of  the  spiritual  life,  that  it  inclmes 
to  grow.  It  is  the  cry  of  the  weak,  "Loidl  believe;  help  thou 
mine  unbelief,"  Mark  ix.  24.  "  Increase  our  faith,"  Luke  xvii.  5, 
And  such  have  a  right  to  this  rich  feast,  because  it  is  a  feast,  which 
strengthens  their  faith,  according  to  what  we  have  taught  on  the 
twenty  fifth  Lord's  day  ;  yet  a  person,  who  hath  a  full  trust  and 
faith,  that  all  his  sins  are  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  sufferings, 
is  qualified  to  partake  of  the  supper  to  greater  advantage,  inasmuch 
as  he  is  able  to  draw  near,  as  one  who  is  entitled,  with  more  confi- 
dence, hath  more  power  to  discern  the  body  of  the  LorJ,  and  to  re- 
ceive the  signs,  as  seals  of  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins. 

3.  That  it  may  nevertheless  appear,  that  this  trust  is  not  a  vain 
imagination,  the  instructor  requireth  also  "  a  desire  to  live  a  more 
holv  life."  Believers  when  they  attend  to  themselves,  see  with  dis- 
pleasure their  continual  backslidings,  and  therefore  their  souls  are 
restlessly  desirous  to  amend  their  lives,  yea,  even  to  be  perfect  ;  for 
although  believers  know  that  they  cannot  be  altogether  perfect  in 
this  life,  nevertheless,  since  they  are  conscious,  that  they  can  be 
more  perfect*  than  they  are,  therefore  they  "  follow  after  perfection, 
and  reach  after  it,  that  they  may  apprehend  it,"  with  Paul,  Philip. 


XXX.  LORD  3  DAY.  Q.  80— 8'i.  135 

hi.  12,  14.  This  desire  is  necessary  in  order  to  draw  near  the  table, 
because  we  shall  otherwise  "  partake  of  the  Lord's  table,  and  the 
table  of  devils,"  winch,  according-  to  the  text  may  not  be  done  ;  we 
may  no1  draw  near  t0  God  any  other  way,  much  less  in  such  a 
solemn  manner.  See  Isaiah  i.  12 — 15.  By  making  use  of  the  seal 
of  the  covenant  we  deel  ire  not  only  that  the  Lord  is  our  God,  but 
also  thai  we  are  his  people,  "  who  must  keep  all  his  command- 
incuts,"  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18.  Yea  the  sacraments  are  means  to  pro- 
mote sanctification,  Eph.  v.  26,  and  the  signs  oblige  us  to  "  show 
forth  the  death  of  the  Lord  till  he  come."  1  cor.  :;i.  26,  which  we 
cannot  do,  unless  we  amend  our  lives. 

The  Lord's  supper  being  instituted  for  such  only,  those  surely 
have  no  right  to  it,  who  dD  not  possess  these  qualifications,  to  wit, 
all  hypocrites,  or  dissemblers,  who  appear  better  than  they  are  in 
themselves  and  in  private  :  they  will  display  a  form  of  godliness  by 
a  fail  profession,  conversing  with  the  godly,  and  making  a  great 
boasting  and  ado  concerning  their  delight  in  holiness,  but  they  deny 
the  po^er  of  it  in  private  ;  they  crave  no  more  than  the  name,  that 
they  are  godly  person*,  and  they  aim  only  at  promoting  their  own 
interest ;  but  when  they  are  examined,  and  cannot  retain  the  name 
any  longer,  nor  gain  aught  by  walking  in  the  narrow  way,  they  will 
then  forsake  their  religious  course,  yea,  they  will  even  oppose  god- 
liness and  the  god'y.  But  these  are  not  the  only  persons,  who  must 
abstain  from  the  Lord's  supper,  but  "  all  those  likewise,  who  do  not 
turn  to  God  with  sincere  hearts,"  as  all  ignorant  persons,  all  who 
cleave  to  any  sin  wilfully  and  wittingly  and  do  not  strive  against  it : 
those  also  who  do  not  pursue  more  than  a  civil  honesty,  and  an  out- 
ward devotion,  or  who  do  indeed  something  more  than  others,  that 
they  may  depend  on  what  they  do,  but  have  never  yet  had  a  dis- 
covery of  their  sins,  do  not  seek  their  salvation  in  Christ  with  an 
anxious  concern,  and  do  not  pursue  a  faith,  that  worketh  by  love. 

It  is  true,  many  venture  to  mingle  with  the  guests  at  the  table 
without  a  wedding  garment ;  but  like  a  lawless  whore,  they  wrest 
the  marriage  pledge  out  of  t  e  hand  of  the  bridegroom  Christ:  they 
cannot  receire  the  supper  aright,  nor  discern  the  bods'  of  the  Lord, 
and  "  to  those  defiled  and  unbelieving  persons  nothing  is  pure  ,  but 
both  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled,"  Titus  i.  15.  "To  the 
wicked  God  saith,  What  hast  thou  to  do,  to  declare  my  statutes,  or 
that  thou  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth  ?"  Psalm  1.  16. 
"  They  eat  and  drink  judgment  to  themselves,"  saith  Paul,  1  Cor. 
zi.  29.  They  aggravate  their  condemnation,  yea,  God  inflicts  sick- 
ness-and  death  upon  them  ;  he  did  thuc  to  the  Corinthians,  1  Cor. 


126  OF  THE  MASS,  &c. 

si.  SO.  Is  this  matter  of  wonder  ?  when  they  receive  the  supp  im* 
worthily,  they  render  themselves  "  guilty  of  the  hody  and  blood  of 
the  Lord,"  as  the  apostle  saith,  I  Cor.  x.  17.  "They  crucify  the  Son 
of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame,"  according  to  Heb. 
vi.  6.  Surely  not  because  they  pollute  and  profane  the  flesh  and 
blood  of  Christ  with  their  mouths,  as  the  Papists  and  Lutherans  ima- 
gine on  account  of  transubstantiation  and  consubstantiati«n,  which  we 
have  confuted  before  ;  but  because,  when  they  suffer  the  kindness 
and  love  of  Christ  in  his  sufferings  to  be  sealed  to  them,  they  de- 
clare that  he  is  a  companion  of  wicked  men,  and  was  justly  punish- 
ed as  an  evil  doer. 

III.  But  may  those,  to  whom  the  oversight  of  the  church  is  in- 
trusted, admit  persons,  who  do  not  possess  the  abovementioned  qual- 
ifications in  truth  ?  no,  they  must  prohibit  them.  But  how  will  any 
man  be  infallibly  certain,  that  another  possesses  truth  in  the  inward 
parts  ?  This  is  not  given  to  any  man  ;  the  Lord  reserves  it  to  him- 
self. Perhaps  it  will  be  said,  the  person  who  is  admitted,  must  ex- 
hibit a  certain  evidence,  that  he  hath  truly  experienced  an  inward 
change  ?  But  what  shall  that  evidence  be  ?  that  he  can  show  the 
time  of  his  new  birth  ?  I  conceive  this  to  be  impossible,  because,  he 
doth  not  know  the  moment,  when  he  became  alive  from  the  dead  ; 
he  can  indeed  say  when  he  was  convinced,  but  that  is  not  always 
spiritual  life  ;  or  shall  his  evidence  be,  that  he  speaks  of  spiritual 
things  in  a  spiritual  manner,  and  heartily  from  experience,  that  he 
holds  with  the  most  excellent  of  the  pious,  and  that  he  walks  in 
every  respect  unblamably  before  all  men  ?  Who  of  the  most  exact 
and  most  scrupulous  dealers  with  souls  in  matters  of  this  nature  hath 
not  often  found  himself  deceived  here  ?  and  hath  he  not  sometimes 
suspected  persons,  who  had  not  either  the  ability,  or  the  confidence 
to  make  themselves  known,  yea,  who  despised  themselves  ?  one  hath 
more  of  the  gift  of  discerning  spirits  than  another :  my  colleagues 
will  reject  a  person,  whom  I  receive,  and  they  will  receive  one  whom 
I  reject.  If  then  such  manifest  evidences  be  the  proper  rulvs,  ac- 
cording to  which  the  overseers  of  the  church  must  admit  a  person 
to  the  Lord's  supper,  or  exclude  him,  there  must  then  necessarily 
arise  strife,  discord,  confusion  and  every  evil  work,  Christ  must  he 
divided,  and  his  coat,  which  is  without  seam,  must  be  rent. 

Shall  we  then  admit  every  person  without  distinction  ?  is  there  no 
certain  standard,  according  to  which  the  overseers  of  the  church 
must  proceed  in  this  matter?  God  forbid.  We  think  that  an  over- 
seer of-  the  church,  in  order  to  administer  the  Lord's  supper  to  a 
person  without  scruple,  and  without  being  perplexed  and  embarrass- 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  127 

ed  with  many  anxious  thoughts,  ought  only  to  inquire  whether  the 
communicant  make  a  proper  confession  of  his  sins,  of  his  faith  in 
Christ,  and  of  his  purpose  to  amend  his  life,  and  whether  his  con- 
versation be  agreeable  to  his  confession  :  "  But  those,  who  by  their 
confession  and  life  declare  themselves  to  be  infidels  and  ungodly, 
must  not  be  admitted  to  this  supper."  Whether  they  do  in  their 
confession  err  from  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  faith,  or  whether 
their  conversation  be  scandalous  and  offensive  ;  for  if  we  admit  such, 
"  the  covenant  of  God  will  be  profaned,"  because  we  then  suffer  the 
seals  of  the  covenant,  and  so  the  covenant  of  God,  to  be  profaned. 
Yea,  then  "  the  wiath  of  God  will  be  kindled  against  the  whole  con- 
gregation." It  fared  thus  with  the  Corinthians,  who  conducted  in  a 
most  slovenly  manner  with  respect  to  the  supper,  when  many  of 
them  were  punished  with  weakness,  sickness,  and  the  sleep  of  death, 
1  Cor.  xi.  17 — 34.  "  And  therefore  it  is  the  duty  af  the  Christian 
church,  according  to  the  appointment  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles, 
to  exclude  such  persons  by  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  till 
they  show  amendment  of  life."  But  »f  this  we  must  speak  en  the 
next  Lord's  day. 


APPLICATION. 

It  will  be  necessary  to  impress  what  hath  been  said  on  our  minds, 
in  order  that  we  may  improve  it,  and  particularly  in  the  first  place 
with  respect  to  the  Popish  mass,  and  then  with  respect  to  the  right 
partakers  of  the  supper.  When  ye,  hearers,  consider  what  hath  been 
said  concerning  the  mass,  must  ye  not  then, 

1.  Justify  our  separation  from  the  church  of  Rome  ?  had  not  our 
fathers  sufficient  reasons  for  departing  out  of  Babylon  ?  they  perceiv- 
ed indeed  that  the  mass  was  a  mystery  of  iniquity.  How  could  they 
remain  with  a  people,  who  would  compel  them,  even  by  the  most 
intolerable  tortures,  to  deny  the  only  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thus  the  only  ground  of  our  salvation,  and  to  practise  the  mest  ac- 
cursed idolaliy  ?  And  though  it  were  even  so,  that  the  Papists  would 
have  permitted  our  fathers  to  disapprove  of  this  abomination,  and 
to  maintain  a  different  opinion  in  their  own  minds,  might  they  then 
have  continued  in  that  synagogue  of  Satan  ?  "  Could  they  drink  the 
cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the  cup  of  devils?  could  they  be  partakers  oi 
the  Lord's  table,   and  of  the  table  »f  devils  I"  as  the    text  speaks- 


ISSS  OF  THE  MASS,  &c. 

When  the  Lord  by  the  jfower  of  his  Spirit,  and  (he  marvellous  en- 
lightening  of  his  truth,  caused  them  to  hear  horn  Rev.  xviii.  4,  the 
*i  voice,  saving,  Come  out  of  Babylon,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not  par- 
takers of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues,"  could 
they  then  yet  remain  in  her  ?  And  verily  we  did  not  separate  from 
her  wantonly,  nor  too  hastily  ;   for  "  we  would  have  healed  Babylon, 

;;  could  not  heal  her,"  and  therefore  we  "  forsook  "  her,  ac 
ing  to  Jer.  lit  9.  «  God's  two  witnesses  prophesied  a  thousand, 
two  hundred  and  threescore  days  :  bu.  the  beasl,  which  came  up  out 
of  the  bottomless  pit,  slew  them  in  all  the  martyrs  ;  but  God  put 
in  the  reformation  of  the  church,  "  a  spirit  of  life  into  them,  io  that 
they  stand  upon  their  feet,"  in  order  to  bear  a  constant  testimony 
against  ti.e  beast,  and  "they  have  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the  pres- 
ence of  their  enemies,"  being  exalted  above  the;r  enemies,  by  a 
heavenly  state  of  the  church.  See  this  foretold,  Rev.  xi.  Who 
must  not  praise  the  Lord  that  he  hash  broken  our  yoke,  and  bursten 
Our  bonds  ;  that  he  hath  brought  forth  the  truth  and  light  out  of 
darkness ;  yea,  without  extraordinary  grace,  this  would  have  been 
impossible. 

I  often  wonder  how  our  reformers,  who  were  from  their  birth  ed- 
ucated in  the  church  of  Rome,  were  presently  able  to  exhibit  the 
truth  in  all  its  lustre,  and  were  endued  with  so  much  valour,  that  they 
could  withstand  and  weaken  the  great  power  of  the  Romish  beast. 
How  ought  we,  with  "  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  to  fall  down  upon 
our  faces,  to  worship  God,  and  say,  We  thank  thee,  O  Lord  God 
Almighty,  which  art  and  wast,  and  art  to  come  ;  because  thou  hast 
taken  to  thee  thy  great  power,  and  hast  reigned  ?"  Surely  we  ought 
all  of  us  to  beware  of  returning  to  i  hat  people,  or  of  exercising  com- 
munion with  them,  which  is  not  unavoidable,  either  in  the  dedica- 
tion of  their  churches,  thronged  with  professed  knaves,  and  those 
who  esteem  the  world  above  all  besides  ;  or  by  going  to  see  that  a 
bo  .Tunable  massworship  ;  or  by  contracting  marriages  with  the  men- 
servants,  or  womenservants  of  Baal ;  or  by  taking  servants  of  them  : 
■  Lice  from  Idolatry,"  saith  Paul,  vrs.  15,  preceding  our  text.  Yea, 
the  magistrates  ought  to  bestir  themselves  to  banish  that  abom  na- 
tion out  of  their  jurisdictions  :  persecution,  and  a  forcing  of  con- 
science, ought  never  to  be  commended  ;  but  we  might  discounte- 
nance the  abomination  of  the  mass,  without  rendering  ourselves 
e-uilty  of  forcing  conscience.  We  find  that  as  soon  as  the  godly 
kings  had  ascei  David,  they  suppressed  the   wor 

- 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  129 

2.  Esleem  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  sufficient  to  procure  the  for- 
giveness of  your  sins,  seek  no  other,  i  est  in  that,  and  be  satisfied 
With  it,  as  the  mean  to  obtain  the  pardon  of  all  your  sins.  It  ought 
with  Paul  "  to  be  far  from  you  to  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  your 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  who  in  the  World  is  crucified  unto  you,  and 
veu;ito  the  world,"  G.d.  vi.  14.  Ye  ought  not  to  seek  pardon  even 
in  the  signs  of  the  supper,  tlwugh  they  were  instituted  by  the  Lord, 
but  to  look  through  them  to  the  Lord  in  heaven,  and  to  his  sacrifice, 
as  he  presents  it  to  his  Father  in  that  true  sanctuaiy  ;  for  "  the 
bread  and  the  wine  are  "  the  seals  of  "  his  body  and  blood  shed  for 
many,  for  the  remission  cf  sins,"  as  the  Saviour  speaks,  Matt.  xxvi. 
V6—28.  "  Count  therefore  all  things  loss  and  dung,  that  ye  may 
be  found  in  him,  not  having  your  own  righteousness,  which  is  of 
the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteous- 
ness which  is  of  God  by  faith,"  Phi!,  iii.  8,  9. 

3.  Believers,  demean  yourselves  as  "  a  holy  priesthood,  offering 
up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ,"  according 
to  the  admonition  of  Peter,  1  Peter  ii.  5.  The  priesthood  of  the 
Popish  communion  is  defiled,  and  their  sacrifice  is  idolatrous  ;  but  ye 
have  been  made  priests  by  Christ  himself  unto  God  his  Father, 
Rev.  i.  6.  Therefore  offer  to  the  Lord  incense  and  a  pure  offering," 
according  to  the  prophecy,  Mai.  i.  1 1,  not  in  a  corporal,  but  in  a  spir- 
itual manner,  and  indeed  your  "body,"  Rom.  xii.  l,"a  broken 
spirit,"  Psalm  lu  17,  "thanksgiving  and  welldoing,"  Heb.  xiii.  15, 
16,  "prayer,"  Psalm  cxli.  2.  "  Your  life  itself,"  if  he  should  re» 
quire  it  in  martyrdom,  for  the  confirmation  of  his  truth,  and  for  the 
glorification  of  his  name.     See  this  in  Paul,  2  Tim.  iv.  6. 

We  must  not  only  improve  the  abomination  ol  the  mass  to  a  good 
purpose,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  it,  but  also  our  doctrine  concern- 
ing the  proper  partakers  of  the  Lord's  supper.  It  is  dangerous  to 
partake  of  the  blessed  supper  of  the  Lord  unworthily  ;  for  we  ren- 
der ourselves  thereby  guilty  of  a  fearful  sin^  and  we  bring  a  dreadful 
judgment  upon  ourselves,  as  we  have  shown  before.  We  have  in- 
deed said  that  the  overseers  of  the  church  have  a  sufficient  warrant 
to  admit  a  person  to  this  seal  of  the  covenant,  when  they  perceive 
that  he  hath  made  a  proper  confession,  and  that  his  conduct  is  agree- 
able to  his  confession  ;  but  this  is  not  enough  for  the  communicant 
himself,  he  must  be  a  true  believer,  one  who  is  truly  sorrowful  for 
his  sins,  who  seeks  his  salvation  and  forgiveness  with  confidence  in 
Christ  only,  and  is  intent  upon  holiness,  and  an  amendment  of  hie 
life,  that  he  may  he  qualified  to  partake  of  this  holy  and  blessed  sup 
per.     Therefore  we  must  attend  to  three  things,  with  respect  t<^  v<? 

Vol..  IT.  R 


ISO  OF  THE  MASS,  fee. 

ceivingthe  Lord's  supper,  in  order  that  we  may  receive  it  properly  . 
1.  Before.     2.  In,  and  3.  After  this  supper. 

1.  It  is  certain,  tlr.it  when  we  undertake  great  things,  we  ought 
to  prepare  ourselves  for  them.  When  the  Lord  was  about  to  come 
down  to  the  people  upon  Sinai,  he  ordered  "  Moses  to  sanctify  the 
people,  that  they  might  be  ready  against  the  third  day,"  Exod.  xix. 
10,  1 1.  See  this  also  Gen.  xxxv.  1 — 4.  No  man  might  come  near 
the  tabernacle  or  temple  under  the  Old  Testament,  until  he  was 
sanctified.  If  Job  should  "  stretch  out  his  hands  toward  Cod,  he 
must  first  prepare  his  heart,"  according  to  the  counsel  of  Zophar, 
Job.  xi.  13  Will  any  man  go  to  an  extraordinary  feast  without  a 
decent  preparation  for  it  ?  How  much  more  ought  a  person  to  pre- 
pare hini9elf  for  this  precious  feast ?  and  therefore  (a)  Examine 
yourselves  whether  ye  have  a  riyht  to  the  supper,  and  whether  ye 
possess  the  qualifications  which  we  have  mentioned.  "  Examine 
yourselves  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith  :  prove  your  own  selves,"  saith 
Paul,  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  This  is  necessary  before  the  supper,  therefore 
the  same  apostle  saith,  1  Cor.  xii.  28,  "  Let  a  man  examine  him- 
self, and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup."  See 
what  we  have  said  formerly  concerning  the  requisite  qualifications 
of  a  worthy  communicant  ;  and  apply  your  souls  to  those  things, 
that  ye  may  see  whether  they  be  in  you. 

(b)  Consider  your  former  backslidings,  since  the  last  supper,  that 
ye  may  humble  yourselves  for  them,  may  be  induced  to  flee  to  the 
sufferings  and  death  of  the  Mediator  for  reconciliation,  and  may  yet 
confide,  notwithstanding  your   deficiencies;  in  this  manner  ire    we 

Red  and  rendered  capable  of  meeting  God  in  the  Lord's  supper. 
'"  A  broken  nd  contrite  heart  God  will  not  despise,*'  Psalm  li.  IT. 
See  also  Isaiah  Ivii.  15.     Matt.  v.  4. 

(c)  Renew  your  assent  to  the  covenant  of  God*  tha*  ye  may  re- 
ceive- the  seal  of  the  covenant  Without  scruple.  Hezekiah  required 
that  the  Israelites  should  "'yield  themselvesto  the  Lord"  before  the 
passover,  and  so  ''enter  into  his  sanctuary,"  2  Chron.  xxx.  8  Do 
thus  also  before  the  supper,  which  hath  succeeded  to  the  passover. 

(d)  Stir  up  your  desires  for  needful  and  for  many  graces  :  al! 
thai  grace  which  was  merited  for  you  by  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  is 
v  presented  .>n  i  sealed  in  the  supper  ;  the  Lord  himself  calls  to  you 
from  Psalm  lxx^i.  10,  '•  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it." 
But  before  ye  approach, 

(e;   be  reconciled  to  your  brother,  if  ye  have  injured  him,  or  if  he 

injured  you  ;  this  is  . required  by  the  Saviour,   Matt.  v.  23,  24. 

they  we're  about  to  draw  near  the  table  in  the  ancient  church, 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  3©— 82.  i3i 

the  deacon  cried  aloud,  "  Embrace  and  kiss  one  another."  Who 
C.»n  expect  fecgivent  ss  and  favour  oi  the  Lord,  if  lie  will  noi  first  for- 
give Ins  broiher  .? 

2.  But  \vc  must  not  only  order  ourselves  thus  before  the  adminis- 
tration of  the  supper,  but  we  must  also  demean  ourselves  propwrly. 
while  it  is  administered,  and  while  we  are  receiving  it :  and  there- 
foe, 

(a)  Endeavour  to  detach  your  hearts  from  all  that  is  visible  and 
sintul,  and  to  empty  them  of  it,  that  ye  may  employ  yourselves  only 
■with  the  Lord,  and  his  institution.  Abraham's  servants  were  obliged 
to  abide  with  the  ass  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  when  he  and  his 
son  went  up  to  the  Lord,  Gen.  xxii  5. 

(b)  Arise  and  draw  near,  as  those  who  have  a  right  and  are  call- 
ed This  would  enable  you  to  approach  with  boldness  and  faith,  in 
expectation  of  favour.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  called  Bartimeus,  the 
multitude  said  to  him,  "  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise,  he  callcth  thee  ;" 
and  when  he  came  in  this  manner,  to  Jesus,  he  obtained  his  request, 
Mark  x.  46 — 52.  We  draw  near  indeed  seriously  enough,  but  not 
believingly  enough,  when  with  Esther  we  only  venture,  and  say,  "  I 
will  go  in  unto  the  king,  which  is  not  according  to  the  law,  and  if  I 
perish,  I  perish,"  Esther  iv.  16. 

(c)  See  in  the  signs  the  painfulness,  and  the  power  of  Christ's 
death  for  you,  and  his  ardent  love  to  you,  that  ye  may  "  look  at  him 
whom  ye  have  pierced,"  as  was  foretold,  Zech    xii.  10. 

(d)  Lake  and  receive  the  signs  of  the  minister,  as  from  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,  to  be  a  pledge  and  seal  of  his  truth  and  love  manifested 
in  his  sufferings  for  you.  See,  for  we  hasten  to  conclude,  Rom.  iv. 
11.  1  Cor.  iv.  1. 

3,  But  shall  we  now  "  return,  like  the  dog  to  his  vomit,  and,  like 
the  sow  that  w*s  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire?"  no  !  but 
we  must  endeavour  also  to  make  a  suitable  improvement  of  the  sup- 
per, after  we  have  received  it ;  and  to  this  belongs, 

(a)  Thai  we  beware  of  carelessness,  recklessness,  and  sins  that 
lightly  beset  us,  and  that  we  remain  near  the  Lord,  that  we  "may 
not  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  by  whom  we  are  sealed,"  Eph. 
iv.  30.  We  should,  with  the  spouse,  "  adjure  all  things,  that  they 
stir  not  up,  nor  awake  our  love,"  Song  ii.  7.  Yea,  with  her  we  ought 
to  be  "  a  garden  inclosed,  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed,"  bong 
iv.   16. 

(b)  Reflect  much  on  what  hath  been  done  to  you  :  Jesus  asked 
his  apostles,  after   washing   their  feet,  John  xiii.  12.     "Know  ye 


in  ^'  THE  MASS,  fcc. 

what  I  have  done  to  you  ?"  In  like  manner  should  we  also  ask  our- 
selves after  the  supper,  that  we  might  retain  a  relish  of  it. 

(c)  Live  and  feed  now  upon  the  sealed  covenant,  and  the  benefits 
of  it.  The  Lord  hath  engaged  to  give  you  out  of  the  fulness  of 
Christ  grace  for  gruce  ;  claim  it  of  him,  and  urge  your  request  by 
lus  scaled  lS  word,  upon  which  he  hath  caused  you  to  hope,"  with 
D*wd,  Psalm  cxix.  49. 

^d)  Live  now  hke  persons  who  are  sealed,  and  engaged  to  the 
Loici,  u  showing  forth  his  death  until  he  come,"  according  to  1  I  or. 
xi.  3#4  and  laying  youiselrcs  wholly  out  lor  him.  Let  "  the  love  of 
Christ  constrain  you  to  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all 
dead  :  and  that  he  died  for  all,  that  they  who  live,  should  not  hence- 
forth live  unto  themselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  them,  and 
rose  again,"  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15. 

Suffer  me  to  say  also,  relative  to  your  improvement  of  the  sapper, 
for  your  direction,  (a)  that  ye  must  not  think,  that  we  ought,  about  the 
time  of  toe  supper,  to  pursue  another  kind  of  holiness,  than  at  other 
times.  Many  fatigue  themselves,  about  tiie  time  of  the  supper,  in  a 
legal  manner,  to  practise  another  kind  of  holiness:  yea,  they  will  re- 
ject a  good  frame  of  assurance  and  delight  in  the  Lord,  in  order  to 
obtain  a  contrite  frame,  and  to  indulge  in  excessive  sorrow.  But  we 
musi  always  practise  the  same  kind  of  holiness  ;  and  we  ought  only 
at  certain  seasons,  and  particularly  about  the  time  of  the  supper,  to 
excite  ourselves  to  special  liveliness. 

(b)  The  soul  ouen  knows  not  how  to  examine,  and  to  older  her- 
self, yea,  sometimes,  when  she  attempts  it,  she  becomes  darker  and 
more  contused  than  before  ;  but  we  undertake  this  work  "  with  might 
and  with  power,"  when  we  ought  "  with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord," 
2ech.  iv.  6.  Therefore  look  buck  with  atu-nlion  upon  your  former 
condition,  see  what  ye  think  of  yourselves,  and  how  ye  arc  disposed 
at  this  moment,  and  ye  will  thus  become  acquainted  with  your  own 
minds,  and  attain  to  clearness  ;  or  read  a  good  book,  which  treats  of 
these  matters  ;  or  apply  to  a  good  man,  speak  to  him  of  your  con- 
dition,  and  seek  relief  of  him. 

(c)  Attend  not  too  scrupulously  to  the  order  and  the  number  of  the 
particulars,  winch  we  have  proposed  for  your  improvement,  lest  it 
should  perplex  and  weary  you  ;  we  give  you  only  a  clue,  that  ye 
rnay  see  what  is  most  agreeable  to  your  frame. 

(d)  Do  not  make  your  good  frame  your  ground  of  confidence  ; 
for  although  a  good  frame  qualifies  you  for  the  supper,  nevertheless 
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  his  institution,  and  his  invitation  to  you  arc 
'the  only  grounds  of  confidence,  upon  which  ye  may  draw  nigh. 


XXX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  80—82.  133 

(c)  Do  not  therefore  forbear  to  draw  nigh  on  account  of  a  sight 
ef  your  unworthiness,  or  a  want  of  preparation  ;  a  sight  of  this,  when 
it  humbles  you,  is  a  proper  frame  to  draw  nigh  with.  Pray  for  your- 
selves, as  Hezekiah  prayed  for  the  people,  2  Chron-  xxx.  18,  19,  20. 

(f )  When  ye  have  sinned  after  the  supper,  do  not  then  think  that 
the  covenant  and  seal  of  God  are  now  become  of  no  effect  to  you. 
No,  that  covenant  and  seal  are  everlasting  •,  and  therefore  recover 
and  bestir  yourselves  in  consequence  of  it,  to  obtain  new  grace  and 
pardon  of  your  covenant  God.     See  Isaiah  liv.  9,  10. 

(g)  Although  the  church  should  be  ever  so  corrupt,  yea,  though 
even  wicked  men  should  be  received  into  the  house  of  God,  and  ad- 
mitted to  his  supper  do  not  therefore  separate  yourselves  from  it  j 
for  ye  have  contributed  to  corrupt  it.  Doth  it  offend  you,  that  the 
overseers  of  the  church  admit  those  whom  ye  consider  as  ungod»y, 
others  have  reason  to  be  offended  with  you  also,  because  ye  do  «iot 
first  speak  to  those  persons,  and  accuse  them  to  the  church,  which 
is  your  duty  accoiding  to  Matt,  xviii.  15,  16,  17  1  Cor.  i.  11.  ,*.nd 
tims  the  wrath  of  God  wdl  not  be  kindled  against  you,  since  ye  do 
your  duty.  Do  ye  not  advance  by  doing  your  duty,  mourn  then, 
yet  do  not  forsake  the  church,  which  is  still  less  profitable  Sep- 
arating from  a  church,  in  which  there  is  still  truth  and  godliness,  is 
also  evil,  and  provokes  God  to  anger.  Sec  this  Pro  v.  xxiv.  21.  Judr 
vrs.  19.  The  church  of  Corinth  was  exceedingly  corrupt,  yet  Paul 
condemns  separating  from  it,  1  Cor.  xi.  17 — 30.  Though  our 
church  in  the  Netherlands  is  sufficiently  corrupt,  she  is  nevertheless 
not  so  corrupt,  but  that  Christ  waiks  still  In  the  midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks  ;  there  are  those  still  "  whom  the  Lord  knows 
and  seals  as  his  own,"  according  to  2  Tim.  ii.  19.  "He  will  him- 
self at  length  take  away  by  his  angels  the  wicked,  as  the  tares,  and 
sause  the  righteous  to  shine,  as  the  sun  in  his  kingdom."  Amen, 


134.  ) 


THE 


KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY* 


Matt.  xvi.  19.  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  :  and  whatsoevor  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth,  shall  be 
loosed  in  heaven.