Q.   83.    Wliat  are  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 

A.  The  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  and  Christian  discipline,  or 
excommunication  out  of  the   Christian   church  ;  by  these   two  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  believers,  and  shut   against-unbe 
lie  vers. 

Q.  84.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  and  shut  by  the  fir  each- 
ing  of  the  holy  go.t/iel  ? 

A-  Thus;  when  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  it  is  de- 
clared and  publicly  testified  to  all  and  every  believer,  that  whenever 
they  receive  the  promise  of  the  gospel  by  a  true  Faith,  all  their  sins 
are  really  forgiven  them  of  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits : 
and  on  the  contrary,  when  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  unbe- 
lievers, and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent,  that  they  stand  exposed 
to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as  thry  are 
unconverted  :  according  to  which  testimony  of  the  gospel,  God  will 
judge  them,  both  in  this,  and  the  life  to  come. 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  83—85.  135 

Q.  85.  Hoio  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and  opened  by  Christian 
discipline  ? 

A.  Thus  ;  When  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  those  who 
under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain  doctrines  or  practices  incon- 
sistent therewith,  will  not  after  having  been  often  brotherly  admon- 
ished, renounce  their  errours  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are  com- 
plained of  to  the  church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  appointed  by 
the  church  :  and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are  by  them  for- 
bid the  use  of  the  sacraments  ;  whereby  they  are  excluded  from  the 
Christian  church,  and  by  God  himself  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ ; 
and  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amendment,  are  again  re- 
ceived as  members  of  Christ  and  his  church. 

V  V  HEN  the  signs  of  the  Lord's  supper  were  about  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  primitive  church,  the  deacon  ctied,  "  The  holy  things 
are  for  them  who  are  holy."  The  holy  are  indeed  the  only  proper 
persons  to  partake  of  that  which  is  holy,  and  they  only  can  use 
it  in  a  holy  manner,  as  it  ought  to  be  used,  while  the  unholy  profane 
whatsoever  is  holy  :  a  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  ;  but  unto 
them  that  are  defiled,  and  unbelieving,  is  nothing  pure  ;  but  even 
their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled,"  saith  Paul,  Titus  i.  15.  No 
uncircumcised  person,  nor  any  who  was  unclean  by  a  dead  carcase, 
might  eat  of  the  holy  passover  under  the  Old  Testament.  No  man 
had  liberty  to  minister  in  holy  things,  until  he  was  first  sanctified 
for  that  purpose ;  yea,  to  the  end  that  no  unholy  person  might  emer 
into  the  tabernacle  or  temple,  door-keepers  were  appointed,  who  re- 
moved the  unclean  therefrom.  The  priests  were  appointed  censors 
of  uncleanness,  to  distinguish  between  persons  and  things  that  were 
clean  and  unclean,  that  nothing  which  was  unclean  might  appear  be- 
fore the  Lord.  These  things  were  enjoined  indeed  until  the  time 
ef  reformation,  and  are  now  abolished  ;  but  the  Lord  doth  not  there- 
fore choose  that  things,  which  are  more  essentially  holy,  snoukl  be" 
administered  to  the  unholy  :  no,  they  may  be  dispensed  only  to  the 
boly,  and  they  must  be  withholden  from  the  unholy:  "  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  befnr« 
swine,  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again,  and 
»end  you,"  saith  the  Saviour  to  the  apostles,  Matt.  vii.  6.  He  hath 
iherefore  given  to  his  ministers  the  power  of  the  keys,  that  they 
may  admit  none  but  the  holy  into  his  kingdom,  and  may  shut  oul 
the  unholy,  according  to  our  text.  The  instructor,  having  taught  in 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  the   holy   supper  was  instituted  only 


1 86     THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

for  the  holy,  showeth  also  that  the  church  must  shut  out  by  the  keys 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  those  who  give  public  evidence  of  their 
unholiness.  The  instructor  having  proposed  this  in  general,  ex- 
plains it  at  large  in  this  Lord's  day  by  two  particulars  ;  he  shows, 

I.  What  arc  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  Q.  S3. 

II.  How  they  must  be  used,  Q.  84,  85. 

1.  By  the  kingdom  of  heaven  the  scripture  understands  often, 
and  thus  also  in  the  text,  the  church  of  the  Lord,  of  which  he  speaks 
in  the  18th  verse;  for  Jesus  Christ,  the  King,  is  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  who  hath  made  that  Jerusalem  his  throne,  to  which  his  heav- 
enly subjects,  the  believers,  the  saints  of  the  high  places,  have  ac- 
cess, to  obtain  there  by  their  heavenly  prayeis,  the  heavenly  benefits 
of  righteousness,  peace  and  joy.  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the 
heavenly  King,  in  or  ler  to  serve  him  excordins;  to  his  heavenly  laws, 
and  by  means  of  this  kingdom  to  inherit  a  still  higher  kiDgdom  of 
heaven. 

.This  heavenly  kingdom  is  shut  against  the  sinner:  the  Lord  sent 
him  out  of  Paradise  in  his  father  Adam  ;  hut  when  the  Lord  God 
erects  this  kingdom  on  earth  for  his  Son,  he  opens  an  access  to  it 
for  the  elect  sinner,  that  his  Son  may  have  the  heathen  for  his  in- 
heritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession. 
He  hath  therefore  given  to  the  ministers  of  his  kingdom  the  keys  of 
that  kingdom  ;  they  are  certainly  not  material,  but,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  church,  heavenly  keys,  a  heavenly  and  ecclesiastical  pow- 
er to  rule  the  church,  to  open  it  to  the  penitent,  and  to  shut  it  against 
the  impenitent  ;  as  in  the  affairs  of  a  house,  when  we  intrust  the 
management  of  a  house  to  a  person,  we  delirer  to  him  for  that  end 
the  keys  of  the  house,  that  he  may  admit  into  it  all  those  who  belong 
to  it,  and  may  open  all  the  hidden  treasures  of  it,  and  that  he  may- 
shut  ali  strangers  out  of  it,  and  lock  up  all  the  goods  of  it.  Thus 
also  the  power  to  govern  the  state  is  expressed  by  keys  ;  when  the 
Lord  apponted  "  Eliakim  treasurer  and  steward  of  the  palace,  com- 
mitting the  government  into  his  hands,"  he  said,  "  I  will  lay  the 
key  of  the  house  of  David  upon  his  shoulder  :  he  shall  open,  and 
none  shall  shut,  and  he  shall  shut,  and  none  shall  open,"  Isaiah  xxii. 
15,  20 — 22.  Therefore  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  are  the 
power  to  govern  that  kingdom,  even  the  church.  This  power  is 
either  the  supreme  power,  which  the  Father  hath  given  to  his  Son 
alone  :  for  "  God  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  hath  given 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  according  to  Eph. 
:.  22  "-He  hath  the  Iceys  of  hell  and  of  death,"  and  "  he  hath, " 
more  tnan  Eliawun,  "the  key  of  David:  for  he  opens,  and  no  mar. 


— $5,  13* 

blurts,  and  he  shuts  and  no  man  opens,"  Rev.  i.  18.  in.  7,  or  a 
power  subordinate  to  him,  and  ministerial,  which  his  ministers  re- 
ceive of  him,  agreeably  to  what  he  saith  in  the  text. 

The  Remonstrants  deny  that  the  church  hath  such  a  power,  dis- 
tinct from  the  civil  power  ;  for  seeing  that  the  church  would  not 
suffer  them,  on  account  of  their  doctrine,  they  sought  their  help 
in  the  gates,  and  in  order  to  flatter  the  magistrates,  they  surrendered 
the  power  of  the  church  to  them,  and  said  that  all  the  power  of  the 
church  depended  upon  the  higher  powers,  that  the  rules  of  the 
church  ought  to  be  enacted  by  the  magistrates  or  in  virtue  of  their 
authority  over  her,  and  that  they  ought  therefore  also  to  appoint  and 
depose  the  ministers  of  the  church  ;  but  the  reformed  church  oppo- 
sed this  doctrine,  and  said  that  the  church  possessed  such  a  ministe- 
rial power,  distinct  from  the  power  of  the  magistrates,  to  govern 
herself,  to  elect  her  ministers  and  rulers  according  to  the  word  of 
God,  and  when  they  conducted  themselves  amiss  in  doctrine  or  life, 
to  reject  them. 

That  the  church  possesses  such  a  power,  distinct  from  the  civil 
power  of  the  magistrates,  appears  (a)  from  the  text,  in  which  Christ, 
as  king  of  Zion,  commits  the  power  of  the  keys,  not  to  the  magis- 
trates, but  to  his  apostles  only,  (b)  Under  the  Old  Testament  the 
power  of  the  church  Was  distinct  from  the  civil  power  :  "  Amariah 
the  chief  priest  was  ruler  in  all  the  matters  of  the  Lord  ;  and  Zeba- 
diah  in  all  the  matters  of  the  king,"  2  Chron.  xix.  8,  11.  When 
Uzziah  undertook  to  perform  the  work  of  a  priest,  he  incurred  the 
displeasure  of  the  Lord,  2.  Chron.  xxvi.  16 — 21.  It  is  true,  the 
godly  kings  exercised  sometimes  a  considerable  jurisdiction  in  the 
affairs  of  the  church,  but  many  of  them  were  also  prophets,  and 
thus  also  ecclesiastical  persons,  who  had  an  extraordinary  revelation 
for  this  purpose  :  moreover,  those  kings  did  not  take  upon  them- 
selves that  jurisdiction  in  the  affairs  of  the  church,  except  in  times 
of  uncommon  declension,  in  order  to  reform  the  chuich,  which  is 
now  still  the  duty  of  the  magistrates  :  but  it  doth  not  follow  there- 
from, that  the  magistrates  have  a  sovereign  poWer  over  the  church, 
any  more  than  it  follows,  that  ecclesiastical  persons  have  a  sovereign 
power  over  the  state,  because  Jehoiada  in  his  time  reformed,  and  re- 
stored the  stale,  2  Chron.  xi.  and  because  priests  also  sat  in  the  great 
Sanhedrim,  which  judged  in  all  legal  and  capital  cases,  (c)  Paul 
teacheth  us  still  more  clearly  the  power'of  the  church  when  he  saith, 
2  Cor.  x.  8,  "  Though  I  should  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  power, 
which  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification,  and  not  for  your  de- 
structiou,  I  should  not  be  ashamtd."  The  church  hath  then  a  power, 
Vot..  u.  S 


THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

Ti'/.  from  the  magistrates,  but  from  the  Lord      The    same    apostle 

.  hat  *•  he  should  use  s.iaipntss  according  to  that  puwtr," 
Cor.  xiii.  10.  (d)  I' he  Lord  himself  hath  ordained  certain  officers  in 
his  church,  which  therefore  intimateth  a  power  to  govern  the  church, 
as  of"  ministers  and  stewards  "  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  "governments,"  1  Cor. 
xii  28,  ^  ambassadours  "  2; Cor  v.  20,  w  apostles, prophets,  evangel- 
ists, paso.s,  teachers,"  Eph.  iv.  11.  "overseers,"  1  'I  hess.  v.  14, 
"liners,  watchmen,"  Hcb.  xiii  17,  "bishops,  stewards  of  Cod," 
Til.  i.  7  (e)  Doih  not  ev>n  the  nature  of  the  case  teach  this?  the 
of  the  magistrates  relates  only  to  the  kingdom  of  nature, 
but  the  power  of  the  i  hurch  relates  to  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the 
power  of  the  magistrates  extends  only  to  the  bodily  condition  of  the 
citizens;  but  that  of  the  church  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  her 
members  ;  the  power  of  the  magistrates  is  a  lordly  power,  but  Chat 
of  the  church  is  a  ministerial  power,  nor    under  tl  istrates,  but 

under  Christ,  1  Cor.  iv.  1.  The  office  of  the  magistrate  can  be  ad- 
ministered by  a  heathen,  but;  no  ecclesiastical  office  can  be  so  admin- 
isle  red. 

It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  that  all  magistrates  have  not  a  power  over 
'.    e  church,  but  only  the  Christian  ttes  ;  for  Christianity1  be- 

longs not  to  the  nature  of  the  magistracy,  since  otherwise  no  hea- 
then could  administer  that.  oftice,  contrary  to  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 6. 

Moreover,  the  power  and  government  of  the  church  doth  not  ef- 
fect a  kingdom  within  a  kingdom,  the  power  of  the  church  subvert- 
ing that  of  the  magistrate  ;  for  then  family  government,  which  is 
distinct  from  civil  government,  would  also  be  contrary  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  magistrates. 

But  they  say,  "  kings  are,"  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23,  "nursing 
fathers,  and  their  queens  nursing  nuthers  of  the  chuich."  Have 
they  therefore  any  Lordship  over  the  church?  if  so,  then  the  \ 
of  the  magistrates  have  also  such  an  authority.  Is  nursing  the 
chuich,  e:;erci  ing  authority  over  her  ?  the  passage  alledged  doth 
not  surely  assert  this,  but  only  that  the  great  men  of  the  world 
should  be  favourable  to  the  church,  not  by  exercising  authority  over 
her,  but  by  submitting  themselves  willingly  to  her.  The  ori 
hath  not  lords,  but  only  nurses,  and  it  is  added,  "  They  shall  how 
down  to  thee  with  toward  ihe  earth,  and   lick  up  the  dust 

of  thy  feet."  This  hath  but  little  resemblance  to  power,  authority, 
and  lordship  over  the  chun  h. 

We  do  not  however  agree  with  the  Papists,  who  ha\e  introduced 
a  lordly  power  into  the  church,  not  only  in  ecclesiastical,  but  also  in 
civil  matters,  in    an   antichristian  manner  ;  yea,   they  do   not  allow 


—85.  139 

the  magistrates  any  power  at  all  relative  to  the  church  ;  for  although 
the  magistrates  have  no  power  in  the  church,  they  have  nevertheless 
a  power  relative  to  the  church.  Ecclesiastical  persons  are  subject, 
as  citizens,  to  the  magistrates  :  the  magistrates  may  punish  ecclesi- 
astical persons  on  account  of  any  civil  misdemeanour,  as  Solomoa 
expelled  Abiathar  on  account  of  his  conspiracy  with  Adonijah,  I 
Kings  ii.  35.  Magistrates  may  also  manage  the  temporal  posses- 
sions of  the  church,  inquire  whether  the  true  doctrine  be  preached, 
root  out  crrours,  enact  the  rules  of  the  church  into  laws,  and  they 
are  bound  to  cherish  the  church,  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23. 

Neither  doth  this  ecclesiastical  power  reside  with  the  pope  of 
Rome,  as  the  head  of  the  church  ;  for  he  is  not  the  head,  as  we  have 
proved  from  the  word  of  God,  on  the  twenty-first  Lord's  day.  When 
Christ  saith  in  the  text  to  Peter,  "  I  will  give  thee  the  keys,"  &c. 
this  surely  doth  not  relate  to  the  pope  ;  for  since  he  doth  neither 
profess  the  doctrine,  nor  live  the  life  of  Peter,  he  cannot  be  the  suc- 
cessor of  Peter.  What  Christ  saith  here  to  Peter,  he  saith  likewise 
to  all  the  apostles.  See  John  xx.  21,  22,  23.  When  Christ  asked 
all  his  apostles  whom  they  said  that  he  was,  Peter  answered  in  the 
name  of  them  all,  and  so  Christ  also  speaks  these  words  to  Peter,  as 
representing  them  all.     See  vrs.  13 — 15. 

Moreover,  this  ecclesiastical  power  doth  not  reside  with  every 
member  of  the  church,  as  the  Brownists  imagine  ;  for  when  all  the 
people  govern,  there  will  arise  confusion:  but  the  Lord  requireth* 
that  "  all  things  should  be  done,"  in  his  church,  "  decently  and  in 
order,"  1  Cor.  xiv.  40.  «*  Are  all  apostles  ?  are  all  prophets?  are 
all  teachers  ?"  may  we  ask  here  with  Paul,  1  Cor.  xii.  29.  Much 
less  doth  this  power  reside  with  the  women,  as  certain  enthusiasts  and 
Antinomians  fancy  ;  for  women  are  forbidden  to  speak  in  the  church, 
1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35.  1  Tim.  ii.  12,  but  the  ecclesiastical  power  re-, 
sides  with  the  rulers  of  the  church  ;  these  are  not  bishops,  on  whom 
the  other  rulers  and  ministers  of  the  church  depend  ;  for  the  name 
bishop,  in  Greek  efiisco/ios,  doth  not  intimate  any  sovereignty,  but 
signifies  only  an  overseer,  and  is  given  to  all  the  ministers  without 
distinction,  and  even  to  the  elders,  as  we  may  see,  Acts  xx.  17,  28. 
Phil.  i.  1.  Titus  i.  5 — 7,  and  besides  this,  all  manner  of  sovereignty 
is  forbidden  in  the  church.  See  Mat.  xx.  20—27.  1  Peter  v,  1—4. 
But  the  rulers  of  the  church  are  either  extraordinary,  as  the  apostles 
and  evangelists,  who  were  called  and  qualified  in  an  extraordinary 
manner  by  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  to  preach  the  gospel  in  all  lan- 
guages to  every  nation,  and  to  confirm  it  by  miracles,  Mat.  x.  14, 
The  evangelists  were  teachers  sent  into  different  parts,  by  the  apo?.' 


m       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

lies  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  confirm  the  churches,  which  the 
apostles  had  gathered.     We   read  of  them,   Eph.  iv.  ]  1.     Such  an 
one  was  Philip,  Acts  xxi.  8.     Timothy,  2  Tim.  iv.  5,  and  Titus,  ch. 
i.  5.    Or  the  rulers  of  the  church  ate  ordinary,  who  are  called  elders  ; 
these  are  distinguished  into  elders,  who  teach  and  rule,  and  elders  who 
do  not  teach,  but  rule  :  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well,  be  counted 
worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word  and 
doctrine,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  v.  17.     The  ciders  who  teach  are  call- 
ed also   "  teachers,"   and  those  who  only  rule,  are  called   "  govern- 
in  e  ts,"   1  Cor.  xii.  28,   and  considered   collectively,   they  are  called 
K  the  presbytery,"  or  eldership,  1  Tim.  iv.  14.     To  these  rulers,  the 
Lord  Jesus,  as  the  great  prophet  .;nd  King  of  his  church,  hath  com- 
mitted the  power  of  the  keys,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  before- 
mentioned  offices,  see  1  Cor.  iv.  1,    Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  but  also  from 
Ma1,   xviii.  17,   where  the  rulers,  as  representing  the  whole  church, 
are  called  the  church,  and  receive  the  power  to  cast  an  incorrigible 
sinner  out   of  the  church;  and  the  rulers,  when   assembled  for  this 
purpose,   are  either  consistories,    classes,    or    synods.     Synods  are 
gathered  from  theNchurches  of  a  province,  or  of  a  whole  country,  or 
from  all  the  known  churches  in  the  world  ;  and  are  therefore  called 
provincial,  national,  and  universal  synods.     Although  all  lordship  is 
forbidden  in  the  church,   nevertheless,  that  all  things  may  be  done 
decently  and  in  order,  consistories  mist  be  subordinate  and  subject 
to  classes,  classes  to  synods,  provincial  synods  to  national,  and  nation- 
al to  universal      This  is  gainsaid  by  the  Independents,  who  will  have 
that  each  church  should  be  governed  according  to  its  own  particular 
laws,  and  be  independenton  other  churches,  because  otherwise  lording 
will  he  introduced  into  the  church.    On  the  contrary  the  apostle  saith, 
that  "  t;.e  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets  :  for  God 
is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of 
the  saints."  See  1  Cor.  xiv.  29 — 33.     For  what  purpose  was  the  syn- 
od of  Jerusalem  assembled  ?  was  it  not  in  ordei  to  decide  the  great 
controversy,  thai  had  arisen  i.i  the  churches,  whether  the  Gentiles 
ought  to  he  circumcised,  in  order  to  their  salvation  ?  and  when  it  was 
decreed,  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  circumcise  them,  was  not  that  de- 
cree s-nt  to  all  the  churches?  ami  did  they  not  submit  to  it?  would 
i  submission  Hitrodo.ee  lording   into  the  church  ?     Nothing  is 
better  calculated  to  prevent  it   and  to  preserve  soundness  of  doctrine. 
II.  The  rulers  of  the  church  make  use  of  these  keys  with  respect 
to  all  that   belongs  to  the  church,  as  the  ecclesiastical  assemblies, 
the  i'  I         i  the  Chtli  .'mgto  which  the  outward  order  of  the 

church  must  be  rfegUlatcd,  the  constituting  of  forms  of  union,  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

■decision  of  controversies  ;  but  ali  tilings  must  be  clone  according  to 
the  word  of  God,  and  nothing  contrary  to  it  :  but,  that  we  may  abide 
by  the  instructor,  this  ecclesiastical  power  must  be  exercised  espe- 
cially *  in  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  and  in  Christian  disci- 
pline, as  two  keys  by  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  be- 
lievers, and  shut  against  unbelievers." 

The  first  key,  to  wit,  the  power  to  preach  the  gospel,  is  not  given 
to  all,  who  possess  an  excellent  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  truth, 
which  is  according  to  godliness ;  but  only  to  those,  who  are  lawfully 
called  thereto,  and  sent.  "  Mow  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be 
sent?  saith  Paul,  Rom.  x,  15.  See  also  Jer.  xiv.  14,  15.  xxiii.  21,. 
32.  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  Heb.  v.  4,  5,  6.  And  although  no  man  is  sent 
now  in  such  an  extraordinary  manner,  as  the  apostles  and  evangel- 
ists were,  nevertheless  we  must  look  upon  a  person  as  sent  by  God, 
when  he  is  chosen  to  such  an  office  by  the  church,  either  unani- 
mously, or  by  a  plurality  of  votes,  or  by  lot ;  for  this  was  usual  even 
in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  and  deemed  proper  and  divine.  See  Acts 
i.  21 — 26.  xiv.  23.  xx.  28.  1  Tim.  iv.  14.  Moreover,  it  belongs  not 
to  all  the  elders  to  preach  the  gospel,  but  only  to  those  who  labour 
in  the  word  and  doctrine,"  1  Tim.  v.  17.  The  tuljng  elders  have 
only  a  right  to  take  care  that  the  preachers  make  use  of  this  key 
rightly,  and  according  to  the  word  of  God    See    'tts  xx.  28.  29.  30. 

The  sinner  is  debarred  by  sin  from  access  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  and  from  all  the  great  privileges  of  it :  yea,  •'  his  own  ini- 
quities take  the  sinner  himself,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of 
his  sins."  according  to  Prov.  v.  22.  «  He  is  taken  captive  in  the 
snare  of  the  devil  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  He  is  "  kept  under  the 
law,  and  shut  up  under  it,"  Gal.  iii.  23.  Even  believers  find  their 
access  barred  up  through  the  strength  of  their  corruption,  the  weak- 
ness of  their  faith,  and  the  hiding  of  the  Lord's  countenance  ;  their 
doubts  concerning  their  right  to  the  benefits  of  the  kingdom  bind 
them  fast  time  after  time,  See  Job  xiv.  23 — 28.  xix.  6,  8.  Psalm 
xxxi.  22.  Lam.  iii.  7,  8,  17,  18,  44.  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
opened  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  thus  loosed,  not  by  granting  him  the 
pardon  of  his  sins,  after  he  hath  confessed  them  to  a  priest  ;  for  this 
doth  not  belong  to  men,  but  to  God  only,  as  we  have  shown  largely 
enough  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day  ;  but  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  by  which  he  is  not  informed,  that  the  gate  of  the  kingdom 
is  opened  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  every  sinner,  as  the  Re- 
monstrants speak  in  their  cavilling  censures  of  this  Lord's  day  ;  for 
this  is  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  day  j  but  the  sinner  is  taught,  that  God  h?.th  set  his  Son  forth 


142       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

to  be  a  p-opitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  which  he  is  invited 
and  culled,  thai  lie  ma)  be  excited  and  allured  to  embrace  this  Me- 
diator, iu  go  through  him  to  the  Father,  and  to  be  admitted  into  his 
kingdom.  In  tnis  manner  did  Paul  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
when  he  said,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  il  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling 
the  woiid  to  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them  ;  and 
hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation  Now  then  we 
are  ambassadpura  for  Christ,  as  t  .ougii  God  did  beseech  you  by  us  : 
we  pr\«y  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  But  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  belie veis,  and  they  are  loosed  by  this 
key  particularly,  "by  declaring  and  testifying  to  them  that  all  their 
sins  are  really  forgiven  them  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  mei  its." 
To  tnis  end  the  God  of  his  people  saith  to  the  ministers  of  the  holy 
gospel,  Isaiah  xl.  1,2.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith 
your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her 
that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned*" 
This  is  k'  remitting  sins,"  John  x»  23,  and  "  preaching  the  for 
ness  of  sins  in  the  name  of  Christ,"  Luke  xxiv.  47.  See  Acts  x. 
43.  To  do  this  properly  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  declare  I 
promises  in  general,  but  we  must  apply  them  to  believers  in  par- 
ticular,  and  for  this  purpose  point  out  to  them  marks  of  grace,  that 
they  may  have  a  clear  view  of  the  truth  of  their  faith,  as  the  apostles 
often  acted.  See  Rom.  viii.  1,  9,  13.  James  ii.  14 — -6.  1  J-  im  iii. 
14,  iv.  13.  This  is  clone  either  «  publicly  "  in  the  assembly  ol  God's 
people,  where  the  gospel  is  preached,  as  Paul  did,  Acts  xiii  3S,  39, 
or  privately,   when   we  speak-toad     res  •   in   paVti 

or  when  he  spca'::s  to  us,  and  \,  •  lis  n  apply  these  promises  to  htm, 
speak  comfortably  to  him,  and  remove  his  difficulties  and  scrn 
thus  Paul  also  acted,  At  is  xx  -J.  But  inasmuch  .  s  believers  dare 
not  always  assure  themselves  by  the  word  of  reconciliation,  ant!  since 
they  offend  often,  they  must  likewise  often  "lay  hold  on  the  prom- 
ises of  the  gospel  by  a  true  faith,"  ami  the  messengers  of  good 
gSj  must  publish  the  message  of  reconciliation  to  them,  by 
which  their  wavering  souls  will  be  brought  to  a  steadfast  assurance 
and  they  will  thus  obtain  "  boldness  to  enter  with  a  true  heart,  in 
a  full  jis.su  aace  of  faith  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesu 
new  and  Jiving  way,  which  he  hath  consecr^ed  for  us  through  the 
veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh,"  lleb.  x.  19,  20,  22.  It  is  true,  every 
one  who  is  capable  can  inform  believers  of  this  from  the  word  of 
God.  but  not  as  aii  ambassadoor  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  as  the  preach- 
ers of  tiie  gospel   must  do,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.     There  is  a  great  dif- 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

ference  whether  a  common  person  announce  to  a  capital  offender, 
that  lie  is  put  cloned,  or  whether  his  lord's  messenger  do  it. 

But  the  preachers  are  not  only  commanded  "  to  say  to  the  right- 
eous, that  it  shall  he  well  with  him,"  but  also  to  denoum  e  "a  wo 
against  the  wicked,"  and  say  "  that  it  shall  be  ill  with  him,"  Isaiah 
iii.  10,  1  I.  Therefore  the  instructor  saith,  that  by  the  key  of  the 
preaching  of  the^oly  gospel  w  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  un- 
believers, and  such  as  do  not  since  rely  repent,  that  they  stand  ex- 
posed to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as 
tuey  are  unconver  ed."  This  is  also  according  to  the  word  of  G  d 
which  saith,  "He.  who  beheveth  not  shall  be  damned,"  Mark  xvi. 
16,  and  k'  he  who  beheveth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him,"  John  iii.  36.  In  this  manner  did 
Peter  use  this  key  against  Simon  the  sorcerer,  when  he  said  to  him, 
Acts  vii.  21,  23,  "Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter  ;  for 
thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  for  I  perceive  that  thou 
art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity  "  Which, 
that  it  may  have  the  greater  effect,  is  proclaimed  to  sinners  with  an 
"  anathema,"  See  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.  By  which  those  unbelievers  and 
impenitent  persons  are  shut  out  of  t!  e  kingdom  of  God,  aie  bound 
under  their  sins  and  the  wrath  of  God,  and  their  "  sins  thus  retain- 
ed," according  to  the  text,  and  John  xx.  2  3,  which  is  done  by  the 
preaching  of  the  holy  gospel  ;  not  that  the  gospel  doth  this  by  itself, 
for  the  gospel  contains  no  threatenings  nor  curses  ;  it  is  "  the  law" 
only  "  that  worketh  wrath,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom  iv.  15.  But  as 
the  law  ministereth  to  the  gospel,  and  must  be  preached  with  the 
gospel,  therefore  this  outshutting  is  said  to  be  performed  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel. 

Let  no  man  think  that  this  opening  and  shutting  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  is  a  vain  thing,  and  of  no  consequence,  for  we 
must  receive  this  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  not  simply  as  the  voice 
of  man ;  for  God  will  judge  by  this  testimony  both  in  this  life  ; 
"  He  confirmeth  the  word  of  his  servant,  and  performeth  the  counsel 
of  his  messenger,"  as  he  saith  himself,  Isaiah  xliv.  26.  "  Whatso- 
ever thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  :  and  what- 
soever thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven,"  saith  the 
Saviour  in  the  text.  '*  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re- 
mitted unto  them  ;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retain- 
ed unto  them,"  saith  he,  John  xx.  23,  and  also  in  the  life  to  come  ; 
therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  ii.  16.  "  God  will  judge  the  secrets 
of  men"  in  the  dav  of  judgment  «  by  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  my 
gospel." 


Hi      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  as  this  key  first  opens,  and  afterwards  shuts,  so  there  is  als» 
another  key,  which  first  shuts,  and  afterwards  opens.  This  is  the 
Christian  discipline,  or  the  shutting  of  a  person  out  of  the  Christian 
chu'cii,  which  is  not  exercised  on  them  who  are  without,  but  on 
them  who  are  within  the  church,"  who  bear  the  Christian  name. 
tc  Ye  slialJ  not  keep  company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be 
a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater  or  a  railtr,  or  a  drunkard,  or 
an  extortioner,  with  such  an  erne  ye  shall  not  even  eat.  For  what 
have  1  to  do  to  judge  them  also  that  are  without  ?  do  not.  ye  judge 
them  that  are  within?  but  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth. 
Therefore  put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person," 
saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  v.  1 1,  12,  13.  Further,  tiiis  key  is  not  used 
with  respect  to  them,  who  ate  only  baptized,  and  who  do  not  declare 
and  testify  by  partaking  oi  the  Lord's  supper,  that  they  abide  by  their 
baptism  ;  for  the  first  key  is  used  with  respect  to  these  :  but  it  is 
used  witn  respect  to  th"s^  who  are  public  members,  who  have  join- 
ed themselves  to  the  church  by  a  confession  of  their  faith,  and  de- 
clare by  receiving  the  supper,  that  they  are  in  union  with  the 
church  :  who  nevertheless  under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain 
unchristian  doctrines  or  practices."  "  A  man  that  is  an  heretic,  re- 
ject," saith  Paul.  Tit  iii.  10.  See  2  John,  vis.  10,  1  1.  Further,  "we 
may  not  keep  company  with  a  brother,  who  leads  an  ungodly  life," 
I  Cor.  v.  11.  2  Thess.  iii.  6,  14. 

This  Christian  discipline  shuts  such  persons  out  of  the  Christian 
church,  not  by  inflicting  corporal  punishment  on  them,  as  the  Papists 
do,  who  bereave  them  in  the  most  cruel  manner  of  their  goods, 
kingdom,  civil  rights,  yea,  of  life  itself.  Not  unlike  this  is  the  con- 
duct of  certain  Mennonites,  who  separate  persons  for  various  trifling 
reasons  from  their  bed  and  board,  yea»  from  all  intercourse  with  be- 
lievers. This  is  an  ecclesiastical,  but  an  abominable  tyranny,  and  a 
prodigious  usurpation  :  it  belongs  onlv  to  the  civil,  and  not  to  the 
ecclesiastical  powers  to  inflict  corporal  punishments  ;  "  for  the  weap- 
ons of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God,  to  the 
pulling  down  of  strong  holds,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor.  x.  4.  Chris- 
tian discipline  punishelh  offending  members  only  in  their  church- 
fellowship,  by  depriving-  them  of  their  communion  with  the  church, 
shutting  them  out  of  it,  removing  and  banishing  them  from  it.  Paul 
speaking  of  the  man,  who  had  taken  his  father's  wife,  calls  this  dis- 
cipline "  a  delivering  of  such  a  person  to  Satan,"  1  Cor.  v.  7.  So 
"  he  delivered  Hymeneus  and  Alexander  to  Satan,"  1  Tim  i.  20. 
Not  that  the  apostle  delivered  them  to  Satan,  that  he  might  possess 
fend  torment  them  in  a  bodily  manner ;  but  this  delivering  of  them 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83— 85.    '        -  '*  145 

lb  Satan  denotes  a  casting  of  them  out  of  the  church,  as  he  explains 
it,  1  Cor.  v.  13,  "Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person  "  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  also  saith  of  the  contumacious 
brother,  Matt,  xviii.  17.  "  If  he  will  not  hear  the  church,  let'him. 
he  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man,  and  a  publican."  For  Satan  rules 
out  of  the  church,  therefore  he  who  is  cast  out  of  the  church  is  de- 
livered up  to  Satan.  And  he  is  thus  shut  cut  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  deprived  of  all  the  privileges  of  it,  he  is  forbidden  the  sacra- 
ments, and  they  ure  withholdcn  from  him,  and  he  is  bound  fast  un- 
der his  sins,  and  under  destruction.  For  the  Lord  God,  when  this 
is  done  agreeably  to  his  word,  approves  of  the  conduct  of  his  faith- 
ful servants  so  far,  that  he  himself  shuts  such  a  person  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ :  for  with  respect  to  this  key  the  Lord  Jesus  saith, 
Matt,  xviii.  17,  13.  "  If  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  Verily  I  say  unto  you. 
Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven." 

But  as  the  servants  of  the  Lord  must  not  be  dilatory  in  this  work, 
so  neither  must  they  be  too  hasty  :  "  But  after  having  been  often 
brotherly  admonished,  they  will  not  renounce  their  en  ours  and  wick- 
ed course  of  life,  and  also  despise  the  admonition  of  the  church." 
The  Saviour  requireth  "  that  I  first  reprove  my  brother,  who  ha\.h 
trespassed  against  me,  in  private  ;  if  he  will  not  hearken  to  me,  that 
I  then  endeavour  to  reduce  him  to  his  duty  in  the  presence  of  one 
Or  two  others  ;  if  he  remain  incorrigible,  that  I  then  complain  of 
him  to  the  ruling  church,  to  wit,  the  eldership  ;  if  he  remain  ob- 
stinate still,  I  must  then  consider  him  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican," Matt,  xviii.  15 — 18.  The  order  of  our  Dutch  church  with 
respect  to  this  matter  cannot  be  censured  ;  it  requires  that  we  first 
admonish  the  offender  ;  then  that  we  forbid  him  the  Lord's  supper 
for  a  time  ;  further,  that  we  denounce  him  to  the  church,  either  by, 
tor  with  his  name,  that  every  one  may  do  what  in  him  lieth  by  ad- 
monitions and  prayers  to  reform  such  a  sinner :  if  all  this  will  not 
avail,  he  must  then  be  wholly  cut  off  in  a  public  manner,  both  that 
he  himself  may  be  ashamed  and  repent,  and  also  that  he  may  not 
defile  others ;  and  that  none  may  be  offended,  either  within  or  out 
of  the  church,  and  become  averse  from  her.  See  this  1  Cor.  v.  5, 
6.  2  Thess.  ill.  14.  2  John  vrs.  10,  II. 

Erastus  and  many  sons  of  Belial,  who  wish  to  live  without  yoke, 
would  fain  wrest  this  key  out  of  our  hands.  Do  they  allow  that  the 
Lord  hath  given  to  his  servants  a  power  to  preach  the  word,  they 
will  neverthele3s  dispute  their  power  to  excommunicate  and  to  shu£ 
•ut  of  the  church,  and  they  decry  it  as  .a  most  unsuitable  practice* 
Vol.'ix.  T 


U6   THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  did  not  the  church  under  the  Old  Testament  cast  refractory 
pcrt>ons  out  ?  did  not  Christ  gi\c  this  key  to  his  church  ?  Matt.  xvi. 
If.  xviii.   17,  18,  did  net  the  apostles  make  use  of  this  hey  ?   1  Cor. 

v#  i i3.  2  John,  vrs    10,  11,  hath  not  the  Christian  church  always 

used  it?  would  not  the  church  without  this  key  be  a  den  of  robhersj 
a  city  without  walls,  a  house  without  doors  or  bars,  and  a  garden 
'vi'houl  an  inclosure  ?  would  not  the  holy  things  be  trampled  upon 
by  dogs,  and  unclean  swine  I  the  wicked  be  hardened,  and  the  godly 
gneveti  ? 

But  when  we  shut  obstinate  persons  in  this  manner  out  of  the 
church  by  forbidding  them  the  sacraments,  shall  we  then  also  debar 
them  from  hearing  the  word  ?  Thus  they  did  anciently,  that  they 
might,  by  ternf\mg  the  Christians,  render  them  cautious  of  offering 
in  any  w.se  to  idols,  ro  which  many  declined  in  those  limes  of  temp* 
tation  :  but  this  appears  to  br  too  harsh.  A  person  is  not  excom- 
municated for  his  destruction,  but  for  his  preservation  by  re* 
pentance  :  how  sh  dl  he  repent,  if  we  withhold  the  word,  the  mean 
»f  repentance,  from  him? 

When  a  person,  who  hath  been  shut  out  of  the  church,  repents, 
must  we  then  always  keep  him  out?  so  unmercifully  the  Novatians 
acted,  (hey  would  not  re-admit  even  those  who  had  full  n  and  y  elded 
only  from  fear  in  times  of  persecution.  But  the  Saviour  dealt  more 
mildly  than  this  with  his  apostle  Peter.  When  God  opens  the  door 
Of  grace,  no  irun  may  shut  it :  we  must  therefore  receive  such  a 
pei son  again,  as  a  member  of  Christ,  and  of  his  church,  yea,  we 
mufii  behave  in  a  friendly  manner  toward  him,  forgive  him  his  evil 
deed,  and  "comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  he  should  be  swallowed  up 
with  overmuch  sorrow."  bee  what  Paul  saith,  2  t  or.  ii.  6 — i  1.  We 
must  nevertheless  not  be  too  forward,  or  hasty  in  thi^  matter;  when 
a  person  only  saith,  1  repent,  shall  we  th<  n  presently  open  the  door 
to  him  again  ?  ought  no!  the  evidences  of  his  rej  entance  and  refor- 
mation to  be.as  manifest,  as  bis  offence  was  before  notorious?  Verily 
the  incestuous  person  was  not  received  again,  until  he  was  exceed- 
ingly and  abundantly  sorry,  and  comfort  v.  as  necessary  for  him. 
Therefore  the  instructor  also  saith,  that  the  excommunicated  "  are 
received  again,  when  they  promise,  and  show  real  amendment." 
The.  ancient  Christian  chttrch  would  not  therefore  re-admit  those  who 
had  transgressed,  until  they  had  given  several  evidences  of  their  re- 
p  ntauce-s  they  had  fortius  purpose  four  classes  of  penitents  :  the 
first  were  the  firosklaion  <••*,   or  "the  we  mplaining,"  who 

stood,  clothed  with  a  filthy  and  blacl  m      ■   a!  the  door  of  the 

church,  weepii  |  -  sins,  and  entreating  those  who  entered  inte- 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8S— 85.  i4f 

the  church  to  pray  for  them  :  the  second  class  consisted  of  the 
akroomenoi,  or  "  the  hearing,"  who  were  permitted  to  hear  in  the  en- 
trance of  the  church  with  the  catechumens  the  word  of  God  read 
and  explained,  but  were  required  to  withdraw  with  the  catechumens 
before  the  supper  was  administered  :  the  third  class  were  the  hyfia- 
flifitonteS)  or  "•  the  downfalling,"  who  prostrated  themselves  humbly 
upon  the  floor  of  the  churc  :,  and  confessed  their  transgression  be- 
fore the  congregation,  whereupon  the  minister  laid  his  hands  upon 
ihem,  and  bade  them  arise,  when  they  were  placed  near  the  Stat  of 
the  reader  :  but  these  also  were  obliged  to  go  out  of  the  church,  with 
the  catechumens;  besides  these,  there  were  also  the  sunistamenci,  or 
4i  those  who  stood  with"  the  people  :  these  did  not  depart  with  the 
.catechumens,  but  continued  standing  with  the  congregation  to  hear 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  pray  and  sing  with  the  believers :  they 
might  see  the  supper  administered,  but  they  might  not  partake  of 
it,  although  they  were  after  a  short  time  promoted  to  that  privilege. 
This  grievous  penance  every  person,  whether  high  or  low,  who  had 
committed  a  scandalous  offence,  was  bound  to  undergo.  Even  the 
emptrour  Theodosius  the  Great  was  not  excused,  but  was  obliged 
to  perform  a  severe  penance  during  eight  months  ;  he  could  not 
otherwise  be  reconciled  to  the  church,  on  account  of  his  shedding; 
fhe  blood  of  the  Thessalonians. 


APPLICATION. 

This,  it  will  be  suid,  was  too  severe  ;  but  are  we  not  now  too 
-slack?  those  who  have  eyes  to  see,  and  are  not  wilfully  blind,  can 
«ee  it.  How  many  membeis  are  there  in  the  church,  who  join  Christ 
:tnd  Belial,  righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  yea,  who  exhibit 
nothing  of  Christianity  !  Alas,  how  many  ungodly  persons  do  we 
find  in  the  house  of  God  !  But  what  is  done  against  them  ?  who 
dares  cry  aloud,  and  life  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet  ?  are  there  still 
faithful  watchmen,  who  do  not  spare  any  ungodly  persons,  how 
-seldom  is  the  Christian  discipline  used  to  shut  them  out  of  the 
church  !  where  do  we  find  those  who  are  so  shut  out  ?  are  any  ad- 
monished, reproved,  and  forbidden  to  approach  the  holy  table,  on 
account  of  their  gross  sins,  how  easily  are  they  restored  !  Are  any 
hearty  enough  i  i  this  matter  to  perform  this  duty  faithfully,  how 
[  many  are  there  who  presently  oppose  them  !  This  key  is  in  a  man- 


148      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

ner  thrown  by  and  suffered  to  rust.  This  hardens  the  wicked,  sad- 
dens the  godly,  kindles  the  wrath  of  God,  and  tarnishes  the  lustre  of 
the  house  of  God. 

If  it  would  avail  to  complain,  I  would  say  more  ;  but  of  what  ad- 
vantage will  it  be  to  root  in  the  filthy  wounds  of  our  mother  ?  If  I 
could  by  these  means  heal  them,  I  might  call  on  all  and  each  of  you 
to  unite  with  me,  and  to  shed  a  flood  >f  tears  over  the  unsightly  con- 
d.tion  of  our  church  in  the  Netherlands.  1  will  do  better,  if  I  ex- 
cite the  magistrates  and  myself,  with  all  my  fellowlabourers,  and 
the  eiders,  and  every  individual  to  endeavour,  as  much  as  in  him 
lieth,  to  conduct  manfully  with  respect  to  these  keys,  according  tc 
the  word  of  God. 

1.  Let  the  magistrates,  (a)  submit  with  humility  and  lowliness  to 
the  kingly  sovereignty  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  The 
Lord  (jiod  saith  to  the  high  and  mighty  ones  of  the  earth,  Psalm  ii. 
6,  10,  11,  12.  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion. 
Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings  ;  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the 
earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss 
the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little  ;  blessed  are  all  they  who  put  their  trust 
in  him."  Have  not  the  great  men  of  the  world  immortal  souls  to 
save,  as  well  as  their  subjects  ?  and  can  they  do  this,  if  they  will  not 
bow  to  him,  who  is  higher  than  the  highest  ?  or  is  Jesus  a  king  of 
the  common  people  only  ?  hath  it  not  been  foretold,  that  the  great 
men  of  the  eaith  should  be  subject  to  him  ?  the  prophecies  are  too 
numerous  to  be  transcribed  here.  See  Psalm  xlviii.  10.  lxiii.  10, 
1 1.  Isaiah  xlix.  7,  23.  Ix.  3,  10.  Rev.  xi.  15.  Or  would  it  disgrace 
and  degrade  the  higher  powers,  if  they  should  stoop  to  this  great 
King?  is  not  Jesus  higher  than  they  ?  of  whom  do  they  hold  their 
honourable  stations  ?  this  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  saith, 
Prov.  viii.  15,  16.  "  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice. 
By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  even  all  the  judges  of  the  earth." 
Shall  it  then  be  deemed  a  reproach  to  princes,  if  they  submit  to  him  ? 
will  it  not  be  an  honour  :o  them,  and  increase  their  lustre  ?  have 
not  godly  sovereigns  always  been  most  honoured,  feared  and  obey- 
ed ?  are  not  the  names  of  David,  Solomon,  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  He- 
zekiah  and  Josiah  until  this  day  blessed,  when  they  are  remembered  ? 
and  have  not  the  names  of  the  ungodly  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel 
been  long  since  rotten  ?  Let  the  magistrates  therefore  seek  their 
happiness,  blessedness  and  glory  in  submitting  to  the  King  of  Zion. 
(b)  Magisliates  ought  also  to  employ  their  supremacy,  excellency 
and  dignity  for  the  advantage  of  the  church.     It  was  foretold  of  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  St-rSS.  148 

Christian  princes,  that  they  should  "bring  presents,  and  offer  gifts," 
Psalm  lxxii.  10.  Hear  what  the  Lord  promiseth  his  church,  Isaiah 
xlix.  23.  "  Kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fcuhers,  and  their  queens  thy 
nursing  mothers,  .hey  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  their  fuce  toward 
the  earih,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet."  The  Lord  saith  to  the 
church,  Isaiah  Ix.  10.  «  -grangers  shall  build  up  thy  walls,  and  th  ir- 
king.s  shall  minister  to  thee."  'i  berefore  let  all  those  who  possess 
eminent  stations,  cherish  the  church,  confirm  her  privileges,  pro- 
tect her  ministers,  support  the  truth,  favour  her  children,  restrain 
her  enemies,  and  with  ail  their  might  correct  the  sinful  manners  of 
their  strjecis,  which  defile  the  church.  Every  godly  king  of  ludah, 
who  sat  on  the  throne  of  David,  made  this  his  most  special  work. 
"  Israel,"  the  church,  "  is  a  blessing  in  the  midst  ot  the  land,"  Isaiah 
xix.  24.  The  godly  bless  the  land  and  the  rulers  of  it,  on  account 
of  the  church  saying,  "  Peace  be  within  thee.  Because  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  our  God  I  v.  ill  seek  thy  good,"  saith  David,  Psalm  exxii. 
3,  9.  When  the  church  is  well  ordered  and  well  cherished,  she  is 
the  defence  of  the  land,  and  renders  the  people  victorious.  See 
Zech.  xii.  5,  6.  lea,  she  maintains  and  establishes  princes  on  their 
thrones  by  her  admonitions,  prayers  and  exemplary  conduct :  the 
wellbeing  of  the  church  is  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  the  higher 
powers  ;  and  therefore  they  consult  their  best  interest  by  doing  weil 
to  the  church  ;  but  when  they  oppress  and  afflict  her,  the  Lord  will 
behold  and  require  it  ;  for  "  he  suffers  no  man  to  do  her  wrong ; 
yea,  he  reproves  kings  for  her  sake,  saying,  Touch  not  mine  anoint- 
ed, and  do  my  prophets  no  harm,"  Psalm  cv.  14,  15. 

But,  my  worthy  brethren  and  fellowlabourers  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  may  I  not  also  exhort  and  excite  you  with  myself,  to  be  faith- 
ful, active  and  zealous  in  all  our  ministry  ?  We  have  an  exceedingly 
great  and  laborious,  but  nevertheless  excellent  work  to  perform  ; 
immortal  souls  are  committed  to  our  care ;  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
us  overseers  to  feed  the  church  of  God,  which  he  haih  purchased 
with  his  own  blood  :  the  honour  pf  God,  the  prosperity  of  the  chmch. 
and  the  precious  truth  are  intrusted  to  us,  that  we  should  regard 
them  with  a  hearty  concern :  shall  we  then  be  negligent  of  our  duty. 
<k  blind  watchmen,  dumb  dogs,  loving  to  slumber,"  and  carnal  per- 
sons, as  the  prophets  of  the  Lord's  people  were,  Isaiah  Ivi.  10.- — 12. 
Let  us  then,  (a)  make  use  of  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
with  respect  to  ourselves  :  "  Thou  who  teachest  another,  teachest 
thou  not  thyself?"  Thus  Paul  asked  the  Jewish  teachers,  Ron.,  ii 
21.  Wc  must  teach  the  people  that  they  must  examine  themselves, 
whether  they  be  in  the  faith,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  5,  fhall  we  then  neglect 


ISO      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

this  duly  with  respect  to  ourselves  ?     Or  shall  we  persuade  ourselves, 
that  all  the  preachers  ^re  surely  believers  and  godly  persons,  as  the 
ignorant  people  imagine,  because  they    are  so   wise,  and  can  preach 
and  pray  so  well  ?      Verily  those  outward  things   do  not  prove    this, 
we  know  better  from  the  examples  of  Judas  and  Demas,  who  showed 
liiat  the  office  of  a  preacher  is   not  one   of   those  better   things   that 
accompany  salvation  :  it  is  certain   that  the  preachers  must  be  born 
again,   and  converted,  as   well  as  others.     Neither  the  college,  nor 
the  classis,  nor  a  call  from  the  church,  nor  the    holy  ministry  consti- 
tutes grace.     Have  we  no  more  than  these  things,  hew  grievous  will 
it  be  for  us  to    sink,  down  from  the  pulpit    into  the  bottomless  pit  of 
hell !     O  let  us  judge  ourselves,  and  flee  yet  to  the  Saviour,  that  we 
may  save  both  ourselves  and   others.     We  who  call   others  to   the 
grace  of  G->d,  and   to  repentance,  are    also   called  by  the  Lord  to  be 
reconciled  to  him.     Do  we  find,  after  a  strict  and  frequent  examina- 
lion  of  ourselves,  rhat  we  do    indeed    possess   truth    in   the   inward 
parts,  let  us  make  use  of  the  key  of  the  gospel  to  apply  all  the  prom- 
ises to    ourselves,  as  Paul  acted,  1  Tim.  i    13 — 16.     2   l  im.   i.    12. 
(b)  Let   us  have  a  serious  concern  for  immortal  souls,   who  are  in- 
trusted to  our  care,  and  let  us  '•  look  well  to  the  flock,"  recording  to 
the  admonition  of  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  28.     If  a   man  fall  into  the 
water  or  fire,  who  will  not  make   haste  to  help  him  out  ?     Shall  pot 
we  then,  whom  God  hath  called   to  this    work,   bestir    ourselves    to 
pluck  sinners  out  of  t,he  fire  of  hell  ?     It   will    fare   hard   with    tl 
watchmen  of  Zion,  if  a  sinner  perish  through  their  listlessness  :  "  the 
Lord  willl  require  the  blood  of  that  sinner  at  the  hands  of  the  watch- 
man," as  he  saith,  Ezek  iii.  18,  20.     (e)  The    preachers  must   use 
the  keys  discretely  :  they  must  nol  open,  when  the  Lord  shuts,  nei- 
ther may  they  shut  when  the  Lord  opens.     To  greet  all  their  I 
ers,  as  beloved,  called,  and  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  apply  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  thus  to  all,   renders  the  people  careless  ;  the 
doctrine  of  particular  grace  doth  not  permit  this.    Jiut  it  is  still  worse 
to  reproach  from  the  pulpit,  to  decry  us  hypqentes,  and  to  deny  the 
holy  table  to  persons  who  are  inwardly  religious,  who  excel  the  civil 
and   formally    religions,  and  urge  ethers  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling-     Who  is  a  good  overseer?  is  it  it  not  one 
who  is  k'  a  lover  of  good  men  :"     Tit.  i.  8.      What  preacher,    who 
fears  God,  dares  to  u  make  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies, 
whom  the  Lord  hath  not  made  sad  ;  and  to  strengthen  the  hands  of 
the  wicked,  that   he  shonl  1  not   turn  from  his  wicked  way  f"   Every 
;. richer  ought  to  read,  yea.  to  read  frequently,  Ezek.  xxiii.  and  xxxiv, 
-•'  ■  '  ' her  will  conduct  himself  wisely,  and  according  to  the  word 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  33—85.  151 

•f  the  Lord,  he  must,  according  to  Jude,  vrs.  22,  24,  "  have  compaa- 
sion  of  some,  making'  a  difference  ;  and  save  others  with  fear,  pulling 
thx-m  out  of  the  fire."  He  must  with  Jeremiah,  "  if  he  shall  be  the 
mouth  of  God,  take  the  precious  from  the  vile,"  Jer.  xv.  13,  "  di\ide 
the  word  of  truth  aright,"  2  Tim.  ii.  15,  and  "  give  the  household  of 
the  Lord  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season,"  Luke  xii.  42.  It  is 
praiseworthy  to  explain  the  truth  well,  it  is  commendable  to  reprove 
haitiul  sins,  if  it  be  done  with  meekness  and  wisdom,  it  is  <rood  to 
publish  the  promises  of  the  gospel ;  but  it  will  not  suffice  to  throw 
every  thing  out  at  random,  so  that  few  can  lay  hold  on  any  thing.  It 
is  best  to  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  that  we  mav  discov- 
er the  hidingplaces  of  his  self-deceit,  and  that  he  may  awake,  be 
concerned,  and  flee  out  of  himself  to  t!,^  throne  of  grace  ;  and  i:- 
would  be  exceedingly  profitable  to  Explain  the  work  of  grace  to  the 
godly  by  marks  of  grace.  Every  one  would  then  obtain  a  near  view 
of  his  heart  and  be  able  to  see  it  on  every  side,  and  the  kevs  would 
be  used  with  advantage.  Therefore  the  preachers  ought  to  attend 
so  particularly  to  every  one,  that  they  would  know  their  people  near 
at  hand,  and  how  to  deal  with  them  to  their  profit.  "  Be  thou  dili- 
geni  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocks,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  13. 
(ci)  That  we  may  not  be  too  prolix,  we  will  only  say  briefly,  that 
the  overseers  of  the  church  ought  to  be  "  examples  to  the  flock,"  in 
their  behaviour,  discourse,  apparel,  wives  and  children,  1  Peter  v.  3. 
They  ought  to  love  the  truth,  and  to  exercise  themselves  diligently 
in  seeking  wisdom,  "that  their  profiting  may  appear  to  all."  1  Tim. 
iv.  15-  And  to  sum  up  all  in  the  words  of  Paul,  Tit  i.  7 — 9,  "  A 
bishop  ought  to  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God,  not  selfwilled, 
not  toon  angry,  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to  filthv  lu- 
ce ;  but  a  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just, 
holy,  temperate  ;  holding  fast  the  faithful  word,  as  he  hath  been 
taught,  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort,  and 
convince  the  gainsayers."  It  would  be  profitable  to  preachers  to 
read  often  the  epistles  of  Paul  to  the  preachers,  Timothy  and  Titus. 

3.  But,  brethren  of  the  eldership,  we  do  not  inform  you,  that  it 
behooves  you  to  take  a  part  in  the  duties  which  belong  to  the 
preachers,  and  we  do  not  speak  now  of  that  winch  was  enjoined  on 
you,  when  ye  were  ordained  to  your  offices  ;  but  we  say,  take  heed, 
that  the  keys  be  not  wrenched,  nor  suffered  to  rust,  but  that  they 
be  used  well.  It  is  your  duty  to  keep  a  strict  eye  on  the  congrega- 
tion, to  visit  particular  persons,  to  "  warn  ihem  wdio  are  unruly,  to 
comfort  the  feeble  minded,  to  support  the  weak,  and  to  be  patient  to 
all  men,"  agreeably  to  1  Thes.  v.  14.     Is  there  any  where  an  auda- 


155       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

clous  sinner,  request  of  your  minister  to  assist  you   complain  of  hirft 
to   the  biot'.ieraood  ;  doth  your  minister  judge  it  to  be  necessary  to 
make  use  of  the  discipline  of  the  church  against   such  an  obstinate 
person,    be   willing   and  ready  to  help  him.     Is   your  minister  dis 
heartened,  encou.'age    him  ;  is  he  remiss,  stir  him  up,  show  that  yc 
love  him,  as  the  servant  of  God,   "count  him  worthy  of  double  hen 
our,"  according  to  1  Tim.  v.  17.    Then  will  ye  b;:  profitable  to  him, 
iceable  to  the  congregation,  and  a  blessing  to  yourselves. 
4.  J  Jut  the  congregation  ought  also  to  make  a  proper  use  on  their 
part  of  these  keys,  and  therefore  it  behooves  them,   (a)  to  acknowl- 
ed  je  tnis  ecclesiastical  power,   as  given  by  the  Lord  to  his  servants, 
and  to  submit  themselves  to  it :  "  We  beseech  you,  brethren,"  saith 
Paul,   "  to  know  them   which  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you 
in  the  Lord,   and  admonish  you,  and  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in 
love   for  their  work's   sake,"  1  Thess.  v.   12,  13.     "The  Lord  hath 
given  them  their  authority,  not  for  destruction,  but  for  edification,"  2 
Cor.  x.  8.  xiii.  10     Ye  know  what  pains  your  faithful  preachers  take, 
yea,  thai  they  "  travail  again,  as  it  were,  that  Christ  may  be  formed  in 
you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  That  ye  may  recompense  them,  be  ye  also  enlarg- 
ed," so  I  speak  with  the  apostle,  2  Cor.  vi.  13.  "  Obey  them  that  have 
the  rule  over  you,   and  submit   yourselves;  for  they  watch   for  your 
souls,  as  they  that  give    account;  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and 
not  with  grief:  for  that  is  not  profitable  to  you,"  as  the  same  apostle 
admonishah,  Heb.  xiii.    17,  i8.  (b)  I  speak  to  all  who  hear  me  this 
day,    behold,    I  open  the  kingdom  of  God  to    on,  and  invite  you  to 
come  to  the  Lord,   and  to  his  goodness,    that  ye  may  obtain   grace, 
mercy  and  peace  :  "  Enter,  enter  through  the  gates ;  I  pray  you  m 
Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God  :  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways;  for  why    will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel."     Jesus  will  not 
thrust  you  back,   but  "  him  that  cometh  to  him  he  will  i::  no  wise 
<ast  out,"  as  he  himself  saith,  John  vi.  37.     He  himself  "stands  at 
your  door,    and   knocks,   only  hear  his   voice,   and  open  the  door  to 
him,   that  he   may  come  in,    and  sup  with  you,  and   ye   with  him," 
Rev.  iii.   20.     "  Do  not  draw  back,    lor  then  his   soul  will  not  have 
any  pleasure  in   you,"  as  Paul   testifieth,    rleb.    x.  38.     Will  ye  not 
tome  to  him,  that  ye  may  have  life,   but  harden  yourselves,  that  yc 
may  enjoy  the  honours,  the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  and  Oi 
sin,  I  say  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  shall  die,  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  on  you,  "  ye  shall  see  yourselves  thrust  out,"  accord- 
ing to  Luke  xiii.  28.     "  Now  therefore,  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your 
bands  be  made  strong,"  as  the  prophet  saith,  Isaiah  xxviii.  22.  (c) 
but,  believers,  ye  who  seek  t©  be  loosed  from  the  bonds  of  sin,  who 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  153 

inourn  on  account  of  it,   who  hasten  to  Christ,  and  press  after  sane- 
tification  ;  .  proclaim  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Li  hat  your  ini- 

quit)  is  pardoned,   and  tiiat   the   Lord   will  no    :  wroth  with 

you     nor  rebuke   you  ;  do  not   start  up  agains'  .     ough  fretful 

unbelief,  but  u  receive  this  preached  word,  not  as  word  of  men, 
but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  a*  ihe  word  of  Go.!."  as  the  I  ■  ssalonians  did, 
1  Thess.  ii.  13.  Do  ye  fear  that  ye  will  be  deceived  in  the  end,  and 
wi'l  find  the  door  shut  against  you,  let  the  foolish  virgins  fe*r  this, 
ihey  who  have  only  lamps  of  profession,  but  not  th^;  oil  of  grace, 
yea,  who  do  not  seek  it,  as  ye  do.  Jesus  will  n<  \  r  si  ut  the  door, 
which  he  hath  opened  to  you.  Hear  him  say,  Rev.  ii  7  "These 
things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of 
David,  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth  "  I  conclude  my 
present  discourse  with  2  Peter  i.  10,  11.  "  Wherefore,  brethren, 
•^ive  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure  :  for  so  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  y-  ii  abundantly  in  >  the  everlast- 
ing kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  Amer. 


Vot.  ix- 


(    l54  ) 


nv. 


NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Titus  ii.  14.  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeal 
ous  of  good  works.

Q.  84.  How  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  and  shut  by  the  fir  each- 
ing  of  the  holy  go.t/iel  ? 

A-  Thus;  when  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  it  is  de- 
clared and  publicly  testified  to  all  and  every  believer,  that  whenever 
they  receive  the  promise  of  the  gospel  by  a  true  Faith,  all  their  sins 
are  really  forgiven  them  of  God,  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  merits : 
and  on  the  contrary,  when  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  unbe- 
lievers, and  such  as  do  not  sincerely  repent,  that  they  stand  exposed 
to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as  thry  are 
unconverted  :  according  to  which  testimony  of  the  gospel,  God  will 
judge  them,  both  in  this,  and  the  life  to  come. 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q,  83—85.  135 

Q.  85.  Hoio  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and  opened  by  Christian 
discipline  ? 

A.  Thus  ;  When  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  those  who 
under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain  doctrines  or  practices  incon- 
sistent therewith,  will  not  after  having  been  often  brotherly  admon- 
ished, renounce  their  errours  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are  com- 
plained of  to  the  church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  appointed  by 
the  church  :  and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are  by  them  for- 
bid the  use  of  the  sacraments  ;  whereby  they  are  excluded  from  the 
Christian  church,  and  by  God  himself  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ ; 
and  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amendment,  are  again  re- 
ceived as  members  of  Christ  and  his  church. 

V  V  HEN  the  signs  of  the  Lord's  supper  were  about  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  primitive  church,  the  deacon  ctied,  "  The  holy  things 
are  for  them  who  are  holy."  The  holy  are  indeed  the  only  proper 
persons  to  partake  of  that  which  is  holy,  and  they  only  can  use 
it  in  a  holy  manner,  as  it  ought  to  be  used,  while  the  unholy  profane 
whatsoever  is  holy  :  a  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  ;  but  unto 
them  that  are  defiled,  and  unbelieving,  is  nothing  pure  ;  but  even 
their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled,"  saith  Paul,  Titus  i.  15.  No 
uncircumcised  person,  nor  any  who  was  unclean  by  a  dead  carcase, 
might  eat  of  the  holy  passover  under  the  Old  Testament.  No  man 
had  liberty  to  minister  in  holy  things,  until  he  was  first  sanctified 
for  that  purpose ;  yea,  to  the  end  that  no  unholy  person  might  emer 
into  the  tabernacle  or  temple,  door-keepers  were  appointed,  who  re- 
moved the  unclean  therefrom.  The  priests  were  appointed  censors 
of  uncleanness,  to  distinguish  between  persons  and  things  that  were 
clean  and  unclean,  that  nothing  which  was  unclean  might  appear  be- 
fore the  Lord.  These  things  were  enjoined  indeed  until  the  time 
ef  reformation,  and  are  now  abolished  ;  but  the  Lord  doth  not  there- 
fore choose  that  things,  which  are  more  essentially  holy,  snoukl  be" 
administered  to  the  unholy  :  no,  they  may  be  dispensed  only  to  the 
boly,  and  they  must  be  withholden  from  the  unholy:  "  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  befnr« 
swine,  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again,  and 
»end  you,"  saith  the  Saviour  to  the  apostles,  Matt.  vii.  6.  He  hath 
iherefore  given  to  his  ministers  the  power  of  the  keys,  that  they 
may  admit  none  but  the  holy  into  his  kingdom,  and  may  shut  oul 
the  unholy,  according  to  our  text.  The  instructor,  having  taught  in 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  the   holy   supper  was  instituted  only 


1 86     THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

for  the  holy,  showeth  also  that  the  church  must  shut  out  by  the  keys 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  those  who  give  public  evidence  of  their 
unholiness.  The  instructor  having  proposed  this  in  general,  ex- 
plains it  at  large  in  this  Lord's  day  by  two  particulars  ;  he  shows, 

I.  What  arc  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  Q.  S3. 

II.  How  they  must  be  used,  Q.  84,  85. 

1.  By  the  kingdom  of  heaven  the  scripture  understands  often, 
and  thus  also  in  the  text,  the  church  of  the  Lord,  of  which  he  speaks 
in  the  18th  verse;  for  Jesus  Christ,  the  King,  is  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  who  hath  made  that  Jerusalem  his  throne,  to  which  his  heav- 
enly subjects,  the  believers,  the  saints  of  the  high  places,  have  ac- 
cess, to  obtain  there  by  their  heavenly  prayeis,  the  heavenly  benefits 
of  righteousness,  peace  and  joy.  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the 
heavenly  King,  in  or  ler  to  serve  him  excordins;  to  his  heavenly  laws, 
and  by  means  of  this  kingdom  to  inherit  a  still  higher  kiDgdom  of 
heaven. 

.This  heavenly  kingdom  is  shut  against  the  sinner:  the  Lord  sent 
him  out  of  Paradise  in  his  father  Adam  ;  hut  when  the  Lord  God 
erects  this  kingdom  on  earth  for  his  Son,  he  opens  an  access  to  it 
for  the  elect  sinner,  that  his  Son  may  have  the  heathen  for  his  in- 
heritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession. 
He  hath  therefore  given  to  the  ministers  of  his  kingdom  the  keys  of 
that  kingdom  ;  they  are  certainly  not  material,  but,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  church,  heavenly  keys,  a  heavenly  and  ecclesiastical  pow- 
er to  rule  the  church,  to  open  it  to  the  penitent,  and  to  shut  it  against 
the  impenitent  ;  as  in  the  affairs  of  a  house,  when  we  intrust  the 
management  of  a  house  to  a  person,  we  delirer  to  him  for  that  end 
the  keys  of  the  house,  that  he  may  admit  into  it  all  those  who  belong 
to  it,  and  may  open  all  the  hidden  treasures  of  it,  and  that  he  may- 
shut  ali  strangers  out  of  it,  and  lock  up  all  the  goods  of  it.  Thus 
also  the  power  to  govern  the  state  is  expressed  by  keys  ;  when  the 
Lord  apponted  "  Eliakim  treasurer  and  steward  of  the  palace,  com- 
mitting the  government  into  his  hands,"  he  said,  "  I  will  lay  the 
key  of  the  house  of  David  upon  his  shoulder  :  he  shall  open,  and 
none  shall  shut,  and  he  shall  shut,  and  none  shall  open,"  Isaiah  xxii. 
15,  20 — 22.  Therefore  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  are  the 
power  to  govern  that  kingdom,  even  the  church.  This  power  is 
either  the  supreme  power,  which  the  Father  hath  given  to  his  Son 
alone  :  for  "  God  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  hath  given 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  according  to  Eph. 
:.  22  "-He  hath  the  Iceys  of  hell  and  of  death,"  and  "  he  hath, " 
more  tnan  Eliawun,  "the  key  of  David:  for  he  opens,  and  no  mar. 


— $5,  13* 

blurts,  and  he  shuts  and  no  man  opens,"  Rev.  i.  18.  in.  7,  or  a 
power  subordinate  to  him,  and  ministerial,  which  his  ministers  re- 
ceive of  him,  agreeably  to  what  he  saith  in  the  text. 

The  Remonstrants  deny  that  the  church  hath  such  a  power,  dis- 
tinct from  the  civil  power  ;  for  seeing  that  the  church  would  not 
suffer  them,  on  account  of  their  doctrine,  they  sought  their  help 
in  the  gates,  and  in  order  to  flatter  the  magistrates,  they  surrendered 
the  power  of  the  church  to  them,  and  said  that  all  the  power  of  the 
church  depended  upon  the  higher  powers,  that  the  rules  of  the 
church  ought  to  be  enacted  by  the  magistrates  or  in  virtue  of  their 
authority  over  her,  and  that  they  ought  therefore  also  to  appoint  and 
depose  the  ministers  of  the  church  ;  but  the  reformed  church  oppo- 
sed this  doctrine,  and  said  that  the  church  possessed  such  a  ministe- 
rial power,  distinct  from  the  power  of  the  magistrates,  to  govern 
herself,  to  elect  her  ministers  and  rulers  according  to  the  word  of 
God,  and  when  they  conducted  themselves  amiss  in  doctrine  or  life, 
to  reject  them. 

That  the  church  possesses  such  a  power,  distinct  from  the  civil 
power  of  the  magistrates,  appears  (a)  from  the  text,  in  which  Christ, 
as  king  of  Zion,  commits  the  power  of  the  keys,  not  to  the  magis- 
trates, but  to  his  apostles  only,  (b)  Under  the  Old  Testament  the 
power  of  the  church  Was  distinct  from  the  civil  power  :  "  Amariah 
the  chief  priest  was  ruler  in  all  the  matters  of  the  Lord  ;  and  Zeba- 
diah  in  all  the  matters  of  the  king,"  2  Chron.  xix.  8,  11.  When 
Uzziah  undertook  to  perform  the  work  of  a  priest,  he  incurred  the 
displeasure  of  the  Lord,  2.  Chron.  xxvi.  16 — 21.  It  is  true,  the 
godly  kings  exercised  sometimes  a  considerable  jurisdiction  in  the 
affairs  of  the  church,  but  many  of  them  were  also  prophets,  and 
thus  also  ecclesiastical  persons,  who  had  an  extraordinary  revelation 
for  this  purpose  :  moreover,  those  kings  did  not  take  upon  them- 
selves that  jurisdiction  in  the  affairs  of  the  church,  except  in  times 
of  uncommon  declension,  in  order  to  reform  the  chuich,  which  is 
now  still  the  duty  of  the  magistrates  :  but  it  doth  not  follow  there- 
from, that  the  magistrates  have  a  sovereign  poWer  over  the  church, 
any  more  than  it  follows,  that  ecclesiastical  persons  have  a  sovereign 
power  over  the  state,  because  Jehoiada  in  his  time  reformed,  and  re- 
stored the  stale,  2  Chron.  xi.  and  because  priests  also  sat  in  the  great 
Sanhedrim,  which  judged  in  all  legal  and  capital  cases,  (c)  Paul 
teacheth  us  still  more  clearly  the  power'of  the  church  when  he  saith, 
2  Cor.  x.  8,  "  Though  I  should  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  power, 
which  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification,  and  not  for  your  de- 
structiou,  I  should  not  be  ashamtd."  The  church  hath  then  a  power, 
Vot..  u.  S 


THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

Ti'/.  from  the  magistrates,  but  from  the  Lord      The    same    apostle 

.  hat  *•  he  should  use  s.iaipntss  according  to  that  puwtr," 
Cor.  xiii.  10.  (d)  I' he  Lord  himself  hath  ordained  certain  officers  in 
his  church,  which  therefore  intimateth  a  power  to  govern  the  church, 
as  of"  ministers  and  stewards  "  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  "governments,"  1  Cor. 
xii  28,  ^  ambassadours  "  2; Cor  v.  20,  w  apostles, prophets,  evangel- 
ists, paso.s,  teachers,"  Eph.  iv.  11.  "overseers,"  1  'I  hess.  v.  14, 
"liners,  watchmen,"  Hcb.  xiii  17,  "bishops,  stewards  of  Cod," 
Til.  i.  7  (e)  Doih  not  ev>n  the  nature  of  the  case  teach  this?  the 
of  the  magistrates  relates  only  to  the  kingdom  of  nature, 
but  the  power  of  the  i  hurch  relates  to  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the 
power  of  the  magistrates  extends  only  to  the  bodily  condition  of  the 
citizens;  but  that  of  the  church  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  her 
members  ;  the  power  of  the  magistrates  is  a  lordly  power,  but  Chat 
of  the  church  is  a  ministerial  power,  nor    under  tl  istrates,  but 

under  Christ,  1  Cor.  iv.  1.  The  office  of  the  magistrate  can  be  ad- 
ministered by  a  heathen,  but;  no  ecclesiastical  office  can  be  so  admin- 
isle  red. 

It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  that  all  magistrates  have  not  a  power  over 
'.    e  church,  but  only  the  Christian  ttes  ;  for  Christianity1  be- 

longs not  to  the  nature  of  the  magistracy,  since  otherwise  no  hea- 
then could  administer  that.  oftice,  contrary  to  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 6. 

Moreover,  the  power  and  government  of  the  church  doth  not  ef- 
fect a  kingdom  within  a  kingdom,  the  power  of  the  church  subvert- 
ing that  of  the  magistrate  ;  for  then  family  government,  which  is 
distinct  from  civil  government,  would  also  be  contrary  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  magistrates. 

But  they  say,  "  kings  are,"  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23,  "nursing 
fathers,  and  their  queens  nursing  nuthers  of  the  chuich."  Have 
they  therefore  any  Lordship  over  the  church?  if  so,  then  the  \ 
of  the  magistrates  have  also  such  an  authority.  Is  nursing  the 
chuich,  e:;erci  ing  authority  over  her  ?  the  passage  alledged  doth 
not  surely  assert  this,  but  only  that  the  great  men  of  the  world 
should  be  favourable  to  the  church,  not  by  exercising  authority  over 
her,  but  by  submitting  themselves  willingly  to  her.  The  ori 
hath  not  lords,  but  only  nurses,  and  it  is  added,  "  They  shall  how 
down  to  thee  with  toward  ihe  earth,  and   lick  up  the  dust 

of  thy  feet."  This  hath  but  little  resemblance  to  power,  authority, 
and  lordship  over  the  chun  h. 

We  do  not  however  agree  with  the  Papists,  who  ha\e  introduced 
a  lordly  power  into  the  church,  not  only  in  ecclesiastical,  but  also  in 
civil  matters,  in    an   antichristian  manner  ;  yea,   they  do   not  allow 


—85.  139 

the  magistrates  any  power  at  all  relative  to  the  church  ;  for  although 
the  magistrates  have  no  power  in  the  church,  they  have  nevertheless 
a  power  relative  to  the  church.  Ecclesiastical  persons  are  subject, 
as  citizens,  to  the  magistrates  :  the  magistrates  may  punish  ecclesi- 
astical persons  on  account  of  any  civil  misdemeanour,  as  Solomoa 
expelled  Abiathar  on  account  of  his  conspiracy  with  Adonijah,  I 
Kings  ii.  35.  Magistrates  may  also  manage  the  temporal  posses- 
sions of  the  church,  inquire  whether  the  true  doctrine  be  preached, 
root  out  crrours,  enact  the  rules  of  the  church  into  laws,  and  they 
are  bound  to  cherish  the  church,  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23. 

Neither  doth  this  ecclesiastical  power  reside  with  the  pope  of 
Rome,  as  the  head  of  the  church  ;  for  he  is  not  the  head,  as  we  have 
proved  from  the  word  of  God,  on  the  twenty-first  Lord's  day.  When 
Christ  saith  in  the  text  to  Peter,  "  I  will  give  thee  the  keys,"  &c. 
this  surely  doth  not  relate  to  the  pope  ;  for  since  he  doth  neither 
profess  the  doctrine,  nor  live  the  life  of  Peter,  he  cannot  be  the  suc- 
cessor of  Peter.  What  Christ  saith  here  to  Peter,  he  saith  likewise 
to  all  the  apostles.  See  John  xx.  21,  22,  23.  When  Christ  asked 
all  his  apostles  whom  they  said  that  he  was,  Peter  answered  in  the 
name  of  them  all,  and  so  Christ  also  speaks  these  words  to  Peter,  as 
representing  them  all.     See  vrs.  13 — 15. 

Moreover,  this  ecclesiastical  power  doth  not  reside  with  every 
member  of  the  church,  as  the  Brownists  imagine  ;  for  when  all  the 
people  govern,  there  will  arise  confusion:  but  the  Lord  requireth* 
that  "  all  things  should  be  done,"  in  his  church,  "  decently  and  in 
order,"  1  Cor.  xiv.  40.  «*  Are  all  apostles  ?  are  all  prophets?  are 
all  teachers  ?"  may  we  ask  here  with  Paul,  1  Cor.  xii.  29.  Much 
less  doth  this  power  reside  with  the  women,  as  certain  enthusiasts  and 
Antinomians  fancy  ;  for  women  are  forbidden  to  speak  in  the  church, 
1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35.  1  Tim.  ii.  12,  but  the  ecclesiastical  power  re-, 
sides  with  the  rulers  of  the  church  ;  these  are  not  bishops,  on  whom 
the  other  rulers  and  ministers  of  the  church  depend  ;  for  the  name 
bishop,  in  Greek  efiisco/ios,  doth  not  intimate  any  sovereignty,  but 
signifies  only  an  overseer,  and  is  given  to  all  the  ministers  without 
distinction,  and  even  to  the  elders,  as  we  may  see,  Acts  xx.  17,  28. 
Phil.  i.  1.  Titus  i.  5 — 7,  and  besides  this,  all  manner  of  sovereignty 
is  forbidden  in  the  church.  See  Mat.  xx.  20—27.  1  Peter  v,  1—4. 
But  the  rulers  of  the  church  are  either  extraordinary,  as  the  apostles 
and  evangelists,  who  were  called  and  qualified  in  an  extraordinary 
manner  by  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  to  preach  the  gospel  in  all  lan- 
guages to  every  nation,  and  to  confirm  it  by  miracles,  Mat.  x.  14, 
The  evangelists  were  teachers  sent  into  different  parts,  by  the  apo?.' 


m       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

lies  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  confirm  the  churches,  which  the 
apostles  had  gathered.     We   read  of  them,   Eph.  iv.  ]  1.     Such  an 
one  was  Philip,  Acts  xxi.  8.     Timothy,  2  Tim.  iv.  5,  and  Titus,  ch. 
i.  5.    Or  the  rulers  of  the  church  ate  ordinary,  who  are  called  elders  ; 
these  are  distinguished  into  elders,  who  teach  and  rule,  and  elders  who 
do  not  teach,  but  rule  :  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well,  be  counted 
worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word  and 
doctrine,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  v.  17.     The  ciders  who  teach  are  call- 
ed also   "  teachers,"   and  those  who  only  rule,  are  called   "  govern- 
in  e  ts,"   1  Cor.  xii.  28,   and  considered   collectively,   they  are  called 
K  the  presbytery,"  or  eldership,  1  Tim.  iv.  14.     To  these  rulers,  the 
Lord  Jesus,  as  the  great  prophet  .;nd  King  of  his  church,  hath  com- 
mitted the  power  of  the  keys,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  before- 
mentioned  offices,  see  1  Cor.  iv.  1,    Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  but  also  from 
Ma1,   xviii.  17,   where  the  rulers,  as  representing  the  whole  church, 
are  called  the  church,  and  receive  the  power  to  cast  an  incorrigible 
sinner  out   of  the  church;  and  the  rulers,  when   assembled  for  this 
purpose,   are  either  consistories,    classes,    or    synods.     Synods  are 
gathered  from  theNchurches  of  a  province,  or  of  a  whole  country,  or 
from  all  the  known  churches  in  the  world  ;  and  are  therefore  called 
provincial,  national,  and  universal  synods.     Although  all  lordship  is 
forbidden  in  the  church,   nevertheless,  that  all  things  may  be  done 
decently  and  in  order,  consistories  mist  be  subordinate  and  subject 
to  classes,  classes  to  synods,  provincial  synods  to  national,  and  nation- 
al to  universal      This  is  gainsaid  by  the  Independents,  who  will  have 
that  each  church  should  be  governed  according  to  its  own  particular 
laws,  and  be  independenton  other  churches,  because  otherwise  lording 
will  he  introduced  into  the  church.    On  the  contrary  the  apostle  saith, 
that  "  t;.e  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets  :  for  God 
is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of 
the  saints."  See  1  Cor.  xiv.  29 — 33.     For  what  purpose  was  the  syn- 
od of  Jerusalem  assembled  ?  was  it  not  in  ordei  to  decide  the  great 
controversy,  thai  had  arisen  i.i  the  churches,  whether  the  Gentiles 
ought  to  he  circumcised,  in  order  to  their  salvation  ?  and  when  it  was 
decreed,  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  circumcise  them,  was  not  that  de- 
cree s-nt  to  all  the  churches?  ami  did  they  not  submit  to  it?  would 
i  submission  Hitrodo.ee  lording   into  the  church  ?     Nothing  is 
better  calculated  to  prevent  it   and  to  preserve  soundness  of  doctrine. 
II.  The  rulers  of  the  church  make  use  of  these  keys  with  respect 
to  all  that   belongs  to  the  church,  as  the  ecclesiastical  assemblies, 
the  i'  I         i  the  Chtli  .'mgto  which  the  outward  order  of  the 

church  must  be  rfegUlatcd,  the  constituting  of  forms  of  union,  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

■decision  of  controversies  ;  but  ali  tilings  must  be  clone  according  to 
the  word  of  God,  and  nothing  contrary  to  it  :  but,  that  we  may  abide 
by  the  instructor,  this  ecclesiastical  power  must  be  exercised  espe- 
cially *  in  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  and  in  Christian  disci- 
pline, as  two  keys  by  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  be- 
lievers, and  shut  against  unbelievers." 

The  first  key,  to  wit,  the  power  to  preach  the  gospel,  is  not  given 
to  all,  who  possess  an  excellent  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  truth, 
which  is  according  to  godliness ;  but  only  to  those,  who  are  lawfully 
called  thereto,  and  sent.  "  Mow  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be 
sent?  saith  Paul,  Rom.  x,  15.  See  also  Jer.  xiv.  14,  15.  xxiii.  21,. 
32.  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  Heb.  v.  4,  5,  6.  And  although  no  man  is  sent 
now  in  such  an  extraordinary  manner,  as  the  apostles  and  evangel- 
ists were,  nevertheless  we  must  look  upon  a  person  as  sent  by  God, 
when  he  is  chosen  to  such  an  office  by  the  church,  either  unani- 
mously, or  by  a  plurality  of  votes,  or  by  lot ;  for  this  was  usual  even 
in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  and  deemed  proper  and  divine.  See  Acts 
i.  21 — 26.  xiv.  23.  xx.  28.  1  Tim.  iv.  14.  Moreover,  it  belongs  not 
to  all  the  elders  to  preach  the  gospel,  but  only  to  those  who  labour 
in  the  word  and  doctrine,"  1  Tim.  v.  17.  The  tuljng  elders  have 
only  a  right  to  take  care  that  the  preachers  make  use  of  this  key 
rightly,  and  according  to  the  word  of  God    See    'tts  xx.  28.  29.  30. 

The  sinner  is  debarred  by  sin  from  access  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  and  from  all  the  great  privileges  of  it :  yea,  •'  his  own  ini- 
quities take  the  sinner  himself,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of 
his  sins."  according  to  Prov.  v.  22.  «  He  is  taken  captive  in  the 
snare  of  the  devil  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  He  is  "  kept  under  the 
law,  and  shut  up  under  it,"  Gal.  iii.  23.  Even  believers  find  their 
access  barred  up  through  the  strength  of  their  corruption,  the  weak- 
ness of  their  faith,  and  the  hiding  of  the  Lord's  countenance  ;  their 
doubts  concerning  their  right  to  the  benefits  of  the  kingdom  bind 
them  fast  time  after  time,  See  Job  xiv.  23 — 28.  xix.  6,  8.  Psalm 
xxxi.  22.  Lam.  iii.  7,  8,  17,  18,  44.  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
opened  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  thus  loosed,  not  by  granting  him  the 
pardon  of  his  sins,  after  he  hath  confessed  them  to  a  priest  ;  for  this 
doth  not  belong  to  men,  but  to  God  only,  as  we  have  shown  largely 
enough  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day  ;  but  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  by  which  he  is  not  informed,  that  the  gate  of  the  kingdom 
is  opened  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  every  sinner,  as  the  Re- 
monstrants speak  in  their  cavilling  censures  of  this  Lord's  day  ;  for 
this  is  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  day  j  but  the  sinner  is  taught,  that  God  h?.th  set  his  Son  forth 


142       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

to  be  a  p-opitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  which  he  is  invited 
and  culled,  thai  lie  ma)  be  excited  and  allured  to  embrace  this  Me- 
diator, iu  go  through  him  to  the  Father,  and  to  be  admitted  into  his 
kingdom.  In  tnis  manner  did  Paul  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
when  he  said,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  il  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling 
the  woiid  to  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them  ;  and 
hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation  Now  then  we 
are  ambassadpura  for  Christ,  as  t  .ougii  God  did  beseech  you  by  us  : 
we  pr\«y  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  But  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  belie veis,  and  they  are  loosed  by  this 
key  particularly,  "by  declaring  and  testifying  to  them  that  all  their 
sins  are  really  forgiven  them  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  mei  its." 
To  tnis  end  the  God  of  his  people  saith  to  the  ministers  of  the  holy 
gospel,  Isaiah  xl.  1,2.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith 
your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her 
that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned*" 
This  is  k'  remitting  sins,"  John  x»  23,  and  "  preaching  the  for 
ness  of  sins  in  the  name  of  Christ,"  Luke  xxiv.  47.  See  Acts  x. 
43.  To  do  this  properly  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  declare  I 
promises  in  general,  but  we  must  apply  them  to  believers  in  par- 
ticular,  and  for  this  purpose  point  out  to  them  marks  of  grace,  that 
they  may  have  a  clear  view  of  the  truth  of  their  faith,  as  the  apostles 
often  acted.  See  Rom.  viii.  1,  9,  13.  James  ii.  14 — -6.  1  J-  im  iii. 
14,  iv.  13.  This  is  clone  either  «  publicly  "  in  the  assembly  ol  God's 
people,  where  the  gospel  is  preached,  as  Paul  did,  Acts  xiii  3S,  39, 
or  privately,   when   we  speak-toad     res  •   in   paVti 

or  when  he  spca'::s  to  us,  and  \,  •  lis  n  apply  these  promises  to  htm, 
speak  comfortably  to  him,  and  remove  his  difficulties  and  scrn 
thus  Paul  also  acted,  At  is  xx  -J.  But  inasmuch  .  s  believers  dare 
not  always  assure  themselves  by  the  word  of  reconciliation,  ant!  since 
they  offend  often,  they  must  likewise  often  "lay  hold  on  the  prom- 
ises of  the  gospel  by  a  true  faith,"  ami  the  messengers  of  good 
gSj  must  publish  the  message  of  reconciliation  to  them,  by 
which  their  wavering  souls  will  be  brought  to  a  steadfast  assurance 
and  they  will  thus  obtain  "  boldness  to  enter  with  a  true  heart,  in 
a  full  jis.su  aace  of  faith  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesu 
new  and  Jiving  way,  which  he  hath  consecr^ed  for  us  through  the 
veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh,"  lleb.  x.  19,  20,  22.  It  is  true,  every 
one  who  is  capable  can  inform  believers  of  this  from  the  word  of 
God.  but  not  as  aii  ambassadoor  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  as  the  preach- 
ers of  tiie  gospel   must  do,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.     There  is  a  great  dif- 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

ference  whether  a  common  person  announce  to  a  capital  offender, 
that  lie  is  put  cloned,  or  whether  his  lord's  messenger  do  it. 

But  the  preachers  are  not  only  commanded  "  to  say  to  the  right- 
eous, that  it  shall  he  well  with  him,"  but  also  to  denoum  e  "a  wo 
against  the  wicked,"  and  say  "  that  it  shall  be  ill  with  him,"  Isaiah 
iii.  10,  1  I.  Therefore  the  instructor  saith,  that  by  the  key  of  the 
preaching  of  the^oly  gospel  w  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  un- 
believers, and  such  as  do  not  since  rely  repent,  that  they  stand  ex- 
posed to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as 
tuey  are  unconver  ed."  This  is  also  according  to  the  word  of  G  d 
which  saith,  "He.  who  beheveth  not  shall  be  damned,"  Mark  xvi. 
16,  and  k'  he  who  beheveth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him,"  John  iii.  36.  In  this  manner  did 
Peter  use  this  key  against  Simon  the  sorcerer,  when  he  said  to  him, 
Acts  vii.  21,  23,  "Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter  ;  for 
thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  for  I  perceive  that  thou 
art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity  "  Which, 
that  it  may  have  the  greater  effect,  is  proclaimed  to  sinners  with  an 
"  anathema,"  See  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.  By  which  those  unbelievers  and 
impenitent  persons  are  shut  out  of  t!  e  kingdom  of  God,  aie  bound 
under  their  sins  and  the  wrath  of  God,  and  their  "  sins  thus  retain- 
ed," according  to  the  text,  and  John  xx.  2  3,  which  is  done  by  the 
preaching  of  the  holy  gospel  ;  not  that  the  gospel  doth  this  by  itself, 
for  the  gospel  contains  no  threatenings  nor  curses  ;  it  is  "  the  law" 
only  "  that  worketh  wrath,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom  iv.  15.  But  as 
the  law  ministereth  to  the  gospel,  and  must  be  preached  with  the 
gospel,  therefore  this  outshutting  is  said  to  be  performed  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel. 

Let  no  man  think  that  this  opening  and  shutting  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  is  a  vain  thing,  and  of  no  consequence,  for  we 
must  receive  this  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  not  simply  as  the  voice 
of  man ;  for  God  will  judge  by  this  testimony  both  in  this  life  ; 
"  He  confirmeth  the  word  of  his  servant,  and  performeth  the  counsel 
of  his  messenger,"  as  he  saith  himself,  Isaiah  xliv.  26.  "  Whatso- 
ever thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  :  and  what- 
soever thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven,"  saith  the 
Saviour  in  the  text.  '*  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re- 
mitted unto  them  ;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retain- 
ed unto  them,"  saith  he,  John  xx.  23,  and  also  in  the  life  to  come  ; 
therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  ii.  16.  "  God  will  judge  the  secrets 
of  men"  in  the  dav  of  judgment  «  by  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  my 
gospel." 


Hi      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  as  this  key  first  opens,  and  afterwards  shuts,  so  there  is  als» 
another  key,  which  first  shuts,  and  afterwards  opens.  This  is  the 
Christian  discipline,  or  the  shutting  of  a  person  out  of  the  Christian 
chu'cii,  which  is  not  exercised  on  them  who  are  without,  but  on 
them  who  are  within  the  church,"  who  bear  the  Christian  name. 
tc  Ye  slialJ  not  keep  company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be 
a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater  or  a  railtr,  or  a  drunkard,  or 
an  extortioner,  with  such  an  erne  ye  shall  not  even  eat.  For  what 
have  1  to  do  to  judge  them  also  that  are  without  ?  do  not.  ye  judge 
them  that  are  within?  but  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth. 
Therefore  put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person," 
saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  v.  1 1,  12,  13.  Further,  tiiis  key  is  not  used 
with  respect  to  them,  who  ate  only  baptized,  and  who  do  not  declare 
and  testify  by  partaking  oi  the  Lord's  supper,  that  they  abide  by  their 
baptism  ;  for  the  first  key  is  used  with  respect  to  these  :  but  it  is 
used  witn  respect  to  th"s^  who  are  public  members,  who  have  join- 
ed themselves  to  the  church  by  a  confession  of  their  faith,  and  de- 
clare by  receiving  the  supper,  that  they  are  in  union  with  the 
church  :  who  nevertheless  under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain 
unchristian  doctrines  or  practices."  "  A  man  that  is  an  heretic,  re- 
ject," saith  Paul.  Tit  iii.  10.  See  2  John,  vis.  10,  1  1.  Further,  "we 
may  not  keep  company  with  a  brother,  who  leads  an  ungodly  life," 
I  Cor.  v.  11.  2  Thess.  iii.  6,  14. 

This  Christian  discipline  shuts  such  persons  out  of  the  Christian 
church,  not  by  inflicting  corporal  punishment  on  them,  as  the  Papists 
do,  who  bereave  them  in  the  most  cruel  manner  of  their  goods, 
kingdom,  civil  rights,  yea,  of  life  itself.  Not  unlike  this  is  the  con- 
duct of  certain  Mennonites,  who  separate  persons  for  various  trifling 
reasons  from  their  bed  and  board,  yea»  from  all  intercourse  with  be- 
lievers. This  is  an  ecclesiastical,  but  an  abominable  tyranny,  and  a 
prodigious  usurpation  :  it  belongs  onlv  to  the  civil,  and  not  to  the 
ecclesiastical  powers  to  inflict  corporal  punishments  ;  "  for  the  weap- 
ons of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God,  to  the 
pulling  down  of  strong  holds,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor.  x.  4.  Chris- 
tian discipline  punishelh  offending  members  only  in  their  church- 
fellowship,  by  depriving-  them  of  their  communion  with  the  church, 
shutting  them  out  of  it,  removing  and  banishing  them  from  it.  Paul 
speaking  of  the  man,  who  had  taken  his  father's  wife,  calls  this  dis- 
cipline "  a  delivering  of  such  a  person  to  Satan,"  1  Cor.  v.  7.  So 
"  he  delivered  Hymeneus  and  Alexander  to  Satan,"  1  Tim  i.  20. 
Not  that  the  apostle  delivered  them  to  Satan,  that  he  might  possess 
fend  torment  them  in  a  bodily  manner ;  but  this  delivering  of  them 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83— 85.    '        -  '*  145 

lb  Satan  denotes  a  casting  of  them  out  of  the  church,  as  he  explains 
it,  1  Cor.  v.  13,  "Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person  "  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  also  saith  of  the  contumacious 
brother,  Matt,  xviii.  17.  "  If  he  will  not  hear  the  church,  let'him. 
he  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man,  and  a  publican."  For  Satan  rules 
out  of  the  church,  therefore  he  who  is  cast  out  of  the  church  is  de- 
livered up  to  Satan.  And  he  is  thus  shut  cut  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  deprived  of  all  the  privileges  of  it,  he  is  forbidden  the  sacra- 
ments, and  they  ure  withholdcn  from  him,  and  he  is  bound  fast  un- 
der his  sins,  and  under  destruction.  For  the  Lord  God,  when  this 
is  done  agreeably  to  his  word,  approves  of  the  conduct  of  his  faith- 
ful servants  so  far,  that  he  himself  shuts  such  a  person  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ :  for  with  respect  to  this  key  the  Lord  Jesus  saith, 
Matt,  xviii.  17,  13.  "  If  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  Verily  I  say  unto  you. 
Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven." 

But  as  the  servants  of  the  Lord  must  not  be  dilatory  in  this  work, 
so  neither  must  they  be  too  hasty  :  "  But  after  having  been  often 
brotherly  admonished,  they  will  not  renounce  their  en  ours  and  wick- 
ed course  of  life,  and  also  despise  the  admonition  of  the  church." 
The  Saviour  requireth  "  that  I  first  reprove  my  brother,  who  ha\.h 
trespassed  against  me,  in  private  ;  if  he  will  not  hearken  to  me,  that 
I  then  endeavour  to  reduce  him  to  his  duty  in  the  presence  of  one 
Or  two  others  ;  if  he  remain  incorrigible,  that  I  then  complain  of 
him  to  the  ruling  church,  to  wit,  the  eldership  ;  if  he  remain  ob- 
stinate still,  I  must  then  consider  him  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican," Matt,  xviii.  15 — 18.  The  order  of  our  Dutch  church  with 
respect  to  this  matter  cannot  be  censured  ;  it  requires  that  we  first 
admonish  the  offender  ;  then  that  we  forbid  him  the  Lord's  supper 
for  a  time  ;  further,  that  we  denounce  him  to  the  church,  either  by, 
tor  with  his  name,  that  every  one  may  do  what  in  him  lieth  by  ad- 
monitions and  prayers  to  reform  such  a  sinner :  if  all  this  will  not 
avail,  he  must  then  be  wholly  cut  off  in  a  public  manner,  both  that 
he  himself  may  be  ashamed  and  repent,  and  also  that  he  may  not 
defile  others ;  and  that  none  may  be  offended,  either  within  or  out 
of  the  church,  and  become  averse  from  her.  See  this  1  Cor.  v.  5, 
6.  2  Thess.  ill.  14.  2  John  vrs.  10,  II. 

Erastus  and  many  sons  of  Belial,  who  wish  to  live  without  yoke, 
would  fain  wrest  this  key  out  of  our  hands.  Do  they  allow  that  the 
Lord  hath  given  to  his  servants  a  power  to  preach  the  word,  they 
will  neverthele3s  dispute  their  power  to  excommunicate  and  to  shu£ 
•ut  of  the  church,  and  they  decry  it  as  .a  most  unsuitable  practice* 
Vol.'ix.  T 


U6   THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  did  not  the  church  under  the  Old  Testament  cast  refractory 
pcrt>ons  out  ?  did  not  Christ  gi\c  this  key  to  his  church  ?  Matt.  xvi. 
If.  xviii.   17,  18,  did  net  the  apostles  make  use  of  this  hey  ?   1  Cor. 

v#  i i3.  2  John,  vrs    10,  11,  hath  not  the  Christian  church  always 

used  it?  would  not  the  church  without  this  key  be  a  den  of  robhersj 
a  city  without  walls,  a  house  without  doors  or  bars,  and  a  garden 
'vi'houl  an  inclosure  ?  would  not  the  holy  things  be  trampled  upon 
by  dogs,  and  unclean  swine  I  the  wicked  be  hardened,  and  the  godly 
gneveti  ? 

But  when  we  shut  obstinate  persons  in  this  manner  out  of  the 
church  by  forbidding  them  the  sacraments,  shall  we  then  also  debar 
them  from  hearing  the  word  ?  Thus  they  did  anciently,  that  they 
might,  by  ternf\mg  the  Christians,  render  them  cautious  of  offering 
in  any  w.se  to  idols,  ro  which  many  declined  in  those  limes  of  temp* 
tation  :  but  this  appears  to  br  too  harsh.  A  person  is  not  excom- 
municated for  his  destruction,  but  for  his  preservation  by  re* 
pentance  :  how  sh  dl  he  repent,  if  we  withhold  the  word,  the  mean 
»f  repentance,  from  him? 

When  a  person,  who  hath  been  shut  out  of  the  church,  repents, 
must  we  then  always  keep  him  out?  so  unmercifully  the  Novatians 
acted,  (hey  would  not  re-admit  even  those  who  had  full  n  and  y  elded 
only  from  fear  in  times  of  persecution.  But  the  Saviour  dealt  more 
mildly  than  this  with  his  apostle  Peter.  When  God  opens  the  door 
Of  grace,  no  irun  may  shut  it :  we  must  therefore  receive  such  a 
pei son  again,  as  a  member  of  Christ,  and  of  his  church,  yea,  we 
mufii  behave  in  a  friendly  manner  toward  him,  forgive  him  his  evil 
deed,  and  "comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  he  should  be  swallowed  up 
with  overmuch  sorrow."  bee  what  Paul  saith,  2  t  or.  ii.  6 — i  1.  We 
must  nevertheless  not  be  too  forward,  or  hasty  in  thi^  matter;  when 
a  person  only  saith,  1  repent,  shall  we  th<  n  presently  open  the  door 
to  him  again  ?  ought  no!  the  evidences  of  his  rej  entance  and  refor- 
mation to  be.as  manifest,  as  bis  offence  was  before  notorious?  Verily 
the  incestuous  person  was  not  received  again,  until  he  was  exceed- 
ingly and  abundantly  sorry,  and  comfort  v.  as  necessary  for  him. 
Therefore  the  instructor  also  saith,  that  the  excommunicated  "  are 
received  again,  when  they  promise,  and  show  real  amendment." 
The.  ancient  Christian  chttrch  would  not  therefore  re-admit  those  who 
had  transgressed,  until  they  had  given  several  evidences  of  their  re- 
p  ntauce-s  they  had  fortius  purpose  four  classes  of  penitents  :  the 
first  were  the  firosklaion  <••*,   or  "the  we  mplaining,"  who 

stood,  clothed  with  a  filthy  and  blacl  m      ■   a!  the  door  of  the 

church,  weepii  |  -  sins,  and  entreating  those  who  entered  inte- 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8S— 85.  i4f 

the  church  to  pray  for  them  :  the  second  class  consisted  of  the 
akroomenoi,  or  "  the  hearing,"  who  were  permitted  to  hear  in  the  en- 
trance of  the  church  with  the  catechumens  the  word  of  God  read 
and  explained,  but  were  required  to  withdraw  with  the  catechumens 
before  the  supper  was  administered  :  the  third  class  were  the  hyfia- 
flifitonteS)  or  "•  the  downfalling,"  who  prostrated  themselves  humbly 
upon  the  floor  of  the  churc  :,  and  confessed  their  transgression  be- 
fore the  congregation,  whereupon  the  minister  laid  his  hands  upon 
ihem,  and  bade  them  arise,  when  they  were  placed  near  the  Stat  of 
the  reader  :  but  these  also  were  obliged  to  go  out  of  the  church,  with 
the  catechumens;  besides  these,  there  were  also  the  sunistamenci,  or 
4i  those  who  stood  with"  the  people  :  these  did  not  depart  with  the 
.catechumens,  but  continued  standing  with  the  congregation  to  hear 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  pray  and  sing  with  the  believers :  they 
might  see  the  supper  administered,  but  they  might  not  partake  of 
it,  although  they  were  after  a  short  time  promoted  to  that  privilege. 
This  grievous  penance  every  person,  whether  high  or  low,  who  had 
committed  a  scandalous  offence,  was  bound  to  undergo.  Even  the 
emptrour  Theodosius  the  Great  was  not  excused,  but  was  obliged 
to  perform  a  severe  penance  during  eight  months  ;  he  could  not 
otherwise  be  reconciled  to  the  church,  on  account  of  his  shedding; 
fhe  blood  of  the  Thessalonians. 


APPLICATION. 

This,  it  will  be  suid,  was  too  severe  ;  but  are  we  not  now  too 
-slack?  those  who  have  eyes  to  see,  and  are  not  wilfully  blind,  can 
«ee  it.  How  many  membeis  are  there  in  the  church,  who  join  Christ 
:tnd  Belial,  righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  yea,  who  exhibit 
nothing  of  Christianity  !  Alas,  how  many  ungodly  persons  do  we 
find  in  the  house  of  God  !  But  what  is  done  against  them  ?  who 
dares  cry  aloud,  and  life  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet  ?  are  there  still 
faithful  watchmen,  who  do  not  spare  any  ungodly  persons,  how 
-seldom  is  the  Christian  discipline  used  to  shut  them  out  of  the 
church  !  where  do  we  find  those  who  are  so  shut  out  ?  are  any  ad- 
monished, reproved,  and  forbidden  to  approach  the  holy  table,  on 
account  of  their  gross  sins,  how  easily  are  they  restored  !  Are  any 
hearty  enough  i  i  this  matter  to  perform  this  duty  faithfully,  how 
[  many  are  there  who  presently  oppose  them  !  This  key  is  in  a  man- 


148      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

ner  thrown  by  and  suffered  to  rust.  This  hardens  the  wicked,  sad- 
dens the  godly,  kindles  the  wrath  of  God,  and  tarnishes  the  lustre  of 
the  house  of  God. 

If  it  would  avail  to  complain,  I  would  say  more  ;  but  of  what  ad- 
vantage will  it  be  to  root  in  the  filthy  wounds  of  our  mother  ?  If  I 
could  by  these  means  heal  them,  I  might  call  on  all  and  each  of  you 
to  unite  with  me,  and  to  shed  a  flood  >f  tears  over  the  unsightly  con- 
d.tion  of  our  church  in  the  Netherlands.  1  will  do  better,  if  I  ex- 
cite the  magistrates  and  myself,  with  all  my  fellowlabourers,  and 
the  eiders,  and  every  individual  to  endeavour,  as  much  as  in  him 
lieth,  to  conduct  manfully  with  respect  to  these  keys,  according  tc 
the  word  of  God. 

1.  Let  the  magistrates,  (a)  submit  with  humility  and  lowliness  to 
the  kingly  sovereignty  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  The 
Lord  (jiod  saith  to  the  high  and  mighty  ones  of  the  earth,  Psalm  ii. 
6,  10,  11,  12.  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion. 
Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings  ;  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the 
earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss 
the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little  ;  blessed  are  all  they  who  put  their  trust 
in  him."  Have  not  the  great  men  of  the  world  immortal  souls  to 
save,  as  well  as  their  subjects  ?  and  can  they  do  this,  if  they  will  not 
bow  to  him,  who  is  higher  than  the  highest  ?  or  is  Jesus  a  king  of 
the  common  people  only  ?  hath  it  not  been  foretold,  that  the  great 
men  of  the  eaith  should  be  subject  to  him  ?  the  prophecies  are  too 
numerous  to  be  transcribed  here.  See  Psalm  xlviii.  10.  lxiii.  10, 
1 1.  Isaiah  xlix.  7,  23.  Ix.  3,  10.  Rev.  xi.  15.  Or  would  it  disgrace 
and  degrade  the  higher  powers,  if  they  should  stoop  to  this  great 
King?  is  not  Jesus  higher  than  they  ?  of  whom  do  they  hold  their 
honourable  stations  ?  this  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  saith, 
Prov.  viii.  15,  16.  "  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice. 
By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  even  all  the  judges  of  the  earth." 
Shall  it  then  be  deemed  a  reproach  to  princes,  if  they  submit  to  him  ? 
will  it  not  be  an  honour  :o  them,  and  increase  their  lustre  ?  have 
not  godly  sovereigns  always  been  most  honoured,  feared  and  obey- 
ed ?  are  not  the  names  of  David,  Solomon,  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  He- 
zekiah  and  Josiah  until  this  day  blessed,  when  they  are  remembered  ? 
and  have  not  the  names  of  the  ungodly  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel 
been  long  since  rotten  ?  Let  the  magistrates  therefore  seek  their 
happiness,  blessedness  and  glory  in  submitting  to  the  King  of  Zion. 
(b)  Magisliates  ought  also  to  employ  their  supremacy,  excellency 
and  dignity  for  the  advantage  of  the  church.     It  was  foretold  of  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  St-rSS.  148 

Christian  princes,  that  they  should  "bring  presents,  and  offer  gifts," 
Psalm  lxxii.  10.  Hear  what  the  Lord  promiseth  his  church,  Isaiah 
xlix.  23.  "  Kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fcuhers,  and  their  queens  thy 
nursing  mothers,  .hey  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  their  fuce  toward 
the  earih,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet."  The  Lord  saith  to  the 
church,  Isaiah  Ix.  10.  «  -grangers  shall  build  up  thy  walls,  and  th  ir- 
king.s  shall  minister  to  thee."  'i  berefore  let  all  those  who  possess 
eminent  stations,  cherish  the  church,  confirm  her  privileges,  pro- 
tect her  ministers,  support  the  truth,  favour  her  children,  restrain 
her  enemies,  and  with  ail  their  might  correct  the  sinful  manners  of 
their  strjecis,  which  defile  the  church.  Every  godly  king  of  ludah, 
who  sat  on  the  throne  of  David,  made  this  his  most  special  work. 
"  Israel,"  the  church,  "  is  a  blessing  in  the  midst  ot  the  land,"  Isaiah 
xix.  24.  The  godly  bless  the  land  and  the  rulers  of  it,  on  account 
of  the  church  saying,  "  Peace  be  within  thee.  Because  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  our  God  I  v.  ill  seek  thy  good,"  saith  David,  Psalm  exxii. 
3,  9.  When  the  church  is  well  ordered  and  well  cherished,  she  is 
the  defence  of  the  land,  and  renders  the  people  victorious.  See 
Zech.  xii.  5,  6.  lea,  she  maintains  and  establishes  princes  on  their 
thrones  by  her  admonitions,  prayers  and  exemplary  conduct :  the 
wellbeing  of  the  church  is  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  the  higher 
powers  ;  and  therefore  they  consult  their  best  interest  by  doing  weil 
to  the  church  ;  but  when  they  oppress  and  afflict  her,  the  Lord  will 
behold  and  require  it  ;  for  "  he  suffers  no  man  to  do  her  wrong ; 
yea,  he  reproves  kings  for  her  sake,  saying,  Touch  not  mine  anoint- 
ed, and  do  my  prophets  no  harm,"  Psalm  cv.  14,  15. 

But,  my  worthy  brethren  and  fellowlabourers  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  may  I  not  also  exhort  and  excite  you  with  myself,  to  be  faith- 
ful, active  and  zealous  in  all  our  ministry  ?  We  have  an  exceedingly 
great  and  laborious,  but  nevertheless  excellent  work  to  perform  ; 
immortal  souls  are  committed  to  our  care ;  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
us  overseers  to  feed  the  church  of  God,  which  he  haih  purchased 
with  his  own  blood  :  the  honour  pf  God,  the  prosperity  of  the  chmch. 
and  the  precious  truth  are  intrusted  to  us,  that  we  should  regard 
them  with  a  hearty  concern :  shall  we  then  be  negligent  of  our  duty. 
<k  blind  watchmen,  dumb  dogs,  loving  to  slumber,"  and  carnal  per- 
sons, as  the  prophets  of  the  Lord's  people  were,  Isaiah  Ivi.  10.- — 12. 
Let  us  then,  (a)  make  use  of  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
with  respect  to  ourselves  :  "  Thou  who  teachest  another,  teachest 
thou  not  thyself?"  Thus  Paul  asked  the  Jewish  teachers,  Ron.,  ii 
21.  Wc  must  teach  the  people  that  they  must  examine  themselves, 
whether  they  be  in  the  faith,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  5,  fhall  we  then  neglect 


ISO      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

this  duly  with  respect  to  ourselves  ?     Or  shall  we  persuade  ourselves, 
that  all  the  preachers  ^re  surely  believers  and  godly  persons,  as  the 
ignorant  people  imagine,  because  they    are  so   wise,  and  can  preach 
and  pray  so  well  ?      Verily  those  outward  things   do  not  prove    this, 
we  know  better  from  the  examples  of  Judas  and  Demas,  who  showed 
liiat  the  office  of  a  preacher  is   not  one   of   those  better   things   that 
accompany  salvation  :  it  is  certain   that  the  preachers  must  be  born 
again,   and  converted,  as   well  as  others.     Neither  the  college,  nor 
the  classis,  nor  a  call  from  the  church,  nor  the    holy  ministry  consti- 
tutes grace.     Have  we  no  more  than  these  things,  hew  grievous  will 
it  be  for  us  to    sink,  down  from  the  pulpit    into  the  bottomless  pit  of 
hell !     O  let  us  judge  ourselves,  and  flee  yet  to  the  Saviour,  that  we 
may  save  both  ourselves  and   others.     We  who  call   others  to   the 
grace  of  G->d,  and   to  repentance,  are    also   called  by  the  Lord  to  be 
reconciled  to  him.     Do  we  find,  after  a  strict  and  frequent  examina- 
lion  of  ourselves,  rhat  we  do    indeed    possess   truth    in   the   inward 
parts,  let  us  make  use  of  the  key  of  the  gospel  to  apply  all  the  prom- 
ises to    ourselves,  as  Paul  acted,  1  Tim.  i    13 — 16.     2   l  im.   i.    12. 
(b)  Let   us  have  a  serious  concern  for  immortal  souls,   who  are  in- 
trusted to  our  care,  and  let  us  '•  look  well  to  the  flock,"  recording  to 
the  admonition  of  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  28.     If  a   man  fall  into  the 
water  or  fire,  who  will  not  make   haste  to  help  him  out  ?     Shall  pot 
we  then,  whom  God  hath  called   to  this    work,   bestir    ourselves    to 
pluck  sinners  out  of  t,he  fire  of  hell  ?     It   will    fare   hard   with    tl 
watchmen  of  Zion,  if  a  sinner  perish  through  their  listlessness  :  "  the 
Lord  willl  require  the  blood  of  that  sinner  at  the  hands  of  the  watch- 
man," as  he  saith,  Ezek  iii.  18,  20.     (e)  The    preachers  must   use 
the  keys  discretely  :  they  must  nol  open,  when  the  Lord  shuts,  nei- 
ther may  they  shut  when  the  Lord  opens.     To  greet  all  their  I 
ers,  as  beloved,  called,  and  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  apply  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  thus  to  all,   renders  the  people  careless  ;  the 
doctrine  of  particular  grace  doth  not  permit  this.    Jiut  it  is  still  worse 
to  reproach  from  the  pulpit,  to  decry  us  hypqentes,  and  to  deny  the 
holy  table  to  persons  who  are  inwardly  religious,  who  excel  the  civil 
and   formally    religions,  and  urge  ethers  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling-     Who  is  a  good  overseer?  is  it  it  not  one 
who  is  k'  a  lover  of  good  men  :"     Tit.  i.  8.      What  preacher,    who 
fears  God,  dares  to  u  make  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies, 
whom  the  Lord  hath  not  made  sad  ;  and  to  strengthen  the  hands  of 
the  wicked,  that   he  shonl  1  not   turn  from  his  wicked  way  f"   Every 
;. richer  ought  to  read,  yea.  to  read  frequently,  Ezek.  xxiii.  and  xxxiv, 
-•'  ■  '  ' her  will  conduct  himself  wisely,  and  according  to  the  word 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  33—85.  151 

•f  the  Lord,  he  must,  according  to  Jude,  vrs.  22,  24,  "  have  compaa- 
sion  of  some,  making'  a  difference  ;  and  save  others  with  fear,  pulling 
thx-m  out  of  the  fire."  He  must  with  Jeremiah,  "  if  he  shall  be  the 
mouth  of  God,  take  the  precious  from  the  vile,"  Jer.  xv.  13,  "  di\ide 
the  word  of  truth  aright,"  2  Tim.  ii.  15,  and  "  give  the  household  of 
the  Lord  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season,"  Luke  xii.  42.  It  is 
praiseworthy  to  explain  the  truth  well,  it  is  commendable  to  reprove 
haitiul  sins,  if  it  be  done  with  meekness  and  wisdom,  it  is  <rood  to 
publish  the  promises  of  the  gospel ;  but  it  will  not  suffice  to  throw 
every  thing  out  at  random,  so  that  few  can  lay  hold  on  any  thing.  It 
is  best  to  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  that  we  mav  discov- 
er the  hidingplaces  of  his  self-deceit,  and  that  he  may  awake,  be 
concerned,  and  flee  out  of  himself  to  t!,^  throne  of  grace  ;  and  i:- 
would  be  exceedingly  profitable  to  Explain  the  work  of  grace  to  the 
godly  by  marks  of  grace.  Every  one  would  then  obtain  a  near  view 
of  his  heart  and  be  able  to  see  it  on  every  side,  and  the  kevs  would 
be  used  with  advantage.  Therefore  the  preachers  ought  to  attend 
so  particularly  to  every  one,  that  they  would  know  their  people  near 
at  hand,  and  how  to  deal  with  them  to  their  profit.  "  Be  thou  dili- 
geni  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocks,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  13. 
(ci)  That  we  may  not  be  too  prolix,  we  will  only  say  briefly,  that 
the  overseers  of  the  church  ought  to  be  "  examples  to  the  flock,"  in 
their  behaviour,  discourse,  apparel,  wives  and  children,  1  Peter  v.  3. 
They  ought  to  love  the  truth,  and  to  exercise  themselves  diligently 
in  seeking  wisdom,  "that  their  profiting  may  appear  to  all."  1  Tim. 
iv.  15-  And  to  sum  up  all  in  the  words  of  Paul,  Tit  i.  7 — 9,  "  A 
bishop  ought  to  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God,  not  selfwilled, 
not  toon  angry,  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to  filthv  lu- 
ce ;  but  a  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just, 
holy,  temperate  ;  holding  fast  the  faithful  word,  as  he  hath  been 
taught,  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort,  and 
convince  the  gainsayers."  It  would  be  profitable  to  preachers  to 
read  often  the  epistles  of  Paul  to  the  preachers,  Timothy  and  Titus. 

3.  But,  brethren  of  the  eldership,  we  do  not  inform  you,  that  it 
behooves  you  to  take  a  part  in  the  duties  which  belong  to  the 
preachers,  and  we  do  not  speak  now  of  that  winch  was  enjoined  on 
you,  when  ye  were  ordained  to  your  offices  ;  but  we  say,  take  heed, 
that  the  keys  be  not  wrenched,  nor  suffered  to  rust,  but  that  they 
be  used  well.  It  is  your  duty  to  keep  a  strict  eye  on  the  congrega- 
tion, to  visit  particular  persons,  to  "  warn  ihem  wdio  are  unruly,  to 
comfort  the  feeble  minded,  to  support  the  weak,  and  to  be  patient  to 
all  men,"  agreeably  to  1  Thes.  v.  14.     Is  there  any  where  an  auda- 


155       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

clous  sinner,  request  of  your  minister  to  assist  you   complain  of  hirft 
to   the  biot'.ieraood  ;  doth  your  minister  judge  it  to  be  necessary  to 
make  use  of  the  discipline  of  the  church  against   such  an  obstinate 
person,    be   willing   and  ready  to  help  him.     Is   your  minister  dis 
heartened,  encou.'age    him  ;  is  he  remiss,  stir  him  up,  show  that  yc 
love  him,  as  the  servant  of  God,   "count  him  worthy  of  double  hen 
our,"  according  to  1  Tim.  v.  17.    Then  will  ye  b;:  profitable  to  him, 
iceable  to  the  congregation,  and  a  blessing  to  yourselves. 
4.  J  Jut  the  congregation  ought  also  to  make  a  proper  use  on  their 
part  of  these  keys,  and  therefore  it  behooves  them,   (a)  to  acknowl- 
ed  je  tnis  ecclesiastical  power,   as  given  by  the  Lord  to  his  servants, 
and  to  submit  themselves  to  it :  "  We  beseech  you,  brethren,"  saith 
Paul,   "  to  know  them   which  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you 
in  the  Lord,   and  admonish  you,  and  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in 
love   for  their  work's   sake,"  1  Thess.  v.   12,  13.     "The  Lord  hath 
given  them  their  authority,  not  for  destruction,  but  for  edification,"  2 
Cor.  x.  8.  xiii.  10     Ye  know  what  pains  your  faithful  preachers  take, 
yea,  thai  they  "  travail  again,  as  it  were,  that  Christ  may  be  formed  in 
you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  That  ye  may  recompense  them,  be  ye  also  enlarg- 
ed," so  I  speak  with  the  apostle,  2  Cor.  vi.  13.  "  Obey  them  that  have 
the  rule  over  you,   and  submit   yourselves;  for  they  watch   for  your 
souls,  as  they  that  give    account;  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and 
not  with  grief:  for  that  is  not  profitable  to  you,"  as  the  same  apostle 
admonishah,  Heb.  xiii.    17,  i8.  (b)  I  speak  to  all  who  hear  me  this 
day,    behold,    I  open  the  kingdom  of  God  to    on,  and  invite  you  to 
come  to  the  Lord,   and  to  his  goodness,    that  ye  may  obtain   grace, 
mercy  and  peace  :  "  Enter,  enter  through  the  gates ;  I  pray  you  m 
Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God  :  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways;  for  why    will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel."     Jesus  will  not 
thrust  you  back,   but  "  him  that  cometh  to  him  he  will  i::  no  wise 
<ast  out,"  as  he  himself  saith,  John  vi.  37.     He  himself  "stands  at 
your  door,    and   knocks,   only  hear  his   voice,   and  open  the  door  to 
him,   that  he   may  come  in,    and  sup  with  you,  and   ye   with  him," 
Rev.  iii.   20.     "  Do  not  draw  back,    lor  then  his   soul  will  not  have 
any  pleasure  in   you,"  as  Paul   testifieth,    rleb.    x.  38.     Will  ye  not 
tome  to  him,  that  ye  may  have  life,   but  harden  yourselves,  that  yc 
may  enjoy  the  honours,  the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  and  Oi 
sin,  I  say  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  shall  die,  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  on  you,  "  ye  shall  see  yourselves  thrust  out,"  accord- 
ing to  Luke  xiii.  28.     "  Now  therefore,  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your 
bands  be  made  strong,"  as  the  prophet  saith,  Isaiah  xxviii.  22.  (c) 
but,  believers,  ye  who  seek  t©  be  loosed  from  the  bonds  of  sin,  who 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  153 

inourn  on  account  of  it,   who  hasten  to  Christ,  and  press  after  sane- 
tification  ;  .  proclaim  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Li  hat  your  ini- 

quit)  is  pardoned,   and  tiiat   the   Lord   will  no    :  wroth  with 

you     nor  rebuke   you  ;  do  not   start  up  agains'  .     ough  fretful 

unbelief,  but  u  receive  this  preached  word,  not  as  word  of  men, 
but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  a*  ihe  word  of  Go.!."  as  the  I  ■  ssalonians  did, 
1  Thess.  ii.  13.  Do  ye  fear  that  ye  will  be  deceived  in  the  end,  and 
wi'l  find  the  door  shut  against  you,  let  the  foolish  virgins  fe*r  this, 
ihey  who  have  only  lamps  of  profession,  but  not  th^;  oil  of  grace, 
yea,  who  do  not  seek  it,  as  ye  do.  Jesus  will  n<  \  r  si  ut  the  door, 
which  he  hath  opened  to  you.  Hear  him  say,  Rev.  ii  7  "These 
things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of 
David,  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth  "  I  conclude  my 
present  discourse  with  2  Peter  i.  10,  11.  "  Wherefore,  brethren, 
•^ive  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure  :  for  so  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  y-  ii  abundantly  in  >  the  everlast- 
ing kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  Amer. 


Vot.  ix- 


(    l54  ) 


nv. 


NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Titus  ii.  14.  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeal 
ous  of  good  works.

Q.  85.  Hoio  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  shut  and  opened  by  Christian 
discipline  ? 

A.  Thus  ;  When  according  to  the  command  of  Christ,  those  who 
under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain  doctrines  or  practices  incon- 
sistent therewith,  will  not  after  having  been  often  brotherly  admon- 
ished, renounce  their  errours  and  wicked  course  of  life,  are  com- 
plained of  to  the  church,  or  to  those  who  are  thereunto  appointed  by 
the  church  :  and  if  they  despise  their  admonition,  are  by  them  for- 
bid the  use  of  the  sacraments  ;  whereby  they  are  excluded  from  the 
Christian  church,  and  by  God  himself  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ ; 
and  when  they  promise  and  show  real  amendment,  are  again  re- 
ceived as  members  of  Christ  and  his  church. 

V  V  HEN  the  signs  of  the  Lord's  supper  were  about  to  be  dis- 
tributed in  the  primitive  church,  the  deacon  ctied,  "  The  holy  things 
are  for  them  who  are  holy."  The  holy  are  indeed  the  only  proper 
persons  to  partake  of  that  which  is  holy,  and  they  only  can  use 
it  in  a  holy  manner,  as  it  ought  to  be  used,  while  the  unholy  profane 
whatsoever  is  holy  :  a  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  ;  but  unto 
them  that  are  defiled,  and  unbelieving,  is  nothing  pure  ;  but  even 
their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled,"  saith  Paul,  Titus  i.  15.  No 
uncircumcised  person,  nor  any  who  was  unclean  by  a  dead  carcase, 
might  eat  of  the  holy  passover  under  the  Old  Testament.  No  man 
had  liberty  to  minister  in  holy  things,  until  he  was  first  sanctified 
for  that  purpose ;  yea,  to  the  end  that  no  unholy  person  might  emer 
into  the  tabernacle  or  temple,  door-keepers  were  appointed,  who  re- 
moved the  unclean  therefrom.  The  priests  were  appointed  censors 
of  uncleanness,  to  distinguish  between  persons  and  things  that  were 
clean  and  unclean,  that  nothing  which  was  unclean  might  appear  be- 
fore the  Lord.  These  things  were  enjoined  indeed  until  the  time 
ef  reformation,  and  are  now  abolished  ;  but  the  Lord  doth  not  there- 
fore choose  that  things,  which  are  more  essentially  holy,  snoukl  be" 
administered  to  the  unholy  :  no,  they  may  be  dispensed  only  to  the 
boly,  and  they  must  be  withholden  from  the  unholy:  "  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  befnr« 
swine,  lest  they  trample  them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again,  and 
»end  you,"  saith  the  Saviour  to  the  apostles,  Matt.  vii.  6.  He  hath 
iherefore  given  to  his  ministers  the  power  of  the  keys,  that  they 
may  admit  none  but  the  holy  into  his  kingdom,  and  may  shut  oul 
the  unholy,  according  to  our  text.  The  instructor,  having  taught  in 
the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  that  the   holy   supper  was  instituted  only 


1 86     THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

for  the  holy,  showeth  also  that  the  church  must  shut  out  by  the  keys 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  those  who  give  public  evidence  of  their 
unholiness.  The  instructor  having  proposed  this  in  general,  ex- 
plains it  at  large  in  this  Lord's  day  by  two  particulars  ;  he  shows, 

I.  What  arc  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  Q.  S3. 

II.  How  they  must  be  used,  Q.  84,  85. 

1.  By  the  kingdom  of  heaven  the  scripture  understands  often, 
and  thus  also  in  the  text,  the  church  of  the  Lord,  of  which  he  speaks 
in  the  18th  verse;  for  Jesus  Christ,  the  King,  is  the  Lord  from 
heaven,  who  hath  made  that  Jerusalem  his  throne,  to  which  his  heav- 
enly subjects,  the  believers,  the  saints  of  the  high  places,  have  ac- 
cess, to  obtain  there  by  their  heavenly  prayeis,  the  heavenly  benefits 
of  righteousness,  peace  and  joy.  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the 
heavenly  King,  in  or  ler  to  serve  him  excordins;  to  his  heavenly  laws, 
and  by  means  of  this  kingdom  to  inherit  a  still  higher  kiDgdom  of 
heaven. 

.This  heavenly  kingdom  is  shut  against  the  sinner:  the  Lord  sent 
him  out  of  Paradise  in  his  father  Adam  ;  hut  when  the  Lord  God 
erects  this  kingdom  on  earth  for  his  Son,  he  opens  an  access  to  it 
for  the  elect  sinner,  that  his  Son  may  have  the  heathen  for  his  in- 
heritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his  possession. 
He  hath  therefore  given  to  the  ministers  of  his  kingdom  the  keys  of 
that  kingdom  ;  they  are  certainly  not  material,  but,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  church,  heavenly  keys,  a  heavenly  and  ecclesiastical  pow- 
er to  rule  the  church,  to  open  it  to  the  penitent,  and  to  shut  it  against 
the  impenitent  ;  as  in  the  affairs  of  a  house,  when  we  intrust  the 
management  of  a  house  to  a  person,  we  delirer  to  him  for  that  end 
the  keys  of  the  house,  that  he  may  admit  into  it  all  those  who  belong 
to  it,  and  may  open  all  the  hidden  treasures  of  it,  and  that  he  may- 
shut  ali  strangers  out  of  it,  and  lock  up  all  the  goods  of  it.  Thus 
also  the  power  to  govern  the  state  is  expressed  by  keys  ;  when  the 
Lord  apponted  "  Eliakim  treasurer  and  steward  of  the  palace,  com- 
mitting the  government  into  his  hands,"  he  said,  "  I  will  lay  the 
key  of  the  house  of  David  upon  his  shoulder  :  he  shall  open,  and 
none  shall  shut,  and  he  shall  shut,  and  none  shall  open,"  Isaiah  xxii. 
15,  20 — 22.  Therefore  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  are  the 
power  to  govern  that  kingdom,  even  the  church.  This  power  is 
either  the  supreme  power,  which  the  Father  hath  given  to  his  Son 
alone  :  for  "  God  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  hath  given 
him  to  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,"  according  to  Eph. 
:.  22  "-He  hath  the  Iceys  of  hell  and  of  death,"  and  "  he  hath, " 
more  tnan  Eliawun,  "the  key  of  David:  for  he  opens,  and  no  mar. 


— $5,  13* 

blurts,  and  he  shuts  and  no  man  opens,"  Rev.  i.  18.  in.  7,  or  a 
power  subordinate  to  him,  and  ministerial,  which  his  ministers  re- 
ceive of  him,  agreeably  to  what  he  saith  in  the  text. 

The  Remonstrants  deny  that  the  church  hath  such  a  power,  dis- 
tinct from  the  civil  power  ;  for  seeing  that  the  church  would  not 
suffer  them,  on  account  of  their  doctrine,  they  sought  their  help 
in  the  gates,  and  in  order  to  flatter  the  magistrates,  they  surrendered 
the  power  of  the  church  to  them,  and  said  that  all  the  power  of  the 
church  depended  upon  the  higher  powers,  that  the  rules  of  the 
church  ought  to  be  enacted  by  the  magistrates  or  in  virtue  of  their 
authority  over  her,  and  that  they  ought  therefore  also  to  appoint  and 
depose  the  ministers  of  the  church  ;  but  the  reformed  church  oppo- 
sed this  doctrine,  and  said  that  the  church  possessed  such  a  ministe- 
rial power,  distinct  from  the  power  of  the  magistrates,  to  govern 
herself,  to  elect  her  ministers  and  rulers  according  to  the  word  of 
God,  and  when  they  conducted  themselves  amiss  in  doctrine  or  life, 
to  reject  them. 

That  the  church  possesses  such  a  power,  distinct  from  the  civil 
power  of  the  magistrates,  appears  (a)  from  the  text,  in  which  Christ, 
as  king  of  Zion,  commits  the  power  of  the  keys,  not  to  the  magis- 
trates, but  to  his  apostles  only,  (b)  Under  the  Old  Testament  the 
power  of  the  church  Was  distinct  from  the  civil  power  :  "  Amariah 
the  chief  priest  was  ruler  in  all  the  matters  of  the  Lord  ;  and  Zeba- 
diah  in  all  the  matters  of  the  king,"  2  Chron.  xix.  8,  11.  When 
Uzziah  undertook  to  perform  the  work  of  a  priest,  he  incurred  the 
displeasure  of  the  Lord,  2.  Chron.  xxvi.  16 — 21.  It  is  true,  the 
godly  kings  exercised  sometimes  a  considerable  jurisdiction  in  the 
affairs  of  the  church,  but  many  of  them  were  also  prophets,  and 
thus  also  ecclesiastical  persons,  who  had  an  extraordinary  revelation 
for  this  purpose  :  moreover,  those  kings  did  not  take  upon  them- 
selves that  jurisdiction  in  the  affairs  of  the  church,  except  in  times 
of  uncommon  declension,  in  order  to  reform  the  chuich,  which  is 
now  still  the  duty  of  the  magistrates  :  but  it  doth  not  follow  there- 
from, that  the  magistrates  have  a  sovereign  poWer  over  the  church, 
any  more  than  it  follows,  that  ecclesiastical  persons  have  a  sovereign 
power  over  the  state,  because  Jehoiada  in  his  time  reformed,  and  re- 
stored the  stale,  2  Chron.  xi.  and  because  priests  also  sat  in  the  great 
Sanhedrim,  which  judged  in  all  legal  and  capital  cases,  (c)  Paul 
teacheth  us  still  more  clearly  the  power'of  the  church  when  he  saith, 
2  Cor.  x.  8,  "  Though  I  should  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  power, 
which  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  edification,  and  not  for  your  de- 
structiou,  I  should  not  be  ashamtd."  The  church  hath  then  a  power, 
Vot..  u.  S 


THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

Ti'/.  from  the  magistrates,  but  from  the  Lord      The    same    apostle 

.  hat  *•  he  should  use  s.iaipntss  according  to  that  puwtr," 
Cor.  xiii.  10.  (d)  I' he  Lord  himself  hath  ordained  certain  officers  in 
his  church,  which  therefore  intimateth  a  power  to  govern  the  church, 
as  of"  ministers  and  stewards  "  1  Cor.  iv.  1,  "governments,"  1  Cor. 
xii  28,  ^  ambassadours  "  2; Cor  v.  20,  w  apostles, prophets,  evangel- 
ists, paso.s,  teachers,"  Eph.  iv.  11.  "overseers,"  1  'I  hess.  v.  14, 
"liners,  watchmen,"  Hcb.  xiii  17,  "bishops,  stewards  of  Cod," 
Til.  i.  7  (e)  Doih  not  ev>n  the  nature  of  the  case  teach  this?  the 
of  the  magistrates  relates  only  to  the  kingdom  of  nature, 
but  the  power  of  the  i  hurch  relates  to  the  kingdom  of  grace,  the 
power  of  the  magistrates  extends  only  to  the  bodily  condition  of  the 
citizens;  but  that  of  the  church  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  her 
members  ;  the  power  of  the  magistrates  is  a  lordly  power,  but  Chat 
of  the  church  is  a  ministerial  power,  nor    under  tl  istrates,  but 

under  Christ,  1  Cor.  iv.  1.  The  office  of  the  magistrate  can  be  ad- 
ministered by  a  heathen,  but;  no  ecclesiastical  office  can  be  so  admin- 
isle  red. 

It  is  of  no  avail  to  say  that  all  magistrates  have  not  a  power  over 
'.    e  church,  but  only  the  Christian  ttes  ;  for  Christianity1  be- 

longs not  to  the  nature  of  the  magistracy,  since  otherwise  no  hea- 
then could  administer  that.  oftice,  contrary  to  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 6. 

Moreover,  the  power  and  government  of  the  church  doth  not  ef- 
fect a  kingdom  within  a  kingdom,  the  power  of  the  church  subvert- 
ing that  of  the  magistrate  ;  for  then  family  government,  which  is 
distinct  from  civil  government,  would  also  be  contrary  to  the  govern- 
ment of  the  magistrates. 

But  they  say,  "  kings  are,"  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23,  "nursing 
fathers,  and  their  queens  nursing  nuthers  of  the  chuich."  Have 
they  therefore  any  Lordship  over  the  church?  if  so,  then  the  \ 
of  the  magistrates  have  also  such  an  authority.  Is  nursing  the 
chuich,  e:;erci  ing  authority  over  her  ?  the  passage  alledged  doth 
not  surely  assert  this,  but  only  that  the  great  men  of  the  world 
should  be  favourable  to  the  church,  not  by  exercising  authority  over 
her,  but  by  submitting  themselves  willingly  to  her.  The  ori 
hath  not  lords,  but  only  nurses,  and  it  is  added,  "  They  shall  how 
down  to  thee  with  toward  ihe  earth,  and   lick  up  the  dust 

of  thy  feet."  This  hath  but  little  resemblance  to  power,  authority, 
and  lordship  over  the  chun  h. 

We  do  not  however  agree  with  the  Papists,  who  ha\e  introduced 
a  lordly  power  into  the  church,  not  only  in  ecclesiastical,  but  also  in 
civil  matters,  in    an   antichristian  manner  ;  yea,   they  do   not  allow 


—85.  139 

the  magistrates  any  power  at  all  relative  to  the  church  ;  for  although 
the  magistrates  have  no  power  in  the  church,  they  have  nevertheless 
a  power  relative  to  the  church.  Ecclesiastical  persons  are  subject, 
as  citizens,  to  the  magistrates  :  the  magistrates  may  punish  ecclesi- 
astical persons  on  account  of  any  civil  misdemeanour,  as  Solomoa 
expelled  Abiathar  on  account  of  his  conspiracy  with  Adonijah,  I 
Kings  ii.  35.  Magistrates  may  also  manage  the  temporal  posses- 
sions of  the  church,  inquire  whether  the  true  doctrine  be  preached, 
root  out  crrours,  enact  the  rules  of  the  church  into  laws,  and  they 
are  bound  to  cherish  the  church,  according  to  Isaiah  xlix.  23. 

Neither  doth  this  ecclesiastical  power  reside  with  the  pope  of 
Rome,  as  the  head  of  the  church  ;  for  he  is  not  the  head,  as  we  have 
proved  from  the  word  of  God,  on  the  twenty-first  Lord's  day.  When 
Christ  saith  in  the  text  to  Peter,  "  I  will  give  thee  the  keys,"  &c. 
this  surely  doth  not  relate  to  the  pope  ;  for  since  he  doth  neither 
profess  the  doctrine,  nor  live  the  life  of  Peter,  he  cannot  be  the  suc- 
cessor of  Peter.  What  Christ  saith  here  to  Peter,  he  saith  likewise 
to  all  the  apostles.  See  John  xx.  21,  22,  23.  When  Christ  asked 
all  his  apostles  whom  they  said  that  he  was,  Peter  answered  in  the 
name  of  them  all,  and  so  Christ  also  speaks  these  words  to  Peter,  as 
representing  them  all.     See  vrs.  13 — 15. 

Moreover,  this  ecclesiastical  power  doth  not  reside  with  every 
member  of  the  church,  as  the  Brownists  imagine  ;  for  when  all  the 
people  govern,  there  will  arise  confusion:  but  the  Lord  requireth* 
that  "  all  things  should  be  done,"  in  his  church,  "  decently  and  in 
order,"  1  Cor.  xiv.  40.  «*  Are  all  apostles  ?  are  all  prophets?  are 
all  teachers  ?"  may  we  ask  here  with  Paul,  1  Cor.  xii.  29.  Much 
less  doth  this  power  reside  with  the  women,  as  certain  enthusiasts  and 
Antinomians  fancy  ;  for  women  are  forbidden  to  speak  in  the  church, 
1  Cor.  xiv.  34,  35.  1  Tim.  ii.  12,  but  the  ecclesiastical  power  re-, 
sides  with  the  rulers  of  the  church  ;  these  are  not  bishops,  on  whom 
the  other  rulers  and  ministers  of  the  church  depend  ;  for  the  name 
bishop,  in  Greek  efiisco/ios,  doth  not  intimate  any  sovereignty,  but 
signifies  only  an  overseer,  and  is  given  to  all  the  ministers  without 
distinction,  and  even  to  the  elders,  as  we  may  see,  Acts  xx.  17,  28. 
Phil.  i.  1.  Titus  i.  5 — 7,  and  besides  this,  all  manner  of  sovereignty 
is  forbidden  in  the  church.  See  Mat.  xx.  20—27.  1  Peter  v,  1—4. 
But  the  rulers  of  the  church  are  either  extraordinary,  as  the  apostles 
and  evangelists,  who  were  called  and  qualified  in  an  extraordinary 
manner  by  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  to  preach  the  gospel  in  all  lan- 
guages to  every  nation,  and  to  confirm  it  by  miracles,  Mat.  x.  14, 
The  evangelists  were  teachers  sent  into  different  parts,  by  the  apo?.' 


m       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

lies  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  confirm  the  churches,  which  the 
apostles  had  gathered.     We   read  of  them,   Eph.  iv.  ]  1.     Such  an 
one  was  Philip,  Acts  xxi.  8.     Timothy,  2  Tim.  iv.  5,  and  Titus,  ch. 
i.  5.    Or  the  rulers  of  the  church  ate  ordinary,  who  are  called  elders  ; 
these  are  distinguished  into  elders,  who  teach  and  rule,  and  elders  who 
do  not  teach,  but  rule  :  "  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well,  be  counted 
worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word  and 
doctrine,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  v.  17.     The  ciders  who  teach  are  call- 
ed also   "  teachers,"   and  those  who  only  rule,  are  called   "  govern- 
in  e  ts,"   1  Cor.  xii.  28,   and  considered   collectively,   they  are  called 
K  the  presbytery,"  or  eldership,  1  Tim.  iv.  14.     To  these  rulers,  the 
Lord  Jesus,  as  the  great  prophet  .;nd  King  of  his  church,  hath  com- 
mitted the  power  of  the  keys,  as  appears  not  only  from  the  before- 
mentioned  offices,  see  1  Cor.  iv.  1,    Eph.  iv.  11,  12,  but  also  from 
Ma1,   xviii.  17,   where  the  rulers,  as  representing  the  whole  church, 
are  called  the  church,  and  receive  the  power  to  cast  an  incorrigible 
sinner  out   of  the  church;  and  the  rulers,  when   assembled  for  this 
purpose,   are  either  consistories,    classes,    or    synods.     Synods  are 
gathered  from  theNchurches  of  a  province,  or  of  a  whole  country,  or 
from  all  the  known  churches  in  the  world  ;  and  are  therefore  called 
provincial,  national,  and  universal  synods.     Although  all  lordship  is 
forbidden  in  the  church,   nevertheless,  that  all  things  may  be  done 
decently  and  in  order,  consistories  mist  be  subordinate  and  subject 
to  classes,  classes  to  synods,  provincial  synods  to  national,  and  nation- 
al to  universal      This  is  gainsaid  by  the  Independents,  who  will  have 
that  each  church  should  be  governed  according  to  its  own  particular 
laws,  and  be  independenton  other  churches,  because  otherwise  lording 
will  he  introduced  into  the  church.    On  the  contrary  the  apostle  saith, 
that  "  t;.e  spirits  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets  :  for  God 
is  not  the  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of 
the  saints."  See  1  Cor.  xiv.  29 — 33.     For  what  purpose  was  the  syn- 
od of  Jerusalem  assembled  ?  was  it  not  in  ordei  to  decide  the  great 
controversy,  thai  had  arisen  i.i  the  churches,  whether  the  Gentiles 
ought  to  he  circumcised,  in  order  to  their  salvation  ?  and  when  it  was 
decreed,  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  circumcise  them,  was  not  that  de- 
cree s-nt  to  all  the  churches?  ami  did  they  not  submit  to  it?  would 
i  submission  Hitrodo.ee  lording   into  the  church  ?     Nothing  is 
better  calculated  to  prevent  it   and  to  preserve  soundness  of  doctrine. 
II.  The  rulers  of  the  church  make  use  of  these  keys  with  respect 
to  all  that   belongs  to  the  church,  as  the  ecclesiastical  assemblies, 
the  i'  I         i  the  Chtli  .'mgto  which  the  outward  order  of  the 

church  must  be  rfegUlatcd,  the  constituting  of  forms  of  union,  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

■decision  of  controversies  ;  but  ali  tilings  must  be  clone  according  to 
the  word  of  God,  and  nothing  contrary  to  it  :  but,  that  we  may  abide 
by  the  instructor,  this  ecclesiastical  power  must  be  exercised  espe- 
cially *  in  the  preaching  of  the  holy  gospel,  and  in  Christian  disci- 
pline, as  two  keys  by  which  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  be- 
lievers, and  shut  against  unbelievers." 

The  first  key,  to  wit,  the  power  to  preach  the  gospel,  is  not  given 
to  all,  who  possess  an  excellent  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  truth, 
which  is  according  to  godliness ;  but  only  to  those,  who  are  lawfully 
called  thereto,  and  sent.  "  Mow  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be 
sent?  saith  Paul,  Rom.  x,  15.  See  also  Jer.  xiv.  14,  15.  xxiii.  21,. 
32.  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  Heb.  v.  4,  5,  6.  And  although  no  man  is  sent 
now  in  such  an  extraordinary  manner,  as  the  apostles  and  evangel- 
ists were,  nevertheless  we  must  look  upon  a  person  as  sent  by  God, 
when  he  is  chosen  to  such  an  office  by  the  church,  either  unani- 
mously, or  by  a  plurality  of  votes,  or  by  lot ;  for  this  was  usual  even 
in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  and  deemed  proper  and  divine.  See  Acts 
i.  21 — 26.  xiv.  23.  xx.  28.  1  Tim.  iv.  14.  Moreover,  it  belongs  not 
to  all  the  elders  to  preach  the  gospel,  but  only  to  those  who  labour 
in  the  word  and  doctrine,"  1  Tim.  v.  17.  The  tuljng  elders  have 
only  a  right  to  take  care  that  the  preachers  make  use  of  this  key 
rightly,  and  according  to  the  word  of  God    See    'tts  xx.  28.  29.  30. 

The  sinner  is  debarred  by  sin  from  access  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  and  from  all  the  great  privileges  of  it :  yea,  •'  his  own  ini- 
quities take  the  sinner  himself,  and  he  is  holden  with  the  cords  of 
his  sins."  according  to  Prov.  v.  22.  «  He  is  taken  captive  in  the 
snare  of  the  devil  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  He  is  "  kept  under  the 
law,  and  shut  up  under  it,"  Gal.  iii.  23.  Even  believers  find  their 
access  barred  up  through  the  strength  of  their  corruption,  the  weak- 
ness of  their  faith,  and  the  hiding  of  the  Lord's  countenance  ;  their 
doubts  concerning  their  right  to  the  benefits  of  the  kingdom  bind 
them  fast  time  after  time,  See  Job  xiv.  23 — 28.  xix.  6,  8.  Psalm 
xxxi.  22.  Lam.  iii.  7,  8,  17,  18,  44.  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
opened  to  the  sinner,  and  he  is  thus  loosed,  not  by  granting  him  the 
pardon  of  his  sins,  after  he  hath  confessed  them  to  a  priest  ;  for  this 
doth  not  belong  to  men,  but  to  God  only,  as  we  have  shown  largely 
enough  on  the  twenty  third  Lord's  day  ;  but  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  by  which  he  is  not  informed,  that  the  gate  of  the  kingdom 
is  opened  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  to  every  sinner,  as  the  Re- 
monstrants speak  in  their  cavilling  censures  of  this  Lord's  day  ;  for 
this  is  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  seventh 
Lord's  day  j  but  the  sinner  is  taught,  that  God  h?.th  set  his  Son  forth 


142       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

to  be  a  p-opitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  which  he  is  invited 
and  culled,  thai  lie  ma)  be  excited  and  allured  to  embrace  this  Me- 
diator, iu  go  through  him  to  the  Father,  and  to  be  admitted  into  his 
kingdom.  In  tnis  manner  did  Paul  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
when  he  said,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  il  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling 
the  woiid  to  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses  to  them  ;  and 
hath  committed  unto  us  the  word  of  reconciliation  Now  then  we 
are  ambassadpura  for  Christ,  as  t  .ougii  God  did  beseech  you  by  us  : 
we  pr\«y  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  But  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  opened  to  belie veis,  and  they  are  loosed  by  this 
key  particularly,  "by  declaring  and  testifying  to  them  that  all  their 
sins  are  really  forgiven  them  of  God  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  mei  its." 
To  tnis  end  the  God  of  his  people  saith  to  the  ministers  of  the  holy 
gospel,  Isaiah  xl.  1,2.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith 
your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her 
that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned*" 
This  is  k'  remitting  sins,"  John  x»  23,  and  "  preaching  the  for 
ness  of  sins  in  the  name  of  Christ,"  Luke  xxiv.  47.  See  Acts  x. 
43.  To  do  this  properly  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  declare  I 
promises  in  general,  but  we  must  apply  them  to  believers  in  par- 
ticular,  and  for  this  purpose  point  out  to  them  marks  of  grace,  that 
they  may  have  a  clear  view  of  the  truth  of  their  faith,  as  the  apostles 
often  acted.  See  Rom.  viii.  1,  9,  13.  James  ii.  14 — -6.  1  J-  im  iii. 
14,  iv.  13.  This  is  clone  either  «  publicly  "  in  the  assembly  ol  God's 
people,  where  the  gospel  is  preached,  as  Paul  did,  Acts  xiii  3S,  39, 
or  privately,   when   we  speak-toad     res  •   in   paVti 

or  when  he  spca'::s  to  us,  and  \,  •  lis  n  apply  these  promises  to  htm, 
speak  comfortably  to  him,  and  remove  his  difficulties  and  scrn 
thus  Paul  also  acted,  At  is  xx  -J.  But  inasmuch  .  s  believers  dare 
not  always  assure  themselves  by  the  word  of  reconciliation,  ant!  since 
they  offend  often,  they  must  likewise  often  "lay  hold  on  the  prom- 
ises of  the  gospel  by  a  true  faith,"  ami  the  messengers  of  good 
gSj  must  publish  the  message  of  reconciliation  to  them,  by 
which  their  wavering  souls  will  be  brought  to  a  steadfast  assurance 
and  they  will  thus  obtain  "  boldness  to  enter  with  a  true  heart,  in 
a  full  jis.su  aace  of  faith  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesu 
new  and  Jiving  way,  which  he  hath  consecr^ed  for  us  through  the 
veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh,"  lleb.  x.  19,  20,  22.  It  is  true,  every 
one  who  is  capable  can  inform  believers  of  this  from  the  word  of 
God.  but  not  as  aii  ambassadoor  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  as  the  preach- 
ers of  tiie  gospel   must  do,  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.     There  is  a  great  dif- 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  143 

ference  whether  a  common  person  announce  to  a  capital  offender, 
that  lie  is  put  cloned,  or  whether  his  lord's  messenger  do  it. 

But  the  preachers  are  not  only  commanded  "  to  say  to  the  right- 
eous, that  it  shall  he  well  with  him,"  but  also  to  denoum  e  "a  wo 
against  the  wicked,"  and  say  "  that  it  shall  be  ill  with  him,"  Isaiah 
iii.  10,  1  I.  Therefore  the  instructor  saith,  that  by  the  key  of  the 
preaching  of  the^oly  gospel  w  it  is  declared  and  testified  to  all  un- 
believers, and  such  as  do  not  since  rely  repent,  that  they  stand  ex- 
posed to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation,  so  long  as 
tuey  are  unconver  ed."  This  is  also  according  to  the  word  of  G  d 
which  saith,  "He.  who  beheveth  not  shall  be  damned,"  Mark  xvi. 
16,  and  k'  he  who  beheveth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him,"  John  iii.  36.  In  this  manner  did 
Peter  use  this  key  against  Simon  the  sorcerer,  when  he  said  to  him, 
Acts  vii.  21,  23,  "Thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter  ;  for 
thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  for  I  perceive  that  thou 
art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity  "  Which, 
that  it  may  have  the  greater  effect,  is  proclaimed  to  sinners  with  an 
"  anathema,"  See  1  Cor.  xvi.  22.  By  which  those  unbelievers  and 
impenitent  persons  are  shut  out  of  t!  e  kingdom  of  God,  aie  bound 
under  their  sins  and  the  wrath  of  God,  and  their  "  sins  thus  retain- 
ed," according  to  the  text,  and  John  xx.  2  3,  which  is  done  by  the 
preaching  of  the  holy  gospel  ;  not  that  the  gospel  doth  this  by  itself, 
for  the  gospel  contains  no  threatenings  nor  curses  ;  it  is  "  the  law" 
only  "  that  worketh  wrath,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom  iv.  15.  But  as 
the  law  ministereth  to  the  gospel,  and  must  be  preached  with  the 
gospel,  therefore  this  outshutting  is  said  to  be  performed  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel. 

Let  no  man  think  that  this  opening  and  shutting  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  is  a  vain  thing,  and  of  no  consequence,  for  we 
must  receive  this  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  not  simply  as  the  voice 
of  man ;  for  God  will  judge  by  this  testimony  both  in  this  life  ; 
"  He  confirmeth  the  word  of  his  servant,  and  performeth  the  counsel 
of  his  messenger,"  as  he  saith  himself,  Isaiah  xliv.  26.  "  Whatso- 
ever thou  shalt  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  :  and  what- 
soever thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven,"  saith  the 
Saviour  in  the  text.  '*  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  re- 
mitted unto  them  ;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  retain- 
ed unto  them,"  saith  he,  John  xx.  23,  and  also  in  the  life  to  come  ; 
therefore  the  apostle  saith,  Rom.  ii.  16.  "  God  will  judge  the  secrets 
of  men"  in  the  dav  of  judgment  «  by  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  my 
gospel." 


Hi      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  as  this  key  first  opens,  and  afterwards  shuts,  so  there  is  als» 
another  key,  which  first  shuts,  and  afterwards  opens.  This  is  the 
Christian  discipline,  or  the  shutting  of  a  person  out  of  the  Christian 
chu'cii,  which  is  not  exercised  on  them  who  are  without,  but  on 
them  who  are  within  the  church,"  who  bear  the  Christian  name. 
tc  Ye  slialJ  not  keep  company,  if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother  be 
a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater  or  a  railtr,  or  a  drunkard,  or 
an  extortioner,  with  such  an  erne  ye  shall  not  even  eat.  For  what 
have  1  to  do  to  judge  them  also  that  are  without  ?  do  not.  ye  judge 
them  that  are  within?  but  them  that  are  without  God  judgeth. 
Therefore  put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked  person," 
saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  v.  1 1,  12,  13.  Further,  tiiis  key  is  not  used 
with  respect  to  them,  who  ate  only  baptized,  and  who  do  not  declare 
and  testify  by  partaking  oi  the  Lord's  supper,  that  they  abide  by  their 
baptism  ;  for  the  first  key  is  used  with  respect  to  these  :  but  it  is 
used  witn  respect  to  th"s^  who  are  public  members,  who  have  join- 
ed themselves  to  the  church  by  a  confession  of  their  faith,  and  de- 
clare by  receiving  the  supper,  that  they  are  in  union  with  the 
church  :  who  nevertheless  under  the  name  of  Christians  maintain 
unchristian  doctrines  or  practices."  "  A  man  that  is  an  heretic,  re- 
ject," saith  Paul.  Tit  iii.  10.  See  2  John,  vis.  10,  1  1.  Further,  "we 
may  not  keep  company  with  a  brother,  who  leads  an  ungodly  life," 
I  Cor.  v.  11.  2  Thess.  iii.  6,  14. 

This  Christian  discipline  shuts  such  persons  out  of  the  Christian 
church,  not  by  inflicting  corporal  punishment  on  them,  as  the  Papists 
do,  who  bereave  them  in  the  most  cruel  manner  of  their  goods, 
kingdom,  civil  rights,  yea,  of  life  itself.  Not  unlike  this  is  the  con- 
duct of  certain  Mennonites,  who  separate  persons  for  various  trifling 
reasons  from  their  bed  and  board,  yea»  from  all  intercourse  with  be- 
lievers. This  is  an  ecclesiastical,  but  an  abominable  tyranny,  and  a 
prodigious  usurpation  :  it  belongs  onlv  to  the  civil,  and  not  to  the 
ecclesiastical  powers  to  inflict  corporal  punishments  ;  "  for  the  weap- 
ons of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God,  to  the 
pulling  down  of  strong  holds,"  as  Paul  speaks,  2  Cor.  x.  4.  Chris- 
tian discipline  punishelh  offending  members  only  in  their  church- 
fellowship,  by  depriving-  them  of  their  communion  with  the  church, 
shutting  them  out  of  it,  removing  and  banishing  them  from  it.  Paul 
speaking  of  the  man,  who  had  taken  his  father's  wife,  calls  this  dis- 
cipline "  a  delivering  of  such  a  person  to  Satan,"  1  Cor.  v.  7.  So 
"  he  delivered  Hymeneus  and  Alexander  to  Satan,"  1  Tim  i.  20. 
Not  that  the  apostle  delivered  them  to  Satan,  that  he  might  possess 
fend  torment  them  in  a  bodily  manner ;  but  this  delivering  of  them 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83— 85.    '        -  '*  145 

lb  Satan  denotes  a  casting  of  them  out  of  the  church,  as  he  explains 
it,  1  Cor.  v.  13,  "Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that  wicked 
person  "  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  also  saith  of  the  contumacious 
brother,  Matt,  xviii.  17.  "  If  he  will  not  hear  the  church,  let'him. 
he  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man,  and  a  publican."  For  Satan  rules 
out  of  the  church,  therefore  he  who  is  cast  out  of  the  church  is  de- 
livered up  to  Satan.  And  he  is  thus  shut  cut  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  deprived  of  all  the  privileges  of  it,  he  is  forbidden  the  sacra- 
ments, and  they  ure  withholdcn  from  him,  and  he  is  bound  fast  un- 
der his  sins,  and  under  destruction.  For  the  Lord  God,  when  this 
is  done  agreeably  to  his  word,  approves  of  the  conduct  of  his  faith- 
ful servants  so  far,  that  he  himself  shuts  such  a  person  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  Christ :  for  with  respect  to  this  key  the  Lord  Jesus  saith, 
Matt,  xviii.  17,  13.  "  If  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  Verily  I  say  unto  you. 
Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven." 

But  as  the  servants  of  the  Lord  must  not  be  dilatory  in  this  work, 
so  neither  must  they  be  too  hasty  :  "  But  after  having  been  often 
brotherly  admonished,  they  will  not  renounce  their  en  ours  and  wick- 
ed course  of  life,  and  also  despise  the  admonition  of  the  church." 
The  Saviour  requireth  "  that  I  first  reprove  my  brother,  who  ha\.h 
trespassed  against  me,  in  private  ;  if  he  will  not  hearken  to  me,  that 
I  then  endeavour  to  reduce  him  to  his  duty  in  the  presence  of  one 
Or  two  others  ;  if  he  remain  incorrigible,  that  I  then  complain  of 
him  to  the  ruling  church,  to  wit,  the  eldership  ;  if  he  remain  ob- 
stinate still,  I  must  then  consider  him  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican," Matt,  xviii.  15 — 18.  The  order  of  our  Dutch  church  with 
respect  to  this  matter  cannot  be  censured  ;  it  requires  that  we  first 
admonish  the  offender  ;  then  that  we  forbid  him  the  Lord's  supper 
for  a  time  ;  further,  that  we  denounce  him  to  the  church,  either  by, 
tor  with  his  name,  that  every  one  may  do  what  in  him  lieth  by  ad- 
monitions and  prayers  to  reform  such  a  sinner :  if  all  this  will  not 
avail,  he  must  then  be  wholly  cut  off  in  a  public  manner,  both  that 
he  himself  may  be  ashamed  and  repent,  and  also  that  he  may  not 
defile  others ;  and  that  none  may  be  offended,  either  within  or  out 
of  the  church,  and  become  averse  from  her.  See  this  1  Cor.  v.  5, 
6.  2  Thess.  ill.  14.  2  John  vrs.  10,  II. 

Erastus  and  many  sons  of  Belial,  who  wish  to  live  without  yoke, 
would  fain  wrest  this  key  out  of  our  hands.  Do  they  allow  that  the 
Lord  hath  given  to  his  servants  a  power  to  preach  the  word,  they 
will  neverthele3s  dispute  their  power  to  excommunicate  and  to  shu£ 
•ut  of  the  church,  and  they  decry  it  as  .a  most  unsuitable  practice* 
Vol.'ix.  T 


U6   THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

But  did  not  the  church  under  the  Old  Testament  cast  refractory 
pcrt>ons  out  ?  did  not  Christ  gi\c  this  key  to  his  church  ?  Matt.  xvi. 
If.  xviii.   17,  18,  did  net  the  apostles  make  use  of  this  hey  ?   1  Cor. 

v#  i i3.  2  John,  vrs    10,  11,  hath  not  the  Christian  church  always 

used  it?  would  not  the  church  without  this  key  be  a  den  of  robhersj 
a  city  without  walls,  a  house  without  doors  or  bars,  and  a  garden 
'vi'houl  an  inclosure  ?  would  not  the  holy  things  be  trampled  upon 
by  dogs,  and  unclean  swine  I  the  wicked  be  hardened,  and  the  godly 
gneveti  ? 

But  when  we  shut  obstinate  persons  in  this  manner  out  of  the 
church  by  forbidding  them  the  sacraments,  shall  we  then  also  debar 
them  from  hearing  the  word  ?  Thus  they  did  anciently,  that  they 
might,  by  ternf\mg  the  Christians,  render  them  cautious  of  offering 
in  any  w.se  to  idols,  ro  which  many  declined  in  those  limes  of  temp* 
tation  :  but  this  appears  to  br  too  harsh.  A  person  is  not  excom- 
municated for  his  destruction,  but  for  his  preservation  by  re* 
pentance  :  how  sh  dl  he  repent,  if  we  withhold  the  word,  the  mean 
»f  repentance,  from  him? 

When  a  person,  who  hath  been  shut  out  of  the  church,  repents, 
must  we  then  always  keep  him  out?  so  unmercifully  the  Novatians 
acted,  (hey  would  not  re-admit  even  those  who  had  full  n  and  y  elded 
only  from  fear  in  times  of  persecution.  But  the  Saviour  dealt  more 
mildly  than  this  with  his  apostle  Peter.  When  God  opens  the  door 
Of  grace,  no  irun  may  shut  it :  we  must  therefore  receive  such  a 
pei son  again,  as  a  member  of  Christ,  and  of  his  church,  yea,  we 
mufii  behave  in  a  friendly  manner  toward  him,  forgive  him  his  evil 
deed,  and  "comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  he  should  be  swallowed  up 
with  overmuch  sorrow."  bee  what  Paul  saith,  2  t  or.  ii.  6 — i  1.  We 
must  nevertheless  not  be  too  forward,  or  hasty  in  thi^  matter;  when 
a  person  only  saith,  1  repent,  shall  we  th<  n  presently  open  the  door 
to  him  again  ?  ought  no!  the  evidences  of  his  rej  entance  and  refor- 
mation to  be.as  manifest,  as  bis  offence  was  before  notorious?  Verily 
the  incestuous  person  was  not  received  again,  until  he  was  exceed- 
ingly and  abundantly  sorry,  and  comfort  v.  as  necessary  for  him. 
Therefore  the  instructor  also  saith,  that  the  excommunicated  "  are 
received  again,  when  they  promise,  and  show  real  amendment." 
The.  ancient  Christian  chttrch  would  not  therefore  re-admit  those  who 
had  transgressed,  until  they  had  given  several  evidences  of  their  re- 
p  ntauce-s  they  had  fortius  purpose  four  classes  of  penitents  :  the 
first  were  the  firosklaion  <••*,   or  "the  we  mplaining,"  who 

stood,  clothed  with  a  filthy  and  blacl  m      ■   a!  the  door  of  the 

church,  weepii  |  -  sins,  and  entreating  those  who  entered  inte- 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8S— 85.  i4f 

the  church  to  pray  for  them  :  the  second  class  consisted  of  the 
akroomenoi,  or  "  the  hearing,"  who  were  permitted  to  hear  in  the  en- 
trance of  the  church  with  the  catechumens  the  word  of  God  read 
and  explained,  but  were  required  to  withdraw  with  the  catechumens 
before  the  supper  was  administered  :  the  third  class  were  the  hyfia- 
flifitonteS)  or  "•  the  downfalling,"  who  prostrated  themselves  humbly 
upon  the  floor  of  the  churc  :,  and  confessed  their  transgression  be- 
fore the  congregation,  whereupon  the  minister  laid  his  hands  upon 
ihem,  and  bade  them  arise,  when  they  were  placed  near  the  Stat  of 
the  reader  :  but  these  also  were  obliged  to  go  out  of  the  church,  with 
the  catechumens;  besides  these,  there  were  also  the  sunistamenci,  or 
4i  those  who  stood  with"  the  people  :  these  did  not  depart  with  the 
.catechumens,  but  continued  standing  with  the  congregation  to  hear 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  pray  and  sing  with  the  believers :  they 
might  see  the  supper  administered,  but  they  might  not  partake  of 
it,  although  they  were  after  a  short  time  promoted  to  that  privilege. 
This  grievous  penance  every  person,  whether  high  or  low,  who  had 
committed  a  scandalous  offence,  was  bound  to  undergo.  Even  the 
emptrour  Theodosius  the  Great  was  not  excused,  but  was  obliged 
to  perform  a  severe  penance  during  eight  months  ;  he  could  not 
otherwise  be  reconciled  to  the  church,  on  account  of  his  shedding; 
fhe  blood  of  the  Thessalonians. 


APPLICATION. 

This,  it  will  be  suid,  was  too  severe  ;  but  are  we  not  now  too 
-slack?  those  who  have  eyes  to  see,  and  are  not  wilfully  blind,  can 
«ee  it.  How  many  membeis  are  there  in  the  church,  who  join  Christ 
:tnd  Belial,  righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  yea,  who  exhibit 
nothing  of  Christianity  !  Alas,  how  many  ungodly  persons  do  we 
find  in  the  house  of  God  !  But  what  is  done  against  them  ?  who 
dares  cry  aloud,  and  life  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet  ?  are  there  still 
faithful  watchmen,  who  do  not  spare  any  ungodly  persons,  how 
-seldom  is  the  Christian  discipline  used  to  shut  them  out  of  the 
church  !  where  do  we  find  those  who  are  so  shut  out  ?  are  any  ad- 
monished, reproved,  and  forbidden  to  approach  the  holy  table,  on 
account  of  their  gross  sins,  how  easily  are  they  restored  !  Are  any 
hearty  enough  i  i  this  matter  to  perform  this  duty  faithfully,  how 
[  many  are  there  who  presently  oppose  them  !  This  key  is  in  a  man- 


148      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

ner  thrown  by  and  suffered  to  rust.  This  hardens  the  wicked,  sad- 
dens the  godly,  kindles  the  wrath  of  God,  and  tarnishes  the  lustre  of 
the  house  of  God. 

If  it  would  avail  to  complain,  I  would  say  more  ;  but  of  what  ad- 
vantage will  it  be  to  root  in  the  filthy  wounds  of  our  mother  ?  If  I 
could  by  these  means  heal  them,  I  might  call  on  all  and  each  of  you 
to  unite  with  me,  and  to  shed  a  flood  >f  tears  over  the  unsightly  con- 
d.tion  of  our  church  in  the  Netherlands.  1  will  do  better,  if  I  ex- 
cite the  magistrates  and  myself,  with  all  my  fellowlabourers,  and 
the  eiders,  and  every  individual  to  endeavour,  as  much  as  in  him 
lieth,  to  conduct  manfully  with  respect  to  these  keys,  according  tc 
the  word  of  God. 

1.  Let  the  magistrates,  (a)  submit  with  humility  and  lowliness  to 
the  kingly  sovereignty  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  The 
Lord  (jiod  saith  to  the  high  and  mighty  ones  of  the  earth,  Psalm  ii. 
6,  10,  11,  12.  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion. 
Be  wise  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings  ;  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the 
earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  Kiss 
the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little  ;  blessed  are  all  they  who  put  their  trust 
in  him."  Have  not  the  great  men  of  the  world  immortal  souls  to 
save,  as  well  as  their  subjects  ?  and  can  they  do  this,  if  they  will  not 
bow  to  him,  who  is  higher  than  the  highest  ?  or  is  Jesus  a  king  of 
the  common  people  only  ?  hath  it  not  been  foretold,  that  the  great 
men  of  the  eaith  should  be  subject  to  him  ?  the  prophecies  are  too 
numerous  to  be  transcribed  here.  See  Psalm  xlviii.  10.  lxiii.  10, 
1 1.  Isaiah  xlix.  7,  23.  Ix.  3,  10.  Rev.  xi.  15.  Or  would  it  disgrace 
and  degrade  the  higher  powers,  if  they  should  stoop  to  this  great 
King?  is  not  Jesus  higher  than  they  ?  of  whom  do  they  hold  their 
honourable  stations  ?  this  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  saith, 
Prov.  viii.  15,  16.  "  By  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  justice. 
By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  even  all  the  judges  of  the  earth." 
Shall  it  then  be  deemed  a  reproach  to  princes,  if  they  submit  to  him  ? 
will  it  not  be  an  honour  :o  them,  and  increase  their  lustre  ?  have 
not  godly  sovereigns  always  been  most  honoured,  feared  and  obey- 
ed ?  are  not  the  names  of  David,  Solomon,  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  He- 
zekiah  and  Josiah  until  this  day  blessed,  when  they  are  remembered  ? 
and  have  not  the  names  of  the  ungodly  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel 
been  long  since  rotten  ?  Let  the  magistrates  therefore  seek  their 
happiness,  blessedness  and  glory  in  submitting  to  the  King  of  Zion. 
(b)  Magisliates  ought  also  to  employ  their  supremacy,  excellency 
and  dignity  for  the  advantage  of  the  church.     It  was  foretold  of  the 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  St-rSS.  148 

Christian  princes,  that  they  should  "bring  presents,  and  offer  gifts," 
Psalm  lxxii.  10.  Hear  what  the  Lord  promiseth  his  church,  Isaiah 
xlix.  23.  "  Kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fcuhers,  and  their  queens  thy 
nursing  mothers,  .hey  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  their  fuce  toward 
the  earih,  and  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet."  The  Lord  saith  to  the 
church,  Isaiah  Ix.  10.  «  -grangers  shall  build  up  thy  walls,  and  th  ir- 
king.s  shall  minister  to  thee."  'i  berefore  let  all  those  who  possess 
eminent  stations,  cherish  the  church,  confirm  her  privileges,  pro- 
tect her  ministers,  support  the  truth,  favour  her  children,  restrain 
her  enemies,  and  with  ail  their  might  correct  the  sinful  manners  of 
their  strjecis,  which  defile  the  church.  Every  godly  king  of  ludah, 
who  sat  on  the  throne  of  David,  made  this  his  most  special  work. 
"  Israel,"  the  church,  "  is  a  blessing  in  the  midst  ot  the  land,"  Isaiah 
xix.  24.  The  godly  bless  the  land  and  the  rulers  of  it,  on  account 
of  the  church  saying,  "  Peace  be  within  thee.  Because  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  our  God  I  v.  ill  seek  thy  good,"  saith  David,  Psalm  exxii. 
3,  9.  When  the  church  is  well  ordered  and  well  cherished,  she  is 
the  defence  of  the  land,  and  renders  the  people  victorious.  See 
Zech.  xii.  5,  6.  lea,  she  maintains  and  establishes  princes  on  their 
thrones  by  her  admonitions,  prayers  and  exemplary  conduct :  the 
wellbeing  of  the  church  is  of  the  greatest  consequence  to  the  higher 
powers  ;  and  therefore  they  consult  their  best  interest  by  doing  weil 
to  the  church  ;  but  when  they  oppress  and  afflict  her,  the  Lord  will 
behold  and  require  it  ;  for  "  he  suffers  no  man  to  do  her  wrong ; 
yea,  he  reproves  kings  for  her  sake,  saying,  Touch  not  mine  anoint- 
ed, and  do  my  prophets  no  harm,"  Psalm  cv.  14,  15. 

But,  my  worthy  brethren  and  fellowlabourers  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  may  I  not  also  exhort  and  excite  you  with  myself,  to  be  faith- 
ful, active  and  zealous  in  all  our  ministry  ?  We  have  an  exceedingly 
great  and  laborious,  but  nevertheless  excellent  work  to  perform  ; 
immortal  souls  are  committed  to  our  care ;  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
us  overseers  to  feed  the  church  of  God,  which  he  haih  purchased 
with  his  own  blood  :  the  honour  pf  God,  the  prosperity  of  the  chmch. 
and  the  precious  truth  are  intrusted  to  us,  that  we  should  regard 
them  with  a  hearty  concern :  shall  we  then  be  negligent  of  our  duty. 
<k  blind  watchmen,  dumb  dogs,  loving  to  slumber,"  and  carnal  per- 
sons, as  the  prophets  of  the  Lord's  people  were,  Isaiah  Ivi.  10.- — 12. 
Let  us  then,  (a)  make  use  of  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
with  respect  to  ourselves  :  "  Thou  who  teachest  another,  teachest 
thou  not  thyself?"  Thus  Paul  asked  the  Jewish  teachers,  Ron.,  ii 
21.  Wc  must  teach  the  people  that  they  must  examine  themselves, 
whether  they  be  in  the  faith,"  2  Cor.  xiii.  5,  fhall  we  then  neglect 


ISO      THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

this  duly  with  respect  to  ourselves  ?     Or  shall  we  persuade  ourselves, 
that  all  the  preachers  ^re  surely  believers  and  godly  persons,  as  the 
ignorant  people  imagine,  because  they    are  so   wise,  and  can  preach 
and  pray  so  well  ?      Verily  those  outward  things   do  not  prove    this, 
we  know  better  from  the  examples  of  Judas  and  Demas,  who  showed 
liiat  the  office  of  a  preacher  is   not  one   of   those  better   things   that 
accompany  salvation  :  it  is  certain   that  the  preachers  must  be  born 
again,   and  converted,  as   well  as  others.     Neither  the  college,  nor 
the  classis,  nor  a  call  from  the  church,  nor  the    holy  ministry  consti- 
tutes grace.     Have  we  no  more  than  these  things,  hew  grievous  will 
it  be  for  us  to    sink,  down  from  the  pulpit    into  the  bottomless  pit  of 
hell !     O  let  us  judge  ourselves,  and  flee  yet  to  the  Saviour,  that  we 
may  save  both  ourselves  and   others.     We  who  call   others  to   the 
grace  of  G->d,  and   to  repentance,  are    also   called  by  the  Lord  to  be 
reconciled  to  him.     Do  we  find,  after  a  strict  and  frequent  examina- 
lion  of  ourselves,  rhat  we  do    indeed    possess   truth    in   the   inward 
parts,  let  us  make  use  of  the  key  of  the  gospel  to  apply  all  the  prom- 
ises to    ourselves,  as  Paul  acted,  1  Tim.  i    13 — 16.     2   l  im.   i.    12. 
(b)  Let   us  have  a  serious  concern  for  immortal  souls,   who  are  in- 
trusted to  our  care,  and  let  us  '•  look  well  to  the  flock,"  recording  to 
the  admonition  of  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  28.     If  a   man  fall  into  the 
water  or  fire,  who  will  not  make   haste  to  help  him  out  ?     Shall  pot 
we  then,  whom  God  hath  called   to  this    work,   bestir    ourselves    to 
pluck  sinners  out  of  t,he  fire  of  hell  ?     It   will    fare   hard   with    tl 
watchmen  of  Zion,  if  a  sinner  perish  through  their  listlessness  :  "  the 
Lord  willl  require  the  blood  of  that  sinner  at  the  hands  of  the  watch- 
man," as  he  saith,  Ezek  iii.  18,  20.     (e)  The    preachers  must   use 
the  keys  discretely  :  they  must  nol  open,  when  the  Lord  shuts,  nei- 
ther may  they  shut  when  the  Lord  opens.     To  greet  all  their  I 
ers,  as  beloved,  called,  and  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  to  apply  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  thus  to  all,   renders  the  people  careless  ;  the 
doctrine  of  particular  grace  doth  not  permit  this.    Jiut  it  is  still  worse 
to  reproach  from  the  pulpit,  to  decry  us  hypqentes,  and  to  deny  the 
holy  table  to  persons  who  are  inwardly  religious,  who  excel  the  civil 
and   formally    religions,  and  urge  ethers  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling-     Who  is  a  good  overseer?  is  it  it  not  one 
who  is  k'  a  lover  of  good  men  :"     Tit.  i.  8.      What  preacher,    who 
fears  God,  dares  to  u  make  the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies, 
whom  the  Lord  hath  not  made  sad  ;  and  to  strengthen  the  hands  of 
the  wicked,  that   he  shonl  1  not   turn  from  his  wicked  way  f"   Every 
;. richer  ought  to  read,  yea.  to  read  frequently,  Ezek.  xxiii.  and  xxxiv, 
-•'  ■  '  ' her  will  conduct  himself  wisely,  and  according  to  the  word 


XXXL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  33—85.  151 

•f  the  Lord,  he  must,  according  to  Jude,  vrs.  22,  24,  "  have  compaa- 
sion  of  some,  making'  a  difference  ;  and  save  others  with  fear,  pulling 
thx-m  out  of  the  fire."  He  must  with  Jeremiah,  "  if  he  shall  be  the 
mouth  of  God,  take  the  precious  from  the  vile,"  Jer.  xv.  13,  "  di\ide 
the  word  of  truth  aright,"  2  Tim.  ii.  15,  and  "  give  the  household  of 
the  Lord  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  season,"  Luke  xii.  42.  It  is 
praiseworthy  to  explain  the  truth  well,  it  is  commendable  to  reprove 
haitiul  sins,  if  it  be  done  with  meekness  and  wisdom,  it  is  <rood  to 
publish  the  promises  of  the  gospel ;  but  it  will  not  suffice  to  throw 
every  thing  out  at  random,  so  that  few  can  lay  hold  on  any  thing.  It 
is  best  to  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  that  we  mav  discov- 
er the  hidingplaces  of  his  self-deceit,  and  that  he  may  awake,  be 
concerned,  and  flee  out  of  himself  to  t!,^  throne  of  grace  ;  and  i:- 
would  be  exceedingly  profitable  to  Explain  the  work  of  grace  to  the 
godly  by  marks  of  grace.  Every  one  would  then  obtain  a  near  view 
of  his  heart  and  be  able  to  see  it  on  every  side,  and  the  kevs  would 
be  used  with  advantage.  Therefore  the  preachers  ought  to  attend 
so  particularly  to  every  one,  that  they  would  know  their  people  near 
at  hand,  and  how  to  deal  with  them  to  their  profit.  "  Be  thou  dili- 
geni  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flocks,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  13. 
(ci)  That  we  may  not  be  too  prolix,  we  will  only  say  briefly,  that 
the  overseers  of  the  church  ought  to  be  "  examples  to  the  flock,"  in 
their  behaviour,  discourse,  apparel,  wives  and  children,  1  Peter  v.  3. 
They  ought  to  love  the  truth,  and  to  exercise  themselves  diligently 
in  seeking  wisdom,  "that  their  profiting  may  appear  to  all."  1  Tim. 
iv.  15-  And  to  sum  up  all  in  the  words  of  Paul,  Tit  i.  7 — 9,  "  A 
bishop  ought  to  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God,  not  selfwilled, 
not  toon  angry,  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  given  to  filthv  lu- 
ce ;  but  a  lover  of  hospitality,  a  lover  of  good  men,  sober,  just, 
holy,  temperate  ;  holding  fast  the  faithful  word,  as  he  hath  been 
taught,  that  he  may  be  able  by  sound  doctrine  both  to  exhort,  and 
convince  the  gainsayers."  It  would  be  profitable  to  preachers  to 
read  often  the  epistles  of  Paul  to  the  preachers,  Timothy  and  Titus. 

3.  But,  brethren  of  the  eldership,  we  do  not  inform  you,  that  it 
behooves  you  to  take  a  part  in  the  duties  which  belong  to  the 
preachers,  and  we  do  not  speak  now  of  that  winch  was  enjoined  on 
you,  when  ye  were  ordained  to  your  offices  ;  but  we  say,  take  heed, 
that  the  keys  be  not  wrenched,  nor  suffered  to  rust,  but  that  they 
be  used  well.  It  is  your  duty  to  keep  a  strict  eye  on  the  congrega- 
tion, to  visit  particular  persons,  to  "  warn  ihem  wdio  are  unruly,  to 
comfort  the  feeble  minded,  to  support  the  weak,  and  to  be  patient  to 
all  men,"  agreeably  to  1  Thes.  v.  14.     Is  there  any  where  an  auda- 


155       THE  KEYS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

clous  sinner,  request  of  your  minister  to  assist  you   complain  of  hirft 
to   the  biot'.ieraood  ;  doth  your  minister  judge  it  to  be  necessary  to 
make  use  of  the  discipline  of  the  church  against   such  an  obstinate 
person,    be   willing   and  ready  to  help  him.     Is   your  minister  dis 
heartened,  encou.'age    him  ;  is  he  remiss,  stir  him  up,  show  that  yc 
love  him,  as  the  servant  of  God,   "count  him  worthy  of  double  hen 
our,"  according  to  1  Tim.  v.  17.    Then  will  ye  b;:  profitable  to  him, 
iceable  to  the  congregation,  and  a  blessing  to  yourselves. 
4.  J  Jut  the  congregation  ought  also  to  make  a  proper  use  on  their 
part  of  these  keys,  and  therefore  it  behooves  them,   (a)  to  acknowl- 
ed  je  tnis  ecclesiastical  power,   as  given  by  the  Lord  to  his  servants, 
and  to  submit  themselves  to  it :  "  We  beseech  you,  brethren,"  saith 
Paul,   "  to  know  them   which  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you 
in  the  Lord,   and  admonish  you,  and  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in 
love   for  their  work's   sake,"  1  Thess.  v.   12,  13.     "The  Lord  hath 
given  them  their  authority,  not  for  destruction,  but  for  edification,"  2 
Cor.  x.  8.  xiii.  10     Ye  know  what  pains  your  faithful  preachers  take, 
yea,  thai  they  "  travail  again,  as  it  were,  that  Christ  may  be  formed  in 
you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  That  ye  may  recompense  them,  be  ye  also  enlarg- 
ed," so  I  speak  with  the  apostle,  2  Cor.  vi.  13.  "  Obey  them  that  have 
the  rule  over  you,   and  submit   yourselves;  for  they  watch   for  your 
souls,  as  they  that  give    account;  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy,  and 
not  with  grief:  for  that  is  not  profitable  to  you,"  as  the  same  apostle 
admonishah,  Heb.  xiii.    17,  i8.  (b)  I  speak  to  all  who  hear  me  this 
day,    behold,    I  open  the  kingdom  of  God  to    on,  and  invite  you  to 
come  to  the  Lord,   and  to  his  goodness,    that  ye  may  obtain   grace, 
mercy  and  peace  :  "  Enter,  enter  through  the  gates ;  I  pray  you  m 
Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God  :  turn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your 
evil  ways;  for  why    will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel."     Jesus  will  not 
thrust  you  back,   but  "  him  that  cometh  to  him  he  will  i::  no  wise 
<ast  out,"  as  he  himself  saith,  John  vi.  37.     He  himself  "stands  at 
your  door,    and   knocks,   only  hear  his   voice,   and  open  the  door  to 
him,   that  he   may  come  in,    and  sup  with  you,  and   ye   with  him," 
Rev.  iii.   20.     "  Do  not  draw  back,    lor  then  his   soul  will  not  have 
any  pleasure  in   you,"  as  Paul   testifieth,    rleb.    x.  38.     Will  ye  not 
tome  to  him,  that  ye  may  have  life,   but  harden  yourselves,  that  yc 
may  enjoy  the  honours,  the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  and  Oi 
sin,  I  say  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  shall  die,  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  on  you,  "  ye  shall  see  yourselves  thrust  out,"  accord- 
ing to  Luke  xiii.  28.     "  Now  therefore,  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your 
bands  be  made  strong,"  as  the  prophet  saith,  Isaiah  xxviii.  22.  (c) 
but,  believers,  ye  who  seek  t©  be  loosed  from  the  bonds  of  sin,  who 


XXXI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—85.  153 

inourn  on  account  of  it,   who  hasten  to  Christ,  and  press  after  sane- 
tification  ;  .  proclaim  to  you  in  the  name  of  the  Li  hat  your  ini- 

quit)  is  pardoned,   and  tiiat   the   Lord   will  no    :  wroth  with 

you     nor  rebuke   you  ;  do  not   start  up  agains'  .     ough  fretful 

unbelief,  but  u  receive  this  preached  word,  not  as  word  of  men, 
but,  as  it  is  in  truth,  a*  ihe  word  of  Go.!."  as  the  I  ■  ssalonians  did, 
1  Thess.  ii.  13.  Do  ye  fear  that  ye  will  be  deceived  in  the  end,  and 
wi'l  find  the  door  shut  against  you,  let  the  foolish  virgins  fe*r  this, 
ihey  who  have  only  lamps  of  profession,  but  not  th^;  oil  of  grace, 
yea,  who  do  not  seek  it,  as  ye  do.  Jesus  will  n<  \  r  si  ut  the  door, 
which  he  hath  opened  to  you.  Hear  him  say,  Rev.  ii  7  "These 
things  saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of 
David,  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth  "  I  conclude  my 
present  discourse  with  2  Peter  i.  10,  11.  "  Wherefore,  brethren, 
•^ive  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure  :  for  so  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  y-  ii  abundantly  in  >  the  everlast- 
ing kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  Amer. 


Vot.  ix- 


(    l54  ) 


nv. 


NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Titus  ii.  14.  Who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeal 
ous  of  good  works.