Q.  86.  Since  then  we  are  delivered  from  cur  misery  merely  of  grace 
through  Christ,  without  any  merit  of  ours,  why  must  we  still  do  good 
works  ? 

A.  Because  that  Christ,  having  redeemed  and  delivered  us  by  his 
blood,  also  renews  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  after  his  own  image  ;  that 
so  we  may  testify  by  the  whole  of  our  conduct  our  gratitude  to  God 
for  his  blessings,  and  that  he  may  be  praised  by  us ;  also,  that  every 
one  may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his  faith  by  the  fruits  thereof;  and 
that  by  our  godly  conversation  others  may  be  gained  to  Christ. 

Q.  87.  Cannot  they  then  be  ■  •■aved,  who  continuing  in  their  wicked 
and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted  to  God? 

A.  13y  no  means  ;  for  the  holy  scripture  declares  that  no  unchaste 
person,  idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard,  slanderer, 
robber,  or  any  such  like,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 


"G, 


REAT  peace    have   they  which   love  thy  law,"  saith  David. 
Psalm  cxix.  165.     They  have  peace  with  men,  who  are  otherwise 


So,  87.  255 

iheir  enemies  ;  for  "  when  a  nun's  Ways  please  the  Lord,   he   ma- 
keth  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him,"  Prov.  xvi.  7.    Have 
they  who  love  the  law  of  the  Lord  any  enemies,  who  fight   against 
them,  they  have  nevertheless  a  great  peace,    whereby  they    are    so 
encouraged,  that  they    are  fearless  of  the  fiercest  and  most   mighty 
enemies:  "The  Lord  is  my  light   and  my  salvation,  whom   shall  I 
fear  ?  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life,  of  whom  shall  I  he  afraid  ? 
Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear," 
saith  that  great  lover  of  the  law  of  God,  Psalm   xxvii.  1,    3.     They 
who  love  t!>e  law  of  the  Lord  have  a  great  peace  and    tranquility  in 
their  soul  with  and  in  the  Lord  :"     The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  and  which  keepeth  the  heart   and   mind   through 
Jesus,"  as  it  is  desribed  by  the  apostle,  Phil.  iv.  7.     Is.  this  matter  of 
wonder.?     Christ  hath  purchased  that  great  peace  for  them  :    "  The 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed,"  Isaiah  liii.  5.     Thelo\eofthe  divine- law  is    itself  a  sweet 
peace  :  the  person  who  loves  the  law  "  rejotceth  in  the  way  of  God's 
testimonies,  more  than  in  all  riches,"  according  to  Psalm   cxix.    14. 
When  he  loves  the  law  ot"  God  so  that  he  practises  it,  the   Lord    re- 
wards him  for  it  with  "  peace  and  mercy,"    as  Paul   testifieth,  Gal. 
vi.  16.     When  the  first  Christians    "  walked  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
the  comfor;  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  multiplied,"  Acts  iz.  31. 

Thus  also  the    instructor  understands  this  matter,  when  he  shows 

us  th&t    we    are  obliged  to  manifest    gratitude  by  good  works,  as  a 

mean  of  obtaining   peace  and  comfort  ;    for  after  having  proposed 

our  only  comfort  in  the   first  question  of  the   catechism,  he  exhibits 

in  the  stcond  question  three  means  of  obtaining  that  comfort,  namely, 

the  knowledge  of  our  misery,  of  our  deliverance,  and  of   gratitude  ; 

for  knowing  that  a  knowledge  of  misery  renders  the    sinner   indeed 

capable  of  comfort,  but  that  it  doth  not  of  itself   merit,    or  procure 

comfort,  he  therefore  teaches  the  deliverance  of  the  elect   sinner  by 

the   Mediator  Jesus,  who  hath  obtained  peace,  and  comfort  for*  him. 

But  who  can  derive  peace  and  comfort  from    this,  while  he  doth  not 

love  trie  law  of  the  Lord,  and  conduct  according  to  it  ?    He  therefore 

shows,  that  if  we  will  live  comfortably,  we  must  do  good  works,  as 

an  acknowledgment  of  that  deliverance.     This   he  doth   in  the  third 

part  of  the  catechism,  in  which  five  particulars  are  proposed  : 

I.  The  necessity  of  good  works  in  the  thirty-second  Lord's  day. 
II.  The  principle  from  which  they  must  be  performed,  to  wit;  con- 
version, Questions  88,  S9,  90.  III.  The  nature  of  good  works. 
Question  91.  IV.  The  rule,  according  to  which  good  works  must  be 
performed,  to  wit.  the  law  of  God,  from  the  34th,  to  the  44th  LordV. 


156  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

days.     V.  The    mean  of  doing  good  works,  namely,    prayer,  from 
the  43th,  to  the  52nd  Lord's  days 

We  must  attend  at  present  only  to  the  necessity  of  good  works, 
which  is  exhibited  in  this  Lord's  day  by   two  particulars: 

I.  The  motives  that  oblige  a  Christian,  who  hath  been  delivered, 
to  perform  good  works,  Q.  8  6. 

II.  T-f.e  impossibility  of  being  saved  without  performing  good 
works,  Q.  87 

1.  We  are  taught  in  the  second  part  of  the  "atechism,  that  "  we 
are  delivered  from  our  misery  only  of  gr^ce  by  Christ,  without  any 
me>i<  oi  our  own."  The  Papists,  who  cannot  endure  this  sacred 
tiu  /.  say  that  then  we  need  not  do  any  gcvl  works;  yea,  they  slan- 
der us  as  enemies  of  good  work^  They  are  strengthened  in  'his 
by  the  lotinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the  law,  who  hold  that  a  per- 
son, who  hath  been  delivered,  doth  indeed  do  good  works,  hut  not 
as  a  duty,  because  (.  hrist  hath  satisfied  'he  law  of  duty  for  thosr 
who  are  delivered,  They  will  admil  that  the  delivered  must  do  good 
".voiks,  because  ;t  is  their  nature,  as  a  vine  must  boar  fruit  ;  but  they 
say  '  at  they  are  not  obliged  to  do  them  as  a  duty,  which  is  r.om- 
m.ncie:.  *nd  .  joined  on  them,  as  though  this  were  the  work  of 
slaves,  and  no.  oi  the  free  children  of  God.  Those  who  have  not 
their  senses  exercised  will  think  that  these  things  are  right  and  fair; 
but  they  who  understand  the  secret,  know  that  these  men  esteem 
every  action,  how  abominable  soever,  to  be  good  ;  because  all  things 
are  done  according  to  the  eternal  decree  of  God,  and  therefore  ac- 
cording to  bis  will.  And  what  is  that  eternal  decree  i  an  unchangc- 
blc  lawT  of  nature,  or  fate,  which  determines  all  things  without  God. 
And  so  this  ass-,  rtion  is  the  offspring  of  Atheism,  and  the  denial  of  a 
God,  tricked  up  by  Spinoza  and  Van  ITat'em. 

Bu  v/e,  who  have  learned  hotter,  say  that  a  person  who  is  delivered 
without  any  merit  o\'  his  own,  merely  of  grace  through  Christ, 
5f  must  "  still  do  good  works  ;  not  that  he  may  merit  by  them,  as 
we  have  proved  upon  the  twenty-third  and  twenty-fourth  Lord's 
day-  ;  arid  not  only  because  it  is  become  the  nature  of  the  delivered, 
but  also  as  a  duty,  which  thev  are  commanded  to  do.  Believers  are 
commanded  again  and  again  to  perform  good  v. oiks  v. ;th  a  holy- 
fear  :  the  passages  are  too  numerous  to  be  transcribed  here.  See 
only  Exod-  xx.  Deut.  v.  Psalm  ii.  11.  Phil.  ii.  12.  Titus  iii. 
8,  14,  Heb  iv  2  The  delivered  glorv  that  "  the  Lord  is  their 
Judge,  their  Lawgiver  and  King,"  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  Must  we  not 
obey  God  according  to  his  commandments  ?  and  is  not  that  which 
we   do   in    obedience    to    him   a     good    work  J      Surely  belif 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  157 

must  be  obedient  to  God  their  Father  with  fear,  not  as  slaves,  but  as 
children,  as  Peter  admonishelh,  I  Peter  i.  14,  17. 

There  are  also  many  reasons,  which  oblige  those  who  are  deliver- 
ed to  do  good  works,  whether  we  attend  to  the  Lord,  who  obligeth 
them  by  himself,  and  by  his  beneiis,  or  whether  we  attend  to  the 
ends,  for  which  they  must  c'o  gnod  works. 

1.  With  respect  to  the  Lord,  he  is  the  Most  High,  and  every  hu- 
man creature  is  subject  to  God,  and  to  him  as  the  only  Lord.  God 
is  the  most  glorious  being,  alone  holy  and  worthy  of  himself  to  be 
obeyed,  believed,  feared  and  served.  This  lays  an  everlasting  obli- 
gation upon  the  reasonable  creature  to  acknowledge  it  by  good 
works.  In  whatsoever  condition  a  man  may  be,  whether  delivered 
by  Christ,  or  still  a  miserable  sinner,  he  can  never  discharge  him- 
self from  this  obligation  ;  as  long  as  the  Lord  is  God,  this  bond 
will  remain  upon  man  :  for  since  the  Lord  is  so  excellent,  is  it  not 
natural  and  equitable,  that  his  reasonable  ereature  should  acknowl- 
edge his  glory  ?  And  how  shall  the  creature  acknowledge  it  ?  only 
by  his  apprehensions  oi  it,  and  by  words  ?  must  not  all  his  actions 
proclaim  and  declare  it  ?  when  a  Christian  acts  from  this  principle, 
his  work  is  then  most  pure  and  excellent.  This  high  excellence  of 
God  obligeth  his  people  to  do  good  works  :  '.'  Ye  shall  be  holy,  for 
I  the  Lord  yoar  God  am  holy,"  saith  he,  Lev.  xix  2.  See  also  1 
Peter  i.  15,  16.  Hear  how  the  prophet  ptoclaims  this  to  the  praise 
of  the  Lord,  Jer.  x.  6,  7.  "  Forasmuch  as  there  is  none  like  thee, 
O  Lord,  thou  art  great,  and  thy  name  is  great  in  might.  Who  would 
not  fear  thee,  O  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  thee  doth  it  appertain  :  for- 
asmuch as  among  ail  the  wise  men  of  the  nations,  and  in  all  their 
kingdoms,  there  is  none  like  unto  thee." 

But  the  Lord  God,  willing  to  manifest  his  kindness,  obligeth  his 
people  by  his  goodness  and  love,  to  perform  good  works :  for  this 
reason  he  hath  delivered  and  freed  them  from  their  condemnation 
and  misery.  Why  then  do  men  say,  that  a  person  who  hath  been 
delivered  without  any  merits  of  his  own,  of  grace  only,  is  not  bound 
to  do  good  works  ?  He  is  for  this  very  reason,  even  that  he  hath 
been  delivered  of  grace,  bound  to  do  good  works.  Attend  only  to 
the  dispensations  of  the  divine  grace  which  each  Person  in  the  God- 
head exerciseth  toward  the  sinner,  in  order  ;o  his  deliverance,  and 
it  will  appear,  that  they  who  are  delivered,  are  under  the  strongest 
obligations  to  do  good  works,  and  must  do  them.  For,  (1)  the  Fa- 
ther from  eternity  foreordained  them,  elected,  and  gave  them  in  the 
council  of  peace  to  his  Son,  that  he  might  deliver  them,  and  that 
s'they  might  might  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  and  be 


$58  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

holy  and  unblamable,"  Rom.  viii.  29.     Eph.  i.  4.     "  He  hath  called 
and  effectually  delivered  them  out  of  the  power   of  darkness,   and 
translated  them  into   the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son."     They   must 
therefore  "  walk  worthily  of  the  vocation  wherewith  they  are  caiied," 
as  Paui  enjoineth,  Eph.  iv.  i.  The  Father  establishes  also  his  great 
covenant  of  grace  with  them:  "They  avouch  the  Lord  to   be   tl.ek* 
God,  and  the  Lord  avouches  them  lobe  his  peculiar   people  ;''  hut 
this  is  done,  that  they  may  hearken  to  his  voice,  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments," as  Moses  saith,  Deut.  xxvi    17,  lo.     Doth    he   justify 
them,  it  is  "  that  he  may  be  feared,"  Psalm  c>:xx.  4.      Doth  he  adopt 
them  lo  be  his  children,  "  they  must  separate  themselves   fiom  the 
unclean  thing,  and  walk  in, fear,"  2  Cor.  vi.  17,    18.      1  Peter  i.  17. 
And  when  he  preserves  them,  u.  he  puts  his  fear  into  their  hearts,  that 
they  may  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40      (2)  The  Son  "  hath 
redeemed  and   delivered  them   by   his   blood,"  saith  the   instructor* 
He  bore  their  punishment,  pjid  the  price  of  his  blood  for  them,  and 
satisfied  the  justice  of  God.     But  for  what  end  I  was  i;  that  ho 
might  discharge  them  from  all  obligation  ?     Did  the  Son   of  God  do 
and  suffer  so  much,  that  he  might  be  a  minister  of  sin  to  them  ?  who 
dares  assert  this?  and   nevertheless  our  adversaries  must  assert  it, 
when  they  will  maintain,  that  we  are  not  obliged  to  do  good  works,  if 
Christ  have  delivered  us  of  grace  only  without  any  merit  of  our  own. 
But  the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  otherwise  by  the  mouth  cf  Paul  in  the 
text,  when  he  saith,  that  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ik  gave  himself  foi* 
us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto 
self  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.     "Cod 
hath  also  exalted  him   with  his  right   hand,    to  be  a   Prince   and  a 
Saviour,  for  tj  give  repentance  to  Israel,"  as  ue'l  as  "  forgiveness  of 
sins,"  Acts  v.  SI.  See  only  how  Paul  infers  from  the  humiliation  and 
exaltation  of  Christ  the  obligation  of  them    who  ate  delivered  to  do 
good  works,  Rom.  vi.     Arc  they  bought  and  made  free  from  sip,  it 
is  that  they  may  "be  servants  of  righteousness,"  according  to  Rom. 
vi.  18 — 22.     "They  are  bought  with  a   price,  therefore  they  must 
glorify  God  in  their  body,  and  in  their  spirit,   which  are  God's."  as 
Paul  teacheth,    1  Cor.  vi   20.-    Yea,   shall    not    this  great   "love  of 
Christ  constrain  them,"  lo  look  upon  themselves,  as  bound  to  live 
for  him  ?"  certainly  yes:  see  2  Cor.   v.  14,    15,  (3)  They  who  are 
delivered,  having  been  bought  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  are   also  ie- 
ncwed  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  after  his  image  ;  for  "  he  is  made  unto 
them  of  God  sanctification,"  as  well  as  "righteousness,"    1  Cor.  i. 
•     And  therefore  he  hath  given    then   "his  Holy  Spirit  to  renew 
j         "'   after  Ins  image,    See  Titus  iii.  4,   5,  6.     Ly  this  renewing 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  36,  87.  15» 

alter  his  image  "Christ  is  formed  in  them,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  They 
become  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  2  Peter  i.  4.  Yea,  "  they 
are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Must 
not  such  persons  do  good  works  ?  may  they  forbear  to  act  conforma- 
bly to  him  in  holiness  ?  It  is  become  their  nature  to  do  good  works; 
for  they  who  are  delivered  are  "  the  workmanship  of  God,  created 
in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained, 
that  they  should  walk  in  them,"  Ep>.  ii.  10.  They  must  also  do 
them,  because  they  are  commanded  to  resemble  him,  in  holiness,  I 
Peter  i,  15,  16.  How  is  it  possible,  that  they  who  are  delivered 
should  not  be  obliged  to  do  good  works  ?  for  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells- 
in  them,  leads  and  comforts  them  ;  therefore  Paul  saith,  "  Know  ye 
not  that  ye  arc  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell- 
eth  in  you  r  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God 
destroy  ;  for  the  temple  of  Gcd  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are,"  1 
Cor.  iii.  16,  17.     He  saith  the  same  also,  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

2.  If  we  consider  the  ends  of  good  works,  we  shall  perceive  clearly, 
that  the  delivered  must  do  good  works.  The  instructor  mentions 
three  ends  of  good  works :  the  first  and  chief  end  is,  "  that  we  may 
testify  by  ihe  whole  of  our  conduct  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his 
blessings,  and  that  he  may  be  praised  by  us."  Gratitude  is  a  cheer- 
ful acknowledgment  of  the  kindness  of  the  Lord,  manifested  in  his 
benefits,  and  it  induceth  us  to  surrender  ourselves  to  him,  in  order 
to  serve  him.  Wonderfully  great  and  many  are  the  benefits,  which 
God  bestows  upon  those  whom  he  deliver?.  We  have  now  spoken 
tonly  very  briefly  of  them,  but  more  largely  before  from  the  fifth 
Lord's  day  to  the  present.  Must  not  those  who  are  delivered  be 
constrained  to  gratitude  by  these  benefits  ?  is  it  not  their  duty  ?  bad 
not  God's  ancient  people  their  thankofferings,  as  well  as  their  sacri- 
fices of  slain  beasts  ?  Because  the  Lord  doth  not  now  impose  such 
a  heavy  burthen  upon  them  whom  he  hath  delivered,  but  is  kinder 
to  them  than  he  was  to  his  ancient  people,  must  they  therefore  be 
unthankful  ?  is  the  duty  of  "  offering  thanksgiving  to  God"  now 
abolished  ?  Psalm  1.  14.  None  will  say  that  it  is.  But  how  shall 
we  be  thankful?  It  will  surely  not  be  enough  to  "say  Lord,  Lord, 
and  not  to  do  the  will  of  our  Father,"  Matt,  vii,  21.  We  must 
evince  our  thankfulness  by  doing  good  works,  in  order  to  manifest; 
that  we  have  wholly  surrendered  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  as 
an  acknowledgment  of  his  benefits.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  of  this., 
Rom.  xii.  1.  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holv.  aecepta- 


160  THE  NECESSlTirtMF  GOOD WORKS. 

ble  to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  In  this  mariner  d* 
we  testify  gratitude  to  God.  and  praise  him  with  our  whole  lives,  in 
all  that  we  do,  and  forbear,  "  whether  we  eat,  or  whether  we  drink, 
or  whatsoever  we  do,  we  t\o  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  according  to 
1  Corrx.  31.  Yea,  "the  delivered  must  serve  the  Lord  in  holinefe 
and  righteousness,   all  the  days  of  their  lives,"  Luke  i.  74,  75. 

The  other  end  is  "  that  each  one  may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his 
faith  by  the  fruits  thereof."  As  there  are  so  many,  who  have  only 
an  apparent  faith,  as  believers  are  not  always  sufficiently  enlightened 
to  perceive  the  soundness  of  their  faith, x  and  as  eve-y  believer  hath 
not  his  senses  exercised  to  discern  between  good  and  evil,  and  faith 
is  often  weak,  and  obscured  by  many  mists  of  cot  ruplion,  therefore 
believers  are  not  always  certain,  that  they  possess  a  true  faith.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  in  order  to  assure  them  tliat  they  possess  a  tine  faith, 
beshines  them  with  his  light,  by  which  they  behold  clearly  "  tin 
things"  (and  therefore  faith  also)  "  that  are  freely  given  them  ol 
God,"  1  Cor    ii.  12.      Yea,   he  gives   them  sometimes  a  strong  and 

■  sensible  assurance  cf  the  love  of  God,  and  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
bin  >,  and  that  in  several  ways,  as  we  have  shown  on  different  occa- 
sions. See  the -first  and  the  twenty-third  Lord's  days.  But  as  this 
assurance  dot'i  not  always  abide  with  the  soul,  and  as  temporary 
believers  pflfcn  exhibit  a  counterfeit  assurance,  (for  they  also  some- 
times taste  the  heavenly  gift,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come) 
therefore  good  works  are,  as  fruits  of  faith,  the  best  evidences  of  a 

■  true  faith  :  k'  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit :  neither  can 
a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt.  vii. 
13,  and  "  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit,"  Matt.  xii.  33.  Therefore 
good  works  are  very  often  proposed,  as  marks  for  trial,  see  Psalm 
xv.  and  xxiv.  2  Peter  i.  4 — 10.  1  John  iii.  14.  James  more  espe- 
cially doth  this  :  "  What  doth  it  profit,  inj  brethren,"  saith  he,  chap, 
ii.  14 — 26.  "  though  a  man  say  he  hail,  faith,  and  have  not  works? 
can  faith  save  him  ?  Faith,  if  it  have  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone, 
Show  me  thy  faith  without  tiiy  works,  and  1  will  show  thee  my  faith 
by  my  works."  He  shows  also  in  that  passage  that  Abraham  and 
Rahab  were  justified  by  works,  as  evidences  of  faith-.  What  is  your 
opinion  now,  hearers,  doth  it  not  concern  those  who  are  delivered  to 
be  assured  .''  and  must  they  not  then  do  good  works,  that  they  may 
have  a  steadfast  and  indisputable  assurance  ? 

The  third  end  of  good  works  is,   '•  that  others  may  be  gained  to 

Christ  by  the  godly  conversation  of  them  who  are  delivered."     The 

wicked,   who  know   not  God,    seeing   the  love,   which  the  delivered 

-L.C'oGo;!  antl  tlreir-neighboati  Ihdr  htfniiitVj  their  self-den iah 


XXXII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  86,  87.  161 

-fceavenly-mindedness,  meekness  and  moderation,  conclude  therefrom 
that  God  is  worthy  to  be  loved   and   feared.     Tiny  harden  them- 
selves against  the   word  of  reproof  and  admonition,    but  tins  li^ht 
etings  their  eyes,   and  pierces  their  hearts  so,    that  c>  they  are  con- 
vinced and   judged,   the  secrets  of  their  hearts  are  manifested,  and 
falling  down  on  their  faces,  they  worship  Gud,  and  report  that  God 
is  in  his  people  of  a  truth,"  1  Cor.  xiv    24,  25.    v'  The  husbands  are 
"Won  without  the  word  by  the   holy  conversation  of  the  wives,"  and 
many  "  are  made    ashamed,"    as   Peter  saith,    1  Petei    iii.  1,   2,16. 
Yea,  the  earnest  piety  of  the  delivered  will   awaken  drowsy  Chris- 
tians, and  they  who  aye  fervent  in  spirit  will  become  more  fervent : 
M  Your  zeal   hath   provoked   very  many,"   saith  Paul,   2  Cor.    ix.  2. 
See  P».il.  i.  14      Is  it  not  the  duty  of  every  person  to  win  his  neigh- 
fcour  for  Christ  ?  ought  he  not,  like  Christ's  "  sheep,  to  bring  forth 
twins,  and  to   be  fruitful  ?"  Song  iv.  2  vi.  6.     Will  the  fair  spoken 
Christian,  the  Christian  only  in  words  do  this  ?  no  ;  even  the  wicked 
presently  perceive,  that  he  is  a  mere  talker,  and  they  become  more 
averse  from  godliness  than  before,  when  they  do  not  see  good  works 
joined  to  speaking  of  God  and  divine  things.     Must  not  the  deliver- 
«d  then  do  good  works?  Surely  the  Lord  Jesus  commands  it,  when 
he  saith  to  his  people,  Matt.  v.  16.    "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before 
men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven  "     Paul  requireth  the  same  thing,  Philip,   ii.  15. 
II.  It  is  therefore  certain,  that  they  who  are  delivered  without  any 
merit  of  their  own,   merely  of  grr.ee  through  Christ,  must  do  good 
works.     But  what  will  become  of  those,  "  who  continuing  in  their 
wicked  and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted   to  God  ?  cannot  they 
¥e  saved  ?"  Thus  asks  the  instructor,  and  he  teaches  us  to  answer, 
"  By  no  means."     This  is  not  a  mere  fiction  of  his  own  brain,  but 
he    appeals  to  "  the  holy  scripture,  which  saith,    that   no  unchaste 
person,   &c.  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."     The  instructor  is 
in  the  right,  for  this  is  declared,  1  Cor.  vi.  10   Eph.  v.  5.     Yea,  the 
word  of  God  saith,  "  that  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children 
of  disobedience,"  on    account  of  such  shameful  sins,  Psalm  xi.  6. 
Eph.   v.  6.  Col.  iii.  5,  6,     And  "  they  who  live  after  the  flesh   shall 
die,"  Rom.  viii.  13.     "  Without  are  dogs,  Sec.  Rev.  xxii    15.     Such 
abominable  persons  shall  not  be  saved,  nor  any  others,  who  are  not 
truly  sanctified  according  to  the  image  of  God,   however  civil  and 
devout  they  may  otherwise  be  ;  for  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall 
aee  the  Lord,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  xii.  H.     The  Saviour  himself  saith, 
Matt.  v.  20.     «  Except  your  righteousness  exceed  the  righteousness 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  king- 
Vox.ii.  V 


o-  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

clom  of  heaven."  And  this  is  also  reasonable  ;  for  God  is  holy,  "  he 
is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab  i.  13.  How  then  should 
the  unholy  and  loathsome  sinner  appear  before  him,  and  enj<  y  the 
embraces  of  his  biessed  love  ?  David  saith,  Psalm  v.  4,  5,  6  "  Thou 
art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness,  neither  shall  evil 
dwell  with  thee.  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight  :  thou 
hatest  all  workers  of  iniquity.  Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak 
leasing:  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  deceitful  man"  We 
may  not  think  that  Christ  hath  satisfied  for  them,  and  bought  them 
with  his  blood,  and  that  they  will  therefore  be  saved,  though  they  be 
ever  so  ungodly  ;  for  such  persons  manifest  that  Christ  hath  not 
bought  them,  for  he  would  then  have  delivered  them  from  the  prac- 
tice of  sin  because,  acco:dmg  to  our  text,"  he  gave  himself  for  us, 
that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself 
a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  The  Lord  saith,  Isaiah 
lix.  20.  "  The  redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto  them,  that 
turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob."  Paul  saith  indeed,  Heb.  v.  9, 
that  "  the  Lord  Jesus  is  become  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto 
all,"  but  he  limits  those  all,  when  he  saith  that  "  they  obey  him," 

Therefore  it  cannot  avail,  either  the  Papists,  or  the  Antinomians, 
that  we  teach  that  Christ  hath  satisfied  the  law  for  them  whom  he 
delivereth,  and  it  rfoth  not  follow  therefrom,  that  if  they  must  still 
do  good  works,  God  would  then  demand  the  debt  twice  ;  for  he  sat- 
isfied  the  law,  not  that  he  might  discharge  the  delivered  from  their 
natural  obligation,  tor  they  cannot  be  discharged  from  that  obliga- 
tion,  unless  they  can  cease  to  be  creatures,  and  become  Gods  ;  but 
the  Son  of  God  satisfied,  that  he  mi^ht  take  away  guilt,  and  obtain, 
sanctification  ;  for  "  he  is  made  to  them  righlt  ousness  and  sanctifica- 
tion,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  \nd  therefore  he  satisfied,  that  he  mi^ht 
strengthen  ihat  eternal  obligation.  The  delivered  must  do  good 
»,  not  to  satisfy  like  Jesus,  but  for  the  reasons,  which  we  have 
mentioned 

:y  say,  "  believers  are  not  under  the  law,"  Rom.  vi.  14.  "  The 
law  is  not  made-  for  the  righteous,"  Sec.  1  Tim  i.  9,  10.  Are  they 
then  on  that  account  discharged  from  all  obedience  and  subjection 
to  the  Lord  ?  no:  but  'hey  are  not  under  the  law,  as  the  condition 
of  the  covenant  of~works,  promising  life  to  them  who  observe  the 
law  perfectly,  ;-.nd  threatening  those  who  transgress  it  with  a  curse. 
Gal   Hi.  13.     Horn,  iii    19,  20. 

The  n'inomians  object  further,  that  if  the  delivered  "  must  "  do 
good  works,  they  will  do  them  not  from  a  childlike  heart,  and  wil- 
lingly, but  from    constraint,  like  slaves.     But   (his   «  must "  h   no'- 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  *6S 

fiom  constraint,  but  from  obligation  and  a  willing  mind,  as  children, 
il  must."  obey  their  parents,  and  nevertheless  ob.y  them  willingly. 
See  1  Peter  i.  14 — 17.  Psalm  ex.  23.  That  it  may  consist  with 
willingness,  that  a  person  may  do  a  thing  from  obligation,  we  learn 
from  Paul,  1  Cor.  ix.  16,  17. 


APPLICATION. 

Therefore  when  Ave  urge  the   necessity  of  good  works   by    such 
reasons,  may  we  not  then,  hearers,  conclude  in  opposition  to  our  ad- 
versaries, that  we  have  the  plainest  and  most  certain  proof  that    the 
doctrine  of  our  church  is  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God  ?  for  we  deny 
thus  all  our  own   righteousness,  seeking  our  salvation    as    sinners  in 
Christ  only,  and    we  assign  no  other  reasons  for  sanctincation,  than 
those  which  the  word  of   God  exhibiteth   to    us.     The    doctrine  of 
"truth  is  according  to  godliness,"    it  is   "  a  mystery   of  godliness," 
Titus  i    1.      1  Tim.  hi.  16.     When  we   therefore    urge    persons   to 
godliness  and  good  works  from  the  purest  principle,  even  their  gra- 
cious deliverance  through  Christ,  without  any  merit  of  their  own,  by 
the  most  suitable  and  powerful  arguments,  may  we  not  then  rest  as- 
sured, that  the  pure  truta  is  taught  by  us  alone  ?  is  it  not  then  a  vile 
calumny  of  our  adversaries,  when  they  say,  that  we  are    enemies  of 
good  works  ?     It  is  true,  that  as  there  is  no  heretic,  who  will  not  ap- 
peal to  scripture,  so  there  is  no  erroneous  spirit  who  will   not  pre- 
tend to  a  form  of  godliness,  unless  we  will  except  the   Antinomians. 
Bu'.  what  are  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  their  good  works  ?  the  Pa- 
pists assert  that  good  works  are  merlor  ous,  obliging  God  to  them, 
and  so  they  do  good  works  like  hirelings  slaves,  and  l.jgalis>ts.     The 
Remonstrants  and  Socinian-*  speak  only  of  free-will,  of  a  law  improved 
by  Christ,  and  of  his    example  ;  the    Remonstrants  add    for  decen- 
cie's  sake,  a  general    and    sufficient    grace,   which,    if  they   would 
apeak  plainly,   would    be  nothing   else  but   free-will,   and   the    out- 
ward   revelation  ;    for  they   cannot  name  aught  that    is   given    by 
God  besides  free-will,  and  the  outward  revelation.      But    are    these 
things  sufficient  to  influence  the  soul,    which  is    incapable  of  t^ood, 
and  disinclined  to  it?     They  may  urge  her  to  a  certain   heathenish 
morality,  but  they  will  not  effectually  captivate  her,  and  conduct  her 
to  unfeigned  holiness. 

Since  then  we  have  such  a  holy  and  sanctifying  doctrine,  is  it  no* 


1*4  THE  'NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKSr. 

lamentable,  that  we  do  not  maintain  good  works  more  than  we  dop 
It  is  cTidcnt  that  many  nm  >ii£  us  do  not  practise  good  works  ;  foP 
where  do  we  see  our  people  "deny  ungodliness,  and  worldly 
lusts,  and  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present 
world,  as  the  gr««.e  of  God,  which  bringeih  salvation,  and  whicb 
hath  appeared  to  us,  teacheth  ?"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  1  itus  11.  11,  12. 
In  whom  do  we  see  that  separating  of  themselves  from  the  woild, 
that  strict  godliness,  that  holy  resignation  to  the  Lord,  to  do  his, 
will  ui  all  things,  that  heavenly  mindedness,  and  that  hearty  love  to 
God  and  his  people  ?  trie  most  do  not  know  the  model,  the  pattern, 
of  these  things.     Is  it  not  true,  hearers  ?  it  is  surely  evident :  for 

1.  Many,  like  the  Antinomians,  look  upon  it  to  be  unnecessary  to. 
do  good  works  ;  why,  think  they,  are  they  necessary?  and  they, 
will,  though  not  with  words,  yet  with  deeds,  justify  the  Papists,  who 
say,  that  if  we  be  saved  without  any  merit  of  our  own,  of  grace 
through  Christ,  we  need  not  then  do  good  works  It  is  as  though 
we  did  works  which  had  been  done  already.  Are  there  any  who 
look  upon  good  works  to  be  necessaty,  who  separate  themselves 
from  the  generality,  "let  their  light  shine,  and  do  something  more 
than  others,"  according  to  the  commands  of  Christ,  Matt,  v  16.  46, 
47,  they  presently  cry  out  against  such  persons,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites, and  legalists :  with  t!>e  wicked  Jews,  "  they  sport  them- 
selves, they  make  a  wide  mouth,  and  draw  out  the  tongue,"  Isaiah 
Ivii.  4.  Do  ye  then  in  this  manner  think  to  break  the  yoke,  and  to 
burst  the  bonds,  which  God  hath  laid  on  you,  in  order  to  bind  you 
to  him,  and  his  service  ?  is  Christ  in  this  manner  become  the  minis- 
ter of  sin,  that  he  may  procure  you  freedom  to  practise  iniquity  ;  will 
ye  in  this  manner  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound,  and  do 
evil,  that  good  may  come  ?  "  Your  damnation  is  just,"  saith  Paul, 
Rom.  iii.  8.  It  is  shameful,  that  ye  will  not  do  good  works  your- 
selves ;  but  it  is  particularly  abominable,  that  ye  endeavour  to  dis- 
charge yourselves  from  your  obligation  to  do  them  ;  and  it  is  still 
worse  that  ye  oppose  those  who  do  them  What  hate  ye  to  de 
among  us,  who  urge  the  necessity  of  good  works,  according  the 
word  of  God  ?  and  why  do  ye  not  join  the  Antinomians,  for  ye  are 
of  one  mind  with  them  ?  Rather  suffer  yourselves  to  be  instructed 
and  sec  with  concern  how  far  ye  have  swerved  in  your  apprehen- 
sions and  conduct  from  the  doctrine  of  truth,  which  is  according  t« 
godliness. 

2.  But  others  will  say,  we  for  our  parts  know  better ;  we  look 
upon  good  works  to  be  necessary.  I  allow  that  ye  do  ;  ye  have  a 
♦borough  and  excellent  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  truth,  and  can 


•if*  1$£ 

,defend  it  manfully,  ye  can  stop  the  mouths  of  the  Papists,  and  cari 
sonfound  the  Antinomians.  But  do  ye  also  do  good  works  ?  what 
are  they  ?  are  ye  weaned  from  the  world,  and  from  your  own  incli- 
nations, and  are  ye  dead  to  your  lusts  ?  is  God  the  great  object  of' 
your  pursuits  ?  do  ye  strive  to  do  his  will  ?  where  is  your  lowliness, 
your  humility  ?  how  doth  your  love  to  your  neighbour  appear  ?  do 
ye  show  yourselves  meek,  courteous,  gentle,  friendly,  and  ready  to 
forgive  the  shame,  the  loss,  and  the  pain,  which  ye  suffer  from  wick- 
ed men  ?  In  what  respect  doth  your  light  shine  i  in  respect  to  your1 
apparel,  demeanour  and  discourse.'  We  do  not  see  it,  but  we 
sliould  see  it,  if  it  did  shine.  Notwithstanding  all  your  civility,  Lon- 
esty,  devotion,  and  liberality  to  the  poor ;  your  earthlymindedness, 
gelfsesking,  dissoluteness,  pride  and  alienation  fiom  God  still  ap- 
pear in  all  your  doings.  Yea,  how  many  are  there,  who,  though 
they  have  been  taught  better,  are  guilty  of  wicked  works  !  I  mean 
you,  ye  irreligious  persons,  violators  of  the  name  and  day  of  God  : 
you  who  indulge  yourselves  in  hatred,  envy,  anger,  revenge,  Iascivi- 
ousness,  gluttony,  drunkenness,  voluptuousness,  falsehood  and  de- 
ceit ;  yea,  as  though  ye  had  quitted  yourselves  well,  who  "  declare 
your  sins  like  Sodom,"  with  the  Jews,  Isaiah  iii.  9.  Are  not  these 
abominable  sins?  and  do  ye  not  aggravate  them  to  the  utmost,  when 
ye  practise  them  against  your  better  knowledge  ?  "  To  him  that 
knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin,"  as  James 
speaks,  James  iv.  17,  Do  ye  not  dishonour  God  among  the  ene- 
mies of  the  truth?  do  ye  not  occasion  that  the  way  of  truth,  yea, 
that  "  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  on  your  account,  as  it  is 
written?"  Horn.  ii.  17—24.  Ye  cannot  imagine  that  ye  will  be  sa- 
ved, if  ye  proceed  in  this  way  :  "  Your  own  mouth  condemns  you,  and 
not  I,"  may  I  say  with  Kliphaz,  Job.  xv.  6.  Ye  certainty  do  not 
exhibit  any  evidence,  that  Christ  hath  redeemed  you,  and  delivered 
you  by  his  blood  ;  ye  have  not  yet  been  renewed  after  his  image. 
Or  do  ye  think  to  escape  destruction  by  "  saying  Lord,  Lord,  with- 
out doing  the  will  of  your  Father  ?"  Jesus  will  reject  you,  accord- 
ing to  Matt.  vii.  21,  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye 
do  them,"  s:\ith  the  Saviour,  John  xiii.  17.  But  «  the  servant  who 
knew  his  lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did  according 
to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes,"  thus  speaks  also  your 
great  Judge,  Luke  xii.  47. 

Alas  !  friends,  look  well  to  yourselves,  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come.  Descend  into  yourselves,  behold  your  abominable 
disposition  and  conduct :  think  seriously  of  your  immortal  souls,  the 
importance  of  eternal  salvation  and  damnation,  break  off  your  iniqu>* 


166  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

ties,  and  "  work  the  work  of  God,  believing  on  him,  whom  he  halL 
sen.,"' John  vi.  29.  So  ye  will  escape  the  damnation  of  hell,  and  be 
able,  yea,  willing  to  do  good  works. 

But  m.iy  Wi  not  take  up  a  lamentation  for  some  of  those  who  are 
delivered,  on  account  of  their  unbecoming  conduct  and  say,  Lam. 
iv.  2  "  The  precious  sons  of  Zbn,  comparable  to  fine  gold,  hi  w 
are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the 
potter!"  Where,  O  believers,  is  your  former  a'id  first  walking  with 
God,  the  love  of  your  espousals,  your  resignation  to  the  Lord,  in 
order  to  serve  him,  your  tenderness,  and  carefulness  not  to  conduct 
yourselves  unbecomingly,  and  that  hearty  love  to  good  men  ?  men 
can  scarcely  conceive  any  more  what  this  means,  they  have  de- 
clined so  far  from  it.  The  world  hath  taken  away  their  heart,  their 
sins,  which  had  been  smothered  a  long  time,  begin  to  revive,  and 
how  many  sinful  emotions,  and  evil  inclinations  are  entertained  and 
winked  at !  their  heartiness,  liveliness  and  vigour  are  abated  ;  when 
they  will  exert  themselves,  and  "  shake  themselves,"  they  experience, 
like  Samson,  too  late,  Judges  xvi.  20,  21,  that  "the  Lord  is  depart- 
ed from  them,"  and  that  the  infernal  •'  Philistines  have  seized  on 
them,"  and  with  Paul,  that  they  are  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the 
law  of  sin,  which  is  in  their  members,"  Rom.  vii.  23.  And  so  the 
soul  becomes  discouraged,  a  burthen  to  herself,  and  to  ethers,  yea, 
even  to  the  Lord,  and  she  reproaches  his  name  :  «  Do  ye  thus  re- 
quite the  Lord,  O  foolish  people  and  unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father, 
that  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  established 
thee?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  Hear  what  "  he,  who  holdeth  the  seven  stars 
in  his  right  hand,  and  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks,"  saith  to  you  also,  Rev.  ii.  1,  4,  5.  I  have  somewhat 
against  thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love.  Remember  there- 
lore  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  the  hrst  works  ;  or 
else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove  thy  candlestick 
out  of  his  plac*-,  except  thou  repent."  Therefore,  as  Paul  admon- 
isheth,  Heb.  xii.  12,  13,  14.  "  Lilt  up  the  hands  which  hang  down, 
and  the  Leble  knees.  \nd  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest 
that  which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way,  but  let  it  rather  be  heal- 
ed. Follow  after  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 

Come  then,  ye  sluggish  persons,  let  me  arouse  and  persuade  you  , 

yea,  you  also,  whose  souls  glow  with  zeal  to  strive  for  perfection, 

that  ye  may  be  urged  the  more  to  "  run  and  not  be  weary,  to  walk 

md  not  faint,"  Isaiah  xl.  31.  (a)  Is  not  the  Lord  worthy  to  be  feared. 

i,  served  and  obeyed  by  you?   hath  he  not   deserved  it  at  vo"'- 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY*  Q.  86,  it.  167 

hands  by  all  his  favours  ?  hath  not  the  Saviour  made  you  "  his  peo- 
ple," by  purchasing  you  with  his  blood,  that  ye  might  be  "  zealous 
of  good  works  ?"  according  to  the  text  ?  doth  it  not  then  become 
you  to  be  thankful  to  him  ?  yea,  have  ye  not  surrendered  yourselves 
to  him,  and  bound  yourselves,  as  it  were,  with  an  oath,  like  David, 
**  to  keep  his  righteous  judgments  :"  Psalm  cxix.  106.  Will  ye  not 
now  perform  your  oath  ?  (b)  Is  there  aut;ht  that  is  sweeter,  more 
d  lightful,  or  that  can  rejoice  the  soul  more  ?  Ye  know  experimen- 
tally that  the  life  of  God,  and  doing  his  will,  is  the  life,  the  element, 
the  meat,  drink,  and  sound  health  of  your  souls  ;  "  It  is  joy  to  the 
just  o  do  judgment,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings,  Prov.  xxi.  15.  David 
saith  of  himself,  Psalm  cxix.  14.  "I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of 
thy  testimonies,  as  much  as  in  all  riches."  And  cannot  each  of  you 
believers,  bear  witness  of  himself  in  troth,  with  the  gre;it  Paul,  Rom. 
vii.  22.  "I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man  ?"  O 
the  contrary,  what  bitterness,  vexation,  restlessness  and  continu 
perturbation  is  there  in  sin  I  How  often  must  ye  complain  with 
David,  Psalm  xxxviii.  3,  4,  18.  "There  is  no  rest  in  my  bones? 
because  of  my  sin ;  for  mine  iniquities  ate  gone  over  mine  head  : 
as  a  heavy  burthen  they  are  loo  heavy  for  me.  I  am  distressed  on 
account  of  my  sin."  Do  not  then  embrace  your  own  sorrow,  but 
delight  in  living  strictly  and  circumspectly  to  the  Lord.  (c>  If  youf 
holy  living  to  God  should  not  ptofit  your  souls  in  the  least,  would  ye 
not  still  reckon  it  your  happiness  ?  how  much  more  should  ye  then 
be  urged  to  live  such  a  life  now,  when  "  in  keeping  God's  command 
ments  there  is  a  great  reward?"  Psalm  xix.  11.  "The  Lord  wih 
not  be  sought  in  Vain,"  Isaiah  xlv.  9  "  He  will  not  suffer  you  to 
shut  the  doors  of  his  house,  nor  kindle  fire  on  his  altar  for  nought," 
Mai.  i.  10.  "  For  God  is  not  unrig!  teous  to  forget  your  work,  and 
labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  his  name,  in  that  y< 
have  ministered  to  the  saints,  and  do  yet  minister,"  saith  Paul,  Heb 
vi.  10.  He  bestows  for  "a  cup  of  cold  water,  which  we  give  to  hii 
little  ones,"  a  great  and  a  sure  reward,  Matt.  x.  42  Is  it  not  true 
ye  know  that  when  the  soul  endeavours  to  do  his  will,  she  acquires 
a  glorious  conformity  to  his  image,  2  Cor  iii.  18,  that  your  heart 
becomes  established,  that  your  soul  is  enlightened,  and  obtains  an 
undoubted  assurance  ;  that  "  the  Father  and  the  Son  love  you,"  and 
manifest  it  by  "  revealing  themselves  to  you,  and  by  coming  to  yo  J, 
and  making  their  abode  with  you,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  promis-  th, 
John  xiv.  21,  23.  Would  ye  not  "  convert  a  sinner  from  the  errour 
of  his  way,  save  a  soul  from  death  and  hide  a  multitude  of  sins  ?" 
•as  the  apostle  speaks,   James  v.  20,   would   yc  not   at  least   excise 


166  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

Christians,  who  are  become  remiss  ?  surely  ye  would.  Ye  cannot. 
do  this  better  than  by  a  manly  activity  in  doing  good  works  ;  and  to 
whom  will  lk  God  render  eternal  life  ?  will  he  not  to  them,  who  by  a 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for  glory,  and  honour,  and 
immortality?"  Rom.  ii.  7. 

Have  ye  therefore   a  desire  to  bestir  and  exert  yourselves  to  do 
good  works,  (a)  Let   then  your  eternal  obligation  to  the   Lord,  and 
all  the  reasons  of  duty,    which   we   have  mentioned,    impress  your 
souls  ;  "  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  incline  thine  ear,  for- 
get also  thy  father's  house,  and  thine  own  people  :  so  shall  the  king 
greatly  desire   thy  beauty  j  for   he  is  thy  Lord,    and   worship  thou 
him,"  Psalm   xlv.  10,  11.     This  would  retain  you  always  under  the- 
bond  and  yoke  of  discretion  ;  therefore   bind  yourselves  frequently 
to  serve  the  Lord,  and  say  vvilh  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  "  O 
Lord,   truly  I   am  thy  servant,   1  am  thy  servant,"   Psalm   cxvi.  16. 
(b)  Endeavour  to  watch  and  to  keep  your  hearts,  and  outward  senses 
and  members  ;  for  these  often  mislead  and  seduce  the  soul,  and  de- 
tach her  from  her  strictness  ;  "  Keep   thy  heart  with   all  diligence  ; 
Jbr  out  of  it  are   the  issues  of  life.     Put  away  from  thee  a  froward 
ynouth,  and  perverse   lips  put  far  from  thee.     Let  thine  eyes  look 
jright  on,  and  let  thine  eye-lids  look  straight  before  thee.  Ponder  the 
path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established.     Turn  not  t« 
the  right  hand,  nor  to  the  left ;  remove   thy  feet  from  evil,"  Prov. 
iv.  23 — 27.     Beware  of  looking   at  evil  examples,  especially  of  per- 
sons,   who  are   eminently  pious ;  for  these    ar>-   powerful  means  of 
Seduction.     When   Peter   dissembled,   the  other   Jews  dissembled 
likewise,  so  that  Barnabas  also  was  carried  away  with  their  dissimu- 
lation," Gal.  ii.  11,  12,  13.  (c)  Depend  upon  Christ,  as  your  pattern, 
Sand  imitate  him,   Eph.  v.  1,2.     For  this  end  he  suffered  and  acted 
Jn  every  respect  in  a  holy  manner,  1  Peter  ii.  21 — 24.     Look  upon 
y\m  as  "  made  sanctification  to  you,"  1  Cor.   i.  30,   and  seek   that 
*help  which  is  laid  on   him,"  Psalm   lxxxix.  19.  (d)  "  Reach  forth, 
and  press  toward  perfection,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  12,   13,  14   (e) 
Do  ye   fall,    lie  not  still  through  discouragement,   but  rise  up  again 
repeatedly.    See  Jer,  viii    4.  (f )  Be  not  satisfied  with  one  good  work, 
but  "  be  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus 
Christ,  to  the  glory  and  the  praise  of  God,"  agreeably  to  the  admo- 
nition of  the  apostle,  Phil.  i.  11.  "  Give  all  diligence  to  add  to  your 
faith  virtue,"  &c.  2  Peter  i.  5 — 11.     Ye,i,see   that  all   your  actions 
are  good,  doing  them  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  to  the  glory  of  God, 
accord';;:-;  to  Col.  iii.  18.  1  Cor.  x.  31.  (g)  Perform  not  good  works 
by  any  means  from  a  slavish  fear,  or  in  order  to  have  a  claim  on  God. 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  iff 

but  as  the  redeemed,  delivered  and  peculiar  people  of  Christ,  agreea- 
bly to  the  text,  (h)  In  order  to  obtain  assurance  by  good  works,  do' 
not  compare  yourselves  with  those  who  are  further  advanced  than 
ye  are,  with  your  great  duty,  or  with  the  strength  of  the  old  man  :- 
but  consider  your  desire  and  love  to  holiness,  and  your  opposition  to- 
sin,  and  "  the  willingness  of  your  mind,  which  renders  you  accepta- 
ble," 2  Cor   viii.  12. 

Do  ye  not  think  highly  of  your  good  works,  because  they  are  few,' 
and  exceedingly  defective,  the  Lord  will  discover  to  you  unci  others 
the  good  that  is  in  them,  and  that  proceedeth  from  his  Spirit,  howT 
ye  have  confessed  his  truth,  embraced  his  grace,  earnestly  longed! 
for  his  promises,  obeyed  his  commandments,  fought  against  siriS 
pressed  toward  perfection,  prayed  in  secret ;  yea,  he  will  more  than 
Paul,  "  remember  your  work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience 
of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Thess.  i.  3,  and  he  will  ac= 
cording  to  his  promise,  Psalm  lxxx.  7,  enable  you  to  u  &o  from 
strength  to  strength,  and  every  ©ne  of  you  shall  appear  before  God 
in  Zi«u,"  Amen. 


Vol,  iij  X 


170  ) 


THE 


NATURE    OF   CONVERSION 


AND  OF 


GOOD  WORKS. 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


2  Cor.  vi i.  10,  11.  For  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salva- 
tion, not  to  b^  repented  of:  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh 
deu.h.  For  behold,  this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a 
godly  sort,  what  carefuln  ss  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  vehem- 
ent desire,  yea,  what  zeal,  yea,  what  revenge  !

Q.  87.  Cannot  they  then  be  ■  •■aved,  who  continuing  in  their  wicked 
and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted  to  God? 

A.  13y  no  means  ;  for  the  holy  scripture  declares  that  no  unchaste 
person,  idolater,  adulterer,  thief,  covetous  man,  drunkard,  slanderer, 
robber,  or  any  such  like,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 


"G, 


REAT  peace    have   they  which   love  thy  law,"  saith  David. 
Psalm  cxix.  165.     They  have  peace  with  men,  who  are  otherwise 


So,  87.  255 

iheir  enemies  ;  for  "  when  a  nun's  Ways  please  the  Lord,   he   ma- 
keth  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him,"  Prov.  xvi.  7.    Have 
they  who  love  the  law  of  the  Lord  any  enemies,  who  fight   against 
them,  they  have  nevertheless  a  great  peace,    whereby  they    are    so 
encouraged,  that  they    are  fearless  of  the  fiercest  and  most   mighty 
enemies:  "The  Lord  is  my  light   and  my  salvation,  whom   shall  I 
fear  ?  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life,  of  whom  shall  I  he  afraid  ? 
Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear," 
saith  that  great  lover  of  the  law  of  God,  Psalm   xxvii.  1,    3.     They 
who  love  t!>e  law  of  the  Lord  have  a  great  peace  and    tranquility  in 
their  soul  with  and  in  the  Lord  :"     The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  and  which  keepeth  the  heart   and   mind   through 
Jesus,"  as  it  is  desribed  by  the  apostle,  Phil.  iv.  7.     Is.  this  matter  of 
wonder.?     Christ  hath  purchased  that  great  peace  for  them  :    "  The 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed,"  Isaiah  liii.  5.     Thelo\eofthe  divine- law  is    itself  a  sweet 
peace  :  the  person  who  loves  the  law  "  rejotceth  in  the  way  of  God's 
testimonies,  more  than  in  all  riches,"  according  to  Psalm   cxix.    14. 
When  he  loves  the  law  ot"  God  so  that  he  practises  it,  the   Lord    re- 
wards him  for  it  with  "  peace  and  mercy,"    as  Paul   testifieth,  Gal. 
vi.  16.     When  the  first  Christians    "  walked  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
the  comfor;  of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  multiplied,"  Acts  iz.  31. 

Thus  also  the    instructor  understands  this  matter,  when  he  shows 

us  th&t    we    are  obliged  to  manifest    gratitude  by  good  works,  as  a 

mean  of  obtaining   peace  and  comfort  ;    for  after  having  proposed 

our  only  comfort  in  the   first  question  of  the   catechism,  he  exhibits 

in  the  stcond  question  three  means  of  obtaining  that  comfort,  namely, 

the  knowledge  of  our  misery,  of  our  deliverance,  and  of   gratitude  ; 

for  knowing  that  a  knowledge  of  misery  renders  the    sinner   indeed 

capable  of  comfort,  but  that  it  doth  not  of  itself   merit,    or  procure 

comfort,  he  therefore  teaches  the  deliverance  of  the  elect   sinner  by 

the   Mediator  Jesus,  who  hath  obtained  peace,  and  comfort  for*  him. 

But  who  can  derive  peace  and  comfort  from    this,  while  he  doth  not 

love  trie  law  of  the  Lord,  and  conduct  according  to  it  ?    He  therefore 

shows,  that  if  we  will  live  comfortably,  we  must  do  good  works,  as 

an  acknowledgment  of  that  deliverance.     This   he  doth   in  the  third 

part  of  the  catechism,  in  which  five  particulars  are  proposed  : 

I.  The  necessity  of  good  works  in  the  thirty-second  Lord's  day. 
II.  The  principle  from  which  they  must  be  performed,  to  wit;  con- 
version, Questions  88,  S9,  90.  III.  The  nature  of  good  works. 
Question  91.  IV.  The  rule,  according  to  which  good  works  must  be 
performed,  to  wit.  the  law  of  God,  from  the  34th,  to  the  44th  LordV. 


156  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

days.     V.  The    mean  of  doing  good  works,  namely,    prayer,  from 
the  43th,  to  the  52nd  Lord's  days 

We  must  attend  at  present  only  to  the  necessity  of  good  works, 
which  is  exhibited  in  this  Lord's  day  by   two  particulars: 

I.  The  motives  that  oblige  a  Christian,  who  hath  been  delivered, 
to  perform  good  works,  Q.  8  6. 

II.  T-f.e  impossibility  of  being  saved  without  performing  good 
works,  Q.  87 

1.  We  are  taught  in  the  second  part  of  the  "atechism,  that  "  we 
are  delivered  from  our  misery  only  of  gr^ce  by  Christ,  without  any 
me>i<  oi  our  own."  The  Papists,  who  cannot  endure  this  sacred 
tiu  /.  say  that  then  we  need  not  do  any  gcvl  works;  yea,  they  slan- 
der us  as  enemies  of  good  work^  They  are  strengthened  in  'his 
by  the  lotinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the  law,  who  hold  that  a  per- 
son, who  hath  been  delivered,  doth  indeed  do  good  works,  hut  not 
as  a  duty,  because  (.  hrist  hath  satisfied  'he  law  of  duty  for  thosr 
who  are  delivered,  They  will  admil  that  the  delivered  must  do  good 
".voiks,  because  ;t  is  their  nature,  as  a  vine  must  boar  fruit  ;  but  they 
say  '  at  they  are  not  obliged  to  do  them  as  a  duty,  which  is  r.om- 
m.ncie:.  *nd  .  joined  on  them,  as  though  this  were  the  work  of 
slaves,  and  no.  oi  the  free  children  of  God.  Those  who  have  not 
their  senses  exercised  will  think  that  these  things  are  right  and  fair; 
but  they  who  understand  the  secret,  know  that  these  men  esteem 
every  action,  how  abominable  soever,  to  be  good  ;  because  all  things 
are  done  according  to  the  eternal  decree  of  God,  and  therefore  ac- 
cording to  bis  will.  And  what  is  that  eternal  decree  i  an  unchangc- 
blc  lawT  of  nature,  or  fate,  which  determines  all  things  without  God. 
And  so  this  ass-,  rtion  is  the  offspring  of  Atheism,  and  the  denial  of  a 
God,  tricked  up  by  Spinoza  and  Van  ITat'em. 

Bu  v/e,  who  have  learned  hotter,  say  that  a  person  who  is  delivered 
without  any  merit  o\'  his  own,  merely  of  grace  through  Christ, 
5f  must  "  still  do  good  works  ;  not  that  he  may  merit  by  them,  as 
we  have  proved  upon  the  twenty-third  and  twenty-fourth  Lord's 
day-  ;  arid  not  only  because  it  is  become  the  nature  of  the  delivered, 
but  also  as  a  duty,  which  thev  are  commanded  to  do.  Believers  are 
commanded  again  and  again  to  perform  good  v. oiks  v. ;th  a  holy- 
fear  :  the  passages  are  too  numerous  to  be  transcribed  here.  See 
only  Exod-  xx.  Deut.  v.  Psalm  ii.  11.  Phil.  ii.  12.  Titus  iii. 
8,  14,  Heb  iv  2  The  delivered  glorv  that  "  the  Lord  is  their 
Judge,  their  Lawgiver  and  King,"  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22.  Must  we  not 
obey  God  according  to  his  commandments  ?  and  is  not  that  which 
we   do   in    obedience    to    him   a     good    work  J      Surely  belif 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  157 

must  be  obedient  to  God  their  Father  with  fear,  not  as  slaves,  but  as 
children,  as  Peter  admonishelh,  I  Peter  i.  14,  17. 

There  are  also  many  reasons,  which  oblige  those  who  are  deliver- 
ed to  do  good  works,  whether  we  attend  to  the  Lord,  who  obligeth 
them  by  himself,  and  by  his  beneiis,  or  whether  we  attend  to  the 
ends,  for  which  they  must  c'o  gnod  works. 

1.  With  respect  to  the  Lord,  he  is  the  Most  High,  and  every  hu- 
man creature  is  subject  to  God,  and  to  him  as  the  only  Lord.  God 
is  the  most  glorious  being,  alone  holy  and  worthy  of  himself  to  be 
obeyed,  believed,  feared  and  served.  This  lays  an  everlasting  obli- 
gation upon  the  reasonable  creature  to  acknowledge  it  by  good 
works.  In  whatsoever  condition  a  man  may  be,  whether  delivered 
by  Christ,  or  still  a  miserable  sinner,  he  can  never  discharge  him- 
self from  this  obligation  ;  as  long  as  the  Lord  is  God,  this  bond 
will  remain  upon  man  :  for  since  the  Lord  is  so  excellent,  is  it  not 
natural  and  equitable,  that  his  reasonable  ereature  should  acknowl- 
edge his  glory  ?  And  how  shall  the  creature  acknowledge  it  ?  only 
by  his  apprehensions  oi  it,  and  by  words  ?  must  not  all  his  actions 
proclaim  and  declare  it  ?  when  a  Christian  acts  from  this  principle, 
his  work  is  then  most  pure  and  excellent.  This  high  excellence  of 
God  obligeth  his  people  to  do  good  works  :  '.'  Ye  shall  be  holy,  for 
I  the  Lord  yoar  God  am  holy,"  saith  he,  Lev.  xix  2.  See  also  1 
Peter  i.  15,  16.  Hear  how  the  prophet  ptoclaims  this  to  the  praise 
of  the  Lord,  Jer.  x.  6,  7.  "  Forasmuch  as  there  is  none  like  thee, 
O  Lord,  thou  art  great,  and  thy  name  is  great  in  might.  Who  would 
not  fear  thee,  O  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  thee  doth  it  appertain  :  for- 
asmuch as  among  ail  the  wise  men  of  the  nations,  and  in  all  their 
kingdoms,  there  is  none  like  unto  thee." 

But  the  Lord  God,  willing  to  manifest  his  kindness,  obligeth  his 
people  by  his  goodness  and  love,  to  perform  good  works :  for  this 
reason  he  hath  delivered  and  freed  them  from  their  condemnation 
and  misery.  Why  then  do  men  say,  that  a  person  who  hath  been 
delivered  without  any  merits  of  his  own,  of  grace  only,  is  not  bound 
to  do  good  works  ?  He  is  for  this  very  reason,  even  that  he  hath 
been  delivered  of  grace,  bound  to  do  good  works.  Attend  only  to 
the  dispensations  of  the  divine  grace  which  each  Person  in  the  God- 
head exerciseth  toward  the  sinner,  in  order  ;o  his  deliverance,  and 
it  will  appear,  that  they  who  are  delivered,  are  under  the  strongest 
obligations  to  do  good  works,  and  must  do  them.  For,  (1)  the  Fa- 
ther from  eternity  foreordained  them,  elected,  and  gave  them  in  the 
council  of  peace  to  his  Son,  that  he  might  deliver  them,  and  that 
s'they  might  might  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  and  be 


$58  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

holy  and  unblamable,"  Rom.  viii.  29.     Eph.  i.  4.     "  He  hath  called 
and  effectually  delivered  them  out  of  the  power   of  darkness,   and 
translated  them  into   the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son."     They   must 
therefore  "  walk  worthily  of  the  vocation  wherewith  they  are  caiied," 
as  Paui  enjoineth,  Eph.  iv.  i.  The  Father  establishes  also  his  great 
covenant  of  grace  with  them:  "They  avouch  the  Lord  to   be   tl.ek* 
God,  and  the  Lord  avouches  them  lobe  his  peculiar   people  ;''  hut 
this  is  done,  that  they  may  hearken  to  his  voice,  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments," as  Moses  saith,  Deut.  xxvi    17,  lo.     Doth    he   justify 
them,  it  is  "  that  he  may  be  feared,"  Psalm  c>:xx.  4.      Doth  he  adopt 
them  lo  be  his  children,  "  they  must  separate  themselves   fiom  the 
unclean  thing,  and  walk  in, fear,"  2  Cor.  vi.  17,    18.      1  Peter  i.  17. 
And  when  he  preserves  them,  u.  he  puts  his  fear  into  their  hearts,  that 
they  may  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40      (2)  The  Son  "  hath 
redeemed  and   delivered  them   by   his   blood,"  saith  the   instructor* 
He  bore  their  punishment,  pjid  the  price  of  his  blood  for  them,  and 
satisfied  the  justice  of  God.     But  for  what  end  I  was  i;  that  ho 
might  discharge  them  from  all  obligation  ?     Did  the  Son   of  God  do 
and  suffer  so  much,  that  he  might  be  a  minister  of  sin  to  them  ?  who 
dares  assert  this?  and   nevertheless  our  adversaries  must  assert  it, 
when  they  will  maintain,  that  we  are  not  obliged  to  do  good  works,  if 
Christ  have  delivered  us  of  grace  only  without  any  merit  of  our  own. 
But  the  Spirit  of  God  speaks  otherwise  by  the  mouth  cf  Paul  in  the 
text,  when  he  saith,  that  the  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ik  gave  himself  foi* 
us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto 
self  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.     "Cod 
hath  also  exalted  him   with  his  right   hand,    to  be  a   Prince   and  a 
Saviour,  for  tj  give  repentance  to  Israel,"  as  ue'l  as  "  forgiveness  of 
sins,"  Acts  v.  SI.  See  only  how  Paul  infers  from  the  humiliation  and 
exaltation  of  Christ  the  obligation  of  them    who  ate  delivered  to  do 
good  works,  Rom.  vi.     Arc  they  bought  and  made  free  from  sip,  it 
is  that  they  may  "be  servants  of  righteousness,"  according  to  Rom. 
vi.  18 — 22.     "They  are  bought  with  a   price,  therefore  they  must 
glorify  God  in  their  body,  and  in  their  spirit,   which  are  God's."  as 
Paul  teacheth,    1  Cor.  vi   20.-    Yea,   shall    not    this  great   "love  of 
Christ  constrain  them,"  lo  look  upon  themselves,  as  bound  to  live 
for  him  ?"  certainly  yes:  see  2  Cor.   v.  14,    15,  (3)  They  who  are 
delivered,  having  been  bought  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  are   also  ie- 
ncwed  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  after  his  image  ;  for  "  he  is  made  unto 
them  of  God  sanctification,"  as  well  as  "righteousness,"    1  Cor.  i. 
•     And  therefore  he  hath  given    then   "his  Holy  Spirit  to  renew 
j         "'   after  Ins  image,    See  Titus  iii.  4,   5,  6.     Ly  this  renewing 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  36,  87.  15» 

alter  his  image  "Christ  is  formed  in  them,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  They 
become  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  2  Peter  i.  4.  Yea,  "  they 
are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Must 
not  such  persons  do  good  works  ?  may  they  forbear  to  act  conforma- 
bly to  him  in  holiness  ?  It  is  become  their  nature  to  do  good  works; 
for  they  who  are  delivered  are  "  the  workmanship  of  God,  created 
in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained, 
that  they  should  walk  in  them,"  Ep>.  ii.  10.  They  must  also  do 
them,  because  they  are  commanded  to  resemble  him,  in  holiness,  I 
Peter  i,  15,  16.  How  is  it  possible,  that  they  who  are  delivered 
should  not  be  obliged  to  do  good  works  ?  for  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells- 
in  them,  leads  and  comforts  them  ;  therefore  Paul  saith,  "  Know  ye 
not  that  ye  arc  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell- 
eth  in  you  r  If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God 
destroy  ;  for  the  temple  of  Gcd  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are,"  1 
Cor.  iii.  16,  17.     He  saith  the  same  also,  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

2.  If  we  consider  the  ends  of  good  works,  we  shall  perceive  clearly, 
that  the  delivered  must  do  good  works.  The  instructor  mentions 
three  ends  of  good  works :  the  first  and  chief  end  is,  "  that  we  may 
testify  by  ihe  whole  of  our  conduct  our  gratitude  to  God  for  his 
blessings,  and  that  he  may  be  praised  by  us."  Gratitude  is  a  cheer- 
ful acknowledgment  of  the  kindness  of  the  Lord,  manifested  in  his 
benefits,  and  it  induceth  us  to  surrender  ourselves  to  him,  in  order 
to  serve  him.  Wonderfully  great  and  many  are  the  benefits,  which 
God  bestows  upon  those  whom  he  deliver?.  We  have  now  spoken 
tonly  very  briefly  of  them,  but  more  largely  before  from  the  fifth 
Lord's  day  to  the  present.  Must  not  those  who  are  delivered  be 
constrained  to  gratitude  by  these  benefits  ?  is  it  not  their  duty  ?  bad 
not  God's  ancient  people  their  thankofferings,  as  well  as  their  sacri- 
fices of  slain  beasts  ?  Because  the  Lord  doth  not  now  impose  such 
a  heavy  burthen  upon  them  whom  he  hath  delivered,  but  is  kinder 
to  them  than  he  was  to  his  ancient  people,  must  they  therefore  be 
unthankful  ?  is  the  duty  of  "  offering  thanksgiving  to  God"  now 
abolished  ?  Psalm  1.  14.  None  will  say  that  it  is.  But  how  shall 
we  be  thankful?  It  will  surely  not  be  enough  to  "say  Lord,  Lord, 
and  not  to  do  the  will  of  our  Father,"  Matt,  vii,  21.  We  must 
evince  our  thankfulness  by  doing  good  works,  in  order  to  manifest; 
that  we  have  wholly  surrendered  ourselves  to  the  service  of  God,  as 
an  acknowledgment  of  his  benefits.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  of  this., 
Rom.  xii.  1.  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies 
of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holv.  aecepta- 


160  THE  NECESSlTirtMF  GOOD WORKS. 

ble  to  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  In  this  mariner  d* 
we  testify  gratitude  to  God.  and  praise  him  with  our  whole  lives,  in 
all  that  we  do,  and  forbear,  "  whether  we  eat,  or  whether  we  drink, 
or  whatsoever  we  do,  we  t\o  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  according  to 
1  Corrx.  31.  Yea,  "the  delivered  must  serve  the  Lord  in  holinefe 
and  righteousness,   all  the  days  of  their  lives,"  Luke  i.  74,  75. 

The  other  end  is  "  that  each  one  may  be  assured  in  himself  of  his 
faith  by  the  fruits  thereof."  As  there  are  so  many,  who  have  only 
an  apparent  faith,  as  believers  are  not  always  sufficiently  enlightened 
to  perceive  the  soundness  of  their  faith, x  and  as  eve-y  believer  hath 
not  his  senses  exercised  to  discern  between  good  and  evil,  and  faith 
is  often  weak,  and  obscured  by  many  mists  of  cot  ruplion,  therefore 
believers  are  not  always  certain,  that  they  possess  a  true  faith.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  in  order  to  assure  them  tliat  they  possess  a  tine  faith, 
beshines  them  with  his  light,  by  which  they  behold  clearly  "  tin 
things"  (and  therefore  faith  also)  "  that  are  freely  given  them  ol 
God,"  1  Cor    ii.  12.      Yea,   he  gives   them  sometimes  a  strong  and 

■  sensible  assurance  cf  the  love  of  God,  and  of  the  forgiveness  of  their 
bin  >,  and  that  in  several  ways,  as  we  have  shown  on  different  occa- 
sions. See  the -first  and  the  twenty-third  Lord's  days.  But  as  this 
assurance  dot'i  not  always  abide  with  the  soul,  and  as  temporary 
believers  pflfcn  exhibit  a  counterfeit  assurance,  (for  they  also  some- 
times taste  the  heavenly  gift,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come) 
therefore  good  works  are,  as  fruits  of  faith,  the  best  evidences  of  a 

■  true  faith  :  k'  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit :  neither  can 
a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt.  vii. 
13,  and  "  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit,"  Matt.  xii.  33.  Therefore 
good  works  are  very  often  proposed,  as  marks  for  trial,  see  Psalm 
xv.  and  xxiv.  2  Peter  i.  4 — 10.  1  John  iii.  14.  James  more  espe- 
cially doth  this  :  "  What  doth  it  profit,  inj  brethren,"  saith  he,  chap, 
ii.  14 — 26.  "  though  a  man  say  he  hail,  faith,  and  have  not  works? 
can  faith  save  him  ?  Faith,  if  it  have  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone, 
Show  me  thy  faith  without  tiiy  works,  and  1  will  show  thee  my  faith 
by  my  works."  He  shows  also  in  that  passage  that  Abraham  and 
Rahab  were  justified  by  works,  as  evidences  of  faith-.  What  is  your 
opinion  now,  hearers,  doth  it  not  concern  those  who  are  delivered  to 
be  assured  .''  and  must  they  not  then  do  good  works,  that  they  may 
have  a  steadfast  and  indisputable  assurance  ? 

The  third  end  of  good  works  is,   '•  that  others  may  be  gained  to 

Christ  by  the  godly  conversation  of  them  who  are  delivered."     The 

wicked,   who  know   not  God,    seeing   the  love,   which  the  delivered 

-L.C'oGo;!  antl  tlreir-neighboati  Ihdr  htfniiitVj  their  self-den iah 


XXXII.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  86,  87.  161 

-fceavenly-mindedness,  meekness  and  moderation,  conclude  therefrom 
that  God  is  worthy  to  be  loved   and   feared.     Tiny  harden  them- 
selves against  the   word  of  reproof  and  admonition,    but  tins  li^ht 
etings  their  eyes,   and  pierces  their  hearts  so,    that  c>  they  are  con- 
vinced and   judged,   the  secrets  of  their  hearts  are  manifested,  and 
falling  down  on  their  faces,  they  worship  Gud,  and  report  that  God 
is  in  his  people  of  a  truth,"  1  Cor.  xiv    24,  25.    v'  The  husbands  are 
"Won  without  the  word  by  the   holy  conversation  of  the  wives,"  and 
many  "  are  made    ashamed,"    as   Peter  saith,    1  Petei    iii.  1,   2,16. 
Yea,  the  earnest  piety  of  the  delivered  will   awaken  drowsy  Chris- 
tians, and  they  who  aye  fervent  in  spirit  will  become  more  fervent : 
M  Your  zeal   hath   provoked   very  many,"   saith  Paul,   2  Cor.    ix.  2. 
See  P».il.  i.  14      Is  it  not  the  duty  of  every  person  to  win  his  neigh- 
fcour  for  Christ  ?  ought  he  not,  like  Christ's  "  sheep,  to  bring  forth 
twins,  and  to   be  fruitful  ?"  Song  iv.  2  vi.  6.     Will  the  fair  spoken 
Christian,  the  Christian  only  in  words  do  this  ?  no  ;  even  the  wicked 
presently  perceive,  that  he  is  a  mere  talker,  and  they  become  more 
averse  from  godliness  than  before,  when  they  do  not  see  good  works 
joined  to  speaking  of  God  and  divine  things.     Must  not  the  deliver- 
«d  then  do  good  works?  Surely  the  Lord  Jesus  commands  it,  when 
he  saith  to  his  people,  Matt.  v.  16.    "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before 
men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven  "     Paul  requireth  the  same  thing,  Philip,   ii.  15. 
II.  It  is  therefore  certain,  that  they  who  are  delivered  without  any 
merit  of  their  own,   merely  of  grr.ee  through  Christ,  must  do  good 
works.     But  what  will  become  of  those,  "  who  continuing  in  their 
wicked  and  ungrateful  lives,  are  not  converted   to  God  ?  cannot  they 
¥e  saved  ?"  Thus  asks  the  instructor,  and  he  teaches  us  to  answer, 
"  By  no  means."     This  is  not  a  mere  fiction  of  his  own  brain,  but 
he    appeals  to  "  the  holy  scripture,  which  saith,    that   no  unchaste 
person,   &c.  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."     The  instructor  is 
in  the  right,  for  this  is  declared,  1  Cor.  vi.  10   Eph.  v.  5.     Yea,  the 
word  of  God  saith,  "  that  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on  the  children 
of  disobedience,"  on    account  of  such  shameful  sins,  Psalm  xi.  6. 
Eph.   v.  6.  Col.  iii.  5,  6,     And  "  they  who  live  after  the  flesh   shall 
die,"  Rom.  viii.  13.     "  Without  are  dogs,  Sec.  Rev.  xxii    15.     Such 
abominable  persons  shall  not  be  saved,  nor  any  others,  who  are  not 
truly  sanctified  according  to  the  image  of  God,   however  civil  and 
devout  they  may  otherwise  be  ;  for  "  without  holiness  no  man  shall 
aee  the  Lord,"  saith  Paul,  Heb.  xii.  H.     The  Saviour  himself  saith, 
Matt.  v.  20.     «  Except  your  righteousness  exceed  the  righteousness 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  the  king- 
Vox.ii.  V 


o-  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

clom  of  heaven."  And  this  is  also  reasonable  ;  for  God  is  holy,  "  he 
is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab  i.  13.  How  then  should 
the  unholy  and  loathsome  sinner  appear  before  him,  and  enj<  y  the 
embraces  of  his  biessed  love  ?  David  saith,  Psalm  v.  4,  5,  6  "  Thou 
art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness,  neither  shall  evil 
dwell  with  thee.  The  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight  :  thou 
hatest  all  workers  of  iniquity.  Thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak 
leasing:  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  deceitful  man"  We 
may  not  think  that  Christ  hath  satisfied  for  them,  and  bought  them 
with  his  blood,  and  that  they  will  therefore  be  saved,  though  they  be 
ever  so  ungodly  ;  for  such  persons  manifest  that  Christ  hath  not 
bought  them,  for  he  would  then  have  delivered  them  from  the  prac- 
tice of  sin  because,  acco:dmg  to  our  text,"  he  gave  himself  for  us, 
that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself 
a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  The  Lord  saith,  Isaiah 
lix.  20.  "  The  redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and  unto  them,  that 
turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob."  Paul  saith  indeed,  Heb.  v.  9, 
that  "  the  Lord  Jesus  is  become  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto 
all,"  but  he  limits  those  all,  when  he  saith  that  "  they  obey  him," 

Therefore  it  cannot  avail,  either  the  Papists,  or  the  Antinomians, 
that  we  teach  that  Christ  hath  satisfied  the  law  for  them  whom  he 
delivereth,  and  it  rfoth  not  follow  therefrom,  that  if  they  must  still 
do  good  works,  God  would  then  demand  the  debt  twice  ;  for  he  sat- 
isfied  the  law,  not  that  he  might  discharge  the  delivered  from  their 
natural  obligation,  tor  they  cannot  be  discharged  from  that  obliga- 
tion,  unless  they  can  cease  to  be  creatures,  and  become  Gods  ;  but 
the  Son  of  God  satisfied,  that  he  mi^ht  take  away  guilt,  and  obtain, 
sanctification  ;  for  "  he  is  made  to  them  righlt  ousness  and  sanctifica- 
tion,"  1  Cor.  i.  30.  \nd  therefore  he  satisfied,  that  he  mi^ht 
strengthen  ihat  eternal  obligation.  The  delivered  must  do  good 
»,  not  to  satisfy  like  Jesus,  but  for  the  reasons,  which  we  have 
mentioned 

:y  say,  "  believers  are  not  under  the  law,"  Rom.  vi.  14.  "  The 
law  is  not  made-  for  the  righteous,"  Sec.  1  Tim  i.  9,  10.  Are  they 
then  on  that  account  discharged  from  all  obedience  and  subjection 
to  the  Lord  ?  no:  but  'hey  are  not  under  the  law,  as  the  condition 
of  the  covenant  of~works,  promising  life  to  them  who  observe  the 
law  perfectly,  ;-.nd  threatening  those  who  transgress  it  with  a  curse. 
Gal   Hi.  13.     Horn,  iii    19,  20. 

The  n'inomians  object  further,  that  if  the  delivered  "  must  "  do 
good  works,  they  will  do  them  not  from  a  childlike  heart,  and  wil- 
lingly, but  from    constraint,  like  slaves.     But   (his   «  must "  h   no'- 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  *6S 

fiom  constraint,  but  from  obligation  and  a  willing  mind,  as  children, 
il  must."  obey  their  parents,  and  nevertheless  ob.y  them  willingly. 
See  1  Peter  i.  14 — 17.  Psalm  ex.  23.  That  it  may  consist  with 
willingness,  that  a  person  may  do  a  thing  from  obligation,  we  learn 
from  Paul,  1  Cor.  ix.  16,  17. 


APPLICATION. 

Therefore  when  Ave  urge  the   necessity  of  good  works   by    such 
reasons,  may  we  not  then,  hearers,  conclude  in  opposition  to  our  ad- 
versaries, that  we  have  the  plainest  and  most  certain  proof  that    the 
doctrine  of  our  church  is  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God  ?  for  we  deny 
thus  all  our  own   righteousness,  seeking  our  salvation    as    sinners  in 
Christ  only,  and    we  assign  no  other  reasons  for  sanctincation,  than 
those  which  the  word  of   God  exhibiteth   to    us.     The    doctrine  of 
"truth  is  according  to  godliness,"    it  is   "  a  mystery   of  godliness," 
Titus  i    1.      1  Tim.  hi.  16.     When  we   therefore    urge    persons   to 
godliness  and  good  works  from  the  purest  principle,  even  their  gra- 
cious deliverance  through  Christ,  without  any  merit  of  their  own,  by 
the  most  suitable  and  powerful  arguments,  may  we  not  then  rest  as- 
sured, that  the  pure  truta  is  taught  by  us  alone  ?  is  it  not  then  a  vile 
calumny  of  our  adversaries,  when  they  say,  that  we  are    enemies  of 
good  works  ?     It  is  true,  that  as  there  is  no  heretic,  who  will  not  ap- 
peal to  scripture,  so  there  is  no  erroneous  spirit  who  will   not  pre- 
tend to  a  form  of  godliness,  unless  we  will  except  the   Antinomians. 
Bu'.  what  are  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  their  good  works  ?  the  Pa- 
pists assert  that  good  works  are  merlor  ous,  obliging  God  to  them, 
and  so  they  do  good  works  like  hirelings  slaves,  and  l.jgalis>ts.     The 
Remonstrants  and  Socinian-*  speak  only  of  free-will,  of  a  law  improved 
by  Christ,  and  of  his    example  ;  the    Remonstrants  add    for  decen- 
cie's  sake,  a  general    and    sufficient    grace,   which,    if  they   would 
apeak  plainly,   would    be  nothing   else  but   free-will,   and   the    out- 
ward   revelation  ;    for  they   cannot  name  aught  that    is   given    by 
God  besides  free-will,  and  the  outward  revelation.      But    are    these 
things  sufficient  to  influence  the  soul,    which  is    incapable  of  t^ood, 
and  disinclined  to  it?     They  may  urge  her  to  a  certain   heathenish 
morality,  but  they  will  not  effectually  captivate  her,  and  conduct  her 
to  unfeigned  holiness. 

Since  then  we  have  such  a  holy  and  sanctifying  doctrine,  is  it  no* 


1*4  THE  'NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKSr. 

lamentable,  that  we  do  not  maintain  good  works  more  than  we  dop 
It  is  cTidcnt  that  many  nm  >ii£  us  do  not  practise  good  works  ;  foP 
where  do  we  see  our  people  "deny  ungodliness,  and  worldly 
lusts,  and  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present 
world,  as  the  gr««.e  of  God,  which  bringeih  salvation,  and  whicb 
hath  appeared  to  us,  teacheth  ?"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  1  itus  11.  11,  12. 
In  whom  do  we  see  that  separating  of  themselves  from  the  woild, 
that  strict  godliness,  that  holy  resignation  to  the  Lord,  to  do  his, 
will  ui  all  things,  that  heavenly  mindedness,  and  that  hearty  love  to 
God  and  his  people  ?  trie  most  do  not  know  the  model,  the  pattern, 
of  these  things.     Is  it  not  true,  hearers  ?  it  is  surely  evident :  for 

1.  Many,  like  the  Antinomians,  look  upon  it  to  be  unnecessary  to. 
do  good  works  ;  why,  think  they,  are  they  necessary?  and  they, 
will,  though  not  with  words,  yet  with  deeds,  justify  the  Papists,  who 
say,  that  if  we  be  saved  without  any  merit  of  our  own,  of  grace 
through  Christ,  we  need  not  then  do  good  works  It  is  as  though 
we  did  works  which  had  been  done  already.  Are  there  any  who 
look  upon  good  works  to  be  necessaty,  who  separate  themselves 
from  the  generality,  "let  their  light  shine,  and  do  something  more 
than  others,"  according  to  the  commands  of  Christ,  Matt,  v  16.  46, 
47,  they  presently  cry  out  against  such  persons,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites, and  legalists :  with  t!>e  wicked  Jews,  "  they  sport  them- 
selves, they  make  a  wide  mouth,  and  draw  out  the  tongue,"  Isaiah 
Ivii.  4.  Do  ye  then  in  this  manner  think  to  break  the  yoke,  and  to 
burst  the  bonds,  which  God  hath  laid  on  you,  in  order  to  bind  you 
to  him,  and  his  service  ?  is  Christ  in  this  manner  become  the  minis- 
ter of  sin,  that  he  may  procure  you  freedom  to  practise  iniquity  ;  will 
ye  in  this  manner  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound,  and  do 
evil,  that  good  may  come  ?  "  Your  damnation  is  just,"  saith  Paul, 
Rom.  iii.  8.  It  is  shameful,  that  ye  will  not  do  good  works  your- 
selves ;  but  it  is  particularly  abominable,  that  ye  endeavour  to  dis- 
charge yourselves  from  your  obligation  to  do  them  ;  and  it  is  still 
worse  that  ye  oppose  those  who  do  them  What  hate  ye  to  de 
among  us,  who  urge  the  necessity  of  good  works,  according  the 
word  of  God  ?  and  why  do  ye  not  join  the  Antinomians,  for  ye  are 
of  one  mind  with  them  ?  Rather  suffer  yourselves  to  be  instructed 
and  sec  with  concern  how  far  ye  have  swerved  in  your  apprehen- 
sions and  conduct  from  the  doctrine  of  truth,  which  is  according  t« 
godliness. 

2.  But  others  will  say,  we  for  our  parts  know  better ;  we  look 
upon  good  works  to  be  necessary.  I  allow  that  ye  do  ;  ye  have  a 
♦borough  and  excellent  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  truth,  and  can 


•if*  1$£ 

,defend  it  manfully,  ye  can  stop  the  mouths  of  the  Papists,  and  cari 
sonfound  the  Antinomians.  But  do  ye  also  do  good  works  ?  what 
are  they  ?  are  ye  weaned  from  the  world,  and  from  your  own  incli- 
nations, and  are  ye  dead  to  your  lusts  ?  is  God  the  great  object  of' 
your  pursuits  ?  do  ye  strive  to  do  his  will  ?  where  is  your  lowliness, 
your  humility  ?  how  doth  your  love  to  your  neighbour  appear  ?  do 
ye  show  yourselves  meek,  courteous,  gentle,  friendly,  and  ready  to 
forgive  the  shame,  the  loss,  and  the  pain,  which  ye  suffer  from  wick- 
ed men  ?  In  what  respect  doth  your  light  shine  i  in  respect  to  your1 
apparel,  demeanour  and  discourse.'  We  do  not  see  it,  but  we 
sliould  see  it,  if  it  did  shine.  Notwithstanding  all  your  civility,  Lon- 
esty,  devotion,  and  liberality  to  the  poor ;  your  earthlymindedness, 
gelfsesking,  dissoluteness,  pride  and  alienation  fiom  God  still  ap- 
pear in  all  your  doings.  Yea,  how  many  are  there,  who,  though 
they  have  been  taught  better,  are  guilty  of  wicked  works  !  I  mean 
you,  ye  irreligious  persons,  violators  of  the  name  and  day  of  God  : 
you  who  indulge  yourselves  in  hatred,  envy,  anger,  revenge,  Iascivi- 
ousness,  gluttony,  drunkenness,  voluptuousness,  falsehood  and  de- 
ceit ;  yea,  as  though  ye  had  quitted  yourselves  well,  who  "  declare 
your  sins  like  Sodom,"  with  the  Jews,  Isaiah  iii.  9.  Are  not  these 
abominable  sins?  and  do  ye  not  aggravate  them  to  the  utmost,  when 
ye  practise  them  against  your  better  knowledge  ?  "  To  him  that 
knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin,"  as  James 
speaks,  James  iv.  17,  Do  ye  not  dishonour  God  among  the  ene- 
mies of  the  truth?  do  ye  not  occasion  that  the  way  of  truth,  yea, 
that  "  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  on  your  account,  as  it  is 
written?"  Horn.  ii.  17—24.  Ye  cannot  imagine  that  ye  will  be  sa- 
ved, if  ye  proceed  in  this  way  :  "  Your  own  mouth  condemns  you,  and 
not  I,"  may  I  say  with  Kliphaz,  Job.  xv.  6.  Ye  certainty  do  not 
exhibit  any  evidence,  that  Christ  hath  redeemed  you,  and  delivered 
you  by  his  blood  ;  ye  have  not  yet  been  renewed  after  his  image. 
Or  do  ye  think  to  escape  destruction  by  "  saying  Lord,  Lord,  with- 
out doing  the  will  of  your  Father  ?"  Jesus  will  reject  you,  accord- 
ing to  Matt.  vii.  21,  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye 
do  them,"  s:\ith  the  Saviour,  John  xiii.  17.  But  «  the  servant  who 
knew  his  lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did  according 
to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes,"  thus  speaks  also  your 
great  Judge,  Luke  xii.  47. 

Alas  !  friends,  look  well  to  yourselves,  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come.  Descend  into  yourselves,  behold  your  abominable 
disposition  and  conduct :  think  seriously  of  your  immortal  souls,  the 
importance  of  eternal  salvation  and  damnation,  break  off  your  iniqu>* 


166  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

ties,  and  "  work  the  work  of  God,  believing  on  him,  whom  he  halL 
sen.,"' John  vi.  29.  So  ye  will  escape  the  damnation  of  hell,  and  be 
able,  yea,  willing  to  do  good  works. 

But  m.iy  Wi  not  take  up  a  lamentation  for  some  of  those  who  are 
delivered,  on  account  of  their  unbecoming  conduct  and  say,  Lam. 
iv.  2  "  The  precious  sons  of  Zbn,  comparable  to  fine  gold,  hi  w 
are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the 
potter!"  Where,  O  believers,  is  your  former  a'id  first  walking  with 
God,  the  love  of  your  espousals,  your  resignation  to  the  Lord,  in 
order  to  serve  him,  your  tenderness,  and  carefulness  not  to  conduct 
yourselves  unbecomingly,  and  that  hearty  love  to  good  men  ?  men 
can  scarcely  conceive  any  more  what  this  means,  they  have  de- 
clined so  far  from  it.  The  world  hath  taken  away  their  heart,  their 
sins,  which  had  been  smothered  a  long  time,  begin  to  revive,  and 
how  many  sinful  emotions,  and  evil  inclinations  are  entertained  and 
winked  at !  their  heartiness,  liveliness  and  vigour  are  abated  ;  when 
they  will  exert  themselves,  and  "  shake  themselves,"  they  experience, 
like  Samson,  too  late,  Judges  xvi.  20,  21,  that  "the  Lord  is  depart- 
ed from  them,"  and  that  the  infernal  •'  Philistines  have  seized  on 
them,"  and  with  Paul,  that  they  are  "  brought  into  captivity  to  the 
law  of  sin,  which  is  in  their  members,"  Rom.  vii.  23.  And  so  the 
soul  becomes  discouraged,  a  burthen  to  herself,  and  to  ethers,  yea, 
even  to  the  Lord,  and  she  reproaches  his  name  :  «  Do  ye  thus  re- 
quite the  Lord,  O  foolish  people  and  unwise  ?  is  not  he  thy  Father, 
that  hath  bought  thee  ?  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  established 
thee?"  Deut.  xxxii.  6.  Hear  what  "  he,  who  holdeth  the  seven  stars 
in  his  right  hand,  and  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden 
candlesticks,"  saith  to  you  also,  Rev.  ii.  1,  4,  5.  I  have  somewhat 
against  thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love.  Remember  there- 
lore  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  the  hrst  works  ;  or 
else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove  thy  candlestick 
out  of  his  plac*-,  except  thou  repent."  Therefore,  as  Paul  admon- 
isheth,  Heb.  xii.  12,  13,  14.  "  Lilt  up  the  hands  which  hang  down, 
and  the  Leble  knees.  \nd  make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  lest 
that  which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way,  but  let  it  rather  be  heal- 
ed. Follow  after  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness,  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 

Come  then,  ye  sluggish  persons,  let  me  arouse  and  persuade  you  , 

yea,  you  also,  whose  souls  glow  with  zeal  to  strive  for  perfection, 

that  ye  may  be  urged  the  more  to  "  run  and  not  be  weary,  to  walk 

md  not  faint,"  Isaiah  xl.  31.  (a)  Is  not  the  Lord  worthy  to  be  feared. 

i,  served  and  obeyed  by  you?   hath  he  not   deserved  it  at  vo"'- 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY*  Q.  86,  it.  167 

hands  by  all  his  favours  ?  hath  not  the  Saviour  made  you  "  his  peo- 
ple," by  purchasing  you  with  his  blood,  that  ye  might  be  "  zealous 
of  good  works  ?"  according  to  the  text  ?  doth  it  not  then  become 
you  to  be  thankful  to  him  ?  yea,  have  ye  not  surrendered  yourselves 
to  him,  and  bound  yourselves,  as  it  were,  with  an  oath,  like  David, 
**  to  keep  his  righteous  judgments  :"  Psalm  cxix.  106.  Will  ye  not 
now  perform  your  oath  ?  (b)  Is  there  aut;ht  that  is  sweeter,  more 
d  lightful,  or  that  can  rejoice  the  soul  more  ?  Ye  know  experimen- 
tally that  the  life  of  God,  and  doing  his  will,  is  the  life,  the  element, 
the  meat,  drink,  and  sound  health  of  your  souls  ;  "  It  is  joy  to  the 
just  o  do  judgment,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings,  Prov.  xxi.  15.  David 
saith  of  himself,  Psalm  cxix.  14.  "I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of 
thy  testimonies,  as  much  as  in  all  riches."  And  cannot  each  of  you 
believers,  bear  witness  of  himself  in  troth,  with  the  gre;it  Paul,  Rom. 
vii.  22.  "I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man  ?"  O 
the  contrary,  what  bitterness,  vexation,  restlessness  and  continu 
perturbation  is  there  in  sin  I  How  often  must  ye  complain  with 
David,  Psalm  xxxviii.  3,  4,  18.  "There  is  no  rest  in  my  bones? 
because  of  my  sin ;  for  mine  iniquities  ate  gone  over  mine  head  : 
as  a  heavy  burthen  they  are  loo  heavy  for  me.  I  am  distressed  on 
account  of  my  sin."  Do  not  then  embrace  your  own  sorrow,  but 
delight  in  living  strictly  and  circumspectly  to  the  Lord.  (c>  If  youf 
holy  living  to  God  should  not  ptofit  your  souls  in  the  least,  would  ye 
not  still  reckon  it  your  happiness  ?  how  much  more  should  ye  then 
be  urged  to  live  such  a  life  now,  when  "  in  keeping  God's  command 
ments  there  is  a  great  reward?"  Psalm  xix.  11.  "The  Lord  wih 
not  be  sought  in  Vain,"  Isaiah  xlv.  9  "  He  will  not  suffer  you  to 
shut  the  doors  of  his  house,  nor  kindle  fire  on  his  altar  for  nought," 
Mai.  i.  10.  "  For  God  is  not  unrig!  teous  to  forget  your  work,  and 
labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  his  name,  in  that  y< 
have  ministered  to  the  saints,  and  do  yet  minister,"  saith  Paul,  Heb 
vi.  10.  He  bestows  for  "a  cup  of  cold  water,  which  we  give  to  hii 
little  ones,"  a  great  and  a  sure  reward,  Matt.  x.  42  Is  it  not  true 
ye  know  that  when  the  soul  endeavours  to  do  his  will,  she  acquires 
a  glorious  conformity  to  his  image,  2  Cor  iii.  18,  that  your  heart 
becomes  established,  that  your  soul  is  enlightened,  and  obtains  an 
undoubted  assurance  ;  that  "  the  Father  and  the  Son  love  you,"  and 
manifest  it  by  "  revealing  themselves  to  you,  and  by  coming  to  yo  J, 
and  making  their  abode  with  you,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  promis-  th, 
John  xiv.  21,  23.  Would  ye  not  "  convert  a  sinner  from  the  errour 
of  his  way,  save  a  soul  from  death  and  hide  a  multitude  of  sins  ?" 
•as  the  apostle  speaks,   James  v.  20,   would   yc  not   at  least   excise 


166  THE  NECESSITY  OF  GOOD  WORKS. 

Christians,  who  are  become  remiss  ?  surely  ye  would.  Ye  cannot. 
do  this  better  than  by  a  manly  activity  in  doing  good  works  ;  and  to 
whom  will  lk  God  render  eternal  life  ?  will  he  not  to  them,  who  by  a 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for  glory,  and  honour,  and 
immortality?"  Rom.  ii.  7. 

Have  ye  therefore   a  desire  to  bestir  and  exert  yourselves  to  do 
good  works,  (a)  Let   then  your  eternal  obligation  to  the   Lord,  and 
all  the  reasons  of  duty,    which   we   have  mentioned,    impress  your 
souls  ;  "  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  incline  thine  ear,  for- 
get also  thy  father's  house,  and  thine  own  people  :  so  shall  the  king 
greatly  desire   thy  beauty  j  for   he  is  thy  Lord,    and   worship  thou 
him,"  Psalm   xlv.  10,  11.     This  would  retain  you  always  under  the- 
bond  and  yoke  of  discretion  ;  therefore   bind  yourselves  frequently 
to  serve  the  Lord,  and  say  vvilh  the  man  after  God's  own  heart,  "  O 
Lord,   truly  I   am  thy  servant,   1  am  thy  servant,"   Psalm   cxvi.  16. 
(b)  Endeavour  to  watch  and  to  keep  your  hearts,  and  outward  senses 
and  members  ;  for  these  often  mislead  and  seduce  the  soul,  and  de- 
tach her  from  her  strictness  ;  "  Keep   thy  heart  with   all  diligence  ; 
Jbr  out  of  it  are   the  issues  of  life.     Put  away  from  thee  a  froward 
ynouth,  and  perverse   lips  put  far  from  thee.     Let  thine  eyes  look 
jright  on,  and  let  thine  eye-lids  look  straight  before  thee.  Ponder  the 
path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  established.     Turn  not  t« 
the  right  hand,  nor  to  the  left ;  remove   thy  feet  from  evil,"  Prov. 
iv.  23 — 27.     Beware  of  looking   at  evil  examples,  especially  of  per- 
sons,   who  are   eminently  pious ;  for  these    ar>-   powerful  means  of 
Seduction.     When   Peter   dissembled,   the  other   Jews  dissembled 
likewise,  so  that  Barnabas  also  was  carried  away  with  their  dissimu- 
lation," Gal.  ii.  11,  12,  13.  (c)  Depend  upon  Christ,  as  your  pattern, 
Sand  imitate  him,   Eph.  v.  1,2.     For  this  end  he  suffered  and  acted 
Jn  every  respect  in  a  holy  manner,  1  Peter  ii.  21 — 24.     Look  upon 
y\m  as  "  made  sanctification  to  you,"  1  Cor.   i.  30,   and  seek   that 
*help  which  is  laid  on   him,"  Psalm   lxxxix.  19.  (d)  "  Reach  forth, 
and  press  toward  perfection,"  with  Paul,  Philip,  iii.  12,   13,  14   (e) 
Do  ye   fall,    lie  not  still  through  discouragement,   but  rise  up  again 
repeatedly.    See  Jer,  viii    4.  (f )  Be  not  satisfied  with  one  good  work, 
but  "  be  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus 
Christ,  to  the  glory  and  the  praise  of  God,"  agreeably  to  the  admo- 
nition of  the  apostle,  Phil.  i.  11.  "  Give  all  diligence  to  add  to  your 
faith  virtue,"  &c.  2  Peter  i.  5 — 11.     Ye,i,see   that  all   your  actions 
are  good,  doing  them  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  to  the  glory  of  God, 
accord';;:-;  to  Col.  iii.  18.  1  Cor.  x.  31.  (g)  Perform  not  good  works 
by  any  means  from  a  slavish  fear,  or  in  order  to  have  a  claim  on  God. 


XXXII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  86,  87.  iff 

but  as  the  redeemed,  delivered  and  peculiar  people  of  Christ,  agreea- 
bly to  the  text,  (h)  In  order  to  obtain  assurance  by  good  works,  do' 
not  compare  yourselves  with  those  who  are  further  advanced  than 
ye  are,  with  your  great  duty,  or  with  the  strength  of  the  old  man  :- 
but  consider  your  desire  and  love  to  holiness,  and  your  opposition  to- 
sin,  and  "  the  willingness  of  your  mind,  which  renders  you  accepta- 
ble," 2  Cor   viii.  12. 

Do  ye  not  think  highly  of  your  good  works,  because  they  are  few,' 
and  exceedingly  defective,  the  Lord  will  discover  to  you  unci  others 
the  good  that  is  in  them,  and  that  proceedeth  from  his  Spirit,  howT 
ye  have  confessed  his  truth,  embraced  his  grace,  earnestly  longed! 
for  his  promises,  obeyed  his  commandments,  fought  against  siriS 
pressed  toward  perfection,  prayed  in  secret ;  yea,  he  will  more  than 
Paul,  "  remember  your  work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience 
of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Thess.  i.  3,  and  he  will  ac= 
cording  to  his  promise,  Psalm  lxxx.  7,  enable  you  to  u  &o  from 
strength  to  strength,  and  every  ©ne  of  you  shall  appear  before  God 
in  Zi«u,"  Amen. 


Vol,  iij  X 


170  ) 


THE 


NATURE    OF   CONVERSION 


AND  OF 


GOOD  WORKS. 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


2  Cor.  vi i.  10,  11.  For  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  salva- 
tion, not  to  b^  repented  of:  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh 
deu.h.  For  behold,  this  selfsame  thing,  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a 
godly  sort,  what  carefuln  ss  it  wrought  in  you,  yea,  what  vehem- 
ent desire,  yea,  what  zeal,  yea,  what  revenge  !