Q.  88.  In  how  many  parts  doth  the  true  conversion  of  man  consist  ? 

A  In  two  purts  ;  in  the  mortification  of  the  old,  and  in  the  quick- 
ening of  the  new  man. 

Q.  89.    What  is  the  mortification  of  the  old  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart  that  we  have  provoked  God  by 
our  sins  ;  and  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from  them. 

Q.  90.    What  is  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  Cod,  through  Christ,  and  with 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  Cod  in  all  good 
works, 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—91.  171 

Q.   9. 1 .  But  ivhat  ere  good  works  ? 

A.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  are  performed 
according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to  his  glory  ;  and  not  such  as  are 
founded  on  our  imagination,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 


GOOD  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth 
foi\h  that  which  is  good  ;  and  an  evil  man,  c;it  of  theevil   treasure 
of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  evil  :  for  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart  Ins  mouth   speaketh."     Thus   speaks  the  Lord  Jesus, 
Luke  vi,  45.      I  he  tongue,   and  all    the  outward  actions  are  the  in- 
terpreters of  the  heart,  and  show  how  a  person  is  internally  disposed. 
The    index    will    show    whether  a  clock    is    in   order    or    whether 
it  is  not ;  the  vessel  wAi  affou!    that  which  it   contains;  and   as  the 
fruit  is.  so  is  the  tree  :  "  t  or  a  Rood  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt 
fruit ;  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  saith  the 
Saviour,   Luke  vi.  43.      Thus  it  i,s   also  with  a  man  ;  if  he  be  good, 
i-c  wui  do.  Lhat  winch  is  good,  and  if  he  be  evil,  he  will  do  that  which. 
is  evil      The  sinner  hath    by  nature   a  wicked    and   an    unbelieving 
heart  to  depart  from  the   living  God,  and  lie  manifests  it  in  all  that 
he  doth,      rherefore  t.  c  Saviour  said  to  the   slandering   Pharisees, 
Matt.  xii.  3i.     "  O  generation  of  vipers,   how  can   ye,   being  evil, 
speaii  good  things  I"     What  remedy  is  there  for  thisr   shall  the  sin- 
ner only  amend    his  conduct   in  some    measure,    and  accustom  his 
tongue  to  decent  language  ?  This  is  impossible  :  the  evil  treasure  of 
his  heart  will,  though  he  strive  agains"  it,  continually  yield  and  bring 
forth  evil  things  ;  the  heart   must  therefore  be  changed  and  amend- 
ed, if  it  shall  afford  better  things.     If  we  will  "  make  the  fruit  good, 
^e  must  fiist  make  the   tree  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks,  Malt  xii.  43. 
As  we  make  a  tree  and  its  fiuit  good  by  inserting  a  better  graft  into 
it,   so  the  sinner   must   also  be    ingrafted    into  Christ,   that  he  may 
<l  partake  of  the  root,   and  f*tness  of  that  olive  tree."  Rom.  xi.  17. 
But  how  shall  he  be  ingrafted  into  him  ?  by  regeneration,   faith  and 
conversion,  whereby,   being  wholly  changed  to  that  which  is  good, 
he  brings  forth  also   good  works.     So   Paul  showed   that  the  sinner 
"  must  first  repent,  and  that  then  he  must  do  works  meet  for  repent- 
ance."   Acts  r.xvi   20. 

In  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed.  After  he  had 
insisted  on  the  necessity  of  good  works,  he  doth  not  hasten  to  the 
law,  as  the  rale  of  good  works,  but  requires  first  that  the 
heart  of  man,  which  is  evil,  should  be  changed,  that  he  may  out  of 
that  good  treasure  also  bring  forth  good  works. 


172     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

There  arc  two  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  our 
exposition  : 

I.  The  nature  of  conversion,  Questions  S8,  89,  90. 

II.  The  nature  of  good  works,  Question  91. 

I.  The  Kemonslrants  imagine  that  the  instructor  ought  not  to 
have  treated  of  conversion  here,  but  before  the  doctrine  of  deliver- 
ance, that  so  die  work  of  man  might  precede  the  grace  of  God,  as 
if  the  grace  of  God  did  not  pre\ent  the  works  of  man,  and  conver- 
sion did  not  flow  from  our  deliverance.  We  cannot  understand  any 
thing,  unless  we  understand  the  name  that  expresseth  the  nature  of 
that  thing.  The  word  bekeeten  in  our  Low  Dutch  language,  as  also 
the  Hebrew  word  schub,  to  return,  and  the  Greek  word  efiistrc/i/uiu, 
to  convert,  to  convert  ourselves,  signifieth  to  turn  again  to  that  f;om 
■which  we  had  turned  away  before;  and  it  expresses  therefore  very 
properly  the  nature  of  conversion.  God  had  created  man  for  him- 
self, and  after  his  image,  but  man  is  by  sin  turned  from  God  to  him* 
self,  to  sin,  and  to  Satan  ;  but  by  conversion,  he  turns  himself  from 
himself,  from  sin  and  .^atan  to  the  Lord,  that  lie  may  obtain  mercy 
of  him,  and  live  for  him  ;  in  this  manner  is  conversion  described, 
Isaiah  xxxi.  6.  "Turn  ye  unto  him  from  whom  the  children  of 
Israel  have  deeply  revolted. "  So  "  Paul  was  sent  to  turn  the  Gentiles 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God;  that 
they  might  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  Christ,"  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18. 

But  let  us  penetrate  somewhat  deeper  into  this  matter.  That  con- 
version should  consist,  as  the  Romanists  fancy,  "  in  sorrow  of  heart, 
in  confession  with  the  mouth,  auricular  confession,  and  in  making 
satisfaction  with  our  works,  by  undergoing  a  certain  penance,  which 
the  priest,  who  is  the  confessor,  imposes  upon  the  sinner,"  this  is  an 
invention,  which  is  beside  the  word  of  God,  it  is  no  gracious  work 
of  God,  nor  virtue  of  man,  but  a  mere  punishment,  and  an  engine  to 
torture  the  conscience.  This  conversion  of  the  Papists  is  not  as 
good  as  the  conversion  of  Judas  ;  for  he  "  repented,"  and  had  more 
sorrow  of  heart,  than  is  required  of  any  Papist,  for  "  hei.anged  him- 
self;"  he  confessed  his  sins  also  very  circumstantially  to  the  priests, 
when  he  said,  "  1  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent 
blood."  He  satisfied  readily  and  actually,  when  "he  brought  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  again  to  the  chief  priests  and  eiders,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  3,  4,  5. 

The  instructor  rejecting  a  false,  or  a   half  and  pretended  con 
sion,  like  that  of  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab,  Judas,  and  the  Popish  conversion, 
inquires  concerning  f\  :>  true"  conversion,  which  he  describes  a 


WORKS,         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8«— 91.  173 

sisting  in  two  pails,  1.  The  mortification  of  the  old  man,  2.  The 
quickening  of  the  new  man. 

1.  The  old  man,  as  we  may  all  easily  conceive,  is  not  another  per- 
son, distinct  from  the  man  who  ;s  converted,  but  the  evil  disposition, 
which  is  in  the  man  himself,  to  wit,  the  natural  corruption  of  man, 
destitute  of  the  image  of  God,  and  possessed  of  the  image  of  Satan, 
which  fills  his  soul  with  hideous  abominations,  excites  him  to  every 
abominable  sin,  and  urges  him  on  from  sin  to  sin.  "  The  old  man 
is  corrupt,  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  iv.  22. 
This  evil  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  because  it  possesseth 
the  whole  man,  "defiles  his  understanding  and  conscience,"  and 
whatsoever  he  doth,  Titus  i.  15,  16,  and  "  rules  in  his  mortal  bodv," 
Horn,  vu  12,  and  because  the  man  loves  it,  as  much  as  he  loves  him- 
self, 2  Tim.  iii.  2  ;  but  also  because  it  hath  ail  the  parts  of  a  man. 
There  is  "a  fleshly  mind,"  Col.  ii.  18,  -desires  and  a  will  of  the 
flesh,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  "a  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6.  '*  flesh,"  John  iii.  G, 
V  members  on  earth,"  Col.  iii.  5,  '•  a  life  after  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii. 
13.  It  is  not  without  reason,  that  it  is  called  also-'1  the  old  "  man  ; 
for  it  is  as  old  as  the  man  himself,  and  is  born  with  him,  Psalm  li. 
5.  Gen.  viii.  21.  Yea,  it  is  as  old  as  Adam,  through  whose  sin  this 
old  man  hath  been  transmitted  to  all  his  descendents  ;  for  af.er 
Adam  had  by  his  first  sin  admitted  this  old  man,  "  he  begat  a  son 
in  his  own  likeness,  after  ids  image,"  Gen.  v.  3.  This  is  explained 
very  beautifully  by  the  apostle,  when  he  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  48,  4P„ 
M  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are 
they  aLo  that  are  earthy.  We  bear  the  image  of  the  earthy." 
We  may  therefore  call  this  old  man  the  old  Adam.  This  old  man 
doth  wholly  possess  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  while  in  his  natural 
state,  John  iii.  6,  but  exists  only  in  part  in  those  who  possess  grace, 
vexing  them,  and  violently  taking  them  captive  against  their  will, 
but  not  ruling  over  them,  according  to  Rom.  vi.  14.  vii.  22,  23. 

Conversion  consists  in  the  mortification  of  the  old  man.  This 
mortification  is  explained  by  the  instructor,  as  consisting  in  a  twofold 
assault  on  the  old  man,  by  which  a  mortal  wound  is  given  him. 
The  first  is  "  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  provoked  Gcd 
by  our  sins."  We  cannot  understand  wherein  this  sincere  sorrow 
consists,  without  considering  the  several  steps  of  our  conversion, 
(a)  The  sinner  bereaved  of  his  reason  before  his  conversion,  know- 
ing nothing  of  himself,  and  running  headlong  on  in  sin,  comes  in 
the  work  of  conversion  to  himself,  with  the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv. 
17.  He  looks  into  himself  and  sees  clearly  and  experimentally  hit. 
abominable  apostacy  from  God,  the  evil  disposition  of  his  soul,  and 


?T4    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOGLJ 

tha  unseemliness  of  .ill  his  behaviour  ;  yea,  he  looks  bark,  and  sees 
that  i.is  whole  life  is  filled  -with  abominable  actions,  and  the  sins  of 
his  youth  are  brought  distinctly  to  his  view.  Tins  affects  him  with 
shame  ;  he  is  amazed  that  he  is  so  abominable,  and  tii^:  he  hath 
not  known  it  before  :  ,;  He  repents  of  his  wickedness,  saying,  V 
have  1  done  ;  '  Jer  viii.  6.  He  had  before  this  heard  others  dis- 
course somewhat  of  God,  of  the  law  and  of  sin,  and  he  also  spoke 
of  these  things,  but  he  now  sees  the  things  themselves,  as  they  re- 
late to  himself,  in  their  nature,  and  cries  out  with  Job,  chap.  xlii.  5, 
6,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine 
eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
asr.es.  See  this  also  in  "  Ephraim,  who,  when  he  was  converted, 
was  instructed,  he  smote  upon  his  thigh  ;  he  was  ashair.ed  :  yea. 
even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi  19.  And  thus  he  becomes  -wise 
again,  as  the  Greek  word  vic'ar.oeit:,  and  the  Latin  resifitseert,  to  re- 
pent, denote.  lie  slops  not  here,  but  (b)  he  sees  also  with  sensible 
sorroiv  how  guilty  and  damnable  he  is  before  God  ;  hcrore  this  be 
thought  with  backsliding  israel,  Jer.  ii.  35,  that  the  anger  of  God 
was  turned  away  from  him,"  and  with  the  wicked,  Psalm  1  2], 
"  that  God  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  himself,"  and  that  he  w 
not  punish  him.  But  he  now  sees  that  God  beholds  him  in  wrath  ; 
he  "trembles  "  at  it,  "  and  is  astonished,"  with  1        .  ix.  6.  He. 

hath  "  a: godly  sorrow,  accompanied  with  Lev,  (  '.  vii.  !0,  II. 
'•'  He  knows  and  sees,"  now  experimentally,  that  it  is  an  e\il  thing 
and  bitter,  that  he  hath  forsaken  the  Lord  his  God,"  Jer.  ii.  19.  He 
condemns  himself,  and  cries  out  with  Judah,  "  Wo  unto  mc,  that  I 
have  sinned,"    Lam.  v.  16.     lie  ji  stifles'  Go  .      Im  li. 

5,  4,  and  humbles  himself  with  the  publican 

not  so  much   as  lift  up  his   eyes  unto  heaven,    and  smites  upon  hia 
breast,"   Luke   xviii.    13.  (c)  Sometimes    he  endeavours  to  reform 
himself,   and  will  not  sin  so  any  more  ;  but  he  discovers  that  all  i.is 
'>cst  performances  are  wholly  abominable,  with  the  church  he 
upon  "  his  own  righteousness  as  filthy  rags,"  Isaiah    Ixiv.  G.     He  is 
disappointed    in   ail   that  lie  attempts  ;  will  lie  forsake  his  sins,  they 
beset   him  continually  anew,    lay  hold   on  him,  and  overcome 
will  he  pray,  his  heart  will  not  accompany  him  ;  will  he  re; 
the  word,   he  finds  an   immovable   and  insensible   heart,  and  he  dis- 
covers thus  experimentally  his  inability,  and  that  '•  he  is  abomi 
and  disobedient,    and  to  every  good   «'ork  le  "   Titnsi.  16. 

affects  him  with  shame  and  humility,  not  only  before 
I  o  before  men,  whom  he  "  esteems  bei  :lf,"  Philip. 

v  .      •  is. in  his  own  uch 


W6RKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 91.  m 

Ignore  capable  and  more  virtuous  than  others  :  but  now  he  looks  upon 
himself  with  Paul  to  be  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  2  Tim.  i.  15,  and 
"  one  born  out  of  due  time,"  1  Cor.  xv.  8.  Before  this  he  was  never 
so  base,  but  he  still  knew  of  a  remedy,  and  he  had  always  a  hope, 
that  he  should  be  saved;  but  now  he  gives  up  his  hope  that  he  will 
obtain  life  in  his  own  way,  and  by  his  own  doings  ;  he  knows  not 
what  he  shall  do  for  his  recovery,  and  "  lie  saith*  There  is  no  hope," 
Isaiah  lvii.  10.  He  is  sometimes  ready  through  dejection  to  aban- 
don the  whole  work  of  his  salvation,  because  he  knows  not  indeed 
what  course  he  must  take  ;  but  as  the  distress  of  his  mind  con- 
tinucth  with  him,  and  he  hath  also  an  earnest  desire  that  his  soul 
should  be  saved,  he  speaks  to  them  who  are  wiser  than  himseif,  and 
asks  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved,"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  SO. 
See  also  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 

This  hearty  sorrow  of  his  soul  proceeds  also  so  far,  that  it  affects 
his  body.  His  countenance  gathers  blackness,  his  eyes  weep  bit- 
terly, like  Peter's,  Mutt.  sxvi.  75,  his  mouth  complains,  and  con- 
fesseth  his  sins,  like  David's,  Psalm  xxxii  5,  his  hand  smues  on  his 
breast,  like  the  publican's,  Luke  xviii.  13,  his  feet  go  softly,  his 
Stomach  fasts,  and  he  manifests  every  token  of  repentance ;  for  the 
afflicted  soul  finds  no  comfort,  except  only  in  sorrow,  with  the  pro- 
phet, Jer.  vhi.  18. 

The  Antinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the  law,  looking;  upon  such  a 
sorrow,  as  unnecessary,  yea,  as  sinful,  show  that  they  understand  not 
the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  nor  the  work  of  conversion,  and  that 
they  do  not  attend  to  the  word  of  God,  which  admonisheth  us  re- 
peatedly to  humble  ourselves  and  repent,  and  informs  us  how  the 
saints  humbled  themselves  See  Joel  ii.  13.  Psalm  vi.  xxxii  xxxviii. 
Iv.  exxx.  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6.  xvi.  29,  30.  2  Cor.  vii. 
10,  1  1,  and  how  "  they  who  mourn  are  comforted,"  Matt.  v.  4. 

2.  "  By  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better," 
saith  Solomon,  Eccl.  vii.  3.  And  so  the  second  assaul;,  by  which 
we  mortify  the  old  man,  is  "  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from 
sin."  When  the  sinner,  during  his  conversion,  bewails  his  sin  with 
so  much  bitterness,  he  cannot  caress  it  anv  more,  as  he  used  ;  it  is 
not  sweet  any  more  in  his  mouth  ;  he  will  not  hide  it  any  longer 
under  his  tongue,  in  order  to  spare  it,  but  he  will  forsake  it,  and  will 
not  keep  it  in  his  mouth  ;  this  meat  is  turned  in  his  bowels,  it  is  to 
him  like  the  gall  of  asps  within  him.  For  (a)  he  hates  sin,  he  hath 
an  antipathy  to  it,  and  an  aversion  from  it  ;  nothing  is  so  hateful  and 
filthy  in  his  eyes  as  sin.  Because  he  sees  now  by  the  light  of  God 
what  sin  is,  therefore  he  is  seized  with  horrour,  when  it  is  ©nly  men-  - 


IY6     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  COOft 

tione.l,   and  he  hath   a  drear)  of  it.     And  so  he  "  abhors  that  which 
is  evil,"  Rom.  xii.  9.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh  indignation,"  according 
to  the  text.     "  He  hates  even  the  garment  spatted  by  the  flesh,"  as 
Jude  speaks  in  his  epistle,  vis.  23.  (b)  Being  so  averse  from  sin,  he 
will  also  actually  turn  from  it,  and  "  cact  it  away  "  as  the  most  hate- 
ful th;ng,  and  "  as  a  menstruous  cloth,  and  will  say  "  to  every  sin, 
(although   formerly  ever  so  honourable,   profitable   and  pleasant  to 
him)    "  Get  thee  hence,"   as  it   is  said  of  those  who  are  converted, 
Isaiah  xxx.  22.     He  flees  from  sin,    as  from  his  greatest  enemy,  he 
is  exceedingly  cautious  and  careful,  that  sin  may  not  take  hold  of 
him;  he  avoids  it,  and  the  occasions  of  it ;  "  he  keeps  himself,  that 
the  wicked  one  may  net  touch  him,"  as  John  speaketh,  1  John  v.  18. 
He  keeps    himself   from  the    iniquity,    to   which  he   is  most  prone, 
with  David,  Psalm  xviii.  23.     He  lakes  heed  to  his  heart,  and  to  all 
his  members,  that  he  may  not  be  turned  aside,  according  to  the  ad- 
monition of  the  wise  king,  Prov.  iv.  23 — 27.     With  Job  «  he  makes 
a  covenant  with  his  eyes,"  Job  xxxi    1.  with  holy  David,  "he  keeps 
himself  by  the  words  of  God's  lips  from   the  paths  of  the  destroyer, 
hot  dug  up  his  goings  in  the  paths  of  the  Lord,    that  his  footsteps 
may  not  slip,"  Psalm   xvii.  4,  5.     Yea,  with   that  man   after  God's 
heart,  "  he  will  !ake  heed  to  his  ways,  that  he  sin  not  with  his  tongue, 
and  he  will  keep  his  mouth  with  a  bridle,  while  the  wicked  is  before 
him,"  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  (c)  As  sin  nevertheless  lightly  besets  him,  as 
his  corrupt  heart  continually  works  up  all  manner  of  filth,  the  world 
flatters  him,  and  the  devil  goeth  about,  seeking  to  devour  him,  he 
will  therefore   also  manfully  withstand    and  fi^ht   against  all  these. 
He  observes  by  what   means   they  seek  to   hring  him   to  a   fall  ;  he 
rejects  their  solicitations,  he  endeavor  rs  to  subdue,  to  annoy  them, 
and  to  "  mortify  the  deed*  of  the  body  through  the  Spirit,"  as  Paul 
speaks  of  converted  persons,   Rom.  viii.  13.     "  He  keeps"  the  lusts 
of"  his  body  under,  and  brings  it  into  subjection,"  with  Paul,  1  Cor. 
ix.  27   "  ile  puts  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,   he    girds  his  loins 
about  with  the  truth,  he  pu.s  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  he 
;,.;s  feet  shed  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  he 
takes  above  ail  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet   of   salvation,  and  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  whirl:  is  the  word  of  God."     He  exercises  him- 
self much  in  fasting  and  prayer,  that  he  may  expel   that   evil    kind, 
and  may  seek  help  of  the  Lord  against  his  enemies,   that  he  may  be 
';  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in    the    power   of  his    might,"    Eph.   vi. 
10 — 18  .Therefore  he  prays  with  David,  whom  we  have  oiter.  men- 
tioned,  that  God  would  keep  his    heart  from   :.  e    dominion  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins,  that  he  would    direct   his    vords    and   thoughts    in 


WORKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—91         17? 

3uch  a  manner,  that  they  may  be  acceptable  to  him,  and  that  he 
would  set  a  watch  before  his  mouth  ?nd  lips,  Psalm  xix.  13,  14. 
cx!i.  3.  And  he  manifests  thus  "  zeal  and  revenge"  against  his 
sins,  as  the  text  speaks, 

This  hearty  goirow,  this  hatred  ?.nd  fleeing  from  sin  is  the  morti- 
fication of  the  old  man.  For  thus  he  is  condemned  to  die,  he  is 
tortured,  he  is  deprived  of  his  food,  a  deathwound  is  inflicted  on 
him,  and  his  ruling  power  is  taken  from  him.  It  is  true,  he  struggles 
and  bestirs  himself  yet  strongly,  but  these  are  only  the  pangs  and 
throes  of  fleatrv,  which  will  never  restore  him  to  his  former  vigour, 
nor  wholly  subdue  the  converted  toy!. 

2.  Nevertheless  conversion  doth  no'  consist  only  in  the  mortifica- 
tion of  the  old  man,  but  also  "in    the  quickening  of  'he  new    man." 
The  apostle  teaching  the  converted  this,  saith  not  only,  Coll.  in.    "•, 
u  Ye  are  dead,"  but  also,    "  your  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God." 
As  the  old   man   is  the  evil  disposition  and  corruption  of  the  sinner, 
ko  the  new  man  is  the  good  disposition  of  the  converted  man,  or  na- 
ture renewed  after  the  image  of  Go -1  and  of  Christ,  that  clear  knowl- 
edge of  God,  and  that  pure  and  true  holiness,  whereby  a  man  is  like 
God,  and  is  urged  to  do  the  will  of  God  only.      See    Coll.  iii.    10. 
Eph.  iv.  23,  24.     This  good  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  be- 
cause it  possesseth  the  whole  man,  who   is  altogether  "  a  new  creac 
ture,"  2  Cor.  v.  17,  and  is  as  dear  to  the  converted  man  as  he  is   to 
himself,  but  also  because  it  hath  all  the  parts  of  a  man,  as  "  enlight- 
ened eyes  of  the  understanding,"  Eph    i.  18,  a  "  will  to  that    which 
is  good,"  Rom.  vii.  19,  «*  a  life  in  the   flesh  according  to  the  will  of 
God,"  1  Peter  iv.  2.     This  renewed  nature  is  also  called  a  new  man. 
not  only  because  the  converted  man  is  newborn,  See  John  iii.  3,  and 
becomes  a  man  first  with  this  new  birth  :  for  before  this  he  was  by 
means  of  his  abominable   sins    with    Nebuchadnezzar,  like  &   beast, 
and  with  the  hypocritical  Pharisees,  a  serpent,    and    an  offspring  of 
vipers,  Matt,  xxiii.  33,  but  especially  because  the  person  who  is  con- 
verted  is  renewed  after  his  new  head  :  the    new    or    second    Adam 
♦'Christ  is  formed  in  him,"  Gal.  iv.  9.     lie  is  "the  workmanship  of 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eph.  ii.  10.     See  this  clearly  asserted 
1  Cor.  xv.  47—40. 

This  new  man,  created  after  God.  was  alive  in  man  before  the 
fell,  but  died  through  sin  ;  but  Christ  having  slain  sin,  quickeneth 
the  new  man  again  after  his  image.  "  This  quickening,"  saith  the 
instructor,  "  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ."  The 
person  who  is  converted,  impressed  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  as  Well  as 
«f  filthy  uncleanness,  (a)  flees  out  of  himself  through  and  in  Chris** 
Vflt.  II.  ">' 


in     THE  N\TURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

whom  lie  embraceth  and  accepts,  to  God,  upon  his  cull,  for  reconcili- 
ation and  grace.     And  thus  conversion  is  fuith,  whereby  we  turn  un- 
to God  through  Christ,  who  for  this  end  calls  unto  sinners,    "  Turn 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."     And    Jer.  iii. 
20.     "  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  and  1  will  heal  your  backsli- 
dings."     Upon  which  the  converts,  betaking  themselves  to  the  Lord, 
cry  out,   "  Behold,  here  we  are.  we  come  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the 
Lord  our   God.-'     (b)  Hence   proceeds    "  that  sincere  joy    in    God 
through  Christ,"  for  whereas  sin  and  the  world  were  before  this  the 
dc-light  of  the  sinner,  now  he  is  converted,  God    in  Christ  is  become 
his  delight:  the  sinner  chooses  God  in   CI  list,  and  makes  him  the 
object  of  all  his  joy  and  gladness,    ihat    lie  may  find  his   delight    in 
him.     God  may  "  increase  the    corn   and  wine  of  the  wicked,"  but 
if  lie   will  only  "  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance   upon  him," 
he  hath    «  more  joy   in  his  heart,  than  the  wicked  "  on  account   of 
all  their  advantages  ;  thus  speaks  David,  Psalm    iv.   6,  7.  8,    "  God 
himself  is  his  escetding  joy,"  Psalm  xliii.  4.     »'  He  desires  nothing 
in  heaven  or  on  earth  besides  the   Lord,"   like  Asaph,  Psalm    lxxiii. 
25-     (c)  God  sheds  sometimes  upon  this  his  lore,  and  with  his  love 
a  heartfelt  joy  by  his  Spirit  into  the   soul;  either  by   assuring    her 
that  her  sins  are  forgiven  her,  *'  witnessing  with  her  by   his    Spirit 
that  she  is  a  child  of  God,"    Rom.  viii.   16  ;  or   by  giving   her   that 
tranquil  pe?ce,  and  calmness,  "  that  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding  and  which  keepeth  the   heart  and  mind,"  Philip,   iv. 
7.     Before   this,  "  s  n  was  continually   before  her  eyes  "  to  affright 
her,  as  David  complains,  Psalm  li.  3.  but  now  it  is  cast  into  the  bot- 
tomless sea  of  God's  mercy,   and    is   not    found   any    more,   though 
sought  for  ever  so  diligently,  Jer.  1.  20  ;  or  by  impressing  a   power- 
ful sens--  of  pardon  on  the  soul,  as  with  a  seal,  and  suggesting  those 
heartravishing   words     "  son     daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee," 
which    imluceth  her   to  say    triumphantly    with    ilezekiah,    Isaiah 
xxKvtii.    16,  17,  "O  Lord,  by  these  things  do  men   live,  and   in   all 
these  things   is  the  lift  of  my  spirit :  for  thou   has'  loved  my  soul, 
and  cast  all  my   sins  behind  thy    back."     With  the  jailer,  the    soul 
ices,  that  she  believes  in  God  "   Acts  xvi.  34.     >he  makes  her 
boast  in  the  Lord,  and  answers  the  cl  arg      of    er  accusers  with  the 
blood  and  death  of  Christ.     See  Isaiah  1    8.   9.     Rom.  viii.  33,  34. 
It  isiiue    the  Lord   doth  not  always  give  the  converted  soul  such  an 
nee  a:id  joy  ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  certain,  that  the  soul  turns 
him  b'   faith  with  a  ready  mind,  makes  'him  the  only 
object  oi"  tie    joy,  and  seeks  thai    jladness  in  God  ;  upon  which  the 
Lord  revives  the  soul  no>v  and  then,  and  more  or  less. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88 — 91.        M 

Can  it  no  v  be  otherwise,  but  that  this  new  man   should  have  "  a 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the    will    of  God    in    all   good 
works  V     No  ;  for  the  law  of  God  is  writ  en  in  his  heart ;  the  love 
of  v_hrist  constraineth  him.  and  the  eyes  of   his   understanding  are 
enlightened,    he    looks  upon  holiness  and   £ood  works  as   beams  of 
the  divine  glory,  though  before  this  he    considered    them   as  trifles 
and  follies  :  with  joy  "  he  esteems  all  the  precepts  of  God  concern- 
ing all  things  to  be  right,"  like  David,    Psalm  cxix.     128.     He  says 
with  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  12,  The  law  is  holy  :  and  the    commandment 
holy,  and  just,  and  good.     "  lie  dedicates   himself  willingly    to   the 
Lord,  and  eng.gcs,  yea,  "  swears  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous 
judgments,  and  he  will  also    perform  it,"  with    David,    Psalm   cxix. 
106.     He  sighs  to  the   Lord   for  strength  and  ability  :  "  O,"  saith 
he,  "that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  s'atutes,"  vrs.  5.     He 
also  actually  sets  about  his   duty,  yea,    "he  makes  haste   and  delays 
not  to  keep  God's  commandments,"  like  tiat  fervent  man,  vrs.    60. 
His  conversion  works  also  this  "  vehement  desire  and  carefulness," 
in  him.  according  to  the  text.     He  "  hath  also  a  delight  in  this  after 
the  inward  man,"  with  thai  holy    .pusie,  Rom.  vii.    22.     Like  king 
David,  "  iie  rejoices  in  the  way  of  God's  testimonies  more   than    in 
all  riches,"  Psalm  cx:x     14,  and  with  him,  he  ta'ces  them  as  an  heri- 
tat.r  for  ever  :  for  tl  ey  are  the  rejoicing  ol  his  heart,"  vrs.  3 

In  this  -nanner  is  the  new  m  in,  before  lead,  quickened  in  the  con- 
verted sinner.  He  becomes  another  man.  a  new  creature  :  is  uni- 
ted to  God,  as  to  his  soul  ;  he  lives  also  otherwise  than  he  was  used 
to  do  before  this  :  he  reckons  himself  to  be  dead  unto  sin  ;  but  alive 
unto  God,  Rom.  vi.  11.  This  is  his  element,  and  the  life  of  his 
life. 

This  conversion  is  ascribed  to  God  :  "  God  giveth  repentance 
unto  life,"  Acts  xi.  18.  It  is  also  ascribed  to  man  :  "  At  Antioch  a 
great  number  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  Lord,"  Acts,  xi  21  : 
for  "  God  works  both  to  will  and  to  do  "  in  man,  Philip  ii.  13,  where- 
by man  also  wills  and  works,  God  converts  man,  and  man  also  con- 
verts himself:  "Turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  tinned."  saith  fhe  church, 
Jer.  xxxi.  3.  Lam.  v.  21.  The  sinner  doth  not  prevent  God,  but 
God  prevents  the  sinner,  with  the  work  of  conversion  ;  yea,  in  the 
beginning  of  conversion  God  works  alone  without  man.  inasmuch  as 
man  is  blind,  and  therefore  wholly  passive  here ;  but  in  the  pro- 
gress of  conversion  mnn  works  also,  because  God  causeth  him  t» 
work.  And  therefore  we  distinguish  conversion  into  a  first  and  sec- 
ond, and  a  daily  conversion.  The  first  conversion  is  that  by  which 
a  man  passeth  out  of  the  state  of  nature  into  the  state  «f  grace  ;  s» 


£30  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

K  God  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent,"  Acts  xvii.  30, 
This  conversion  is  also  called  regeneration  :  the  second  conversion 
is  thai  by  which  a  converted  person  rises  up  after  a  grievous  fall, 
with  Peter,  Luke  xxh.  32,  62.  The  daily  conversion  takes  place 
every  day,  when  a  person  rises  up  from  his  continual  stumblings, 
and  bestirs  himself  repeatedly  to  "  follow  after  perfection,"  with 
Paul,  Philip,  hi,  12,  14,  whereby  "  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day 
by  day,"  2  Cor.  iv.  IS 

II.  He  who  is  converted  in  this  manner  must  also  do  works  wor- 
thy of  conversion.  The  sinner,  estranged  from  God,  and  blind  be- 
fore his  conversion,  knows  not  what  conversion  is,  nor  what  good 
works  are.  With  the  Papists  he  will  esteem  certain  superstitious 
practices,  in  which  he  engages  with  a  religious  intention,  extraordi- 
nary holiness ;  and  with  the  Pelagians  or  Semipelagians  he  will 
wonder  at  himself,  when  he  performs  certain  moral  duties ;  but  after 
he  is  converted,  the  eyes  of  his  understanding  are  enlightened,  and 
he  will  say  with  the  instructor,  "  Those  only  are  good  works  which 
proceed  irom  a  right  fuith,"  &c.  We  will  explain  this  somewhat 
more  particularly. 

We  must  know  previously  that  some  works  are  good,  and  have 
these  qualifications  from  their  own  nature,  and  so  cannot  be  evil. 
thus  it  is  with  saving  faith  in  Christ,  hope  in  God  through  Christ, 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  proceeding  from  the 
love  of  God  ;  these  are  indeed  fruits  of  the  Spin:.,  as  Paul  saith  Gal. 
v.  22,  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,  goodness  fahh  meekness,  temperance."  Other  works 
are  materially  good,  but  without  these  qualifications  evil  to  wit,  out- 
ward moral  duties.  The  Pharisees  seemed  to  have  many  good 
works  ;  but  inasmuch  as  those  works  had  not  these  good  qualifica- 
ions,  the  Saviour  expresseth  repeatedly  his  detestation  of  them. 
See  Mat,  xxiii.  13 — 16.  Luke  xviii.  10,  II,  12,  14.  There  are  also 
works  which  are  in  themselves  indifferent,  or  neither  good  nor  evil, 
as  eating  and  drinking  of  this  or  that  kind  of  food,  following  this  or 
that  calling  ;  but  they  become  evil,  when  they  are  not  performed 
with  these  qualifications,  and  good  when  they  are  accompanied 
with  them.  And  thus  we  must  "  do  all  things  by  faith  in  the  name 
of  Jesus,"  agreeably  to  Coll.  iii.  17,  according  to  the  lav.  of  God, 
"doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart,"  Eph.  Vl.  5,  6,  and  "  to  hi* 
glory,"  1  Cor.  x    31. 

1.  Therefore  if  works  shall  be  good,  they  must  in  the  first  place 
"proceed  from  a  true  faith  ;"  "The  end  of  the  commandment  is 
charity,  out  of  a  pure   heart,  and  a  good  conscience,   and   faith   un 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—51.         1*1 

Signed,"  1  Tim.  1.  5.  Faith  makes  the  heart  good,  and  therefore 
the  works  which  proceed  from  such  a  heart,  also  agreeable  to  (jod  ; 
for  "  the  heart  is  purified  by  faith,"  Acts  xv.  6.  And  tlierr-fore 
(i  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin,"  Rom.  x.v.  13,  and  "without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  Iitb.  xi.  6.  .Many  know  in- 
deed that  good  works  must  proceed  from  faith,  but  they  know  not 
how  they  proceed  from  it ;  the  matter  is  thus,  good  works  proceed 
from  faith  (a)  when  they  are  performed  by  a  true  believer  If  a 
man's  doings  shall  p'ease  God,  his  person  must  first  please  him  : 
u  The  Lord  had  respect  "  fiist  "  to  Abel,  and  "  thtn  "to  his  off  r- 
ing,"  as  Moses  relateth,  Gen.  iv.  4,  5.  Even  "the  satr:fice,  the 
way,  and  the  ploughing  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord  ;  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight,"  saith  the  wise 
man,  Frov  xv.  8,  9.  zxxi.  4.  They  are  the  "peculiar  people  " 
of  Jesus,  who  are  "  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  Bttt  how 
do  we  become  his  peculiar  people  and  united  to  him  ?  do  we  not  by 
faith,  we  aie  taught  this,  Song  ii.  16  John  i.  12.  Kph.  iii.  17. 
(b)  Good  works  are  also  performed  from  faith,  when  they  are  done 
by  the  power  and  influence  of  Christ :  "  Without  him,"  and  his 
influence,"  we  can  do  nothing,"  according  to  John  xv.  45.  Hut  how 
shall  we  obtain  his  influence  ?  surely  by  faith  only  :  for  we  thereby 
"receive  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  1.  12,  16,  and 
we  "  do  thus  all  things  in  word  and  deed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  commands,  Coll  iii.  If.  (c)  We  do  good  works 
also  from  faith,  when  we  do  them  with  an  assured  mind,  that  they 
arc  the  will  of  God,  and  pleasing  to  him,  and  thus  as  the  will  of 
God,  and  in  obedience  to  him  :  therefore  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
saith,  Rom.  xiv.  22,  23,  "  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  him- 
self in  that  thing  which  he  allowed.  \  nd  he  that  dbubteth  is  damn- 
ed, if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith  ;  for  whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin," 

2.  And  so  they  are  performed  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord," 
which  is  necessary,  if  the  works  shall  be  good  :  for  the  law  is  the 
rule  of  good  works  ;  the  Lord  God  also  directs  man  to  his  law, 
that  he  may  regulate  himself  in  all  that  he  doth  according  to  it : 
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  no!  according  to 
this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them,"  Isaiah  viii.  20. 
He  alone  is  the  lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy,  and  therefore 
lie  alone  can  determine  and  prescribe  what  he  wdl  have  his  reason* 
able  creatures  to  do  and  omit.  To  behave  as  a  man  thinks  fit.  with 
the  Papists,  may  please  the  man  himself,  but  it  will  not  the  Lord  ; 
for  then  God  is  rejected,  man  becomes  his  own  lawgiver,  and  he 


185     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

may  commit  the  greatest  abominations  with  a  good  design  to  serve 
God  ;  "  Whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doth  God  service,"' 
saith  the  Saviour  to  his  aposiles,  John  xvi,  2.  Yea,  we  perform 
then  adeiestabie  'v  wiii  worship,"  tending  only  k4  to  the  satisfying  of 
the  flesh,"  Col.  ii.  23  r*s  we  cannot  make  laws  for  ourselves,  so 
we  cannot  for  others  ;  u  In  vain  do  they  worship  me.  teaching  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,"  saith  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xxix. 
13.  Matt.  xv.  9.  Though  a  thing  be  ever  so  indifferent,  yea,  ever 
so  good,  it  still  '•  pcrisheth  with  the  using,"  if  it  be  introduced 
"  after  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men,"  as  Paul  speaks, 
Col  ii.  22.  We  must  be  servants  of  God,  and  not  of  men,  accord- 
ing to  1  Cor.  vii.  23  We  shall  not  "  be  judged  "  by  the  law  of 
men,  but  "  by  the  law  of  God,"  James  ii.  12, 

3.  ISO  work,  which  is  clone  from   faith,  and  according  to  the  law 
of  God,  can  be  pleasing  to  him,  "  unless  it   be  done  also  to  the  glory 
of  God."     The  Lord  hath  made  all  things,  and  especially   the   rea- 
sonable creature,  for   himself,  and    for  his    glory  :  therefore    it    be- 
comes the   reasonable  creature   to  direct  all   things  to    his  glory. 
The  Lord  is  the  most  glorious    being :  it   is   therefore    proper  that 
his  creature  should  acknowledge  this   in  all  that  he  doth,  "whether 
he  eat,  or  whether  he  drink,  or  whatever  else  lie  do,"    1  Cor.  x   31. 
"When  a  man  aims  at  himself,   he  puts  himself  in  the  place  of  God, 
It  is  true  we  must  do  good  works,  that  we  may  gain   our  neighbour 
for  Christ,  but  this  issues   in  the  glory  of  the  Lord.     See    Mutt.    v. 
16.     We  must  not  always  disapprove   of  believets    aiming  at  their 
own    profit  and    pleasure;  for  the  Lord  himself  excites  and  urgeth 
his  people  sometimes  by  these  things,  Gen.  xv,  1,  and  they  also  suf- 
fer themselves  to  be  moved  thereby.     See  this  in   the  virgins  of  Je- 
sus, and  in  Moses,  Song  1.  4       Heb.  xi.  26.     It  is  also  nearly    im- 
possible that  unexperienced  Christians  who  have  but  little  knowledge 
of  divine  truths,  should  begin  all  that  they  do  from  a  direct  view  to 
the  glory  of  God  ;  their    own  salvation,  advantage  and  pleasure  will 
excite  them  most,  and  they  end  thus  in  the  glory  of  the   Lord,  since 
the  glory  of  God   is    their  salvation,   and   their    salvation    is   the 
glory  of  God;  when    "God  satisfieth    their  souls  as   with  marrow 
and  fatness,  then    their  mouths  praise  him  with   joyful  lips,"  Psalm 
lxviii.  5.     And  so  the  Lord  obtains  his  em!,  to  wit,  his  jjlory,  and  he 
esteems  such  a  work  good. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S 'DAY,  Q.  88—91.         183 


APPLICATION. 

Do  these  qualifications  render  the  works  of  men  good,  can  then 
the  virtues  of  the  heathens  be  good  works,  as  the  patrons  of  free- 
will imagine  ?  They  had  not  surely  a  true  faith  ;  did  they  possess  the 
law  of  nature,  how  was  it  obscured  and  effaced  by  their  blindness 
corruption  and  evil  practices  !  was  it  not  their  own  honour,  the 
reputation  that  they  were  wise  and  virtuous,  that  ur^ed  them  on  ? 
For,  "when  they  knew  God,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  i.  21,  22,  "  they  glo- 
rified him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful ;  but  they  became  vaia 
in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened.  Pro- 
fessing themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  But  we  need 
not  wonder  that  persons,  who  speak  so  highly  of  the  powers  of  free- 
will, look  upon  the  virtues  of  the  heathens  to  be  good  works  ;  for 
even  their  own  virtues  are  no  better  than  heathenish  morality,  the 
offspring  of  the  corrupt  will,  and  only  tricked  up  with  the  name  of 
Christian  virtues  and  of  faith.  The  Papists,  who  value  themselves 
wonderfully  upon  their  good  works,  have  made  good  works  of  the  most 
fantastical  things  ;  performing  pilgrimages,  going  barefoot,  not  spa- 
ring the  body,  but  scourging  it,  making  monastic  vows,  yea,  doctrines 
of  devils,  forbidding  to  marry,  and  abstaining  from  certain  meats, 
these  are  reckoned  not  only  good  works,  but  even  supererogatory 
good.  But  these  things  cannot  be  done  from  faith,  to  the  glory  of 
God,  nor  according  to  his  law.  God  doth  not  require  them  at  the 
hands  of  any  man,  he  detests  them  :  "  In  vain,"  saith  the  Saviour, 
"do  they  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of 
men,"  Mat.  xv.  9.  Our  church  speaks  wi'h  more  sincerity  and 
truth  of  good  works,  and  hath  therefore  the  surest  evidence,  that 
she  thinks  rightly,  more  especially  as  she  speaks  according  to  the 
word  of  Got!. 

Will  it  now  suffice,  that  we  have  contemplated  this  matter,  as  a 
truth,  without  respect  to  ourselves  ?  must  we  not  also  apply  it  to 
ourselves  ?  It  concerns  us  greatly,  whether  we  also  be  converted 
or  not.  It  is  certain,  that  all  who  are  present  here  are  not  eonvert- 
ed,  nor  all  unconverted.  Many  fee*d  upon  ashes,  a  deceived  heart 
turns  tbem  aside,  so  ttiat  they  cannot  deliver  themselves,  nor  say, 
Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?  They  ween  that  they  are  con- 
verted, but  the  old  man  hath  never  yet  been  mortified  in  them,   nor 


Ii4     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

the  new  man  quickened.  Others  think  that  they  are  not  yet  con- 
verted, because  they  experience  so  gveat  a  power  of  the  body  of 
death  in  themselves,  although  they  are  truly  partakers  of  grace. 
It  is  therefore  necessary,  that  each  one  should  consider  his  ways, 
and  examine  himself  whether  he  be  truly  converted  or  not.  But  be- 
fore we  hold  the  light  to  you,  that  ye  may  see  yourselves  by  it,  we 
will  discover  to  you  the  false  evidences,  which  disturb  or  quiet  the 
converted  and  the  unconverted  improperly. 

It  is  surely  no  evidence  of  conversion,  (a)  that  a  person  is  able  to 
mention  the  time,  when  he  had  certain  emotions  of  painful  sorrow 
on  account  of  sin,  of  delightful  joy,  and  an  inclination  to  that  which 
is  good  ;  for  these  things  are  not  accompanied  in  all  men  with  con- 
version  ;  they  are  surely  not  always  the  beginning  of  conversion, 
(b)  The  severity  and  the  duration  of  the  convictions,  which  a  person 
hath  ones  had,  are  also  no  evidences  that  he  is  converted.  It  ap- 
pears from  experience,  that  some  are  converted  without  any  griev- 
ous distress  of  mind  ;  that  others  do  not  continue  long  under  severe 
convictions,  and  that  there  are  those  also,  who  partake  of  converting 
grace  from  their  youth  ;  and  some  are  converted  by  a  calm  contem- 
plation of  the  truth,  yea,  even  with  a  sweet  joy,  as  we  have  shown 
upon  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  day.  On  the  other  hand,  reprobates, 
such  as  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab  and  Judas,  experience  sometimes  severe 
convictions,  (c)  Neither  may  we  look  upon  it  as  an  evidence  of 
true  conversion,  that  a  person  is  more  virtuous  in  some  respects 
than  others  ;  many  are  civil,  honest,  and  exceedingly  devout,  but 
their  heart  is  and  continues  rotten,  like  the  heart  of  the  Pharisee, 
who  thanked  God  that  he  was  more  virtuous  than  other  men,  Luke 
xviii.  1 1,  12.  As  it  is  also  no  evidence  of  an  unconverted  state,  that 
a  person  still  expenenceth  a  great  power  of  the  old  man  in  himself; 
for  we  should  then  be  obliged  to  condemn  Paul,  who  bewailed  him- 
self rreatly  on  this  account,  Rom,  vii.  (d)  It  is  still  less  a  true  evi- 
dence, that  a  person  is  converted  or  unconverted,  because  eminently 
godly  persons  approve  or  condemn  him.  Paul,  though  he  was  con- 
yerted,  was  at  first  suspected  by  the  Christians,  Acts  ix.  26,  and 
without  doubt  Judas,  Simon  the  sorcerer,  and  Demas  were  looked 
upon  by  many,  as  converted. 

A  better  and  a  surer  evidence  of  conversion  (a)is  tl.e  work  of  conver- 
sion itself,  as  explained  above.  The  converted  have  a  sincere  sorrow  of 
heart  for  their  sins,  they  hate  them  mere  t'nn  aught  besides,  they  a»e 
afraid  of  them,  and  endeavour  to  flee  from  them.  Gcd  and  his  service 
are  the  objects  of  their  joy,  delight  and  love.  It  is  true,  some  are  corv- 
verted  without  such  a  grievous  sorrow,  but  they  wilJ  I  : 


WORKS.        XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9  i         18 J 

sorry,  and  mourn  on  account  of  their  daily  offences.     Do  they  not 
obtain  much  joy   from  the  Lord,  they  cannot,  nevertheless,  delight 
themselves   in  sin,  and  out  of  the  Lord  :  their  continual  turning  to 
the  Lord  manifests  that  they  seek  their  rest  in  him  only.     Are  they 
sometimes   listless  with    respeet  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  it  is  a 
burthen  to  them,  and  they  endeavour  again  and  again  to  enliven  them- 
selves.    True  conversion  discovertth  kself  still  more  (c)  by  the  work 
of  faith  ;  faith  and  conversion  always   accompany  each  other*     See 
Mark  i.  15.  Act*  si.  2i.     They  who  are  converted,  actually  pass  by 
faith  out  of  themselves  into  the  Lord,  in  order  that  they  may  obtain 
in  and  with   him  grace,  reconciliation,  pardon  and   sanctiffcation  ; 
with  the    prodigal  son    "  they  arise,   go  to  their   Father,"    confess 
their  sins,  and  entreat  him   for  grace,  Luke  xv.  18,   19      Yea,  they 
engage  in  a  solemn  manner  to  serve  him,  they  "  join  themselves  to 
him  to  serve  him,  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  to  be  his  ser- 
vants," Isaiah  xlv.  5.  Ivi.  5.     We  add  to  this  (c)  Their  sorrow  for 
sin  as  sin.     It   grieves  them  that  they   have   deserved   damnation  ; 
but  they  see  also  so  much  shame  and  filth  in  their  inquiry,  that  they 
hide  themselves  for  shame,  "  they  loathe  themselves,"  Ezek.  xxxvi, 
31,  and  they  "  dare  not  lift  up  their  face  to  God,"  Ezraix.  6.    They 
hate   sin  and  flee   from  it,  because  it  is  sin.     Although   sin    were 
not    punished,  they  would,  on  account  of  its   hatefulness,  still  hate 
it,  flee  fiom  it,  and  cast  it  away,  as  a  menstruous   cloth,"  Isaiah 
xxx  22.  Once  more,  (d)They  are  converted  from  every  sin  to  every 
good  work,  that  God  hath  commanded  :    "  They  have  a  delight," 
saith  the  instructor,  "  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  good 
works."     There  is  not  one  sin,  great  cr  small,  though  ever  so  hon- 
ourable, pleasant  and  profitable  to  the  flesh,  from    which   they  do 
not  turn  away,  and  which  they  do  not  hate  and  strive  against  :  there 
is  not  one   commandment  of  God,  to  which   they   do   not   submit 
themselves  with  delight  and  willingly  :  their  heart  saith  with  David, 
Psalm  cxix.   128.    "I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  concerning  all  things 
to  be  right ;    and  I  hate  every  false  way."     Suffer  me  to  add  yet  j 
(f)  They  who  are  conrcrted  are  not  satisfied  with  merely  amending 
their  actions,  forsaking  that  which  is  evil,  and  doing  that   which  is 
good  ;    but  they  attend  also  to  their  hearts,  that  they  likewise  may 
be   amended,  converted  and  changed.     They  see  that  their  under- 
standing is  darkened,  they  endeavour  to  enlighten  it,  that  they  may 
see  the  light  in  God's  light  ;  conversion  is  indeed   "  a  turning  from 
darkness  to  light,"    Acts  xxvi.  18.     They   see  that  their  will  with 
its  motions  and  desires  is  stubborn,  crooked  and  perverse  ;  they  en= 
deavour  to  subdue,  to  renew  and  direct  it  according  t©  the  will  •( 
Vol  it.  y 


186    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

God,  and  thus  "  to  make  themselves  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit," 

according  to  Ezck.  xviii  31.  They  lind  that  they  have  no  strength 
to  do  aught,  and  especially  none  to  change  their  hearts  ;  therefore 
they  turn  themselves  to  the  Eord,  and  cry  with  David,  Psalm  li  10. 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  with- 
in me,"'  And  thus  with 'king  Josiah,  2  Kings  xxiii.  25.  "  They  turn 
•to  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  soul,  and  with  all 
their  might,  according  to  all  the  law  of  Moses  " 

What  think  ye  hearers  ?  do  ye  all  answer  this  description  ?  Surely 
ye  do  not,  who  have  not  yet  striven  to  he  converted,  but  are  and  re- 
main careless  and  listless  :  earthly,  visible  and  sinful  objects  possess 
you  altogether  :  Evil  is  still  sweet  in  your  mouths,  ye  hide  it  under 
your  tongues,  ye  spare  it,  and  forsake  it  not,"  as  Zopbar  speaks, 
Job  xx.  I",  13.  What  will  it  avail  you  to  perforin  certain  works  of 
honesty  and  religion,  and  to  prink  yourselves  with  them,  while  your 
hearts  are  unconverted,  and  your  works  have  not  the  requisite  qual- 
ifications ?  "  Your  webs  will  not  become  garments,  neither  will  ye 
be  able  to  cover  yourselves  with  your  works  :  your  works  are  works 
of  iniquity,  and  the  act  of  violence  is  in  your  hands,"  as  it  is  said, 
Isaiah  lix.  5.  Or  do  ye  flatter  yourselves,  that  ye  will  convert  your- 
selves some  time  or  other  hereafter.  Alas,  how  do  ye  deceive  your- 
selves !  how  long  do  ye  expect  to  live  ?  "  Thou  fool,"  perhaps 
"  this  night  thy  soul  will  be  required  of  thee,"  as  the  Saviour  spake, 
IjUke  xii.  20.  Or  do  ye  hope  to  repent  on  your  death-beds  ?  will 
ye  be  abler  then,  than  ye  are  now  ?  no,  your  deadly  sickness  will 
not  suffer  your  souls  to  repent,  and  will  perhaps  so  stupify  your  un- 
derstandings, that  ye  will  be  forced  to  die  as  a  fool  dieth.  Or  is  it 
yoor  hope,  that  ye  will  live  yet  some  time  ?  will  ye  have  then  more 
time  and  inclination,  and  less  to  do  in  the  world  than  ye  have  now  ? 
will  the  door  of  grace  be  then  still  open,  and  God  stand  toady  to  re- 
ceive you,  as  soon  as  ye  cail,  when  ye  have  rejected  him  so  long,  in 
opposition  to  all  his  calls  ?  lie  saith  no,  Prov.  i.  24,  28.  Do  ye  de- 
fer your  conversion  until  another  time,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  God 
will  punish  you  then  with  judicial  blindness  and  hardness,  winch 
will  render  you  .  .  of  conversion.     See  this  threatened,  Isaiah 

iv.   '.:,   10. 

"  Seek  t!  while  he  may  be  found,  call  upon  him  while 

lie  is  near-  Lei  the  wicked  forsake  hit  way,  and  the  unrighteous 
man  his  thoughts ;  and  kt  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
have  mercy  oh  him,  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.' 
Thus  the  Lord  callech  u>  you,  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  Delay  not  by  any 
>S)  but  as  Davie!  saith,  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harde" 


works.      ::xx:n.  lord's  day.  q.  88— 9 1.       is? 

net  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.  There  is  surely  nothing,  in  which 
ye  have  a  greater  concern  than  conversion.  Have  ye  not  departed 
from  God,  and  from  a  most,  glorious  condition  ?  Will  ye  not  then 
return  ?  "  Shall  they  fall,  and  not  arise  ?  shall  he  turn  away,  and 
net  return?  saith  the  Lord,"  Jer.  viii.  4.  "Or  do  ye  despise  the 
riches  of  his  goodness,  forbearance,  and  long-suffering  ;  not  knowing 
fjKat  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repentance?"  or  will  ye, 
14  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  to  yourselves 
wrath  against  the  d«y  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  :"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Rom.  ii.  4,  5.  Or  are  ye 
indifferent  whether  ye  be  saved  or  damned  ?  or  do  ye  not  endeavour 
to  be  converted,  because  ye  cannot  convert  yourselves  ?  This  doth 
not  hinder  you,  for  God  gives  you  not  only  the  word,  and  time  to 
repent,  but  often  his  Spirit  also  to  convince  you,  and  he  stirs  you  up 
repeatedly  by  your  conscience,  and  thus  gives  you  strength  ;  but  ye 
withstand  his  Spirit,  and  therefore  it  is  your  will  that  hinders  you  ; 
u  Ye  will  not  come  to  Christ,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  as  he  himself 
saith,  John  v.  4.  Or  dare  ye  not  turn  to  God,  because  ye  have  sin- 
ned so  grievously,  and  so  long  a  time  against  him  ?  He  calls  to 
you  still,  yea.  he  swears,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 1.  "  That  he  hath  bo  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  the  wicked  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his 
way  and  live  :  turn  ye,  turn  yc  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will 
ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?" 

Only  consider  and  say,  "  What  have  I  done  ?"  Jer.  viii.  6.  A 
person  will  never  repent,  until  he  first  comes  to  himself  and  sees  hir, 
abominable  disposition  and  dreadful  situation  ;  for  this  drives  him 
out  of  himself  to  the  Lord.  "  When  we  fear,  then  we  come  to  the 
Lord  and  to  his  goodness;  and  when  we  acknowledge  our  offence, 
and  are  in  affliction,! then  we  seek  his  face  early,"  Hosea  hi.  5.  v. 
I  5.  Abide  by  all  means  under  a  zealous  ministration  of  the  word 
of  conversion  ;  "God  gives  thereby  repentance  unto  life."  "  When 
they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said  unto  Pe- 
ter, and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we 
do  ?"  Thus  speaks  Luke  of  the  ptntecost  hearers,  Acts  ii.  27. 
Above  ail,  pray  earnestly  and  incessantly  to  God,  that  he  would  con- 
vert you,  with  the  church,  who  said  repeatedly,  "  Turn  thou  me, 
and  I  shall  be  turned,"  Jer  xxxi  18.  Lam.  v.  21.  And  flee  to  his 
Son,  "  who  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repen- 
tance to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts.  v.  31. 

But  ye  who  are  converted,  (a)  Glory  and  rejoice  in  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you  ;  others  glory  and  rejoice  in  you. 
See  Acts  xi.  18.     xv.  3.   1  Thess.  i.  9.     Why    should  not  then  yc 


1*83  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

yourselves,  whom  it  concerns  more  than  others  ?  (b)  Conduct  your* 
selves  as  it  btcometh  those  who  are  converted :  show  that  the 
Lord  is  the  God  of  your  exceeding  joy  ;  and  that  it  is  truly  your  de- 
ci'c  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  all  good 
works,  that  "  ye  are  dead  "  to  yourselves,  and  to  all  that  is  sinful, 
and  that  "  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  CoK 
'iii.  3.  Therefore  he  commands  you,  "  Yield  not  your  members  in- 
5trumfcrits  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,:  but  yield  yourselves  unto 
God,  as  those  that  arc  alive  from  the  dead  ;  and  your  members  as 
instruments  of  righteousness  Unld'  GW,""R«ifl.  vi.  13.  "Bring 
forth  then  fruits  meet  for  repentance,"  as  the  Baptist'  admonisheth, 
Matt,  iii  3.  It  behooves  you  to  take  particular  care,  that  your  works 
be  not  only  materially  good,  but  also  that  they  have  the  requisite 
qualifications.  It  is  commendable  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  but  it  is 
detestable  to  hear  it  without  fruit ;  therefore  the  Saviour  saith, 
Luke  viii.  18,  "Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  "Whatever  we  do  in 
word  or  work,"  we  must  do  it  in  faith,  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  Col  iii.  17.  "  Servants  must  be  obe- 
dient to  their  masters,  not  with  eyeservice,  as  men-pleasers,  but  as 
the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart."  F.ph.  vi. 
5,  6,  7.  And  every  one  ought  to  conduct  himself  thus  in  all  that  he 
doth,  yea.  he  ought  to  u  eat  and  drink  to  the  glory  of  God,"  1  Cor. 
x.  31.  This  would  add  a  comely  lustre  to  the  converted  people, 
(c)  VVc  exhort  you  further  from  Keb  xii.  15,  "  Look  diligently  lest 
any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God,"  either  through  a  common  slug- 
gishne_sSj  by  which  we  are  brought  to  a  deep  decay  :  or  by  some 
enormous  sin,  which  disturbs  the  mind.  How  shameful,  hurtful  and 
painful  this  is,  we  have  shown  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  and  also 
that  those  who  have  backslidden  thus,  should  return,  (d)  We  would 
add  finally,  "  Do  ye,  who  are  converted,  strengthen  your  brethren," 
as  Jesus  enjoins,  Luke  xxii.  32.  There  are  weak  and  feeble  ones  ; 
ye  know  the  temper  of  their  minds,  and  how  ye  have  been  restored. 
Encourage  them,  support,  direct,  and  "  comfort  them  with  the  com- 
fort wherewith  ye  yourselves  have  been  comforted  of  God,"  as  Paul 
apeaks,  2  Cor.  i.  4.  We  should  also  seek  by  word  and  conversation 
to  convert  those  who  are  wholly  unconverted,  as  we  have  shown  on 
the  former  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  bemoan  yourselves  with  Ephraim  on  account  of  your  mani- 
fold sins,  the  Lord  hears  it,  he  is  pleased  with  it,  and  he  will  show 
you  that  he  is;saying,  Jer.  xxxi.  20,  "  Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  is 
he  a  pleasant  child  ?  for  since  I  spake  against  him,  1  do  earnestly 
remember  him  still ;  therefore  my  bowels  are   troubled   for  him  :  I 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9 J.        189 

will  surely  have  mercy  en  him."  Will  he  not,  like  the  father  of 
the  prodigal  son,  when  his  son  repented,  Luke  xv.  17 — 24  "  run  to 
meet  you,  fall  on  your  neck,  kiss  you,  clothe  you  with  the  best  robe," 
and  feast  you  with  the  choicest  dainties  ?  According  to  his  promi- 
ses, Hosea  xiv.  4.  "  he  will  heal  your  backslidings,  he  will  love  you 
fiee:y  ;  for  his  anger  is  turned  away  from  you."  The  Lord  promi- 
seth,  Isa.  xxxv.  10,  (It  is  partly  fulfilled,  but  it  will  be  perfectly 
fulfilled  after  this  life)  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and 
come  to  Zion  with  bongs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads  :  they 
shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
3W#y»"     Amen, 


30  ) 


THE 


LAW  OF  GOD, 


AND  THE 


FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  1,  2,  3.  And  God  spake  all  these  words  saying,  I  am  the 
Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  be- 
fore me.

Q.  89.    What  is  the  mortification  of  the  old  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart  that  we  have  provoked  God  by 
our  sins  ;  and  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from  them. 

Q.  90.    What  is  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  Cod,  through  Christ,  and  with 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  Cod  in  all  good 
works, 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—91.  171 

Q.   9. 1 .  But  ivhat  ere  good  works  ? 

A.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  are  performed 
according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to  his  glory  ;  and  not  such  as  are 
founded  on  our  imagination,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 


GOOD  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth 
foi\h  that  which  is  good  ;  and  an  evil  man,  c;it  of  theevil   treasure 
of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  evil  :  for  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart  Ins  mouth   speaketh."     Thus   speaks  the  Lord  Jesus, 
Luke  vi,  45.      I  he  tongue,   and  all    the  outward  actions  are  the  in- 
terpreters of  the  heart,  and  show  how  a  person  is  internally  disposed. 
The    index    will    show    whether  a  clock    is    in   order    or    whether 
it  is  not ;  the  vessel  wAi  affou!    that  which  it   contains;  and   as  the 
fruit  is.  so  is  the  tree  :  "  t  or  a  Rood  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt 
fruit ;  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  saith  the 
Saviour,   Luke  vi.  43.      Thus  it  i,s   also  with  a  man  ;  if  he  be  good, 
i-c  wui  do.  Lhat  winch  is  good,  and  if  he  be  evil,  he  will  do  that  which. 
is  evil      The  sinner  hath    by  nature   a  wicked    and   an    unbelieving 
heart  to  depart  from  the   living  God,  and  lie  manifests  it  in  all  that 
he  doth,      rherefore  t.  c  Saviour  said  to  the   slandering   Pharisees, 
Matt.  xii.  3i.     "  O  generation  of  vipers,   how  can   ye,   being  evil, 
speaii  good  things  I"     What  remedy  is  there  for  thisr   shall  the  sin- 
ner only  amend    his  conduct   in  some    measure,    and  accustom  his 
tongue  to  decent  language  ?  This  is  impossible  :  the  evil  treasure  of 
his  heart  will,  though  he  strive  agains"  it,  continually  yield  and  bring 
forth  evil  things  ;  the  heart   must  therefore  be  changed  and  amend- 
ed, if  it  shall  afford  better  things.     If  we  will  "  make  the  fruit  good, 
^e  must  fiist  make  the   tree  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks,  Malt  xii.  43. 
As  we  make  a  tree  and  its  fiuit  good  by  inserting  a  better  graft  into 
it,   so  the  sinner   must   also  be    ingrafted    into  Christ,   that  he  may 
<l  partake  of  the  root,   and  f*tness  of  that  olive  tree."  Rom.  xi.  17. 
But  how  shall  he  be  ingrafted  into  him  ?  by  regeneration,   faith  and 
conversion,  whereby,   being  wholly  changed  to  that  which  is  good, 
he  brings  forth  also   good  works.     So   Paul  showed   that  the  sinner 
"  must  first  repent,  and  that  then  he  must  do  works  meet  for  repent- 
ance."   Acts  r.xvi   20. 

In  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed.  After  he  had 
insisted  on  the  necessity  of  good  works,  he  doth  not  hasten  to  the 
law,  as  the  rale  of  good  works,  but  requires  first  that  the 
heart  of  man,  which  is  evil,  should  be  changed,  that  he  may  out  of 
that  good  treasure  also  bring  forth  good  works. 


172     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

There  arc  two  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  our 
exposition  : 

I.  The  nature  of  conversion,  Questions  S8,  89,  90. 

II.  The  nature  of  good  works,  Question  91. 

I.  The  Kemonslrants  imagine  that  the  instructor  ought  not  to 
have  treated  of  conversion  here,  but  before  the  doctrine  of  deliver- 
ance, that  so  die  work  of  man  might  precede  the  grace  of  God,  as 
if  the  grace  of  God  did  not  pre\ent  the  works  of  man,  and  conver- 
sion did  not  flow  from  our  deliverance.  We  cannot  understand  any 
thing,  unless  we  understand  the  name  that  expresseth  the  nature  of 
that  thing.  The  word  bekeeten  in  our  Low  Dutch  language,  as  also 
the  Hebrew  word  schub,  to  return,  and  the  Greek  word  efiistrc/i/uiu, 
to  convert,  to  convert  ourselves,  signifieth  to  turn  again  to  that  f;om 
■which  we  had  turned  away  before;  and  it  expresses  therefore  very 
properly  the  nature  of  conversion.  God  had  created  man  for  him- 
self, and  after  his  image,  but  man  is  by  sin  turned  from  God  to  him* 
self,  to  sin,  and  to  Satan  ;  but  by  conversion,  he  turns  himself  from 
himself,  from  sin  and  .^atan  to  the  Lord,  that  lie  may  obtain  mercy 
of  him,  and  live  for  him  ;  in  this  manner  is  conversion  described, 
Isaiah  xxxi.  6.  "Turn  ye  unto  him  from  whom  the  children  of 
Israel  have  deeply  revolted. "  So  "  Paul  was  sent  to  turn  the  Gentiles 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God;  that 
they  might  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  Christ,"  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18. 

But  let  us  penetrate  somewhat  deeper  into  this  matter.  That  con- 
version should  consist,  as  the  Romanists  fancy,  "  in  sorrow  of  heart, 
in  confession  with  the  mouth,  auricular  confession,  and  in  making 
satisfaction  with  our  works,  by  undergoing  a  certain  penance,  which 
the  priest,  who  is  the  confessor,  imposes  upon  the  sinner,"  this  is  an 
invention,  which  is  beside  the  word  of  God,  it  is  no  gracious  work 
of  God,  nor  virtue  of  man,  but  a  mere  punishment,  and  an  engine  to 
torture  the  conscience.  This  conversion  of  the  Papists  is  not  as 
good  as  the  conversion  of  Judas  ;  for  he  "  repented,"  and  had  more 
sorrow  of  heart,  than  is  required  of  any  Papist,  for  "  hei.anged  him- 
self;"  he  confessed  his  sins  also  very  circumstantially  to  the  priests, 
when  he  said,  "  1  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent 
blood."  He  satisfied  readily  and  actually,  when  "he  brought  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  again  to  the  chief  priests  and  eiders,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  3,  4,  5. 

The  instructor  rejecting  a  false,  or  a   half  and  pretended  con 
sion,  like  that  of  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab,  Judas,  and  the  Popish  conversion, 
inquires  concerning  f\  :>  true"  conversion,  which  he  describes  a 


WORKS,         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8«— 91.  173 

sisting  in  two  pails,  1.  The  mortification  of  the  old  man,  2.  The 
quickening  of  the  new  man. 

1.  The  old  man,  as  we  may  all  easily  conceive,  is  not  another  per- 
son, distinct  from  the  man  who  ;s  converted,  but  the  evil  disposition, 
which  is  in  the  man  himself,  to  wit,  the  natural  corruption  of  man, 
destitute  of  the  image  of  God,  and  possessed  of  the  image  of  Satan, 
which  fills  his  soul  with  hideous  abominations,  excites  him  to  every 
abominable  sin,  and  urges  him  on  from  sin  to  sin.  "  The  old  man 
is  corrupt,  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  iv.  22. 
This  evil  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  because  it  possesseth 
the  whole  man,  "defiles  his  understanding  and  conscience,"  and 
whatsoever  he  doth,  Titus  i.  15,  16,  and  "  rules  in  his  mortal  bodv," 
Horn,  vu  12,  and  because  the  man  loves  it,  as  much  as  he  loves  him- 
self, 2  Tim.  iii.  2  ;  but  also  because  it  hath  ail  the  parts  of  a  man. 
There  is  "a  fleshly  mind,"  Col.  ii.  18,  -desires  and  a  will  of  the 
flesh,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  "a  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6.  '*  flesh,"  John  iii.  G, 
V  members  on  earth,"  Col.  iii.  5,  '•  a  life  after  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii. 
13.  It  is  not  without  reason,  that  it  is  called  also-'1  the  old  "  man  ; 
for  it  is  as  old  as  the  man  himself,  and  is  born  with  him,  Psalm  li. 
5.  Gen.  viii.  21.  Yea,  it  is  as  old  as  Adam,  through  whose  sin  this 
old  man  hath  been  transmitted  to  all  his  descendents  ;  for  af.er 
Adam  had  by  his  first  sin  admitted  this  old  man,  "  he  begat  a  son 
in  his  own  likeness,  after  ids  image,"  Gen.  v.  3.  This  is  explained 
very  beautifully  by  the  apostle,  when  he  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  48,  4P„ 
M  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are 
they  aLo  that  are  earthy.  We  bear  the  image  of  the  earthy." 
We  may  therefore  call  this  old  man  the  old  Adam.  This  old  man 
doth  wholly  possess  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  while  in  his  natural 
state,  John  iii.  6,  but  exists  only  in  part  in  those  who  possess  grace, 
vexing  them,  and  violently  taking  them  captive  against  their  will, 
but  not  ruling  over  them,  according  to  Rom.  vi.  14.  vii.  22,  23. 

Conversion  consists  in  the  mortification  of  the  old  man.  This 
mortification  is  explained  by  the  instructor,  as  consisting  in  a  twofold 
assault  on  the  old  man,  by  which  a  mortal  wound  is  given  him. 
The  first  is  "  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  provoked  Gcd 
by  our  sins."  We  cannot  understand  wherein  this  sincere  sorrow 
consists,  without  considering  the  several  steps  of  our  conversion, 
(a)  The  sinner  bereaved  of  his  reason  before  his  conversion,  know- 
ing nothing  of  himself,  and  running  headlong  on  in  sin,  comes  in 
the  work  of  conversion  to  himself,  with  the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv. 
17.  He  looks  into  himself  and  sees  clearly  and  experimentally  hit. 
abominable  apostacy  from  God,  the  evil  disposition  of  his  soul,  and 


?T4    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOGLJ 

tha  unseemliness  of  .ill  his  behaviour  ;  yea,  he  looks  bark,  and  sees 
that  i.is  whole  life  is  filled  -with  abominable  actions,  and  the  sins  of 
his  youth  are  brought  distinctly  to  his  view.  Tins  affects  him  with 
shame  ;  he  is  amazed  that  he  is  so  abominable,  and  tii^:  he  hath 
not  known  it  before  :  ,;  He  repents  of  his  wickedness,  saying,  V 
have  1  done  ;  '  Jer  viii.  6.  He  had  before  this  heard  others  dis- 
course somewhat  of  God,  of  the  law  and  of  sin,  and  he  also  spoke 
of  these  things,  but  he  now  sees  the  things  themselves,  as  they  re- 
late to  himself,  in  their  nature,  and  cries  out  with  Job,  chap.  xlii.  5, 
6,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine 
eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
asr.es.  See  this  also  in  "  Ephraim,  who,  when  he  was  converted, 
was  instructed,  he  smote  upon  his  thigh  ;  he  was  ashair.ed  :  yea. 
even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi  19.  And  thus  he  becomes  -wise 
again,  as  the  Greek  word  vic'ar.oeit:,  and  the  Latin  resifitseert,  to  re- 
pent, denote.  lie  slops  not  here,  but  (b)  he  sees  also  with  sensible 
sorroiv  how  guilty  and  damnable  he  is  before  God  ;  hcrore  this  be 
thought  with  backsliding  israel,  Jer.  ii.  35,  that  the  anger  of  God 
was  turned  away  from  him,"  and  with  the  wicked,  Psalm  1  2], 
"  that  God  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  himself,"  and  that  he  w 
not  punish  him.  But  he  now  sees  that  God  beholds  him  in  wrath  ; 
he  "trembles  "  at  it,  "  and  is  astonished,"  with  1        .  ix.  6.  He. 

hath  "  a: godly  sorrow,  accompanied  with  Lev,  (  '.  vii.  !0,  II. 
'•'  He  knows  and  sees,"  now  experimentally,  that  it  is  an  e\il  thing 
and  bitter,  that  he  hath  forsaken  the  Lord  his  God,"  Jer.  ii.  19.  He 
condemns  himself,  and  cries  out  with  Judah,  "  Wo  unto  mc,  that  I 
have  sinned,"    Lam.  v.  16.     lie  ji  stifles'  Go  .      Im  li. 

5,  4,  and  humbles  himself  with  the  publican 

not  so  much   as  lift  up  his   eyes  unto  heaven,    and  smites  upon  hia 
breast,"   Luke   xviii.    13.  (c)  Sometimes    he  endeavours  to  reform 
himself,   and  will  not  sin  so  any  more  ;  but  he  discovers  that  all  i.is 
'>cst  performances  are  wholly  abominable,  with  the  church  he 
upon  "  his  own  righteousness  as  filthy  rags,"  Isaiah    Ixiv.  G.     He  is 
disappointed    in   ail   that  lie  attempts  ;  will  lie  forsake  his  sins,  they 
beset   him  continually  anew,    lay  hold   on  him,  and  overcome 
will  he  pray,  his  heart  will  not  accompany  him  ;  will  he  re; 
the  word,   he  finds  an   immovable   and  insensible   heart,  and  he  dis- 
covers thus  experimentally  his  inability,  and  that  '•  he  is  abomi 
and  disobedient,    and  to  every  good   «'ork  le  "   Titnsi.  16. 

affects  him  with  shame  and  humility,  not  only  before 
I  o  before  men,  whom  he  "  esteems  bei  :lf,"  Philip. 

v  .      •  is. in  his  own  uch 


W6RKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 91.  m 

Ignore  capable  and  more  virtuous  than  others  :  but  now  he  looks  upon 
himself  with  Paul  to  be  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  2  Tim.  i.  15,  and 
"  one  born  out  of  due  time,"  1  Cor.  xv.  8.  Before  this  he  was  never 
so  base,  but  he  still  knew  of  a  remedy,  and  he  had  always  a  hope, 
that  he  should  be  saved;  but  now  he  gives  up  his  hope  that  he  will 
obtain  life  in  his  own  way,  and  by  his  own  doings  ;  he  knows  not 
what  he  shall  do  for  his  recovery,  and  "  lie  saith*  There  is  no  hope," 
Isaiah  lvii.  10.  He  is  sometimes  ready  through  dejection  to  aban- 
don the  whole  work  of  his  salvation,  because  he  knows  not  indeed 
what  course  he  must  take  ;  but  as  the  distress  of  his  mind  con- 
tinucth  with  him,  and  he  hath  also  an  earnest  desire  that  his  soul 
should  be  saved,  he  speaks  to  them  who  are  wiser  than  himseif,  and 
asks  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved,"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  SO. 
See  also  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 

This  hearty  sorrow  of  his  soul  proceeds  also  so  far,  that  it  affects 
his  body.  His  countenance  gathers  blackness,  his  eyes  weep  bit- 
terly, like  Peter's,  Mutt.  sxvi.  75,  his  mouth  complains,  and  con- 
fesseth  his  sins,  like  David's,  Psalm  xxxii  5,  his  hand  smues  on  his 
breast,  like  the  publican's,  Luke  xviii.  13,  his  feet  go  softly,  his 
Stomach  fasts,  and  he  manifests  every  token  of  repentance ;  for  the 
afflicted  soul  finds  no  comfort,  except  only  in  sorrow,  with  the  pro- 
phet, Jer.  vhi.  18. 

The  Antinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the  law,  looking;  upon  such  a 
sorrow,  as  unnecessary,  yea,  as  sinful,  show  that  they  understand  not 
the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  nor  the  work  of  conversion,  and  that 
they  do  not  attend  to  the  word  of  God,  which  admonisheth  us  re- 
peatedly to  humble  ourselves  and  repent,  and  informs  us  how  the 
saints  humbled  themselves  See  Joel  ii.  13.  Psalm  vi.  xxxii  xxxviii. 
Iv.  exxx.  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6.  xvi.  29,  30.  2  Cor.  vii. 
10,  1  1,  and  how  "  they  who  mourn  are  comforted,"  Matt.  v.  4. 

2.  "  By  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better," 
saith  Solomon,  Eccl.  vii.  3.  And  so  the  second  assaul;,  by  which 
we  mortify  the  old  man,  is  "  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from 
sin."  When  the  sinner,  during  his  conversion,  bewails  his  sin  with 
so  much  bitterness,  he  cannot  caress  it  anv  more,  as  he  used  ;  it  is 
not  sweet  any  more  in  his  mouth  ;  he  will  not  hide  it  any  longer 
under  his  tongue,  in  order  to  spare  it,  but  he  will  forsake  it,  and  will 
not  keep  it  in  his  mouth  ;  this  meat  is  turned  in  his  bowels,  it  is  to 
him  like  the  gall  of  asps  within  him.  For  (a)  he  hates  sin,  he  hath 
an  antipathy  to  it,  and  an  aversion  from  it  ;  nothing  is  so  hateful  and 
filthy  in  his  eyes  as  sin.  Because  he  sees  now  by  the  light  of  God 
what  sin  is,  therefore  he  is  seized  with  horrour,  when  it  is  ©nly  men-  - 


IY6     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  COOft 

tione.l,   and  he  hath   a  drear)  of  it.     And  so  he  "  abhors  that  which 
is  evil,"  Rom.  xii.  9.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh  indignation,"  according 
to  the  text.     "  He  hates  even  the  garment  spatted  by  the  flesh,"  as 
Jude  speaks  in  his  epistle,  vis.  23.  (b)  Being  so  averse  from  sin,  he 
will  also  actually  turn  from  it,  and  "  cact  it  away  "  as  the  most  hate- 
ful th;ng,  and  "  as  a  menstruous  cloth,  and  will  say  "  to  every  sin, 
(although   formerly  ever  so  honourable,   profitable   and  pleasant  to 
him)    "  Get  thee  hence,"   as  it   is  said  of  those  who  are  converted, 
Isaiah  xxx.  22.     He  flees  from  sin,    as  from  his  greatest  enemy,  he 
is  exceedingly  cautious  and  careful,  that  sin  may  not  take  hold  of 
him;  he  avoids  it,  and  the  occasions  of  it ;  "  he  keeps  himself,  that 
the  wicked  one  may  net  touch  him,"  as  John  speaketh,  1  John  v.  18. 
He  keeps    himself   from  the    iniquity,    to   which  he   is  most  prone, 
with  David,  Psalm  xviii.  23.     He  lakes  heed  to  his  heart,  and  to  all 
his  members,  that  he  may  not  be  turned  aside,  according  to  the  ad- 
monition of  the  wise  king,  Prov.  iv.  23 — 27.     With  Job  «  he  makes 
a  covenant  with  his  eyes,"  Job  xxxi    1.  with  holy  David,  "he  keeps 
himself  by  the  words  of  God's  lips  from   the  paths  of  the  destroyer, 
hot  dug  up  his  goings  in  the  paths  of  the  Lord,    that  his  footsteps 
may  not  slip,"  Psalm   xvii.  4,  5.     Yea,  with   that  man   after  God's 
heart,  "  he  will  !ake  heed  to  his  ways,  that  he  sin  not  with  his  tongue, 
and  he  will  keep  his  mouth  with  a  bridle,  while  the  wicked  is  before 
him,"  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  (c)  As  sin  nevertheless  lightly  besets  him,  as 
his  corrupt  heart  continually  works  up  all  manner  of  filth,  the  world 
flatters  him,  and  the  devil  goeth  about,  seeking  to  devour  him,  he 
will  therefore   also  manfully  withstand    and  fi^ht   against  all  these. 
He  observes  by  what   means   they  seek  to   hring  him   to  a   fall  ;  he 
rejects  their  solicitations,  he  endeavor  rs  to  subdue,  to  annoy  them, 
and  to  "  mortify  the  deed*  of  the  body  through  the  Spirit,"  as  Paul 
speaks  of  converted  persons,   Rom.  viii.  13.     "  He  keeps"  the  lusts 
of"  his  body  under,  and  brings  it  into  subjection,"  with  Paul,  1  Cor. 
ix.  27   "  ile  puts  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,   he    girds  his  loins 
about  with  the  truth,  he  pu.s  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  he 
;,.;s  feet  shed  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  he 
takes  above  ail  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet   of   salvation,  and  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  whirl:  is  the  word  of  God."     He  exercises  him- 
self much  in  fasting  and  prayer,  that  he  may  expel   that   evil    kind, 
and  may  seek  help  of  the  Lord  against  his  enemies,   that  he  may  be 
';  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in    the    power   of  his    might,"    Eph.   vi. 
10 — 18  .Therefore  he  prays  with  David,  whom  we  have  oiter.  men- 
tioned,  that  God  would  keep  his    heart  from   :.  e    dominion  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins,  that  he  would    direct   his    vords    and   thoughts    in 


WORKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—91         17? 

3uch  a  manner,  that  they  may  be  acceptable  to  him,  and  that  he 
would  set  a  watch  before  his  mouth  ?nd  lips,  Psalm  xix.  13,  14. 
cx!i.  3.  And  he  manifests  thus  "  zeal  and  revenge"  against  his 
sins,  as  the  text  speaks, 

This  hearty  goirow,  this  hatred  ?.nd  fleeing  from  sin  is  the  morti- 
fication of  the  old  man.  For  thus  he  is  condemned  to  die,  he  is 
tortured,  he  is  deprived  of  his  food,  a  deathwound  is  inflicted  on 
him,  and  his  ruling  power  is  taken  from  him.  It  is  true,  he  struggles 
and  bestirs  himself  yet  strongly,  but  these  are  only  the  pangs  and 
throes  of  fleatrv,  which  will  never  restore  him  to  his  former  vigour, 
nor  wholly  subdue  the  converted  toy!. 

2.  Nevertheless  conversion  doth  no'  consist  only  in  the  mortifica- 
tion of  the  old  man,  but  also  "in    the  quickening  of  'he  new    man." 
The  apostle  teaching  the  converted  this,  saith  not  only,  Coll.  in.    "•, 
u  Ye  are  dead,"  but  also,    "  your  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God." 
As  the  old   man   is  the  evil  disposition  and  corruption  of  the  sinner, 
ko  the  new  man  is  the  good  disposition  of  the  converted  man,  or  na- 
ture renewed  after  the  image  of  Go -1  and  of  Christ,  that  clear  knowl- 
edge of  God,  and  that  pure  and  true  holiness,  whereby  a  man  is  like 
God,  and  is  urged  to  do  the  will  of  God  only.      See    Coll.  iii.    10. 
Eph.  iv.  23,  24.     This  good  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  be- 
cause it  possesseth  the  whole  man,  who   is  altogether  "  a  new  creac 
ture,"  2  Cor.  v.  17,  and  is  as  dear  to  the  converted  man  as  he  is   to 
himself,  but  also  because  it  hath  all  the  parts  of  a  man,  as  "  enlight- 
ened eyes  of  the  understanding,"  Eph    i.  18,  a  "  will  to  that    which 
is  good,"  Rom.  vii.  19,  «*  a  life  in  the   flesh  according  to  the  will  of 
God,"  1  Peter  iv.  2.     This  renewed  nature  is  also  called  a  new  man. 
not  only  because  the  converted  man  is  newborn,  See  John  iii.  3,  and 
becomes  a  man  first  with  this  new  birth  :  for  before  this  he  was  by 
means  of  his  abominable   sins    with    Nebuchadnezzar,  like  &   beast, 
and  with  the  hypocritical  Pharisees,  a  serpent,    and    an  offspring  of 
vipers,  Matt,  xxiii.  33,  but  especially  because  the  person  who  is  con- 
verted  is  renewed  after  his  new  head  :  the    new    or    second    Adam 
♦'Christ  is  formed  in  him,"  Gal.  iv.  9.     lie  is  "the  workmanship  of 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eph.  ii.  10.     See  this  clearly  asserted 
1  Cor.  xv.  47—40. 

This  new  man,  created  after  God.  was  alive  in  man  before  the 
fell,  but  died  through  sin  ;  but  Christ  having  slain  sin,  quickeneth 
the  new  man  again  after  his  image.  "  This  quickening,"  saith  the 
instructor,  "  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ."  The 
person  who  is  converted,  impressed  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  as  Well  as 
«f  filthy  uncleanness,  (a)  flees  out  of  himself  through  and  in  Chris** 
Vflt.  II.  ">' 


in     THE  N\TURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

whom  lie  embraceth  and  accepts,  to  God,  upon  his  cull,  for  reconcili- 
ation and  grace.     And  thus  conversion  is  fuith,  whereby  we  turn  un- 
to God  through  Christ,  who  for  this  end  calls  unto  sinners,    "  Turn 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."     And    Jer.  iii. 
20.     "  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  and  1  will  heal  your  backsli- 
dings."     Upon  which  the  converts,  betaking  themselves  to  the  Lord, 
cry  out,   "  Behold,  here  we  are.  we  come  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the 
Lord  our   God.-'     (b)  Hence   proceeds    "  that  sincere  joy    in    God 
through  Christ,"  for  whereas  sin  and  the  world  were  before  this  the 
dc-light  of  the  sinner,  now  he  is  converted,  God    in  Christ  is  become 
his  delight:  the  sinner  chooses  God  in   CI  list,  and  makes  him  the 
object  of  all  his  joy  and  gladness,    ihat    lie  may  find  his   delight    in 
him.     God  may  "  increase  the    corn   and  wine  of  the  wicked,"  but 
if  lie   will  only  "  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance   upon  him," 
he  hath    «  more  joy   in  his  heart,  than  the  wicked  "  on  account   of 
all  their  advantages  ;  thus  speaks  David,  Psalm    iv.   6,  7.  8,    "  God 
himself  is  his  escetding  joy,"  Psalm  xliii.  4.     »'  He  desires  nothing 
in  heaven  or  on  earth  besides  the   Lord,"   like  Asaph,  Psalm    lxxiii. 
25-     (c)  God  sheds  sometimes  upon  this  his  lore,  and  with  his  love 
a  heartfelt  joy  by  his  Spirit  into  the   soul;  either  by   assuring    her 
that  her  sins  are  forgiven  her,  *'  witnessing  with  her  by   his    Spirit 
that  she  is  a  child  of  God,"    Rom.  viii.   16  ;  or   by  giving   her   that 
tranquil  pe?ce,  and  calmness,  "  that  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding  and  which  keepeth  the   heart  and  mind,"  Philip,   iv. 
7.     Before   this,  "  s  n  was  continually   before  her  eyes  "  to  affright 
her,  as  David  complains,  Psalm  li.  3.  but  now  it  is  cast  into  the  bot- 
tomless sea  of  God's  mercy,   and    is   not    found   any    more,   though 
sought  for  ever  so  diligently,  Jer.  1.  20  ;  or  by  impressing  a   power- 
ful sens--  of  pardon  on  the  soul,  as  with  a  seal,  and  suggesting  those 
heartravishing   words     "  son     daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee," 
which    imluceth  her   to  say    triumphantly    with    ilezekiah,    Isaiah 
xxKvtii.    16,  17,  "O  Lord,  by  these  things  do  men   live,  and   in   all 
these  things   is  the  lift  of  my  spirit :  for  thou   has'  loved  my  soul, 
and  cast  all  my   sins  behind  thy    back."     With  the  jailer,  the    soul 
ices,  that  she  believes  in  God  "   Acts  xvi.  34.     >he  makes  her 
boast  in  the  Lord,  and  answers  the  cl  arg      of    er  accusers  with  the 
blood  and  death  of  Christ.     See  Isaiah  1    8.   9.     Rom.  viii.  33,  34. 
It  isiiue    the  Lord   doth  not  always  give  the  converted  soul  such  an 
nee  a:id  joy  ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  certain,  that  the  soul  turns 
him  b'   faith  with  a  ready  mind,  makes  'him  the  only 
object  oi"  tie    joy,  and  seeks  thai    jladness  in  God  ;  upon  which  the 
Lord  revives  the  soul  no>v  and  then,  and  more  or  less. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88 — 91.        M 

Can  it  no  v  be  otherwise,  but  that  this  new  man   should  have  "  a 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the    will    of  God    in    all   good 
works  V     No  ;  for  the  law  of  God  is  writ  en  in  his  heart ;  the  love 
of  v_hrist  constraineth  him.  and  the  eyes  of   his   understanding  are 
enlightened,    he    looks  upon  holiness  and   £ood  works  as   beams  of 
the  divine  glory,  though  before  this  he    considered    them   as  trifles 
and  follies  :  with  joy  "  he  esteems  all  the  precepts  of  God  concern- 
ing all  things  to  be  right,"  like  David,    Psalm  cxix.     128.     He  says 
with  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  12,  The  law  is  holy  :  and  the    commandment 
holy,  and  just,  and  good.     "  lie  dedicates   himself  willingly    to   the 
Lord,  and  eng.gcs,  yea,  "  swears  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous 
judgments,  and  he  will  also    perform  it,"  with    David,    Psalm   cxix. 
106.     He  sighs  to  the   Lord   for  strength  and  ability  :  "  O,"  saith 
he,  "that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  s'atutes,"  vrs.  5.     He 
also  actually  sets  about  his   duty,  yea,    "he  makes  haste   and  delays 
not  to  keep  God's  commandments,"  like  tiat  fervent  man,  vrs.    60. 
His  conversion  works  also  this  "  vehement  desire  and  carefulness," 
in  him.  according  to  the  text.     He  "  hath  also  a  delight  in  this  after 
the  inward  man,"  with  thai  holy    .pusie,  Rom.  vii.    22.     Like  king 
David,  "  iie  rejoices  in  the  way  of  God's  testimonies  more   than    in 
all  riches,"  Psalm  cx:x     14,  and  with  him,  he  ta'ces  them  as  an  heri- 
tat.r  for  ever  :  for  tl  ey  are  the  rejoicing  ol  his  heart,"  vrs.  3 

In  this  -nanner  is  the  new  m  in,  before  lead,  quickened  in  the  con- 
verted sinner.  He  becomes  another  man.  a  new  creature  :  is  uni- 
ted to  God,  as  to  his  soul  ;  he  lives  also  otherwise  than  he  was  used 
to  do  before  this  :  he  reckons  himself  to  be  dead  unto  sin  ;  but  alive 
unto  God,  Rom.  vi.  11.  This  is  his  element,  and  the  life  of  his 
life. 

This  conversion  is  ascribed  to  God  :  "  God  giveth  repentance 
unto  life,"  Acts  xi.  18.  It  is  also  ascribed  to  man  :  "  At  Antioch  a 
great  number  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  Lord,"  Acts,  xi  21  : 
for  "  God  works  both  to  will  and  to  do  "  in  man,  Philip  ii.  13,  where- 
by man  also  wills  and  works,  God  converts  man,  and  man  also  con- 
verts himself:  "Turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  tinned."  saith  fhe  church, 
Jer.  xxxi.  3.  Lam.  v.  21.  The  sinner  doth  not  prevent  God,  but 
God  prevents  the  sinner,  with  the  work  of  conversion  ;  yea,  in  the 
beginning  of  conversion  God  works  alone  without  man.  inasmuch  as 
man  is  blind,  and  therefore  wholly  passive  here ;  but  in  the  pro- 
gress of  conversion  mnn  works  also,  because  God  causeth  him  t» 
work.  And  therefore  we  distinguish  conversion  into  a  first  and  sec- 
ond, and  a  daily  conversion.  The  first  conversion  is  that  by  which 
a  man  passeth  out  of  the  state  of  nature  into  the  state  «f  grace  ;  s» 


£30  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

K  God  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent,"  Acts  xvii.  30, 
This  conversion  is  also  called  regeneration  :  the  second  conversion 
is  thai  by  which  a  converted  person  rises  up  after  a  grievous  fall, 
with  Peter,  Luke  xxh.  32,  62.  The  daily  conversion  takes  place 
every  day,  when  a  person  rises  up  from  his  continual  stumblings, 
and  bestirs  himself  repeatedly  to  "  follow  after  perfection,"  with 
Paul,  Philip,  hi,  12,  14,  whereby  "  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day 
by  day,"  2  Cor.  iv.  IS 

II.  He  who  is  converted  in  this  manner  must  also  do  works  wor- 
thy of  conversion.  The  sinner,  estranged  from  God,  and  blind  be- 
fore his  conversion,  knows  not  what  conversion  is,  nor  what  good 
works  are.  With  the  Papists  he  will  esteem  certain  superstitious 
practices,  in  which  he  engages  with  a  religious  intention,  extraordi- 
nary holiness ;  and  with  the  Pelagians  or  Semipelagians  he  will 
wonder  at  himself,  when  he  performs  certain  moral  duties ;  but  after 
he  is  converted,  the  eyes  of  his  understanding  are  enlightened,  and 
he  will  say  with  the  instructor,  "  Those  only  are  good  works  which 
proceed  irom  a  right  fuith,"  &c.  We  will  explain  this  somewhat 
more  particularly. 

We  must  know  previously  that  some  works  are  good,  and  have 
these  qualifications  from  their  own  nature,  and  so  cannot  be  evil. 
thus  it  is  with  saving  faith  in  Christ,  hope  in  God  through  Christ, 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  proceeding  from  the 
love  of  God  ;  these  are  indeed  fruits  of  the  Spin:.,  as  Paul  saith  Gal. 
v.  22,  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,  goodness  fahh  meekness,  temperance."  Other  works 
are  materially  good,  but  without  these  qualifications  evil  to  wit,  out- 
ward moral  duties.  The  Pharisees  seemed  to  have  many  good 
works  ;  but  inasmuch  as  those  works  had  not  these  good  qualifica- 
ions,  the  Saviour  expresseth  repeatedly  his  detestation  of  them. 
See  Mat,  xxiii.  13 — 16.  Luke  xviii.  10,  II,  12,  14.  There  are  also 
works  which  are  in  themselves  indifferent,  or  neither  good  nor  evil, 
as  eating  and  drinking  of  this  or  that  kind  of  food,  following  this  or 
that  calling  ;  but  they  become  evil,  when  they  are  not  performed 
with  these  qualifications,  and  good  when  they  are  accompanied 
with  them.  And  thus  we  must  "  do  all  things  by  faith  in  the  name 
of  Jesus,"  agreeably  to  Coll.  iii.  17,  according  to  the  lav.  of  God, 
"doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart,"  Eph.  Vl.  5,  6,  and  "  to  hi* 
glory,"  1  Cor.  x    31. 

1.  Therefore  if  works  shall  be  good,  they  must  in  the  first  place 
"proceed  from  a  true  faith  ;"  "The  end  of  the  commandment  is 
charity,  out  of  a  pure   heart,  and  a  good  conscience,   and   faith   un 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—51.         1*1 

Signed,"  1  Tim.  1.  5.  Faith  makes  the  heart  good,  and  therefore 
the  works  which  proceed  from  such  a  heart,  also  agreeable  to  (jod  ; 
for  "  the  heart  is  purified  by  faith,"  Acts  xv.  6.  And  tlierr-fore 
(i  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin,"  Rom.  x.v.  13,  and  "without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  Iitb.  xi.  6.  .Many  know  in- 
deed that  good  works  must  proceed  from  faith,  but  they  know  not 
how  they  proceed  from  it ;  the  matter  is  thus,  good  works  proceed 
from  faith  (a)  when  they  are  performed  by  a  true  believer  If  a 
man's  doings  shall  p'ease  God,  his  person  must  first  please  him  : 
u  The  Lord  had  respect  "  fiist  "  to  Abel,  and  "  thtn  "to  his  off  r- 
ing,"  as  Moses  relateth,  Gen.  iv.  4,  5.  Even  "the  satr:fice,  the 
way,  and  the  ploughing  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord  ;  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight,"  saith  the  wise 
man,  Frov  xv.  8,  9.  zxxi.  4.  They  are  the  "peculiar  people  " 
of  Jesus,  who  are  "  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  Bttt  how 
do  we  become  his  peculiar  people  and  united  to  him  ?  do  we  not  by 
faith,  we  aie  taught  this,  Song  ii.  16  John  i.  12.  Kph.  iii.  17. 
(b)  Good  works  are  also  performed  from  faith,  when  they  are  done 
by  the  power  and  influence  of  Christ :  "  Without  him,"  and  his 
influence,"  we  can  do  nothing,"  according  to  John  xv.  45.  Hut  how 
shall  we  obtain  his  influence  ?  surely  by  faith  only  :  for  we  thereby 
"receive  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  1.  12,  16,  and 
we  "  do  thus  all  things  in  word  and  deed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  commands,  Coll  iii.  If.  (c)  We  do  good  works 
also  from  faith,  when  we  do  them  with  an  assured  mind,  that  they 
arc  the  will  of  God,  and  pleasing  to  him,  and  thus  as  the  will  of 
God,  and  in  obedience  to  him  :  therefore  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
saith,  Rom.  xiv.  22,  23,  "  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  him- 
self in  that  thing  which  he  allowed.  \  nd  he  that  dbubteth  is  damn- 
ed, if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith  ;  for  whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin," 

2.  And  so  they  are  performed  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord," 
which  is  necessary,  if  the  works  shall  be  good  :  for  the  law  is  the 
rule  of  good  works  ;  the  Lord  God  also  directs  man  to  his  law, 
that  he  may  regulate  himself  in  all  that  he  doth  according  to  it : 
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  no!  according  to 
this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them,"  Isaiah  viii.  20. 
He  alone  is  the  lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy,  and  therefore 
lie  alone  can  determine  and  prescribe  what  he  wdl  have  his  reason* 
able  creatures  to  do  and  omit.  To  behave  as  a  man  thinks  fit.  with 
the  Papists,  may  please  the  man  himself,  but  it  will  not  the  Lord  ; 
for  then  God  is  rejected,  man  becomes  his  own  lawgiver,  and  he 


185     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

may  commit  the  greatest  abominations  with  a  good  design  to  serve 
God  ;  "  Whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doth  God  service,"' 
saith  the  Saviour  to  his  aposiles,  John  xvi,  2.  Yea,  we  perform 
then  adeiestabie  'v  wiii  worship,"  tending  only  k4  to  the  satisfying  of 
the  flesh,"  Col.  ii.  23  r*s  we  cannot  make  laws  for  ourselves,  so 
we  cannot  for  others  ;  u  In  vain  do  they  worship  me.  teaching  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,"  saith  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xxix. 
13.  Matt.  xv.  9.  Though  a  thing  be  ever  so  indifferent,  yea,  ever 
so  good,  it  still  '•  pcrisheth  with  the  using,"  if  it  be  introduced 
"  after  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men,"  as  Paul  speaks, 
Col  ii.  22.  We  must  be  servants  of  God,  and  not  of  men,  accord- 
ing to  1  Cor.  vii.  23  We  shall  not  "  be  judged  "  by  the  law  of 
men,  but  "  by  the  law  of  God,"  James  ii.  12, 

3.  ISO  work,  which  is  clone  from   faith,  and  according  to  the  law 
of  God,  can  be  pleasing  to  him,  "  unless  it   be  done  also  to  the  glory 
of  God."     The  Lord  hath  made  all  things,  and  especially   the   rea- 
sonable creature,  for   himself,  and    for  his    glory  :  therefore    it    be- 
comes the   reasonable  creature   to  direct  all   things  to    his  glory. 
The  Lord  is  the  most  glorious    being :  it   is   therefore    proper  that 
his  creature  should  acknowledge  this   in  all  that  he  doth,  "whether 
he  eat,  or  whether  he  drink,  or  whatever  else  lie  do,"    1  Cor.  x   31. 
"When  a  man  aims  at  himself,   he  puts  himself  in  the  place  of  God, 
It  is  true  we  must  do  good  works,  that  we  may  gain   our  neighbour 
for  Christ,  but  this  issues   in  the  glory  of  the  Lord.     See    Mutt.    v. 
16.     We  must  not  always  disapprove   of  believets    aiming  at  their 
own    profit  and    pleasure;  for  the  Lord  himself  excites  and  urgeth 
his  people  sometimes  by  these  things,  Gen.  xv,  1,  and  they  also  suf- 
fer themselves  to  be  moved  thereby.     See  this  in   the  virgins  of  Je- 
sus, and  in  Moses,  Song  1.  4       Heb.  xi.  26.     It  is  also  nearly    im- 
possible that  unexperienced  Christians  who  have  but  little  knowledge 
of  divine  truths,  should  begin  all  that  they  do  from  a  direct  view  to 
the  glory  of  God  ;  their    own  salvation,  advantage  and  pleasure  will 
excite  them  most,  and  they  end  thus  in  the  glory  of  the   Lord,  since 
the  glory  of  God   is    their  salvation,   and   their    salvation    is   the 
glory  of  God;  when    "God  satisfieth    their  souls  as   with  marrow 
and  fatness,  then    their  mouths  praise  him  with   joyful  lips,"  Psalm 
lxviii.  5.     And  so  the  Lord  obtains  his  em!,  to  wit,  his  jjlory,  and  he 
esteems  such  a  work  good. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S 'DAY,  Q.  88—91.         183 


APPLICATION. 

Do  these  qualifications  render  the  works  of  men  good,  can  then 
the  virtues  of  the  heathens  be  good  works,  as  the  patrons  of  free- 
will imagine  ?  They  had  not  surely  a  true  faith  ;  did  they  possess  the 
law  of  nature,  how  was  it  obscured  and  effaced  by  their  blindness 
corruption  and  evil  practices  !  was  it  not  their  own  honour,  the 
reputation  that  they  were  wise  and  virtuous,  that  ur^ed  them  on  ? 
For,  "when  they  knew  God,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  i.  21,  22,  "  they  glo- 
rified him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful ;  but  they  became  vaia 
in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened.  Pro- 
fessing themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  But  we  need 
not  wonder  that  persons,  who  speak  so  highly  of  the  powers  of  free- 
will, look  upon  the  virtues  of  the  heathens  to  be  good  works  ;  for 
even  their  own  virtues  are  no  better  than  heathenish  morality,  the 
offspring  of  the  corrupt  will,  and  only  tricked  up  with  the  name  of 
Christian  virtues  and  of  faith.  The  Papists,  who  value  themselves 
wonderfully  upon  their  good  works,  have  made  good  works  of  the  most 
fantastical  things  ;  performing  pilgrimages,  going  barefoot,  not  spa- 
ring the  body,  but  scourging  it,  making  monastic  vows,  yea,  doctrines 
of  devils,  forbidding  to  marry,  and  abstaining  from  certain  meats, 
these  are  reckoned  not  only  good  works,  but  even  supererogatory 
good.  But  these  things  cannot  be  done  from  faith,  to  the  glory  of 
God,  nor  according  to  his  law.  God  doth  not  require  them  at  the 
hands  of  any  man,  he  detests  them  :  "  In  vain,"  saith  the  Saviour, 
"do  they  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of 
men,"  Mat.  xv.  9.  Our  church  speaks  wi'h  more  sincerity  and 
truth  of  good  works,  and  hath  therefore  the  surest  evidence,  that 
she  thinks  rightly,  more  especially  as  she  speaks  according  to  the 
word  of  Got!. 

Will  it  now  suffice,  that  we  have  contemplated  this  matter,  as  a 
truth,  without  respect  to  ourselves  ?  must  we  not  also  apply  it  to 
ourselves  ?  It  concerns  us  greatly,  whether  we  also  be  converted 
or  not.  It  is  certain,  that  all  who  are  present  here  are  not  eonvert- 
ed,  nor  all  unconverted.  Many  fee*d  upon  ashes,  a  deceived  heart 
turns  tbem  aside,  so  ttiat  they  cannot  deliver  themselves,  nor  say, 
Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?  They  ween  that  they  are  con- 
verted, but  the  old  man  hath  never  yet  been  mortified  in  them,   nor 


Ii4     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

the  new  man  quickened.  Others  think  that  they  are  not  yet  con- 
verted, because  they  experience  so  gveat  a  power  of  the  body  of 
death  in  themselves,  although  they  are  truly  partakers  of  grace. 
It  is  therefore  necessary,  that  each  one  should  consider  his  ways, 
and  examine  himself  whether  he  be  truly  converted  or  not.  But  be- 
fore we  hold  the  light  to  you,  that  ye  may  see  yourselves  by  it,  we 
will  discover  to  you  the  false  evidences,  which  disturb  or  quiet  the 
converted  and  the  unconverted  improperly. 

It  is  surely  no  evidence  of  conversion,  (a)  that  a  person  is  able  to 
mention  the  time,  when  he  had  certain  emotions  of  painful  sorrow 
on  account  of  sin,  of  delightful  joy,  and  an  inclination  to  that  which 
is  good  ;  for  these  things  are  not  accompanied  in  all  men  with  con- 
version  ;  they  are  surely  not  always  the  beginning  of  conversion, 
(b)  The  severity  and  the  duration  of  the  convictions,  which  a  person 
hath  ones  had,  are  also  no  evidences  that  he  is  converted.  It  ap- 
pears from  experience,  that  some  are  converted  without  any  griev- 
ous distress  of  mind  ;  that  others  do  not  continue  long  under  severe 
convictions,  and  that  there  are  those  also,  who  partake  of  converting 
grace  from  their  youth  ;  and  some  are  converted  by  a  calm  contem- 
plation of  the  truth,  yea,  even  with  a  sweet  joy,  as  we  have  shown 
upon  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  day.  On  the  other  hand,  reprobates, 
such  as  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab  and  Judas,  experience  sometimes  severe 
convictions,  (c)  Neither  may  we  look  upon  it  as  an  evidence  of 
true  conversion,  that  a  person  is  more  virtuous  in  some  respects 
than  others  ;  many  are  civil,  honest,  and  exceedingly  devout,  but 
their  heart  is  and  continues  rotten,  like  the  heart  of  the  Pharisee, 
who  thanked  God  that  he  was  more  virtuous  than  other  men,  Luke 
xviii.  1 1,  12.  As  it  is  also  no  evidence  of  an  unconverted  state,  that 
a  person  still  expenenceth  a  great  power  of  the  old  man  in  himself; 
for  we  should  then  be  obliged  to  condemn  Paul,  who  bewailed  him- 
self rreatly  on  this  account,  Rom,  vii.  (d)  It  is  still  less  a  true  evi- 
dence, that  a  person  is  converted  or  unconverted,  because  eminently 
godly  persons  approve  or  condemn  him.  Paul,  though  he  was  con- 
yerted,  was  at  first  suspected  by  the  Christians,  Acts  ix.  26,  and 
without  doubt  Judas,  Simon  the  sorcerer,  and  Demas  were  looked 
upon  by  many,  as  converted. 

A  better  and  a  surer  evidence  of  conversion  (a)is  tl.e  work  of  conver- 
sion itself,  as  explained  above.  The  converted  have  a  sincere  sorrow  of 
heart  for  their  sins,  they  hate  them  mere  t'nn  aught  besides,  they  a»e 
afraid  of  them,  and  endeavour  to  flee  from  them.  Gcd  and  his  service 
are  the  objects  of  their  joy,  delight  and  love.  It  is  true,  some  are  corv- 
verted  without  such  a  grievous  sorrow,  but  they  wilJ  I  : 


WORKS.        XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9  i         18 J 

sorry,  and  mourn  on  account  of  their  daily  offences.     Do  they  not 
obtain  much  joy   from  the  Lord,  they  cannot,  nevertheless,  delight 
themselves   in  sin,  and  out  of  the  Lord  :  their  continual  turning  to 
the  Lord  manifests  that  they  seek  their  rest  in  him  only.     Are  they 
sometimes   listless  with    respeet  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  it  is  a 
burthen  to  them,  and  they  endeavour  again  and  again  to  enliven  them- 
selves.    True  conversion  discovertth  kself  still  more  (c)  by  the  work 
of  faith  ;  faith  and  conversion  always   accompany  each  other*     See 
Mark  i.  15.  Act*  si.  2i.     They  who  are  converted,  actually  pass  by 
faith  out  of  themselves  into  the  Lord,  in  order  that  they  may  obtain 
in  and  with   him  grace,  reconciliation,  pardon  and   sanctiffcation  ; 
with  the    prodigal  son    "  they  arise,   go  to  their   Father,"    confess 
their  sins,  and  entreat  him   for  grace,  Luke  xv.  18,   19      Yea,  they 
engage  in  a  solemn  manner  to  serve  him,  they  "  join  themselves  to 
him  to  serve  him,  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  to  be  his  ser- 
vants," Isaiah  xlv.  5.  Ivi.  5.     We  add  to  this  (c)  Their  sorrow  for 
sin  as  sin.     It   grieves  them  that  they   have   deserved   damnation  ; 
but  they  see  also  so  much  shame  and  filth  in  their  inquiry,  that  they 
hide  themselves  for  shame,  "  they  loathe  themselves,"  Ezek.  xxxvi, 
31,  and  they  "  dare  not  lift  up  their  face  to  God,"  Ezraix.  6.    They 
hate   sin  and  flee   from  it,  because  it  is  sin.     Although   sin    were 
not    punished,  they  would,  on  account  of  its   hatefulness,  still  hate 
it,  flee  fiom  it,  and  cast  it  away,  as  a  menstruous   cloth,"  Isaiah 
xxx  22.  Once  more,  (d)They  are  converted  from  every  sin  to  every 
good  work,  that  God  hath  commanded  :    "  They  have  a  delight," 
saith  the  instructor,  "  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  good 
works."     There  is  not  one  sin,  great  cr  small,  though  ever  so  hon- 
ourable, pleasant  and  profitable  to  the  flesh,  from    which   they  do 
not  turn  away,  and  which  they  do  not  hate  and  strive  against  :  there 
is  not  one   commandment  of  God,  to  which   they   do   not   submit 
themselves  with  delight  and  willingly  :  their  heart  saith  with  David, 
Psalm  cxix.   128.    "I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  concerning  all  things 
to  be  right ;    and  I  hate  every  false  way."     Suffer  me  to  add  yet  j 
(f)  They  who  are  conrcrted  are  not  satisfied  with  merely  amending 
their  actions,  forsaking  that  which  is  evil,  and  doing  that   which  is 
good  ;    but  they  attend  also  to  their  hearts,  that  they  likewise  may 
be   amended,  converted  and  changed.     They  see  that  their  under- 
standing is  darkened,  they  endeavour  to  enlighten  it,  that  they  may 
see  the  light  in  God's  light  ;  conversion  is  indeed   "  a  turning  from 
darkness  to  light,"    Acts  xxvi.  18.     They   see  that  their  will  with 
its  motions  and  desires  is  stubborn,  crooked  and  perverse  ;  they  en= 
deavour  to  subdue,  to  renew  and  direct  it  according  t©  the  will  •( 
Vol  it.  y 


186    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

God,  and  thus  "  to  make  themselves  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit," 

according  to  Ezck.  xviii  31.  They  lind  that  they  have  no  strength 
to  do  aught,  and  especially  none  to  change  their  hearts  ;  therefore 
they  turn  themselves  to  the  Eord,  and  cry  with  David,  Psalm  li  10. 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  with- 
in me,"'  And  thus  with 'king  Josiah,  2  Kings  xxiii.  25.  "  They  turn 
•to  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  soul,  and  with  all 
their  might,  according  to  all  the  law  of  Moses  " 

What  think  ye  hearers  ?  do  ye  all  answer  this  description  ?  Surely 
ye  do  not,  who  have  not  yet  striven  to  he  converted,  but  are  and  re- 
main careless  and  listless  :  earthly,  visible  and  sinful  objects  possess 
you  altogether  :  Evil  is  still  sweet  in  your  mouths,  ye  hide  it  under 
your  tongues,  ye  spare  it,  and  forsake  it  not,"  as  Zopbar  speaks, 
Job  xx.  I",  13.  What  will  it  avail  you  to  perforin  certain  works  of 
honesty  and  religion,  and  to  prink  yourselves  with  them,  while  your 
hearts  are  unconverted,  and  your  works  have  not  the  requisite  qual- 
ifications ?  "  Your  webs  will  not  become  garments,  neither  will  ye 
be  able  to  cover  yourselves  with  your  works  :  your  works  are  works 
of  iniquity,  and  the  act  of  violence  is  in  your  hands,"  as  it  is  said, 
Isaiah  lix.  5.  Or  do  ye  flatter  yourselves,  that  ye  will  convert  your- 
selves some  time  or  other  hereafter.  Alas,  how  do  ye  deceive  your- 
selves !  how  long  do  ye  expect  to  live  ?  "  Thou  fool,"  perhaps 
"  this  night  thy  soul  will  be  required  of  thee,"  as  the  Saviour  spake, 
IjUke  xii.  20.  Or  do  ye  hope  to  repent  on  your  death-beds  ?  will 
ye  be  abler  then,  than  ye  are  now  ?  no,  your  deadly  sickness  will 
not  suffer  your  souls  to  repent,  and  will  perhaps  so  stupify  your  un- 
derstandings, that  ye  will  be  forced  to  die  as  a  fool  dieth.  Or  is  it 
yoor  hope,  that  ye  will  live  yet  some  time  ?  will  ye  have  then  more 
time  and  inclination,  and  less  to  do  in  the  world  than  ye  have  now  ? 
will  the  door  of  grace  be  then  still  open,  and  God  stand  toady  to  re- 
ceive you,  as  soon  as  ye  cail,  when  ye  have  rejected  him  so  long,  in 
opposition  to  all  his  calls  ?  lie  saith  no,  Prov.  i.  24,  28.  Do  ye  de- 
fer your  conversion  until  another  time,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  God 
will  punish  you  then  with  judicial  blindness  and  hardness,  winch 
will  render  you  .  .  of  conversion.     See  this  threatened,  Isaiah 

iv.   '.:,   10. 

"  Seek  t!  while  he  may  be  found,  call  upon  him  while 

lie  is  near-  Lei  the  wicked  forsake  hit  way,  and  the  unrighteous 
man  his  thoughts ;  and  kt  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
have  mercy  oh  him,  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.' 
Thus  the  Lord  callech  u>  you,  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  Delay  not  by  any 
>S)  but  as  Davie!  saith,  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harde" 


works.      ::xx:n.  lord's  day.  q.  88— 9 1.       is? 

net  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.  There  is  surely  nothing,  in  which 
ye  have  a  greater  concern  than  conversion.  Have  ye  not  departed 
from  God,  and  from  a  most,  glorious  condition  ?  Will  ye  not  then 
return  ?  "  Shall  they  fall,  and  not  arise  ?  shall  he  turn  away,  and 
net  return?  saith  the  Lord,"  Jer.  viii.  4.  "Or  do  ye  despise  the 
riches  of  his  goodness,  forbearance,  and  long-suffering  ;  not  knowing 
fjKat  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repentance?"  or  will  ye, 
14  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  to  yourselves 
wrath  against  the  d«y  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  :"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Rom.  ii.  4,  5.  Or  are  ye 
indifferent  whether  ye  be  saved  or  damned  ?  or  do  ye  not  endeavour 
to  be  converted,  because  ye  cannot  convert  yourselves  ?  This  doth 
not  hinder  you,  for  God  gives  you  not  only  the  word,  and  time  to 
repent,  but  often  his  Spirit  also  to  convince  you,  and  he  stirs  you  up 
repeatedly  by  your  conscience,  and  thus  gives  you  strength  ;  but  ye 
withstand  his  Spirit,  and  therefore  it  is  your  will  that  hinders  you  ; 
u  Ye  will  not  come  to  Christ,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  as  he  himself 
saith,  John  v.  4.  Or  dare  ye  not  turn  to  God,  because  ye  have  sin- 
ned so  grievously,  and  so  long  a  time  against  him  ?  He  calls  to 
you  still,  yea.  he  swears,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 1.  "  That  he  hath  bo  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  the  wicked  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his 
way  and  live  :  turn  ye,  turn  yc  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will 
ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?" 

Only  consider  and  say,  "  What  have  I  done  ?"  Jer.  viii.  6.  A 
person  will  never  repent,  until  he  first  comes  to  himself  and  sees  hir, 
abominable  disposition  and  dreadful  situation  ;  for  this  drives  him 
out  of  himself  to  the  Lord.  "  When  we  fear,  then  we  come  to  the 
Lord  and  to  his  goodness;  and  when  we  acknowledge  our  offence, 
and  are  in  affliction,! then  we  seek  his  face  early,"  Hosea  hi.  5.  v. 
I  5.  Abide  by  all  means  under  a  zealous  ministration  of  the  word 
of  conversion  ;  "God  gives  thereby  repentance  unto  life."  "  When 
they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said  unto  Pe- 
ter, and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we 
do  ?"  Thus  speaks  Luke  of  the  ptntecost  hearers,  Acts  ii.  27. 
Above  ail,  pray  earnestly  and  incessantly  to  God,  that  he  would  con- 
vert you,  with  the  church,  who  said  repeatedly,  "  Turn  thou  me, 
and  I  shall  be  turned,"  Jer  xxxi  18.  Lam.  v.  21.  And  flee  to  his 
Son,  "  who  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repen- 
tance to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts.  v.  31. 

But  ye  who  are  converted,  (a)  Glory  and  rejoice  in  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you  ;  others  glory  and  rejoice  in  you. 
See  Acts  xi.  18.     xv.  3.   1  Thess.  i.  9.     Why    should  not  then  yc 


1*83  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

yourselves,  whom  it  concerns  more  than  others  ?  (b)  Conduct  your* 
selves  as  it  btcometh  those  who  are  converted :  show  that  the 
Lord  is  the  God  of  your  exceeding  joy  ;  and  that  it  is  truly  your  de- 
ci'c  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  all  good 
works,  that  "  ye  are  dead  "  to  yourselves,  and  to  all  that  is  sinful, 
and  that  "  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  CoK 
'iii.  3.  Therefore  he  commands  you,  "  Yield  not  your  members  in- 
5trumfcrits  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,:  but  yield  yourselves  unto 
God,  as  those  that  arc  alive  from  the  dead  ;  and  your  members  as 
instruments  of  righteousness  Unld'  GW,""R«ifl.  vi.  13.  "Bring 
forth  then  fruits  meet  for  repentance,"  as  the  Baptist'  admonisheth, 
Matt,  iii  3.  It  behooves  you  to  take  particular  care,  that  your  works 
be  not  only  materially  good,  but  also  that  they  have  the  requisite 
qualifications.  It  is  commendable  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  but  it  is 
detestable  to  hear  it  without  fruit ;  therefore  the  Saviour  saith, 
Luke  viii.  18,  "Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  "Whatever  we  do  in 
word  or  work,"  we  must  do  it  in  faith,  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  Col  iii.  17.  "  Servants  must  be  obe- 
dient to  their  masters,  not  with  eyeservice,  as  men-pleasers,  but  as 
the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart."  F.ph.  vi. 
5,  6,  7.  And  every  one  ought  to  conduct  himself  thus  in  all  that  he 
doth,  yea.  he  ought  to  u  eat  and  drink  to  the  glory  of  God,"  1  Cor. 
x.  31.  This  would  add  a  comely  lustre  to  the  converted  people, 
(c)  VVc  exhort  you  further  from  Keb  xii.  15,  "  Look  diligently  lest 
any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God,"  either  through  a  common  slug- 
gishne_sSj  by  which  we  are  brought  to  a  deep  decay  :  or  by  some 
enormous  sin,  which  disturbs  the  mind.  How  shameful,  hurtful  and 
painful  this  is,  we  have  shown  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  and  also 
that  those  who  have  backslidden  thus,  should  return,  (d)  We  would 
add  finally,  "  Do  ye,  who  are  converted,  strengthen  your  brethren," 
as  Jesus  enjoins,  Luke  xxii.  32.  There  are  weak  and  feeble  ones  ; 
ye  know  the  temper  of  their  minds,  and  how  ye  have  been  restored. 
Encourage  them,  support,  direct,  and  "  comfort  them  with  the  com- 
fort wherewith  ye  yourselves  have  been  comforted  of  God,"  as  Paul 
apeaks,  2  Cor.  i.  4.  We  should  also  seek  by  word  and  conversation 
to  convert  those  who  are  wholly  unconverted,  as  we  have  shown  on 
the  former  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  bemoan  yourselves  with  Ephraim  on  account  of  your  mani- 
fold sins,  the  Lord  hears  it,  he  is  pleased  with  it,  and  he  will  show 
you  that  he  is;saying,  Jer.  xxxi.  20,  "  Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  is 
he  a  pleasant  child  ?  for  since  I  spake  against  him,  1  do  earnestly 
remember  him  still ;  therefore  my  bowels  are   troubled   for  him  :  I 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9 J.        189 

will  surely  have  mercy  en  him."  Will  he  not,  like  the  father  of 
the  prodigal  son,  when  his  son  repented,  Luke  xv.  17 — 24  "  run  to 
meet  you,  fall  on  your  neck,  kiss  you,  clothe  you  with  the  best  robe," 
and  feast  you  with  the  choicest  dainties  ?  According  to  his  promi- 
ses, Hosea  xiv.  4.  "  he  will  heal  your  backslidings,  he  will  love  you 
fiee:y  ;  for  his  anger  is  turned  away  from  you."  The  Lord  promi- 
seth,  Isa.  xxxv.  10,  (It  is  partly  fulfilled,  but  it  will  be  perfectly 
fulfilled  after  this  life)  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and 
come  to  Zion  with  bongs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads  :  they 
shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
3W#y»"     Amen, 


30  ) 


THE 


LAW  OF  GOD, 


AND  THE 


FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  1,  2,  3.  And  God  spake  all  these  words  saying,  I  am  the 
Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  be- 
fore me.

Q.  90.    What  is  the  quickening  of  the  new  man  ? 

A.  It  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  Cod,  through  Christ,  and  with 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  Cod  in  all  good 
works, 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  83—91.  171 

Q.   9. 1 .  But  ivhat  ere  good  works  ? 

A.  Only  those  which  proceed  from  a  true  faith,  are  performed 
according  to  the  law  of  God,  and  to  his  glory  ;  and  not  such  as  are 
founded  on  our  imagination,  or  the  institutions  of  men. 


GOOD  man,  out  of  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,  bringeth 
foi\h  that  which  is  good  ;  and  an  evil  man,  c;it  of  theevil   treasure 
of  his  heart,  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  evil  :  for  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart  Ins  mouth   speaketh."     Thus   speaks  the  Lord  Jesus, 
Luke  vi,  45.      I  he  tongue,   and  all    the  outward  actions  are  the  in- 
terpreters of  the  heart,  and  show  how  a  person  is  internally  disposed. 
The    index    will    show    whether  a  clock    is    in   order    or    whether 
it  is  not ;  the  vessel  wAi  affou!    that  which  it   contains;  and   as  the 
fruit  is.  so  is  the  tree  :  "  t  or  a  Rood  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt 
fruit ;  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  saith  the 
Saviour,   Luke  vi.  43.      Thus  it  i,s   also  with  a  man  ;  if  he  be  good, 
i-c  wui  do.  Lhat  winch  is  good,  and  if  he  be  evil,  he  will  do  that  which. 
is  evil      The  sinner  hath    by  nature   a  wicked    and   an    unbelieving 
heart  to  depart  from  the   living  God,  and  lie  manifests  it  in  all  that 
he  doth,      rherefore  t.  c  Saviour  said  to  the   slandering   Pharisees, 
Matt.  xii.  3i.     "  O  generation  of  vipers,   how  can   ye,   being  evil, 
speaii  good  things  I"     What  remedy  is  there  for  thisr   shall  the  sin- 
ner only  amend    his  conduct   in  some    measure,    and  accustom  his 
tongue  to  decent  language  ?  This  is  impossible  :  the  evil  treasure  of 
his  heart  will,  though  he  strive  agains"  it,  continually  yield  and  bring 
forth  evil  things  ;  the  heart   must  therefore  be  changed  and  amend- 
ed, if  it  shall  afford  better  things.     If  we  will  "  make  the  fruit  good, 
^e  must  fiist  make  the   tree  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks,  Malt  xii.  43. 
As  we  make  a  tree  and  its  fiuit  good  by  inserting  a  better  graft  into 
it,   so  the  sinner   must   also  be    ingrafted    into  Christ,   that  he  may 
<l  partake  of  the  root,   and  f*tness  of  that  olive  tree."  Rom.  xi.  17. 
But  how  shall  he  be  ingrafted  into  him  ?  by  regeneration,   faith  and 
conversion,  whereby,   being  wholly  changed  to  that  which  is  good, 
he  brings  forth  also   good  works.     So   Paul  showed   that  the  sinner 
"  must  first  repent,  and  that  then  he  must  do  works  meet  for  repent- 
ance."   Acts  r.xvi   20. 

In  this  manner  doth  the  instructor  also  proceed.  After  he  had 
insisted  on  the  necessity  of  good  works,  he  doth  not  hasten  to  the 
law,  as  the  rale  of  good  works,  but  requires  first  that  the 
heart  of  man,  which  is  evil,  should  be  changed,  that  he  may  out  of 
that  good  treasure  also  bring  forth  good  works. 


172     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

There  arc  two  particulars  in  this  Lord's  day,  which  require  our 
exposition  : 

I.  The  nature  of  conversion,  Questions  S8,  89,  90. 

II.  The  nature  of  good  works,  Question  91. 

I.  The  Kemonslrants  imagine  that  the  instructor  ought  not  to 
have  treated  of  conversion  here,  but  before  the  doctrine  of  deliver- 
ance, that  so  die  work  of  man  might  precede  the  grace  of  God,  as 
if  the  grace  of  God  did  not  pre\ent  the  works  of  man,  and  conver- 
sion did  not  flow  from  our  deliverance.  We  cannot  understand  any 
thing,  unless  we  understand  the  name  that  expresseth  the  nature  of 
that  thing.  The  word  bekeeten  in  our  Low  Dutch  language,  as  also 
the  Hebrew  word  schub,  to  return,  and  the  Greek  word  efiistrc/i/uiu, 
to  convert,  to  convert  ourselves,  signifieth  to  turn  again  to  that  f;om 
■which  we  had  turned  away  before;  and  it  expresses  therefore  very 
properly  the  nature  of  conversion.  God  had  created  man  for  him- 
self, and  after  his  image,  but  man  is  by  sin  turned  from  God  to  him* 
self,  to  sin,  and  to  Satan  ;  but  by  conversion,  he  turns  himself  from 
himself,  from  sin  and  .^atan  to  the  Lord,  that  lie  may  obtain  mercy 
of  him,  and  live  for  him  ;  in  this  manner  is  conversion  described, 
Isaiah  xxxi.  6.  "Turn  ye  unto  him  from  whom  the  children  of 
Israel  have  deeply  revolted. "  So  "  Paul  was  sent  to  turn  the  Gentiles 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God;  that 
they  might  receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified  by  faith  in  Christ,"  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18. 

But  let  us  penetrate  somewhat  deeper  into  this  matter.  That  con- 
version should  consist,  as  the  Romanists  fancy,  "  in  sorrow  of  heart, 
in  confession  with  the  mouth,  auricular  confession,  and  in  making 
satisfaction  with  our  works,  by  undergoing  a  certain  penance,  which 
the  priest,  who  is  the  confessor,  imposes  upon  the  sinner,"  this  is  an 
invention,  which  is  beside  the  word  of  God,  it  is  no  gracious  work 
of  God,  nor  virtue  of  man,  but  a  mere  punishment,  and  an  engine  to 
torture  the  conscience.  This  conversion  of  the  Papists  is  not  as 
good  as  the  conversion  of  Judas  ;  for  he  "  repented,"  and  had  more 
sorrow  of  heart,  than  is  required  of  any  Papist,  for  "  hei.anged  him- 
self;"  he  confessed  his  sins  also  very  circumstantially  to  the  priests, 
when  he  said,  "  1  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the  innocent 
blood."  He  satisfied  readily  and  actually,  when  "he  brought  the 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  again  to  the  chief  priests  and  eiders,"  Matt, 
xxvii.  3,  4,  5. 

The  instructor  rejecting  a  false,  or  a   half  and  pretended  con 
sion,  like  that  of  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab,  Judas,  and  the  Popish  conversion, 
inquires  concerning  f\  :>  true"  conversion,  which  he  describes  a 


WORKS,         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  8«— 91.  173 

sisting  in  two  pails,  1.  The  mortification  of  the  old  man,  2.  The 
quickening  of  the  new  man. 

1.  The  old  man,  as  we  may  all  easily  conceive,  is  not  another  per- 
son, distinct  from  the  man  who  ;s  converted,  but  the  evil  disposition, 
which  is  in  the  man  himself,  to  wit,  the  natural  corruption  of  man, 
destitute  of  the  image  of  God,  and  possessed  of  the  image  of  Satan, 
which  fills  his  soul  with  hideous  abominations,  excites  him  to  every 
abominable  sin,  and  urges  him  on  from  sin  to  sin.  "  The  old  man 
is  corrupt,  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  iv.  22. 
This  evil  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  because  it  possesseth 
the  whole  man,  "defiles  his  understanding  and  conscience,"  and 
whatsoever  he  doth,  Titus  i.  15,  16,  and  "  rules  in  his  mortal  bodv," 
Horn,  vu  12,  and  because  the  man  loves  it,  as  much  as  he  loves  him- 
self, 2  Tim.  iii.  2  ;  but  also  because  it  hath  ail  the  parts  of  a  man. 
There  is  "a  fleshly  mind,"  Col.  ii.  18,  -desires  and  a  will  of  the 
flesh,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  "a  body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6.  '*  flesh,"  John  iii.  G, 
V  members  on  earth,"  Col.  iii.  5,  '•  a  life  after  the  flesh,"  Rom.  viii. 
13.  It  is  not  without  reason,  that  it  is  called  also-'1  the  old  "  man  ; 
for  it  is  as  old  as  the  man  himself,  and  is  born  with  him,  Psalm  li. 
5.  Gen.  viii.  21.  Yea,  it  is  as  old  as  Adam,  through  whose  sin  this 
old  man  hath  been  transmitted  to  all  his  descendents  ;  for  af.er 
Adam  had  by  his  first  sin  admitted  this  old  man,  "  he  begat  a  son 
in  his  own  likeness,  after  ids  image,"  Gen.  v.  3.  This  is  explained 
very  beautifully  by  the  apostle,  when  he  saith,  1  Cor.  xv.  47,  48,  4P„ 
M  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  As  is  the  earthy,  such  are 
they  aLo  that  are  earthy.  We  bear  the  image  of  the  earthy." 
We  may  therefore  call  this  old  man  the  old  Adam.  This  old  man 
doth  wholly  possess  and  rule  over  the  sinner,  while  in  his  natural 
state,  John  iii.  6,  but  exists  only  in  part  in  those  who  possess  grace, 
vexing  them,  and  violently  taking  them  captive  against  their  will, 
but  not  ruling  over  them,  according  to  Rom.  vi.  14.  vii.  22,  23. 

Conversion  consists  in  the  mortification  of  the  old  man.  This 
mortification  is  explained  by  the  instructor,  as  consisting  in  a  twofold 
assault  on  the  old  man,  by  which  a  mortal  wound  is  given  him. 
The  first  is  "  a  sincere  sorrow  of  heart,  that  we  have  provoked  Gcd 
by  our  sins."  We  cannot  understand  wherein  this  sincere  sorrow 
consists,  without  considering  the  several  steps  of  our  conversion, 
(a)  The  sinner  bereaved  of  his  reason  before  his  conversion,  know- 
ing nothing  of  himself,  and  running  headlong  on  in  sin,  comes  in 
the  work  of  conversion  to  himself,  with  the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv. 
17.  He  looks  into  himself  and  sees  clearly  and  experimentally  hit. 
abominable  apostacy  from  God,  the  evil  disposition  of  his  soul,  and 


?T4    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOGLJ 

tha  unseemliness  of  .ill  his  behaviour  ;  yea,  he  looks  bark,  and  sees 
that  i.is  whole  life  is  filled  -with  abominable  actions,  and  the  sins  of 
his  youth  are  brought  distinctly  to  his  view.  Tins  affects  him  with 
shame  ;  he  is  amazed  that  he  is  so  abominable,  and  tii^:  he  hath 
not  known  it  before  :  ,;  He  repents  of  his  wickedness,  saying,  V 
have  1  done  ;  '  Jer  viii.  6.  He  had  before  this  heard  others  dis- 
course somewhat  of  God,  of  the  law  and  of  sin,  and  he  also  spoke 
of  these  things,  but  he  now  sees  the  things  themselves,  as  they  re- 
late to  himself,  in  their  nature,  and  cries  out  with  Job,  chap.  xlii.  5, 
6,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  with  the  hearing  of  the  ear;  but  now  mine 
eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
asr.es.  See  this  also  in  "  Ephraim,  who,  when  he  was  converted, 
was  instructed,  he  smote  upon  his  thigh  ;  he  was  ashair.ed  :  yea. 
even  confounded,"  Jer.  xxxi  19.  And  thus  he  becomes  -wise 
again,  as  the  Greek  word  vic'ar.oeit:,  and  the  Latin  resifitseert,  to  re- 
pent, denote.  lie  slops  not  here,  but  (b)  he  sees  also  with  sensible 
sorroiv  how  guilty  and  damnable  he  is  before  God  ;  hcrore  this  be 
thought  with  backsliding  israel,  Jer.  ii.  35,  that  the  anger  of  God 
was  turned  away  from  him,"  and  with  the  wicked,  Psalm  1  2], 
"  that  God  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  himself,"  and  that  he  w 
not  punish  him.  But  he  now  sees  that  God  beholds  him  in  wrath  ; 
he  "trembles  "  at  it,  "  and  is  astonished,"  with  1        .  ix.  6.  He. 

hath  "  a: godly  sorrow,  accompanied  with  Lev,  (  '.  vii.  !0,  II. 
'•'  He  knows  and  sees,"  now  experimentally,  that  it  is  an  e\il  thing 
and  bitter,  that  he  hath  forsaken  the  Lord  his  God,"  Jer.  ii.  19.  He 
condemns  himself,  and  cries  out  with  Judah,  "  Wo  unto  mc,  that  I 
have  sinned,"    Lam.  v.  16.     lie  ji  stifles'  Go  .      Im  li. 

5,  4,  and  humbles  himself  with  the  publican 

not  so  much   as  lift  up  his   eyes  unto  heaven,    and  smites  upon  hia 
breast,"   Luke   xviii.    13.  (c)  Sometimes    he  endeavours  to  reform 
himself,   and  will  not  sin  so  any  more  ;  but  he  discovers  that  all  i.is 
'>cst  performances  are  wholly  abominable,  with  the  church  he 
upon  "  his  own  righteousness  as  filthy  rags,"  Isaiah    Ixiv.  G.     He  is 
disappointed    in   ail   that  lie  attempts  ;  will  lie  forsake  his  sins,  they 
beset   him  continually  anew,    lay  hold   on  him,  and  overcome 
will  he  pray,  his  heart  will  not  accompany  him  ;  will  he  re; 
the  word,   he  finds  an   immovable   and  insensible   heart,  and  he  dis- 
covers thus  experimentally  his  inability,  and  that  '•  he  is  abomi 
and  disobedient,    and  to  every  good   «'ork  le  "   Titnsi.  16. 

affects  him  with  shame  and  humility,  not  only  before 
I  o  before  men,  whom  he  "  esteems  bei  :lf,"  Philip. 

v  .      •  is. in  his  own  uch 


W6RKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 91.  m 

Ignore  capable  and  more  virtuous  than  others  :  but  now  he  looks  upon 
himself  with  Paul  to  be  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  2  Tim.  i.  15,  and 
"  one  born  out  of  due  time,"  1  Cor.  xv.  8.  Before  this  he  was  never 
so  base,  but  he  still  knew  of  a  remedy,  and  he  had  always  a  hope, 
that  he  should  be  saved;  but  now  he  gives  up  his  hope  that  he  will 
obtain  life  in  his  own  way,  and  by  his  own  doings  ;  he  knows  not 
what  he  shall  do  for  his  recovery,  and  "  lie  saith*  There  is  no  hope," 
Isaiah  lvii.  10.  He  is  sometimes  ready  through  dejection  to  aban- 
don the  whole  work  of  his  salvation,  because  he  knows  not  indeed 
what  course  he  must  take  ;  but  as  the  distress  of  his  mind  con- 
tinucth  with  him,  and  he  hath  also  an  earnest  desire  that  his  soul 
should  be  saved,  he  speaks  to  them  who  are  wiser  than  himseif,  and 
asks  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved,"  like  the  jailer,  Acts  xvi.  SO. 
See  also  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6. 

This  hearty  sorrow  of  his  soul  proceeds  also  so  far,  that  it  affects 
his  body.  His  countenance  gathers  blackness,  his  eyes  weep  bit- 
terly, like  Peter's,  Mutt.  sxvi.  75,  his  mouth  complains,  and  con- 
fesseth  his  sins,  like  David's,  Psalm  xxxii  5,  his  hand  smues  on  his 
breast,  like  the  publican's,  Luke  xviii.  13,  his  feet  go  softly,  his 
Stomach  fasts,  and  he  manifests  every  token  of  repentance ;  for  the 
afflicted  soul  finds  no  comfort,  except  only  in  sorrow,  with  the  pro- 
phet, Jer.  vhi.  18. 

The  Antinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the  law,  looking;  upon  such  a 
sorrow,  as  unnecessary,  yea,  as  sinful,  show  that  they  understand  not 
the  abominable  nature  of  sin,  nor  the  work  of  conversion,  and  that 
they  do  not  attend  to  the  word  of  God,  which  admonisheth  us  re- 
peatedly to  humble  ourselves  and  repent,  and  informs  us  how  the 
saints  humbled  themselves  See  Joel  ii.  13.  Psalm  vi.  xxxii  xxxviii. 
Iv.  exxx.  Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19.  Acts  ii.  37.  ix.  6.  xvi.  29,  30.  2  Cor.  vii. 
10,  1  1,  and  how  "  they  who  mourn  are  comforted,"  Matt.  v.  4. 

2.  "  By  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  better," 
saith  Solomon,  Eccl.  vii.  3.  And  so  the  second  assaul;,  by  which 
we  mortify  the  old  man,  is  "  more  and  more  to  hate  and  flee  from 
sin."  When  the  sinner,  during  his  conversion,  bewails  his  sin  with 
so  much  bitterness,  he  cannot  caress  it  anv  more,  as  he  used  ;  it  is 
not  sweet  any  more  in  his  mouth  ;  he  will  not  hide  it  any  longer 
under  his  tongue,  in  order  to  spare  it,  but  he  will  forsake  it,  and  will 
not  keep  it  in  his  mouth  ;  this  meat  is  turned  in  his  bowels,  it  is  to 
him  like  the  gall  of  asps  within  him.  For  (a)  he  hates  sin,  he  hath 
an  antipathy  to  it,  and  an  aversion  from  it  ;  nothing  is  so  hateful  and 
filthy  in  his  eyes  as  sin.  Because  he  sees  now  by  the  light  of  God 
what  sin  is,  therefore  he  is  seized  with  horrour,  when  it  is  ©nly  men-  - 


IY6     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  COOft 

tione.l,   and  he  hath   a  drear)  of  it.     And  so  he  "  abhors  that  which 
is  evil,"  Rom.  xii.  9.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh  indignation,"  according 
to  the  text.     "  He  hates  even  the  garment  spatted  by  the  flesh,"  as 
Jude  speaks  in  his  epistle,  vis.  23.  (b)  Being  so  averse  from  sin,  he 
will  also  actually  turn  from  it,  and  "  cact  it  away  "  as  the  most  hate- 
ful th;ng,  and  "  as  a  menstruous  cloth,  and  will  say  "  to  every  sin, 
(although   formerly  ever  so  honourable,   profitable   and  pleasant  to 
him)    "  Get  thee  hence,"   as  it   is  said  of  those  who  are  converted, 
Isaiah  xxx.  22.     He  flees  from  sin,    as  from  his  greatest  enemy,  he 
is  exceedingly  cautious  and  careful,  that  sin  may  not  take  hold  of 
him;  he  avoids  it,  and  the  occasions  of  it ;  "  he  keeps  himself,  that 
the  wicked  one  may  net  touch  him,"  as  John  speaketh,  1  John  v.  18. 
He  keeps    himself   from  the    iniquity,    to   which  he   is  most  prone, 
with  David,  Psalm  xviii.  23.     He  lakes  heed  to  his  heart,  and  to  all 
his  members,  that  he  may  not  be  turned  aside,  according  to  the  ad- 
monition of  the  wise  king,  Prov.  iv.  23 — 27.     With  Job  «  he  makes 
a  covenant  with  his  eyes,"  Job  xxxi    1.  with  holy  David,  "he  keeps 
himself  by  the  words  of  God's  lips  from   the  paths  of  the  destroyer, 
hot  dug  up  his  goings  in  the  paths  of  the  Lord,    that  his  footsteps 
may  not  slip,"  Psalm   xvii.  4,  5.     Yea,  with   that  man   after  God's 
heart,  "  he  will  !ake  heed  to  his  ways,  that  he  sin  not  with  his  tongue, 
and  he  will  keep  his  mouth  with  a  bridle,  while  the  wicked  is  before 
him,"  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  (c)  As  sin  nevertheless  lightly  besets  him,  as 
his  corrupt  heart  continually  works  up  all  manner  of  filth,  the  world 
flatters  him,  and  the  devil  goeth  about,  seeking  to  devour  him,  he 
will  therefore   also  manfully  withstand    and  fi^ht   against  all  these. 
He  observes  by  what   means   they  seek  to   hring  him   to  a   fall  ;  he 
rejects  their  solicitations,  he  endeavor  rs  to  subdue,  to  annoy  them, 
and  to  "  mortify  the  deed*  of  the  body  through  the  Spirit,"  as  Paul 
speaks  of  converted  persons,   Rom.  viii.  13.     "  He  keeps"  the  lusts 
of"  his  body  under,  and  brings  it  into  subjection,"  with  Paul,  1  Cor. 
ix.  27   "  ile  puts  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,   he    girds  his  loins 
about  with  the  truth,  he  pu.s  on  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  he 
;,.;s  feet  shed  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  he 
takes  above  ail  the  shield  of  faith,  the  helmet   of   salvation,  and  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  whirl:  is  the  word  of  God."     He  exercises  him- 
self much  in  fasting  and  prayer,  that  he  may  expel   that   evil    kind, 
and  may  seek  help  of  the  Lord  against  his  enemies,   that  he  may  be 
';  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in    the    power   of  his    might,"    Eph.   vi. 
10 — 18  .Therefore  he  prays  with  David,  whom  we  have  oiter.  men- 
tioned,  that  God  would  keep  his    heart  from   :.  e    dominion  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins,  that  he  would    direct   his    vords    and   thoughts    in 


WORKS.         XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—91         17? 

3uch  a  manner,  that  they  may  be  acceptable  to  him,  and  that  he 
would  set  a  watch  before  his  mouth  ?nd  lips,  Psalm  xix.  13,  14. 
cx!i.  3.  And  he  manifests  thus  "  zeal  and  revenge"  against  his 
sins,  as  the  text  speaks, 

This  hearty  goirow,  this  hatred  ?.nd  fleeing  from  sin  is  the  morti- 
fication of  the  old  man.  For  thus  he  is  condemned  to  die,  he  is 
tortured,  he  is  deprived  of  his  food,  a  deathwound  is  inflicted  on 
him,  and  his  ruling  power  is  taken  from  him.  It  is  true,  he  struggles 
and  bestirs  himself  yet  strongly,  but  these  are  only  the  pangs  and 
throes  of  fleatrv,  which  will  never  restore  him  to  his  former  vigour, 
nor  wholly  subdue  the  converted  toy!. 

2.  Nevertheless  conversion  doth  no'  consist  only  in  the  mortifica- 
tion of  the  old  man,  but  also  "in    the  quickening  of  'he  new    man." 
The  apostle  teaching  the  converted  this,  saith  not  only,  Coll.  in.    "•, 
u  Ye  are  dead,"  but  also,    "  your  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God." 
As  the  old   man   is  the  evil  disposition  and  corruption  of  the  sinner, 
ko  the  new  man  is  the  good  disposition  of  the  converted  man,  or  na- 
ture renewed  after  the  image  of  Go -1  and  of  Christ,  that  clear  knowl- 
edge of  God,  and  that  pure  and  true  holiness,  whereby  a  man  is  like 
God,  and  is  urged  to  do  the  will  of  God  only.      See    Coll.  iii.    10. 
Eph.  iv.  23,  24.     This  good  disposition  is  called  a  man,  not  only  be- 
cause it  possesseth  the  whole  man,  who   is  altogether  "  a  new  creac 
ture,"  2  Cor.  v.  17,  and  is  as  dear  to  the  converted  man  as  he  is   to 
himself,  but  also  because  it  hath  all  the  parts  of  a  man,  as  "  enlight- 
ened eyes  of  the  understanding,"  Eph    i.  18,  a  "  will  to  that    which 
is  good,"  Rom.  vii.  19,  «*  a  life  in  the   flesh  according  to  the  will  of 
God,"  1  Peter  iv.  2.     This  renewed  nature  is  also  called  a  new  man. 
not  only  because  the  converted  man  is  newborn,  See  John  iii.  3,  and 
becomes  a  man  first  with  this  new  birth  :  for  before  this  he  was  by 
means  of  his  abominable   sins    with    Nebuchadnezzar,  like  &   beast, 
and  with  the  hypocritical  Pharisees,  a  serpent,    and    an  offspring  of 
vipers,  Matt,  xxiii.  33,  but  especially  because  the  person  who  is  con- 
verted  is  renewed  after  his  new  head  :  the    new    or    second    Adam 
♦'Christ  is  formed  in  him,"  Gal.  iv.  9.     lie  is  "the  workmanship  of 
God,  created  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eph.  ii.  10.     See  this  clearly  asserted 
1  Cor.  xv.  47—40. 

This  new  man,  created  after  God.  was  alive  in  man  before  the 
fell,  but  died  through  sin  ;  but  Christ  having  slain  sin,  quickeneth 
the  new  man  again  after  his  image.  "  This  quickening,"  saith  the 
instructor,  "  is  a  sincere  joy  of  heart  in  God  through  Christ."  The 
person  who  is  converted,  impressed  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  as  Well  as 
«f  filthy  uncleanness,  (a)  flees  out  of  himself  through  and  in  Chris** 
Vflt.  II.  ">' 


in     THE  N\TURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

whom  lie  embraceth  and  accepts,  to  God,  upon  his  cull,  for  reconcili- 
ation and  grace.     And  thus  conversion  is  fuith,  whereby  we  turn  un- 
to God  through  Christ,  who  for  this  end  calls  unto  sinners,    "  Turn 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."     And    Jer.  iii. 
20.     "  Return,  ye  backsliding  children,  and  1  will  heal  your  backsli- 
dings."     Upon  which  the  converts,  betaking  themselves  to  the  Lord, 
cry  out,   "  Behold,  here  we  are.  we  come  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the 
Lord  our   God.-'     (b)  Hence   proceeds    "  that  sincere  joy    in    God 
through  Christ,"  for  whereas  sin  and  the  world  were  before  this  the 
dc-light  of  the  sinner,  now  he  is  converted,  God    in  Christ  is  become 
his  delight:  the  sinner  chooses  God  in   CI  list,  and  makes  him  the 
object  of  all  his  joy  and  gladness,    ihat    lie  may  find  his   delight    in 
him.     God  may  "  increase  the    corn   and  wine  of  the  wicked,"  but 
if  lie   will  only  "  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance   upon  him," 
he  hath    «  more  joy   in  his  heart,  than  the  wicked  "  on  account   of 
all  their  advantages  ;  thus  speaks  David,  Psalm    iv.   6,  7.  8,    "  God 
himself  is  his  escetding  joy,"  Psalm  xliii.  4.     »'  He  desires  nothing 
in  heaven  or  on  earth  besides  the   Lord,"   like  Asaph,  Psalm    lxxiii. 
25-     (c)  God  sheds  sometimes  upon  this  his  lore,  and  with  his  love 
a  heartfelt  joy  by  his  Spirit  into  the   soul;  either  by   assuring    her 
that  her  sins  are  forgiven  her,  *'  witnessing  with  her  by   his    Spirit 
that  she  is  a  child  of  God,"    Rom.  viii.   16  ;  or   by  giving   her   that 
tranquil  pe?ce,  and  calmness,  "  that  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding  and  which  keepeth  the   heart  and  mind,"  Philip,   iv. 
7.     Before   this,  "  s  n  was  continually   before  her  eyes  "  to  affright 
her,  as  David  complains,  Psalm  li.  3.  but  now  it  is  cast  into  the  bot- 
tomless sea  of  God's  mercy,   and    is   not    found   any    more,   though 
sought  for  ever  so  diligently,  Jer.  1.  20  ;  or  by  impressing  a   power- 
ful sens--  of  pardon  on  the  soul,  as  with  a  seal,  and  suggesting  those 
heartravishing   words     "  son     daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee," 
which    imluceth  her   to  say    triumphantly    with    ilezekiah,    Isaiah 
xxKvtii.    16,  17,  "O  Lord,  by  these  things  do  men   live,  and   in   all 
these  things   is  the  lift  of  my  spirit :  for  thou   has'  loved  my  soul, 
and  cast  all  my   sins  behind  thy    back."     With  the  jailer,  the    soul 
ices,  that  she  believes  in  God  "   Acts  xvi.  34.     >he  makes  her 
boast  in  the  Lord,  and  answers  the  cl  arg      of    er  accusers  with  the 
blood  and  death  of  Christ.     See  Isaiah  1    8.   9.     Rom.  viii.  33,  34. 
It  isiiue    the  Lord   doth  not  always  give  the  converted  soul  such  an 
nee  a:id  joy  ;  but  it  is  nevertheless  certain,  that  the  soul  turns 
him  b'   faith  with  a  ready  mind,  makes  'him  the  only 
object  oi"  tie    joy,  and  seeks  thai    jladness  in  God  ;  upon  which  the 
Lord  revives  the  soul  no>v  and  then,  and  more  or  less. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88 — 91.        M 

Can  it  no  v  be  otherwise,  but  that  this  new  man   should  have  "  a 
love  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the    will    of  God    in    all   good 
works  V     No  ;  for  the  law  of  God  is  writ  en  in  his  heart ;  the  love 
of  v_hrist  constraineth  him.  and  the  eyes  of   his   understanding  are 
enlightened,    he    looks  upon  holiness  and   £ood  works  as   beams  of 
the  divine  glory,  though  before  this  he    considered    them   as  trifles 
and  follies  :  with  joy  "  he  esteems  all  the  precepts  of  God  concern- 
ing all  things  to  be  right,"  like  David,    Psalm  cxix.     128.     He  says 
with  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  12,  The  law  is  holy  :  and  the    commandment 
holy,  and  just,  and  good.     "  lie  dedicates   himself  willingly    to   the 
Lord,  and  eng.gcs,  yea,  "  swears  that  he  will  keep  God's  righteous 
judgments,  and  he  will  also    perform  it,"  with    David,    Psalm   cxix. 
106.     He  sighs  to  the   Lord   for  strength  and  ability  :  "  O,"  saith 
he,  "that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy  s'atutes,"  vrs.  5.     He 
also  actually  sets  about  his   duty,  yea,    "he  makes  haste   and  delays 
not  to  keep  God's  commandments,"  like  tiat  fervent  man,  vrs.    60. 
His  conversion  works  also  this  "  vehement  desire  and  carefulness," 
in  him.  according  to  the  text.     He  "  hath  also  a  delight  in  this  after 
the  inward  man,"  with  thai  holy    .pusie,  Rom.  vii.    22.     Like  king 
David,  "  iie  rejoices  in  the  way  of  God's  testimonies  more   than    in 
all  riches,"  Psalm  cx:x     14,  and  with  him,  he  ta'ces  them  as  an  heri- 
tat.r  for  ever  :  for  tl  ey  are  the  rejoicing  ol  his  heart,"  vrs.  3 

In  this  -nanner  is  the  new  m  in,  before  lead,  quickened  in  the  con- 
verted sinner.  He  becomes  another  man.  a  new  creature  :  is  uni- 
ted to  God,  as  to  his  soul  ;  he  lives  also  otherwise  than  he  was  used 
to  do  before  this  :  he  reckons  himself  to  be  dead  unto  sin  ;  but  alive 
unto  God,  Rom.  vi.  11.  This  is  his  element,  and  the  life  of  his 
life. 

This  conversion  is  ascribed  to  God  :  "  God  giveth  repentance 
unto  life,"  Acts  xi.  18.  It  is  also  ascribed  to  man  :  "  At  Antioch  a 
great  number  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  Lord,"  Acts,  xi  21  : 
for  "  God  works  both  to  will  and  to  do  "  in  man,  Philip  ii.  13,  where- 
by man  also  wills  and  works,  God  converts  man,  and  man  also  con- 
verts himself:  "Turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  tinned."  saith  fhe  church, 
Jer.  xxxi.  3.  Lam.  v.  21.  The  sinner  doth  not  prevent  God,  but 
God  prevents  the  sinner,  with  the  work  of  conversion  ;  yea,  in  the 
beginning  of  conversion  God  works  alone  without  man.  inasmuch  as 
man  is  blind,  and  therefore  wholly  passive  here ;  but  in  the  pro- 
gress of  conversion  mnn  works  also,  because  God  causeth  him  t» 
work.  And  therefore  we  distinguish  conversion  into  a  first  and  sec- 
ond, and  a  daily  conversion.  The  first  conversion  is  that  by  which 
a  man  passeth  out  of  the  state  of  nature  into  the  state  «f  grace  ;  s» 


£30  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

K  God  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent,"  Acts  xvii.  30, 
This  conversion  is  also  called  regeneration  :  the  second  conversion 
is  thai  by  which  a  converted  person  rises  up  after  a  grievous  fall, 
with  Peter,  Luke  xxh.  32,  62.  The  daily  conversion  takes  place 
every  day,  when  a  person  rises  up  from  his  continual  stumblings, 
and  bestirs  himself  repeatedly  to  "  follow  after  perfection,"  with 
Paul,  Philip,  hi,  12,  14,  whereby  "  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day 
by  day,"  2  Cor.  iv.  IS 

II.  He  who  is  converted  in  this  manner  must  also  do  works  wor- 
thy of  conversion.  The  sinner,  estranged  from  God,  and  blind  be- 
fore his  conversion,  knows  not  what  conversion  is,  nor  what  good 
works  are.  With  the  Papists  he  will  esteem  certain  superstitious 
practices,  in  which  he  engages  with  a  religious  intention,  extraordi- 
nary holiness ;  and  with  the  Pelagians  or  Semipelagians  he  will 
wonder  at  himself,  when  he  performs  certain  moral  duties ;  but  after 
he  is  converted,  the  eyes  of  his  understanding  are  enlightened,  and 
he  will  say  with  the  instructor,  "  Those  only  are  good  works  which 
proceed  irom  a  right  fuith,"  &c.  We  will  explain  this  somewhat 
more  particularly. 

We  must  know  previously  that  some  works  are  good,  and  have 
these  qualifications  from  their  own  nature,  and  so  cannot  be  evil. 
thus  it  is  with  saving  faith  in  Christ,  hope  in  God  through  Christ, 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  proceeding  from  the 
love  of  God  ;  these  are  indeed  fruits  of  the  Spin:.,  as  Paul  saith  Gal. 
v.  22,  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering, 
gentleness,  goodness  fahh  meekness,  temperance."  Other  works 
are  materially  good,  but  without  these  qualifications  evil  to  wit,  out- 
ward moral  duties.  The  Pharisees  seemed  to  have  many  good 
works  ;  but  inasmuch  as  those  works  had  not  these  good  qualifica- 
ions,  the  Saviour  expresseth  repeatedly  his  detestation  of  them. 
See  Mat,  xxiii.  13 — 16.  Luke  xviii.  10,  II,  12,  14.  There  are  also 
works  which  are  in  themselves  indifferent,  or  neither  good  nor  evil, 
as  eating  and  drinking  of  this  or  that  kind  of  food,  following  this  or 
that  calling  ;  but  they  become  evil,  when  they  are  not  performed 
with  these  qualifications,  and  good  when  they  are  accompanied 
with  them.  And  thus  we  must  "  do  all  things  by  faith  in  the  name 
of  Jesus,"  agreeably  to  Coll.  iii.  17,  according  to  the  lav.  of  God, 
"doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart,"  Eph.  Vl.  5,  6,  and  "  to  hi* 
glory,"  1  Cor.  x    31. 

1.  Therefore  if  works  shall  be  good,  they  must  in  the  first  place 
"proceed  from  a  true  faith  ;"  "The  end  of  the  commandment  is 
charity,  out  of  a  pure   heart,  and  a  good  conscience,   and   faith   un 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88—51.         1*1 

Signed,"  1  Tim.  1.  5.  Faith  makes  the  heart  good,  and  therefore 
the  works  which  proceed  from  such  a  heart,  also  agreeable  to  (jod  ; 
for  "  the  heart  is  purified  by  faith,"  Acts  xv.  6.  And  tlierr-fore 
(i  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin,"  Rom.  x.v.  13,  and  "without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  Iitb.  xi.  6.  .Many  know  in- 
deed that  good  works  must  proceed  from  faith,  but  they  know  not 
how  they  proceed  from  it ;  the  matter  is  thus,  good  works  proceed 
from  faith  (a)  when  they  are  performed  by  a  true  believer  If  a 
man's  doings  shall  p'ease  God,  his  person  must  first  please  him  : 
u  The  Lord  had  respect  "  fiist  "  to  Abel,  and  "  thtn  "to  his  off  r- 
ing,"  as  Moses  relateth,  Gen.  iv.  4,  5.  Even  "the  satr:fice,  the 
way,  and  the  ploughing  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the 
Lord  ;  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  delight,"  saith  the  wise 
man,  Frov  xv.  8,  9.  zxxi.  4.  They  are  the  "peculiar  people  " 
of  Jesus,  who  are  "  zealous  of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  Bttt  how 
do  we  become  his  peculiar  people  and  united  to  him  ?  do  we  not  by 
faith,  we  aie  taught  this,  Song  ii.  16  John  i.  12.  Kph.  iii.  17. 
(b)  Good  works  are  also  performed  from  faith,  when  they  are  done 
by  the  power  and  influence  of  Christ :  "  Without  him,"  and  his 
influence,"  we  can  do  nothing,"  according  to  John  xv.  45.  Hut  how 
shall  we  obtain  his  influence  ?  surely  by  faith  only  :  for  we  thereby 
"receive  of  his  fulness,  and  grace  for  grace,"  John  1.  12,  16,  and 
we  "  do  thus  all  things  in  word  and  deed  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  commands,  Coll  iii.  If.  (c)  We  do  good  works 
also  from  faith,  when  we  do  them  with  an  assured  mind,  that  they 
arc  the  will  of  God,  and  pleasing  to  him,  and  thus  as  the  will  of 
God,  and  in  obedience  to  him  :  therefore  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles 
saith,  Rom.  xiv.  22,  23,  "  Happy  is  he  that  condemneth  not  him- 
self in  that  thing  which  he  allowed.  \  nd  he  that  dbubteth  is  damn- 
ed, if  he  eat,  because  he  eateth  not  of  faith  ;  for  whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin," 

2.  And  so  they  are  performed  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord," 
which  is  necessary,  if  the  works  shall  be  good  :  for  the  law  is  the 
rule  of  good  works  ;  the  Lord  God  also  directs  man  to  his  law, 
that  he  may  regulate  himself  in  all  that  he  doth  according  to  it : 
"  To  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  no!  according  to 
this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them,"  Isaiah  viii.  20. 
He  alone  is  the  lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy,  and  therefore 
lie  alone  can  determine  and  prescribe  what  he  wdl  have  his  reason* 
able  creatures  to  do  and  omit.  To  behave  as  a  man  thinks  fit.  with 
the  Papists,  may  please  the  man  himself,  but  it  will  not  the  Lord  ; 
for  then  God  is  rejected,  man  becomes  his  own  lawgiver,  and  he 


185     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

may  commit  the  greatest  abominations  with  a  good  design  to  serve 
God  ;  "  Whosoever  killeth  you  will  think  that  he  doth  God  service,"' 
saith  the  Saviour  to  his  aposiles,  John  xvi,  2.  Yea,  we  perform 
then  adeiestabie  'v  wiii  worship,"  tending  only  k4  to  the  satisfying  of 
the  flesh,"  Col.  ii.  23  r*s  we  cannot  make  laws  for  ourselves,  so 
we  cannot  for  others  ;  u  In  vain  do  they  worship  me.  teaching  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,"  saith  the  Lord,  Isaiah  xxix. 
13.  Matt.  xv.  9.  Though  a  thing  be  ever  so  indifferent,  yea,  ever 
so  good,  it  still  '•  pcrisheth  with  the  using,"  if  it  be  introduced 
"  after  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men,"  as  Paul  speaks, 
Col  ii.  22.  We  must  be  servants  of  God,  and  not  of  men,  accord- 
ing to  1  Cor.  vii.  23  We  shall  not  "  be  judged  "  by  the  law  of 
men,  but  "  by  the  law  of  God,"  James  ii.  12, 

3.  ISO  work,  which  is  clone  from   faith,  and  according  to  the  law 
of  God,  can  be  pleasing  to  him,  "  unless  it   be  done  also  to  the  glory 
of  God."     The  Lord  hath  made  all  things,  and  especially   the   rea- 
sonable creature,  for   himself,  and    for  his    glory  :  therefore    it    be- 
comes the   reasonable  creature   to  direct  all   things  to    his  glory. 
The  Lord  is  the  most  glorious    being :  it   is   therefore    proper  that 
his  creature  should  acknowledge  this   in  all  that  he  doth,  "whether 
he  eat,  or  whether  he  drink,  or  whatever  else  lie  do,"    1  Cor.  x   31. 
"When  a  man  aims  at  himself,   he  puts  himself  in  the  place  of  God, 
It  is  true  we  must  do  good  works,  that  we  may  gain   our  neighbour 
for  Christ,  but  this  issues   in  the  glory  of  the  Lord.     See    Mutt.    v. 
16.     We  must  not  always  disapprove   of  believets    aiming  at  their 
own    profit  and    pleasure;  for  the  Lord  himself  excites  and  urgeth 
his  people  sometimes  by  these  things,  Gen.  xv,  1,  and  they  also  suf- 
fer themselves  to  be  moved  thereby.     See  this  in   the  virgins  of  Je- 
sus, and  in  Moses,  Song  1.  4       Heb.  xi.  26.     It  is  also  nearly    im- 
possible that  unexperienced  Christians  who  have  but  little  knowledge 
of  divine  truths,  should  begin  all  that  they  do  from  a  direct  view  to 
the  glory  of  God  ;  their    own  salvation,  advantage  and  pleasure  will 
excite  them  most,  and  they  end  thus  in  the  glory  of  the   Lord,  since 
the  glory  of  God   is    their  salvation,   and   their    salvation    is   the 
glory  of  God;  when    "God  satisfieth    their  souls  as   with  marrow 
and  fatness,  then    their  mouths  praise  him  with   joyful  lips,"  Psalm 
lxviii.  5.     And  so  the  Lord  obtains  his  em!,  to  wit,  his  jjlory,  and  he 
esteems  such  a  work  good. 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S 'DAY,  Q.  88—91.         183 


APPLICATION. 

Do  these  qualifications  render  the  works  of  men  good,  can  then 
the  virtues  of  the  heathens  be  good  works,  as  the  patrons  of  free- 
will imagine  ?  They  had  not  surely  a  true  faith  ;  did  they  possess  the 
law  of  nature,  how  was  it  obscured  and  effaced  by  their  blindness 
corruption  and  evil  practices  !  was  it  not  their  own  honour,  the 
reputation  that  they  were  wise  and  virtuous,  that  ur^ed  them  on  ? 
For,  "when  they  knew  God,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  i.  21,  22,  "  they  glo- 
rified him  not  as  God,  neither  were  thankful ;  but  they  became  vaia 
in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened.  Pro- 
fessing themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools."  But  we  need 
not  wonder  that  persons,  who  speak  so  highly  of  the  powers  of  free- 
will, look  upon  the  virtues  of  the  heathens  to  be  good  works  ;  for 
even  their  own  virtues  are  no  better  than  heathenish  morality,  the 
offspring  of  the  corrupt  will,  and  only  tricked  up  with  the  name  of 
Christian  virtues  and  of  faith.  The  Papists,  who  value  themselves 
wonderfully  upon  their  good  works,  have  made  good  works  of  the  most 
fantastical  things  ;  performing  pilgrimages,  going  barefoot,  not  spa- 
ring the  body,  but  scourging  it,  making  monastic  vows,  yea,  doctrines 
of  devils,  forbidding  to  marry,  and  abstaining  from  certain  meats, 
these  are  reckoned  not  only  good  works,  but  even  supererogatory 
good.  But  these  things  cannot  be  done  from  faith,  to  the  glory  of 
God,  nor  according  to  his  law.  God  doth  not  require  them  at  the 
hands  of  any  man,  he  detests  them  :  "  In  vain,"  saith  the  Saviour, 
"do  they  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of 
men,"  Mat.  xv.  9.  Our  church  speaks  wi'h  more  sincerity  and 
truth  of  good  works,  and  hath  therefore  the  surest  evidence,  that 
she  thinks  rightly,  more  especially  as  she  speaks  according  to  the 
word  of  Got!. 

Will  it  now  suffice,  that  we  have  contemplated  this  matter,  as  a 
truth,  without  respect  to  ourselves  ?  must  we  not  also  apply  it  to 
ourselves  ?  It  concerns  us  greatly,  whether  we  also  be  converted 
or  not.  It  is  certain,  that  all  who  are  present  here  are  not  eonvert- 
ed,  nor  all  unconverted.  Many  fee*d  upon  ashes,  a  deceived  heart 
turns  tbem  aside,  so  ttiat  they  cannot  deliver  themselves,  nor  say, 
Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?  They  ween  that  they  are  con- 
verted, but  the  old  man  hath  never  yet  been  mortified  in  them,   nor 


Ii4     THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

the  new  man  quickened.  Others  think  that  they  are  not  yet  con- 
verted, because  they  experience  so  gveat  a  power  of  the  body  of 
death  in  themselves,  although  they  are  truly  partakers  of  grace. 
It  is  therefore  necessary,  that  each  one  should  consider  his  ways, 
and  examine  himself  whether  he  be  truly  converted  or  not.  But  be- 
fore we  hold  the  light  to  you,  that  ye  may  see  yourselves  by  it,  we 
will  discover  to  you  the  false  evidences,  which  disturb  or  quiet  the 
converted  and  the  unconverted  improperly. 

It  is  surely  no  evidence  of  conversion,  (a)  that  a  person  is  able  to 
mention  the  time,  when  he  had  certain  emotions  of  painful  sorrow 
on  account  of  sin,  of  delightful  joy,  and  an  inclination  to  that  which 
is  good  ;  for  these  things  are  not  accompanied  in  all  men  with  con- 
version  ;  they  are  surely  not  always  the  beginning  of  conversion, 
(b)  The  severity  and  the  duration  of  the  convictions,  which  a  person 
hath  ones  had,  are  also  no  evidences  that  he  is  converted.  It  ap- 
pears from  experience,  that  some  are  converted  without  any  griev- 
ous distress  of  mind  ;  that  others  do  not  continue  long  under  severe 
convictions,  and  that  there  are  those  also,  who  partake  of  converting 
grace  from  their  youth  ;  and  some  are  converted  by  a  calm  contem- 
plation of  the  truth,  yea,  even  with  a  sweet  joy,  as  we  have  shown 
upon  the  twenty-fifth  Lord's  day.  On  the  other  hand,  reprobates, 
such  as  Cain,  Saul,  Ahab  and  Judas,  experience  sometimes  severe 
convictions,  (c)  Neither  may  we  look  upon  it  as  an  evidence  of 
true  conversion,  that  a  person  is  more  virtuous  in  some  respects 
than  others  ;  many  are  civil,  honest,  and  exceedingly  devout,  but 
their  heart  is  and  continues  rotten,  like  the  heart  of  the  Pharisee, 
who  thanked  God  that  he  was  more  virtuous  than  other  men,  Luke 
xviii.  1 1,  12.  As  it  is  also  no  evidence  of  an  unconverted  state,  that 
a  person  still  expenenceth  a  great  power  of  the  old  man  in  himself; 
for  we  should  then  be  obliged  to  condemn  Paul,  who  bewailed  him- 
self rreatly  on  this  account,  Rom,  vii.  (d)  It  is  still  less  a  true  evi- 
dence, that  a  person  is  converted  or  unconverted,  because  eminently 
godly  persons  approve  or  condemn  him.  Paul,  though  he  was  con- 
yerted,  was  at  first  suspected  by  the  Christians,  Acts  ix.  26,  and 
without  doubt  Judas,  Simon  the  sorcerer,  and  Demas  were  looked 
upon  by  many,  as  converted. 

A  better  and  a  surer  evidence  of  conversion  (a)is  tl.e  work  of  conver- 
sion itself,  as  explained  above.  The  converted  have  a  sincere  sorrow  of 
heart  for  their  sins,  they  hate  them  mere  t'nn  aught  besides,  they  a»e 
afraid  of  them,  and  endeavour  to  flee  from  them.  Gcd  and  his  service 
are  the  objects  of  their  joy,  delight  and  love.  It  is  true,  some  are  corv- 
verted  without  such  a  grievous  sorrow,  but  they  wilJ  I  : 


WORKS.        XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9  i         18 J 

sorry,  and  mourn  on  account  of  their  daily  offences.     Do  they  not 
obtain  much  joy   from  the  Lord,  they  cannot,  nevertheless,  delight 
themselves   in  sin,  and  out  of  the  Lord  :  their  continual  turning  to 
the  Lord  manifests  that  they  seek  their  rest  in  him  only.     Are  they 
sometimes   listless  with    respeet  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  it  is  a 
burthen  to  them,  and  they  endeavour  again  and  again  to  enliven  them- 
selves.    True  conversion  discovertth  kself  still  more  (c)  by  the  work 
of  faith  ;  faith  and  conversion  always   accompany  each  other*     See 
Mark  i.  15.  Act*  si.  2i.     They  who  are  converted,  actually  pass  by 
faith  out  of  themselves  into  the  Lord,  in  order  that  they  may  obtain 
in  and  with   him  grace,  reconciliation,  pardon  and   sanctiffcation  ; 
with  the    prodigal  son    "  they  arise,   go  to  their   Father,"    confess 
their  sins,  and  entreat  him   for  grace,  Luke  xv.  18,   19      Yea,  they 
engage  in  a  solemn  manner  to  serve  him,  they  "  join  themselves  to 
him  to  serve  him,  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  to  be  his  ser- 
vants," Isaiah  xlv.  5.  Ivi.  5.     We  add  to  this  (c)  Their  sorrow  for 
sin  as  sin.     It   grieves  them  that  they   have   deserved   damnation  ; 
but  they  see  also  so  much  shame  and  filth  in  their  inquiry,  that  they 
hide  themselves  for  shame,  "  they  loathe  themselves,"  Ezek.  xxxvi, 
31,  and  they  "  dare  not  lift  up  their  face  to  God,"  Ezraix.  6.    They 
hate   sin  and  flee   from  it,  because  it  is  sin.     Although   sin    were 
not    punished,  they  would,  on  account  of  its   hatefulness,  still  hate 
it,  flee  fiom  it,  and  cast  it  away,  as  a  menstruous   cloth,"  Isaiah 
xxx  22.  Once  more,  (d)They  are  converted  from  every  sin  to  every 
good  work,  that  God  hath  commanded  :    "  They  have  a  delight," 
saith  the  instructor,  "  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  good 
works."     There  is  not  one  sin,  great  cr  small,  though  ever  so  hon- 
ourable, pleasant  and  profitable  to  the  flesh,  from    which   they  do 
not  turn  away,  and  which  they  do  not  hate  and  strive  against  :  there 
is  not  one   commandment  of  God,  to  which   they   do   not   submit 
themselves  with  delight  and  willingly  :  their  heart  saith  with  David, 
Psalm  cxix.   128.    "I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  concerning  all  things 
to  be  right ;    and  I  hate  every  false  way."     Suffer  me  to  add  yet  j 
(f)  They  who  are  conrcrted  are  not  satisfied  with  merely  amending 
their  actions,  forsaking  that  which  is  evil,  and  doing  that   which  is 
good  ;    but  they  attend  also  to  their  hearts,  that  they  likewise  may 
be   amended,  converted  and  changed.     They  see  that  their  under- 
standing is  darkened,  they  endeavour  to  enlighten  it,  that  they  may 
see  the  light  in  God's  light  ;  conversion  is  indeed   "  a  turning  from 
darkness  to  light,"    Acts  xxvi.  18.     They   see  that  their  will  with 
its  motions  and  desires  is  stubborn,  crooked  and  perverse  ;  they  en= 
deavour  to  subdue,  to  renew  and  direct  it  according  t©  the  will  •( 
Vol  it.  y 


186    THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

God,  and  thus  "  to  make  themselves  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit," 

according  to  Ezck.  xviii  31.  They  lind  that  they  have  no  strength 
to  do  aught,  and  especially  none  to  change  their  hearts  ;  therefore 
they  turn  themselves  to  the  Eord,  and  cry  with  David,  Psalm  li  10. 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  with- 
in me,"'  And  thus  with 'king  Josiah,  2  Kings  xxiii.  25.  "  They  turn 
•to  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  soul,  and  with  all 
their  might,  according  to  all  the  law  of  Moses  " 

What  think  ye  hearers  ?  do  ye  all  answer  this  description  ?  Surely 
ye  do  not,  who  have  not  yet  striven  to  he  converted,  but  are  and  re- 
main careless  and  listless  :  earthly,  visible  and  sinful  objects  possess 
you  altogether  :  Evil  is  still  sweet  in  your  mouths,  ye  hide  it  under 
your  tongues,  ye  spare  it,  and  forsake  it  not,"  as  Zopbar  speaks, 
Job  xx.  I",  13.  What  will  it  avail  you  to  perforin  certain  works  of 
honesty  and  religion,  and  to  prink  yourselves  with  them,  while  your 
hearts  are  unconverted,  and  your  works  have  not  the  requisite  qual- 
ifications ?  "  Your  webs  will  not  become  garments,  neither  will  ye 
be  able  to  cover  yourselves  with  your  works  :  your  works  are  works 
of  iniquity,  and  the  act  of  violence  is  in  your  hands,"  as  it  is  said, 
Isaiah  lix.  5.  Or  do  ye  flatter  yourselves,  that  ye  will  convert  your- 
selves some  time  or  other  hereafter.  Alas,  how  do  ye  deceive  your- 
selves !  how  long  do  ye  expect  to  live  ?  "  Thou  fool,"  perhaps 
"  this  night  thy  soul  will  be  required  of  thee,"  as  the  Saviour  spake, 
IjUke  xii.  20.  Or  do  ye  hope  to  repent  on  your  death-beds  ?  will 
ye  be  abler  then,  than  ye  are  now  ?  no,  your  deadly  sickness  will 
not  suffer  your  souls  to  repent,  and  will  perhaps  so  stupify  your  un- 
derstandings, that  ye  will  be  forced  to  die  as  a  fool  dieth.  Or  is  it 
yoor  hope,  that  ye  will  live  yet  some  time  ?  will  ye  have  then  more 
time  and  inclination,  and  less  to  do  in  the  world  than  ye  have  now  ? 
will  the  door  of  grace  be  then  still  open,  and  God  stand  toady  to  re- 
ceive you,  as  soon  as  ye  cail,  when  ye  have  rejected  him  so  long,  in 
opposition  to  all  his  calls  ?  lie  saith  no,  Prov.  i.  24,  28.  Do  ye  de- 
fer your  conversion  until  another  time,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  God 
will  punish  you  then  with  judicial  blindness  and  hardness,  winch 
will  render  you  .  .  of  conversion.     See  this  threatened,  Isaiah 

iv.   '.:,   10. 

"  Seek  t!  while  he  may  be  found,  call  upon  him  while 

lie  is  near-  Lei  the  wicked  forsake  hit  way,  and  the  unrighteous 
man  his  thoughts ;  and  kt  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
have  mercy  oh  him,  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.' 
Thus  the  Lord  callech  u>  you,  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  Delay  not  by  any 
>S)  but  as  Davie!  saith,  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harde" 


works.      ::xx:n.  lord's  day.  q.  88— 9 1.       is? 

net  your  hearts,"  Psalm  xcv.  7,  8.  There  is  surely  nothing,  in  which 
ye  have  a  greater  concern  than  conversion.  Have  ye  not  departed 
from  God,  and  from  a  most,  glorious  condition  ?  Will  ye  not  then 
return  ?  "  Shall  they  fall,  and  not  arise  ?  shall  he  turn  away,  and 
net  return?  saith  the  Lord,"  Jer.  viii.  4.  "Or  do  ye  despise  the 
riches  of  his  goodness,  forbearance,  and  long-suffering  ;  not  knowing 
fjKat  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  you  to  repentance?"  or  will  ye, 
14  after  your  hardness  and  impenitent  hearts,  treasure  up  to  yourselves 
wrath  against  the  d«y  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  :"  as  the  apostle  speaks,  Rom.  ii.  4,  5.  Or  are  ye 
indifferent  whether  ye  be  saved  or  damned  ?  or  do  ye  not  endeavour 
to  be  converted,  because  ye  cannot  convert  yourselves  ?  This  doth 
not  hinder  you,  for  God  gives  you  not  only  the  word,  and  time  to 
repent,  but  often  his  Spirit  also  to  convince  you,  and  he  stirs  you  up 
repeatedly  by  your  conscience,  and  thus  gives  you  strength  ;  but  ye 
withstand  his  Spirit,  and  therefore  it  is  your  will  that  hinders  you  ; 
u  Ye  will  not  come  to  Christ,  that  ye  may  have  life,"  as  he  himself 
saith,  John  v.  4.  Or  dare  ye  not  turn  to  God,  because  ye  have  sin- 
ned so  grievously,  and  so  long  a  time  against  him  ?  He  calls  to 
you  still,  yea.  he  swears,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 1.  "  That  he  hath  bo  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  the  wicked  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his 
way  and  live  :  turn  ye,  turn  yc  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will 
ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?" 

Only  consider  and  say,  "  What  have  I  done  ?"  Jer.  viii.  6.  A 
person  will  never  repent,  until  he  first  comes  to  himself  and  sees  hir, 
abominable  disposition  and  dreadful  situation  ;  for  this  drives  him 
out  of  himself  to  the  Lord.  "  When  we  fear,  then  we  come  to  the 
Lord  and  to  his  goodness;  and  when  we  acknowledge  our  offence, 
and  are  in  affliction,! then  we  seek  his  face  early,"  Hosea  hi.  5.  v. 
I  5.  Abide  by  all  means  under  a  zealous  ministration  of  the  word 
of  conversion  ;  "God  gives  thereby  repentance  unto  life."  "  When 
they  heard  this,  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and  said  unto  Pe- 
ter, and  to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we 
do  ?"  Thus  speaks  Luke  of  the  ptntecost  hearers,  Acts  ii.  27. 
Above  ail,  pray  earnestly  and  incessantly  to  God,  that  he  would  con- 
vert you,  with  the  church,  who  said  repeatedly,  "  Turn  thou  me, 
and  I  shall  be  turned,"  Jer  xxxi  18.  Lam.  v.  21.  And  flee  to  his 
Son,  "  who  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repen- 
tance to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts.  v.  31. 

But  ye  who  are  converted,  (a)  Glory  and  rejoice  in  the  grace 
which  hath  been  shown  to  you  ;  others  glory  and  rejoice  in  you. 
See  Acts  xi.  18.     xv.  3.   1  Thess.  i.  9.     Why    should  not  then  yc 


1*83  THE  NATURE  OF  CONVERSION  AND  OF  GOOD 

yourselves,  whom  it  concerns  more  than  others  ?  (b)  Conduct  your* 
selves  as  it  btcometh  those  who  are  converted :  show  that  the 
Lord  is  the  God  of  your  exceeding  joy  ;  and  that  it  is  truly  your  de- 
ci'c  and  delight  to  live  according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  all  good 
works,  that  "  ye  are  dead  "  to  yourselves,  and  to  all  that  is  sinful, 
and  that  "  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  CoK 
'iii.  3.  Therefore  he  commands  you,  "  Yield  not  your  members  in- 
5trumfcrits  of  unrighteousness  unto  sin,:  but  yield  yourselves  unto 
God,  as  those  that  arc  alive  from  the  dead  ;  and  your  members  as 
instruments  of  righteousness  Unld'  GW,""R«ifl.  vi.  13.  "Bring 
forth  then  fruits  meet  for  repentance,"  as  the  Baptist'  admonisheth, 
Matt,  iii  3.  It  behooves  you  to  take  particular  care,  that  your  works 
be  not  only  materially  good,  but  also  that  they  have  the  requisite 
qualifications.  It  is  commendable  to  hear  the  word  of  God,  but  it  is 
detestable  to  hear  it  without  fruit ;  therefore  the  Saviour  saith, 
Luke  viii.  18,  "Take  heed  how  ye  hear."  "Whatever  we  do  in 
word  or  work,"  we  must  do  it  in  faith,  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  Col  iii.  17.  "  Servants  must  be  obe- 
dient to  their  masters,  not  with  eyeservice,  as  men-pleasers,  but  as 
the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart."  F.ph.  vi. 
5,  6,  7.  And  every  one  ought  to  conduct  himself  thus  in  all  that  he 
doth,  yea.  he  ought  to  u  eat  and  drink  to  the  glory  of  God,"  1  Cor. 
x.  31.  This  would  add  a  comely  lustre  to  the  converted  people, 
(c)  VVc  exhort  you  further  from  Keb  xii.  15,  "  Look  diligently  lest 
any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God,"  either  through  a  common  slug- 
gishne_sSj  by  which  we  are  brought  to  a  deep  decay  :  or  by  some 
enormous  sin,  which  disturbs  the  mind.  How  shameful,  hurtful  and 
painful  this  is,  we  have  shown  on  the  foregoing  Lord's  day,  and  also 
that  those  who  have  backslidden  thus,  should  return,  (d)  We  would 
add  finally,  "  Do  ye,  who  are  converted,  strengthen  your  brethren," 
as  Jesus  enjoins,  Luke  xxii.  32.  There  are  weak  and  feeble  ones  ; 
ye  know  the  temper  of  their  minds,  and  how  ye  have  been  restored. 
Encourage  them,  support,  direct,  and  "  comfort  them  with  the  com- 
fort wherewith  ye  yourselves  have  been  comforted  of  God,"  as  Paul 
apeaks,  2  Cor.  i.  4.  We  should  also  seek  by  word  and  conversation 
to  convert  those  who  are  wholly  unconverted,  as  we  have  shown  on 
the  former  Lord's  day. 

Do  ye  bemoan  yourselves  with  Ephraim  on  account  of  your  mani- 
fold sins,  the  Lord  hears  it,  he  is  pleased  with  it,  and  he  will  show 
you  that  he  is;saying,  Jer.  xxxi.  20,  "  Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  is 
he  a  pleasant  child  ?  for  since  I  spake  against  him,  1  do  earnestly 
remember  him  still ;  therefore  my  bowels  are   troubled   for  him  :  I 


WORKS.  XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  88— 9 J.        189 

will  surely  have  mercy  en  him."  Will  he  not,  like  the  father  of 
the  prodigal  son,  when  his  son  repented,  Luke  xv.  17 — 24  "  run  to 
meet  you,  fall  on  your  neck,  kiss  you,  clothe  you  with  the  best  robe," 
and  feast  you  with  the  choicest  dainties  ?  According  to  his  promi- 
ses, Hosea  xiv.  4.  "  he  will  heal  your  backslidings,  he  will  love  you 
fiee:y  ;  for  his  anger  is  turned  away  from  you."  The  Lord  promi- 
seth,  Isa.  xxxv.  10,  (It  is  partly  fulfilled,  but  it  will  be  perfectly 
fulfilled  after  this  life)  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and 
come  to  Zion  with  bongs,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads  :  they 
shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee 
3W#y»"     Amen, 


30  ) 


THE 


LAW  OF  GOD, 


AND  THE 


FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  1,  2,  3.  And  God  spake  all  these  words  saying,  I  am  the 
Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  be- 
fore me.