Q.  95.    What  is  idolatry  ? 

A-  Idolatry  is  instead  of,  or  besides  that  one  true  God,  who  has 
manifested  himself  in  his  word,  to  contrive  or  have  any  other  object 
in  which  men  place  their  trust. 


N 


OTHING  is  more  generally  known  in  the  world,  than  that 
there  is  a  Supreme  Being',  and  that  he  ought  to  be  worshipped.  It 
is  indeed  innate  in  man.  Paul  Uacheth  us  trus,  when  he  saith, 
Rom.  i.  19,  20,  "  Thai  which  may  be  kaown  of  God  is  manifest  in 
them  ;  for  God  hath  showed  it  unto  them.  For  the  "invisible  things 
of  him  fr  >m  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  under- 
stood by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  God- 
head." Yea,  all  nations,  even  the  most  illiterate  declare  it  by  their 
religious  worship.  But  what,  and  who  that  Supreme  Being  is,  and 
how  he  ought  to  be  worshipped,  is  not  so  well  known  to  all  ;  for  ma- 
ny have  worshipped  an  unknown  God,  with  the  Athenians,  Acts 
xvii.  23.  He  had  indeed  not  revealed  to  them  either  himself  or  his 
will,  according  to  which  he  must  be  worshipped  :  "  In  times  past  he 
suffered  all  the  Gentiles  to  walk  in  their  own  ways,"  Acts  xiv.  16. 
It  is  true,  "  the  Gentiles,  who  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the 
things  contained  in  the  law  ;  and  these,  not  having  the  law,  are 
a  law  unto  themselves,  inasmuch  as  they  sluw  the  work  of  the  law 
written  in  their  hearts,"  according  to  Rom.  ii,  14,  15.  But  who 
knows  not  that  this  light  is  in  them  like  darkness  i'self  ?  it  is  indeed 
exceedingly  beclouded  and  obscured  by  their  natural  depravity ;  and 
by  indulging  their  lusts  their  foolish  hearts  have  become  "  still 
more  darkened,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  i.  21.  Have  not  all  the 
heathen  nations  manifested  this  in  those  practices,  by  which  they 
served  their  gods  ?  have  not  all  their  religious  ceremonies  been 
mere  follies  ?  Therefore  the  Lord  God  not  having  created  all  the 
children  of  men  in  vain,  but  willing  that  some  of  them  should,  as  his 
peculiar  people,  know  and  serve  him  aright,  it  bcheoved   him  to  re- 


192      THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

Teal  himself  and  his  will  to  them.  The  foreign  nations,  who  were 
transplanted  into  the  possession  of  the  Israelites,  knew  how  necessary 
this  was  ;  for  when  u  they  were  plagued  with  lions,  because  they 
feared  not  the  God  of  the  land,  they  desired  to  have  one  of  the  Israel- 
ittsh  priests,  in  order  that  he  might  teach  them  the  manner  of  the 
God  of  the  laid,"  2  Kin^s  xvii.  25 — 27.  As  the  Lord  also  hath 
not  left  himself  without  a  witness  in  this  respect:  he  did  not  indeed 
show  all  nations  this  favour,  but  only  that  people  whom  he  had  sep- 
arated for  himself:  u  He  showed  his  word  unto  Jacob ;  his  statutes 
and  his  judgments  unto  Israel :  he  dealt  not  so  with  any  nation  : 
and  as  for  his  judgments,  they  knew  them  not,"  Psalm  cxlvii.  19> 
30.  For  this  purpose  he  conducted  Israel  from  among  the  nations 
into  the  wilderness,  that  he  might,  when  they  were  separated  from 
all  other  families,  speak  comfortably  to  them,  and  declare  that  he 
Was  their  covenant  God,  and  teach  them  how  they  ought  to  con- 
duct as  his  people ;  for,  as  the  text  saith,  "  God  spake  all  these 
words,"  &c. 

The  instructor  having  taught  in  the  foregoing  question,  that  good 
works  must  be  done  according  to  the  law  of  God,  explains  now,  and 
;n  the  sequel  of  the  catechism,  Avhat  law  God  hath  given  to  his  peo» 
pie,  whom  he  hath  delivered,  (1)  In  general,  Q.  92,  93.  (2)  With 
respect  to  each  commandment  in  particular,  Q.  94 — 113,  and  (3) 
how  even  those  who  are  converted  are  net  able  to  keep  this  law 
perfectly. 

We  must  attend  at  present, 

I.  To  the  giving  of  the  law,  Q.  92. 

II.  The  division  of  it.  Q.  93.     and 

III.  The  sense  of  the  first  commandment,  Q.  94,  95. 

I.  I  will  not  attempt  to  explain  the  reason  why  the  law  is  called 
by  the  Hebrews,  tkora/i,  an  instruction,  direction  ;  by  the  Greeks, 
nomos^  from  ncmcin,  to  give  each  one  his  due  ;  by  the  Latins,  lex^ 
from  legcrci  to  read,  and  by  us,  vtet,  from  ivecten,  to  know.  Nei- 
ther will  we  inquire  how  many  different  titles  are  given  to  this  law 
in  the  word  of  God,  as  testimonies,  judgments,  commandments, 
&c.  nor  why  the  word  law  sometimes  denotes  the  whole  doctrine  of 
salvation-,  Psalm  i.  2.  and  particularly  the  gospel  of  fulfilment,  Isai- 
ah ii.  3.  at  other  times  all  the  books  of  the  old  testament,  John  xii. 
3  1.  as  the  books  of  Moses,  John  viii.  5.  the  Psalms,  John  x.  34. 
compare  with  Psalm  lxxxii.  6.  and  John  xv.  25.  with  Psalm  r.xxv. 
19.  Ixix.  4,  the  prophets,  1  Cor.  xvi.  21,  with  Isaiah  xxviii.  11. 
The  word  law  denotes  also  the  covenant  of  works,  Rom.  iii.  27. 
But  it  will  suffice  to  say,  that  we  speak  here  of  the  law,  as  the  rule 
ef  ouv  conduct.     We  have  shewn  on  the   second   Lord's  day,  thar 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q=  92—95.  19S 

there  was  an  ecclesiastical  law,  or  a  law  of  ceremonies,  a  civil  law, 
and  a  moral  law.  We  speak  htre,  as  all  know,  of  the  moral  law, 
the  everlasting  rule  of  all  our  actions. 

j.  In  order  to  understand   the  nature  of  this  law,  we  must  consider 
the  preface,  the  contents,  and  the  scope  of  it.     Moses,  the  leader  of 
Israel,  describing  the  giving  of  the  law.  saith,  "  God  spake  all  these 
words."     The  words  that  God  spake,  are  emphatically  called,  "  the 
ten  words."*     Dcut.  iv.  13,  which  are  certainly  the  ten  command- 
ments, although  proposed  lor  the  most  part  in  a  paraphrastic   man- 
ner, and  not  so  much  the   promises  and  threatenings,  with   which 
the  ten  commandments  are  enforced,  and  which  God  spake,  as  per- 
taining to  the  commandments.     This  law  was  not  pronounced  before 
the  whole    world,  but  only   from  mount  Sinai  or  Horeb,  in  the  wil- 
derness of  Arabia,  before  all  Israel,  in  the  presence,  and  by  the  min- 
istry of  many    "  thousands  of  angels,"  Dtut.  xxxiii.  2,  on  the    fif- 
tieth day  after  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt, 
"  four   hundred   and    thirty  years"  after  the  promise  to    Abraham, 
Gal.  iii.  17.     It  was  nevertheless  not  Moses,  who  pronounced  it,  al- 
though he  also  may  be  called  the  law-giver,  since  the  iaw  was  deliv- 
ered  by   his   ministry  to   Israel,  Numb.  xxi.  18.  Deut.   xxxiv.  21. 
He  doth  not  however  assume   this  high  authority   to  himself,  but   it 
was  God  who  pronounced  the  law  ;  the  burning,  smoking  and  qua- 
king mountain,   the  dreadful  thunderings,  the  gleaming  flashes  of 
lightning,   and  other  fearful  tokens  manifested  that  God  was  come 
down,  and  that  he  himself  spoke  after  his  manner  with  power,  that 
he  might  convince  the  people  of  his  high  sovereignty,  might  cause 
them  to    quake  at  his  presence,  and  fear  to  transgress  his  law  ;    as 
the  people  also,  terrified  by  those  appearances,  were  persuaded  that 
God  spake,  and  obligated  themselves  to  obey   hi  m,  Exod.  xix.  16— 
19,   xx.  18,  19,  20.     It  was  nevertheless  not  to  destroy  Israel,  for  it 
was  the  second  Person,  the  Son  of  God,  who  spoke  to  them,  as  the 
Mediator  of  the  covenant,    who  had  the  law  within  his  heart,  that 
he  might  satisfy  the  vindictive  justice  of  God,  according  to  the  law, 
for  the   true  Israel.     The  Father  was,  according  to  the  distribution 
of  the  gifts  and  graces  among  the  divine  Persons,  indeed  the    law- 
giver ;  nevertheless  the  Son  spake  in  his  name,  the  angel  of  God's 
presence  ;  who  led  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  to  the  land  of  Canaan, 
whose  voice  they  were  obliged  to  obey,  Exod.  xxix.  20 — 23.     "  He 
was  the  angel  who  spake  in  the  church  in  the  wilderness  with  Mo- 

•  In  the  original,  and  in  the  Dutch    translation.     From  this  expression  of 
Ihe  ten  words,  the  ten  commandments  are  often  called  the  decalogue- 
Vet.    It.  % 


1*4         THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ses,  and  with  their  fathers  in  the  mount  Sinai,"  according  to  the  de- 
claration of  Stephen,  Acts  vii.  33.  It  Avas  "  his  voice  which  then 
shook  the  earth,"  as  Paul  saith,  Heb.  xii.  26.  Yet  God  did  not  only 
speak  these  words,  but  he  also  wrote  them  on  two  tables  of  slone, 
not  with  outstanding,  but  with  incarved  and  engraven  letters,  u  on 
both  sides  :  the  tables  were  the  work  of  God,  the  writing  was  also 
the  writing  of  God,  graven  upon  the  tables,"  Exod.  xxxii.  15,  16. 
This  represented  the  everlasting  duration  of  the  law,  the  stony 
hearts  of  the  Israelites,  and  the  manner  in  which  God  himself  would 
write  his  law  in  them,  according  to  the  covenant,  Jer.  xxxi.  33. 
2  Cor.  iii.  2,  3.  Eut  after  Israel  had  committed  idolatry  with  the 
golden  calf,  and  had  broken  the  covenant  of  God,  Moses  broke  the 
'cables  also,  Exod.  xxxii.  19.  But  the  Lord,  turning  from  the  fierce- 
ness of  his  anger,  and  being  reconciled  to  the  people,  restored  the 
broken  law,  not  by  making  other  tables  himself ;  but,  that  there 
might  remain  a  testimony  of  the  abominable  action  of  the  Israelites 
for  their  humiliation,  he  ordered  Moses  to  hew  two  other  tables,  like 
the  first,  and  he  wrote  himself  the  former  words  in  them,  Exod. 
xxxiv.  1. 

Before  the  Lord  delivers  his  commandments,  he  prefixes  his  pre- 
face to  them,  in  order  that  he  may  teach  the  Israelites  their  obliga- 
tion to  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord.  He  saith  to  them, 
"  I  am  the  Lord,"  Jehovah,  the  selfexisting,  the  alone-existing,  the 
everlasting,  unchangeable,  faithful  God,  who  will  now  fulfil  my  prom- 
ises, which  I  made  to  your  fathers,  and  show  that  I  am  the  Jeho- 
vah. See  Exodc  vi.  2,  who  am  also  with  this  my  name  "  the  Most 
High  over  all  the  earth."  Psalm  lxxxiii.  18,  to  whom  ye  are  there- 
fore obligated  in  the  strongest  manner.  They  are  obligated  to  him 
so  much  the  more,  as  he  had  declared  that  he  was  their  God,  "  I 
am  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  he.  The  Lord  was  their  God  by  vir- 
tue of  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  Gen.  xviii.  7. 
He  had  nothing  greater  than  himself,  he  could  not  therefore  bestow 
a  greater  good  upon  them  than  himself ;  whatever  he  was,  had,  and 
Jic:,  was  theirs.  It  was  therefore  just  that  they  should  conduct 
themselves  as  his  people,  according  to  his  law  ;  it  was  for  this  that 
he  was  become  their  God,  and  they  his  people,  as  Moses  declares, 
Deut.  xxvii.  17,  IS.  The  Lord  had  also  manifested  himself  as  their 
God,  when  "  he  led  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  They  had 
suffered  grievously  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  it  had  been  a  house  of 
bondage  to  them,  an  iron  furnace  :  but  the  Lord  had  delivered  them, 
and  had  led  them  out  of  Egypt  with  great  power,  and  with  an  out- 
stretched  arm,  with  many  mighty  tokens  and  wonders,  and  he  war 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.         ;         if* 

»ow  about    to  lead  them  into  Canaan,  as  the  pledge   of  the  cove- 
nant,  and  in  order  to  prove   that  he  was  their  God,  according  to 
the  promise  of  the  covenant,  made  to  Abraham,  Gen.  xv.  18.    xvii, 
8.     Did  it  not  then  behoove  them  to   acknowledge  this,  and,   as  the 
people,  whom  the  Lord  owned,  to  conform  themselves  in  every   re- 
spect to  his  law  ?     It  is  silly  to  infer  hence  with  the  Antinomians  and 
ethers,  that  the  law  of  Moses  doth  not  relate  to  us,  because  we  have 
rot  been  led  out  of  Egypt,  like  the  Israelites  ;  for  it  is  the  law  which 
floweth  from  the  supremacy  of  God,  as  Jehovah  :  is  he  now  less  the 
God  of  his  people  than  he  was  in  the  time  of  Moses  ?  hath  not  the 
Lord  now  also  brought  his  people  out  of  the   spiritual    Egypt,  the 
bouse  of  Satan  and  of  Antichrist  ?    are  not  all   the  commandments 
moral  ?    do  they  not    require  love  to  God    and  to  our  neighbour  ? 
"  Jesus  came  not  to  destroy  the  law  :  not  one  jot  nor  tittle  may  pass 
from  the   law."     See  Matt.  xv.  17 — 20.     The  fifth    commandment 
hath    respect  to  Canaan,  but  Paul  shows  that  it  relates  to  us  also, 
Eph.  vi.  1,2,  3.    If  the  law  pertain  not  to  us,  because  we  were  not 
brought  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  then  it  also  relates  to  them  only, 
who  were  personally  brought  out,  and  not  to  the   following  genera- 
tions.   We  will  not  attempt  to  refute  their  objections  ;  we  have  done 
this  on  the  thirty-second  Lord's  day. 

2.  The   great  Lawgiver  hath  proposed  the  duty  of  his  people  in 
a  few  words :  but  Paul  exhibits  by   the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  the  sum 
of  the  law,  in  still    fewer,  when   he  comprehends  it  in  one  word, 
(<  love,"  Rom.  xiii.  9,  10.     The  law  is  nevertheless,,  not  on  this  ac- 
count defective,  but  the  more  perfect,  because  it  must  be  taken  in  its 
whole  extent :  ''  I  have  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection  :  but  thy  com- 
mandment is  exceeding  broad,"   saith  David,    Psalm  cxix.   96.     It 
must  therefore  be  explained    (a)  spiritually  ;  for  "  the  law  is  spiritu- 
al," as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vii.  14.     When  it  forbids  open  murder  and 
adultery,  then  it  forbids  also  the  hatred  of  the  heart,  and  the  adulte- 
rous eye,  according  to   1  John  iii.  15.    Matt.  v.  2 S.     (b)  Whenever 
aught  is  forbidden,   we  must  consider  that  then  also  something  is 
commanded.     Doth   the  first  commandment  forbid   having   other 
gods  before  God,  it  doth  then  also  command  us  to  hold  and  acknowl- 
edge him  only  to  be  God.     And  when  any  thing  is  commanded,  we 
must  know  that  something  is  then  also  forbidden,  as  in  the  fourth 
and  fifth  commandments,     (g)  When  any  sins  are  forbidden,  or  any 
virtue  commanded,  then  also  the  causes  and  consequences  of  such  a 
sin  or  virtue  are  forbidden  or  commanded.     "  Thou  shalt  not  steal," 
saith  the   Lawgiver  :   but  he  forbids  with  this  also  covetousness  and 
r/asting  our  goods, 


196        THE  FIRST.  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

Therefore  the  law  is  perfect,  and  it  doth  not  need  any  amendment 
nor  addition,    as  the  ^»ocmians  imagine,   that   thty  m«y    represent 
Crist  as  a  new  lawgiver,    and  may  seek  justification  by  the  law  of 
Christ.     But  do  they  not  show  hereby,   that  they  are  self-condemn-. 
eo,  since  they  are  unable  to  maintain  their  opinion  without  reproach- 
ins^  the  law  of  Sod,  and  saying  that  it  is  not  perfect,  contrary  to  so 
many  testimonies  of  the  word  of  God  ?    See  Psalm  xix.   and  Psalm 
cmx.     And  what  should  the  Lord  Jesus  forsooth  have  added  to  the 
law  of  God  ?    the  command  of  self-denial,  of  taking  up   our  cross 
and  following  him  ?     Might  nun  then,  before  the  coming  of  Christ, 
neglect   self-denial  i  might  his  people  indulge  fietfulness,   when  he 
subjected   them  to    adversity  ?  and  was  he  not    then   also  a  pattern 
for  i heir  imitation  ?     See  how  the  Levites  denied  themselves,  accor- 
ding  to  the    commandment   of  God,    Exod.   xxxii    26 — 29.    Deut. 
xxxiii.  9,    how  the   afflicted  people   bowed  patiently  under  the    bur- 
then,   Lam.  iii.  26 — .30     Micha  vii.  9,  and  how  the  Lord  requirelh 
that  Israel  should  imitate  him  in  his  holiness.    Lev.  xix.  2.     When 
Christ  said  repeatedly,   "ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  by  them  of 
old  ;    but  1  say  unto  you,"   Matt.  y.  21 — 48,  he  doth  not  speak  thus 
in  order  to  amend  the  law,  but  to  rescue  it  from  the  false  glosses  of 
the  elders,  who  imagined  that  none  other  than  outward  actions  were 
forbidden    or  commanded  :    in   opposition  to  which  Christ  declares 
the  spiritual  and  true  meaning  of  the  law.     The  Papists  trifle,  Avhen 
they  speak  of  evangelical  counsels,  as  the  monastic  vows  of  a  single 
life,   implicit  obedience,  and  voluntary  poverty  :    these  things  they 
imagine,  are  not  commanded,  but  only  advised,  as  means  »f  obtain- 
ing a  greater  rewaul.     Truly  mere  fictions  beside  the  word  of  God, 
and  condemned  in  that  ward)  as  will-worship.     We  cannot  busy  our- 
selves with  them  here. 

3.  But  what  is  the  design  of  the  law,  and  for  what  purpose  hath 
God  given  it  ?  Some  suppose  that  the  Lord  gave  it  to  be  a  form,  a 
scheme,  a  transcript  or  prescript  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  that 
it  is  therefore  nothing  else  but  the  covenant  of  grace  itself,  requiring 
and  teaching  faith  in  Christ,  and  that  it  is  therefore  called  "  the  law 
of  faith,"  Rom.  iii.  7.  But  that  when  Moses  had  broken  the  first 
two  tables,  on  account  of  the  sin  committed  with  the  golden  calf, 
and  had  afterwards  brought  other  tables  to  the  Lord,  who  wrote  the 
former  law  on  th*m  again,  that  then  the  law  assumed,  as  a  punish- 
ment of  that  sin,  the  form  of  the  covenant  of  works,  with  the  addi- 
tion of  the  demand  and  curse  of  the  covenant  of  works.  "  do  this  and 
live,  and  cursed  is  every  one  thatcontinueth  not  in  all  things  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Lev.  xvii.  5.  Deut.  xxvii.  26, 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92— 95.  19r 

See  Rom.  x.  5.  Gal.  in.  10.  But  we  cannot  accede  to  this  opinion, 
because  this  law  contains  only  commandments,  and  no  promises  of 
'affording  strength  and  ability  for  enabling  us  to  keep  it,  as  the  cove- 
nant of  grace  doth,  Exod.  xxxvi  26,  27.  Tht  same  words  cannot 
exhibit  such  different  form*,  n»w  of  a  covenant  of  grace,  and  then 
of  a  covenant  of  works.  The  second  giving  of  the  law  was  not  a 
punishment  of  the  sin  with  the  golden  calf,  but  it  proceeded  from 
v  special  kindness  as  well  as  the  first  giving  ;  for  after  the  first  ta- 
bles of  the  law  were  broken,  God  did  not  give  his  law  the  second 
time,  until  he  was  reconciled  to  the  people,  upon  the  intercession  of 
Moses.  See  Exod.  xxxii.  xxxiii.  xxxiv.  Is  there  a  sentence  and  a 
promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace  in  the  preface,  and  in  the  second 
commandment  of  the  law,  the  lav/ is  not  therefore  the  covenantof  grace 
itself;  for  that  sentence  and  promise  is  also  in  the  law, which  was  given 
the  second  time.  There  is  a  threatening  of  the  covenantof  works  in  the 
second  commandment,  "  that  God  will  visit  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers 
upon  the  children,"  &c.  but  none  may  therefore  say  that  the  law  is 
nothing  else  but  a  covenant  of  works.  The  Son  of  God,  the  Medi- 
ator of  the  covenant  of  grace,  did  indeed  publish  the  law,  but  that 
doth  not  make  it  a  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  he  published  the  law  upon 
other  occasions,  yea,  as  the  demand  of  the  covenant  of  works,  al- 
though he  was  already  revealed,  as  the  Mediator  of  the  covenant  of  . 
grace.  See  Matt.  xix.  16 — 20.  Luke  x.  25—  28.  It  is  true,  the  . 
law  is  sometimes  called  the  covenant  of  God,  but  who  doth  net 
know  that  the  word  covenant  hath  various  significations  ?  the  stead- 
fast order  of  nature  is  called  God's  covenant  of  the  day  and  of  the 
night."  Jer.  xxxiii.  20.  So  also  God's  steadfast  promise  is  called 
a  covenant,  Exod.  xxxiv.  17.  Circumcision  and  the  sabbath  are 
styled  God's  covenant,  Gen.  xvii.  10.  Exod.  xxxi.  16.  Thus  also 
a  command  of  the  civil  law,  Jer.  xxxiv.  13,  14.  But  none  will  look  - 
upon  these  things,  each  considered  separately,  as  the  covenant  itself. 
In  the  same  manner  is  the  law  also  called  the  covenant  of  God,  be- 
cause it  pertained  to  the  covenant  of  God,  established  at  Horeb, 
as  a  part  of  it,  and  so  the  law  was,  "  the  covenant  of  God,  which  he 
commanded  them  to  perform,"  Deut.  iv.  13.  It  vvas  "  after  the 
tenor  of  these  words,"  as  the  demand  of  the  covenant,  that  "  the 
Lord  made  the  covenant  with  Israel,"  Exod.  xxxiv.  17.  Therefore 
v/e  cannot  call  the  law  of  the  ten  commandments  "the  law  of  faith  ;" 
for  by  "  the  law  of  faith,"  Rom  iii.  27,  we  must  understand  the 
gospel,  which  is  also  called  "  a  law,"  Isaiah  li.  3',  and  is  opposed  by . 
Paul:tothe  law  of  works,  Rom.  iii.  27.  i  .. 


J9S       THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

That  we  may  apprehend  the  matter  rightly,  and  perceive  clcarly 
what  we  must  judge  concerning  this  law,  we  must  know  that  God 
established  a  covenant  with  Israel  on.  Sinai  by  the  ministry  of  Moses, 
and  what  kind  of  a  covenant  that  was.  It  is  abundantly  evident 
from  Exod.  XIX.  that  God  established  a  covenant  with  all  Israel  up- 
on sinai ;  for  God  commands  Moses,  vie.  5,  C,  to  propose  the  de- 
mand and  promise  of  the  covenant  to  Israel,  when  he  satth,  "If  ye 
will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  b< 
a  peculiar  treasure  to  me  above  all  people  ;  for  all  the  earth  is  mine. 
And  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  a  h  iry  nation. 
These  are  the  words  which  thou  shait  speak  unto  the  children  oi 
Israel."  Moses  reports  these  words  to  the  people,  vrs.  7,  ami  ; 
consent  to  the  proposal  of  God,  when  they  say,  yn  •      II  that  the 

Lord  liL'.h  spoken  will  we  do."     Behold  here  a  solemn  covenanting. 
Hereupon  the  people  are  prepared  to  receive  the  law   of  the    cove- 
nant, and  the  Lord  descends  with  the  tokens  of  his    awful  majesty 
on  the  mountain  to  pronounce  that  law  of  his  in   the  hearing  of  the 
people,  Exod.  xix.  9 — 25.     He  delivers  in    the  first  place  the  moral 
law,  Exod.  xx.  and  then  the  civil  law,    Exod.    ::. 
though  he  inserts  also  in  the  civil  law  certain  moral  and  ceremon 
or  ecclesiastical  commands.     Hereupon  the  people  consent  again  to 
the  covenant  with  all  its  laws,  which  Moses  writes    in  a   book,    and 
confirms  with  burnt  sacrifices  and  the  sprinkling  of  blood,  Exod 
xxiv.     And  finally,  the  God  cf  the  covenant  delivers  to   his  covenant 
people  the  ceremonial  or  church-law  ;  ait  which  was  concluded  with 
the  delivery  of  the  two  tables  of  stone  of  the  covenant,  in  which  ti.e 
moral  law,  as  the  chief  and  fundamental  part  of  all  the  laws,  was  en- 
graven, Exod.  xxv. — xxxi.     But  after  the  people    had   broken  th 
covenant  of  God  by  their  sin  with  the  golden  calf,  Moses  also  brokc 
the  tables  of  the  covenant,  and  God  would  destroy   the  people  :  but 
upon  the  intercession  of  Moses,  he  received  them  again  into  his  i.  - 
vour,  and  into  his  covenant,  Exod.  zxxii.  xxxiii.  xxxiv.  and  he  be- 
gan to  give  his  ecclesiastical  laws  again,  which  he  had  left  off  giving 
on  account  of  the  sin  of  his  people. 

Erom  all  this  we  may  see  clearly  that  the  moral  law  was  not  a 
transcript  nor  prescript  of  any  covenant,  nor  the  other  laws  neither: 
but  the  moral  law  was  with  the  other  laws  a  rule  for  the  covenant 
people,  who  were  already  in  the  covenant,  that  they  might  conduct 
themselves  as  God's  covenant  people,  according  to  that  rule,  worthily 
of  God  and  of  his  covenant. 

If  we  will  form  a  right  idea  of  the  proper  nature  of  the  law   cf 
M<         Icorenant,  we  must  then  also  lightly  understand  the 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  199 

nature  of  the  covenant,  of  which  it  was  the  lav/.  Some  call  that 
covenant  the  legal  covenant,  which  came  in  the  stead  of  the  cove- 
nant of  nature.  They  imagine  that  the  covenant  of  works  promised 
the  enjoyment  of  all  good  to  soul  and  hody  in  paradise,  and  not  in 
heaven,  in  consequence  of  perfect  obedience  ;  and  that  the  legal 
covenant  at  Sinai  promised  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  life  in  Canaan  ; 
Which  legal  covenant  they  call  a  covenant  of  servitude,  because  it 
served  indirectly  and  accidentally  the  covenant  of  grace.  But  this 
covenant  hath  been  contrived  without,  and  contrary  to  the  word  of 
God ;  it  is  not  true,  that  God  promised  Adam  that  he  should  enjoy 
eternal  life  in  Paradise  ;  he  promised  him  the  enjoyment  of  eternal 
life  in  heaven,  as  we  have  proved  on  the  second  Lord's  day.  This 
legal  covenant  supposeth,  contrary  to  the  word  of  God,  that  the  Is- 
raelites were  able  to  keep  the  law  of  God  perfectly,  and  that  they 
were  not  worthy  of  death.  According  to  this  covenant,  Israel  would 
have  been  obliged  to  seek  that  eternal  life  in  Canaan  by  their  own 
doings,  and  thus  their  own  righteousness  by  the  Jaw  :  and  so  this 
legal  covenant  would  not  have  served  to  lead  men  to  the  covenant 
of  grace,  but  to  lead  them  from  it,  and,  contrary  to  what  Paul  saith, 
Gal.  iii.  21,  "the  law  would  have  been  against  the  promises." 

Others  will  have  that  it  was  a  national  covenant,  that  is,  a  covenant 
made  with  a  whole  .people,  which  required  a  sincere  obedience,  ac- 
cording to  the  moral  law,  with  the  promise  of  a  reward  in  this  life, 
and  that  to  come  ;  which  was,  notwithstanding,  neither  the  covenant 
of  grace,  nor  of  works,  but  presupposed  both  ;  but  the  word  national 
doth  not  describe  nor  explain  the  nature  or  kind  of  the  covenant, 
but  only  saith  that  it  was  a  covenant  established  with  that  nation  and 
that  people.  If  it  should  be  rejoined,  that  it  is  neither  the  covenant 
of  grace  nor  of  works,  the  matter  remains  equally  obscure  :  it  is  as 
though  it  were  said,  we  have  no  offensive  nor  defensive  alliance,  or 
covenant,  but  an  alliance  with  the  nation  or  people  of  England.  If  it 
be  said,  that  it  was  a  covenant  of  sincere  obedience,  neither  doth  this 
define  the  nature  of  the  covenant ;  for  the  covenants  of  works  and  of 
grace  require  also  a  sincere  obedience.  The  covenant  that  requirelh 
sincere  obedience,  with  the  promise  of  this  life,  and  of  that  which  is 
to  come,  is  a  covenant  of  works,  or  a  covenant  of  grace. 

Some  think  that  it  was  a>  mixed  covenant,  composed  of  the  cove- 
nant of  works,  and  the  covenant  of  grace;  but  then  Israel  would 
have  been  obliged  to  seek  their  righteousness  by  the  covenant  of 
works,  and  by  the  covenant  of  grace,  contrary  to  Rom.  va.  6. 

There  are  those  also,  who  will  have  that  it  was  an  outward  cove- 
--,-.<-,  requiring  an  outward,  obedience.,  a"nd  pvomic'r,g  c-"*^nv<'  'bles- 


2fO      THE   FIRST   COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

sings  in  Canaan  :  which  they  also  call  a  shadowy  covenant,  the  name 
of  which,  the  mutual  relation,  the  treatment,  the  bestowing  andj  re- 
ceiving of  the  benefits,  the  covenant  people,  the  promises  that  God 
■would  be  the  God  of  Israel,  and  would  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan, 
all  God's  dispensations  toward,  and  hie  leadings  of  Israel  Mere  shad- 
ows and  types  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  God  promised,  Jer. 
xxxi.  to  establish  with  his  elect  Israel  under  the  New  Testament. 
Which  covenant  they  suppose  to  be  the  only  foundation  of  all  the 
types  of  the  Old  Testament ;  but  that  this  opinion  also  is  not  agree- 
able to  the  wud  of  God,  appears  hence,  that  we  may  not  pursue 
any  outward  blessing  without  the  inward,  and  that  God  detests  and 
condemns  an  outward  obedience,  which  is  not  accompanied  with 
the  inward.  See  Isa.  xxix.  13,  14.  This  opinion  also  contradicts 
itself;  for  a  shadowy  and  typical  covenant  requires  an  inward  obe- 
dience, and  promiseth  spiritual  blessings,  to  which  the  shadows  and 
types  have  respect,  and  they  must  tberefere  be  improved  by  an  in- 
ward obedience  and  faith,  which  looks  steadfastly  to  the  antitypes. 
If  we  make  this  Mosaic  covenant  the  only  ground  of  the  types,  we 
will  then  be  obliged  to  reject  many  real  types,  as  the  sacrifices  of 
the  believing  lathers  before  the  time  of  Moses,  Melchizedek,  also 
circumcision  with  the  passover,  Isrsel's  abode  under  the  cloud, 
their  passage  through  the  red  sea,  the  manna  and  the  rock.  All 
these  things  had  place  before  the  solemn  covenanting  at  Horeb ;  and 
that  these  things  were  really  types,  this  we  have  proved  in  our 
14  Sketch  of  the  system  of  types;"  in  which  we  have  also  shown, 
that  it  must  follow  from  such  an  outward  covenant,  which  was  shad- 
owy in  all  its  circumstances,  that  many  things,  as  the  moral  and 
civil  law,  ought  to  be  considered  as  types,  which  were  really  no  types. 
Was  then  the  Mosaic  covenant  the  covenant  of  works  ?  it  could  not 
be  that  neither;  for  that  cannot  be  established  with  any  sinner,  be- 
cause the  sinner  is  not  able  to  assent  to  it,  not  to  observe  it,  and  be- 
cause God  cannot  enter  into  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  him.  such 
as  takes  place  in  a  covenant,  unless  he  have  a  mediator  of  reconcilia- 
tion, which  the  covenant  of  works  doth  not  admit. 

Since  then  the  covenant,  which  was  made  at  Sinai,  was  not  a  legal, 
servile  covenant,  nor  a  national  covenant,  distinct  from  the  covenant 
of  works  and  of  grace,  nor  a  mixed  covenant,  composed  of  the  cov- 
enant of  works  and  of  grace,  nor  an  outward,  shadowy  covenant, 
nor  a  covenant  of  works,  it  follows  that  it  was  the  covenant  of  grace 
itself.  That  it  was  the  covenant  of  grace  itself  is  evident  from  the 
word  of  God  ;  for  it  was  the  same  covenant  with  that  which  God 
\  braham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  which  was  ceitainly  the  covr- 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  201 

aant  of  grace,  and  the  Mosaic  covenant  was  only  a  solemn  and  na- 
tional -renyving  of  that  covenant  with  all  Israel  (and  so  a  national 
covenant  of  grace)  and  for  the  confirmation  of  the  covenant  of  grace 
established  with  those  fathers.  This  is  evident  from  Deut.  xxix. 
10 — 15,  where  the  covenant,  which  was  made  at  Horeb,  is  renewed 
"with  all  Israel,  as  Moses  saith,  M  Ye  stand  this  day  all  of  you  before 
the  Lord  your  God — that  thou  shouldest  enter  into  covenant  with  the 
Lord  thy  God — that  he  may  establish  thee  to  day  for  a  people  unto 
himself,  and  that  he  may  be  unto  thee  a  God,  as  he  hath  siid  u;to 
thee,"  (to  wit,  at  Horeb)  "  and  as  he  hath  sworn  unto  thy  fathers, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  We  see  here  that  God  promiseth  in 
the  Mosaic  covenant,  to  be  the  God  of  Israel,  and  that  Israel  should 
be  his  people.  See  also  Deut.  xxvi.  17,  18,  19.  This  promise  was 
surely  a  promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  God  had  establish- 
ed With  the  fathers  of  the  Israelites.  See  Gen.  xvii.  7.  Yea  ;  we  see 
also  in  the  words  quoted  from  Deut.  xxix  that  God  promises  to  be 
the  God  of  Israel,  and  admits  them  into  the  covenant  of  grace,  for 
this  end.  even  that  he  might  confirm  and  fulfil  to  Israel  the  same 
promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  he  had  promised  and  sworn 
to  Abraham,  in  behalf  of  him  and  his  seed.  Was  not  the  covenant 
made  at  Sinai  the  same  then  with  the  covenant  of  those  fathers  ? 
We  add  further,  to  prove  that  the  Mosaic  covenant  was  the  covenant 
of  grace  hself,  that  it  was  the  same  in  substance  with  that  which 
God  makes  with  his  chosen  people,  under  the  new  testament ;  for 
the  covenant  made  at  Horeb,  hath  the  same  promises  with  the  cove- 
nant under  the  New  Testament  :  in  this  new  covenant  of  the  New 
Testament  it  is  promised,  "  that  the  Lord  will  be  the  God  of  Israel, 
and  that  Israel  shall  be  the  people  of  God,"  Jer.  xxxi.  33.  This 
promise  God  makes  in  the  Mosaic  covenant  also,  Exod.  xx  2. 
Deut.  xxix.  13.  In  the  covenant  of  grace  under  the  New  Testament 
it  is  promised,  "  that  the  Lord  will  walk  in  his  people,"  2  Cor.  vi. 
16,  and  this  promise  was  also  made  in  the  Mosaic  covenant  ;  yea, 
in  2  Cor.  vi.  16,  it  is  assumed  and  cited  out  of  this  covenant.  See 
this  Exod.  xxix.  45.  Lev  xxvi,  11,  12.  The  Israel  of  God  under 
the  New  Testament  is  at  this  time  by  virtue  of  the  covenant  of  grace, 
"  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,"  &c.  according  to  1  Peter 
11,9.  But  the  Israel  of  Moses's  time,  which  entered  not  only  out- 
wardly, like  the  carnal  Israelites,  but  also  inwardly  into  the  covenant 
at  Horeb,  this  people  was  also  "  God's  peculiar  treasure,  and  a 
kingdom  of  priests,"  &c.  according  to  Exod.  xix.  5,  6.  Once  more, 
the  covenant  at  Sinai  was  dedicated  with  the  blood  of  beasts,  offered 
up  in  sacrifice,  and  had  a  law  of  ceremonies,  for  a  rule  of  celebrating 
*  Vol.  ii.  2  A 


50?        THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

the  public  worship,  Exod  xxiv.  xxv.  Now  it  is  certain,  that  these 
things  were  types  of  Christ,  the  Mediator  of  the  covenant  of  grace, 
and  of  his  sufferings  and  benefits.  See  Heb.  x.  15 — 23.  There- 
fere  Israel  was  obliged  to  look  through  all  the  sacrifices  and  blood- 
sheddings  of  the  Mosaic  covenant  to  the  future  sacrifice  of  Christ  : 
did  not  these  ceremonies  of  the  Mosaic  covenant  belong  then  to  the 
covenant  of  grace,  and  was  not  the  Mosaic  covenant  then  the  same 
in  substance  with  the  covenant  of  grace  i 

h  will  now  be   easy  to  understand  what  was  God's   end  in  giving 
the  la*,    and    what  we  are   to   think  of  these  ten  commandments, 
(a)  It  is  evident,  that  this  law  is  not  the  covenant  of  grace  itself,  but 
a  rule  of  life  and  of  thankfulness  to  the  covenant  people  of  the  cove- 
nam  of  grace    that  they  may   conduct  themselves,  according  to   it, 
worthily  of  God,  who  had  So  graciously  admitted  Israel  into  his  cov- 
enant.    For    after   God  had  proposed  the  covenant,  and  the  people 
hud  consented  to  it.  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  to  prepare  the  peo- 
ple for  receiving  his  law.  Exod.  xix.  and  he  saith,  Exod.  xx.  2.    •'  I 
am   the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  and  presently  after  this  he  delivers  his 
commandments  to  them,  as  the  God  of  Israel.     Therefore  the  law  is 
so  often  urged  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,   as  such  a  rule,  and 
is  and  remaineth  always  an  everlasting   rule   of  thankfulness  to  all 
the  covenant  people  of  God,  as  it  is  also  proposed  and  explained  by 
our  instructor,  in  the  third  Dart  of  his  catechism,  as  Paul  hath  also 
done,    Rom.  xii.  xiii.     (b)  Though  the  Lord  entered  not  into  a  cov- 
enant of  works  with  the  sinful  Israel  by  this  law,  which  was  impos- 
sible,  he   nevertheless  exhibited  to  Israel,  when  he  gave  them  this 
law,  the  demand  of  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  that  he    might 
teach  those  of  them,  who  were  sincere,  from  what  they  were  deliver- 
ed, and  might  convince,  condemn,  and  induce  the  others  to  seek  his 
grace  ;    and    the    law  serveth  for  this  end  still  ;    for  as  Saul   saith, 
Rom.  v.  20,    «  The  law    entered,    that  the  offence  might  abound  ; 
but  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."     Therefore 
the  Lord  did  also  enforce  this  law,  both  with  the  promise  of  the  cov- 
enant of  works,   u  do  this,  and  thou  shalt  live,"  Lev.  xviii.  5,  com- 
pared with  Rom.  x.  5,   and   also  with    the   curse  of  that    covenant, 
Deul.  xxviii.  26,  compared  with  Gal.  iii.  10.     This  will  not  appear 
30  strange,  if  we  consider  that  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  proposed  this 
law,  as  the  demand  of  the  covenant  of  works,  Matt.  xix.  16 — 21,  ae 
it  is  also  proposed  by  the  instructor  in  the  doctrine  of  man's  misery, 
(c)  If  wc  consider  the    law,  as  having  a  special  relation  to  Israel,  it 
appears  then  as  imposing  a  legal  administration  upon  the  covenant 
of  grace  :  God  had  indeed  entered  into  the  pure  covenant  of  grace 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  203 

/ 

•  with  that  people  ;  but  he  did  not  choose  to  administer  it  with  so 
much  mildness  and  enlargement  lo  them  then,  as  now  under  the 
New  Testament.  lie  chose  to  retain  them  like  children  under  dis- 
cipline, and  cause  them  to  long  earnestly  for  the  Messiah,  who  was 
to  come.  This  the  apostle  teacheth  us,  when  he  saith,  Gal.  iii.  i9, 
23*  24,  25.  "  Whereiore  then  serveth  the  law  ?  it  was  added  be- 
cause of  transgressions,"  (namely.  10  the  covenant  established  in 
Christ,  and  to  the  promise  of  grace,  vs.  16,  17,  18)  "  until  the  seed 
should  come,"  Sec.  1  lierefoie  the  law  was  promulgated  in  accents 
of  thunder,  with  so  many  fearful  tokens  before  Israel,  enforced  in 
the  second  commandment  with  a  threatening  of  the  covenant  ol  works, 
and  rendered  grievous  by  a  burthen->oine  ceremonial  service,  although 
with  an  evangelical  design  And  since  thi*  legal  administration  did 
not  of  itself  give  life,  therefore  it  is  called  "  a  letter  and  ministra- 
tion of  death  and  condemnation,"  2  Cor  iii.  6  7,  9.  The  cat  rial 
and  unconverted  Jews,  not  comprehending  the  end  of  ( iod  in  this 
legal  administration,  looked  upon  it  as  it  covenant  of  works,  ctying 
inconsiderately,  u  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  we  will  do,"  I\xod. 
xix.  8.  Exod.  xxiv.  3,  and  so  they  so«ght  their  righteousness  by  it, 
as  Paul  saith,  Rom.  ix.  31,  32.  Therefore  they  are  likened  io  the 
children  of  Hagar,  Gal.  iv.  21.  And  in  this  manner  the  covenant 
of  lloreb  is  opposed  to  the  new  covenant  of  grace,  Jer.  xxxi.  31  — 
3  4.  And  in  this  respect  the  apostle  saith,  Gal.  iii.  25.  After  that 
faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer  under  a  schoolmaster." 

II.  In  order  to  illustrate  this  more  fully,  the  instructor  divides  the 
ten  commandments  into  two  tables.  The  law  was  written  upon  "  two 
tables,"  Ex.  xxx.  13.  Christ  himself  divides  the  law  into  two  great 
commandments  ;  the  first  of  which  enjoins  love  to  God,  and  the 
ether  love  to  our  neighbour.  See  Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40.  The  Papists, 
in  order  to  conceal  their  imageworship,  reduce  the  first  and  second 
commandments  to  one,  and  assign  only  three  to  the  first  table,  and 
seven  to  the  second,  dividing  the  tenth  command  into  two  commands. 
The  Lutherans,  who  patronize  images,  as  books  of  the  laity,  do  the 
same.  But  besides  that,  these  men  must  suspect  that  they  are  guilty 
of  worshipping  images,  when  they  do  either  wholly  abolish  the 
second  commandment,  or  exhibit  it  very  imperfectly  ;  the  second 
commandment  is  wholly  different  from  the  first ;  for  the  first  teach- 
clh  that  we  must  serve  God  only,  but  the  second  teacheth  in  what 
manner  we  must  serve  him,  to  wit.  that  we  must  do  it  without  ima- 
ges. We  may  sin  against  the  first  commandment  without  trans- 
gressing the  second  :  we  can  also  offend  against  the  second  without 
i-ende'ring  ourselves  guilty  of  transgressing  the  first  :  he  who  wor- 


304         THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ships  another,  as  the  true  God,  or  besides  the  true  God,  without  an 
image,  sins  against  the  flrst,  and  not  against  the  second  command- 
ment :  but  he  who  worships  the  true  God  alone  by  images,  violates 
the  sec»nd,  and  not  the  first  commandment.  We  cannot  make  two 
commands  of  the  tenth  command,  because  only  one  sinful  act,  to 
wit,  coveting  is  forbidden  with  respect  to  several  objects,  as  Paul 
also  observes,  Rom.  vii.  f .  Moreovei',  we  could  not  know  by  this 
division  which  was  the  ninth  or  tenth  command  ;  for  in  Exod.  xx. 
17,  the  ninth  command  would  be,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neigh- 
bour's house,"  and  the  tenth  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy 
neighbour's  wife :"  but  in  Deut.  v.  21,  that  ninth  would  be  the  tenth, 
and  that  tenth  the  ninth  command  ;  for  here  the  wife  is  mentioned 
first,  and  then  follows  the  house,  and  thus  otherwise  than  Exod.  xx. 
17.  We  therefore  apprehend  this  better,  when  we  assignfour  com- 
mandments to  the  first  table,  and  six  to  the  second. 

ill.  The  first  commandment,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  tLo 
other  commandments,  was  pronounced  by  the  mouth  of  the  great 
Lawgiver  in  these  words,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  beforc- 
me."  The  Lord  God,  speaking  to  the  great  congregation  of  his 
people,  saith  not  "  ye,"  but  "  thou,"  each  of  you  in  particular,  as  if 
each  individual  stood  alone  at  the  mountain,  "  shalt  have  no  other 
gods  before  me."  There  are  no  other  gods  :  but  the  sinner,  "  com- 
ing short  of  the  glory  of  God,"  hath  set  up  other  objects  besides 
God  for  gods,  in  opposition  to  the  Lord,  and  so  there  are,  as  Paul 
speaks,  1  Cor.  via.  5,  6,  "  many  that  are  called  gods  ;  whether  in 
heaven,  or  in  earth  ;  but  to  us  there  is  but  one  God."  Therefore  we 
may  not  have  any  other  gods  before  him  (or  before  his  face)  that  is, 
no  where,  for  his  face,  and  "  his  eyes  are  every  where,  beholding 
the  evil  and  the  good,"  as  Solomon  speaks,  Prow  xv.  3.  Therefore 
the  Lord  requires  that  the  idolater  should  "  put  away  his  abomina- 
tions out  of  his  st^ht,"  in  order  that  he  may  return  to  him,  Jer.  iv.  I. 

The  God  of  Israel  enjoins  then  two  great  things  in  this  part  of 
his  word  ;  First,  that  men  should  have  and  hold  him  alone  for  God  ; 
and  then,  that  they  should  not  have  any  other  gods  instead  of,  or  be- 
sides him.  Therefore  we  must  hold  and  acknowledge  the  Lord  for 
our  God.  The  Lord  was  become  the  God  of  Israel  by  the  covenant 
of  grace  :  it  was  their  duty  therefore  to  hold  and  acknowledge  him 
for  their  God,  as  Jacob  vowed  to  the  Lord,  that  "  he  should  be  his 
God/'  Gen.  xxviii.  21,  or  as  Asaph  declared,  when  he  said,  Psalm 
lxxiii.  25,  26,  »  Whom  have  1  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  nono 

*  rhis  is  according  to  the  Botch  translation. 


XXXIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  265 

upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee.  My  flesh  and  my  heart  fai!- 
eth  ;  but  God  is  the  strength  oi"  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever." 
The  instructor  showeth  in  what  manner  we  do  this,  when  he  saith, 
that  (a)  "  we  must  learn  to  know  the  only  true  God  rightly."  Since 
he  alone  is  God,  therefore  he  alone  must  be  known  as  such,  and  in- 
deed as  our  God  in  Christ,  agreeably  to  his  revelation.  "  This," 
saith  the  Saviour  to  his  Father,  "  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 
know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent," 
John  xvii.  3.  (b)  "  That  we  should  trust  in  him  alone."  The 
Psalmist  saith,  "  They  that  know  thy  name  will  trust  in  thee," 
Psalm  ix.  11.  When  we  trust  in  God,  we  rest  and  lean  upon  him, 
as  our  God  in  all  cases,  with  calm  tranquillity  :  "  Commit  thy  way 
unto  the  Lord  :  trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  bring  it  to  pass," 
saith  David  to  the  favourites  of  the  Lord,  Psalm  xxxvii.  5.  (c)  The 
person,  who  is  in  covenant  with  God,  must  also  "  submit  himself  to 
God  alone,"  as  well  with  respect  to  his  commandments  by  obedience 
to  them  :  Israel  declared  readily,  when  they  surrendered  themselves 
in  covenant  to  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiv.  7.  All  that  the  Lord  hath  said 
will  we  do,  and  be  obedient :"  as  with  respect  to  his  chastisements, 
«  with  all  lowliness  and  patience  :  We  had  fathers  of  our  flesh, 
which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  :  shall  we  not  much 
rather  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live  }"  thus  asks 
Paul,  Heb  xii.  9.  See  how  the  saints  did  this,  1  Sam.  iii.  18. 
2  Sam.  xv.  26.  xvi.  7— 13  Micha  vii.  9.  (d)  «  We  must  expect 
all  good  things  from  him"  only,  because  he  takes  care,  as  the  God 
of  the  covenant,  of  his  covenant  people  :  "  The  Lord  is  good  to  them 
that  wait  for  him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  him,"  Lam.  iii.  25. 
(e)  As  the  Lord  is  worthy  to  be  loved,  and  as  he  loves  his  people 
greatly,  as  the  God  of  the  covenant,  therefore  "  we  must  love  him 
with  our  whole  heart"  above  a!l :  "  Hear  O  Israel,"  saith  Moses, 
Deut.  vi.  4,  5,  "  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord.  And  thou  shaltlove 
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and 
with  all  thy  might."  (f)  But  when  God  enters  into  covenant  with 
man  in  such  a  familiar  manner,  it  ought  not  to  beget  any  irreverence 
in  us,  but  we  must  also  "  fear"  and  stand  in  awe  of  him  :  "  Sanc- 
tify the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  let  him  be  your  fear,  and  let  him  be  your 
dread,"  saith  the  prophet  to  the  people  of  God,  Isaiah  viii.  1 S. 
(g)  "  The  happy  people,  whose  God  is  the  Lord,  must  also  "  glori- 
fy him,"  since  he  is  worthy  of  all  glory,  and  "  he  hath  formed  his 
people  for  himself,  that  they  may  show  forth  his  praise,"  Isaiah  xliii. 
21.  See  1  Peter  ii.  9.  (h)  Finally,  the  Israel  of  God  "  may  not 
do  any  thing  contrary  to  his  will ;"  yea,  (;  they  should  much  rather 


906      THE  FIRST  \COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

reiiounce  and  forsake  all  creatures,  than  do  the  least  thing  contrary 
to  his  will."  This  is  to  deny,  not  to  know,  yea,  to  hate-  ourselves, 
:ind  all  that  belongs  and  is  dear  to  us,  for  the  Lord's  sake  :  '{  If  any 
man  come  to  me,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Luke  xiv.  26,  u  and  hate  not 
his  father  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children,  and  brethren,  and  sis- 
ters, yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple*" 

But  when  the  Lord  commands  this,  he  then  ai.;.o  forbids  having 
any  other  gods  in  his  stead,  or  besides  him.  The  catechism  ex- 
plains tins, 

I.  Of  "idolatry,"  which  is  either  a  greater  or  less.  The  gi 
idolatry  is  either  "to  contrive,  or  to  have  in  the  stead  of,  or  besides 
the  one  true  God,  any  other  object,  in  which  men  place  theii  trust. ' 
The  heathens  defiled  themselves  abominably  with  this  kind  of  idola- 
try ;  for  they  held  almost  every  thing  in  heaven,  on  earth,  and  ia 
the  sea,  yea,  even  the  sinful  passions  of  men  to  be  gods.  The  Jews 
were  not  entirely  clear  of  these  sins  :  "  they  forsook  Gocl,  the  foun- 
tain of  living  waters,  and  hewed  them  out  cisterns,  broken  cisterns, 
that  could  hold  no  water,"  Jer.  iii.  11,  12,  13.  It  is  also  a  gross 
idolatry,  when  men  acknowledge  the  true  God  to  be  God,  but  never- 
theless make  and  worship  something  besides  him  as  God.  The 
heathens  had,  besides  their  supreme  god,  Jupiter,  also  many  inferior 
gods.  The  old  Samaritans  "  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  gods 
also,"  S  Kings  xvii.  33.  The  Papists  conduct  no  better,  for  they 
have  their  breaden  or  mass-god  besides  the  true  God,  and  they  ought 
therefore  to  be  deemed  idolaters.  The  less  idolatry  consists  in 
being  led  by  the  depravity  of  our  hearts  from  God  to  the  creature. 
For  instance,  (a)  when  a  person  takes  such  a  pleasure  in  himself,  as 
if  he  were  God,  like  Herod,  Acts  xii.  31,  22,  33.  A  person  "  sets 
his  heart  as  God's  heart,"  like  the  p'.ince  o:  Tyre,  Eaek.  x::\hi.  2 
— G.  (b)  When  a  person  ends  in  himself,  and  doth  all  things  for 
his  own  sake.  Our  first  parents  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  that  they 
might  be  like  God.  We  ought  to  do  all  things  on  account  cf,  and 
for  the  Lord's  sake  :  but  the  sinful  nature  of  Adam  having  been 
transmitted  to  his  posterity,  causeth  us  to  "  seek  every  one  his  own, 
end  not  that  which  is  the  Lord's,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Philip,  ii.  2  1. 
fc)  It  is  also  idolatry  to  purpose  any  thing  rashly,  and  to  believe, 
when  we  purpose  it,  that  we  shall  succeed,  without  looking  up  to 
the  Lord  ;  for  we  do  then  depend  on  ourselves,  as  if  we  were  gods  ; 
whether  we  do  this  in  spirituals,  with  Peter,  Matt,  xxvi  31 — 35,  or 
in  temporals,  James  iv.  12 — 16.  (d)  To  this  we  may  add  relying 
upon  our  own  righteousness,  thinking  that  we  shall  stand  before  God 
in  cur  own  duties,  as  though  our  cv.n   doings  were  an  infiniely  val- 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  307 

-jable  righteousness  ;  and  thus  "we  submit  not  to  the  righteousness 
of  God,  but  establish  our  own  righteousness,"  Rom.  x.  2,  3.  (e)  To 
this  belongs  also  the  love  of  money,  desiring  to  be  rich,  as  if  riches 
v/ere  a  kind  of  divinity,  or  our  salvation  :  "  Covetousness  is  idolatry," 
saith  Paul,  Col    hi.  5,  and   u  the  covetous  man  is  an  idolater,"  Eph. 
v.  5.     When  men  obtain  many  goods,  they  become  proud  of  them, 
and  "  place  their  hope  and  trust  in  them,"  Job  xxxi.  24.     (f)  It  is 
thus  also  with  sensual  pleasures,  in  winch  men  endeavour  to  delight 
themselves,  as  if  they  were  Gods  :  "  The  belly  is  the  God"  of  sen- 
sualists, Philip    iii.    19.     (g)  It  is  not   otherwise  with    confiding  in 
warlike  stores  and   heroes  :  the  idolater  is  persuaded,  that  by  these 
he  will    overcome    his  enemies.     <•  He  makes  his  power  his  God  " 
Heb.  i.  1 1.     And  it  is  no  better  to  ascribe  our  gains,  our  acquisition 
of  any  goods  to  cur  own  wise    contrivance  and  power  ;  for  we  do 
thus  "  forget   the  Lord,   and  we  exalt"  and   place  ourselves  in  the- 
Lord's  stead,  Deut.  viii.  11  — 17.    (h)  We  add  to  this  the  fear  of  man, 
Whereby  we  suffer  ourselves  to  be   hindered  from  doing  our  dut", 
and  from  trusting  in  the  Lord,  and  so  •<  forget  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  li. 
12,  13.     (i)  Finally,  having  too  high  an  esteem    and    affection  for 
this  and  that  human   being  is   also  idolatry.     A  husband,   a  wife, 
children,  physicians,  godly  ministers  possess  the  heart,  like  so  many 
gods.     Pious  Asa  was  reproved  for  this,  2  Chron.  xvi.  12.     Corne- 
lius and  others,  Acts  x.  25,  26.  xiv.  1 1  — 15.  Rev.  xix.  10.  xxii.  8,9. 
2.  The    instructor  mentions  "  sorcery"    after  idolatry.     Sorcery 
(or  witchcraft)  consists  not  in  doing  any  thing  by  slight  of  hand,  and 
in  such  a  manner,  that  it   appears  wonderful  to  us  ;  but  it  is  a  doins- 
of  something  by  the  help  of  the  devil,  which  cannot  be  done  by  any- 
human  device  or  power  :    the  Egyptian   sorcerers  did   so  with  theis' 
enchantments,  Exod.  vii.  and  viii.     To  deny  the  existence  of  such 
sorcery,  in  order  to  maintain  that  the  essence  of  a  spirit  consists  in 
thought,  and  to  say  that  a  spirit   cannot  act  upon  a  body,  is  a  direr* 
contradiction  of  the  word   of  God,   which    forbids  sorcery,  and  ap- 
points a  punishment  for  it,  Deut.  xviii.  10,  Exod.  xxii.  18.  2nd  it  is 
making  a  jest  of  all  human  and  divine  history,  which  relates  the  ao 
tions  of  sorcerers  ;  although  every  idle  tale  concerning  sorcery  is  not- 
to  be  credited  neither.     The  reason  why  this  abominable  practice  is 
forbidden  here,  is  that  we  depart  thereby  from  God,   and  betake 
ourselves  to  the  devil,  who  is  **  the  God  of  this  world,"  2  Cor.  iv.  4. 
3.  "  Soothsaying"  is    also  forbidden   here.     This  consists  in  en* 
deavouring  to  discover  hidden  things,  which  we  cannot  know  by  nat- 
ural   means,  or  by  divine  revelation,  either  by  tokens  in  the  heaver.c 
w  in  the  hands,  by  the  entrails  of  bp;i«t«.  by  the  streaming  cfbird*, 


SOS         THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

or  by  a  diabolical  art ;  for  we  do  thus  seek  something  of  a  divine  na- 
ture out  of  the  Lord,  in  the  creatures,  yea,  in  his  enemy,  and  there- 
fore this  is  forbidden.  Lev.  xix.  26,  Deut.  xviii.  10.  Soothsayers 
are  indeed  "  artists  of  Satan,"*  according  to  the  word  of  God,  Lev. 
xix.  3  1. 

4.  The  instructor  speaks  also  of  "  superstition,"  by  which  men 
ascribe  a  certain  divinity  to  something  that  doth  not  possess  it.  The 
Papists  render  themselves  horribly  guil'y  in  this  respect,  when  they 
ascribe  a  wonderful  virtue  and  divinity  to  the  water  in  baptism,  to  holy 
■water,  to  the  sign  of  the  cross,  to  the  relics  of  the  saints,  mumbling 
prayers,  the  monk's  hood,  and  other  matters.  Yea,  all  the  willwor- 
ship  of  the  Papists  is  nothing  else  but  superstition  :  God  requires 
none  of  these  things  at  their  hands.  It  is  also  silly  in  superstitious 
people,  to  hang  a  paper  with  certain  figures,  or  the  Lord's  prayer 
about  their  necks,  or  to  moke  use  of  other  trifles  in  different  ways 
against  fevers,  or  o'.her  diseases.  It  is  also  foolish,  to  think  that 
the  mere  saying  of  the  sixth  petition  will  expel  the  devil  from  us  : 
we  may  also  reckon  it  superstition  to  ascribe  too  much  power  to  the 
means  of  grace,  and  to  depend  upon  them  ;  which  Paul  opposeth, 
1  Cor.  hi.  4 — 7.  This  command  undoubtedly  forbids  superstition, 
since  that  supposeth  something  divine  out  ci  God,  in  things  which 
do  nut  possess  it. 

5.  "  The  invocation  of  saints,  whether  angels  or  men,  "or  other 
creatures,"  is  also  forbidden  here.  Tor  we  do  thus  ascribe  to  the 
creatures  the  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  goodness  of  God,  we 
practise  heathenish  idolatry,  "  serving  them  who  by  nature  are  no 
gods,"  Gal.  iv.  S.  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
him  only  shalt  thou  serve,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt,  iv.  10.  The 
saints  refused  to  be  worshipped,  as  we  sec,  Acts  x.  14.  Rev.  xix. 
and  xxii.  The  Socinians  are  therefore  to  be  censured,  since  they 
worship  Christ,  whom  they  look  upon  to  be  a  mere  creature,  as  a 
God  inferior  to  the  Father.  The  Papists  transgress  still  more,  when 
they  worship  the  saints.  The  Romish  Church  hath  deified  thousands, 
both  saints  and  angels,  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient  heathens,  in 
cider  to  worship  them  :  she  worships  also  other  creatures,  as  the 
bread  in  the  roass,  holy  relics,  and  the  wood  of  the  cross.  In  order 
to  blindfold  the  people,  she  excuses  herself  by  distinguishing  between 
tatreih,  the  worship  which  they  offer  to  God,  and  douleia,  the  wor- 
ship which  they  give  to  the  saints,  and  hufierdouleia,  a  higher  wor- 
ship than   douleia,  which  they   appropriate  to  Mary.     But  the  word 

*  This  '.r-  arrccab'.a  t9  the  Dutch  translation. 


XXXIV.  L0RD3  DAY.Q.  92—95,  201 

*f  God  knoweth  nothing  of  such  a  distinction  ;  and  the  people  do 
not  understand  it  ;  the  heathens  might  have  excused  their  idolatry 
in  the  same  manner,  for  they  worshipped  their  gods  with  the  wor-  , 
ship  of  douleia,  as  Paul  shows  in  the  Greek,  Gal.  iv.  8.  That  the  . 
Romanists  give  divine  honour  to  the  creatures  by  this  service,  ap- 
pears hence,  that  they  offer  them  the  service  of  the  first  table  of  the 
law  by  praying  to  th^m,  swearing  by  them,  and  dedicating  days  and 
temples  to  them. 

6  If  time  would  permit,  we  should  show  further  that  this  command 
forbids  also  ignorance,  heresy,  u  bewitching "  others  spiritually, 
**  that  they  should  net  obey  the  truth,"  Gal.  hi.  1,  unbelief,  mistrust, 
despair,  pride,  impatience  under  adversity,  disobedience,  seeking  our 
salvation  out  of  God,  want  of  love  to  the  Lord,  unfrelingness.  hard- 
ness of  heart,  giving  offence,  dishonouring  and  blaspheming  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  ungodliness,  dissoluteness,  and  endeavouring  to 
remove  every  idea  of  the  godhead  cut  of  the  soul,  and  to  practise 
every  kind  of  iniquity  without  fear,  like  "  the  fool,  who  saith  in  his 
heart,  there  is  no  God,"  Psalm  xjv.  1.  We  must,  if  we  wish  to 
save  our  souls,  avoid  and  flee  from  all  these  abominations  ;  fur  they 
who  practise  them  cannot  be  saved,  according  to  1  Cor.  vi.  10. 
7siph.  v.  5,6  Rev.  xxi  8.  How  should  God  favour  such  a  wicked 
person  with  his  salvation,  who  doth  not  love  him,  but  others  in  his 
stead,  or  besides  him  ? 

This  is  then  also  an  equitable  command  ;  for  there  is  no  God  be- 
sides the  Lord,  Deut.  vi.  4.  1  Cor.  viii.  6.  He  is  Jehovah,  who  is 
alone  worthy  to  be  acknowledged.  See  Psaim  xcvi.  5,  6.  1  he 
Lord  alone  was  the  covenant  God  cf  Israel:  Israel  was  therefore 
obliged  to  him  alone,  lie  alone  had  delivered  that  people  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt,  the  house  of  bondage  ;  they  were  therefore  un- 
der the  strongest  obligations  to  him  alone.  The  face  of  God  was 
every  where,  therefore  how  much  soever  any  one  concealed  his  idols, 
yea,  though  he  erected  his  dunghill  gods  in  his  heart,  it  was  still  be- 
fore the  face  of  God  ;  he  would  see  it,  he  would  be  jealous  on  ac- 
count of  it,  and  it  would  provoke  bim  to  anger,  See  Ezek.  viii. 
This  commandment  is  the  foundation  of  all  the  others  :  he  who 
transgresseth  this,  will  not  keep  any  other,  and  he  who  keeps  this 
will  not  transgress  any  of  the  other  commandments. 

We  look  upon  this  commandment  with  good  reason  to  be  perfect  j. 
for  nothing  more  than  this  can  be  required  of  us,  in  order  to  acknowl- 
edge that  the  Lord  alone  is  God.     Therefore  the  Socinians  reproach 
the  only  wise  and  perfect  Lawgiver,  when  they    say  that   this   com- 
Vox,,  ii.  3  B 


210       THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

mandment  was  not  perfect  ;  but  that  another  Lawgiver,  to  wit, 
Christ,  perfected  and  enlarged  it  with  a  command,  that  we  should 
pray  to  God,  and  particularly  after  the  pattern  of  the  Lord's  prayer, 
and  that  we  must  now  pray  to  Christ  also.  See  to  what  all  this 
tends :  there  was  then  no  command  under  the  Old  Testament  to 
pray  to  God,  contrary  to  Psalm  1.  15.  Men  did  not  pray  to  him  as 
their  Father,  who  was  in  heaven,  for  the  sanctification  of  his 
name,  &e.  contrary  to  Job.  xxxiv.  36.  Isaiah,  lxiii.  16.  Christ 
was  not  God  then,  and  so  not  to  be  worshipped.  Where  will  all 
this  end  ?  It  is  true,  the  ancients  had  not  the  form  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  in  the  same  order,  in  which  we  have  it  now ;  but  they  were 
nevertheless  obliged  to  pray  for  the  same  things  with  us. 


APPLICATION. 

As  we  had  so  many  things  to  say,  in  older  to  explain  our  subject, 
we  will  add  only  a  few  words  by  way  of  application. 

Whoever  thou  art,  present  thyself,  as  it  were,  at  Horeb,  beheld 
the  quaking,  burning,  and  smoking  mountain,  the  glittering  flashes  of 
lightning,  and  hear  the  Lord  saying  amidst  the  dreadful  thunderings 
to  thee,  "  1  am  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods 
before  me."  It  was  for  this  end,  that  the  Lord  ordered  his  law 
to  be  written  in  his  word,  which  is  brought  to  thee  also  ;  yea,  for  this 
end  it  is  read  to  thee  every  Sabbath,  and  the  Lord  speaks  in  it  to  thee 
also.  Art  thou  not  an  Israelite  by  birth,  but  a  sinner  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  hast  thou  not  therefore  been  brought  out  of  Egypt  with  re- 
spect to  thy  body  ;  thou  art  nevertheless  subject  to  the  Lord  ;  he  is 
worthy  for  his  own  sake,  and  thou  art  naturally  obliged  to  esteem, 
and  acknowledge  him  to  be  God.  "It  appertains  to  him,  that  thou 
shouldest  fear  him."  because  he  is  incomparably  glorious,  Jer.  x. 
6,  7.  Is  not  he  thy  God  by  the  covenant  of  grace,  he  is  by  creation, 
by  his  providence  over  thee,  and  by  all  the  favours  which  he  hath 
Bhown  to  thee,  especially  by  leading  us  out  of  the  Romish  Egypt. 
There  is  surely  nothing  more  proper,  than  that  wo  should  acknowl- 
edge and  fear  our  Creator  and  Benefactor  alone  as  God. 

It  is  certain  that  this  law  hath  a  relation  to  the  covenant  of  works, 
and  to  the  covenant  of  t^rare.  If  we  will  then  make  a  profitable  use 
of  the  law,  it  will  be  necessary  for  us  to  look  at  ourselves,  and  exam- 


XXXIV.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  92— 95.  211 

ine  whether  we  are  yet  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  or  un- 
der the  new  covenant  of  grace  ;  for  we  must  ail  of  us  order  our- 
selves according  to  the  law,  as  our  condition  requireth.  Ye  art-  all 
yet  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  who  have  never  leuna-d  by 
the  law  to  acknowledge  your  sins  and  damnable  condition  with  hu- 
mility, with  fear  and  concern,  like  Paul,  Rom.  vii.  7.  See  also  Rom. 
iii.  20.  Ye  also,  who  by  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  according 
to  the  law,  are  subject  to  the  dominion  of  sin,  so  that  the  motions  of 
sins,  which  are  by  the  law,  work  in  your  members  to  bring  forth 
fruit  unto  death."  Rom.  vii.  5.  Ye  also,  who  seek  your  rest,  peace 
and  salvation  of  God  by  your  own  doings,  and  who  do  thus  **  estab- 
lish your  own  righteousness,  with  the  zealous  Jews,"  Rom.  x.  2.  3. 
But  ye  who  have  seen  with  concern  your  abominable  misconduct, 
and  your  forlorn  condition,  who  have  fit  d  therefore  to  the  Mediator 
of  the  covenant ;  have  chosen  the  Lord  upon  his  offer  for  your  God, 
in  opposition  to  all  others  j  have  surrendered  yourselves  to  him,  and 
have  engaged  yourselves  to  be  his  people,  and  to  obey  his  voice  ; 
yea,  who  make  it  your  daily  work  to  do  all  this,  and  strive  to  conduct 
in  such  a  manner  as  is  well  pleasing  to  him,  ye,  I  say,  evidence 
that  "ye  have  passed  under  the  rod,  and  that  ye  have  been 
brought  under  the  bond  of  the  covenant."  Ezek.  xx.  37. 

Ye  then,  who  are  still  under  the  broken  covenant  of  works,  and 
have  never  entered  into  God's  covenant  of  grace,  (a)  Examine 
yourselves  whether  ye  have  kept  the  law  of  God,  and  this  command- 
ment in  particular  perfectly.  Consider  whether  ye  have,  as  ye  oughtf 
practised  all  the  duties  which  it  commands,  and  abstained  from  all  the 
sins,  which  it  forbids.  Are  ye  no  idolaters,  sorcerers,  or  soothsay- 
ers, what  is  the  reason  and  cause  why  ye  are  not  the  worst  of  sin- 
ners? Is  it  the  fear  of  Gcd  that  restrains  you,  and  that  ought  to 
restrain  you  ?  no :  but  because  ye  have  no  opportunity  to  be  so  vile, 
because  ye  were  otherwise  educated,  and  your  natural  conscience 
doth  not  suffer  you  to  be  so  wicked.  See  then  also,  (b)  that  ye 
are  abominable,  disobedient  and  to  every  good  work  reprobate  ;  that 
ye  are  not,  as  ye  now  are,  partakers  of  the  life  which  was  promised 
in  consequence  of  perfect  obedience  :  "  For  Moses  describeth  the 
righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  that  the  man  who  doth  these 
things  shall  live  by  them,"  as  Paul  teacheth.  Rom.  x.  5,  from  Lev. 
xviii.  5.  Yea,  according  to  the  covenant  of  works,  ye  are  under  the 
curse  :  for,  "  cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Thus  speaks 
the  same  apostle,  Gal.  iii.  10,  from  Deut-  xxvii.  26.     See  also  whaf 


312        THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

he  saith  to  you,  Rom.  ill-  19,20.  (c)  Do  ye  see  this  with  grief  and 
concern  ?  Do  ye  not  know  what  ye  must  do,  in  order  to  be  saved  ? 
flee  to  the  Mediator  of  the  covenant,  embrace  him  by  faith  for  the 
reconciliation  ot  all  your  violations  of  the  law,  and  your  abominable 
idolatry  :  'k  God  sets  him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in 
his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  fur  the  remission  of  sins," 
Rom.  iii  25.  Make  now  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  by  his  sacrifice, 
enter  into  it,  and  accept  of  his  offer  of  the  covenant.  Hear  him  cry 
to  you,  Isaiah  lv.  3,  "  Incline  your  ear,  and  come  unto  me  :  hear  and 
your  soul  shall  live,  and  I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with 
you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of/ David."  (d)  In  the  mean  time  con- 
sider and  count  the  cost  well  even  whether  Cod  and  his  favour  be 
so  precious  in  your  esteem,  that  ye  would  be  willing  to  endure  evei  j 
kind  of  reproach,  pain  and  shame  which  may  befal  you  with  respect 
to  soul  and  body,  on  account  cf  them  ;  and  whether  ye  would  be 
willing  also  to  spurn  all  your  seemingly  honourable,  pleasant  and 
profitable  idols,  to  "cast  them  away,  as  amenstruous  clcth,  and  say 
to  every  one  of  them,  get  thee  hence,"  as  the  covenant  people  do, 
Isaiah  xxx.  22.  Yea,  consider  before  ye  begin,  whether  ye  be  wil- 
ling to  keep  the  law  of  the  covenant,  and  all  the  precepts  of  it  to 
the  least,  as  well  as  to  partake  of  the  blessings  o!  the  covenant  We 
im.st  count  all  these  things,  that  wc  may  not  quit  at  lust,  and  so  ap- 
pear ridiculous.  The  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us  this  by  the  similitude 
ot  a  man,  who  builds  a  tower,  and  of  a  king  who  marches  against  his 
enemy,  Luke  xiv.  2  5 — 33.  Are  ye  willing  to  do  and  to  endure  so 
much  for  the  covenant,  surrender  yourselves  then  cheerfully  in  it  to 
the  Lord,  and  yield  yoursehes  iip  to  htm,  as  Hezekiah  admonished, 
2  Chron.  xxx.  3.  Yea,  come  then  upon  the  promises,  in  which  he 
promiseth,  Jer.  xxx.  33.  »« to  put  this  law  into  your  inward  parts, 
and  to  write  it  in  your  hearts  ;  and  that  he  will  thus  be  your  God, 
and  that  ye  shall  be  his  people."  Bring  your  hearts  to  him,  as 
Moses  did  the  tables  of  stone,  that  he  may  engrave  his  law  in 
them. 

Hut  yc,  who  have  truly  entered  into  covenant  with  God.  (a)  Be- 
hold your  great  happiness.  Ye  are  delivered  from  the  covenant  ol 
the  curse  by  the  Lord  your  God  :  whatsoever  the  Lord  is,  hath  and 
doth  ■with  respect  to  his  essence,  his  persons,  his  works  from  eterni- 
ty and  in  time,  is  for  you;  he  hath  given  you  the  greatest  and  the 
most  precious  promises:  he  will  remain  your  God  for  ever  ;  ye  are 
his  special  property  :  surely  lk  blessed  is  the  nation,  whose  God  ir 
the  Lord,  and  the  people  whom  he  hath  chosen   for  ins  own  htheri 


XXXIV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  92—95.  218 

tance,"  Psalm  xxxiii.  11.  Yea,  he  magnifies  you  by  his  law  ;  we 
may  say  of  you  with  greater  emphasis  than  Moses  said  of  Israel, 
Deut.  iv.  8,  "  What  nation  is  there  so  great,  that  hath  statutes  and 
judgments  so  righteous,  as  all  this  law  is  r"  •  The  free  covenant  of 
grace  was  administered  in  an  exceedingly  legal  and  rigorous  man- 
ner to  the  ancient  Israelites ;  the  law  ol  ceremonies  was  a  heavy 
yoke  lor  that  people,  though  it  had  an  evangelic  design.  But  ye 
are  no  longer  under  the  law  as  such  "  a  schoolmaster,"  Gal.  iii.  25. 
therefore  boast  and  delight  in  this  covenant,  with  David  :  hear  him 
say  himself,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5.  "  Though  my  house  be  not  so  with 
God  ;  yet  he  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure  ;  for  this  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire, 
although  tie  make  it  not  to  grow."  (b)  Though  ye  are  no  longer 
under  the  law,  as  the  condition  of  the  covenant  of  works,  nor  as  a 
severe  administration,  nevertheless  the  law  is,  and  remains  a  look- 
ing-glass for  you,  that  ye  may  see  your  spots  in  it.  Therefore  ex- 
amine yourselves  by  it ;  see  how  often  ye  have  transgressed  it,  and 
how  shamefully  ye  have  offended  against  this  commandment,  that 
ye  may  repeatedly  humble  yourselves,  and  flee  to  your  Surety  for 
reconciliation.  Thus  Paul  used  the  law,  Rom.  vii.  and  so  the  cat- 
echism requires  us  to  improve  it,  Question  115.  (c)  Banish  every 
idol  now  out  of  your  souls,  deny  yourselves  in  all  things,  and  let  the 
Lord,  your  covenant  God  alone  be  your  delight,  and  the  object  of  all 
your  desires,  inclinations  and  actions,  with  Asaph,  Psalm  lxxiii.  25, 
25.  "  Therefore,  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  idolatry,"  thus  we  say 
with  Paul,  1  Cor.  x.  14,  and  with  John,  "  Little  children,  keep  your- 
selves from  idols,"  1  John  v.  21.  (d)  Do  ye  see  your  impotency, 
seek  strength  in  the  covenant,  plead  the  promises  of  the  Lord  which 
he  makes,  Lzek.  xxxvi.  27,  "  1  wiil  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and 
cause  you  to  walk  in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judgments, 
and  do  them."  Convert  his  commandments  into  prayers  with 
David,  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5. 

Do  ye  go  astray  to  your  sorrow  in  any  instance,  it  will  never  be  a 
total  apostacy ;  he  hath,  according  to  Jer.  xxxii.  40,  "  made  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  will  not  turn  away  from  you, 
to  do  you  good  ;  but  he  will  put  his  fear  in  your  hearts,  that  ye 
may  not  depart  from  him.  Your  steps  are  ordered  by  the  Lord  : 
and  he  delighteth  in  your  way.  Though  ye  fall,  ye  shall  not  be  ut- 
terly cast  down  :  for  the  Lord  upholdeth  you  with  his  hand,"  as 
David  saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  23,  24.  It  is  true  ye  stumble  ;  but  ac- 
cording to  the  words  of  the  covenant,  Jer.  liv.  9.     "He  will  not  be 


2U     THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED,  fcc. 

wroth  with  you,  nor  rebuke  you.  Your  iniquity,  though  sought  for 
ever  so  diligently,  shall  not  be  found  ;  for  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will 
pardon  it,"  Jer.  1  20.  Doth  the  Lord  in  the  mean  while  hide  his 
face  from  you,  on  account  of  your  sins,  he  will  not  do  so  for  ever, 
for  according  to  Rev.  xxi.  3,  4,  "  his  tabernacle  shall  be  with  you, 
and  ye  shall  be  his  people,  and  he  will  be  with  yon,  and  will  be  your 
God>  and  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes."    Amen. 


(  215  ) 


EXPLANATION 


OF  THE 


SECOND  COMMANDMENT. 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  4,  5,6.  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  im* 
age,  or  any  likeness  of  any  thing,  that  is  in  the  heaven  above,  or 
that  is  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the 
earth.  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  servo 
them  ;  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  ini- 
quity of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  unto  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  them  that  hate  me  ;  and  showing  mercy  unto  thou- 
sands of  them  that  love  me,  and  keep  my  commandments.