Q.  96.    What  doth  God  require  in  the  second  commandment  ? 

A.  That  we  in  no  wise  represent  God  by  images,  nor  worship 
him  in  any  other  way  than  he  has  commanded  in  his  word. 

Q.  97.  Are  images  then  not  at  all  to  be  mtde  ? 

A.  God  neither  can,  nor  may  be  represented  by  any  means  ;  but 
as  to  creatures,  though  they  may  be  repreesnted,  yet  God  forbids  to 
make,  or  have  any  resemblance  of  them,  either  in  order  to  worship 
themj  or  to  serve  God  by  them. 


216  XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98. 

Q.  98.  Bui  may  not  images  be  tolerated  in  the  churches,  as  books  %f 
the  laity  ? 

A.  No ;  for  we  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  who  will 
have  his  people  taught,  not  by  dumb  images,  but  by  the  lively  preach- 
ine  of  his  word. 


X  r  is  not  so  much  the  matter,  as  the  manner  and  good  quality  <5f  a 
work)  that  renders  it  good.  Though  a  building  were  constructed  of 
polished  stones  and  of  cedar  Wood,  it  would  nevertheless  be  neither 
comely  nor  convenient,  if  the  materials  were  not  properly  joined  to 
gether,  and  if  the  apartments  were  not  well  adapted  to  their  iise. 
Although  the  matter  of  a  garment  were  ever  so  costly,  )ca,  such  as 
would  befit  a  king,  it.  would  notwithstanding  be  unseemly  and  disa- 
greeable, if  it  were  disproportioned  to  the  body.  The  warlike  apparel 
of  Saul  was  such  as  became  a  king,  but  David  rejected  it,  because  it 
was  not  proportioned  to  his  body,  and  he  was  not  used  to  it,  1  Sam. 
xvii.  38,  39.  It  is  thus  likewise  with  all  our  religious  performances. 
It  is  not  so  much  the  mutter  of  our  actions,  as  the  manner  and  the 
requisite  qualifications  of  them,  that  renders  them  good.  The  cere- 
monies of  fisting  and  of  sacrifices  were  commanded:  but  because 
the  Lord's  people  did  not  perform  them  in  a  right  manner,  he  dis- 
approved of  them,  as  abominations.  See  Isaiah  i.  10 — 15  lviii. 
1  — 5,  The  Lord  saith,  Isaiah  lxvi.  3.  "  He  that  killeth  an  ox  is  as 
if  he  slew  a  man  :  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's 
neck  :  he  that  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered  swine's  flesh  : 
he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol."  The  Lord  is 
indeed  a  God,  who  observes  strictly  he  looks  not  only  at  actions, 
but  also  at  the  qualities  of  actions';  we  must  hear  the  word  of 
God,  but  we  must  also  "take  heed  how  we  hear,"  as  Jesus  ad- 
monisheth,  Luke  viii.  18.  The  great  Lawgiver  did  not  therefore 
deem  it  sufficient  to  require  of  his  people  in  the  first  command- 
ment,  that  they  should  honour  and  worship  him  alone  as  God, 
in  opposition  to  all  idols ;  btit  he  requires  also  in  the  second  com- 
m  and  men  t,  that  they  should  do  this  in  a  right  manner,  spiritually, 
and  not  only  with  the  body  ;  according  to  his  prescript,  and  not  just 
as  they  saw  lit ;  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  not  by  images,  when  he 
saith,  "Thou  shair,  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any 
likeness." 

The  Lord  Cou.  in  order  to  discover  his  jealousy  against  images. 
iorbids  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  2 IF 

I.  Most  circumstantially,  and, 

II.  He  assigns  exceedingly  weighty  reasons  to  restrain  all  men 
from  them. 

I.  It  is  necessary,  1,  to  explain  what  is  forbidden  here.  2,  to  in- 
quire concerning  what  is  commanded,  and,  3,  to  show  that  this 
second  commandment  is  not  defective,  but  perfect. 

1.  God  forbids  making  and  honouring  an  image  and  likeness. 
Pezel  signifies  a  graven  image,  and  themouna-  a  likeness  which  rep- 
resents something  that  exists  ;  others  have  explained  largely  enough, 
in  what  manner  these  words  have  been  translated  by  the  Gretks.  It 
will  suffice  us  to  say,  that  they  denote  in  this  commandment  ima- 
ges and  likenesses  of  every  kind,  "  whether  graven,  or  molten,  or 
painted,  or  woven,  or  embroidered.  The  Lawgiver  speaks  not  there- 
fore of"  his  own  image  and  likeness,  after  which  he  made  man," 
Gen.  i,  26,  but  of  an  image  and  likeness,  meaner  than  the  man  him- 
self, made  by  himself,  and  thus  not  worthy  that  the  maker  of  it 
should  bow  down  himself  to  it.  The  Papists,  not  knowing  how  to 
excuse  their  forbidden  imageworship,  say  that  we  must  understand  by 
image  and  likeness  here,  an  image  of  an  idol,  which  was  contrived 
indeed  by  the  heathens,  but  exists  nowhere,  and  is  thus  an  image  of 
a  falsehood,  because  the  apostle  saith,  1  Cor.  viii.  4.  "  We  know 
that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  But  to  be  nothing  denotes 
here  that  an  idol  is  not  worthy,  that  we  should  ascribe  any  divinity 
to  it ;  and  therefore  the  idols  are  called  elilim,  <*  nothings,"  or  "  not 
gods."  The  divine  command  speaks  of  images  and  likenesses, 
which  represent  "  that  which  is  in  heaven  above,"  as  the  sun,  moon, 
stars  and  birds  ;  ll  that  which  is  in  the  earth  beneath,"  as  men,  beast* 
and  plants  ;  and  "  that  which  is  in  the  waters  under  the  earth,"  as 
brooks,  streams,  rivers,  fishes  and  seamonsters. 

The  God  of  Israel  forbids  making  images  and  likenesses  of  these 
things.  The  instructor  asks  with  good  reason,  "  Are  images  then 
not  at  all  to  be  made  ?"  Must  we  justify  the  followers  of  Mahomet, 
who  proscribe  entirely  the  art  of  making  images  ?  shall  we  utterly 
abolish  the  civil  use  of  images,  as  ornaments  of  houses,  cities  and 
coins?  If  any  should  be  so  unreasonable,  as  to  censure  Solomon 
for  adorning  his  throne  with  images  of  lions,  he  will  certainly  not  dis- 
approve of  the  conduct  of  the  Lord,  that  he  taught  Bezaleel  by  his 
Spirit  "  to  cut  stones,  and  carve  timber  in  a  curious  manner,"  Exod. 
xxxj.  i — 5.  When  therefore  the  Lawgiver  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
make  any  image  or  likeness,  he  speaks  of  images,  by  which  men  en- 
deavour to  represent  him  in  particular ;  for  so  this  prohibition  is 
cxpluned,  as  we  will  show  presently  from  Deut.  ir.  15 — 18.  God 
Vol.  ii.  2  C 


218     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

forbids  also  every  other  kind  of  images,  with  respect  to  any  religious 
vise  or  them,  The  heathens  and  Jews  were  too  wise  to  think 
that  all  their  images  represented  God  :  they  made  images  of  crea- 
tures also,  in  older  to  honour  God  by  them  :  therefore  the  Lord  for- 
bids also  "  bowing  ourselves  down  to  them,  and  serving  them." 
The  Hebrew  word  Schachah  signifies  an  outward  downbowing  of  the 
body,  either  with  the  head,  or  with  the  knees,  or  with  the  whole 
body  to  the  earth.  The  Greek  translators  render  this  word  by 
proskunein,  to  reverence,  as  the  idolaters  reverenced  their  images 
and  gods,  sometimes  even  by  kissing  them  ;  for  tiny  kissed  either 
the  images  themselves,  or  they  kissed  their  hands  in  honour  of  their 
gods,  whom  they  could  not  reach.  See  Job.  xxxi.  26,  27.  The 
other  word  gnabad,  to  serve,  is  translated  by  the  seventy  laircnti-:, 
and  they  translate  it  elsewhere  doulenein.  There  is  not  therefore  so 
great  a  difference  between  the  service  of  lalreia  and  dowleia,  as  the 
Papists  imagine.  We  have  spoken  more  largely  of  this  in  the  fore- 
going sermon.  Thus  all  religious  worshipping  of  images  is  forbid- 
den, whether  by  praying  or  by  sacrificing,  or  by  burning  incense,  or 
by  celebrating  festivals. 

The  Lord  God  doth  not   forbid  this  making  and  worshipping  of 
images  without  a  reason.     He  knows  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the 
heart,  which  doth  most  easily  suffer  itself  to  be  seduced  to  this  abom- 
inable service  :  it  knows  that  God   ought  to  be   worshipped ;  if  we 
shall  worship  him,  we  must  conceive  of  him  as  present  with  us  ;  the 
soul  bereaved  of  the  image  of  God,  knows  not  how  to  do  this  :  there- 
fore she  did  not  know  how  to  conduct  better  in  this  matter  than   by 
representing  him  in  a  bodily  manner,  and  by   directing  her  religious 
services  to  such  a   representation.     The   children   of  Ham    and   of 
Ja'phet,  separating  themselves  from  Shem,  and   from  his  true   cove- 
nant God,  invented  even    at  an   early  period  several  gods  for  them- 
selves ;  the  sun,  moon,  and   stars  were  first    and    before   all    others 
honoured  as  gods  by  the  Babylonians      After  this  they  placed  men 
also  in  the  number  of  their  Gods ;  they   deified  their  parents,  chil- 
dren, princes,  heroes,  and  others,  making  use  of  certain  ceremonies 
for  this  purpose.     The  Egyptians  looked  upon  beasts,  plants,  croco- 
serpents,  and    other  monsters,  to  be   gods       Idolatry   passed 
n  to  the  Greeks  :  and  the    Romans,    although    they    were 
v  than  the  rest,  became  so  foolish,  that  they  adopted  the  gods  of 
all  nations,  and  budded  a  Pantheon,  or  temple  of  all  the  gods,    and 
bro.ug  -  r  gods  into  it.     Even  the   Germans  and  Dutch*  did 

*  Although  the  a'jihor  speaks    in  tbe  original  only  of  the  Dutch,  it  is  evi- 
dent from  what  he  says,  that  he  intends  both  the  High  and  the  Low  Dutch. 


XXXV.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  2  IS 

.nain  free  of  this  vice  :  we  have  hence  still  the  names  Sunday, 
monday,  S;c.  The  Germans  and  the  Dutch  worshipped  particularly 
the  sun,  moon,  Vulcan,  Wodan,  (called  otherwise  Mercury,)  whence 
Wednesday,  Tuisco,  and  his  son  Man,  who  were  lore  fa  hers  of  the 
Germans  and  Dutch.  From  Tuisco  they  seem  still  to  be  called 
Dutch,  and  from  Man,  Germans.  The  heathens  made  images  of 
all  these  god:;,  bowed  down  to  them,  and  practised  every  kind  of 
worship  before  them.  At  first  the  idolaters  were  not  so  curious,  as 
to  make  images  of  their  gods,  they  contented  themselves  with  an 
unhewn  stone,  or  the  unpolished  trunk  of  a  tree  ;  but  the  arts  multi- 
plying, and  the  art  of  making  images  being  invented,  they  made  im- 
ages of  their  gods  of  every  form,  of  wood,  stone,  gold,  silver,  and 
other  materials,  according  to  their  erroneous  conceptions,  which  they 
had  formed  of  their  gods. 

It  was  not  so  strange,  that  the  heathens,  whom  God  had  abandon- 
ed to  walk  in  their  own  ways,  should  be  so  madly  addicted  to  idola- 
try, as  that  even  the  posterity  of  Shem,  who  were  beloved  by  God, 
should  apostatize  thereto.  "  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham  and  of 
Nahor,  served  other  gods,"  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  Joshua  xxiv.  2. 
Laban  swore  also  by  those  false  gods  of  his  fathers,  Gen.  xxxi  53. 
ll'.i  had  also  his  Teraphims,  or  household  gods,  and  Rachel,  who 
was  foolishly  inclined  to  them,  "stole  them,  Gen.  xxxi.  19.  Jacob 
indeed  purged  his  house  of  them,  Gen.  xxxv.  2 — 4,  but  his  poster- 
ity multiplying  in  Egypt,  defiled  themselves  with  the  idolatry  of 
the  Egyptians.  And  although  the  Lord  had  brought  thtm  out  of 
that  house  of  bondage  with  great  power,  and  with  an  outstretched 
arm,  yet  they  made  a  calf  at  Horeb,  and  bowed  down  to  a  molten 
image  :  "  They  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox 
that  eateth  g  ass."  When  Israel  was  come  to  the  borders  of  the 
Moabitcs,  "  they  joined  themselves  to  Baalpeor,  and  ate  the  sacrifi- 
ces of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi.  19,  20,28.  The  Israelites  were  but 
just  settled  in  Canaan,  when  they  adopted  and  served  the  gods  of 
the  heathens,  who  dwelled  among  them,  and  of  the  nations  wl  o 
were  round  about  them.  They  served  the  Baals  and  Molochs  of 
every  people,  the  Apis,  or  calf  of  the  Egyptians,  the  \shtoreth  of 
the  Zidonians,  the  Chemosh  of  the  Moabites,  and  other  gods  and 
goddesses,  yea,  they  served  them  with  the  filthiest,  lewdest  and 
most  cruel  ceremonies  :  they  made  for  them  temples,  high  places, 
groves  and  images,  which  were  fitter  to  frighten  and  to  shock  a  per» 

or  a*  they  are  usually  distinguished  by  the  English,  the  Germans  and  the 
Dutch. 


220       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

son,  than  to  be  worshipped ;  yea,  they  mul'i plied  these  images  so 
txce  di.i.Jy,  that  '■  they  filled  their  land  with  them  :  they  had  gods, 
lOKtgef  aliaisand  high  places,  not  only  according  to  the  number  of 
then  ciies,"  but  even  "according  to  the  number  of  their  streets," 
Jer.  xi.  13,  Ez  k.  xvi.  24,  25,  31.  But  the  Lord  punished  them 
severely  by  the  Babylonish  captivity,  which  impressed  a  horrour  of 
every  kind  of  image-worship  on  them,  that  cleaves  to  their  posterity 
even  until  ihis  day. 

It  might  be  imagined,  that  Christians,   having  such  examples  be- 
fore their  eyes,  greater  privileges,  and  a    clearer  revelation,    would 
not  apostatize  to  image    worship.      The  first    Christians  also  knew 
nothing  of  images  ;  neither  the    Saviour   nor    the    apostles  ordered 
the  Christians  to  worship  images  ;  they  who    defended  the    laws  of 
Cod  time   after  time  could  not  do  this.     The  Christians  were  accu- 
sed by  the  heathens  of  atheism,    because  they    had  no   images      In 
the  fourth  century,  »vhen  the  church    began  to  decline  from  her  pu- 
rity, there  was  here  and  there  an  image    seen   in    the  church  ;  but 
Lpiphanius,  seeing  a  picture  of  Christ  in  a  church,  tore  it  in  pieces. 
Alter  this  a  certain  bishop  of  Nola  introduced  images  into  churches 
for  ornament  and  instruction  ;  but  they  were   not  yet   worshipped. 
W  hen  men  began  after  this  to  worship   images,   Serenus,  bishop  of 
Marseilles,  cast  them  out  of  the  church.     The  bishop  of  Home  com- 
mended him    for  watching  against  image-worship,   but  blamed  lum 
for  casting  them  out  of  the  church,  because,  as  he  said,  they   might 
serve  to  instruct  the  ignorant.      !n  the  eighth  century  there  were  se- 
\-ete  contests  in  favour  of  and  against  images.     When  John,  Patri- 
arch of  Constantinople,  a  Monothelite,  who  held  that  Christ  had  only 
one  will,  was  condemned  by  the  Synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the  year 
711,  the  Roman  bishop.  Leo  the  second,  caused  pictures  of  oil    the 
members  of  that  synod  to  be  hung  up  in  the    porch   of   St.    Peter. 
The  emperour  Leo  Isaurus  took  this  exceedingly  ill,  and  ordered  in 
the  year  726,  that  no  man  should  worship  any  image  made  by  hands, 
and  that  all  the  images  should  be  destroyed.     The  bishop  of  Home 
excommunicated  the  Empeiour  on  this  account ;  but  the  Fmpevour 
laughed  at  him,  and  said,  he  is  an  idolater,   and  is    himself   excom- 
municated.    Constantine  Copronynuis  succeeding  his  father,  as  Em- 
perour, was  not  less  zealous  against  the  images,  and  procured  in  the 
general  synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the   year  754,  that  the    worship- 
pers of  images  should  be  condemned,  as  idolaters  ;  but  the  Empress 
Irene,  who  was  sottishly   addicted  to   image-worship,   obtained  in  a 
Synod  at  Nice,  in  the  year  787,  that  the  images  should  be  restored, 
served  and  worshipped.     To  manifest  her  special   zeal  for  images, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—58.  25 J 

3he  caused  her  father-h-law  Constantine  Copronymiis  to  be  digged 
up,  burned,  and  his  ashes  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea.  She  was  so 
imbittered  against  her  son  aNo,  on  account  of  his  aversion  from  im- 
ages, that  she  caused  his  eyes  te  he  thrust  out,  and  afterwards  ordered 
him  to  be  slain.  But  Charles  the  great  set  himself  against  this  mad- 
ness, and  assembled  a  synod  at  Frankfort,  in  the  year  794,  in  which 
that  Nicene  synod  «as  condemned.  Nevertheless,  all  this  strug- 
gling against  the  images  did  not  reform  the  church  of  Rome,  she  ad- 
heres even  until  this  day  to  the  judgment  of  the  false  synod  of  Nice, 
the  members  of  which  doting  upon  the  images,  said,  k'  We  judge 
that  the  images  of  the  angels  and  saints  ought  to  be  worshipped. 
If  any  man  be  not  of  this  mind,  but  scrupulous  and  doubtful  concern- 
ing the  worship  of  the  venerable  images,  the  holy  synod  denounces  an 
anathema  against  him."  Therefore  she  appealed  in  the  assembly 
of  Trent  to  this  synod;  she  likewise  punctually  observes  the  decree 
to  worship  images.  Like  the  Armenians  in  the  fifth  century  she  rep- 
resents the  Holy  Trinity  by  images,  the  Father,  in  the  form  of  an  . 
old  man,  the  Son  like  a  young  man,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  like  a  dove. 
She  conducts  in  this  manner  also  toward  the  saints  ;  her  temples, 
cities  and  streets  are  full  of  the  images  of  the  saints  ;  are  they  men 
she  decks  them  like  worldlings  ;  are  they  women,  she  bedizens 
them,  as  if  they  were  of  the  most  wanton  sort,  and  she  acts  thus  es- 
pecially with  the  images  of  Mary  ;  they  kiss  the  images,  they  burn 
incense  to  them,  they  bow  themselves  down  to  them,  and  mutter 
their  prayers  before  them.  Yea,  this  new  Babylon,  like  the  old,  is 
"  a  land  of  graven  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon  their  idols,"  as 
the  Lord  speaks,  Jer.  1.  38. 

But  we  oppose  such  a  conduct  with  this  second  commandment, 
which  strictly  forbids  such  making  of  images,  bowing  of  ourselves 
to  them,  and  serving  of  them.  Hear  how  Moses  explains  it,  when 
he  saith  to  all  Israel,  Deut  iv.  15 — 18.  "  Take  ye  therefore  good 
heed  to  yourselves,  (for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  in  the  day 
that  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  Horeb,  out  of  the  fire)  lest  ye  cor- 
rupt yourselves,  and  make  yourselves  a  graven  image,  the  similitude 
of  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female,  the  likeness  of  any 
beast  that  is  on  the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  fiieth 
in  the  air,  the  likeness  of  any  thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground,  the 
likeness  of  any  fish  that  is  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth."  The 
Papists,  like  the  heathens,  "  professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  have 
become  fools,  since  they  have  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  an  image,  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and 
fourfooted  beasts,  and  creeping  things,"  Rom.  i.  22,  23.    How  can 


222      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  indeed  represent  that  purely  spiritual,  infinite  and  invisible  ] 
bv  images:     Can  he  be  expressed  by  the   image  i»f  »q  old  man,  of 
a  young  man,  and  of  a  dove  ?  no  :    "  to  whom   then   will   ye  liken 
God  ?  or  what  likeness  will   ye  compare  to  him  I"  so  we   ask  with 
the  prophet,  Isaiah  xl.  13.     "  Who.  or  what"   is  like  hjm  ?    None, 
according  to  Jcr.  x.  6.     And  although  there  were   v>  e.tiu:r   evil  in 
making   an  image  of  Gcd,  than  that  it  causcth  {.!>e  w  I 
to  form  a  mistaken   idea  of  Cot!,   and  unfits  him   for  coojtempl 
God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth,  it  ought  nevertheless  lobe  utterly  de 
ed.     It  doth  not  surely  help   the    Papists,   that  God  exhibited  suqh 
tokens  of  his  presence   sometimes,  Dan.   vii.  13,   Malt,   hi.   1,6,    17* 
But  where  have  we  either  a  command  of  God,  qrao  example  pi  the 
saints  to  warrant  a  delineating  of  God  after  those 

But  may  we  not  make  images  of  Christ  and  the  saints,  who  co;. 
versed  on  earth  in  bodies,  capable  of  being  represented  b) 
But  who  among  the  makers  of  images  hath   ever  se/  a   them  ?  who 
can  tell  us  that  the  images,    which  men  make  now  of  Christ  and  of 
his  saints,  are  like  them,  and  not  like  others  r  hath  any  one  informed 
thern,  that  Christ  was:  of  a.  middle  stature,  neither  too   tall  nor  too 
short,  of  a  fair  and  rudely  complexion,    and  that  his  hair  \.  as 
and  dangled  upon  his  shoulders  in  curls  ?  he  hath  never  seen  I 
but  hath  vainly  depicted  him  thus  in  his  own  brain..     If  it  were  even 
so,  that  the  makers  of  images   had  seen   him   and   his  saints, 
need  would  there  be  that  we   should   make  images  of  them  ?  ( 
not  God's  image  of  his  Son,   depictured  in  the  gospel  and  in  believ- 
ers to  suflice  us  ?    can  we  delineate  tic   saints   better  to  -ourselves 
than  by   imitating  their  virtues  ?    have  the  saints  ever   represente< 
oilier  saints  to  themselves  by  images  I     It   is  a   mere    fable,   that 
Christ,  when  going  to  Golgotha,   expressed  the  form  of  his  counte- 
nance in    the  handkerchief  of  Veronica,  (for  that   handkerchief  is 
shown    both  at  Rome  and  in  Spain.)     But  that  which   presses  the 
Papists  here,  is  that  they  will  worship  the  human   nature  of  Chi  is', 
and  the  saints,    which  we  have   refuted    before,    and  therefore  they 
imagine  that  they  ought  to  make    images  of  them,    that   they  maj 
worship  those  images  also. 

The  Papists  transgress  still  more  heinously  by  bowing  down  to 
hose  images,  and  serving  them,  yea,  worshipping  them.  "  We 
must  worship  and  serve  God  only,"  as  Jesus  commands,  Matt.  iv. 
10.  Do  the  images  know  our  wants  ?  can  they  help  us  ?  aie  they 
not  mere  lifeless  and  irrational  works  ?  can  they  make,  clothe,  or 
keep  themselves  from  being  spoiled  or  robbed  ?  shall  a  man  bow 
himself  i\.>;vn  to  what  his  fingers   have  made  ?    what  difference 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY-  Q.  96—98.  223 

there  then  be  between  the  imageworship  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
the  imageworship  of  Christians  ?  yea,  doih  not  the  worshipper  of 
images  m:ke  himself  like  his  images  ?  let  the  worshippers  of  ima- 
ges hear  how  they  are  derided,  Psalm  cxv.  4—8  4  The  idols  of 
the  nations  are  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands.  They 
have  mouths,  but  thejK  speak  not  ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see 
not  ;  they  have  ears,  but  th  y  hear  not;  noses  have  they,  but  they 
smell  not  ;  hands  have  they,  but  they  handle  not;  feet  have  they, 
but  they  walk  not  :  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat.  They 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in 
them  "  The  epistle  ascribed  to  Jeremiah,  among  the  apocryphal 
books,*  at  the  end  of  the  larger  bibles,  is  worthy  of  a  repeated  pe- 
rusal, that  we  may  see  the  vanity  of  image-worship  pourtrayed  in 
the  most  lively  colours. 

We    have  refuted  on  the   foregoing   Lord's  day,  (a)  the   opinion 
that  this  prohibition  of  imageworship  is  the  same  with  the  first  com- 
mandment, which  forbids  idolatry.     And  although  it   were  even  so, 
as  the  Romanists  assert   they  do  still  commit  idolatry  with  the  ima- 
ges, which  they  say  are  forbidden  in  this  commandment,     (b)  The 
Papists  manifest  their  folly,  when  they  say  that  this  relates  only   to 
the  Jews,  who  were  inclined  to  idolatry,  in  consequence  of  their  so- 
journing in  Egypt ;    doth    it  not  then   relate  to  the  Romanists  also, 
who   are  not  less  inclined  to    idolatry  than  the  Jews  were  ?  the  law, 
and  the  reasons  with  Which  it  is  enforced,  are  universal,  and  reach 
to  every  person,  who  is  subject  lo  God,  as  a  Lawgiver.  This  prohibi- 
tion flows  from  the  spiritual  nature  of  God,  which  cannot  be  depicted, 
and  it  pertains  thus  to  every    man  ;    and  therefore  Paul   proves 
against  the  heathens,  Actsxvii.  22,  29,  "  that  we  ought  not  to  think 
that  the  Godhead  is  like  gold,  or   silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and 
man's  device,  because  we  are  the    offspring  of  God."     Is  not  this 
argument  as  forcible  against  the  images  of  the   Papists,    as   against 
those  of  the    heathens  ?     Those   among  the  heathens,  who  followed 
their  natural    principles  wonld  not  suffer  any  images.     I  should  be 
too  prolix,  if  I  should  relate  with  others  what  many  ancient  writers 
of  the  heathens  say  of  these  things,  and  how  many  nations  worship- 
ped their  gods  without  images.     Or  hath   God  forbidden  only  idola- 
trous  images,    and    not   images  of  himself  and  of   his  saints  ?  but 
God  doth  not  except  any   kind  of  images :    "  Thou  shalt  not  make 

*  The  Apocryphal  books  are  placed  at  the  end  of  the  Dutch  bibles,  and  no? 
in  the  middle,  as  is  usual  in  the  English  bibles.  In  these  different  arrange 
ments  the  Dutch  have  consulted  dignity,  and  the  Enghs'a  method- 


224      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

any  image,  nor  any  likeness  "  saith  God.  What  are  idolatrous  ima- 
ges? are  they  not  images,  which  designate  God  and  his  creatures? 
and  are  not  the  popish  images  such  ?  (c)  They  cry  in  a  shameless 
manner,  We  do  not  worship  the  images,  but  those  whom  they  re- 
present. Who  can  believe  these  m;n,  who  engaged  in  the  council 
of  Trent  to  obey  the  council  of  Nice,  which  denounces  an  anathema 
against  every  one,  who  is  only  scrupulous  concerning  worshipping 
images  ?  do  they  not  honour  the  images  themselves,  why  then  do 
they  esteem  one  image  above  another,  although  it  represents  the 
same  saint  ?  for  they  bestow  greater  honour  upon  the  images  of 
Mary  at  Hall,  at  Montague,  and  at  Loretto,  than  upon  other  images 
oi  that  holy  virgin.  Let  it  be  allowed,  that  they  do  not  worship  the 
images;  but  do  they  not  bow  clown  to  them,  contrary  to  this  com- 
mand ?  They  say,  We  do  not  bow  down  in  order  to  honour  the 
images,  but  we  honour  and  serve  God  by  them.  In  this  manner 
might  the  Jews  also  have  excused  themselves  ;  for  they  intended  to 
honour  God  by  their  images  ;  Aaron  made  his  calf,  that  "  they  might 
hold  a  feast  to  the  Lord,"  Exod.  xxxii.  1 — 6.  Micha's  mother 
"  dedicated  her  silver  to  the  Lord,  to  make  an  image,"  Judges  xvii. 
3.  The  heathens  themselves  were  so  wise,  that  they  distinguished 
between  their  gods  and  the  images  of  their  gods.  The  F.phesians 
distinguished  also  between  "  the  goddess  Diana  and  her  image, 
which  fell  down  from  Jupiter,"  Acts  xix.  35.  "  Who  but  an  entire 
fool  can  believe  that  the  images  are  gods,"  said  the  heathen  in  Ar- 
nobius  (d)  It  is  no  better  what  the  Church  of  Rome  saith,  that 
under  the  old  testament  they  were  obliged  to  worship  the  ark  with 
its  cherubims,  because  the  Psalmist  saith,  Psalm  cxix.  5.  "  Exalt 
ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship  at  his  footstool."  But  they  were 
obliged  to  turn  themselves  toward  the  ark,  because  God  manifested 
himself  especially  present  there,  but  not  to  worship  the  ark.  Must 
we  say  that  Jesus  worshipped  the  heavens,  because,  when  he  pray- 
ed, he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  war!  heaven  ?  John  xvii  1.  Do  the  Pa- 
pists say  that  we  must  not  worship  the  images,  but  God  who  mani- 
festeth  himself  in  them,  we  answer,  where  doth  this  appear?  doth 
God  appear  upon  the  images,  as  he  did  formerly  upon  the  ark  in  ft 
cloud  ?  God  hath  removed  the  ark  ;  shall  we  then  now  set  up  ima- 
ges in  the  stead  of  it,  contrary  to  the  command  of  God  ?  We  omit 
other  cloaks  of  this  shame,  which  uncloaks  itself. 

M  But  may  we  not  tolerate  images  as  books  of  the  laity,"  that  is, 
of  the  common  people  ?  When  they  introduced  images  into  the 
churches  in  ancient  times,  they  did  not  at  first  worship  the  images, 
but  intended  that  they  should  serve  for  ornaments,  to  allure  the  hea 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  225 

thens,  who  were  extravagantly  fond  of  images  ;  and  also  for  instruct- 
ing the  ignorant  The  Lutherans  alsj  place  images  in  their  church- 
es for  this  purpose.  While  Martin  Luther  lay  concealed  in  the  castle 
of  Wirtemberg,  from  the  wiles  of  the  Papists,  Andrew  Carlstadt, 
assisted  by  others,  cast  the  images  out  of  the  Church  of  Wirtem- 
berg. Luther  heaving  of  this,  took  it  exceedingly  ill,  returned  to 
Wirtemberg,  and  restored  the  images,  saying  that  they  could  serve 
to  instruct  the  the  ignorant.  But  the  instructor  saith  wisely,  "  We 
must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God,  who  will  not  have  his  peo- 
ple taught  by  dumb  images,"  8cc.  For,  (a)  if  images  were  neces- 
sary and  profitable  to  instruct  in  this  manner,  the  Lord  would  not 
have  prohibited  them  to  us.  Therefore  they  who  desire  to  intro- 
duce images  for  this  purpose,  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  The 
Lord  God  directs  us  to  his  word  to  instruct  his  people :  we  must 
betake  ourselves  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,"  according  to 
the  divine  command,  Isaiah  viii.  20.  "  The  scriptures"  alone  "can 
make  us  wise  to  salvation,  "  2  Tim.  iii.  15.  By  the  lively  preach- 
ing of  the  word  of  God  "Jesus  Christ  is  depictured  before  our 
eyes,"*  as  Paul  speaks,  Gal.  iii.  1.  (b)  Images  are  unable  to  teach, 
they  are  dumb,  "  they  have  indeed  mouths,  bu  they  do  not  speak, 
neither  do  they  utter  any  sound  through  their  throat,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  from  Psalm  cxv.  5,  7.  If  we  receive  no  oral  instruc- 
tion, what  will  the  image  teach  us  by  itself  ?  it  will  mislead  us 
and  destroy  the  spirituality  of  our  worship.  "  The  stock,"  saith 
the  prophet,  is  a  doctrine  of  vanities,"  Jer.  x.  8.  "  The  molten 
image  is  a  teacher  of  lies,"  Hab.  ii  18,  and  "  the  idols  speak  vani- 
ty," Zech  x.  2.  There  were  indeed  images  of  Cherubims  in  the 
tabernacle  and  temple,  but  they  were  appointed  for  types  under  the 
old  testament,  and  are  now  abolished  :  those  images  were  also  re- 
moved from  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  were  thus  not  for  the  in- 
struction of  the  laity, 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  we  ought  also  to  condemn  the  obso- 
lete opinion  of  the  Anthropomorphites,  who  ascribed  a  human  body 
to  God.  Neither  will  I  attempt  to  refute  the  will  worship  of  the  Pa- 
pists, who  pretend  to  serve  God  according  to  their  own  imaginations, 
or  those  of  others  :  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  already  on  the 
thirty-third  Lord's  day.  We  will  rather  treat  of  the  more  secret 
vices,  which  are  contrary  to  this  commandment,  that  we  may  have 
a  fuller  discovery  of  our  deformity.  "  The  law  is  surely  spiritual," 
according  to  Rom.  vii.  14.     Therefore  this  commandment  without 

•   This  is  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 
Vol.  n.  2   D 


226      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

doubt,  forbids  a  want  of  spirituality  in  our  religious  worship.  For 
instance,  (a)  forming  a  corporeal  idea  of  God,  when  we  pray, 
(b)  li  vehemently  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  perfect  conception  and 
idea  of  God  :  we  "  cannot  surely  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection," 
Job  xi.  7,  8,  9.  (c)  Entertaining  a  different  notion  of  God  from 
what  he  hath  revealed  in  his  word.  The  sinner  itnagmeth  that  God 
is  like  himself,  md  that  he  will  forget  and  forgive  his  sins,  as  he 
himself  forgives  them  ;  but  the  Lord  will  punish  him,  as  we  see. 
Psalm  I.  21,  22.  The  people  of  God  imagine  that  tbeir  affliction, 
"their  way  is  hidden  from  the  Lord,  end  their  judgment  passed  over 
from  t'.eir  God."  l»ut  the  imag-.  of  God,  and  the  pattern  of  his 
•word  teacheth  otherwise,  Isaiah  xl  27,28.  (d)  It  must  also  be 
reckoned  a  sin  contrary  to  this  commandment,  to  be  dull,  sluggish, 
and  heartless  in  the  worship  of  God,  to  be  no  more  moved,  than  if 
we  were  images  before  God  :  "  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our 
months,  and  honour  him  with  our  lips,  but  remove  our  hearts  far 
from  him,"  with  the  Jews,  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  14.  (e)  We  may  add 
also  following  evil  examples  ;  "  we  may  not  follow  a  multitude  to 
do  evil ;"  thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  2. 

Wherever  we  find  any  vice  forbidden,  there  we  hare  also  a  com- 
mandment, winch  enjoins  the  contrary  virtues.  It  is  required  in  this 
command,  that  they  who  love  God  should  keep  his  commands,  as 
he  speaks  in  the  reasons,  with  which  he  enforceth  this  command. 
Therefore  (a)  the  word  of  God  must  be  our  pattern  and  rule  in  all 
things  :  we  must  "  hold  last  the  form  of  sound  words,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  rim.  i.  13  (b)  Our  worship  ought  also  to  be  reason- 
able, spiritual  and  without  images,  "in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  that 
we  may  serve  the  Lord  as  a  spirit,  according  to  his  word,  John  iv. 
24.  (c)  May  we  not  serve  God  by  images,  then  he  only  must  be 
the  pattern  of  our  sanctincation  :  therefore  he  saith  to  the  children 
of  Israel)  Lev.  xix.  2.  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God 
am  holy."  He  hath  indeed  exhibited  his  image  to  us  in  his  com- 
mandments, and  throughout  his  whole  word. 

3.  This  commandment  being  so  broad,  it  ought  not  to  be  censur- 
ed as  imperfect.  The  Socinians  say  that  the  second  commandment 
was  imperfect ;  but  that  Christ,  the  new  Lawgiver,  hath  perfected 
and  enlarged  it.  And  what  hath  Christ  forsooth  added  to  it,  that 
was  not  forbidden  before  ?  they  say,  fleeing  from  idols,  avoiding  pla- 
ces where  they  are,  and  caring  things  sacrificed  to  idols.  But  the 
Lord  commanded  by  Moses,  that  they  should  avoid  even  the  names 
of  idols,  E:;od.  xxiii.  13,  that  Israel  should  burn  the  idols  with  fire, 
that  they  should  not  cov'et  their  silver  nor  gold,  and  that  they  shouW 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  227 

destroy  all  the  places,  where  they  were  formerly  worshipped.  See 
Deut  vii  25,  26.  xii.  2,  3.  It  .vas  sinful  in  Israel  to  tat  things, 
that  were  sacrificed  to  idols,  "  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi. 
23.  It  was  therefore  forbidden  by  God  through;  closes,  and  indeed 
in  this  commandment. 

II.   Although  this  commandment  is    worthy,  on  its  own  account, 
to  be  approved  and  observed,  it  nevertheless  pleases  the  Lord  to  en- 
force it  by  powerful  motives  ;  for  he  doth  not  only  Say,   that  he  wis 
"  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,"  on  which  account  they  were  obliged 
to  observe  his  whole  law,  as  ha  h  been  shown  on  the  preface  oi    the 
Lord  to  the  law,  in  the   forme.   Lord's  day  ;  but    he   adds   also  two 
reasons  to  move  them  to  observe  this  command,     (1)  "that  tie  is  a 
jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of   the  fathers   upon    the   children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  him."     Tie 
Lord,   entering   into  a  covenant   with   his  people    consii  ers   ft   as  a 
marriage  covenant,  by  which  he  was,  as  it  were,  the  husb  nd  of   Is- 
rael, and  Israel,   as  it  were,  the  wife   of  the    Lord  :    if  no*    Israel 
should  cleave  in  luve  to  the  images,  they  would  then,  like  an  adulte- 
rous wife,  hate  the  Lord  their  husband  ;  therefore  worshipping  ima- 
ges is  often    represented   to  us  as    spiri:ual    whoredom  ;    which  the 
Lord,   inflamed  with    vehement  jealou -y,    would    revenge,  as  a  i>"S- 
band  awngeth  himself  on  a.  count  of  the  adulteiy  of  his  wife.    Yea, 
with  su  h  severity  would  God  punish  this  abomination,  that  he  would 
visit  the  iniquity  of    the    fathers  upon  the  children,    unto  the  third 
and  fourth  generation.     We   know   how  the  children  fared   in  the 
time  of  the  flood,  how  Eli's  and  Jeroboam's  posterity  fared;  which 
was  surely  not  unrighteous  ;  for  since  children  are   not  only  punish- 
able on  their  own  account,  but  were  also  admitted  with  their  parents 
into  that  covenant,  therefore  they  were  considered   by  the   Lord,   as 
having  broken  that  covenant,  with  their  parents,  when  their  parents 
were  guilty  of  worshipping  images,   and  were  become  thus  children 
of  whoredom.      But  although  God   executes  his  vengeance  with  se- 
verity,  he  nevertheless  displays  his  mercy  more  than  his  severity. 
The  justice  of  God  is  as  natural  to  him  as  his  mercy  :  but  he  choos- 
es to   manifest  his  mercy  rather   than  his  justice  :  for  he  doth  not 
always  execute  his  justice  upon  every  sinner,  and  he  saith  that  '*  the 
son  shall  not  always  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,"  Ezek.  xviii.  20. 
Therefore  (a)  "  he  also  showeth  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that 
love  him,   and  keep  his  commandments."     The    J-  wish   nation  is 
still  beloved  for  the  sake  of  their  fathers  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ; 
■who  loved  the  Lord,  and  kept  his  commandments,  aid  they  will  yet 
be   converted  to  the   Lord,   in  consequence  of  his  mercy,  as  Paul 


228      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

teacheth,  Rom.  xi.  24—  28.  And  so  the  Lord  promiseth  that  he 
will  show  favour  to  the  offspring  of  all  who  love  him.  Therefore 
as  parents  do  not  desire  that  their  children  should  suffer  the  grie- 
vous anger  of  God,  but  rather  that  they  should  experience  his  loving- 
kindness,  they  ought  to  be  persuaded  lo  abstain  from  breaking  his 
commandments,  and  th.s  commandment  in  particular,  and  to  see  that 
they  keep  it. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  the  attachment  of  Babylon  to  images,  do  we 
not  then  see,  hearers,  that  our  fathers  had  weighty  reasons  for  leav- 
ing her  ?  Rome,  formerly  a  faithful  city,  was  indeed  become  a  har- 
lot. The  church  of  Rome,  that  adulterous  woman,  admitted  stran- 
gers instead  of  her  husband.  Justly  is  she  described,  Rev.  xvii.  1, 
2,  5,  as  "  the  great  whore,  the  mother  of  whoredoms,  who  made 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication." 
The  Jews,  through  their  attachment  to  images,  apostatized  to  hea- 
thenism :  but  the  Papists  exceed  the  heathens  and  Jews  in  worship- 
ping images.  The  Lord  God  hath  chastised  that  church  severely 
by  strange  nations,  and  especially  by  the  Turks,  for  her  doting  on 
images  ;  but  "  she  hath  not  repented  of  the  works  of  her  hands, 
that  she  should  not  worship  devils,  and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and 
brass,  and  stone,  and  of  wood  :  which  neither  can  see  nor  hear,  nor 
walk,"  as  John  foretold,  Rev,  ix.  14 — 20.  How  could  the  Irueborn 
children  of  God  endure  this  ?  for  their  flesh  abhorred  this  wicked- 
ness, when  they  saw  it,  and  when  they  were  obliged  to  betake  them- 
selves to  a  man  on  a  cross,  instead  of  the  crucified  Christ  and  his 
Spirit  ;  and  they  were  besides  this  murdered  also,  because  they 
would  not  bow  their  knees  to  the  abominable  images.  Therefore 
they  justly  pleaded  with  their  mother,  because  she  was  not  the  wife 
of  the  Lord,  nor  he  her  husband ;  and  they  did  not  forsake  her, 
without  a  reason,  since  she  was  incorrigible.  May  the  Lord  pre- 
serve us  from  returning  to  her  impure  bosom  again. 

It  is  time,  hearers,  to  come  to  ourselves.  Was  this  command, 
with  its  threatenings  and  promises,  given  to  Israel  only,  and  not  to 
us  also?  But  have  ye  also  kept  it  ?  Yea,  will  some  of  you  think, 
we  have  never  bowed  our  knees  to  the  images  of  Babylon  :  but  doth 
God  forbid  nothing  but  making  images,  bowing  ourselves  to  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  229 

and  serving  them  ?    surely  yes :    he   forbids  here  also  the  spiritual 
imagetnaking,   and   the  inward   imageworship.     (a)  When  yc  pray 
to  God,  what  do  ye  make  of  him  ?  what  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves, 
when  ye  address  him  ?    nothing   at  all  ?    do   ye  only  mutter  a  few 
words  t  or  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves  a  vast,   extended   body,   that 
fills  the  universe  ?     How    many  are   there  who   often,  yea,   usually 
propose  to  themselves,  next  to  their  teraphims,  household  gods,  or 
pictures,  an  image  of  a  man  on  a  cross,  if  not  of  an  aged  father,  a 
young  son,  and  a  dove,  that  they  may  mumble  a  few  words  to  those 
images  !     (b)  If  ye  do    endeavour   to   know  God,   and  to  discover 
what  he  is,  do  ye  then  give  heed  only  to  what  he  reveals  concerning 
himself  in  his  word,  and  believe  it  with  simplicity  of  heart,  because 
he  testifieth  it?  it  is  then  well      But  how  often   do   men  endeavour 
to  intrude   with  their  fleshly  understandings  into  the   unsearchable 
mysteries  of  God,  to  inquire   how   he  can  be  simple,   and  yet   just, 
merciful  and  triune  ;  how  he  hath  elected  one,  and  rejected  others  ■ 
how  he   can    conclude  all  men   under   the  disobedience   of  Adam. 
When  they  cannot  see  into  these  things,  nor  reconcile  them  to  their 
corrupt  ideas,    they  imagine  evil  against  the  Lord,  they  deny  the 
truth,  and  join  themselves  to  the  enemies  of  it,  if  not  in  profession 
at  least  in  heart,     (e)  Come,  impenitent  sinner,  what  thinkest  thou 
or  what  dost  thou  imagine  concerning  the  Lord,  with  respect  to  thy- 
self ?  will  he  indeed  mark  thy  sins  strictly,  and   punish  them  so  se- 
verely, as  he  saith  in  his  word  ?  thou  thinkest,  no,  God  is  good  and 
merciful :  I  hope  that  he  will  not  notice  my  sins  so  particularly.     I 
trust  that  he  hath  forgiven  them  already  ;  I  am  not  concerned  ahout" 
it,  he  blesses  me,  and  with  careless  Judah,  Jer.  ii.  35,  thou   sayest 
"Surely  I  am    innocent;    for  his  anger  is  turned   away   from  me." 
Thou  dost  not  doubt   but  that  thou  wilt  be  saved.     Thou   believest 
that  God  would    not   otherwise  be  merciful,   and   that  Christ    would 
have  died  in  vain.     Therefore  God,   according  to  thine  imagination, 
which  thou  formest  of  him,  will  deny  his  justice,  and  will  revoke  all 
his   threatnings   against  thee.     Behold  what  an  abominable    imao-e 
thou  makest  to  thyself  of  God,  thou  bowest  down  thyself  to  it,  and 
servest  it.     (d)  Further  my  friends,  when  ye  are  about  to  serve  God 
after  your  manner,  to  pray  to   him,  to  read  and  hear  his  word,  how 
are  ye  then  disposed  ?     "  Is  not  God  only  near  in  your  mouths,  and 
far  from  your  reins  ?"    as  the  prophet  speaks  of  his   countrymen, 
Jer.  xii.  2.     Do  ye  not  come  before  his  face,  like  immoveable  stocks 
and  stones  ?     Men  may  see  in  you,  when  ye  attend  upon  the   public 
worship,  that  ye  are  as  inattentive,  and  as  unaffected,  as  the  popish 
images,  which  are  more  in  the  church  than  ye  are.     The  looks  of 


J30       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

your  countenances  testify  against  you.  (e)  And  what  is  your  rule 
and  pattern,  which  ye  propose  to  yourselves,  in  order  to  direct  ycuv 
goings?  is  it  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  his  image  expressed  there- 
in, and  in  his  saints?  Verily,  the  most  of  you  know  nothing  of 
this :  comparing  themselves  with  themselves,  they  imagine  that 
they  know  best  what  they  ought  to  do  :  they  propose  the  honours, 
the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  to  themselves,  as  alluring 
images,  and  they  govern  themselves  by  those  in  all  that  they  do,  and 
forbear. 

Ye  have  therefore  sinned  in  a  dreadful  manner  against  this  com- 
mandment. Are  ye  not  Papists  by  profession,  ye  are  such  in  your 
hearts,  and  in  your  conversation.  And  what  restrains  you  fi  om  serving 
the  Romish  images?  Is  it  the  commandment  of  God.  his  threaten- 
ing and  promises?  Is  it  the  fear  of  God  ?  no  ;  but  because  ye  have 
no  opportunity  for  it,  and  have  been  born  and  educated  among  re- 
formed Christians.  If  your  parents,  friends  and  preachers  should 
return,  either  willingly,  or  compelled  by  persecution,  to  the  Romish 
Egypt,  ye  would  soon  follow  their  examples.  Your  disposition  is 
therefore  abominable  ;  like  the  worshippers  of  images  ye  are  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  image,  and  your  "  understanding  is  darkened,  and 
ye  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is 
in  you.  and  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,"  Eph.  iv.  18.  Ye  hate  tbe 
Lord,  and  are  exceedingly  guilty  before  him.  If  ye  remain  as  ye 
are,  ye  cannot  expect  any  mercy,  but  that  his  anger  and  jealousy 
will  be  kind'ed  against  you  :  "  As  a  dream,  when  one  awaketh,  so 
when  he  awaketh.  he  will  despise  your  image,"  us  Asaph  expect- 
ed, Psalm  lxxiii.  20. 

But  neither  are  ye,  O  believers,  though  ye  are  newformed  after 
the  image  of  God,  altogether  innocent.  How  often  do  those  spiritu- 
al images  possess  you.  and  hinder  you  in  your  contemplations,  and 
in  your  worship  of  God,  as  a  being  who  is  altogether  spiritual  ?  yea, 
do  they  not  destroy  the  purity  and  spirituality  of  your  devotions  ? 
and  do  they  not  leave  only  a  few  barren,  lifeless  and  sapless  exer- 
cises ? 

Whoever  ye  arc,  whether  lovers  or  haters  of  the  Lord,  have  ye 
any  desire  to  regulate  yourselves  according  to  this  commandment : 

1.  See  then  your  shameful  doting  upon  images,  and  your  trans- 
gressions against  the  Lord.  Examine  yourselves  by  what  we  h.r.c 
just  now  said,  in  order  to  discover  to  you  your  misconduct,  and  your 
spiritual  imageuorship  :  put  your  hands  into  your  bosoms,  and  sec 
whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous  :  your  recovery  must  begin 
here,  they  who  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,   but    they   \v!:0    are 


— $8.  281 

sick.  Shut  not  your  eyes  then  and  flatter  not  yourselves  with  Ju» 
dah,  who  was  sottishly  addicted  to  images,  as  it  ye  were  innocent. 
Hear  the  Lord  say  to  every  one  of  you  also,  as  he  said  to  that  people 
Jer.  ii.  23.  "  How  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not 
gone  after  Baalim  ?  see  thy  way  in  the  valley,  know  what  thou  hast 
done  :  thou  art  a  swift  dromedary,  traversing  her  ways,"  Jer.  ii.  23* 
2  But  will  it  suffice  to  see  and  know  your  tranigiessions  in  a 
slight  manner  ?  no,  but  ye  must  be  ashamed  of  them,  and  must 
humble  yourselves  before  the  Lord.  What  is  more  shameful,  what 
provokes  the  Loid  more  to  anger  and  jealousy,  and  what  ought  to 
fill  a  person  with  shame  more  than  this  sin  ?  The  idolatrous  image 
is  emphatically  called  "Shame,"  Jer.  iii.  24,  xi.  13.  liosea  ix.  10. 
Was  it  not  so  called,  because  the  people  of  the  Lord  ought  to  be 
ashamed  of  their  worshipping  of  images  ?  Therefore  stand  still 
awhile  by  these  sins  of  yours,  and  behold  them,  until  ye  blush  for 
shame  of  them  before  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord's  returning  people,  be- 
moaning themselves  on  account  of  their  worshipping  of  images, 
said  before  the  Load,  Jer.  iii.  25,  "  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  and 
our  confusion  covereth  us  ;  for  we  have  'sinned  against  the  Lord  our 
God,  we  and  our  fathers  from  our  youth  even  unto  this  day,  and 
have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God." 

3.  Flee  unto  Christ,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  to  obtain  par- 
don for  this  iniquity  :  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  and  so  also  of 
this  commandment,  "  to  every  one  who  believeth,"'  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  x.  4.  By  your  transgressions  of  this  commandment  ye  have 
rendered  yourselves  guilty,  and  have  provoked  the  Lord  to  jealousy 
against  you,  that  he  should  visit  your  iniquities  upon  you.  Will  ye 
not  now  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  this  guilt,  and  to  be  recon- 
ciled to  God  ?  and  how  shall  ye  obtain  reconciliation?  He  only, 
who  is  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his 
person,  hath  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  Heb.  i.  3.  Hee  then 
every  one  of  you  to  him,  "  lay  hold  on  him,  and  make  your  peace 
with  God,"  as  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxvii.  5. 

4.  Be  earnestly  desirous,  that  the  Lord  would  imprint  his  image 
upon  you.  Bring  your  hearts  unto  him,  that  he  may  express  his 
image,  the  transcript  of  his  law,  in  you.  The  zeal  of  faithful  preach- 
ers tends  to  this,  with  Paul  they  "travail  in  birth,  till  Christ  be 
formed  in  you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  Lo'.k  then  much  at  the  Lord,  and  at 
his  image,  that  his  beams  may  irradiate  you,  and  may  cause  you  to 
shine  by  his  glory.  See  how  this  happened  to  Moses,  Lzod.  xxxiv, 
29,  30.  Paul  having  respect  to  this  case,  saith  2  Cor.  iii.  IS,  "  We 
all  with  open    face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  ths   Lord, 


232     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED- 

are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Yea,  in  all  your  conversation  "be  ye  fol- 
lowers of  God,  as  dear  children,"  Eph.  v.  1. 

5.  Regulate  all  your  conceptions  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  ways  by 
his  image  expressed  in  his  word.  Whatever  ye  think,  judge,  or  say 
of  him,  if  it  agree  not  with  his  word,  ye  must  reject  it  as  hurtful, 
yea,  as  reproachful  to  the  Lord.  Beware  in  all  your  approaches  to 
him  of  bouily  and  excessive  exertions,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of 
him  :  ye  are  too  contracted  to  comprehend  many  great  things  of 
him.  Even  when  the  Lord  sheds  much  light  into  the  soul,  she  still 
"  sees  only  the  utmost  ends  of  his  ways,  and  hears  only  a  small  por- 
tion of  him  ;  who  then  can  understand  the  thunder  of  his  power?" 
Job  xxxvi.  14.  When  "  the  Lord  beset  David  in  all  that  he  did," 
he  was  still  obliged  to  cry  out,  "  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful 
for  me  ;  it  is  too  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it,"  Psalm  exxxix.  6. 
To  exert  ourselves,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of  God,  deprives  our 
souls  of  their  vigour,  and  renders  our  understandings  dull.  It  is 
best  to  approach  unto  God  in  a  sober  manner,  with  a  belief  of  his 
omnipresence,  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  goodness  ;  and  there- 
fore Paul  saith,  Heb.  xi.  6,  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe 
that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
him." 

6.  Seek  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  to  perform  all 
your  works  by  him  ;  for  without  him  both  we  and  all  that  we  do  is 
like  an  image  without  spirit.  "  Be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  saith 
Paul,  Eph.  v.  18.  "  We  must  live  and  walk  in  the  Spirit,"  Gal.  v. 
16,  25.  We  must  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  be  led,  cry 
Abba,  Father,  aud  assure  ourselves  by  him,"  Rom.  viii.  13 — 16.  It 
therefore  behooves  you  to  pray  earnestly  with  David  for  the  Spirit, 
Psalm  cxhii.  10,  "  Teach  me  lo  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God  : 
let  thy  good  Spirit  lead  me  in  the  hnd  of  uprightness  "  Let  it  not 
however  satisfy  you,  that  the  Lord  hath  favoured  you  with  his  Spirit, 
but  be  earnestly  desirous  that  the  church  also  may  be  filled  with 
him,  agreeably  to  the  representation  of  the  Spirit  in  Ezekiel's  vision 
of  the  waters,  which  rose  to  a  great  height,  Lzek.  xlviii.  1  — 10.  For 
when  the  Spirit  departs  from  the  church,  she  is  filled  with  images. 

7.  Let  every  one  of  you  manifest  his  aversion  from  the  Popish 
images,  and  let  the  magistrates  destroy  them.  We  ought  all,  and 
each  of  us  in  his  station  to  act  the  same  part  toward  the  images 
which  we  have  said  we  ou.^ht  toad  toward  the  Popish  mass. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  soul,  who  seeks  to  love  the  Lord  and  t» 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  233 

keep  his  command  men  s  may  assure  herself  that  he  will  show  mer- 
cy to  her  and  to  her  seed  ;  '•  Jesus  and  his  Father  will  love  her,  will 
manifest  themselves  to  her,  and  make  their  abode  with  her,"  as  he 
promiseth,  John  xiv.  21.  23.  He  will  be  jealous,  not  against  her, 
but  for  her,  to  the  destruction  of  her  enemies;  for  "thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion  with  a  great 
jealousy.  And  I  am  very  sorely  displeased  with  the  heathen  that 
are  at  ease,"  Zech  i.  14  15.  Yea,  the  Lord  will  adorn  t1  ose  who 
love  him  with  his  beauty,  that  he  may  glorify  them  ;  and  they  may 
with  an  elevated  mind,  like  David,  Psalm  xvii.  15,  say  with  confi- 
dence, "  I  will  behoid  thy  face  in  righteousness  :  1  shall  be  satisfied; 
*^hen  I  awake,  with  thv  likeness."     Amen, 


Vol.  a*  U  fc 


(  234  ; 


EXPLANATION 


OF  THE 


THIRD  COMMANDMENT. 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exodus  xx.  7.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God  in  vain :  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain. 

Question  99.     What  is  required  in  the  third  command  ? 

Answer.  That  we,  not  only  by  cursing  or  perjury,  but  also  by 
rash  swearing,  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God  ;  nor  by 
silence  or  connivance  be  partakers  of  these  horrible  sins  in  others  ; 
and  briefly,  that  we  use  the  name  of  God  no  otherwise,  than  with 
fear  and  reverence,  so  that  he  may  be  rightly  confessed  and  worship- 
ped by  us,  and  glorified  in  all  our  words  and  works.

Q.  97.  Are  images  then  not  at  all  to  be  mtde  ? 

A.  God  neither  can,  nor  may  be  represented  by  any  means  ;  but 
as  to  creatures,  though  they  may  be  repreesnted,  yet  God  forbids  to 
make,  or  have  any  resemblance  of  them,  either  in  order  to  worship 
themj  or  to  serve  God  by  them. 


216  XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98. 

Q.  98.  Bui  may  not  images  be  tolerated  in  the  churches,  as  books  %f 
the  laity  ? 

A.  No ;  for  we  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  who  will 
have  his  people  taught,  not  by  dumb  images,  but  by  the  lively  preach- 
ine  of  his  word. 


X  r  is  not  so  much  the  matter,  as  the  manner  and  good  quality  <5f  a 
work)  that  renders  it  good.  Though  a  building  were  constructed  of 
polished  stones  and  of  cedar  Wood,  it  would  nevertheless  be  neither 
comely  nor  convenient,  if  the  materials  were  not  properly  joined  to 
gether,  and  if  the  apartments  were  not  well  adapted  to  their  iise. 
Although  the  matter  of  a  garment  were  ever  so  costly,  )ca,  such  as 
would  befit  a  king,  it.  would  notwithstanding  be  unseemly  and  disa- 
greeable, if  it  were  disproportioned  to  the  body.  The  warlike  apparel 
of  Saul  was  such  as  became  a  king,  but  David  rejected  it,  because  it 
was  not  proportioned  to  his  body,  and  he  was  not  used  to  it,  1  Sam. 
xvii.  38,  39.  It  is  thus  likewise  with  all  our  religious  performances. 
It  is  not  so  much  the  mutter  of  our  actions,  as  the  manner  and  the 
requisite  qualifications  of  them,  that  renders  them  good.  The  cere- 
monies of  fisting  and  of  sacrifices  were  commanded:  but  because 
the  Lord's  people  did  not  perform  them  in  a  right  manner,  he  dis- 
approved of  them,  as  abominations.  See  Isaiah  i.  10 — 15  lviii. 
1  — 5,  The  Lord  saith,  Isaiah  lxvi.  3.  "  He  that  killeth  an  ox  is  as 
if  he  slew  a  man  :  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's 
neck  :  he  that  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered  swine's  flesh  : 
he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol."  The  Lord  is 
indeed  a  God,  who  observes  strictly  he  looks  not  only  at  actions, 
but  also  at  the  qualities  of  actions';  we  must  hear  the  word  of 
God,  but  we  must  also  "take  heed  how  we  hear,"  as  Jesus  ad- 
monisheth,  Luke  viii.  18.  The  great  Lawgiver  did  not  therefore 
deem  it  sufficient  to  require  of  his  people  in  the  first  command- 
ment,  that  they  should  honour  and  worship  him  alone  as  God, 
in  opposition  to  all  idols ;  btit  he  requires  also  in  the  second  com- 
m  and  men  t,  that  they  should  do  this  in  a  right  manner,  spiritually, 
and  not  only  with  the  body  ;  according  to  his  prescript,  and  not  just 
as  they  saw  lit ;  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  not  by  images,  when  he 
saith,  "Thou  shair,  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any 
likeness." 

The  Lord  Cou.  in  order  to  discover  his  jealousy  against  images. 
iorbids  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  2 IF 

I.  Most  circumstantially,  and, 

II.  He  assigns  exceedingly  weighty  reasons  to  restrain  all  men 
from  them. 

I.  It  is  necessary,  1,  to  explain  what  is  forbidden  here.  2,  to  in- 
quire concerning  what  is  commanded,  and,  3,  to  show  that  this 
second  commandment  is  not  defective,  but  perfect. 

1.  God  forbids  making  and  honouring  an  image  and  likeness. 
Pezel  signifies  a  graven  image,  and  themouna-  a  likeness  which  rep- 
resents something  that  exists  ;  others  have  explained  largely  enough, 
in  what  manner  these  words  have  been  translated  by  the  Gretks.  It 
will  suffice  us  to  say,  that  they  denote  in  this  commandment  ima- 
ges and  likenesses  of  every  kind,  "  whether  graven,  or  molten,  or 
painted,  or  woven,  or  embroidered.  The  Lawgiver  speaks  not  there- 
fore of"  his  own  image  and  likeness,  after  which  he  made  man," 
Gen.  i,  26,  but  of  an  image  and  likeness,  meaner  than  the  man  him- 
self, made  by  himself,  and  thus  not  worthy  that  the  maker  of  it 
should  bow  down  himself  to  it.  The  Papists,  not  knowing  how  to 
excuse  their  forbidden  imageworship,  say  that  we  must  understand  by 
image  and  likeness  here,  an  image  of  an  idol,  which  was  contrived 
indeed  by  the  heathens,  but  exists  nowhere,  and  is  thus  an  image  of 
a  falsehood,  because  the  apostle  saith,  1  Cor.  viii.  4.  "  We  know 
that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  But  to  be  nothing  denotes 
here  that  an  idol  is  not  worthy,  that  we  should  ascribe  any  divinity 
to  it ;  and  therefore  the  idols  are  called  elilim,  <*  nothings,"  or  "  not 
gods."  The  divine  command  speaks  of  images  and  likenesses, 
which  represent  "  that  which  is  in  heaven  above,"  as  the  sun,  moon, 
stars  and  birds  ;  ll  that  which  is  in  the  earth  beneath,"  as  men,  beast* 
and  plants  ;  and  "  that  which  is  in  the  waters  under  the  earth,"  as 
brooks,  streams,  rivers,  fishes  and  seamonsters. 

The  God  of  Israel  forbids  making  images  and  likenesses  of  these 
things.  The  instructor  asks  with  good  reason,  "  Are  images  then 
not  at  all  to  be  made  ?"  Must  we  justify  the  followers  of  Mahomet, 
who  proscribe  entirely  the  art  of  making  images  ?  shall  we  utterly 
abolish  the  civil  use  of  images,  as  ornaments  of  houses,  cities  and 
coins?  If  any  should  be  so  unreasonable,  as  to  censure  Solomon 
for  adorning  his  throne  with  images  of  lions,  he  will  certainly  not  dis- 
approve of  the  conduct  of  the  Lord,  that  he  taught  Bezaleel  by  his 
Spirit  "  to  cut  stones,  and  carve  timber  in  a  curious  manner,"  Exod. 
xxxj.  i — 5.  When  therefore  the  Lawgiver  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
make  any  image  or  likeness,  he  speaks  of  images,  by  which  men  en- 
deavour to  represent  him  in  particular ;  for  so  this  prohibition  is 
cxpluned,  as  we  will  show  presently  from  Deut.  ir.  15 — 18.  God 
Vol.  ii.  2  C 


218     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

forbids  also  every  other  kind  of  images,  with  respect  to  any  religious 
vise  or  them,  The  heathens  and  Jews  were  too  wise  to  think 
that  all  their  images  represented  God  :  they  made  images  of  crea- 
tures also,  in  older  to  honour  God  by  them  :  therefore  the  Lord  for- 
bids also  "  bowing  ourselves  down  to  them,  and  serving  them." 
The  Hebrew  word  Schachah  signifies  an  outward  downbowing  of  the 
body,  either  with  the  head,  or  with  the  knees,  or  with  the  whole 
body  to  the  earth.  The  Greek  translators  render  this  word  by 
proskunein,  to  reverence,  as  the  idolaters  reverenced  their  images 
and  gods,  sometimes  even  by  kissing  them  ;  for  tiny  kissed  either 
the  images  themselves,  or  they  kissed  their  hands  in  honour  of  their 
gods,  whom  they  could  not  reach.  See  Job.  xxxi.  26,  27.  The 
other  word  gnabad,  to  serve,  is  translated  by  the  seventy  laircnti-:, 
and  they  translate  it  elsewhere  doulenein.  There  is  not  therefore  so 
great  a  difference  between  the  service  of  lalreia  and  dowleia,  as  the 
Papists  imagine.  We  have  spoken  more  largely  of  this  in  the  fore- 
going sermon.  Thus  all  religious  worshipping  of  images  is  forbid- 
den, whether  by  praying  or  by  sacrificing,  or  by  burning  incense,  or 
by  celebrating  festivals. 

The  Lord  God  doth  not   forbid  this  making  and  worshipping  of 
images  without  a  reason.     He  knows  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the 
heart,  which  doth  most  easily  suffer  itself  to  be  seduced  to  this  abom- 
inable service  :  it  knows  that  God   ought  to  be   worshipped ;  if  we 
shall  worship  him,  we  must  conceive  of  him  as  present  with  us  ;  the 
soul  bereaved  of  the  image  of  God,  knows  not  how  to  do  this  :  there- 
fore she  did  not  know  how  to  conduct  better  in  this  matter  than   by 
representing  him  in  a  bodily  manner,  and  by   directing  her  religious 
services  to  such  a   representation.     The   children   of  Ham    and   of 
Ja'phet,  separating  themselves  from  Shem,  and   from  his  true   cove- 
nant God,  invented  even    at  an   early  period  several  gods  for  them- 
selves ;  the  sun,  moon,  and   stars  were  first    and    before   all    others 
honoured  as  gods  by  the  Babylonians      After  this  they  placed  men 
also  in  the  number  of  their  Gods ;  they   deified  their  parents,  chil- 
dren, princes,  heroes,  and  others,  making  use  of  certain  ceremonies 
for  this  purpose.     The  Egyptians  looked  upon  beasts,  plants,  croco- 
serpents,  and    other  monsters,  to  be   gods       Idolatry   passed 
n  to  the  Greeks  :  and  the    Romans,    although    they    were 
v  than  the  rest,  became  so  foolish,  that  they  adopted  the  gods  of 
all  nations,  and  budded  a  Pantheon,  or  temple  of  all  the  gods,    and 
bro.ug  -  r  gods  into  it.     Even  the   Germans  and  Dutch*  did 

*  Although  the  a'jihor  speaks    in  tbe  original  only  of  the  Dutch,  it  is  evi- 
dent from  what  he  says,  that  he  intends  both  the  High  and  the  Low  Dutch. 


XXXV.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  2  IS 

.nain  free  of  this  vice  :  we  have  hence  still  the  names  Sunday, 
monday,  S;c.  The  Germans  and  the  Dutch  worshipped  particularly 
the  sun,  moon,  Vulcan,  Wodan,  (called  otherwise  Mercury,)  whence 
Wednesday,  Tuisco,  and  his  son  Man,  who  were  lore  fa  hers  of  the 
Germans  and  Dutch.  From  Tuisco  they  seem  still  to  be  called 
Dutch,  and  from  Man,  Germans.  The  heathens  made  images  of 
all  these  god:;,  bowed  down  to  them,  and  practised  every  kind  of 
worship  before  them.  At  first  the  idolaters  were  not  so  curious,  as 
to  make  images  of  their  gods,  they  contented  themselves  with  an 
unhewn  stone,  or  the  unpolished  trunk  of  a  tree  ;  but  the  arts  multi- 
plying, and  the  art  of  making  images  being  invented,  they  made  im- 
ages of  their  gods  of  every  form,  of  wood,  stone,  gold,  silver,  and 
other  materials,  according  to  their  erroneous  conceptions,  which  they 
had  formed  of  their  gods. 

It  was  not  so  strange,  that  the  heathens,  whom  God  had  abandon- 
ed to  walk  in  their  own  ways,  should  be  so  madly  addicted  to  idola- 
try, as  that  even  the  posterity  of  Shem,  who  were  beloved  by  God, 
should  apostatize  thereto.  "  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham  and  of 
Nahor,  served  other  gods,"  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  Joshua  xxiv.  2. 
Laban  swore  also  by  those  false  gods  of  his  fathers,  Gen.  xxxi  53. 
ll'.i  had  also  his  Teraphims,  or  household  gods,  and  Rachel,  who 
was  foolishly  inclined  to  them,  "stole  them,  Gen.  xxxi.  19.  Jacob 
indeed  purged  his  house  of  them,  Gen.  xxxv.  2 — 4,  but  his  poster- 
ity multiplying  in  Egypt,  defiled  themselves  with  the  idolatry  of 
the  Egyptians.  And  although  the  Lord  had  brought  thtm  out  of 
that  house  of  bondage  with  great  power,  and  with  an  outstretched 
arm,  yet  they  made  a  calf  at  Horeb,  and  bowed  down  to  a  molten 
image  :  "  They  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox 
that  eateth  g  ass."  When  Israel  was  come  to  the  borders  of  the 
Moabitcs,  "  they  joined  themselves  to  Baalpeor,  and  ate  the  sacrifi- 
ces of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi.  19,  20,28.  The  Israelites  were  but 
just  settled  in  Canaan,  when  they  adopted  and  served  the  gods  of 
the  heathens,  who  dwelled  among  them,  and  of  the  nations  wl  o 
were  round  about  them.  They  served  the  Baals  and  Molochs  of 
every  people,  the  Apis,  or  calf  of  the  Egyptians,  the  \shtoreth  of 
the  Zidonians,  the  Chemosh  of  the  Moabites,  and  other  gods  and 
goddesses,  yea,  they  served  them  with  the  filthiest,  lewdest  and 
most  cruel  ceremonies  :  they  made  for  them  temples,  high  places, 
groves  and  images,  which  were  fitter  to  frighten  and  to  shock  a  per» 

or  a*  they  are  usually  distinguished  by  the  English,  the  Germans  and  the 
Dutch. 


220       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

son,  than  to  be  worshipped ;  yea,  they  mul'i plied  these  images  so 
txce  di.i.Jy,  that  '■  they  filled  their  land  with  them  :  they  had  gods, 
lOKtgef  aliaisand  high  places,  not  only  according  to  the  number  of 
then  ciies,"  but  even  "according  to  the  number  of  their  streets," 
Jer.  xi.  13,  Ez  k.  xvi.  24,  25,  31.  But  the  Lord  punished  them 
severely  by  the  Babylonish  captivity,  which  impressed  a  horrour  of 
every  kind  of  image-worship  on  them,  that  cleaves  to  their  posterity 
even  until  ihis  day. 

It  might  be  imagined,  that  Christians,   having  such  examples  be- 
fore their  eyes,  greater  privileges,  and  a    clearer  revelation,    would 
not  apostatize  to  image    worship.      The  first    Christians  also  knew 
nothing  of  images  ;  neither  the    Saviour   nor    the    apostles  ordered 
the  Christians  to  worship  images  ;  they  who    defended  the    laws  of 
Cod  time   after  time  could  not  do  this.     The  Christians  were  accu- 
sed by  the  heathens  of  atheism,    because  they    had  no   images      In 
the  fourth  century,  »vhen  the  church    began  to  decline  from  her  pu- 
rity, there  was  here  and  there  an  image    seen   in    the  church  ;  but 
Lpiphanius,  seeing  a  picture  of  Christ  in  a  church,  tore  it  in  pieces. 
Alter  this  a  certain  bishop  of  Nola  introduced  images  into  churches 
for  ornament  and  instruction  ;  but  they  were   not  yet   worshipped. 
W  hen  men  began  after  this  to  worship   images,   Serenus,  bishop  of 
Marseilles,  cast  them  out  of  the  church.     The  bishop  of  Home  com- 
mended him    for  watching  against  image-worship,   but  blamed  lum 
for  casting  them  out  of  the  church,  because,  as  he  said,  they   might 
serve  to  instruct  the  ignorant.      !n  the  eighth  century  there  were  se- 
\-ete  contests  in  favour  of  and  against  images.     When  John,  Patri- 
arch of  Constantinople,  a  Monothelite,  who  held  that  Christ  had  only 
one  will,  was  condemned  by  the  Synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the  year 
711,  the  Roman  bishop.  Leo  the  second,  caused  pictures  of  oil    the 
members  of  that  synod  to  be  hung  up  in  the    porch   of   St.    Peter. 
The  emperour  Leo  Isaurus  took  this  exceedingly  ill,  and  ordered  in 
the  year  726,  that  no  man  should  worship  any  image  made  by  hands, 
and  that  all  the  images  should  be  destroyed.     The  bishop  of  Home 
excommunicated  the  Empeiour  on  this  account ;  but  the  Fmpevour 
laughed  at  him,  and  said,  he  is  an  idolater,   and  is    himself   excom- 
municated.    Constantine  Copronynuis  succeeding  his  father,  as  Em- 
perour, was  not  less  zealous  against  the  images,  and  procured  in  the 
general  synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the   year  754,  that  the    worship- 
pers of  images  should  be  condemned,  as  idolaters  ;  but  the  Empress 
Irene,  who  was  sottishly   addicted  to   image-worship,   obtained  in  a 
Synod  at  Nice,  in  the  year  787,  that  the  images  should  be  restored, 
served  and  worshipped.     To  manifest  her  special   zeal  for  images, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—58.  25 J 

3he  caused  her  father-h-law  Constantine  Copronymiis  to  be  digged 
up,  burned,  and  his  ashes  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea.  She  was  so 
imbittered  against  her  son  aNo,  on  account  of  his  aversion  from  im- 
ages, that  she  caused  his  eyes  te  he  thrust  out,  and  afterwards  ordered 
him  to  be  slain.  But  Charles  the  great  set  himself  against  this  mad- 
ness, and  assembled  a  synod  at  Frankfort,  in  the  year  794,  in  which 
that  Nicene  synod  «as  condemned.  Nevertheless,  all  this  strug- 
gling against  the  images  did  not  reform  the  church  of  Rome,  she  ad- 
heres even  until  this  day  to  the  judgment  of  the  false  synod  of  Nice, 
the  members  of  which  doting  upon  the  images,  said,  k'  We  judge 
that  the  images  of  the  angels  and  saints  ought  to  be  worshipped. 
If  any  man  be  not  of  this  mind,  but  scrupulous  and  doubtful  concern- 
ing the  worship  of  the  venerable  images,  the  holy  synod  denounces  an 
anathema  against  him."  Therefore  she  appealed  in  the  assembly 
of  Trent  to  this  synod;  she  likewise  punctually  observes  the  decree 
to  worship  images.  Like  the  Armenians  in  the  fifth  century  she  rep- 
resents the  Holy  Trinity  by  images,  the  Father,  in  the  form  of  an  . 
old  man,  the  Son  like  a  young  man,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  like  a  dove. 
She  conducts  in  this  manner  also  toward  the  saints  ;  her  temples, 
cities  and  streets  are  full  of  the  images  of  the  saints  ;  are  they  men 
she  decks  them  like  worldlings  ;  are  they  women,  she  bedizens 
them,  as  if  they  were  of  the  most  wanton  sort,  and  she  acts  thus  es- 
pecially with  the  images  of  Mary  ;  they  kiss  the  images,  they  burn 
incense  to  them,  they  bow  themselves  down  to  them,  and  mutter 
their  prayers  before  them.  Yea,  this  new  Babylon,  like  the  old,  is 
"  a  land  of  graven  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon  their  idols,"  as 
the  Lord  speaks,  Jer.  1.  38. 

But  we  oppose  such  a  conduct  with  this  second  commandment, 
which  strictly  forbids  such  making  of  images,  bowing  of  ourselves 
to  them,  and  serving  of  them.  Hear  how  Moses  explains  it,  when 
he  saith  to  all  Israel,  Deut  iv.  15 — 18.  "  Take  ye  therefore  good 
heed  to  yourselves,  (for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  in  the  day 
that  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  Horeb,  out  of  the  fire)  lest  ye  cor- 
rupt yourselves,  and  make  yourselves  a  graven  image,  the  similitude 
of  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female,  the  likeness  of  any 
beast  that  is  on  the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  fiieth 
in  the  air,  the  likeness  of  any  thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground,  the 
likeness  of  any  fish  that  is  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth."  The 
Papists,  like  the  heathens,  "  professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  have 
become  fools,  since  they  have  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  an  image,  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and 
fourfooted  beasts,  and  creeping  things,"  Rom.  i.  22,  23.    How  can 


222      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  indeed  represent  that  purely  spiritual,  infinite  and  invisible  ] 
bv  images:     Can  he  be  expressed  by  the   image  i»f  »q  old  man,  of 
a  young  man,  and  of  a  dove  ?  no  :    "  to  whom   then   will   ye  liken 
God  ?  or  what  likeness  will   ye  compare  to  him  I"  so  we   ask  with 
the  prophet,  Isaiah  xl.  13.     "  Who.  or  what"   is  like  hjm  ?    None, 
according  to  Jcr.  x.  6.     And  although  there  were   v>  e.tiu:r   evil  in 
making   an  image  of  Gcd,  than  that  it  causcth  {.!>e  w  I 
to  form  a  mistaken   idea  of  Cot!,   and  unfits  him   for  coojtempl 
God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth,  it  ought  nevertheless  lobe  utterly  de 
ed.     It  doth  not  surely  help   the    Papists,   that  God  exhibited  suqh 
tokens  of  his  presence   sometimes,  Dan.   vii.  13,   Malt,   hi.   1,6,    17* 
But  where  have  we  either  a  command  of  God,  qrao  example  pi  the 
saints  to  warrant  a  delineating  of  God  after  those 

But  may  we  not  make  images  of  Christ  and  the  saints,  who  co;. 
versed  on  earth  in  bodies,  capable  of  being  represented  b) 
But  who  among  the  makers  of  images  hath   ever  se/  a   them  ?  who 
can  tell  us  that  the  images,    which  men  make  now  of  Christ  and  of 
his  saints,  are  like  them,  and  not  like  others  r  hath  any  one  informed 
thern,  that  Christ  was:  of  a.  middle  stature,  neither  too   tall  nor  too 
short,  of  a  fair  and  rudely  complexion,    and  that  his  hair  \.  as 
and  dangled  upon  his  shoulders  in  curls  ?  he  hath  never  seen  I 
but  hath  vainly  depicted  him  thus  in  his  own  brain..     If  it  were  even 
so,  that  the  makers  of  images   had  seen   him   and   his  saints, 
need  would  there  be  that  we   should   make  images  of  them  ?  ( 
not  God's  image  of  his  Son,   depictured  in  the  gospel  and  in  believ- 
ers to  suflice  us  ?    can  we  delineate  tic   saints   better  to  -ourselves 
than  by   imitating  their  virtues  ?    have  the  saints  ever   represente< 
oilier  saints  to  themselves  by  images  I     It   is  a   mere    fable,   that 
Christ,  when  going  to  Golgotha,   expressed  the  form  of  his  counte- 
nance in    the  handkerchief  of  Veronica,  (for  that   handkerchief  is 
shown    both  at  Rome  and  in  Spain.)     But  that  which   presses  the 
Papists  here,  is  that  they  will  worship  the  human   nature  of  Chi  is', 
and  the  saints,    which  we  have   refuted    before,    and  therefore  they 
imagine  that  they  ought  to  make    images  of  them,    that   they  maj 
worship  those  images  also. 

The  Papists  transgress  still  more  heinously  by  bowing  down  to 
hose  images,  and  serving  them,  yea,  worshipping  them.  "  We 
must  worship  and  serve  God  only,"  as  Jesus  commands,  Matt.  iv. 
10.  Do  the  images  know  our  wants  ?  can  they  help  us  ?  aie  they 
not  mere  lifeless  and  irrational  works  ?  can  they  make,  clothe,  or 
keep  themselves  from  being  spoiled  or  robbed  ?  shall  a  man  bow 
himself  i\.>;vn  to  what  his  fingers   have  made  ?    what  difference 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY-  Q.  96—98.  223 

there  then  be  between  the  imageworship  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
the  imageworship  of  Christians  ?  yea,  doih  not  the  worshipper  of 
images  m:ke  himself  like  his  images  ?  let  the  worshippers  of  ima- 
ges hear  how  they  are  derided,  Psalm  cxv.  4—8  4  The  idols  of 
the  nations  are  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands.  They 
have  mouths,  but  thejK  speak  not  ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see 
not  ;  they  have  ears,  but  th  y  hear  not;  noses  have  they,  but  they 
smell  not  ;  hands  have  they,  but  they  handle  not;  feet  have  they, 
but  they  walk  not  :  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat.  They 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in 
them  "  The  epistle  ascribed  to  Jeremiah,  among  the  apocryphal 
books,*  at  the  end  of  the  larger  bibles,  is  worthy  of  a  repeated  pe- 
rusal, that  we  may  see  the  vanity  of  image-worship  pourtrayed  in 
the  most  lively  colours. 

We    have  refuted  on  the   foregoing   Lord's  day,  (a)  the   opinion 
that  this  prohibition  of  imageworship  is  the  same  with  the  first  com- 
mandment, which  forbids  idolatry.     And  although  it   were  even  so, 
as  the  Romanists  assert   they  do  still  commit  idolatry  with  the  ima- 
ges, which  they  say  are  forbidden  in  this  commandment,     (b)  The 
Papists  manifest  their  folly,  when  they  say  that  this  relates  only   to 
the  Jews,  who  were  inclined  to  idolatry,  in  consequence  of  their  so- 
journing in  Egypt ;    doth    it  not  then   relate  to  the  Romanists  also, 
who   are  not  less  inclined  to    idolatry  than  the  Jews  were  ?  the  law, 
and  the  reasons  with  Which  it  is  enforced,  are  universal,  and  reach 
to  every  person,  who  is  subject  lo  God,  as  a  Lawgiver.  This  prohibi- 
tion flows  from  the  spiritual  nature  of  God,  which  cannot  be  depicted, 
and  it  pertains  thus  to  every    man  ;    and  therefore  Paul   proves 
against  the  heathens,  Actsxvii.  22,  29,  "  that  we  ought  not  to  think 
that  the  Godhead  is  like  gold,  or   silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and 
man's  device,  because  we  are  the    offspring  of  God."     Is  not  this 
argument  as  forcible  against  the  images  of  the   Papists,    as   against 
those  of  the    heathens  ?     Those   among  the  heathens,  who  followed 
their  natural    principles  wonld  not  suffer  any  images.     I  should  be 
too  prolix,  if  I  should  relate  with  others  what  many  ancient  writers 
of  the  heathens  say  of  these  things,  and  how  many  nations  worship- 
ped their  gods  without  images.     Or  hath   God  forbidden  only  idola- 
trous  images,    and    not   images  of  himself  and  of   his  saints  ?  but 
God  doth  not  except  any   kind  of  images :    "  Thou  shalt  not  make 

*  The  Apocryphal  books  are  placed  at  the  end  of  the  Dutch  bibles,  and  no? 
in  the  middle,  as  is  usual  in  the  English  bibles.  In  these  different  arrange 
ments  the  Dutch  have  consulted  dignity,  and  the  Enghs'a  method- 


224      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

any  image,  nor  any  likeness  "  saith  God.  What  are  idolatrous  ima- 
ges? are  they  not  images,  which  designate  God  and  his  creatures? 
and  are  not  the  popish  images  such  ?  (c)  They  cry  in  a  shameless 
manner,  We  do  not  worship  the  images,  but  those  whom  they  re- 
present. Who  can  believe  these  m;n,  who  engaged  in  the  council 
of  Trent  to  obey  the  council  of  Nice,  which  denounces  an  anathema 
against  every  one,  who  is  only  scrupulous  concerning  worshipping 
images  ?  do  they  not  honour  the  images  themselves,  why  then  do 
they  esteem  one  image  above  another,  although  it  represents  the 
same  saint  ?  for  they  bestow  greater  honour  upon  the  images  of 
Mary  at  Hall,  at  Montague,  and  at  Loretto,  than  upon  other  images 
oi  that  holy  virgin.  Let  it  be  allowed,  that  they  do  not  worship  the 
images;  but  do  they  not  bow  clown  to  them,  contrary  to  this  com- 
mand ?  They  say,  We  do  not  bow  down  in  order  to  honour  the 
images,  but  we  honour  and  serve  God  by  them.  In  this  manner 
might  the  Jews  also  have  excused  themselves  ;  for  they  intended  to 
honour  God  by  their  images  ;  Aaron  made  his  calf,  that  "  they  might 
hold  a  feast  to  the  Lord,"  Exod.  xxxii.  1 — 6.  Micha's  mother 
"  dedicated  her  silver  to  the  Lord,  to  make  an  image,"  Judges  xvii. 
3.  The  heathens  themselves  were  so  wise,  that  they  distinguished 
between  their  gods  and  the  images  of  their  gods.  The  F.phesians 
distinguished  also  between  "  the  goddess  Diana  and  her  image, 
which  fell  down  from  Jupiter,"  Acts  xix.  35.  "  Who  but  an  entire 
fool  can  believe  that  the  images  are  gods,"  said  the  heathen  in  Ar- 
nobius  (d)  It  is  no  better  what  the  Church  of  Rome  saith,  that 
under  the  old  testament  they  were  obliged  to  worship  the  ark  with 
its  cherubims,  because  the  Psalmist  saith,  Psalm  cxix.  5.  "  Exalt 
ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship  at  his  footstool."  But  they  were 
obliged  to  turn  themselves  toward  the  ark,  because  God  manifested 
himself  especially  present  there,  but  not  to  worship  the  ark.  Must 
we  say  that  Jesus  worshipped  the  heavens,  because,  when  he  pray- 
ed, he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  war!  heaven  ?  John  xvii  1.  Do  the  Pa- 
pists say  that  we  must  not  worship  the  images,  but  God  who  mani- 
festeth  himself  in  them,  we  answer,  where  doth  this  appear?  doth 
God  appear  upon  the  images,  as  he  did  formerly  upon  the  ark  in  ft 
cloud  ?  God  hath  removed  the  ark  ;  shall  we  then  now  set  up  ima- 
ges in  the  stead  of  it,  contrary  to  the  command  of  God  ?  We  omit 
other  cloaks  of  this  shame,  which  uncloaks  itself. 

M  But  may  we  not  tolerate  images  as  books  of  the  laity,"  that  is, 
of  the  common  people  ?  When  they  introduced  images  into  the 
churches  in  ancient  times,  they  did  not  at  first  worship  the  images, 
but  intended  that  they  should  serve  for  ornaments,  to  allure  the  hea 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  225 

thens,  who  were  extravagantly  fond  of  images  ;  and  also  for  instruct- 
ing the  ignorant  The  Lutherans  alsj  place  images  in  their  church- 
es for  this  purpose.  While  Martin  Luther  lay  concealed  in  the  castle 
of  Wirtemberg,  from  the  wiles  of  the  Papists,  Andrew  Carlstadt, 
assisted  by  others,  cast  the  images  out  of  the  Church  of  Wirtem- 
berg. Luther  heaving  of  this,  took  it  exceedingly  ill,  returned  to 
Wirtemberg,  and  restored  the  images,  saying  that  they  could  serve 
to  instruct  the  the  ignorant.  But  the  instructor  saith  wisely,  "  We 
must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God,  who  will  not  have  his  peo- 
ple taught  by  dumb  images,"  8cc.  For,  (a)  if  images  were  neces- 
sary and  profitable  to  instruct  in  this  manner,  the  Lord  would  not 
have  prohibited  them  to  us.  Therefore  they  who  desire  to  intro- 
duce images  for  this  purpose,  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  The 
Lord  God  directs  us  to  his  word  to  instruct  his  people :  we  must 
betake  ourselves  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,"  according  to 
the  divine  command,  Isaiah  viii.  20.  "  The  scriptures"  alone  "can 
make  us  wise  to  salvation,  "  2  Tim.  iii.  15.  By  the  lively  preach- 
ing of  the  word  of  God  "Jesus  Christ  is  depictured  before  our 
eyes,"*  as  Paul  speaks,  Gal.  iii.  1.  (b)  Images  are  unable  to  teach, 
they  are  dumb,  "  they  have  indeed  mouths,  bu  they  do  not  speak, 
neither  do  they  utter  any  sound  through  their  throat,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  from  Psalm  cxv.  5,  7.  If  we  receive  no  oral  instruc- 
tion, what  will  the  image  teach  us  by  itself  ?  it  will  mislead  us 
and  destroy  the  spirituality  of  our  worship.  "  The  stock,"  saith 
the  prophet,  is  a  doctrine  of  vanities,"  Jer.  x.  8.  "  The  molten 
image  is  a  teacher  of  lies,"  Hab.  ii  18,  and  "  the  idols  speak  vani- 
ty," Zech  x.  2.  There  were  indeed  images  of  Cherubims  in  the 
tabernacle  and  temple,  but  they  were  appointed  for  types  under  the 
old  testament,  and  are  now  abolished  :  those  images  were  also  re- 
moved from  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  were  thus  not  for  the  in- 
struction of  the  laity, 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  we  ought  also  to  condemn  the  obso- 
lete opinion  of  the  Anthropomorphites,  who  ascribed  a  human  body 
to  God.  Neither  will  I  attempt  to  refute  the  will  worship  of  the  Pa- 
pists, who  pretend  to  serve  God  according  to  their  own  imaginations, 
or  those  of  others  :  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  already  on  the 
thirty-third  Lord's  day.  We  will  rather  treat  of  the  more  secret 
vices,  which  are  contrary  to  this  commandment,  that  we  may  have 
a  fuller  discovery  of  our  deformity.  "  The  law  is  surely  spiritual," 
according  to  Rom.  vii.  14.     Therefore  this  commandment  without 

•   This  is  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 
Vol.  n.  2   D 


226      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

doubt,  forbids  a  want  of  spirituality  in  our  religious  worship.  For 
instance,  (a)  forming  a  corporeal  idea  of  God,  when  we  pray, 
(b)  li  vehemently  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  perfect  conception  and 
idea  of  God  :  we  "  cannot  surely  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection," 
Job  xi.  7,  8,  9.  (c)  Entertaining  a  different  notion  of  God  from 
what  he  hath  revealed  in  his  word.  The  sinner  itnagmeth  that  God 
is  like  himself,  md  that  he  will  forget  and  forgive  his  sins,  as  he 
himself  forgives  them  ;  but  the  Lord  will  punish  him,  as  we  see. 
Psalm  I.  21,  22.  The  people  of  God  imagine  that  tbeir  affliction, 
"their  way  is  hidden  from  the  Lord,  end  their  judgment  passed  over 
from  t'.eir  God."  l»ut  the  imag-.  of  God,  and  the  pattern  of  his 
•word  teacheth  otherwise,  Isaiah  xl  27,28.  (d)  It  must  also  be 
reckoned  a  sin  contrary  to  this  commandment,  to  be  dull,  sluggish, 
and  heartless  in  the  worship  of  God,  to  be  no  more  moved,  than  if 
we  were  images  before  God  :  "  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our 
months,  and  honour  him  with  our  lips,  but  remove  our  hearts  far 
from  him,"  with  the  Jews,  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  14.  (e)  We  may  add 
also  following  evil  examples  ;  "  we  may  not  follow  a  multitude  to 
do  evil ;"  thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  2. 

Wherever  we  find  any  vice  forbidden,  there  we  hare  also  a  com- 
mandment, winch  enjoins  the  contrary  virtues.  It  is  required  in  this 
command,  that  they  who  love  God  should  keep  his  commands,  as 
he  speaks  in  the  reasons,  with  which  he  enforceth  this  command. 
Therefore  (a)  the  word  of  God  must  be  our  pattern  and  rule  in  all 
things  :  we  must  "  hold  last  the  form  of  sound  words,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  rim.  i.  13  (b)  Our  worship  ought  also  to  be  reason- 
able, spiritual  and  without  images,  "in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  that 
we  may  serve  the  Lord  as  a  spirit,  according  to  his  word,  John  iv. 
24.  (c)  May  we  not  serve  God  by  images,  then  he  only  must  be 
the  pattern  of  our  sanctincation  :  therefore  he  saith  to  the  children 
of  Israel)  Lev.  xix.  2.  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God 
am  holy."  He  hath  indeed  exhibited  his  image  to  us  in  his  com- 
mandments, and  throughout  his  whole  word. 

3.  This  commandment  being  so  broad,  it  ought  not  to  be  censur- 
ed as  imperfect.  The  Socinians  say  that  the  second  commandment 
was  imperfect ;  but  that  Christ,  the  new  Lawgiver,  hath  perfected 
and  enlarged  it.  And  what  hath  Christ  forsooth  added  to  it,  that 
was  not  forbidden  before  ?  they  say,  fleeing  from  idols,  avoiding  pla- 
ces where  they  are,  and  caring  things  sacrificed  to  idols.  But  the 
Lord  commanded  by  Moses,  that  they  should  avoid  even  the  names 
of  idols,  E:;od.  xxiii.  13,  that  Israel  should  burn  the  idols  with  fire, 
that  they  should  not  cov'et  their  silver  nor  gold,  and  that  they  shouW 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  227 

destroy  all  the  places,  where  they  were  formerly  worshipped.  See 
Deut  vii  25,  26.  xii.  2,  3.  It  .vas  sinful  in  Israel  to  tat  things, 
that  were  sacrificed  to  idols,  "  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi. 
23.  It  was  therefore  forbidden  by  God  through;  closes,  and  indeed 
in  this  commandment. 

II.   Although  this  commandment  is    worthy,  on  its  own  account, 
to  be  approved  and  observed,  it  nevertheless  pleases  the  Lord  to  en- 
force it  by  powerful  motives  ;  for  he  doth  not  only  Say,   that  he  wis 
"  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,"  on  which  account  they  were  obliged 
to  observe  his  whole  law,  as  ha  h  been  shown  on  the  preface  oi    the 
Lord  to  the  law,  in  the   forme.   Lord's  day  ;  but    he   adds   also  two 
reasons  to  move  them  to  observe  this  command,     (1)  "that  tie  is  a 
jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of   the  fathers   upon    the   children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  him."     Tie 
Lord,   entering   into  a  covenant   with   his  people    consii  ers   ft   as  a 
marriage  covenant,  by  which  he  was,  as  it  were,  the  husb  nd  of   Is- 
rael, and  Israel,   as  it  were,  the  wife   of  the    Lord  :    if  no*    Israel 
should  cleave  in  luve  to  the  images,  they  would  then,  like  an  adulte- 
rous wife,  hate  the  Lord  their  husband  ;  therefore  worshipping  ima- 
ges is  often    represented   to  us  as    spiri:ual    whoredom  ;    which  the 
Lord,   inflamed  with    vehement  jealou -y,    would    revenge,  as  a  i>"S- 
band  awngeth  himself  on  a.  count  of  the  adulteiy  of  his  wife.    Yea, 
with  su  h  severity  would  God  punish  this  abomination,  that  he  would 
visit  the  iniquity  of    the    fathers  upon  the  children,    unto  the  third 
and  fourth  generation.     We   know   how  the  children  fared   in  the 
time  of  the  flood,  how  Eli's  and  Jeroboam's  posterity  fared;  which 
was  surely  not  unrighteous  ;  for  since  children  are   not  only  punish- 
able on  their  own  account,  but  were  also  admitted  with  their  parents 
into  that  covenant,  therefore  they  were  considered   by  the   Lord,   as 
having  broken  that  covenant,  with  their  parents,  when  their  parents 
were  guilty  of  worshipping  images,   and  were  become  thus  children 
of  whoredom.      But  although  God   executes  his  vengeance  with  se- 
verity,  he  nevertheless  displays  his  mercy  more  than  his  severity. 
The  justice  of  God  is  as  natural  to  him  as  his  mercy  :  but  he  choos- 
es to   manifest  his  mercy  rather   than  his  justice  :  for  he  doth  not 
always  execute  his  justice  upon  every  sinner,  and  he  saith  that  '*  the 
son  shall  not  always  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,"  Ezek.  xviii.  20. 
Therefore  (a)  "  he  also  showeth  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that 
love  him,   and  keep  his  commandments."     The    J-  wish   nation  is 
still  beloved  for  the  sake  of  their  fathers  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ; 
■who  loved  the  Lord,  and  kept  his  commandments,  aid  they  will  yet 
be   converted  to  the   Lord,   in  consequence  of  his  mercy,  as  Paul 


228      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

teacheth,  Rom.  xi.  24—  28.  And  so  the  Lord  promiseth  that  he 
will  show  favour  to  the  offspring  of  all  who  love  him.  Therefore 
as  parents  do  not  desire  that  their  children  should  suffer  the  grie- 
vous anger  of  God,  but  rather  that  they  should  experience  his  loving- 
kindness,  they  ought  to  be  persuaded  lo  abstain  from  breaking  his 
commandments,  and  th.s  commandment  in  particular,  and  to  see  that 
they  keep  it. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  the  attachment  of  Babylon  to  images,  do  we 
not  then  see,  hearers,  that  our  fathers  had  weighty  reasons  for  leav- 
ing her  ?  Rome,  formerly  a  faithful  city,  was  indeed  become  a  har- 
lot. The  church  of  Rome,  that  adulterous  woman,  admitted  stran- 
gers instead  of  her  husband.  Justly  is  she  described,  Rev.  xvii.  1, 
2,  5,  as  "  the  great  whore,  the  mother  of  whoredoms,  who  made 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication." 
The  Jews,  through  their  attachment  to  images,  apostatized  to  hea- 
thenism :  but  the  Papists  exceed  the  heathens  and  Jews  in  worship- 
ping images.  The  Lord  God  hath  chastised  that  church  severely 
by  strange  nations,  and  especially  by  the  Turks,  for  her  doting  on 
images  ;  but  "  she  hath  not  repented  of  the  works  of  her  hands, 
that  she  should  not  worship  devils,  and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and 
brass,  and  stone,  and  of  wood  :  which  neither  can  see  nor  hear,  nor 
walk,"  as  John  foretold,  Rev,  ix.  14 — 20.  How  could  the  Irueborn 
children  of  God  endure  this  ?  for  their  flesh  abhorred  this  wicked- 
ness, when  they  saw  it,  and  when  they  were  obliged  to  betake  them- 
selves to  a  man  on  a  cross,  instead  of  the  crucified  Christ  and  his 
Spirit  ;  and  they  were  besides  this  murdered  also,  because  they 
would  not  bow  their  knees  to  the  abominable  images.  Therefore 
they  justly  pleaded  with  their  mother,  because  she  was  not  the  wife 
of  the  Lord,  nor  he  her  husband ;  and  they  did  not  forsake  her, 
without  a  reason,  since  she  was  incorrigible.  May  the  Lord  pre- 
serve us  from  returning  to  her  impure  bosom  again. 

It  is  time,  hearers,  to  come  to  ourselves.  Was  this  command, 
with  its  threatenings  and  promises,  given  to  Israel  only,  and  not  to 
us  also?  But  have  ye  also  kept  it  ?  Yea,  will  some  of  you  think, 
we  have  never  bowed  our  knees  to  the  images  of  Babylon  :  but  doth 
God  forbid  nothing  but  making  images,  bowing  ourselves  to  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  229 

and  serving  them  ?    surely  yes :    he   forbids  here  also  the  spiritual 
imagetnaking,   and   the  inward   imageworship.     (a)  When  yc  pray 
to  God,  what  do  ye  make  of  him  ?  what  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves, 
when  ye  address  him  ?    nothing   at  all  ?    do   ye  only  mutter  a  few 
words  t  or  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves  a  vast,   extended   body,   that 
fills  the  universe  ?     How    many  are   there  who   often,  yea,   usually 
propose  to  themselves,  next  to  their  teraphims,  household  gods,  or 
pictures,  an  image  of  a  man  on  a  cross,  if  not  of  an  aged  father,  a 
young  son,  and  a  dove,  that  they  may  mumble  a  few  words  to  those 
images  !     (b)  If  ye  do    endeavour   to   know  God,   and  to  discover 
what  he  is,  do  ye  then  give  heed  only  to  what  he  reveals  concerning 
himself  in  his  word,  and  believe  it  with  simplicity  of  heart,  because 
he  testifieth  it?  it  is  then  well      But  how  often   do   men  endeavour 
to  intrude   with  their  fleshly  understandings  into  the   unsearchable 
mysteries  of  God,  to  inquire   how   he  can  be  simple,   and  yet   just, 
merciful  and  triune  ;  how  he  hath  elected  one,  and  rejected  others  ■ 
how  he   can    conclude  all  men   under   the  disobedience   of  Adam. 
When  they  cannot  see  into  these  things,  nor  reconcile  them  to  their 
corrupt  ideas,    they  imagine  evil  against  the  Lord,  they  deny  the 
truth,  and  join  themselves  to  the  enemies  of  it,  if  not  in  profession 
at  least  in  heart,     (e)  Come,  impenitent  sinner,  what  thinkest  thou 
or  what  dost  thou  imagine  concerning  the  Lord,  with  respect  to  thy- 
self ?  will  he  indeed  mark  thy  sins  strictly,  and   punish  them  so  se- 
verely, as  he  saith  in  his  word  ?  thou  thinkest,  no,  God  is  good  and 
merciful :  I  hope  that  he  will  not  notice  my  sins  so  particularly.     I 
trust  that  he  hath  forgiven  them  already  ;  I  am  not  concerned  ahout" 
it,  he  blesses  me,  and  with  careless  Judah,  Jer.  ii.  35,  thou   sayest 
"Surely  I  am    innocent;    for  his  anger  is  turned   away   from  me." 
Thou  dost  not  doubt   but  that  thou  wilt  be  saved.     Thou   believest 
that  God  would    not   otherwise  be  merciful,   and   that  Christ    would 
have  died  in  vain.     Therefore  God,   according  to  thine  imagination, 
which  thou  formest  of  him,  will  deny  his  justice,  and  will  revoke  all 
his   threatnings   against  thee.     Behold  what  an  abominable    imao-e 
thou  makest  to  thyself  of  God,  thou  bowest  down  thyself  to  it,  and 
servest  it.     (d)  Further  my  friends,  when  ye  are  about  to  serve  God 
after  your  manner,  to  pray  to   him,  to  read  and  hear  his  word,  how 
are  ye  then  disposed  ?     "  Is  not  God  only  near  in  your  mouths,  and 
far  from  your  reins  ?"    as  the  prophet  speaks  of  his   countrymen, 
Jer.  xii.  2.     Do  ye  not  come  before  his  face,  like  immoveable  stocks 
and  stones  ?     Men  may  see  in  you,  when  ye  attend  upon  the   public 
worship,  that  ye  are  as  inattentive,  and  as  unaffected,  as  the  popish 
images,  which  are  more  in  the  church  than  ye  are.     The  looks  of 


J30       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

your  countenances  testify  against  you.  (e)  And  what  is  your  rule 
and  pattern,  which  ye  propose  to  yourselves,  in  order  to  direct  ycuv 
goings?  is  it  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  his  image  expressed  there- 
in, and  in  his  saints?  Verily,  the  most  of  you  know  nothing  of 
this :  comparing  themselves  with  themselves,  they  imagine  that 
they  know  best  what  they  ought  to  do  :  they  propose  the  honours, 
the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  to  themselves,  as  alluring 
images,  and  they  govern  themselves  by  those  in  all  that  they  do,  and 
forbear. 

Ye  have  therefore  sinned  in  a  dreadful  manner  against  this  com- 
mandment. Are  ye  not  Papists  by  profession,  ye  are  such  in  your 
hearts,  and  in  your  conversation.  And  what  restrains  you  fi  om  serving 
the  Romish  images?  Is  it  the  commandment  of  God.  his  threaten- 
ing and  promises?  Is  it  the  fear  of  God  ?  no  ;  but  because  ye  have 
no  opportunity  for  it,  and  have  been  born  and  educated  among  re- 
formed Christians.  If  your  parents,  friends  and  preachers  should 
return,  either  willingly,  or  compelled  by  persecution,  to  the  Romish 
Egypt,  ye  would  soon  follow  their  examples.  Your  disposition  is 
therefore  abominable  ;  like  the  worshippers  of  images  ye  are  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  image,  and  your  "  understanding  is  darkened,  and 
ye  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is 
in  you.  and  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,"  Eph.  iv.  18.  Ye  hate  tbe 
Lord,  and  are  exceedingly  guilty  before  him.  If  ye  remain  as  ye 
are,  ye  cannot  expect  any  mercy,  but  that  his  anger  and  jealousy 
will  be  kind'ed  against  you  :  "  As  a  dream,  when  one  awaketh,  so 
when  he  awaketh.  he  will  despise  your  image,"  us  Asaph  expect- 
ed, Psalm  lxxiii.  20. 

But  neither  are  ye,  O  believers,  though  ye  are  newformed  after 
the  image  of  God,  altogether  innocent.  How  often  do  those  spiritu- 
al images  possess  you.  and  hinder  you  in  your  contemplations,  and 
in  your  worship  of  God,  as  a  being  who  is  altogether  spiritual  ?  yea, 
do  they  not  destroy  the  purity  and  spirituality  of  your  devotions  ? 
and  do  they  not  leave  only  a  few  barren,  lifeless  and  sapless  exer- 
cises ? 

Whoever  ye  arc,  whether  lovers  or  haters  of  the  Lord,  have  ye 
any  desire  to  regulate  yourselves  according  to  this  commandment : 

1.  See  then  your  shameful  doting  upon  images,  and  your  trans- 
gressions against  the  Lord.  Examine  yourselves  by  what  we  h.r.c 
just  now  said,  in  order  to  discover  to  you  your  misconduct,  and  your 
spiritual  imageuorship  :  put  your  hands  into  your  bosoms,  and  sec 
whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous  :  your  recovery  must  begin 
here,  they  who  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,   but    they   \v!:0    are 


— $8.  281 

sick.  Shut  not  your  eyes  then  and  flatter  not  yourselves  with  Ju» 
dah,  who  was  sottishly  addicted  to  images,  as  it  ye  were  innocent. 
Hear  the  Lord  say  to  every  one  of  you  also,  as  he  said  to  that  people 
Jer.  ii.  23.  "  How  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not 
gone  after  Baalim  ?  see  thy  way  in  the  valley,  know  what  thou  hast 
done  :  thou  art  a  swift  dromedary,  traversing  her  ways,"  Jer.  ii.  23* 
2  But  will  it  suffice  to  see  and  know  your  tranigiessions  in  a 
slight  manner  ?  no,  but  ye  must  be  ashamed  of  them,  and  must 
humble  yourselves  before  the  Lord.  What  is  more  shameful,  what 
provokes  the  Loid  more  to  anger  and  jealousy,  and  what  ought  to 
fill  a  person  with  shame  more  than  this  sin  ?  The  idolatrous  image 
is  emphatically  called  "Shame,"  Jer.  iii.  24,  xi.  13.  liosea  ix.  10. 
Was  it  not  so  called,  because  the  people  of  the  Lord  ought  to  be 
ashamed  of  their  worshipping  of  images  ?  Therefore  stand  still 
awhile  by  these  sins  of  yours,  and  behold  them,  until  ye  blush  for 
shame  of  them  before  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord's  returning  people,  be- 
moaning themselves  on  account  of  their  worshipping  of  images, 
said  before  the  Load,  Jer.  iii.  25,  "  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  and 
our  confusion  covereth  us  ;  for  we  have  'sinned  against  the  Lord  our 
God,  we  and  our  fathers  from  our  youth  even  unto  this  day,  and 
have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God." 

3.  Flee  unto  Christ,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  to  obtain  par- 
don for  this  iniquity  :  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  and  so  also  of 
this  commandment,  "  to  every  one  who  believeth,"'  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  x.  4.  By  your  transgressions  of  this  commandment  ye  have 
rendered  yourselves  guilty,  and  have  provoked  the  Lord  to  jealousy 
against  you,  that  he  should  visit  your  iniquities  upon  you.  Will  ye 
not  now  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  this  guilt,  and  to  be  recon- 
ciled to  God  ?  and  how  shall  ye  obtain  reconciliation?  He  only, 
who  is  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his 
person,  hath  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  Heb.  i.  3.  Hee  then 
every  one  of  you  to  him,  "  lay  hold  on  him,  and  make  your  peace 
with  God,"  as  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxvii.  5. 

4.  Be  earnestly  desirous,  that  the  Lord  would  imprint  his  image 
upon  you.  Bring  your  hearts  unto  him,  that  he  may  express  his 
image,  the  transcript  of  his  law,  in  you.  The  zeal  of  faithful  preach- 
ers tends  to  this,  with  Paul  they  "travail  in  birth,  till  Christ  be 
formed  in  you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  Lo'.k  then  much  at  the  Lord,  and  at 
his  image,  that  his  beams  may  irradiate  you,  and  may  cause  you  to 
shine  by  his  glory.  See  how  this  happened  to  Moses,  Lzod.  xxxiv, 
29,  30.  Paul  having  respect  to  this  case,  saith  2  Cor.  iii.  IS,  "  We 
all  with  open    face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  ths   Lord, 


232     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED- 

are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Yea,  in  all  your  conversation  "be  ye  fol- 
lowers of  God,  as  dear  children,"  Eph.  v.  1. 

5.  Regulate  all  your  conceptions  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  ways  by 
his  image  expressed  in  his  word.  Whatever  ye  think,  judge,  or  say 
of  him,  if  it  agree  not  with  his  word,  ye  must  reject  it  as  hurtful, 
yea,  as  reproachful  to  the  Lord.  Beware  in  all  your  approaches  to 
him  of  bouily  and  excessive  exertions,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of 
him  :  ye  are  too  contracted  to  comprehend  many  great  things  of 
him.  Even  when  the  Lord  sheds  much  light  into  the  soul,  she  still 
"  sees  only  the  utmost  ends  of  his  ways,  and  hears  only  a  small  por- 
tion of  him  ;  who  then  can  understand  the  thunder  of  his  power?" 
Job  xxxvi.  14.  When  "  the  Lord  beset  David  in  all  that  he  did," 
he  was  still  obliged  to  cry  out,  "  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful 
for  me  ;  it  is  too  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it,"  Psalm  exxxix.  6. 
To  exert  ourselves,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of  God,  deprives  our 
souls  of  their  vigour,  and  renders  our  understandings  dull.  It  is 
best  to  approach  unto  God  in  a  sober  manner,  with  a  belief  of  his 
omnipresence,  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  goodness  ;  and  there- 
fore Paul  saith,  Heb.  xi.  6,  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe 
that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
him." 

6.  Seek  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  to  perform  all 
your  works  by  him  ;  for  without  him  both  we  and  all  that  we  do  is 
like  an  image  without  spirit.  "  Be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  saith 
Paul,  Eph.  v.  18.  "  We  must  live  and  walk  in  the  Spirit,"  Gal.  v. 
16,  25.  We  must  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  be  led,  cry 
Abba,  Father,  aud  assure  ourselves  by  him,"  Rom.  viii.  13 — 16.  It 
therefore  behooves  you  to  pray  earnestly  with  David  for  the  Spirit, 
Psalm  cxhii.  10,  "  Teach  me  lo  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God  : 
let  thy  good  Spirit  lead  me  in  the  hnd  of  uprightness  "  Let  it  not 
however  satisfy  you,  that  the  Lord  hath  favoured  you  with  his  Spirit, 
but  be  earnestly  desirous  that  the  church  also  may  be  filled  with 
him,  agreeably  to  the  representation  of  the  Spirit  in  Ezekiel's  vision 
of  the  waters,  which  rose  to  a  great  height,  Lzek.  xlviii.  1  — 10.  For 
when  the  Spirit  departs  from  the  church,  she  is  filled  with  images. 

7.  Let  every  one  of  you  manifest  his  aversion  from  the  Popish 
images,  and  let  the  magistrates  destroy  them.  We  ought  all,  and 
each  of  us  in  his  station  to  act  the  same  part  toward  the  images 
which  we  have  said  we  ou.^ht  toad  toward  the  Popish  mass. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  soul,  who  seeks  to  love  the  Lord  and  t» 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  233 

keep  his  command  men  s  may  assure  herself  that  he  will  show  mer- 
cy to  her  and  to  her  seed  ;  '•  Jesus  and  his  Father  will  love  her,  will 
manifest  themselves  to  her,  and  make  their  abode  with  her,"  as  he 
promiseth,  John  xiv.  21.  23.  He  will  be  jealous,  not  against  her, 
but  for  her,  to  the  destruction  of  her  enemies;  for  "thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion  with  a  great 
jealousy.  And  I  am  very  sorely  displeased  with  the  heathen  that 
are  at  ease,"  Zech  i.  14  15.  Yea,  the  Lord  will  adorn  t1  ose  who 
love  him  with  his  beauty,  that  he  may  glorify  them  ;  and  they  may 
with  an  elevated  mind,  like  David,  Psalm  xvii.  15,  say  with  confi- 
dence, "  I  will  behoid  thy  face  in  righteousness  :  1  shall  be  satisfied; 
*^hen  I  awake,  with  thv  likeness."     Amen, 


Vol.  a*  U  fc 


(  234  ; 


EXPLANATION 


OF  THE 


THIRD  COMMANDMENT. 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exodus  xx.  7.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God  in  vain :  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain. 

Question  99.     What  is  required  in  the  third  command  ? 

Answer.  That  we,  not  only  by  cursing  or  perjury,  but  also  by 
rash  swearing,  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God  ;  nor  by 
silence  or  connivance  be  partakers  of  these  horrible  sins  in  others  ; 
and  briefly,  that  we  use  the  name  of  God  no  otherwise,  than  with 
fear  and  reverence,  so  that  he  may  be  rightly  confessed  and  worship- 
ped by  us,  and  glorified  in  all  our  words  and  works.

Q.  98.  Bui  may  not  images  be  tolerated  in  the  churches,  as  books  %f 
the  laity  ? 

A.  No ;  for  we  must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  who  will 
have  his  people  taught,  not  by  dumb  images,  but  by  the  lively  preach- 
ine  of  his  word. 


X  r  is  not  so  much  the  matter,  as  the  manner  and  good  quality  <5f  a 
work)  that  renders  it  good.  Though  a  building  were  constructed  of 
polished  stones  and  of  cedar  Wood,  it  would  nevertheless  be  neither 
comely  nor  convenient,  if  the  materials  were  not  properly  joined  to 
gether,  and  if  the  apartments  were  not  well  adapted  to  their  iise. 
Although  the  matter  of  a  garment  were  ever  so  costly,  )ca,  such  as 
would  befit  a  king,  it.  would  notwithstanding  be  unseemly  and  disa- 
greeable, if  it  were  disproportioned  to  the  body.  The  warlike  apparel 
of  Saul  was  such  as  became  a  king,  but  David  rejected  it,  because  it 
was  not  proportioned  to  his  body,  and  he  was  not  used  to  it,  1  Sam. 
xvii.  38,  39.  It  is  thus  likewise  with  all  our  religious  performances. 
It  is  not  so  much  the  mutter  of  our  actions,  as  the  manner  and  the 
requisite  qualifications  of  them,  that  renders  them  good.  The  cere- 
monies of  fisting  and  of  sacrifices  were  commanded:  but  because 
the  Lord's  people  did  not  perform  them  in  a  right  manner,  he  dis- 
approved of  them,  as  abominations.  See  Isaiah  i.  10 — 15  lviii. 
1  — 5,  The  Lord  saith,  Isaiah  lxvi.  3.  "  He  that  killeth  an  ox  is  as 
if  he  slew  a  man  :  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's 
neck  :  he  that  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered  swine's  flesh  : 
he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol."  The  Lord  is 
indeed  a  God,  who  observes  strictly  he  looks  not  only  at  actions, 
but  also  at  the  qualities  of  actions';  we  must  hear  the  word  of 
God,  but  we  must  also  "take  heed  how  we  hear,"  as  Jesus  ad- 
monisheth,  Luke  viii.  18.  The  great  Lawgiver  did  not  therefore 
deem  it  sufficient  to  require  of  his  people  in  the  first  command- 
ment,  that  they  should  honour  and  worship  him  alone  as  God, 
in  opposition  to  all  idols ;  btit  he  requires  also  in  the  second  com- 
m  and  men  t,  that  they  should  do  this  in  a  right  manner,  spiritually, 
and  not  only  with  the  body  ;  according  to  his  prescript,  and  not  just 
as  they  saw  lit ;  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  not  by  images,  when  he 
saith,  "Thou  shair,  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any 
likeness." 

The  Lord  Cou.  in  order  to  discover  his  jealousy  against  images. 
iorbids  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  2 IF 

I.  Most  circumstantially,  and, 

II.  He  assigns  exceedingly  weighty  reasons  to  restrain  all  men 
from  them. 

I.  It  is  necessary,  1,  to  explain  what  is  forbidden  here.  2,  to  in- 
quire concerning  what  is  commanded,  and,  3,  to  show  that  this 
second  commandment  is  not  defective,  but  perfect. 

1.  God  forbids  making  and  honouring  an  image  and  likeness. 
Pezel  signifies  a  graven  image,  and  themouna-  a  likeness  which  rep- 
resents something  that  exists  ;  others  have  explained  largely  enough, 
in  what  manner  these  words  have  been  translated  by  the  Gretks.  It 
will  suffice  us  to  say,  that  they  denote  in  this  commandment  ima- 
ges and  likenesses  of  every  kind,  "  whether  graven,  or  molten,  or 
painted,  or  woven,  or  embroidered.  The  Lawgiver  speaks  not  there- 
fore of"  his  own  image  and  likeness,  after  which  he  made  man," 
Gen.  i,  26,  but  of  an  image  and  likeness,  meaner  than  the  man  him- 
self, made  by  himself,  and  thus  not  worthy  that  the  maker  of  it 
should  bow  down  himself  to  it.  The  Papists,  not  knowing  how  to 
excuse  their  forbidden  imageworship,  say  that  we  must  understand  by 
image  and  likeness  here,  an  image  of  an  idol,  which  was  contrived 
indeed  by  the  heathens,  but  exists  nowhere,  and  is  thus  an  image  of 
a  falsehood,  because  the  apostle  saith,  1  Cor.  viii.  4.  "  We  know 
that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  But  to  be  nothing  denotes 
here  that  an  idol  is  not  worthy,  that  we  should  ascribe  any  divinity 
to  it ;  and  therefore  the  idols  are  called  elilim,  <*  nothings,"  or  "  not 
gods."  The  divine  command  speaks  of  images  and  likenesses, 
which  represent  "  that  which  is  in  heaven  above,"  as  the  sun,  moon, 
stars  and  birds  ;  ll  that  which  is  in  the  earth  beneath,"  as  men,  beast* 
and  plants  ;  and  "  that  which  is  in  the  waters  under  the  earth,"  as 
brooks,  streams,  rivers,  fishes  and  seamonsters. 

The  God  of  Israel  forbids  making  images  and  likenesses  of  these 
things.  The  instructor  asks  with  good  reason,  "  Are  images  then 
not  at  all  to  be  made  ?"  Must  we  justify  the  followers  of  Mahomet, 
who  proscribe  entirely  the  art  of  making  images  ?  shall  we  utterly 
abolish  the  civil  use  of  images,  as  ornaments  of  houses,  cities  and 
coins?  If  any  should  be  so  unreasonable,  as  to  censure  Solomon 
for  adorning  his  throne  with  images  of  lions,  he  will  certainly  not  dis- 
approve of  the  conduct  of  the  Lord,  that  he  taught  Bezaleel  by  his 
Spirit  "  to  cut  stones,  and  carve  timber  in  a  curious  manner,"  Exod. 
xxxj.  i — 5.  When  therefore  the  Lawgiver  saith,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
make  any  image  or  likeness,  he  speaks  of  images,  by  which  men  en- 
deavour to  represent  him  in  particular ;  for  so  this  prohibition  is 
cxpluned,  as  we  will  show  presently  from  Deut.  ir.  15 — 18.  God 
Vol.  ii.  2  C 


218     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

forbids  also  every  other  kind  of  images,  with  respect  to  any  religious 
vise  or  them,  The  heathens  and  Jews  were  too  wise  to  think 
that  all  their  images  represented  God  :  they  made  images  of  crea- 
tures also,  in  older  to  honour  God  by  them  :  therefore  the  Lord  for- 
bids also  "  bowing  ourselves  down  to  them,  and  serving  them." 
The  Hebrew  word  Schachah  signifies  an  outward  downbowing  of  the 
body,  either  with  the  head,  or  with  the  knees,  or  with  the  whole 
body  to  the  earth.  The  Greek  translators  render  this  word  by 
proskunein,  to  reverence,  as  the  idolaters  reverenced  their  images 
and  gods,  sometimes  even  by  kissing  them  ;  for  tiny  kissed  either 
the  images  themselves,  or  they  kissed  their  hands  in  honour  of  their 
gods,  whom  they  could  not  reach.  See  Job.  xxxi.  26,  27.  The 
other  word  gnabad,  to  serve,  is  translated  by  the  seventy  laircnti-:, 
and  they  translate  it  elsewhere  doulenein.  There  is  not  therefore  so 
great  a  difference  between  the  service  of  lalreia  and  dowleia,  as  the 
Papists  imagine.  We  have  spoken  more  largely  of  this  in  the  fore- 
going sermon.  Thus  all  religious  worshipping  of  images  is  forbid- 
den, whether  by  praying  or  by  sacrificing,  or  by  burning  incense,  or 
by  celebrating  festivals. 

The  Lord  God  doth  not   forbid  this  making  and  worshipping  of 
images  without  a  reason.     He  knows  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  the 
heart,  which  doth  most  easily  suffer  itself  to  be  seduced  to  this  abom- 
inable service  :  it  knows  that  God   ought  to  be   worshipped ;  if  we 
shall  worship  him,  we  must  conceive  of  him  as  present  with  us  ;  the 
soul  bereaved  of  the  image  of  God,  knows  not  how  to  do  this  :  there- 
fore she  did  not  know  how  to  conduct  better  in  this  matter  than   by 
representing  him  in  a  bodily  manner,  and  by   directing  her  religious 
services  to  such  a   representation.     The   children   of  Ham    and   of 
Ja'phet,  separating  themselves  from  Shem,  and   from  his  true   cove- 
nant God,  invented  even    at  an   early  period  several  gods  for  them- 
selves ;  the  sun,  moon,  and   stars  were  first    and    before   all    others 
honoured  as  gods  by  the  Babylonians      After  this  they  placed  men 
also  in  the  number  of  their  Gods ;  they   deified  their  parents,  chil- 
dren, princes,  heroes,  and  others,  making  use  of  certain  ceremonies 
for  this  purpose.     The  Egyptians  looked  upon  beasts,  plants,  croco- 
serpents,  and    other  monsters,  to  be   gods       Idolatry   passed 
n  to  the  Greeks  :  and  the    Romans,    although    they    were 
v  than  the  rest,  became  so  foolish,  that  they  adopted  the  gods  of 
all  nations,  and  budded  a  Pantheon,  or  temple  of  all  the  gods,    and 
bro.ug  -  r  gods  into  it.     Even  the   Germans  and  Dutch*  did 

*  Although  the  a'jihor  speaks    in  tbe  original  only  of  the  Dutch,  it  is  evi- 
dent from  what  he  says,  that  he  intends  both  the  High  and  the  Low  Dutch. 


XXXV.   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  2  IS 

.nain  free  of  this  vice  :  we  have  hence  still  the  names  Sunday, 
monday,  S;c.  The  Germans  and  the  Dutch  worshipped  particularly 
the  sun,  moon,  Vulcan,  Wodan,  (called  otherwise  Mercury,)  whence 
Wednesday,  Tuisco,  and  his  son  Man,  who  were  lore  fa  hers  of  the 
Germans  and  Dutch.  From  Tuisco  they  seem  still  to  be  called 
Dutch,  and  from  Man,  Germans.  The  heathens  made  images  of 
all  these  god:;,  bowed  down  to  them,  and  practised  every  kind  of 
worship  before  them.  At  first  the  idolaters  were  not  so  curious,  as 
to  make  images  of  their  gods,  they  contented  themselves  with  an 
unhewn  stone,  or  the  unpolished  trunk  of  a  tree  ;  but  the  arts  multi- 
plying, and  the  art  of  making  images  being  invented,  they  made  im- 
ages of  their  gods  of  every  form,  of  wood,  stone,  gold,  silver,  and 
other  materials,  according  to  their  erroneous  conceptions,  which  they 
had  formed  of  their  gods. 

It  was  not  so  strange,  that  the  heathens,  whom  God  had  abandon- 
ed to  walk  in  their  own  ways,  should  be  so  madly  addicted  to  idola- 
try, as  that  even  the  posterity  of  Shem,  who  were  beloved  by  God, 
should  apostatize  thereto.  "  Terah,  the  father  of  Abraham  and  of 
Nahor,  served  other  gods,"  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  Joshua  xxiv.  2. 
Laban  swore  also  by  those  false  gods  of  his  fathers,  Gen.  xxxi  53. 
ll'.i  had  also  his  Teraphims,  or  household  gods,  and  Rachel,  who 
was  foolishly  inclined  to  them,  "stole  them,  Gen.  xxxi.  19.  Jacob 
indeed  purged  his  house  of  them,  Gen.  xxxv.  2 — 4,  but  his  poster- 
ity multiplying  in  Egypt,  defiled  themselves  with  the  idolatry  of 
the  Egyptians.  And  although  the  Lord  had  brought  thtm  out  of 
that  house  of  bondage  with  great  power,  and  with  an  outstretched 
arm,  yet  they  made  a  calf  at  Horeb,  and  bowed  down  to  a  molten 
image  :  "  They  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox 
that  eateth  g  ass."  When  Israel  was  come  to  the  borders  of  the 
Moabitcs,  "  they  joined  themselves  to  Baalpeor,  and  ate  the  sacrifi- 
ces of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi.  19,  20,28.  The  Israelites  were  but 
just  settled  in  Canaan,  when  they  adopted  and  served  the  gods  of 
the  heathens,  who  dwelled  among  them,  and  of  the  nations  wl  o 
were  round  about  them.  They  served  the  Baals  and  Molochs  of 
every  people,  the  Apis,  or  calf  of  the  Egyptians,  the  \shtoreth  of 
the  Zidonians,  the  Chemosh  of  the  Moabites,  and  other  gods  and 
goddesses,  yea,  they  served  them  with  the  filthiest,  lewdest  and 
most  cruel  ceremonies  :  they  made  for  them  temples,  high  places, 
groves  and  images,  which  were  fitter  to  frighten  and  to  shock  a  per» 

or  a*  they  are  usually  distinguished  by  the  English,  the  Germans  and  the 
Dutch. 


220       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

son,  than  to  be  worshipped ;  yea,  they  mul'i plied  these  images  so 
txce  di.i.Jy,  that  '■  they  filled  their  land  with  them  :  they  had  gods, 
lOKtgef  aliaisand  high  places,  not  only  according  to  the  number  of 
then  ciies,"  but  even  "according  to  the  number  of  their  streets," 
Jer.  xi.  13,  Ez  k.  xvi.  24,  25,  31.  But  the  Lord  punished  them 
severely  by  the  Babylonish  captivity,  which  impressed  a  horrour  of 
every  kind  of  image-worship  on  them,  that  cleaves  to  their  posterity 
even  until  ihis  day. 

It  might  be  imagined,  that  Christians,   having  such  examples  be- 
fore their  eyes,  greater  privileges,  and  a    clearer  revelation,    would 
not  apostatize  to  image    worship.      The  first    Christians  also  knew 
nothing  of  images  ;  neither  the    Saviour   nor    the    apostles  ordered 
the  Christians  to  worship  images  ;  they  who    defended  the    laws  of 
Cod  time   after  time  could  not  do  this.     The  Christians  were  accu- 
sed by  the  heathens  of  atheism,    because  they    had  no   images      In 
the  fourth  century,  »vhen  the  church    began  to  decline  from  her  pu- 
rity, there  was  here  and  there  an  image    seen   in    the  church  ;  but 
Lpiphanius,  seeing  a  picture  of  Christ  in  a  church,  tore  it  in  pieces. 
Alter  this  a  certain  bishop  of  Nola  introduced  images  into  churches 
for  ornament  and  instruction  ;  but  they  were   not  yet   worshipped. 
W  hen  men  began  after  this  to  worship   images,   Serenus,  bishop  of 
Marseilles,  cast  them  out  of  the  church.     The  bishop  of  Home  com- 
mended him    for  watching  against  image-worship,   but  blamed  lum 
for  casting  them  out  of  the  church,  because,  as  he  said,  they   might 
serve  to  instruct  the  ignorant.      !n  the  eighth  century  there  were  se- 
\-ete  contests  in  favour  of  and  against  images.     When  John,  Patri- 
arch of  Constantinople,  a  Monothelite,  who  held  that  Christ  had  only 
one  will,  was  condemned  by  the  Synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the  year 
711,  the  Roman  bishop.  Leo  the  second,  caused  pictures  of  oil    the 
members  of  that  synod  to  be  hung  up  in  the    porch   of   St.    Peter. 
The  emperour  Leo  Isaurus  took  this  exceedingly  ill,  and  ordered  in 
the  year  726,  that  no  man  should  worship  any  image  made  by  hands, 
and  that  all  the  images  should  be  destroyed.     The  bishop  of  Home 
excommunicated  the  Empeiour  on  this  account ;  but  the  Fmpevour 
laughed  at  him,  and  said,  he  is  an  idolater,   and  is    himself   excom- 
municated.    Constantine  Copronynuis  succeeding  his  father,  as  Em- 
perour, was  not  less  zealous  against  the  images,  and  procured  in  the 
general  synod  of  Constantinople,  in  the   year  754,  that  the    worship- 
pers of  images  should  be  condemned,  as  idolaters  ;  but  the  Empress 
Irene,  who  was  sottishly   addicted  to   image-worship,   obtained  in  a 
Synod  at  Nice,  in  the  year  787,  that  the  images  should  be  restored, 
served  and  worshipped.     To  manifest  her  special   zeal  for  images, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—58.  25 J 

3he  caused  her  father-h-law  Constantine  Copronymiis  to  be  digged 
up,  burned,  and  his  ashes  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea.  She  was  so 
imbittered  against  her  son  aNo,  on  account  of  his  aversion  from  im- 
ages, that  she  caused  his  eyes  te  he  thrust  out,  and  afterwards  ordered 
him  to  be  slain.  But  Charles  the  great  set  himself  against  this  mad- 
ness, and  assembled  a  synod  at  Frankfort,  in  the  year  794,  in  which 
that  Nicene  synod  «as  condemned.  Nevertheless,  all  this  strug- 
gling against  the  images  did  not  reform  the  church  of  Rome,  she  ad- 
heres even  until  this  day  to  the  judgment  of  the  false  synod  of  Nice, 
the  members  of  which  doting  upon  the  images,  said,  k'  We  judge 
that  the  images  of  the  angels  and  saints  ought  to  be  worshipped. 
If  any  man  be  not  of  this  mind,  but  scrupulous  and  doubtful  concern- 
ing the  worship  of  the  venerable  images,  the  holy  synod  denounces  an 
anathema  against  him."  Therefore  she  appealed  in  the  assembly 
of  Trent  to  this  synod;  she  likewise  punctually  observes  the  decree 
to  worship  images.  Like  the  Armenians  in  the  fifth  century  she  rep- 
resents the  Holy  Trinity  by  images,  the  Father,  in  the  form  of  an  . 
old  man,  the  Son  like  a  young  man,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  like  a  dove. 
She  conducts  in  this  manner  also  toward  the  saints  ;  her  temples, 
cities  and  streets  are  full  of  the  images  of  the  saints  ;  are  they  men 
she  decks  them  like  worldlings  ;  are  they  women,  she  bedizens 
them,  as  if  they  were  of  the  most  wanton  sort,  and  she  acts  thus  es- 
pecially with  the  images  of  Mary  ;  they  kiss  the  images,  they  burn 
incense  to  them,  they  bow  themselves  down  to  them,  and  mutter 
their  prayers  before  them.  Yea,  this  new  Babylon,  like  the  old,  is 
"  a  land  of  graven  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon  their  idols,"  as 
the  Lord  speaks,  Jer.  1.  38. 

But  we  oppose  such  a  conduct  with  this  second  commandment, 
which  strictly  forbids  such  making  of  images,  bowing  of  ourselves 
to  them,  and  serving  of  them.  Hear  how  Moses  explains  it,  when 
he  saith  to  all  Israel,  Deut  iv.  15 — 18.  "  Take  ye  therefore  good 
heed  to  yourselves,  (for  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  in  the  day 
that  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  in  Horeb,  out  of  the  fire)  lest  ye  cor- 
rupt yourselves,  and  make  yourselves  a  graven  image,  the  similitude 
of  any  figure,  the  likeness  of  male  or  female,  the  likeness  of  any 
beast  that  is  on  the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  fiieth 
in  the  air,  the  likeness  of  any  thing  that  creepeth  on  the  ground,  the 
likeness  of  any  fish  that  is  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth."  The 
Papists,  like  the  heathens,  "  professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  have 
become  fools,  since  they  have  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  an  image,  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and 
fourfooted  beasts,  and  creeping  things,"  Rom.  i.  22,  23.    How  can 


222      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  indeed  represent  that  purely  spiritual,  infinite  and  invisible  ] 
bv  images:     Can  he  be  expressed  by  the   image  i»f  »q  old  man,  of 
a  young  man,  and  of  a  dove  ?  no  :    "  to  whom   then   will   ye  liken 
God  ?  or  what  likeness  will   ye  compare  to  him  I"  so  we   ask  with 
the  prophet,  Isaiah  xl.  13.     "  Who.  or  what"   is  like  hjm  ?    None, 
according  to  Jcr.  x.  6.     And  although  there  were   v>  e.tiu:r   evil  in 
making   an  image  of  Gcd,  than  that  it  causcth  {.!>e  w  I 
to  form  a  mistaken   idea  of  Cot!,   and  unfits  him   for  coojtempl 
God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth,  it  ought  nevertheless  lobe  utterly  de 
ed.     It  doth  not  surely  help   the    Papists,   that  God  exhibited  suqh 
tokens  of  his  presence   sometimes,  Dan.   vii.  13,   Malt,   hi.   1,6,    17* 
But  where  have  we  either  a  command  of  God,  qrao  example  pi  the 
saints  to  warrant  a  delineating  of  God  after  those 

But  may  we  not  make  images  of  Christ  and  the  saints,  who  co;. 
versed  on  earth  in  bodies,  capable  of  being  represented  b) 
But  who  among  the  makers  of  images  hath   ever  se/  a   them  ?  who 
can  tell  us  that  the  images,    which  men  make  now  of  Christ  and  of 
his  saints,  are  like  them,  and  not  like  others  r  hath  any  one  informed 
thern,  that  Christ  was:  of  a.  middle  stature,  neither  too   tall  nor  too 
short,  of  a  fair  and  rudely  complexion,    and  that  his  hair  \.  as 
and  dangled  upon  his  shoulders  in  curls  ?  he  hath  never  seen  I 
but  hath  vainly  depicted  him  thus  in  his  own  brain..     If  it  were  even 
so,  that  the  makers  of  images   had  seen   him   and   his  saints, 
need  would  there  be  that  we   should   make  images  of  them  ?  ( 
not  God's  image  of  his  Son,   depictured  in  the  gospel  and  in  believ- 
ers to  suflice  us  ?    can  we  delineate  tic   saints   better  to  -ourselves 
than  by   imitating  their  virtues  ?    have  the  saints  ever   represente< 
oilier  saints  to  themselves  by  images  I     It   is  a   mere    fable,   that 
Christ,  when  going  to  Golgotha,   expressed  the  form  of  his  counte- 
nance in    the  handkerchief  of  Veronica,  (for  that   handkerchief  is 
shown    both  at  Rome  and  in  Spain.)     But  that  which   presses  the 
Papists  here,  is  that  they  will  worship  the  human   nature  of  Chi  is', 
and  the  saints,    which  we  have   refuted    before,    and  therefore  they 
imagine  that  they  ought  to  make    images  of  them,    that   they  maj 
worship  those  images  also. 

The  Papists  transgress  still  more  heinously  by  bowing  down  to 
hose  images,  and  serving  them,  yea,  worshipping  them.  "  We 
must  worship  and  serve  God  only,"  as  Jesus  commands,  Matt.  iv. 
10.  Do  the  images  know  our  wants  ?  can  they  help  us  ?  aie  they 
not  mere  lifeless  and  irrational  works  ?  can  they  make,  clothe,  or 
keep  themselves  from  being  spoiled  or  robbed  ?  shall  a  man  bow 
himself  i\.>;vn  to  what  his  fingers   have  made  ?    what  difference 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY-  Q.  96—98.  223 

there  then  be  between  the  imageworship  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and 
the  imageworship  of  Christians  ?  yea,  doih  not  the  worshipper  of 
images  m:ke  himself  like  his  images  ?  let  the  worshippers  of  ima- 
ges hear  how  they  are  derided,  Psalm  cxv.  4—8  4  The  idols  of 
the  nations  are  silver  and  gold,  the  work  of  men's  hands.  They 
have  mouths,  but  thejK  speak  not  ;  eyes  have  they,  but  they  see 
not  ;  they  have  ears,  but  th  y  hear  not;  noses  have  they,  but  they 
smell  not  ;  hands  have  they,  but  they  handle  not;  feet  have  they, 
but  they  walk  not  :  neither  speak  they  through  their  throat.  They 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in 
them  "  The  epistle  ascribed  to  Jeremiah,  among  the  apocryphal 
books,*  at  the  end  of  the  larger  bibles,  is  worthy  of  a  repeated  pe- 
rusal, that  we  may  see  the  vanity  of  image-worship  pourtrayed  in 
the  most  lively  colours. 

We    have  refuted  on  the   foregoing   Lord's  day,  (a)  the   opinion 
that  this  prohibition  of  imageworship  is  the  same  with  the  first  com- 
mandment, which  forbids  idolatry.     And  although  it   were  even  so, 
as  the  Romanists  assert   they  do  still  commit  idolatry  with  the  ima- 
ges, which  they  say  are  forbidden  in  this  commandment,     (b)  The 
Papists  manifest  their  folly,  when  they  say  that  this  relates  only   to 
the  Jews,  who  were  inclined  to  idolatry,  in  consequence  of  their  so- 
journing in  Egypt ;    doth    it  not  then   relate  to  the  Romanists  also, 
who   are  not  less  inclined  to    idolatry  than  the  Jews  were  ?  the  law, 
and  the  reasons  with  Which  it  is  enforced,  are  universal,  and  reach 
to  every  person,  who  is  subject  lo  God,  as  a  Lawgiver.  This  prohibi- 
tion flows  from  the  spiritual  nature  of  God,  which  cannot  be  depicted, 
and  it  pertains  thus  to  every    man  ;    and  therefore  Paul   proves 
against  the  heathens,  Actsxvii.  22,  29,  "  that  we  ought  not  to  think 
that  the  Godhead  is  like  gold,  or   silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and 
man's  device,  because  we  are  the    offspring  of  God."     Is  not  this 
argument  as  forcible  against  the  images  of  the   Papists,    as   against 
those  of  the    heathens  ?     Those   among  the  heathens,  who  followed 
their  natural    principles  wonld  not  suffer  any  images.     I  should  be 
too  prolix,  if  I  should  relate  with  others  what  many  ancient  writers 
of  the  heathens  say  of  these  things,  and  how  many  nations  worship- 
ped their  gods  without  images.     Or  hath   God  forbidden  only  idola- 
trous  images,    and    not   images  of  himself  and  of   his  saints  ?  but 
God  doth  not  except  any   kind  of  images :    "  Thou  shalt  not  make 

*  The  Apocryphal  books  are  placed  at  the  end  of  the  Dutch  bibles,  and  no? 
in  the  middle,  as  is  usual  in  the  English  bibles.  In  these  different  arrange 
ments  the  Dutch  have  consulted  dignity,  and  the  Enghs'a  method- 


224      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

any  image,  nor  any  likeness  "  saith  God.  What  are  idolatrous  ima- 
ges? are  they  not  images,  which  designate  God  and  his  creatures? 
and  are  not  the  popish  images  such  ?  (c)  They  cry  in  a  shameless 
manner,  We  do  not  worship  the  images,  but  those  whom  they  re- 
present. Who  can  believe  these  m;n,  who  engaged  in  the  council 
of  Trent  to  obey  the  council  of  Nice,  which  denounces  an  anathema 
against  every  one,  who  is  only  scrupulous  concerning  worshipping 
images  ?  do  they  not  honour  the  images  themselves,  why  then  do 
they  esteem  one  image  above  another,  although  it  represents  the 
same  saint  ?  for  they  bestow  greater  honour  upon  the  images  of 
Mary  at  Hall,  at  Montague,  and  at  Loretto,  than  upon  other  images 
oi  that  holy  virgin.  Let  it  be  allowed,  that  they  do  not  worship  the 
images;  but  do  they  not  bow  clown  to  them,  contrary  to  this  com- 
mand ?  They  say,  We  do  not  bow  down  in  order  to  honour  the 
images,  but  we  honour  and  serve  God  by  them.  In  this  manner 
might  the  Jews  also  have  excused  themselves  ;  for  they  intended  to 
honour  God  by  their  images  ;  Aaron  made  his  calf,  that  "  they  might 
hold  a  feast  to  the  Lord,"  Exod.  xxxii.  1 — 6.  Micha's  mother 
"  dedicated  her  silver  to  the  Lord,  to  make  an  image,"  Judges  xvii. 
3.  The  heathens  themselves  were  so  wise,  that  they  distinguished 
between  their  gods  and  the  images  of  their  gods.  The  F.phesians 
distinguished  also  between  "  the  goddess  Diana  and  her  image, 
which  fell  down  from  Jupiter,"  Acts  xix.  35.  "  Who  but  an  entire 
fool  can  believe  that  the  images  are  gods,"  said  the  heathen  in  Ar- 
nobius  (d)  It  is  no  better  what  the  Church  of  Rome  saith,  that 
under  the  old  testament  they  were  obliged  to  worship  the  ark  with 
its  cherubims,  because  the  Psalmist  saith,  Psalm  cxix.  5.  "  Exalt 
ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship  at  his  footstool."  But  they  were 
obliged  to  turn  themselves  toward  the  ark,  because  God  manifested 
himself  especially  present  there,  but  not  to  worship  the  ark.  Must 
we  say  that  Jesus  worshipped  the  heavens,  because,  when  he  pray- 
ed, he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  war!  heaven  ?  John  xvii  1.  Do  the  Pa- 
pists say  that  we  must  not  worship  the  images,  but  God  who  mani- 
festeth  himself  in  them,  we  answer,  where  doth  this  appear?  doth 
God  appear  upon  the  images,  as  he  did  formerly  upon  the  ark  in  ft 
cloud  ?  God  hath  removed  the  ark  ;  shall  we  then  now  set  up  ima- 
ges in  the  stead  of  it,  contrary  to  the  command  of  God  ?  We  omit 
other  cloaks  of  this  shame,  which  uncloaks  itself. 

M  But  may  we  not  tolerate  images  as  books  of  the  laity,"  that  is, 
of  the  common  people  ?  When  they  introduced  images  into  the 
churches  in  ancient  times,  they  did  not  at  first  worship  the  images, 
but  intended  that  they  should  serve  for  ornaments,  to  allure  the  hea 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  225 

thens,  who  were  extravagantly  fond  of  images  ;  and  also  for  instruct- 
ing the  ignorant  The  Lutherans  alsj  place  images  in  their  church- 
es for  this  purpose.  While  Martin  Luther  lay  concealed  in  the  castle 
of  Wirtemberg,  from  the  wiles  of  the  Papists,  Andrew  Carlstadt, 
assisted  by  others,  cast  the  images  out  of  the  Church  of  Wirtem- 
berg. Luther  heaving  of  this,  took  it  exceedingly  ill,  returned  to 
Wirtemberg,  and  restored  the  images,  saying  that  they  could  serve 
to  instruct  the  the  ignorant.  But  the  instructor  saith  wisely,  "  We 
must  not  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God,  who  will  not  have  his  peo- 
ple taught  by  dumb  images,"  8cc.  For,  (a)  if  images  were  neces- 
sary and  profitable  to  instruct  in  this  manner,  the  Lord  would  not 
have  prohibited  them  to  us.  Therefore  they  who  desire  to  intro- 
duce images  for  this  purpose,  pretend  to  be  wiser  than  God.  The 
Lord  God  directs  us  to  his  word  to  instruct  his  people :  we  must 
betake  ourselves  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,"  according  to 
the  divine  command,  Isaiah  viii.  20.  "  The  scriptures"  alone  "can 
make  us  wise  to  salvation,  "  2  Tim.  iii.  15.  By  the  lively  preach- 
ing of  the  word  of  God  "Jesus  Christ  is  depictured  before  our 
eyes,"*  as  Paul  speaks,  Gal.  iii.  1.  (b)  Images  are  unable  to  teach, 
they  are  dumb,  "  they  have  indeed  mouths,  bu  they  do  not  speak, 
neither  do  they  utter  any  sound  through  their  throat,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  from  Psalm  cxv.  5,  7.  If  we  receive  no  oral  instruc- 
tion, what  will  the  image  teach  us  by  itself  ?  it  will  mislead  us 
and  destroy  the  spirituality  of  our  worship.  "  The  stock,"  saith 
the  prophet,  is  a  doctrine  of  vanities,"  Jer.  x.  8.  "  The  molten 
image  is  a  teacher  of  lies,"  Hab.  ii  18,  and  "  the  idols  speak  vani- 
ty," Zech  x.  2.  There  were  indeed  images  of  Cherubims  in  the 
tabernacle  and  temple,  but  they  were  appointed  for  types  under  the 
old  testament,  and  are  now  abolished  :  those  images  were  also  re- 
moved from  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  were  thus  not  for  the  in- 
struction of  the  laity, 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  we  ought  also  to  condemn  the  obso- 
lete opinion  of  the  Anthropomorphites,  who  ascribed  a  human  body 
to  God.  Neither  will  I  attempt  to  refute  the  will  worship  of  the  Pa- 
pists, who  pretend  to  serve  God  according  to  their  own  imaginations, 
or  those  of  others  :  we  have  spoken  of  these  things  already  on  the 
thirty-third  Lord's  day.  We  will  rather  treat  of  the  more  secret 
vices,  which  are  contrary  to  this  commandment,  that  we  may  have 
a  fuller  discovery  of  our  deformity.  "  The  law  is  surely  spiritual," 
according  to  Rom.  vii.  14.     Therefore  this  commandment  without 

•   This  is  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 
Vol.  n.  2   D 


226      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

doubt,  forbids  a  want  of  spirituality  in  our  religious  worship.  For 
instance,  (a)  forming  a  corporeal  idea  of  God,  when  we  pray, 
(b)  li  vehemently  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  perfect  conception  and 
idea  of  God  :  we  "  cannot  surely  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection," 
Job  xi.  7,  8,  9.  (c)  Entertaining  a  different  notion  of  God  from 
what  he  hath  revealed  in  his  word.  The  sinner  itnagmeth  that  God 
is  like  himself,  md  that  he  will  forget  and  forgive  his  sins,  as  he 
himself  forgives  them  ;  but  the  Lord  will  punish  him,  as  we  see. 
Psalm  I.  21,  22.  The  people  of  God  imagine  that  tbeir  affliction, 
"their  way  is  hidden  from  the  Lord,  end  their  judgment  passed  over 
from  t'.eir  God."  l»ut  the  imag-.  of  God,  and  the  pattern  of  his 
•word  teacheth  otherwise,  Isaiah  xl  27,28.  (d)  It  must  also  be 
reckoned  a  sin  contrary  to  this  commandment,  to  be  dull,  sluggish, 
and  heartless  in  the  worship  of  God,  to  be  no  more  moved,  than  if 
we  were  images  before  God  :  "  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our 
months,  and  honour  him  with  our  lips,  but  remove  our  hearts  far 
from  him,"  with  the  Jews,  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  14.  (e)  We  may  add 
also  following  evil  examples  ;  "  we  may  not  follow  a  multitude  to 
do  evil ;"  thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  2. 

Wherever  we  find  any  vice  forbidden,  there  we  hare  also  a  com- 
mandment, winch  enjoins  the  contrary  virtues.  It  is  required  in  this 
command,  that  they  who  love  God  should  keep  his  commands,  as 
he  speaks  in  the  reasons,  with  which  he  enforceth  this  command. 
Therefore  (a)  the  word  of  God  must  be  our  pattern  and  rule  in  all 
things  :  we  must  "  hold  last  the  form  of  sound  words,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  rim.  i.  13  (b)  Our  worship  ought  also  to  be  reason- 
able, spiritual  and  without  images,  "in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  that 
we  may  serve  the  Lord  as  a  spirit,  according  to  his  word,  John  iv. 
24.  (c)  May  we  not  serve  God  by  images,  then  he  only  must  be 
the  pattern  of  our  sanctincation  :  therefore  he  saith  to  the  children 
of  Israel)  Lev.  xix.  2.  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God 
am  holy."  He  hath  indeed  exhibited  his  image  to  us  in  his  com- 
mandments, and  throughout  his  whole  word. 

3.  This  commandment  being  so  broad,  it  ought  not  to  be  censur- 
ed as  imperfect.  The  Socinians  say  that  the  second  commandment 
was  imperfect ;  but  that  Christ,  the  new  Lawgiver,  hath  perfected 
and  enlarged  it.  And  what  hath  Christ  forsooth  added  to  it,  that 
was  not  forbidden  before  ?  they  say,  fleeing  from  idols,  avoiding  pla- 
ces where  they  are,  and  caring  things  sacrificed  to  idols.  But  the 
Lord  commanded  by  Moses,  that  they  should  avoid  even  the  names 
of  idols,  E:;od.  xxiii.  13,  that  Israel  should  burn  the  idols  with  fire, 
that  they  should  not  cov'et  their  silver  nor  gold,  and  that  they  shouW 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96— 98.  227 

destroy  all  the  places,  where  they  were  formerly  worshipped.  See 
Deut  vii  25,  26.  xii.  2,  3.  It  .vas  sinful  in  Israel  to  tat  things, 
that  were  sacrificed  to  idols,  "  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead,"  Psalm  cvi. 
23.  It  was  therefore  forbidden  by  God  through;  closes,  and  indeed 
in  this  commandment. 

II.   Although  this  commandment  is    worthy,  on  its  own  account, 
to  be  approved  and  observed,  it  nevertheless  pleases  the  Lord  to  en- 
force it  by  powerful  motives  ;  for  he  doth  not  only  Say,   that  he  wis 
"  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,"  on  which  account  they  were  obliged 
to  observe  his  whole  law,  as  ha  h  been  shown  on  the  preface  oi    the 
Lord  to  the  law,  in  the   forme.   Lord's  day  ;  but    he   adds   also  two 
reasons  to  move  them  to  observe  this  command,     (1)  "that  tie  is  a 
jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of   the  fathers   upon    the   children, 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  him."     Tie 
Lord,   entering   into  a  covenant   with   his  people    consii  ers   ft   as  a 
marriage  covenant,  by  which  he  was,  as  it  were,  the  husb  nd  of   Is- 
rael, and  Israel,   as  it  were,  the  wife   of  the    Lord  :    if  no*    Israel 
should  cleave  in  luve  to  the  images,  they  would  then,  like  an  adulte- 
rous wife,  hate  the  Lord  their  husband  ;  therefore  worshipping  ima- 
ges is  often    represented   to  us  as    spiri:ual    whoredom  ;    which  the 
Lord,   inflamed  with    vehement  jealou -y,    would    revenge,  as  a  i>"S- 
band  awngeth  himself  on  a.  count  of  the  adulteiy  of  his  wife.    Yea, 
with  su  h  severity  would  God  punish  this  abomination,  that  he  would 
visit  the  iniquity  of    the    fathers  upon  the  children,    unto  the  third 
and  fourth  generation.     We   know   how  the  children  fared   in  the 
time  of  the  flood,  how  Eli's  and  Jeroboam's  posterity  fared;  which 
was  surely  not  unrighteous  ;  for  since  children  are   not  only  punish- 
able on  their  own  account,  but  were  also  admitted  with  their  parents 
into  that  covenant,  therefore  they  were  considered   by  the   Lord,   as 
having  broken  that  covenant,  with  their  parents,  when  their  parents 
were  guilty  of  worshipping  images,   and  were  become  thus  children 
of  whoredom.      But  although  God   executes  his  vengeance  with  se- 
verity,  he  nevertheless  displays  his  mercy  more  than  his  severity. 
The  justice  of  God  is  as  natural  to  him  as  his  mercy  :  but  he  choos- 
es to   manifest  his  mercy  rather   than  his  justice  :  for  he  doth  not 
always  execute  his  justice  upon  every  sinner,  and  he  saith  that  '*  the 
son  shall  not  always  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,"  Ezek.  xviii.  20. 
Therefore  (a)  "  he  also  showeth  mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that 
love  him,   and  keep  his  commandments."     The    J-  wish   nation  is 
still  beloved  for  the  sake  of  their  fathers  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ; 
■who  loved  the  Lord,  and  kept  his  commandments,  aid  they  will  yet 
be   converted  to  the   Lord,   in  consequence  of  his  mercy,  as  Paul 


228      THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

teacheth,  Rom.  xi.  24—  28.  And  so  the  Lord  promiseth  that  he 
will  show  favour  to  the  offspring  of  all  who  love  him.  Therefore 
as  parents  do  not  desire  that  their  children  should  suffer  the  grie- 
vous anger  of  God,  but  rather  that  they  should  experience  his  loving- 
kindness,  they  ought  to  be  persuaded  lo  abstain  from  breaking  his 
commandments,  and  th.s  commandment  in  particular,  and  to  see  that 
they  keep  it. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  the  attachment  of  Babylon  to  images,  do  we 
not  then  see,  hearers,  that  our  fathers  had  weighty  reasons  for  leav- 
ing her  ?  Rome,  formerly  a  faithful  city,  was  indeed  become  a  har- 
lot. The  church  of  Rome,  that  adulterous  woman,  admitted  stran- 
gers instead  of  her  husband.  Justly  is  she  described,  Rev.  xvii.  1, 
2,  5,  as  "  the  great  whore,  the  mother  of  whoredoms,  who  made 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication." 
The  Jews,  through  their  attachment  to  images,  apostatized  to  hea- 
thenism :  but  the  Papists  exceed  the  heathens  and  Jews  in  worship- 
ping images.  The  Lord  God  hath  chastised  that  church  severely 
by  strange  nations,  and  especially  by  the  Turks,  for  her  doting  on 
images  ;  but  "  she  hath  not  repented  of  the  works  of  her  hands, 
that  she  should  not  worship  devils,  and  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and 
brass,  and  stone,  and  of  wood  :  which  neither  can  see  nor  hear,  nor 
walk,"  as  John  foretold,  Rev,  ix.  14 — 20.  How  could  the  Irueborn 
children  of  God  endure  this  ?  for  their  flesh  abhorred  this  wicked- 
ness, when  they  saw  it,  and  when  they  were  obliged  to  betake  them- 
selves to  a  man  on  a  cross,  instead  of  the  crucified  Christ  and  his 
Spirit  ;  and  they  were  besides  this  murdered  also,  because  they 
would  not  bow  their  knees  to  the  abominable  images.  Therefore 
they  justly  pleaded  with  their  mother,  because  she  was  not  the  wife 
of  the  Lord,  nor  he  her  husband ;  and  they  did  not  forsake  her, 
without  a  reason,  since  she  was  incorrigible.  May  the  Lord  pre- 
serve us  from  returning  to  her  impure  bosom  again. 

It  is  time,  hearers,  to  come  to  ourselves.  Was  this  command, 
with  its  threatenings  and  promises,  given  to  Israel  only,  and  not  to 
us  also?  But  have  ye  also  kept  it  ?  Yea,  will  some  of  you  think, 
we  have  never  bowed  our  knees  to  the  images  of  Babylon  :  but  doth 
God  forbid  nothing  but  making  images,  bowing  ourselves  to  them, 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  229 

and  serving  them  ?    surely  yes :    he   forbids  here  also  the  spiritual 
imagetnaking,   and   the  inward   imageworship.     (a)  When  yc  pray 
to  God,  what  do  ye  make  of  him  ?  what  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves, 
when  ye  address  him  ?    nothing   at  all  ?    do   ye  only  mutter  a  few 
words  t  or  do  ye  propose  to  yourselves  a  vast,   extended   body,   that 
fills  the  universe  ?     How    many  are   there  who   often,  yea,   usually 
propose  to  themselves,  next  to  their  teraphims,  household  gods,  or 
pictures,  an  image  of  a  man  on  a  cross,  if  not  of  an  aged  father,  a 
young  son,  and  a  dove,  that  they  may  mumble  a  few  words  to  those 
images  !     (b)  If  ye  do    endeavour   to   know  God,   and  to  discover 
what  he  is,  do  ye  then  give  heed  only  to  what  he  reveals  concerning 
himself  in  his  word,  and  believe  it  with  simplicity  of  heart,  because 
he  testifieth  it?  it  is  then  well      But  how  often   do   men  endeavour 
to  intrude   with  their  fleshly  understandings  into  the   unsearchable 
mysteries  of  God,  to  inquire   how   he  can  be  simple,   and  yet   just, 
merciful  and  triune  ;  how  he  hath  elected  one,  and  rejected  others  ■ 
how  he   can    conclude  all  men   under   the  disobedience   of  Adam. 
When  they  cannot  see  into  these  things,  nor  reconcile  them  to  their 
corrupt  ideas,    they  imagine  evil  against  the  Lord,  they  deny  the 
truth,  and  join  themselves  to  the  enemies  of  it,  if  not  in  profession 
at  least  in  heart,     (e)  Come,  impenitent  sinner,  what  thinkest  thou 
or  what  dost  thou  imagine  concerning  the  Lord,  with  respect  to  thy- 
self ?  will  he  indeed  mark  thy  sins  strictly,  and   punish  them  so  se- 
verely, as  he  saith  in  his  word  ?  thou  thinkest,  no,  God  is  good  and 
merciful :  I  hope  that  he  will  not  notice  my  sins  so  particularly.     I 
trust  that  he  hath  forgiven  them  already  ;  I  am  not  concerned  ahout" 
it,  he  blesses  me,  and  with  careless  Judah,  Jer.  ii.  35,  thou   sayest 
"Surely  I  am    innocent;    for  his  anger  is  turned   away   from  me." 
Thou  dost  not  doubt   but  that  thou  wilt  be  saved.     Thou   believest 
that  God  would    not   otherwise  be  merciful,   and   that  Christ    would 
have  died  in  vain.     Therefore  God,   according  to  thine  imagination, 
which  thou  formest  of  him,  will  deny  his  justice,  and  will  revoke  all 
his   threatnings   against  thee.     Behold  what  an  abominable    imao-e 
thou  makest  to  thyself  of  God,  thou  bowest  down  thyself  to  it,  and 
servest  it.     (d)  Further  my  friends,  when  ye  are  about  to  serve  God 
after  your  manner,  to  pray  to   him,  to  read  and  hear  his  word,  how 
are  ye  then  disposed  ?     "  Is  not  God  only  near  in  your  mouths,  and 
far  from  your  reins  ?"    as  the  prophet  speaks  of  his   countrymen, 
Jer.  xii.  2.     Do  ye  not  come  before  his  face,  like  immoveable  stocks 
and  stones  ?     Men  may  see  in  you,  when  ye  attend  upon  the   public 
worship,  that  ye  are  as  inattentive,  and  as  unaffected,  as  the  popish 
images,  which  are  more  in  the  church  than  ye  are.     The  looks  of 


J30       THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

your  countenances  testify  against  you.  (e)  And  what  is  your  rule 
and  pattern,  which  ye  propose  to  yourselves,  in  order  to  direct  ycuv 
goings?  is  it  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  his  image  expressed  there- 
in, and  in  his  saints?  Verily,  the  most  of  you  know  nothing  of 
this :  comparing  themselves  with  themselves,  they  imagine  that 
they  know  best  what  they  ought  to  do  :  they  propose  the  honours, 
the  pleasures  and  profits  of  the  world  to  themselves,  as  alluring 
images,  and  they  govern  themselves  by  those  in  all  that  they  do,  and 
forbear. 

Ye  have  therefore  sinned  in  a  dreadful  manner  against  this  com- 
mandment. Are  ye  not  Papists  by  profession,  ye  are  such  in  your 
hearts,  and  in  your  conversation.  And  what  restrains  you  fi  om  serving 
the  Romish  images?  Is  it  the  commandment  of  God.  his  threaten- 
ing and  promises?  Is  it  the  fear  of  God  ?  no  ;  but  because  ye  have 
no  opportunity  for  it,  and  have  been  born  and  educated  among  re- 
formed Christians.  If  your  parents,  friends  and  preachers  should 
return,  either  willingly,  or  compelled  by  persecution,  to  the  Romish 
Egypt,  ye  would  soon  follow  their  examples.  Your  disposition  is 
therefore  abominable  ;  like  the  worshippers  of  images  ye  are  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  image,  and  your  "  understanding  is  darkened,  and 
ye  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance  that  is 
in  you.  and  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,"  Eph.  iv.  18.  Ye  hate  tbe 
Lord,  and  are  exceedingly  guilty  before  him.  If  ye  remain  as  ye 
are,  ye  cannot  expect  any  mercy,  but  that  his  anger  and  jealousy 
will  be  kind'ed  against  you  :  "  As  a  dream,  when  one  awaketh,  so 
when  he  awaketh.  he  will  despise  your  image,"  us  Asaph  expect- 
ed, Psalm  lxxiii.  20. 

But  neither  are  ye,  O  believers,  though  ye  are  newformed  after 
the  image  of  God,  altogether  innocent.  How  often  do  those  spiritu- 
al images  possess  you.  and  hinder  you  in  your  contemplations,  and 
in  your  worship  of  God,  as  a  being  who  is  altogether  spiritual  ?  yea, 
do  they  not  destroy  the  purity  and  spirituality  of  your  devotions  ? 
and  do  they  not  leave  only  a  few  barren,  lifeless  and  sapless  exer- 
cises ? 

Whoever  ye  arc,  whether  lovers  or  haters  of  the  Lord,  have  ye 
any  desire  to  regulate  yourselves  according  to  this  commandment : 

1.  See  then  your  shameful  doting  upon  images,  and  your  trans- 
gressions against  the  Lord.  Examine  yourselves  by  what  we  h.r.c 
just  now  said,  in  order  to  discover  to  you  your  misconduct,  and  your 
spiritual  imageuorship  :  put  your  hands  into  your  bosoms,  and  sec 
whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous  :  your  recovery  must  begin 
here,  they  who  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,   but    they   \v!:0    are 


— $8.  281 

sick.  Shut  not  your  eyes  then  and  flatter  not  yourselves  with  Ju» 
dah,  who  was  sottishly  addicted  to  images,  as  it  ye  were  innocent. 
Hear  the  Lord  say  to  every  one  of  you  also,  as  he  said  to  that  people 
Jer.  ii.  23.  "  How  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not  polluted,  I  have  not 
gone  after  Baalim  ?  see  thy  way  in  the  valley,  know  what  thou  hast 
done  :  thou  art  a  swift  dromedary,  traversing  her  ways,"  Jer.  ii.  23* 
2  But  will  it  suffice  to  see  and  know  your  tranigiessions  in  a 
slight  manner  ?  no,  but  ye  must  be  ashamed  of  them,  and  must 
humble  yourselves  before  the  Lord.  What  is  more  shameful,  what 
provokes  the  Loid  more  to  anger  and  jealousy,  and  what  ought  to 
fill  a  person  with  shame  more  than  this  sin  ?  The  idolatrous  image 
is  emphatically  called  "Shame,"  Jer.  iii.  24,  xi.  13.  liosea  ix.  10. 
Was  it  not  so  called,  because  the  people  of  the  Lord  ought  to  be 
ashamed  of  their  worshipping  of  images  ?  Therefore  stand  still 
awhile  by  these  sins  of  yours,  and  behold  them,  until  ye  blush  for 
shame  of  them  before  the  Lord,  as  the  Lord's  returning  people,  be- 
moaning themselves  on  account  of  their  worshipping  of  images, 
said  before  the  Load,  Jer.  iii.  25,  "  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  and 
our  confusion  covereth  us  ;  for  we  have  'sinned  against  the  Lord  our 
God,  we  and  our  fathers  from  our  youth  even  unto  this  day,  and 
have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God." 

3.  Flee  unto  Christ,  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  to  obtain  par- 
don for  this  iniquity  :  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law,"  and  so  also  of 
this  commandment,  "  to  every  one  who  believeth,"'  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  x.  4.  By  your  transgressions  of  this  commandment  ye  have 
rendered  yourselves  guilty,  and  have  provoked  the  Lord  to  jealousy 
against  you,  that  he  should  visit  your  iniquities  upon  you.  Will  ye 
not  now  endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  this  guilt,  and  to  be  recon- 
ciled to  God  ?  and  how  shall  ye  obtain  reconciliation?  He  only, 
who  is  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his 
person,  hath  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  Heb.  i.  3.  Hee  then 
every  one  of  you  to  him,  "  lay  hold  on  him,  and  make  your  peace 
with  God,"  as  it  is  said,  Isaiah  xxvii.  5. 

4.  Be  earnestly  desirous,  that  the  Lord  would  imprint  his  image 
upon  you.  Bring  your  hearts  unto  him,  that  he  may  express  his 
image,  the  transcript  of  his  law,  in  you.  The  zeal  of  faithful  preach- 
ers tends  to  this,  with  Paul  they  "travail  in  birth,  till  Christ  be 
formed  in  you,"  Gal.  iv.  19.  Lo'.k  then  much  at  the  Lord,  and  at 
his  image,  that  his  beams  may  irradiate  you,  and  may  cause  you  to 
shine  by  his  glory.  See  how  this  happened  to  Moses,  Lzod.  xxxiv, 
29,  30.  Paul  having  respect  to  this  case,  saith  2  Cor.  iii.  IS,  "  We 
all  with  open    face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  ths   Lord, 


232     THE  SECOND  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED- 

are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  Yea,  in  all  your  conversation  "be  ye  fol- 
lowers of  God,  as  dear  children,"  Eph.  v.  1. 

5.  Regulate  all  your  conceptions  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  ways  by 
his  image  expressed  in  his  word.  Whatever  ye  think,  judge,  or  say 
of  him,  if  it  agree  not  with  his  word,  ye  must  reject  it  as  hurtful, 
yea,  as  reproachful  to  the  Lord.  Beware  in  all  your  approaches  to 
him  of  bouily  and  excessive  exertions,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of 
him  :  ye  are  too  contracted  to  comprehend  many  great  things  of 
him.  Even  when  the  Lord  sheds  much  light  into  the  soul,  she  still 
"  sees  only  the  utmost  ends  of  his  ways,  and  hears  only  a  small  por- 
tion of  him  ;  who  then  can  understand  the  thunder  of  his  power?" 
Job  xxxvi.  14.  When  "  the  Lord  beset  David  in  all  that  he  did," 
he  was  still  obliged  to  cry  out,  "  Such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful 
for  me  ;  it  is  too  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it,"  Psalm  exxxix.  6. 
To  exert  ourselves,  in  order  to  conceive  highly  of  God,  deprives  our 
souls  of  their  vigour,  and  renders  our  understandings  dull.  It  is 
best  to  approach  unto  God  in  a  sober  manner,  with  a  belief  of  his 
omnipresence,  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  goodness  ;  and  there- 
fore Paul  saith,  Heb.  xi.  6,  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe 
that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek 
him." 

6.  Seek  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  to  perform  all 
your  works  by  him  ;  for  without  him  both  we  and  all  that  we  do  is 
like  an  image  without  spirit.  "  Be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,"  saith 
Paul,  Eph.  v.  18.  "  We  must  live  and  walk  in  the  Spirit,"  Gal.  v. 
16,  25.  We  must  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  be  led,  cry 
Abba,  Father,  aud  assure  ourselves  by  him,"  Rom.  viii.  13 — 16.  It 
therefore  behooves  you  to  pray  earnestly  with  David  for  the  Spirit, 
Psalm  cxhii.  10,  "  Teach  me  lo  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God  : 
let  thy  good  Spirit  lead  me  in  the  hnd  of  uprightness  "  Let  it  not 
however  satisfy  you,  that  the  Lord  hath  favoured  you  with  his  Spirit, 
but  be  earnestly  desirous  that  the  church  also  may  be  filled  with 
him,  agreeably  to  the  representation  of  the  Spirit  in  Ezekiel's  vision 
of  the  waters,  which  rose  to  a  great  height,  Lzek.  xlviii.  1  — 10.  For 
when  the  Spirit  departs  from  the  church,  she  is  filled  with  images. 

7.  Let  every  one  of  you  manifest  his  aversion  from  the  Popish 
images,  and  let  the  magistrates  destroy  them.  We  ought  all,  and 
each  of  us  in  his  station  to  act  the  same  part  toward  the  images 
which  we  have  said  we  ou.^ht  toad  toward  the  Popish  mass. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  soul,  who  seeks  to  love  the  Lord  and  t» 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  96—98.  233 

keep  his  command  men  s  may  assure  herself  that  he  will  show  mer- 
cy to  her  and  to  her  seed  ;  '•  Jesus  and  his  Father  will  love  her,  will 
manifest  themselves  to  her,  and  make  their  abode  with  her,"  as  he 
promiseth,  John  xiv.  21.  23.  He  will  be  jealous,  not  against  her, 
but  for  her,  to  the  destruction  of  her  enemies;  for  "thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  I  am  jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Zion  with  a  great 
jealousy.  And  I  am  very  sorely  displeased  with  the  heathen  that 
are  at  ease,"  Zech  i.  14  15.  Yea,  the  Lord  will  adorn  t1  ose  who 
love  him  with  his  beauty,  that  he  may  glorify  them  ;  and  they  may 
with  an  elevated  mind,  like  David,  Psalm  xvii.  15,  say  with  confi- 
dence, "  I  will  behoid  thy  face  in  righteousness  :  1  shall  be  satisfied; 
*^hen  I  awake,  with  thv  likeness."     Amen, 


Vol.  a*  U  fc 


(  234  ; 


EXPLANATION 


OF  THE 


THIRD  COMMANDMENT. 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exodus  xx.  7.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God  in  vain :  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh 
his  name  in  vain. 

Question  99.     What  is  required  in  the  third  command  ? 

Answer.  That  we,  not  only  by  cursing  or  perjury,  but  also  by 
rash  swearing,  must  not  profane  or  abuse  the  name  of  God  ;  nor  by 
silence  or  connivance  be  partakers  of  these  horrible  sins  in  others  ; 
and  briefly,  that  we  use  the  name  of  God  no  otherwise,  than  with 
fear  and  reverence,  so  that  he  may  be  rightly  confessed  and  worship- 
ped by  us,  and  glorified  in  all  our  words  and  works.