Q.  100.  Is  then  the  profaning  of  God's  name  by  swearing  and 
cursing  so  heinous  a  sin,  that  his  wrath  is  kindled  against  those,  who 
do  not  endeavour  as  much  as  in  them  lies  to  prevent  and  forbid  such 
cursing  and  swearing  ? 

A.  It  undoubtedly  is,  for  there  is  no  sin  greater,  or  more  provo- 
king (o  (iod,  than  the  profaning  f.f  his  name  ;  and  therefore  he  hae 
commanded  this  sin  to  be  punished  with  death* 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  99,  100.  23$ 

VJfREAT  personages  excite  in  those  who  are  meaner  than  they, 
reverence  and  respect-  A  mean  man  when  speaking  to  his  supe- 
rior, will  sometimes  not  know  what  to  say,  and  will  be  so  abashed, 
that  he  will  not  be  able  to  utter  his  words  distinctly.  When  Job 
"  went  out  to  the  gate,  through  the  city,  when  he  prepared  his  seat 
in  the  street,  the  young  men  hid  themselves ;  and  the  a.^ed  arose 
and  stood  up.  The  princes  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hand 
upon  their  mouth.  The  nobles  held  their  peace,  and  their  tongue 
cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth,"  Job  xxix.  7 — 10.  It  is  also 
proper,  that  men  should  have  a  moderate  reverence  for  their  superi- 
ours  ;  for  if  there  be  aught  in  any  person  that  renders  him  more 
worthy  than  ourselves,  we  ought  to  acknowledge  it.  The  Lord  God 
himself  requires  that  we  should  "  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head, 
and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man,"  Lev.  xix.  32.  Is  tl  is  proper, 
it  is  still  more  becoming  that  we  should  bow  down  with  profound 
reverence  before  the  high  God.  See  Isaiah  vi.  1 — 5,  how  a  the  Ser- 
aphs cover"  with  a  holy  reverence  "  their  faces  and  feet,"  and 
proclaim  the  awful  holiness  of  the  Lord,  and  how  the  holy  prophet 
shrinks  in  his  own  eyes  on  account  of  it.  Indeed,  whatever  is  wor- 
thy of  honour  in  any  creature  is  from  the  Lord.  He  is  higher  than 
the  highest,  and  is  worthy  on  his  own  account  to  be  feared  :  "  For- 
asmuch as  there  is  none  like  him,  therefore  he  is  great,  and  great  is 
his  name  in  might.  Who  would  not  then  fear  him?  for  to  lrm 
doth  it  appertain,"  as  the  prophet  saith,  Jer.  x.  6,  7.  Doth  not  the 
sinner  fear  God,  he  will  "correct  him  on  account  of  his  wicked- 
ness," as  he  saith,  Jer.  ii  19.  Even  those  who  do  not  use  his  name 
with  a  holy  reverence  and  respect,  but  take  it  in  vain,  he  will  not 
hold  guiltless,  as  he  declared  from  Sinai  amidst  dreudiul  thun- 
derings,  and  fearful  lightnings,  in  the  third  commandment.  He  did 
not  judge  it  sufficient  to  enjoin  in  the  first  commandment,  that  we 
should  worship  him  only  ;  and  in  the  second  commandment,  that 
we  should  worship  him  according  to  his  word,  in  spirit  and  in  truth, 
without  images ;  but  he  also  ordains  in  this  third  commandment, 
according  to  his  sovereign  excellency,  and  with  a  severe  threaten- 
ing, that  we  should  worship  him  with  fear  and  reverence. 
We  must  speak  here  of  three  particulars, 

I.  What  the  name  of  God  is. 

II.  That  we  may  not  take  it  in  vain,  and 

III.  The  nature  of  the  threatening,  with  which  this  command  i» 
enforced. 


236      THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

1.  Although  there  is  none  like  the  Lord,  and  he  therefore  doth 
not  need  a  name  to  distinguish  him  from  others;  ne\ertheless  since 
the  inventors  and  promoters  of  idolatry  have  wished  to  impose  those 
who  were  like  him  on  the  world,  and  since  a  name  serves  to  make  a 
person  better  known  to  others,  therefore  the  Lord,  in  order  to  dis- 
tinguish himself  the  better  from  the  intruded  idols,  and  to  make 
himself  known  to  his  people,  hath  revealed  himself  by  a  name. 
But  as  the  Lord  is  infinitely  excellent,  it  is  impossible  to  express  his 
excellency  by  a  single  name,  and  therefore  the  name  of  God  inti- 
mates several  particulars.  The  name  of  God  signifieth  sometimes 
God  himself,  so  far  as  he  makes  himself,  his  perfections  and  excel- 
lencies known  to  his  reasonable  creatures,  by  his  woids  and  works. 
Therefore  Moses  saith,  Deut.  xxviii.  58,  that  Israel  ought  "to  fear 
that  glorious  and  fearful  name,  the  Lord  their  God."  God  being 
asked  what  his  name  was,  said,  "  I  AM  THAT  I  AM,"  Exod.  Hi. 
\3,  14.  But  inasmuch  as  the  essence  of  God.  as  it  is  in  itself,  can- 
not be  expressed  by  any  name,  since  he  surpasseth  every  concep- 
tion and  expression,  therefore  the  name  of  God  doth  not  denote 
God,  as  he  is  in  himself,  but  as  he  makes  himself  known  in  his  per- 
fections and  excellencies,  and  particularly,  as  the  God  of  the  sinner, 
by  which  he  reveals  himself  in  the  most  glorious  manner  with 
respect  to  his  excellencies  and  perfections.  When  he  was  willing, 
upon  the  intercession  of  Moses,  to  forgive  the  sin  of  Israel,  he  de- 
clared his  name,  proclaiming,  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful 
and  gracious,  longsuffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth," 
Exod  xxxiv.  5,  6.  7.  For  this  end  he  gave  his  Son,  "  in  the  midst 
of  whom  is  his  name,"  Exod.  xxiii.  21.  And  who  by  his  words, 
works,  sufferings  and  glory,  "  manifested  his  Father's  name  unto 
the  men  whom  the  Father  had  given  him,"  John  xvii.  6.  For  this 
end  he  gives  also  his  word  and  instituted  worship,  in  which  his  peo- 
ple "  walk,  as  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  their  God,"  Mich.  iv.  5.  So 
also  the  great  works  of  the  Lord  make  him  known  as  his  name. 
David  having  respect  to  this,  begins  and  concludes  his  eighth  psalm 
with  the  words,  "  O  Lord  our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in 
all  the  earth  !"  And  therefore  we  must  understand  by  the  name  of 
God  all  those  particulars  by  which  he  reveals  and  makes  himself 
known  ;  as  also  certuin  nouns.,  to  wit,  Lord,  God,  of  which  there 
are  several  in  Hebrew  and  Greek,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  eighth 
Lord's  day. 

2.  Since  now  man,  especially  an  Israelite,  is  directly  subject  to 
"  the  Lord  his  God,"  and  hath  the  greatest  concern  in  him,  there- 
fore he  must  use  his  name.     The  word  jYuta,  which  occurs  here  in 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  99,  100.  237 

the  original,  and  is  rendered  by  our  translators,  "  to  use,"*  signifi'eth 
to  ta;s.e,  to  take  up,  to  lift  up  and  bear,  to  wit,  in  order  to  make  use 
of  the  name  of  God  ;  as  is  done  by  calling  ourselves  after  that  name, 
which  we  do,  when  we  enter  into  covenant  with  God  :  "  We  are 
called  by  thy  name,"  saith  the  church  to  the  Lord,  Jer.  xiv.  9.  Or 
by  private  contemplations  and  meditations,  like  David,  whose  "  med- 
itation of  the  Lord  was  sweet,"  Psalm  civ  34.  Or  by  words, 
H  speaking"  with  ourselves  "  of  the  works  of  his  hands,"  Psalm 
cxi.  iii.  5,  and  "  exalting  his  name,"  in  the  presence  of  others, 
Psalm  xxxiv.  3.  Or  by  religious  exercises,  as  "  men  began  at  the 
time  of  the  birth  of  Enos,  to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  •  Gen. 
iv.  26.  Or  by  our  whole  conversation,  that,  as  the  apostle  saith  to 
the  Thessalonians,  2  Thess.  i.  ii.  "  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  him."  Therefore  when 
the  Lawgiver  saith  that  we  must  not  take  his  name  in  vain,  he  com- 
mands, according  to  the  explanation  of  the  instructor,  "  that  we 
should  use  the  holy  name  of  God  no  otherwise  than  with  fear  find 
reverence."  And  so  this  command  requires  that  holy  fear,  and  that 
profound  reverence  for  Gcd,  by  which  we  "  fear  that  glorious  and 
ieuriul  name,"  Deut.  xxviii.  38,  so  that  we  sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
and  make  him  our  fear  and  our  dread,"  as  the  prophet  admonisheth, 
Isaiah  viii.  13.  Surely  not  with  a  slavish  fear,  "  which  terrifies  the 
sinner,  and  surprises  him  with  fearfulness,  as  it  were  for  a  devouring 
fire,  and  for  everlasting  burnings,''  Isaiah  xxxiii.  14,  but  with  a 
childlike  fear,  which  causeth  us  to  love  and  fear  the  Lord  as  our 
God,  according  to  the  covenant  of  grace  ;  therefore  the  Lawgiver 
speaks  of  himself  as  of  the  God  of  Israel,  thou  shalt  take  the  name 
of ';  the  Lord  thy  God."  And  so  we  must,  with  such  a  holy  reve- 
rence and  fear  for  him,  (1)  enter  into  covenant  with  him,  that  we 
may  be  called  by  his  name,  and  may  "  say,  yea,  subscribe  with  our 
hand,  1  am  the  Lord's,"  according  to  Isaiah  xliv.  5.  To  do  this 
rashly  and  unadvisedly,  only  with  words,  making  merely  an  outward 
confession,  and  a  bodily  use  of  the  signs  of  the  covenant,  is  hateful 
in  the  sight  of  God.  To  such  persons  "  God  saith,  What  hast  thou 
to  do  to  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth  ?"  Psalm  1.  16.  The  chil- 
dren of  Israel  will  enter  in  a  better  manner  into  the  covenant  in  the 
latter  days,  when,  according  to  the  prophecy,  Hosea  iii.  5.  "  They 
will  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their  king  ;  for 
thev  will  come  with  fear  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  goodness."  (2) 
Neither  may  we  think  of  the  Lord,  or  of  aught  that  pertains  to  him, 

*  The  Dutch  translation  hath  use  instead  of  take. 


238       THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

except  with  a  holy  trembling.  David  prayed  for  this,  when  he  said 
to  tha  Lord,  "  Keep  hick  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins. 
Let  the  meditation  of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,"  Psalm 
xix.  14.  "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me.  O  God  1" 
psalm  cxxxix.  14—18.  He  spake  thus,  when  he  considered  that 
"  he  was  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made."  (3)  When  we  speak 
of,  and  to  God,  we  must  not  only  "  say  to  him,  how  terrible  art  thou 
in  thy  works  !"  as  the  Psalmist  requireth,  Psalm  lxvi.  3,  but  we  must 
also  humbly  account  ourselves,  as  dust  and  ashes  before  the  Lord, 
with  Abraham,  Gen.  xviii.  27.  "  We  must  not  be  rash  with  our 
mouths,  nor  let  our  hearts  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  : 
for  God  is  in  heaven,  and  we  on  earth  ;  therefore  our  words  must 
be  few,'*  as  Solomon  admonisheth,  Eccl,  v.  2.  If  we  shall  "  teach 
others  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  with  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  ii.  we  must 
then  never  speak  of  the  Lord,  but  with  reverence.  When  Elihu 
spake  to  Job  concerning  the  great  works  of  the  Lord,  he  said,  Job 
xxxvii.  1.  "  At  this  also  my  heart  trembleth,  and  is  moved  out  of 
his  place."  (4)  When  we  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  per- 
form any  kind  of  religious  worship,  (for  calling  upon  God  denotes 
religious  worship  in  general,  Joel  ii.  32.)  we  must  do  it  with  a  holy 
fear  for  God  :  "  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  tremb- 
ling," saith  David,  Psalm  ix.  ii.  His  son  Solomon  saith,  Eccl.  v.  i» 
*'  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  house  of  God."  When  we 
either  read  or  hear  the  word  of  God,  we  should  "  tremble  at  it," 
isaiah  lxvi.  2.  If  we  will  worship  the  Lord  with  David,  Psalm  v. 
7,  "  we  must  worship  in  his  fear  toward  his  holy  temple."  Do.h  rm 
opportunity  offer,  and  are  we  called  to  it,  we  must  also  rightly  and 
veverently  confess  him,"  that  is,  profess  him  ;  "  He  ready  always," 
<»'i  Peter  saith,  1  Peter  hi.  15,  "  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that 
askcth  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and 
fear."  (f )  Yea,  we  ought  so  to  order  our  whole  conversation  in  a 
holy  fear  for  God,  u  that  his  name  may  not  be  blasphemed  on  our 
account,  but  honoured  and  praised,"  as  the  catechism  saith.  Our 
countenasce,  our  words,  gestures,  clothing,  discourse  and  whole  be- 
haviour ought  to  be  grave,  humble  and  modi  st,  that  every  one  may 
•oee  th-t  we  have  God  befor=  our  eyes,  and  that  we  fear  him..  See 
what  Solomon  enjoinelh  on  us  with  respect  to  our  whole  outward 
behaviour,  Prov  iv.  24 — 27.  But  hear  also  how  Paul  requires  that 
the  Phihppians  should  n  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  son*  of 
God,  without  rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation, 
among  whom  they  shine   as  lights  in  the  world,"    Philip,  ii.  15.     It 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  99,  100.  239 

sould  be  seen-in  Hanani,  that  "  he  was  a  faithful  man,  and  one  who 
feared  God  above  many,"  Neh.  vii.  2.  And  the  Shunamitess  per- 
ceived that  Llisha  was  holy,  2  Kings  iv.  9. 

In  this  manner  must  the  person  who  is  in  covenant  with  God,  use 
the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God  ;  but  it  is  forbidden  to  use  (or  take) 
it  in  vain.  The  Socinians  imagine,  in  order  that  they  may  repre« 
sent  Christ  as  a  new  Lawgiver,  that  he  hath  added  to  this  command- 
ment not  only  that  we  may  swear  by  his  name,  because,  according 
to  Rev.  iii.  23.  *  He  searcheth  the  heart  and  reins,"  as  if  that  were 
not  allowable  under  the  Old  Testament,  and  as  if  he,  who  searcheth 
the  hearts  and  reins,  were  not  the  eternal  and  allknowing  God  ;  but 
they  say  also,  that  he  hath  forbidden  ai!  rash  oaths  under  the  New 
Testament,  which,  as  they  pretend,  were  not  forbidden  under  the 
Old  Testament,  provided  only  they  were  not  false  ;  therefore  they 
will  not  translate  the  Hebrew  word  lassc/iave,  "  in  vain,"  but  *•  false- 
ly." It  is  true,  the  word  lasschave  signifies  also  falsely  ;  as  it  is  also 
translated,  Deut.  v.  20.  But  it  signifies  also  "  in  vain,  vanity,  and 
to  no  purpose."  See  Psalm  cxix.  37.  exxvii.  I.  The  seventy 
translators  have  also  rendered  it  by  malaio?i,  "  vanity."  And  who 
that  knows  the  fearful  name  of  God,  and  the  honour  due  to  him  can 
believe  that  men  were  allowed  under  the  Old  Testament  to  take  his 
name  in  vain  ? 

To  take  God's  name  in  vain,  is  to  make  use  of  it  without  weighty 
reasons,  to  a  vain,  unprofitable  and  unnecessary  purpose,  with  a  vain 
heart,  which  is  void  of  the  bpirit,  and  in  a  vain,  trifling  and  sinful 
manner.  This  is  done,  I.  By  blaspheming  and  reproaching  the 
name  of  God,  which  we  do,  (a)  when  we  deny  the  being  and  per- 
fections of  God,  and  ascribe  them  to  the  creatures:  "  The  fool  saith 
in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God."  Psalm  xiv.  1.  The  wicked  man 
"  blasphemes  God,"  and  persuades  himself,  that  God  "  covers  him- 
self with  the  clouds,"  tHat  he  4i  knoweth  nothing"  of  what  the  sinner 
doth,  and  that  he  doth  not  regard  it,  to  require  it  of  him,  Job  xxii. 
13,  U,  Psalm  x.  13.  Yea,  he  thinks  and  "  speaks  of  the  trnc  God, 
as  of  the  gods  of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  which  are  the  works  of 
men's  hands."  So  Rabshakeh  blasphemed  and  reproached  the  Lord, 
2  Chron.  xxxii.  19.  He  was  that  'wicked  counsellor,  who  imagin- 
ed evil  against  the  Lord,"  Nahum  1.  ii.  (b)  Or  when  we  ascribe 
absurdities  to  God,  and  speak  reproachfully  of  him.  So  the  Jews 
<k  wearied  the  Lord  with  their  words,  when  they  said,  Every  one  that 
doth  evil  is  good  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in 
ihem,"  Mai.  ii.  17,  and  •<  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,"  Ezek, 
xrui.  25.     It  was  blasphemy,  wben  the  Jews  railed  at  the  Son  of 


210        THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

God,  as  a  glutton,   a  winebibber,   one  who   had  a  devil,  and  was  a 
blasphemer,     (c)  When  the  sinner  becomes  angry   and  displeased 
With  the  Lord  on  account  of  the    afflictions,   with   which    he   visits 
him:  u  When  he  is  hungry,  he  looks  upward  and  curses   his  God," 
Isaiah  viii.  21,     This  is  blaspheming,    Rev.   xvi.  9,  11,  21.     (d)  Or 
wiien  we  speak  contemptuously  of  the  works  of  God,  of  his  worship, 
of  his  servants,   children,    and  of   persons,    who  are    defective.     So 
"  the  Jews  contradicted  and  blasphemed  the  things  which  were  spo- 
ken by  Paul,"    Acts  xiii.  45.     To  reproach   the    godly   is  to  ''blas- 
pheme that  worthy  name,    by  which  they    are  called,"  James  ii.  7. 
See    Prov.  xvii.  5.    Acts  ix.  4-     1  Pet.    iv.  14.     (e)  The    name  of 
God  is  also  blasphemed,  when  those  who  profess  his  name  live  un- 
godly lives  :   Israel,  '    a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  blasphemed  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel,"  Isaiah  1.  4»     For  such    an  offensive  life  causes' 
those  also  who  are  without,  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  the  Lord  and 
his  service,   2  Sam.   xii    14.     Rom.   ii   23,24.     (f)  But  the  sinner 
venders  himself  guilty  of  the  highest,  and  of  an  unpardonable  blas- 
phemy, when,  after  a  proceeding  conviction  and  enlightening  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  he  maliciously  rejects  and  resists  the  truth  and  piety  of 
the  gospel,  without  a  powerful    temptation  of  endangering    his  life. 
This  is  "  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,"    Matt.  xii.  31,  32. 
2.  We  take  the  name  of  God   in  vain  also  by  cursing,  whereby 
we  wish  and  desire  of  God,  that  he  would  inflict  some  evil  upon  a 
person.     We  may  not  refer  to  this,  that  the  prophets  at  certain  times, 
from  a  holy  Zeal*  cursed  the  openly  profane,  and  the  enemies  of  the 
church  ;    which  we  may   nevertheless  not  imitate.     When  "  John 
and  James  would  call  fire  down  from  heaven"  upon  the  Samaritans, 
"  as  Ehas  had  done,  Jesus  said,  Ye  know  nut  what  manner  of  spirit 
ye  are  of."     Luke    ix.  54,   55.     It  is    nevertheless  not  unlawful  to 
pray  with    "  the  souls  under  the  altar,"  Rev.  vi.  10,  that  the  Lord 
would  destroy   the    incorrigible   enemies  of  the   church :  we  must 
pray  for  the  church,  and  therefore  also  against  the   enemies  of  the 
church.     But  this  command    forbids  that    cursing,   which  proceeds 
from  a  special  hatred,    by  which  we   desire  that  evil  may  betide  our 
neighbour,  either  from  anger  on  account  of  some  real,  or  supposed 
injury,  or  from  envy  on  account  of  his  prosperity  ;  whether  we  ex- 
press our  curse  with  words,  as  Shimei  did,  2  Sam.  xvi.  5,  6,  7,  8,  or 
whether  we  curse  him,  when  we  are  alone,  and  in  our  thoughts,  con- 
trary to   the    precept   of  Solomon,    Eccl.  x   20.     Dreadful  are  the 
wicked  customs  of  the  ungodly  in  this  respect,  they   wish  that  this 
and  that  may  smite  and  fetch  their  neighbour.     Or  they  wish   that 
evil  may  befr'l   themselves,   either  from  a  vexatious  fretfulncss  on 


XXXVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  99,  100.  S4i 

account  of  some  difficulty,  like  Job  and  Jeremiah,  who  were  trans- 
ported so  far,  that  they  cursed  their  joyful  birthday,  Job  iii.  i.  Jer. 
xv.  10.  or  in  order  to  deliver  themselves  from  some  danger  with 
Peter.  Matt  xxvi.  74,  or  to  procure  some  injury  to  others  as  a  the 
Jews  bound  thtmselves  with  a  curse,  that  they  would  kill  Paul" 
Acts  xxiii.  22.  And  thus  we  use  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  a  wicked 
purpose:  we  wish  that  the  high  God  would  fulfil  our  wicked  desires. 
But  hear,  ye  cursers,  if  God  should  bring  all  your  wicked  curses  up- 
on you,  how  wretched  would  ye  be  1 

3.  We  also  abuse  the  n^me  of  God  by  perjury,  (or  false  swear- 
ing ;)  either  confirming  with  an  oath  a  matter,  which  we  know  to 
be  otherwise  ;  as  "  when  a  person  hath  found  something  that  was 
lost,  and  lies  concerning  it,  and  swears  falsely,"  Lev.  vi  3,  or  prom- 
ising upon  an  oath  to  do  something,  which  we  intend  not  to  do  ; 
or  of  which  we  know  before,  that  we  cannot  do  it,  and  thus  "  swear- 
ing deceitfully,"  Psalm  xxiv.  4,  or  not  keeping  the  promise,  to  which 
we  have  sworn  as  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  Nebuchadnezzar,  who 
had  "  made  him  swear  by  God,"  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13,  Fzek.  xvii.  13. 

4.  We  may  easily  conceive  that  we  take  God's  name  in  vain  also 
by  swearing  without  necessity,  and  rashly.  We  do  this,  (a)  when 
we  are  forthwith  ready  to  confirm  without  necessity  whatever  we 
say  with  an  oath.  Solomon  describes  a  godly  man,  as  "  one  who 
feareth  an  oath,"  but  a  wicked  man,  as  "  one  wiio  sweareth,"  F.ccl. 
ix.  2.  (b)  We  swear  likewise  without  necessity,  when  we  promise 
with  an  oath  to  do  what  we  ought  not  to  do,  as  Jephthah  and  Herod 
swore  to  their  sorrow,  Judges  xi.  30,  31.  Mattt  xiv.  6,  7,  8.  (c^  We 
swear  also  rashly,  when  we  are  urt^ed  by  a  sudden  passion  to  bind 
ourselves  by  an  oath  to  do  this  or  that ;  as  David,  vexed  by  the  inci- 
vility of  Nabal,  swore  that  he  would  destroy  him  and  all  that  he  had, 
1  Sam.  xxv.  22.  We  swear  rashly  also,  (d)  when  we  confirm 
any  truth  or  purpose  with  very  higl  strained  expressions;  the 
name  of  God,  his  word  and  sacraments  are  not  too  holy  for  ihe  chil- 
dren of  Belial  to  swear  by  ;  thunder  and  lightning  are  not  too  fear- 
ful;  their  sou's  and  salvation  are  not  too  prerious;  eternal  damna- 
tion and  the  judgment  of  God  are  not  too  dreadful,  (e)  Other  vain 
persons  will  invent  jocular  oaths,  to  divert  themselves  and  others, 
as  if  that  were  not  swearing  rashly,  and  taking  God's  name  in  vain. 

5.  This  is  also  done  by  every  kind  of  abuse  of  the  name  of  God  : 
as  (a)  by  an  unholy  use  of  the  lot,  the  event  of  which  depends 
upon  the  immediate  direction  of  God,  and  not  upon  human  contri- 
vance :  "  The  lot,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xvi.  33  "  is  cast  into  the 
Jap  :  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."     This  is  abu- 

VoL.    TT.  3    E 


242       THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

sed,  either  when  we  might  mike  use  of  something  else  in  disputes, 
and  nevertheless  betake  ourselves  to  the  lot;  for  we  then  make  use 
of  it  without  necessity,  and  we  tempt  God  ;  or  when  we  make  use 
of  it  irreverendly,  without  looking  up  to  God,  as  if  the  event  of  it 
were  only  casual  ;  or  when  we  are  discontented,  when  it  proves  un- 
favourable to  us  ;  but  we  abuse  the  lot  s". ill  more,  when  we  make 
use  of  v  in  games,  either  for  profit  or  pleasure;  for  we  do  then 
sport  with  the  immediate  providence  of  God  :  making  use  of  the  lot 
in  g^mes  is  necessarily  accompanied  with  many  other  sins,  paiticu- 
1  iiy  that  the  gamester  miopeud  their  precious  time  without  any  es- 
sential advantage,  and  that  t  ey  become  so  sottislly  addicted  to  ga- 
ming, that  it  possesses  the  whole  man,  and  they  cannot  disengage 
themselves  horn  it  ;  they  ate  drive,  to  it,  as  it  were,  by  a  spirit  of 
wi  hcrafl  :  the  saints  never  made  use  of  lots  in  games,  but  only  in 
weighty  and  sacred  matters,:  persons  attached  to  gaming  increase 
disputes,  contrary  «o  the  nature  of  the  lot,  "  which  causeth  conten- 
tions to  cease,  and    parteth  between  the  mighty,"  Prov.    xviii.    18. 

(b)  The  nunc  uf  God  is  also  fearfully  abused  in  comedies  and 
Stage-plays;  vain  persons  will  take  the  holy  name  of  God  in  their 
moulds  in  an  unholy  manner,  will  repeat  divine  histories  idly  and 
f or  (I. version,  will  exhibit  the  ancient  idolatry  in  the  most  agreeable 
manner,  and  "ill  personate  and    represent  either  a    saint   or    sinner. 

(c)  I  may  not  insist  particularly  on  abusing  the  name  of  God,  either 
from  custom,  wi.en  we  use  the  name  of  God  upon  every  occasion, 
and  s^y,  ()  Lord,  O  God  !  or  by  corrupted  words,  when  we  use, 
instead  of  the  word  God,  the  words  sacraments,  or  the  devil,  or  some 
otier  word  which  nearly  resembles  these,  as  if  we  were  exceedingly 
godfearing  persons,  or  by  making  use  of  the  word  and  worship  of 
God,  as  subjects  of  quibbles  and  foolish  jesting,  or  to  excuse  our 
faults.  Surely  these  are  bi'se  methods  of  profaning  rGod's  great 
name.  1  would  rather  explain  in  what  manner  men  abuse  the  name 
of  God  in  religious  worship.  Will  not  every  one  allow  that  he  abu- 
ses the  name  of  God,  who  uses  it  t  >o  frequently,  and  only  to  fill  up 
a  sentence,  or  with  an  unholy  heart  in  his  prayers  ?  Can  any  person 
consider  himself  as  not  guilty  of  taking  the  nameof  the  Lord  in  vain, 
who  behaves  himself  irreverendly  in  the  presence  of  God,  either  in 
his  private  or  public  worship  ?  See  how  ill  the  Bethshemites  and 
Uzza  fared,  in  consequence  of  their  irreverent  conduct  toward  the 
ark  of  God,  1  Sam.  vi.  19.  2  Sam.  vi»  6,  7.  It  is  still  more  abom- 
inable to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  with  a  wicked  heart  and  de- 
sign, in  order  to  cloke  our  abominable  actions,  and  so  from  hypoc- 
risy, as  if  the  worship  of  God  were  a  cloke  for  shame.     See  how  ve- 


XXXV.  LORD!S  DAY.  Q.  99,  100.  243 

hemently  the  Lord  reproves  this  conduct,  Jer.  vii.  4,  8,  9,  10. 
(d)  We  abuse  the  name  of  God  also,  when  we  behave  vainly,  lightly* 
dissolutely,  and  without  the  fear  of  God  in  all  our  conve  satioi  :  of 
such  the  Lord  saith,  Isaiah  hii.  11,  "Thou  hast  not  remembere^l 
me,  nor  laid  it  to  thy  heart."  (e)  He  also  renders  himself  guilty  of 
thisdreaclful  sin,  who,  when  he  sees  or  hears  it,  observes  it,  and  re- 
mains silent.  "  He  who  heareth  the  voice  of  sweai  mg,  if  he  do  not 
utter  it,  then  "  shall  he  bear  his  iniquity,"  according  to  Lev.  v.  1. 
Prov.  xxix.  24. 

III.  A  most  severe  threatening  is  denounced  againsr  the  person 
who  taketh  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  vain  :  "  '1  he  Lord  will  not  !  old 
him  guiltless,"  that  is,  he  will  surely  punish  him.  The  L<  id  cloth 
not  say  what  punishment  he  will  inflict  upon  him,  an'*  therefore  ve 
may  conclude  that  the  greatest  misery  which  «e  can  imagine  is 
threatened.  Eveiy  sin  renders  a  person  guilty  ;  for  '  cursed  is  he 
that  continued!  not  in  all  things  winch  are  written  if.  the  hook  oi  the 
law  to  do  them,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Gal.  iii.  10,  f  .  m  Dtut.  xxvii. 
26.  And  God  doth  not  hold  any  guilty  person  guiltless,  as  ht  ,m- 
self  saith,  Exod.  xxxiv.  7.  Much  less  will  lie  held  him  who  dishon- 
oured his  name  guiltless :"  For  there  is  ro  sin  greater,  or  more 
provoking  to  God  than  the  profaning  of  is  name"  saith  the  cate- 
chism. It  is  indeed  "attacking"  the  name  of  God.  Prov.  xxx  9. 
The  Hebrew  word  for  blaspheme,  nakab>  denotes  to  thrus'  the  name 
of  God  through.  On  account  of  the  horribleness  of  this  sin  it  is 
called  by  a  catachresis  a  blessing  of  Cod,  as  though  it  ought  not  o 
be  named,  1  Kings  xxi.  10.  Job.  i.  5,  II,  unless  we  would  rather 
understand  by  blessing  God  in  that  passage,  forsaking  him,  and  bid- 
ding him  farewell,  and  so  departing  wickedly  from  him  by  breaking 
covenant  with  him.  Job's  wife  seems  to  have  used  it  in  this  sense, 
when  she  said  to  her  husband,  Job  ii.  9,  "  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine 
integrity  ?  bless  God  and  die,1'*  But  however  this  m?y  be.  every 
sin  is  punishable,  because  it  is  contrary  to  the  highness  and  glory  of 
God:  much  more  is  diis  sin  then  punishable,  since  it  is  in  itself  a 
reproaching  of  the  Lord  :  "God  hath  therefore  commanded  it  to  be 
punished  with  death,"  saith  the  instructor  according  to  the  word  of 
God :  «  He  that  blasphemeth  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  put  to 
death  ;  which  sentence  the  Lord  ordered  to  be  executed  upon  '■  the 
son  of  an  Israelitish  woman."  Lev.  xxiv.  23.  God  being  jealot-s 
for  his  holy  name,  poured  out  his  wrath  also  in  the    most  dread'ul 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  translation,  and  is   the  literal   sense  of 
the  word  in  the  original- 


244      THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

Hianner  upon  Pharaoh,  Sennacherib,  Belshazzur  and  others  Mho 
blasphemed  the  name  of  God  v/ith  cursing,  perjury  and  rash 
swearing, 


APPLICATION. 

Is  this  so,  hearers,  how  guilty  then  is  our  land  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord!  if  any  person  will  walk  through  the  land  he  will  see  thai 
taking  of  the  name  of  the  God  in  vain,  is  become  the  sin  of  onr  land. 
"W  hat  honest  heart  is  not  grieved,  and  what  go:!ly  car  is  not  offend- 
ed, when  it  percieves  that  the  name  of  God  is  dishonoured  in  the 
most  dreadful  manner  by  blaspheming,  by  cursing,  perjury,  unne- 
cessary swearing  and  all- kinds  of  abominations?  Behold  how  this 
is  done  by  high  and  low,  by  old  and  young  :  travel  by  sea  or  by 
land,  converse  with  our  sailers  and  soldiers,  traverse  our  streets,  and 
lodge  in  our  inns,  and  ye  will  perceive  that  all  flesh  hath  corrupted 
its  way,  and  that  the  fear  of  God  is  in  few  places.  Yea,  taking  the 
n  une  of  God  in  vain,  and  abusing  it,  is  become,  as  it  were,  a  neces- 
sary custom,  and  wo  to  him  who  whispers  aught  against  it.  "  The 
prudent  man  must  keep  silence,  for  it  is"  now  also  an  evil  time," 
as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Amos,  chap.  v.  13.  It  is  true,  the  magis- 
trates have  enacted  severe  laws  against  this  horrible  sin:  but  if  they 
could  secure  themselves,  and  stop  the  mouths  of  audacious  sinners, 
this  evil  would  not  prevail  as  it  doth.  We  must  therefore  wonder 
at  the  longsuffering.  the  forbearance  and  goodness  of  God,  which  he 
displays  in  order  to  lead  our  people  to  repentance,  that  he  cloth  not 
destroy  our  land  But  our  wanton  and  dissolute  people  do  not  regard 
this,  they  despise  the  favours  of  the  Lord  ;  and  therefore  he  doth 
not  hold  them  guiltless  They  who  have  eyes  to  see,  and  hearts  to 
understand,  perceive  how  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  revealed  time 
after  lime  from  heaven  against  this  ungodliness  ;  we  will  not  speak 
now  of  scanty  harvests,  of  dearths,  of  inundations,  the  bursting  of 
dykes  and  dams,  of  war,  without,  or  after  a  short  intermission,  upon 
war;  see  only  how  the  Lord,  after  having  marched  forth  with  our 
armies  in  the  last  war  year  after  year,  hath  at  last  "  caused  our  sun 
to  go  down  at  noon,  and  darkened  the  earth  in  the  clear  day,"  as  he 
threatens,  Amos  viii.  9  And  who  knows  what  the  decree  of  God 
will  ytt  bring   forth  against  such  an  ungodly  nation  as  we  are  ?  If 


XXXV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  99,   100.  lib 

there  were  not  still  a  remnant  among  us,  according  to  the  election 
of  grace,  we  should  have  been  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 

It  is  true,  the  children  oi  Belial  do  not  regard  the  condition  of  the 
commonwea'th,  they  are  bold  and  speak  boldly,  they  soothe  and  flat- 
ttr  themselves,  when  they  hear  the  curses  of  the  Lord.  But  know 
ye  blasphemers,  cuisers,  false  and  unnecessary  swearers,  the  Lord 
is  not  your  God,  and  he  will  not  be  called  upon  by  you,  nor  permit 
you  to  take  his  name  and  covenant  h>to  your  mouths,  Ps:dm  1  16. 
His  wrath  lieth  upon  you,  he  will  not  hold  you  guiltless,  but  punish 
you  according  to  the  measure  of  your  wickedness.  Should  the  Lord 
suffer  you  to  proceed  in  your  wickedness,  without  punishing  you,  he 
will  bring  your  abominations  and  curses,  uttered  against  yourselves 
and  others  with  greater  aggravation  upon  you,  and  with  a  recompence, 
after  your  death  :  surely  "no  blasphemers  shall  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  but  everlasting  fire,  wi'h 
their  father  the  devil,  who  is  a  blasphemer.  How  will  ye  gnaw  your 
tongues,  which  ye  have  so  often  abused  by  dishonouring  God,  for 
pain,  in  that  fire  !  ye  will  then  indeed  curse  and  blaspheme  God, 
but  it  will  not  be  your  element,  any  more  than  seething  water  is  the 
element  of  fishes.  It  is  no  excuse,  that  ye  do  not  use  the  name  of 
God  in  blaspheming  and  cursing,  but  that  ye  speak  only  of  the  devil, 
and  use  other  dreadful  expressions  ;  for  yc  call  down  such  curses 
upon  yourselves  and  upon  your  neighbour,  from  God,  though  they 
are  uttered  by  you  in  a  careless  manner.  It  will  avail  you  still  less 
that  ye  do  this  from  custom,  and  not  from  design  ;  for  ye  show 
thus,  that  it  i3  become  your  second  nature  to  abuse  the  name  of 
God,  and  that  ye  differ  but  little  from  the  devil,  who  is  by  his  very 
temper  wicked  and  inclined  to  blaspheme. 

But  are  ye,  who  are  not  so  enormously  wicked,  guiltless  ?  surely 
no  :  ye  will  see  it,  if  ye  only  remember  what  God  hath  commanded 
and  forbidden  you  here,  and  if  ye  will  examine  yourselves  by  it. 
Have  ye  entered  with  a  holy  dread  into  the  covenant,  and  thought  oil 
God  with  a  holy  trembling  ?  doth  such  a  holy  reverence  possess 
your  souls,  when  ye  speak  to  and  of  him  ?  Is  it  your  endeavour  to 
glorify  and  confess  him  with  words  and  deeds,  and  that  a  holy  awe 
for  him  may  direct  you  in  all  your  behaviour  ?  Are  ye  strangers  to 
blaspheming  the  name  of  God,  to  cursing,  false  and  unnecessary 
swearing  ?  are  ye  no  dicers  nor  gamesters  ?  have  ye  not  abused  the 
name  of  God  in  any  respect,  neither  in  nor  out  of  the  public  wor- 
ship? doth  the  fear  of  God  restrain  you  from  sinning  ?  and  is  it  in- 
tolerable to  you,  when  he  is  dishonoured  ?  in  what  doth  it  appear, 
and  by  what  is  it  seen  in  you  ?    put  your  hands   into   your   bosoms 


245       THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  see  whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous.  Think  not  that  ye 
have  cleansed  your  hearts  in  this  respect,  and  are  pure  oi"  this  sin, 
because  ye  are  so  blind,  that  ye  do  not  know  yourselves.  Paul,  be- 
fore be  was  converted,  blasphemed  God,  and  he  nevertheless  knew 
not  that  he  did  it  as  he  confessed  afterwards,  when  he  was  better 
enlightened,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Yea,  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme, 
and  thought  that  he  did  God  service,  Acts.  >:xvi.  9,  10,  11.  Only 
attend  to  all  your  former  doings,  and  ye  will  see  that  your  whole  life 
hath  been  altogether  without  and  dishonourable  to  God.  And  it  is 
therefore  evident,  that  ye  take  his  name  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  your 
covenant  God,  that  ye  are  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  thai  he  will  not 
hold  you  guiltless. 

Alus  !  that  with  the  jailer,  ye  cried  out  with  trembling,  on  ac- 
count of  your  great  gnilt,  u  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Ye 
would  then  learn  how  the  Lord  could  hold  you  guiltless  ;  for  this 
would  cause  your  souls  to  flee  out  of  themselves  to  him,  who  suffered 
blasphemy,  and  on  account  of  blasphemy.  Endeavour  not  only  to  re- 
strain youi  mouths  from  uttering  such  dreadful  language,  but  also 
to  be  found  wholly  in  Christ,  and  with  "  the  Corinthians,  who  were 
before  blasphemers,  to  be  washed,  sanctified  and  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  as  the  apostie 
testifieth  of  them,  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11. 

But,  believers,  ye  also  have  frequently  sinned  against  this  com- 
mandment. Reflect  only  on  your  former  behaviour,  on  all  your 
free  thoughts  and  words,  your  vain  and  dissolute  conversation,  an:l 
how  ye  have  reproached  God  during  your  "  ignorance  and  unbelief," 
like  Paul  1  Tim.  i.  13.  Ye  have  laden  yourselves  with  a  heavy 
burthen  of  guilt,  ye  have  seen  it,  and  know  how  it  oppressed  you, 
and  with  what  dreadful  distress  your  souls  were  seized,  when  yc 
saw  that  God  would  not  hold  you  guiltless  ;  but  ye  have  with  Paul, 
"obtained  mercy,"  1  Tim.  i.  13.  God  could  not,  and  he  nevertheless 
doth  hold  you  guiltless :  his  Son  hath  atoned  for  your  reproaching 
of  the  Lord  in  your  stead  :  "  The  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him 
up,  and  the  reproaches  of  them  who  reproached  the  Lord  fell  on 
him,"  as  lie  complains  by  the  mouth  of  David,  Psalm  Ixix.  9.  Be» 
cause  ye  had  blasphemed  God,  the  wicked  accused  him  of  blasphe- 
my, and  slew  him  on  account  of  it :  he  purchased  the  covenant  of 
grace  for  you,  and  "  though  he  was  just,  he  suffered  for  you,  who 
were  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you  to  God,"  1  Peter  iii.  18,  and 
thai  the  Lord  might  no  more  be  wroth  with  you,  "  that  he  might 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  would  not  tv.rn  awav 


ion.  247 

from  you  to  do  you  good,  and  that  he  would  put  his  fear  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  might  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  Therefore, 
1,  Let  your  souls  wonder  and  be  amazed  at  the  great  and  free 
grace,  that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  Ye  who  were  guilty  are  hol- 
den  guiltless  ;  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  guiltlt  ss,  was  hoiden  guilty, 
and  punished  in  your  stead,  and  ali  grace  is  conveyed  to  you  there- 
by :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  Cod  made  to  be  sin  for  you, 
that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  according 
to  2  Cor.  v.  21.  Why  did  not  God  lay  the  guilt  of  your  blasphemy 
upon  you,  as  well  as  upon  others  ?  It  was  only  free  grace.  Behold 
it,  wonder  at  it  and  rejoice,  praise  him  on  account  of  it,  like  i  aid, 
when  he  saith,  1  Tim.  1.  15,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, of  whom  I  am  chief." 

2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  still  often  taken  in  vain  by  you  :  must 
ye  not  own  it  ?  ye  know  surely  that  his  fear  doth  not  always  impress 
your  hearts,  as  it  ought ;  how  often  are  ye  but  little  influenced  by  it, 
as  well  when  ye  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  as  when 
ye  are  not.  Therefore  the  soul  should,  as  often  as  she  renders  her- 
self guilty,  lay  hold  on  the  Son  of  God  for  reconciliation,  and  dip 
herself  in  the  fountain  cf  his  blood,  that  she  may  be  reconciled  and 
cleansed.  He  is  indeed  "  the  opened  fountain,"  which  is  always 
f*  open  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

3.  Let  it  henceforward  be  your  earnest  endeavour,  that  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  your  God  may  direct  you  in  all  your  conversation,  so 
that  ye  may  not  reproach,  but  glorify  him  :  "  If  ye  call  on  the  Fath- 
er, who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"    1  Peter  i.  17. 

The  fear  of  God  should  restrain  you  from  sinning,  especially  from 
scandalous  sins,  which  induce  men  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  : 
u  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid,  and  his  dread  fall  on 
you?"  may  we  ask  you  with  Job,  ch.  xiii.  ii.  Job  himself  refrained 
from  sinning,  because  "  destruction  from  God  was  a  terrour  to  him  ; 
and  by  teason  of  his  highness  he  could  not  endure,"  ch.  xxxi.  23. 
So  Joseph  also  acted,  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  and  Nehemiah,  Neh.  v.  15. 
An  awe  for  God  ought  to  restrain  your  tongues  and  mouths,  and 
prevent  you  from  "  speaking  so  exceeding  proudly,  and  from  letting 
arrogancy  come  out  cf  your  mouths  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  judg- 
ment," as  Hannah  admonisheth,  1  Sam.  ii.  3.  We  ought  to  follow 
even  our  daily  callings  with  «<  fear  and  trembling."  as  the  apostle 
enjoins  upon   servants,  Eph.  vi.  3.     Therefore  plead  the  covenant 


248        THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

promise  with  the  Lord,  that  "  he  would  put  his  fear    in  your  hearts," 
according  to  Jer.  xxxii.  40. 

4.  Let  every  one  of  you  opposehis  neighbour,  who  takes  the  name 
of  God  in  vain.  This  is  also  M  an  unfruitful  work,  which  we  ought  to 
reprove,"  Eph.  v.  ii.     This  is  the  duty  of  every  one,   but  it  is  espe- 
cially the   duty  of  all  who  are  set  over  others,  whether  magistrates, 
parents,   masters  or   mistresses.     He  who  is  silent,   when  he  hears 
the  name  of  God  abused  ;    renders    himself  guilty  of  that  sin,  be- 
cause  he  assents    to  it  by    his  silence  :   what   man  can  s.y  that  the 
Lord  is  his  God  and  Father,  if  his  spirit  be  not  vexed,  when  God  is 
reproached  ?     It  is  recorded,    a?    an  unheard    ol  abomination,  that 
"when  Jehoiakim  the  king  had  cut  Jeremiah's  roll,  and  had  burned 
it,  no  man  was  afraid,   nor  rent  his  clothes,"  on  account  of  that  ac- 
tion, Jer   xxxiv.  23,  24      But  whoever  will  rebuke  another  must  see 
that    he  doit    "in    the   spirit    of    meekness;  considering  himself, 
lest  he  also  be  tempted,"  Gal   vi.  1.      but  if  we  have  to  do  with  the 
men  of  Belial,  who  are  as  sharp  thorns,   and  who  act  and  speak  still 
more  wickedly,  when  they  are  reproved,  we  must  then  forbear,  and 
"  not  give  the  holy  things  to  dogs    nor  cast  our  pearls  before  swine, 
lest  at  any  time  they  trample  them  under    heir   feet,  and  turn  again 
and   rent  us,"    as  Jesus  adviseth,  Matt.  vii.  6.     Solomon,    his  type 
gave  the  same  lesson,  Prov.  ix.  7,  8.     All  that  we  can  do  then,  is  to 
manifest  some  token  of  displeasure,  to  withdraw,    and  complain  to 
the  Lord.     See  2  Kings  xviii.  35,  37.   xix.  1. 

Is  any  one,  in  the  mean  while,  disturbed  with  blasphemous  thoughts 
and  injections,  as  it  often  happeneth  to  the  children  of  God,  let  him 
not  cherish  them,  but  repel  them  from  him,  as  he  would  shake  coals 
of  fire  horn  his  clothes,  and  the  Lord  will  hold  him  guiltless,  will 
honour  him  again,  and  his  name  will  be  precious  to  him,  and  be 
blessed  among  men ;  yea,  he  will  bring  honour,  glory  and 
thanksgiving  to  the  name  of  the  Lord  .his  God  for  ever,  when,  accord- 
ing to  Rev  xxii.  4,  5,  "  he  shall  see  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
name  of  God  shall  be  upon  his  forehead,  that  he  may  be  enlightened 
by  him,  and  reign  as  a  king  for  ever.     Amen. 


(  24f  ) 


THE 


GOOD  AND  EVIL 


OATH- 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY* 


Hcb.  vi.  16.    For  men  verily  swear  by  the  greater :  and  an  oath  for 
confirmation  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  strife. 

Q.   102,  May  we  then  swear  religiously  by  the  name  of  God  ? 

A.  Yes  ;  either  when  the  magistrates  demand  it  of  the  subjects, 
©r  when  necessity  requires  of  us  thereby  to  confirm  fidelity  and 
truth,  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  safety  of  our  neighbour  ;  for 
such  an  oath  is  founded  on  the  word  of  God,  and  was  therefore 
justly  used  by  the  saints,  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament. 

Q.   102.  May  we  also  swear  by  the  saints  or  any  other  creature  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  a  lawful  oath  is  calling  upon  God,  as  the  only  one, 
who  knows  the  heart,  that  he  will  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and 
punish  me,  if  I  swear  falsely  ;  which  honour  is  due  to  no  creature. 


B 


>E  not  righteous  overmuch,  neither   make  thyself  overwisej 
why  shouldest  thou  destroy   thyself?      Be  not  overmuch   wicked, 
neither  be  thou  foolish ;  why  shouldest  thou  die  before   thy  time  ?" 
V«l.  it.  3  G 


150  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

Thus  speaks  the  wisest  of  kings,  Eccl.  vii,  16,  \7.  We  can 
not  be  too  righteous,  nor  too  wise  :  neither  may  we  be  in  any 
respect  wicked,  or  foolish.  But  when  the  wise  man  disapproves  of 
an  excess  in  these  things,  we  must  believe  that  he  introduceth  a 
wicked  man,  as  speaking,  who  hath  no  delight  in  pure  righteous- 
ness, and  in  heavenly  wisdom,  and  who  will  not  indulge  neither  in 
open  villainy  and  folly,  because  it  would  be  too  detrimental  to  his 
temporal  interest,  which  he  considers  as  Lis  God.  Or  Solomon  re- 
quires with  these  words,  that  we  should  keep  the  middle  way,  and 
not  turn  aside  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left,  according  to  Pro  v. 
iv.  26,  27.  The  sinner  turns  easily  aside  to  the  right  hand,  that  is, 
he  becomes  too  righteous,  or  too  wise  by  believing  too  much,  and 
doing  more  than  God  commands  him,  "honouring  God  in  vain,' 
teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,"  Matt.  xv.  9. 
He  will  also  attend  too  much  to  lighter  matters,  and  neglect  in  the 
mean  while  the  weightiest,  like  the  Pharisees,  "who  tithed  mint, 
anise  and  cummin,  but  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law," 
Matt,  xxiii.  23.  When  sinful  man  will  not  do  this,  he  will  turn 
aside  to  the  left  hand,  even  become  too  wicked,  and  too  foolish,  and 
abandon  himself  lo  evil  practices. 

We  ought  to  avoid  such  extremes,  and  to  steer  a  direct  course  ; 
the  middle  way  is  the  safest,  and  in  that  we  shall  proceed  with  the 
greatest  security.  Therefore  our  reformed  church,  following  the 
course  of  God's  word  abstains  from  the  dangerous  extremes  of  her 
adversaries.  This  appears  in  her  doctrine  concerning  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  sinner  belore  God  by  faith  only,  but  evidenced  by  good 
works ;  and  she  stt  ers  thus  a  direct  course  between  the  Papists, 
who  being  righteous  overmuch,  extol  works  too  highly  in  this  mat- 
ter, and  the  Antinomians,  who  being  wicked  overmuch,  dissolve 
ail  obligations  to  good  works.  So  our  purified  church  explains  also 
the  doctrine  of  the  sacraments  as  signs  and  seals  of  the  divine 
grace  ;  which  the  Papists,  as  righteous  overmuch,  extol,  as  though 
they  conferred  grace  by  thenaselv-'S ;  and  which  the  Socin- 
ians,  as  wicked  overmuch  disparage,  as  though  they  were  no  more 
than  bare  signs  of  Christianity.  Doth  not  our  unblamableness  ap- 
pear also  in  our  doctrine  concerning  a  religious  oath  by  the  name 
of  God  ?  by  which  we  avoid  the  doctrine  of  the  Mennonites,  who,  as 
righteous  overmuch,  think  that  a  Christian  hath  no  right  to  swear 
at  all ;  and  of  the  Papists,  who,  as  wicked  overmuch,  swear  by  the 
saints  and  other  creatures,  as  we  are  taught  here  in  this  Lord's 
iay.     Wc  have    spoken  before  of  vain  and   false  oaths  ;    we    nuts' 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   101—102.  25 1 

next  consider  whether  we  may  swear  at  all,  and  if  we  may,  whether 
we  may  swear  by  the  creatures. 

Two  particulars  require  our  consideration  here, 

I.  The  nature  of  an  oath. 

II.  The  controversy  which  we  have  with  the  Mennonites  and  Pa- 
pists concerning  oaths. 

I.  We  know  nx  lio.v  to  describe  an  oath  better  than  the  instructor 
doth  in  the  hundred  and  second  question,  in  which  he  saith  that  it  is 
"  a  calling-  upon  God,  that  he,  as  the  only  one  who  knoweth  the 
heart,  will  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and  punish  us  if  we  swear 
falsely."     Jn  an  oath  there  is, 

1.  Something  supposed,  to  which  men  swear,  either  truth  or  fidel- 
ity. We  swear  to  the  truth  of  any  thing,  whether  we  ourselves,  or 
others  have  spoken  or  done  it,  when  we  confirm  by  an  oath  that  it 
hath  truly  happened,  as  we  testify  concerning  it.  Thus  Obadiah 
swore  to  assi  rj  Klij.  h  1  K'ngs  xviii .  10,  "As  the  Lord  ;hy  God  liveth. 
there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom,  whither  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to 
seek  thee  ;  and  when  they  said,  he  is  not  there  ;  he  took  an  oath  of 
the  kingdom  and  nation,  that  they  found  thee  not."  Or  we  swear 
to  fidelity,  when  we  swear  that  we  will  be  faithful,  and  keep  our 
word  in  promises,  obligations  and  contracts,  as  Rahab  caused  the 
spies  to  swear,  that  they  would  save  her,  and  her  kindred  alive, 
Joshua  ii.  12 — 21.  See  this  also  in  Jonathan  and  David,  1  Sam. 
xx    12—17.     xxiv.  21,  22,  23. 

2.  As  no  man  knows  our  heart,  and  as  therefore  no  man  knows 
whether  we  testify  and  promise  according  to  truth,  therefore  we 
call  upon  God,  that  he,  as  the  only  one  who  knoweth  the  heart, 
would  bear  witness  to  the  truth  :  "  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my 
soul,"  saith  the  apostle,  2  Cor.  i.  23.  And  thus  we  appeal  in  an  ob- 
scure matter  to  the  ailknowing  God,  as  the  Reubenites,  Gadites,  and 
half  tribe  of  Manasseh  did,  in  order  to  confirm  that  they  had  not 
builded  their  altar,  to  rebel  against  the  Lord  their  God,  saying  Josh. 
xxii.  22,  « The  Lord  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he 
knoweth,"  Yea,  we  pray  to  the  Lord,  that  he  would  bear  witness 
to  the  truth,  and  that  he  would  make  it  known,  that  we  speak  the 
truth  ;  which  he  doth  by  manifesting  the  matter,  to  which  we  have 
sworn  in  succeeding  times,  and  by  causing  others  to  acquit  see  in 
our  oath,  and  also  by  blessing  us,  and  giving  us  joy  and  peace  of 
mind  by  his  Spirit,  upon  our  swearing,  as  the  Lord  bore  witness  to 
Paul,  so  that  he  could  say,  "  1  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my 
conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Rontk 
ix.   10. 


251  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

3.  Though  the  Lord  God  knows  when  the  sinner  lies,  and 
though  he  sometimes  bears  witness  to  the  truth  by  punishing  liars, 
by  bringing  reproach  upon  them,  and  destroying  them,  and  there- 
fore all  men  ought  to  lay  aside  lying,  and  to  speak  the  truth  with 
their  neighbour,  nevertheless  a  man  ought  to  fear  a  false  oath  more 
than  a  lie,  because  in  an  oath  he  calls  upon  the  allknowing  God  to 
manifest  it,  if  he  utter  a  lie,  yea,  "  to  punish  him,  if  he  swear  Llse- 
ly  »"  whereby  he  therefore  declares,  that  he  will  look  for  no  favour 
from  God,  that  he  will  suffer  ail  his  judgments,  and  that  he  stakes 
and  pledges  all  that  is  clear  to  him,  if  he  do  not  speak  the  truth. 
Therefore  they  said  of  old,  when  they  swore,  "  God  do  so  to  me 
and  more  also,"  Ruth  i.  17.  1  Kings  ii.  23.  Yea,  they  cursed 
and  execrated  themselves  with  their  oath,  Matt,  xxvi  74.  Acts 
xxiii  12,  13.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  an  oath  is  sometimes 
called  a  curse,  Numb.  v.  21.  1  Kings  viii.  31.  Although  men 
do  not  always  express  in  an  oath  the  curse,  which  they  wish  them- 
selves, nevertheless  the  most  fearful  curse  is  supposed. 

4.  The  immediate  design  of  an  oath  is  the  confirmation  of  truth 
and  fidelity,  which  remains  otherwise  doubtful.  Man  is  become 
through  sin  unbelieving,  and  unworthy  to  be  believed  :  "  He  is  in- 
deed of  his  father  the  devil,  who,  when  he  speaketh  a  lie,  speaketh 
it  of  his  own  ;  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it,"  John  viii.  44. 
But  when  we  swear,  we  then  render  ourselves  capable  of  being  be- 
lieved,  and  we  are  obliged  to  believe  others  upon  their  oath  :  "  For 

i  men  swear  by  the  greater ;  and  an  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them 
»an  end  of  all  strife,"  according  to  our  text ;  for  we  may  not  think 
that  any  man  is  so  forgetful  of  God,  that  he  would  undertake  to  ap- 
peal to  the  allknowing,  holy  and  righteous  God,  with  the  most  dreadful 
execration  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to  him,  in  be- 
half of  a  lie  and  breach  of  trust.  If  any  man  be  nevertheless  so 
ungodly,  we  must  notwithstanding  be  satisfied  with  his  oath,  because 
there  is  no  other  way  to  decide  controversies,  and  the  false  swearer 
cannot  injure  others  by  his  wicked  oath,  as  much  as  he  injures 
himself. 

Sometimes  a  man  himself  utters  an  oath,  in  order  to  confirm 
truth  and  fidelity,  and  sometimes  others  utter  an  oath  for  him,  to 
adjure  and  urge  him  by  an  oath,  to  speak  the  truth  ;  thus  Caiaphas 
adjured  the  Saviour  to  tell  whether  he  were  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,"  Malt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  Thus  Paul  also  did,  1  Thess.  v.  27,  "  I 
adjure  you  by  the  Ljrd,  that  this  epistle  be  read  by  all  the  holy 
brethren."  To  this  pertains  also  the  curse  which  he  clenounceth 
against  all  those,  "  who  love  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Cor. 
xvi.  32.     See  alsoLxod.  x'ni.  19.     Numb.  v.  19 — 22. 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  253 

II.  Since  then  swearing  is  such  a  solemn  work,  that  we  thereby 
call  the  allknowing  and  righteous  God  to  witness,  and  imprecate  his 
judgments  upon  us,  if  we  do  not  speak  the  truth,  therefore  the  god- 
ly have  with  good  reason  feared  an  oath.  Solomon,  distinguishing 
the  ungodly  from  the  righteous,  saith  that  the  former  "  swtareth," 
but  that  the  latter  "  feareth  an  oath,"  Eccl.  ix.  2.  Therefore  the 
instructor  asks  with  propriety,  "  whether  we  may  swear  religiously 
by  the  name  of  God."  The  Esstnes  among  the  Jews,  and  also  cer- 
tain ancient  Christians  thought  that  it  was  unlawful  to  swear,  and 
the  Mennonitts  hold  the  sunie  opinion  at  this  day  ;  but  the  instructor 
answers  that  an  oath  is  lawful.  If  we  shall  explain  this  question 
properly,  we  must  know  that  the  dispute  is  not  whether  they  might 
swear  under  the  Old  Testament ;  for  these  men  will  not  deny  that : 
but  whether  we  may  swear  under  the  New  Testament :  neither, 
whether  we  may  swear  vainly,  but  religiously  ;  not  whether  we  may 
swear  at  all  times,  but  whether  when  the  magistrates  require  it  of 
their  subjects,  or  when  other  circumstances  render  it  necessary,  in 
matters  of  importance,  when  we  cannot  obtain  satisfactory  evidence, 
or  testimonies  sufficient  to  determine  differences  between  man  and 
man. 

The  Mennonites  deny  that  we  may  swear  in  such  cases,  but  we 
maintain  the  affirmative,  because 

1.  Swearing  in  this  manner  is  founded  on  the  word  of  God,  in 
which  we  are  commanded  not  only  "  to  fear  the  Lord,  and  to  serve 
him,  but  also  to  swear  by  his  name,"  Deut.  vi.  13.  x  20.  It  is  true, 
this  was  under  the  Old  Testament ;  but  there  is  no  reason  why  God 
should  forbid  it  now  under  the  New  Testament,  since  swearing  doth 
not  belong  either  to  the  civil,  or  to  the  ecclesiastical  law  of  the  Jews, 
It  was  also  foretold  of  believers  under  the  New  Testament,  that  they 
should  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  their  whole  worship  is  expressed  by 
the  figure  of  swearing  :  "  In  that  day,"  saith  the  prophet,  "  shall 
five  cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  ai^ 
swear  to  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Isaiah  xix.  18.  See  also  Isaiah  xlv. 
23.  lxv.  16.  Jer.  xii.  16 

2.  The  saints  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  made  use  of 
oaths  rightly.  It  is  unnecessary  to  collect  many  examples  of  the 
Old  Testament  saints  who  swore,  since  the  dispute  relates  only  to 
the  New  Testament.  And  surely  the  saints  of  the  New  Testament 
have  sworn.  The  Head  of  the  saints,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
was  made  a  priest  by  an  oath  of  the  Father,  suffered  himself  to  be 
adjured  by  Caiaphas,  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  Paal  "  called  God  to  rec- 
ord upon  his  soul,"  2  Cor.  i.  23.    Philip,  i.  3.    lie  also  "  adjured 


254  THE  GOOD  AND  LV1L  OATH. 

the  Thessalonians,  that  they  should  see  that  his  epistle  was  read  by 
all  the  holy  brethren,"  1  Thess  v.  27.  How  -would  he  have  dared 
to  do  this,  if  it  had  been  forbidden  him  ? 

3.  Further,  an  oath  is  often  necessary  on  account  of  the  weighty 
controversies,  which  happen  between  man  and  man,  and  on  account, 
of  contracts,  which  men  make  one  with  another.  How  shall  men 
believe  one  anothers  testimony  and  promise,  and  truth  and  fidelity 
be  confirmed  ?  must  it  not  be  by  an  oath  ?  therefore  the  text  saith, 
"  An  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  men  an  end  of  all  strife."  Would 
yea  and  nay  suffice  to  believe  one  another  without  scruple  ?  Are 
not  "  all  men  then  liars  r"  Psalm  cxvi  11.  Rom.  iii.  4.  Or  will  the 
truth  of  the  Mennonitish  men  and  women  satisfy  us  ?  why  do  they 
then  make  use  of  Mennonitish  tricks  and  ambiguous  expressions  to 
deceive  their  neighbours  ?  can  they  show  us  men  and  women  of 
their  sect,  who  are  so  true,  that  they  never  lie  :  and  what  is  their  af- 
firmation by  the  truth  of  men  and  women,  but  an  implicit  oath,  by 
which  they  engage  their  honour  as  true  men,  with  an  oath,  and  de- 
sire that  God  should  expose  them  to  shame,  if  they  do  not  speak 
the  truth  ? 

4.  How  can  an  oath  be  forbidden  in  the  New  Testament,  when  tt 
conduceth  to  the  glory  ot  God,  and  to  the  salvation  of  our  neigh- 
bour ?  By  an  oath  a  person  protests  in  a  solemn  manner,  that  God 
is  true,  allknowing,  righteous  and  almighty,  and  he  calls  upon  him 
as  such,  with  a  fear  and  dread  of  his  wrath.  The  honour,  the  prop- 
erly, the  life  and  salvation  of  cur  neighbour  is  at  stake,  if  either  he 
himself,  or  some  other  cannot  deliver  him  by  an  oath  ;  shall  it  then 
be  deemed  sinful?     How  is  this  to  be  endured  ? 

Let  none  object  here  the  words  of  Christ  Matt.  v.  3-1,  37.  "  But 
I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all  ;  neither  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's 
throne  ;  nor  by  the  earth,  for,  he.  But  let  your  communication  be 
yea,  yea  ;  nay,  nay  ;  for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  comtth  of 
evil,"  which  is  briefly  repeated  by  James,  James  v.  '2.  These  texts 
do  not  surely  favour  the  opinion  of  the  Mennonites  ;  for  they  make 
use  of  more  than  yea  and  nay,  when  they  confirm  their  words  by 
the  truth  of  their  men  and  women.  Christ  himself  made  use  of 
more  than  yea  and  nay  ;  for  he  often  confirmed  his  words  with  a 
double  verily  :  therefore  we  may  say  more  than  yea  and  nay  in  mat- 
ters of  importance.  But  when  he  saith,  Swear  not  at  all  he  oppo- 
ses the  false  glosses  of  the  old  Pharisees,  who  made  the  law  of  Cod 
of  no  effect  by  their  traditions.  This  is  evident  from  the  whole 
chapter  ;  for  Jesus  forbids  us  to  "  break  even  the  least  of  God's 
commandments,"   as   19.     He  teacheth  tbat    -'cur    righteousness 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  162.  255 

must  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,"  vs.  20. 
They  had  taught  that  "  men  ought  to  love  their  neighbours,  but 
that  they  might  hate  their  enemies,"  vs.  43,  which  was  contrary  to 
the  law,  Prov.  xxiv.  29.  xxv  21,  22.  They  also  persuaded  them- 
seives  and  others,  that  only  false  oaths  were  forbidden,  but  not  vain 
ones  :  yea,  they  thought  that  they  might  swear  by  the  creatures, 
and  even  by  mean  creatures,  and  moreover,  that  they  were  not  bound 
by    such    oaths,  as    the  Saviour   plainly   shows.     Matt.  v.  33 — 37. 

xxiii.  16 22.     Jesus   as  the  best  expositor  of  God's,   yea,  of  his 

own  law,  opposes  these  expositions.  It  is  true,  that  what  is  more 
than  yea,  and  nay,  cometh  of  evil  ;  but  an  oath  doth  not  therefore 
come  of  evil ;  for  how  could  God  himself  then  have  sworn,  and 
commanded  oaths  ?  Christ  would  not  then  have  suffered  himself  to 
be  adjured,  nor  the  saints  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  made 
use  of  oaths  ;  but  that  which  is  more  than  yea  and  nay  is  avoin  oath 
by  the  creatures,  and  a  false  oath  ;  tor  Satan,  the  evil  one.  first  swore 
a  vain  and  false  oath  ;  sec  Gen.  iii.  5.  It  cometh  also  of  evil,  that 
men  cannot  be  believed  on  account  of  their  yea  and  nay,  hut  are 
liars,  and  are  therefore  obliged  to  confirm  their  words  with  an  oath  : 
See  John  viii.  44. 

1  he  Vlennonites  are  so  scrupulous  with  respect  to  oaths  ;  but 
the  Papists  proceed  to  as  great  an  extreme  of  lightness  and  trifling 
with  them,  when  they  venture  to  swear  by  the  saints  and  by  other 
creatures.  This  abomination  we  justly  condemn  with  the  instructor, 
and  that  our  reasons  for  condemning  it  may  be  the  more  forcible, 
and  that  we  may  unsinew  the  principle  arguments  of  our  adversa- 
ries against  us,  we  will  explain  the  subject  of  this  controversy  some- 
what more  particularly.  The  question  is  not,  whether  we  may  not 
pledge  or  stake  a  beloved  object  in  our  oath,  to  confirm  truth  and 
fidelity,  as  Paul  did  "  his  rejoicing  which  he  had  in  Christ  Jesus," 
1  Cor.  xv.  31.  We  may  not  disapprove  of  this,  because  we  submit 
ourselves  in  an  oaih  to  the  divine  punishment,  if  we  swear  falsely  : 
neither  is  the  dispute  here  whether  we  may  not  confirm  truth,  or 
fidelity  by  something,  of  which  every  one  is  certain,  as  Joseph  con- 
firmed his  assertion  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  of  which  every  one  was 
conscious,  1  Cor.  xv.  31,  unless  we  would  consider  Joseph's  words, 
as  a  pledging  of  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  which  was  very  dear  to  him. 
See  also  1  Sam.  I.  26.  xvii.  55  xx  3  xxv.  26.  In  what  sense  so- 
ever it  be  taken,  we  wdl  not  condemn  it.  Neither  do  we  dispute 
with  our  adversaries  whether  \re  may  not  make  a  strong  protesta- 
tion before  creatures,  who  are  present,  and  can  be  witnesses  of  what 
we  affirm  ;  for  Mosss  m^lt;  such  a  protestation  before  ({  heaven  and 


S56  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

earth,"  Deut.  ::xx.  19,  and  Paul  "protested  before  the  elect  en- 
eels,"  1  Tim.  v.  2i.  Or  if  we  would  consider  this  protestation  be- 
fore the  angels,  as  an  oath,  to  adjure  i  imoihy,  and  oblige  him  to 
keep  the  commandment,  then  we  must  look  upon  tho^e  creatures,  as 
instruments  of  God's  anger  against  the  disobedient ;  and  so  this 
protestation  is,  as  it  were,  an  urging  of  a  person  to  his  duty  by  the 
denunciation  of  a  cuise,  as  the  aposde  did,  I  Cor.  xvi.  22  That  we 
may  appeal  in  this  manner  to  the  creatures  in  an  oath  we  will  not 
deny.  And  so  the  question  between  us  and  the  Papists  is,  whether 
we  may  call  upon,  or  pray  to  any  creature  leligiously,  to  bear  wit- 
ness concerning  any  secret  matter,  and  to  punish  us  judicially,  if  we 
swear  falseiy.  Tlie  Papists  say  that  this  is  lawful,  but  we  deny  it 
for  the  most  weighty  reason*.     For 

1.  We  may  not  pray  to  the  suints,  nor  to  any  other  creatures,  as 
we  have  proved  on  the  first  commandment  ;  and  besides  this,  swear- 
ing by  the  creatures  is  contraiy  to  the  nature  of  an  oath,  because 
that  suppobetii  an  allimowing,  righteous  and  almighty  supreme 
Judge,  to  whom  we  appeal,  that  he  may  bear  witness  to  the  truth, 
anu  punish  us,  if  we  swear  falsely,  as  we  have  proved  before.  Now 
since  it  is  certain,  that  no  creature  possesses  these  perfections,  how 
can  we  then  presume  to  swear  by  the  saints,  or  by  other  creatures  ? 

2.  Swearing  by  tiie  creatures  is  condemned,  threatened  and  pun- 
ished by  God,  as  a  grievous  sin.  He  saith,  Jer.  v.  7.  "  How  shall 
I  pardon  thee  for  this  ?  thy  children  have  forsaken  me  and 
sworn  by  them  that  are  no  gods,"  Hear  what  a  dreadful  judgment 
the  Lord  threatens  to  inflict  on  "  the  fair  virgins  and  young  men  of 
Israel,  even  that  they  should  faint  for  thirst,  because  they  swore  by 
the  sin  of  Samaria,  and  said,  Thy  God,  O  Dan,  liveth,  and  the  man- 
ner of  Beersheba  liveth  :  they  should  fall  and  not  rise  up  again." 
Amos  viii.  13,  14.  It  is  recorded  as  an  abomination,  that  the  Jews 
s*  swore  by  the  Lord  and  by  Maicham,"  Zeph.  1.  5. 

The  Papists  endeavour  in  vain  to  defend  their  idolatrous  swear- 
ing with  the  oath  of  Jacob  u  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac,''  Gen. 
xxxi.  53  ;  for  that  oath  of  Jacob  is  opposed  to  the  idolatrous  oath  of 
Laban,by  "  the  god  of  Abraham,  the  god  of  Nahor,  and  the  god  of 
their  father."  Those  gods  were  idols,  which  Abraham  served  before 
his  conversion.  See  Joshua  x.viv.  2.  Therefore  the  fear  of  Isaac 
was  the  ttue  God,  who  was  with  him,  and  helped  him,  vs.  42.  as 
the  Lord  God  is  often  called  "  the  fear  and  dread"  of  his  people, 
Isaiah  viii.  13,  the  act  being  put  for  the  object  of  the  act  by  a  me- 
'onymy,  because  the  Lord,  the  object  of  the  fear,  is  worthy  to  be 
fie  ar< 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  25f 

The  Papists  object  further  the  words  of  the  Saviour  from  Matt. 
xxiii.  16—22  "  Wo  unto  you,  ye  blind  guides,  which  say,  Who- 
soever shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is  nothing  ;  but  whos-oever  shall 
swear  by  the  gold  of  the  temple,  he  is  a  debtor,  &c.  Whosoever 
shall  swear  by  the  temple  sweareth  by  it,  and  by  him  that  dweileth 
therein.  And  he  that  shall  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth  by  the  throne 
of  God  and  by  him  that  sitteth  thereon."  They  conclude  from  this, 
that  we  may  swear  by  the  creatures,  and  particularly  by  those,  that 
are  dedicated  to  Cod,  because  they  represent  God.  The  Saviour 
doth  not  however  leach  this  ;  but,  among  other  things,  that  the  Phar- 
isees, by  pledging  and  engaging  the  temple  and  alar  in  their  oaths, 
as  precious  things,  swore  by  God,  as  the  Judge,  that  he  might  pun- 
ish them  in  those  things,  and  that  they  were  therefore  bound  by 
such  oaths.  This  text  doth  not  therefore  militate  against  our  opin- 
ion, since  we  do  not  disapprove  of  submitting  creatures,  which  are 
dear  to  us,  to  the  judgment  of  God.  Neither  is  this  the  subject  of 
our  controversy,  but  whether  we  may  call  on  the  saints  and  other- 
creatures,  in  secret  matters,  to  bear  witness,  and  to  be  judges,  in  or- 
der that  they  may  punish  us,  if  we  swear  fabely  :  and  therefore  this 
text  is  not  applicable  here. 

The  swearing  of  the  Papists  by  the  saints  and  other  creatures  is 
not  the  only  mistake,  which  they  commit  with  respect  to  oaths,  but 
also,  that  they,  especially  the  Jesuits,  allow  that  men  may  make  use 
of  doublemeaning  words,  and  mental  reservations  in  swearing ; 
whereby  they  utter  a  word,  which  may  be  understood  in  a  twofold 
sense,  in  one  sense,  and  keep  the  other  sense  to  themselves :  or 
when  they  utter  words,  which  have  only  one  simple  sense,  but  in- 
tend some  limitation  of  it  in  their  own  minds.  Tor  instance,  we  ask 
a  Popish  priest,  whether  he  is  a  priest,  and  he,  seeing  that  he  would 
expose  himself  to  danger  by  an  honest  confession,  answers  no,  but 
with  this  reservation  and  tacit  limitation,  I  am  not  a  priest  of  Baal5 
or,  I  am  not  a  priest  to  tell  you  that  I  am. 

But  the  saints  did  not  act  so,  for  "  they  renounced  the  hidden 
things  of  dishonesty,  and  walked  not  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv.  2. 
They  would  rather  suffer  the  most  painful  deaths,  than  rescue  them- 
selves by  such  miserable  shifts.  The  citizen  of  Zion  "  doth  not 
swear  deceitfully,"  Psalm  xxiv.  4.  God  condemned  the  conduct  of 
his  people  in  "not  swearing  in  truth  and  righteousness,"  Isaiah 
xlviii.  1.  It  is  also  abominable  :  for  by  this  mean  a  person  deceives 
with  an  oath,  which  is  required,  in  order  to  prevent  all  kinds  of  de- 
ceit :  he  increases  disputes,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  an  oath,  Heb. 
>i.  16.     All  truth  and  fidelity  is  thus  abolished,  good  neighbourhood 

Voi.  it.  2  H 


235  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

is  destroyed,  and  the  Jesuits  compel  us  to  discredit  their  words  and 
their  oaths  for  ever  ;  yea,  this  is  such  a  sin,  that  they  are  ashamed 
of  their  opinion,  they  will  conceal  it,  and  e-.en  deny  it 

This  filth  cannot  -be  cloked  with  the  words  of  Abraham,  who  said 
that  Sarah  his  wife  was  his  sister,  Gen.  xx.  2,  nor  with  the  declara- 
tion of  Samuel,  who  gave  out  that  he  was  come  to  Bethlehem,  in 
order  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  when  it  was  his  intention  to  anoinl 
David,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1  —5.  But  if  these  men  sinned,  must  we  there- 
fore imitate  them  ?  They  also  spoke  the  truth  ;  for  Sarah  was  indeed 
the  sister  of  Abraham,  Gen.  xx.  12,  and  Samuel  did  indeed  go  to 
Bethlehem,  in  order  that  he  might  sacrifice  :  but  they  did  not  utter 
the  whole  truth,  which  we  are  not  always  obliged  to  do  :  we  may  ut- 
ter one  truth,  and  suppress  another.     See  Jer.  xxxviii.  24 — 27. 

It  is  not  less  hateful  in  the  Papists,  to  teach  that  men  are  not 
obliged  to  keep  their  oaths  with  here  ics,  by  which  means  these  men 
have  turned  the  world  into  a  shambles.  When  the  emperour  Si- 
gismund  had  promised  John  Hus  a  safe  conduct,  in  order  that  he 
might  appear  without  danger  at  the  council  of  Constance,  that  eccle- 
siastical assembly  enacted  a  law,  that  men  should  not  be  bou'  d  to 
keep  faith  with  heretics,  and  they  condemned  him  to  be  burned,  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  the  emperour.  But  the  Israelites  acted  differ- 
ently from  this  with  the  Gibeonites,  when  they  spared  them  on  ac- 
count of  their  p'ighted  oath,  although  the  Gibeonites  had  deceived 
the  Israelites,  and  had  obtained  an  oath  from  them  by  deceit,  Joshua 
ix.  When  Saul,  in  his  mad  zeal  for  the  children  of  Israel,  had  rut 
them  to  death,  the  Lord  revenged  the  slaughter  many  years  after 
upon  Israel,  and  ordered  it  to  be  revenged  on  the  family  of  Saul, 
2  Sam.  xxi.  It  matters  not  to  whom,  but  by  whom  we  swear  ;  but 
the  Papists  render  themselves  so  detestable,  that  no  man  dares  to 
trust  them,  either  upon  their  word,  or  their  oath. 

Two  questions  arise  here  :  first,  whether  we  may  require  an  oath 
from  an  idolater,  who  swears  by  that  which  is  no  God  ?     It  is  cer- 
tain that  we  may  enter  into  covenants  with  persons,  who  are  not  of 
the  same  faith  with   ourselves,   yea,    who  are   idolaters,    in  order  to 
maintain  good  neighbourhood.     But  inasmuch  as  it  is  dangerous  to 
depend,  in  such  momentous  cases,  upon  the  single  word  of  the  idol- 
ater,  it  becomes  therefore  necessary   to   require   an  oath  of  him. 
Now  as  he  will  not  swear  by  any  one  but  his  idol,  since  he  looks  upon 
his  idol  to  be  a  God,  and  thus  reckons  himself  as  much  bound   by- 
such  an  oath  as  if  he  had  sworn  by  the  true  Go.l,  there  is  there- 
fore no  reason  why  we  should  not  require  an  oath  of  him  ;  doth  he 
commit  u  sin,  it  will  lie  at  his  own  door :  others,  who  earncs.ly  de- 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  259 

sire  that  he  should  swear  by  the  true  God,  do  not  become  guilty  of 
his  sin.  The  saints  did  not  therefore  scruple  to  enter  into  covenants, 
confirmed  by  oaths,  with  idolaters,  see  this  in  Isaac,  Gen.  xxvi  26 
— 31.  and  in  Jacob,  Gen.  xxxi  53.  The  other  question  is,  how 
far  we  are  bound  by  an  oath,  in  which  we  have  promised  fidelity. 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  we  may  break  a  wicked  oath,  by 
which  we  have  bound  ourselves  to  do  a  moral  evil,  as  David  broke 
his  unadvised  oath  against  the  life  of  Nabal,  1  Sam.  xxv.  for  we  do 
otherwise  commit  a  double  sin,  like  Herod,  who,  being  moved  by 
the  idle  dancing  of  the  daughter  of  Herodias.  promised  with  an  oath 
to  give  her  whatsoever  she  should  ask,  and  when  she  asked  for  the 
head  of  John  the  Baptist,  he  ordered  that  that  holy  man  should  be 
beheaded,  on  account  of  his  oath,  Matt.  xiv.  1 — 1 1.  But  every  other 
oath  by  which  we  obligate  ourselves  to  do  tlvngs,  that  are  not  sinful, 
but  allowable,  we  ought  to  fulfil  punctually,  although  it  should  be  to 
our  own  hurt;  for  "  he  who  abides  in  the  tabernacle  of  God,  and 
dwells  in  his  holy  hill,  changes  not,  although  he  have  sworn  to  his 
own  hurt,"  Psalm  xv.  1 — 4.  Oaths  which  have  been  sworn  to  con- 
firm a  mutual  contract,  ought  to  be  kept  on  both  sides  ;  but  if  one 
party  break  his  contract,  and  therefore  his  oath,  the  other  party  is 
then  discharged  and  freed  from  his  oath,  because  it  depends  upon 
the  condition,  that  his  confederate  will  be  faithful,  and  because  he  is 
rendered  incapable  of  keeping  his  word  and  his  oath.  The  words 
of  Paul  apply  here,  1  Cor.  vii.  15.  "If  the  unbelieving  depart,  let 
him  depart.  A  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  bondage  in  sucH 
sases," 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  if  any  of  you  have  ever  been  called  upon  to  make 
oath,  and  have  sworn  either  once,  or  repeatedly,  it  behooves  you  to 
consider  your  ways,  and  to  look  back  on  your  former  behaviour,  in 
order  to  reflect  on  your  conduct.  Permit  me  to  bring  you  to  your- 
selves, and  to  propose  certain  questions  to  you  :  (a)  When  ye  swore, 
did  ye  know  the  nature  of  an  oath?  did  ye  apprehend  that  ye  ap- 
pealed to  an  allknowing,  true,  righteous,  and  almighty  Judge,  and 
called  upon  him  to  punish  you,  if  ye  swore  falsely  ?  were  your  souls 
seiz.ed  with  a  holy  trembling  before  his  dreadful  majesty,  when  ye 
lifted  up  your  hands,  and  said,   «*  So  help  me  Almighty  God  ?" 


260  THE  GOOD  AND  EVrIL  OATH. 

Again,  (b)  When  ye  swore  to  confirm  your  testimony,  did  ye  know 
certainly,  and  without  doubting,  that  it  was  true  I  when  ye  promised 
any  thing  upon  an  oath,  did  ye  know  that  it  was  in  your  power  punc- 
tually 10  fulfil  your  promise  ?  were  your  hearts  fully  determined, 
ai'd  had  ye  a  steadfast  resolution  to  perform  all  that  ye  promised  ? 
Let  no  mas  flatter  himself,  thinking,  I  knew  indeed  that  it  was  not 
possible  for  me  to  perform  all  that  was  required  of  me,  and  I  pur- 
posed to  do  as  much  as  was  possible  for  me  ;  for  ye  ought  to  have 
Su  d  so,  <mci  ye  would  not  then  have  been  permitted  to  swear.  We 
may  not  swear  with  such  a  tacit  condition,  and  with  such  a  mental 
rescrvarion.  Permit  me  to  ask  you  this  one  question  also,  (c)  Have 
ye  kept  your  oath  i  have  ye  performed  it  in  every  respect  ?  hath 
the  fear  of  the  high  God,  by  whom  ye  swore,  restrained  you  from 
doing  aught,  that  was  contrary  to  what  ye  promised  I 

What  think  ye,  hearers  ?  can  ye  say  yea  to  all  this  with  a  well- 
assured  mind  i  Be  then  also  assured,  that  the  Lord  hath  a  special 
delight  in  your  oath,  and  in  your  performance  of  it,  and  that  he  will 
bless  you  in  the  work  of  your  hands:  but  can  ye  not  answer  yea  to 
this  question  ?  and  have  ye,  being  ignorant  of  the  importance  of  an 
oath,  sworn  only  in  a  careless  manner,  not  certainly  knowing  wheth- 
er that  which  ye  affirmed  were  true,  and  only  with  a  design  to  deliv- 
er yourselves,  or  your  friend  from  a  danger,  or  to  injure  your  ene- 
riiy  I  and  when  ye  had  bound  yourselves  with  an  oath  to  be  faithful 
in  this  or  that  affair,  did  ye  not  know  that  it  was  possible  for  you, 
and  had  ye  nut  then  a  steadfast  resolution  to  perform  what  ye  swore  ? 
had  ye  no  other  view  than  to  obtain  an  office,  or  some  other  emolu- 
ment ?  and  did  ye  not  think  much  of  breaking  your  oath  for  the 
sake  of  some  advantage  ?  know  then  that  ye  cannot  be  numbered 
among  the  citizens  of  Zion  ;  for  "  they  do  not  swear  deceitfully," 
Psulm  xxiv.  4.  Surely  ye  are  abominably  wicked  ;  for  this  is  record- 
ed as  a  grievous  abomination  of  Zedekiah,  which  he  added  to  all  his 
other  sins,  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  12,  13.  "  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord.  And  he  also  rebelled  against  king  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who  made  him  swear  by  God  "  Ye  have  "profaned  the 
name  of  God  by  your  false  swearing,"  Lev.  xix.  12,  for  ye  have  de- 
nied that  God  was  allknowing,  true,  righteous  and  almighty  ;  ye 
have  made  a  false  witness  of  him,  and  prayed  for  your  own  damna- 
tion, and  destruction.  Can  there  be  a  more  horrible  sin  ?  is  not  this 
a  bond  of  many  and  mischievous  iniquities  i  ye  are  therefore  justly 
reckoned  as  "  perjured,"  among  "  lawless  persons,  disobedient,  un- 
godly, sinners,  unholy,  profane,  murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers 
•f  mothers,  whoremongers,  those  who  defile  themselves  with  mvx; 


i 

Kind,"  and  among  "  menstealers,"  1  Tim.  i.  10.  What  think  ye? 
will  God  hold  you  guiltless,  when  ye  yourselves  have  appealed  lo  his 
justice  ?  surely,  "  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,  who  taketh 
his  name  in  vain,"  Exod.  xx.  7.  Hear  what  the  Lord  God  saith  of 
the  perjured  king  Zedekiah,  Ezek,  xvii.  18,  19.  *«  He  despised  the 
oath  by  breaking  the  covenant,  (when  lo,  he  had  given  his  hand) 
since  he  hath  done  all  these  things,  he  shall  not  escape.  Therefore 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  as  I  live,  surely  my  oath  that  lie  hath  de- 
spised, and  my  covenant  that  he  hath  broken,  even  it  will  1  recom- 
pense upon  his  own  head."  The  Lord  saith  also,  Zech.  v.  1 — 4, 
"  that  he  will  bring  the  roll  of  the*  curse,  the  length  whereof  is 
twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  ten  cubits,  into  the  house  of  him  who 
hath  sworn  falsely  by  his  name,  that  it  may  remain  there,  to  con 
sume  it,  with  the  timber  thereof,  and  with  the  stones  thereof." 

D©  ye  ask,  if  there  be  then  no  way  for  you  to  escape  the  judg- 
ment of  God  ?  We  say,  yes  :  only  let  my  counsel  be  acceptable  to 
yon,  (a)  Break  off  your  sins  of  perjury,  and  begin  henceforth  to 
perform  and  keep  your  oath.  Have  ye  been  confirmed  in  any  office, 
by  an  oath.,  and  are  ye  unable  to  execute  it  according  to  your  oath, 
give  that  office  up,  although  ye  should  become  poor;  for  ye  may 
not  retain  it,  when  ye  cannot  execute  it  without  perjury.  It  is  bet- 
ter to  be  poor  and  needy  without  such  sins,  than  to  become  rich 
with  those  sins  ;  there  is  indeed  no  way  to  deliver  your  precious 
souls  from  destruction,  as  long  as  ye  do  not  break  off  sin  ;  "  Wash 
ye,  make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well  :  Come  then,  and  let 
us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord,  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool,"  Isaiah  1  16,  17,  IS,  Seek  pardon  for  the 
abomination  of  breaking  your  oath  from  God  in  Christ,  "  who  is 
set  forth  to  you  to  be  a  propiti-  tion  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to 
declare  the  righteousness  of  God,"  Rom.  iii.  25  He  was  obliged 
to  suffer  also  the  profane  swearing  of  Caiaphas,  and  to  satisfy  for 
the  false  oaths  of  his  elect ;  if  he  had  not  done  this,  Peter  would 
not  have  been  accepted  and  saved  by  him.  It  is  therefore  absolute- 
ly necessary  for  you  to  lay  hold  of  him  as  he  is  offered  to  you  in  his 
satisfaction  by  the  Father,  and  thus  to  make  peace  with  God,  Isaiah 
xxvii.  4,  5. 

We  ought  also  to  exhort  the  magistrates,  who  are  appointed  to 
exact  oaths  of  their  subjects,  when  necessity  requires,  that  they  be 
not  too  forward  to  demand  an  oath.  They  ought  surely  not  to  admit 
children,  brainsick,  or  treacherous  persons,   or  those  who  are  infa- 


263  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  O  \TH. 

mous  on  account  of  their  dishonest  conduct  to  an  oath  ;  lor  such 
pu.sons  cannot  swear  without  profaning  the  name  of  God.  Neither 
siiould  those  who  are  set  over  others  urge  any  person  to  iwea;',  un- 
less in  important  cases,  and  such  as  are  possible,  and  then  only,  when 
necessity  requires.  And  not  even  then,  except  after  preceding  in. 
structions  an:l  admonitions  ;  for  otherwise  vain  and  false  oaths  will 
be  multiplied,  and  the  magistrates  will  render  themselves  guilty  of 
the  sins  of  others.  • 

Let  every  one  also  fear  an  oath  ;  swearing  by  the  name  of  God  is 
indeed  a  solemn  wok;  let  none  therefore  proceed  lightly  to  an 
oath  ;  a  godly  man  "  feareth  an  oath,"  as  Solomon  saith,  Led.  ix.  I. 
Therefore,  hearers,  "be  noi  rash  with  your  mouths,  neither  let  ycur 
hearts  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  :  for  God  is  in  heaven, 
and  ye  upon  earth,"  Eccl.  \.  2.  But  when  the  magistrates  demand 
it,  or  it  is  otherwise  necessary,  then  swear  :  yet  with  a  holy  ftar  for 
God,  with  a  holy  frame  of  heart,  and  with  an  assur;  nee,  that  the 
matter  to  which  ye  swear  is  the  truth,  and  that  it  is  possible  for  you  ; 
and  swear  also  plainly,  and  directly,  without  clokes  of  shame,  and 
thus  "  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness,"  according  to 
the  divine  command,  Jer.  iv.  2.  See  also  that  ye  keep  your  oath, 
which  ye  have  sworn  for  the  confirmation  of  fidelity,  and  that  ye 
change  not,  though  it  were  to  your  hurt. 

Must  we  swear  fidelity  to  men,  much  more  must  we  then  to  God 
and  to  his  Son.  It  was  foretold,  Isaiah  xix.  IS,  that  "  five  cities  in 
the  land  of  Egypt  should  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  swear 
to  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  Messiah  saith,  Isaiah  xlv.  23.  "  I  have 
sworn  by  myself,  the  word  is  gone  out  of  my  m-  uth  in  righteous- 
ness, and  shall  not  return,  that  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  evei  y 
tongue  shall  swear."  God  offers  now  to  all  people  his  well  ordered 
covenant,  promising  all  grace  to  the  sinner.  Hear  how  the  Son  of 
God  calls  to  you  all,  Isaiah  lv.  3.  «  Incline yout  ear  and  com?  unto 
me,  hear  and  your  soul  shall  live,  and  J  will  make  an  everlasting 
covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David.''  We  must  as- 
sent to  this  covenant,  must  enter  into  it,  and  engage  that  we  will  be 
the  Lord's,  and  do  his  will,  and  thus  "  say,  I  am  the  Lord's,  and 
call  ourselves  by  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  yea,  subscribe  to  it, 
as  it  were,  with  our  hand,"  Isaiah  xiv.  5.  And  to  prove  that  we  do 
:h;s  with  a  perfect  heart,  we  must  with  David,  Psalm  cxix.  10G, 
kt  swear  that  we  will  keep  God's  righteous  judgments,  and  we  must 
>rm  our  oath."  Yea,  we  must  confirm  it  in  a  solemn  manner,  as 
•-were,  with  an  oath  of  cursing,  like  Israel,  "  who  entered  into  the 
nant  of  the  Lord,  and  into  his  •  un  ■••■"  Deut.  xxix    12.     I  wish 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY-  Q.  101,  102.  26S 

that  I  could  say  of  you  all,  that  ye  had  thus  bound  yourselves  and 
sworn  to  the  Lord  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  like  "  all  Ju- 
dah,  who  rejoiced  at  the  oath  ;  for  all  the  Jews  had  swot  n  with  their 
whole  heart,  and  sought  the  Lord  with  theit  whole  desire,  and  he 
was  found  of  them,"  2  Chron.  xv.  15.  Let  none  refuse  this  great 
and  blessed  duty  ;  ye  are  all  bound  by  nature  to  do  the  will  of  the 
Lord.  Ye  have  oeen  outwardly  surrendered  into  the  covenant  of 
God  by  your  baptism,  and  have  been  obliged  thereby,  as  by  a  mili- 
tary oath,  "  to  cleave  to  the  Triune  God,  to  trust  in  him  and  love 
him,  to  forsake  the  world,  crucify  your  nature,  and  walk  in  a  new 
and  holy  life."  Is  it  your  mini  to  renounce  and  to  make  void 
that  oath  ?  If  ye  will  not  do  this,  but  abide  by  your  oath,  enter  then 
solemnly  into  his  covenant,  and  swear  to  the  Lord.  Is  there  any 
one  who  knows  his  indwelling  corruption,  and  is  he  fearful,  that  he 
wdl  prove  unfaithful,  and  do'h  this  deter  him  from  swearing  in  such 
a  manner  to  the  Lord,  let  him  know  that  he  enters  into  this  cove- 
nant at  the  expence  of  free  grace,  and  of  all  the  promises  of  the 
covenant,  and  that  the  Lord  hath  said,  that  '  he  would  put  his  fear 
into  the  heart  of  him  who  is  in  covenant  with  him,  that  he  may  not 
depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  Kzek.  xxxvi.  27.  Sins,  which 
we  oppose  and  lament,  will  not  annul  the  covenant  Hear  what  the 
Lord  saith  of  you,  who  desire  to  be  faithful,  Psalm  lxxxix,  31 — 34. 
"  If  they  break  my  statutes,  and  keep  not  my  commandments,  then 
will  I  visit  their  transgressions  with  the  rod,  and  their  iniquity  with 
stripes.  Nevertheless  my  lovingkindness  will  I  not  utterly  take 
from  him,  nor  suffer  my  faithfulness  to  fail.  My  covenant  will  I 
not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips,"  Yea, 
God  confirms  this  word  of  his  by  an  oath,  Heb.  vi.  17,  18.  i:  God 
willing  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  the  promise  the  immutability  of 
his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that  by  two  immutable  things, 
in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong 
consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  be- 
fore us."     Amen. 


(   264  ) 


THE 


FOURTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XXXV III.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exodus  xx.  3 — 11.  Remember  the  sabbathday  to  keep  it  holy* 
Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work  :  but  the  seventh 
day  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt  not  do 
any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy  manservant, 
nor  thy  maidservant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that  is  with- 
in thy  gates.  For  in  six  days  the  Loul  made  heaven  and  earth, 
the  sea  and  all  that  in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day  :  where- 
fore the  Lord  blessed  the  sabbathday,  and  hallowed  it,

Q.   102.  May  we  also  swear  by  the  saints  or  any  other  creature  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  a  lawful  oath  is  calling  upon  God,  as  the  only  one, 
who  knows  the  heart,  that  he  will  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and 
punish  me,  if  I  swear  falsely  ;  which  honour  is  due  to  no  creature. 


B 


>E  not  righteous  overmuch,  neither   make  thyself  overwisej 
why  shouldest  thou  destroy   thyself?      Be  not  overmuch   wicked, 
neither  be  thou  foolish ;  why  shouldest  thou  die  before   thy  time  ?" 
V«l.  it.  3  G 


150  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

Thus  speaks  the  wisest  of  kings,  Eccl.  vii,  16,  \7.  We  can 
not  be  too  righteous,  nor  too  wise  :  neither  may  we  be  in  any 
respect  wicked,  or  foolish.  But  when  the  wise  man  disapproves  of 
an  excess  in  these  things,  we  must  believe  that  he  introduceth  a 
wicked  man,  as  speaking,  who  hath  no  delight  in  pure  righteous- 
ness, and  in  heavenly  wisdom,  and  who  will  not  indulge  neither  in 
open  villainy  and  folly,  because  it  would  be  too  detrimental  to  his 
temporal  interest,  which  he  considers  as  Lis  God.  Or  Solomon  re- 
quires with  these  words,  that  we  should  keep  the  middle  way,  and 
not  turn  aside  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left,  according  to  Pro  v. 
iv.  26,  27.  The  sinner  turns  easily  aside  to  the  right  hand,  that  is, 
he  becomes  too  righteous,  or  too  wise  by  believing  too  much,  and 
doing  more  than  God  commands  him,  "honouring  God  in  vain,' 
teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,"  Matt.  xv.  9. 
He  will  also  attend  too  much  to  lighter  matters,  and  neglect  in  the 
mean  while  the  weightiest,  like  the  Pharisees,  "who  tithed  mint, 
anise  and  cummin,  but  omitted  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law," 
Matt,  xxiii.  23.  When  sinful  man  will  not  do  this,  he  will  turn 
aside  to  the  left  hand,  even  become  too  wicked,  and  too  foolish,  and 
abandon  himself  lo  evil  practices. 

We  ought  to  avoid  such  extremes,  and  to  steer  a  direct  course  ; 
the  middle  way  is  the  safest,  and  in  that  we  shall  proceed  with  the 
greatest  security.  Therefore  our  reformed  church,  following  the 
course  of  God's  word  abstains  from  the  dangerous  extremes  of  her 
adversaries.  This  appears  in  her  doctrine  concerning  the  justifica- 
tion of  the  sinner  belore  God  by  faith  only,  but  evidenced  by  good 
works ;  and  she  stt  ers  thus  a  direct  course  between  the  Papists, 
who  being  righteous  overmuch,  extol  works  too  highly  in  this  mat- 
ter, and  the  Antinomians,  who  being  wicked  overmuch,  dissolve 
ail  obligations  to  good  works.  So  our  purified  church  explains  also 
the  doctrine  of  the  sacraments  as  signs  and  seals  of  the  divine 
grace  ;  which  the  Papists,  as  righteous  overmuch,  extol,  as  though 
they  conferred  grace  by  thenaselv-'S ;  and  which  the  Socin- 
ians,  as  wicked  overmuch  disparage,  as  though  they  were  no  more 
than  bare  signs  of  Christianity.  Doth  not  our  unblamableness  ap- 
pear also  in  our  doctrine  concerning  a  religious  oath  by  the  name 
of  God  ?  by  which  we  avoid  the  doctrine  of  the  Mennonites,  who,  as 
righteous  overmuch,  think  that  a  Christian  hath  no  right  to  swear 
at  all ;  and  of  the  Papists,  who,  as  wicked  overmuch,  swear  by  the 
saints  and  other  creatures,  as  we  are  taught  here  in  this  Lord's 
iay.     Wc  have    spoken  before  of  vain  and   false  oaths  ;    we    nuts' 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   101—102.  25 1 

next  consider  whether  we  may  swear  at  all,  and  if  we  may,  whether 
we  may  swear  by  the  creatures. 

Two  particulars  require  our  consideration  here, 

I.  The  nature  of  an  oath. 

II.  The  controversy  which  we  have  with  the  Mennonites  and  Pa- 
pists concerning  oaths. 

I.  We  know  nx  lio.v  to  describe  an  oath  better  than  the  instructor 
doth  in  the  hundred  and  second  question,  in  which  he  saith  that  it  is 
"  a  calling-  upon  God,  that  he,  as  the  only  one  who  knoweth  the 
heart,  will  bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and  punish  us  if  we  swear 
falsely."     Jn  an  oath  there  is, 

1.  Something  supposed,  to  which  men  swear,  either  truth  or  fidel- 
ity. We  swear  to  the  truth  of  any  thing,  whether  we  ourselves,  or 
others  have  spoken  or  done  it,  when  we  confirm  by  an  oath  that  it 
hath  truly  happened,  as  we  testify  concerning  it.  Thus  Obadiah 
swore  to  assi  rj  Klij.  h  1  K'ngs  xviii .  10,  "As  the  Lord  ;hy  God  liveth. 
there  is  no  nation  or  kingdom,  whither  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to 
seek  thee  ;  and  when  they  said,  he  is  not  there  ;  he  took  an  oath  of 
the  kingdom  and  nation,  that  they  found  thee  not."  Or  we  swear 
to  fidelity,  when  we  swear  that  we  will  be  faithful,  and  keep  our 
word  in  promises,  obligations  and  contracts,  as  Rahab  caused  the 
spies  to  swear,  that  they  would  save  her,  and  her  kindred  alive, 
Joshua  ii.  12 — 21.  See  this  also  in  Jonathan  and  David,  1  Sam. 
xx    12—17.     xxiv.  21,  22,  23. 

2.  As  no  man  knows  our  heart,  and  as  therefore  no  man  knows 
whether  we  testify  and  promise  according  to  truth,  therefore  we 
call  upon  God,  that  he,  as  the  only  one  who  knoweth  the  heart, 
would  bear  witness  to  the  truth  :  "  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my 
soul,"  saith  the  apostle,  2  Cor.  i.  23.  And  thus  we  appeal  in  an  ob- 
scure matter  to  the  ailknowing  God,  as  the  Reubenites,  Gadites,  and 
half  tribe  of  Manasseh  did,  in  order  to  confirm  that  they  had  not 
builded  their  altar,  to  rebel  against  the  Lord  their  God,  saying  Josh. 
xxii.  22,  « The  Lord  God  of  gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he 
knoweth,"  Yea,  we  pray  to  the  Lord,  that  he  would  bear  witness 
to  the  truth,  and  that  he  would  make  it  known,  that  we  speak  the 
truth  ;  which  he  doth  by  manifesting  the  matter,  to  which  we  have 
sworn  in  succeeding  times,  and  by  causing  others  to  acquit  see  in 
our  oath,  and  also  by  blessing  us,  and  giving  us  joy  and  peace  of 
mind  by  his  Spirit,  upon  our  swearing,  as  the  Lord  bore  witness  to 
Paul,  so  that  he  could  say,  "  1  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my 
conscience  also  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Rontk 
ix.   10. 


251  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

3.  Though  the  Lord  God  knows  when  the  sinner  lies,  and 
though  he  sometimes  bears  witness  to  the  truth  by  punishing  liars, 
by  bringing  reproach  upon  them,  and  destroying  them,  and  there- 
fore all  men  ought  to  lay  aside  lying,  and  to  speak  the  truth  with 
their  neighbour,  nevertheless  a  man  ought  to  fear  a  false  oath  more 
than  a  lie,  because  in  an  oath  he  calls  upon  the  allknowing  God  to 
manifest  it,  if  he  utter  a  lie,  yea,  "  to  punish  him,  if  he  swear  Llse- 
ly  »"  whereby  he  therefore  declares,  that  he  will  look  for  no  favour 
from  God,  that  he  will  suffer  ail  his  judgments,  and  that  he  stakes 
and  pledges  all  that  is  clear  to  him,  if  he  do  not  speak  the  truth. 
Therefore  they  said  of  old,  when  they  swore,  "  God  do  so  to  me 
and  more  also,"  Ruth  i.  17.  1  Kings  ii.  23.  Yea,  they  cursed 
and  execrated  themselves  with  their  oath,  Matt,  xxvi  74.  Acts 
xxiii  12,  13.  And  this  is  the  reason  why  an  oath  is  sometimes 
called  a  curse,  Numb.  v.  21.  1  Kings  viii.  31.  Although  men 
do  not  always  express  in  an  oath  the  curse,  which  they  wish  them- 
selves, nevertheless  the  most  fearful  curse  is  supposed. 

4.  The  immediate  design  of  an  oath  is  the  confirmation  of  truth 
and  fidelity,  which  remains  otherwise  doubtful.  Man  is  become 
through  sin  unbelieving,  and  unworthy  to  be  believed  :  "  He  is  in- 
deed of  his  father  the  devil,  who,  when  he  speaketh  a  lie,  speaketh 
it  of  his  own  ;  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it,"  John  viii.  44. 
But  when  we  swear,  we  then  render  ourselves  capable  of  being  be- 
lieved,  and  we  are  obliged  to  believe  others  upon  their  oath  :  "  For 

i  men  swear  by  the  greater ;  and  an  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them 
»an  end  of  all  strife,"  according  to  our  text ;  for  we  may  not  think 
that  any  man  is  so  forgetful  of  God,  that  he  would  undertake  to  ap- 
peal to  the  allknowing,  holy  and  righteous  God,  with  the  most  dreadful 
execration  of  himself,  and  of  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to  him,  in  be- 
half of  a  lie  and  breach  of  trust.  If  any  man  be  nevertheless  so 
ungodly,  we  must  notwithstanding  be  satisfied  with  his  oath,  because 
there  is  no  other  way  to  decide  controversies,  and  the  false  swearer 
cannot  injure  others  by  his  wicked  oath,  as  much  as  he  injures 
himself. 

Sometimes  a  man  himself  utters  an  oath,  in  order  to  confirm 
truth  and  fidelity,  and  sometimes  others  utter  an  oath  for  him,  to 
adjure  and  urge  him  by  an  oath,  to  speak  the  truth  ;  thus  Caiaphas 
adjured  the  Saviour  to  tell  whether  he  were  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,"  Malt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  Thus  Paul  also  did,  1  Thess.  v.  27,  "  I 
adjure  you  by  the  Ljrd,  that  this  epistle  be  read  by  all  the  holy 
brethren."  To  this  pertains  also  the  curse  which  he  clenounceth 
against  all  those,  "  who  love  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  1  Cor. 
xvi.  32.     See  alsoLxod.  x'ni.  19.     Numb.  v.  19 — 22. 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  253 

II.  Since  then  swearing  is  such  a  solemn  work,  that  we  thereby 
call  the  allknowing  and  righteous  God  to  witness,  and  imprecate  his 
judgments  upon  us,  if  we  do  not  speak  the  truth,  therefore  the  god- 
ly have  with  good  reason  feared  an  oath.  Solomon,  distinguishing 
the  ungodly  from  the  righteous,  saith  that  the  former  "  swtareth," 
but  that  the  latter  "  feareth  an  oath,"  Eccl.  ix.  2.  Therefore  the 
instructor  asks  with  propriety,  "  whether  we  may  swear  religiously 
by  the  name  of  God."  The  Esstnes  among  the  Jews,  and  also  cer- 
tain ancient  Christians  thought  that  it  was  unlawful  to  swear,  and 
the  Mennonitts  hold  the  sunie  opinion  at  this  day  ;  but  the  instructor 
answers  that  an  oath  is  lawful.  If  we  shall  explain  this  question 
properly,  we  must  know  that  the  dispute  is  not  whether  they  might 
swear  under  the  Old  Testament ;  for  these  men  will  not  deny  that : 
but  whether  we  may  swear  under  the  New  Testament :  neither, 
whether  we  may  swear  vainly,  but  religiously  ;  not  whether  we  may 
swear  at  all  times,  but  whether  when  the  magistrates  require  it  of 
their  subjects,  or  when  other  circumstances  render  it  necessary,  in 
matters  of  importance,  when  we  cannot  obtain  satisfactory  evidence, 
or  testimonies  sufficient  to  determine  differences  between  man  and 
man. 

The  Mennonites  deny  that  we  may  swear  in  such  cases,  but  we 
maintain  the  affirmative,  because 

1.  Swearing  in  this  manner  is  founded  on  the  word  of  God,  in 
which  we  are  commanded  not  only  "  to  fear  the  Lord,  and  to  serve 
him,  but  also  to  swear  by  his  name,"  Deut.  vi.  13.  x  20.  It  is  true, 
this  was  under  the  Old  Testament ;  but  there  is  no  reason  why  God 
should  forbid  it  now  under  the  New  Testament,  since  swearing  doth 
not  belong  either  to  the  civil,  or  to  the  ecclesiastical  law  of  the  Jews, 
It  was  also  foretold  of  believers  under  the  New  Testament,  that  they 
should  swear  by  the  Lord,  and  their  whole  worship  is  expressed  by 
the  figure  of  swearing  :  "  In  that  day,"  saith  the  prophet,  "  shall 
five  cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  ai^ 
swear  to  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Isaiah  xix.  18.  See  also  Isaiah  xlv. 
23.  lxv.  16.  Jer.  xii.  16 

2.  The  saints  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  made  use  of 
oaths  rightly.  It  is  unnecessary  to  collect  many  examples  of  the 
Old  Testament  saints  who  swore,  since  the  dispute  relates  only  to 
the  New  Testament.  And  surely  the  saints  of  the  New  Testament 
have  sworn.  The  Head  of  the  saints,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
was  made  a  priest  by  an  oath  of  the  Father,  suffered  himself  to  be 
adjured  by  Caiaphas,  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  Paal  "  called  God  to  rec- 
ord upon  his  soul,"  2  Cor.  i.  23.    Philip,  i.  3.    lie  also  "  adjured 


254  THE  GOOD  AND  LV1L  OATH. 

the  Thessalonians,  that  they  should  see  that  his  epistle  was  read  by 
all  the  holy  brethren,"  1  Thess  v.  27.  How  -would  he  have  dared 
to  do  this,  if  it  had  been  forbidden  him  ? 

3.  Further,  an  oath  is  often  necessary  on  account  of  the  weighty 
controversies,  which  happen  between  man  and  man,  and  on  account, 
of  contracts,  which  men  make  one  with  another.  How  shall  men 
believe  one  anothers  testimony  and  promise,  and  truth  and  fidelity 
be  confirmed  ?  must  it  not  be  by  an  oath  ?  therefore  the  text  saith, 
"  An  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  men  an  end  of  all  strife."  Would 
yea  and  nay  suffice  to  believe  one  another  without  scruple  ?  Are 
not  "  all  men  then  liars  r"  Psalm  cxvi  11.  Rom.  iii.  4.  Or  will  the 
truth  of  the  Mennonitish  men  and  women  satisfy  us  ?  why  do  they 
then  make  use  of  Mennonitish  tricks  and  ambiguous  expressions  to 
deceive  their  neighbours  ?  can  they  show  us  men  and  women  of 
their  sect,  who  are  so  true,  that  they  never  lie  :  and  what  is  their  af- 
firmation by  the  truth  of  men  and  women,  but  an  implicit  oath,  by 
which  they  engage  their  honour  as  true  men,  with  an  oath,  and  de- 
sire that  God  should  expose  them  to  shame,  if  they  do  not  speak 
the  truth  ? 

4.  How  can  an  oath  be  forbidden  in  the  New  Testament,  when  tt 
conduceth  to  the  glory  ot  God,  and  to  the  salvation  of  our  neigh- 
bour ?  By  an  oath  a  person  protests  in  a  solemn  manner,  that  God 
is  true,  allknowing,  righteous  and  almighty,  and  he  calls  upon  him 
as  such,  with  a  fear  and  dread  of  his  wrath.  The  honour,  the  prop- 
erly, the  life  and  salvation  of  cur  neighbour  is  at  stake,  if  either  he 
himself,  or  some  other  cannot  deliver  him  by  an  oath  ;  shall  it  then 
be  deemed  sinful?     How  is  this  to  be  endured  ? 

Let  none  object  here  the  words  of  Christ  Matt.  v.  3-1,  37.  "  But 
I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all  ;  neither  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's 
throne  ;  nor  by  the  earth,  for,  he.  But  let  your  communication  be 
yea,  yea  ;  nay,  nay  ;  for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  comtth  of 
evil,"  which  is  briefly  repeated  by  James,  James  v.  '2.  These  texts 
do  not  surely  favour  the  opinion  of  the  Mennonites  ;  for  they  make 
use  of  more  than  yea  and  nay,  when  they  confirm  their  words  by 
the  truth  of  their  men  and  women.  Christ  himself  made  use  of 
more  than  yea  and  nay  ;  for  he  often  confirmed  his  words  with  a 
double  verily  :  therefore  we  may  say  more  than  yea  and  nay  in  mat- 
ters of  importance.  But  when  he  saith,  Swear  not  at  all  he  oppo- 
ses the  false  glosses  of  the  old  Pharisees,  who  made  the  law  of  Cod 
of  no  effect  by  their  traditions.  This  is  evident  from  the  whole 
chapter  ;  for  Jesus  forbids  us  to  "  break  even  the  least  of  God's 
commandments,"   as   19.     He  teacheth  tbat    -'cur    righteousness 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  162.  255 

must  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,"  vs.  20. 
They  had  taught  that  "  men  ought  to  love  their  neighbours,  but 
that  they  might  hate  their  enemies,"  vs.  43,  which  was  contrary  to 
the  law,  Prov.  xxiv.  29.  xxv  21,  22.  They  also  persuaded  them- 
seives  and  others,  that  only  false  oaths  were  forbidden,  but  not  vain 
ones  :  yea,  they  thought  that  they  might  swear  by  the  creatures, 
and  even  by  mean  creatures,  and  moreover,  that  they  were  not  bound 
by    such    oaths,  as    the  Saviour   plainly   shows.     Matt.  v.  33 — 37. 

xxiii.  16 22.     Jesus   as  the  best  expositor  of  God's,   yea,  of  his 

own  law,  opposes  these  expositions.  It  is  true,  that  what  is  more 
than  yea,  and  nay,  cometh  of  evil  ;  but  an  oath  doth  not  therefore 
come  of  evil ;  for  how  could  God  himself  then  have  sworn,  and 
commanded  oaths  ?  Christ  would  not  then  have  suffered  himself  to 
be  adjured,  nor  the  saints  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  have  made 
use  of  oaths  ;  but  that  which  is  more  than  yea  and  nay  is  avoin  oath 
by  the  creatures,  and  a  false  oath  ;  tor  Satan,  the  evil  one.  first  swore 
a  vain  and  false  oath  ;  sec  Gen.  iii.  5.  It  cometh  also  of  evil,  that 
men  cannot  be  believed  on  account  of  their  yea  and  nay,  hut  are 
liars,  and  are  therefore  obliged  to  confirm  their  words  with  an  oath  : 
See  John  viii.  44. 

1  he  Vlennonites  are  so  scrupulous  with  respect  to  oaths  ;  but 
the  Papists  proceed  to  as  great  an  extreme  of  lightness  and  trifling 
with  them,  when  they  venture  to  swear  by  the  saints  and  by  other 
creatures.  This  abomination  we  justly  condemn  with  the  instructor, 
and  that  our  reasons  for  condemning  it  may  be  the  more  forcible, 
and  that  we  may  unsinew  the  principle  arguments  of  our  adversa- 
ries against  us,  we  will  explain  the  subject  of  this  controversy  some- 
what more  particularly.  The  question  is  not,  whether  we  may  not 
pledge  or  stake  a  beloved  object  in  our  oath,  to  confirm  truth  and 
fidelity,  as  Paul  did  "  his  rejoicing  which  he  had  in  Christ  Jesus," 
1  Cor.  xv.  31.  We  may  not  disapprove  of  this,  because  we  submit 
ourselves  in  an  oaih  to  the  divine  punishment,  if  we  swear  falsely  : 
neither  is  the  dispute  here  whether  we  may  not  confirm  truth,  or 
fidelity  by  something,  of  which  every  one  is  certain,  as  Joseph  con- 
firmed his  assertion  by  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  of  which  every  one  was 
conscious,  1  Cor.  xv.  31,  unless  we  would  consider  Joseph's  words, 
as  a  pledging  of  the  life  of  Pharaoh,  which  was  very  dear  to  him. 
See  also  1  Sam.  I.  26.  xvii.  55  xx  3  xxv.  26.  In  what  sense  so- 
ever it  be  taken,  we  wdl  not  condemn  it.  Neither  do  we  dispute 
with  our  adversaries  whether  \re  may  not  make  a  strong  protesta- 
tion before  creatures,  who  are  present,  and  can  be  witnesses  of  what 
we  affirm  ;  for  Mosss  m^lt;  such  a  protestation  before  ({  heaven  and 


S56  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

earth,"  Deut.  ::xx.  19,  and  Paul  "protested  before  the  elect  en- 
eels,"  1  Tim.  v.  2i.  Or  if  we  would  consider  this  protestation  be- 
fore the  angels,  as  an  oath,  to  adjure  i  imoihy,  and  oblige  him  to 
keep  the  commandment,  then  we  must  look  upon  tho^e  creatures,  as 
instruments  of  God's  anger  against  the  disobedient ;  and  so  this 
protestation  is,  as  it  were,  an  urging  of  a  person  to  his  duty  by  the 
denunciation  of  a  cuise,  as  the  aposde  did,  I  Cor.  xvi.  22  That  we 
may  appeal  in  this  manner  to  the  creatures  in  an  oath  we  will  not 
deny.  And  so  the  question  between  us  and  the  Papists  is,  whether 
we  may  call  upon,  or  pray  to  any  creature  leligiously,  to  bear  wit- 
ness concerning  any  secret  matter,  and  to  punish  us  judicially,  if  we 
swear  falseiy.  Tlie  Papists  say  that  this  is  lawful,  but  we  deny  it 
for  the  most  weighty  reason*.     For 

1.  We  may  not  pray  to  the  suints,  nor  to  any  other  creatures,  as 
we  have  proved  on  the  first  commandment  ;  and  besides  this,  swear- 
ing by  the  creatures  is  contraiy  to  the  nature  of  an  oath,  because 
that  suppobetii  an  allimowing,  righteous  and  almighty  supreme 
Judge,  to  whom  we  appeal,  that  he  may  bear  witness  to  the  truth, 
anu  punish  us,  if  we  swear  falsely,  as  we  have  proved  before.  Now 
since  it  is  certain,  that  no  creature  possesses  these  perfections,  how 
can  we  then  presume  to  swear  by  the  saints,  or  by  other  creatures  ? 

2.  Swearing  by  tiie  creatures  is  condemned,  threatened  and  pun- 
ished by  God,  as  a  grievous  sin.  He  saith,  Jer.  v.  7.  "  How  shall 
I  pardon  thee  for  this  ?  thy  children  have  forsaken  me  and 
sworn  by  them  that  are  no  gods,"  Hear  what  a  dreadful  judgment 
the  Lord  threatens  to  inflict  on  "  the  fair  virgins  and  young  men  of 
Israel,  even  that  they  should  faint  for  thirst,  because  they  swore  by 
the  sin  of  Samaria,  and  said,  Thy  God,  O  Dan,  liveth,  and  the  man- 
ner of  Beersheba  liveth  :  they  should  fall  and  not  rise  up  again." 
Amos  viii.  13,  14.  It  is  recorded  as  an  abomination,  that  the  Jews 
s*  swore  by  the  Lord  and  by  Maicham,"  Zeph.  1.  5. 

The  Papists  endeavour  in  vain  to  defend  their  idolatrous  swear- 
ing with  the  oath  of  Jacob  u  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac,''  Gen. 
xxxi.  53  ;  for  that  oath  of  Jacob  is  opposed  to  the  idolatrous  oath  of 
Laban,by  "  the  god  of  Abraham,  the  god  of  Nahor,  and  the  god  of 
their  father."  Those  gods  were  idols,  which  Abraham  served  before 
his  conversion.  See  Joshua  x.viv.  2.  Therefore  the  fear  of  Isaac 
was  the  ttue  God,  who  was  with  him,  and  helped  him,  vs.  42.  as 
the  Lord  God  is  often  called  "  the  fear  and  dread"  of  his  people, 
Isaiah  viii.  13,  the  act  being  put  for  the  object  of  the  act  by  a  me- 
'onymy,  because  the  Lord,  the  object  of  the  fear,  is  worthy  to  be 
fie  ar< 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  25f 

The  Papists  object  further  the  words  of  the  Saviour  from  Matt. 
xxiii.  16—22  "  Wo  unto  you,  ye  blind  guides,  which  say,  Who- 
soever shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is  nothing  ;  but  whos-oever  shall 
swear  by  the  gold  of  the  temple,  he  is  a  debtor,  &c.  Whosoever 
shall  swear  by  the  temple  sweareth  by  it,  and  by  him  that  dweileth 
therein.  And  he  that  shall  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth  by  the  throne 
of  God  and  by  him  that  sitteth  thereon."  They  conclude  from  this, 
that  we  may  swear  by  the  creatures,  and  particularly  by  those,  that 
are  dedicated  to  Cod,  because  they  represent  God.  The  Saviour 
doth  not  however  leach  this  ;  but,  among  other  things,  that  the  Phar- 
isees, by  pledging  and  engaging  the  temple  and  alar  in  their  oaths, 
as  precious  things,  swore  by  God,  as  the  Judge,  that  he  might  pun- 
ish them  in  those  things,  and  that  they  were  therefore  bound  by 
such  oaths.  This  text  doth  not  therefore  militate  against  our  opin- 
ion, since  we  do  not  disapprove  of  submitting  creatures,  which  are 
dear  to  us,  to  the  judgment  of  God.  Neither  is  this  the  subject  of 
our  controversy,  but  whether  we  may  call  on  the  saints  and  other- 
creatures,  in  secret  matters,  to  bear  witness,  and  to  be  judges,  in  or- 
der that  they  may  punish  us,  if  we  swear  fabely  :  and  therefore  this 
text  is  not  applicable  here. 

The  swearing  of  the  Papists  by  the  saints  and  other  creatures  is 
not  the  only  mistake,  which  they  commit  with  respect  to  oaths,  but 
also,  that  they,  especially  the  Jesuits,  allow  that  men  may  make  use 
of  doublemeaning  words,  and  mental  reservations  in  swearing ; 
whereby  they  utter  a  word,  which  may  be  understood  in  a  twofold 
sense,  in  one  sense,  and  keep  the  other  sense  to  themselves :  or 
when  they  utter  words,  which  have  only  one  simple  sense,  but  in- 
tend some  limitation  of  it  in  their  own  minds.  Tor  instance,  we  ask 
a  Popish  priest,  whether  he  is  a  priest,  and  he,  seeing  that  he  would 
expose  himself  to  danger  by  an  honest  confession,  answers  no,  but 
with  this  reservation  and  tacit  limitation,  I  am  not  a  priest  of  Baal5 
or,  I  am  not  a  priest  to  tell  you  that  I  am. 

But  the  saints  did  not  act  so,  for  "  they  renounced  the  hidden 
things  of  dishonesty,  and  walked  not  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv.  2. 
They  would  rather  suffer  the  most  painful  deaths,  than  rescue  them- 
selves by  such  miserable  shifts.  The  citizen  of  Zion  "  doth  not 
swear  deceitfully,"  Psalm  xxiv.  4.  God  condemned  the  conduct  of 
his  people  in  "not  swearing  in  truth  and  righteousness,"  Isaiah 
xlviii.  1.  It  is  also  abominable  :  for  by  this  mean  a  person  deceives 
with  an  oath,  which  is  required,  in  order  to  prevent  all  kinds  of  de- 
ceit :  he  increases  disputes,  contrary  to  the  nature  of  an  oath,  Heb. 
>i.  16.     All  truth  and  fidelity  is  thus  abolished,  good  neighbourhood 

Voi.  it.  2  H 


235  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  OATH. 

is  destroyed,  and  the  Jesuits  compel  us  to  discredit  their  words  and 
their  oaths  for  ever  ;  yea,  this  is  such  a  sin,  that  they  are  ashamed 
of  their  opinion,  they  will  conceal  it,  and  e-.en  deny  it 

This  filth  cannot  -be  cloked  with  the  words  of  Abraham,  who  said 
that  Sarah  his  wife  was  his  sister,  Gen.  xx.  2,  nor  with  the  declara- 
tion of  Samuel,  who  gave  out  that  he  was  come  to  Bethlehem,  in 
order  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  when  it  was  his  intention  to  anoinl 
David,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1  —5.  But  if  these  men  sinned,  must  we  there- 
fore imitate  them  ?  They  also  spoke  the  truth  ;  for  Sarah  was  indeed 
the  sister  of  Abraham,  Gen.  xx.  12,  and  Samuel  did  indeed  go  to 
Bethlehem,  in  order  that  he  might  sacrifice  :  but  they  did  not  utter 
the  whole  truth,  which  we  are  not  always  obliged  to  do  :  we  may  ut- 
ter one  truth,  and  suppress  another.     See  Jer.  xxxviii.  24 — 27. 

It  is  not  less  hateful  in  the  Papists,  to  teach  that  men  are  not 
obliged  to  keep  their  oaths  with  here  ics,  by  which  means  these  men 
have  turned  the  world  into  a  shambles.  When  the  emperour  Si- 
gismund  had  promised  John  Hus  a  safe  conduct,  in  order  that  he 
might  appear  without  danger  at  the  council  of  Constance,  that  eccle- 
siastical assembly  enacted  a  law,  that  men  should  not  be  bou'  d  to 
keep  faith  with  heretics,  and  they  condemned  him  to  be  burned,  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  the  emperour.  But  the  Israelites  acted  differ- 
ently from  this  with  the  Gibeonites,  when  they  spared  them  on  ac- 
count of  their  p'ighted  oath,  although  the  Gibeonites  had  deceived 
the  Israelites,  and  had  obtained  an  oath  from  them  by  deceit,  Joshua 
ix.  When  Saul,  in  his  mad  zeal  for  the  children  of  Israel,  had  rut 
them  to  death,  the  Lord  revenged  the  slaughter  many  years  after 
upon  Israel,  and  ordered  it  to  be  revenged  on  the  family  of  Saul, 
2  Sam.  xxi.  It  matters  not  to  whom,  but  by  whom  we  swear  ;  but 
the  Papists  render  themselves  so  detestable,  that  no  man  dares  to 
trust  them,  either  upon  their  word,  or  their  oath. 

Two  questions  arise  here  :  first,  whether  we  may  require  an  oath 
from  an  idolater,  who  swears  by  that  which  is  no  God  ?     It  is  cer- 
tain that  we  may  enter  into  covenants  with  persons,  who  are  not  of 
the  same  faith  with   ourselves,   yea,    who  are   idolaters,    in  order  to 
maintain  good  neighbourhood.     But  inasmuch  as  it  is  dangerous  to 
depend,  in  such  momentous  cases,  upon  the  single  word  of  the  idol- 
ater,  it  becomes  therefore  necessary   to   require   an  oath  of  him. 
Now  as  he  will  not  swear  by  any  one  but  his  idol,  since  he  looks  upon 
his  idol  to  be  a  God,  and  thus  reckons  himself  as  much  bound   by- 
such  an  oath  as  if  he  had  sworn  by  the  true  Go.l,  there  is  there- 
fore no  reason  why  we  should  not  require  an  oath  of  him  ;  doth  he 
commit  u  sin,  it  will  lie  at  his  own  door :  others,  who  earncs.ly  de- 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101,  102.  259 

sire  that  he  should  swear  by  the  true  God,  do  not  become  guilty  of 
his  sin.  The  saints  did  not  therefore  scruple  to  enter  into  covenants, 
confirmed  by  oaths,  with  idolaters,  see  this  in  Isaac,  Gen.  xxvi  26 
— 31.  and  in  Jacob,  Gen.  xxxi  53.  The  other  question  is,  how 
far  we  are  bound  by  an  oath,  in  which  we  have  promised  fidelity. 
It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  we  may  break  a  wicked  oath,  by 
which  we  have  bound  ourselves  to  do  a  moral  evil,  as  David  broke 
his  unadvised  oath  against  the  life  of  Nabal,  1  Sam.  xxv.  for  we  do 
otherwise  commit  a  double  sin,  like  Herod,  who,  being  moved  by 
the  idle  dancing  of  the  daughter  of  Herodias.  promised  with  an  oath 
to  give  her  whatsoever  she  should  ask,  and  when  she  asked  for  the 
head  of  John  the  Baptist,  he  ordered  that  that  holy  man  should  be 
beheaded,  on  account  of  his  oath,  Matt.  xiv.  1 — 1 1.  But  every  other 
oath  by  which  we  obligate  ourselves  to  do  tlvngs,  that  are  not  sinful, 
but  allowable,  we  ought  to  fulfil  punctually,  although  it  should  be  to 
our  own  hurt;  for  "  he  who  abides  in  the  tabernacle  of  God,  and 
dwells  in  his  holy  hill,  changes  not,  although  he  have  sworn  to  his 
own  hurt,"  Psalm  xv.  1 — 4.  Oaths  which  have  been  sworn  to  con- 
firm a  mutual  contract,  ought  to  be  kept  on  both  sides  ;  but  if  one 
party  break  his  contract,  and  therefore  his  oath,  the  other  party  is 
then  discharged  and  freed  from  his  oath,  because  it  depends  upon 
the  condition,  that  his  confederate  will  be  faithful,  and  because  he  is 
rendered  incapable  of  keeping  his  word  and  his  oath.  The  words 
of  Paul  apply  here,  1  Cor.  vii.  15.  "If  the  unbelieving  depart,  let 
him  depart.  A  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  bondage  in  sucH 
sases," 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  if  any  of  you  have  ever  been  called  upon  to  make 
oath,  and  have  sworn  either  once,  or  repeatedly,  it  behooves  you  to 
consider  your  ways,  and  to  look  back  on  your  former  behaviour,  in 
order  to  reflect  on  your  conduct.  Permit  me  to  bring  you  to  your- 
selves, and  to  propose  certain  questions  to  you  :  (a)  When  ye  swore, 
did  ye  know  the  nature  of  an  oath?  did  ye  apprehend  that  ye  ap- 
pealed to  an  allknowing,  true,  righteous,  and  almighty  Judge,  and 
called  upon  him  to  punish  you,  if  ye  swore  falsely  ?  were  your  souls 
seiz.ed  with  a  holy  trembling  before  his  dreadful  majesty,  when  ye 
lifted  up  your  hands,  and  said,   «*  So  help  me  Almighty  God  ?" 


260  THE  GOOD  AND  EVrIL  OATH. 

Again,  (b)  When  ye  swore  to  confirm  your  testimony,  did  ye  know 
certainly,  and  without  doubting,  that  it  was  true  I  when  ye  promised 
any  thing  upon  an  oath,  did  ye  know  that  it  was  in  your  power  punc- 
tually 10  fulfil  your  promise  ?  were  your  hearts  fully  determined, 
ai'd  had  ye  a  steadfast  resolution  to  perform  all  that  ye  promised  ? 
Let  no  mas  flatter  himself,  thinking,  I  knew  indeed  that  it  was  not 
possible  for  me  to  perform  all  that  was  required  of  me,  and  I  pur- 
posed to  do  as  much  as  was  possible  for  me  ;  for  ye  ought  to  have 
Su  d  so,  <mci  ye  would  not  then  have  been  permitted  to  swear.  We 
may  not  swear  with  such  a  tacit  condition,  and  with  such  a  mental 
rescrvarion.  Permit  me  to  ask  you  this  one  question  also,  (c)  Have 
ye  kept  your  oath  i  have  ye  performed  it  in  every  respect  ?  hath 
the  fear  of  the  high  God,  by  whom  ye  swore,  restrained  you  from 
doing  aught,  that  was  contrary  to  what  ye  promised  I 

What  think  ye,  hearers  ?  can  ye  say  yea  to  all  this  with  a  well- 
assured  mind  i  Be  then  also  assured,  that  the  Lord  hath  a  special 
delight  in  your  oath,  and  in  your  performance  of  it,  and  that  he  will 
bless  you  in  the  work  of  your  hands:  but  can  ye  not  answer  yea  to 
this  question  ?  and  have  ye,  being  ignorant  of  the  importance  of  an 
oath,  sworn  only  in  a  careless  manner,  not  certainly  knowing  wheth- 
er that  which  ye  affirmed  were  true,  and  only  with  a  design  to  deliv- 
er yourselves,  or  your  friend  from  a  danger,  or  to  injure  your  ene- 
riiy  I  and  when  ye  had  bound  yourselves  with  an  oath  to  be  faithful 
in  this  or  that  affair,  did  ye  not  know  that  it  was  possible  for  you, 
and  had  ye  nut  then  a  steadfast  resolution  to  perform  what  ye  swore  ? 
had  ye  no  other  view  than  to  obtain  an  office,  or  some  other  emolu- 
ment ?  and  did  ye  not  think  much  of  breaking  your  oath  for  the 
sake  of  some  advantage  ?  know  then  that  ye  cannot  be  numbered 
among  the  citizens  of  Zion  ;  for  "  they  do  not  swear  deceitfully," 
Psulm  xxiv.  4.  Surely  ye  are  abominably  wicked  ;  for  this  is  record- 
ed as  a  grievous  abomination  of  Zedekiah,  which  he  added  to  all  his 
other  sins,  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  12,  13.  "  He  did  that  which  was  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord.  And  he  also  rebelled  against  king  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who  made  him  swear  by  God  "  Ye  have  "profaned  the 
name  of  God  by  your  false  swearing,"  Lev.  xix.  12,  for  ye  have  de- 
nied that  God  was  allknowing,  true,  righteous  and  almighty  ;  ye 
have  made  a  false  witness  of  him,  and  prayed  for  your  own  damna- 
tion, and  destruction.  Can  there  be  a  more  horrible  sin  ?  is  not  this 
a  bond  of  many  and  mischievous  iniquities  i  ye  are  therefore  justly 
reckoned  as  "  perjured,"  among  "  lawless  persons,  disobedient,  un- 
godly, sinners,  unholy,  profane,  murderers  of  fathers  and  murderers 
•f  mothers,  whoremongers,  those  who  defile  themselves  with  mvx; 


i 

Kind,"  and  among  "  menstealers,"  1  Tim.  i.  10.  What  think  ye? 
will  God  hold  you  guiltless,  when  ye  yourselves  have  appealed  lo  his 
justice  ?  surely,  "  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,  who  taketh 
his  name  in  vain,"  Exod.  xx.  7.  Hear  what  the  Lord  God  saith  of 
the  perjured  king  Zedekiah,  Ezek,  xvii.  18,  19.  *«  He  despised  the 
oath  by  breaking  the  covenant,  (when  lo,  he  had  given  his  hand) 
since  he  hath  done  all  these  things,  he  shall  not  escape.  Therefore 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  as  I  live,  surely  my  oath  that  lie  hath  de- 
spised, and  my  covenant  that  he  hath  broken,  even  it  will  1  recom- 
pense upon  his  own  head."  The  Lord  saith  also,  Zech.  v.  1 — 4, 
"  that  he  will  bring  the  roll  of  the*  curse,  the  length  whereof  is 
twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  ten  cubits,  into  the  house  of  him  who 
hath  sworn  falsely  by  his  name,  that  it  may  remain  there,  to  con 
sume  it,  with  the  timber  thereof,  and  with  the  stones  thereof." 

D©  ye  ask,  if  there  be  then  no  way  for  you  to  escape  the  judg- 
ment of  God  ?  We  say,  yes  :  only  let  my  counsel  be  acceptable  to 
yon,  (a)  Break  off  your  sins  of  perjury,  and  begin  henceforth  to 
perform  and  keep  your  oath.  Have  ye  been  confirmed  in  any  office, 
by  an  oath.,  and  are  ye  unable  to  execute  it  according  to  your  oath, 
give  that  office  up,  although  ye  should  become  poor;  for  ye  may 
not  retain  it,  when  ye  cannot  execute  it  without  perjury.  It  is  bet- 
ter to  be  poor  and  needy  without  such  sins,  than  to  become  rich 
with  those  sins  ;  there  is  indeed  no  way  to  deliver  your  precious 
souls  from  destruction,  as  long  as  ye  do  not  break  off  sin  ;  "  Wash 
ye,  make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well  :  Come  then,  and  let 
us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord,  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson, 
they  shall  be  as  wool,"  Isaiah  1  16,  17,  IS,  Seek  pardon  for  the 
abomination  of  breaking  your  oath  from  God  in  Christ,  "  who  is 
set  forth  to  you  to  be  a  propiti-  tion  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to 
declare  the  righteousness  of  God,"  Rom.  iii.  25  He  was  obliged 
to  suffer  also  the  profane  swearing  of  Caiaphas,  and  to  satisfy  for 
the  false  oaths  of  his  elect ;  if  he  had  not  done  this,  Peter  would 
not  have  been  accepted  and  saved  by  him.  It  is  therefore  absolute- 
ly necessary  for  you  to  lay  hold  of  him  as  he  is  offered  to  you  in  his 
satisfaction  by  the  Father,  and  thus  to  make  peace  with  God,  Isaiah 
xxvii.  4,  5. 

We  ought  also  to  exhort  the  magistrates,  who  are  appointed  to 
exact  oaths  of  their  subjects,  when  necessity  requires,  that  they  be 
not  too  forward  to  demand  an  oath.  They  ought  surely  not  to  admit 
children,  brainsick,  or  treacherous  persons,   or  those  who  are  infa- 


263  THE  GOOD  AND  EVIL  O  \TH. 

mous  on  account  of  their  dishonest  conduct  to  an  oath  ;  lor  such 
pu.sons  cannot  swear  without  profaning  the  name  of  God.  Neither 
siiould  those  who  are  set  over  others  urge  any  person  to  iwea;',  un- 
less in  important  cases,  and  such  as  are  possible,  and  then  only,  when 
necessity  requires.  And  not  even  then,  except  after  preceding  in. 
structions  an:l  admonitions  ;  for  otherwise  vain  and  false  oaths  will 
be  multiplied,  and  the  magistrates  will  render  themselves  guilty  of 
the  sins  of  others.  • 

Let  every  one  also  fear  an  oath  ;  swearing  by  the  name  of  God  is 
indeed  a  solemn  wok;  let  none  therefore  proceed  lightly  to  an 
oath  ;  a  godly  man  "  feareth  an  oath,"  as  Solomon  saith,  Led.  ix.  I. 
Therefore,  hearers,  "be  noi  rash  with  your  mouths,  neither  let  ycur 
hearts  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  :  for  God  is  in  heaven, 
and  ye  upon  earth,"  Eccl.  \.  2.  But  when  the  magistrates  demand 
it,  or  it  is  otherwise  necessary,  then  swear  :  yet  with  a  holy  ftar  for 
God,  with  a  holy  frame  of  heart,  and  with  an  assur;  nee,  that  the 
matter  to  which  ye  swear  is  the  truth,  and  that  it  is  possible  for  you  ; 
and  swear  also  plainly,  and  directly,  without  clokes  of  shame,  and 
thus  "  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness,"  according  to 
the  divine  command,  Jer.  iv.  2.  See  also  that  ye  keep  your  oath, 
which  ye  have  sworn  for  the  confirmation  of  fidelity,  and  that  ye 
change  not,  though  it  were  to  your  hurt. 

Must  we  swear  fidelity  to  men,  much  more  must  we  then  to  God 
and  to  his  Son.  It  was  foretold,  Isaiah  xix.  IS,  that  "  five  cities  in 
the  land  of  Egypt  should  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  swear 
to  the  Lord  of  hosts."  The  Messiah  saith,  Isaiah  xlv.  23.  "  I  have 
sworn  by  myself,  the  word  is  gone  out  of  my  m-  uth  in  righteous- 
ness, and  shall  not  return,  that  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  evei  y 
tongue  shall  swear."  God  offers  now  to  all  people  his  well  ordered 
covenant,  promising  all  grace  to  the  sinner.  Hear  how  the  Son  of 
God  calls  to  you  all,  Isaiah  lv.  3.  «  Incline yout  ear  and  com?  unto 
me,  hear  and  your  soul  shall  live,  and  J  will  make  an  everlasting 
covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure  mercies  of  David.''  We  must  as- 
sent to  this  covenant,  must  enter  into  it,  and  engage  that  we  will  be 
the  Lord's,  and  do  his  will,  and  thus  "  say,  I  am  the  Lord's,  and 
call  ourselves  by  the  name  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  yea,  subscribe  to  it, 
as  it  were,  with  our  hand,"  Isaiah  xiv.  5.  And  to  prove  that  we  do 
:h;s  with  a  perfect  heart,  we  must  with  David,  Psalm  cxix.  10G, 
kt  swear  that  we  will  keep  God's  righteous  judgments,  and  we  must 
>rm  our  oath."  Yea,  we  must  confirm  it  in  a  solemn  manner,  as 
•-were,  with  an  oath  of  cursing,  like  Israel,  "  who  entered  into  the 
nant  of  the  Lord,  and  into  his  •  un  ■••■"  Deut.  xxix    12.     I  wish 


XXXVII.  LORD'S  DAY-  Q.  101,  102.  26S 

that  I  could  say  of  you  all,  that  ye  had  thus  bound  yourselves  and 
sworn  to  the  Lord  in  truth,  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  like  "  all  Ju- 
dah,  who  rejoiced  at  the  oath  ;  for  all  the  Jews  had  swot  n  with  their 
whole  heart,  and  sought  the  Lord  with  theit  whole  desire,  and  he 
was  found  of  them,"  2  Chron.  xv.  15.  Let  none  refuse  this  great 
and  blessed  duty  ;  ye  are  all  bound  by  nature  to  do  the  will  of  the 
Lord.  Ye  have  oeen  outwardly  surrendered  into  the  covenant  of 
God  by  your  baptism,  and  have  been  obliged  thereby,  as  by  a  mili- 
tary oath,  "  to  cleave  to  the  Triune  God,  to  trust  in  him  and  love 
him,  to  forsake  the  world,  crucify  your  nature,  and  walk  in  a  new 
and  holy  life."  Is  it  your  mini  to  renounce  and  to  make  void 
that  oath  ?  If  ye  will  not  do  this,  but  abide  by  your  oath,  enter  then 
solemnly  into  his  covenant,  and  swear  to  the  Lord.  Is  there  any 
one  who  knows  his  indwelling  corruption,  and  is  he  fearful,  that  he 
wdl  prove  unfaithful,  and  do'h  this  deter  him  from  swearing  in  such 
a  manner  to  the  Lord,  let  him  know  that  he  enters  into  this  cove- 
nant at  the  expence  of  free  grace,  and  of  all  the  promises  of  the 
covenant,  and  that  the  Lord  hath  said,  that  '  he  would  put  his  fear 
into  the  heart  of  him  who  is  in  covenant  with  him,  that  he  may  not 
depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  Kzek.  xxxvi.  27.  Sins,  which 
we  oppose  and  lament,  will  not  annul  the  covenant  Hear  what  the 
Lord  saith  of  you,  who  desire  to  be  faithful,  Psalm  lxxxix,  31 — 34. 
"  If  they  break  my  statutes,  and  keep  not  my  commandments,  then 
will  I  visit  their  transgressions  with  the  rod,  and  their  iniquity  with 
stripes.  Nevertheless  my  lovingkindness  will  I  not  utterly  take 
from  him,  nor  suffer  my  faithfulness  to  fail.  My  covenant  will  I 
not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips,"  Yea, 
God  confirms  this  word  of  his  by  an  oath,  Heb.  vi.  17,  18.  i:  God 
willing  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  the  promise  the  immutability  of 
his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  :  that  by  two  immutable  things, 
in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong 
consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  be- 
fore us."     Amen. 


(   264  ) 


THE 


FOURTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XXXV III.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exodus  xx.  3 — 11.  Remember  the  sabbathday  to  keep  it  holy* 
Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  thy  work  :  but  the  seventh 
day  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God  :  in  it  thou  shalt  not  do 
any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,  thy  manservant, 
nor  thy  maidservant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that  is  with- 
in thy  gates.  For  in  six  days  the  Loul  made  heaven  and  earth, 
the  sea  and  all  that  in  them  is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day  :  where- 
fore the  Lord  blessed  the  sabbathday,  and  hallowed  it,