Q.    103.    What  doth  Cod  require  in  thejourth  command? 

A.  First,  thar.  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  and  the  schools  be  main- 
tained ;  and  that  I,  especially  on  the  sabbath,  that  is,  on  the  day  of 
rest,  diligently  frequent  the  church  of  God,  to  hear  his  word,  to  use 
the  sacraments,  publicly  to  cail  upon  the  Lord,  and  contribute  to  the 
relief  of  the  poor,  as  becomes  a  Christian  :  secondly,  that  all  the  days 
of  my  life  I  cease  from  my  evil  works,  and  yield  myself  to  the  Lord; 
to  work  by  his  holy  Spirit  in  me  :  and  thus  begin  in  this  lift 
r:oly  sabbath. 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  265 


"X 


O  every  thing  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  pur- 
pose under  the  heaven  :"  thus  speaks  Solomon,  Eccl.  hi.  1.  We 
cannot  do  all  things  at  all  times,  but  every  work  must  he  done  in 
its  proper  and  appointed  season  :  "  There  is  a  time  to  be  born,  and 
a  time  to  die,"  Sec.  as  the  same  wise  man  saith  in  the  sequel  of  !  is 
discourse.  The  only  wise  God  hath  appointed  a  particular  time  for 
every  matter:  either  by  the  order  and  nature  of  things :  thus 
*'  there  is  a  time  to  plant,  and  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is  plant- 
ed," vs  2  :  or  by  his  decree  and  powerful  direction,  "  making  every 
thing  beautiful  in  its  season,"  vs.  11:  or  by  his  commandment :  and 
so  there  is  a  time  to  repent ;  u  the  Lord  gave  such  a  time  to  the 
woman  Jezabel,"  Rev.  ii.  21.  There  is  also  a  time  for  public  wor- 
ship, which  the  Lord  prescribes  to  man  by  his  sovereign  right  to 
command,  as  all  the  festivals  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  particularly 
every  seventh  day  of  the  week,  which  the  Lord  hath  enjoined  on 
his  people  in  the  fourth  commandment. 

If  there  be  aught,  that  is  in  any  respect  equitable,  it  is  particu- 
larly that  we  should  worship  God  and  him  only.  Therefore  the 
great  Lawgiver  hath  enjoined  this,  as  the  principal  thing,  in  the  first 
commandment ;  but  inasmuch  as  we  do  not  worship  him  in  a  suitable 
manner,  when  we  do  not  worship  him  conformably  to  his  spiritual 
nature,  therefore  he  requires  in  the  second  commandment,  that  \vc 
should  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth  without  images.  Since 
now  the  Lord  is  incomparably  glorious,  therefore  he  requires  also  in 
the  third  commandment,  that  we  should  worship  him  with  a  holy 
reverence  and  godly  fear.  Inasmuch  now  as  it  is  not  enough,  that 
each  one  of  us  should  worship  him  separately  from  others,  in  pri- 
vate, but  since  he  ought  to  be  worshipped  also  publicly  in  the  con- 
gregation of  the  righteous,  therefore  the  Lord  hath  appointed  a  cer- 
tain season  for  this  purpose  in  the  fourth  commandment,  saying, 
«  Remember  the  sabbathday,"  Sec. 

As  it  is  necessary  to  say  much  on  this  fourth  commandment,  we 
will  consider  briefly  by  way  of  explanation, 

I.  The  demand  of  the  commandment. 

II.  The  explanatory  paraphrase  of  it. 

III.  The  motives  or  reasons  with  which  it  is  enforced. 

I.  The  brief  demand  of  the  commandment  is,  "  Remember  the 
sahbathday."  Sabbath  is  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying  rest,  and  there- 
fore sabbathday  is  a  day  of  rest.  The  Lord  appointed  many  sab- 
baths, or  seasons  of  resting  in  the  time  of  the  Old  Testament,  as 
(a)  the  sabbath  of  years,  being  every  seventh,  and  every  fiftieth  year. 
Vol.  ii.  2  I 


265     THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

in  which  the  land  should  vest,  and  not  be  ploughed  nor  sown,  Ltv. 
xxv.  1  — 16.  (b)The  sabbath  of  months,  to  wit,  every  first  day  of 
the  month,  Numb,  xxviii.  11.  (c)  The  sabbath  of  weeks,  to  wit,  the 
three  great  festivals  of  the  passover,  pentecost  and  tabernacles,  upon 
which  all  Israel  ought  to  come  up  for  worship,  and  rest  a  whole 
week,  Exod.  xxiii.  15,  16.  Deut.  xvi.  13.  (d)  The  sabbath  of  days, 
which  lasted  but  one  whole  day.  Such  was  the  first  day  of  the 
seventh  month,  with  which  the  civil  year  of  Israel  began.  Lev. 
xxiii.  24.  The  day  of  atonement  was  also  ordained  to  be  a  day  of 
rest,  Lev.  xvi.  31,  and  especially  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  :  this 
is  the  sabbath  spoken  of  in  the  fourth  con  manc'.ment. 

With  respect  to  this  sabbathday  we  are  commanded  (a) "  to  keep 
it  holy,"  (or  to  sanctify  it.)  It  is  known  that  sanctifying  common 
tilings  signifieth,  according  to  the  word  of  God,  in  the  firs-t  place,  to 
set  them  apart  from  thsir  common  use  for  the  service  of  God,  as 
the  Israelites  ought  "  to  sanctify  all  their  firstborn"  to  the  Lord, 
Exod.  xiii.  2.  And  so  to  sanctify  the  sabbath  denotes  to  set  it  apart 
from  the  other  days,  which  had  a  common  use,  for  a  religious  ser- 
vice :  but  the  word  sanctify  denotes  also  in  this  place  to  devote  this 
day  to  holy  purposes,  and  particularly  to  public  worship:  "Six 
days  shall  work  be  done,  but  the  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of  rest, 
a  holy  convocation,"  saith  the  Lord,  Lev.  xxiii.  3.  On  that  dny  the 
sacrifices  were  to  be  doubled,  Numb,  xxviii.  9,  10.  The  law  was 
then  also  vead,  Acts  xv.  2  1,  psalms  were  sung,  Psalm  xcii.  1.  And 
they  delighted  themselves  in  the  Lord,  Isaiah  lviii.  13.  And  there- 
fore we  may  not  say  that  the  Sabbath  requires,  with  respect  to  the 
essence  of  it,  only  a  bodily  rest  and  leisure.  Since  now  the  Lord 
earnestly  desires  that  his  people  should  sanctify  the  sabbath,  there- 
fore he  commands  them  also  (b)  "  to  remember"  the  sabbath,  to 
keep  it  holy,  supposing  that  this  sabbath  was  known  and  instituted 
before,  and  n  t  first  in  the  wilderness,  upon  occasion  of  the  manna: 
for  we  find  in  Exod.  xvi.  no  institution,  bat  only  an  account  of  a  sab- 
;  ith,  whjch  had  been  instituted  before,  and  was  known  to  the  people, 
who  gathered  therefore  on  the  sixth  day  bread  for  two  days,  as  Mo- 
ses declared  thatihe  people  had  done  on  account  of  the  instituted 
.  .  ith.  See  Exod,  xvi.  52,  23.  And  therefore  we  conceive  that 
tl  bbath  was  instituted,  Gen.  ii.  2,3.  For  God  derives  no  reason 
for  the  fourth  commandment,  from  the  manna,  Exod.  xxi.but  from 
his  own  rest  and  injunction  before  the  fall.  Israel  ought  now  to 
;-  remember"  the  sabbathday  to  keep  it  holy,  that  is,  they  ought  to 
set  their  hearts  upon  it  to  keep  it  holy,  as  the  Lord  saith,  Mai. 
iv.  4.  "  Remember  the  law  of  Moses  "  Remembering  denotes 
here    also,    disposing    and    preparing    ourselves    for   the    tebbath  ; 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  267 

Israel  had  for  this  purpose  "  a  day  of  preparation,"  Luke  xxiii.  54. 
This  command  concerning  "  remembering"  the  sabbathday  to  keep 
\t  holy  is  also  a  warning  against  profaning  that  day,  and  is  as  much, 
as  "  lake  heed,"  that  ye  keep  it  holy  Would  we  have  more,  this 
"remembering"  the  sabbath  to  keep  it  holy  signifies  also  keep- 
ing the  sabbath,  as  it  is  said,  Esther  ix.  28,  "  that  the  days  of  purim 
should  be  remembered  and  kept."  Theiefore  the  Lord  saith,  Deut. 
v.  12,  "  Keep  the  sabbathday  to  sanctify." 

II.  Inasmuch   now  as  the  sabbath  would  be   greatly  profaned  by 
doing  any  servile  work  on  it,   therefore  the  Lord  God  requireth  that 
we  should  labour  and  do  all  our  works  in  six  days,   commanding  us 
to  finish  all  our  daily  business  in  six  days,  and  to  leave  nolhug  to  be 
done  on  the  sabbath  ;  "  for  the  seventh  day,"  saith  he,  "  is  the  sab- 
bath of  the   Lord  fhy  God."      I  have  not  the  least  doubt,  that  this 
seventh  day  is  our  Saturday,  the  seventh  day  after  the  creation,  as 
appears   plainly  from  the  reasons   annexed  to  tins   commandment: 
for  God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  after  the  creation,  and  gave  it  to 
Adam  for  a  day  of  rest,  Gen.  iii.  23.    No  man  who  is  not    prepos^ 
sessed  with  a  prejudice,  that  the  saboath  of  the  fourth  commandment 
was  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,   will  think  that  the   seventh 
day  was  called  the  Lord's  day,  because  Christ  should  rest  on  that 
♦lay  in  the  grave  :  for  it  is  evident  from  the  reasons  annexed  to  the 
fourth   commandment,  that  it  was  so  called,,  because  God  rested  on 
it,  and  because  he  instituted  it  for  his  worship,  as  the  second   sacra- 
ment of  the  New  Testament  is  called  "  the  Lord's  supper,"    1  Cor, 
xi.  20.     On  this  day  they   might  "  not  do  any  work."     It  is  certain 
that  the  work  of  divine  worship  is  not  forbidden  here,   nor  works  of 
charity,  nor  of  necessity,  nor  of  common  civility  :  but  only  those  that 
belong  to  our  sixdays  calling,   as  all  fieldwovks  of  ploughing  and 
reaping,  Exod.  xxxiv.  21,  marketworks  of  buying  and  selling,  Neh. 
x.  31.  xii.  15 — 22,   streetworks,   as  bearing   and  carrying  burthens, 
Jer.  xvii.  20,  and  thus  also  every  work  thai  belongs  to  our  daily  call- 
ing.    And  therefore  "  we  may  not  do  our  own  ways,  nor  find  our 
own  pleasure,   nor  speak   even  one  word  of  these    things,"  Isaiah 
Iviii.  13.     And  this  might  not  be  done  by  any  person,  neither  by  pa- 
rents nor  by  children,  nor  by  bond,  nor  by   free,  nor  by  natives,  nor 
by  foreigners,  nor  by  rational,   nor   irrational   creatures  :    therefore 
the  Lawgiver  saith,    "  In  it  thou  shalt   not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor 
thy  son,  nor  thy  daughter,"  Sec. 

III.  But  what  should  induce  a  human  being  to  keep  the  sabbath= 
Jay  holy  ?  the  command  of  the  sovereign  God  ought  to  suffice  him* 


268      THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

Yet  that  he.  who  is  naturally  backward  to  keep  God's  commandment, 
may  become  willing  and  ready,  ihe  Lord  offers  him  powerful  mo- 
tives, (1)  ironi  bis  own  example  :  kt  For  in  six  days  the  Lord  made 
heaven  and  earth,  the  sea,  and  ail  that  in  them  is,  and  he  rested  the 
Seventh  day  "  This  hath  been  briefly  explained  on  the  ninth  Lord's 
day.  Now  when  the  Lord  proposeth  to  Israel  his  great  work  and 
his  rest,  he  shows  them  that  he  commands  them  to  keep  the  sabbath 
in  remembrance  of  his  creation,  and  also  that  he  requires  that  they 
should  imitate  him  in  his  resting;  for  "therefore  the  Lord  blessed 
the  sabbat;. day  and  hallowed  it."  To  bless  and  to  hallow  the  sab- 
bathday  is  to  hallow  it  for  a  special  blessing,  which  God  will  bestow 
on  that  day  up.  n  'hose  who  keep  it,  and  so  to  separate  and  institute 
it  for  himself,  and  for  his  holy  service,  as  "God  sanctified  Aaron 
and  his  sons,  so  that  they  might  minister  to  him  in  the  priest's 
ofh(e,"  Exod.  xxix.  44.  And  it  was  thus  the  sabba'hday  of 
tiie  Lord,  and  so  the  example  of  God,  his  blessing  and  hallowing  of 
tie  sabbath  is  the  ground  and  reason  of  the  command  concerning 
the  sabbath.  G  >d  blessed  and  hallowed  tlie  s:bb  .th,  not  when  he 
gave  tne  manna  in  the  wilderness,  Exod.  xvi.  for  we  do  not  find  that 
blessing  and  hallowing  there  ;  but  when  he  rested  before  the  fall,  as 
is  related]  Gen.  ii.  2,  3.  It  is  said  by  some,  that  Gen.  ii.  3,  is  an 
anticipated  account  of  that  which  should  have  happened  afterwards 
in  *  lie  wilderness;  but  the  history  of  iV'oses  doth  not  suggest  the 
least  occasion  or  necessity  for  such  an  opinion.  Neither  may  we 
say^in  order  to  d.ny  the  morality  cf  the  sabbath,  that  God  blessed 
noi  only  the  seventh  d.-.y,  but  also  therewith  all  the  following  days ; 
for  then  the  blessing  would  not  be  a  reason  why  men  ought  to  hal- 
low every  seventh  day.  (2)  God  added  to  this  reason  afterwards 
another,  which  had  a  special  respect  to  Israel,  for  he  saith,  Deut.  v. 
14,  15,  *«  That  thy  manservant,  and  thy  maidservant  may  rest  as 
well  as  thou.  And  remember  that  thou  wast  a  servant  in  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  that  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence  by  a 
mighty  hand,  and  a  stretched  out  arm  ;  therefore  the  Lord  thy  God 
commanded  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath  day."  Both  superiors  and  in- 
feriors were  oppressed  with  a  grievous  bondage  in  the  land  of  Egypt ; 
but  the  Lord  had  delivered  them  all  with  power.  Therefore  it  be- 
hooved superiors  to  be,  after  the  example  of  the  Lord,  merciful  and 
kind  to  their  servants,  and  to  permit  them  also  to  rest  from  their 
labours  on  the  sabbaUiday,  and  "  to  be  refreshed,"  Exod.  xxiii.  12. 
T l, is  fourth  commandment  hath  been  a  subject  of  controversy 
with  those  who  were  within  the  church,  as  well  as  with  those  who 
were  without.    The  Jews  think  that  the  commandment  concerning- 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  26* 

observing  the  seventh  day  after  the  creation,  with  all  the  ceremonial 
additions  to  it,  is  everlasting,  and  can  never  be  abrogated.  But  then 
the  seventh  day  ought  to  flow  from  the  essence  of  God  ;  for  what- 
ever doth  not  flow  therefrom  can  be  abrogated.  The  Socinians, 
Mennonites  and  others  assert  that  Christ  hath,. as  a  new  Lawgiver, 
wholly  abrogated  tne  fourth  commandment,  and  that  we  are  not 
bound  any  longer  to  observe  a  weekly  sabbath.  There  are  two 
principal  opinions  in  the  church  :  the  one,  that  this  commandment 
is  ceremonial,  and  therefore  abrogated  under  the  New  Testament ; 
the  other,  that  it  is  moral,  and  that  Christians  are  still  bound  to  ob- 
serve it. 

In  order  that  we  may  understand  this  difference  rightly,  we  must 
know  whai  we  must  understand  by  ceremonial,  and  what  by    moral. 
A  thing  is  ceremonial,  when  it  is  a  type,  that  is,  when   it    shadows 
forth  Christ,  and  his  benefits,  and  must  cease  with   his  coming  ;  or 
it  is  ceremonial,  as  far  as  it  is  an  outward  usage  of  the  church,  which 
conduceth  to  a  proper  ordering  of  religious  worship,  as    preaching 
with  our  head  uncovered,  sprinkling  thrice  in  baptism,  and  celebra- 
ting the  Lord's  supper  sitting.     A  thing  is  also    moral  in  a    twofold 
respect;  it  is  mord,  when  it  hath  an  inward    virtuousness,   flowing 
from  the  essence  of  God,   the  reverse  of  which   God  cannot  eitber 
command  or  permit  with  pleasure,  as  to  love  God  ;  and   in  this  re- 
spect the  first,  second,  and  third  commandments  are  moral.     Or  a 
tning  is  moral,  when  it  is  virtuous  only  because-   God,  according   to 
his  free  and  sovereign  will,  commands  it  for  an  everlasting  rule,  the 
reverse  of  which  he  might  nevertheless  also  command.     That    God 
can  command  or  forbid  a  thing  to  be  an  everlasting  rule,  which  nev- 
ertheless flows  not  from  his  nature,  will  not  be  gainsaid,  when    it    is 
considered,  that  God  hath  a  sovereign  authority,  and  that  he  hath  ac- 
tually forbidden  and  commanded  several  matters,  which  do  not   flow 
from  his  nature  ;  for  instance,  God  forbids  us   to    marry   with   our 
kindred,  and  yet  the  sons  of  Adam  were  obliged  to  marry    their   sis- 
ters.    If  now  the  commandment,  which   fori  /ids  incest,  flowed   frcm 
the  essence  of  God,   he  would  not   then  have   permitted  it  ;  for   he 
could  have  created  two  human  couples,  who  were  not  related  one  to 
the  other,  and   could    luve  ordered   their  children  to   marry   each 
other.     Can  any  man  deny  that  baptism  and   the  Lord's  supper   are 
enjoined  on  the  church  of  die  New  Testament  for  everlasting   ordi- 
nances ;  but  they  nevertheless  do  not  flow  from   the   holy  essence 
of  God. 

We  shall  now  be  able  to  apprehend  in  what  sense  divines  call  the 
fourth  commandment  ceremonial  or  moral.  They  who  call  it  ceie- 
monial  mean  that  it  is  typically  ceremonial,  and  that  Israel  declared, 


270      THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

by  observing  it,  (a)  that  their  works  were  unclean,  and  that  the 
purification  from  sin  was  not  yet  accomplished  ;  (b)  that  sanctifi- 
cation  from  the  guilt  of  sin  should  be  accomplished  by  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ ;  (c)  that  Christ,  having  effected  this,  should  rest  from 
that  work  on  the  sabbath  in  the  grave,  and  (d)  that  there  should  be 
a  rest  under  the  New  Testament  from  the  burthensomc  ceremonial 
service.  From  which  it  therefore  necessarily  follows,  that}  the  fourth 
commandment  is  now  abrogated,  like  the  other  ceremonial  laws,  and 
that  the  keeping  of  the  sabbath  is  injurious  to  the  gospel. 

They  who  look  upon  the  fourth  commandment  to  be  moral  do  rot 
say  that  the  seventh  day,  either  after  the  creation,  or  after  the  six 
workingdays.  flows  from  the  holy  nature  of  God,  but  that  it  is  given 
to  the  church  for  an  everlasting  ordinance  by  God,  as  an  absolute 
sovereign,  and  that  this  command  is  thus  still  obligatory  on  us  now 
under  the  New  Testament.  And  that  they  may  not  engage  in  a 
mere  strife  about  words,  nor  dispute  at  random,  they  distinguish  be- 
tween the  sabbath,  as  it  is  enjoined  in  the  fourth  commandment,  and 
between  the  circumstances  and  appendages,  which  Cod,  agreeably  to 
the  nature  of  the  legal  economy  of  the  Old  Testament,  annexed  to 
the  sabbath,  and  which  related  to  the  Jews  only  ;  as  many  particular 
ceremonial  and  civd  commandments,  enjoined  upon  Israel  in  the 
books  of  Moses,  must  be  referred  in  one  way  or  other  to  this  or  that 
commandment  of  the  ten  commandments,  and  are  nevertheless  dis- 
tinct from  the  ten  commandments  as  moral.  Thus  we  must  refer 
the  law  of  ceremonies  to  the  second  commandment,  which  deter- 
mines the  manner  of  divine  worship,  as  an  appendage  of  that  com- 
mand ;  and  the  civil  law  hath  its  foundation  in  the  fifth  command  : 
thus  also  the  command  which  forbids  adultery  had  i!s  appendage; 
under  the  Old  Testament,  as  the  manner  in  which  they  should  detect 
and  punish  adultery.  And  so  the  fourth  commandment  had  also  its 
appendages,  which,  as  being  ceremonial,  obliged  the  Jews  only:  for 
instance,  (a)  that  they  should  observe  particularly  the  seventh  day 
after  the  creation  ;  thus  also  the  second  article  of  the  synod  of  Dordt 
speaks  concerning  the  sabbath  ;  for  that  did  not  affect  the  essence  of 
the  fourth  commandment,  since  that  day  was  commanded,  only 
because  the  first  sabbathday  happened  on  the  first  seventhday  after 
the  creation.  It  is  indeed  evident,  that  they  they  did  not  observe 
the  seventh  day  after  the  time  of  Joshua,  when  4i  the  sun  aud  moon 
stood  still  about  a  whole  clay,"  Joshua  x.  13,  nor  after  the  time  of 
Hezekiah,  when  "  the  sun  returned  ten  degrees,  by  the  degrees,  in 
which  it  was  gone  down,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  8.  (b)  That  Israel  should 
double  their  sacrifices  on    the  sabbath,    (c)  That   God    superadded 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105.  2f  I 

to  tliis  certain  motives,  which  related  to  Israel   only  ;  as  the  promise 
of  a  long  life  in  the  land  of  Canaan  was  added  to  the  fifth  command- 
ment, as  a  motive  to  that  people  ;  so  Cod  gives  in   the  repetition  of 
the  law,  Deut   v.  a  motive  derived  from  the  deliverrnce  of  Israel  out 
of  the    Egyptian    bondage,  to  induce  them  to  suffer  their  bondmen 
also  to  rest  on  the    sabbathday.     (d)  "  the  strict   observance  of  the 
same  day,   prescribed  to  the  Jewish  people  in  particular,"  was  also 
Ceremonial,  as  the  synod  of  Dcjrdt  speaks.     God  required  that  "  who 
ever  did  any  work  on  the  sabbathday,  should  be  put  to  death,"  Exod. 
xxxi.    15.  xxxv.  2.    Numb.  xv.  32 — 36.     But  we  may    reasonably 
doubt  whether  Israel  was  obliged  to  keep  this  sabbath  so  strictly    as 
some  have  imagined,  as  if  "  they   might    neither   bake,    nor    seethe 
aught  on  the  sabbath,  that  no  man  might    go  out   of  his    tent,   nor 
kindle  fire  in  his  habitation  on  that  day,"  according    to    Exod.  xvi. 
2  3,  29.     xxxv.  3,  for  when  the  Lawgiver  saith,  xvi.  23,  <>  Bake  that 
which  ye  bake,  and  seethe  that  which  ye  will  seethe  ;  and  that  which 
remaineth  over  lay  up  for  you,  to  be  kept   until    the    morning,"    he 
doth  not  then  order  that  they  should  bake  and  seethe   all   that  they 
had  before  the  sabbath,  and  that  they  should  lay  up  until  the  morn- 
ing that  which  should  be  left  of  what  they  had  baken  and    sodden  : 
for  this  law  seems  to  distinguish  between  that  which  was  baken  and 
sodden,  and  that  which  was  left,  and  thus  neither  baken    nor  sodden, 
which  might  then  be  prepared  on  the  sabbath  ;  if  it   should    never- 
theless be  thought,  that  this  passage  forbids  baking  and  seething  on 
the  sabbath,  we  must  conceive  that  it  had  respect  only  to  preparing 
the    manna,    which    was    attended  with    considerable  labour.     See 
Numb.  xi.  8.     But  it  was  not  an  universal  law  :     for  if"  they  might 
prepare  as  much  food  on  the  paschal  sabbath,  as  every  man   should 
eat,"  Exod.    xii.    16,    and    if  Solomon    and  Jsehtmiah    needed    so 
much  food  every  day  for  their  households,  as  is    mentioned  1  Kings 
iv.  22,  23.     Neh    v.    17,  18,  we  may  then   believe  that  they    might 
prepare  at  least  their  necessary    food    on  the  weekly  sabbath.       The 
words,  "  that  the  people  should    not  go  out  of  their    place,"  Exod. 
xvi.  19,  respected  the  gatheiing  of  Manna,    which    was    their  daily 
employment :  but  it  was  no  command,  that  they   should   always    a- 
bide  in  their  houses  on  the  sabbath  ;  for  that    would    have  hindered 
the  worship  of  God.     Might  not  the  Israelites    "kindle  fire"  on  the 
sabbath,  Exod.  xxxv    3,  that  cannot  be  understood  without  any  lim- 
itation, because  kindling  fire  was  necessary  for  children  and    weakly 
persons,  and  in  the  winter  :  but  we  must  understand  these  words  of 
the  fire,  which  they  used  for  ther    daily  callings,  or  for   building  the 
tabernacle  ;  for  so  tins  law,  Exod.  xxxv.  3,  is  connected  with  Excd. 


372       THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

xxxi  where  they  are  commanded  to  rest  even  from  the  work  of  the 
tabernacle.  And  we  must  believe  when  the  Jews  censured  the  Sa- 
viour and  his  disciples  so  often,  on  account  of  the  liberty  which  they 
used,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  on  the  sabbath,  that  it  proceeded 
from  a  misunderstanding  of  these  commandments. 

These  things  many  divines  consider  as  ceremonial,  to  which  the 
Jews  only  were  obliged,  and  which  are  abolished  under  the  New 
Testament.  They  look  upon  these  things,  either  as  typically  cer- 
emonial, or  as  circumstances,  which  tended  to  a  proper  regulation  of 
the  Jewish  worship. 

The  question  therefore  is,  whether  the  sabbath  of  the  fourth  com- 
mandment is  typically  ceremonial,  and  consequently  abolished) 
under  the  New  Testament ;  and  whether  Christians  therefore  are 
not  obligated  to  observe  the  day  of  rest  by  virtue  of  the  fourth  com- 
mandment ;  or  whether  Christians  are  obligated  by  viitue  of  the 
fourth  commandment  to  celebrate  and  observe  one  day  after  six 
workingdays,  as  a  day  set  apart  for  publick  worship,  and  to  abstain 
for  this  purpose  from  their  daily  labours.  We  deny  the  first  of  these 
opinions,  and  maintain  the  second,  and  will  confirm  it  with  proper 
arguments. 

But  before  we  exhibit  our  arguments,  we  will  show  that  this  opin- 
ion of  ours  is  also  the  doctrine  of  the  church    of  the    Netherlands. 
This  appears  from  the  forms  of  union,  to  which  all  the  ministers  of 
the  church  of  the  Netherlands   oblige  themselves  by  their    subscrip- 
tions.    The  synod  of  Dordtrecht  saith,  u  that    Me    morality  of  the 
fourth  commandment  consists  herein,  that  a    certain  and   fixed  day 
is  ordained  for  the  worship  of  God,  and  so  much  rest,  as  is  necessary 
for  divine  worship,  and  a  holy  meditation  on  it.     The  Jewish  sabbath 
being  abolished,  the  day  of  the  Lord  must   be    solemnly   sanctified. 
This  day  hath  always  been  observed  from  the  times  of  the    apostles 
in  the  ancient  catholic  church.  The  same  day  must  be  so  dedicated  to 
the  worship  of  God.  that  we  rest   from  all  our   works,   except    such 
actions  as  pertain  to  charity   and  present  necessity,  and  that  we  also 
abstain  from  such  pleasures  and   amusements,  as  hinder  divine  wor- 
ship."    And  our  catechism  saith,  "  God  requires  in  the  fourth  com- 
mandment, that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  or  the  office  of  preaching, 
and  the  schools  be  maintained  ;  and  th.it  I,  especially  on  the  sabba»h5 
that  is,  on  the  day  of  rest,  diligently  frequent  the  church  of  God,  to 
hear  his  word,"  Sec.     Are  not   these    moral  duties,  which    ought   to 
be  observed  by  Christians  under  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  they 
behooved  to  be  observed  by  the  Jews  under  the  Old  Testament  ?     It 
is  true,  the  instructor  saith,  that  according  to  the  fourth    command- 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  tTS 

incnt,  **  the  schools  ought  to  be  maintained  ;"  it  is  also  tftte,  that  w® 
do  not  go  to  school  on  the  day  of  rest ;  nevertheless  the  instrucsor 
would  not  teach  thereby^  that  the  sabbath  was  in  this  respeci  ceremo- 
nial and  typical ;  for  they  did  not  go  to  school  under  tiie  Old  Tes- 
tament neither  on  the  sabbath  ;  but  he  means  that  this  was  neces- 
sary, in  order  that  the  sabbath  might  be  celebrated  by  preaching  on 
it.  Neither  doth  the  catechism  intimate  that  it  considers  the  fourth 
commandment  as  typically  ceremonial,  when  it  saith  that  it  requi* 
reth  also  "  that  we  rest  all  the  days  of  our  lives  from  our  evil  works, 
and  yield  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  to  work  in  us  by  his  holy  Spirit, 
and  thus  begin  in  this  life  the  eternal  sabbath  ;"  but  it  saith  this,  in 
order  to  explain  the  commandment  in  its  greatest  extent,  as  it  ex- 
plains the  other  commandments  ;  for  this  spiritual  keeping  of  the 
sabbath  belongs  to,  and  follows  from  tiie  celebration  of  the  sabbath. 
See  what  we  say  of  these  things  in  the  sequel.  All  this,  saith  the 
instructor,  of  which  we  have  d<  clared,  thai  we  would  abide  by  it.  is 
enjoined  in  the  fourth  commandment,  ;  nd  so  he  intends  that  it  was 
enjoined  on  the  Jews  also.  If  now  the  fourth  commandment  be 
wholly  ceremonial,  it  doth  not  then  concern  us.  Or  shall  we  say 
the  fourth  commandment  typified  this  to  us,  and  so  it  concerns  us  : 
but  is  the  fourth  commandment  therefore  moral  1  If  it  be  affirmed', 
then  all  the  ceremonial  commands  are  moral.  11  it  be  denied  ;  wl  at 
morality  will  there  then  be  in  the  fourth  command  ?  And  we  must 
surely  say,  as  we  are  obliged,  that  the  fourth  commandment  is  with 
respect  to  the  essence  of  it,  moral,  and  so  our  opinion  is  taught  in 
the  forms  of  union. 

If  this  were  only  the  doctrine  of  our  church,  we  should  not  have  a 
sufficient  warrant  to  embrace  it,  but  the  word  of  Cod  obligeth  us  to 
consider  it,  as  a  certain  truth.     For  that  teacheth  us, 

1.  That  the  sabbath  was  instituted  by  God,  even  before  the  fall 
after  his  own  example.  This  Moses  teaches  us.  Gen.  ii.  23,  "On 
the  seventh  day  God  ended  his  work  which  he  had  made  ;  and  he 
rested  on  the  seventh  day  fiom  all  his  works  which  he  had  made  : 
And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sanctified  it  ;  because  that  in 
it  he  had  rested  from  all  his  works."  That  with  these  words  God 
instituted  the  sabbath  after  his  example,  and  that  this  passage  re- 
lates not  to  that  seventhday  only,  but  to  all  the  following  days  also,  and 
that  this  is  not  an  anticipated  account,  we  have  just  now  seen  in  our 
explanation  of  the  fourth  commandment.  Paul  teaches  us  this  also, 
Hebr.  3 — 9.  It  was  his  design  to  prove  that  the  words  of  Psalm 
xcv.  II,  "I  sware  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  rest,"  ought 
to  be  understood  of  the  blessed  rest  after  this  life,  for  which  we  must 
Vol.   it.  2  K 


274      THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

still  look,  as  appears  from  his  conclusion,  vs.  9,  "  There  remaineu. 
therefore  a  rest  for  the  people  of  Cod."  But  low  doth  he  prove 
this  He  shows  that  Psalm  xcv.  11,  cannot  speak  either  cf  the 
rest  of  Canaan,  or  of  the  rest  of  the  seventh  day  because  that  was 
not  a  rest  .o  come  for  Israel,  into  which  they  should  enter,  but  that 
it  was  known  even  from  the  Inundation  of  the  world,  ts.  3,  4,  even 
then  men  of  that  time  entered  into  the  rest  ;  therefore  the  sabbath 
w  is  instituted  before  the  fall  from  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
\v  hence  it  evidently  feltoweth,  that  the  sabbath  cannot  be  ceremo- 
nia  ,  typifying  Christ  and  his  benefits  of  the  New  Testament ;  since 
Christ  could  not  be  considered  os  Mediator,  and  therefore  no  typifying 
ceiemonies  could  come  into  consideration  before  the  fall.  T  Ley 
object  indeed  against  the  institution  of  the  sabbath  before  the  fall, 
(a)  that  Adam  fell  before  fhe  seventh  day  ;  but  what  proof  have 
they  for  that  ?  There  is  certainly  not  the  least  sign  nor  shadow  of 
it.  We  have  demonstrated  the  contrary,  though  briefly,  in  treating 
on  the  seventh  question.  They  say  further,  (b)  that  the  sabbath 
did  not  become  Adam,  because  he  was  not  weary  ;  but  they  suppose 
then  that  bodily  rest  only  was  enjoined  in  the  fourth  commandment : 
but  this  we  deny,  and  have  shown  that  the  seventh  day  was  enjoined, 
that  men  abstaining  from  their  daily  labour,  (which  Adam  was  also 
obliged  to  do  by  keeping  and  dressing  the  garden)  they  might  serve 
God  in  a  solemn  manner.  How  could  God  command  bodily  idle- 
ness, which  is  the  fiuiuu!  source  of  every  kind  of  iniquity  ?  who  can 
think  this  ?  the  rest  of  sleep  became  Adam  ;  why  not  then  also  the 
rest  of  the  seventh  day  ?  (c)  They  say,  we  read  not  that  the  sab- 
buth  was  kept  before  the  manna  was  given,  and  the  fathers  were 
never  reproved  for  not  keeping  it :  But  was  the  sabbath  therefore 
not  instituted  ?  can  we  infer  this  from  a  negative  argument  ?  The 
fathers  were  not  reproved  for  having  more  than  one  Avife  at  the  same 
time  ;  was  it  therefore  not  contrary  to  the  first  institution  of  mar- 
riage ?  Very  little  is  recorded  concerning  those  times,  and  there- 
fore we  do  not  know  all  that  happened  then.  The  fathers  of  those 
times  knew  something  of  the  period  of  seven  days,  which  began  with 
the  first)  and  ended  with  the  seventh  day,  and  so  with  the  sabbath 
whici;  wcis  then  known,  Gen.  viii.  10,  I  L  xxix.  27,  28.  1  he  god- 
ly of  those  tin  -es  celebrated  public  worship:  for  when  "  f  nos  was 
boin,  men  began  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  iv  26. 
Did  they  i!o  iha<  without  a  stated  time  for  it?  If  I  be  not  prepos- 
sessed with  prejudice*  tins  will  induce  me  to  think  that  they  obser- 
ved for  ihaj  purpose  the  da-.  whi<  h  God  bad  instituted. 

3i  Toe  muiahty  of  tnu  sabbath  appeal's  also  from  the  fourth  com.- 


 

Oaandrmefit  itself;  for  this  commandment  is  contained  in  the  moral 
law,  as  well  as  the  other  nine  commandments,  it  was  given  to  Israel 
by  God  amidst  a  display  of  his  exalted  Majesty  by  thunder  and 
lightening;  before  the  ceremonial  law,  it  was  engraven  upon  the  ta- 
bles of  stone,  which  were  laid  up  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  en- 
forced, not  with  ceremonial  and  typical,  but  only  with  the  moral  rea- 
sons of  God's  blessing,  sanctifying-,  and  example.  What  .ritual  and 
ceremonial  commandment  was  ever  accompanied  with  all  this? 
There  is  therefore  no  reason  why  we  should  esteem  the  fourth 
commandment  to  be  ceremonial  and  abolished,  and  not  moral  and 
everlasting. 

3.  When  we  hold  that  the  fourth  commandment  is  ceremonial  and 
abolished,  we  annul,  contrary  to  the  command  and  threateni  g  of 
Christ,  Matt.  v.  17,  18,  19,  not  merely  "  one  of  the  least,"  but  one 
of  "  the  greatest  commandments  of  the  law."  It  appears  plainly 
from  the  connexion,  that  he  enforceth  here  serious  godliness,  accord- 
ing to  the  moral  law  ;  how  can  we  then  presume  to  say,  that  one  of 
these  commandments  is  ceremonial  and  abolished  ?  We  cannot  ex- 
cuse oarselves  by  saying  that  we  do  not  annul  the  commandment 
concerning  the  sabbath,  when  we  declare  it  to  bt.  ceremonial  and 
abolished,  because  we  do  still  fulfil  it  by  keeping  the  sabbath  spirit- 
ually and  daily  :  for  the  antitype  of  the  ceremonies  being  come  the 
law  of  ceremonies  is  abolished  and  annulled,  and  so  we  teach  that 
one  of  the  commandments  of  the  moral  law  is  annulled,  when  we 
declare  it  to  be  ceremonial ;  but  this  is  contiary  to  the  text. 

4.  Add  to  this  the  natural  equity  of  the  fourth  commandment, 
which  will  always  declare  it  to  be  holy  and  good.  Is  it  not  equitable, 
that  man  and  beast,  when  wearied  with  slavish  labour,  "  should  be 
refreshed?"  See  Exod.  xxiii.  12.  Can  any  person  deem  it  lo  be 
improper,  that  all  the  saints  on  the  whole  earth  should,  as  one  body, 
abstain  from  labour  on  a  certain  day  and  time,  and  endeavour  lo  ex- 
ercise in  a  solemn  manner  the  communion  of  saints,  and  to  employ 
themselves  in  knowing,  loving,  fearing,  praising  and  delighting 
themselves  in  God  ?  and  this  belongs  to  keepb.g  the  sabbaih  :  s.-e 
Isaiah  lxiii.  13,  14.  We  wonder  therefore  how  men  can  decry  the 
sabbath,  as  a  superstitious  imposition. 

We  might  combat  the  opinion  of  our  opponents  also  from  its  in- 
justice, and  because  we  cannot  find  any  where  in  the  word  of  God, 
that  the  works  of  the  believing  Israelites  were  unclean,  and  that  this 
was  declared  to  them  by  the  sabbath.  Wre  are  billing  to  allow  that 
the  purification  was  not  yet  accomplished  by  the  actual  sacrifice  of 
Christ,   but  that  it  should  be  accomplished  ;    that  Christ  should  rest 


276       THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

in  the  grave,  and  the  believers  under  the  New  Testament  from  the 
ceremonial  service  :  but  that  these  things  were  signified  to  Israel  in 
the  fourth  commandment,  of  this  we  have  neither  word  nor  tittle, 
liut  1  will  not  busy  myself  with  these  matters,  but  only  vindicate  the 
divine  commandment,   and  refute  the  objections  of  the  adversaries. 

The  principal  objections  against  the  morality  of  the  sabbath  of  the 
fourth  commandment  are  the  following  : 

1.  That  if  the  fourth  commandment  do  stili  oblige  us,  we  oug'it 
t';en  to  observe  the  last,  and  not  the  first  day  of  the  week.  But  we 
have  just  now  shown,  that  the  seventh  day  in  particular  belongs  not: 
to  the  essence  of  the  fourth  commandment.  We  add  now  also, 
that  if  we  cannot  find  here  any  divine  translation  of  the  last  to  the 
hr-t  day  of  the  week,  we  are  then  still  bound  to  that  last  day.  But 
it  is  evident,  that  the  first  day  was  instituted  instead  of  the  seventh  ; 
for  why  is  the  first  day  called  "  the  Lord's  day  :"  Rev.  i.  10.  Is  it 
not,  because  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  the  sabbath  rested  on  that 
day  from  his  painful  labour,  and  instituted  it  for  his  service)  as  tiie 
seventhday  sabbath  is  therefore  called  the  Lord's  sabbath  ?  what  else 
moved  the  aposdes  to  meet  together  just  on  the  first  day  of  the 
week?  John  xx.  19,  26.  Why  did  the  disciples  at  Troas  assemble 
just  on  that  day  to  break  bread,  Acts  xx.  7,  if  that  day  were  not  in- 
stiled before  ?  why  doth  Paul  recommend  to  the  GaJalians  and 
Ccrmt.v.ans  to  make  their  charitable  collections  on  the  first,  and  not 
on  any  other  day  of  the  week?  1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2.  No  other  reason 
ca;!  be  assigned  for  this,  but  the  divine  institution  of  that  day.  Did 
not  the  Loid  of  the  sabbath  also  bless  the  first  day,  when  he  showed 
himself  present  sundry  times  with  his  apostles  on  that  day  ?  John 
xx.  19,  kc.  poured  out  his  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  1 — 1,  and  caused  the  dis- 
ciple, whom  he  loved,  to  be  in  the  Spirit  on  that  day?  Rev.  i.  1. 
Low  hath  it  come  to  pass,  that  the  Christians  throughout  the  whoic 
world,  from  the  times  of  the  apostles,  even  until  now  have  agreed  to 
celebrate  public  worship  on  this  day  ?  did  any  synod,  or  Christian 
emperour,  or  king  introduce  that  custom,  where  it  was  not  before  ? 
surely  no.  It  is  true,  we  read  not  that  Christ  said,  Keep  the  first 
day  of  the  week  instead  of  the  seventh  ;  but  all  the  words  of  cu. 
Saviour  have  not  been  recorded :  because  he  saith  no  where,  !;. 
infants,  shall  we  therefore  say,  that  he  did  not  institute  infant  bap- 
tism ?  no,  but  we  conclude  that  from  good  reasons  am!  consequences  . 
and  so  we  conclude  also  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  the  first  daj 
ot  the  week  was  instituted,  either  immediately  by  the  Lord  him 
or  by  his  apostles. 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1®3.  27f 

2.  They  allege  also  against  the  morality  of  the  fourth  command- 
ment, Exod.  xxxi.  13.  "  Vcnly,  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep,  for  it 
is  a  sign  between  me  and  you  throughout  your  generations,  that  ye 
may  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  that  doth  sanctify  you."  They  con- 
clude from  tbis  that  the  seveftthday  sabbath  was  a  covenant  sign  only 
for  the  nation  of  Israel  of  the  future  sanctification  by  Christ:  -but 
this  doth  not  follow  from  that  passage.  For  (a)  we  do  net  read  in 
that  verse  of  the  seventhd  iy  sabbath,  hut  in  vs.  IS,  17,  and  so  an  evi- 
dent distinction  is  made  between  sabbaths  in  the  plural,  and  sabbath 
in  the  singular ;  and  it  is  not  said  of  this  sabbath,  that  it  is  a  sign  of 
sanctification,  but  of  the  creation  :  k>  it  is  a  sign  between  me  and 
the  children  of  Israel  for  ever  ;  for  in  six  days  the  Lord  made 
heaven  and  earth,  and  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested  and  was  re- 
freshed,'' vb.  17.  (b)  If  it  were  even  so,  that  the  sevenlhday  sabbath 
was  a  sign  that  the  Lord  would  sanctify  Israel,  it  would  not  follow 
therefromj  that  it  was  a  sign  of  the  future  sanctification  ;  for  God 
signified  to  Israel  by  the  sabbath,  that  he  sanctified  them  even  then  ; 
for  Israel  by  keeping  the  sabbath  was  separated  from  other  people, 
and  exercised  the  holy  worship  of  God,  by  which  they  were  sancti- 
fied. .Sec  Psalm  cxlvii.  19,  20.  (c)  If  we  should  allow  that  the 
sevenlhday  sabbath  was  a  sacramental  sign  of  the  covenant,  con- 
cerning the  future  sanctification  through  Christ,  to  the  generations 
of  Israel  only,  it  would  not  follow  then  neither,  that  the  sabbath  was 
from  its  first  institution,  of  itself  a  typifying  ceremony,  that  might 
be  abolished;  but  that  it  was  annexed  to  the  fourth  commandment 
by  the  Sovereign  Lawgiver,  as  an  appendage  for  the  Israel  of  that 
time,  as  the  Lord  appointed  the  rainbow,  which  was  naturally  and 
of  itself  no   sign,   to  be  afterwards  a   sign  ci*  the   covenant,   ( 

xi\  13. 

3.  It  is  said  further,  lhat  the  sabbath  is  distinguished,  Ezeki-xxii. 
12,  from  "  the  statutes  and  judgments,  by  which  we  live  ;"  for  the 
Lord  saith,  "  Moreover  also  I  gave  them  my  sabbaths,"  Cut  (a)  il- 
ls not  true,  that  the  statutes  and  judgments  signify  only  the  moral 
lav/,  by  which  we  live  ;  for  the  ceremonial  and  civil  law  is  also  so 
cailed,  Mai.  iv.  4.  Eph.  li.  15.  (b)  The  sabbath  is  enjoined  in  the 
moral  law,  by  which  we  live,  (c)  The  sabbath  is  distinguished 
"from  "the  statutes,  which  were  not  good,  and  the  judgments,  by 
which  the  Israelites  should  not  live,"  Ezek.  xx.  24,  25,  by  which 
some  erroneously  affirm  the  ceremonial  laws  to  be  understood  :  and 
God  saith  that  he  gave  them  those  evil  statutes  and  destructive 
judgments  on  account  of  their  violation  of  the  sabbath,  (d)  The 
vrorcl  «  moreover,"  or  according  to  the   original,  '•'  and  also,"  doth 


478      THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

not  imply  any  oppos;tion  of  the  sabbath  to  the  statutes  and  judg- 
ments, but  it  connects  the  sabbath  with  the  statutes  and  judgments, 
as  ol  the  same  nature.  We  see  this  word  used  thus,  Gen.  i.  18. 
Exod.  x.  25,  26.  (e)  Further,  we  do  not  read  heie  of  sabbath  in 
the  singular,  as  the  seventhday  sabbath  is  commonly  mentioned  in 
the  singular  ;  but  of  sabbaths  in  the  plural,  and  therefore  the  cere- 
monial sabbaths  must  be  understood  here. 

4.  They  likewise  object  against  us,  Rom.  xv.  5.  Gal.  iv.  10  11. 
Col.  ii.  16,  17,  where  Paul  considers  those  us  "weak,  who  esteemed 
one  day  above  another  :"  he  saith  also  that  "  the  observation  of  days, 
months,  times,  and  years  is  hurtful  and  pernicious  at  present  ;  and 
that  those  things  were  a  shadow  of  Christ:"  but  if  the  sabbath  he 
on  this  account  ceremonial,  we  may  not  then  observe  any  days  at  all 
under  any  pretence  whatever,  more  than  any  other  pait  of  the  c<  re- 
monial  law,  and  we  must  therefore  condemn  not  only  all  Christians 
of  the  present  time,  who  observe  the  first  day  of  the  week,  as  a  u^y 
ufpublick  worship,  but  the  apostles  and  primitive  Christians  also, 
whose  example  we  now  follow.  But  besides  this,  v.  e  may  under- 
standby  those  who  esteemed  one  clay  above  another,  the  stronger 
Christians  of  the  Gentiles,  who  observed  the  Lord's  day  above  other 
days  to  the  Lord  ;  for  as  he  who  believeth  that  he  may  eat-  all  things 
is  mentioned  before  him,  who  is  weak,  vrs.  2,  3,  so  also  lie  who  es- 
teerneth  one  day  above  another  is  mentioned  in  the  same  order,  be- 
fore him,  who  esteems  every  day  alike.  Hut  not  to  insist  upon  this, 
let  it  be  proved  that  Paul  hath  respect  in  the  passage;  alleged  to  the 
seventh  day  sabbath  ;  he  speaks  indeed.  Col.  ii.  16,  of  sabbaths  : 
he  mentions  also  Gal.  iv.  10,  days;  but  there  were  more  sabbaths 
of  days,  than  the  seventhday  sabbath,  as  we  have  just  now  shown. 
And  although  the  apostle  did  intend  the  seventhday  sabbath,  his 
words  cannot  however  extend  further  than  the  Jewish  sabbath  of  the 
seventh  day,  after  the  creation,  with  all  its  circumstances  and  appen- 
dages,  agreeably  to  the  nature  of  the  ancient  ceconomy. 

5.  They  think  that  Christ  declares  the  sabbath  to  be  ceremonial, 
when  he  saith,  Matt.  xii.  5,  (a)  that  the  priests  profaned  the  sab- 
bath by  their  ceremonial  works  on  it ;  as  though  he  taught  that 
the  essence  of  the  fou'-th  commandment  required  only  a  cessation 
from  labour.  But  who  sees  not  that  the  Saviour  refutes  the  Jews 
from  their  own  principles  ?  for  they  imagined  that  every  kind  of  la- 
bour, even  "  plucking  and  eating  ears  of  corn  "  on  the  sabbath  was 
forbidden,  Christ  teaches,  in  opposition  thereto,  that  this  was  not 
forbidden, -because  otherwise  the  priests  also  would  have  profsned  the 
ijabbath  by  their  religious  employment  on  it.     Inasmuch  as  the  Jews 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   103.  27 9 

would  not  allow  this,  therefore  his  disciples  also  did  not  profane  the 
sabbath  by  plucking  and  eating  ears  of  corn  on  it.  Neither  doth  it 
u>ilow,  that  the  fourth  commandment  farbkls  only  doing  any  kind  of 
work,  because  that  is  a  profanation  of  the  sabbath  ;  for  we  have 
shown  before,  that  the  fourth  commandment  enjoins  not  only  restj 
but  also  publick  worship  on  the  sabbath,  (b)  Christ  also  calls  the 
keeping  of  the  sabbath  a  sacrifice,  Matt.  xii.  7,  and  sacrifices  be- 
hooved to  give  place  to  mercy  ;  from  which  they  will  conclude  that 
the  sabbath  is  ceremonial,  as  well  as  the  sacrifices  :  but  it  is  evident 
that  he  doth  not  call  the  keeping  of  the  sabbath  a  sacrifice,  but  the 
superstition  of  the  Jews,  who  made  the  commandment  of  God  of 
none  effect  by  their  traditions  ;  since  they  were  not  willing,  that  any 
necessary  work  should  be  done  on  the  sabbath,  as  plucking  ears  of 
corn  to  appease  hunger,  healing  the  sick  and  infirm.  See  Luke  xiii. 
10 — 17.    xiv.  1 — 6,     John  v.  5 — 17. 

6.  The  s«bbath,  it  is  said,  was  a  type  of  the  rest  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament, in  which  the  church  rests  from  the  burthensome  service  of 
the  Old  Testament  ;  for  Paul  calls  the  rest  which  remains  for  the 
people  of  God,  sabbuismos,  and  he  adds,  "  he  that  is  entered  into  his 
rest  hath  also  ceased  from  his  own  works,  as  God  did  from  his," 
tieb.  iv.  9,  10,  by  which  the  apostle  therefore  showeth  that  this 
spiritual  rest  was  typified  by  the  sabbath.  Since  now  the  antitype, 
the  spiritual  rest  of  ttie  New  Testament,  is  come,  therefore  the  type, 
even  the  sabbath,  ought  to  be  abolished.  Some  will  deny  that  Pvul 
represents  the  sabbath  in  that  passage  as  a  type,  although  they  ad- 
mit that  he  alludes  to  it.  Let  us  not  however  be  so  unyielding,  but 
rather  admit  freely  and  readily,  that  the  sabbath  was  a  type  of  the 
rest,  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  ;  but  even  then  it  will  not 
follow  that  the  sabbath  is  now  abolished.  For  (1)  the  rest,  sabbatis* 
mos,  is  not  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament,  but  of  eternal  salvation, 
which,  the  people  of  God  will  enjoy  after  this  life  in  heaven.  This 
is  evident,  because,  (a)  the  aposle  speaks  of  the  rest  which  is  not 
enjoyed  at  preeent,  but  which  remaineth.  But  the  believing  He* 
brews  enjoytd  even  then  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament,  |to  which 
they  had  already  attained  through  the  humiliation  and  exaltation  of 
Christ,  and  through  the  spirit  of  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  and  it  did1 
not  therefore  remain  for  them,  (b)  Me  speaks  of  that  rest,  into  which 
Israel  could  enter  under  the  Old  Testament  by  faith,  and  into  which 
they  did  not  enter  because  of  their  unbelief.  See  Heb.  iii.  18,  19. 
iv.  2,  6.  Now  the  Israel  of  the  Old  Testament  could  not  surely  en~ 
ter  into  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  by  faith,  inasmuch  as  the 
New  Testament  was  not  yet  enme  nor  offered  to  then),  its  it  was  V 


m       THE  1  OURTII  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

the  preaching- of  the  Baptist  and  of  Jesus,  Matt.  Hi.  2.  iv.  17.  From 
■■\  hich  it  therefore  followeth,  that  Paul  cloth  not  teach,  Heb.  iv.  9,  10. 
that  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  was  typified  by  the  sabbath,  but 
only  the  blessed  rest  of  heaven-  (2)  He  speaks  of  the  sabbath  before 
the  fall,  upon  which  God  rested  from  his  works,  and  which  he  gave 
to  man  that  he  might  rest  as  God  had  done,  Heb.  iv.  10.  Gen.  ii.  ' 
S.  Now  that  sabbath  could  not  typify  any  matter  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, since  before  the  fall  there  could  not  be  any  respect  to  sin,  and 
therefore  none  to  any  Mediator  of  the  New  Testament.  And  so  it  fol- 
lows indeed,  that  that  sabbath  was  a  type  of  the  everlasting  rest,  and 
that  when  this  rest  is  come,  the  celebrating  of  the  sabbath  will  cease  : 
but  not  that  the  sabbath  shadowed  forth  the  rest  of  the  New  T 
Mivnt  and  is  therefore  abolished. 

Perbaps  it  may  be  thou  srs,  that  I  insist  too  long  upon  the 

dispute  concerning  the  sabbath  ;  but  the  great  pains  winch  men  have 
raken  to  invalidate  the  Christian  sabbath,  obligeth  us  to  this,  I 
however  desist,  having  spoken  sufficiently  on  this  subject,  and  will 
teach  you  the  duties  of  '.he  sabbath  according  to  the  instructor.  lie 
reforms  us  that  three  great  duties  belong  to  the  keeping  of  the  sab- 
bath ;  fast  that  which  is  required  before  the  sabbath  ;  then  the  p"ub* 
lie  duties,  which  we  ought  to  perform  on  the  sabbath  ;  and  lastly 
the  end  of  keeping  the  sabbath. 

That  which  is  required  beforehand,  in  order  that  we  may  keep 
the  sabbath,  is  "  that  the  ministry  of  the  gospel  and  the  school-,  he 
maintained."  Inasmuch  as  the  Lord's  day  is  et  apart  for  the  pub- 
lic worship  of  God,  it  is  therefore  necessary,  that  the  service  of  the 
church  or  the  ministry  of  the  gospJ,  should  be  exercised,  and  there 
fore  also  maintained  :  but  whereas  it  hath  not  pleased  God  to  bestow 
the  extraordinary  gifts  of  his  spirit  always,  as  he  did  formerly  upon  his 
apostles,  it  is  therefore  necessary,  that  schools,  either  of  a  lower  or 
ler  order,  should  be  n  d  for  exercising.youth,   in  order  to 

prepare  them  for  the  ministry  ol  the  gospel,  and  for  other  special 
functions  of  the  civil  community  that  they  may  cherish  the  service 
of  the  church.  Even  in  the  times  of  the  prophets  there  were 
schools  in    which  the    sons  of  the   prophets  were  taught   and  exef* 

The  duties  which  we  m  i  it  perform  on  the  sal       '           in  public, 

are' in 'general,  -frequent  the  church  of  God."     If  any 

:  ba  t  be  can  afford  time  on  oilier  days 

u>  co.w    I              ■  ^            ■                                   im  do  that  als» 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  281 

for  the  good  of  his  soul  ;*  but  he  must  do  it  particularly  on  the  sab- 
bath, as  God  hath  commanded,  Lev.  xxiii.  3.     We  read  frequently 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  the  people  of  God  had  this  custom  : 
"  Paul  also  preached  on  the  first  clay  of  the  week  to  the  disciples, 
who  weie  come  together  at  Troas,"  Acts  xx.  6,  7.     But  what  must 
we  do  in  the  church  ?  shall  we  go  thither  only  to  see  and  to  be  seen  ? 
no,  but  we  must  go,  (a)  "  to  hear  the  word  of  God,"  as  "  at  Antioch, 
almost  the  whole  city  came  together  on  the    sabbath  to  hear  the 
word  of  God,"  Acts  xiii.  44.     We  ought  to  have  ears  there  to  hear 
what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the   church:    "  the  ears  of  all  the  people" 
ought  to  be  u  attentive  to  the   word,"  Neh.  viii.  4.     (b)  We   must 
also  go  to  the  church  of  God  on  the  day  of  the  Lord,  "  to  use  the 
sacraments,"  as  the  believers  "  at  Troas  came  together  on  the  first 
day  of  the  week  to  break  bread,"    Acts  xx.  7.     We  ought  certainly 
not  to  receive  the  sacraments  privately  in  a  corner,  as  the  Papists  do, 
but  in  the  congregation  of  God's  people,     (c)  We   must   also  then 
and  there  "publicly  call  ontheLoid  God."  We  must  call  uf  on  him 
also  in  private,  but  in  order  to  serve  God  publicly,  we  must  call  upon 
him  also  publicly    in  tiie   congregation  on  the  sabbath  :    thus  Paul 
and  the  Christians    "  went  on  the  sabbathday  out  of  the   city  to  the 
river,  where  prayer  was   wont  to  be  made,"   Acts  xvi.  13.     (d)  We 
must  also  go  to  the  church  on  the  sabbath,  "  that  we  may  contrib- 
ute  to  the    relief  of  the   poor,    as  becometh  Christians  ;"   this  the 
apostle  recommended  to  the  Galatians  and  Corinthians,   1  Cor.  xvi. 
1,  2. 

But  will  it  suffice  and  satisfy  the  demand  of  the  fourth  command- 
ment, to  set  apart  one  day  in  this  manner,  and  to  do  no  more  than 
ihat?  no,  God  surely  ordained  the  sabbath,  that  he  might  sanctify 
his  people  :  the  s  bbath  must  also  serve  to  the  end,  "  that  we  may 
«ease"  and  rest  "  all  the  days  of  our  lives  from  our  evil  works  :"  the 
exercises  of  the  sabbath  ought  surely  to  invite  and  urge  us  to  this, 
and  we  must  for  this  end  "  seek  for  the  Lord  to  work  in  us  by  his 
Spirit,"  not  only  on  that  day,  but  on  every  day,  by  means  of  the 
word,  the  sacraments  and  the  prayers  of  the  sabbath,  and  we  ought 
to  retain  a  relish  of  those  exercises,    and  thus  inhale  and  solicit  the 

*  The  author  appears  to  refer  here  to  a  custom  of  the  cities  in  Holland, 
ef  having  divine  service  in  the  churches  every  day  of  the  week,  except  Mon- 
days and  Saturdays,  and  on  those  days  also  when  they  are  festivals.  This 
is  feasible  there,  as  they  have  in  those  cities  usual  1/  several  more  ministers 
•than  churches.  Thus  in  Amsterdam  the  Reformed  have  eleven  churches  and 
thirty  ministers,  in  Rotterdam  they  hare  four  churches  and  tw«lve  ministers 
Vol.  it.  Q  K 


J82       THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

operations  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  by  a  continual  uplooking  to  him, 
and  depending  on  him,  like  the  spouse,  Song  iv.  16.  And  so  "  we 
will  begin  in  this  life  the  everlasting  sabbath  and  rest,  which  remain* 
eth  for  the  people  of  God,"  according  to  Heb.  iv.  y. 

APPLICATION. 


What  think  ye,  beloved,  can  such  a  keeping  of  the  sabbath  be 
deemed  a  yoke  and  a  burthen,  which  doth  not  become  the  free  peo- 
ple of  the  New  Testament  \  those  who  relish  the  power,  the  advan- 
tages and  the  delights  of  the  sabbath  will  not  judge  so  concerning  it. 

But  how  shamefully  is  this  day,  which  God  hath  hallowed  and 
blessed,  unhallowed  by  many  !  for  there  are  few  who  remember  it 
to  keep  it  holy.  Will  not  one  and  another  defer  a  part  of  his  daily 
labour  until  this  dny,  that  he  may  do  it  on  the  Lord's  day  ?  on  this 
day  men  will  indulge  in  sleep  more  than  on  other  days,  they  will 
work,  trade,  travel,  divert  themselves,  and  seek  their  pleasure,  yea, 
practise  every  kind  of  vanity  and  abomination.  If  they  come  to  the 
church  of  God,  they  think  that  they  have  done  well,  when  they  have 
been  there  once  :  do  they  attend  of  ner,  it  is  a  burthen,  they  cry 
and  sigh  with  sinful  Israel,  Amos  viii.  5.  "  When  will  the  sabbath 
be  past  ?"  They  are  satisfied  with  doing  the  outward  duties  of  the 
sabbath,  without  spirit  and  life  ;  or  if  they  do  aught  themselves, 
they  take  no  heed  to  their  children  nor  servants,  as  if  the  sabbath 
were  not  ordained  for  them  also. 

How  do  ye  dare  act  thus  ?  This  is  surely  a  commandment  of 
God,  delivered  amidst  thunder  and  lightning,  and  it  hath  the  Lord 
for  its  example,  more  than  any  other  command  of  the  law.  Do  ye 
not  know,  that  God  is  angry  with  those  who  profane  the  sabbath  ? 
the  land  of  Canaan  was  laid  waste,  and  Israel  carried  away  captive 
to  Babylon,  on  account  of  this  sin,  Levit.  xxvi.  34.  Neh.'xiii.  17. 
God  vvould,  on  account  of  it,  "kindle  a  fire  in  the  gates  of  Jerusa- 
lem, which  could  not  be  quenched,"  Jer.  xvii.  27.  and  "  he  would 
pour  out  his  fury  upon  his  people  in  the  wilderness,  to  consume 
thenV'  Ezek*  XX.  13.  Ye  need  not  excuse  yourselves  by  thinking, 
that  there  are  many  learaed  men,  who  say  that  we  are  not  obliged 
to  keep  the  sabbath  under  the  New  Testament ;  for  they  are  not 
the  word  of  God,  from  which  we  and  others  have  proved,  that  the 
fourth  commandment,  as  well  as  the  other  commandments  of  the 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105.  W3 

law,  are  an  everlasting  rule  to  us.  And  why  will  ye  adopt  the  sen- 
timents of  one  learned  man,  rather  than  those  of  another  ?  is  it  not 
because  ye  can  reconcile  tnem  better  to  the  lusts  of  your  carnal  ease, 
pleasure  and  proiit  ?  or  is  it  because  ye  think  that  they  agree  better 
with  the  word  of  God  ?  If  so,  I  would  advise  you  to  consider  whe.h- 
er  all  our  Netherland  divinesTdo  not,  with  the  Synod  of  Dordt,  say, 
"  that  the  fourth  commandment  is  moral,  so  far  as  it  appropriates  a 
certain  and  stated  day  to  religious  worship,  and  so  much  rest  also, 
as  is  necessary  for  religious  worship,  and  holy  meditation  on  it,"  &c 
Is  there  indeed  a  single  learned  man,  who  doth  not  say,  that  the 
first  day  of  the  week  ought  to  be  observed,  if  not  on  account  of  the 
fourth  commandment,  nevertheless  either  on  account  of  maintaining 
good  order,  or  for  the  sake  of  an  ecclesiastical  or  civil  institution  ? 
Ye  have  therefore  no  reason  for  profaning  the  day  of  the  Lord  in 
such  a  wanton  manner.  But  ye  surely  sin  more  grievously,  and 
against  your  own  conscience,  who  say  and  maintain  your  own  selves, 
that  the  fourth  commandment  is  moral,  and  do  still  violate  the 
sabbath. 

Therefore  humble  yourselves  on  account  of  this  sin,  seek  recon- 
ciliation for  it  in  the  blood  of  the  Lord  of  the  sabbath,  and  bring  your 
hearts  to  him,  that  he  may,  as  he  hath  promised,  write  also  this 
commandment  in  them,  and  that  ye  may  once  set  about  keeping  the 
sabbath  in  good  earnest.  It  is  surely  reasonable,  easy  and  pleasant: 
God  proniiseth  to  do  great  things  for  them,  who  keep  the  sabbath, 
"  he  will  give  them  in  his  house,  and  within  his  walls,  a  place  and  a 
name  better  than  that  of  sons  and  of  daughters  ;  he  will  make  them 
joyful  in  his  house  of  prayer,  and  will  accept  of  all  their  religious 
performances,"  Isaiah  Ivi.  4 — 7.  Yea,  «  ye  shall  then  delight  your- 
selves in  the  Lord,  and  he  will  cause  you  to  ride  on  the  high  places 
of  the  earth,  and  feed  you  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob  your  father." 
Friends,  how  can  ye  be  *so  averse  from  keeping  the  sabbath  !  ye 
surely  wish  for  a  place  in  heaven  :  well,  there  we  will  have  an  ever^ 
lusting  sabbath    as  Paul  speaks,  Hebr.  iv.  9. 

Do  ye  deshe  to  keep  the  sabbath  in  such  a  manner,  that  ye  will 
derive  a  blessing  from  it,  prepare  yourselves  then  for  it  beforehand, 
endeavour  to  conduct  properly  on  it  and  to  make  a  right  improve- 
ment of  it,  after  it  is  ended. 

1.  Ye  must,  in  the  first  place,  prepare  yourselves  for  it  before- 
hand. The  Lord  God  saith  therefore  to  you,  "  Remember  the  sab- 
bathday  to  keep  it  holy."  If  we  have  not  thought  of  it  beforehand, 
and  if  we  begin  the  work  of  the  sabbath  with  a  heart  wholly  disor- 
dered, and  distracted  with  earthly  concerns,  our  souls  will  not  be  in 


3S4       THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

a  proper  frame  for  celebrating  this  day  of  the  Lord.  And  therefore 
(a)  seek  to  impress  on  your  minds  a  sense  of  the  divine  in- 
stitution of  this  day,  that  ye  may  observe  it  in  obedience  to  God. 
The  holy  women  k*  re  ted  on  the  sabbath,  according  to  the  com- 
mandment," Luke  xxiii.  56.  "  He  who  regardeth  the  day  must  re- 
gard it  to  the  Lord,"  Rom.  xiv.  6.  We  shall  not  otherwise  regard 
it  in  faith,  and  then  we  sin,  Rom.  xiv.  23.  (b)  Long  for  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  because  God  hath  blessed  and  hallowed  it.  On  this 
day  he  gives  his  blessed  and  holy  institutions,  with  which  he  bless- 
cth  and  makes  us  holy,  he  gives  also  his  Spirit,  delights  and  rejoices 
his  people  in  his  house  ot  prayer,  he  accepts  our  burntofferings  and 
sacrifices  on  his  altar,  and  we  delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord.  Hear 
how  desirous  David  was  of  the  public  institutions  of  the  Lord,  and 
imitate  his  example,  Psalm  xxvii.  4.  "  ( >ne  thing  have  I  desired  of 
the  Lord,  that  will  I  seek  after,  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of 
th j  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord, 
and  to  inquire  in  his  temple  "  See  also  how  he  panted  and  longed 
for  this,  Psalm  xlii.  lxiii.  lxxxiv.  and  exxii.  (c)  Finish  all  your 
work  seasonably  before  the  sabbath,  that  ye  may  betake  yourselves 
early  to  your  nightly  rest,  and  may  thus  celebrate  the  day  of  the 
Lord  with  a  mind  freed  from  all  earthly  cares,  and  refreshed  with 
moderate  sleep.  When  Abraham  will  go  up  into  the  mountain  in 
order  to  "  worship,  his  young  men  and  the  ass  must  abide  below," 
Gen.  xxii.  5.  (d)  "  Betake  not  yourselves  to  your  nightly  rest,  un- 
til ye  have  first  thought  with  sorrow  and  humiliation  on  your  back- 
slidings  from  the  Lord,  during  the  former  days  of  the  week,  have 
confessed  them  to  the  Lord,  and  obtained  recouciliaMon  and  peace 
with  him,  by  heartily  embracing  his  Son,  that  ye  may  with  David. 
"  lay  yourselves  down  in  peace  and  sleep,  and  the  Lord  may  make 
you  dwell  safely,"  Psalm  iv.  3.  This  would  bring  your  souls  to  a 
most  proper  frame  for  keeping  the  day  of  the  Lord,  in  a  manner  ac- 
ceptable to  him. 

2.  In  order  that  we  may  conduct  ourselves  properly  on  this  day, 
we  must  not  only  abstain  altogether  from  our  daily  work,  as  we  have 
bhown  before,  and  not  only  come  diligently  to  the  church  of  God, 
that  we  may  attend  on  the  public  worship ;  but  we  must  also  endea- 
vour (a)  to  obtain  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  that  wc 
may  be  thereby  enlightened,  enlivened,  sanctified,  and  rendered  ac- 
tive. We  ought  therefore  to  pray  to  the  Lord  with  David,  Psalm 
xliii.  3.  "O  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  truth,  let  them  lead  me, 
let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  holy  hill  and  to  thy  tabernacles."  (b) 
We  ought  also  to  exercise  ourselves  before  and  after  public  worship, 


XXXVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103.  385 

•ne  while  in  secret,  and  then  with  our  households,  in  contemplating 
God's  great  works  of  creation  and  redemption,  in  praying  over  them, 
in  speaking  and  singing  of  them.  Hear  how  the  holy  man  express- 
ed himself  in  his  psalm  for  the  sabhathday,  when  he  saith,  "  Thou, 
Lord,  hast  made  me  glad  through  thy  work  :  1  will  triumph  in  the 
works  of  thy  hands.  O  Lord  how  great  are  thy  works  !  and  thy 
thoughts  are  very  deep,"  &c.  Psalm  xcii.  4,  5.  This  would  render 
"the  sabbath  a  delight  to  us,  and  the  Lord,  who  is  to  be  honored  would 
be  sanctified,"*  Isaiah  Iviii.  13.  Yea,  we  should,  atter  the  example 
of  God,  "  rest  and  be  refreshed,"  Exod.  xxxi.  IS,  and  with  John, 
Rev.  i.  10,  "  be  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day." 

3.  But  it  behooves  us,  in  order  to  show  that  we  are  not  satisfied 
with  the  mere  work,  to  make  a  suitable  improvement  of  the  sabbath 
after  it  is  ended.  And  it  would  therefore  be  proper,  to  recollect 
wherein  we  had  misbehaved,  that  we  might  humble  ourselves ; 
what  blessing  God  had  bestowed  on  us,  that  we  might  reflect  on  it, 
with  the  c'ean  animals  feed  anew  on  it,  and  hear  twice,  what  God 
speaks  once,"  Psalm  Ixii.  n.  We  should  then  retain  the  blessing  of 
the  sabbathday,  and  a  relish  for  it,  and  we  should  derive  nourishment 
from  it  the  whole  week,  yea,  our  lives  long,  we  should  rest  from 
our  wicked  works,  suffer  the  Lord  to  work  in  us  by  his  Spirit,  and 
thus  begin  here  on  earth  the  everlasting  sabbath. 

Before  I  conclude,  I  must  add,  (a)  that  every  one  ought  to  keep 
the  sabbath  ;  the  magistrates  also,  not  only  for  themselves,  but  also 
for  their  subjects,  "  who  are  in  their  gates,"  that  they  may  cause 
them  to  rest.  O  !  that  they  were  inflamed  with  such  a  spirit  of 
zeal,  as  Nehemiah,  Neh.  xiii.  15 — 22.  Parents  ought  also  to  keep 
the  sabbath,  and  to  see  that  their  children  and  servants  keep  it,  as 
the  Lawgiver  enjoineth  in  this  fourth  commandment,  (b)  Let  none 
think  that  the  sabbath  requires  a  more  holy  worship  than  the  other 
days:  all  our  daily  works, ^a,  our  "eating  and  drinking"  ought  to 
be  directed  "to  the  glory  of  God,"  1  Cor.  x  31.  But  the  sabbath 
requires  a  worship  of  a  different  kind,  we  must  then  worship  in  a 
solemn  manner,  and  in  public.  Neither  must  we  imagine,  that  rest- 
ing is  in  itself  pleasing  to  God,  for  it  is  not  agreable  to  him,  unless 
we  direct  it  to  the  worship  of  the  Lord  :"  Bodily  exercise  profiteth 
indeed  but  little  :  but  godliness  is  profitable  to  ail  things,  having  the 
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come,"  1  Tim. 
iv.  8.  (c)  Do  not  busy  yourselves  neither  with  many  trifling  ques- 
tions,   which  minister  disputation,  as,   may  I  not  do  this  or  that  on 

*  We  have  rendered  this  passes*  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


286       THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED 

the  Lovd's  day  ?  for  this  will  render  your  tender  minds  too  scrupu- 
lous, or  too  lax.  "From  this  doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of 
words  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil  surmisings,  pei  verse  dis- 
puiings,"  as  Paul  speaks,  I  Tim.  vi.  4,  5.  According  to  the  coun- 
sel of  Eliphas,  Job  xxii.  21,  22.  "Acquaint  now  yourselves  with 
the  Lord,  receive  the  law  from  his  mouth,  and  lay  up  his  words  in 
your  hearts."  desiring  only  to  inquire  concerning  and  to  do  the  will  of 
God  :  "  The  Lord  will  then  give  you  counsel,  your  reins  will  instruct 
yon  in  the  night  seasons."  as  David  experienced,  Psalm  xvi.  7.  This 
will  afford  you  an  abundant  sabbath,  or  rest  of  mind,  and  the  Lord 
God  will  grant  you  an  everlasting  and  a  most  blissful  sabbath  ;  for, 
as  the  apostle  saith,  Hebr.  iv.  9,  "  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the 
people  of  God."    Amen. 


(  J87  ) 


THE 


FIFTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED* 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exodus  xx.  12.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that  thy 
days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth 
thee. 

Q.   1 04.      What  doth  God  require  in  the  Jifth  command  ? 

A.  That  I  show  all  hbnour,  love  and  fidelity  to  my  father  and  mou- 
ther, and  all  in  authority  over  me,  and  submit  myself  to  their  good 
instruction  and  correction,  with  due  obedience  :  and  also  patiently 
bear  with  their  weaknesses*  and  infirmities,  since  it  pleases  God  to 
govern  us  by  their  hand.    * 


L 


lOVE  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,"  thus  speaks  Paul,  Rom.xiii. 
10.  He  speaks  of  the  love  of  our  neighbour  ;  for  he  had  said,  vs  8. 
"  Owe  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  another  :  for  he  that  loveth 
another  hath  fulfilled  the  law."  But  how  can  he  say  this?  must  we 
not  love  God  also,  and  more  than  our  neighbour  ?  Surely  the  com- 
mand to  love  God  is,  as  Jesus  declares,  "  the  first  and  great  com- 
mandment," Matt.  xxii.  37.  But  it  is  not  so  strange,  that  the  love' 
of  our  neighbour  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law ;    for  when  this  love  i* 


38S        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

properly  exercised,  it  proceeds  from  a  heart  that  is  filled  with  love  tt 
God,  and  it  is  active  for  the  sake  and  the  love  of  God,  and  so  the 
love  of  our  neighbour  is  the  evidence  and  proof  of  our  love  to  God. 
Therefore  the  apostle,  whom  Jesus  loved,  saith,  1  John  iv.  20,  "  If 
a  man  s*y,  1  love  God.  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar;  for  he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love 
God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?"  He  then  who  loves  God,  cannot 
say  that  he  fulfills  the  law,  unless  he  love  his  brother  also;  for  as 
the  same  beloved  of  the  Lord  saith,  1  John  iv.  20.  "  This  com- 
mandment have  we  received  of  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God,  love 
his  brother  also  " 

Therefore  as  we  have  exhorted  every  one  to  love  God  in  our  dis- 
courses on  the  commands  of  the  first  table,  so  we  will  also  show 
how  we  must  fulfil  the  law  by  loving  our  neighbour,  according  to  the 
commands  of  the  second  table  of  the  law.  In  which  the  duty  of 
children  to  love  their  parents  is  commanded  in  the  first  place,  be- 
cause we  are  obliged  to  them  most  of  ail  next  to  God  :  and  because 
we  must  understand  by  our  parents  likewise  all  who  are  set  over  us, 
as  will  appear,  and  so  this  command  secures  the  four  following  com- 
mands from  transgression ;  for  when  the  higher  powers  are  honour- 
ed, then  murderers,  adulterers,  thieves  and  liars  will  also  be  re- 
strained. 

Two  particulars  require  our  consideration  here  : 

I.  The  demand  of  this  commandment,  and  then 

II.  The  promise  annexed  to  enforce  the  observation  of  the  com- 
mandment. 

I.  it  hath  not  pleased  God,  according  to  his  exalted  wisdom,  to 
create  all  men  at  once,  but  of  one  blood,  and  thus  to  cause  one  to 
proceed  from  another,  that  one  might  cleave  to  another,  as  his  fellow- 
man,  in  love,  and  that  children  might  be  subject  to  their  parents,  and 
a  good  order  be  established  in  human  society,  and  God's  supreme 
authority  over  his- creatures  be  represented.  Therefore  the  great 
Lawgiver  saith,  «  Honour  thy  father  andAhy  mother." 

God  chooseth  that  we  should  honour  our  mother  as  well  as  our 
father.  As  the  mother  is  subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  father,  con- 
verses most  familiarly  with  the  children,  and  manifests  her  love  to 
the  children  generally  more  than  the  father,  she  will  also  usually  be 
less  reverenced  by  ihe  children  than  the  father.  The  Lord  will  nev- 
ertheless not-  suffer  this,  but  commands  us  to  love  our  mother  as 
well  us  our  father.  Tiie  children  are  indeed  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  niother  as  well  as  of  the  father.  We  must  surely  honour  oui 
m<  tl  •  :•  no  less  than  our  father,  for  she  carries  her  children  in  het 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  104.  239 

bowels,  brings  them  forth  with  pain,  and  cherishes  them  with  more 
tenderness  and  difficulty,  tlian  the  father.  Therefore  the  mot"er  is 
once  indeed  exhibited  to  the  children  as  the  object  of  this  duty,  be- 
fore the  father  :  '  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and  his  father," 
saith  the  Lord,  Lev   xix.  3. 

<;  God's  commandment  is  exceedingly  broad,"  saith  the  man  after 
God's  heart,  Psalm  cxix.  96.  It  calls  all  these  who  are  set  over  us 
our  fathers  and  mothers.  For  the  magistrates  are  fathers  in  the 
civil  state :"  Eiiakim,  having  the  government  in  his  hands  should 
be  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  house  of  Ju~ 
dah,"  Isaiah  xxii.  20,  21.  Thus  also  the  aged,  "  whom  we  must 
entreat  as  fathers  and  mothers,"  1  Tim.  v.  1,  2.  In  the  church 
ministers  are  fathers,  especially  they  who  are  the  instruments  of  a 
person's  spiritual  birth  :  so  Paul  was  "  a  father"  of  the  Corinthians, 
"  having  begotten  them  through  the  gospel,"  1  Cor.  iv.  1  5.  And 
in  a  family  relation  ancestors  are  fathers  and  mothers  ;  therefore 
the  patriarchs  are  called  the  fathers  of  Israel.  Stephen  saith,  Acts 
vii.  11.  "  Our  fathers  found  no  sustenance."  Stepfathers  and  step- 
mothers are  not  excepted  here.  Joseph  the  husband  of  Mary,  is 
called  the  father  of  Jesus,  Luke  ii.  48.  It  is  thus  also  with  fathei  s- 
inlaw  and  motiiersinlaw,  as  David  called  Saul  his  father.  1  S'.m. 
xxiv.  12,  and  Naomi  called  Ruth  her  daughter,  Ruth  iii  1.  Tims 
likewise  guardians,  who  take  upon  themselves  the  care  of  another 
person's  children,  and  treat  them  as  their  own,  are  fathers  ;  so 
"  MordecaLtook  Esther  for  his  daughter,"  Esther  ii.  7,  15.  Masters 
and  mistresses  must  also  be  considered  as  fathers  and  mothers  of 
their  servants;  the  servants  of  Naaman,  the  iryrian  called  him  their 
father,  2  Kings  v.  13. 

The  Lord  God  is  alone  wise,  and  therefore  doth  nothing  in  vain, 
as  it  is  also  not  without  a  reason,  that  he  bestows  the  names  of  father 
and  mother  on  all  those  who  are  set  over  us  ;  for  he  teacheth  us  thus 
(a)  the  intimate  relation  and  connexion  of  superiors  and  inferiors, 
that  it  is  like  that,  which  subsists  between  parents  and  children,  (b) 
God  also  shows  thereby,  that  they  who  are  set  over  others  ought  to 
govern  their  inferiors  with  love  and  affection,  as  fathers  and  mothers, 
and  that  the  inferiors  ought  to  obey  as  children,  (c)  All  the  author- 
ity that  one  man  hath  over  another  hath  originated  from  the  power 
of  fathers.  Before  many  families  connected  themielves  together  in 
an  orderly  neighbourhood,  the  fathers  were  the  magistrates,  teachers 
and  priests  of  their  families  ;  but  after  those  families  had  connected 
themselves  together,  the  fathers  elected  a  head,  even  the  magistrate.. 

Vol..  u.  2  L 


29<*         THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

as  a  common  father,  that  he  might  g.,vern  and  protect   the  mult.- 
tude  according  to  certain  laws. 

Inasmuch  as  fatherhood  and  motherhood  imply  a  superiority   and 
supremacy  over  the  children,  there  fore    the  Lord  requires   that    this 
should  he  acknowledged  ;  and  hence  he  saith,  with  a   dreadful    dis- 
play of  his  supreme  authority  to  every  child,  "honour  thy  father  and 
mother  "     We  do  this,  when  we  acknowledge  the   superiority    and 
honourableness  of  our  parents  with  reverence,  with   inward  disposi- 
tions of  mind,  which  we  express  by  becoming  gestures,  words,  ac* 
tionsand  virtues;  as  Solomon  honoured  his  mother,  when  "  he  rose 
up  from  his  throne  to  meet  her,  bowed  himself  to  her,  and   sst  h>r 
On   his    right  hand,"   1  Kings  ii.   19.     We  must  also   "  honour  the 
king."    1  Peter  ii.  17       So  Job  was  honoured    like    a  prince    by  his 
people  ;   when''   he  went  out  to  the  gate  through  the    city,  when  he 
prepared  his  seat  in  the  street,  the    young   men  saw   him.    and    hid 
themselves,  and  the  aged  arose    and   stood  up,"  &c.  Job  xxix    7.    8. 
We  may  not  despise  aged  persons,  but  we  must  "  rise  up  before  the 
hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man."  Lev.  xix.  32.   We 
■must  also  honour  our  preacher-  ;  for  "  the  eiders  who  rule  well  mnst 
be  counted  worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  who    labour  in 
the  word  and  doctrine,"   1  Tim.  v.  17.  and  Paul  commands  servants 
il  to  count  their  masters  worthy  of  all  honour,"   1  Tim.  vi.   I. 

He  who  honours  his  parents,  (1^  wiil  also  love  them  ;  love  is  indeed 
the  mother  of  that  fair  daughter  honour.  It  is  also  the  law  of  love, 
that  enjoins  honour  ;  as  love  also  actually  honours  parents  by  showing 
a  good  inclination  to  them,  by  doing  well  to  them,  and  fulfilling  their 
desires.  It  is  so  natural  and  innate  to  children  to  love  their  parents, 
that  it  was  not  necessary  to  enjoin  it  upon  them  directly;  neither  do 

1  knpvv  that  this  virtue  is  any  where  enjoined  in  the  book  of  God,  ex- 
cept indirectly  ;  M  He  that  loveth  father  and  mother  more  than  me 
is  not  worthy  of  me,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt.  x.  37,  and  he  there- 
fore supposeth  that  every  child  naturally  loves  his  parents  They 
are    unnatural,   degenerate    children,    "  without    natural    affection," 

2  Tim.  iii.  S,  who  are  destitute  of  this  virtue.  We  ought  to  love 
not  only  our  natural  parents,  but  the  magistrates  also,  as  fathers: 
We  may  "  not  curse  them,"  as  Solomon  saith,  Eccl.  x.  20.  The 
people  who  cleaved  to  their  king,  David,  lo'vcd  him  so,  that  they 
would  not  suffer  him  to  expose  himself  in  the  battle  against  Absa- 
lom, that  he  might  not  be  endangered.  Preachers,  who  like  good 
fathers,  feed  and  nourish  the  church.es  with  the  word  of  God,  "must 
be  esteemed  very  highly  in  love  for  their  work's  sake,"  according  to 
1  Thess.  v.  13.     The  Galatians  quitted   themselves  well  in  this   re- 


XXXIX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  104.  29i 

spect  toward  Paul :  "  they  would  if  it  had  been  possible,  havcplucked 
out  their  eyes,  and  given  them  to  him,"  Gal.  iv.  14,  15.  The  Lord 
teacheth  us  that  we  must  love  also  the  aged,  our  iorefathers  and 
fathersinl  aw,  when  he  orders  it  to  he  recorded,  as  a  detestable  action, 
that  "  the  daughterinlaw  rose  up  against  her  mothennlaw,"  Micha 
vii.  6.  It  is  also  the  duty  of  servants  to  love  their  masters  and  mis- 
tresses, and  to  serve  them  from  iove  ;  for  M  we  cannot  serve  a  mas- 
ter, whom  wc  hate,  and  do  not  love,"  as  Jesus  speaks,  Matt.  vi.  24. 

2.  As  love  is  the  mother  of  honour,  so  honour  hath  also  a  sister, 
even  fidelity,  who  seryes  her  parents,  without  bereaving  them  of 
aught  that  is  theirs  ;  for  "  whoso  robbelh  his  father  and  mother, 
and  saith,  it  is  no  transgression,  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  de- 
stroyer," Prov.  xxviii.  24.  Like  Joseph,  the  faithful  child,  when  it 
is  in  his  power,  "  will  sustain  his  father,  his  brethren,  and  all  his 
father's  househld  with  bread,  even  to  the  little  ones,"  Gen  xlvii.  12. 
We  must  be  faithful  also  to  the  magistrates  ;  •'  To  Casar  we  must 
give  the  things  that  are  Cxsar's,"  Matt.  xxii.  21.  "  Render  trib- 
ute to  whom  tribute  is  due  ;  custom  to  whom  custom,"  saith  that 
faithful  apostle,  Rom.  xiii.  7.  It  is  a  detestable  conduct  to  deny  our 
preachers  a  proper  support :  even  Pharaoh  provided  for  his  priests, 
Gen.  xlvii.  22,  47.  Paul  also  requires  that  people  should  support  their 
preachers,  1  Cor  ix,  4 — 10.  Gal.  vi.  6.  And  though  our  fore- 
fathers are  not  so  nearly  related  to  us  as  our  immediate  parents,  we 
must  nevertheless  '*  requite  them,"  according  to  1  Tim.  v.  4.  It  is 
also  the  duty  of  servants  to  serve  their  masters  and  mistresses  faith- 
fully, and  not  "to  purloin  from  them,"  Titus  ii.  10.  "  Good  ser- 
vants," are  called  also  5'  faithful  servants"  by  the  Saviour,  Matt, 
xxv.  21,  22. 

3.  But  if  there  be  ailght  that  becomes  children,  it  is  particularly 
"  that  they  submit  themselves  to  the  good  instruction  and  coirection 
of  their  parents  with  due  obedience."  They  must  receive  their  in- 
structions with  teachableness  :  «  My  son,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  i. 
S,  "  hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father,  and  forsake  not  the  law  of 
thy  mothei."  Children  must  receive  their  commands  with  submis- 
sion, like  Jesus,  who  was  subject  to  his  parents  in  his  youth,  Luke 
ii.  5  1,  and  they  must  endure  their  good  corrections  with  becoming 
reverence,  and  with  a  humble  patience.  Paul  hath  respect  to  this, 
when  he  saith,  Heb.  xii.  9,  "  We  had  fathers  of  our  flesh,  which  cor- 
rected us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence."  The  Lord  takes  the  stub- 
born and  incorrigible  disobedience  of  children,  who  have  been  chas- 
tised by  their  parents,  so  heinously,  that  he  orders  the  magistrates  to 
punish  them  with  death,  Deut.  xxi.  18 — 21.  But  are  those  who 
are  set  over  us  also  our  fathers,  "  Let  every  soul  then  be  subject  t* 


592       THE  FIFTH   COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

the  higher  powers  "  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  xiii-  1.  It  is  also  prope* 
to  obey  and  submit  to  our  preachers,  u  those  who  have  the  rule  over 
us,"  as  the -same  apostle  requheth,  Heb.  xiii.  17.  "The  younger 
must  also  submit  themselves  unto  the  elder,-'  as  Peter  admonisheth, 
1  Peter  v.  5,  and  servants  are  exhorted  "  to  be  obedient  to  their 
masters  according  to  the  flesh,  with  fear  and  trembling,  in  single- 
ness of  heart,  as  unto  Christ,"  Eph.  vi.  5. 

It  is  true,  parents  haveoften  many  weaknesses  and  infirmaties  ;  they 
Subject  their  children  to  many  expences  and  inconveniences  ;  they 
are  besides  fretful,  yea.  sometimes  wicked  and  intolerable  :  but  shall 
we  therefore  refuse  to  conduct  toward  them,  as  becomes  children  ? 
it  is  never  more  proper  to  honour  them  than  in  such  untoward  con- 
ditions. Consider  only  what  weaknesses  and  infirmities  they  liave 
borne  in  their  children  :  and  thus  we  have  only  to  pay  our  old  score, 
by  pitying  them,  and  bearing  patiently  with  their  weaknesses 
and  infhmities  :  "  Hearken  to  thy  father  that  begat  thee,  and  despise 
not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  xsiii.  22, 
Itwasthecou'luct  of  wickedHam  tosport  with  the  infirmity  and  weak- 
ness of  his  father  Noah  :  Shetn  and  japhet  covered  his  nakedness  ; 
but  Ham  was  cursed  on  account  of  his  wickedness,  and  his  brethren 
were  blessed  on  account  of  their  virtue,  Gen.  ix.  21 — 27".  Magis- 
trates, masters  and  preachers  sometimes  rule,  like  Diotrephesses, 
with  rigour  and  great  severity  :  but  "  we  must  be  suhject  with  all 
fear,  not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  froward," 
1  Pet.  ii.  18. 

II.  Although  it  is  very  natural  to  honour  our  parents,  and  equity 
requires  that  we  should  be  obedient  to  God,  only  because  he  com- 
mands us,  the  Lord  nevertheless  chooseth  to  draw  us  to  this  duty 
with  cords  f  love,  promising  to  bestow  a  great  reward  upon  our 
keeping  of  this  commandment,  for  he  saith  "  that  thy  days  may  be 
long  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee  "  The  Lord 
Jehovah,  was  the  God  of  Israel,  on  account  of  the  covenant  estab- 
lished with  Abraham  and  his  seed,  under  the  Old  Testament.  The 
Lord  gave  Israel,  as  their  God,  the  blessed  land  of  Canaan,  to  which 
this  promise  hath  respect,  for  an  inheritance  and  possession  ;  surely 
not  for  Israel's  only,  or  principal  inheritance,  but  as  a  superadded 
promise  and  inheritance,  a  pledge  of  the  principal  promise,  that  the 
Lord  would  be  their  God,  and  that  in  the  seed  of  Abraham,  even 
the  Messiah,  "  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed."  See 
Gen.  xvii.  7,  8.     Gal.  iii.  16,  17. 

The  Lord  promiseth  a  long  life  in  this  land  to  the  children  of 
Israel,  who  honour  their  parents.     This  doth  not  imply  that  a  man's 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  104.  292 

life  can  be  prolonged  beyond  the  limits,  which  God  hath  appointed 
by  his  eternal  and  unchangeable  decree  ;  for  "  the  days  of  man  are 
determined,  the  number  of  his  months  ure  with  God  :  he  hath  ap- 
pointed his  bounds,  which  man  cannot  overpass,"  as  Job  saith,  Job 
xiv.  5.  But  a  man's  days  are  prolonged  either  with  respect  to 
others,  who  are  snatched  away  in  their  \outh;  or  with  respect  to 
his  natural  strength  and  expectation.  Such  a  prolonging  of  days 
doth  the  Lord  promise  to  obedient  children  in  the  land  of  Canaan, 
as  in  a  most  blessed  and  4t  a  good  laud,  a  land  of  brooks  of  water, 
of  fountains  and  depths,  that  spring  out  of  vallies  and  hills  ;  a  land 
oi  wheat  and  barley,  and  vines  and  ligtiees,  and  pomgranates,  a  land 
of  oiloiive  and  honey,  a  land  wherein  Israel  should  eat  bread  without 
scarceness,  and  in  which  they  ihoukl  not  lack  any  thing :  a  land 
whose  stones  were  iron,  and  out  of  whose  hills  they  might  dig  brass  ;" 
thus  the  Lord  God  himself  speaks  of  it,  Dent,  vim  9 — 19.  The 
Lord  saith  further  to  his  people,  Deut.  >:i.  12.  «  A  land  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  careth  for  ;  the  e\es  of  the  Lo;d  thy  God  are  upon  it. 
from  the  beginning  of  the  year,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  year." 
Yea,  it  was  a  land  which  the  Lord  gave  to  the  children  of  Israel  as 
their  God  out  of,  and  in  his  free  favour,  in  which  the  Messiah  should 
appear  in  the  flesh,  "  Immanue.'s  land,"  Isaiah  viii.  8.  Upon  which 
God  sent  down  all  his  spiritual  blessings,  to  which  he  attached  his 
worship,  and  which  was  to  them  a  pledge  of  the  everlasting  rest. 
To  live  long  in  this  Ian;!  was  a  great  biessing  ;  but  to  be  snatched 
out  of  it  early,  either  by  death,  or  by  exile,  was  a  grievous  judg- 
ment ;  as  the  Lord  threatened  and  inflicted  it  upon  Israel  on  account 
of  their  sins,  to  their  bitter  sorrow.  See  this  Lev.  xxvi.  Deut. 
xxviii.  2  Kings  xvii.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  It  behooved  Israel  then 
to  suffer  themselves  to  be  allured  by  this  promise  to  honour  their 
parents. 

But  when  God  gave  this  commandment  with  such  a  promise  to 
Israel,  did  he  then  excuse  us  from  it,  as  the  Antinomians,  or  adver- 
saries of  the  law  think  ?  By  no  means  :  Paul  shows  that  this  com- 
mandment obligeth  believers  under  the  New  Testament  also,  when  he 
saith,  Eph.  vi.  1 — 3,  "  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord: 
for  this  is  right.  Honour  thy  father .  and  mother,  that  it  may  be 
well  with  thee,  and  thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth."  As  Canaan 
was  the  possession  and  inheiitance  of  Israel,  so  also  "  the  whole 
earth  is  the  inheritance  of  the  meek,"  Matt.  v.  5.  "  All  things,  and 
the  world  also,  is  theirs,  because  they  are  Christ's  and  God's," 
1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 2  3.  As  the  Lord  was  the  God  of  Israel  under  the 
Old  Testament,  in  like  manner  is  he  now  also  the  God  of  his  peo- 


291        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

pie,  according  to  2  Cor.  vi.  16.  It  is  not  therefore  a  less  ble- 
now  to  live  a  long  life,  than  it  was  under  the  Old  Testament ;  una 
it  is  not  a  smaller  punishment  now  to  be  taken  out  of  life,  than  it 
was  under  the  Old  Testament,  believers  were  not  then  move  sub- 
ject to  the  fear  of  death  al!  their  lifelong,  from  a  die  ad  of  losing 
the  land  of  Canaan  by  death,  than  believers  are  now  ;  and  Paul 
speaks  not  in  lieb.  ii.  '5,  concerning  the  fear  of  death,  which 
should  have  possessed  believers  of  the  Old  Testament,  through  an 
anxious  concern,  lest  they  might  lose  the  land  of  Canaan.  Our  an- 
notators  suggest  better  thoughts  on  thai  passage  ;  and  we  refer  to 
them. 

How,  will  some  perhaps  think,  is  a  long  life  on  earth  a  blessing  r 
would  it  not  be  better  for  believers  to  enter  betimes  into  heaven  by 
death  ?  But  a  long  life  is  not  opposed  here  to  everlasting  life,  but 
to  death:  life  is  also  in  itself  a  blessing,  not  only  to  a  wicked  man, 
who,  as  long  as  he  lives,  is  exempted  from  destruction,  enjoys  the 
gifts  of  God,  and  time  and  means  for  repentance  ;  hut  a  long  life  is 
also  a  blessing  to  the  pious  ;  for  life  is  sweer,  and  all  who  live  are 
afraid  to  die  :  if  all  the  righteous  should  die  in  their  youth,  what 
would  become  of  the  world  >  who  would  restrain  and  convert  it  ? 
but  when  the  pious  live  long,  they  may  convert  others,  and  glorify 
God  among  them,  who  are  alive  on  the  earth,  for  which  they  will  not 
have  any  opportunity  hereafter.  The  Lord  also  bestows  long  life 
fortius  purpose  upon  his  favorites,  as  Hezekiah  showed  :  after  the 
Lord  had  "  recovered  and  healed  him,"  he  said  to  his  praise;  For 
the  grave  cannot  praise  thee,  death  cannot  celebrate  thee  :  they  that 
go  down  into  the  pit  cannot  hope  for  thy  truth.  The  living,  the  liv- 
ing, he  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day  :  the  father  to  the  children 
shall  make  known  thy  truth,"  Isaiah  xxxviti.  16-19.  In  heaven  we  v.  ill 
do  this  indeed  more  than  here,  but  there  we  will  have  time  enough, 
believers  will  not  come  short  of  heaven,  nor  enjoy  less  of  it.  Th< 
wicked  by  continuing  a  long  time  on  earth,  prolong  their  liv 
their  impenitence,  it  is  therefore  no  blessing  to  them,  but  a  curse  : 
for  "the  sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall  be  accursed,"  Isaiah 
Ixv.  20.  Doth  a  godly  person  die  in  his  youth,  he  hath  notwiih. 
Standing  lived  longer  than  an  old  sinner,  who  is  dead,  while  he  liv 
cth  :  God  sometimes  takes  his  children  away  earlv,  in  order  to  pre 
serve  them  from  the  evil,  which  he  is  about  to  bring  on  their  pene- 
ration,  and  so  «  they  are  taken  away  from  the  e;il  to  come,"  Isaiah 
Ivn.  I.  like  young  Abijah,  the  son  of  Jeroboam,  l  Kings  xiv.  12,  13. 
A  !>,ood  and  desirable  long  life  is  also  promised  ;  for  the  Lawgiver 
Deut.   v.  16,  and  Paulfrom  him,  Eph.  vi.  3,  "that  thy  davs. 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY  Q   104.  aft 

may  be  prolonged,  and  it  may  go  well  with  thee  "  We  must  also 
know  that  when  God  promiseth  temportl  blessings,  he  doth  it  usu- 
ally upon  certain  conditions,  and  therefore  that  obedient  children 
shall  live  long,  if  it  shall  be  for  the  honor  of  God,  and  for  their  salva- 
tion :  we  may  not  extend  temporal  promises  further  ihan  this. 

The  word  Jaarichoun,  which  we  find  here  in  the  Hebrew  original, 
signified!  also,  that   uthey  may  prolong"  your  days,  to  wit,  the  fath- 
er, and  mother,  who  exercise  much  tender  care  that  they  may  pro- 
long the  blessed  days  of  their  children,  pray  for  them,  instruct  them, 
and  bless  them,  which   they  will  do  so  much   the  more,    when  their 
children  honour  them.   How  ought  the  children  then  to  exert  them- 
selves to  perform  their  duty,  since  it  depends  greatly  upon  their  pa- 
rents, whether  they   shall  he  blessed.      This  promise  ought  to  incite 
them  the  more,  because  *'  this  commandment  is  the  first  with  a  prem- 
ise," as  the  apostle  testifieth,  Lph.  vi.2.     But  how  can  he  say   this, 
for  the  second  commandment  hath  also  a  promise,  and  it  nevertheless 
precedes  this  ?  But    we  may  easily  understand  his  meaning,  if  we 
consider,  that  he  doth  not  say,  it  is  the  commandment  which  hath 
first  and  before  all  the  commandments  a  promise,  but  that   he  saith, 
it  is  the  first  commandment ;  for  it  is  the  first,  and  also  the  principal 
commandment  of  the  second  table,   and  the  foundation  and  fence  of 
the  four  following,  and   therefore    we  are   in   a  particular  manner 
obliged  to  observe    this  commandment,  if  we   will    not  carelessly 
transgress  the  following      Or  if  we  would  understand  it  so,  that  the 
fifth  commandment  is  the  first  in  order  of  the  commandments,  that 
hath  a  promise,  it  is  then  also  true,  not  with  respect  to  the  first,  but 
with  respect  to  the  second  table  :  moreover  this  promise    is  particu- 
larly applicable  to  the  duly  of  honouring  our  parents,  but  the  prom- 
ise of  the  second  commandment  relates  to  keeping  all  the  command- 
ments of  the  law  ;  for  in  that  commandment  the  Lawgiver  saith,  "  I 
show  mercy  to  thousands  of  them    that  love  me.  and  keep  my  com- 
mandments."    Since  then    God   enforccth  this  fifth   commandment 
only  with  such  a  suitable  promise,   therefore   children  must    honour 
their  parents,  if  they  do  not  wish  to  be  excluded  from  any    share  in 
this  promise. 

Further,  Paul  explaining  and  enforcing  this  commandment,  saith 
that  "it  is  right"  to  obey  our  parents,  Eph.  vi.  1.  And  is  it  not 
right  and  proper?  for  God  commands  it,  and  we  must  obey  God  on 
his  own  account ;  all  nations  have  also  judged  it  to  be  right  and  prop- 
er, and  they  have  enjoined  it :  it  is  also  naturally  proper,  being  in- 
na'.e  to  human  nature  ;  yea,  what  can  be  more  proper,  than  to  ac- 
knowledge  (be   superiority  and   supremacy  of  our  parents  over  us  j 


296        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

for  we  receh'e  all  things  from  them,  and  we  owe  ali  things  to  them 
next  to  God.  There  is  nothing  therefore  more  unnatural  than  to 
refuse  to  honour  our  parents,  and  they  who  do  not  honour  them  are 
branded  as  persons  who  are  "■  without  natural  affection,"  2  Tim.  iii.  3. 
The  instructor  adds  another  motive  to  the^e  and  especially  that  we 
may  be  moved  to  have  patience  with  the  weaknesses  anci  infirmities 
of  our  parents  :  "  i-.ince,"  s<uth  he,  "  it  pleases  Cod  to  govern  us  by 
their  hand."  °o  that  we  ntusi  honour  our  parents  in  obedience  to 
.  God.  Therefore  Peter  saith,  "  submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance 
of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake,"  1  Peter  ii.  13.  When  then  it  is  God's 
will  to  govern  us  by  such  ,\veak  and  faulty  parents,  we  have  no  right 
to  be  displeased  with  them,- and  to  withdraw  ourselves  from  them. 


APPLICATION. 

The  Pharisees  sought  in  a  most  shameful  manner  to  make  this 
commandment  of  none  effect,  when  they  said  Mutt.  xv.  5.  "  If  any 
man  say  to  his  father  or  mother,  It  is  a  gift  by  whatsoever  thou 
mightest  be  profited  by  me,  and  honour  not  his  father  or  mother,  he 
s  i  ■!!  be  free."  As  if  children  were  not  under  any  obligation  whatso- 
ever to  their  parents,  but  when  they  brought  either  them,  or  the 
Lord  a  gift  for  an  offering,  (Corban,  Mark  v  •.  11)  by  which  their 
parents  mig'it  be  profited,  that  it  was  a  wonderful  favour,  which  mer- 
ited the  thanks  of  their  parents.  But  the  Saviour  withstood  them 
manfully,  and  to  their  faces,  for  they  deserved  to  be  severely  repro- 
ved, because  "  they  made  the  command  of  God  of  no  effect  by  their 
tradition,"     Matt.  xv.  0. 

The  Papists  do  not  conduct  better,  when  they  discharge  children 
From  their  obligation  to  their  parents  ;  for  they  teach,  that  children 
may  enter  into  a  monastery,  and  may  contract  marriage  against  the 
mind  oftheir  parents,  yea,  that  they  may  refuse  to  obey  their  parents 
altogether,  and  even  banish  them,  if  the  church  of  Rome  declare 
them  to  be  heretics,  and  excommunicate  them  :  but  is  there  aught, 
*„hat  shows  more  plainly  than  this,  that  the  Romish  church  is  anti- 
christian,  and  that  the  Pope  is,  according  to  2  I'hcss.  ii.  3,  4.  "the 
man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeih  and  exalteth  him- 
self above  all  thai  is  called  God,  oris  worshipped  :  so  that  he  as  God 
sittefh  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God?"  for 
••:  magnifies  himself  above  God,  wl.cn    he  discharges  the  creature?- 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   104.  S97 

•f  God  from  their  obligation  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  law.  Therefore 
our  forefathers  justly  withdrew  from  his  arrogated  authority,  which 
he  had  assumed  by  robbery,  that  they  might  submit  themselves  to 
the  Lord  alone,  according  to  his  law,  and  might  obey  him. 

But  ought  the  magistrates  also  to  be  acknowledged  as  fathers,  the 
Mennonites  act  then  improperly,  when  they  assert  that  no  Christian 
ought  to  hold  the  office  of  a  magistrate,  because  it  doth  not  become 
him,  and  doth  not  comport  with  Christian  humility.  But  were  not 
the  higher  powers  instituted  by  God  ?  There  is  surely  no  power 
but  of  God  :  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God,"  as  Paul 
teacheth,  Rom.  xiii.  1.  Did  not  God  institute  government  even  be- 
fore the  fall?  man  had  dominion  not  only  over  every  irrational  crea- 
ture, but  the  man  obtained  of  the  Lord  dominion  over  the  woman 
also,  Gen.  iii  16.  Let  it  not  be  thought,  that  this  was  a  conse- 
quence of  sin,  for  it  proceeded  from  the  creation  of  the  man  in  the 
image  of  God,  and  from  the  creation  of  the  woman  after  the  image 
of  the  man,  and  of,  and  foi  the  man,  as  the  apostle  teacheth,  1  Cor. 
xi.  7 — 10.  David  was  a  great  king,  bat  he  was  nevertheless  very 
humble,  as  he  showed  himself,  2  Sam,  vi.  21,  22.  Psalm  cxxxi. 
Joseph  of  Arimathea  was  an  excellent  and  humble  Christian,  he 
was  not  ashamed  to  desire  the  crucified  Christ  of  Pilate,  and  to  lay 
him  in  his  own  new  tomb  ;  and  he  was  notwithstanding  "  an  hon- 
ourable counsellor,"  Luke  xxiii.  50 — 53,  Neither  Christ  nor  his 
apostles  advised  the  magistrates,  after  their  conversion,  to  abdicate 
their  magistracy,  any  more  than  they  advised  fathers  to  renounce 
their  fatherhood. 

"  The  law  entered  that  the  oITence  might  abound,"  saith  the 
preacher  of  the  gospel,  Rom.  v.  20  But  is  the  law  then  sin  ?  doth 
it  teach  sin  ?  God  forbid.  But  it  discovered  sin,  that  we  may  see 
it  the  more,  and  that  the  sinner  may  be  the  more  humbled  on  ac- 
count of  it :  u  for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  saith  the  same 
man,  Rom.  iii.  20.  And  to  what  end  doth  sin  abound  by  the  law  ? 
it  is  that  "  grace  may  much  more  abound,"  Rom.  v.  20.  If  we 
will  then  improve  this  commandment  to  our  profit,  we  must  com- 
pare and  examine  our  conduct  by  the  fifth  commandment,  that  we 
may  behold  and  humble  ourselves  for  our  shameful  deviations  from 
it,  and  may  thus  from  an  anxious  concern  flee  to  Christ,  the  end  of 
the  law,  with  a  desire  of  reconciliation  and  sanctification. 

Come  then,  friends,  I  have  now  set  before  you  the  demand  of  this 

commandment,  suffer  me  to  discover  to  you  also  your  transgressions 

of  it.     Can  ye  all  say  with  more  truth,  than  that  "ruler  who  came  to 

Jesus,  p.nd  fell  down  on  his  knees  before  him,  all  these  things   have 

Vol.  ii.  2  M 


398        TFIE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

I  kept  from  my  youth  up?"  Luke  xviii.  18 — 21.  Mark  x.  17 — 20. 
Lit  he  actions  of  your  childhood,  of  your  youth  unci  y<  ur  riper  years 
declare. 

1     Where  and  when  have  we  seen  in  you   that  actual  respect  and 
reverence  for  your  parents  ?    are  they  not  often  treated  by  you  in  an 
uncivil,  impudent  and  shameless   manner,    and    despised  as  if   they 
were  your    inferiors  ?     Surely  men  do  not  behave  better  among  us, 
than  the  Jews,  "who  set  light  by  their  father  and   mother,"    Ezek. 
x.<.!i.  7.    They  do  not  conduct  better  toward  the  magistrates :  "They 
despise  government,  they  are  presumptuous,  they  are  selfwilled,  and 
are  not  af.aid  to  speak  evil  of  dignities,"  like  those  who  will  be  pun- 
ished with    the    greatest    severity  in  the  day  of"  judgment,  of  whom 
Piter  speaks,  2  Pet    ii.    10.     We  see  that  grievous  judgment,  which 
God  foretels  would  befal  his   people.     Isaiah  iii.  5,  that   "  the  child 
should   behave  himself  proudly  against   t.     ancient,   and  the    base 
agahist    the    honourable."       The    preachers,   though   they  conduct 
ever  so  unblamubly,  must  suffer   reproach:    "hypocritical   muckers 
at  feasts  will  gnash  upon  them    with    their  teeth,"    as   David   com- 
pi  lined  in  his  time,  Psalm    xxxv.   16.      When   the  preachers  faith- 
fully detect,  and  oppose  their  opinions,  concerns,  and  daily  iniquities, 
w  ii  not  these  wicked  men  cry   out   then,    like  "  the    Epicurean    and 
Stoic  philosophers,  what  will  this  babbler  say  ?"  Acts  vii.   18.     And 
how  proud  are  our  servants  !  how  spitefully  and  contemptuously   do 
they  behave  toward  their  masters  and  mistresses  !    truly  just    as  if 
they  were  lshmaelites,  children  of  Hagar,  who  despised  her  mistress, 
Gen.  xvi.   5. 

2-  And  h  )w  have  ye  manifested  your  love  to  your  father  and 
mother?  have  ye  not  often  shown  an  aversion  from  your  parents? 
have  they  not  been  in  your  way,  and  been  even  a  burthen  to  you  ? 
and  perhaps  they  are  still,  so  that  ye  wish  for  their  death,  that  they 
may  not  be  a  restraint  to  you,  and  that  ye  may  inherit  their  estate. 
M  u  show  thus,  that  they  are  degenerate,  and  without  natural  affec- 
tion They  do  not  even  think  that  they  ought  to  love  the  magis- 
trates, I  hey  hate  and  curse  them,  us  the  citizens  of  bhechem  cursed 
Abnndcch,  Judges  ix.  2,7.  They  behave  no  better  toward  their 
preachers  :  "  Tliev  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  ihe  gate,  and  they  ab- 
hor dm  that  speaketh  uprightly,"  saith  the  Lord,  Amos  v.  10. 
proper  A'.uhs,  who  "  hate  the  prophet^  because  lie  doth  not  pro- 
pnesy  good  concerning  them,  but  evil,"  1  Kings  xxii.  8.  And 
Where  shall  we  now  find  a  Servant,  who  would  be  willing  to  serve 
I  n  d  forever  from  love  to  him,  like-  ihc  Hebrew  servant  ?  Exod.  • 
.cxi.  5. 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  101.  259 

3.  And  how  unfaithful  is  the  prt  sent  generation  !  children  imagine 
that  they  are  at  liberty  to  rob  their  parents,  which  Solomon  recaVda 
as  exceedingly  destructive,  Pro  v.  xxviii.  25.  To  support  parents) 
and  "to  requite  them,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  1  Tim.  v.  4,  appears 
so  strange  to  many  children,  U  at  they  imagine  with  the  Pharisees, 
that  parents  ought  not  to  look  lor  any  advantage  from  their  children  : 
they  will  sooner  sutler  them  to  depend  upon  the  pubhck  alma,  than 
sustain  them;  or  if  they  will  not  he  so  shameless,  thej  will  re.tch 
them  a  fragment  or  a  morsel  ;  but  with  what  coldness  and  con- 
tempt! If  they  can  rob  the  magistrates  of  toll  and  tribute,  they 
will  not  scruple  to  do  it,  provided  they  can  only  cone  al  it  Preach- 
ers have  no  reason  to  complain  in  this  province  ;  but  it  is  suflfi<  ieatlyi 
known  how  they  fare  elsewhere,  and  that  they  are  obliged  »o  per- 
form their  labour  with  grief.  It  would  be  hard  to  decry  all  our  ser- 
van'.s,  as  faithless;  but  it  is  sufficiently  known  that  some  are  unfaith- 
ful through  slothfulness  and  carelessness  about  matters  which  re- 
quire their  attention  :  yea,  some  have  declined  so  far,  that  they  rob 
their  masters  and  mistresses,  like  Onesimus,  though  he  was  after- 
wards converted,  and  O,  that  al'  unfaithful  servants  would  endeav- 
our to  become  so  happy  ! 

4.  We  ought  to  submit  ourselves  lo  the  good  instruction  and  cor- 
rection of  parents  with  clue  obedience.  But  if  ye  had  given  heed 
to  their  instructions  in  your  youth,  would  ye  not  have  been  wis-r 
now  ?  but  ye  have  c^st  them  behind  your  backs.  How  sullenfv  did 
ye  behave,  when  thev  either  bade,  or  admonished  you  to  do  any 
thing,  so  that  they  were  obliged  to  chastise  you  ;  ondO,  that  u<-y 
had  done  that  oftner  !  fol  y  would  not  then  perhaps  have  holden 
you  captive,  as  it  doth.  And  when  they  chastised  you,  how  angry 
did  ye  become,  yea,  were  more  hardened  than  before  !  Refect  on  your 
youth,  that  ye  may  see  that  heathenish  abomination,  even  '•  dis-be- 
dience  to  parents,"  Rom.  i.  39,  and  may  be  ashamed.  How  diso- 
bedient are  men  also  to  the  magistrates  !  how  many  evil  thoughts 
rise  up  in  their  hearts  against  them  !  If  ye  only  durst,  and  were 
not  afraid  that  they  would  punish  you,  ye  would  rebel  against  them, 
no  less  than  Korah  and  his  company.  Ye  ought  surely  to  submit 
to  the  instructions  and  rep-oofs  of  your  preachers,  with  due  obedi- 
ence ;  for  they  seek  not  yours,  but  you:  but  how  backward  are  men 
to  this  !  "they  say  to  the  seers,  see  not;  and  to  the  prophets,  pro- 
phesy not  unto  us  right  things,  speak  unto  us  smooth  thine s,  prophe- 
sy deceits.  Get  you  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of  the  path, 
cause  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  cease  from  before  us,"  Isaiah  x.\x. 
50,  11.     Do  persons  behave  in  this  niannea?  toward   their  parents* 


300      THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

magistrates,  and  preachers  we  need  not  then  wonder  that  servants 
are  also  so  stubborn  and  wayward,  contrary  to  what  the  apostle  saith, 
Titus  ii.  9.  There  are  still  servants,  who  are  obedient,  but  it  is 
not  from  obedience  to  the  Lord,  but  u  with  eye-service,  as  men- 
pleasers,"  Eph.  vi.  6. 

5.  Do  men  behave  in  this  manner,  when  their  parents,  magistrates, 
preachers,  and  others  are  competent,  we  may  then  easily  conceive 
how  they  conduct,  when  they  have  weaknesses  and  infirmities.  Will 
not  children,  subjects,  hearers  and  servants,  as  if  they  were  the  prop- 
er offspring  of  Ham,  sport  then  with  those  weaknesses  and  infirmi- 
ties, and  report  them  to  others,  and  expose  father  and  mother,  and  all 
who  are  set  over  them,  to  contempt  and  hatred  ? 

We  may  see  then,  and  we  need  not  search  for  it  industriously, 
how  it  happens  that  families  and  civil  communities  are  so  sinful  and 
and  disorderly,  yea,  that  the  church  is  clothed  with  the  filthy  garb 
of  worldlymindedness,  corruption,  and  indifference.  Or  do  yc  think 
that  ye  are  not  guilty  in  these  respects  ?  Ye  surely  know  better. 
It  is  well  known  to  you,  that  ye  have  not  done  all  that  God  requires 
of  you  in  obedience  to  him.  I  repeat  it,  think  on  your  conduct  in  your 
youth  and  in  your  childhood  :  imagine  not  that  because  this  or  that 
was  done  by  you  in  your  childhood,  it  was  therefore  no  sin  :  ye  were 
then  also  subject  to  the  Lawgiver.  And  do  not  presume  that  the  Lord 
hath  forgotten  and  forgiven  your  iniquities,  because  they  were  com- 
mitted by  you  a  long  time  since,  and  because  ye  yourselves  have 
lorgotten  them.  David,  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  who  trusted 
in  the  Lord  from  his  youth,  as  he  saith,  Psalm  Ixxi.  5,  6,  was  troub- 
led in  his  manly  years  on  account  of  the  sins  of  his  youth,"  Psalm 
xxv  7.  And  if  ye  have  not  yet  been  converted  and  reconciled  to 
God,  your  whole  life  hath  been  without  God,  and  sinful,  and  all 
those  sins  lie  yet  upon  you,  and  ye  have  reason  to  think  that  the 
Lord  hath  a  lively  remembrance  of  them,  that  he  will  upbraid  you 
with  ihem,  as  he  did  Judah  and  Israel,  when  he  said,  Jer.  xxxii.  30. 
"  Toi  the  children  of  Israel,  and  the  children  of  Judah  have  only 
done  evil  before  me  from  their  youth." 

Perhaps  ye  will  say,  I  know  that  I  have  conducted  badly  enough, 
but  what  shall  1  do  now  ?  it  is  indeed  so,  and  what  hath  been  done 
cannot  be  undone,  and  ye  forget  upon  this,  according  to  your  old 
custom,  your  grievous  and  manifold  sins.  But  friends,  this  will  no: 
obtain  the  pardwn  of  your  sins  for  you  ;  and  therefore  pause  a  While 
here,  and  hearken  to  what  I  will  say  unto  you,  that  ye  may  be  hum- 
bled, reconciled  to  God,' and  changed,  (a)  1  hose  sins  of  yours  aie 
exceedingly  abominable  ;  for   they    have  been   committed  agfcinst 


XXXIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  164.  Wi 

the  most  high  God  ;  against  his  express  command,  and  particularly 
against  tlie  first  command  of  the  second   table  ;  against  his  promise 
and  love,  with  which  he  would  allure  you,  and  which  ye  have  despi- 
sed ;  against  natural  equity  ;  and   ye   have  also  shown,  that  ye  were 
degenerate,  corrupt  and  unnatural,     (b)  Ye  are  cursed   Gn  account 
of  these   sins,  and  all  who  hear  and  observe    it    must   assent    to    it. 
"  Cursed  is  he  that   setteth  light  by  his  fathyr  and   mother  :  and  all 
the  people  shall  say   Amen,"  according   to   the  register  of  curses, 
which  was  to  be    proclaimed    from  mount  Ebal,  before   all    Israel, 
Deut.  xxviii.   16.     (c)  Ye  have  long   since  forfeited  your  lives  :  for 
a  long  life    is   promised   only    to    children,  who  obey  their  parents. 
Ye  are  still  alive,  but  if    is  no  blessing  to  you  ;    for  the    Lord  is  not 
your  covenant  God  ;  the  Lord  (ills  your  life   with    bitter  'things   on 
account  of  the  iniquities  of  your  youth,  and  your  present  iniquities. 
Do  we  say  this  fr»m   anger,  and  that  we  may   cause   you   to   de- 
spair?    It  is  true  we  wish  that  every  one   of  you   said   from    Isaiah 
Mi.  10,  "  There  is  no  hope,  that  he  did  not  find  the  life  of  his  hand, 
but  was  grieved,"  yet  we  do  not  say  this   from    anger,    or   that    we 
may  deprive  you  of  all  hope  of  pardon  and    salvation,  but    that  we 
may  save  you,  and  direct  you  to  the   good  and  holy  way.     Are  ye 
then  desirous  of  being  delivered    from    destruction,     (a)   Lay  youi- 
misery  seriously  to  heart ;  to  be  so  unconcerned   about  it    is    deadly 
to  you.     Therefore  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come 
upon  you,"  James  v.  1.     Alas,   that   with   Ephraim,  Jer.  xxxi.  .19, 
ye  did,  as  (confounded,  "  smite  upon  your  thigh,  on  account  of  the 
sins  of  your  youth."     (b)  Beware  nevertheless  of  being,    like    Cain, 
terrified  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  be  driven  from  the  Lord  ;  but  come 
to  him  with  lowly   humility,  and  with  a  confession  of  your  abomina- 
tions from    your  youth  until  this  day,  like  Israel,  who  turning  to  the 
Lord,  said,  Jer.  iii.  25,    "  We  lie  down  in  our  shame,  and  our  con 
fusion  covereth  us  ;  for  we  have  sinned  against    the  Lord  our  God, 
we  and  our  fathers  from  our  youth  unto  this  day."     (c)  Know   that 
Christ  the  Son  of  God  was  cut  off  for  such  sins  also  out  of  the  land 
of  the  living,  and  that  he  fulfilled  this  commandment  also,  when  he 
was  subject  to  his  parents,  Luke  ii.  51.     And  all  this  only,  that  he 
might  satisfy  the  justice  of  God,  and  purchase  the    forfeited    life  ;" 
for  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  God  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  that   we 
might  be  the    righteousness   of  God   in   him,"  as    Paul   teacheth, 
3  Cor.  v.  21.     (d)  Be  not  nevertheless   too  ready  to  apply  this   to 
yourselves,  but  inquire  whether  he  calls  you  also  to   his   righteous- 
ness, and  proffers  it  to  you  ;  yea,  endeavour  to  obtain  an  assurance, 
that  he  invites  you  thereto,  and  that  he  is  ready   to   impart   all   his 


40?         THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

merits  to  you  He  cries  to  you  also,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  sa- 
vcu,  all  ye  e.)d->  of  tiie  eartii,"  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  Therefore  rice  unto 
hnn,  accept  ot  him,  and  rest  not,  until  he  favours  your  bouls  with 
Ins  rigiueousuess.  Hear  what  he  hath  foretold  concerning  our 
days,  Isaiah  xlv  24,  "  Surely  shall  one  say,  in  the  Lord  have  I 
righteousness  and  strength  :  to  him  shall  men  come."  And  thus, 
"  Christ  would  be  to  you  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,"  ac- 
cording to  Rom.  x.  4. 

Those  who  have  taken  their  refuge  to  him,  ought  to  make  use  of 
the  law,  and  thus  also  of  this  commandment,  for  a  rule  ot  a  thank 
ful  life,  and  therefore, 

1.  Wonder,  rejoice  and  praise  him  for  preserving  you  so  long  alive, 
until  his  time  of  love  to  you  was  come.  Hear  how  David  eries  out 
concerning  this  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  xxi.  4.  "  He  asked  life  of  thee, 
and  thou  gavest  it  him,  even  length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever."  lie 
might  have  taken  you  away  long  ere  now  by  a  shameful  death,  your 
sentence  was  written  from  ancient  times,  and  particularly,  Prov.  xxx. 
17.  "  The  eye  that  mocketh  at  his  father,  and  despiseth  to  obey  his 
mother,  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out,  and  the  young  ea- 
gles shall  eat  it."  But  the  Lord  hath  spared  you. 

2.  Let  the  love  and  the  kindness  of  God  to  you  induce  you  to 
honour  your  father  and  mother,  and  all  who  are  set  over  you,  with 
reverence,  love,  fidelity,  obedience  and  patience.  Do  this  neverthe- 
less from  an  acknowledgment,  that  their  authority  over  you  was 
given  them  by  God.  "  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  pow- 
ers," saith  Paul,  Rom.  xiii.  1.  And  thus  also  from  obedience  to  the 
Lord,  "  Not  with  eye-service,  as  menpleasers,  but  as  the  servants  of 
Christ,  doing  the  will  of  Cod  from  the  heart:  with  good  will  doing 
service  to  the  Lord,  arid  not  to  men,"  Eph.  vi.  6,  7.  Do  it  also  in 
all  things.  "  Ye  children"  saith  the  same  apostle  further,  Col.  iii. 
20.  obey  your  parents  in  all  things  :  for  this  is  well  pleasing  to  the 
Lord."  We  must  nevertheless  not  do  this,  when  they  who  are 
set  ever  us  command  us  aught  that  thwarts  the  command  of 
Cod.  We  must  "  obey  our  parents,  but  it  must  be  in  the  Lord." 
Eph.  vi.  \.  "  We  oitp^ht  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  said  the  a- 
Jiostles,  Acts.  v.  29.  We  m  iy  "'  not  love  our  father  and  mother 
more  than  Jesus,"  Matt.  x.  37.  We  must  sooner  "hate  our  father 
and  mother,"  Luke  xiv.  -6.  See  a  noble  example  of  this  in  the  Le- 
rit.-s,  Exod.  xxxii.  26,  27,  28,  29.  Deut.  xxxiii.  9.  Neither  outfit 
they  to  be  obeyed,  when  they  command  aught  that  militates 
against  any  official  duty  of  their  children.  Solomon,  although  he 
honoured  his  mother  greatly,  would  nevertheless  not  heaiken  to  her, 
^hen  sue  spoke  to  him  for  Adonijah,  who  nourished  insurrection  in 


XXXIX.  LORDS  DAY,  Q.  104.  SOS 

his  heart,  1  Kings  ii.  17 — 23.  The  duties  of  marriage  do  also  ex» 
empt  children  from  tbic  duty  :  it  is  the  law  of  marriage,  that  u  a 
man  shall  leave  his  father  and  mother  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife, 
and  that  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh  "  Although  children,  who 
are  married  ought  to  hearken  in  many  respects  to  the  good  advice 
of  their  parents.  It  is  especially  the  duty  of  children,  to  inform 
their  parents,  and  to  ask  their  consent,  when  they  are  about  to  con- 
tract marriage.  God  hath  given  parents  power  tk  to  take  wives  for 
their  sons,  and  to  give  their  daughters  to  husbards,"  Jer.  xxix.  6* 
Abraham  undertook  to  provide  a  wife  for  his  son  Isaac,  Gen.  xxiv. 
and  Samson  asked  a  wife  of  his  parents,  Judges  xiv.  1,  2. 

But  when  God  commands  children  to  perform  certain  dut'es  to- 
ward their  parents,  he  then  supposeth  that  parents  owe  also  certain 
duties  to  their  children  ;  for  the  commands  of  the  law  must  be  un- 
derstood in,the  most  extensive  sense,  and  must  be  explained  recip- 
rocally:  for  instance,  God  forbids  mtn  to  commit  adultery,  to  kill, 
&c.  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Hebrew  oiiginal,  bin  he  doth  then  intend 
women  also.  Paul  explaining  the  commandment  before  us,  Fph. 
vi.  1 — 9  teaches  that  parents  are  obliged  to  perform  certain  duties 
to  their  children,  and  masters  10  their  servants.  The  reason  why 
the  Lawgiver  doth  not  express  the  duty  of  parents  here,  which  con- 
sists not  so  much  in  honouring,  as  in  loving  their  children,  is  because 
nature  and  their  own  bowels  urge  them  to  that  love.  All  then,  who 
are  honoured  with  the  name  of  father  and  mother,  are  obliged  to  con- 
duct themselves  well  toward  their  children,  and  those  over  whom 
they  are  placed. 

1.  Parents  ought  to  take  a  suitable  care  of  their  children,  provi- 
ding them  with  food  and  with  necessaries ;  "  If  any  man  provide 
not  for  his  own,  and  especially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath 
denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel,"  saith  P  ml,  1  Tim.  v. 
8.  He  teacheth  also  that"  parents  ought  to  lay  up  for  their  chil- 
dren," 2  Cor.  xii.  14.  They  ought  especially  to  dispose  their  souls* 
their  noblest  part,  to  godliness,  and  salvation,  and  therefore  to  in- 
struct them,  according  to  their  capacities,  in  the  mysteries  of  God, 
and  admonish  them,  as  Solomon  adviseth  Prov.  xxii.  6.  and  as  Paul 
enjoins,  Eph  vi.  4.  So  Abraham  acted,  Gen.  xviii.  19,  and  David, 
Prov.  iv.  3,  4.  Fathersinlaw,  and  mothersinlaw,  guardians,  godfa- 
thers, and  godmothers,  and  grandparents  are  obliged  to  do  this  also, 
See  1  Tim  v,  4.  But  parents  ought  to  enforce  their  instructions  with 
a  pious  example,  as  Joshua  said,  "  as  for  me,  and  my  house,  we  will 
serve  the  Lord,"  Joshua  xxiv.  15.  But  inasmuch  as  Solomon  saith, 
Prov.  xxii,  15.  <k  Foolbhnesr-  ir>  bound  up  in  the  heart  of  a  child,  but 


304        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it  far  from  him,"  therefore  love  re- 
quires  that  parents  should  "  correct  their  children  betimes,"  accor- 
ding to  Prov.  xiii.  24.  God  inflicted  a  dreadful  judgment  on  the 
house  of  Eli,  because  "  he  did  not  restrain  his  sons,  when  they  made 
themselves  vile,"  1  Sam.  hi.  13.  Yet  parents  ought  not  to  be  too  se- 
vere, so  as  to  provoke  their  children  to  wrath,  and  vex  them,  lest 
they  be  discouraged,"  Eph.  vi.  4.  Col.  iii,  21.  But  nothing 
■will  be  of  any  service  to  the  children,  unless  the  Lord  bless  whate- 
ver we  do,  and  therefore  parents  ought  to  pray  for  their  chidren,  as 
Abraham  and  Job  did.  Gen    xvii.  18.  Job.  i.  6. 

2.  Magistrates  ought,   according  to  the   advice  of  Jethro,  Exod. 
xviii.  21.  "  to  be  able  men,  such   as  fear  God,  men  of  truth,  hating 
covetousness."  Their   elevated    stations  ought  not  to  render   them 
proud,  nor  to  puff  them   up  so  as  to  make  them  bighminded,  as  the 
Lord  enjoins  with  respect  to    the   kings    of  Israel,   Deut.    xvii.  20. 
They  must  "  love  their  people,"  as  it  is  said  of  the  centurion  at  Ca- 
pernaum, Luke  vii.   5.  They  ought,  like  Julius,    "  to  be  courteous," 
Acts  xxvii.  3.     They  ou;^ht  to    take  care,  that  their  subjects  enjoy 
peace,  a  free  trade,  and  prosperity,  that  they  may   lead  a  quiet    and 
peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  aad  honesty  ;  for  which    purpose    the 
subjects  must  also  pray  for  them,  as  the  apostle   requireth,    1   Tim. 
ii.  1 — 3.     The  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  greatly   blessed    in    these 
respects,  1  Kings   iv.  25.     x.  27.     It  is  also  the  duty  of  magistrates 
to  pray  for  their  subjects,  as  Solomon    and    Hezekuh    did,    1  Kings 
viii.     2  Chron.  xxx.  18 — 20.       They   must  execute   judgment  and 
justice  with  a  holy  awe  and  dread  of  the  Lord,  and  without  respect- 
ing the  persons  of  men  :  "  Jehoshaphat  said  to  the  judges,  take  heed 
what  ye  do  :  for  ye  judge  not  for    men,   but   for  the  Lord,  who    is 
with  you  in  the  judgment.     Yv'herefore  now  let  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
be  upon  you,  take  heed  and  do  it,  for  there  is   no   iniquity   with  the 
Lord  our  God,  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of  gifts,"  2  Chron. 
xix.   1  — 11.     Magistrates    will  he  in  a  'particular  manner  acceptable 
to  God,  when  they  cherish  the  church  in  a  tender    manner,  accord- 
in^  to  the  prophecy  concerning  them,  Isaiah  xlix.  23,  but  of  this  we 
have  spoken  on  the  thirty-first  Lord's  day- 

3.  The  preachers  ought  also  to   be   careful    to    feed    and    govern 
their  congregations,  as  lathers.     But  this  we  have  taught  also  on  the 
ty.first  Lord's  ■ 

and  mistresses  should  thank  God,  that  they  are  not  obli- 
•  -•    .-.  serve,  but  may   he    served    by  others.     And  it  is  therefore 
■  duty  to  beware  of  treating  their  servants  with  too  great  severi- 
ty, appom      .  i  more  labour  than  is  meet,  and  rewarding  them 


 

too  sparingly,  or  speaking  too  harshly  to  them,  and  threatening  them. 
Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  this  purpose,  Lph.  vi.  9.  <k  Ye  masters,  do 
the  same  things  unto  them,  forbearing  threatening  ;  knowing  that 
your  Master  also  is  in  heaven,  neither  is  there  respect  of  persons 
with  him."  And  see  what  he  saith,  Col.  iv.  1.  Take  no  heed,  as 
Solomon  wisely  adviseth;of  every  mistep  of  your  servants,  Eccl.  vii<, 
21.  It  is  proper  to  wink  at  some  things,  ye  yourselves  have  grievous 
faults  :  and  when  ye  serve  (Jod  perfectly  without  fault,  then  and  not 
before  seek  for  perfect  servants.  Above  all,  seek  servants  who 
strive  to  serve  the  Lord,  like  David,  i<c  who  would  be  served  by 
such  as  walked  in  a  perfect  way,"  Psalm  ci.  6,  7.  Instruct,  exhort, 
and  afford  them  time  to  serve  the  Lord,  especially  on  the  Lord's 
dav  ;  for  the  sabbath  was  ordained  for  menservants  and  women- 
servants  as  well  as  for  you,  and  their  souls  are  as  dear  to  the  Lord  as 
yours. 

If  all  and  every  one  of  us  in  particular,  whether  children  and 
those  who  are  subject  to  others,  or  parents,  and  those  who  are  set 
over  others,  would  discharge  their  duty  in  this  manner,  what  a 
blessed  domestic,  ecclesiastical,  and  civil  state  should  w«  have  ? 
We  might  then  say  with  David,  Psalm  cxiiv.  15.  "  Happy  is  that 
people,  that  is  in  such  a  case ;  yea,  happy  is  that  people,  whose 
God  is  the  Lord."     Amen. 


Vol.  ii.  2  K 


(    306   ) 


THE 


SIXTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  13.     Thou  shalt  not  kill.