Q.   105.      What  doth  God  require  in  the  sixth  command? 

A.  That  neither  in  thoughts,  nor  words,  nor  gestures,  much  less 
in  deeds,  I  dishonour,  hate,  wound,  or  kill  my  neighbour,  by  my- 
self, or  by  another  ;  but  that  I  lay  aside  all  desire  of  revenge  :  also 
that  I  hurt  not  myself,  or  wilfully  expose  myself  to  any  danger, 
wherefore  also  the  magistrate  is  armed  with  the  sword  to  prevent 
murder. 

Q.   106.  But  this  command  seem.?  to  speak  only  of  mivrder  ? 

A.  In  forbidding  murder  God  teaches  us,  that  he  abhors  the 
causes  thereof;  such  as  enTy,  hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge  t 
and  that  he  accounts  all  these  as  murder. 

Q.  107.  But  is  it  enough  that  ive  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  manner 
mentioned  above  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger,  he  com- 
mands us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves  ;  to  show  patience, 
peace,  meekness,  mercy,  and  all  kindness  toward  him,  and  prevent 
his  h»rt  as  much  as  in  us  lies  ;  and  that  we  do  good,  even  to  our 
enemies, 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  3©T 

k.r-|"1 

X  HE  Lord  killeth  and  maketli  alive,"  thus  sings  Hannah  to  the 
honour  of  the  most  high  God,  1  Sam.  ii.  6.  The  right  of  life  and 
death  belongs  to  him  only,  who  hath  a  sovereign  power  over  all 
things  ;  and  who  hath  this  but  the  Lord  God  alone,  who  can  make 
alive  as  easily  as  he  can  kill  ?  He  requires  that  his  pe»ple  should 
attend  seriously  to  this,  when  he  saith,  Dent.  xxxin  39,  «  See-  now 
I,  even  I  am  he,  and  there  is  no  God  with  me  :  I  kill,  and  I  make 
alive;  I  wound  and  I  heal."  Job  saith.  Job  xii.  10,  "  in  his  hand 
is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind." 
Even  sovereign  princes  cannot  withdraw  themselves  from  this  sove- 
reign power  of  God  :  "  He  will  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes  :  he  is 
terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  Psalm  Ixvi.  12.  Therefore 
those  high  potentates  take  too  much  upon  themselves,  yea,  they 
exalt  themselves  to  the  seat  of  God,  when  with  the  king  of  Babylon, 
;i  they  kill  and  save  aiive  whom  they  will,"  Dan.  v.  19.  Are  they 
raised  above  their  subjects,  it  is  not  to  bereave  them  of  their  life, 
but  to  preserve  it ;  do  they  not  bear  the  sword  in  vain,  they  may 
not  however  use  it  as  they  please,  but  as  God  pleaseth  with  respect 
to  killing  and  saving,  alive  :  "  The  power,"  saith  Paul  to  the  Romans, 
u  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good,  a  revenger  to  execute 
wrath  upon  him  that  doth  evil,"  Rom.  xiii.  3,  4.  But  the  highest 
sovereignty,  and  the  supreme  right  of  life  and  death  God  hath  re- 
served for  himself,  and  he  prohibits  It  to  all  others,  when  he  pro- 
claims from  heaven,  with  a  display  of  his  exalted  majesty,  out  of 
the  burning  fire,  amidst  darkness,  gloominess,  thunder,  lightning 
and  a  tempest,  to  every  one,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill." 
-  The  Lord  God  hath  set  parents  and  others  over  us,  and  he  re- 
quites in  the  fifth  commandment,  that  we  should  honour  them. 
But  that  families,  over  which  parents  are  set.  and  the  commonwealth, 
over  which  magistrates  are  set,  may  not  be  destroyed,  he  requires 
that  no  man  should  kill  his  neighbour. 

The  instructor  in  explaining  this  commandment  shows, 

I.  What  sins  are  forbidden  in  it,  Q.   105,  106. 

II.  What  virtues  are  commanded  in  it,  Q.   10?". 

I.  The  sin  is  considered  first  in  itself,  Q.  105,  and  then  with  re- 
spect to  its  causes,  Q.  106. 

The  sin  is  in  general  killing  ;  which  we  commit  with  respect  to 
others,  and  with  respect  to  ourselves.  The  second  table  of  the  law 
enjoins  the  love  of  out  neighbour,  and  so  this  sixth  commandment 
requireth  the  love  of  our  neighbour's  life  ;  and  therefore  it  doth  not 
■.-.  our  the  opinion  of  Pythagoras,  who   taught   that   we   might  net 


508        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINER. 

kill  evrn  a  beast,  because  he  imagined  that  the  souls  of  men  passed 
into  beasts.  We  may  and  must  kill  wild  animals,  that  they  may 
not  devour  men:  God  took,  care  that  they  did  not  prevail,  nor  mul- 
tiply too  abundantly  for  Israel,  Exod  xxiii.  29.  David  slew  a  lion 
and  a  bear,  that  had  taken  a  sheep  from  the  flock,  1  Sam.  xvii. 
34,  S5.  "  Every  beast  of  the  earth,  every  fowl  of  the  air,  all  that 
moveth  on  the  earth,  and  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  every  moving 
thing  that  liveth,  shall  be  meat  for  you  ;  even  as  the  green  herb 
have  I  given  you  all  things,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Noah  and  his  poster- 
ity, Gen.  ix.  23.  '«  Brute  beasts  are  indeed  made  to  be  taken  and 
destroyed,"  as  Peter  saith,  2  Pet.  ii.  12.  It  is  not  however  to  be 
approved  of,  but  it  is  inhuman  to  be  cruel  to  cattle,  and  to  torment 
tiiem  in  a  ruthless  manner  :  M  A  righteous  man  re<jardeth  the  life 
oi  his  beast  :  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  »ii.  10.  When  we  exercise  such  cruelty  and  tor- 
ture, we  compel  "the  creatures  to  groan,"  Rom.  viii.  20 — 22. 
This  command  therefore  forbids  killing  men. 

Although  subjects  are  the  neighbours  of  their  magistrates,  they 
may  nevertheless  be  put  to  death  by  their  magistrates  on  account  of 
grievous  misdemeanours,  which  tend  to  destroy  the  commonwealth. 
We  have  observed  before  from  Paul,  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 4,  that  the  ma- 
gistrates are  armed  by  God  with  the  sword  for  this  purpose.  'I  he 
Lord  hath  expressly  commanded,  Gen.  ix.  6,  "  that  if  any  shed 
man's  blood,  Ids  blood  shall  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image  of  God  made 
he  man."  It  is  not  lelt  to  the  discretion  of  the  higher  powers  to 
release,  or  pardon  the  murderer  ;  it  is  said  to  them,  Num.  xxxv. 
31,  "  Ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  who  is 
guilty  of  death,  but  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  "  It  fared  ex- 
ceedingly ill  with  Saul,  because  he  spared  the  devoted  Amalekites  ; 
and  with  Ahab,  because  he  showed  mercy  improperly  to  Benhadad, 
I  Sam.  xv.  1 — 35.  1  Kings  xx.  32 — 43.  It  is  therefore  an  abom- 
inable practice  of  the  Papists,  to  open  churches  and  monasteries  in 
order  to  shelter  and  secure  murderers  from  the  sword  of  the  magis- 
trates, who  may  not  take  them  thence  God  required  that  they 
should  "  take  the  marderer  from  his  altar,  and  put  him  to  death," 
Exod  xxi.  14.  Solomon  did  not  spare  Joab,  although  he  had  fled 
to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  had  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 
the  altar,  but  ordered  him  to  be  slain  there,  1  Kings  ii.  28 — 33.  It 
ia  therefore  silly  in  the  followers  of  Mcnno  and  Socinus,  to  as- 
sert that  magistrates  have  no  right  under  the  New  Testament  to 
put  malefactors  to  death  with  the  sword  ;  but  if  this  did  not  become 
ChvistiRn  magistrates,  whose  life  would  then  be  safe  ?     There  is  al- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    l«5_10f.  SOS 

so  no  reason,  why  we  may  not  punish  a  murderer  now,  as  well  as 
formerly.  Magistrates  oufcht  nevertheless  to  beware  of  putting  an 
innocent  person  to  death,  like  the  wicked  Ahabs,  Joashes,  Manas- 
sehs,  Filates  and  Herods,  that  they  may  not  subject  themselves  and 
their  people  to  bloodguiltiness,  and  the  wrath  of  God. 

How  dreadful  is  war  I  how  many  thousands  of  innocent  persons 
ate  killed  in  it !  neither  shall  they  who  excite  unjust  wars  escape 
the  judgment  of  the  just  supreme  Avenger  :  We  may  not  however, 
with  the  Mennonites  and  Socinians,  condemn  a  just  war,  because 
God  forbids  us  to  kill  ;  for  no  man  could  lead  a  tranquil  and  peacea- 
ble life,  if  men  did  not  resist  their  malicious  foes  by  a  righteous  war  - 
and  besides  this,  the  people  of  God,  after  this  commandment  was 
given  to  them,  waged  wars  by  the  order  of  God,  and  according  to 
laws  of  war  enacted  by  him.  John  the  Baptist  never  advised  the 
soldiers,  nor  Peter  Cornelius  the  centurion,  nor  Paul  Semius 
Paulus  the  deputy,  to  resign  their  military  callings,  after  they  were 
converted  to  Christianity.     It  is  true,  "  we  may  not  resist  evil,  and 

we  must  love  our  enemies,"  as  Christ  saith,  Matt.  v.  39 48.     But 

is  this  said  to  the  magistrates  concerning  the  enemies  of  the  com- 
monwealth ?  surely  no :  but  to  the  disciples  concerning  their  private 
enemies,  against  whom  it  did  not  become  them  to  wage  war.  The 
Lord  God  foretold   indeed,  that  "nation  should    not   lift   up  sword 

against  nation,  nor   learn   war  any    more,"  Isaiah  ii.  4.     xi.  6 9. 

But  if  these  prophecies  condemn  all  wars,  they  are  then  not  yet  ful- 
filled ;  for  experience  teacheth  us  that  all  wars  have  not  yet  ceased  : 
it  is  therefore  evident,  that  these  words  foretcl  the  peace,  which 
should  be  effected  by  the  death  of  Christ  bet\? een  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
as  appears  from  the  connexion  of  those  passages,  which  do  not  there- 
fore condemn  lawful  wars. 

Although  it  is  exceedingly  melancholic,  when  a  person,  urged  by 
danger,  and  unable  to  rescue  himself  by  entreaties,  by  protestations, 
by  crying  or  fleeing,  kills  in  the  instant  of  attack,  not  from  revenge, 
but  only  that  he  may  defend  himself,  his  neighbour,  who  assaults 
him  in  a  murderous  manner  ;  yet  this  is  not  to  be  charged  upon 
him  as  a  prohibited  killing.  If  men  might,  without  being  guilty  of 
murder,  kill  a  thief,  when  he  broke  into  a  house  by  night  to  steal, 
according  to  Exodus  xxii.  2,  how  much  more  may  we  then  kill  a  per- 
son, who  attacks  our  lives,  if  we  cannot  otherwise  deliver  ourselves 
from  death.  God  hath  armed  almost  every  living  creature  with 
natural  weapons,  in  order  that  he  may  defend  himself  against  his 
enemies ,  when  his  life  is  in  danger  :  and  shall  not  the  reasonable 
creature  then  defend  himself  in  such  a   situation,  but  submit  to  be 


310         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

rnurdcred  ?  It  is  true,  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  as  myself; 
but  I  ought  then  to  love  myself  first  and  most,  and  thus  seek  to 
preserve  mine  own  life,  more  than  my  neighbour's. 

It  is  also  a  grievous  misfortune,  when  a  person  kills  his  neighbour 
by  accident,  unawares,  and  without  hating  him  beforelime  ;  for  in- 
stance, a  person  "hews  wood,  and  the  axe  slips  from  the  helve,  and 
lights  upon  his  neighbour,  and  he  dies  ;"  this  is  a  grievous  misfor- 
tune, yet  it  may  not  be  reckoned  such  a  killing  of  a  person,  as  de 
serves  punishment.  The  Lord  declares  tint  such  unfortunate  slay- 
ers are  "  innocent,"  and  he  would  screen  them  from  the  avengers 
of  blood,  and  therefore  ordered  six  cities  and  places  of  refuge  to  be 
severed  for  them  in   the  land  of  Israel,  .  '.     Deut.  xix. 

I — -10. 

But  when    the   Lawgiver   sailh,  "thou  Bhi  ill,"  he  sj 

then  of  a  private  person's  killing  his  neighbour  from  hatred,  re- 
venge and  with  forethought :  either  "  by  himself  or  by  another." 

•A  person  kills  his  neighbour  by  himself,   1  "  With  his  thougl  . 
when  he  curses  him  in  his  thoughts,  and   wishes   that  this    c. 
evil,  yea,  death   itself  may  befal   him.     Which   Solomon  oppc 
when  he  saith,  Eccl.  'x.  -0,  "  Curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in    thy 
thought,  and  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  bedchamber."     How 
doth  the  sinner  think,  when  any  person  doth  not  act  as   he  wishes. 
"  When  will  he  die,  and    his  name  perish  :"    as   David's   e:, 
longed  for  his  death,  Psalm  xli.  5.     Doth  not  this  manifest  a  mur- 
derous  disposition  ?     If  all  those  should  die,  whom  the  sinner  wished 

,  the  whole  world  would  soon  die  out.  It  is  with  equal  p; 
ty  to  be  reckoned  murder,  when  a  person  contrives  with  himself 
how  to  injure  his  neighbour,  when  "  one  i  magi  net h  evil  in  his  heart 
against  another,"  which  God  forbids,  Zech.  viii.  IT.  It  is  also  to 
be  accounted  murder,  when  with  Saul  wo  "  consent  to  the  death"  of 
the  innocent,  Acts  viii.    1. 

2.  A  j.er„un  i.ihs  his  neighbour  also  with  spiteful,  ■  e\Tere,  piercing 

words,"  with  chid. ug  and  railing, with  which  David 

was  sorer,  !  .'.,  who  therefore  complained  to  the  Lord,  I 

Ivii.  4,  '*  My  ;.oul  is  among  iieos,  and  I  lie   even  among   them  that 

.  fire,  even  the  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  ar- 

rovvs>and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword."     It  is  more  especially  a  kil- 

of  our  neighbour,  when  we  report   his    I        ....:r  in  the  most 

ible  manner  to  his   enemy,   ■  nd  endanger    hio  life  ;   • 

.   .-..  been   obliged  to  employ    hi  laying  with 

thee         .    ihe  sword  eig  five  priests,  and  all   tha*  breathed 

.■--• 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 5 or.  311 

to  Saul  the  friendship  which  Ahimelech  had  shown  to  David  ?  See 
the  history,  1  Sam.  xxii.  6.  We  must  reckon  those  also  to  he  not 
less  guilty  of  murder,  who  falsely  accuse  an  innocent  person  to  the 
judge,  and  demand  his  death,  as  the  Jews  repea.edly  acted  toward 
the  Saviour,  and  became  thus  "  the  betrayers  and  murderers  of  that 
Just  One,"  as  Stephen  upbraids  them,  Acts  vii.  52.  Peter  also 
convinceth  them,  Acts  ii.  23,"  that  they  had  by  wicked  hands  cru- 
cified and  slain  him." 

3.  A  person  can  be  guilty  of  this  sin  also  with  his  "  gestures," 
when  his  countenance,  like  the  index  of  the  heart,  discovers  that  he 
harbours  malicious  inclinations  against  his  neighbour :  one  while 
the  murderous  mind  of  the  sinner  will  affect  his  visage  with  pale- 
ness, then  it  will  cause  him  to  blush,  one  while  his  countenance  will 
be  bloated,  then  it  will  be  wrinkled,  every  glance  of  his  eyes  is,  as 
it  were,  an  act  of  murder,  and  darts  forth  fiery  flames  of  burning 
anger,  his  no*trils  widen,  and  breathe  forth  threatenings  and  slaugh- 
ter, or,  as  Solomon  expresseth  it,  "  An  ungodly  man  diggcth  up 
evil,  and  in  his  lips  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  burning  fire  :  he  shutteth 
his  eyes  to  devise  froward  things  ;  moving  his  lips,  he  bringeth  evil 
to  pass,"  Prov.  xvi.  27,  30.  Or  that  we  may  depict  it  to  you  in 
Cain,  who  murdered  his  brother,  "  He  was  very  wroth,  and  his  coun- 
tenance fell,"  Gen  iv.  5,  6. 

4.  If  we  may  not  kill  our  neighbour,  with  thoughts,  words  or 
gestures,  "  much  less  may  we  do  it  with  deeds."  We  do  this,  (a) 
by  "  dishonouring"  our  neighbour,  injuring  him  with  respect  to  his 
honour,  which  is  dearer  to  many  than  their  life,  reproaching  him, 
and  bringing  him  into  contempt.  It  was  to  David  "  as  a  sword  in 
his  bones,  when  his  enemies  reproached  him,"  Psalm  xlii  10.  The 
Lord  himself  takes  it  exceedingly  ill,  when  a  man  dishonours  his 
neighbour  ;  it  is  his  will,  that  ''  he  who  saith  to  his  brother,  Raca, 
shall  be  punishable  by  the  council ;  and  that  he  who  saith,  thou 
fool,  shall  be  punishable  by  hellfire."  Matt,  v-  22.  (b)  Or  «  by 
wounding"  him,  which  may  easily  bring  him  to  his  end.  If  we 
should  inflict  a  wound  upon  a  person,  which  is  not  mortal,  but  which 
should  occasion  a  fever,  or  some  other  calamity,  of  which  he  should 
die,  would  we  not  then  be  the  cause  of  his  death  ?  It  was  therefore 
a  righteous  recompence,  which  the  Lord  ordained  for  such  offences, 
Lev.  xxiv.  19,  20.  "  If  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour; 
as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  him  :  breach  for  breach, 
eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,"  &c.  See  also  Deut.  xix.  21.  (c) 
Neither  can  we  acquit  a  person  of  actual  murder,  who  endangers 
the   life  of  his    neighbour:    "When  a  mar   built  a  house,  he  was 


312         THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

obliged  to  make  a  battlement  for  the  roof,  that  he  might  not  bring 
blood  upon  his  house,  if  any  man  fell  from  it,"    Deut.  xxii.  8.     "  If 
a  man  knew  that  his  ox  was  wont  lo  push,  and  he  kept  him  not  in, 
and  the  ox  killed  a  man  or  woman,  the  ox  was  to  be  stoned,  and  his 
owner  was  also  to  be  put  to  death,"  according  to  the  commandment 
of  the  Lord,  Ex.   xxi.  29.     (d)  But  it  is  a  greater  offence,  when  a 
man  attacks  the  life  of  his  neighbour,  and  deprives  him  of  it,  either 
with    an    instrument  of  iron,  or  with  a  stone,  or   with   a  weapon  of 
wood,"     See  Numb.  xxxv.    16,  i7,  18,  or  by  witchcraft,  that  evil 
work  of  the  flesh,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  Gal.  v.  20.     If  tkis 
be  done  treacherously,  under  a  pretence  of  friendship,  "  with  a  kiss, 
as  Joab  slew  Abner  and  Amasa,"    2  Sam   iii.  27.  xx.   9,  10,  it  ex- 
ceeds all  other  abominations.     Although  duels,  which  are  fought  by- 
two  persons,  after   a    previous   challenge,  are    not    to  be    reckoned 
among    acts  of  treachery,  they  cannot   however   be    defended,  but 
merit  the  utmost  abhorrence  ;  for  what  can  be  imagined  more  horri- 
ble, than  that  two  persons  enter  the  lists  with  one  another,  determined 
either  to  die  themselves,  or  to  kill  their  neighbour,  or  to  perish  both 
of  them  ?     How !     is  a  man  lord   ot  his  own   life,  or  of  his   neigh- 
bour's, that  he  may  attack  it,  and  take  it  from  the  earth  ?    Let  «o 
man  think,  that  he  betrays  an  abject  spirit,  when  he  declines  lo  re- 
trieve his  injured   honour  by  challenging  his  adversary,  or  coward- 
ice, when  he   doth  not  accept  a  challenge  :    no,  the   magnanimous 
generosity,    and  generous  magnanimity  of  man    will  not  suffer  him 
to   seek   his  honour  in   shameful,  yea,  in    murderous    duels,  but  it 
teaches  him  to  despise  the  person,  who   reproaches,  or  challenges 
him.     Doth  not  he,  who  prefers  the  greater  to  the  less,  even  life  to 
honour,  excel  him,  who  values  the  less  more  than  the  greater,  even 
honour  more  than  life  ?     But  1  apprehend  that  such  combatants  do 
not  understand  that  holy  magnanimity  which   provides  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the    soul.     It  is   the    act  of  fools  to  excuse  this   abominable 
practice  with  the  example  of  David,  wlio  engaged  in  a  combat  with 
Goliath,   1  Sam.  xviii.  32 — 50,  for  David  did  that   by   and   with  the 
authority   of  the    king   of  Israel,  against  an  open  enemy  of  Israel, 
who  had  defied  the  armies  of  Cod  and  of  Israel,  with  an   assurance 
that  he   should  obtain  the    victory,  and   from  a  powerful   impulse  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  but  not   seduced  by  vain   glory.      \\  hen  our  duel- 
ists  have,  like  D*vid,  fought  with  a  lion  and  a  bear,  let  them  then 
3ee    whether    they   can    avail    themselves  of  this  heroic    action  of 
David. 

We  kill  our  neighbour  not  only  by  ourselves,  but  also  by  others, 
either  by   commanding  and   appointing  others   to  do  it ;    as  David 


—107.  313 

storr.r.iandsd  Joab  to  set  Uriah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  battle, 
and  to  withdraw  his  assistance  from  him,  which  order  Joyb  obeying, 
it  occasioned  the  death  of  Uriah,  and  of  many  others  AviMi  him, 
2  Sam.  xi.  14 — 17.  But  hear  how  Nathan  addresses  David  on  ac- 
count of  this  action,  "  Thou  hast  slain  Uriah  the  Hhtite  with  the 
sword,"  2  Sam.  xii.  9.  Or  by  ptocuring  others  to  pronounce  an 
unjust  sentence,  as  Naboth  perished  :  nevertheless  Ahab  was  up- 
braided with  putting  him  to  death,  although  the  judges  and  false 
witnesses,  who  were  suborned  by  Jezabcl,  had  done  it  in  Ahab's 
name,  1  Kings  xxi.  Or  by  giving  our  consent,  as  Paul  before  his 
conversion  consented  to  the  death  of  the  confessors  of  the  Lord, 
Acts  xxvi.  10. 

Whether  a  person  kill  his  neighbour  by  himself,  or  by  another, 
it  is  an  exceedingly  dreadful  sin  ;  for  the  murderer  destroys  the  best 
and  fairest  workmanship  of  God  on  earth,  even  man,"  who  was 
made  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  crowned  with  gloty  and 
honour,  and  set  over  the  works  of  God's  hands  :"  he  who  kills  him, 
violates  also  the  "  image  of  God,"  as  the  Lord  himself  declareth, 
Gen.  ix.  6.  He  injures  the  community,  and  despatches  the  uncon- 
verted sinner  to  hell,  without  allowing  him  time  for  repentance  :  he 
makes  himself  like  wicked  Cain,  yea  like  his  father  the  devil,  the 
murderer  of  man,  as  John  and  bis  Master  speak,  1  John  hi.  12. 
John  viii.  *4.  The  blood  of  the  slain  man  crieth  for  vengeance, 
and  tortures  the  conscience,  as  we  see  in  the  first  murderer,  Gen. 
iv.  io — U  It  cannot  be  atoned,  except  by  an  ignominious  death, 
according  to  the  law  of  vengeance,  enacted  by  God,  Gen.  ix.  6. 
The  murderer  shall  not  obtain  eternal  life,  1  John  iii.  15.  Yea, 
"the  second  death  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone," is  the  portion  of  murderers,  Rev.  xx.  8.  '  The  law  was 
made,"  as  Paul  testificth,  1  Tim.  i.  9,  "  for  murderers"  to  their 
condemnation. 

Is  it  such  a  fearful  sin  to  murder  our  neighbour,  who  then  can 
express  in  adequate  terms  the  horrible  conduct  of  those  parents, 
who  murder  their  children  '.  It  is  surely  unnatural  to  rage  against 
9ur  own  bowels.  It  hath  nevertheless  been  frequently  seen,  that 
parents  have  been  transported  to  this  horrid  deed,  when  they  suffer- 
ed famine  or  poverty,  and  were  unable  to  procure  food  for  their 
children,  or  to  behold  their  distress.  Often,  yea,  oftner  than  we 
are  aware,  do  giddy  and  wanton  women,  who  have  become  preg- 
nant by  whoredom,  destroy  their  unborn,  or  newly  born  infants. 
Verily  a  work  of  base,  degenerate,  unnatural,  and  inhuman  persons 
•f  the  human  race.  But  it  appears  inconceivable,  that  human  tee- 
Vol.  ii.  2  O 


314        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ings  can  be  so  blinded,  and  apostatize  so  far  from  God,  that  they 
can  be  inclined  to  such  an  evil  work  from  I  know  not  what  reS. 
gtous  principle,  "'giving  their  firstborn, to  be  a  sacrifice  for  their 
transgressioh,  and  the  fruit  of  their  body  for  the  sin  of  their  soul," 
]S  tclia  vi.  7.  The  heathens  nevertheless,  like  the  king  of  the  Mo- 
abites.  2  Ri  gs  iii.  17,  defiled  themselves  in  a  shameful  manner 
with  this  sin  :  "  1  hey  knew  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  who 
committed  such  things  were  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i  32,  and  that 
Wood  roust  be  given  for  blood,  ;md  -oul  for  smil  to  satisfy  the  divine 
justice  ;  blood,  the  soul  of  beasts,  could  nut  atone  for  the  guilt  of 
reasonable  creatures  ;  therefore  nothing  was  more  proper  fortius 
than  the  blood  and  souls  of  their  dear  children.  It  might  admit  of 
some  kind  of  excuse,  that  these  blinded  nations,  who  were  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  revelation  concerning  the  proper  surety,  deviated 
to  such  a  conduct ;  but  that  the  peculiar  people  ot  Clod,  who  were 
daily  instructed  concerning  the  future  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Mes- 

••  should  slay  their  children  in  the  valleys,  should  offer  them 
up.  and  cause  them  to  pass  through  the  fire  unto  ?>loioch  and  the 
idols,  to    consume   them,"    Isaiah    lvii.  5.     Jer.   xxxii.  35.     Ezek. 

ft,  21.  xxi ti.  39,  this,  I  say,  was  more  intolerable  than  the 
atrocious  child-murdering  of  the  heathens.  Neither  did  the  Lord 
suffer  those  murders  ot  his  people  to  remain  unrevenged  ;  it  was  on 
account  of  this  eity  as  well  as  others,  that  the  Lord  God  said  of  the 
Jews,  hzek.  xxiu.  46,47.  u  I  will  bring  up  a  company  upon  them, 
and  will  give  them  to  be  removed  and  spoiled  ;  and  the  company 
shall  stone  them  with  stones,  and  despatch  them  with  their  swords  ; 
they  s;'<dl  siay  their  sons  and  their  daughters,  and  burn  up  their 
houses  with  lire." 

It  will  perhaps  be  said,  no  person  can  surpass  the  actions  of  those 
wicked  men*  We  see  nevertheless  still  greater  abominations  :  the 
sinner,  deceived  by  him,  who  was  a  murderer  of  man  from  the  be- 
ginning, becomes  sometimes  so  outrageous,  that  he  lays  his  hands 
on  his  own  hie,  and  destroys  himself,  either  from  despair  with  Ju- 
das, Mat.  xxvii.  5.  or  from  angry  vexation,  because  he  is  not 
honoured  as  much  as  others,  on  which  account  Ahirhophel  hanged 
himself,  2  Sam.  >vi».  23,  or  like  Saul  and  his  armourbearer,  that 
he  may  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  and  bt  reproached 
and  tormented  by  them,  1  Chron.  x.  4,  5.  Those  seamen  do  not 
conduct  better,  who,  in  order  to  escape  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies, 
set  fire  to  their  powder,  and  blow  up  their  ship  with  all  who  are  in 
it.  Certainly  no  sin  is  more  unnatural  than  sclfmurder  :  for  "  who 
•uth  ever  yet   luted  his  own  flush.?    no  man,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  t- 


S— 107.  315 

£9.  Such  a  sinner  dies  in  his  sin,  like  Saul,  1  Chron.  x.  13.  Is 
"  he  who  hateth  his  brother  a  murderer,"  and  do  we  learn  from  the 
apostle,  that  "nomurdeier  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him,"  tlie 
eternal  perdition  of  such  selfmurdert-rs  is  not  less  certain.  Are 
there  madmen,  who  are  utterly  ignorant  of  what  they  do,  and  who 
destroy  themselves  in  their  madness,  we  cannot  judge  of  their  eterj- 
rial  issue.  To  excuse  killing  ourselves  with  the  conduct  of  ai«r 
son,  who  destroyed  himself  with  the  Philistines,  Judges  xvi  -8, 
29,  30,  is  unreasonable  ;  for  Samson  did  that  as  a  judge  of  Isr  -1, 
as  an  act  of  vvonderlul  heroism,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  ti  e  Lord 
came  mightily  upon  him.  as  in  all  his  other  heroical  actions,  and 
so  "  in  faith,'-'  Heb.  xi   32, 

Although  prisons,  who  "  wilfully  expose  themselves  to  danger," 
out  of  their  pioper  callings,  as  those  who  clnnb  high  and  d'we 
deep,  fearless  sailors,  venturous  riders,  and  giddy  rop*.  dancers,  do 
not  lay  hands  designedly  on  their  own  lives,  they  are  neverthe- 
less not  altogether  guiltless  of  sell-murder  ;  for  if  they  perish  in  such 
dangerous  actions,  are  they  not  themselves  the  authors  of  their 
death  ?  do  they  not  tempt  God  by  their  unadvised  conduct  ?  and 
who  urges  them  on,  but  he  who  *  as  a  murderer  of  man  bom  the 
beginning?  did  not  he  endeavour  to  seduce  the  Son  of  God  to  this 
sin,  that  he  might,  if  possible,  despatch  him  thereby  ?  M..t.  iv.  5, 
6,  7.  Nor  are  those  less  guilty  of  bereaving  themselves  of  their 
lives,  who  injure  their  health  and  spirits  by  their  dissoluteiuss,  by 
excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  by  shameful  lorniotion  mi<>  adul- 
tery, so  that  "they  do  not  live  out  half  their  days,"  as  David  speaks, 
Psalm  Iv.  23,  for  "who  hath  wo  ?  who  hath  sorrow  ?  who  hath 
wounds  without  cause  ?  they  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine  ;  they  that 
go  to  seek  mixed  wine  :"  thus  asks  and  answers  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30.  And  of  the  unchaste  person  lie  saith,  Prov. 
T.  11,  that  "he  mourneth  at  the  last,  when  his  flesh  and  his  body 
are  consumed."  If  vve  will  not  render  ourselves  guilty  of  this  sin, 
"we  must  not  hurt  ourselves"  neither:  a  priest  may  not  do  this, 
although  he  mourn  ever  so  sorely  for  a  deceased  person  ;  the  Lord 
forbids  it,  Lev.  xxv.  5.  Did  the  priests  of  Baal,  from  a  principle 
of  devotion,  "cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  the  Wood 
gushed  out  upon  them,"  as  we  read,  1  Kings  xviii.  28.  we  must 
ascribe  that  to  their  idolatrous  folly,  and  foohMi  idolatry  ;  hut  the 
conduct  of  the  Romish  priests,  who  scourge  themselves  with  whips, 
stuck  with  pins,  until  they  even  shed  their  blood,  that  they  may  dis- 
play their  vainglorious  holiness,  and  imaginary  crucifixion  of  the 
Mesh,  is  dettstable  and  cruel,  or  suffer  me  rather  to  say,  Col.  ii.  23, 


316         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

44  it  is  a  pretended  argument  of  wisdom  in  willworship  and  humility, 
and  in  not  sparing  the  body  ;  and  it  is  not  of  any  advantage,  but  only 
a  satisfying  of  the  flesh."* 

But  how  doth  it  come  to  pass,  that  man,  who  was  created  after 
the  ima^e  of  God, 'in  perfect  love  to  God  and  his  neighbour,  can  be 
guilty  of  such  abominations  ?  By  his  apostacy  from  God,  seduced 
by  his  father,  and  the  murderer  of  man,  he  hath  lost  that  pure 
image,  and  that  fair  love  ;  he  hath  contracted  a  horrible  and  devil- 
ish disposition :  u  His  heart  is  desperately  wicked,"  Jer.  xrii.  19. 
"  The  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  is  become  only  evil 
continually,"  Gen.  vi.  5  He  is  by  nature  prone  to  hate  God  and 
his  neighbour,"  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful  and  haling  others," 
Titus  iii.  13.  His  lusts  and  his  delight  in  vain  glory,  in  fleshly 
pleasures,  and  in  worldly  profit  mislead  him  to  "  wars  and  fight- 
ings," James  iv.  1  «  Out  of  such  an  evil  heart  proceed  murders," 
as  our  ^>aviour  testifieth,  Matt.  xv.  19,  for  it  disposes  a  person  to  en- 
vy, hatred,  anger  and  a  desire  of  revenge,  which  evil  emotions  the 
instructor  records  as  the  next  causes  of  murder. 

1.  In  the  first  place  ''envy"  is  considered  as  such  an  evil  root  of 
gall  and  wormwood,  by  which  a  person  is  grieved  on  account  of  his 
neighbour's  profit,  and  grudges  him  his  advantage  with  a  fretful 
mind.  An  abominable  disposition,  which  censures  the  Lord  for 
showing  favour,  and  "  is  evil,  because  God  is  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks," 
Mat.  xx.  15.  There  are  few  sins,  in  which  the  sinner  doth  not  en- 
joy some  pleasure  ;  but  envy  is  a  malicious  fury  to  him,  of  which 
he  himself  wishes  to  be  rid  ;  envy  is  also  hurttul  to  his  health,  it 
gnaws  the  marrow  out  of  his  bones,  and  consumes  his  flesh  ;  "  En- 
vy," saith  tio'omon,  Prov.  xiv.  ;;0,  "  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones." 
Yea,  this  sin  desires  and  seeks  our  neighbour's  harm,  and  it  is  thus 
a  cause  of  murder,  to  which  ti;e  wicked  person  is  urged  through 
envy  by  the  devil,  •'  Caim"  saith  the  apostie,  1  John  iii.  12,  was  of 
that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother :  and  wherefore  slew  he  him  ? 
because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  hrother's  righteous."  En- 
vy appeared  so  plainly  in  the  murderous  Jews,  that  "  Pilate  knew 
that  they  had  delivered  Jesus  for  envy,"  Mat.  xxvii.  IS.  We  may 
hide  and  shelter  ourselves  from  u  cruel  wrath,  and  from  outra- 
geous anger  :  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  r"  saith  Solomon, 
P  ov.  xxvii.  K. 

2.  The  other  sin  is  "  hatred,"  which  is  an  aversion  from  our 
neighbour,  and  will  not  suffer  him  to  live  :  the  Lord  God  fori 

*  W«  have  rendered  this  passage  xccoruU)£  lo  the  Dutch  translation- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   1©5— 107.  3\? 

this  ab.ominable  temper  of  old  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  1.41 
thy  hear1:,"  suith  he,  Lev.  xix.  17.  No  marvel,  for  "  hatred,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  x.  12,  "  stirreth  up  strife:  yea.  it  urgeth  the  sin- 
ner to  commit  murder.  Esau,  because  he  hated  his  brother,  sought 
io  slay  him,"  Gen.  xxvii.  41.  And  '"  Hainan  ordered  a  gallows  to 
be  made  for  Mordecai,"  whom  he  hated,  "  in  order  to  hang  him 
thereon,"  Esther  v.  13,  U. 

3.  The  third  sin  is  "  anger,"  by  which  we  must  not  understand 
here  a  holy  displeasure  at  sin  in  a  person,  as  the  Saviour  had,  when, 
being  grieved  on  account  of  the  hardness  of  the  hearts  of  the  Jews, 
he  looked  round  about  upon  them  with  anger,"  Mark  iii.  15.  We 
may  "be  angry"  in  this  manlier,  "and  not  sin,"  Eph.  iv.  26.  But 
the  anger  that  is  forbidden  here,  is  that  shortlived  phrenzy,  or  evil 
agitation  of  the  mind,  by  which  a  person  is  driven  furiously  on  to 
injure  his  neighbour  in  the  highest  degree.  This  anger  disturbs  noE 
only  the  soul,  but  also  the  whole  body,  the  members  tremble,  the 
countenance  waxes  pale  and  wan,  the  hair  stands  erect,  the  mouth 
foams,  the  veins  swell,  the  b'ocd  boils,  seethes  and  foams,  and  thus 
wrath  is  "an  outrageous  anger  and  cruelty,"  as  we  have  just  now- 
heard  from  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  4.  Anger  is  justly  considered  as 
the  parent  of  murder ;  for  "  an  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,"  ac- 
cording to  Prov.  xv.  18.  xxix.  22,  and  therefore  commits  murder 
also,  as  we  may  see  in  "  Simeon  and  Levi,  those  instruments  of 
cruelly,"  Gen.  xlix.  5,  3,  7,  and  in  Saul,  who,  when  he  was  in- 
censed with  anger,  would  slay  David,  '.  Sam.  xviiK  8 — 11,  and  in 
the  childmurdercr  Lierod,  Mat.  ii.  16.  It  hath  often  happened,  that 
angry  persons  have  occasioned  an  incurable  disease  to  themselves 
by  an  erxessive  agitation  of  anger,  and  thus  their  death. 

4.  Another  sin,  and  more  heinous  than  anger,  is  forbidden  here, 
to  wit,  "  a  desire  of  revenge,"  by  which  a  p^rt-on  covets  to  return 
and  recompense  an  injury,  which  he  hath  suffered,  or  imagines  that 
he  hath  suilered,  with  an  equal,  yea,  with  a  greater  evil,  and  some- 
times even  with  death.  Thus  wicked  Lamech  boasted  in  an  arro- 
gant manner  of  Ins  revengeful  temper,  as  of  a  noble  vinue,  Gen. 
iv.  23,  24  '-'  Verily  I  have  slain  a  man  for  my  wounding,  and  a 
young  man  for  my  hurt :  if  Cain  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  La- 
mech seventy  and  seven  fold."  A  detestable  evil  :  a  rcvergeful 
person  snatches  the  sword  of  vengeance  out  of  the  hands  of  God, 
iS  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth,"  Heb.  x.  30,  and  places  himself 
in  his  jjdgment-seat.  Although  God  speaks  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment only  of  murder,  yet  he  forbids  also  such  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and 
desire  of  reveftge,  an4  accounts  all  these  as  murder:   "  Whosoevsv 


318        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

hateth  his  brother,  is  a  murderer,"  as  we  read,  1  John  iii.  15.  He 
wno  hates  and  condemns  the  fruit,  will  destroy  also  ihe  tree  with  its 
stock  and  root.  The  reason  why  men  do  noi  commit  actual  murder 
oftner,  is  not  because  they  are  too  \iituous,  but  because  they  luck 
the  opportunity  or  ability,  and  especially  because  Go-1  ly  re- 

strains tiiem  :  but  wnen  a  man  is  abandoned  to  himself  in  vexatious 
circumstances,  and  hath  the  power,  he  will  soon  manifest  Lib  mur- 
derous temper. 

II.  Man  being  wholly  subject  to  God,  as  his  sovereign  Lord,  can- 
not be  indifferent  in  a  moral  sense,  or  neither  goad  nor  evil,  but  he 
must  be  either  one  or  the  other:  when  he  forsakes  evil  be  then 
doth  good,  and  when  he  doth  good,  he  then  forsakes  evil  :  "  There- 
fore it  is  not  enough,  that  we  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  v.< 
mentioned  above  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger, 
he  then  commands  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,"  S-cc. 

1.  We  are  commanded  here  in  the  lirst  place  "  to  love  ourr. 
hour  as  ourselves,"  as  this  is  the  root  of  other  virtues  ;  for  then  we 
shall  not  kill  him  The  cavilling  Remonstrants  condemn  this  asser- 
tion of  the  instructor,  as  if  he  had  not  inserted  this  virtue  in  its 
proper  place,  because  loving  our  neighbour  pertains  to  ail  the  com- 
mandments of  the  second  table.  But  there  is  no  impropriety  in 
speaking  of  this  virtue  here,  not  only  because  it  pertains  to  this,  as 
well  as  to  the  other  commandments,  but  also  because  it  is  especially 
opposed  to  murder,  and  is  therefore  by  the  Lawgiver  himself  oppo- 
sed to  that  sin,  when  he  saith,  Lev.  xix.  13.  "  Thou shalt  not  ay 
nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy  people,  bui:  thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

2    It  followeth  from  this,  that  we  must  be  "patient"  t<  ward  our 
neighbour,  bearin:;  in  a  longsuffering  manner  the  injury   and   harm 
that  we  have  sustained  from  him,  and  not  revenging  it,  but   f< 
ing  it,  and  thus  not  killing  him.     We  must,  as  the  apostle  S] 
"be  longsuffering,    forbearing  and  forgiving  one  another,  Col.  iii. 
12,  13.     This  is  indeed  the  nature  of  love,  which  is  lor. 
is  not  easily  provoked,  beareth  and  endurelh  all  things,"  ace. 
to  1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  5,  7. 

3.  When  a  person  pursues  love,  he  will  overtake  "peace  "  also, 
and  maintain  it  with  his  neighbour,  and  thus  prevent  all    strift 
discord,  and  therefore  also  murder.     Applicable  are   here  the  > 
of  the  apostle,  Kom.  xii,  "  Ii  it  be  pos  much  as  in  you 

li  •.:  peaceably  with    all  men.    Blessed  are  I 
the  great  Prince  of  peace,  Matt  v.  9. 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 107.  319 

4.  Those  who  love  others  are  also  "  meek,"  for  they  do  not 
start  up  in  sudden  anger,  when  they  are  injured,  endeavouring  to 
render  their  neighbour  evil  for  evil,  but  they  remain  soft  and  tracta- 
ble, like  the  most  pliable  substances.  We  see  this  virtue  in  Moses 
above  other  men,  Numb.  xii.  2.  But  the  unsinning  Saviour  ex- 
celled him,  and  he  requires  t'iat  all  men  should  "  learn  of  him  to 
be  meek,"  Matt.  >:i.  29. 

5  Love  excites  a  person  to  "  mercy,"  by  which  he  regards  his 
neighbour's  distress  as  his  own,  and  endeavours,  as  if  he  suffered 
with  him,  to  assist  and  deliver  him,  and  hereby  he  is  without  difficulty 
preserved  from  envy,  cruelty  and  murder.  Tims  he  "  puts  on  bow- 
els of  mercy,"  as  Paul  adviseth,  Col.  iii.  12.  The  tenderhearted 
Saviour  was  repeatedly  moved  with  inward  motions  of  mercy  to- 
ward the  miserable,  and  he  pronounced  "  the  merciful  blessed  ;  for 
they  should  obtain  mercy,"  Matt.  v.   7. 

6.  When  love  bums  in  the  heart,  the  flames  thereof  will  appear 
abroad  in  "  kindness,"  by  which  a  person  conducts  affectionately 
and  courteously  in  his  gestures,  words,  and  in  all  his  behaviour  to- 
ward his  neighbours,  and  whereby  he  restrains  his  neighbour's  envy, 
hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge.  Peter  requires  that  we  should 
not  only  <k  love  as  brethren,  but  also  be  courteous,"  1  Peter,  iii.  8. 

7.  A  person  who  is  so  friendly,  "  will  also,  as  much  as  in  him  li- 
eth,  prevent  the  hurt  of  his  neighbour,"  In  consequence  of  an  inju- 
ry, which  affects  the  property,  honour,  or  body  of  our  neighbour,  his 
life  may  be  in  imminent  danger;  if  we  love  him  then,  we  will  en- 
deavour to  deliver  him,  when  he  is  seized,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
put  to  death  ;  for  he  is  in  danger  of  being  slain,  if  we  forbear," 
Prov.  xxiv.  1 1. 

8.  Love  appears  still  more  generous,  when  a  person  l*  doth  good 
to  his  enemies  "  With  respect  to  public  enemies,  distuibers  of  the 
commonwealth,  who  endeavour  to  deprive  us  of  the  opportunity  to 
do  them  good,  we  ought  to  hinder,  resist,  and  annoy  them,  as  much 
as  we  can,  agreeably  to  the  love,  which  we  owe  to  ourselves  and  to 
our  fellowcitizens  above  those  enemies.  But  with  respect  to  pri- 
vate and  personal  enemies,  we  ought,  according  to  the  nature  of 
love,  to  do  them  good,  as  the  Samaritan  did  good  to  the  wounded 
Jew,  who  was  his  enemy,  Luke  x.  30 — 35  This  the  Saviour  com- 
mands, Matt.  v.  44.  and  Paul  urgeth  it  also,  Rom.  xii.  20.  and  Solo- 
mon, the  forefather  of  the  Saviour-  had  enjoined  it  before,  Pr»v.  xxv. 
21,  22, 


lSSi        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 


APPLICATION. 

That  Christ  did  as  a  new  Lawgiver,  add  to  this  commandment, 
n  that  we  must  not  be  angry  with  our  brother,  nor  address  him  with 
bitter  language,  nor  revenue  an  injury,  no  not  by  the  interference  of 
the  magistrate,"  this  is  the  language  of  the  Socinians,  and  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  God,  which  teaches  us  that  all  anger,  all  revi- 
ling, and  desire  of  revenge  was  forbiddtn  under  the  old  testament  ; 
see  oniy  Lev.  xix.  18.  which  we  have  cited  before  ;  and  therefore 
the  commandment  of  Jesus,  that  we  may  not  be  angry  with  our  bro- 
ther without  cause,  is  not  a  new  law,  but  a  repetition  and  an  illustra- 
tion of  an  old  law,  which  the  ancient  Pharisees  had  obscured,  Matt. 
V.  22,  39. 

What  is  your  opinion  now,  hearers,  concerning  the  church  of 
Rome,  which  weens  that  she  hath  done  God  service  by  destroying 
so  many  kings  and  princes,  and  so  many  other  men,  on  account  of 
the  profession  of  the  truth.  No  man  was  formerly  sure  of  his  life  ; 
whoever  spake  but  the  least  word  against  that  impure  whore,  was 
presently  seized  and  condemned  to  be  put  to  death,  either  by  the 
sword,  or  the  halter,  or  by  drowning,  yea,  such  a  death  was  deemed 
too  mild,  they  burned  such  persons  alive,  and  buried  them  in  the 
eaith  alive.  Yea,  the  Papists  have  endeavoured  to  lay  waste  and 
murder  whole  countries,  which  Were  infested  with  what  they  called 
the  northern  heresy  :  let  Piedmont,  France.  Ire  .  rid  and  Holland  de- 
clare. Can  such  a  religion  be  conformable  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  acceptable  to  God,  which  established  itself  in  the  blood  of  the 
innocent?  surely  no  :  all  this  bloodshedding  is  the  mark  of  "  the 
great  whore,  who  is  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with 
the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,"  according  to  Rev.  xvii.  7.  The 
Lord  God  hath  also  revenged  it  by  abridging  Antichrist,  and  by 
hing  him  with  spiritual  and  temporal  judgments,  and   "giving 

him  blood  to  drink,   since  he  hath  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  pro- 
'pliets  "  as  John  prophesieth,  Rev.  xvi.  G      And  we    need  not  doubt 

that  the  Lord  God  will  punish  it  more  adequately  at  some  future  pe- 
iorl,  by  a  total  devastation  of  the  spiritual  Babylon,  because  "in  her 

:s  found  the  blood  of  the  prophets,  and  of  all  who  were  slain   on    the 

earth."     See  Rev.  xviii.   1 — 24. 

But  that  which  chiefly  concerns  you  at  present,  hearers,  is  whether 

sdl  of  you  have  kept  this  commandment  in  all  its  parts.     It  was  your 

duty  to  keep  it,  for  ye  are  directly  subject    to  the  exalted   Lawgiver, 
lo  yoq    amidst  the  d  I  !iunderings,   and   fearful 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105— 107.  321 

lightnings  from  heaven,  "  Ye  shall  not  kill."     Have  ye  not  kept  the 
commandment,  ye  are  condemned  to   die,   and  "accursed,  because 
ye  bave  not  continued  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to 
do  them,"  agreeably  to  what   Paul  teacheth   us,    Gal.  iii.   10,  from 
Deut.  xxvii.  26.     I  have  no  reason   to    think  that  any  of  you    hath 
killed  his  neighbour,  either  secretly  or  openly  ;  but  are  ye  therefore 
clear  of  bloodguiltmess  ?     No:  we  kill  our   neighbour  by    malicious 
thoughts,  by  bitter  words,  and  surly  gestures,  by  dishonouring  him, 
by  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  a  desire  of  revenge  j  yea,  we  violate  this 
commandment  by  a  want  of  love  to  our   neighbour,   by   passionate- 
ness,   strife,    harshness,    unmercifulness,    surliness,  and    sullenness 
toward  our  neighbour,  and  also   when  we  do  not   maintain  love    and 
its  goud  fruits.     Compare  yourselves  with   this  picture,   view   your- 
selves in  this  mirror,  and  sec  whether  ye  do  not  behold  your  proper 
figure,  and  perceive  your    murderous  heart  in  it'     Or  are  ye    utter 
strangers  to  these  malignant    motions  ?  and  do  ye  think  that  ye  are 
goodnatured  ?  but  when  ?  when  ye  are  alone,  and  have  no   opportu- 
nity to  discover  your  sullenness  ?     Yea,  will  ye  not  even  then  stir  up 
your  malignity  against    this  or  that  person,  who   ye  think,   hath    in- 
jured you,  or  might  injure  you  ?     Are  there  not  many  strangers  and 
relations,  husband,  wife,  children,  parents,  who  are  not  to  your  mind, 
or  who  are  a  burthen  to  you,  whom   ye  secretly    wish    God  would 
take  away  i   and  how  do  ye  behave  toward   persons,  with  whom  ye 
must  converse  at  home  and  elsewhere  f  do  ye  not    vex   them    time 
after  time  with  your    difficult   temper,    austere   looks,   and   spiteful 
words  ?     And  if  others  look  at  you,  and  speak  to  you    in   an   unkind 
manner,  or  do  aught  that  is  not   to  your  mind,   or   vex    and   wrong 
you,  are  ye  able  to  endure  all  with  patience  and    meekness,    and    to 
answer  it  with  kindness  ?  do  ye  say  yea ;  I  ask  you  then    also,  what 
it  is  that  moves  y«u  to  this  ?  is  it  the  fear  of   God  ?  is  "  destruction 
from  God  a  terrour  to  you,  and  are  ye  unable  to  endure    by    reason 
of  his  highness  I"  as  that  patient  man  speaks,    Job  xxxi.  23,  oris  it 
because  ye  are  of  an  abject    and  cowardly   spirit  ?  or  because    men 
would  despise  you,  if  ye  showed  your   moody    disposition  ?  or    be- 
cause your  adversary  is  your  superiour ;  or  is  at  least  as  keen  as  ye 
are  yourselves,  and  thus  one  knife,  as  we  say,  keeps  the  other  in  its 
sheath  ?     I  ask  all  this,  that  I  may,  if  it  be    possible,   bring    you    to 
yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  see  the  abominableness  of  your  hearts. 
Are  ye  so  exceedingly  filled  with  selfiove,  that    ye    cannot    look  to 
the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  and  therefore   cannot   think   any   evil    of 
yourselves ;  hear  then  what  the   Lord   God,   who  "  searcheth    youv 
heart  which  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  se 
Vol.  ir.  2  P 


*8         TEL::  J  MM AL'DMENT  EXPLAINED. 

that  none  can  know  it,T'  Jer-  xvii.  9,  10,  hear,  I  say,  what  he  tesi- 
fieth  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  thus  of  all  Men,  and  therefore  of 
you  also,  Rem.  hi.  13 — IS.  "  Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre  ; 
with  their  tdni  i  es  they  have  used  deceit ;  the  poison  of  asps  is  un- 
der their  lips  :  whose  mouth,  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness:  their 
feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood :  destruction  and  misery  are  in  Iheir 
v.:1'  s :  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known  ;  there  is  no  fear 
of  God  before  their  eyes."  Behold,  this  is  your  character,  whether 
ye  know  it  or  not ;  and  when  God  shall  set  these  things  in  order 
before  ycur  eye3,  then  will  ye  see  it. 

Do  not  however  reckon  it  enough  to  know  that  ye  are  exceedingly 
sinful  and  abominable,   but   observe    also   what    a    recompence    the 
Lord  God  hath  appointed  for  such  wickedness,  and  apply  it  to  your- 
selves, that  ye  may  know  also  that  it  is  an  evil  and    bitter   thing  to 
forsake  the  Lord,  and  that  his   fear  is  not  in  you.     I   will    proclaim 
the  word  of  God  to  you,  which   saith,  Deut.  xxvii.  42,  "  Cursed   be 
he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly  ;  and  all  the  people  shall  say 
Amen."     Among  uthe  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth,   and    the 
seVen  which  arc  an  abomination  to  his  soul,  are  also  hands  that  shed 
innocent  blood,  an  heart  that  deviselh  wicked  imaginations,  and  feet 
that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief,"  Prov.  vi.  16 — 18.     "  Murder- 
ers shall  have  their  part  in  the   lake    which   burnetii    with   fire  and 
brimstone,"  according  to  Rev.  x*i.  8.     Or  is  it  your  thought,   that 
ye  need  not  regard  this,  because  ye  have  not  killed  any  man  ?  but  is 
nut  a  heart  which  deviseth  wicked    imaginations   numbered    among 
the  seven  abominations  ?     "  Whoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  mur- 
derer :  and  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal    life    abiding    in 
him,"  according  to  the    words  of  the  apostle,  1  John  iii.    15.     Paul 
saith,  Rom.  iii.    19,  "  We  know  that  what   things  soever   the    law 
saith,  it  saith  to  them    who   are  under  the  law  :  that    every   mouth 
may  be  slopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God," 
and  he  applies  this  to  all  the  abominations  of  which  he  had  spoken, 
vrs.    13 — IS,  and  of  which  we    have    convinced   you,    as  that   your 
■'throat  is  an  open  sepulchre,-'  Jksc.     Behold  this,  and  be  concerned, 
and  distressed,  that  ye  may   not  find  any   longer   the    life    of  your 
hands,  although  ye  should  be    afflicted   and   ready  to  die  ;    for  this 
woul    cause  you  to  fice  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  from  the    sec- 
ond dea  .  . 

Do  any  of  you  I  '  '     -  m  bloodguiltiness,  and  do 

ye  not  know  what  to  do,  hear  then,  ye  who  mourn  and  weep  on  ac- 
count of  your  vileness,  and  your  condemnation,  I  have  a  good  word 
to  you,  and  O  that  it  mi,,  :  jour  souls,  so  that  it  would  pre- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  523 

-jut  you  blameless  before  your  Judge.  It  3s  this,  God  hatfc  ap- 
pointed has  h^on  *  surety  for  persons  who  were  worthy  of  death,  he 
engaged  to  his  Father  that  he  Would  become  a  surety,  and  he  actu- 
ally fulfilled  the  sureiiship,  when  from  love,  and  "  through  zeal  for 
tfce  house  of  Clod,"  he  suffered  himself  to  be  "consumed,  and  gave 
kelf.an  offering,  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,  for  a  sweetsroeHing  sa- 
vour," according  to  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Eph.  v.  3s  Ik-cause  he  stood 
m  the  stead  of  persons  who  deserved  to  die,  therefore  he,  who  was 
the  Prince  of  life,  was  put  to  death,  "  he  was  delivered  and  died  for 
our  offences,  according  10  the  scriptures,"  as  we  read,  Rom.  iv.  25. 
1  Cor.  xv.  3.  I  would  not  have  you  all  however  to  dismiss  forth- 
with your  concern  on  this  account,  as  though  he  died  for  all  men, 
we  know  better  :  but  I  would  that  ye  should  seek  to  win  Christ,  and 
thus  to  partake  of  his  death,  that  his  death  may  be  reckoned  yours, 
and  for  you.  Know  then  that  he  proffers  himself,  his  death,  and 
thereby  life  to  and  for  you  ;  for,  "having  abolished  death,  he  hath 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  2  Tim.  i.  10.  Touch  then  that  evangeli- 
cal sceptre  of  his,  consent  to  his  proffer,  "  take  hold  of  him,  who  is 
Lrengh  of  God,  and  make  your  peace  with  the  Lord,  and  be  re- 
conciled to  God,"  as  ye  are  counselled  and  entreated  to  do,  Isaiah 
xxvii  5.  2  Cor.  v  20.  Yea,  flee  to  him,  as  a  most  secure  city 
of  refuge,  like  the  murderer,  Luke  xxiii.  42,  45.  "The  name  of 
the  Lord  is  indeed  a  strong  tower  :  the  righteous  runneth  into  if, 
and  is  safe,"  according  to  Prov.  xviii.  10-  O  rest  not,  until  ye  have 
really  and  actually  become  partakers  of  his  death,  andt  are  thereby 
reconciled  to  God. 

«'  With  thee  there  is  forgiveness,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared," 
saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  exxx.  4.  Let  him  then,  who  hath 
obtained  forgiveness,  and  to  whom  life  hath  been  granted,  endeavour 
to  be  delivered  from  his  deadly  disposition,  which  suggests  murders  : 
we  must  "  put  off  wrath,  anger,  malice  and  evilspeaking,"  as  the 
apostle  admonished).  Though  we  be  ever  so  much  wronged  and 
harmed,  we  must  not  retain  any  anger,  nor  desire  of  revenge.  We 
all  pray  to  God,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them 
who  trespass  against  us  ;"  shall  we  not  then  be  ready  to  forgive  ? 
what  evidence  can  we  have,  that  our  sins  are  forgiven,  if  we  retain 
displeasure  against  our  neighbour  ?  Consider,  ye  justified  persons, 
how  often,  and  how  grievously  ye  have  provoked  the  Lord,  and 
with  how  much  patience  he  hath  endured  your  sins,  and  how  freely 
he  hath  forgiven  them  ;  yea,  that  he  would  rather  punish  them  in 
his  dear  Son,  than  in  you  ;  will  not  ye  then,  whom  God  hath  forgiven 


324        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ten  thousand  talents,  forgive  your  fellowservant  a  hundred  pence  ? 
See  Matt,  xviii.  24 — 35.  I  therefore  exhort  you  with  Paul  fr<  m 
Eph.  iv.  31,-32.  v.  1,  2  "  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  an- 
ger, and  clamour,  and  evilspeaking  hr  put  away  from  you,  with  all 
malice.  And  be  ye  kind,  one  to  another,  tenderhearted,  forgiving 
one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  ycu.  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children  :  and  walk  in  love  as 
Curist  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for  us,  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweetsmelling  savour."  See  this  same 
exhortation,  Col.  hi.  12 — 14.  Thesssins  ought  certainly  to  be 
pursued  with  a  deadly  hatred,  and  to  be  slain  ;  for  they  are  murder- 
ers of  your  souls,  yea,  they  killed  the  Prince  of  life  ;  therefore  nail 
them  to  bis  cross,  that  it  may  appear  that  ye  belong  to  Christ  ;  for 
"such  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  \\  c  may  not  kill  any  man,  because  he  is  our  neighbour,  but 
we  must  kill  our  old  man,  who  is  nearer  to  us  than  our  neighbour. 

Ought  we  to  conduct  in  this  manner  toward  our  neighbour,  we 
ought  then  niuc'i  more  to  take  care  of  cur  own  lives.  We  have  ob- 
tained our  lives  of  the  Lord,  as  a  precious  treasure  ;  we  ought  then 
to  take  care  of  them,  and  to  preserve  tbem  for  him,  and  for  his  ser- 
vice. It  becomes  us  therefore  not  only  to  beware  of  rashness,  and 
of  all  iniquity,  by  which  our  lives  are  endangered,  but  also  to  be  in- 
dustrious according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  order  that  we  may 
provide  ourselves  by  all  lawful  means  with  whatever  is  necessary  to 
sustain  our  lives,  Hear  and  practise  what  Paul  saith,  2  Thess.  hi. 
10 — 12,  "  When  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that 
if  any  man  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat ;  for  we  hear  that 
these  are  some  which  walk  among  you  disorderly*  working  not  «t 
all,  but  are  busybodies.  Now  them  that  are  such,  we  command  and 
exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and 
cat  their  own  bread."  Are  we  not  in  health,  but  sick,  we  should 
then  make  use  of  medicines  for  our  recovery,  for  the  Lord  hath  ap- 
appointed  them  for  healing:  we  ought  not  then  to  he  averse  from 
them,  but  to  make  use  of  them  according  to  his  will.  When  tk« 
Lord  would  prolong  the  life  of  Ilef.el.iah.  who  was  visited  v. 
deadly  disease,  fifteen  years,  he  commanded  that  "  they  should  lay 
a  plaiiter  upon  the  bile,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  2  1.  Depend  not  hov 
for  the  preservation  of  your  lives  on  your  own  care,  nor  on  the;-; 
outward  means,  but  only  on  the  Lord,  living  from  his  hand:  it  was 
a  blot  on  the  religious  character  of  Asa,  that  "  he  sought  not  to  the 
Lord  in  his  sickness,  but  to  the  physicians,"  2  Chron-  xvi.  12  "  He 
I  either  suffers,"  or  is  in  danger  of  losing  his  life  in  tbi 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    105—107.  S25 

any  other  way,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  must  commit  his  soul 
in  welldoing  to  Jjie  faithful  Creator/'  as  Peter  admonisheth,  1  Pet. 
iv.  19.  And  are  we  in  w^nt  of  daily  food  and  clothing,  let  us  not 
be  too  much  discouraged  :  God.  our  father,  our  life,  and  the  length 
of  our  days,  who  giveth  us  life,  who  feeds  the  fowls,  who  clothes 
and  adorns  the  grass  of  the  field,  \iill  provide  us  wiih  both  food  and 
raiment,  as  the  mouth  of  truth  teachcth,  Matt.  vi.  25 — 34.  Jt  is 
true,  believers,  ye  also  must  die  ;  but  ye  will  die,  that  ye  may  he- 
come  heirs  of  life,  and  may  be  settled  there,  where  "there  will  not 
be  any  more  death,  nor  sorrow,  nor  crying,  nor  pain,"  Rev.  xxi.  4, 
for,  as  Paul  hath  foretold,  "  corruption  will  put  on  incorruption,  and 
mortal  will  put  on  immortality."     Amen. 


(   £26  ) 


the 


SEVENTH  COMMANDMEN" 


EXPLAINED. 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  4..  "  Thou  shak  not  cohimit  adulter} .

Q.   106.  But  this  command  seem.?  to  speak  only  of  mivrder  ? 

A.  In  forbidding  murder  God  teaches  us,  that  he  abhors  the 
causes  thereof;  such  as  enTy,  hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge  t 
and  that  he  accounts  all  these  as  murder. 

Q.  107.  But  is  it  enough  that  ive  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  manner 
mentioned  above  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger,  he  com- 
mands us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves  ;  to  show  patience, 
peace,  meekness,  mercy,  and  all  kindness  toward  him,  and  prevent 
his  h»rt  as  much  as  in  us  lies  ;  and  that  we  do  good,  even  to  our 
enemies, 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  3©T 

k.r-|"1 

X  HE  Lord  killeth  and  maketli  alive,"  thus  sings  Hannah  to  the 
honour  of  the  most  high  God,  1  Sam.  ii.  6.  The  right  of  life  and 
death  belongs  to  him  only,  who  hath  a  sovereign  power  over  all 
things  ;  and  who  hath  this  but  the  Lord  God  alone,  who  can  make 
alive  as  easily  as  he  can  kill  ?  He  requires  that  his  pe»ple  should 
attend  seriously  to  this,  when  he  saith,  Dent.  xxxin  39,  «  See-  now 
I,  even  I  am  he,  and  there  is  no  God  with  me  :  I  kill,  and  I  make 
alive;  I  wound  and  I  heal."  Job  saith.  Job  xii.  10,  "  in  his  hand 
is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind." 
Even  sovereign  princes  cannot  withdraw  themselves  from  this  sove- 
reign power  of  God  :  "  He  will  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes  :  he  is 
terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  Psalm  Ixvi.  12.  Therefore 
those  high  potentates  take  too  much  upon  themselves,  yea,  they 
exalt  themselves  to  the  seat  of  God,  when  with  the  king  of  Babylon, 
;i  they  kill  and  save  aiive  whom  they  will,"  Dan.  v.  19.  Are  they 
raised  above  their  subjects,  it  is  not  to  bereave  them  of  their  life, 
but  to  preserve  it ;  do  they  not  bear  the  sword  in  vain,  they  may 
not  however  use  it  as  they  please,  but  as  God  pleaseth  with  respect 
to  killing  and  saving,  alive  :  "  The  power,"  saith  Paul  to  the  Romans, 
u  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good,  a  revenger  to  execute 
wrath  upon  him  that  doth  evil,"  Rom.  xiii.  3,  4.  But  the  highest 
sovereignty,  and  the  supreme  right  of  life  and  death  God  hath  re- 
served for  himself,  and  he  prohibits  It  to  all  others,  when  he  pro- 
claims from  heaven,  with  a  display  of  his  exalted  majesty,  out  of 
the  burning  fire,  amidst  darkness,  gloominess,  thunder,  lightning 
and  a  tempest,  to  every  one,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill." 
-  The  Lord  God  hath  set  parents  and  others  over  us,  and  he  re- 
quites in  the  fifth  commandment,  that  we  should  honour  them. 
But  that  families,  over  which  parents  are  set.  and  the  commonwealth, 
over  which  magistrates  are  set,  may  not  be  destroyed,  he  requires 
that  no  man  should  kill  his  neighbour. 

The  instructor  in  explaining  this  commandment  shows, 

I.  What  sins  are  forbidden  in  it,  Q.   105,  106. 

II.  What  virtues  are  commanded  in  it,  Q.   10?". 

I.  The  sin  is  considered  first  in  itself,  Q.  105,  and  then  with  re- 
spect to  its  causes,  Q.  106. 

The  sin  is  in  general  killing  ;  which  we  commit  with  respect  to 
others,  and  with  respect  to  ourselves.  The  second  table  of  the  law 
enjoins  the  love  of  out  neighbour,  and  so  this  sixth  commandment 
requireth  the  love  of  our  neighbour's  life  ;  and  therefore  it  doth  not 
■.-.  our  the  opinion  of  Pythagoras,  who   taught   that   we   might  net 


508        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINER. 

kill  evrn  a  beast,  because  he  imagined  that  the  souls  of  men  passed 
into  beasts.  We  may  and  must  kill  wild  animals,  that  they  may 
not  devour  men:  God  took,  care  that  they  did  not  prevail,  nor  mul- 
tiply too  abundantly  for  Israel,  Exod  xxiii.  29.  David  slew  a  lion 
and  a  bear,  that  had  taken  a  sheep  from  the  flock,  1  Sam.  xvii. 
34,  S5.  "  Every  beast  of  the  earth,  every  fowl  of  the  air,  all  that 
moveth  on  the  earth,  and  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  every  moving 
thing  that  liveth,  shall  be  meat  for  you  ;  even  as  the  green  herb 
have  I  given  you  all  things,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Noah  and  his  poster- 
ity, Gen.  ix.  23.  '«  Brute  beasts  are  indeed  made  to  be  taken  and 
destroyed,"  as  Peter  saith,  2  Pet.  ii.  12.  It  is  not  however  to  be 
approved  of,  but  it  is  inhuman  to  be  cruel  to  cattle,  and  to  torment 
tiiem  in  a  ruthless  manner  :  M  A  righteous  man  re<jardeth  the  life 
oi  his  beast  :  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  »ii.  10.  When  we  exercise  such  cruelty  and  tor- 
ture, we  compel  "the  creatures  to  groan,"  Rom.  viii.  20 — 22. 
This  command  therefore  forbids  killing  men. 

Although  subjects  are  the  neighbours  of  their  magistrates,  they 
may  nevertheless  be  put  to  death  by  their  magistrates  on  account  of 
grievous  misdemeanours,  which  tend  to  destroy  the  commonwealth. 
We  have  observed  before  from  Paul,  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 4,  that  the  ma- 
gistrates are  armed  by  God  with  the  sword  for  this  purpose.  'I  he 
Lord  hath  expressly  commanded,  Gen.  ix.  6,  "  that  if  any  shed 
man's  blood,  Ids  blood  shall  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image  of  God  made 
he  man."  It  is  not  lelt  to  the  discretion  of  the  higher  powers  to 
release,  or  pardon  the  murderer  ;  it  is  said  to  them,  Num.  xxxv. 
31,  "  Ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  who  is 
guilty  of  death,  but  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  "  It  fared  ex- 
ceedingly ill  with  Saul,  because  he  spared  the  devoted  Amalekites  ; 
and  with  Ahab,  because  he  showed  mercy  improperly  to  Benhadad, 
I  Sam.  xv.  1 — 35.  1  Kings  xx.  32 — 43.  It  is  therefore  an  abom- 
inable practice  of  the  Papists,  to  open  churches  and  monasteries  in 
order  to  shelter  and  secure  murderers  from  the  sword  of  the  magis- 
trates, who  may  not  take  them  thence  God  required  that  they 
should  "  take  the  marderer  from  his  altar,  and  put  him  to  death," 
Exod  xxi.  14.  Solomon  did  not  spare  Joab,  although  he  had  fled 
to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  had  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 
the  altar,  but  ordered  him  to  be  slain  there,  1  Kings  ii.  28 — 33.  It 
ia  therefore  silly  in  the  followers  of  Mcnno  and  Socinus,  to  as- 
sert that  magistrates  have  no  right  under  the  New  Testament  to 
put  malefactors  to  death  with  the  sword  ;  but  if  this  did  not  become 
ChvistiRn  magistrates,  whose  life  would  then  be  safe  ?     There  is  al- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    l«5_10f.  SOS 

so  no  reason,  why  we  may  not  punish  a  murderer  now,  as  well  as 
formerly.  Magistrates  oufcht  nevertheless  to  beware  of  putting  an 
innocent  person  to  death,  like  the  wicked  Ahabs,  Joashes,  Manas- 
sehs,  Filates  and  Herods,  that  they  may  not  subject  themselves  and 
their  people  to  bloodguiltiness,  and  the  wrath  of  God. 

How  dreadful  is  war  I  how  many  thousands  of  innocent  persons 
ate  killed  in  it !  neither  shall  they  who  excite  unjust  wars  escape 
the  judgment  of  the  just  supreme  Avenger  :  We  may  not  however, 
with  the  Mennonites  and  Socinians,  condemn  a  just  war,  because 
God  forbids  us  to  kill  ;  for  no  man  could  lead  a  tranquil  and  peacea- 
ble life,  if  men  did  not  resist  their  malicious  foes  by  a  righteous  war  - 
and  besides  this,  the  people  of  God,  after  this  commandment  was 
given  to  them,  waged  wars  by  the  order  of  God,  and  according  to 
laws  of  war  enacted  by  him.  John  the  Baptist  never  advised  the 
soldiers,  nor  Peter  Cornelius  the  centurion,  nor  Paul  Semius 
Paulus  the  deputy,  to  resign  their  military  callings,  after  they  were 
converted  to  Christianity.     It  is  true,  "  we  may  not  resist  evil,  and 

we  must  love  our  enemies,"  as  Christ  saith,  Matt.  v.  39 48.     But 

is  this  said  to  the  magistrates  concerning  the  enemies  of  the  com- 
monwealth ?  surely  no :  but  to  the  disciples  concerning  their  private 
enemies,  against  whom  it  did  not  become  them  to  wage  war.  The 
Lord  God  foretold   indeed,  that  "nation  should    not   lift   up  sword 

against  nation,  nor   learn   war  any    more,"  Isaiah  ii.  4.     xi.  6 9. 

But  if  these  prophecies  condemn  all  wars,  they  are  then  not  yet  ful- 
filled ;  for  experience  teacheth  us  that  all  wars  have  not  yet  ceased  : 
it  is  therefore  evident,  that  these  words  foretcl  the  peace,  which 
should  be  effected  by  the  death  of  Christ  bet\? een  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
as  appears  from  the  connexion  of  those  passages,  which  do  not  there- 
fore condemn  lawful  wars. 

Although  it  is  exceedingly  melancholic,  when  a  person,  urged  by 
danger,  and  unable  to  rescue  himself  by  entreaties,  by  protestations, 
by  crying  or  fleeing,  kills  in  the  instant  of  attack,  not  from  revenge, 
but  only  that  he  may  defend  himself,  his  neighbour,  who  assaults 
him  in  a  murderous  manner  ;  yet  this  is  not  to  be  charged  upon 
him  as  a  prohibited  killing.  If  men  might,  without  being  guilty  of 
murder,  kill  a  thief,  when  he  broke  into  a  house  by  night  to  steal, 
according  to  Exodus  xxii.  2,  how  much  more  may  we  then  kill  a  per- 
son, who  attacks  our  lives,  if  we  cannot  otherwise  deliver  ourselves 
from  death.  God  hath  armed  almost  every  living  creature  with 
natural  weapons,  in  order  that  he  may  defend  himself  against  his 
enemies ,  when  his  life  is  in  danger  :  and  shall  not  the  reasonable 
creature  then  defend  himself  in  such  a   situation,  but  submit  to  be 


310         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

rnurdcred  ?  It  is  true,  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  as  myself; 
but  I  ought  then  to  love  myself  first  and  most,  and  thus  seek  to 
preserve  mine  own  life,  more  than  my  neighbour's. 

It  is  also  a  grievous  misfortune,  when  a  person  kills  his  neighbour 
by  accident,  unawares,  and  without  hating  him  beforelime  ;  for  in- 
stance, a  person  "hews  wood,  and  the  axe  slips  from  the  helve,  and 
lights  upon  his  neighbour,  and  he  dies  ;"  this  is  a  grievous  misfor- 
tune, yet  it  may  not  be  reckoned  such  a  killing  of  a  person,  as  de 
serves  punishment.  The  Lord  declares  tint  such  unfortunate  slay- 
ers are  "  innocent,"  and  he  would  screen  them  from  the  avengers 
of  blood,  and  therefore  ordered  six  cities  and  places  of  refuge  to  be 
severed  for  them  in   the  land  of  Israel,  .  '.     Deut.  xix. 

I — -10. 

But  when    the   Lawgiver   sailh,  "thou  Bhi  ill,"  he  sj 

then  of  a  private  person's  killing  his  neighbour  from  hatred,  re- 
venge and  with  forethought :  either  "  by  himself  or  by  another." 

•A  person  kills  his  neighbour  by  himself,   1  "  With  his  thougl  . 
when  he  curses  him  in  his  thoughts,  and   wishes   that  this    c. 
evil,  yea,  death   itself  may  befal   him.     Which   Solomon  oppc 
when  he  saith,  Eccl.  'x.  -0,  "  Curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in    thy 
thought,  and  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  bedchamber."     How 
doth  the  sinner  think,  when  any  person  doth  not  act  as   he  wishes. 
"  When  will  he  die,  and    his  name  perish  :"    as   David's   e:, 
longed  for  his  death,  Psalm  xli.  5.     Doth  not  this  manifest  a  mur- 
derous  disposition  ?     If  all  those  should  die,  whom  the  sinner  wished 

,  the  whole  world  would  soon  die  out.  It  is  with  equal  p; 
ty  to  be  reckoned  murder,  when  a  person  contrives  with  himself 
how  to  injure  his  neighbour,  when  "  one  i  magi  net h  evil  in  his  heart 
against  another,"  which  God  forbids,  Zech.  viii.  IT.  It  is  also  to 
be  accounted  murder,  when  with  Saul  wo  "  consent  to  the  death"  of 
the  innocent,  Acts  viii.    1. 

2.  A  j.er„un  i.ihs  his  neighbour  also  with  spiteful,  ■  e\Tere,  piercing 

words,"  with  chid. ug  and  railing, with  which  David 

was  sorer,  !  .'.,  who  therefore  complained  to  the  Lord,  I 

Ivii.  4,  '*  My  ;.oul  is  among  iieos,  and  I  lie   even  among   them  that 

.  fire,  even  the  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  ar- 

rovvs>and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword."     It  is  more  especially  a  kil- 

of  our  neighbour,  when  we  report   his    I        ....:r  in  the  most 

ible  manner  to  his   enemy,   ■  nd  endanger    hio  life  ;   • 

.   .-..  been   obliged  to  employ    hi  laying  with 

thee         .    ihe  sword  eig  five  priests,  and  all   tha*  breathed 

.■--• 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 5 or.  311 

to  Saul  the  friendship  which  Ahimelech  had  shown  to  David  ?  See 
the  history,  1  Sam.  xxii.  6.  We  must  reckon  those  also  to  he  not 
less  guilty  of  murder,  who  falsely  accuse  an  innocent  person  to  the 
judge,  and  demand  his  death,  as  the  Jews  repea.edly  acted  toward 
the  Saviour,  and  became  thus  "  the  betrayers  and  murderers  of  that 
Just  One,"  as  Stephen  upbraids  them,  Acts  vii.  52.  Peter  also 
convinceth  them,  Acts  ii.  23,"  that  they  had  by  wicked  hands  cru- 
cified and  slain  him." 

3.  A  person  can  be  guilty  of  this  sin  also  with  his  "  gestures," 
when  his  countenance,  like  the  index  of  the  heart,  discovers  that  he 
harbours  malicious  inclinations  against  his  neighbour :  one  while 
the  murderous  mind  of  the  sinner  will  affect  his  visage  with  pale- 
ness, then  it  will  cause  him  to  blush,  one  while  his  countenance  will 
be  bloated,  then  it  will  be  wrinkled,  every  glance  of  his  eyes  is,  as 
it  were,  an  act  of  murder,  and  darts  forth  fiery  flames  of  burning 
anger,  his  no*trils  widen,  and  breathe  forth  threatenings  and  slaugh- 
ter, or,  as  Solomon  expresseth  it,  "  An  ungodly  man  diggcth  up 
evil,  and  in  his  lips  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  burning  fire  :  he  shutteth 
his  eyes  to  devise  froward  things  ;  moving  his  lips,  he  bringeth  evil 
to  pass,"  Prov.  xvi.  27,  30.  Or  that  we  may  depict  it  to  you  in 
Cain,  who  murdered  his  brother,  "  He  was  very  wroth,  and  his  coun- 
tenance fell,"  Gen  iv.  5,  6. 

4.  If  we  may  not  kill  our  neighbour,  with  thoughts,  words  or 
gestures,  "  much  less  may  we  do  it  with  deeds."  We  do  this,  (a) 
by  "  dishonouring"  our  neighbour,  injuring  him  with  respect  to  his 
honour,  which  is  dearer  to  many  than  their  life,  reproaching  him, 
and  bringing  him  into  contempt.  It  was  to  David  "  as  a  sword  in 
his  bones,  when  his  enemies  reproached  him,"  Psalm  xlii  10.  The 
Lord  himself  takes  it  exceedingly  ill,  when  a  man  dishonours  his 
neighbour  ;  it  is  his  will,  that  ''  he  who  saith  to  his  brother,  Raca, 
shall  be  punishable  by  the  council ;  and  that  he  who  saith,  thou 
fool,  shall  be  punishable  by  hellfire."  Matt,  v-  22.  (b)  Or  «  by 
wounding"  him,  which  may  easily  bring  him  to  his  end.  If  we 
should  inflict  a  wound  upon  a  person,  which  is  not  mortal,  but  which 
should  occasion  a  fever,  or  some  other  calamity,  of  which  he  should 
die,  would  we  not  then  be  the  cause  of  his  death  ?  It  was  therefore 
a  righteous  recompence,  which  the  Lord  ordained  for  such  offences, 
Lev.  xxiv.  19,  20.  "  If  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour; 
as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  him  :  breach  for  breach, 
eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,"  &c.  See  also  Deut.  xix.  21.  (c) 
Neither  can  we  acquit  a  person  of  actual  murder,  who  endangers 
the   life  of  his    neighbour:    "When  a  mar   built  a  house,  he  was 


312         THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

obliged  to  make  a  battlement  for  the  roof,  that  he  might  not  bring 
blood  upon  his  house,  if  any  man  fell  from  it,"    Deut.  xxii.  8.     "  If 
a  man  knew  that  his  ox  was  wont  lo  push,  and  he  kept  him  not  in, 
and  the  ox  killed  a  man  or  woman,  the  ox  was  to  be  stoned,  and  his 
owner  was  also  to  be  put  to  death,"  according  to  the  commandment 
of  the  Lord,  Ex.   xxi.  29.     (d)  But  it  is  a  greater  offence,  when  a 
man  attacks  the  life  of  his  neighbour,  and  deprives  him  of  it,  either 
with    an    instrument  of  iron,  or  with  a  stone,  or   with   a  weapon  of 
wood,"     See  Numb.  xxxv.    16,  i7,  18,  or  by  witchcraft,  that  evil 
work  of  the  flesh,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  Gal.  v.  20.     If  tkis 
be  done  treacherously,  under  a  pretence  of  friendship,  "  with  a  kiss, 
as  Joab  slew  Abner  and  Amasa,"    2  Sam   iii.  27.  xx.   9,  10,  it  ex- 
ceeds all  other  abominations.     Although  duels,  which  are  fought  by- 
two  persons,  after   a    previous   challenge,  are    not    to  be    reckoned 
among    acts  of  treachery,  they  cannot   however   be    defended,  but 
merit  the  utmost  abhorrence  ;  for  what  can  be  imagined  more  horri- 
ble, than  that  two  persons  enter  the  lists  with  one  another,  determined 
either  to  die  themselves,  or  to  kill  their  neighbour,  or  to  perish  both 
of  them  ?     How !     is  a  man  lord   ot  his  own   life,  or  of  his   neigh- 
bour's, that  he  may  attack  it,  and  take  it  from  the  earth  ?    Let  «o 
man  think,  that  he  betrays  an  abject  spirit,  when  he  declines  lo  re- 
trieve his  injured   honour  by  challenging  his  adversary,  or  coward- 
ice, when  he   doth  not  accept  a  challenge  :    no,  the   magnanimous 
generosity,    and  generous  magnanimity  of  man    will  not  suffer  him 
to   seek   his  honour  in   shameful,  yea,  in    murderous    duels,  but  it 
teaches  him  to  despise  the  person,  who   reproaches,  or  challenges 
him.     Doth  not  he,  who  prefers  the  greater  to  the  less,  even  life  to 
honour,  excel  him,  who  values  the  less  more  than  the  greater,  even 
honour  more  than  life  ?     But  1  apprehend  that  such  combatants  do 
not  understand  that  holy  magnanimity  which   provides  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the    soul.     It  is   the    act  of  fools  to  excuse  this   abominable 
practice  with  the  example  of  David,  wlio  engaged  in  a  combat  with 
Goliath,   1  Sam.  xviii.  32 — 50,  for  David  did  that   by   and   with  the 
authority   of  the    king   of  Israel,  against  an  open  enemy  of  Israel, 
who  had  defied  the  armies  of  Cod  and  of  Israel,  with  an   assurance 
that  he   should  obtain  the    victory,  and   from  a  powerful   impulse  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  but  not   seduced  by  vain   glory.      \\  hen  our  duel- 
ists  have,  like  D*vid,  fought  with  a  lion  and  a  bear,  let  them  then 
3ee    whether    they   can    avail    themselves  of  this  heroic    action  of 
David. 

We  kill  our  neighbour  not  only  by  ourselves,  but  also  by  others, 
either  by   commanding  and   appointing  others   to  do  it ;    as  David 


—107.  313 

storr.r.iandsd  Joab  to  set  Uriah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  battle, 
and  to  withdraw  his  assistance  from  him,  which  order  Joyb  obeying, 
it  occasioned  the  death  of  Uriah,  and  of  many  others  AviMi  him, 
2  Sam.  xi.  14 — 17.  But  hear  how  Nathan  addresses  David  on  ac- 
count of  this  action,  "  Thou  hast  slain  Uriah  the  Hhtite  with  the 
sword,"  2  Sam.  xii.  9.  Or  by  ptocuring  others  to  pronounce  an 
unjust  sentence,  as  Naboth  perished  :  nevertheless  Ahab  was  up- 
braided with  putting  him  to  death,  although  the  judges  and  false 
witnesses,  who  were  suborned  by  Jezabcl,  had  done  it  in  Ahab's 
name,  1  Kings  xxi.  Or  by  giving  our  consent,  as  Paul  before  his 
conversion  consented  to  the  death  of  the  confessors  of  the  Lord, 
Acts  xxvi.  10. 

Whether  a  person  kill  his  neighbour  by  himself,  or  by  another, 
it  is  an  exceedingly  dreadful  sin  ;  for  the  murderer  destroys  the  best 
and  fairest  workmanship  of  God  on  earth,  even  man,"  who  was 
made  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  crowned  with  gloty  and 
honour,  and  set  over  the  works  of  God's  hands  :"  he  who  kills  him, 
violates  also  the  "  image  of  God,"  as  the  Lord  himself  declareth, 
Gen.  ix.  6.  He  injures  the  community,  and  despatches  the  uncon- 
verted sinner  to  hell,  without  allowing  him  time  for  repentance  :  he 
makes  himself  like  wicked  Cain,  yea  like  his  father  the  devil,  the 
murderer  of  man,  as  John  and  bis  Master  speak,  1  John  hi.  12. 
John  viii.  *4.  The  blood  of  the  slain  man  crieth  for  vengeance, 
and  tortures  the  conscience,  as  we  see  in  the  first  murderer,  Gen. 
iv.  io — U  It  cannot  be  atoned,  except  by  an  ignominious  death, 
according  to  the  law  of  vengeance,  enacted  by  God,  Gen.  ix.  6. 
The  murderer  shall  not  obtain  eternal  life,  1  John  iii.  15.  Yea, 
"the  second  death  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone," is  the  portion  of  murderers,  Rev.  xx.  8.  '  The  law  was 
made,"  as  Paul  testificth,  1  Tim.  i.  9,  "  for  murderers"  to  their 
condemnation. 

Is  it  such  a  fearful  sin  to  murder  our  neighbour,  who  then  can 
express  in  adequate  terms  the  horrible  conduct  of  those  parents, 
who  murder  their  children  '.  It  is  surely  unnatural  to  rage  against 
9ur  own  bowels.  It  hath  nevertheless  been  frequently  seen,  that 
parents  have  been  transported  to  this  horrid  deed,  when  they  suffer- 
ed famine  or  poverty,  and  were  unable  to  procure  food  for  their 
children,  or  to  behold  their  distress.  Often,  yea,  oftner  than  we 
are  aware,  do  giddy  and  wanton  women,  who  have  become  preg- 
nant by  whoredom,  destroy  their  unborn,  or  newly  born  infants. 
Verily  a  work  of  base,  degenerate,  unnatural,  and  inhuman  persons 
•f  the  human  race.  But  it  appears  inconceivable,  that  human  tee- 
Vol.  ii.  2  O 


314        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ings  can  be  so  blinded,  and  apostatize  so  far  from  God,  that  they 
can  be  inclined  to  such  an  evil  work  from  I  know  not  what  reS. 
gtous  principle,  "'giving  their  firstborn, to  be  a  sacrifice  for  their 
transgressioh,  and  the  fruit  of  their  body  for  the  sin  of  their  soul," 
]S  tclia  vi.  7.  The  heathens  nevertheless,  like  the  king  of  the  Mo- 
abites.  2  Ri  gs  iii.  17,  defiled  themselves  in  a  shameful  manner 
with  this  sin  :  "  1  hey  knew  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  who 
committed  such  things  were  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i  32,  and  that 
Wood  roust  be  given  for  blood,  ;md  -oul  for  smil  to  satisfy  the  divine 
justice  ;  blood,  the  soul  of  beasts,  could  nut  atone  for  the  guilt  of 
reasonable  creatures  ;  therefore  nothing  was  more  proper  fortius 
than  the  blood  and  souls  of  their  dear  children.  It  might  admit  of 
some  kind  of  excuse,  that  these  blinded  nations,  who  were  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  revelation  concerning  the  proper  surety,  deviated 
to  such  a  conduct ;  but  that  the  peculiar  people  ot  Clod,  who  were 
daily  instructed  concerning  the  future  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Mes- 

••  should  slay  their  children  in  the  valleys,  should  offer  them 
up.  and  cause  them  to  pass  through  the  fire  unto  ?>loioch  and  the 
idols,  to    consume   them,"    Isaiah    lvii.  5.     Jer.   xxxii.  35.     Ezek. 

ft,  21.  xxi ti.  39,  this,  I  say,  was  more  intolerable  than  the 
atrocious  child-murdering  of  the  heathens.  Neither  did  the  Lord 
suffer  those  murders  ot  his  people  to  remain  unrevenged  ;  it  was  on 
account  of  this  eity  as  well  as  others,  that  the  Lord  God  said  of  the 
Jews,  hzek.  xxiu.  46,47.  u  I  will  bring  up  a  company  upon  them, 
and  will  give  them  to  be  removed  and  spoiled  ;  and  the  company 
shall  stone  them  with  stones,  and  despatch  them  with  their  swords  ; 
they  s;'<dl  siay  their  sons  and  their  daughters,  and  burn  up  their 
houses  with  lire." 

It  will  perhaps  be  said,  no  person  can  surpass  the  actions  of  those 
wicked  men*  We  see  nevertheless  still  greater  abominations  :  the 
sinner,  deceived  by  him,  who  was  a  murderer  of  man  from  the  be- 
ginning, becomes  sometimes  so  outrageous,  that  he  lays  his  hands 
on  his  own  hie,  and  destroys  himself,  either  from  despair  with  Ju- 
das, Mat.  xxvii.  5.  or  from  angry  vexation,  because  he  is  not 
honoured  as  much  as  others,  on  which  account  Ahirhophel  hanged 
himself,  2  Sam.  >vi».  23,  or  like  Saul  and  his  armourbearer,  that 
he  may  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  and  bt  reproached 
and  tormented  by  them,  1  Chron.  x.  4,  5.  Those  seamen  do  not 
conduct  better,  who,  in  order  to  escape  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies, 
set  fire  to  their  powder,  and  blow  up  their  ship  with  all  who  are  in 
it.  Certainly  no  sin  is  more  unnatural  than  sclfmurder  :  for  "  who 
•uth  ever  yet   luted  his  own  flush.?    no  man,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  t- 


S— 107.  315 

£9.  Such  a  sinner  dies  in  his  sin,  like  Saul,  1  Chron.  x.  13.  Is 
"  he  who  hateth  his  brother  a  murderer,"  and  do  we  learn  from  the 
apostle,  that  "nomurdeier  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him,"  tlie 
eternal  perdition  of  such  selfmurdert-rs  is  not  less  certain.  Are 
there  madmen,  who  are  utterly  ignorant  of  what  they  do,  and  who 
destroy  themselves  in  their  madness,  we  cannot  judge  of  their  eterj- 
rial  issue.  To  excuse  killing  ourselves  with  the  conduct  of  ai«r 
son,  who  destroyed  himself  with  the  Philistines,  Judges  xvi  -8, 
29,  30,  is  unreasonable  ;  for  Samson  did  that  as  a  judge  of  Isr  -1, 
as  an  act  of  vvonderlul  heroism,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  ti  e  Lord 
came  mightily  upon  him.  as  in  all  his  other  heroical  actions,  and 
so  "  in  faith,'-'  Heb.  xi   32, 

Although  prisons,  who  "  wilfully  expose  themselves  to  danger," 
out  of  their  pioper  callings,  as  those  who  clnnb  high  and  d'we 
deep,  fearless  sailors,  venturous  riders,  and  giddy  rop*.  dancers,  do 
not  lay  hands  designedly  on  their  own  lives,  they  are  neverthe- 
less not  altogether  guiltless  of  sell-murder  ;  for  if  they  perish  in  such 
dangerous  actions,  are  they  not  themselves  the  authors  of  their 
death  ?  do  they  not  tempt  God  by  their  unadvised  conduct  ?  and 
who  urges  them  on,  but  he  who  *  as  a  murderer  of  man  bom  the 
beginning?  did  not  he  endeavour  to  seduce  the  Son  of  God  to  this 
sin,  that  he  might,  if  possible,  despatch  him  thereby  ?  M..t.  iv.  5, 
6,  7.  Nor  are  those  less  guilty  of  bereaving  themselves  of  their 
lives,  who  injure  their  health  and  spirits  by  their  dissoluteiuss,  by 
excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  by  shameful  lorniotion  mi<>  adul- 
tery, so  that  "they  do  not  live  out  half  their  days,"  as  David  speaks, 
Psalm  Iv.  23,  for  "who  hath  wo  ?  who  hath  sorrow  ?  who  hath 
wounds  without  cause  ?  they  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine  ;  they  that 
go  to  seek  mixed  wine  :"  thus  asks  and  answers  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30.  And  of  the  unchaste  person  lie  saith,  Prov. 
T.  11,  that  "he  mourneth  at  the  last,  when  his  flesh  and  his  body 
are  consumed."  If  vve  will  not  render  ourselves  guilty  of  this  sin, 
"we  must  not  hurt  ourselves"  neither:  a  priest  may  not  do  this, 
although  he  mourn  ever  so  sorely  for  a  deceased  person  ;  the  Lord 
forbids  it,  Lev.  xxv.  5.  Did  the  priests  of  Baal,  from  a  principle 
of  devotion,  "cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  the  Wood 
gushed  out  upon  them,"  as  we  read,  1  Kings  xviii.  28.  we  must 
ascribe  that  to  their  idolatrous  folly,  and  foohMi  idolatry  ;  hut  the 
conduct  of  the  Romish  priests,  who  scourge  themselves  with  whips, 
stuck  with  pins,  until  they  even  shed  their  blood,  that  they  may  dis- 
play their  vainglorious  holiness,  and  imaginary  crucifixion  of  the 
Mesh,  is  dettstable  and  cruel,  or  suffer  me  rather  to  say,  Col.  ii.  23, 


316         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

44  it  is  a  pretended  argument  of  wisdom  in  willworship  and  humility, 
and  in  not  sparing  the  body  ;  and  it  is  not  of  any  advantage,  but  only 
a  satisfying  of  the  flesh."* 

But  how  doth  it  come  to  pass,  that  man,  who  was  created  after 
the  ima^e  of  God, 'in  perfect  love  to  God  and  his  neighbour,  can  be 
guilty  of  such  abominations  ?  By  his  apostacy  from  God,  seduced 
by  his  father,  and  the  murderer  of  man,  he  hath  lost  that  pure 
image,  and  that  fair  love  ;  he  hath  contracted  a  horrible  and  devil- 
ish disposition :  u  His  heart  is  desperately  wicked,"  Jer.  xrii.  19. 
"  The  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  is  become  only  evil 
continually,"  Gen.  vi.  5  He  is  by  nature  prone  to  hate  God  and 
his  neighbour,"  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful  and  haling  others," 
Titus  iii.  13.  His  lusts  and  his  delight  in  vain  glory,  in  fleshly 
pleasures,  and  in  worldly  profit  mislead  him  to  "  wars  and  fight- 
ings," James  iv.  1  «  Out  of  such  an  evil  heart  proceed  murders," 
as  our  ^>aviour  testifieth,  Matt.  xv.  19,  for  it  disposes  a  person  to  en- 
vy, hatred,  anger  and  a  desire  of  revenge,  which  evil  emotions  the 
instructor  records  as  the  next  causes  of  murder. 

1.  In  the  first  place  ''envy"  is  considered  as  such  an  evil  root  of 
gall  and  wormwood,  by  which  a  person  is  grieved  on  account  of  his 
neighbour's  profit,  and  grudges  him  his  advantage  with  a  fretful 
mind.  An  abominable  disposition,  which  censures  the  Lord  for 
showing  favour,  and  "  is  evil,  because  God  is  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks," 
Mat.  xx.  15.  There  are  few  sins,  in  which  the  sinner  doth  not  en- 
joy some  pleasure  ;  but  envy  is  a  malicious  fury  to  him,  of  which 
he  himself  wishes  to  be  rid  ;  envy  is  also  hurttul  to  his  health,  it 
gnaws  the  marrow  out  of  his  bones,  and  consumes  his  flesh  ;  "  En- 
vy," saith  tio'omon,  Prov.  xiv.  ;;0,  "  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones." 
Yea,  this  sin  desires  and  seeks  our  neighbour's  harm,  and  it  is  thus 
a  cause  of  murder,  to  which  ti;e  wicked  person  is  urged  through 
envy  by  the  devil,  •'  Caim"  saith  the  apostie,  1  John  iii.  12,  was  of 
that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother :  and  wherefore  slew  he  him  ? 
because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  hrother's  righteous."  En- 
vy appeared  so  plainly  in  the  murderous  Jews,  that  "  Pilate  knew 
that  they  had  delivered  Jesus  for  envy,"  Mat.  xxvii.  IS.  We  may 
hide  and  shelter  ourselves  from  u  cruel  wrath,  and  from  outra- 
geous anger  :  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  r"  saith  Solomon, 
P  ov.  xxvii.  K. 

2.  The  other  sin  is  "  hatred,"  which  is  an  aversion  from  our 
neighbour,  and  will  not  suffer  him  to  live  :  the  Lord  God  fori 

*  W«  have  rendered  this  passage  xccoruU)£  lo  the  Dutch  translation- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   1©5— 107.  3\? 

this  ab.ominable  temper  of  old  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  1.41 
thy  hear1:,"  suith  he,  Lev.  xix.  17.  No  marvel,  for  "  hatred,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  x.  12,  "  stirreth  up  strife:  yea.  it  urgeth  the  sin- 
ner to  commit  murder.  Esau,  because  he  hated  his  brother,  sought 
io  slay  him,"  Gen.  xxvii.  41.  And  '"  Hainan  ordered  a  gallows  to 
be  made  for  Mordecai,"  whom  he  hated,  "  in  order  to  hang  him 
thereon,"  Esther  v.  13,  U. 

3.  The  third  sin  is  "  anger,"  by  which  we  must  not  understand 
here  a  holy  displeasure  at  sin  in  a  person,  as  the  Saviour  had,  when, 
being  grieved  on  account  of  the  hardness  of  the  hearts  of  the  Jews, 
he  looked  round  about  upon  them  with  anger,"  Mark  iii.  15.  We 
may  "be  angry"  in  this  manlier,  "and  not  sin,"  Eph.  iv.  26.  But 
the  anger  that  is  forbidden  here,  is  that  shortlived  phrenzy,  or  evil 
agitation  of  the  mind,  by  which  a  person  is  driven  furiously  on  to 
injure  his  neighbour  in  the  highest  degree.  This  anger  disturbs  noE 
only  the  soul,  but  also  the  whole  body,  the  members  tremble,  the 
countenance  waxes  pale  and  wan,  the  hair  stands  erect,  the  mouth 
foams,  the  veins  swell,  the  b'ocd  boils,  seethes  and  foams,  and  thus 
wrath  is  "an  outrageous  anger  and  cruelty,"  as  we  have  just  now- 
heard  from  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  4.  Anger  is  justly  considered  as 
the  parent  of  murder ;  for  "  an  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,"  ac- 
cording to  Prov.  xv.  18.  xxix.  22,  and  therefore  commits  murder 
also,  as  we  may  see  in  "  Simeon  and  Levi,  those  instruments  of 
cruelly,"  Gen.  xlix.  5,  3,  7,  and  in  Saul,  who,  when  he  was  in- 
censed with  anger,  would  slay  David,  '.  Sam.  xviiK  8 — 11,  and  in 
the  childmurdercr  Lierod,  Mat.  ii.  16.  It  hath  often  happened,  that 
angry  persons  have  occasioned  an  incurable  disease  to  themselves 
by  an  erxessive  agitation  of  anger,  and  thus  their  death. 

4.  Another  sin,  and  more  heinous  than  anger,  is  forbidden  here, 
to  wit,  "  a  desire  of  revenge,"  by  which  a  p^rt-on  covets  to  return 
and  recompense  an  injury,  which  he  hath  suffered,  or  imagines  that 
he  hath  suilered,  with  an  equal,  yea,  with  a  greater  evil,  and  some- 
times even  with  death.  Thus  wicked  Lamech  boasted  in  an  arro- 
gant manner  of  Ins  revengeful  temper,  as  of  a  noble  vinue,  Gen. 
iv.  23,  24  '-'  Verily  I  have  slain  a  man  for  my  wounding,  and  a 
young  man  for  my  hurt :  if  Cain  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  La- 
mech seventy  and  seven  fold."  A  detestable  evil  :  a  rcvergeful 
person  snatches  the  sword  of  vengeance  out  of  the  hands  of  God, 
iS  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth,"  Heb.  x.  30,  and  places  himself 
in  his  jjdgment-seat.  Although  God  speaks  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment only  of  murder,  yet  he  forbids  also  such  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and 
desire  of  reveftge,  an4  accounts  all  these  as  murder:   "  Whosoevsv 


318        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

hateth  his  brother,  is  a  murderer,"  as  we  read,  1  John  iii.  15.  He 
wno  hates  and  condemns  the  fruit,  will  destroy  also  ihe  tree  with  its 
stock  and  root.  The  reason  why  men  do  noi  commit  actual  murder 
oftner,  is  not  because  they  are  too  \iituous,  but  because  they  luck 
the  opportunity  or  ability,  and  especially  because  Go-1  ly  re- 

strains tiiem  :  but  wnen  a  man  is  abandoned  to  himself  in  vexatious 
circumstances,  and  hath  the  power,  he  will  soon  manifest  Lib  mur- 
derous temper. 

II.  Man  being  wholly  subject  to  God,  as  his  sovereign  Lord,  can- 
not be  indifferent  in  a  moral  sense,  or  neither  goad  nor  evil,  but  he 
must  be  either  one  or  the  other:  when  he  forsakes  evil  be  then 
doth  good,  and  when  he  doth  good,  he  then  forsakes  evil  :  "  There- 
fore it  is  not  enough,  that  we  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  v.< 
mentioned  above  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger, 
he  then  commands  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,"  S-cc. 

1.  We  are  commanded  here  in  the  lirst  place  "  to  love  ourr. 
hour  as  ourselves,"  as  this  is  the  root  of  other  virtues  ;  for  then  we 
shall  not  kill  him  The  cavilling  Remonstrants  condemn  this  asser- 
tion of  the  instructor,  as  if  he  had  not  inserted  this  virtue  in  its 
proper  place,  because  loving  our  neighbour  pertains  to  ail  the  com- 
mandments of  the  second  table.  But  there  is  no  impropriety  in 
speaking  of  this  virtue  here,  not  only  because  it  pertains  to  this,  as 
well  as  to  the  other  commandments,  but  also  because  it  is  especially 
opposed  to  murder,  and  is  therefore  by  the  Lawgiver  himself  oppo- 
sed to  that  sin,  when  he  saith,  Lev.  xix.  13.  "  Thou shalt  not  ay 
nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy  people,  bui:  thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

2    It  followeth  from  this,  that  we  must  be  "patient"  t<  ward  our 
neighbour,  bearin:;  in  a  longsuffering  manner  the  injury   and   harm 
that  we  have  sustained  from  him,  and  not  revenging  it,  but   f< 
ing  it,  and  thus  not  killing  him.     We  must,  as  the  apostle  S] 
"be  longsuffering,    forbearing  and  forgiving  one  another,  Col.  iii. 
12,  13.     This  is  indeed  the  nature  of  love,  which  is  lor. 
is  not  easily  provoked,  beareth  and  endurelh  all  things,"  ace. 
to  1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  5,  7. 

3.  When  a  person  pursues  love,  he  will  overtake  "peace  "  also, 
and  maintain  it  with  his  neighbour,  and  thus  prevent  all    strift 
discord,  and  therefore  also  murder.     Applicable  are   here  the  > 
of  the  apostle,  Kom.  xii,  "  Ii  it  be  pos  much  as  in  you 

li  •.:  peaceably  with    all  men.    Blessed  are  I 
the  great  Prince  of  peace,  Matt  v.  9. 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 107.  319 

4.  Those  who  love  others  are  also  "  meek,"  for  they  do  not 
start  up  in  sudden  anger,  when  they  are  injured,  endeavouring  to 
render  their  neighbour  evil  for  evil,  but  they  remain  soft  and  tracta- 
ble, like  the  most  pliable  substances.  We  see  this  virtue  in  Moses 
above  other  men,  Numb.  xii.  2.  But  the  unsinning  Saviour  ex- 
celled him,  and  he  requires  t'iat  all  men  should  "  learn  of  him  to 
be  meek,"  Matt.  >:i.  29. 

5  Love  excites  a  person  to  "  mercy,"  by  which  he  regards  his 
neighbour's  distress  as  his  own,  and  endeavours,  as  if  he  suffered 
with  him,  to  assist  and  deliver  him,  and  hereby  he  is  without  difficulty 
preserved  from  envy,  cruelty  and  murder.  Tims  he  "  puts  on  bow- 
els of  mercy,"  as  Paul  adviseth,  Col.  iii.  12.  The  tenderhearted 
Saviour  was  repeatedly  moved  with  inward  motions  of  mercy  to- 
ward the  miserable,  and  he  pronounced  "  the  merciful  blessed  ;  for 
they  should  obtain  mercy,"  Matt.  v.   7. 

6.  When  love  bums  in  the  heart,  the  flames  thereof  will  appear 
abroad  in  "  kindness,"  by  which  a  person  conducts  affectionately 
and  courteously  in  his  gestures,  words,  and  in  all  his  behaviour  to- 
ward his  neighbours,  and  whereby  he  restrains  his  neighbour's  envy, 
hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge.  Peter  requires  that  we  should 
not  only  <k  love  as  brethren,  but  also  be  courteous,"  1  Peter,  iii.  8. 

7.  A  person  who  is  so  friendly,  "  will  also,  as  much  as  in  him  li- 
eth,  prevent  the  hurt  of  his  neighbour,"  In  consequence  of  an  inju- 
ry, which  affects  the  property,  honour,  or  body  of  our  neighbour,  his 
life  may  be  in  imminent  danger;  if  we  love  him  then,  we  will  en- 
deavour to  deliver  him,  when  he  is  seized,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
put  to  death  ;  for  he  is  in  danger  of  being  slain,  if  we  forbear," 
Prov.  xxiv.  1 1. 

8.  Love  appears  still  more  generous,  when  a  person  l*  doth  good 
to  his  enemies  "  With  respect  to  public  enemies,  distuibers  of  the 
commonwealth,  who  endeavour  to  deprive  us  of  the  opportunity  to 
do  them  good,  we  ought  to  hinder,  resist,  and  annoy  them,  as  much 
as  we  can,  agreeably  to  the  love,  which  we  owe  to  ourselves  and  to 
our  fellowcitizens  above  those  enemies.  But  with  respect  to  pri- 
vate and  personal  enemies,  we  ought,  according  to  the  nature  of 
love,  to  do  them  good,  as  the  Samaritan  did  good  to  the  wounded 
Jew,  who  was  his  enemy,  Luke  x.  30 — 35  This  the  Saviour  com- 
mands, Matt.  v.  44.  and  Paul  urgeth  it  also,  Rom.  xii.  20.  and  Solo- 
mon, the  forefather  of  the  Saviour-  had  enjoined  it  before,  Pr»v.  xxv. 
21,  22, 


lSSi        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 


APPLICATION. 

That  Christ  did  as  a  new  Lawgiver,  add  to  this  commandment, 
n  that  we  must  not  be  angry  with  our  brother,  nor  address  him  with 
bitter  language,  nor  revenue  an  injury,  no  not  by  the  interference  of 
the  magistrate,"  this  is  the  language  of  the  Socinians,  and  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  God,  which  teaches  us  that  all  anger,  all  revi- 
ling, and  desire  of  revenge  was  forbiddtn  under  the  old  testament  ; 
see  oniy  Lev.  xix.  18.  which  we  have  cited  before  ;  and  therefore 
the  commandment  of  Jesus,  that  we  may  not  be  angry  with  our  bro- 
ther without  cause,  is  not  a  new  law,  but  a  repetition  and  an  illustra- 
tion of  an  old  law,  which  the  ancient  Pharisees  had  obscured,  Matt. 
V.  22,  39. 

What  is  your  opinion  now,  hearers,  concerning  the  church  of 
Rome,  which  weens  that  she  hath  done  God  service  by  destroying 
so  many  kings  and  princes,  and  so  many  other  men,  on  account  of 
the  profession  of  the  truth.  No  man  was  formerly  sure  of  his  life  ; 
whoever  spake  but  the  least  word  against  that  impure  whore,  was 
presently  seized  and  condemned  to  be  put  to  death,  either  by  the 
sword,  or  the  halter,  or  by  drowning,  yea,  such  a  death  was  deemed 
too  mild,  they  burned  such  persons  alive,  and  buried  them  in  the 
eaith  alive.  Yea,  the  Papists  have  endeavoured  to  lay  waste  and 
murder  whole  countries,  which  Were  infested  with  what  they  called 
the  northern  heresy  :  let  Piedmont,  France.  Ire  .  rid  and  Holland  de- 
clare. Can  such  a  religion  be  conformable  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  acceptable  to  God,  which  established  itself  in  the  blood  of  the 
innocent?  surely  no  :  all  this  bloodshedding  is  the  mark  of  "  the 
great  whore,  who  is  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with 
the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,"  according  to  Rev.  xvii.  7.  The 
Lord  God  hath  also  revenged  it  by  abridging  Antichrist,  and  by 
hing  him  with  spiritual  and  temporal  judgments,  and   "giving 

him  blood  to  drink,   since  he  hath  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  pro- 
'pliets  "  as  John  prophesieth,  Rev.  xvi.  G      And  we    need  not  doubt 

that  the  Lord  God  will  punish  it  more  adequately  at  some  future  pe- 
iorl,  by  a  total  devastation  of  the  spiritual  Babylon,  because  "in  her 

:s  found  the  blood  of  the  prophets,  and  of  all  who  were  slain   on    the 

earth."     See  Rev.  xviii.   1 — 24. 

But  that  which  chiefly  concerns  you  at  present,  hearers,  is  whether 

sdl  of  you  have  kept  this  commandment  in  all  its  parts.     It  was  your 

duty  to  keep  it,  for  ye  are  directly  subject    to  the  exalted   Lawgiver, 
lo  yoq    amidst  the  d  I  !iunderings,   and   fearful 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105— 107.  321 

lightnings  from  heaven,  "  Ye  shall  not  kill."     Have  ye  not  kept  the 
commandment,  ye  are  condemned  to   die,   and  "accursed,  because 
ye  bave  not  continued  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to 
do  them,"  agreeably  to  what   Paul  teacheth   us,    Gal.  iii.   10,  from 
Deut.  xxvii.  26.     I  have  no  reason   to    think  that  any  of  you    hath 
killed  his  neighbour,  either  secretly  or  openly  ;  but  are  ye  therefore 
clear  of  bloodguiltmess  ?     No:  we  kill  our   neighbour  by    malicious 
thoughts,  by  bitter  words,  and  surly  gestures,  by  dishonouring  him, 
by  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  a  desire  of  revenge  j  yea,  we  violate  this 
commandment  by  a  want  of  love  to  our   neighbour,   by   passionate- 
ness,   strife,    harshness,    unmercifulness,    surliness,  and    sullenness 
toward  our  neighbour,  and  also   when  we  do  not   maintain  love    and 
its  goud  fruits.     Compare  yourselves  with   this  picture,   view   your- 
selves in  this  mirror,  and  sec  whether  ye  do  not  behold  your  proper 
figure,  and  perceive  your    murderous  heart  in  it'     Or  are  ye    utter 
strangers  to  these  malignant    motions  ?  and  do  ye  think  that  ye  are 
goodnatured  ?  but  when  ?  when  ye  are  alone,  and  have  no   opportu- 
nity to  discover  your  sullenness  ?     Yea,  will  ye  not  even  then  stir  up 
your  malignity  against    this  or  that  person,  who   ye  think,   hath    in- 
jured you,  or  might  injure  you  ?     Are  there  not  many  strangers  and 
relations,  husband,  wife,  children,  parents,  who  are  not  to  your  mind, 
or  who  are  a  burthen  to  you,  whom   ye  secretly    wish    God  would 
take  away  i   and  how  do  ye  behave  toward   persons,  with  whom  ye 
must  converse  at  home  and  elsewhere  f  do  ye  not    vex   them    time 
after  time  with  your    difficult   temper,    austere   looks,   and   spiteful 
words  ?     And  if  others  look  at  you,  and  speak  to  you    in   an   unkind 
manner,  or  do  aught  that  is  not   to  your  mind,   or   vex    and   wrong 
you,  are  ye  able  to  endure  all  with  patience  and    meekness,    and    to 
answer  it  with  kindness  ?  do  ye  say  yea ;  I  ask  you  then    also,  what 
it  is  that  moves  y«u  to  this  ?  is  it  the  fear  of   God  ?  is  "  destruction 
from  God  a  terrour  to  you,  and  are  ye  unable  to  endure    by    reason 
of  his  highness  I"  as  that  patient  man  speaks,    Job  xxxi.  23,  oris  it 
because  ye  are  of  an  abject    and  cowardly   spirit  ?  or  because    men 
would  despise  you,  if  ye  showed  your   moody    disposition  ?  or    be- 
cause your  adversary  is  your  superiour ;  or  is  at  least  as  keen  as  ye 
are  yourselves,  and  thus  one  knife,  as  we  say,  keeps  the  other  in  its 
sheath  ?     I  ask  all  this,  that  I  may,  if  it  be    possible,   bring    you    to 
yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  see  the  abominableness  of  your  hearts. 
Are  ye  so  exceedingly  filled  with  selfiove,  that    ye    cannot    look  to 
the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  and  therefore   cannot   think   any   evil    of 
yourselves ;  hear  then  what  the   Lord   God,   who  "  searcheth    youv 
heart  which  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  se 
Vol.  ir.  2  P 


*8         TEL::  J  MM AL'DMENT  EXPLAINED. 

that  none  can  know  it,T'  Jer-  xvii.  9,  10,  hear,  I  say,  what  he  tesi- 
fieth  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  thus  of  all  Men,  and  therefore  of 
you  also,  Rem.  hi.  13 — IS.  "  Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre  ; 
with  their  tdni  i  es  they  have  used  deceit ;  the  poison  of  asps  is  un- 
der their  lips  :  whose  mouth,  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness:  their 
feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood :  destruction  and  misery  are  in  Iheir 
v.:1'  s :  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known  ;  there  is  no  fear 
of  God  before  their  eyes."  Behold,  this  is  your  character,  whether 
ye  know  it  or  not ;  and  when  God  shall  set  these  things  in  order 
before  ycur  eye3,  then  will  ye  see  it. 

Do  not  however  reckon  it  enough  to  know  that  ye  are  exceedingly 
sinful  and  abominable,   but   observe    also   what    a    recompence    the 
Lord  God  hath  appointed  for  such  wickedness,  and  apply  it  to  your- 
selves, that  ye  may  know  also  that  it  is  an  evil  and    bitter   thing  to 
forsake  the  Lord,  and  that  his   fear  is  not  in  you.     I   will    proclaim 
the  word  of  God  to  you,  which   saith,  Deut.  xxvii.  42,  "  Cursed   be 
he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly  ;  and  all  the  people  shall  say 
Amen."     Among  uthe  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth,   and    the 
seVen  which  arc  an  abomination  to  his  soul,  are  also  hands  that  shed 
innocent  blood,  an  heart  that  deviselh  wicked  imaginations,  and  feet 
that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief,"  Prov.  vi.  16 — 18.     "  Murder- 
ers shall  have  their  part  in  the   lake    which   burnetii    with   fire  and 
brimstone,"  according  to  Rev.  x*i.  8.     Or  is  it  your  thought,   that 
ye  need  not  regard  this,  because  ye  have  not  killed  any  man  ?  but  is 
nut  a  heart  which  deviseth  wicked    imaginations   numbered    among 
the  seven  abominations  ?     "  Whoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  mur- 
derer :  and  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal    life    abiding    in 
him,"  according  to  the    words  of  the  apostle,  1  John  iii.    15.     Paul 
saith,  Rom.  iii.    19,  "  We  know  that  what   things  soever   the    law 
saith,  it  saith  to  them    who   are  under  the  law  :  that    every   mouth 
may  be  slopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God," 
and  he  applies  this  to  all  the  abominations  of  which  he  had  spoken, 
vrs.    13 — IS,  and  of  which  we    have    convinced   you,    as  that   your 
■'throat  is  an  open  sepulchre,-'  Jksc.     Behold  this,  and  be  concerned, 
and  distressed,  that  ye  may   not  find  any   longer   the    life    of  your 
hands,  although  ye  should  be    afflicted   and   ready  to  die  ;    for  this 
woul    cause  you  to  fice  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  from  the    sec- 
ond dea  .  . 

Do  any  of  you  I  '  '     -  m  bloodguiltiness,  and  do 

ye  not  know  what  to  do,  hear  then,  ye  who  mourn  and  weep  on  ac- 
count of  your  vileness,  and  your  condemnation,  I  have  a  good  word 
to  you,  and  O  that  it  mi,,  :  jour  souls,  so  that  it  would  pre- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  523 

-jut  you  blameless  before  your  Judge.  It  3s  this,  God  hatfc  ap- 
pointed has  h^on  *  surety  for  persons  who  were  worthy  of  death,  he 
engaged  to  his  Father  that  he  Would  become  a  surety,  and  he  actu- 
ally fulfilled  the  sureiiship,  when  from  love,  and  "  through  zeal  for 
tfce  house  of  Clod,"  he  suffered  himself  to  be  "consumed,  and  gave 
kelf.an  offering,  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,  for  a  sweetsroeHing  sa- 
vour," according  to  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Eph.  v.  3s  Ik-cause  he  stood 
m  the  stead  of  persons  who  deserved  to  die,  therefore  he,  who  was 
the  Prince  of  life,  was  put  to  death,  "  he  was  delivered  and  died  for 
our  offences,  according  10  the  scriptures,"  as  we  read,  Rom.  iv.  25. 
1  Cor.  xv.  3.  I  would  not  have  you  all  however  to  dismiss  forth- 
with your  concern  on  this  account,  as  though  he  died  for  all  men, 
we  know  better  :  but  I  would  that  ye  should  seek  to  win  Christ,  and 
thus  to  partake  of  his  death,  that  his  death  may  be  reckoned  yours, 
and  for  you.  Know  then  that  he  proffers  himself,  his  death,  and 
thereby  life  to  and  for  you  ;  for,  "having  abolished  death,  he  hath 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  2  Tim.  i.  10.  Touch  then  that  evangeli- 
cal sceptre  of  his,  consent  to  his  proffer,  "  take  hold  of  him,  who  is 
Lrengh  of  God,  and  make  your  peace  with  the  Lord,  and  be  re- 
conciled to  God,"  as  ye  are  counselled  and  entreated  to  do,  Isaiah 
xxvii  5.  2  Cor.  v  20.  Yea,  flee  to  him,  as  a  most  secure  city 
of  refuge,  like  the  murderer,  Luke  xxiii.  42,  45.  "The  name  of 
the  Lord  is  indeed  a  strong  tower  :  the  righteous  runneth  into  if, 
and  is  safe,"  according  to  Prov.  xviii.  10-  O  rest  not,  until  ye  have 
really  and  actually  become  partakers  of  his  death,  andt  are  thereby 
reconciled  to  God. 

«'  With  thee  there  is  forgiveness,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared," 
saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  exxx.  4.  Let  him  then,  who  hath 
obtained  forgiveness,  and  to  whom  life  hath  been  granted,  endeavour 
to  be  delivered  from  his  deadly  disposition,  which  suggests  murders  : 
we  must  "  put  off  wrath,  anger,  malice  and  evilspeaking,"  as  the 
apostle  admonished).  Though  we  be  ever  so  much  wronged  and 
harmed,  we  must  not  retain  any  anger,  nor  desire  of  revenge.  We 
all  pray  to  God,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them 
who  trespass  against  us  ;"  shall  we  not  then  be  ready  to  forgive  ? 
what  evidence  can  we  have,  that  our  sins  are  forgiven,  if  we  retain 
displeasure  against  our  neighbour  ?  Consider,  ye  justified  persons, 
how  often,  and  how  grievously  ye  have  provoked  the  Lord,  and 
with  how  much  patience  he  hath  endured  your  sins,  and  how  freely 
he  hath  forgiven  them  ;  yea,  that  he  would  rather  punish  them  in 
his  dear  Son,  than  in  you  ;  will  not  ye  then,  whom  God  hath  forgiven 


324        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ten  thousand  talents,  forgive  your  fellowservant  a  hundred  pence  ? 
See  Matt,  xviii.  24 — 35.  I  therefore  exhort  you  with  Paul  fr<  m 
Eph.  iv.  31,-32.  v.  1,  2  "  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  an- 
ger, and  clamour,  and  evilspeaking  hr  put  away  from  you,  with  all 
malice.  And  be  ye  kind,  one  to  another,  tenderhearted,  forgiving 
one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  ycu.  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children  :  and  walk  in  love  as 
Curist  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for  us,  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweetsmelling  savour."  See  this  same 
exhortation,  Col.  hi.  12 — 14.  Thesssins  ought  certainly  to  be 
pursued  with  a  deadly  hatred,  and  to  be  slain  ;  for  they  are  murder- 
ers of  your  souls,  yea,  they  killed  the  Prince  of  life  ;  therefore  nail 
them  to  bis  cross,  that  it  may  appear  that  ye  belong  to  Christ  ;  for 
"such  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  \\  c  may  not  kill  any  man,  because  he  is  our  neighbour,  but 
we  must  kill  our  old  man,  who  is  nearer  to  us  than  our  neighbour. 

Ought  we  to  conduct  in  this  manner  toward  our  neighbour,  we 
ought  then  niuc'i  more  to  take  care  of  cur  own  lives.  We  have  ob- 
tained our  lives  of  the  Lord,  as  a  precious  treasure  ;  we  ought  then 
to  take  care  of  them,  and  to  preserve  tbem  for  him,  and  for  his  ser- 
vice. It  becomes  us  therefore  not  only  to  beware  of  rashness,  and 
of  all  iniquity,  by  which  our  lives  are  endangered,  but  also  to  be  in- 
dustrious according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  order  that  we  may 
provide  ourselves  by  all  lawful  means  with  whatever  is  necessary  to 
sustain  our  lives,  Hear  and  practise  what  Paul  saith,  2  Thess.  hi. 
10 — 12,  "  When  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that 
if  any  man  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat ;  for  we  hear  that 
these  are  some  which  walk  among  you  disorderly*  working  not  «t 
all,  but  are  busybodies.  Now  them  that  are  such,  we  command  and 
exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and 
cat  their  own  bread."  Are  we  not  in  health,  but  sick,  we  should 
then  make  use  of  medicines  for  our  recovery,  for  the  Lord  hath  ap- 
appointed  them  for  healing:  we  ought  not  then  to  he  averse  from 
them,  but  to  make  use  of  them  according  to  his  will.  When  tk« 
Lord  would  prolong  the  life  of  Ilef.el.iah.  who  was  visited  v. 
deadly  disease,  fifteen  years,  he  commanded  that  "  they  should  lay 
a  plaiiter  upon  the  bile,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  2  1.  Depend  not  hov 
for  the  preservation  of  your  lives  on  your  own  care,  nor  on  the;-; 
outward  means,  but  only  on  the  Lord,  living  from  his  hand:  it  was 
a  blot  on  the  religious  character  of  Asa,  that  "  he  sought  not  to  the 
Lord  in  his  sickness,  but  to  the  physicians,"  2  Chron-  xvi.  12  "  He 
I  either  suffers,"  or  is  in  danger  of  losing  his  life  in  tbi 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    105—107.  S25 

any  other  way,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  must  commit  his  soul 
in  welldoing  to  Jjie  faithful  Creator/'  as  Peter  admonisheth,  1  Pet. 
iv.  19.  And  are  we  in  w^nt  of  daily  food  and  clothing,  let  us  not 
be  too  much  discouraged  :  God.  our  father,  our  life,  and  the  length 
of  our  days,  who  giveth  us  life,  who  feeds  the  fowls,  who  clothes 
and  adorns  the  grass  of  the  field,  \iill  provide  us  wiih  both  food  and 
raiment,  as  the  mouth  of  truth  teachcth,  Matt.  vi.  25 — 34.  Jt  is 
true,  believers,  ye  also  must  die  ;  but  ye  will  die,  that  ye  may  he- 
come  heirs  of  life,  and  may  be  settled  there,  where  "there  will  not 
be  any  more  death,  nor  sorrow,  nor  crying,  nor  pain,"  Rev.  xxi.  4, 
for,  as  Paul  hath  foretold,  "  corruption  will  put  on  incorruption,  and 
mortal  will  put  on  immortality."     Amen. 


(   £26  ) 


the 


SEVENTH  COMMANDMEN" 


EXPLAINED. 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  4..  "  Thou  shak  not  cohimit  adulter} .

Q.  107.  But  is  it  enough  that  ive  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  manner 
mentioned  above  ? 

A.  No  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger,  he  com- 
mands us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves  ;  to  show  patience, 
peace,  meekness,  mercy,  and  all  kindness  toward  him,  and  prevent 
his  h»rt  as  much  as  in  us  lies  ;  and  that  we  do  good,  even  to  our 
enemies, 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  3©T 

k.r-|"1 

X  HE  Lord  killeth  and  maketli  alive,"  thus  sings  Hannah  to  the 
honour  of  the  most  high  God,  1  Sam.  ii.  6.  The  right  of  life  and 
death  belongs  to  him  only,  who  hath  a  sovereign  power  over  all 
things  ;  and  who  hath  this  but  the  Lord  God  alone,  who  can  make 
alive  as  easily  as  he  can  kill  ?  He  requires  that  his  pe»ple  should 
attend  seriously  to  this,  when  he  saith,  Dent.  xxxin  39,  «  See-  now 
I,  even  I  am  he,  and  there  is  no  God  with  me  :  I  kill,  and  I  make 
alive;  I  wound  and  I  heal."  Job  saith.  Job  xii.  10,  "  in  his  hand 
is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing,  and  the  breath  of  all  mankind." 
Even  sovereign  princes  cannot  withdraw  themselves  from  this  sove- 
reign power  of  God  :  "  He  will  cut  off  the  spirit  of  princes  :  he  is 
terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth,"  Psalm  Ixvi.  12.  Therefore 
those  high  potentates  take  too  much  upon  themselves,  yea,  they 
exalt  themselves  to  the  seat  of  God,  when  with  the  king  of  Babylon, 
;i  they  kill  and  save  aiive  whom  they  will,"  Dan.  v.  19.  Are  they 
raised  above  their  subjects,  it  is  not  to  bereave  them  of  their  life, 
but  to  preserve  it ;  do  they  not  bear  the  sword  in  vain,  they  may 
not  however  use  it  as  they  please,  but  as  God  pleaseth  with  respect 
to  killing  and  saving,  alive  :  "  The  power,"  saith  Paul  to  the  Romans, 
u  is  the  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good,  a  revenger  to  execute 
wrath  upon  him  that  doth  evil,"  Rom.  xiii.  3,  4.  But  the  highest 
sovereignty,  and  the  supreme  right  of  life  and  death  God  hath  re- 
served for  himself,  and  he  prohibits  It  to  all  others,  when  he  pro- 
claims from  heaven,  with  a  display  of  his  exalted  majesty,  out  of 
the  burning  fire,  amidst  darkness,  gloominess,  thunder,  lightning 
and  a  tempest,  to  every  one,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill." 
-  The  Lord  God  hath  set  parents  and  others  over  us,  and  he  re- 
quites in  the  fifth  commandment,  that  we  should  honour  them. 
But  that  families,  over  which  parents  are  set.  and  the  commonwealth, 
over  which  magistrates  are  set,  may  not  be  destroyed,  he  requires 
that  no  man  should  kill  his  neighbour. 

The  instructor  in  explaining  this  commandment  shows, 

I.  What  sins  are  forbidden  in  it,  Q.   105,  106. 

II.  What  virtues  are  commanded  in  it,  Q.   10?". 

I.  The  sin  is  considered  first  in  itself,  Q.  105,  and  then  with  re- 
spect to  its  causes,  Q.  106. 

The  sin  is  in  general  killing  ;  which  we  commit  with  respect  to 
others,  and  with  respect  to  ourselves.  The  second  table  of  the  law 
enjoins  the  love  of  out  neighbour,  and  so  this  sixth  commandment 
requireth  the  love  of  our  neighbour's  life  ;  and  therefore  it  doth  not 
■.-.  our  the  opinion  of  Pythagoras,  who   taught   that   we   might  net 


508        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINER. 

kill  evrn  a  beast,  because  he  imagined  that  the  souls  of  men  passed 
into  beasts.  We  may  and  must  kill  wild  animals,  that  they  may 
not  devour  men:  God  took,  care  that  they  did  not  prevail,  nor  mul- 
tiply too  abundantly  for  Israel,  Exod  xxiii.  29.  David  slew  a  lion 
and  a  bear,  that  had  taken  a  sheep  from  the  flock,  1  Sam.  xvii. 
34,  S5.  "  Every  beast  of  the  earth,  every  fowl  of  the  air,  all  that 
moveth  on  the  earth,  and  all  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  every  moving 
thing  that  liveth,  shall  be  meat  for  you  ;  even  as  the  green  herb 
have  I  given  you  all  things,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Noah  and  his  poster- 
ity, Gen.  ix.  23.  '«  Brute  beasts  are  indeed  made  to  be  taken  and 
destroyed,"  as  Peter  saith,  2  Pet.  ii.  12.  It  is  not  however  to  be 
approved  of,  but  it  is  inhuman  to  be  cruel  to  cattle,  and  to  torment 
tiiem  in  a  ruthless  manner  :  M  A  righteous  man  re<jardeth  the  life 
oi  his  beast  :  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  »ii.  10.  When  we  exercise  such  cruelty  and  tor- 
ture, we  compel  "the  creatures  to  groan,"  Rom.  viii.  20 — 22. 
This  command  therefore  forbids  killing  men. 

Although  subjects  are  the  neighbours  of  their  magistrates,  they 
may  nevertheless  be  put  to  death  by  their  magistrates  on  account  of 
grievous  misdemeanours,  which  tend  to  destroy  the  commonwealth. 
We  have  observed  before  from  Paul,  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 4,  that  the  ma- 
gistrates are  armed  by  God  with  the  sword  for  this  purpose.  'I  he 
Lord  hath  expressly  commanded,  Gen.  ix.  6,  "  that  if  any  shed 
man's  blood,  Ids  blood  shall  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image  of  God  made 
he  man."  It  is  not  lelt  to  the  discretion  of  the  higher  powers  to 
release,  or  pardon  the  murderer  ;  it  is  said  to  them,  Num.  xxxv. 
31,  "  Ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  who  is 
guilty  of  death,  but  he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death  "  It  fared  ex- 
ceedingly ill  with  Saul,  because  he  spared  the  devoted  Amalekites  ; 
and  with  Ahab,  because  he  showed  mercy  improperly  to  Benhadad, 
I  Sam.  xv.  1 — 35.  1  Kings  xx.  32 — 43.  It  is  therefore  an  abom- 
inable practice  of  the  Papists,  to  open  churches  and  monasteries  in 
order  to  shelter  and  secure  murderers  from  the  sword  of  the  magis- 
trates, who  may  not  take  them  thence  God  required  that  they 
should  "  take  the  marderer  from  his  altar,  and  put  him  to  death," 
Exod  xxi.  14.  Solomon  did  not  spare  Joab,  although  he  had  fled 
to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  and  had  caught  hold  on  the  horns  of 
the  altar,  but  ordered  him  to  be  slain  there,  1  Kings  ii.  28 — 33.  It 
ia  therefore  silly  in  the  followers  of  Mcnno  and  Socinus,  to  as- 
sert that  magistrates  have  no  right  under  the  New  Testament  to 
put  malefactors  to  death  with  the  sword  ;  but  if  this  did  not  become 
ChvistiRn  magistrates,  whose  life  would  then  be  safe  ?     There  is  al- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    l«5_10f.  SOS 

so  no  reason,  why  we  may  not  punish  a  murderer  now,  as  well  as 
formerly.  Magistrates  oufcht  nevertheless  to  beware  of  putting  an 
innocent  person  to  death,  like  the  wicked  Ahabs,  Joashes,  Manas- 
sehs,  Filates  and  Herods,  that  they  may  not  subject  themselves  and 
their  people  to  bloodguiltiness,  and  the  wrath  of  God. 

How  dreadful  is  war  I  how  many  thousands  of  innocent  persons 
ate  killed  in  it !  neither  shall  they  who  excite  unjust  wars  escape 
the  judgment  of  the  just  supreme  Avenger  :  We  may  not  however, 
with  the  Mennonites  and  Socinians,  condemn  a  just  war,  because 
God  forbids  us  to  kill  ;  for  no  man  could  lead  a  tranquil  and  peacea- 
ble life,  if  men  did  not  resist  their  malicious  foes  by  a  righteous  war  - 
and  besides  this,  the  people  of  God,  after  this  commandment  was 
given  to  them,  waged  wars  by  the  order  of  God,  and  according  to 
laws  of  war  enacted  by  him.  John  the  Baptist  never  advised  the 
soldiers,  nor  Peter  Cornelius  the  centurion,  nor  Paul  Semius 
Paulus  the  deputy,  to  resign  their  military  callings,  after  they  were 
converted  to  Christianity.     It  is  true,  "  we  may  not  resist  evil,  and 

we  must  love  our  enemies,"  as  Christ  saith,  Matt.  v.  39 48.     But 

is  this  said  to  the  magistrates  concerning  the  enemies  of  the  com- 
monwealth ?  surely  no :  but  to  the  disciples  concerning  their  private 
enemies,  against  whom  it  did  not  become  them  to  wage  war.  The 
Lord  God  foretold   indeed,  that  "nation  should    not   lift   up  sword 

against  nation,  nor   learn   war  any    more,"  Isaiah  ii.  4.     xi.  6 9. 

But  if  these  prophecies  condemn  all  wars,  they  are  then  not  yet  ful- 
filled ;  for  experience  teacheth  us  that  all  wars  have  not  yet  ceased  : 
it  is  therefore  evident,  that  these  words  foretcl  the  peace,  which 
should  be  effected  by  the  death  of  Christ  bet\? een  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
as  appears  from  the  connexion  of  those  passages,  which  do  not  there- 
fore condemn  lawful  wars. 

Although  it  is  exceedingly  melancholic,  when  a  person,  urged  by 
danger,  and  unable  to  rescue  himself  by  entreaties,  by  protestations, 
by  crying  or  fleeing,  kills  in  the  instant  of  attack,  not  from  revenge, 
but  only  that  he  may  defend  himself,  his  neighbour,  who  assaults 
him  in  a  murderous  manner  ;  yet  this  is  not  to  be  charged  upon 
him  as  a  prohibited  killing.  If  men  might,  without  being  guilty  of 
murder,  kill  a  thief,  when  he  broke  into  a  house  by  night  to  steal, 
according  to  Exodus  xxii.  2,  how  much  more  may  we  then  kill  a  per- 
son, who  attacks  our  lives,  if  we  cannot  otherwise  deliver  ourselves 
from  death.  God  hath  armed  almost  every  living  creature  with 
natural  weapons,  in  order  that  he  may  defend  himself  against  his 
enemies ,  when  his  life  is  in  danger  :  and  shall  not  the  reasonable 
creature  then  defend  himself  in  such  a   situation,  but  submit  to  be 


310         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

rnurdcred  ?  It  is  true,  I  ought  to  love  my  neighbour  as  myself; 
but  I  ought  then  to  love  myself  first  and  most,  and  thus  seek  to 
preserve  mine  own  life,  more  than  my  neighbour's. 

It  is  also  a  grievous  misfortune,  when  a  person  kills  his  neighbour 
by  accident,  unawares,  and  without  hating  him  beforelime  ;  for  in- 
stance, a  person  "hews  wood,  and  the  axe  slips  from  the  helve,  and 
lights  upon  his  neighbour,  and  he  dies  ;"  this  is  a  grievous  misfor- 
tune, yet  it  may  not  be  reckoned  such  a  killing  of  a  person,  as  de 
serves  punishment.  The  Lord  declares  tint  such  unfortunate  slay- 
ers are  "  innocent,"  and  he  would  screen  them  from  the  avengers 
of  blood,  and  therefore  ordered  six  cities  and  places  of  refuge  to  be 
severed  for  them  in   the  land  of  Israel,  .  '.     Deut.  xix. 

I — -10. 

But  when    the   Lawgiver   sailh,  "thou  Bhi  ill,"  he  sj 

then  of  a  private  person's  killing  his  neighbour  from  hatred,  re- 
venge and  with  forethought :  either  "  by  himself  or  by  another." 

•A  person  kills  his  neighbour  by  himself,   1  "  With  his  thougl  . 
when  he  curses  him  in  his  thoughts,  and   wishes   that  this    c. 
evil,  yea,  death   itself  may  befal   him.     Which   Solomon  oppc 
when  he  saith,  Eccl.  'x.  -0,  "  Curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in    thy 
thought,  and  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  bedchamber."     How 
doth  the  sinner  think,  when  any  person  doth  not  act  as   he  wishes. 
"  When  will  he  die,  and    his  name  perish  :"    as   David's   e:, 
longed  for  his  death,  Psalm  xli.  5.     Doth  not  this  manifest  a  mur- 
derous  disposition  ?     If  all  those  should  die,  whom  the  sinner  wished 

,  the  whole  world  would  soon  die  out.  It  is  with  equal  p; 
ty  to  be  reckoned  murder,  when  a  person  contrives  with  himself 
how  to  injure  his  neighbour,  when  "  one  i  magi  net h  evil  in  his  heart 
against  another,"  which  God  forbids,  Zech.  viii.  IT.  It  is  also  to 
be  accounted  murder,  when  with  Saul  wo  "  consent  to  the  death"  of 
the  innocent,  Acts  viii.    1. 

2.  A  j.er„un  i.ihs  his  neighbour  also  with  spiteful,  ■  e\Tere,  piercing 

words,"  with  chid. ug  and  railing, with  which  David 

was  sorer,  !  .'.,  who  therefore  complained  to  the  Lord,  I 

Ivii.  4,  '*  My  ;.oul  is  among  iieos,  and  I  lie   even  among   them  that 

.  fire,  even  the  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  ar- 

rovvs>and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword."     It  is  more  especially  a  kil- 

of  our  neighbour,  when  we  report   his    I        ....:r  in  the  most 

ible  manner  to  his   enemy,   ■  nd  endanger    hio  life  ;   • 

.   .-..  been   obliged  to  employ    hi  laying  with 

thee         .    ihe  sword  eig  five  priests,  and  all   tha*  breathed 

.■--• 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 5 or.  311 

to  Saul  the  friendship  which  Ahimelech  had  shown  to  David  ?  See 
the  history,  1  Sam.  xxii.  6.  We  must  reckon  those  also  to  he  not 
less  guilty  of  murder,  who  falsely  accuse  an  innocent  person  to  the 
judge,  and  demand  his  death,  as  the  Jews  repea.edly  acted  toward 
the  Saviour,  and  became  thus  "  the  betrayers  and  murderers  of  that 
Just  One,"  as  Stephen  upbraids  them,  Acts  vii.  52.  Peter  also 
convinceth  them,  Acts  ii.  23,"  that  they  had  by  wicked  hands  cru- 
cified and  slain  him." 

3.  A  person  can  be  guilty  of  this  sin  also  with  his  "  gestures," 
when  his  countenance,  like  the  index  of  the  heart,  discovers  that  he 
harbours  malicious  inclinations  against  his  neighbour :  one  while 
the  murderous  mind  of  the  sinner  will  affect  his  visage  with  pale- 
ness, then  it  will  cause  him  to  blush,  one  while  his  countenance  will 
be  bloated,  then  it  will  be  wrinkled,  every  glance  of  his  eyes  is,  as 
it  were,  an  act  of  murder,  and  darts  forth  fiery  flames  of  burning 
anger,  his  no*trils  widen,  and  breathe  forth  threatenings  and  slaugh- 
ter, or,  as  Solomon  expresseth  it,  "  An  ungodly  man  diggcth  up 
evil,  and  in  his  lips  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  burning  fire  :  he  shutteth 
his  eyes  to  devise  froward  things  ;  moving  his  lips,  he  bringeth  evil 
to  pass,"  Prov.  xvi.  27,  30.  Or  that  we  may  depict  it  to  you  in 
Cain,  who  murdered  his  brother,  "  He  was  very  wroth,  and  his  coun- 
tenance fell,"  Gen  iv.  5,  6. 

4.  If  we  may  not  kill  our  neighbour,  with  thoughts,  words  or 
gestures,  "  much  less  may  we  do  it  with  deeds."  We  do  this,  (a) 
by  "  dishonouring"  our  neighbour,  injuring  him  with  respect  to  his 
honour,  which  is  dearer  to  many  than  their  life,  reproaching  him, 
and  bringing  him  into  contempt.  It  was  to  David  "  as  a  sword  in 
his  bones,  when  his  enemies  reproached  him,"  Psalm  xlii  10.  The 
Lord  himself  takes  it  exceedingly  ill,  when  a  man  dishonours  his 
neighbour  ;  it  is  his  will,  that  ''  he  who  saith  to  his  brother,  Raca, 
shall  be  punishable  by  the  council ;  and  that  he  who  saith,  thou 
fool,  shall  be  punishable  by  hellfire."  Matt,  v-  22.  (b)  Or  «  by 
wounding"  him,  which  may  easily  bring  him  to  his  end.  If  we 
should  inflict  a  wound  upon  a  person,  which  is  not  mortal,  but  which 
should  occasion  a  fever,  or  some  other  calamity,  of  which  he  should 
die,  would  we  not  then  be  the  cause  of  his  death  ?  It  was  therefore 
a  righteous  recompence,  which  the  Lord  ordained  for  such  offences, 
Lev.  xxiv.  19,  20.  "  If  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour; 
as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  him  :  breach  for  breach, 
eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth,"  &c.  See  also  Deut.  xix.  21.  (c) 
Neither  can  we  acquit  a  person  of  actual  murder,  who  endangers 
the   life  of  his    neighbour:    "When  a  mar   built  a  house,  he  was 


312         THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

obliged  to  make  a  battlement  for  the  roof,  that  he  might  not  bring 
blood  upon  his  house,  if  any  man  fell  from  it,"    Deut.  xxii.  8.     "  If 
a  man  knew  that  his  ox  was  wont  lo  push,  and  he  kept  him  not  in, 
and  the  ox  killed  a  man  or  woman,  the  ox  was  to  be  stoned,  and  his 
owner  was  also  to  be  put  to  death,"  according  to  the  commandment 
of  the  Lord,  Ex.   xxi.  29.     (d)  But  it  is  a  greater  offence,  when  a 
man  attacks  the  life  of  his  neighbour,  and  deprives  him  of  it,  either 
with    an    instrument  of  iron,  or  with  a  stone,  or   with   a  weapon  of 
wood,"     See  Numb.  xxxv.    16,  i7,  18,  or  by  witchcraft,  that  evil 
work  of  the  flesh,  of  which  the  apostle  speaks,  Gal.  v.  20.     If  tkis 
be  done  treacherously,  under  a  pretence  of  friendship,  "  with  a  kiss, 
as  Joab  slew  Abner  and  Amasa,"    2  Sam   iii.  27.  xx.   9,  10,  it  ex- 
ceeds all  other  abominations.     Although  duels,  which  are  fought  by- 
two  persons,  after   a    previous   challenge,  are    not    to  be    reckoned 
among    acts  of  treachery,  they  cannot   however   be    defended,  but 
merit  the  utmost  abhorrence  ;  for  what  can  be  imagined  more  horri- 
ble, than  that  two  persons  enter  the  lists  with  one  another,  determined 
either  to  die  themselves,  or  to  kill  their  neighbour,  or  to  perish  both 
of  them  ?     How !     is  a  man  lord   ot  his  own   life,  or  of  his   neigh- 
bour's, that  he  may  attack  it,  and  take  it  from  the  earth  ?    Let  «o 
man  think,  that  he  betrays  an  abject  spirit,  when  he  declines  lo  re- 
trieve his  injured   honour  by  challenging  his  adversary,  or  coward- 
ice, when  he   doth  not  accept  a  challenge  :    no,  the   magnanimous 
generosity,    and  generous  magnanimity  of  man    will  not  suffer  him 
to   seek   his  honour  in   shameful,  yea,  in    murderous    duels,  but  it 
teaches  him  to  despise  the  person,  who   reproaches,  or  challenges 
him.     Doth  not  he,  who  prefers  the  greater  to  the  less,  even  life  to 
honour,  excel  him,  who  values  the  less  more  than  the  greater,  even 
honour  more  than  life  ?     But  1  apprehend  that  such  combatants  do 
not  understand  that  holy  magnanimity  which   provides  for  the  wel- 
fare of  the    soul.     It  is   the    act  of  fools  to  excuse  this   abominable 
practice  with  the  example  of  David,  wlio  engaged  in  a  combat  with 
Goliath,   1  Sam.  xviii.  32 — 50,  for  David  did  that   by   and   with  the 
authority   of  the    king   of  Israel,  against  an  open  enemy  of  Israel, 
who  had  defied  the  armies  of  Cod  and  of  Israel,  with  an   assurance 
that  he   should  obtain  the    victory,  and   from  a  powerful   impulse  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  but  not   seduced  by  vain   glory.      \\  hen  our  duel- 
ists  have,  like  D*vid,  fought  with  a  lion  and  a  bear,  let  them  then 
3ee    whether    they   can    avail    themselves  of  this  heroic    action  of 
David. 

We  kill  our  neighbour  not  only  by  ourselves,  but  also  by  others, 
either  by   commanding  and   appointing  others   to  do  it ;    as  David 


—107.  313 

storr.r.iandsd  Joab  to  set  Uriah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  battle, 
and  to  withdraw  his  assistance  from  him,  which  order  Joyb  obeying, 
it  occasioned  the  death  of  Uriah,  and  of  many  others  AviMi  him, 
2  Sam.  xi.  14 — 17.  But  hear  how  Nathan  addresses  David  on  ac- 
count of  this  action,  "  Thou  hast  slain  Uriah  the  Hhtite  with  the 
sword,"  2  Sam.  xii.  9.  Or  by  ptocuring  others  to  pronounce  an 
unjust  sentence,  as  Naboth  perished  :  nevertheless  Ahab  was  up- 
braided with  putting  him  to  death,  although  the  judges  and  false 
witnesses,  who  were  suborned  by  Jezabcl,  had  done  it  in  Ahab's 
name,  1  Kings  xxi.  Or  by  giving  our  consent,  as  Paul  before  his 
conversion  consented  to  the  death  of  the  confessors  of  the  Lord, 
Acts  xxvi.  10. 

Whether  a  person  kill  his  neighbour  by  himself,  or  by  another, 
it  is  an  exceedingly  dreadful  sin  ;  for  the  murderer  destroys  the  best 
and  fairest  workmanship  of  God  on  earth,  even  man,"  who  was 
made  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  crowned  with  gloty  and 
honour,  and  set  over  the  works  of  God's  hands  :"  he  who  kills  him, 
violates  also  the  "  image  of  God,"  as  the  Lord  himself  declareth, 
Gen.  ix.  6.  He  injures  the  community,  and  despatches  the  uncon- 
verted sinner  to  hell,  without  allowing  him  time  for  repentance  :  he 
makes  himself  like  wicked  Cain,  yea  like  his  father  the  devil,  the 
murderer  of  man,  as  John  and  bis  Master  speak,  1  John  hi.  12. 
John  viii.  *4.  The  blood  of  the  slain  man  crieth  for  vengeance, 
and  tortures  the  conscience,  as  we  see  in  the  first  murderer,  Gen. 
iv.  io — U  It  cannot  be  atoned,  except  by  an  ignominious  death, 
according  to  the  law  of  vengeance,  enacted  by  God,  Gen.  ix.  6. 
The  murderer  shall  not  obtain  eternal  life,  1  John  iii.  15.  Yea, 
"the  second  death  in  the  lake  which  burnetii  with  fire  and  brim- 
stone," is  the  portion  of  murderers,  Rev.  xx.  8.  '  The  law  was 
made,"  as  Paul  testificth,  1  Tim.  i.  9,  "  for  murderers"  to  their 
condemnation. 

Is  it  such  a  fearful  sin  to  murder  our  neighbour,  who  then  can 
express  in  adequate  terms  the  horrible  conduct  of  those  parents, 
who  murder  their  children  '.  It  is  surely  unnatural  to  rage  against 
9ur  own  bowels.  It  hath  nevertheless  been  frequently  seen,  that 
parents  have  been  transported  to  this  horrid  deed,  when  they  suffer- 
ed famine  or  poverty,  and  were  unable  to  procure  food  for  their 
children,  or  to  behold  their  distress.  Often,  yea,  oftner  than  we 
are  aware,  do  giddy  and  wanton  women,  who  have  become  preg- 
nant by  whoredom,  destroy  their  unborn,  or  newly  born  infants. 
Verily  a  work  of  base,  degenerate,  unnatural,  and  inhuman  persons 
•f  the  human  race.  But  it  appears  inconceivable,  that  human  tee- 
Vol.  ii.  2  O 


314        THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ings  can  be  so  blinded,  and  apostatize  so  far  from  God,  that  they 
can  be  inclined  to  such  an  evil  work  from  I  know  not  what  reS. 
gtous  principle,  "'giving  their  firstborn, to  be  a  sacrifice  for  their 
transgressioh,  and  the  fruit  of  their  body  for  the  sin  of  their  soul," 
]S  tclia  vi.  7.  The  heathens  nevertheless,  like  the  king  of  the  Mo- 
abites.  2  Ri  gs  iii.  17,  defiled  themselves  in  a  shameful  manner 
with  this  sin  :  "  1  hey  knew  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  who 
committed  such  things  were  worthy  of  death,"  Rom.  i  32,  and  that 
Wood  roust  be  given  for  blood,  ;md  -oul  for  smil  to  satisfy  the  divine 
justice  ;  blood,  the  soul  of  beasts,  could  nut  atone  for  the  guilt  of 
reasonable  creatures  ;  therefore  nothing  was  more  proper  fortius 
than  the  blood  and  souls  of  their  dear  children.  It  might  admit  of 
some  kind  of  excuse,  that  these  blinded  nations,  who  were  desti- 
tute of  the  divine  revelation  concerning  the  proper  surety,  deviated 
to  such  a  conduct ;  but  that  the  peculiar  people  ot  Clod,  who  were 
daily  instructed  concerning  the  future  atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Mes- 

••  should  slay  their  children  in  the  valleys,  should  offer  them 
up.  and  cause  them  to  pass  through  the  fire  unto  ?>loioch  and  the 
idols,  to    consume   them,"    Isaiah    lvii.  5.     Jer.   xxxii.  35.     Ezek. 

ft,  21.  xxi ti.  39,  this,  I  say,  was  more  intolerable  than  the 
atrocious  child-murdering  of  the  heathens.  Neither  did  the  Lord 
suffer  those  murders  ot  his  people  to  remain  unrevenged  ;  it  was  on 
account  of  this  eity  as  well  as  others,  that  the  Lord  God  said  of  the 
Jews,  hzek.  xxiu.  46,47.  u  I  will  bring  up  a  company  upon  them, 
and  will  give  them  to  be  removed  and  spoiled  ;  and  the  company 
shall  stone  them  with  stones,  and  despatch  them  with  their  swords  ; 
they  s;'<dl  siay  their  sons  and  their  daughters,  and  burn  up  their 
houses  with  lire." 

It  will  perhaps  be  said,  no  person  can  surpass  the  actions  of  those 
wicked  men*  We  see  nevertheless  still  greater  abominations  :  the 
sinner,  deceived  by  him,  who  was  a  murderer  of  man  from  the  be- 
ginning, becomes  sometimes  so  outrageous,  that  he  lays  his  hands 
on  his  own  hie,  and  destroys  himself,  either  from  despair  with  Ju- 
das, Mat.  xxvii.  5.  or  from  angry  vexation,  because  he  is  not 
honoured  as  much  as  others,  on  which  account  Ahirhophel  hanged 
himself,  2  Sam.  >vi».  23,  or  like  Saul  and  his  armourbearer,  that 
he  may  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  and  bt  reproached 
and  tormented  by  them,  1  Chron.  x.  4,  5.  Those  seamen  do  not 
conduct  better,  who,  in  order  to  escape  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies, 
set  fire  to  their  powder,  and  blow  up  their  ship  with  all  who  are  in 
it.  Certainly  no  sin  is  more  unnatural  than  sclfmurder  :  for  "  who 
•uth  ever  yet   luted  his  own  flush.?    no  man,"  saith  Paul,  Eph.  t- 


S— 107.  315 

£9.  Such  a  sinner  dies  in  his  sin,  like  Saul,  1  Chron.  x.  13.  Is 
"  he  who  hateth  his  brother  a  murderer,"  and  do  we  learn  from  the 
apostle,  that  "nomurdeier  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  him,"  tlie 
eternal  perdition  of  such  selfmurdert-rs  is  not  less  certain.  Are 
there  madmen,  who  are  utterly  ignorant  of  what  they  do,  and  who 
destroy  themselves  in  their  madness,  we  cannot  judge  of  their  eterj- 
rial  issue.  To  excuse  killing  ourselves  with  the  conduct  of  ai«r 
son,  who  destroyed  himself  with  the  Philistines,  Judges  xvi  -8, 
29,  30,  is  unreasonable  ;  for  Samson  did  that  as  a  judge  of  Isr  -1, 
as  an  act  of  vvonderlul  heroism,  and  when  the  Spirit  of  ti  e  Lord 
came  mightily  upon  him.  as  in  all  his  other  heroical  actions,  and 
so  "  in  faith,'-'  Heb.  xi   32, 

Although  prisons,  who  "  wilfully  expose  themselves  to  danger," 
out  of  their  pioper  callings,  as  those  who  clnnb  high  and  d'we 
deep,  fearless  sailors,  venturous  riders,  and  giddy  rop*.  dancers,  do 
not  lay  hands  designedly  on  their  own  lives,  they  are  neverthe- 
less not  altogether  guiltless  of  sell-murder  ;  for  if  they  perish  in  such 
dangerous  actions,  are  they  not  themselves  the  authors  of  their 
death  ?  do  they  not  tempt  God  by  their  unadvised  conduct  ?  and 
who  urges  them  on,  but  he  who  *  as  a  murderer  of  man  bom  the 
beginning?  did  not  he  endeavour  to  seduce  the  Son  of  God  to  this 
sin,  that  he  might,  if  possible,  despatch  him  thereby  ?  M..t.  iv.  5, 
6,  7.  Nor  are  those  less  guilty  of  bereaving  themselves  of  their 
lives,  who  injure  their  health  and  spirits  by  their  dissoluteiuss,  by 
excess  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  by  shameful  lorniotion  mi<>  adul- 
tery, so  that  "they  do  not  live  out  half  their  days,"  as  David  speaks, 
Psalm  Iv.  23,  for  "who  hath  wo  ?  who  hath  sorrow  ?  who  hath 
wounds  without  cause  ?  they  that  tarry  long  at  the  wine  ;  they  that 
go  to  seek  mixed  wine  :"  thus  asks  and  answers  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30.  And  of  the  unchaste  person  lie  saith,  Prov. 
T.  11,  that  "he  mourneth  at  the  last,  when  his  flesh  and  his  body 
are  consumed."  If  vve  will  not  render  ourselves  guilty  of  this  sin, 
"we  must  not  hurt  ourselves"  neither:  a  priest  may  not  do  this, 
although  he  mourn  ever  so  sorely  for  a  deceased  person  ;  the  Lord 
forbids  it,  Lev.  xxv.  5.  Did  the  priests  of  Baal,  from  a  principle 
of  devotion,  "cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  the  Wood 
gushed  out  upon  them,"  as  we  read,  1  Kings  xviii.  28.  we  must 
ascribe  that  to  their  idolatrous  folly,  and  foohMi  idolatry  ;  hut  the 
conduct  of  the  Romish  priests,  who  scourge  themselves  with  whips, 
stuck  with  pins,  until  they  even  shed  their  blood,  that  they  may  dis- 
play their  vainglorious  holiness,  and  imaginary  crucifixion  of  the 
Mesh,  is  dettstable  and  cruel,  or  suffer  me  rather  to  say,  Col.  ii.  23, 


316         THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

44  it  is  a  pretended  argument  of  wisdom  in  willworship  and  humility, 
and  in  not  sparing  the  body  ;  and  it  is  not  of  any  advantage,  but  only 
a  satisfying  of  the  flesh."* 

But  how  doth  it  come  to  pass,  that  man,  who  was  created  after 
the  ima^e  of  God, 'in  perfect  love  to  God  and  his  neighbour,  can  be 
guilty  of  such  abominations  ?  By  his  apostacy  from  God,  seduced 
by  his  father,  and  the  murderer  of  man,  he  hath  lost  that  pure 
image,  and  that  fair  love  ;  he  hath  contracted  a  horrible  and  devil- 
ish disposition :  u  His  heart  is  desperately  wicked,"  Jer.  xrii.  19. 
"  The  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  is  become  only  evil 
continually,"  Gen.  vi.  5  He  is  by  nature  prone  to  hate  God  and 
his  neighbour,"  living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful  and  haling  others," 
Titus  iii.  13.  His  lusts  and  his  delight  in  vain  glory,  in  fleshly 
pleasures,  and  in  worldly  profit  mislead  him  to  "  wars  and  fight- 
ings," James  iv.  1  «  Out  of  such  an  evil  heart  proceed  murders," 
as  our  ^>aviour  testifieth,  Matt.  xv.  19,  for  it  disposes  a  person  to  en- 
vy, hatred,  anger  and  a  desire  of  revenge,  which  evil  emotions  the 
instructor  records  as  the  next  causes  of  murder. 

1.  In  the  first  place  ''envy"  is  considered  as  such  an  evil  root  of 
gall  and  wormwood,  by  which  a  person  is  grieved  on  account  of  his 
neighbour's  profit,  and  grudges  him  his  advantage  with  a  fretful 
mind.  An  abominable  disposition,  which  censures  the  Lord  for 
showing  favour,  and  "  is  evil,  because  God  is  good,"  as  Jesus  speaks," 
Mat.  xx.  15.  There  are  few  sins,  in  which  the  sinner  doth  not  en- 
joy some  pleasure  ;  but  envy  is  a  malicious  fury  to  him,  of  which 
he  himself  wishes  to  be  rid  ;  envy  is  also  hurttul  to  his  health,  it 
gnaws  the  marrow  out  of  his  bones,  and  consumes  his  flesh  ;  "  En- 
vy," saith  tio'omon,  Prov.  xiv.  ;;0,  "  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones." 
Yea,  this  sin  desires  and  seeks  our  neighbour's  harm,  and  it  is  thus 
a  cause  of  murder,  to  which  ti;e  wicked  person  is  urged  through 
envy  by  the  devil,  •'  Caim"  saith  the  apostie,  1  John  iii.  12,  was  of 
that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother :  and  wherefore  slew  he  him  ? 
because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  hrother's  righteous."  En- 
vy appeared  so  plainly  in  the  murderous  Jews,  that  "  Pilate  knew 
that  they  had  delivered  Jesus  for  envy,"  Mat.  xxvii.  IS.  We  may 
hide  and  shelter  ourselves  from  u  cruel  wrath,  and  from  outra- 
geous anger  :  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  r"  saith  Solomon, 
P  ov.  xxvii.  K. 

2.  The  other  sin  is  "  hatred,"  which  is  an  aversion  from  our 
neighbour,  and  will  not  suffer  him  to  live  :  the  Lord  God  fori 

*  W«  have  rendered  this  passage  xccoruU)£  lo  the  Dutch  translation- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   1©5— 107.  3\? 

this  ab.ominable  temper  of  old  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  1.41 
thy  hear1:,"  suith  he,  Lev.  xix.  17.  No  marvel,  for  "  hatred,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  x.  12,  "  stirreth  up  strife:  yea.  it  urgeth  the  sin- 
ner to  commit  murder.  Esau,  because  he  hated  his  brother,  sought 
io  slay  him,"  Gen.  xxvii.  41.  And  '"  Hainan  ordered  a  gallows  to 
be  made  for  Mordecai,"  whom  he  hated,  "  in  order  to  hang  him 
thereon,"  Esther  v.  13,  U. 

3.  The  third  sin  is  "  anger,"  by  which  we  must  not  understand 
here  a  holy  displeasure  at  sin  in  a  person,  as  the  Saviour  had,  when, 
being  grieved  on  account  of  the  hardness  of  the  hearts  of  the  Jews, 
he  looked  round  about  upon  them  with  anger,"  Mark  iii.  15.  We 
may  "be  angry"  in  this  manlier,  "and  not  sin,"  Eph.  iv.  26.  But 
the  anger  that  is  forbidden  here,  is  that  shortlived  phrenzy,  or  evil 
agitation  of  the  mind,  by  which  a  person  is  driven  furiously  on  to 
injure  his  neighbour  in  the  highest  degree.  This  anger  disturbs  noE 
only  the  soul,  but  also  the  whole  body,  the  members  tremble,  the 
countenance  waxes  pale  and  wan,  the  hair  stands  erect,  the  mouth 
foams,  the  veins  swell,  the  b'ocd  boils,  seethes  and  foams,  and  thus 
wrath  is  "an  outrageous  anger  and  cruelty,"  as  we  have  just  now- 
heard  from  Solomon,  Prov.  xxvii.  4.  Anger  is  justly  considered  as 
the  parent  of  murder ;  for  "  an  angry  man  stirreth  up  strife,"  ac- 
cording to  Prov.  xv.  18.  xxix.  22,  and  therefore  commits  murder 
also,  as  we  may  see  in  "  Simeon  and  Levi,  those  instruments  of 
cruelly,"  Gen.  xlix.  5,  3,  7,  and  in  Saul,  who,  when  he  was  in- 
censed with  anger,  would  slay  David,  '.  Sam.  xviiK  8 — 11,  and  in 
the  childmurdercr  Lierod,  Mat.  ii.  16.  It  hath  often  happened,  that 
angry  persons  have  occasioned  an  incurable  disease  to  themselves 
by  an  erxessive  agitation  of  anger,  and  thus  their  death. 

4.  Another  sin,  and  more  heinous  than  anger,  is  forbidden  here, 
to  wit,  "  a  desire  of  revenge,"  by  which  a  p^rt-on  covets  to  return 
and  recompense  an  injury,  which  he  hath  suffered,  or  imagines  that 
he  hath  suilered,  with  an  equal,  yea,  with  a  greater  evil,  and  some- 
times even  with  death.  Thus  wicked  Lamech  boasted  in  an  arro- 
gant manner  of  Ins  revengeful  temper,  as  of  a  noble  vinue,  Gen. 
iv.  23,  24  '-'  Verily  I  have  slain  a  man  for  my  wounding,  and  a 
young  man  for  my  hurt :  if  Cain  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  La- 
mech seventy  and  seven  fold."  A  detestable  evil  :  a  rcvergeful 
person  snatches  the  sword  of  vengeance  out  of  the  hands  of  God, 
iS  to  whom  vengeance  belongeth,"  Heb.  x.  30,  and  places  himself 
in  his  jjdgment-seat.  Although  God  speaks  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment only  of  murder,  yet  he  forbids  also  such  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and 
desire  of  reveftge,  an4  accounts  all  these  as  murder:   "  Whosoevsv 


318        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

hateth  his  brother,  is  a  murderer,"  as  we  read,  1  John  iii.  15.  He 
wno  hates  and  condemns  the  fruit,  will  destroy  also  ihe  tree  with  its 
stock  and  root.  The  reason  why  men  do  noi  commit  actual  murder 
oftner,  is  not  because  they  are  too  \iituous,  but  because  they  luck 
the  opportunity  or  ability,  and  especially  because  Go-1  ly  re- 

strains tiiem  :  but  wnen  a  man  is  abandoned  to  himself  in  vexatious 
circumstances,  and  hath  the  power,  he  will  soon  manifest  Lib  mur- 
derous temper. 

II.  Man  being  wholly  subject  to  God,  as  his  sovereign  Lord,  can- 
not be  indifferent  in  a  moral  sense,  or  neither  goad  nor  evil,  but  he 
must  be  either  one  or  the  other:  when  he  forsakes  evil  be  then 
doth  good,  and  when  he  doth  good,  he  then  forsakes  evil  :  "  There- 
fore it  is  not  enough,  that  we  do  not  kill  any  man  in  the  v.< 
mentioned  above  ;  for  when  God  forbids  envy,  hatred,  and  anger, 
he  then  commands  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,"  S-cc. 

1.  We  are  commanded  here  in  the  lirst  place  "  to  love  ourr. 
hour  as  ourselves,"  as  this  is  the  root  of  other  virtues  ;  for  then  we 
shall  not  kill  him  The  cavilling  Remonstrants  condemn  this  asser- 
tion of  the  instructor,  as  if  he  had  not  inserted  this  virtue  in  its 
proper  place,  because  loving  our  neighbour  pertains  to  ail  the  com- 
mandments of  the  second  table.  But  there  is  no  impropriety  in 
speaking  of  this  virtue  here,  not  only  because  it  pertains  to  this,  as 
well  as  to  the  other  commandments,  but  also  because  it  is  especially 
opposed  to  murder,  and  is  therefore  by  the  Lawgiver  himself  oppo- 
sed to  that  sin,  when  he  saith,  Lev.  xix.  13.  "  Thou shalt  not  ay 
nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of  thy  people,  bui:  thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself." 

2    It  followeth  from  this,  that  we  must  be  "patient"  t<  ward  our 
neighbour,  bearin:;  in  a  longsuffering  manner  the  injury   and   harm 
that  we  have  sustained  from  him,  and  not  revenging  it,  but   f< 
ing  it,  and  thus  not  killing  him.     We  must,  as  the  apostle  S] 
"be  longsuffering,    forbearing  and  forgiving  one  another,  Col.  iii. 
12,  13.     This  is  indeed  the  nature  of  love,  which  is  lor. 
is  not  easily  provoked,  beareth  and  endurelh  all  things,"  ace. 
to  1  Cor.  xiii.  4,  5,  7. 

3.  When  a  person  pursues  love,  he  will  overtake  "peace  "  also, 
and  maintain  it  with  his  neighbour,  and  thus  prevent  all    strift 
discord,  and  therefore  also  murder.     Applicable  are   here  the  > 
of  the  apostle,  Kom.  xii,  "  Ii  it  be  pos  much  as  in  you 

li  •.:  peaceably  with    all  men.    Blessed  are  I 
the  great  Prince  of  peace,  Matt  v.  9. 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105 — 107.  319 

4.  Those  who  love  others  are  also  "  meek,"  for  they  do  not 
start  up  in  sudden  anger,  when  they  are  injured,  endeavouring  to 
render  their  neighbour  evil  for  evil,  but  they  remain  soft  and  tracta- 
ble, like  the  most  pliable  substances.  We  see  this  virtue  in  Moses 
above  other  men,  Numb.  xii.  2.  But  the  unsinning  Saviour  ex- 
celled him,  and  he  requires  t'iat  all  men  should  "  learn  of  him  to 
be  meek,"  Matt.  >:i.  29. 

5  Love  excites  a  person  to  "  mercy,"  by  which  he  regards  his 
neighbour's  distress  as  his  own,  and  endeavours,  as  if  he  suffered 
with  him,  to  assist  and  deliver  him,  and  hereby  he  is  without  difficulty 
preserved  from  envy,  cruelty  and  murder.  Tims  he  "  puts  on  bow- 
els of  mercy,"  as  Paul  adviseth,  Col.  iii.  12.  The  tenderhearted 
Saviour  was  repeatedly  moved  with  inward  motions  of  mercy  to- 
ward the  miserable,  and  he  pronounced  "  the  merciful  blessed  ;  for 
they  should  obtain  mercy,"  Matt.  v.   7. 

6.  When  love  bums  in  the  heart,  the  flames  thereof  will  appear 
abroad  in  "  kindness,"  by  which  a  person  conducts  affectionately 
and  courteously  in  his  gestures,  words,  and  in  all  his  behaviour  to- 
ward his  neighbours,  and  whereby  he  restrains  his  neighbour's  envy, 
hatred,  anger,  and  desire  of  revenge.  Peter  requires  that  we  should 
not  only  <k  love  as  brethren,  but  also  be  courteous,"  1  Peter,  iii.  8. 

7.  A  person  who  is  so  friendly,  "  will  also,  as  much  as  in  him  li- 
eth,  prevent  the  hurt  of  his  neighbour,"  In  consequence  of  an  inju- 
ry, which  affects  the  property,  honour,  or  body  of  our  neighbour,  his 
life  may  be  in  imminent  danger;  if  we  love  him  then,  we  will  en- 
deavour to  deliver  him,  when  he  is  seized,  in  order  that  he  may  be 
put  to  death  ;  for  he  is  in  danger  of  being  slain,  if  we  forbear," 
Prov.  xxiv.  1 1. 

8.  Love  appears  still  more  generous,  when  a  person  l*  doth  good 
to  his  enemies  "  With  respect  to  public  enemies,  distuibers  of  the 
commonwealth,  who  endeavour  to  deprive  us  of  the  opportunity  to 
do  them  good,  we  ought  to  hinder,  resist,  and  annoy  them,  as  much 
as  we  can,  agreeably  to  the  love,  which  we  owe  to  ourselves  and  to 
our  fellowcitizens  above  those  enemies.  But  with  respect  to  pri- 
vate and  personal  enemies,  we  ought,  according  to  the  nature  of 
love,  to  do  them  good,  as  the  Samaritan  did  good  to  the  wounded 
Jew,  who  was  his  enemy,  Luke  x.  30 — 35  This  the  Saviour  com- 
mands, Matt.  v.  44.  and  Paul  urgeth  it  also,  Rom.  xii.  20.  and  Solo- 
mon, the  forefather  of  the  Saviour-  had  enjoined  it  before,  Pr»v.  xxv. 
21,  22, 


lSSi        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 


APPLICATION. 

That  Christ  did  as  a  new  Lawgiver,  add  to  this  commandment, 
n  that  we  must  not  be  angry  with  our  brother,  nor  address  him  with 
bitter  language,  nor  revenue  an  injury,  no  not  by  the  interference  of 
the  magistrate,"  this  is  the  language  of  the  Socinians,  and  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  word  of  God,  which  teaches  us  that  all  anger,  all  revi- 
ling, and  desire  of  revenge  was  forbiddtn  under  the  old  testament  ; 
see  oniy  Lev.  xix.  18.  which  we  have  cited  before  ;  and  therefore 
the  commandment  of  Jesus,  that  we  may  not  be  angry  with  our  bro- 
ther without  cause,  is  not  a  new  law,  but  a  repetition  and  an  illustra- 
tion of  an  old  law,  which  the  ancient  Pharisees  had  obscured,  Matt. 
V.  22,  39. 

What  is  your  opinion  now,  hearers,  concerning  the  church  of 
Rome,  which  weens  that  she  hath  done  God  service  by  destroying 
so  many  kings  and  princes,  and  so  many  other  men,  on  account  of 
the  profession  of  the  truth.  No  man  was  formerly  sure  of  his  life  ; 
whoever  spake  but  the  least  word  against  that  impure  whore,  was 
presently  seized  and  condemned  to  be  put  to  death,  either  by  the 
sword,  or  the  halter,  or  by  drowning,  yea,  such  a  death  was  deemed 
too  mild,  they  burned  such  persons  alive,  and  buried  them  in  the 
eaith  alive.  Yea,  the  Papists  have  endeavoured  to  lay  waste  and 
murder  whole  countries,  which  Were  infested  with  what  they  called 
the  northern  heresy  :  let  Piedmont,  France.  Ire  .  rid  and  Holland  de- 
clare. Can  such  a  religion  be  conformable  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  acceptable  to  God,  which  established  itself  in  the  blood  of  the 
innocent?  surely  no  :  all  this  bloodshedding  is  the  mark  of  "  the 
great  whore,  who  is  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with 
the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,"  according  to  Rev.  xvii.  7.  The 
Lord  God  hath  also  revenged  it  by  abridging  Antichrist,  and  by 
hing  him  with  spiritual  and  temporal  judgments,  and   "giving 

him  blood  to  drink,   since  he  hath  shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  pro- 
'pliets  "  as  John  prophesieth,  Rev.  xvi.  G      And  we    need  not  doubt 

that  the  Lord  God  will  punish  it  more  adequately  at  some  future  pe- 
iorl,  by  a  total  devastation  of  the  spiritual  Babylon,  because  "in  her 

:s  found  the  blood  of  the  prophets,  and  of  all  who  were  slain   on    the 

earth."     See  Rev.  xviii.   1 — 24. 

But  that  which  chiefly  concerns  you  at  present,  hearers,  is  whether 

sdl  of  you  have  kept  this  commandment  in  all  its  parts.     It  was  your 

duty  to  keep  it,  for  ye  are  directly  subject    to  the  exalted   Lawgiver, 
lo  yoq    amidst  the  d  I  !iunderings,   and   fearful 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105— 107.  321 

lightnings  from  heaven,  "  Ye  shall  not  kill."     Have  ye  not  kept  the 
commandment,  ye  are  condemned  to   die,   and  "accursed,  because 
ye  bave  not  continued  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law,  to 
do  them,"  agreeably  to  what   Paul  teacheth   us,    Gal.  iii.   10,  from 
Deut.  xxvii.  26.     I  have  no  reason   to    think  that  any  of  you    hath 
killed  his  neighbour,  either  secretly  or  openly  ;  but  are  ye  therefore 
clear  of  bloodguiltmess  ?     No:  we  kill  our   neighbour  by    malicious 
thoughts,  by  bitter  words,  and  surly  gestures,  by  dishonouring  him, 
by  envy,  hatred,  anger,  and  a  desire  of  revenge  j  yea,  we  violate  this 
commandment  by  a  want  of  love  to  our   neighbour,   by   passionate- 
ness,   strife,    harshness,    unmercifulness,    surliness,  and    sullenness 
toward  our  neighbour,  and  also   when  we  do  not   maintain  love    and 
its  goud  fruits.     Compare  yourselves  with   this  picture,   view   your- 
selves in  this  mirror,  and  sec  whether  ye  do  not  behold  your  proper 
figure,  and  perceive  your    murderous  heart  in  it'     Or  are  ye    utter 
strangers  to  these  malignant    motions  ?  and  do  ye  think  that  ye  are 
goodnatured  ?  but  when  ?  when  ye  are  alone,  and  have  no   opportu- 
nity to  discover  your  sullenness  ?     Yea,  will  ye  not  even  then  stir  up 
your  malignity  against    this  or  that  person,  who   ye  think,   hath    in- 
jured you,  or  might  injure  you  ?     Are  there  not  many  strangers  and 
relations,  husband,  wife,  children,  parents,  who  are  not  to  your  mind, 
or  who  are  a  burthen  to  you,  whom   ye  secretly    wish    God  would 
take  away  i   and  how  do  ye  behave  toward   persons,  with  whom  ye 
must  converse  at  home  and  elsewhere  f  do  ye  not    vex   them    time 
after  time  with  your    difficult   temper,    austere   looks,   and   spiteful 
words  ?     And  if  others  look  at  you,  and  speak  to  you    in   an   unkind 
manner,  or  do  aught  that  is  not   to  your  mind,   or   vex    and   wrong 
you,  are  ye  able  to  endure  all  with  patience  and    meekness,    and    to 
answer  it  with  kindness  ?  do  ye  say  yea ;  I  ask  you  then    also,  what 
it  is  that  moves  y«u  to  this  ?  is  it  the  fear  of   God  ?  is  "  destruction 
from  God  a  terrour  to  you,  and  are  ye  unable  to  endure    by    reason 
of  his  highness  I"  as  that  patient  man  speaks,    Job  xxxi.  23,  oris  it 
because  ye  are  of  an  abject    and  cowardly   spirit  ?  or  because    men 
would  despise  you,  if  ye  showed  your   moody    disposition  ?  or    be- 
cause your  adversary  is  your  superiour ;  or  is  at  least  as  keen  as  ye 
are  yourselves,  and  thus  one  knife,  as  we  say,  keeps  the  other  in  its 
sheath  ?     I  ask  all  this,  that  I  may,  if  it  be    possible,   bring    you    to 
yourselves,  and  cause  you  to  see  the  abominableness  of  your  hearts. 
Are  ye  so  exceedingly  filled  with  selfiove,  that    ye    cannot    look  to 
the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  and  therefore   cannot   think   any   evil    of 
yourselves ;  hear  then  what  the   Lord   God,   who  "  searcheth    youv 
heart  which  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  se 
Vol.  ir.  2  P 


*8         TEL::  J  MM AL'DMENT  EXPLAINED. 

that  none  can  know  it,T'  Jer-  xvii.  9,  10,  hear,  I  say,  what  he  tesi- 
fieth  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  thus  of  all  Men,  and  therefore  of 
you  also,  Rem.  hi.  13 — IS.  "  Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre  ; 
with  their  tdni  i  es  they  have  used  deceit ;  the  poison  of  asps  is  un- 
der their  lips  :  whose  mouth,  is  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness:  their 
feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood :  destruction  and  misery  are  in  Iheir 
v.:1'  s :  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known  ;  there  is  no  fear 
of  God  before  their  eyes."  Behold,  this  is  your  character,  whether 
ye  know  it  or  not ;  and  when  God  shall  set  these  things  in  order 
before  ycur  eye3,  then  will  ye  see  it. 

Do  not  however  reckon  it  enough  to  know  that  ye  are  exceedingly 
sinful  and  abominable,   but   observe    also   what    a    recompence    the 
Lord  God  hath  appointed  for  such  wickedness,  and  apply  it  to  your- 
selves, that  ye  may  know  also  that  it  is  an  evil  and    bitter   thing  to 
forsake  the  Lord,  and  that  his   fear  is  not  in  you.     I   will    proclaim 
the  word  of  God  to  you,  which   saith,  Deut.  xxvii.  42,  "  Cursed   be 
he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour  secretly  ;  and  all  the  people  shall  say 
Amen."     Among  uthe  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth,   and    the 
seVen  which  arc  an  abomination  to  his  soul,  are  also  hands  that  shed 
innocent  blood,  an  heart  that  deviselh  wicked  imaginations,  and  feet 
that  be  swift  in  running  to  mischief,"  Prov.  vi.  16 — 18.     "  Murder- 
ers shall  have  their  part  in  the   lake    which   burnetii    with   fire  and 
brimstone,"  according  to  Rev.  x*i.  8.     Or  is  it  your  thought,   that 
ye  need  not  regard  this,  because  ye  have  not  killed  any  man  ?  but  is 
nut  a  heart  which  deviseth  wicked    imaginations   numbered    among 
the  seven  abominations  ?     "  Whoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  mur- 
derer :  and  ye  know  that  no  murderer  hath  eternal    life    abiding    in 
him,"  according  to  the    words  of  the  apostle,  1  John  iii.    15.     Paul 
saith,  Rom.  iii.    19,  "  We  know  that  what   things  soever   the    law 
saith,  it  saith  to  them    who   are  under  the  law  :  that    every   mouth 
may  be  slopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God," 
and  he  applies  this  to  all  the  abominations  of  which  he  had  spoken, 
vrs.    13 — IS,  and  of  which  we    have    convinced   you,    as  that   your 
■'throat  is  an  open  sepulchre,-'  Jksc.     Behold  this,  and  be  concerned, 
and  distressed,  that  ye  may   not  find  any   longer   the    life    of  your 
hands,  although  ye  should  be    afflicted   and   ready  to  die  ;    for  this 
woul    cause  you  to  fice  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  from  the    sec- 
ond dea  .  . 

Do  any  of  you  I  '  '     -  m  bloodguiltiness,  and  do 

ye  not  know  what  to  do,  hear  then,  ye  who  mourn  and  weep  on  ac- 
count of  your  vileness,  and  your  condemnation,  I  have  a  good  word 
to  you,  and  O  that  it  mi,,  :  jour  souls,  so  that  it  would  pre- 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  105—107.  523 

-jut  you  blameless  before  your  Judge.  It  3s  this,  God  hatfc  ap- 
pointed has  h^on  *  surety  for  persons  who  were  worthy  of  death,  he 
engaged  to  his  Father  that  he  Would  become  a  surety,  and  he  actu- 
ally fulfilled  the  sureiiship,  when  from  love,  and  "  through  zeal  for 
tfce  house  of  Clod,"  he  suffered  himself  to  be  "consumed,  and  gave 
kelf.an  offering,  and  a  sacrifice  to  God,  for  a  sweetsroeHing  sa- 
vour," according  to  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Eph.  v.  3s  Ik-cause  he  stood 
m  the  stead  of  persons  who  deserved  to  die,  therefore  he,  who  was 
the  Prince  of  life,  was  put  to  death,  "  he  was  delivered  and  died  for 
our  offences,  according  10  the  scriptures,"  as  we  read,  Rom.  iv.  25. 
1  Cor.  xv.  3.  I  would  not  have  you  all  however  to  dismiss  forth- 
with your  concern  on  this  account,  as  though  he  died  for  all  men, 
we  know  better  :  but  I  would  that  ye  should  seek  to  win  Christ,  and 
thus  to  partake  of  his  death,  that  his  death  may  be  reckoned  yours, 
and  for  you.  Know  then  that  he  proffers  himself,  his  death,  and 
thereby  life  to  and  for  you  ;  for,  "having  abolished  death,  he  hath 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  gospel,"  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  Paul,  2  Tim.  i.  10.  Touch  then  that  evangeli- 
cal sceptre  of  his,  consent  to  his  proffer,  "  take  hold  of  him,  who  is 
Lrengh  of  God,  and  make  your  peace  with  the  Lord,  and  be  re- 
conciled to  God,"  as  ye  are  counselled  and  entreated  to  do,  Isaiah 
xxvii  5.  2  Cor.  v  20.  Yea,  flee  to  him,  as  a  most  secure  city 
of  refuge,  like  the  murderer,  Luke  xxiii.  42,  45.  "The  name  of 
the  Lord  is  indeed  a  strong  tower  :  the  righteous  runneth  into  if, 
and  is  safe,"  according  to  Prov.  xviii.  10-  O  rest  not,  until  ye  have 
really  and  actually  become  partakers  of  his  death,  andt  are  thereby 
reconciled  to  God. 

«'  With  thee  there  is  forgiveness,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared," 
saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  exxx.  4.  Let  him  then,  who  hath 
obtained  forgiveness,  and  to  whom  life  hath  been  granted,  endeavour 
to  be  delivered  from  his  deadly  disposition,  which  suggests  murders  : 
we  must  "  put  off  wrath,  anger,  malice  and  evilspeaking,"  as  the 
apostle  admonished).  Though  we  be  ever  so  much  wronged  and 
harmed,  we  must  not  retain  any  anger,  nor  desire  of  revenge.  We 
all  pray  to  God,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them 
who  trespass  against  us  ;"  shall  we  not  then  be  ready  to  forgive  ? 
what  evidence  can  we  have,  that  our  sins  are  forgiven,  if  we  retain 
displeasure  against  our  neighbour  ?  Consider,  ye  justified  persons, 
how  often,  and  how  grievously  ye  have  provoked  the  Lord,  and 
with  how  much  patience  he  hath  endured  your  sins,  and  how  freely 
he  hath  forgiven  them  ;  yea,  that  he  would  rather  punish  them  in 
his  dear  Son,  than  in  you  ;  will  not  ye  then,  whom  God  hath  forgiven 


324        THE  SIXTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ten  thousand  talents,  forgive  your  fellowservant  a  hundred  pence  ? 
See  Matt,  xviii.  24 — 35.  I  therefore  exhort  you  with  Paul  fr<  m 
Eph.  iv.  31,-32.  v.  1,  2  "  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  an- 
ger, and  clamour,  and  evilspeaking  hr  put  away  from  you,  with  all 
malice.  And  be  ye  kind,  one  to  another,  tenderhearted,  forgiving 
one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  ycu.  Be  ye 
therefore  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children  :  and  walk  in  love  as 
Curist  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for  us,  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweetsmelling  savour."  See  this  same 
exhortation,  Col.  hi.  12 — 14.  Thesssins  ought  certainly  to  be 
pursued  with  a  deadly  hatred,  and  to  be  slain  ;  for  they  are  murder- 
ers of  your  souls,  yea,  they  killed  the  Prince  of  life  ;  therefore  nail 
them  to  bis  cross,  that  it  may  appear  that  ye  belong  to  Christ  ;  for 
"such  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,"  Gal.  v. 
24.  \\  c  may  not  kill  any  man,  because  he  is  our  neighbour,  but 
we  must  kill  our  old  man,  who  is  nearer  to  us  than  our  neighbour. 

Ought  we  to  conduct  in  this  manner  toward  our  neighbour,  we 
ought  then  niuc'i  more  to  take  care  of  cur  own  lives.  We  have  ob- 
tained our  lives  of  the  Lord,  as  a  precious  treasure  ;  we  ought  then 
to  take  care  of  them,  and  to  preserve  tbem  for  him,  and  for  his  ser- 
vice. It  becomes  us  therefore  not  only  to  beware  of  rashness,  and 
of  all  iniquity,  by  which  our  lives  are  endangered,  but  also  to  be  in- 
dustrious according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  order  that  we  may 
provide  ourselves  by  all  lawful  means  with  whatever  is  necessary  to 
sustain  our  lives,  Hear  and  practise  what  Paul  saith,  2  Thess.  hi. 
10 — 12,  "  When  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded  you,  that 
if  any  man  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat ;  for  we  hear  that 
these  are  some  which  walk  among  you  disorderly*  working  not  «t 
all,  but  are  busybodies.  Now  them  that  are  such,  we  command  and 
exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work,  and 
cat  their  own  bread."  Are  we  not  in  health,  but  sick,  we  should 
then  make  use  of  medicines  for  our  recovery,  for  the  Lord  hath  ap- 
appointed  them  for  healing:  we  ought  not  then  to  he  averse  from 
them,  but  to  make  use  of  them  according  to  his  will.  When  tk« 
Lord  would  prolong  the  life  of  Ilef.el.iah.  who  was  visited  v. 
deadly  disease,  fifteen  years,  he  commanded  that  "  they  should  lay 
a  plaiiter  upon  the  bile,"  Isaiah  xxxviii.  2  1.  Depend  not  hov 
for  the  preservation  of  your  lives  on  your  own  care,  nor  on  the;-; 
outward  means,  but  only  on  the  Lord,  living  from  his  hand:  it  was 
a  blot  on  the  religious  character  of  Asa,  that  "  he  sought  not  to  the 
Lord  in  his  sickness,  but  to  the  physicians,"  2  Chron-  xvi.  12  "  He 
I  either  suffers,"  or  is  in  danger  of  losing  his  life  in  tbi 


XL.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    105—107.  S25 

any  other  way,  according  to  the  will  of  God,  must  commit  his  soul 
in  welldoing  to  Jjie  faithful  Creator/'  as  Peter  admonisheth,  1  Pet. 
iv.  19.  And  are  we  in  w^nt  of  daily  food  and  clothing,  let  us  not 
be  too  much  discouraged  :  God.  our  father,  our  life,  and  the  length 
of  our  days,  who  giveth  us  life,  who  feeds  the  fowls,  who  clothes 
and  adorns  the  grass  of  the  field,  \iill  provide  us  wiih  both  food  and 
raiment,  as  the  mouth  of  truth  teachcth,  Matt.  vi.  25 — 34.  Jt  is 
true,  believers,  ye  also  must  die  ;  but  ye  will  die,  that  ye  may  he- 
come  heirs  of  life,  and  may  be  settled  there,  where  "there  will  not 
be  any  more  death,  nor  sorrow,  nor  crying,  nor  pain,"  Rev.  xxi.  4, 
for,  as  Paul  hath  foretold,  "  corruption  will  put  on  incorruption,  and 
mortal  will  put  on  immortality."     Amen. 


(   £26  ) 


the 


SEVENTH  COMMANDMEN" 


EXPLAINED. 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  :;x.  4..  "  Thou  shak  not  cohimit  adulter} .