Q.   108.   What  doth  the  seventh  commandment  teach  us  ? 

A.  Tnat  all  unclcanness  is  accursed  of  God,  and  that  therefore  we 
must  with  all  our  hearts  detest  the  same,  and  live  chastely  and  tem- 
perately, whether  in  holy  wedlock,  or  in  a  single  state. 

Q.  109.  Doth  God  forbid  in  this  command  only  adultery,  and  such* 
tike  grost  sins  ? 

A.  Since  both  body  and  soul  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
commands  us  to  preserve  them  pure  and  holy  ;  therefore  he  forbids 
all  unchaste  actions,  gestures,  words,  thoughts,  desires,  and  what- 
ever can  entice  men  thereto. 


F  the  various  kinds  of  love,  with  which  men  cleave,  and  are  uni- 
ted to  one  another,  the  conjugal  love  of  two  persons,  who  arc  con- 
nected in  wedlock,  is  the  strongest,  and  the  most  agreeable.  Is  there 
indeed  a  stronger  love,  than  that  which  the  Son  of  God  bearcth  to 
his  church,  as  his  bride  and   wife,  and  which  she  ought    to   bear    to 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103,  109.  327 

him,  as  her  bridegroom  and  husband?  but  this  love  is  proposed  to 
persons  connected  in  wedlock,  as  a  pattern  for  their  imitation. 
See  Eph.  v.  23 — 33.  Exceedingly  strong  was  the  love  of  Jonathan 
to  David,  1  Sam.  xviii.  1.  "  His  soul  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  Da- 
vid, and,he  loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  But  wedded  love  ought  to 
exceed  even  that.  David  saith  indeed  in  his  song  of  lamentation 
for  the  death  of  Jonathan,  2  Sam.  i.  26,  "  My  brother  Jonathan, 
very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  unto  me  :  thy  love  to  me  was  wonder- 
ful, passing  the  love  of  women."  But  he  doth  not  say  that  the  love 
of  Jonathan  was  greater  than  that  of  women,  but  that  he  was  better 
pleased  with  Jonathan's  love  to  him,  than  with  the  love  of  his  wives. 
The  law  commands  a  man  to  love  his  neighbour  "  as  himself," 
but  by  his  conjugal  love,  a  man  loves  his  consort  not  only  as  him- 
self, but  he  even  loves  himself  in  her  ;  for  as  the  apostle  saith, 
Eph.  v.  28,  "  He  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself."  Are  human  be- 
ings obliged  to  love  one  another  heartily  ;  then  children  are  obliged 
to  love  their  parents  so  ;  but  the  husband  is  still  more  bound  to  love 
his  wife  so.  The  Lord  God  therefore  created  the  woman  for  the 
man,  as  his  other  self,  yea,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bone,  and  enjoined 
on  him  to  "  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife, 
and  to  be  with  her  one  flesh."  Therefore  he  also  forbids  us  to  dis- 
solve this  love  and  wedlock,  when  he  proclaims  to  every  one  from 
heaven,  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery." 

The  Lawgiver  had  indeed  enjoined  in  the  fifth  commandment, 
that  children  should  honour  their  parents,  and  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment, that  men  should  love  their  neighbour  as  themselves,  and  there- 
fore preserve  his  life  ;  but  he  provides  particularly  in  the  seventh 
commandment  for  the  inviolate  preservation  of  conjugal  love  and 
of  wedlock. 

If  it  be  true  concerning  any  sin,  that  *>'  taking  occasion  by  the 
commandment,  it  worketh  all  manner  of  concupiscence  "  in  the 
sinner,  ae  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vii.  8,  it  is  true  concerning  this  sin  : 
we  may  nevertheless  not  forbear  to  speak  of  it ;  for  this  sin  must  be 
"  manifested  to  be  sin,  working  death  "  to  the  Sinner  "  by  that 
which  is  good,"  as  the  same  holy  man  speaks,  Rom.  vii.  13.  Let 
therefore  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fall  on  you,  and  let  his  excellency 
make  you  afraid,  while  we  set  this  sin  before  you. 

I.  With  respect  to  its  head, 

II.  With  respect  to  its  members, 

III.  With  respect  to  its  soul. 

I.  The  headsin  is  called  in  the  text  naafih,  "  breaking  wedlock, 
hut  in  Deut.  v.  18,  that  Hebr ]    i     rendered  "committing- 


J2S      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

adultery,"  which  breaks  wedlock.  It  is  clear,  that  the  Lord  doth 
not  speak  here  of  that  spiritual  adultery,  which  Israel  and  Judah, 
who  were-  married  to  the  Lord,  "committed  with  wood  and  stone," 
as  he  complains,  Jer.  lii.  6 — 9,  but  he  hath  respect  here  to  a  prop- 
er and  corporal  wedlock-breaking  and  adultery. 

Wedlock,  which  is  broken  by  adultery,  is  the  state  of  marriage, 
in  which  one  man  is  united  to  one  woman,  as  one  flesh,  for  their 
mutual  assistance,  and  the  propagation  of  the  human  race.  This 
union  by  wedlock  cannot  and  ought  not  to  be  effected  by  force  ;  but 
it  is  contracted  by  a  mutual  consent,  and  covenanting,  and  it  is  con- 
firmed, as  it  were,  by  an  oath  of  the  Lord  :  and  thus  >l  the  Lord  is 
a  witness  between  a  man  and  the  wife  of  his  youth,"  according  to 
what  we  read,  Mai.  ii.  14.  Although  the  solemn  and  public  con- 
firmation, whether  by  the  magistrate,  or  by  the  church,  doth  not 
constitute  marriage,  it  is  nevertheless  necessary,  that  all  may  know 
whose  husband  and  wife  a  person  is,  and  that  the  children  are  not 
bastards,  but  the  offspring  of  a  lawful  marriage. 

The  instructor  calls  the  married  state  with  propriety  holy  :  it 
was  instituted  by  a  holy  God  :  it  is  also  contracted  and  confirmed 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  as  a  witness,  with  calling  upon  his 
name,  and  it  serves  for  a  holy  purpose,  even  to  propagate  a  seed  for 
God  :  this  hath  place  especially  in  the  marriage  of  godly  persons, 
who  have  the  premises  for  them  and  their  seed.  See  Mai.  ii.  15. 
Gen.  xvii.  7.  Hut  although  wedlock  is  so  holy,  every  person  is 
not  therefore  obliged  to  enter  into  it  :  the  Lord  hath  left  marriage  to 
the  free  choice  of  men  ;  when  a  person  marries,  he  doth  not  sin, 
and  when  he  forbears  to  marry,  the  Lord  will  not  take  it  ill  of  him. 
He  who  can  contain,  and  doth  not  need  a  help,  and  foresees  an  ap- 
proaching calamity,  doth  best  when  he  forbears  to  marry  :  but  he 
who  hat!)  not  the  gift  of  continence,  will  do  better,  if  he  marry,  that 
he  may  avoid  shameful  desires  sp.d  fornication.  These  are  the 
rules  which  the  apostle  prescribes  with  respect  to  marriage,  1  Cor. 
vii.  But  how  shall  we  understand  the  conduct  of  the  Papists,  who 
consider  marriage  as  a  sacrament,  and  nevertheless  do  not  permit 
their  pretended  spiritual  persons,  their  churchmen,  to  marry  ;  yea, 
these  vain  men  have  such  an  aversion  from  marriage,  that  they 
reckon  it  better  to  retain  a  mistress,  or  harlot,  than  to  have  a  lawful 
wife.  But  how  !  is  marriage  a  holy  sacrament,  and  yet  so  detesta- 
ble, that  they  who  marry  are  "  in  the  flesh  and  cannot  please  God," 
as  these  men  abuse  the  words  of  Paul  ?  Rom.  viii.  S.  "  Marriage 
is  honourable  in  all  and  the  bed  undefiled,"  Heb.  xiii.  4.  Why  is 
it  then  prohibited  to   persons,   who   would  be  honourable,  and   why 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  329 

are  they  rather  permitted  to  keep  a  dishonourable  mistress  ?  but 
•why  need  we  wonder  at  this?  Hath  not  "the  Spirit  said  express- 
ly, that  in  the  latter  times  some  should  depart  from  the  faith,  giving 
heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils,  forbidding  to  marry  ?" 
1  Tim.  v.   1,  3. 

Although  we  have  all  of  us  a  right  to  marry,  we  may  nevertheless 
not  commit  incest,  which  we  do,  when  we  marry  with  a  person  who 
is  too  near  akin  to  us  :  the  Lord  hath  strictly  forbidden  this.  The 
Ganaanites  defiled  their  land  so  by  incest,  that  it  vomited  them  out, 
as  the  Lawgiver  saitli,  and  he  hath  also  precisely  defined  the  kin- 
dred who  may  not  converse  carnally  with  one  another,  Lev.  xviii. 
It  is  an  abominable  conductvof  the  Pope,  that  he  presumes,  as  above, 
and  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  God,  to  allow  a  dispensation  to  marry 
kindred,  in  certain  cases,  and  he  manifests  thus  that  he  is  "  that 
wicked  one,  that  man  of  sin,  that  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth 
and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worship- 
ped (as  God)  so  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  him- 
self that  he  is  God,"  as  Paul  hath  foretold,  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4,  8.  He 
exalteth  himself  indeed  above  the  high  God.  when  he  dissolves  his 
laws,  and  enacts  others  instead  of  them,  by  constituting  a  spiritual 
affinity  between  godfathers  and  godmothers,  so  that  they  may  not 
many  each  other,  although  they  be  not  even  the  most  distant  kindred, 
and  he  "  binds  thus  heavy  burthens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and 
lays  them  upon  men's  shoulders,"  as  the  Saviour  saith  of  t!ie  Phari- 
sees, Matt,  xxiii.  4.  "  We  may  not  add  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 
may  we  diminish  aught  from  it."  according  to  Deut.  iv.  2.  We 
are  therefore  at  liberty  to  marry  with  any  one  whom  we  please, 
provided  he  be  not  our  kinsman.  The  children  of  \dam  were  obli- 
ged to  marry  each  other;  but  this  law,  which  forbids  incest,  could 
not  oblige  at  that  time.  God  had  indeed  commanded,  that  when 
the  elder  brother  died  without  children,  the  younger  should  marry 
his  widow,  and  raise  up  seed  to  his  brother  :  but  this  was  a  dispen- 
sation of  the  law  of  incest  for  that  time,  agreeably  to  God's  absolute 
sovereignty,  in  order  to  maintain  the  name  and  privileges  of  the 
firstborn  among  the  Israelites.  No  man  may  believe  that  he  hath 
a  right  in  the  free  statj  of  the  New  Testament  church  to  enter  into 
marriage  With  his  kindred,  as  if  the  law  of  incest  were  now  abolished 
with  the  ceremonial,  or  churchlaws  of  Israel :  for  the  law  which 
forbids  incest,  obliged  the  heathens  also,  who  were  cast  out  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  on  account  of  their  abominable  mixtures:  there- 
fore Paul,  who  was  so  zealous  against  introducing  the  ceremonial 
Vol.  ii-  2  q 


330      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED- 

law  into  the  Christian  church,   would  not  suffer  the   incestuous  per- 
son, who  had  his  Father's  wife,  in  the  church,  1  Cor.  x.   1 — r*3. 

"  Think  hefoi'e  you  begin,"  saith   the  proverb.     "With  the  well- 
admed  there  is  wisdom."  saith  the  wise    king,  Prov.  xiii.  10.      He 
w  in  will  marry    must  oblige  himself  for  life;  he    may   not   repent 
afterward,  and   dissolve  his    marriage  ;  for   he    is  become    with    his 
wife  one  flesh,  which  he  may  rot  rend.     This   is  nevertheless  done 
too  Oiten  by  a  faithless   desertion  of  one  another,  or  by  adultery.     It 
is  a  dissolving  of  marriage,  and  acting  contrary  to    the    rst  institu- 
ol  it,  when  a  man  separates  from  his  wif  ,  or  a  wife  from  her    hus- 
band.     Hear  what   the    Saviour   saith,  Matt.  xix.  4 — 6,  from  Gen. 
ii.   21 — 24,     "  Have  ye  not  read,  that  he   which   made    them    from 
the  beginning,  made  them    male    and    female  ?  and    said,    for   this 
cause  shall  a  man    leave  his  father  and  mother,  and   shall  cleave  to 
his  wife,  and  they  twain  shall  be   one  flesh.      What   therefore    God 
hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder."     Therefore  although 
the  man  or  woman   should  be  wicked,  or  a  heathen,  and    not   guilty 
of  adultery,  we  may  not  separate.     Are  we   faithlessly  deserted,   we 
must  bear  it  patienliy,  if  we  cannot  effect    a   reconciliation:  but   let 
not  a  person,  who  is  deserted  in  this   manner,   marry   again,  which 
the    Lord   forbids   by    Paul,    1  Cor.  vii.    10 — 16.     "  He  commkteth 
adultery,"  saith  the  Lord,  VJatt.   xix.  9,  "  who  marrieth  her  that  is 
put  away,  except  for  adultery."     See  also  the  apo-tle's  words,  Rom. 
vii.    1 — 3*     As  it  is  abominable   to    desert  a  wife   faithlessly,  so   it 
is  unlawful  for  a  man  and  his  wife  to  agree  upon  a  separation,  though 
one  party  should  give  more  occasion  to  it    than  another,  and  should 
compel  bis  consort  to  a  separation  ;  for  both  render  themselves  thus 
guilty  of  breaking  wedlock.     We  must  also  lo-k  upon  those    to   be 
guilty  of  breaking  wedlock,  who  have  engaged  to  be  married,  and  af- 
terwards rashly  discharge  each  other,  although    their  marriage  have 
not  been  publickly  confirmed  ;  for  the   public k    ceremony  doth   not 

*  This  is  to  be  understood  so,  that  a  person  may  not  marry  again,  when 
he  is  iairhlessly  deserted,  unless  Ins  consort  proceed  to  carnal  conversation 
with  another  person;  for  that,  although  committed  during  a  state  of  sepa- 
ration, must  be  considered  as  aduhery.  which  is  the  only  offence  that  can 
Ordinal  ir)  sundtr  married  persons,  nnd  entitle  the  injured  party  in  any  situa- 
tion to  mart-)  again.  The  word  of  God  also  permits  a  Christian,  who  is 
fai'hle  sly  deserted  on  account  of  his  religion  by  a  consort  who  is  an  un- 
believ  r,  to  marr*  agaij),  if  he  cannot  hv  any  proper  menns  persuade  his  con- 
sort to  live  with  him,  i  Ce>r  vii  ij,  as  it  also  forbids  a  Christian  to  mar- 
ry an  unbeliever.  By  an  unbeliever  we  may  reasonably  understand  in  the 
passage  alleged  not  only  a  btatheu,  but  also  an)  person,  who  either  re- 
jects the  Christian  faith,  or  denies  the  tutidamenul  doctrines  of  Christianity 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  331 

constitute  marriage,  but  the  mutual  engagement  :  "  Moses  indeed 
suffered  t:ie  Jews  to  give  their  wives  a  bill  oi  divorcement,  and  to 
put  theui  away  ;  but  thi->  was  only  on  account  of  the  hardness  of 
their  hearts;  tor  from  th<:  beginning  ;t  was  not  so,"  as  the  Saviour 
sailh,  Matt.  xix.  7,  8.  The  Jews  who  were  a  difficult  people,  acted 
with  so  much  lightness  in  this  affair,  that  they  gave  their  wives  a 
bill  of  divorcement,  and  put  them  away  for  every  cause,  and  even 
fov  a  trifle  :  Moses  did  not  however  permit  this,  but  only,  when  the 
woman  "  fuiind  no  favour  in  the  eyes  of  her  husband,  because  he 
had  discovered  some  uncleanness  in  her,"  as  we  read  Deut.  xxiv.  I. 

But  a  person  renders  himself  guilty  of  breaking  wedlock,  not 
only  by  separating,  but  also  when  he  remains  with  his  wife,  and 
yet  defiles  himself  with  adultery ;  which  adultery,  as  some  describe 
it,  is  "  a  violation  of  another's  bed  :"  and  so  this  sin  is  commuted, 
not  only  when  a  married,  but  also  when  an  unmarried  person  con- 
version carnally  with  another's  consort.  But  I  conceive  that  adul- 
tery consists  also  in  violating  any  person's  marriage-bed,  and  is 
therefore  committed  also  by  married  persons  with  the  unmarried  ; 
for  the  Saviour  sailh,  Matt.  xix.  9,  "  Whosoever  si. all  put  away 
his  wife,  except  it  be  for  fornication,  and  ^hall  marry  another,"  and 
therefore  an  unmarri.  d  woman,  "  committeth  adultery."  This 
aboaiination  may  also  be  committed  by  persons  who  are  betro'hed 
to  each  other,  although  they  have  not  yet  been  cm  finned  in  wed- 
lock, as  "  Israel's  brides*  committed  adultery,"   Hosea,  iv.    14. 

We  must  refer  also  to  this  abomination  having  more  than  one 
wife  at  the  same  tine-  A  man  may  be  the  husband  of  only  one 
wife,  which  is  required  especially  in  "a  bishop,  that  he  may  be 
blameless,"  1  Tim.  hi.  2.  To  have  more  than  one  at  the  same 
time  militates  against  the  first  marriage,  and  the  first  institution  of 
marriage.  The  last  prophet  hath  also  an  eye  to  this,  when,  repro- 
ving the  Jews  for  their  polygamy,  he  saith,  Mai.  ii.  15,  "Did  he 
not  make  one  ?  yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  Spirit  :  and  wherefore 
one  ?  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed."  As  if  he  should  say,  that 
God  had  created  but  one  man,  and  out  of  him  but  one  woman,  al- 
though he  could  have  made  more  :  but  one  man  with  one  woman 
was  sufficient  to  propagate  a  holy  seed.  Unless  we  would  rat  er 
understand  by  that  one  person,  Abraham,  who  took  besides  Sara  i, 
Hagar  also,  that  he  mi^ht  obtain  the  promised  seed  by  her,  and  this 
was  therefore  in  some  measure  excusable  in  him,  as  he  did  not  do 
it  from  wi<  ked  lewdness,  nor  to  afflict  Sarah  :  and  therefore  Abra- 
ham's conduct  could  not  justify  the  Jews'  desire  of  many  wives,   as 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


332     THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

they  imagined.  Even  u  the  king  of  Israel  might  not  take  rhany 
wives,"  according  to  the  divine  prescript  to  him,  Deut.  xvii.  17, 
and  no  man  ventured  to  do  that,  before  that  proud  and  revengeful 
Lamech,  Gen.  iv.  19.  Is  a  man  obligated  to  love  his  wife  as  his 
own  flesh,  how  is  that  possible,  when  he  hath  many  wives,  and  thus 
divides  Ids  love?  The  jealousy  and  domestic  quarrels,  which  arose 
from  a  pluiality  of  wives,  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs,  demon- 
strates the  inconvenience  of  this  conduct.  It  is  true,  God  suffered  it  in 
them,  and  did  not  punish  it  severely  ;  but  neither  did  he  visit  other 
sins  of  those  holy  persons  severely  :  yet  he  did  not  therefore  ap- 
prove of  them,  neither  are  they  to  be  imitated  :  it  was  then,  as  Paul 
saith,  Rom.  iii.  25,  the  time  of  "God's  forbearance,"  and  the 
church  was  then  yet  in  her  state  of  childhood,  which  inclined  God 
to  wink  at  many  things. 

II.  As  the  head  of  this  sin  is,  so  also  are  the  members;  for  we 
sin  against  this  commandment,  not  only  in  the  married  state,  but 
also,  (though  not  so  grievously)  when  we  commit  the  same  deeds 
out  of  the  married  state,  to  wit,  when  two  unmarried  persons  abuse 
one  another  by  fornication.  The  adultery  of  a  married  woman,  en 
account  of  which  she  may  be  put  away,  is  also  called  fornication  by 
Jesus,  Matt.  xix,  9.  But  it  is  usually  distinguished  from  adultery. 
The  "  spouses  "  among  the  people  of  God  "  committed  adultery," 
but  "the  daughters  committed  whoredom,"  (or  fornication,)  Hosea 
iv.  14.  It  is  a  vde  conduct  to  keep  a  mistress  ;  but  it  is  also  ex- 
ceedingly base,  when  the  fornicator  converseth  with  every  one,  who 
will  submit  to  be  abused  by  him.  Neither  is  it  excusable,  that  per- 
sons, who  have  been  betrothed  to  one  another,  have  carnal  commu- 
nication one  with  another  before  their  marriage  hath  been  rendered 
lawful,  according  to  the  law  of  the  land;  if  this  be  proper,  why  then 
do  we  suffer  our  marriage  to  be  confirmed  by  the  magistrates,  or 
the  church  ?  it  is  true,  this  is  only  a  human  institution,  but  we  ought 
to  be  subject  to  tint  also  for  the  Lord's  sake,  as  Peter  requires, 
1  Peter  ii.  13.  If  the  betrothed  bride  should  become  pregnant,  and 
should  lose  her  bridegroom  by  death,  before  her  marriage  was  con- 
summated, how  would  the  children  be  considered  by  the  civil  law, 
as  legitimate,  or  illegitimate  ?  Holy  persons,  like  Joseph  and  Mary, 
abstained  from  such  conduct  :  although  they  were  betrothed,  they 
came  not  presently  together,  Matt.  i.   18. 

And  men  sin  against  this  commandment  also  very  grievously  both 
in  and  out  of  the  married  slate, 

1.  By  stealing  women,  carrying  either  unmarried,  or  married  wo- 
men away,  with,  or  against  their  mind,  in  order  to  defile  them.  We 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  335 

may  consider  this  as  a  kind  of  manstealing,  for  which  the  Lord  ap- 
pointed the  punishment  of  death,  t  xod.  xxi.  16.  The  magistrates 
have  also  watched  of  old  against  this  misconduct,  by  annexing  the 
same  punishment  to  it.  To  this  we  must  also  refer  the  behaviour 
of  young  men,  in  stealing  the  affections  of  young  women,  and  ren- 
dering them  pregnant  without  the  knowledge  of  their  parents,  that 
they  may  compel  the  parents  to  consent  to  the  marriage  of  their 
children,  as  Shechem  defiled  Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob,  for  which 
both  he  and  his  father  with  all  his  fellowcitizens  suffered  very  griev- 
ously, Gen.  xxxiv.  The  parents  are  however  not  obliged  to  give 
their  daughter  to  such  a  dishonest  person,  and  they  may  compel 
him  to  satisfy  for  his  crime,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses3  Exod. 
xxii.    17. 

2.  It  is  a  still  greater  sin  to  force  women  and  maids,  or  to  over- 
power them  by  violence,  that  we  may  commit  abomination  with 
them.  God  appointed  no  less  a  penalty  for  this  sin  than  death, 
Deut.  xxii.  25.  Amnon,  after  he  had  forced  his  sister  Tamar,  Avas 
slain  by  Absalom,  not  without  the  righteous  avenging  providence  of 
God.  2  Sam.  xiii. 

3.  The  sin  of  the  Sodomites,  which  was  punished  by  God  with 
fire  from  heaven,  Gen.  xix.  This  unnatural  and  more  than  beastly 
sin  we  will  not  mention,  it  is  justly  called  the  dumb  sin. 

The  sins  of  adultery  and  fornication  are  exceedingly  wicked  and 
detestable  in  whatever  situation  they  are  committed.  They  are 
abominable  in  themselves,  and  men  dare  not  speak  of  them  :  u  It  is 
a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  things  which  are  done  of  them  in 
secret,"  Eph.  v.  12.  There  is  no  sin  that  disgraceth  a  person  more: 
than  adultery  and  fornication  ;  "  He  who  is  joined  to  a  harlot  is  one 
body  with  her :  every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is  without  the  body  ;  but 
he  that  committeth  fornication  sinneth  against  his  own  body,"  ac- 
cording to  1  Cor.  vi.  16,  18.  This  sin  transforms  a  man  into  a  beast, 
and  makes  him  "like  a  fed  horse,"  Jer.  v.  8,  yea,  it  disgraces  the 
generation  of  them,  who  defile  themselves  with  it  ;  the  Lord  requi- 
red that  "  the  daughter  of  the  priest,  who  played  the  whore,  should 
be  burned  with  fire,  because  she  had  profaned  her  father,"  Lev. 
xxi.  9. 

Add  to  this,  that  these  iniquities  are  attended  with  many  evil  con- 
sequences. The  adulterer  dissolves  marriage,  and  withal  the  strict- 
est bond  of  the  most  agreeable  love  and  friendship,  that  ought  to 
subsist  between  married  persons.  Fornication,  as  well  as  adultery, 
consumes  our  estate  :  "  By  means  of  a  whorish  woman  a  man  is 
brought  to  a  piece  of  bread,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  vi.  26,  and  "he 


334      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

that  kecpeth  company  with  harlots  spendeth  his  substance,"  Pro". 
xxix.  3.  What  an  evil  thing  must  that  sin  be,  which  deprives  a 
person  of  his  natural  and  becoming  modesty,  so  tliat  ''lie  shall  have 
a  whore's  forehead,  and  refuse  to  be  ashamed,"  Jcr.  in.  3.  Hath 
not  this  filthy  sin  deprived  many  of  their  health  by  loathsome  dis- 
eases, and  caused  them  to  die  painful  deaths,  so  that  "  they  have 
mourned  at  the  last,  when  their  flesh  and  their  body  were  consu- 
med?" as  Solomon  saith,  Prov.  v.  11,  Yea,  have  not  these  abom- 
inations occasioned  murders  and  massacres  ?  The  Shcchemites 
and  Amnon  were  slain  on  account  of  this  sin,  Gen.  xxxh.  2  barn. 
xiii. 

We  must  add  further,  that  this  sin  is  accursed  of  God  :  God 
suffers  not  any  man  to  be  guilty  of  it,  with  whom  he  is  not  displeas- 
ed :  "  1  he  mouth  of  a  strange  woman  is  a  deep  pit,  he  that  is  ab- 
horred of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein,"  saith  the  wise  man,  Prov.  xxii. 
14.  God  inflicts  dreadful  judgments  upon  adulterers,  though  they  may 
be  in  other  respects  his  favourites :  what  fearful  plagues  befell  the 
house  of  David  on  account  of  this  transgression  1  read  from  the 
twelfth  to  the  twentieth  chapter  of  second  Samuel.  God  required 
that  adultery  should  be  punished  with  death,  Lev.  xx.  10.  He 
shuts  impenitent  adulterers  and  fornicators  out  of  his  hea\enly  king- 
dom, and  he  hath  kindled  the  bottomless  and  unquenchable  lake 
for  them,  1  Cor.  vi.  10.  Rev.  xxi.  8.  xxii.    15. 

III.  "  Doth  God  forbid  only  adultery,  and  such  like  gross  sins?" 
No,  for  since  "  he  requireth  that  we  should  preserve  both  body  and 
soul  holy,"  he  forbids  likewise, 

1.  "  All  unchaste  actions,"  as  all  impure  kisses,  dallying,  flattering 
and  alluring,  such  as  the  harlot,  whom  Solomon  describes,  used 
with  the  young  man,  void  of  understanding,  Prov.  \ii.  7 — 23.  The 
tin  of  Onan  is  therefore  also  forbidden  here. 

2.  Unchaste  "  gestures  "  wiih  our  eyes,  hands  or  feet  are  also  to 
be  avoided  :  "  A  naughty  person  winketh  with  his  eyes,  he  speaketh 
with  his  feet,  and  he  teacheth  with  his  fingers,"  Prov.  vi.  12,  13. 
"  Having  the  eyes  full  of  adultery  "  is  a  work  of  the  fhsh,  as  Peter 
teacheth,  2  Peter  ii.  14  The  wise  king  therefore  justly  admonish- 
etti  his  son,  Prov.  vi.  25,  "  Not  to  lust  after  the  beauty  of  a  strange 
v/oman  in  his  heart,  and  not  to  let  her  take  him  with  her  eyelids." 

3.  If  there  be  aught  that  discovers  the  lewdness  of  a  person,  and 
kindles  it  in  others,  it  is  unchaste  ','  words,"  tales,  songs,  "  filthy 
communications,"  Eph.  iv.    29.      Col.     iii.    8,    "  filthiness,    foolish 

tig  and  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient,"  Eph.  v.  4.   We  may 


XLT.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  335 

apply  here  also  the  words  of  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  33,  "  Evil  communica- 
tions corrupt  good  manners." 

4.  Unchaste  "  thoughts,"  either  waking  or  sleeping,  are  not  ex- 
cusable neither :  the  heart  ought  to  be  pure,  but  it  is  exceedingly 
filthy;  for  4'out  of  it  proceed  evil  thoughts,  and  thus  also  adulteries 
and  fornications  "  as  the  mouth  of  truth  speaketh,  Matt.  xv.  19. 
He  teaches  also.  Matt,  v  28,  "  If  any  look  at  a  woman  to  lust  after 
her,  he  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart." 

5    "  And  whatsoever  can  entice  men  to  adultery   and  fornication" 
is  forbidden    here.     Many  things   entice    men   thereto,  as  (a)  sloth 
and  idleness  :  the  heart  hath  leisure  and  opportunity  then    to  work 
up  "  all  its  filth iness  and   superfluity  of  naughtiness,"  and  the  devil 
finds  room  a4so  to  tempt  us,  and  to  employ  us  with  lascivious  injec- 
tions.    David  was  seduced  to  this  sin,  when   he  walked  liesurely  on 
his  roof,  2  Sam.  xi.  2.     (b)   The  excessive    use   of   luscious    meats 
and  of  delicious  drinks  will  also  seduce  a  person    to  this  sin  :    "  Be 
not  amongst  wmebibbers,  amongst  riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  thine  eve 
shall  behold  strange  women."  saith   the  wisest  ol  kings,  Prov.  xxiii. 
20,  33.     (c)   Curiosity  to  hear  and  to  see  every    thing    entices   also 
very  frequently  to  this  abomination.     Dinah,  by    going  out    to    see 
the  daughters  of  the  land,  exposed  herself  to  the   violence  of  She- 
chem,  Gen.   xxxiv.  1,  2.     (d)   Unchaste  portraits  and  pictures    will 
also  excite  the  mind  to  lewdness.     Aholibah  became  enamoured  of 
the  young  men  of  Chaldea  by  looking  at  their  portraits,  Ezek,  xxiii. 
14 — 17.     (e)  The  idle  dress  of  worldly  women,  and  the  uncovering 
of  those  members  which  modesty  bids  us  to    conceal,  are    not  less 
powerful  allurements.     This  nevertheless    prevails   exceedingly    at 
present,  as  if  we  could  not  sin  with    our    garments  ;  but  what    was 
"  the  whorish   attire"  of  that  wanton  woman?  Prov.   vii.    10.  was 
it  aught  else  but  ribbands,   and  laces,  and  gauderies  of  every  kind  ? 
"We  see  this  sort  ©f  dress  described  in  the  attire  of  the  daughters  of  ' 
Zion,  Isaiah  hi.    16 — 23.      The   Lord   saith,    Zeph.  i.  8,  that   "he 
"will  punish  the  children  of  the  king,  and  all   such   as  were   clothed 
with    strange  apparel."     It  was  the  wicked    "  JeZabel,  who  painted 
herself,"  2  Kings  ix.  30.     The  admonition  of  Paul  is  surely  proper 
in  our  time,  1  Tim.  ii.  9.    "  Let  the    women   adorn    themselves    in 
modest   apparel,  with  shamefacedness  and  sobriety :  not   with  broi- 
dered  hair,  or  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array."     See  also    Titus  hi. 
3,  4.     It  is  true  a  person  may  clothe    himself  according  to    his    sta- 
tion, but  he  who  is  not  vain  will  conform  himself  rather  to  the  hum- 
blest of  his  condition,  than  to  those  who  desire  to  excel   their  equals 
in  their  attire.     But  "  it  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  for 


336      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

a  man  to  wear  a  garment  which  pertains  to  a  woman,  or  a  woman  6 
garment  which  pertains  to  a  man,"  as  the  Lord  himself  saith,  Deut. 
xxii  5.  (f)  Dancing,  comedies  and  stageplays  entice  men  also  to 
this  sin,  as  they  know  best  who  entertain  themselves  with  these  van- 
ities. I  do  not  believe  that  any  person  will  say,  that  he  ever  came 
from  the  dancingroom,  or  from  a  s'ageplay  a  better  man  than  he 
-ras  before  ;  at  least,  he  will  not  persuade  any  serious  and  soberminded 
person  that  he  did.  Doth  not  dancing,  seeing  and  hearing  so  many  un- 
chaste shows  heat  and  inflame  the  blood  and  spirits  ?  but  the  giddy 
sinner  doth  not -attend  to  himself,  and  is  so  besotted  with  these  vani- 
ties, that  he  will  keep  his  foul  heart  hid,  lest  it  should  affect  both 
himself  and  others. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  all  these  sins,  which  are  forbidden  in  this 
commandment,  and  which  were  therefore  forbidden  also  under  the 
Old  Testament,  as  we  have  shown  from  many  passages  of  the  scrip- 
tures of  the  Old  Testament,  may  we  then,  hearers,  think  with  the 
Socinians,  that  this  commandment  is  not  perfect,  but  that  it  was  en- 
larged by  Christ  with  a  prohibition,  (1)  that  we  should  abstain  not 
only  from  actual  whoredom,  but  also  from  whoredom  with  the  de- 
sires of  the  heart.  (2)  With  a  declaration  that  "he  who  putteth 
away  his  wife,  except  for  fornication,  coirmiiteth  adultery,  and  that 
he  who  marrieth  her  who  is  put  away,  doth  commit  adultery." 
(3)  With  a  prohibition  of  all  uncleanness,  and  lascivious  discourse, 
as  if  all  these  things  were  allowable  under  the  Old  Testament,  and 
God  did  not  then  require  an  exact  holiness  <-f  soul  and  body,  and  as 
if  even  the  heathens  did  not  dismprove  of  these  sins  ;  but  it  was  ne- 
cessary that  the  Socinians  should  reproach  the  dispensation  of  Mo- 
■  es,  yea,  of  the  Lord  in  this  manner,  if  they  would  maintain  that 
Christ  [.reached  a  new  doctrine. 

But  who  is  not  averse  fom  the  church  of  Home,  who  doth  not 
-inly  forbid  her  ministers  to  marry,  and  doth  not  only  permit  them  to 
keep  a  mistress,  but  also  considers  whoredom  as  a  venial,  and  not 
os  a  mortal  sin,  yea,  even  licenses  whores  at  Pome,  if  they  will  only 
pay  a  julio  weekly,  to  make  the  portion  of  the  pope  fat,  and  his 
meat  plenteous.  And  what  is  still  more  enormous  in  that  church, 
men]       ■  \  in  her  to  justify  the  ain  of  ^he  Sodomites  in    a  book 


ies,  109.  337 

printed  with  an  exclusive  license.  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered 
at  that  that  church  is  so  frequently  called  "the  whore,  the  great 
whore,  who  corrupted  the  earth  with  her  fornication,"  Rev.  xvii.  1, 
2,  15,  16.  xix.  2.  We  ought  to  justify  our  fathers  in  forsaking 
that  unclean  woman,  and  in  giving  her  a  bill  of  divorcement:  we 
will  nevermore  return  to  her  again- 

Alas  !  that  Holland,  delivered  from  the  yoke  of  Rome,  were  only- 
innocent.  But  how  guilty  doth  she  render  herself!  This  iniquity 
is  committed  in  secret :  but  the  Lord  seeth  it,  and  it  is  evil  in  his 
eyes :  and  how  often  doth  it  become  publick,  that  this  and  that  per- 
son hath  defiled  himself  with  adultery  and  fornication !  the  bastards, 
and  the  filthy  sicknesses  discover  it  but  too  frequently.  And  how 
many  are  there  whose  transgression  is  not  yet  known  !  But  why 
need  I  fight  at  random  ?  come  to  yourselves,  bsth  married  and  un- 
married persons,  and  see  whether  ye  have  never  been  seduced  to 
these  abominations.  I  believe  there  are  many  honest  person? 
among  you,  who  have  never  defiled  themselves  with  whoredom  :  but 
do  ye  think  that  ye  can  therefore  take  your  hands  out  of  your  bosoms, 
and  that  they  will  not  be  leprous,  and  that  ye  are  clean  with  respect 
to  this  vice  ?  are  ye  not  conscious  of  any  unchaste  actions  ?  do  ye 
say,  yea  ?  are  ye  then  altogether  strangers  to  unchaste  gestures  and 
words  ?  are  ye  strangers  to  these  also  ?  how  is  it  with  your  hearts 
and  thoughts,  and  particulaily  with  respect  to  all  those  things,  that 
might  entice  you  to  this  transgression  ?  do  ye  think  that  ye  are  pure 
in  this  respect  also  ?  I  believe  that  ye  are  not  yet  acquainted  with 
your  hearts,  and  that  ye  do  not  know  what  sin  is.  Do  ye  see  your 
detestable  heart  and  actions,  see  then  also  that  ye  are  under  the 
curse  ;  for  all  uncleanness  is  accursed  of  God,  and  he  threatens 
and  punisheth  it  severely,  that  ye  may  become  contrite,  and  may 
humble  yourselves  on  account  of  it,  and  be  earnestly  desirous  of  ob- 
taining pardon  and  reconciliation  for  it.  Think  not,  it  is  long  since, 
for  it  is  not  therefore  forgiven.  God  doth  neither  forgive  nor  forget 
this  sin,  until  men  sincerely  humble  and  abase  themselves  on  ac- 
count of  it.  Or  do  ye  think  that  God  will  not  take  this  enormity  so 
exceedingly  ill  of  you,  because  David,  the  man  after  God's  heart 
was  guilty  of  it,  and  nevertheless  obtained  forgiveness  ?  But  is  your 
sin  therefore  the  less,  because  a  holy  man  was  seduced  to  it  ?  doth 
it  not  rather  aggravate  your  sin,  that  ye  do  not  watch  against  it  now, 
when  ye  have  such  a  melancholic  example  before  your  eyes,  which 
ought  to  restrain  you  from  it  the  more  ?  Did  not  God  punish  that 
sin  of  David  with  particular  severity  ?  Because  another  cast  himself 
into  the  fire  and  water,  and  was  delivered  out  of  it,  do  ye  think  that 
Vol.  it.  9  R    . 


538      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ye,  who  run  after  him  into  such  a  destructive  evil,  will  also  be  de- 
livered? David  sinned  in  a  most  grievous  manner,  but  he  also  hum- 
bled himself  to  the  lowest  degree  en  account  of  his  sin,  and  sought 
reconciliation  with  God  earnestly  and  heartily  :  do  ye  so  likewise, 
that  ye  may  obtain  mercy  and  help.  Yea,  believers,  although  they 
have  obtained  peace  and  reconciliation  with  the  Lord  for  this  sin, 
should  yet  pause  a  while  by  it,  should  humble  themselves,  and  seek 
a  renewal  of  their  peace  with  the  Lord,  like  David,  Psalm  li.  after 
Nathan  had  informed  him,  that  the  Lord  had  taken  away  his  sin, 
2  Sam.  xii.  13-. 

Are  ye  troubled  and  concerned  on  account  of  the  impurity  of  your 
hearts  and  actions,  flee  then  to  the  pure  Jesus,  who  suffered  the 
punishment  of  these  sins  also  for  his  elect,  that  they  might  obtain 
peace,  and  be  healed  with  his  stripes.  David  did  so,  when  he  said, 
Psalm  li.  7,  "Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  ciean  :  wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  This  iniquity  will  some- 
times oppress  the  soul  exceedingly,  and  be  continually  belore  her  ; 
yea,  it  will  someumes  burthen  the  heart  so,  that  there  will  remain 
but  little  hope  of  pardon  in  the  mind.  Hut  let  such  afflicted  and 
tempesttossed  persons  know  that  the  Mediator  poured  out  his  soul, 
and  prayed  for  great  sins  also.  Did  not  David  and  Lot  obtain  par- 
don for  these  sins,  though  they  were  aggravated  to  the  highest  de- 
gree ?  "  Some  "  of  the  Corinthians  "  had  been  adulterers  and  ef- 
feminate," yea,  still  more  atrocious  sinners  ;  but  joining  themselves 
to  the  Saviour  by  faith  aivl  conversion,  "  tl^ey  were  washed,  sancti- 
fied and  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
our  God,"  as  Paul  testifieth,  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  1 1.  I  speak  not  thus  to 
encourage  any  unclean  person  in  this  abomination,  but  to  persuade 
and  induce  the  distressed  to  flee*  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  wash 
their  sou's  "in  the  fountain  "  of  his  blood,  "opened  to  the  house 
of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  for  sin,  and  for  un- 
cleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.   1. 

Let  every  one  beware  of  this  abomination,  yea,  of  the  least  pro- 
vocation and  temptation  to  this  sin,  and  let  him  show  himself  chaste 
ami  continent,  that  is,  modest,  shamefaced,  anil  unfriendly  to  the 
least  and  fi.st  motion  of  this  sin,  both  in  and  out  of  the  mairied 
state  :  (a)  "  For  the  eyes  of  God  ate  upon  the  w:-ys  of  man,  and  he 
seeth  all  his  ^oir.i^s  There  is  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  death, 
'where  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  Hide  themselves,"  saith  Elihu, 
Job  xxxiv.  21,  22.  This  withheld  the  chaste  Joseph  from  adultery 
ivith  his  master's  wife,  who  tempted  him  thereto,  Gen.  xxxix.  9. 
(b)  Know  also  believers,  that  "  your  members  are  the  members  of 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  339 

Christ,   that  your   bodies    and   souls   are  the   temples  of  the    Holy 
Ghost,"  sanctified  and  bought  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God  .;  therefore  such  filthy  sins  ought  not  to  be  entertained  in  them, 
yea,  not  even  the  motions  of  those  sins.     This  the  apostle  teacheth 
the  Corinthians,  who  were   purified    from  this   impurity,   1  Cor.  \'i. 
10,  U,  15,  20.     (c)  Let  the  commandment  of  God,  with    whom  we 
have  to  do,  affect  you"  souls  so,  as  to  render  you   averse    from  this 
Bin*     lie  proclaims  to  you  from  heaven   amidst  a  display  of  his  ex- 
alted majesty,  •'   fi.ou  shalt  not  commit  adultery."     Who  will  then 
dare  to  excite  the  least  motion  of  this  sin  in  his  soul  ?  "  For  tins  is 
the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification,  that  ye  should  abstain  from 
fornication  ;  that  every  one  of  you  should  know  how  to  possess  his 
vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour  :  not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence, 
even  >.s  the  Gentiles,  which  know  not  God."     Thus  speaks   Paul,    1 
Tins,  iv.  3,  4,  5.     (d)  It  happens   to  some,    yea,   to   believers    also, 
that  they  are  disturbed  with  powertul  motions  of  these  sins  :  an  un- 
clean devil  knows  how  to  allure  thern  by  wonderful  representations, 
and  to  distress  their  souls,  and  they  do  not   see  how   they   shall  dis- 
engage themselves  from  him.     But  1  would    advise    these   persons, 
(1;  to  be  afraid  of  such    evil   motions  of  lust.     It  is  the   design   of 
your  enemy  to  bring  you  to  a  most  grievous  fall:    repel    foithwith 
those  motions  and  ideas,  that  arise  and  are  injected  into  you,    as  ye 
would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes,  and  keep  all  your  members  un- 
der, that  they  may  not  seduce  you  :  yea,  like  chaste  Job,  "  make  a 
covenant   with    your  eyes,  that  they   may  not   look  upon  a  maid," 
Job  xxxi.  1.     The  words  of  James  are  applicable  here,  "  Resist  the 
devil,  and  he  will    flee  from  you,"    James  iv.  7.     (2)  Employ  your- 
selves with  something  or  other  :  be  either  industriously  engaged  in 
your  calling  ;  or  with  some  work,  which  is  otherwise  not  so  neces- 
sary ;  or  associate  with  decent  company,  and    discourse    with  them 
of  civd,  or  ecclesiastical,  or  more  spiritual  matters  ;  or  sing  a  psalm, 
or   spiritual  song,  either   alone,    or  with   others  :  "  Be  always  busy 
with  some  work,  that  the   devil  may  find  you  occupied,"  saith  one 
of  the  ancients.     (3)  Be  much  engaged  in  praver,  complain  ol  your 
case  to   the  Lord,  call  upon    him,  and  plead  with  him  to  help  you  : 
yea,  abstain  also  sometimes  from  such  meats  and  drinks,  as  inflame 
the   spirits ;    «  This  kind  can  go  out  by  nothing,  but  by  prayer   and 
fasting,"  Mavk  ix.  29.     (4)  Let  husbands  and  wives  love  one  another 
heartily,  that  they  may  not  loathe  one  another,  and  that  their  conju- 
gal affection  may  not  be  diverted  to  a  stranger.     See  what  Solomon 
and   Paul  say,   Prov.  v.  17 — 21.     1  Cor.  vii.  2 — 5.     (5)  Let  unmar- 
ried persons,  who  cannot  contain  themselves,  enter  into  an  honour- 


340     THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

able  marriage,  "  but  only  in  the  Lord,"  as  the  apostle  adviseth,  1 
Corf  vii.  39,  that  is,  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  after  asking  counsel  of 
the  Lord,  and  with  a  person  who  fears  the  Lord  :  "  The  sons  of 
God  must  not  see  the  daughters  of  men,  that  they  are  fair,  and 
take  them  wives  of  all  whom  they  choose  ;"  it  was  this  that  cor- 
rupted the  old  world,  as  Moses  relates,  Gen.  vi.  1,2.  "  Beauty  is 
vain,  and  favour  is  deceitful ;  but  a  woman  that  feareth  the  Lot  d, 
she  shall  be  praised,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxxi.  30.  (6)  1  show 
you  a  still  more  excellent  way  ;  let  every  one  of  you  enter  into  a 
spiritual  marriage  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  let  him  who  hath  con- 
nected himself  with  him  in  that  blessed  marriage  covenant,  devote 
his  love  wholly  to  him,  and  delight  himself  in  him.  This  would 
detach  the  soul  from  too  great  a  love  to  the  creature,  and  "they  who 
had  wives  would  be  as  though  they  had  none,"  1  Cor.  vii  29.  -'  The 
Lord  would  then  delight  in  you  ;  and  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth 
over  the  bride,  so  your  God  would  rejoice  over  you,"  as  he  saith, 
Isaiah  lxii.  4,  5,  and  "  ye  should  be  blessed,"  and  according  to 
Rev.  xix.  9,  "  be  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lambo" 
Amen. 


(   341  ) 


THE 


EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  15.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

Q.   110.    Wliat  doth  God  forbid  in  the  eighth  commandment  ? 

A.  God  forbids  not  only  those  thefts  and  robberies  which  are  pun- 
ishable by  magistrates;  but  he  comprehends  under  the  name  of 
theft  all  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropri- 
ate to  ourselves  the  goods  which  belong  to  our  neighbour  ;  whether 
it  be  by  force,  or  under  the  appearance  of  right ;  as  by  unjust 
weights,  ells,  measures,  fraudulent  merchandize,  false  coins,  usury, 
or  by  any  other  way  forbidden  by  God  ;  as  also  all  covetousness,  all 
abuse  and  waste  of  his  gifts. 

Q.   111.  But  what  doth  God  require  in  this  command? 

A.  That  I  promote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbour  in  every  in- 
stance I  can  or  may  ;  and  deal  with  him  as  I  desire  to  be  dealt  with 
by  others  :  further  also,  that  I  faithfully  labour,  that  1  may  be  able 
to  relieve  the  needy. 


342      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


G 


OD,"  saith  Paul  to  the   Athenians,  Acts   xvii.  25,  "  gheth 
to  all  lite,  breath,  and  all  things."     Life  and  breath  are  either  M  the 
breath  of  life,"    which  "  God   hath  breathed   into  man,"    as  iV'oses 
testifieth,  Gen.  ii.  17.     Or  if  life  and  breath  be  considered  distinctly, 
life  is  that  which  gives  existence  to  man  by  his  creation  or  birth,  and 
breath,  by   which  he   inhales  and  exhales   the   air  in  breathing,  is 
the   action   and  preservation   of  his  life  by  the  influence  of  God,  by 
which  lie   maintains  that  life,  which  he  hath  given.     But  as  neither 
life  nor  breath  can  endure,  unless  the  powers,  which  are  continually 
wasted  by  perspiration,  be  recompensed  again,  therefore  God  givetn 
us  all   things  to   maintain  our  life  and    breath,   as  food  and  clothing. 
The  Lord  is  indeed  "  a  faithful  Creator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19.    "  The  liv- 
ing God  givcth  us  all   things   richly  to  enjoy,"  saith   the  apostle,  1 
Tim.  vi.  17.     Man,  although    he  is  the  most    excellent  of  all  God's 
creatures  on  earth,  was    nevertheless   created   by  God   af'er  all  the 
creatures  :  and  why  ?  it  was  in  order  that  God  might  introduce  him 
into  a  plentiful    habitation,  and  thus    show  that   he    wouhl    maintain 
his   life   and   breath.     If  it  had   pleased  the    Lord,  he    conkl    have 
3naintained  the  life  and  breath  of  man  immediately,  as  he   support- 
ed Moses,  Elias  and   Christ   forty    days   and  nights ;  but    he  would 
afford  continually  new  evidences  of  his  independence,  allsuffic'u  nry, 
wisdom  and   goodness,  and  of   man's   dependence  on    his   Maker. 
As  the  Lord  then  giveth  man  all  things  to  preserve  him  alive,  so  he 
chooses  that  he  should  also  retain  them,  and  he  cloih  not  permit  any 
person  to  bereave  him  of  those  tilings,  that  lie  mav  not  by  the  want 
of  them   lose   the  breath   of  life.     Therefore   he  saith,  as   the  only 
Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy]  "  Thou   shall  not  steal."     He 
required   in  the  sixth   commandment,  that  no  man   should   kill  his 
neighbour  ;     and   Lmce   the   woman  is  the   delight  of  his  eyes,  and 
thus  refreshes  and  continues  his  life  and  breat'd,  therefore  the  Lord 
forbids   also  adultery  in   the  seventh   commandment.     But  can  any 
man  retain  and  enjoy  the  breath  of  his   life  wit!)  t'ie  wife  whom  he 
loves,  when  others  deprive    him  of  food  and   clothing?  surely  no  j 
and  therefore  the  Lawgiver  enjoins  en  every  man  in  the  eighth  com- 
mandment, that  he  should  not  steal. 

The  instructor  explaining  this  commandment,  z\,qy;s>  fur  that  pur- 
pose, 

I.  The  sins  that  are  forbidden  in  it,   Question  1 10. 

II.  The  virtues  that  are  commanded  in  it,  Question  111. 

i.  The  sin    which    the    Lawgiver    forbids   here  is  stealing.     We 
■  ill  survey  this  iniquity  first  in  itself,  and  then  in  its  c.ni5:s  ;  and  will 


XLIL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  Hi.  345 

then  also  attend  to  the  abominable  nature  of  the  sin.  The  Hebrew 
word  ganab  signifies  to  do  something  secretly,  that  is  shameful,  and 
ol  which  a  person  is  ashamed.  When  "David  mourned  for  Absa- 
lom," by  whose  death  nevertheless  the  insurrection  against  him  was 
quelled,  "  the  victory  was  turned  into  mourning  to  all  the  people, 
and  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  into  the  city,  as  people  being 
ashamed,  steal  away,  when  they  flee  in  battle,"  as  we  read,  2  Sam. 
xix.  1,  2,  3.  And  this  word  signifies  doing  thus  particularly  by  de- 
ceit, as  "  Absalom  stole  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Israel,"  2  Sam. 
>:v  6,  when  by  deceitful  speeches  he  withdrew  the  minds  of  the  Is- 
raelites from  his  father,  and  inclined  ihem  to  himself.  And  so 
stealing  consists  in  "  taking  our  neighbour's  property  from  him, 
with  or  without  his  knowledge,  against  his  mind." 

God  hath  given  to  every  man  his  particular  portion  of  the  goods 
of  this  world,  as  his  property.  It  was  his  will  that  Adam  should 
"  subdue  the  earth,"  and  all  the  creatures  on  it  to  himself,"  and 
that  he  should  have  dominion  over  them,"  Gen,  i.  28.  But  when 
men  multiplied,  it  was  necessary  that  each  of  them  should  have  his 
portion:  "Cain,  a  tiller  of  the  giound,  had  therefore  the  fruits  of 
the  ground,  and  Abel,  a  shepherd,  had  his  sheep,"  Gen.  iv.  3,  4. 
When  men  were  not  yet  so  numerous,  that  they  could  occupy  the 
whole  earth,  every  man  became  the  owner  of  that  land,  and  of 
those  goods,  which  he  first  found.  When  the  whole  body  of  men 
purposed  to  settle  together  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  were  unwil- 
ling to  disperse  over  the  whole  earth,  the  Lord  defeated  their  pur- 
pose by  confounding  their  language,  that  he  might  induce  them  to 
dwell  on  all  the  earth,  and  each  to  take  for  his  property  the  posses- 
sion that  was  allotted  him  ;  for  when  "  the  Most  High  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  he  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance," 
Deut.  xxxii.  8.  Are  there  at  present  no  more  vacant  lands  to  be 
occupied,  every  individual  nevertheless  holds,  as  his  special  goods 
and  property,  that  which  he  obtains  by  right  of  inheritance,  by  traf- 
fic, learning,  and  any  honourable  art,  or  by  the  labour  of  his  hands, 
and  thus  "  he  eats  his  own  bread,"  according  to  2  Thess.  iii.  12, 
It  is  therefore,  considering  this  wise  distribution  of  goods  among 
men,  exceedingly  preposterous  in  certain  persons,*  to  assert,  with 
the  ancient  Essenes,  a  community  of  goods,  whereby  all  things 
should  be  common  to  all,  and  none  should  have   aught  as  his  own  ; 

*  By  these  the  author  designs  the  Labadists,  a  sect  which  existed  in  his 
time,  but  which  hath  since  fallen  into  oblivion.  They  were  so  called  from 
John  Labadie,  their  founder,  a  minister  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  Frinee, 
a  gre;:t  enthusiast,  who  held  r?v?r^i  ether  erroneous  '.•■■■ 


344      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

this  would  encourage  sloth  fulness,  and  exclude  liberali'y.  In  ordei* 
that  the  Israelite  might  "  open  his  hand  wide  to  his  brother,  to  his 
poor,  and  to  his  needy,"  the  Lord  saith, 'that  "  the  poor  should  not 
cease  out  of  the  land,"  Deut  xv.  11.  It  is  true,  in  the  first  Chris- 
tian church  all  who  believed  were  together,  and  had  all  things  in 
common  ;  neither  said  any  of  them,  that  aught  of  the  things  that 
he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  they  had  all  things  common,"  as 
Luke  reliteth,  Acts  ii.  44.  iv.  32.  But  this  was  only  a  special 
case  for  that  time,  and  it  proceeded  from  the  heat  of  the  power  of 
that  love,  which  consumed  them  and  their  goods  through  the  power 
of  godliness ;  but  it  was  not  general,  neither  was  it  a  command  of 
the  apostles :  every  man  was  permitted  to  keep  his  goods  for 
his  own  use,  as  Peter  declares  to  Ananias,  Acts  v.  4.  John  had  his 
own  house,  and  maintained  the  mother  of  Jesus  in  it,  John  xix.  27. 
If  it  had  been  otherwise,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary,  that  the 
believing  Gentiles  should  send,  every  one  according  to  his  ability, 
their  charitable  contributions  to  the  believing  Jews,  as  is  testified, 
Acts  xi.  28,  29,  30,  neither  would  it  have  been  of  any  use,  that 
Paul  should  urge  that  liberality  by  so  many  motives,  1  Cor.  xvi. 
1 — 4,  2  Cor.  viii,  and  ix.  lor  this  command  is  founded  in  the 
property,  that  men  have  in  these  or  those  goods;  for  stealing  is  a 
taking  of  another  person's  property  to  ourselves,  without  his  con- 
sent. 

Theft  is  divided  into  the  grosser  or  greater,  and  the  lesser.  The 
grosser  or  greater  is  that  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrate, 
because  it  tendeth  to  the  destruction  of  the  commonwealth.  This  is. 

1.  "  Manstealing,"  when  a  person  steals  a  human  being,  to  sell 
him,  or  to  beg  with  him,  and  thus  to  gain  aught  by  him  ;  so  Jo- 
seph complained  that  k<  he  had  been  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews,"  Gen.  xi.  15.  The  Lord  God  required  that  such  thieves 
should  be  punished  with  death:  he  saith,  Exod.  xxi.  16,  "  He  that 
steaieth  a  man  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death."  See  also  Deut.  xxi  v.  7,  and  1  Tim  i.  10. 
But  since  we  do  not  buy  men  in  this  country,  this  sin  doth  not  pre- 
vail among  us:  it  happens  indeed  sometimes,  that  lazy  beggars 
steal  children,  in  order  to  beg  with  them,  but  this  is  also  rare  :  the 
Jesuits  and  monks  nevertheless  often  render  themselves  guilty  of 
this  theft,  for  they  entice  children,  seduce  them  from  their  parents, 
and  carry  t!icm  agjia^t  their  parents  mind  into  monasteries. 

2.  "  Stealing  cattle,"  although  it  is  not  so  atrocious  an  offence, 
as  stealing  men,  must  also  be  considered  as  punishable  by  the  magis- 
trate,    'i'he  Lord  Baith,  Exod.  xxii.   1,   <■  It'  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox, 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  ill.  345 

or  a  sheep,  ar.d  kill  it,  or  sell  it,  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox, 
and  four  sheep  for  a  sheep  •"  The  penalty  for  an  ox  was  greater 
thaii  that  foi  a  sheep,  because  they  made  use  of  oxen  for  ploughing 
arid  husbandry :  he  therefore,  who  stole  an  ox,  not  only  deprived 
the  owner  of  his  property,  as  he  did,  who  stole  a  sheep,  but  also 
discommoded  the  posssessor  in  tilling  his  land. 

3.  We   add  to  this  w  houserobbery,"  that  is,    stealing    money,  or 

old  goods,  clothes,  victuals,  or  ether  matters,  whether  the 
thief  take  aught  of  the  goods  that  are  at  hand,  in  passing  by,  or 
her  he  filch  aught  from  the  owner,  while  he  is  talking,  or  other- 
iged  :  or  whether  he  enter  privately  into  the  house,  or 
break  into  it,  and  take  whatever  pleaseth  him.  Tie  civil  law  of  Is- 
rael permitted  the  master  of  the  house  to  "kill  the  thief,  who  broke 
into  his  house  by  night ;  but  if  the  sun  were  risen,  he  might  not  kill 
hitn.  but  the  thief  was  to  make  full  restitution,  yea,  to  give  double  : 
If  he  had  nothing  wherewith  to  make  restitution,  he  was  to  be  sold 
for  his  theft,"  Exod.  xxii.  2 — 4.  We  cannot  determine  from  the 
civil  law  of  Israel,  that  we  have  now  a  right  to  kill  a  thief,  who  steals 
cattle,  or  household  goods,  since  this  law  was  ordained  only  for  that 
people  and  country,  and  cannot  well  be  observed  in  other  countries 
and  nations:  among  the  Israelites  the  thief  was  able  to  make  full 
restitution  of  what  he  had  stolen,  because  among  them  every  man 
had  his  immovable  possesison  of  lands ;  and  if  he  had  spent  all, 
and  had  empovei  isheel  himself,  he  mig:it  be  sold,  and  his  debt  com- 
pensated, according  to  Exod.  xxii.  3.  But  this  hath  not  place  among 
us.  It  is  true,  we  could  now  confine  the  thief  in  a  house  of  correc- 
tion, but  he  could  not  then  compensate  his  theft,  or  restore  to  the 
owner  that  which  he  had  stolen  from  him  five,  four,  or  twofold. 
We  dare  not  therefore  determine  whether  the  magistrate  may  not 
punish  grosser  acts  of  theft,  which  are  aggravated  by  many  circum- 
stances, with  death.  But  it  appears  too  hard  to  punish  simple  theft 
severely,  especially  when  it  proceeds  from  poverty,  either  with  death-. 
or  with  a  great  contempt  of  the  thief:  Solomon  sailh,  Prov.  vi.  30, 
31.  "  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul 
when  he  is  hungry  :  but  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sevenfold, 
lie  shall  give  all  the    substance  of  his  house." 

4.  Unfaithful  magistrates  and  collectors  render  themselves  guilty 
of"  peculation,"  or  stealing  from  the  public,  when  they  exhaust  the 
poor  commons,  in  order  to  enrich  themselves  :  "  As  a  roaring  lion, 
and  a  ranging  bear,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people,"  saith 
the  wise  man,  Prov    xxviii.   15.     Such  were   the  rulers    of  Israel  : 

:  they  plucked  the  skin  from  off  the  Israelites,   and  their  flesh  from 
Vol..  iu  2  S 


246       THE  THTRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  see  whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous.  Think  not  that  ye 
have  cleansed  your  hearts  in  this  respect,  and  are  pure  of  this  sin, 
because  ye  are  so  blind,  that  ye  do  not  know  yourselves.  Paul,  be- 
fore he  was  converted,  blasphemed  God,  and  he  nevertheless  knew 
not  that  he  did  it  as  he  confessed  afterwards,  when  he  was  better 
enlightened,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Yea,  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme, 
and  thought  that  he  did  God  service,  Acts.  xxvi.  9,  10,  11.  Only 
attend  to  all  your  former  doings,  and  ye  will  see  that  your  whole  lift 
hath  been  altogether  without  aDd  dishonourable  to  God.  And  it  is 
therefore  evident,  that  ye  take  his  name  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  your 
covenant  God,  that  ye  are  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  thai  he  will  not 
hold  you  guiltless. 

Alas  !  that  with  the  jailer,  ye  cried  out  with  trembling,  on  ac- 
count of  your  great  guilt,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Ye 
would  then  learn  how  the  Lord  could  hold  you  guiltless ;  for  this 
would  cause  your  souls  to  flee  out  of  themselves  to  him,  who  suffered 
blasphemy,  and  on  account  of  blasphemy.  Endeavour  not  only  to  re- 
s'.rain  yout  mouths  from  uttering  such  dreadful  Language,  but  also 
to  be  found  wholly  in  Christ,  and  with  "  the  Corinthians,  who  were 
before  blasphemers,  to  be  washed,  sanctified  and  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  as  the  apostie 
testifieth  of  them,  1  Cor.  vi,  10,  11. 

But,  believers,  ye  also  have  frequently  sinned  against  this  com- 
mandment. Reflect  only  on  your  former  behaviour,  on  all  your 
free  thoughts  and  words,  your  vain  and  dissolute  conversation,  and 
how  ye  have  reproached  God  during  your  "  ignorance  and  unbelief," 
like  Paul  1  Tim.  i.  13.  Ye  have  laden  yourselves  with  a  heavy 
burthen  of  guilt,  ye  have  seen  it,  and  know  how  it  oppressed  you, 
and  with  what  dreadful  distress  your  souls  were  seized,  when  ye 
st.w  that  God  would  not  hold  you  guiltless  ;  but  ye  have  with  Paul, 
"obtained  mercy,"  1  Tim.  i.  13.  God  could  not,  and  he  nevertheless 
doth  hold  you  guikless :  his  Son  hath  atoned  for  your  reproaching 
of  the  Lord  in  your  stead  :  "  The  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him 
up,  and  the  reproaches  of  them  who  reproached  the  Lord  fell  on 
him,"  as  lie  complains  by  the  mouth  of  David,  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Be» 
cause  ye  had  blasphemed  God,  the  wicked  accused  him  of  blasphe- 
my, and  slew  him  on  account  of  it :  he  purchased  the  covenant  of 
grace  for  yon,  and  "  though  he  was  just,  he  suffered  for  you,  who 
were  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you  to  God,"  1  Peter  iii.  18,  and 
that  the  Lord  might  no  more  be  wroth  with  you,  "that  be  might 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  would  not  hlfli 


io<\  247 

from  you  to  do  you  good,  and  that  he  would  put  his  fear  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  might  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.     Therefore, 

1.  Let  your  souls  wonder  and  he  amazed  at  the  great  and  free 
grace,  that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  Ye  who  were  guilty  are  hol- 
den  guiltless  ;  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  guiltless,  was  holden  guilty, 
and  punished  in  your  stead,  and  ali  grace  is  conveyed  to  you  there- 
by :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  Cod  made  to  be  sin  for  you, 
that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  according 
to  2  Cor.  v.  21.  Why  did  not  God  lay  the  guilt  of  your  blasphemy 
upon  you,  as  well  as  upon  others  ?  It  was  only  free  grace.  Behold 
it,  wonder  at  it  and  rejoice,  praise  him  on  account  of  it,  like  Paul", 
when  he  saith,  1  Tim.  1.  15,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, of  whom  I  am  chief." 

2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  still  often  taken  in  vain  by  you  :  must 
ye  not  own  it  ?  ye  know  surely  that  his  fear  doth  not  always  impress 
your  hearts,  as  it  ought ;  how  often  are  ye  but  little  influenced  by  it, 
as  well  when  ye  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  as  when 
ye  are  not.  Therefore  the  soul  should,  as  often  as  she  renders  her- 
self guilty,  lay  hold  on  the  Son  of  God  for  reconciliation,  and  dip 
herself  in  the  fountain  cf  his  blood,  that  she  may  be  reconciled  and 
cleansed.  He  is  indeed  "  the  opened  fountain,"  which  is  always 
"  open  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

3.  Let  it  henceforward  be  your  earnest  endeavour,  that  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  your  God  may  direct  you  in  all  your  conversation,  so 
that  ye  may  not  reproach,  but  glorify  him  :  "  If  ye  call  on  the  Fath- 
er, who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"    1  Peter  i.  17. 

The  fear  of  God  should  restrain  you  from  sinning,  especially  from 
scandalous  sins,  which  induce  men  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  : 
"  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid,  and  his  dread  fall  on 
you  I"  may  we  ask  you  with  Job,  ch.  xiii.  ii.  Job  himself  refrained 
from  sinning,  because  "  destruction  from  God  was  a  terrour  to  him  ; 
and  by  leason  of  his  highness  he  could  not  endure,"  ch.  xxxi.  23. 
So  Joseph  also  acted,  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  and  Nehemiah,  Neh.  v.  15. 
An  a»ve  for  God  ought  to  restrain  your  tongues  and  mouths,  and 
prevent  you  from  "  speaking  so  exceeding  proudly,  and  from  letting 
arrogancy  come  out  cf  your  mouths  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  judg- 
ment," as  Hannah  admonisheth,  1  Sam.  ii.  3.  We  ought  to  follow 
even  our  daily  callings  with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  as  the  apostle 
enjoins  upon   servants,   Eph.  vi.  3.     Therefore  plead  the  covenant 


Z4»      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

his  son  acted  worse,  and  abominably,  when  he  resolved  to  rendei 
that  yoke  much  heavier,  1  Kings  xii  1 — 14.  It  is  also  force  when 
a  person  endeavours  by  his  power,  riches,  courage  and  friends  to 
control  justice,  in  order  to  withhold  from  infe-iors  their  dues, 
James  bewails  the  poor  on  this  account,  when  he  saith,  James  ii.  6* 
"  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment- 
seats  ?"  Job  was  innocent  of  this  great  transgression  :  hear  his 
solemn  protesration  ;  "  If  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  against  the  father- 
less,  when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  gate  ;  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from 
my  shouhlerblade,  and  mine  arm  be  broken  from  the  bone,"  Job 
xxxi.  21,  22. 

The  sinner,  not  contented  with  his  own,  and  grasping  after  his 
neighbour's  property,  wishes  nevertheless  to  appear  honest,  and 
will  therefore  endeavour  to  deprive  him  of  it  "  under  an  appear- 
ance of  right,  as  by  unjust  weights,  ells  and  measures."  He  doth 
this,  when  he  "buys  his  wares  with  such  as  are  loo  great,  and  sells 
them  with  such  as  are  too  small :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness 
in  judgment,  in  meteyard,  in  weight,  or  in  measure,"  saith  the 
Lord,  Lev.  xix.  See  how  he  explains  this  mors  particularly,  Deut. 
xxv.  13 — 16,  and  Prov  xx.  10.  Hear  how  the  wicked  arc  reproved 
on  account  of  this  kind  of  theft,  Micha  vi.  10.  "  Are  there  not  yet 
the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  the 
scant  measure  that  is  abominable  ?" 

We  may  add  to  this  cheating  with  our  u  merchandise,"  or  wares, 
which  unjust  men  adulterate,  and  set  off  in  such  a  manner,  that  they 
appear  better  than  they  are.  This  is  "selling  chaff  for  wheat," 
Amos  villi  6. 

The  Lord  is  not  less  displeased  with  u  false  coins,"  when  a  per. 
son  debases,  or  clips  money,  or  when  he  knowingly  passes  base  or 
clipped  money  for  more  than  it  is  worth.  Or  a  person,  in  order  to 
deceive  his  neighbour  *vith  the  money,  will  miscount  it,  either 
in  writing,  or  reckoning,  or  weighing,  like  Israel,  who  in  receiving 
■money,  "  made  the  shekel,"  that  is,  the  weight  of  the  shekel, 
"great,"  Amos  viii.  5. 

The  instructor  adds  to  this  "  usury,"  that  is,  exorbitant  interest, 
which  we  take  for  money  or  goods,  that  we  have  lent  to  others,  in 
order  to  accommodate  them.  But  this  commandment  doth  not  for- 
bid that  iHury,  which  is  agreeable  to  equity,  to  the  current  value  of 
money,  of  merchandise,  or  of  the  profits  that  others  make  by  our 
money  or  goods,  or  according  to  the  measure  which  the  magistrate 
appoints.  Such  money  may  be  considered  as  just  ;  for  how  can  we 
condemn  a  person,  who  lends  another  money,  from  which  he  derives 


XLTI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1  TO,  111.  349 

advantage,  for  sharing  in  that  advantage  :  there  cannot  be  otherwise 
any  trafficking  or  trading  ;  may  we  derive  piofit  from  our  wares  which 
we  sell,  why  then  not  also  from  our  money,  which  we  lend  ?  The 
Lovd  Jesus  approves  of  such  usury,  when  he  teacheth  us,  that  we 
should  endeavour  to  derive  p»ofit  from  our  spiritual  gifts  after  the 
manner  of  usurers,  Matt.  xv.v.  14 — 30.  But  when  usury  is  forbid- 
den, we  must  understand  by  it  that  griping  usury,  which  must  ne- 
cessarily consume  and  empoverish  the  person  who  borrows  upon 
usury.  To  such  griping  usury  belongs  also  taking  interest  of  the 
poor,  to  whom  we  ought  to  lend  money  without  interest,  that  we 
may  relieve  their  necessity,  although  we  could  not  hope  that  they 
would  recompence  our  favour,  or  restore  the  money  which  we  have 
lent  them,  as  the  Saviour  commands,  Luke  vi.  35.  It  is  also  un- 
just usury  to  take  such  necessary  pledges  of  security  of  the  poor,  to 
whom  we  lend  money,  as  they  cannot  spare.  The  Lord  God  was 
highly  displeased,  and  would  punish  it  severely,  when  any  one  "  took 
another's  garment,  or  his  millstone,  and  especially  his  up^er  mill- 
stone, to  pledge,"  Exod.  xxii    2  5 — 27.     Deut.  xxiv.  6. 

There  are  "  other  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  by  which  men  appro- 
priate their  neighbour's  goods  to  themselves."  Who  can  enume- 
rate them  all  ?  We  will  mention  only  a  few.  For  instance,  (a)  '1  hat 
wicked  judges  receive  bribes,  in  order  to  .pervert  justice  :  'l  TLou 
shalt  not  take  any  gift;  for  the  gift  blindtth  the  wise,  and  perverfeth 
the  words  of  the  righteous,"  saith  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  8.  Deut. 
xvi.  19.  The  princes  of  Judah  are  taxed  as  "companions  of 
thieves,"  because  "they  loved  giffs,"  Isi-iah  i.  23.  (b)  The  un- 
faithful managing  and  devouring  of  estates,  which  we  can  get  into 
our  hands,  loading  them  with  so  many  expences  that  they  dwindle 
into  nothing  :  but  "  wo  to  the  writers,  who  prescribe  grievousness, 
to  turn  aside  the  nc.  dy  from  judgment,"  Sec.  Isaiah  x  1,  2.  To 
which  we  must  also  refer  alienating  goods  that  have  been  committed 
to  our  trust ;  the  Lord  condemns  such  a  conduct,  Exod.  xxii.  10 
— 13  ;  also  neglecting  to  rtstove  that  which  we  have  borrowed,  and 
not  paying  our  debts ;  for  this  is  "  the  work  of  the  wicked,"  as  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  21,  It  is  of  the  same  kind  also,  when  a 
person  doth  not  produce  goods  which  he  hath  found,  nor  restore 
them  to  the  owner,  as  the  Lord  rtquireth,  Lev.  vi-  3.  Deut.  xxii. 
1.  Also  concealing  stolen  goods,  in  order  to  be  ''  a  partner  with  the 
thief,"  as  the  wise  king  speaks,  Prov.  xxix.  24,  (c)  Empoverishing 
debtors,  who  are  willing  to  pay  their  debts,  and  have  not  contracted 
them  wilfully,  falling  on  them  forthwith,  in  order  to  ruin  them,  and 
turn  them  out  naked  and  bare :  tlut>  is  a  hateful  conduct,  as  the  ba- 


350       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

viour  shows  in  that  wicked  servant,  Matt,  xviii.  28,  29,30.  (d)  Keep- 
ing buck  the  wages  of  the  hireling,  and  abridging  them  :  a  wo  is 
denounced  against  those  who  do  thus,  Jer.  xxii.  13.  This,  as  James 
informs  us,  is  "  a  crying  sin,"  James  v.  4.  God  wiU  not  allow  us 
to  keep  such  wages  with  us  all  night,  Leviticus  xix,  13.  (e)  It  is 
also  abominable  to  be  slothful  and  sluggish,  either  when  we  labour 
for  another,  and  thus  eat  the  bread  of  idleness,  contrary  to  Prov. 
xxxi.  17  ;  or  when  we  do  our  own  work  :  "  He  that  is  slothful  in 
his  work,  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster,"  sailh  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  9.  Paul  condemns  such  persons,  2  Thess.  iii.  10 — 12, 
and  he  saith  that  "they  ought  not  to  eat."  (f)  Displacing  and  remov- 
ing land-marks,  in  order  to  enlarge  our  own,  and  abridge  another's 
land,  is  also  a  theft,  which  is  forbidden,  Dent.  xix.  14.  Prov.  xxii. 
28.  xxiii.  10:  as  also  stealing  out  of  another's  garden,  or  orchard, 
and  so  likewise  "putting  our  cattle  into  our  neighbour's  field,  and 
letting  them  feed  in  it,"  contrary  to  the  divine  prohibition,  Exod. 
xxii.  5.  (g)  It  is  also  a  conduct,  which  God  forbids,  to  supplant  our 
neighbour  in  his  trade,  by  disparaging  him  and  his  wares  :  this  is 
contrary  to  "  charity,  which  envieth  not,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  4.  Crying 
down  wares,  which  are  offered  for  sale,  in  order  to  buy  them  at  a 
cheap  rate,  this  we  ought  to  condemn  with  Solomon,  Prov.  >;x.  14, 
"  It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer ;  but  when  he  is  gone  his 
way,  he  boasteth."  We  ought  to  disapprove  no  less  of  "  monopo- 
lizing goods,  buying  them  up,  or  forestalling,"  especially  eatables, 
by  which  a  person  obtains  the  sole  command  of  these  things,  and  can 
regulate  the  sale  of  thern,  raise  the  price  of  them  to  an  enormous 
height,  and  so  enrich  himself  beyond  measure,  and  thus  exhaust  the 
poor  commons  :  "  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall  curse 
him,"  saith  the  wise  man.  Prov.  xi.  26.  (h)  It  is  exceedingly  de- 
testable in  children  to  rob  their  parents,  and  to  deem  this  notwith- 
standing to  be  right :  hear  what  the  same  wise  man  saith  of  it. 
Prov.  xxviii.  24,  "  Whoso  robbeth  his  father,  or  his  mother,  and 
saith, It  is  no  transgression,  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer." 
The  time  would  fail  me,  if  I  should  speak  of  deceitful  bargains,  re- 
ceipts, or  bills  of  discharge,  of  the  violation  of  contracts  and  condi- 
tions, on  account  of  some  loss  that  might  accrue  to  us;  of  unjust 
judgments  and  pleadings,  in  order  to  abridge  our  neighbour;  of 
that  dishonest  thirst  for  gain,  which  is  shown  in  betting,  playing  at 
dice,  and  gaming,  in  keeping  drinking-houses,  whore-houses,  and 
gaming-houses. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  111.  35 1 

A  person  who  cloth  not  know  himself,  wonders  how  any  one   can 
be  so  dishonest,  as  to  be  guilty  of  stealing  from  others  :  but  he  con- 
siders not  that  it  is  restraining  grace,  that  hinders  him  from  sinning 
against  God  in   this   manner.      The   sinner    being   destitute- of  the 
Lord,  and  not  knowing  what  is  essentially  good  for  him,  can  never 
be  satisfied  with  his  earthly  goods,   he   will    always  have  still  more, 
as  we  will  show  more  fully  on  the  tenth  commandment.     And  hence 
ariseth,    (1)  "  Covetousness,"  as  the   immediate  cause  of  theft,  by 
which  a  person  craves  insatiably,  and  covets  vehemently  an    abun- 
dance of  earthly  goods,  and  endeavours  to  keep  them,   and   will   not 
make  a  moderate  use  of  them,  nor  communicate  of  them  to  others  : 
"  Wo  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Hab.  ii.  9.     And  thus  covetousness  consists   in  desiring 
to  be  rich,   1  Tim.  vi.   16.     He  who   is  infected   with   this  disease 
will  be  repeatedly  seduced  more  or  less  to  theft :    "  He   falls   into 
temptation,  and  a  snare,  and  into  many   foolish  and  hurtful   lusts, 
which  drown  men   in  destruction   and   perdition  ;    for   the  love    of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.     His  de- 
sire  of  having    whets   his  understanding,   and  teaches  him  to  in- 
crease his  own  by  1  know  not  what  methods  under  an  appearance  of 
right :   "  all  the  instruments  of  the  churl  are  evil :  he  deviseth  wicked 
devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy 
speaketh  right :"  thus  we  read,  Isaiah  xxxii.  7.     And  therefore  we 
cannot  sufficiently  wonder  that  the  Socinians  deny  that  covetousness 
was  forbidden  under  the  Old  Testament.     This  is  a  sin,  from  which 
many  are  averse,  but  not  on  account  of  their  satisfaction  in  God,  and 
their  contentment  with  that  portion  of  earthly  goods,  which  he  giveth 
them,  but  they  proceed  to  another  extreme,  to  wit,  (2)  to  f  an  abuse 
and  wasting  of  the  gifts  of  God,"  by  excess  in  eating,  drinking, 
clothing,  household  furniture,   and   pleasures,   which   are   otherwise 
lav  fial ;  and  no  less  by  gaming,  playing,  idle  betting  and  whoredom, 
by  which  such  persons  empoverish  themselves  and  their  households^ 
and  are  easily  seduced  to  stealing.     The  wisest  of  kings  had  there- 
fore reason  to  say  to  his  son,  "  Be  not  amongst  winebibbers,  amongst 
riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  for  the  drunkard   and  the  glutton  shall  sure- 
ly come  to  poverty,"  &c.  Prov.  xxiii.  20.     When  the  steward  had 
wasted  his  master's  goods,  and  was  obliged  to  render  an  account   of 
his  stewardship,  he  fell  into  iniquity,  Luke  xvi.   1 — 3. 

Stealing  is  abominable,  in  whatever  manner  it  is  perpetrated  :  "  All 
that  do  such  things,  and  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  an  abomination 
unto  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  Moses,  Deut.xxv.  16.  For,  (a)  stealing 
is  a  dissatisfaction   with  the  dispensation  of  God.  by  which    men 


5-       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

therefore  "  take  the  mme  of  God  in  vain,"  as  it  is  said,  Prov.  xxx. 
9.     The  thief  destroys  the  security  and  tranquility  of  human  society  . 
he  occasions  strife  and  contention  ;  he  exposts  himself  to  ignominy 
and  shame,  when  he  is  caught.     See  this  Jer.  ii.   16.     And  in  order 
t!  at  he  may  not  he  ashamed,  he  will  endeavour  to  corceal  his  theft 
with  lies  and  fab*;  oaths,  and  he  rentiers  himself  thus  still  more  guil- 
ty, as  the  Lord  intimateth,  Lev.  vi.  1 — 4.     (b)  This    iniquity    is    an 
o*f  nee,  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrates,  who  were  obliged  to 
punish  certain  acts  of  theft  with  death,  as   man  stealing;   Exod     xxi. 
16,  sacrilege,  for  which  Achat)  was  stoned,  Joshua  vii.  20 — 26.     If 
a  man   broke   into   a  house   by   night,    the    master   of    the    house 
might   kill    him   instantly,   without  incurring  the   guilt  of  murder, 
Exod.  xxiK  2.     David  pronounced  the  man  who  had  robbed  a  poor 
man  of   his  little  cwelamb,  guilty  ;  but  other  thefts  were  to  be  ato- 
ned by  restoring  two,  four,   five  and  sevenfold.     Yea,  the  Lord   God 
himself  punishes  this    sin,  not  only    by  exposing  such  unrighteous 
persons  to  reproach,  but  also  sometimes    by   reducing  them   to  ex- 
treme poverty  ;  he  curses  the  thief  and  deceiver  in  all  that  he  hath, 
not  only  in  what  he  hath  stolen,  but  also  in  what  he  hath  not  stolen ; 
"Cursed  be  he  that  renloveth  his  neighbour's  landmark  "  was  pro- 
claimed aloud  from  mount    Ebal,   Deut.   xxvii.    17.     "The   roll    of 
the  ciuse.  the   length  whereof  was  twenty   cubits,  and  the   breadth 
when  of  was  ten  cubits,  God  would  bring  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
to  cut  him  oft",  and  to  const  me  his  house,  with  the  limber  thereof,  and 
the  stones  thereof,"  Zech.  v.    1 — 4.     Yea,  he  who  gathereth  riches5 
but  not  by  right,  is  sometimes  snatched  away  by  an  early  death  from 
his  stolen  riches,  according  to  the    threatening,  Jer.  xvii.   11.     He 
leaves  them  indeed  to  his  heirs,  but  not   with   the  blessing  of  God- 
but  what  becomes  of  the  soul  of  such   an    unrighteous  person  ?     It 
doth  not  surely   go    to    the    glory   of  the    righteous  ;  for    "  neither 
thieves,  nor  covetous   persons  shall  inherit  the   kingdom  of  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.    iO.     Thercfoie  the  end   of  such  persons   will   surely  be 
destruction,  when  they  "  will  vomil  up  the  riches,  which   they  have 
swallowed  ('own,  and  God  will  cast  them  out  of  their  belly,"  as  Zo- 
phar  speaks.  Job  xx.  15. 

II.  But  doth  he,  who  only  abstains  from  stealing,  keep  this  com- 
mandment? surely  no,  unless  he  also  practise  the  virtues  that  air 
opposed  to  stealing,  and  so  (.1)  "  promote  the  advantage  of  his 
neighbour  in  every  instance  that  he  can  and  may."  Man  was  crea- 
ted for  the  advantage  of  his  neighbour,  as  well  as  for  himself ;  he 
must  indeed  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  which  he  doth  not  do 
When  he  forbears  to  promote  his  neighbour's  advantage  as  well   as 


XLlI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   no,   111.  353 

his  own  :  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man 
also  on  the  things  of  others,"  saith  the  apostle  of  the  Geniles, 
Philip,  ii.  4.  Therefore  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxii.  1 — 4,  "Thou 
shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself 
from  them,"  &c.  Job  quitted  himself  well  in  this  respect,  when 
"  he  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (o  the  lame,"  &c.  Job  xxix. 
15 — 17.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  just  must  direct  us  herein,  and 
teach  us  that  we  must  not  do  these  things,  unless  we  can  and  may. 
It  is  sinful,  and  the  work  of  fools  to  empoverish  ourselves  in  order 
to  succour  others,  or  by  undue  methods  to  deliver  them  out  of  diffi- 
culties, in  which  t'>ey  have  involved  themselves  by  their  iniquitous 
actions,  that  we  may  thus  act  the  part  of  good  men.  (2)  "  We  should 
deal  and  act  with  our  neighbour,  as  we  desire  that  he  should  deal 
and  act  with  us."  When  we  consider  and  regard  our  neighbour's 
case  in  this  manner  as  our  own,  we  will  not  wrong  him,  nor  suffer 
him  to  remain  under  a  difficulty  ;  it  is  also  a  work  of  equity  and 
justice:  even  the  law  and  the  prophets  enjoin  by  the  mouth  of  the 
Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  12,  that  "whatsoever  things  we  would  that  men 
should  do  unto  us,  we  should  do  even  so  to  them."  But  if  we  shall 
be  able  to  do  this,  we  must,  (3)  "  labour  faithfully,"  or  be  diligent 
and  industrious  in  our  calling,  "the  work  which  our  hand  findeth  to 
do,"  according  to  the  words  of  the  preacher,  Ec<  1.  ix.  10.  The 
apostle  requires  that  men  should  "  work  in  quietness,  and  eat  their 
own  bread,"  2  Thess.  iii.  8— -13.  But  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  our  own  advantage  by  means  of  our  faithful  labour 
ought  to  be  our  principal  motive,  that  we  may  do  this  in  obedience 
to  God,  since  it  pleaseth  him  to  provide  for  us  by  means  of  our 
faithful  labour,  and  so  "  we  must  do  all  tilings  heartily,  as  to  the 
Lord,"  according  to  Col.  iii.  23.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  take 
good  heed,  that  we  have  a  proper  calling,  end  we  ought  "  to  abide 
therein  with  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  vii.  20,  24.  This  doth 
not  mean  that  a  person  may  not  change  his  calling,  for  he  is  some- 
times obliged  to  do  that  by  events  which  befal  him  through  the  ap- 
pointment of  God  :  but  we  may  not  desert  one  calling  for  another 
rashly,  and  without  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord.  Let  no  man  think 
that  it  will  suffice  to  labour  for  himself  and  his  family  :  he  must  do 
that  also,  "  that  he  may  relieve  the  needy."  If  there  be  any  du'y, 
which  is  at  once  human,  religious  and  christian,  it  is  that  of  r<  iiev- 
ing  the  needy  :  "  We  may  not  hide  ourselves  from  our  own  flesh/' 
Isaiah  lviii.  7.  How  often  is  this  commanded  as  a  religious  duty  ? 
yea,  for  this  end  God  suffered  the  poor  to  remain  in  Israel.  See 
Deut.  xv.  7 — 11.  Eccl.  xi.  1,2.  Yea,  this  duty  is  also  enjoined 
Vol.  ii.  2  T 


354      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

upon  Christians :  "  Distribute  to  the  necessity  of  the  saints,  sailh 
Paul,  Rom.  xii.  13.  Sec  this  repeatedly  commanded  and  urged, 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1 — 3.  2  Cur.  viii.  and  ix.  Luke  relates  how  nobly 
the  first  Christians  quitted  themselves  in  this  respect,  Acts  iv.  34, 
35.  xi.  28—  30.  In  order  to  practise  this  goodly  virtue,  which  is 
so  pleasing  to  God,  we  must  labour  faithfully  ;  this  is  enjoined, 
Eph.  iv.  28,  "  Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more:  but  rather  let 
him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he 
may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Praiseworthy  was  the  ex- 
ample of  "  Dorcas,  who  made  coats  and  garments  for  the  widows," 
Acts  ix.  39. 


APPLICATION. 

If  this  law  were  given,  hearers,  that  it  might  give  life,  and  that 
We  might  seek  our  righteousness  by  it,  we  should  have  nothing  else 
to  do  now,  but  exhort  you  to  flee  from  the  sins  that  are  forbidden, 
and  to  pursue  the  virtues  which  are  commanded  in  it.  But  that  is 
impossible  for  this  law,  for  it  is  become  weak  through  the  flesh  ; 
and  therefore  all  who  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the 
curse.  God  therefore  gave  this  law,  that  the  offence  might  abound, 
and  thus  also  that  grace  might  much  more  abound.  In  order  then, 
that  our  observations  on  this  commandment  may  be  salutary  to  you, 
it  will  be  necessary, 

1.  That  each  of  you  should  compare  his  heart  and  actions  with 
what  is  forbidden  and  enmnundtd  here.  We  can  easily  believe 
that  ye  are  not  guilty  of  the  grosser  acts  of  theft,  even  manstealing 
and  stealing  cattle  :  but  there  are  other  wicked  practices  and  devi- 
ces, by  which  we  take  to  ourselves  the  property  of  another.  Come 
hither,  and  examine  what  ye  possess,  and  what  ye  have  handled,  but 
lack  at  present.  How  did  ye  obtain  it?  did  ye  get  all  in  an  honest 
way  ?  doth  nothing  of  what  bclongeth  to  another  cleave  to  your  fin* 
gers  ?  have  ye  behaved  yourselves  righteously  in  every  respect,  as 
well  in  reckoning  with  others,  as  in  giving  and  receiving  money, 
m  trafficking,  trading,  handicrafts,  labour,  and  in  demanding  and 
paying  debts  ?  are  ye  pure  with  respect  to  all  this  ?  have  ye  always 
kept  the  middU  way  between  greediness,  and  abusing  and  squander- 
r»s  oF  God,  and  that  in  every  instance  ?  Ye  need  not  ask 
whether  we  must  be  so  exact  a.:d  jferfect  in  all  these  points  ;  for  ye 


XLH.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  1 II.  ^5i 

Iftiow,  at  least,  ye  ought  to  know,  that  he  who  continueth  not  in  alL 
things  which  are  wriiten  in  the  law,  is  cursed.  Doth  any  one  say,  I 
know  not  that  I  have  transgressed  in  any  instance.  It  is  possible, 
that  thou  art  so  just  and  righteous  in  a  civil  respect,  that  thou  dost 
nut  possess  aught  of  what  belongs  to  another  ;  but  hast  thou  then 
also  performed  what  is  commanded  here  ?  dost  thou  think,  yes  ? 
I  should  believe  that  such  an  one  had  never  yet  seen  himself  in  the 
nurrour  of  this  perfect  commandment,  but  that  his  heart  deceives 
him,  like  Ephraim's,  who  said,  "  1  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance ;  in  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in 
me,  that  were  sin,"  Hoseu  xii.  8.  But,  friends,  this  is  not  the 
way  to  clear  your  account,  when  the  Lord  will  begin  to  reckon 
with  you  and  to  state  the  amount  of  it.  It  behooves  you  indeed  to 
review  your  account  frequently,  and  it  will  appear  that  your  debt  is 
great,  and  the  amount  that  God  might  justly  condemn  you.  There- 
lore  "  examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  yourselves  strictly, 
ye  listless  people,"  agreeably  to  the  admonition,  Zeph.  ii.  1.  Hum- 
ble yourselves,  abase  yourselves,  and  be  ashamed  before  the  Lord, 
"as  a  thief,  when  he  is  found,"  Jer.  ii.  26. 

2.  Have  ye  taken  aught  ftom  your  neighbour,  keep  it  not  with 
you,  but  restore  it  to  him.  It  belongs  to  another,  it  is  not  yours. 
If  ye  keep  it,  it  will  become  a  canker  in  all  your  goods,  which  are 
otherwise  your  rightful  property,  and  it  will  consume  them,  and 
emp  jverish  you.  Yea,  God  will  in  his  lime  make  your  stolen  goods 
a  file  in  your  bowels,  and  compel  you  to  vomit  up  that  which  ye 
have  swallowed  down,  like  Judas,  who  returned  his  illgotten  silver 
pieces,  and  when  he  could  not  get  rid  of  them,  threw  them  furious- 
ly down  in  the  temple.  What  think  ye,  shall  a  sinner  find  favour 
with  God,  while  he  withholds  stolen  goods  from  their  owner  ?  Hear 
what  the  Lord  saith  to  the  Jews,  Isaiah  i.  16 — 18.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  ye  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  &c.  Come  then,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow,"  &c  Thus  we 
read  also,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  15.  "  If  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge, 
give  again  that  which  he  hath  robbed,  &c.  he  shall  surely  live,  he 
shall  not  die."  When  Zaccheus  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord,  he  was  forthwith  ready  to  "  restore  fourfold,  if  he  had  by 
false  accusation  taken  aught  from  any  man,"  Luke  xix.  8.  Paul 
offered  to  pay  Philemon  even  what  Onesin.us  had  taken  from  him, 
Philemon,  vs.  8,  9.  But  I  suspect  that  many  will  decline  to  do  this, 
because  they  have  robbed  others  of  so  much,  that  they  would  be 
obliged  to  surrender  all  the  substance  of  their  house,  and  thus  em- 


35b       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

poverish  themselves.  But  is  it  not  better  to  be  an  honest  poor  man, 
and  possess  grace,  than  to  be  a  rich  thief,  and  remain  graceless  ? 
Do  ye  not  dare  to  return  aught,  because  it  would  expose  you  to 
contempt,  ye  may  do  it  by  another  person,  whom  ye  can  trust,  or 
which  is  preferable,  by  a  letter  written  in  an  uncouth  hand.  Is  that 
which  was  robbed  already  consumed,  so  that  it  is  not  in  your  power 
to  repay  it,  do  nevertheless  as  much  as  ye  can,  by  sparing  some- 
thing, and  living  more  scantily,  that  ye  may  gather  a  little,  and  re- 
store that. 

3.  Bu  think  not,  after  ye  have  satisfied  men  for  what  was  taken 
from  them,  that  God  is  then  also  satisfied.  By  our  unrighteousness 
we  render  ourselves  debtors  not  only  to  men,  to  satisfy  them  for 
what  we  have  alienated  from  them,  but  we  render  ourselves  guilty 
also  before  the  Lord.  And  therefore  the  unrighteous  person*  wheth- 
er he  be  more  or  less  unrighteous,  must  endeavour  to  be  reconciled 
unto  God.  O  that  ye  were  concerned  about  this,  and  cried  out 
with  the  church,  Micha  vi  6,  7.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  give  my 
firstborn  for  my  transgression  ?  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of 
my  soul  ?  We  should  say  to  you,  "  Seek  the  reconciling  blood"  of 
the  Surety  and  Mediator  Jesus,  by  which  "  he  restored  that  which 
he  took  not  away,"  as  he  foretold,  Psalm  'mix.  4.  Those  Corinthi- 
ans, who  were  before  "  thieves  and  covetous,  were"  not  only 
"  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  but  also  justified  in  the  name,"  and  thus 
by  the  blood  'k  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11.  For  "God 
bath  set  forth"  his  Son  "to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Flee  therefore 
to  him,  and  lay  hold  on  him  for  the  reconciliation  of  your  guilt. 

4.  Beware  of  defiling  yourselves  again,  and  endeavour  to  be  righ- 
teous in  every  instance  :  ''Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more  :  but 
vather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needelh,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  Paul  admonish  us,  Fph.  iv.  28.  Be  afraid  of  your 
covetous  and  prodigal  heart,  pray  against  it  with  David,  Psalm 
cxix.  36.  "  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies  and  not  to  covet- 
ousness."  Oppose  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  which  hath  enticed  so  many 
persons  to  unrighteousness :  when  "  Achan  saw  a  good!/  Babylo- 
nish garment,  and  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  we<!ge  ol 
gold,  then  he  coveted  them,  and  took  them,"  Joshua  vii-  21.  En- 
deavour to  be  content  with  what  the  Lord  hath  given  you,  though 
it  be  ever  so  little  :  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  indeed  great 
gain;  for  we  brought  nothing   into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  111.  35? 

can  carry  nothing  out  of  it:"  thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 8. 
and  he  practised  this  lesson  himself:  "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  saith  he,  Philip,  iv,  11.  We 
ought  with  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8  9,  even  to  deprecate  "  riches"  as 
well  as  "poveay,"  and  to  seek  only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient 
for  us,"  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9,  and  we  ou^ht  more  especially  to  aim  at 
those  beiter  ''treasures,"  which  aie  laid  up  "in  heaven,  where 
neither  moth  nor  rust  corrupteth,  and  where  thieves  cannot  break 
through,  nor  steal,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  commands,  Mat.  vi.  19,  20. 
Doth  it  nevertheless  please  the  Loid  to  enrich  you  with  many  earthly 
goods,  "  do  not  then  set  your  hearts  on  them,  and  trust  not  in  them, 
neither  be  proud  of  them  :  but  do  good,  be  rich  in  good  works, 
willing  to  communicate,"  as  David  and  Paul  require,  Psalm  lxii.  10. 
1  Tim.  vi.  17,  18.  Are  ye  poor  and  in  want,  commit  your  con- 
cerns to  the  Lord,  even  your  Father,  if  ye  fear  and  love  him. 
Hear  what  Jesus  saith,  Mat.  vi.  31.  "Take  no  thought,  saying, 
What  shall  we  eat?  or  what  shall  we  drink?  or  wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  for  after  all  the-e  tnings  do  the  Gentiles  seek  :  for 
your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 
things."  The  Lord  hath  surely  said,  "  1  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii.  5.  Fret  not  on  account  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  ye  have  more  than  they,  bee  what  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  7,  1C.  "Fret  not  thyself  because  of  him 
who  prospercth  in  his  way,  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wick- 
ed devices  to  pass  :"  for  "  a  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  bet- 
ter than  the  riches  of  many  wicked."  Ye  have  a  perfect  right,  in 
and  through  Christ,  to  the  least,  yea,  to  all  things ;  for  "  all  things 
are  vours,  because  ye  are  his,  as  Paul  teacheth,  1  Cer.  iii.  21 — 23. 
Ye  will  obtain  the  full  possession  of  all  things  hereafter,  when  the 
wealthy  wicked  will  not  have  even  a  drop  of  water.  Jesus  saith, 
Mat.  v.  3,  5.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heavtn."  And  "  blessed  are  the  meek  ;  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth,"    Amen. 


(   358  ) 


THE 


NINTH  COMMANDMEN' 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIII.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exod.  xx.  16.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour. 

Q.   112.   What  is  requ'rccl  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man  ;  nor  falsify  any 
man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slanderer  ;  that  I  do  not 
judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that 
I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil, 
unless  I  would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  :  like- 
wise that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love  the  truth,  speak 
it  uprightly,  and  confess  it  :  also  that  I  defend  and  promote,  as 
much  as  I  am  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  my  neigh- 
bour. 

tc   t~ ■""> 

JL  HE  tongue,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  is  a  fire,  a  world  of 
iniquity,  which  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.  The  tongue  can  no 
man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison,"  James  iii. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  11!.  359 

6,  3.     The  heart  of  man,  filled  by  sin  with  every  abomination,  and 
producing  every  evil  motion,  corrupts  all  the  members  of  the  body, 
and  directs  them  to  evil,  rendering  them  "  servants  of  uncleanness 
and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"    as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vi.  19.     But  the 
tongue  is  more  particularly  set  on  fire  thus,  by  that  evil  corruption, 
as  a  fire  and  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  that  it  defileth  even  the  whole 
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  by  urging  it  violently 
on,  like   an    unquenchable  fire,  and    like  a  wild   beast,  that  is  un» 
tameable.     Therefore  ho:y  men   have  been  so  careful  and  circum- 
spect with   respect  ta  their  tongue,  and  they   have   endeavoured  to 
bridle  it,  like  an  unruly  horse.    David  said,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  H  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  :     I  will   keep 
my  mouth  with  a  bridie."     We  may  therefore,   with  that  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  compare  the  tongue  to  a  cily,  which  is  well   pro- 
vided with  bulwarks  of  teeth,   and  doors  of  lips,  and  yet   hath  need 
of  a  guard  to   watch,  and  to  defend  it  against    tumults  within,  and 
the  assaults  of  enemies  without  :  hear  him   therefore  pray,   Psalm 
cxli.  3.     "  Set  a  watch,    O  Lord,  before  my  mouth,  keep    the  door 
of  my    lips."     It    is   also   remarkable,  that    there  is  only  a  single 
guard,    that   is,  one  commandment    in  the  law,  against    other  sins, 
but  against   the  sins  of  the  tongue  there  is  a  double    guard  of  two 
commandments  :  it   was  not  enough  that  God  required  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law,  and  in  the  third   commandment,  that  we   should 
watch  against  the  sins  of  the   tongue,  but  he  chooseth  to  do  it  also 
by  this  ninth   commandment,  that  the  tongue  may  not  be  perverted 
to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour. 

The  Lord  commanding  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourse-ves, 
requires  of  us  that  we  should  conformably  to  this,  honour  our  pa- 
rents, not  kill  our  neighbour,  not  commit  adultery,  nor  steal  :  but 
how  shall  we  keep  these  commandments,  if  we  bear  false  witness 
against  our  neighbour  ?  "  Death  and  life,"  and  thus  all  that  is  dear 
to  our  neighbour,  "  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  saith  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  21.  Theiefore  the  Lawgiver  manifests  his  wisdom  by 
annexing  this  commandment  to  the  foregoing. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  this  commandment,  shows 

I.  What  is  forbidden,  and 

II.  What  is  commanded  in  it. 

1.  This  commandment  forbids  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
our  neighbour."  We  have  shown  before,  that  all  men  are  our 
neighbours,  because  they  are  all  made  of  one  blood  with  us.  We 
are  called  upon  on  many  occasions  to  bear  witness  against  our  neigh- 
bours, but  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  bear  false  witness  ag;irsf. 


360       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

them,  or  otherwise  than  we  know  to  be  the  truth  ;  which  is  done 
"  in  judgment,"  when  falsehood  and  iniquity  are  practised  there  in 
an  ungodly  manner  :  "  In  the  place  of  judgment  there  is  wicked- 
ness, and  *n  the  place  of  righteousness  there  is  iniquity  :"  this  the 
preacher  saw  also  in  his  time,  Eccl.  iii.  16.  The  Lawgiver  hath 
also  respect  in  a  particular  manner  to  bearing  false  witness  in  judg- 
ment, in  which,  when  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  the  truth,  we 
answer  and  bear  a  false  witness  to  injure  our  neighbour,  as  the  He- 
brew word  tagnaneh,  "to  answer,"  intimates.  1  his  wickedness  is 
frequently  practised  by  different  persons,  who  appear  in  judg- 
ment, as, 

1.  By  the  "plaintiff"  or  accuser,  who  accuseth  his  neighbour 
fedsely,  by  which  he  endangers  his  good  name,  his  life  and  property, 
yea,  his  whole  prosperity.  Of  this  the  Jewish  council  rendered 
themselves  exceedingly  guilty,  when  they  accused  J?sus,  wdio  was 
perfectly  innocent,  before  Pilate,  saying,  "  we  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  arid  foi  bidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cxsar,  saying 
that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  king,"  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

2.  By  the  defendant,  when  he  denies  the  fault,  of  which  he  is 
justly  accused,  like  Cain,  who  when  he  was  cited  before  the  divine 
tribunal,  and  asked  "  where  his  brother  Abel  was,  said,  I  know  not ; 
am  I  my  brother's  keeper r"  Gen  iv.  9.  He  who  fears  not  to  do 
wrong,  ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  confess  that  he  hath  done  wrong, 
and  to  humble  himself  by  submitting  also  to  the  proper  punishment 
of  his  sin,  with  Achan,  when  Joshua  required  of  him  to  confess  and 
acknowledge  his  guilt,  Joshua  vii.  19 — 21.  "•  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  sin :  but  with  the  righteous  there  is  favour,"  according  to  the 
words  of  the  wise  king.   Prov.  xv.  9. 

3.  It  is  not  less  libominable,  when  "  witnesses  "  utter  a  falsehood 
against  a  person,  who  is  unjustly  accused.  How  lamentable  was 
the  case  of  Naboth,  when  "  two  men  of  Belial  were  suborned  against 
him,  and  witnessed  falsely,  Naboth  bla  \  hemed  God  and  the  king, 
and  he  was  thereupon  stoned  !"  1  Kings  xxi.  9 — 13.  So  also  "  the 
whole  council  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,"  as  the  members  of  that  council  found  also  many 
false  witnesses,  who  were  nevertheless  of  no  service  to  them,  Matt. 
xxvi.  59,  60.  "  The  Lord  hates  a  false  witness,"  Prov.  vi.  16,  19. 
God  ordered  the  judges  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  witnesses 
testified  a  falsehood,  and  if  they  did,  that  it  should  then  be  done  to 
them,  as  it  would  have  been  done  to  the  accused,  if  he  had  been 
accused  according  to  truth,  Deut.  xix.  16 — 21.  Although  the  Law- 
giver forbids  bearing  false  witness  against  our  neighbour  to  his  hurt- 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  361 

we  may  nevertheless  not  bear  false  witness  in  his  behalf  to  deliver 
him  ;  for  we  may  not  deliver  the  guilty,  and  certainly  not  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come  ;  and  when  we  bear  false  witness  for  the  guilty, 
we  then  bear  false  witness  against  the  accuser,  who  is  our  neighbour 
also. 

4.  But  still  more  atrocious  than  these  are  those  wicked  lawyers 
and  attorneys,  who  defend  false  accusations,  and  by  means  of  a 
smooth  and  eloquent  tongue,  or  deceitful  writings,  darken  the  true 
circumstances  of  matters,  mislead  the  judge,  and  delay  a  righteous 
sentence,  so  tnat  an  honest  person  can  scarcely  obtain  justice. 
Such  a  lawyer  was  Tertullus,  who  pleaded  in  behalf  of  the  Jews 
against  Paul,  \cts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Verily  such  persons,  who  ought  to 
assist  the  oppressed,  and  nevertheless  load  them  still  heavier,  are 
pests  of  the  human  race,  they  promote  the  interest  of  hell,  and  de- 
fend the  causes  of  the  devil.  They  may  remain  unpunished  in  this 
world,  but  the  wo,  with  which  they  are  threatened,  will  pursue 
them,  and  cleave  to  them  :  "  Wo  unto  them  that  call  good  evil,  and 
evil  good,"  saith  God,  Isaiah  v.  20. 

5.  But  that  which  surpasseth  all  other  abominations  is  the  conduct 
of  those  unjust  judges,  who  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  do  not 
regard  the  causes  of  the  righteous  for  a  long  time,  like  that  ungodly 
judge,  of  whom  the  saviour  speaks,  Luke  xviii.  2 — 4.  And  it  is 
still  worse  in  judges  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence  :  "  He  that 
justifie'.h  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemnelh  the  just,  even  they 
both  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Piov.  xvii.  15.  Whether  it  proceed  from  the  incapacity  and  un- 
skilfulness  of  the  foolish  judge,  who  is  like  a  child  in  understand- 
ing ;  bee  Ecci.  x.  16.  Isaiah  hi.  4,  12  ;  or  from  unrighteousness, 
Avhen  the  judge  will  not  hear  the  accused,  nor  permit  him  to  defend 
himself,  as  the  Jewish  council  pronounced  sentence  in  such  an  un- 
just manner  against  the  baviour,  and  his  servant  Paul,  John  vii. 
47 — 52.  xviii.  19 — 21.  Acts  xxiii.  1 — 3  ;  or  on  account  of  bribes 
and  self-interest:  so  the  judges  of  Judah  were  "  companions  of 
thieves,  every  one  loved  gifts,  and  followed  after  rewards,"  Isaiah 
i.  23  ;  or  because  the  judge  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  is  a  person  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  rich  or  poor,  courageous  or  fearful,  the  unjust 
judge  will  pervert  justice  accordingly  :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor, 
nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  :  but  in  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Lev.  xix.  15.  See 
also  Exod.  xxiii.  6 — 8.     God  denounceth  a  wo  against  such  judges, 

Vol.  ii.  2  U 


362         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  saith,  thai  "•  lie  will  ease  and  avenge  himself  of  those  adversa- 
ries of  linn."  Isaiah  l.  24. 

In  the  foregoing  commandments  only  head-sins  arc  mentioned} 
bqt  their  particular  members  are  also  comprehended  under  them; 
it  is  thus  also  here  :  when  bearing  false  witness  in  judgment  is  op- 
posed, it  is  then  forbidden  on  o'  her  occasions  also,  as 

4  '»  Falsifying  the  words  of  another,"  by  giving  them  a  sense 
different  from  that  which  they  commonly  have,  and  in  which  vse 
know  they  were  uttered.  This  is  "  that  frov/ard  mouth,  which  ve 
must  put  aw.ay  from  us,  and  those  perverse  lips,  which  we  must  put 
far  from  us,"  Prov.  iy.  24.  We  misconstrue  the  words  and  mean- 
ing of  another  thus,  either  by  adding  something  to  our  neighbour's 
words,  by  which  they  have  an  entirely  different  sense.  The  Savi- 
our speaking  of  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  which  he  would  raise  up 
from  the  dead,  saith,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  1  will 
raise  it  up,"  John  ii.  19,2  1,  but  the  Jews  perverted  his  words  by 
adding  to  them,  when  they  accused  him,  k*  that  he  had  said,  I  will 
destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made  with  hands,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands,"  Mark  xiv  38,  whtn  he  h&d 
nevertheless  not  said,  "  1  will  destroy,"  but,  "destroy  ye  ;"  he  did 
not  say,  kl  the  temple  made  with  hands,"  but  "  this  temple  ;"  nei- 
ther had  he  Spoken  "of  another,  but  of  ihe  same  temple,"  which 
they  should  destroy  ;  but  all  these  words  they  added  by  a  false  tes- 
timony. Or  when  we  leave  out  something,  in  order  to  falsify  a  per- 
son's words,  like  the  devil,  who,  that  he  might  induce  Christ  to 
tempt  his  Father  by  casting  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  said  from  Psalm  xci.  11,  that  kl  God  would  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  him  to  keep  him  ;"  but  he  leaves  out,  "  in  all 
thy  ways,"  Mat.  iv.  6.  We  also  falsify  a  person's  words  by  gestures, 
Whereby  we  give  them  another  and  a  wrong  colour.  A  person  ut- 
te  s  something  that  was  said  in  jest,  or  from  compassion,  in  such  a 
ler,  bj  an  alteration  of  his  countenance  or  voice,  as  if  it  were  spo- 
ke;) in  earnest,  or  from  contempt.  An  abominable  and  false  con- 
duct  1  vViio  can  b«.  safe  from  persons  ol  such  a  frowaid  heart  and 
jperver  e  1 

2.  I  his  commandment  forbids  also  "  backbiting."  by  which  a 
to  others  the  secrets  and  failings  of  his  neighbour,  to 
his  hurt  "  A  talebearer  revealeth  secrets,"  saith  the  wise  kin;-, 
Prov.  :::.  13.  Whether  a  person  do  this,  from  talkativeness,  arm  for 
p  stime,  like  "  the  Athenians,  who  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else, 
but  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing,"  Acts  xvii.  21,  and  like  the 
WOiaeU)  of  whom  i^aul  speaks,  1  Tim.  v.  13  ;  or  lrom  a 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  56S 

fondness  of  ridiculing  a  person  ;  as  Job  was  the  song  and  byword  of 
contemptible  persons,  Job  xxx  9  ;  or  IVom  a  cksire  of  pleasing 
others,  who  are  deligh  ed  with  hearing  their  neighbour's  secrets  add 
evil  doings,  as  Doeg  informed  Saui  concerning  David,  by  which  it 
came  to  pass,  that  to  many  priests,  and  ether  inhabitants  of  Nob 
"Were  slaini  1  Sam  xxii  7,  19;  or  from  envy  and  displeasure  with 
our  neighbour,  that  we  may  raise  up  new  enemies  against  him 
And  these  j.er-ons,  that  they  may  not  be  accounted  backbiter^.  Will, 
in  the  first  place,  relate  that  which  is  good  of  their  neighbour  and 
when  another  speaks  well  of  him,  they  will  assent  to  it,  yet  they 
will  add  a  "  but,"  or  an  "  alas;"  it  is  true,  they  will  s^y,  he  hath 
(hat  good  quality,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  he  hath  such  and  such  a  h .sl- 
ing ;  and  tuusa  person  is  condemned  by  himself  for  not  c:oing  well, 
and  this  is  nevertheless  an  evil  which  is  common  under  the  sun,  and 
occasions  much  disturbance.  And  surely  those  are  not  innocent  of 
backbiting-,  who  do  not  discountenance  such  backbiters-  but  sl.ow 
that  they  are  pleased  with  them  by  listening  to  them,  and  encoi  rag- 
ing them  to  say  all  that  they  know:  "  He  is  a  wicked  doer,  who 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips,  and  a  liar,  who  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty 
tongue,"  Prov.  xvii.  4. 

3.  "  Slandering"  our  neighbour,  that  is,  belching  out  words  of 
reproach  against  him,  either  when  he  is  present  or  absent  Da\id 
calls  this,  Psalm  xv.  3,  "  Taking  up  a  reproach  against  our  neigh- 
bour." Therefore  the  slanderer  is  also  called  a  reproachcr,  Psalm 
xliv.  16,  as  Shimei  acted  toward  David,  Ahab  toward  Elijah,  and 
the  Jews  toward  the  apostles,  2  Sam  xvi.  5 — 9.  1  Kings  xviii  17. 
Acts  xvii.  6.  It  is  exceedingly  wicked  to  do  this  with  words  ;  for 
"  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproachetb  his  Maker,"  Piov  xvii.  5, 
but  it  is  worse  and  mrolerable  to  do  it  with  pasquil :,  and  reproachful 
writings ;  no  man  can  be  repu'ed  honest  longer  than  such  a  re- 
proachful writer  chooseth  ;  bu'  let  rim  conceal  himself  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  the  Lord  will  find  him  out,  and  recompence  his  reproach- 
es upon  him. 

4.  The  commandment  concerning  bearing  false  witness  forbids 
also  "  judging,  or  joining  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard. 
"  We  have  just  now  shown  how  this  is  done  in  judgment  :  but  it  is 
done  also  out  of  judgment  ;  to  which  we  must  nevertheless  not  re- 
ftr  judging  that  a  person  is  in  the  way  to  perdition,  and  warning 
him  against  it,  when  he  discovers  manifest  tokens  of  his  graceless 
condition  by  his  exceeding  ignorance,  his  abandoning  ot  himself  to 
the  world,  his  hatred  of  the  good,  and  of  that  which  is  good,  and 
hy  other  sins  ;  for  we  must  judge  thus,  that  we  may  "  save  him  by 


364         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

fear,  and  pull  him  out  of  the  fire,"  according  to  the  exhortation  of 
holy  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  vs.  23.  But  we  must  refer  to  this,  (a) 
judging  that  a  person  is  or  is  not  gracious  from  his  prosperity  or 
adversity,  as  the  friends  of  Job  decried  him  for  a  hypocrite,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grievous  afflictions  :  "  No  man  knoweth  either  the  love 
or  hatred"  of  God,  "  by  all  that  is  before  him.  There  is  one  event 
to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,"  according  to  Eccl.  ix.  1,2. 
(b)  Giving  credit  without  further  inquiry  to  every  evil  report  con- 
cerning our  neighbour,  like  Saul,  who  without  any  reason  "  heard 
the  words  of  men,,  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt,"  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  10.  This  is  "  receiving  a  false  report,"  which  is  forbidden, 
Exod.  xxiii.  1.  We  must  refer  also  to  this,  (c)  judging  presently 
the  worst  of  our  neighbour  from  any  particular  event,  which  hap- 
pens through  the  disposal  of  divine  providence.  Because  "  a  viper 
fastened  upon  Paul's  hand,  the  Barbarians  judged  that  he  was  a 
murderer,  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  vengeance  suifered 
not  to  live,"  Acts  xxviii.  2 — 4.  (d)  It  is  still  more  unjust  to  mis- 
construe and  condemn  the  virtuous  conduct  of  a  person.  When 
Hannah  prayed  with  a  low  voice  from  sorrow,  Eli  judged  "  that 
she  was  drunk,"  1  Sam.  i.  10 — 16,  and  the  wicked  Jews  judged 
the  same  of  the  apostles  from  their  speaking  in  every  lan- 
guage by  the  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  13.  "  John  came  neither  eating  nor 
drinking,  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil.  The  Son  of  man  came 
eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  Behold,  a  man  gluttonous  and  a 
winebibber,"  Mat.  xi.  18,  19.  When  he  doih  not  allow  himself 
time  to  eat  and  drink,  his  friends  will  '«  by  hold  on  him,  as  if  he 
"Were  beside  himself,"  A' ark  iii.  20.  21.  Because  people  cannot  en- 
dure serious  godliness,  therefore  they  will  decry,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites and  legalists,  persons  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  com- 
mon manner  of  living,  but  endeavour  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  They  will  not  be  judged  themselves  ac- 
cording to  truth  from  their  evil  behaviour,  and  they  will  neverthe- 
less repeatedly  condemn  others  on  account  of  their  godliness.  But 
such  persons  set  themselves  up  for  judges  in  the  stead  of  God  : 
*'  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,"  saith  Paul,  1  Ccr.  iv.  4,  5.  They 
who  act  thus  "  speak  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  it  as  judges,"  ac- 
cording to  James  iv.  11,  12.  Therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ;  for  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged  ;" 
thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Mat.  vii.  1,2. 

5.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  "  all  sorts   of  lies."     By   which  wc 
must  understand,  relating  a  matter  for  truth,  which   is  nevertheless 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  365 

not  true,  when  a  person  knows  not  but  that  it  is  true  ;  for  he  doth 
indeed  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  no  lie  in  him,  because  he  speaks  according 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  ;  but  he  sins  notwithstanding,  because 
he  might  perhaps  have  known  better,  and  he  often  speaks  thus 
without  necessity  ;  but  it  is  a  complete  lie,  when  a  person  speaks 
contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  and  with  a  design  to  mislead 
others.  Since  now  we  bear  falbe  witness  by  all  sorts  of  lies,  there- 
fore this  commandment  forbids,  (a)  Lying  from  custom,  when  a 
a  person  hath  so  accustomed  himself  to  lying,  that  almost  every 
word  which  he  utters  is  a  lie,  and  he  can  plead  for  it,  as  for  a  most 
certain  truth,  like  "  the  Cretians,  who  were  always  liars,"  Titus  i. 
12,  and  like  "the  devil,  who  speaks  lies,  as  of  his  own,"  John  viii. 
44.  (b)  Also  lies  by  which  a  person  guesses  and  suppdseth  a  thing 
to  be  true,  when  he  might  nevertheless  have  known  better,  as  the 
people  of  Antichrist,  who  are  subject  to  "  a  strong  delusion,"  and 
therefore  "  believe  a  lie,"  according  to  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  (c)  Hurt- 
ful lies,  to  injure  our  neighbour.  So  "  the  rich  men  of  Judah  were 
full  of  violence,  aud  the  inhabitants  thereof  spoke  lies,  and  their 
tongue  was  deceitful  m  their  mouth,"  Micha  vi.  12.  (d)  Lies  for 
our  profit  and  advantage  are  also  hateful,  as  Gehazi  experienced, 
when  he  was  punished  with  leprosy,  Kings  v.  21 — 27.  To  which 
we  must  refer  also  officious  lies,  uttered  to  procure  an  advantage  to 
our  neighbour,  or  to  deliver  him  from  some  imminent  danger, 
(e)  And  further  jocular  lies,  to  divert  ourselves  and  others,  as  the 
idle  Israelites,  "  who  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and 
the  princes  with  their  lies,"  Hosea  vii.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  detesta- 
ble conduct  of  certain  persons  to  excuse  lies,  which  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  profit  or  pleasure,  when  nevertheless  all  lies  without  dis- 
tinction are  hated,  condemned  and  punished  by  God,  Psalm  v,  6. 
Prov.  vi.  19.  xii.  22.  Eph.  iv.  25.  Col.  iii.  9.  "We  may  not* 
speak  wickedly  nor  deceitfully  for  God,"  as  Job  saith,  Job  xiii.  7. 
Shall  we  then  do  it  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  neighbour  ?  "  We 
must  give  an  account  of  every  idle  word,"  Matt.  xii.  36.  If  the 
saints  did  sometimes  lie,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xii.  13 — 19.  Isaac, 
Gen.  xxvi.  7.  Jacob,  Gen  xxvii.  19.  34.  the  midwives  in  Egypt, 
Exod.  1.  19,  and  others,  we  ought  to  censure,  and  not  to  imitate 
their  conduct :  the  saints  had  also  other  infirmities,  which  ought 
not  therefore  to  be  approved  of.  Did  Abraham  say,  that  Sarah  was 
his  sister,  it  was  also  true,  as  he  showeth,  Gen.  xx.  12  Did  God 
bless  the  midwives  in  Egypt,  it  was  not  on  account  of  their  lies, 
but  their  godliness.     And  v/ho  can  say  that  they  did  not  speak  the 


.366       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

truth,  when  they  said,  "  the   Hebrew  women  are  lively,  and  are  de- 
livered tre  the  midwives  come  in  un'o  them  !"  Exod.  i.  19. 

Finally.}  this  commandment  forbids  also  '  deceit  :"  Not  those 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  men  abridge  their  neighbour  of 
his  property  :  for  this  belongs  to  the  ighth  commandment  Nei- 
ther doth  it  forbid  deceiving  our  enemy  with  military  artifices  :  for 
we  arc  not  obliged  to  inform  our  enemy  of  our  intention  to  annoy 
him.  God  himself  instructed  Israel  in  such  military  stratagems, 
and  commanded  them  to  make  use  of  them,  Joshua,  viii.  2.  We 
must  not  condemn  employing  a  holy  wisdom,  m  order  10  convert 
our  neighbour  by  the  word  :  Paul  "  being  crafty,  eaug \ft  the  Co.iri- 
vhians  with  guile,"  2  Lor.  xii.  16.  Neither  is  it  censurable  to  be- 
have as  strangers,  and  to  appear  unwilling,  in  order  to  try  a  person, 
and  to  discover  whether  he  will  perform  his  dtity,  as  the  angels  tried 
Lot,  and  the  Saviour  his  disciples;  Gen.  xix.  2.  Luke  xxiv.  2 
But  the  deceit  that  is  spoken  of  here  proceeds  from  a  malicious 
desire  to  insnare  and  mislead  our  felluvmen,  to  their  hurt.  And 
this  is  done,  (a)  by  treachery,  whereby  a  person  pretends  to  be 
friendly,  while  he  harbours  a  malignant  hatred  in  his  heart,  which 
disposeth  him  to  destroy  Ids  neighbour  :  "  they  speak  vanity  every 
one  with  his  neighbour  :  with  flattering  lips  and  with  a  double 
do  they  speak,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xii.  2.  See  also  Psalm  xxviii. 
J.  Such  deceivers  are  Joabs  and  Judasses.  who  kissed  their  neigh- 
bours deceitfully,  2  Sam.  ii  27.  xx.  8 — 10.  Matt.  xxvi.  -19. 
(b)  By  hypocrisy,  whereby  a  person  appears  exceedingly  devout 
externaliy,  while  l;is  heart  within  is  rotten,  and  nil  his  designs  are 
corrupt,  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  describes  the  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27,  and  thus  '*  men  deceive  themselves  with  vain  imaginations,"  as 
James  testifieth,  James  i.  22.  The  hypocrite  is  an  abominable 
monster  ;  for  he  hes  even  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  Spirit,  as  if  he 
would  deceive  the  Aillknowhig,  See  Psalm  'xxviii.  35.  Acts  v. 
3.  4,  9.  (c)  It  is  deceit  also  to  flatter,  and  soothe  our  neighbour 
by  praising  bin)  and  that  often  not  according  to  truth  ;  for  we  do 
thus  deceive  him  :  "  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,  spreadeth 
a  net  for  his  feet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxix.  5.  How  detestable 
this  is  in  preachers  we  may  think  and  read,  Isaiah  iii.  12.  Jer.  vi. 
14.  xxui.  14.  (d)  A  person  deceives  not  less  by  ambiguous  words 
and  mental  reservations,  which  are  usually  called  Mennonitish 
•tricks.  Of  these  we  havs  spoken  belore  upon  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

IL  As  no  man  is  good,  who  only   abstains  from  doing  evil,   hu; 
doth  not  do  that  which  is  good,  therefore  the  Lord  not  only  forbids 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 12.  367 

bearing  false  witness,  but  he  also  commands  us  to  have  a  proper  re- 
gatd  to  the  honour  of  our  neighbour.     To  which  pertains, 

1  H  That  we  love  the  truth."  The  Lord  saith,  "  love  the  truth," 
Zech.  viii.  19.  "  God  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  Psalm 
li.  6.  We  will  never  beware  of  bearing  false  witness,  unless  the 
truth  be  dear  and  lovely  in  our  eyes. 

2.  We  must  also  '4  speak  the  truth  uprightly,  and  confess  it."  We 
must  beware  of  every  reservation,  and  of  all  ambiguity  in  our  words, 
and  with  Paul,  we  must  "renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv-  2,  and  with  the  citizens  of 
Zion,  we  must  "speak  the  truth  in  our  hearts,"  according  to  Psalm 
xv.  2.  We  must  especially  speak  the  truth  and  confess  it,  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  speak  it,  whether  in  judgments"  a3  Jesus  be- 
ing adjured  by  Caiaphas,  confessed  that  "  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,"  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  or  *•  in  other  dealings,"  when  it 
may  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour,  and.  of  the  commu- 
nity :  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear," 
saith  Peter,  I  Peter  iii.  15.  Take  heed  nevertheless  not  to  utter 
the  whole  truth  without  necessity,  bolomon  saith,  Prov.  xxix.  11, 
that  "a  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  "  When  Samuel  came  to  Beth- 
lehem, in  order  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  to  anoint  one  of 
the  sons  of  Jesse,  he  declared  the  first,  but  not  the  second  reason  of 
his  coming,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1 — 5.  So  Jeremiah  also  acted,  telling  a 
part  of  what  had  passed  between  him  and  the  king,  but  not  the  whole, 
Jer.  xxviii :  24 — 27. 

3.  It  becomes  us  also  to  "defend  and  promote  as  much  as  we 
are  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  cur  neighbour."  And 
therefore  we  must  not  lend  an  ear  to  backbiters  ;  for  if  we  do  we 
lend  our  ear  to  the  devd,  as  the  backbiter  doth  his  tongue.  Do  we 
hear  aught  to  the  disparagement  of  our  neighbour,  we  must  beware 
that  we  do  not  presently  believe  it,  but  we  must  defend  our  neigh- 
bour's honour,  as  much  as  we  can  and  may  :  "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction," 
This  is  enjoined  even  on  the  king,  Prov.  xxi.  8.  Jonathan  acted 
so  in  behalf  of  David,  1  Sam.  xix.  45.  xx.  32.  And  the 
princes  and  elders  of  the  land  conducted  so  toward  Jeremiah,  Jer. 
xxxvi.  16 — 24.  Do  we  know  aught  that  would  disgrace  our  neigh- 
bour, we  must  not  report  it,  but  hold  our  peace  ;  yea,  though  every 
one  should  know  it,  we  must  nevertheless  not  speak  of  it,  that  the 
evil  rer  ort  may  be  hushed,  and  <he  offence  may  gradually  ceas^. 
Do  we  know  any  good  of  our  neighbour,  we  ought  to   speak  of  it. 


368        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

when  we  may  excile  others  to  imitate  it,  and  when  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  such  a  virtuous  man,  as  one  of  Saul's  young  men  said 
in  commendation  of  David  to  his  king,  that  "  he  was  a  cunning 
player,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war  and  prudent 
in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him," 
1  Sam.  xvi.   18. 

And  what  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  this  command,  which  is  given 
to  the  covenant  p;  ople  of  God,  a  reasonable  command  ?  This  com- 
mand approves  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  to  be  holy,  just  and 
good.      Would  ye  see  the  propriety  of  it,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  Lord  God,  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  de- 
stroy, to  whom  all  the  creatures,  and  still  more  his  reasonable  crea- 
tures, but  most  of  all  his  covenant  people  are  subject,  is  "the  God 
of  truth,"  Isaiah  lxv.  16-  Yea,  lie  is  the  truth  itself,  Jer.  x.  10, 
"  he  cannot  lie,"  Tit.  i.  2.  Hub  v\.  18.  It  is  now  surely  proper, 
that  his  reasonable  creatures,  who  were  mac'e  after  his  image,  and 
especially  that  his  covenant  people,  who  are  renewed  after  his 
likeness,  should  be  like  him.  The  apostle  might  therefore  rea- 
sonably exhort  the  Ephesians,  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness  and  holiness,  or  in  the 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  to  put  away 
lying  and  to  speak  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  Eph. 
iv.  24,  25. 

2.  Bearing  false  witness  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  :  it  is 
violated,  annihilated,  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  even  made  a  lie 
thereby.  Is  not  this  abominable  ?  and  if  a  person  dare  to  do  this, 
what  other  unbecoming  actions  will  he  not  presume  to  do  ? 

3.  Is  it  not  right,  that  the  thoughts  and  words  of  a  person  should 
agree  ?  Must  not  the  person,  who  speaks  falsehoods,  silence  his 
conscience,  before  he  can  abandon  himself  to  bearing  false  witness? 
To  excite  such  a  strife  between  his  heart  and  mouth  is  certainly  un- 
seemly. Will  he  who  deceives  his  neighbour,  endure  to  be  de- 
ceived by  him  in  such  a  manner  ?  No  man  is  willing  to  be  called  a 
false  witness,  or  a  liar ;  will  he  then  be  it  ?  this  is  iniquity. 

4.  The  person  who  transgresseth  this  commandment,  destroys  at" 
the  same  time  all  human  society  ;  for  he  disturbs  all  love,  sincerity, 
trust,  confidence  and  good  neighbourhood  among  friends  and  citi- 
zens. When  the  commonwealths  of  Israel  and  Judah  hastened  to 
their  ruin,  it  was  a  forerunner  of  their  dissolution,  that  "  lying  pic- 
vailed,"  Hosea  iv.  2,  and  M  thai  they  could  not  trust  a  friend,  nor 
put  confidence  in  a  guide,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
doors  of  their  mouths  from  her  wko  lay  in  their  bosom/'  Micha 
vii.  5. 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  U2.  369 

5.  "  Lying  and  deceit,"  and  whatever  else  belongs  to  bearing  false 
witness,  "  arc  works  of  the  devil."  He  forged  the  first  lie,  Gen. 
iii.  4.  "  He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is 
a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it ;"  thus  speaks  the  mouth  of  truth  con- 
cerning him,  John  viiu  44.  Shall  not  a  man  then,  yea,  a  believer 
avoid  these  abominations?  If  he  do  not,  he  declares  himself  to  be 
a  "  child  and  of  his  father  the  devil,  and  that  the  lusts  of  his  father 
he  will  do,"  according  to  the  words  of  him  who  is  true,  John 
viii.  44. 

6.  Once  more  ;  he  who  defiles  himself  with  this  sin,  "brings 
down  upon  himself  the  heavy  wrath  of  God."  Among  "the  six 
things  which  the  Lord  hateth,  and  the  seven  which  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  him,  are  also  a  lying  tongue,  and  a  false  witness  that  speak- 
eth lies,"  according  to  Prov.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  "  A  false  witness  shall 
not  be  innocent,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape,  but  per- 
ish," saith  the  same  wise  man,  Prov.  xix.  5,  9.  The  Lord  will 
punish  such  persons,  until  he  hath  destroyed  them  :  "  Thou  shale 
destroy  them  that  speak  leasing,"  saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  v. 
6.  John  teacheth,  Rev.  xxi.  8,  that  "  liars  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone." 


APPLICATION, 

But,  friends,  how  is  it  with  you  in  this  respect  ?  are  ye  entirely 
innocent  of  these  transgressions  ?  Ye  will  say  no  ;  "  all  men  are 
liars."  It  is  true,  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  this,  Psalm  cxvi.  11. 
Rom.  iii  4.  But  do  ye  believe  this  of  yourselves,  so  that  ye  see  it 
in  your  actions,  and  are  ashamed  of  it  ?  surely  no  ;  for  if  any  per- 
son should  look  upon  you  as  liars,  and  should  tell  you  that  he  did, 
would  it  not  provoke  yovi  to  anger  against  him  ?  who  indeed  will 
suffer  such  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  not  then  evident,  that  ye  have  not 
such  an  impression  concerning  yourselves,  and  that  ye  do  not  be- 
lieve it  ?  Ye  believe  that  the  word  of  God,  which  declares  that  all 
men  are  liars,  is  true,  and  that  bearing  false  witness  is  a  shameful 
sin,  and  deserves  a  severe  punishment ;  and  nevertheless  when  this 
matter  is  applied  to  you,  ye  then  look  upon  yourselves  to  be  honest 
persons,  at  least,  your  hearts  are  not  broken  on  account  of  these 
sins.  It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  know  only  from  the  word,  that 
Vol.  n.  3  V 


370        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  are  called  transgressors  of  this  commandment,  but  we  must  also 
sue  it  in  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  asi-amed,  concerned,  ,and  hum- 
bled  on  account  of  it.  Therefore  examine  yourselves  by  what  is 
foi  bidden  and  commanded  here,  and  pause  a  while,  until  ye  see  the 
most,  if  not  all  these  abominations  in  your  minds  and  ac'ions,  ai,d 
until  this  affects  you  thoroughly!  Come,  ye  who  have  at  any  time 
acted  as  plaintiffs,  as  defendants,  as  witnesses,  as  lawyers  and  attor- 
neys, or  as  judges  in  courts  of  judicature,  have  ye  never  boine  wit- 
ness to  aught  hot  the  truth,  and  have  ye  always  spoken  the  truth, 
without  any  clokes  of  shame  ?  Yea,  hear,  all  ye  who  hear  me  this 
d.iy,  are  ye  faithful  in  relating  the  words  of  another,  forbearing  either 
to  add  or  diminish  aught  by  your  words  cr  gestures  ?  are  ye  stran- 
gers to  backbiting,  never  bespattering  your  neighbour's  skirts  ?  do  ye 
never  defame,  nor  reproach  him,  either  in  his  presence  or  absence  ? 
is  your  soul  so  filled  with  love  to  your  neighbour,  that  ye  do  not  sus- 
pect, nor  judge  him  rashly  or  unheard  ?  do  ye  shudder  at  every 
kind  of  lying  and  deceit  ?  do  ye  love  the  truth  ?  always  speak  and 
confess  it  with  sincerity,  when  it  is  proper  ?  and  do  ye  do  your  ut- 
most to  defend  the  honour  and  good  character  of  your  neighbour? 
ye  are  tl-en  "  perfect,  since  ye  do  not  offend  in  word,"  according  to 
James  iii.  2.  But  friends,  i.ow  can  ye,  and  how  can  we  believe 
this  of  you  ?  your  actions,  words,  and  behaviour  condemn  you,  and 
declare  that  ye  bear  false  witness  of  yourselves.  Your  angry,  raving 
thoughts  concerning  your  neighbour  ;  the  pains,  the  grief,  the  sor- 
row and  complaints  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  courts  of  judi- 
cature ;  your  prating  the  whole  day  long  against  your  neighbour  ; 
all  that  discontent,  and  all  those  complaints,  winch  we  hear  daily  of 
the  injuries  which  some  suffer  from  their  neighbour's  tongues,  man- 
ifest how  abominable  and  guilty  our  people  are  before  the  Lord. 
We  may  indeed  say  now  from  Isaiah  lix.  14,  15,  '"Judgment  is 
turned  away  backward,  and  justice  standeth  afar  off;  for  truth  is  fal- 
len in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter.  Yea,  truth  faileth,  and  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  a  prey  :  and  the  Lord  seeth 
it,  and  it  displtaseth  him."  It  would  be  your  happinesss,  if  ye  also 
saw  it,  and  that  ye  were  wholly  perverse,  hateful  and  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  O  see  with  brokenness  of  heart,  that  your  "  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre,  that  ye  have  used  deceit  with  your  tongues,  that 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  your  lips,  and  that  your  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness."  It  is  so  of  a  truth,  whether  ye  know  it  or 
not.  Paul,  who  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  accuseth  you  ,of  this,. 
Rom.  iii.  13,  14, 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  371 

Do  ye  see  these  things  in  yourselves  with  anxiety  and  concern, 
permit  me  to  afford  you  my  advice,  in  order  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  may  be  delivered  from  your  evil  disposition. 

1.  £>eek  to  obtain  reconciliation  for  these  iniquities  of  the  Lord. 
His  Son  hath  borne  his  wrath,  and  satisfied  his  justice  for  such 
transgressions,  in  behalf  of  those  who  lice  for  refuge  to  him.  He 
himself  bore  the  punishment  of  them,  when  he  suffered  false  accu- 
sations, the  falsifying  of  his  words,  backbiting,  reproaches,  unjust 
condemnations,  with  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit.  Yea,  he  purcha'.d 
a  perfect  righteousness,  which  can  entitle  you  to  life,  when,  in  obe- 
dience to  his  Father,  he  loved  the  truth,  always  spoke  uprightly, 
and  promoted  in  the  most  hearty  manner  his  neighbour's  honour. 
Seek  then  and  receive  by  faith  him  and  his  righteousness,  tha>  with 
Paul  ye  may  "  be  found  in  him,  and  may  have  his  righteousness5" 
Pinlip.  hi.  7  —  10. 

2.  seek  another  and  a  true  temper  of  mind,  that  ye  may  love  the 
truth,  and  may  speak  it  upon  every  occasion  :  "  God  desireth  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  as  David  testifielh  with  truth,  lJsaln;  li.  6.  Ye 
will  never  govern  your  tongues  aright,  until  your  minds  are  changed  ; 
"  For  out  of  the  abund  nee  of  the  heart  the  mnmh  spt&keth,"  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  Mat.  xn.  34  But  this  can  never  happen,  unless 
the  Lord  himself,  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  apply 
his  hand  effectually  to  the  mind-  As  he  alone  wrote  this  command 
in  tables  of  stone,  so  he  also  must  write  it  in  the  heart,  and  thus, 
according  to  his  promise.  Isaiah  Ixi  8  "direct  our  work  in  truth." 
As  iVloses  then  carried  his  tables  ot  stone  up  to  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  engrave  his  law  v>  them,  so  do  ye  also  commit  your  heaits 
into  his  hand,  that  he  may  form  and  dispose  them  according  to  his 
law,  yea,  that  he  may  imprint  his  law  in  them,  and  that  he  may 
also  direct  your  mouths  according  to  it.  David  did  so,  when  lie 
said,  Psalm  xix-  14.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tation of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord."  See  how  he 
dreaded  the  sin  of  his  tongue,  and  therefore  prayed  against  it  time 
after  time,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  cxli.  3.  Thus  also  Agur,  the  son  of 
Jakeh  did,  Prov.  xxx.  7,  8. 

3.  Let  no  man  bear  false  witness  against  himself.  A  man  haih 
none  nearer  to  him  than  himself;  and  therefore  it  is  much  more 
preposterous  in  him  to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  than 
against  his  neighbour.  This  is  nevertheless  often  done :  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  who  can 
know  it  ?"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  Therefore  an  unconverted 
person  will  often  judge  concerning  himself,  that  he  and  his  condi- 


m       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

tion  are  good  in  the  sight  of  God  :  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  de^ 
ceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul, 
nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  I"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 
Moreover,  a  believer,  who  hath  yet  but  little  experience,  will  some- 
times judge,  from  a  prejudice  against  himself,  that  he  is  in  a  grace- 
less  condition  ;  but  as  it  is  on  the  one  hand  dangerous,  so  it  is  on 
the  other  exceedingly  sinful  to  judge  otherwise  of  ourselves,  than 
God  lestifieth  of  us  in  his  word. 

4.  Hate  lies  and  deceit  of  every  kind,  be  afraid  of  them,  as  of 
the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  and  those  by  which  we  bring  down 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  us  :  '•  A  righteous  man  hateth  lying,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  xiii.  5,  He  had  also  observed  this  in  his  father, 
who  saith,  Psalm,  cxix.  104,  "  I  hale  every  false  way." 

5.  Beware  of  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness,  as  (a)  discon- 
tent with  your  neighbour,  by  which  men  are  easily  urged  to  speak 
evil  of  their  neighbour,  and  to  hear  it  eagerly,  with  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  7 — 19.  xxiv.  10.  (b)  Great  talkativeness:  "India  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  x. 
19.  We  must  especially  beware  of  idle  talking  and  jesting  :  "  Fil- 
thiness,  and  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  must  not  be  once  named 
among  you,"  Eph.  v.  4.  (c)  Watch  particularly  against  your  pride  ; 
tor  through  pride  we  imagine  that  we  know,  and  are  able  to  say 
every  thing  better  than  others  ;  "  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a 
rod  of  pride  :  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them,"  accord- 
ing to  Prov.  xiv.  3.  (d)  Watch  also  against  a  heart  that  is  void  of 
the  Spirit ;  for  when  the  heart  is  not  filled  with  good  things,  the 
tongue  must  speak  vanity  :  "  Finally,  brethren,"  saith  Paul,  Philip. 
iv.  8,  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest, 
whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things,"  (e) 
Never  think  that  your  neighbour  will  keep  aught  to  himself  that  ye 
have  said  to  him  :  forbid  him  to  speak  of  it  again,  and  he  will  still 
mention  it  to  another,  and  enjoin  on  him  to  keep  it  to  himself,  and 
it  will  thus  pass  from  one  to  another,  and  often  with  many  false  ad- 
ditions. If  ye  be  silent  yourselves,  another  cannot  bewray  your  se- 
cret :  but  after  ye  havs  once  related  it,  ye  arc  then  no  longer  mas- 
ters of  your  words.  Therefore  study  to  keep  silence :  "  Even  a 
fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise  :  and  he  that  shut- 
teth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding,"  Prov.  xvii.  "S. 

If  we  would  conduct  in  this  manner,  what  a  harmonious  friendship 
should  we  enjoy  with  ourselves,  with  men,  and  God  !     "  What  man 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112,  37S 

is  he,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  12,  13,  "  that  desireth  life,  and 
loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile."  Hear  what  he  saith  to 
God,  Psalm  xv.  1,3,  "  Lord,  v/ho  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernarle  ? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nov  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbour."     Amen. 


(  3^4  ) 


THE 


TENTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his 
maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  tiling  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's.

Q.  109.  Doth  God  forbid  in  this  command  only  adultery,  and  such* 
tike  grost  sins  ? 

A.  Since  both  body  and  soul  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
commands  us  to  preserve  them  pure  and  holy  ;  therefore  he  forbids 
all  unchaste  actions,  gestures,  words,  thoughts,  desires,  and  what- 
ever can  entice  men  thereto. 


F  the  various  kinds  of  love,  with  which  men  cleave,  and  are  uni- 
ted to  one  another,  the  conjugal  love  of  two  persons,  who  arc  con- 
nected in  wedlock,  is  the  strongest,  and  the  most  agreeable.  Is  there 
indeed  a  stronger  love,  than  that  which  the  Son  of  God  bearcth  to 
his  church,  as  his  bride  and   wife,  and  which  she  ought    to   bear    to 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  103,  109.  327 

him,  as  her  bridegroom  and  husband?  but  this  love  is  proposed  to 
persons  connected  in  wedlock,  as  a  pattern  for  their  imitation. 
See  Eph.  v.  23 — 33.  Exceedingly  strong  was  the  love  of  Jonathan 
to  David,  1  Sam.  xviii.  1.  "  His  soul  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  Da- 
vid, and,he  loved  him  as  his  own  soul."  But  wedded  love  ought  to 
exceed  even  that.  David  saith  indeed  in  his  song  of  lamentation 
for  the  death  of  Jonathan,  2  Sam.  i.  26,  "  My  brother  Jonathan, 
very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  unto  me  :  thy  love  to  me  was  wonder- 
ful, passing  the  love  of  women."  But  he  doth  not  say  that  the  love 
of  Jonathan  was  greater  than  that  of  women,  but  that  he  was  better 
pleased  with  Jonathan's  love  to  him,  than  with  the  love  of  his  wives. 
The  law  commands  a  man  to  love  his  neighbour  "  as  himself," 
but  by  his  conjugal  love,  a  man  loves  his  consort  not  only  as  him- 
self, but  he  even  loves  himself  in  her  ;  for  as  the  apostle  saith, 
Eph.  v.  28,  "  He  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself."  Are  human  be- 
ings obliged  to  love  one  another  heartily  ;  then  children  are  obliged 
to  love  their  parents  so  ;  but  the  husband  is  still  more  bound  to  love 
his  wife  so.  The  Lord  God  therefore  created  the  woman  for  the 
man,  as  his  other  self,  yea,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bone,  and  enjoined 
on  him  to  "  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife, 
and  to  be  with  her  one  flesh."  Therefore  he  also  forbids  us  to  dis- 
solve this  love  and  wedlock,  when  he  proclaims  to  every  one  from 
heaven,  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery." 

The  Lawgiver  had  indeed  enjoined  in  the  fifth  commandment, 
that  children  should  honour  their  parents,  and  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment, that  men  should  love  their  neighbour  as  themselves,  and  there- 
fore preserve  his  life  ;  but  he  provides  particularly  in  the  seventh 
commandment  for  the  inviolate  preservation  of  conjugal  love  and 
of  wedlock. 

If  it  be  true  concerning  any  sin,  that  *>'  taking  occasion  by  the 
commandment,  it  worketh  all  manner  of  concupiscence  "  in  the 
sinner,  ae  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vii.  8,  it  is  true  concerning  this  sin  : 
we  may  nevertheless  not  forbear  to  speak  of  it ;  for  this  sin  must  be 
"  manifested  to  be  sin,  working  death  "  to  the  Sinner  "  by  that 
which  is  good,"  as  the  same  holy  man  speaks,  Rom.  vii.  13.  Let 
therefore  the  fear  of  the  Lord  fall  on  you,  and  let  his  excellency 
make  you  afraid,  while  we  set  this  sin  before  you. 

I.  With  respect  to  its  head, 

II.  With  respect  to  its  members, 

III.  With  respect  to  its  soul. 

I.  The  headsin  is  called  in  the  text  naafih,  "  breaking  wedlock, 
hut  in  Deut.  v.  18,  that  Hebr ]    i     rendered  "committing- 


J2S      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

adultery,"  which  breaks  wedlock.  It  is  clear,  that  the  Lord  doth 
not  speak  here  of  that  spiritual  adultery,  which  Israel  and  Judah, 
who  were-  married  to  the  Lord,  "committed  with  wood  and  stone," 
as  he  complains,  Jer.  lii.  6 — 9,  but  he  hath  respect  here  to  a  prop- 
er and  corporal  wedlock-breaking  and  adultery. 

Wedlock,  which  is  broken  by  adultery,  is  the  state  of  marriage, 
in  which  one  man  is  united  to  one  woman,  as  one  flesh,  for  their 
mutual  assistance,  and  the  propagation  of  the  human  race.  This 
union  by  wedlock  cannot  and  ought  not  to  be  effected  by  force  ;  but 
it  is  contracted  by  a  mutual  consent,  and  covenanting,  and  it  is  con- 
firmed, as  it  were,  by  an  oath  of  the  Lord  :  and  thus  >l  the  Lord  is 
a  witness  between  a  man  and  the  wife  of  his  youth,"  according  to 
what  we  read,  Mai.  ii.  14.  Although  the  solemn  and  public  con- 
firmation, whether  by  the  magistrate,  or  by  the  church,  doth  not 
constitute  marriage,  it  is  nevertheless  necessary,  that  all  may  know 
whose  husband  and  wife  a  person  is,  and  that  the  children  are  not 
bastards,  but  the  offspring  of  a  lawful  marriage. 

The  instructor  calls  the  married  state  with  propriety  holy  :  it 
was  instituted  by  a  holy  God  :  it  is  also  contracted  and  confirmed 
in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  as  a  witness,  with  calling  upon  his 
name,  and  it  serves  for  a  holy  purpose,  even  to  propagate  a  seed  for 
God  :  this  hath  place  especially  in  the  marriage  of  godly  persons, 
who  have  the  premises  for  them  and  their  seed.  See  Mai.  ii.  15. 
Gen.  xvii.  7.  Hut  although  wedlock  is  so  holy,  every  person  is 
not  therefore  obliged  to  enter  into  it  :  the  Lord  hath  left  marriage  to 
the  free  choice  of  men  ;  when  a  person  marries,  he  doth  not  sin, 
and  when  he  forbears  to  marry,  the  Lord  will  not  take  it  ill  of  him. 
He  who  can  contain,  and  doth  not  need  a  help,  and  foresees  an  ap- 
proaching calamity,  doth  best  when  he  forbears  to  marry  :  but  he 
who  hat!)  not  the  gift  of  continence,  will  do  better,  if  he  marry,  that 
he  may  avoid  shameful  desires  sp.d  fornication.  These  are  the 
rules  which  the  apostle  prescribes  with  respect  to  marriage,  1  Cor. 
vii.  But  how  shall  we  understand  the  conduct  of  the  Papists,  who 
consider  marriage  as  a  sacrament,  and  nevertheless  do  not  permit 
their  pretended  spiritual  persons,  their  churchmen,  to  marry  ;  yea, 
these  vain  men  have  such  an  aversion  from  marriage,  that  they 
reckon  it  better  to  retain  a  mistress,  or  harlot,  than  to  have  a  lawful 
wife.  But  how  !  is  marriage  a  holy  sacrament,  and  yet  so  detesta- 
ble, that  they  who  marry  are  "  in  the  flesh  and  cannot  please  God," 
as  these  men  abuse  the  words  of  Paul  ?  Rom.  viii.  S.  "  Marriage 
is  honourable  in  all  and  the  bed  undefiled,"  Heb.  xiii.  4.  Why  is 
it  then  prohibited  to   persons,   who   would  be  honourable,  and   why 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  329 

are  they  rather  permitted  to  keep  a  dishonourable  mistress  ?  but 
•why  need  we  wonder  at  this?  Hath  not  "the  Spirit  said  express- 
ly, that  in  the  latter  times  some  should  depart  from  the  faith,  giving 
heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines  of  devils,  forbidding  to  marry  ?" 
1  Tim.  v.   1,  3. 

Although  we  have  all  of  us  a  right  to  marry,  we  may  nevertheless 
not  commit  incest,  which  we  do,  when  we  marry  with  a  person  who 
is  too  near  akin  to  us  :  the  Lord  hath  strictly  forbidden  this.  The 
Ganaanites  defiled  their  land  so  by  incest,  that  it  vomited  them  out, 
as  the  Lawgiver  saitli,  and  he  hath  also  precisely  defined  the  kin- 
dred who  may  not  converse  carnally  with  one  another,  Lev.  xviii. 
It  is  an  abominable  conductvof  the  Pope,  that  he  presumes,  as  above, 
and  in  opposition  to  the  law  of  God,  to  allow  a  dispensation  to  marry 
kindred,  in  certain  cases,  and  he  manifests  thus  that  he  is  "  that 
wicked  one,  that  man  of  sin,  that  son  of  perdition,  who  opposeth 
and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worship- 
ped (as  God)  so  that  he  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  him- 
self that  he  is  God,"  as  Paul  hath  foretold,  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4,  8.  He 
exalteth  himself  indeed  above  the  high  God.  when  he  dissolves  his 
laws,  and  enacts  others  instead  of  them,  by  constituting  a  spiritual 
affinity  between  godfathers  and  godmothers,  so  that  they  may  not 
many  each  other,  although  they  be  not  even  the  most  distant  kindred, 
and  he  "  binds  thus  heavy  burthens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and 
lays  them  upon  men's  shoulders,"  as  the  Saviour  saith  of  t!ie  Phari- 
sees, Matt,  xxiii.  4.  "  We  may  not  add  to  the  law  of  God,  neither 
may  we  diminish  aught  from  it."  according  to  Deut.  iv.  2.  We 
are  therefore  at  liberty  to  marry  with  any  one  whom  we  please, 
provided  he  be  not  our  kinsman.  The  children  of  \dam  were  obli- 
ged to  marry  each  other;  but  this  law,  which  forbids  incest,  could 
not  oblige  at  that  time.  God  had  indeed  commanded,  that  when 
the  elder  brother  died  without  children,  the  younger  should  marry 
his  widow,  and  raise  up  seed  to  his  brother  :  but  this  was  a  dispen- 
sation of  the  law  of  incest  for  that  time,  agreeably  to  God's  absolute 
sovereignty,  in  order  to  maintain  the  name  and  privileges  of  the 
firstborn  among  the  Israelites.  No  man  may  believe  that  he  hath 
a  right  in  the  free  statj  of  the  New  Testament  church  to  enter  into 
marriage  With  his  kindred,  as  if  the  law  of  incest  were  now  abolished 
with  the  ceremonial,  or  churchlaws  of  Israel :  for  the  law  which 
forbids  incest,  obliged  the  heathens  also,  who  were  cast  out  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  on  account  of  their  abominable  mixtures:  there- 
fore Paul,  who  was  so  zealous  against  introducing  the  ceremonial 
Vol.  ii-  2  q 


330      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED- 

law  into  the  Christian  church,   would  not  suffer  the   incestuous  per- 
son, who  had  his  Father's  wife,  in  the  church,  1  Cor.  x.   1 — r*3. 

"  Think  hefoi'e  you  begin,"  saith   the  proverb.     "With  the  well- 
admed  there  is  wisdom."  saith  the  wise    king,  Prov.  xiii.  10.      He 
w  in  will  marry    must  oblige  himself  for  life;  he    may   not   repent 
afterward,  and   dissolve  his    marriage  ;  for   he    is  become    with    his 
wife  one  flesh,  which  he  may  rot  rend.     This   is  nevertheless  done 
too  Oiten  by  a  faithless   desertion  of  one  another,  or  by  adultery.     It 
is  a  dissolving  of  marriage,  and  acting  contrary  to    the    rst  institu- 
ol  it,  when  a  man  separates  from  his  wif  ,  or  a  wife  from  her    hus- 
band.     Hear  what   the    Saviour   saith,  Matt.  xix.  4 — 6,  from  Gen. 
ii.   21 — 24,     "  Have  ye  not  read,  that  he   which   made    them    from 
the  beginning,  made  them    male    and    female  ?  and    said,    for   this 
cause  shall  a  man    leave  his  father  and  mother,  and   shall  cleave  to 
his  wife,  and  they  twain  shall  be   one  flesh.      What   therefore    God 
hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder."     Therefore  although 
the  man  or  woman   should  be  wicked,  or  a  heathen,  and    not   guilty 
of  adultery,  we  may  not  separate.     Are  we   faithlessly  deserted,   we 
must  bear  it  patienliy,  if  we  cannot  effect    a   reconciliation:  but   let 
not  a  person,  who  is  deserted  in  this   manner,   marry   again,  which 
the    Lord   forbids   by    Paul,    1  Cor.  vii.    10 — 16.     "  He  commkteth 
adultery,"  saith  the  Lord,  VJatt.   xix.  9,  "  who  marrieth  her  that  is 
put  away,  except  for  adultery."     See  also  the  apo-tle's  words,  Rom. 
vii.    1 — 3*     As  it  is  abominable   to    desert  a  wife   faithlessly,  so   it 
is  unlawful  for  a  man  and  his  wife  to  agree  upon  a  separation,  though 
one  party  should  give  more  occasion  to  it    than  another,  and  should 
compel  bis  consort  to  a  separation  ;  for  both  render  themselves  thus 
guilty  of  breaking  wedlock.     We  must  also  lo-k  upon  those    to   be 
guilty  of  breaking  wedlock,  who  have  engaged  to  be  married,  and  af- 
terwards rashly  discharge  each  other,  although    their  marriage  have 
not  been  publickly  confirmed  ;  for  the   public k    ceremony  doth   not 

*  This  is  to  be  understood  so,  that  a  person  may  not  marry  again,  when 
he  is  iairhlessly  deserted,  unless  Ins  consort  proceed  to  carnal  conversation 
with  another  person;  for  that,  although  committed  during  a  state  of  sepa- 
ration, must  be  considered  as  aduhery.  which  is  the  only  offence  that  can 
Ordinal  ir)  sundtr  married  persons,  nnd  entitle  the  injured  party  in  any  situa- 
tion to  mart-)  again.  The  word  of  God  also  permits  a  Christian,  who  is 
fai'hle  sly  deserted  on  account  of  his  religion  by  a  consort  who  is  an  un- 
believ  r,  to  marr*  agaij),  if  he  cannot  hv  any  proper  menns  persuade  his  con- 
sort to  live  with  him,  i  Ce>r  vii  ij,  as  it  also  forbids  a  Christian  to  mar- 
ry an  unbeliever.  By  an  unbeliever  we  may  reasonably  understand  in  the 
passage  alleged  not  only  a  btatheu,  but  also  an)  person,  who  either  re- 
jects the  Christian  faith,  or  denies  the  tutidamenul  doctrines  of  Christianity 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  331 

constitute  marriage,  but  the  mutual  engagement  :  "  Moses  indeed 
suffered  t:ie  Jews  to  give  their  wives  a  bill  oi  divorcement,  and  to 
put  theui  away  ;  but  thi->  was  only  on  account  of  the  hardness  of 
their  hearts;  tor  from  th<:  beginning  ;t  was  not  so,"  as  the  Saviour 
sailh,  Matt.  xix.  7,  8.  The  Jews  who  were  a  difficult  people,  acted 
with  so  much  lightness  in  this  affair,  that  they  gave  their  wives  a 
bill  of  divorcement,  and  put  them  away  for  every  cause,  and  even 
fov  a  trifle  :  Moses  did  not  however  permit  this,  but  only,  when  the 
woman  "  fuiind  no  favour  in  the  eyes  of  her  husband,  because  he 
had  discovered  some  uncleanness  in  her,"  as  we  read  Deut.  xxiv.  I. 

But  a  person  renders  himself  guilty  of  breaking  wedlock,  not 
only  by  separating,  but  also  when  he  remains  with  his  wife,  and 
yet  defiles  himself  with  adultery ;  which  adultery,  as  some  describe 
it,  is  "  a  violation  of  another's  bed  :"  and  so  this  sin  is  commuted, 
not  only  when  a  married,  but  also  when  an  unmarried  person  con- 
version carnally  with  another's  consort.  But  I  conceive  that  adul- 
tery consists  also  in  violating  any  person's  marriage-bed,  and  is 
therefore  committed  also  by  married  persons  with  the  unmarried  ; 
for  the  Saviour  sailh,  Matt.  xix.  9,  "  Whosoever  si. all  put  away 
his  wife,  except  it  be  for  fornication,  and  ^hall  marry  another,"  and 
therefore  an  unmarri.  d  woman,  "  committeth  adultery."  This 
aboaiination  may  also  be  committed  by  persons  who  are  betro'hed 
to  each  other,  although  they  have  not  yet  been  cm  finned  in  wed- 
lock, as  "  Israel's  brides*  committed  adultery,"   Hosea,  iv.    14. 

We  must  refer  also  to  this  abomination  having  more  than  one 
wife  at  the  same  tine-  A  man  may  be  the  husband  of  only  one 
wife,  which  is  required  especially  in  "a  bishop,  that  he  may  be 
blameless,"  1  Tim.  hi.  2.  To  have  more  than  one  at  the  same 
time  militates  against  the  first  marriage,  and  the  first  institution  of 
marriage.  The  last  prophet  hath  also  an  eye  to  this,  when,  repro- 
ving the  Jews  for  their  polygamy,  he  saith,  Mai.  ii.  15,  "Did  he 
not  make  one  ?  yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  Spirit  :  and  wherefore 
one  ?  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed."  As  if  he  should  say,  that 
God  had  created  but  one  man,  and  out  of  him  but  one  woman,  al- 
though he  could  have  made  more  :  but  one  man  with  one  woman 
was  sufficient  to  propagate  a  holy  seed.  Unless  we  would  rat  er 
understand  by  that  one  person,  Abraham,  who  took  besides  Sara  i, 
Hagar  also,  that  he  mi^ht  obtain  the  promised  seed  by  her,  and  this 
was  therefore  in  some  measure  excusable  in  him,  as  he  did  not  do 
it  from  wi<  ked  lewdness,  nor  to  afflict  Sarah  :  and  therefore  Abra- 
ham's conduct  could  not  justify  the  Jews'  desire  of  many  wives,   as 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


332     THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

they  imagined.  Even  u  the  king  of  Israel  might  not  take  rhany 
wives,"  according  to  the  divine  prescript  to  him,  Deut.  xvii.  17, 
and  no  man  ventured  to  do  that,  before  that  proud  and  revengeful 
Lamech,  Gen.  iv.  19.  Is  a  man  obligated  to  love  his  wife  as  his 
own  flesh,  how  is  that  possible,  when  he  hath  many  wives,  and  thus 
divides  Ids  love?  The  jealousy  and  domestic  quarrels,  which  arose 
from  a  pluiality  of  wives,  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs,  demon- 
strates the  inconvenience  of  this  conduct.  It  is  true,  God  suffered  it  in 
them,  and  did  not  punish  it  severely  ;  but  neither  did  he  visit  other 
sins  of  those  holy  persons  severely  :  yet  he  did  not  therefore  ap- 
prove of  them,  neither  are  they  to  be  imitated  :  it  was  then,  as  Paul 
saith,  Rom.  iii.  25,  the  time  of  "God's  forbearance,"  and  the 
church  was  then  yet  in  her  state  of  childhood,  which  inclined  God 
to  wink  at  many  things. 

II.  As  the  head  of  this  sin  is,  so  also  are  the  members;  for  we 
sin  against  this  commandment,  not  only  in  the  married  state,  but 
also,  (though  not  so  grievously)  when  we  commit  the  same  deeds 
out  of  the  married  state,  to  wit,  when  two  unmarried  persons  abuse 
one  another  by  fornication.  The  adultery  of  a  married  woman,  en 
account  of  which  she  may  be  put  away,  is  also  called  fornication  by 
Jesus,  Matt.  xix,  9.  But  it  is  usually  distinguished  from  adultery. 
The  "  spouses  "  among  the  people  of  God  "  committed  adultery," 
but  "the  daughters  committed  whoredom,"  (or  fornication,)  Hosea 
iv.  14.  It  is  a  vde  conduct  to  keep  a  mistress  ;  but  it  is  also  ex- 
ceedingly base,  when  the  fornicator  converseth  with  every  one,  who 
will  submit  to  be  abused  by  him.  Neither  is  it  excusable,  that  per- 
sons, who  have  been  betrothed  to  one  another,  have  carnal  commu- 
nication one  with  another  before  their  marriage  hath  been  rendered 
lawful,  according  to  the  law  of  the  land;  if  this  be  proper,  why  then 
do  we  suffer  our  marriage  to  be  confirmed  by  the  magistrates,  or 
the  church  ?  it  is  true,  this  is  only  a  human  institution,  but  we  ought 
to  be  subject  to  tint  also  for  the  Lord's  sake,  as  Peter  requires, 
1  Peter  ii.  13.  If  the  betrothed  bride  should  become  pregnant,  and 
should  lose  her  bridegroom  by  death,  before  her  marriage  was  con- 
summated, how  would  the  children  be  considered  by  the  civil  law, 
as  legitimate,  or  illegitimate  ?  Holy  persons,  like  Joseph  and  Mary, 
abstained  from  such  conduct  :  although  they  were  betrothed,  they 
came  not  presently  together,  Matt.  i.   18. 

And  men  sin  against  this  commandment  also  very  grievously  both 
in  and  out  of  the  married  slate, 

1.  By  stealing  women,  carrying  either  unmarried,  or  married  wo- 
men away,  with,  or  against  their  mind,  in  order  to  defile  them.  We 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  335 

may  consider  this  as  a  kind  of  manstealing,  for  which  the  Lord  ap- 
pointed the  punishment  of  death,  t  xod.  xxi.  16.  The  magistrates 
have  also  watched  of  old  against  this  misconduct,  by  annexing  the 
same  punishment  to  it.  To  this  we  must  also  refer  the  behaviour 
of  young  men,  in  stealing  the  affections  of  young  women,  and  ren- 
dering them  pregnant  without  the  knowledge  of  their  parents,  that 
they  may  compel  the  parents  to  consent  to  the  marriage  of  their 
children,  as  Shechem  defiled  Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob,  for  which 
both  he  and  his  father  with  all  his  fellowcitizens  suffered  very  griev- 
ously, Gen.  xxxiv.  The  parents  are  however  not  obliged  to  give 
their  daughter  to  such  a  dishonest  person,  and  they  may  compel 
him  to  satisfy  for  his  crime,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses3  Exod. 
xxii.    17. 

2.  It  is  a  still  greater  sin  to  force  women  and  maids,  or  to  over- 
power them  by  violence,  that  we  may  commit  abomination  with 
them.  God  appointed  no  less  a  penalty  for  this  sin  than  death, 
Deut.  xxii.  25.  Amnon,  after  he  had  forced  his  sister  Tamar,  Avas 
slain  by  Absalom,  not  without  the  righteous  avenging  providence  of 
God.  2  Sam.  xiii. 

3.  The  sin  of  the  Sodomites,  which  was  punished  by  God  with 
fire  from  heaven,  Gen.  xix.  This  unnatural  and  more  than  beastly 
sin  we  will  not  mention,  it  is  justly  called  the  dumb  sin. 

The  sins  of  adultery  and  fornication  are  exceedingly  wicked  and 
detestable  in  whatever  situation  they  are  committed.  They  are 
abominable  in  themselves,  and  men  dare  not  speak  of  them  :  u  It  is 
a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  things  which  are  done  of  them  in 
secret,"  Eph.  v.  12.  There  is  no  sin  that  disgraceth  a  person  more: 
than  adultery  and  fornication  ;  "  He  who  is  joined  to  a  harlot  is  one 
body  with  her :  every  sin  that  a  man  doeth  is  without  the  body  ;  but 
he  that  committeth  fornication  sinneth  against  his  own  body,"  ac- 
cording to  1  Cor.  vi.  16,  18.  This  sin  transforms  a  man  into  a  beast, 
and  makes  him  "like  a  fed  horse,"  Jer.  v.  8,  yea,  it  disgraces  the 
generation  of  them,  who  defile  themselves  with  it  ;  the  Lord  requi- 
red that  "  the  daughter  of  the  priest,  who  played  the  whore,  should 
be  burned  with  fire,  because  she  had  profaned  her  father,"  Lev. 
xxi.  9. 

Add  to  this,  that  these  iniquities  are  attended  with  many  evil  con- 
sequences. The  adulterer  dissolves  marriage,  and  withal  the  strict- 
est bond  of  the  most  agreeable  love  and  friendship,  that  ought  to 
subsist  between  married  persons.  Fornication,  as  well  as  adultery, 
consumes  our  estate  :  "  By  means  of  a  whorish  woman  a  man  is 
brought  to  a  piece  of  bread,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  vi.  26,  and  "he 


334      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

that  kecpeth  company  with  harlots  spendeth  his  substance,"  Pro". 
xxix.  3.  What  an  evil  thing  must  that  sin  be,  which  deprives  a 
person  of  his  natural  and  becoming  modesty,  so  tliat  ''lie  shall  have 
a  whore's  forehead,  and  refuse  to  be  ashamed,"  Jcr.  in.  3.  Hath 
not  this  filthy  sin  deprived  many  of  their  health  by  loathsome  dis- 
eases, and  caused  them  to  die  painful  deaths,  so  that  "  they  have 
mourned  at  the  last,  when  their  flesh  and  their  body  were  consu- 
med?" as  Solomon  saith,  Prov.  v.  11,  Yea,  have  not  these  abom- 
inations occasioned  murders  and  massacres  ?  The  Shcchemites 
and  Amnon  were  slain  on  account  of  this  sin,  Gen.  xxxh.  2  barn. 
xiii. 

We  must  add  further,  that  this  sin  is  accursed  of  God  :  God 
suffers  not  any  man  to  be  guilty  of  it,  with  whom  he  is  not  displeas- 
ed :  "  1  he  mouth  of  a  strange  woman  is  a  deep  pit,  he  that  is  ab- 
horred of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein,"  saith  the  wise  man,  Prov.  xxii. 
14.  God  inflicts  dreadful  judgments  upon  adulterers,  though  they  may 
be  in  other  respects  his  favourites :  what  fearful  plagues  befell  the 
house  of  David  on  account  of  this  transgression  1  read  from  the 
twelfth  to  the  twentieth  chapter  of  second  Samuel.  God  required 
that  adultery  should  be  punished  with  death,  Lev.  xx.  10.  He 
shuts  impenitent  adulterers  and  fornicators  out  of  his  hea\enly  king- 
dom, and  he  hath  kindled  the  bottomless  and  unquenchable  lake 
for  them,  1  Cor.  vi.  10.  Rev.  xxi.  8.  xxii.    15. 

III.  "  Doth  God  forbid  only  adultery,  and  such  like  gross  sins?" 
No,  for  since  "  he  requireth  that  we  should  preserve  both  body  and 
soul  holy,"  he  forbids  likewise, 

1.  "  All  unchaste  actions,"  as  all  impure  kisses,  dallying,  flattering 
and  alluring,  such  as  the  harlot,  whom  Solomon  describes,  used 
with  the  young  man,  void  of  understanding,  Prov.  \ii.  7 — 23.  The 
tin  of  Onan  is  therefore  also  forbidden  here. 

2.  Unchaste  "  gestures  "  wiih  our  eyes,  hands  or  feet  are  also  to 
be  avoided  :  "  A  naughty  person  winketh  with  his  eyes,  he  speaketh 
with  his  feet,  and  he  teacheth  with  his  fingers,"  Prov.  vi.  12,  13. 
"  Having  the  eyes  full  of  adultery  "  is  a  work  of  the  fhsh,  as  Peter 
teacheth,  2  Peter  ii.  14  The  wise  king  therefore  justly  admonish- 
etti  his  son,  Prov.  vi.  25,  "  Not  to  lust  after  the  beauty  of  a  strange 
v/oman  in  his  heart,  and  not  to  let  her  take  him  with  her  eyelids." 

3.  If  there  be  aught  that  discovers  the  lewdness  of  a  person,  and 
kindles  it  in  others,  it  is  unchaste  ','  words,"  tales,  songs,  "  filthy 
communications,"  Eph.  iv.    29.      Col.     iii.    8,    "  filthiness,    foolish 

tig  and  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient,"  Eph.  v.  4.   We  may 


XLT.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  335 

apply  here  also  the  words  of  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  33,  "  Evil  communica- 
tions corrupt  good  manners." 

4.  Unchaste  "  thoughts,"  either  waking  or  sleeping,  are  not  ex- 
cusable neither :  the  heart  ought  to  be  pure,  but  it  is  exceedingly 
filthy;  for  4'out  of  it  proceed  evil  thoughts,  and  thus  also  adulteries 
and  fornications  "  as  the  mouth  of  truth  speaketh,  Matt.  xv.  19. 
He  teaches  also.  Matt,  v  28,  "  If  any  look  at  a  woman  to  lust  after 
her,  he  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart." 

5    "  And  whatsoever  can  entice  men  to  adultery   and  fornication" 
is  forbidden    here.     Many  things   entice    men   thereto,  as  (a)  sloth 
and  idleness  :  the  heart  hath  leisure  and  opportunity  then    to  work 
up  "  all  its  filth iness  and   superfluity  of  naughtiness,"  and  the  devil 
finds  room  a4so  to  tempt  us,  and  to  employ  us  with  lascivious  injec- 
tions.    David  was  seduced  to  this  sin,  when   he  walked  liesurely  on 
his  roof,  2  Sam.  xi.  2.     (b)   The  excessive    use   of   luscious    meats 
and  of  delicious  drinks  will  also  seduce  a  person    to  this  sin  :    "  Be 
not  amongst  wmebibbers,  amongst  riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  thine  eve 
shall  behold  strange  women."  saith   the  wisest  ol  kings,  Prov.  xxiii. 
20,  33.     (c)   Curiosity  to  hear  and  to  see  every    thing    entices   also 
very  frequently  to  this  abomination.     Dinah,  by    going  out    to    see 
the  daughters  of  the  land,  exposed  herself  to  the   violence  of  She- 
chem,  Gen.   xxxiv.  1,  2.     (d)   Unchaste  portraits  and  pictures    will 
also  excite  the  mind  to  lewdness.     Aholibah  became  enamoured  of 
the  young  men  of  Chaldea  by  looking  at  their  portraits,  Ezek,  xxiii. 
14 — 17.     (e)  The  idle  dress  of  worldly  women,  and  the  uncovering 
of  those  members  which  modesty  bids  us  to    conceal,  are    not  less 
powerful  allurements.     This  nevertheless    prevails   exceedingly    at 
present,  as  if  we  could  not  sin  with    our    garments  ;  but  what    was 
"  the  whorish   attire"  of  that  wanton  woman?  Prov.   vii.    10.  was 
it  aught  else  but  ribbands,   and  laces,  and  gauderies  of  every  kind  ? 
"We  see  this  sort  ©f  dress  described  in  the  attire  of  the  daughters  of  ' 
Zion,  Isaiah  hi.    16 — 23.      The   Lord   saith,    Zeph.  i.  8,  that   "he 
"will  punish  the  children  of  the  king,  and  all   such   as  were   clothed 
with    strange  apparel."     It  was  the  wicked    "  JeZabel,  who  painted 
herself,"  2  Kings  ix.  30.     The  admonition  of  Paul  is  surely  proper 
in  our  time,  1  Tim.  ii.  9.    "  Let  the    women   adorn    themselves    in 
modest   apparel,  with  shamefacedness  and  sobriety :  not   with  broi- 
dered  hair,  or  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array."     See  also    Titus  hi. 
3,  4.     It  is  true  a  person  may  clothe    himself  according  to    his    sta- 
tion, but  he  who  is  not  vain  will  conform  himself  rather  to  the  hum- 
blest of  his  condition,  than  to  those  who  desire  to  excel   their  equals 
in  their  attire.     But  "  it  is  abominable  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  for 


336      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED, 

a  man  to  wear  a  garment  which  pertains  to  a  woman,  or  a  woman  6 
garment  which  pertains  to  a  man,"  as  the  Lord  himself  saith,  Deut. 
xxii  5.  (f)  Dancing,  comedies  and  stageplays  entice  men  also  to 
this  sin,  as  they  know  best  who  entertain  themselves  with  these  van- 
ities. I  do  not  believe  that  any  person  will  say,  that  he  ever  came 
from  the  dancingroom,  or  from  a  s'ageplay  a  better  man  than  he 
-ras  before  ;  at  least,  he  will  not  persuade  any  serious  and  soberminded 
person  that  he  did.  Doth  not  dancing,  seeing  and  hearing  so  many  un- 
chaste shows  heat  and  inflame  the  blood  and  spirits  ?  but  the  giddy 
sinner  doth  not -attend  to  himself,  and  is  so  besotted  with  these  vani- 
ties, that  he  will  keep  his  foul  heart  hid,  lest  it  should  affect  both 
himself  and  others. 


APPLICATION. 

When  we  consider  all  these  sins,  which  are  forbidden  in  this 
commandment,  and  which  were  therefore  forbidden  also  under  the 
Old  Testament,  as  we  have  shown  from  many  passages  of  the  scrip- 
tures of  the  Old  Testament,  may  we  then,  hearers,  think  with  the 
Socinians,  that  this  commandment  is  not  perfect,  but  that  it  was  en- 
larged by  Christ  with  a  prohibition,  (1)  that  we  should  abstain  not 
only  from  actual  whoredom,  but  also  from  whoredom  with  the  de- 
sires of  the  heart.  (2)  With  a  declaration  that  "he  who  putteth 
away  his  wife,  except  for  fornication,  coirmiiteth  adultery,  and  that 
he  who  marrieth  her  who  is  put  away,  doth  commit  adultery." 
(3)  With  a  prohibition  of  all  uncleanness,  and  lascivious  discourse, 
as  if  all  these  things  were  allowable  under  the  Old  Testament,  and 
God  did  not  then  require  an  exact  holiness  <-f  soul  and  body,  and  as 
if  even  the  heathens  did  not  dismprove  of  these  sins  ;  but  it  was  ne- 
cessary that  the  Socinians  should  reproach  the  dispensation  of  Mo- 
■  es,  yea,  of  the  Lord  in  this  manner,  if  they  would  maintain  that 
Christ  [.reached  a  new  doctrine. 

But  who  is  not  averse  fom  the  church  of  Home,  who  doth  not 
-inly  forbid  her  ministers  to  marry,  and  doth  not  only  permit  them  to 
keep  a  mistress,  but  also  considers  whoredom  as  a  venial,  and  not 
os  a  mortal  sin,  yea,  even  licenses  whores  at  Pome,  if  they  will  only 
pay  a  julio  weekly,  to  make  the  portion  of  the  pope  fat,  and  his 
meat  plenteous.  And  what  is  still  more  enormous  in  that  church, 
men]       ■  \  in  her  to  justify  the  ain  of  ^he  Sodomites  in    a  book 


ies,  109.  337 

printed  with  an  exclusive  license.  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered 
at  that  that  church  is  so  frequently  called  "the  whore,  the  great 
whore,  who  corrupted  the  earth  with  her  fornication,"  Rev.  xvii.  1, 
2,  15,  16.  xix.  2.  We  ought  to  justify  our  fathers  in  forsaking 
that  unclean  woman,  and  in  giving  her  a  bill  of  divorcement:  we 
will  nevermore  return  to  her  again- 

Alas  !  that  Holland,  delivered  from  the  yoke  of  Rome,  were  only- 
innocent.  But  how  guilty  doth  she  render  herself!  This  iniquity 
is  committed  in  secret :  but  the  Lord  seeth  it,  and  it  is  evil  in  his 
eyes :  and  how  often  doth  it  become  publick,  that  this  and  that  per- 
son hath  defiled  himself  with  adultery  and  fornication !  the  bastards, 
and  the  filthy  sicknesses  discover  it  but  too  frequently.  And  how 
many  are  there  whose  transgression  is  not  yet  known  !  But  why 
need  I  fight  at  random  ?  come  to  yourselves,  bsth  married  and  un- 
married persons,  and  see  whether  ye  have  never  been  seduced  to 
these  abominations.  I  believe  there  are  many  honest  person? 
among  you,  who  have  never  defiled  themselves  with  whoredom  :  but 
do  ye  think  that  ye  can  therefore  take  your  hands  out  of  your  bosoms, 
and  that  they  will  not  be  leprous,  and  that  ye  are  clean  with  respect 
to  this  vice  ?  are  ye  not  conscious  of  any  unchaste  actions  ?  do  ye 
say,  yea  ?  are  ye  then  altogether  strangers  to  unchaste  gestures  and 
words  ?  are  ye  strangers  to  these  also  ?  how  is  it  with  your  hearts 
and  thoughts,  and  particulaily  with  respect  to  all  those  things,  that 
might  entice  you  to  this  transgression  ?  do  ye  think  that  ye  are  pure 
in  this  respect  also  ?  I  believe  that  ye  are  not  yet  acquainted  with 
your  hearts,  and  that  ye  do  not  know  what  sin  is.  Do  ye  see  your 
detestable  heart  and  actions,  see  then  also  that  ye  are  under  the 
curse  ;  for  all  uncleanness  is  accursed  of  God,  and  he  threatens 
and  punisheth  it  severely,  that  ye  may  become  contrite,  and  may 
humble  yourselves  on  account  of  it,  and  be  earnestly  desirous  of  ob- 
taining pardon  and  reconciliation  for  it.  Think  not,  it  is  long  since, 
for  it  is  not  therefore  forgiven.  God  doth  neither  forgive  nor  forget 
this  sin,  until  men  sincerely  humble  and  abase  themselves  on  ac- 
count of  it.  Or  do  ye  think  that  God  will  not  take  this  enormity  so 
exceedingly  ill  of  you,  because  David,  the  man  after  God's  heart 
was  guilty  of  it,  and  nevertheless  obtained  forgiveness  ?  But  is  your 
sin  therefore  the  less,  because  a  holy  man  was  seduced  to  it  ?  doth 
it  not  rather  aggravate  your  sin,  that  ye  do  not  watch  against  it  now, 
when  ye  have  such  a  melancholic  example  before  your  eyes,  which 
ought  to  restrain  you  from  it  the  more  ?  Did  not  God  punish  that 
sin  of  David  with  particular  severity  ?  Because  another  cast  himself 
into  the  fire  and  water,  and  was  delivered  out  of  it,  do  ye  think  that 
Vol.  it.  9  R    . 


538      THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

ye,  who  run  after  him  into  such  a  destructive  evil,  will  also  be  de- 
livered? David  sinned  in  a  most  grievous  manner,  but  he  also  hum- 
bled himself  to  the  lowest  degree  en  account  of  his  sin,  and  sought 
reconciliation  with  God  earnestly  and  heartily  :  do  ye  so  likewise, 
that  ye  may  obtain  mercy  and  help.  Yea,  believers,  although  they 
have  obtained  peace  and  reconciliation  with  the  Lord  for  this  sin, 
should  yet  pause  a  while  by  it,  should  humble  themselves,  and  seek 
a  renewal  of  their  peace  with  the  Lord,  like  David,  Psalm  li.  after 
Nathan  had  informed  him,  that  the  Lord  had  taken  away  his  sin, 
2  Sam.  xii.  13-. 

Are  ye  troubled  and  concerned  on  account  of  the  impurity  of  your 
hearts  and  actions,  flee  then  to  the  pure  Jesus,  who  suffered  the 
punishment  of  these  sins  also  for  his  elect,  that  they  might  obtain 
peace,  and  be  healed  with  his  stripes.  David  did  so,  when  he  said, 
Psalm  li.  7,  "Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  ciean  :  wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  This  iniquity  will  some- 
times oppress  the  soul  exceedingly,  and  be  continually  belore  her  ; 
yea,  it  will  someumes  burthen  the  heart  so,  that  there  will  remain 
but  little  hope  of  pardon  in  the  mind.  Hut  let  such  afflicted  and 
tempesttossed  persons  know  that  the  Mediator  poured  out  his  soul, 
and  prayed  for  great  sins  also.  Did  not  David  and  Lot  obtain  par- 
don for  these  sins,  though  they  were  aggravated  to  the  highest  de- 
gree ?  "  Some  "  of  the  Corinthians  "  had  been  adulterers  and  ef- 
feminate," yea,  still  more  atrocious  sinners  ;  but  joining  themselves 
to  the  Saviour  by  faith  aivl  conversion,  "  tl^ey  were  washed,  sancti- 
fied and  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
our  God,"  as  Paul  testifieth,  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  1 1.  I  speak  not  thus  to 
encourage  any  unclean  person  in  this  abomination,  but  to  persuade 
and  induce  the  distressed  to  flee*  to  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  wash 
their  sou's  "in  the  fountain  "  of  his  blood,  "opened  to  the  house 
of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  for  sin,  and  for  un- 
cleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.   1. 

Let  every  one  beware  of  this  abomination,  yea,  of  the  least  pro- 
vocation and  temptation  to  this  sin,  and  let  him  show  himself  chaste 
ami  continent,  that  is,  modest,  shamefaced,  anil  unfriendly  to  the 
least  and  fi.st  motion  of  this  sin,  both  in  and  out  of  the  mairied 
state  :  (a)  "  For  the  eyes  of  God  ate  upon  the  w:-ys  of  man,  and  he 
seeth  all  his  ^oir.i^s  There  is  no  darkness,  nor  shadow  of  death, 
'where  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  Hide  themselves,"  saith  Elihu, 
Job  xxxiv.  21,  22.  This  withheld  the  chaste  Joseph  from  adultery 
ivith  his  master's  wife,  who  tempted  him  thereto,  Gen.  xxxix.  9. 
(b)  Know  also  believers,  that  "  your  members  are  the  members  of 


XLI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  108,  109.  339 

Christ,   that  your   bodies    and   souls   are  the   temples  of  the    Holy 
Ghost,"  sanctified  and  bought  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God  .;  therefore  such  filthy  sins  ought  not  to  be  entertained  in  them, 
yea,  not  even  the  motions  of  those  sins.     This  the  apostle  teacheth 
the  Corinthians,  who  were   purified    from  this   impurity,   1  Cor.  \'i. 
10,  U,  15,  20.     (c)  Let  the  commandment  of  God,  with    whom  we 
have  to  do,  affect  you"  souls  so,  as  to  render  you   averse    from  this 
Bin*     lie  proclaims  to  you  from  heaven   amidst  a  display  of  his  ex- 
alted majesty,  •'   fi.ou  shalt  not  commit  adultery."     Who  will  then 
dare  to  excite  the  least  motion  of  this  sin  in  his  soul  ?  "  For  tins  is 
the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification,  that  ye  should  abstain  from 
fornication  ;  that  every  one  of  you  should  know  how  to  possess  his 
vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour  :  not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence, 
even  >.s  the  Gentiles,  which  know  not  God."     Thus  speaks   Paul,    1 
Tins,  iv.  3,  4,  5.     (d)  It  happens   to  some,    yea,   to   believers    also, 
that  they  are  disturbed  with  powertul  motions  of  these  sins  :  an  un- 
clean devil  knows  how  to  allure  thern  by  wonderful  representations, 
and  to  distress  their  souls,  and  they  do  not   see  how   they   shall  dis- 
engage themselves  from  him.     But  1  would    advise    these   persons, 
(1;  to  be  afraid  of  such    evil   motions  of  lust.     It  is  the   design   of 
your  enemy  to  bring  you  to  a  most  grievous  fall:    repel    foithwith 
those  motions  and  ideas,  that  arise  and  are  injected  into  you,    as  ye 
would  shake  fire  from  your  clothes,  and  keep  all  your  members  un- 
der, that  they  may  not  seduce  you  :  yea,  like  chaste  Job,  "  make  a 
covenant   with    your  eyes,  that  they   may  not   look  upon  a  maid," 
Job  xxxi.  1.     The  words  of  James  are  applicable  here,  "  Resist  the 
devil,  and  he  will    flee  from  you,"    James  iv.  7.     (2)  Employ  your- 
selves with  something  or  other  :  be  either  industriously  engaged  in 
your  calling  ;  or  with  some  work,  which  is  otherwise  not  so  neces- 
sary ;  or  associate  with  decent  company,  and    discourse    with  them 
of  civd,  or  ecclesiastical,  or  more  spiritual  matters  ;  or  sing  a  psalm, 
or   spiritual  song,  either   alone,    or  with   others  :  "  Be  always  busy 
with  some  work,  that  the   devil  may  find  you  occupied,"  saith  one 
of  the  ancients.     (3)  Be  much  engaged  in  praver,  complain  ol  your 
case  to   the  Lord,  call  upon    him,  and  plead  with  him  to  help  you  : 
yea,  abstain  also  sometimes  from  such  meats  and  drinks,  as  inflame 
the   spirits ;    «  This  kind  can  go  out  by  nothing,  but  by  prayer   and 
fasting,"  Mavk  ix.  29.     (4)  Let  husbands  and  wives  love  one  another 
heartily,  that  they  may  not  loathe  one  another,  and  that  their  conju- 
gal affection  may  not  be  diverted  to  a  stranger.     See  what  Solomon 
and   Paul  say,   Prov.  v.  17 — 21.     1  Cor.  vii.  2 — 5.     (5)  Let  unmar- 
ried persons,  who  cannot  contain  themselves,  enter  into  an  honour- 


340     THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

able  marriage,  "  but  only  in  the  Lord,"  as  the  apostle  adviseth,  1 
Corf  vii.  39,  that  is,  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  after  asking  counsel  of 
the  Lord,  and  with  a  person  who  fears  the  Lord  :  "  The  sons  of 
God  must  not  see  the  daughters  of  men,  that  they  are  fair,  and 
take  them  wives  of  all  whom  they  choose  ;"  it  was  this  that  cor- 
rupted the  old  world,  as  Moses  relates,  Gen.  vi.  1,2.  "  Beauty  is 
vain,  and  favour  is  deceitful ;  but  a  woman  that  feareth  the  Lot  d, 
she  shall  be  praised,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxxi.  30.  (6)  1  show 
you  a  still  more  excellent  way  ;  let  every  one  of  you  enter  into  a 
spiritual  marriage  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  let  him  who  hath  con- 
nected himself  with  him  in  that  blessed  marriage  covenant,  devote 
his  love  wholly  to  him,  and  delight  himself  in  him.  This  would 
detach  the  soul  from  too  great  a  love  to  the  creature,  and  "they  who 
had  wives  would  be  as  though  they  had  none,"  1  Cor.  vii  29.  -'  The 
Lord  would  then  delight  in  you  ;  and  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth 
over  the  bride,  so  your  God  would  rejoice  over  you,"  as  he  saith, 
Isaiah  lxii.  4,  5,  and  "  ye  should  be  blessed,"  and  according  to 
Rev.  xix.  9,  "  be  called  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lambo" 
Amen. 


(   341  ) 


THE 


EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  15.  Thou  shalt  not  steal. 

Q.   110.    Wliat  doth  God  forbid  in  the  eighth  commandment  ? 

A.  God  forbids  not  only  those  thefts  and  robberies  which  are  pun- 
ishable by  magistrates;  but  he  comprehends  under  the  name  of 
theft  all  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropri- 
ate to  ourselves  the  goods  which  belong  to  our  neighbour  ;  whether 
it  be  by  force,  or  under  the  appearance  of  right ;  as  by  unjust 
weights,  ells,  measures,  fraudulent  merchandize,  false  coins,  usury, 
or  by  any  other  way  forbidden  by  God  ;  as  also  all  covetousness,  all 
abuse  and  waste  of  his  gifts. 

Q.   111.  But  what  doth  God  require  in  this  command? 

A.  That  I  promote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbour  in  every  in- 
stance I  can  or  may  ;  and  deal  with  him  as  I  desire  to  be  dealt  with 
by  others  :  further  also,  that  I  faithfully  labour,  that  1  may  be  able 
to  relieve  the  needy. 


342      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


G 


OD,"  saith  Paul  to  the   Athenians,  Acts   xvii.  25,  "  gheth 
to  all  lite,  breath,  and  all  things."     Life  and  breath  are  either  M  the 
breath  of  life,"    which  "  God   hath  breathed   into  man,"    as  iV'oses 
testifieth,  Gen.  ii.  17.     Or  if  life  and  breath  be  considered  distinctly, 
life  is  that  which  gives  existence  to  man  by  his  creation  or  birth,  and 
breath,  by   which  he   inhales  and  exhales   the   air  in  breathing,  is 
the   action   and  preservation   of  his  life  by  the  influence  of  God,  by 
which  lie   maintains  that  life,  which  he  hath  given.     But  as  neither 
life  nor  breath  can  endure,  unless  the  powers,  which  are  continually 
wasted  by  perspiration,  be  recompensed  again,  therefore  God  givetn 
us  all   things  to   maintain  our  life  and    breath,   as  food  and  clothing. 
The  Lord  is  indeed  "  a  faithful  Creator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19.    "  The  liv- 
ing God  givcth  us  all   things   richly  to  enjoy,"  saith   the  apostle,  1 
Tim.  vi.  17.     Man,  although    he  is  the  most    excellent  of  all  God's 
creatures  on  earth,  was    nevertheless   created   by  God   af'er  all  the 
creatures  :  and  why  ?  it  was  in  order  that  God  might  introduce  him 
into  a  plentiful    habitation,  and  thus    show  that   he    wouhl    maintain 
his   life   and   breath.     If  it  had   pleased  the    Lord,  he    conkl    have 
3naintained  the  life  and  breath  of  man  immediately,  as  he   support- 
ed Moses,  Elias  and   Christ   forty    days   and  nights ;  but    he  would 
afford  continually  new  evidences  of  his  independence,  allsuffic'u  nry, 
wisdom  and   goodness,  and  of   man's   dependence  on    his   Maker. 
As  the  Lord  then  giveth  man  all  things  to  preserve  him  alive,  so  he 
chooses  that  he  should  also  retain  them,  and  he  cloih  not  permit  any 
person  to  bereave  him  of  those  tilings,  that  lie  mav  not  by  the  want 
of  them   lose   the  breath   of  life.     Therefore   he  saith,  as   the  only 
Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy]  "  Thou   shall  not  steal."     He 
required   in  the  sixth   commandment,  that  no  man   should   kill  his 
neighbour  ;     and   Lmce   the   woman  is  the   delight  of  his  eyes,  and 
thus  refreshes  and  continues  his  life  and  breat'd,  therefore  the  Lord 
forbids   also  adultery  in   the  seventh   commandment.     But  can  any 
man  retain  and  enjoy  the  breath  of  his   life  wit!)  t'ie  wife  whom  he 
loves,  when  others  deprive    him  of  food  and   clothing?  surely  no  j 
and  therefore  the  Lawgiver  enjoins  en  every  man  in  the  eighth  com- 
mandment, that  he  should  not  steal. 

The  instructor  explaining  this  commandment,  z\,qy;s>  fur  that  pur- 
pose, 

I.  The  sins  that  are  forbidden  in  it,   Question  1 10. 

II.  The  virtues  that  are  commanded  in  it,  Question  111. 

i.  The  sin    which    the    Lawgiver    forbids   here  is  stealing.     We 
■  ill  survey  this  iniquity  first  in  itself,  and  then  in  its  c.ni5:s  ;  and  will 


XLIL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  Hi.  345 

then  also  attend  to  the  abominable  nature  of  the  sin.  The  Hebrew 
word  ganab  signifies  to  do  something  secretly,  that  is  shameful,  and 
ol  which  a  person  is  ashamed.  When  "David  mourned  for  Absa- 
lom," by  whose  death  nevertheless  the  insurrection  against  him  was 
quelled,  "  the  victory  was  turned  into  mourning  to  all  the  people, 
and  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  into  the  city,  as  people  being 
ashamed,  steal  away,  when  they  flee  in  battle,"  as  we  read,  2  Sam. 
xix.  1,  2,  3.  And  this  word  signifies  doing  thus  particularly  by  de- 
ceit, as  "  Absalom  stole  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Israel,"  2  Sam. 
>:v  6,  when  by  deceitful  speeches  he  withdrew  the  minds  of  the  Is- 
raelites from  his  father,  and  inclined  ihem  to  himself.  And  so 
stealing  consists  in  "  taking  our  neighbour's  property  from  him, 
with  or  without  his  knowledge,  against  his  mind." 

God  hath  given  to  every  man  his  particular  portion  of  the  goods 
of  this  world,  as  his  property.  It  was  his  will  that  Adam  should 
"  subdue  the  earth,"  and  all  the  creatures  on  it  to  himself,"  and 
that  he  should  have  dominion  over  them,"  Gen,  i.  28.  But  when 
men  multiplied,  it  was  necessary  that  each  of  them  should  have  his 
portion:  "Cain,  a  tiller  of  the  giound,  had  therefore  the  fruits  of 
the  ground,  and  Abel,  a  shepherd,  had  his  sheep,"  Gen.  iv.  3,  4. 
When  men  were  not  yet  so  numerous,  that  they  could  occupy  the 
whole  earth,  every  man  became  the  owner  of  that  land,  and  of 
those  goods,  which  he  first  found.  When  the  whole  body  of  men 
purposed  to  settle  together  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  were  unwil- 
ling to  disperse  over  the  whole  earth,  the  Lord  defeated  their  pur- 
pose by  confounding  their  language,  that  he  might  induce  them  to 
dwell  on  all  the  earth,  and  each  to  take  for  his  property  the  posses- 
sion that  was  allotted  him  ;  for  when  "  the  Most  High  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  he  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance," 
Deut.  xxxii.  8.  Are  there  at  present  no  more  vacant  lands  to  be 
occupied,  every  individual  nevertheless  holds,  as  his  special  goods 
and  property,  that  which  he  obtains  by  right  of  inheritance,  by  traf- 
fic, learning,  and  any  honourable  art,  or  by  the  labour  of  his  hands, 
and  thus  "  he  eats  his  own  bread,"  according  to  2  Thess.  iii.  12, 
It  is  therefore,  considering  this  wise  distribution  of  goods  among 
men,  exceedingly  preposterous  in  certain  persons,*  to  assert,  with 
the  ancient  Essenes,  a  community  of  goods,  whereby  all  things 
should  be  common  to  all,  and  none  should  have   aught  as  his  own  ; 

*  By  these  the  author  designs  the  Labadists,  a  sect  which  existed  in  his 
time,  but  which  hath  since  fallen  into  oblivion.  They  were  so  called  from 
John  Labadie,  their  founder,  a  minister  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  Frinee, 
a  gre;:t  enthusiast,  who  held  r?v?r^i  ether  erroneous  '.•■■■ 


344      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

this  would  encourage  sloth  fulness,  and  exclude  liberali'y.  In  ordei* 
that  the  Israelite  might  "  open  his  hand  wide  to  his  brother,  to  his 
poor,  and  to  his  needy,"  the  Lord  saith, 'that  "  the  poor  should  not 
cease  out  of  the  land,"  Deut  xv.  11.  It  is  true,  in  the  first  Chris- 
tian church  all  who  believed  were  together,  and  had  all  things  in 
common  ;  neither  said  any  of  them,  that  aught  of  the  things  that 
he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  they  had  all  things  common,"  as 
Luke  reliteth,  Acts  ii.  44.  iv.  32.  But  this  was  only  a  special 
case  for  that  time,  and  it  proceeded  from  the  heat  of  the  power  of 
that  love,  which  consumed  them  and  their  goods  through  the  power 
of  godliness ;  but  it  was  not  general,  neither  was  it  a  command  of 
the  apostles :  every  man  was  permitted  to  keep  his  goods  for 
his  own  use,  as  Peter  declares  to  Ananias,  Acts  v.  4.  John  had  his 
own  house,  and  maintained  the  mother  of  Jesus  in  it,  John  xix.  27. 
If  it  had  been  otherwise,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary,  that  the 
believing  Gentiles  should  send,  every  one  according  to  his  ability, 
their  charitable  contributions  to  the  believing  Jews,  as  is  testified, 
Acts  xi.  28,  29,  30,  neither  would  it  have  been  of  any  use,  that 
Paul  should  urge  that  liberality  by  so  many  motives,  1  Cor.  xvi. 
1 — 4,  2  Cor.  viii,  and  ix.  lor  this  command  is  founded  in  the 
property,  that  men  have  in  these  or  those  goods;  for  stealing  is  a 
taking  of  another  person's  property  to  ourselves,  without  his  con- 
sent. 

Theft  is  divided  into  the  grosser  or  greater,  and  the  lesser.  The 
grosser  or  greater  is  that  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrate, 
because  it  tendeth  to  the  destruction  of  the  commonwealth.  This  is. 

1.  "  Manstealing,"  when  a  person  steals  a  human  being,  to  sell 
him,  or  to  beg  with  him,  and  thus  to  gain  aught  by  him  ;  so  Jo- 
seph complained  that  k<  he  had  been  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews,"  Gen.  xi.  15.  The  Lord  God  required  that  such  thieves 
should  be  punished  with  death:  he  saith,  Exod.  xxi.  16,  "  He  that 
steaieth  a  man  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death."  See  also  Deut.  xxi  v.  7,  and  1  Tim  i.  10. 
But  since  we  do  not  buy  men  in  this  country,  this  sin  doth  not  pre- 
vail among  us:  it  happens  indeed  sometimes,  that  lazy  beggars 
steal  children,  in  order  to  beg  with  them,  but  this  is  also  rare  :  the 
Jesuits  and  monks  nevertheless  often  render  themselves  guilty  of 
this  theft,  for  they  entice  children,  seduce  them  from  their  parents, 
and  carry  t!icm  agjia^t  their  parents  mind  into  monasteries. 

2.  "  Stealing  cattle,"  although  it  is  not  so  atrocious  an  offence, 
as  stealing  men,  must  also  be  considered  as  punishable  by  the  magis- 
trate,    'i'he  Lord  Baith,  Exod.  xxii.   1,   <■  It'  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox, 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  ill.  345 

or  a  sheep,  ar.d  kill  it,  or  sell  it,  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox, 
and  four  sheep  for  a  sheep  •"  The  penalty  for  an  ox  was  greater 
thaii  that  foi  a  sheep,  because  they  made  use  of  oxen  for  ploughing 
arid  husbandry :  he  therefore,  who  stole  an  ox,  not  only  deprived 
the  owner  of  his  property,  as  he  did,  who  stole  a  sheep,  but  also 
discommoded  the  posssessor  in  tilling  his  land. 

3.  We   add  to  this  w  houserobbery,"  that  is,    stealing    money,  or 

old  goods,  clothes,  victuals,  or  ether  matters,  whether  the 
thief  take  aught  of  the  goods  that  are  at  hand,  in  passing  by,  or 
her  he  filch  aught  from  the  owner,  while  he  is  talking,  or  other- 
iged  :  or  whether  he  enter  privately  into  the  house,  or 
break  into  it,  and  take  whatever  pleaseth  him.  Tie  civil  law  of  Is- 
rael permitted  the  master  of  the  house  to  "kill  the  thief,  who  broke 
into  his  house  by  night ;  but  if  the  sun  were  risen,  he  might  not  kill 
hitn.  but  the  thief  was  to  make  full  restitution,  yea,  to  give  double  : 
If  he  had  nothing  wherewith  to  make  restitution,  he  was  to  be  sold 
for  his  theft,"  Exod.  xxii.  2 — 4.  We  cannot  determine  from  the 
civil  law  of  Israel,  that  we  have  now  a  right  to  kill  a  thief,  who  steals 
cattle,  or  household  goods,  since  this  law  was  ordained  only  for  that 
people  and  country,  and  cannot  well  be  observed  in  other  countries 
and  nations:  among  the  Israelites  the  thief  was  able  to  make  full 
restitution  of  what  he  had  stolen,  because  among  them  every  man 
had  his  immovable  possesison  of  lands ;  and  if  he  had  spent  all, 
and  had  empovei  isheel  himself,  he  mig:it  be  sold,  and  his  debt  com- 
pensated, according  to  Exod.  xxii.  3.  But  this  hath  not  place  among 
us.  It  is  true,  we  could  now  confine  the  thief  in  a  house  of  correc- 
tion, but  he  could  not  then  compensate  his  theft,  or  restore  to  the 
owner  that  which  he  had  stolen  from  him  five,  four,  or  twofold. 
We  dare  not  therefore  determine  whether  the  magistrate  may  not 
punish  grosser  acts  of  theft,  which  are  aggravated  by  many  circum- 
stances, with  death.  But  it  appears  too  hard  to  punish  simple  theft 
severely,  especially  when  it  proceeds  from  poverty,  either  with  death-. 
or  with  a  great  contempt  of  the  thief:  Solomon  sailh,  Prov.  vi.  30, 
31.  "  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul 
when  he  is  hungry  :  but  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sevenfold, 
lie  shall  give  all  the    substance  of  his  house." 

4.  Unfaithful  magistrates  and  collectors  render  themselves  guilty 
of"  peculation,"  or  stealing  from  the  public,  when  they  exhaust  the 
poor  commons,  in  order  to  enrich  themselves  :  "  As  a  roaring  lion, 
and  a  ranging  bear,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people,"  saith 
the  wise  man,  Prov    xxviii.   15.     Such  were   the  rulers    of  Israel  : 

:  they  plucked  the  skin  from  off  the  Israelites,   and  their  flesh  from 
Vol..  iu  2  S 


246       THE  THTRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  see  whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous.  Think  not  that  ye 
have  cleansed  your  hearts  in  this  respect,  and  are  pure  of  this  sin, 
because  ye  are  so  blind,  that  ye  do  not  know  yourselves.  Paul,  be- 
fore he  was  converted,  blasphemed  God,  and  he  nevertheless  knew 
not  that  he  did  it  as  he  confessed  afterwards,  when  he  was  better 
enlightened,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Yea,  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme, 
and  thought  that  he  did  God  service,  Acts.  xxvi.  9,  10,  11.  Only 
attend  to  all  your  former  doings,  and  ye  will  see  that  your  whole  lift 
hath  been  altogether  without  aDd  dishonourable  to  God.  And  it  is 
therefore  evident,  that  ye  take  his  name  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  your 
covenant  God,  that  ye  are  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  thai  he  will  not 
hold  you  guiltless. 

Alas  !  that  with  the  jailer,  ye  cried  out  with  trembling,  on  ac- 
count of  your  great  guilt,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Ye 
would  then  learn  how  the  Lord  could  hold  you  guiltless ;  for  this 
would  cause  your  souls  to  flee  out  of  themselves  to  him,  who  suffered 
blasphemy,  and  on  account  of  blasphemy.  Endeavour  not  only  to  re- 
s'.rain  yout  mouths  from  uttering  such  dreadful  Language,  but  also 
to  be  found  wholly  in  Christ,  and  with  "  the  Corinthians,  who  were 
before  blasphemers,  to  be  washed,  sanctified  and  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  as  the  apostie 
testifieth  of  them,  1  Cor.  vi,  10,  11. 

But,  believers,  ye  also  have  frequently  sinned  against  this  com- 
mandment. Reflect  only  on  your  former  behaviour,  on  all  your 
free  thoughts  and  words,  your  vain  and  dissolute  conversation,  and 
how  ye  have  reproached  God  during  your  "  ignorance  and  unbelief," 
like  Paul  1  Tim.  i.  13.  Ye  have  laden  yourselves  with  a  heavy 
burthen  of  guilt,  ye  have  seen  it,  and  know  how  it  oppressed  you, 
and  with  what  dreadful  distress  your  souls  were  seized,  when  ye 
st.w  that  God  would  not  hold  you  guiltless  ;  but  ye  have  with  Paul, 
"obtained  mercy,"  1  Tim.  i.  13.  God  could  not,  and  he  nevertheless 
doth  hold  you  guikless :  his  Son  hath  atoned  for  your  reproaching 
of  the  Lord  in  your  stead  :  "  The  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him 
up,  and  the  reproaches  of  them  who  reproached  the  Lord  fell  on 
him,"  as  lie  complains  by  the  mouth  of  David,  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Be» 
cause  ye  had  blasphemed  God,  the  wicked  accused  him  of  blasphe- 
my, and  slew  him  on  account  of  it :  he  purchased  the  covenant  of 
grace  for  yon,  and  "  though  he  was  just,  he  suffered  for  you,  who 
were  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you  to  God,"  1  Peter  iii.  18,  and 
that  the  Lord  might  no  more  be  wroth  with  you,  "that  be  might 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  would  not  hlfli 


io<\  247 

from  you  to  do  you  good,  and  that  he  would  put  his  fear  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  might  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.     Therefore, 

1.  Let  your  souls  wonder  and  he  amazed  at  the  great  and  free 
grace,  that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  Ye  who  were  guilty  are  hol- 
den  guiltless  ;  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  guiltless,  was  holden  guilty, 
and  punished  in  your  stead,  and  ali  grace  is  conveyed  to  you  there- 
by :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  Cod  made  to  be  sin  for  you, 
that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  according 
to  2  Cor.  v.  21.  Why  did  not  God  lay  the  guilt  of  your  blasphemy 
upon  you,  as  well  as  upon  others  ?  It  was  only  free  grace.  Behold 
it,  wonder  at  it  and  rejoice,  praise  him  on  account  of  it,  like  Paul", 
when  he  saith,  1  Tim.  1.  15,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, of  whom  I  am  chief." 

2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  still  often  taken  in  vain  by  you  :  must 
ye  not  own  it  ?  ye  know  surely  that  his  fear  doth  not  always  impress 
your  hearts,  as  it  ought ;  how  often  are  ye  but  little  influenced  by  it, 
as  well  when  ye  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  as  when 
ye  are  not.  Therefore  the  soul  should,  as  often  as  she  renders  her- 
self guilty,  lay  hold  on  the  Son  of  God  for  reconciliation,  and  dip 
herself  in  the  fountain  cf  his  blood,  that  she  may  be  reconciled  and 
cleansed.  He  is  indeed  "  the  opened  fountain,"  which  is  always 
"  open  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

3.  Let  it  henceforward  be  your  earnest  endeavour,  that  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  your  God  may  direct  you  in  all  your  conversation,  so 
that  ye  may  not  reproach,  but  glorify  him  :  "  If  ye  call  on  the  Fath- 
er, who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"    1  Peter  i.  17. 

The  fear  of  God  should  restrain  you  from  sinning,  especially  from 
scandalous  sins,  which  induce  men  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  : 
"  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid,  and  his  dread  fall  on 
you  I"  may  we  ask  you  with  Job,  ch.  xiii.  ii.  Job  himself  refrained 
from  sinning,  because  "  destruction  from  God  was  a  terrour  to  him  ; 
and  by  leason  of  his  highness  he  could  not  endure,"  ch.  xxxi.  23. 
So  Joseph  also  acted,  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  and  Nehemiah,  Neh.  v.  15. 
An  a»ve  for  God  ought  to  restrain  your  tongues  and  mouths,  and 
prevent  you  from  "  speaking  so  exceeding  proudly,  and  from  letting 
arrogancy  come  out  cf  your  mouths  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  judg- 
ment," as  Hannah  admonisheth,  1  Sam.  ii.  3.  We  ought  to  follow 
even  our  daily  callings  with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  as  the  apostle 
enjoins  upon   servants,   Eph.  vi.  3.     Therefore  plead  the  covenant 


Z4»      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

his  son  acted  worse,  and  abominably,  when  he  resolved  to  rendei 
that  yoke  much  heavier,  1  Kings  xii  1 — 14.  It  is  also  force  when 
a  person  endeavours  by  his  power,  riches,  courage  and  friends  to 
control  justice,  in  order  to  withhold  from  infe-iors  their  dues, 
James  bewails  the  poor  on  this  account,  when  he  saith,  James  ii.  6* 
"  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment- 
seats  ?"  Job  was  innocent  of  this  great  transgression  :  hear  his 
solemn  protesration  ;  "  If  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  against  the  father- 
less,  when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  gate  ;  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from 
my  shouhlerblade,  and  mine  arm  be  broken  from  the  bone,"  Job 
xxxi.  21,  22. 

The  sinner,  not  contented  with  his  own,  and  grasping  after  his 
neighbour's  property,  wishes  nevertheless  to  appear  honest,  and 
will  therefore  endeavour  to  deprive  him  of  it  "  under  an  appear- 
ance of  right,  as  by  unjust  weights,  ells  and  measures."  He  doth 
this,  when  he  "buys  his  wares  with  such  as  are  loo  great,  and  sells 
them  with  such  as  are  too  small :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness 
in  judgment,  in  meteyard,  in  weight,  or  in  measure,"  saith  the 
Lord,  Lev.  xix.  See  how  he  explains  this  mors  particularly,  Deut. 
xxv.  13 — 16,  and  Prov  xx.  10.  Hear  how  the  wicked  arc  reproved 
on  account  of  this  kind  of  theft,  Micha  vi.  10.  "  Are  there  not  yet 
the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  the 
scant  measure  that  is  abominable  ?" 

We  may  add  to  this  cheating  with  our  u  merchandise,"  or  wares, 
which  unjust  men  adulterate,  and  set  off  in  such  a  manner,  that  they 
appear  better  than  they  are.  This  is  "selling  chaff  for  wheat," 
Amos  villi  6. 

The  Lord  is  not  less  displeased  with  u  false  coins,"  when  a  per. 
son  debases,  or  clips  money,  or  when  he  knowingly  passes  base  or 
clipped  money  for  more  than  it  is  worth.  Or  a  person,  in  order  to 
deceive  his  neighbour  *vith  the  money,  will  miscount  it,  either 
in  writing,  or  reckoning,  or  weighing,  like  Israel,  who  in  receiving 
■money,  "  made  the  shekel,"  that  is,  the  weight  of  the  shekel, 
"great,"  Amos  viii.  5. 

The  instructor  adds  to  this  "  usury,"  that  is,  exorbitant  interest, 
which  we  take  for  money  or  goods,  that  we  have  lent  to  others,  in 
order  to  accommodate  them.  But  this  commandment  doth  not  for- 
bid that  iHury,  which  is  agreeable  to  equity,  to  the  current  value  of 
money,  of  merchandise,  or  of  the  profits  that  others  make  by  our 
money  or  goods,  or  according  to  the  measure  which  the  magistrate 
appoints.  Such  money  may  be  considered  as  just  ;  for  how  can  we 
condemn  a  person,  who  lends  another  money,  from  which  he  derives 


XLTI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1  TO,  111.  349 

advantage,  for  sharing  in  that  advantage  :  there  cannot  be  otherwise 
any  trafficking  or  trading  ;  may  we  derive  piofit  from  our  wares  which 
we  sell,  why  then  not  also  from  our  money,  which  we  lend  ?  The 
Lovd  Jesus  approves  of  such  usury,  when  he  teacheth  us,  that  we 
should  endeavour  to  derive  p»ofit  from  our  spiritual  gifts  after  the 
manner  of  usurers,  Matt.  xv.v.  14 — 30.  But  when  usury  is  forbid- 
den, we  must  understand  by  it  that  griping  usury,  which  must  ne- 
cessarily consume  and  empoverish  the  person  who  borrows  upon 
usury.  To  such  griping  usury  belongs  also  taking  interest  of  the 
poor,  to  whom  we  ought  to  lend  money  without  interest,  that  we 
may  relieve  their  necessity,  although  we  could  not  hope  that  they 
would  recompence  our  favour,  or  restore  the  money  which  we  have 
lent  them,  as  the  Saviour  commands,  Luke  vi.  35.  It  is  also  un- 
just usury  to  take  such  necessary  pledges  of  security  of  the  poor,  to 
whom  we  lend  money,  as  they  cannot  spare.  The  Lord  God  was 
highly  displeased,  and  would  punish  it  severely,  when  any  one  "  took 
another's  garment,  or  his  millstone,  and  especially  his  up^er  mill- 
stone, to  pledge,"  Exod.  xxii    2  5 — 27.     Deut.  xxiv.  6. 

There  are  "  other  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  by  which  men  appro- 
priate their  neighbour's  goods  to  themselves."  Who  can  enume- 
rate them  all  ?  We  will  mention  only  a  few.  For  instance,  (a)  '1  hat 
wicked  judges  receive  bribes,  in  order  to  .pervert  justice  :  'l  TLou 
shalt  not  take  any  gift;  for  the  gift  blindtth  the  wise,  and  perverfeth 
the  words  of  the  righteous,"  saith  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  8.  Deut. 
xvi.  19.  The  princes  of  Judah  are  taxed  as  "companions  of 
thieves,"  because  "they  loved  giffs,"  Isi-iah  i.  23.  (b)  The  un- 
faithful managing  and  devouring  of  estates,  which  we  can  get  into 
our  hands,  loading  them  with  so  many  expences  that  they  dwindle 
into  nothing  :  but  "  wo  to  the  writers,  who  prescribe  grievousness, 
to  turn  aside  the  nc.  dy  from  judgment,"  Sec.  Isaiah  x  1,  2.  To 
which  we  must  also  refer  alienating  goods  that  have  been  committed 
to  our  trust ;  the  Lord  condemns  such  a  conduct,  Exod.  xxii.  10 
— 13  ;  also  neglecting  to  rtstove  that  which  we  have  borrowed,  and 
not  paying  our  debts ;  for  this  is  "  the  work  of  the  wicked,"  as  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  21,  It  is  of  the  same  kind  also,  when  a 
person  doth  not  produce  goods  which  he  hath  found,  nor  restore 
them  to  the  owner,  as  the  Lord  rtquireth,  Lev.  vi-  3.  Deut.  xxii. 
1.  Also  concealing  stolen  goods,  in  order  to  be  ''  a  partner  with  the 
thief,"  as  the  wise  king  speaks,  Prov.  xxix.  24,  (c)  Empoverishing 
debtors,  who  are  willing  to  pay  their  debts,  and  have  not  contracted 
them  wilfully,  falling  on  them  forthwith,  in  order  to  ruin  them,  and 
turn  them  out  naked  and  bare :  tlut>  is  a  hateful  conduct,  as  the  ba- 


350       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

viour  shows  in  that  wicked  servant,  Matt,  xviii.  28,  29,30.  (d)  Keep- 
ing buck  the  wages  of  the  hireling,  and  abridging  them  :  a  wo  is 
denounced  against  those  who  do  thus,  Jer.  xxii.  13.  This,  as  James 
informs  us,  is  "  a  crying  sin,"  James  v.  4.  God  wiU  not  allow  us 
to  keep  such  wages  with  us  all  night,  Leviticus  xix,  13.  (e)  It  is 
also  abominable  to  be  slothful  and  sluggish,  either  when  we  labour 
for  another,  and  thus  eat  the  bread  of  idleness,  contrary  to  Prov. 
xxxi.  17  ;  or  when  we  do  our  own  work  :  "  He  that  is  slothful  in 
his  work,  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster,"  sailh  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  9.  Paul  condemns  such  persons,  2  Thess.  iii.  10 — 12, 
and  he  saith  that  "they  ought  not  to  eat."  (f)  Displacing  and  remov- 
ing land-marks,  in  order  to  enlarge  our  own,  and  abridge  another's 
land,  is  also  a  theft,  which  is  forbidden,  Dent.  xix.  14.  Prov.  xxii. 
28.  xxiii.  10:  as  also  stealing  out  of  another's  garden,  or  orchard, 
and  so  likewise  "putting  our  cattle  into  our  neighbour's  field,  and 
letting  them  feed  in  it,"  contrary  to  the  divine  prohibition,  Exod. 
xxii.  5.  (g)  It  is  also  a  conduct,  which  God  forbids,  to  supplant  our 
neighbour  in  his  trade,  by  disparaging  him  and  his  wares  :  this  is 
contrary  to  "  charity,  which  envieth  not,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  4.  Crying 
down  wares,  which  are  offered  for  sale,  in  order  to  buy  them  at  a 
cheap  rate,  this  we  ought  to  condemn  with  Solomon,  Prov.  >;x.  14, 
"  It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer ;  but  when  he  is  gone  his 
way,  he  boasteth."  We  ought  to  disapprove  no  less  of  "  monopo- 
lizing goods,  buying  them  up,  or  forestalling,"  especially  eatables, 
by  which  a  person  obtains  the  sole  command  of  these  things,  and  can 
regulate  the  sale  of  thern,  raise  the  price  of  them  to  an  enormous 
height,  and  so  enrich  himself  beyond  measure,  and  thus  exhaust  the 
poor  commons  :  "  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall  curse 
him,"  saith  the  wise  man.  Prov.  xi.  26.  (h)  It  is  exceedingly  de- 
testable in  children  to  rob  their  parents,  and  to  deem  this  notwith- 
standing to  be  right :  hear  what  the  same  wise  man  saith  of  it. 
Prov.  xxviii.  24,  "  Whoso  robbeth  his  father,  or  his  mother,  and 
saith, It  is  no  transgression,  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer." 
The  time  would  fail  me,  if  I  should  speak  of  deceitful  bargains,  re- 
ceipts, or  bills  of  discharge,  of  the  violation  of  contracts  and  condi- 
tions, on  account  of  some  loss  that  might  accrue  to  us;  of  unjust 
judgments  and  pleadings,  in  order  to  abridge  our  neighbour;  of 
that  dishonest  thirst  for  gain,  which  is  shown  in  betting,  playing  at 
dice,  and  gaming,  in  keeping  drinking-houses,  whore-houses,  and 
gaming-houses. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  111.  35 1 

A  person  who  cloth  not  know  himself,  wonders  how  any  one   can 
be  so  dishonest,  as  to  be  guilty  of  stealing  from  others  :  but  he  con- 
siders not  that  it  is  restraining  grace,  that  hinders  him  from  sinning 
against  God  in   this   manner.      The   sinner    being   destitute- of  the 
Lord,  and  not  knowing  what  is  essentially  good  for  him,  can  never 
be  satisfied  with  his  earthly  goods,   he   will    always  have  still  more, 
as  we  will  show  more  fully  on  the  tenth  commandment.     And  hence 
ariseth,    (1)  "  Covetousness,"  as  the   immediate  cause  of  theft,  by 
which  a  person  craves  insatiably,  and  covets  vehemently  an    abun- 
dance of  earthly  goods,  and  endeavours  to  keep  them,   and   will   not 
make  a  moderate  use  of  them,  nor  communicate  of  them  to  others  : 
"  Wo  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Hab.  ii.  9.     And  thus  covetousness  consists   in  desiring 
to  be  rich,   1  Tim.  vi.   16.     He  who   is  infected   with   this  disease 
will  be  repeatedly  seduced  more  or  less  to  theft :    "  He   falls   into 
temptation,  and  a  snare,  and  into  many   foolish  and  hurtful   lusts, 
which  drown  men   in  destruction   and   perdition  ;    for   the  love    of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.     His  de- 
sire  of  having    whets   his  understanding,   and  teaches  him  to  in- 
crease his  own  by  1  know  not  what  methods  under  an  appearance  of 
right :   "  all  the  instruments  of  the  churl  are  evil :  he  deviseth  wicked 
devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy 
speaketh  right :"  thus  we  read,  Isaiah  xxxii.  7.     And  therefore  we 
cannot  sufficiently  wonder  that  the  Socinians  deny  that  covetousness 
was  forbidden  under  the  Old  Testament.     This  is  a  sin,  from  which 
many  are  averse,  but  not  on  account  of  their  satisfaction  in  God,  and 
their  contentment  with  that  portion  of  earthly  goods,  which  he  giveth 
them,  but  they  proceed  to  another  extreme,  to  wit,  (2)  to  f  an  abuse 
and  wasting  of  the  gifts  of  God,"  by  excess  in  eating,  drinking, 
clothing,  household  furniture,   and   pleasures,   which   are   otherwise 
lav  fial ;  and  no  less  by  gaming,  playing,  idle  betting  and  whoredom, 
by  which  such  persons  empoverish  themselves  and  their  households^ 
and  are  easily  seduced  to  stealing.     The  wisest  of  kings  had  there- 
fore reason  to  say  to  his  son,  "  Be  not  amongst  winebibbers,  amongst 
riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  for  the  drunkard   and  the  glutton  shall  sure- 
ly come  to  poverty,"  &c.  Prov.  xxiii.  20.     When  the  steward  had 
wasted  his  master's  goods,  and  was  obliged  to  render  an  account   of 
his  stewardship,  he  fell  into  iniquity,  Luke  xvi.   1 — 3. 

Stealing  is  abominable,  in  whatever  manner  it  is  perpetrated  :  "  All 
that  do  such  things,  and  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  an  abomination 
unto  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  Moses,  Deut.xxv.  16.  For,  (a)  stealing 
is  a  dissatisfaction   with  the  dispensation  of  God.  by  which    men 


5-       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

therefore  "  take  the  mme  of  God  in  vain,"  as  it  is  said,  Prov.  xxx. 
9.     The  thief  destroys  the  security  and  tranquility  of  human  society  . 
he  occasions  strife  and  contention  ;  he  exposts  himself  to  ignominy 
and  shame,  when  he  is  caught.     See  this  Jer.  ii.   16.     And  in  order 
t!  at  he  may  not  he  ashamed,  he  will  endeavour  to  corceal  his  theft 
with  lies  and  fab*;  oaths,  and  he  rentiers  himself  thus  still  more  guil- 
ty, as  the  Lord  intimateth,  Lev.  vi.  1 — 4.     (b)  This    iniquity    is    an 
o*f  nee,  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrates,  who  were  obliged  to 
punish  certain  acts  of  theft  with  death,  as   man  stealing;   Exod     xxi. 
16,  sacrilege,  for  which  Achat)  was  stoned,  Joshua  vii.  20 — 26.     If 
a  man   broke   into   a  house   by   night,    the    master   of    the    house 
might   kill    him   instantly,   without  incurring  the   guilt  of  murder, 
Exod.  xxiK  2.     David  pronounced  the  man  who  had  robbed  a  poor 
man  of   his  little  cwelamb,  guilty  ;  but  other  thefts  were  to  be  ato- 
ned by  restoring  two,  four,   five  and  sevenfold.     Yea,  the  Lord   God 
himself  punishes  this    sin,  not  only    by  exposing  such  unrighteous 
persons  to  reproach,  but  also  sometimes    by   reducing  them   to  ex- 
treme poverty  ;  he  curses  the  thief  and  deceiver  in  all  that  he  hath, 
not  only  in  what  he  hath  stolen,  but  also  in  what  he  hath  not  stolen ; 
"Cursed  be  he  that  renloveth  his  neighbour's  landmark  "  was  pro- 
claimed aloud  from  mount    Ebal,   Deut.   xxvii.    17.     "The   roll    of 
the  ciuse.  the   length  whereof  was  twenty   cubits,  and  the   breadth 
when  of  was  ten  cubits,  God  would  bring  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
to  cut  him  oft",  and  to  const  me  his  house,  with  the  limber  thereof,  and 
the  stones  thereof,"  Zech.  v.    1 — 4.     Yea,  he  who  gathereth  riches5 
but  not  by  right,  is  sometimes  snatched  away  by  an  early  death  from 
his  stolen  riches,  according  to  the    threatening,  Jer.  xvii.   11.     He 
leaves  them  indeed  to  his  heirs,  but  not   with   the  blessing  of  God- 
but  what  becomes  of  the  soul  of  such   an    unrighteous  person  ?     It 
doth  not  surely   go    to    the    glory   of  the    righteous  ;  for    "  neither 
thieves,  nor  covetous   persons  shall  inherit  the   kingdom  of  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.    iO.     Thercfoie  the  end   of  such  persons   will   surely  be 
destruction,  when  they  "  will  vomil  up  the  riches,  which   they  have 
swallowed  ('own,  and  God  will  cast  them  out  of  their  belly,"  as  Zo- 
phar  speaks.  Job  xx.  15. 

II.  But  doth  he,  who  only  abstains  from  stealing,  keep  this  com- 
mandment? surely  no,  unless  he  also  practise  the  virtues  that  air 
opposed  to  stealing,  and  so  (.1)  "  promote  the  advantage  of  his 
neighbour  in  every  instance  that  he  can  and  may."  Man  was  crea- 
ted for  the  advantage  of  his  neighbour,  as  well  as  for  himself ;  he 
must  indeed  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  which  he  doth  not  do 
When  he  forbears  to  promote  his  neighbour's  advantage  as  well   as 


XLlI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   no,   111.  353 

his  own  :  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man 
also  on  the  things  of  others,"  saith  the  apostle  of  the  Geniles, 
Philip,  ii.  4.  Therefore  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxii.  1 — 4,  "Thou 
shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself 
from  them,"  &c.  Job  quitted  himself  well  in  this  respect,  when 
"  he  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (o  the  lame,"  &c.  Job  xxix. 
15 — 17.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  just  must  direct  us  herein,  and 
teach  us  that  we  must  not  do  these  things,  unless  we  can  and  may. 
It  is  sinful,  and  the  work  of  fools  to  empoverish  ourselves  in  order 
to  succour  others,  or  by  undue  methods  to  deliver  them  out  of  diffi- 
culties, in  which  t'>ey  have  involved  themselves  by  their  iniquitous 
actions,  that  we  may  thus  act  the  part  of  good  men.  (2)  "  We  should 
deal  and  act  with  our  neighbour,  as  we  desire  that  he  should  deal 
and  act  with  us."  When  we  consider  and  regard  our  neighbour's 
case  in  this  manner  as  our  own,  we  will  not  wrong  him,  nor  suffer 
him  to  remain  under  a  difficulty  ;  it  is  also  a  work  of  equity  and 
justice:  even  the  law  and  the  prophets  enjoin  by  the  mouth  of  the 
Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  12,  that  "whatsoever  things  we  would  that  men 
should  do  unto  us,  we  should  do  even  so  to  them."  But  if  we  shall 
be  able  to  do  this,  we  must,  (3)  "  labour  faithfully,"  or  be  diligent 
and  industrious  in  our  calling,  "the  work  which  our  hand  findeth  to 
do,"  according  to  the  words  of  the  preacher,  Ec<  1.  ix.  10.  The 
apostle  requires  that  men  should  "  work  in  quietness,  and  eat  their 
own  bread,"  2  Thess.  iii.  8— -13.  But  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  our  own  advantage  by  means  of  our  faithful  labour 
ought  to  be  our  principal  motive,  that  we  may  do  this  in  obedience 
to  God,  since  it  pleaseth  him  to  provide  for  us  by  means  of  our 
faithful  labour,  and  so  "  we  must  do  all  tilings  heartily,  as  to  the 
Lord,"  according  to  Col.  iii.  23.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  take 
good  heed,  that  we  have  a  proper  calling,  end  we  ought  "  to  abide 
therein  with  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  vii.  20,  24.  This  doth 
not  mean  that  a  person  may  not  change  his  calling,  for  he  is  some- 
times obliged  to  do  that  by  events  which  befal  him  through  the  ap- 
pointment of  God  :  but  we  may  not  desert  one  calling  for  another 
rashly,  and  without  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord.  Let  no  man  think 
that  it  will  suffice  to  labour  for  himself  and  his  family  :  he  must  do 
that  also,  "  that  he  may  relieve  the  needy."  If  there  be  any  du'y, 
which  is  at  once  human,  religious  and  christian,  it  is  that  of  r<  iiev- 
ing  the  needy  :  "  We  may  not  hide  ourselves  from  our  own  flesh/' 
Isaiah  lviii.  7.  How  often  is  this  commanded  as  a  religious  duty  ? 
yea,  for  this  end  God  suffered  the  poor  to  remain  in  Israel.  See 
Deut.  xv.  7 — 11.  Eccl.  xi.  1,2.  Yea,  this  duty  is  also  enjoined 
Vol.  ii.  2  T 


354      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

upon  Christians :  "  Distribute  to  the  necessity  of  the  saints,  sailh 
Paul,  Rom.  xii.  13.  Sec  this  repeatedly  commanded  and  urged, 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1 — 3.  2  Cur.  viii.  and  ix.  Luke  relates  how  nobly 
the  first  Christians  quitted  themselves  in  this  respect,  Acts  iv.  34, 
35.  xi.  28—  30.  In  order  to  practise  this  goodly  virtue,  which  is 
so  pleasing  to  God,  we  must  labour  faithfully  ;  this  is  enjoined, 
Eph.  iv.  28,  "  Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more:  but  rather  let 
him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he 
may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Praiseworthy  was  the  ex- 
ample of  "  Dorcas,  who  made  coats  and  garments  for  the  widows," 
Acts  ix.  39. 


APPLICATION. 

If  this  law  were  given,  hearers,  that  it  might  give  life,  and  that 
We  might  seek  our  righteousness  by  it,  we  should  have  nothing  else 
to  do  now,  but  exhort  you  to  flee  from  the  sins  that  are  forbidden, 
and  to  pursue  the  virtues  which  are  commanded  in  it.  But  that  is 
impossible  for  this  law,  for  it  is  become  weak  through  the  flesh  ; 
and  therefore  all  who  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the 
curse.  God  therefore  gave  this  law,  that  the  offence  might  abound, 
and  thus  also  that  grace  might  much  more  abound.  In  order  then, 
that  our  observations  on  this  commandment  may  be  salutary  to  you, 
it  will  be  necessary, 

1.  That  each  of  you  should  compare  his  heart  and  actions  with 
what  is  forbidden  and  enmnundtd  here.  We  can  easily  believe 
that  ye  are  not  guilty  of  the  grosser  acts  of  theft,  even  manstealing 
and  stealing  cattle  :  but  there  are  other  wicked  practices  and  devi- 
ces, by  which  we  take  to  ourselves  the  property  of  another.  Come 
hither,  and  examine  what  ye  possess,  and  what  ye  have  handled,  but 
lack  at  present.  How  did  ye  obtain  it?  did  ye  get  all  in  an  honest 
way  ?  doth  nothing  of  what  bclongeth  to  another  cleave  to  your  fin* 
gers  ?  have  ye  behaved  yourselves  righteously  in  every  respect,  as 
well  in  reckoning  with  others,  as  in  giving  and  receiving  money, 
m  trafficking,  trading,  handicrafts,  labour,  and  in  demanding  and 
paying  debts  ?  are  ye  pure  with  respect  to  all  this  ?  have  ye  always 
kept  the  middU  way  between  greediness,  and  abusing  and  squander- 
r»s  oF  God,  and  that  in  every  instance  ?  Ye  need  not  ask 
whether  we  must  be  so  exact  a.:d  jferfect  in  all  these  points  ;  for  ye 


XLH.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  1 II.  ^5i 

Iftiow,  at  least,  ye  ought  to  know,  that  he  who  continueth  not  in  alL 
things  which  are  wriiten  in  the  law,  is  cursed.  Doth  any  one  say,  I 
know  not  that  I  have  transgressed  in  any  instance.  It  is  possible, 
that  thou  art  so  just  and  righteous  in  a  civil  respect,  that  thou  dost 
nut  possess  aught  of  what  belongs  to  another  ;  but  hast  thou  then 
also  performed  what  is  commanded  here  ?  dost  thou  think,  yes  ? 
I  should  believe  that  such  an  one  had  never  yet  seen  himself  in  the 
nurrour  of  this  perfect  commandment,  but  that  his  heart  deceives 
him,  like  Ephraim's,  who  said,  "  1  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance ;  in  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in 
me,  that  were  sin,"  Hoseu  xii.  8.  But,  friends,  this  is  not  the 
way  to  clear  your  account,  when  the  Lord  will  begin  to  reckon 
with  you  and  to  state  the  amount  of  it.  It  behooves  you  indeed  to 
review  your  account  frequently,  and  it  will  appear  that  your  debt  is 
great,  and  the  amount  that  God  might  justly  condemn  you.  There- 
lore  "  examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  yourselves  strictly, 
ye  listless  people,"  agreeably  to  the  admonition,  Zeph.  ii.  1.  Hum- 
ble yourselves,  abase  yourselves,  and  be  ashamed  before  the  Lord, 
"as  a  thief,  when  he  is  found,"  Jer.  ii.  26. 

2.  Have  ye  taken  aught  ftom  your  neighbour,  keep  it  not  with 
you,  but  restore  it  to  him.  It  belongs  to  another,  it  is  not  yours. 
If  ye  keep  it,  it  will  become  a  canker  in  all  your  goods,  which  are 
otherwise  your  rightful  property,  and  it  will  consume  them,  and 
emp  jverish  you.  Yea,  God  will  in  his  lime  make  your  stolen  goods 
a  file  in  your  bowels,  and  compel  you  to  vomit  up  that  which  ye 
have  swallowed  down,  like  Judas,  who  returned  his  illgotten  silver 
pieces,  and  when  he  could  not  get  rid  of  them,  threw  them  furious- 
ly down  in  the  temple.  What  think  ye,  shall  a  sinner  find  favour 
with  God,  while  he  withholds  stolen  goods  from  their  owner  ?  Hear 
what  the  Lord  saith  to  the  Jews,  Isaiah  i.  16 — 18.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  ye  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  &c.  Come  then,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow,"  &c  Thus  we 
read  also,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  15.  "  If  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge, 
give  again  that  which  he  hath  robbed,  &c.  he  shall  surely  live,  he 
shall  not  die."  When  Zaccheus  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord,  he  was  forthwith  ready  to  "  restore  fourfold,  if  he  had  by 
false  accusation  taken  aught  from  any  man,"  Luke  xix.  8.  Paul 
offered  to  pay  Philemon  even  what  Onesin.us  had  taken  from  him, 
Philemon,  vs.  8,  9.  But  I  suspect  that  many  will  decline  to  do  this, 
because  they  have  robbed  others  of  so  much,  that  they  would  be 
obliged  to  surrender  all  the  substance  of  their  house,  and  thus  em- 


35b       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

poverish  themselves.  But  is  it  not  better  to  be  an  honest  poor  man, 
and  possess  grace,  than  to  be  a  rich  thief,  and  remain  graceless  ? 
Do  ye  not  dare  to  return  aught,  because  it  would  expose  you  to 
contempt,  ye  may  do  it  by  another  person,  whom  ye  can  trust,  or 
which  is  preferable,  by  a  letter  written  in  an  uncouth  hand.  Is  that 
which  was  robbed  already  consumed,  so  that  it  is  not  in  your  power 
to  repay  it,  do  nevertheless  as  much  as  ye  can,  by  sparing  some- 
thing, and  living  more  scantily,  that  ye  may  gather  a  little,  and  re- 
store that. 

3.  Bu  think  not,  after  ye  have  satisfied  men  for  what  was  taken 
from  them,  that  God  is  then  also  satisfied.  By  our  unrighteousness 
we  render  ourselves  debtors  not  only  to  men,  to  satisfy  them  for 
what  we  have  alienated  from  them,  but  we  render  ourselves  guilty 
also  before  the  Lord.  And  therefore  the  unrighteous  person*  wheth- 
er he  be  more  or  less  unrighteous,  must  endeavour  to  be  reconciled 
unto  God.  O  that  ye  were  concerned  about  this,  and  cried  out 
with  the  church,  Micha  vi  6,  7.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  give  my 
firstborn  for  my  transgression  ?  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of 
my  soul  ?  We  should  say  to  you,  "  Seek  the  reconciling  blood"  of 
the  Surety  and  Mediator  Jesus,  by  which  "  he  restored  that  which 
he  took  not  away,"  as  he  foretold,  Psalm  'mix.  4.  Those  Corinthi- 
ans, who  were  before  "  thieves  and  covetous,  were"  not  only 
"  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  but  also  justified  in  the  name,"  and  thus 
by  the  blood  'k  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11.  For  "God 
bath  set  forth"  his  Son  "to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Flee  therefore 
to  him,  and  lay  hold  on  him  for  the  reconciliation  of  your  guilt. 

4.  Beware  of  defiling  yourselves  again,  and  endeavour  to  be  righ- 
teous in  every  instance  :  ''Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more  :  but 
vather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needelh,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  Paul  admonish  us,  Fph.  iv.  28.  Be  afraid  of  your 
covetous  and  prodigal  heart,  pray  against  it  with  David,  Psalm 
cxix.  36.  "  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies  and  not  to  covet- 
ousness."  Oppose  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  which  hath  enticed  so  many 
persons  to  unrighteousness :  when  "  Achan  saw  a  good!/  Babylo- 
nish garment,  and  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  we<!ge  ol 
gold,  then  he  coveted  them,  and  took  them,"  Joshua  vii-  21.  En- 
deavour to  be  content  with  what  the  Lord  hath  given  you,  though 
it  be  ever  so  little  :  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  indeed  great 
gain;  for  we  brought  nothing   into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  111.  35? 

can  carry  nothing  out  of  it:"  thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 8. 
and  he  practised  this  lesson  himself:  "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  saith  he,  Philip,  iv,  11.  We 
ought  with  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8  9,  even  to  deprecate  "  riches"  as 
well  as  "poveay,"  and  to  seek  only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient 
for  us,"  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9,  and  we  ou^ht  more  especially  to  aim  at 
those  beiter  ''treasures,"  which  aie  laid  up  "in  heaven,  where 
neither  moth  nor  rust  corrupteth,  and  where  thieves  cannot  break 
through,  nor  steal,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  commands,  Mat.  vi.  19,  20. 
Doth  it  nevertheless  please  the  Loid  to  enrich  you  with  many  earthly 
goods,  "  do  not  then  set  your  hearts  on  them,  and  trust  not  in  them, 
neither  be  proud  of  them  :  but  do  good,  be  rich  in  good  works, 
willing  to  communicate,"  as  David  and  Paul  require,  Psalm  lxii.  10. 
1  Tim.  vi.  17,  18.  Are  ye  poor  and  in  want,  commit  your  con- 
cerns to  the  Lord,  even  your  Father,  if  ye  fear  and  love  him. 
Hear  what  Jesus  saith,  Mat.  vi.  31.  "Take  no  thought,  saying, 
What  shall  we  eat?  or  what  shall  we  drink?  or  wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  for  after  all  the-e  tnings  do  the  Gentiles  seek  :  for 
your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 
things."  The  Lord  hath  surely  said,  "  1  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii.  5.  Fret  not  on  account  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  ye  have  more  than  they,  bee  what  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  7,  1C.  "Fret  not  thyself  because  of  him 
who  prospercth  in  his  way,  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wick- 
ed devices  to  pass  :"  for  "  a  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  bet- 
ter than  the  riches  of  many  wicked."  Ye  have  a  perfect  right,  in 
and  through  Christ,  to  the  least,  yea,  to  all  things ;  for  "  all  things 
are  vours,  because  ye  are  his,  as  Paul  teacheth,  1  Cer.  iii.  21 — 23. 
Ye  will  obtain  the  full  possession  of  all  things  hereafter,  when  the 
wealthy  wicked  will  not  have  even  a  drop  of  water.  Jesus  saith, 
Mat.  v.  3,  5.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heavtn."  And  "  blessed  are  the  meek  ;  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth,"    Amen. 


(   358  ) 


THE 


NINTH  COMMANDMEN' 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIII.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exod.  xx.  16.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour. 

Q.   112.   What  is  requ'rccl  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man  ;  nor  falsify  any 
man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slanderer  ;  that  I  do  not 
judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that 
I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil, 
unless  I  would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  :  like- 
wise that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love  the  truth,  speak 
it  uprightly,  and  confess  it  :  also  that  I  defend  and  promote,  as 
much  as  I  am  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  my  neigh- 
bour. 

tc   t~ ■""> 

JL  HE  tongue,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  is  a  fire,  a  world  of 
iniquity,  which  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.  The  tongue  can  no 
man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison,"  James  iii. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  11!.  359 

6,  3.     The  heart  of  man,  filled  by  sin  with  every  abomination,  and 
producing  every  evil  motion,  corrupts  all  the  members  of  the  body, 
and  directs  them  to  evil,  rendering  them  "  servants  of  uncleanness 
and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"    as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vi.  19.     But  the 
tongue  is  more  particularly  set  on  fire  thus,  by  that  evil  corruption, 
as  a  fire  and  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  that  it  defileth  even  the  whole 
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  by  urging  it  violently 
on,  like   an    unquenchable  fire,  and    like  a  wild   beast,  that  is  un» 
tameable.     Therefore  ho:y  men   have  been  so  careful  and  circum- 
spect with   respect  ta  their  tongue,  and  they   have   endeavoured  to 
bridle  it,  like  an  unruly  horse.    David  said,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  H  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  :     I  will   keep 
my  mouth  with  a  bridie."     We  may  therefore,   with  that  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  compare  the  tongue  to  a  cily,  which  is  well   pro- 
vided with  bulwarks  of  teeth,   and  doors  of  lips,  and  yet   hath  need 
of  a  guard  to   watch,  and  to  defend  it  against    tumults  within,  and 
the  assaults  of  enemies  without  :  hear  him   therefore  pray,   Psalm 
cxli.  3.     "  Set  a  watch,    O  Lord,  before  my  mouth,  keep    the  door 
of  my    lips."     It    is   also   remarkable,  that    there  is  only  a  single 
guard,    that   is,  one  commandment    in  the  law,  against    other  sins, 
but  against   the  sins  of  the  tongue  there  is  a  double    guard  of  two 
commandments  :  it   was  not  enough  that  God  required  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law,  and  in  the  third   commandment,  that  we   should 
watch  against  the  sins  of  the   tongue,  but  he  chooseth  to  do  it  also 
by  this  ninth   commandment,  that  the  tongue  may  not  be  perverted 
to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour. 

The  Lord  commanding  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourse-ves, 
requires  of  us  that  we  should  conformably  to  this,  honour  our  pa- 
rents, not  kill  our  neighbour,  not  commit  adultery,  nor  steal  :  but 
how  shall  we  keep  these  commandments,  if  we  bear  false  witness 
against  our  neighbour  ?  "  Death  and  life,"  and  thus  all  that  is  dear 
to  our  neighbour,  "  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  saith  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  21.  Theiefore  the  Lawgiver  manifests  his  wisdom  by 
annexing  this  commandment  to  the  foregoing. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  this  commandment,  shows 

I.  What  is  forbidden,  and 

II.  What  is  commanded  in  it. 

1.  This  commandment  forbids  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
our  neighbour."  We  have  shown  before,  that  all  men  are  our 
neighbours,  because  they  are  all  made  of  one  blood  with  us.  We 
are  called  upon  on  many  occasions  to  bear  witness  against  our  neigh- 
bours, but  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  bear  false  witness  ag;irsf. 


360       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

them,  or  otherwise  than  we  know  to  be  the  truth  ;  which  is  done 
"  in  judgment,"  when  falsehood  and  iniquity  are  practised  there  in 
an  ungodly  manner  :  "  In  the  place  of  judgment  there  is  wicked- 
ness, and  *n  the  place  of  righteousness  there  is  iniquity  :"  this  the 
preacher  saw  also  in  his  time,  Eccl.  iii.  16.  The  Lawgiver  hath 
also  respect  in  a  particular  manner  to  bearing  false  witness  in  judg- 
ment, in  which,  when  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  the  truth,  we 
answer  and  bear  a  false  witness  to  injure  our  neighbour,  as  the  He- 
brew word  tagnaneh,  "to  answer,"  intimates.  1  his  wickedness  is 
frequently  practised  by  different  persons,  who  appear  in  judg- 
ment, as, 

1.  By  the  "plaintiff"  or  accuser,  who  accuseth  his  neighbour 
fedsely,  by  which  he  endangers  his  good  name,  his  life  and  property, 
yea,  his  whole  prosperity.  Of  this  the  Jewish  council  rendered 
themselves  exceedingly  guilty,  when  they  accused  J?sus,  wdio  was 
perfectly  innocent,  before  Pilate,  saying,  "  we  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  arid  foi  bidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cxsar,  saying 
that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  king,"  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

2.  By  the  defendant,  when  he  denies  the  fault,  of  which  he  is 
justly  accused,  like  Cain,  who  when  he  was  cited  before  the  divine 
tribunal,  and  asked  "  where  his  brother  Abel  was,  said,  I  know  not ; 
am  I  my  brother's  keeper r"  Gen  iv.  9.  He  who  fears  not  to  do 
wrong,  ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  confess  that  he  hath  done  wrong, 
and  to  humble  himself  by  submitting  also  to  the  proper  punishment 
of  his  sin,  with  Achan,  when  Joshua  required  of  him  to  confess  and 
acknowledge  his  guilt,  Joshua  vii.  19 — 21.  "•  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  sin :  but  with  the  righteous  there  is  favour,"  according  to  the 
words  of  the  wise  king.   Prov.  xv.  9. 

3.  It  is  not  less  libominable,  when  "  witnesses  "  utter  a  falsehood 
against  a  person,  who  is  unjustly  accused.  How  lamentable  was 
the  case  of  Naboth,  when  "  two  men  of  Belial  were  suborned  against 
him,  and  witnessed  falsely,  Naboth  bla  \  hemed  God  and  the  king, 
and  he  was  thereupon  stoned  !"  1  Kings  xxi.  9 — 13.  So  also  "  the 
whole  council  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,"  as  the  members  of  that  council  found  also  many 
false  witnesses,  who  were  nevertheless  of  no  service  to  them,  Matt. 
xxvi.  59,  60.  "  The  Lord  hates  a  false  witness,"  Prov.  vi.  16,  19. 
God  ordered  the  judges  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  witnesses 
testified  a  falsehood,  and  if  they  did,  that  it  should  then  be  done  to 
them,  as  it  would  have  been  done  to  the  accused,  if  he  had  been 
accused  according  to  truth,  Deut.  xix.  16 — 21.  Although  the  Law- 
giver forbids  bearing  false  witness  against  our  neighbour  to  his  hurt- 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  361 

we  may  nevertheless  not  bear  false  witness  in  his  behalf  to  deliver 
him  ;  for  we  may  not  deliver  the  guilty,  and  certainly  not  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come  ;  and  when  we  bear  false  witness  for  the  guilty, 
we  then  bear  false  witness  against  the  accuser,  who  is  our  neighbour 
also. 

4.  But  still  more  atrocious  than  these  are  those  wicked  lawyers 
and  attorneys,  who  defend  false  accusations,  and  by  means  of  a 
smooth  and  eloquent  tongue,  or  deceitful  writings,  darken  the  true 
circumstances  of  matters,  mislead  the  judge,  and  delay  a  righteous 
sentence,  so  tnat  an  honest  person  can  scarcely  obtain  justice. 
Such  a  lawyer  was  Tertullus,  who  pleaded  in  behalf  of  the  Jews 
against  Paul,  \cts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Verily  such  persons,  who  ought  to 
assist  the  oppressed,  and  nevertheless  load  them  still  heavier,  are 
pests  of  the  human  race,  they  promote  the  interest  of  hell,  and  de- 
fend the  causes  of  the  devil.  They  may  remain  unpunished  in  this 
world,  but  the  wo,  with  which  they  are  threatened,  will  pursue 
them,  and  cleave  to  them  :  "  Wo  unto  them  that  call  good  evil,  and 
evil  good,"  saith  God,  Isaiah  v.  20. 

5.  But  that  which  surpasseth  all  other  abominations  is  the  conduct 
of  those  unjust  judges,  who  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  do  not 
regard  the  causes  of  the  righteous  for  a  long  time,  like  that  ungodly 
judge,  of  whom  the  saviour  speaks,  Luke  xviii.  2 — 4.  And  it  is 
still  worse  in  judges  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence  :  "  He  that 
justifie'.h  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemnelh  the  just,  even  they 
both  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Piov.  xvii.  15.  Whether  it  proceed  from  the  incapacity  and  un- 
skilfulness  of  the  foolish  judge,  who  is  like  a  child  in  understand- 
ing ;  bee  Ecci.  x.  16.  Isaiah  hi.  4,  12  ;  or  from  unrighteousness, 
Avhen  the  judge  will  not  hear  the  accused,  nor  permit  him  to  defend 
himself,  as  the  Jewish  council  pronounced  sentence  in  such  an  un- 
just manner  against  the  baviour,  and  his  servant  Paul,  John  vii. 
47 — 52.  xviii.  19 — 21.  Acts  xxiii.  1 — 3  ;  or  on  account  of  bribes 
and  self-interest:  so  the  judges  of  Judah  were  "  companions  of 
thieves,  every  one  loved  gifts,  and  followed  after  rewards,"  Isaiah 
i.  23  ;  or  because  the  judge  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  is  a  person  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  rich  or  poor,  courageous  or  fearful,  the  unjust 
judge  will  pervert  justice  accordingly  :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor, 
nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  :  but  in  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Lev.  xix.  15.  See 
also  Exod.  xxiii.  6 — 8.     God  denounceth  a  wo  against  such  judges, 

Vol.  ii.  2  U 


362         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  saith,  thai  "•  lie  will  ease  and  avenge  himself  of  those  adversa- 
ries of  linn."  Isaiah  l.  24. 

In  the  foregoing  commandments  only  head-sins  arc  mentioned} 
bqt  their  particular  members  are  also  comprehended  under  them; 
it  is  thus  also  here  :  when  bearing  false  witness  in  judgment  is  op- 
posed, it  is  then  forbidden  on  o'  her  occasions  also,  as 

4  '»  Falsifying  the  words  of  another,"  by  giving  them  a  sense 
different  from  that  which  they  commonly  have,  and  in  which  vse 
know  they  were  uttered.  This  is  "  that  frov/ard  mouth,  which  ve 
must  put  aw.ay  from  us,  and  those  perverse  lips,  which  we  must  put 
far  from  us,"  Prov.  iy.  24.  We  misconstrue  the  words  and  mean- 
ing of  another  thus,  either  by  adding  something  to  our  neighbour's 
words,  by  which  they  have  an  entirely  different  sense.  The  Savi- 
our speaking  of  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  which  he  would  raise  up 
from  the  dead,  saith,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  1  will 
raise  it  up,"  John  ii.  19,2  1,  but  the  Jews  perverted  his  words  by 
adding  to  them,  when  they  accused  him,  k*  that  he  had  said,  I  will 
destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made  with  hands,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands,"  Mark  xiv  38,  whtn  he  h&d 
nevertheless  not  said,  "  1  will  destroy,"  but,  "destroy  ye  ;"  he  did 
not  say,  kl  the  temple  made  with  hands,"  but  "  this  temple  ;"  nei- 
ther had  he  Spoken  "of  another,  but  of  ihe  same  temple,"  which 
they  should  destroy  ;  but  all  these  words  they  added  by  a  false  tes- 
timony. Or  when  we  leave  out  something,  in  order  to  falsify  a  per- 
son's words,  like  the  devil,  who,  that  he  might  induce  Christ  to 
tempt  his  Father  by  casting  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  said  from  Psalm  xci.  11,  that  kl  God  would  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  him  to  keep  him  ;"  but  he  leaves  out,  "  in  all 
thy  ways,"  Mat.  iv.  6.  We  also  falsify  a  person's  words  by  gestures, 
Whereby  we  give  them  another  and  a  wrong  colour.  A  person  ut- 
te  s  something  that  was  said  in  jest,  or  from  compassion,  in  such  a 
ler,  bj  an  alteration  of  his  countenance  or  voice,  as  if  it  were  spo- 
ke;) in  earnest,  or  from  contempt.  An  abominable  and  false  con- 
duct  1  vViio  can  b«.  safe  from  persons  ol  such  a  frowaid  heart  and 
jperver  e  1 

2.  I  his  commandment  forbids  also  "  backbiting."  by  which  a 
to  others  the  secrets  and  failings  of  his  neighbour,  to 
his  hurt  "  A  talebearer  revealeth  secrets,"  saith  the  wise  kin;-, 
Prov.  :::.  13.  Whether  a  person  do  this,  from  talkativeness,  arm  for 
p  stime,  like  "  the  Athenians,  who  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else, 
but  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing,"  Acts  xvii.  21,  and  like  the 
WOiaeU)  of  whom  i^aul  speaks,  1  Tim.  v.  13  ;  or  lrom  a 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  56S 

fondness  of  ridiculing  a  person  ;  as  Job  was  the  song  and  byword  of 
contemptible  persons,  Job  xxx  9  ;  or  IVom  a  cksire  of  pleasing 
others,  who  are  deligh  ed  with  hearing  their  neighbour's  secrets  add 
evil  doings,  as  Doeg  informed  Saui  concerning  David,  by  which  it 
came  to  pass,  that  to  many  priests,  and  ether  inhabitants  of  Nob 
"Were  slaini  1  Sam  xxii  7,  19;  or  from  envy  and  displeasure  with 
our  neighbour,  that  we  may  raise  up  new  enemies  against  him 
And  these  j.er-ons,  that  they  may  not  be  accounted  backbiter^.  Will, 
in  the  first  place,  relate  that  which  is  good  of  their  neighbour  and 
when  another  speaks  well  of  him,  they  will  assent  to  it,  yet  they 
will  add  a  "  but,"  or  an  "  alas;"  it  is  true,  they  will  s^y,  he  hath 
(hat  good  quality,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  he  hath  such  and  such  a  h .sl- 
ing ;  and  tuusa  person  is  condemned  by  himself  for  not  c:oing  well, 
and  this  is  nevertheless  an  evil  which  is  common  under  the  sun,  and 
occasions  much  disturbance.  And  surely  those  are  not  innocent  of 
backbiting-,  who  do  not  discountenance  such  backbiters-  but  sl.ow 
that  they  are  pleased  with  them  by  listening  to  them,  and  encoi  rag- 
ing them  to  say  all  that  they  know:  "  He  is  a  wicked  doer,  who 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips,  and  a  liar,  who  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty 
tongue,"  Prov.  xvii.  4. 

3.  "  Slandering"  our  neighbour,  that  is,  belching  out  words  of 
reproach  against  him,  either  when  he  is  present  or  absent  Da\id 
calls  this,  Psalm  xv.  3,  "  Taking  up  a  reproach  against  our  neigh- 
bour." Therefore  the  slanderer  is  also  called  a  reproachcr,  Psalm 
xliv.  16,  as  Shimei  acted  toward  David,  Ahab  toward  Elijah,  and 
the  Jews  toward  the  apostles,  2  Sam  xvi.  5 — 9.  1  Kings  xviii  17. 
Acts  xvii.  6.  It  is  exceedingly  wicked  to  do  this  with  words  ;  for 
"  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproachetb  his  Maker,"  Piov  xvii.  5, 
but  it  is  worse  and  mrolerable  to  do  it  with  pasquil :,  and  reproachful 
writings ;  no  man  can  be  repu'ed  honest  longer  than  such  a  re- 
proachful writer  chooseth  ;  bu'  let  rim  conceal  himself  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  the  Lord  will  find  him  out,  and  recompence  his  reproach- 
es upon  him. 

4.  The  commandment  concerning  bearing  false  witness  forbids 
also  "  judging,  or  joining  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard. 
"  We  have  just  now  shown  how  this  is  done  in  judgment  :  but  it  is 
done  also  out  of  judgment  ;  to  which  we  must  nevertheless  not  re- 
ftr  judging  that  a  person  is  in  the  way  to  perdition,  and  warning 
him  against  it,  when  he  discovers  manifest  tokens  of  his  graceless 
condition  by  his  exceeding  ignorance,  his  abandoning  ot  himself  to 
the  world,  his  hatred  of  the  good,  and  of  that  which  is  good,  and 
hy  other  sins  ;  for  we  must  judge  thus,  that  we  may  "  save  him  by 


364         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

fear,  and  pull  him  out  of  the  fire,"  according  to  the  exhortation  of 
holy  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  vs.  23.  But  we  must  refer  to  this,  (a) 
judging  that  a  person  is  or  is  not  gracious  from  his  prosperity  or 
adversity,  as  the  friends  of  Job  decried  him  for  a  hypocrite,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grievous  afflictions  :  "  No  man  knoweth  either  the  love 
or  hatred"  of  God,  "  by  all  that  is  before  him.  There  is  one  event 
to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,"  according  to  Eccl.  ix.  1,2. 
(b)  Giving  credit  without  further  inquiry  to  every  evil  report  con- 
cerning our  neighbour,  like  Saul,  who  without  any  reason  "  heard 
the  words  of  men,,  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt,"  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  10.  This  is  "  receiving  a  false  report,"  which  is  forbidden, 
Exod.  xxiii.  1.  We  must  refer  also  to  this,  (c)  judging  presently 
the  worst  of  our  neighbour  from  any  particular  event,  which  hap- 
pens through  the  disposal  of  divine  providence.  Because  "  a  viper 
fastened  upon  Paul's  hand,  the  Barbarians  judged  that  he  was  a 
murderer,  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  vengeance  suifered 
not  to  live,"  Acts  xxviii.  2 — 4.  (d)  It  is  still  more  unjust  to  mis- 
construe and  condemn  the  virtuous  conduct  of  a  person.  When 
Hannah  prayed  with  a  low  voice  from  sorrow,  Eli  judged  "  that 
she  was  drunk,"  1  Sam.  i.  10 — 16,  and  the  wicked  Jews  judged 
the  same  of  the  apostles  from  their  speaking  in  every  lan- 
guage by  the  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  13.  "  John  came  neither  eating  nor 
drinking,  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil.  The  Son  of  man  came 
eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  Behold,  a  man  gluttonous  and  a 
winebibber,"  Mat.  xi.  18,  19.  When  he  doih  not  allow  himself 
time  to  eat  and  drink,  his  friends  will  '«  by  hold  on  him,  as  if  he 
"Were  beside  himself,"  A' ark  iii.  20.  21.  Because  people  cannot  en- 
dure serious  godliness,  therefore  they  will  decry,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites and  legalists,  persons  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  com- 
mon manner  of  living,  but  endeavour  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  They  will  not  be  judged  themselves  ac- 
cording to  truth  from  their  evil  behaviour,  and  they  will  neverthe- 
less repeatedly  condemn  others  on  account  of  their  godliness.  But 
such  persons  set  themselves  up  for  judges  in  the  stead  of  God  : 
*'  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,"  saith  Paul,  1  Ccr.  iv.  4,  5.  They 
who  act  thus  "  speak  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  it  as  judges,"  ac- 
cording to  James  iv.  11,  12.  Therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ;  for  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged  ;" 
thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Mat.  vii.  1,2. 

5.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  "  all  sorts   of  lies."     By   which  wc 
must  understand,  relating  a  matter  for  truth,  which   is  nevertheless 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  365 

not  true,  when  a  person  knows  not  but  that  it  is  true  ;  for  he  doth 
indeed  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  no  lie  in  him,  because  he  speaks  according 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  ;  but  he  sins  notwithstanding,  because 
he  might  perhaps  have  known  better,  and  he  often  speaks  thus 
without  necessity  ;  but  it  is  a  complete  lie,  when  a  person  speaks 
contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  and  with  a  design  to  mislead 
others.  Since  now  we  bear  falbe  witness  by  all  sorts  of  lies,  there- 
fore this  commandment  forbids,  (a)  Lying  from  custom,  when  a 
a  person  hath  so  accustomed  himself  to  lying,  that  almost  every 
word  which  he  utters  is  a  lie,  and  he  can  plead  for  it,  as  for  a  most 
certain  truth,  like  "  the  Cretians,  who  were  always  liars,"  Titus  i. 
12,  and  like  "the  devil,  who  speaks  lies,  as  of  his  own,"  John  viii. 
44.  (b)  Also  lies  by  which  a  person  guesses  and  suppdseth  a  thing 
to  be  true,  when  he  might  nevertheless  have  known  better,  as  the 
people  of  Antichrist,  who  are  subject  to  "  a  strong  delusion,"  and 
therefore  "  believe  a  lie,"  according  to  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  (c)  Hurt- 
ful lies,  to  injure  our  neighbour.  So  "  the  rich  men  of  Judah  were 
full  of  violence,  aud  the  inhabitants  thereof  spoke  lies,  and  their 
tongue  was  deceitful  m  their  mouth,"  Micha  vi.  12.  (d)  Lies  for 
our  profit  and  advantage  are  also  hateful,  as  Gehazi  experienced, 
when  he  was  punished  with  leprosy,  Kings  v.  21 — 27.  To  which 
we  must  refer  also  officious  lies,  uttered  to  procure  an  advantage  to 
our  neighbour,  or  to  deliver  him  from  some  imminent  danger, 
(e)  And  further  jocular  lies,  to  divert  ourselves  and  others,  as  the 
idle  Israelites,  "  who  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and 
the  princes  with  their  lies,"  Hosea  vii.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  detesta- 
ble conduct  of  certain  persons  to  excuse  lies,  which  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  profit  or  pleasure,  when  nevertheless  all  lies  without  dis- 
tinction are  hated,  condemned  and  punished  by  God,  Psalm  v,  6. 
Prov.  vi.  19.  xii.  22.  Eph.  iv.  25.  Col.  iii.  9.  "We  may  not* 
speak  wickedly  nor  deceitfully  for  God,"  as  Job  saith,  Job  xiii.  7. 
Shall  we  then  do  it  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  neighbour  ?  "  We 
must  give  an  account  of  every  idle  word,"  Matt.  xii.  36.  If  the 
saints  did  sometimes  lie,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xii.  13 — 19.  Isaac, 
Gen.  xxvi.  7.  Jacob,  Gen  xxvii.  19.  34.  the  midwives  in  Egypt, 
Exod.  1.  19,  and  others,  we  ought  to  censure,  and  not  to  imitate 
their  conduct :  the  saints  had  also  other  infirmities,  which  ought 
not  therefore  to  be  approved  of.  Did  Abraham  say,  that  Sarah  was 
his  sister,  it  was  also  true,  as  he  showeth,  Gen.  xx.  12  Did  God 
bless  the  midwives  in  Egypt,  it  was  not  on  account  of  their  lies, 
but  their  godliness.     And  v/ho  can  say  that  they  did  not  speak  the 


.366       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

truth,  when  they  said,  "  the   Hebrew  women  are  lively,  and  are  de- 
livered tre  the  midwives  come  in  un'o  them  !"  Exod.  i.  19. 

Finally.}  this  commandment  forbids  also  '  deceit  :"  Not  those 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  men  abridge  their  neighbour  of 
his  property  :  for  this  belongs  to  the  ighth  commandment  Nei- 
ther doth  it  forbid  deceiving  our  enemy  with  military  artifices  :  for 
we  arc  not  obliged  to  inform  our  enemy  of  our  intention  to  annoy 
him.  God  himself  instructed  Israel  in  such  military  stratagems, 
and  commanded  them  to  make  use  of  them,  Joshua,  viii.  2.  We 
must  not  condemn  employing  a  holy  wisdom,  m  order  10  convert 
our  neighbour  by  the  word  :  Paul  "  being  crafty,  eaug \ft  the  Co.iri- 
vhians  with  guile,"  2  Lor.  xii.  16.  Neither  is  it  censurable  to  be- 
have as  strangers,  and  to  appear  unwilling,  in  order  to  try  a  person, 
and  to  discover  whether  he  will  perform  his  dtity,  as  the  angels  tried 
Lot,  and  the  Saviour  his  disciples;  Gen.  xix.  2.  Luke  xxiv.  2 
But  the  deceit  that  is  spoken  of  here  proceeds  from  a  malicious 
desire  to  insnare  and  mislead  our  felluvmen,  to  their  hurt.  And 
this  is  done,  (a)  by  treachery,  whereby  a  person  pretends  to  be 
friendly,  while  he  harbours  a  malignant  hatred  in  his  heart,  which 
disposeth  him  to  destroy  Ids  neighbour  :  "  they  speak  vanity  every 
one  with  his  neighbour  :  with  flattering  lips  and  with  a  double 
do  they  speak,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xii.  2.  See  also  Psalm  xxviii. 
J.  Such  deceivers  are  Joabs  and  Judasses.  who  kissed  their  neigh- 
bours deceitfully,  2  Sam.  ii  27.  xx.  8 — 10.  Matt.  xxvi.  -19. 
(b)  By  hypocrisy,  whereby  a  person  appears  exceedingly  devout 
externaliy,  while  l;is  heart  within  is  rotten,  and  nil  his  designs  are 
corrupt,  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  describes  the  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27,  and  thus  '*  men  deceive  themselves  with  vain  imaginations,"  as 
James  testifieth,  James  i.  22.  The  hypocrite  is  an  abominable 
monster  ;  for  he  hes  even  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  Spirit,  as  if  he 
would  deceive  the  Aillknowhig,  See  Psalm  'xxviii.  35.  Acts  v. 
3.  4,  9.  (c)  It  is  deceit  also  to  flatter,  and  soothe  our  neighbour 
by  praising  bin)  and  that  often  not  according  to  truth  ;  for  we  do 
thus  deceive  him  :  "  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,  spreadeth 
a  net  for  his  feet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxix.  5.  How  detestable 
this  is  in  preachers  we  may  think  and  read,  Isaiah  iii.  12.  Jer.  vi. 
14.  xxui.  14.  (d)  A  person  deceives  not  less  by  ambiguous  words 
and  mental  reservations,  which  are  usually  called  Mennonitish 
•tricks.  Of  these  we  havs  spoken  belore  upon  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

IL  As  no  man  is  good,  who  only   abstains  from  doing  evil,   hu; 
doth  not  do  that  which  is  good,  therefore  the  Lord  not  only  forbids 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 12.  367 

bearing  false  witness,  but  he  also  commands  us  to  have  a  proper  re- 
gatd  to  the  honour  of  our  neighbour.     To  which  pertains, 

1  H  That  we  love  the  truth."  The  Lord  saith,  "  love  the  truth," 
Zech.  viii.  19.  "  God  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  Psalm 
li.  6.  We  will  never  beware  of  bearing  false  witness,  unless  the 
truth  be  dear  and  lovely  in  our  eyes. 

2.  We  must  also  '4  speak  the  truth  uprightly,  and  confess  it."  We 
must  beware  of  every  reservation,  and  of  all  ambiguity  in  our  words, 
and  with  Paul,  we  must  "renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv-  2,  and  with  the  citizens  of 
Zion,  we  must  "speak  the  truth  in  our  hearts,"  according  to  Psalm 
xv.  2.  We  must  especially  speak  the  truth  and  confess  it,  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  speak  it,  whether  in  judgments"  a3  Jesus  be- 
ing adjured  by  Caiaphas,  confessed  that  "  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,"  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  or  *•  in  other  dealings,"  when  it 
may  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour,  and.  of  the  commu- 
nity :  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear," 
saith  Peter,  I  Peter  iii.  15.  Take  heed  nevertheless  not  to  utter 
the  whole  truth  without  necessity,  bolomon  saith,  Prov.  xxix.  11, 
that  "a  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  "  When  Samuel  came  to  Beth- 
lehem, in  order  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  to  anoint  one  of 
the  sons  of  Jesse,  he  declared  the  first,  but  not  the  second  reason  of 
his  coming,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1 — 5.  So  Jeremiah  also  acted,  telling  a 
part  of  what  had  passed  between  him  and  the  king,  but  not  the  whole, 
Jer.  xxviii :  24 — 27. 

3.  It  becomes  us  also  to  "defend  and  promote  as  much  as  we 
are  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  cur  neighbour."  And 
therefore  we  must  not  lend  an  ear  to  backbiters  ;  for  if  we  do  we 
lend  our  ear  to  the  devd,  as  the  backbiter  doth  his  tongue.  Do  we 
hear  aught  to  the  disparagement  of  our  neighbour,  we  must  beware 
that  we  do  not  presently  believe  it,  but  we  must  defend  our  neigh- 
bour's honour,  as  much  as  we  can  and  may  :  "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction," 
This  is  enjoined  even  on  the  king,  Prov.  xxi.  8.  Jonathan  acted 
so  in  behalf  of  David,  1  Sam.  xix.  45.  xx.  32.  And  the 
princes  and  elders  of  the  land  conducted  so  toward  Jeremiah,  Jer. 
xxxvi.  16 — 24.  Do  we  know  aught  that  would  disgrace  our  neigh- 
bour, we  must  not  report  it,  but  hold  our  peace  ;  yea,  though  every 
one  should  know  it,  we  must  nevertheless  not  speak  of  it,  that  the 
evil  rer  ort  may  be  hushed,  and  <he  offence  may  gradually  ceas^. 
Do  we  know  any  good  of  our  neighbour,  we  ought  to   speak  of  it. 


368        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

when  we  may  excile  others  to  imitate  it,  and  when  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  such  a  virtuous  man,  as  one  of  Saul's  young  men  said 
in  commendation  of  David  to  his  king,  that  "  he  was  a  cunning 
player,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war  and  prudent 
in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him," 
1  Sam.  xvi.   18. 

And  what  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  this  command,  which  is  given 
to  the  covenant  p;  ople  of  God,  a  reasonable  command  ?  This  com- 
mand approves  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  to  be  holy,  just  and 
good.      Would  ye  see  the  propriety  of  it,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  Lord  God,  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  de- 
stroy, to  whom  all  the  creatures,  and  still  more  his  reasonable  crea- 
tures, but  most  of  all  his  covenant  people  are  subject,  is  "the  God 
of  truth,"  Isaiah  lxv.  16-  Yea,  lie  is  the  truth  itself,  Jer.  x.  10, 
"  he  cannot  lie,"  Tit.  i.  2.  Hub  v\.  18.  It  is  now  surely  proper, 
that  his  reasonable  creatures,  who  were  mac'e  after  his  image,  and 
especially  that  his  covenant  people,  who  are  renewed  after  his 
likeness,  should  be  like  him.  The  apostle  might  therefore  rea- 
sonably exhort  the  Ephesians,  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness  and  holiness,  or  in  the 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  to  put  away 
lying  and  to  speak  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  Eph. 
iv.  24,  25. 

2.  Bearing  false  witness  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  :  it  is 
violated,  annihilated,  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  even  made  a  lie 
thereby.  Is  not  this  abominable  ?  and  if  a  person  dare  to  do  this, 
what  other  unbecoming  actions  will  he  not  presume  to  do  ? 

3.  Is  it  not  right,  that  the  thoughts  and  words  of  a  person  should 
agree  ?  Must  not  the  person,  who  speaks  falsehoods,  silence  his 
conscience,  before  he  can  abandon  himself  to  bearing  false  witness? 
To  excite  such  a  strife  between  his  heart  and  mouth  is  certainly  un- 
seemly. Will  he  who  deceives  his  neighbour,  endure  to  be  de- 
ceived by  him  in  such  a  manner  ?  No  man  is  willing  to  be  called  a 
false  witness,  or  a  liar ;  will  he  then  be  it  ?  this  is  iniquity. 

4.  The  person  who  transgresseth  this  commandment,  destroys  at" 
the  same  time  all  human  society  ;  for  he  disturbs  all  love,  sincerity, 
trust,  confidence  and  good  neighbourhood  among  friends  and  citi- 
zens. When  the  commonwealths  of  Israel  and  Judah  hastened  to 
their  ruin,  it  was  a  forerunner  of  their  dissolution,  that  "  lying  pic- 
vailed,"  Hosea  iv.  2,  and  M  thai  they  could  not  trust  a  friend,  nor 
put  confidence  in  a  guide,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
doors  of  their  mouths  from  her  wko  lay  in  their  bosom/'  Micha 
vii.  5. 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  U2.  369 

5.  "  Lying  and  deceit,"  and  whatever  else  belongs  to  bearing  false 
witness,  "  arc  works  of  the  devil."  He  forged  the  first  lie,  Gen. 
iii.  4.  "  He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is 
a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it ;"  thus  speaks  the  mouth  of  truth  con- 
cerning him,  John  viiu  44.  Shall  not  a  man  then,  yea,  a  believer 
avoid  these  abominations?  If  he  do  not,  he  declares  himself  to  be 
a  "  child  and  of  his  father  the  devil,  and  that  the  lusts  of  his  father 
he  will  do,"  according  to  the  words  of  him  who  is  true,  John 
viii.  44. 

6.  Once  more  ;  he  who  defiles  himself  with  this  sin,  "brings 
down  upon  himself  the  heavy  wrath  of  God."  Among  "the  six 
things  which  the  Lord  hateth,  and  the  seven  which  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  him,  are  also  a  lying  tongue,  and  a  false  witness  that  speak- 
eth lies,"  according  to  Prov.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  "  A  false  witness  shall 
not  be  innocent,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape,  but  per- 
ish," saith  the  same  wise  man,  Prov.  xix.  5,  9.  The  Lord  will 
punish  such  persons,  until  he  hath  destroyed  them  :  "  Thou  shale 
destroy  them  that  speak  leasing,"  saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  v. 
6.  John  teacheth,  Rev.  xxi.  8,  that  "  liars  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone." 


APPLICATION, 

But,  friends,  how  is  it  with  you  in  this  respect  ?  are  ye  entirely 
innocent  of  these  transgressions  ?  Ye  will  say  no  ;  "  all  men  are 
liars."  It  is  true,  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  this,  Psalm  cxvi.  11. 
Rom.  iii  4.  But  do  ye  believe  this  of  yourselves,  so  that  ye  see  it 
in  your  actions,  and  are  ashamed  of  it  ?  surely  no  ;  for  if  any  per- 
son should  look  upon  you  as  liars,  and  should  tell  you  that  he  did, 
would  it  not  provoke  yovi  to  anger  against  him  ?  who  indeed  will 
suffer  such  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  not  then  evident,  that  ye  have  not 
such  an  impression  concerning  yourselves,  and  that  ye  do  not  be- 
lieve it  ?  Ye  believe  that  the  word  of  God,  which  declares  that  all 
men  are  liars,  is  true,  and  that  bearing  false  witness  is  a  shameful 
sin,  and  deserves  a  severe  punishment ;  and  nevertheless  when  this 
matter  is  applied  to  you,  ye  then  look  upon  yourselves  to  be  honest 
persons,  at  least,  your  hearts  are  not  broken  on  account  of  these 
sins.  It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  know  only  from  the  word,  that 
Vol.  n.  3  V 


370        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  are  called  transgressors  of  this  commandment,  but  we  must  also 
sue  it  in  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  asi-amed,  concerned,  ,and  hum- 
bled  on  account  of  it.  Therefore  examine  yourselves  by  what  is 
foi  bidden  and  commanded  here,  and  pause  a  while,  until  ye  see  the 
most,  if  not  all  these  abominations  in  your  minds  and  ac'ions,  ai,d 
until  this  affects  you  thoroughly!  Come,  ye  who  have  at  any  time 
acted  as  plaintiffs,  as  defendants,  as  witnesses,  as  lawyers  and  attor- 
neys, or  as  judges  in  courts  of  judicature,  have  ye  never  boine  wit- 
ness to  aught  hot  the  truth,  and  have  ye  always  spoken  the  truth, 
without  any  clokes  of  shame  ?  Yea,  hear,  all  ye  who  hear  me  this 
d.iy,  are  ye  faithful  in  relating  the  words  of  another,  forbearing  either 
to  add  or  diminish  aught  by  your  words  cr  gestures  ?  are  ye  stran- 
gers to  backbiting,  never  bespattering  your  neighbour's  skirts  ?  do  ye 
never  defame,  nor  reproach  him,  either  in  his  presence  or  absence  ? 
is  your  soul  so  filled  with  love  to  your  neighbour,  that  ye  do  not  sus- 
pect, nor  judge  him  rashly  or  unheard  ?  do  ye  shudder  at  every 
kind  of  lying  and  deceit  ?  do  ye  love  the  truth  ?  always  speak  and 
confess  it  with  sincerity,  when  it  is  proper  ?  and  do  ye  do  your  ut- 
most to  defend  the  honour  and  good  character  of  your  neighbour? 
ye  are  tl-en  "  perfect,  since  ye  do  not  offend  in  word,"  according  to 
James  iii.  2.  But  friends,  i.ow  can  ye,  and  how  can  we  believe 
this  of  you  ?  your  actions,  words,  and  behaviour  condemn  you,  and 
declare  that  ye  bear  false  witness  of  yourselves.  Your  angry,  raving 
thoughts  concerning  your  neighbour  ;  the  pains,  the  grief,  the  sor- 
row and  complaints  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  courts  of  judi- 
cature ;  your  prating  the  whole  day  long  against  your  neighbour  ; 
all  that  discontent,  and  all  those  complaints,  winch  we  hear  daily  of 
the  injuries  which  some  suffer  from  their  neighbour's  tongues,  man- 
ifest how  abominable  and  guilty  our  people  are  before  the  Lord. 
We  may  indeed  say  now  from  Isaiah  lix.  14,  15,  '"Judgment  is 
turned  away  backward,  and  justice  standeth  afar  off;  for  truth  is  fal- 
len in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter.  Yea,  truth  faileth,  and  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  a  prey  :  and  the  Lord  seeth 
it,  and  it  displtaseth  him."  It  would  be  your  happinesss,  if  ye  also 
saw  it,  and  that  ye  were  wholly  perverse,  hateful  and  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  O  see  with  brokenness  of  heart,  that  your  "  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre,  that  ye  have  used  deceit  with  your  tongues,  that 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  your  lips,  and  that  your  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness."  It  is  so  of  a  truth,  whether  ye  know  it  or 
not.  Paul,  who  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  accuseth  you  ,of  this,. 
Rom.  iii.  13,  14, 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  371 

Do  ye  see  these  things  in  yourselves  with  anxiety  and  concern, 
permit  me  to  afford  you  my  advice,  in  order  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  may  be  delivered  from  your  evil  disposition. 

1.  £>eek  to  obtain  reconciliation  for  these  iniquities  of  the  Lord. 
His  Son  hath  borne  his  wrath,  and  satisfied  his  justice  for  such 
transgressions,  in  behalf  of  those  who  lice  for  refuge  to  him.  He 
himself  bore  the  punishment  of  them,  when  he  suffered  false  accu- 
sations, the  falsifying  of  his  words,  backbiting,  reproaches,  unjust 
condemnations,  with  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit.  Yea,  he  purcha'.d 
a  perfect  righteousness,  which  can  entitle  you  to  life,  when,  in  obe- 
dience to  his  Father,  he  loved  the  truth,  always  spoke  uprightly, 
and  promoted  in  the  most  hearty  manner  his  neighbour's  honour. 
Seek  then  and  receive  by  faith  him  and  his  righteousness,  tha>  with 
Paul  ye  may  "  be  found  in  him,  and  may  have  his  righteousness5" 
Pinlip.  hi.  7  —  10. 

2.  seek  another  and  a  true  temper  of  mind,  that  ye  may  love  the 
truth,  and  may  speak  it  upon  every  occasion  :  "  God  desireth  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  as  David  testifielh  with  truth,  lJsaln;  li.  6.  Ye 
will  never  govern  your  tongues  aright,  until  your  minds  are  changed  ; 
"  For  out  of  the  abund  nee  of  the  heart  the  mnmh  spt&keth,"  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  Mat.  xn.  34  But  this  can  never  happen,  unless 
the  Lord  himself,  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  apply 
his  hand  effectually  to  the  mind-  As  he  alone  wrote  this  command 
in  tables  of  stone,  so  he  also  must  write  it  in  the  heart,  and  thus, 
according  to  his  promise.  Isaiah  Ixi  8  "direct  our  work  in  truth." 
As  iVloses  then  carried  his  tables  ot  stone  up  to  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  engrave  his  law  v>  them,  so  do  ye  also  commit  your  heaits 
into  his  hand,  that  he  may  form  and  dispose  them  according  to  his 
law,  yea,  that  he  may  imprint  his  law  in  them,  and  that  he  may 
also  direct  your  mouths  according  to  it.  David  did  so,  when  lie 
said,  Psalm  xix-  14.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tation of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord."  See  how  he 
dreaded  the  sin  of  his  tongue,  and  therefore  prayed  against  it  time 
after  time,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  cxli.  3.  Thus  also  Agur,  the  son  of 
Jakeh  did,  Prov.  xxx.  7,  8. 

3.  Let  no  man  bear  false  witness  against  himself.  A  man  haih 
none  nearer  to  him  than  himself;  and  therefore  it  is  much  more 
preposterous  in  him  to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  than 
against  his  neighbour.  This  is  nevertheless  often  done :  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  who  can 
know  it  ?"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  Therefore  an  unconverted 
person  will  often  judge  concerning  himself,  that  he  and  his  condi- 


m       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

tion  are  good  in  the  sight  of  God  :  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  de^ 
ceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul, 
nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  I"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 
Moreover,  a  believer,  who  hath  yet  but  little  experience,  will  some- 
times judge,  from  a  prejudice  against  himself,  that  he  is  in  a  grace- 
less  condition  ;  but  as  it  is  on  the  one  hand  dangerous,  so  it  is  on 
the  other  exceedingly  sinful  to  judge  otherwise  of  ourselves,  than 
God  lestifieth  of  us  in  his  word. 

4.  Hate  lies  and  deceit  of  every  kind,  be  afraid  of  them,  as  of 
the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  and  those  by  which  we  bring  down 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  us  :  '•  A  righteous  man  hateth  lying,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  xiii.  5,  He  had  also  observed  this  in  his  father, 
who  saith,  Psalm,  cxix.  104,  "  I  hale  every  false  way." 

5.  Beware  of  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness,  as  (a)  discon- 
tent with  your  neighbour,  by  which  men  are  easily  urged  to  speak 
evil  of  their  neighbour,  and  to  hear  it  eagerly,  with  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  7 — 19.  xxiv.  10.  (b)  Great  talkativeness:  "India  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  x. 
19.  We  must  especially  beware  of  idle  talking  and  jesting  :  "  Fil- 
thiness,  and  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  must  not  be  once  named 
among  you,"  Eph.  v.  4.  (c)  Watch  particularly  against  your  pride  ; 
tor  through  pride  we  imagine  that  we  know,  and  are  able  to  say 
every  thing  better  than  others  ;  "  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a 
rod  of  pride  :  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them,"  accord- 
ing to  Prov.  xiv.  3.  (d)  Watch  also  against  a  heart  that  is  void  of 
the  Spirit ;  for  when  the  heart  is  not  filled  with  good  things,  the 
tongue  must  speak  vanity  :  "  Finally,  brethren,"  saith  Paul,  Philip. 
iv.  8,  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest, 
whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things,"  (e) 
Never  think  that  your  neighbour  will  keep  aught  to  himself  that  ye 
have  said  to  him  :  forbid  him  to  speak  of  it  again,  and  he  will  still 
mention  it  to  another,  and  enjoin  on  him  to  keep  it  to  himself,  and 
it  will  thus  pass  from  one  to  another,  and  often  with  many  false  ad- 
ditions. If  ye  be  silent  yourselves,  another  cannot  bewray  your  se- 
cret :  but  after  ye  havs  once  related  it,  ye  arc  then  no  longer  mas- 
ters of  your  words.  Therefore  study  to  keep  silence :  "  Even  a 
fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise  :  and  he  that  shut- 
teth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding,"  Prov.  xvii.  "S. 

If  we  would  conduct  in  this  manner,  what  a  harmonious  friendship 
should  we  enjoy  with  ourselves,  with  men,  and  God  !     "  What  man 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112,  37S 

is  he,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  12,  13,  "  that  desireth  life,  and 
loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile."  Hear  what  he  saith  to 
God,  Psalm  xv.  1,3,  "  Lord,  v/ho  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernarle  ? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nov  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbour."     Amen. 


(  3^4  ) 


THE 


TENTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his 
maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  tiling  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's.

Q.   110.    Wliat  doth  God  forbid  in  the  eighth  commandment  ? 

A.  God  forbids  not  only  those  thefts  and  robberies  which  are  pun- 
ishable by  magistrates;  but  he  comprehends  under  the  name  of 
theft  all  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  we  design  to  appropri- 
ate to  ourselves  the  goods  which  belong  to  our  neighbour  ;  whether 
it  be  by  force,  or  under  the  appearance  of  right ;  as  by  unjust 
weights,  ells,  measures,  fraudulent  merchandize,  false  coins,  usury, 
or  by  any  other  way  forbidden  by  God  ;  as  also  all  covetousness,  all 
abuse  and  waste  of  his  gifts. 

Q.   111.  But  what  doth  God  require  in  this  command? 

A.  That  I  promote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbour  in  every  in- 
stance I  can  or  may  ;  and  deal  with  him  as  I  desire  to  be  dealt  with 
by  others  :  further  also,  that  I  faithfully  labour,  that  1  may  be  able 
to  relieve  the  needy. 


342      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


G 


OD,"  saith  Paul  to  the   Athenians,  Acts   xvii.  25,  "  gheth 
to  all  lite,  breath,  and  all  things."     Life  and  breath  are  either  M  the 
breath  of  life,"    which  "  God   hath  breathed   into  man,"    as  iV'oses 
testifieth,  Gen.  ii.  17.     Or  if  life  and  breath  be  considered  distinctly, 
life  is  that  which  gives  existence  to  man  by  his  creation  or  birth,  and 
breath,  by   which  he   inhales  and  exhales   the   air  in  breathing,  is 
the   action   and  preservation   of  his  life  by  the  influence  of  God,  by 
which  lie   maintains  that  life,  which  he  hath  given.     But  as  neither 
life  nor  breath  can  endure,  unless  the  powers,  which  are  continually 
wasted  by  perspiration,  be  recompensed  again,  therefore  God  givetn 
us  all   things  to   maintain  our  life  and    breath,   as  food  and  clothing. 
The  Lord  is  indeed  "  a  faithful  Creator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19.    "  The  liv- 
ing God  givcth  us  all   things   richly  to  enjoy,"  saith   the  apostle,  1 
Tim.  vi.  17.     Man,  although    he  is  the  most    excellent  of  all  God's 
creatures  on  earth,  was    nevertheless   created   by  God   af'er  all  the 
creatures  :  and  why  ?  it  was  in  order  that  God  might  introduce  him 
into  a  plentiful    habitation,  and  thus    show  that   he    wouhl    maintain 
his   life   and   breath.     If  it  had   pleased  the    Lord,  he    conkl    have 
3naintained  the  life  and  breath  of  man  immediately,  as  he   support- 
ed Moses,  Elias  and   Christ   forty    days   and  nights ;  but    he  would 
afford  continually  new  evidences  of  his  independence,  allsuffic'u  nry, 
wisdom  and   goodness,  and  of   man's   dependence  on    his   Maker. 
As  the  Lord  then  giveth  man  all  things  to  preserve  him  alive,  so  he 
chooses  that  he  should  also  retain  them,  and  he  cloih  not  permit  any 
person  to  bereave  him  of  those  tilings,  that  lie  mav  not  by  the  want 
of  them   lose   the  breath   of  life.     Therefore   he  saith,  as   the  only 
Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy]  "  Thou   shall  not  steal."     He 
required   in  the  sixth   commandment,  that  no  man   should   kill  his 
neighbour  ;     and   Lmce   the   woman  is  the   delight  of  his  eyes,  and 
thus  refreshes  and  continues  his  life  and  breat'd,  therefore  the  Lord 
forbids   also  adultery  in   the  seventh   commandment.     But  can  any 
man  retain  and  enjoy  the  breath  of  his   life  wit!)  t'ie  wife  whom  he 
loves,  when  others  deprive    him  of  food  and   clothing?  surely  no  j 
and  therefore  the  Lawgiver  enjoins  en  every  man  in  the  eighth  com- 
mandment, that  he  should  not  steal. 

The  instructor  explaining  this  commandment,  z\,qy;s>  fur  that  pur- 
pose, 

I.  The  sins  that  are  forbidden  in  it,   Question  1 10. 

II.  The  virtues  that  are  commanded  in  it,  Question  111. 

i.  The  sin    which    the    Lawgiver    forbids   here  is  stealing.     We 
■  ill  survey  this  iniquity  first  in  itself,  and  then  in  its  c.ni5:s  ;  and  will 


XLIL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  Hi.  345 

then  also  attend  to  the  abominable  nature  of  the  sin.  The  Hebrew 
word  ganab  signifies  to  do  something  secretly,  that  is  shameful,  and 
ol  which  a  person  is  ashamed.  When  "David  mourned  for  Absa- 
lom," by  whose  death  nevertheless  the  insurrection  against  him  was 
quelled,  "  the  victory  was  turned  into  mourning  to  all  the  people, 
and  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  into  the  city,  as  people  being 
ashamed,  steal  away,  when  they  flee  in  battle,"  as  we  read,  2  Sam. 
xix.  1,  2,  3.  And  this  word  signifies  doing  thus  particularly  by  de- 
ceit, as  "  Absalom  stole  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Israel,"  2  Sam. 
>:v  6,  when  by  deceitful  speeches  he  withdrew  the  minds  of  the  Is- 
raelites from  his  father,  and  inclined  ihem  to  himself.  And  so 
stealing  consists  in  "  taking  our  neighbour's  property  from  him, 
with  or  without  his  knowledge,  against  his  mind." 

God  hath  given  to  every  man  his  particular  portion  of  the  goods 
of  this  world,  as  his  property.  It  was  his  will  that  Adam  should 
"  subdue  the  earth,"  and  all  the  creatures  on  it  to  himself,"  and 
that  he  should  have  dominion  over  them,"  Gen,  i.  28.  But  when 
men  multiplied,  it  was  necessary  that  each  of  them  should  have  his 
portion:  "Cain,  a  tiller  of  the  giound,  had  therefore  the  fruits  of 
the  ground,  and  Abel,  a  shepherd,  had  his  sheep,"  Gen.  iv.  3,  4. 
When  men  were  not  yet  so  numerous,  that  they  could  occupy  the 
whole  earth,  every  man  became  the  owner  of  that  land,  and  of 
those  goods,  which  he  first  found.  When  the  whole  body  of  men 
purposed  to  settle  together  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  were  unwil- 
ling to  disperse  over  the  whole  earth,  the  Lord  defeated  their  pur- 
pose by  confounding  their  language,  that  he  might  induce  them  to 
dwell  on  all  the  earth,  and  each  to  take  for  his  property  the  posses- 
sion that  was  allotted  him  ;  for  when  "  the  Most  High  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  he  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance," 
Deut.  xxxii.  8.  Are  there  at  present  no  more  vacant  lands  to  be 
occupied,  every  individual  nevertheless  holds,  as  his  special  goods 
and  property,  that  which  he  obtains  by  right  of  inheritance,  by  traf- 
fic, learning,  and  any  honourable  art,  or  by  the  labour  of  his  hands, 
and  thus  "  he  eats  his  own  bread,"  according  to  2  Thess.  iii.  12, 
It  is  therefore,  considering  this  wise  distribution  of  goods  among 
men,  exceedingly  preposterous  in  certain  persons,*  to  assert,  with 
the  ancient  Essenes,  a  community  of  goods,  whereby  all  things 
should  be  common  to  all,  and  none  should  have   aught  as  his  own  ; 

*  By  these  the  author  designs  the  Labadists,  a  sect  which  existed  in  his 
time,  but  which  hath  since  fallen  into  oblivion.  They  were  so  called  from 
John  Labadie,  their  founder,  a  minister  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  Frinee, 
a  gre;:t  enthusiast,  who  held  r?v?r^i  ether  erroneous  '.•■■■ 


344      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

this  would  encourage  sloth  fulness,  and  exclude  liberali'y.  In  ordei* 
that  the  Israelite  might  "  open  his  hand  wide  to  his  brother,  to  his 
poor,  and  to  his  needy,"  the  Lord  saith, 'that  "  the  poor  should  not 
cease  out  of  the  land,"  Deut  xv.  11.  It  is  true,  in  the  first  Chris- 
tian church  all  who  believed  were  together,  and  had  all  things  in 
common  ;  neither  said  any  of  them,  that  aught  of  the  things  that 
he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  they  had  all  things  common,"  as 
Luke  reliteth,  Acts  ii.  44.  iv.  32.  But  this  was  only  a  special 
case  for  that  time,  and  it  proceeded  from  the  heat  of  the  power  of 
that  love,  which  consumed  them  and  their  goods  through  the  power 
of  godliness ;  but  it  was  not  general,  neither  was  it  a  command  of 
the  apostles :  every  man  was  permitted  to  keep  his  goods  for 
his  own  use,  as  Peter  declares  to  Ananias,  Acts  v.  4.  John  had  his 
own  house,  and  maintained  the  mother  of  Jesus  in  it,  John  xix.  27. 
If  it  had  been  otherwise,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary,  that  the 
believing  Gentiles  should  send,  every  one  according  to  his  ability, 
their  charitable  contributions  to  the  believing  Jews,  as  is  testified, 
Acts  xi.  28,  29,  30,  neither  would  it  have  been  of  any  use,  that 
Paul  should  urge  that  liberality  by  so  many  motives,  1  Cor.  xvi. 
1 — 4,  2  Cor.  viii,  and  ix.  lor  this  command  is  founded  in  the 
property,  that  men  have  in  these  or  those  goods;  for  stealing  is  a 
taking  of  another  person's  property  to  ourselves,  without  his  con- 
sent. 

Theft  is  divided  into  the  grosser  or  greater,  and  the  lesser.  The 
grosser  or  greater  is  that  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrate, 
because  it  tendeth  to  the  destruction  of  the  commonwealth.  This  is. 

1.  "  Manstealing,"  when  a  person  steals  a  human  being,  to  sell 
him,  or  to  beg  with  him,  and  thus  to  gain  aught  by  him  ;  so  Jo- 
seph complained  that  k<  he  had  been  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews,"  Gen.  xi.  15.  The  Lord  God  required  that  such  thieves 
should  be  punished  with  death:  he  saith,  Exod.  xxi.  16,  "  He  that 
steaieth  a  man  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death."  See  also  Deut.  xxi  v.  7,  and  1  Tim  i.  10. 
But  since  we  do  not  buy  men  in  this  country,  this  sin  doth  not  pre- 
vail among  us:  it  happens  indeed  sometimes,  that  lazy  beggars 
steal  children,  in  order  to  beg  with  them,  but  this  is  also  rare  :  the 
Jesuits  and  monks  nevertheless  often  render  themselves  guilty  of 
this  theft,  for  they  entice  children,  seduce  them  from  their  parents, 
and  carry  t!icm  agjia^t  their  parents  mind  into  monasteries. 

2.  "  Stealing  cattle,"  although  it  is  not  so  atrocious  an  offence, 
as  stealing  men,  must  also  be  considered  as  punishable  by  the  magis- 
trate,    'i'he  Lord  Baith,  Exod.  xxii.   1,   <■  It'  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox, 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  ill.  345 

or  a  sheep,  ar.d  kill  it,  or  sell  it,  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox, 
and  four  sheep  for  a  sheep  •"  The  penalty  for  an  ox  was  greater 
thaii  that  foi  a  sheep,  because  they  made  use  of  oxen  for  ploughing 
arid  husbandry :  he  therefore,  who  stole  an  ox,  not  only  deprived 
the  owner  of  his  property,  as  he  did,  who  stole  a  sheep,  but  also 
discommoded  the  posssessor  in  tilling  his  land. 

3.  We   add  to  this  w  houserobbery,"  that  is,    stealing    money,  or 

old  goods,  clothes,  victuals,  or  ether  matters,  whether  the 
thief  take  aught  of  the  goods  that  are  at  hand,  in  passing  by,  or 
her  he  filch  aught  from  the  owner,  while  he  is  talking,  or  other- 
iged  :  or  whether  he  enter  privately  into  the  house,  or 
break  into  it,  and  take  whatever  pleaseth  him.  Tie  civil  law  of  Is- 
rael permitted  the  master  of  the  house  to  "kill  the  thief,  who  broke 
into  his  house  by  night ;  but  if  the  sun  were  risen,  he  might  not  kill 
hitn.  but  the  thief  was  to  make  full  restitution,  yea,  to  give  double  : 
If  he  had  nothing  wherewith  to  make  restitution,  he  was  to  be  sold 
for  his  theft,"  Exod.  xxii.  2 — 4.  We  cannot  determine  from  the 
civil  law  of  Israel,  that  we  have  now  a  right  to  kill  a  thief,  who  steals 
cattle,  or  household  goods,  since  this  law  was  ordained  only  for  that 
people  and  country,  and  cannot  well  be  observed  in  other  countries 
and  nations:  among  the  Israelites  the  thief  was  able  to  make  full 
restitution  of  what  he  had  stolen,  because  among  them  every  man 
had  his  immovable  possesison  of  lands ;  and  if  he  had  spent  all, 
and  had  empovei  isheel  himself,  he  mig:it  be  sold,  and  his  debt  com- 
pensated, according  to  Exod.  xxii.  3.  But  this  hath  not  place  among 
us.  It  is  true,  we  could  now  confine  the  thief  in  a  house  of  correc- 
tion, but  he  could  not  then  compensate  his  theft,  or  restore  to  the 
owner  that  which  he  had  stolen  from  him  five,  four,  or  twofold. 
We  dare  not  therefore  determine  whether  the  magistrate  may  not 
punish  grosser  acts  of  theft,  which  are  aggravated  by  many  circum- 
stances, with  death.  But  it  appears  too  hard  to  punish  simple  theft 
severely,  especially  when  it  proceeds  from  poverty,  either  with  death-. 
or  with  a  great  contempt  of  the  thief:  Solomon  sailh,  Prov.  vi.  30, 
31.  "  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul 
when  he  is  hungry  :  but  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sevenfold, 
lie  shall  give  all  the    substance  of  his  house." 

4.  Unfaithful  magistrates  and  collectors  render  themselves  guilty 
of"  peculation,"  or  stealing  from  the  public,  when  they  exhaust  the 
poor  commons,  in  order  to  enrich  themselves  :  "  As  a  roaring  lion, 
and  a  ranging  bear,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people,"  saith 
the  wise  man,  Prov    xxviii.   15.     Such  were   the  rulers    of  Israel  : 

:  they  plucked  the  skin  from  off  the  Israelites,   and  their  flesh  from 
Vol..  iu  2  S 


246       THE  THTRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  see  whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous.  Think  not  that  ye 
have  cleansed  your  hearts  in  this  respect,  and  are  pure  of  this  sin, 
because  ye  are  so  blind,  that  ye  do  not  know  yourselves.  Paul,  be- 
fore he  was  converted,  blasphemed  God,  and  he  nevertheless  knew 
not  that  he  did  it  as  he  confessed  afterwards,  when  he  was  better 
enlightened,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Yea,  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme, 
and  thought  that  he  did  God  service,  Acts.  xxvi.  9,  10,  11.  Only 
attend  to  all  your  former  doings,  and  ye  will  see  that  your  whole  lift 
hath  been  altogether  without  aDd  dishonourable  to  God.  And  it  is 
therefore  evident,  that  ye  take  his  name  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  your 
covenant  God,  that  ye  are  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  thai  he  will  not 
hold  you  guiltless. 

Alas  !  that  with  the  jailer,  ye  cried  out  with  trembling,  on  ac- 
count of  your  great  guilt,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Ye 
would  then  learn  how  the  Lord  could  hold  you  guiltless ;  for  this 
would  cause  your  souls  to  flee  out  of  themselves  to  him,  who  suffered 
blasphemy,  and  on  account  of  blasphemy.  Endeavour  not  only  to  re- 
s'.rain  yout  mouths  from  uttering  such  dreadful  Language,  but  also 
to  be  found  wholly  in  Christ,  and  with  "  the  Corinthians,  who  were 
before  blasphemers,  to  be  washed,  sanctified  and  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  as  the  apostie 
testifieth  of  them,  1  Cor.  vi,  10,  11. 

But,  believers,  ye  also  have  frequently  sinned  against  this  com- 
mandment. Reflect  only  on  your  former  behaviour,  on  all  your 
free  thoughts  and  words,  your  vain  and  dissolute  conversation,  and 
how  ye  have  reproached  God  during  your  "  ignorance  and  unbelief," 
like  Paul  1  Tim.  i.  13.  Ye  have  laden  yourselves  with  a  heavy 
burthen  of  guilt,  ye  have  seen  it,  and  know  how  it  oppressed  you, 
and  with  what  dreadful  distress  your  souls  were  seized,  when  ye 
st.w  that  God  would  not  hold  you  guiltless  ;  but  ye  have  with  Paul, 
"obtained  mercy,"  1  Tim.  i.  13.  God  could  not,  and  he  nevertheless 
doth  hold  you  guikless :  his  Son  hath  atoned  for  your  reproaching 
of  the  Lord  in  your  stead  :  "  The  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him 
up,  and  the  reproaches  of  them  who  reproached  the  Lord  fell  on 
him,"  as  lie  complains  by  the  mouth  of  David,  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Be» 
cause  ye  had  blasphemed  God,  the  wicked  accused  him  of  blasphe- 
my, and  slew  him  on  account  of  it :  he  purchased  the  covenant  of 
grace  for  yon,  and  "  though  he  was  just,  he  suffered  for  you,  who 
were  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you  to  God,"  1  Peter  iii.  18,  and 
that  the  Lord  might  no  more  be  wroth  with  you,  "that  be  might 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  would  not  hlfli 


io<\  247 

from  you  to  do  you  good,  and  that  he  would  put  his  fear  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  might  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.     Therefore, 

1.  Let  your  souls  wonder  and  he  amazed  at  the  great  and  free 
grace,  that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  Ye  who  were  guilty  are  hol- 
den  guiltless  ;  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  guiltless,  was  holden  guilty, 
and  punished  in  your  stead,  and  ali  grace  is  conveyed  to  you  there- 
by :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  Cod  made  to  be  sin  for  you, 
that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  according 
to  2  Cor.  v.  21.  Why  did  not  God  lay  the  guilt  of  your  blasphemy 
upon  you,  as  well  as  upon  others  ?  It  was  only  free  grace.  Behold 
it,  wonder  at  it  and  rejoice,  praise  him  on  account  of  it,  like  Paul", 
when  he  saith,  1  Tim.  1.  15,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, of  whom  I  am  chief." 

2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  still  often  taken  in  vain  by  you  :  must 
ye  not  own  it  ?  ye  know  surely  that  his  fear  doth  not  always  impress 
your  hearts,  as  it  ought ;  how  often  are  ye  but  little  influenced  by  it, 
as  well  when  ye  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  as  when 
ye  are  not.  Therefore  the  soul  should,  as  often  as  she  renders  her- 
self guilty,  lay  hold  on  the  Son  of  God  for  reconciliation,  and  dip 
herself  in  the  fountain  cf  his  blood,  that  she  may  be  reconciled  and 
cleansed.  He  is  indeed  "  the  opened  fountain,"  which  is  always 
"  open  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

3.  Let  it  henceforward  be  your  earnest  endeavour,  that  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  your  God  may  direct  you  in  all  your  conversation,  so 
that  ye  may  not  reproach,  but  glorify  him  :  "  If  ye  call  on  the  Fath- 
er, who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"    1  Peter  i.  17. 

The  fear  of  God  should  restrain  you  from  sinning,  especially  from 
scandalous  sins,  which  induce  men  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  : 
"  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid,  and  his  dread  fall  on 
you  I"  may  we  ask  you  with  Job,  ch.  xiii.  ii.  Job  himself  refrained 
from  sinning,  because  "  destruction  from  God  was  a  terrour  to  him  ; 
and  by  leason  of  his  highness  he  could  not  endure,"  ch.  xxxi.  23. 
So  Joseph  also  acted,  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  and  Nehemiah,  Neh.  v.  15. 
An  a»ve  for  God  ought  to  restrain  your  tongues  and  mouths,  and 
prevent  you  from  "  speaking  so  exceeding  proudly,  and  from  letting 
arrogancy  come  out  cf  your  mouths  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  judg- 
ment," as  Hannah  admonisheth,  1  Sam.  ii.  3.  We  ought  to  follow 
even  our  daily  callings  with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  as  the  apostle 
enjoins  upon   servants,   Eph.  vi.  3.     Therefore  plead  the  covenant 


Z4»      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

his  son  acted  worse,  and  abominably,  when  he  resolved  to  rendei 
that  yoke  much  heavier,  1  Kings  xii  1 — 14.  It  is  also  force  when 
a  person  endeavours  by  his  power,  riches,  courage  and  friends  to 
control  justice,  in  order  to  withhold  from  infe-iors  their  dues, 
James  bewails  the  poor  on  this  account,  when  he  saith,  James  ii.  6* 
"  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment- 
seats  ?"  Job  was  innocent  of  this  great  transgression  :  hear  his 
solemn  protesration  ;  "  If  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  against  the  father- 
less,  when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  gate  ;  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from 
my  shouhlerblade,  and  mine  arm  be  broken  from  the  bone,"  Job 
xxxi.  21,  22. 

The  sinner,  not  contented  with  his  own,  and  grasping  after  his 
neighbour's  property,  wishes  nevertheless  to  appear  honest,  and 
will  therefore  endeavour  to  deprive  him  of  it  "  under  an  appear- 
ance of  right,  as  by  unjust  weights,  ells  and  measures."  He  doth 
this,  when  he  "buys  his  wares  with  such  as  are  loo  great,  and  sells 
them  with  such  as  are  too  small :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness 
in  judgment,  in  meteyard,  in  weight,  or  in  measure,"  saith  the 
Lord,  Lev.  xix.  See  how  he  explains  this  mors  particularly,  Deut. 
xxv.  13 — 16,  and  Prov  xx.  10.  Hear  how  the  wicked  arc  reproved 
on  account  of  this  kind  of  theft,  Micha  vi.  10.  "  Are  there  not  yet 
the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  the 
scant  measure  that  is  abominable  ?" 

We  may  add  to  this  cheating  with  our  u  merchandise,"  or  wares, 
which  unjust  men  adulterate,  and  set  off  in  such  a  manner,  that  they 
appear  better  than  they  are.  This  is  "selling  chaff  for  wheat," 
Amos  villi  6. 

The  Lord  is  not  less  displeased  with  u  false  coins,"  when  a  per. 
son  debases,  or  clips  money,  or  when  he  knowingly  passes  base  or 
clipped  money  for  more  than  it  is  worth.  Or  a  person,  in  order  to 
deceive  his  neighbour  *vith  the  money,  will  miscount  it,  either 
in  writing,  or  reckoning,  or  weighing,  like  Israel,  who  in  receiving 
■money,  "  made  the  shekel,"  that  is,  the  weight  of  the  shekel, 
"great,"  Amos  viii.  5. 

The  instructor  adds  to  this  "  usury,"  that  is,  exorbitant  interest, 
which  we  take  for  money  or  goods,  that  we  have  lent  to  others,  in 
order  to  accommodate  them.  But  this  commandment  doth  not  for- 
bid that  iHury,  which  is  agreeable  to  equity,  to  the  current  value  of 
money,  of  merchandise,  or  of  the  profits  that  others  make  by  our 
money  or  goods,  or  according  to  the  measure  which  the  magistrate 
appoints.  Such  money  may  be  considered  as  just  ;  for  how  can  we 
condemn  a  person,  who  lends  another  money,  from  which  he  derives 


XLTI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1  TO,  111.  349 

advantage,  for  sharing  in  that  advantage  :  there  cannot  be  otherwise 
any  trafficking  or  trading  ;  may  we  derive  piofit  from  our  wares  which 
we  sell,  why  then  not  also  from  our  money,  which  we  lend  ?  The 
Lovd  Jesus  approves  of  such  usury,  when  he  teacheth  us,  that  we 
should  endeavour  to  derive  p»ofit  from  our  spiritual  gifts  after  the 
manner  of  usurers,  Matt.  xv.v.  14 — 30.  But  when  usury  is  forbid- 
den, we  must  understand  by  it  that  griping  usury,  which  must  ne- 
cessarily consume  and  empoverish  the  person  who  borrows  upon 
usury.  To  such  griping  usury  belongs  also  taking  interest  of  the 
poor,  to  whom  we  ought  to  lend  money  without  interest,  that  we 
may  relieve  their  necessity,  although  we  could  not  hope  that  they 
would  recompence  our  favour,  or  restore  the  money  which  we  have 
lent  them,  as  the  Saviour  commands,  Luke  vi.  35.  It  is  also  un- 
just usury  to  take  such  necessary  pledges  of  security  of  the  poor,  to 
whom  we  lend  money,  as  they  cannot  spare.  The  Lord  God  was 
highly  displeased,  and  would  punish  it  severely,  when  any  one  "  took 
another's  garment,  or  his  millstone,  and  especially  his  up^er  mill- 
stone, to  pledge,"  Exod.  xxii    2  5 — 27.     Deut.  xxiv.  6. 

There  are  "  other  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  by  which  men  appro- 
priate their  neighbour's  goods  to  themselves."  Who  can  enume- 
rate them  all  ?  We  will  mention  only  a  few.  For  instance,  (a)  '1  hat 
wicked  judges  receive  bribes,  in  order  to  .pervert  justice  :  'l  TLou 
shalt  not  take  any  gift;  for  the  gift  blindtth  the  wise,  and  perverfeth 
the  words  of  the  righteous,"  saith  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  8.  Deut. 
xvi.  19.  The  princes  of  Judah  are  taxed  as  "companions  of 
thieves,"  because  "they  loved  giffs,"  Isi-iah  i.  23.  (b)  The  un- 
faithful managing  and  devouring  of  estates,  which  we  can  get  into 
our  hands,  loading  them  with  so  many  expences  that  they  dwindle 
into  nothing  :  but  "  wo  to  the  writers,  who  prescribe  grievousness, 
to  turn  aside  the  nc.  dy  from  judgment,"  Sec.  Isaiah  x  1,  2.  To 
which  we  must  also  refer  alienating  goods  that  have  been  committed 
to  our  trust ;  the  Lord  condemns  such  a  conduct,  Exod.  xxii.  10 
— 13  ;  also  neglecting  to  rtstove  that  which  we  have  borrowed,  and 
not  paying  our  debts ;  for  this  is  "  the  work  of  the  wicked,"  as  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  21,  It  is  of  the  same  kind  also,  when  a 
person  doth  not  produce  goods  which  he  hath  found,  nor  restore 
them  to  the  owner,  as  the  Lord  rtquireth,  Lev.  vi-  3.  Deut.  xxii. 
1.  Also  concealing  stolen  goods,  in  order  to  be  ''  a  partner  with  the 
thief,"  as  the  wise  king  speaks,  Prov.  xxix.  24,  (c)  Empoverishing 
debtors,  who  are  willing  to  pay  their  debts,  and  have  not  contracted 
them  wilfully,  falling  on  them  forthwith,  in  order  to  ruin  them,  and 
turn  them  out  naked  and  bare :  tlut>  is  a  hateful  conduct,  as  the  ba- 


350       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

viour  shows  in  that  wicked  servant,  Matt,  xviii.  28,  29,30.  (d)  Keep- 
ing buck  the  wages  of  the  hireling,  and  abridging  them  :  a  wo  is 
denounced  against  those  who  do  thus,  Jer.  xxii.  13.  This,  as  James 
informs  us,  is  "  a  crying  sin,"  James  v.  4.  God  wiU  not  allow  us 
to  keep  such  wages  with  us  all  night,  Leviticus  xix,  13.  (e)  It  is 
also  abominable  to  be  slothful  and  sluggish,  either  when  we  labour 
for  another,  and  thus  eat  the  bread  of  idleness,  contrary  to  Prov. 
xxxi.  17  ;  or  when  we  do  our  own  work  :  "  He  that  is  slothful  in 
his  work,  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster,"  sailh  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  9.  Paul  condemns  such  persons,  2  Thess.  iii.  10 — 12, 
and  he  saith  that  "they  ought  not  to  eat."  (f)  Displacing  and  remov- 
ing land-marks,  in  order  to  enlarge  our  own,  and  abridge  another's 
land,  is  also  a  theft,  which  is  forbidden,  Dent.  xix.  14.  Prov.  xxii. 
28.  xxiii.  10:  as  also  stealing  out  of  another's  garden,  or  orchard, 
and  so  likewise  "putting  our  cattle  into  our  neighbour's  field,  and 
letting  them  feed  in  it,"  contrary  to  the  divine  prohibition,  Exod. 
xxii.  5.  (g)  It  is  also  a  conduct,  which  God  forbids,  to  supplant  our 
neighbour  in  his  trade,  by  disparaging  him  and  his  wares  :  this  is 
contrary  to  "  charity,  which  envieth  not,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  4.  Crying 
down  wares,  which  are  offered  for  sale,  in  order  to  buy  them  at  a 
cheap  rate,  this  we  ought  to  condemn  with  Solomon,  Prov.  >;x.  14, 
"  It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer ;  but  when  he  is  gone  his 
way,  he  boasteth."  We  ought  to  disapprove  no  less  of  "  monopo- 
lizing goods,  buying  them  up,  or  forestalling,"  especially  eatables, 
by  which  a  person  obtains  the  sole  command  of  these  things,  and  can 
regulate  the  sale  of  thern,  raise  the  price  of  them  to  an  enormous 
height,  and  so  enrich  himself  beyond  measure,  and  thus  exhaust  the 
poor  commons  :  "  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall  curse 
him,"  saith  the  wise  man.  Prov.  xi.  26.  (h)  It  is  exceedingly  de- 
testable in  children  to  rob  their  parents,  and  to  deem  this  notwith- 
standing to  be  right :  hear  what  the  same  wise  man  saith  of  it. 
Prov.  xxviii.  24,  "  Whoso  robbeth  his  father,  or  his  mother,  and 
saith, It  is  no  transgression,  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer." 
The  time  would  fail  me,  if  I  should  speak  of  deceitful  bargains,  re- 
ceipts, or  bills  of  discharge,  of  the  violation  of  contracts  and  condi- 
tions, on  account  of  some  loss  that  might  accrue  to  us;  of  unjust 
judgments  and  pleadings,  in  order  to  abridge  our  neighbour;  of 
that  dishonest  thirst  for  gain,  which  is  shown  in  betting,  playing  at 
dice,  and  gaming,  in  keeping  drinking-houses,  whore-houses,  and 
gaming-houses. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  111.  35 1 

A  person  who  cloth  not  know  himself,  wonders  how  any  one   can 
be  so  dishonest,  as  to  be  guilty  of  stealing  from  others  :  but  he  con- 
siders not  that  it  is  restraining  grace,  that  hinders  him  from  sinning 
against  God  in   this   manner.      The   sinner    being   destitute- of  the 
Lord,  and  not  knowing  what  is  essentially  good  for  him,  can  never 
be  satisfied  with  his  earthly  goods,   he   will    always  have  still  more, 
as  we  will  show  more  fully  on  the  tenth  commandment.     And  hence 
ariseth,    (1)  "  Covetousness,"  as  the   immediate  cause  of  theft,  by 
which  a  person  craves  insatiably,  and  covets  vehemently  an    abun- 
dance of  earthly  goods,  and  endeavours  to  keep  them,   and   will   not 
make  a  moderate  use  of  them,  nor  communicate  of  them  to  others  : 
"  Wo  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Hab.  ii.  9.     And  thus  covetousness  consists   in  desiring 
to  be  rich,   1  Tim.  vi.   16.     He  who   is  infected   with   this  disease 
will  be  repeatedly  seduced  more  or  less  to  theft :    "  He   falls   into 
temptation,  and  a  snare,  and  into  many   foolish  and  hurtful   lusts, 
which  drown  men   in  destruction   and   perdition  ;    for   the  love    of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.     His  de- 
sire  of  having    whets   his  understanding,   and  teaches  him  to  in- 
crease his  own  by  1  know  not  what  methods  under  an  appearance  of 
right :   "  all  the  instruments  of  the  churl  are  evil :  he  deviseth  wicked 
devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy 
speaketh  right :"  thus  we  read,  Isaiah  xxxii.  7.     And  therefore  we 
cannot  sufficiently  wonder  that  the  Socinians  deny  that  covetousness 
was  forbidden  under  the  Old  Testament.     This  is  a  sin,  from  which 
many  are  averse,  but  not  on  account  of  their  satisfaction  in  God,  and 
their  contentment  with  that  portion  of  earthly  goods,  which  he  giveth 
them,  but  they  proceed  to  another  extreme,  to  wit,  (2)  to  f  an  abuse 
and  wasting  of  the  gifts  of  God,"  by  excess  in  eating,  drinking, 
clothing,  household  furniture,   and   pleasures,   which   are   otherwise 
lav  fial ;  and  no  less  by  gaming,  playing,  idle  betting  and  whoredom, 
by  which  such  persons  empoverish  themselves  and  their  households^ 
and  are  easily  seduced  to  stealing.     The  wisest  of  kings  had  there- 
fore reason  to  say  to  his  son,  "  Be  not  amongst  winebibbers,  amongst 
riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  for  the  drunkard   and  the  glutton  shall  sure- 
ly come  to  poverty,"  &c.  Prov.  xxiii.  20.     When  the  steward  had 
wasted  his  master's  goods,  and  was  obliged  to  render  an  account   of 
his  stewardship,  he  fell  into  iniquity,  Luke  xvi.   1 — 3. 

Stealing  is  abominable,  in  whatever  manner  it  is  perpetrated  :  "  All 
that  do  such  things,  and  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  an  abomination 
unto  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  Moses,  Deut.xxv.  16.  For,  (a)  stealing 
is  a  dissatisfaction   with  the  dispensation  of  God.  by  which    men 


5-       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

therefore  "  take  the  mme  of  God  in  vain,"  as  it  is  said,  Prov.  xxx. 
9.     The  thief  destroys  the  security  and  tranquility  of  human  society  . 
he  occasions  strife  and  contention  ;  he  exposts  himself  to  ignominy 
and  shame,  when  he  is  caught.     See  this  Jer.  ii.   16.     And  in  order 
t!  at  he  may  not  he  ashamed,  he  will  endeavour  to  corceal  his  theft 
with  lies  and  fab*;  oaths,  and  he  rentiers  himself  thus  still  more  guil- 
ty, as  the  Lord  intimateth,  Lev.  vi.  1 — 4.     (b)  This    iniquity    is    an 
o*f  nee,  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrates,  who  were  obliged  to 
punish  certain  acts  of  theft  with  death,  as   man  stealing;   Exod     xxi. 
16,  sacrilege,  for  which  Achat)  was  stoned,  Joshua  vii.  20 — 26.     If 
a  man   broke   into   a  house   by   night,    the    master   of    the    house 
might   kill    him   instantly,   without  incurring  the   guilt  of  murder, 
Exod.  xxiK  2.     David  pronounced  the  man  who  had  robbed  a  poor 
man  of   his  little  cwelamb,  guilty  ;  but  other  thefts  were  to  be  ato- 
ned by  restoring  two,  four,   five  and  sevenfold.     Yea,  the  Lord   God 
himself  punishes  this    sin,  not  only    by  exposing  such  unrighteous 
persons  to  reproach,  but  also  sometimes    by   reducing  them   to  ex- 
treme poverty  ;  he  curses  the  thief  and  deceiver  in  all  that  he  hath, 
not  only  in  what  he  hath  stolen,  but  also  in  what  he  hath  not  stolen ; 
"Cursed  be  he  that  renloveth  his  neighbour's  landmark  "  was  pro- 
claimed aloud  from  mount    Ebal,   Deut.   xxvii.    17.     "The   roll    of 
the  ciuse.  the   length  whereof  was  twenty   cubits,  and  the   breadth 
when  of  was  ten  cubits,  God  would  bring  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
to  cut  him  oft",  and  to  const  me  his  house,  with  the  limber  thereof,  and 
the  stones  thereof,"  Zech.  v.    1 — 4.     Yea,  he  who  gathereth  riches5 
but  not  by  right,  is  sometimes  snatched  away  by  an  early  death  from 
his  stolen  riches,  according  to  the    threatening,  Jer.  xvii.   11.     He 
leaves  them  indeed  to  his  heirs,  but  not   with   the  blessing  of  God- 
but  what  becomes  of  the  soul  of  such   an    unrighteous  person  ?     It 
doth  not  surely   go    to    the    glory   of  the    righteous  ;  for    "  neither 
thieves,  nor  covetous   persons  shall  inherit  the   kingdom  of  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.    iO.     Thercfoie  the  end   of  such  persons   will   surely  be 
destruction,  when  they  "  will  vomil  up  the  riches,  which   they  have 
swallowed  ('own,  and  God  will  cast  them  out  of  their  belly,"  as  Zo- 
phar  speaks.  Job  xx.  15. 

II.  But  doth  he,  who  only  abstains  from  stealing,  keep  this  com- 
mandment? surely  no,  unless  he  also  practise  the  virtues  that  air 
opposed  to  stealing,  and  so  (.1)  "  promote  the  advantage  of  his 
neighbour  in  every  instance  that  he  can  and  may."  Man  was  crea- 
ted for  the  advantage  of  his  neighbour,  as  well  as  for  himself ;  he 
must  indeed  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  which  he  doth  not  do 
When  he  forbears  to  promote  his  neighbour's  advantage  as  well   as 


XLlI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   no,   111.  353 

his  own  :  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man 
also  on  the  things  of  others,"  saith  the  apostle  of  the  Geniles, 
Philip,  ii.  4.  Therefore  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxii.  1 — 4,  "Thou 
shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself 
from  them,"  &c.  Job  quitted  himself  well  in  this  respect,  when 
"  he  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (o  the  lame,"  &c.  Job  xxix. 
15 — 17.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  just  must  direct  us  herein,  and 
teach  us  that  we  must  not  do  these  things,  unless  we  can  and  may. 
It  is  sinful,  and  the  work  of  fools  to  empoverish  ourselves  in  order 
to  succour  others,  or  by  undue  methods  to  deliver  them  out  of  diffi- 
culties, in  which  t'>ey  have  involved  themselves  by  their  iniquitous 
actions,  that  we  may  thus  act  the  part  of  good  men.  (2)  "  We  should 
deal  and  act  with  our  neighbour,  as  we  desire  that  he  should  deal 
and  act  with  us."  When  we  consider  and  regard  our  neighbour's 
case  in  this  manner  as  our  own,  we  will  not  wrong  him,  nor  suffer 
him  to  remain  under  a  difficulty  ;  it  is  also  a  work  of  equity  and 
justice:  even  the  law  and  the  prophets  enjoin  by  the  mouth  of  the 
Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  12,  that  "whatsoever  things  we  would  that  men 
should  do  unto  us,  we  should  do  even  so  to  them."  But  if  we  shall 
be  able  to  do  this,  we  must,  (3)  "  labour  faithfully,"  or  be  diligent 
and  industrious  in  our  calling,  "the  work  which  our  hand  findeth  to 
do,"  according  to  the  words  of  the  preacher,  Ec<  1.  ix.  10.  The 
apostle  requires  that  men  should  "  work  in  quietness,  and  eat  their 
own  bread,"  2  Thess.  iii.  8— -13.  But  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  our  own  advantage  by  means  of  our  faithful  labour 
ought  to  be  our  principal  motive,  that  we  may  do  this  in  obedience 
to  God,  since  it  pleaseth  him  to  provide  for  us  by  means  of  our 
faithful  labour,  and  so  "  we  must  do  all  tilings  heartily,  as  to  the 
Lord,"  according  to  Col.  iii.  23.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  take 
good  heed,  that  we  have  a  proper  calling,  end  we  ought  "  to  abide 
therein  with  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  vii.  20,  24.  This  doth 
not  mean  that  a  person  may  not  change  his  calling,  for  he  is  some- 
times obliged  to  do  that  by  events  which  befal  him  through  the  ap- 
pointment of  God  :  but  we  may  not  desert  one  calling  for  another 
rashly,  and  without  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord.  Let  no  man  think 
that  it  will  suffice  to  labour  for  himself  and  his  family  :  he  must  do 
that  also,  "  that  he  may  relieve  the  needy."  If  there  be  any  du'y, 
which  is  at  once  human,  religious  and  christian,  it  is  that  of  r<  iiev- 
ing  the  needy  :  "  We  may  not  hide  ourselves  from  our  own  flesh/' 
Isaiah  lviii.  7.  How  often  is  this  commanded  as  a  religious  duty  ? 
yea,  for  this  end  God  suffered  the  poor  to  remain  in  Israel.  See 
Deut.  xv.  7 — 11.  Eccl.  xi.  1,2.  Yea,  this  duty  is  also  enjoined 
Vol.  ii.  2  T 


354      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

upon  Christians :  "  Distribute  to  the  necessity  of  the  saints,  sailh 
Paul,  Rom.  xii.  13.  Sec  this  repeatedly  commanded  and  urged, 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1 — 3.  2  Cur.  viii.  and  ix.  Luke  relates  how  nobly 
the  first  Christians  quitted  themselves  in  this  respect,  Acts  iv.  34, 
35.  xi.  28—  30.  In  order  to  practise  this  goodly  virtue,  which  is 
so  pleasing  to  God,  we  must  labour  faithfully  ;  this  is  enjoined, 
Eph.  iv.  28,  "  Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more:  but  rather  let 
him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he 
may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Praiseworthy  was  the  ex- 
ample of  "  Dorcas,  who  made  coats  and  garments  for  the  widows," 
Acts  ix.  39. 


APPLICATION. 

If  this  law  were  given,  hearers,  that  it  might  give  life,  and  that 
We  might  seek  our  righteousness  by  it,  we  should  have  nothing  else 
to  do  now,  but  exhort  you  to  flee  from  the  sins  that  are  forbidden, 
and  to  pursue  the  virtues  which  are  commanded  in  it.  But  that  is 
impossible  for  this  law,  for  it  is  become  weak  through  the  flesh  ; 
and  therefore  all  who  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the 
curse.  God  therefore  gave  this  law,  that  the  offence  might  abound, 
and  thus  also  that  grace  might  much  more  abound.  In  order  then, 
that  our  observations  on  this  commandment  may  be  salutary  to  you, 
it  will  be  necessary, 

1.  That  each  of  you  should  compare  his  heart  and  actions  with 
what  is  forbidden  and  enmnundtd  here.  We  can  easily  believe 
that  ye  are  not  guilty  of  the  grosser  acts  of  theft,  even  manstealing 
and  stealing  cattle  :  but  there  are  other  wicked  practices  and  devi- 
ces, by  which  we  take  to  ourselves  the  property  of  another.  Come 
hither,  and  examine  what  ye  possess,  and  what  ye  have  handled,  but 
lack  at  present.  How  did  ye  obtain  it?  did  ye  get  all  in  an  honest 
way  ?  doth  nothing  of  what  bclongeth  to  another  cleave  to  your  fin* 
gers  ?  have  ye  behaved  yourselves  righteously  in  every  respect,  as 
well  in  reckoning  with  others,  as  in  giving  and  receiving  money, 
m  trafficking,  trading,  handicrafts,  labour,  and  in  demanding  and 
paying  debts  ?  are  ye  pure  with  respect  to  all  this  ?  have  ye  always 
kept  the  middU  way  between  greediness,  and  abusing  and  squander- 
r»s  oF  God,  and  that  in  every  instance  ?  Ye  need  not  ask 
whether  we  must  be  so  exact  a.:d  jferfect  in  all  these  points  ;  for  ye 


XLH.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  1 II.  ^5i 

Iftiow,  at  least,  ye  ought  to  know,  that  he  who  continueth  not  in  alL 
things  which  are  wriiten  in  the  law,  is  cursed.  Doth  any  one  say,  I 
know  not  that  I  have  transgressed  in  any  instance.  It  is  possible, 
that  thou  art  so  just  and  righteous  in  a  civil  respect,  that  thou  dost 
nut  possess  aught  of  what  belongs  to  another  ;  but  hast  thou  then 
also  performed  what  is  commanded  here  ?  dost  thou  think,  yes  ? 
I  should  believe  that  such  an  one  had  never  yet  seen  himself  in  the 
nurrour  of  this  perfect  commandment,  but  that  his  heart  deceives 
him,  like  Ephraim's,  who  said,  "  1  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance ;  in  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in 
me,  that  were  sin,"  Hoseu  xii.  8.  But,  friends,  this  is  not  the 
way  to  clear  your  account,  when  the  Lord  will  begin  to  reckon 
with  you  and  to  state  the  amount  of  it.  It  behooves  you  indeed  to 
review  your  account  frequently,  and  it  will  appear  that  your  debt  is 
great,  and  the  amount  that  God  might  justly  condemn  you.  There- 
lore  "  examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  yourselves  strictly, 
ye  listless  people,"  agreeably  to  the  admonition,  Zeph.  ii.  1.  Hum- 
ble yourselves,  abase  yourselves,  and  be  ashamed  before  the  Lord, 
"as  a  thief,  when  he  is  found,"  Jer.  ii.  26. 

2.  Have  ye  taken  aught  ftom  your  neighbour,  keep  it  not  with 
you,  but  restore  it  to  him.  It  belongs  to  another,  it  is  not  yours. 
If  ye  keep  it,  it  will  become  a  canker  in  all  your  goods,  which  are 
otherwise  your  rightful  property,  and  it  will  consume  them,  and 
emp  jverish  you.  Yea,  God  will  in  his  lime  make  your  stolen  goods 
a  file  in  your  bowels,  and  compel  you  to  vomit  up  that  which  ye 
have  swallowed  down,  like  Judas,  who  returned  his  illgotten  silver 
pieces,  and  when  he  could  not  get  rid  of  them,  threw  them  furious- 
ly down  in  the  temple.  What  think  ye,  shall  a  sinner  find  favour 
with  God,  while  he  withholds  stolen  goods  from  their  owner  ?  Hear 
what  the  Lord  saith  to  the  Jews,  Isaiah  i.  16 — 18.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  ye  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  &c.  Come  then,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow,"  &c  Thus  we 
read  also,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  15.  "  If  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge, 
give  again  that  which  he  hath  robbed,  &c.  he  shall  surely  live,  he 
shall  not  die."  When  Zaccheus  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord,  he  was  forthwith  ready  to  "  restore  fourfold,  if  he  had  by 
false  accusation  taken  aught  from  any  man,"  Luke  xix.  8.  Paul 
offered  to  pay  Philemon  even  what  Onesin.us  had  taken  from  him, 
Philemon,  vs.  8,  9.  But  I  suspect  that  many  will  decline  to  do  this, 
because  they  have  robbed  others  of  so  much,  that  they  would  be 
obliged  to  surrender  all  the  substance  of  their  house,  and  thus  em- 


35b       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

poverish  themselves.  But  is  it  not  better  to  be  an  honest  poor  man, 
and  possess  grace,  than  to  be  a  rich  thief,  and  remain  graceless  ? 
Do  ye  not  dare  to  return  aught,  because  it  would  expose  you  to 
contempt,  ye  may  do  it  by  another  person,  whom  ye  can  trust,  or 
which  is  preferable,  by  a  letter  written  in  an  uncouth  hand.  Is  that 
which  was  robbed  already  consumed,  so  that  it  is  not  in  your  power 
to  repay  it,  do  nevertheless  as  much  as  ye  can,  by  sparing  some- 
thing, and  living  more  scantily,  that  ye  may  gather  a  little,  and  re- 
store that. 

3.  Bu  think  not,  after  ye  have  satisfied  men  for  what  was  taken 
from  them,  that  God  is  then  also  satisfied.  By  our  unrighteousness 
we  render  ourselves  debtors  not  only  to  men,  to  satisfy  them  for 
what  we  have  alienated  from  them,  but  we  render  ourselves  guilty 
also  before  the  Lord.  And  therefore  the  unrighteous  person*  wheth- 
er he  be  more  or  less  unrighteous,  must  endeavour  to  be  reconciled 
unto  God.  O  that  ye  were  concerned  about  this,  and  cried  out 
with  the  church,  Micha  vi  6,  7.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  give  my 
firstborn  for  my  transgression  ?  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of 
my  soul  ?  We  should  say  to  you,  "  Seek  the  reconciling  blood"  of 
the  Surety  and  Mediator  Jesus,  by  which  "  he  restored  that  which 
he  took  not  away,"  as  he  foretold,  Psalm  'mix.  4.  Those  Corinthi- 
ans, who  were  before  "  thieves  and  covetous,  were"  not  only 
"  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  but  also  justified  in  the  name,"  and  thus 
by  the  blood  'k  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11.  For  "God 
bath  set  forth"  his  Son  "to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Flee  therefore 
to  him,  and  lay  hold  on  him  for  the  reconciliation  of  your  guilt. 

4.  Beware  of  defiling  yourselves  again,  and  endeavour  to  be  righ- 
teous in  every  instance  :  ''Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more  :  but 
vather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needelh,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  Paul  admonish  us,  Fph.  iv.  28.  Be  afraid  of  your 
covetous  and  prodigal  heart,  pray  against  it  with  David,  Psalm 
cxix.  36.  "  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies  and  not  to  covet- 
ousness."  Oppose  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  which  hath  enticed  so  many 
persons  to  unrighteousness :  when  "  Achan  saw  a  good!/  Babylo- 
nish garment,  and  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  we<!ge  ol 
gold,  then  he  coveted  them,  and  took  them,"  Joshua  vii-  21.  En- 
deavour to  be  content  with  what  the  Lord  hath  given  you,  though 
it  be  ever  so  little  :  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  indeed  great 
gain;  for  we  brought  nothing   into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  111.  35? 

can  carry  nothing  out  of  it:"  thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 8. 
and  he  practised  this  lesson  himself:  "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  saith  he,  Philip,  iv,  11.  We 
ought  with  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8  9,  even  to  deprecate  "  riches"  as 
well  as  "poveay,"  and  to  seek  only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient 
for  us,"  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9,  and  we  ou^ht  more  especially  to  aim  at 
those  beiter  ''treasures,"  which  aie  laid  up  "in  heaven,  where 
neither  moth  nor  rust  corrupteth,  and  where  thieves  cannot  break 
through,  nor  steal,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  commands,  Mat.  vi.  19,  20. 
Doth  it  nevertheless  please  the  Loid  to  enrich  you  with  many  earthly 
goods,  "  do  not  then  set  your  hearts  on  them,  and  trust  not  in  them, 
neither  be  proud  of  them  :  but  do  good,  be  rich  in  good  works, 
willing  to  communicate,"  as  David  and  Paul  require,  Psalm  lxii.  10. 
1  Tim.  vi.  17,  18.  Are  ye  poor  and  in  want,  commit  your  con- 
cerns to  the  Lord,  even  your  Father,  if  ye  fear  and  love  him. 
Hear  what  Jesus  saith,  Mat.  vi.  31.  "Take  no  thought,  saying, 
What  shall  we  eat?  or  what  shall  we  drink?  or  wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  for  after  all  the-e  tnings  do  the  Gentiles  seek  :  for 
your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 
things."  The  Lord  hath  surely  said,  "  1  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii.  5.  Fret  not  on  account  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  ye  have  more  than  they,  bee  what  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  7,  1C.  "Fret  not  thyself  because  of  him 
who  prospercth  in  his  way,  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wick- 
ed devices  to  pass  :"  for  "  a  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  bet- 
ter than  the  riches  of  many  wicked."  Ye  have  a  perfect  right,  in 
and  through  Christ,  to  the  least,  yea,  to  all  things ;  for  "  all  things 
are  vours,  because  ye  are  his,  as  Paul  teacheth,  1  Cer.  iii.  21 — 23. 
Ye  will  obtain  the  full  possession  of  all  things  hereafter,  when  the 
wealthy  wicked  will  not  have  even  a  drop  of  water.  Jesus  saith, 
Mat.  v.  3,  5.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heavtn."  And  "  blessed  are  the  meek  ;  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth,"    Amen. 


(   358  ) 


THE 


NINTH  COMMANDMEN' 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIII.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exod.  xx.  16.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour. 

Q.   112.   What  is  requ'rccl  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man  ;  nor  falsify  any 
man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slanderer  ;  that  I  do  not 
judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that 
I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil, 
unless  I  would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  :  like- 
wise that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love  the  truth,  speak 
it  uprightly,  and  confess  it  :  also  that  I  defend  and  promote,  as 
much  as  I  am  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  my  neigh- 
bour. 

tc   t~ ■""> 

JL  HE  tongue,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  is  a  fire,  a  world  of 
iniquity,  which  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.  The  tongue  can  no 
man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison,"  James  iii. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  11!.  359 

6,  3.     The  heart  of  man,  filled  by  sin  with  every  abomination,  and 
producing  every  evil  motion,  corrupts  all  the  members  of  the  body, 
and  directs  them  to  evil,  rendering  them  "  servants  of  uncleanness 
and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"    as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vi.  19.     But  the 
tongue  is  more  particularly  set  on  fire  thus,  by  that  evil  corruption, 
as  a  fire  and  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  that  it  defileth  even  the  whole 
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  by  urging  it  violently 
on,  like   an    unquenchable  fire,  and    like  a  wild   beast,  that  is  un» 
tameable.     Therefore  ho:y  men   have  been  so  careful  and  circum- 
spect with   respect  ta  their  tongue,  and  they   have   endeavoured  to 
bridle  it,  like  an  unruly  horse.    David  said,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  H  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  :     I  will   keep 
my  mouth  with  a  bridie."     We  may  therefore,   with  that  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  compare  the  tongue  to  a  cily,  which  is  well   pro- 
vided with  bulwarks  of  teeth,   and  doors  of  lips,  and  yet   hath  need 
of  a  guard  to   watch,  and  to  defend  it  against    tumults  within,  and 
the  assaults  of  enemies  without  :  hear  him   therefore  pray,   Psalm 
cxli.  3.     "  Set  a  watch,    O  Lord,  before  my  mouth,  keep    the  door 
of  my    lips."     It    is   also   remarkable,  that    there  is  only  a  single 
guard,    that   is,  one  commandment    in  the  law,  against    other  sins, 
but  against   the  sins  of  the  tongue  there  is  a  double    guard  of  two 
commandments  :  it   was  not  enough  that  God  required  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law,  and  in  the  third   commandment,  that  we   should 
watch  against  the  sins  of  the   tongue,  but  he  chooseth  to  do  it  also 
by  this  ninth   commandment,  that  the  tongue  may  not  be  perverted 
to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour. 

The  Lord  commanding  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourse-ves, 
requires  of  us  that  we  should  conformably  to  this,  honour  our  pa- 
rents, not  kill  our  neighbour,  not  commit  adultery,  nor  steal  :  but 
how  shall  we  keep  these  commandments,  if  we  bear  false  witness 
against  our  neighbour  ?  "  Death  and  life,"  and  thus  all  that  is  dear 
to  our  neighbour,  "  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  saith  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  21.  Theiefore  the  Lawgiver  manifests  his  wisdom  by 
annexing  this  commandment  to  the  foregoing. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  this  commandment,  shows 

I.  What  is  forbidden,  and 

II.  What  is  commanded  in  it. 

1.  This  commandment  forbids  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
our  neighbour."  We  have  shown  before,  that  all  men  are  our 
neighbours,  because  they  are  all  made  of  one  blood  with  us.  We 
are  called  upon  on  many  occasions  to  bear  witness  against  our  neigh- 
bours, but  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  bear  false  witness  ag;irsf. 


360       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

them,  or  otherwise  than  we  know  to  be  the  truth  ;  which  is  done 
"  in  judgment,"  when  falsehood  and  iniquity  are  practised  there  in 
an  ungodly  manner  :  "  In  the  place  of  judgment  there  is  wicked- 
ness, and  *n  the  place  of  righteousness  there  is  iniquity  :"  this  the 
preacher  saw  also  in  his  time,  Eccl.  iii.  16.  The  Lawgiver  hath 
also  respect  in  a  particular  manner  to  bearing  false  witness  in  judg- 
ment, in  which,  when  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  the  truth,  we 
answer  and  bear  a  false  witness  to  injure  our  neighbour,  as  the  He- 
brew word  tagnaneh,  "to  answer,"  intimates.  1  his  wickedness  is 
frequently  practised  by  different  persons,  who  appear  in  judg- 
ment, as, 

1.  By  the  "plaintiff"  or  accuser,  who  accuseth  his  neighbour 
fedsely,  by  which  he  endangers  his  good  name,  his  life  and  property, 
yea,  his  whole  prosperity.  Of  this  the  Jewish  council  rendered 
themselves  exceedingly  guilty,  when  they  accused  J?sus,  wdio  was 
perfectly  innocent,  before  Pilate,  saying,  "  we  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  arid  foi  bidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cxsar,  saying 
that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  king,"  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

2.  By  the  defendant,  when  he  denies  the  fault,  of  which  he  is 
justly  accused,  like  Cain,  who  when  he  was  cited  before  the  divine 
tribunal,  and  asked  "  where  his  brother  Abel  was,  said,  I  know  not ; 
am  I  my  brother's  keeper r"  Gen  iv.  9.  He  who  fears  not  to  do 
wrong,  ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  confess  that  he  hath  done  wrong, 
and  to  humble  himself  by  submitting  also  to  the  proper  punishment 
of  his  sin,  with  Achan,  when  Joshua  required  of  him  to  confess  and 
acknowledge  his  guilt,  Joshua  vii.  19 — 21.  "•  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  sin :  but  with  the  righteous  there  is  favour,"  according  to  the 
words  of  the  wise  king.   Prov.  xv.  9. 

3.  It  is  not  less  libominable,  when  "  witnesses  "  utter  a  falsehood 
against  a  person,  who  is  unjustly  accused.  How  lamentable  was 
the  case  of  Naboth,  when  "  two  men  of  Belial  were  suborned  against 
him,  and  witnessed  falsely,  Naboth  bla  \  hemed  God  and  the  king, 
and  he  was  thereupon  stoned  !"  1  Kings  xxi.  9 — 13.  So  also  "  the 
whole  council  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,"  as  the  members  of  that  council  found  also  many 
false  witnesses,  who  were  nevertheless  of  no  service  to  them,  Matt. 
xxvi.  59,  60.  "  The  Lord  hates  a  false  witness,"  Prov.  vi.  16,  19. 
God  ordered  the  judges  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  witnesses 
testified  a  falsehood,  and  if  they  did,  that  it  should  then  be  done  to 
them,  as  it  would  have  been  done  to  the  accused,  if  he  had  been 
accused  according  to  truth,  Deut.  xix.  16 — 21.  Although  the  Law- 
giver forbids  bearing  false  witness  against  our  neighbour  to  his  hurt- 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  361 

we  may  nevertheless  not  bear  false  witness  in  his  behalf  to  deliver 
him  ;  for  we  may  not  deliver  the  guilty,  and  certainly  not  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come  ;  and  when  we  bear  false  witness  for  the  guilty, 
we  then  bear  false  witness  against  the  accuser,  who  is  our  neighbour 
also. 

4.  But  still  more  atrocious  than  these  are  those  wicked  lawyers 
and  attorneys,  who  defend  false  accusations,  and  by  means  of  a 
smooth  and  eloquent  tongue,  or  deceitful  writings,  darken  the  true 
circumstances  of  matters,  mislead  the  judge,  and  delay  a  righteous 
sentence,  so  tnat  an  honest  person  can  scarcely  obtain  justice. 
Such  a  lawyer  was  Tertullus,  who  pleaded  in  behalf  of  the  Jews 
against  Paul,  \cts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Verily  such  persons,  who  ought  to 
assist  the  oppressed,  and  nevertheless  load  them  still  heavier,  are 
pests  of  the  human  race,  they  promote  the  interest  of  hell,  and  de- 
fend the  causes  of  the  devil.  They  may  remain  unpunished  in  this 
world,  but  the  wo,  with  which  they  are  threatened,  will  pursue 
them,  and  cleave  to  them  :  "  Wo  unto  them  that  call  good  evil,  and 
evil  good,"  saith  God,  Isaiah  v.  20. 

5.  But  that  which  surpasseth  all  other  abominations  is  the  conduct 
of  those  unjust  judges,  who  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  do  not 
regard  the  causes  of  the  righteous  for  a  long  time,  like  that  ungodly 
judge,  of  whom  the  saviour  speaks,  Luke  xviii.  2 — 4.  And  it  is 
still  worse  in  judges  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence  :  "  He  that 
justifie'.h  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemnelh  the  just,  even  they 
both  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Piov.  xvii.  15.  Whether  it  proceed  from  the  incapacity  and  un- 
skilfulness  of  the  foolish  judge,  who  is  like  a  child  in  understand- 
ing ;  bee  Ecci.  x.  16.  Isaiah  hi.  4,  12  ;  or  from  unrighteousness, 
Avhen  the  judge  will  not  hear  the  accused,  nor  permit  him  to  defend 
himself,  as  the  Jewish  council  pronounced  sentence  in  such  an  un- 
just manner  against  the  baviour,  and  his  servant  Paul,  John  vii. 
47 — 52.  xviii.  19 — 21.  Acts  xxiii.  1 — 3  ;  or  on  account  of  bribes 
and  self-interest:  so  the  judges  of  Judah  were  "  companions  of 
thieves,  every  one  loved  gifts,  and  followed  after  rewards,"  Isaiah 
i.  23  ;  or  because  the  judge  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  is  a  person  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  rich  or  poor,  courageous  or  fearful,  the  unjust 
judge  will  pervert  justice  accordingly  :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor, 
nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  :  but  in  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Lev.  xix.  15.  See 
also  Exod.  xxiii.  6 — 8.     God  denounceth  a  wo  against  such  judges, 

Vol.  ii.  2  U 


362         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  saith,  thai  "•  lie  will  ease  and  avenge  himself  of  those  adversa- 
ries of  linn."  Isaiah  l.  24. 

In  the  foregoing  commandments  only  head-sins  arc  mentioned} 
bqt  their  particular  members  are  also  comprehended  under  them; 
it  is  thus  also  here  :  when  bearing  false  witness  in  judgment  is  op- 
posed, it  is  then  forbidden  on  o'  her  occasions  also,  as 

4  '»  Falsifying  the  words  of  another,"  by  giving  them  a  sense 
different  from  that  which  they  commonly  have,  and  in  which  vse 
know  they  were  uttered.  This  is  "  that  frov/ard  mouth,  which  ve 
must  put  aw.ay  from  us,  and  those  perverse  lips,  which  we  must  put 
far  from  us,"  Prov.  iy.  24.  We  misconstrue  the  words  and  mean- 
ing of  another  thus,  either  by  adding  something  to  our  neighbour's 
words,  by  which  they  have  an  entirely  different  sense.  The  Savi- 
our speaking  of  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  which  he  would  raise  up 
from  the  dead,  saith,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  1  will 
raise  it  up,"  John  ii.  19,2  1,  but  the  Jews  perverted  his  words  by 
adding  to  them,  when  they  accused  him,  k*  that  he  had  said,  I  will 
destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made  with  hands,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands,"  Mark  xiv  38,  whtn  he  h&d 
nevertheless  not  said,  "  1  will  destroy,"  but,  "destroy  ye  ;"  he  did 
not  say,  kl  the  temple  made  with  hands,"  but  "  this  temple  ;"  nei- 
ther had  he  Spoken  "of  another,  but  of  ihe  same  temple,"  which 
they  should  destroy  ;  but  all  these  words  they  added  by  a  false  tes- 
timony. Or  when  we  leave  out  something,  in  order  to  falsify  a  per- 
son's words,  like  the  devil,  who,  that  he  might  induce  Christ  to 
tempt  his  Father  by  casting  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  said  from  Psalm  xci.  11,  that  kl  God  would  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  him  to  keep  him  ;"  but  he  leaves  out,  "  in  all 
thy  ways,"  Mat.  iv.  6.  We  also  falsify  a  person's  words  by  gestures, 
Whereby  we  give  them  another  and  a  wrong  colour.  A  person  ut- 
te  s  something  that  was  said  in  jest,  or  from  compassion,  in  such  a 
ler,  bj  an  alteration  of  his  countenance  or  voice,  as  if  it  were  spo- 
ke;) in  earnest,  or  from  contempt.  An  abominable  and  false  con- 
duct  1  vViio  can  b«.  safe  from  persons  ol  such  a  frowaid  heart  and 
jperver  e  1 

2.  I  his  commandment  forbids  also  "  backbiting."  by  which  a 
to  others  the  secrets  and  failings  of  his  neighbour,  to 
his  hurt  "  A  talebearer  revealeth  secrets,"  saith  the  wise  kin;-, 
Prov.  :::.  13.  Whether  a  person  do  this,  from  talkativeness,  arm  for 
p  stime,  like  "  the  Athenians,  who  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else, 
but  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing,"  Acts  xvii.  21,  and  like  the 
WOiaeU)  of  whom  i^aul  speaks,  1  Tim.  v.  13  ;  or  lrom  a 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  56S 

fondness  of  ridiculing  a  person  ;  as  Job  was  the  song  and  byword  of 
contemptible  persons,  Job  xxx  9  ;  or  IVom  a  cksire  of  pleasing 
others,  who  are  deligh  ed  with  hearing  their  neighbour's  secrets  add 
evil  doings,  as  Doeg  informed  Saui  concerning  David,  by  which  it 
came  to  pass,  that  to  many  priests,  and  ether  inhabitants  of  Nob 
"Were  slaini  1  Sam  xxii  7,  19;  or  from  envy  and  displeasure  with 
our  neighbour,  that  we  may  raise  up  new  enemies  against  him 
And  these  j.er-ons,  that  they  may  not  be  accounted  backbiter^.  Will, 
in  the  first  place,  relate  that  which  is  good  of  their  neighbour  and 
when  another  speaks  well  of  him,  they  will  assent  to  it,  yet  they 
will  add  a  "  but,"  or  an  "  alas;"  it  is  true,  they  will  s^y,  he  hath 
(hat  good  quality,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  he  hath  such  and  such  a  h .sl- 
ing ;  and  tuusa  person  is  condemned  by  himself  for  not  c:oing  well, 
and  this  is  nevertheless  an  evil  which  is  common  under  the  sun,  and 
occasions  much  disturbance.  And  surely  those  are  not  innocent  of 
backbiting-,  who  do  not  discountenance  such  backbiters-  but  sl.ow 
that  they  are  pleased  with  them  by  listening  to  them,  and  encoi  rag- 
ing them  to  say  all  that  they  know:  "  He  is  a  wicked  doer,  who 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips,  and  a  liar,  who  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty 
tongue,"  Prov.  xvii.  4. 

3.  "  Slandering"  our  neighbour,  that  is,  belching  out  words  of 
reproach  against  him,  either  when  he  is  present  or  absent  Da\id 
calls  this,  Psalm  xv.  3,  "  Taking  up  a  reproach  against  our  neigh- 
bour." Therefore  the  slanderer  is  also  called  a  reproachcr,  Psalm 
xliv.  16,  as  Shimei  acted  toward  David,  Ahab  toward  Elijah,  and 
the  Jews  toward  the  apostles,  2  Sam  xvi.  5 — 9.  1  Kings  xviii  17. 
Acts  xvii.  6.  It  is  exceedingly  wicked  to  do  this  with  words  ;  for 
"  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproachetb  his  Maker,"  Piov  xvii.  5, 
but  it  is  worse  and  mrolerable  to  do  it  with  pasquil :,  and  reproachful 
writings ;  no  man  can  be  repu'ed  honest  longer  than  such  a  re- 
proachful writer  chooseth  ;  bu'  let  rim  conceal  himself  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  the  Lord  will  find  him  out,  and  recompence  his  reproach- 
es upon  him. 

4.  The  commandment  concerning  bearing  false  witness  forbids 
also  "  judging,  or  joining  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard. 
"  We  have  just  now  shown  how  this  is  done  in  judgment  :  but  it  is 
done  also  out  of  judgment  ;  to  which  we  must  nevertheless  not  re- 
ftr  judging  that  a  person  is  in  the  way  to  perdition,  and  warning 
him  against  it,  when  he  discovers  manifest  tokens  of  his  graceless 
condition  by  his  exceeding  ignorance,  his  abandoning  ot  himself  to 
the  world,  his  hatred  of  the  good,  and  of  that  which  is  good,  and 
hy  other  sins  ;  for  we  must  judge  thus,  that  we  may  "  save  him  by 


364         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

fear,  and  pull  him  out  of  the  fire,"  according  to  the  exhortation  of 
holy  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  vs.  23.  But  we  must  refer  to  this,  (a) 
judging  that  a  person  is  or  is  not  gracious  from  his  prosperity  or 
adversity,  as  the  friends  of  Job  decried  him  for  a  hypocrite,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grievous  afflictions  :  "  No  man  knoweth  either  the  love 
or  hatred"  of  God,  "  by  all  that  is  before  him.  There  is  one  event 
to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,"  according  to  Eccl.  ix.  1,2. 
(b)  Giving  credit  without  further  inquiry  to  every  evil  report  con- 
cerning our  neighbour,  like  Saul,  who  without  any  reason  "  heard 
the  words  of  men,,  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt,"  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  10.  This  is  "  receiving  a  false  report,"  which  is  forbidden, 
Exod.  xxiii.  1.  We  must  refer  also  to  this,  (c)  judging  presently 
the  worst  of  our  neighbour  from  any  particular  event,  which  hap- 
pens through  the  disposal  of  divine  providence.  Because  "  a  viper 
fastened  upon  Paul's  hand,  the  Barbarians  judged  that  he  was  a 
murderer,  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  vengeance  suifered 
not  to  live,"  Acts  xxviii.  2 — 4.  (d)  It  is  still  more  unjust  to  mis- 
construe and  condemn  the  virtuous  conduct  of  a  person.  When 
Hannah  prayed  with  a  low  voice  from  sorrow,  Eli  judged  "  that 
she  was  drunk,"  1  Sam.  i.  10 — 16,  and  the  wicked  Jews  judged 
the  same  of  the  apostles  from  their  speaking  in  every  lan- 
guage by  the  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  13.  "  John  came  neither  eating  nor 
drinking,  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil.  The  Son  of  man  came 
eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  Behold,  a  man  gluttonous  and  a 
winebibber,"  Mat.  xi.  18,  19.  When  he  doih  not  allow  himself 
time  to  eat  and  drink,  his  friends  will  '«  by  hold  on  him,  as  if  he 
"Were  beside  himself,"  A' ark  iii.  20.  21.  Because  people  cannot  en- 
dure serious  godliness,  therefore  they  will  decry,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites and  legalists,  persons  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  com- 
mon manner  of  living,  but  endeavour  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  They  will  not  be  judged  themselves  ac- 
cording to  truth  from  their  evil  behaviour,  and  they  will  neverthe- 
less repeatedly  condemn  others  on  account  of  their  godliness.  But 
such  persons  set  themselves  up  for  judges  in  the  stead  of  God  : 
*'  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,"  saith  Paul,  1  Ccr.  iv.  4,  5.  They 
who  act  thus  "  speak  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  it  as  judges,"  ac- 
cording to  James  iv.  11,  12.  Therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ;  for  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged  ;" 
thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Mat.  vii.  1,2. 

5.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  "  all  sorts   of  lies."     By   which  wc 
must  understand,  relating  a  matter  for  truth,  which   is  nevertheless 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  365 

not  true,  when  a  person  knows  not  but  that  it  is  true  ;  for  he  doth 
indeed  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  no  lie  in  him,  because  he  speaks  according 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  ;  but  he  sins  notwithstanding,  because 
he  might  perhaps  have  known  better,  and  he  often  speaks  thus 
without  necessity  ;  but  it  is  a  complete  lie,  when  a  person  speaks 
contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  and  with  a  design  to  mislead 
others.  Since  now  we  bear  falbe  witness  by  all  sorts  of  lies,  there- 
fore this  commandment  forbids,  (a)  Lying  from  custom,  when  a 
a  person  hath  so  accustomed  himself  to  lying,  that  almost  every 
word  which  he  utters  is  a  lie,  and  he  can  plead  for  it,  as  for  a  most 
certain  truth,  like  "  the  Cretians,  who  were  always  liars,"  Titus  i. 
12,  and  like  "the  devil,  who  speaks  lies,  as  of  his  own,"  John  viii. 
44.  (b)  Also  lies  by  which  a  person  guesses  and  suppdseth  a  thing 
to  be  true,  when  he  might  nevertheless  have  known  better,  as  the 
people  of  Antichrist,  who  are  subject  to  "  a  strong  delusion,"  and 
therefore  "  believe  a  lie,"  according  to  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  (c)  Hurt- 
ful lies,  to  injure  our  neighbour.  So  "  the  rich  men  of  Judah  were 
full  of  violence,  aud  the  inhabitants  thereof  spoke  lies,  and  their 
tongue  was  deceitful  m  their  mouth,"  Micha  vi.  12.  (d)  Lies  for 
our  profit  and  advantage  are  also  hateful,  as  Gehazi  experienced, 
when  he  was  punished  with  leprosy,  Kings  v.  21 — 27.  To  which 
we  must  refer  also  officious  lies,  uttered  to  procure  an  advantage  to 
our  neighbour,  or  to  deliver  him  from  some  imminent  danger, 
(e)  And  further  jocular  lies,  to  divert  ourselves  and  others,  as  the 
idle  Israelites,  "  who  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and 
the  princes  with  their  lies,"  Hosea  vii.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  detesta- 
ble conduct  of  certain  persons  to  excuse  lies,  which  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  profit  or  pleasure,  when  nevertheless  all  lies  without  dis- 
tinction are  hated,  condemned  and  punished  by  God,  Psalm  v,  6. 
Prov.  vi.  19.  xii.  22.  Eph.  iv.  25.  Col.  iii.  9.  "We  may  not* 
speak  wickedly  nor  deceitfully  for  God,"  as  Job  saith,  Job  xiii.  7. 
Shall  we  then  do  it  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  neighbour  ?  "  We 
must  give  an  account  of  every  idle  word,"  Matt.  xii.  36.  If  the 
saints  did  sometimes  lie,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xii.  13 — 19.  Isaac, 
Gen.  xxvi.  7.  Jacob,  Gen  xxvii.  19.  34.  the  midwives  in  Egypt, 
Exod.  1.  19,  and  others,  we  ought  to  censure,  and  not  to  imitate 
their  conduct :  the  saints  had  also  other  infirmities,  which  ought 
not  therefore  to  be  approved  of.  Did  Abraham  say,  that  Sarah  was 
his  sister,  it  was  also  true,  as  he  showeth,  Gen.  xx.  12  Did  God 
bless  the  midwives  in  Egypt,  it  was  not  on  account  of  their  lies, 
but  their  godliness.     And  v/ho  can  say  that  they  did  not  speak  the 


.366       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

truth,  when  they  said,  "  the   Hebrew  women  are  lively,  and  are  de- 
livered tre  the  midwives  come  in  un'o  them  !"  Exod.  i.  19. 

Finally.}  this  commandment  forbids  also  '  deceit  :"  Not  those 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  men  abridge  their  neighbour  of 
his  property  :  for  this  belongs  to  the  ighth  commandment  Nei- 
ther doth  it  forbid  deceiving  our  enemy  with  military  artifices  :  for 
we  arc  not  obliged  to  inform  our  enemy  of  our  intention  to  annoy 
him.  God  himself  instructed  Israel  in  such  military  stratagems, 
and  commanded  them  to  make  use  of  them,  Joshua,  viii.  2.  We 
must  not  condemn  employing  a  holy  wisdom,  m  order  10  convert 
our  neighbour  by  the  word  :  Paul  "  being  crafty,  eaug \ft  the  Co.iri- 
vhians  with  guile,"  2  Lor.  xii.  16.  Neither  is  it  censurable  to  be- 
have as  strangers,  and  to  appear  unwilling,  in  order  to  try  a  person, 
and  to  discover  whether  he  will  perform  his  dtity,  as  the  angels  tried 
Lot,  and  the  Saviour  his  disciples;  Gen.  xix.  2.  Luke  xxiv.  2 
But  the  deceit  that  is  spoken  of  here  proceeds  from  a  malicious 
desire  to  insnare  and  mislead  our  felluvmen,  to  their  hurt.  And 
this  is  done,  (a)  by  treachery,  whereby  a  person  pretends  to  be 
friendly,  while  he  harbours  a  malignant  hatred  in  his  heart,  which 
disposeth  him  to  destroy  Ids  neighbour  :  "  they  speak  vanity  every 
one  with  his  neighbour  :  with  flattering  lips  and  with  a  double 
do  they  speak,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xii.  2.  See  also  Psalm  xxviii. 
J.  Such  deceivers  are  Joabs  and  Judasses.  who  kissed  their  neigh- 
bours deceitfully,  2  Sam.  ii  27.  xx.  8 — 10.  Matt.  xxvi.  -19. 
(b)  By  hypocrisy,  whereby  a  person  appears  exceedingly  devout 
externaliy,  while  l;is  heart  within  is  rotten,  and  nil  his  designs  are 
corrupt,  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  describes  the  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27,  and  thus  '*  men  deceive  themselves  with  vain  imaginations,"  as 
James  testifieth,  James  i.  22.  The  hypocrite  is  an  abominable 
monster  ;  for  he  hes  even  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  Spirit,  as  if  he 
would  deceive  the  Aillknowhig,  See  Psalm  'xxviii.  35.  Acts  v. 
3.  4,  9.  (c)  It  is  deceit  also  to  flatter,  and  soothe  our  neighbour 
by  praising  bin)  and  that  often  not  according  to  truth  ;  for  we  do 
thus  deceive  him  :  "  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,  spreadeth 
a  net  for  his  feet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxix.  5.  How  detestable 
this  is  in  preachers  we  may  think  and  read,  Isaiah  iii.  12.  Jer.  vi. 
14.  xxui.  14.  (d)  A  person  deceives  not  less  by  ambiguous  words 
and  mental  reservations,  which  are  usually  called  Mennonitish 
•tricks.  Of  these  we  havs  spoken  belore  upon  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

IL  As  no  man  is  good,  who  only   abstains  from  doing  evil,   hu; 
doth  not  do  that  which  is  good,  therefore  the  Lord  not  only  forbids 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 12.  367 

bearing  false  witness,  but  he  also  commands  us  to  have  a  proper  re- 
gatd  to  the  honour  of  our  neighbour.     To  which  pertains, 

1  H  That  we  love  the  truth."  The  Lord  saith,  "  love  the  truth," 
Zech.  viii.  19.  "  God  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  Psalm 
li.  6.  We  will  never  beware  of  bearing  false  witness,  unless  the 
truth  be  dear  and  lovely  in  our  eyes. 

2.  We  must  also  '4  speak  the  truth  uprightly,  and  confess  it."  We 
must  beware  of  every  reservation,  and  of  all  ambiguity  in  our  words, 
and  with  Paul,  we  must  "renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv-  2,  and  with  the  citizens  of 
Zion,  we  must  "speak  the  truth  in  our  hearts,"  according  to  Psalm 
xv.  2.  We  must  especially  speak  the  truth  and  confess  it,  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  speak  it,  whether  in  judgments"  a3  Jesus  be- 
ing adjured  by  Caiaphas,  confessed  that  "  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,"  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  or  *•  in  other  dealings,"  when  it 
may  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour,  and.  of  the  commu- 
nity :  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear," 
saith  Peter,  I  Peter  iii.  15.  Take  heed  nevertheless  not  to  utter 
the  whole  truth  without  necessity,  bolomon  saith,  Prov.  xxix.  11, 
that  "a  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  "  When  Samuel  came  to  Beth- 
lehem, in  order  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  to  anoint  one  of 
the  sons  of  Jesse,  he  declared  the  first,  but  not  the  second  reason  of 
his  coming,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1 — 5.  So  Jeremiah  also  acted,  telling  a 
part  of  what  had  passed  between  him  and  the  king,  but  not  the  whole, 
Jer.  xxviii :  24 — 27. 

3.  It  becomes  us  also  to  "defend  and  promote  as  much  as  we 
are  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  cur  neighbour."  And 
therefore  we  must  not  lend  an  ear  to  backbiters  ;  for  if  we  do  we 
lend  our  ear  to  the  devd,  as  the  backbiter  doth  his  tongue.  Do  we 
hear  aught  to  the  disparagement  of  our  neighbour,  we  must  beware 
that  we  do  not  presently  believe  it,  but  we  must  defend  our  neigh- 
bour's honour,  as  much  as  we  can  and  may  :  "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction," 
This  is  enjoined  even  on  the  king,  Prov.  xxi.  8.  Jonathan  acted 
so  in  behalf  of  David,  1  Sam.  xix.  45.  xx.  32.  And  the 
princes  and  elders  of  the  land  conducted  so  toward  Jeremiah,  Jer. 
xxxvi.  16 — 24.  Do  we  know  aught  that  would  disgrace  our  neigh- 
bour, we  must  not  report  it,  but  hold  our  peace  ;  yea,  though  every 
one  should  know  it,  we  must  nevertheless  not  speak  of  it,  that  the 
evil  rer  ort  may  be  hushed,  and  <he  offence  may  gradually  ceas^. 
Do  we  know  any  good  of  our  neighbour,  we  ought  to   speak  of  it. 


368        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

when  we  may  excile  others  to  imitate  it,  and  when  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  such  a  virtuous  man,  as  one  of  Saul's  young  men  said 
in  commendation  of  David  to  his  king,  that  "  he  was  a  cunning 
player,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war  and  prudent 
in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him," 
1  Sam.  xvi.   18. 

And  what  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  this  command,  which  is  given 
to  the  covenant  p;  ople  of  God,  a  reasonable  command  ?  This  com- 
mand approves  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  to  be  holy,  just  and 
good.      Would  ye  see  the  propriety  of  it,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  Lord  God,  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  de- 
stroy, to  whom  all  the  creatures,  and  still  more  his  reasonable  crea- 
tures, but  most  of  all  his  covenant  people  are  subject,  is  "the  God 
of  truth,"  Isaiah  lxv.  16-  Yea,  lie  is  the  truth  itself,  Jer.  x.  10, 
"  he  cannot  lie,"  Tit.  i.  2.  Hub  v\.  18.  It  is  now  surely  proper, 
that  his  reasonable  creatures,  who  were  mac'e  after  his  image,  and 
especially  that  his  covenant  people,  who  are  renewed  after  his 
likeness,  should  be  like  him.  The  apostle  might  therefore  rea- 
sonably exhort  the  Ephesians,  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness  and  holiness,  or  in  the 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  to  put  away 
lying  and  to  speak  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  Eph. 
iv.  24,  25. 

2.  Bearing  false  witness  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  :  it  is 
violated,  annihilated,  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  even  made  a  lie 
thereby.  Is  not  this  abominable  ?  and  if  a  person  dare  to  do  this, 
what  other  unbecoming  actions  will  he  not  presume  to  do  ? 

3.  Is  it  not  right,  that  the  thoughts  and  words  of  a  person  should 
agree  ?  Must  not  the  person,  who  speaks  falsehoods,  silence  his 
conscience,  before  he  can  abandon  himself  to  bearing  false  witness? 
To  excite  such  a  strife  between  his  heart  and  mouth  is  certainly  un- 
seemly. Will  he  who  deceives  his  neighbour,  endure  to  be  de- 
ceived by  him  in  such  a  manner  ?  No  man  is  willing  to  be  called  a 
false  witness,  or  a  liar ;  will  he  then  be  it  ?  this  is  iniquity. 

4.  The  person  who  transgresseth  this  commandment,  destroys  at" 
the  same  time  all  human  society  ;  for  he  disturbs  all  love,  sincerity, 
trust,  confidence  and  good  neighbourhood  among  friends  and  citi- 
zens. When  the  commonwealths  of  Israel  and  Judah  hastened  to 
their  ruin,  it  was  a  forerunner  of  their  dissolution,  that  "  lying  pic- 
vailed,"  Hosea  iv.  2,  and  M  thai  they  could  not  trust  a  friend,  nor 
put  confidence  in  a  guide,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
doors  of  their  mouths  from  her  wko  lay  in  their  bosom/'  Micha 
vii.  5. 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  U2.  369 

5.  "  Lying  and  deceit,"  and  whatever  else  belongs  to  bearing  false 
witness,  "  arc  works  of  the  devil."  He  forged  the  first  lie,  Gen. 
iii.  4.  "  He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is 
a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it ;"  thus  speaks  the  mouth  of  truth  con- 
cerning him,  John  viiu  44.  Shall  not  a  man  then,  yea,  a  believer 
avoid  these  abominations?  If  he  do  not,  he  declares  himself  to  be 
a  "  child  and  of  his  father  the  devil,  and  that  the  lusts  of  his  father 
he  will  do,"  according  to  the  words  of  him  who  is  true,  John 
viii.  44. 

6.  Once  more  ;  he  who  defiles  himself  with  this  sin,  "brings 
down  upon  himself  the  heavy  wrath  of  God."  Among  "the  six 
things  which  the  Lord  hateth,  and  the  seven  which  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  him,  are  also  a  lying  tongue,  and  a  false  witness  that  speak- 
eth lies,"  according  to  Prov.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  "  A  false  witness  shall 
not  be  innocent,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape,  but  per- 
ish," saith  the  same  wise  man,  Prov.  xix.  5,  9.  The  Lord  will 
punish  such  persons,  until  he  hath  destroyed  them  :  "  Thou  shale 
destroy  them  that  speak  leasing,"  saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  v. 
6.  John  teacheth,  Rev.  xxi.  8,  that  "  liars  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone." 


APPLICATION, 

But,  friends,  how  is  it  with  you  in  this  respect  ?  are  ye  entirely 
innocent  of  these  transgressions  ?  Ye  will  say  no  ;  "  all  men  are 
liars."  It  is  true,  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  this,  Psalm  cxvi.  11. 
Rom.  iii  4.  But  do  ye  believe  this  of  yourselves,  so  that  ye  see  it 
in  your  actions,  and  are  ashamed  of  it  ?  surely  no  ;  for  if  any  per- 
son should  look  upon  you  as  liars,  and  should  tell  you  that  he  did, 
would  it  not  provoke  yovi  to  anger  against  him  ?  who  indeed  will 
suffer  such  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  not  then  evident,  that  ye  have  not 
such  an  impression  concerning  yourselves,  and  that  ye  do  not  be- 
lieve it  ?  Ye  believe  that  the  word  of  God,  which  declares  that  all 
men  are  liars,  is  true,  and  that  bearing  false  witness  is  a  shameful 
sin,  and  deserves  a  severe  punishment ;  and  nevertheless  when  this 
matter  is  applied  to  you,  ye  then  look  upon  yourselves  to  be  honest 
persons,  at  least,  your  hearts  are  not  broken  on  account  of  these 
sins.  It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  know  only  from  the  word,  that 
Vol.  n.  3  V 


370        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  are  called  transgressors  of  this  commandment,  but  we  must  also 
sue  it  in  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  asi-amed,  concerned,  ,and  hum- 
bled  on  account  of  it.  Therefore  examine  yourselves  by  what  is 
foi  bidden  and  commanded  here,  and  pause  a  while,  until  ye  see  the 
most,  if  not  all  these  abominations  in  your  minds  and  ac'ions,  ai,d 
until  this  affects  you  thoroughly!  Come,  ye  who  have  at  any  time 
acted  as  plaintiffs,  as  defendants,  as  witnesses,  as  lawyers  and  attor- 
neys, or  as  judges  in  courts  of  judicature,  have  ye  never  boine  wit- 
ness to  aught  hot  the  truth,  and  have  ye  always  spoken  the  truth, 
without  any  clokes  of  shame  ?  Yea,  hear,  all  ye  who  hear  me  this 
d.iy,  are  ye  faithful  in  relating  the  words  of  another,  forbearing  either 
to  add  or  diminish  aught  by  your  words  cr  gestures  ?  are  ye  stran- 
gers to  backbiting,  never  bespattering  your  neighbour's  skirts  ?  do  ye 
never  defame,  nor  reproach  him,  either  in  his  presence  or  absence  ? 
is  your  soul  so  filled  with  love  to  your  neighbour,  that  ye  do  not  sus- 
pect, nor  judge  him  rashly  or  unheard  ?  do  ye  shudder  at  every 
kind  of  lying  and  deceit  ?  do  ye  love  the  truth  ?  always  speak  and 
confess  it  with  sincerity,  when  it  is  proper  ?  and  do  ye  do  your  ut- 
most to  defend  the  honour  and  good  character  of  your  neighbour? 
ye  are  tl-en  "  perfect,  since  ye  do  not  offend  in  word,"  according  to 
James  iii.  2.  But  friends,  i.ow  can  ye,  and  how  can  we  believe 
this  of  you  ?  your  actions,  words,  and  behaviour  condemn  you,  and 
declare  that  ye  bear  false  witness  of  yourselves.  Your  angry,  raving 
thoughts  concerning  your  neighbour  ;  the  pains,  the  grief,  the  sor- 
row and  complaints  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  courts  of  judi- 
cature ;  your  prating  the  whole  day  long  against  your  neighbour  ; 
all  that  discontent,  and  all  those  complaints,  winch  we  hear  daily  of 
the  injuries  which  some  suffer  from  their  neighbour's  tongues,  man- 
ifest how  abominable  and  guilty  our  people  are  before  the  Lord. 
We  may  indeed  say  now  from  Isaiah  lix.  14,  15,  '"Judgment  is 
turned  away  backward,  and  justice  standeth  afar  off;  for  truth  is  fal- 
len in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter.  Yea,  truth  faileth,  and  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  a  prey  :  and  the  Lord  seeth 
it,  and  it  displtaseth  him."  It  would  be  your  happinesss,  if  ye  also 
saw  it,  and  that  ye  were  wholly  perverse,  hateful  and  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  O  see  with  brokenness  of  heart,  that  your  "  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre,  that  ye  have  used  deceit  with  your  tongues,  that 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  your  lips,  and  that  your  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness."  It  is  so  of  a  truth,  whether  ye  know  it  or 
not.  Paul,  who  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  accuseth  you  ,of  this,. 
Rom.  iii.  13,  14, 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  371 

Do  ye  see  these  things  in  yourselves  with  anxiety  and  concern, 
permit  me  to  afford  you  my  advice,  in  order  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  may  be  delivered  from  your  evil  disposition. 

1.  £>eek  to  obtain  reconciliation  for  these  iniquities  of  the  Lord. 
His  Son  hath  borne  his  wrath,  and  satisfied  his  justice  for  such 
transgressions,  in  behalf  of  those  who  lice  for  refuge  to  him.  He 
himself  bore  the  punishment  of  them,  when  he  suffered  false  accu- 
sations, the  falsifying  of  his  words,  backbiting,  reproaches,  unjust 
condemnations,  with  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit.  Yea,  he  purcha'.d 
a  perfect  righteousness,  which  can  entitle  you  to  life,  when,  in  obe- 
dience to  his  Father,  he  loved  the  truth,  always  spoke  uprightly, 
and  promoted  in  the  most  hearty  manner  his  neighbour's  honour. 
Seek  then  and  receive  by  faith  him  and  his  righteousness,  tha>  with 
Paul  ye  may  "  be  found  in  him,  and  may  have  his  righteousness5" 
Pinlip.  hi.  7  —  10. 

2.  seek  another  and  a  true  temper  of  mind,  that  ye  may  love  the 
truth,  and  may  speak  it  upon  every  occasion  :  "  God  desireth  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  as  David  testifielh  with  truth,  lJsaln;  li.  6.  Ye 
will  never  govern  your  tongues  aright,  until  your  minds  are  changed  ; 
"  For  out  of  the  abund  nee  of  the  heart  the  mnmh  spt&keth,"  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  Mat.  xn.  34  But  this  can  never  happen,  unless 
the  Lord  himself,  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  apply 
his  hand  effectually  to  the  mind-  As  he  alone  wrote  this  command 
in  tables  of  stone,  so  he  also  must  write  it  in  the  heart,  and  thus, 
according  to  his  promise.  Isaiah  Ixi  8  "direct  our  work  in  truth." 
As  iVloses  then  carried  his  tables  ot  stone  up  to  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  engrave  his  law  v>  them,  so  do  ye  also  commit  your  heaits 
into  his  hand,  that  he  may  form  and  dispose  them  according  to  his 
law,  yea,  that  he  may  imprint  his  law  in  them,  and  that  he  may 
also  direct  your  mouths  according  to  it.  David  did  so,  when  lie 
said,  Psalm  xix-  14.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tation of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord."  See  how  he 
dreaded  the  sin  of  his  tongue,  and  therefore  prayed  against  it  time 
after  time,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  cxli.  3.  Thus  also  Agur,  the  son  of 
Jakeh  did,  Prov.  xxx.  7,  8. 

3.  Let  no  man  bear  false  witness  against  himself.  A  man  haih 
none  nearer  to  him  than  himself;  and  therefore  it  is  much  more 
preposterous  in  him  to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  than 
against  his  neighbour.  This  is  nevertheless  often  done :  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  who  can 
know  it  ?"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  Therefore  an  unconverted 
person  will  often  judge  concerning  himself,  that  he  and  his  condi- 


m       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

tion  are  good  in  the  sight  of  God  :  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  de^ 
ceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul, 
nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  I"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 
Moreover,  a  believer,  who  hath  yet  but  little  experience,  will  some- 
times judge,  from  a  prejudice  against  himself,  that  he  is  in  a  grace- 
less  condition  ;  but  as  it  is  on  the  one  hand  dangerous,  so  it  is  on 
the  other  exceedingly  sinful  to  judge  otherwise  of  ourselves,  than 
God  lestifieth  of  us  in  his  word. 

4.  Hate  lies  and  deceit  of  every  kind,  be  afraid  of  them,  as  of 
the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  and  those  by  which  we  bring  down 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  us  :  '•  A  righteous  man  hateth  lying,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  xiii.  5,  He  had  also  observed  this  in  his  father, 
who  saith,  Psalm,  cxix.  104,  "  I  hale  every  false  way." 

5.  Beware  of  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness,  as  (a)  discon- 
tent with  your  neighbour,  by  which  men  are  easily  urged  to  speak 
evil  of  their  neighbour,  and  to  hear  it  eagerly,  with  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  7 — 19.  xxiv.  10.  (b)  Great  talkativeness:  "India  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  x. 
19.  We  must  especially  beware  of  idle  talking  and  jesting  :  "  Fil- 
thiness,  and  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  must  not  be  once  named 
among  you,"  Eph.  v.  4.  (c)  Watch  particularly  against  your  pride  ; 
tor  through  pride  we  imagine  that  we  know,  and  are  able  to  say 
every  thing  better  than  others  ;  "  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a 
rod  of  pride  :  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them,"  accord- 
ing to  Prov.  xiv.  3.  (d)  Watch  also  against  a  heart  that  is  void  of 
the  Spirit ;  for  when  the  heart  is  not  filled  with  good  things,  the 
tongue  must  speak  vanity  :  "  Finally,  brethren,"  saith  Paul,  Philip. 
iv.  8,  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest, 
whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things,"  (e) 
Never  think  that  your  neighbour  will  keep  aught  to  himself  that  ye 
have  said  to  him  :  forbid  him  to  speak  of  it  again,  and  he  will  still 
mention  it  to  another,  and  enjoin  on  him  to  keep  it  to  himself,  and 
it  will  thus  pass  from  one  to  another,  and  often  with  many  false  ad- 
ditions. If  ye  be  silent  yourselves,  another  cannot  bewray  your  se- 
cret :  but  after  ye  havs  once  related  it,  ye  arc  then  no  longer  mas- 
ters of  your  words.  Therefore  study  to  keep  silence :  "  Even  a 
fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise  :  and  he  that  shut- 
teth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding,"  Prov.  xvii.  "S. 

If  we  would  conduct  in  this  manner,  what  a  harmonious  friendship 
should  we  enjoy  with  ourselves,  with  men,  and  God  !     "  What  man 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112,  37S 

is  he,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  12,  13,  "  that  desireth  life,  and 
loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile."  Hear  what  he  saith  to 
God,  Psalm  xv.  1,3,  "  Lord,  v/ho  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernarle  ? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nov  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbour."     Amen. 


(  3^4  ) 


THE 


TENTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his 
maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  tiling  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's.

Q.   111.  But  what  doth  God  require  in  this  command? 

A.  That  I  promote  the  advantage  of  my  neighbour  in  every  in- 
stance I  can  or  may  ;  and  deal  with  him  as  I  desire  to  be  dealt  with 
by  others  :  further  also,  that  I  faithfully  labour,  that  1  may  be  able 
to  relieve  the  needy. 


342      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 


G 


OD,"  saith  Paul  to  the   Athenians,  Acts   xvii.  25,  "  gheth 
to  all  lite,  breath,  and  all  things."     Life  and  breath  are  either  M  the 
breath  of  life,"    which  "  God   hath  breathed   into  man,"    as  iV'oses 
testifieth,  Gen.  ii.  17.     Or  if  life  and  breath  be  considered  distinctly, 
life  is  that  which  gives  existence  to  man  by  his  creation  or  birth,  and 
breath,  by   which  he   inhales  and  exhales   the   air  in  breathing,  is 
the   action   and  preservation   of  his  life  by  the  influence  of  God,  by 
which  lie   maintains  that  life,  which  he  hath  given.     But  as  neither 
life  nor  breath  can  endure,  unless  the  powers,  which  are  continually 
wasted  by  perspiration,  be  recompensed  again,  therefore  God  givetn 
us  all   things  to   maintain  our  life  and    breath,   as  food  and  clothing. 
The  Lord  is  indeed  "  a  faithful  Creator,"  1  Peter  iv.  19.    "  The  liv- 
ing God  givcth  us  all   things   richly  to  enjoy,"  saith   the  apostle,  1 
Tim.  vi.  17.     Man,  although    he  is  the  most    excellent  of  all  God's 
creatures  on  earth,  was    nevertheless   created   by  God   af'er  all  the 
creatures  :  and  why  ?  it  was  in  order  that  God  might  introduce  him 
into  a  plentiful    habitation,  and  thus    show  that   he    wouhl    maintain 
his   life   and   breath.     If  it  had   pleased  the    Lord,  he    conkl    have 
3naintained  the  life  and  breath  of  man  immediately,  as  he   support- 
ed Moses,  Elias  and   Christ   forty    days   and  nights ;  but    he  would 
afford  continually  new  evidences  of  his  independence,  allsuffic'u  nry, 
wisdom  and   goodness,  and  of   man's   dependence  on    his   Maker. 
As  the  Lord  then  giveth  man  all  things  to  preserve  him  alive,  so  he 
chooses  that  he  should  also  retain  them,  and  he  cloih  not  permit  any 
person  to  bereave  him  of  those  tilings,  that  lie  mav  not  by  the  want 
of  them   lose   the  breath   of  life.     Therefore   he  saith,  as   the  only 
Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  destroy]  "  Thou   shall  not  steal."     He 
required   in  the  sixth   commandment,  that  no  man   should   kill  his 
neighbour  ;     and   Lmce   the   woman  is  the   delight  of  his  eyes,  and 
thus  refreshes  and  continues  his  life  and  breat'd,  therefore  the  Lord 
forbids   also  adultery  in   the  seventh   commandment.     But  can  any 
man  retain  and  enjoy  the  breath  of  his   life  wit!)  t'ie  wife  whom  he 
loves,  when  others  deprive    him  of  food  and   clothing?  surely  no  j 
and  therefore  the  Lawgiver  enjoins  en  every  man  in  the  eighth  com- 
mandment, that  he  should  not  steal. 

The  instructor  explaining  this  commandment,  z\,qy;s>  fur  that  pur- 
pose, 

I.  The  sins  that  are  forbidden  in  it,   Question  1 10. 

II.  The  virtues  that  are  commanded  in  it,  Question  111. 

i.  The  sin    which    the    Lawgiver    forbids   here  is  stealing.     We 
■  ill  survey  this  iniquity  first  in  itself,  and  then  in  its  c.ni5:s  ;  and  will 


XLIL  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  Hi.  345 

then  also  attend  to  the  abominable  nature  of  the  sin.  The  Hebrew 
word  ganab  signifies  to  do  something  secretly,  that  is  shameful,  and 
ol  which  a  person  is  ashamed.  When  "David  mourned  for  Absa- 
lom," by  whose  death  nevertheless  the  insurrection  against  him  was 
quelled,  "  the  victory  was  turned  into  mourning  to  all  the  people, 
and  the  people  gat  them  by  stealth  into  the  city,  as  people  being 
ashamed,  steal  away,  when  they  flee  in  battle,"  as  we  read,  2  Sam. 
xix.  1,  2,  3.  And  this  word  signifies  doing  thus  particularly  by  de- 
ceit, as  "  Absalom  stole  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Israel,"  2  Sam. 
>:v  6,  when  by  deceitful  speeches  he  withdrew  the  minds  of  the  Is- 
raelites from  his  father,  and  inclined  ihem  to  himself.  And  so 
stealing  consists  in  "  taking  our  neighbour's  property  from  him, 
with  or  without  his  knowledge,  against  his  mind." 

God  hath  given  to  every  man  his  particular  portion  of  the  goods 
of  this  world,  as  his  property.  It  was  his  will  that  Adam  should 
"  subdue  the  earth,"  and  all  the  creatures  on  it  to  himself,"  and 
that  he  should  have  dominion  over  them,"  Gen,  i.  28.  But  when 
men  multiplied,  it  was  necessary  that  each  of  them  should  have  his 
portion:  "Cain,  a  tiller  of  the  giound,  had  therefore  the  fruits  of 
the  ground,  and  Abel,  a  shepherd,  had  his  sheep,"  Gen.  iv.  3,  4. 
When  men  were  not  yet  so  numerous,  that  they  could  occupy  the 
whole  earth,  every  man  became  the  owner  of  that  land,  and  of 
those  goods,  which  he  first  found.  When  the  whole  body  of  men 
purposed  to  settle  together  in  the  land  of  Shinar,  and  were  unwil- 
ling to  disperse  over  the  whole  earth,  the  Lord  defeated  their  pur- 
pose by  confounding  their  language,  that  he  might  induce  them  to 
dwell  on  all  the  earth,  and  each  to  take  for  his  property  the  posses- 
sion that  was  allotted  him  ;  for  when  "  the  Most  High  separated 
the  sons  of  Adam,  he  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance," 
Deut.  xxxii.  8.  Are  there  at  present  no  more  vacant  lands  to  be 
occupied,  every  individual  nevertheless  holds,  as  his  special  goods 
and  property,  that  which  he  obtains  by  right  of  inheritance,  by  traf- 
fic, learning,  and  any  honourable  art,  or  by  the  labour  of  his  hands, 
and  thus  "  he  eats  his  own  bread,"  according  to  2  Thess.  iii.  12, 
It  is  therefore,  considering  this  wise  distribution  of  goods  among 
men,  exceedingly  preposterous  in  certain  persons,*  to  assert,  with 
the  ancient  Essenes,  a  community  of  goods,  whereby  all  things 
should  be  common  to  all,  and  none  should  have   aught  as  his  own  ; 

*  By  these  the  author  designs  the  Labadists,  a  sect  which  existed  in  his 
time,  but  which  hath  since  fallen  into  oblivion.  They  were  so  called  from 
John  Labadie,  their  founder,  a  minister  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  Frinee, 
a  gre;:t  enthusiast,  who  held  r?v?r^i  ether  erroneous  '.•■■■ 


344      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

this  would  encourage  sloth  fulness,  and  exclude  liberali'y.  In  ordei* 
that  the  Israelite  might  "  open  his  hand  wide  to  his  brother,  to  his 
poor,  and  to  his  needy,"  the  Lord  saith, 'that  "  the  poor  should  not 
cease  out  of  the  land,"  Deut  xv.  11.  It  is  true,  in  the  first  Chris- 
tian church  all  who  believed  were  together,  and  had  all  things  in 
common  ;  neither  said  any  of  them,  that  aught  of  the  things  that 
he  possessed  was  his  own,  but  they  had  all  things  common,"  as 
Luke  reliteth,  Acts  ii.  44.  iv.  32.  But  this  was  only  a  special 
case  for  that  time,  and  it  proceeded  from  the  heat  of  the  power  of 
that  love,  which  consumed  them  and  their  goods  through  the  power 
of  godliness ;  but  it  was  not  general,  neither  was  it  a  command  of 
the  apostles :  every  man  was  permitted  to  keep  his  goods  for 
his  own  use,  as  Peter  declares  to  Ananias,  Acts  v.  4.  John  had  his 
own  house,  and  maintained  the  mother  of  Jesus  in  it,  John  xix.  27. 
If  it  had  been  otherwise,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary,  that  the 
believing  Gentiles  should  send,  every  one  according  to  his  ability, 
their  charitable  contributions  to  the  believing  Jews,  as  is  testified, 
Acts  xi.  28,  29,  30,  neither  would  it  have  been  of  any  use,  that 
Paul  should  urge  that  liberality  by  so  many  motives,  1  Cor.  xvi. 
1 — 4,  2  Cor.  viii,  and  ix.  lor  this  command  is  founded  in  the 
property,  that  men  have  in  these  or  those  goods;  for  stealing  is  a 
taking  of  another  person's  property  to  ourselves,  without  his  con- 
sent. 

Theft  is  divided  into  the  grosser  or  greater,  and  the  lesser.  The 
grosser  or  greater  is  that  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrate, 
because  it  tendeth  to  the  destruction  of  the  commonwealth.  This  is. 

1.  "  Manstealing,"  when  a  person  steals  a  human  being,  to  sell 
him,  or  to  beg  with  him,  and  thus  to  gain  aught  by  him  ;  so  Jo- 
seph complained  that  k<  he  had  been  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the 
Hebrews,"  Gen.  xi.  15.  The  Lord  God  required  that  such  thieves 
should  be  punished  with  death:  he  saith,  Exod.  xxi.  16,  "  He  that 
steaieth  a  man  and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  shall 
surely  be  put  to  death."  See  also  Deut.  xxi  v.  7,  and  1  Tim  i.  10. 
But  since  we  do  not  buy  men  in  this  country,  this  sin  doth  not  pre- 
vail among  us:  it  happens  indeed  sometimes,  that  lazy  beggars 
steal  children,  in  order  to  beg  with  them,  but  this  is  also  rare  :  the 
Jesuits  and  monks  nevertheless  often  render  themselves  guilty  of 
this  theft,  for  they  entice  children,  seduce  them  from  their  parents, 
and  carry  t!icm  agjia^t  their  parents  mind  into  monasteries. 

2.  "  Stealing  cattle,"  although  it  is  not  so  atrocious  an  offence, 
as  stealing  men,  must  also  be  considered  as  punishable  by  the  magis- 
trate,    'i'he  Lord  Baith,  Exod.  xxii.   1,   <■  It'  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox, 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  ill.  345 

or  a  sheep,  ar.d  kill  it,  or  sell  it,  he  shall  restore  five  oxen  for  an  ox, 
and  four  sheep  for  a  sheep  •"  The  penalty  for  an  ox  was  greater 
thaii  that  foi  a  sheep,  because  they  made  use  of  oxen  for  ploughing 
arid  husbandry :  he  therefore,  who  stole  an  ox,  not  only  deprived 
the  owner  of  his  property,  as  he  did,  who  stole  a  sheep,  but  also 
discommoded  the  posssessor  in  tilling  his  land. 

3.  We   add  to  this  w  houserobbery,"  that  is,    stealing    money,  or 

old  goods,  clothes,  victuals,  or  ether  matters,  whether  the 
thief  take  aught  of  the  goods  that  are  at  hand,  in  passing  by,  or 
her  he  filch  aught  from  the  owner,  while  he  is  talking,  or  other- 
iged  :  or  whether  he  enter  privately  into  the  house,  or 
break  into  it,  and  take  whatever  pleaseth  him.  Tie  civil  law  of  Is- 
rael permitted  the  master  of  the  house  to  "kill  the  thief,  who  broke 
into  his  house  by  night ;  but  if  the  sun  were  risen,  he  might  not  kill 
hitn.  but  the  thief  was  to  make  full  restitution,  yea,  to  give  double  : 
If  he  had  nothing  wherewith  to  make  restitution,  he  was  to  be  sold 
for  his  theft,"  Exod.  xxii.  2 — 4.  We  cannot  determine  from  the 
civil  law  of  Israel,  that  we  have  now  a  right  to  kill  a  thief,  who  steals 
cattle,  or  household  goods,  since  this  law  was  ordained  only  for  that 
people  and  country,  and  cannot  well  be  observed  in  other  countries 
and  nations:  among  the  Israelites  the  thief  was  able  to  make  full 
restitution  of  what  he  had  stolen,  because  among  them  every  man 
had  his  immovable  possesison  of  lands ;  and  if  he  had  spent  all, 
and  had  empovei  isheel  himself,  he  mig:it  be  sold,  and  his  debt  com- 
pensated, according  to  Exod.  xxii.  3.  But  this  hath  not  place  among 
us.  It  is  true,  we  could  now  confine  the  thief  in  a  house  of  correc- 
tion, but  he  could  not  then  compensate  his  theft,  or  restore  to  the 
owner  that  which  he  had  stolen  from  him  five,  four,  or  twofold. 
We  dare  not  therefore  determine  whether  the  magistrate  may  not 
punish  grosser  acts  of  theft,  which  are  aggravated  by  many  circum- 
stances, with  death.  But  it  appears  too  hard  to  punish  simple  theft 
severely,  especially  when  it  proceeds  from  poverty,  either  with  death-. 
or  with  a  great  contempt  of  the  thief:  Solomon  sailh,  Prov.  vi.  30, 
31.  "  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul 
when  he  is  hungry  :  but  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore  sevenfold, 
lie  shall  give  all  the    substance  of  his  house." 

4.  Unfaithful  magistrates  and  collectors  render  themselves  guilty 
of"  peculation,"  or  stealing  from  the  public,  when  they  exhaust  the 
poor  commons,  in  order  to  enrich  themselves  :  "  As  a  roaring  lion, 
and  a  ranging  bear,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  people,"  saith 
the  wise  man,  Prov    xxviii.   15.     Such  were   the  rulers    of  Israel  : 

:  they  plucked  the  skin  from  off  the  Israelites,   and  their  flesh  from 
Vol..  iu  2  S 


246       THE  THTRD  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  see  whether  they  will  not  come  out  leprous.  Think  not  that  ye 
have  cleansed  your  hearts  in  this  respect,  and  are  pure  of  this  sin, 
because  ye  are  so  blind,  that  ye  do  not  know  yourselves.  Paul,  be- 
fore he  was  converted,  blasphemed  God,  and  he  nevertheless  knew 
not  that  he  did  it  as  he  confessed  afterwards,  when  he  was  better 
enlightened,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Yea,  he  compelled  others  to  blaspheme, 
and  thought  that  he  did  God  service,  Acts.  xxvi.  9,  10,  11.  Only 
attend  to  all  your  former  doings,  and  ye  will  see  that  your  whole  lift 
hath  been  altogether  without  aDd  dishonourable  to  God.  And  it  is 
therefore  evident,  that  ye  take  his  name  in  vain,  that  he  is  not  your 
covenant  God,  that  ye  are  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  thai  he  will  not 
hold  you  guiltless. 

Alas  !  that  with  the  jailer,  ye  cried  out  with  trembling,  on  ac- 
count of  your  great  guilt,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Ye 
would  then  learn  how  the  Lord  could  hold  you  guiltless ;  for  this 
would  cause  your  souls  to  flee  out  of  themselves  to  him,  who  suffered 
blasphemy,  and  on  account  of  blasphemy.  Endeavour  not  only  to  re- 
s'.rain  yout  mouths  from  uttering  such  dreadful  Language,  but  also 
to  be  found  wholly  in  Christ,  and  with  "  the  Corinthians,  who  were 
before  blasphemers,  to  be  washed,  sanctified  and  justified  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  as  the  apostie 
testifieth  of  them,  1  Cor.  vi,  10,  11. 

But,  believers,  ye  also  have  frequently  sinned  against  this  com- 
mandment. Reflect  only  on  your  former  behaviour,  on  all  your 
free  thoughts  and  words,  your  vain  and  dissolute  conversation,  and 
how  ye  have  reproached  God  during  your  "  ignorance  and  unbelief," 
like  Paul  1  Tim.  i.  13.  Ye  have  laden  yourselves  with  a  heavy 
burthen  of  guilt,  ye  have  seen  it,  and  know  how  it  oppressed  you, 
and  with  what  dreadful  distress  your  souls  were  seized,  when  ye 
st.w  that  God  would  not  hold  you  guiltless  ;  but  ye  have  with  Paul, 
"obtained  mercy,"  1  Tim.  i.  13.  God  could  not,  and  he  nevertheless 
doth  hold  you  guikless :  his  Son  hath  atoned  for  your  reproaching 
of  the  Lord  in  your  stead  :  "  The  zeal  of  God's  house  did  eat  him 
up,  and  the  reproaches  of  them  who  reproached  the  Lord  fell  on 
him,"  as  lie  complains  by  the  mouth  of  David,  Psalm  lxix.  9.  Be» 
cause  ye  had  blasphemed  God,  the  wicked  accused  him  of  blasphe- 
my, and  slew  him  on  account  of  it :  he  purchased  the  covenant  of 
grace  for  yon,  and  "  though  he  was  just,  he  suffered  for  you,  who 
were  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  you  to  God,"  1  Peter  iii.  18,  and 
that  the  Lord  might  no  more  be  wroth  with  you,  "that  be  might 
make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  that  he  would  not  hlfli 


io<\  247 

from  you  to  do  you  good,  and  that  he  would  put  his  fear  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  might  not  depart  from  him,"  Jer.  xxxii.     Therefore, 

1.  Let  your  souls  wonder  and  he  amazed  at  the  great  and  free 
grace,  that  hath  been  shown  to  you.  Ye  who  were  guilty  are  hol- 
den  guiltless  ;  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  guiltless,  was  holden  guilty, 
and  punished  in  your  stead,  and  ali  grace  is  conveyed  to  you  there- 
by :  "  For  him  who  knew  no  sin  hath  Cod  made  to  be  sin  for  you, 
that  ye  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,"  according 
to  2  Cor.  v.  21.  Why  did  not  God  lay  the  guilt  of  your  blasphemy 
upon  you,  as  well  as  upon  others  ?  It  was  only  free  grace.  Behold 
it,  wonder  at  it  and  rejoice,  praise  him  on  account  of  it,  like  Paul", 
when  he  saith,  1  Tim.  1.  15,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy 
of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, of  whom  I  am  chief." 

2.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  still  often  taken  in  vain  by  you  :  must 
ye  not  own  it  ?  ye  know  surely  that  his  fear  doth  not  always  impress 
your  hearts,  as  it  ought ;  how  often  are  ye  but  little  influenced  by  it, 
as  well  when  ye  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  Lord,  as  when 
ye  are  not.  Therefore  the  soul  should,  as  often  as  she  renders  her- 
self guilty,  lay  hold  on  the  Son  of  God  for  reconciliation,  and  dip 
herself  in  the  fountain  cf  his  blood,  that  she  may  be  reconciled  and 
cleansed.  He  is  indeed  "  the  opened  fountain,"  which  is  always 
"  open  to  the  house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem, 
for  sin  and  for  uncleanness,"  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

3.  Let  it  henceforward  be  your  earnest  endeavour,  that  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  your  God  may  direct  you  in  all  your  conversation,  so 
that  ye  may  not  reproach,  but  glorify  him  :  "  If  ye  call  on  the  Fath- 
er, who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"    1  Peter  i.  17. 

The  fear  of  God  should  restrain  you  from  sinning,  especially  from 
scandalous  sins,  which  induce  men  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God  : 
"  Shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  afraid,  and  his  dread  fall  on 
you  I"  may  we  ask  you  with  Job,  ch.  xiii.  ii.  Job  himself  refrained 
from  sinning,  because  "  destruction  from  God  was  a  terrour  to  him  ; 
and  by  leason  of  his  highness  he  could  not  endure,"  ch.  xxxi.  23. 
So  Joseph  also  acted,  Gen.  xxxix.  9,  and  Nehemiah,  Neh.  v.  15. 
An  a»ve  for  God  ought  to  restrain  your  tongues  and  mouths,  and 
prevent  you  from  "  speaking  so  exceeding  proudly,  and  from  letting 
arrogancy  come  out  cf  your  mouths  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of  judg- 
ment," as  Hannah  admonisheth,  1  Sam.  ii.  3.  We  ought  to  follow 
even  our  daily  callings  with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  as  the  apostle 
enjoins  upon   servants,   Eph.  vi.  3.     Therefore  plead  the  covenant 


Z4»      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

his  son  acted  worse,  and  abominably,  when  he  resolved  to  rendei 
that  yoke  much  heavier,  1  Kings  xii  1 — 14.  It  is  also  force  when 
a  person  endeavours  by  his  power,  riches,  courage  and  friends  to 
control  justice,  in  order  to  withhold  from  infe-iors  their  dues, 
James  bewails  the  poor  on  this  account,  when  he  saith,  James  ii.  6* 
"  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you  before  the  judgment- 
seats  ?"  Job  was  innocent  of  this  great  transgression  :  hear  his 
solemn  protesration  ;  "  If  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  against  the  father- 
less,  when  I  saw  my  help  in  the  gate  ;  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from 
my  shouhlerblade,  and  mine  arm  be  broken  from  the  bone,"  Job 
xxxi.  21,  22. 

The  sinner,  not  contented  with  his  own,  and  grasping  after  his 
neighbour's  property,  wishes  nevertheless  to  appear  honest,  and 
will  therefore  endeavour  to  deprive  him  of  it  "  under  an  appear- 
ance of  right,  as  by  unjust  weights,  ells  and  measures."  He  doth 
this,  when  he  "buys  his  wares  with  such  as  are  loo  great,  and  sells 
them  with  such  as  are  too  small :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness 
in  judgment,  in  meteyard,  in  weight,  or  in  measure,"  saith  the 
Lord,  Lev.  xix.  See  how  he  explains  this  mors  particularly,  Deut. 
xxv.  13 — 16,  and  Prov  xx.  10.  Hear  how  the  wicked  arc  reproved 
on  account  of  this  kind  of  theft,  Micha  vi.  10.  "  Are  there  not  yet 
the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  the 
scant  measure  that  is  abominable  ?" 

We  may  add  to  this  cheating  with  our  u  merchandise,"  or  wares, 
which  unjust  men  adulterate,  and  set  off  in  such  a  manner,  that  they 
appear  better  than  they  are.  This  is  "selling  chaff  for  wheat," 
Amos  villi  6. 

The  Lord  is  not  less  displeased  with  u  false  coins,"  when  a  per. 
son  debases,  or  clips  money,  or  when  he  knowingly  passes  base  or 
clipped  money  for  more  than  it  is  worth.  Or  a  person,  in  order  to 
deceive  his  neighbour  *vith  the  money,  will  miscount  it,  either 
in  writing,  or  reckoning,  or  weighing,  like  Israel,  who  in  receiving 
■money,  "  made  the  shekel,"  that  is,  the  weight  of  the  shekel, 
"great,"  Amos  viii.  5. 

The  instructor  adds  to  this  "  usury,"  that  is,  exorbitant  interest, 
which  we  take  for  money  or  goods,  that  we  have  lent  to  others,  in 
order  to  accommodate  them.  But  this  commandment  doth  not  for- 
bid that  iHury,  which  is  agreeable  to  equity,  to  the  current  value  of 
money,  of  merchandise,  or  of  the  profits  that  others  make  by  our 
money  or  goods,  or  according  to  the  measure  which  the  magistrate 
appoints.  Such  money  may  be  considered  as  just  ;  for  how  can  we 
condemn  a  person,  who  lends  another  money,  from  which  he  derives 


XLTI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1  TO,  111.  349 

advantage,  for  sharing  in  that  advantage  :  there  cannot  be  otherwise 
any  trafficking  or  trading  ;  may  we  derive  piofit  from  our  wares  which 
we  sell,  why  then  not  also  from  our  money,  which  we  lend  ?  The 
Lovd  Jesus  approves  of  such  usury,  when  he  teacheth  us,  that  we 
should  endeavour  to  derive  p»ofit  from  our  spiritual  gifts  after  the 
manner  of  usurers,  Matt.  xv.v.  14 — 30.  But  when  usury  is  forbid- 
den, we  must  understand  by  it  that  griping  usury,  which  must  ne- 
cessarily consume  and  empoverish  the  person  who  borrows  upon 
usury.  To  such  griping  usury  belongs  also  taking  interest  of  the 
poor,  to  whom  we  ought  to  lend  money  without  interest,  that  we 
may  relieve  their  necessity,  although  we  could  not  hope  that  they 
would  recompence  our  favour,  or  restore  the  money  which  we  have 
lent  them,  as  the  Saviour  commands,  Luke  vi.  35.  It  is  also  un- 
just usury  to  take  such  necessary  pledges  of  security  of  the  poor,  to 
whom  we  lend  money,  as  they  cannot  spare.  The  Lord  God  was 
highly  displeased,  and  would  punish  it  severely,  when  any  one  "  took 
another's  garment,  or  his  millstone,  and  especially  his  up^er  mill- 
stone, to  pledge,"  Exod.  xxii    2  5 — 27.     Deut.  xxiv.  6. 

There  are  "  other  wicked  tricks  and  devices,  by  which  men  appro- 
priate their  neighbour's  goods  to  themselves."  Who  can  enume- 
rate them  all  ?  We  will  mention  only  a  few.  For  instance,  (a)  '1  hat 
wicked  judges  receive  bribes,  in  order  to  .pervert  justice  :  'l  TLou 
shalt  not  take  any  gift;  for  the  gift  blindtth  the  wise,  and  perverfeth 
the  words  of  the  righteous,"  saith  the  Lord,  Exod.  xxiii.  8.  Deut. 
xvi.  19.  The  princes  of  Judah  are  taxed  as  "companions  of 
thieves,"  because  "they  loved  giffs,"  Isi-iah  i.  23.  (b)  The  un- 
faithful managing  and  devouring  of  estates,  which  we  can  get  into 
our  hands,  loading  them  with  so  many  expences  that  they  dwindle 
into  nothing  :  but  "  wo  to  the  writers,  who  prescribe  grievousness, 
to  turn  aside  the  nc.  dy  from  judgment,"  Sec.  Isaiah  x  1,  2.  To 
which  we  must  also  refer  alienating  goods  that  have  been  committed 
to  our  trust ;  the  Lord  condemns  such  a  conduct,  Exod.  xxii.  10 
— 13  ;  also  neglecting  to  rtstove  that  which  we  have  borrowed,  and 
not  paying  our  debts ;  for  this  is  "  the  work  of  the  wicked,"  as  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  21,  It  is  of  the  same  kind  also,  when  a 
person  doth  not  produce  goods  which  he  hath  found,  nor  restore 
them  to  the  owner,  as  the  Lord  rtquireth,  Lev.  vi-  3.  Deut.  xxii. 
1.  Also  concealing  stolen  goods,  in  order  to  be  ''  a  partner  with  the 
thief,"  as  the  wise  king  speaks,  Prov.  xxix.  24,  (c)  Empoverishing 
debtors,  who  are  willing  to  pay  their  debts,  and  have  not  contracted 
them  wilfully,  falling  on  them  forthwith,  in  order  to  ruin  them,  and 
turn  them  out  naked  and  bare :  tlut>  is  a  hateful  conduct,  as  the  ba- 


350       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

viour  shows  in  that  wicked  servant,  Matt,  xviii.  28,  29,30.  (d)  Keep- 
ing buck  the  wages  of  the  hireling,  and  abridging  them  :  a  wo  is 
denounced  against  those  who  do  thus,  Jer.  xxii.  13.  This,  as  James 
informs  us,  is  "  a  crying  sin,"  James  v.  4.  God  wiU  not  allow  us 
to  keep  such  wages  with  us  all  night,  Leviticus  xix,  13.  (e)  It  is 
also  abominable  to  be  slothful  and  sluggish,  either  when  we  labour 
for  another,  and  thus  eat  the  bread  of  idleness,  contrary  to  Prov. 
xxxi.  17  ;  or  when  we  do  our  own  work  :  "  He  that  is  slothful  in 
his  work,  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster,"  sailh  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  9.  Paul  condemns  such  persons,  2  Thess.  iii.  10 — 12, 
and  he  saith  that  "they  ought  not  to  eat."  (f)  Displacing  and  remov- 
ing land-marks,  in  order  to  enlarge  our  own,  and  abridge  another's 
land,  is  also  a  theft,  which  is  forbidden,  Dent.  xix.  14.  Prov.  xxii. 
28.  xxiii.  10:  as  also  stealing  out  of  another's  garden,  or  orchard, 
and  so  likewise  "putting  our  cattle  into  our  neighbour's  field,  and 
letting  them  feed  in  it,"  contrary  to  the  divine  prohibition,  Exod. 
xxii.  5.  (g)  It  is  also  a  conduct,  which  God  forbids,  to  supplant  our 
neighbour  in  his  trade,  by  disparaging  him  and  his  wares  :  this  is 
contrary  to  "  charity,  which  envieth  not,"  1  Cor.  xiii.  4.  Crying 
down  wares,  which  are  offered  for  sale,  in  order  to  buy  them  at  a 
cheap  rate,  this  we  ought  to  condemn  with  Solomon,  Prov.  >;x.  14, 
"  It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer ;  but  when  he  is  gone  his 
way,  he  boasteth."  We  ought  to  disapprove  no  less  of  "  monopo- 
lizing goods,  buying  them  up,  or  forestalling,"  especially  eatables, 
by  which  a  person  obtains  the  sole  command  of  these  things,  and  can 
regulate  the  sale  of  thern,  raise  the  price  of  them  to  an  enormous 
height,  and  so  enrich  himself  beyond  measure,  and  thus  exhaust  the 
poor  commons  :  "  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the  people  shall  curse 
him,"  saith  the  wise  man.  Prov.  xi.  26.  (h)  It  is  exceedingly  de- 
testable in  children  to  rob  their  parents,  and  to  deem  this  notwith- 
standing to  be  right :  hear  what  the  same  wise  man  saith  of  it. 
Prov.  xxviii.  24,  "  Whoso  robbeth  his  father,  or  his  mother,  and 
saith, It  is  no  transgression,  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer." 
The  time  would  fail  me,  if  I  should  speak  of  deceitful  bargains,  re- 
ceipts, or  bills  of  discharge,  of  the  violation  of  contracts  and  condi- 
tions, on  account  of  some  loss  that  might  accrue  to  us;  of  unjust 
judgments  and  pleadings,  in  order  to  abridge  our  neighbour;  of 
that  dishonest  thirst  for  gain,  which  is  shown  in  betting,  playing  at 
dice,  and  gaming,  in  keeping  drinking-houses,  whore-houses,  and 
gaming-houses. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   110,  111.  35 1 

A  person  who  cloth  not  know  himself,  wonders  how  any  one   can 
be  so  dishonest,  as  to  be  guilty  of  stealing  from  others  :  but  he  con- 
siders not  that  it  is  restraining  grace,  that  hinders  him  from  sinning 
against  God  in   this   manner.      The   sinner    being   destitute- of  the 
Lord,  and  not  knowing  what  is  essentially  good  for  him,  can  never 
be  satisfied  with  his  earthly  goods,   he   will    always  have  still  more, 
as  we  will  show  more  fully  on  the  tenth  commandment.     And  hence 
ariseth,    (1)  "  Covetousness,"  as  the   immediate  cause  of  theft,  by 
which  a  person  craves  insatiably,  and  covets  vehemently  an    abun- 
dance of  earthly  goods,  and  endeavours  to  keep  them,   and   will   not 
make  a  moderate  use  of  them,  nor  communicate  of  them  to  others  : 
"  Wo  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  house,"  saith 
the  Lord,  Hab.  ii.  9.     And  thus  covetousness  consists   in  desiring 
to  be  rich,   1  Tim.  vi.   16.     He  who   is  infected   with   this  disease 
will  be  repeatedly  seduced  more  or  less  to  theft :    "  He   falls   into 
temptation,  and  a  snare,  and  into  many   foolish  and  hurtful   lusts, 
which  drown  men   in  destruction   and   perdition  ;    for   the  love    of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  evil,"  saith  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.     His  de- 
sire  of  having    whets   his  understanding,   and  teaches  him  to  in- 
crease his  own  by  1  know  not  what  methods  under  an  appearance  of 
right :   "  all  the  instruments  of  the  churl  are  evil :  he  deviseth  wicked 
devices  to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy 
speaketh  right :"  thus  we  read,  Isaiah  xxxii.  7.     And  therefore  we 
cannot  sufficiently  wonder  that  the  Socinians  deny  that  covetousness 
was  forbidden  under  the  Old  Testament.     This  is  a  sin,  from  which 
many  are  averse,  but  not  on  account  of  their  satisfaction  in  God,  and 
their  contentment  with  that  portion  of  earthly  goods,  which  he  giveth 
them,  but  they  proceed  to  another  extreme,  to  wit,  (2)  to  f  an  abuse 
and  wasting  of  the  gifts  of  God,"  by  excess  in  eating,  drinking, 
clothing,  household  furniture,   and   pleasures,   which   are   otherwise 
lav  fial ;  and  no  less  by  gaming,  playing,  idle  betting  and  whoredom, 
by  which  such  persons  empoverish  themselves  and  their  households^ 
and  are  easily  seduced  to  stealing.     The  wisest  of  kings  had  there- 
fore reason  to  say  to  his  son,  "  Be  not  amongst  winebibbers,  amongst 
riotous  eaters  of  flesh  ;  for  the  drunkard   and  the  glutton  shall  sure- 
ly come  to  poverty,"  &c.  Prov.  xxiii.  20.     When  the  steward  had 
wasted  his  master's  goods,  and  was  obliged  to  render  an  account   of 
his  stewardship,  he  fell  into  iniquity,  Luke  xvi.   1 — 3. 

Stealing  is  abominable,  in  whatever  manner  it  is  perpetrated  :  "  All 
that  do  such  things,  and  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  an  abomination 
unto  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  Moses,  Deut.xxv.  16.  For,  (a)  stealing 
is  a  dissatisfaction   with  the  dispensation  of  God.  by  which    men 


5-       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

therefore  "  take  the  mme  of  God  in  vain,"  as  it  is  said,  Prov.  xxx. 
9.     The  thief  destroys  the  security  and  tranquility  of  human  society  . 
he  occasions  strife  and  contention  ;  he  exposts  himself  to  ignominy 
and  shame,  when  he  is  caught.     See  this  Jer.  ii.   16.     And  in  order 
t!  at  he  may  not  he  ashamed,  he  will  endeavour  to  corceal  his  theft 
with  lies  and  fab*;  oaths,  and  he  rentiers  himself  thus  still  more  guil- 
ty, as  the  Lord  intimateth,  Lev.  vi.  1 — 4.     (b)  This    iniquity    is    an 
o*f  nee,  which  is  punishable  by  the  magistrates,  who  were  obliged  to 
punish  certain  acts  of  theft  with  death,  as   man  stealing;   Exod     xxi. 
16,  sacrilege,  for  which  Achat)  was  stoned,  Joshua  vii.  20 — 26.     If 
a  man   broke   into   a  house   by   night,    the    master   of    the    house 
might   kill    him   instantly,   without  incurring  the   guilt  of  murder, 
Exod.  xxiK  2.     David  pronounced  the  man  who  had  robbed  a  poor 
man  of   his  little  cwelamb,  guilty  ;  but  other  thefts  were  to  be  ato- 
ned by  restoring  two,  four,   five  and  sevenfold.     Yea,  the  Lord   God 
himself  punishes  this    sin,  not  only    by  exposing  such  unrighteous 
persons  to  reproach,  but  also  sometimes    by   reducing  them   to  ex- 
treme poverty  ;  he  curses  the  thief  and  deceiver  in  all  that  he  hath, 
not  only  in  what  he  hath  stolen,  but  also  in  what  he  hath  not  stolen ; 
"Cursed  be  he  that  renloveth  his  neighbour's  landmark  "  was  pro- 
claimed aloud  from  mount    Ebal,   Deut.   xxvii.    17.     "The   roll    of 
the  ciuse.  the   length  whereof  was  twenty   cubits,  and  the   breadth 
when  of  was  ten  cubits,  God  would  bring  into  the  house  of  the  thief, 
to  cut  him  oft",  and  to  const  me  his  house,  with  the  limber  thereof,  and 
the  stones  thereof,"  Zech.  v.    1 — 4.     Yea,  he  who  gathereth  riches5 
but  not  by  right,  is  sometimes  snatched  away  by  an  early  death  from 
his  stolen  riches,  according  to  the    threatening,  Jer.  xvii.   11.     He 
leaves  them  indeed  to  his  heirs,  but  not   with   the  blessing  of  God- 
but  what  becomes  of  the  soul  of  such   an    unrighteous  person  ?     It 
doth  not  surely   go    to    the    glory   of  the    righteous  ;  for    "  neither 
thieves,  nor  covetous   persons  shall  inherit  the   kingdom  of  God," 
1  Cor.  vi.    iO.     Thercfoie  the  end   of  such  persons   will   surely  be 
destruction,  when  they  "  will  vomil  up  the  riches,  which   they  have 
swallowed  ('own,  and  God  will  cast  them  out  of  their  belly,"  as  Zo- 
phar  speaks.  Job  xx.  15. 

II.  But  doth  he,  who  only  abstains  from  stealing,  keep  this  com- 
mandment? surely  no,  unless  he  also  practise  the  virtues  that  air 
opposed  to  stealing,  and  so  (.1)  "  promote  the  advantage  of  his 
neighbour  in  every  instance  that  he  can  and  may."  Man  was  crea- 
ted for  the  advantage  of  his  neighbour,  as  well  as  for  himself ;  he 
must  indeed  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  which  he  doth  not  do 
When  he  forbears  to  promote  his  neighbour's  advantage  as  well   as 


XLlI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   no,   111.  353 

his  own  :  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man 
also  on  the  things  of  others,"  saith  the  apostle  of  the  Geniles, 
Philip,  ii.  4.  Therefore  the  Lord  saith,  Deut.  xxii.  1 — 4,  "Thou 
shalt  not  see  thy  brother's  ox  or  sheep  go  astray,  and  hide  thyself 
from  them,"  &c.  Job  quitted  himself  well  in  this  respect,  when 
"  he  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  (o  the  lame,"  &c.  Job  xxix. 
15 — 17.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  just  must  direct  us  herein,  and 
teach  us  that  we  must  not  do  these  things,  unless  we  can  and  may. 
It  is  sinful,  and  the  work  of  fools  to  empoverish  ourselves  in  order 
to  succour  others,  or  by  undue  methods  to  deliver  them  out  of  diffi- 
culties, in  which  t'>ey  have  involved  themselves  by  their  iniquitous 
actions,  that  we  may  thus  act  the  part  of  good  men.  (2)  "  We  should 
deal  and  act  with  our  neighbour,  as  we  desire  that  he  should  deal 
and  act  with  us."  When  we  consider  and  regard  our  neighbour's 
case  in  this  manner  as  our  own,  we  will  not  wrong  him,  nor  suffer 
him  to  remain  under  a  difficulty  ;  it  is  also  a  work  of  equity  and 
justice:  even  the  law  and  the  prophets  enjoin  by  the  mouth  of  the 
Saviour,  Matt.  vii.  12,  that  "whatsoever  things  we  would  that  men 
should  do  unto  us,  we  should  do  even  so  to  them."  But  if  we  shall 
be  able  to  do  this,  we  must,  (3)  "  labour  faithfully,"  or  be  diligent 
and  industrious  in  our  calling,  "the  work  which  our  hand  findeth  to 
do,"  according  to  the  words  of  the  preacher,  Ec<  1.  ix.  10.  The 
apostle  requires  that  men  should  "  work  in  quietness,  and  eat  their 
own  bread,"  2  Thess.  iii.  8— -13.  But  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord,  and  not  our  own  advantage  by  means  of  our  faithful  labour 
ought  to  be  our  principal  motive,  that  we  may  do  this  in  obedience 
to  God,  since  it  pleaseth  him  to  provide  for  us  by  means  of  our 
faithful  labour,  and  so  "  we  must  do  all  tilings  heartily,  as  to  the 
Lord,"  according  to  Col.  iii.  23.  And  therefore  we  ought  to  take 
good  heed,  that  we  have  a  proper  calling,  end  we  ought  "  to  abide 
therein  with  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  vii.  20,  24.  This  doth 
not  mean  that  a  person  may  not  change  his  calling,  for  he  is  some- 
times obliged  to  do  that  by  events  which  befal  him  through  the  ap- 
pointment of  God  :  but  we  may  not  desert  one  calling  for  another 
rashly,  and  without  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord.  Let  no  man  think 
that  it  will  suffice  to  labour  for  himself  and  his  family  :  he  must  do 
that  also,  "  that  he  may  relieve  the  needy."  If  there  be  any  du'y, 
which  is  at  once  human,  religious  and  christian,  it  is  that  of  r<  iiev- 
ing  the  needy  :  "  We  may  not  hide  ourselves  from  our  own  flesh/' 
Isaiah  lviii.  7.  How  often  is  this  commanded  as  a  religious  duty  ? 
yea,  for  this  end  God  suffered  the  poor  to  remain  in  Israel.  See 
Deut.  xv.  7 — 11.  Eccl.  xi.  1,2.  Yea,  this  duty  is  also  enjoined 
Vol.  ii.  2  T 


354      THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

upon  Christians :  "  Distribute  to  the  necessity  of  the  saints,  sailh 
Paul,  Rom.  xii.  13.  Sec  this  repeatedly  commanded  and  urged, 
1  Cor.  xvi.  1 — 3.  2  Cur.  viii.  and  ix.  Luke  relates  how  nobly 
the  first  Christians  quitted  themselves  in  this  respect,  Acts  iv.  34, 
35.  xi.  28—  30.  In  order  to  practise  this  goodly  virtue,  which  is 
so  pleasing  to  God,  we  must  labour  faithfully  ;  this  is  enjoined, 
Eph.  iv.  28,  "  Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more:  but  rather  let 
him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he 
may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Praiseworthy  was  the  ex- 
ample of  "  Dorcas,  who  made  coats  and  garments  for  the  widows," 
Acts  ix.  39. 


APPLICATION. 

If  this  law  were  given,  hearers,  that  it  might  give  life,  and  that 
We  might  seek  our  righteousness  by  it,  we  should  have  nothing  else 
to  do  now,  but  exhort  you  to  flee  from  the  sins  that  are  forbidden, 
and  to  pursue  the  virtues  which  are  commanded  in  it.  But  that  is 
impossible  for  this  law,  for  it  is  become  weak  through  the  flesh  ; 
and  therefore  all  who  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the 
curse.  God  therefore  gave  this  law,  that  the  offence  might  abound, 
and  thus  also  that  grace  might  much  more  abound.  In  order  then, 
that  our  observations  on  this  commandment  may  be  salutary  to  you, 
it  will  be  necessary, 

1.  That  each  of  you  should  compare  his  heart  and  actions  with 
what  is  forbidden  and  enmnundtd  here.  We  can  easily  believe 
that  ye  are  not  guilty  of  the  grosser  acts  of  theft,  even  manstealing 
and  stealing  cattle  :  but  there  are  other  wicked  practices  and  devi- 
ces, by  which  we  take  to  ourselves  the  property  of  another.  Come 
hither,  and  examine  what  ye  possess,  and  what  ye  have  handled,  but 
lack  at  present.  How  did  ye  obtain  it?  did  ye  get  all  in  an  honest 
way  ?  doth  nothing  of  what  bclongeth  to  another  cleave  to  your  fin* 
gers  ?  have  ye  behaved  yourselves  righteously  in  every  respect,  as 
well  in  reckoning  with  others,  as  in  giving  and  receiving  money, 
m  trafficking,  trading,  handicrafts,  labour,  and  in  demanding  and 
paying  debts  ?  are  ye  pure  with  respect  to  all  this  ?  have  ye  always 
kept  the  middU  way  between  greediness,  and  abusing  and  squander- 
r»s  oF  God,  and  that  in  every  instance  ?  Ye  need  not  ask 
whether  we  must  be  so  exact  a.:d  jferfect  in  all  these  points  ;  for  ye 


XLH.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 10,  1 II.  ^5i 

Iftiow,  at  least,  ye  ought  to  know,  that  he  who  continueth  not  in  alL 
things  which  are  wriiten  in  the  law,  is  cursed.  Doth  any  one  say,  I 
know  not  that  I  have  transgressed  in  any  instance.  It  is  possible, 
that  thou  art  so  just  and  righteous  in  a  civil  respect,  that  thou  dost 
nut  possess  aught  of  what  belongs  to  another  ;  but  hast  thou  then 
also  performed  what  is  commanded  here  ?  dost  thou  think,  yes  ? 
I  should  believe  that  such  an  one  had  never  yet  seen  himself  in  the 
nurrour  of  this  perfect  commandment,  but  that  his  heart  deceives 
him,  like  Ephraim's,  who  said,  "  1  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance ;  in  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in 
me,  that  were  sin,"  Hoseu  xii.  8.  But,  friends,  this  is  not  the 
way  to  clear  your  account,  when  the  Lord  will  begin  to  reckon 
with  you  and  to  state  the  amount  of  it.  It  behooves  you  indeed  to 
review  your  account  frequently,  and  it  will  appear  that  your  debt  is 
great,  and  the  amount  that  God  might  justly  condemn  you.  There- 
lore  "  examine  yourselves  strictly,  yea,  examine  yourselves  strictly, 
ye  listless  people,"  agreeably  to  the  admonition,  Zeph.  ii.  1.  Hum- 
ble yourselves,  abase  yourselves,  and  be  ashamed  before  the  Lord, 
"as  a  thief,  when  he  is  found,"  Jer.  ii.  26. 

2.  Have  ye  taken  aught  ftom  your  neighbour,  keep  it  not  with 
you,  but  restore  it  to  him.  It  belongs  to  another,  it  is  not  yours. 
If  ye  keep  it,  it  will  become  a  canker  in  all  your  goods,  which  are 
otherwise  your  rightful  property,  and  it  will  consume  them,  and 
emp  jverish  you.  Yea,  God  will  in  his  lime  make  your  stolen  goods 
a  file  in  your  bowels,  and  compel  you  to  vomit  up  that  which  ye 
have  swallowed  down,  like  Judas,  who  returned  his  illgotten  silver 
pieces,  and  when  he  could  not  get  rid  of  them,  threw  them  furious- 
ly down  in  the  temple.  What  think  ye,  shall  a  sinner  find  favour 
with  God,  while  he  withholds  stolen  goods  from  their  owner  ?  Hear 
what  the  Lord  saith  to  the  Jews,  Isaiah  i.  16 — 18.  "  Wash  ye, 
make  ye  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
eyes,  &c.  Come  then,  and  let  us  reason  together :  though  your 
sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow,"  &c  Thus  we 
read  also,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  15.  "  If  the  wicked  restore  the  pledge, 
give  again  that  which  he  hath  robbed,  &c.  he  shall  surely  live,  he 
shall  not  die."  When  Zaccheus  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord,  he  was  forthwith  ready  to  "  restore  fourfold,  if  he  had  by 
false  accusation  taken  aught  from  any  man,"  Luke  xix.  8.  Paul 
offered  to  pay  Philemon  even  what  Onesin.us  had  taken  from  him, 
Philemon,  vs.  8,  9.  But  I  suspect  that  many  will  decline  to  do  this, 
because  they  have  robbed  others  of  so  much,  that  they  would  be 
obliged  to  surrender  all  the  substance  of  their  house,  and  thus  em- 


35b       THE  EIGHTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

poverish  themselves.  But  is  it  not  better  to  be  an  honest  poor  man, 
and  possess  grace,  than  to  be  a  rich  thief,  and  remain  graceless  ? 
Do  ye  not  dare  to  return  aught,  because  it  would  expose  you  to 
contempt,  ye  may  do  it  by  another  person,  whom  ye  can  trust,  or 
which  is  preferable,  by  a  letter  written  in  an  uncouth  hand.  Is  that 
which  was  robbed  already  consumed,  so  that  it  is  not  in  your  power 
to  repay  it,  do  nevertheless  as  much  as  ye  can,  by  sparing  some- 
thing, and  living  more  scantily,  that  ye  may  gather  a  little,  and  re- 
store that. 

3.  Bu  think  not,  after  ye  have  satisfied  men  for  what  was  taken 
from  them,  that  God  is  then  also  satisfied.  By  our  unrighteousness 
we  render  ourselves  debtors  not  only  to  men,  to  satisfy  them  for 
what  we  have  alienated  from  them,  but  we  render  ourselves  guilty 
also  before  the  Lord.  And  therefore  the  unrighteous  person*  wheth- 
er he  be  more  or  less  unrighteous,  must  endeavour  to  be  reconciled 
unto  God.  O  that  ye  were  concerned  about  this,  and  cried  out 
with  the  church,  Micha  vi  6,  7.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  give  my 
firstborn  for  my  transgression  ?  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of 
my  soul  ?  We  should  say  to  you,  "  Seek  the  reconciling  blood"  of 
the  Surety  and  Mediator  Jesus,  by  which  "  he  restored  that  which 
he  took  not  away,"  as  he  foretold,  Psalm  'mix.  4.  Those  Corinthi- 
ans, who  were  before  "  thieves  and  covetous,  were"  not  only 
"  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  but  also  justified  in  the  name,"  and  thus 
by  the  blood  'k  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11.  For  "God 
bath  set  forth"  his  Son  "to  be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness,"  Rom.  iii.  25.  Flee  therefore 
to  him,  and  lay  hold  on  him  for  the  reconciliation  of  your  guilt. 

4.  Beware  of  defiling  yourselves  again,  and  endeavour  to  be  righ- 
teous in  every  instance  :  ''Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more  :  but 
vather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needelh,"  as  we  have 
just  now  heard  Paul  admonish  us,  Fph.  iv.  28.  Be  afraid  of  your 
covetous  and  prodigal  heart,  pray  against  it  with  David,  Psalm 
cxix.  36.  "  Incline  my  heart  unto  thy  testimonies  and  not  to  covet- 
ousness."  Oppose  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  which  hath  enticed  so  many 
persons  to  unrighteousness :  when  "  Achan  saw  a  good!/  Babylo- 
nish garment,  and  two  hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  we<!ge  ol 
gold,  then  he  coveted  them,  and  took  them,"  Joshua  vii-  21.  En- 
deavour to  be  content  with  what  the  Lord  hath  given  you,  though 
it  be  ever  so  little  :  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  indeed  great 
gain;  for  we  brought  nothing   into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  111.  35? 

can  carry  nothing  out  of  it:"  thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 8. 
and  he  practised  this  lesson  himself:  "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever 
state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content,"  saith  he,  Philip,  iv,  11.  We 
ought  with  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8  9,  even  to  deprecate  "  riches"  as 
well  as  "poveay,"  and  to  seek  only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient 
for  us,"  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9,  and  we  ou^ht  more  especially  to  aim  at 
those  beiter  ''treasures,"  which  aie  laid  up  "in  heaven,  where 
neither  moth  nor  rust  corrupteth,  and  where  thieves  cannot  break 
through,  nor  steal,"  as  the  Lord  Jesus  commands,  Mat.  vi.  19,  20. 
Doth  it  nevertheless  please  the  Loid  to  enrich  you  with  many  earthly 
goods,  "  do  not  then  set  your  hearts  on  them,  and  trust  not  in  them, 
neither  be  proud  of  them  :  but  do  good,  be  rich  in  good  works, 
willing  to  communicate,"  as  David  and  Paul  require,  Psalm  lxii.  10. 
1  Tim.  vi.  17,  18.  Are  ye  poor  and  in  want,  commit  your  con- 
cerns to  the  Lord,  even  your  Father,  if  ye  fear  and  love  him. 
Hear  what  Jesus  saith,  Mat.  vi.  31.  "Take  no  thought,  saying, 
What  shall  we  eat?  or  what  shall  we  drink?  or  wherewithal  shall 
we  be  clothed  ?  for  after  all  the-e  tnings  do  the  Gentiles  seek  :  for 
your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these 
things."  The  Lord  hath  surely  said,  "  1  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,"  Heb.  xiii.  5.  Fret  not  on  account  of  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  ye  have  more  than  they,  bee  what  Da- 
vid saith,  Psalm  xxxvii.  7,  1C.  "Fret  not  thyself  because  of  him 
who  prospercth  in  his  way,  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wick- 
ed devices  to  pass  :"  for  "  a  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  bet- 
ter than  the  riches  of  many  wicked."  Ye  have  a  perfect  right,  in 
and  through  Christ,  to  the  least,  yea,  to  all  things ;  for  "  all  things 
are  vours,  because  ye  are  his,  as  Paul  teacheth,  1  Cer.  iii.  21 — 23. 
Ye  will  obtain  the  full  possession  of  all  things  hereafter,  when  the 
wealthy  wicked  will  not  have  even  a  drop  of  water.  Jesus  saith, 
Mat.  v.  3,  5.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heavtn."  And  "  blessed  are  the  meek  ;  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth,"    Amen. 


(   358  ) 


THE 


NINTH  COMMANDMEN' 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIII.  LORDS  DAY, 


Exod.  xx.  16.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour. 

Q.   112.   What  is  requ'rccl  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man  ;  nor  falsify  any 
man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slanderer  ;  that  I  do  not 
judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that 
I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil, 
unless  I  would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  :  like- 
wise that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love  the  truth,  speak 
it  uprightly,  and  confess  it  :  also  that  I  defend  and  promote,  as 
much  as  I  am  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  my  neigh- 
bour. 

tc   t~ ■""> 

JL  HE  tongue,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  is  a  fire,  a  world  of 
iniquity,  which  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.  The  tongue  can  no 
man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison,"  James  iii. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  11!.  359 

6,  3.     The  heart  of  man,  filled  by  sin  with  every  abomination,  and 
producing  every  evil  motion,  corrupts  all  the  members  of  the  body, 
and  directs  them  to  evil,  rendering  them  "  servants  of  uncleanness 
and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"    as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vi.  19.     But  the 
tongue  is  more  particularly  set  on  fire  thus,  by  that  evil  corruption, 
as  a  fire  and  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  that  it  defileth  even  the  whole 
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  by  urging  it  violently 
on,  like   an    unquenchable  fire,  and    like  a  wild   beast,  that  is  un» 
tameable.     Therefore  ho:y  men   have  been  so  careful  and  circum- 
spect with   respect  ta  their  tongue,  and  they   have   endeavoured  to 
bridle  it,  like  an  unruly  horse.    David  said,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  H  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  :     I  will   keep 
my  mouth  with  a  bridie."     We  may  therefore,   with  that  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  compare  the  tongue  to  a  cily,  which  is  well   pro- 
vided with  bulwarks  of  teeth,   and  doors  of  lips,  and  yet   hath  need 
of  a  guard  to   watch,  and  to  defend  it  against    tumults  within,  and 
the  assaults  of  enemies  without  :  hear  him   therefore  pray,   Psalm 
cxli.  3.     "  Set  a  watch,    O  Lord,  before  my  mouth,  keep    the  door 
of  my    lips."     It    is   also   remarkable,  that    there  is  only  a  single 
guard,    that   is,  one  commandment    in  the  law,  against    other  sins, 
but  against   the  sins  of  the  tongue  there  is  a  double    guard  of  two 
commandments  :  it   was  not  enough  that  God  required  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law,  and  in  the  third   commandment,  that  we   should 
watch  against  the  sins  of  the   tongue,  but  he  chooseth  to  do  it  also 
by  this  ninth   commandment,  that  the  tongue  may  not  be  perverted 
to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour. 

The  Lord  commanding  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourse-ves, 
requires  of  us  that  we  should  conformably  to  this,  honour  our  pa- 
rents, not  kill  our  neighbour,  not  commit  adultery,  nor  steal  :  but 
how  shall  we  keep  these  commandments,  if  we  bear  false  witness 
against  our  neighbour  ?  "  Death  and  life,"  and  thus  all  that  is  dear 
to  our  neighbour,  "  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  saith  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  21.  Theiefore  the  Lawgiver  manifests  his  wisdom  by 
annexing  this  commandment  to  the  foregoing. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  this  commandment,  shows 

I.  What  is  forbidden,  and 

II.  What  is  commanded  in  it. 

1.  This  commandment  forbids  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
our  neighbour."  We  have  shown  before,  that  all  men  are  our 
neighbours,  because  they  are  all  made  of  one  blood  with  us.  We 
are  called  upon  on  many  occasions  to  bear  witness  against  our  neigh- 
bours, but  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  bear  false  witness  ag;irsf. 


360       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

them,  or  otherwise  than  we  know  to  be  the  truth  ;  which  is  done 
"  in  judgment,"  when  falsehood  and  iniquity  are  practised  there  in 
an  ungodly  manner  :  "  In  the  place  of  judgment  there  is  wicked- 
ness, and  *n  the  place  of  righteousness  there  is  iniquity  :"  this  the 
preacher  saw  also  in  his  time,  Eccl.  iii.  16.  The  Lawgiver  hath 
also  respect  in  a  particular  manner  to  bearing  false  witness  in  judg- 
ment, in  which,  when  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  the  truth,  we 
answer  and  bear  a  false  witness  to  injure  our  neighbour,  as  the  He- 
brew word  tagnaneh,  "to  answer,"  intimates.  1  his  wickedness  is 
frequently  practised  by  different  persons,  who  appear  in  judg- 
ment, as, 

1.  By  the  "plaintiff"  or  accuser,  who  accuseth  his  neighbour 
fedsely,  by  which  he  endangers  his  good  name,  his  life  and  property, 
yea,  his  whole  prosperity.  Of  this  the  Jewish  council  rendered 
themselves  exceedingly  guilty,  when  they  accused  J?sus,  wdio  was 
perfectly  innocent,  before  Pilate,  saying,  "  we  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  arid  foi  bidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cxsar,  saying 
that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  king,"  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

2.  By  the  defendant,  when  he  denies  the  fault,  of  which  he  is 
justly  accused,  like  Cain,  who  when  he  was  cited  before  the  divine 
tribunal,  and  asked  "  where  his  brother  Abel  was,  said,  I  know  not ; 
am  I  my  brother's  keeper r"  Gen  iv.  9.  He  who  fears  not  to  do 
wrong,  ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  confess  that  he  hath  done  wrong, 
and  to  humble  himself  by  submitting  also  to  the  proper  punishment 
of  his  sin,  with  Achan,  when  Joshua  required  of  him  to  confess  and 
acknowledge  his  guilt,  Joshua  vii.  19 — 21.  "•  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  sin :  but  with  the  righteous  there  is  favour,"  according  to  the 
words  of  the  wise  king.   Prov.  xv.  9. 

3.  It  is  not  less  libominable,  when  "  witnesses  "  utter  a  falsehood 
against  a  person,  who  is  unjustly  accused.  How  lamentable  was 
the  case  of  Naboth,  when  "  two  men  of  Belial  were  suborned  against 
him,  and  witnessed  falsely,  Naboth  bla  \  hemed  God  and  the  king, 
and  he  was  thereupon  stoned  !"  1  Kings  xxi.  9 — 13.  So  also  "  the 
whole  council  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,"  as  the  members  of  that  council  found  also  many 
false  witnesses,  who  were  nevertheless  of  no  service  to  them,  Matt. 
xxvi.  59,  60.  "  The  Lord  hates  a  false  witness,"  Prov.  vi.  16,  19. 
God  ordered  the  judges  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  witnesses 
testified  a  falsehood,  and  if  they  did,  that  it  should  then  be  done  to 
them,  as  it  would  have  been  done  to  the  accused,  if  he  had  been 
accused  according  to  truth,  Deut.  xix.  16 — 21.  Although  the  Law- 
giver forbids  bearing  false  witness  against  our  neighbour  to  his  hurt- 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  361 

we  may  nevertheless  not  bear  false  witness  in  his  behalf  to  deliver 
him  ;  for  we  may  not  deliver  the  guilty,  and  certainly  not  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come  ;  and  when  we  bear  false  witness  for  the  guilty, 
we  then  bear  false  witness  against  the  accuser,  who  is  our  neighbour 
also. 

4.  But  still  more  atrocious  than  these  are  those  wicked  lawyers 
and  attorneys,  who  defend  false  accusations,  and  by  means  of  a 
smooth  and  eloquent  tongue,  or  deceitful  writings,  darken  the  true 
circumstances  of  matters,  mislead  the  judge,  and  delay  a  righteous 
sentence,  so  tnat  an  honest  person  can  scarcely  obtain  justice. 
Such  a  lawyer  was  Tertullus,  who  pleaded  in  behalf  of  the  Jews 
against  Paul,  \cts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Verily  such  persons,  who  ought  to 
assist  the  oppressed,  and  nevertheless  load  them  still  heavier,  are 
pests  of  the  human  race,  they  promote  the  interest  of  hell,  and  de- 
fend the  causes  of  the  devil.  They  may  remain  unpunished  in  this 
world,  but  the  wo,  with  which  they  are  threatened,  will  pursue 
them,  and  cleave  to  them  :  "  Wo  unto  them  that  call  good  evil,  and 
evil  good,"  saith  God,  Isaiah  v.  20. 

5.  But  that  which  surpasseth  all  other  abominations  is  the  conduct 
of  those  unjust  judges,  who  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  do  not 
regard  the  causes  of  the  righteous  for  a  long  time,  like  that  ungodly 
judge,  of  whom  the  saviour  speaks,  Luke  xviii.  2 — 4.  And  it  is 
still  worse  in  judges  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence  :  "  He  that 
justifie'.h  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemnelh  the  just,  even  they 
both  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Piov.  xvii.  15.  Whether  it  proceed  from  the  incapacity  and  un- 
skilfulness  of  the  foolish  judge,  who  is  like  a  child  in  understand- 
ing ;  bee  Ecci.  x.  16.  Isaiah  hi.  4,  12  ;  or  from  unrighteousness, 
Avhen  the  judge  will  not  hear  the  accused,  nor  permit  him  to  defend 
himself,  as  the  Jewish  council  pronounced  sentence  in  such  an  un- 
just manner  against  the  baviour,  and  his  servant  Paul,  John  vii. 
47 — 52.  xviii.  19 — 21.  Acts  xxiii.  1 — 3  ;  or  on  account  of  bribes 
and  self-interest:  so  the  judges  of  Judah  were  "  companions  of 
thieves,  every  one  loved  gifts,  and  followed  after  rewards,"  Isaiah 
i.  23  ;  or  because  the  judge  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  is  a  person  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  rich  or  poor,  courageous  or  fearful,  the  unjust 
judge  will  pervert  justice  accordingly  :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor, 
nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  :  but  in  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Lev.  xix.  15.  See 
also  Exod.  xxiii.  6 — 8.     God  denounceth  a  wo  against  such  judges, 

Vol.  ii.  2  U 


362         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  saith,  thai  "•  lie  will  ease  and  avenge  himself  of  those  adversa- 
ries of  linn."  Isaiah  l.  24. 

In  the  foregoing  commandments  only  head-sins  arc  mentioned} 
bqt  their  particular  members  are  also  comprehended  under  them; 
it  is  thus  also  here  :  when  bearing  false  witness  in  judgment  is  op- 
posed, it  is  then  forbidden  on  o'  her  occasions  also,  as 

4  '»  Falsifying  the  words  of  another,"  by  giving  them  a  sense 
different  from  that  which  they  commonly  have,  and  in  which  vse 
know  they  were  uttered.  This  is  "  that  frov/ard  mouth,  which  ve 
must  put  aw.ay  from  us,  and  those  perverse  lips,  which  we  must  put 
far  from  us,"  Prov.  iy.  24.  We  misconstrue  the  words  and  mean- 
ing of  another  thus,  either  by  adding  something  to  our  neighbour's 
words,  by  which  they  have  an  entirely  different  sense.  The  Savi- 
our speaking  of  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  which  he  would  raise  up 
from  the  dead,  saith,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  1  will 
raise  it  up,"  John  ii.  19,2  1,  but  the  Jews  perverted  his  words  by 
adding  to  them,  when  they  accused  him,  k*  that  he  had  said,  I  will 
destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made  with  hands,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands,"  Mark  xiv  38,  whtn  he  h&d 
nevertheless  not  said,  "  1  will  destroy,"  but,  "destroy  ye  ;"  he  did 
not  say,  kl  the  temple  made  with  hands,"  but  "  this  temple  ;"  nei- 
ther had  he  Spoken  "of  another,  but  of  ihe  same  temple,"  which 
they  should  destroy  ;  but  all  these  words  they  added  by  a  false  tes- 
timony. Or  when  we  leave  out  something,  in  order  to  falsify  a  per- 
son's words,  like  the  devil,  who,  that  he  might  induce  Christ  to 
tempt  his  Father  by  casting  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  said  from  Psalm  xci.  11,  that  kl  God  would  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  him  to  keep  him  ;"  but  he  leaves  out,  "  in  all 
thy  ways,"  Mat.  iv.  6.  We  also  falsify  a  person's  words  by  gestures, 
Whereby  we  give  them  another  and  a  wrong  colour.  A  person  ut- 
te  s  something  that  was  said  in  jest,  or  from  compassion,  in  such  a 
ler,  bj  an  alteration  of  his  countenance  or  voice,  as  if  it  were  spo- 
ke;) in  earnest,  or  from  contempt.  An  abominable  and  false  con- 
duct  1  vViio  can  b«.  safe  from  persons  ol  such  a  frowaid  heart  and 
jperver  e  1 

2.  I  his  commandment  forbids  also  "  backbiting."  by  which  a 
to  others  the  secrets  and  failings  of  his  neighbour,  to 
his  hurt  "  A  talebearer  revealeth  secrets,"  saith  the  wise  kin;-, 
Prov.  :::.  13.  Whether  a  person  do  this,  from  talkativeness,  arm  for 
p  stime,  like  "  the  Athenians,  who  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else, 
but  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing,"  Acts  xvii.  21,  and  like  the 
WOiaeU)  of  whom  i^aul  speaks,  1  Tim.  v.  13  ;  or  lrom  a 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  56S 

fondness  of  ridiculing  a  person  ;  as  Job  was  the  song  and  byword  of 
contemptible  persons,  Job  xxx  9  ;  or  IVom  a  cksire  of  pleasing 
others,  who  are  deligh  ed  with  hearing  their  neighbour's  secrets  add 
evil  doings,  as  Doeg  informed  Saui  concerning  David,  by  which  it 
came  to  pass,  that  to  many  priests,  and  ether  inhabitants  of  Nob 
"Were  slaini  1  Sam  xxii  7,  19;  or  from  envy  and  displeasure  with 
our  neighbour,  that  we  may  raise  up  new  enemies  against  him 
And  these  j.er-ons,  that  they  may  not  be  accounted  backbiter^.  Will, 
in  the  first  place,  relate  that  which  is  good  of  their  neighbour  and 
when  another  speaks  well  of  him,  they  will  assent  to  it,  yet  they 
will  add  a  "  but,"  or  an  "  alas;"  it  is  true,  they  will  s^y,  he  hath 
(hat  good  quality,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  he  hath  such  and  such  a  h .sl- 
ing ;  and  tuusa  person  is  condemned  by  himself  for  not  c:oing  well, 
and  this  is  nevertheless  an  evil  which  is  common  under  the  sun,  and 
occasions  much  disturbance.  And  surely  those  are  not  innocent  of 
backbiting-,  who  do  not  discountenance  such  backbiters-  but  sl.ow 
that  they  are  pleased  with  them  by  listening  to  them,  and  encoi  rag- 
ing them  to  say  all  that  they  know:  "  He  is  a  wicked  doer,  who 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips,  and  a  liar,  who  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty 
tongue,"  Prov.  xvii.  4. 

3.  "  Slandering"  our  neighbour,  that  is,  belching  out  words  of 
reproach  against  him,  either  when  he  is  present  or  absent  Da\id 
calls  this,  Psalm  xv.  3,  "  Taking  up  a  reproach  against  our  neigh- 
bour." Therefore  the  slanderer  is  also  called  a  reproachcr,  Psalm 
xliv.  16,  as  Shimei  acted  toward  David,  Ahab  toward  Elijah,  and 
the  Jews  toward  the  apostles,  2  Sam  xvi.  5 — 9.  1  Kings  xviii  17. 
Acts  xvii.  6.  It  is  exceedingly  wicked  to  do  this  with  words  ;  for 
"  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproachetb  his  Maker,"  Piov  xvii.  5, 
but  it  is  worse  and  mrolerable  to  do  it  with  pasquil :,  and  reproachful 
writings ;  no  man  can  be  repu'ed  honest  longer  than  such  a  re- 
proachful writer  chooseth  ;  bu'  let  rim  conceal  himself  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  the  Lord  will  find  him  out,  and  recompence  his  reproach- 
es upon  him. 

4.  The  commandment  concerning  bearing  false  witness  forbids 
also  "  judging,  or  joining  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard. 
"  We  have  just  now  shown  how  this  is  done  in  judgment  :  but  it  is 
done  also  out  of  judgment  ;  to  which  we  must  nevertheless  not  re- 
ftr  judging  that  a  person  is  in  the  way  to  perdition,  and  warning 
him  against  it,  when  he  discovers  manifest  tokens  of  his  graceless 
condition  by  his  exceeding  ignorance,  his  abandoning  ot  himself  to 
the  world,  his  hatred  of  the  good,  and  of  that  which  is  good,  and 
hy  other  sins  ;  for  we  must  judge  thus,  that  we  may  "  save  him  by 


364         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

fear,  and  pull  him  out  of  the  fire,"  according  to  the  exhortation  of 
holy  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  vs.  23.  But  we  must  refer  to  this,  (a) 
judging  that  a  person  is  or  is  not  gracious  from  his  prosperity  or 
adversity,  as  the  friends  of  Job  decried  him  for  a  hypocrite,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grievous  afflictions  :  "  No  man  knoweth  either  the  love 
or  hatred"  of  God,  "  by  all  that  is  before  him.  There  is  one  event 
to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,"  according  to  Eccl.  ix.  1,2. 
(b)  Giving  credit  without  further  inquiry  to  every  evil  report  con- 
cerning our  neighbour,  like  Saul,  who  without  any  reason  "  heard 
the  words  of  men,,  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt,"  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  10.  This  is  "  receiving  a  false  report,"  which  is  forbidden, 
Exod.  xxiii.  1.  We  must  refer  also  to  this,  (c)  judging  presently 
the  worst  of  our  neighbour  from  any  particular  event,  which  hap- 
pens through  the  disposal  of  divine  providence.  Because  "  a  viper 
fastened  upon  Paul's  hand,  the  Barbarians  judged  that  he  was  a 
murderer,  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  vengeance  suifered 
not  to  live,"  Acts  xxviii.  2 — 4.  (d)  It  is  still  more  unjust  to  mis- 
construe and  condemn  the  virtuous  conduct  of  a  person.  When 
Hannah  prayed  with  a  low  voice  from  sorrow,  Eli  judged  "  that 
she  was  drunk,"  1  Sam.  i.  10 — 16,  and  the  wicked  Jews  judged 
the  same  of  the  apostles  from  their  speaking  in  every  lan- 
guage by  the  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  13.  "  John  came  neither  eating  nor 
drinking,  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil.  The  Son  of  man  came 
eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  Behold,  a  man  gluttonous  and  a 
winebibber,"  Mat.  xi.  18,  19.  When  he  doih  not  allow  himself 
time  to  eat  and  drink,  his  friends  will  '«  by  hold  on  him,  as  if  he 
"Were  beside  himself,"  A' ark  iii.  20.  21.  Because  people  cannot  en- 
dure serious  godliness,  therefore  they  will  decry,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites and  legalists,  persons  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  com- 
mon manner  of  living,  but  endeavour  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  They  will  not  be  judged  themselves  ac- 
cording to  truth  from  their  evil  behaviour,  and  they  will  neverthe- 
less repeatedly  condemn  others  on  account  of  their  godliness.  But 
such  persons  set  themselves  up  for  judges  in  the  stead  of  God  : 
*'  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,"  saith  Paul,  1  Ccr.  iv.  4,  5.  They 
who  act  thus  "  speak  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  it  as  judges,"  ac- 
cording to  James  iv.  11,  12.  Therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ;  for  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged  ;" 
thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Mat.  vii.  1,2. 

5.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  "  all  sorts   of  lies."     By   which  wc 
must  understand,  relating  a  matter  for  truth,  which   is  nevertheless 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  365 

not  true,  when  a  person  knows  not  but  that  it  is  true  ;  for  he  doth 
indeed  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  no  lie  in  him,  because  he  speaks  according 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  ;  but  he  sins  notwithstanding,  because 
he  might  perhaps  have  known  better,  and  he  often  speaks  thus 
without  necessity  ;  but  it  is  a  complete  lie,  when  a  person  speaks 
contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  and  with  a  design  to  mislead 
others.  Since  now  we  bear  falbe  witness  by  all  sorts  of  lies,  there- 
fore this  commandment  forbids,  (a)  Lying  from  custom,  when  a 
a  person  hath  so  accustomed  himself  to  lying,  that  almost  every 
word  which  he  utters  is  a  lie,  and  he  can  plead  for  it,  as  for  a  most 
certain  truth,  like  "  the  Cretians,  who  were  always  liars,"  Titus  i. 
12,  and  like  "the  devil,  who  speaks  lies,  as  of  his  own,"  John  viii. 
44.  (b)  Also  lies  by  which  a  person  guesses  and  suppdseth  a  thing 
to  be  true,  when  he  might  nevertheless  have  known  better,  as  the 
people  of  Antichrist,  who  are  subject  to  "  a  strong  delusion,"  and 
therefore  "  believe  a  lie,"  according  to  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  (c)  Hurt- 
ful lies,  to  injure  our  neighbour.  So  "  the  rich  men  of  Judah  were 
full  of  violence,  aud  the  inhabitants  thereof  spoke  lies,  and  their 
tongue  was  deceitful  m  their  mouth,"  Micha  vi.  12.  (d)  Lies  for 
our  profit  and  advantage  are  also  hateful,  as  Gehazi  experienced, 
when  he  was  punished  with  leprosy,  Kings  v.  21 — 27.  To  which 
we  must  refer  also  officious  lies,  uttered  to  procure  an  advantage  to 
our  neighbour,  or  to  deliver  him  from  some  imminent  danger, 
(e)  And  further  jocular  lies,  to  divert  ourselves  and  others,  as  the 
idle  Israelites,  "  who  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and 
the  princes  with  their  lies,"  Hosea  vii.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  detesta- 
ble conduct  of  certain  persons  to  excuse  lies,  which  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  profit  or  pleasure,  when  nevertheless  all  lies  without  dis- 
tinction are  hated,  condemned  and  punished  by  God,  Psalm  v,  6. 
Prov.  vi.  19.  xii.  22.  Eph.  iv.  25.  Col.  iii.  9.  "We  may  not* 
speak  wickedly  nor  deceitfully  for  God,"  as  Job  saith,  Job  xiii.  7. 
Shall  we  then  do  it  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  neighbour  ?  "  We 
must  give  an  account  of  every  idle  word,"  Matt.  xii.  36.  If  the 
saints  did  sometimes  lie,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xii.  13 — 19.  Isaac, 
Gen.  xxvi.  7.  Jacob,  Gen  xxvii.  19.  34.  the  midwives  in  Egypt, 
Exod.  1.  19,  and  others,  we  ought  to  censure,  and  not  to  imitate 
their  conduct :  the  saints  had  also  other  infirmities,  which  ought 
not  therefore  to  be  approved  of.  Did  Abraham  say,  that  Sarah  was 
his  sister,  it  was  also  true,  as  he  showeth,  Gen.  xx.  12  Did  God 
bless  the  midwives  in  Egypt,  it  was  not  on  account  of  their  lies, 
but  their  godliness.     And  v/ho  can  say  that  they  did  not  speak  the 


.366       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

truth,  when  they  said,  "  the   Hebrew  women  are  lively,  and  are  de- 
livered tre  the  midwives  come  in  un'o  them  !"  Exod.  i.  19. 

Finally.}  this  commandment  forbids  also  '  deceit  :"  Not  those 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  men  abridge  their  neighbour  of 
his  property  :  for  this  belongs  to  the  ighth  commandment  Nei- 
ther doth  it  forbid  deceiving  our  enemy  with  military  artifices  :  for 
we  arc  not  obliged  to  inform  our  enemy  of  our  intention  to  annoy 
him.  God  himself  instructed  Israel  in  such  military  stratagems, 
and  commanded  them  to  make  use  of  them,  Joshua,  viii.  2.  We 
must  not  condemn  employing  a  holy  wisdom,  m  order  10  convert 
our  neighbour  by  the  word  :  Paul  "  being  crafty,  eaug \ft  the  Co.iri- 
vhians  with  guile,"  2  Lor.  xii.  16.  Neither  is  it  censurable  to  be- 
have as  strangers,  and  to  appear  unwilling,  in  order  to  try  a  person, 
and  to  discover  whether  he  will  perform  his  dtity,  as  the  angels  tried 
Lot,  and  the  Saviour  his  disciples;  Gen.  xix.  2.  Luke  xxiv.  2 
But  the  deceit  that  is  spoken  of  here  proceeds  from  a  malicious 
desire  to  insnare  and  mislead  our  felluvmen,  to  their  hurt.  And 
this  is  done,  (a)  by  treachery,  whereby  a  person  pretends  to  be 
friendly,  while  he  harbours  a  malignant  hatred  in  his  heart,  which 
disposeth  him  to  destroy  Ids  neighbour  :  "  they  speak  vanity  every 
one  with  his  neighbour  :  with  flattering  lips  and  with  a  double 
do  they  speak,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xii.  2.  See  also  Psalm  xxviii. 
J.  Such  deceivers  are  Joabs  and  Judasses.  who  kissed  their  neigh- 
bours deceitfully,  2  Sam.  ii  27.  xx.  8 — 10.  Matt.  xxvi.  -19. 
(b)  By  hypocrisy,  whereby  a  person  appears  exceedingly  devout 
externaliy,  while  l;is  heart  within  is  rotten,  and  nil  his  designs  are 
corrupt,  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  describes  the  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27,  and  thus  '*  men  deceive  themselves  with  vain  imaginations,"  as 
James  testifieth,  James  i.  22.  The  hypocrite  is  an  abominable 
monster  ;  for  he  hes  even  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  Spirit,  as  if  he 
would  deceive  the  Aillknowhig,  See  Psalm  'xxviii.  35.  Acts  v. 
3.  4,  9.  (c)  It  is  deceit  also  to  flatter,  and  soothe  our  neighbour 
by  praising  bin)  and  that  often  not  according  to  truth  ;  for  we  do 
thus  deceive  him  :  "  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,  spreadeth 
a  net  for  his  feet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxix.  5.  How  detestable 
this  is  in  preachers  we  may  think  and  read,  Isaiah  iii.  12.  Jer.  vi. 
14.  xxui.  14.  (d)  A  person  deceives  not  less  by  ambiguous  words 
and  mental  reservations,  which  are  usually  called  Mennonitish 
•tricks.  Of  these  we  havs  spoken  belore  upon  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

IL  As  no  man  is  good,  who  only   abstains  from  doing  evil,   hu; 
doth  not  do  that  which  is  good,  therefore  the  Lord  not  only  forbids 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 12.  367 

bearing  false  witness,  but  he  also  commands  us  to  have  a  proper  re- 
gatd  to  the  honour  of  our  neighbour.     To  which  pertains, 

1  H  That  we  love  the  truth."  The  Lord  saith,  "  love  the  truth," 
Zech.  viii.  19.  "  God  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  Psalm 
li.  6.  We  will  never  beware  of  bearing  false  witness,  unless  the 
truth  be  dear  and  lovely  in  our  eyes. 

2.  We  must  also  '4  speak  the  truth  uprightly,  and  confess  it."  We 
must  beware  of  every  reservation,  and  of  all  ambiguity  in  our  words, 
and  with  Paul,  we  must  "renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv-  2,  and  with  the  citizens  of 
Zion,  we  must  "speak  the  truth  in  our  hearts,"  according  to  Psalm 
xv.  2.  We  must  especially  speak  the  truth  and  confess  it,  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  speak  it,  whether  in  judgments"  a3  Jesus  be- 
ing adjured  by  Caiaphas,  confessed  that  "  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,"  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  or  *•  in  other  dealings,"  when  it 
may  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour,  and.  of  the  commu- 
nity :  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear," 
saith  Peter,  I  Peter  iii.  15.  Take  heed  nevertheless  not  to  utter 
the  whole  truth  without  necessity,  bolomon  saith,  Prov.  xxix.  11, 
that  "a  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  "  When  Samuel  came  to  Beth- 
lehem, in  order  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  to  anoint  one  of 
the  sons  of  Jesse,  he  declared  the  first,  but  not  the  second  reason  of 
his  coming,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1 — 5.  So  Jeremiah  also  acted,  telling  a 
part  of  what  had  passed  between  him  and  the  king,  but  not  the  whole, 
Jer.  xxviii :  24 — 27. 

3.  It  becomes  us  also  to  "defend  and  promote  as  much  as  we 
are  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  cur  neighbour."  And 
therefore  we  must  not  lend  an  ear  to  backbiters  ;  for  if  we  do  we 
lend  our  ear  to  the  devd,  as  the  backbiter  doth  his  tongue.  Do  we 
hear  aught  to  the  disparagement  of  our  neighbour,  we  must  beware 
that  we  do  not  presently  believe  it,  but  we  must  defend  our  neigh- 
bour's honour,  as  much  as  we  can  and  may  :  "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction," 
This  is  enjoined  even  on  the  king,  Prov.  xxi.  8.  Jonathan  acted 
so  in  behalf  of  David,  1  Sam.  xix.  45.  xx.  32.  And  the 
princes  and  elders  of  the  land  conducted  so  toward  Jeremiah,  Jer. 
xxxvi.  16 — 24.  Do  we  know  aught  that  would  disgrace  our  neigh- 
bour, we  must  not  report  it,  but  hold  our  peace  ;  yea,  though  every 
one  should  know  it,  we  must  nevertheless  not  speak  of  it,  that  the 
evil  rer  ort  may  be  hushed,  and  <he  offence  may  gradually  ceas^. 
Do  we  know  any  good  of  our  neighbour,  we  ought  to   speak  of  it. 


368        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

when  we  may  excile  others  to  imitate  it,  and  when  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  such  a  virtuous  man,  as  one  of  Saul's  young  men  said 
in  commendation  of  David  to  his  king,  that  "  he  was  a  cunning 
player,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war  and  prudent 
in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him," 
1  Sam.  xvi.   18. 

And  what  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  this  command,  which  is  given 
to  the  covenant  p;  ople  of  God,  a  reasonable  command  ?  This  com- 
mand approves  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  to  be  holy,  just  and 
good.      Would  ye  see  the  propriety  of  it,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  Lord  God,  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  de- 
stroy, to  whom  all  the  creatures,  and  still  more  his  reasonable  crea- 
tures, but  most  of  all  his  covenant  people  are  subject,  is  "the  God 
of  truth,"  Isaiah  lxv.  16-  Yea,  lie  is  the  truth  itself,  Jer.  x.  10, 
"  he  cannot  lie,"  Tit.  i.  2.  Hub  v\.  18.  It  is  now  surely  proper, 
that  his  reasonable  creatures,  who  were  mac'e  after  his  image,  and 
especially  that  his  covenant  people,  who  are  renewed  after  his 
likeness,  should  be  like  him.  The  apostle  might  therefore  rea- 
sonably exhort  the  Ephesians,  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness  and  holiness,  or  in  the 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  to  put  away 
lying  and  to  speak  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  Eph. 
iv.  24,  25. 

2.  Bearing  false  witness  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  :  it  is 
violated,  annihilated,  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  even  made  a  lie 
thereby.  Is  not  this  abominable  ?  and  if  a  person  dare  to  do  this, 
what  other  unbecoming  actions  will  he  not  presume  to  do  ? 

3.  Is  it  not  right,  that  the  thoughts  and  words  of  a  person  should 
agree  ?  Must  not  the  person,  who  speaks  falsehoods,  silence  his 
conscience,  before  he  can  abandon  himself  to  bearing  false  witness? 
To  excite  such  a  strife  between  his  heart  and  mouth  is  certainly  un- 
seemly. Will  he  who  deceives  his  neighbour,  endure  to  be  de- 
ceived by  him  in  such  a  manner  ?  No  man  is  willing  to  be  called  a 
false  witness,  or  a  liar ;  will  he  then  be  it  ?  this  is  iniquity. 

4.  The  person  who  transgresseth  this  commandment,  destroys  at" 
the  same  time  all  human  society  ;  for  he  disturbs  all  love,  sincerity, 
trust,  confidence  and  good  neighbourhood  among  friends  and  citi- 
zens. When  the  commonwealths  of  Israel  and  Judah  hastened  to 
their  ruin,  it  was  a  forerunner  of  their  dissolution,  that  "  lying  pic- 
vailed,"  Hosea  iv.  2,  and  M  thai  they  could  not  trust  a  friend,  nor 
put  confidence  in  a  guide,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
doors  of  their  mouths  from  her  wko  lay  in  their  bosom/'  Micha 
vii.  5. 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  U2.  369 

5.  "  Lying  and  deceit,"  and  whatever  else  belongs  to  bearing  false 
witness,  "  arc  works  of  the  devil."  He  forged  the  first  lie,  Gen. 
iii.  4.  "  He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is 
a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it ;"  thus  speaks  the  mouth  of  truth  con- 
cerning him,  John  viiu  44.  Shall  not  a  man  then,  yea,  a  believer 
avoid  these  abominations?  If  he  do  not,  he  declares  himself  to  be 
a  "  child  and  of  his  father  the  devil,  and  that  the  lusts  of  his  father 
he  will  do,"  according  to  the  words  of  him  who  is  true,  John 
viii.  44. 

6.  Once  more  ;  he  who  defiles  himself  with  this  sin,  "brings 
down  upon  himself  the  heavy  wrath  of  God."  Among  "the  six 
things  which  the  Lord  hateth,  and  the  seven  which  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  him,  are  also  a  lying  tongue,  and  a  false  witness  that  speak- 
eth lies,"  according  to  Prov.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  "  A  false  witness  shall 
not  be  innocent,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape,  but  per- 
ish," saith  the  same  wise  man,  Prov.  xix.  5,  9.  The  Lord  will 
punish  such  persons,  until  he  hath  destroyed  them  :  "  Thou  shale 
destroy  them  that  speak  leasing,"  saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  v. 
6.  John  teacheth,  Rev.  xxi.  8,  that  "  liars  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone." 


APPLICATION, 

But,  friends,  how  is  it  with  you  in  this  respect  ?  are  ye  entirely 
innocent  of  these  transgressions  ?  Ye  will  say  no  ;  "  all  men  are 
liars."  It  is  true,  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  this,  Psalm  cxvi.  11. 
Rom.  iii  4.  But  do  ye  believe  this  of  yourselves,  so  that  ye  see  it 
in  your  actions,  and  are  ashamed  of  it  ?  surely  no  ;  for  if  any  per- 
son should  look  upon  you  as  liars,  and  should  tell  you  that  he  did, 
would  it  not  provoke  yovi  to  anger  against  him  ?  who  indeed  will 
suffer  such  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  not  then  evident,  that  ye  have  not 
such  an  impression  concerning  yourselves,  and  that  ye  do  not  be- 
lieve it  ?  Ye  believe  that  the  word  of  God,  which  declares  that  all 
men  are  liars,  is  true,  and  that  bearing  false  witness  is  a  shameful 
sin,  and  deserves  a  severe  punishment ;  and  nevertheless  when  this 
matter  is  applied  to  you,  ye  then  look  upon  yourselves  to  be  honest 
persons,  at  least,  your  hearts  are  not  broken  on  account  of  these 
sins.  It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  know  only  from  the  word,  that 
Vol.  n.  3  V 


370        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  are  called  transgressors  of  this  commandment,  but  we  must  also 
sue  it  in  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  asi-amed,  concerned,  ,and  hum- 
bled  on  account  of  it.  Therefore  examine  yourselves  by  what  is 
foi  bidden  and  commanded  here,  and  pause  a  while,  until  ye  see  the 
most,  if  not  all  these  abominations  in  your  minds  and  ac'ions,  ai,d 
until  this  affects  you  thoroughly!  Come,  ye  who  have  at  any  time 
acted  as  plaintiffs,  as  defendants,  as  witnesses,  as  lawyers  and  attor- 
neys, or  as  judges  in  courts  of  judicature,  have  ye  never  boine  wit- 
ness to  aught  hot  the  truth,  and  have  ye  always  spoken  the  truth, 
without  any  clokes  of  shame  ?  Yea,  hear,  all  ye  who  hear  me  this 
d.iy,  are  ye  faithful  in  relating  the  words  of  another,  forbearing  either 
to  add  or  diminish  aught  by  your  words  cr  gestures  ?  are  ye  stran- 
gers to  backbiting,  never  bespattering  your  neighbour's  skirts  ?  do  ye 
never  defame,  nor  reproach  him,  either  in  his  presence  or  absence  ? 
is  your  soul  so  filled  with  love  to  your  neighbour,  that  ye  do  not  sus- 
pect, nor  judge  him  rashly  or  unheard  ?  do  ye  shudder  at  every 
kind  of  lying  and  deceit  ?  do  ye  love  the  truth  ?  always  speak  and 
confess  it  with  sincerity,  when  it  is  proper  ?  and  do  ye  do  your  ut- 
most to  defend  the  honour  and  good  character  of  your  neighbour? 
ye  are  tl-en  "  perfect,  since  ye  do  not  offend  in  word,"  according  to 
James  iii.  2.  But  friends,  i.ow  can  ye,  and  how  can  we  believe 
this  of  you  ?  your  actions,  words,  and  behaviour  condemn  you,  and 
declare  that  ye  bear  false  witness  of  yourselves.  Your  angry,  raving 
thoughts  concerning  your  neighbour  ;  the  pains,  the  grief,  the  sor- 
row and  complaints  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  courts  of  judi- 
cature ;  your  prating  the  whole  day  long  against  your  neighbour  ; 
all  that  discontent,  and  all  those  complaints,  winch  we  hear  daily  of 
the  injuries  which  some  suffer  from  their  neighbour's  tongues,  man- 
ifest how  abominable  and  guilty  our  people  are  before  the  Lord. 
We  may  indeed  say  now  from  Isaiah  lix.  14,  15,  '"Judgment  is 
turned  away  backward,  and  justice  standeth  afar  off;  for  truth  is  fal- 
len in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter.  Yea,  truth  faileth,  and  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  a  prey  :  and  the  Lord  seeth 
it,  and  it  displtaseth  him."  It  would  be  your  happinesss,  if  ye  also 
saw  it,  and  that  ye  were  wholly  perverse,  hateful  and  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  O  see  with  brokenness  of  heart,  that  your  "  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre,  that  ye  have  used  deceit  with  your  tongues,  that 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  your  lips,  and  that  your  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness."  It  is  so  of  a  truth,  whether  ye  know  it  or 
not.  Paul,  who  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  accuseth  you  ,of  this,. 
Rom.  iii.  13,  14, 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  371 

Do  ye  see  these  things  in  yourselves  with  anxiety  and  concern, 
permit  me  to  afford  you  my  advice,  in  order  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  may  be  delivered  from  your  evil  disposition. 

1.  £>eek  to  obtain  reconciliation  for  these  iniquities  of  the  Lord. 
His  Son  hath  borne  his  wrath,  and  satisfied  his  justice  for  such 
transgressions,  in  behalf  of  those  who  lice  for  refuge  to  him.  He 
himself  bore  the  punishment  of  them,  when  he  suffered  false  accu- 
sations, the  falsifying  of  his  words,  backbiting,  reproaches,  unjust 
condemnations,  with  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit.  Yea,  he  purcha'.d 
a  perfect  righteousness,  which  can  entitle  you  to  life,  when,  in  obe- 
dience to  his  Father,  he  loved  the  truth,  always  spoke  uprightly, 
and  promoted  in  the  most  hearty  manner  his  neighbour's  honour. 
Seek  then  and  receive  by  faith  him  and  his  righteousness,  tha>  with 
Paul  ye  may  "  be  found  in  him,  and  may  have  his  righteousness5" 
Pinlip.  hi.  7  —  10. 

2.  seek  another  and  a  true  temper  of  mind,  that  ye  may  love  the 
truth,  and  may  speak  it  upon  every  occasion  :  "  God  desireth  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  as  David  testifielh  with  truth,  lJsaln;  li.  6.  Ye 
will  never  govern  your  tongues  aright,  until  your  minds  are  changed  ; 
"  For  out  of  the  abund  nee  of  the  heart  the  mnmh  spt&keth,"  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  Mat.  xn.  34  But  this  can  never  happen,  unless 
the  Lord  himself,  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  apply 
his  hand  effectually  to  the  mind-  As  he  alone  wrote  this  command 
in  tables  of  stone,  so  he  also  must  write  it  in  the  heart,  and  thus, 
according  to  his  promise.  Isaiah  Ixi  8  "direct  our  work  in  truth." 
As  iVloses  then  carried  his  tables  ot  stone  up  to  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  engrave  his  law  v>  them,  so  do  ye  also  commit  your  heaits 
into  his  hand,  that  he  may  form  and  dispose  them  according  to  his 
law,  yea,  that  he  may  imprint  his  law  in  them,  and  that  he  may 
also  direct  your  mouths  according  to  it.  David  did  so,  when  lie 
said,  Psalm  xix-  14.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tation of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord."  See  how  he 
dreaded  the  sin  of  his  tongue,  and  therefore  prayed  against  it  time 
after  time,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  cxli.  3.  Thus  also  Agur,  the  son  of 
Jakeh  did,  Prov.  xxx.  7,  8. 

3.  Let  no  man  bear  false  witness  against  himself.  A  man  haih 
none  nearer  to  him  than  himself;  and  therefore  it  is  much  more 
preposterous  in  him  to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  than 
against  his  neighbour.  This  is  nevertheless  often  done :  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  who  can 
know  it  ?"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  Therefore  an  unconverted 
person  will  often  judge  concerning  himself,  that  he  and  his  condi- 


m       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

tion  are  good  in  the  sight  of  God  :  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  de^ 
ceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul, 
nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  I"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 
Moreover,  a  believer,  who  hath  yet  but  little  experience,  will  some- 
times judge,  from  a  prejudice  against  himself,  that  he  is  in  a  grace- 
less  condition  ;  but  as  it  is  on  the  one  hand  dangerous,  so  it  is  on 
the  other  exceedingly  sinful  to  judge  otherwise  of  ourselves,  than 
God  lestifieth  of  us  in  his  word. 

4.  Hate  lies  and  deceit  of  every  kind,  be  afraid  of  them,  as  of 
the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  and  those  by  which  we  bring  down 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  us  :  '•  A  righteous  man  hateth  lying,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  xiii.  5,  He  had  also  observed  this  in  his  father, 
who  saith,  Psalm,  cxix.  104,  "  I  hale  every  false  way." 

5.  Beware  of  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness,  as  (a)  discon- 
tent with  your  neighbour,  by  which  men  are  easily  urged  to  speak 
evil  of  their  neighbour,  and  to  hear  it  eagerly,  with  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  7 — 19.  xxiv.  10.  (b)  Great  talkativeness:  "India  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  x. 
19.  We  must  especially  beware  of  idle  talking  and  jesting  :  "  Fil- 
thiness,  and  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  must  not  be  once  named 
among  you,"  Eph.  v.  4.  (c)  Watch  particularly  against  your  pride  ; 
tor  through  pride  we  imagine  that  we  know,  and  are  able  to  say 
every  thing  better  than  others  ;  "  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a 
rod  of  pride  :  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them,"  accord- 
ing to  Prov.  xiv.  3.  (d)  Watch  also  against  a  heart  that  is  void  of 
the  Spirit ;  for  when  the  heart  is  not  filled  with  good  things,  the 
tongue  must  speak  vanity  :  "  Finally,  brethren,"  saith  Paul,  Philip. 
iv.  8,  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest, 
whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things,"  (e) 
Never  think  that  your  neighbour  will  keep  aught  to  himself  that  ye 
have  said  to  him  :  forbid  him  to  speak  of  it  again,  and  he  will  still 
mention  it  to  another,  and  enjoin  on  him  to  keep  it  to  himself,  and 
it  will  thus  pass  from  one  to  another,  and  often  with  many  false  ad- 
ditions. If  ye  be  silent  yourselves,  another  cannot  bewray  your  se- 
cret :  but  after  ye  havs  once  related  it,  ye  arc  then  no  longer  mas- 
ters of  your  words.  Therefore  study  to  keep  silence :  "  Even  a 
fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise  :  and  he  that  shut- 
teth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding,"  Prov.  xvii.  "S. 

If  we  would  conduct  in  this  manner,  what  a  harmonious  friendship 
should  we  enjoy  with  ourselves,  with  men,  and  God  !     "  What  man 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112,  37S 

is  he,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  12,  13,  "  that  desireth  life,  and 
loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile."  Hear  what  he  saith  to 
God,  Psalm  xv.  1,3,  "  Lord,  v/ho  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernarle  ? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nov  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbour."     Amen. 


(  3^4  ) 


THE 


TENTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his 
maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  tiling  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's.

Q.   112.   What  is  requ'rccl  in  the  ninth  command? 

A.  That  I  bear  false  witness  against  no  man  ;  nor  falsify  any 
man's  words  ;  that  I  be  no  backbiter,  or  slanderer  ;  that  I  do  not 
judge,  or  join  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard  ;  but  that 
I  avoid  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit,  as  the  proper  works  of  the  devil, 
unless  I  would  bring  down  upon  me  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  :  like- 
wise that  in  judgment  and  all  other  dealings,  I  love  the  truth,  speak 
it  uprightly,  and  confess  it  :  also  that  I  defend  and  promote,  as 
much  as  I  am  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  my  neigh- 
bour. 

tc   t~ ■""> 

JL  HE  tongue,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  is  a  fire,  a  world  of 
iniquity,  which  defileth  the  whole  body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the 
course  of  nature,  and  is  set  on  fire  of  hell.  The  tongue  can  no 
man  tame,  it  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  deadly  poison,"  James  iii. 


XLII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  110,  11!.  359 

6,  3.     The  heart  of  man,  filled  by  sin  with  every  abomination,  and 
producing  every  evil  motion,  corrupts  all  the  members  of  the  body, 
and  directs  them  to  evil,  rendering  them  "  servants  of  uncleanness 
and  of  iniquity  to  iniquity,"    as  Paul  speaks,  Rom.  vi.  19.     But  the 
tongue  is  more  particularly  set  on  fire  thus,  by  that  evil  corruption, 
as  a  fire  and  a  world  of  iniquity,  so  that  it  defileth  even  the  whole 
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature,  by  urging  it  violently 
on,  like   an    unquenchable  fire,  and    like  a  wild   beast,  that  is  un» 
tameable.     Therefore  ho:y  men   have  been  so  careful  and  circum- 
spect with   respect  ta  their  tongue,  and  they   have   endeavoured  to 
bridle  it,  like  an  unruly  horse.    David  said,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  H  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  :     I  will   keep 
my  mouth  with  a  bridie."     We  may  therefore,   with  that  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  compare  the  tongue  to  a  cily,  which  is  well   pro- 
vided with  bulwarks  of  teeth,   and  doors  of  lips,  and  yet   hath  need 
of  a  guard  to   watch,  and  to  defend  it  against    tumults  within,  and 
the  assaults  of  enemies  without  :  hear  him   therefore  pray,   Psalm 
cxli.  3.     "  Set  a  watch,    O  Lord,  before  my  mouth,  keep    the  door 
of  my    lips."     It    is   also   remarkable,  that    there  is  only  a  single 
guard,    that   is,  one  commandment    in  the  law,  against    other  sins, 
but  against   the  sins  of  the  tongue  there  is  a  double    guard  of  two 
commandments  :  it   was  not  enough  that  God  required  in  the  first 
table  of  the  law,  and  in  the  third   commandment,  that  we   should 
watch  against  the  sins  of  the   tongue,  but  he  chooseth  to  do  it  also 
by  this  ninth   commandment,  that  the  tongue  may  not  be  perverted 
to  bear  false  witness  against  our  neighbour. 

The  Lord  commanding  us  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourse-ves, 
requires  of  us  that  we  should  conformably  to  this,  honour  our  pa- 
rents, not  kill  our  neighbour,  not  commit  adultery,  nor  steal  :  but 
how  shall  we  keep  these  commandments,  if  we  bear  false  witness 
against  our  neighbour  ?  "  Death  and  life,"  and  thus  all  that  is  dear 
to  our  neighbour,  "  is  in  the  power  of  the  tongue,"  saith  Solomon, 
Prov.  xviii.  21.  Theiefore  the  Lawgiver  manifests  his  wisdom  by 
annexing  this  commandment  to  the  foregoing. 

The  instructor,  in  order  to  explain  this  commandment,  shows 

I.  What  is  forbidden,  and 

II.  What  is  commanded  in  it. 

1.  This  commandment  forbids  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
our  neighbour."  We  have  shown  before,  that  all  men  are  our 
neighbours,  because  they  are  all  made  of  one  blood  with  us.  We 
are  called  upon  on  many  occasions  to  bear  witness  against  our  neigh- 
bours, but  we  must  beware  that  we  do  not  bear  false  witness  ag;irsf. 


360       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

them,  or  otherwise  than  we  know  to  be  the  truth  ;  which  is  done 
"  in  judgment,"  when  falsehood  and  iniquity  are  practised  there  in 
an  ungodly  manner  :  "  In  the  place  of  judgment  there  is  wicked- 
ness, and  *n  the  place  of  righteousness  there  is  iniquity  :"  this  the 
preacher  saw  also  in  his  time,  Eccl.  iii.  16.  The  Lawgiver  hath 
also  respect  in  a  particular  manner  to  bearing  false  witness  in  judg- 
ment, in  which,  when  we  are  called  upon  to  witness  the  truth,  we 
answer  and  bear  a  false  witness  to  injure  our  neighbour,  as  the  He- 
brew word  tagnaneh,  "to  answer,"  intimates.  1  his  wickedness  is 
frequently  practised  by  different  persons,  who  appear  in  judg- 
ment, as, 

1.  By  the  "plaintiff"  or  accuser,  who  accuseth  his  neighbour 
fedsely,  by  which  he  endangers  his  good  name,  his  life  and  property, 
yea,  his  whole  prosperity.  Of  this  the  Jewish  council  rendered 
themselves  exceedingly  guilty,  when  they  accused  J?sus,  wdio  was 
perfectly  innocent,  before  Pilate,  saying,  "  we  found  this  fellow  per- 
verting the  nation,  arid  foi  bidding  to  give  tribute  to  Cxsar,  saying 
that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  king,"  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

2.  By  the  defendant,  when  he  denies  the  fault,  of  which  he  is 
justly  accused,  like  Cain,  who  when  he  was  cited  before  the  divine 
tribunal,  and  asked  "  where  his  brother  Abel  was,  said,  I  know  not ; 
am  I  my  brother's  keeper r"  Gen  iv.  9.  He  who  fears  not  to  do 
wrong,  ought  not  to  be  afraid  to  confess  that  he  hath  done  wrong, 
and  to  humble  himself  by  submitting  also  to  the  proper  punishment 
of  his  sin,  with  Achan,  when  Joshua  required  of  him  to  confess  and 
acknowledge  his  guilt,  Joshua  vii.  19 — 21.  "•  Fools  make  a  mock 
at  sin :  but  with  the  righteous  there  is  favour,"  according  to  the 
words  of  the  wise  king.   Prov.  xv.  9. 

3.  It  is  not  less  libominable,  when  "  witnesses  "  utter  a  falsehood 
against  a  person,  who  is  unjustly  accused.  How  lamentable  was 
the  case  of  Naboth,  when  "  two  men  of  Belial  were  suborned  against 
him,  and  witnessed  falsely,  Naboth  bla  \  hemed  God  and  the  king, 
and  he  was  thereupon  stoned  !"  1  Kings  xxi.  9 — 13.  So  also  "  the 
whole  council  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus,  that  they  might 
put  him  to  death,"  as  the  members  of  that  council  found  also  many 
false  witnesses,  who  were  nevertheless  of  no  service  to  them,  Matt. 
xxvi.  59,  60.  "  The  Lord  hates  a  false  witness,"  Prov.  vi.  16,  19. 
God  ordered  the  judges  to  inquire  diligently  whether  the  witnesses 
testified  a  falsehood,  and  if  they  did,  that  it  should  then  be  done  to 
them,  as  it  would  have  been  done  to  the  accused,  if  he  had  been 
accused  according  to  truth,  Deut.  xix.  16 — 21.  Although  the  Law- 
giver forbids  bearing  false  witness  against  our  neighbour  to  his  hurt- 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  361 

we  may  nevertheless  not  bear  false  witness  in  his  behalf  to  deliver 
him  ;  for  we  may  not  deliver  the  guilty,  and  certainly  not  do  evil, 
that  good  may  come  ;  and  when  we  bear  false  witness  for  the  guilty, 
we  then  bear  false  witness  against  the  accuser,  who  is  our  neighbour 
also. 

4.  But  still  more  atrocious  than  these  are  those  wicked  lawyers 
and  attorneys,  who  defend  false  accusations,  and  by  means  of  a 
smooth  and  eloquent  tongue,  or  deceitful  writings,  darken  the  true 
circumstances  of  matters,  mislead  the  judge,  and  delay  a  righteous 
sentence,  so  tnat  an  honest  person  can  scarcely  obtain  justice. 
Such  a  lawyer  was  Tertullus,  who  pleaded  in  behalf  of  the  Jews 
against  Paul,  \cts  xxiv.  1 — 9.  Verily  such  persons,  who  ought  to 
assist  the  oppressed,  and  nevertheless  load  them  still  heavier,  are 
pests  of  the  human  race,  they  promote  the  interest  of  hell,  and  de- 
fend the  causes  of  the  devil.  They  may  remain  unpunished  in  this 
world,  but  the  wo,  with  which  they  are  threatened,  will  pursue 
them,  and  cleave  to  them  :  "  Wo  unto  them  that  call  good  evil,  and 
evil  good,"  saith  God,  Isaiah  v.  20. 

5.  But  that  which  surpasseth  all  other  abominations  is  the  conduct 
of  those  unjust  judges,  who  fearing  neither  God  nor  man,  do  not 
regard  the  causes  of  the  righteous  for  a  long  time,  like  that  ungodly 
judge,  of  whom  the  saviour  speaks,  Luke  xviii.  2 — 4.  And  it  is 
still  worse  in  judges  to  pronounce  an  unjust  sentence  :  "  He  that 
justifie'.h  the  wicked,  and  he  that  condemnelh  the  just,  even  they 
both  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisest  of  kings, 
Piov.  xvii.  15.  Whether  it  proceed  from  the  incapacity  and  un- 
skilfulness  of  the  foolish  judge,  who  is  like  a  child  in  understand- 
ing ;  bee  Ecci.  x.  16.  Isaiah  hi.  4,  12  ;  or  from  unrighteousness, 
Avhen  the  judge  will  not  hear  the  accused,  nor  permit  him  to  defend 
himself,  as  the  Jewish  council  pronounced  sentence  in  such  an  un- 
just manner  against  the  baviour,  and  his  servant  Paul,  John  vii. 
47 — 52.  xviii.  19 — 21.  Acts  xxiii.  1 — 3  ;  or  on  account  of  bribes 
and  self-interest:  so  the  judges  of  Judah  were  "  companions  of 
thieves,  every  one  loved  gifts,  and  followed  after  rewards,"  Isaiah 
i.  23  ;  or  because  the  judge  is  a  respecter  of  persons  ;  is  a  person  a 
friend  or  an  enemy,  rich  or  poor,  courageous  or  fearful,  the  unjust 
judge  will  pervert  justice  accordingly  :  "  Ye  shall  do  no  unrighteous- 
ness in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  of  the  poor, 
nor  honour  the  person  of  the  mighty  :  but  in  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour,"  saith  the  Lawgiver,  Lev.  xix.  15.  See 
also  Exod.  xxiii.  6 — 8.     God  denounceth  a  wo  against  such  judges, 

Vol.  ii.  2  U 


362         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

and  saith,  thai  "•  lie  will  ease  and  avenge  himself  of  those  adversa- 
ries of  linn."  Isaiah  l.  24. 

In  the  foregoing  commandments  only  head-sins  arc  mentioned} 
bqt  their  particular  members  are  also  comprehended  under  them; 
it  is  thus  also  here  :  when  bearing  false  witness  in  judgment  is  op- 
posed, it  is  then  forbidden  on  o'  her  occasions  also,  as 

4  '»  Falsifying  the  words  of  another,"  by  giving  them  a  sense 
different  from  that  which  they  commonly  have,  and  in  which  vse 
know  they  were  uttered.  This  is  "  that  frov/ard  mouth,  which  ve 
must  put  aw.ay  from  us,  and  those  perverse  lips,  which  we  must  put 
far  from  us,"  Prov.  iy.  24.  We  misconstrue  the  words  and  mean- 
ing of  another  thus,  either  by  adding  something  to  our  neighbour's 
words,  by  which  they  have  an  entirely  different  sense.  The  Savi- 
our speaking  of  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  which  he  would  raise  up 
from  the  dead,  saith,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  1  will 
raise  it  up,"  John  ii.  19,2  1,  but  the  Jews  perverted  his  words  by 
adding  to  them,  when  they  accused  him,  k*  that  he  had  said,  I  will 
destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made  with  hands,  and  in  three  days  I 
will  build  another  made  without  hands,"  Mark  xiv  38,  whtn  he  h&d 
nevertheless  not  said,  "  1  will  destroy,"  but,  "destroy  ye  ;"  he  did 
not  say,  kl  the  temple  made  with  hands,"  but  "  this  temple  ;"  nei- 
ther had  he  Spoken  "of  another,  but  of  ihe  same  temple,"  which 
they  should  destroy  ;  but  all  these  words  they  added  by  a  false  tes- 
timony. Or  when  we  leave  out  something,  in  order  to  falsify  a  per- 
son's words,  like  the  devil,  who,  that  he  might  induce  Christ  to 
tempt  his  Father  by  casting  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  said  from  Psalm  xci.  11,  that  kl  God  would  give  his  angels 
charge  concerning  him  to  keep  him  ;"  but  he  leaves  out,  "  in  all 
thy  ways,"  Mat.  iv.  6.  We  also  falsify  a  person's  words  by  gestures, 
Whereby  we  give  them  another  and  a  wrong  colour.  A  person  ut- 
te  s  something  that  was  said  in  jest,  or  from  compassion,  in  such  a 
ler,  bj  an  alteration  of  his  countenance  or  voice,  as  if  it  were  spo- 
ke;) in  earnest,  or  from  contempt.  An  abominable  and  false  con- 
duct  1  vViio  can  b«.  safe  from  persons  ol  such  a  frowaid  heart  and 
jperver  e  1 

2.  I  his  commandment  forbids  also  "  backbiting."  by  which  a 
to  others  the  secrets  and  failings  of  his  neighbour,  to 
his  hurt  "  A  talebearer  revealeth  secrets,"  saith  the  wise  kin;-, 
Prov.  :::.  13.  Whether  a  person  do  this,  from  talkativeness,  arm  for 
p  stime,  like  "  the  Athenians,  who  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else, 
but  telling  or  hearing  some  new  thing,"  Acts  xvii.  21,  and  like  the 
WOiaeU)  of  whom  i^aul  speaks,  1  Tim.  v.  13  ;  or  lrom  a 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  56S 

fondness  of  ridiculing  a  person  ;  as  Job  was  the  song  and  byword  of 
contemptible  persons,  Job  xxx  9  ;  or  IVom  a  cksire  of  pleasing 
others,  who  are  deligh  ed  with  hearing  their  neighbour's  secrets  add 
evil  doings,  as  Doeg  informed  Saui  concerning  David,  by  which  it 
came  to  pass,  that  to  many  priests,  and  ether  inhabitants  of  Nob 
"Were  slaini  1  Sam  xxii  7,  19;  or  from  envy  and  displeasure  with 
our  neighbour,  that  we  may  raise  up  new  enemies  against  him 
And  these  j.er-ons,  that  they  may  not  be  accounted  backbiter^.  Will, 
in  the  first  place,  relate  that  which  is  good  of  their  neighbour  and 
when  another  speaks  well  of  him,  they  will  assent  to  it,  yet  they 
will  add  a  "  but,"  or  an  "  alas;"  it  is  true,  they  will  s^y,  he  hath 
(hat  good  quality,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  he  hath  such  and  such  a  h .sl- 
ing ;  and  tuusa  person  is  condemned  by  himself  for  not  c:oing  well, 
and  this  is  nevertheless  an  evil  which  is  common  under  the  sun,  and 
occasions  much  disturbance.  And  surely  those  are  not  innocent  of 
backbiting-,  who  do  not  discountenance  such  backbiters-  but  sl.ow 
that  they  are  pleased  with  them  by  listening  to  them,  and  encoi  rag- 
ing them  to  say  all  that  they  know:  "  He  is  a  wicked  doer,  who 
giveth  heed  to  false  lips,  and  a  liar,  who  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty 
tongue,"  Prov.  xvii.  4. 

3.  "  Slandering"  our  neighbour,  that  is,  belching  out  words  of 
reproach  against  him,  either  when  he  is  present  or  absent  Da\id 
calls  this,  Psalm  xv.  3,  "  Taking  up  a  reproach  against  our  neigh- 
bour." Therefore  the  slanderer  is  also  called  a  reproachcr,  Psalm 
xliv.  16,  as  Shimei  acted  toward  David,  Ahab  toward  Elijah,  and 
the  Jews  toward  the  apostles,  2  Sam  xvi.  5 — 9.  1  Kings  xviii  17. 
Acts  xvii.  6.  It  is  exceedingly  wicked  to  do  this  with  words  ;  for 
"  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproachetb  his  Maker,"  Piov  xvii.  5, 
but  it  is  worse  and  mrolerable  to  do  it  with  pasquil :,  and  reproachful 
writings ;  no  man  can  be  repu'ed  honest  longer  than  such  a  re- 
proachful writer  chooseth  ;  bu'  let  rim  conceal  himself  as  much  as 
he  pleases,  the  Lord  will  find  him  out,  and  recompence  his  reproach- 
es upon  him. 

4.  The  commandment  concerning  bearing  false  witness  forbids 
also  "  judging,  or  joining  in  condemning  any  man  rashly  or  unheard. 
"  We  have  just  now  shown  how  this  is  done  in  judgment  :  but  it  is 
done  also  out  of  judgment  ;  to  which  we  must  nevertheless  not  re- 
ftr  judging  that  a  person  is  in  the  way  to  perdition,  and  warning 
him  against  it,  when  he  discovers  manifest  tokens  of  his  graceless 
condition  by  his  exceeding  ignorance,  his  abandoning  ot  himself  to 
the  world,  his  hatred  of  the  good,  and  of  that  which  is  good,  and 
hy  other  sins  ;  for  we  must  judge  thus,  that  we  may  "  save  him  by 


364         THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

fear,  and  pull  him  out  of  the  fire,"  according  to  the  exhortation  of 
holy  Jude,  in  his  epistle,  vs.  23.  But  we  must  refer  to  this,  (a) 
judging  that  a  person  is  or  is  not  gracious  from  his  prosperity  or 
adversity,  as  the  friends  of  Job  decried  him  for  a  hypocrite,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grievous  afflictions  :  "  No  man  knoweth  either  the  love 
or  hatred"  of  God,  "  by  all  that  is  before  him.  There  is  one  event 
to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,"  according  to  Eccl.  ix.  1,2. 
(b)  Giving  credit  without  further  inquiry  to  every  evil  report  con- 
cerning our  neighbour,  like  Saul,  who  without  any  reason  "  heard 
the  words  of  men,,  saying,  Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt,"  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  10.  This  is  "  receiving  a  false  report,"  which  is  forbidden, 
Exod.  xxiii.  1.  We  must  refer  also  to  this,  (c)  judging  presently 
the  worst  of  our  neighbour  from  any  particular  event,  which  hap- 
pens through  the  disposal  of  divine  providence.  Because  "  a  viper 
fastened  upon  Paul's  hand,  the  Barbarians  judged  that  he  was  a 
murderer,  whom,  though  he  had  escaped  the  sea,  vengeance  suifered 
not  to  live,"  Acts  xxviii.  2 — 4.  (d)  It  is  still  more  unjust  to  mis- 
construe and  condemn  the  virtuous  conduct  of  a  person.  When 
Hannah  prayed  with  a  low  voice  from  sorrow,  Eli  judged  "  that 
she  was  drunk,"  1  Sam.  i.  10 — 16,  and  the  wicked  Jews  judged 
the  same  of  the  apostles  from  their  speaking  in  every  lan- 
guage by  the  Spirit,  Acts  ii.  13.  "  John  came  neither  eating  nor 
drinking,  and  they  said,  He  hath  a  devil.  The  Son  of  man  came 
eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  Behold,  a  man  gluttonous  and  a 
winebibber,"  Mat.  xi.  18,  19.  When  he  doih  not  allow  himself 
time  to  eat  and  drink,  his  friends  will  '«  by  hold  on  him,  as  if  he 
"Were  beside  himself,"  A' ark  iii.  20.  21.  Because  people  cannot  en- 
dure serious  godliness,  therefore  they  will  decry,  as  Pharisees,  hyp- 
ocrites and  legalists,  persons  who  are  not  satisfied  with  the  com- 
mon manner  of  living,  but  endeavour  to  work  out  their  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  They  will  not  be  judged  themselves  ac- 
cording to  truth  from  their  evil  behaviour,  and  they  will  neverthe- 
less repeatedly  condemn  others  on  account  of  their  godliness.  But 
such  persons  set  themselves  up  for  judges  in  the  stead  of  God  : 
*'  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  Therefore  judge  nothing  before 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,"  saith  Paul,  1  Ccr.  iv.  4,  5.  They 
who  act  thus  "  speak  evil  of  the  law,  and  judge  it  as  judges,"  ac- 
cording to  James  iv.  11,  12.  Therefore  "judge  not,  that  ye  be 
not  judged  ;  for  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye  shall  be  judged  ;" 
thus  speaks  the  Lord,  Mat.  vii.  1,2. 

5.  To  this  the  instructor  adds  "  all  sorts   of  lies."     By   which  wc 
must  understand,  relating  a  matter  for  truth,  which   is  nevertheless 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  365 

not  true,  when  a  person  knows  not  but  that  it  is  true  ;  for  he  doth 
indeed  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  no  lie  in  him,  because  he  speaks  according 
to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  ;  but  he  sins  notwithstanding,  because 
he  might  perhaps  have  known  better,  and  he  often  speaks  thus 
without  necessity  ;  but  it  is  a  complete  lie,  when  a  person  speaks 
contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  and  with  a  design  to  mislead 
others.  Since  now  we  bear  falbe  witness  by  all  sorts  of  lies,  there- 
fore this  commandment  forbids,  (a)  Lying  from  custom,  when  a 
a  person  hath  so  accustomed  himself  to  lying,  that  almost  every 
word  which  he  utters  is  a  lie,  and  he  can  plead  for  it,  as  for  a  most 
certain  truth,  like  "  the  Cretians,  who  were  always  liars,"  Titus  i. 
12,  and  like  "the  devil,  who  speaks  lies,  as  of  his  own,"  John  viii. 
44.  (b)  Also  lies  by  which  a  person  guesses  and  suppdseth  a  thing 
to  be  true,  when  he  might  nevertheless  have  known  better,  as  the 
people  of  Antichrist,  who  are  subject  to  "  a  strong  delusion,"  and 
therefore  "  believe  a  lie,"  according  to  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  (c)  Hurt- 
ful lies,  to  injure  our  neighbour.  So  "  the  rich  men  of  Judah  were 
full  of  violence,  aud  the  inhabitants  thereof  spoke  lies,  and  their 
tongue  was  deceitful  m  their  mouth,"  Micha  vi.  12.  (d)  Lies  for 
our  profit  and  advantage  are  also  hateful,  as  Gehazi  experienced, 
when  he  was  punished  with  leprosy,  Kings  v.  21 — 27.  To  which 
we  must  refer  also  officious  lies,  uttered  to  procure  an  advantage  to 
our  neighbour,  or  to  deliver  him  from  some  imminent  danger, 
(e)  And  further  jocular  lies,  to  divert  ourselves  and  others,  as  the 
idle  Israelites,  "  who  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and 
the  princes  with  their  lies,"  Hosea  vii.  3.  It  is  therefore  a  detesta- 
ble conduct  of  certain  persons  to  excuse  lies,  which  are  told  for  the 
sake  of  profit  or  pleasure,  when  nevertheless  all  lies  without  dis- 
tinction are  hated,  condemned  and  punished  by  God,  Psalm  v,  6. 
Prov.  vi.  19.  xii.  22.  Eph.  iv.  25.  Col.  iii.  9.  "We  may  not* 
speak  wickedly  nor  deceitfully  for  God,"  as  Job  saith,  Job  xiii.  7. 
Shall  we  then  do  it  for  ourselves,  or  for  our  neighbour  ?  "  We 
must  give  an  account  of  every  idle  word,"  Matt.  xii.  36.  If  the 
saints  did  sometimes  lie,  as  Abraham,  Gen.  xii.  13 — 19.  Isaac, 
Gen.  xxvi.  7.  Jacob,  Gen  xxvii.  19.  34.  the  midwives  in  Egypt, 
Exod.  1.  19,  and  others,  we  ought  to  censure,  and  not  to  imitate 
their  conduct :  the  saints  had  also  other  infirmities,  which  ought 
not  therefore  to  be  approved  of.  Did  Abraham  say,  that  Sarah  was 
his  sister,  it  was  also  true,  as  he  showeth,  Gen.  xx.  12  Did  God 
bless  the  midwives  in  Egypt,  it  was  not  on  account  of  their  lies, 
but  their  godliness.     And  v/ho  can  say  that  they  did  not  speak  the 


.366       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

truth,  when  they  said,  "  the   Hebrew  women  are  lively,  and  are  de- 
livered tre  the  midwives  come  in  un'o  them  !"  Exod.  i.  19. 

Finally.}  this  commandment  forbids  also  '  deceit  :"  Not  those 
wicked  tricks  and  devices,  whereby  men  abridge  their  neighbour  of 
his  property  :  for  this  belongs  to  the  ighth  commandment  Nei- 
ther doth  it  forbid  deceiving  our  enemy  with  military  artifices  :  for 
we  arc  not  obliged  to  inform  our  enemy  of  our  intention  to  annoy 
him.  God  himself  instructed  Israel  in  such  military  stratagems, 
and  commanded  them  to  make  use  of  them,  Joshua,  viii.  2.  We 
must  not  condemn  employing  a  holy  wisdom,  m  order  10  convert 
our  neighbour  by  the  word  :  Paul  "  being  crafty,  eaug \ft  the  Co.iri- 
vhians  with  guile,"  2  Lor.  xii.  16.  Neither  is  it  censurable  to  be- 
have as  strangers,  and  to  appear  unwilling,  in  order  to  try  a  person, 
and  to  discover  whether  he  will  perform  his  dtity,  as  the  angels  tried 
Lot,  and  the  Saviour  his  disciples;  Gen.  xix.  2.  Luke  xxiv.  2 
But  the  deceit  that  is  spoken  of  here  proceeds  from  a  malicious 
desire  to  insnare  and  mislead  our  felluvmen,  to  their  hurt.  And 
this  is  done,  (a)  by  treachery,  whereby  a  person  pretends  to  be 
friendly,  while  he  harbours  a  malignant  hatred  in  his  heart,  which 
disposeth  him  to  destroy  Ids  neighbour  :  "  they  speak  vanity  every 
one  with  his  neighbour  :  with  flattering  lips  and  with  a  double 
do  they  speak,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xii.  2.  See  also  Psalm  xxviii. 
J.  Such  deceivers  are  Joabs  and  Judasses.  who  kissed  their  neigh- 
bours deceitfully,  2  Sam.  ii  27.  xx.  8 — 10.  Matt.  xxvi.  -19. 
(b)  By  hypocrisy,  whereby  a  person  appears  exceedingly  devout 
externaliy,  while  l;is  heart  within  is  rotten,  and  nil  his  designs  are 
corrupt,  as  the  Lord  Jeaus  describes  the  hypocrites,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27,  and  thus  '*  men  deceive  themselves  with  vain  imaginations,"  as 
James  testifieth,  James  i.  22.  The  hypocrite  is  an  abominable 
monster  ;  for  he  hes  even  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  Spirit,  as  if  he 
would  deceive  the  Aillknowhig,  See  Psalm  'xxviii.  35.  Acts  v. 
3.  4,  9.  (c)  It  is  deceit  also  to  flatter,  and  soothe  our  neighbour 
by  praising  bin)  and  that  often  not  according  to  truth  ;  for  we  do 
thus  deceive  him  :  "  A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,  spreadeth 
a  net  for  his  feet,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxix.  5.  How  detestable 
this  is  in  preachers  we  may  think  and  read,  Isaiah  iii.  12.  Jer.  vi. 
14.  xxui.  14.  (d)  A  person  deceives  not  less  by  ambiguous  words 
and  mental  reservations,  which  are  usually  called  Mennonitish 
•tricks.  Of  these  we  havs  spoken  belore  upon  the  twenty-seventh 
Lord's  day. 

IL  As  no  man  is  good,  who  only   abstains  from  doing  evil,   hu; 
doth  not  do  that  which  is  good,  therefore  the  Lord  not  only  forbids 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  1 12.  367 

bearing  false  witness,  but  he  also  commands  us  to  have  a  proper  re- 
gatd  to  the  honour  of  our  neighbour.     To  which  pertains, 

1  H  That  we  love  the  truth."  The  Lord  saith,  "  love  the  truth," 
Zech.  viii.  19.  "  God  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  Psalm 
li.  6.  We  will  never  beware  of  bearing  false  witness,  unless  the 
truth  be  dear  and  lovely  in  our  eyes. 

2.  We  must  also  '4  speak  the  truth  uprightly,  and  confess  it."  We 
must  beware  of  every  reservation,  and  of  all  ambiguity  in  our  words, 
and  with  Paul,  we  must  "renounce  the  hidden  things  of  dishonesty, 
not  walking  in  craftiness,"  2  Cor.  iv-  2,  and  with  the  citizens  of 
Zion,  we  must  "speak  the  truth  in  our  hearts,"  according  to  Psalm 
xv.  2.  We  must  especially  speak  the  truth  and  confess  it,  when 
we  are  called  upon  to  speak  it,  whether  in  judgments"  a3  Jesus  be- 
ing adjured  by  Caiaphas,  confessed  that  "  he  was  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,"  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64.  or  *•  in  other  dealings,"  when  it 
may  conduce  to  the  advantage  of  our  neighbour,  and.  of  the  commu- 
nity :  "  Be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh 
you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear," 
saith  Peter,  I  Peter  iii.  15.  Take  heed  nevertheless  not  to  utter 
the  whole  truth  without  necessity,  bolomon  saith,  Prov.  xxix.  11, 
that  "a  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind  "  When  Samuel  came  to  Beth- 
lehem, in  order  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  to  anoint  one  of 
the  sons  of  Jesse,  he  declared  the  first,  but  not  the  second  reason  of 
his  coming,  1  Sam.  xvi.  1 — 5.  So  Jeremiah  also  acted,  telling  a 
part  of  what  had  passed  between  him  and  the  king,  but  not  the  whole, 
Jer.  xxviii :  24 — 27. 

3.  It  becomes  us  also  to  "defend  and  promote  as  much  as  we 
are  able,  the  honour  and  good  character  of  cur  neighbour."  And 
therefore  we  must  not  lend  an  ear  to  backbiters  ;  for  if  we  do  we 
lend  our  ear  to  the  devd,  as  the  backbiter  doth  his  tongue.  Do  we 
hear  aught  to  the  disparagement  of  our  neighbour,  we  must  beware 
that  we  do  not  presently  believe  it,  but  we  must  defend  our  neigh- 
bour's honour,  as  much  as  we  can  and  may  :  "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are  appointed  to  destruction," 
This  is  enjoined  even  on  the  king,  Prov.  xxi.  8.  Jonathan  acted 
so  in  behalf  of  David,  1  Sam.  xix.  45.  xx.  32.  And  the 
princes  and  elders  of  the  land  conducted  so  toward  Jeremiah,  Jer. 
xxxvi.  16 — 24.  Do  we  know  aught  that  would  disgrace  our  neigh- 
bour, we  must  not  report  it,  but  hold  our  peace  ;  yea,  though  every 
one  should  know  it,  we  must  nevertheless  not  speak  of  it,  that  the 
evil  rer  ort  may  be  hushed,  and  <he  offence  may  gradually  ceas^. 
Do  we  know  any  good  of  our  neighbour,  we  ought  to   speak  of  it. 


368        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

when  we  may  excile  others  to  imitate  it,  and  when  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  such  a  virtuous  man,  as  one  of  Saul's  young  men  said 
in  commendation  of  David  to  his  king,  that  "  he  was  a  cunning 
player,  and  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of  war  and  prudent 
in  matters,  and  a  comely  person,  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him," 
1  Sam.  xvi.   18. 

And  what  think  ye,  hearers,  is  not  this  command,  which  is  given 
to  the  covenant  p;  ople  of  God,  a  reasonable  command  ?  This  com- 
mand approves  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  to  be  holy,  just  and 
good.      Would  ye  see  the  propriety  of  it,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  Lord  God,  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can  save  and  de- 
stroy, to  whom  all  the  creatures,  and  still  more  his  reasonable  crea- 
tures, but  most  of  all  his  covenant  people  are  subject,  is  "the  God 
of  truth,"  Isaiah  lxv.  16-  Yea,  lie  is  the  truth  itself,  Jer.  x.  10, 
"  he  cannot  lie,"  Tit.  i.  2.  Hub  v\.  18.  It  is  now  surely  proper, 
that  his  reasonable  creatures,  who  were  mac'e  after  his  image,  and 
especially  that  his  covenant  people,  who  are  renewed  after  his 
likeness,  should  be  like  him.  The  apostle  might  therefore  rea- 
sonably exhort  the  Ephesians,  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  true  righteousness  and  holiness,  or  in  the 
righteousness  and  holiness  of  the  truth,  and  therefore  to  put  away 
lying  and  to  speak  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour,"  Eph. 
iv.  24,  25. 

2.  Bearing  false  witness  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  truth  :  it  is 
violated,  annihilated,  banished  out  of  the  world,  and  even  made  a  lie 
thereby.  Is  not  this  abominable  ?  and  if  a  person  dare  to  do  this, 
what  other  unbecoming  actions  will  he  not  presume  to  do  ? 

3.  Is  it  not  right,  that  the  thoughts  and  words  of  a  person  should 
agree  ?  Must  not  the  person,  who  speaks  falsehoods,  silence  his 
conscience,  before  he  can  abandon  himself  to  bearing  false  witness? 
To  excite  such  a  strife  between  his  heart  and  mouth  is  certainly  un- 
seemly. Will  he  who  deceives  his  neighbour,  endure  to  be  de- 
ceived by  him  in  such  a  manner  ?  No  man  is  willing  to  be  called  a 
false  witness,  or  a  liar ;  will  he  then  be  it  ?  this  is  iniquity. 

4.  The  person  who  transgresseth  this  commandment,  destroys  at" 
the  same  time  all  human  society  ;  for  he  disturbs  all  love,  sincerity, 
trust,  confidence  and  good  neighbourhood  among  friends  and  citi- 
zens. When  the  commonwealths  of  Israel  and  Judah  hastened  to 
their  ruin,  it  was  a  forerunner  of  their  dissolution,  that  "  lying  pic- 
vailed,"  Hosea  iv.  2,  and  M  thai  they  could  not  trust  a  friend,  nor 
put  confidence  in  a  guide,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the 
doors  of  their  mouths  from  her  wko  lay  in  their  bosom/'  Micha 
vii.  5. 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  U2.  369 

5.  "  Lying  and  deceit,"  and  whatever  else  belongs  to  bearing  false 
witness,  "  arc  works  of  the  devil."  He  forged  the  first  lie,  Gen. 
iii.  4.  "  He  abode  not  in  the  truth,  because  there  is  no  truth  in 
him.  When  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  :  for  he  is 
a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it ;"  thus  speaks  the  mouth  of  truth  con- 
cerning him,  John  viiu  44.  Shall  not  a  man  then,  yea,  a  believer 
avoid  these  abominations?  If  he  do  not,  he  declares  himself  to  be 
a  "  child  and  of  his  father  the  devil,  and  that  the  lusts  of  his  father 
he  will  do,"  according  to  the  words  of  him  who  is  true,  John 
viii.  44. 

6.  Once  more  ;  he  who  defiles  himself  with  this  sin,  "brings 
down  upon  himself  the  heavy  wrath  of  God."  Among  "the  six 
things  which  the  Lord  hateth,  and  the  seven  which  are  an  abomina- 
tion to  him,  are  also  a  lying  tongue,  and  a  false  witness  that  speak- 
eth lies,"  according  to  Prov.  vi.  16,  17,  19.  "  A  false  witness  shall 
not  be  innocent,  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  escape,  but  per- 
ish," saith  the  same  wise  man,  Prov.  xix.  5,  9.  The  Lord  will 
punish  such  persons,  until  he  hath  destroyed  them  :  "  Thou  shale 
destroy  them  that  speak  leasing,"  saith  David  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  v. 
6.  John  teacheth,  Rev.  xxi.  8,  that  "  liars  have  their  portion  in  the 
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone." 


APPLICATION, 

But,  friends,  how  is  it  with  you  in  this  respect  ?  are  ye  entirely 
innocent  of  these  transgressions  ?  Ye  will  say  no  ;  "  all  men  are 
liars."  It  is  true,  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  this,  Psalm  cxvi.  11. 
Rom.  iii  4.  But  do  ye  believe  this  of  yourselves,  so  that  ye  see  it 
in  your  actions,  and  are  ashamed  of  it  ?  surely  no  ;  for  if  any  per- 
son should  look  upon  you  as  liars,  and  should  tell  you  that  he  did, 
would  it  not  provoke  yovi  to  anger  against  him  ?  who  indeed  will 
suffer  such  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  not  then  evident,  that  ye  have  not 
such  an  impression  concerning  yourselves,  and  that  ye  do  not  be- 
lieve it  ?  Ye  believe  that  the  word  of  God,  which  declares  that  all 
men  are  liars,  is  true,  and  that  bearing  false  witness  is  a  shameful 
sin,  and  deserves  a  severe  punishment ;  and  nevertheless  when  this 
matter  is  applied  to  you,  ye  then  look  upon  yourselves  to  be  honest 
persons,  at  least,  your  hearts  are  not  broken  on  account  of  these 
sins.  It  is  therefore  not  enough  to  know  only  from  the  word,  that 
Vol.  n.  3  V 


370        THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

we  are  called  transgressors  of  this  commandment,  but  we  must  also 
sue  it  in  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  asi-amed,  concerned,  ,and  hum- 
bled  on  account  of  it.  Therefore  examine  yourselves  by  what  is 
foi  bidden  and  commanded  here,  and  pause  a  while,  until  ye  see  the 
most,  if  not  all  these  abominations  in  your  minds  and  ac'ions,  ai,d 
until  this  affects  you  thoroughly!  Come,  ye  who  have  at  any  time 
acted  as  plaintiffs,  as  defendants,  as  witnesses,  as  lawyers  and  attor- 
neys, or  as  judges  in  courts  of  judicature,  have  ye  never  boine  wit- 
ness to  aught  hot  the  truth,  and  have  ye  always  spoken  the  truth, 
without  any  clokes  of  shame  ?  Yea,  hear,  all  ye  who  hear  me  this 
d.iy,  are  ye  faithful  in  relating  the  words  of  another,  forbearing  either 
to  add  or  diminish  aught  by  your  words  cr  gestures  ?  are  ye  stran- 
gers to  backbiting,  never  bespattering  your  neighbour's  skirts  ?  do  ye 
never  defame,  nor  reproach  him,  either  in  his  presence  or  absence  ? 
is  your  soul  so  filled  with  love  to  your  neighbour,  that  ye  do  not  sus- 
pect, nor  judge  him  rashly  or  unheard  ?  do  ye  shudder  at  every 
kind  of  lying  and  deceit  ?  do  ye  love  the  truth  ?  always  speak  and 
confess  it  with  sincerity,  when  it  is  proper  ?  and  do  ye  do  your  ut- 
most to  defend  the  honour  and  good  character  of  your  neighbour? 
ye  are  tl-en  "  perfect,  since  ye  do  not  offend  in  word,"  according  to 
James  iii.  2.  But  friends,  i.ow  can  ye,  and  how  can  we  believe 
this  of  you  ?  your  actions,  words,  and  behaviour  condemn  you,  and 
declare  that  ye  bear  false  witness  of  yourselves.  Your  angry,  raving 
thoughts  concerning  your  neighbour  ;  the  pains,  the  grief,  the  sor- 
row and  complaints  of  those  who  are  condemned  in  courts  of  judi- 
cature ;  your  prating  the  whole  day  long  against  your  neighbour  ; 
all  that  discontent,  and  all  those  complaints,  winch  we  hear  daily  of 
the  injuries  which  some  suffer  from  their  neighbour's  tongues,  man- 
ifest how  abominable  and  guilty  our  people  are  before  the  Lord. 
We  may  indeed  say  now  from  Isaiah  lix.  14,  15,  '"Judgment  is 
turned  away  backward,  and  justice  standeth  afar  off;  for  truth  is  fal- 
len in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter.  Yea,  truth  faileth,  and  he 
that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  a  prey  :  and  the  Lord  seeth 
it,  and  it  displtaseth  him."  It  would  be  your  happinesss,  if  ye  also 
saw  it,  and  that  ye  were  wholly  perverse,  hateful  and  guilty  before 
the  Lord.  O  see  with  brokenness  of  heart,  that  your  "  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre,  that  ye  have  used  deceit  with  your  tongues,  that 
the  poison  of  asps  is  under  your  lips,  and  that  your  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness."  It  is  so  of  a  truth,  whether  ye  know  it  or 
not.  Paul,  who  was  led  by  the  Spirit  of  truth,  accuseth  you  ,of  this,. 
Rom.  iii.  13,  14, 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112.  371 

Do  ye  see  these  things  in  yourselves  with  anxiety  and  concern, 
permit  me  to  afford  you  my  advice,  in  order  that  ye  may  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  may  be  delivered  from  your  evil  disposition. 

1.  £>eek  to  obtain  reconciliation  for  these  iniquities  of  the  Lord. 
His  Son  hath  borne  his  wrath,  and  satisfied  his  justice  for  such 
transgressions,  in  behalf  of  those  who  lice  for  refuge  to  him.  He 
himself  bore  the  punishment  of  them,  when  he  suffered  false  accu- 
sations, the  falsifying  of  his  words,  backbiting,  reproaches,  unjust 
condemnations,  with  all  sorts  of  lies  and  deceit.  Yea,  he  purcha'.d 
a  perfect  righteousness,  which  can  entitle  you  to  life,  when,  in  obe- 
dience to  his  Father,  he  loved  the  truth,  always  spoke  uprightly, 
and  promoted  in  the  most  hearty  manner  his  neighbour's  honour. 
Seek  then  and  receive  by  faith  him  and  his  righteousness,  tha>  with 
Paul  ye  may  "  be  found  in  him,  and  may  have  his  righteousness5" 
Pinlip.  hi.  7  —  10. 

2.  seek  another  and  a  true  temper  of  mind,  that  ye  may  love  the 
truth,  and  may  speak  it  upon  every  occasion  :  "  God  desireth  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,"  as  David  testifielh  with  truth,  lJsaln;  li.  6.  Ye 
will  never  govern  your  tongues  aright,  until  your  minds  are  changed  ; 
"  For  out  of  the  abund  nee  of  the  heart  the  mnmh  spt&keth,"  saith 
the  Lord  Jesus,  Mat.  xn.  34  But  this  can  never  happen,  unless 
the  Lord  himself,  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,  apply 
his  hand  effectually  to  the  mind-  As  he  alone  wrote  this  command 
in  tables  of  stone,  so  he  also  must  write  it  in  the  heart,  and  thus, 
according  to  his  promise.  Isaiah  Ixi  8  "direct  our  work  in  truth." 
As  iVloses  then  carried  his  tables  ot  stone  up  to  the  Lord,  that  he 
might  engrave  his  law  v>  them,  so  do  ye  also  commit  your  heaits 
into  his  hand,  that  he  may  form  and  dispose  them  according  to  his 
law,  yea,  that  he  may  imprint  his  law  in  them,  and  that  he  may 
also  direct  your  mouths  according  to  it.  David  did  so,  when  lie 
said,  Psalm  xix-  14.  "  Let  the  words  of  my  mouth,  and  the  medi- 
tation of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord."  See  how  he 
dreaded  the  sin  of  his  tongue,  and  therefore  prayed  against  it  time 
after  time,  Psalm  xxxix.  1.  cxli.  3.  Thus  also  Agur,  the  son  of 
Jakeh  did,  Prov.  xxx.  7,  8. 

3.  Let  no  man  bear  false  witness  against  himself.  A  man  haih 
none  nearer  to  him  than  himself;  and  therefore  it  is  much  more 
preposterous  in  him  to  bear  false  witness  against  himself,  than 
against  his  neighbour.  This  is  nevertheless  often  done :  "  The 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked,  who  can 
know  it  ?"  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  Therefore  an  unconverted 
person  will  often  judge  concerning  himself,  that  he  and  his  condi- 


m       THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT  EXPLAINED. 

tion  are  good  in  the  sight  of  God  :  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes  :  a  de^ 
ceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  soul, 
nor  say,  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  I"  Isaiah  xliv.  20. 
Moreover,  a  believer,  who  hath  yet  but  little  experience,  will  some- 
times judge,  from  a  prejudice  against  himself,  that  he  is  in  a  grace- 
less  condition  ;  but  as  it  is  on  the  one  hand  dangerous,  so  it  is  on 
the  other  exceedingly  sinful  to  judge  otherwise  of  ourselves,  than 
God  lestifieth  of  us  in  his  word. 

4.  Hate  lies  and  deceit  of  every  kind,  be  afraid  of  them,  as  of 
the  proper  works  of  the  devil,  and  those  by  which  we  bring  down 
the  wrath  of  God  upon  us  :  '•  A  righteous  man  hateth  lying,"  saith 
Solomon,  Prov.  xiii.  5,  He  had  also  observed  this  in  his  father, 
who  saith,  Psalm,  cxix.  104,  "  I  hale  every  false  way." 

5.  Beware  of  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness,  as  (a)  discon- 
tent with  your  neighbour,  by  which  men  are  easily  urged  to  speak 
evil  of  their  neighbour,  and  to  hear  it  eagerly,  with  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  7 — 19.  xxiv.  10.  (b)  Great  talkativeness:  "India  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,"  saith  the  wise  king,  Prov.  x. 
19.  We  must  especially  beware  of  idle  talking  and  jesting  :  "  Fil- 
thiness,  and  foolish  talking,  and  jesting  must  not  be  once  named 
among  you,"  Eph.  v.  4.  (c)  Watch  particularly  against  your  pride  ; 
tor  through  pride  we  imagine  that  we  know,  and  are  able  to  say 
every  thing  better  than  others  ;  "  In  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a 
rod  of  pride  :  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them,"  accord- 
ing to  Prov.  xiv.  3.  (d)  Watch  also  against  a  heart  that  is  void  of 
the  Spirit ;  for  when  the  heart  is  not  filled  with  good  things,  the 
tongue  must  speak  vanity  :  "  Finally,  brethren,"  saith  Paul,  Philip. 
iv.  8,  "  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest, 
whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things,"  (e) 
Never  think  that  your  neighbour  will  keep  aught  to  himself  that  ye 
have  said  to  him  :  forbid  him  to  speak  of  it  again,  and  he  will  still 
mention  it  to  another,  and  enjoin  on  him  to  keep  it  to  himself,  and 
it  will  thus  pass  from  one  to  another,  and  often  with  many  false  ad- 
ditions. If  ye  be  silent  yourselves,  another  cannot  bewray  your  se- 
cret :  but  after  ye  havs  once  related  it,  ye  arc  then  no  longer  mas- 
ters of  your  words.  Therefore  study  to  keep  silence :  "  Even  a 
fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace,  is  counted  wise  :  and  he  that  shut- 
teth  his  lips  is  esteemed  a  man  of  understanding,"  Prov.  xvii.  "S. 

If  we  would  conduct  in  this  manner,  what  a  harmonious  friendship 
should  we  enjoy  with  ourselves,  with  men,  and  God  !     "  What  man 


XLIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  112,  37S 

is  he,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxiv.  12,  13,  "  that  desireth  life,  and 
loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  good  ?  Keep  thy  tongue  from 
evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile."  Hear  what  he  saith  to 
God,  Psalm  xv.  1,3,  "  Lord,  v/ho  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernarle  ? 
who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  He  that  backbiteth  not  with  his 
tongue,  nor  doth  evil  to  his  neighbour,  nov  taketh  up  a  reproach 
against  his  neighbour."     Amen. 


(  3^4  ) 


THE 


TENTH  COMMANDMENT 


EXPLAINED. 


XLIV.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Exod.  xx.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,  thou 
shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor  his  manservant,  nor  his 
maidservant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  any  tiling  that  is  thy  neigh- 
bour's.