Q.  117.  What  are  the  requisites  of  that  prayer,  which  is  acceptable 
to  Gody  and  which  he  will  lira*-  ? 

A.  First,  that  we  from  the  heart  pray  to  the  one  true  God  only 
who  has  manifested  himself  in  his  word ;  for  all  things  he  hath  com- 
manded us  to  ask  of  him  ;  secondly,  that  we  rightly  and  thoroughly 
know  our  need  and  misery  that  so  we  may  deeply  humble  ourselves 
in  the  presence  of  his  divine  majesty  :  thirdly)  that  we  may  be  fully 


390  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

persuaded,  that  he,  notwithstanding  we  are  unworthy  of  it,  will  for 
the  sake  of  Christ  our  Lord,  certainly  hear  our  prayer,  as  he  has 
promised  us  in  his  word. 

Q.   118.   What  haih  God  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him  ? 

A.  All  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body  :  which  Christ  our 
Lord  has  comprised  in  that  prayer  he  himself  has  taught  us. 

Q.    119.    What  are  the  ivords  of  that  firayer  ? 

A.  "  Our  father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,  thy 
kingdom  come," 


w, 


HEN  God  commands,  his  children  pray.  "  Lord,  thou  hast 
commanded  us  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O  that  my  ways 
were  directed  to  ketp  thy  statutes  !"  saith  David,  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5. 
Thus  Augustin  also  acted,  when  he  prayed  to  God,  saying,  "  Give 
me  what  thou  comrrundest,  and  command  what  thou  wilt,  and  thou 
shak  not  command  in  vain."  They  esteem  all  God's  command- 
ments, and  the  whole  law  to  be  "  holy,  just  and  good,"  with  Fau!, 
Rom.  vii.  12.  They  have  an  earnest  inclination,  and  an  insatiable 
desire  to  keep  the  commandments  :  "  1  opened  my  mouth,  and  pant- 
ed ;  for  I  longed  for  thy  commandments,"  saith  that  godly  king, 
Psalm  cxix.  131.  They  are  exceedingly  fearful  and  afraid  of  trans- 
gressing the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  they  beseech  him  therefore  to 
keep  them  from  transgressing  it,  as  the  same  man  speaks,  Psalm 
xix.  13.  "Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins, 
let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  And  Psalm  cxix.  10, 
"  With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee  :  O  let  me  not  wander 
from  thy  commandments."  They  cannot  indeed  preserve  them- 
selves, and  they  know  by  experience  that  they  cannot  keep  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  Lord  perfectly,  though  they  esteem  them  so  highly, 
and  do  so  earnestly  desire  to  keep  them.  But  knowing  the  cove- 
nant promise  of  the  Lord,  that  "  he  wili  cause  them  to  walk  in  his 
statutes,  and  to  keep  his  judgments  and  do  them,"  according  to 
Ezek.  xx::vi.  27,  therefore  they  apply  to  him  in  prayer,  that  he  may 
perfect  his  promised  strength  in  their  weakness.  I  will  adduce  once 
more  David's  petition,  as  a  proof  of  these  observations  :  '*  Teach 
me,"  saith  he,  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11,  "O  Lonl,  thy  way.  I  will  walk 
in  thy  truth  :  unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name."  In  this  way  doth 
the  instructor  also  proceed  ;  for  when  he  would  excite  us  to  good 
works,  as  fruits  of  thankfulness,  he  taught  us  ( 1)  The  necessity  (.f 
those  works,  in  the  xxxii.  Lord's  day.  (2)  The  principle  of  them, 
io  wit,  conversion,   Question    83 — 90.     (J3)  The    nature   of  lhem; 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  391 

Question  91.  (4)  The  rule  of  good  works,  Lord's  days  xxxiv — xliv. 
and  now  (5)  Prayer,  as  a  mean  to  assist  us  in  doing  good  works  j 
for  having  shown  that  even  those  who  are  converted  cannot  keep 
the  law  perfectly,  and  that  they  are  therefore  taught  to  pray  unto 
God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  more  and 
more  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  until  they  attain  to  the  per- 
fection, which  hath  been  exhibited,  after  this  life,  Question  114, 
1 15.  We  say,  having  shown  this,  he  proceeds  to  an  explanation  of 
prayer. 

Three  particulars  require  our  consideration  here, 

I.  The  nature. 

II.  The  pattern,  and 

III.  The  necessity  of  prayer. 

I.  Before  we  exhibit  the  proper  work  of  prayer,  we  must  speak 
of  certain  particulars,  which  are  previously  required  to  prayer,  with 
respect  to  him,  to  whom  we  must  pray,  to  the  person  who  prays, 
the  things  for  which  he  must  pray,  and  the  disposition  of  mind  with 
which  he  must  pray. 

We  must  pray  to  "  none  but  the  one  true  God,  who  hath  mani- 
fested himself  in  his  word."  The  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us  this, 
when  he  saith,  Matt.  iv.  10,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  shalt  thou  wor- 
ship, and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  Prayer  is  indeed  a  religious 
work,  by  which  we  acknowledge  and  honour  God,  as  the  most  high, 
and  infinitely  perfect,  as  they  who  overcame  the  beast  honoured  the 
Lord  with  the  song  of  Moses,  saying,  Rev.  xv.  4,  "  Who  shall  not  fear 
thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy  :  for  all 
nations  ahall  come  and  worship  before  thee."  He  to  whom  we 
shall  pray  must  be  allsumcient,  that  he  may  be  able  to  help ;  and 
allknowing,  that  he  may  know  the  thoughts,  and  hear  the  words  of 
him  who  prayeth,  afar  off;  and  infinitely  good,  that  he  may  be  willing 
to  help  the  needy  and  unworthy  sinner  ;  and  so  he  must  be  "  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  Eph.  Hi. 
20.  The  Papists,  when  they  pray  to  the  saints  and  other  creatures, 
and  the  Socinians,  when  they  pray  to  Christ,  whom  they  esteem  to 
be  but  a  mere  man,  are  guilty  of  idolatry,  as  we  have  proved  upon 
the  first  commandment.  And  we  must  pray  to  God,  as  he  hath 
manifested  himself  in  his  word  ;  for  otherwise  we  "  worship  we 
know  not  what,"  with  the  Samaritans,  John  iv.  22,  and  we  "  serve 
an  unknown  God,"  like  the  Athenians,  Acts  xvii.  23.  Since  now 
the  Lord  God  hath  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  as  the  Triune 
Creator,  Redeemer  and  Sanctifier,  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him 
•as  such,  and  with  suca  u  becoming  apprehension  of  him  ;  for  God 


J92  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

cannot  draw  near  to  the  sinner  with  his  grace,  neither  can  the  sinner 
draw  near  to  God  with  his  prayers  in  any  other  way.  That  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  God,  coessential  with  the  Father,  and 
that  we  must  therefore  pray  to  them  also,  these  are  particulars 
which  we  have  proved  upon  the  thirteenth  and  twentieth  Lord's 
days.  Inasmuch  now  as  the  Triune  God  hath  revealed  himself  by 
a  special  ceconomy  of  grace,  in  which  the  Father  comes  with  his 
favour  to  the  sinner,  through  the  Son  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost, 
therefore  we  must  also  come  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
through  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  end  in  him  with  our  prayers : 
"Through  Christ  we  have  an  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father," 
according  to  Eph.  ii.  18. 

Irrational  creatures  are  sometimes  said  to  pray  to  God  :  "  The 
young  ravens,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  cry,  and  call  mightily  to 
God,"  Job  xxxviii.  41.  Joel  i.  20.  Jonah  iii.  8.  This  is  however 
not  praying  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  bui  it  only  intimates 
their  danger  and  distress  :  but  praying  is  the  work  of  men,  who 
can  draw  nigh  to  Go  J,  and  present  their  requests  to  him  in  a  rational 
manner.  A«d  prayer  is  especially  the  work  of  believers,  who  are 
reconciled  to  God,  have  an  nccess  to  him,  partake  of  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  of  prayer,  and  are  acceptable  to  God  with  their  prayers  ; 
'■'•  God  had  respect  unto  Abel,  and  then  also  to  his  offering  :  but  unto 
Cain  he  had  not  respect,  and  then  not  to  Lis  offering  neither,"  Gen. 
iv.  45.  "  "Ye  know,"  said  the  man,  who  was  born  blind,  John  ix. 
31,  ''that  God  heareth  not  sinners  ;  but  if  a  man  be  a  worshipper 
of  God,  and  doth  his  will,  him  he  heareth."  James  saith  of  no  other, 
but  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous  man,  that  it  avail- 
eth  much,"  James  v.  17.  The  sinner,  who  is  in  his  natural  state, 
is  obliged  to  pmy  on  account  of  the  supremacy  of  God,  and  his  own 
dependance  ;  but  he  is  not  able  to  pray  origin:  "his  prayer  be- 
comes sin  to  him,"  Psalm  cix.  7.  '  he  Lord  God  "  hides  his  eyes, 
and  shuts  his  ears  "  to  the  praj  er  of  such  a  sinner,  Isaiah  i.  15. 
And  since  he  hath  never  embraced  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  in  whom 
he  is  well  pleased,  therefore  he  cannot,  and  may  not  approach  the 
Lord,  as  his  reconciled  God,  who  is  a  consuming  fire  to  him.  Shall 
such  an  one  then  forbear  to  pray  ?  God  forbid.  "  The  ploughing 
of  the  wicked  is  sin,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxi.  4.  May  or  shall 
they  then  forbear  to  p'uugh  ?  surely  no  ;  but  the  unconverted  sinner 
must  see  that  it  is  his  duty  to  pray,  that  he  may  be  concerned,  and 
may  from  concern  ilee  to  the  Mediator,  upon  the  call  of  the  gospel  ; 
for  he  should  thus  obtain  freedom,  and  an  ability  to  pray  well.  But 
if  he  will  persist  in  sinning,  oi  what  advantage  will  his  praying  be 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   116—119.  393 

to  him?     If  he  will   K  confess  and  forsake  his   sins,  he  v/ill  obtain 
mercy,''  according  to  Prov.  xxvi.    13. 

Alan  is  exceedingly  needy,  lie  is  destitute  of  every  thing,  he  pos- 
sessed nothing  in  himself,  that  can  afford  him  satisfaction,  but  he 
mu-st  seek  ail  things  out  of  himseh  from  the  Lord  by  prayer.  Yet 
he  may  not  pray  for  ail  that  he  can  desire,  as  that  which  opposeth 
the  decree  of  God,  and  his  revealed  will,  that  all  men  may  be  saved, 
that  he  himself  may  be  perfect  in  this  life,  and  that  he  may  obtain 
such  and  such  things,  in  order  to  commit  sin  with  them,  or  to  con- 
sume them  upon  his  lusts.  This  would  be  making  a  mock  of  God, 
as  we  do  of  men  ;  but  we  must  pray  "  for  all  things  that  he  hath 
commanded  us  to  ask  of  him."  Tnese  all  things  are  "  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body."  The  things  ntcessary  for  the  soul 
are  pardon  of  sin,  s  (notification;  assurance,  strength,  preservation, 
and  an  increase  of  all  g  ace.  The  saints  prayed  for  these  things, 
as  we  see  particularly  in  David,  an  l  especially  in  the  fifty-first  Psalm. 
The  things  which  are  necessary  for  tiie  body  are  health,  meat,  drink, 
clothing,  and  all  that  can  conduce  to  the  weliare  of  the  body.  We 
m  iy,  and  ought  to  pray  lor  these  things,  because  we  depend  upon 
God,  according  to  the  body  also  :  but  to  covet  with  an  evil  covetous- 
rtess  for  our  house,  in  order  that  we  may  set  our  mst  on  high,  and 
to  desire  to  be  iich,  is  shameful  and  unjust ;  if  we  have  food  and  rai- 
ment, we  ought  therewith  to  be  content.  And  therefore  we  may 
pray  against  riches,  as  well  as  against  poverty,  and  desire  of  God 
only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient  for  us,"  as  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh 
did,  Prov.  xxx.  8.  We  ought  also  to  take  good  heed,  that  we 
pray  (a)  more  for  the  things  that  are  necessary  for  the  soul,  than 
for  those  that  are  necessary  for  the  body,  Matt.  vi.  33.  John  vi. 
27,  (b)  More  for  things  that  relate  to  God,  than  for  those  that  re- 
late to  ourselves  :  see  this  in  the  Lord's  prayer,  (c)  More  against  sin, 
than  against  chastisement,  Lam.  iii.  39.  (d)  We  must  pray  for 
grace  with  respect  to  the  essence  of  it  absolutely  :  but  for  grace 
with  respect  to  the  increase  and  degrees  of  it.  as  also  for  things 
which  concern  the  body,  we  must  pray  conditionally,  to  wit,  if 
they  will  promote  the  honour  and  worship  of  the  Lord,  and  will 
contribute  to  the  furtherance  of  our  salvation. 

It  is  necessary,  that  the  mind  should  be  well  disposed,  in  order 
that  we  may  pray  in  such  a  manner,  as  is  acceptable  to  God,  and 
that  he  may  hear  us.  (a)  The  mind  must  know  through  the  Spirit 
the  one  true  God,  who  hath  revealed  himself  in  his  word,  from  that 
word,  in  all  his  adorable  perfections,  that  the  soul,  affected  with  live- 
ly apprehensions  and  contemplations  of  God,  to  whom  she  speaks. 
Vol.  ii.  2  Z 


394  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

may  possess  and  be  actuated  with  reverence  and  a  believing  confi- 
dence in  prayer.  The  stints  have  for  this  purpose,  when  they  pray- 
ed,  employed  in  their  addresses  ^uch  honourable  titles  of  God,  as  in- 
spired them  -with  a  profound  reverence  for  him,  and  nevertheless  en- 
couraged them  to  desire  and  expect  good  things  of  him.  See  this  in 
the  prayer  of  Moses,  Numb.  xxiii.  16,  17,  of  those  who  returned  from 
Babylon,  Neh.  ix.  1 — 26,  of  Jeremiah  chap,  x/xii.  17,  18,  of 
Daniel,  chap.  ix.  5,  of  the  first  Christian  church,  Acts  iv.  24 — 26. 
We  ought  not  therefore  to  approve  of  uttering  without  any  impres- 
sion, and  hastily  the  first  word  that  occurs  concerning  God.  (b)  Our 
minds  must  also  be  rightly  affected  with  respect  to  ourselves,  and 
the  things,  for  which  we  are  about  to  pray.  We  cannot  pray  as  we 
ought,  unless  "  we  rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  mis- 
ery." Our  hearts  must  be  deeply  sensible  of  what  we  need,  of  the 
misery  to  which  we  are  subject,  that  we  are  unworthy  of,  and  have 
forfeited  all  things,  that  the  soul,  urged  by  her  need,  may  humbly 
prostrate  herself  before  the  Lord,  and  may  seek  his  grace.  It  is 
not  enough  to  pray  for  things  that  are  needful,  but  we  must  also 
have  a  deep  sense  of  our  need  of  them,  that  our  need  may  urge  us 
to  pray  :  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;  I  will  deliver  thee," 
saith  the  Lord,  Psalm  1.  15.  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord 
heard  him  ;  and  saved  him  out  of  all  his  troubles,"  saith  David,  Psalm 
xxxiv.  6.  He  saith  concerning  himself  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  Ixi.  2, 
"  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heart  is 
overwhelmed."  Seethe  prayer  of  the  church,  Psaml  cii.  1.  (c)  The 
mind  of  the  person  who  prayeth  must  also  undoubtedly  desire  the 
good  things  for  which  he  prays.  Only  to  mention  desirable  things, 
and  not  to  desire  them,  but  to  be  heartless,  indifferent  and  libtless, 
when  we  pray,  is  just  as  though  we  said,  I  do  not  wish  that  God 
should  grant  me  my  petition.  When  David  prayed  to  the  Lord, 
his  soul  was  like  "  a  panting  hart,  and  a  land,  in  which  there  was 
no  water,"  Psalm  xlii.  1,  2.  lxiii.  1.  cxliii.  6.  Therefore  prayer 
is  sometimes  called  "  a  cry,"  Psalm  v.  2.     Lam.  iii.  8. 

When  the  mind  i3  so  disposed,  it  is  prepared  for  "  prayer,  by 
which  we  address  God,  make  our  needs  and  desires  known  to  him. 
and  request  of  him  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body,  with  hu- 
mility and  believing  confidence,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  a  trust, 
that  we  shall  be  heard,  with  thanksgiving,  and  with  an  intense  ear- 
nestness, in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

It  is  necessary  to  describe  prayer  agreeably  to  this  representation 
somewhat  more  particularly. 

1.  We   say  that   prayer  is  "  an  address  to   God."     The  natural 


—119.  395 

man,  when  he  prays  after  his  fashion,  speaks  only  to  the  air  :    "  He 
draws  near  to  God    with  his  mouth,  and  honours  him  with  his   lips, 
but  removes  his  heart  far   from    him,"  Isaiah  xxix.   13.     But   the 
true  supplicant  **  seeks  unto  God,  and    unto   God   he  commits  his 
cause,"  as  Eliphaz  adviseth,  Job  v.  8.  He  lifts  up  his  heart  to  heaven, 
presents  himself  before  the  Lord,  treats  with   him,  and  speaks    to 
him:  "  Let  us  lift  up  our  heart   with  our    hands  unto    God  in   the 
heavens,"  saith  the  complaining  and  praying   church,  Lam.  iii    41. 
David's  psalm  of  prayer  begins  thus,  "  Unto   thee,   O   Lord,   do   I 
lift  up  my  soul,"  Psalm  xxv.  1.     Hear   how  Job  sighs,  "  O  that  I 
knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I  might  come  even  to  his   seat ! 
I  would  order   my  cause  before    him,"  Job  xxiii.  3,  4.     We  make 
this  address  either  with  our  heart  only,  by    ejaculatory  prayers,  like 
IVloses,  who  though  he  did  not  speak  one  word,  nevertheless  "cried 
to  God,"  Exod.  xiv.  15,  and  like    Nehemiah,  who  ««  prayed  to   the 
God  of  heaven,"  while  he   spake   with    the    king,  "  whei    the  king 
said  to  him,  For  what  dost  thou  make  thy  request,"  Neh.  ii.  4.  Or 
with  our  mouth,  either    whispering,   like  "Hannah,  who   spake  in 
her  heart,  only  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not  heard."  1  Sam. 
i.   13,  or  with  an  audible  voice,  by    which  we    excite   our   attention, 
and  are  preserved  from  wandering  thoughts.     \\  hen  we  pray  alone, 
we  must  be  able  to  hear  ourselves,  but    we  must  not  then    be  heard 
by  others,  that  they   may  not  suspect  us  of  hypocrisy  ;  for  why  else 
do  we  "  we  enter  into  our  closets,"  but  that  we  may  "  pray  in    se- 
cret to  God,"  according  to    the  command  of  our  Saviour,  Matt.    vi. 
6.     But  when  we  pray,  as  leaders  in  prayer,   with  others,   we  must 
then  raise  our  voice  so  high,  that  every  one  may    hear   it,   like    the 
Levites,  Neh.  ix.  4.     But  to  pray  in  the  presence  of  others,  as  lead- 
ers of  prayer,  in  an  unknown  tongue,  is  the  work  of  the  "  Barbarian 
and  mad"  Papists.     How  can  the   people  unite    with   us,  when  we 
pray  so,  and  say  Amen  to  what  they  do  not  understand  ?     See  what 
Paul  saith  against  this,  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 — 23.     To  excuse  this  irregu- 
larity by  saying  that  God  understands  such   a   strange  language,   is 
absurd  :  for  it  would  then  be  the  same  whether  a  man  or  a  parrot 
prayed.     "  We  must  pray  with  our  undei  standing,"  as   the  apostle 
required,    1  Cor.   xiv.    1 5.     Neither  is   it  proper  to  mutter   every 
word  after  the  person,  who  is  the  leader  of  prayer;  we  need  only 
give  heed  to  what  is  uttered,  and  take  care  that  our  hearts  accom- 
pany with  their  desires  the  words  of  the  prayer,  and  that  we  confirm 
it  with  our  Amen,  as  all  the  people  said  Amen  upon  David's  psalm, 
1  Chron.  xvi.  36.  We   read,   Neh.   viii.  6,  that  Ezra  blessed   the 
Lord,  the  great  God  ;  and  all  the  people   answered,  Amen,  Amen5 


396  THE  WORK.  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

with  lifting  tip  their  hands  :  and  they  bowed   their  heads,  and  wor* 
shipped  the  Eord  with  iheir  f  c-b  to  the  ground." 

2.  The  per&on  who  prays  in  faith  "  makes  with  his  address  his 
need  and  desires  known  unto  God."  "  In  every  thing  by  prayei 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving-,  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God,"  saith  the  text.  He  shows  God  what  afflicts  him, 
and  what  his  condition  requires,  from  what  evil  he  wishes  to  be  de- 
livered, and  what  good  he  wishes  to  enjoy  ;  and  therefore  he  sends 
up  his  groanings  and  desires  to  God  :  "  Lord,  all  my  desire  is  be- 
fore thee,  and  my  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee,"  saith  David, 
Psalm  xxxviii.  9.  M  He  declares  his  ways  unto  God,  and  is  heard," 
Psalm  cxix.  26.  The  prophet  saith  to  the  Lord  concerning  the 
righteous,  Isaiah  xxvk  16.  "Lord  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee, 
they  poured  out  a  prayer,  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  them." 
The  Lord  knows  indeed  the  needs  and  desires  of  those  whom  he 
loves  ;  but.  he  chooseth  nevertheless  that  they  should  complain  of 
them,  and  propose  them  to  him,  that  it  may  appear,  that  they  also 
know  them,  that  they  are  affected  with  them,  and  earnestly  desi- 
rous of  his  favour  ;  lor  this  is  acceptable  to  him.  "Let  me  see 
thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice  ;  for  sweet  is  thy  voice  and 
thy  countenance  is  comely,"  saith  Jesus  to  his  dove,  Song  ii.   14. 

3.  But  the  most  essential  requisite  of  prayer  is  the  request,  which 
we  make  to  God  in  praying.  The  need  of  the  soul  constrains  her 
to  seek  deliverance,  and  her  desire  urgeth  her  to  obtain  that  which 
is  good,  and  to  request  of  the  Lord  to  bestow  it.  As  God  describes 
prayer  by  requesting  that  which  is  good  of  him,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  37. 
"■  Daniel  desired  that  his  companions  would  request  mercies  of  the 
God  of  heaven."  Dan.  ii.  18.  Which  request  earnest  petitioners 
urge  vehe-nenly  with  the  Lord  God,  by  a  persevering  cleaving  to  the 
Lord,  and  "  wrestling"  with  him,  not  being  able  to  desist,  "  until 
he  hath  blessed  them,"  like  Jacob,  Gen  xxxii.  24 — 26,  and  by  a 
continual  uplifting  of  their  hearts  and  enforcing  of  their  words  in 
their  request,  that  they  may  importune  him  to  grant  their  request, 
like  Daniel,  "  O  Lord  he.>r,  O  Lord  forgive,  t)  Lord,  hearken  and 
do,  defer  not,"  Dan.  ix  19,  and  also  by  vehement  motives,  derived, 
one  while  from  his  honour,  which  will  be  manifested  thtreby,  like 
the  church,  Psalm  lxxix.  9,  "  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for 
the  p;lory  of  thy  tv.nie,  and  deliver  us,  and  purge  away  our  sins  for 
thy  name's  sake:"  another  while  from  his  promise,  like  Jacob, 
Gen.  x:<sii.  11,12.  "  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of 
my  brut:.!.;',  from  the  hand  of  Esau.  And  thou  saidest,  I  will  surely 
do  thee  good,"  tf.v..     Yea,  su(.a  u  petitioner  will  derive   his   motive? 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116— 119.  39T 

also  from  the  malice  and  power  of  his  enemies,  from  the  providence  of 
God,  who  hath  brought  him  into  such  a  situation,  from  the  intensity 
of  his  desire,  which  God  himself  halh  wrought  in  him,  and  from 
the  greatness  of  his  distress,  rendered  more  grievous  by  his  sins  ; 
"Pardon  mine  iniquity  ;  for  it  is  great,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxv.  11. 
If  our  prayer  shall  be  acceptable  to  God,  it  must  possess  such  qual- 
ifications and  properties,  as  are  acceptable  to  him,  and  it  must 
therefore  be  made, 

J."  With  humility."  We  must  "  humble  ourselves  deeply  in  the 
presence  of  the  divine  Majesty."  The  person  who  prays  aright  be- 
holds the  exalted  dignity  of  God,  and  he  sees  his  own  meanness, 
nothingness,  neediness,  filthy  sinfulness  and  impotence.  This  ex- 
cites a  holy  awe  for  the  Lord  in  his  soul,  it  causeth  him  to  abase  and 
abhor  himself,  and  it  teaches  him  to  desire  all  things  of  grace,  and 
to  submit  patiently  to  the  wise,  righteous,  and  sovereign  disposal  of 
God,  with  respect  to  the  measure,  the  time  and  the  place  of  the 
fulfilment  of  his  desire.  See  this  in  Abraham,  Gen.  xyiii.  in  Job. 
ch.  xlii.  5,  6,  in  David,  Psalm  cxxxi.  in  Isaiah,  ch.  vi.  5,  in  Daniel, 
ch.  ix.  and  most  emphatically  in  "  the  publican,  who  standing  afar 
off,  would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote 
upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  Luke 
xviii.  13. 

2.  But  although  the  praying  soul  humbles  herself  so  much,  she 
is  nevertheless  not  diffident  but  "  goes  with"  a  believing  confidence 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  she  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace 
to  nelp  her  in  time  of  need,"  Heb  iv.  16.  x.  19 — 22.  Her  need 
urges  her:  the  command  of  God  to  call  on  him  constrains  her,  so 
that  she  dares  not  forbear  :  his  call,  his  promises,  that  he  will  hear, 
and  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  aliure  the  soul;  and  "the  Spirit"  of 
the  Lord  "  leads"  her,  and  effects  "  an  access  for  her  to  the  Father," 
Eph.  ii.  18.  Yea,  "he  causes  her  to  cry,  and  cries  also  in  her, 
Abba,  Father,"  Rom.  viii.  15.     Gal.  iv.  6. 

3.  But  how  can  he,  who  contemplates  the  highness  of  God,  and 
his  own  odiousness  and  nothingness,  come  boldly  before  the  Lord; 
and  bow  down  before  the  high  God  ?  He  comes  in  the  name  of 
Christ.  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do," 
saith  he,  John  xiv.  13,  14.  The  name  of  Jesus  denotes  not  only 
his  proper  name  and  his  titles,  Mat.  i.  21,  Isaiah  ix.  5,  but  also  hi6 
person,  as  God  and  man,  and  as  Mediator,  John  i.  12,  his  merits,  I 
Cot.  vi.  1 1,  his  charge  and  command,  2  Thess,  iii.  6,  and  thus  also  his 
power  and  strength,  Acts  iii.  16.  To  pray  in  his  name,  signifies  in 
general,  to  go  through  him  unto  God.  and  to   request  all  things  o; 


398  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

him  for   Christ's  sake.     By  him   we    have  also  an   access  to  the 
Father,  according  to  the   words  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostle,  John 
xiv.  6.     Eph.  h.  IS.     But  we  pray  especially  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
Wien  we  (a)  draw  near  with  boldness,  relying  upon  the  right  which 
we  huve  in  him,  and  in  his  name :  "  In  him  we  have  boldness  and 
access  with   confidence   by   the  faith  of  him,"  saith   Paul,  Eph.  iii. 
12.     (b)  When  we  lay  hold  on  him  and  on  his  merits  by  an  active 
faith,  unite  ourselves  to  him,  and  in  this  manner  come  with  him  to 
the  throne,  and  refer  the  Father  to  Jesus  in  all  that  we  request,  that 
we  may  be  acceptable  in  him,  and  may  request  and  obtain  all  things 
for  his  sake.     Therefore  the  Saviour  saith,  John  xvi.  23.     "  What- 
soever ye    shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you." 
(c)  We  also  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  draw  near   and  offer  up  our 
petitions  to  God  upon  his  command  and  encouragement.     We  come 
then,  as  sent  by  him  ;  for  he  saith,   Mat.  vii.  7,    "Ask,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you,"  &c.     (d)   Also  when  we  apply  to  the   Father  upon 
the  foundation  of  his  merits  for  all  that  grace,  which  he  hath   pur- 
chased, and  plead  thereupon  before  his  throne,  "  with  the  answer  of 
a  good  conscience,"   1  Peter  iii.  21.    (e)  And  we  pray  not  less  in  his 
name,  when  we  are  influenced   by  his  power  and   Spirit,  while   we 
draw  near  to    God,  and  request   all  things   of  him.     It  is  •*  by  the 
Spirit,"  that  we  go  through  Christ  to  the  Father,    Eph.  ii.  18.     (f) 
Once  more  ;  we  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  request  aught  for  his 
sake  ;  as  Daniel  prayed  "  for  ths  Lord's  sake,"  Dan.  ix.  17.     Jesus 
desires  by  his  intercession  with  the  Father,  that  he  would   hear  and 
show   favour  to  his  delivered,  as  he  declares,  John  xvii.     To  apply 
then  to  the  Father  upon  the  foundation  of  the  will  and  of  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ  is  praying  in  his  name,     (g)  Finally,  we  do  this, 
when  we  commit  our  prayers  into  the  hands  of  the  Advocate,  that  he 
may  present  them  with  his  intercession  to  the  Father.    See  him  en- 
gaged in  this  work,  Rev.  viii.  3,  4. 

4.  The  believer,  praying  thus  in  the  name  of  Christ,  "  trusts  also 
that  God  will  certainly  hear  his  prayer,  although  he  is  unworthy  of 
it."  God  hears  pray i  r  according  to  Psalm  lxv.  2.  And  he  doth 
this  sometimes  by  granting  that  for  which  we  pray  :"  Jabez,  who 
was  more  honmnable  than  his  brethren,  called  on  the  God  of  Israel. 
saying,  O  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  Jx-.  And  God 
granted  him  his  request,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  He  doth  this,  eithei 
presently,  as  upon  the  prayer  of  Elijah  fire  fell  presently  from 
heaven,  and  c-.isumed  his  sacrifice,  1  Kings  xv'ni.  36 — 38,  or  some 
time  after.  Abraham  prayed  for  a  son,  and  God  promised  him  one, 
when  he  wab  seventy-fire  years  old  j  but  he  did  not  obtain  him,  be- 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  399 

fore  he  was  an  hundred  years  old,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  1  — 14. 
xv  2.  xxi.  5.  Sometimes  God  gives  upon  our  praying  that  which 
is  better  than  what  we  desire.  Abraham  prayed  that  lshmael,  the 
son  whom  he  had  by  his  b  ndmaid,  might  live  before  God,  as  the 
promised  seed  ;  but  the  Lord  promised  him  that  which  was  better, 
namely,  Isaac,  a  son  of  his  proper  wife,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  19.  But 
sometimes  Gcd  denies  that  which  a  person  desires,  and  yet  causes 
the  soul  to  acquiesce  in  the  denial,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  by 
affording  her  an  abundant  influence  of  grace.  Paul  "  prayed  thrice 
to  be  delivered  from  the  bufl'etmgs  of  Satan  ;"  but  it  did  not  please 
the  Lord  to  grant  him  his  request,  "  but  he  said,  My  grace  is  suf- 
ficient for  thee  :  for  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
Paul  acquiesced  in  this,  and  was  satisfied,  saying,  "  Most  gladly 
therefore  will  I  glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  me,"  2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10.  It  is  necessary  to  confide 
that  God  will  assuredly  hear  the  person  who  prays  believingly,  either 
in  one  way,  or  another  :  therefore  the  apostle  James  saith,  "  If  any 
of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  libe- 
rally, and  upbraideth  not  ;  and  it  shall  be  given  to  him  :  but  let  him 
ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering,"  Sec.  James  i-  5,  6.  "  Whatsoever 
things  ye  desire  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  I  hem,  and 
ye  shall  have  them,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Mark  xi.  24.  The  person 
who  calls  on  the  name  of  God  hath  indeed  a  sure  foundation  of 
trust  in  the  power,  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  and  in  the  merits, 
intercession  and  promise  of  Christ.  Doth  any  one  ask,  How  can  I 
know  that  God  heareth  my  prayer,  when  he  doth  not  presently  grant 
me  my  desire  upon  my  petition  ?  It  is  certain,  that  God  hears  our 
prayer,  when  we  pray  according  to  his  will  :  "  This  is  the  confi- 
dence that  we  have  in  him,  that  if  we  ask  any  tiling  according  to 
his  will,  he  heareth  us,"  saith  the  best  beloved  disciple  of  Jesus, 
1  John  v.  14.  The  Lord  also  sometimes  assures  his  praying  people 
by  his  .spirit,  that  he  hears  them,  and  particularly,  (a)  when  he 
affords  them  a  ready  and  free  access  to  him  ;  for  he  shows  then  that 
his  ears  are  open  to  the  prayer  of  faith  ;  when  it  is  otherwise,  "  he 
covers  himself  with  a  cloud,  that  their  prayer  may  not  pass  through," 
Lam.  iii.  44.  (b)  When  he  gives  the  person  who  prays  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  so  that  he  prays  heartily,  copiously,  and  with  perseve- 
rance. This  is  an  evidence,  that  he  will  hear  our  prayer  ;  for  the 
apostle  teacheth  us  this,  Rom.viii.  26,  27,  (c)  Sometimes  the  Lord 
shows  the  soul,  that  he  is  pleased  with  her  prayer,  he  nods,  as  it 
were,  to  her,  and  grants  her  rest,  peace,  confidence,  and  an  expec- 
tation that  Jie  will  fulfill  her  desire,  so  that  she  must  say  with  the 


400  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

church,  "  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord  :  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my 
salvaiion  :  my  God  will  hear  rue,"  IViicha  vii.  7-  (d)  But  the  soul 
becomes  most  clearly  persuaded,  that  her  petition  is  heard,  when 
God  secretly  speaks  and  saith  to  the  soul,  Be  of  good  eheer,  "  I 
will  do  this  same  thing  also  of  which  thou  hast  spoken."  bee  Lxod. 
xxxiii.  17.      Isaiah  xxxviii.  5. 

5.  According  to  the  text,  we  must  "  make  our  request  known 
to  Cod  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving."  It  is  also 
proper,  that  he  who  requests  and  obtains  aught  of  Cod,  should 
cheerfully  acknowledge  it,  and  give  him  the  honour  of  it.  It  is 
true,  that  as  long  as  we  have  not  obtained  our  request,  or  the  evi- 
dence that  we  are  heard,  we  cannot  thank  the  Lord  for  it.  The 
praying  soul  hath  nevertheless  sufficient  cause  to  thank  the  Loid. 
She  must  praise  the  glory  of  the  Lord:  former  benefits  must  be  ac- 
knowledged ;  and  her  happiness,  that  she  may  draw  near  to  him, 
may  obtain  the  Spirit  of  prayer,  and  trust  that  she  will  be  heard, 
must  surely  cause  her  to  honour  the  Lord. 

6.  But  shall  we  do  this  great  work  remissly  and  carelessly  ? 
no,  it  must  be  done  with  "  intense  earnestness."  It  was  foretold 
of  Christians,  that  they  should  be  "  earnest  supplicants,"  Zeph. 
iii.  10.  They  are  exceedingly  desirous  of  the  fulfilment  of  their 
request;  and  this  renders  them  vehemently  and  perseveringly  ear- 
nest to  obtain  it :  "  Continue  instant  in  prayer,"  thus  Paul  adrrion- 
isheth,  Coll.  iv.  2.  And  therefore  their  souls  are  actively  intent 
with  respect  to  God,  to  themselves,  their  request,  faith  and  trust, 
and  they  also  attend  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  will  conduct 
toward  them,  whether  their  prayer  will  be  acceptable  to  him,  or 
whether  he  will  oppose  them  :  and  so  they  '  Match  to  see  what  he 
will  say  unto  them,"  Hah.  ii.  1.  "  Satan  indeed  stands  at  the  rig!. 
hand"  of  the  person  who  prays,  "  when  he  stands  before  the  Lord" 
with  his  petitions,  "that  he  may  resist  him,"  and  may  suggest  every 
discouragement  to  the  soul,  bee  this,  Zech.  iii.  1,  2.  But  ihc  ear- 
nest supplicant  will  not  become  remiss  on  this  account  but  will 
call  upon  God  with  greater  zeal,  and  with  more  vehemence,  like 
his  Saviour,  "who,  being  in  an  agony,  prayed  moie  earnestly," 
Luke  xxii.  44. 

7.  This  earnestness  is  nevertheless  not  a  mere  noise,  neither  is  it 
effected  u  by  our  power  and  might,  hut  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord," 
Zech.  iv.  6.  For  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  as  Jesus  saith,  John  iv.  24. 
And  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him  with  our  spirits,  and  with  the 
inmost  emotions  of  our  snuls,  and  so  also  in  truth  and  upright- 
ness.    We    must  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  Ileb.  x.  22.     But  to 


"XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119. 

piv>y  in 'spirit  and  in  truth  denofes  also  to  pray-  without  being  con- 
fined by  God  to  any  place  of  prayer,  as  the  church  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament was  limited  with  her  solemn  prayers  to  Jerusalem.  See 
John  iv.  20—24. 

8.  Although  we  must  pray  with  the  spirit,  nevertheless  the  body, 
which  is  the  Lord's,  must  also  be  active  in  this  work  with  such  ges- 
tures, as  manifest  a  becoming  sense,  and  reverence  for  God,  and  ex- 
press the  praying  posture  of  the   soul.     Whether  in  grievous    dis- 
tress we  "  fall  with  our  faces  to.  the  earth,"  like  Joshua,  Joshua  vii. 
6  ;  or  whether  from   reverence  we  "  bow  down  and   kneel,"  with 
the  church,  Psalm  xcv.  6  ;  or  to  manifest  our  confidence,  and  read- 
iness to    serve*    we  "  stand,"    with  Abraham,   Gen.    xviii.  22,  23. 
We  must  also  "  lift  up  our  hands  with  our  hearts  unto  heaven,"    as 
the   church  would  do,  Lam.  iii.  41.     And    we   must   "lift    up   our 
eyes  to  heaven,"  with  Jesus,   John    xvii.  1,  or  to  testify  our  unwor- 
thiness,  we  must  cast  them  down  with  the  publican,  Luke  xviii.   13, 
II.  There  is  no  work,  for  which  wc  are  less  qualified,  than  pray- 
ing in  a.suitable  manner  to  the  Lord.     The  apostles  were  conscious 
of  this,  and  therefore  said  to  their  Master,  «  Lord  teach  us   to  pray. 
And  he  said  unto  them,  After  this  manner  pray  ye,     Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven,  Hallowed  be  thy  name,"  he.  Matt.  vi.  9 — 13. 
Luke  xi.   1 — 4.     Of  which  pattern  of  prayer  we  may   say  with  pro- 
priety, that  Christ  gave   it,  that  we  might  offer  up  our  desires  to 
God   with  the  selfsame   words ;    for   he   puts  kthe  words  into  our 
mouths.     After  the  same  manner  the  prophet  saith  to  Israel,  Hosea 
xiv.  2,  3,  "  Take  with   you  words,  and  tu.-n   to  the  Lord  :  say  unto 
him,  take  away  all  iniquity,    and  receive  us   graciously,"  &c.     But 
no  person   will  admit  that  we  ought  always  to  make  use  of  this  pat- 
tern, and  of  no  other,  when  we  pray.     We  do  not  read  that  the  apos- 
tles ever  used  this  pattern  word  for  word,  when   they  prayed  :    we 
therefore  conceive  that  the  principle  design  of  Jesus  was  to   teach 
believers  for    what  things,  and  in  what  manner  they  ought    to  pray* 
And  this  pattern  is  also  a  most  perfect  model  of  a  well  ordered  prayer  ; 
for  we  have    here,    (1)  A  most  suitable  address  to   God.     (2)  Six 
petitions,  the  first  three  of  which  have   an  immediate  reference   to 
God,  and  the  three  last  to  ourselves.     Or   we   may   divide   the    six 
petitions  into  one  petition  for  the  chief  end,  to  wit,  the  hallowing  of 
the  Father's  name,  and  the  five  last  petitions,  as  means  for  obtaining 
that  chief  endo     Which  means  are   either  petitions  for  good  thin gss 
to  wit,  spiritual  in  the  second  and  third  petition,   and  bodily  in   the 
fourth  petition  :  or  petitions  for  deprecating  evil,  both  that    which  is 
past,  in  the  fifth  petition,  and  that  which  is  to  come  in  the  sixth  p<?- 
Vol,  ii.  3  A 


402  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

tition.  (3)  And  we  have  then  in  this  prayer  of  the  Lord  the  cone's: 
sion,  designed  to  ascribe  suitable  praise  to  the  Lord,  and  to  move 
him  by  his  own  glory  and  praise,  and  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the 
trust  of  the  true  petitioner.  This  pattern  is  wonderfully  sententious 
and  concise,  manifesting  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of  the  greatest 
Advocate  with  the  Father.  We  need  not  however  seek  in  the  six 
petitions,  and  in  the  conclusion  following  them  certain  prophecies 
of  seven  successive  periods,  and  account  for  this  by  the  wisdom  of 
the  Lord,  as  some  do  :*  for  we  cannot  produce  either  from  this 
prayer,  or  from  elsewhere  any  decisive  proof  of  this,  and  therefore 
it  doth  not  appear  proper  to  denominate  our  own  ungrounded  inven- 
tions divine  wisdom  ;  and  besides  this,  we  may  also  see  that  those 
who  judge  thus  are  prejudiced  in  favour  of  those  seven  successive 
periods,  for  they  do  not  consider  the  address  to  be  prophetical,  as 
they  do  the  conclusion,  because  they  should  then  have  eight  periods. 
If  the  prophetical  sense  of  this  prayer  were  wellgrounded,  we  should 
not  then  be  able  to  use  the  several  petitions  at  all  times  in  their  prop- 
er emphasis.  If  our  method  would  permit,  we  should  shoAV  that 
we  could  refer  the  conclusion  of  this  prayer,  as  well,  and  with  as 
much  propriety,  to  the  first  period  of  the  church,  as  the  first  petition 
is  forced  to  that  period,  and  we  should  find  it  thus  with  all  the  six 
petitions,  which  are  applied  to  the  other  periods.  For  instance, 
when  was  it  most  proper  to  pray,  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  ?  was 
it  not  in  the  time  of  the  heathen  persecutions,  and  of  the  antichrstian 
seductions  ?  This  they  nevertheless  refer,  not  to  the  sixth,  but  to 
the  foregoing  petitions.  They  think  that  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
under  the  New  Testament  is  expressed  by  the  word  a/ihesis  ;  but 
we  have  that  word  in  the  sixth  petition.  Ought  they  not  then,  ac- 
cording to  that  supposition,  to  refer  this  petition  to  the  time  before  the 
death  of  Christ,  when  believers  prayed,  as  they  pretend,  for  ajihetis  ? 
Observe,  in  this  manner  do  men  intongle  themselves,  when  in  order 
to  appear  wise,  they  exceed  their  proper  measure  by  farsought  in- 
ventions. 

III.  That  we  may  at  length  conclude  our  explanation  of  prayer,  we 
will  inquire  in  the  first  place,  "  why  it  is  nee  ssary  for  Christians  to 
pray  ?"     Every  one  will  acknowledge  that  Christians  are  bound  to 

*  By  these  our  author  understands  the  Cocceians,  who  expound  many  pas- 
sages oi'  scripture  as  prophecies,  which  are  not  considered  as  such  by  the 
generality  of  interpreters.  Thev  also  divide  the  whole  season  of  the  New 
Testament  church  into  seven  periods,  and  endeavour  in  a  very  fanciful  man- 
ner, to  find  them  in  many  passages  of  scripture,  in  which  there  doth  not 
appear  to  be  the  least  probable  hint  of  them. 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  403 

pray,  unless  we  will  except  the  disciples  of  Van  Hattem,  who  only- 
give  thanks,  and  do  not  pray,  from  their  profane  opinion  concerning 
the  Godhead,  and  the  secret  will  of  God,  as  the  rule  of  our  conduct- 
But  those  who  understand  the  mystery  suspect  them  with  reason  of 
denying  the  existence  of  a  God,  and  of  atheism,  and  consider  them 
theiufore  as  unfit  and  incapable  of  being  instructed  by  natural  and 
scriptural  reasons.  They  who  believe  an  infinite,  simple,  and  su- 
preme Spirit  may  be  easily  convinced,  that  prayer  is  necessary  for 
Christians  ;  for  (a)  "  prayer  is  the  chief  part  of  thankfulness,  which 
God  requires  of  us."  Christians  are  delivered  by  the  Son  of  God 
with  a  great  deliverance  ;  it  becomes  them  then  to  acknowledge  it 
thankfully,  which  they  do  especially  vUien  they  pray;  for  we 
thereby  acknowledge  our  dependence  on  God,  we  contemplate  and 
celebrate  in  a  practical  manner  all  his  excellencies  and  perfections, 
and  we  engage  that  we  will  serve  him,  yea,  prayer  is  a  service, 
which  we  offer  to  God,  in  order  to  manifest  our  thankfulness  ;  for 
the  whole  service  of  God  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  of  "  calling 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  iv.  26.  Joel  ii.  32,  Therefore 
"  exalting  the  Lord  as  the  God  of  his  people,  and  worshipping  be- 
fore him,  because  he  is  holy,"  are  joined  together,  Psalm  xcix.  9. 
God  also  requires  this  of  his  delivered  people,  as  the  principal  part 
of  thankfulness,  Psalm  i.  14,  15,  Philip,  iv.  6  Rev.  xv.  4. 
(b)  "  God  will  give  his  grace  and  his  holy  Spirit  to  those  only,  who- 
with  sincere  desires  ask  them  of  him,  and  are  thankful  for  them." 
The  Lord  knows  the  needs  of  his  children,  he  hath  purposed  to  sup- 
ply them,  and  Christ  hath  purchased  all  things  for  them;  but  he 
hath  appointed  prayer  to  be  a  mean  of  obtaining  our  desires,  and  he 
will  bestow  nothing,  except  upon  and  through  prayer.  When  God 
had  promised  great  things  to  his  people,  and  had  assured  them  that 
he  would  do  those  things  for  them,  he  said  that  he  would  neverthe- 
less "be  inquired  of  that  he  might  do  those  things,"  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
36,  37.  See  also  how  David  and  Daniel  prayed  to  God  for  what  he 
had  already  promised,  that  he  would  certainly  do  it,  2  Sam.  vii.  27„ 
Ban.  ix.  2,  3« 


APPLICATION. 

Although  the  Pelagians  will  allow  that  Christians  ought  to  pray, 
and  although  they  also  pray  after  their  manner,  nevertheless  they 


iO.i  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

deny  by  their  doctrine  the  necessity  of  prayer,  when  they  assert 
that  man  can  p<  rform  and  merit  all  things  by  his  freewill.  For 
when  a  person  bath  an  ability  to  effect  and  merit  all  virtuous  good, 
what  need  hath  Ue  to  pray  to  God  for  his  grace,  and  his  Spirit? 
Therefore  when  the  Jesuits,  Socinians  and  Remonstrants  pray  with 
a  Pelagian  spir.t,  they  only  fl-iUtr. 

But  what  think  ye,  hearers,  do  ye  ako  pray  ?  Perhaps  ye  will 
wonder,  and  be  displeased,  if  i  tell  you  that  the  most  of  you  do  not 
yet  pray,  and  have  never  yet  prayed  :  it  is  nevertheless  true,  and  it 
appears  very  evidently.  For,  (a)  many  know  neither  the  Triune 
God,  nor  themselves,  as  desparately  miserable,  so  as  to  be  concern- 
ed, and  they  have  not  the  least  desire  to  Go-!,  nor  to  fellowship  with 
him,  nor  to  his  blessed  benefits.  Is  not  tbia  true  ?  hath  any  active 
desire  to  enjoy  the  Lord  ever  possessed  your  minds  ?  doth  your 
misery  affect  you  so,  that  it  afflicts  you,  and  u  to  cry  to  God  ? 

Hath  it  ever  been  your  earnest  endeavour  to  embrace  the  Son  ot 
God  for  grace  and  salvation,  and  thus  to  attain  to  a  condition,  that  is 
acceptable  to  God,  in  order  to  have  a  right  and  an  ability  to  pray  to 
him  ?  (b)  It  is  true,  ye  pray  also  after  your  manner  :  but  what  and 
how  do  ye  pray  ?  ye  say  your  ordinary  forms  and  lessons,  like  a 
schoolboy  to  his  master,  ye  have  done  this,  and  nought  besides  from 
your  youth  up  hitherto.  But  I  pray  vou.  consider  whether  this  be 
praying.  Ye  surely  do  not  understand  the  things  which  ye  express 
with  those  good  and  suitable  words  and  forms  :  do  ye  not  merely  pre- 
sent God  with  a  certain  number  of  words  without  matter  and  without 
heart,  as  the  Papists  offer  a  certain  number  of  mumbled  prayers  to 
God  and  the  sain's  ?  Do  not  your  souls  remain  far  from  the  Lord, 
while  ye  pray  thus  ?  do  ye  express  your  desires  to  God,  and  entreat 
his  favour  by  such  praying?  doth  that  ordinary  prayer  exhibit  vour 
particular  need,  desire  and  request?  have  ye  always  the  same  need 
and  request,  contrary  to  the  temper  and  experience  of  sincere 
Christians  I  Friends,  consider  whether  ye  do  by  these  ordinary 
lessons  humble  yousselves,  acquire  faith  and  boldness,  draw  neat 
in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,  obtain  a  ground  of  confidence,  th::t 
God  will  hear  you,  and  whether  ye  be  influenced  to  hearty  thanks- 
givings, and  to  an  intense  earnestness  ?  your  prayers  are  certainly 
words  only,  without  matter  and  without  heart.  And  how  detestably 
do  many  conduct,  that  they  dare  call  upon  God  on  their  beds,  al- 
though they  are  in  health,  like  the  carefess  Israelites,  "  who  cried 
unto  God,  but  hot  with  their  hearts,  and  howled  upon  their  beds," 
H«  >  a  \ii.  II.  (c.)  IVihaps  some  among  us  will  detest  such  a  con- 
duct, and  think  that  they  quit  the:  ■  —11,  because  they   pray 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  40s 

from  their  heads,  and  either  standing  or  kneeling.  But  is  it  only 
from  your  heads,  and  not  from  your  hearts,  how  can  such  a  fabrica- 
ted speech  be  acceptable  to  God  ?  for  it  is  not  then  an  address  of  your 
soul  to  God,  it  is  not  a  making  of  your  desire  krown  to  him,  nor  a 
request  that  he  would  fulfil  it,  but  merely  words  concerning  neces- 
sary and  desirable  things,  and  your  souls  do  not  draw  near  to  God 
with  ardent  desires  but  remain  cold  and  estranged  from  him.  For 
thus  ye  draw  near  to  him  with  your  mouths  and  honour  him  with 
your  lips,  but  remove  your  hearts  far  from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.  13. 

If  this  be  your  case,  how  wretched  are  ye  !  ye  ha%e  never  yet 
prayed  :  at  least  your  praying  hath  not  been  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
Ye  cannot  indeed  pray,  ye  are  not  qualified  for  it :  your  prayer  is 
sin,  and  abominable,  it  displeaseth  the  Lord  ;  ye  often  lie  in  your 
ptaying,  when  ye  thank  him  with  your  prayers,  that  he  hath  redeem- 
ed you  by  Jesus  Christ,  since  by  speaking  only  words,  and  always 
without  heart  in  praying,  ye  yourselves  show  that  ye  neither  know 
your  misery,  nor  have  ever  earnestly  desired,  nor  sought  the  Re- 
deemer. He  wdl  also  not  hear  you :  for  "  he  heareth  not  sinners," 
John  ix  31.  Doth  he  give  you  that  which  is  good,  it  is  not  in  lm 
favour  with  and  in  Christ. 

Say  not,  this  is  a  hard  saying,  who  can  bear  it  ?  if  this  be  so,  whi 
should  we  pray  any  longer  ?  must  we  then  forbear  to  pray?  We 
speak  thus  only  from  love  to  you,  that  we  may  bring  you  to  your- 
selves, and  that  ye  may  learn  how  to  pray  aright  and  acceptably  to 
God.  Ye  cannot  pray  acceptably  to  God,  and  ye  may  nevertheless 
not  forbear  to  pray :  "  God  pours  out  his  wrath  upon  them,  who  call 
not  upon  his  name,"  Psalm  Ixxix.  10.  Jer.  x.  25.  And  therefore 
only  know  your  wretched  and  miserable  condition;  that  your  dan- 
ger may  urge  you  to  pray  ;  it  is  our  ordinary  saying,  that  danger 
leaches  a  person  to  pray.  When  Paul  was  discouraged  on  account 
of  his  misery,  he  learned  how  to  pray  acceptably  to  God,  so  that  the 
Lord  testified  of  him,  "Behold  he  prayeth,"  Acts.  ix.  11.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  once  saw  your  deplorable  condition,  that  none  of  your 
sins  were  yet  forgiven,  that  God  did  yet  behold  you  in  anger,  that 
ye  were  unable  to  do  what  is  necesary  for  you  to  do,  in  order  to  be 
saved,  that  ye  had  never  yet  prayed  aright,  that  ye  cannot  pray  so, 
and  that  therefore  if  ye  die  as  ye  are  at  present,  ye  must  perish  : 
would  ye  not  be  urged  by  your  danger  to  retire,  and  enter  into  se- 
cret, to  fall  upon  your  knees,  and  cry  to  God  for  grace  ?  doth  not 
a  stammering  child,  when  he  is  hungry,  and  suffers  pain,  know  how 
to  complain  of  such  matters  to  his  parents,  and  to  call  upon  them 
for  help,  and  rs  not  that  stammering  language  of  the  child  accepta- 


406  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

ble  to  his  parents  ?  would  not  ye  then,  if  ye  were  spiritually  hungry, 
and  had  a  painful  sense  of  your  misery,  be  able  to  complain,  and  to 
call  upon  God  for  his  grace,  and  would  not  he  be  pleased  with  such 
addresses,  though  ye  prayed  ever  so  meanly  and  stammeringly  ?  1 
believe  he  would.  And  therefore  pause,  and  attend  a  while  to  your- 
woful  misery,  contemplate  it,  and  be  concerned  on  account  of  it, 
that  ye  may  with  fervent  prayers,  "  seek  to  God,  and  direct  your 
speech  unto  him,"  as  Eiiphas  adviseth,  Job  v.   8. 

But,  believers  and  redeemed  ye  who  know  how  to  pray  through 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  engage  often  in  hearty  prayer. 
It  is  a  difficult  work,  the  flesh  is  unwilling  to  exercise  itself  in  it. 
I  consider  it  therefore  proper  to  exhort  you  to  attend  to  it  with  ear- 
nestness. For  (a)  your  God,  your  Father,  your  Redeemer  and  Sanc- 
tified hath  enjoined  it  on  you  in  his  word,  Psalm  I.  15.  Jer.  xxxiii. 
l>.  Matt.  vii.  7.  He  often  stirs  your  souls  up  to  it.  Your  heart 
saith  not  less  than  David's  in  the  Lord's  stead,  u  Seek  my  Lee," 
Psalm  xxvii.  8  ;  will  ye  not  then  echo  with  him,  "Thy  face  will  I 
beek  I"  Dare  ye  be  disobedient  to  that  universal  and  great  com- 
mand ?  (b)  It  was  foretold  of  you  :  the  Lord  foretold  in  ancient 
days  concerning  our  times  and  people,  that  "  all  flesh  should  ronie 
and  worship  before  him,"  Isaiah  lxvi.  23.  He  saith)  Zeph,  iii.  9, 
10,  "  Surely  I  will  then  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  that 
they  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one 
consent.  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  ray  suppliants,  even 
the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  offering,"  Is  it  in- 
deed your  desire  to  defeat  the  prophecies,  which  have  been  formerly 
uttered  concerning  you,  and  not  rather  to  confirm  them  by  earnest 
and  hearty  prayer?,  ?  it  is  your  duty  to  fulfil  these  prophecies  by 
your  conduct.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  his  "  son  Timothy,"  1  Tim. 
i.  18,  "  This  charge  I  commit  unto  thee,  according  to  the  prophe- 
cies, which  went  before  on  thee,  that  thou  by  them  raightest  war  a 
food  warfare."  (c)  Have  not  all  the  saints  prayed  frequently  and 
fervently  ?  Abel's  sacrifice,  with  which  God  was  well  pleased,  was 
not  unaccompanied  with  prayer.  Enoch  walked  with  God  by  con- 
stant prayer:  in  what  other  manner  did  Abraham  manifest  that  he 
was 'a  friend  of  God?  Isr.cc  went  into  the  field  to  pray:*  Jacob 
arose  in  the  night,  and  sent  his  household  from  him,  over  the  brook, 
that  he  might  wrestle  alone  with  God.  The  time  would  fail  me,  if 
I  should  speak  of  Joshua,  of  Samuel,  of  Jahez,  of  all  the  holy  pro- 
>Kels  and  apostles.     Wherefore   seeing   we   are   compassed  about 

■  Vlii6  •£  ajrrecab'e  to  the  Dtrtch  translation 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  407 

v,  ii.ii  50  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  same  way, 
and  look  especially  to  the  chief  Captain,  and  great  leader  of  prayer 
Jesus,  who,  according  to  Luke  xxi.  37,  "  was  in  the  daytime  teach- 
ing in  the  temple,  and  at  night  went  out,  and  lodged  in  the  mount," 
without  doubt  to  pray  See  Mark  i  25.  (d)  Ye  have  liberty,  and 
that  great  privilege  above  others,  that  ye  may  come  day  by  day  to 
your  Father,  and  speak  familiarly  to  him.  In  ancient  times  the 
Jews  only  had  liberty  to  call  upon  God,  as  near  at  hand,  and  other 
nations  were,  and  remained  strangers  to  the  Lord,  as  Moses  cries 
out  with  admiration  of  this.  Deut.  iv  7,  "  What  nation  is  there  so 
great,  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as  the  Lord  our  God  is  in 
all  things  that  we  call  upon  him  for  ?"  But  believers  of  the  Gen- 
tiles have  now,  as  the  Jews  had  then,  '  an  access  through  Christ  by 
one  Spirit  to  the  Father,"  Eph  ii.  18.  formerly  none  but  the 
Highpriest  was  permitted  to  appear  solemnly  once  a  year  in  the 
earthly  holy  of  holies,  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  the  people 
of  God  through  him  ;  but,  believers,  ye  have  now  all  of  you  liberty, 
and  indeed  every  day,  yea,  every  hour,  to  go  into  a  better  holy  place, 
through  Jesus,  the  true  Highpriest.  Will  ve  not  now  make  use  of 
your  liberty,  and  that  great  privilege  ?  Hear  what  Paul  saith,  Hcb. 
x.  19 — 22,  "  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he 
hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh  ; 
and  having  an  Highpriest  over  the  house  of  God:  let  us  draw  near 
with  a  true  heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith."  (e)  Ye,  believers,  and 
true  Christians,  even  ye  have  an  ability  to  pray.  The  sinner,  who 
is  in  a  state  of  nature,  is  bound  hand  and  foot,  through  his  ignorance 
and  inability  with  respect  to  prayer  :  but  the  Lord,  according  to  his 
promise,  Zech.  xii.  10,  hath  "poured  out  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
of  supplication  upon  you  ;"  and  according  to  Rom.  viii.  15.  Gal. 
iv.  5,  "  he  hath  given  you  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  which  erieth  Abba 
Father:  yea,  which  prayeth  for  and  in  you  with  groanings  that  can- 
not be  uttered,"  Rom.  viii.  26.  Will  ye  then  grieve  and  quench 
that  Spirit  of  prayer  by  your  sluggishness  and  listlessness  ?  No, 
awake,  and  "  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  you,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  Tim.  i.  6.  (t)  What  a  glorious,  delightful  and  pow- 
erful work  is  prayer  !  the  practice  of  it  confers  honour  upon  a  per- 
son :  "  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  ;  for  Jabez  cal- 
led upon  the  God  of  Israel,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  See  this  also  of 
Samuel,  Psalm,  xcix.  6.  Prayer  is  iike  Jacob's  ladder,  by  which 
we  climb  up  to  heaven,  and  like  the  wings  of  an  eagle,  by  which  we 
mount  up  to  heaven  :  by  prayer  we  are  with  Paul  caught  up  into  ths 


408  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

paradise  of  God,  the  third  heaven  :  we  enter  in  through  the  inmost 
veil ;  we  see  him  who  is  invisible  ;  we  speak  to  God  as  a  man  speaks 
to  his  friend,  we  walk  with  him,  we  cleave  to  him,  and  acquaint  our- 
selves  with  him  :  by  prayer  we  can  shut  and  open  heaven,  with  Eli- 
jah, overcome  God,  with  Jacob,  and  with  Moses,  restrain  his  anger, 
so  that  he  will  not  consume  Israel.  What  think  ye  Christians,  have 
ye  not  a  desire  to  such  a  great  work,  and  will  ye  not  give  yourselves 
wholly  to  it?  (g)  A  Christian  is  in  a  good  or  evil  state,  according 
as  he  prays  much  or  little,  remissly  or  earnestly  :  his  spiritual  life 
must  languish  and  decline  when  he  is  heanless  in  this  duty  ;  but 
when  it  is  otherwise,  he  is  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and 
grows  like  the  calves  of  the  stall,  (h)  Ye  complain  of  corporal  and 
spiritual  afflictions  ;  but  whence  do  they  proceed  ?  do  they  not  from 
your  praying  so  seldom,  and  in  such  a  heartless  manner  ?  the  apos- 
tle James  saith,  "  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not,"  James  iv.  2. 
God  suffers  you,  as  it  were,  to  dwell,  like  the  rebellious,  in  a  dry 
land,  that  ye  may  pray  earnestly  to  him  :  "  I  will  go,  and  return  to 
my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  my  face  : 
in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early,"  saith  God,  Hosea  v.  14. 
<'  He  would  bring  a  third  part  "  of  his  people  "  into  the  fire  :"  but 
they  should  then  also  call  upon  his  name,"  Zech.  xiii,  9.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  exercised  yourselves  much  in  prayer,  would  ye  not 
obtain  more  than  ye  do  ?  "  He  gives  liberally  to  him  who  prays, 
and  upbraideth  not,"  James  i.  6.  "  He  heareth  prayer,"  and  there* 
fore  "all  flesh  must  come  to  him,"  Psalm  lxv.  2.  See  Isaiah 
xxx.  18,  19.  Jer.  xxix.  11 — 14.  The  Lord  doth  still  give  you 
much,  and  ye  are  pleased  with  it,  though  ye  pray  little  :  but  when 
he  gives  you  that  which  is  good  upon  your  praying,  it  is  then  a 
double  blessing,  which  causeth  you  to  rejoice  twice,  once  because 
lie  gives  you  that  which  is  good,  and  once  because  he  hears  your 
prayer.  Do  ye  see  your  duty  and  do  ye  delight  in  it,  conduct  your- 
selves then  well  in  it ;  and  particularly, 

1.  Beware  that  ye  do  not  become  slothful  with  respect  to  it. 
Praying  is  a  difficult  work,  we  must  encourage  ourselves,  and  exert 
all  our  strength  for  it,  and  must  be  intent  upon  it.  It  is  therefore  a 
hateful  conduct,  and  hurtful  to  the  soul,  to  study  sometimes  from 
mere  sluggishness  to  defer  prayer,  until  this  or  that  opportunity,  and 
to  be  inwardly  wellpleased,  when  we  are  hindered  by  some  accident^ 
or  can  pray  only  in  a  cursory  manner.  Conscience  saith,  it  is  time 
for  you  to  seek  the  Lord,  but  your  listlessness  hinders  you  from 
setting  about  it,  except  in  a  slothful  manner,  and  ye  depart  thus 
further  and  further  from  the   Lord,    who    hides   his  face    from  th~ 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119*  409 

soul.  The  spouse  slept,  while  her  heart  was  awake  :  when  her 
bridegroom  knocked,  she  was  so  overcome  with  spiritual  drowsiness, 
that  she  suffered  him  to  stand  at  the  door ;  but  he  went  his  way, 
and  what  distress  did  she  experience,  and  what  pains  was  she  obliged 
to  take,  before  he  would  suffer  himself  to  be  entreated  by  her,  Song 
v.  2—8. 

2.  Take  heed  that  an  unbelieving  fear  do  not  beset  you,  at  least, 
that  it  do  not  hinder  you  from  praying.  The  corruption  of  your 
heart,  your  ill  behaviour,  your  falling  repeatedly  into  sin  ought  in- 
deed to  render  you  humble,  and  induce  you  to  stand  afar  off,  hke 
the  publican,  and  cry  only  for  grace  ;  but  these  things  ought  not  to 
drive  you  from  the  Lord,  nor  cause  you  to  despair,  as  though  there 
were  no  grace,  nor  mercy  with  the  Lord  for  you  ;  for  by  acting  thus 
ye  dishonour  God,  as  if  his  grace  and  mercy  could  not  overmatch 
your  sins,  and  could  not  swallow  your  sin  up.  The  soul  saith  some- 
times indeed  with  the  people  of  God,  "  If  my  transgressions  and 
my  sins  be  upon  me,  and  I  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  I  then 
live.'  but  the  Lord  saith,  As  I  live  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,"  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10,  1 1.  Are  ye  not  grieved  for  your  sins, 
will  ye  hold  them  fast  ;  remain  then  aloof,  and  flee  from  the  Lord, 
like  Cain  and  Judas  ;  but  do  ye  seek  to  be  delivered  from  your  sins 
and  sinfulness,  "  cast  not  then  away  your  confidence,  which  hath  a 
great  recompence  of  reward,"  Heb.  x.  35*. 

3.  Watch  against  wandering  thoughts  ;  for  these  remove  the  heart 
far  from  the  Lord,  even  when  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our  mouths. 
Do  they  beset  you,  endeavour  to  banish  them  from  you  ;  disengage 
your  minds  from  them.  Are  ye  not  able,  propose  your  requests 
then,  not  with  many,  but  with  few  words,  and  do  not  make  "  use  of 
vain  repetitions,"  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  Saviour,  Mat.  vi.  7. 
We  must  therefore  take  good  heed  that  we  do  not  hurry  too  much, 
in  order  to  finish  our  prayer,  and  utter  only  many  words  in  haste, 
and  also  that  wc  do  not  limit  ourselves  to  a  certain  time,  praying 
just  so  long,  and  no  longer :  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let 
not  thy  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  ;  for  God  is  in 
heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  ;  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few,"  Eccl. 
v.  2. 

4.  None  of  us  may  think  that  he  may  abstain  from  praying,  when 
he  is  not  influenced  in  just  such  or  such  a  particular  manner  by  the 
Spirit  of  prayer.  It  is  true,  we  c;.nnot  pray  aright  without  his  pre- 
venting influence  ;  yet  we  may  not  forbear  to  pray,  when  we  do  not 
enjoy  that  influence,  but  the  experience  of  our  inability,  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  also  worketh  in  us,  should  urge  and  induce  us  to  pray 

Vol.  ii.  3  B 


410  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

vehemently,  and  we  shall  experience  that  the  Lord  will  recorr.pence 
ou!  zeal,  and  that  ne  will,  as  lie  hath  promised,  Isaiah  !>:iv.  5,  "  meet 
those  who  remember  h;m  in  his  ways."  Therefore  the  soul  oui,ht 
also  to  look  rip  to  the  Lord,  and  to  depend  upon  him  for  the  prom- 
ised "  Sp;rit  of  grace  and  of  supplications,"  Zech.  xii.  10. 

5.  Pray  for  yourselves,  but  also  for  the  community.  It  behooves 
you  to  mention  the  land  and  the  place  of  your  habitation  to  the 
Lord.  God  required  that  they  who  were  carried  away  captive  should 
pray  for  Babylon,  Jer.  xxix.  7.  How  much  more  then  ought  we 
to  remember  in  cur  prayers  this  good  land,  in  which  we  enjoy 
liberty  and  happiness !  And  since  the  prosperity  of  the  land  de- 
pends greatly  upon  the  magistrates,  we  ought  also  to  "  pray  for  kings, 
and  all  that  arc  id  authority  ;  that  we  may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable 
lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  1  Tim. 
ii.  1,  23.  Forget  not  your  lamily  and  children  :  Isaac  prayed  for 
his  wife,  Gen.  xxv  21.  Abraham  for  Ishmael,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  and 
David  for  his  child,  when  it  was  sick,  2  Sam.  xii-  15,  16.  But  the 
church  of  the  Lord,  "  Jerusalem,"  ou.^ht  more  especially  to  '*  come 
into  your  mind,"  Jer.  Ii.  50.  "  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto 
Zion  :  build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,"  said  David  to  the  Lord, 
although  he  was  sufficiently  burthened  with  his  own  affliction,  Psalm 
li     .8. 

6.  Unite  with,  and  forsake  not  the  ordinary  prayers  of  the  church  ; 
for  the  Lord  manifests  himself  present  with  his  church,  and  he 
hears  those  prayers  :  "  when  only  two  agree  touching  any  thing 
that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father,"  saith 
Jesus,  ivjat.  xviii.  19.  Masters  and  mistresses  of  families  ought 
also  to  pray  for,  and  with  their  whole  family  :  "  Isaac  prayed  for, 
and  in  the  presence  of  his  wife,"  Gen.  xxv.  21  How  can  families, 
:.n  which  f  mily  praye  s  are  neglected,  be  considered  as  godly  ?  they 
cannot  certainly  expect  a  blessing.  .Neither  ought  private  and  soli- 
tary prayers  tu  be  neglected  :  for  we  have  surely  something  of  a 
particular  nature  to  lay  before  the  Lord,  which  we  do  not  desire 
others  to  know.  We  exercise  fellowship  with  God  chiefly  in  such 
a  retired  solitude,  bee  wiiat  Solomon  and  the  Lord  Jesus  say,  Prov. 
xviii.  1.  Mat.  vi.  6. 

7.  *'  Pray  without  ceasing,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Thess.  v.  17. 
How  can  or  may  tins  be  done  ?  our  spirit,  as  long  as  it  is  in  this 
mortal  body,  cannot  endure  to  be  always  intent  upon  any  subject: 
God  hath  also  enjoined  it  upon  man  to  exercise  himself  in  many- 
other  employments,  lint  the  phrase,  M  wi'hou1  ceasing"  denotes 
either  that  we  should  persevere  in  prayer,  and,  as  it  were,  weary  the 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.    116— 119.  41  i 

Lord  with  our  praying,  uutil  he  show  us  favour  :  "  for  this  end  Jesus 
spake  the  parable  of  the  widow,  wo  wearied,  as  it  were,  the  ungouiy 
judge,  in  order  to  show  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint,"  Luke  xviii  1 — 7.  We  ought  thus  to  "  continue  uistai  I  in 
pr  ;yer,  and  to  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving,"  Col.  iv.  2. 
Or  "to  pray  without  erasing"  denotes  being  continually  in  a  .sup- 
plicating posture  of  mind  toward  the  Lord,  even  while  we  are  tn- 
gaged  in  our  daily  callings,  like  .Nehemiah,"  who  pn.yed  to  the 
God  or  heaven,  even  when  the  king  spake  to  hin>,"  Neh.  ii.  4. 
Or  it  intimates  observing  our  stated  seasons  of  prayer.  David  and 
Daniel  "  pray*  d  in  tne  morning,  at  noon  and  night,"  Psalm  iv.  If. 
Dan.  vi.  11.  This  is  praying  without  ceasing,  as  the  Morning  arid 
evening  sacrifice  is  called  "  the  continual  sacrifice,"  Exod.  xxix. 
58,  39    Dan.  viii.  1 1. 

8.  As  we  ought  to  demean  ourselves  well,  while  we  pray,  pray- 
ing with  humuity,  with  boldness,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  con- 
fidence, with  thanksgiving,  wi.i  intense  earnestness  in  spirit  a  d  in 
truth,  and  with  becoming  gestures  ot  the  body,  so  ve  ought  also  to 
endeavour  to  be  well  disposed  before  and  after  prayer.  Before 
prayer  we  ought  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it  in  a  suitable  mi  nner, 
"  to  order  ourselves  and  keep  watch,"  with  David,  Psalm  v.  3.  We 
ought  to  dismiss  all  our  worldly  thoughts,  to  inquire  what  we  need, 
and  endeavour  to  have  a  suitable  sense  of  God,  to  whom  we  are 
about  to  draw  near  :  but  we  ought  in  a  more  particular  manner  actu- 
ally to  repent  of  and  forsake  our  sins,  and  to  entertain  a  >.  teadfast 
resolution  to  lesist  them  in  future.  Zophar,  the  friend  of  Job,  said 
to  him,  "  If  thou  prepare  thy  heart,  and  stretch  out  thy  hand  toward 
him  :  if  iniquity  be  in  thy  hand,  put  it  far  from  thee,  and  let  not 
■wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tents,"  Job  xi.  13,  14  After  prayer,  in- 
quire for  what  and  how  ye  have  prayed,  and  whether  ye  be  the  bet- 
ter for  it.  Let  your  hearts  continue  turned  to  the  Lord,  and,  as  it 
were,  employed  in  repeating  your  prayer,  and  look  out  for  an  an- 
swer, in  order  to  hear  what  God  the  Lord  wiil  speak,  ttusting  that 
l<  he  will  speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints  :  but  turn 
not  again  unto  folly,"  Psalm  lxxxv.  8.  Doth  the  Lord  hear  you, 
rejoice,  and  praise  him.  David  was  so  well  pleased  with  God's 
hearing  of  him,  that  he  would  not  only  praise  the  Lord  himself, 
Psalm  cxviii.  21,  but  would  also  inform  others,  who  feared  God,  of 
God's  kindness  in  this  respect,  that  they  likewise  might  praise  the 
Lord,  Psalm  lxvi.  16-20.  Yea,  he  found  that  he  was  unable  to  do 
this  alone  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  benefit,  and  therefore 
he  called  upon  others  to  help  him  :  "  O  magnify  the  Lord  with  me, 


412  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

and  let  us  exalt  his  name  together.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard 
me,  and  delivered  me  from  all  my  fears,"  saith  he  to  the  people  of 
God,  Psalm  xxxiv.  3,  4.  To  conclude,  I  will  finish  this  discourse 
with  the  request  of  the  church,  P^alm  xx.  1 — 4.  "  The  Lord  hear 
thee  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend 
thee  :  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary  ;  and  strengthen  thee  out 
of  Zion  :  remember  all  thine  offerings,  and  accept  thy  burnt  sacri- 
fice ;  Selah.  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart,  and  fulfil  all 
thy  counsel,"  Amen. 


(  413  ) 


THE  ADDRESS 


OF 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  6.     Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven.

Q.   118.   What  haih  God  commanded  us  to  ask  of  him  ? 

A.  All  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body  :  which  Christ  our 
Lord  has  comprised  in  that  prayer  he  himself  has  taught  us. 

Q.    119.    What  are  the  ivords  of  that  firayer  ? 

A.  "  Our  father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,  thy 
kingdom  come," 


w, 


HEN  God  commands,  his  children  pray.  "  Lord,  thou  hast 
commanded  us  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O  that  my  ways 
were  directed  to  ketp  thy  statutes  !"  saith  David,  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5. 
Thus  Augustin  also  acted,  when  he  prayed  to  God,  saying,  "  Give 
me  what  thou  comrrundest,  and  command  what  thou  wilt,  and  thou 
shak  not  command  in  vain."  They  esteem  all  God's  command- 
ments, and  the  whole  law  to  be  "  holy,  just  and  good,"  with  Fau!, 
Rom.  vii.  12.  They  have  an  earnest  inclination,  and  an  insatiable 
desire  to  keep  the  commandments  :  "  1  opened  my  mouth,  and  pant- 
ed ;  for  I  longed  for  thy  commandments,"  saith  that  godly  king, 
Psalm  cxix.  131.  They  are  exceedingly  fearful  and  afraid  of  trans- 
gressing the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  they  beseech  him  therefore  to 
keep  them  from  transgressing  it,  as  the  same  man  speaks,  Psalm 
xix.  13.  "Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins, 
let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  And  Psalm  cxix.  10, 
"  With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee  :  O  let  me  not  wander 
from  thy  commandments."  They  cannot  indeed  preserve  them- 
selves, and  they  know  by  experience  that  they  cannot  keep  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  Lord  perfectly,  though  they  esteem  them  so  highly, 
and  do  so  earnestly  desire  to  keep  them.  But  knowing  the  cove- 
nant promise  of  the  Lord,  that  "  he  wili  cause  them  to  walk  in  his 
statutes,  and  to  keep  his  judgments  and  do  them,"  according  to 
Ezek.  xx::vi.  27,  therefore  they  apply  to  him  in  prayer,  that  he  may 
perfect  his  promised  strength  in  their  weakness.  I  will  adduce  once 
more  David's  petition,  as  a  proof  of  these  observations  :  '*  Teach 
me,"  saith  he,  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11,  "O  Lonl,  thy  way.  I  will  walk 
in  thy  truth  :  unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name."  In  this  way  doth 
the  instructor  also  proceed  ;  for  when  he  would  excite  us  to  good 
works,  as  fruits  of  thankfulness,  he  taught  us  ( 1)  The  necessity  (.f 
those  works,  in  the  xxxii.  Lord's  day.  (2)  The  principle  of  them, 
io  wit,  conversion,   Question    83 — 90.     (J3)  The    nature   of  lhem; 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  391 

Question  91.  (4)  The  rule  of  good  works,  Lord's  days  xxxiv — xliv. 
and  now  (5)  Prayer,  as  a  mean  to  assist  us  in  doing  good  works  j 
for  having  shown  that  even  those  who  are  converted  cannot  keep 
the  law  perfectly,  and  that  they  are  therefore  taught  to  pray  unto 
God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  more  and 
more  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  until  they  attain  to  the  per- 
fection, which  hath  been  exhibited,  after  this  life,  Question  114, 
1 15.  We  say,  having  shown  this,  he  proceeds  to  an  explanation  of 
prayer. 

Three  particulars  require  our  consideration  here, 

I.  The  nature. 

II.  The  pattern,  and 

III.  The  necessity  of  prayer. 

I.  Before  we  exhibit  the  proper  work  of  prayer,  we  must  speak 
of  certain  particulars,  which  are  previously  required  to  prayer,  with 
respect  to  him,  to  whom  we  must  pray,  to  the  person  who  prays, 
the  things  for  which  he  must  pray,  and  the  disposition  of  mind  with 
which  he  must  pray. 

We  must  pray  to  "  none  but  the  one  true  God,  who  hath  mani- 
fested himself  in  his  word."  The  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us  this, 
when  he  saith,  Matt.  iv.  10,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  shalt  thou  wor- 
ship, and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  Prayer  is  indeed  a  religious 
work,  by  which  we  acknowledge  and  honour  God,  as  the  most  high, 
and  infinitely  perfect,  as  they  who  overcame  the  beast  honoured  the 
Lord  with  the  song  of  Moses,  saying,  Rev.  xv.  4,  "  Who  shall  not  fear 
thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy  :  for  all 
nations  ahall  come  and  worship  before  thee."  He  to  whom  we 
shall  pray  must  be  allsumcient,  that  he  may  be  able  to  help ;  and 
allknowing,  that  he  may  know  the  thoughts,  and  hear  the  words  of 
him  who  prayeth,  afar  off;  and  infinitely  good,  that  he  may  be  willing 
to  help  the  needy  and  unworthy  sinner  ;  and  so  he  must  be  "  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  Eph.  Hi. 
20.  The  Papists,  when  they  pray  to  the  saints  and  other  creatures, 
and  the  Socinians,  when  they  pray  to  Christ,  whom  they  esteem  to 
be  but  a  mere  man,  are  guilty  of  idolatry,  as  we  have  proved  upon 
the  first  commandment.  And  we  must  pray  to  God,  as  he  hath 
manifested  himself  in  his  word  ;  for  otherwise  we  "  worship  we 
know  not  what,"  with  the  Samaritans,  John  iv.  22,  and  we  "  serve 
an  unknown  God,"  like  the  Athenians,  Acts  xvii.  23.  Since  now 
the  Lord  God  hath  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  as  the  Triune 
Creator,  Redeemer  and  Sanctifier,  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him 
•as  such,  and  with  suca  u  becoming  apprehension  of  him  ;  for  God 


J92  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

cannot  draw  near  to  the  sinner  with  his  grace,  neither  can  the  sinner 
draw  near  to  God  with  his  prayers  in  any  other  way.  That  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  God,  coessential  with  the  Father,  and 
that  we  must  therefore  pray  to  them  also,  these  are  particulars 
which  we  have  proved  upon  the  thirteenth  and  twentieth  Lord's 
days.  Inasmuch  now  as  the  Triune  God  hath  revealed  himself  by 
a  special  ceconomy  of  grace,  in  which  the  Father  comes  with  his 
favour  to  the  sinner,  through  the  Son  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost, 
therefore  we  must  also  come  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
through  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  end  in  him  with  our  prayers : 
"Through  Christ  we  have  an  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father," 
according  to  Eph.  ii.  18. 

Irrational  creatures  are  sometimes  said  to  pray  to  God  :  "  The 
young  ravens,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  cry,  and  call  mightily  to 
God,"  Job  xxxviii.  41.  Joel  i.  20.  Jonah  iii.  8.  This  is  however 
not  praying  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  bui  it  only  intimates 
their  danger  and  distress  :  but  praying  is  the  work  of  men,  who 
can  draw  nigh  to  Go  J,  and  present  their  requests  to  him  in  a  rational 
manner.  A«d  prayer  is  especially  the  work  of  believers,  who  are 
reconciled  to  God,  have  an  nccess  to  him,  partake  of  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  of  prayer,  and  are  acceptable  to  God  with  their  prayers  ; 
'■'•  God  had  respect  unto  Abel,  and  then  also  to  his  offering  :  but  unto 
Cain  he  had  not  respect,  and  then  not  to  Lis  offering  neither,"  Gen. 
iv.  45.  "  "Ye  know,"  said  the  man,  who  was  born  blind,  John  ix. 
31,  ''that  God  heareth  not  sinners  ;  but  if  a  man  be  a  worshipper 
of  God,  and  doth  his  will,  him  he  heareth."  James  saith  of  no  other, 
but  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous  man,  that  it  avail- 
eth  much,"  James  v.  17.  The  sinner,  who  is  in  his  natural  state, 
is  obliged  to  pmy  on  account  of  the  supremacy  of  God,  and  his  own 
dependance  ;  but  he  is  not  able  to  pray  origin:  "his  prayer  be- 
comes sin  to  him,"  Psalm  cix.  7.  '  he  Lord  God  "  hides  his  eyes, 
and  shuts  his  ears  "  to  the  praj  er  of  such  a  sinner,  Isaiah  i.  15. 
And  since  he  hath  never  embraced  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  in  whom 
he  is  well  pleased,  therefore  he  cannot,  and  may  not  approach  the 
Lord,  as  his  reconciled  God,  who  is  a  consuming  fire  to  him.  Shall 
such  an  one  then  forbear  to  pray  ?  God  forbid.  "  The  ploughing 
of  the  wicked  is  sin,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxi.  4.  May  or  shall 
they  then  forbear  to  p'uugh  ?  surely  no  ;  but  the  unconverted  sinner 
must  see  that  it  is  his  duty  to  pray,  that  he  may  be  concerned,  and 
may  from  concern  ilee  to  the  Mediator,  upon  the  call  of  the  gospel  ; 
for  he  should  thus  obtain  freedom,  and  an  ability  to  pray  well.  But 
if  he  will  persist  in  sinning,  oi  what  advantage  will  his  praying  be 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   116—119.  393 

to  him?     If  he  will   K  confess  and  forsake  his   sins,  he  v/ill  obtain 
mercy,''  according  to  Prov.  xxvi.    13. 

Alan  is  exceedingly  needy,  lie  is  destitute  of  every  thing,  he  pos- 
sessed nothing  in  himself,  that  can  afford  him  satisfaction,  but  he 
mu-st  seek  ail  things  out  of  himseh  from  the  Lord  by  prayer.  Yet 
he  may  not  pray  for  ail  that  he  can  desire,  as  that  which  opposeth 
the  decree  of  God,  and  his  revealed  will,  that  all  men  may  be  saved, 
that  he  himself  may  be  perfect  in  this  life,  and  that  he  may  obtain 
such  and  such  things,  in  order  to  commit  sin  with  them,  or  to  con- 
sume them  upon  his  lusts.  This  would  be  making  a  mock  of  God, 
as  we  do  of  men  ;  but  we  must  pray  "  for  all  things  that  he  hath 
commanded  us  to  ask  of  him."  Tnese  all  things  are  "  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body."  The  things  ntcessary  for  the  soul 
are  pardon  of  sin,  s  (notification;  assurance,  strength,  preservation, 
and  an  increase  of  all  g  ace.  The  saints  prayed  for  these  things, 
as  we  see  particularly  in  David,  an  l  especially  in  the  fifty-first  Psalm. 
The  things  which  are  necessary  for  tiie  body  are  health,  meat,  drink, 
clothing,  and  all  that  can  conduce  to  the  weliare  of  the  body.  We 
m  iy,  and  ought  to  pray  lor  these  things,  because  we  depend  upon 
God,  according  to  the  body  also  :  but  to  covet  with  an  evil  covetous- 
rtess  for  our  house,  in  order  that  we  may  set  our  mst  on  high,  and 
to  desire  to  be  iich,  is  shameful  and  unjust ;  if  we  have  food  and  rai- 
ment, we  ought  therewith  to  be  content.  And  therefore  we  may 
pray  against  riches,  as  well  as  against  poverty,  and  desire  of  God 
only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient  for  us,"  as  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh 
did,  Prov.  xxx.  8.  We  ought  also  to  take  good  heed,  that  we 
pray  (a)  more  for  the  things  that  are  necessary  for  the  soul,  than 
for  those  that  are  necessary  for  the  body,  Matt.  vi.  33.  John  vi. 
27,  (b)  More  for  things  that  relate  to  God,  than  for  those  that  re- 
late to  ourselves  :  see  this  in  the  Lord's  prayer,  (c)  More  against  sin, 
than  against  chastisement,  Lam.  iii.  39.  (d)  We  must  pray  for 
grace  with  respect  to  the  essence  of  it  absolutely  :  but  for  grace 
with  respect  to  the  increase  and  degrees  of  it.  as  also  for  things 
which  concern  the  body,  we  must  pray  conditionally,  to  wit,  if 
they  will  promote  the  honour  and  worship  of  the  Lord,  and  will 
contribute  to  the  furtherance  of  our  salvation. 

It  is  necessary,  that  the  mind  should  be  well  disposed,  in  order 
that  we  may  pray  in  such  a  manner,  as  is  acceptable  to  God,  and 
that  he  may  hear  us.  (a)  The  mind  must  know  through  the  Spirit 
the  one  true  God,  who  hath  revealed  himself  in  his  word,  from  that 
word,  in  all  his  adorable  perfections,  that  the  soul,  affected  with  live- 
ly apprehensions  and  contemplations  of  God,  to  whom  she  speaks. 
Vol.  ii.  2  Z 


394  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

may  possess  and  be  actuated  with  reverence  and  a  believing  confi- 
dence in  prayer.  The  stints  have  for  this  purpose,  when  they  pray- 
ed,  employed  in  their  addresses  ^uch  honourable  titles  of  God,  as  in- 
spired them  -with  a  profound  reverence  for  him,  and  nevertheless  en- 
couraged them  to  desire  and  expect  good  things  of  him.  See  this  in 
the  prayer  of  Moses,  Numb.  xxiii.  16,  17,  of  those  who  returned  from 
Babylon,  Neh.  ix.  1 — 26,  of  Jeremiah  chap,  x/xii.  17,  18,  of 
Daniel,  chap.  ix.  5,  of  the  first  Christian  church,  Acts  iv.  24 — 26. 
We  ought  not  therefore  to  approve  of  uttering  without  any  impres- 
sion, and  hastily  the  first  word  that  occurs  concerning  God.  (b)  Our 
minds  must  also  be  rightly  affected  with  respect  to  ourselves,  and 
the  things,  for  which  we  are  about  to  pray.  We  cannot  pray  as  we 
ought,  unless  "  we  rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  mis- 
ery." Our  hearts  must  be  deeply  sensible  of  what  we  need,  of  the 
misery  to  which  we  are  subject,  that  we  are  unworthy  of,  and  have 
forfeited  all  things,  that  the  soul,  urged  by  her  need,  may  humbly 
prostrate  herself  before  the  Lord,  and  may  seek  his  grace.  It  is 
not  enough  to  pray  for  things  that  are  needful,  but  we  must  also 
have  a  deep  sense  of  our  need  of  them,  that  our  need  may  urge  us 
to  pray  :  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;  I  will  deliver  thee," 
saith  the  Lord,  Psalm  1.  15.  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord 
heard  him  ;  and  saved  him  out  of  all  his  troubles,"  saith  David,  Psalm 
xxxiv.  6.  He  saith  concerning  himself  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  Ixi.  2, 
"  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heart  is 
overwhelmed."  Seethe  prayer  of  the  church,  Psaml  cii.  1.  (c)  The 
mind  of  the  person  who  prayeth  must  also  undoubtedly  desire  the 
good  things  for  which  he  prays.  Only  to  mention  desirable  things, 
and  not  to  desire  them,  but  to  be  heartless,  indifferent  and  libtless, 
when  we  pray,  is  just  as  though  we  said,  I  do  not  wish  that  God 
should  grant  me  my  petition.  When  David  prayed  to  the  Lord, 
his  soul  was  like  "  a  panting  hart,  and  a  land,  in  which  there  was 
no  water,"  Psalm  xlii.  1,  2.  lxiii.  1.  cxliii.  6.  Therefore  prayer 
is  sometimes  called  "  a  cry,"  Psalm  v.  2.     Lam.  iii.  8. 

When  the  mind  i3  so  disposed,  it  is  prepared  for  "  prayer,  by 
which  we  address  God,  make  our  needs  and  desires  known  to  him. 
and  request  of  him  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body,  with  hu- 
mility and  believing  confidence,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  a  trust, 
that  we  shall  be  heard,  with  thanksgiving,  and  with  an  intense  ear- 
nestness, in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

It  is  necessary  to  describe  prayer  agreeably  to  this  representation 
somewhat  more  particularly. 

1.  We   say  that   prayer  is  "  an  address  to   God."     The  natural 


—119.  395 

man,  when  he  prays  after  his  fashion,  speaks  only  to  the  air  :    "  He 
draws  near  to  God    with  his  mouth,  and  honours  him  with  his   lips, 
but  removes  his  heart  far   from    him,"  Isaiah  xxix.   13.     But   the 
true  supplicant  **  seeks  unto  God,  and    unto   God   he  commits  his 
cause,"  as  Eliphaz  adviseth,  Job  v.  8.  He  lifts  up  his  heart  to  heaven, 
presents  himself  before  the  Lord,  treats  with   him,  and  speaks    to 
him:  "  Let  us  lift  up  our  heart   with  our    hands  unto    God  in   the 
heavens,"  saith  the  complaining  and  praying   church,  Lam.  iii    41. 
David's  psalm  of  prayer  begins  thus,  "  Unto   thee,   O   Lord,   do   I 
lift  up  my  soul,"  Psalm  xxv.  1.     Hear   how  Job  sighs,  "  O  that  I 
knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I  might  come  even  to  his   seat ! 
I  would  order   my  cause  before    him,"  Job  xxiii.  3,  4.     We  make 
this  address  either  with  our  heart  only,  by    ejaculatory  prayers,  like 
IVloses,  who  though  he  did  not  speak  one  word,  nevertheless  "cried 
to  God,"  Exod.  xiv.  15,  and  like    Nehemiah,  who  ««  prayed  to   the 
God  of  heaven,"  while  he   spake   with    the    king,  "  whei    the  king 
said  to  him,  For  what  dost  thou  make  thy  request,"  Neh.  ii.  4.  Or 
with  our  mouth,  either    whispering,   like  "Hannah,  who   spake  in 
her  heart,  only  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not  heard."  1  Sam. 
i.   13,  or  with  an  audible  voice,  by    which  we    excite   our   attention, 
and  are  preserved  from  wandering  thoughts.     \\  hen  we  pray  alone, 
we  must  be  able  to  hear  ourselves,  but    we  must  not  then    be  heard 
by  others,  that  they   may  not  suspect  us  of  hypocrisy  ;  for  why  else 
do  we  "  we  enter  into  our  closets,"  but  that  we  may  "  pray  in    se- 
cret to  God,"  according  to    the  command  of  our  Saviour,  Matt.    vi. 
6.     But  when  we  pray,  as  leaders  in  prayer,   with  others,   we  must 
then  raise  our  voice  so  high,  that  every  one  may    hear   it,   like    the 
Levites,  Neh.  ix.  4.     But  to  pray  in  the  presence  of  others,  as  lead- 
ers of  prayer,  in  an  unknown  tongue,  is  the  work  of  the  "  Barbarian 
and  mad"  Papists.     How  can  the   people  unite    with   us,  when  we 
pray  so,  and  say  Amen  to  what  they  do  not  understand  ?     See  what 
Paul  saith  against  this,  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 — 23.     To  excuse  this  irregu- 
larity by  saying  that  God  understands  such   a   strange  language,   is 
absurd  :  for  it  would  then  be  the  same  whether  a  man  or  a  parrot 
prayed.     "  We  must  pray  with  our  undei  standing,"  as   the  apostle 
required,    1  Cor.   xiv.    1 5.     Neither  is   it  proper  to  mutter   every 
word  after  the  person,  who  is  the  leader  of  prayer;  we  need  only 
give  heed  to  what  is  uttered,  and  take  care  that  our  hearts  accom- 
pany with  their  desires  the  words  of  the  prayer,  and  that  we  confirm 
it  with  our  Amen,  as  all  the  people  said  Amen  upon  David's  psalm, 
1  Chron.  xvi.  36.  We   read,   Neh.   viii.  6,  that  Ezra  blessed   the 
Lord,  the  great  God  ;  and  all  the  people   answered,  Amen,  Amen5 


396  THE  WORK.  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

with  lifting  tip  their  hands  :  and  they  bowed   their  heads,  and  wor* 
shipped  the  Eord  with  iheir  f  c-b  to  the  ground." 

2.  The  per&on  who  prays  in  faith  "  makes  with  his  address  his 
need  and  desires  known  unto  God."  "  In  every  thing  by  prayei 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving-,  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God,"  saith  the  text.  He  shows  God  what  afflicts  him, 
and  what  his  condition  requires,  from  what  evil  he  wishes  to  be  de- 
livered, and  what  good  he  wishes  to  enjoy  ;  and  therefore  he  sends 
up  his  groanings  and  desires  to  God  :  "  Lord,  all  my  desire  is  be- 
fore thee,  and  my  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee,"  saith  David, 
Psalm  xxxviii.  9.  M  He  declares  his  ways  unto  God,  and  is  heard," 
Psalm  cxix.  26.  The  prophet  saith  to  the  Lord  concerning  the 
righteous,  Isaiah  xxvk  16.  "Lord  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee, 
they  poured  out  a  prayer,  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  them." 
The  Lord  knows  indeed  the  needs  and  desires  of  those  whom  he 
loves  ;  but.  he  chooseth  nevertheless  that  they  should  complain  of 
them,  and  propose  them  to  him,  that  it  may  appear,  that  they  also 
know  them,  that  they  are  affected  with  them,  and  earnestly  desi- 
rous of  his  favour  ;  lor  this  is  acceptable  to  him.  "Let  me  see 
thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice  ;  for  sweet  is  thy  voice  and 
thy  countenance  is  comely,"  saith  Jesus  to  his  dove,  Song  ii.   14. 

3.  But  the  most  essential  requisite  of  prayer  is  the  request,  which 
we  make  to  God  in  praying.  The  need  of  the  soul  constrains  her 
to  seek  deliverance,  and  her  desire  urgeth  her  to  obtain  that  which 
is  good,  and  to  request  of  the  Lord  to  bestow  it.  As  God  describes 
prayer  by  requesting  that  which  is  good  of  him,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  37. 
"■  Daniel  desired  that  his  companions  would  request  mercies  of  the 
God  of  heaven."  Dan.  ii.  18.  Which  request  earnest  petitioners 
urge  vehe-nenly  with  the  Lord  God,  by  a  persevering  cleaving  to  the 
Lord,  and  "  wrestling"  with  him,  not  being  able  to  desist,  "  until 
he  hath  blessed  them,"  like  Jacob,  Gen  xxxii.  24 — 26,  and  by  a 
continual  uplifting  of  their  hearts  and  enforcing  of  their  words  in 
their  request,  that  they  may  importune  him  to  grant  their  request, 
like  Daniel,  "  O  Lord  he.>r,  O  Lord  forgive,  t)  Lord,  hearken  and 
do,  defer  not,"  Dan.  ix  19,  and  also  by  vehement  motives,  derived, 
one  while  from  his  honour,  which  will  be  manifested  thtreby,  like 
the  church,  Psalm  lxxix.  9,  "  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for 
the  p;lory  of  thy  tv.nie,  and  deliver  us,  and  purge  away  our  sins  for 
thy  name's  sake:"  another  while  from  his  promise,  like  Jacob, 
Gen.  x:<sii.  11,12.  "  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of 
my  brut:.!.;',  from  the  hand  of  Esau.  And  thou  saidest,  I  will  surely 
do  thee  good,"  tf.v..     Yea,  su(.a  u  petitioner  will  derive   his   motive? 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116— 119.  39T 

also  from  the  malice  and  power  of  his  enemies,  from  the  providence  of 
God,  who  hath  brought  him  into  such  a  situation,  from  the  intensity 
of  his  desire,  which  God  himself  halh  wrought  in  him,  and  from 
the  greatness  of  his  distress,  rendered  more  grievous  by  his  sins  ; 
"Pardon  mine  iniquity  ;  for  it  is  great,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxv.  11. 
If  our  prayer  shall  be  acceptable  to  God,  it  must  possess  such  qual- 
ifications and  properties,  as  are  acceptable  to  him,  and  it  must 
therefore  be  made, 

J."  With  humility."  We  must  "  humble  ourselves  deeply  in  the 
presence  of  the  divine  Majesty."  The  person  who  prays  aright  be- 
holds the  exalted  dignity  of  God,  and  he  sees  his  own  meanness, 
nothingness,  neediness,  filthy  sinfulness  and  impotence.  This  ex- 
cites a  holy  awe  for  the  Lord  in  his  soul,  it  causeth  him  to  abase  and 
abhor  himself,  and  it  teaches  him  to  desire  all  things  of  grace,  and 
to  submit  patiently  to  the  wise,  righteous,  and  sovereign  disposal  of 
God,  with  respect  to  the  measure,  the  time  and  the  place  of  the 
fulfilment  of  his  desire.  See  this  in  Abraham,  Gen.  xyiii.  in  Job. 
ch.  xlii.  5,  6,  in  David,  Psalm  cxxxi.  in  Isaiah,  ch.  vi.  5,  in  Daniel, 
ch.  ix.  and  most  emphatically  in  "  the  publican,  who  standing  afar 
off,  would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote 
upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  Luke 
xviii.  13. 

2.  But  although  the  praying  soul  humbles  herself  so  much,  she 
is  nevertheless  not  diffident  but  "  goes  with"  a  believing  confidence 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  she  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace 
to  nelp  her  in  time  of  need,"  Heb  iv.  16.  x.  19 — 22.  Her  need 
urges  her:  the  command  of  God  to  call  on  him  constrains  her,  so 
that  she  dares  not  forbear  :  his  call,  his  promises,  that  he  will  hear, 
and  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  aliure  the  soul;  and  "the  Spirit"  of 
the  Lord  "  leads"  her,  and  effects  "  an  access  for  her  to  the  Father," 
Eph.  ii.  18.  Yea,  "he  causes  her  to  cry,  and  cries  also  in  her, 
Abba,  Father,"  Rom.  viii.  15.     Gal.  iv.  6. 

3.  But  how  can  he,  who  contemplates  the  highness  of  God,  and 
his  own  odiousness  and  nothingness,  come  boldly  before  the  Lord; 
and  bow  down  before  the  high  God  ?  He  comes  in  the  name  of 
Christ.  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do," 
saith  he,  John  xiv.  13,  14.  The  name  of  Jesus  denotes  not  only 
his  proper  name  and  his  titles,  Mat.  i.  21,  Isaiah  ix.  5,  but  also  hi6 
person,  as  God  and  man,  and  as  Mediator,  John  i.  12,  his  merits,  I 
Cot.  vi.  1 1,  his  charge  and  command,  2  Thess,  iii.  6,  and  thus  also  his 
power  and  strength,  Acts  iii.  16.  To  pray  in  his  name,  signifies  in 
general,  to  go  through  him  unto  God.  and  to   request  all  things  o; 


398  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

him  for   Christ's  sake.     By  him   we    have  also  an   access  to  the 
Father,  according  to  the   words  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostle,  John 
xiv.  6.     Eph.  h.  IS.     But  we  pray  especially  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
Wien  we  (a)  draw  near  with  boldness,  relying  upon  the  right  which 
we  huve  in  him,  and  in  his  name :  "  In  him  we  have  boldness  and 
access  with   confidence   by   the  faith  of  him,"  saith   Paul,  Eph.  iii. 
12.     (b)  When  we  lay  hold  on  him  and  on  his  merits  by  an  active 
faith,  unite  ourselves  to  him,  and  in  this  manner  come  with  him  to 
the  throne,  and  refer  the  Father  to  Jesus  in  all  that  we  request,  that 
we  may  be  acceptable  in  him,  and  may  request  and  obtain  all  things 
for  his  sake.     Therefore  the  Saviour  saith,  John  xvi.  23.     "  What- 
soever ye    shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you." 
(c)  We  also  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  draw  near   and  offer  up  our 
petitions  to  God  upon  his  command  and  encouragement.     We  come 
then,  as  sent  by  him  ;  for  he  saith,   Mat.  vii.  7,    "Ask,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you,"  &c.     (d)   Also  when  we  apply  to  the   Father  upon 
the  foundation  of  his  merits  for  all  that  grace,  which  he  hath   pur- 
chased, and  plead  thereupon  before  his  throne,  "  with  the  answer  of 
a  good  conscience,"   1  Peter  iii.  21.    (e)  And  we  pray  not  less  in  his 
name,  when  we  are  influenced   by  his  power  and   Spirit,  while   we 
draw  near  to    God,  and  request   all  things   of  him.     It  is  •*  by  the 
Spirit,"  that  we  go  through  Christ  to  the  Father,    Eph.  ii.  18.     (f) 
Once  more  ;  we  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  request  aught  for  his 
sake  ;  as  Daniel  prayed  "  for  ths  Lord's  sake,"  Dan.  ix.  17.     Jesus 
desires  by  his  intercession  with  the  Father,  that  he  would   hear  and 
show   favour  to  his  delivered,  as  he  declares,  John  xvii.     To  apply 
then  to  the  Father  upon  the  foundation  of  the  will  and  of  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ  is  praying  in  his  name,     (g)  Finally,  we  do  this, 
when  we  commit  our  prayers  into  the  hands  of  the  Advocate,  that  he 
may  present  them  with  his  intercession  to  the  Father.    See  him  en- 
gaged in  this  work,  Rev.  viii.  3,  4. 

4.  The  believer,  praying  thus  in  the  name  of  Christ,  "  trusts  also 
that  God  will  certainly  hear  his  prayer,  although  he  is  unworthy  of 
it."  God  hears  pray i  r  according  to  Psalm  lxv.  2.  And  he  doth 
this  sometimes  by  granting  that  for  which  we  pray  :"  Jabez,  who 
was  more  honmnable  than  his  brethren,  called  on  the  God  of  Israel. 
saying,  O  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  Jx-.  And  God 
granted  him  his  request,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  He  doth  this,  eithei 
presently,  as  upon  the  prayer  of  Elijah  fire  fell  presently  from 
heaven,  and  c-.isumed  his  sacrifice,  1  Kings  xv'ni.  36 — 38,  or  some 
time  after.  Abraham  prayed  for  a  son,  and  God  promised  him  one, 
when  he  wab  seventy-fire  years  old  j  but  he  did  not  obtain  him,  be- 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  399 

fore  he  was  an  hundred  years  old,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  1  — 14. 
xv  2.  xxi.  5.  Sometimes  God  gives  upon  our  praying  that  which 
is  better  than  what  we  desire.  Abraham  prayed  that  lshmael,  the 
son  whom  he  had  by  his  b  ndmaid,  might  live  before  God,  as  the 
promised  seed  ;  but  the  Lord  promised  him  that  which  was  better, 
namely,  Isaac,  a  son  of  his  proper  wife,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  19.  But 
sometimes  Gcd  denies  that  which  a  person  desires,  and  yet  causes 
the  soul  to  acquiesce  in  the  denial,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  by 
affording  her  an  abundant  influence  of  grace.  Paul  "  prayed  thrice 
to  be  delivered  from  the  bufl'etmgs  of  Satan  ;"  but  it  did  not  please 
the  Lord  to  grant  him  his  request,  "  but  he  said,  My  grace  is  suf- 
ficient for  thee  :  for  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
Paul  acquiesced  in  this,  and  was  satisfied,  saying,  "  Most  gladly 
therefore  will  I  glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  me,"  2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10.  It  is  necessary  to  confide 
that  God  will  assuredly  hear  the  person  who  prays  believingly,  either 
in  one  way,  or  another  :  therefore  the  apostle  James  saith,  "  If  any 
of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  libe- 
rally, and  upbraideth  not  ;  and  it  shall  be  given  to  him  :  but  let  him 
ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering,"  Sec.  James  i-  5,  6.  "  Whatsoever 
things  ye  desire  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  I  hem,  and 
ye  shall  have  them,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Mark  xi.  24.  The  person 
who  calls  on  the  name  of  God  hath  indeed  a  sure  foundation  of 
trust  in  the  power,  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  and  in  the  merits, 
intercession  and  promise  of  Christ.  Doth  any  one  ask,  How  can  I 
know  that  God  heareth  my  prayer,  when  he  doth  not  presently  grant 
me  my  desire  upon  my  petition  ?  It  is  certain,  that  God  hears  our 
prayer,  when  we  pray  according  to  his  will  :  "  This  is  the  confi- 
dence that  we  have  in  him,  that  if  we  ask  any  tiling  according  to 
his  will,  he  heareth  us,"  saith  the  best  beloved  disciple  of  Jesus, 
1  John  v.  14.  The  Lord  also  sometimes  assures  his  praying  people 
by  his  .spirit,  that  he  hears  them,  and  particularly,  (a)  when  he 
affords  them  a  ready  and  free  access  to  him  ;  for  he  shows  then  that 
his  ears  are  open  to  the  prayer  of  faith  ;  when  it  is  otherwise,  "  he 
covers  himself  with  a  cloud,  that  their  prayer  may  not  pass  through," 
Lam.  iii.  44.  (b)  When  he  gives  the  person  who  prays  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  so  that  he  prays  heartily,  copiously,  and  with  perseve- 
rance. This  is  an  evidence,  that  he  will  hear  our  prayer  ;  for  the 
apostle  teacheth  us  this,  Rom.viii.  26,  27,  (c)  Sometimes  the  Lord 
shows  the  soul,  that  he  is  pleased  with  her  prayer,  he  nods,  as  it 
were,  to  her,  and  grants  her  rest,  peace,  confidence,  and  an  expec- 
tation that  Jie  will  fulfill  her  desire,  so  that  she  must  say  with  the 


400  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

church,  "  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord  :  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my 
salvaiion  :  my  God  will  hear  rue,"  IViicha  vii.  7-  (d)  But  the  soul 
becomes  most  clearly  persuaded,  that  her  petition  is  heard,  when 
God  secretly  speaks  and  saith  to  the  soul,  Be  of  good  eheer,  "  I 
will  do  this  same  thing  also  of  which  thou  hast  spoken."  bee  Lxod. 
xxxiii.  17.      Isaiah  xxxviii.  5. 

5.  According  to  the  text,  we  must  "  make  our  request  known 
to  Cod  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving."  It  is  also 
proper,  that  he  who  requests  and  obtains  aught  of  Cod,  should 
cheerfully  acknowledge  it,  and  give  him  the  honour  of  it.  It  is 
true,  that  as  long  as  we  have  not  obtained  our  request,  or  the  evi- 
dence that  we  are  heard,  we  cannot  thank  the  Lord  for  it.  The 
praying  soul  hath  nevertheless  sufficient  cause  to  thank  the  Loid. 
She  must  praise  the  glory  of  the  Lord:  former  benefits  must  be  ac- 
knowledged ;  and  her  happiness,  that  she  may  draw  near  to  him, 
may  obtain  the  Spirit  of  prayer,  and  trust  that  she  will  be  heard, 
must  surely  cause  her  to  honour  the  Lord. 

6.  But  shall  we  do  this  great  work  remissly  and  carelessly  ? 
no,  it  must  be  done  with  "  intense  earnestness."  It  was  foretold 
of  Christians,  that  they  should  be  "  earnest  supplicants,"  Zeph. 
iii.  10.  They  are  exceedingly  desirous  of  the  fulfilment  of  their 
request;  and  this  renders  them  vehemently  and  perseveringly  ear- 
nest to  obtain  it :  "  Continue  instant  in  prayer,"  thus  Paul  adrrion- 
isheth,  Coll.  iv.  2.  And  therefore  their  souls  are  actively  intent 
with  respect  to  God,  to  themselves,  their  request,  faith  and  trust, 
and  they  also  attend  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  will  conduct 
toward  them,  whether  their  prayer  will  be  acceptable  to  him,  or 
whether  he  will  oppose  them  :  and  so  they  '  Match  to  see  what  he 
will  say  unto  them,"  Hah.  ii.  1.  "  Satan  indeed  stands  at  the  rig!. 
hand"  of  the  person  who  prays,  "  when  he  stands  before  the  Lord" 
with  his  petitions,  "that  he  may  resist  him,"  and  may  suggest  every 
discouragement  to  the  soul,  bee  this,  Zech.  iii.  1,  2.  But  ihc  ear- 
nest supplicant  will  not  become  remiss  on  this  account  but  will 
call  upon  God  with  greater  zeal,  and  with  more  vehemence,  like 
his  Saviour,  "who,  being  in  an  agony,  prayed  moie  earnestly," 
Luke  xxii.  44. 

7.  This  earnestness  is  nevertheless  not  a  mere  noise,  neither  is  it 
effected  u  by  our  power  and  might,  hut  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord," 
Zech.  iv.  6.  For  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  as  Jesus  saith,  John  iv.  24. 
And  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him  with  our  spirits,  and  with  the 
inmost  emotions  of  our  snuls,  and  so  also  in  truth  and  upright- 
ness.    We    must  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  Ileb.  x.  22.     But  to 


"XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119. 

piv>y  in 'spirit  and  in  truth  denofes  also  to  pray-  without  being  con- 
fined by  God  to  any  place  of  prayer,  as  the  church  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament was  limited  with  her  solemn  prayers  to  Jerusalem.  See 
John  iv.  20—24. 

8.  Although  we  must  pray  with  the  spirit,  nevertheless  the  body, 
which  is  the  Lord's,  must  also  be  active  in  this  work  with  such  ges- 
tures, as  manifest  a  becoming  sense,  and  reverence  for  God,  and  ex- 
press the  praying  posture  of  the   soul.     Whether  in  grievous    dis- 
tress we  "  fall  with  our  faces  to.  the  earth,"  like  Joshua,  Joshua  vii. 
6  ;  or  whether  from   reverence  we  "  bow  down  and   kneel,"  with 
the  church,  Psalm  xcv.  6  ;  or  to  manifest  our  confidence,  and  read- 
iness to    serve*    we  "  stand,"    with  Abraham,   Gen.    xviii.  22,  23. 
We  must  also  "  lift  up  our  hands  with  our  hearts  unto  heaven,"    as 
the   church  would  do,  Lam.  iii.  41.     And    we   must   "lift    up   our 
eyes  to  heaven,"  with  Jesus,   John    xvii.  1,  or  to  testify  our  unwor- 
thiness,  we  must  cast  them  down  with  the  publican,  Luke  xviii.   13, 
II.  There  is  no  work,  for  which  wc  are  less  qualified,  than  pray- 
ing in  a.suitable  manner  to  the  Lord.     The  apostles  were  conscious 
of  this,  and  therefore  said  to  their  Master,  «  Lord  teach  us   to  pray. 
And  he  said  unto  them,  After  this  manner  pray  ye,     Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven,  Hallowed  be  thy  name,"  he.  Matt.  vi.  9 — 13. 
Luke  xi.   1 — 4.     Of  which  pattern  of  prayer  we  may   say  with  pro- 
priety, that  Christ  gave   it,  that  we  might  offer  up  our  desires  to 
God   with  the  selfsame   words ;    for   he   puts  kthe  words  into  our 
mouths.     After  the  same  manner  the  prophet  saith  to  Israel,  Hosea 
xiv.  2,  3,  "  Take  with   you  words,  and  tu.-n   to  the  Lord  :  say  unto 
him,  take  away  all  iniquity,    and  receive  us   graciously,"  &c.     But 
no  person   will  admit  that  we  ought  always  to  make  use  of  this  pat- 
tern, and  of  no  other,  when  we  pray.     We  do  not  read  that  the  apos- 
tles ever  used  this  pattern  word  for  word,  when   they  prayed  :    we 
therefore  conceive  that  the  principle  design  of  Jesus  was  to   teach 
believers  for    what  things,  and  in  what  manner  they  ought    to  pray* 
And  this  pattern  is  also  a  most  perfect  model  of  a  well  ordered  prayer  ; 
for  we  have    here,    (1)  A  most  suitable  address  to   God.     (2)  Six 
petitions,  the  first  three  of  which  have   an  immediate  reference   to 
God,  and  the  three  last  to  ourselves.     Or   we   may   divide   the    six 
petitions  into  one  petition  for  the  chief  end,  to  wit,  the  hallowing  of 
the  Father's  name,  and  the  five  last  petitions,  as  means  for  obtaining 
that  chief  endo     Which  means  are   either  petitions  for  good  thin gss 
to  wit,  spiritual  in  the  second  and  third  petition,   and  bodily  in   the 
fourth  petition  :  or  petitions  for  deprecating  evil,  both  that    which  is 
past,  in  the  fifth  petition,  and  that  which  is  to  come  in  the  sixth  p<?- 
Vol,  ii.  3  A 


402  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

tition.  (3)  And  we  have  then  in  this  prayer  of  the  Lord  the  cone's: 
sion,  designed  to  ascribe  suitable  praise  to  the  Lord,  and  to  move 
him  by  his  own  glory  and  praise,  and  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the 
trust  of  the  true  petitioner.  This  pattern  is  wonderfully  sententious 
and  concise,  manifesting  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of  the  greatest 
Advocate  with  the  Father.  We  need  not  however  seek  in  the  six 
petitions,  and  in  the  conclusion  following  them  certain  prophecies 
of  seven  successive  periods,  and  account  for  this  by  the  wisdom  of 
the  Lord,  as  some  do  :*  for  we  cannot  produce  either  from  this 
prayer,  or  from  elsewhere  any  decisive  proof  of  this,  and  therefore 
it  doth  not  appear  proper  to  denominate  our  own  ungrounded  inven- 
tions divine  wisdom  ;  and  besides  this,  we  may  also  see  that  those 
who  judge  thus  are  prejudiced  in  favour  of  those  seven  successive 
periods,  for  they  do  not  consider  the  address  to  be  prophetical,  as 
they  do  the  conclusion,  because  they  should  then  have  eight  periods. 
If  the  prophetical  sense  of  this  prayer  were  wellgrounded,  we  should 
not  then  be  able  to  use  the  several  petitions  at  all  times  in  their  prop- 
er emphasis.  If  our  method  would  permit,  we  should  shoAV  that 
we  could  refer  the  conclusion  of  this  prayer,  as  well,  and  with  as 
much  propriety,  to  the  first  period  of  the  church,  as  the  first  petition 
is  forced  to  that  period,  and  we  should  find  it  thus  with  all  the  six 
petitions,  which  are  applied  to  the  other  periods.  For  instance, 
when  was  it  most  proper  to  pray,  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  ?  was 
it  not  in  the  time  of  the  heathen  persecutions,  and  of  the  antichrstian 
seductions  ?  This  they  nevertheless  refer,  not  to  the  sixth,  but  to 
the  foregoing  petitions.  They  think  that  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
under  the  New  Testament  is  expressed  by  the  word  a/ihesis  ;  but 
we  have  that  word  in  the  sixth  petition.  Ought  they  not  then,  ac- 
cording to  that  supposition,  to  refer  this  petition  to  the  time  before  the 
death  of  Christ,  when  believers  prayed,  as  they  pretend,  for  ajihetis  ? 
Observe,  in  this  manner  do  men  intongle  themselves,  when  in  order 
to  appear  wise,  they  exceed  their  proper  measure  by  farsought  in- 
ventions. 

III.  That  we  may  at  length  conclude  our  explanation  of  prayer,  we 
will  inquire  in  the  first  place,  "  why  it  is  nee  ssary  for  Christians  to 
pray  ?"     Every  one  will  acknowledge  that  Christians  are  bound  to 

*  By  these  our  author  understands  the  Cocceians,  who  expound  many  pas- 
sages oi'  scripture  as  prophecies,  which  are  not  considered  as  such  by  the 
generality  of  interpreters.  Thev  also  divide  the  whole  season  of  the  New 
Testament  church  into  seven  periods,  and  endeavour  in  a  very  fanciful  man- 
ner, to  find  them  in  many  passages  of  scripture,  in  which  there  doth  not 
appear  to  be  the  least  probable  hint  of  them. 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  403 

pray,  unless  we  will  except  the  disciples  of  Van  Hattem,  who  only- 
give  thanks,  and  do  not  pray,  from  their  profane  opinion  concerning 
the  Godhead,  and  the  secret  will  of  God,  as  the  rule  of  our  conduct- 
But  those  who  understand  the  mystery  suspect  them  with  reason  of 
denying  the  existence  of  a  God,  and  of  atheism,  and  consider  them 
theiufore  as  unfit  and  incapable  of  being  instructed  by  natural  and 
scriptural  reasons.  They  who  believe  an  infinite,  simple,  and  su- 
preme Spirit  may  be  easily  convinced,  that  prayer  is  necessary  for 
Christians  ;  for  (a)  "  prayer  is  the  chief  part  of  thankfulness,  which 
God  requires  of  us."  Christians  are  delivered  by  the  Son  of  God 
with  a  great  deliverance  ;  it  becomes  them  then  to  acknowledge  it 
thankfully,  which  they  do  especially  vUien  they  pray;  for  we 
thereby  acknowledge  our  dependence  on  God,  we  contemplate  and 
celebrate  in  a  practical  manner  all  his  excellencies  and  perfections, 
and  we  engage  that  we  will  serve  him,  yea,  prayer  is  a  service, 
which  we  offer  to  God,  in  order  to  manifest  our  thankfulness  ;  for 
the  whole  service  of  God  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  of  "  calling 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  iv.  26.  Joel  ii.  32,  Therefore 
"  exalting  the  Lord  as  the  God  of  his  people,  and  worshipping  be- 
fore him,  because  he  is  holy,"  are  joined  together,  Psalm  xcix.  9. 
God  also  requires  this  of  his  delivered  people,  as  the  principal  part 
of  thankfulness,  Psalm  i.  14,  15,  Philip,  iv.  6  Rev.  xv.  4. 
(b)  "  God  will  give  his  grace  and  his  holy  Spirit  to  those  only,  who- 
with  sincere  desires  ask  them  of  him,  and  are  thankful  for  them." 
The  Lord  knows  the  needs  of  his  children,  he  hath  purposed  to  sup- 
ply them,  and  Christ  hath  purchased  all  things  for  them;  but  he 
hath  appointed  prayer  to  be  a  mean  of  obtaining  our  desires,  and  he 
will  bestow  nothing,  except  upon  and  through  prayer.  When  God 
had  promised  great  things  to  his  people,  and  had  assured  them  that 
he  would  do  those  things  for  them,  he  said  that  he  would  neverthe- 
less "be  inquired  of  that  he  might  do  those  things,"  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
36,  37.  See  also  how  David  and  Daniel  prayed  to  God  for  what  he 
had  already  promised,  that  he  would  certainly  do  it,  2  Sam.  vii.  27„ 
Ban.  ix.  2,  3« 


APPLICATION. 

Although  the  Pelagians  will  allow  that  Christians  ought  to  pray, 
and  although  they  also  pray  after  their  manner,  nevertheless  they 


iO.i  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

deny  by  their  doctrine  the  necessity  of  prayer,  when  they  assert 
that  man  can  p<  rform  and  merit  all  things  by  his  freewill.  For 
when  a  person  bath  an  ability  to  effect  and  merit  all  virtuous  good, 
what  need  hath  Ue  to  pray  to  God  for  his  grace,  and  his  Spirit? 
Therefore  when  the  Jesuits,  Socinians  and  Remonstrants  pray  with 
a  Pelagian  spir.t,  they  only  fl-iUtr. 

But  what  think  ye,  hearers,  do  ye  ako  pray  ?  Perhaps  ye  will 
wonder,  and  be  displeased,  if  i  tell  you  that  the  most  of  you  do  not 
yet  pray,  and  have  never  yet  prayed  :  it  is  nevertheless  true,  and  it 
appears  very  evidently.  For,  (a)  many  know  neither  the  Triune 
God,  nor  themselves,  as  desparately  miserable,  so  as  to  be  concern- 
ed, and  they  have  not  the  least  desire  to  Go-!,  nor  to  fellowship  with 
him,  nor  to  his  blessed  benefits.  Is  not  tbia  true  ?  hath  any  active 
desire  to  enjoy  the  Lord  ever  possessed  your  minds  ?  doth  your 
misery  affect  you  so,  that  it  afflicts  you,  and  u  to  cry  to  God  ? 

Hath  it  ever  been  your  earnest  endeavour  to  embrace  the  Son  ot 
God  for  grace  and  salvation,  and  thus  to  attain  to  a  condition,  that  is 
acceptable  to  God,  in  order  to  have  a  right  and  an  ability  to  pray  to 
him  ?  (b)  It  is  true,  ye  pray  also  after  your  manner  :  but  what  and 
how  do  ye  pray  ?  ye  say  your  ordinary  forms  and  lessons,  like  a 
schoolboy  to  his  master,  ye  have  done  this,  and  nought  besides  from 
your  youth  up  hitherto.  But  I  pray  vou.  consider  whether  this  be 
praying.  Ye  surely  do  not  understand  the  things  which  ye  express 
with  those  good  and  suitable  words  and  forms  :  do  ye  not  merely  pre- 
sent God  with  a  certain  number  of  words  without  matter  and  without 
heart,  as  the  Papists  offer  a  certain  number  of  mumbled  prayers  to 
God  and  the  sain's  ?  Do  not  your  souls  remain  far  from  the  Lord, 
while  ye  pray  thus  ?  do  ye  express  your  desires  to  God,  and  entreat 
his  favour  by  such  praying?  doth  that  ordinary  prayer  exhibit  vour 
particular  need,  desire  and  request?  have  ye  always  the  same  need 
and  request,  contrary  to  the  temper  and  experience  of  sincere 
Christians  I  Friends,  consider  whether  ye  do  by  these  ordinary 
lessons  humble  yousselves,  acquire  faith  and  boldness,  draw  neat 
in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,  obtain  a  ground  of  confidence,  th::t 
God  will  hear  you,  and  whether  ye  be  influenced  to  hearty  thanks- 
givings, and  to  an  intense  earnestness  ?  your  prayers  are  certainly 
words  only,  without  matter  and  without  heart.  And  how  detestably 
do  many  conduct,  that  they  dare  call  upon  God  on  their  beds,  al- 
though they  are  in  health,  like  the  carefess  Israelites,  "  who  cried 
unto  God,  but  hot  with  their  hearts,  and  howled  upon  their  beds," 
H«  >  a  \ii.  II.  (c.)  IVihaps  some  among  us  will  detest  such  a  con- 
duct, and  think  that  they  quit  the:  ■  —11,  because  they   pray 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  40s 

from  their  heads,  and  either  standing  or  kneeling.  But  is  it  only 
from  your  heads,  and  not  from  your  hearts,  how  can  such  a  fabrica- 
ted speech  be  acceptable  to  God  ?  for  it  is  not  then  an  address  of  your 
soul  to  God,  it  is  not  a  making  of  your  desire  krown  to  him,  nor  a 
request  that  he  would  fulfil  it,  but  merely  words  concerning  neces- 
sary and  desirable  things,  and  your  souls  do  not  draw  near  to  God 
with  ardent  desires  but  remain  cold  and  estranged  from  him.  For 
thus  ye  draw  near  to  him  with  your  mouths  and  honour  him  with 
your  lips,  but  remove  your  hearts  far  from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.  13. 

If  this  be  your  case,  how  wretched  are  ye  !  ye  ha%e  never  yet 
prayed  :  at  least  your  praying  hath  not  been  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
Ye  cannot  indeed  pray,  ye  are  not  qualified  for  it :  your  prayer  is 
sin,  and  abominable,  it  displeaseth  the  Lord  ;  ye  often  lie  in  your 
ptaying,  when  ye  thank  him  with  your  prayers,  that  he  hath  redeem- 
ed you  by  Jesus  Christ,  since  by  speaking  only  words,  and  always 
without  heart  in  praying,  ye  yourselves  show  that  ye  neither  know 
your  misery,  nor  have  ever  earnestly  desired,  nor  sought  the  Re- 
deemer. He  wdl  also  not  hear  you :  for  "  he  heareth  not  sinners," 
John  ix  31.  Doth  he  give  you  that  which  is  good,  it  is  not  in  lm 
favour  with  and  in  Christ. 

Say  not,  this  is  a  hard  saying,  who  can  bear  it  ?  if  this  be  so,  whi 
should  we  pray  any  longer  ?  must  we  then  forbear  to  pray?  We 
speak  thus  only  from  love  to  you,  that  we  may  bring  you  to  your- 
selves, and  that  ye  may  learn  how  to  pray  aright  and  acceptably  to 
God.  Ye  cannot  pray  acceptably  to  God,  and  ye  may  nevertheless 
not  forbear  to  pray :  "  God  pours  out  his  wrath  upon  them,  who  call 
not  upon  his  name,"  Psalm  Ixxix.  10.  Jer.  x.  25.  And  therefore 
only  know  your  wretched  and  miserable  condition;  that  your  dan- 
ger may  urge  you  to  pray  ;  it  is  our  ordinary  saying,  that  danger 
leaches  a  person  to  pray.  When  Paul  was  discouraged  on  account 
of  his  misery,  he  learned  how  to  pray  acceptably  to  God,  so  that  the 
Lord  testified  of  him,  "Behold  he  prayeth,"  Acts.  ix.  11.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  once  saw  your  deplorable  condition,  that  none  of  your 
sins  were  yet  forgiven,  that  God  did  yet  behold  you  in  anger,  that 
ye  were  unable  to  do  what  is  necesary  for  you  to  do,  in  order  to  be 
saved,  that  ye  had  never  yet  prayed  aright,  that  ye  cannot  pray  so, 
and  that  therefore  if  ye  die  as  ye  are  at  present,  ye  must  perish  : 
would  ye  not  be  urged  by  your  danger  to  retire,  and  enter  into  se- 
cret, to  fall  upon  your  knees,  and  cry  to  God  for  grace  ?  doth  not 
a  stammering  child,  when  he  is  hungry,  and  suffers  pain,  know  how 
to  complain  of  such  matters  to  his  parents,  and  to  call  upon  them 
for  help,  and  rs  not  that  stammering  language  of  the  child  accepta- 


406  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

ble  to  his  parents  ?  would  not  ye  then,  if  ye  were  spiritually  hungry, 
and  had  a  painful  sense  of  your  misery,  be  able  to  complain,  and  to 
call  upon  God  for  his  grace,  and  would  not  he  be  pleased  with  such 
addresses,  though  ye  prayed  ever  so  meanly  and  stammeringly  ?  1 
believe  he  would.  And  therefore  pause,  and  attend  a  while  to  your- 
woful  misery,  contemplate  it,  and  be  concerned  on  account  of  it, 
that  ye  may  with  fervent  prayers,  "  seek  to  God,  and  direct  your 
speech  unto  him,"  as  Eiiphas  adviseth,  Job  v.   8. 

But,  believers  and  redeemed  ye  who  know  how  to  pray  through 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  engage  often  in  hearty  prayer. 
It  is  a  difficult  work,  the  flesh  is  unwilling  to  exercise  itself  in  it. 
I  consider  it  therefore  proper  to  exhort  you  to  attend  to  it  with  ear- 
nestness. For  (a)  your  God,  your  Father,  your  Redeemer  and  Sanc- 
tified hath  enjoined  it  on  you  in  his  word,  Psalm  I.  15.  Jer.  xxxiii. 
l>.  Matt.  vii.  7.  He  often  stirs  your  souls  up  to  it.  Your  heart 
saith  not  less  than  David's  in  the  Lord's  stead,  u  Seek  my  Lee," 
Psalm  xxvii.  8  ;  will  ye  not  then  echo  with  him,  "Thy  face  will  I 
beek  I"  Dare  ye  be  disobedient  to  that  universal  and  great  com- 
mand ?  (b)  It  was  foretold  of  you  :  the  Lord  foretold  in  ancient 
days  concerning  our  times  and  people,  that  "  all  flesh  should  ronie 
and  worship  before  him,"  Isaiah  lxvi.  23.  He  saith)  Zeph,  iii.  9, 
10,  "  Surely  I  will  then  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  that 
they  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one 
consent.  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  ray  suppliants,  even 
the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  offering,"  Is  it  in- 
deed your  desire  to  defeat  the  prophecies,  which  have  been  formerly 
uttered  concerning  you,  and  not  rather  to  confirm  them  by  earnest 
and  hearty  prayer?,  ?  it  is  your  duty  to  fulfil  these  prophecies  by 
your  conduct.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  his  "  son  Timothy,"  1  Tim. 
i.  18,  "  This  charge  I  commit  unto  thee,  according  to  the  prophe- 
cies, which  went  before  on  thee,  that  thou  by  them  raightest  war  a 
food  warfare."  (c)  Have  not  all  the  saints  prayed  frequently  and 
fervently  ?  Abel's  sacrifice,  with  which  God  was  well  pleased,  was 
not  unaccompanied  with  prayer.  Enoch  walked  with  God  by  con- 
stant prayer:  in  what  other  manner  did  Abraham  manifest  that  he 
was 'a  friend  of  God?  Isr.cc  went  into  the  field  to  pray:*  Jacob 
arose  in  the  night,  and  sent  his  household  from  him,  over  the  brook, 
that  he  might  wrestle  alone  with  God.  The  time  would  fail  me,  if 
I  should  speak  of  Joshua,  of  Samuel,  of  Jahez,  of  all  the  holy  pro- 
>Kels  and  apostles.     Wherefore   seeing   we   are   compassed  about 

■  Vlii6  •£  ajrrecab'e  to  the  Dtrtch  translation 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  407 

v,  ii.ii  50  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  same  way, 
and  look  especially  to  the  chief  Captain,  and  great  leader  of  prayer 
Jesus,  who,  according  to  Luke  xxi.  37,  "  was  in  the  daytime  teach- 
ing in  the  temple,  and  at  night  went  out,  and  lodged  in  the  mount," 
without  doubt  to  pray  See  Mark  i  25.  (d)  Ye  have  liberty,  and 
that  great  privilege  above  others,  that  ye  may  come  day  by  day  to 
your  Father,  and  speak  familiarly  to  him.  In  ancient  times  the 
Jews  only  had  liberty  to  call  upon  God,  as  near  at  hand,  and  other 
nations  were,  and  remained  strangers  to  the  Lord,  as  Moses  cries 
out  with  admiration  of  this.  Deut.  iv  7,  "  What  nation  is  there  so 
great,  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as  the  Lord  our  God  is  in 
all  things  that  we  call  upon  him  for  ?"  But  believers  of  the  Gen- 
tiles have  now,  as  the  Jews  had  then,  '  an  access  through  Christ  by 
one  Spirit  to  the  Father,"  Eph  ii.  18.  formerly  none  but  the 
Highpriest  was  permitted  to  appear  solemnly  once  a  year  in  the 
earthly  holy  of  holies,  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  the  people 
of  God  through  him  ;  but,  believers,  ye  have  now  all  of  you  liberty, 
and  indeed  every  day,  yea,  every  hour,  to  go  into  a  better  holy  place, 
through  Jesus,  the  true  Highpriest.  Will  ve  not  now  make  use  of 
your  liberty,  and  that  great  privilege  ?  Hear  what  Paul  saith,  Hcb. 
x.  19 — 22,  "  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he 
hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh  ; 
and  having  an  Highpriest  over  the  house  of  God:  let  us  draw  near 
with  a  true  heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith."  (e)  Ye,  believers,  and 
true  Christians,  even  ye  have  an  ability  to  pray.  The  sinner,  who 
is  in  a  state  of  nature,  is  bound  hand  and  foot,  through  his  ignorance 
and  inability  with  respect  to  prayer  :  but  the  Lord,  according  to  his 
promise,  Zech.  xii.  10,  hath  "poured  out  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
of  supplication  upon  you  ;"  and  according  to  Rom.  viii.  15.  Gal. 
iv.  5,  "  he  hath  given  you  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  which  erieth  Abba 
Father:  yea,  which  prayeth  for  and  in  you  with  groanings  that  can- 
not be  uttered,"  Rom.  viii.  26.  Will  ye  then  grieve  and  quench 
that  Spirit  of  prayer  by  your  sluggishness  and  listlessness  ?  No, 
awake,  and  "  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  you,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  Tim.  i.  6.  (t)  What  a  glorious,  delightful  and  pow- 
erful work  is  prayer  !  the  practice  of  it  confers  honour  upon  a  per- 
son :  "  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  ;  for  Jabez  cal- 
led upon  the  God  of  Israel,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  See  this  also  of 
Samuel,  Psalm,  xcix.  6.  Prayer  is  iike  Jacob's  ladder,  by  which 
we  climb  up  to  heaven,  and  like  the  wings  of  an  eagle,  by  which  we 
mount  up  to  heaven  :  by  prayer  we  are  with  Paul  caught  up  into  ths 


408  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

paradise  of  God,  the  third  heaven  :  we  enter  in  through  the  inmost 
veil ;  we  see  him  who  is  invisible  ;  we  speak  to  God  as  a  man  speaks 
to  his  friend,  we  walk  with  him,  we  cleave  to  him,  and  acquaint  our- 
selves  with  him  :  by  prayer  we  can  shut  and  open  heaven,  with  Eli- 
jah, overcome  God,  with  Jacob,  and  with  Moses,  restrain  his  anger, 
so  that  he  will  not  consume  Israel.  What  think  ye  Christians,  have 
ye  not  a  desire  to  such  a  great  work,  and  will  ye  not  give  yourselves 
wholly  to  it?  (g)  A  Christian  is  in  a  good  or  evil  state,  according 
as  he  prays  much  or  little,  remissly  or  earnestly  :  his  spiritual  life 
must  languish  and  decline  when  he  is  heanless  in  this  duty  ;  but 
when  it  is  otherwise,  he  is  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and 
grows  like  the  calves  of  the  stall,  (h)  Ye  complain  of  corporal  and 
spiritual  afflictions  ;  but  whence  do  they  proceed  ?  do  they  not  from 
your  praying  so  seldom,  and  in  such  a  heartless  manner  ?  the  apos- 
tle James  saith,  "  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not,"  James  iv.  2. 
God  suffers  you,  as  it  were,  to  dwell,  like  the  rebellious,  in  a  dry 
land,  that  ye  may  pray  earnestly  to  him  :  "  I  will  go,  and  return  to 
my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  my  face  : 
in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early,"  saith  God,  Hosea  v.  14. 
<'  He  would  bring  a  third  part  "  of  his  people  "  into  the  fire  :"  but 
they  should  then  also  call  upon  his  name,"  Zech.  xiii,  9.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  exercised  yourselves  much  in  prayer,  would  ye  not 
obtain  more  than  ye  do  ?  "  He  gives  liberally  to  him  who  prays, 
and  upbraideth  not,"  James  i.  6.  "  He  heareth  prayer,"  and  there* 
fore  "all  flesh  must  come  to  him,"  Psalm  lxv.  2.  See  Isaiah 
xxx.  18,  19.  Jer.  xxix.  11 — 14.  The  Lord  doth  still  give  you 
much,  and  ye  are  pleased  with  it,  though  ye  pray  little  :  but  when 
he  gives  you  that  which  is  good  upon  your  praying,  it  is  then  a 
double  blessing,  which  causeth  you  to  rejoice  twice,  once  because 
lie  gives  you  that  which  is  good,  and  once  because  he  hears  your 
prayer.  Do  ye  see  your  duty  and  do  ye  delight  in  it,  conduct  your- 
selves then  well  in  it ;  and  particularly, 

1.  Beware  that  ye  do  not  become  slothful  with  respect  to  it. 
Praying  is  a  difficult  work,  we  must  encourage  ourselves,  and  exert 
all  our  strength  for  it,  and  must  be  intent  upon  it.  It  is  therefore  a 
hateful  conduct,  and  hurtful  to  the  soul,  to  study  sometimes  from 
mere  sluggishness  to  defer  prayer,  until  this  or  that  opportunity,  and 
to  be  inwardly  wellpleased,  when  we  are  hindered  by  some  accident^ 
or  can  pray  only  in  a  cursory  manner.  Conscience  saith,  it  is  time 
for  you  to  seek  the  Lord,  but  your  listlessness  hinders  you  from 
setting  about  it,  except  in  a  slothful  manner,  and  ye  depart  thus 
further  and  further  from  the   Lord,    who    hides   his  face    from  th~ 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119*  409 

soul.  The  spouse  slept,  while  her  heart  was  awake  :  when  her 
bridegroom  knocked,  she  was  so  overcome  with  spiritual  drowsiness, 
that  she  suffered  him  to  stand  at  the  door ;  but  he  went  his  way, 
and  what  distress  did  she  experience,  and  what  pains  was  she  obliged 
to  take,  before  he  would  suffer  himself  to  be  entreated  by  her,  Song 
v.  2—8. 

2.  Take  heed  that  an  unbelieving  fear  do  not  beset  you,  at  least, 
that  it  do  not  hinder  you  from  praying.  The  corruption  of  your 
heart,  your  ill  behaviour,  your  falling  repeatedly  into  sin  ought  in- 
deed to  render  you  humble,  and  induce  you  to  stand  afar  off,  hke 
the  publican,  and  cry  only  for  grace  ;  but  these  things  ought  not  to 
drive  you  from  the  Lord,  nor  cause  you  to  despair,  as  though  there 
were  no  grace,  nor  mercy  with  the  Lord  for  you  ;  for  by  acting  thus 
ye  dishonour  God,  as  if  his  grace  and  mercy  could  not  overmatch 
your  sins,  and  could  not  swallow  your  sin  up.  The  soul  saith  some- 
times indeed  with  the  people  of  God,  "  If  my  transgressions  and 
my  sins  be  upon  me,  and  I  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  I  then 
live.'  but  the  Lord  saith,  As  I  live  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,"  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10,  1 1.  Are  ye  not  grieved  for  your  sins, 
will  ye  hold  them  fast  ;  remain  then  aloof,  and  flee  from  the  Lord, 
like  Cain  and  Judas  ;  but  do  ye  seek  to  be  delivered  from  your  sins 
and  sinfulness,  "  cast  not  then  away  your  confidence,  which  hath  a 
great  recompence  of  reward,"  Heb.  x.  35*. 

3.  Watch  against  wandering  thoughts  ;  for  these  remove  the  heart 
far  from  the  Lord,  even  when  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our  mouths. 
Do  they  beset  you,  endeavour  to  banish  them  from  you  ;  disengage 
your  minds  from  them.  Are  ye  not  able,  propose  your  requests 
then,  not  with  many,  but  with  few  words,  and  do  not  make  "  use  of 
vain  repetitions,"  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  Saviour,  Mat.  vi.  7. 
We  must  therefore  take  good  heed  that  we  do  not  hurry  too  much, 
in  order  to  finish  our  prayer,  and  utter  only  many  words  in  haste, 
and  also  that  wc  do  not  limit  ourselves  to  a  certain  time,  praying 
just  so  long,  and  no  longer :  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let 
not  thy  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  ;  for  God  is  in 
heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  ;  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few,"  Eccl. 
v.  2. 

4.  None  of  us  may  think  that  he  may  abstain  from  praying,  when 
he  is  not  influenced  in  just  such  or  such  a  particular  manner  by  the 
Spirit  of  prayer.  It  is  true,  we  c;.nnot  pray  aright  without  his  pre- 
venting influence  ;  yet  we  may  not  forbear  to  pray,  when  we  do  not 
enjoy  that  influence,  but  the  experience  of  our  inability,  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  also  worketh  in  us,  should  urge  and  induce  us  to  pray 

Vol.  ii.  3  B 


410  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

vehemently,  and  we  shall  experience  that  the  Lord  will  recorr.pence 
ou!  zeal,  and  that  ne  will,  as  lie  hath  promised,  Isaiah  !>:iv.  5,  "  meet 
those  who  remember  h;m  in  his  ways."  Therefore  the  soul  oui,ht 
also  to  look  rip  to  the  Lord,  and  to  depend  upon  him  for  the  prom- 
ised "  Sp;rit  of  grace  and  of  supplications,"  Zech.  xii.  10. 

5.  Pray  for  yourselves,  but  also  for  the  community.  It  behooves 
you  to  mention  the  land  and  the  place  of  your  habitation  to  the 
Lord.  God  required  that  they  who  were  carried  away  captive  should 
pray  for  Babylon,  Jer.  xxix.  7.  How  much  more  then  ought  we 
to  remember  in  cur  prayers  this  good  land,  in  which  we  enjoy 
liberty  and  happiness !  And  since  the  prosperity  of  the  land  de- 
pends greatly  upon  the  magistrates,  we  ought  also  to  "  pray  for  kings, 
and  all  that  arc  id  authority  ;  that  we  may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable 
lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  1  Tim. 
ii.  1,  23.  Forget  not  your  lamily  and  children  :  Isaac  prayed  for 
his  wife,  Gen.  xxv  21.  Abraham  for  Ishmael,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  and 
David  for  his  child,  when  it  was  sick,  2  Sam.  xii-  15,  16.  But  the 
church  of  the  Lord,  "  Jerusalem,"  ou.^ht  more  especially  to  '*  come 
into  your  mind,"  Jer.  Ii.  50.  "  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto 
Zion  :  build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,"  said  David  to  the  Lord, 
although  he  was  sufficiently  burthened  with  his  own  affliction,  Psalm 
li     .8. 

6.  Unite  with,  and  forsake  not  the  ordinary  prayers  of  the  church  ; 
for  the  Lord  manifests  himself  present  with  his  church,  and  he 
hears  those  prayers  :  "  when  only  two  agree  touching  any  thing 
that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father,"  saith 
Jesus,  ivjat.  xviii.  19.  Masters  and  mistresses  of  families  ought 
also  to  pray  for,  and  with  their  whole  family  :  "  Isaac  prayed  for, 
and  in  the  presence  of  his  wife,"  Gen.  xxv.  21  How  can  families, 
:.n  which  f  mily  praye  s  are  neglected,  be  considered  as  godly  ?  they 
cannot  certainly  expect  a  blessing.  .Neither  ought  private  and  soli- 
tary prayers  tu  be  neglected  :  for  we  have  surely  something  of  a 
particular  nature  to  lay  before  the  Lord,  which  we  do  not  desire 
others  to  know.  We  exercise  fellowship  with  God  chiefly  in  such 
a  retired  solitude,  bee  wiiat  Solomon  and  the  Lord  Jesus  say,  Prov. 
xviii.  1.  Mat.  vi.  6. 

7.  *'  Pray  without  ceasing,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Thess.  v.  17. 
How  can  or  may  tins  be  done  ?  our  spirit,  as  long  as  it  is  in  this 
mortal  body,  cannot  endure  to  be  always  intent  upon  any  subject: 
God  hath  also  enjoined  it  upon  man  to  exercise  himself  in  many- 
other  employments,  lint  the  phrase,  M  wi'hou1  ceasing"  denotes 
either  that  we  should  persevere  in  prayer,  and,  as  it  were,  weary  the 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.    116— 119.  41  i 

Lord  with  our  praying,  uutil  he  show  us  favour  :  "  for  this  end  Jesus 
spake  the  parable  of  the  widow,  wo  wearied,  as  it  were,  the  ungouiy 
judge,  in  order  to  show  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint,"  Luke  xviii  1 — 7.  We  ought  thus  to  "  continue  uistai  I  in 
pr  ;yer,  and  to  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving,"  Col.  iv.  2. 
Or  "to  pray  without  erasing"  denotes  being  continually  in  a  .sup- 
plicating posture  of  mind  toward  the  Lord,  even  while  we  are  tn- 
gaged  in  our  daily  callings,  like  .Nehemiah,"  who  pn.yed  to  the 
God  or  heaven,  even  when  the  king  spake  to  hin>,"  Neh.  ii.  4. 
Or  it  intimates  observing  our  stated  seasons  of  prayer.  David  and 
Daniel  "  pray*  d  in  tne  morning,  at  noon  and  night,"  Psalm  iv.  If. 
Dan.  vi.  11.  This  is  praying  without  ceasing,  as  the  Morning  arid 
evening  sacrifice  is  called  "  the  continual  sacrifice,"  Exod.  xxix. 
58,  39    Dan.  viii.  1 1. 

8.  As  we  ought  to  demean  ourselves  well,  while  we  pray,  pray- 
ing with  humuity,  with  boldness,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  con- 
fidence, with  thanksgiving,  wi.i  intense  earnestness  in  spirit  a  d  in 
truth,  and  with  becoming  gestures  ot  the  body,  so  ve  ought  also  to 
endeavour  to  be  well  disposed  before  and  after  prayer.  Before 
prayer  we  ought  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it  in  a  suitable  mi  nner, 
"  to  order  ourselves  and  keep  watch,"  with  David,  Psalm  v.  3.  We 
ought  to  dismiss  all  our  worldly  thoughts,  to  inquire  what  we  need, 
and  endeavour  to  have  a  suitable  sense  of  God,  to  whom  we  are 
about  to  draw  near  :  but  we  ought  in  a  more  particular  manner  actu- 
ally to  repent  of  and  forsake  our  sins,  and  to  entertain  a  >.  teadfast 
resolution  to  lesist  them  in  future.  Zophar,  the  friend  of  Job,  said 
to  him,  "  If  thou  prepare  thy  heart,  and  stretch  out  thy  hand  toward 
him  :  if  iniquity  be  in  thy  hand,  put  it  far  from  thee,  and  let  not 
■wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tents,"  Job  xi.  13,  14  After  prayer,  in- 
quire for  what  and  how  ye  have  prayed,  and  whether  ye  be  the  bet- 
ter for  it.  Let  your  hearts  continue  turned  to  the  Lord,  and,  as  it 
were,  employed  in  repeating  your  prayer,  and  look  out  for  an  an- 
swer, in  order  to  hear  what  God  the  Lord  wiil  speak,  ttusting  that 
l<  he  will  speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints  :  but  turn 
not  again  unto  folly,"  Psalm  lxxxv.  8.  Doth  the  Lord  hear  you, 
rejoice,  and  praise  him.  David  was  so  well  pleased  with  God's 
hearing  of  him,  that  he  would  not  only  praise  the  Lord  himself, 
Psalm  cxviii.  21,  but  would  also  inform  others,  who  feared  God,  of 
God's  kindness  in  this  respect,  that  they  likewise  might  praise  the 
Lord,  Psalm  lxvi.  16-20.  Yea,  he  found  that  he  was  unable  to  do 
this  alone  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  benefit,  and  therefore 
he  called  upon  others  to  help  him  :  "  O  magnify  the  Lord  with  me, 


412  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

and  let  us  exalt  his  name  together.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard 
me,  and  delivered  me  from  all  my  fears,"  saith  he  to  the  people  of 
God,  Psalm  xxxiv.  3,  4.  To  conclude,  I  will  finish  this  discourse 
with  the  request  of  the  church,  P^alm  xx.  1 — 4.  "  The  Lord  hear 
thee  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend 
thee  :  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary  ;  and  strengthen  thee  out 
of  Zion  :  remember  all  thine  offerings,  and  accept  thy  burnt  sacri- 
fice ;  Selah.  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart,  and  fulfil  all 
thy  counsel,"  Amen. 


(  413  ) 


THE  ADDRESS 


OF 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  6.     Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven.

Q.    119.    What  are  the  ivords  of  that  firayer  ? 

A.  "  Our  father  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name,  thy 
kingdom  come," 


w, 


HEN  God  commands,  his  children  pray.  "  Lord,  thou  hast 
commanded  us  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O  that  my  ways 
were  directed  to  ketp  thy  statutes  !"  saith  David,  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5. 
Thus  Augustin  also  acted,  when  he  prayed  to  God,  saying,  "  Give 
me  what  thou  comrrundest,  and  command  what  thou  wilt,  and  thou 
shak  not  command  in  vain."  They  esteem  all  God's  command- 
ments, and  the  whole  law  to  be  "  holy,  just  and  good,"  with  Fau!, 
Rom.  vii.  12.  They  have  an  earnest  inclination,  and  an  insatiable 
desire  to  keep  the  commandments  :  "  1  opened  my  mouth,  and  pant- 
ed ;  for  I  longed  for  thy  commandments,"  saith  that  godly  king, 
Psalm  cxix.  131.  They  are  exceedingly  fearful  and  afraid  of  trans- 
gressing the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  they  beseech  him  therefore  to 
keep  them  from  transgressing  it,  as  the  same  man  speaks,  Psalm 
xix.  13.  "Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins, 
let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  And  Psalm  cxix.  10, 
"  With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee  :  O  let  me  not  wander 
from  thy  commandments."  They  cannot  indeed  preserve  them- 
selves, and  they  know  by  experience  that  they  cannot  keep  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  Lord  perfectly,  though  they  esteem  them  so  highly, 
and  do  so  earnestly  desire  to  keep  them.  But  knowing  the  cove- 
nant promise  of  the  Lord,  that  "  he  wili  cause  them  to  walk  in  his 
statutes,  and  to  keep  his  judgments  and  do  them,"  according  to 
Ezek.  xx::vi.  27,  therefore  they  apply  to  him  in  prayer,  that  he  may 
perfect  his  promised  strength  in  their  weakness.  I  will  adduce  once 
more  David's  petition,  as  a  proof  of  these  observations  :  '*  Teach 
me,"  saith  he,  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  11,  "O  Lonl,  thy  way.  I  will  walk 
in  thy  truth  :  unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  name."  In  this  way  doth 
the  instructor  also  proceed  ;  for  when  he  would  excite  us  to  good 
works,  as  fruits  of  thankfulness,  he  taught  us  ( 1)  The  necessity  (.f 
those  works,  in  the  xxxii.  Lord's  day.  (2)  The  principle  of  them, 
io  wit,  conversion,   Question    83 — 90.     (J3)  The    nature   of  lhem; 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  391 

Question  91.  (4)  The  rule  of  good  works,  Lord's  days  xxxiv — xliv. 
and  now  (5)  Prayer,  as  a  mean  to  assist  us  in  doing  good  works  j 
for  having  shown  that  even  those  who  are  converted  cannot  keep 
the  law  perfectly,  and  that  they  are  therefore  taught  to  pray  unto 
God  for  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  more  and 
more  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  until  they  attain  to  the  per- 
fection, which  hath  been  exhibited,  after  this  life,  Question  114, 
1 15.  We  say,  having  shown  this,  he  proceeds  to  an  explanation  of 
prayer. 

Three  particulars  require  our  consideration  here, 

I.  The  nature. 

II.  The  pattern,  and 

III.  The  necessity  of  prayer. 

I.  Before  we  exhibit  the  proper  work  of  prayer,  we  must  speak 
of  certain  particulars,  which  are  previously  required  to  prayer,  with 
respect  to  him,  to  whom  we  must  pray,  to  the  person  who  prays, 
the  things  for  which  he  must  pray,  and  the  disposition  of  mind  with 
which  he  must  pray. 

We  must  pray  to  "  none  but  the  one  true  God,  who  hath  mani- 
fested himself  in  his  word."  The  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us  this, 
when  he  saith,  Matt.  iv.  10,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  shalt  thou  wor- 
ship, and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve."  Prayer  is  indeed  a  religious 
work,  by  which  we  acknowledge  and  honour  God,  as  the  most  high, 
and  infinitely  perfect,  as  they  who  overcame  the  beast  honoured  the 
Lord  with  the  song  of  Moses,  saying,  Rev.  xv.  4,  "  Who  shall  not  fear 
thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy  :  for  all 
nations  ahall  come  and  worship  before  thee."  He  to  whom  we 
shall  pray  must  be  allsumcient,  that  he  may  be  able  to  help ;  and 
allknowing,  that  he  may  know  the  thoughts,  and  hear  the  words  of 
him  who  prayeth,  afar  off;  and  infinitely  good,  that  he  may  be  willing 
to  help  the  needy  and  unworthy  sinner  ;  and  so  he  must  be  "  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  Eph.  Hi. 
20.  The  Papists,  when  they  pray  to  the  saints  and  other  creatures, 
and  the  Socinians,  when  they  pray  to  Christ,  whom  they  esteem  to 
be  but  a  mere  man,  are  guilty  of  idolatry,  as  we  have  proved  upon 
the  first  commandment.  And  we  must  pray  to  God,  as  he  hath 
manifested  himself  in  his  word  ;  for  otherwise  we  "  worship  we 
know  not  what,"  with  the  Samaritans,  John  iv.  22,  and  we  "  serve 
an  unknown  God,"  like  the  Athenians,  Acts  xvii.  23.  Since  now 
the  Lord  God  hath  manifested  himself  in  his  word,  as  the  Triune 
Creator,  Redeemer  and  Sanctifier,  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him 
•as  such,  and  with  suca  u  becoming  apprehension  of  him  ;  for  God 


J92  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

cannot  draw  near  to  the  sinner  with  his  grace,  neither  can  the  sinner 
draw  near  to  God  with  his  prayers  in  any  other  way.  That  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  God,  coessential  with  the  Father,  and 
that  we  must  therefore  pray  to  them  also,  these  are  particulars 
which  we  have  proved  upon  the  thirteenth  and  twentieth  Lord's 
days.  Inasmuch  now  as  the  Triune  God  hath  revealed  himself  by 
a  special  ceconomy  of  grace,  in  which  the  Father  comes  with  his 
favour  to  the  sinner,  through  the  Son  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost, 
therefore  we  must  also  come  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
through  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  end  in  him  with  our  prayers : 
"Through  Christ  we  have  an  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father," 
according  to  Eph.  ii.  18. 

Irrational  creatures  are  sometimes  said  to  pray  to  God  :  "  The 
young  ravens,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  cry,  and  call  mightily  to 
God,"  Job  xxxviii.  41.  Joel  i.  20.  Jonah  iii.  8.  This  is  however 
not  praying  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  bui  it  only  intimates 
their  danger  and  distress  :  but  praying  is  the  work  of  men,  who 
can  draw  nigh  to  Go  J,  and  present  their  requests  to  him  in  a  rational 
manner.  A«d  prayer  is  especially  the  work  of  believers,  who  are 
reconciled  to  God,  have  an  nccess  to  him,  partake  of  the  Spirit  of 
grace  and  of  prayer,  and  are  acceptable  to  God  with  their  prayers  ; 
'■'•  God  had  respect  unto  Abel,  and  then  also  to  his  offering  :  but  unto 
Cain  he  had  not  respect,  and  then  not  to  Lis  offering  neither,"  Gen. 
iv.  45.  "  "Ye  know,"  said  the  man,  who  was  born  blind,  John  ix. 
31,  ''that  God  heareth  not  sinners  ;  but  if  a  man  be  a  worshipper 
of  God,  and  doth  his  will,  him  he  heareth."  James  saith  of  no  other, 
but  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  the  righteous  man,  that  it  avail- 
eth  much,"  James  v.  17.  The  sinner,  who  is  in  his  natural  state, 
is  obliged  to  pmy  on  account  of  the  supremacy  of  God,  and  his  own 
dependance  ;  but  he  is  not  able  to  pray  origin:  "his  prayer  be- 
comes sin  to  him,"  Psalm  cix.  7.  '  he  Lord  God  "  hides  his  eyes, 
and  shuts  his  ears  "  to  the  praj  er  of  such  a  sinner,  Isaiah  i.  15. 
And  since  he  hath  never  embraced  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  in  whom 
he  is  well  pleased,  therefore  he  cannot,  and  may  not  approach  the 
Lord,  as  his  reconciled  God,  who  is  a  consuming  fire  to  him.  Shall 
such  an  one  then  forbear  to  pray  ?  God  forbid.  "  The  ploughing 
of  the  wicked  is  sin,"  saith  Solomon,  Prov.  xxi.  4.  May  or  shall 
they  then  forbear  to  p'uugh  ?  surely  no  ;  but  the  unconverted  sinner 
must  see  that  it  is  his  duty  to  pray,  that  he  may  be  concerned,  and 
may  from  concern  ilee  to  the  Mediator,  upon  the  call  of  the  gospel  ; 
for  he  should  thus  obtain  freedom,  and  an  ability  to  pray  well.  But 
if  he  will  persist  in  sinning,  oi  what  advantage  will  his  praying  be 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   116—119.  393 

to  him?     If  he  will   K  confess  and  forsake  his   sins,  he  v/ill  obtain 
mercy,''  according  to  Prov.  xxvi.    13. 

Alan  is  exceedingly  needy,  lie  is  destitute  of  every  thing,  he  pos- 
sessed nothing  in  himself,  that  can  afford  him  satisfaction,  but  he 
mu-st  seek  ail  things  out  of  himseh  from  the  Lord  by  prayer.  Yet 
he  may  not  pray  for  ail  that  he  can  desire,  as  that  which  opposeth 
the  decree  of  God,  and  his  revealed  will,  that  all  men  may  be  saved, 
that  he  himself  may  be  perfect  in  this  life,  and  that  he  may  obtain 
such  and  such  things,  in  order  to  commit  sin  with  them,  or  to  con- 
sume them  upon  his  lusts.  This  would  be  making  a  mock  of  God, 
as  we  do  of  men  ;  but  we  must  pray  "  for  all  things  that  he  hath 
commanded  us  to  ask  of  him."  Tnese  all  things  are  "  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body."  The  things  ntcessary  for  the  soul 
are  pardon  of  sin,  s  (notification;  assurance,  strength,  preservation, 
and  an  increase  of  all  g  ace.  The  saints  prayed  for  these  things, 
as  we  see  particularly  in  David,  an  l  especially  in  the  fifty-first  Psalm. 
The  things  which  are  necessary  for  tiie  body  are  health,  meat,  drink, 
clothing,  and  all  that  can  conduce  to  the  weliare  of  the  body.  We 
m  iy,  and  ought  to  pray  lor  these  things,  because  we  depend  upon 
God,  according  to  the  body  also  :  but  to  covet  with  an  evil  covetous- 
rtess  for  our  house,  in  order  that  we  may  set  our  mst  on  high,  and 
to  desire  to  be  iich,  is  shameful  and  unjust ;  if  we  have  food  and  rai- 
ment, we  ought  therewith  to  be  content.  And  therefore  we  may 
pray  against  riches,  as  well  as  against  poverty,  and  desire  of  God 
only  "  the  food  that  is  convenient  for  us,"  as  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh 
did,  Prov.  xxx.  8.  We  ought  also  to  take  good  heed,  that  we 
pray  (a)  more  for  the  things  that  are  necessary  for  the  soul,  than 
for  those  that  are  necessary  for  the  body,  Matt.  vi.  33.  John  vi. 
27,  (b)  More  for  things  that  relate  to  God,  than  for  those  that  re- 
late to  ourselves  :  see  this  in  the  Lord's  prayer,  (c)  More  against  sin, 
than  against  chastisement,  Lam.  iii.  39.  (d)  We  must  pray  for 
grace  with  respect  to  the  essence  of  it  absolutely  :  but  for  grace 
with  respect  to  the  increase  and  degrees  of  it.  as  also  for  things 
which  concern  the  body,  we  must  pray  conditionally,  to  wit,  if 
they  will  promote  the  honour  and  worship  of  the  Lord,  and  will 
contribute  to  the  furtherance  of  our  salvation. 

It  is  necessary,  that  the  mind  should  be  well  disposed,  in  order 
that  we  may  pray  in  such  a  manner,  as  is  acceptable  to  God,  and 
that  he  may  hear  us.  (a)  The  mind  must  know  through  the  Spirit 
the  one  true  God,  who  hath  revealed  himself  in  his  word,  from  that 
word,  in  all  his  adorable  perfections,  that  the  soul,  affected  with  live- 
ly apprehensions  and  contemplations  of  God,  to  whom  she  speaks. 
Vol.  ii.  2  Z 


394  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

may  possess  and  be  actuated  with  reverence  and  a  believing  confi- 
dence in  prayer.  The  stints  have  for  this  purpose,  when  they  pray- 
ed,  employed  in  their  addresses  ^uch  honourable  titles  of  God,  as  in- 
spired them  -with  a  profound  reverence  for  him,  and  nevertheless  en- 
couraged them  to  desire  and  expect  good  things  of  him.  See  this  in 
the  prayer  of  Moses,  Numb.  xxiii.  16,  17,  of  those  who  returned  from 
Babylon,  Neh.  ix.  1 — 26,  of  Jeremiah  chap,  x/xii.  17,  18,  of 
Daniel,  chap.  ix.  5,  of  the  first  Christian  church,  Acts  iv.  24 — 26. 
We  ought  not  therefore  to  approve  of  uttering  without  any  impres- 
sion, and  hastily  the  first  word  that  occurs  concerning  God.  (b)  Our 
minds  must  also  be  rightly  affected  with  respect  to  ourselves,  and 
the  things,  for  which  we  are  about  to  pray.  We  cannot  pray  as  we 
ought,  unless  "  we  rightly  and  thoroughly  know  our  need  and  mis- 
ery." Our  hearts  must  be  deeply  sensible  of  what  we  need,  of  the 
misery  to  which  we  are  subject,  that  we  are  unworthy  of,  and  have 
forfeited  all  things,  that  the  soul,  urged  by  her  need,  may  humbly 
prostrate  herself  before  the  Lord,  and  may  seek  his  grace.  It  is 
not  enough  to  pray  for  things  that  are  needful,  but  we  must  also 
have  a  deep  sense  of  our  need  of  them,  that  our  need  may  urge  us 
to  pray  :  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;  I  will  deliver  thee," 
saith  the  Lord,  Psalm  1.  15.  "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord 
heard  him  ;  and  saved  him  out  of  all  his  troubles,"  saith  David,  Psalm 
xxxiv.  6.  He  saith  concerning  himself  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  Ixi.  2, 
"  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heart  is 
overwhelmed."  Seethe  prayer  of  the  church,  Psaml  cii.  1.  (c)  The 
mind  of  the  person  who  prayeth  must  also  undoubtedly  desire  the 
good  things  for  which  he  prays.  Only  to  mention  desirable  things, 
and  not  to  desire  them,  but  to  be  heartless,  indifferent  and  libtless, 
when  we  pray,  is  just  as  though  we  said,  I  do  not  wish  that  God 
should  grant  me  my  petition.  When  David  prayed  to  the  Lord, 
his  soul  was  like  "  a  panting  hart,  and  a  land,  in  which  there  was 
no  water,"  Psalm  xlii.  1,  2.  lxiii.  1.  cxliii.  6.  Therefore  prayer 
is  sometimes  called  "  a  cry,"  Psalm  v.  2.     Lam.  iii.  8. 

When  the  mind  i3  so  disposed,  it  is  prepared  for  "  prayer,  by 
which  we  address  God,  make  our  needs  and  desires  known  to  him. 
and  request  of  him  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and  body,  with  hu- 
mility and  believing  confidence,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  a  trust, 
that  we  shall  be  heard,  with  thanksgiving,  and  with  an  intense  ear- 
nestness, in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

It  is  necessary  to  describe  prayer  agreeably  to  this  representation 
somewhat  more  particularly. 

1.  We   say  that   prayer  is  "  an  address  to   God."     The  natural 


—119.  395 

man,  when  he  prays  after  his  fashion,  speaks  only  to  the  air  :    "  He 
draws  near  to  God    with  his  mouth,  and  honours  him  with  his   lips, 
but  removes  his  heart  far   from    him,"  Isaiah  xxix.   13.     But   the 
true  supplicant  **  seeks  unto  God,  and    unto   God   he  commits  his 
cause,"  as  Eliphaz  adviseth,  Job  v.  8.  He  lifts  up  his  heart  to  heaven, 
presents  himself  before  the  Lord,  treats  with   him,  and  speaks    to 
him:  "  Let  us  lift  up  our  heart   with  our    hands  unto    God  in   the 
heavens,"  saith  the  complaining  and  praying   church,  Lam.  iii    41. 
David's  psalm  of  prayer  begins  thus,  "  Unto   thee,   O   Lord,   do   I 
lift  up  my  soul,"  Psalm  xxv.  1.     Hear   how  Job  sighs,  "  O  that  I 
knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I  might  come  even  to  his   seat ! 
I  would  order   my  cause  before    him,"  Job  xxiii.  3,  4.     We  make 
this  address  either  with  our  heart  only,  by    ejaculatory  prayers,  like 
IVloses,  who  though  he  did  not  speak  one  word,  nevertheless  "cried 
to  God,"  Exod.  xiv.  15,  and  like    Nehemiah,  who  ««  prayed  to   the 
God  of  heaven,"  while  he   spake   with    the    king,  "  whei    the  king 
said  to  him,  For  what  dost  thou  make  thy  request,"  Neh.  ii.  4.  Or 
with  our  mouth,  either    whispering,   like  "Hannah,  who   spake  in 
her  heart,  only  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not  heard."  1  Sam. 
i.   13,  or  with  an  audible  voice,  by    which  we    excite   our   attention, 
and  are  preserved  from  wandering  thoughts.     \\  hen  we  pray  alone, 
we  must  be  able  to  hear  ourselves,  but    we  must  not  then    be  heard 
by  others,  that  they   may  not  suspect  us  of  hypocrisy  ;  for  why  else 
do  we  "  we  enter  into  our  closets,"  but  that  we  may  "  pray  in    se- 
cret to  God,"  according  to    the  command  of  our  Saviour,  Matt.    vi. 
6.     But  when  we  pray,  as  leaders  in  prayer,   with  others,   we  must 
then  raise  our  voice  so  high,  that  every  one  may    hear   it,   like    the 
Levites,  Neh.  ix.  4.     But  to  pray  in  the  presence  of  others,  as  lead- 
ers of  prayer,  in  an  unknown  tongue,  is  the  work  of  the  "  Barbarian 
and  mad"  Papists.     How  can  the   people  unite    with   us,  when  we 
pray  so,  and  say  Amen  to  what  they  do  not  understand  ?     See  what 
Paul  saith  against  this,  1  Cor.  xiv.  1 — 23.     To  excuse  this  irregu- 
larity by  saying  that  God  understands  such   a   strange  language,   is 
absurd  :  for  it  would  then  be  the  same  whether  a  man  or  a  parrot 
prayed.     "  We  must  pray  with  our  undei  standing,"  as   the  apostle 
required,    1  Cor.   xiv.    1 5.     Neither  is   it  proper  to  mutter   every 
word  after  the  person,  who  is  the  leader  of  prayer;  we  need  only 
give  heed  to  what  is  uttered,  and  take  care  that  our  hearts  accom- 
pany with  their  desires  the  words  of  the  prayer,  and  that  we  confirm 
it  with  our  Amen,  as  all  the  people  said  Amen  upon  David's  psalm, 
1  Chron.  xvi.  36.  We   read,   Neh.   viii.  6,  that  Ezra  blessed   the 
Lord,  the  great  God  ;  and  all  the  people   answered,  Amen,  Amen5 


396  THE  WORK.  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

with  lifting  tip  their  hands  :  and  they  bowed   their  heads,  and  wor* 
shipped  the  Eord  with  iheir  f  c-b  to  the  ground." 

2.  The  per&on  who  prays  in  faith  "  makes  with  his  address  his 
need  and  desires  known  unto  God."  "  In  every  thing  by  prayei 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving-,  let  your  requests  be  made 
known  unto  God,"  saith  the  text.  He  shows  God  what  afflicts  him, 
and  what  his  condition  requires,  from  what  evil  he  wishes  to  be  de- 
livered, and  what  good  he  wishes  to  enjoy  ;  and  therefore  he  sends 
up  his  groanings  and  desires  to  God  :  "  Lord,  all  my  desire  is  be- 
fore thee,  and  my  groaning  is  not  hid  from  thee,"  saith  David, 
Psalm  xxxviii.  9.  M  He  declares  his  ways  unto  God,  and  is  heard," 
Psalm  cxix.  26.  The  prophet  saith  to  the  Lord  concerning  the 
righteous,  Isaiah  xxvk  16.  "Lord  in  trouble  have  they  visited  thee, 
they  poured  out  a  prayer,  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  them." 
The  Lord  knows  indeed  the  needs  and  desires  of  those  whom  he 
loves  ;  but.  he  chooseth  nevertheless  that  they  should  complain  of 
them,  and  propose  them  to  him,  that  it  may  appear,  that  they  also 
know  them,  that  they  are  affected  with  them,  and  earnestly  desi- 
rous of  his  favour  ;  lor  this  is  acceptable  to  him.  "Let  me  see 
thy  countenance,  let  me  hear  thy  voice  ;  for  sweet  is  thy  voice  and 
thy  countenance  is  comely,"  saith  Jesus  to  his  dove,  Song  ii.   14. 

3.  But  the  most  essential  requisite  of  prayer  is  the  request,  which 
we  make  to  God  in  praying.  The  need  of  the  soul  constrains  her 
to  seek  deliverance,  and  her  desire  urgeth  her  to  obtain  that  which 
is  good,  and  to  request  of  the  Lord  to  bestow  it.  As  God  describes 
prayer  by  requesting  that  which  is  good  of  him,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  37. 
"■  Daniel  desired  that  his  companions  would  request  mercies  of  the 
God  of  heaven."  Dan.  ii.  18.  Which  request  earnest  petitioners 
urge  vehe-nenly  with  the  Lord  God,  by  a  persevering  cleaving  to  the 
Lord,  and  "  wrestling"  with  him,  not  being  able  to  desist,  "  until 
he  hath  blessed  them,"  like  Jacob,  Gen  xxxii.  24 — 26,  and  by  a 
continual  uplifting  of  their  hearts  and  enforcing  of  their  words  in 
their  request,  that  they  may  importune  him  to  grant  their  request, 
like  Daniel,  "  O  Lord  he.>r,  O  Lord  forgive,  t)  Lord,  hearken  and 
do,  defer  not,"  Dan.  ix  19,  and  also  by  vehement  motives,  derived, 
one  while  from  his  honour,  which  will  be  manifested  thtreby,  like 
the  church,  Psalm  lxxix.  9,  "  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for 
the  p;lory  of  thy  tv.nie,  and  deliver  us,  and  purge  away  our  sins  for 
thy  name's  sake:"  another  while  from  his  promise,  like  Jacob, 
Gen.  x:<sii.  11,12.  "  Deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of 
my  brut:.!.;',  from  the  hand  of  Esau.  And  thou  saidest,  I  will  surely 
do  thee  good,"  tf.v..     Yea,  su(.a  u  petitioner  will  derive   his   motive? 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116— 119.  39T 

also  from  the  malice  and  power  of  his  enemies,  from  the  providence  of 
God,  who  hath  brought  him  into  such  a  situation,  from  the  intensity 
of  his  desire,  which  God  himself  halh  wrought  in  him,  and  from 
the  greatness  of  his  distress,  rendered  more  grievous  by  his  sins  ; 
"Pardon  mine  iniquity  ;  for  it  is  great,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxv.  11. 
If  our  prayer  shall  be  acceptable  to  God,  it  must  possess  such  qual- 
ifications and  properties,  as  are  acceptable  to  him,  and  it  must 
therefore  be  made, 

J."  With  humility."  We  must  "  humble  ourselves  deeply  in  the 
presence  of  the  divine  Majesty."  The  person  who  prays  aright  be- 
holds the  exalted  dignity  of  God,  and  he  sees  his  own  meanness, 
nothingness,  neediness,  filthy  sinfulness  and  impotence.  This  ex- 
cites a  holy  awe  for  the  Lord  in  his  soul,  it  causeth  him  to  abase  and 
abhor  himself,  and  it  teaches  him  to  desire  all  things  of  grace,  and 
to  submit  patiently  to  the  wise,  righteous,  and  sovereign  disposal  of 
God,  with  respect  to  the  measure,  the  time  and  the  place  of  the 
fulfilment  of  his  desire.  See  this  in  Abraham,  Gen.  xyiii.  in  Job. 
ch.  xlii.  5,  6,  in  David,  Psalm  cxxxi.  in  Isaiah,  ch.  vi.  5,  in  Daniel, 
ch.  ix.  and  most  emphatically  in  "  the  publican,  who  standing  afar 
off,  would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote 
upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"  Luke 
xviii.  13. 

2.  But  although  the  praying  soul  humbles  herself  so  much,  she 
is  nevertheless  not  diffident  but  "  goes  with"  a  believing  confidence 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  she  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace 
to  nelp  her  in  time  of  need,"  Heb  iv.  16.  x.  19 — 22.  Her  need 
urges  her:  the  command  of  God  to  call  on  him  constrains  her,  so 
that  she  dares  not  forbear  :  his  call,  his  promises,  that  he  will  hear, 
and  the  satisfaction  of  Christ  aliure  the  soul;  and  "the  Spirit"  of 
the  Lord  "  leads"  her,  and  effects  "  an  access  for  her  to  the  Father," 
Eph.  ii.  18.  Yea,  "he  causes  her  to  cry,  and  cries  also  in  her, 
Abba,  Father,"  Rom.  viii.  15.     Gal.  iv.  6. 

3.  But  how  can  he,  who  contemplates  the  highness  of  God,  and 
his  own  odiousness  and  nothingness,  come  boldly  before  the  Lord; 
and  bow  down  before  the  high  God  ?  He  comes  in  the  name  of 
Christ.  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do," 
saith  he,  John  xiv.  13,  14.  The  name  of  Jesus  denotes  not  only 
his  proper  name  and  his  titles,  Mat.  i.  21,  Isaiah  ix.  5,  but  also  hi6 
person,  as  God  and  man,  and  as  Mediator,  John  i.  12,  his  merits,  I 
Cot.  vi.  1 1,  his  charge  and  command,  2  Thess,  iii.  6,  and  thus  also  his 
power  and  strength,  Acts  iii.  16.  To  pray  in  his  name,  signifies  in 
general,  to  go  through  him  unto  God.  and  to   request  all  things  o; 


398  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

him  for   Christ's  sake.     By  him   we    have  also  an   access  to  the 
Father,  according  to  the   words  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostle,  John 
xiv.  6.     Eph.  h.  IS.     But  we  pray  especially  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
Wien  we  (a)  draw  near  with  boldness,  relying  upon  the  right  which 
we  huve  in  him,  and  in  his  name :  "  In  him  we  have  boldness  and 
access  with   confidence   by   the  faith  of  him,"  saith   Paul,  Eph.  iii. 
12.     (b)  When  we  lay  hold  on  him  and  on  his  merits  by  an  active 
faith,  unite  ourselves  to  him,  and  in  this  manner  come  with  him  to 
the  throne,  and  refer  the  Father  to  Jesus  in  all  that  we  request,  that 
we  may  be  acceptable  in  him,  and  may  request  and  obtain  all  things 
for  his  sake.     Therefore  the  Saviour  saith,  John  xvi.  23.     "  What- 
soever ye    shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  it  you." 
(c)  We  also  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  draw  near   and  offer  up  our 
petitions  to  God  upon  his  command  and  encouragement.     We  come 
then,  as  sent  by  him  ;  for  he  saith,   Mat.  vii.  7,    "Ask,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you,"  &c.     (d)   Also  when  we  apply  to  the   Father  upon 
the  foundation  of  his  merits  for  all  that  grace,  which  he  hath   pur- 
chased, and  plead  thereupon  before  his  throne,  "  with  the  answer  of 
a  good  conscience,"   1  Peter  iii.  21.    (e)  And  we  pray  not  less  in  his 
name,  when  we  are  influenced   by  his  power  and   Spirit,  while   we 
draw  near  to    God,  and  request   all  things   of  him.     It  is  •*  by  the 
Spirit,"  that  we  go  through  Christ  to  the  Father,    Eph.  ii.  18.     (f) 
Once  more  ;  we  pray  in  his  name,  when  we  request  aught  for  his 
sake  ;  as  Daniel  prayed  "  for  ths  Lord's  sake,"  Dan.  ix.  17.     Jesus 
desires  by  his  intercession  with  the  Father,  that  he  would   hear  and 
show   favour  to  his  delivered,  as  he  declares,  John  xvii.     To  apply 
then  to  the  Father  upon  the  foundation  of  the  will  and  of  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ  is  praying  in  his  name,     (g)  Finally,  we  do  this, 
when  we  commit  our  prayers  into  the  hands  of  the  Advocate,  that  he 
may  present  them  with  his  intercession  to  the  Father.    See  him  en- 
gaged in  this  work,  Rev.  viii.  3,  4. 

4.  The  believer,  praying  thus  in  the  name  of  Christ,  "  trusts  also 
that  God  will  certainly  hear  his  prayer,  although  he  is  unworthy  of 
it."  God  hears  pray i  r  according  to  Psalm  lxv.  2.  And  he  doth 
this  sometimes  by  granting  that  for  which  we  pray  :"  Jabez,  who 
was  more  honmnable  than  his  brethren,  called  on  the  God  of  Israel. 
saying,  O  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  Jx-.  And  God 
granted  him  his  request,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  He  doth  this,  eithei 
presently,  as  upon  the  prayer  of  Elijah  fire  fell  presently  from 
heaven,  and  c-.isumed  his  sacrifice,  1  Kings  xv'ni.  36 — 38,  or  some 
time  after.  Abraham  prayed  for  a  son,  and  God  promised  him  one, 
when  he  wab  seventy-fire  years  old  j  but  he  did  not  obtain  him,  be- 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  399 

fore  he  was  an  hundred  years  old,  according  to  Gen.  xii.  1  — 14. 
xv  2.  xxi.  5.  Sometimes  God  gives  upon  our  praying  that  which 
is  better  than  what  we  desire.  Abraham  prayed  that  lshmael,  the 
son  whom  he  had  by  his  b  ndmaid,  might  live  before  God,  as  the 
promised  seed  ;  but  the  Lord  promised  him  that  which  was  better, 
namely,  Isaac,  a  son  of  his  proper  wife,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  19.  But 
sometimes  Gcd  denies  that  which  a  person  desires,  and  yet  causes 
the  soul  to  acquiesce  in  the  denial,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  it.  by 
affording  her  an  abundant  influence  of  grace.  Paul  "  prayed  thrice 
to  be  delivered  from  the  bufl'etmgs  of  Satan  ;"  but  it  did  not  please 
the  Lord  to  grant  him  his  request,  "  but  he  said,  My  grace  is  suf- 
ficient for  thee  :  for  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
Paul  acquiesced  in  this,  and  was  satisfied,  saying,  "  Most  gladly 
therefore  will  I  glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  me,"  2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10.  It  is  necessary  to  confide 
that  God  will  assuredly  hear  the  person  who  prays  believingly,  either 
in  one  way,  or  another  :  therefore  the  apostle  James  saith,  "  If  any 
of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  libe- 
rally, and  upbraideth  not  ;  and  it  shall  be  given  to  him  :  but  let  him 
ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering,"  Sec.  James  i-  5,  6.  "  Whatsoever 
things  ye  desire  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye  receive  I  hem,  and 
ye  shall  have  them,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Mark  xi.  24.  The  person 
who  calls  on  the  name  of  God  hath  indeed  a  sure  foundation  of 
trust  in  the  power,  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  and  in  the  merits, 
intercession  and  promise  of  Christ.  Doth  any  one  ask,  How  can  I 
know  that  God  heareth  my  prayer,  when  he  doth  not  presently  grant 
me  my  desire  upon  my  petition  ?  It  is  certain,  that  God  hears  our 
prayer,  when  we  pray  according  to  his  will  :  "  This  is  the  confi- 
dence that  we  have  in  him,  that  if  we  ask  any  tiling  according  to 
his  will,  he  heareth  us,"  saith  the  best  beloved  disciple  of  Jesus, 
1  John  v.  14.  The  Lord  also  sometimes  assures  his  praying  people 
by  his  .spirit,  that  he  hears  them,  and  particularly,  (a)  when  he 
affords  them  a  ready  and  free  access  to  him  ;  for  he  shows  then  that 
his  ears  are  open  to  the  prayer  of  faith  ;  when  it  is  otherwise,  "  he 
covers  himself  with  a  cloud,  that  their  prayer  may  not  pass  through," 
Lam.  iii.  44.  (b)  When  he  gives  the  person  who  prays  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  so  that  he  prays  heartily,  copiously,  and  with  perseve- 
rance. This  is  an  evidence,  that  he  will  hear  our  prayer  ;  for  the 
apostle  teacheth  us  this,  Rom.viii.  26,  27,  (c)  Sometimes  the  Lord 
shows  the  soul,  that  he  is  pleased  with  her  prayer,  he  nods,  as  it 
were,  to  her,  and  grants  her  rest,  peace,  confidence,  and  an  expec- 
tation that  Jie  will  fulfill  her  desire,  so  that  she  must  say  with  the 


400  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

church,  "  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord  :  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my 
salvaiion  :  my  God  will  hear  rue,"  IViicha  vii.  7-  (d)  But  the  soul 
becomes  most  clearly  persuaded,  that  her  petition  is  heard,  when 
God  secretly  speaks  and  saith  to  the  soul,  Be  of  good  eheer,  "  I 
will  do  this  same  thing  also  of  which  thou  hast  spoken."  bee  Lxod. 
xxxiii.  17.      Isaiah  xxxviii.  5. 

5.  According  to  the  text,  we  must  "  make  our  request  known 
to  Cod  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving."  It  is  also 
proper,  that  he  who  requests  and  obtains  aught  of  Cod,  should 
cheerfully  acknowledge  it,  and  give  him  the  honour  of  it.  It  is 
true,  that  as  long  as  we  have  not  obtained  our  request,  or  the  evi- 
dence that  we  are  heard,  we  cannot  thank  the  Lord  for  it.  The 
praying  soul  hath  nevertheless  sufficient  cause  to  thank  the  Loid. 
She  must  praise  the  glory  of  the  Lord:  former  benefits  must  be  ac- 
knowledged ;  and  her  happiness,  that  she  may  draw  near  to  him, 
may  obtain  the  Spirit  of  prayer,  and  trust  that  she  will  be  heard, 
must  surely  cause  her  to  honour  the  Lord. 

6.  But  shall  we  do  this  great  work  remissly  and  carelessly  ? 
no,  it  must  be  done  with  "  intense  earnestness."  It  was  foretold 
of  Christians,  that  they  should  be  "  earnest  supplicants,"  Zeph. 
iii.  10.  They  are  exceedingly  desirous  of  the  fulfilment  of  their 
request;  and  this  renders  them  vehemently  and  perseveringly  ear- 
nest to  obtain  it :  "  Continue  instant  in  prayer,"  thus  Paul  adrrion- 
isheth,  Coll.  iv.  2.  And  therefore  their  souls  are  actively  intent 
with  respect  to  God,  to  themselves,  their  request,  faith  and  trust, 
and  they  also  attend  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  will  conduct 
toward  them,  whether  their  prayer  will  be  acceptable  to  him,  or 
whether  he  will  oppose  them  :  and  so  they  '  Match  to  see  what  he 
will  say  unto  them,"  Hah.  ii.  1.  "  Satan  indeed  stands  at  the  rig!. 
hand"  of  the  person  who  prays,  "  when  he  stands  before  the  Lord" 
with  his  petitions,  "that  he  may  resist  him,"  and  may  suggest  every 
discouragement  to  the  soul,  bee  this,  Zech.  iii.  1,  2.  But  ihc  ear- 
nest supplicant  will  not  become  remiss  on  this  account  but  will 
call  upon  God  with  greater  zeal,  and  with  more  vehemence,  like 
his  Saviour,  "who,  being  in  an  agony,  prayed  moie  earnestly," 
Luke  xxii.  44. 

7.  This  earnestness  is  nevertheless  not  a  mere  noise,  neither  is  it 
effected  u  by  our  power  and  might,  hut  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord," 
Zech.  iv.  6.  For  "  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  as  Jesus  saith,  John  iv.  24. 
And  therefore  we  must  pray  to  him  with  our  spirits,  and  with  the 
inmost  emotions  of  our  snuls,  and  so  also  in  truth  and  upright- 
ness.    We    must  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  Ileb.  x.  22.     But  to 


"XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119. 

piv>y  in 'spirit  and  in  truth  denofes  also  to  pray-  without  being  con- 
fined by  God  to  any  place  of  prayer,  as  the  church  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament was  limited  with  her  solemn  prayers  to  Jerusalem.  See 
John  iv.  20—24. 

8.  Although  we  must  pray  with  the  spirit,  nevertheless  the  body, 
which  is  the  Lord's,  must  also  be  active  in  this  work  with  such  ges- 
tures, as  manifest  a  becoming  sense,  and  reverence  for  God,  and  ex- 
press the  praying  posture  of  the   soul.     Whether  in  grievous    dis- 
tress we  "  fall  with  our  faces  to.  the  earth,"  like  Joshua,  Joshua  vii. 
6  ;  or  whether  from   reverence  we  "  bow  down  and   kneel,"  with 
the  church,  Psalm  xcv.  6  ;  or  to  manifest  our  confidence,  and  read- 
iness to    serve*    we  "  stand,"    with  Abraham,   Gen.    xviii.  22,  23. 
We  must  also  "  lift  up  our  hands  with  our  hearts  unto  heaven,"    as 
the   church  would  do,  Lam.  iii.  41.     And    we   must   "lift    up   our 
eyes  to  heaven,"  with  Jesus,   John    xvii.  1,  or  to  testify  our  unwor- 
thiness,  we  must  cast  them  down  with  the  publican,  Luke  xviii.   13, 
II.  There  is  no  work,  for  which  wc  are  less  qualified,  than  pray- 
ing in  a.suitable  manner  to  the  Lord.     The  apostles  were  conscious 
of  this,  and  therefore  said  to  their  Master,  «  Lord  teach  us   to  pray. 
And  he  said  unto  them,  After  this  manner  pray  ye,     Our  Father 
which  art  in  heaven,  Hallowed  be  thy  name,"  he.  Matt.  vi.  9 — 13. 
Luke  xi.   1 — 4.     Of  which  pattern  of  prayer  we  may   say  with  pro- 
priety, that  Christ  gave   it,  that  we  might  offer  up  our  desires  to 
God   with  the  selfsame   words ;    for   he   puts  kthe  words  into  our 
mouths.     After  the  same  manner  the  prophet  saith  to  Israel,  Hosea 
xiv.  2,  3,  "  Take  with   you  words,  and  tu.-n   to  the  Lord  :  say  unto 
him,  take  away  all  iniquity,    and  receive  us   graciously,"  &c.     But 
no  person   will  admit  that  we  ought  always  to  make  use  of  this  pat- 
tern, and  of  no  other,  when  we  pray.     We  do  not  read  that  the  apos- 
tles ever  used  this  pattern  word  for  word,  when   they  prayed  :    we 
therefore  conceive  that  the  principle  design  of  Jesus  was  to   teach 
believers  for    what  things,  and  in  what  manner  they  ought    to  pray* 
And  this  pattern  is  also  a  most  perfect  model  of  a  well  ordered  prayer  ; 
for  we  have    here,    (1)  A  most  suitable  address  to   God.     (2)  Six 
petitions,  the  first  three  of  which  have   an  immediate  reference   to 
God,  and  the  three  last  to  ourselves.     Or   we   may   divide   the    six 
petitions  into  one  petition  for  the  chief  end,  to  wit,  the  hallowing  of 
the  Father's  name,  and  the  five  last  petitions,  as  means  for  obtaining 
that  chief  endo     Which  means  are   either  petitions  for  good  thin gss 
to  wit,  spiritual  in  the  second  and  third  petition,   and  bodily  in   the 
fourth  petition  :  or  petitions  for  deprecating  evil,  both  that    which  is 
past,  in  the  fifth  petition,  and  that  which  is  to  come  in  the  sixth  p<?- 
Vol,  ii.  3  A 


402  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

tition.  (3)  And  we  have  then  in  this  prayer  of  the  Lord  the  cone's: 
sion,  designed  to  ascribe  suitable  praise  to  the  Lord,  and  to  move 
him  by  his  own  glory  and  praise,  and  to  strengthen  and  confirm  the 
trust  of  the  true  petitioner.  This  pattern  is  wonderfully  sententious 
and  concise,  manifesting  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of  the  greatest 
Advocate  with  the  Father.  We  need  not  however  seek  in  the  six 
petitions,  and  in  the  conclusion  following  them  certain  prophecies 
of  seven  successive  periods,  and  account  for  this  by  the  wisdom  of 
the  Lord,  as  some  do  :*  for  we  cannot  produce  either  from  this 
prayer,  or  from  elsewhere  any  decisive  proof  of  this,  and  therefore 
it  doth  not  appear  proper  to  denominate  our  own  ungrounded  inven- 
tions divine  wisdom  ;  and  besides  this,  we  may  also  see  that  those 
who  judge  thus  are  prejudiced  in  favour  of  those  seven  successive 
periods,  for  they  do  not  consider  the  address  to  be  prophetical,  as 
they  do  the  conclusion,  because  they  should  then  have  eight  periods. 
If  the  prophetical  sense  of  this  prayer  were  wellgrounded,  we  should 
not  then  be  able  to  use  the  several  petitions  at  all  times  in  their  prop- 
er emphasis.  If  our  method  would  permit,  we  should  shoAV  that 
we  could  refer  the  conclusion  of  this  prayer,  as  well,  and  with  as 
much  propriety,  to  the  first  period  of  the  church,  as  the  first  petition 
is  forced  to  that  period,  and  we  should  find  it  thus  with  all  the  six 
petitions,  which  are  applied  to  the  other  periods.  For  instance, 
when  was  it  most  proper  to  pray,  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  ?  was 
it  not  in  the  time  of  the  heathen  persecutions,  and  of  the  antichrstian 
seductions  ?  This  they  nevertheless  refer,  not  to  the  sixth,  but  to 
the  foregoing  petitions.  They  think  that  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
under  the  New  Testament  is  expressed  by  the  word  a/ihesis  ;  but 
we  have  that  word  in  the  sixth  petition.  Ought  they  not  then,  ac- 
cording to  that  supposition,  to  refer  this  petition  to  the  time  before  the 
death  of  Christ,  when  believers  prayed,  as  they  pretend,  for  ajihetis  ? 
Observe,  in  this  manner  do  men  intongle  themselves,  when  in  order 
to  appear  wise,  they  exceed  their  proper  measure  by  farsought  in- 
ventions. 

III.  That  we  may  at  length  conclude  our  explanation  of  prayer,  we 
will  inquire  in  the  first  place,  "  why  it  is  nee  ssary  for  Christians  to 
pray  ?"     Every  one  will  acknowledge  that  Christians  are  bound  to 

*  By  these  our  author  understands  the  Cocceians,  who  expound  many  pas- 
sages oi'  scripture  as  prophecies,  which  are  not  considered  as  such  by  the 
generality  of  interpreters.  Thev  also  divide  the  whole  season  of  the  New 
Testament  church  into  seven  periods,  and  endeavour  in  a  very  fanciful  man- 
ner, to  find  them  in  many  passages  of  scripture,  in  which  there  doth  not 
appear  to  be  the  least  probable  hint  of  them. 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  403 

pray,  unless  we  will  except  the  disciples  of  Van  Hattem,  who  only- 
give  thanks,  and  do  not  pray,  from  their  profane  opinion  concerning 
the  Godhead,  and  the  secret  will  of  God,  as  the  rule  of  our  conduct- 
But  those  who  understand  the  mystery  suspect  them  with  reason  of 
denying  the  existence  of  a  God,  and  of  atheism,  and  consider  them 
theiufore  as  unfit  and  incapable  of  being  instructed  by  natural  and 
scriptural  reasons.  They  who  believe  an  infinite,  simple,  and  su- 
preme Spirit  may  be  easily  convinced,  that  prayer  is  necessary  for 
Christians  ;  for  (a)  "  prayer  is  the  chief  part  of  thankfulness,  which 
God  requires  of  us."  Christians  are  delivered  by  the  Son  of  God 
with  a  great  deliverance  ;  it  becomes  them  then  to  acknowledge  it 
thankfully,  which  they  do  especially  vUien  they  pray;  for  we 
thereby  acknowledge  our  dependence  on  God,  we  contemplate  and 
celebrate  in  a  practical  manner  all  his  excellencies  and  perfections, 
and  we  engage  that  we  will  serve  him,  yea,  prayer  is  a  service, 
which  we  offer  to  God,  in  order  to  manifest  our  thankfulness  ;  for 
the  whole  service  of  God  is  expressed  by  the  phrase  of  "  calling 
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  Gen.  iv.  26.  Joel  ii.  32,  Therefore 
"  exalting  the  Lord  as  the  God  of  his  people,  and  worshipping  be- 
fore him,  because  he  is  holy,"  are  joined  together,  Psalm  xcix.  9. 
God  also  requires  this  of  his  delivered  people,  as  the  principal  part 
of  thankfulness,  Psalm  i.  14,  15,  Philip,  iv.  6  Rev.  xv.  4. 
(b)  "  God  will  give  his  grace  and  his  holy  Spirit  to  those  only,  who- 
with  sincere  desires  ask  them  of  him,  and  are  thankful  for  them." 
The  Lord  knows  the  needs  of  his  children,  he  hath  purposed  to  sup- 
ply them,  and  Christ  hath  purchased  all  things  for  them;  but  he 
hath  appointed  prayer  to  be  a  mean  of  obtaining  our  desires,  and  he 
will  bestow  nothing,  except  upon  and  through  prayer.  When  God 
had  promised  great  things  to  his  people,  and  had  assured  them  that 
he  would  do  those  things  for  them,  he  said  that  he  would  neverthe- 
less "be  inquired  of  that  he  might  do  those  things,"  Ezek.  xxxvi. 
36,  37.  See  also  how  David  and  Daniel  prayed  to  God  for  what  he 
had  already  promised,  that  he  would  certainly  do  it,  2  Sam.  vii.  27„ 
Ban.  ix.  2,  3« 


APPLICATION. 

Although  the  Pelagians  will  allow  that  Christians  ought  to  pray, 
and  although  they  also  pray  after  their  manner,  nevertheless  they 


iO.i  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

deny  by  their  doctrine  the  necessity  of  prayer,  when  they  assert 
that  man  can  p<  rform  and  merit  all  things  by  his  freewill.  For 
when  a  person  bath  an  ability  to  effect  and  merit  all  virtuous  good, 
what  need  hath  Ue  to  pray  to  God  for  his  grace,  and  his  Spirit? 
Therefore  when  the  Jesuits,  Socinians  and  Remonstrants  pray  with 
a  Pelagian  spir.t,  they  only  fl-iUtr. 

But  what  think  ye,  hearers,  do  ye  ako  pray  ?  Perhaps  ye  will 
wonder,  and  be  displeased,  if  i  tell  you  that  the  most  of  you  do  not 
yet  pray,  and  have  never  yet  prayed  :  it  is  nevertheless  true,  and  it 
appears  very  evidently.  For,  (a)  many  know  neither  the  Triune 
God,  nor  themselves,  as  desparately  miserable,  so  as  to  be  concern- 
ed, and  they  have  not  the  least  desire  to  Go-!,  nor  to  fellowship  with 
him,  nor  to  his  blessed  benefits.  Is  not  tbia  true  ?  hath  any  active 
desire  to  enjoy  the  Lord  ever  possessed  your  minds  ?  doth  your 
misery  affect  you  so,  that  it  afflicts  you,  and  u  to  cry  to  God  ? 

Hath  it  ever  been  your  earnest  endeavour  to  embrace  the  Son  ot 
God  for  grace  and  salvation,  and  thus  to  attain  to  a  condition,  that  is 
acceptable  to  God,  in  order  to  have  a  right  and  an  ability  to  pray  to 
him  ?  (b)  It  is  true,  ye  pray  also  after  your  manner  :  but  what  and 
how  do  ye  pray  ?  ye  say  your  ordinary  forms  and  lessons,  like  a 
schoolboy  to  his  master,  ye  have  done  this,  and  nought  besides  from 
your  youth  up  hitherto.  But  I  pray  vou.  consider  whether  this  be 
praying.  Ye  surely  do  not  understand  the  things  which  ye  express 
with  those  good  and  suitable  words  and  forms  :  do  ye  not  merely  pre- 
sent God  with  a  certain  number  of  words  without  matter  and  without 
heart,  as  the  Papists  offer  a  certain  number  of  mumbled  prayers  to 
God  and  the  sain's  ?  Do  not  your  souls  remain  far  from  the  Lord, 
while  ye  pray  thus  ?  do  ye  express  your  desires  to  God,  and  entreat 
his  favour  by  such  praying?  doth  that  ordinary  prayer  exhibit  vour 
particular  need,  desire  and  request?  have  ye  always  the  same  need 
and  request,  contrary  to  the  temper  and  experience  of  sincere 
Christians  I  Friends,  consider  whether  ye  do  by  these  ordinary 
lessons  humble  yousselves,  acquire  faith  and  boldness,  draw  neat 
in  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God,  obtain  a  ground  of  confidence,  th::t 
God  will  hear  you,  and  whether  ye  be  influenced  to  hearty  thanks- 
givings, and  to  an  intense  earnestness  ?  your  prayers  are  certainly 
words  only,  without  matter  and  without  heart.  And  how  detestably 
do  many  conduct,  that  they  dare  call  upon  God  on  their  beds,  al- 
though they  are  in  health,  like  the  carefess  Israelites,  "  who  cried 
unto  God,  but  hot  with  their  hearts,  and  howled  upon  their  beds," 
H«  >  a  \ii.  II.  (c.)  IVihaps  some  among  us  will  detest  such  a  con- 
duct, and  think  that  they  quit  the:  ■  —11,  because  they   pray 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  40s 

from  their  heads,  and  either  standing  or  kneeling.  But  is  it  only 
from  your  heads,  and  not  from  your  hearts,  how  can  such  a  fabrica- 
ted speech  be  acceptable  to  God  ?  for  it  is  not  then  an  address  of  your 
soul  to  God,  it  is  not  a  making  of  your  desire  krown  to  him,  nor  a 
request  that  he  would  fulfil  it,  but  merely  words  concerning  neces- 
sary and  desirable  things,  and  your  souls  do  not  draw  near  to  God 
with  ardent  desires  but  remain  cold  and  estranged  from  him.  For 
thus  ye  draw  near  to  him  with  your  mouths  and  honour  him  with 
your  lips,  but  remove  your  hearts  far  from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.  13. 

If  this  be  your  case,  how  wretched  are  ye  !  ye  ha%e  never  yet 
prayed  :  at  least  your  praying  hath  not  been  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
Ye  cannot  indeed  pray,  ye  are  not  qualified  for  it :  your  prayer  is 
sin,  and  abominable,  it  displeaseth  the  Lord  ;  ye  often  lie  in  your 
ptaying,  when  ye  thank  him  with  your  prayers,  that  he  hath  redeem- 
ed you  by  Jesus  Christ,  since  by  speaking  only  words,  and  always 
without  heart  in  praying,  ye  yourselves  show  that  ye  neither  know 
your  misery,  nor  have  ever  earnestly  desired,  nor  sought  the  Re- 
deemer. He  wdl  also  not  hear  you :  for  "  he  heareth  not  sinners," 
John  ix  31.  Doth  he  give  you  that  which  is  good,  it  is  not  in  lm 
favour  with  and  in  Christ. 

Say  not,  this  is  a  hard  saying,  who  can  bear  it  ?  if  this  be  so,  whi 
should  we  pray  any  longer  ?  must  we  then  forbear  to  pray?  We 
speak  thus  only  from  love  to  you,  that  we  may  bring  you  to  your- 
selves, and  that  ye  may  learn  how  to  pray  aright  and  acceptably  to 
God.  Ye  cannot  pray  acceptably  to  God,  and  ye  may  nevertheless 
not  forbear  to  pray :  "  God  pours  out  his  wrath  upon  them,  who  call 
not  upon  his  name,"  Psalm  Ixxix.  10.  Jer.  x.  25.  And  therefore 
only  know  your  wretched  and  miserable  condition;  that  your  dan- 
ger may  urge  you  to  pray  ;  it  is  our  ordinary  saying,  that  danger 
leaches  a  person  to  pray.  When  Paul  was  discouraged  on  account 
of  his  misery,  he  learned  how  to  pray  acceptably  to  God,  so  that  the 
Lord  testified  of  him,  "Behold  he  prayeth,"  Acts.  ix.  11.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  once  saw  your  deplorable  condition,  that  none  of  your 
sins  were  yet  forgiven,  that  God  did  yet  behold  you  in  anger,  that 
ye  were  unable  to  do  what  is  necesary  for  you  to  do,  in  order  to  be 
saved,  that  ye  had  never  yet  prayed  aright,  that  ye  cannot  pray  so, 
and  that  therefore  if  ye  die  as  ye  are  at  present,  ye  must  perish  : 
would  ye  not  be  urged  by  your  danger  to  retire,  and  enter  into  se- 
cret, to  fall  upon  your  knees,  and  cry  to  God  for  grace  ?  doth  not 
a  stammering  child,  when  he  is  hungry,  and  suffers  pain,  know  how 
to  complain  of  such  matters  to  his  parents,  and  to  call  upon  them 
for  help,  and  rs  not  that  stammering  language  of  the  child  accepta- 


406  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

ble  to  his  parents  ?  would  not  ye  then,  if  ye  were  spiritually  hungry, 
and  had  a  painful  sense  of  your  misery,  be  able  to  complain,  and  to 
call  upon  God  for  his  grace,  and  would  not  he  be  pleased  with  such 
addresses,  though  ye  prayed  ever  so  meanly  and  stammeringly  ?  1 
believe  he  would.  And  therefore  pause,  and  attend  a  while  to  your- 
woful  misery,  contemplate  it,  and  be  concerned  on  account  of  it, 
that  ye  may  with  fervent  prayers,  "  seek  to  God,  and  direct  your 
speech  unto  him,"  as  Eiiphas  adviseth,  Job  v.   8. 

But,  believers  and  redeemed  ye  who  know  how  to  pray  through 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  let  your  souls  engage  often  in  hearty  prayer. 
It  is  a  difficult  work,  the  flesh  is  unwilling  to  exercise  itself  in  it. 
I  consider  it  therefore  proper  to  exhort  you  to  attend  to  it  with  ear- 
nestness. For  (a)  your  God,  your  Father,  your  Redeemer  and  Sanc- 
tified hath  enjoined  it  on  you  in  his  word,  Psalm  I.  15.  Jer.  xxxiii. 
l>.  Matt.  vii.  7.  He  often  stirs  your  souls  up  to  it.  Your  heart 
saith  not  less  than  David's  in  the  Lord's  stead,  u  Seek  my  Lee," 
Psalm  xxvii.  8  ;  will  ye  not  then  echo  with  him,  "Thy  face  will  I 
beek  I"  Dare  ye  be  disobedient  to  that  universal  and  great  com- 
mand ?  (b)  It  was  foretold  of  you  :  the  Lord  foretold  in  ancient 
days  concerning  our  times  and  people,  that  "  all  flesh  should  ronie 
and  worship  before  him,"  Isaiah  lxvi.  23.  He  saith)  Zeph,  iii.  9, 
10,  "  Surely  I  will  then  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  that 
they  may  all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one 
consent.  From  beyond  the  rivers  of  Ethiopia,  ray  suppliants,  even 
the  daughter  of  my  dispersed,  shall  bring  mine  offering,"  Is  it  in- 
deed your  desire  to  defeat  the  prophecies,  which  have  been  formerly 
uttered  concerning  you,  and  not  rather  to  confirm  them  by  earnest 
and  hearty  prayer?,  ?  it  is  your  duty  to  fulfil  these  prophecies  by 
your  conduct.  Hear  what  Paul  saith  to  his  "  son  Timothy,"  1  Tim. 
i.  18,  "  This  charge  I  commit  unto  thee,  according  to  the  prophe- 
cies, which  went  before  on  thee,  that  thou  by  them  raightest  war  a 
food  warfare."  (c)  Have  not  all  the  saints  prayed  frequently  and 
fervently  ?  Abel's  sacrifice,  with  which  God  was  well  pleased,  was 
not  unaccompanied  with  prayer.  Enoch  walked  with  God  by  con- 
stant prayer:  in  what  other  manner  did  Abraham  manifest  that  he 
was 'a  friend  of  God?  Isr.cc  went  into  the  field  to  pray:*  Jacob 
arose  in  the  night,  and  sent  his  household  from  him,  over  the  brook, 
that  he  might  wrestle  alone  with  God.  The  time  would  fail  me,  if 
I  should  speak  of  Joshua,  of  Samuel,  of  Jahez,  of  all  the  holy  pro- 
>Kels  and  apostles.     Wherefore   seeing   we   are   compassed  about 

■  Vlii6  •£  ajrrecab'e  to  the  Dtrtch  translation 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119.  407 

v,  ii.ii  50  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  same  way, 
and  look  especially  to  the  chief  Captain,  and  great  leader  of  prayer 
Jesus,  who,  according  to  Luke  xxi.  37,  "  was  in  the  daytime  teach- 
ing in  the  temple,  and  at  night  went  out,  and  lodged  in  the  mount," 
without  doubt  to  pray  See  Mark  i  25.  (d)  Ye  have  liberty,  and 
that  great  privilege  above  others,  that  ye  may  come  day  by  day  to 
your  Father,  and  speak  familiarly  to  him.  In  ancient  times  the 
Jews  only  had  liberty  to  call  upon  God,  as  near  at  hand,  and  other 
nations  were,  and  remained  strangers  to  the  Lord,  as  Moses  cries 
out  with  admiration  of  this.  Deut.  iv  7,  "  What  nation  is  there  so 
great,  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as  the  Lord  our  God  is  in 
all  things  that  we  call  upon  him  for  ?"  But  believers  of  the  Gen- 
tiles have  now,  as  the  Jews  had  then,  '  an  access  through  Christ  by 
one  Spirit  to  the  Father,"  Eph  ii.  18.  formerly  none  but  the 
Highpriest  was  permitted  to  appear  solemnly  once  a  year  in  the 
earthly  holy  of  holies,  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  the  people 
of  God  through  him  ;  but,  believers,  ye  have  now  all  of  you  liberty, 
and  indeed  every  day,  yea,  every  hour,  to  go  into  a  better  holy  place, 
through  Jesus,  the  true  Highpriest.  Will  ve  not  now  make  use  of 
your  liberty,  and  that  great  privilege  ?  Hear  what  Paul  saith,  Hcb. 
x.  19 — 22,  "  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he 
hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh  ; 
and  having  an  Highpriest  over  the  house  of  God:  let  us  draw  near 
with  a  true  heart,  in  full  assurance  of  faith."  (e)  Ye,  believers,  and 
true  Christians,  even  ye  have  an  ability  to  pray.  The  sinner,  who 
is  in  a  state  of  nature,  is  bound  hand  and  foot,  through  his  ignorance 
and  inability  with  respect  to  prayer  :  but  the  Lord,  according  to  his 
promise,  Zech.  xii.  10,  hath  "poured  out  the  Spirit  of  grace  and 
of  supplication  upon  you  ;"  and  according  to  Rom.  viii.  15.  Gal. 
iv.  5,  "  he  hath  given  you  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  which  erieth  Abba 
Father:  yea,  which  prayeth  for  and  in  you  with  groanings  that  can- 
not be  uttered,"  Rom.  viii.  26.  Will  ye  then  grieve  and  quench 
that  Spirit  of  prayer  by  your  sluggishness  and  listlessness  ?  No, 
awake,  and  "  stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  you,"  as  Paul  ad- 
monisheth,  2  Tim.  i.  6.  (t)  What  a  glorious,  delightful  and  pow- 
erful work  is  prayer  !  the  practice  of  it  confers  honour  upon  a  per- 
son :  "  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  ;  for  Jabez  cal- 
led upon  the  God  of  Israel,"  1  Chron.  iv.  9,  10.  See  this  also  of 
Samuel,  Psalm,  xcix.  6.  Prayer  is  iike  Jacob's  ladder,  by  which 
we  climb  up  to  heaven,  and  like  the  wings  of  an  eagle,  by  which  we 
mount  up  to  heaven  :  by  prayer  we  are  with  Paul  caught  up  into  ths 


408  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

paradise  of  God,  the  third  heaven  :  we  enter  in  through  the  inmost 
veil ;  we  see  him  who  is  invisible  ;  we  speak  to  God  as  a  man  speaks 
to  his  friend,  we  walk  with  him,  we  cleave  to  him,  and  acquaint  our- 
selves  with  him  :  by  prayer  we  can  shut  and  open  heaven,  with  Eli- 
jah, overcome  God,  with  Jacob,  and  with  Moses,  restrain  his  anger, 
so  that  he  will  not  consume  Israel.  What  think  ye  Christians,  have 
ye  not  a  desire  to  such  a  great  work,  and  will  ye  not  give  yourselves 
wholly  to  it?  (g)  A  Christian  is  in  a  good  or  evil  state,  according 
as  he  prays  much  or  little,  remissly  or  earnestly  :  his  spiritual  life 
must  languish  and  decline  when  he  is  heanless  in  this  duty  ;  but 
when  it  is  otherwise,  he  is  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and 
grows  like  the  calves  of  the  stall,  (h)  Ye  complain  of  corporal  and 
spiritual  afflictions  ;  but  whence  do  they  proceed  ?  do  they  not  from 
your  praying  so  seldom,  and  in  such  a  heartless  manner  ?  the  apos- 
tle James  saith,  "  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not,"  James  iv.  2. 
God  suffers  you,  as  it  were,  to  dwell,  like  the  rebellious,  in  a  dry 
land,  that  ye  may  pray  earnestly  to  him  :  "  I  will  go,  and  return  to 
my  place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  my  face  : 
in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early,"  saith  God,  Hosea  v.  14. 
<'  He  would  bring  a  third  part  "  of  his  people  "  into  the  fire  :"  but 
they  should  then  also  call  upon  his  name,"  Zech.  xiii,  9.  What 
think  ye,  if  ye  exercised  yourselves  much  in  prayer,  would  ye  not 
obtain  more  than  ye  do  ?  "  He  gives  liberally  to  him  who  prays, 
and  upbraideth  not,"  James  i.  6.  "  He  heareth  prayer,"  and  there* 
fore  "all  flesh  must  come  to  him,"  Psalm  lxv.  2.  See  Isaiah 
xxx.  18,  19.  Jer.  xxix.  11 — 14.  The  Lord  doth  still  give  you 
much,  and  ye  are  pleased  with  it,  though  ye  pray  little  :  but  when 
he  gives  you  that  which  is  good  upon  your  praying,  it  is  then  a 
double  blessing,  which  causeth  you  to  rejoice  twice,  once  because 
lie  gives  you  that  which  is  good,  and  once  because  he  hears  your 
prayer.  Do  ye  see  your  duty  and  do  ye  delight  in  it,  conduct  your- 
selves then  well  in  it ;  and  particularly, 

1.  Beware  that  ye  do  not  become  slothful  with  respect  to  it. 
Praying  is  a  difficult  work,  we  must  encourage  ourselves,  and  exert 
all  our  strength  for  it,  and  must  be  intent  upon  it.  It  is  therefore  a 
hateful  conduct,  and  hurtful  to  the  soul,  to  study  sometimes  from 
mere  sluggishness  to  defer  prayer,  until  this  or  that  opportunity,  and 
to  be  inwardly  wellpleased,  when  we  are  hindered  by  some  accident^ 
or  can  pray  only  in  a  cursory  manner.  Conscience  saith,  it  is  time 
for  you  to  seek  the  Lord,  but  your  listlessness  hinders  you  from 
setting  about  it,  except  in  a  slothful  manner,  and  ye  depart  thus 
further  and  further  from  the   Lord,    who    hides   his  face    from  th~ 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  116—119*  409 

soul.  The  spouse  slept,  while  her  heart  was  awake  :  when  her 
bridegroom  knocked,  she  was  so  overcome  with  spiritual  drowsiness, 
that  she  suffered  him  to  stand  at  the  door ;  but  he  went  his  way, 
and  what  distress  did  she  experience,  and  what  pains  was  she  obliged 
to  take,  before  he  would  suffer  himself  to  be  entreated  by  her,  Song 
v.  2—8. 

2.  Take  heed  that  an  unbelieving  fear  do  not  beset  you,  at  least, 
that  it  do  not  hinder  you  from  praying.  The  corruption  of  your 
heart,  your  ill  behaviour,  your  falling  repeatedly  into  sin  ought  in- 
deed to  render  you  humble,  and  induce  you  to  stand  afar  off,  hke 
the  publican,  and  cry  only  for  grace  ;  but  these  things  ought  not  to 
drive  you  from  the  Lord,  nor  cause  you  to  despair,  as  though  there 
were  no  grace,  nor  mercy  with  the  Lord  for  you  ;  for  by  acting  thus 
ye  dishonour  God,  as  if  his  grace  and  mercy  could  not  overmatch 
your  sins,  and  could  not  swallow  your  sin  up.  The  soul  saith  some- 
times indeed  with  the  people  of  God,  "  If  my  transgressions  and 
my  sins  be  upon  me,  and  I  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  I  then 
live.'  but  the  Lord  saith,  As  I  live  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,"  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10,  1 1.  Are  ye  not  grieved  for  your  sins, 
will  ye  hold  them  fast  ;  remain  then  aloof,  and  flee  from  the  Lord, 
like  Cain  and  Judas  ;  but  do  ye  seek  to  be  delivered  from  your  sins 
and  sinfulness,  "  cast  not  then  away  your  confidence,  which  hath  a 
great  recompence  of  reward,"  Heb.  x.  35*. 

3.  Watch  against  wandering  thoughts  ;  for  these  remove  the  heart 
far  from  the  Lord,  even  when  we  draw  near  to  him  with  our  mouths. 
Do  they  beset  you,  endeavour  to  banish  them  from  you  ;  disengage 
your  minds  from  them.  Are  ye  not  able,  propose  your  requests 
then,  not  with  many,  but  with  few  words,  and  do  not  make  "  use  of 
vain  repetitions,"  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  Saviour,  Mat.  vi.  7. 
We  must  therefore  take  good  heed  that  we  do  not  hurry  too  much, 
in  order  to  finish  our  prayer,  and  utter  only  many  words  in  haste, 
and  also  that  wc  do  not  limit  ourselves  to  a  certain  time,  praying 
just  so  long,  and  no  longer :  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let 
not  thy  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  God  ;  for  God  is  in 
heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  ;  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few,"  Eccl. 
v.  2. 

4.  None  of  us  may  think  that  he  may  abstain  from  praying,  when 
he  is  not  influenced  in  just  such  or  such  a  particular  manner  by  the 
Spirit  of  prayer.  It  is  true,  we  c;.nnot  pray  aright  without  his  pre- 
venting influence  ;  yet  we  may  not  forbear  to  pray,  when  we  do  not 
enjoy  that  influence,  but  the  experience  of  our  inability,  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  also  worketh  in  us,  should  urge  and  induce  us  to  pray 

Vol.  ii.  3  B 


410  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

vehemently,  and  we  shall  experience  that  the  Lord  will  recorr.pence 
ou!  zeal,  and  that  ne  will,  as  lie  hath  promised,  Isaiah  !>:iv.  5,  "  meet 
those  who  remember  h;m  in  his  ways."  Therefore  the  soul  oui,ht 
also  to  look  rip  to  the  Lord,  and  to  depend  upon  him  for  the  prom- 
ised "  Sp;rit  of  grace  and  of  supplications,"  Zech.  xii.  10. 

5.  Pray  for  yourselves,  but  also  for  the  community.  It  behooves 
you  to  mention  the  land  and  the  place  of  your  habitation  to  the 
Lord.  God  required  that  they  who  were  carried  away  captive  should 
pray  for  Babylon,  Jer.  xxix.  7.  How  much  more  then  ought  we 
to  remember  in  cur  prayers  this  good  land,  in  which  we  enjoy 
liberty  and  happiness !  And  since  the  prosperity  of  the  land  de- 
pends greatly  upon  the  magistrates,  we  ought  also  to  "  pray  for  kings, 
and  all  that  arc  id  authority  ;  that  we  may  lead  quiet  and  peaceable 
lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty,"  as  Paul  admonisheth,  1  Tim. 
ii.  1,  23.  Forget  not  your  lamily  and  children  :  Isaac  prayed  for 
his  wife,  Gen.  xxv  21.  Abraham  for  Ishmael,  Gen.  xvii.  18,  and 
David  for  his  child,  when  it  was  sick,  2  Sam.  xii-  15,  16.  But  the 
church  of  the  Lord,  "  Jerusalem,"  ou.^ht  more  especially  to  '*  come 
into  your  mind,"  Jer.  Ii.  50.  "  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto 
Zion  :  build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,"  said  David  to  the  Lord, 
although  he  was  sufficiently  burthened  with  his  own  affliction,  Psalm 
li     .8. 

6.  Unite  with,  and  forsake  not  the  ordinary  prayers  of  the  church  ; 
for  the  Lord  manifests  himself  present  with  his  church,  and  he 
hears  those  prayers  :  "  when  only  two  agree  touching  any  thing 
that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father,"  saith 
Jesus,  ivjat.  xviii.  19.  Masters  and  mistresses  of  families  ought 
also  to  pray  for,  and  with  their  whole  family  :  "  Isaac  prayed  for, 
and  in  the  presence  of  his  wife,"  Gen.  xxv.  21  How  can  families, 
:.n  which  f  mily  praye  s  are  neglected,  be  considered  as  godly  ?  they 
cannot  certainly  expect  a  blessing.  .Neither  ought  private  and  soli- 
tary prayers  tu  be  neglected  :  for  we  have  surely  something  of  a 
particular  nature  to  lay  before  the  Lord,  which  we  do  not  desire 
others  to  know.  We  exercise  fellowship  with  God  chiefly  in  such 
a  retired  solitude,  bee  wiiat  Solomon  and  the  Lord  Jesus  say,  Prov. 
xviii.  1.  Mat.  vi.  6. 

7.  *'  Pray  without  ceasing,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Thess.  v.  17. 
How  can  or  may  tins  be  done  ?  our  spirit,  as  long  as  it  is  in  this 
mortal  body,  cannot  endure  to  be  always  intent  upon  any  subject: 
God  hath  also  enjoined  it  upon  man  to  exercise  himself  in  many- 
other  employments,  lint  the  phrase,  M  wi'hou1  ceasing"  denotes 
either  that  we  should  persevere  in  prayer,  and,  as  it  were,  weary  the 


XLV.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.    116— 119.  41  i 

Lord  with  our  praying,  uutil  he  show  us  favour  :  "  for  this  end  Jesus 
spake  the  parable  of  the  widow,  wo  wearied,  as  it  were,  the  ungouiy 
judge,  in  order  to  show  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint,"  Luke  xviii  1 — 7.  We  ought  thus  to  "  continue  uistai  I  in 
pr  ;yer,  and  to  watch  in  the  same  with  thanksgiving,"  Col.  iv.  2. 
Or  "to  pray  without  erasing"  denotes  being  continually  in  a  .sup- 
plicating posture  of  mind  toward  the  Lord,  even  while  we  are  tn- 
gaged  in  our  daily  callings,  like  .Nehemiah,"  who  pn.yed  to  the 
God  or  heaven,  even  when  the  king  spake  to  hin>,"  Neh.  ii.  4. 
Or  it  intimates  observing  our  stated  seasons  of  prayer.  David  and 
Daniel  "  pray*  d  in  tne  morning,  at  noon  and  night,"  Psalm  iv.  If. 
Dan.  vi.  11.  This  is  praying  without  ceasing,  as  the  Morning  arid 
evening  sacrifice  is  called  "  the  continual  sacrifice,"  Exod.  xxix. 
58,  39    Dan.  viii.  1 1. 

8.  As  we  ought  to  demean  ourselves  well,  while  we  pray,  pray- 
ing with  humuity,  with  boldness,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  with  con- 
fidence, with  thanksgiving,  wi.i  intense  earnestness  in  spirit  a  d  in 
truth,  and  with  becoming  gestures  ot  the  body,  so  ve  ought  also  to 
endeavour  to  be  well  disposed  before  and  after  prayer.  Before 
prayer  we  ought  to  prepare  ourselves  for  it  in  a  suitable  mi  nner, 
"  to  order  ourselves  and  keep  watch,"  with  David,  Psalm  v.  3.  We 
ought  to  dismiss  all  our  worldly  thoughts,  to  inquire  what  we  need, 
and  endeavour  to  have  a  suitable  sense  of  God,  to  whom  we  are 
about  to  draw  near  :  but  we  ought  in  a  more  particular  manner  actu- 
ally to  repent  of  and  forsake  our  sins,  and  to  entertain  a  >.  teadfast 
resolution  to  lesist  them  in  future.  Zophar,  the  friend  of  Job,  said 
to  him,  "  If  thou  prepare  thy  heart,  and  stretch  out  thy  hand  toward 
him  :  if  iniquity  be  in  thy  hand,  put  it  far  from  thee,  and  let  not 
■wickedness  dwell  in  thy  tents,"  Job  xi.  13,  14  After  prayer,  in- 
quire for  what  and  how  ye  have  prayed,  and  whether  ye  be  the  bet- 
ter for  it.  Let  your  hearts  continue  turned  to  the  Lord,  and,  as  it 
were,  employed  in  repeating  your  prayer,  and  look  out  for  an  an- 
swer, in  order  to  hear  what  God  the  Lord  wiil  speak,  ttusting  that 
l<  he  will  speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints  :  but  turn 
not  again  unto  folly,"  Psalm  lxxxv.  8.  Doth  the  Lord  hear  you, 
rejoice,  and  praise  him.  David  was  so  well  pleased  with  God's 
hearing  of  him,  that  he  would  not  only  praise  the  Lord  himself, 
Psalm  cxviii.  21,  but  would  also  inform  others,  who  feared  God,  of 
God's  kindness  in  this  respect,  that  they  likewise  might  praise  the 
Lord,  Psalm  lxvi.  16-20.  Yea,  he  found  that  he  was  unable  to  do 
this  alone  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  benefit,  and  therefore 
he  called  upon  others  to  help  him  :  "  O  magnify  the  Lord  with  me, 


412  THE  WORK  OF  CHRISTIAN  PRAYER. 

and  let  us  exalt  his  name  together.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  heard 
me,  and  delivered  me  from  all  my  fears,"  saith  he  to  the  people  of 
God,  Psalm  xxxiv.  3,  4.  To  conclude,  I  will  finish  this  discourse 
with  the  request  of  the  church,  P^alm  xx.  1 — 4.  "  The  Lord  hear 
thee  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend 
thee  :  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary  ;  and  strengthen  thee  out 
of  Zion  :  remember  all  thine  offerings,  and  accept  thy  burnt  sacri- 
fice ;  Selah.  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart,  and  fulfil  all 
thy  counsel,"  Amen. 


(  413  ) 


THE  ADDRESS 


OF 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  6.     Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven.