Q.  120.  Why  hath  Christ  commanded  us  to  address  Gcd  thus,  Our 
Father  ? 

A.  That  immediately  in  the  very  beginning  of  our  prayer  he 
might  excite  in  us  a  childlike  reverence  for,  and  confidence  in  God, 
■which  are  the  foundation  of  our  prayer  ;  namely,  that  God  is  be- 
come our  Father  in  Christ,  and  will  much  less  deny  us  what  we 
ask  of  him  in  true  faith,  than  our  parents  will  refuse  us  earthly 
things. 

Q.    121.    Why  is  it  here  added,  "  Which  art  in  heaven  ?" 

A.  Lest  we  should  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of  God's  heavenly 
majesty,  and  that  we  may  expect  from  his  almighty  power  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body. 


D 


ANGER  will  cause  a  person  to  pray:"  this  is  a  common 
proverb  with  us.  It  is  also  true  :  for  when  a  man  is  in  danger,  he 
is  constrained  to  call  for  help.     Seafaring  men,  though  ever  so  care- 


114  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

less  and  dissolute,  when  they  are  in  dangeu,  and  cannot  deliver 
themselves,  will  stretch  out  their  hands  toward  heaven,  and  call  upon 
God  for  relief.  If  a  man  will  learn  to  pray,  saith  another  proverb, 
let  him  go  to  sea.  But  how  true  soever  it  be,  that  danger  will  cause 
us  to  pray,  it  doth  not  however  teach  us  the  right  nature  of  prayer  ; 
the  mind  is  too  much  agitated  and  disturbed  by  danger,  to  draw  near 
to  the  true  God  with  deliberation  and  faith.  Danger  doth  not  teach 
the  afflicted  person  for  what  things  he  ought  to  pray,  in  what  method, 
and  with  what  motives  he  ought  to  propose  his  requests :  "  We 
know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought,"  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  viii.  26.  Danger  causeth  him  to  cry  at  random  to  an  un- 
known God :  but  who  the  true  and  adorable  God  is,  and  in  what 
Inanner  he  ought  to  address  him,  this  danger  v. ill  not  discover  to. 
him.  When  "the  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea,  and 
there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to 
be  broken,  and  the  mariners  were  afraid  ;  tnen  they  cried  every 
suan  to  his  god,"  and  therefore  to  his  idol,  Jonah  i.  4,  5.  If  a  man 
fchall  learn  to  pray  aright,  and  in  a  manner  that  is  acceptable  to 
God,  he  must  have  an  expert  teacher.  When  a  person  will  apply 
to  his  prince  for  relief  in  a  civil  danger  and  distress,  he  finds  himself 
fearful,  and  abashed,  because  he  knows  not  with  what  titles  le  ought 
to  address  his  prince,  or  how,  and  in  what  manner  he  ought  to  pro- 
pose his  request  to  him  :  he  will  therefore  betake  himself  to  some 
person,  who  is  more  skilful  than  himself,  and  obtain  a  petition  cf 
lnm,  that  he  may  present  it  to  his  prince.  Thus  believers  also  have 
their  teacher,  who  teaches  them  to  pray,  and  composes  a  petition  for 
them,  that  they  may  present  it  with  their  requests  to  the  God  of 
heaven.  "The  Spirit,"  saUh  Paul.  "  htlpeth  our  infirmities:  for 
we  know  not  wnat  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought  :  but  the  Spirit 
itself  maketh  intent sion  for  us,  with  groanings  which  cannot  be 
uttered,'  Rom.  viii.  26.  The  disciples  of  John  the  br.pt  ist  were 
fain  to  learn  of  their  master  how  to  pray  :  and  the  disciples  of  Jesiis, 
knowing  their  needs,  and  the  necessity  ot  prayer,  but  not  the  right 
method  of  praying  in  a  manner  which  is  acceptable  to  (Jod,  desire 
also  of  their  Lord,  "  that  he  would  teach  them  to  pray,  as  John 
taught  his  disciples."  Jesus  was  too  good  to  deny  their  request,  and 
lie  therefore  composes  a  most  perfect  prayer  for  them,  and  "  saith 
to  them,  when  ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hal- 
lowed be  thy  name,"  &c  Luke  xi.  I — 4.  In  this  prayer  he  teach  • 
06  them  with  what  confidtnee  and  reverence  they  ought  to  address 
God,  what  matters  they  ought  to  ask  of  him,  in  what  method  they 


XLVI.  •  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  413 

ought  to  propose  them,  and  with  what  motives  they  ought  to  enforce 
their  requests. 

We  must  speak  at  present  only  of  the  address  of  prayer,-  and  in- 
quire with  the  instructor  concerning  this, 

I.  Why  believers,  when  they  pray,  must  address  God  as  "their 
Father,"  and  then, 

II.  Why  they  must  consider  him,  in  their  approaches  to  him,  as 
"  in  heaven." 

1.  The  Lord  doth  not  send  the  children  of  God  to  the  saints,  but. 
directly  to  their  Father.  The  people  of  God  were  also  to  turn  from 
the  saints  to  the  Lord,  as  their  Father  :  "  Doubtless  thou  art  our 
Father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge 
us  not :  thou,  O  Lord,  art  our  Father,"  thus  they  spake,  Isaiah 
Ixiii.   16. 

Although  the  essence  of  God,  and  also  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  may  be  called  Father,  and  ought  to  be  worshipped,  neverthe- 
less we  must  understand  here,  with  the  instructor,  by  the  Father  the 
first  Person  ;  for  he  saith,  in  order  to  explain  this,  that  God  is  be- 
come our  Father  through  Christ."  This  is  also  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  which  teacheth  us  that  in  the  ceconomy  of  grace  the 
first  Person  hath  undertaken  to  exhibit  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead 
of  the  whole  Trinity  in  his  Person,  as  the  Son  should  accomplish  the 
work  of  redemption,  as  Mediator,  and  thus  as  the  Father's  servant, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  should  render  the  elect  partakers  of  the  redemp- 
tion. Therefore  the  first  Person  must  be  considered  as  the  foun- 
tain of  all  grace,  from  whom  we  derive  all  things  through  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost :  "  We  have  one  God,  even  the  Father,  of  whom 
are  all  things,  and  we  in  him  :  and  one  Loid  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
are  all  things,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  viii.  6.  Although  we 
ought  to  worship  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  the  Father, 
we  may  nevertheless  not  end  in  the  Son,  or  in  the  Holy  Ghost : 
but  we  must  proceed  through  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Son  to  the 
Father,  and  end  in  him :  "  For  through  Christ  we  have  an  access 
by  the  Spirit  unto  the  Father,"  according  to  Eph.  ii.  18.  Even  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  pray  to  the  Father  for  and  in  believers, 
as  Christ  and  his  servant  Paul  teach  us,  John  xiv.  16.  Rom.  viiu 
26,  as  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  do  also  receive  all  things  of  the 
Father  for  believers.  Therefore  Jesus  saith,  John  xvi.  13 — 15s 
"  The  Spirit  of  truth  shall  not  speak  of  himself;  but  whatsoever  he 
shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak  :  and  he  will  show  you  things  to 
come  :  he  will  glorify  me  ;  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall 
*how  it  unto  you."      The  apostles  therefore  called   upon  the  ftrsfi 


416  *HE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

"Person  under  the  name  of  Father,  Rom.  i.  7.  1  Cor.  i.  3.  2  Cor. 
j.  2.  Gal.  i.  3.  Eph.  i.  2.  iii.  14.  1  Pet.  i.  3.  2  John  vrs.  3. 
It  is  true,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  in  heaven,  as  well  as  the 
Father.  Yet  the  Son  was  sent  as  Mediator  by  the  Father  out  of 
heaven  upon  earth,  and  was  "  exalted  again  by  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father,  as  his  Vicegerent,  to  his  throne,  that  he  might  be  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgivenesr- 
of  sins,"  Rev.  iii.  21.  Acts  v.  31.  Thus  also  "the  Holy  Spirit  is 
sent  forth  "  by  the  Father  through  the  Son  "  into  the  hearts  "  of  be- 
lievers, and  "cries"  in  them,  "Abba,  Father,"  Gal.  iv.  6.  But 
the  Fa-her  is,  and  abides  in  heaven,  upon  his  throne,  and  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  receive  all  things  from  him,  and  therefore  the  first 
Person  is  called  heavenly  Father,  Matt.  vi.  14.  xviii.  10,  14,  19. 
On  this  account  the  words  of  James  must  also  be  understood  of 
the  first  Person  :  "  Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from 
above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,"  James  i.   17. 

That  God  i->  the  Father  of  Christ  by  an  eternal  and  inconceivable 
generation,  this  we  have  shown  in  our  explanation  of  the  thirteenth 
Lord's  clay.  But  here  believers  call  him  their  Father,  not  so  much 
on  account  of  creation  and  preservation,  for  in  this  respect  he  is  the 
Father  of  the  ungodly  also  ;  but  he  is  the  Father  of  believers  by 
grace  through  Christ,  in  and  through  whom  they  may  draw  near 
with  their  prayers  to  God,  who  is  their  Father  by  regeneration,  by 
a  spiritual  marriage  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  by  adoption,  as  we 
have  shown  upon  the  ninth  Lord's  day. 

Behold,  O  believers,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestow- 
ed upon  you,  that  ye  should  be  called  the  children  of  God.  Ye,  and 
no  others,  have  a  right  to  address  him,  as  your  Father,  and  to  ex- 
pect all  good  things  of  him.  God  is  indeed  the  Father  of  the  sin- 
ner, who  is  siill  in  a  state  of  nature,  by  creation,  and  he  bestows 
therefore  many  good  things  on  him  ;  for  "God  is  good  to  all,  and 
his  mercies  are  over  all  his  works  •"  but  the  un-onverted  sinner, 
having  forfeited  all  things,  and  being  "  without  Christ,  an  alien  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  a  stranger  from  the  covenants  of 
promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world,"  as  the 
apostle  speaks,  Epli.  ii  1~,  hath  no  right  ai  all  to  address  God  with 
confidence  as  his  Father  in  Christ.  When  he  doth  it,  he  lies,  and 
his  confidence  is  vain.  If  he  will  call  upon  God  as  his  Father,  he 
must  earnestly  seek  to  be  regenerated,  and  to  obtain  his  Maker  for 
his  husband,  that  he  may  be  able,  and  may  have  a  right  to-cry  Abba, 
Father.  That  Spirit  is  indeed  the  Spirit  of  faith,  which  appropri- 
a'es  and  owns  God  as  a   Fath?"   and  causeth  us  to  address   him  as 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  417 

such  ;  either  by  a  direct  act  of  faith,  by  which  a  person  receives  the 
Son,  and  thus  also  the  Father  in  him,  and  draws  near  to  him  with 
confidence  upon  his  invitation  ;'  or  by  a  reflex  act  of  faith,  by  which 
the  soul,  observing  her  believing  outgoings  toward  God,  perceives 
that  God  is  her  Father,  and  "  goes  thus  with  boldness  and  with 
confidence  to  him  through  faith  in  Christ,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Eph. 
iii.   12.     Heb.   iv.  16.     x.    18—22. 

Every  believer  hath  liberty,  with  Elihu,  and  with  the  church,  to 
address  God  as  his  Father,  Job  xxxiv.  36.  Jer.  iii.  4,  19.  But  Jesus 
requires  that  believers  in  general,  gathered  from  among  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  should  with  one  heart  and  with  one  mouth  call  God  their 
Father.  They  are  indeed  all  children  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
have  all  an  equal  right  to  the  Lord  :  the  minds  of  alltend  with  their 
desires  to  one  Father,  the  same  wants  and  desires  urge  them  all  to 
their  Father's  throne,  and  their  souls  are  knit  to  each  other  in  love, 
as  brethren,  so  that  they  cry  jointly  to  him,  as  children  of  one 
Father.  Therefore  when  the  believer  is  about  to  pray,  he  must  from 
his  heart  forgive  every  injury  that  hath  been  done  to  him  by  Jus 
brother,  and  banish  his  displeasure  out  of  his  heart,  that  he  may  unite 
himself  to  him  in  love,  and  appear  thus  with  him  before  the  throne, 
especially,  when  "  he  agrees  with  his  brother  touching  any  thing 
that  they  shall  ask."  Such  an  agreement  of  two  persons  is  indeed  ef- 
fectual :"  that  thing,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt  xviii.  19,  "  shall  be 
done  for  them  by  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  There  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  but  that  God  the  Lord  was  the  Father  of  the  believ- 
ers under  the  Old  Testament  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come. 
For  they  had  "  the  adoption,"  Rom.  ix.  4.  They  were  also  called 
the  children  of  God,  Exod.  iv.  22.  Deut.  xiv.  1.  God  called  him- 
self "their  Father,"  Deut.  xxxii.  36,  Isaiah  Ixiii.  16.  Ixiv.  8. 
But  although  they  were  in  a  much  happier  condition  than  the  hea- 
thens, yea,  than  all  the  outward  prefessors  among  the  Israelites,  they 
were  nevertheless,  like  minoi  "  children,  under  tutors  and  govern- 
ours,"  of  rhe  law  of  ceremonies,  "  the  rudiments  of  tjie  world,  and 
they  differed  in  nothing  from  servants,  though  they  were  lords  of 
all."  But  believers  of  the  New  Testament,  being  delivered  by  the 
coming  of  Christ  from  the  law,  have  like  those  who  are  of  full  age, 
outgrown  those  tutors  and  governours,  and  have  a  greater  boldness, 
and  a  more  abundant  measure  of  the  spirit  of  adoption,  by  winch  they 
can  "cry,  Abba,  Father,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Gal.  iv.  1 — 6.  And 
even  now  yet  the  sonship  of  believers  is  not  perfect,  since  they  have 
not  yet  the  full  possession  of  all  their  inheritance,  but  will  obtain 
it  first  in  the  blessed  resurrection  ;*for  "  they  wait  yet  for  the  adopton 
of  children,  even  the  redemption  of  their  bodies,"  as  we  read,  Horn. 
Vor.  ii.  3  C 


415  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

viii.  23.     But  Jesus  chooses  that  they  should  cry  unto  God  as  then 
Father,  ki  order  that  they  may  obtain    their  inheritance    gradually! 

Believers  are  then  exhorted  to  address  God,  as  then  Father,  not 
because  he  is  willing  to  become  their  Father,  and  to  show  them  all 
.!y  kindness,  if  they  will  perform  their  dutj  aright,  as  the  Pe- 
ria  speak  ;  but  they  must  address  him  thus,  b.  cause  he  is  ai- 
re (iy  becom  their  Father  through  Christ,  for  he  is  their  Father  by 
regeneration,  by  a  spiritual  marriage  with  Christ,  and  by  adoption, 
before  they  perform  their  duty  aright.  The  Lord  Cod  "  predestina- 
ted them  to  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  from  eternity, 
according  to  the  good  pleasure  ot  his  will,"  without  any  respect  to 
their  duty,  and  from  his  own  free  choice,  according  to  Eph.  i  5. 
Surely,  no  sinner  can,  nor  may  address  God  with  boldness,  as  long 
as  the  Lord  is  riot  his  Father  A  believer,  who  is  yet  unexperien- 
ced, and  is  not  sufficiently  assured  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  grace,  will 
in'  eed  entreat  God  to  become  his  Father,  but  this  proceeds  from 
the  weakness  of  his  faith,  and  he  will  not  see,  nor  attend  to  his 
right  exercises,  while  he  is  praying  ;  for  he  views  himself  as  too  de- 
ficient and  sinful,  and  he  will  cry  therefore  with  the  publican  only 
for  grace,  Luke  xviii.    13. 

But  why  cloth  the  Lord  Jesus  require  that  we  should  address  God 
particularly  as  our  Father?  -  It  would  surely  be  right  to  call  him 
Lord,  God,  Almighty,  Wise  and  Good  :  for  believers  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament  have  addressed  him  thus.  It  is  true  ;  but 
when  our  Saviour  teacheth  us  to  worship  God  as  Father,  he  doth 
not  thereby  condemn  every  other  mode  of  address  ;  but  he  chooses 
thai  we  should  address  God  as  Father  particularly  in  this  short  pat- 
t.  in  of  prayer  not  only  because  all  other  titles  of  honour,  that  can 
excite  confidence  and  reverence,  are  comprehended  in  the  words, 
'  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven ;"  and  because  in  whatsoever 
manner  we  address  God,  we  must  possess  a  childlike  disposition  to- 
ward him,  and  consider  him  as  a  Father:  but  particularly  because 
when  we  call  God  our  Father,  we  express  the  nearest  and  dearest 
relation,  that  subsists  between  Cod  and  believers,  and  this  enables 
them  to  pray  to  him  with  suitable  dispositions.     For, 

1.  '1  1ms  they  become  bold,  and  consequently  able  to  draw  near 
to  him  in  a  familiar  manner,  and  to  exercise  a  sweet  fellowship  with 
'iiim  by  prayer  V  e  can  indeed  have  a  greater  boldness  toward  our 
father,  than  toward  our  lord  and  judge.  In  order  that  he  might  in- 
duce the  Israelites  to  call  on  him  freely,  after  they  had  provoked 
him  greatly,  he  saith,  Jer.  iii.  4,  u  W  ilt  thon  not  from  this  time  cry 
onto  me;  My  father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth  ?" 


XLVI.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  120,  1*21.  419 

%.  T:iis  furnishes  them  with  an  argument,  wit'  which  they  urge 
and  move  him  vehemently  to  .  rant  their  requests,  The  church 
praying  under  grievous  distress  in  a  plaintive  manner,  urgeth  her 
petition  thus,  Isaiah  Ixiii.  16,  ''Doubtless  thou  art  pur  Father, 
though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Lraei  acknowledge  us  not ; 
Thou,  0  Lor  I,  art  our  lather,  our  Redeemer  is  thy  name  from 
everlasting."  The  Lord  is  so  well  pleased  with  their  calling  him 
their  Father  when  they  cry  to  him,  that  he  suiters  himself  to  he 
overcome  l>y  it,  so  that  he  is  induced  to  show  kindness  to  his  people, 
which  he  can  otherwise  scarcely  do,  on  account  of  their  sins.  Hear 
what  the  Lord  himself  saith  of  it,  Jer.  iii.  19,  "  I  said  how  long 
shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children,  and  give  thee  a  pleasant  land, 
a  goodly  heritage  of  the  host  of  nations  ?  and  I  said,  thou  shalt  call 
me  my  Father,  and  shall  not  turn  away  from  me." 

3.  When  believers  address  God,  as  their  Father,  it  excites  a  child- 
like trust  and  confidence  in  them  toward  God,  that  their  prayer  is  ac- 
ceptable to  him,  and  that  he  will  grant  their  petition.  Is  he  become 
their  Father  in  Christ,  and  will  he  then  refuse  them  that  which  is 
less  ?  "  He  who  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for 
us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  freely  .give  us  ull  thing??"  saith 
Paui,  Rom.  viii  3  2.  When  a  man  hears  his  child  cry  to  him  in 
distress,  my  father,  help  me,  will  not  his  bowels  yearn  over  him, 
and  will  lie  not  give  his  child  what  he  desires  r  May  and  ought  not 
then  the  consideration  that  God  is  a  Father,  and  that  he  will  be  ad- 
dressed as  such,  induce  believers  to  "confide  in  the  ve«'y  beginning 
of  their  prayers,  that  God  will  grant  them  their  petition  ?"  The 
Saviour  teacheth  this,  Matt.  vii.  9 — 11.  "What  man  is  thereof 
you,  whom,  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  sone  r  or  if  he 
ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent.  If  ye  then,  being  evjl,  know 
how  to  give  good  ?ifts  to  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  then)  that  as::  him  I" 

4.  It  will  tend  no  less  to  excite  also  a  childlike  fear  and  reverence 
in  believers,  that  they  contemplate  and  address  him  as  their  Father. 
We  must  "  fear  our  father  and  mother,"  according  to  the  law  j 
Lev.  xix.  3.  Much  more  then  God  the  Father,  who  is  higher  thaa 
the  highest.     "A  son,"  saith   the  Lord,    Mai.  i.  6,  "  honoureth  his 

:and  a  servant  his  master ;  if  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is 
mine  honour  I  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is  my  fear  ?"  To  con- 
template God  as  a  Lord  and  Judge  may  affect  a  person  with  a  sla- 
vish fear,  which  will  drive  him  from  the  Lord  :  but  to  address  him 
as  a  Father,  will  excite  indeed  a  dread  for  God  in  the  believer-  I  ut 
it  wiil  be  attended  with  a  childlike  affection,  that  will  lead   him   to 


42©  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

the  Lord.  Therefore  Peler  saith,  «  If  ye  call  on  him  as  a  Father,* 
who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"  1  Pet.  i.  17. 
II.  How  often  doth  familiarity  heget  contempt  !  As  children 
converse  most  familiarly  with  their  parents,  they  are  not  always  im- 
pressed with  a  suitable  reverence  for  them.  The  Lord  Jesus,  desi- 
ring to  excite  a  becoming  awe  for  the  Father  in  his  disciples,  teach- 
eth  them  to  pray,  Our  Father,  "  which  art  in  heaven."  In  the  third 
petition  only  one  heaven  is  mentioned,  but  here  more  than  one.t 
The  air  is  the  first  heaven,  in  which  the  birds  fiy,  which  are  therefore 
called  "  the  fowls  of  heaven,"  Matt.  vi.  2G.  xiii.  20.  The  firma- 
ment, in  which  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  shine,  is  also  called  heaven. 
David  "considered  (he  heaven,  the  work  of  God's  fingers,  the  moon 
and  the  stars,"  Psalm  viii.  3.  We  read  finally  of  the  Paradise  of 
God,  which  is  called  "  the  third  heaven,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens," 
2  Cor.  xii.  2,  4.     1  Kings  viii.  27. 

"Whoever  will  address  God  must  consider  him  as  in  heaven  :  he 
is  therefore  often  called  the  heavenly  Father.  We  explain  and 
prove  upon  other  occasions,  that  the  Lord  God  is  omnipresent, 
neither  included  nor  excluded  any  where  ;  and  it  is  therefore  also 
certain,  that  God  is  not  shut  up  in  the  heavens,  nor  confined  to 
them  :  "  Behold  the  heavens,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain thee,"  saith  Solomon,  1  Kings  viii.  27.  But  he  is  said  to  be  in 
-the  heavens,  (1)  Because  he  manifests  his  glory  and  majesty  in 
the  heavens,  more  than  elsewhere  ;  for  he  is  there,  as  in  his  palace, 
and  upon  his  throne  :  "  The  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the 
heavens,  and  his  kingdom  rulelh  over  all,"  saith  David,  Psalm  ciii. 
10..-  Who  can  behold  the  visible  heavens,  the  first  and  the  second 
•heaven,  with  all  that  appears  in  them,  without  being  ravished  at  the 
bight,  and  crying  out  with  David,  Psalm  civ.  >1 — 3,  "  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul:  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  great,  thou  art  clothed 
"with  honour  and  majesty.  Who  coverest  thyself  with  light,  as  with 
a  garment  :  who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain  :  who 
layeth  the  beams  of  his  chambers  in  the  waters,  who  maketh  the 
clouds  his  chariot,  who  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind."  And 
he  manifests  his  glory  still  more  in  the  third  heaven,  where  he  is 
encircled,  attended  upon  and  glorified  by  his  courtiers,  even  all  the 
blessed,  and  especially  his  angels,  as  Micaiah  and  Isaiah  saw  him  thus 
in  a  vision,  "  sitting  upon  his  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven 
standing  by  him,  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left,  ready  to   sen 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  translation. 
■\  According  to  th;  Dutch  translation- 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  421 

him,  and  proclaiming  his  glory  with  a  loud  voice,"  I  Kings  xxii.  19. 
Isaiah  vi.  1 — 3.  For  "  the  Lord  is  there  in  his  holy  palace,  and 
his  throne  is  in  heaven,"  as  David  speaks,  Psalm  xi.  4.  And  there- 
fore God  hath  "  a  heavenly  majesty,"  as  the  instructor  speaks. 
(2)  God  is  also  in  the  heavens,  as  in  his  treasury,  from  which  he 
sends  down  to  his  children  whatsoever  they  need  for  soul  and  body. 
He  sends  them  from  heaven  light,  heat,  rain  and  drought,  and  ren- 
ders the  earth  habitable  and  fruitful.  "  The  Lord,"  saith  Moses, 
Deut.  xxviii.  12,  "  shall  open  to  thee  his  good  treasure,  to  give  the 
rain  to  thy  land  in  his  season,  and  to  bless  all  the  work  of  thy  hand." 
See  also  Acts  xix.  17.  Yea,  from  the  highest  heaven  he  sends  his 
Spirit,  and  all  heavenly  grace  down;  for  "every  good  gift,  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  comcth  down  from  the  Father 
of  lights,"  James  i.  17.  Because  the  Father  will  communicate  all 
his  saving  grace  only  through  his  Son,  therefore  he  took  him  up  to 
himself  into  heaven,  and  "  exalted  him  by  his  right  hand,  that  he 
might  receive  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
shed  him  forth,"  Acts  ii.  33.  The  Saviour  hath  manifested  his  wis- 
dom by  directing  us  to  address  our  Father,  as  he  "  who  is  in  heaven  ;" 
for  he  teacheth  us  thus, 

1.  To  call  upon  the  only,  true  and  high  God,  and  that  we  oue,ht 
not  to  turn  to  the  idols ;  for  that  he  is  in  heaven  distinguishes  him, 
as  the  true  God,  from  the  idols  :  "  Our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he 
hath  done  whatsoever  lie  pleased-  Their  idols  are  silver  and  gold, 
the  work  of  men's  hands  :"  thus  the  people  of  God  speak,  Psalm 
cxv.  3,  4,  The  forefathers  of  Israel,  "  Abraham  and  Israel,"  were 
indeed  in  heaven,  but  not  like  the  Lord,  who  "alone  was  their  Fath- 
er," in  heaven,  and  therefore  they  betook  themselves  to  him,  and 
prayed  that  "  he  would  look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 
the  habitation  of  his  holiness  and  of  his  glory,"  Isaiah  lxiii.  15.  16. 
Therefore  the  Saviour  requires  that  we  should  "  call  no  man  on 
earth  our  father,"  so  as  wholly  to  submit  to  him  and  trust  in  him, 
because  God  alone,  "  who  is  in  heaven,  is  our  Father,"  Matt. 
xxiii.  9. 

2.  The  Saviour  admonisheth  us  by  this  addition,  "which  art  in 
heaven,"  that  we  should  not  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of  the 
heavenly  majesty  of  God.  It  is  altogether  unsuitable  to  entertain 
degrading  ideas  of  him,  "  who  sitteth  above  the  circle  of  the  earth, 
the  inhabitants  whereof  are  as  grasshoppers  before  him  ;  who  stretch- 
eth  out  the  heavens,  as  a  curtain,  and  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent 
to  dwell  in,"  Isaiah  xl.  13,22.  Therefore  when  we  address  the 
heavenly  Father,  we  must  by  all  means  do  it  with  exalted  concep- 
tions of  him,  and  must  thereby  dispose  ourselves  to   humility   and 


THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

reverence  :  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,"  saith  the  preacher,  "  and 
let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  any  tiling  before  Coil  ;  For  God 
is  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  :  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few," 
Eccl.  v.  2 

3.  Is  the  Father,  upon  whom  we  call,  in  heaven,  we  must  then 
"  expect  from  his  almighty  power  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and 
body  :"  for  «  is  he  in  heaven,"  he  is  then  almighty,  and  "  cloth  what- 
soever he  pleaseth,"  Psalm  cxv.  3.  In  heaven  he  is  in  ins  full  store- 
house, and  therefore  allsufficieut,  and  so  "  abie  to  make  all  grace 
abound  toward  us  ;  that  we  always  having  all  sufficiency  in  all  things, 
may  abound  to  every  good  work,"  2  Cor  ix.  8.  Since  now  this 
heavenly,  and  therefore  almighty  God  is  the  Father  of  believers, 
therefore  they  can  and  may  look  for  that  which  is  good  from  him  only. 

4.  We  must  then  also  seek  heavenly   more  than  earthly- thii 

for  God  the  Father,  who  is  the  principal  portion  of  his  children,  is 
heavenly,  every  blessing  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  in  propor- 
tion as  heavenly  are  higher  and  worthier  than  earthly  things,  we 
ougiit  to  pursue  heavenly  more  than  earthly  things.  Ha'.h  the 
child  of  God  a  right  to  se»jk  also  earthly  things,  he  may  no1  d<  sire 
them  as  the  principal  things,  but  only  as  appendages,  that  lie  may 
by  them  be  led  up  fo  heavenly  things.  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus 
saith,  Mat.  vi.  33.  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righ* 
teousness,  and  all  these  tilings  shall  be  added  to  you  " 

5.  Once  more  ;  the  Saviour  choose th  that  we  should  address  the 
Father,  as  he  "  who  is  in  heaven,"  that  we  may  call  on  him  with  a 
heavenlv  heart,  which  lifts  itself  up  to  heaven,  and  places  itself  be- 
fore his  throne,  and  speaks  to  him  there.  Believers  have  for  this 
end  "  lifted  up  their  eyes,  hands  and  hearts  toward  heaven,"  as  we 
see,  Psalm  cxxiii.  1,  Lam  i,i  41  Believers  under  the  ( )Id  T 
nient  turned  themselves  toward  Jerusalem,  the  temple  and  the  ark, 
as  Solomon,  1  Kini^s  vim  44.  Dav'rd  and  Daniel,  Psalm  v.  7.  Dan. 
vi.  II,  because  there  the  Lord  exhibited  a  special  token  of  his 
presence,  and  "sat,  and  dwelled  there  between  the  cherub 
Psalm  lxxx.  1.  Isaiah  xxxvii.    16,  as  a  type,  that  c>  all  the  fain 

the  Godhead  should  dwell  in  the  human  nature  of  tiie  Messiah,  who 
was  to  come,  and  that  '*  the  Word  should  become  flesh,  and  dwell 
among  us,  that  we  might  belw>Id  hrsglory,  li'e  glory  as  ol 

.-gotten  of  the  Father,   full  of  grace  and  truth,"  Coi.  ii.  9.    John  i. 

14.  Believers  of  that  time  did  not  however  neglect  to  turn  them- 
selves toward  heaven,  and  address  God  as  in  heaven.  They  directed 
their  eyes  and  hands  with  their  hearts  toward  heaven,  as  we  have 
just   now   shown,    and   Solomon  prayed    "that  God  would  hear  jr. 


XLVI.  LORD'S    DAY.  Q.    120,  121.  423 

heaven  his  dwellingplace,"  1  Kings  viii.  39.  But  when  they  turned 
themselves  toward  Jerusalem  the  temple  and  ark  they  showed  then 
*  hat  they  looked  to  the  Surety,  and  worshipped  in  ids  name  the 
Father,  who  was  in  heaven. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  what  a  great  and  glorious  privilege  true  believers 
obtain  of  the  Lord,  that  he,  who  is  the  God  of  heaven,  and  who  is 
exalted  above  all,  is  the  Father  of  them,  who  are  by  nature  "  of 
their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii  44,  "children  of  wrath,"  Eph.  ii. 
3,  "  and  of  the  curse,"  2  Peter  ii.  14.  If  they  were  children  of  a 
great  king,  it  would  he  a  gpeat  matter.  "  When  David  was  solicited 
to  become  the  son-in-law  of  Saul,  he  said  to  the  messengers  of  the 
king,  Seemethit  to  you  a  light  thing  to  be  a  king's  son-in-law,  seeing 
that  1  am  a  poor  man.  and  lightly  esteemed  I"  1  Sam  xviii.  22,  23. 
But  that  such  arrant  wretches  should  become  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Almighty  and  Most  High  is  surely  inconceivable  ;  "  Behold,'' 
saith  the  beloved  disciple  of  Jesus,  "  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  on  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God,*'  1 
John  iii.  1.  Who  can  conceive  or  express  the  greatness  of  this 
love?  for  they  are  ''the  offspring  of  God,  born  of  Gud,"  John  i.  !3. 
The  Son  of  God,  O  wonderful  !  is  "their  Maker  and  their  Hus- 
band," Isaiah  liv.  5.  They  have  one  God  and  Father  with  him, 
John  xx.  17,  and  they  have  been  translated  into  the  family  of  God, 
that  they  may  enjoy  all  the  true  and  exalted  privileges  of  children, 
to  wit,  that  "  they  may  have  an  access"  with  confidence  *'  through 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  being  no  more  strangers  and  foreign- 
ers, but  fellowcitizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God," 
Eph.  ii.  18,  19.  Yea,  they  have  even  liberty  through  him  to  con- 
verse familiarly  in  his  palace,  even  heaven,  ''  to  have  their  conversa- 
tion in  heaven,"  Philip,  iii.  20,  and  to  u  enter  into  that  within  the  veil, 
whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus,"  Heb.  vi.  19, 
20.  Behold,  thus  hath  the  Lord  exalted  the  horn  ot  his  people,  the 
praise  of  all  his  saints,  even  of  the  children  of  Israel,  a  people  nip-h 
unto  him,"  Psalm  cxlviii.  14. 

Although  every  one  calls  God  in  this  common  prayer  his  Father, 
it  is  nevertheless  certain  that  God  is  not  the  Father  of  all  men,  Mo- 
ses saith  of  Israel    after  the  flesh,  Deut.  xxxii.  5.     "  Thcv  are  no* 


424  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

his  children,  a  blot  cleaveth  to  them,  they  arc  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation*;"  The  Jews,  who  were  not  made  free  by  the  Son,  al- 
tuo'igii  they  were  in  other  respects  the  people  of  God,  are  said  "  to 
be  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii.  44.  For  they  are  not  all 
Israel,  which  are  of  Israel  ;  neither  because  they  are  of  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  are  they  all  children  :  but  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called, 
that  is,  They  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the 
children  of  God  :  but  the  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for 
the  seed,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  he.  6 — 8. 

Is  this  so,  let  every  one  then  see  and  inquire  whether  he  be  also  a 
child.  Eet  none  think,  that  this  is  such  a  secret  matter,  that  we 
cannot  learn  how  it  is  with  us  in  this  respect.  The  reformed  church 
hath  long  since  expelled  by  the  word  of  God  this  popish  unbelief. 
Do  not  these  saints  and  these  excellent  ones  in  the  earth  outshine 
the  children  of  hell  in  one  particular,  or  another  whereby  they  may 
be  known  ?  Verily  God  hath  set  a  mark  in  their  hearts  and  in  their 
foreheads  by  his  Spirit.  These  marks  are  exhibited  in  the  word  of 
God  :  see  only,  Rom.  viii.  and  the  epistles  lof  John.  Attend  to 
these,  which  are  the  principal  evidences  : 

1.  Those,  who.  as  true  children,  address  God  as  their  Father,  do 
it  upon  the  ground  of  faith,  either  by  a  direct  act  of  faith,  whereby 
they  accept  of  the  Son,  and  the  Father  in  the  Son  by  an  active  di- 
rect motion  of  the  soul  :  for  *  as  many  as  have  received  the  Son, 
to  them  hath  he  given  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name,"  John  i.  12,  or  by  a  reflex  act  of 
faith,  by  which,  attending  carefully  to  themselves,  they  see  and  know 
with  Paul,  "in  whom  they  have  believed,"  2  Tim.  i.  12.  "The 
Spirit  causeth  them  to  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  them 
of  God,"  according  to  1  Cor.  ii.  12,  and  thus  "  the  Spirit  of  God 
bcareth  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of  God," 
as  the  same  apostle  teacheth,  Rom.  viii.  16.  Before  they  have  this 
witness,  they  dare  not  call  God  with  any  confidence  their  Pather.  It 
is  true,  they  have  not  always  such  an  assurance  ;  and  therefore  they 
are  not  always  so  confident ;  but  as  they  cannot  remain  absent  from 
the  Lord,  they  will  call  on  him  time  after  time,  that  he  would  be 
pleased  to  become  theii  Pather,  and  they  will  for  this  end  continuallv 
lay  hold  on  the  iron,  they  will  lift  themselves  up  in  faith,  and  will 
give  themselves  no  rest,  until  God  sailh  unto  them,  "  I  am  thy  sal- 
vation," Psalm  xx/.v.  :j.  Others  inquire  not  so  much  concerning 
i         ahd  are  not  so  scrupulous    whether   they   may   address  God  a 

.;r.ci£e  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  425 

their  Father,  and  they  call  him  so  inconsiderately,  and  from  custom. 

2.  The  children  of  God  will  love  their  fellowchildren,  their  breth- 
ren and  sisters  heartily,  because  God  loves  them,  and  they  love  God  ; 
and  the  more  this  love  of  God,  and  to  him  shines  forth  in  them, 
the  more  they  love  them,  even  when  they  rebuke  and  reprove  them  : 
"  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness,"  8cc.  saith  Da- 
vid, Psalm  cxli.  5.  This  mutual  love  is  a  certain  evidence,  that  a 
person  is  a  child  of  God  :  "  We  know,"  saith  the  apostle  John, 
"  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the 
brethren,"  1  John  iii.  14.  The  children  of  God  certainly  love  God, 
as  their  Father,  and  therefore  they  love  his  children  also.  Hear 
what  the  same  apostle  saith,  1  John  v.  1.  "Every  one  that  loveth 
him  that  begat,  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him."  Others, 
who  are  not  children  of  God,  will  either  mak-*  no  difference  between 
persons,  or  will  even  hate,  at  least  in  their  hearts,  the  children  of 
God,  on  account  of  their  godliness  ;  or,  if  they  love  them,  it  is  for 
the  sake  of  lucre,  or  on  account  of  their  agreeable  manners,  or  be- 
cause it  is  an  honour  to  join  themselves  to  that  people. 

3.  They  who  address  God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth  as  their  Father, 
endeavour  to  penetrate  into  heaven,  even  unto  the  throne  of  God, 
that  they  may  speak  with  and  to  God  himself.  Others  are  satisfied 
■with  mumbling  a  few  words,  and  merely  uttering  them  :  "  they 
draw  near  to  him  with  their  mouths,  and  honour  him  with  their  lips, 
but  remove  their  hearts  far  from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  But  the 
children  of  God  desire  to  be  near  him,  and  to  speak  to  him  ;  if  they 
cannot,  it  grieves  them,  they  wrestle  and  weary  themselves,  until  he 
opens  an  access  for  them,  places  them  near  him,  and  saith,  Behold, 
here  am  I.  Hear  how  Job  sighs,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  him  !  that  I  might  come  even  to  his  seat !  I  would  order  my 
cause  before  him,"  Job  xxiii.  3,  4. 

Apply  these  things  now  to  yourselves,  and  see  Whether  they  be  in 
you.  Do  ye  know  nothing  of  them,  are  ye  unacquainted  with  this 
work  of  the  heart  with  and  toward  the  Father ;  judge  then  for  your- 
selves whether  it  be  lawful  for  you  to  look  upon  him,  and  address 
him  as  your  Father,  if  ye  do  this  notwithstanding,  ye  only  "  flat- 
ter him  with  your  mouths,  and  lie  unto  him  with  your  tongues," 
Psalm  lxxviii.  36.  Expect  not  that  he  will  send  blessings  down  for 
you  from  his  storehouse  of  heaven,  but  curses:  "  Upon  the  wicked 
he  will  rain  snares  :  fire,  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tempest 
shall  be  the  portion  of  their  cup,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xi.  6.  Where 
will  your  souls  abide,  when  they  depart  htnee  ?  and  where  your  bod' 
ies,  united  to  your  souls,  when  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
Vol.  ik.    '  3  D 


426  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

Lord  shall  come  ?  in  heaven  ?  no,  for  your  father  is  not  there,  but 
<♦  in  everlasting  fire."  in  order  to  receive  there  "  the  inheritance  of 
your  father  the  devil,  and  of  his  angels  for  ever,"  according  to  the 
sentence  of  the  great  Judie,  Matt.  xxv.  41. 

Therefore  "  rt  cover  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  •which  ye  are 
taken  captive  at  his  will,"  2  Tim*  ii.  26.  Rest  not,  until  God  is  be- 
come your  Father.  Let  it  not  suffice  you,  that  he  is  your  Father  as 
Creator ;  for  since  ye  have  apostatized  from  him.  and  have  violated 
his  image,  his  most  goodly  work,  ye  may  not  address  him  with  con- 
fidence as  your  Father  by  creation ;  he  is  become,  on  account  of 
your  transgressions,  "  a  devouring  fire  and  everlasting  burnings"  to 
you,  and  therefore  ye  "cannot  dwell"  with  him,  nor  draw  near  to 
him,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  14.  But  do  this,  "  lay  hold  on"  his  Son,  "his 
strength,  and  make  your  peace  with  him,  that  he  may  not  attack 
you  as  thorns  and  thistles,  and  burn  you  together,"  Isaiah  xxvii.  4,  5. 

But,  believers,  children  of  the  Most  High,  why  do  ye  indulge  so 
many  hard  thoughts  of  your  heavenly  Father,  as  if  he  were  a  rigo- 
rous master,  and  embrace  thus  without  reason  your  own  sorrow  ?  is 
it  not  true?  for  (a)  ye  often  suspect  your  childship,  and  draw  near  in 
your  prayers  with  so  much  slavish  fear,  as  if  that  were  most  safe 
for  you  ;  yea,  ye  dare  not  often  address  him  as  your  Father,  as  if  he 
would  take  it  ill,  when  he  nevertheless  desires  to  hear  those  words, 
"  My  Father,"  out  of  your  mouths  :  Wilt  thou  not  from  this  time 
cry  unto  me,  My  Father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth,"  Jer.  iii. 
4.  (b)  Sometimes  ye  venture  to  draw  near  to  the  Son  more  than  to 
the  Father,  imagining  that  the  Father  is  a  rigorous  Judge,  who  de- 
mands satisfaction  for  your  sins,  but  that  the  Son  hath  a  goodwill  to 
poor  sinners  :  just  as  if  the  Son  could  have  a  goodwill  to  sinners, 
and  the  Father  at  the  same  time  not  love  them,  when  the  Father 
sent  his  Son  from  his  love.  Hear  what  the  Lord  Jesus  saith,  John 
xvi.  26,  27.  "  I  say  not  unto  you,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for 
you  :  for  the  "  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  have  loved 
me."  (c)  The  smallest  sin  discourageth  you,  and  renders  you  fear- 
ful of  corning  to  i!ie  throne  ofthe  Father  ;  yea,  ye  wdl,  on  account 
of  your  baekslidingSj  omit  even  your  stated  and  ordinary  prayers. 
It  is  childlike  to  humble  ourselves  on  account  of  sin  ;  but  it  is  slavish 
to  remain  absent  and  to  run  from  our  Father.  How !  did  the  Lord 
adopt  you  for  his  children,  when  all  your  sins  lay  upon  you,  and 
shall  the  !e,ast  sin  extinguish  all  hU  fatherly  affection  for  you, 
now  ye  are  his  children  ?  When  the  prodigal  son  came  to  his  father, 
and  confessed  his  siris,  he  was  not  rejected  by  him  :  but  "  his  father 
Steing    him   afar  off,  had  compassion  on  him,  and  ran,   and  fell  or. 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  421 

hm  neck,  and  kissed  him,"  Luke  xv.  18—20.  (d)  Are  ye  under 
any  heavy  cross,  ye  forthwith  suspect  him  of  rigour,  become  fretful 
and  uneasy  and  complain,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me  ;  and  my 
Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  ? 
"Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have 
compassion  on  the  son  ol  her  womb  ?  yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will 
inot  forget  thee,"  Isaiah  xlix.  14 — 16.  (e)  How  seldom  do  ye 
commend  your  wants  to  the  care  of  your  Father  !  Ye  keep  them 
often  to  yourselves,  become  dejected,  and  endeavour  to  relieve  your- 
selves by  various  strange  methods,  as  if  the  Lord  did  not  regard 
your  affairs  :  "  My  way,"  saith  the  soul,  "  is  hidden  from  the  Lord, 
and  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God,"  Isaiah  xl.  27.  As 
if  the  Lord  were  so  unmerciful,  that  he  would  harden  his  heart 
against  the  mournful  complaints  of  those  whom  he  loved.  And  so 
men  dishonour  and  reproach  their  Father,  who  requires  that  they 
should  think  well  of  him,  and  trust  in  him.     Therefore 

1.  Endeavour  to  obtain  an  assurance,  that  ye  are  his  children,  and 
that  he  is  truly  become  your  Father  through  Christ.  Ye  have  cer- 
tainly the  evidences  j  for  ye  cannot  deny  that  ye  exercise  faith  to- 
ward God  in  Christ,  nor  that  ye  love  the  children  of  God,  nor  that 
ye  lift  up  your  souls  to  God  in  the  heaven.  Hath  it  not  also  been 
clearly  discovered  to  you  by  the  witnessing  of  God's  Spirit  with  your 
spirits  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  and  by  the  embraces  of  his  love,  so 
that  ye  could  not  any  longer  deny  that  ye  were  the  children  of  God? 
Will  ye  reject  again  and  again  such  clear  and  palpable  evidences, 
embrace  your  distress,  and  consider  the  work  of  God  as  deceit?  No, 
no.  Rather  lift  up  your  souls  in  faith,  and  acknowledge  him  even 
in  darkness  to  be  your  Father,  like  the  church,  Isaiah  lxiii.  !  6. 
"  Doubtless,  thou  art  our  Father,"  and  again,  "  Thou,  O  Lord,  ait 
our  Father." 

2.  Thank  him  for  the  happy  privilege,  that  he  is  your  Father, 
and  that  ye  have  liberty  to  speak  to  him.  as  your  Father  who  is  in 
heaven,  so  that  ye  may  desire  all  tilings  of  him  with  boldness  and 
confidence.  It  is  a  great  matter,  ye  have  it  not  of  yourselves,  but 
of  him ;  and  not  on  account  of  your  worthiness,  or  because  ye  have 
moved  him  by  your  good  works.  It  is  only  through  his  Son,  and 
from  his  free  and  everlasting  love  and  grace,  that  it  may  be  to  his 
praise  :  '<  Having  predestinated  us  to  the  adoption  of  children  by 
Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will, 
to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,"  saith  the  apostle,  Eph   i.  5,6. 

3.  Make  use  now  of  your  liberty,  and  indeed  familiarly.     For  is 


428  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

he  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  "  cast  not  then  away  your  cofi- 
dence,  which  hatha  great  recompence  of  reward,"  Heb.  x.  35,  but 
go  frequently  with  boldness  to  the  throne,  send  up  thither  all  your 
groanings,  compluints,  desires  and  requests.  He  is  indeed  your 
Father,  he  encourageth  you,  and  ye  will  please  him,  if  ye  pour  out 
your  complaints  often  into  his  bosom,  like  children  :  "  Let  us  there- 
fore go  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,"  Heb.  iv.  16. 

4.  Commit  your  concerns  to  him,  when  ye  pray,  trusting  that  he 
will  accept  your  petitions,  and  answer  them  in  his  own  time,  and  in 
his  own  way,  and  grant  you  your  requests.  For  he  is  your  Father, 
Who  bears  a  kind  and  fatherly  heart  toward  you,  and  loves  you 
more  than  any  earthly  father,  and  too  much  to  refuse  you  your 
reasonable  petitions.  Therefore  "  commit  your  way  unto  the  Lord, 
trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  brin^  it  to  pass,"  Psalm  xxxvii.  5. 

5.  Be  always  impressed  with  a  holy  reverence  for  him,  as  well  in 
drawing  near  to  the  Father,  "  worshipping  in  his  fear  toward  his 
holy  temple,"  with  Da\id,  Psalm  v.  7,  as  in  waiting  for  an  answer 
to  your  prayers,  leaving  the  time,  the  manner  and  measure  thereof 
to  him,  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  when  he  prayed  in  his  great  agony 
to  his  Father,  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him,  said,  "  yet  not  my 
will  but  thy  will  be  done,"  Mat.  xxvi.  59.  Thus  also  the  children  of 
God  ought  to  conduct  toward  him  with  a  holy  awe  in  all  their  conver- 
sation. Peter  teacheth  us  this,  1  Peter  i.  17.  "  If  ye  call  on  the 
Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgetb  according  to  every 
man's  work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  For 
he  is  your  Father  in  heaven. 

6.  When  ye  call  on  your  Father,  think  then  also  of  your  brethren 
nnd  sisters,  who  perhaps  have  need  of  more  than  ye,  and  cannot 
call  on  him,  as  well  as  ye  can.  Therefore  the  Saviour  teacheth  you 
to  say,  not  "  my,"  but  "our"  Father.  This  is  often  enjoined  :  see 
Psalm  exxii.  6.  Jer.  li.  50.  James  v.  1C.  David,  even  when  he 
had  enough  to  do  with  his  own  case,  could  nevertheless  not  forbear 
mentioning  Zion  in  his  prayer,  Psalm  li.  18. 

7.  It  ought  also  to  support  you  in  your  adversities,  that  ye  may 
address  God  as  your  Father.  Do  wicked  men  boast  of  their  noble 
parentage,  ye  have  greater  reason  to  boast,  for  ye  are  u  born  of  God," 
John  i,  13.  Are  ye  afflicted,  your  Father  regards  your  affliction  : 
"  his  bowels  are  troubled  for  you,  and  he  hath  mercy  on  you,"  Jer. 
iixxi.  20.  Psalm  ciii.  13.  Do  ye  not  know  "  what  and  how  ye  should 
pray,"  or  how  ye  should  conduct  before  the  throne,  "  the  Spirit"  of 
four  Father  «<  will  help    your  infirmities,"  he   will  lead  you  to  the 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  42 » 

ihrone,  and  "  pray  for  you  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered." 
Doth  it  grieve  you,  that  ye  must  remain  so  long  a  time  absent  from 
your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  and  that  ye  are  not  yet  taken  up  to 
him  ;  well,  your  eldest  brother  Jesus  "  is  gone  before  you,"  in  or- 
der, as  he  saith  himself,  John  xiv  2,  3,  u  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you,  and  when  he  hath  accomplished  that  work,  he  will  come  to 
you,  and  take  you  unto  himself,  that  where  he  is,  there  ye  may  be 
also."     Amen. 


439  ) 


THE 


FIRST  PETITION 


EXPLAINED. 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  9.     Hallowed  be  thy  name.

Q.    121.    Why  is  it  here  added,  "  Which  art  in  heaven  ?" 

A.  Lest  we  should  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of  God's  heavenly 
majesty,  and  that  we  may  expect  from  his  almighty  power  all  things 
necessary  for  soul  and  body. 


D 


ANGER  will  cause  a  person  to  pray:"  this  is  a  common 
proverb  with  us.  It  is  also  true  :  for  when  a  man  is  in  danger,  he 
is  constrained  to  call  for  help.     Seafaring  men,  though  ever  so  care- 


114  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

less  and  dissolute,  when  they  are  in  dangeu,  and  cannot  deliver 
themselves,  will  stretch  out  their  hands  toward  heaven,  and  call  upon 
God  for  relief.  If  a  man  will  learn  to  pray,  saith  another  proverb, 
let  him  go  to  sea.  But  how  true  soever  it  be,  that  danger  will  cause 
us  to  pray,  it  doth  not  however  teach  us  the  right  nature  of  prayer  ; 
the  mind  is  too  much  agitated  and  disturbed  by  danger,  to  draw  near 
to  the  true  God  with  deliberation  and  faith.  Danger  doth  not  teach 
the  afflicted  person  for  what  things  he  ought  to  pray,  in  what  method, 
and  with  what  motives  he  ought  to  propose  his  requests :  "  We 
know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought,"  saith  the  apostle, 
Rom.  viii.  26.  Danger  causeth  him  to  cry  at  random  to  an  un- 
known God :  but  who  the  true  and  adorable  God  is,  and  in  what 
Inanner  he  ought  to  address  him,  this  danger  v. ill  not  discover  to. 
him.  When  "the  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea,  and 
there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to 
be  broken,  and  the  mariners  were  afraid  ;  tnen  they  cried  every 
suan  to  his  god,"  and  therefore  to  his  idol,  Jonah  i.  4,  5.  If  a  man 
fchall  learn  to  pray  aright,  and  in  a  manner  that  is  acceptable  to 
God,  he  must  have  an  expert  teacher.  When  a  person  will  apply 
to  his  prince  for  relief  in  a  civil  danger  and  distress,  he  finds  himself 
fearful,  and  abashed,  because  he  knows  not  with  what  titles  le  ought 
to  address  his  prince,  or  how,  and  in  what  manner  he  ought  to  pro- 
pose his  request  to  him  :  he  will  therefore  betake  himself  to  some 
person,  who  is  more  skilful  than  himself,  and  obtain  a  petition  cf 
lnm,  that  he  may  present  it  to  his  prince.  Thus  believers  also  have 
their  teacher,  who  teaches  them  to  pray,  and  composes  a  petition  for 
them,  that  they  may  present  it  with  their  requests  to  the  God  of 
heaven.  "The  Spirit,"  saUh  Paul.  "  htlpeth  our  infirmities:  for 
we  know  not  wnat  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought  :  but  the  Spirit 
itself  maketh  intent sion  for  us,  with  groanings  which  cannot  be 
uttered,'  Rom.  viii.  26.  The  disciples  of  John  the  br.pt  ist  were 
fain  to  learn  of  their  master  how  to  pray  :  and  the  disciples  of  Jesiis, 
knowing  their  needs,  and  the  necessity  ot  prayer,  but  not  the  right 
method  of  praying  in  a  manner  which  is  acceptable  to  (Jod,  desire 
also  of  their  Lord,  "  that  he  would  teach  them  to  pray,  as  John 
taught  his  disciples."  Jesus  was  too  good  to  deny  their  request,  and 
lie  therefore  composes  a  most  perfect  prayer  for  them,  and  "  saith 
to  them,  when  ye  pray,  say,  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  hal- 
lowed be  thy  name,"  &c  Luke  xi.  I — 4.  In  this  prayer  he  teach  • 
06  them  with  what  confidtnee  and  reverence  they  ought  to  address 
God,  what  matters  they  ought  to  ask  of  him,  in  what  method  they 


XLVI.  •  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  413 

ought  to  propose  them,  and  with  what  motives  they  ought  to  enforce 
their  requests. 

We  must  speak  at  present  only  of  the  address  of  prayer,-  and  in- 
quire with  the  instructor  concerning  this, 

I.  Why  believers,  when  they  pray,  must  address  God  as  "their 
Father,"  and  then, 

II.  Why  they  must  consider  him,  in  their  approaches  to  him,  as 
"  in  heaven." 

1.  The  Lord  doth  not  send  the  children  of  God  to  the  saints,  but. 
directly  to  their  Father.  The  people  of  God  were  also  to  turn  from 
the  saints  to  the  Lord,  as  their  Father  :  "  Doubtless  thou  art  our 
Father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  acknowledge 
us  not :  thou,  O  Lord,  art  our  Father,"  thus  they  spake,  Isaiah 
Ixiii.   16. 

Although  the  essence  of  God,  and  also  the  Son  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  may  be  called  Father,  and  ought  to  be  worshipped,  neverthe- 
less we  must  understand  here,  with  the  instructor,  by  the  Father  the 
first  Person  ;  for  he  saith,  in  order  to  explain  this,  that  God  is  be- 
come our  Father  through  Christ."  This  is  also  according  to  the 
word  of  God,  which  teacheth  us  that  in  the  ceconomy  of  grace  the 
first  Person  hath  undertaken  to  exhibit  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead 
of  the  whole  Trinity  in  his  Person,  as  the  Son  should  accomplish  the 
work  of  redemption,  as  Mediator,  and  thus  as  the  Father's  servant, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  should  render  the  elect  partakers  of  the  redemp- 
tion. Therefore  the  first  Person  must  be  considered  as  the  foun- 
tain of  all  grace,  from  whom  we  derive  all  things  through  the  Son 
and  the  Holy  Ghost :  "  We  have  one  God,  even  the  Father,  of  whom 
are  all  things,  and  we  in  him  :  and  one  Loid  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom 
are  all  things,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  viii.  6.  Although  we 
ought  to  worship  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  the  Father, 
we  may  nevertheless  not  end  in  the  Son,  or  in  the  Holy  Ghost : 
but  we  must  proceed  through  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Son  to  the 
Father,  and  end  in  him :  "  For  through  Christ  we  have  an  access 
by  the  Spirit  unto  the  Father,"  according  to  Eph.  ii.  18.  Even  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  pray  to  the  Father  for  and  in  believers, 
as  Christ  and  his  servant  Paul  teach  us,  John  xiv.  16.  Rom.  viiu 
26,  as  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  do  also  receive  all  things  of  the 
Father  for  believers.  Therefore  Jesus  saith,  John  xvi.  13 — 15s 
"  The  Spirit  of  truth  shall  not  speak  of  himself;  but  whatsoever  he 
shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak  :  and  he  will  show  you  things  to 
come  :  he  will  glorify  me  ;  for  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall 
*how  it  unto  you."      The  apostles  therefore  called   upon  the  ftrsfi 


416  *HE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

"Person  under  the  name  of  Father,  Rom.  i.  7.  1  Cor.  i.  3.  2  Cor. 
j.  2.  Gal.  i.  3.  Eph.  i.  2.  iii.  14.  1  Pet.  i.  3.  2  John  vrs.  3. 
It  is  true,  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  in  heaven,  as  well  as  the 
Father.  Yet  the  Son  was  sent  as  Mediator  by  the  Father  out  of 
heaven  upon  earth,  and  was  "  exalted  again  by  the  right  hand  of 
the  Father,  as  his  Vicegerent,  to  his  throne,  that  he  might  be  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgivenesr- 
of  sins,"  Rev.  iii.  21.  Acts  v.  31.  Thus  also  "the  Holy  Spirit  is 
sent  forth  "  by  the  Father  through  the  Son  "  into  the  hearts  "  of  be- 
lievers, and  "cries"  in  them,  "Abba,  Father,"  Gal.  iv.  6.  But 
the  Fa-her  is,  and  abides  in  heaven,  upon  his  throne,  and  the  Son  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  receive  all  things  from  him,  and  therefore  the  first 
Person  is  called  heavenly  Father,  Matt.  vi.  14.  xviii.  10,  14,  19. 
On  this  account  the  words  of  James  must  also  be  understood  of 
the  first  Person  :  "  Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from 
above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,"  James  i.   17. 

That  God  i->  the  Father  of  Christ  by  an  eternal  and  inconceivable 
generation,  this  we  have  shown  in  our  explanation  of  the  thirteenth 
Lord's  clay.  But  here  believers  call  him  their  Father,  not  so  much 
on  account  of  creation  and  preservation,  for  in  this  respect  he  is  the 
Father  of  the  ungodly  also  ;  but  he  is  the  Father  of  believers  by 
grace  through  Christ,  in  and  through  whom  they  may  draw  near 
with  their  prayers  to  God,  who  is  their  Father  by  regeneration,  by 
a  spiritual  marriage  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  by  adoption,  as  we 
have  shown  upon  the  ninth  Lord's  day. 

Behold,  O  believers,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestow- 
ed upon  you,  that  ye  should  be  called  the  children  of  God.  Ye,  and 
no  others,  have  a  right  to  address  him,  as  your  Father,  and  to  ex- 
pect all  good  things  of  him.  God  is  indeed  the  Father  of  the  sin- 
ner, who  is  siill  in  a  state  of  nature,  by  creation,  and  he  bestows 
therefore  many  good  things  on  him  ;  for  "God  is  good  to  all,  and 
his  mercies  are  over  all  his  works  •"  but  the  un-onverted  sinner, 
having  forfeited  all  things,  and  being  "  without  Christ,  an  alien  from 
the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  a  stranger  from  the  covenants  of 
promise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world,"  as  the 
apostle  speaks,  Epli.  ii  1~,  hath  no  right  ai  all  to  address  God  with 
confidence  as  his  Father  in  Christ.  When  he  doth  it,  he  lies,  and 
his  confidence  is  vain.  If  he  will  call  upon  God  as  his  Father,  he 
must  earnestly  seek  to  be  regenerated,  and  to  obtain  his  Maker  for 
his  husband,  that  he  may  be  able,  and  may  have  a  right  to-cry  Abba, 
Father.  That  Spirit  is  indeed  the  Spirit  of  faith,  which  appropri- 
a'es  and  owns  God  as  a   Fath?"   and  causeth  us  to  address   him  as 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  417 

such  ;  either  by  a  direct  act  of  faith,  by  which  a  person  receives  the 
Son,  and  thus  also  the  Father  in  him,  and  draws  near  to  him  with 
confidence  upon  his  invitation  ;'  or  by  a  reflex  act  of  faith,  by  which 
the  soul,  observing  her  believing  outgoings  toward  God,  perceives 
that  God  is  her  Father,  and  "  goes  thus  with  boldness  and  with 
confidence  to  him  through  faith  in  Christ,"  as  Paul  speaks,  Eph. 
iii.   12.     Heb.   iv.  16.     x.    18—22. 

Every  believer  hath  liberty,  with  Elihu,  and  with  the  church,  to 
address  God  as  his  Father,  Job  xxxiv.  36.  Jer.  iii.  4,  19.  But  Jesus 
requires  that  believers  in  general,  gathered  from  among  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  should  with  one  heart  and  with  one  mouth  call  God  their 
Father.  They  are  indeed  all  children  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
have  all  an  equal  right  to  the  Lord  :  the  minds  of  alltend  with  their 
desires  to  one  Father,  the  same  wants  and  desires  urge  them  all  to 
their  Father's  throne,  and  their  souls  are  knit  to  each  other  in  love, 
as  brethren,  so  that  they  cry  jointly  to  him,  as  children  of  one 
Father.  Therefore  when  the  believer  is  about  to  pray,  he  must  from 
his  heart  forgive  every  injury  that  hath  been  done  to  him  by  Jus 
brother,  and  banish  his  displeasure  out  of  his  heart,  that  he  may  unite 
himself  to  him  in  love,  and  appear  thus  with  him  before  the  throne, 
especially,  when  "  he  agrees  with  his  brother  touching  any  thing 
that  they  shall  ask."  Such  an  agreement  of  two  persons  is  indeed  ef- 
fectual :"  that  thing,"  saith  the  Saviour,  Matt  xviii.  19,  "  shall  be 
done  for  them  by  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  There  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  but  that  God  the  Lord  was  the  Father  of  the  believ- 
ers under  the  Old  Testament  in  the  Messiah,  who  was  to  come. 
For  they  had  "  the  adoption,"  Rom.  ix.  4.  They  were  also  called 
the  children  of  God,  Exod.  iv.  22.  Deut.  xiv.  1.  God  called  him- 
self "their  Father,"  Deut.  xxxii.  36,  Isaiah  Ixiii.  16.  Ixiv.  8. 
But  although  they  were  in  a  much  happier  condition  than  the  hea- 
thens, yea,  than  all  the  outward  prefessors  among  the  Israelites,  they 
were  nevertheless,  like  minoi  "  children,  under  tutors  and  govern- 
ours,"  of  rhe  law  of  ceremonies,  "  the  rudiments  of  tjie  world,  and 
they  differed  in  nothing  from  servants,  though  they  were  lords  of 
all."  But  believers  of  the  New  Testament,  being  delivered  by  the 
coming  of  Christ  from  the  law,  have  like  those  who  are  of  full  age, 
outgrown  those  tutors  and  governours,  and  have  a  greater  boldness, 
and  a  more  abundant  measure  of  the  spirit  of  adoption,  by  winch  they 
can  "cry,  Abba,  Father,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Gal.  iv.  1 — 6.  And 
even  now  yet  the  sonship  of  believers  is  not  perfect,  since  they  have 
not  yet  the  full  possession  of  all  their  inheritance,  but  will  obtain 
it  first  in  the  blessed  resurrection  ;*for  "  they  wait  yet  for  the  adopton 
of  children,  even  the  redemption  of  their  bodies,"  as  we  read,  Horn. 
Vor.  ii.  3  C 


415  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

viii.  23.     But  Jesus  chooses  that  they  should  cry  unto  God  as  then 
Father,  ki  order  that  they  may  obtain    their  inheritance    gradually! 

Believers  are  then  exhorted  to  address  God,  as  then  Father,  not 
because  he  is  willing  to  become  their  Father,  and  to  show  them  all 
.!y  kindness,  if  they  will  perform  their  dutj  aright,  as  the  Pe- 
ria  speak  ;  but  they  must  address  him  thus,  b.  cause  he  is  ai- 
re (iy  becom  their  Father  through  Christ,  for  he  is  their  Father  by 
regeneration,  by  a  spiritual  marriage  with  Christ,  and  by  adoption, 
before  they  perform  their  duty  aright.  The  Lord  Cod  "  predestina- 
ted them  to  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  from  eternity, 
according  to  the  good  pleasure  ot  his  will,"  without  any  respect  to 
their  duty,  and  from  his  own  free  choice,  according  to  Eph.  i  5. 
Surely,  no  sinner  can,  nor  may  address  God  with  boldness,  as  long 
as  the  Lord  is  riot  his  Father  A  believer,  who  is  yet  unexperien- 
ced, and  is  not  sufficiently  assured  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  grace,  will 
in'  eed  entreat  God  to  become  his  Father,  but  this  proceeds  from 
the  weakness  of  his  faith,  and  he  will  not  see,  nor  attend  to  his 
right  exercises,  while  he  is  praying  ;  for  he  views  himself  as  too  de- 
ficient and  sinful,  and  he  will  cry  therefore  with  the  publican  only 
for  grace,  Luke  xviii.    13. 

But  why  cloth  the  Lord  Jesus  require  that  we  should  address  God 
particularly  as  our  Father?  -  It  would  surely  be  right  to  call  him 
Lord,  God,  Almighty,  Wise  and  Good  :  for  believers  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament  have  addressed  him  thus.  It  is  true  ;  but 
when  our  Saviour  teacheth  us  to  worship  God  as  Father,  he  doth 
not  thereby  condemn  every  other  mode  of  address  ;  but  he  chooses 
thai  we  should  address  God  as  Father  particularly  in  this  short  pat- 
t.  in  of  prayer  not  only  because  all  other  titles  of  honour,  that  can 
excite  confidence  and  reverence,  are  comprehended  in  the  words, 
'  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven ;"  and  because  in  whatsoever 
manner  we  address  God,  we  must  possess  a  childlike  disposition  to- 
ward him,  and  consider  him  as  a  Father:  but  particularly  because 
when  we  call  God  our  Father,  we  express  the  nearest  and  dearest 
relation,  that  subsists  between  Cod  and  believers,  and  this  enables 
them  to  pray  to  him  with  suitable  dispositions.     For, 

1.  '1  1ms  they  become  bold,  and  consequently  able  to  draw  near 
to  him  in  a  familiar  manner,  and  to  exercise  a  sweet  fellowship  with 
'iiim  by  prayer  V  e  can  indeed  have  a  greater  boldness  toward  our 
father,  than  toward  our  lord  and  judge.  In  order  that  he  might  in- 
duce the  Israelites  to  call  on  him  freely,  after  they  had  provoked 
him  greatly,  he  saith,  Jer.  iii.  4,  u  W  ilt  thon  not  from  this  time  cry 
onto  me;  My  father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth  ?" 


XLVI.  LORD'S  D\Y.  Q.  120,  1*21.  419 

%.  T:iis  furnishes  them  with  an  argument,  wit'  which  they  urge 
and  move  him  vehemently  to  .  rant  their  requests,  The  church 
praying  under  grievous  distress  in  a  plaintive  manner,  urgeth  her 
petition  thus,  Isaiah  Ixiii.  16,  ''Doubtless  thou  art  pur  Father, 
though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us,  and  Lraei  acknowledge  us  not ; 
Thou,  0  Lor  I,  art  our  lather,  our  Redeemer  is  thy  name  from 
everlasting."  The  Lord  is  so  well  pleased  with  their  calling  him 
their  Father  when  they  cry  to  him,  that  he  suiters  himself  to  he 
overcome  l>y  it,  so  that  he  is  induced  to  show  kindness  to  his  people, 
which  he  can  otherwise  scarcely  do,  on  account  of  their  sins.  Hear 
what  the  Lord  himself  saith  of  it,  Jer.  iii.  19,  "  I  said  how  long 
shall  I  put  thee  among  the  children,  and  give  thee  a  pleasant  land, 
a  goodly  heritage  of  the  host  of  nations  ?  and  I  said,  thou  shalt  call 
me  my  Father,  and  shall  not  turn  away  from  me." 

3.  When  believers  address  God,  as  their  Father,  it  excites  a  child- 
like trust  and  confidence  in  them  toward  God,  that  their  prayer  is  ac- 
ceptable to  him,  and  that  he  will  grant  their  petition.  Is  he  become 
their  Father  in  Christ,  and  will  he  then  refuse  them  that  which  is 
less  ?  "  He  who  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for 
us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  freely  .give  us  ull  thing??"  saith 
Paui,  Rom.  viii  3  2.  When  a  man  hears  his  child  cry  to  him  in 
distress,  my  father,  help  me,  will  not  his  bowels  yearn  over  him, 
and  will  lie  not  give  his  child  what  he  desires  r  May  and  ought  not 
then  the  consideration  that  God  is  a  Father,  and  that  he  will  be  ad- 
dressed as  such,  induce  believers  to  "confide  in  the  ve«'y  beginning 
of  their  prayers,  that  God  will  grant  them  their  petition  ?"  The 
Saviour  teacheth  this,  Matt.  vii.  9 — 11.  "What  man  is  thereof 
you,  whom,  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  sone  r  or  if  he 
ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent.  If  ye  then,  being  evjl,  know 
how  to  give  good  ?ifts  to  your  children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  then)  that  as::  him  I" 

4.  It  will  tend  no  less  to  excite  also  a  childlike  fear  and  reverence 
in  believers,  that  they  contemplate  and  address  him  as  their  Father. 
We  must  "  fear  our  father  and  mother,"  according  to  the  law  j 
Lev.  xix.  3.  Much  more  then  God  the  Father,  who  is  higher  thaa 
the  highest.     "A  son,"  saith   the  Lord,    Mai.  i.  6,  "  honoureth  his 

:and  a  servant  his  master ;  if  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is 
mine  honour  I  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is  my  fear  ?"  To  con- 
template God  as  a  Lord  and  Judge  may  affect  a  person  with  a  sla- 
vish fear,  which  will  drive  him  from  the  Lord  :  but  to  address  him 
as  a  Father,  will  excite  indeed  a  dread  for  God  in  the  believer-  I  ut 
it  wiil  be  attended  with  a  childlike  affection,  that  will  lead   him   to 


42©  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

the  Lord.  Therefore  Peler  saith,  «  If  ye  call  on  him  as  a  Father,* 
who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgeth  according  to  every  man's 
work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear,"  1  Pet.  i.  17. 
II.  How  often  doth  familiarity  heget  contempt  !  As  children 
converse  most  familiarly  with  their  parents,  they  are  not  always  im- 
pressed with  a  suitable  reverence  for  them.  The  Lord  Jesus,  desi- 
ring to  excite  a  becoming  awe  for  the  Father  in  his  disciples,  teach- 
eth  them  to  pray,  Our  Father,  "  which  art  in  heaven."  In  the  third 
petition  only  one  heaven  is  mentioned,  but  here  more  than  one.t 
The  air  is  the  first  heaven,  in  which  the  birds  fiy,  which  are  therefore 
called  "  the  fowls  of  heaven,"  Matt.  vi.  2G.  xiii.  20.  The  firma- 
ment, in  which  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  shine,  is  also  called  heaven. 
David  "considered  (he  heaven,  the  work  of  God's  fingers,  the  moon 
and  the  stars,"  Psalm  viii.  3.  We  read  finally  of  the  Paradise  of 
God,  which  is  called  "  the  third  heaven,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens," 
2  Cor.  xii.  2,  4.     1  Kings  viii.  27. 

"Whoever  will  address  God  must  consider  him  as  in  heaven  :  he 
is  therefore  often  called  the  heavenly  Father.  We  explain  and 
prove  upon  other  occasions,  that  the  Lord  God  is  omnipresent, 
neither  included  nor  excluded  any  where  ;  and  it  is  therefore  also 
certain,  that  God  is  not  shut  up  in  the  heavens,  nor  confined  to 
them  :  "  Behold  the  heavens,  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain thee,"  saith  Solomon,  1  Kings  viii.  27.  But  he  is  said  to  be  in 
-the  heavens,  (1)  Because  he  manifests  his  glory  and  majesty  in 
the  heavens,  more  than  elsewhere  ;  for  he  is  there,  as  in  his  palace, 
and  upon  his  throne  :  "  The  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the 
heavens,  and  his  kingdom  rulelh  over  all,"  saith  David,  Psalm  ciii. 
10..-  Who  can  behold  the  visible  heavens,  the  first  and  the  second 
•heaven,  with  all  that  appears  in  them,  without  being  ravished  at  the 
bight,  and  crying  out  with  David,  Psalm  civ.  >1 — 3,  "  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul:  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  great,  thou  art  clothed 
"with  honour  and  majesty.  Who  coverest  thyself  with  light,  as  with 
a  garment  :  who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain  :  who 
layeth  the  beams  of  his  chambers  in  the  waters,  who  maketh  the 
clouds  his  chariot,  who  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind."  And 
he  manifests  his  glory  still  more  in  the  third  heaven,  where  he  is 
encircled,  attended  upon  and  glorified  by  his  courtiers,  even  all  the 
blessed,  and  especially  his  angels,  as  Micaiah  and  Isaiah  saw  him  thus 
in  a  vision,  "  sitting  upon  his  throne,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven 
standing  by  him,  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left,  ready  to   sen 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dutch  translation. 
■\  According  to  th;  Dutch  translation- 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  421 

him,  and  proclaiming  his  glory  with  a  loud  voice,"  I  Kings  xxii.  19. 
Isaiah  vi.  1 — 3.  For  "  the  Lord  is  there  in  his  holy  palace,  and 
his  throne  is  in  heaven,"  as  David  speaks,  Psalm  xi.  4.  And  there- 
fore God  hath  "  a  heavenly  majesty,"  as  the  instructor  speaks. 
(2)  God  is  also  in  the  heavens,  as  in  his  treasury,  from  which  he 
sends  down  to  his  children  whatsoever  they  need  for  soul  and  body. 
He  sends  them  from  heaven  light,  heat,  rain  and  drought,  and  ren- 
ders the  earth  habitable  and  fruitful.  "  The  Lord,"  saith  Moses, 
Deut.  xxviii.  12,  "  shall  open  to  thee  his  good  treasure,  to  give  the 
rain  to  thy  land  in  his  season,  and  to  bless  all  the  work  of  thy  hand." 
See  also  Acts  xix.  17.  Yea,  from  the  highest  heaven  he  sends  his 
Spirit,  and  all  heavenly  grace  down;  for  "every  good  gift,  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  comcth  down  from  the  Father 
of  lights,"  James  i.  17.  Because  the  Father  will  communicate  all 
his  saving  grace  only  through  his  Son,  therefore  he  took  him  up  to 
himself  into  heaven,  and  "  exalted  him  by  his  right  hand,  that  he 
might  receive  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
shed  him  forth,"  Acts  ii.  33.  The  Saviour  hath  manifested  his  wis- 
dom by  directing  us  to  address  our  Father,  as  he  "  who  is  in  heaven  ;" 
for  he  teacheth  us  thus, 

1.  To  call  upon  the  only,  true  and  high  God,  and  that  we  oue,ht 
not  to  turn  to  the  idols ;  for  that  he  is  in  heaven  distinguishes  him, 
as  the  true  God,  from  the  idols  :  "  Our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he 
hath  done  whatsoever  lie  pleased-  Their  idols  are  silver  and  gold, 
the  work  of  men's  hands  :"  thus  the  people  of  God  speak,  Psalm 
cxv.  3,  4,  The  forefathers  of  Israel,  "  Abraham  and  Israel,"  were 
indeed  in  heaven,  but  not  like  the  Lord,  who  "alone  was  their  Fath- 
er," in  heaven,  and  therefore  they  betook  themselves  to  him,  and 
prayed  that  "  he  would  look  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from 
the  habitation  of  his  holiness  and  of  his  glory,"  Isaiah  lxiii.  15.  16. 
Therefore  the  Saviour  requires  that  we  should  "  call  no  man  on 
earth  our  father,"  so  as  wholly  to  submit  to  him  and  trust  in  him, 
because  God  alone,  "  who  is  in  heaven,  is  our  Father,"  Matt. 
xxiii.  9. 

2.  The  Saviour  admonisheth  us  by  this  addition,  "which  art  in 
heaven,"  that  we  should  not  form  any  earthly  conceptions  of  the 
heavenly  majesty  of  God.  It  is  altogether  unsuitable  to  entertain 
degrading  ideas  of  him,  "  who  sitteth  above  the  circle  of  the  earth, 
the  inhabitants  whereof  are  as  grasshoppers  before  him  ;  who  stretch- 
eth  out  the  heavens,  as  a  curtain,  and  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent 
to  dwell  in,"  Isaiah  xl.  13,22.  Therefore  when  we  address  the 
heavenly  Father,  we  must  by  all  means  do  it  with  exalted  concep- 
tions of  him,  and  must  thereby  dispose  ourselves  to   humility   and 


THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

reverence  :  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy  mouth,"  saith  the  preacher,  "  and 
let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  any  tiling  before  Coil  ;  For  God 
is  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  :  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few," 
Eccl.  v.  2 

3.  Is  the  Father,  upon  whom  we  call,  in  heaven,  we  must  then 
"  expect  from  his  almighty  power  all  things  necessary  for  soul  and 
body  :"  for  «  is  he  in  heaven,"  he  is  then  almighty,  and  "  cloth  what- 
soever he  pleaseth,"  Psalm  cxv.  3.  In  heaven  he  is  in  ins  full  store- 
house, and  therefore  allsufficieut,  and  so  "  abie  to  make  all  grace 
abound  toward  us  ;  that  we  always  having  all  sufficiency  in  all  things, 
may  abound  to  every  good  work,"  2  Cor  ix.  8.  Since  now  this 
heavenly,  and  therefore  almighty  God  is  the  Father  of  believers, 
therefore  they  can  and  may  look  for  that  which  is  good  from  him  only. 

4.  We  must  then  also  seek  heavenly   more  than  earthly- thii 

for  God  the  Father,  who  is  the  principal  portion  of  his  children,  is 
heavenly,  every  blessing  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  in  propor- 
tion as  heavenly  are  higher  and  worthier  than  earthly  things,  we 
ougiit  to  pursue  heavenly  more  than  earthly  things.  Ha'.h  the 
child  of  God  a  right  to  se»jk  also  earthly  things,  he  may  no1  d<  sire 
them  as  the  principal  things,  but  only  as  appendages,  that  lie  may 
by  them  be  led  up  fo  heavenly  things.  Therefore  the  Lord  Jesus 
saith,  Mat.  vi.  33.  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righ* 
teousness,  and  all  these  tilings  shall  be  added  to  you  " 

5.  Once  more  ;  the  Saviour  choose th  that  we  should  address  the 
Father,  as  he  "  who  is  in  heaven,"  that  we  may  call  on  him  with  a 
heavenlv  heart,  which  lifts  itself  up  to  heaven,  and  places  itself  be- 
fore his  throne,  and  speaks  to  him  there.  Believers  have  for  this 
end  "  lifted  up  their  eyes,  hands  and  hearts  toward  heaven,"  as  we 
see,  Psalm  cxxiii.  1,  Lam  i,i  41  Believers  under  the  ( )Id  T 
nient  turned  themselves  toward  Jerusalem,  the  temple  and  the  ark, 
as  Solomon,  1  Kini^s  vim  44.  Dav'rd  and  Daniel,  Psalm  v.  7.  Dan. 
vi.  II,  because  there  the  Lord  exhibited  a  special  token  of  his 
presence,  and  "sat,  and  dwelled  there  between  the  cherub 
Psalm  lxxx.  1.  Isaiah  xxxvii.    16,  as  a  type,  that  c>  all  the  fain 

the  Godhead  should  dwell  in  the  human  nature  of  tiie  Messiah,  who 
was  to  come,  and  that  '*  the  Word  should  become  flesh,  and  dwell 
among  us,  that  we  might  belw>Id  hrsglory,  li'e  glory  as  ol 

.-gotten  of  the  Father,   full  of  grace  and  truth,"  Coi.  ii.  9.    John  i. 

14.  Believers  of  that  time  did  not  however  neglect  to  turn  them- 
selves toward  heaven,  and  address  God  as  in  heaven.  They  directed 
their  eyes  and  hands  with  their  hearts  toward  heaven,  as  we  have 
just   now   shown,    and   Solomon  prayed    "that  God  would  hear  jr. 


XLVI.  LORD'S    DAY.  Q.    120,  121.  423 

heaven  his  dwellingplace,"  1  Kings  viii.  39.  But  when  they  turned 
themselves  toward  Jerusalem  the  temple  and  ark  they  showed  then 
*  hat  they  looked  to  the  Surety,  and  worshipped  in  ids  name  the 
Father,  who  was  in  heaven. 


APPLICATION. 

See,  hearers,  what  a  great  and  glorious  privilege  true  believers 
obtain  of  the  Lord,  that  he,  who  is  the  God  of  heaven,  and  who  is 
exalted  above  all,  is  the  Father  of  them,  who  are  by  nature  "  of 
their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii  44,  "children  of  wrath,"  Eph.  ii. 
3,  "  and  of  the  curse,"  2  Peter  ii.  14.  If  they  were  children  of  a 
great  king,  it  would  he  a  gpeat  matter.  "  When  David  was  solicited 
to  become  the  son-in-law  of  Saul,  he  said  to  the  messengers  of  the 
king,  Seemethit  to  you  a  light  thing  to  be  a  king's  son-in-law,  seeing 
that  1  am  a  poor  man.  and  lightly  esteemed  I"  1  Sam  xviii.  22,  23. 
But  that  such  arrant  wretches  should  become  the  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Almighty  and  Most  High  is  surely  inconceivable  ;  "  Behold,'' 
saith  the  beloved  disciple  of  Jesus,  "  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  on  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God,*'  1 
John  iii.  1.  Who  can  conceive  or  express  the  greatness  of  this 
love?  for  they  are  ''the  offspring  of  God,  born  of  Gud,"  John  i.  !3. 
The  Son  of  God,  O  wonderful  !  is  "their  Maker  and  their  Hus- 
band," Isaiah  liv.  5.  They  have  one  God  and  Father  with  him, 
John  xx.  17,  and  they  have  been  translated  into  the  family  of  God, 
that  they  may  enjoy  all  the  true  and  exalted  privileges  of  children, 
to  wit,  that  "  they  may  have  an  access"  with  confidence  *'  through 
the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  being  no  more  strangers  and  foreign- 
ers, but  fellowcitizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God," 
Eph.  ii.  18,  19.  Yea,  they  have  even  liberty  through  him  to  con- 
verse familiarly  in  his  palace,  even  heaven,  ''  to  have  their  conversa- 
tion in  heaven,"  Philip,  iii.  20,  and  to  u  enter  into  that  within  the  veil, 
whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus,"  Heb.  vi.  19, 
20.  Behold,  thus  hath  the  Lord  exalted  the  horn  ot  his  people,  the 
praise  of  all  his  saints,  even  of  the  children  of  Israel,  a  people  nip-h 
unto  him,"  Psalm  cxlviii.  14. 

Although  every  one  calls  God  in  this  common  prayer  his  Father, 
it  is  nevertheless  certain  that  God  is  not  the  Father  of  all  men,  Mo- 
ses saith  of  Israel    after  the  flesh,  Deut.  xxxii.  5.     "  Thcv  are  no* 


424  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

his  children,  a  blot  cleaveth  to  them,  they  arc  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation*;"  The  Jews,  who  were  not  made  free  by  the  Son,  al- 
tuo'igii  they  were  in  other  respects  the  people  of  God,  are  said  "  to 
be  of  their  father  the  devil,"  John  viii.  44.  For  they  are  not  all 
Israel,  which  are  of  Israel  ;  neither  because  they  are  of  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  are  they  all  children  :  but  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called, 
that  is,  They  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the 
children  of  God  :  but  the  children  of  the  promise  are  counted  for 
the  seed,"  saith  Paul,  Rom.  he.  6 — 8. 

Is  this  so,  let  every  one  then  see  and  inquire  whether  he  be  also  a 
child.  Eet  none  think,  that  this  is  such  a  secret  matter,  that  we 
cannot  learn  how  it  is  with  us  in  this  respect.  The  reformed  church 
hath  long  since  expelled  by  the  word  of  God  this  popish  unbelief. 
Do  not  these  saints  and  these  excellent  ones  in  the  earth  outshine 
the  children  of  hell  in  one  particular,  or  another  whereby  they  may 
be  known  ?  Verily  God  hath  set  a  mark  in  their  hearts  and  in  their 
foreheads  by  his  Spirit.  These  marks  are  exhibited  in  the  word  of 
God  :  see  only,  Rom.  viii.  and  the  epistles  lof  John.  Attend  to 
these,  which  are  the  principal  evidences  : 

1.  Those,  who.  as  true  children,  address  God  as  their  Father,  do 
it  upon  the  ground  of  faith,  either  by  a  direct  act  of  faith,  whereby 
they  accept  of  the  Son,  and  the  Father  in  the  Son  by  an  active  di- 
rect motion  of  the  soul  :  for  *  as  many  as  have  received  the  Son, 
to  them  hath  he  given  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to 
them  that  believe  on  his  name,"  John  i.  12,  or  by  a  reflex  act  of 
faith,  by  which,  attending  carefully  to  themselves,  they  see  and  know 
with  Paul,  "in  whom  they  have  believed,"  2  Tim.  i.  12.  "The 
Spirit  causeth  them  to  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  them 
of  God,"  according  to  1  Cor.  ii.  12,  and  thus  "  the  Spirit  of  God 
bcareth  witness  with  their  spirits,  that  they  are  the  children  of  God," 
as  the  same  apostle  teacheth,  Rom.  viii.  16.  Before  they  have  this 
witness,  they  dare  not  call  God  with  any  confidence  their  Pather.  It 
is  true,  they  have  not  always  such  an  assurance  ;  and  therefore  they 
are  not  always  so  confident ;  but  as  they  cannot  remain  absent  from 
the  Lord,  they  will  call  on  him  time  after  time,  that  he  would  be 
pleased  to  become  theii  Pather,  and  they  will  for  this  end  continuallv 
lay  hold  on  the  iron,  they  will  lift  themselves  up  in  faith,  and  will 
give  themselves  no  rest,  until  God  sailh  unto  them,  "  I  am  thy  sal- 
vation," Psalm  xx/.v.  :j.  Others  inquire  not  so  much  concerning 
i         ahd  are  not  so  scrupulous    whether   they   may   address  God  a 

.;r.ci£e  according  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  425 

their  Father,  and  they  call  him  so  inconsiderately,  and  from  custom. 

2.  The  children  of  God  will  love  their  fellowchildren,  their  breth- 
ren and  sisters  heartily,  because  God  loves  them,  and  they  love  God  ; 
and  the  more  this  love  of  God,  and  to  him  shines  forth  in  them, 
the  more  they  love  them,  even  when  they  rebuke  and  reprove  them  : 
"  Let  the  righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness,"  8cc.  saith  Da- 
vid, Psalm  cxli.  5.  This  mutual  love  is  a  certain  evidence,  that  a 
person  is  a  child  of  God  :  "  We  know,"  saith  the  apostle  John, 
"  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the 
brethren,"  1  John  iii.  14.  The  children  of  God  certainly  love  God, 
as  their  Father,  and  therefore  they  love  his  children  also.  Hear 
what  the  same  apostle  saith,  1  John  v.  1.  "Every  one  that  loveth 
him  that  begat,  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him."  Others, 
who  are  not  children  of  God,  will  either  mak-*  no  difference  between 
persons,  or  will  even  hate,  at  least  in  their  hearts,  the  children  of 
God,  on  account  of  their  godliness  ;  or,  if  they  love  them,  it  is  for 
the  sake  of  lucre,  or  on  account  of  their  agreeable  manners,  or  be- 
cause it  is  an  honour  to  join  themselves  to  that  people. 

3.  They  who  address  God  in  Spirit  and  in  truth  as  their  Father, 
endeavour  to  penetrate  into  heaven,  even  unto  the  throne  of  God, 
that  they  may  speak  with  and  to  God  himself.  Others  are  satisfied 
■with  mumbling  a  few  words,  and  merely  uttering  them  :  "  they 
draw  near  to  him  with  their  mouths,  and  honour  him  with  their  lips, 
but  remove  their  hearts  far  from  him,"  Isaiah  xxix.  13.  But  the 
children  of  God  desire  to  be  near  him,  and  to  speak  to  him  ;  if  they 
cannot,  it  grieves  them,  they  wrestle  and  weary  themselves,  until  he 
opens  an  access  for  them,  places  them  near  him,  and  saith,  Behold, 
here  am  I.  Hear  how  Job  sighs,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  him  !  that  I  might  come  even  to  his  seat !  I  would  order  my 
cause  before  him,"  Job  xxiii.  3,  4. 

Apply  these  things  now  to  yourselves,  and  see  Whether  they  be  in 
you.  Do  ye  know  nothing  of  them,  are  ye  unacquainted  with  this 
work  of  the  heart  with  and  toward  the  Father ;  judge  then  for  your- 
selves whether  it  be  lawful  for  you  to  look  upon  him,  and  address 
him  as  your  Father,  if  ye  do  this  notwithstanding,  ye  only  "  flat- 
ter him  with  your  mouths,  and  lie  unto  him  with  your  tongues," 
Psalm  lxxviii.  36.  Expect  not  that  he  will  send  blessings  down  for 
you  from  his  storehouse  of  heaven,  but  curses:  "  Upon  the  wicked 
he  will  rain  snares  :  fire,  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tempest 
shall  be  the  portion  of  their  cup,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xi.  6.  Where 
will  your  souls  abide,  when  they  depart  htnee  ?  and  where  your  bod' 
ies,  united  to  your  souls,  when  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the 
Vol.  ik.    '  3  D 


426  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

Lord  shall  come  ?  in  heaven  ?  no,  for  your  father  is  not  there,  but 
<♦  in  everlasting  fire."  in  order  to  receive  there  "  the  inheritance  of 
your  father  the  devil,  and  of  his  angels  for  ever,"  according  to  the 
sentence  of  the  great  Judie,  Matt.  xxv.  41. 

Therefore  "  rt  cover  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  •which  ye  are 
taken  captive  at  his  will,"  2  Tim*  ii.  26.  Rest  not,  until  God  is  be- 
come your  Father.  Let  it  not  suffice  you,  that  he  is  your  Father  as 
Creator ;  for  since  ye  have  apostatized  from  him.  and  have  violated 
his  image,  his  most  goodly  work,  ye  may  not  address  him  with  con- 
fidence as  your  Father  by  creation ;  he  is  become,  on  account  of 
your  transgressions,  "  a  devouring  fire  and  everlasting  burnings"  to 
you,  and  therefore  ye  "cannot  dwell"  with  him,  nor  draw  near  to 
him,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  14.  But  do  this,  "  lay  hold  on"  his  Son,  "his 
strength,  and  make  your  peace  with  him,  that  he  may  not  attack 
you  as  thorns  and  thistles,  and  burn  you  together,"  Isaiah  xxvii.  4,  5. 

But,  believers,  children  of  the  Most  High,  why  do  ye  indulge  so 
many  hard  thoughts  of  your  heavenly  Father,  as  if  he  were  a  rigo- 
rous master,  and  embrace  thus  without  reason  your  own  sorrow  ?  is 
it  not  true?  for  (a)  ye  often  suspect  your  childship,  and  draw  near  in 
your  prayers  with  so  much  slavish  fear,  as  if  that  were  most  safe 
for  you  ;  yea,  ye  dare  not  often  address  him  as  your  Father,  as  if  he 
would  take  it  ill,  when  he  nevertheless  desires  to  hear  those  words, 
"  My  Father,"  out  of  your  mouths  :  Wilt  thou  not  from  this  time 
cry  unto  me,  My  Father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth,"  Jer.  iii. 
4.  (b)  Sometimes  ye  venture  to  draw  near  to  the  Son  more  than  to 
the  Father,  imagining  that  the  Father  is  a  rigorous  Judge,  who  de- 
mands satisfaction  for  your  sins,  but  that  the  Son  hath  a  goodwill  to 
poor  sinners  :  just  as  if  the  Son  could  have  a  goodwill  to  sinners, 
and  the  Father  at  the  same  time  not  love  them,  when  the  Father 
sent  his  Son  from  his  love.  Hear  what  the  Lord  Jesus  saith,  John 
xvi.  26,  27.  "  I  say  not  unto  you,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for 
you  :  for  the  "  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  have  loved 
me."  (c)  The  smallest  sin  discourageth  you,  and  renders  you  fear- 
ful of  corning  to  i!ie  throne  ofthe  Father  ;  yea,  ye  wdl,  on  account 
of  your  baekslidingSj  omit  even  your  stated  and  ordinary  prayers. 
It  is  childlike  to  humble  ourselves  on  account  of  sin  ;  but  it  is  slavish 
to  remain  absent  and  to  run  from  our  Father.  How !  did  the  Lord 
adopt  you  for  his  children,  when  all  your  sins  lay  upon  you,  and 
shall  the  !e,ast  sin  extinguish  all  hU  fatherly  affection  for  you, 
now  ye  are  his  children  ?  When  the  prodigal  son  came  to  his  father, 
and  confessed  his  siris,  he  was  not  rejected  by  him  :  but  "  his  father 
Steing    him   afar  off,  had  compassion  on  him,  and  ran,   and  fell  or. 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  421 

hm  neck,  and  kissed  him,"  Luke  xv.  18—20.  (d)  Are  ye  under 
any  heavy  cross,  ye  forthwith  suspect  him  of  rigour,  become  fretful 
and  uneasy  and  complain,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me  ;  and  my 
Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  But  what  saith  the  answer  of  God  ? 
"Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that  she  should  not  have 
compassion  on  the  son  ol  her  womb  ?  yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will 
inot  forget  thee,"  Isaiah  xlix.  14 — 16.  (e)  How  seldom  do  ye 
commend  your  wants  to  the  care  of  your  Father  !  Ye  keep  them 
often  to  yourselves,  become  dejected,  and  endeavour  to  relieve  your- 
selves by  various  strange  methods,  as  if  the  Lord  did  not  regard 
your  affairs  :  "  My  way,"  saith  the  soul,  "  is  hidden  from  the  Lord, 
and  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God,"  Isaiah  xl.  27.  As 
if  the  Lord  were  so  unmerciful,  that  he  would  harden  his  heart 
against  the  mournful  complaints  of  those  whom  he  loved.  And  so 
men  dishonour  and  reproach  their  Father,  who  requires  that  they 
should  think  well  of  him,  and  trust  in  him.     Therefore 

1.  Endeavour  to  obtain  an  assurance,  that  ye  are  his  children,  and 
that  he  is  truly  become  your  Father  through  Christ.  Ye  have  cer- 
tainly the  evidences  j  for  ye  cannot  deny  that  ye  exercise  faith  to- 
ward God  in  Christ,  nor  that  ye  love  the  children  of  God,  nor  that 
ye  lift  up  your  souls  to  God  in  the  heaven.  Hath  it  not  also  been 
clearly  discovered  to  you  by  the  witnessing  of  God's  Spirit  with  your 
spirits  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  and  by  the  embraces  of  his  love,  so 
that  ye  could  not  any  longer  deny  that  ye  were  the  children  of  God? 
Will  ye  reject  again  and  again  such  clear  and  palpable  evidences, 
embrace  your  distress,  and  consider  the  work  of  God  as  deceit?  No, 
no.  Rather  lift  up  your  souls  in  faith,  and  acknowledge  him  even 
in  darkness  to  be  your  Father,  like  the  church,  Isaiah  lxiii.  !  6. 
"  Doubtless,  thou  art  our  Father,"  and  again,  "  Thou,  O  Lord,  ait 
our  Father." 

2.  Thank  him  for  the  happy  privilege,  that  he  is  your  Father, 
and  that  ye  have  liberty  to  speak  to  him.  as  your  Father  who  is  in 
heaven,  so  that  ye  may  desire  all  tilings  of  him  with  boldness  and 
confidence.  It  is  a  great  matter,  ye  have  it  not  of  yourselves,  but 
of  him ;  and  not  on  account  of  your  worthiness,  or  because  ye  have 
moved  him  by  your  good  works.  It  is  only  through  his  Son,  and 
from  his  free  and  everlasting  love  and  grace,  that  it  may  be  to  his 
praise  :  '<  Having  predestinated  us  to  the  adoption  of  children  by 
Jesus  Christ  to  himself,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will, 
to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,"  saith  the  apostle,  Eph   i.  5,6. 

3.  Make  use  now  of  your  liberty,  and  indeed  familiarly.     For  is 


428  THE  ADDRESS  OF  PRAYER. 

he  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  "  cast  not  then  away  your  cofi- 
dence,  which  hatha  great  recompence  of  reward,"  Heb.  x.  35,  but 
go  frequently  with  boldness  to  the  throne,  send  up  thither  all  your 
groanings,  compluints,  desires  and  requests.  He  is  indeed  your 
Father,  he  encourageth  you,  and  ye  will  please  him,  if  ye  pour  out 
your  complaints  often  into  his  bosom,  like  children  :  "  Let  us  there- 
fore go  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,"  Heb.  iv.  16. 

4.  Commit  your  concerns  to  him,  when  ye  pray,  trusting  that  he 
will  accept  your  petitions,  and  answer  them  in  his  own  time,  and  in 
his  own  way,  and  grant  you  your  requests.  For  he  is  your  Father, 
Who  bears  a  kind  and  fatherly  heart  toward  you,  and  loves  you 
more  than  any  earthly  father,  and  too  much  to  refuse  you  your 
reasonable  petitions.  Therefore  "  commit  your  way  unto  the  Lord, 
trust  also  in  him,  and  he  shall  brin^  it  to  pass,"  Psalm  xxxvii.  5. 

5.  Be  always  impressed  with  a  holy  reverence  for  him,  as  well  in 
drawing  near  to  the  Father,  "  worshipping  in  his  fear  toward  his 
holy  temple,"  with  Da\id,  Psalm  v.  7,  as  in  waiting  for  an  answer 
to  your  prayers,  leaving  the  time,  the  manner  and  measure  thereof 
to  him,  like  the  Lord  Jesus,  who,  when  he  prayed  in  his  great  agony 
to  his  Father,  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him,  said,  "  yet  not  my 
will  but  thy  will  be  done,"  Mat.  xxvi.  59.  Thus  also  the  children  of 
God  ought  to  conduct  toward  him  with  a  holy  awe  in  all  their  conver- 
sation. Peter  teacheth  us  this,  1  Peter  i.  17.  "  If  ye  call  on  the 
Father,  who  without  respect  of  persons,  judgetb  according  to  every 
man's  work,  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear."  For 
he  is  your  Father  in  heaven. 

6.  When  ye  call  on  your  Father,  think  then  also  of  your  brethren 
nnd  sisters,  who  perhaps  have  need  of  more  than  ye,  and  cannot 
call  on  him,  as  well  as  ye  can.  Therefore  the  Saviour  teacheth  you 
to  say,  not  "  my,"  but  "our"  Father.  This  is  often  enjoined  :  see 
Psalm  exxii.  6.  Jer.  li.  50.  James  v.  1C.  David,  even  when  he 
had  enough  to  do  with  his  own  case,  could  nevertheless  not  forbear 
mentioning  Zion  in  his  prayer,  Psalm  li.  18. 

7.  It  ought  also  to  support  you  in  your  adversities,  that  ye  may 
address  God  as  your  Father.  Do  wicked  men  boast  of  their  noble 
parentage,  ye  have  greater  reason  to  boast,  for  ye  are  u  born  of  God," 
John  i,  13.  Are  ye  afflicted,  your  Father  regards  your  affliction  : 
"  his  bowels  are  troubled  for  you,  and  he  hath  mercy  on  you,"  Jer. 
iixxi.  20.  Psalm  ciii.  13.  Do  ye  not  know  "  what  and  how  ye  should 
pray,"  or  how  ye  should  conduct  before  the  throne,  "  the  Spirit"  of 
four  Father  «<  will  help    your  infirmities,"  he   will  lead  you  to  the 


XLVI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  120,  121.  42 » 

ihrone,  and  "  pray  for  you  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered." 
Doth  it  grieve  you,  that  ye  must  remain  so  long  a  time  absent  from 
your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  and  that  ye  are  not  yet  taken  up  to 
him  ;  well,  your  eldest  brother  Jesus  "  is  gone  before  you,"  in  or- 
der, as  he  saith  himself,  John  xiv  2,  3,  u  to  prepare  a  place  for 
you,  and  when  he  hath  accomplished  that  work,  he  will  come  to 
you,  and  take  you  unto  himself,  that  where  he  is,  there  ye  may  be 
also."     Amen. 


439  ) 


THE 


FIRST  PETITION 


EXPLAINED. 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  9.     Hallowed  be  thy  name.