Q.  122.   Which  is  the  Jlrst  petition  ? 

A.  "  Hallowed  be  thy  name  ;"  that  is,  grant  us  first  rightly  to 
Imow  thee,  and  to  sanctify,  glorify  and  praise  tl.ee  in  all  thy  works, 
in  which  thy  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  justice,  mercy  and  truth  are 
clearly  displayed  ;  and  further  also,  that  we  may  so  order  and 
direct  our  whole  lives,  our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  as  that  thy 
name  may  never  be  blasphemed,  but  rather  honoured  and  praised 
on  our  account. 

:'  A 

/"V  SON  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his  master  :  it 
then  I  be  a  father,  where  is  mine  honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  master, 
where  is  my  fear?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  Mai  i.  6.  It  is  the  duly 
of  children  to  honour  their  father  :  "  Children,  honour  your  father 
and  mother,  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise,"  saith 
Paul,  agreeably  to  the  law  of  the  Lord,  Lph.  vi.  J,  2,  and  this  is  also 


XL VII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122.  431 

the  nature  of  right-tempered  children.  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Jo- 
seph and  Solomon  exhibited  noble  evidences  of  this,  and  especially 
the  Lord  Jesus,  the  pattern  of  us  all :  "  he  was  subject  to  his  pa- 
rents," Luke  ii.  51.  Therefore  God  also  justly  requires  this  of  his 
people,  Mar.  i.  6.  For  he  is  their  Father,  and  they  are  his  children. 
Yea,  he  requires  with  greater  justice  that  his  children  should  honour 
him,  than  eanhly  fathers  require  it  of  their  children,  inasmuch  as  he 
excels  earthly  fathers  in  the  highest  degree  in  glory  and  sovereign 
authority,  and  his  favoured  people  are  more  obligated  to  him  than  to 
their  earthly  fathers.  Therefore  the  apostle  saith  Heb.  xii.  9. 
u  We  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them 
reverence  ;  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father 
of  spirits,  and  live  ?"  Yea,  the  children  of  God,  who  know  the 
honourableness  of  their  Father,  are  pleased,  and  they  esteem  it  their 
happiness,  when  he  is  honoured  and  glorified  :  "  Their  souls  are 
then  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and  they  praise  him  with 
joyful  lips,"  Psalm  lxiii.  5.  It  is  their  principal  aim,  and  they  de- 
sire to  direct  all  that  they  do;  yea,  even  their  "  eating  and  drinking," 
to  this  end,  as  the  apostle  admonisheth,  1  Cor.  x.  31.  And  since 
they  behold  so  much  honourableness  and  glory  in  God,  that  "  he  is 
exalted  above  all  blessing  and  praise,"  Neh.  ix.  5,  and  that  they  are 
in  themselves  too  contracted  and  unable  to  glorify  his  name,  there- 
fore they  cry  and  pray  that  he  would  grant  them  to  do  this,  as  the 
Saviour  teacheth  them  to  pray  to  the  Father,  "  Hallowed  be  thy 
name." 

The  Saviour  teachirg  his  followers  to  acknowledge  and  address 
God,  as  their  heavenly  Father,  enjoins  upon  them  to  pray  in  the  first 
place,  that  his  name  may  be  hallowed  and  glorified,  as  the  first  and 
principal  object,  to  which  all  the  following  petitions  ought  to  be  di- 
rected, as  means  ;  for  we  must,  as  we  have  taught  on  the  forty-fifth 
Lord's  day,  divide  the  six  petitions  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  first 
exhibits  the  chief  end,  and  the  five  following  the  means  which  lead 
to  that  end  ;  for  if  we  desire  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  come, 
his  will  be  done,  &c.  it  must  only  be  to  the  end,  that  the  Father's 
name  may  be  glorified  and  hallowed. 

In  order  rightly  to  understand  this  petition  concerning  the  hallow- 
ing of  God's  name,  we  must  attend  to  four  particulars ; 

I.  What  the  name  of  God,  and  particularly  what  the  Father's 
name  is. 

II.  How  it  is  hallowed. 

III.  For  what  we  pray  here,  and 

IV.  Why  we  must  pray  thus. 


432  THE  FIRST   PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

I.  That  the  Lord  God,  being  incomparably  glorious,  needeth  no 
name  ;  and  that  he  hath  nevertheless  called  himself  by  a  name,  that 
he  might  make  himself  better  known,  and  distinguish  himself  more 
from  idols ;  and  that  by  his  name,  we  must  understand  himself,  as 
far  as  he  makes  himself,  his  perfections  and  excellencies"  known  to 
the  reasonable  creature  by  his  words  and  works,  that  he  may  be  the 
God  of  the  sinner,  this  we  have  shown  upon  the  third  com- 
mandment. Therefore  the  instructor  explaining  in  this  Lord's  day 
the  name  of  God,  saith  also,  «■  that  in  all  his  works  his  power,  wis- 
dom, goodness,  justice,  mercy  and  truth  are  clearly  displayed  ;  in 
which\ve  learn,  as  by  his  name,  rightly  to  know  him,  to  glorify  and 
praise  him"  And  his  name  denotes  particularly  in  this  petition,  that 
he  is  the  Father  of  believers,  and  therefore  is  become  their  Father 
in  Christ,  "  in  the  midst  of  whom  is  his  Father's  name,  and  who 
makes  his  Father's  name  known  to  the  men,  who  were  given  him," 
Lxnd.  xxiii.  21.     John  xyii.  6. 

II.  Since  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  holy,  therefore  we  may  not  pro- 
fane it,  but  it  must  be  hallowed  To  hallow  (or  sanctify)  any  thing 
denotes,  (a)  to  m  ike  that  which  is  unholy,  holy  ;  as  Jsinners  "  are 
washed  and  sanctified,"  1  Cor.  vii.  11.  (b)  To  set  that  which  is 
common  apait  for  a  holy  use  :  "  Sanctify  unto  me  all  the  firstborn, 
said  the  Lord  to  Moses,"  Fxod.  xiii.  I.  (c)  To  acknowledge  that 
which  is  holy  to  be  so  :  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  in  your  hearts,"  1  Pet. 
iii.  15.  It  is  evident,  that  to  hallow  the  Father's  name  doth  not 
signify  to  make  it  holy,  or  to  set  it  apart  for  a  h  ly  use  :  for  it  is  es- 
sentially and  incomparably  holy  :  "  There  is  none  holy,  as  the  Lord," 
saith  Hannah,  1  Sam.  ii-  2.  But  to  hallow  his  name  is  to  acknowl- 
edge it  to  be  holy. 

It  is  necessary  to  declare  beforehand  what  the  holiness  of  God 
is  ;  and  then  how  his  name  is  hallowed.  As  "  God's  name  is  won- 
derful," Judges  xiii.  18.  «*  What  is  his  name,  and  what  is  his  Son's 
name,  if  thou  canst  tell?"  saith  'vgur,  Prov.  xxx.  4,  so  his  holi- 
ness also  is  inconceivable  and  inexpressible.  We  say  in  a  stammer- 
ing manner,  and  as  the  book  of  God  teacheth  us,  that  the  holiness 
of  God  is,  (a)  that  most  pure  love,  which  God  beareth  to  himself, 
to  his  perfections  and  excellencies,  and  to  his  honour,  by  which  he 
is  so  immaculate,  thai  he  cannot  say  or  do  aught  that  militates  against 
his  perfections,  and  that  he  hath  therefore  a  natural  hatred  to  all 
that  is  sinful,  and  that  opposeth  him,  and  so  "he  is  of  purer  fcyes 
than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab  i.  13.  (b,  That  becomingness  and  fit- 
ness of  God's  nature  and  conduct,  that  a  1  that  he  doth  is  proper  and  un- 
blamable, and  we  cannot  censure  him  in  any  instance,  but  must  ap- 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122*  433 

prove  of  him  in  the  highest  degree  :  "  My  God,"  saith  the  Psalm- 
ist," I  cry  in  the  daytime,  but  thou  hearest  not,  and  in  the  night 
season,  and  am  not  silent,"  What  then  ?  will  he  censure  the  Lord  ? 
no,  all  that  he  doth  is  right,  therefore  he  submitted  himself,  and 
said,  "but  thou  art  holy,"  Psalm  xxii.  2,  3.  (c)  The  highness, 
incomparable  glory,  lustre  and  brightness  which  shines  forth  from 
his  essence,  perfections,  virtues  and  works.  Hear  this  from  the 
mouth  of  Moses,  Exod.  xv.  11,  "  Who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  Lord, 
among  the  gods  ?  who  is  like  thee,  glorious,  in  holiness,  fearful  in 
praises,  doing  wonders  ?"  (d)  His  unchangeableness,  whereby  he 
continues  the  same  that  he  is  and  was,  in  his  essence  and  glory. 
Thus  those  four  living  creatures  declare  the  holiness  of  God,  when 
they  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  was,  and  is, 
and  is  to  come,"  Rev.  iv.  8. 

We  may  easily  conceive  now,  that  the  name  of  God  is  hallowed, 
when  his  holy  glory,  and  glorious  holiness  is  declared,  manifested, 
acknowledged  and  glorified.  Thus  "  the  four  living  creatures  pro- 
claiming the  glory  of  the  Lord,  gave  glory,  and  honour,  and  thanks 
to  him,"  Rev.  iv.  8,  9,  as  before  that  "■  the  seraphs  cried  one  to 
another,  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is 
filled  with  his  glory,"  Isaiah  vi.  3. 

The  name  of  God  is  hallowed  by  the  Lord  himself,  or  by  his  crea- 
tures :  God  hallows  his  name  (a)  by  his  judgments,  with  which  he 
punisheth  the  wicked  ;  for  by  them  he  minifests  his  holy  aversion 
from  the  sinner,  and  from  his  sins  ;  he  demonstrates  thus  his  justice 
by  inflicting  on  the  sinner  his  righteous  anger,  he  declares  the  truth 
of  his  threatenings,  and  he  causes  the  wicked  doer  to  experience 
his  punitive  power,  and  so  the  Lord  causes  the  ungodly  and  all 
others  to  see  that  "  he  is  a  righteous  Judge,  and  a  God  who  is  angry 
every  day,"  Psalm  vii.  11.  "  And  a  man  shall  say.  Verily  there  is 
a  reward  for  the  righteous  :  verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the* 
earth,"  as  David  speaks  in  his  maschil,  Psalm  lxiii.  11.  "When 
the  Lord  consumed  the  sons  of  Aaron  by  the  fire,  which  went  out 
from  him,  he  was  then  sanctified  and  glorified  before  all  the  people," 
Lev.  x.  2,  3.  "  When  God  executed  judgments  in  Zidon,  he  wad 
sanctified  in  her  likewise,"  as  he  speaks,  Ezek.  xxviii.  25.  (b)  God 
also  hallows  his  name  by  bestowing  blessings  and  benefits  upon  his 
children,  for  he  manifests  thus  in  an  illustrious  manner  his  great  pow- 
er, wisdom,  goodness,  love,  grace,  mercy,  and  the  truth  of  his 
promises  to  his  people,  so  that  they,  and  the  wicked  also  behold 
the  favourable  hand  of  God  toward  them  ;  "  I  will  sanctify  my  grsat 
Vol,,  xx.  3  D 


4S4  THE  FIRST  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

name  which  was  profaned  among  the  heathen,  which  ye  have  pro- 
faned in  the  midst  of  them,  and  the  heathen  shall  know  that  1  am 
the  Lord,  saith  the  Lord  God,  when  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  them  be- 
fore their  eyes.  For  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  heathen,  and 
gather  you  out  of  all  countries,  and  will  bring  you  into  your  own 
land,"  Ezek.  xxxvi.  23,  24.  (c)  But  doth  God  hallow  his  name  in 
any  instance,  it  is  in  that  great  and  wonderful  work  of  the  redemp- 
tion of  sinners,  that  he  gave  his  only  Son  to  be  their  Surely,  pun- 
ished their  sins  in  him;  made  them  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and 
hath  given  them  the  certain  expectation  of  an  inconceivable  bliss. 
His  name  shines  forth  in  this,  even  his  power  in  effecting  it,  not- 
withstanding every  opposition  ;  his  manifold  wisdom  in  contriving 
such  an  admirable  way  ;  his  goodness,  grace,  mercy  and  love  to 
miserable  sinners,  in  sending  his  only  begotten  Son  for  the  reconcil- 
iation of  his  enemies  ;  his  justice,  which  the  Surety  hath  fully  satis- 
fied, and  his  truth  in  executing  his  counsel  of  peace,  and  in  fulfilling 
all  his  promises.  And  if  aught  shine  forth  in  this  work,  it  is  his 
holiness  ;  for  by  redeeming  the  sinner  through  his  Son,  he  manifests 
his  hatred  of  sin,  and  his  love  to  himself  and  to  his  perfections,  which 
were  injured  by  sin ;  he  hath  glorified  these  by  the  satisfaction  of 
his  Son  ;  and  by  virtue  of  that  satisfaction  he  sanctifies  his  children, 
and  shows  that  since  he  is  satisfied,  he  will  not  demand  the  debt 
again.  And  thus  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  exalted  in  judgment,  and 
God  who  is  holy  is  sanctified  in  righieousness,"  Isaiah  v.    16. 

"  The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  himself,"  saith  the  wise  king, 
Prov.  xvi.  4.  Therefore  his  creatures,  both  rational  and  irrational, 
were  made  in  order  to  sanctify  and  glorify  his  name.  Irrational  crea- 
tures sanctify  and  glorify  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  "  The  heavens  de- 
clare the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  forth  his  handy 
work,"  &c.  saith  the  sweet  Psalmist,  Psalm  xix.  1—7.  «'  As  know 
the  beasts  and  they  shall  teach  thee  :  and  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they 
shall  tell  thee  ;  or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee,  and 
the  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unto  thee.  Who  knoweth  not  in 
all  these-  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  this  ?"  Job.  xii. 
T — 9.  For  although  these  several  creatures  do  not  utter  any  articu- 
late words,  they  nevertheless  show  the  reasonable  creature  "  God's 
eternal  power  and  Godhead,  which  we  may  understand  and  see 
clearly  by  means  of  these  creatures,"  Horn.  i.  20,  his  wisdom,  "  by 
which  he  hath  made  them  all,"  and  his  goodness,  by  which  "  he 
hath  filled  the  earth  with  good  things/'  as  David  observed,  Psalm 
civ.  24. 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122.  435 

Every  creature  ought  to  contribute  to  the  honour  of  its  Maker,  ir* 
proportion  to  t!ie  excellency  with  which  he  hath  endued  it.  Rational 
creatures,  to  wit,  angels  and  men,  are  the  most  excellent  of  all  God's 
works,  and  therefore  they  ought  to  hallow  the  name  of  God  more 
than  others.  David  filled  with  the  praises  of  God,  calls  upon  the 
angels  to  praise  the  Lord,  Psalm  ciii.  2Q.  They  did  this  also  at  an 
early  period  :  "  When  the  Lord  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth, 
those  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted 
for  joy,"  Job  xxxviii.  7.  "  They  are  desirous  of  looking  into  the  work 
ot  redemption,"  1  Pet.  i.  12.  "  The  church  makes  known  to  them 
the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,"  Eph.  iii.  20.  "  They  praise  God 
on  account  ofit  in  the  highest  heavens,"  Luke  ii.  13,  14.  "They 
rejoice,  when  a  sinner  is  converted,"  Luke  xv.  7,  10,  and  they  watch 
his  Father's  beck,  to  defend  and  serve  him,  Matt,  xviii.  10.  Heb. 
i.  14. 

But  as  Christ  did  not  receive  angels,  but  men,  in  order  to  render 
them  the  children  of  God,  there  forethese  are  particularly  obliged  to 
hallow  their  Father's  name.  Men  do  this  in  and  after  this  life  ! 
in  this  life  they  do  it,  when  they  are  alone,  and  when  they  are  with 
others.  The  children  of  God  hallow  and  glorify  his  name  when 
they  are  alone,  (a)  with  the  thoughts  of  their  hearts,  when  they  re- 
flect with  holy  meditations  on  the  acts  of  God,  and  his  perfections  of 
almightiness,  wisdom,  goodness,  &c  when  they  look  deep  into 
them,  admire,  rejoice  in  them,  extol  them,  and  praise  the  Lord,  on 
account  of  them  :  "  My  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet:  I  will  be 
glad  in  the  Lord,"  saith  David,  Psalm  civ.  34.  (b)  With  words, 
with  which  they  proclaim  with  joy  the  glory  of  the  Lord  before  his 
face,  and  in  his  presence,  that  they  may  praise  and  extol  him  high- 
ly. "  They  speak  thus  by  themselves  of  the  works  of  his  hand," 
with  David,  Psalm  cxliii.  5,  who,  contemplating  in  the  silent  eve- 
ning the  great  works  of  God,  cried  out  to  him,  Psalm  viii.  1 — 9„ 
"  O  Lord,  our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  earth  !  who 
hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens."  (c)  With  virtuous  actions. 
They  apply  to  his  almighty  power  for  help,  they  suffer  themselves 
to  be  directed  by  his  wisdom,  they  are  enamoured  of  his  goodness 
and  mercy,  they  admire  his  justice  in  Christ,  they  trust  in  his  truth, 
and  they  fear  him  with  a  childlike  fear  on  account  of  his  incompara- 
ble glory  and  holiness  :  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  saith  the  pro- 
phet :  but  how  ?  "  Let  him  be  your  fear,  and  let  him  be  your 
dread,"  Isaiah  viii.  13.  Doth  it  please  him,  according  to  his  sove- 
reignty, to  chastise  his  children,  they  sanctify  him  by  submitting  t# 


436  THE  FIRST  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

him  without  contradiction:  " My  God,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxii. 
2,  3,  "  I  cry  in  the  daytime,  but  thou  hearest  me  not ;  and  in  the 
night  season,  and  am  not  silent.  But  thou  art  holy."  Peter  en- 
joins upon  believers  to  "  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  their  hearts, 
when  they  suffer,"  1  Pet,  Hi.  14,  15.  (d)  With  good  and  holy 
intentions,  aiming  in  all  that  they  do,  even  in  indifferent  actions,  at 
the  glory  of  God,  1  Cor.  x.  31.  "  Whether  they  eat  or  drink,  er 
whatever  else  they  do,  doing  all  to  the   glory  of  God." 

The  children  of  God  behold  and  perceive  with  pleasure  so  much 
glorious  holiness  and  praiseworthiness  in  their  Father,  that  they  can- 
not be  satisfied  with  sanctifying  him  by  themselves,  but  they  desire 
help  ;  and  therefore  they  do  it  also  in  the  presence  of  others,  that 
they  also  may  do  it.  On  this  account  they  will  speak  of  God,  and 
of  his  exalted  dignity  to  their  neighbours,  that  they  also  may  know 
the  holy  glory  of  God,  may  obtain  a  sense  of  his  virtues,  and  be  to 
his  praise,  as  David  in  his  psalm  of  praise  would  for  this  end  "  teach 
others  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  Psalm  xxxiv.  1 1,  and  he  "  declared  to 
them  who  feared  God  what  God  had  done  for  his  soul,"  Psalm 
Ixvi.  16.  17.  Yea,  they  will  excite  each  other  to  praise  his  name 
together.  Hear  the  sweet  psalmist  say  again,  Psalm  xxxiv.  3, 
"  O  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt  his  name  together." 
And  that  they  may  not  do  aught  besides,  they  will  endeavour  to  man- 
ifest in  all  their  behaviour  by  their  humility,  selfdenial,  and  heavenly 
mindedness,  that  he  is  worthy  to  be  sought,  loved,  feared  and  hon- 
oured, "  letting  their  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  be- 
hold their  good  works,  and  glorify  their  Father  who  is  in  heaven," 
Matt.  v.   16,      1  Peter,  ii.   12.     iii.   16. 

But  the  name  of  the  Father  will  be  hallowed  by  his  children  still 
more  after  this  life,  when  the  blessed  light  of  the  divine  holiness  and 
glory  shining  upon  them,  and  the  blessed  influence  of  the  divine  all- 
sufficiency  being  shed  abroad  upon  them  immediately,  they  will 
with  all  the  blessed  angels  and  men  proclaim  his  glory  with  all  their 
might,  and  cause  the  heaven  to  resound  for  ever.  See  as  it  were  a 
sketch  of  this  their  future  work.  Rev.  iv.  v.  vii. 

III.  Behold,  in  tins  manner  is  the  name  of  the  Father  hallowed 
by  himself,  by  his  creatures,  and  especially  by  his  children.  "Truly  a 
Work  which  deserves  that  they  should  pray  to  the  Father,  that  he 
Would  teach  and  enable  them  to  do  it :  the  Father  also  teacheth 
them  this,  (a)  when  he  grants  them  rightly  to  know  him  by  irradia- 
ting their  understandings  with  his  light,  so  that  they  see  and  behold 
him,  his  name,  his  holiness  and  virtues  in  all  his  works  clearly   and 


XLVII.  LORD'S   DAY.  Q.    122.  43? 

with  suitable  attention.  See  how  Paul  prays  for  the  believing 
Ephesians,  that  "  God  would  give  them  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  and 
revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him,  the  eyes  of  their  understanding 
being  enlightened,"  &c.  Eph.  i.  17 — 19.  (b)  When  he  enables 
them  to  praise  and  celebrate  him  by  giving  them  much  experimen- 
tal and  heartenlarging  grace.  The  heart  is  sometimes  sluggish,  it 
expeiienceth  itself  listless,  or  is  discouraged  on  account  of  manifold 
difficulties:  but  the  Lord  raises  it  up,"  he  looses  their  sackcloth, 
turns  their  mourning  into  dancing,  and  makes  them  glad  through 
his  works,  so  that  they  triumph  in  the  works  of  his  hands,"  Psalm 
xcii.  4,  '•  and  he  puts  a  new  song  in  their  mouths,  even  praise  to 
their  God,"  Psalm  xl.  3.  (c)  The  Father  grants  them  to  hallow 
his  name  also,  when  "  he  teaches  them  to  do  his  will,  and  when  his 
good  Spirit  leads  them  into  the  land  of  uprightness,"  as  David  prays 
Psalm  cxliii.  10.  And  "  they  do  thus  order  and  direct  their  whole 
lives,  thoughts,  words  and  works,  so  that  his  name  is  not  blasphe- 
med, but  honoured  and  praised  on  their  account." 

IV,  These  are  the  things  which  the  children  of  God  desire,  when 
they  offer  up  this  petition  to  him.  But  why  doth  the  Lord  Je- 
sus choose  that  they  should  pray  thus  ?  (a)  "  Praise  is  comely," 
Psalm  cxlvii.  1.  He  is  worthy  on  account  of  his  transcendent  glory, 
to  be  hallowed.  As  all  things  are  of  and  by  him,  so  all  things 
ought  to  be  referred  back  to  him  by  hallowing  him,  and  all  other 
things,  for  which  we  pray,  ought  to  serve  to  this  end.  God  aims 
at  this  in  all  that  he  doth.  The  Father's  children  ought  to  be  like 
him,  and  therefore  to  be  "  followers  of  God,"  Eph.  v.  I.  They 
have  indeed  been  made  his  children,  and  "called,  that  they  might 
show  forth  his  praise  and  excellencies,"  Isaish  xliii.  21.  1  Peter 
ii.  9.  Yea,  their  Father's  holiness  and  glory  is  also  their  holiness  and 
glory.  See  Isaiah  xxviii.  5  Ezek.  xvi.  14,  and  therefore  they 
must  pray  thus,  if  they  shall  pray  aright  for  themselves,  (b)  They 
are  pleased,  when  their  Father  is  hallowed.  How  will  they  show 
that  they  are,  but  by  their  praying,  like  the  church,  Isaiah  xxvi.  8, 
"  The  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  name,  and  to  the  remembrance  of 
thee."  (c)  They  know  experimentally,  that  they  are  unable  to  hal- 
low his  name,  as  they  ought.  How  shall  they  obtain  an  ability  ? 
only  by  calling  on  the  Father  from  Psalm  lxxi.  8,  "  Let  my  mouth 
be  filled  with  thy  praise,  and  with  thy  honour  all  the  day."  See 
also  Psalm  Ii-  15.  (d)  The  Father  will  also  grant  this  upon  their 
praying  :  when  "  they  cry  to  him  with  their  mouth,  he  is  extolled 
with  their  tongue,"  as  the   church  ^peaks,  Psalm  Ixvi.  17.    They 


438  THE  FIRST  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

pray  indeed  for  the  glorification  of  his  name,  in  which  he  delights-, 
and  therefore  he  will  hear  that  petition. 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  who,  yea,  who  of  you  hallows  the  name  of  God 
thus  ?  Yea,  who  hath  a  hearty  desire  to  be  enabled  to  glorify  the 
name  of  God  ?  indeed  very  few  aim  at  this  ;  for, 

1.  Many,  though  they  say  this  ordinary  lesson  every  day,  known  ot 
what  they  say  :  the  most  of  you  understand  not  what  the  name  of 
God  is,  nor  how  it  is  hallowed.  If  we  should  ask  you  what  ye  un- 
derstood by  it,  when  ye  said,  "hallowed  be  thy  name,"  would  ye 
not  be  ashamed,  and  be  utterly  unable  to  say  what  ye  meant  ?  and 
be  obliged  to  own  that  ye  uttered  barely  words,  without  knowledge, 
and  thus  only  provoked  God  by  your  praying  ?  "  O  Lord,"  saith 
David,  Psalm  xcii.  5,  6,  "how  great  are  thy  works!  and  thy 
thoughts  are  very  deep.  A  brutish  man  knoweth  not :  neither  doth 
a  fool  understand  this."  It  is  then  surely  evident,  that  since  ye  do 
not  understand  this,  ye  do  not  hallow  his  name,  yea.  that  ye  have  no 
inclination  or  desire  to  do  it ;  for  we  cannot  desire  that  of  which  we 
have  no  knowledge. 

2.  The  most  of  you  seek  only  the  glorification  of  their  own 
name.  Is  it  not  true,  that  it  is  your  only  aim  to  he  esteemed,  loved 
and  feared  by  your  neighbour?  Ye  will  say  this  and  that,  make 
r,uch  and  such  a  fair  show,  do  this  or  that  action,  behave  yourselves 
friendly,  flatter  your  neighbour,  and  speak  highly  of  yourselves  with 
«  Theudas,  saying  that  ye  are  somebody,"  Acts  v.  36,  and  with  "  Si- 
mon the  Sorcerer,  who  said  of  himself  that  he  was  some  great  one," 
Acts  viii.  9.  Therefore  ye  inquire  whether  there  be  any  who  are 
pleased  with  you :  and  when  ye  perceive  that  there  are,  it  delights . 
your  souls,  and  affords  you  a  heartfelt  pleasure  ;  but  doth  any  person 
despise  you,  "  ye  are  "  full  of  indignation  at  him,"  as  "  Haman  wras 
at  Mordecai ;"  and  though  ye  fare  ever  so  well,  it  is  nothing  to  you, 
as  long  as  there  is  a  "  Mordecai,  who  will  not  make  obeisance,"  to 
you,  Esther  v.  9 — 13.  What  think  ye,  when  ye  aim  thus  at  your 
own  glory,  can  ye  then  pray  in  truth,  that  the  name  of  God  may  be 
hallowed  ? 

3.  Further,    a  person  who  is  not  born    again,  and   adopted   for  a 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122.  439 

child  of  God,  will  aim  only  at  himself,  and  propose  nothing  but  him- 
self for  his  God.  It  is  certain,  that  as  God  hath  made  all  things 
for  himself,  so  men  ought  also  to  do  all  things  for  the  Lord's  sake. 
Therefore  when  a  man  doth  all  things  for  himself,  doth  he  not  then 
thrust  God,  as  it  were,  from  his  throne,  and  place  himself  in  the  seat 
of  the  Lord  ?  Contemplate  now  yourselves,  hearers,  and  see  with 
what  aims  ye  do  all  things.  Why  do  ye  eat  and  drink?  why  do  ye 
clothe  yourselves  ?  why  do  ye  labour  ?  is  it  because  it  is  the  will  of 
the  Lord,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  serve  and  glorify  him  better  with 
your  bodies  and  your  spirits  ?  surely  no  :  this  enters  not  into  your 
thoughts  :  but  ye  yourselves  are  the  great  objects  of  all  your  under- 
takings. Ye  eat  and  drink  because  ye  are  hungry,  and  because  your 
meat  and  drink  are  pleasant  to  your  taste ;  ye  clothe  yourselves, 
that  ye  may  be  warm,  and  may  not  be  reproached,  and  ye  labour, 
that  ye  may  derive  profit  from  it.  When  therefore  ye  are  so  en- 
tirely devoted  to  yourselves,  and  do  all  things  for  yourselves,  is  it 
possible  that  ye  should  truly  desire,  that  the  name  of  God  should  be 
hallowed  ? 

4.  Doth  God  himself  glorify  his  name  by  benefits  or  judgments, 
there  are  few  who  will  observe  it :  "  Let  favour  be  showed  to  the 
wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteousness  :  in  the  land  of  upright- 
ness will  he  deal  unjustly,  and  will  not  behold  the  majesty  of  the 
Lord.  Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not  see  it,"  Isaiah 
xxvi.  10,  1 1.  Yea,  will  ye  not  ascribe  it  to  your  own  wisdom,  or  to 
chance,  or  to  the  actions  of  this  or  that  person  ?  "  Ye  say  in  your 
hearts,  the  power  and  the  might  of  our  hands  hath  gotten  us  this 
wealth,"  Deut,  viii.  17.  When  we  do  not  attend  to  God,  but  id 
ourselves,  have  we  then  the  smallest  desire,  that  the  name  of  God 
should  be  hallowed  ? 

5.  Once  more,  consider  your  behaviour  and  conduct,  when  ye  are 
alone,  and  when  ye  are  with  others,  with  respect  to  your  imagina» 
tions,  thoughts,  v/ords  and  actions.  Do  these  indeed  show  that  ye 
are  intent  upon  glorifying  the  name  of  God  ?  do  they  not  tend  ta 
the  dishonour  and  to  the  reproach  of  your  Maker  ?  do  heathens  and 
Papists  lead  worse  lives  than  many  of  those  who  are  called  Chris- 
tians ?  If  those  abandoned  nations  should  behold  your  doings,  would 
they  not  reproach  your  profession  ?  and  is  not  "  the  name  oi  God 
blasphemed  also  ©n  your  account  ?"  Rom.  ii.  17 — 24.  "  Ye  profess 
that  ye  know  God  ;  but  in  works  ye  deny  him,  being  abominable, 
and  disobedient,  and  unto  every  good  work  reprobate."  Thus  speaks 
Paul  to  the  ungodly  of  his  time,  Titus  i.  16.  Say  then,  how  can  >*■*? 
pray  in  truth  %h?A  the  name  of  the  Lord  may  be  hallowed  I 


440  THE  FIRST  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

And  is  this  so  ?  it  is  glaringly  evident  that  it  is.  Why  then  de 
ye  call  God  your  Father.  Ye  are  certainly  like  the  Jews,  Isaiah  i. 
4,  k-  children  that  ave  corrupters  ;  for  ye  have  forsaken  the  Lord, 
and  have  provoked  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  anger  :  ye  are  gone 
away  backward."  Is  not  your  praying,  that  his  name  may  be  hal- 
lowed, only  a  mocking  of  the  Lord  ?  for  ye  do  not  mean  what  ye 
say  :  "  Is  it  good  that  he  should  search  you  out  ?  and  as  one  man 
mocketh  another,  do  ye  so  mock  him  ?"  Job  xiii.  9.  Alas  !  friends, 
ye  who  pray  in  this  manner  for  the  hallowing  of  God's  name,  ye 
abuse  his  name,  and  he  will  not  hold  you  guiltless,  as  he  thieaten- 
eth,  Exod.  xx.  7.  Ye  pray  that  God's  name  may  be  hallowed  ;  but 
if  God  should  hallow  his  name  according  to  your  petition,  would  it 
not  be  to  your  destruction,  as  the  fire  consumed  the  sons  of  Aaron  ? 
Lev.  x.  2,  3. 

Will  ye  escape  the  wrath  of  God,  behold  your  unhallowed  con- 
versation, and  see  how  his  indignation  is  kindled  against  you,  that 
ye  may  come  with  fear  and  trembling  to  the  Lord,  and  to  his  good- 
ness, and  may  embrace  his  Son,  in  whom  the  name  of  God  is  hal- 
lowed, and  may  thus  glorify  him  in  this  way  of  grace  ;  for  "  the 
Lord  waiteth,  that  he  may  be  gracious  unto  you,  and  he  will  be  ex- 
alted, that  he  may  have  mercy  on  you,"  as  the  prophet  speaks, 
Isaiah  xxx.  18. 

But,  children  of  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  who  are  especially 
obligated  to  hallow  his  name,  how  little  do  ye  glorify  him  !  Reflect 
how  ye  conduct,  when  ye  are  alone,  with  resp  ct  to  your  thoughts, 
words,  actions,  and  designs ;  and  how  ye  demean  yourselves,  when 
ye  are  with  others,  whether  ye  speak  becomingly  of  God,  whether 
ye  stir  others  up  to  give  glory  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  whether 
they  can  see  by  your  actions,  that  God  your  Father  is  glorious,  and 
worthy  to  be  glorified  ?  must  ye  not  acknowledge  that  ye  dishonour 
him  more  than  ye  glorify  him  I  But  what  would  I  say  ?  shall  I 
speak  harshly  to  you  ?  no,  ye  are  of  yourselves  too  much  grieved 
for  your  misconduct.  Let  your  souls  only  confess  their  folly  with  a 
childlike  humility,  and  glorify  him  in  this  respect,  as  Joshua  required 
of  Achan,  Joshua  vii.  19. 

Is  it  your  desire  to  hallow  the  Lord  : 

1.  Be  then  intent  upon  it,  and  let  it  be  your  aim  in  all  your  doings. 
Why  do  wo  pray  for  a  thing  which  we  do  not  earnestly  desire.  Let 
us  show  then  that  we  are  not  indifferent  whether  we  be  heard  or  not. 
To  bailor/  the  name  of  God  is  surely  your  happiness,  pleasure  and 
joy.     With  the  spouse  "  ye  are  glad  and  rejoice,   when  ye  remem 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122.  441 

ber  his  love  more  than  wine,"  Song  i.  4.  In  what  else  will  your 
eternal  bliss  consist,  but  in  hallowing  and  glorifying  him.  Have 
therefore  a  steadfast  desire  to  this. 

2.  Endeavour  to  know  wherein  it  consists  to  hallow  his  name,  and 
what  his  name  is.  Reflect  upon  what  we  have  said  concerning  it. 
Yea,  seek  to  know  your  Father  himself,  as  he  hath  revealed  himself 
in  his  word,  in  his  ways,  and  especially  to  your  souls.  Ye  have  in 
one  way  or  another,  like  David,  "  seen  him  in  the  sanctuary,  seeing 
his  power  and  his  glory,"  Psalm  lxiii.  2.  Continue  in  that  light 
and  in  that  sight  of  him,  that  ye  may,  "  with  open  face,  beholding 
as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  be  changed  into  the  same  image, 
from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  2  Cor.  iii. 
18,  This  would  indeed  fill  your  mouths  with  his  praise,  with  his 
honour  all  the  day. 

3.  Pray  therefore  heartily,  earnestly,  firstly  and  mostly  that  the 
Lord  would  give  you  grace  to  hallow  his  name  ;  that  he  would  fill 
your  souls  with  his  lovingkindness,  and  permit  you  to  enjoy  him, 
that  **  being  satisfied,  as  with  marrow  and  fatness,  your  mouths  may 
praise  him  with  joyful  lips,"  Psalm  lxiii.  5.  The  church  tried, 
Psalm  cvi.  4,  5.  "Remember  me,  O  Lord,  with  the  favour  that 
Shou  bearest  unto  thy  people  :  O  visit  me  with  thy  salvation  :  that 
I  may  see  the  good  of  thy  chosen,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness 
of  thy  nation  :  that  I  may  glory  with  thine  inheritance."  Think 
not  that  your  hearts,  or  mouths  will  be  opened  to  praise  his  name, 
until  God  himself  shall  incline  to  you,  and  shall  put  a  new  song  in 
your  mouths.  David,  though  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  know= 
ing  this,  said  to  the  Lord,  "  Open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall 
show  forth  thy  praise,"  Psalm  li.  15. 

4.  Let  the  hallowing  of  your  Father's  name  be  your  first  motive 
in  all  that  ye  do.  Let  it  excite  you  to  perform  this  or  that  work, 
that  God  can  and  will  be  glorified  by  it,  and  let  this  be  your  end 
and  aim  in  all  your  undertakings,  "  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  all 
things,  through  Jesus  Christ :  to  whom  be  praise  and  dominion  for 
ever  and  ever,  Amen,"  1  Peter  iv.  1 1.  We  ought  even  to  pray  for 
all  that  we  need  for  soul  and  body,  that  the  Lord  may  be  glorified 
thereby  ;  for  to  this  end  doth  the  Saviour  give  us  this  petition  in  the 
first  place,  that  we  may  for  this  purpose  pray  for  other  things  also. 
The  children  of  God  end  indeed  with  all  that  they  do  in  the  glory 
of  God,  and  God  is  glorified  in  them  by  his  several  favours  ;  but 
believers,  who  are  yet  inexperienced,  do  not  begin  so  much  from 
the  glory  of  God,  snd  they  do  not  aim  immediately  and  directly  at 

Voi.   ii  3 i  E 


442  THE  FIRST  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

the  divine  glory  in  their  actions  ;  but  they  pursue  their  own  happi- 
ness and  comfort  in  the  practice  of  godliness,  and  thus  they  glorify 
the  name  of  God  indeed  indirectly,  but  not  directly  and  intentionally  ; 
and  therefore  they  must,  according  to  tne  promise,  Psalm  xcii.  12 — 
15,  endeavour  to  "  grow,  that  they  may  show  that  the  Lord  is  up- 
right." 

5.  Let  this  petition  serve  as  an  argument  in  all  your  prayers,  that 
if  the  Lord  wdl  gi»ant  your  holy  requests,  ye  will  then  praise  his 
name  on  account  of  it,  and  that  it  will  certainly  conduce  to  his  glory, 
as  David  prayed  in  this  manner,  Psalm  xxv.  11.  "  For  thy  name's 
sake,  O  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity.''  The  church  imitated  him 
herein,  Psalm  Ixxix.  9.  "  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for  the 
glory  of  thy  name  :  and  deliver  us,  and  purge  away  our  sins,  for 
thy  name's  sake."  This  renders  the  person  who  prays  bold,  and 
strengthens  his  confidence,  that  God  will  grant  him  his  requests, 
and  it  inducelh  the  Lord  to  hear  the  prayer  of  his  people  ;  for  he 
doth  all  things  for  his  name's  sake. 

6.  Deny  your  own  name,  not  that  ye  are  the  children  of  God  ; 
for  ye  would  then  profane  your  Father's  name  :  but  all  your  own 
honour,  profit,  pleasure,  and  all  that  ye  have  of  yourselves  :  "  Hear- 
ken, O  daughter,  and  consider,  and  incline  thine  ear  :  forget  also 
thine  own  people,  and  thy  father's  house  ;  so  shall  the  king  greatly 
desire  thy  beauty  :  for  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  worship  thou  him."  Thus 
ye  are  exhorted,  Psalm  xlv.  10,  11.  Be  not  exceedingly  grieved, 
■when  ye  are  dishonoured,  as  long  as  your  Father's  name  is  hallow- 
ed :  "  Jesus  sought  not  his  own  glory,"  John  viii.  50.  '«  He  endured 
the  cross,  despising  the  shame,"  saith  the  apostle,  Heb.  xii  2.  But 
let  it  pierce  your  hearts  through  with  grief,  when  the  name  of  God 
is  unhallowed  :  "  Hezekiah  and  his  messengers  rent  their  clothes, 
because  the  name  of  the  Lord  was  blasphemed,"  2  Kings  xviii.  37. 
xix.  1.  For  it  is  your  Father's  name,  which  he  hath  put  upon  you 
also,  and  by  which  he  glorifies  you.  How  then  can  ye  endure,  that 
it  should  be  reproached  ? 

"  Do  wicked  men  blaspheme  that  worthy  name,  by  which  ye  are 
called,"  Juries  ii.  7,  and  "  are  \e  teproached  for  the  name  of  Christ; 
happy  are  ye  ;  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  upon  you  : 
on  their  part  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  part  he  is  glorified," 
1  Pet.  iv.  14.  Ye  are  sanctified  for  your  Father,  for  ye  are  a  chosen 
gene  ./ion,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people; 
that  yc  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you 
out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light,"  1  Peter  ii.  9.  The  Father 


XLVII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  122.  443 

will  regard  your  sanctification  and  glorification,  and  wo  to  him  who 
dishonoured  you  :  «  He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  his 
eye,"  Zech-ii.  8.  He  will  answer  all  your  petitions,  he  will  sanctify 
you  perfectly,  and  in  sanctifying  and  glorifying  you,  he  will  manifest 
himself  wonderful  and  glorious,  when,  according  to  2  Thess.  i  10, 
"  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe,"  Amen. 


(    ***   ) 


THE 


SECOND  PETITION 


EXPLAINED. 


XLVIIi.  LORD'S  DAV 


jVIat.  vi.  10.  Thy  kingdom  come,