Q.   123.    Which  is  the  second  petition  ? 

A.  "  Thy  kingdom  come  ;"  that  is,  rule  us  so  by  thy  word  and 
Spirit,  that  we  may  submit  ourselves  more  and  more  to  thee  ;  pre- 
serve and  increase  thy  church,  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and 
all  violence,  which  would  exalt  itself  against  thee  ;  and  also  all  wick- 
ed counsels  devised  against  thy  holy  word  ;  till  the  full  perfection  of 
thy  kingdom  takes  place,  wherein  thou  shalt  be  all  in  all. 


A. 


„LTHOUGH  the  glory  of  God  shines  abroad  in  the  clearest 
manner  by  means  of  all  his  great  actions  in  nature,  nevertheless  it 
is  still  more  manifested  by  his  work  of  grace  in  the  church. 
In  the  world  "  he  doth  great  things  past  finding  out,  yea, 
and  wonders  without  number  :  he  removeth  the  mountains,  and 
they  know  it  not,  and  he  overturneth  them  in  his  anger,"  &c.  Job 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123.  445 

ix.  5 — 10.  This  manifests  him  wonderful  in  his  glory'  :  '«  I  know," 
saith  the  psalmist,  "  that  the  Lord  is  great,  and  that  our  Lord  is 
above  all  gods.  Whatsoever  the  Lord  pleased,  that  did  he  in  heaven, 
and  in  earth,  in  the  seas,  and  all  deep  places.  He  causeth  the  va- 
pours to  ascend,"  &c.  Psalm  cxxxv.  6,  7.  All  these  actions  of  God 
manifest  "  his  invisible  things,  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead," 
Rom.  i.  20.  But  his  glory  beams  forth  still  more  in  his  church. 
David,  calling  upon  "  the  children  of  the  mighty  to  give  unto  the 
Lord  the  glory  due  unto  his  name,"  speaks  not  only  of  God's  great 
works,  of  thunder,  lightning,  floods,  and  the  painful  calving  of  the 
hinds,  but  also  of  his  glory,  which  he  hath  placed  in  his  church, 
and  in  which  he  is  praised  on  account  of  it  more  than  elsewhere, 
saying,  "  but  in  his  temple  doth  every  one  speak  of  his  glory," 
Psalm  xxix.  1 — 9.  For  he  hath  placed  his  children  in  his  church, 
«■'  that  chosen  generation,  that  royal  priesthood,  that  holy  nation,  and 
peculiar  people,  that  they  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him, 
who  hath  called  them  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light,"  1 
Peter  ii.  9.  He  dwells  and  converseth  there  as  in  his  house,  and 
u  he  hath  his  fire  and  his  furnace  there,"  Isaiah  xxxi.  9.  Yea,  in 
his  church  he  is  like  a  king  in  his  palace,  he  appears  there  on  his 
throne,  the  theatre  of  his  glory,  which  shines  forth  particularly  in 
his  giving  of  his  Son,  that  he  might  forgive  sins  through  grace,  and 
nevertheless  remain  just ;  for  to  this  end  "  hath  he  set  his  Son 
forth"  in  his  church,  Rom.  iii.  25,  26. 

He  therefore  who  desires  that  the  Lord  should  be  glorified,  must 
also  promote  the  glory  of  the  church.  Therefore  Jesus,  the  great 
Advocate  of  his  people,  teaching  the  children  of  God  to  pray  for 
the  hallowing  and  glorifyingof  their  Father's  name,  commands 
them  to  pray  for  the  promoting  and  "  the  coming  of  his  kingdom" 
in  his  church,  because  his  name  is  hallowed  chiefly  in  his  church. 

In  order  rightly  to  understand  this  second  petition,  we  must  attend 
to  three  particulars, 

I.  What  the  kingdom  of  God  is. 

II.  How  it  comes,  and 

III.  Why  we  must  pray  for  this. 

1.  Believers,  calling  upon  their  Father,  speak  to  him  concerning 
his  kingdom.  A  kingdom  is  a  state  of  a  people,  in  which  one  per- 
son hath  as  king,  the  supreme  power  and  authority,  whereby  he 
governs  the  subjects  according  to  certain  laws,  protects  the  good, 
and  punisheth  the  evil. 

Such  a  supreme  authority  is  ascribed  to  God,  and  particularly  to 
the   Father,   with   which  he  rules  as  king.     We  read  of  a  twofold 


446  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

kingdom  of  God  :  we  find  first  an  universal,  and  then  a  paiticular 
kingdom.  The  universal  kingdom,  called  also  the  kingdom  of  na» 
lure,  of  power,  and  of  common  providence,  is  the  whole  world,  in 
which  the  Lord  governs  all  his  creatures,  according  to  a  certain  ox- 
der  and  laws  which  are  innate  in  them,  and  also  sometimes  ahove 
and  without  those  laws  by  miracles  ;  and  causes  them  to  observe  his 
beck  and  will,  that  he  many  manifest  his  supreme  authority  and 
sovereign  power  over  them.  All  the  creatuies  are  subject  to  this 
jurisdiction  of  God  :  "  The  Lord  hath  established  his  throne  in  the 
heavens,  and  his  kingdom  ruleth  over  an,"  saith  David,  Psalm  ciii. 
19.  Even  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  the  mightiest  kings  are  sub- 
ject to  this  dominion  of  the  Lord.  Although  Pharaoh  may  attempt 
to  shake  off  this  yoke  from  himself  and  say,  "  Who  is  the  Lord, 
that  I  should  obey  his  voice  to  let  Israel  go  ?  I  know  not  the  Lord, 
neither  will  I  let  Israel  go,"  Exod.  v,  2,  the  great  Cod  and  king, 
who  is  above  all  gods,  will  speedily  compel  him  to  acknowledge  his 
sovereign  power,  and  say,  "  The  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my 
people  are  wicked,"  Exod.  ix.  27.  Did  the  great  Nebuchadnezzar 
think  and  say,  that  he  was  the  supreme  king,  and  the  independent 
ruler  of  great  Babylon,  the  Lord  God  manifested  that  he  was  never- 
theless above  him  ;  for  he  caused  "  the  kingdom  to  depart  from  that 
proud  boaster  j  lie  was  driven  from  men  among  the  beasts,  and  a 
beast's  heart  was  given  him,  until  he  knew  that  the  heavens  did  rule, 
and  until  he  blessed  the  Most  High,  and  praised  and  honoured  him 
who  liveth  for  ever,  whose  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  and 
his  kingdom  is  from  generation  to  generation;  and  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  are  reputed  as  nothing  ;  and  he  doth  according  to  his 
will  in  the  army  of  heavcm,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  : 
and  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  What  doth  thou  ?" 
Dan.  iv.  The  Lord  is  indeed  "a  king  of  kings,"  1  Tim.  vi.  15. 
The  devil  himself,  though  he  is  the  god  of  this  world,  must  submit 
with  his  angels  to  the  dominion  of  the  Lord,  although  it  is  contrary 
to  his  will.  When  the  Son  of  God  "  commands  those  unclean 
spirits,  they  obey  him,"  Mark  i.  27.  When  "  he  doth  not  suffer 
them  to  speak,"  they  dare  not  even  mutter,  Mark  i.  34.  They  can- 
not enter  into  the  swine,  when  he  doth  not  permit  them  upon  their 
request,  Mat.  viii.  31,  32. 

But  the  Lord  hath  also  a  particular  kingdom,  called  the  kingdom 
of  grace,  in  which  he  alone  reigneth  over  his  children,  as  his  pecu- 
liar property  above  all  other  creatures,  according  to  his  free  and 
royallaw.     This  Christ  calls  "  the  kingdom  of  God   and  his   riglv- 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123  M7 

teonsness,"  and  he  saith  that  "  all  other  things  shall  be  added  to  it," 
Matt.  vi.  33. 

God  the  Father  is  the  king  of  this  kingdom  of  grace  ;  for  to  hirn 
do  believers  speak,  as  we  have  shown  before,  in  treating  on  the 
manner  of  addressing  God  in  prayer.  It  is"  true,  "  the  Son  of  God 
is  the  king  of  Israel,"  as  Nathanael  confessed  with  an  upright  mind, 
John  i.  50.  But  when  the  Son  of  God  prescribed  this  prayer  to  his 
people,  he  did  not  appear  like  a  king,  but  like  "  one  whom  man 
despiseth,  like  a  servant  of  rulers,  and  one  whom  the  nation  abhor- 
red," according  to  the  prophecy,  Isaiah  xiix.  7.  As  "  he  also  made 
himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant, 
and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  man,"  Philip,  ii.  7.  Having  after- 
wards ascended  into  heaven.,  and  sitten  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  he 
manifested  himself  a  king,  when  he  poured  out  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but 
he  did  this  on  the  behalf  of  his  Father,  who  appointed  him  his  vice- 
gerent, that  he  might  govern  his  church  with,  by,  and  in  him.  For 
to  this  end  "  the  Father  anointed  him,"  Psalm  ii  6,  "gave  him 
the  throne  of  his  Father  David,"  Luke  i.  32,  "  exalted  him  by  his 
right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Is- 
rael, and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  Acts  v.  31,  "  made  him  sit  at  his 
right  hand,  and  gave  him  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  shed 
him  forth,  and  made  him  thus  Lord  and  Christ,"  Acts  ii.  33 — 36. 
And  so  he  reigns,  as  Mediator,  in  the  name,  and  "  to  the  glory  of 
Cod  the  Father,"  as  Paul  teacheth,  Philip,  ii.  9 — 11.  "Which  king- 
dom he  will  deliver  up  to  the  Father  again,"   1  Cor.  xv.  24. 

Although  many  reprobates  join  themselves  outwardly  to  his 
church,  and  are  on  that  account  called  "  Children  of  the  kingdom," 
they  are  nevertheless  not  proper  subjects,  and  shall  therefore  be  ban- 
ished and  "  cast  out  "  of  the  kingdom,  as  the  King  saith,  Matt  viii. 
12.  But  those  only  are  proper  subjects,  who  have  been  chosen  by 
the  Father,  and  given  to  his  Son  ;  who  hath  bought  them  with  his 
blood  for  himself,  hath  subjected  them  to  himself,  and  bestows  upon 
them  the  benefits  of  the  kingdom,  "  righteousness,  peace  and  joy 
through  the  Holy  Ghost,"  Rom.  xiv.  17,  and  whom  he  governs  by 
his  word  of  the  law  and  gospel  with  his  Spirit.  Thus  God  promised 
to  his  Son,  that  "  he,  as  the  anointed  King  of  God,  should  have  the 
elect  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 
for  his  possession,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  8,  and  also  **  a  rod  of  his  strength, 
that  he  might  subdue  his  enemies  to  himself,  and  render  them  a 
willing  people,"  Psalm  ex.  2,  3,  as  they,  affected  in  this  manner, 
do  also  "join  themselves  to  him."  and  do  homage  to  him.  "  to  be. 
hi.c  servants,"  Isaiah  |vt.  6. 


m  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

This  kingdom  hath  also  its  enemies.  The  devil  hath  exalted 
himself  with  his  angels  against  the  King,  and  hath  erected  the  king- 
dom of  darkness,  in  order  to  oppose  the  King,  and  the  subjects  of 
the  kingdom  of  salvation  ;  to  whom  Mahomet  and  his  whole  multi- 
tude have  joined  themselves,  and  also  Antichrist,  the  whore  of  Baby- 
lon, with  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  commit  fornication  with 
her  ;  for  "the  coming  of  the  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  is 
after  the  working  of  Satan,"  2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 9.  Heretics  also  in 
general  conspire  with  this  power  of  hell ;  and  that  roaring  lion,  that 
he  may  the  more  easily  devour  the  subjects  of  the  Lord,  stirs  up 
traitors  also  within  the  kingdom  of  God,  even  all  the  false  brethren 
in  the  church,  and  all  the  corruptions  in  the  souls  of  the  true  sub- 
jects. But  our  great  King  will  destroy  him,  with  all  that  cleave  to 
him  :  for  "  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his 
feet,"   1  Cor.  xv.  25. 

Although  the  kingdom  of  grace,  with  respect  to  the  essentials  of 
it,  is  always  the  same,  nevertheless  it  must  be  considered,  agreeably 
to  the  free  dispensation  of  the  King,  in  different  situations.  It  is 
either  the  kingdom  of  the  Old  '1  estament,  or  of  the  New  Testament, 
or  of  glory. 

J.  God  erected  his  kingdom  under  the  Old  Testament,  even  in 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  when  he  promised  his  Son,  as  "  the  seed 
of  the  woman,"  that  he  might  cause  him,  as  king,  to  "bruise  the 
head  of  the  seed  of  the  serpent,"  Gen.  iii.  15.  He  manifested 
himself  alsa  a  king  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs,  until  he  adop- 
ted the  posterity  of  Abraham  for  his  subjects,  and  erected  his  king- 
dom in  a  public  manner  among  them,  and  undertook  to  govern  them 
himself,  without  an  earthly  king.  Gideon,  knowing  this,  **  would 
not  reign  over  Israel,  nor  suffer  his  son  to  reign  over  them,"  be- 
cause "  the  Lord  alone  ought  to  reign  over  them,"  Judges  viii.  23. 
When  the  children  of  Israel  afterwards  desired  a  king,  it  displeased 
the  Lord,  because  "  they  rejected  him,  that  he  should  not  reign 
over  them,"  1  Sam.  viii.  9,  and  therefore  he  indeed  "gave  them  a 
king,  but  it  was  in  his  anger,  and  he  took  him  away  in  his  wrath," 
Ho  sea  xiii.  1 1.  And  after  this  the  Lord  did,  as  it  were,  tolerate  the 
kingly  government  among  them.  He  himself  had  indeed  acted  in 
the  most  perfect  manner,  as  their  king  :  he  had  led  them  out  oi 
Egypt,  had  brought  them  to  Horeb,  had  given  them  there  his  civil 
ecclesiastical  and  moral  laws,  had  gone  before  them  in  a  pillar  ci 
fire  and  of  cloud,  had  fed  them  with  Manna  from  heaven,  had  given 
them  water  to  drink  out  of  the  rock,  had  brought  them  into  Canaan 
•;.:esfor  them,  and  maintained,  his  throne,  as  -a  king 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123.  44$ 

who  reigneth,  on  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  «  between  the  cherubims," 
Psalm  xcix.  1.  Although  Christ  was  not  then  yet  exalted  to  the 
kingly  authority,  he  nevertheless  then  also  manifested  himself  a 
king.  He  appeared  then  often  as  the  angel  ef  God's  presence,  he 
gave  the  law,  went  before  Israel  to  lead  them  into  Canaan,  and  ap- 
peared to  Joshua,  as  "the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host."  Yet  all  this 
was  done  with  the  encumbrance  of  a  worldly  sanctuary,  and  under 
darksome  shadows  of  better  things.  But  although  that  kingdom  of 
the  Old  Testament  was  such  an  outward  and  material  kingdom*  it 
nevertheless  included  an  inward  and  spiritual  kingdom  within  it. 
They  had  then  certainly  the  essential  benefits  of  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  as  righteousness,  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghost. 
See  only  the  Psalms  of  David,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  grace  exists  particularly  undtr  the  New  Tes- 
tament, in  which  the  Lord  God  reigns  over  the  elect  Gentiles,  as 
well  as  Jews,  only  by  his  Spirit  with  his  word  and  sacraments,  with= 
out  the  encumbrance  of  a  worldly  sanctuary  :  this  is  called  emphati- 
cally, *!  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  waited,"  Mark  xv.  43.  Therefore  God  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  king,  John  xviii.  37,  who  also  bore 
the  guilt  of  his  subjects,  reconciled  them  to  God,  overcame  his  and 
their  enemies,  "  abolished  the  sacrifices  and  oblations,  broke  down 
the  middle  wall  of  partition,"  and  maintains  "  his  throne  no  longef 
on  the  ark,  but  hath  Jerusalem,  even  his  church,  for  his  throne,  and 
is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father,  angels,  and  authorities  and 
powers  being  made  subject  to  him,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  Col«  ii, 
13—15.     Eph.  ii.  13-19.     Jer.  hi.  16.     1  Pet.  iii.  22. 

3.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  however  not  yet  complete,  but  it  will 
be  perfected  after  this  life  in  glory  ;  which  lakes  place  indeed  partly 
now,  when  the  souls  of  the  subjects,  separated  from  the  body,  become 
forthwith  happy,  and  are  taken  up  into  paradise,  even  heaven  ;  but 
it  will  take  place  fully  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  in  the 
final  judgment,  when  they  will  "  inherit  the  kingdom,"  in  body  as 
well  as  in  soul,  "  and  be  taken  up  into  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord,"  Matt.  xxv.  34. 
1  Thess.  iv.  17.  Where  God  will  then  be  all  in  all;  for  they  will 
be  round  about  the  throne,  and  God  will  reign  over  them  immedi- 
ately,  and  render  them  happy  for  ever  with  his  allsuffkient  influence, 
neither  will  any  adversaries  afflict  them  ;  for  "  death  and  hell  shall 
be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev.  xx.  14. 

II.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  teaches  the  children  ©f  God  to   pray 
for  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom,  he  doth  not  then  speak  of  God's 
Vol,  it.  3  F 


*SQ  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

universal  kingdom,  but  of  the  kingdom  of  grace  as  far  as  it  was 
still  to  come:  and  therefore  he  doth  not  mention  the  kingdom  of 
grace  under  the  Old  Testament,  which  was  then  ready  to  vanish 
away  :  but  he  requireth  that  we  should  pray  for  the  coming  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  of  glory,  which  drew  near  even  then:  "Re- 
pent :  for  the  kingdom  of  heaVen  is  at  hand,"  said  the  Baptist,  Matt. 
iii.  2.  The  Saviour  saith  the  same  thing,  Matt.  i.  15.  The  pro- 
phetsforetold  from  ancient  times  that  it  would  come,  according  to 
Which  prophecies  the  believers  "  waited  for  that  kingdom,  with  Jo- 
seph of  Arimathea,"  Mark  iv.  43. 

This  kingdom  comes,  either  with  respect  to  the  church  in  gen- 
eral, or  with  respect  to  each  sincere  member  of  the  church  in  par- 
ticular. With  respect  to  the  church  in  general,  the  kingdom  of 
God  comes,  (a)  When  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  is  preached, 
where  it  was  not  before,  and  when  it  is  published  with  more  clear- 
ness than  before,  (b)  When  the  enemies  are  destroyed,  or  re- 
strained, (c)  When  eminent  men  are  raised  up,  who  promote  the 
kingdom  greatly,  (d)  When  the  church  is  improved  in  doctrine 
and  life,  and  (e)  When  many  submit  themselves  to  the  King  in 
truth  ;  for  "  the  king's  honour  is  in  the  multitude  of  people," 
Prov.  iv.  28.  Or,  as  the  instructor  saith,  when  "  God  preserves  and 
increase's  the  church,  and  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil,"  &c. 

If  ye  will  rather,  with  many  others,  follow  the  order  of  time,  and 
notice  in  what  manner  the  Lord  hath  caused  his  kingdom-  to  come 
from  time  to  time  in  the  lvorld,  observe  then, 

1.  That  the  kingdom  of  God  came,  when  Christ  the  king  came 
into  the  world,  preached  the  word  among  the  Jews,  confirmed  it  by 
his  miracles,  purchased  the  benefits  of  the  kingdom  by  his  obedi- 
ence and  sufferings,  overcame  death  and  the  devil  by  his  resurrec- 
tion, arose  to  the  throne  at  the  ri^ht  hand  of  the  Father  by  his  ascen- 
sion into  heaven,  sent  the  Spirit  of  the  kingdom  down  from  his  throne 
upon  his  apostles,  and  sent  them  into  the  world,  to  subdue,  and 
gather  his  subjects  to  him  :  "If  I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out 
devils,"  said  the  King  to  the  Jews,  Matt.  xii.  18,  "then  the^king- 
dom  of  God  is  come  unto  you."  When  he  was  among  them  with 
his  word  and  miracles,  then  "  the  kingdom  of  God  was  also  within 
them,"  Luke  xvii.  20,  21.  He  evidenced  by  his  exaltation  and  tbje 
outpouring  of  his  Spirit,  that  "  God  had  mode  him  both  Lord  and 
Christ,"  Acts  ii.  33 — 36. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  God  came  also,  when  the  word  of  the  king- 
dom was  preache-d  with  power  among  the  Gentiles,  and  received  by 
jnany  nations:  When  "he  spake  peace  unto  the   heathen,   he  then 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123.  45! 

also  ruled  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth,"  Zech.  ix.  10. 

3.  We  add  also  to  this,  that  it  came,  when  "  he  sent  forth  his 
armies,"  even  the  Romans,  "  who  destroyed  the  Jews,  and  burnt  up 
the  city,"  as  the  king  foretold,  because  "  they  would  not  have  that 
he  should  reign  over  them,  and  had  slain  him  and  his  people,"  Matt, 
xxii.  7.  Luke  xix.  37.  Then  "  they  saw  him,  sitting  on  the  right 
hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt.  xxvi. 
64.  For  when  the  Lord  punisheth  and  ju  Igeth  a  people,  he  is  then 
said  "  to  come  on  the  clouds,"  Isaiah  xix.  1. 

4.  When  Christ  came  in  this  manner  with  his  kingdom  in  the 
world,  "  the  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves  against  him,"  and 
sought  by  the  ten  wellknown  heathen  persecutions  to  root  out  the 
remembrance  of  his  name  from  the  earth.  But  God,  who  "  had 
anointed  his  king,"  and  had  promised  him,  that  "  he  would  give 
him  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  his  possession,"  Psalm  ii.  6,  8,  did  by  means  of  Constan- 
tine  the  Great,  the  first  Christian  emperour,  destroy  those  tyrants 
and  their  tyranny,  and  he  "  compassed  his  people  about  with  joyful 
songs  of  deliverance,"  and  gathered  also  many  kings  of  the  earth 
to  himself :  for  then  "the  dragon  was  cast  out  into  the  earth, 
and  the  strength,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power  of 
his  Christ  came,"  Rev.  xii.  9,  10. 

5.  The  kingdom  of  God  came  in  an  exceedingly  glorious  and  il- 
lustrious manner  in  the  reformation  of  the  church  ;  for  then  the 
gospel,  which  had  been  long  obscured  by  the  Romish  additions,  was 
clearly  and  powerfully  explained  and  preached,  by  which  means 
even  many  kings  were  induced  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  Antichrist 
and  submit  themselves  to  Christ.  See  this  represented  in  a  vision, 
Rev.  xiv.  6. 

6.  These  things  have  happened  already,  and  we  enjoy  now  yet 
the  blessed  fruits  of  them  :  therefore  we  must  not  pray,  but  praise 
the  Lord  for  them.  But  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  we  must 
still  pray,  will  come  when  he  will  give  more  life,  and  a  greater  por- 
tion of  his  Spirit,  when  he  will  convert  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  sub- 
due the  Turks  and  Antichrist,  Although  we  cannot  determine  the 
measure,  nor  the  manner,  nor  the  extent  of  this  event,  nor  the  time 
when  it  will  happen,  we  nevertheless  see  the  matter  itself  foretold, 
Rom.  xi.  25 — 29,     Rev   xvi.     xviii.     xix.     xx. 

7.  But  this  kingdom  will  come  perfectly  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
when  Jesus  the  King  will  cast  all  the  ungodiy  into  the  fire  of  hell, 


452  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

and  "  conduct  his  subjects  into  the  kingdom  of  his  Father,  where 
they  will  shine  as  the  sun  ;  and  then  he  will  deliver  up  the  kingdom 
to  God,  even  the  Father,  and  God  "  will  influence  all  the  blessed  im- 
mediately, and  thus  be  "all  in  all,"  Matt.  xhi.  41—43.  xxv.  31— 
46,      1  Cor.  xv    24 — 28. 

When  the  kingdom  of  God  comes  thus  with  respect  to  the  church 
in  general,  it  comes  then  also  with  respect  to  each  member  in  par- 
ticular, and  each  receives  his  particular  advantage  by  it,  and  indeed 
(a)  When  God  delivers  the  elect  sinner  out  of  the  power  of  dark- 
ness, and  translates  him  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son,"  as  Paul 
speaks,  Col.  i.  13.  Then  "the  King"  comes  and  "  rides  prosper- 
ously in  his  majesty,  because  of  truth,  and  meekness,  and  righteous- 
ness," in  his  heart,  Psalm  xlv.  4.  But  the  believer  doth  not  pray 
for  this,  because  he  is  already  delivered,  (b)  When  God  endues 
him  with  so  much  power  and  vigour,  that  he  exerts  a  manly  holiness, 
and  fights  valiantly  against  his  spiritual  enemies,  and  treads  them 
under  his  feet,  saying  with  a  holy  magnanimity,  like  Paul,  1  Cor.  vi. 
12.  "I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any."  (c)  He  some- 
times visits  him  with  his  kingly  grace,  shows  him  his  love,  reveals 
his  glory,  and  "  makes  with  his  Father  his  abode  "  in  the  heart  of 
the  person  who  loves  him.  as  he  promiseth,  John  xiv.  21,  23.  And 
he  thus,  "  rules  him  by  his  word  and  Spirit,  so  that  he  submits  him- 
self more  and  more  to  the  Lord,"  as  the  catechism  explains  this 
matter,  according  to  the  scripture,  (d)  But  finally,  this  kingdom 
comes  to  him,  when  the  King  glorifies  him,  and  conducts  him  into 
his  blessed  kingdom,  first  in  death,  with  respect  to  his  soul,  com- 
manding "  the  angels  to  carry  his  soul  into  Abraham's  bosom,"  that 
he  may  "  be  with  the  King  in  Paradise,"  Luke  xvi.  22.  xxiii.  43, 
and  afterward*  in  the  resurrection,  Psalm  xvii.   15.     Matt.  xxv.  34. 

III.  So  far  then  as  the  church,  and  the  children  of  God  do  not 
yet  enjoy  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom,  they  are  bound  to  pray, 
fhat  it  may  come  to  them  ;  for  ( 1 )  They  are  the  children  of  the 
King,  and  it  is  therefore  natural  to  them  to  desire  that  their  Father 
may  be  manifested  as  king,  and  rule  over  all.  This  induced  the 
psalmist  to  proclaim  before  the  Messiah,  the  antitype  of  Solomon, 
"  Blessed  be  his  glorious  name,  and  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled 
with  his  glory,"  Psalm  Ixxii.  19.  (2)  Their  Father's  name  is  hal- 
lowed and  glorified,  when  his  kingdom  comes  :  see  Prov.  xiv.  28. 
Therefore  they  who  pi  ay  in  truth  that  his  name  may  be  hallowed, 
ought  also  to  pray  that  his  kingdom  may  come.  (3)  The  glory  of 
the  kingdom  should  induce  them  to  pray  that  it  may  come  :  for  it 
is  a  most  righteous  kingdom,  and  the  King  doth  no  iniquity  :  it  is  a 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123,  45 3 

kingdom  of  incredible  riches  ;  the  greatest  peace,  contentment  and 
happiness  is  enjoyed  in  it.  (4)  Believers  ought  certainly  to  love 
their  neighbour :  they  do  also  love  him  :  shall  not  that  love  then 
urge  them  to  pray  for  him,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  may  come  to 
him  also  ?  see  how  Paul  did  this  for  Agrippa,  Acts  xxvi.  29.  David 
prayed  thus,  and  desired  that  every  citizen  of  Jerusalem  should 
imitate  him  therein,  Psalm  cxxii.  (5)  They  long  much  for  the  per- 
fection of  God's  kingdom.  This  will  surely  induce  them  to  cry, 
"  Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus,"  Rev.  xxii.  20.  (6)  They  have  learn- 
ed by  experience,  that  they  are  unable  to  effect  any  thing  for  this 
purpose  :  their  numerous  enemies  are  too  powerful  for  them.  What 
shall  they  then  do  but  sigh  with  Jehoshaphat.  2  Chron.  xx.  12.  "  O 
our  God,  wilt  thou  not  judge  them  i  for  we  have  no  might  against 
this  great  company  that  cometh  against  us :  neither  know  we  what 
to  do  ;  but  our  eyes  are  upon  thee," 


APPLICATION. 

But,  hearers,  who  of  you  prays  that  the  kingdom  of  God  may 
come  ?  I  know  that  there  are  few,  and  perhaps  there  are  none  who 
have  not  learned  to  say  this  petition  after  others,  and  they  will  re- 
peat  this  lesson  day  by  day,  as  if  that  were  praying  :  while  many  nev- 
ertheless know  not  what  they  say,  and  they  speak  without  heart, 
and  not  to  God,  who  is  far  from  them,  and  a  stranger  to  them. 
But  who  is  so  solicitous  for  the  coming  of  this  kingdom,  that  his  soul 
prays  for  it  with  hearty  longings. 

Ye  surely  are  not,  (a)  who  suffer  your  lusts,  the  world,  and  the 
devil  to  rule  over  you,  and  who  follow  whatever  your  vile  hearts 
suggest :  doth  the  world,  urged  by  the  devil,  propose  and  command 
aught,  as  honourable,  pleasant  and  profitable,  ye  will  by  all  means 
obey  them,  and  will  not  so  much  as  listen  to  the  great  King.  Ye 
have  indeed  suffered  yourselves  to  be  overcome  by  those  vile  and 
evil  lords,  and  are  become  their  servants,  2  Peter  ii.  15.  For 
"  ye  walk  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,  according  to  the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience,  in  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  fulfilling  the  de- 
sires of  the  flesh  and  of  the  mind,"  Eph.  ii.  2,  3.  How  should  ye 
then  pray  for  this  kingdom  ?  ye  regard  only  the  kingdom  of  dark- 


454  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

ness.  (b)  Neither  de  ye  pray  for  this  kingdom,  who  oppose  the  ser- 
vants and  subjects  of  it,  who  reproach  them,  and  set  yourselves  in 
all  things  against  them,  as  enemies  ;  "  Is  not  the  just  and  upright 
man  laughed  to  scorn,  and  is  he  not  a  despised  lamp  in  the  thought 
of  him  that  is  at  ease  ?"  Job  xii.  4,  5.  If  ye  can  harm  and  grieve 
them  in  any  respect,  ye  will  not  forbear  to  do  it.  And  how  do  many 
endeavour  to  abridge  the  privileges  of  the  church,  that  they  may 
lord  it  over  her !  this  is  done  by  wicked  magistrates,  who  seek  to 
usurp  the  whole  government  of  the  church,  when  God  hath  never- 
theless anointed  his  Son  king  of  Zion,  his  holy  hill,"  Psalm  ii.  6. 
And  unfaithful  watchmen  do  not  act  better,  "  who  make  the  hearts 
of  the  righteous  sad  with  lies,"  Ezek.  xiii.  22,  "  smite  them,  and 
wound  them  "  Song  v.  7.  Yea,  "  it  grieves  them  exceedingly, 
when  there  comes  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel," 
Neh.  ii.  10.  Why  do  men  pray  lor  the  coming  of  this  kingdom, 
when  they  labour  so  against  it  ?  (c)  We  know  indeed  that  mai  y 
would  be  ashamed  to  gainstand  the  King  and  his  people,  in  such  a 
malicious  manner  :  but  what  do  ye  do  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom  ? 
even  "  the  nobles  will  not  put  their  necks  to  the  work  of  the  Lord," 
to  assist  in  building  Jerusalem,  Neh.  iii.  5.  Ye  are  not  concerned 
whether  the  church  fare  well  or  ill :  like  Galiio  men  do  not  care  for 
ihese  things  :  "  This  i.s  Zion,"  say  they,  "  whom  no  man  seeketh 
after,"  Jer.  xxx.  17.  "They  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of 
Joseph,"  Amos  vi.  6.  It  is  too  much  trouble,  yea,  it  is  a  lobs  to  do 
something  for  the  great  King.  What  think  ye,  are  ye  in  earnest, 
v/hen  ye  pray,  Thy  kingdom  come  ?  (d)  Are  there  any  who  pray 
for  this  kingdom,  ye  do  not,  who  bar  your  hearts  against  the  King's 
sharp  arrows  of  conviction  relative  to  your  condition  and  your  sins. 
Is  it  not  true,  when  a  word  is  spoken  on  the  King's  behalf,  which 
affects  you,  that  ye  then  close  your  hearts,  harden  them,  and  endeav- 
our to  excuse  yourselves,  that  ye  may  not  be  reduced  to  a  strait, 
and  be  obliged  to  receive  him  into  your  souls,  and  suffer  him  to  de- 
throne all  your  reigning  sins  ?  Do  ye  then  pray  in  truth,  Thy  king- 
dom come  ?  Do  ye  not  pray  and  labour  against  it  ?  and  do  ye  not 
say  with  the  wicked  Jews,  Luke  xix.  14.  "  We  will  not  have  this 
man  to  reign  over  us  ?" 

If  it  be  thus  with  you,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  then  come  to 
you  with  power,  but  ye  are  still  out  of  it,  "  without  Christ,  aliens 
from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants 
of  piomise,  having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world,"  Eph. 
)<..  12.  Ye  are  yet  "under  the  power  of  darkness,"  Col.  i.  13,  and 
«  in  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  he  takes  you  captive  at  his  vull," 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123.  4S5 

2  Tim.  ii.  26.  Are  ye  not  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  ye  never  will, 
if  ye  remain  in  your  present  condition,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
glory,  but  shall,  like  other  "  children  of  the  kingdom,  be  cast  out 
into  utter  darkness ;  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth," 
Mat.  via.  12. 

Whither  then,  O  sinner,  wilt  thou  flee  ?  stop  short  in  thy  career, 
which  leads  to  destruction,  and  recover  thyself  out  of  the  snare  of 
the  devil.  Return,  it  is  still  time,  the  Lord  God  still  calleth  thee, 
that  thou  shouldest  ';  turn  to  him,  and  be  saved,"  Isaiah  xlv.  22- 
Gi^e  ear  to  his  word,  be  no  longer  rebellious,  but  suffer  thyself  to 
be  "  taken  captive  by  him,  that  he  may  cause"  thee,  who  hast  hith- 
erto been  "  rebellious,  to  dwell  with  him,"  Psalm  lxviii.  18. 

But  ye,  children  of  the  great  King, 

1.  Employ  yourselves  in  contemplating  the  glory  of  this  kingdom  : 
"  The  Lord  is  g'*eat,  and  greatly  to  be  praised  in  the  city  of  our 
God,  in  the  mountain  of  holiness.  Beautiful  for  situation,  the  jcy 
of  the  whole  earth  is  mount  Zion,  on  the  sides  of  the  north,  the 
city  of  the  great  King.  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge. 
Walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about  her ;  tell  the  towers  thereof: 
mark  ye  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her  palaces ;  that  ye  may  tell 
it  to  the  generation  following,"  Thus  ye  are  admonished,  Psalm 
Ixxxvii.  3.  Your  Father,  the  God  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  is  alone 
the  king  there  :  he  suffers  no  creature  to  reign  in  his  stead  ;  his 
own  Son,  your  Saviour,  him  only  he  hath  exalted  at  his  right  hand 
to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  He  hath  made  you  children  of  a 
King,  yea,  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,"  Rev.  i.  6, 
though  ye  were  of  your  father,  the  devil,  and  sinners  of  the  Gentiles. 
It  was  formerly  the  privilege  of  the  Jews  only,  to  have  the  kingdom 
of  God  among  them  ;  but  he  hath  now  brought  you  also,  who  dwell 
at  the  ends  of  the  earth,  nigh.  Yea,  "behold,  Rahab  and  Babylon 
know  the  Lord  :  the  Philistine  and  Tyrian,  with  the  Ethiopian  is 
born  there,  and  it  is  yet  said  of  Zion,  This  and  that  man  is  born  in 
her,"  Psalm  Ixxxvii.  4,  5.  "  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with  his  people. 
Praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles,  and  laud  him,  all  ye  people,"  Rom, 
xv  10,  11.  There  was  anciently  "no  people,  that  had  such  righte- 
ous statutes  and  judgments,  as  Israel,"  Deut.  iv.  8.  But  although 
their  ecclesiastical  law  was  so  good,  and  so  great  a  blessing  to  them, 
informing  them  what  their  King  would  do  for  their  salvation,  it  was 
nevertheless  "  a  yoke,  which  they  could  not  bear,"  Acts  xv.  10.  Ye 
are  freed  from  that  yoke,  and  ye  stand  in  the  liberty,  wherewith  the 
King  hath  made  you  free.  The  Lord  had  then  indeed  his  throne  on. 
the  ark,   and   dwelled   between  the  cherubims  ;  but  now    "tneark 


456  THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

comes  not  any  more  to  mind,  Jerusalem  itself  is  now  the  throne  of 
the  Lord,"  Jer.  hi,  16,  17.  What  kingly  privileges  and  bounties 
doth  the  great  King  bestow  on  you  !  "  All  things  that  pertain  unto 
life  and  godliness,  through  the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath  called  us 
to  glory  and  virtue  ;  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceedingly  great 
and  precious  promises  ;  that  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 
through  lust,"  2  Peter  i.  3,  4.  The  King  caresses,  "  kisses"  his 
subjects,  "  leads  them  into  his  chambers,  like  his  spouse,  brings 
them  into  his  banquettinghouse,  and  his  banner  over  them  is  love," 
Song  i.  2,  4.  ii.  4.  And  these  things  are  only  a  foretaste,  and  the 
first  fruits  of  the  Spirit:  what  will  it  be  then  hereafter,  when  ye 
shall  be  fully  satiated  with  the  lovingkindnesses  of  the  Almighty  ! 
'  O  come  then,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord  :  let  us  make  a  joyful 
"oise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation.  Let  us  come  before  his  presence 
with  thanksgiving,  and  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  him  with  psalms  : 
for  the  Lord  is  a  great  God,  and  a  great  King  above  all  gods," 
Psalm  xcv.  1 — 3. 

2_But  behold  how  the  kingdom  of  Cod  is  still  obscured  by  many 
miseries  and  sins.  The  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition  is  not  yet 
utterly  destroyed;  he  still  tyrannizes  in  many  places  over  the  heri- 
tage of  the  Lord  :  •'  The  kings  and  princes  of  the  earth,  who  ha^e 
given  their  power  to  the  beast,  still  set  themselves,  and  take  counsel 
together  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anointed."  Wherever 
they  can,  they  oppress,  spoil  and  banish  the  people  of  the  Lord* 
And  how  sad  is  it  even  within  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  !  how  many 
traitors  and  hypocrites  are  there  to  be  found  in  it !  how  is  the  truth, 
the  stability  of  the  kingdom  undermined  !  now  also  "  the  children 
of  our  mother  are  angry  with  us,"  Song  i.  6.  We  see  no  more 
that  agreement  to  serve  the  Lord  with  one  consent,  and  to  annoy 
the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  and  of  his  master  the  devil ;  but  men 
tear  each  other's  bowels.  How  little  doth  the  word  profit  them  i 
it  is  only  now  and  then,  and  here  and  there.  An  imagination  that 
they  are  alive,  when  they  are  dead,  and  a  spiritual  lukewarmness- 
(for  men  are  neither  cold  nor  hot)  pervades  the  kingdom  of  Godr 
And  how  lean  are  even  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the  King  !  Igno- 
rance, darkness,  the  power  of  corruptions  and  lisilessness  with  re- 
gard tc  seeking  the  Lord  in  the  most  earnest  manner,  and  to  live 
.v'lth  and  in  him  in  secret,  prevails  in  many  :  "  The  precious  sonr 
of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold,  how  are  they  esteemed  as  earthen 
pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  potter  !"  Lam.  iv.  2.  We 
ought  to  see  all  this  and  more,  to  be  affected  with  it,  and  to  mourr 
it,  as  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  did  in  their  time,  Ezra  ix.  Neh.  i. 


XLVIII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  123,  45F 

3.  Represent  to  the  King  in  earnest  prayers  the  misery  of  his  sub- 
jects, that  he  may  befriend  them,  whom  he  hath  purchased  for  him- 
self: "Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"  as  David  adviseth,  Psalm 
cxxii.  6.  Ye  who  are  members,  do  ye  not  suffer,  when  those  who 
are  members  of  the  same  body  with  you,  suffer  ?  when  ye  pray  for 
the  church,  ye  pray  then  also  for  yourselves.  Ye  are  perhaps  your- 
selves in  an  evil  plight,  how  shall  ye  be  delivered  out  of  it,  except 
by  hearty  prayers  ?  Ye  have  by  your  unbecoming  conversation 
contributed  to  spoil  the  b-jauty  of  Israel  ;  will  ye  not  then  seek 
to  restore  it  to  its  proper  lustre  by  your  prayers  ?  why  else  are 
ye  commanded  to  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come  ?"  Or  have  ve  now 
so  much  to  do  with  your  own  case,  that  ye  forget  the  people  of  the 
Lord  ?  David  did  not  act  so,  when  he  was  greatly  distressed  on  ac* 
count  of  his  sins,  and  prayed  for  pardon  ;  for  he  thought  then  also 
on  Zion  and  Jerusalem  :  "  Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion  ; 
build  thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  "  said  i  e  .to  the  Lord,  Psalm  li, 
18.  "  Remember  then  the  Lord  afar  off,  and  let  Jerusalem  come 
into  your  minds." 

4,  Doth  the  Lord  hear  you,  thank  him  for  it.  Doth  the  Lord  con- 
tend  any  where  against  antichrist;  cloth  he  raise  up  persons  in  the 
church  or  state,  who  seek  heartily  the  good  of  the  kingdom  ;  doth 
he  bring  his  word  and  Spirit  to  any  place,  and  convert  anv  persons  • 
doth  he  bestow  his  kingly  bounties  upon  his  courtiers,  the  children 
of  the  King  ;  .praise  him  then  with  your  hearts,  and  in  a  hearty 
manner.  See  how  king  David  engaged  in  this  duty,  Psalm  lxvi„ 
xlvii.  xlviii.  lxxii.  lxxxvii.  and  in  other  psalms.  The  corning  of  his 
kingdom  must  conduce  to  his  glory  ;  therefore  this  petition  is  joined 
to  the  first. 

5.  Do  not  only  pray  and  give  thanks  for  this  kingdom,  but  labour 
also  to  promote  it.  Magistrates  should,  as  the  Lord  commandcth, 
not  only  submit  to  "the  ^on,  and  kiss  him,  but  should  also  serve 
him,"  and  order  all  things  for  his  glory,  Psalm  ii.  10 — 12.  "The 
v/atchmen  on  the  v  alls  ofjerusalem  ought  never  to  hold  their  peace 
day  nor  night.  Ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  silence  • 
and  give  him  no  rest,  till  he  establish,  and  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a 
praise  in  the  earth,"  Isaiah  lxii  6,  7  Yea,  every  subject  ought 
cheerfully  to  exert  himself,  in  proportion  to  his  abilities,  in  favour  of 
this  kingdom,  especially  to  convert  others,  that  he  may  gain  people 
for  the  King ;  even  the  women  ought  not  to  refuse  their  service  s 
rt  The  women  of  Israel  span  for  the  tabernacle,  and  brought  their 
looking-glasses,  to  serve  as  materials  for  the  brazen  laver,"  Exod» 
xxxv.  25,  26.   sxxviii.  8.    '«  The  daughters  of  bhallum  helped  to 

Vol.  it.  3  H 


THE  SECOND  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

This  kingdom  hath  also  its  enemies.  The  devil  hath  exalted 
himself  with  his  angels  against  the  King,  and  hath  erected  the  king- 
dom of  darkness,  in  order  to  oppose  the  King,  and  the  subjects  of 
the  kingdom  of  salvation  ;  to  whom  Mahomet  and  his  whole  multi- 
tude have  joined  themselves,  and  also  Antichrist,  the  whore  of  Baby- 
lon, with  all  the  kings  of  the  earth,  who  commit  fornication  with 
her  ;  for  "  the  coming  of  the  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  is 
after  the  working  of  Satan,"  2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 9.  Heretics  also  in 
general  conspire  with  this  power  of  hell  ;  and  that  roaring  lion,  that 
he  may  the  more  easily  devour  the  subjects  of  the  Lord,  stirs  up 
traitors  also  within  the  kingdom  of  God,  even  all  the  false  brethren 
•n  the  church,  and  all  the  corruptions  in  the  souls  of  the  true  sub- 
jects. But  our  great  King  will  destroy  him,  with  all  that  cleave  to 
him  :  for  u  he  must  reign,  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his 
fcet,"   I  Cor.  xv.  25. 

Although  the  kingdom  of  grace,  with  respect  to  the  essentials  of 
it,  is  always  the  same,  nevertheless  it  must  be  considered,  agreeably 
to  the  free  dispensation  of  the  King,  m  different  situations.  It  is 
either  the  kingdom  of  the  Old  'i  estament,  or  of  the  New  Testament, 
or  of  glory. 

1.  God  erected  his  kingdom  under  the  Old  Testament,  even  in 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  when  he  promised  his  Son,  as  "  the  seed 
of  the  woman,"  that  he  might  cause  him,  as  king,  to  "bruise  the 
head  of  the  seed  of  the  serpent,"  Gen.  iii.  15.  He  manifested 
himself  alsa  a  king  in  the  families  of  the  patriarchs,  until  he  adop- 
ted the  posterity  of  Abraham  for  his  subjects,  and  erected  his  king- 
dom in  a  public  manner  among  them,  and  undertook  to  govern  them 
himself,  without  an  earthly  king.  Gideon,  knowing  this,  **  would 
not  reign  over  Israel,  nor  suffer  his  son  to  reign  over  them,"  be- 
cause "  the  Lord  alone  ought  to  reign  over  them,"  Judges  viii.  23. 
When  the  children  of  Israel  afterwards  desired  a  king,  it  displeased 
the  Lord,  because  "  they  rejected  him,  that  he  should  not  reign 
over  them,"  1  Sam.  viii.  9,  and  therefore  he  indeed  "  gave  them  a 
king,  but  it  was  in  his  anger,  and  he  took  him  away  in  his  wrath," 
Ho  sea  xiii.  1 1«  And  after  this  the  Lord  did,  as  it  were,  tolerate  the 
kingly  government  among  them.  He  himself  had  indeed  acted  in 
the  most  perfect  manner,  as  their  king  :  he  had  led  them  out  o! 
Egypt,  had  brought  them  to  Hoieb,  had  given  them  there  his  civil 
•vcciesiastical  and  moral  laws,  had  gone  before  them  in  a  pillar  ci 
fice  and  of  cloud,  had  fed  them  with  Manna  from  heaven,  had  given 
them  water  to  drink  out  of  the  rock,  had  brought  them  into  Canaan 
•-. seniles  for  them,  and  maintained  his  throne,  asa  kin^ 


XLVIII.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  123.  44* 

who  reigneth,  on  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  "  between  the  cherubims," 
Psalm  xcix.  1.  Although  Christ  was  not  then  yet  exalted  to  the 
kingly  authority,  he  nevertheless  then  also  manifested  himself  a 
king.  He  appeared  then  often  as  the  angel  of  God's  presence,  he 
gave  the  law,  went  before  Israel  to  lead  them  into  Canaan,  and  ap- 
peared to  Joshua,  as  "  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host."  Yet  all  this 
was  done  with  the  encumbrance  of  a  worldly  sanctuary,  and  under 
darksome  shadows  of  better  things.  But  although  that  kingdom  of 
the  Old  Testament  was  such  an  outward  and  material  kingdom,  it 
nevertheless  included  an  inward  and  spiritual  kingdom  within  it. 
They  had  then  certainly  the  essential  benefits  of  the  kingdom  of 
grace,  as  righteousness,  peace  and  joy  through  the  Holy  Ghost* 
See  only  the  Psalms  of  David,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon. 

2.  The  kingdom  of  grace  exists  particularly  undtr  the  New  Tes~ 
lament,  in  which  the  Lord  Cod  reigns  over  the  elect  Gentiles,  as 
well  as  Jews,  only  by  his  Spirit  with  his  word  and  sacraments,  with= 
out  the  encumbrance  of  a  worldly  sanctuary  :  this  is  called  emphati- 
cally, "  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  kingdom  of  God,  for  which 
Joseph  of  Arimathea,  waited,"  Mark  xv.  43.  Therefore  God  sent 
his  Son  into  the  world  to  be  a  king,  John  xviii.  37,  who  also  bore 
the  guilt  of  his  subjects,  reconciled  them  to  God,  overcame  his  and 
their  enemies,  "  abolished  the  sacrifices  and  oblations,  broke  down 
the  middle  wall  of  partition,"  and  maintains  "  his  throne  no  longer 
on  the  ark,  but  hath  Jerusalem,  even  his  church,  for  his  throne,  and 
is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father,  angels,  and  authorities  and 
powers  being  made  subject  to  him,"  Dan.  ix.  24 — 27.  Col.  u\ 
13—15.     Eph.  ii.  13-19.     Jer.  iii.  16.     1  Pet.  iii.  22. 

3.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  however  not  yet  complete,  but  it  will 
be  perfected  after  this  life  in  glory  ;  which  takes  place  indeed  partly 
now,  when  the  souls  of  the  subjects,  separated  from  the  body,  become 
forthwith  happy,  and  are  taken  up  into  paradise,  even  heaven  ;  but 
it  will  take  place  fully  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  in  the 
final  judgment,  when  they  will  "  inherit  the  kingdom,"  in  body  as 
well  as  in  soul,  "  and  be  taken  up  into  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord 
in  the  air,  and  so  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord,"  Matt.  xxv.  34. 
1  Thess.  \v.  17.  Where  God  will  then  be  all  in  all;  for  they  will 
be  round  about  the  throne,  and  God  will  reign  over  them  jmmedi- 
ately,  and  render  them  happy  for  ever  with  his  allsufficient  influence, 
neither  will  any  adversaries  afflict  them  ;  for  "  death  and  hell  shall 
be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire,"  Rev.  xx.  14. 

II.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  teaches  the  children  ©f  God  to  pray 
for  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom,  he  doth  not  then  speak  of  God's 
Vol,  ii.  3  F 


480  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

of  his  kingly  authority  :  "  When  every  man  in  Israel  did  what  was 
right  in  his  0*0  eyes,  then  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,"  Judges 
xvii    6. 

"  The  Lord  is  a  great  God,  and  a  king  above  ail  e;ods,"  Psalm, 
xcv.  3.  And  therefore  he  also  13  '•  the  only  Lawgiver,  who  can 
save  and  destroy,"  James  iv  12.  All  the  creatures  are  under  his 
control,  and  he  hath  power  to  govern  them  according  to  his  will 
and  his  laws  :  u  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion,  and  his 
kingdom  is  from  eeneratioi  1  generation.  And  all  the  inhabitants 
ef  the  earth  are  reputed  :■  hing:  and  he  doth  according  to  his 
will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  d  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  : 
and  none  can  stay  ins  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  What  dost  thou  ?" 
Thus  the  g.e«i  "  Nebuchadnezzar  praised  him  who  liveth  for  ever," 
Dan.  iv.  34,  35.  He  hath  as  king  of  tlie  whole  earth,  given  the 
law  of  nature  to  all  his  irrational  and  inanimate  creatures,  which 
they  also  obey  :  u  Thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it  aliclelh. 
They  continue  this  day  according  to  thine  ordinances  :  for  all  are 
thy  serv jnts,"  as  David  speaks  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  cxix.  90,  91. 
But  as  king  of  his  rational  creatures,  he  hath  given  them  particular- 
ly his  "  royal  law,"  that  he  may  cause  them  to  "  love  him  and  their 
neighbour,"  James  ii  8.  But  as  he  is  especially  the  king  of  his 
children  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  therefore  he  gives  them  the  most 
righteous  laws  and  statutes,  which  they,  as  his  freemade  subjects, 
are  bound  to  observe,  and  they  glory  that  "  the  Lord  is  their  Judge, 
their  Lawgiver,  and  King,  who  will  save  them,"  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22. 
And  they  are  also  ready  and  "  exceedingly  willing"  to  do  his  will^ 
as  it  is  foretold  of  them,  Psalm  ex.  3.  Yea,  they  pray  that  their 
King  would  enable  them  and  others  to  do  it,  when  they  pray,  "  Thy 
will  he  done,"   See. 

.  The  Lord  Jesus  had  commanded  believers  to  pray  that  the  name 
of  God  might  be  hallowed,  and  for  this  end  also  that  his  kingdom, 
might  come  In  order  now  to  promote  the  coming  of  his  kingdom, 
he  requires  that  they  should  pray  in  the  third  petition  that  they,  and 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  may  do  the  will  of  the  Lord,  as  those 
who  are  in  heaven  do  it. 

In  tiiis  petition  we  must  inquire, 

I.  What  the  will  of  God  is. 

II.  How  it  is  done  in  earth,  after  the  example  of  those  who  are  i» 
heaven. 

III.  What  we  desire  with  this  petition,  and 

IV.  Why  we  must  pray  thus. 


XLIX   LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  124.  461 

I.  The  will  of  God,  and  particularly  the  will  of  the  Father,  the 
King,  is  the  love  which  he  beareth  to  himself,  and  to  his  glory,  and 
for  which  he  doth,  according  to  his  sovereignty,  appoint  and  com- 
mand whatsoever  he  pleaseth.  "  Our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he 
hath  clone  whatsoever  he  |jle<ised,"  Psalm  cxv.  3.  It  is  distinguish- 
ed into  the  will  of  his  decree  and  of  his  command.  The  will  of 
the  decree  is  God's  eternal  counsel  and  purpose,  whereby,  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  he  decreed  and  resolved  with  and  in 
himself  what  he  would  do  and  permit  in  time  "He  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will."  saith  the  apostle,  Fph.  i.  2, 
The  will  of  the  command  is  that  which  God  hath  expressed  in 
his  commands,  by  which  he  declares  what  he  will  have  his  reason- 
able creatures  do  and  forbear :  '  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your 
sanctincation,"  saith  Paul,  1  Thess  iv.  3.  We  must  nevertheless 
not  understand  this  so,  as  if  there  were  a  twofold  will,  or  a  twofold 
operation  of  the  will,  the  one  distinct  from  the  other,  in  God  ;  for 
God,  being  simple,  or  uncompounded,  there  canno  be  any  diversity 
in  him  ;  and  therefore  there  is  but  one  simple  will  in  him,  yea,  his 
wi.il  is  the  willing  God  himself.  But  as  we  aie  not  simple,  and  can- 
not comprehend  God  with  one  single  act  of  our  understanding,  and 
as  God's  simple  will  is  exercised  about  a  twofold  object,  decreeing 
one  thing,  and  commanding  another,  therefore  we  distinguish  in 
this  ma-mer  between  the  will  of  the  decree,  and  the  will  of  the  com- 
mand. Let  none  imagine  that  the  will  of  the  decree  militates 
against  the  will  of  the  command  ;  for  God  hath  also  decreed  what 
he  would  command.  God  commands  Abraham,  in  order  to  try 
him,  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac,  and  he  had  decreed  that  he  should 
not  offer  him  up.  This,  we  would  say,  militates.  It  appears  so : 
it  militates  also  to  offer  and  not  to  offer  ;  but  the  will  of  the  decree, 
that  he  should  not  offer,  doth  not  therefore  militate  against  the  will 
of  the  command,  that  he  should  offer,  as  they  would,  if  God  himself 
would  effect  the  will  of  the  command,  as  he  effects  the  will  of  the 
decree,  and  if  he  had  not  also  willed  and  resolved  by  his  decree,  that  he 
would  command  him  to  offer  his  son,  and  nevertheless  would  hincierhim 
from  doing  it.  But  God  decreed  that  Abraham  should  not  offer  up  his 
son,  and  that  he  would  nevertheless  command  him  to  do  it,  not  that  it 
should  be  done,  but  that  he  might  prove  him  ;  and  he  resolved  withal 
that  he  would  hinder  him  from  doing  it :  and  so  the  will  of  the  com- 
mand is  subordinate  to  the  will  of  the  decree.  Now  we  know  that 
things  which  are  contrary  to  one  another  do  indeed  militate  against 
each  other,  but  not  things  that  are  subordinate  tp  one  another:  and  we 


163  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

do  not  distinguish  the  will  of  God  thus  without  reason  :  for  the  word  oi 
God  affords  us  examples  of  such  a  distinction,  as  we  have  seen  horn 
Eph.  i.  11.  1  Thess.  iv.  3,  and  because  the  will  of  the  decree  is  not 
the  rule  of  our  conduct,  since  it  is  unknown  to  us,  hut  the  will  of 
the  command,  which  God  hath  prescribed  to  us.  We  shall  other- 
wise destroy  all  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  as  appears  suffi- 
ciently in  the  example  of  the  Antinomians,  or  adversaries  of  the 
law  ;  for  though  they  commit  ever  so  many  sins,  they  will  not  re- 
pent of  them,  but  imagine  that  they  must  acquiesce  in  the  will  of 
God,  who  hath  decreed  them.  And  this  issues  at  last  in  a  total  de- 
nial of  a  Godhead,  and  of  our  obligation  to  the  law,  which  is  given 
to  us. 

II.  With  respect  to  the  will  of  God,  we  must  pray  "  that  it  may  be 
done  in  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven."  The  will  of  God  is  done  by  God 
himself,  or  by  his  children  and  the  subjects  of  ois  kingdom.  God 
himself  doth  not  do  the  will  of  his  command  except  so  far.  that  he 
gives  his  Spirit  to  men,  in  order  that  tiny  may  uo  it  ;  but  he  cloth 
the  will  of  his  decree,  which  is  the  plan  that  he  haih  devised,  ac- 
cording to  which  he  doth  powerfully  and  unchangeably  effect  all 
thii  gs  :  "  He  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will," 
saith  Paul,  Eph.  i.  11.  He  saith  himself,  lsaian  xlvi.  10.  •«  My 
counsel  shall  stand    and  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure." 

As  God  the  Lord  doth  the  will  of  his  decree,  and  not  the  will  of 
his  command,  so  the  children  of  God  do  the  will  of  his  command, 
and  not  so  much  the  will  of  his  decree  :  for  the  command  of  (.od, 
and  not  his  decree,  is  the  only  rule  of  their  actions.  It  is  true,  they 
must  submit  to  the  calamitous  evils  which  he  inflicteth  upon  them 
by  his  providence,  according  to  his  decree,  as  Jesus,  and  the  clnrch 
at  Gesarea  did,  Luke  xx'n.  42  Acts  xxi.  14.  And  they  must  en- 
treat God  by  tlieir  prayers  to  bestow  his  decreed  blessings,  with 
Daniel,  Dan  ix.  2,  3.  Yea  they  ou^ht  with  Isuiah  to  proffer  them- 
selves, as  instruments,  to  execute  the  decree  of  God,  that  they  may 
serve  his  counsel,  Isaiah  vi.  8 — 10.  But  this  is  not  doing  the  will 
of  the  decree,  but  the  will  of  the  command,  which  enjoins  on  us  to 
do  thus  ;  for  the  decree  of  God  doth  not  bind  and  oblige  man,  but 
his  command  which  he  hath  given  to  him.  God  had  dLcreed  and 
promised,  that  he  would  show  great  favour  to  his  people,  and  he 
commanded  them  to  pray  for  that  favour,  which  he  had  decreed  and 
promised,  in  order  that  his  decree  and  promise  might  be  fulfilled, 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  36,  37.  And  it  behooved  them  to  do  thus,  not  the  will 
of  the  decree,  but  the  will  of  the  command.  Thus  the  instructor 
also  explahic  this  petition,  when  he  saith  that  the  will  of  God  is  done 


XLIX.  LORD'S   DAY.  Q.    124.  4dS 

hy  obeying-  it,  which  therefore  respects  a  command  and   injunction 
that  is  obeyed. 

The  will  of  the  command  requires  that  we  should  believe  all  that 
God  re\eals,  do  all  that  he  commands,  abstain  from  all  that  he  for- 
bids, and  endure  patiently  all  the  calamitous  evils  that  he  inflicts  on 
us.  Which  we  perform  in  truth,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  is  ac- 
ceptable to  the  Lord,  when  (a) ''We  renounce  our  own  will."  Though 
our  will  be  ever  so  right  and  good,  if  it  nevertheless  oppose  the  will 
of  our  Lather,  we  must  then  submit  our  own  will  to  his  will,  yea, 
we  must  not  will  any  thing,  though  ever  so  good  and  necessary,  and 
must  have  no  will  but  God's,  and  we  must  lose  our  will  in  his.  So 
the  Saviour  acted  with  his  own  will,  though  it  was  perfectly  holy, 
"saying,  Father,  if  thou  be  willing  remove  this  cup  fiom  me: 
nevertheless  not  my  will  but  thine  be  done,"  Luke  xxii.  42.  We 
ought  more  especially  to  renounce  our  will  on  account  of  God's 
will,  which  is  only  good,  because  our  will  is  evil  and  perverse  through 
sin,  and  "  a  will  of  the  fLsh  and  mind,"  Eph.  ii.  3,  and  also  "  enmity 
against  God,"  Rom.  viii.  7.  If  we  shall  do  the  will  of  God,  we 
must  then  renounce  our  own  will,  forsake  and  mortify  it,  and  thus 
cut  off  our  hand  and  foot,  and  pluck  out  our  eye,"  Mark  ix.  43 — 48, 
for  <k  it  is  impossible  to  serve  two  masters,"  the  will  of  God,  and 
our  own  will,  Matt.  vi.  44.  (b)  We  do  the  will  of  God  by  surrender- 
ing ourselves  to  him,  and  becoming  servants  of  him  and  of  his  will, 
that  we  may  do  his  will  only  :  "  We  join  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  to 
serve  him,  and  to  be  his  servants,"  Isaiah  lvi.  6.  We  proffer  our- 
selves to  him  for  this  end  with  Samuel,  and  with  the  Messiah,  I 
Sam.  iii.  10.  Psalm  xl,  7,  8,  and  we  give  ourselves  to  the  Lord,  as 
those  who  were  delegated  by  the  great  ecclesiastical  council  ol  Jeru- 
salem, Acts  xv.  26,  and  as  these  of  Macedonia,  "  first  gave  them- 
selves by  the  will  of  God  to  the  Lord,"  and  afterwards  to  those  who 
collected  their  alms,  2  Cor.  viii.  4.  (c)  To  doing  the  will  of  God 
belongs  also  doing  his  commands  in  obedience  to  him.  It  is  not 
enough  to  forsake  the  evil,  which  is  forbidden,  and  to  perform  the 
good  that  is  commanded  ;  but  this  must  be  done  in  obedience  to 
God,  and  because  it  is  his  will  :  "  Servants  must  be  obedient  to  them 
that  are  their  masters  :  but  not  with  eyeservice,  as  menpleasers,  but 
as  the  servants  ol  Christ,  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart,1' 
Eph   vi.  5—7. 

If  we  shall  do  the  will  of  God  in  a  manner  that  is  acceptable  to 
foim,  we  must  do  it  as  those  who  are  in  heaven.  In  the  address  cf 
the  Lord's  prayer  we  read  of  heavens  in  the  plural,*  but  here  only  of 

'  This  is  agreeable  to  the  Dstr.h  translation. 


164  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

heav-n,  and  so  of  the  third  heaven.     God   and    his   Son   are   there- 
although  he  was    not   ascended    thither,   when    he    prescribed    this 
prayer  ;  there  also  are  the  spirits  of  just   men   made    perfect,    and 
particularly  the  holy  angels,  who  have  their  habitation   in   heaven, 
Which  tin  rebellions  angels,  the  devils  forsook.  Jude,  vrs.  6.     There- 
fore those  who  cntinue  to  stair!,  are  called  "the  angels  of  heaven," 
Matt.  xxiv.  36,  and  are    sa;d    to  be    "  in    heaven,"  Murk    xii.    26. 
The  souls  of  the  blessed  do  inde  d  the  will  of  God  perfectly  in   heav- 
en,  and  "serve  him  day  and  night,"   Rev   vii.    15,   and   the    angels 
also  with  them.  Rev.  v.   1 1.     And  so  the  souls  of  the  blessed  can  be 
our  patterns  :  but  we  ought  rather  to    have   respect   here   with   the 
instructor  to  the  pattern  of  the  angels,  since  they   especially  are  the 
servants  of  God,  who  minister  to  him,  and  to  believers  ;  for  they  ob» 
serve  his  will  and  beck,  that  they  may  defend  his  favourites  :  "  Their 
angels  do  always  behold  *n  heaven  the  face  of  my  Father,  which    is 
in  heaven,"  saith  Jesus,  Matt,  xviii     10.     For  this  purpose  they  de- 
scend from    heaven,    and    ascend    thither    again,    Luke   ii.    13 — 15. 
John  i.  52.     These  angels   do    (a)  the   will  of  Gor1    in  all   things* 
David,  exciting  ihem  to  praise   the  Lord,   saith,  M  Bless   the   Lord, 
all  ye  his  hosts,  ye  ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure,"  Psalm  ciii. 
20,21.     (b)  Willingly,  readily,  frequently,  and    faithfully.      There- 
fore they  are    represented  to  us   as   winged,  and  as  "flying,"    Dan. 
ix.  21,  and  "  their  appearance   as  burning  coals  of  fire,  and  like  the 
appearance  of  lamps,"   Ezek.  i.   13.     (c)  Perfectly,  without  any  sin- 
ful defect,  which  doth  not  enter  into  heaven.     !rod  confirmed   them 
jn  their  holy  and    happy  estate,  after  they    had    fnfdled    the    season 
allotted  them    for  the  trial  of  their    obedience.      The    will   of  God 
must  be  done  on  earth  as  they  do  it,  (1)  By  all  or  all   kinds  of  men.; 
who,  as  it  was  foretold,  are  brought  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  who 
will  be  brought  to  it  hereafter,  that  the  Son  of  God  may  "  rule  from 
sea  to  sea,  and  from   the   river   to  tnt-  ends  of  the  earth  "   Psalm 
Hxxii.  8.     (2)  In  all   things,  which   God  reveals  or  commands,  with 
David,  who  said,  Psalm  cxix.  128,  "I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  con- 
cerning ah  things  to  be  right,  and  1  hate  every  false  way."     (3)  WiJ 
Hngly,  rea.iily,  fervently,  and  faithfully,  "  riot  being  slothful  in  busi- 
ness, but  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord,"  Rom.  xii.  10.  (4)  Per- 
fectly, not  only  with  a  perfection  of  parts,  but  also  of  degrees.     It  is 
true,  no  man  attains  to  this  perfection  on   earth  ;  yet  it  is,  and  re*- 
mains  the  duty  of  believers  to  abstain  altogether  from  sinning  :  they 
desire  to  be  perfect,  and    "  follow  after  it,"  with  the  apostle,  Philip. 
iii.   12 — 14   and  they  will  attain  to  it  after  this  life,  as  a  consequencf 
«♦*'  their  prayers. 


XLIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  124.  465 

in.  When  we  speak  thus  to  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  we  do 
^.hen  pray. 

1.  That  God  would  "  grant"  that  we  may  renounce  our  own  will,  and 
obey  his  wdi,  which  is  only  good,  without  murmuring,  in  all  things, 
each  in  his  particular  calling,  wherein  God  hath  set  him,"  as  the  in- 
structor explains  this  petition.  God  grants  this,  when  he  regenerates 
the  sinner  according  to  his  will,  and  lenews  him  after  his  image,  and 
puts  his  law  and  fear  into  his  heart ;  whereby  he  sees  the  detesta- 
ble rebellion  of  his  will,  and  the  goodness  of  God's  will,  and  becomes 
inclined  to  die  to  himself,  and  live  to  God  ;  for  which  end  he  yields 
himself  unto  God,  that  he  may  "  obey  the  Lord  according  to  his 
will  from  the  heart,"  Rom.  vi.  17.  But  the  children  of  God,  who 
are  already  regenerated,  do  not  pray  thus  for  themselves,  but  that 
he  would  grant  this  to  them  still  more  ;  which  he  c'oth  by  causing 
them  to  see  from  time  to  time  the  equity  or  his  will,  so  that  their 
souls  become  enamoured  of  it.  He  doth  their  own  will,  renders  them 
willing,  and  causeth  them  to  do  aiso  his  will  in  all  things.  David 
prayed  for  this,  Psalm  cxliii  10,  "Teach  me  to  do  thy  will,  for 
thou  art  my  God  ;  thy  Spirit  is  good,  lead  me  into  the  land  of  up- 
rightness," Paul  also  desired  this,  for  the  Colossians,  Col.  i    9 1], 

The  Lord  also  promiseth  to  bestow  this  by  his  Spirit,  F.zek.    xxxvi. 
27,  and  ''he  works  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do,"  Phil    ii.   13. 

2.  That  God  would  likewise  grant  this  to  all,  or  all  kinds  of  men. 
The  children  of  God  seeing  the  equity,  and  blessedness  of  doing 
God's  will,  are  grieved  that  there  should  be  a  single  person,  who 
doth  not  do  the  will  of  God  in  this  most  hearty  and  perfect  manner. 
They  wish  with  Paul,  "  that  all  men  were  almost  and  altogether 
such  as  they  are,  excepting  their  bonds  of  sin  and  misery,  Acts 
xxvi.  29.  They  wish  that  the  will  of  God  were  done  as  generally 
by  all  men  on  earth,  as  it  is  by  all  the  angels  in  hea'-en.  They  pray 
for  this  so  much  the  more,  because  it  hath  been  foretold,  that  "  the 
Lord  would  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  that  they  might 
all  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him  with  one  consent," 
Zeph.  iii.  9.  They  desire  that  their  petition  should  conduce  to  the 
fulfilment  of  his  promise. 

IV,  The  Saviour  prescribed  this  petition  to  believers,  and  com- 
manded them  to  make  use  of  it  for  certain  reasons.  For  (a)  it  is  a 
petition,  that  the  will  of  their  Father  may  be  done.  What  righttem* 
pered  child  will  not  earnestly  desire  that  his  father's  will  should  be 
done  by  all  ?  (b)  God's  name  is  hallowed,  when  his  will  is  done  : 
"  Herein,"  saith  the  Son  of  God  M  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye 
bear  much  fruit,"  John  xv.  8.  Therefore  he  who  prays  in  truth 
Voj...  11.  3  I 


466  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

that  his  Father's  name  may  be  hallowed,  will  find  himself  constrain* 
ed  10  pray  also  that  his  will  may  be  done,  (c)  The  ki  gdorn  of 
God  doth  then  also  come  ;  for  his  kingly  glory  and  dominion  arc 
never  manifested  more  than  when  all  his  subjects  do  his  will.  We 
cannot  ther-efoie  pray  for  the  coming  his  kingdom,  unless  we  also 
pray,  that  his  will  may  be  done,  (d)  All  the  children  of  God  have 
an  insatiable  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God  :  "  1  delight  in  the  law  of 
God  after  the  inward  man,"  so  they  can  all  say  with  Paul,  Rom. 
vii.  22.  How  should  they  then  forbear  to  pray  with  Da\id,  Psalm 
cxix.  35.  "  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments,  lor 
therein  do  I  delight."  (e)  How  great  soever  their  desire  may  also 
be,  they  find  that  they  are  unable  to  do  his  will,  as  they  wish  ;  "  The 
flesh  lusteth  arainst  the  Spirit  ;  and  they  cannot  do  the  things  that 
they  would,"  Gal.  v.  IT.  See  how  that  illustrious  saint  was  con- 
strained to  complain,  Rom.  vii.  13 — 24.  Tins  will  soon  urge  them 
to  pray  that  the  will  of  God  may  be  done  by  them.  Hear  how 
David  sighed  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5.  u  Thou  hast  command- 
ed us  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently.  O  that  my  ways  were  direct 
•d  to  keep  thy  statutes." 


APPLICATION. 

Are  the  children  of  God  obliged  to  pray  thus,  the  opinion  of  the 
Pelagians  cannot  then  be  maintained  ;  for  they  imagine  that  the 
sinner  is  able  through  his  own  freewill  to  do  the  will  of  God  per- 
fectly of  himself;  yea,  the  Papists  pretend  that  they  can  do  more 
than  the  will  of  God  by  works  of  supererogation.  They  talk  indeed 
of  a  general  and  sufficient  grace  ;  but  what  do  they  mean  by  it, 
hut  that  God  hath  given  them  a  freewill,  wheteby  they  are  able  to 
do  his  will  perfectly.  They  sptak  very  highly  of  assisting  grace, 
but  they  cannot  inform  us  how  it  influencetii  or  assists  the  will  in- 
wardly to  do  the  will  of  God.  Rut  why  do  they  pray  then  that 
God's  will  may  be  done  by  them  ?  it  is  certainly  unnecessary,  they 
are  able  of  themselves  to  do  it.  And  therefore  we  must  look  upon 
their  praying  to  be  only  a  mocking  of  God,  and  a  mere  flattering 
of  him  with  their  mouths,  and  a  lying  unto  him  with    their  tongues. 

Purer  therefore  is  the  doctrine  of  the  reformed  church,  which 
humbles  man  by  teaching  him  according  to  the  word  of  God  his  ina- 
bility, that  he  may  seek  help  of  the  Lord,  in  order  that   he   may  do 


XLIX.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  124.  &T 

his  will.  Although  we  had  no  other  proof  than  this  petition,  of  the 
inability  of  the  sinner  to  do  good,  and  that  even  the  children  of  God 
are  unable  in  part  to  perform  the  will  of  God  perfectly,  it  would  suf- 
fice to  assure  us  of  the  truth  of  our  opinion. 

But  of  what  advantage  is  it  to  us  to  know  that  we  are  unable  to 
do  the  will  of  God,  and  that  we  are  therefore  obliged  to  pray  that 
he  would  enable  us  to  do  it,  if  we  do  not  call  upon  God  in  spirit  and 
Hi  truth  for  this  purpose.  It  is  indeed  certain,  that  ye  who  are  not 
yet  converted,  and  are  not  children  of  God  in  Christ,  do  not  offer  up 
this  petition  in  truth.  For  (a)  many  are  yet  so  ignorant,  that  they 
know  not  what  the  will  of  God  is.  nor  how  it  is  done,  nor  in  what 
manner  they  ought  to  pray  that  it  may  be  done.  Is  it  not  true  ?  If 
we  should  as.<  you.  who  have  not  yet  been  instructed  herein  from 
the  word  of  God,  concerning  these  things,  would  ye  be  able  to  give 
us  any  account  of  them  ?  How  then  can  your  saying  these  words 
»e  praying  ?  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask,"  like  the  sons  of  Ztbedee, 
Matt.  xx.  22.  and  "  ye  worship  ye  know  not  what,"  like  the  Samar- 
itans, John  iv.  2  2-  (b)  Some  of  you  it  is  true,  "  know  the  will  of 
God,  and  approve  of  the  things  that  are  more  excellent,  being  in- 
structed out  of  the  law,"  like  the  Pharisees,  Rom.  ii.  18.  But  ye 
have  no  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  for  ye  conduct  yourselves  so 
dissolutely,  as  if  ye  had  nothing  to  do  with  it  :  "  God  writes  to  you 
the  great  things  of  his  law.  but  they  are  counted  as  a  strange  thing 
by  you,"  Hosea  viii.  12.  Ye  will  not  submit  to  such  a  strait  bond; 
and  have  no  mind  to  it.  but  only  that  your  will  may  be  done,  and  ye 
H  do  the  will  of  the  flesh,  and  of  the  mind,"  Eph.  ii.  3.  And  there^ 
fore  it  is  true  of  you  what  Paul  testifieth  of  the  Judaizing  Christians 
of  his  time,  Titus  i.  16,  "They  profess  that  they  know  God  ;  but 
in  work*  they  deny  him,  bring  abominable,  and  disobedient,  and  to 
every  good  work  reprobate."  (c)  I  know  that  many  of  you  are 
not  so  ungodly,  but  civil,  honest,  and  even  exceedingly  devout  ;  but 
to  deny  your  own  wills  and  to  do  just  the  will  of  God  in  all  things, 
believing  all  that  God  reveals,  and  doing  all  that  he  commands,  ab* 
staining  from  all  that  he  forbids,  and  enduring  patiently  all  the  mise* 
ry  that  he  inflicts  upon  you,  and  that  because  it  is  the  will  cf  God,. 
and  doing  all  this  so  exactly  and  perfectly,  as  the  angels  in  heaven, 
to  this  indeed  ye  have  no  mind,  and  it  is  not  your  aim,  when  ye  ut- 
ter this  petition.  Yea,  ye  are  exceedingly  averse  from  these  things, 
and  >vill  even  scoff  at  those  who  are  set  upon  strict  godliness,  and 
will  decry  them,  as  legalists.  It  is  your  idea,  that  since  we  cannot  be 
perfect  in  this  life,  we  are  therefore  not  obliged  to  aim  at  it,  or  to 
pursue  it,  as  if  this  were  a  work  tnat  belonged  to  none$   but   those 


4CS  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

who  were  in  heaven.  How  can  ye  then  say  to  God  in  prayer,  "  Thy 
wiJl  be  done  in  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,"  for  ye  mean  not  Wi.at  ye  say, 
but  come  to  God  with  a  lie  in  your  mouths  (d)  There  are  those  also 
who  had  once  a  vehement  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God  in  all  things, 
when  tuey  were  concerned  about  their  sins,  and  their  salvation,  or 
when  they  were  admitted  upon  their  confession  to  be  members 
of  the  church;  but  how  soon  have  they  become  cool!  like  that 
young  man,  who  said,  when  his  father  commanded  him,  "  I  go, 
Sir,  but  went  not,"  Matt.  xxi.  30,  and  like  Demas  and  others,  2 
Tim.  iv.  10.  2  Peter  ii.  20—22.  We  might  say,  how  was  it  pos- 
sible, when  they  seemed  to  have  such  an  ardent  desire  ?  but  their 
determination  was  the  effect  of  their  inconsidcration,  they  counted 
not  the  cost ;  they  were  not  aware  of  the  strength  of  their  lusts,  nor 
of  their  own  inability.  And  therefore  their  fire  which  they  had  kin- 
dled themselves,  was  soon  quenched,  they  were  found  faithless  to 
their  promise,  and  showed  that  they  had  never  yet  prayed  from  a 
d  ep  and  experimental  view  of  their  inability  that  they  might  do 
the  will  of  God. 

What  do  ye,  who  are  thus  disposed,  think  :  is  not  your  praying 
only  a  mocking  of  God  ?  or  do  ye  imagine,  that  he  doth  not  attend 
to  your  behaviour?  can  he  be  pleased  with  your  conduct?  no:  for 
ye  set  your  will  above  his  will,  and  "  walk  according  to  the  course 
of  this  world,  according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the 
spirit  that  now  woiketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience."  Eph  ii.  2, 
and  ye  arc  "  taken  captive  in  the  snare  cf  the  devil  at  his  will,"  2  Tim. 
ii.  26.  Ye  pray  that  the  will  of  God  may  be  done,  and  what  is  God's 
will  concerning  you  ?  Is  it  not  that  he  should  reveal  his  wrath  from 
heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men."  ac- 
cording to  Rom.  i.  lo.  And  he  will  ccuse  this  to  be  done  with  re- 
spect to  you  also  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Rehold  I  am  against 
thee,  O  Zidon,  and  I  will  be  glorified  in  the  midst  of  thee :  and  they 
shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  when  I  shall  have  executed  judg- 
ments in  the  midst  of  her,  and  shall  be  sanctified  in  her,"  Ezek. 
xxviii.  22.  It  is  your  earnest  desire  to  obtain  a  place  in  heaven  with 
the  holy  angels  ;  but  how  is  this  possible,  while  ye  have  no  desire 
to  do  the  will  of  God  on  earth,  as  the  angels  do  it  in  heaven  ?  It 
behooves  you  therefore  to  know  that,  continuing  thus,  ye  will  hear 
that  dreadful  and  irreversible  sentence  from  the  mouth  of  the  great 
Judge,  "  Depart  fom  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared 
for  the  devil  and  his  angels,"  Matt.  xxv.  41. 

Alas,  sinner!  behold  this  with  concern  and  anxiety,  that  thou 
mayest  awake,  and  be  in  earnest,  and  yet  do  the  will  of  God,  by  em- 


XLIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  124.  46S 

bracing  his  Son.  and  hearkening  to  him  :  God  cries  to  thee  "  from 
the  clouds,  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased; 
hear  thou  him,"  Matt.  xvii.  5.  Be  not  any  longer  rebellious,  but 
submit  thyself  to  him,  that  thou  mayest  be  saved 

But  children  of  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven,  who  see  with  so 
much  sorrow  the  perversity  of  your  will,  and  your  wicked  inclina- 
tions and  have  so  great  a  desire  to  do  the  will  of  your  Father,  let  it 
be  your  frequent  and  hearty  prayer,  that  the  will  of  God  may  be  done 
by  you,  and  therefore, 

1  Know  and  acknowledge  with  pleasure  his  lawgiving  power. 
Unite  in  heart  with  the  church,  when  she  saith,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  22s 
"  The  Lord  is  our  judge,  the  Lord  is  our  lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our 
king,  he  will  save  us."  Is  not  he  the  supreme  Lord,  who  hath  a 
right  to  command  that  which  is  holy,  just  and  good  ?  Is  not  he 
your  Father,  to  whom  it  appertaineih  to  enjoin  that  which  is  good 
on  his  children  ?  Are  not  ye  subject  to  him  in  every  respect  ?  Let 
your  souls  then  be  ready  to  receive  the  law  from  his  mouth,  and 
"to  hear  when  he  speaks,"  like  young  Samuel,  1  Sam.  iii.  10,  and 
to  approve  of  his  will  with  Paul,  who  said,  Rom.  vii.  12,  "The  law 
is  holy,  and  the  commandment  is  holy,  just  and  good." 

2.  Stir  up  your  desire  to  do  his  will,  and  declare  it  to  him-  Your 
Father  beholds  with  pleasure  the  readiness  of  your  mind  :  "  For  if 
there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted,"  saith  the  apostle, 
2  Gor.  viii.  12.  David  declared  in  this  manner  his  desire  to  do  the 
will  of  the  Lord,  Psalm  cxix.  35,  "  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of 
thy  commandments,  for  therein  do  I  delight."  Your  Redeemer, 
whom  ye  ought  to  imitate,  said  to  his  Father,  Psalm  xl.  8.  <k  I  de- 
light to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God  :  yea,  thy  law  is  within  my  heart." 
We  shall  not  indeed  otherwise  pray  heartily  :  a  strong  delight  and 
desire  adds  strength  and  wings  to  prayer,  so  that  it  penetrates  to 
the  throne  of  God,  yea,  even  into  his  affections. 

3.  Have  and  retain  a  deep  sense  of  your  inability  to  do  the  will  of 
God.  Although  ye  are  regenerated  and  are  new  creatures,  and  pos- 
sess thus  new  abilities,  there  remains  still,  beside  orher  deficiencies, 
a  great  impotency  in  you.  How  great  soever  your  strength  may 
be  through  your  eminent  inciease  in  the  spiritual  life,  ye  will  never- 
theless while  here  u  know  only  in  part,"  according  to  1  Cor.  xiii. 
9.  Yea,  though  ye  were  perfect,  and  not  guilty  of  any  iniquity,  ye 
would  still  not  be  gods,  but  creatures,  dependent  on  God,  and  able 
to  do  his  will  only  through  his  influence.  We  must  therefore  have 
a  lively  apprehension  of  our  inability :  the  Saviour  impressed  this 
on  his  believing  apostles,  when  he  said,  Jehn  xv.   15»    "  Without 


470  THE  THIRD  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

me  ye  can  do  nothing."  When  we  have  even  a  great  desire  to  do 
the  will  of  God,  and  think  that  this  will  preserve  us  from  stumbling, 
■we  are  then  near  to  our  fall.  The  example  of  Peter,  Matt.  xxvi. 
33 — 35.  69 — 74,  ought  to  keep  us  humble,  and  cause  us  to  see, 
that  like  David  we  "are  ready  to  halt  "  Psalm  xxxviii.  17.  Such 
a  discovery  of  our  inability,  accompanied  with  a  desire  to  do  the  will 
of  God,  causes  the  soul  to  cry  for  help,  and  to  say  with  Jehoshaphat 
2  Chron.  xx.  12,  "  We  have  no  might  against  this  company  tfrat 
cometh  against  us:  neither  know  we  what  to  do,  but  our  eyes  are 
upon  thee." 

4.  We  are  never  able,  either  to  do  the  will  of  God,  or  to  pray 
that  God  would  enable  us  to  do  it,  as  long  as  we  cleave  to  our  own 
will  And  therefore  the  Christian  ought  to  deny  his  own  will,  and 
to  renounce  it:  it  is  evil  to  will  our  own  judgment,  profit,  pleasure 
and  honour  ;  and  the  will  of  God  alone  is  good  :  and  therefore  the 
will  of  God  ought  to  bt  our  will,  and  our  will  ought  to  be  lost  in  God's 
"Will,  so  that  we  willed  nothing  but  what  God  willeth,  and  because 
he  wills  it.  We  ha\e  seen  before  how  the  Saviour  himself  and 
others  denied  their  own  will.  Believers,  "ye  are  not  jour  ovn, 
but  God's,  in  body  and  in  spirit,"  1  Cor-  vi.  19,  20.  "For  none  of 
us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  mm  dieth  to  himself.  For  whether  we 
live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the 
Lord  :  whether  we  live  therefore  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's/'  Rom. 
xiv.  7,  8.  The  Christian  should  "die  "  then  to  all  that  is  his  own, 
that  "  his  life  may  be  hidden  with  Christ  in  God,  and  that  whatso- 
ever he  doth,  he  may  do  it  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,"  according  to 
the  words  of  Paul,  Col.  iii.  3,  23. 

5.  Have  ye  a  desire  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord,  endeavour  to  ob- 
tain a  knowledge  of  it  in  every  respect.  "  Wherefore  be  not  unwise, 
but  understanding  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is,"  Eph.  v.  1 7.  In 
every  situation  "  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and  per- 
fect will  of  God,"  Rom.  xii.  2.  Give  heed  to  the  word,  in  which 
the  Lord  discovers  his  will ;  attend  much  to  your  conscience,  in 
which  God  hath  written  his  law,  as  David  attended  to  it,  Psalm 
xxvii.  8.  Make  frecment  use  of  Christ,  whose  name  is  "  Counsel- 
lor," Isaiah  ix.  5,  and  call  often  on  the  Lord,  "  to  teach  you  his 
way,  that  ye  may  walk  in  his  truth,"  like  David,  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  1 1. 

6.  Pray  much  and  earnestly,  that  he  would  cause  you  to  do  his 
will.  See  how  David,  the  man  after  God's  heart,  who  did  all  the 
will  of  God,  prayed  repeatedly  to  God  for  this,  Psalm  xxv.  Ixxxvi. 
cxix.  cxliii.  Ye  also  have  liberty  to  do  this  :  Jesus  directs  you  to 
his  Father,  he  hath  even  obtained  for  you,  that  ye  should  do  the  will 


XLIX.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  124.  471 

df  God  :  he  is  made  of  God  sanctification  to  you,  1  Cor.  i.  30.  It 
behooves  you  therefore  to  pray  for  it  perseveringly  at  the  throne, 
with  a  steadfast  confidence. 

7.  Do  then  your  Father's  will.  He  excites  you  frequently,  and 
strengthens  you  with  might  in  your  soul  upon  your  praying.  Attend 
therefore  to  his  operations,  and  "  run  after  him,  when  he  draws 
you."  Song  i.  4.  But  aim  at  a  manly  holiness  ;  yea,  with  Paul 
"follow  after  perfection,"  Philip  iii.  12-14.  Eye  the  illustrious 
examples  of  the  citzens  of  heaven,  yea,  endeavour  to  "  be  followers 
of  God,  as  dear  children,"  Eph.  v.  1,  "  to  be  perfect,  as  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect,"  Mat.  v.  48. 

Is  it  your  desire  to  do  and  pray  thus  according  to  the  will  of  God, 
assure  yourselves  then  that  "yepiay  according  to  his  will,  and 
shall  be  heard,"  1  John  v.  14.  Do  afflictions  betide  you,  they  are 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  "  ye  may  safely  commit  your 
souls  to  him  in  welldoing,"  and  they  will  not  be  so  grievous  to  you  : 
they  will  assuredly  one  time  or  other  cease  ;  since  ye  will  be  estab- 
lished with,  and  among,  and  like  the  angels,  that  ye  may,  beinc 
without  spot  or  wrinkle,  do  his  will  perfectly  :  "  May  the  Lord  611 
you  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in  all  wisdom,  and  spiritual  un- 
derstanding ;  that  ye  may  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord  to  all  pleasing, 
being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge 
of  God."     Amen. 


(  472  ) 


THE 


FOURTH  PETITION 


EXPLAINED. 


L.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Mat.  vi.  1 1.  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread.