Q.    125.    Which  is  the  fourth  petition  ? 

A.  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;  that  is,  be  pleased  to  pro 
vide  us  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  body,  that  we  may  thereby 
acknowledge  thee  to  be  the  only  fountain  of  all  good,  and  that  nei- 
ther our  care  nor  industry,  nor  even  thy  gifts  can  profit  us  without 
thy  blessing  ;  and  therefore  that  we  may  withdraw  our  trust  from 
all  creatures,  and  place  it  alone  in  thee. 


JLT  was  a  reasonable  exhortation  of  the  apostle  to  the  believing 
Corinthians,  "  Whether  ye  eat,  or  whether  ye  drink,  or  whatsoever 
ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,"  I  (Jor.  x.  31.  It  is  certain,  that 
"the  Lord  hath  mad^  all  things  for  himself,"  as  the  wisest  of  kil%s 
bpeaks,  Prov.  xvi.  4.  There  is  nothing,  that  doth  not  in  its  particu- 
lar way  praise  the  Lord,  all  his  creatures,  yea,  even  the  least,  bear 
witness  to  his  glory :  but  "  he  hath    formed   his  people"  especially 


L.  LORD'S   DAY.  Q.    125.  473 

"  that  they  should  show  forth  his  praise,"  Isaiah  xliii.  21.  Hear 
how  David  speaks,  he  saith,  Psalm  cxlv.  10,  K  All  thy  works  shall 
praise  thee,  O  Lord,  and  thy  saints  shall  bless  thee."  Great  and 
inconceivable  is  the  favour  which  he  showeth  to  those  whom  he 
loves  ;  he  hath  made  them  his  children,  his  subjects,  yea,  kings, 
that  they  may  do  only  his  will,  and  conduct  themselves  to  his  glory ; 
Peter  saith  to  them,  "  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priest- 
hood, a  holy  nation  a  peculiar  people ;  that  ye  should  show  forth 
the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into  his 
marvellous  light,"  1  Pet.  ii.  9.  These  glorious  favours  affect  their 
hearts  so,  that  they  sometimes,  through  ignorance,  consider  it  as  too 
ignoble  an  employment  to  meditate  on  inferior  things,  even  benefits 
which  relate  to  the  body.  But  as  the  Lord  doth  all  things,  and 
therefore  provides  then  also  with  their  bodily  necessaries,  for  his  own 
sake,  it  is  therefore  his  will,  that  they  should  praise  and  glorify  him 
also  in  eating  and  drinking.  If  the  1  ord  could  susti  in  Moses,  Eli- 
jah and  Jesus  many  days  without  meat  and  drink,  he  could  also  sus= 
tain  all  his  children  immediately  without  food  ;  but  it  doth  not  phase 
him  to  do  this,  but  it  is  his  will,  that  they  should  depend  on  him  con- 
tinually, that  they  may  seek  of  him  renewedly  that  which  is  neces- 
sary for  their  support,  and  may  have  repeatedly  new  matter  for  glo- 
rifying  him  in  eating  and  drink  ng. 

This  is  the  reason  why  the  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  the  children  of 
God  to  pray  every  day  for  their  daily  bread,  as  a  mean  wherebv  they 
may  hallow  their  Father's  name.  For  he  prescribes  as  means  to 
promote  the  hallowing  of  the  name  of  the  Lord  the  following  peti- 
tions, as  well  those  for  obtaining  that  which  is  good,  as  those  for  de- 
precating evu\  to  wit,  the  two  last  petitions.  The  petitions,  which 
serve  as  means  to  obtain  thdt  which  is  good,  relate  either  to  spiritual 
good,  as  the  coming  of  God's  kingdom,  and  the  doing  of  God's  will, 
mentioned  in  the  second  and  third  petition  ;  or  they  relate  to  tem- 
poral good,  even  our  daily  bread,  mentioned  in  this  fourth  pi'tition9 
that  we  may  partake  of  it  to  his  honour.  Thus  the  instructor  also 
explains  this  petition,  when  he  saith,  "  That  we  may  thereby  ac- 
knowledge thee  to  be  the  only  fountain  of  all  good,"  &c. 

Three  particulars  offer  themselves  to  our  consideration  here  : 

I.  The  subject  concerning  which  we  pray,  "  Our  daily  bread," 

II.  That  which  we  request  with  respect  to  it,  "  That  God  would 
give  it  us  this  day,"  and 

III.  Why  we  must  pray  thus. 

I.  Because  the  word  bread  sometimes  denotes  the  spiritual  food 
of  the  soul,  to  wit,  Christ,  who  calls  himself  if  the  bread  of  life," 
Vol..  ii.  8  K 


tfi  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

John  vi.  48,  as  also  the  word  of  God,  with  respect  to  which  God 
sometimes  ''sends  a  famine,"  Amos  viii.  11,  therefore  the  Papists 
wish  to  find  their  massbread  here.  There  were  of  old  certain  per- 
sons among  the  orthodox,  who  would  not  allow,  that  men  ought  to 
pray  for  material  bread  :  and  there  are  still  famous  men,*  who  think 
that  these  words  relate  not  only  to  material,  but  also  to  spiritual 
bread  in  the  future  times  of  antichrist,  when  "a  measure  of  wheat 
should  be  sold  for  a  penny,  and  three  measures  of  barley  for  a 
penny,"  Prov.  vi.  6,  But  we  cannot  agree  with  them  in  their  opin- 
ion, but  believe  that  these  words  speak  only  of  proper  bread,  because 
we  perceive  no  reason  here  for  departing  from  the  literal  sense  of 
the  words.  This  pattern  of  prayer  would  be  imperfect,  if  it  did  not 
direct  us  to  pray  for  material  bread,  and  if  it  did  not  teach  us  to  de- 
pend on  God  with  respect  to  the  body.  It  is  also  too  curious  and  too 
farsought,  to  apply  this  petition  in  its  proper  emphasis  to  the  defi- 
ciency of  the  means  of  grace  under  the  dominion  of  antichrist :  for 
we  have  no  reason  but  our  own  fancy  to  explain  this  compendious 
prayer,  as  a  prophecy.  There  was  undoubtedly  as  great  a  defect  of 
the  pure  administration  of  the  gospel  in  the  times  of  the  heathen 
persecutions,  and  of  the  heresy  of  Alius  and  others.  It  is  also  cer- 
tain that  Rev.  vi.  6,  relates  not  to  the  power  of  antichrist,  which  we 
must  seek  under  the  sounding  of  the  trumpets,  and  not  under  the 
opening  of  the  third  seal,  which  foreshows  a  scarcity,  occasioned  by 
persecutions  from  without,  and  errours  from  within  :  for  the  seals 
exhibit  the  church  under  the  heathen  persecutions,  and  introduce 
the  trumpets,  after  a  silence  of  a  half  an  hour  under  Constantine  the 
Great,  according  to  Rev.  viii.  1,  2,  and  the  trumpets  declare  the 
appearance  of  antichrist,  and  introduce  the  vials,  which  plague  anti- 
christ.    See  Rev.  xi.   14,  15.     xv.    1.  5 — 8.     xvi.   1. 

But  when  proper  bread  is  mentioned  here,  then  "  all  things  which 
are  necessary  for  the  body"  are  implied  under  it,  to  wit,  all  that  a 
man  needeth  to  preserve  life,  as  meat,  drink,  clothing,  a  dwelling, 
health,  rest  and  peace  :  and  thus  also  that  which  preserves  men 
from  war,  sickness,  famine,  thieves,  &c.  Bread  therefore  denotes 
here  all  that  a  man  hath  need  of  for  the  body  :  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy 
face  shalt  thou  eat  bread,"  saith  God  to  Adam,  Gen.  iii.  19.  Paul 
calls  ''  that  with  which  we  ought  to  he  content,  our  food  and  rai- 
ment," 1  Tim.  vi.  8.     And  Jacob  calls  it  "  being  kept  in  his  way, 

*  By  these  the  author  means  the  Cocceians,  who  look  upon  the  Lord'c 
|>ra\er  as  a  prophecy,  althongh  the*  explain  it  also  according  to  the  com> 
fflcn  method,  and  thus  affix  a  twofold  sense  to  it. 


L.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  125.  475 

bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  and  returning;  again  to  his  father's 
house  in  peace,"  Gen.  xxviii.  20,  21.  The  Saviour  had  also  weighty- 
reasons  for  calling  our  bodily  necessaries  simply  bread,  since, 
(a)  bread  is  most  necessary  for  us,  (b)  is  always  tasteful,  and  w.e 
never  loathe  it,  when  we  are  in  health,  (c)  it  is  also  used  with  all 
kinds  of  food,  and  renders  it  palatable  and  nourishing,  (d)  We 
could  alvvay-i  subsist  upon  bread  alone  better  than  upon  any  other 
kind  of  food,  and  (e)  he  would  teach  us  thus  that  we  ought  not  to 
be  too  much  set  upon  pleasing  our  appetites,  or  hanker  too  much 
af'.er  delicious  food-,  and  sensual  gratifications,  nor  after  an  abun- 
dance  :  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,  feed  me  with  food 
convenient  for  me,"  saith  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8. 

It  is  worthy  of  observation,  thai  he  calls  this  "  Our  bread."  The 
Lord  God  adopts  believers  for  members  of  his  household,  and  par- 
takers of  his  table  :  for  "they  are  no  longer  strangers  and  foreign- 
ers, but  fellowcitizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God," 
Eph.  ii.  19.  They  go  therefore  every  day  to  their  Father,  that  he 
may  give  them  bread,  which  they  may,  according  to  the  liberty, 
which  the  Son  of  God  giveth  them,  call  their  own  bread,  as  well  be- 
cause they  have  need  of  it,  as  that  is  called  a  person's  bread,  of 
which  he  hath  need  :  "  His  bread  shall  be  given  him,  and  his  waters 
shall  be  sure,"  Isaiah  xxxiu.  16,  as  also  because  it  is  dispensed  to 
them  by  their  Father,  as  their  appointed  portion  :  "  Feed  me  with 
the  bread  of  my  appointed  portion,"*  saith  Agur,  Prov.  xxx.  8. 
And  the  children  of  God  say  "  our  bread,"  particularly  on  account 
of  a  certain  and  lawful  right,  which  they  have  to  their  necessary 
food,  as  their  own  property.  We  have  a  lawful  right  to  our  bread 
before  men,  when  we  obtain  it  by  lawful  means,  by  inheritance,  by 
a  gift,  or  by  any  honest  calling)  as  trafficking,  trade,  handicrafts,  or 
other  labour:  when  "  we  work  quietly,  we  then  eat  our  own  bread," 
saith  Paul,  2  Thess.  iii.  12.  But  if  we  will  call  it  our  bread  with. 
respect  to  the  Lord,  we  must  then  have  a  right  to  it  before  the  di- 
vine tribunal  also.  Before  the  fall  man  had  a  right  to  all  things^ 
having  been  appointed  lord  of  all  things  by  God,  according  to  Gen. 
i.  28,  29,  but  having  apostatized  from  God,  he  forfeited  all  things, 
and  "the  ground  was  cursed  "  on  account  of  his  sin,  Gen.  iii.  17. 
Yea,  "  his  basket  and  his  store  are  cursed,"  Deut.  xxviii.  17.  But 
the  Son  of  God  having  satisfied  for  the  sins  of  the  elect,  hath  obtain- 
ed aright  and  property  in  all  the  divine  benefits  for  them  again,  and 
on  account  of  this  righteousness  of  his,  they  call  their  necessaries 

*  This  is  agreeable  tp  the  Dutch  translation. 


*r6  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED 

their  bread  :  "  All  things  are  yours  ;  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or 
Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to 
come,  all  are  yours  ;  for  ye  are  Christ's:"  thus  speaks  Paul,  1  Cor. 
iii.  21 — 23.  And  thus  they  ask  for  their  own  bread,  of  which  they 
have  need,  which  the  Father  had  appointed  for  them,  and  to  which 
they  have  a  lawful  right  before  God  and  men.  And  since  they  know 
that  every  believer  hath  the  same  right  to  his  Father's  table,  and 
since  they  love  one  another  heartily,  as  children  of  the  same  family, 
therefore  each  one  saith  not  my  bread  :  but  uniting  his  soul  in 
prayer  with  all  the  children  of  Cod,  he  saith,  "our  bread,"  and  he 
will  also  request  of  his  Father  so  much  for  himself,  that  he  may 
have  whereof  he  may  impart  something  to  his  fellowchildren,  when 
they  have  need,  as  their  bread. 

As  the  Greek  word  e/iiousios,  translated  "  daily,"  occurs  in  no 
other  passage  of  the  New  Testament,  but  only  in  this  fourth  petition, 
it  hath  occasioned  some  difficulty  to  expositors  to  know  what  they 
ought  to  understand  by  it.  One  understands  this  by  it,  and  another 
that :  but  we  approve  most  of  those  who  render  it  "  superessential," 
that  of  which  we  have  need  over  and  above  our  bodily  being,  as  a 
sufficiency  to  support  it :  because  the  words,  of  which  this  is  com- 
pounded, to  wit,  e/ii,  over,  above,  and  oueia,  essence,  or  being,  lead 
us  to  this  sen^e  :  and  because  the  Greek  fathers,  who  understood 
their  own  language  best,  took  it  thus.  And  therefore  our  daily 
bread  significth  those  things  which  are  necessary  for  the  body,  or 
which  we  need  over  and  above  our  body,  in  order  to  sustain  it :  "  God 
givcth  us,  besides  life  and  breath,  likewise  all  things,"  Acts  xvii.  25. 
Thus  James  also,  having  spoken  first,  though  with  other  Greek 
words,  of  daily  food,  calls  this  afterwards  "  those  things  which  are 
needful  for  the  body,"  James  ii.  15,  16.  So  it  is  also  said  of  the 
food  of  Jehoiakim,  2  Kings  xxv.  30,  "  His  allowance  was  a  continu- 
al allowance,  given  him  of  the  king,  a  daily  rate  for  every  day." 

II  With  respect  to  this  daily  bread  we  pray  "  that  God  would 
give  it  us  this  day."  That  is,  as  the  instructor  explains  it,  that  God 
would  "  provide  "  us  with  all  things  necessary  for  the  body.  He 
doth  this,  (a)  When  he  causes  bread  to  grow  in  the  fields  for  us, 
giving  us  fruitful  years  and  harvests,  :  «  He  causeth  the  grass  to 
grow  for  the  cattle,  and  herb  for  the  service  of  man  :  that  he  may 
bring  forth  food  out  of  the  earth  ;  and  wine  that  maketh  glad  the 
heart  of  man,  and  oil  to  make  his  face  shine,  and  bread  which 
strengthened  man's  heart."  Thus  David  speaks  through  the  Spir- 
it, Psylm  civ.  14.  15,  God  commands  his  blessing,  so  that  "the 
land  yields  her  fruits,  and  we  eat  to  the  full,"  Lev.  xxv.   19.    «  He 


L.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  125.  47 7 

hears  the  heavens,  and  the  heavens  hear  the  earth,  and  the  earth 
hears  the  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  they  hear  Jezreel,"  Hosea  ii„ 
21,  22.  When  God  is  angry  with  his  people,  and  will  not  give 
them  their  bread,  he  then  "  makes  their  heaven  as  iron,  and  their 
earth  as  brass,"  Lev.  xxvi.  19.  (b)  God  gives  us  bread,  when  he 
permits  us  to  gather  it  into  our  barns  in  its  season,  with  success,  and 
with  his  blessing,  and  when  he  brings  it  into  our  houses,  and  to  our 
tables.  Hear  David  say  this  also,  Psalm  civ.  21 — 28.  cxiv  15,  16. 
u  These  all  wait  upon  thee,  that  thou  rnuyest  give  them  their  meat 
in  due  season.  1  hat  which  thou  givest  them  they  gather  :  thou 
openest  thy  hand,  they  are  filled  with  good."  Of  what  advantage 
is  it  to  us,  that  there  is  food  in  the  field,  while  it  is  not  brought  to 
us  ?  God  can  destroy  it  even  then  by  sending  too  plenteous  a  rain, 
which  "  he  causes  to  come  sometimes  in  harvest  for  a  correction," 
as  Elihu  speaks,  Job  xxxvii.  13.  See  1  Sam.  xii,  17,  '8.  Prov, 
xxvi.  1,  or  by  insects,  "  the  locust,  the  cankerworm,  the  caterpillar 
and  the  palmerworm,  which  eat  up  all  tilings,"  Joel  ii.  25,  or  by 
"  the  enemies,  who  eat  up  our  grain  in  the  fields,  so  that  we  sovy 
our  seed  in  vain,"  Lev.  xxvi.  16  (c)  God  gives  bread  also  when 
he  blesses  our  plans  and  the  labour  of  our  hands,  so  that  we  obtain 
sufficient  profit  and  store,  and  are  thus  able  to  provide  ourselves  with 
whatsoever  is  necessary  for  us,  without  anxiety  j  for  when  God  doth 
not  bless  us  thus,  "  it  is  in  vain  for  us  to  rise  up  early,  to  sit  up 
late,  and  to  eat  the  bread  of  sorrows  ;  for  so  he  giveth  his  beloved 
sleep,"  Psalm  exxviii.  2.  (d)  Also  when  the  Lord  grants  us  power 
to  make  use  of  it  willingly  and  cheerfully,  in  proportion  to  the  meas- 
ure of  his  blessings:  "It  is  good  and  comely  for  one  to  eat 
and  to  drink,  and  to  enjoy  the  good  of  all  his  labour  that  he 
taketh  under  the  sun,  all  the  days  of  his  life,  which  God  giveth 
him  ;  for  it  is  his  portion.  Every  man  also,  to  whom  God  hath 
given  riches  and  wealth,  and  hath  given  him  power  to  eat  there- 
of ;  and  to  take  his  portion,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  labour  ;  this  is  the 
gift  of  God,"  as  the  preacher  saith,  Eccl.  v.  18,  19.  And  see 
how  God  punisheth  the  covetous  man,  when  he  doth  not  give  him 
power  to  use  the  gifts  of  God  willingly  and  cheerfully,  though  tem- 
perately withal,  Eccl.  vi.  1,  2.  (e)  It  is  not  less  a  gift  of  God, 
when  he  affords  us  health,  so  that  we  can  partake  of  .his  gifts  with 
pleasure,  and  relish  them  ;  for  when  "  God  chastens  a  man  with 
pain  on  his  bed,  his  life  abhorreth  bread,  and  his  soul  dainty  meat," 
Job  xxxiii.  19,  28.  Psalm  vii.  18.  (f)  God  gives  bread  paiticu- 
lariy,  when  he  affords  by  his  influence  a  profitable  and  nourishing 
virtue  to  the  bread,  of  which  we  partake  ;  "'for  man  doth  not  live 


478  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

by  bread  only,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
oi  the  Lord,"  Deut.  viii.  3.  Matt.  iv.  4.  When  God  breaks  the 
staff  of  bread,  it  doth  then  neither  profit  nor  nourish,  See  Lev.  xxvi. 
26.     Hag.  i.   6. 

But  God's  giving  bread  denotes  not  only,  that  he  provides  man 
■with  it,  but  also  that  he  gives  it  to  his  children  in  his  kindness, 
from  a  fatherly  heart :  God  gives  unconverted  persons  also  bread  ; 
for  "  he  causeth  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  he 
sendeth  his  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust,"  as  Jesus  speaks, 
Mat.  v.  45.  But  he  doth  not  do  this  from  his  special  kindness  and 
love  in  Christ,  as  a  Father  :  he  gives  it  to  them  as  beggars,  from 
his  common  goodness  :  but  he  doth  not  take  them  into  his  house,  as 
his  children  and  heirs.  He  gives  believers  bread,  because  they  are 
his  children,  his  heirs,  and  entitled  to  all  his  goodness  ;  yea,  he 
gives  himself  and  his  Son  to  them  in  the  bread:  "  He  that  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  r"  as  Paul  speaks,  Rom. 
viii.  32. 

Although  the  children  of  God  have  such  a  special  right  to  their 
bread,  they  have  it  not  nevertheless  on  account  of  their  own  worthi- 
ness and  merits.  It  is  only  free  favour  and  grace  :  they  had  forfeit- 
ed it ;  the  Son  of  God  purchased  it  for  them  :  they  must  obtain  it 
by  prayer  of  the  Father.  They  ought  therefore  to  beware  of  de- 
manding it  of  their  Father  with  insolence,  like  petulant  children  ; 
but  they  must  pray  for  it  with  humility  and  selfabasement,  like  the 
prodigal  son,  Luke  xv.  18,  19. 

But  why  do  they  pray  for  bread  ?  and  why  doth  the  Father  give 
it  yjem,  upon  their  petition  ?  the  catechism  saith,  (a)  "  That  we 
may  thereby  acknowledge  thee  to  be  the  only  fountain  of  all  good." 
They  must  come  to  him  with  this  impression,  that  they  may  en- 
courage themselves,  when  they  pray,  with  the  consideration,  "that 
he  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  they  ask  or 
think,"  Eph.  hi.  20.  They  go  to  him,  as  their  Father,  who  is  in 
heaven,  as  in  his  storehouse,  acknowledging  thus  that  "  every  good 
gift,  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from 
the  Father  of  lights,"  James  i.  7.  And  when  God  giveth  them 
bread  upon  their  praying,  they  acknowledge  then  from  expe- 
rience, that  he  is  the  only  fountain  of  all  good,  as  Jacob  promised 
that  he  would  do,  when  God  should  give  him  bread,  Gen.  xxviii.  20 
— 22.  (b)  "  And  that  neither  our  care,  nor  industry,  nor  even  his 
gifts  can  profit  us  without  his  blessing."  He  who  prays  in  truth  be- 
lieves this,  for  he  would  otherwise  look  no  further  than  his  own  care. 


L.  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  125.  479 

and  labour,  and  the  gifts  of  God,  which  he  enjoys  already :  but  now 
he  lifts  his  soul  up  to  the  Father,  that  he  may  obtain  his  blessing  j 
and  when  his  Father  bestows  his  blessing,  he  then  acknowledges  in 
his  heart,  "  that  it  is  the  Lord  his  God,  who  giveth  him  power  to 
get  wealth,"  Deut.  viii.  18.  From  which  it  followeth,  that  they 
"  withdraw  their  trust  from  all  creatures,  and  place  it  in  him  alone  ;" 
for  they  frequently  see  that  those  things  on  which  they  depend,  as 
their  own  care,  industry,  yea,  even  the  gifts  of  God,  in  which  they 
often  used  to  trust  and  with  which  they  frequently  encouraged  them- 
selves, do  all  fail  and  forsake  them.  This  causes  them  to  look  unto 
and  trust  only  in  the  Lord,  the  everlasting  rock,  especially  when 
they  have  frequently  discovered,  that  he  provides  them  with  tempo- 
ral necessaries,  without  their  own  care,  and  beyond  their  own  expec- 
tation. David,  having  by  the  help  of  the  Lord,  "  slain  the  lion  and 
the  bear,"  trusted  that  he  would  also  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
slay  the  giant,"  1  Sam.  xvii.  36,  37,  45,  46. 

In  order  that  they  may  acknowledge  this,  they  pray  that  the 
Father  would  give  "  them"  bread.  Give  "  us  "  say  they.  The 
Lord  sometimes  gives  it  to  their  enemies,  either  their  private,  or  pub- 
lic enemies,  when  his  anger  is  kindled  against  them,  on  account  of 
their  sins  ;  but  they  pray  that  he  would  not  do  this,  according  to  his 
promises,  which  he  hath  made  to  them,  Isaiah  lxv.  22.  "They 
shall  not  build,  and  another  inhabit :  they  shall  not  plant,  and  another 
eat ;  for  as  the  days  of  a  tree  are  the  days  of  my  people,  and  mine 
elect  shall  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands."  And  they  pray 
thus,  not  only  each  for  himself,  but  also  for  one  another,  as  children 
of  one  family,  who  do  not  nourish  any  envy  or  illwill  toward  each 
other.  As  soon  as  they  sea  any  one  of  the  Lord's  household  in  want, 
if  they  cannot  themselves  communicate  to  the  necessities  of  the 
saints,  they  will  have  compassion  on  him  and  will  pray  to  the  Esther 
for  him,  that  he  may  provide  for  him  also.  "  They  pray  for  all  the 
saints,"  Eph.  vi.  18,  for  "they  have  been  taught  of  God  to  love 
one  another,"  1  Thess.  iv.  9.  And  therefore  "  they  look,  not  every 
man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others/' 
as  Paul  teacheth,  Philip,  ii.  4. 

But  when  do  we  wish  God  to  give  us  bread  ?  according  to  the 
prescript  of  the  Saviour  we  must  pray  that  God  would  give  it  us 
"this  day,"  that  is  "each  day,"*  as  it  is  explained,  Luke  xi.  3, 
And  so  our  great  Advocate  chooses  that  we  (a)  should  depend  upon 
She  Father,  and  go  to  him  for  our  bread  every  day.     (b)  He  teacher 

*  Awarding  to  '.he  Butch  txan&Uucr 


480  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED* 

us  that  we  are  so  necessitous,  that  we  need  bread  day  by  day.  The 
bread  of  yesterday  cannot  profit  us  to  day,  it  must  be  renewed,  and 
given  again  and  again,  ^c)  He  forbids  us  to  ask  for  much  bread,  or 
bread  for  a  long  time,  and  (d)  he  chooses  that  we  should  not  have 
any  anxious  or  cumbering  concern  for  the  morrow,  but  live  day  by 
day  from  our  Father's  hands  Therefore  he  saith,  Mat.  vi.  34. 
*'•  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow  ;  for  the  morrow  shall  take 
thought  for  the  things  of  itself:  sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evi! 
thereof." 

III.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  doth  not  enjoin  aught  upon  the  children 
of  God  to  no  purpose.,  therefore  he  had  also  certain  reasons  for  en- 
joining on  them  to  pray  fop  their  daily  bread  ;  for  (1)  tney  have  need 
of  it  :  God  hath  created  them  with  such  needy  bodies,  that  they 
cannot  subsist  without  daily  food.  (2)  He  chooses  that  they  should 
hallow  his  Father's  name,  promote  his  kingdom,  and  do  his  will. 
How  shall  they  do  this,  while  they  have  neither  food  nor  raiment  I 
will  they  not  when  they  are  poor,  be  seduced  Jo  "  steal  and  take  the 
name  of  their  God  in  vain  ?"  Therefore  Agur  prayed  to  be  pre* 
served  from  poverty,  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9.  (3)  We  cannot  provide  our- 
selves with  bread,  no  creature  can  furnish  us  with  it :  all  our  own 
care  and  industry,  and  that  of  others;  yea,  and  the  giftsof  the  Lord 
are  to  no  purpose  without  his  blessing.  Whither  shall  we  then  go  ? 
must  we  not  pray  to  the  Father  for  bread  ?  (4)  We  have  wasted 
and  forfeited  all  that  we  had :  how  shall  we  obtain  it  again,  but  by 
praying  to  the  Father  ?  (5)  God  is  the  Father  of  his  children  ;  doth 
it  not  now  become  children  to  seek  their  bread  of  their  Father? 
(6)  He  gives  bread  upon  our  praying  :  "  he  provides  even  the  raven 
with  food,  when  his  young  ones  cry  to  God,  and  wander  for  lack  of 
meat,"  Job  xxxviii.  41.  God  hearkened  to  young  Ishmae],  and 
showed  his  mother  a  well,  that  she  might  give  him  drink,  Gen.  xxi. 
15 — 19.  Will  he  not  then  attend  to  the  prayer  of  his  children,  and 
provide  them  with  daily  bread  ?  and  shall  not  this  induce  them  to 
call  on  him  for  bread  ?  (7)  Though  a  man  should  have  exceedingly 
many  goods,  and  be  free  from  all  care,  how  shall  his  food  be  blessed 
to  him,  except  by  prayer ;  for  "  it  is  sanctified  by  prayer,"  as  Paul1 
teacheth,  1  Tito.  iv»  5. 


t.  LORD'S  DAY.  $.  125.  481 


APPLICATION. 

Ought  men,  yea,  ought  even  the  children  of  God  to  pray  for 
their  daily  bread,  how  senseless  then  are  the  Papists,  who  think  that 
they  will  merit  heaven  by  their  works,  which  they  call  good,  but 
which  are  only  superstitious  1  We  sannot  merit  so  much  as  a  mor- 
3ei  of  bread  of  God,  but  must  pray  for  it  day  by  day,  yea,  beg,  as 
it  were,  at  the  door  of  heaven  ;  how  then  shall  we  merit  that  eter- 
nal weight  of  glory  ? 

But,  hearers,  how  few  are  there  of  you,  who,  like  true  children 
of  God,  pray  for  then  daily  bread  !  It  is  true,  ye  utter  these  words 
every  day  ;  but  when  your  behaviour  is  rightly  considered,  it  will 
appear  that  the  most  of  you  dj  not  pray  aright  for  that  which  they 
need.  For  (a)  of  whom  do  ye  seek  your  bread  ?  of  him,  who  is 
the  only  fountain  of  all  good  ?  do  ye  depend  in  all  things  on  him, 
living  only  from  his  hand,  and  not  from  your  own  industry  and  care, 
and  his  gifts,  which  ye  possess  ?  Surely  many  do  not  act  thus  ;  for 
the  most  look  to  their  own  store,  and  to  nothing  besides  ;  if  they 
have  nothing,  they  attend  then  to  their  own  contrivance,  health, 
wisdori  and  strength,  and  think  that  their  own  hands  are  suf- 
ficient for  them,  to  provide  them  with  bread  :  and  when  they  ob- 
tain aught  by  these  means,  they  thank  themselves,  and  say  in  theif 
hearts,  ,k  My  power,  and  the  might  of  my  hand  hath  gotten  me 
this  wealth,"  Deut.  viii.  17.  And  they  do  thus,  like  the  king  of 
Babylon,  Hab.  i.  16,  '«  sacrifice  to  their  net,  and  burn  incense  to 
their  drag  :  because  by  them  their  portion  is  fat,  and  their  meat 
plenteous."  (b)  Perhaps  ye  say,  We  know  that  we  must  seek  our 
bread  of  God  alone,  and  not  from  our  own  industry,  and  anxious 
care,  and  therefore  we  are  easy.  But  how  are  ye  easy  ?  is  not  your 
easiness  only  carelessness  and  slotht'ulness  ?  is  it  not  a  depending 
upon  the  labour,  or  kindness  and  gif;s  of  others,  eating  the  bread  of 
idleness,  and  neglecting  every  proper  opportunity  to  eat  your  own, 
bread?  for  ye  do  not  thus  eat  your  own  bread,  but  that  of  others. 
He  who  prays,  and  doth  not  work  as  he  ought  for  bread,  his  prayer 
displeaseth  the  Lord,  and  he  eats  that  which  is  not  his  own  :  »'  If 
any  man  will  not  work,  neither  ought  he  to  eat.  For  we  hear  tl^at 
there  are  some  among  you  which  walk  disorderly,  not  working  at 
all,  but  are  busybodies.  Now  them  that  are  such,  we  command  and 
exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quietness  they  work, 
Vol.  ii.  3  L 


m  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

and    eat    their   own    bread,"    according    to    2  Thess.    iii.    10 — 1*. 
(e)  Some  among  you  are  exceedingly  industrious,  yea,  root  like  moles 
in  the   earth  with   their   whole   heart.     But    for  what  purpose  ?  not 
that  they  may  have  dail .  bread,  but  that  they  may  obtain  an   abun- 
dance, more  than  is  sufficien-  for  them.     They  are  not  satisfied  with 
daily  bread,  but  they  endeavour  by  scraping  and  scrambling,  by  fair 
and  unfair  means,   to  heap  up  much':    f<  They   covet  with  an  evil 
covetousness,  that  they  may  set  their  nest  on  high,   and  may  be  de- 
livered from  the  power  of  evil,"  Hab.  ii.  9,   or  that   they    may   eat 
and  drink  luxuriously  :  and  when  it  happens,  that  the  food,  which  is 
prepared  for  those  dainty  persons,  is  not  tasteful  enough,  they  be- 
come wonderfully  peevish,    and  even  intolerable  to  those  who  pre- 
pare their  meat  and  drink  for  them:   It  is  still  more  unsuitable,  that 
some  dare  not  make  a  moderate  use  of  the   gifts  of  God,    but   en- 
deavour to  hoard  all  up,  that  they  may  be  rich,  which  they  will  call 
frugality    and    thriftiness,    wfchen    it    is    indeed  a  vile    niggardliness, 
"  vanity  and  an  evil  disease,"  as  Solomon   speaks,  Eccl.  vi.  2.     (d) 
Many  will  disapprove  of  this,  yea,  detest  it  ;  but  do  ye  not   decline 
to  another  extreme  ?    I  mean  you,  who,    when  God    gives   you  his 
gifts,  employ  them  against  him  by  being  proud  of  them,  by  squan- 
dering them  in  making  a  parade   wilh  your   furniture  and  clothing, 
by  eating  and  drinking  to  excess,   and  by  taking  your   pleasure. 
Men  employ  thus  the  blessings  of  God.  as  weapons  to  fight  against 
him,  and  provoke  him  to  anger,  like  "  Jeshurun,  who  when  he  was 
waxen  fat,   kicked,   and   forsook  God    who  made  him,    and   lightly 
esteemed  the  rock  of  his  salvation,"  Deut.  xxxii.  15,  and  like   "  Is- 
rael, who,   when  they  were   increased,    sinned  still  more  against  the 
Lord,"  Hosea  iv.  7.  (e)  But  those  are  not  less  Worthy  to  be  reproved, 
who  do  indeed   provide   bread   for  themselves,    but  have  nothing  for 
their  neighbour*     Every  man.   think  they,  for  himself  and  God  fo? 
us  all,  as   if  man   were   created    only    for   himself,  and  not  for  his 
neighbour,  and  as  if  he  might   hide    himself  from   his   own  flesh. 
Doth  God  give  your  neighbour  bread,  ye  will  presently  repine  at  it, 
and      'your  eye  will  be  evil   because   God   is   good,"  Mat.  xx.   15. 
But  how  do  ye  then  pray,  ,(  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ?"    Ye 
do  not  mean  it,  your  mouth   saith  it,  but  your  heart  and  actions  do 
not  agree  with  your  mouth. 

Know    then,    friends,    ye  who  are  thus   disposed,    that  the  bread 

which  ye  have,  and  of  which  ye  partake,  is  not  yours.     Perhaps  ye 

have  a    lawful    right  to  it  before    men,  but  ye  have  not   before   the 

Lord   since- ye   rvidence  that  be  is  not   your  father  in   Christ:    and 

tore  ye  possess  and  partake  of  it  unjustly  like  robbers:  "God 


L.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  125.  48* 

will  also  curse  your  blessings,  yea,  he  hath  cursed  them  already,'' 
JVlal.  li.  2.  I  beseech  you,  read  what  is  said,  Deut.  xxviii.  16 — 2Q3 
Perhaps  ye  laugh  at  the  time  to  corne,  because  ye  have  a  great  store 
for  a  long  time  :  but  know  t  at  if  yt  remain  as  ye  are,  ye  may  yet 
suffer  want :  "Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which  is  not? 
for  riches  certainly  make  themselves  wings,  they  fly  ?way  as  an 
eagie  toward  heaven,"  Prov  xxiii  5.  If  your  stoie  be  not  taken 
away  from  you,  ye  will  be  snatched  away  from  it,  like  the  rich  fool, 
Luke  xii.  20.  What  comfort  will  there  t  en  be  for  your  soul? 
surely  not  even  a  drop  of  water.  See  this  in  that  rich  man,  Luke 
xvi   24. 

Be  then  concerned  for  your  soiils  that  they  may  become  hungry, 
and  may  seek  to  have  God  for  their  father,  that  he  may  'k  fill  the  m,'; 
according  to  his  promise,  Mat.  v.  6.  M  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  a. id  his  righteousness,  and  other  things  shall  be  added  to  you/* 
Mat.  vi.  33. 

With  respect  to  you,  true  believers,  who  have  God  for  your  father 
and  faithful  provider : 

Behold  his  wisdom  and  goodness,  that  he  hath  created,  and  that 
he  continues  all  his  creatures,  and  you  also  so  dependent  and  needy, 
that  ye  must  be  provided  by  him  with  bre  d  repeatedly.  It  is  bet- 
ter, that  ye  must  be  sustained  by  his  gifts,  than  that  he  should  sup- 
port you  immediately  without  them  :  for  ye  not  only  obtain  thus 
continually  a  new  refreshment  by  a  variety  oi  gifts,  but  ye  have  also 
by  your  continual  renewed  neediness  an  inducement  to  apply  unto, 
and  to  praise  his  allsufficiency,  power,  and  goodness,  and  to  "  trust 
in  the  living  God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy,"  as  the 
apostle  speaks,  I    I  im.  vi.  17. 

2.  Therefore  depend  also  continually  in  an  active  manner  on  him, 
seeking  to  obtain  of  him  all  that  ye  need,  and  living  not  from  your 
care  and  industry,  but  only  from  him,  and  from  his  hand,  as  a  child 
lives  from  his  father's  hand  :  "  He  giveth  to  all  life,  breath  and  all 
things.  And  in  him  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being,"  as  Paul 
saith  to  the  Gentiles  at  Athens,  Acts  xwi.  25,  28.  But  is  it  enough 
to  depend  on  him,  and  to  be  provided  by  him  in  this  passive  man- 
ner ?  ought  not  the  children  of  God  to  depend  on  him  for  all  things 
also  in  an  active  and  operative  manner  ?  certainly  they  ought.  There- 
fore when  ye  have  need  of  any  tiling,  let  not  your  souls  look  too 
much  to  your  care,  nor  to  your  labour,  nor  to  the  gifts  of  the  Lord, 
and  suffer  not  yourselves,  when  ye  are  in  want,  to  be  disquieted 
with  anxious  solicitude ;  but  look  up  continually  to  him  with  sighing 
and  praying,  that  be  may  give  it  you,  having  an  undisturbed  trust; 


484  THE  FOURTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED, 

and  a  holy,  childlike  security,  that  he  will  provide  you  sufficiently  ifi 
h;s  time,  and  in  his  way.  Ye  come  surely  lor  your  own  bread, 
Which  your  Father  hath  allotted  you  :  "  Therefore  take  no  thought 
for  your  life  what  ye  shall  eat,  nor  what  ye  shall  drink;  nor  yet  for 
your  body  what  ye  shall  put  on.  He  who  hath  given  you  life  and  a 
body  will  also  provide  for  them.  He  provides  even  for  the  fowls, 
and  for  the  grass  of  the  field :  will  not  your  lather  then,  who  know- 
etii  what  ye  need,  provide  what  is  needful  for  you  ?"  See  Mat.  vi. 
26-  34.  "He  who  hath  given  you  "  the  greater,  yea  even  "  his 
own  Son,"  will  he  deny  you  the  less,  "  and  not  freely  give  you  all 
things  with  him  i"  Rom.  viii.  32.  "  Cast  then  all  your  care  upon 
him,  for  he  careth  for  you,"   1  Peter  v.  7. 

3.  Make  use  nevertheless  of  the  means,  which  he  hath  appointed 
and  commanded  you  to  use,  in  order  to  sustain  you  by  them,  to  wit, 
a  suitable  careiulness,  diligent  labour,  and  a  judicious  contrivance, 
and  do  not  neglect  his  gifts  by  your  carelessness.  No  godly  person 
ought  to  afford  an  occasion  of  reproaching  sincere  Christians 
with  slothfulness  and  negligence.  No  man  ought  to  be  more  dili- 
gent iu  an  honest  calling  than  a  Christian  :  not  that  he  may  live  by 
it,  for  he  must  live  from  his  Father's  hand  ;  but  because  it  is  his 
Father's  will  to  sustain  him  by  his  dil'gence,  and  he  is  therefore 
bound  to  work  in  obedience  to  his  Father :  "  Them  that  are  such 
we  command  and  exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with  quiet- 
ness they  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread,"  saith  Paul,  2  Thess. 
iii.   12. 

4.  Be  content  with  your  daily  bread.  To  crave  with  vehement 
desires  an  abundance  is  unbecoming  and  unprofitable  :  ye  will  indeed 
have  no  more  than  your  Father  hath  allotted  you  :  We  must  with 
Paul  "  learn  in  whatsoever  state  we  are,  therewith  to  be  content," 
Philip,  iv.  11.  He  saith,  Heb.  xiii.  5.  *•  Let  your  conversation  be 
without  covetousness  ;  and  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have  ; 
for  he  hath  said  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  As  we 
should  pray  against  "  poverty,"  so  we  may  indeed  pray  also  against 
"  riches,"  and  desire  of  God  only  "  the  bread  that  is  convenient  for 
us,"  with  Agur  Piov  xxx.  8.  Ye  have  liberty  to  seek  only  your 
daily  bread  of  your  Father,  and  not  an  abundance :  "  Having  food 
and  raiment,  let  us  therewith  be  content,"  according  to  1  Tim.  vi. 
8.  Let  the  men  of  this  world,  who  have  their  portion  in  this  life, 
pant  after  much  ;  but  do  not  ye,  who  have  obtained  a  better  and 
more  noble  poivion  of  your  Father,  and  who  expect  still  more. 

5.  When  your  Father  gives  you  bread,  endeavour  to  pause  a 
while,  and  observe  by  what  ways  and  means  he  hath  furnished  you 


L.  LORD'S   DAY.  Q.    125.  485 

with  it ;  whence  itha:h  come  to  you  ;  who  hath  laboured  at  it ;  how 
it  hath  been  brought  to  you  ;  how  the  little  that  ye  obtain  sufficeth 
you  ;  and  all  frequently  without  any  exertion  of  your  own  how 
many  wonderful  ways  of  God's  good  hand  toward  you  would  ye  not 
see  in  this,  and  admire  and  rejoice  in  it,  saying  with  Hagar,  Gen. 
xvi.  13.     "  Have  I  here  also  looked  after  him  that  seeth  me  ?" 

6.  Make  also  a  good  use  of  your  daily  bread,  when  your  Father 
gives  it  you,  tasting  his  fatherly  kindness  and  bis  sweet  love  in  it. 
Ye  should  also  "  taste  and  see  "  in  it  "  that  the  Lord  is  good," 
Psalm  xxxiv.  8.  Ye  ought  also  to  praise  him  on  account  of  it, 
and  to  acknowledge  with  your  heart,  and  mouth,  and  actions,  that  he 
is  the  only  fountain  of  all  good,  that  it  may  be  to  him,  as  it  is  of 
and  through  him :  "  When  tl  ou  hast  eaten  and  art  full,  then  thou 
-shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God,"  saith  Moses,  Deut.  viii.  10.  Be  also 
charitable  to  them,  who  are  in  want,  especially  when  the  Lord  bless- 
eth  you  more  than  others.  See  how  this  is  enjoined  on  you,  Frov. 
iii.  9,  10.  Fxcl.  xi.  42.  Isaiah  lviii.  7.  Gal.  vi.  10.  Heb.  xhi.  16. 
Ye  pray  that  not  only  yourselves,  but  others  also  may  have  their 
daily  bread,  and  the  Father  will  honour  you,  by  making  you  his 
hand  to  give  others  their  daily  bread. 

Do  the  wicked  boast  of  their  abundance  and  have  ye  but  little  ? 
Well,  "  a  li'.tle  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  better  than  the  riches 
of  many  wicked,"  as  David  speaks  with  tvuth.  Psalm  xxxvii.  16. 
He  hath  it  from  his  Father  in  his  love  with  his  Son.  When  the 
wicked  shall  be  stripped  of  all  that  he  hath  at  present,  and  shall  be 
reduced  to  the  greatest  want,  then  "shall  ye  not  hunger  any  more, 
nor  thirst  any  more,  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  you,  nor  any 
heat  ;  for  the  Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shaft  feed 
you,  and  shall  lead  you  unto  living  fountains  of  waters  :  and  God 
.shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes."     Amen. 


(  466  ) 


THE 


FIFTH  PETITION 


EXPLAINED 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Matt.  vi.  12.  And  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  ouv 
debtors.