Q.   126.    Which  is  the ffth  petition? 

A.  "  And  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  ou''  debtors  ;  that  is^ 
be  pleased  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood,  not  to  impute  to  us  poor 
sinners,  our  transgressions,  nor  that  depravity  which  always  cleaves 
to  us  ;  even  as  we  feel  this  evidence  of  thy  grace  in  us,  that  it  is 
our  firm  resolution  from  the  heart,  to  forgive  our  neighbour. 

V^>URSED  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat 
of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life.  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it  bring 
forth  to  thee,"  saith  the  Lord  to  Adam,  because  he  had  sinned 
against  him,  Gen.  iii.  17,  18.  This  curse  continues  even  until  the 
present  day,  to  the  sorrow  of  his  posterity,  since  they  have  inherited 
their  father's  sin  :  yea,  it  is  also  increased  by  unfruitful  seasons. 
Cod  sometimes  denies  rain,  at  other  times  he  sends  too  great   an 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  126.  487 

abundance  of  it ;  he  makes  the  heaven  like  iron,  and  the  earth  like 
brass  ;  he  sends  mildew  and  blasting  ;  he  commands  his  great  army, 
the  locust,  the  cankerworm,  the  caterpillar  and  the  palmerworm  to 
eat  up  all  things,  and  when  he   even  seems  to  bless  the  fruits  of  the 
earth,  he  then  still  sends  sometimes  the  enemies,  who  rob  and  take 
all  away.     Doth  he  permit  the  owner    to  gather  it,    he   breaks    the 
staff  of  his  bread,  so  that  although  he  eat,  he  is  not   satisfied.     And 
what  is  the  cause  of  all  this,  but  his   sins  ?     Cain  was  cursed  on  ac- 
count of  his  sins,  and  not  only  himself,  but  also  his  ground  :  "  When 
thou  tillest  the  ground,  it  shall  not  henceforth  yield  unto  thee   her 
strength,"  saith  the  Lord,  Gen.  iv.   11,  12.     Yea,  he  threatens   his 
priests  on  account  of  their  sins,  "  that  he   would   send   a  curse   on 
them,  and  curse  their  blessings  s  yea,  he   had  cursed   them  already, 
because  they  did  not  lay    the   commandment  to   heart,"  Mai.  ii.  1, 
2,  3.     We  might  say,  he    will  spare    his    children  :  for  their  trans- 
gression is  pardoned,   their  iniquity   is   forgiven  ;    but  they   return 
still  too  often  to  folly,  and  therefore  the  Lord  will  also  chastise  them 
Often  with  scarceness.     On  this  account  Abraham  was    obliged    to 
go  to  Egypt,  Gen.  xii.    10.     Isaac  to  Gerar,  Gen.  xxvi.   1,  and  Ja- 
cob to  send  with  anxiety  his    sons    to    Egypt,    Gen.  xlii.    and   xliii. 
How  often  were  the  Israelites    visited   with    famine  !  and   the   chil- 
dren of  God  are  still  frequently  forced  to  complain,  that  their  bread 
is  not  blessed  to  them.     What  shall  they  do  ?  it  will    be   said,  they 
must  pray  to  their  Father :  but  their    sins  are   bars   to  them,   and 
<•  they  hide  his  fact  from  them,  so  that  he  doth    not   hear,"  Isaiah 
lix.  2.     Their  iniquities  must  be  taken   aWay.     But  how  ?  shall  it 
be  done  only   by  conversion  ?  no  ;  for  that  doth  not   take   away   the 
guilt   of  sins.       They    must    therefore    first  endeavour    to     seek 
the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  of  their  Father:    "When    the   Lord 
God  had  formed  grasshoppers,  and  they    would  have  wholly   eaten 
up  the  grass  of  the  land,  Amos  said,  O  Lord,  forgive,  I  beseech  thee  j 
by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ?  for  he  is  small,"  Amos  vii.   1,  2. 

The  Lord  Jesus  teacheth  us  this  in  the  petition  before  us.  He 
had  taught  his  children  to  pray  for  their  daily  bread,  in  the  fourth 
petition  :  but  how  could  their  Father  give  them  their  bread,  while 
their  sins  remained  upon  them  ?  The  Saviour  willing  to  provide 
against  this,  teaches  them  to  pray  .for  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins, 
in  the  fifth  petition,  as  a  mean  of  hallowing  their  Father's  name. 
We  have  shown  before,  that  they  were  obliged  to  pray  in  the  first 
petition,  that  the  name  of  God  might  be  hallowed,  and  that  the  fol- 
lowing petitions  serve  as  means  to  obtain  that  end  :  which  means 
are  either  prayers  for  that  which  is  good,  to  wit,  spiritual  good,   in 


486  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED: 

Ihe  second  and  third  petition,  and  bodily,  in  the  fourth  petition  ;  or 
prayers  against  evil,  to  wit.  thai  which  is  p.  st  in  the  fifth  petition, 
and  that  which  is  to  come,  in  the  sixth  petition. 

We  must  now  learn  to  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  our  debts,  which 
is  first  proposed  in  these  words, 

I.  l  Forgive  us  our  debts  ;"  and  then  further  paraphrased  for 
explanation. 

II.  "  As  we  forgive  our  debtors." 

I.  By  our  "  debts  "  we  must  understand  here  our  "  sins,"  com- 
mitted against  God,  as  appears  from  Luke  xi.  4,  for  in  that  passage 
these  debts  are  called  sins.  Thus  also  the  instructor  explains  our 
debts  by  "  all  our  transgressions,  and  that  depravity,  which  always 
cleaves  to  us."  The  reason  is,  (a)  because  they  leave  us  debtors 
to  fulfil  our  duty  :  u  it  is  our  duty  to  do  that  which  is  commanded 
us,"  as  the  Saviour  saith,  Luke  xvii.  10.  Therefore  when  we  sin, 
we  remain  debtors  to  do  all  that,  (b)  Sins  render  us  guilty  of  dis- 
honouring God  by  breaking  and  violating  his  law,  and  therefore  sub- 
ject us  to  debt  in  this  respect.  Sinnors  are  debtors  thus,  as  Jesus 
speaks  of  the  suffering  Galileans,  and  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem,  who 
were  punished,  Luke  xviii.  1 — *j  Sins  are  also  debts  that  deserve 
punishment,  inasmuch  as  they  oblige  us  to  undergo  the  punishment, 
appointed  by  the  justice  of  God,  for  the  recompence  of  sins  :  "  The 
judgment  was  by  one  offence  to  condemnation,"  saith  Paul,  Rom., 
vi.   16. 

These  debts  are  not  one,  or  a  few  but  many-  We  have  original 
and  actual  debts,  debts  of  thought,  word  and  deed,  against  the  first 
and  second  table  of  the  law.  Yea,  "  who  can  understand '  our  er- 
rours  ?"  Psalm  xix.  12.  Whoever  will  examine  himself  in  the 
Tight  of  God  by  his  law,  will  find  himself  covered  w'th  the  debts  of 
his  sins,  and  must  cry  out  with  truth,  •'  Our  iniquities  are  increased 
over  our  head,  and  our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens," 
Ezra  ix.  1 6. 

We  acknowledge  this  not  only  in  general,  but  we  say  with  re- 
spect to  ourselves  "our"  debts.  By  which  (a)  each  individual  ac- 
knowledges with  regard  to  himself,  that  he  himself  and  not  another 
hath  acted  abominably,  and  sinned  against  the  Lord.  The  sinner, 
while  he  is  not  yet  affected  with  a  sense  of  his  sins,  will  like  Adam, 
lay  the  blame  of  his  sins  upon  another,  and  "  cover  his  transgres- 
sions, by  hiding  his  iniquities  in  his  bosom."  as  Job  speaks,  Job 
xxxi.  33.  But  the  children  of  God  will  see,  and  confess  With  shame, 
that  they  themselves  are  guilty  :  "  I  acknowh  dge  my  tr  nsgressions, 
and  my,"  and  not  Batheheba's,   "  tins,  are   ever  before   me,"   said 


LI   LORD'S  DAY.  Q    126.  485 

the  man  after  God's  heart,"  Psalm  li.  3.  And  hear  him  say  on  an- 
other occasion,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  17,  "  Lo,  I  have  sinned,  and  I  have 
done  wickedly  ;  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done?  Let  thine 
hand,  I  pray  thee,  be  against  me,  and  against  my  father's  house." 
(b)  When  we  say  our  debts,  we  then  also  acknowledge,  that  we  have 
rendered  ourselves  guilty  of  the  sins  of  others ;  by  which  we  do 
therefore  confess,  that  we  have  betn  authors,  abettors  and  imitators 
of  the  sins  of  others,  and  that  we  are  therefore  the  more 
abominable,  (c)  We  also  declare  that  we  ourselves  are  bound  to 
satisfy  the  justice  of  God  by  suffering  the  righteous  punishment  of 
sin,  and  we  do  thus  condemn  ourselves  with  the  church,  who  pro- 
nounceda  wo  upon  herself,  Lam.  v.  1G.  "The  crown  is  fallen 
from  our  head  ;  wo  unto  us  that  we  have  sinned  "  (d)  And  since 
the  children  of  God  appear  before  him  every  day  with  this  petition, 
therefore  they  confess,  as  the  instructor  saiih,  their  depravity  which 
always  cleaves  lo 'them,  and  declare  that  their  hearts  are  evil  and 
abominable  through  their  inbred  cor.uption,  as  David,  when  he  con- 
fesserh  his  sins,  mentions  his  inherent  corruption,  saying,  Psalm  li. 
5,  '•  Behold  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity  ;  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  con- 
ceive me." 

The  children  of  God,  contemplating  their  debts  in  this  manner, 
are  greatly  distressed  on  account  of  them.  But  whither  shall  they 
go?  shall  they  hide  themselves  with  Adam,  cry  out  with  Cain,  My 
transgression  is  too  great  to  be  forgiven  ;*  or  with  Judas,  flee  to 
the  halter  ?  no,  they  are  too  desirous  to  be  saved,  and  to  obtain  for- 
giveness. Shall  they  then  hurry  to  a  priest,  confess  their  sins  to 
him,  and  seek  forgiveness  of  him  ?  No,  they  know  that  vain  is  the 
help  of  man :  this  would  avail  them  as  little,  as  it  did  Judas,  that  he 
went  to  the  chief  priests.  They  know,  as  well  as  the  Pharisees, 
that  "none  can  forgive  £>ins,  but  God  alone,"  Mark  ii.  7.  Like 
David  they  know  that  "  they  have  sinned  against  God  only,"  Psalm 
li.  4.  And  therefore  they  seek  forgiveness  of  him  only,  who  is  their 
Father. 

But  do  they  wish  that  the  Father  should  forgive  their  debts,  and 
not  those  of  others  ?  no  :  but  they  desire  that  he  would  forgive  the 
debts  of  others  also,  with  whom  they  unite  themselves,  and  whom 
they  bring  v/ith  themselves  to  the  Father,  that  he  may  show  kind- 
ness to  them  also.  They  know  by  experience  how  bitter  their  sins 
are  to  them  ;  they  regard  from  brotherly  affection  the  distress  o£ 
others  as  their  own,  and  therefore  they  beseech  their  Father  that  he 

*  This  is  agreeable  to  t!ie  Dutch  translator;  ■ 
Vol.  ix.  3  M 


490  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

would  forgive  their  debts  also,  as  Moses  prayed  thus  for  Israel; 
Exod.  xxxii.  32.  Numb.  xiv.    19, 

The  Greek  word  a/i/ies,  "forgive,"  which  we  fii.d  here,  and  from. 
Which  -the  word  afrhesis,  "forgiveness,"  is  derived,  is  supposed  by 
some*  to  denote  the  complete  forgiveness  of  sins  under  the  New 
Testament,  since  the  death  of  Christ,  in  opposition  to  fiaresis,  which 
word  they  think,  intimates  a  Lss,  an  imperfect  forgiveness,  and  a 
passing  of  sins  by,  wih  an  up  >rai  ling  of  the  sinner  on  account 
of  them.  But  this  opinion  is  without  any  foundation  ;  inasmuch  a* 
believers  prayed  even  before  the  death  of.  Christ  for  forgiveness,  with 
the  word  afiheaia,  and  therefore  also  obtained  it;  for  the  Saviour  for- 
gave believers  thus  even  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  as  we  see,  Matt.  ix. 
2.      Luke  vii     47,  48. 

We  observe  briefly  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  for  which 
believers  pray  here,  that  it  consists  in  "  a  not  imputing  of  sins  to 
them  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood,"  as  the  instructor  speaks, 
Whereby  God  disc  hat  geth  and  acquits  his  believing  debtors  of  their 
guilt,  and  gives  them  a  tight  to  life  ;  and  so  forgiveness  of  sins  is 
the  same  with  justification :  "  Even  as  David  describtth  the  bles- 
sedness of  the  man  to  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  without 
works,  spying,  "  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  and 
whose  sins  are  covered  :  blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  doth 
not  impute  sin,"  Rom  iv.  6 — 8,  fiom  Psalm  xxxii.  1,  2.  But  as 
we  have  treated  largely  enough  on  justification,  upon  the  twenty- 
third  and  twenty  fourth  Lord's  days,  we  deem  it  unnecessary  to  re- 
peat here  what  we  have  said  there. 

But  since  justification  takes  place  only  once,  and  is  perfect,  as  we 
have  taught  on  the  twenty-third  Lord's  day,  therefore  it  appears 
strange,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  requires  that  believers,  who  have  God 
for  their  Father,  and  are  already  justified,  should  notwithstanding 
pray  daily  for  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins.  The  Antinomians  also 
say  that  believers  of  the  New  Testament  ought  not  to  pray  that  their 
sins  may  be  forgiven,  because  Christ  hath  now  satisfied,  and  that 
their  sins  being  once  forgiven,  they  have  no  more  sins,  and  there- 
fore they  need  not  mourn  for  their  sins  any  longer,  nor  pray  that 
they  may  be  forgiven.  With  respect  to  Christ's  command,  that 
they  must  still  pray,  "  Father,  forgixe  us  our  debts,"  they  think 
that  they  can  evade  that,  by  saying  that  this  petition  speaks  only  of 

•By  these  the  author  intends  the  Cocceians,  who  represent  the  condition  of 
the  bell,  vers  under  die  Old  Testament  as  more  servile,  gloomy  and  discon- 
solate, than  Christians  :n  general  have  considered  it- 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.   126.  491 

♦he  application,  that  is,  of  the  assurance,  that  their  sins  are  forgiven  : 
but  according  to  them,  he  is  no  believer,  who  hath  no  assurance, 
and  ne  would  therefore  pray  absurdly  for  that  which  he  hath 
already. 

The  difficulty  therefore  still  remains,  how  the  daily  praying  of 
believers  can  consist  with  the  perfect  forgiveness  of  sins.  To  say 
that  they  deprecate  only  the  temporal  punishment  of  sins,  when  they 
entreat  that  their  sins  may  be  forgiven  them,  cannot  wholly  remove 
the  difficulty.  We  rather  say  that  believers  pray  in  the  full  sense  of 
the  words,  according  to  the  rxplanation  of  the  instructor,  u  that  God 
«ould  for  the  sake  of  Christ's  blood,  not  impute  to  them  their  trans- 
gressions, and  the  depravity  which  always  cleaves  to  them."  For 
when  God  justifieth  tliem  perfectly  ai  the  fust,  he  doth  then  indeed 
forgive  their  past  and  present  sins,  but  not  their  future  sins,  except 
so  far,  that  he  engages  that  he  will  not  punish  them  in  future,  but 
mil  forgive  them  upon  their  hurmliation,  and  continued  exercise  of 
faith,  as  we  have  shown  on  the  twenty -third  Lord's  day.  For  sins 
cannot  properly  be  forgiven,  before  they  are  committed  :  we  find 
also  that  God  forgives  the  sins  of  his  children  every  day.  See  this 
not  only  in  this  petition,  but  also  Numb.  xiv.  19,  20.  Rev.  xxii.  11. 
And  he  forgives  them  particularly  upon  their  daily  humiliation  as 
David  shows  by  his  example,  Psalm  xxxii.  3 — -5  In  order  to  un- 
derstand this  matter  rightly,  we  must  observe,  (a)  that  justifica- 
tion in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  is  either  that  of  the  ungodly, 
whereby  God  justifieth  the  elect  sinner  upon  his  first  act  of  faith,  of 
which  Paul  saith,  Rom.  iv.  5,  "  To  him  that  worketh  not,  but  be- 
lieveth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for 
righteousness."  And  in  this  manner  was  the  publican  justified, 
Luke  xviii.  13,  14.  Or  justification  is  that  of  the  righteous,  by 
which  he  receives  continually  a  new  forgiveness  of  his  daily  sins 
upon  his  renewed  exercise  of  faith.  David  often  sought  this  justi- 
fication in  the  xxxii.  li.  exxx.  and  cxliii.  Psalms,  (b)  Faith  is  also 
to  justification,  winch  faith  an  elect  sinner  exerciseth  first  of  all,  when 
he  begins  to  seek  and  to  embrace  Christ,  that  he  may  be  justified 
by  God  through  him ;  or  faith  is  from  justification,  by  which  the  be- 
liever, who  is  justified,  and  who  hath  thus  a  right  to  life,  to  all  the 
benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  to  all  the  merits  of  Christ, 
exercises  faith  continually  upon  God  in  Christ,  that  he  may  actually 
obtain  all  that  to  which  he  hath  a  right,  and  thus  also  the  continual 
forgiveness  of  his  sins.  See  with  respect  to  this  what  hath  been 
said  on  the  seventh  Lord's  day.  (c)  But  in  order  to  remove  the  dif- 
ficulty entirely,  we  observe  that  God  justifieth  the  ungodly  as  a 


493  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

judge  upon  a  faith,  which  is  to  justification  :  but  he  justifies  the 
righteous  as  a  father,  upon  a  faith,  which  is  from  justification,  as 
David  remarks,  saying,  Psalm  ciii.  12,  13,  "  As  far  as  the  east  is 
from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  us. 
Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that 
fear  him."  See  this  also,  Isaiah  lxiv  8,  9.  And  believers  also  say- 
here  in  this  sense,  and  therefore  properly.  "  Father,  foigive  us  our 
debts."  By  which  they  do  therefore  pray  that  God  would  not  pun- 
ish them,  on  account  of  their  daily  wickedness,  that  he  would  grant 
them  to  enjoy  anew  the  benefits  cf  the  covenant  of  grace,  that  he 
would  assure  their  souls  of  his  favour,  and  cause  his  face,  which  is 
turned  away  from  them,  to  shine  on  them  again.  See  how  David 
prays  for  all  this,  Psalm  li.  Which  doth  not  therefore  by  any  means 
mditate  against  the  perfection  of  their  first  justification. 

Jesus  requires  that  they  should  pray,  that  their  debts  may  be  for- 
given,  (a)  because  he  knows  how  intolerable  their  debts  ore  to  them. 
Hear  how  David  complains,  Psalm  xxxviii.  3,  4,  "  There  is  no 
rest  in  my  bones,  because  of  my  sin.  For  mine  iniquities  are  gone 
over  my  head  :  as  a  heavy  burthen  they  are  become  too  heavy  for 
me."  (d)  Nothing  is  dearer  and  sweeter  to  them  than  the  forgive- 
ness of  their  sins.  "David  pronounces  the  man  blessed,  Whose 
transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered,"  Psalm  xxxii.  1,2. 
(c)  **  Their  Father  only  can  forgive  sins."  Even  the  Pharisees 
knew  this,  Mark  ii.  7  :  Yea,  he  will  forgive  them  ;  for  with  him 
there  is  forgiveness.  (d)  They  must  pray  for  bread  :  but  the 
Father  cannot  give  them  bread  with  a  blessing,  as  long  as  their  sins 
are  not  forgiven.  This  hath  been  shown  before,  (e)  They  pray 
that  they  may  do  the  will  of  God  :  but  in  order  to  this,  they  must 
bave  forgiveness:  for  we  cannot  serve  God,  with  a  guilty  conscience, 
"we  must  do  it  without  fear,"  Luke  i.  74.  And  he  grants  forgive- 
ness for  this  end  :  "  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayest 
be  feared,"  saith  David,  Psalm  exxx.  4.  (f)  Forgiveness  promotes 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  they  must  pray  that  his  kingdom  may 
come  ;  for  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  also  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy  through  the  Holy  Ghos; ."  Rom.  xiv.  17.  (g)  The  Father's 
name  is  also  hallowed  by  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  all  the  petitions 
must  serve  this  end.  See  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.  Isaiah  v.  16. 
Micha  vii.    18. 

II.  The  Lord  Jesus  requires  that  they  should  paraphase  this  peti- 
tion in  order  to  explain  it,  with  the  words,  "  as  we  forgive  our 
debtors."  Those  x ho  are  indebted  to  us  in  money,  are  not  our 
debtors  in  the  sense  of  the  text :    for   to  forgive   debts  of  money 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  126.  49 <. 

without  necessity  would  be  prodigality  ;  but  by  our  debtors  are 
meant  here  those  who  injure  us  by  words  or  actions  in  our  bodv; 
honour  or  goods.  One  man  is,  according  to  the  second  table  of  the 
law,  obliged  to  love,  honour,  help,  and  be  faithful  to  another.  When 
therefore  we  do  not  show  these  thir.gs  to  our  neighbour,  but  imure 
him,  then  we  become  debtors  to  him,  to  retrieve  his  health,  honouv 
and  goods,  and  we  deserve  his  vengeance,  on  account  of  the  injuries, 
which  we  do  to  him. 

To  forgive  such  a  debtor  is  not  to  revenge  the  wrong  that  he  hath 
done  to  us,  and  to  be  kind  to  him,  as  our  brother,  as  far  as  we  are 
able,  and  to  put  away  from  us  all  bitlerness,  wrath,  anger,  clamour 
and  evilspeaking,  with  all  malice  ;  and  to  be  kind,  and  tenderheart- 
ed to.  him,  and  thus  to  forgive  him,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake 
hath  forgiven  his  children,"  Eph.  iv.  31,  32.  It  is  true,  a  Chris- 
tian may  seek  compensation  for  the  damage  that  he  hath  sustained, 
with  regard  to  his  health,  honour  and  property  :  but  only  when  his 
person,  honour  and  prosperity  are  in  danger.  It  is  also  unlawful 
for  him  to  seek  his  right  with  malicious  bitterness,  and  a  desire  of 
revenue,  that  he  may  afflict  his  debtor:  he  may  do  it  only  to  main- 
tain the  justice  of  his  cause.  And  if  we  can  deliver  ourselves  with- 
out exposing  our  neighbour  to  shame,  loss  or  pain,  we  ought  to  do 
it,  and  be  goodwiiled  and  kind  to  our  neighbour,  that  we  may  con- 
vince  him  of  his  evil  doings  with  meekness,  and  "  heap  coals  of  fire 
on  his  head,"  according  to  the  injunction  of  the  Saviour  and  his 
apostle,  Matt.  v.  44— 18.     Rom.  xii.   18 — 21. 

The  Saviour  teacheth  us  to  do  and  say  this,  in  order  to  explain 
our  petition,  that  we  may  importune  the  Father  to  forgive  our  debts, 
when  he  connects  our  petition  with  our  doing  by  the  words,  "  as  we." 
We  do  not  assert  with  these  words,  that  the  Father  forgives  in  the 
selfsame  manner  in  which  we  forgive  ;  for  God  forgives  as  a  judge 
and  father,  but  we  as  private  persons,  who  are  obliged  to  one  another 
as  neighbours  :  God  forgives  on  account  of  the  satisfaction  of  his 
justice  by  his  Son,  but  we  without  a  satisfaction  :  when  God  forgives, 
he  delivers  us  from  eternal  punishment,  but  we  do  not  deliver  our 
neighbour  from  the  judgment  of  God  :  although  we  forgive  our 
\ieighbour,  God  still  retains  his  right  with  respect  to  them  who  in- 
jure us.  Neither  do  we  use  these  words,  "  as  we  forgive  our  debt- 
ors," to  denote  the  meritorious  cause,  for  which  we  wish  that  God 
would  forgive  our  debts  ;  for  it  doth  not  become  a  person,  who  prays 
for  the  forgiveness  of  his  debts,  to  speak  of  his  merits  :  he  declares 
that  he  is  wholly  guilty,  that  he  deserves  hell  and  damnation.  But 
we  must  consider  this  appendix,  as  "  the  evidence  of  God's  grace, 


494  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

which  believers  feel  in  themselves,  that  it  is  their  firm  resolution 
from  the  heart  to  forgive  their  neighbour."  Men  are  by  nature 
prone  to  revenge,  "  hateful  and  hating  one  another,"  Titus  iii.  3. 
But  the  Lord  changes  the  hearts  of  his  elect,  according  to  his  lav.', 
u  which  he  writes  in  their  hearts,"  Jer.  xxxi.  33,  and  thus  they  be- 
come inclined  to  love  their  neighbour  as  themselves,  and  to  forgive 
him  his  injurious  deeds.  God  enables  them  to  see  and  feel  this  in 
themselves  by  his  Spirit,  who  causes  them  to  "  know  the  things 
that  are  freely  given  them  of  God,"  as  Paul  speaks,  1  Cor.  ii.  12, 
which  is  also  an  evidence  of  God's  grace  to  them  ;  for  "  we  know 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  the  breth- 
ren," 1  John  iii.  14.  And  so  this  evidence  serves,  (1)  for  a  declara- 
tion, that  they  have  a  proper  disposition  for  prayer,  and  particularly 
for  praying  that  their  debts  may  be  forgiven,  to  which  God  hath 
respect,  and  upon  which  he  promiseth  forgiveness.  The  Lord 
Christ  saith  also,  Mark  xi  25.  "When  ye  stand  praying,  forgive, 
if  ye  have  aught  against  any  ;  that  your  Father  also  which  is  in 
heaven  may  forgive  you  your  tresspasses."  (2)  "  The  children  of 
God  show  also  in  some  measure  by  the  words,  after  what  maimer 
they  desire  that  God  would  forgive  their  deb'.s,  to  wit,  that  he  would 
forgive  them  all,  heartily,  and  for  ever,  even  as  they  forgive  their 
debtors.  So  David  said  to  caul,  to  whom  he  had  rendered  good  for 
evil,  1  Sam.  xxvi.  24.  "  As  thy  life  was  much  set  by  this  day  in 
mine  eyes,  so  let  my  life  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  let  him  deliver  me  out  of  all  tribulation."  (3)  This  appendix 
serves  also  for  a  token  and  evidence  to  them,  that  God  will  hear 
them,  and  forgive  their  debts.  So  Jesus  himself  explains  it,  when 
he  saith,  vs.  14.  "  If  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses-  your  heavenly 
Father  will  also  forgive  you."  (4)  It  serves  finally  as  an  argument, 
to  urge  the  Father  strongly,  that  he  would  forgive  us  our  debts  ;  it 
is  as  though  we  said,  are  we,  who  are  evil,  through  thy  grace  so 
well  inclined  to  our  neighbour,  that  we  forgive  him  his  faults,  and 
wilt  not  thou  then,  who  art  goodness  itself,  much  more  forgive 
us  our  debts  ?  Therefore  Luke  explains  the  word  "  as  "  by  "  for," 
when  he  writes,  "  Forgive  us  our  sins  ;  for  we  also  forgive  every 
one  that  is  indebted  to  us,"  Luke  xi.  4. 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  126.  \95 


APPLICATION. 

We  might  from  this  petition  refute  the  patrons  of  the  perfection 
of  the  saints  ;  but  I  will  not  busy  myself  with  them,  but  with  you, 
my  worthy  hearers,  that  I  may  improve  this  petition  to  your  advan- 
tage. Ye  see  how  the  children  of  God  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of 
thtir  debts  ;  do  ye  pray  so  also  ?  Surely  ye  do  not,  (a)  who  lake 
still  so  great  a  delight  in  the  practice  of  sinning  :  sin  is,  as  it  were, 
your  life,  your  element ;  ye  live  in  it,  as  a  fish  in  the  water  :  "  ye 
have  pleasure  in  unrighteousness,"  2  Thess.  ii.  12.  "  Ye  rejoice  to 
do  evil,  and  delight  in  the  frowardness  of  the  wicked,"  Prov.  ii.  14. 
Ye  delight  in  nothing  but  sin  ;  and  therefore  ye  regard  not  what 
your  conscience  saith,  what  the  word  of  God,  what  his  judgments 
and  blessings  say  to  you,  but  will  as  soon  part  with  your  lives  as 
with  your  sins :  for  not  to  sin  is  like  death  to  you  :  "  Wickedness  is 
sweet  in  your  mouths,  ye  hide  it  under  your  tongues  ;  ye  spare  it 
and  forsake  it  not ;  but  keep  it  still  within  your  mouths,"  Job  xx. 
12,  13  What  think  ye,  can  a  person  who  cleaves  so  with  his 
lusts  to  sins,  pray  that  God  would  forgive  him  his  sins  ?  and  when 
he  even  repeats  this  petition,  after  his  manner,  doth  he  then  mean 
what  he  saith :  surely  no.  (b)  Neither  do  ye  pray  that  your  debts 
may  be  forgiven,  who  are  so  little  concerned  about  your  sins.  Ye 
know  not  how  abominable  they  are,  nor  that  they  render  you  guilty 
before  God,  that  his  wrath  lieth  upon  you,  that  he  will  sureiy  set 
them  in  order  before  your  eyes,  and  punish  you  on  account  of  th  -m. 
Ye  know  indeed  that  ye  are  great  sinners,  but  this  is  only  from 
hearsay,  ye  see  no  sins  in  yourselves,  and  would  not  be  able  to  reckon 
up  even  six  sins.  Do  others  point  them  out  to  you,  ye  excuse  tliem, 
and  plead  for  them.  David  saith  of  you,  and  others  of  your  charac- 
ter, Psalm  xxxvi.  2.  "  He  fiattereth  himself  in  his  own  eyes,  when 
his  iniquity  is  found,  which  is  hateful.'  How  then  can  ye  pray  to 
be  forgiven  ?  (c)  Neither  can  ye,  who  have  some  knowledge  of 
your  sins,  but  think  that  ye  have  obtained  forgiveness  of  them,  or 
will  obtain  it  without  much  difficulty.  Ye  doubt  not  but  that  God 
hath  forgiven  your  sins  already.  And  why  do  ye  think  so  ?  Because 
Christ  hath  satisfied  for  sins?  hath  he  then  satisfied  for  all  men,  and 
for  you  in  particular  ?  what  proof  have  ye  of  this  ?  do  ye  think  so, 
because  ye  live  among  Christians,  and  have  received  the  sacraments 
3f  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper?  what  do  ye  think  then  of  Judas, 


t96  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

and  of  Simon  the  sorcerer,  and  of  "  those  who  will  say  at  the  last  day, 
We  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  tliy  presence,"  according  to  Luke  xiii. 
26  ?  or  do  ye  imagine  that  your  sins  are  forgiven,  because  they 
were  committed  a  long  time  since,  and  are  forgotten,  and  i-od  doth 
not  punish  you  for  them  ?  Thus  the  people  also  thought,  when 
they  said,  Jcr.  it.  35.  "  burely  I  am  innocent,  for  his  anger  is- turned 
from  me,  Behold,"  said  the  Lord,  "  I  will  plead  with  thee,  because 
thou  sayest,  I  have  not  sinned."  Hear  what  the  Lord  saith.  Psalm 
?.  21,  22.  "  These  things  hast  thou  done,  and  1  kept  silence  :  thou 
Ihoughtest  that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thyself:  but  I  will 
reprove  thee,  and  set  them  in  order  before  thine  eyes.  Now  con- 
sider this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  1  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be 
none  to  deliver."  Or  is  it  your  opinion,  that  ye  will  obtain  forgive- 
ness by  merely  uttering  this  petition,  or  by  a  superficial  sorrow,  or 
by  a  civil  amendment !  Mas,  how  shamefully  do  ye  deceive  your- 
selves, and  show  that  ye  have  never  yet  called  upon  God  aright  to 
forgive  your  sins  !  (d)  Much  less  have  ye  prayed  for  the  forgive- 
ness of  your  sins,  who  retain  so  much  displeasure,  and  revenge 
against  your  neighbour,  on  account  of  the  smallest  injury  which  he 
hath  done  you,  that  if  ye  might  but  have  your  will,  and  if  it  were  in 
your  power,  ye  would  even     '  slay  a  man  for   your   wounding,   and 

*  young  man  'or  your  hurt,"*  like  that  wicked  Lamech,  Gen.  iv.' 
23.  No,  say  ye,  I  forgive  indeed,  but  I  do  not  forget.  When  ye 
<hen  say,  "  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors,"  do  ye 
not  pray  that  God  would  take  vengeance  of  you  or  your  evil  deeds, 
and  that  he  would  not  forgive  them,  at  least,  that  he  would  not  forget. 

•  hem  ? 

Is  this  so,  then  all  your  debts,  which  render  you  guilty,  lie  still 
upon  you,  and  the  wrath  of  God  lieth  on  you  ;  for  your  debts  are 
not  yet  forgiven,  since  ye  have  not  done  aught  yet  to  obtain  forgive- 
ness. And  how  shall  ye  then  obtain  forgiveness?  Ye  cannot  as 
long  as  ye  indulge  your  careless  imaginations.  Hear  what  the  Lord 
himself  saith,  Deut.  xxix.  19,  29.     "  If   he  hear   the   words  of  this 

,  and  bless  himself  in  his  heart,  saying,  I  shall  have  peace, 
though  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  my  heart,  to  add  drunkenness 
to  thirst,  the  Lord  will  not  spare  him,  but  then  the  anger  of  the 
Lord  and  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  man,  and  all  the 
<Airses  that  are  written  in  this  book  shall  lie  upon  him,  and  the  Lord 
"hall  blot  out  his  name  from  under  heaven."  Ye  will  be  forced  to 
all  your  debts    yourselves  by  bearing  the  wrath  of  the    Lord  for 

•  and  ye    "shall   be  delivered  for    this  end  to  the  tormentors," 

*    A.ccordinr  to  the  Dutch  translation- 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  126,  49f 

Mat.  xviii.  34.  How  grievous  and  dreadful  will  this  be  to  you  !  Al- 
though ye  do  not  now  feel  the  wrath  of  God,  under  which  ye  lie, 
but  harden  yourselves  against  it,  "  God  will  render  to  every  man  ac- 
cording to  his  deeds  :  to  them  that  are  contentious,  and  obey  not  the 
truth,  but  obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and  wrath  shall  be  ren- 
dered :  tribulation  and  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doth 
evil,"  Rom.b.  8,  9.  "  Deceive  not  yourselves  with  vain  imagina- 
tions, as  though  your  end  will  not  be  so  sad  i  surely  God  will  wound 
the  head  of  his  enemies  ;  and  the  hairy  scalp  of  such  an  one,  as 
goeth  on  still  in  his  trespasses,"  Psalm  Ixviii.  21.  '•  If  the  right- 
eous scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  ap- 
pear?"  1  Peter  iv.   18. 

Are  ye  desirous  of  escaping  eternal  destruction,  and  the  wrath  to 
come,  (a)  Endeavour  then  to  know  your  sins,  and  to  see  how  abomi- 
nable your  heart  and   actions  have  been  from   your  birth  even  until 
this  day,  and  that  ye  are    "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond 
of  iniquity,"   Acts  viii.  23.     The  Lord  requires  this,  in  order  to  your 
recovery  :   He  saith,  "  only  acknowledge  thine    iniquity."     (b)  Nev- 
ertheless behold  your  sins,  as  they  are  in  their  proper  nature,  as  vio- 
lating the  majesty  of  God,  provoking  the  eyes  of  his  glory,  rejecting 
his  favour,  and  rendering  you   exceedingly  guilty  :  yea,  apply  your 
eyes  and  ears  to  the  door  of  hell,  and  see  and  hear  how  the  damned 
weep  with  their  eyes,  and  gnash  with  their  teeth,  how  they  wring 
their  hands,  and  bewail   themselves   for   ever,    that  your   hardened 
hearts  may  at  length  become  contrite,     (cj  Lay  aside  your  imagina- 
tion, that  it  is  so  easy   to  obtain  the  forgiveness  of  your  sins  ;    for 
this  imagination  retains  you   in  your  careless  humor.     What  griev- 
ous sufferings   did  sin  procure  Christ !     How   was   Job   forced    to 
complain  of  it!  Job  xiii.  24~*26.     How  was  David  bowed  down  un- 
der it !  Psalm  xxxviii.     How  did  Heman  lament  on   account  of  it  ! 
Psalm  lxxxviii.  and   how  "  bitterly   did    Peter  weep  "  for  his   sin  ! 
Matt.  xxvi.  75,  and  shall  ye  obtain  forgiveness  by  a  faint  sigh,  by 
ineffectual  words,  and  by  only  behaving  yourselves  somewhat  more 
decently  ?     (d)  "  Confess  your  sins  "  circumstantially  to  the  Lord, 
"  and  forsake  them  ;"  for  then,  as  Solomon  saith,  "  shall  ye  obtain 
mercy,"  Prov.  xxviii.  15.     Think  not  that  ye  will  obtain  forgive- 
ness, as  long  as  ye  retain  one  sin  willingly  and  wittingly  :    "  Wash 
ye,  make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes,  cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do   well.     Come   now,   and   let 
us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord  :  though   your  sins  be    as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as   snow :  though  they  be    red    like    crimson, 
Vol.  ii.  3  N 


4-9S  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

they  shall  be  as  wool,"  Isaiah  i.  16 — 18.  (e)  Flee  with  your  sins 
to  the  Mediator,  that  ye  may  seek  and  find  forgiveness  of  your  debts 
in  his  satisfaction  :  for  "  God  ha  h  set  him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins, "  Rom    iii    25. 

tiut,  believers,  ye  who  have  already  obtained  forgiveness  of  your 
sins  by  your  first  entrance  into  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  by  em- 
bracing the  Son  of  God,  it  behooves  you  nevertheless  to  pray  daily 
for  forgiveness.  How  often  do  ye  now  yet  transgress  against  your 
Father  !  It  is  not  enough  always  to  recover  from  your  sins,  and  to 
forsake  them,  and  in  the  mean  while  to  suffer  your  debts  to  remain 
uncancelled,  and  not  to  seek  continually  a  new  reconciliation  :  your 
High  Priest  hath  put  this  prayer  in  your  mouths,  that  ye  may  seek 
partlon  of  your  Father  every  day*  Endeavour  therefore  to  obtain 
grace  and  pardon  day  by  day.     And  for  this  end, 

1.  Lay  your  dailv  offences  to  heart,  that  ye  may  be  grieved  for 
them,  and  may,  with  believing  David,  ''be  sorry  for  your  sins," 
Psal'.u  xxxviii.  18  The  clnidien  of  God  can  never  be  in  a  more 
wretched  state,  than  when  they  are  not  sensible  of  their  sins.  The 
clinch,  seeing  this,  complained,  il saiah  lxiii.  17,  "O  Lord,  why 
hast  rhou  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear?'  Your  sins  are  more 
aggravated  now  than  before  your  conversion  ;  for  they  are  commit- 
ted against  your  loving  Father,  against  so  m?ny  and  such  great  fa- 
vours, against  greater  light  and  conviction,  and  against  your  solemn 
obligations.  All  this  ought  suiely  to  affV-ct  your  souls,  and  to  eiievc 
you  ;  we  will  never  seek  forgiveness  in  earnest,  until  our  souls  are 
heavy  laden  with  our  sins ;  therefore  reflect. often  upon  your  sinful 
behaviour,  that  ye  may  be  grieved,  and  ashamed,  and  may  seek  for- 
giveness heartily. 

2.  Confess  also  your  sins  to  the  Lord  in  their  aggravating  circum- 
stances, with  detestation  of  them,  that  ye  may  humble  and  abase 
yourselves  before  your  Falhtr,  like  Job,  chap.  xhi.  5,  6,  and  Ezra, 
ix.  3 — 15.  We  are  sometimes  backward  to  this  we  dare  not  be- 
hold our  sins  attentively,  it  weld  oppress  and  confound  us  too  much, 
and  we  cannot  endure  this.  But  the  soul  must  know,  that  while 
3he  conducts  thus,  she  will  not  obtain  forgiveness,  God- will  continue 
to  hide  his  countenance  from  her,  and  her  gr»ef  will  become  still 
heavier:  rt  When  I  kept  silence,"  saith  David,  Psalm  xxxii.  3 — 5, 
"  my  bones  waxed  old,  through  my  roaring  all  the  day  long.  For 
day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  upon  me  ;  my  moisture  is  turn- 
ed into  the  drought  of  summer.     I  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  thee, 


LI.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  tfl  4S9 

And  mine  iniquity  have  I  nor  hid  :  I  said,  I  will  confess  my  trans- 
gressions unto  the  Lord  ;  and  thou  forgafeeS  th  iniquity  of  my 
sin."  We  can  expect  forgivenessi  only  upon  our  confessing  ofowr 
sins  :  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  ami  just  to  forgive  us 
our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  uariglvtewusffessr*"  I  J©hn  i   S. 

3.  Pray  also  to  your  rather  that  he  would  iorgive  your  sins.  The 
Saviour  commands  you  this  in  the  text.  Urge  him  by  rep'.esuuing 
to  him  his  iacherly  heart,  "  that  he  is  good  and  ready  to  forgiv< ," 
Psalm  lxxxvi.  5.  Plead  upon  the  perfect  satisfaction  of  his  Son, 
that  he  hath  satisfied  for  your  sins,  that  the  Father  gave  i.im  a  p<  r- 
fect  acquittal  by  his  resurrection  from  the  <:ead:  that  he  is  become 
righteousness  to  you,  and  is  exalted  by  the  right  hand  ot  Goch  to 
give  you  remission  of  sins,  and  that  he  intercedes  for  you.  L  v  h<  1(3 
of  him  repeatedly  for  reconciliation,  and  lay  aii  your  sins  npi 
Lamb  of  God,  winch  taketh  away  the  sins  of  t'te  world       Join 

and  persevere,  until  ye    find   peace,   assurance    and   aa   im 
that  your  sins  are  forgiven.    David  was  not  safisfin  d.  when 
said  to  him,   The  Lord;  hath   put   away   thy   sins,"    2  Sam.. 
but  he  cried  still  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  li.  8,  •'  Makt  me    to 
and  gladness  ;  that  the  bones  which  thou    hast  broken  may  r«j 

4.  Preserve  cautiously  and  c'.rcumspt.ctly  your  reconciled  bra 
That  your  indiscretions  may  not  disturb  you  again  :  u  W  hen  the 
Lord  speaks  peace  ,o  his  people  and  to  his  saints,  they  must  not 
turn  again  to  folly,"  Psalm  Ixxxv.  8.  Ye  know  that  the  Lord  is 
jealous,  and  that  he  soon  hides  his  countenance  from  you  on  ac- 
count of  your  sins,  and  what  pains  ye  must  take,  before  he  Will  cause 
his  face  to  shine  on  you  again.  Hurry  not  nevertheless  from  him 
with  your  sins,  when  ye  have  misbehaved,  through  discouragement, 
with  the  church,  Isaiah  lxiv  6,  7,  but  go  to  him  for  renewed  for- 
giveness :  "My  little  cdildren,"  saith  John,  "  these  things  write  I 
unto  you,  that  ye  sin  not.  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advo- 
cate with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ,  the  righteous  ;  and  he  is  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins,"   1  John  ii.   1,  2. 

5.  Deal  now  with  your  neighbour  as  your  Father  deals  with  you. 
How  effectually  doth  he  forgive  your  sins,  and  continually  !  Do  ye 
so  also  :  "  Put  on  therefore,  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved, 
bowels  of  mercies,  kindness,  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  long- 
suffering,  forbearing  one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against 
against  any  ;  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  do  ye  also,"  (  61.  hi.  12, 
13.  And  be  assured  that  the  Lord  hath  forgiven  your  iniquity,  and 
covered  all  your  sins.     Yea,  he  hath   taken  away   all  his  wrath,  and 


500  THE  FIFTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

hath  turned  himself  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger,"  Psalm  Ixxxv. 
2,  3.  "  He  hath  sworn,  that  he  will  not  be  wroth  with  you,  nor  re- 
buke you,"  Isaiah  hv.  9.  And  he  will  therefore  one  clay  place  you 
before  his  throne,  where  there  will  be  ho  more  sin,  nor  curses  against 
you.  Rev.  xxii.  3,  and  where,  according  to  Isaiah  xxxiii  24, 
"  none  of  the  inhabitants  shall  say,  I  am  sick :"  for  "  the  people 
that  dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity."    Amen, 


(  *>1 ) 


THE 


SIXTH  PETITION 


EXPLAINED 


WITH  THE  CONCLUSION. 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY. 


Matt.  vl.  13.  And  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  uo 
from  evil ;  for  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory, 
for  ever,     Amen. 

Q.   1 27.    Which  is  the  sixth  Petition  ? 

A.  "  And  lead  us  not  inu>  temptation,  bat  deliver  us  from  evil ;" 
chat  is,  since  we  are  so  weak  in  ourselves,  that  we  cannot  stand  a 
moment ;  and  besides  this,  since  our  mortal  enemies,  the  devil,  the 
world,  and  our  own  flesh  cease  not  to  assault  us  ;  do  thou  therefore 
preserve  and  strengthen  us  by  the  power  of  thy  holy  Spirit,  that 
we  may  not  be  overcome  in  this  spiritual  warfare,  but  constantly 
and  strenuously  may  resist  our  foes,  till  at  last  we  obtain  a  complete 
victory. 


S03  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED.