Q.    129.    What  doth  the  word  "  Amen  "  signify  ? 

A.  "Amen"  signifies,  it  shall  truly  and  certainly  be;  for  my 
prayer  is  more  assuredly  heard  of  God,  than  1  feel  in  my  heart  ilia'. 
I  desire  these  things  of  him. 


A 


ALTHOUGH  justification  and  sanctification  are  distinct  bene 
fits,  they  do  nevertheless  always  accompany  each  other,  and  are  nev- 
er separated  in  any  person  one  from  the  cfther.  Justification  is  one 
benefit,  and  sanctification  is  another.  Justification  takes  away  the 
guilt  of  sin,  but  sanctification  cleanses  from  the  filth  of  sin.  Justi 
fication  is  effected  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  but  sanctification  by  his 
Spirit.  The  former  brings  a  sinner  into  a  different  condition,  ma- 
king him  a  friend,  when  he  was  before  an  enemy  of  God,  but  the 
latter  brings  him  to  a  different  disposition,  rendering  him  a  lover  ot 
God,  when  he  was  before  a  hater  of  him.  Yet  these  benefits  arc 
not  so  distinct,  that  they  are  ever  separated  the  one  from  the  other  . 
where  the  one  is,  there  also  the  oilier  is  always  with  it.  Tire  Coiin 
thians  u  were  washed  and  sanctified,  as  well  as  justified  ;  1  Cor.  vi 
1 1.  "  Christ  is  made  to  them  who  ate  his,  sanctification,  as  well  ar- 
jusiification,"  according  to  1  Cor.  i.  30.  God  justificth  the  elect 
sinner,  that  he  may  sanctify  him  :  "  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee, 
that  thou  mayest  be  feared,"  saith  David,  to  the  Lord,  Psalm  exxx. 
4.  No  sooner  doth  a  person  obtain  of  God  forgiveness  and  justifica- 
tion, than  he  also  becomes  desirous  of  conducting  himself  in  a  man- 
ner that  is  acceptable  to  God  ;  but  his  enemies  also  soon  bestir 
themselves,  that  they  may  seduce  him  to  iniquity  :  he,  knowing  thi¥, 
and  being  afraid  of  sinning,  will  also  resist  and  encounter  his  ene- 
mies. They  are  nevertheless  loo  mighty  for  him,  and  he  hath  but 
little  pow.-r  :  how  often  do  they  foil  him  before  he  is  aware  !  what 
shall  the  poor  soul  do  ?  Jesus  feacheth  her  to  cry  to  the  Fathe: 
"Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  S:c. 

The  Saviour  had  taught  the  children  of  God  to  pray  for  the  par- 
don of  their  sins  :  but  their  enemies,  who  would  be  too  mighty  for 
them,  would  soon  encounter  them  again,  that  they  might  seduce 
them  to  new  sins.     He,  knowing  their  weakness,   admonishes 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  127—129,    .  503 

to  flee  to  the  Father,  and  ciy  to  him,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation," 
that  they  may  thus  hallow  his  name,  to  which  this  petition  is  direct- 
ed, as  well  as  the  foregoing. 

We  must  with  the  instructor  explain  here  three  particulars  ; 

I.  The  sixth  petition, 

II.  The  conclusion, 

III.  How  we  must  seal  our  prayer  with  "  Amen." 

I.  In  the  sixth  petition  we  pray  in  the  first  place  against  tempta^ 
tion,  and  then  i:all  upon  God  lor  deliverance  from  evil.  The  word 
fieirasmos,  which  occurs  here  in  the  Greek,  signifies  an  examination 
and  trial  of  persons  and  things,  that  we  may  know  whether  they  be 
in  reality  what  they  seem  to  be.  Thus  a  man  u  must  examine  and 
try  himself,  whether  he  be  in  the  faith,"  2  Cor  xiii.  5.  God 
also  tempts  and  tries  men,  not  for  his  own  sake,  for  he  is  allknow- 
ing,  but  that  he  may  discover  their  sincerity  and  virtue  to  others. 
For  this  purpose  he  sometimes  gives  them  a  probationary  command  ; 
as,  when  «  he  tempted  Abraham,  he  commanded  him  to  offer  up 
his  son  Isaac,"  Gen.  xxii.  or  he  exposeth  them  to  adversities  and 
"tribulations,  which  bt fall  them  for  trial,"  James  i.  2.  1  Peter  iv. 
12,  or  he  gives  them  "  his  Spirit,  that  they  may  know  the  things 
that  are  freely  given  them  of  God,"  1  Cor.  ii.  12.  We  do  not  prav 
against  such  temptations  in  this  petition.  David  prayed  that  "  the 
Lord  would  examine  him,  prove  and  try  him,"  Psalm  xxvi.  2. 
cxxxix.  23,  24.  But  the  Saviour  speaks  here  of  an  evil  temptation, 
by  which  we  are  enticed  and  seduced  to  sin  ;  for  "  every  man  is 
tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and  enticed,"  James 
i.  14.     See  also  1  Tim.  vi.  9. 

The  children  of  God  have  "  three  mighty  and  deadly  enemies, 
namely,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  their  own  fiesh,  who  cease  not  to 
assault  them."  The  devil  is  the  head,  who  rules  the  rest ;  therefore 
he  is  emphatically  called  "  the  tempter,"  Mat.  iv.  3.  1  Thess.  iii.  5. 
He  is  '•  Satan,"  the  adversary  who  tempts,  1  Cor.  vii.  5.  He  doth 
this,  (l)by  offering  inducements  to  sinning,  and  by  bringing  men 
into  a  situation,  in  which  they  can  be  easily  enticed  ;  he  proposes  to 
Eve  the  desirableness  of  the  tree  :  to  Achan  he  represents  the  pre- 
ciousness  of  the  spoil :  he  directs  David  to  Bathsheba,  and  he  urges 
Peter  to  go  into  the  hall  of  Caiaphas,  that  he  may  sift  him  like 
wheat.  (2)  He  suggests  also  evil  thoughts.  He  knows  wonderfully, 
well  how  to  maintain  a  secret  correspondence  with  our  spirits,  and 
to  exhibit  to  them  the  seeming  honour,  pleasure  and  profit,  that  will 
accrue  from  sin,  and  to  influence  the  affections  so,  that  the  soul  is 
enticed  to  sin  insensibly,    and  before  she  is  aware  :    "  He  put  into 


0tt  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

the  heart  of  Judas  to  betray  Christ,"  John  xiii  2,  and  "  filled  the 
heart  of  Ananias,  that  he  should  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  keep 
back  part  of  the  price  of  the  land,"  Acts  v.  3.  (3)  The  devil  knows 
how  to  darken  and  stupify  the  understanding,  so  that  it  perceives 
neither  good  nor  evil,  by  which  means  the  will  is  powerfully  urged 
to  cltoose  that  which  is  wrong  :  i  The  God  of  this  world  blinds  the 
minds  of  them  who  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel 
of  Christ  should  shine  unto  thern,"  saith  Paul,  2  Cor.  iv.  4.  (4) 
Sometimes  Satan  comes  with  power  and  with  an  ovebearing  force, 
and  drives  the  soul  headlong  into  sin  :  conscience  indeed  sometimes 
cries  out  against  sin  ;  and  others  dissuade  from  it :  but  he,  having 
the  ear  of  the  soul,  will  not  suffer  her  to  pause,  in  order  to  attend 
as  she  ought  to  that  which  woidtl  restrain  her  from  sinning,  but  lie 
urges  her  violently  on,  and  crosses  every  good  advice.  When  "  he 
provoked  David  to  number  Israel,"  he  drove  him  on  so,  that  he  would 
not  hearken  to  Joab's  advice,  but  "  his  word  prevailed,"  1  Chron. 
xxi.  1 — 4.  "He  works"  more  especially  so  powerfully  "  in  the 
children  of  disobedience,"  Eph.  ii.  2.  H  He  takes  them  captive  in 
his  snare  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  and  "  he  persuades  them,  and 
prevails  also,"  1  Kings  xxii.  22.  He  can  manage  his  temptation? 
with  wonderful  subtilty,  so  that  men  do  not  observe  that  he  tempteth 
?hem,  and  the  children  of  God  themselves  ascribe  his  temptations. 
jvhplljr  to  their  own  corruption,  unless  they  be  greatly  advanced  : 
'  He  beguiled  Eve  "  herself,  when  she  was  yet  uncorrupted,  "  by 
his  subtilty,"  2  Cor.  xi.  3.  Therefore  he  willo'i  n  begin  his  attack? 
with  asking  questions,  that  he  may  influence  the  mind  to  consider 
his  propositions,  and  may  cause  it  to  waver,  and  especially  when  a 
person  is  in  his  weakest  condition,  and  alone.  And  that  he  may 
not  seem  to  have  an  evil  design,  he  will  pretend  a  wonderful  appear- 
ance of  a  great  and  holy  zeal,  and  even  swear  that  he  seeks  our 
happiness  only.  See  Gen.  iii.  1 — 6,  and  thus  he  "  transforms 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light."  as  the  apostle  saith,  2  Cor.  xi.  14. 
But  when -he  attacks  a  person,  who  is  further  advanced,  and  who 
knows  his  devices,  he  appears  like  "  a  messenger  of  Satan,"  2  Cor. 
xii.  7.  He  hath  indeed  wonderful  artifices  and  "  devices  "  2  Cor. 
ii.  11,  "wiles,"  Eph.  vi.  11,  and  u  depths,"  Rev.  ii.  24.  If  any 
desire  to  see  his  mysteries  unfolded,  let  them  read  what  an  eminentlv 
godly  man*  hath  written  concerning  the  temptations  of  Satan. 
The  other  enemy,  who  tempts  the   people  of  God,  in  order  to  se- 

*  William  8rakel  in  1  is  SeJehke  Godsdiast ,  or   Reasonabie  Service,  paf! 


LIL  LORDS  DAY.  Q.  127— 129.  505 

'nice  them  is  the  world,  of  which  the  devil  is  '  the  prince  and  god," 
since  he  governs  the  world,  and  the  world  obeys  him,  John  xiv,  30. 
2  Cor.  iv.  4.  But  by  the  world  we  must  not  understand  here  the 
frame  of  the  world,  with  all  that  is  iii  it,  except  so  far  us  the  crea- 
ture, being  subject  to  vanity  through  sin,  is  abused  by  the  sinner; 
but  by  the  world  we  understand  chiefly  worldly-minded  persons, 
"  who  are  of  the  world,  and  therefore  sp^ak  of  the  world,  and  the 
world  heareth  them,"  1  John  iv.  5,  and  also  "  worldly  lusis  which 
pass  away,"  1  John  ii.  17,  which  world  tempts  and  seduceth  men, 
either  by  flattering  and  alluring  them  with  her  honours,  pleasures 
and  profits,  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the 
pride  of  life,"  1  John  ii.  16,  or  by  haired,  persecuting  them,  who 
will  not  do  as  she  doth.  The  Lord  Jesus  saith  to  them  who  are  his-, 
"  If  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  his  own  ;  but  be- 
cause ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the 
world,  therefore  the  world  hateih  you,"  John  xv.  19. 

Nevertheless  the  devil  and  the  world  would  not  be  able  to  seduce 
us  in  this  manner,  if  there  were  not  a  traitor  within  the  soul,  who 
unites  with  the  devil  and  the  world  to  destroy  the  poor  soul.  The 
flesh  is  that  traitor,  namely  our  inbred  depravity,  «  the  old  man,  the 
body  of  sin,"  Rom.  vi.  6.  "The  motions  of  sin,  which  are  by  the 
law,  and  which  work  in  our  members  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death  ; 
indwelling  sin,  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  the  members,  w  Rom.  vii. 
5,  29,  23,  for  "every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of 
his  own  lust,  and  enticed,"  James  i.  14.  One  while  it  will  oppose 
the  truth  of  God  by  foolish  conceptions,  "  imaginations  and  high 
things,"  2  Cor.  x.  5,  then  it  works  up  every  abomination,  "  like  a 
troubled  sea  and  a  fountain,"  Isaiah  lvii  20,  Jer.  vi.  7.  Mat.  xv.  19. 
Yea,  "  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  ;  for  it  is  not  subject 
to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  it  be,"  Rom.  viii.  7.  "  Doth 
the  Spirit  lust  against  the  flesh,  the  flesh  lusteth  also  against  the 
Spirit :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  j  so  that  ye  can- 
not do  the  things  that  ye  would,"  Gal.  v.  17. 

But  why  doth  the  Saviour  choose  that  we  should  pray  to  the 
Father,  that  he  would  not  lead  us  into  temptation  ?  doth  he  mislead 
and  entice  his  children  to  evil  ?  surely  no ;  for  li  he  is  of  purer  eyes 
than  to  behold  evil,"  Hab.  i.  13.  "Far  be  it  from  God,  that  he 
should  do  wickedness,  and  from  the  Almighty,  that  he  should  com- 
mit iniquity,"  so  we  say  with  Elihu,  Job  xxxiv.  10.  "  Let  no  man 
say,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God  ;  for  God  cannot  be 
tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man.  But  every  man 
is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and  enticed^' 
Vol.  ii,  3  O 


5&6  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

according-  to  James  i.  14.  This  petition  must  however  have  a  cer- 
tain meaning  ;  we  may  not  therefore  wholly  exclude  the  direction 
of  God  from  sin.  No  man  will  say  that  God  commands  or  works 
sin,  or  that  he  urges  a  person  to  commit  it ;  but  every  one  will 
allow  that  he  permits  sin  in  a  holy  manner,  not  by  giving  license  to 
sin,  but  by  not  hindering  it.  Is  he  then  a  mere  spectator  of  sin  ? 
Thus  the  Pelagians  think  :  but  the  word  of  God  teaches  us  that 
God  doth  more  with  respect  to  sin,  than  merely  permit  it :  for  it 
saith  that  God  ■'  blinds  and  hardens  "  a  person,  Lxod.  iv.  21,  Isaiah 
iv.  9,  10,  lsiii.  17.  "  He  sends  a  lying  spirit,"  1  Kings  xxii.  23. 
"  He  turned  the  heart  of  the  Egyptians  to  hate  his  people,"  Psalm 
cv.  25.  "He  gives  men  up  to  vile  affections,  and  to  a  reprobate 
mind,  to  do  things  which  are  not  convenient,  Rom.  i.  26,  28,  and 
"  he  sends  them  a  strong  delusion,  so  that  they  believe  a  lie,"  2 
Thess.  ii.  II.  Surely  these  words  denote  more  than  a  bare  per- 
mission. We  must  nevertheless  beware  that  we  do  not  impeach 
the  holiness  of  God,  by  endeavouring  to  look  too  deep  into  his  un- 
searchable ways,  and  we  must  not  think  nor  say  more  than  the 
Lord  himself  testifieth  of  this  work  of  his,  which  is,  (a)  that  he 
brings  a  person  into  this  or  that  situation,  in  which  he  will  be  tempt- 
ed and  assaulted  ;  for  even  "  Jesus  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
wilderness,  that  he  might  be  tempted  of  the  devil,"  Mat.  iv.  1.  (b) 
The  word  of  God  saith  also,  that  God  sometimes  lets  the  tempters 
loose  upon  a  person,  to  tempt  him.  We  see  how  the  devil  was  let 
loose  upon  Job  and  Paul,  Job  i.  and  ii.  2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 9.  "  The 
devil  provoked  David  to  number  the  people,"  according  to  1  Chron. 
xxi.  1,  and  it  is  said,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  1,  that  "  the  Lord  himself  moved 
him."  How  shall  we  understand  this,  except  of  letting  Satan  loose 
upon  David  r  (c)  The  Bible  saitli  also  that  God  withholds  his  re- 
straining influence,  by  which  a  person,  being  left  to  himself,  will 
certainly  sin.  It  is  said  of  holy  Hezekiah,  that  "  his  heart  was  lifted 
up;"  for  "  God  left  him  to  try  him,  that  he  might  know  all  that  was 
in  his  heart,"  2  Chron.  xxxii.  25,  31.  Therefore  it  is  also  said  of 
Israel,  that  "God  gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts  lusts,  so  that 
they  walked  in  their  own  counsels,"  Psalm  lxxxi.  12.  And  God 
manifests  thus  his  sovereign  power  in  a  holy  manner,  inasmuch  as 
he  is  not  obligated  to  man.  He  reveals  thus  also  his  goodness  and 
justice  by  humbling  his  children,  and  by  destroying  the  ungodly, 
"  that  he  may  show  his  power,  and  that  his  name  may  be  declared 
throughout  all  the  earth,"  Pom.  ix.  17. 

When  we  pray  against  temptation;  we  then  also  call  on  God  fo* 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  127—129.  50* 

deliverance  from  the  evil  one.*  The  words  afio  ton  fwizerou,  which 
eccur  here  in  the  Greek,  may  be  rendered  "  from  evil,"  and  we 
should  thus  pray  against  the  evil  of  sin.  But  because  we  are  drawn 
by  temptation  into  the  evil  of  sin,  and  this  is  opposed  to  temptation^ 
we  may  with  the  greatest  propriety  understand  this  with  our  trans- 
lators of  the  evil  one,  who  tempteth  us,  and  therefore  of  the  devil, 
the  world,  and  our  own  flesh.  Our  flesh  is  evil,  it  is  "  an  evil  treas- 
ure," Mat.  xii.  35.  "  There  dwelieth  no  good  thing  in  it,"  Rom, 
vii.  !8.  4i  The  world  is  evil,"  Gal.  i.  4.  "  It  lieth  in  wickedness," 
i  John  v.  19.  But  the  prince  of  the  world  is  more  especially  evil. 
He  is  called  "  the  evil  one,"  Mat.  v.  37,  xiii.  19,  33.  He  is  evil 
and  evilminded  toward  all  that  is  of  God,  and  that  is  good  :  it  is  his 
disposition  to  be  evil  :  he  loves  and  delights  in  evil,  and  is  the  cause 
of  all  evil. 

The  Lord  doth  indeed  deliver  his  people  from  the  evil  one,  when 
li  he  delivers  them  out  of  the  power  of  darkness,  and  translates 
them  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son,"  Col.  i.  13,  and  when  he 
"  gives  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth,  so  that 
they  recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  they 
were  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will,"  2  Tim.  ii.  25,  26  The  Son 
of  God  "binds  the  strong  man,  and  spoils  his  goods,"  Mat.  xii.  29. 
But  those  evil  enemies  endeavour  to  bring  them  under  their  power 
again,  and  therefore  tempt  them  time  after  time.  Their  Father  how- 
ever delivers  them  continually,  and  particularly,  (a)  when  he  places 
them  out  of  the  way,  and  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation,  Jesus 
knowing  the  weakness  of  his  apostles,  surrendered  himself  to  those 
who  came  to  take  him,  upon  condition  that  they  should  "  let  them  go 
their  way."  u  If  ye  seek  me,"  said  he.  John  xviii.  8,  "  let  these  go 
their  way."  Having  learned  by  frequent  experience,  that  the  least 
occurrence  perverls  them,  they  are  fearful  of  every  circumstance 
that  might  seduce  them  :  and  therefore  they  pray  to  be  preserved 
from  it-  (b)  Also  when  the  Lord  binds  and  controls  the  tempters, 
so  that  they  have  not  the  power  to  entice  them :.  "  The  Lord  some- 
times rebukes  Satan,"  Zech.  iii  1,  2,  binds  and  controls  him,  Rev, 
::x.  1 — 3.  (c)  Me  also  affords  the  soul  sometimes  in  her  tempta- 
tion his  restraining  grace  and  power,  by  which  she  is  enabled  to 
light  and  conquer,  "  preserving  and  strengthening  her  by  the  power 
of  his  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  she  is  not  overcome  in  the  spiritual  war- 
fare, but  resists  her  foes  constantly  and  strenuously  :  He  keeps  her 
from  the  hour  of  temptation,"  according   to  his   promise;  Rev.   iih 

*  According  to  the  Dutch  translation. 


SO*  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

10    He  invigorates  her  conscience,  which  saith  to  her  continually  irt 
the  name  of  tne  Lord,  H  Seek  thou  my    face,"  Psalm  xxvii.  8.     He 
renders  her  watchful    and    careful,    "  setting    a    watch    before    her 
mouth,  and  keeping  the  door  of  her  lips,"  as  she  prays,  Psalm  cxli. 
3.     He  puts  his  fear  into  her,  and    a  unites   her    heart   to  fear    his 
name,    that  sha    may    walk  in  his  truth,"  as  David    ptayed,    Psalm 
Ixxxvi.  li.     Yea,  he  fills  her   sometimes  with   so    much    condoning 
grace,  that  she  is  not  afraid  of  the  most  violent   assaults,  but   saith, 
"  The  Lord  is  my  light,  and  my  salvation   whom  shall  I  fear  ?"  &c. 
Psalm  xxvii.  1,  or  he  speaks  a  woru  of  encouragement  to  her,  u  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,"    2  '_or.  xii.  9.  and  he  places  her  above 
the  reach  of  her  enemies,  and  becomes  "  a  strong  iiabitation  to  her, 
whereunto  she  may  continually  resort,  and  he  gives  thus  command- 
ment to  save  her,"  Pscdm  lxxi.  3.     The  believer  prays   also  for  this 
restraining   grace,  with    David,    Psalm  xix.  13.     '    Keep    buck    thy 
servant  from  presumptuous  sins,"  See,     (d)  Are  the  children  of  Ciod 
sometimes  enticed  by  a  temptation,   the  Lord  limits  the  temptation, 
that  it  may  not  proceed  too   far,  and  that  the  life  of  the  soul  may 
not  be  trodden  down  to  the  ground,  and  that    the  enemy   may   not 
wholly  overcome  her,  as  we  may  see  in  the  temptations  of  Job  and 
Peter,  Job  i.  12,  ii.  6.  Luke  xxii.  31,  32.     Yea,  the  Lord  raiseth  his 
favourites   up   again,  after   they    have    fallen,    that  he  may   deliver 
them  :    "  1  hough  the   righteous  fall,    he  shall    not  be    utterly    cast 
down ;  for  the  Lord  upholdeth  him    with  his   hand,"    saith    David, 
Psalm  xxxvii.  24,  and  his  Son  saith,  Prov.  xxiv.  16.     <k  A  just  man 
falleth  seven  times,  and  riseth  up  again."     Upon  which  they   begin 
to  fight  anew,  with  their  Father's  aid,  and  thus    '  resist    constantly 
and  strenuously,  until  at  last  they  obtain  a   complete   victory,"  and 
exclaim  triumphantly  with  Paul,   1  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.    "  I  have  fought  a 
good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  1  have  kept  the  faith  :  hence- 
forth there  is  laid   up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,"  &c.     (e) 
And  finally,  he  conducts  them  to  that  glory,  where  there  will  not  be 
any  more  temptation  or  curse  ;    but  all    their  enemies  he  casts  into 
perdition,  Rev   xx.  14,  xxi.  27,  xxii.  3. 

. .  As  every  believer  must  pray  thus  for  himself,  so  they  must  all, 
and  each  of  them  pray  thus  for  the  whole  church,  and  therefore 
say,  Lead  "us1*  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  "  us  "  from  evil; 
All  the  enemies  combine  together  against  all  the  believers  ;  they 
must  therefore  "  strive  together  in  one  spirit,  and  with  one  mind  : 
praying  always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit,  and 
watching  thereunto  with  all  perseverance  and  supplication  for  all 
%ajnts,"  Philip,  i.  27.  Eph.  vi.  18.     But  we  must  not  therefore  think 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  127—123.  iOj) 

that  this  petition  is  prophetical,  and  that  it  hath  respect  to  our  times, 
in  which  the  temptation  of  \ntiehrist  begins  to  work  poweilully  ; 
for  we  have  no  foundation  for  such  an  opinion  :  if  men  were  not 
prepossessed  with  a  notion  concerning  the  seven  periods  of  the 
church,  they  would  not  seek  for  such  a  prophecy  here,  and  ther^ 
will  never  be  a  time,  in  which  it  will  not  be  our  duty  to  offer  up  this 
petition  in  its  fullest  extent  and  emphasis.* 

The  Saviour  commands  the   children  of  God  to  offer  up  this  pe- 
tition   for  certain  reasons.     For,  (1)  the   tempters  are  their    mortal 
enemies,    they    are    many,   crafty,  mighty,  cruel    and    unwearied  : 
a  They  cease  not  to  assault   us  :"    there  is  then  no    better  remedy 
against  them,  than  u  to  pray  that  we  may  not  enter  into    tempta- 
tion," Mat.  xxvi.  41.     "  This  kind    goeth  not  forth,    but  by    prayer 
•and  fasting,"  Mark  ix.  29.     (2)  The  children    of  God    hate    every 
sin,  and  "every    false  way,"  Psalm  cxix.    128,  and   therefore  every 
temptation  also,  that  may  easily    seduce  them  to  sin      They  cannot 
declare  nor  prevent  this  better  than  by  praying  against  temptation, 
like  David,  Psalm   cxix.  10.     "  Let  me  not  wander  from  thy  com- 
mandments."    (3)  They    know  what  a   revolting  heart  they   have, 
that  "  they  are  ready  to  halt,"  Psalm  xxxviii.  17,  and  therefore  they 
are  afraid  of  themselves,  and  pray  that  they  may  be  preserved  from 
themselves:    "  Set  a  watch,    O   Lord,   before  my   mouth,  keep  the 
door  of  my  lips,   incline  not  mine  heart  to  any  evil  thing,"  thus  the 
man  of  God  prayed,   Psalm  cxli.  3,  4,     (4)  They  have  a  great  de- 
sire, and  a  steadfast  inclination  to  conduct  themselves  in  such  a  man- 
ner, as  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord  :  but  how   shall   they  do  this,  unless 
the  Lord  preserve  them  ?  therefore  they  say  with  the  same  man,   'I 
will  keep  thy  statutes  :    O  forsake  me  not  utterly,"  Psalm  cxix.  8. 
(5)  The  Lord  hath  also  promised  "  that  he  would  put  his  Spirit  with- 
in  them,  and  cause  them  to  walk  in  his  statutes,  and  keep  his  judg- 
ments, and  do  them  ;"  but  he  will  not  do  this,  unless  they  call  on  him 
for  it;  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  I  will  do  it :  yet  I  will  be  in- 
quired of  by  the  house  of  Israel  for  this,  to  do  it  for  them,  saith  the 
Lord,"  Ezek.  xxxvi.  27,  36,  37.     (6)  Moreover,  they  are  not  able  to 
withstand  their  enemies,  or  to  perform  their  duty  :  shall  they  not  then 
cry  to  the  Lord  for  help,  and  say,  "  Thou  hast  commanded  me  to  keep 
thy  precepts  diligently  :    O  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  keep  thy 
statutes,"  Psalm  cxix.  4,  5.     "  We  are  indeed  so  weak  in  ourselves* 
that  we   cannot  stand  a  single    moment."     And    therelore    we   ar» 
"aught  to  betake  ourselves  always  with  our  prayers  to  the  Father. 

*   The  author  intendi  in  th  is  passage  the  Cocceians 


j  10  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

II.  Shall  we  now,  after  we  have  uttered  all  our  petitions,  break  off 
abruptly  ?  No,  the  Saviour  requires,  that  we  should  end  and  con- 
clude our  prayer  in  a  suitable  manner.  Therefore  he  teacheth  his 
favourites  to  say  also,  "  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power, 
and  the  glory,  for  ever."  The  kingdom  of  the  Father  denotes  here 
not  only  the  kingdom  of  nature,  in  which  he  reigns  over  all  things, 
but  also  the  kingdom  of  grace,  in  which  he  reigns  over  his  children 
in  Christ.  This  is  explained  in  the  second  petition.  But  how  is  it 
possible  to  govern  such  a  great  kingdom  alone  ?  the  Father  hath  also 
"  power,"  even  an  almighty  power,  to  direct  all  things  with  one 
word  according  to  his  will.  And  hence  it  appears,  that  "  the  glory" 
is  iiis  also  even  that  brightness  and  lustre,  which  shines  forth  from 
all  his  perfections  and  ways  in  his  kingly  and- almighty  direction,  by 
which  he  excels  all  others.  But  his  kingdom,  his  power  and  his 
glory  will  not  descend  finally  into  the  dust,  as  the  greatest  govern- 
ments and  glory  of  earthly  kings  will :  but  all  the  divine  excellencies 
will  endure  and  be  glorified  more  and  more  for  ever.  Hear  what 
Paul  saith  of  this  almighty,  glorious  and  eternal  king ;  *«  Now  to 
the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God,  be  honour 
and  glory,  for  ever  and  ever,"  1  Tim.  i.  17.  See  also  1  Tim.  vi. 
15,  16. 

The  Papists,  who  endeavour  to  excite  a  suspicion  that  the  word  of 
God  hath  been  corrupted,  and  is  imperfect,  imagine  that  these  words 
were  not  added  to  this  prayer  by  our  Saviour,  but  that  they  were  im- 
prudently foisted  in  by  a  certain  Greek,  because  some  cf  the  Latin 
fathers  do  not  mention  this  addition,  and  Luke  also  omits  it,  Luke 
xi.  2 — 4.  But  it  is  certain,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  added  these 
words  to  this  prayer  ;  for  such  doxolegies  are  usual  in  the  conclu- 
sion of  prayers  in  the  word  of  God,  as  we  may  see,  1  Chron.  xxix. 
11,  12.  1  Tim.  i  17,  vi.  15,  16.  Jude  vs.  25.  Rev.  i.  4 — 6,  and 
besides  this  the  most  ancient  copies  of  the  New  Testament  do  also 
contain  these  words,  not  only  the  Greek,  but  also  the  Syriac,  and 
Arabic;  and  the  Greek  fathers  acknowledge  these  words  It  doth 
not  follow,  because  Luke  hath  not  these  words,  that  they  did  not 
stand  anciently  in  Matthew,  since  one  evangelist  records  in  more  in- 
stances certain  particulars,  which  are  omitted  by  the  others. 

As  now  the  address  of  this  prayer  must  be  referred  not  only  to  the 
first,  but  to  all  the  following  petitions,  so  also  this  conclusion  must  be 
applied  not  only  to  the  last,  but  also  to  all  the  foregoing  prayers. 
And  to  what  purpose  is  this  appendix  ?  Is  it  in  order  to  foretell  the 
last  and  most  glorious  state  of  the  church,  which  we  certainly  ex- 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  127—129.  511 

pect  ?  no  :  for  it  ought  not  then  to  be  referred  to  the  foregoing  pe» 
titions,  but  to  be  used  separately  irom  them.  But  we  conceive  that 
it  serves,  (a)  as  a  thanksgiving,  which  must  be  added  to  our  pray* 
ers  ;  "  AU  our  requests  must  be  made  known  to  God  by  prayer 
and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,"  Philip,  iv.  6\  Thus  David 
also  used  these  words,  1  Chron.  xxix.  11,  12.  The  believer  began 
his  prayer  with  the  glory  of  God  in  the  first  petition  and  he  ends 
it  with  the  same,  when  he  concludes  in  this  manner,  (b)  These 
words  serve  also  as  motives  and  grounds  of  confidence  to  the  chil- 
dren of  God  in  their  praying  ;  for  if  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and 
the  glory  be  his  for  ever,  then  it  concerns  him,  and  he  is  willing  and 
able  to  grant  their  requests,  and  he  will  have  the  honour  of  it  for 
ever,  «  when  he  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be 
admired  in  all  them  that  believe,"  2  Thess.  i.  10.  Thus  the 
psaimist  mentions  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  everlasting  glory, 
as  a  motive  and  ground  of  his  confidence  in  his  prayer.  Psalm  v.  2, 
"  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry,  my  king  and  my  God."  Sec 
also  Psalm  xx.  9    lxxiv.    12.     cxv,   1,  2. 

III.  It  is  proper  that  we  should  also  seal  our  prayer  with  "  Amen." 
This  is  a  Hebrew  word,  and  signifieth  truth,  and  it  serves,  (a)  to 
confirm  the  truth  of  our  desire  :  "  The  prophet  Jeremiah  said 
Amen  ;  the  Lord  do  so,"  Jer.  xxviii  6.  The  believing  supplicant 
declares  his  sincere  desire  and  inclination  that  God  would  "  give 
ear  to  his  prayer,  which  goeth  not  out  of  feigned  lips,"  like  David, 
Psalm  xvii.  1.  (b)  It  tends  also  to  confirm  the  confidence  of  be- 
lievers, •' that  their  prayer  is  more  assuredly  heard  of  God,  Than 
they  feel  in  their  hearts,  that  they  desire  these  things  of  him," 
it  Yov  "  Amen  "  signifies  that  a  thing  is  certain  :  «  All  the  promises- 
of  God  are  in  him,  yea,  and  in  hirn  amen,"  saiththe  apostle,  2  or. 
i.  20.  The  believing  supplicant  hath  also  a  foundation  of  confidence 
when  he  saith  Amen,  that  his  prayer  will  be  heard  :  "  Surely  he  will 
be  gracious  unto  thee  at  the  voice  of  thy  cry  :  when  he  shall  hear 
it,  he  will  answer  thee,"  saith  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
by  his  Spirit,  Jer.  xxx.  19.  When  the  children  of  God  pray  ac- 
cording to  the  prescript  of  Jesus,  they  pray  according  to  his  will, 
which  he  will  then  certainly  hear.  John  saith,  "  This  is  the  confi- 
dence, that  we  have  in  him,  that  if  we  ask  any  thing  according  to 
his  will,  he  heareth  us.  And  if  we  know  that  he  heareth  us.  what- 
soever we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions,  that  we  desired 
of  him,"  1  John  v.  14,   15. 


12  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED 


APPLICATION. 

That  I  may  not  be  too  prolix,  I  will  not  busy  myself  with  conhV 
ting  the  Pelagians,  who  deny  God's  efficacious  government  of  sin, 
and  the  inability  of  m  in  to  resist  temptation  ;  for  it  is  evident  of 
itself,  that  they  err.  if  we  must  pray  that  we  may  not  be  led  into 
temptation,  but  be  delivered  from  the  evil  one.  Nor  will  I  say- 
much  at  present  concerning  the  vanity  of  the  Papists,  who  imagine 
that  they  can  expel  the  devil  by  their  exorcisms,  which  is  as  vain 
as  "  the  behaviour  of  the  vagabond  exorcists  at  Ephesus,"  Acts 
xix.  13 — 16.  But  I  may  not  forbear  saying  something  of  those 
who  conceive  that  the  devil  hath  no  more  power  at  all  in  the  world, 
and  that  he  is  chained  up  in  hell  hke  a  banddog  Is  this  petition  then 
to  no  purpose  ?  Is  all  that  is  said  in  the  whole  bible  concerning 
the  actions  of  the  devil  nothing  but  vanity,  and  spoken  only  accord- 
ing to  the  foolish  opinions  of  the  people  ?  We  cannot  conspire  better 
with  the  devil,  than  by  denying  all  his  temptations  and  assaults  : 
for  it  is  the  aim  of  Satan,  and  his  subtility  to  conceal  his  wiles. 
When  we  deny  them,  do  we  not  then  assist  him  ?  "  When  Zebul 
said  to  Gaal,  who  saw  the  army  of  Abimelech  coming  toward  him 
in  a  hostile  manner,  Thou  sawest  the  shadow  of  the  mountains,  as 
if  they  were  men,"  Judges  ix.  36,  did  he  not  then  manifest  that 
he  had  conspired  with  Abimelech  to  destroy  Gaal  ?  Why  then 
should  we  not  think  that  those  persons  assist  the  devil,  who  endeav- 
our to  banish  a  moderate  fear  of  his  seductions  out  of  the  hearts  of 
men?       Therefore  such  have  justly  been  condemned  by  the  church. 

But  when  ye,  hearers,  utter  this  petition  in  praying  after  your 
manner,  are  ye  then  in  earnest  and  sincere  ?  Surely  ye  are  not, 
(a)  who  know  nothing  of  any  danger,  or  of  any  tempters,  but  are, 
like  the  men  of  Laish,  quiet  and  secure.  Ye  are  not  afraid  of  sins 
to  which  ye  are  enticed,  and  still  more-  to  which  ye  will  be  sedu- 
ced ;  ye  think  that  ye  can  preserve  yourselves ;  if  any  one  should 
tell  you  what  abominations  t'neie  are  in  your  hearts,  and  that  ye  will 
perhaps  commit  them  one  time  or  other,  ye  would  wonder,  and  say 
-with  resentment,  like  Hazael,  when  the  horrible  cruelties  which  he 
should  perpetrate   upon  Israel,  were  foretold  to  him,  "  Am  I  then  a 

•  The  autlmr  refers  here  to  Dr.   Balthazar  Bekker,  a  minister  of  the  refor- 
~r.fi  church  at  Amsterdam.     See  a  note  concerning  him  on  the  third  sermon. 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  127—129.  S13 

dog?"  2  Kings  viii.  12,  13.  But  there  cannot  be  a  greater  evidence 
that  ye  are  yet  really  under  the  dominion,  and  are  taken  captive  in 
the  snare  of  the  devd  at  his  will  ;  for  he  seeks  to  lull  t.iose  who  are 
under  his  power,  quietly  and  placidly  to  sleep,  that  ihey  may  not 
awake,  and  escape  horn  him.  Jesus  shows  this,  when  he  s.uth, 
Luke  xi.  21,  «  when  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace,  all 
his  goods  are  in  peace."  (b)  It  is  evident,  that  ye  mean  not  what 
ye  say,  when  ye  l'epeat  this  petition,  because  ye  leud  yourselves  into 
temptation,  and  are  not  willing  to  De  delivered  fYom  that  of  the  evil 
one  ;  for  ye  pursue  after  vanities  ;  is  there  a  fair  any  where,  or  is 
this  or  that  show  to  be  seen,  or  doth  any  idle  company  assemble  in 
one  place  or  another,  can  ye  be  even  torn  from  these  things  ?  must 
ye  not  be  present,  do  ye  not  then  leadyourselves  into  temptation,  like 
"  Dinah,  who  went  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land,  and  was 
denied  ?"  Gen.  xxxiv.  When  ye  are  so  set  upon  wealth,  and 
"  will  be  rich,  do  ye  not  then  fall  into  temptation,  and  a  snare,  and 
into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruction 
and  perdition  ?"  1  Tim-  vi.  9.  How  often  do  ye  indulge  in  musing 
and  meditating  with  delight  upon  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  !  by  which 
ye  tempt  yourselves,  and  kindle,  by  vehement  motions  of  your  lusts, 
a  burning  heat  of  sin  in  your  souls.  Yea,  ye  will  not  be  delivered 
from  these  temptations,  "  evil  is  indeed  sweet  in  your  mouths,  and. 
ye  spare  it,  like  a  delicious  morsel  under  your  tongues :  But  thus  ye 
are  drawn  away  of  your  own  lusts,  and  enticed  ;  then  when  lust  hath 
conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth 
forth  death,"  James  i.  14,  15.  (c)  And  ye  act  still  more  abomina- 
bly, who  lead  not  only  yourselves,  but  others  also  into  temptation  : 
it  is  not  enough  for  you,  that  ye  yourselves  hasten  to  destruction, 
but  ye  will  drag  others  also  with  you.  In  this  manner  do  lascivious 
persons  act,  like  the  harlot  whom  Solomon  describes,  Prov.  vii.  And 
thus  also  those  luxurious  feasters,  who  invite  others  to  their  fellow- 
ship, and  provoke  them  to  gluttony :  "  Come  ye,  say  they,  I  Avill 
fetch  wine,"  &c  Isaiah  Ivi.  12,  Is  there  any  one,  who  will  not  do 
as  ye  do,  or  who  seeks  to  be  delivered  from  the  evil  one  by  conver- 
sion, will  ye  not  scoff  at  him,  yea.  appose  him  ?  "  He  who  depart- 
eth  from  evil,  maketh  himself  a  prey  ;  but  the  Lord  seeth  it,  and  it 
displeaseth  him,"  lix.  15.  (d)  Neither  do  ye  pray  aright,  who  are 
satisfied  with  barely  saying  this  petition,  and  think  that  mumbling  it 
over  will  have  a  great  effect,  as  if  the  devil  would  be  exceedingly 
frightened,  and  flee,  when  he  only  heard  these  words  uttered.  Mise- 
rable men  !  how  blind  are  ye  !  is  this  petition  then  a  charm,  to  expel 
the  devil  and  every  hellish  spectre  ?  and  is  God  pleased  witfi  your 
Vol.  ii.  3  P 


514  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

saying  of  these  words  without  heart,  and  without  a  holy  fear  of 
temptation,  and  without  a  hearty  desire  to  be  delivered  from  your 
misery  ?  surely  no:  God  requireth  sincerity.  But  know  that  -'God 
will  deal  wonderfully  and  marvellously  with  the  people,  who  draw 
near  to  him  with  their  mouths,  <<nd  honour  him  with  their  lips," 
This  God  himself,  who  is  the  Amen,  saith,  Isaiah  xxix.  13,   14. 

Alas,  sinners,  behold  your  misery,  and  endeavour  to  recover  out 
of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  in  which  he  takes  you  captive  at  his  will. 
He  seeks  to  draw  you  to  destruction,  and  that  unawares,  without 
your  knowledge,  that  he  may  cause  you  to  inherit  his  perdition. 
Ye  are  afraid  of  seeing  him  in  a  bodily  shape,  but  it  behooves  you 
to  be  more  afraid  of  him,  when  he  conceals  himself  in  his  subtilty  :  he 
goeth  about  you  in  a  secret  manner,  like  a  roaring  lion,  that  he  may 
devour  you.  O  be  concerned,  and  cry  earnestly  to  the  Lord,  that 
he  would  deliver  you  from  him,  from  the  world,  and  still  more  from 
yourselves. 

But,  believers,  who  have  learned  by  experience,  and  have  fre- 
quently seen  that  sin  lightly  besets  you  through  the  temptation,  not 
only  of  Satan,  and  of  the  world,  but  also  of  your  own  corrupt  flesh, 
endeavour  to  be  delivered  from  those  evil  ones.     And  therefore, 

1.  Behold  your  obligation  to  serve  the  Lord.  It  is  your  duty  to 
serve  him  on  account  of  his  eternal  glory,  which  he  possesseth,  as 
an  almighty  king  :  "  Forasmuch  as  there  is  none  like  unto  thee, 
O  Lord,"  saith  the  prophet,  "  thou  art  great,  and  thy  name  is  great 
jn  might ;  who  would  not  fear  thee,  thou  King  of  nations,  for  to  thee 
doth  it  appertain  \  forasmuch  as  among  all  the  wise  men  of  the  na- 
tions, and  in  all  the  kingdoms  there  is  none  like  thee  ?"  Jer.  x.  6,  7. 
How  many  favours  hath  he  bestowed  on  you,  as  your  Father  in  Christ, 
and  that  only,  that  ye  might  live  for  him,  and  not  for  yourselves. 
The  Son  of  God  "  gave  himself  for  you,  that  he  might  redeem  you 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  you  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zeal- 
ous of  good  works,"  Titus  ii.  14.  Have  ye  not  entered  into  an  en- 
gagement to  him  and  "  sworn,"  as  it  were,  with  an  Amen  to  his 
demand,  "  awd  will  ye  not  perform  it,  that  ye  will  keep  his  righteous 
judgments  r"  Psalm  cxix.  106.  This  obligation  and  this  bond  ought 
to  have  a  great  weight  on  your  souls,  and  should  induce  you  to  watch 
with  greater  caution  against  temptation. 

2.  Be  firmiy  resolved,  and  earnestly  desirous  to  live  in  a  holy  and 
tender  manner  before  the  Lord,  according  to  his  will.  With  Paul 
we  ought  to  *'  follow  after  perfection."  and  therefore  to  "  forget  the 
things  that  are  behind,  and  to  reach  forth  to  those  which  are  before, 
and  to  press  toward  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q    127—129.  515 

God  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Philip,  iii.  12,  14.  How  good  is  it  to  look 
often  into  ourselves,  to  see  our  declensions,  and  to  bestir  ourselves 
anew,  like  king  David,  when  he  said,  Psalm  cxix.  59,  60.  "  I 
thought  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies,  I 
made  haste  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandments."  For  when 
we  have  ^uch  a  desire  to  holiness,  we  will  strive  the  more  earnestly 
and  manfully. 

3.  \  re  ye  desirous  to  excel  in  holiness,  and  to  have  an  abundant 
entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  God,  do  not  then  study  your 
ease,  but  prepare  for  fighting  :  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  ; 
for  strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  which  leadeth  unto  life," 
saith  the  the  Lord  Christ,  Luke  xiii.  24.  Matt.  vii.  14.  Know 
that  your  tempters  will  harrass  you ;  they  are  not  pleased  with  your 
withdrawing  from  their  service  ;  they  seek  by  alluring  and  by  af« 
flicring  means  to  bring  you  back  to  them  ;  if  they  cannot  prevail, 
they  will  then  case  as  many  stumbling-blocks  in  your  way  as  they 
can  ;  and  ye  must  overcome  them  all,  or  "  ye  will  not  be  crowned,'* 
as  that  valiant  champion  Paul  speaks,  2  Tim.  ii.  5.  God  himself, 
when  he  delivered  you  out  of  the  power  of  darkness,  called  you  to 
fight :  k<  Fight  then  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on  eternal  life, 
whereunto  ye  are  also  called,"  1  Tim.  vi.   12. 

4.  Learn  by  all  means  to  know  your  enemie-s,  and  their  wiles 
otherwise  ye  cannot  guard  against  their  assaults  and  temptations  • 
but  when  we  know  them,  we  have  partly  vanquished  them.  Paul 
desired  that  the  Corinthians  should  confirm  their  love  toward  the 
penitent  incestuous  person,"  as  he  himself  also  did,  "  lest,"  saith 
be,  "  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  of  us  ;  for  we  are  not  ignorant 
of  his  devices,"  2  Cor.  ii.  8,  11.  Therefore  observe  well  their 
depths,  and  their  wiles,  and  how,  and  by  what  ways  they  have  often 
insuared  you,  that  ye  may  know  in  what  manner  to  watch  against 
them.  It  is  also  necessary  to  distinguish  when,  and  in  what  manner 
each  enemy  assaults  you.  Sometimes  they  will  all  three  attack  the 
soul  at  once  ;  but  sometimes  also  each  separately,  although  they 
soon  hasten  to  assist  each  other  :  observe  how.  The  flesh  rises  and 
works  within  by  vile  and  evil  thoughts  and  lusts  ;  the  world  enticeth 
by  her  honours,  gayeties,  profits  and  pleasures  ;  and  the  devil  joins 
often  these,  that  he  may  urge  the  soul  on  to  these  things  by  repre- 
senting the  world  in  the  fairest  colours.  But  in  some  cases  he  is 
active  alone,  yet  in  such  a  secret  manner  that  the  soul  knows  not 
but  that  the  abominations,  which  are  injected  into  her,  proceed  from 
her  own  depravity  ;  which  therefore  sorely  distresses  her.  But  it  is 
certain,  that  the  temptation  proceeds  from  the  devil  only,  when  the 


516  THE  SIXTH  PETITION  EXPLAINED. 

thoughts  that  are  injected  into  her,  are  unnatural,  inhuman  and  blas- 
phemous ;  which  will  therefore  also  disturb  the  soul,  and  are  sug- 
gested likewise  very  suddenly,  and  when  a  person  had  not  thought 
of  them  before.  We  may  justly  call  them  "  fiery  darts,  bufferings 
of  Satan,  and  sharp  thorns  in  our  flesii,"  Eph.v.  16,  2  Cor.  xii.  7. 

5.  Arm  yourselves  against  these  enemies  with  the  truth,  with 
righteousness,  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel,  with  hope,  the 
word  of  God  and  prayer.  We  may  learn  of  Paul,  Eph.  vi.  11—18, 
how  we  ought  to  arm  ourselves  with  these  weapons,  and  how  neces- 
sary they  are.  Our  time  will  not  permit  us  to  extend  our  discouise5 
and  therefore  we  do  not  enlarge  upon  this. 

6.  Be  watchful  and  on  your  guard,  that  ye  may  not  be  attacked 
unawares.  The  spiritual  warriour  must  be  continually  in  arms,  he 
must  look  before  him,  and  about  him,  and  be  thoughtful,  that  he  may 
not  be  attacked  either  secretly  or  suddenly  :  "  Be  sober,  be  vigi- 
lant, because  your  adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh 
about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  1  Peter  v.  8.  *■'  Let  discre- 
tion preserve  you,  understanding  keep  you,"  Prov.  ii.  11.  Oppose 
forthwith  sinful  emotions  and  injections ;  do  not  pause  long,  for 
otherwise  the  enemy  will  make  a  great  breach  in  your  souls. 

7.  Beware  of  pride,  and  an  imagination  that  ye  can  keep  your- 
selves from  this  and  that  sin  ;  for  this  will  bring  you  to  a  fall.  Pe- 
ter's sad  experience,  Mat.  xxvi.  31,  55,  69 — 75.  ought  to  teach  us 
humility  :  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he 
fall,"  saith  the  apostle,  1  Cor.  x.  12.  And  "be  not  highminded, 
but  fear,"  Rom.  xi.  20.  Therefore  it  behooves  each  of  us  to  pray 
in  the  most  fervent  manner  with  David,  Psalm  xix.  13.  "  Keep 
bark  thy  servant  from  presumptuous  sins,  let  them  not  have  domin- 
ion over  me  :  then  shall  I  be  upright,  and  I  shall  be  innocent  from 
the  transgression." 

8.  Be  not  however  too  timorous,  or  too  fearful  of  your  enemies : 
they  would  make  use  of  such  a  discouragement  to  their  advantage, 
and  your  power  would  forsake  you  :  "  If  thou  faint  in  the  day  of  ad- 
versity, thy  strength  is  small,"  saith  the  wise  man,  Prov,  xxiv.  10, 
but  "  watch,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like  men,  be  strong," 
1  Cor.  xvi.  13.  Ye  have  to  do  with  conquered  enemies  :  "  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ;  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  over- 
come the  world,"  saith  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  John  xvi. 
23.  They  have  indeed  "  all  fallen  before  him,"  ye  need  only  "  slay 
them  after  your  Lord,"  like  the  armourbearer  of  Jonathan,  1  Sam. 
xiv.  13.  Only  cry  continually  to  him  for  strength:  "  He  is  the 
mighty  One,  on  whom  help  is  laid,"  Psalm  lxxxix.  19,  and  "hide 


LII.  LORD'S  DAY.  Q.  12/— 129.  5 if 

yourselves  with  him,"  like  David,  Psalm  cxliii.  9,  « that  he  may 
deliver  you  from  your  enemy.  '  When  we  do  this,  we  "  strengthen 
ourselves  in  the  Lord  our  God,"  like  that  valiant  king  of  Israel,  1 
Sam.  xxx.  6,  and  we  "  become  strong  in  the  "  Lord,  and  in  the 
power  of  his  might,"  Eph.  vi    10. 

9.  As  ye  pray  to  your  Father  for  all  things,  so  it  behooves  you 
to  glorify  and  thank  him  in  all  things  :  «  In  every  thing  give  thanks : 
for  this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Lhrist  Jesus  concerning  you,"  saith 
Paul,  1  Thess.  v.  18.  Yea,  we  ought  to  pray,  that  we  may  praise 
him,  and  we  ought  to  engage  in  our  praying  to  praise  him,  and  thus 
to  make  use  of  our  engagement  to  glorify  him,  as  a  motive  to  urge 
our  prayer  the  more  powerfully.  In  this  manner  did  the  church 
conclude  her  prayer  for  deliverance  from  her  enemies,  when  she 
said,  Psalm  lxxix.  13.  "  ^o  we  thy  people,  and  sheep  of  thy  past- 
ure will  give  thee  thanks  for  ever  :  we  will  shew  forth  thy  praise  to 
all  generations." 

10.  Trust  also,  when  ye  say  Amen,  that  the  Father  will  grant 
your  petitions  in  his  own  time,  and  in  his  own  way.  It  is  his  will 
that  we  should  think  well  of  him,  and  trust  in  him.  It  is  unjust  to 
mistrust  our  gracious  Father,  and  to  suspect  him  of  sparingness  and 
austerity.  He  requires  that  we  should  «  ask  all  things  in  laith, 
nothing  wavering ;  for  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea, 
driven  with  the  wind  and  lossed  r  for  let  not  that  man  think  that  he 
shall  receive  any  thing  of  the  Lord,"  James  i.  6,  7.  His  Son  hath 
indeed  purchased  all  things  for  you,  and  hath  promised  you  all  things 
in  the  covenant  of  grace,  especially  that  your  prayers  shall  be  heard, 
and  "  all  the  promises  of  God  are  in  him  yea,  and  in  him  Amen," 
2  Cor.  i.  20.  And  thus  we  conclude  all  the  truths  which  we  have 
explained  in  the  foregoing  discourses,  and  all  our  prayers  with  the 
words  of  David  from  Psalm  Ixxii.  18,  19.  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  Israel,  who  only  doth  wonderous  things.  And  blessed 
be  his  glorious  name  for  ever,  and  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with 
his  glory  :  Amen,  and  Amen." 


FIJYIS, 


INDEX 


OF    THE 

PRINCIPAL  MATTERS  AND  PASSAGES  OF 


'3 
ILLUSTRATED,  VINDICATED  AND  EXPOUNDED  IN  THIS  WORK 


ACTS  i.  5,  x.  38,  45. 
Acts  vii.  51, 

xiii.  2, 

xiii.  32,  33. 

xvii.  25, 

xxii.  16, 
Adam,  his  creation, 

He  had  before  his  fall  an  ability  to  believe  in  Christ, 
His  fall,  see  Fall. 

God  did  not  receive  all  mankind  in  Adam  into  favour 
Adultery,  what, 
Is  abominable, 

Altar  on  which  Christ  was  offered,  what, 
Amen,  what  this  word  signifies  in  praying, 
Angels,  were  created  the  first  day, 
Had  a  season  allotted  them  for  their  trial, 
Those  who  continued  to  stand  were  confirmed, 
The  manner  in  which  they  do  the  will  of  Ged, 
Anger  of  man, 
What, 
Is  a  sause  of  murder, 


Vol. 

Page. 

1, 
2, 
2, 
li 
2, 
2, 
h 
72 
2, 
333 

1, 

25/ 

2, 
1, 
2, 
ibid. 

ibid. 

1» 
2, 
2, 
INDEX 


Anger  of  God,  what, 

Anointing  of  Christ,  what  and  how  necessary, 

Anointing  of  believers,  what, 

The  foundation  of  their  anointing, 

Jfihesis,  what, 

Articles  of  faith  were  not  arranged  by  the  apostles, 

What  end  they  serve, 

Fundamental  articles,  what, 

Ascension  of  Christ,  how  it  took  place  according  to 
both  his  natures, 

It  was  local, 

When  it  happened, 

It  was  in  the  presence  of  angels  and  men, 

Was  effected  by  his  Father's  power  and  his  own, 

Took  place  but  once, 

Christ   spoke  and  pronounced  blessings,  when    he 
ascended 

He  ascended  visibly, 

Locally, 

The  reality  and  necessity  of  his  ascension, 

The  advantages  of  his  ascension, 

The  happiness  which  believers  derive  from  his  ascen- 
sion, 375,  376 

Who  those  happy  persons  are,   and  how  they  must 
conduct  themselves.. 

Christ  ascended  to  heaven,  in  order  to  sit  at  the  right 
hand  of  God, 

Assent  of  faith,  what, 

How  it  is  wrought, 

Assurance  that  we  are  in  a  state  of  gra;e,  how  it  is 
effected, 

It  is  proved, 

Believers  must  endeavour  to  obtain  assurance, 

Attributes  of  God  are  incommunicable  and  commu- 
nicable, 

B 

Backbiting  is  practised  from  different  motives. 
'Jo  is  n.  what  the  word  signifies, 
Si.i,n  and  the  thing  signified, 
(lath  respect  also  to  future  sins, 


Vol 

Page. 

1, 
1, 

261; 

,  262 

h 
ibid. 

2, 
l"l 
ibid. 
1, 
365, 
367 

367, 

,  368 
369 
,  370 
ibid. 
,  373 

373- 

-375 

376- 

-381 
1, 
158 

Ii 
159 
h 

174- 

-m 

*, 

362, 
*, 

o  1 
34- 

—38 
INDEX.  iii 

Vol.       Page. 

The  union  of  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified  in  bap- 
tism, 

The  institution  and  promise  of  baptism, 

Baptism  of  John  and  Christ,  how  they  agree, 

By  and  to  whom,  where  and  when  baptism  must  be 
administered, 

Baptism  may  not  be  repeated, 

It  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  church, 

Who  are  partakers  of  the  grace  of  baptism,  and  how 
they  must  demean  themselves, 

Opinion  of  the  Pap  sts  concerning  baptism, 

That  the  water  in  baptism  doth  not  wash  away  sins, 
but  the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ  proved  and  de» 
fended, 

Baptism  of  infants  proved  and  defended, 

Baptism  is  come  in  the  stead  of  circumcision, 

Two  questions  relative  to  infant  baptism, 

Evil  conduct  of  many  with  respect  to  baptism, 

How  we  ought  to  improve  our  own  baptism  and  that 
of  our  children, 

Bara,  what  this  Hebrew  word  means, 

Batach,  emphasis  of  this  Hebrew  word, 

Believers  (true)  how  they  differ  from  temporary  be- 
lievers, 

Why  they  must  die  as  well  as  the  ungodly, 

Birth,  the  holy  birth  of  Christ,  how  it  covers  sins, 

Blaspheming  the  name  of  God,  what, 

Blood  of  Christ  signifies  his  bloody  suffering, 

Is  precious. 

Bread  denotes  material  bread  in  the  fourth  petition, 

All  thai  is  necessary  for  the  body, 

How  we  have  a  right  to  it, 

Why  it  is  called  daily, 

How  and  why  Cod  gives  it, 

Burial  of  Christ  proper  on  many  accounts, 

C 

Canaan  was  not  the  principal  inheritance,  but  a  super- 

added  promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  U,  292 

The  glory  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  293 

A  long  life  therein  was  a  blessing,  ibid, 

Vol.  it.  3  Q 


2, 

39,  40 
40,41 

47,  48 
48,  49 

50—55 

58,  59 

59—62 

62--66 

64,  65 

66—69 

69—72 

73—75 

-. 
h 
h 

166-168 
i, 

301,  302 

2, 

239,  240 

!, 
ibid. 

2, 
474,  475 
476 

478,  479, 

1, 

331,  332 

iv  INDEX. 


Cattle,  stealing  them  punishable, 
Tormenting  them,  inhuman  and  wicked, 

Cause,  knowing  tiie  causes  ot  things  conduces  to  hap- 
piness, 

Ceremonial,  what  this  means. 

Cliazah,  what  this  H'.-brew  word  denotes, 

Childien,    th<  y  must  be    baptized,  see  baptism, 

Their  duty  to  their  parents, 

Children  of  God,  believers  are  such, 

Inquiry  who  they  are, 

Their  happiness,  and  the  unhappiness  of  others, 

How  the  children  of  God  must  conduct  themselves, 

Christ,  how  he  was  bom  without  original  sin, 

His  Godhead  proved  and  defended, 

Is  the  seed  of  Uavid, 

Is  an   absolute  surety, 

He  did  not  die  for  all  men, 

What  the  name  Christ    signifieth,   and  why  he  is  so 
called, 

He  could  not  sin, 

He  is  not  corporally  present  in  the  Lord's  supper, 

Christians  are  believers,  and  why  they  are  so  called 

Their  happiness, 

Who  are,  and  who  are  not  true  Christians, 

How  true  Christians  must  conduct, 

Church,  signification  of  the  word, 

Names  and  different  respects  of  the  church, 

The  true  members  of  the  church, 

Christ  alone  is  her  head, 

Epithets  of  the  church 

Her  different  situations, 

The  constituent  causes,   circumstances  and  preserva- 
tion of  the  church, 

How  we  believe  a  church, 

Her  glory, 

Inquiry  concerning  the  true  church, 

The  distinguishing  mark  of  the  true  church, 

The  true  church  exists  with  the  reformed, 

See  the  preface. 

Wno  are  and  who  are  not  true*  members  of  the  church, 
how  we  may  become  such,  and  how  the  true  mem- 
bers ought  to  conduct,  432.-4^ 


fti 

Page 

2, 
,  345 
1, 

► 
2, 
h 

i 
2, 

i 
h 
,  196 
,  206 
,  204 
-209 

l'i 
--300 

1, 
,  275 

299, 

i  300 

1  10, 

,  135 

149- 

-151 

253, 
300 
1, 
267, 
268- 

-270 

270, 
1, 
Hid. 
422 
423, 
42*- 

■428 
431 

431, 
432 
ibid. 

INDEX 


Vol.       Page, 


£oL  i.  24,. 

ii.   11,  12, 

iii.   10. 
Comfort,  wnat  it  means  in  the  word  of  God, 
It  is  necessary  in  every  icspect, 
Belongs  only  to  believers, 
"Wherein  it  doth  .-:ot  consist, 
Believers  under  the  O'.d  Testament  enjoyed  it, 
Means  to  obtain  comfort, 
Improper  comfort  of  many, 

Who  are  partakers  of  the  true  comfort,  and  how  they 

ought  to  improve  it, 
Comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost* 
Coming  of  God's  kingdom,  the  manner  of  it, 
Why  we  must  pray  for  this, 

How  it  is  disregarded,  and  how  we  ought  to  regard  it, 
Communion  of  the  saints   in  general, 
With  whom  the  saints  have  communion, 
It  must  be  exercised  in  the  Lord's  supper, 
Community  of  goods,  there  is  none, 
Condemning  a  person  rashly  and   unheard,  is  done  in 

different  ways, 
Confidence  in  general  and  in  particular  explained, 
Produceth  assurance, 
Is  unto  and  from  justification 
Consubstantiation,  how  it  must  be  understood 
Conversion,  what  this  word  signifies, 
Wherein  it  doth  not,  and  doth  consist, 
It  is  a  work  of  God  and  also  of  man, 
Is  a  first,  second  and  daily, 
False  and  good  evidences  of  conversion, 
Conviction  of  the  unconverted,  and  exhortation  to  con- 
version, 
The  duties  of  the  converted;, 
1  Cor.  i.  30, 

ii.   14, 

iii.   12,  13., 

vi.  13, 

vii.  14, 

viii.  4, 

A»        ■-■*': 


I J 
2, 
1, 
h 

2,  3 

3,  4 
5 
12 

13,  14 

138,  139 

15—18 

4Q9 

2, 

449-452 

452,  453 

453-458 

1, 
429,  430 

2, 

343,  344 

2, 
2, 

363.  364 

I, 

159-162 

162,  163 
2, 
2< 
172-179 
179,  180 

184-186 

186,  187 

187-189 

Ii 

127-130 
98,     99 

Is 

441,  442 

Is 
2, 
2, 
2, 

472,  473 

A 


INDEX, 


i  Cor.  xii.  13, 

xv.  29, 

xv.  36—53, 

xv.  47, 
-    xv.  50, 
Covenant  of  works  explained  and  proved, 
Adam  could  keep  it, 
It  was  made  with  him  and  his  posterity, 
How  it  was  broken, 
Covenant  ot  redemption,  what, 
Covenani  of  grace  explained, 
We  must  enter  into  the  covenant  of  grace. 
Covenant  established  at  Sinai, 
What  kind  of  a  covenant  that  was  not,  and  what  kind  it 

wa^, 
Coveting,  what  it  is.  and  what  kind  is  forbidden, 
Why  it  is  mentioned  twice  in  the  tenth  commandment, 
Covetousness  exhibited  with  respect  to  its  root,  branch- 
es and  fruits,  with  the  degrees  of  its  growth, 
Counsel  of  peace,     bee  covenant  of  redemption. 
Creation,  what, 
Of  all  things,  of  what,  by  whom,  by  what  power,  how, 

when  and  to  what  end, 
Creed,  (the  apostles)   why  so  called, 
It   is  not  the  word  of  God,  but  only   a  brief  compend 

of  the  doctrine  of  faith, 
Design  of  the  creed, 
How  it  must  be  explained, 
Crucifixion,  what  kind  of  a  punishment, 
Why   an  accursed   death, 
The  jfheacy  of  Christ's  crucifixion, 
Cursing,  what  kind  is  forbidden, 

D 
Dan.  xii.  2. 

Death  of  Christ,  why  necessary, 
In  what  respects  advantageous, 
Who  partake  of  Christ's  death, 
See  crucifixion. 

Death  of  Ik  lievers  no  proper  punishment  of  sin, 
Why  death  befalls  them  as  well  as  the  ungodly. 


Vol. 

Page. 

1, 
h 

441,  442 

1, 

414,  445 

1, 
1, 
h 

24,     25 

4$ 

48,    49 
1, 
1, 
o 
—  » 
198-202 

2, 

376,  377 
2, 

377-380 

1, 
196-200 

1, 
ibid. 

ibid. 

ibid. 

h 
319,  320 
2, 
1 
1, 

329,  330 

335, 336 

340,  341 

1, 

332,  333 
INDEX.  vii 

Vol.      Page, 
Debtors,  who,  and  why  they  must  be  forgiven.  2,  492-494 

Deceiving  our  neighbour,  what  kind  is  not,  and  what 

kind  is  forbidden,  2,  366 

Deliverance  of  sinners,   exhibited  with  respect  to  its 

greatness, 
Doth  not  extend  to  angels. 
Wherein  it  consists, 
Concern  with  respect  to  it, 
Deliverance  from  evil,  how  it  is  effected, 
Deliverer.     See  Mediator. 
Denying,  believers  must  deny  themselves, 
Descent  into  hell,  what, 
Desertion  (faithless)  dissolves  wedlock, 
The  deserted  person  may  not  marry   again,   while  his 

consort  is  living,  except  in  certain  cases, 
Deut.  vi    5, 

xxi.  23, 
Devil,  how  he  tempts 

Denying  his  operations  in  the  world,  is  assisting  him, 
Dikaioun,  signification  of  this   Greek  word, 
Discipline  of  the  church   on  whom  it  is  exercised, 
Shuts  the  impenitent  out  of  the  church,  and  how, 
Defended, 

Excludes  none  from  hearing  the  word, 
Readmits  the  penitent, 
Discontentment    particularly   forbidden    in   the   tenth 

commandment,  2,  277 

Dominion  of  man  before  the  fall  belongs  to  the  image 

of  God, 
Douleia,  Popish  interpretation  of  this  word  erroneous, 
Duels  are  to  be  condemned, 

E 

Eating  of  Christ's  flesh,   and   drinking  of  his   blood, 

what,  2,     83,    84 

Eccl.  iii.  1,  2,           265 

iii.  18—20,  I,            439 

vii.   16,  17,  2,  249,  250 

viii.  4,  2,  459,  460 

Ekklesia,  what  this  Greek  word  signifies,  1,          420 

Election  (eternal)  what,  1,          426 


h 
103, 
104, 
105 

2, 

507, 
I, 
u 

job, 
o 
ibid. 

1, 
1, 

319, 
2, 

1, 

503- 

-505 
465 

2, 
144, 
145, 

,  146 
146; 

,  147 

1, 
208 

2, 
viii  INDEX. 


Respects  certain  persons, 

Is  not  on  account  of  foreseen  faith  and  good  works. 

But  from  the  free  good  pleasure  of  God, 

Is  unto  faith  and  good  works, 

Envy,  what  and  how  abominable, 

Eph.  iv.  10, 

iv.  24, 

vi.   1—3, 
Eperetoma,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Efiiousious.  emphasis  of  this  Greek  word, 
E/u'strep/iein,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Essence  of  God,  what  it  is, 
Eternity  of  God, 

Eaangciion,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Evil  directed  for  good, 
Evil,  who  are  so  called, 
How  we  are  delivered  from  them, 
Excommunication.     See  discipline  - 
Exod.  xvi.  23,  29, 

xxxi.  13,  16,  17", 

xxxiii.  23, 

xxxv.  3, 
Ezek.  xviii.  20, 

xx.   11,  12, 


Faith  (saving)  is  necessary, 

We  are  saved  thereby, 

See  justification. 

The  object  of  faith,  what,  153—155 

Is  to  be  distinguished  from  a  historical  and  temporary 

faith,  and  from  a  faith  of  miracles,  155,  156 

The  nature  and  acts  of  faith,  156—164 

How  we  live  by  faith,  163,  164 

It  is  also  an  act  of  the  will,  164 

It  is  precious,  464 

The  happiness  of  those  who  have  it,  164,  165 

Who  have  it  not,  and  who  have  it,  1 65-- 168 

Motives  lo  believe,  141-143 

Pretences  to  excuse  believing,  answered,  248,  2i9 

How  they  who  have  faith  ought  to  conduct,  168,  16? 


Vol. 

Page. 

i> 

42  & 
ibid, 
ibid*. 

2, 
1> 
h 
2, 
1, 
o 
2, 
1, 
I> 
I, 
1, 
2, 
507 

,  508 

2, 
2, 
1, 
,  192 

2, 
I, 
,  59 
277 

,  278 

1, 
153 

INDEX,  is 

Vol.  Page, 
Faith  is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost  through  the  gospel  2,  5,  6 
It  is  wrought  effectually.  7,      8 

The   effectual    working  of  faith  by  the    Holy    Ghost 

doth  not  destroy  freewill,  8 

The   different  ways  in  whicli  the  Holy    Ghost  works 

faith, 
What  a  strong  and  a  weak  faith  is, 
How  it  is  confirmed  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Means  to  confirm  faith, 

How  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  faith  by  the  sacraments, 
Reproof  of  those  who  are  weak  in  the  faith, 
How  some  grow  in  faith, 
Helps  to  confirm  faith, 
Faith  in  God  the  Father, 
In  God  the  Son, 
In  God  the  Holy  Ghost, 
Fall  of  Adam  by  eating  the  forbidden  fruit, 
Was  a  grievous  sin, 

It  did  not  happen  without  the  providence  of  God, 
Occasioned  by  the  seduction  of  the  devil, 
Was  a  wilful  disobedience, 
Happened  not  on  the  sixth  day, 
Reproof,  admonition  and  comfort  relative  to  the  fall, 
Falsifying  of  words,  how  this  is  done, 
Father,   the  first  person  in  the    Godhead  is  more    fre- 
quently called   God  than  the    Son  and  the  Holy 

Ghost, 
His  dispensation  in  different  respects,  what, 
He  is  a  father  of  many, 
The    happiness  of  those  whose  father  he  is,   and   the 

unhappiness  of  others,  203,  204 

Who  those  are  who  may  esteem  him  their  father,  and 

how  they  ought  to  conduct,  205--209 

He  is  the  most  special  object  of  worship,  2;  215,  216 

Believers  may  address  him  as  their  father,  416,  417 

Believers  under  the  Old  Testament  addressed  God  as 

their  father,  4 1 S 

The  ground  on  which   we  address  God  as  our  father 

is  not  that  we  perform  our  duty,  418 

Why  we  must  address  him  particularly  as  father,  ibid. 


9, 
11, 
12, 
13, 
17 

23- 

-25 

25- 

—28 

28- 

—30 

1,  201, 
239, 
411, 
1, 
52 

52, 
49- 

-51 
52 

59- 

-«4 

o 
1,  180, 
194, 
195, 
iNDEX, 


Vol.      Page 


What  and  whose  privilege   this   is,   how  it  is  abused, 

and  how  it  must  be  rightly  used, 
Father  and  mother,  who, 
We  must  honour  them  with  many  duties, 
Their  duties  to  their  inferiors, 
Flesh  (corrupt)  how  it  tempts, 
Forcing  of  women  is  abominable, 
Forgiving  debtors,  what,  and  what  end  it  serves, 
Forgi>  ing  sin  a  work  of  God  alone, 
Wherein  it  consists, 
Takes  place  daily, 
Fornication,  what, 
Is  abominable, 

G 

Gcrnab,  what  this  Hebrew  word  signifies, 
Gal.   iii.  I  3, 

iv.  21—31, 
v.  25, 
Generation  of  the  Son  by  the  Father   the  only  ground 

of  his  sonship,  proved   defended,  and  explained, 
Is  a  fundamental  article  of  the  faith. 
Gen.  i.  26, 
ii.  17, 
iii.  14,  15, 
iii.   17,  IS, 
xiv.    18, 
xx.  2, 
xxi.  9,  iO, 
xxxi.  53, 
Ghost  (Holy)  without  him  we  know  neither  the  Father, 

nor  the  Son, 
Is  the  third  Person  in  the  divine  essence, 
Why  called  Spirit, 

Pioceedeth  from  the  Father  nnd  the  Son, 
y  called  holy, 
person, 
I  re  is  trulv  God, 

•son  distinct  from  the  Father  and 
i  gifts  arc  various, 
'  ;licve  in  him, 


h 

423-429 
290-292 

303-30* 

2, 
2, 
2 

492-494 

2, 
490, 

490-. 92 

-"> 

e>  no 
fi 
1, 

319,  320 

1. 
1, 

416,  417 

1, 

277-281 
U 
1, 

25,     53 

1, 
2, 

486,  487 

2, 
3, 
h 
2, 
h 

400,  401 
ibid. 

402,  403 
404,  405 

405-407 

40f 

408--410 
1, 
412, 
413- 

-417 

2, 
1, 
2, 
I, 
h 
2, 
5, 

171, 
173 

173- 

-177 
INDEX.  xi 

Vol.       Page* 

Our  faith  in  the  Holy  Ghost   demonstrates  the  purity 
of  our  doctrine, 

How  much  depends  upon  having  the  Spirit, 

Who  do,   and  who  do   not  partake  of  him,  and   how 
every  one  must  conduct  toward  him, 

The  Holy  Ghost  works  faith, 

What  he  effected  in  the  birth  of  Christ, 

Gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  see  Holy  Ghost. 

God's  temporal  gifts,  how  abused, 

Glorifying  God,  the  duty  of  believers, 

Glory  of  God,  how  it  shines  forth  in  the  world  and  in 
the  church, 

Gnabad,  what  ihis  Hebrew  word  signifies, 

God.     See  Trinity. 

It  is  selfevident  that  there  is  a  God, 

We  may  not  doubt  whether  there  be  a  God, 

We  know  by  his  names  anil  attributes  what  be  is, 

We  know  who  he  is  by  the   Trinity, 

The  words  essence  and  person  may  be  used  of  God, 

and  what  they  mem,  ibid. 

There  are  in  God  three    distinct   Persons   in   one  es- 
sence, which  is  explained,  proved,  and  defended, 

God  is  faithful  in  preserving  his  woik, 

Reproof  of  those  wao  do  not  conduct  rightly   toward 
God, 

The  duty  of  believers  toward  God, 

God,  signification  of  this  Hebrew  word, 

Goodness  of  God,  what. 

Goodness  of  man  is  the  image  of  God, 

Goods,    we  must   inquire    whether    we  possess   them 

rightfully,  2,  354,  355 

We  must  restore  those,   to  which  we   have  no  lawful 
right, 

Gospel,  what  it  is  and  doth, 

Is  distinguished  into  the  gospel  of  promise  and  of  ful- 
filment, 

Was  published  by  sundry  persons,  &c. 

Grace  of  God.  what, 

Grace  (universal)  denied, 

Gratitude, 

Vol.  ii.  3  R 


178- 

-183 

210, 
184- 

-187 

187- 

-190 

1, 
1, 
1, 
355, 
h 
131, 
132- 

-135 

1, 
1, 
3, 
o 

159, 
INDEX. 


H 

Hab.  ii.  4, 

JJadesy  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Hallowing  of  God's  name  in  general  and  in  particular, 
How  and  why  we  ought  to  pray  for  this, 
Many  neglect  this  duty,   and  how  miserable  they  are, 
Exhortation  to  hallow  the  name  of  God, 
Hatred  of  our  neighbour  forbidden, 
Is  a  cause  of  murder, 

Heart,  how  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  soul,  un- 
derstanding and  strength, 
Heaven  is  a  real  place, 
Is  threefold, 
How  God  is  there, 

Why  we  must  address  God  as  in  heaven, 
The  wiil  ef  God  is  done  in  heaven, 
Heb.  i.  3, 

ii.  10, 

iv.  2, 

iv.  3—10, 

iv.  9;  10, 

X    4, 
Hcena;u  emphasis  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Hell-  sec  descent  into  helL 
Heresy,  its  fruitful  nature, 
Hiizdik,  what  this  Hebrew  word  signifies, 
Holiness    >f  God    what, 
Honour,  we  must  defend  and  promote   the  honour  of 

our  neighbour, 
We  must  honour  our  parents  by  several  duties, 
Hosea  i.  7. 
Housei obbery,  what, 
Humble,  believers  ought  to  be  humble, 
Huperdoulia,  the  worship  which  the  Papists   appropri- 
ate to  Mary, 
Hurt,  we  must  prevent  our  neighbour's  hurt, 


Idolatry  is  eithei  a  greater  or  less, 
Ignorance,  esteemed  by  the  Papists  the  mother  of  de- 
■"otion', 


Vol. 

Page, 

1, 

163,  164 

1, 
2, 

433-436 

436,  437 

438-440 

440-443 

2, 

316,  317 

ibid. 

1, 
1, 
2, 
420,  421 

421  -423 
\ 
1, 

107,  108 

1, 
2, 
279.  280 

1, 
h 
2, 

115.  116 

1, 
1, 
2, 

367,  368 

290-292 

1, 

272,  273 

2, 
1, 

37,     38 

2, 
2, 
2, 

206,  207 

1, 
Vol. 

Page, 

h 
1, 
42—45 

45,  46 

46.  47 

h 

2l7 
21S--221 

221,  222 

222-224 

224,  225 

225,  226 

229,  230 

h 

45,  46 

1, 
INDEX  xin 


Its  hurtful  nature, 

Image  of  God,  man  was  created  in  it, 

"Wherein  it  doth  not,  and  wherein  it  doth  consist, 

The  ends  of  it, 

It  was  natural  to  man, 

Image  and  likeness  (forbidden)  what, 

The  making  and  worshipping  of  images  forbidden. 

History  of  the  ima^e  worship  of  the  heathens,  Jews  and 
Christians, 

Images  of  GoJ,   Christ  and   the  saints  not  to  be  ap- 
proved, 

Unau.iableness  of  imageworship, 

Images  are  not  to  be  tolerated,  as  books  of  the  laity, 

Spiritual  imageworship,  what, 

"VVnq  render  themselves  guilty  of  this, 

Immortality  enjoyed  by  Adam  before  the  fall, 

Immortality  of  rhe  soul, 

Imperfection,  the  doctrine  of  it  explained,   proved  and 

defended,  2,  381-384 

Many  sin  from  an  observation  of  the  imperfections  of 

the  saints,  385 

How  we  ought  to  improve  this  doctrine,  387,  383 

Imputation,     ice  original  s:n  and  justification. 

lnaolity  of  the  sinner  aggravates  his  misery,  1,     65,    66 

How  and  wiiy  it  is  denied  by  many,  66,     67 

W  lie rein  it  doth  not,  and  wherein  it  doth  consist,  67 — 69 

It  is  proved,  69 — 7 1 

Objections  against  it  answered,  71 — 74 

Doth  not  deprive  God  of  his  right  to  demand  obe- 
dience, 71,  72 
Our  inability  to  preserve  ourselves  from  errours,  75 
Believers  subject  to  a  partial  inability,  ibid* 
How  the  unconverted  and  the  converted  ought  to  im- 
prove their  inability,  78— .82 
It  ought  to  excite  to  prayer,  2,  390 
Incarnation,  the  Son  of  God  became  incarnate,  1,  292; 
He  became  by  his  incarnation  very  man  of  very  man,  393 
Of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Mary,  294 
By  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghostj  295 
How,  295-298 
For  what  ends,                                                                        298-301 


xiv  INDEX. 


He  was  made  like  his  brethren, 
The  advantages  of  his  incarnation, 
Who  are,  ;;nd  who  are  not  interested  in  it, 
The  incarnation  is  replete  with  wonders, 
How  we  ought  to  improve  it, 
Incest,  what,  and  how  abominable, 
Independence  of  God,  what, 
Infinity  of  God  in  several  respects, 
Intercession  of  Christ,  wherein  it  consists, 
Invocation  of  saints  and  angels,  unlawful, 
Isaiah  ii.  4, 

xi.  6 — 9 

xxviii.  2  1, 

xxx.  21, 

xxxviii.  1—5, 

Xlix.  23, 

lix.  20, 

J 

Jaarkhoun,  emphasis  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
James  ii.  21, 

iii.  6,  8, 
Jer.  ii.  19, 

Jesus  is  the  mediator, 
See  Christ. 

Why  he  is  called  Jesus, 

He  is  denied  by  many  who  are  not  of  our  communion, 
Advantages  of  the  name  Jesus, 
Who  do  truly  partake  of  him, 
And  who  do  not, 
Exhortation  to  receive  him, 
Duties  of  those  who  have  received  him, 
John  i.  14, 

iii.  5, 

iii.  13, 

iv.  24, 

V.  26, 

"Vi    38, 

Vi.  55,  58, 

xiv.  1, 

XV.  26,  j.  402 


Vol. 

Pagc 
t 
301 

,  302 
:  304 
305 

--308 

2, 
,  330 

h 

i 
1: 

i 
1, 
,  259 

2, 
.  209 

o 

i 
2, 

30» 

1, 
,  96 

2, 
1, 
2, 
h 

2»1 

2, 
1, 
2, 

358. 

,  359 

1, 

83. 

i  84 

1, 

126, 
235 

240- 

-243 

244- 

-246 

246, 
247, 
248, 
249- 

-251 

h 
2, 
h 
2, 
1, 
1, 
2, 
1 ,  .  v* , , 
INDEX. 


xv 


xvii.  3, 

'i  John  ii.  2, 

v.  16, 

Joshua  the  highpriest,  how  a  type  of  Christ, 

Judge,  God  is  the  judge  in  jusiification, 

Judges  xvi.  30, 

Judging.     See  condemning. 

Judgment,  a  general  one  in  death  and  on  the  last  day, 

Judge  in  the  last  judgment, 

Who  and  what  will  be  judged, 

The  process. 

The  circumstances  and  qualities, 

The  certainty  of  it, 

It  is  matter  of  comfort  to  believers, 

Proves  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church,  and  that 
the  Christian  religion  is  true, 

It  ought  to  terrify  the  sinner  and  urge  him  to  repen- 
tance, 

How  believers  ought  to  improve  the  general  judgment, 

Justice  of  God,  what. 

How  it  is  and  must  be  satisfied, 

Justification,  what, 

The  Judge,  the  persons  cited,  the  accusers,  and  the 
Advocate  in  justification, 

Concerning  the  import  of  the  sentence  in  justification, 
the  procuring  causes  of  it,  the  manner  in  which 
the  sinner  obtains  an  interest  in  it,  and  how  it  is 
made  known  to  him, 

We  are  justified  by  faith  only,  and  how, 

The  time  of  it, 

It  is  active  and  passive, 

It  is  a  benefit  of  the  church  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament, 

It  evidences  the  purity  of  our  doctrine, 

The  happiness  of  the  justified. 

Who  they  are,  and  how  they  ought  to  conduct  them- 
selves 

Many  hold  that  we  are  justified  by  works; 

This  is  denied;,  and  the  negative  proved, 


Vol 

Page, 

1, 
h 
1, 
1, 
1, 

4§r: 

,  468 

h 
1, 
388, 
289 

389- 

-392 
393 

S93, 
395 

395-397 
397-399 

1>  106 

106-109 

1,  465-467 

467-471 


471. 

-474 
478 

474- 

-476 
477 
479, 
480- 

-482 

482- 
489 

-491 

491. 

-499 

XVi 


INDEX. 


Justification  without  works  doth  not  make  men  careless 
and  profane, 

Many  do  not  conduct  themselves  rightly  with  respect 
to  justification,  and  how  every  one  ought  to  con- 
duct himself, 

How  justification  is  distinct  from  sanctification, 

K 

Keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  what, 
Are  not  sufficiently  used, 

See  discipline,  power  of  the  church,  and  preaching  of 
the  word. 
Killing,  what  kind  is  not,  and  what  kind  is  forbidden, 
Different  ways  of  killing  our  neighbour, 
Of  our  children, 
Of  ourselves, 
It  is  abominable, 

Kindness,  what, 

King,  Christ  is  a  king, 

Believers  are  kings, 

Kingdom  of  God,  the  universal,, 

Of  grace,  what, 

Tne  king  of  it,  who, 

The  subjects  and  enemies  of  it, 

Is  of  the  Old  Testament,  of  the  New,  and  of  glory, 

How  it  conies, 

Kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  church, 

Knowledge,   Adam  had  it  before  the  fall  by  the  image 

of  God, 
Pertains  to  faith, 

Natural  knowledge  is  not  sufficient, 
What  fundamental  truths  we  must  know, 
How  saving  knowledge  operates, 
Knowledge  of  God,  what, 


Labour,  we  must  labour  faithfully, 
Laaac/iave,  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
JLatreia,  the  popish  interpretation  of  this  word  erro- 
neous, 


roU 

Page. 

1, 

499, 
501. 

-508 

2, 
136 

1-17, 
2 

307- 

-310 

310- 

-313 
314 

314- 

-3  1 6 

313, 
322 

2, 
1, 

260. 
265, 
445, 
446 
447, 
448, 
449- 

-452 

•"J 
1, 

43, 
156, 

15  7 
156 

ibid. 

»1 
n 
239 

2, 


:o8 


INDEX, 


xvii 


Laws,  three  kinds, 

Law  of  ceremonies  related  to  four  kinds  of  matters, 
Why  it  was  given, 

The  moral  law  discovers  the  misery   of  the   sinner, 
and  how, 


The  preface  to  it, 

The  demand  of  it  is  love. 

It  hath  its  relation  to  the   covenant   of  grace  and  of 

works, 
It  is  perfect, 

Is  no  form  of  the  covenant  of  grace, 
Why  it  was  published  from  Horeb, 

The  division  of  it, 

We  must  examine  ourselves  by  it, 

It  relates  to  us  also, 

It  must  be  strictly  preached  for  several  reasons, 

Many  d*  not  make  a  right  use  of  the  law, 

Lies,  different  kinds, 

Are  proper  works  of  the  devil, 

Life,  everlasting  cannot  be  fully  comprehended, 

From  what  it  delivers,  and  what  it  affords  us  to  enjoy, 

Its  circumstances. 

Whether  there  will  be  degrees  of  glory, 

Whether  the  blessed  will  know  one  another, 

Beginnings  of  everlasting  life,  what,  and  how  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  joy  of  temporary  believers, 

How  believers  ought  to  improve  the  doctrine  of  ever- 
lasting life, 

Life,  our  temporal  life,  we  must  provide  for  it, 

God  will  maintain  our  life  and  breath  by  means, 

A  long  life  is  a  blessing, 

Living  to  Chrisi,  what, 

LongsufFering  of  God,  what, 

Lord,  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  believers, 

Their  happiness  on  this  account, 

Who  are,  and  who  are  not  partakers  of  this  happiness, 

How  believers  ought  to  conduct  toward  their  Lord, 


Vol. 

Page. 

1, 
1, 
134,  135 

21—27 

31,    32 

2, 
194 

1, 

22 — 24 

<-> 
1, 
2 
196--193 

1, 
202,  203 

203,  204 
293 

383,  384 
2, 

364,  365 
1, 
448-451 

451-453 
ibid. 

1, 

453-457 

458-462 

2, 
342 

294,  296 

1, 
1, 
I, 

282, 283 

283-285 

285,  286 

287-t2£9 

Vol. 

Page, 

2, 
2, 

241, 
1, 
h 

22, 
36 

h 

o:j 

h 
1, 
2, 
2, 
I, 

346, 
I 
xviii  INDEX; 


God  alone  is  lord  of  life  and  of  death, 
Loi,  how  it  is  abused  in  an  unholy  manner, 
Love  of  God,  what, 

Love  to  God  and  our  neighbour  the  sum  of  the  law, 
Believers  are  bound  to  it, 
Love  to  our  neighbour  enjoined  in  the  sixth  command- 
ment, 2,  31ft 
Love  to  our  enemies  commanded  in  the  law,  and  un- 
der the  Old  Testament, 
Luke  i.  5, 

i.  35, 

vi.  45, 

xxii.  13, 

xxiv.  26, 

xxiv.  49, 

M 

Magistrates  may  punish  capital  offenders  with  death, 

and  may  wage  war, 
Mai   i.  6, 

i.  11, 

ii.  15, 
Man  was  created  with  a  virtuous  goodness, 
"Was  not  created  to  be  damned. 

Is  not  acted  upon  in  conversion  like  a  stock  or  a  stone, 
Manhood  of  Christ  is  not  omnipresent, 
Mans'ealing,  a  capital  offence, 
Mark  xvi.  16, 
Marriage,  what, 
How  it  is  holy, 

It  may  not  be  contracted  with  the  nearest  kindred, 
The    papists    forbid    wrongfully    the  marriage  of  the 

clergy, 
Marriage  is  dissolved  in  various  ways, 
Mary  was  born  with  original  sin, 
Was  the  seed  of  David  and  of  the  tribe  of  Judab5 
Mass.  (the  popish)  original  of  the  name, 
What  it  is, 
Confuted, 

It  denies  the  sacrifice  of  Christ-. 
It  is  an  accursed  idolatry, 


2, 

508,  309 

2, 

430,  431 

2, 
2, 
J, 

41—45 
74 

1.. 
2, 
2, 
2, 
ibid. 
336 

330,  331 

1, 

57,     58 
2, 

116,  117 
117-120 
!20, 121 

INDEX. 


Pretended  arguments  in  favour  of  it  answered, 
How  we  ought  to  conduct  .with  respect  to  it, 
Matt.  lii.  11, 

V.  4, 

v.  17,  18,  19, 

V.  34—  37, 

v.  39 — 48, 

xii.  5,  7, 

XV.  5, 
xx.  28, 
xxii    31,  32, 
xxii.  37 — 40, 
xxiii.  9, 
xxiii.  16 — 22, 
xxvi.  64, 
xxviii.  19, 
xxviii    20, 
Mediator,  what  qualities  he  must  possess, 

How  and  for  what  end  he  is  given, 

To  whom  he  is  given, 

The  unhappiness  of  those  who  are  not   interested  in 

him, 
What  we  ought  to  do  with  respect  to  him, 
Meekness,  what, 
Melchizedek,  who  he  was,  and  ho  w  Christ  was  a  priest 

after  his  order, 
Mercy  of  God,  what  it  is,  and  how  it  is  exercised, 

It  doth  not  militate  against  his  justice, 

Mercy  of  men    what, 

Messias,  Jesus  is  the  Messias, 

Meaning  of  this  Hebrew  name, 

Metanoein,  what  this  Greek  word  signifies. 

Miracle,  what, 

Misery  of  the  fallen  angels,  of  the  whole  creation  and 
of  man, 

Man  doth  not  know  his  misery, 

We  learn  our  misery  from  the  law  by  comparing  our- 
selves with  the  law* 
Vol.  it.  3  S 


Vol. 

Page. 
121,  122 
». 
J, 
2, 
254,  255 

2, 
2, 

278,  279 

2, 
1, 

309,  310 

1, 
1, 

22—24 

2, 
2, 
1, 
2, 
1, 
1, 
123-126 

127-129 

139—141 
141-145 

2, 
1, 

259-260 

1, 

96,  97 
97,  98 

2, 
1, 
253 

2, 
1, 
1, 
20,  21 

21—27 


X£ 


INDEX. 


The  Holy  Ghost  convinceth  the  sinner  of  his  misery, 

Who  those  are  who  do  not  know  their  misery,  how 
dangerous  their  condition  is,  and  what  they  must 
do  id  order  to  become  acquainted  with  their 
misery, 

The  believer  must  endeavour  to  obtain  a  greater 
knowledge  of  his  misery, 

The  misery  of  man  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  ren- 
ders him  detestable, 

Moral,  what, 

Mortification  of  the  old  man, 

Motives  and  means  to  mortify  the  old  man, 
Mother  must  be  honoured  as  well  as  the  father. 
Murder,  see  killing. 
The  murders  of  the  papists  exhibited, 

N 
Mkab,  emphasis  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Names  of  Gorl,  several, 
What  the  name  of  God  signifieth, 
How  it  is  used  and  abused, 
A'asa,  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Nature,  what  is  meant  by  nature  in  the  catechism, 
Man  is  prone  by  nature  to  hate  God  and  his  neighbour, 
Neighbour,  who  is  a  man's  neighbour, 
We  must  promote  his  advantage, 
We  must  deal  with  him  as  we  desire    that  he   should 

deal  with  us, 
JV'imos,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Nourishment,  ;bodily  and  spiritual)  necessary, 
Numbers  xxxvi.  6, 

O 
Oath,  what  an  oath  is,  and  what  pertains  to  it, 
We  utter  an  oath  ourselves,  or  others  do  it  for  us,   to 

adjure  us, 
Whether  we  may  swear  an  oath, 
WhStfier  we  mray  swear  by    tie  •  ints, 
WhethvT  wi-  -«i.  y  ■      ■    ■  -h  meaning  words  and  men* 

tal  rcseivauons  in  oaths. 


Vol. 
Page. 
1   32 — 36 


36, 


2, 


98. 
1,  334—336 

2,  173-177 

1,  342-345 
5,  288,  289 

2,  32* 
1, 

173,  174 

2, 

236  432 

237-243 

2, 
1> 
27—30 

I, 
2, 
352 

2, 
2, 

77,  78 

1, 
2,  251,  252 
253-255 
255-257 

257,  2S* 


INDEX. 


xxi 


Whether  we  ought  to  keep   an  oath  which  we  have 

sworn  to  heretics, 
How  fur  we  are  bound  by  our  oath, 
We  muse  inquire  in  what  manner  we  have  sworn, 
Those  who  have  sworn  falsely  are  abominable, 
Several   duties,   which    we   must  observe   relative  to 

oaths, 
Omnipresence  of  God,  what, 
Original  sin  is  either  imputed  or  inherent, 
Ho'i  we  inherit  it, 
All  men  are  born  with  it, 
Own,  what  it  means  to  be  one's  own, 
It  is  a  miserable  condition, 


Vol.       Page. 
258,  259 

2  257,  260 

260,  261 


1, 
1, 


261-263 
55—57 

57,  58 
5 

5,       6 


Pancguris,  What  this  Greek  word  signifies,  1,  421 

Pares. s.  meaning  of  this   Greek  word   according  to 

some, 
Patience,  what, 
Patriarchs,  who, 

Peace  with  our  neighbour  prevents  murder, 
Peculation,  what, 

Peirasmos,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Penitents,   several  classes  of  them  in  the   primitive 

church, 
Perfection,  believers  must  pursue  after  it, 
Perjury,  what, 

Person,  what  we  must  understand  by  a  divine  Person, 
There  are  three  distinct  persons  in  the  divine  essence, 

1  Peter  iii.  19, 

iii.  20    21, 
iii.  21, 

2  Peter  i.   1, 

Pezel,  What  this  Hebrew  word  signifies, 
Philip,  ii.  7, 
Pilate  (Pontius)  who  he  was.  why  he  is  mentioned  in 

the  creed,  and  why  Christ  suffered  under  him, 
pisteuo,  signification  of  this  Greek  word, 
Pneuma,  what  this  Greek  word  denotes, 
Polygamy,  unlawful. 
Poneros,  meaning  of  this  Greek  word, 
Porch  of  hell,  a  figment  of  the  Papists,  836,  448 


2, 
3 
ll 

132, 
I, 
2, 

346, 
2, 
3, 

146, 
2, 
2, 
If 
178 

h 

337, 
2, 
2, 
», 
2, 
1. 

293; 

,  294 

I5 
,  31» 

Ii 
I, 
2. 
,  331 

2, 
xxil  INDEX. 


Power  of  God,  wherein  it  consists, 

Power  of  the  church,  what, 

With  whom  it  doth  not,  and  withwhom  it  doth  reside, 

How  every  one  ought  to  conduct  with  respect  to  it, 

Prayer,  a  description  of  prayer,  and  the  proper  acts 
of  it, 

The  Lord's  prayer,  how  it  must  be  divided, 

Is  not  to  be  explained  as  a  prophecy, 

The  conclusion  of  it  was  dictated  by  the  Saviour  him- 
self, 
^  The  design  of  it, 

Praying,  we  must  pray  to  God  only, 

Believers  only  can  pray  aright, 

We  must  pray  for  spiritual  and  bodily  necessaries, 

From  a  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  our  need,  and  with 
desire, 

The  requisite  qualifications  of  prayer, 

How  we  pray  in  the  name  of  Christ, 

How  God  heareth  prayer, 

Praying  is  necessary, 

Pelagians  only  flatter  when  they  pray, 

Reproof  and  admonition  of  those,  who  do  not  pray 
aright. 

Exhortation  to  pray  with  motives,  means  and  direc- 
tions, 

Danger  causes  us  to  pray,  but  doth  not  teach  us  the 
right  method, 

Preaching  of  God's  word,  whose  work  it  is, 

It  opens  and  shuts  the  kingdom  of  God, 

Preservation,  believers  are  preserved  carefully, 

By  the  Holy  Ghost, 

So  that  they  will  never  fall  away,  nor  perish, 

Priest,  Christ  is  a  priest  for  several  reasons, 

He  is  the  highest  priest, 

The  work  of  the   highpriest  6n  the  day  of  atonement 

typical  of  Christ, 
Priests,  believers  are  spiritual  priests, 
Pronoeo,  signification  of  this  Greek  word, 
Property,  what  it  is  to  be  the  property  of  Christ, 
How  we  become  his  property, 


Vol 

.       Page. 

1. 
3, 
2 

137-140 

148-153 

2, 

394-397 

401,  402 
510 

510,  511 

391,  393 
393 

393,  394 

397-401 

397,  398 

398-400 

402,  403 

403,  404 
404-406 

406--412 

415,  416 

2, 
141-143 

1, 

10,     11 
427 

2, 

12,     13 

h 

256-259 

2S9 
1, 

264,  265 

1, 

2  1 2 

1> 
6—8 

INDEX, 


And  how  we  are  preserved,  assured  and  sanctified  as 

his  property, 
Properties,  the  personal  properties  of  the  divine  Per- 
sons, what, 
Prophet,  Christ  is  a  prophet  on  many  accounts, 
He  is  the  chief  prophet, 
Prophets,  believers  are  prophets, 
Providence,  what  this  word  signifies. 
Is  ascribed  to  the  Father, 
Extends  to  all  things, 

Consists  in  upholding,  cooperation  and  government, 
It  operates  in  different  methods, 
Certain  objections  against  providence  answered, 
How  providence  works  with  respect  to  sin, 
Providence  proved  from  reason, 
The  advantages  and  use  of  this  doctrine, 
Psalm  ii.  7, 

xiv.  1, 

Iv.  23, 

lxxiii.  1, 

xcix.  5, 

cxix   96, 

cxix.  165, 

cxxxviii.  8, 

cxli.  3, 
Punishment,  (proper)  what, 
Of  the  sin  of  Adam, 
In  and  after  this  life, 
Dangerous  opinion  of  the  Socinians  concerning  eter. 

nal  punishment, 
Punishment  of  original  sin, 
Nature  of  the  punishment, 
In  what  sense  it  is  natural  to  God  to  punish  sin, 
In  what  manner   many  among  us  deny   this   punish- 
ment, and  how  we  may  escape  it, 
How  those  who  are  delivered  from  it  must  conduct, 
Purgatory  of  the  papists  confuted, 
Purchase  of  believers  by  Christ, 


Vol. 

Page. 

8,  9,  1.0 

1, 
1, 

254-256 
1, 

263,  264 

1, 
213 

213-215 

215-217 

217-219 

2 19-22 f 

221,  222 

2/ 2/ £}  2 2o 

222-231 

1, 
h 
1, 
li 
2, 
2, 
2, 

154,  155 

1, 

210,  21  1 

2, 
1, 
53,     54 

86 — 90 

90,     91 

91,     92 

93 — 96 

94—96 

98-101 

101,  102 

1, 

441,  442 

6, 


Q 

Quality  of  an  action  makes  it  good,  2,  216 

Quickening  of  the  new  man,  the  manner  of  it,  2,  177-179 


xxiv  INDEX. 

Vol.       Page. 
R 
Raah,  what  this  Hebrew  word  signifies,  |,  212 

Redeemer.     See  Mediator. 
Redeemers  under  the  Old  Testament,  who  they  were, 

and  how  they  were  types  of  Christ,  1,   123,  291 

Redemption.     See  deliverance, 

Regeneration,  what,  \      f\    409 

It  is  necessary,  o,     32,    33 

Religion,  or  the   service  of  God   acknowledged  by  all 

nations,  0  191 

In  order  that  we  may  practise  it  aright,  a  divine  reve- 
lation is  neressary, 
It  must  be  regulated  agreeably  to  the  divine  prescript, 
Must  be  in  spirit  and  in  truth, 
Resurrection  of  Christ,  what, 
He  hath  in  consequence  of  his  resurrection  a  plorified, 

but  not  an  omnipresent  !x>dy, 
By  whose  power,  and  when  he  arose, 
The  reality    of  his  resurrection  proved, 
The  necessity  and  advantages  of  his  resurrection, 
It  proves  the  truth  of  our  doctrine, 
How  it  is  denied. 

Who  are  partakers  of  it,  and  what  they  ought  to  do, 
Resurrect-on  of  the  body,  what, 
Who  will  arise, 

We  shall  be  raised  by  the  power  of  Christ, 
With  what  qualifications, 
With  the  same  bodies, 
When, 

The  certainty  of  our  resurrection, 
Io  what  manner  the  unconverted  and  converted  ought 
to  improve  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body, 
Rev.  iii.  4, 

hi.  14, 

vi.  6( 

xi.  3-13, 

xii.  9,  10, 

xiv.  G, 

XX.  4,  5, 

xx*  U>  1,  390,  391 
226 

ibid. 

1, 

347,  348 
348  -350 

350-352 

352—356 
357,  358 

358-362 

h 
ibid. 
444,  445 
446 

446-448 

457-462 

1, 
I, 
2, 

47'J 

U 

,   .        416 

2, 
2, 
1, 

44<J 

INDEX, 


xxi.  17, 

Revenge,  a  desire  of  it  forbidden,  and  a  cause  of  mur- 
der, 
Reward,  God  encourages  men  thereby  to  their  duty, 
See  works. 

Right,  whether  God  can  recede  from  his  right. 
Righteousness  of  the  law  and  of  the  gospel,  what, 
On    account  of  what  righteousness  the   sinner  is  jus- 
tified, 
The  righteousness  which  shall  endure  the  judgment  of 

God  must  be  perfect, 
Our  works  cannot   be  either  the   whole,   or  a  part  of 

our  righteousness  before  God, 
Righteousness  of  God  to  be   considered   in  different 

relations, 
Right  hand  of  God,  what, 
Christ's  being,   sitting   and   standing  at   God's  right 

hand,  what, 
He  is  at  God's  right  hand  according  to  both  natures, 
The  advantages  of  his  bring  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
Which  believers  must  improve, 
Robbery,  what, 
Rom.  i.  3,  4. 

i.  32, 

iii.  24, 

iii.  25, 

iv.  4. 

iv.  5, 

v.  18, 

V.  20, 

vi     14, 

viii.  3, 

viii.  3,  4j 

viii.  32, 

xi.  2  V 

xiii.  10, 

xiv.   5, 
Romish  church,  the  difficulty  of  being  saved  therein, 
Huac/i,  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Rulers  of  the  Qhurch,  who  they  are.. 


Vol. 

Page. 

1, 
"5 

317, 
I, 
1, 
1, 

110, 
472, 
492, 
492- 

-499 

If 
1, 
384- 

-386 
387, 
397 

2, 
h 
1, 
h 
h 
1, 
1, 
h 

151, 

,  152 

2, 
i6a 

1, 
1, 

i22 

l'i 
1, 

437, 

,  438 

% 
,  288 

2, 
1, 
,  243 

1, 
2j 
.  UO 

nxy!  INDEX. 

Vol.       Page. 
S 
Sabbath,  meaning  of  the  word, 
Several  kinds  of  sabbaths, 

How  and  why  it  must  be  remembered  and  sanctified, 
Controversy  wth  respect  to  the  morality  of  the  sabbath 
The  synod  of  Dordtrecht  considered  it  as  moral, 
The  morality  of  the  sabbath  proved  and  defended, 
The  duties  of  the  sabbath, 
It  is  no  burthen, 

How  it  is  unhallowed  by  persons  among  us, 
Exhortation  to  observe  'it, 
How  we  ought  to  improve  it, 

Sacrament,  derivation  and  signification  of  the  word, 
The  nature  and  parts  of  a  sacrament, 
How  the  Holy  Ghost  confirms  faith  by  it, 
How  it  agrees  with  the  word  of  God, 
Different  sacraments, 
The  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  were  not  type3 

of  the  sacraments  of  the  New  Testament, 
Sacramental  phrases,  what, 
Sacrifice  of  Christ  is  denied  in  the  moss, 
We  must  seek  forgiveness  by  Christ's  sacrifice  only, 
Sacrifices  of  believers,  what, 
Sacrifice  of  atonement  how  it  might  not  be  eaten,  and 

how  we  may  eat  of  Christ's  sacrifice  of  atonement, 
Sacrilege,  what, 
Saints,  who  they  are, 
We  may  not  call  on  them, 
They  are  no*  perfect  in  this  life, 
They  have  only  small  beginnings  of  obedience  to  God, 
•Salvation,  what  it  is, 
See  everlasting  life. 
1  Sam.  ii.  6, 

xvi.  1 — 5, 
xviii.  32 — 50, 
Sanctificauon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  what, 
How  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from  justification, 
Satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  is  necessary, 
It  must  be  full, 
The   reality  hricl   perfection  of  Christ's  satisfaction    by 

his  suffering  and  obedience.  3 1 4—3 1  r 


2, 
265,  266 

266,  268 

268,  269 
273-280 

280-282 
ibid. 

282,  283 

283.-286 
14—17 
18 

18,     19 

19,     20 

2, 
2, 
129 

2; 
2- 

,     81—83 

346,  347 

i; 

428,  429 

3, 

208,  209 
383 

i, 
2, 
2, 
■j. 

312, 

1, 
2, 
1, 

107-110 
INDEX. 


Satisfy,  how  we  must  satisfy   the  justice  of  God  by 

ourselves,  or  by  another, 
How  it  can  be  done  by  another. 
We   cannot  satisfy  by  ourselves,    nor   by   any   mere 

creature, 
Reproofs  and  admonitions  with  respect  to  this  matter, 
Saving,  how  Jesus  saves, 

Saviour,  the  Son  of  God  alone  is  the  Saviour, 
Schachach,  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Schub,  what  this  Hebrew  word  signifies, 
Segullahy  emphasis  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Separation  of  our  fathers   from  the  church  of  Rome 

was  just, 


Simony,  what, 
Simplicity  of  God,  what, 
Sin,  how  distinguished, 

Is  followed  by  many  evil  consequences. 

Every  sin  deserves  death, 

The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  what, 

Why  sins  are  called  debts, 

How  they  must  be  confessed, 

Slandering  of  our  neighbour,  what, 

Sodomy, 

Soothsaying,  what, 

Sorcery,  what, 

Soul,  what, 

It  is  dangerous  to  assert  that  it  is  a  mere  thought,  and 
that  it  doth  not  exist  in  any  particular  place, 

It  is  immortal, 

Is  active  after  death, 

Stealing,  what, 

Suffering  of  Christ,  the  word  suffered  in  the  creed  de- 
notes his  whole  suffering, 

The  Son  of  God  suffered,  and  not  the  Father, 

Only  in  his  human  nature, 

What  his  Godhead  did  with  respect  to  hi»  suffering, 

He  suffered  the  wrath  of  God, 
Vol.  ii.  T 


Vol.       Page* 


u 

110, 
111, 
113- 

-115 

116- 

-120 

1, 

235- 

-238 

1, 

238, 
2, 
2, 
li 

« 

1, 

243, 
3, 

127, 
228 

2, 
I, 
u 
2, 

488, 

,  489 

i, 

83, 
85 
2, 
488, 
2, 
2, 
2, 

207, 

,  208 

2, 

2oa> 

h 

43, 
90 
440 

3, 
h 
311 
ibid, 

311, 

i  312 
Vol, 

Page. 

1) 
ibid. 

313,  314 
318,  319 

319,  320 

321-326 

2, 
2, 
79,     80 

80,     81 

84,     85 

85,     86 

86,     87 

87,     83 

88,     89 

xxviii  INDEX. 


He  suffered  in  body  and  sou!; 

When  he  suffered, 

For  what  end, 

For  whom, 

Under  whom, 

The  giievousness  of  his  suffering, 

How  we  ought  to  improve  k 

Sup'  petition,  what,  and  who  are  guilty  of  it, 

Supper  (Lo.d's)  why  so  called, 

Its  signs,  and  how  they  must  be  used, 

The  things  signified, 

The  sacramental  union  in  the  Lord's  supper. 

The  instiution  and  promise  of  it, 

The  ends  of  it, 

The  circumstances, 

The  happiness  ot  those  who  partake  of  it, 

Detection  of  those  who  do  not  receive  it,  or  receive  it 

unsuitably,  89 — 92 

The    duties  of  believers  with   respect  to   the   Lord's 

supper,  92 — 95 

How  we  must  conduct  before,  during  and   after   the 

Lord's  supper,  129-133 

The  reformed  church   gives   more  than    bare  signs  in 

the  Lord's  supper.  108 

Who   act  like   Socinians  and  Papists  with  respect  to 

the  supper, 
In  what  sense  the  antients  called  the  supper  a  sacrifice, 
For  whom  it  was,  and  for  whom  it  was  not  instituted, 
How  it  must  be  preserved  from  being  abused, 
The   grounds  on  which   the  overseers  of  the  church 

may  admit  a  person  to  the  Lord's  supper, 
Surely  may  be  admitted  by  God  for  the  guilty, 
Swearing  false  and  unnecessary,  how  it  is  practised, 
Synagogue,  usual  sense  of  this  word  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament, 1,  420 

T 

Yables  of  the  law,  how  they  are  connected,  2,  38a 

Tagnanth,  what  this  Hebrew  word  signifies.  2,  360 

Temporary  believers,  how  they  are  to  be  distinguished 

from  true  believers,  1,  166-162 


109, 
122 

122- 

-126 

126, 
ibid. 

J, 

Ill 

2, 
INDEX.  xxix 

Vol,       Page. 


Temptation,  the  devil's  temptation  of  our  first  parents 

was  conducted  very  subt illy, 
There  is  a  temptation  to  good  and  to  evil, 
]t  is  ascribed  to  many, 

How  God  leads  into  temptation  in  a  holy  manner, 
How  he  delivers  out  of  it, 
ThenvMna,  signification  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
Theft,  different  kinds,  the  causes  of  it,  and  its  abomi- 

nableness, 
1  Thess  v.  17, 

Thorah,  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  word, 
1  Tim.  ii.  4,  6, 
1  Tim.  v.  21, 
Titus  iii.  5, 

Tongue,  how  shamefully  it  is  abused, 
Transmigration  condemned, 
Transubstantiation,  what, 
Wha'  we   acknowledge  with  respect   to  it,   and  what 

we  deny, 
Cont   union  of  it, 
Objections  answered, 
Tree  of  knowledge, 
Tree  of  life, 
Trinity.     See  God. 
Whether  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  be  a  fundamental 

article  of  the  faith,  and  advantageous  to  godliness, 
How  we  believe  in  the  Trinity, 
How  we  are  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity, 
Truth,  we  must  love  and  speak  the  truth  uprightly, 
Types,  the  ceremonies  were  types, 

U 

Unchangeableness  of  God, 

Unchastity,  different  kinds, 

We  must  avoid  it, 

Union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ,    how  it  must   not 

and  how  it  must  be  understood, 
The  consequences  of  it, 
Usury,  what,  and  what  kind  is  forbidden, 


1, 

50. 
2, 
503 

-505 

505, 

,  506 

507, 
2, 
2, 

344- 

-352 

2, 

410, 
2, 
1, 
2, 
2, 
2, 

458, 
2, 

307, 
3, 
100 

100- 
105- 

-108 

U 
h 
h 
114 
2, 

35, 
2; 
!» 
I« 
3, 

336- 

-338 

338- 

-340 

h 

295. 
297, 
3, 

348, 
xxx  INDEX. 


W 
Washing  from  sins,   what,  and  how  it  is  effected  by 

the  blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ, 
Whoredom,  what, 
Is  abominable, 

Is  considered  as  a  trifling  sin  by  the  Romonists, 
Will  of  the  decree  and  of  the  command,   what,  and 

how  they  do  not  militate  against  each  other, 

The  will  of  the  command  is  the  rule  of  our  obedience, 
How  it  is  done, 

We  must  know  it,  in  order  that  we  may  serve  God, 
Will,   (free)  wherein  it  doth  not,    and  wherein  it  doth 

consist, 
It  is  not  destroyed  by  our  inability, 
Nor  by  efficacious  providence, 
Nor  by  effectual  grace, 
Witchcraft.     See  sorcery. 
Witnessbearing,  false,  what, 

We  may  not  bear  false  witness  against  ourselves, 
We  must  avoid  the  causes  of  bearing  false  witness, 
Women,  stealing  them  punishable, 
Works,  (good)  many  kinds, 
They  are  defiled, 

They  are  not  our  righteousness  before  God, 
What  works  Paul  excludes  from  justification, 
Why  they  do  not  merit, 
The  doctrine  that  the   delivered  must  do   good  works 

explained,  proved  and  defended, 
We  cannot  be  saved  without  them, 
Reproofs  and  admonitions  relative  to  good  works, 
What  works  are  ^ood, 
And  what  are  not, 


Zech.  vi.   1  i, 
ix.   11, 


Vol.      P*ge. 


2. 

,  37 

—39 

2, 
333 
I, 
o 
-1 

461. 

i  462 
462- 

-464 

191- 

-192 

1, 

73- 

—74 

ibid. 

219, 
*i 
2, 

359- 

-366 

371, 
372 

2, 

n  o  » 

1, 

67- 

—68 
492- 

-496 

496, 
497, 
2, 

15  6- 

-163 

161, 
163- 

-169 

180- 

-182 
I, 
I, 
441 

SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES, 


A  Wessel  Broadhead,     do. 

REVD.  JOHN  N.  ABEEL,  William  Bennet,  Narrows. 
D.  D.  New-York,  c 

Revd.  James  Anderson,  Stillwater,  Revd.  Ira  Condict,   D.    D.    Vict; 
Nicholas  Arrowsmith,  Esq.   Bed-       President  of  Queen's  College, 

minster,  New-Brunswick, 

Nicholas  N.  Anthony,  N.  York,     Revd.  James  S.  Cannon,  Pleasant 
Okey  A  merman,  Shennick,  plains, 

Peter  Amerman,  New- York,  Revd.  John  Cornelison,  Bergen, 

B  Benj.  Carpenter,  Mehakkemack, 

Revd.   John  Basset,  D.  D.  Bogt,  Benj.  Cuddebeck,    do. 

2  copies,  William  Cuddebeck,     do. 
Re-d.  Jacob  Broadhead,  N.  York,  James  Christie,  New  Hempstead, 
Revd.  John  Bradford,  Albany,        David  Christie,         do. 
Revd.  Abm.  Brokaw,  John  Christie,  do. 

Revd.  John  Beatty,  New  Utrecht,    Cornelius  C  Cooper,     do. 
Revd.  G.  Brinkerhof,  Sempronius,  Ezekiel  Coole,  Reddington, 
Revd.  Matthew  Bogert,  Tappan,  Col.  Elias  Conover,  Freehold, 
John  Bleecker,  Albany,  Phinehas  Carman,  N.  Brunswick, 

Nicholas  Bleecker,     do.  John  Cornell,  do. 

Barent  Bleecker,        do.  Jane  Cornell,  do. 

Abm.  G.  Blauvelt,  Tappan,  John  Christopher,  Millstone, 

Jc.mes  Bennet,  Mehakkemack,       Edward  Cock,  Shennick, 
Nicholas  Bodine. Laurence's  brook  Frederick  Cock,     do. 
Elias  Brevort,  Hackensack,  John  <-^ark,  New-Brunswick-. 

Benjamin  Brouwer,  Middletown,     Jacob  Conover,  Freehold, 
V/m.  M.  Bennet.  Monmouth,        Daniel  Conover,         do. 
Matthias  Bellis,  Amwel,  <-'apt.  W  m.  Conover,    do. 

Cornelius  Boerum,  Shennick,  Martin  Cole,  Mehakkemack* 

David  Bishop,  Amwel,  Garret  Cozine,  Orangetown, 

Abraham  Brokaw,  Millstone,  James  Carmer,  Shappanack, 
Major  F.  Berkelo,  Middlebush,  Kern  Cornell,  Northampton, 
John  Bogert,  Readington,  G»"an  Cornell,  Southampton, 

P.  A.  Blanshan,  Hurley,  J°!in  Cornell,         do. 

Cornelius  Blauvelt,  N.Hempstead,  James  Carmichael,  Saratoga, 
Andrew  Brown,  Six-mile-run,  D 

John  Bergen,  Flatlands,  Revd   Benj.  Dubois,  Freehold, 

Isaac  Bloom,  Marbletown,  Revd.  John  Duryee,  Fairfield, 

Henry  Breadbead,  Marbletown,      Revd.  Philip  Duryea,  Saratoga, 


SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES. 


Revd-  R-  Demarest  New  Hemp- 
stead, 
Revd.  C.  T.  Demarest,  Rockaway 
John  C.  Dewit,  Esq.  Hurley, 
Garret  Dewit,  do. 

John  Douw,  Albany, 
Benjamin  Depuis,  Menissing, 
Nicholas  Dubois,  Shennick, 
Teunis  D.  Dubois,  Freehold, 
Henry  Disborough,  Millstone, 
Abraham  Ditmars,  Harlingen, 
Abraham  Ditmars,  Reddington, 
Paul  Duryea,   Villstone, 
Peter  B.  Dumont,  Raiitan, 
Peter  D.  Vroom,  Raritan. 
Henry  D   Vroom,  Redciinglon, 
Simeon  Doremus,  Fairfield, 
"William  Dear,  New-Brunswick, 

E 
Revd.  William  Elting,  Paramus, 
Peter  E.  Elmendorf,  Albany, 
Frederick    S.    Elmendorf,     Mar- 

bletown, 
Joseph  Ennes,  Esq.  Menissing, 

F 
Revd.  Solomon  Fioeligh,  S.  T.  P. 

Schrahnburg, 
Revd.  James  v_r.  Force,  Walpeck, 
General  Frederick  Frelinghuysen, 
Millstone,  3  sets. 

John  Frere,  Kingston, 
Wm,  French,  Middlebush, 
George  Forman,  New-York, 

4  sets. 
Douw  Fonda,  Albany. 

G. 
Revd.  S.  Goetschius,  Marbletown, 
Revd.  John  Gosman,  Kingston, 
Revd.  Andrew  Gray,  Tuscarora, 
Revd.  Ebenezer  Grant,  New  Bed- 
ford, 
Moses  Guest,  New-Brunswick, 
Elias  Gomar,  Mehakkemack, 
Peter  Gomar,  do. 

Peter  Gansevoort,  Junr.  Albany, 
Abraham  Gansevoort,         do. 


John  Gates,  Albany, 
Uerard  Groesbeek,   do. 
Garrit  Garretson,  Millstone, 
oamuel  Garretson,  Middlebushj 

H 
Revd.  Charles  Hardenberg,  Bed- 
minster, 
Revd.  I.  R.  H.  Hasbrook,  Klein 

Eusopus, 
J.   R.  Hardenberg,  N   Brunswick, 
John  Haring,    New-Hempstead, 
Stephen  Hunt,  Bedminster, 
Dennis  Hagaman,  Amwell, 
Teunis  Hubbard,  Middletown, 
Flenry  hendrickson,  Sen.     do. 
Benjamin  Hoombeek,    Mehakke- 

mjtck, 
John  C.  Hardenberg,  Hurley, 
John  Haring   Orangetown, 
Abraham  Hofman,  ihawangunck, 
Aaion  Hagaman,  5ix-mile-run, 
Israel  Harris,  Boundbrook, 
John  Hoogland,  shennick, 
Daniel  Hoogland,  Northampton, 
Abraham  Flunn,  Albany, 
Peter  Jansen,  Marbletown, 
Daniel  Hendrickson,  Middletown, 

K 
Revd.    Gerard   Kuypers.    D.    D. 
New-York,  2  sets. 

Cornelius  Kershouw,    Harlingen, 
Aaron  Klein,  Reddington, 
Michael  Kinney,  do 

Jacob  Klaily,  New-Brunswick, 
Paul  Kool,  Amwell. 

L 
Revd.  John  H   Livingston,  S.  T. 
1).  et  P.  and  President  of  Queen's 
college,  New- Brunswick. 

William  Linn,  D  D.Albany 

Nicholas  Lansing,    Orange- 
town, 
Jacob  Larzelier,  Southamp- 


ton, 


Isaac  Labagh,  Sharon, 
Peter  Labagh,  Harlingen, 


SUBSCRIBER'S  NAMES. 


Revd.  Peter  Louw,  Flatbush, 
S.  Lambert,  Mehakkemack, 
Arthur  Leffisrts,    outham^ton, 
John  Lansing,  jun.  Albany, 
Sanders  Lansing.  do. 

Jeremiah  Lansing,         do. 
Anne  Lutteridge,  Saratoga, 
Hester  Lefoy,  New-York, 
Wm.  Little,  Mehakkemack, 
John  C.  Luister,  Middletown, 
John  P.  Luister,         do. 
Sarah  Lisk   Southbranch, 
Abm.  Lot,  New-Brunswick, 
Matthew  Lane,  Bedminster, 
Simon  Lefevre,  Hurlev, 

M 
Levi  Middagh,  Mehakkemack, 
Simon  Midd;>gh,         do. 
David  Morrow,  do. 

Christian  Miller,  Albany, 
John  Melich,  do. 

Cornelius  Marshal,  do. 
Samuel  Miner,  Harlingen, 
John  A.  Meseroll,  Bushwick. 

N 
David  Nevius,  Pleasant-plains, 
Peter  D.  Nevius,  do. 

Rodof  Nevius,  Northbranch, 
John  Nevius,  New-Brunswick, 
Cornelius  Nevius,  Shennick, 
Jacob  Neerpass,  Mehakkemack, 
G.  A.  Nieuwkerk,  Hurley, 

O 
Revd.  Henry  Ostrander,  Catskill, 
10  sets. 
Abraham  Oothout,  Schenectady, 
Magdelcne  Oothout,  New-York, 
Adrian  K.    Onderdonk,    Ramma- 

pugh, 
Andrew  K.  Onderdonk,         do. 
Rail' Onderdonk,  Clarkstown. 

P 
Revd.  Henry  Polhemus,   English 

neighbourhood, 
Revd.    Matthew    Lerue   Perine, 

Chatham, 
Daniel  Polhemws,  Harlingen, 


Abraham  Post,  Reddington, 
Cornelius  Powclson,  Bedminster^ 
Abm.  Powelson,         do. 
John  Polhemus,  Coltsneck, 
Tobias  Polhemus,  Freehold, 
Jacob  I.  Pruin,  Albany, 
Frederick  Probasco,    Middltbush, 
James  Perry,  Orangetown. 

Q  " 

Henry  Quackenbush,  Albany  2  9. 
James.  Quick,  New-York, 
Peter  Quick,  Harlingen, 
Peter  Quick,  Reddington, 
Jacob  Quick,  Mehakkemack. 

R 
Revd.   John    B.  Romein,  D.   D. 

New- York. 
Jerome  Rappleje,  Middlebush, 
Jeremiah  Remson,  Bedford, 
Simeon  Rosecrans,  Shappanack, 
Peter  Richtmeier,  Broome, 
Wm.  M.  Rowles,  Mehakkemack, 

S 
Revd.  Henry  Schoonmaker,   Ac- 

quackenunk,  10  sets. 

■  Wm.  R   Smith,  Shennick, 

John  Schureman,  N.  York, 

Peter  Studdiford,  S.  Branch, 

Jacob  Sickles,  Kinderhook, 

Peter  Stryker,  Belleville, 

C.  Schemerhorn,  Broome, 

Dr.    Peter    Stryker,     Somerville, 

2  setts. 

James  Schureman,  Esq.  Mayor  of 

the  city  of  New-Brunswick, 
James  atryker,  Esq-  Harlingen, 
Stephen  Stryker,  Shennick, 
Peter  Stryker,  Millstone, 
Peter  Stryker.  Scrivener,     do, 
Samuel  Stryker.  Gravesand, 
Phebe  Stryker,  Ricefield, 
Francis  Salisbury,  Catskill, 
Dr.  Henry  Schcnk,  Shennick, 
Peter  Schenk,  Bushwick, 
John  Scheuk,  Monmouth, 
J.  jchenk,  fuller,  Pleasant-valley. 
Peter  Schenk,  Middletown, 


SUBSCRIBER'S  NAMES 


Dennis  Schenk,  Freehold, 
Martin  Schenk,  Esq.  Millstone, 
William  schenk,  Amwell, 
Abraham  ichenk,  Shennick, 
Jacob  schenk,  Amwell, 
Roelof  Schenk,  do. 

John  Stootliof,  Middlebush, 
Peter  Staats,  Millstone, 
John  Staats,  Ricefield, 
Jacob  -inyder,  Marbletown, 
Andrew  Snyder,  Hurley, 
Jacob  A.  Snyder,  Marbletown, 
Peter  Sythoof,  Millstone, 
Peter  Swartwout,  Mehakkemack, 
John  Simonson,  Esq.  Karitan, 
Henry  btaats,   \lbany, 
H.  P   Schuyler,  Albany, 
Henry  Smock,  Freehold, 
Garrit  Smock,  Pleasant-valley, 
Abni.  Schuyler,  N.  Brunswick, 
Dr.  Moses  Scot,  do. 

•  Cornelius  Sardam,  Bedminster, 
Gerbrand  Service,  Kammapugh, 
Thomas  Stout,  Amwell. 

I 
Revd.   Conrade  Teneyck,  Fon- 

da's-bush, 
Jacob  Teneyck,  Princeton, 
Peter  Teneyck,  N.  Brunswick, 
Jacob  Teneyck,  Albany, 
Abm.  Teneyck,         do. 
Conrade  Tinkie.  Rammapugh, 
Henry  Traphagen,  Bergen, 
Abm    Tenbroek,  Albany, 
Margaret  Tenbroek,  Albany, 
Willet  Taylor,  Raritan, 
Gilbert  B.  Taylor,  -outhbranch, 
W'm.  Titswcrt  i,  Clove. 

V 
Reyd.  Elias   Van    Bunschooten, 

Clove, 
John  S.  Vredenburg,  Rari- 
tan, 

Abm.  Van  Horn,  Cochna- 

waga,  5  sets. 

Garret  Vocrhees,  Middlebush, 
David  Voorhees,  N.  Brunswick, 


Arnoldus  Voorhees,  New-York} 
Peter  Voorhees,  Middlebush, 
Garrit  Voorhees,  bhennick, 
Derick  Voorhees,         do. 
Roelof  Voo.  liees,  Six-mile-run, 
Peter  Voorhees,  Harlingen, 
Gerard  Voorhees  Millstone, 
John  Voorhee^,  Bedimnster, 
Abraham  Vooihees,  Keddington, 
Dr.  Abm.  Van  Jiuren,  Millstone, 
Dr.  Wm.  Van  Buren,         do. 
Dr.  Laurence  Vanderveer,   Rice- 
field, 
James  Vanderveer,  Bedminster, 
Christian    Van    Doren,     South- 
branch, 
Dennis  Van  Leeuwen,  Middlebush, 
Jeremiah  Vanderbilt,  Wallebogt, 
James  Van  Vliet,  'viehakkemackj 
Dennis  Van  Leeuwen,  Shenni'k, 
Samuel  Van  Vechten,  tisq.  v,ats- 

kill, 
Joseph  Van  Noy,  Mehakkemack? 
Ganit  Van  Aken,  do. 

James  Van  Aken,  do. 

Evert  Van  Aken,  do. 

Joseph  Van     orden,  do. 

James  Van   ..orden,  do. 

Martin  Van  Gorden,  do* 

Joseph  Van  Aken,  do. 

Daniel  Vredenburg,  do. 

Cornelius  Van  W'ey,  Hurley, 
John  Van   Leeuwen,   Thre-mile- 

run, 
Frederick  Van  Leeuwen,         do. 
Elizabeth    Van   Leeuwen,   Mid 

dlebush, 
Abraham  Van  Horn*  Roekaway, 
Benjamin    Van    Doren,    Middle- 
bush, 
Abm.  Van  Aursdalen,  Esq.  Har- 
lingen, 
Jaques  Van  Leeuwen,  Laurence's 

brook, 
Herman   Van    Nimwegen,    Me- 

hakkeraack, 
G.  Van  Aursdalen,  Northampton, 


SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES. 


Isaac  Van  Nuis,  Ricefield, 
Reinier  Vechten,  Raritan, 
Ernestus   Van  Harlingen,  Mill- 
stone, 
Edward  Van  Harlingen,    do 
John  M.  Van  Harlingen,  New- 
Brunswick, 
Wm.  Van  Deursen,  do. 

Staats  Van  Deursen,  do. 

John  Van  Doren,  Millstone, 
James  Van  Nuis,  Harlingen, 
Charles  Van  Zand,  Southampton, 
Cornelius  Van  Meteren,  Freehold, 
Teunis  D.  Vanderveer,  do. 

Teunis  G.  Vanderveer,  do. 

Peter  Van  Doren,  do. 

Peter  Van  Neste,  Esq.  Flatbrook, 
Abm.  Van  Campen,  Esq.  Shap- 

panack, 
Abm.  Van  Vechten.  Albany, 
Cornelius  Van  Vechten,        do. 
G.  H.  Van  Schaick,  do. 

Mary  Van  Schaick,  do. 

Aaron  Van  Doren,  Bedminster, 
Abm-  Van  Neste,  do. 

Abm.  Van  Aursdalen,  do. 

Abm.  Van  Voorhees,   Redding- 

ton, 
Henry  Van  Dolsen,  Rammapugh, 
Nicholas  Van  Houten,  do. 

Jerome  Vanderbilt,  New-Bruns- 
wick, 
John  Van  Nuys,  do. 

W. 
Revd.  Henry  Wyckoff,  Charels- 
town,  5  sets. 

Revd.  Cornelius  Wyckoff,  New- 
York, 


Peter  Wyckoff,  Ricefield, 
Peter  Wyckoff,  New-Brunswick, 
Martin  Wyckoff,  Reddington, 
Peter  Wyckoff,  do. 

Simon  Wyckoff  do. 

John  Wyckoff,  Middlebush, 
John  Wyckoff,  Mdlstone, 
Cornelius  Wyckoff,  Rockaway, 
William  Wyckoff,  Mdlstone,' 
Garrit  Wyckoff,  Freehold, 
Ralf  Westervelt,  Rammapugh, 
Benj.  Westervelt,  do. 

John  Wortman,  Esq.  Bedminster, 
Elbert  VV  illet,  Albauy, 
J.  H.  Wendell,  do. 

Renselaer  Westerloo,    do. 
John  D.  Westbrook,  Menissing* 
John  I.  Westbrook,  do. 

Severin  Westbrook,  do. 

Wm.  Westbrook,  do. 

Abm.  Wesibrook,   Mammacot- 

tong, 
Isaac  Williamson,   Three-mile- 
run, 
John  Williamson,  Middletown, 
David  Wynkoop,  Northampton, 
Abm.  Westfall,  LVlenissing, 
George  D.  Westfall,   Menakke- 

mack, 
Daniel  B.  Westfall,  do. 

Garrit   Walgrove,   New- York, 

10  sets, 
Jeremiah  Williamson,  Harlingen 
Maynard  Wilson,  Ricefield, 
Jerome  S.  Waldron,  Hunterdon, 
Francis  Waldron,  Amwell, 

Z 
R«vd.  John  Zabriskie,  Millstone, 


ERRATA. 

VOL.    I. 

Page  30,  line  2  from  the  bottom,  insert  or  before  because* 

P.  68,     1 1  from  the  top,  read  (his  instead  of  their. 

P.  8  1 ,    7  from  the  top,  read  suck  instead  of  seek. 

P.  117,    4  from  the  top,  read  exceedingly  instead  of  accordingly, 

P.  164,     6  from  the  top,  read  as  inste  d  of  at. 

P.  335,     13  fr^m  the  bottom,  read  his  instead  of  their. 

P.  380,    4  from  the  bottom,  read  hands  instead  of  hrads. 

P.  488,     6  from  the  top,  read  after  instead  of  of  before  the  flesh- 

P.  503,     10  from  the  bottom,  insert  which  before  without. 

P.  aOS,    4  from  the  top,  read  prosperity  instead  of  property. 

VOL.    II. 

P.  25,  line  18  from  the  top,  read  or  instead  of  as. 

P.   102,     12  from  the  top,  read  their  instead  of  Ma. 

P.  204,     14  f;om  the  bottom,  inset  u  reference  after  face. 

P.  255,    7  from  the  bottom,  read    Gen.  xliii.  15  instead  of  1    Cor, 

xv.  31 
P.  267,    8  from  the  top,  read  it  after  sanct(/y. 
P    281,    4  from  the  bottom,  read  suffer  instead  of  seek  for. 
P.  £48,    2  from  the  bottom    read  usury  instead  of  money. 
P.  464,    20  from  the  top,  read  fervently  Instead  of  frequently, 
P.  5 1 6,    13  from  the  bottom  insert  great  before  transgression, 


* 


fifi 


m 


&***